2706 S122986 44920289 173738
THE CL. PSALMES OF DAVID, in Scottish meter: AFTER THE FORME that they are vsed to bee sung in the KIRKE of SCOTLAND. IAMES, 5.13. Is any among you afflicted? let him pray. Is any merry? let him sing Psalmes. EDINBVRGH, Printed by ANDRO HART, ANNO 1615.
THE CL. PSALMES OF DAVID. PSALME I. THe man is blest that hath not bent, to wicked rede his eare: Nor led his life as sinners doe, nor sate in scorners chaire. But in the Law of God the Lord, doeth set his whole de∣light: And in that Law doeth exercise, him∣selfe both day and night. Hee shall bee like the tree that grow'th fast by the riuer side: Which bringeth foorth moste pleasant fruite in her due time and tide. Whose leafe shall neuer fade nor fall, but flourish still and stand: Even so shall all thinges prosper well, that this man takes in hand. So shall not the vngodly men, they shall bee nothing so: But as the dust, which from the earth, the winde driues to and fro. Therefore shall not the wicked men, in judgement stand vpright: Nor yet the sinners with the just, shall come in place or sight. For why? the way of godly men, vnto the Lord is knowne: And eke the way of wicked men, shall quite bee ouer-throwne. PSALME II. WHy did the Gentiles tumultes raise, what rage was in their braine? Why did the Iewish people muse, seeing all is but vaine? The Kinges and Rulers of the earth, conspire and are all bent, against the Lord and Christ his Sonne, whom hee among vs sent. Shall wee bee bound to them? say they, let all their bondes bee broke: And of their doctrine and their law, let vs reject the yoke. But hee that in the heauen dwelleth, their doinges will deride: And make them all as mocking stockes, through-out the world so wide. For in his wrath the Lord will speake, to them vpon a day: And in his furie trouble them, and then the Lord will say: I haue annoynted him my King, vpon my holy hill: I will therefore, Lord, preach thy lawes and eke declare thy will. For in this wise the Lord himselfe, did say to mee, I wote: Thou art my deare and onely Sonne, this day I thee begote. All people I will giue to thee, as heires at thy request: The endes and coastes of all the earth, by thee shall bee possest.
Thou shalt them bruise euen with a mace, as men vnder foote trode: And as the potters shearde shall breake, them with an yron rodde. Now yee, O kinges and rulers all, bee wise, therefore, and learnde: By whom the matters of the world, be judged and discernde. See that yee serue the Lord aboue, in trembling and in feare: See that with reuerence yee rejoyce, to him in like maner. See that yee kisse and eke embrace, his blessed Sonne, I say: Lest in his wrath yee suddenly, perish in the mid way. If once his wrath neuer so small, shall kindle in his brest: Oh then all they that trust in Christ, shall happie bee and blest. PSALME III. O Lord, howe are my foes increast, which vexe mee more and more! They kill mine heart, when as they saye, God can him not restore. But thou, O Lord, art my de∣fence, when I am hard bestead. My worshippe and mine honour both, and thou holdst vp mine head. Then with my voyce vpon the Lord, I did both call and cry: And hee out of his holy hill, did heare mee by and by. I laide mee downe, and quietly, I slept, and rose againe: For why? I know assuredly, the Lord will mee sustaine. If ten thousand had hemde mee in, I could not bee afraide: For thou art still my Lord, my God, my Sauiour, and mine aide. Rise vp, therefore, saue mee, my God, for now to thee I call: For thou hast broke the cheekes and teeth, of these wicked men all. Saluation onely doeth belong, to thee, O Lord, aboue: Thou doest bestow vpon thy folke, thy blessing and thy loue. PSALME IV. Sing this as the 3. Psalme. O God that art my righteousnesse, Lord heare mee when I call: Thou hast set mee at libertie, when I was bounde and thrall. Haue mercie, Lord, therefore on mee, and graunt mee this request: For vnto thee vncessantly, to cry I will not rest. O mortall men, how long will yee, my glory thus despise? Why wander yee in vanitie, and follow after lyes? Know yee that good and godly men, the Lord doeth take and chuse: And when to him I make my plaint, hee doeth mee not refuse. Sinne not, but stand in awe therefore, examine well your heart: And in your chamber quietly, see yee your selues conuert. Offer to God the sacrifice, of righteousnesse, I say: And looke that in the liuing Lord, you put your trust alway. The greater sort craue worldly goods, and riches doe embrace: But, Lord, graunt vs thy countenance, thy fauour and thy grace: For thou thereby shalt make my heart, more joyfull and more glad, Then they that of their corne and wine, full great increase haue had. In peace, therefore, lye downe will I, taking my rest and sleepe: For thou onely wilt mee, O Lord, alone in safetie keepe. PSALME V. Sing this as the 3. Psalme. INcline thine eares vnto my wordes, O Lord, my plaint consider: And heare my voyce, my King my God, to thee I make my prayer.
Heare mee betime, Lord, tarie not, For I will haue respect: My prayer early in the morne, to thee for to direct. And I will trust, through patience, in thee my God alone: That art not pleasde with wickednesse, and ill with thee dwel'th none. And in thy fight shall neuer stand, these furious fooles, O Lord: Vaine workers of iniquitie, thou hast alwayes abhord. The lyers and the flatterers, thou shalt destroy them than: And God will hate the blood-thirstie, and the deceitfull man. Therefore will I come to thine house, trusting vpon thy grace: And reverently will worshippe thee, toward thine holy place. Lord lead mee in thy righteousnesse, for to confound my foes: And eke the way that I shall walke, before my face disclose. For in their mouthes there is no trueth, their heart is foule and vaine: Their throate an open sepulchre, their tongues doe glose and faine. Destroy their false conspiracies, that they may come to nought: Subuert them in their heapes of sinne, which haue rebellion wrought. But those that put their trust in thee, let them bee glad alwayes: And render thankes for thy defence, and giue thy Name the praise. For thou with fauour wilt increase, the just and righteous still: And with thy grace as with a shield, defend him from all ill. PSALME VI. LOrd in thy wrath reprooue mee not, though I deserue thine ire: Nor yet correct mee in thy rage, O LORD, I thee desire. For I am weake therefore, O LORD, of mercy mee forbeare: And heale mee, LORD, for why? thou knowst, my bones doe quake for feare. My soule is troubled very sore, and vexed vehemently: But, Lord, how long wilt thou delay, to cure my misery? Lord, turne thee to thy wonted grace, my sillie soule vp take: Oh, saue mee, not for my desertes, but for thy mercies sake. For why? no man among the dead, remembreth thee one whit: Or who shall worshippe thee, O Lord, in the infernall pit? So grieuous is my plaint and mone, that I waxe wondrous faint: All the night long I wash my bedde, with teares of my complaint. My sight is dimme and waxed olde, with anguish of mine heart: For feare of those that bee my foes, and would my soule subuert. But now away from mee all yee, that worke iniquitie, For why? the Lord hath heard the voyce, of my complaint and crie. Hy heard not onely the request, and prayer of mine heart, But it receiued at mine hand, and tooke it in good part. And now my foes that vexed mee, the Lord will soone defame, And suddenly confound them all, to their rebuke and shame. PSALME VII. O LORD my GOD, I put my trust, and confidence in thee: Saue mee from them that mee
pursue, & eke deliuer mee:  Lest like a lion hee mee teare, and rent in pieces small: Whilst there is none to succour mee, and ridde mee out of thrall. O Lord my God, if I haue done, the thing that is not right: Or els if I bee found in fault, or guilty in thy sight: Or to my friend rewarded euill, or left him in distresse: Which mee pursude moste cruelly, and hated mee causelesse: Then let my foes pursue my soule, and eke my life downe thrust, Vnto the earth, and also lay mine honour in the dust. Start vp, O Lord, now in thy wrath, and put my foes to paine: Performe thy Kingdome promised, to mee which wrong sustaine. Then shall great Nations come to thee, and know thee by this thing: If thou declare for loue of them, thy selfe as Lord and King. And thou that art of all men Iudge, O Lord, now judge thou mee: According to my righteousnesse, and mine integritie. Lord cease the hate of wicked men, and bee the just mans guide: By whom the secretes of all heartes, are searched and discride. I take mine helpe to come of God, in all my griefe and smart: That doeth preserue all those that bee of pure and perfect heart. The just man, and the wicked both, God iudgeth by his power: So that hee feel'th his mighty hand, euen euery day and houre. Except hee change his minde, I die, for euen as hee should smite, Hee whets his sword, his bow hee bendes, aiming where hee may hit. And doeth prepare his mortall dartes, his arrowes kiene and sharpe: For them that doe mee persecute, whiles hee doeth mischiefe warpe. But loe, though hee in trauell bee, of his deuilish fore-cast: And of his mischiefe once conceiu'd, yet bringeth foorth nought at last. Hee dig'th a ditch, and delu'th it deepe, in hope to hurt his brother: But hee shall fall into the pit, that hee digg'd vp for other. Thus wrong returneth to the hurt, of him in whom it bred: And all the mischiefe that hee wrought, shall fall vpon his head. I will giue thankes to God, therefore, that judgeth righteouslie: And with my song will praise the Name of him that is moste hie. PSALME VIII. O God out Lord, how wonderfull, are thy workes euery where! Whose fame sur∣mountes in dignitie, aboue the heauens cleare.  Euen by the mouthes of sucking babes, thou wilt confound thy foes: For in these babes thy might is seene, thy graces they disclose. And when I see the heauens high, the workes of thine owne hand: The Sunne, the Moone, & all the starres, in order as they stand: What thing is man, Lord, thinke I then, that thou doest him remember? Or what is mans posteritie, that thou doest it consider? For thou hast made him little lesse, then Angels in degree: And thou hast crowned him also, with glorie and dignitie. Thou hast preferde him to bee lord, of all thy workes of wonder: And at his feete hast set all thinges, that hee should keepe them vnder, As sheepe and neate, and all thinges els, that in the fieldes doe feede: Foules of the aire, fish in the sea, and all that therein breede. Therefore must I say once againe, O God, that art our Lord, How famous and how wonderfull, are thy workes through the world!
PSALME IX. WIth heart & mouth vnto the Lord, will I sing laud and praise: And speake of all thy wondrous workes, and them declare al∣wayes.  I will bee glad, and much rejoyce, in thee, O God, moste hie: And make my songes extoll thy Name, aboue the starrie skie. For that my foes are driuen backe, and turned vnto flight: They fall downe flatte, and are destroyde, by thy great force and might. Thou hast reuenged all my wronges, my griefe, and all my grudge: Thou doest with justice heare my cause, moste like a righteous Iudge. Thou doest rebuke the heathen folke, and wicked so confound: That afterward the memorie, of them cannot bee found. My foe, thou hast made good dispatch, and all our townes destroide: Thou hast their fame with them defaced, through all the world so wide. Know thou that hee which is aboue, for euermore shall reigne: And in the seate of equitie, true judgement will maintaine. With justice hee will keepe and guide, the world and euery wight: And so will yeeld with equitie, to every man his right. Hee is protectour of the poore, what time they bee opprest: Hee is in all adversitie, their refuge and their rest. All they that know thy holy Name, therefore shall trust in thee: For thou forsakest not their sute, in their necessitie. Sing Psalmes therefore, vnto the Lord, that dwelles in Sion hill: Publish among all Nations, his noble actes and will. For hee is mindfull of the blood, of those that bee opprest: Forgetting not th'afflicted heart, that seeketh to him for rest. Haue mercy, Lord, on mee poore wretch, whose enemies still remaine: Which from the gates of death are wont, to raise mee vp againe: In Sion that I might set foorth, thy praise with heart and voyce: And that in thy saluation, Lord, my soule might still reioyce. The heathen stick fast in the pitte, that they themselues preparde: And in the nette, that they did set, their owne feete fast are snarde. God shewes his iudgementes, which were good, for euery man to marke: When as yee see the wicked man, lye trapt in his owne warke. The wicked and the sinnefull men, goe downe to hell for euer: And all the people of the worlde, that will not God remember. But sure the Lord will not forget, the poore mans griefe and paine: The patient people neuer looke, for helpe of God in vaine. O Lord, arise, lest men preuaile, that bee of worldly might: And let the heathen folke receiue, their iudgement in thy sight. Lord, strike such terrour, feare, and dread, into the heartes of them: That they may know assuredly, they bee but mortall men. PSALME X. Sing this as the 2. Psalme. WHat is the cause that thou, O Lord, art now so farre from thine? And keepest close thy countenance, from vs this troublous time. The poore doe perish by the proude and wicked mens desire: Let them bee taken in the craft, that they themselues conspire. For in the lust of his owne heart, th'vngodly doeth delite: So doeth the wicked praise himselfe, and doeth the Lord despite. Hee is so proude, that right and wrong, hee serteth all apart: Nay, nay, there is no God, saith hee: for thus hee thinkes in heart. Because his wayes doe prosper still, hee doeth thy Lawes neglect: And with a blast doeth puffe against, such as would him correct.
Tush, tush, saith hee, I haue no dread, lest mine estate should change; And why? for all aduersitie, to him is very strange. His mouth is full of cursednesse, of fraude, deceite and guile: Vnder his tongue doeth mischiefe sit, and trauell all the while. Hee lyeth hid in wayes and holes, to slay the innocent: Against the poore that passe him by, his cruell eyes are bent. And like a lion priuily, ly╌th lurking in his denne, (If hee may snare them in his nette) to spoile poore simple men. And for the nones full craftily, hee croucheth downe, I say, So are great heapes of poore men made, by his strong power his prey. Tush, God forgetteth this, saith hee, therefore may I bee bolde, His countenance is cast aside, hee doeth it not beholde. Arise, O Lord, O God, in whom the poore mans hope doeth rest, Lift vp thine hand, forget not, Lord, the poore that bee opprest. What blasphemie is this to thee, Lord, doest thou not abhorre it? To heare the wicked in their heartes, say, tush, thou cares not for it? But thou seest all this wickednesse, and well doest vnderstand, That friendlesse and poore fatherlesse, are left into thine hand. Of wicked and malicious men, then breake the power for euer, That they with their iniquitie, may perish altogether. The Lord shall reigne for euermore as King and God alone, And hee will chase the heathen folke, out of his land eachone. Thou hearest, O Lord, the poore mens plaint, their prayers and request, Their heartes thou wilt confirme, vntill thine eares to heare bee prest. To judge the poore and fatherlesse, and helpe them to their right, That they may bee no more opprest, with men of wordly might. PSALME XI. Sing this as the 2. Psalme. I Trust in GOD, how dare yee then, say thus my soule vntill, Flie hence as sast as any foule, and hide you in your hill? Beholde, the wicked bende their bowes, and make their arrowes prest, To shoote in secrete, and to hurt, the sounde and harmelesse brest. Of worldly hope all stayes were shronke, and clearely brought to nought, Alas, the just and righteous man, what euill hath hee wrought? But hee that in his Temple is, moste holy and most hie, And in the heauen hath set his seate, of Royall Majestie, The poore and simple mans estate, considereth in his minde, And searcheth out full narrowly, the maners of mankinde. And with a chearefull countenance, the righteous man will vse, But in his heart hee doeth abhorre, all such as mischiefe muse. And on the sinners casteth snares, as thicke as any raine, Fire and brimstone, and whirle-windes thicke appointed for their paine. Yee see then how a righteous God, doeth rigteousnesse embrace, And to the just and vpright man, shew'th foorth his pleasant face. PSALME XII. Sing this as the 7. Psalme. HElpe, Lord, for good and godly men, doe perish and decay, And faith and trueth from worldly men is parted cleane away. Who so doeth with his neighbour talke, his talke is all but vaine, For euery man bethinketh how, to flatter, lye and faine. But flattering and decietfull lippes, and tongues that bee so stout, To speake proude wordes, and make great brags, the Lord soone cut them out. For they say still, wee will preuaile, our tongues shall vs extoll, Our tongues are ours, wee ought to speake, what Lord shall vs controll? But for the great complaint and cry, of poore and men opprest, Arise will I now, sayeth the Lord, and them restore to rest. Gods word is like the siluer pure, that from the earth is tried, And hath no lesse then seuen times, in fire beene purified.
Now since thy promise is to helpe, Lord keepe thy promise then, And saue vs now, and euermore, from this ill kinde of men. For now the wicked world is full, of mischiefes manyfolde. When vanitie with mortall men, so highly is extolde. PSALME XIII. Sing this as the 6. Psalme. HOw long wilt thou forget mee, Lord, shall I neuer bee remembred? How long wilt thou thy visage hide, as though thou were offended? In heart and minde how long shall I, with care tormented bee? How long eke shall my deadly foe, thus triumph ouer mee? Beholde mee now, my Lord my God, and heare mee, sore opprest, Lighten mine eyes, lest that I sleepe, as one by death possest, Lest then mine enemie say to mee, beholde, I doe preuaile, Lest they also that hate my soule, rejoyce to see mee quaile. But from thy mercies and goodnesse, mine hope shall neuer start, In thy reliefe and sauing health, right glad shall bee mine heart. I will giue thankes vnto the Lord, and praises to him sing, Because hee hath heard my request, and graunted my wishing. PSALME XIV. THere is no God, as foolish men, af∣firme in their madde moode: Their driftes are all corrupt and vaine, not one of them doeth good.  The LORD behelde from heauen high, the whole race of mankinde: And sawe not one that sought indeede, the liuing GOD to finde. They went all wide, and were corrupt, and truely there was none, That in the worlde did any good: I say, there was not one. Is all their judgementes so farre lost, that all worke mischiefe still: Eating my people euen as bread, not one to seeke GODS will? When they thus rage, then suddenly, great feare on them shall fall: For God doeth loue the righteous men, and will maintaine them all: Ye mocke the doinges of the poore, to their reproach and shame, Because they put their trust in GOD, and call vpon his Name. But who shall giue thy people health? and when wilt thou fulfil, Thy promise made to Israel, from out of Sion hill? Euen when thou shalt restore againe, such as were captiues ledde: Then Iaakob shall therein rejoyce, and Israel shall bee glad. PSALME XV. O LORD, within thy Tabernacle, who shal inhabite stil? Or whom wilt thou receiue to dwel, in thy most holy hil?  The man whose life is vncorrupt, whose workes are just and straight: Whose heart doeth thinke the very trueth, whose tongue speak'th no deceite.
Nor to his neighbour doeth none ill, in bodie, goods, or name, Nor willingly doeth heare false tales, which might empaire the same. That in his heart regardeth not, malicious wicked men, But those that loue and feare the Lord, hee maketh much of them. His othe and all his promises, that keepeth faythfully, Although hee make his couenant so, that hee doeth losse thereby. That putteth not to vsurie, his money and his coyne, Nor for to hurt the innocent, doeth bryde or els purloyne. Who so doeth all thinges as yee see, that here is to bee done, Shall neuer perish in this world, nor in the world to come. PSALME XVI. LORD keepe mee, for I trust in thee, and doe confesse indeede, Thou art my GOD, and of my good, O LORD, thou hast no neede.  I giue my goodnes to the Saintes, that in the world doe dwell: And namely to the faythfull flocke, in ver∣tue that excell. They shall heape sorrowes on their heads, which runne as they were madde, To offer to the idole gods, alas, it is to badde. As for their bloody sacrifice, and offringes of that sort, I will not touch, nor yet thereof, my lippes shall make report. For why? the Lord the portion is, of mine inheritance, And thou art hee that doeth maintaine, my rent, my lot, my chance. The place wherein my lot did fall, in beawtie doeth excell. Mine heritage assignde to mee, doeth please mee wondrous well. I thanke the Lord that caused mee, to vnderstand the right. For by his meanes my secret thoughtes, doe teach mee euery night. I set the Lord still in my sight, and trust him ouer all, For hee doeth stand on my right hand, therefore I shall not fall. Wherefore my heart and tongue also, doe both rejoyce together, My flesh and body rest in hope, when I this thing consider. Thou wilt not leaue my soule in graue, (for, Lord, thou Iouest mee) Nor yet wilt giue thine holy one, corruption for to see. But wilt mee teach the way to life, for all treasure and store. Of perfect joy, are in thy face, and power for euermore. PSALME XVII. Sing this as the 16. Psalme. O Lord, giue eare to my just cause, attend when I complaine, And heare the prayer that I put foorth, with lippes that doe not faine. And let the judgement of my cause, proceede alwayes from thee, And let mine eyes beholde, and cleare this my simplicitie. Thou hast well tried mee in the night, and yet couldst nothing finde, That I haue spoken with my tongue, that was not in my minde. As for the workes of wicked men, and pathes peruerse and ill, For loue of thy moste holy worde, I haue refrained still. Then in thy pathes, that bee moste pure, stay mee, Lord, and preserue, That from the way, wherein I walke, my steppes may neuer swerue. For I doe call to thee, O Lord, thou wilt mee surely aide, Then heare my prayer, and weigh right well, the wordes that I haue saide. Oh, thou the Sauiour of all them, that puts their trust in thee, Declare thy strength, on them that spurne. against thy Maiestie.
Oh, keepe me, Lord, as thou wouldst keepe, the apple of thine eye: And vnder couert of thy winges, defend mee secretely. From wicked men that trouble mee, and dayly mee annoy: And from my foes that goe about, my soule for to destroy. Which wallow in their worldly wealth, so full and eke so fatte: That in their pryde they doe not spare, to speake they care not what. They lye in waite where wee should passe, with craft mee to confound: And musing mischiefe in their mindes, to cast mee to the ground. Much like a lion greedily, that would his prey embrace: Or lurking like a lions whelpe, within some secrete place. Vp, Lord, with haste preuent my foe, and cast him at my feete: Saue thou my soule from the ill man, and with thy sworde him smite. Deliuer mee, Lord, by thy power, out of these tyrantes handes: Which now so long time reigned haue, and kept vs in their bandes. I meane from worldly men, to whom all worldly goods are rife: That haue no hope nor part of joy, but in this present life. Thou of thy store their bellies filst, with pleasures to their minde: Their children haue enough, and leaue to theirs the rest behinde. But I shall with pure conscience, beholde thy gracious face: So when I wake, I shall bee full, with thine image and grace. PSALME XVIII. O GOD my strength and fortitude, of force I must loue thee: Thou art my Castell and defence in my necessitie,  My GOD, my rocke, in whom I trust, the worker of my wealth: My refuge, buckler, and my shielde, the horne of all my health. When I sing laud vnto the Lord, moste worthie to bee serued: Then from my foes I am right sure, that I shall bee preserued. The pangues of death did compasse mee, and bounde mee euery where: The flowing waues of wickednesse, did put mee in great feare. The slie and subtle snares of hell, were rounde about mee set: And for my death there was preparde, a deadly trapping net. I thus beset with paine and grief, did pray to God for grace: And hee foorthwith did heare my plaint, out of his holy place. Such is his power, that in his wrath, hee made the earth to quake: Yea, the foundation of the Mount, of Basan for to shake. And from his nostrels came a smoke, when kindled was his ire: And from his mouth came kindled coles, of hote consuming fire. The Lord descended from aboue, and bowde the heauens hie: And vnderneath his feete hee cast, the darkenesse of the skie. On Cherubs and on Cherubins, full royally hee rode: And on the winges of all the windes, came flying all abrode. And like a denne moste darke hee made, his hid and secrete place: With waters blacke, and airie cloudes, enuironed hee was. But when the presence of his face, in brightnesse shall appeare: Then cloudes consume, and in their stead, come haile and coales of fire. These fierie dartes and thunder-boltes, disperse them here and there: And with his often lighteninges, hee puts them in great feare. Lord at thy wrath and threatninges sharpe, and at thy chiding cheare, The springes and the foundations, of all the worlde appeare. And from aboue the Lord sent downe, to teach mee from below: And pluckt mee out of waters great, that woulde mee ouer-flow.
And mee deliuered from my foes, that would haue made mee thrall: Yea, from such foes as were too strong for mee to deale withall. They did preuent mee to oppresse, in time of my great griefe: But yet the Lord was my defence, my succour and reliefe. Hee brought mee foorth in open place, whereas I might bee free: And kept mee safe, because hee had a fauour vnto mee. And as I was an innocent, so did hee mee regard: And to the cleanenesse of my handes, hee gaue mee my reward. For that I walked in his wayes, and in his pathes haue trode: And haue not wauered wickedly against my Lord my God. But euermore I haue respect to his Law and Decree, His statutes and commandementes, I cast not out from mee. But pure and cleane and vncorrupt, appearde before his face: And did refraine from wickednesse and sinne in any case. The Lord therefore will mee reward, as I haue done aright: And to the cleanenesse of my handes, appearing in his sight. Thou wilt with him that holy is, bee holy (LORD) also: And with the good and vertuous men, right vertuously wilt do. And to the louing and Elect, thy loue thou wilt reserue: And thou wilt vse the wicked men, as wicked men deserue. For thou doest saue the simple folke, in trouble when they lie: And doest bring downe the countenance, of them that looke full hie. The Lord will light my candle so, that it shall shine full bright: The Lord my God will make also my darknesse to bee light. For by thine helpe an hoste of men discomfite, Lord, I shall: By thee I scale and ouer-leape the strength of any wall. Vnspotted are the wayes of God, his word is surely tride: Hee is a sure defence to such as in his fayth abide. For who is God, except the Lord? for other there is none: Or els who is omnipotent, sauing our God alone? The God that girdeth mee with strength, is hee that I did meane: That all the wayes wherein I walke, did euermore keepe cleane. That made my feete euen like the Hartes, in swiftnesse of my pace: And for my surety brought mee foorth, into an open place. Hee did in order put my handes, to battell and to fight: To breake insunder barres of brasse, hee gaue mine armes the might. Thou reachest mee thy sauing health, thy right hand is my tower: Thy loue and familiaritie, doeth still increase my power. And vnder mee thou makest plaine, the way where I should walke: So that my feete shall neuer slip, nor stumble at a balke. And fiercely I pursue and take my foes, that mee annoyde: And from the field doe not returne, till they bee all destroyde. So I suppresse and wound my foes, that they can rise no more: For at my feete they fall downe flat, I strike them all so sore. For thou doest gird mee with thy strength, to warre in such a wise, That they bee scattered all abrode, that vp against mee rise. Lord, thou hast put into mine handes, my mortall enemies yoke: And all my foes thou didst diuide, in sunder with thy stroke. They cald for help, but none would heare, not yet giue them reliefe: Yea to the Lord they calde for helpe, yet heard hee not their griefe. And still like dust before the wind, I driue them vnder feete: And tread them downe like filthy clay, that lyeth in the streete. Thou kepst mee from seditious folke, that still in strife bee led: And thou doest of the heathen folke, appoint mee to bee head. A people strange to mee vnknowne, and yet they shall mee serue: And at the first obey my wordes, whereas mine owne will swerue. I shall bee irkesome to mine owne, they will not see my light: But wander wide out of the way, and hide them out of fight.
But blessed bee the liuing LORD, moste worthy of all praise: That is my rocke and sauing health, praised bee hee alwayes. For God it is that gaue mee power, reuenged for to bee: And with his onely word subdude the people vnto mee. And mee deliuered from my foes, and set mee vp from those, That cruell and vngodly were, and vp against mee rose. And for this cause, O Lord my God, to thee giue thankes I shall: And sing out praises to thy Name, among the Gentiles all. That gauest great prosperity, vnto the king, I say: To Dauid thine anoynted king, and to his seede for ay. PSALME XIX. THe heauens and the firmament, doe wondrously declare, The glory of GOD omnipotent, his workes, and what they are.  The wondrous workes of GOD appeare, by euery dayes successe, The nightes which likewise their race runne, the selfe same thing expresse. There is no language, tongue or speech, where their sound is not heard: In all the earth and coastes thereof, their knowledge is conferd. In them the Lord made for the sunne, a place of great renowne. Who like a bridegrome ready trimde, doeth from his chamber come. And as a valiant champion, who for to get a price, With joy doeth haste to take in hand, some noble enterprise. And all the skie from end to end, hee compasseth about: Nothing can hide it from his heat, but hee will find it out. How perfect is the Law of God, how is his couenant sure: Conuerting soules, and making wise, the simple and obscure: Iust are the Lordes Commandementes, and glad both heart and mind: His precepts pure and giueth light, to eyes that hee full blind. The feare of God is excellent, and doeth endure for euer: The judgementes of the Lord are true, and righteous altogether. And more to bee embrac'de alwayes, then fined gold I say: The hony and the hony combe, are not so sweet as they. By them thy seruant is forwarnd, to haue God in regard: And in performance of the same, there shall bee great reward. But, Lord, what earthly man doeth know the errours of his life? Then cleanse my soule from secret sinnes. which are in mee moste rife. And keepe mee, that presumptuous sinnes, preuaile not ouer mee: And then I shall bee innocent, and great offences flie. Accept my mouth, and eke my heart, my wordes and thoughtes eachone: For my redeemer and my strength, O Lord, thou art alone. PSALME XX. IN trouble and aduersitie, the LORD GOD heare thee still, The Majestie of Iaakobs GOD, defend thee from all ill.  And sende thee from his holy place, his
helpe at euery neede: And so in Sion stablish thee, and make thee strong indeede. Remembring well the sacrifice, that now to him is done: And so receiue right thankefully, thy burnt offringes each one. According to thine heartes desire, the Lord graunt vnto thee: And all thy counsell and deuise, full well performe may hee. Rejoycing wee, when thou vs sauest, our baners shall display, Vnto the Lord, which thy requestes, fullfilled hath alway. The Lord will his anoynted saue, I know well by his grace, And sende him health by his right hand, out of his holy place. In charets some put confidence, and some in horses trust: But wee remember God our Lord, that keepeth promise just. They fall downe flat, but wee doe rise, and stand vp stedfastly: Now saue and helpe vs Lord and King, on thee when wee doe cry. PSALME XXI. O LORD, how joyfull is the King, in thy strength, & thy power: How vehe∣mently doeth hee rejoyce, in thee his Sa∣uiour?  For thou hast giuen vnto him, his godly heartes desire: To him hast thou nothing denied, of that hee did require. Thou didst preuent him with thy giftes, and blessinges manyfolde: And thou hast set vpon his head, a crowne of perfect golde. And when hee asked life of thee, thereof thou madest him sure: To haue long life: yea, such a life, as euer should endure. Great is his glory, by thine helpe, thy benefite and aide: Great worship, and great honour both, thou hast vpon him laide. Thou wilt giue him felicitie, that neuer shall decay: And with thy chearefull countenance, wilt comfort him alway. For why? the King doeth strongly trust, in God for to preuaile: Therefore his goodnesse and his grace, will not that hee shall quaile. But let thine enemies feele thy force, and those that thee withstand: Finde out thy foes, and let them feele, the power of thy right hand. As in an ouen burne them, O Lord, in fiery flame and fume: Thine anger shall destroy them all, and fire shall them consume. And thou wilt roote out of the earth, their fruite that should encrease: And from the number of thy folke, their seede shall ende and cease. For why? much mischiefe did they muse, against thine holy Name: Yet did they faile, and had no power, for to performe the same. But as a marke thou shalt them set, in a moste open place: And charge thy bow-stringes readily, against thine enemies face. Bee thou exalted, Lord, therefore, in thy strength euery houre: So shall wee sing right solemnely, praising thy might and power. PSALME XXII. Sing this as the 21. Psalme. O God my God, wherefore doest thou forsake mee vtterly? And helpest not when I doe make my great complaint and cry. To thee my God, euen all day long, I doe both cry and call: I cease not all the night, and yet thou hearest not at all. Euen thou that in thy Sanctuary, and holy place doest dwell: Thou art the comfort and the joy, and glory of Israell.
And hee in whom our fathers olde, had all their hope for euer: And when they put their trust in thee, thou didst them aye deliuer. They were deliuered euer, when they called on thy Name: And for the faith they had in thee, they were not put to shame. But I am now become a worme, more like then any man: An out-cast, whom the people scorne, with all the spite they can. All mee despise, as they beholde mee walking on the way: They grinne, they mow, they nod their heads, and in this wise they say, This man did glory in the Lord, his fauour, and his loue, Let him redeeme and helpe him now, his power for to proue. Euen from my mothers wombe, O Lord, to take mee thou wast prest, Thou didst preserue mee still in hope, while I did sucke her brest. I was committed from my birth, with thee to haue abode: Since I was in my mothers wombe, thou hast beene aye my God. Then, Lord, depart not now from mee, in this my present griefe: Since I haue none to bee my helpe, my succour and reliefe. So many bulles doe compasse mee, that bee full strong of head: Yea, bulles so fat, as though they had, in Basan fielde beene fed. They gape vpon mee griedily, as though they woulde mee slay: Much like a lion roaring out, and ramping for his prey. But I drop downe like water shed, my joyntes in sunder breake, My heart doeth in my body melt, like waxe against the heate. And like a pot-shard drieth my strength, my tongue it cleaueth fast, Vnto my jawes, and I am brought, to dust of death at last. And many dogges doe compasse mee, and wicked counsell eke, Conspire against mee cursedly, they picrce my handes and feete. I was tormented so, that I might all my bones haue tolde: Yet still vpon mee they doe looke, and still they mee beholde. My garmentes they diuided eke, in partes among them all: And for my coate they did cast lots, to whom it might befall. Therefore, I pray thee, bee not farre, from mee in my great neede: But rather sith thou art my strength, to helpe mee, Lord, make speede. And from the sword, Lord, saue my soule, by thy might, and thy power. And keepe my soule, thy darling deare, from dogges that woulde deuoure. And from the lions mouth, that woulde mee all in sunder shiuer: And from the hornes of Vnicornes, Lord, safely mee deliuer. And I shall to my brethren all, thy Majestie recorde: And in thy Church shall praise the Name, of thee the liuing LORD. All yee that feare the Lord him praise, exalt him Iaakobs seede: And thou, O house of Israell, looke thou him feare and dread. For hee despiseth not the poore, hee turneth not away, His countenance when they doe call, but graunteth to their cry. Among the flocke that feare the Lord, I will therefore proclaime, They praise, and keepe my promise made, for setting foorth thy Name. The poore shall eate, and bee sufficed, and those that endeuour, To know the Lord, their heart shall liue, and praise him euermore. All coastes of earth shall praise the Lord, and turne to him for grace: The heathen folke shall worshippe him, before his blessed face. The kingdome of the heathen folke, the Lord shall haue therefore: And hee shall bee their gouernour, and King for euermore. The rich men of his goodly giftes, shall seeke and taste also: And in his presence worshippe him, and bowe their knees full lowe. And all that shall goe downe to dust, of life by him must taste: My seede shall serue and praise his Name, whilst any worlde shall last. My seede shall plainely shewe to them, that shall bee borne hereafter, His justice and his righteousnesse, and all his workes of wonder.
PSALME XXIII. THe LORD is onely my support, and hee that doeth mee feede. How can I then lacke any thing, whereof I stande in neede? Hee doeth mee folde in cotes moste safe, the tender grasse fast by, And after driues mee to the streames, which runne moste pleasantly. And when I feele my selfe neare lost, then doeth hee mee home take, Conducting mee in his right pathes, euen for his owne Names sake. And though I were euen at deathes dore, yet woulde I feare none ill: For by thy rodde and sheepe-heardes crooke, I am comforted still. Thou hast my table richly deckt, in despite of my foe: Thou hast my head with balme refresht, my cuppe doeth ouer-flowe. And finally, while breath doeth last, thy grace shall mee defende, And in the house of God will I, my life for euer spende. PSALME XXIV. Sing this as the 15. Psalme. TO GOD the earth doeth appeartaine, with all thinges great and small: The worlde also is his demaine, with the indwellers all. For hee hath founded it full fast, aboue the salt sea strande: And stablisht it to abide and last, and on the flooddes to stande. Now who is hee that shall vp-goe, into Gods holy hill? And in his holy place also, who shall continue still? The man whose handes no wrong haue wrought, whose heart is pure and neat: Whose minde for vanitie not sought, nor sworne hath with deceite. Hee that is such, the Lord will sende, his blessinges him vpon, And righteousnesse vnto him lende, shall God, who saues alone. This is the stocke and offring eke, of those that search for thee, Of them, O Lord, that thy face seeke, who true Israelites bee. Exalt your heads, yee gates, on hie, yee doores that last for aye, Bee lift, so the King of glorie, shall through you make his way. Who is this King so glorious? the strong and mightie Lord, Euen hee that is victorious, in battell tride by sworde. Exalt your heads, yee gates, on hie, yee doores that last for aye, Bee lift, so the King of glory, shall through you make his way. Who is this glorious King, I say? the Lord of hostes moste hie, Euen hee is King and shall bee aye, of euerlasting glorie. PSALME XXV. I Lift mine heart to thee, my GOD and guide moste just, Now suffer mee to take no shame, for in thee doe I trust.  Let not my foes rejoyce, nor make a scorne of mee, And let them not be ouerthrowne, that put their trust in thee. But shame shall them befall, which harme them wrongfully, Therefore thy pathes, and thy right wayes, vnto mee, Lord, descrie. Direct mee in thy trueth, and teach mee, I thee pray: Thou art my God and Sauiour, on thee I waite alway. Thy mercies manyfolde, I praye thee, Lord, remember: And eke thy pitie plentifull, for they haue beene for euer.
Remember not the faultes, and frailue of my youth: Remember not how ignorant, I haue beene of thy trueth. Nor after my desertes, let mee thy mercie find: But of thine owne benignitie, Lord, haue mee in thy mind. His mercie is full sweet, his trueth a perfect guide: Therefore the Lord will sinners teach, and such as goe aside. The humble hee will teach, his preceptes for to keepe: Hee will direct in all his wayes, the lowly and the meeke. For all the wayes of God, are trueth and mercie both, To them that keepe his Testament, the witnesse of his Trueth. Now for thine holy Name, O Lord, I thee entreat, To graunt mee pardon for my sinne, for it is wondrous great. Who so doeth feare the Lord, the Lord doeth him direct, To lead his life in such a way, as hee doeth best accept. His soule shall euermore, in goodnesse dwell and stand: His seede and his posteritie, inherit shall the land. All those that feare the Lord, know his secret intent: And vnto them hee doeth declare, his Will and Testament. Mine eyes and eke mine heart, to him I will aduance, That pluckt my feet out of the snare, of sinne and ignorance. With mercy mee behold, to thee I make my mone: For I am poore and desolate, and comfortlesse alone. The troubles of mine heart, are multiplied indeed: Bring mee out of this miserie, necessitie, and need. Behold my pouertie, mine anguish, and my paine: Remit my sinne, and mine offence, and make mee cleane againe. O Lord, behold my foes, how they doe still increase: Pursuing mee with deadly hate, that faine would liue in peace, Preserue and keepe my soule, and eke deliuer mee, And let mee not bee ouer-throwne, because I trust in thee. Let my simple purenesse, mee from mine enemies shend, Because I looke as one of thine, that thou shouldst mee defend. Deliuer, Lord, thy folke, and send them some reliefe, (I meane thy chosen Israel) from all their paine and griefe. PSALME XXVI. LORD bee my judge, for loe, my way is vpright, just and plaine: In GOD my trust hath beene for ay, who shall mee still sustaine,  Proue mee, O LORD, trie thou my raines, my heart examine eke,  Sith in my fight thy grace remaines, thy trueth I sue and seeke. I had no will no haunt or vse, with men whose workes are vaine: The companie I did refuse, of the deceitfull traine. I much abhorde the wicked sort, their deedes did I refuse: To them would I not once resort, which hurtfull thinges deuise. My handes I wash, and doe proceede, in workes that are vpright: Then to thine Altar I make speede, to offer there in sight: That I may speake and preach the praise, that doeth belong to thee: And so declare how wondrous wayes, thou hast beene good to mee. O Lord, thy house I loue moste deare, to mee it doeth excell: I haue delight, and would bee neare, whereas thy grace doeth dwell.
Oh, gather not my soule with them, to sinne that bend their will: Nor yet my life among those men, that thirst much blood to spill: Whose handes are heapt and stuffed full, of fraud, deceit, and guile: And their right hand for bribes doeth pull, and plucke with wrench and wile. But I in righteousnesse intend, my time and dayes to serue: Haue mercy, Lord, and mee defend, so that I doe not swerue. My foote is staid gainst all assayes, it standeth well and right: Therefore, O GOD, thee will I praise, in all thy peoples sight. PSALME XXVII. THe LORD my light and health wil bee, For what then should I bee dismaid? My strength and life also is hee, Of whom then should I be afraid?  When that my foes (men vile and vaine) Approched neare my flesh to eat, They stumbled in the selfe same traine, which they for mee laid by deceit. Against mee though there pitch an hoast, My heart from feare yet farre it is: Though warres bee raised with great boast, Yet will I surely trust in this: One thing I haue the Lord besought, That I may in his house still dwell, To see his beautie, passing thought, His Temple eke which doeth excell. For in the time of troubles great, His tabernacle shall hee hide: His secret tentes shall bee my seat, And on a rocke I shall abide. And now mine head lift vp will hee, About my foes, which worke such fraud, With sacrifice, and offringes free, Within his tentes I will him laud. My voyce, O Lord, let it take place, With mercie heare mee when I cry: When thou didst say, Seeke yee my face, With full consent, Loe, heare, quoth I. Hide not, therefore, thy face mee fro, Nor in thy wrath thy seruant spill: Thou hast mee helpt, then leaue not so, O God of health, helpe thou mee still. Although my parentes mee forsake, The Lord yet will mee raise and stay: My foes set snares, mee in to take, But, Lord, lead me in thy right way. Vnto mine aduersaries lust, Lord, giue mee not in any wise: For witnesse false, with wordes vnjust, They seeke against mee to deuise. I should waxe faint, and sore dismaide, But that I did beleeue to see, Gods goodnesse in that land displaide, Whereas his faithfull seruantes bee. Hope in the Lord, and bee thou strong, Hee comfort will thine heart indeede: Trust in the Lord, and thinke not long, For hee will surely come with speede. PSALME XXVIII. THou art, O Lord, my strength and stay, the succour which I craue: Neglect mee not, lest I bee like, to them which goe to graue.  The voyce of thy suppliant heare, that vnto thee doeth crie: When I lift vp mine handes vnto, thine holy Arke moste hie. Repute mee not among the sort, of wicked and paruert: That speake right faire vnto their friendes, and thinke full ill in heart.
According to their handy worke, as they deserue indeede. And after their inuentions, let them receiue their meede. For they regard nothing Gods workes, his lawes, nor yet his lore: Therefore will hee them and their seede, destroy for euermore. To render thankes vnto the Lord, how great a cause haue I? My voyce, my prayer, and my complaint, that heard so willingly. Hee is my shield and fortitude, my buckler in distresse: My hope, my helpe, my heartes reliefe, my song shall him confesse. Hee is our strength, and our defence, our enemies to resist: The health and the saluation, of his elect by Christ. Thy people and thine heritage, LORD, blesse, guide, and preserue: Increase them, LORD and rule their heartes, that they may neuer swerue. PSALME XXIX. GIue to the Lord yee Potentates, yee Rulers of the world: Giue yee all paise, ho∣nour, and strength, vnto the liuing LORD.  Giue glory to his holy Name, and honour him alone: Worshippe him in his Majestie, within his holy Throne. His voyce doeth rule the waters all, euen as himselfe doeth please: Hee doeth prepare the thunder clappes, and gouerneth all the seas. The voyce of God is of great force, and wondrous excellent: It is moste mightie in effect, and much magnificent. The voyce of God doeth tent and breake, the Cedar trees so long: The Cedar trees of Libanus, which are moste high and strong, And makes them leape like as a calle, Or els the Vnicorne: Not onely trees, but mountaines great, whereon the trees are borne. His voyce diuideth flames of fire, and shakes the wildernesse: It makes the Desert quake for feare, that called is Kades. It makes the Hindes for feare to calue, and makes the couert plaine: Then in his Temple euery man, his glorie doeth proclaime: The Lord was set aboue the floods, ruling the raging sea: So shall hee reigne as Lord and King, for euer and for ay. The Lord will giue his people power, in vertue to increase: The Lord will blesse his chosen flocke, with euerlasting peace. PSALME XXX. ALl laude and praise, with heart and voyce, O Lord, I giue to thee, which didst not make my foes rejoyce, but hast exalted mee.  O Lord my God, to thee I cride, in all my paine and griefe: Thou gauest an eare, and didst prouide, to ease mee with reliefe. Of thy good will thou hast calde backe, my soule from hell to saue: Thou didst reuiue when strength did lacke, and keep'st mee from the graue. Sing praise yee Saintes, that proue and see, the goodnesse of the Lord: In memorie of his Majestie, rejoyce with one accord.
For why? his anger but a space, doeth last, and slacke againe: But in his fauour and his grace, alwayes doeth life remaine. Though gripes of griefe & panges full sore, shall lodge with mee all night: The Lord to joy shall vs restore, before the day bee light. When I enjoy'de the world at will, thus would I boast and say: Tush, I am sure to feele none ill, this wealth shall not decay: For thou, O Lord, of thy good grace, hadst sent mee strength and aide: But when thou turnd'st away thy face, may mind was sore dismaide. Wherefore againe yet did I cry, to thee, O Lord of might: My God with plaintes I did apply, and pray'de both day and night. What gaine is in my blood, sayd I, if death destroy my dayes? Doeth dust declare thy Majestie, or yet thy trueth doeth praise? Wherefore my God some pitie take, O Lord, I thee defire, Doe not this simple soule forsake, of helpe I thee require. Then didst thou turne my griefe and wo, vnto a chearefull voyce, The mourning weede thou took'st mee fro, and mad'st mee to rejoyce. Wherefore, my soule vncessantly, shall sing vnto thee praise: My Lord, my God, to thee will I, giue laud and thankes alwayes. PSALME XXXI. Sing this as the 18. Psalme. O Lord. I put my trust in thee, let nothing worke mee shame: As thou art just deliuer mee, and set mee quite from blame. Heare mee, O Lord, and that anone, to helpe mee make good speed: Bee thou my rocke and house of stone, my fence in time of need. For why? as stones thy strength is tride, thou art my fort and tower: For thy Names sake bee thou my guide, and lead mee in thy power. Plucke foorth my feet, and breake the snare, which they for mee haue laid: Thou art my strength, and all my care, is in thy might and aide. Into thy handes, Lord, I commit, my spirit which is thy due, For why? thou hast redeemed it, O Lord my God moste true. I hate such folke as will not part, from thinges to bee abhord, When they on trifles set their heart, my trust is in the Lord. For I will in thy mercie joy, I see it doeth excell, Thou seest when ought would mee annoy, and knowst my soule full well. Thou hast not left mee in their hand, that would mee ouer-charge, But thou hast set mee out of band, to walke abroad at large. Great griefe, O Lord, doeth mee assaile, some pitie on mee take, Mine eyes waxe dimme, my might doeth faile, my wombe for woe doeth ake. My life is worne with griefe and paine, my yeeres are gone and past, My strength is gone, and through disdaine, my bones corrupt and waste. Among my foes I am a scorne, my friendes are all dismaide. My neighbours and my kinsmen borne, to see mee are afraide. As men once dead are out of mind, so am I now forgot, As small effect in mee they find, as in a broken pot. I heard the bragges of all the rout, their threats my mind did fray, How they conspird and went about, to take my life away. But, Lord, I trust in thee for aide, not to bee ouer-trod, For I confesse and still haue said, thou art my Lord and God. The length of all my life and age, o Lord, is in thy had: Defend mee from the wrathfull rage, of them that mee with-stand. To mee, thy seruant, Lord, expresse, and shew thy joyfull face: And saue mee Lord, for thy goodnesse, thy mercie, and thy grace. Lord, let mee not bee put to blame, for that on thee I call: But let the wicked beare their shame, and in the graue to fall. O Lord, make dumbe their lips outright, which are addict to lies: And cruelly with pride and spight, against the just deuise. Oh, how great good hast thou in store, laide vp, and done for them, That feare and trust in thee, before the sonnes of mortall men!
Thy presence doeth them fence and guide, from all proude bragges and wronges: Within thy place thou doest them hide, from all the strife of tongues. Thankes to the Lord, that hath declar'de, on mee his grace so farre: Mee to defend with watch and warde, as in a towne of warre. Though in my haste and griefe said I, loe, see, I am reject: Yet, Lord, on thee when I did cry, my plaint thou didst accept. Yee Saintes, loue yee the Lord, I say, the faithfull hee doeth guide: And to the proude hee will repay, according to their pride. Bee strong, and God shall stay your heart, bee bolde yee that are just, For sure the Lord will take your part, sith yee on him doe trust. PSALME XXXII. Sing this as the 39. Psalme. THe man is blest, whose wickednesse, the Lord hath cleane remitted: And hee, whose sinne and wretchednesse, is hidde and also couered. And blest is hee, to whom the Lord, imputeth not his sinne: Which in his heart hath hidde no guile, nor fraude is found therein. For whiles that I kept close my sinne, by silence and constraint: My bones did weare and waste away, with dayly mone and plaint. For night and day thine hand on mee, so grieuous was and smert: That all my blood and humours moist, to drynesse did conuert. I did, therefore, confesse my fault, and all my sinnes discouer: Then thou, o Lord, didst mee forgiue, and all my sinnes passe ouer. The humble man shall pray therefore, and seeke thee in due time: So that the floods of waters great, shall haue no power on him. When trouble and aduersitie, doe compasse mee about, Thou art my refuge, and my ioy, and thou doest rid mee out. Come hither, and I shall thee teach, how thou shalt Walke aright, And will thee guide, as I my selfe, haue learnde by proofe and sight. Bee not so rude and ignorant, as is the horse and mule: Whose mouth without a raine or bit, from harme thou canst not rule. The wicked man shall manyfold, sorrowes and griefe sustaine, But vnto him that trustes in God, his goodnesse shall remaine. Bee merry, therefore, in the Lord, yee iust lift vp your voyce, And yee of pure and perfect heart, bee glad, and eke reioyce. PSALME XXXIII. YEe righteous in the Lord reioyce, it is a seemely sight, That vpright men with thankefull voyce, should praise the God of might.  Praise yee the Lord with harpe and song, in Psalmes and pleasant thinges, with lute and instrument among, that soundeth with tenne stringes. Sing to the Lord a song moste new, with courage giue him praise, For why? his word is euer true, his workes and all his wayes. To iudgement, equity, and right, hee hath a great good will, And with his giftes hee doeth delight, the earth throughout to fill. For by the word of God alone, the heauens all were wrought, Their hoastes and powers euerechone, his breath to passe hath brought. The waters great gathered that hee, on heapes within the shore: And hide them in the depth to bee, as in a house of store. All men on earth, both least and moste, feare God, and keepe his law: Yee that inhabite in each coaste, dread him and stand in aw.
What hee commanded wrought it was, at once with present speed: What hee doeth will, is brought to passe, with full effect indeed. The counsels of the Nations rude, the Lord doeth driue to nought: Hee doeth defeate the multitude, of their deuise and thought. But his decrees continue still, thy neuer slacke nor swage: The motions of his mind and will, take place in euery age. And blest are they to whom the Lord, as God and guide is knowne: Wnom hee doeth choose of meere accord, to take them as his owne. The Lord from heauen doeth cast his sight, on men mortall by birth: Considering from his seat of might, the dwellers on the earth. The Lord, I say, whose hand hath wroght, mans heart, and doeth it frame: For hee alone doeth know the thought, and working of the same. A king that trusteth in his hoste, shall not preuaile at length: The man that of his might doeth boast, shall fall for all his strength. The troupes of horsemen eke shall faile, their sturdy steedes shall sterue: The strength of horse shall not preuaile, the rider to preserue. But loe, the eyes of God intend, and watch to aide the just: With such as feare him to offend, and on his goodnesse trust. That hee of death and all distresse, may set their soules from dread: And if that dearth the land oppresse, in hunger them to feed. Wherefore our soule doeth still depend, on God our strength and stay: Hee is the shield vs to defend, and driue all dartes away. Our soule in God hath ioy and game, reioycing in his might, For why? in his moste holy Name, wee hope and much delight. Therefore, let thy goodnesse, O Lord, still present with vs bee, As wee alwayes with one accord, doe onely trust in thee. PSALME XXXIV. I will giue laud: and honour both, vnto the LORD alwayes: And eke my mouth for euermore, shall speake vnto his praise.  I doe delite to laude the LORD, in soule and eke in voyce: That humble men and mortified, may heare and so rejoyce. Therefore see that yee magnifie, with mee the liuing LORD: And let vs now exalt his Name, together with one accord. For I my selfe besought the LORD, hee answered mee againe: And me relieued incontinent, from all my feare and paine. Who so they bee that him behold, shall see his light moste cleare: Their countenance shall not bee dasht, they neede it not to feare. This silly wretch for some reliefe, vnto the Lord did call: Who did him heare without delay, and rid him out of thrall. The Angell of the Lord doeth pitch, his tentes in euery place: To saue all such as feare the Lord, that nothing them deface. Taste and consider well, therefore, that God is good and just: O happy man, that maketh him, his onely stay and trust. Feare yee the Lord his holy ones, aboue all earthly thing: For they that feare the liuing Lord, are sure to lacke nothing. The lions shall bee hunger-bit, and pinde with famine much: But as for them that feare the Lord, no lacke shall bee to such. Come neare, therefore, my children deare, and to my word giue eare: I shall you teach the perfect way, how yee the Lord should feare. Who is the man that would liue long, and lead a blessed life: See thou refraine thy tongue and lippes, from all deceit and strife.
Turne backe thy face from doing ill, and doe the godly deed: Inquire for peace and quietnesse, and follow it with speed. For why? the eyes of God aboue, vpon the just are bent: His eares likewise doe heare the plaint, of the poore innocent. But hee doeth frowne & bend his browes, vpon the wicked traine: And cuts away the memorie, that should of them remaine. But when the just doe call and cry, the Lord doeth heare them so, That out of paine and miserie, foorthwith hee lets them goe. The Lord is kind and streight at hand, to such as bee contrite: Hee saues also the sorrowfull, the meeke and pure in sprite, Full many bee the miseries, that righteous men doe suffer: But out of all aduersities, the Lord doeth him deliuer. The Lord doeth so preserue and keepe, his very bones alway: that not so much as one of them, doeth perish or decay. The sinne shall slay the wicked man, which hee himselfe hath wrought: And such as hate the righteous man, shall soone bee brought to nought. But they that serue the liuing Lord, the Lord doeth saue them sound: And whom that put their trust in him, nothing shall them confound. PSALME XXXV. LOrd plead my cause against my foes, confound their force and might: Fight on my part against all those, that seeke with mee to fight.  Lay hand my God vpon thy shield, thy selfe in armour dresse; Stand vp for mee and fight the field, to helpe mee from distresse. Bring foorth the speare, and stop the way, mine enemies to with-stand: Then, Lord, vnto my soule thus say, I am thy helpe at hand. Confound them with rebuke and blame, that seeke my soule to spill: Let them turne backe, and fly with shame, that thinke to worke mee ill. Let them bee scattred all abrode, as chaffe let them bee tost: And by the Angell of our God, disperst, destroyde, and lost. Let all their wayes bee voyde of light, and slippery like to fall: And send thine Angell with thy might, to persecute them all. For why? without my fault they haue, in secret set their grin: And for no cause haue digde a caue, to take my soule therein. When they thinke least, and haue no care, O Lord, destroy them all: Let them bee trapt in their owne snare, and in their mischiefe fall. Then shall my soule, my heart, and voyce, in God haue joy and wealth: That in the Lord I may rejoyce, and in his sauing health. And then my bones shall speake and say, my partes shall all agree: O Lord, though they doe seeme full gay, what man is like to thee? That doest defend the weake from them, that are both stout and strong: And rid the poore from wicked men, that spoile and doe them wrong. Against mee cruell men did rise, to witnesse thinges vntrue: And to accuse mee did deuise, of that I neuer knew. And where to them I bare good will, they quite mee with disdaine, For their intent was how to spill, and bring my soule in paine. Yet I when they were sicke took thought, and clad my selfe in sacke, With fasting I my selfe low brought, to pray I was not slacke. As to my friend or brother deare, I did my selfe behaue,
And as one making wofull cheare, about his mothers graue. But in my trouble they did joy, and gather on a rout: Yea abject slaues at mee did toy, with mockes and checkes full stout. The bellie-gods and flattering traine, at feastes did mee deride: They gnasht their teeth with great disdaine, and wryde their mouth aside. Lord, when wilt thou amend this geare? why doest thou stay and pause? Oh, rid my soule repleat with feare, out of these Lions clawes. So then will I giue thankes to thee, before thy Church alwayes: And where in preasse the people bee, there will I shew thy praise. Let not my foes prauaile on mee, which hate mee for no fault: Nor yet to winke or turne their eye, that causelese mee assault. Of peace no word they thinke or say, their talke is all vntrue: They still consult, and would betray, all those that peace ensue. With open mouth they runne at mee, they gape, they laugh, they fliere: Well, well, say they, our eye doeth see, the thing that wee desire. But, Lord, thou seest what wayes they take, cease not this geare to mend: Bee not farre off, nor mee forsake, as men that faile their friend. A wake, arise, and stirre abrode, defend mee in my right: Reuenge my cause, my Lord my God, and aide mee with thy might. According to thy righteousnesse, my Lord God set mee free: And let not them their pride expresse, nor triumph ouer mee. Let not their heartes rejoyce and cry, there, there, this geare goeth trimme: Nor giue them cause to say on hie, wee haue our will on him. Confound them with rebuke and shame, that joy when I doe mourne: And pay them home with spite and blame, that bragge at mee with scorne. Let them bee glad, and eke rejoyce, which loue mine vpright way: And they all times with heart and voyce, shall praise the Lord and say. Great is the Lord, and doeth excell, for why? hee doeth delight: To see his seruantes prosper well, that is his pleasant sight. Wherefore my tongue I will apply, thy righteousnesse to praise: Vnto the Lord my God will I, sing laud and thankes alwayes. PSALME XXXVI. THe wicked deedes of the ill man, vn∣to mine heart doe witnesse plaine, That feare of God in him is none:  Though hee him∣selfe would flatter faine: His wickednesse is judgde and knowne. His mouth is bent to vile deceat, With ignorance hee is repleat, And to doe good hee hath no will: In bedde hee doeth for mischiefe waite, full bent to seeke the way moste ill. Thy mercies, Lord, to heauen reach, Thy faithfulnesse the cloudes doe preach, Thy righteousnesse as mountaines huge, Thy judgements deepe no tongue can teach, To man and beast thou art refuge. O God, how great thy mercies bee! The sonnes of men doe trust in thee: With thee they shall bee fully fed, And thou wilt giue them drinke full free, Of pleasant riuers largely spred. The Well of life is thine by right, Thy brightnesse doeth giue vs our light, Thy fauour, Lord, to such extend, As knowledge thee with heart vpright, Thy righteousnesse to such men lend. Let not the proud, O Lord, preuaile, Nor vaine mens power make mee to quaile, But loe, they faile in their deuise: They mischiefe worke with tooth and naile, And fall, but can by no meanes rise. PSALME XXXVII. GRudge not to see the wicked men, in wealth to flourish still: Nor yet enuie
such as to ill, haue bent and set their will.  For as greene grasse and flourishing herbes are cut and wither away, So shall their great prosperitie, soone passe, fade, and decay. Trust thou therefore in God alone, to doe well giue thy mind: So shalt thou haue the land as thine, and there sure food shall find. In God set all thine heartes delite, and looke what thou wouldst haue, Or els can wish in all the world, thou needst it not to craue. Cast both thy selfe and thine affaires, on God with perfect trust: And thou shall see with patience, th'effect both sure and just. Thy perfect life and godly name, hee will cleare as the light: So that the Sunne, euen at noone day, shall not shine halfe so bright. Bee still, therefore, and stedfastly, on God see thou wait then: Not shrinking for the prosprous state, of leud and wicked men. Shake off despite, enuie, and hate, at least in any wise: Their wicked steps auoide and flee, and follow not their guise. For euery wicked man will God, destory, both more and lesse: But such as trust in him, are sure the land for to possesse. Watch but a while, and thou shalt see, no more the wickeds traine: No, not so much as house or place, where once hee did remaine. But mercyfull and humble men, enjoy shall sea and land: In rest and peace they shall rejoyce, for nought shall them with-stand. The lewd men and malicious, against the just conspire: They gnash their teeth at him as men, which doe his bane desire. But while that lewd men thus doe thinke, the Lord laugh'th them to scorne: For why? hee seeth their terme approach, when they shall sigh and mourne. The wicked haue their sword outdrawne, their bow eke haue they bent: To ouer-throw and kill the poore, as they the right way went. But the same sword shall pierce their heart, which was to kill the iust: Likewise the bow shall breake to shiuers, wherein they put their trust. Doubtlesse the iust mans poore estate, is better a great deale more, Then all these lewd and wordly mens rich pompe and heaped store. For bee their power neuer so strong, God will it ouer-throw: Where contrary hee doeth preserue, the humble men and low. Hee seeth by his great prouidence, the good mens trade and way: And will giue them inheritance, which neuer shall decay. They shall not bee discouraged, when some are hard bested, When other shall bee hunger-bit, they shall bee clad and fed. For whosoeuer wicked is, and enemies to the Lord: Shall quaile, yea melt, euen as lambes grease, or smoke that flieth abrode. Behold, the wicked borroweth much, and neuer payeth againe, Whereas the just, by liberall giftes, maketh many glad and faine. For they whom God doth blesse shall haue the land for heritage, And they whom hee doeth curse likewise, shall perish in his rage. The Lord the iust mans wayes doth guide, and giueth him good successe: To euery thing hee takes in hand, hee sendeth good addresse. Though that hee fall, yet is hee fure, not vtterly to quaile: Because the Lord stretch'th out his hand, at neede, and doeth not faile. I haue beene young, and now am old, yet did I neuer see, The just man left, or els his seed, to begge for miserie. But giueth alwayes moste liberally, and lendeth whereas is need: His children and posteritie, receiue of God their meed. Flee vice therefore, and wickednesse, and vertue doe embrace: So God shall graunt thee long to haue, in earth a dwelling place: For God so loueth equitie, and sheweth to his such grace:
That hee preserueth them alway, but stroyeth the wicked race. Whereas the good and godly men, inherite shall the land, Hauing as lordes all thinges therein, in their owne power and hand. The just mans mouth doeth euer speake, of matters wise and hie: His tongue doeth talke to edifie, with trueth and equitie. For in his heart the Law of God his Lord doeth still abide: So that where euer hee goeth or walk'th, his foot can neuer slide. The wicked like a rauening wolfe, the just man doeth beset: By all meanes seeking him to kill, if hee fall in his net. Though hee should fall into his handes, yet God would succour send: Though men against him sentence giue, God would him yet defend. Wait thou on God, and keepe his way, hee shall preserue thee then: The earth to rule, and thou shalt see, destroy de these wicked men. The wicked haue I seene moste strong, and plac'd in high degree: Flourishing in all wealth and store, as doeth the Lawrell tree: But suddenly hee passed away, and loe, hee was quite gone: Then I him sought, but could scarce find, the place where dwelt such one. Marke and behold the perfect man, how God doeth him increase: For the just man shall haue at length, great joy with rest and peace. As for transgressors, woe to them, destroyde they shall all bee: God will cut off their budding race, and rich posteritie. But the saluation of the just, doeth come from God aboue: Who in their trouble send'th them aide, of his meere grace and loue. God doeth them helpe, saue, and deliuer, from lewd men and vniust, And still will saue them, whiles that they in him doe put their trust. PSALME XXXVIII. Sing this as the 6. Psalme. PVt mee not to rebuke, O LORD, when kindled is thine ire: Nor in thy furie mee correct, O Lord, I thee desire. For loe, on mee poore wretch haue light, thine arrowes sharpe and kiene, And on my backe thine heauie hand, to lie may well bee seene. Sith thou art angrie, Lord, therefore, no health my flesh is in: Nor in my bones, rest, lesse or more, by reason of my sinne. For loe, my wicked doinges, Lord, aboue my head are gone, A greater lode then I can beare, they lie mee sore vpon. My woundes so stinke, & festered are, as loathsome is to see, Which all through mine owne foolishnesse, betideth vnto mee. I am bowde downe, and crookt full sore through this my great distresse: That I passe ouer all the day, with plaintes and heauinesse, For why? with raging heat throughout, my loynes are whole repleat, And in my flesh no part at all, is sound, or yet compleat. So weake and feeble am I brought, and broken eke so sore, That euen for very griefe of heart, I am compeld to roare. My whole request, my sighes also, are open in thy sight, My heart doth pant, my strēgth hath faild, mine eyes haue lost their light. My louers and my wonted friendes, flee this my plague and griefe, My kinsfolke they aloofe doe stand, and shew mee no reliefe. They that did seeke my life laid snares, and they that sought the way, To doe mee hurt, spake lies, and thought, on treason all the day. But as a deafe man I became, that could not heare at all, And as one dumbe, that openeth not, his mouth to speake withall. Euen as the man both deafe and dumbe, that answereth not againe, When hee reprooued is, such like, am I become certaine. For why? O Lord, on thee with hope, I wait, and doe attend: Thou wilt mee heare, my Lord my God, and succour to mee send. Heare mee in time, said I, lest that my foes should mee despise: Rejoycing when they see mee slip, who then against mee rise. For loe, I am already brought, to halte moste shamefully,
And euer present mee before, is my great miserie. For while that I my wickednesse, in humble wise confesse, And while I for my sinnefull deedes, my sorrow doe expresse. My foes doe still remaine aliue, and mightie are also: And they that hate mee wrongfully, in number hugely grow. They are mine aduersaries eke, that ill for good repayes, Because I follow with mine heart, and ensue goodnesse ay. Forsake not mee, therefore, O Lord, bee not farre off away, With speed make haste vnto my helpe, O God my health and stay. PSALME XXXIX. Sing this as the 29. Psalme. I Said; I will looke to my wayes, for feare I should goe wrong: I will take heed all times, that I offend not with my tongue. As with a bit I will keepe fast, my mouth with force and might: Not once to whisper all the while, the wicked are in sight. I held my tongue and spake no word, but kept mee close and still: Yea, from good talke I did refraine, but sore against my will. My heart waxt hote within my brest, with musing, thought, and doubt, Which did increase and stirre the fire, at last these wordes brast out. Lord, number out my life and dayes, which yet I haue not past: So that I may bee certified, how long my life shall last. Lord, thou hast powred out my life, in length much like a span: Mine age is nothing vnto thee, so vaine is euery man. Man walketh like a shade, and doeth in vaine himselfe annoy, In getting goods, and can not tell, who shall the same enioy. Now, Lord sith thinges this wise do frame, what helpe doe I desire? Of trueth my hope doeth hang on thee, I nothing els require. From all the sinnes that I haue done, Lord, quite mee out of hand: And make mee not a scorne to fooles, that nothing vnderstand. I should haue beene as dumbe, and to complaine, my lippes not moue, Because I knew it was thy worke, my patience for to proue. Lord, take from me thy scourge & plague, I can them not with-stand, For I consume and pine with feare, of thy moste heauie hand. When thou for sinne doeth man rebuke, hee waxeth woe and wanne, As doeth a cloath that mothes haue fret, so vaine a thing is man. Lord, heare my sute and giue good heed, regard my teares that fall, I soiourne like a stranger heere, as did my fathers all. Oh, spare a little, giue mee space, my strength for to restore. Before I goe away from hence, and shall bee seene no more. PSALME XL. Sing this as the 35. Psalme. I Waited long, and sought the Lord, and patiently did beare, At length to mee hee did accord, my voyce and cry to heare. Hee pluckt mee from the lake so deept, out of the myre and clay, and on a rocke hee set my feete, and hee did guide my way. To mee hee taught a Psalme of praise, which I must shew abrode, And sing new songes and thankes alwayes, vnto the Lord our God. When all the folke these thinges shall see, as people much afraid, Then they vnto the Lord will flee, and trust vpon his aide. O blest is hee, whose hope and heart, doeth in the Lord remaine, That with the proud doeth take no part nor such as lie and faine. For, Lord my God, thy wondrous deeds, in greatnesse farre doe passe, Thy fauour towardes vs exceeds, all thinges that euer was. When I intend and doe deuise, thy workes abrode to show, To such a reckoning they doe rise, thereof none end I know. Burnt offringes thou didst not desire, (mine eares well vnderstand) Nor sacrifice for sinne with fire, thou didst at all demaund. But then said I, behold and looke, I come, O Lord, to thee,
For in the volume of thy booke, thus is it writ of mee. That I, O God, with my whole mind, thy will to doe like well, For in my heart thy Law I find, fast placed there to dwell. Thy justice and thy righteousnesse, in great resortes I tell: Behold, my tongue no time doeth cease, O Lord, thou knowest full well. I haue not hid within my brest, thy goodnesse as by stealth: But I declare, and haue exprest, thy trueth and sauing health. I kept not close thy louing mind, that no man should it know, The trust that in thy trueth I find, to all the Church I show. Thy tender mercie, Lord, from mee, with-draw thou not away: But let thy loue and veritie, preserue mee still for ay. For I with mischiefes many one, am sore beset about, My sinnes such hold haue tane mee on, I can not once looke out. Yea, they in number farre exceed, the haires vpon mine head, So that mine heart doeth faint for dread, that I almost am dead. With speed send helpe, and set mee free, O Lord, I thee require, Make haste with aide to succour mee, O Lord, at my desire. Let them sustaine rebuke and shame, that seeke my soule to spill, Driue backe my foes, and them defame, that wish and would mee ill. For their ill fates doe them destroy, that would deface my name, Which at mee thus doe raile and cry, fye on him, fye for shame. Let them in thee haue joy and wealth, that seeke to thee alwayes, That such as loue thy sauing health, may say, to God bee praise. But as for mee, I am but poore, opprest, and brought full low: Yet thou, O Lord, wilt mee restore, to health full well I know. For why? thou art my hope and trust, my refuge, helpe, and stay: Wherefore, my God, as thou art iust, with mee no time delay. PSALME XLI. THe man is blest, that carefull is, the needie to consider, For in the season peri∣lous, the Lord will him deliuer.  The Lord will make him safe and sound, and happy in the land, And hee will not deliuer him, into his enemies hand. And in his bed when hee lieth sicke, the Lord will him restore, And thou, O Lord, wilt turne to health, his sickenesse and his sore. Then in my sickenesse thus say I, haue mercy, Lord, on mee, And heale my soule, which is full woe, that I offended thee. Mine enemies wisht mee ill in heart, and thus of mee did say, When shall hee die, that all his name, may vanish quite away? And when they come to visite mee, they aske if I doe well, But in their heartes mischiefe they hatch, and to their mates it tell. They bite their lippes, and whisper so, as though they would mee charme, And cast their fetches, how to trap mee with some mortall harme. Some grieuous sinne hath brought him to this sickenesse, say they plaine, Hee is so low, that without doubt, rise can hee not againe. The man also that I did trust, with mee did vse deceit, Who at my table ate my bread, the same for mee laid wait. Haue mercy, Lord, on mee therefore, and let mee bee preseru'de, That I may render vnto them, the thinges they haue deseru'de. By this I know assuredly, to bee belou'de of thee, When that mine enemies haue no cause, to triumph ouer mee.
But in my right thou hast mee kept, and maintained alway, And in thy presence place assignde, where I shall dwell for aye. The Lord the God of Israel, bee praised euermore, Euen so bee it, Lord will I say, euen so bee it therefore. PSALME XLII. Sing this as the 33. Psalme. LIke as the Hart doeth breath and bray, the well-springes to obtaine, So doeth my soule desire alway, with thee, Lord, to remaine. My soule doth thirst, and wold draw neare, the liuing God of might. Oh, when shall I come and appeare, in presence of his sight? The teares all times are my repast, which from mine eyes doe slide, When wicked men cry out so fast, where is now God thy guide? Alas, what griefe is it to thinke, what freedome once I had? Therefore my soule as at pits brinke, is moste heauy and sad. When I did march in good array, well furnisht with my traine, Vnto the Temple was our way, with songes and heartes most faine. My soule, why art thou sad alwayes, and fretst thus in my brest? Trust still in God, for him to praise, I hold it euer best. By him I haue succour at need, against all paine and griefe: Hee is my God, which with all speed. will haste to send reliefe. And thus my soule within mee, Lord, doeth faint to thinke vpon The land of Iordan, and record, the little hill Hermon. One griefe another in doeth call, as cloudes burst out their voyce, The floods of euils that doe fall, runne ouer mee with noyce. yet I by day felt his goodnesse, and helpe at all assayes: Likewise by night I did not cease, the liuing God to praise. I am perswaded thus to say, to him with pure pretence: O Lord, thou art my guide and stay, my rocke, and my defence. Why doe I then in pensiuenesse, hanging the head, thus walke, While that mine enemies mee oppresse, and vexe mee with their talke? For why? they pierce mine inward partes, with panges to bee abhord: When they cry out with stubborn heartes, where is thy God, thy Lord? So soone why doest thou faint and quaile, my soule with paines opprest? With thoughtes why doest thy selfe assaile, so sore within my brest? Trust in the Lord thy God alwayes, and thou the time shalt see: To giue him thankes with laud and praise, for health restorde to thee. PSALME XLIII. IVdge and reuenge my cause, O Lord, from them that euil be: From wicked & de∣ceitfull men, O Lord deliuer mee.  For of my strength thou art the GOD, why putst thou mee thee fro? And why walke I so heauily, oppressed with my foe? Send out thy light, and eke thy trueth, and lead mee with thy grace: Which may conduct mee to thy hill, and to thy dwelling place. Then shall I to the Altar goe, of God my joy and cheare: And on my harpe giue thankes to thee, O God my God moste deare. Why art thou then so sad, my soule? and fretst thus in my brest? Still trust in God, for him to praise, I hold it alwayes best. By him I haue deliuerance, against all paines and griefe, Hee is my God, which doeth alwayes, at need send mee reliefe.
PSALME XLIV. OVr eares haue heard our Fathers tell, and reuerently record, The wondrous workes that thou hast done, in alder time O Lord,  How thou didst cast the Gentiles out, and stroyedst them with strong hand, Planting our Fathers in their place, and gauest to them their land. They conquered, not by sword or strength, the land of thy behest: But by thy hand, thy arme, and grace, because thou louedst them best. Thou art my King, O God, that helpt, Iaakob in sundrie wise: Led with thy power, we threw downe such as did against vs rise. I trusted not in bow nor sword, they could not saue mee sound: Thou kept vs from our enemies rage, thou didst our foes confound. And still wee boast of thee our God, and praise thine holy Name. Yet now thou goest not with our hoast, but leauest vs to shame. Thou madest vs flee before our foes, and so was ouer-trode. Our enemies spoild and robd our goods, when wee were sparst abrode. Thou hast vs giuen to our foes, as sheep for to bee slaine: Amongst the Heathen euery where, scattred wee doe remaine. Thy people thou hast sold like slaues, and as a thing of nought: For profite none thou hadst thereby, no gaine at all was sought. And to our neighbours thou hast made, of vs a laughing stocke: And those that round about vs dwell, at vs doe grinne and mocke. Thus wee serue for none other vse, but for a common talke: They mocke, they scorne, and nod their heads, where euer wee goe or walke. I am ashamde continually, to heare those wicked men: Yea, I so blush, that all my face, with red is couered then. For why? we heare such slandrous wordes, such false reportes and lies: That death it is to see their wronges, their threatninges and their cries. For all this wee forget not thee, nor yet thy couenant breake: Wee turne not backe our hearts from thee, nor yet thy pathes forsake. Yet thou hast trode vs downe to dust, where dennes of dragons bee: And couered vs with shade of death, and great aduersitie. If wee had our Gods Name forgot, and helpe of idols sought: Would not God then haue tride this out? for hee doeth know our thought. Nay, nay, for thy Names sake, O Lord, alwayes are wee slaine thus: As sheepe vnto the shambles sent, right so they deale with vs. Vp, Lord, why sleepest thou? awake, and leaue vs not for all: Why hidest thou thy countenance, and doest forget our thrall? For downe to dust our soule is brought, and wee now at last cast: Our bellie like as it were glude, vnto the ground cleaues fast. Rise vp, therefore, for our defence, and helpe vs, Lord, at need: Wee thee beseech for thy goodnesse, to rescue vs with speed. PSALME XLV. Sing this as the 25. Psalme. MY heart doeth take in hand, some godly song to sing: The praise that I shall shew therein, pertaineth to the King. My tongue shall bee as quicke, his honour to endite: As is the penne of any scribe, that vseth fast to write. O fairest of all men, thy speech is pleasant pure: For God hath blessed thee with giftes, for euer to endure. About thee gird thy sword, thou mightie Prince of fame:
Which is the glorie and renoune, and honour of thy Name. Goe foorth with prosperous speed, in meekenesse, trueth, and right: And thy right hand shall thee instruct, in workes of dreadfull might. Thy shaftes are sharpe, O King, to pearce thy foes heartes all: Therefore shall Nations thee obey, and at thy feet down fall. Thy royall seat, O Lord, for euer shall remaine: Because the Scepter of thy Realme, doeth righteousnesse maintaine. Thou righteousnesse doest loue, and wickednesse detest: Because God hath anoynted thee, with joy aboue the rest. Of Myrrhe and Cassia, thy clothes moste sweet smell had: VVhen thou didst from thy Palace passe, where they had made thee glad. Amongst thy Ladies are, Kinges daughters right demure: At thy right hand the Queene doeth stand, arrayed in gold moste pure. O daughter, take good heed, incline and giue good eare Thou must forget thy kinred all, and fathers house moste deare. So shall the King desire, thy beautie excellent: Hee is thy Lord, therefore shalt thou, to honour him bee bent. The daughters then of Tyre, with giftes full rich to see: And all the vvealthie of the land, shall make their sute to thee. The daughter of the King, is glorious to behold: VVithin her chamber shee doeth sit, deckt vp in broydred gold. In robes by needle wrought, with many pleasant thing: And Virgins faire on her to wait, shee commeth to the King. They shall bee brought with joy, and mirth on euerie side, Into the Palace of the King, and there they shall abide. Instead of parentes left, O Queene, the case so standes, Thou shalt haue sonnes, whom thou mayst set, as Princes in all landes. VVherefore thine holy Name, all ages shall record: The people shall giue thankes to thee, for euermore, O LORD. PSALME XLVI. THe Lord is our defence and aide, the strength whereby wee stand, VVhen wee with woe were much dismaid, we found his helpe at hand.  Though th'earth remoue, wee will not feare, though hilles so high and steepe, Bee thrust, and hurled here and there, within the sea so deepe. No though the waues doe rage so sore, that all the bankes it spilles: and though it ouer-flow the shore, and beat downe mightie hilles: Yet one faire flood doeth send abrode, his pleasant streames apace, To fresh the citie of our God, and wash his holy place. In midst of her the Lord doeth dwell, shee can no whit decay: VVith speedie helpe those that rebell, against her, God will stay. The Heathen flocke the Kingdomes feare, the people make a noyce: The earth doeth melt, and not appeare, when God puts foorth his voyce. The Lord of hoasts doeth take our part, to vs hee hath an eye, Our hope of health, with all our heart, on Iaakobs God doeth lye. Come heare and see, with mind & thought, the working of our God, VVhat wonders hee himselfe hath wrought, throughout the earth abrode. By him all warres are husht and gone, which countries did conspire, Their bowes hee brake, and speares echone, their charets burnt with fire. Leaue off, therefore, saith hee, and know, I am a God moste stout,
I will bee praisde of high and low, euen all the earth throughout. The Lord of hoastes doeth vs defend, hee is our strength and tower: On Iaakobs God doe wee depend, and on his mightie power. PSALME XLVII. LEt all folke with joy, Clap handes and rejoyce, And sing vnto God, With moste chearefull voyce:  For high is the Lord, And feared to bee; The earth ouer all, A great King is hee:  In daunting the folke, Hee hath so well wrought, That vnder our feete, Whole Nations are brought. An heritage faire, Hee chose vs to moue: Which Iaakob enjoyed, Whom hee so did loue. Our God is gone vp, With triumph and fame, With sound of the trumpe, To witnesse the same. Sing praises to God, Sing praises, I say, To this our great King, Sing praises alway. For of all the earth, Our God is the King: Such as vnderstand, Now praise to him sing. The Heathen to rule, God also doeth reigne: Who doeth still vpon, His high Throne remaine. Strange princes doe come, Vnto the Lordes fold: Who are as his shieldes, His Church vp to hold: For shieldes of the world, Belong to the Lord: His Name to exalt, Let all men accord. PSALME XLVIII. Sing this as the 46. Psalme. GReat is the Lord, and with great praise to bee aduanced still: Within the citie of our God, vpon his holy hill. Mount Sion is a pleasant place, it gladdeth all the land: The citie of the mightie King, on her North-side doeth stand. Within her Palaces the Lord, is knowne a refuge sure: For loe, the Kinges together came, her ruine to procure. But when they did behold the same, they wondred, and they were Astonied much, and suddenly, were driuen backe with feare. Great terrour there on them did fall, for very woe they cry: As doeth a woman when shee shall, goe trauell by and by. As with the stormie Easterne windes, thou breakest the ships that saile, Of Tarshish, so they scattered were, destroyde and made to quaile. VVithin the citie of the Lord, wee saw, as it was told: Yea, in the citie of our God, which hee will ay vphold. O Lord, wee wait, and looke to haue, thy louing helpe and grace: For which all times wee doe attend, within thine holy place. O Lord, according to thy Name, for euer is thy praise: And thy right hand, O Lord, is full, of righteousnesse alwayes. Let for thy judgementes, Sion Mount, with ioyes fulfilled bee: And let Iehudas daughters all, bee glad, O Lord, in thee. Goe walke about all Sion hill, yea, round about her goe: And tell the bul-warkes that thereon, are builded on a rowe. View and marke well the wall thereof, behold her towers hie: That you of it may make report, to your posteritie. For euen this God, our God is hee, for euer and for ay: Hee shall direct, and vs conduct, euen to our dying day.
PSALME XLIX. ALl people hearken and giue eare, to that that I shall tell:  Both high and low, both rich and poore, that in the world doe dwell.  For why? my mouth shal make discourse, of many thinges right wise: In vnderstanding shall my heart, his studie exercise. I will incline mine eare, to know the parables so darke: And open all my doubtfull speech, in meeter on my harpe. Why should I feare afflictions, or any carefull toile? Or els my foes, which at my heeles, are prest my life to spoile? For as for such as riches haue, wherein their trust is moste: And they which of their treasures great, themselues doe bragge and boast. There is not one of them that can, his brothers death redeeme: Or that can giue a price to God, sufficient for him. It is too great a price to pay, none can theretoe attaine: Or that hee might his life prolong, or not in graue remaine. They see wise men, aswell as fooles, subject vnto deathes bandes: And beeing dead, strangers possesse, their goodes, their rentes, their landes. Their care is to builde houses faire, and so determine sure: To make their name right great in earth, for euer to endure. Yet shall no man alwayes enjoy, high honour, wealth, and rest: But shall at length taste of deathes cuppe, aswell as the bruite beast. And though they try these foolish thoghts, to bee moste lewd and vaine: Their children yet approue their talke, and in like sinne remaine. As sheepe vnto the folde are brought, so shall they into graue: Death shall them eat, and in that day, the just shall lordshippe haue. Their image and their royall port, shall fade and quite decay: When as from house to pit they passe, with woe and wel-away. But God will surely mee preserue, from death and end lesse paine: Because hee will of his good grace, my soule receiue againe. If any man waxe wondrous rich, feare not, I say, therefore: Although the glory of his house, increaseth more and more. For when hee dyeth, of all these thinges, nothing shall hee receiue: His glory will not follow him, his pompe will take her leaue. Yet in this life hee taketh himselfe, the happiest vnder Sunne: And others likewise flatter him, saying, all is well done. And presuppose hee liue as long, as did his fathers olde: Yet must hee needes as length giue place, and bee brought to deathes folde. Thus man to honour God hath calde, yet doeth hee not consider, But like bruite beastes so doeth hee liue, which turne to dust and powder. PSALME L. THe mightie God, Th'Eternall hath thus spoke: And all the worlde Hee will call and prouoke, Euen from the East, And so foorth to the West:  From to∣ward Sion, Which place him liketh best:
God will appeare in beautie moste excel∣lent. Our GOD will come before that long time bee spent. Deuouring fire, shall goe before his face: A great tempest shall round about him trace: Then shall hee call, the earth and heauen so bright, To judge his folke, with equitie and right: Saying, goe to, and now my Saintes assemble, My Pact they keepe, their giftes doe not dissemble. The heauens shall, declare his righteousnesse, For God is judge, of all thinges more and lesse, My people heare, for I will now reueale, Lift Israell, I will thee nought conceale. Thy GOD, thy GOD, am I, and will not blame thee. For giuing not, all maner offringes to mee. I haue not need, to take of thee at all, Goates of thy fold, or calfe out of thy stall: For all the beastes, are mine within the woods, On thousand hilles, the beastes are mine owne goods: I know for mine, all birdes that are on mountaines: All beastes are mine, which haunt the fieldes and fountaines. If I were hungrie, I would thee not it tell: For all is mine, that in the world doe dwell. Eat I the flesh, of great bulles and bullockes? Or drinke the blood, of goates, and of the flockes? Present to GOD, due thankefullnesse and praise, And pay thy vowes, to him moste high alwayes. Call vpon mee, when troubled thou shalt bee, Then will I helpe, and thou shalt honour mee. To wicked men, thus sayth th'Eternall GOD, Why doest thou preach, my Lawes and Hestes abrode? Seeing thou hast, them with thy mouth deformed: And hatest to bee, by discipline reformed. My wordes, I say, thou doest reject and hate: If that thou see a thiefe, as with thy mate, Thou runnest with him, and so your prey doe seeke, And art all one, with bawdes and ruffians eke, Thou giuest thy selfe, to backe-bite and to slander: And how thy tongue deceiueth, it is a wonder. Thou fits musing, thy brother how to blame: And how to put, thy mothers sonne to shame. These thinges thou didst, and whilst I helde my tongue, Thou didst mee judge, (because I staide so long) Like to thy selfe: yet though I kept long silence, Once shalt thou feele, for thy wronges, just recompence. Consider this, yee that forget the LORD, And feares not when, hee threatneth with his worde, Lest without helpe, I spoile you as a prey. But hee that thankes offereth, praiseth mee aye, Saith the LORD GOD, and hee that walketh this trace, I will him teach, Gods sauing health to embrace. PSALME LI. O LORD, consider my distresse, And nowe with speede some pitie take: My
sinnes deface, my faultes redresse, Good Lord for thy great mercies sake.  Wash mee, O Lord, & make mee clean, From this vnjust and sinnefull act: And purifie yet once againe, My hainous crime and bloodie fact. Remorse and sorow doeth constraine, Mee to acknowledge mine excesse: My sinne, alas, doeth still remaine, Before my face without release: For thee alone I haue offended, Committing euill in thy sight: And if I were therefore condemned, Yet were thy judgementes just and right. It is too manyfest, alas, That first I was conceiu'de in sinne: Yea, of my mother so borne was, And yet vile wretch remaines therein. Also behold, LORD, thou doest loue, The inward trueth of a pure heart, Therefore thy wisedome from aboue, Thou hast reuealde mee to conuert. If thou with hysop purge my blot, I shall bee cleaner then the glasse, And if thou wash away my spot, The snow in whitenesse shall I passe. Therefore, O Lord, such joy mee send, That inwardly I may find grace: And that my strength may now amend, Which thou hast swagde for my trespasse. Turne backe thy face and frowning ire, (For I haue felt enough thy hand) And purge my sinnes I thee desire, Which doe in number passe the sand. Make new my heart within my brest, And frame it to thy holy will: Thy constant Sprite in mee let rest, Which may these raging enemies kill. Cast mee not out, Lord, from thy face, But speedily my tormentes end: Take not from me thy Sprite and grace, Which may from danger mee defend. Restore mee to these joyes againe, Which I was wont in thee to find: And let mee thy free Sprite retaine, Which vnto thee may stirre my mind. Thus when I shall thy mercies know, I shall instruct others therein: And men that are likewise brought low, By mine example shall flee sinne. O God that of mine health art Lord, Forgiue mee this my bloody vice: My heart and tongue shall then accord, To sing thy mercies and justice. Touch thou my lippes, my tongue vntie, O Lord, which art the onely kay: And then my mouth shall testifie, Thy wondrous workes and praise alway. And as for outward sacrifice, I would haue offered many one, But thou esteemest them of no price, And therein pleasure takest none. The heauie heart, the mind opprest, O Lord, thou neuer doest reject: And to speake trueth it is the best, And of all sacrifice th'effect. Lord, vnto Sion turne thy face, Powre out thy mercies on thine hill: And on Hierusalem thy grace, Builde vp the walles, and loue it still. Our offringes then thou wilt receaue, Of peace and righteousnesse, I say: Yea, calues, and all that thou doest craue, Vpon thine altar shall wee lay. PSALME LII. WHy doest thou tyrant boast abrode, thy wicked workes to praise? Doest thou not knowe there is a GOD, whose mercies last alwayes? Why doeth thy minde yet still deuise, such wicked wyles to warpe?  Thy tongue vntrue in forging lyes, is like a rasour sharpe.
On mischiefe why setst thou thy mind, and wilt not walke vpright? Thou hast more lust false tales to find, then bring the trueth to light. Thou doest delite in fraud and guile, in mischiefe, blood, and wrong: Thy lips haue learnde the flattring style, O false deceitfull tongue! Therefore shall God for aye confound, and plucke thee from thy place: Thy seed root out from off the ground, and so shall thee deface. The just when they behold thy fall, with feare shall praise the Lord: And in reproach of thee withall, cry out with one accord: Behold the man that would not take, the Lord for his defence: But of his goods his god did make, and trust his corrupt sence. But I, an oliue, fresh and greene, shall spring and spread abroad: For why? my trust all times hath beene, vpon the liuing GOD. For this, therefore, will I giue praise, to thee with heart and voyce: I will set foorth thy Name alwayes, wherein thy Saintes rejoyce. PSALME LIII. Sing this as the 14. Psalme. THere is no God, as foolish men, affirme in their madde moode: Their driftes are all corrupt and vaine, not one of them doeth good. The Lord beheld from heauen hie, the whole race of mankind: And saw not one that sought indeed, th liuing GOD to find. They did turne backe, and were corrupt, and truely there was none: That in the world did any good, I say there was not one. Doe not all wicked workers know, that they doe feed vpon, My people, as they feed on bread? the Lord they call not on. Euen there they were afraid, and stood with trembling all dismaide: Whereas there was no cause at all, why they should bee afraid. For God his bones that thee besiegde, hath scattered all abrode: Thou hast confounded them, for they rejected are of God. O Lord, giue thou thy people health, and thou, O Lord, fulfill, Thy promise made to Israel, from out of Sion hill. When God his people shall restore, that erst was captiue led, Then Iaakob shall therein rejoyce, and Israel shall bee glad. PSALME LIV. Sing this as the 27. Psalme. SAue mee, O God, for thy Name sake, And by thy grace my cause defend: Oh, heare my prayers, which I make, And let my wordes to thee ascend. For strangers doe against mee rise, And tyrantes seeke my soule to spill: They set not God before their eyes, But bent to please their wicked will. Behold, God is mine helpe and stay, And is with such as doe mee aide: My foes despite hee will repay, Oh, cut them off, as thou hast sayd. Then sacrifice, O Lord, wil I, Present full freely in thy sight: And will thy Name still magnifie, Because it is both good and right. For hee mee brought from troubles great, And kept mee from their raging ire: Yea, on my foes, which did mee threat, Mine eyes haue seene mine heartes desire. PSALME LV. Sing this as the 35. Psalme. O GOD, giue care, and doe apply, to heare mee when I pray: And when to thee I call and cry, hide not thy selfe away. Take heed to mee, grant my request, and answere mee againe: With plaintes I pray, full sore opprest, great griefe doeth mee constraine. Because my foes with threates and cryes, oppresse mee through despite: And so the wicked sort likewise, to vexe mee haue delite. For they in counsell doe conspire, to charge mee with some ill: And in their hastie wrath and ire, they doe pursue mee still. Mine heart doeth faint for want of breath, it panteth in my brest: The terrours and the dread of death, doe worke mee much vnrest. Such dreadfull feare on mee doeth fall, that I therewith doe quake: Such horrour whelmeth mee withall, that I no shift can make.
But I did say, Who will giue mee, the swift and pleasant winges: Of some faire doue? then would I flee, and rest mee from those thinges. Loe, then I would goe farre away, to flee I would not cease: And I would hide my selfe, and stay in some great wildernesse. I would bee gone in all the haste, and not abide behind: That I were quite and ouer-past, those blastes of boistrous wind. Diuide them, Lord, and from them pull, their deuelish double tongue: For I haue spyed their citie full, of rapine, strife, and wrong. For they both night and day, about doe walke, vpon her wall: In mids of her is mischiefe stout, and sorow eke withall. Her inward partes are wicked plaine, her deedes are much too vile: And in her streetes there doeth remaine, all craftie fraud and guile. If that my foes had sought my shame, I might it well abide: From open enemies check and blame, some where I could mee hide. But thou that was my fellow deare, which friendship didst pretend: And didst my secret counfell heare, as my familiar friend. With whom I had delight to talke, in secret and abroad: And wee together oft did walke, within the house of God. Let death in haste vpon them fall, and send them quicke to hell, For mischiefe reigneth in their hall, and parlour where they dwell. But I vnto my God will cry, to him for helpe I flee: The Lord will heare mee by and by, and hee wil succour mee. At morning, noone, and euening tide, vnto the Lord I pray: When I so instantly haue cryde, hee doeth not say mee nay. To peace hee shall restore mee yet, though warre bee now at hand: Although the number bee full great, that would against me stand. The Lord that reigneth aire and late, shall heare, and wracke them sore: For sith no change is of their state, they feare not God therefore. Vpon his friendes hee laid his handes, which were in couenant knit: Of friendship to neglect the bandes, hee passeth not a whit. Though warre within his heart did boile, like butter were his wordes: Although hia wordes were smooth as oile. they cut as sharpe as swordes. Cast thou thy care vpon the Lord, and hee shall nourish thee: For hee will not for aye accord, the just in thrall to bee. But God shall cast them deepe in pit, that thirst for blood alwayes: Hee will no guilefull man permit, to liue out halfe his dayes. Though such bee quite destroyde and gone, in thee, O Lord, I trust: I shall depend thy grace vpon, with all my heart and lust. PSALME LVI. Sing this as the 27. Psalme. O God, to mee thy mercie show, Whom men would swallow & deuour, Each day they striue to bring mee low, Vexing mee sore from hour to hour. Mine enemies dayly would mee eate, For many doe against mee fight: O thou most high, yet in this strait, In thee my hope is surely pight. I will rejoyce in God for aye, Because his wordes are true and just: And feare no whit what flesh doe may, To mee, sith I in God doe trust. The wordes which I may selfe did speake, Are turned to my smart and griefe: Their thoughts echone tend them to wreak, On mee causelesse, to my mischiefe. In companies conueene doe they, Keeping them secret in their strait: They to my steps take heed alway, For why? to trap my soule they wait. They thinke they shall escape at last, Because by wrong they much annoy: But thou, O God, in wrath down cast, These wicked folke, and them destroy. My wandringes thou hast numbred all, And in thy bottell put my teares, Are they not written great and small, As thy register witnesse beares? What time to thee I call and cry, Mine enemies then abacke shall flee: This know I most assuredly, For God the Lord hee is with mee.
For this I will in GOD rejoyce, Because his promises are sure: To him will I lift vp my voyce, Whose worde for euer doeth endure. And since my trust in God doeth stand, I will mans power not feare at all: O Lord, thy vowes are in mine hand, To thee I praises render shall. For thou from death my soule restorde, And keepest my feete from slip or fall: That I may walke before the LORD, With such as light haue ouer all. PSALME LVII. BEe mercifull to mee, O GOD, bee mercifull to mee: For why? my soule in all assaultes, shall euer trust in thee. And till these wicked stormes bee past, which rise on euery side, Vnder the shadowe of thy winges, my hope shall alwayes bide. I will, therefore, call to the LORD, who is moste high alone, To GOD, who will his worke in mee, bring to perfection. Hee will sende downe from heauen aboue, to saue mee, and restore, From the rebukes of wicked men that faine woulde mee deuoure. God will his mercie surely send, and constant trueth also: To comfort mee, and to defend, against my cruell foe. Alas, too long my soule doeth lye, amongst these Lions kiene: That rage and fume like flames of fire, the sonnes of men I meane. Whose teeth are like the grynded speare, like arrowes are their wordes: And eke their tongues in forging lyes, are sharpe as any swordes. Exalt thy selfe, O Lord, therefore, aboue the heauens hight: And ouer all the earth declare, thy glory, and thy might. To trap my steps where shoulde I passe, a snare they did lay out: My soule was pressed downe for feare, which compast mee about. Before mee they did digge and cast, a deepe and vgly pit: Yet now they fallen are at last, themselues in middes of it. My heart is ready bent, O God, my heart is ready bent: I will sing songes and Psalmes of praise, to thee I will present. Awake my tongue, my great delite, my viole and mine harpe: I will get vp by breake of day, and of my God will carpe. I will thee praise, O Lord of might, the people all among: And eke amid the Nations great, of thee shall bee my song. For thy goodnesse is wondrous great, and to the heauens doeth reach: The cloudes and elementes aboue, thy faithfullnesse doe preach. Exalt thy selfe, O Lord, therefore, aboue the heauens hight: And ouer all the earth declare, thy glory, and thy might. PSALME LVIII. BVt is it true, O frowarde folke, doe yee nowe justly talke? O sonnes of men, in judging thus, doe yee vprightly walke?  Nay, nay, yee rather mischiefe muse, whereto your heartes bee bent: To execute your cruell rage, on earth your
time is spent. But what? the wicked strangers are, and from the wombe they stray: Yea, from their birth they lewdly erre, and none so lye as they. Their subtle malice doeth surmount, the crafrie serpentes speare: Who could th'inchanters charmes auoide, by stopping of her eare. Breake thou, O Lord, the teeth of such, as doe the trueth deuoure: The jawes of these young Lions, Lord, breake downe and swage their power. And as the waters doe decrease, away so let them passe: When that thou doest thine arrowes shoot, then let them breake as glasse. Let such consume, as doeth a snaile, whose nature is to melt: Or like vntimely fruite, whose eyes no Sunne hath seene or felt. As flesh red-rawe, vnmeete for meate, till change bee made by fire: So let them, Lord, fade hence, as with a whirle-winde in thine ire. The righteous shall in heart rejoyce, thy vengeance thus to see: And bathe his feete in such mens blood, with pure effect shall hee. And men shall say, now of a trueth, the righteous fruite may haue, By seeing God to judge the earth, and yet his flocke to saue. PSALME LIX. DEliuer mee, my GOD of might, From danger of mine enemie: And mee de∣fende in this my right, From them that doe against mee rise.  Deliuer mee from them that haue delite to worke iniquitie: And from these bloody men mee saue, That seeke my soule with crueltie. For loe, they waite my soule to take, Strong men against mee doe conueene, Not for the fault that I did make, That they, O Lord, in mee haue seene. They runne on fast, for none offence, Prepare themselues with brags and boastes: Arise therefore, in my defence, And them behold, Lord God of hoastes. O GOD of Israell, awake, That thou all Nations so mayst try, To punish them no pitie take, That thus transgresse maliciously. At night they stirre, and seeke about, As hungrie houndes they houle and cry, And all the citie cleane throughout, From place to place they seeke and spy. Beholde, their lippes such spitefull wordes, Cast out, as they shoulde seeme to beare, Within their mouthes sharpe edged swords, For what regard they who doeth heare. But, Lord, thou hast their wayes espide, And at the same shall laugh apace, The Heathen folke thou shalt deride, Yea, mocke and scorne them to their face. His force therefore that wold mee wrong, I will referre, O Lord, to thee: For though for mee hee bee too strong, Yet God will my defender bee. God will preuent mee with his grace, Whose mercies I haue founde of olde: God will my foes echone deface, So that mine eyes shall it beholde. But slay them not, lest their decay, My people shoulde forget, and light: Disperse them, Lord, our shielde and slay, And bring them low by thy great might. Let them bee taken in their pride, The sinnes of their owne mouth, euen that Whereto their lippes were ay applide, Perjured lyes then let them prate. Consume, consume them in thine ire, That they hencefoorth no more bee kend, That men may know how great empire, Hath Iaakobs God to the worldes end. And they in th'euening shall turne backe, Like barking dogges, which houle and cry, When they runne heere and there for lacke, The towne about their prey to spy. They wander shall for hunger great, To seeke their foode, with neede opprest:
Before they filled bee with meat, Although the night driue them to rest. But I will sing of thy great power, And early will thy mercies praise: For thou hast aye beene my strong tower, And refuge in my troublous dayes. To thee, my onely strength, I will, Therefore, sing Psalmes vncessantly, For God is my defence, and still A God most mercifull to mee. PSALME LX. Sing this as the 49. Psalme. O Lord, thou didst vs cleane forsake, and scatteredst vs abroad: Such great displeasure thou didst take, returne to vs, O GOD. Thy might did moue the land so sore, that it in sunder brake: The hurt, therefore, O Lord, restore, for it doeth bow and quake. With heauie thinges thou plaguest thus, the people that are thine: And thou hast giuen vnto vs, a drinke of giddie wine. But yet to such as feare thy Name, a banner thou didst shew: That they may triumph in the same, because thy word is trew. So that thy might may keepe and saue, thy folke that fauour thee: That they thy helpe at hand may haue, O Lord, grant this to mee. I will rejoyce, for God hath said, within his holy place, That I shall Sichem land diuide, and Succothes vale by pace. Gilead is giuen to mine hand, Manasses mine beside: Ephraim the strength of all my land, my law doeth Iudah guide. In Moab I will wash my feet, ouer Edom throw my shoe: And Palestina see thou seeke, for fauour mee vnto. But, who will bring mee at this tide, vnto the citie strong? Or who to Edom will mee guide, so that I goe not wrong? Wilt thou not God? which didst forsake, thy folke, their land, and coastes, Our warres in hand that would not take, nor walke among our hoastes. Giue aide, O Lord, and vs relieue, from them that vs disdaine: The helpe that hoastes of men can giue, it is but all vaine. But through our God we shal haue might, to take great thinges in hand: Hee will tread down, and put to flight, all those that vs with-stand. PSALME LXI. REgard, O LORD, for I complaine, and make my sute to thee: Let not my wordes returne in vaine, but giue an eare to mee.  From off the coastes and vtmost partes of all the earth abroad, In griefe and anguish of mine heart, I cry to thee, O GOD. Vpon the rocke of thy great power, my wofull mind repose: Thou art my hope, my fort, and tower, my fence against my foes. Within thy tentes I lust to dwell, for euer to endure: Vnder thy winges I know right well, I shall bee safe and sure. For thou, O Lord, heardst my request, and grantedst eke the same: And with an heritage hast blest, all such as feare thy Name. Thus shalt thou grant the King alwayes, a life full long to see: To many ages shall his dayes, and yeeres prolonged bee. That hee may haue a dwelling place, before the LORD for aye: O let thy mercie, trueth, and grace, defend him from decay. Then shall I sing for euer still, with praise vnto thy NAME: That all my vowes I may fulfill, and dayly pay the same.
PSALME LXII. ALthough my soule, hath sharpely beene assaulted, Yet towardes GOD, in silence haue I walked: In whom alone, all health and hope I see:  Hee is mine health and my saluation sure, My strong defence, which shall foreuer endure: Therefore afraid I need not much to bee. How long will yee, of mischiefe thus bee musing? Thereby not mine, but your own deathes procuring: For yee shall bee, like to a rotten wall. Yet loe, how they, consult for to displace him, And by their lyes, from dignitie to chase him: With mouth they blesse, their heartes repleat with gall. But thou, my soule, in silence wait GODS leasure: Who is mine hope, my strength, and onely treasure: Therefore my foes, I need nothing to feare. In GOD the LORD, my sauing health is certaine, My glory doeth, to him also appertaine: Hee is my rocke, I trust hee will mee heare. Trust in the LORD, yee people sore oppressed, Shew him your griefe, hee will it see redressed: For hee alone, our hope must bee, and stay. But yet, alas, mennes sonnes are meere vanitie, Such lyars are, as pretend most grauitie, Yea, vanitie, in weight them down will wey. Put then no trust, in wicked oppression, And bee not vaine, nor yet want discretion: If riches grow, set not your heartes thereon. GOD once or twise, spake thus within my hearing: That power to him, alone was appertaining, And that all should, depend well therevpon, But thou, O LORD, to thine thy mercie shewest: And as men bee, so thou their workes rewardest. PSALME LXIII. Sing this as the 44. Psalme. O GOD, my GOD, I watch betime, to come to thee in haste: For why? my soule and body both, doe thirst of thee to taste. And in this barren wildernesse, where waters there are none: My flesh is parcht for thought of thee, for thee I wish alone, That I might see yet once againe, thy glorie, strength, and might: As I was wont it to behold, within thy Temple bright. For why? thy mercies far surmount, this life and wretched dayes: My lips, therefore, shall giue to thee due honour, laud, and praise. And whiles I liue I will not faile, to worship thee alway: And in thy NAME I shall lift vp, my handes, when I doe pray. My soule is fil'de, as with marrow, that is both fat and sweet: My mouth, therefore, shall sing such songes as are for thee most meet. When as on bed I thinke on thee, and eke all the night tide: For vnder couert of thy winges, thou art my joyfull guide. My soule doeth surely sticke to thee, thy right hand is my power, And those that seeke my soule to stroy, them death shall soone dououre.
The sword shall them deuoure echone, their carcases shall feede: The hungrie foxes, which doe runne, their prey to seeke at neede. The King and all men shall rejoyce, that doe professe Gods word, For lyars mouthes shall then bee stopt, which haue the trueth disturbde. PSALME LXIV. Sing this as the 18. Psalme. O LORD, vnto my voyce giue eare, with plaint when I doe pray: And rid my life and soule from feare, of foes that threat to slay. Defend mee from that sort of men, which in deceits doe lurke: And from the frowning face of them, that all ill feates doe worke: Who whet their tongues as wee haue seene, men whet and sharp their swordes: They shoot abroad their arrowes keene, I meane most bitter wordes. With priuie slight shoot they their shaftes, the vp—right man to hit: The just vnware to strike by craft, they care and feare no whit. A wicked worke haue they decreed, in counsell thus they cry, To vse deceit, let vs not dread, what? who can it espy? What wayes to hurt they talke and muse, all times within their heart: They all consult, what feates to vse, each doeth inuent his part. But yet all this shall not auaile, when they thinke least vpon, God with his dart shall them assaile, and wound them euery one: Their craftes and their ill tongues withall, shall worke themselues such blame, That they shall flee which see their fall, and wonder at the same. Then all shall see and know right well, that God the thing hath wrought: And praise his wittie workes, and tell what hee to passe hath brought. Yet shall the just in God rejoyce, still trusting in his might: So shall they joy with mind and voyce, whose heart is pure and right. PSALME LXV. Sing this as the 30. Psalme. THy praise alone, O Lord, doeth reigne, in Sion thine owne hill: Their vowes to thee they doe maintaine, and their behestes fulfill. For that thou doest their prayer heare, and doest thereto agree: Thy people all, both far and neare, with trust shall come to thee. My wicked deedes preuaile, O Lord, they power haue ouer mee: But thou shalt mercie vs accord, although wee sinnefull bee. The man is blest whom thou doest choose, within thy court to dwell: Thy house and Temple hee shall vse, with pleasures that excell. Thou wilt in justice heare vs, GOD, our health of thee doeth rise: The hope of all the earth abroad, and the sea coastes likewise. With strength hee is beset about, and compast with his power: Hee makes the mountaines strong and stout, to stand in euery stoure. The swelling seas hee doeth asswage, and makes their streames full still: Hee doeth restraine the peoples rage, and rules them at his will. The folke that dwell full farre on earth, shall dread thy signes to see: Thou shalt the Morne and Euen with mirth, make passe with praise to thee. When that the earth is chapt and dry, and thirsteth more and more: Then with thy drops thou doest apply, and much encrease her store. The flood of God doeth ouer-flow, and so doeth cause to spring, The seed and corne which men doe sow, for hee doeth guide that thing: With wette thou doest her furrowes fill, whereby her cloddes doe fall: Thy drops to her thou doest distill, and blesse her fruit withall. Thou deck'st the earth of thy good grace, with fair and pleasant crop: Thy cloudes distill their dew apace, great plentie they doe drop. The pastures of the desert drop, with fatnesse they abound: The hils also for joy shall hop, so fertile is their ground. In pastures plaine the flockes doe feed, and couer all the earth: The vales with corne shall so exceed, that men shall sing for mirth.
PSALME LXVI. YEe men on earth, in GOD re∣joyce, with praise set foorth his NAME. Extoll his might with heart and voyce, giue glorie to the same.  How won∣derfull, O LORD, say yee, in all thy workes thou art: Thy foes for feare shall seeke to thee, full sore against their heart. All men that dwell the earth throughout, shall praise the Name of God: The laud thereof the world about, they shall shew foorth abroad. All folke come foorth, behold and see, what thinges the Lord hath wrought: Marke well the wondrous workes, that hee for man to passe hath brought. Hee laid the sea like heapes on hie, theein a way they had: On foot to passe, both faire and drye, whereof our heartes were glad. His might doeth rule the world alway, his eyes all thinges behold: All such as would him disobey, by him shall bee controld. Yee people giue vnto our God, due laud and thankes alwayes: With joyfull voyce declare abroad, and sing vnto his praise: Which doeth endue our soule with life, and it preserue withall: Hee stayes our feet, so that no strife, can make vs slip or fall. The Lord doeth proue our deeds with fire, if that they will abide: As worke-men doe, when they desire, to haue their siluer tride. Thou hast vs taken in the snare, where wee haue beene full long: Our loynes likewise they compast are with chaines and fetters strong. And thou also didst suffer men, on vs to ride and reigne: Wee went through fire and water then, and euery painfull thing. Yet sure thou doest of thy good grace, dispose it to the best: And bring vs out into a place, to liue in wealth and rest. Vnto thine house resort will I, to offer, and to pray: And there I will my selfe apply, my vowes to thee to pay. The vowes that with my mouth I spake, in all my griefe and smart: The vowes (I say) that I did make, in dolour of mine heart. Burnt offringes I will giue to thee, of incense and fat rammes: Yea, this my sacrifice shall bee, of bullockes, goates, and lambes. Come foorth and hearken heere ful soone, all yee that feare the Lord: What hee for my poore soule hath done, to you I will record. Full oft I cal'de vpon his grace, this mouth to him did cry: My tongue likewise did speed apace, to praise him by and by. But if I feele my heart within, in wicked workes rejoyce: Or if I haue delite to sinne, God will not heare my voyce. But surely God my voyce hath heard, and what I did require: My prayer hee did well regard, and granted my desire. All praise to him that hath not put, nor cast mee out of mind: Nor yet his mercy from mee shut, which I doe euer find. PSALME LXVII. OVr GOD, that is LORD, and author of grace, Turne to vs, poore soules, his mercyfull face: His blessinges increase, defend vs with might, And shew
vs his loue, and countenance bright. That whiles in this earth, wee wander and walke, Thy wayes may bee knowne, in thought, deed, and talke. And how thy great loue, to mankind is bent, Since thy sauing health, to all folke is sent. The people therefore, O God, let them praise Thy wonderfull workes, and mercyfull wayes: Yea, let all the world, both farre, wide, and neare, Praise thee their Lord God, with reuerence and feare. Oh, let the whole world, bee glad and rejoyce: And praise thee their God, with heart and with voyce, For thou shalt judge all, with judgement most right: And likewise on earth, shalt rule by thy might. O Souereigne GOD, whose workes passe all same, Let all people praise, thy glorious NAME; All people, I say, in euery place, Let them giue thee praise, and extoll thy grace. So shalt thou then cause, the earth fruite to beare, Most plentyfully, and euery where: And GOD, euen GOD, on whom wee doe call, His blessing shall giue, and prosper vs all. So then wee shall feele, Gods blessinges each one: And so of his grace, there shall complaine none. Then all the worldes endes, and countries throughout, His marueilous power, shall feare and redoubt. PSALME LXVIII. LEt GOD arise, and then his foes, will turne themselues to flight: His enemies then will runne abroad, and seat∣ter out of sight.  And as the fire doeth melt the waxe; and winde blowe smoke away: So in the presence of the Lord, the wicked shall decay. But righteous men before the Lord, shall heartily rejoyce: They shall bee glad and merrie all, and chearefull in their voyce. Sing praise, sing praise vnto the Lord, who rideth on the Skie: Extoll this Name of IAH our GOD, and him doe magnifie. That same is hee that is aboue, within his holy place: That Father is of fatherlesse, and Iudge of widowes case. Houses hee giues, and children both, vnto the comfortlesse: Hee bringeth bond-men out of thrall, and rebels to distresse. When thou didst march before thy folke, th'Egyptians from among, And broughtst them through the wildernesse, which was both wide and long: The earth did quake, the rain powrd down, heard were great claps of thunder: The mount Sinai shooke in such sort, as it would cleaue asunder. Thine heritage with droppes of raine, aboundantly was wesht; And if so bee it barren waxt, by thee it was refresht. Thy chosen flocke doeth there remaine, thou hast prepar'de that place: And for the poore thou didst prouide, of thine especiall grace. God will giue women causes just, to magnifie his Name: When as his people triumphes ake, and purchase bruite and fame. For puissant Kinges, for all their power, shall flee, and take the foile:
And women which remaine at home, shall helpe to parte the spoyle. And though yee were as blacke as pots, your hew should passe the doue: Whose winges and feathers seeme to haue, siluer and gold aboue. When in this land God shall triumph, ouer Kinges, both high and low, Then shall it bee like Salmon hill, as white as any snow. Though Bashan bee a fruitefull hill, and in height others passe: Yet Sion, Gods most holy hill, doeth farre excell in grace. Why bragge yee thus, yee hilles most high, and leape for pride together? This hill of Sion God doeth loue, and there will dwell for euer. Gods armie is two millions, of warriours good and strong: The LORD also in Sinai, is present them among. Thou didst, O Lord, ascend on high, and captiue led them all: Who in times past thy chosen flocke, in prison kept and thrall. Thou mad'st them tribute for to pay, and such as did repine: Thou didst subdue, that they might dwell, within thine house diuine. Now praised bee the Lord, for that hee powres on vs such grace: From day to day hee is the God, of our health and solace. Hee is the God from whom alone, saluation commeth plaine: Hee is the God by whom wee scape, all dangers, death, and paine. This God will wound his enemies head, and breake the hairie scalpe: Of those that in their wickednesse, continually doe walke. From Bashan will I bring, said hee, my people and my sheepe: And all mine owne, as I haue done, from danger of the deepe. And make them dip their feet in blood, of those that hate my NAME. And dogs shall haue their tongues embrude, with licking of the same. All men may see how thou, O God, thine enemies doest deface: And how thou goest, as God and King, into thine holy place. The singers goe before with joy, the minstrels follow after: And in the mids the damefels play, with timbrell, and with taber. Now, in thy Congregations, O Israel, praise the Lord: And Iaakobs whole posteritie, giue thankes with one accord. Their chiefe was litle Benjamin, but Iudah made their hoast: With Zabulon and Nephthalim, which dwelt about their coast. As God hath giuen power to thee, so, Lord, make firme and sure: The Thinges that thou hast wrought in vs, for euer to endure. And in thy Temple giftes will wee, giue vnto thee, O Lord, For thine vnto Ierusalem, sure promise made by word. Yea, and strange Kinges to vs subdude, shall doe like in those dayes: I meane to thee they shall present, their giftes of laud and praise. Hee shall destroy the speare-mens rankes, these Calues and Bulles of might: And cause them tribute pay, and daunt, all such as loue to fight. Then shall the lordes of Egypt come, and presentes with them bring: The Mores most black shall stretch their hands vnto their Lord and King. Therefore, yee kingdomes of the earth, giue praise vnto the Lord: Sing Psalmes to God with one consent, thereto let all accord: Who though hee ride, and euer hath aboue the Heauens bright: Yet by the fearefull thunder claps, men may well know his might. Therefore, the strength of Israel, ascribe to God on hie: Whose might and power doth farre extend, aboue the cloudie Skie. O God, thine holynesse and power, is dread for euermore: The God of Israel giu'th vs strength, praised bee GOD therefore. PSALME LXIX. SAue mee, O GOD, and that with speed, the waters flow full fast: So nie my soule doe they proceed, that
I am sore agast.  I sticke full deepe in filth & clay, whereas I feele no ground: I fall into such floods, I say, that I am like bee drownde. With crying oft I faint and quaile, my throte is hoarse and drie: With looking vp my sight doeth faile, for helpe to God on hie. My foes which seeke for to oppresse, my soule, with hate are led: In number sure they are no lesse, then haires are on mine head. Though for no cause they vexe me sore, they prosper, and are glad: They doe compell mee to restore, the thinges I neuer had. What I haue done for want of wit, thou, Lord, all times canst tell: And all the sinne that I commit, to thee is knowne full well. O God of hoastes, defend and stay, all those that trust in thee: Let no man doubt, nor shrinke away, for ought that chanceth mee. It is for th and for thy sake, that I do beare this blame, In spite of thee they would mee make, to hide my face for shame. My mothers sonnes, my brethren all, forsake mee on a row: And as a stranger they mee call, my face they will not know. Vnto thine house such zeale I beare, that it doeth pine mee much: Their checkes and tauntes at thee to heare, my very heart doeth grutch. Though I doe fast my flesh to chaste, yea, if I weepe and mone: Yet in my teeth this geare is cast, they passe not thereupon. If I for griefe and paine of heart, in sacke-cloth vse to walke: Then they anone will it peruert, thereof they jest and talke. I was a talke to all the throng, that sate within the gate: The drunkardes likewise in their song, of mee did talke and prate. But thee, the while, O Lord, I pray, that when it pleaseth thee: For thy great trueth thou wilt alway, send downe thine aide to mee. Plucke thou my feete out of the mire, from sincking doe mee keepe, From such as mee pursue with ire, and from the waters deepe: Lest with the waues I should bee dround, and depth my soule deuoure: And that the pit should mee confound, and shut mee in her power. O Lord of hoastes, to mee giue eare, as thou art good and kind: And as thy mercie is most deare, Lord haue mee in thy mind. And doe not from thy seruant hide, nor turne thy face away: I am opprest on euery side, in haste giue eare, I say. O Lord, vnto my soule draw nie, the same with aide repose: Because of their great tyrannie, acquite mee from my foes. That I abide rebuke and shame, thou knowest, and thou canst tell: For those that seeke and worke the same, thou seest them all full well. Whē they with brags do break mine heart, I seeke for helpe anone: But find no friendes to ease my smart, to comfort mee not one. But in my meat they gaue mee gall, too cruell for to thinke: And gaue mee in my thirst withall, strong vineger to drinke. Lord, turne their table to a snare, to take themselues therein: And when they thinke full well to fare, then trap them in the gin. And let their eyes bee darke and blind, that they may nothing see: Bow downe their backes, and doe them bind, in thraldome for to bee. Powre out thy wrath, as hote as fire, that it on them may fall: Let thy displeasure in thine ire, take hold vpon them all. As desert drie, their house disgrace, their off-spring eke expell: That none thereof possesse their place, nor in their tentes doe dwell. If thou doest strike, the man to tame, on him they lay full sore: And if that thou doe wound the same, they seeke to hurt him more. Lord, let them heape vp misciefe still, sith they are all peruert,
That of thy fauour and good will, they neuer haue no part. And dash them cleane out of the booke, of life, of hope, of trust: That for their names they neuer looke, in number of the just. Though I, O Lord, with woe and griefe, haue beene full sore opprest: Thy helpe shall giue mee such reliefe, that all shall bee redrest. That I may giue thy Name the praise, and shew it with a song: I will extoll the same alwayes, with heartie thankes among: Which is more pleasant vnto thee, (such mind thy grace hath borne) Then either oxe or calfe can bee, that hath both hoofe and horne. When simple folke doe this behold, it shall rejoyce them sure: All yee that seeke the Lord, bee bold, your life for aye shall dure. For why? the Lord of hoastes doth heare, the poore when they complaine: His prisoners are to him full deare, hee doeth them not disdaine. Wherefore, the Skie and earth below, the sea with flood and streame, His praise they shall declare and shew, with all that liue in them. For sure our God will Sion saue, and Iudahs cities build. Much folke possession there shall haue, her streetes shall all bee fild. His seruantes seed shall keepe the same, all ages out of mind, And there all they that loue his NAME, a dwelling place shall find. PSALME LXX. MAke haste, O GOD, to set mee free, For why? my foes are fierce∣ly bent, For helpe with speede I call to thee, O LORD, make haste, my foes preuent.  Confounde them quite, and put to shame, That seeke my soule so furiously, Let them bee tur∣ned backe with blame, That wish mee harme, but causes why. Let them bee, LORD, as men forlorne, And turned backe with shame indeed, Which cry, Aha, aha, in scorne, As though thou couldst not helpe at need. But such as doe thy trueth approue, Let those bee glad and joy in thee, And such as thy Saluation loue, Say thus, O GOD, thou praised bee. But now, O GOD, I still remaine, In needynesse and great distresse, Make haste, therefore, mee to sustaine, Delay not, LORD, but send redresse. PSALME LXXI. MY trust, O LORD, in thee, I haue put euermore: Oh! let mee neuer take the foyle, nor shrinke for shame therefore,  But for thy justice sake, mee rescue and defend: Incline thy gracious care to mee, and nowe some succour send. Bee thou my Rocke most sure, that aye I may bee bold: Thou hast giuen charge to saue mee sound, and art my towre and hold. O thou, my God and Lord, from wicked handes mee shield:
And from all cruell enemies rage, which seeke to make mee yeeld. For thou art my sure hope, on whom I doe depend: O Lord my God, thou art my trust, since I did childhood end. Yea, from my mothers wombe, thou wast my stay and guide: Thou took'st mee thence, therefore will I, thee praise both time and tide. As I a monster were, full many fled mee fro: Yet thou wast my strong hope and trust, so that I dread no foe. Like as the gushing spring, so shall my mouth burst out: Thy praises and magnificence, for euer the world about. And now reject mee not, when age creep'th mee vpon: Nor yet forsake mee in this plonge, when strength and force is gone. For they haue talck't of mee, which seeke mine vtter shame: And they which would bereaue my life, deuised haue the same. Saying with courage stout, God hath him cast away: Pursue him hard, and hold him fast, for none him succour may. Ah God, some mercy show, and bee not farre from mee, My God, make haste to helpe mee now, as mine hope is in thee. Strike thou my foes with shame, kill them which would mee kill, Let shame and flander burie them, which would mee harme and ill. The meane while patiently, I will attend and waite, Extolling euer more and more, thy praises high and great. And though thy sweet mercies, in number passe my reach, I dayly will thy righteousnesse, and thy saluation teach. I will remaine, O Lord, in thy great strength and might, I will record thy bountie great, and bring it foorth to light. My GOD, thou hast mee taught, euen from my youth thy sawes, And hitherto I haue set foorth, thy diuine workes and lawes. Now, Lord, forsake mee not, when head and haire is gray, Thine arme till I haue taught this age, and ages all for aye. As for thy justice, LORD, it is indeed most hie, For thou hast done great thinges, O GOD, and who is like to thee? For thou hast made mee see, full great troubles and griefe, But when thou turndst, comfort I felt, by life thou sendst reliefe. Mine honour and estate, thou hast encreased so, That by thy louing face, I feele my selfe comforted tho. Therefore, thy trueth will I, on viols praise my LORD, O holy One of Israel, mine harpe shall eke accord. My lippes shall sing for joy, when I shall tune thy praise, Likewise my soule by thee redeemde, the same shall doe alwayes. Also my tongue shall speake, thy mercies euer and aye, For such as did procure mine hurt, shame hath brought to decay. PSALME LXXII. LORD, giue thy judgementes to the King, therein instruct him well. And with his sonne, that princely thing, LORD, let thy justice dwell,  That hee may gouerne vprightly, and rule thy folke aright, And so defend with equitie, the poore that haue no might. And let the mountaines that are hie, vnto their folke giue peace, And eke let litle hils apply, thy justice to encrease: That hee may helpe the weake and poore, with aide, and make them strong, And eke destroy for euermore, all those that doe them wrong.
And then from age to age shall they, regard and feare thy might, So long as Sunne doeth shine by day, or els the Moone by night. Lord, make the King vnto the just, like raine to fieldes new mowne, And like to drops that lay the dust, and fresh the land vnsowne. The just shall flourish in his time, and all shall bee at peace, Vntill the moone shall leaue to prime, waste, change, and to encrease. Hee shall bee lord of sea and sand, from shore to shore throughout, And from the floods within the land, through all the earth about. The people that in desert dwell, shall kneele to him full thicke, And all his enemies that rebell, the earth and dust shall licke. The lordes of all the yles thereby, great giftes to him shall bring, The kinges of Sabe and Arabie, giue many costly thing. All kinges shall seeke with one accord, in his good grace to stand, And all the people of the world, shall serue him at his hand. For hee the needy sort doeth saue, that vnto him doe call, And eke the simple folke, that haue no helpe of man at all. Hee shall take pitie on the poore, that are with need opprest, Hee shall preserue them euermore, and bring their soules to rest. Hee shall redeeme their life from dread, from fraud, from wrong, from might, And eke their blood shall bee indeed, most precious in his sight. But hee shall liue, and they shall bring to him of Sabaes gold, Hee shall bee honoured as a king, and dayly bee extold. The mightie mountaines of his land, of corne shall beare such throng, That it like Cedar trees shall stand, in Libanus full long. Their cities eke full well shall speed, the fruites thereof shall passe, In plenty it shall farre exceed, and spring as greene as grasse. For euer they shall praise his NAME, while that the sunne is light, And thinke them happy through the same, all folke shall blesse his might. Praise yee the Lord of hoastes, and sing to Israels GOD each one, For hee doeth euery wondrous thing, yea, hee himselfe alone. And blessed bee his holy NAME, all times eternally, That all the earth may praise the same, Amen, Amen, say I. PSALME LXXIII. HOw euer it bee, yet GOD is good, and kinde to Israel, And to all such as safely keepe, their conscience pure and well.  But I was almost off my feete, and downe-with so did slide, That ere I wist, full suddenly, my steppes were turnde aside. For when I saw such foolish men, I grudgde, and did disdaine, That wicked men all thinges should haue, without turmoile or paine. They neuer suffer panges nor griefe, as if death should them smite, Their bodies are both stout and strong, and euer in good plight. And free from all aduersitie, when other men bee shent, And with the rest they take no part, of plague or punishment. Therefore, presumption doeth embrace, their neckes, as doeth a chaine, And are euen wrapt, as in a robe, with rapine and disdaine. They are so fedde, that euen for fat, their eyes oft times out start, And as for worldly goods, they haue more then can wish their heart. Their life is most licentious, boasting much of the wrong, Which they haue done to simple men, and euer pride among. The heauens, and the liuing LORD, they spare not to blaspheme, And prate they doe on worldly thinges, no wight they doe esteeme.
The people of God oft times turne backe, to see their prosperous state, And almost drinke the selfe same cuppe, and follow the same rate. How can it bee, that God (say they) should know and vnderstand, These worldly thinges, sith wicked men, bee lordes of sea and land? For wee may see, how wicked men, in riches still encrease, Rewarded well with worldly goods, and liue in rest and peace. Then why doe I from wickednesse, my fantasie refraine? And wash mine handes with innocentes, and cleanse mine heart in vaine? And suffer scourges euery day, as subject to all blame? And euery morning from my youth, sustaine rebuke and shame? And I had almost said as they, mislyking mine estate, But that I should thy children judge, as folke vnfortunate. Then I bethought mee how I might, this matter vnderstand, But yet the labour was too great, for mee to take in hand. Vntill the time I went into thine holy place, and then I vnderstood right perfectly, the end of all these men. And namely how thou settest them, vpon a slipperie place, And at thy pleasure and thy will, thou doest them all deface. Then all men muse at that strange sight, to see how suddenly, They are destroyde, dispatcht, comsumde, and dead so horribly: Much like a dreame when one awakes, so shall their wealth decay, Their famous names in all mens fight, shall ebbe and passe away. Yet thus mine heart was grieued then, my minde was much opprest, So fonde was I and ignorant, and in this point a beast. Yet neuerthelesse by my right hand, thou holdst mee alwayes fast, And with thy counsell doest mee guide, to glory at the last. What thing is there that I can wish, but thee in heauen aboue? And in the earth there is no thing, like thee, that I can loue. My flesh, and eke mine heart, doeth faile, but God doeth faile mee neuer: For of my health God is the strength, my portion eke for euer. And loe, all such as thee forsake, thou shalt destroy each one: And those that trust in any thing, sauing in thee alone. Therefore will I draw neare to God, and euer with him dwell: In God alone I put my trust, thy wonders will I tell. PSALME LXXIV. Sing this as the 72. Psalme. WHy art thou, Lord, so long from vs in all this danger deepe? Why doth thine anger kindle thus at thine owne pasture sheepe? Lord, call the people to thy thought, which haue beene thine so long: The which thou hast redeemde and bought, from bondage sore and strong. Haue minde, therefore and thinke vpon, remember it full well: Thy pleasant place, thy mount Sion, where thou wast wont to dwell. Lift vp thy foote, and come in haste, and all thy foes deface: Which now at pleasure robbe and waste, within thine holy place. And in thy Congregations all, thine enemies roare, O God: They set (as signes on euery wall) their banners splayde abroad. As men with axes hew the trees, that on the hilles doe grow, So shine the billes and swordes of these, within thy Temple now. The sieling sawde, the carued bordes, the goodly grauen stones, With axes, hammers, billes, and swordes, they beat them downe at once. Thine holy place with fierie flame, to ground they haue downe cast: The house appointed to thy NAME, defiled is and waste. And thus they said within their heart, dispatch them out of hand: Then burnt they vp in euery part, God houses through the land. Yet thou no signe of helpe doest send, our Prophets are all gone: To tell how this our plague shall end, among vs there is none. When wilt thou, Lord, once end this shame and quaile thine enemies strong: Shall they alwayes blaspheme thy NAME, and raile on thee so long?
Why doest thou draw thy hand abacke, and hide it in thy lap? Oh, plucke it out, and bee not slacke, to giue thy foes a rap. O God, thou art my King and Lord, and euermore hast beene: Yea, thy good grace throughout the world, for our good helpe hath seene. The seas that are so deepe and dead, thy might did make them drie, And thou didst breake the serpentes head, that hee therein did die. Yea, thou didst breake the head so great, of whales that are so fell: And gau'st them to those folke to eate, that in the desert dwell. Thou mad'st a spring with streames to rise, from rockes, both hard and hie: And eke thine hand hath made likewise, deepe riuers to bee drie. Both day and eke the night are thine, by thee they were begun: Thou setst to serue vs with their shine, the light and eke the sunne. Thou doest appoint the endes & coastes, of all the earth about: Both sommer heates, and winter frostes, thy hand hath found them out. Thinke on, O Lord, no time forget, thy foes that thee defame: And how the foolish folke are set, to raile vpon thy NAME. O let no cruell beast deuoure, the turtle, that is true: Forget not alwayes in thy power, the poore that much doe rue. Regard thy couenant, and behold, thy foes possesse the land: All sad and darke, forworne and olde, our realme as now doeth stand. Let not the simple goe away, nor yet returne with shame: But let the poore and needie aye, giue praise vnto the same. Rise, Lord, let bee by thee maintainde, the cause that is thine owne: Remember how that thou blasphemde art, by the foolish one. The voyce forget not of thy foes, for the presumption hie, Is more and more increast of those, that hate thee spitefully. PSALME LXXV. Sing this as the 67. Psalme. O GOD, laud and praise, wee will giue to thee: Of vs at all times, thou shalt thanked bee: Sith thy NAME is neare, they will without doubt, Thy workes of great fame, declare and shew out. When I, saith GOD, a meete time shall see, I will rightly judge: for though the earth bee, With all that there dwell, dissolued and waste, Her pillars shall I, make stable and fast. I said to the fooles, learne now to bee wise: And to the peruerse, let not your horne rise. Lift not vp, I said, your hornes thus on hie: Nor yet with stiffe necke, speake presumptuously. For why? high degree, proceedes in no part, From East, nor from West, nor yet from desert, But GOD is the Iudge, who onely hath power, To throw and cast downe, or raise vp each houre. For loe, in his hand, a cuppe now hath GOD, Of strong wine, full mixt, which hee powres abroad. The wicked each one, the dregges of that cuppe, Shall doubtlesse wring out, and drinke them all vp. But I will declare, and shew foorth alwayes, And to Iaakobs GOD, will sing laude and praise. The wicked mens hornes, in twaine breake will I, But the just mens shall, bee lifted on hie. PSALME LXXVI. IN Iurie land GOD is well knowne, In Israel great is his NAME:  Hee chose out Salem for his owne: His Tabernacle
of great fame, Therein to raise, and mount Sion, To make his habitation, And residence within the same. There did he break the bowmens shafts, Their fierie dartes so swift of flight: Their shields, their swords, & al their crafts, Of warre, when they were bown to fight. More excellent and more mightie, Art thou, therefore, then mountaines hie, Of rauenous wolues, voide of all right. The stout hearted were made a prey, A sudden sleepe did them confound: And all the strong men in that fray, Their feeble handes they haue not found. At thy rebuke, O Iaakobs GOD, Horses with chariots ouer-trod, As with dead sleepe were cast to ground. Fearefull art thou, O Lord our guide, Yea, thou alone, and who is hee, That in thy presence may abide, If once thine anger kindled bee? Thou makest men from heauen to heare, Thy judgementes just: the earth for feare, Stilled with silence then wee see. When thou, O Lord, beginst to rise, Sentence to giue, as Iudge of all: And in the earth doest enterprise, to ridde the humble out of thrall. Certes, the rage of mortall men, Shall bee thy praise: the remnant then, Of their furie thou bindst withall. Vow, & performe your vowes, therefore, Vnto the Lord your God, all yee, That round about him dwell, adore This fearefull One, with offringes free: Who may cut off at his vintage, The breath of princes in their rage, To earthly kinges fearefull is hee. PSALME LXXVII. I With my voyce to GOD doe cry, with heart and heartie cheare: My voyce to GOD I lift on hie, and hee my sute doeth heare.  In time of griefe I sought to GOD, by night no rest I tooke: But stretcht mine hands to him abroad, my soule comfort forsooke. When I to thinke on GOD intend, my trouble then is more: I spake, but could not make an end, my breath was stopt so sore, Thou heldst mine eyes such wise from rest, that I alwayes did wake: With feare I was so sore opprest, my speech did mee forsake. The dayes of olde in minde I cast, and oft did thinke vpon, The times and ages that are past, full many yeeres agone. By night my songes I call to minde, once made thy praise to shew: And with my heart much talke I finde, my spirite doeth search to know. Will GOD, said I, at once for all, cast off his people thus? So that hencefoorth no time hee shall, bee friendly vnto vs? What? is his goodnesse cleane decayde, for euer and a day? Or is his promise now delayde, and doeth his trueth decay? And will the LORD our GOD forget his mercies manyfolde? Or shall his wrath increase so hote, his mercie to with-holde? At last, I said, my weakenesse is, the cause of this mistrust: GODS mightie hand can helpe all this, and change it when hee list. I will regarde and thinke vpon, the working of the LORD: Of all his wonders past and gone, I gladly will recorde. Yea, all thy workes I will declare, and what hee did deuise: To tell his factes I will not spare, and eke his counsell wise. Thy workes, O LORD, are all vpright, and holy all abroad: What one hath strength to match the might, of thee, O LORD our GOD? Thou art a GOD that doest foorthshew thy wonders euery houre:
And so doest make the people know, thy vertue and thy power. And thine owne folke thou didst defend, with strength and stretched arme: The sonnes of Iaakob, that descend, and Iosephs seede from harme. The waters, LORD, perceiued thee, the waters saw thee well: And they for feare aside did flee, the depthes on trembling fell. The clouds that were both thick & blacke did raine most plenteously, The thunder in the aire did cracke, thy shaftes abroad did flie. Thy thunder in the fire was heard, the lightning from aboue: With flashes great made them afeard, the earth did quake and moue. Thy wayes within the sea doe lie, thy path in waters deepe: Yet none can there thy steps espie, nor know thy pathes to keepe. Thou leadest thy folke vpon the land, as sheepe on euery side: By Moses and by Aarons hand, thou didst them safely guide. PSALME LXXVIII. ATtend my people, to my Law, and to my wordes incline:  My mouth shal speake strange parables, and sentences di∣uine:  Which wee our selues haue heard and learnde, euen of our fathers old: And which for our instruction, our fathers haue vs tolde. Because wee should not keepe it close, from them that should come after, Who should Gods power to their race praise and all his workes of wonder. To Iaakob hee commandement gaue, how Israel should liue: Willing our fathers should the same, vnto their children giue. That they and their posteritie, that were not sprung vp tho: Should haue the knowledge of the Law, and teach their seed also. That they might haue the better hope, in GOD that is aboue: And not forget to keepe his Lawes, and his Preceptes in loue. Not beeing as their fathers were, rebelling in GODS sight: And would not frame their wicked heartes, to know their GOD aright. How went the people of Ephaim, their neighbours for to spoile: Shooting their dartes the day of warre, and yet they tooke the foile? For why? they did not keepe with GOD, the couenant that was made: Nor yet would walke, or lead their liues, according to his trade: But put into obliuion, his counsell, and his will: And all his workes, moste magnifike, which hee declared still. What wonders to our fore-fathers, did hee himselfe disclose? In Egypt land within the fielde, that called is Thaneos: Hee did diuide and cut the sea, that they might passe at ones: And made the water stand as still, as doeth an heape of stones. Hee led them secrete in a cloude, by day when it was bright: And all the night, when darke it was, with fire hee gaue them light. Hee brake the rockes in wildernesse, and gaue the people drinke: Als' plentifull, as when the deepes, doe flow vp to the brinke. Hee drew out riuers out of rockes, that were both drie and hard: Of such aboundance, that no floods, to them might bee comparde. Yet for all this, against the LORD, their sinne they did increase: And stirred him that is moste high, to wrath in wildernesse. They tempted him within their heartes, like people of mistrust: Requiring such a kinde of meate, as serued to their lust. Saying with murmuration, in their vnthankefulnesse: What? can our GOD prepare for vs, a feast in wildernesse?
Behold, hee strake the stonie rocke, and floods foorth-with did flow: But can hee now giue to his folke, both bread and flesh also? When GOD heard this, he waxed wroth, with Iaakob and his seede: So did his indignation, on Israel proceede. Because they did not faithfully, beleeue and hope, that hee Could alwayes helpe and succour them, in their necessitie. Wherefore hee did command the cloudes, foorth-with they brake in sunder: And rainde downe MAN for them to eat, a foode of meekle wonder. When earthly men, with Angels foode, were fed at their request: Hee bade the East winde blow away, and brought in the South-west: And rainde downe flesh as thicke as dust, and foule as thicke as sand: Which hee did cast amids the place, where all their tentes did stand. Then did they eate exceedingly. and all men had their filles: Yet more and more they did desire, to serue their lustes and willes. But as the meate was in their mouthes, his wrath vpon them fell: And slew the flowre of all the youth, and choise of Israel. Yet fell they to their wonted sinne, and still they did him grieue: For all the wonders that hee wrought, they would him not beleeue. Their dayes, therefore, hee shortened, and made their honour vaine: Their yeeres did waste and passe away, with terrour, and with paine. But euer when hee plagued them, they sought him by and by: Remembring then hee was their strength, their helpe and GOD moste hie. Though in their mouths they did but glose, and flatter with the LORD: And with their tongues, and in their heartes, dissembled euery word. For why? their hearts were nothing bent, to him nor to his trade: Nor yet to keepe, or to performe, the couenant that was made. Yet was hee still so mercyfull, when they deseru'de to die, That hee forgaue them their misdeedes, and would not them destroy. Yea, many a time hee turnde his wrath, and did himselfe auise: And would not suffer all his whole displeasure to arise. Considering that they were but flesh, and euen as a winde, That passeth away, and cannot well, returne by his owne kinde. How often times in wildernesse, did they their LORD prouoke? How did they moue and stirre their LORD, to plague them with his stroke? Yet did they turne againe to sinne, and tempted GOD eftsoone, Prescribing to the holy LORD, what thinges they would haue done. Not thinking of his hand and power, nor of the day, when hee Deliuered them out of the bondes, of the fierce enemie. Nor how hee wrought his miracles, as they themselues beheld, In Egypt, and the wonders that hee did in Zoan field. Nor how hee turned by his power, the waters into blood: That no man might receiue his drinke, at riuer, nor at flood. Nor how hee sent them swarmes of flies, which did them sore annoy: And filde their countrey full of frogges, which should their land destroy. Nor how hee did commit their fruites, vnto the caterpiller: And all the labour of their handes, hee gaue to the grasse-hopper. With haile-stones hee destroid their vines, so that they were all lost: And not so much as wilde figge-trees, but hee consumde with frost. And yet with haile-stones once againe, the LORD their cattell smote: And all their flockes and heardes likewise, with thunder-boltes full hote. Hee cast vpon them in his ire, and in his furie strong, Displeasure wrath, and euill spirites, to trouble them among. Then to his wrath hee made a way, and spared not the least: But gaue vnto the Pestilence, the man and eke the beast. Hee strake also the first-borne all, that vp in Egypt came: And all the chiefe of men and beastes, within the tentes of Ham. But as for all his owne deare folke, hee did preserue and keepe: And caried them through wildernesse, euen like a flocke of sheepe.
Without all feare, both safe and found, hee brought them out of thrall: Whereas their foes with rage of seas, were ouer-whelmed all. And brought them all into the coastes, of his owne holy land: Euen to the mount, which hee had got, by his strong arme and hand. And there cast out the heathen folke, and did their land diuide: And in their tentes hee set the Tribes, of Israel to abide. Yet for all this, their GOD most high, they stirde and tempted still: And would not keepe his Testament, nor yet obey his will. But as their fathers turned backe, euen so they went astray: Much like a bow, that would not bend, but slipt and start away. And grieued him with their Hill-altars, with offringes, and with fire: And with their idoles vehemently, prouoked him to ire. Therewith his wrath began againe, to kindle in his brest: The naughtinesse of Israel. hee did so much detest. Then hee forsooke the tabernacle, of Silo, where hee was: Right conuersant with earthly men, euen as his dwelling place. Then suffered hee his might and power, in bondage for to stand: And gaue the honour of his Arke, into his enemies hand. And did commit them to the sworde, wroth with his heritage: The young men were deuourde with fire, maides had no mariage. And with the sworde the priestes also, did perish euereachone: And not a widow left aliue, their death for to bemone. And then the LORD began to wake, like one that slept a time: Or like a valiant man of warre, refreshed after wine, With emraudes in the hinder partes, hee strake his enemies all, And put them then vnto a shame, that was perpetuall. Then hee the tent and tabernacle, of Ioseph did refuse: As for the tribe of Ephraim, hee would in no wise choose. But chose the tribe of Iehudah, whereas hee thought to dwell: Yea, euen the noble mount Sion, which hee did loue so well. Whereas hee did his Temple builde, both sumptuously and sure: Like as the earth, which hee hath made, for euer to endure. Then chose hee Dauid him to serue, his people for to keepe: Whom hee tooke vp, and brought away, euen from the foldes of sheepe. As hee did follow the ewes with young, the LORD did him aduance: To feede his people of Israel, and his inheritance. Then Dauid with a faithfull heart, his flocke and charge did feede: And prudently with all his power, did gouerne them indeed. PSALME LXXIX. O LORD, the Gentiles doe in∣uade, thine heritage to spoile: Ierusalem an heape is made, thy Temple they defoile:  The bodies of thy Saintes moste deare, abroad to birdes they cast: The flesh of such as doe thee feare, the beastes deuoure and waste. Their blood throughout Ierusalem, like water spilt they haue: So that there is not one of them, to lay their dead in graue. Thus are wee made a laughing stocke, almost the world throughout: The enemies at vs jest and mocke, which dwell our coastes about. Wilt thou, O LORD, thus in thine ire, against vs euer fume? And shew thy wrath as hote as fire, thy folke for to consume? Vpon these people powre the same, which did thee neuer know, All Realmes which call not on thy NAME, consume and ouer-throw.
For they haue got the vpper-hand, and Iaakobs seede destroide: His habitation and his land, they haue left waste and voyde. Beare not in minde our former faultes, with speede some pitie show: And aide vs, LORD, in all assaultes, for wee are weake and low. O GOD, that giuest all health and grace, on vs declare the same: Weigh not our workes, our sinnes deface, for honour of thy NAME. Why shall the wicked still alway, to vs as people dumbe: In thy reproach rejoyce and say. where is their GOD become. Require, O LORD, as thou seest good, before our eyes in sight, Of all these folke thy seruantes blood, which they spilt in despight. Receiue into thy sight in haste, the clamours, griefe, and wrong, Of such as are in prison cast, sustaining yrons strong. Thy force and strength to celebrate, LORD, set them out of band, Which vnto death are destinate, and in their enemies hand. The Nations which haue beene so bolde, as to blaspheme thy NAME, Into their lappes with seuen folde, repay againe the same. So wee, thy folke, thy pasture sheepe, will praise thee euermore: And teach all ages for to keepe, for thee like praise in store. PSALME LXXX. O Pastor of Israel! like sheepe that doest lead, The linage of Ioseph, aduert and take heede: That sittest betweene the Cherubims bright: Appeare now and shew, to vs thy great might. Before thy folke Ephraim, Benjamin of olde: And tribe of Manasses, the flocke of thy folde. Awake, once vp-reare, thy puissance moste strong: And come saue vs, LORD, thou tariest too long. O great GOD Eternall! our strength and our stay: Returne, and restore vs, without more delay. And let shine on vs, thy countenance cleare, So shall wee bee safe, and shrinke for no feare. O LORD GOD of Armies, thy folke to consume, How long at their prayers, shall thine anger fume? Thou fedst them with bread, of weeping and woe: Teares largely to drinke, thou gau'st them also. Thou set'st vs the hatred, and strife to sustaine: Of all our next neighbours, our harmes that haue seene. And our foes right glad, of our shame and wrong, With taunting vs mocke, themselues all among. O LORD GOD of Armies, our strength and our stay: Returne, and restore vs, without more delay. And let shine on vs, thy countenance cleare: So shall wee bee safe, and shrinke for no feare. A Vine out of Egypt, thou brought'st with great cure: Thou cast out the Gentiles, and plantedst it sure. Thou cleansedst the ground, and rootedst it so: That all the whole land, it fil'de to and fro. With the shadow thereof, the mountaines were clad: And like the tall Cedars, her branches did spread. Her boughes to the sea, farre foorth did shee streach: And graffes to the flood Euphrates out-reach. Why hast thou broke downe then, her hedges so faire: Till all that passe by her, haue pluckt her full bare? The Boare of the Wood, hath dig'de vp at will:
And beastes of the fielde, their bellies doe fill. O great GOD of Armies, our strength, and our stay: Returne wee beseech thee, without more delay. Consider from heauen, and see this sore case, And visite this vine, which all men disgrace. And visite the Vine-yarde, and fielde where it stood, Which thy right hand planted, when it was but roode. And of the young budde, some pitie, LORD, take, Which thou for thy selfe, moste strong did once make. Which now all downe beaten, is burnt vp with fire, As people which perish, at thy frowning ire. But yet on that man, let thine hand bee knowne, Which by thy right hand, thou chose for thine owne. On the Sonne of man, LORD, thy might now declare: For thy selfe so potent, whom thou didst prepare. Wee shall not turne backe, from thee then no more, Reuiue vs, thy NAME so shall wee implore. O LORD GOD of Armies, our strength, and our stay, Returne and restore vs, without more delay. And let shine on vs, thy countenance cleare, So shall wee bee safe, and shrinke for no feare. PSALME LXXXI. TO GOD our strength most com∣fortable, With merie heartes sing and re∣joyce, To Iaakobs GOD most amiable, Make melodie with chearefull voyce.  Goe take vp the Psalmes, The timbrell with shalmes, Bring foorth now, let see, The harpe full of pleasure, With viole in measure, That well can agree. At our feast day (as wee were wonted) Let blowe the trumpet merily, The first day of the month appointed, Thus to bee kept solemnedly: For (as time hath serued) Israel obserued, This statute of olde: And this is the ordour, Which their GOD to honour, Iaakobs seede did holde. Hee laide his Lawe vnto the linage Of Ioseph, parting from the land Of Egypt, where I heard a language Vncouth and strange to vnderstand. Then my force vp-rearing, From the burthens bearing, His shoulders I tooke: And eke the Taske-maister, The pots and the plaster, His handes then forsooke. Thou calledst, beeing brought at vnder, And I did ridde thee from distresse: Within the secrete of my thunder, I heard thy grudginges more and lesse, I did also proue thee, My goodnesse aboue thee, When thou didst mistrust: At Meribah chyding, For waters prouiding, To serue thee at lust. Hearken, my people, I assure thee, O Israel (if thou wouldst heare) Thou shuldst let no strange god allure thee, Nor other gods worship or feare: For I am th'Eternall, Thy great GOD supernall, Which from Egyptes thrall, Haue brought thee so safely, Thy mouth open largely, And fill it I shall. But yet my people, whom I choosed, My voice they would not heare, I say: And Israel proudely refused, On mee, their louing LORD, to stay. Therefore I did leaue them, Euen as their heartes gaue them,
To serue their ingine, After lewde intisinges, Of their owne deuisinges, So did they decline. Oh, if my folke had not forsaken, To hearken vnto mee those dayes. Oh, if that Israel had taken, Delite to walke in my true wayes. Then could I haue reason, In a little season, Their foes to subdue: And mine hand haue turned, Vpon such as spurned, My Saintes to pursue. The haters of the LORD should neuer, But flatter him, by force constrainde, And a most prosperous time for euer, Should to my people haue remainde. Thou should'st then haue beene fed, With most finest wheat bread, Euen at thne owne will: And with the sweete honie, Of the rockes so stonie, I woulde thee fullfill. PSALME LXXXII. A Mid the preasse, with men of might, the LORD himselfe did stand, To plead the cause of trueth and right, with judges of the land. 2. How long, said hee, will yee proceede, false judgement to award? And haue respect for loue fo meede, the wic∣ked to regarde? Whereas of due yee shoulde defend, the fatherlesse and weake: And when the poore man doeth contend, in judgement justly speake. If yee bee wise, defend the cause, of poore men in their right, And ridde the needie from the clawes, of tyrantes force and might. But nothing will they know or learne, in vaine to them I talke: They will not see, or ought discerne, but still in darkenesse walke. For loe, euen now the time is come, that all thinges fall to nought: And likewise Lawes, both all and some, for gaine are solde and bought. I had decreede it in my sight, as Gods to take you all: And children to the moste of might, for loue I did you call. But notwithstanding yee shall die, as men, and so decay: O tyrantes, I shall you destroy, and plucke you quite away. Vp, LORD, & let thy strength bee known, and judge the world with might: For why? all nations are thine owne, to take them as thy right. PSALME LXXXIII. GOD, for thy grace, thou keepe no more silence: Cease not, O GOD, nor holde thy peace no more:  For loe, thy foes, with cruell violence, Confedered are, and with an hideous roare. In this their rage, these rebelles bragge and shoare. And they that hate thee moste maliciously, Against thy might, their heads haue raised on hie. For to oppresse, thy people they pretend, With subtle slight, and moue conspiracie: For such as on, thy secrete helpe depende. Goe to, saide they, and let vs vtterly, This Nation, roote out from memorie,
And of the Name, of Israelites let neuer, Further bee made, no mention for euer. Conspired are, with cruell heartes and fell, Thus against thee, together in a band, The Edomites, that in their tentes doe dwel, And Ismaelites, joyned with them doe stand: The Moabites, vpon the other hand, With the proude race, of Agarens, together, Assembled are, and wickedly confeder. Gebal, Ammon, and Amaleck all three, March foorth, each one with his garison. The Philistims, formest they thinke to bee: The in-dwellers, of Tyre with them are bown Ashur also, is their companion: With the children of Lot, to bee arayed, In their support, his banner is displayed. Doe thou to them, as thou didst to the host, Of Madian: Iasin, and Sisera, At Kyson flod: in End or liues they lost, To doung the land, whereas their bodies lay. Like Oreb, Zeb, Zeba, and Zalmunna, So make thou them, euen their most mightie princes, And all the chiefe, rulers of their prouinces. VVhich saide, let vs inherite as our owne, GODS mansions: my GOD make them to bee, Like rolling wheeles, or as the stubble, blowne Before the winde. as fire the woods wee see, Doeth burne, and flame, deuoure on mountaines hie, The hather croppe, So let thy tempest chase them, And thy whirle-winde, with terrour so deface them. Their faces, LORD, with shamefulnesse fulfill: That they may seeke, thy NAME in mind to print. Confounded let them bee, and euer still Vexed with woe: yea, make them shamde and shent. And let them know, that thou art permanent, That IEHOVAH, thy NAME alone pertaineth, To thee, ouer all the earth, whose glorie reigneth. PSALME LXXXIV. Sing this as the 67. Psalme. HOw pleasant is thy dwelling place, O LORD of hostes to mee: The Tabernacles of thy grace, how pleasant, LORD, they bee. My soule doeth long full sore, to goe into thy Courtes abroad: My heart doeth joy, my flesh also, in thee, the liuing GOD, The sparrowes finde a roome to rest, and saue themselues from wrong: And eke the swallow hath a nest, wherein to keepe her young. These birdes full nigh thine Altar may, haue place to fit and sing: O LORD of hoastes, thou art, I say, My GOD, and eke my King. Oh, they bee blessed, that may dwell, within thine house alwayes: For they all times thy factes doe tell, and euer giue thee praise. Yea, happie sure likewise are they, whose strength and stay thou art: Which to thine house doe minde the way, and seeke it with their heart. As they goe through the vale of teares, they digge vp fountaines still: That as a spring it all appeares, and thou their pits doest fill. From strength to strēgth they walk ful fast, no faintnesse there shall bee: And so the GOD of gods at last, in Sion they doe see. O LORD of hoastes, to mee giue heede, and heare when I doe pray: And let it through thine eare proceede, O Iaakobs GOD, I say. O LORD, our shield, of thy good grace, regarde, and so draw neare:
Regarde, I say, beholde the face, of thine Anointed deare. For why? within thy Courtes one day, is better to abide: Then other whare to keepe or stay, a thousand dayes beside. Much rather woulde I keepe a doore, within the house of GOD: Then in the tentes of wickednesse, to settle mine abode. For GOD the LORD our light & shield, wil grace and worship giue: And no good thing shall bee with-held, from them that purely liue. O LORD of hoastes, that man is blest, and happie sure is hee, That is perswaded in his brest, to trust all times in thee. PSALME LXXXV. O LORD, thou loued hast thy land, And brought foorth Iaakob with thine hande, Who was in thraldome straite:  Thy peoples sinnes so great and huge: Thou couered hast, and didst not judge, Thy mercies were so great. Thine anger then, and wrath so ho e, Thou didst remit, and haste forgot Such was thy tender loue. O turne vs, then, GOD of our strength, Release thine ire, and now at length, Let our distresse thee moue. Wilt thou bee angrie, LORD, for aye? Wilt thou prolong thy wrath, I say, And that from age to age? Wilt thou not turne, vs vp to raise? That wee, thy people may thee praise, And that with great courage? Thy mercy, LORD, to shew vouchsafe, That thy saluation wee may haue: But hearken now I will. And heare what GOD himselfe did say, Who peace before his Saintes did lay, Lest they should turne to ill. Now certainely his health is neare, To such as doe indeede him feare: And blesseth still our land. Loe, trueth and mercie both doe meete, His righteousnesse and peace doe greete And both joine hand in hand. For trueth shall from the earth bud out From heauen righteousnesse, no doubt; Yea, GOD shall giue good store, So that our land shall giue increase, And righteousnesse toward him prease, Who shall still march before. PSALME LXXXVI. LORD, bow thine eare to my re∣quest, and heare mee by and by: With grieuous paine and griefe opprest, full poore and weake am I.  Preserue my soule, because my wayes, and doinges ho∣ly bee: And saue thy seruant, LORD, I pray, that puts his trust in thee. Thy mercie, Lord, on mee expresse, defende mee eke withall: For through the day I doe not cease, on thee to cry and call. Comfort, O Lord, thy seruantes soule, that now with paine is pinde: For vnto thee, Lord, I extoll, and lift my soule and mind. For thou art good and bountifull, thy giftes of grace are free: And eke thy mercie plentifull, to all that call on thee. O LORD, likewise, when I doe pray, regarde, and giue an eare: Marke well the wordes that I doe say, and all my prayers heare. In time when trouble doeth mee moue, to thee I doe complaine: For why? I know, and well doe proue, thou answerest mee againe. Among the gods, O LORD, is none, with thee to bee comparde,
And none can doe, as thou alone, the like can not bee hearde. The Gentiles, and the people all, which thou didst make and frame, Before thy face on knees will fall, and glorifie thy NAME. For why? thou art so much of might, all power, LORD, is thine owne, Thou workest wonders still in sight, for thou art GOD alone. O teach mee, LORD, thy way, and I shall in thy trueth proceede, O joine mine heart to thee so nie, that I thy NAME may dread. To thee, my GOD, wil I giue praise, with all mine heart, O LORD, And glorifie thy NAME alwayes, for euer through the world. For why? thy mercy shewde to mee, is great, and doeth excell, Thou settest my soule at libertie, out from the lower hell. O LORD, the proude against mee rise, and heapes of men of might, They seeke my soule, and in no wise, will haue thee in their fight. Thou, LORD, art mercifull and meeke, full slacke and flowe to wrath, Thy goodnesse is full great, and eke thy trueth no measure hath. O turne to mee, and mercie grant, thy strength to mee apply, O helpe and saue thine owne seruant, thine hand-maides sonne am I. On mee some signe of fauour show, that all my foes may see, And bee ashamde, because, LORD, thou, didst helpe and succour mee. PSALME LXXXVII. Sing thit as the 77. Psalme. THat Citie shall full well indure, her ground-worke still doeth stay, Vpon the holy hilles full sure, it can no time decay. GOD loues the gates of Sion best, his grace doeth there abide: Hee loues them more then all the rest, of Iaakobs tentes beside. Full glorious thinges reported bee, in Sion, and abroad: Great thinges, I say, are saide of thee, thou Citie of our God. On Rahab I will cast an eye, and beare in minde the same: And Babylon shall eke apply, and learne to know my NAME. Loe, Palestine and Tyre also, with Ethiope likewise, A people olde, full long agoe, were borne, and there did rise. Of Sion they shall say abroad that diuers men of fame, Haue there sprung vp, and the high GOD hath founded fast the same. In their recordes, to them it shall, through GODS deuise appeare, Of Sion, that the chiefe of all, had his beginning there. The minstrelles all, with such as singes, shall praise the LORd with glee: For of delight my pleasant springes, are compast all in thee. PSALME LXXXVIII. O GOD of my saluation, I day and night before thee fall:  O let my supplication, Of thee bee hearde when I doe call:  For euils doe my soule so fill, My life neare to the graue is throwne:  With such as fall the pit vntill, I numbred am, and strength haue none. Among the dead, a man moste free, As one in graue alreadie slaine: Whom thou esteemst no more to bee, But quite cut off, as men moste vaine. In depth profounde thou hast mee cast, Where, in the darke, full deep I lye: Thy wrath so laid on mee thou hast, That, ouer-come with griefe, I crye. Such as mee knew, thou hast drawn backe, Whose loue is turned to great hate: I am shut vp, all helpe I lacke, for to redresse my dreadfull state. My visage doeth my griefe declare: To thee I cry, LORD, day by day, Mine handes to thee I stretcht with care, But yet can haue no rest, nor stay. Wilt thou shew wonders to the dead? Shall dead men rise to praise thy NAME?
Shall in the graue thy loue bee spred? With faithfulnesse may death well frame? Thy wondrous workes for to repeat, Shall they in darkenesse deepe bee known? Or shall thy righteousnesse so great, In a forgetfull land bee showne? To thee, O LORD, long cryde I haue, And early shall I come to pray: Why doest thou stay my soule to saue? And turne thy face from mee away? I am afflicted to the death, Alwayes in dread of life I doubt, Thy wrath I feele at euery breath, Thy feare almoste hath worne mee out. Like water they mee closed round, Because I should not from them slide, My louers heartes thou hast vp-bound, And mine acquaintance did them hide. PSALME LXXXIX. TO sing the mercies of the LORD, my tongue shall neuer spare: And with my mouth from age to age, thy trueth I will declare:  For I haue saide, that mercie shall, for euermore remaine: In that thou doest the heauens stay, thy trueth appea∣reth plaine. To mine Elect (saide GOD) I made, a Couenant and Behest, My seruant Dauid to perswade, I swore, and did protest, Thy seede for euer I will stay, and stablish it full fast: And still vp-holde thy throne alway, from age to age to last. The heauens shew with joy and mirth, thy wondrous workes, O LORD, Thy Saintes within thy Church on earth, thy faith and trueth record. Who with the LORD is equall then, in all the cloudes abroad? Among the sonnes of all the gods, what one is like our GOD? GOD in assemblie of his Saintes, is greatly to bee dread: And ouer all that dwell about, in terrour to bee had. LORD GOD of hostes, in all the world, whose strength is like to thee? On euery side, moste mightie LORD, thy trueth is seene to bee. The raging sea, by thine aduise, thou rulest at thy will: And when the waues thereof arise, thou mak'st them calme and still. As a man slaine, so Egypt land, hast thou subdewde, O LORD, Thy foes with mightie arme and hand, thou scattered hast abroad. The heauens are thine, and still haue bene, likewise the earth and land: The world, with all that is therein, thou formedst with thine hand. Both North & South, thou, LORD, alone, thy selfe didst make and frame: Both Tabor mount, and eke Hermon, rejoyce and praise thy NAME. Thine arme is strong, and full of power, all might therein doeth lie: The strength of thy right hand each houre, thou liftest vp on hie. In righteousnesse and equitie, thou hast thy seat and place: Mercie and trueth are still with thee, and goe before thy face. Those folke are blest, that know aright, to joy in thee, O GOD: For in the fauour of thy sight, they walke full safe abroad. LORD, in thy NAME rejoyce they shall, and that from day to day: And in thy righteousnesse withall, exalt themselues alway. For why? their glory, strength, and aide, in thee alone doeth lie: Thy goodnesse eke, that hath vs staide, shall lift our horne on hie. Our strength, that doeth defende vs well, the LORD to vs doeth bring: The holy One of Israel, hee is our guide and King. Thy will vnto thy Saintes sometimes, in visions thou didst show: And thus then didst thou say to them, thy minde to make them know: A man of might haue I erect, your King and guide to bee: And set him vp, whom I elect, among the folke to mee. My seruant Dauid I appoint, whom I haue searched out:
And with mine holy oyle anoint, him King of all the rout. Therefore, mine hand is readie still, with him for the remaine: And with mine arme also I will, him strengthen and sustaine. The enemies shall not him oppresse, they shall him not deuoure: Nor yet the sonnes of wickednesse, of him shall haue no power. His foes likewise will I destroy, before his face in sight: And those that hate him, plague will I, and strike them with my might. My trueth and mercie eke withall, shall still vpon him bee: And in my NAME his horne eke shall, bee lifted vp on hie. His kingdome I will set to bee, vpon the sea and land: And eke the running floops shall hee, embrace with his right hand. Hee shall depend with all his heart, on mee, and thus shall say: My Father and my God thou art, my rocke of health and stay. As my first-borne I will him take, of all on earth that springes: His might and honour I shall make, aboue all worldly kinges. My mercie shall bee with him still, for euer to indure: My faithfull Couenant I will, to him keepe firme and sure. And eke his seede will I sustaine, for aye, both sure and fast: So that his throne shall still remaine, while that the heauens doe last. If that his sonnes forsake my Law, and so begin to swerue, And of my judgementes haue none awe, nor will not them obserue: Or if they doe not vse aright, my statutes to them made, And set all my Commandementes light, and will not keepe my trade: Then with the rod I will begin, their doinges to amende, And so with scourging for their sinne, when that they doe offende. My mercie yet, and my goodnesse, I will not take him fro Nor handle him with craftinesse, and so my trueth forgo. But sure my Couenant I will holde, with all that I haue spoke: No worde, the which my lippes haue tolde, shall alter, or bee broke. Once swore I by mine holinesse, and that performe will I, With Dauid I will keepe promise, and to his seede for aye. His seede for euermore shall reigne, and eke his throne of might: As doeth the Sunne, it shall remaine, for euer in my sight. And as the Moone within the Skie, for euer standeth fast: A faithfull witnnesse from on hie, So shall thy kingdome last. But now, O Lord, thou doest reject, and now thou changest cheare: Yea, thou art wroth with thine Elect, thine owne Anointed deare. Thy Couenant with thy seruant, loe, Lord, thou hast quite vndone: And downe vpon the ground also, hast cast his royall crowne. Thou hast his hedge pluct vp with might, thou didst his walles confound: His Bull-warkes thou hast beat downe right, and brought them to the ground. That hee is sore destroyde and torne, of commers by throughout: And so is made a mocke and scorne, to all that dwell about. Thou their right hande hast lifted vp, that him so sore annoy: And all his foes which him deuoure, loe, thou hast made to joy. His sworde thou hast made dull and blunt, so that hee may not stand, Before his foes, as hee was wont, nor haue the vpper hand. His glorie thou hast made to waste, his throne, his joy, and mirth, By thee is ouer-throwne and cast, full lowe vpon the earth. Thou hast cut off and made full short, his youth and lustie dayes, And raisde of him an ill report, with shame and great dispraise. How long away from mee, O Lord, for euer wilt thou turne? And shall thine anger still alway, as fire consume and burne? O call to minde, remember then, my time consumeth fast, Why hast thou made the sonnes of men, as thinges in vaine to waste? What man is hee, that liueth here, and death shall neuer see? Or from the hand of hell his soule, shall hee deliuer free? Where is, O Lord, thine olde goodnesse, so oft declarde beforne?
Which by thy trueth and vprightnesse, to Dauid thou hast sworne? The great rebukes to minde, Lord, call, that on thy seruant lie: The raylinges of the people all, beare in my brest doe I. For why? O Lord, behold, thy foes blasphemed haue thy Name: In that their steps, whom thou hast chose and ointed, they defame. All praise to thee, O Lord of hostes, both now and eke for aye: Through Skie and earth in all the costes, Amen, Amen, I say. PSALME XC. Sing this as the 89. Psalme. O LORD, thou hast beene our refuge, and kept vs safe and sound, From age to age, as witnesse can, all wee which true it found. Before the mountaines were foorth broght, ere thou the earth didst frame, Thou was our great Eternall GOD, and still shalt bee the same. Thou doest vaine man strike down to dust, though hee bee in his floure: Againe thou sayst, Yee Adams sonnes, returne to shew your power: For what is it a thousand yeeres, to count them in thy sight? But as a day which last is past, and as a watch by night. They are, so soone as thou doest storme, euen like a sleepe or shade: Or like the grasse, which as wee know, betimes away doeth fade. With pleasant dewes in breake of day, it groweth vp full greene: By night cut downe, it withereth, as no beautie can bee seene. O Lord, how sore doe wee consume, in this thy wrath so hote? Wee feare thy furie bee so fierce, that death shall bee our lot. Thou hast so marked our misdeedes, that they are in thy minde: Our secrete sinnes are in thy sight, as though none grace should finde. For when thine anger kindled is, our dayes consume foorth-with: Then end our yeeres, as thoughtes most vaine, which haue in them no pith. The dayes of man wee finde to bee, of yeares tenne and three-score: And if that some by nature strong, attaine to liue tenne more. Yet is their strength, bragge what they list, but labour, griefe, and care: And passeth hence, to haste their ende, ere they themselues beware. Yet who regardeth well the power, of this thy wrath so great? All such truely as doe thee know, thy plagues when thou doest threat. Teach vs, therefore, to count our dayes, that wee our heartes may bende, To learne thy wisedome, and thy trueth, for that should bee our ende. Turne yet againe, O Lord, how long, wilt thou bee angrie still? Bee mercyfull vnto thy flocke, and grant them thy good will. Oh, fill vs with thy mercies great, in the sweete morning spring: So wee rejoyce shall all our dayes, and eke bee glad and sing. Declare eftsoones some signe of loue, thy scourges to asswage: And for the yeeres of our distresse, sustaining such great plagues. Shew foorth thy mercy thine own worke, vnto thy seruantes deare: And let thy glory to their seede, for euermore appeare. And let the beautie of the Lord, vpon vs still remaine: Lord, prosper thou our handie-worke, and still the same maintaine. PSALME XCI. WHo so with full intent and minde, In God most high himselfe doeth stay, His mightie power than man shall finde, A sure defence to bee alway.  And now say to the Lord will I, O thou my hope and fort moste sure, Hee is my God, thus will I crye, My trust in him shall still indure.
Hee surely will thee freely set, Farre from the craftie hunters snare: So that thou need'st not feare his net, Nor yet for plagues no whit to care. Vnder his winges hee will thee hide, And there thee keepe full well shall hee, Thee to defend on either side, His trueth shall still thy buckler bee. Thou shalt not need to bee dismaide, For any feare to come by night: Nor of the arrow bee afraide, That foorth is shot when it is light. Nor yet the Pestilence to feare, Which in the darke doeth much annoy, Nor of the plague at noone-day cleare, Which doeth full oft great heapes destroy. A thousand at thy side shall fall, And at thy right hand thousandes ten: But vnto thee none hurt at all, Shall once so much as touch thee then, Thine eyes shall certainely beholde, what recompence the wicked haue, For that the Lord as thy strong holde, Thou hast him made thy soule to saue. There shall none ill thee apprehende, Nor yet thy Tabernacle touch: For hee his Angels foorth doeth sende, And giues them charge to keepe all such, So warilie shall they thee defende, That harme thou shalt bee sure of none: Nor yet so much as once offende, Or dash thy foote against a stone. Thou shalt vpon the Lions tread, The Dragon, and the Aspe also, They shall of thee bee still in dread, Thou shalt vpon them walke and goe: For so the Lord himselfe hath sworne, Because, saith God, hee knew my Name, I surely will exalt his horne, And such confound as seeke his shame. On mee hee shall call in his neede, And I will heare him out of doubt: His troubles end will I with speede, And will him glorifie throughout. Of yeeres hee shall haue his desire, That hee the same full well may spend, My sauing health and loue entire, To doe him good shall haue none end. PSALME XCII. Sing this as the 89. Psalme. A Thing both good and meete truely, it is to laude the Lord: And to thy Name, O Lord, moste hie, to sing in one accorde. To shew the kindnesse of the Lord, betime ere day bee light: And eke declare his trueth abroad, when it doeth draw to night. Vpon tenne-stringed instrumentes, on lute and harpe so sweete: With all the mirth yee can inuent, of instrumentes most meete. For thou hast made mee to rejoyce, in thinges so wrought by thee: And I haue joy in heart and voyce, thy handie workes to see. O Lord, how glorious, and how great, are all thy workes so stout! So deepely are thy counsels set, that none can try them out. The man vnwise, hee doeth not know, how this is brought to passe: Nor yet the idiote foole also, doeth vnderstand this case. when so the wicked at their will, as grasse doe spring full fast: They, when they flourish in their ill, for aye shall bee made waste. But thou art mightie, Lord most hie, yea, thou doest reigne therefore, In euery time eternally, both now and euermore. For why? O Lord, beholde and see, beholde thy foes, I say: How all that worke iniquitie, shall perish and decay. But thou like th'Vnicorne this while, shalt lift mine horne on hie: With fresh and new prepared oyle, thine ointed king am I. And of my foes before mine eyes, shall see the fall and shame: Of all that vp against mee rise, mine eares shall heare the same. The just shall flourish vp on hie, as Date-trees budde and blowe: And as the Cedars multiplie, in Libanus that growe. For they are planted in the place, and dwelling of our God: Within the Courtes they spring apace, and flourish all abroad: And in their age much fruite shall bring, both fat and well beseene: And pleasantly both budde and spring, with boughes and branches greene. To shew that God is good and just, and vpright in his will: Hee is my Rocke, my hope, and trust, in him there is none ill.
PSALME XCIII. Sing this as the 70. Psalme: THe Lord as King aloft doeth reigne, in glorie goodly dight And he to shew his strength and maine, hath girde himselfe with might. The Lord likewise the earth hath made, and shaped it so sure: No might can make it moue or fade, at stay it doeth indure. Ere that the world was made or wrought, thy seate was set before: Beyond allt ime that can bee thought, thou hast beene euermore. The floods, O Lord, the floods doe rise, they roare and make a noyse: The floods, I say, did enterprise, and lifted vp their voyce. Yea, though the stormes arise in sight, though seas doe rage and swell, The Lord is strong and more of might, for hee on hie doeth dwell. And looke what promise hee doeth make, his house-holde to defende: For just and true they shall it take, all times withouten ende. PSALME XCIV. Sing this as the 41. Psalme. O Lord, since vengeance doeth to thee, and to none els belong: Now shew thy selfe, O Lord our God, with speede reuenge our wrong. Arise thou great Iudge of the worlde, and haue at length regarde: That as the proude deserue and doe, thou wilt them so rewarde. O Lord, how long shall wicked men, triumph thy flocke to slay? Yea, Lord, how long? for they triumph, as though who now but they. How long shall wicked doers speake, their great disdaine wee see? Whose boasting pride doeth seeme to threat, no speach but theirs to bee. O Lord, they smite thy people downe, not sparing young nor olde: Thine heritage they so torment, as strange is to beholde. The widow and the stranger both, they murther cruelly, The fatherlesse they put to death, and cause they know not why. And yet say they, Tush, tush, the Lord will not beholde this deede, Nor yet will Iaakobs God regarde, the thinges by vs decreede. But now take heede, yee fooles vnwise, among the folke that dwell: Yee fooles, I say, when will yee weigh, or vnderstand this well? Hee that the eare did plant and place, shall hee bee slow to heare? Or hee that made the eye to see, shall hee not see most cleare? Or hee that plagu'de the Heathen folke, and knowledge teacheth men, To nurture such as went astray, shall hee not punish then? The Lord our God, who man did frame, his very thoughtes doeth know: And that they are both vile and vaine, to him is knowne also. But blessed is the man, O Lord, whom thou doest bring in awe: And teachest him by this thy rodde, to loue and feare thy Law. That thou may giue him rest and ease, in time of troubles great: When that the pit is digged vp, th'vngodly for to eate. Surely the Lord will neuer faile, his people which him loue: Nor yet forsake his heritage, which hee doeth still approue. For judgment now with truth shall joyne, that justice may bee free: And such as bee vpright in heart, thereof full glad shall bee. Who now will vp, and rise with mee, against this wicked band? Or who against these workers ill, on my part stout will stand? If that the Lord had not mee helpt, doubtlesse it had beene done: To wit, my soule in silence brought, and so my foes had wonne. But though my foote did swiftly slide, yet when I did it tell, Thy mercies, Lord, so helde mee vp, that I therewith not fell. For in the heapes of sorrowes sharpe, that did mine heart oppresse: Thy mercies were no mee so great, they did my soule refresh. Wilt thou, vaine man, haue ought to doe, with that most wicked chaire, Which forgeth mischiefe as a law, without remorse or feare? Against the soules of godly men, they all with speede conuent: And so condemne the guiltlesse blood, of the poore innocent. But yet the Lord is my refuge, in all these dangers deepe▪
And God the Rocke is of mine hope, who doeth mee alwayes keepe. Hee will reward their wickednesse, and in his wrath them kill: Yea, them destroy shall GOD our LORD, for hee both can and will. PSALME XCV. O Come, let vs lift vp our voyce, and sing vnto the Lord: In him our Rocke of health rejoyce, let vs with one accord.  Yea, let vs come before his face, to giue him thanks and praise: In singing Psalmes vnto his grace, let vs bee glad alwayes. For why? the Lord, hee is, no doubt, a great and mightie God: A King aboue all gods throughout, in all the world abroad. The secretes of the earth so deepe, and corners of the land: The toppes of hilles, that are so steepe, hee hath them in his hand. The sea and waters all are his, for hee the same hath wrought: The earth and all that therein is, his hand hath made of nought. Come, let vs bow, and praise the Lord, before him leet vs fall: And kneele to him with one accorde, the which hath made vs all. For why? hee is the Lord our God, for vs hee doeth prouide: Wee are his flocke, hee doeth vs feede, his sheepe, and hee our guide. To day if yee his voyce will heare, then harden not your heart, As yee with grudging many a yeere, prouok't mee in desert. Whereas your fathers tempted mee, my power for to proue: My wondrous workes when they did see, yet still they did mee moue. Twise twentie yeeres they did mee grieue, and I to them did say: They erre in heart, and not beleeue. they haue not knowne my way. Wherefore I sware when that my wrath, was kindled in my brest, That they should neuer tread the path, to enter in my rest. PSALME XCVI. SIng yee with praise vnto the Lord, new songes of joy and mirth: Sing vnto him with one accorde, all people on the earth.  Yea, sing vnto the Lord, I say, praise yee his holy Name: Declare and shew from day to day, saluation by the same. Among the Heathen eke declare, his honour round about: To shew his wonders doe not spare, in all the world throughout. For why? the Lord is much of might, and worthie praise alway: And hee is to bee dread of right, aboue all gods, I say. For all the Heathen gods abroad, are idoles, that will fade: But yet our God, hee is the Lord, that hath the heauens made. All praise and honour eke doe dwell, for aye before his face: Both power and might likewise excell, within his holy place. Ascribe vnto the Lord alway, (yee people of the worlde) All might and worshippe eke, I say, ascribe vnto the Lord. Ascribe vnto the Lord also, the glory of his Name: And eke vnto his Courtes doe goe, with giftes vnto the same. Fall downe, and worshippe yee the Lord, within his Temple bright: Let all the people of the worlde, bee fearefull at his sight.
Tell all the worlde, bee not agast, the Lord doeth reigne aboue: Yea, hee hath set the earth so fast, that it shall neuer moue. And that it is the Lord alone, that rules with princely might, To judge the Nations euery one, with equitie and right. Yee heauens therefore with joy beginne, and let the earth rejoyce: Thou sea, and all that is therein, cry out and make a noyse. The fielde shall joy, and euery thing, that springeth of the earth: The wood, and euery tree, shall sing, with gladnesse and with mirth, Before the presence of the Lord, and comming of his might: For hee shall come to judge the worlde, with equitie and right. PSALME XCVII. Sing this as the 95. Psalme. THe Lord doeth reigne, whereat ye earth, may joy with pleasant voyce: And eke the Yles with joyfull mirth, may triumph and rejoyce. Both cloudes and darkenesse eke doe swell, and round about him beate: Yea, right and justice euer dwell, and bide about his seate. Yea, fire and heat at once shall runne, and goe before his face: Which shall his foes and enemies burne, abroad in euery place. His lightninges eke full bright did blaze, and to the world appeare: Whereat the earth did looke and gaze, with dread and deadly feare. The hilles like waxe did melt in sight, and presence of the Lord: They fled before that rulers might, which guideth all the world. The heauens eke declare and show, his iustice foorth abroad: That all the world may see and know, the glorie of our God. Confusion sure shall come to such, as worshippe idoles vaine: And eke to those that glorie much, dumbe pictures to maintaine. For all the idoles of the worlde, which they as gods doe call, Shall feele the power of the Lord, and downe to him shall fall. With ioy did Sion heare this thing, and Iudah did reioyce: And at thy iudgementes they did sing, and made a pleasant noyse: For thou, O Lord, art set on hie, in all the earth abroad: And art exalted wondrously, aboue each other god. All yee that loue the Lord doe this, hate all thinges that are ill: For hee doeth keepe the soules of his, from such as would them spill. And light doeth spring vp to the iust, with pleasure for his part: Great ioy with gladnesse, mirth and lust, to them of vpright heart. Yee righteous in the Lord reioyce, his holynesse proclaime: Bee thankefull eke with heart and voyce, and mindefull of the same. PSALME XCVIII. Sing this as the 95. Psalme. O Sing yee now vnto the Lord, a new and pleasant song: For hee hath wrought throughout the world, his wonders great and strong. With his right hand full worthily, hee doeth his foes deuoure, And get himselfe the victorie, with his owne arme and power. The Lord doeth make the people know, his sauing health and might, The Lord doeth eke his justice show, in all the Heathens sight. His grace and trueth to Israel, in minde hee does recorde, That all the earth hath seene right well, the goodnesse of the Lord. Bee glad in him with joyfull voyce, all people of the earth, Giue thankes to God, sing and rejoyce, to him with joy and mirth. Vpon the harpe vnto him sing, giue thankes to him with Psalmes, Rejoyce before the Lord our King, with trumpet and with shalmes. Yea, let the sea, with all therein, with ioy both roare and swell, The earth likewise, let it begin, with all that therein dwell. And let the floods rejoyce their filles, and clap their handes apace: And eke the mountaines and the hilles, before the LORD his face. For hee shall come to judge and try, the world and euery wight: And rule the people mightily, with iustice and with right.
PSALME XCIX. Sing this as the 95. Psalme. THe Lord doeth reigne, although at it the people rage full sore: Yea, hee on Cherubim doeth sit, though all the world would roare. The Lord that doeth in Sion dwell, is high and wondrous great: Aboue all folke hee doeth excell, and hee aloft is set. Let all men praise thy mightie Name, for it is fearefull sure: And let them magnifie the same, that holy is and pure. The princely power of our King, doeth loue iudgement and right: Thou rightly rulest euery thing, in Iaakob through thy might. To praise the Lord our God deuise, all honour him accorde: Before his foote-stoole fall likewise, hee is the holy Lord. Moyses, Aaron, and Samuel, as Priestes on him did call: When they did pray, hee heard them well, and gaue them answere all. Within the cloude to them hee spake, then did they labour still, To keepe such Lawes as hee did make, and pointed them vntill. O Lord our God, thou didst them heare, to thee when they did seeke: Thy mercie did on them appeare, though thou their sinnes didst wreake. Giue laude and praise to God our Lord, within his holy hill: For why? our God throughout the world, is holy euer still. PSALME C. ALl people that on earth doe dwell, Sing to the LORD with chearefull voyce, Him serue with feare, his praise foorth∣tell, Come yee before him and reioyce. The Lord, yee know, is God indeed, Without our aide hee did vs make: Wee are his flocke, hee doeth vs feede, And for his sheepe hee doeth vs take. Oh, enter then his gates with praise, Approach with ioy his courtes vnto: Praise, laude, and blesse his Name alwayes, For it is seemely so to doe. For why? the Lord our God is good, His mercie is for euer sure: His trueth at all times firmely stood, And shall from age to age indure. SALME CI. OF mercy and of iudgement both. O LORD, my song shall bee: And it so oft as I doe sing, shall bee, O LORD, to thee.  I will my wayes with wise∣dome guide, till thou my state erect: And walke vprightly in mine house, as one of thine Elect. No wicked thing will I attempt, but from the same refraine: I hate the sinnes of faithlesse folke, no such I will maintaine. The froward heart may take his leaue, such shall not with mee dwell: And for the proude and wicked man, I will with force expell. Who so his neighbour doeth backe-bite, that man will I destroy: And who so hath a proude high looke, I will the same annoy: For such as leade a godly life, and wickednesse forsake, Will I defend, and more then that, my seruantes will them make. Who so is bent to vse deceite, mine house is not for such: The lyer may I not beholde, his lyes I hate so much. Th'vngodly soone I will destroy, which dwell the land about: And from the Citie of the Lord, all wicked men roote out.
PSALME CII. LORD, to mine humble sute giue eare, And let my crye fore thee appeare▪  Hide not thy face this troublous time, But when I call thine eares incline, Make haste to heare mee, LORD, I pray:  For like as smoke consum'th away, So are my dayes heere on this earth, And all my bones parcht as an hearth. Like the mowne grasse withered and dry, Such is mine heart, because that I, Through griefe, my bread forgat to eat: For through my voyce of groninges great, My bones vnto my skinne doe sticke. Yea, I the Pelicane am like, Which doeth in wildernesse abide: And like the Owle of desertes wide. As on the house toppe all alone, The sparrow doeth her selfe bemone: Euen so I watch throughout the night: For dayly loe, my foes mee spight, And they that thus doe rage and scorne, With one consent my death haue sworne, I ashes ate, as bread, through woe, And blent my cuppe with teares also. This▪ Lord, mee hapneth for thine ire, And for thy wrath as hote as fire: For thou in high estate mee plaste, And downe to dust againe hast cast. My dayes are like the fading shade, I like the withered grasse am made, But, Lord, thou still abidest sure, Thy memorie for aye doeth dure. Thou wilt arise for Sion hill, And grant thy mercie her vntill: For loe, the time, the time, I say, Of mercie, Lord, is come this day: For in her stones thy seruantes lust, And pitie take vpon her dust, So shall the Heathen feare thy Name, And earthly kinges thy glorious fame. What time the Lord shall Sion reare, And in his glorie shall appeare, And to the desolate him bende, Despising not their sute t'attende. This shall bee written for the race, That after shall succeede in place: Yea, people yet vncreated, The Lordes renowne abroad shall spread. For from his holy Temple hie, The Lord our God hath cast his eye, From heauen the earth beholde did hee, The prisoners grones to heare and see, And set the damned free from care, That they in Sion may declare, This holy Name of God alwayes, And in Ierusalem his praise. When to conueene the folke accord, And kingdomes all to serue the Lord, My strength hee bated in the wayes, And shorter cut my life and dayes. Wherefore I said, my God moste hie, In midst my life let mee not die, Thy yeeres eternally indure, From age to age abyding sure. Thou in times past the earth didst ground, Thine handyworke the heauens are found, They perish shall, thou standing still, They shall waxe olde, as garmentes will, Thou changing them, they shall so bide, But thou art one, whose yeeres not slide, Thy seruantes sonnes for aye shall last, And in thy sight their seede stand fast. PSALME CIII. MY soule, giue laude vnto the LORD, my spirite shall doe the same, And all the secretes of mine heart, praise yee his holy Name.  Giue thankes to GOD, for all his giftes, shew not thy selfe vnkinde, And suffer not his benefites, to
flippe out of thy minde. That gaue thee pardon for thy faultes, and thee restorde againe, For all thy weake and fraile disease, and healde thee of thy paine. That did redeeme thy ife from death, from which thou couldst not flee, His mercy and compassion both, hee did extende to thee. That filde with goodnesse thy desire, and did prolong thy youth, Like as the Eagle casteth her bill, whereby her age renueth. The Lord with iustice doeth repay, all such as bee opprest, So that their sufferinges and their wronges, are turned to the best. His wayes and his commandementes, to Moyses hee did showe, His counsels, and his valiant actes, the Israelites did knowe. The Lord is kinde and mercyfull, when sinners doe him grieue, The slowest to conceiue a wrath, and readiest to forgiue. Hee thyd'th not vs continually, though wee bee full of strife, Nor keep'th our faultes in memorie, for all our sinnefull life. Nor yet according to our sinnes, the Lord doeth vs regarde, Nor after our iniquities, hee doeth vs not rewarde. But as the space is wondrous great, twixt earth and heauen aboue. So is his goodnesse much more large, to them that doe him loue. God doeth remoue our sinnes from vs, and our offences all, As farre as is the Sunne rysing, full distant from his fall. And looke what pitie parentes deare, vnto their children beare, Like pitie beares the Lord to such, as worshippe him in feare. The Lord that made vs, knowth our shape, our mould, and fashion iust, How weake and fraile our nature is, and how wee are but dust. And how the time of mortall men, is like the withering hay, Or like the floure right faire on fielde, that fad'th full soone away: Whose glosse and beautie stormie windes, doe vtterly disgrace. And make that after their assaultes, such blossomes haue no place. But yet the goodnesse of the Lord, with his shall euer stand, Their childrens children doe receiue, his righteousnesse at hand. I meane which keepe his Couenant, with all their whole desire, And not forget to doe the thing, that hee doeth them require. The heauens high are made the seate, and foote-stoole of the Lord, And by his power imperiall, hee gouern'th all the world. Yee Angels which are great in power, praise yee and blesse the Lord, Which to obey and doe his will, immediately accorde. Yee noble hostes and ministers, cease not to laude him still, Which ready are to execute, his pleasure and his will. Yea, all his workes in euery place, praise yee his holy Name, Mine heart, my minde, and eke my soule, praise yee also the same. PSALME CIV. MY soule, praise the LORD, speake good of his Name, O LORD, our great GOD, how doest thou appeare, So passing in glory, that great is thy fame. Honour and maiestie in thee shine moste cleare.  With light as a robe, thou hast thee beclad, Whereby all the earth thy greatnesse may see. The beauens in such sort, thou also hast spred. That it to a curtaine compared may bee.
His chamber-beames lye, in the cloudes full sure: Which as his Charets, are made him to beare, And there with much swiftnesse, his course doeth indure: Vpon the winges ryding, of windes in the aire. Hee maketh his spirites, as Herauldes to goe, And lighteninges to serue, wee see also prest, His will to accomplish, they runne to and froe, To saue and consume thinges, as seemeth him best. Hee groundeth the earth, so firmely and fast, That it once to moue, none haue shall such power. The deepe a faire couering, for it made thou hast, VVhich by his owne nature, the hilles woulde deuoure: But at thy rebuke, the waters doe flee, And so giue due place, thy worde to obey: At thy voyce of thunder, so fearefull they bee. That in their great raging, they haste soone away. The mountaines full high, they then vp ascende, If thou doe but speake, thy worde they fullfill. So likewise the valleyes, most quickly descende, VVhere thou them appointest, remaine they doe still. Their boundes hast thou set, how farre they shall runne, So as in their rage, not passe that they can: For God hath appointed, they shall not returne, The earth to destroy more, which made was for man. Hee sendeth the springes, to strong streames or lakes, VVhich runne doe full swift, among the huge hilles, VVhere both the wilde asses, their thirst oft times slakes, And beastes of the mountaines, thereof drinke their filles. By these pleasant springes, or fountaines full faire, The foules of the aire, abide shall and dwell, Who moued by nature, to hop heere and there, Among the greene branches, their song shall excell. The mountaines to moist the cloudes hee doeth vse: The earth with his workes, are wholely repleat. So as the brute cattell, hee doeth not refuse: but grasse doeth prouide them, and herbe for mans meat. Yea, bread, wine, and oyle, hee made for mans sake, His face to refresh, and heart to make strong. The Cedars of Liban, this great Lord did make, Which trees hee doeth nourish, that grow vp so long. In these may birdes builde, and make there their nest, In fyrre-trees the storckes, remaine and abide. The high hilles are succoures, for wilde goates to rest: And eke the rockes stonie, for conies to hide. The moone then is set, her seasons to runne: The dayes from the nightes, thereby to discerne: And by the descending, also of the sunne. The colde from the heate, so thereby wee doe learne. When darkenesse doeth come, by Gods will and power: Then creepe foorth doe all, the beastes of the wood. The lyons range roaring, their preye to deuoure: But yet it is thou, Lord, which giuest them food. Assoone as the Sunne, is vp, they retire: To couch in their dennes, then are they full faine, That man doe his worke may, as right doeth require: Till night come, and call him, to take rest againe. How sundrie, O Lord, are all thy workes found: With wisedome full great, they are indeede wrought: So that the worlde all whole, of thy praise doeth sounde. And as for thy riches, they passe all mens thought:
So is the great sea, which large is and broad: Where thinges that creepe, swarme, and beastes of each sort. There both mightie shippes saile, and some lye at roade: The whale hudge and monstrous, there also doeth sport. All thinges on thee waite, thou doest them relieue: And thou in due time, full well doest them feede. Now, when it doeth please thee, the same so to giue: They gather full gladly, those thinges which they neede: Thou openest thine hand, and they find such grace, That they with good thinges, are filled wee see. But sore they are troubled, if thou turne thy face: For if thou their breath take, vile dust then they bee. Againe, when thy Spirite, from thee doeth proceede, All thinges to appoint, and what shall insue, Then are they created, as thou hast decreede: And doest by thy goodnesse, the drye earth renue. The praise of the LORD, for euer shall last: Who may in his workes, by right well rejoyce: His lookes can the earth make, to tremble full fast: And likewise the mountaines, to smoke at his voyce. To this LORD and GOD, sing will I alwayes, So long as I liue, my GOD praise will I. Then am I moste certaine, my wordes shall him please. I will rejoyce in him, to him will I crye. The sinners, O LORD, consume in thine ire: And eke the peruerse, them roote out with shame: But as for my soule, now, let it still desire, And saye with the faithfull, Praise yee the LORDS NAME. PSALME CV. Sing this as the 104. Psalme. O Praise yee the LORD, and call on his NAME: Among the folke shewe, his noble workes wrought▪ Sing praises, sing to him, to set foorth his fame: And talke of the wonders, hee hath to passe brought. In his holy NAME, rejoyce and bee light, And let their heartes joy, which seeke for the LORD. Seeke yee our GOD holy, his strength and his might, His face to beholde still, for euer accorde. His marueilous workes, keepe fixt in your minde: His signes and his judgementes, which hee by mouth spake. Yee seede of his seruant, Abraham by kinde, And you sonnes of Iaakob, whom hee his doeth take. Hee is our LORD GOD, whose judgements are knowne, Throughout all the earth, and hee aye certaine, His promise remembred, once made to his owne, For thousandes of ages, to bide and remaine. Th'agreement, I saye, with Abraham made, Which vnto Isaak, by othe hee made sure, Confirming to Iaakob, for a law and trade, And bonde to Israel, alwayes to indure: Saying on this wise, to thee giue I shall, As lot to enjoy, the Cananites grounde. Albeit they were then, in number but small: Yea, few, and but strangers, throughout the land founde. And from place to place, did walke to and froe: And from one kingdome, to other folke moue. Yet suffered hee no man, them wrong for to doe. But thus for their sakes, hee great kinges did reproue. Touch not mine ointed, nor harme not at all. My Prophets moste deare: and on the whole earth, A famine extreame then, to come hee did call:
Which vtterly stroyed, their store whole with dearth. Yet sent hee before, a man to prouide: Euen Ioseph his owne, in seruage was solde, Whose feete they in stockes helde, yea, hee a long tide, With fetters of yron, was kept in sure holde. Vntill the time came, his cause should bee knowne, And that the LORDS word, his patience and tride. Then sent the king for him, and loosde him full soone: The head of the people, his bandes laide aside. Who made him the lord, his house ouer all: And of his substance, the ruler and staye, That hee might his princes, vnto his will thrall And eke teach the elders, of wisedome the waye. Then came Israel, into Egypt land: A stranger in Cham, Iaakob then abode: Where GOD did increase them, much like the sea sand: And made them more mightie, then those them with-stoode. Whose heartes hee did turne, his people to hate, And seeke by deceate, his seruantes to abuse. But then hee sent Moyses, their cause to debate, And Aaron his seruantes, whom hee did foorth chose. They vnto his foes, his message declar'de: His signes and his wonders, of Ham in the land. Hee darkenesse sent downe then, and darke it appearde: And these not rebelled, to doe his command. Their waters hee turn'de, redde blood for to bee: Hee slew all their fish, and frogges made to breede, Euen in their kinges chambers, then also spake hee, So lyce and fleas swarmed, the land through indeede. Hee sent on them haile, in stead of sweete raine, And great flames of fire, their countrie throughout. Their vines and their figge-trees, hee strake to their paine, And brake the trees all, their costes rounde about. Hee spake but the worde, and grasse-hoppers came, With hudge caterpillers, beyonde all mens thought. The grasse they deuoured, that grew then in Ham, And fruites of the ground all, they brought vnto nought. Also the first-borne, the land through hee smote: Euen the beginning, of their force and might. And with golde and siluer, brought foorth his owne lot: Amongst whose tribes was not, one feeble in sight. Egypt rejoyced, when they went away: For why? vpon them, their feare then was fall. The LORD a cloud spred out to guide them by day: And fire for to light them, the night ouer all. They did but demande, and quailes hee them sent: And with bread from heauen, hee did them suffice. The harde rocke hee opened, and waters out went: Euen through the drie places, like floods that doe rise. For hee doeth remember, his holy othe made: Vnto Abraham, his seruant moste deare. And brought forth his people, (that were with woe lade) His owne chosen children, with joy and gladde cheare: The Heathen folkes land, to them hee did part: The peoples whole labours, they had to possesse. That they from his statutes, and lawes should not start: Wherefore, our LORD GOD praise, his laude no time cease. PSALME CVI. Sing this as the 95. Psalme. PRaise yee the LORD, for hee is good, his mercies dure for aye:
Who can expresse his noble actes, or all his praise display? They blessed are, that judgement keepe, and justly doe alway: With fauour of thy people, LORD, remember mee, I pray. And with thy sauing health, O LORD, vouchsafe to visite mee: That I the great felicitie, of thine Elect may see. And with the peoples joy I may, a joyfull minde possesse: And may with thine inheritance, a glorying heart expresse. Both wee and eke our fathers all, haue sinned euery one: Wee haue committed wickednesse, and lewdely wee haue done. The wonders great which thou, O LORD, hast done in Egypt land: Our fathers, though they saw them all, yet did not vnderstand. Nor yet thy mercies multitude, did keepe in thankefull minde: But at the sea, yea, the redde sea, rebelled moste vnkinde. Neuerthelesse hee saued them, for honour of his NAME: That hee might make his power knowne, and spred abroad with fame. The redde sea hee did then rebuke, and foorth-with it was dryde: And as in wildernesse, so through, the deepe hee did them guide. Hee sau'de them from the cruell hande, of their despitefull foe: And from the enemies hand hee did, deliuer them also. The waters their oppressours whelm'de, not one was left aliue: Then they beleeu'de his wordes, and praise in songes they did him giue: But by and by vnthankefully, his workes they cleane forgat: And for his counsell and his will, they did neglect to waite. But lusted in the wildernesse, with fonde and greedie lust: And in the desert tempted GOD, the stay of all their trust. And then their wanton mindes desire, hee suffred them to haue: But wasting leanenesse there withall, into their soule hee gaue. Then when they lodged in their tentes, at Moyses they did grutch: Aaron, the holy of the LORD, so did they enuie much. Therefore the earth did open wide, nd Dathan did deuoure, nd all Abirams companie, did couer in that houre. In their assemblies kindled was, the hote consuming fire: And wasting flame did then burne vp, the wicked in his ire. Vpon the hill of Horeb, they an idole calfe did frame: And there the molten image did, they worshippe of the same. Into the likenesse of a calfe, that feedeth on the grasse: Thus they their glorie turnde, and all their honour did deface. And GOD their onely Sauiour, vnkindly they forgot: Which many great and mightie thinges, In Egypt land had wrought. And in the land of Ham for them, moste wondrous workes had done: And by the redde sea dreadfull thinges, performed long agone: Therefore, for their so shewing them, forgetfull and vnkinde: To bring destruction on them all, hee purposde in his minde: Had not his chosen Moyses stood, before him in the breake, To turne his wrath, lest hee on them, with slaughter should him wreake. They did despise the pleasant land, that hee behight to giue: Yea, and the wordes that hee had spoke, they did no whit beleeue. But in their tentes with grudging heart, they wickedly repinde: Nor to the voyce of GOD the LORD, they gaue an hearkning mind. Therefore, against them lifted hee, his strong reuenging hand: Them to destroy in wildernesse, ere they should see the land. And to destroy their seed, among the Nations, with his rodde: And through the countries of the world, to scatter them abroad. To Baal-Peor then they did, adjoyne themselues also, And ate the offeringes of the dead, so they forsooke him tho. Thus with their owne inuentions, his wrath they did prouoke: And in his so in-kindled wrath, the plague vpon them broke. But phineas stood vp with zeale, the sinners vile to slay:
And judgement hee did execute, and then the plague did stay. It was imputed vnto him, for righteousnesse that day: And from thencefoorth so counted is, from race to race for ay. At waters eke of Meribah, they did him angrie make: Yea, so farre foorth, that Moses was, then punisht for their sake. Because they vext his Spirite so sore, that in impatient heat: His lippes spake vnaduisedly, his feruour was so great. Nor as the LORD commanded them, they slew the people tho: But were among the Heathen mixt, and learnde their workes also. And did their idols serue, which were their ruine and decay: To fiendes their sonnes and doughters they did offer vp and slay. Thus with vnkindly murthring knife, the guiltlesse blood they spilt: Yea, their owne sonnes and daughters blood, without all cause of guilt, Whom they to Canaan idoles then, offred with wicked hand: And so with blood of innocentes, defiled was the land. Thus were they stained with the workes, of their owne filthie way: And with their owne inuentions, awhoring did they stray. Therefore, against his people was the LORDS wrath kindled sore: And euen his owne inheritance, hee did abhorre therefore. Into the handes of Heathen men, hee gaue them for a prey: And made their foes their lords, whom they were forced to obey. Yea, and their hatefull enemies, opprest them in their land: And they were humbly made to stoup, as subjectes to their hand. Full oftentimes from thrall had hee, deliuered them before: But with their counsels they to wrath, prouok't him euermore. Therefore, they by their wickednesse, were brought full low to lye: Yet when hee saw them in distresse, hee hearkned to their crye. Hee calde to minde his Couenant, which hee to them had swore: And by his mercies multitude, repented him therefore. And fauour hee them made to finde, before the sight of those, That led them captiue from their land, and earst had beene their fors. Saue vs, O'LORD, that art our GOD, saue vs, O LORD, wee pray: And from among the Heathen folke, LORD, gather vs away. That wee may spread the noble praise, of thy moste holy NAME: That wee may glorie in thy praise, and sounde abroad thy fame. The LORD the GOD of Israel, bee blest for euermore: Let all the people say Amen, praise yee the LORD therefore. PSALME CVII. GIue thankes vnto the LORD, our GOD, for gratious is hee, And that his mercie hath none ende, all mortall men may see.  Such as the LORD redee∣med hath, with thankes should praise his NAME, And shewe how they from foes were freede, and how hee wrought the same. Hee gathered them foorth of the land, that lay so farre about: From East to West, from North to South, his hand did find them out. They wandred in the wildernesse, and strayed from the way: And found no citie where to dwell, that serue might for their stay, Whose thirst and hunger was so great, in those desertes so voyde: That faintnesse did them sore assault, and eke their soules annoyde. Then did they cry in their distresse, vnto the LORD for ayde: Who did remoue their troublous state, according as they prayde. And by that way, which was most right, hee led them, like a guide:
That they might to a citie goe, and there also abide. Let men, therefore, before the LORD, confesse his goodnesse then: And shew the wonders that hee doeth, before the sonnes of men. For hee the emptie soule sustainde, whom thirst had made to faint: The hungrie soule with goodnesse fedde, and did them eke acquaint. Such as doe dwell in darknesse deepe, where they of death doe waite: Fast bound to taste such troublous stormes, as yron chaines doe threat. For that against the LORDS own words, they sought so to rebell: Esteeming light his counsels high, which doe so farre excell. But when hee humbled them full low, then they fell downe with griefe: And none was found so much to helpe, whereby to get reliefe. Then did they cry in ther distresse, vnto the LORD for ayde: Who did remoue their troublous state, according as they prayde. For hee from darknesse out them brought, and from deathes dreadfull shade: Bursting with force the yron bandes, which did before them lade. Let men, therefore, before the LORD, confesse his kindnesse then: And shew the wonders that hee doeth, before the sonnes of men. For hee threw downe the gates of brasse, and brake them with strong hand, The yron barres hee smote in two, nothing could him with-stand. The foolish folke great plagues doe feele, and cannot from them wend: But heape on moe to those they haue, because they doe offend. Their soule so much did loath all meat, that none they could abide, Whereby death had them almost caught, as they full truely tryde. Then did they crye in their distresse, vnto the LORD for aide: Who did remoue their troublous state, according as they praide: For hee then sent to them his worde, which health did soone restore: And brought them from those dangers deepe, wherein they were before. Let men, therefore, before the LORD, confesse his kindnesse then: And shew the wonders that hee doeth, before the sonnes of men. And let them offer sacrifice, with thankes, and also feare: And speake of all his wondrous workes, with glad and joyfull cheare. Such as in shippes or brittle barkes, into the seas descende. Their merchandise through fearefull floods, to compasse and to ende: Those men are forced to beholde, the LORDS workes what they bee: And in the dangerous deepe the same, moste marueilous they see. For at his worde the stormie winde, ariseth in a rage, And stirreth vp the surges so, as nought can them asswage. Then are they lifted vp so high, the cloudes they seeme to gaine: And plunging downe the depth vntill, their soules consume with paine. And like a drunkarde, to and froe, now heere, now there they reele: As men with feare of wit bereft, or had of sence no feele. Then did they crye in their distresse, vnto the LORD for aide: Who did remoue their troublous state, according as they praide. For with his word the LORD doth make the sturdie storme to cease: So that the great waues from their rage, are brought to rest and peace. Then are men glad when rest is come, which they so much doe craue: And are by him in hauen brought, which they so faine would haue. Let men, therefore, before the LORD, confesse his kindnesse then, And shew the wonders that hee doeth, before the sonnes of men. Let men in presence of the folke, with praise extoll his NAME, And where the Elders doe conueene, let them there doe the same. For running floods to dry desertes, hee doeth oft change and turne: And dryeth vp, as it were dust, the springing Well and Burne. A fruitefull land with pleasures deckt, full barren hee doeth make: When on their sinnes, which dwell therein, hee doeth just vengeance take. Againe, the wildernesse full rude, hee maketh fruit to beare, With pleasant springes of water cleare, though none before was there, Wherein such hungrie soules are set, as hee doeth freely choose,
That they a citie may them build, to dwell in for their vse. That they may sow their pleasant land, and vine-yardes also plant: To yeeld them fruites of such increase, as none may seeme to want. They multiply exceedingly, the LORD doeth blesse them so, Who doeth also their bruit beastes make, by numbers great to grow. But when the faithfull are low brought, by the oppressours stout, And minish doe through many plagues, that compasse them about. Then doeth hee princes bring to shame, which did them so oppresse: And likewise caused them to erre, within the wildernesse. but yet the poore hee raiseth vp, out of his troubles deepe, And oft times doeth his traine augment, much like a flocke of sheepe. The righteous shall behold this sight, and also much rejoyce, Whereas the wicked and peruerse, with griefe shall stop their voyce. But who is wise? that now full well, hee may these thinges record: For certainely such shall perceiue, the kindnesse of the LORD. PSALME CVIII. Sing this as the 57. Psalme. O GOD, behold mine heart and tongue, they both prepared bee, My voyce aduance will I in song, and giue all praise to thee. Rise vp, sweet melodie to make, my viole and mine harpe, For I by breake of day will wake, thy laud and praise to carpe. Among the people, LORD, I shall, giue praises vnto thee, And eke amid the nations all, to thee my song shall bee. For why? thy mercie great doeth stretch, aboue the heauens hie, Likewise thy trueth, O LORD, doeth reach, vnto the cloudie Skie. Exalt thy selfe, O LORD our GOD, aboue the heauens bright, Set foorth thy praise in earth abroad, thy glory and thy might. That thy beloued in the land, may freede bee from all thrall, O helpe vs, LORD with thy right hand, and heare mee when I call. I will rejoyce, sith GOD hath saide, within his holy place, That I shall Sichem land diuide, and Succothes vale, by pace. For Gilead shall bee mine owne, Manasses mine beside: Mine head-strength Ephraim well knowne, my law doeth Iudah guide. Moab my wash-pot, and my shoe, on Edom will I cast: Yea, I on Palestine also, shall triumph at the last. Who now will leade mee by the hand, into the Citie strong? Or bee my guide to Edom land, so that I goe not wrong? Is it not thou, O LORD our GOD, which hadst vs cleane forsooke: And wentst not with our hostes abroad, when warres in hand wee tooke? O LORD, when trouble doeth assaile, with aide vs then relieue: Vaine is, and nothing can auaile, the helpe that man can giue. Throgh GOD to do we shall haue might, actes worthie of renowne: Hee shall our foes put vnto flight, yea, hee shall treade them downe. PSALME CIX. IN speechlesse silence doe not holde, O LORD, thy tongue alwayes: O GOD, euen thou, I say, that art, the GOD of all my praise.  The wicked and the guile∣full mouth, on mee disclosed bee: And they with false and lying tongue, haue spoken vnto mee. They did beset mee round about, with wordes of hatefull spight: Without all cause of my desert, against mee did they fight:
For my good will they were my foes, but then gan I to pray: My good with ill, my friendlynesse, with hate they did repay. Set thou the wicked ouer him, to haue the vpper hand, At his right hand eke suffer thou, his hatefull foe to stand. When hee is judged, let him then, condemned bee therein, And let the prayer that hee makes, bee turned into sinne. Few bee his dayes, his charge also, let thou another take, His children let bee fatherlesse, his Wife a widow make. Let his off-spring bee vagabondes, to begge and seeke them bread: Wandring out of the wasted place, where earst they haue beene fed. Let couetous extortioners, catch all his goods and store, And let the strangers spoile the fruites, of all his toile before. Let there bee none to pitie him, let there bee none at all, That on his children fatherlesse, will let his mercie fall. And so let his posteritie, for euer bee destroyde, Their name out-blotted in the age, that after shall succeede. Let not his fathers wickednesse, from GODS remembrance fall, And let thou not his mothers sinne, bee done away at all. but in the presence of the LORD, let them remaine for ay: That from the earth their memorie, hee my cut cleane away. Sith mercie hee forgat to shew, but did pursue with spight, The troubled man, and sought to slay, the woefull hearted wight. As hee did cursing loue, it shall betide vnto him so, And as hee did not blessing loue, it shall bee farre him froe. As hee with cursing clad himselfe, so it like water shall, Into his bowels, and like oyle, into his bones befall. As garmentes let it bee to him, to couer him for ay, And as a girdle, wherewith hee shall girded bee alway. Loe, let the same before the LORD, bee guerdon of my foe, Yea, and of those that euill speake, against my soule also. But thou, O LORD that art my GOD, deale thou, I say, with mee, After thy NAME deliuer mee, for good thy mercies bee. Because in depth of great distresse, I needie am and poore, And eke within my pained brest, my heart is wounded sore. Euen so I doe depart away, as doeth declining shade: And as the grasse-hopper, so I am shaken off, and fade. With fasting long, from needefull foode, enfeebled are my knees: And all her fatnesse hath my flesh, enforced beene to leese. And I also a vile reproach, to them was made to bee: And they that did vpon mee looke, did shake their heads at mee. But thou, O LORD, that art my GOD, mine aide and succour bee, According to thy mercie, LORD, saue and deliuer mee. And they shall know thereby, that this, LORD, is thy mightie hand: And that thou, thou hast done it, LORD, so shall they vnderstand. Although they curse with spite, yet thou shalt blesse with louing voyce: They shall arise, and come to shame, thy seruant shall rejoyce. Let them bee clothed all with shame, that enemies are to mee: And with confusion, as a cloake, eke let them couered bee. But greatly I will with my mouth, giue thankes vnto the LORD: And I among the multitude, his praises will recorde. For hee with helpe at his right hand, will stand the poore man by: To saue him from the men, that woulde condemne his soule to dye. PSALME CX. THe LORD moste high, vnto my LORD thus spake, Sit thou nowe downe, and rest at my right hande, Vntill
that I thine enemies doe make, A stoole to bee, whereon thy feete may stande. The scepter of thy regall power and might, From Sion shal the LORD send & disclose: Bee thou, therefore, the ruler in the sight, And in the midst of all thy mortall foes. Thy people shall come willingly to thee, What time thine hoste in holy beauty shew, The yuth that of thy womb do spring shalbe Compared like vnto the morning dew. Thus God hath sworn, & it perform wil he, And not repent, nor any time it breake, Thou art a Priest for euer vnto mee, After the forme of King Melchisedeck. The Lord our God, who is at euery stound, At thy right hand, to bee thy helpe and stay, He princes proud, & stately kings shal woūd, For loue of thee, in his fierce wrathfull day. Hee shall bee Iudge among the Heathen all, Hee places voyde with carkases shall fill, And in his rage, the heads eke smite hee shall, That ouer countries great do work their wil. Yea, hee through haste for to pursue his foes, Shal drink the brook that runneth in ye way, And thus when he confoūded shal haue those, His head on hie then shall hee lift that day. PSALME CXI. WIth heart I doe accord, To praise and laud the LORD, In pesence of the just,  For great his workes are found, To search them such are bound, As doe him loue and trust.  His workes are gloirous, Also his righteousnesse, It doeth indure for euer.  His wondrous workes hee would, Wee still remember should, his mercie faileth neuer. Such as doe loue him beare, A portion full faire, Hee hath vp for them laide, For this they shall well find; Hee will them haue in mind, And keepe them as hee said. For hee did not disdaine, His workes to shew them plaine, By lightninges and by thunders, When hee the Heathens land, Did giue into their hand, Where they beheld his wonders. Of all his workes insueth, Both judgement, right, and trueth, Whereto his statutes tend. They are decreede sure, For euer to indure, Which equitie doeth ende. Redemption hee gaue, His people for to saue. And hath also required, His promise not to faile, But alwayes to preuaile: His holy NAME be feared. Who so with heart full faine, True wisedome would attaine, The LORD feare and obeye: Such as his lawes doe keepe, Shall knowledge haue full deepe, His praise shall last for aye. PSALME CXII. THe man is blest, that GOD doeth feare, And that his lawes doeth loue indeed:  His seede on earth GOD will vpreare, And blesse such as from him proceed.  His house with good hee will fullfill, His righ∣teousnesse indure shall still.
Vnto the righteous doeth arise, In trouble joy, in darkenesse light: Compassion is in his eyes, And mercie alwayes in his sight. Yea, pitie moueth such to lende, Hee doeth by judgement thinges expende. And surely such shall neuer faile, For in remembrance had is hee: No tydinges ill can make him quaile. Who in the LORD sure hope doeth see, His heart is firme, his feare is past, For hee shall see his foes downe cast. Hee did well for the poore prouide, His righteousnesse shall still remaine: And his estate with praise abide, Though that the wicked man disdaine: Yea, gnash his teeth thereat shall hee, And so consume his state to see. PSALME CXIII. YEe children, which doe serue the LORD, Praise yee his NAME with one accord.  Yea, blessed bee alway his NAME,  Who from the rising of the sun, Till it returne where it begun, Is to bee prai∣sed with great fame.  The LORD all people doeth surmount, As for his glorie, wee may count, Aboue the heauens high to bee.  With GOD the LORD who may compare, Whose dwellinges in the heauens are? Of such great power and force is hee. Hee doeth abase himselfe, wee know, Thinges to behold, both heere below, And also in the heauen aboue, The needie out of dust to draw, And eke the poore, which helpe none saw, His onely mercie did him moue, And so him set in high degree, With princes of great dignitie, That rule his people with great fame. The barren hee doeth make to beare, And with great joy her fruit to reare. Therefore praise yee his holy NAME. PSALME CXIV. WHen Israel, by GODS addresse, from Pharaos land was bent, And Iaakobs house the strangers left, and in the same traine went.  In Iudah GOD his glo∣rie shewde, his holynesse moste bright. So did the Israelites declare, his Kingdome, power, and might. The sea it saw, and suddenly, as all amazde, did flee, The roaring streames of Iordans flood, reculed backwardly. As Rams afraide, the mountaines skipt, their strength did them forsake: And as the sillie trembling Lambes, their toppes did beate and shake. What ailde thee, sea, as all amazde, so suddainly to flee? Yee rouling waues of Iordanes flood, why ranne yee backwardly? Why shooke yee hilles, as Rams afraid, why did your strength so shake? Why did your toppes as trembling Lambes, for feare quiuer and quake? O earth confesse thy soueraigne LORD, and dread his mightie hand, Before the face of Iaakobs GOD, feare yee, both sea and land. I meane the GOD which from hard rocks doeth cause maine floods appeare, And from the stonie flint doeth make, gush out the fountaines cleare.
PSALME CXV. NOt vnto vs, O LORD, I say, to vs giue none, But giue all praise of grace and trueth, vnto thy NAME alone.  Why shall the Gentiles say, to vs, as in despite, VVhere is their GOD they call vpon? where is their heartes delite? Doubtlesse, our souereigne GOD, in heauen sitt'h on hie, And worketh what him liketh best, for all thinges doe can hee. But their idoles and gods, before whom they doe stand, Siluer and golde they are at most, the worke euen of mens hand. A mouth they haue, speechlesse, not mouing tongue nor lippes, And eyes they haue, but see no whit, no more then doe dead chippes. Eares they haue, and heare not, as doe the eares of man: A nose also, but to no vse, for smell nothing they can. Both handes and feete they haue, in forme there is no lacke: But neither touch, nor go they can, nor yet with throate noise make. Like vnto them shall bee, the forgers that them frame: And likewise such are no lesse madde, which call vpon their name. But thou, O Israel, in GOD put confidence: For to all such an aide hee is, a buckler, and defence. and thou tribe of Aaron, in GOD put confidence: For to all such an aide hee is, a buckler, and defence. All yee that feare the LORD, in GOD put confidence: For to all such an aide hee is, a buckler, and defence. The LORD hath vs in minde, and will vs blesse each one; The house I meane of Israel, and the tribe of Aaron. And blesse will hee all them, that feare the LORD indeed: Aswell the weake, as them of strength, which seeke to him at need. With graces manyfolde, the LORD will all you blesse: Aswell your seed, as you your selues, with plentie and increase. For yee are deare to him, that LORD is ouer all. Who made both heauen and the earth, and thinges both great and small. The heauens are the LORDS, as his owne dwelling place: But vnto men the earth hee giueth, thereon to runne their race. Surely they that are dead, doe not now praise the LORD: Nor such as in the graue are laide, doe thereunto accord. But wee that heere doe liue, shall thanke the LORD alwayes: With heart and mouth giue thankes will wee, likewise all you him praise. PSALME CXVI. I Loue the LORD, because my voyce, and prayer heard hath hee:  When in my dayes I calde on him, hee bowde his eare to mee.  Euen when the snares of cruell death, about beset mee round, When paines of hell mee caught, and when, I woe and sorow found. Vpon the NAME and GOD my LORD, then did I call and say, Deliuer thou my soule, O LORD, I doe thee humbly pray.
The LORD is very mercyfull, and just hee is also, And in our GOD compassion, doeth plentifully floe. The LORD in safetie doeth preserue, all those that simple bee, I was in wofull miserie, and hee relieued mee. And now, my soule, sith thou art safe, returne vnto thy rest, For largely, loe, the LORD to thee, his bountie hath exprest. Because thou hast deliuered, my soule from deadly thrall, My moisted eyes, from mournefull teares, my slyding feete from fall. Before the LORD I in the land of life will walke therefore: I did beleeue, therefore I spake, for I was troubled sore. I said in my distresse and feare, that all men lyars bee: What shall I pay the LORD, for all his benefites to mee? The wholesome cup of sauing health, I thankefully will take: And on the LORDS NAME I will call, when I my prayer make. I to the LORD will pay the vowes, that I haue him beheght: Yea, now, euen at this present time, in all his peoples fight. Right deare and precious in his sight, the LORD doeth ay esteeme, The death of all his holy ones, what euer men doe deeme. Thy seruant, LORD, thy seruant, loe, I doe my selfe confesse, And hand-maids son, thou, LORD, hast broke the bondes of my distresse. And I will offer vp to thee, a sacrifice of praise: And I will call vpon the NAME oF GOD the LORD alwayes. I to the LORD will pay the vowes, that I haue him beheght: Yea, now, euen at this present time, in all his peoples sight. Yea, in the courtes of GODS own house, and in the midst of thee, O thou Ierusalem, I say, wherefore, the LORD praise yee, PSALME CXVII. O Praise the LORD, yee nations all, Laude him yee people great and small:  For why? his grace and tender loue, To vs is great, as wee well proue: His trueth is constant euermore: Vnto the LORD sing praise there∣fore. PSALME CXVIII. GIue to the LORD all praise and honour: For hee is gratious and kinde: Yea, more his mercy and great fauour, Doeth firme abide worlde without ende.  Let Israel now say thus boldly: That his mercies for euer dure:  And let Aarons whole progenie, Confesse the same stable and sure. Let those that fear GOD them now addres, To come and sing to him therefore: That his great loue and tender kindnes, Remaineth still for euermore. For when with troubles I was pressed, I then vpon the LORD did call: Who heard my voice, and mee vp-raised, And set at large free from all thrall.
The most of might, who heard my cōplaint, Hee is with mee, my part to take: No feare, therefore, shall cause mee to faint, Nor ought that man may against me make. The LORD on my side doeth him retire, With such as doe mee helpe and aide: So that I shall see my just desire, Vpon my foes, which mee vp-braide. In GOD to trust is farre better, Then to vaine man to trust and stand: To trust in GOD, I say is surer, Then princes, lordes, of sea and land. All nations haue mee round compassed, With one consent: yet in GODS NAME, By mee they shall be soone destroyed, And put to flight, rebuke, and shame. They haue mee round about inclosed, Yea, and shut vp with one accord: Yet they by mee shall bee destroyed, Euen in ye NAME of GOD the LORD. Like bees they came about mee swarming, But were as fire of thornes put out: For in GODS NAME, the Euer-liuing, I shall confound them all, no doubt. Thou hast, O cruell aduersarie, Thrust sore at mee, with maine & might: To cause mee fall: but loe, contrarie, For GOD hath helpt mee in my right. My strēgth & force is GOD the most hie, Yea, hee my song is of pleasance: For hee hath beene in all aduersitie, Mine helper and deliuerance. The voyce of joy and freedome shall bee, Within the just mans dwelling place: Saying, Behold, right valiantly, The Lords right hand hath broght to pas. The hand most strong of the Almightie, Exalted is now presentlie, Of God the Lord the right hand sturdie, Hath done (say they) triumphantlie. Away, away, enuyers each one, For yet deathes cup I shall not proue: But shall still liue, that I may expone, And shew abroad GODS workes aboue. The LORD my GOD hath me chastised, And that right sore, I must confesse: But, of his goodnesse, not deliuered Mee vnto death, in that distresse. Open, therefore, to mee the gates faire, Which are the gates of righteousnesse, That through the same I may haue repaire, And praise the LORD his holynesse. This is GODS gate, famous and worthie, Whereat the righteous enter shall: I wil thee praise, Lord, which hast heard me And my deliuerance beene withall. The stone which wholly was refused, And of the builders cast away: The same layed is now, and placed, As of the corner chiefe head and stay. Which thing is done by th'onely working, Of GOD the LORD most glorious, And as a wonder is appearing, Vnto our sight most maruellous. This is of trueth the day most happie, Which GOD hath made of his goodnes: Let vs therein bee blythe and merrie, And sing to GOD with great gladnes. O LORD, I now beseech and pray thee, Saue thou the king, and him maintaine: Giue him good lucke, & prosperous to be, O LORD, I yet require againe. Who in the Name of God moste holy, Doeth come, hee blessed bee alway: Wee wish also yee may bee happie, Who in Gods house are night and day. The Lord our God hee is moste mightie, And hath vs giuen light at last: Vnto the hornes of th'Altar holy, Your sacrifice now bind full fast. Thou art the God, in whom I glorie, To thee will I giue praise therefore: Euen thou my God art, therefore will I, Laude and exalt thee euermore. Giue to the Lord all praise and honour, For gratious is hee and kinde: Yea, more, his mercy and great fauour, Doeth ay indure world without ende. PSALME CXIX. ALEPH. BLessed are they that perfect are, and pure in mind and heart, Whose liues and conuersation, from Gods Lawes neuer start.  Blessed are they that giue them∣selues, his statutes to obserue: Seeking the Lord with all their heart, and neuer from him swerue.
Doubtlesse such men go not astray, nor doe no wicked thing: Which stedfastly walke in his pathes, with out any wandring. It is thy will and commandement, that with attentiue heed, Thy hoble and diuine preceptes, wee learne and keepe indeed. Oh, would to God it might thee please, my wayes so to addresse. That I might both in heart and voice, thy Lawes keepe and confesse. So should no shame my life attaint, whiles I thus set mine eyes: And bend my mind alwayes to muse, on thy sacred decrees. Then will I praise with vp-right heart, and magnifie thy NAME: When I shall learne thy judgementes just, and likewise prooue the same. And wholly will I giue my selfe, to keepe thy Lawes most right: Forsake mee not for euer, LORD, but shew thy grace and might. BETH. By what meanes may a young man best, his life learne to amend? If that hee marke and keepe thy word, and therein his life spend, Vnfainedly I haue thee sought, and thus seeking abide: Oh, neuer suffer mee, O LORD, from thy preceptes to slide. Within mine heart and secrete thought, thy word I haue hid still: That I might not at any time, offend thy godly will. Wee magnifie thy NAME, O LORD, and praise thee euermore: Thy statutes of most worthy fame, O LORD, teach mee therefore, My lips haue neuer ceasde to preach, and publish day and night, The judgementes all, which did proceed from thy mouth full of might. Thy testimonies and thy wayes, please mee no lesse indeed, Then all the treasures of the earth, which worldlinges make their meed. Of thy preceptes I will still muse, and thereto frame my talke, As at a marke, so will I aime, thy wayes how I may walke. Mine onely joy shall bee so fixt, and on thy Lawes so set, That nothing can mee so farre blind, that I thy wordes forget. GIMEL. Grant to thy seruant now such grace, as may my life prolong: Thine holy word then will I keepe, both in mine heart and tongue. Mine eyes which were dim and shut vp, so open make and bright, That of thy Law and marueilous workes, I may haue the cleare sight. I am a stranger in this earth, wandring now heere, now there: Thy word therefore to mee disclose, my foote-steppes for to cleare. My soule is rauisht with desire, and neuer is at rest, But seekes to know thy judgementes hie, and what may please thee best. The proude men and malicious, thou hast destroyde each one: And cursed are such, as doe not thine Hestes attend vpon. LORD, turne from mee rebuke and shame, which wicked men conspire: For I haue kept thy Couenantes, with zeal as hote as fire. The princes great in counsell sate, and did against mee speake: But then thy seruant thought how hee, thy statutes might not breake. For why? thy Couenantes are my joy, and my great heartes solace: They serue in stead of counsellers, my matters for to passe. DALETH. I am, alas, as brought to graue, and almost turnde to dust: Restore therefore my life againe, as thy promise is just. My wayes when I acknowledged, with mercie thou didst heare: Heare now eftsoones, and mee instruct, thy lawes to loue and feare. Teach mee once throughly for to know, thy preceptes and thy lore: Thy workes then will I meditate, and lay them vp in store. My soule I feele so sore opprest, that it melteth for griefe: According to thy word therefore, haste, Lord, to send reliefe. From lying and deceitefull lippes, let thy grace mee defend: And that I may learne thee to loue, thine holy law mee send. The way of trueth both straight and sure, I haue chosen and found: I set thy judgementes mee before, which keepe mee safe and sound. Since then, O Lord, I forc'de my selfe, thy Couenantes to embrace: Let mee therefore haue no rebuke, nor checke in any case.
Then will I runne with joyfull cheare, where thy word doeth mee call: When thou hast set mine heart at large, and ridde mee out of thrall. HE. Instruct mee, Lord, in the right trade, of thy statutes diuine: And it to keepe, euen to the end, mine heart I will incline. Grant mee the knowledge of thy Law, and I shall it obey: With heart and mind, and all my might, I will it keepe (I say) In the right path of thy preceptes, guide mee, Lord, I require: None other pleasure doe I wish, nor greater thing desire. Incline mine heart thy lawes to keepe, and Couenantes to embrace: And from all filthie auarice, Lord, shield mee with thy grace. From vaine desire and worldly lustes, turne backe mine eyes and sight: Giue mee the spirite of life and power, to walke thy wayes aright. Confirme thy gratious promise, Lord, which thou hast made to mee: Which am thy seruant, and doe loue, and feare nothing but thee. Reproach and shame, which I so feare, from mee, O LORD, expell: For thou doest judge with equitie, and therein doest excell. Behold, mine heartes desire is bent, thy Lawes to keepe for ay: LORD, strengthen mee so with thy grace, that it performe I may. VAV. Thy mercies great and manyfold, let mee obtaine, O LORD: Thy sauing health let mee enjoy, according to thy word. So shall I stop the slandrous mouthes, of leude men and vnjust: For in thy faithfull promises, standes my comfort and trust. The word of trueth within my mouth, let euer still bee prest: For in thy judgementes wonderfull, mine hope doeth stand and rest. And while that breath within my brest, doeth naturall life preserue: Yea, till this world shall bee dissolued, thy Law I will obserue. So walke will I, as set at large, and made free from all dread: Because I sought how for to keepe, thy preceptes and thy read. Thy noble actes I will describe, as thinges of moste great fame: Euen before kinges I will them blase, and shrinke no whit for shame. I will rejoyce then to obey, thy worthie Hestes and will, Which euermore I haue lou'de best, and so will loue them still. Mine handes will I lift to thy Lawes, which I haue dearely sought: And practise thy Commandementes, I will in deede and thought. ZAIN. Thy promise which thou mad'st to mee, thy seruant, LORD, remember: For therein haue I put my trust, and confidence for euer. It is my comfort and my joy, when troubles mee assaile: For were my life not by thy word, my life would soone mee faile. The proud and such as GOD contemne, still made of mee a scorne: Yet would I not thy Law forsake, as hee that were forlorne. But cald to mind, LORD, thy good works, shewde to our fathers olde: Whereby I felt the joyes surmount, my griefe an hundreth folde. But yet (alas) for feare I quake, seeing how wicked men, Thy Law forsooke, and did procure, thy judgementes, who know'th when? And as for mee, I framde my song, thy statutes of exalt: When I among the strangers dwelt, and thoughtes gan mee assault. I thought vpon thy Name, O Lord, by night, when others sleepe: As for thy law, I it obey, and euer will it keepe. This grace I did obtaine, because thy Couenantes sweet and deare, I did embrace, and also keepe, with reuerence and with feare. HETH. O God, who art my part and lot, my comfort, and my stay: I haue decreed and promised, thy law to keepe alway. Mine earnest heart did humbly sue, in presence of thy face, As thou therefore hast promised, Lord, grant mee of thy grace. My life I haue examined, and tride my secret heart, Which to thy statutes caused mee, my feet straight to conuert. I did not stay, nor linger long, as they that slouthfull are,
But hastely thy lawes to keepe, I did my selfe beware. The cruell bandes of wicded men, haue made of mee their prey, Yet would I not thy lawes forget, nor from the go astray. Thy righteous judgement toward mee, so great is, and so hie, That euen at mid-night will I rise, thy Name to magnifie. Companion am I to all them, which feare thee in their heart, And neither will for loue nor dread, from thy Commandementes start. Thy mercies, Lord, moste plenteously, doe all the world fulfill, Oh, teach mee how I may obey, thy statutes, and thy will. TETH. According to thy promise, Lord, so hast thou with mee dealt, For of thy grace, in sundrie sortes, haue I, thy seruant, felt. Teach mee alwayes to judge aright, and giue mee knowledge sure, For certainely beleeue I doe, that thy preceptes are pure. Ere thou didst touch mee with thy rodde, I erde, and went astray, But now I keepe thine holy word, and make it all my stay. Thou art both good and gracious, and giuest moste liberally, Thine ordinances how to keepe, therefore, O Lord, teach mee. The proud and wicked men haue forgde, against mee many a lye, Yet thy Commandementes still obserue, with all mine heart will I. Their harts are swoln with worldy wealth as grease so are they fat, But in thy law doe I delite, and nothing seeke but that. O happie time, may I well say, when thou didst mee correct: For as a guide, to learne thy Lawes, thy roddes did mee direct. So that to mee thy word and law, is dearer manyfolde. Then thousandes great of siluer and golde, or ought that can bee tolde. IOD. Seeing thine handes haue made mee, Lord, to bee thy creature: Grant knowledge likewise how to learne, to put thy Lawes in ure. So they that feare thee shall rejoyce, when euer they mee see: Because I haue learnde by thy word, to put my trust in thee. When with thy rods the world is plagued, I know the cause is iust: So when thou doest correct mee, LORD, the cause iust needes bee must. Now, of thy goodnesse, I thee pray, some comfort to mee send: As thou to mee, thy seruant, hechtst, so from all ill mee shend. Thy tender mercies poure on mee, and I shall surely liue: For ioy and consolation both, thy Law to mee doeth giue. Confound the proud, whose false pretence, is mee for to destroy: But as for mee, thine Hestes to know; I will my selfe employ. Who so with reuerence doe thee feare, to mee let them retire: And such as doe thy Couenantes know, and them alone desire. Mine heart without all wauering, let on thy lawes bee bent: That no confusion come to mee, whereby I should bee shent. CAPH. My soule doeth faint, and ceaseth not, thy sauing health to craue: And for thy wordes sake still I trust, mine heartes desire to haue. Mine eyes doe faile, with looking for thy word, and thus I say, Oh, when wilt thou mee comfort, LORD, why doest thou thus delay? As a skinne-bottell in the smoke, so am I parcht and dride: Yet will I not out of mine heart, Let thy Commandementes slide. Alas, how long shall I yet liue, before I see the houre, That on my foes, which mee torment, thy vengeance thou wilt poure? Presumptuous men haue digged pittes, thinking to make mee sure: Thus contrarie against thy Law, mine hurt they doe procure. But thy Commandementes are all true, and causelesse they mee grieue: To thee, therefore, I doe complaine, that thou mightst mee relieue. Almost they had mee cleane destroyed, and brought mee quite to ground, Yet by thy statutes I abode, and therein succour found. Restore mee, Lord, againe to life, (for thy mercies excell) And so I shall thy Couenantes keepe, till death my life expell.
LAMED. In heauen, Lord, where thou doest dwell, thy word is stablisht sure, And shall for all eternitie, fast grauen there indure. From age to age thy trueth abides, as doeth the earth witnesse, Whose ground-worke thou hast laide so sure, as no tongue can expresse. Euen to this day wee may well see, how all thinges perseuere: According to thine ordinance, for all thinges thee reuere. Had it not beene that in thy law, my soule had comfort sought, Long time ere now, in my distresse, I had beene brought to nought. Therefore will I thy preceptes ay, in memorie keepe fast, By them thou hast my life restorde, when I was at last cast. No wight to mee can title make, for I am onely thine: Saue mee therefore, for to thy lawes, mine eares and heart incline. The wicked men doe seeke my bane, and thereto lye in waite, But I the while considered, thy noble actes and great. I see nothing in this wide world, at length which hath not end: But thy Commandement and thy word, beyond all end extend. MEM. What great desire and feruent loue, doe I beare to thy law! All the day long, my whole deuise, is onely on thy saw. Thy word hath taught mee farre to passe, my foes in policie: For still I keepe it, as a thing of moste excellencie. My teachers which did mee instruct, in knowledge I excell, Because I doe thy Couenantes keepe, and them to others tell. In wisedome I doe passe also, the ancient men indeed, And all because to keepe thy lawes, I helde it ay best reed. My feet I haue refrained eke, from euery euill way, Because that I continually, thy word might keepe (I say) I haue not sweru'de from thy judgments, nor yet shronke any deale, For why? thou hast mee taught thereby, to liue godly and well. Oh, LORD, how sweet vnto my taste find I thy wordes alway? Doubtlesse no honey in my mouth, feele ought so sweet I may. Thy laws haue me much wisdom learnd, that vtterly I hate, All wicked and vngodly wayes, in euery kind or rate. NVN. Euen as a lanterne to my feet, so doeth thy word shine bright: And to my pathes, where euer I go, it is a flaming light. I haue both sworne, and will performe, most certainely dobtlesse: That I will keepe thy iudgementes iust, and them in life expresse. Affliction hath mee sore opprest, and brought to deathes doore: O LORD, as thou hast promised, so mee to life restore. The offringes which with heart & voice, most franckly I thee giue, Accept: and teach mee how I may, after thy iudgementes liue. My soule is ay so in mine hand, that dangers it assaile: Yet did I not thy Law forget, nor it to keepe will faile. Although the wicked laid their nets, to catch mee at a bray: Yet doe I not from thy preceptes, once swerue, or go astray. Thy Law I haue so claimde alway, as mine owne heritage: And why? for therin I delite, and set my whole courage. For euermore I haue beene bent, thy statutes to fulfill: Euen so likewise vnto the end, I will continue still. SAMECH. The crafty thoughtes and double heartes, I doe alwayes detest: But as for thy Law and Preceptes, I loued euer best. Thou art my hid and secret place, my shield of strong defence: Therefore haue I thy promises, lookt for with patience. Go to, therefore, yee wicked men, depart from mee anone: For the Commandementes will I keepe, of God my Lord alone. As thou hast promised, so performe, that death mee not assaile: Nor let my hope abuse mee so, that through distrust I quaile. Vp-hold mee, and I shall bee safe, for ought they doe or say: And in thy statutes pleasure take, will I both night and day.
Thou hast trode such vnder thy feete, as doe thy statutes breake: For nought auailth their subtiltie, their counsell is but weake. Like drosse thou castes the wicked out, where euer they bee or dwell: Therefore can I as thy statutes, loue nothing halfe so well. My flesh (alas) is taken with feare, as though it were benomde: For when I see thy judgementes straight, I am as one astonde. AIN. I doe the thing that lawfull is, and giue to all men right: Resigne mee not to them that would, oppresse mee with their might. But for thy seruant suretie bee, in that thing that is good, That proude men giue mee not the foile, which rage as they were woode. Mine eyes with waiting are now blind, thine helpe so much I craue: And eke thy righteous promise, Lord, whereby thou wilt mee saue. Intreat thy seruant louingly, and fauour to him show: Thy statutes of moste excellencie, teach mee also to know. Thine humble seruant, Lord, I am, oh, grant mee to vnderstand: How by thy statutes I may know, best what to take in hand. It is now time, Lord, to begin, for trueth is quite decay'd. Thy law likewise they haue transgrest, and none against them said. This is the cause wherefore I loue, thy Lawes better then golde: Or jewels fine, which are esteemde, moste costly to bee solde. I thought thy preceptes all moste just, and so them laide in store: All craftie and malicious wayes, I doe abhorre therefore. PE. Thy Couenantes are moste wonderfull, and full of thinges profound: My soule therefore doeth keepe them sure, when they are tride and found. When men first enter into thy wordes, they find a light moste cleare: And very idiotes vnderstand, when they it read or heare. For joy I haue both gapt and breathde, to know thy Commandement: That I might guide my life thereby, I sought what thing it meant. With mercy and compassion, Lord, beholde mee from aboue: As thou art wont to beholde such, as thy Name feare and loue. Direct my foot-steppes by thy word, that I thy will may know: And neuer let iniquitie, thy seruant ouer-throw. From slandrous tongues & deadly harms preserue and keepe mee sure: Thy preceptes then will I obserue, and put them eke in ure. Thy countenance, which doth surmount, the Sunne in his bright hew: Let shine on mee, and by thy Law, teach mee what to eschew. Out of mine eyes great floods gush out, of drearie teares and fell, When I behold how wicked men, thy Law keepe neuer a deale. ZADE. In euery point, Lord, thou art just, the wicked though they grudge, And when thou doest sentence pronounce, thou art a righteous judge. To render right, and flee from guile, are two chiefe pointes, and hie: And such as thou hast in thy Law, commanded vs straitely. With zeale and wrath I am consum'de, and euen pyned away: To see my foes thy wordes forget, for ought that I doe may. So pure and perfect is thy word, as any heart can deeme: And I thy seruant nothing more, doe loue or yet esteeme. And though I bee nothing set by, as one of base degree: Yet doe I not thine Hestes forget, nor shrinke away from thee. Thy righteousnesse, Lord, is moste just, for euer to indure: Also thy Law is trueth it selfe, moste constant and moste pure. Trouble and griefe haue seazde on mee, and brought mee wondrous low: Yet doe I still of thy Preceptes, delite to heare and know. The righteousnesse of thy judgementes, doe last for euermore: Then teach them mee, for euen in them, my life lieth vp in store. KOPH. With feruent heart I calde and cride, now answere mee, O LORD: That thy Commandementes to obserue, I may fully accord. To thee, my God, I make my sute, with moste humble request: Saue mee, therefore, and I will keepe, thy Preceptes and thine Hest.
To thee I crie, euen in the morne, before the day wax light: Because that I haue in thy word, my confidence whole plight. Mine eyes preuent the watch by night, and ere the day I wake: That by deuising of thy word, I might some comfort take. Incline thine eares to heare my voice, and pitie on mee take: As thou wast wont, so judge mee, Lord, lest life mee should forsake. My foes draw neare, and doe procure, my death maliciously: Which from thy Law are farre gone backe, and straide from it lewdly. Therefore, O Lord, approach thou neare, for neede doeth so require: And all thy Preceptes true they are, then helpe, I thee desire. By thy Commandements I haue learnde, not now, but long ago: That they remaine for euermore, thou hast them grounded so. RESH. My trouble and affliction, consider and beholde: Deliuer mee, for of thy Law, I euer take fast holde. Defend my good and righteous cause, with speed mee succour send, From death, as thou hast promised, Lord, keepe mee and defend. As for the wicked, farre they are, from hauing health and grace, Whereby they might thy statutes know, they enter not the trace. Great are thy mercies, Lord, I grant, what tongue can them attaine? And as thou hast mee judgde ere now, so let mee life obtaine. Though many men doe trouble mee, and persecute moste sore, Yet from thy Lawes I neuer shrunke, nor went awry therefore. And trueth it is, for griefe I die, when I these traitors see, Because they keepe no whit thy word, nor yet seeke to know thee. Behold, for I doe loue thy Lawes, with heart most glad and faine, As thou art good and gratious, Lord, restore my life againe. What thy word doeth decree must bee, and so it hath beene euer, Thy righteous judgementes are also, moste true, and decay neuer. SCHIN. Princes haue sought, with crueltie, causelesse to make mee crouch: But all in vaine, for of thy word, the feare did mine heart touch. And certainely euen of thy word, I was more merrie and glad, Then hee that of rich spoyles and preyes, great store and plentie had. As for all lyes and falsities, I hate moste and detest, For why? thine holy Law doe I, aboue all thinges loue best. Seuen times a day I praise thee, Lord, singing with heart and voice, Thy righteous actes and wonderfull, so cause mee to rejoice. Great peace and rest shall all such haue, who doe thy statutes loue, No danger shall their quyet state, impaire, or once remoue. Mine onely health and comfort, Lord, I looke for, at thine hand: And therefore haue I done these thinges, which thou didst mee command. Thy Lawes haue beene mine exercise, which my soule moste desirde: So much my loue to them was bent, that nought els I requirde. Thy Statutes and Commandementes, I kept, thou knowest, aright: For all the thinges that I haue done, are present in thy sight. TAV. O Lord, let my complaint and crie, before thy face appeare: And as thou hast mee promised, so teach mee thee to feare. Mine humble supplication, to thee let find accesse: And grant mee, Lord, deliuerance, for so is thy promise. Then shall my lippes thy praises speake, after moste ample sort: When thou thy statutes hast mee taught, wherein standes my comfort. My tong shall sing and preach thy word, and on this wyse say shall: GODS famous actes and noble Lawes, are just and perfect all. Stretch out thine hand, I thee beseech, and speedily mee saue: For thy Commandementes to obserue, chosen, O LORD, I haue. Of thee alone, LORD, I craue health, for other know I none: And in thy Law, and nothing els, I doe delite alone. Grant mee, therefore, long dayes to liue, thy NAME to magnifie: And of thy judgementes mercifull, let mee thy fauour trie.
For I was lost, and went astray, much like a wandring sheepe: Oh, seeke mee, for I haue not failde, thy Commandementes to keepe. PSALME CXX. IN trouble and in thrall, Vnto the LORD I call, And hee doeth mee com∣fort:  Deliuer mee, I say, From lyars lippes alway: And tongues of false report. What vantage, or what thing, Gets thou, thus for to sting, Thou false and flattering lyar? Thy tongue doeth hurt, I weene, No lesse then arrowes keene, Of hote consuming fire. Alas, too long I slacke, Within these tentes so blacke, Which Kedars are by name: By whom the folke elect, And all of Isaaks sect, Are put to open shame. With them that peace did hate, I came a peace to make, And set a quyet life: But when my word was tolde, Causelesse I was controlde, By them that would haue strife. PSALME CXXI. I Lift mine eyes to Sion hill, From whence I doe attend, That succour GOD mee send:  The mightie GOD mee succour will, Who heauen & earth framed. And all thinges therein named. Thy foote from slip hee will preserue, And will thee safely keepe: For hee will neuer sleepe. Lo, hee that Israel doeth conserue, No sleepe at all can him catch, But his eyes shall euer watch. The LORD is thy warrant alway, The LORD eke doeth thee couer, As at thy right hand euer. The Sunne shall not thee partch by day, Nor the Moone, nor halfe so bright, Shall with colde thee hurt by night. The LORD will keepe thee from distresse, And will thy life sure saue: And thou shalt also haue, In thy businesse good successe, Where euer thou goest in or out, GOD will thy thinges bring about. PSALME CXXII. I Did in heart reioyce, To heare the peoples voyce, In offering so willing∣ly: For let vs vp, say they, And in the LORDS house pray: Thus spake the folke full louingly.  Our feete that wandred wide, Shall in thy gates abide,  O thou Ierusalem full faire, Which art so seemely set, Much like a Citie neat, The like whereof is not els where. The Tribes with one accord, The Tribes of GOD the LORD, Are thither bent their way to take, So GOD before did tell, That there his Israel, Their prayers should together make: For there are thrones erect,
And that for this respect, To set foorth justice orderly: Which thrones right to maintaine, To Dauids house pertaine, His folke to judge accordingly. To pray let vs not cease, For Ierusalems peace, Thy friendes GOD prosper mightily, Peace bee thy walles about, And prosper thee throughout, Thy Palaces continually. I wish thy prosperous state, For my poore brethrens sake: That comfort haue by meanes of thee, GODS house doeth mee allure, Thy wealth for to procure, So much alwayes as lyeth in mee. PSALME CXXIII. O LORD, that heauen doest possesse, I lift mine eyes to thee, Euen as the ser∣uant lifteth his, his maisters handes to see.  As hand-maides watch their mistresse handes, some grace for to atchieue: So wee beholde the LORD our GOD, till hee doe vs forgiue. LORD grant vs thy compassion, and mercie in thy fight, For wee bee filde and ouer-come, with hatred and despight. Our mindes bee stuft with great rebuke, the rich and worldly wise, Doe make of vs their mocking stocke, the proude doe vs despise. PSALME CXXIV. NOw Israel may say, and that truely, If that the LORD had not our cause maintainde:  If that the LORD had not our right sustainde, when all the world against vs furiously, Made their vproares, and said, wee should all die. Now long agoe, they had deuourde vs all, And swallowde quicke, for ought that we could deeme: Such was their rage, as wee might well esteeme, And as the floods with mightie force doe fall, So had they now, our life euen brought to thrall. The raging streames, moste proude in roaring noise, Had long agoe, ouer-whelmde vs in the deepe, But loued bee GOD, which doeth vs safely keepe, From bloodie teeth, and their moste cruell voyce, Which as a prey, to eate vs would reioyce. Euen as the birde, out of the fowlers grinne, Escapes away, right so it far'th with vs, Broke are their nettes, and wee haue scaped thus, GOD, that made heauen and earth, is our helpe then, His NAME hath sau'de vs from those wicked men. PSALME CXXV. SVch as in GOD the LORD doe trust, As Mount-Sion shall firmely stand, And bee remooued at no hand, The LORD will count them right and just,
So that they shall bee sure: For euer to indure. As mightie mountaines hudge and great, Ierusalem about doe close, So will the LORD bee vnto those, Who on his Godly will doe waite: Such are to him so deare, They neuer need to feare. For though the righteous trie doeth hee, By making wicked men his rod: Lest they, through grief forsake their God, It shall not as their lot still bee. Giue LORD, to these thy light, Whose heartes are true and right. But as for such as turne aside, By crooked wayes, which they out-sought, The LORD will surely bring to nought, With workers vile they shall abide, But peace with Israel, For euermore shall dwell. PSALME CXXVI. WHen that the LORD, againe his Sion had foorth-brought, From bon∣dage great, and also seruitude extreame, His worke was such as did surmount mans heart and thought, So that wee were much like to them that vse to dreame: Our mouthes were with laughter filled then, And eke our tongues did shew vs ioy∣full men. The Heathen folke, were forced then this to confesse, How that the LORD, for them also great thinges had done, But much more wee, and therefore can confesse no lesse, Wherefore to ioy, wee haue good cause, as wee begun. O LORD, goe foorth, thou canst our bondage end: As to desertes, thy flowing riuers send. Full true it is, that they which sow with teares indeed, A time will come, when they shal reape with mirth and ioy. They went and wept, in bearing of their pretious seede, For that their foes, full often times did them annoy, But their returne, with ioy they shall sure see, Their sheaues home bring, and not impeded bee. PSALME CXXVII. EXcept the LORD the house doe make, And thereunto doe set his hand: What men doe builde, it cannot stand. Likewise in vaine men vnder-take, Cities and holdes to watch and ward, Except the LORD bee their safe-gard. Though yee rise earely in the morne, And so at night goe late to bedde, Feeding full hardly with browne bread, Yet were your labour lost and worne, But they whom God doeth loue and keepe, Receiue all thinges with quyet sleepe. Therefore, marke well, when euer yee see, That men haue heires t'enioy their land, It is the gift of GODS owne hand, For GOD himselfe doeth multiplie, Of his great liberalitie, The blessing of posteritie.
And when the children come to age, They grow in strength and actiuenesse, In person and in comelynesse, So that a shaft shot with courage, Of one that hath a moste strong arme, Flieth not so swift, nor doeth like harme. Oh, well is him that hath his quiuer, Furnisht with such artilerie: For when in perill bee shall bee, Such one shall neuer shake nor shiuer, When that hee pleades before the Iudge, Against his foes, which beare him grudge. PSALME CXXVIII. BLessed art thou, that fearest GOD, and walkest in his waye:  For of thy labour thou shalt eate, happie art thou, I say.  Like fruitefull vines on thy house sides, so doeth thy Wife spring out: Thy Children stand like Oliue plantes, thy table round about. Thus art thou blest that fearest GOD, and hee shall let thee see: The promised Ierusalem, and his felicitie. Thou shalt thy Childrens Children see, to thy great joyes, increase: And likewise grace on Israel, prosperitie and peace. PSALME CXXIX. OF Israel this may now bee the song,  Euen from my youth my foes haue oft mee noyed: A thousand illes since I was tender and young, They haue mee wrought, yet was I not destroyed. As yet I beare, the marke in bone and skinne, That one would thinke, the plow-men with their plowes, Vpon my backe, haue made their balkes farre in, For like plowde ground, euen so haue I long furrowes. But yet the LORD, who doeth all thinges iustly; Hath cut the ropes, and so staide the wickeds rage. Euen so shall all, such perish shamefully, Which hate Sion, or wish it any domage. All such men shall, bee like the grasse that groweth, Vpon the walles, or toppes of houses moste hie, Which suddainely, ere one beware, withreth, So that no fruite, on such herbes can gathred bee. Neuer man saw, that any mower mowde, Such grasse as that, or thereof his hand did fill: Much lesse that hee, who glainth of that is sowde, Vnder his arme, bare some thing his house vntill. Nor yet that hee, that passeth by that way, Saith to the reapers, GOD saue you, or GOD speede, No man doeth, wish them good lucke, I say, Or pray, that GOD, would for their worke send them meede. PSALME CXXX. LORD, to thee I make my mone, VVhen dangers mee oppresse, I call, I sigh, plaine, and grone,
Trusting to finde release.  Heare now, O LORD, my request, For it is full due time: And let thine eares ay bee prest, Vnto this prayer mine. O LORD, my GOD, if thou wey, Our sinnes, and them peruse: Who shall then escape, and say, I can my selfe excuse? But, LORD, thou art mercifull, And turnst to vs thy grace: That wee with heartes most carefull, Should feare before thy face. In GOD I put my whole trust, My soule waites on his will: For his promise is moste just, And I hope therein still. My soule to GOD hath regarde, Wishing for him alway: More then they that watch and warde, To see the dawning day. Let Israel then boldly, In the LORD put his trust: Hee is that GOD of mercie, That his deliuer must. For hee it is that must saue, Israel from his sinne: And all such as surely haue, Their confidence in him. PSALME CXXXI. Sing this as the 95. Psalme. LORD, I am not puft vp in minde, I haue no scornefull eye: I doe not exercise my selfe, in thinges that are too hie. But as a child, that wained is, euen from his mothers brest: So haue I, LORD, behau'de my selfe, in silence and in rest. O Israel, trust in the LORD, let him bee all thy stay: From this time foorth, and euermore, from age to age, I say. PSALME CXXXII. Sing this as the 36. Psalme. OF Dauid, LORD, in mind record, And eke of his afflictions all: Who sware an othe vnto the LORD, And made a solemne vow withall, Saying to Iaakobs mightie GOD: This promise, LORD, to thee I make, Mine house not enter in will I: Nor rest vpon my couch will take, Nor once giue sleepe vnto mine eye, Or yet mine eye-lids close from wake: Vntill I for the LORD prouide, And find some place his owne to bee, Where Iaakobs mightie GOD may bide, And plant his house eternally, There to remaine from time to tide. Behold, the same then heare did wee, In Ephrata that fruitfull ground: Which is right pleasant vnto thee, And haue thy dwelling place out found, Within the Forest fieldes to bee. Thy Tabernacles there once pight, To worship thee, wee will bee prest: Before thy foot-stoole there in fight. Arise, therefore, come to thy rest, Thou, and the Arke of thy great might. Let righteousnesse thy Priestes embrace, A pretious garment it them make: Giue to thine holy One solace, And for thy seruant Dauids sake, Refuse not thine Anointeds face. To Dauid GOD in trueth did sweare, And sure hee will performe that thing: Saying, Doubtlesse I will vpreare, The fruit that from thy loines shall spring, Vpon thy throne the rule to beare. If that thy sonnes my bond retaine, And from my Lawes abacke not flit, Which I them learne, this grace againe, Will I them shew, their sonnes shall sit, Vpon thy seat, ay to remaine. For GOD hath chosen mount Sion, Where to abide hee liketh well: Saying, This is my rest alone: For euermore I heere will dwell, My whole delite is set thereon. I doubtlesse will her victualles blesse, Her poore with bread eke satisfie, And clothe her Priestes with healthfulnes, Yea, all her good men cause will I, To shout and crie for joyfullnesse. My seruant Dauids horne of might, In her will I make budde and spring: For I ordained haue a light, To mine Anointed CHRIST and King, There to remaine in all mens sight. But I will clothe his enemies all, With vile reproach, rebuke, and shame:
Whereas his Crowne imperiall, Vnto his honour and great fame, Vpon his head still flourish shall. PSALME CXXXIII. O How happie a thing it is, and joyfull for to see, Brethren together fast to hold, the band of amitie!  It cals to mind that sweet perfume, and that costly ointment, Which on the sacrificers head, by GODS Precept was spent. It wet not Aarons head alone, but drencht his beard throughout: And finally it did runne downe, his rich attire about. And as the lower ground doeth drinke, the dew of Hermon hill, And Sion with his siluer droppes, the fieldes with fruit doeth fill. Euen so the LORD doth poure on them, his blessinges manyfold, Whose heartes and mindes without all guile, this knot doe keepe and hold. PSALME CXXXIV. BEhold and haue regard, yee ser∣uantes of the LORD: Who in his house by night doe watch, praise him with one accord. Lift vp your handes on high, vnto his holy place: And giue the LORD his praises due, his benefites embrace. For why? the LORD, who did, both earth and heauen frame, Doeth Sion blesse, and will conserue, for euermore the same. PSALME CXXXV. VNto the NAME of GOD the LORD, giue praise with one accord: O praise him still all yee that bee, the ser∣uantes of the LORD.  Extoll his praise all yee that stand, within the house of GOD: All yee that in his courtes remaine, his praise declare abroad. Praise yee the LORD, for hee is good, sing praises to his NAME: It is a comely and good thing, alwayes to doe the same. For GOD hath chosen Iaakob out, his very owne yee see: So hath hee chosen Israel, his treasure for to bee. For this I know assuredly, the LORD is very great: And hee that hath aboue all gods, his dwelling place and seat. For whatsoeuer pleased him, that hath hee brought about: In heauen, in earth, and in the sea, yea, all the depthes throughout. Hee from the earth the cloudes doeth bring, the lightninges and the raine, Hee maketh eke, and windes to come, from whence they did remaine. Hee smote the first-borne of each thing, in Egypt that tooke rest: Hee spared there no liuing thing, the man, nor yet the beast. O Egypt, hee in mids of thee, hath made his wonders fall, On Pharaoh, thy cruell king, and on his seruantes all.
Hee sundrie people brought to nought, destroying them outright: And many kinges hee slew also, that were of power and might. As Sihon, that sometime was lord, and king of Amorites: And Og, the king of Basan land, with all the Canaanites. And gaue their land to Israel, an heritage wee see: To Israel his chosen folke, their heritage to bee. Thy NAME, O LORD, shall still indure, and thy memoriall, Throughout all generations, that are, or euer shall. The LORD will surely judge aright, his people all indeed: And to his seruantes fauour shew, will hee in time of need. The idoles of the Heathen all, throughout their costes and landes: Of siluer and of golde they bee, the worke euen of mens handes. For mouthes they haue, and speak no whit, and eyes, but may not see, So haue they eares, but nothing heare, and breathlesse wholly bee. Wherefore, all they are like to them, that doe so set them foorth: And likewise those that trust in them, or thinke they bee ought worth. O all yee house of Israel, see that yee praise the LORD, And yee that bee of Aarons house, praise him with one accord. And yee that bee of Leuies house, praise yee likewise the LORD, And all that stand in awe of him, praise him with one accord. And out of Sion sound his praise, the praise of GOD the LORD: Which dwelleth in Ierusalem, praise him with one accord. PSALME CXXXVI. O Laude the LORD benigne, Whose mercies last for ay, Giue thankes and praises sing, To GOD of gods, I say: For cer∣tainely, His mercies dure, Both firme and sure, Eternally. The LORD of lordes praise yee, Whose mercies ay doe dure: Great wonders onely hee, Doeth worke by his great power: For certainely, His mercies dure, Both firme and sure, Eternally. Which LORD Omnipotent, By his great wisedome hie, The heauenly firmament, Did frame, as wee may see: For certainely, His mercies dure, Both firme and sure, Eternally. Yea, hee the heavie charge, Of all the earth did stretch, And on the waters large, The same hee did out-reach: For certainely, His mercies, &c. Great lightes hee made to bee, For why? his loue is ay: Such as the Sunne wee see, To rule the lightsome day: For certainely, His mercies, &c. And eke the Moone so cleare, Which shineth in our sight, And starres that doe appeare, To guide the darkesome night: For certainely, His mercies, &c. With grieuous plagues and sore, All Egypt smote hee then: Their first-borne lesse and more, Hee slew of beast and man: For certainely, His mercies, &c. And from amidst their land, His Israel foorth brought: Which hee with mightie hand, And stretched arme hath wrought: For certainely, His mercies, &c. The sea hee cut in two, Which stood vp like a wall, And made through it to go, His chosen children all:
For certainely, His mercies, &c. But there hee whelmed then, The proud king Pharao, With his hudge hoste of men, And charets eke also: For certainely, His mercies, &c. Who led through wildernesse, His people safe and sound, And for his loue endlesse, Great kinges hee brought to ground: For certainly, His mercies, &c. And slew with puissan Kinges mightie and of As of Amorites land, Sihon the king by name: For certainly, His mercies, &c. And Og the Giant large, Of Basan king also, Whose land for heritage, Hee gaue his people tho: For certainly, His mercies, &c. Euen vnto Israel, His seruant deare, I say, Hee gaue the same to dwell, And there abide for ay: For certainly, His mercies, &c. To mind hee did vs call, In our most base degree, And from oppressours all, In safetie set vs free: For certainly, His mercies, &c. All flesh on earth abroad, With food hee doeth fulfill, Wherefore of heauen the GOD, To laude bee it your will: For certainly, His mercies, &c. PSALME CXXXVII. WHen as wee sate in Babylon, the riuers round about: And in remembrance of Sion, the teares for griefe brast out.  Wee hangde our harpes and instrumentes, the willow trees vpon, For in that place men for their vse, had planted many one. Then they to whom wee prisoners were, said to vs tauntingly, Now let vs heare your Hebrew songes, and pleasant melodie. Alace, said wee, who can once frame his sorowfull heart, to sing The praises of our louing GOD, thus vnder a strange king? But yet if I Ierusalem, out of mine heart let slide: Then let my fingers quite forget, the warbling harpe to guide. And let my tongue within my mouth, bee tied for euer fast: If that I joy before I see, thy full deliuerance past. Therefore, O LORD remember now, the cursed noise and crie, That Edoms sonnes against vs made, when they razde our citie. Remember, LORD, their cruell wordes, when as with one accord, They cryde, On sacke, and rase their walles, in despite of their LORD. Euen so shalt thou, O Babylon, at length to dust bee brought: And happie shall that man bee calde, that our reuenge hath wrought. Yea, blessed shall that man bee calde, that takes thy children young, To dash their bones, against hard stones, that lye the streetes among. PSALME CXXXVIII. WIth my whole heart the LORD now praise will I, Before the gods I will him praise for euer:  Towardes thy Church and Temple will I crie, Because thy
loue and kindnesse faileth neuer. Thy Godly NAME, thy word hath moste ad∣uanced, Which doeth excell, and ought to bee inhanced. When I did call, then diddest thou mee heare, And strengthened hast, my soule so sore oppressed. All earthly kinges, shall thee, LORD, praise with feare, For they haue heard, thy word by mouth expressed. They all shall sing, and praise thy wayes so holy, For great thou art, and great, LORD, is thy glory. The LORD is high, but yet the meeke doeth see: As for the proude, far off hee him obserueth. But though I walke, and in great troubles bee, Mee to reuiue, from all hurt hee dischargeth, Thine hand stretch foorth, my foes their meed doe render, And with the same, thou art my sure defender. The LORD his worke, which hee in mee beganne, Will it performe, I am thereof resolued. Thy mercies, LORD, expresse with penne who can? They are so great, they can not bee reuolued. Forsake not, LORD, thy worke, which thou hast framed: But let mee bee, by thee alwayes reclaimed. PSALME CXXXIX. Sing this as the 137. Psalme. O LORD, thou hast me tride & known, my sitting doest thou know: And rising eke, my thoughtes afarre, thou vnderstandst also. My pathes, yea, and my lying downe, thou compassest alwayes, And by familiar custome art, acquainted with my wayes. No word was in my tongue, O LORD, but knowne it is to thee: Thou bindst mee in on either side, and layest thine hand on mee. Too wonderfull aboue my reach, LORD is thy cunning skill: It is so hie, that I the same, cannot attaine vntill. From sight of thy all-seeing Spirit, LORD, whither shall I goe? Or whither shall I flee away, thy presence to scape fro? To heauen if I mount aloft, loe, thou art present there: In hell if I lie downe below, euen there thou doest appeare. Yea, let mee take the morning winges, and let mee goe and hide, Euen there where are the farthest partes, where flowing sea doeth slide: Yet notwithstanding thither shall, thy reaching-hand mee guide: And thy right hand shall hould mee fast, and make mee to abide. Yea, if I say the darkenesse shall, yet shroude mee from thy sight. Loe, euen also the darkest night, about mee shall bee light. Yea, darkenesse hideth not from thee, but night doeth shine as day: To thee the darkenesse and the night, are both alike alway. For thou possessed hast my raines, and thou hast couered mee, When I within my mothers wombe, enclosed was by thee. I will thee praise, for fearefully, and wondrous made I am: Thy workes are marueilous, and well my soule doeth know the same. My bones they are not hid from thee, although in secret place: I haue beene made, and in the earth, beneath I shapen was. When I was formelesse, then thine eye saw mee; for in thy booke Were written all, nought was before that after fashion tooke. The thoughtes therefore of thee, O GOD, how deare are they to mee! And of them all, how passing great, the endlesse numbers bee. If I should count them, loe their summe, more then the sand I see: And whensoeuer I awake, yet still am I with thee.
The wicked and the bloody men, oh, that thou wouldest slay, Euen those, O GOD, to whom I cry, depart from mee away. Euen those of thee, O LORD my GOD, that speake full wickedly, These that are lifted vp in vaine, and enemies are to thee. Hate I not them that hate thee, LORD, and that in earnest wise? Contend I not against them all, that doe against thee rise? I hate them with vnfained hate, euen as mine vtter foes, Try mee, O GOD, and know mine heart, my thoughtes proue and disclose. Consider, LORD, if wickednesse, in mee there any bee: And in thy way, O GOD my guide, for euer lead thou mee. PSALME CXL. FRom the peruerse and wicked wight, O LORD deliuer mee: And from the cruell-mans despight, preserued let mee bee:  VVho in their heartes doe mis∣chiefe warpe, and euill thinges inuent, Continually to warre right sharpe, on mee they are full bent. They whetted haue their tongues, as keene as is the serpentes speare: They adders poison may bee seene, vnder their lippes to beare. From wicked hands, LORD, me with-hold, preserue mee to abide. Free from the cruell man, that would my foot-steppes cause to slide. For lo, the proud a snare haue set, for mee, in my path-way: And haue with cordes spred foorth their net, and grinnes for mee they lay. Therefore vnto the LORD said I, Thou art my GOD alone: Heare then, O LORD, the voice and crie, wherewith I plaint and mone. O LORD my GOD, the strength & stay, of my saluation: Mine head thou coueredst in the day, that battell came mee on. Let not the wicked man obtaine, on mee his heartes desire: Nor yet perfor his thoughtes most vaine, lest pride him set on fire. Of those that compasse mee, O LORD, the chiefe and principall: The mischiefe of their lippes accord, vpon themselues to fall. Let coles vpon their heads downe fall, cast them in fierie glow: And that they rise no more at all, into deepe pits them throw. The LORD, I know, th'afflicteds cause, will surely take in hand: And hee against the poore mans foes, with judgement just will stand. Vndoubtedly the man vpright, shall praise thy NAME therefore: And eke the just shall in thy sight, inhabite euermore. PSALME CXLI. ON thee I call, O LORD, there∣fore, haste lest I bee dismaide:  Oh, heare my voyce when as I roare, and crie to thee for aide. My prayers in thy sight, let bee, as incense pure of price: And eke mine handes lift vp to thee, as Euening sacrifice. Before my mouth, O LORD, a ward, and watch set, I thee pray: And of my lippes bee thou the garde, and keeper sure for ay. Let not mine heart to ill incline, that with those wicked mates, Which mischiefe worke, I fall to sinne, nor taste their delicates.
When I offend, then let the just, correct mee, LORD, that day, For as a benefite needes must I take the same alway. Yea, his reproofe shall bee sweet oyle, that shall mine head not breake: As for my foes, within short while, I shall haue cause to speake. And when there Iudges downe shall fall, amongst the stones to ground: The people shall my wordes heare all, which sweet and true they found. O LORD, behold, our bones are strowde, about the pit and graue: Like chippes by him that wood hath hewde, or digged in a caue. Yet vnto thee, mine eyes their sight, doe cast in this distresse: On thee, O LORD, my trust is pight, leaue not my soule helpelesse. But keepe mee from the snare, which they haue spred to take mee in: And from the grinnes, which such doe lay, as are addict to sinne. As for the wicked, let them fall, into their nettes preparde: Whilst I escape: yea, let them all, together so bee snarde. PSALME CXLII. VNto the LORD I cry did and call: Yea, with my voyce I him besought:  And my requestes before him let fall: So that my griefes and troubles withall, Before his presence I foorth brought, to stay my troubled thought. Though I in spirit was troubled and rent, Yet thou my path didst know alway: The selfe same trade wherein I then went, My foes so much to malice were bent, They priuily their snares did lay, to take mee as their prey. As I now at my right hand did looke, And so beheld on either side, Not one found I, which cold me wel brook, But seeming strange they there me forsook, All refuge was from mee full wide, my soule the selfe same tride. Then cryed I, O LORD, vnto thee, And also said thus in effect: Thou art mine hope, and so still shalt bee, Yea, my whole part, which thou gauest me, VVithin that land so seemely dect, where dwell doe thine elect. To my complaint, O Lord, now giue eare, For I am brought full low and base, Saue mee from such, as put mee in feare, VVhich tyrantes would asunder mee teare: For why? their force might soon take place, mee throughly to deface. Make free my soule, in bonds that doeth ly, That I may praise thine holy NAME: The righteous then will still stand mee by: And with much joy, thy praises foorth cry: For shewing, LORD, to mee the same, they will set foorth thy fame. PSALME CXLIII. OH, heare my prayer, LORD, And vnto my request: To bow thine care accord: And as thou thinkest best, According to thy trueth, And for thy justice sake, O LORD, on mee haue rueth, And answere to mee make. To judgement enter not, With mee, thy seruant poore: For why? this well I wot, No man in sight may dure. Of thee the liuing GOD, If thou his deedes wouldst trie, Hee dare make none abode, Himselfe to justifie. Behold, mine enemie, Pursued hath with spight, My soule it to destroy: Yea, hee my life, downe right Vnto the earth had smote,
And layed mee full low, In darkenesse, as forgot, Or men dead long ago. Wherethrough my spirit, alas, Was troubled with vnrest: Mine heart amazed was, And vexed in my brest. Yet I to mind did call, Time past, and doe record, Thy workes: yea, thinke on all Thine handie-workes, O LORD. With grieuous plaint and mone, Mine handes I stretch abroad: To thee, mine helpe alone. For lo, my soule, O GOD, Moste ardently desires, And longeth after thee, As thirstie ground requires, With raine refresht to bee. O LORD, for mine auaile, To heare mee make good speed: For lo, my spirit doeth faile, Hide not thy face in need, From mee, poore wretch, alas, For doubtlesse els I shall, Bee like to them that passe, And in the graue doe fall. Now, sith I trust in thee, Thy clemencie benigne, To heare grant vnto mee, When breake of day doeth spring. The way to mee descrie, That I should walke and goe: For I my soule on hie, To thee haue lifted tho. From all my foes mee saue, And set mee free, I pray: For, LORD, with thee I haue, Still hid my selfe alway. To doe thy will instruct Mee, LORD, my GOD of might, Let thy good Spirit conduct Mee to the land of right. To quicken mee accord, For thy NAMES sake also, And for thy justice, LORD, Bring out my soule from woe. And for thy mercies, slay My foes, and put to shame My soules oppressours aye, For I thy seruant am. PSALME CXLIV. Sing this as the 135. Psalme. BLess'd be the Lord, my strength that doth instruct mine handes to fight: The LORD that doth my fingers frame, to batell by his might. Hee is my goodnesse, fort and towre, deliuerer and shield: In him I trust, my people hee, subdues, to mee to yeeld. O LORD, what thing is man, that him thou holdest so in price? Or sonne of man, that vpon him, thou thinkest in such wise? Man is but like to vanitie, so passe his dayes to end, As fleeting shade, bow downe, O LORD, thy heauens, and descend. The mountains touch, and they shall smoke, cast foorth my lightning flame, And scatter them: thine arrowes shoot, consume them with the same. Send downe thine hand euen from aboue, O LORD, deliuer mee, Take mee from waters great, from hand of strangers make mee free: Whose subtile mouth of vanitie, and fondnesse doeth intreat: And their right hand is a right hand, of falshood and deceat. A new song I will sing, O GOD, and singing will I bee: On viole and on instrument, tenne stringed vnto thee. Euen hee it is that onely giues, deliuerance to kinges: Vnto his seruant Dauid, helpe from hurtfull sword hee bringes. From strangers hand mee saue and shield, whose mouth talkes vanitie: And their right hand is a right hand, of guile and subtiltie. So that our sonnes may bee as plantes, whom growing youth doeth reare: Our daughters carued corner stones, like to a palace faire. Our garners full, and plentie may, with sundrie sortes bee found: Our sheepe bring thousandes in our streetes, tenne thousandes may abound. Our oxen bee to labour strong, that none doe vs inuade, There bee no going out, nor crie within our streetes bee made. Those people blessed are, that with such blessinges are so storde, Yea, blessed all the people are, whose GOD is GOD the LORD PSALME CXLV. O LORD, that art my GOD
and King, Vndoubtedly I will thee praise, I will extoll and blessinges sing, Vnto thine holy NAME alwayes:  From day to day I will thee blesse, And laude thy NAME world without end.  For great is GOD, moste worthie praise, Whose greatnesse none may com∣prehende. Race shall thy workes praise vnto race, And so declare thy power, O LORD, The glorious beautie of thy grace, And wondrous workes will I record. And all men shall the power, O GOD, Of all thy fearefull actes declare, And I to publish all abroad, Thy greatnesse at no time will spare. They shall breake out to mention, And specifie thy great goodnesse, And with loud voyce their songs each one, Shall frame to shew thy righteousnesse. The LORD our GOD is gratious, Yea, mercifull is hee also, In mercie hee is plenteous, But vnto wrath and anger slow. The LORD to all men is benigne, Whose mercies all his workes exceed, Thy workes each one thy praises sing, And eke thy Saintes thee blesse indeed. The glorie of thy Kingdome they Doe shew, and of thy power doe tell, That so mens soones his might know may, And Kingdome great, that doeth excell. Thy Kingdome hath none end at all, Thy Lordship euer doeth remaine: The Lord vpholdeth all that fall, And doeth the feeble folke sustaine. The eyes of all thinges, Lord, attend, And on thee waite, that heere doe liue, And thou in season due doest send, Sufficient food them to relieue. Yea, thou thine hand doest open wide, And euery thing doest satisfie, That liue, and on this earth abide, Of thy great liberalitie. The Lord is just in his wayes all, And holy in his workes each one, At hand to all, that on him call, In trueth that call to him alone. The Lord will the desire fulfill, Of such as doe him feare and dread, And hee also their crie heare will, And saue them in the time of need. Hee doeth preserue them more and lesse, That beare to him a louing heart, But workers all of wickednesse, Destroy will hee and cleane subuert. My mouth, therefore, my speech shall frame To speake the praises of the Lord, All flesh to blesse his holy NAME, For euermore eke shall accord. PSALME CXLVI. MY soule praise thou the LORD alwayes, my GOD I will confesse,  While breath and life prolong my dayes, my tongue no time shall cease: 3. Trust not in worldly Princes then, Though they abounde in wealth, Nor in the sonnes of mortall men, in whom there is no health. For why? their breath doeth soone depart, to earth anone they fall. And then the counsels of their heart, decay and perish all. O happie is that man, I say, whom Iaakobs God doeth aide, And hee whose hope doeth not decay, but on the Lord is staide: Who made the earth and waters deepe, the heauens hie withall,
VVho doeth his word and promise keepe, in trueth, and euer shall. VVith right alwayes doeth hee proceed, for such as suffer wrong, The poore and hungrie hee doeth feed, and loose the fetters strong. The Lord doeth send the blind their sight, the lame to limmes restore, The Lord, I say, doeth loue the right, and just man euermore. Hee doeth defend the fatherlesse, the strangers sad in heart, And quite the widow from distresse, and ill mens wayes subuert. Thy Lord and God eternally, O Sion, still shall reigne, In time of all posteritie, for euer to remaine. PSALME CXLVII. PRaise yee the LORD, for it is good, vnto our GOD to sing: For it is pleasant, and to praise, it is a come∣ly thing.  The LORD his owne Ierusalem, hee buildeth vp alone, And the disperst of Israel, doeth gather in∣to one. Hee heales the broken in their heart, their sore vp doeth hee bind: Hee countes the number of the starres, and nam'th them in their kind. Great is the Lord, great is his power, his wisedome infinite: The Lord relieues the meeke, and throwes to ground the wicked wight. Sing vnto God the Lord with praise, vnto the Lord rejoyce: And to our God vpon the harpe, aduance your singing voyce. Hee couereth heauen with cloudes, and for the earth prepareth raine, And on the mountaines hee doeth make, the grasse to grow againe. Hee giueth beastes their food, yea, to young rauens when they crie: In strength of horse, nor in mans legges, no pleasure taketh hee. But in all those that feare the Lord, the Lord hath his delight: And such as doe attend vpon, his mercies shining light. O praise y LORD Ierusalem, thy GOD, O Sion, praise: For hee the barres hath forged strong, wherewith thy gates hee stayes. Thy children hee hath blest in thee, and in thy borders hee Doeth settle peace, and with the floure of wheat hee filleth thee. And his Commandementes vpon the earth hee sendeth out, And eke his word with speedie course, doeth swiftly runne about. Hee giueth snow like wool, hoare frost like ashes doeth hee spread: Like morsels castes his yee, whereof the colde who can abide? Hee sendeth foorth his mightie word, and melteth them againe: His winde hee maketh blow, and then the waters flow amaine. The doctrine of his holy word; to Iaakob doeth hee show: His statutes and his judgementes hee giues Israel to know. With euery Nation hath hee not so dealt nor haue they knowne, His secret judgementes, now therefore, praise yee the LORD alone. PSALME CXLVIII. Sing this as the 136. Psalme. GIue laude vnto the LORD, From heauen, that is so hie: Praise him in deede and word, Aboue the starrie Skie. And also yee, His Angelles all, Armies royall, Praise him with glee. Praise him both Sunne and Moone, Which are so cleare and bright: The same of you bee done, Yee glistring starres of light. And eke no lesse, Yee heauens faire, And cloudes of the aire, His laude expresse.
For at his word they were, All formed, as wee see: At his voyce did appeare, All thinges in their degree: Which hee set fast, To them hee made, A law and trade, for aye to last. Extoll and praise GODS NAME In earth yee Dragons fell, All depthes doe yee the sae, For it becommeth you well. Him magnifie, Fire, haile, yee, snow, And stormes that blow, At his decree. The hilles and mountaines all, And trees that fruitfull are, The Cedars great and tall, His worthie praise declare. Beastes and cattell, Yea, birdes flying, And wormes creeping, That on earth dwell. All kinges, both more and lesse, With all their pompous traine, Princes and all iudges, That in the world remaine. Exalt his NAME, Young men and maides, Olde men and babes, Doe yee the same. For his NAME shall wee proue, To bee moste excellent, Whose praise is farre aboue, The earth and firmament: For sure hee shall, Exalt with blisse, The horne of his, And helpe them all. His Saintes all shall foorth tell, His praise and worthinesse, The children of Israel, Each one, both more and lesse. And also they, That with good will, His wordes fulfill. And him obey. PSALME CXLIX. SIng vnto the LORD, with hear∣tie accord, A new joyfull song, His praises resound, In euery ground, His Saintes all among. Let Israel rejoyce, And praise eke with voyce, His maker louing, The sonnes of Sion, Let them euery one, Bee glad in their King. Let all them aduance, His NAME in the dance, Both now and alwayes, With harpe and abret, Euen so likewise let Them vtter his praise. The Lordes pleasure is, In them that are his, Not willing to start: But all meanes doe seeke, To succour the meeke, And humble in heart. The Saintes more and lesse, His praise shall expresse, As is good and right: Rejoycing, I say, Both now and for aye, In their beddes at night. Their throat shall brast out, In euery rout, In praise of their Lord, And as men moste bolde, In hand shall they holde A two edged sword: Auenged to bee, In euery degree, The hearthen vpon, And for to reproue, As them doeth behoue, The people each one. To binde strange kinges fast, In chaines that will last, Their nobles also, In hard yron bandes, Aswell feete as handes, To their griefe and woe. That they may indeed, Giue sentence with speed, On them to their paine. Which is writ alwayes, such honour and praise, His Saintes shall obtaine.
PSALME CL. YEeld vnto GOD, the mightie LORD, praise in his Sanctuarie: And praise him in the firmament, that shew'th his power on hie.  Aduance his NAME, and praise him in his mightie actes alwayes: According to his excellencie, of greatnesse giue him praise. His praises with the princely noise, of sounding trumpets blow: Praise him vpon the viole, and vpon the harpe also. Praise him with timbrell and with flute, organes, and virginalles: With sounding cymballes praise yee him, praise him with loude cymballes. What euer hath the benefite, of breathing, praise the LORD: To praise the NAME of GOD the LORD, agree with one accord. THE END OF THE PSALMES.
A TABLE OF THE WHOLE PSALMES, DECLARING BOTH the beginning, and also the number, of euery PSALME. A ALl laude and praise Psalme xxx All people hearken, and Psalme xlix Although my soule haue Psalme lxii Attend my people to my Psalme lxxviii Amid the preasse, with Psalme lxxxii A thing both good and meete Psalme xcii All people that on earth doe Psalme C B BEe mercifull to mee, O GOD, Psalme lvii But is it true, O froward Psalme lviii Blessed are they that perfect Psalme Cxix Blessed art thou that fearest Psalme Cxxviii Beholde and haue regarde, yee Psalme Cxxxiv Blessed bee the Lord my strength, Psalme Cxliv D DEliuer mee, my God of might, Psalme lix E EXcept the Lord the house doe Psalme Cxxvi F FRom the peruerse and wicked Psalme Cxl G GIue to the Lord yee potentates Psalme xxix Grudge not to see the wicked Psalme xxxvii Great is the Lord, and with great Psalme xlviii God, for thy grace, thou Psalme lxxxiii Giue thankes vnto the Lord, Psalme Cvii Giue to the Lord all praise and Psalme Cxviii Giue laude vnto the Lord, Psalme Cxlviii H HElpe Lord, for good and godly Psalme xii How long wilt thou forget mee Psalme xiii How euer it bee, yet God is Psalme lxxiii How pleasant is thy dwelling Psalme lxxxiv I INcline thine eares vnto my Psalme v I trust in God, how dare yee then Psalme xi In trouble and aduersitie Psalme xx I lift mine heart to thee Psalme xxv I will giue laude and honour Psalme xxxiv I said, I will looke to my wayes Psalme xxxix I waited long, and sought Psalme xl Iudge and reuenge my cause Psalme xliii In Iurie land God is well Psalme lxxvi I with my voyce to God doe Psalme lxxvii In speechlesse silence doe not Psalme Cix I loue the Lord, because my Psalme Cxvi In trouble and in thrall Psalme Cxx I lift mine eyes to Sion hill Psalme Cxxi I did in heart rejoyce Psalme Cxxii L LOrd in thy wrath reproue mee Psalme vl Lord keepe mee, for I trust in Psalme xvii Lord bee my Iudge, for Psalme xxvi Lord plead my cause against Psalme xxxv Like as the Hart doeth breath Psalme xlii Let all folke with joy clap Psalme xlvii Let God arise, and then his foes Psalme lxviii Lord giue thy judgementes to the Psalme lxxii Lord bow thine eare to my Psalme lxxxvi Lord to mine humble sute giue Psalme Cii Lord to thee I make my mone Psalme Cxxx Lord, I am not puft vp in minde. Psalme Cxxxi. M MIne heart doeth take in hand Psalme xlv Make haste, O God, to set mee Psalme lxx My trust, O Lord, in thee I haue Psalme lxxi My soule, giue laude vnto the Psalme Ciii My soule praise the Lord, speake good Psalme Civ My soule praise thou the Lord alwayes Psalme Cxlvi N NOt vnto vs, O Lord, I say, to vs Psalme Cxv Now Israel may say, and Psalme Cxxiv O O Lord, how are my foes increast, Psalme iii O God that art my righteousnesse Psalme iv O Lord my God, I put my trust Psalme vii O God our Lord, how wonderfull Psalme viii O Lord, within thy Tabernacle Psalme xv O Lord, giue eare to my request Psalme xvii O God my strength and fortitude Psalme xviii O Lord, how joyfull is the King Psalme xxi O God my God, wherefore hast Psalme xxii
O Lord, I put my trust in thee Psalme xxxi Our eares haue heard our Psalme xliv O Lord consider my distresse Psalme li O God giue eare, and doe apply Psalme lv O God to mee thy mercie shew Psalme lvi O Lord, thou didst vs cleane Psalme lx O God my God, I watch Psalme lxiii O Lord, vnto my voyce giue eare Psalme lxiv Our God that is Lord and author Psalme lxvii O God, laude and praise wee will Psalme lxxv O Lord, the Gentiles doe inuade Psalme lxxix O Pastor of Israel, like Psalme lxxx O Lord, thou loued hast thy Psalme lxxxv O God of my saluation Psalme lxxxviii O Lord, thou hast beene our Psalme xc O Lord, sith vengeance doeth Psalme xciv O come, let vs lift vp our voice Psalme xcv O sing yee now vnto the Lord Psalme xcviii Of mercie, and of judgement Psalme Ci O praise yee the Lord, and call Psalme Cv O God, beholde mine heart and Psalme Cviii O praise the Lord yee Nations Psalme Cxvii O Lord, that heauen doest Psalme Cxxiii Of Israel this may now bee Psalme Cxxix Of Dauid, Lord, in minde Psalme Cxxxii O how happie a thing it is Psalme Cxxxiii O laude the Lord benigne Psalme Cxxxvi O Lord, thou hast me ied Psalme Cxxxix On thee I call, O Lord, therefore Psalme Cxli Oh, heare my prayer, Lord, Psalme Cxlii O Lord that art my God and Psalme Cxlv P PVt mee not to rebuke Psalme xxxviii Praise yee the Lord, for hee is Psalme Cvi Praise yee the Lord, for it is Psalme Cxlvii R REgarde, O Lord, for I complaine Psalme lxi S SAue mee, O God, for thy Names Psalme liv Saue mee, O God, and that with Psalme lxix Sing yee with praise vnto Psalme xcvi Sch as in God the Lord Psalme Cxxv Sing vnto the Lord, with Psalme Cxlix T THe man is blest, that hath not bent Psalme i There is no God, as foolish men Psalme xiv The heauens and the firmament Psalme xix The Lord is onely my support, Psalme xxiii To God the earth doeth appertaine, Psalme xxiv The Lord my light and health Psalme xxvii Thou art, O Lord, my strength Psalme xxviii The man is blest, whose wickednesse Psalme xxxii The wicked deedes of the Psalme xxxvi The man is blest, that carefull is Psalme xli The Lord is our defence and Psalme xlvi The mightie God, the Psalme l There is no God, as foolish men Psalme liii Thy praise alone, O Lord, Psalme lxv To God our strength moste Psalme lxxxi That Citie shall full well Psalme lxxxvii To sing the mercies of the Psalme lxxxix The Lord as King aloft doeth Psalme xciii The Lord doeth reigne, whereat Psalme xcvii The Lord doeth reigne although Psalme xcix The Lord moste high, vnto Psalme Cx The man is blest, that God doeth Psalme Cxii V VNto the Name of God the Psalme Cxxxiv Vnto the Lord I crie did and Psalme cxlii W WHy did the Gentiles tumultes Psalme ii With heart and mouth Psalme ix What is the cause, that thou Psalme x Why doest thou tyrant boast Psalme lii Why art thou, Lord, so long Psalme lxxiv Who so with full intent Psalme xcl With heart I doe accord Psalme Cxi When Israel, by Gods addresse, Psalme Cxiv When that the L againe Psalme Cxxvi When as wee sate in Babylon Psalme Cxxxvii With my whole heart the Psalme Cxxxviii Y YEe righteous, in the Lord Psalme xxxiii Yee men on earth, in God Psalme lxvi Yee children which doe serue the Psalme Cxiii Yeelde vnto GOD the mightie Psalme CL. THE END OF THE TABLE.
