C1269 51784430 174850
I. St PETERS Colledge or House was Founded 1256. HƲGO de BALSHAM Prior of Ely, in the year 1256. placed a Master and Scholars in the Hostle of St. John in Cambridge in the year 1284. he being Bishop of Ely, separated them from the Master and Fryars of St. John's Hostle and seated them in two Hostles adjoyning to St. Peter's Church, (now called Little St. Maries) without Trumpington-gate in the place of which two He then Founded this Colledge, Endowed it, and placing in it a Master and 14 Fellows: Since which time, by the Liberality of Simon de Langham, John de Fordham, Bishops of Ely; John Laceby, VVilliam Irby, Thomas de Castro, Bernardi Master of this Colledge, VVilliam Nonion, Dr Holbrooks, Dr Lant, Dr VVarkworth, Dr Denham, Dr Hornby, Dr Brgoine, Dr Edmonds, Dr Shirton, Arch-Bishop VVhitgist, Dr Pern, John Blyth Fellow, Dr Richardson Master, Dr Hale Master, John Cofins Bishop of Darham Master, and other Benefactors, (this Colledge or House being the first that was built in this University) there are in it a Master, 22 Fellows, 45 Scholars, a Bible-Clerk, beside Officers and Servants of the Foundation, with other Students, in all about Ninety. —Dr Joseph Beaumont Master, Margaret Professor. II. CLARE-HALL Founded 1326. RICHARD BADEW, born at Great Badew in Essex, by Licence from Edward the Second, Founded this Colledge in Milnstreet near St. Zacharies Church, placing there a Principal, under whom the first 16 years the Students lived at their own Charges; after Walter Thaxted Principal, with the consent of the said Richard Badew, Richard Ling Chancellour of the Uni∣versity, Anno 1340 resigned the first Foundation into the hands of Elizabeth Grand-Child to Edward the first, second Daughter and Coheir of Gilbert Earl of Clare, from whom it bare the Name, Clare-ball: She Re-built and Endowed the same, which many other Benefactors have since increased; as VValter VVorleigh, Ralph Scrivenor, Tho. Cave, Thomas Paske, Benjamin Oley, Arthur Ld Capel, Peter Gunning Ld Bp of Ely, Dr Hacket Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, Dr Heaver and others: There are in it a Master, 18 Fellows, 41 Scholars, beside Officers of the Foundation, and other Students, to the number of 100.—Dr Dillingham Master. III. PEMBROKE-HALL was Founded 1343. MARY de St PAƲL Countess of Pembroke, having first Built and Endowed Denny Abbey in this County, She procured a Licence from King Edward the third, in the 17th of his Reign, and then Founded this Colledge or Hall of Mary de Valentia, after Pembroke-hall, in which, as it now stands, are the Ancient Hostles of the University, and S. Thomas, Knaptons, Boltons, and Cosins places, with part of the Chantry-house of Little St. Maries, and Endowed the same with Lands, Impropriati∣ons, and Patronages, Plate, Jewels, and other Ornaments: Since it hath been much inlarged by the Bounty of King Henry the 6th, by the Donations of John Langton Bishop of St. Davids, Lawrence Booth Arch-Bishop of York, Edmund Grindal Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, Lancelot Andrews Bishop of Winchester, Benjamin Laney late Bishop of Ely, Dr Mark Frank, Sir Philip Booth, Sir Roger L'Estrange, all of this Colledge, beside others who have setled Lands, or given summs of money, as Sir William Hussey Lord Chief Justice of England, Mr Thomas Watts, Thomas James, Thomas Hobs Esq, William Marshal, John Holmes, with others, who not long since repaired the Old Court of this Colledge, and New Buildings were Erected by Sir Robert Hitcham sometime of this House, Richard Ball Fellow D. D. and now Master of the Temple, William Quarles late President; also a fair New Chapel was Built, and Endowed, and Furnished by Mathew Wren sometime Fellow, President, and late Lord Bishop of Ely: the Master, Fellows and Scholars, with other Students, Officers and Servants of the Foundation are about 100. —Dr Coga D. D. Master. IV. CORPƲS-CHRISTI Colledge was Founded 1351. HENRY of MONMOƲTH, Sirnamed (Torto Collo) Son and Heir of Henry of Lancaster, Lord of Monmouth and Ponte∣fract, Earl of Lancaster, Leicester, Derby, and High-Steward of England, succeeded his Father in all his Honours, and was by King Edward the 3d Created Earl of Lincoln, and one of the Knights of the first Foundation of the most Noble Order of the Garter, Duke of Lancaster, &c. of the Fraternity or Guild of Corpus Christi, and Blessed Mary the Virgin, near unto Luth∣born-Lane, and the Hostle of St. Bernard in the East, whereof himself was then Alderman, Founded this Colledge in the year 1351, among other things appropriating unto the same, the perpetual patronage of St. Benedicts Church: This Colledge since hath been much beautified with Buildings, and increased with Revenues, by the Lady Elizabeth Brotherton Dutchess of Norfolk, Thomas Cambridge, and Sir John Cambridge gave Stone-hall toward the Augmentation of the same, John Meers Esq Beadle, Ma∣thew Parker Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, Sir Nicholas Bacon Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, Roger Mannors Earl of Rtland, Lord Roos of Hamlake, Belvoir and Trusbut, &c. Roger Mannors his great Unkle, William Benedict, Leonard Causton gave 18l. 3s. 4d. for maintenance of 3 Scholarships, and Mr John Booth B. D. sometime Fellow of this Colledge gave 3l. per Annum, beside divers other Benefactors: Here is at present a Master, 12 Fellows, 37 Scholars, besides Officers and Servants of the Foundation, with other Students, to the number of 150. —John Spencer D. D. Master, and Dean of Ely. V. TRINITY-HALL was Founded 1350. WILLIAM BATEMAN born in Norwich, Doctor of the Civil Law, after 18 year Bishop of that Sea, for the ex∣change of certain Parsonages in the 24th of King Edward the third, Anno 1350. obtained an Ancient Hostle, near ad∣joyning to the University House, where in former times Students lived at their own charges, he made thereof a Colledge or Hall, and dedicated it to the honour of the Holy and Blessed Trinity; Endowing the same with Lands and Possessions for Students of the Civil Law: Since Richard Ling D. D. Chancellour of this University, Archibald of Norwich, Simon de Rekenhall, and Walter Elverton gave four Tenements; Robert Stratton, John Trunch, Walter Baketon, Walter de Aldersey, and Peter de Bittering gave two Messuages, and seven pieces of Ground, one called Drakes Entry: Since John de Botisham Bishop of Rochester, Richard Nix Bi∣shop of Norwich, Stephen Gardner Bishop of VVinchester, Lord Chancellour of England, Mathew Parker Arch-Bishop of Canter∣bury, Dr Mouse, Dr Harvey, Dr Cowel, Doctor of Laws, and Kings Professor, Sir George Newman, Thomas Eden Dr of Law, Chan∣cellour of Ely, George Gaell; and by other Benefactors this Colledge hath been much inlarged, so that here is a Master, 12 Fellows, 14 Scholars, beside Officers and Servants of the Foundation, with other Students to the number of 70.—Sir Tho. Exton Master. VI. GONVILL and CAI. Colledge was Founded 1348. EDMOND de GONVILL younger Brother of Sir Nicholas Gonvill, and Rector of Rushworth, and Terington in Nor∣folk, obtained of Edward the third Licence to Convert his three Messuages, with a Garden and the Appurtenances, si∣tuate in the Parish of St. Botolphs and St. Benedicts into a perpetual Colledge of a Guardian, or Warden, and 20 Scholars, Stu∣dents in Logick, and other Sciences, and to give it what Name he would; who by his Deed dated on Thursday in the week of Pentecost, the 23d of Edward the 3d 1348. Founded this Colledge accordingly, and gave it Statutes of his own, and called it by the Name of Gonvill-hall, and while he lived maintained the Guardian and Scholars or Fellows with his own money, but he dying An. Dom. 1350. left VVilliam Bateman Bishop of Norwich Executor of his Last Will, leaving him a great summ of mo∣ney in trust to the intent he should perfect his Foundation, and Endow his Hall with competent Possessions, who in 1353. pre∣vailed with the Masters and Fellows to remove to a place near his own Colledge, where he purchased divers Messuages and Te∣nements on which he Erected the same, by the Name of Gonvill-hall: afterward John Caius Dr of Physick, a great Antiquary in An. Dom. 1557. was made a Co-founder by Letters Patents, and caused it to be called Gonvill and Caius Colledge: He added to it a fair Building of Freestone, increased the Treasury with new Revenues for the maintenance of three Fellows, twenty Scho∣lars and a Porter. Since, the Ladies, Mary Pakenham, and Ann Scroop, Elizabeth Cleer, Dr Bayly, Stephen Smith, Dr Knight, Dr Whitacre, Dr Parker Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, Dr Wendy, Dr Bishby, Sir VVilliam Paston, Dr Batchcroft, Dr Gostlin, Dr Cosis Bi∣shop of Durham, and other Benefactors have much increased the buildings and number of Scholars; so that here are twenty six Fellows, one Chaplain, seventy five Scholars besides Officers and Servants of the Foundation, and other Students, to the num∣ber of one hundred and forty. —Doctor Brady M. D. Master.
VII. KINGS-COLLEDGE was Founded 1441. HENRY the Sixth, called Henry of VVindsor, King of England and France, Lord of Ireland, Sirnamed the Holy, Proclaimed in his Cradle, Crowned in his Infancy, and in his riper years Renowned in France; in the 19th year of his Reign, An. Dom. 1441. began his Royal Foundation of this Colledge, dedicating the same to the honour of our Blessed Lady Mary the Virgin, and St. Nicholas, and called it Kings Colledge, which having so Royal a Founder, we acknowledge no other for the Maintenance thereof, in which at this present is standing one of the most Famous Chapels in the World, conformable to which he intended to make this his Colledge, but by reason of the Civil Wars between the Houses of York and Lancaster, he was in a short space de∣prived both of his Kingdom and his Life, and so left it unperfected for some of his Successors to finish: Accordingly Henry the 7th finished the outward Fabrick, and was cut off by death; but Henry the 8th adorned it with glorious Windows, and beautified it with Seats, and a rich carved Rood-loft, and divers other Ornaments, and gave to it this Coat of Arms, (viz.) in a Field Sable three Roses Argent, and that it might appear to be the work of a King, he caused a part of his own Arms to be placed on the Chief of the Eschocheon, (viz.) party per Pale Azure and Gules; on the first a Flower of France, on the second a Lion of En∣gland: In this Colledge is one Provost, 70 Fellows and Scholars, three Chaplains, one Master of the Choristers, six singing Clerks, 16 Choristers, and 16 Colledge Officers and Servants, the whole number being 113. all maintained by the Bounty of Her Royal Founder King Henry the sixth. —Sir Thomas Page Provost. VIII. QƲEEN-COLLEDGE was Founded 1448. MARGARET ANDEGAVENSIS, Daughter of Reiner Duke of Anjou, Titular King of Sicily, Naples and Jeru∣salem, Consort of King Henry the 6th obtained Licence to build this Colledge, upon part of the Ground belonging to the Carmelite Fryars, and purchased Lands to the value of 200l per An. for the Endowment thereof, dedicating the same to St Mar∣garet and St. Bernard, but she died and left it unperfected: Queen Elizabeth Wife to King Edward the fourth obtained Licence to finish the same, which she did; afterward by the Liberality of Andrew Ducket first President of this Colledge, George Duke of Clarence, Cicely Dutchess of York, Richard Duke of Glocester, the Lady Ann his Wife, Edward Earl of Salisbury, Maud Countess of Oxford, Marmaduke Lumbey Bishop of Lincoln, Dr Thimbleby, Dr Davenant Bishop of Salisbury, Dr Mountain Bishop of London, Dr Roberts Bishop of Bangor, Dr Gell, Dr Smith, Edward Kemp B. D. and other great Benefactors, it is so increased, that there is in it a President, 19 Fellows, 27 Scholars, 12 Bible Clerks, 3 Lecturers, of Hebrew, Arithmetick and Geometry, beside other Officers and Servants of the Foundation; the whole number is about 124. —Doctor James President. IX. KATHERINE-HALL was Founded 1475. ROBERT VVOODLARK D. D. born at VVakerby in Northumberland Founded this Colledge or Hall in a place called Milnstreet, he dedicated the same to the Honour of St. Katherine the Virgin and Martyr; He obtained of King Edward the fourth, a Licence of Mortmain for the Endowment thereof, which was confirmed to him and his Successors for ever, wherein he Established a Master and six Fellows: Since it hath been inlarged by the Liberality of Isabel Canterbury, VVilliam Taylor, Kathe∣rine Myles, the Lady Elizabeth Bernardiston, Dr Sharton, Mr St. Johns, Dr Green, Dr Thimbleby, Dr Midleton, John Cholmley, John Duke, Sir John Claypool, John Gostlin, M. D. a large and bountiful Benefactor, Thomas Buck Fellow, Senior Beadle Esq, Peter Phesant, Ann Lady Cocket, Ann Lady Bernardiston, Dr VVilliam Gouge, Mr Coulson, Mr Cradock, Robert Skerne Esq a great Bene∣factor, John Lightfoot D. D. Here is now a Master, 6 Fellows, 18 Scholars, 9 Exhibitioners besides Officers and Servants of the Foundation, with other Students, 156. —Doctor Echard Master, D. D. X. JESƲS-COLLEDGE was Founded 1496. JOHN ALCOCK born at Beverly in York-shire, Doctor of the Civil Law, Bishop of Ely, Lord Chancellour of England, pro∣cured Licence of King Henry the seventh, to Convert into a Colledge an Ancient Nunnery, the Nuns whereof all were dead but two and dispersed, and the House much wasted: He also obtained Licence under the Great Seal of England to appropriate all the Land that belonged to it, to this his Colledge, and Dedicated it to the blessed Virgin St. Mary, and St. John the Evange∣list, and the glorious Virgin St. Rhadegund, commonly called Jesus Colledge, wherein he Established a Master, five Fellows, and six Scholars: Since it is much increased by the accessary Foundations of James Stanly Bishop of Ely, Richard Pigott Serjeant at Law, Sir Richard Read Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, John Andrews Prebend of St. Pauls, Dr Fuller, Sir John Risely, Tho∣mas Thirleby Bishop of Ely, John Batemanson, L. L. D. Dr Duport late Master, Tho. Sutton Esq, Tobias Rustat Esq Yeoman of the Robes to King Charles the second, with divers other Benefactors; so that there is now in the same a Master, 16 Fellows, 26 Scho∣lars, besides Officers and Servants of the Foundation, with other Students, in all 116. —Edmund Boldero, D. D. Master. XI. CHRIST-COLLEDGE was Founded 1505. MARGARET Countess of Richmond and Derby, in testimony of her love to Learning, obtained Licence of King Henry the seventh, to Erect a Colledge without Barnwell-gates in Preacher-street, of four Messuages and Gardens belonging to the Abbot of Tilti, and Prioress of Denny, where King Henry the sixth had founded a House called Gods House, Dedicating the same to the honour of our Saviour Christ, the Lady Margaret Endowing it with Lands and Revenues for a Master and 12 Fel∣lows, 47 Scholars, and King Edward the sixth added the 13th Fellow, together with three more Scholars: Since Dr Thompson, Dr Hawford, Dr Carey, and Dr Bainbridge Masters, Dr Patison, Sir VValter Mildmay, Sir John VVentworth, Dr Grindal Arch-Bi∣shop of Caterbury, Anthony VVatson Bishop of Chichester, Mr Joseph Mede, Edward King, Mr John and Mr Josias Alsop, Sir Thomas VVidderington, Dr Gell, Henry Montague Earl of Manchester, Sir Sidney Mountague, George Earl of Rutland, Sir Justinian Isham, Sir Thomas Willis, Dr Honiwood, Dr Grey, Dr Shute, all great Benefactors, gave Scholarships, Houses, Monies or Books; so that here is a Master, 13 Fellows, 55 Scholars, beside Officers and Servants of the Foundation, with other Students, to the num∣ber of 206. —Doctor Ralph Cudworth Master. XII. St. JOHN-COLLEDGE was Founded 1508. THE aforesaid Margaret Countess of Richmond and Derby, Mother to King Henry the seventh, obtained Licence of her Ne∣phew King Henry the Eighth, to Convert a House of Regular Canons Founded by Nigellus second Bishop of Ely, in An. Dom. 1134. afterward translated to a Priory, and Dedicated to St John the Evangelist in the Jury, by Hugo de Balsham, tenth Bishop of Ely, now called St John's Colledge, the perfecting whereof she left to her Executors Richard Fox Bishop of Winche∣ster, John Fisher Bishop of Rochester, Charles Somerset, Lord Herbert and others, who most justly performed the Trust reposed in them: Since it hath been much enlarged by John Morton Bishop, Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and Cardinal, Hugh Ashton Arch-Deacon of York, Roger Lupton Provost of Eaton, Sir Robert Wood, Dr Dee Bishop of Peterborough, Sir Ambrose Cave, Stephen Cardi∣nall, Thomas Tompson D. D also John Barwick Dean of St Pauls a bountiful Benefactor, a fair Court was built by Mary Countess of Shrewsbury, and the Case of the Library by John Williams Bishop of Lincoln, and Lord Keeper, Sir Ralph Hare, Robert Johnson, and other good Benefactors; so that here is a Master, 52 Fellows, 94 Scholars, beside Officers of the Foundation, with other Students to the number of 372. —Francis Turner D. D. Master.
XIII. MAGDALEN-COLLEDGE was Founded 159. EDWARD STAF-FORD last Duke of Buckingham of that Name, Earl of Stafford, Earl of Heresord and Northampton. Founded this Colledge by the Name of Buckingham Colledge, in a place where the Priory of St Giles had formerly been Situated; it was an Hostle or Hall inhabited by divers Monks of several Monasteries to reside and study in: Afterward in 1542 Thomas Audley Baron of Waltham, and Lord Chancellour, obtained Licence of Henry the Eighth to alter the Name, and call it St Mary Magdalen Colledge; unto which he gave Lands and Revenues; the Right Honourable James Earl of Suffolk, be∣ing now by Inheritance Patron thereof, Hugh Dennis Esq, Sir Christopher Wray Chief Justice, and John Spenluffe Esq, Edmund Grindal Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, Thomas Parkinson Rector of Wivelingham, William Roberts of Norsolk Esq, John Hughes Chan∣cellour of Bangor, Thomas Sutton Esq, Founder of Sutton's Hospital, the Honourable Lady Frances Countess Dowager of War∣wick, John Smith late Fellow, all great Benefactors, Robert Holmes Merchant of Exeter, born at Wisbich, James Duport D. D. and other Benefactors who have much increased this Colledge; so that there is a Master, 15 Fellows, 31 Scholars, besides Officers and Servants of the Foundation, with other Students, being in all 120. —James Duport D. D. Master, Dean of Peterborough. XIV. TRINITY-COLLEDGE was Founded 1546. KING HENRY the Eighth, after the suppression 1546. United Kings-Hall, Founded by King Edward the Third, Michael House Founded by Henericus de Stanton Chancellour of the Exchequer to Edward the Second, into one Colledge, and Dedicated it to the undivided Trinity, which he Endowed with 1640l per An. Queen Mary added to her Fathers Foun∣dation the yearly Revenue of 385l, increased the number of Fellows and Scholars by a third part; Founded a Quire, and laid the Foundation of a large Chappel, which after her Death was finished by the Society: Since Thomas Allen gave two Scholar∣ships and Lands to other Uses, Sir Edward Stanhope gave maintenance for a Library Keeper, and a Servant under him, the Lady Ann Bromley gave five Scholarships, Mr Hope gave the perpetual Patronage of North-Runcton, Dr Nevil Master of this Col∣ledge expended 3000l in building the back-Court, Dr John Hacket late Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield gave 1200l to Erect a Building by the Name of Bishops Hostle, the Rent whereof is to remain a constant Revenue to the Library; so that this Col∣ledge is one of the Goodliest and most Uniform Colledges in Europe: In this Colledge is a Master, 60 Fellows, 67 Scholars, 3 publick Professors, 4 Conducts, 13 Poor Scholars, a Master of the Choristers, 6 Secular Clerks, 20 Beads-men, besides Ex∣hibitioners, Officers and Servants of the Foundations, with many other Students, being in all above 400. —John North D. D. Mr. XV. EMANƲEL-COLLEDGE was Founded 1584. SIR WALTER MILDMAY Chancellour of the Exchequer, and Privy Counsellour to Queen Elizabeth, Founded and Erected this Colledge to be a Nursery of Divines, in the place where formerly inhabited the Black Fryars, and Consti∣tuted therein a Master, three Fellows, four Scholars with inferiour Officers: Since it hath been much increased by the Noble Bounty of Queen Elizabeth of Famous Memory: As also by Henry Earl of Huntington, and his Brother Sir Francis Hastings, Sir Samuel Leonard, Sir Robert Jermin, Sir Francis Walsingham, and others; Dr John Wells Master of this Colledge; Francis Ash Master of the Muscovian Company London, hath setled on this Colledge 170l yearly for divers Charitable Uses, Dr Sudbury Dean of Durham hath given 500l to the Colledge, which is laid out in Lands and Tenements, Dr Benjamin Whitchcot late Fel∣low hath given 1000l, which is laid out in Lands and Tenements for four Scholarships of the Foundation: The New Chap∣pel and Library were first undertaken by the Encouragement of Sir Robert Gayer, by his Noble Gift of a 1000l; others since have Contributed to that Good Work, as Charles Earl of Westmorland, John Cosins Bishop of Durham, Sir Thomas Rich, Sir Sa∣muel Sterling late Lord Mayor of London, Dr William Sandcroft present Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, Dr Clark Dean of Winchester, Mathew Pindar Esq and others: Here is at present a Master, 14 Fellows, 50 Scholars, 10 Poor Scholars, beside Officers and Servants of the Foundation, the whole number is about 170. —Doctor Holdbeach D. D. Master. XVI. SIDNEY SƲSSEX-COLLEDGE was Founded 1598. FRANCES SIDNEY Countess of Sussex Founded this Colledge by the Name of the Colledge of the Lady Frances Sidney-Sussex in a place called the Gray Fryars, which Fryery was built by Henry the First, suppressed 1546 by Henry the Eighth, and given to Trinity Colledge in Cambridge, and was since by Act of Parliament conveyed to the Executors of the said Countess, Henry Grey Earl of Kent, John Lord Harrington of Exton in Fee-farm, for the building and perfecting of this her Colledge; She gave by her last Will, besides her Goods, 5000l, wherewith her Executors aforenamed Built and Endowed it with Lands for the maintenance of a Master, 10 Fellows, afterwards reduced to 7, and 20 Scholars which being increased by the accessary Foundation of Sir John Hart, Leonard Smith of London, Edward Lord Mountague of Boughton, Dr Paul Micklethwait some∣time Fellow of the Colledge, &c. It hath at present a Master, 13 Fellows, 32 Scholars, and for the further inlarging thereof Sir Francis Clark hath built 20 Chambers for Students, Founded 4 Fellowships, with 8 Scholarships more, and Augmented the Stipends of the Scholarships of the Foundation: Since John Lord Harrington the younger, the Lady Lucy Countess of Bedford, the Lady Ann Harrington, James Mountague Bishop of Winchester, George Lord Goring, Sir John Breerton, John Young D. D. Sir Richard Wilmore, Francis Combes Esq, Richard Dugard, and Charles Pendrt B. D. and late Fellow: The whole number of Stu∣dents with Officers and Servants of the Foundation are 122. —Richard Minshal Master D. D. The Total Number of all Degrees in this Ʋniversity, that hav Nnes in every particular Colledge, with the Magistrates and daily Officers thereunto belonging, beside divers young Scholars that are Relieved, that have no Na, in any of the Colledges afore∣said, are near Three Thousand. FINIS A CATALOGUE of all the COLLEDGES in the Famous UNIVERSITY of CAMBRIDGE With the Names of the Principal FOUNDERS and BENEFACTORS, with the Time of their FOUNDATION, and the Names of the present MASTERS and GOVERNOURS, with the Number of STUDENTS in every COLLEDGE. THe Learned Antiquaries have diversly written about the Foundation of this Ʋniversity of Cambridge, s affirming it was Founded by Cantaber, a Prince of Spain, Brother to Partholinus King of Ireland, Son in L to Gurguntius King of Great Britain; but the Chiefest conclude that Sigebert King of the East-Angle was the Principal Founder thereof, about the Year 630, or 636, who assigned divers Hostles and Houses for Students to inhabit in, giving them large Priviledges and Charters, whereof some are yet extant, procuring also great Imties from Pope Honorius the First, which Sergius the First Confirmed. Much Honour this place hath received b the Sons and Nephews of Kings, being Earls thereof, (viz.) William Brother to Ranulph Earl of Chester,  Earl of Henault Ʋncle to Philip le Beau King of France, William Marquess of Juliers, Edmund of Lang Duke of York, Edward Duke of York, Richard Earl of Cambridge, Richard Duke of York, James Marqu amilton Earl of Arran, his Successor James Marquess of Hamilton Master of the Horse to King Charles the  the Illustrious Henry Stewart Duke of Glocester, fourth Son of King Charles the first; since Charles Duke of Cambridge, James and Edgar Dukes of Cambridge, all Sons to the most Illustrious Prince James Duke of Yor his Highness James Duke of Monmouth being present Chancellour thereof. With Allowance. March 6. 1678. Ro. L'Estrange.
