C3038B 53981618 180155
C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSEA royal blazon or coat of arms His MAJESTIES Gracious PARDON AND INDEMPNITY, To those in the late Rebellion. CHARLES R. CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Scotland, England, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith; To all and sundry Our Lieges and Subjects whom these presents do or may concern, Greeting: Forasmuch as it hath been alwayes Our greatest care, that Our good Subjects may live in Peace and Happiness under Our Government, So We have for that purpose been more desirous to make use of Our Mercy, to induce them to a dutiful submission to Our Laws, then to take special notice of any disorders committed by them, as the Acts of Indempnity and Grace lately granted by Vs will witness. And the same tenderness towards them still possessing us, in order to those who have been seduced and misled in the late Rebellion and Insurrection that appeared in some of the Western Shires, in the Moneth of November last, We are resolved that Our Mercy to them shall far exceed Our Iustice: And therefore, out of Our special Grace and Favour, We do by these presents grant Our full and free Pardon and Indempnity to all persons who were engaged in the said Rebellion, or who had accession thereto, from all pain or punishment, which by the Law they are lyable to for the said Rebellion, and for all deeds done by them in the same, or in relation thereto: Excepting alwayes from this Pardon, the Persons and Fortunes of Colonel James Wallace, Major Lermonth,  Maxwel of Montief younger,  Macklellan of Barscob,  Gordoun of Parbrek, Macklellan of Balmagechan,  Cannon of Burnshalloch younger,  Cannon of Barley younger,  Cannon of Mordrogget younger,  Welsh of Skar,  Welsh of Cornley,  Gordoun of Garrery in Kells, Robert Chambers Brother to Gadgirth, Henry Grier in Balmaclelan, David Stot in Irongray, John Gordoun in Mid∣toun of Dalry, William Gordoun there, John Macknacht there, Robert and Gilbert Cannons there,  Gordoun of Bar elder in Kirkpatrick-Durham, Patrick Macknacht in Cumnock, John Macknacht his Son,  Gordoun of Holm younger,  Dempster of Carridow,  of Dargoner,  of Sundiwall,  Ramsay in the Mains of Arnistoun, John Hutcheson in Newbottle, Patrick Listoun in Calder, William Listoun his Son, James Wilkie in the Mains of Cliftoun-hall, the Laird of Caldwell, the Goodman of Caldwell younger, the Laird of Kersland younger, the Laird of Bedland-Canninghame,  Porterfield Of Quarreltoun, Alexander Porterfield his Brother,  Lockhart of Wicketshaw, Mr.  Trail, Son to Mr. Robert Trail, sometime Chaplain to Scotstarbet, David Poe in Pokelly, Mr. Gabriel Semple, John Semple, Mr. John Guthry, Mr. John Welsh, Mr. Samuel Arnot, Mr. James Smith, Mr. Alexander Pedden, Mr.  Orr, Mr. William Veitch, Mr.  Patton Preacher, Mr.  Cruikshanks, Mr. Gabriel Maxwel, Mr. John Carstairs, Mr. James Mitchel, Mr. William Forsyth, and of all others who are forfaulted, and who are under process of forfaulture: As also excepting all such, who, since the late Rebellion, have been accessory to the robbing of Ministers houses, and committing violences upon the persons of Ministers, and who shall be processed for the same, and found guilty thereof, betwixt and the first day of December next ensuing; But with this express condition alwayes, That this Pardon shall only extend to such, who betwixt and the first day of January next shall make their appearance before such as are authorized for that effect, and shall give Bond and Security for keeping the pubick Peace of Our Kingdom; and that such of them as shall give their Oath that they cannot find Security and Caution, give their own Bond for that purpose. And this Our Royal Favour and Grace, We appoint to be published at the Mercat-cross of Edinburgh, and other Royal Burroughs of these Shires. Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the first day of October, one thousand six hundred and sixty seven, and of Our Reign the nineteenth year.
