C6936C R174306 53299026 179800
A New BOOK FOR CHILDERN To Learn in. With many wholsome Meditations for them to CONSIDER. With Directions for true SPELLING. And the Ground of true Read∣ing and Writing of True ENGLISH. By S. C.
Also a Testimony concerning the Father, Son and Spirit, one true living and eternal God, who is Light; and concerning his work∣ing; and how he and they may be known. Also, the Devil and his Works ma∣nifested, which are to be de∣stroyed, and how; With several other things, very useful for Chil∣dren & others to learn, that they may be turned unto the Light, which is the Gift of God. By G. Fox the Younger. Train up a Child in the Way that it should walk, and it will not for∣get it when it is Old.
A short Epistle. ALL you Friends of the Truth, this is a Salutation unto you and to your Children, a fruit of the Plant of Righteousness, which ye know, and can savour the Fruit thereof, & is given forth from that Spirit in which we are one with you in the Service of Love and Truth, for the removing the use of such Books and Catechisms as are sprung forth of the corrupt Tree, which now is to be burned, and its fruits reject∣ed, and People are to use the leaves of the Tree that grows by the River of Water, that proceeds from the Throne and Presence of God for healing. So all Friends be faithful, and walk in that which refreshes the Plant, the Power of the Lord God. S. C.
a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s s t u v w x y z &. A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z. a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s s t u v w x y z &. A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T Ʋ V W X Y Z. ft ct sh fl a e i o u.
ab ad af ak am ap eb ed ef ek em ep ib id if ik im ip ob od of ok om op ub ud uf uk um up ba da fa ca ma pa be de fe ce me pe bi di fi ci mi pi bo do fo co mo po bu du fu cu mu pu
A Child may learn the fear of the Lord by ta-king heed unto the Light. Shall not the Plant that thou hast set grow, and be great, and bring forth Fruit for men to eat? The Lord's Right Hand hath made the Earth, and all things else that is in it. Man is God's Work, made for his use, his Light is pla-ced to be mans Guide to keep all things from a-buse. The Way to ob-tain a good Un-der-stand-ing is to be-gin in the Fear of the Lord; but
such as re-ject the Coun-sel of the Light, Dark-ness and Er-ror is in all their Wayes. A wise Child pre-ser-veth him-self from Cor-re-cti-on by O-be-di-ence; but a Fool-ish Child pro-cu-reth Strips by his Re-bel-li-on. A So-ber Child hath E-steem a mongst the Wise, and a Youth that fear-eth the Lord shall be ac-count-ed a-mongst the God-ly. O-be-di-ence to Pa-rents is of good Re-port a-mong all men, there-fore the Child that li veth in Sub-je-cti-on shall be lo-ved a-bove o-thers. And the bles-sing of the Lord
shall be mul-ti-ply-ed up on such; and his mer-ci-ful hand shall ac-com-pany them. The Coun-sel of the Light is the way of Wis-dom, and such as heark-en there-un-to, ob-tain the true know-ledge. That which re-pro-veth thee for E-vil is good, and bles-sed are they that love it, and turn from their E-vil. That which ma-ni-fest-eth Sin, is con-tra-ry to Sin, and lead-eth in-to Righ teous-ness, such as fol-low it. And that which makes ma-ni-fest is the Light, which is con-tra-ry to all the works of Dark-ness.
That which lead-eth in-to Sin is na-tu-ral, but that which leads out of sin, and re-pro-veth it, is spi-ri-tu-al. The na-tu ral man can-not un-der-stand the things of God, be-cause they must be seen with that which is spi-ri-tu-al. The Light of the Bo-dy is the Eye, and that is spi-ri-tu-al. He that ta-keth heed un-to this Light, with it he shall see Temp-ta-ti-ons, and they that are wil-ling to o-bey it, shall re-ceive Pow-er, and be pre-ser-ved. Lit-tle Chil-dren, let your Ears be di-li-gent to hear the Voice of the Light, for that calls out of e-ve-ry E-vil Way.
That is the Light which tel-leth thee in se-cret thou should-est not do E-vil, and that is pla-ced with-in thee, to be a Wit-ness for God a-gainst all E-vil. He that doth E-vil ha-teth the Light; yet he can-not hide him-self from the Judg-ment there-of. There-fore cease from that which is E-vil, and O-bey the Light with-in, and then shalt thou be de-li-ve-red from Con-dem-na-ti-on. For the Way of the Lord is Peace to the Righ-te-ous; but he re-ward-eth the Wic-ked with Sor-row. So, all Chil-dren and Peo-ple,
mind the Fear of the Lord God, that so ye may be pre-ser-ved out of I-ni-qui-ty, and may come to un der-stand the things that be-long to your E-ver-last-ing Peace, in this the Day of your Vi-si-ta-ti-on (be-fore they be hid from your Eyes) Now whilst the Light Re-pro-veth, the Lord cal-leth, and such as turn at his Re-proof, and an∣swer his Call shall find Mer-cy, but the Light shall be the Con dem-na-ti-on of the Re-bel-li-ous. So all ye lit-tle Chil-dren, ex-er cise our selves in the Law of the Lord, which the Scrip-tures
of Truth saith is the Light; for if ye re-ject the Light, then ye re-ject the Law of God, and cast it be-hind your backs, and with such God is not well plea-sed. And hear-ken not to the de-cei-vers, who keep you from the Light of Christ Jesus where-with he hath en-ligh ten-ed e-ve-ry one of you, and tell you it is na-tu-ral, where-as ye know Sin is na-tu-ral, and the Light in Your Con-sci-en-ces is con-tra-ry to the Sin, and re-pro-veth you for sin; there-fore be-lieve them not that turn you from the Light, for
they are not Mi-ni-sters of Christ; his Mi-ni-sters turn-ed Peo-ple to the Light, as you may read in the six and twen-ti-eth Chap-ter of the Acts; and the eigh-teenth verse. And such are al-so De-cei-vers, who tell you the on-ly way to come to the Know-ledge of all Truth is by the Scrip∣tures; for the know-ledge of Truth is by the Spirit of Truth, which is the Light that con-vin-ceth you first of un-truth, and then being o-bey-ed, doth bring to the know-ledge of Je-sus Christ, who said, I am the
Truth, and his Spi-rit lead-eth in-to all Truth. And such are De-cei-vers, who preach for mo-ney and for Tythes; such can-not lead you out of Trans-gres-si-on, for they are in Trans-gres-si on them-selves; for Christ said to his, free-ly you have re-cei-ved, free-ly give; and Paul made not the Gos-pel charge-able; but these Priests, that preach for fil-thy Lu-cre, do de-ceive peo-ple, and keep them from be-lie-ving in the light, lest by it they should come no see their a-bo-mi-na-ti-ons and de-ceits. And such are no Mi ni-sters
of God's Word, who tell you the Scrip-ture is the Word of God; for they speak con-tra-ry to the Scrip-ture, which saith, Christ is the Word, and was in the Be-gin-ning, which the Scrip-ture was not; and did be-come Flesh, which the Scrip-ture never did; and made the World, which the Scrip-tures could not do; and these are Mi-ni-sters of the Let-ter, who are Mi-ni-sters of the Scrip-ture, and not Mi-ni-sters of Christ the Word, see-ing the Scrip-ture is nei-ther Christ, nor the Word; There-fore let e-ve-ry one, Old and Young, High and Low, mind
the Light of Jesus Christ within, in the the Con-sci-ence, and it. Tea-ching, that you may know the Path of Life, and the Way of Righ-te-ous-ness, that ye may be sa-ved from the Wrath that must come up-on them, who by con-ti-nu-ing in their e-vil deeds pro-voke the Lord to An-ger. And may be made Par-ta-kers of the Mer-cy and Lo-ving-kind-ness of God, which is laid up in Christ Je-sus the Light, for them that fear him, and de-part from I-ni-qui-ty. S. C.
Little Children, GOD that made the World, and created all Things that therein is, he is not a Man, sitting as a Man above the Stars, in some one place, which place is called Heaven, as many of the World, and the Teachers there∣of imagine. But the true God, who was Creator of all things, h is an E∣ternal Spirit, and he is the Life and Vertue, and Power that uphold∣eth
all his Creatures, and by him all things consist. For without him no Creature can have a being, for he giveth Life and Breath unto all that have it. And this Eternal GOD no Mortal Man can approach un∣to; for he only hath Im∣mortallity, and dwelleth in the Light. And this Immortal God, he cannot be kept in one place, for his presence filleth Heaven and Earth, & the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him, as saith the Scripture. And this God, who is an Im∣mortal
Spirit, he was your Crea∣tor, and this is he whom you are to remember in the dayes of your Youth. And to know this true and living God, and Jesus Christ whom he hath sent (and freely gi∣ven to be the Light of the World, that all through the Light might believe) it is Life Eternal. Now God the higher Power, he is called the Father, and Christ, the Light, is called the Son; and Christ was glorified with the Father before the World began. And Christ the light was (and is) called the Word, which
was with God in the beginning, and was (and is) God; and God the higher Power, and Christ the Word are One, by whom the World was made. And the Spirit of Truth that is Life, which proceeds from the Fa∣ther and the Son, as say the Scrip∣tures of Truth. And these, the Father, Son and Spirit, the world and their Teach∣ers call Three Persons; but they speak they know not what, even as they have imagined, contrary to the Scriptures. Therefore Children, believe them not. For the Father, which is called the Higher Power, and the Son,
which is called the Word, and the Spirit, which is called Life, which proceeds from the Father and Son; these are one, and are not separated. For he that hath seen the Son, hath seen the Father also; for the Father is in the Son, and the Son is in the Father, and the Spirit proceedeth from the Fa∣ther and the Son, as saith the Scripture, and these are one Be∣ing and Subsistence. Now that Word which was in the Beginiing with God, and was (and is) God, by whom all things were made, that were made [Mark] in that Word was
Life, and that Life was (and is) the Light of men. And this is the true light, which lighteth every one that cometh into the World, that all through that Light might believe, as saith the Scriptures of Truth. This Light which every one is enlightned withal, the Priests of the World call it a natural light; but Children, believe them not, for they speak contrary to the Scripture. For the Scriptures of Truth say, That in the Word (which was God) by whom all Things were made, was Life, and the Life was the Light, of Men
So Children, take notice, that the Light of Men is the Life of the Word, which is God: And this Word is Eternal and Spiri∣tual; and this Word made all the natural lights, and this Word also is called, Christ the Son of God, whose Life is the Light of Men. And this Word became Flesh, and in due time he was made Manifest in the Likeness of Sinful Flesh, in that Body which was supposed to be Joseph the Car∣penter's Son, and he was called Jesus. And in him dwelt the Fulness of the Godhead bodily; and this
Jesus fulfilled the Will of him that sent him, and he freely gave his Life a Ransome for many, as saith the Scripture. And as concerning the flesh, he was crucified without the Gates of Jerusalem, and he was buried, and he is risen again, according to the Scriptures, and he wrought Eternal Salvation for all them that obey him. And so, the same that descend∣ed, the same also ascended (as saith the Scriptures) he that came from the Father, the same is gone to the Father again. And he is glorified with the Father, with the same Glory
that he had with the Father be∣fore the World began. And though some have known him after the flesh, yet henceforth know they him so no more (as say the Scriptures of Truth.) Now Children, the Scriptures of Truth do declare of God and Christ, and the Spirit of Truth, which are one; but the Scrip∣tures cannot bring you to know God and Christ, and the Spirit of Truth. For no man knoweth the Father, who is a Spirit, but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him, as say the Scriptures. And they that come to see
and know the Son, they come to see and know the Father also; for the Father is in the Son, and the Son is in the Father, as saith the Scriptures. And they are call'd by one name which is the Word or the Light; for the Word is God, and Christ is the Word, and God is Light, and Christ is the Light of the World, and the spirit of Life pro∣ceeds from God and Christ, who are Light. And whatsoever the Son seeth the Father do, that doth he also, and the spirit of Life is not sepa∣rate from the Father and the Son in the Work.
Now Children, the Father, Son and Spirit, which are one Being, is the true one only God, which you are to know, believe in, and Worship, which God is a Spirit of Truth, and they that Worship him, must Worship him in the Spirit, and in the Truth; and before you can Worship him a∣right, you must know him, and believe in him. And the Knowledge of God, and the Faith in him, man lost through disobeying the higher Power; and so fell from God in the Transgression, into darkness and death. And all Children (and Peo∣ple)
that be in Transgression, in their Natural estate in the Fall, they are out of the Knowledge of God, and out of the true Faith, and out of the Spirit of Truth, and so out of the Worship of God. And in this Estate they are alienated from the Life of God, and Strangers to the Covenant of Promise, even Strangers un∣to the Law of God (which is Light) written in the Heart; and so in this estate they are Darkness. Now Children, although you be darkness, yet the Light shines in the Darkness (as saith the
Scripture) and the Darkness cannot Comprehend it; the Darkness cannot shut up the Light, that is plain to your Un∣derstandings. For the Light breaks through the Darkness, and sheweth unto you your darkness; and shines in∣to your hearts, to give you the knw∣ledge of the Glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. So, that which may be known of God is manifested in you, for God hath shewed it unto you: Therefore Children, ye should not seek nor look out, nor search in your own Thoughts to find out the Knowledge of God; for
the World by their Thoughts and Wisdom know not God. But the Lord God is nigh unto every one of you, for to shew unto you your Thoughts, for he knoweth your Thoughts, and none of them can be with∣held from him; and he that declareth unto man what his Thoughts are, the Lord of Hosts is his Name; so Children, take notice of that which sheweth you your Thoughts, for that is the Lord. And it was prophesied con∣cerning Christ, That he should be a Light to lighten the Gentiles, that the Thoughts of many Hearts
may be revealed; and again, The Word discerneth the Thoughts and the Intents of the Heart. So Children, there is some∣thing in you, that makes manifest your bad Words, and your bad Deeds, and your bad Thoughts unto you, and reproveth you for them. Now all things that are reproved, they are made ma∣nifest with the Light (as saith the Scriptures) For whatsoever doth make Manifest, the same is Light. And God is Light, who said, to him that thought God to be such a one as himself, I will re∣prove thee, and set thy sins in order
before thy eyes; and they that would have none of Gods reproof, they were the stubborn children, whom God, the Light, brought his Judgments upon; therefore take heed of rejecting that which doth reprove you for sin. And again, the Scripture saith, of the Spirit of Truth, That he shall reprove the World of Sin, of Righteousness, & of Judgment; & Christ the Word, he for Sin con∣demned Sin in the flesh: So take notice of that which makes ma∣nifest, reproves and condemns you for Sin; for that i God, or Christ, or the Spirit, which are but One.
Now Children, there are but two Grounds or Powers from whence all Peoples Deeds arise, and by which all People are acted or led, that is to say, the Ground of Truth, and the Ground of Unrighteousness, nd the Power of God, and the Power of Satan, which is the Devil, who abode not in the Truth: And there is the Spirit of God, and the Spirit of Error. Now, the Ground, and Power and Spirit of Truth, are of one Nature, which is the DIVINE NATURE; and the Ground and Power, and the Spirit of Error, they
are also one in their Natures, which is the Cursed Nature, and these Natures are contrary one to the other. Now, they that Act any manner of Unrighteousness, it ariseth from the Unrighteous Ground; and they are moved, acted and led in all Unrighteous Actions, that they Act by the Power of Satan, the Spirit of Error. And they that act any thing that is Just and Right in the sight of God, it ariseth from the Ground of Truth, and they are moved, acted and led in all such Actions by the Power and Spirit of God.
Now these Powers, or Natures, or Spirits being contrary one to another, oppose one another; and thus Children ye may come to know that it is so, and discern it by the Light, which makes ma∣nifest all Words, Actions and Motions. For when ye have disobey∣ed your Parents, or them that have the Rule over you, in any thing that ye ought not, or when ye have done any Evil, then ye have been acted by Satan his Power; and then the Power of God hath moved in you against the Evil that you have commit∣ted, and then (many times)
with the Spirit of Truth you have seen that you have done amiss, and have been troubled for it. And when you have told a Lye, the Devil hath begotten that in you, for he is the Father of all Lyes; and then the Light of God's Spirit hath often times shewed unto you your Lye, and hath condemned you for it. And thus the Spirit and Power of God Opposeth the Power and Spirit of Satan in all things that Satan begets in you, and moveth and leadeth you to do; for the Spirit and Power of God
moves and stirs against every moving and stirring of the Pow∣er and Spirit of Satan, and calls you from the evil to refrain, and not to joyn to the Evil Motions, but to the good. And likewise, where the Spi∣rit and Power of Satan is not yet limited or destroy'd [Mark] when the Power and Spirit of God begets any tender Desires, or stirrings, or movings in you after Truth and Righteousness, then the Power and Spirit of Satan moves and stirs in you a∣gainst them, and seeks to draw your Minds from that which is good, into that which is evil.
And thus you may plainly see that the light hath no fellowship with the darkness, nor the dark∣ness with the light; for the Spi∣rit and Power of God is Light, and the Spirit and Power of Satan is Darkness, and these are contrary one to each other in all things. And they that joyn to to the Darkness, and believe in it, they by it continue, or are made Chil∣dren of Darkness, and so of the Devil. And they that joyn to the Light, and believe in it, they by it are made, or continue Children of the Light, and so of God.
Now Children, there is a day of Visitation, if ye slight it not, which the Lord God giveth you, wherein you may come to witness this Word of God, in making you his children through his Workings and Operations of his Eternal Spirit. But if ye let slip the Day of your Visitation, and continue resisting the Workings of the Spirit, and harden your selves against the Reproof of the Lod, then the Spirit of the Lord will cease striving with you, and ye will be shut up in Darkness. Therefore, whilst ye feel some∣thing which convinceth you
of Sin and Evil, take heed unto that; for that which lets you see that ye should not lye, nor swear, nor be proud, nor wild, nor diso∣bedient to your Parents in any lawful thing that they command you, nor act any manner of Un∣righteousness whatsoever; This is the Manifestation of the Spirit, which is given you to profit withal, or the true Light of God or Christ, who are one. And this ye should mind r¦joyn unto (when it convinceth you) and to abide in it, and then ye would come to feel the Mighty Power of God, which s Christ manifested in you, who
was (and is) made manifest for this very end, that he might (and may) destroy the Works of the Devil. And they that commit Sin, are of the Devil, and in the Devil's Work; for that is the Devil which begetteth Sin, and works it in the Members; and they that joyn to that which moveth to Sin, they become one with the Devil, the Author of Sin; and so joyn with him in his Work, and he becomes their Master. Now Children, Christ that Power of God, he appears against Sin in the Members, therefore
mind the stirrings, and movings and arisings of Christ, the Power of God (in you) against Sin, and believe and wait in it, and thn ye will come to feel Sin, and the Devil, who is the Author of it, consuming even by the bright∣ness of the coming, or appearing, or Revelation of Jesus Christ, the Power of God (in you.) And then you will grow in∣to Soberness, and Stilness, and Quietness, and Innocency, and true Tenderness and Obedience both unto God and your Pa∣rents, and them that have Rule over you; and then the Bles∣sing of the Lord will come upon you.
So Children, ye being turned unto the true Light that shews you Sin and Evil, with that, as ye mind to abide in it, ye will come to see and know, that the true God, the true Christ, and the true Spirit is but one Being and Substance, and as ye wait in the Light, with it ye will come to see the Works and Workings of the one true and living God; and so ye will grow into a good Understanding, as ye believe and wait in that Light of God mani∣fested in you. And then ye will come to see and know the Devil also, (who abode not in the Truth)
and his Works and Workings, and as ye abide in the Truth, (which the Devil is out of) ye will come to feel the Devil and his Works and workings destroy∣ed and consumed by the Bright∣ness of the appearing of the one God of Light, who is a consu∣ming Fire. So Children, ye need not look out, nor strive in your own Thoughts for the Knowledge of things; but keep your Minds within, in that which calls for Soberness and Stilness, and Qui∣etness and Harmelesness of Spi∣rit; and as ye wait in that, ye will be kept in God's fear, then
whatsoever is needful for you to know, the Lord will reveal it un∣to you by his Spirit. For the secrets of the Lord are with them that fear him, as say the Scriptures; and they that fear the Lord shall not lack any thing that they have need of; for they that stand in awe of God, the light, they shall be kept out of Sin, and they shall grow into the pure Knowledge and Wisdom of God and therein be preserved; for the Wisdom of God preserves all things that are preserved. And Children, with the Wis∣dom of God all God's Creatures
must be ordered, and they that come into the Wisdom of God [Mark] they must first come in∣to the fear of God; for the fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom; and the fear of God is to depart from Iniquity, even from every Evil Way. And before any can depart from their Iniquity, they must first see their Iniquities; & before they can see their Iniquities, their Sins and Evil Deeds, they must first hear the Light which they are enlightned withal, which will tell them that they are in Iniquity, and also shew them their Sins and Evil Deeds.
And Children, they that hear the Light, they hear God, for God is Light; and they that hear God, they hear Christ also; for God and Christ are One (as saith the Scripture) and they that hear Christ, hear the Author of the True Faith, and so hear the Saviour of their Souls; and the Light is that Prophet, which all that hear not him are to be cut off. Now Children, that which moves, or leads, or draws to Ly∣ing, to Swearing, to Dissimula∣tion, to Pride, to Covetousness, to Wilfulness, to Stubbornness to Envy, to Rashness, to Wild∣ness,
to Disobedience to Parents, or Masters, or Dames, (when they command that to be done by you, which you ought to do) or that which moves, draws or leads you into Gaming, or into any manner of Evil whatso∣ever, the same moves, and draws, and leads you from hearing the Voice of God. And that which moves, draw and leads into any Evil, that i the Devil; and going into the Evil, which the Devil tempts to, that hardneth the Heart, and the Heart being hardned, that stop the Ear that should hear Gods Voice.
Therefore Children, mind that which will shew you all the Mo∣tions and Temptations of the De∣vil, and hear that which will tell you your Thoughts, for that is God, the Light, who is the Word, and the Word is as a Hammer, to break the hard Heart; and the Heart being broken into Tender∣ness, then the Mercy and Virtue of God will be felt to heal again. And then the presence of God will be witnessed; for the Lord dwells with those that are of a bro∣ken and contrite Spirit, and tremble at his Word; and in his presence is fulness of Joy, as say the Scrip∣tures.
So little Children, Learn of the Light, which is Christ, who is meek and Lowly in the Heart, and he will teach you to be meek and lowly, and patient, and in∣nocent, and harmless, and to live in true Love and Tender∣ness, and Obedience, and Ho∣nesty, and Uprightness toward God and toward Men; and then ye will find Rest and Peace for your Souls. Now Children, the wisdom of the Lord God is more precious then all the riches of the world. They that are of a froward, stubborn, crooked, envious, rash, fretting Nature, they shall not
be acquainted with the Wisdom of God. But they that fear the Lord, and are of a tender, humble, meek, patient lowly Spirit, they shall be filled with true Wisdom and Understanding. They that are wild and stud∣born, and run into wicked and prophane Language, and Sport themselves in Vanity, and live in disobedience, the Lord God will overtake them, with his Judg∣ments, before they are aware of them. The End of a disobedient, stubborn, wicked Man, who will not depart from his wi ness
shall be full of Torment, Sor∣row and Misery. But the End of an Upright and Perfect man, who delight∣eth himself in the Way of the Lord, shall be full of Joy, and Comfort & Peace in the Lord. The Way of the Lord, which is the way of Holiness, and the Path of the Just is the bright shining Light, which shieth ore and more until the perfect Day. And the bright shining Light is that which will shew you your evil Words, and your evil Deeds, and your evil Thoughts, and will chek and reprove you for them; and this is the way where∣in ye should walk.
Every good and perfect Gift comes from God, and the Gift of God is perfect; and God gives Gifts even to the Rebellious; and the Gift of God to the Rebelli∣ous is the Light, which sheweth him his Rebellion, and for this Cause it is given him, that he might return from his Rebellion unto God, the Giver. Now Christ is the Light, the Way, the Truth and the Life and this is the Gift of God, and they that receive, love, believe and follow the Light, which showeth unto them their Sins, they shall receive Power to come out of their Sins, and to
become Children of God, and that Light, which is the Gift of God, that shall justifie and comfort them. But they that disobey, reject, despise and hate the Light which sheweth unto them their Sins, they shall abide in Darkness; and if they Repent not, they shall dye in their Sins; and the Light, which was God's Gift to them, which shewed unto them their Sins, and call'd unto them to forsake their Sins, shall remain their Condemnation. Blessed are they that love and obey the Light, and believe in it; for they shall be kept
by it through Faith, out of con∣demnation, and they shall feel and know the Light to be their continual Teacher, to teach them that which God requireth them to do, and it will give them Power to do it also. Little Children, joyn not your selves to the Wicked, (Mark) neither keep Company with them that walk in Unrighte∣ous Wayes, lest they tempt you to run into Wickedness also; and so ye come thereby to re∣ceive the Wages that Sinners must receive; and the Wages of Sin, and of such as live in Sn, is Death.
And they that partake with the Wicked in their Wicked∣ness, they also must partake with them in the Judgment; therefore refrain from the Com∣pany of the Wicked, and de∣light your selves in the Fear of the Lord. They that seek to the Wicked for Counsel, they go to a cor∣rupt Fountain; but they that seek to the Lord for Counsel, and live in his Fear, they shall find the Treasures of Wisdom, and the Fountain of Life. Children, delight not your selves in earthly Riches, nor in the Honour of the World, nor
in the Pleasures of the Flesh, nor in gay Apparel, nor in vain Mirth, in Musick, nor in any Evil whatsoever; but let this be your Delight to learn to know the Lord, and to be obedient unto him. Now Children, the Light, if ye wait in it, that will learn you the fear of the Lord, and it will shew unto you what the Lord commandeth you to do, and it will lead you in Obedience unto God and his Commandments, and so ye will be brought unto the End of the Matters, and to the whole Duty of man, which is
to fear God, and keep his Com∣mandments; and in the Light his Commandments are seen, and they that receive the Light, re∣ceive Power to keep them, and to such they are not grievous, but joyous. Little Children, wait in the Light G. F. Something concerning Original SIN. THE Original of all Sin is out of the Truth, and out of the Light, and its conception is not in that Power by which
all Creatures were made, nei∣ther is its Original in that in which the Original of all Crea∣tures is and doth stand. And although Sin may be in a Creature, it is not by Crea∣tion, but by Degeneration; not by the Power that made Man, but by the Power that captivateth Man in his Senses, and leadeth him from the Power that made him, which he should be Subject and O∣bedient unto; which Power placeth a Law in the Creature, which it maketh and formeth; and so, as this was (or is) kept, so long doth not Sin
enter, but when the other Pow∣er, namely, the Power of the Lust, or earthly desire after some∣thing besides the pure Power, and the Law of it takes the Crea∣tures Senses into the Appre∣hension of something to be good beside the Law, and the pure O∣bedience thereof; here is Sins Original and Conception, and so then the Knowledge of a Plea∣sure in Sin that enters into the Heart, which is darkened with Love and Desire of that which is earthly, and the Love which was to the Law, which is the Light, that grows cold, and the Affections become deceived
by the Subtilty of the Author f Transgression, who is the egetter of the Evil Desires, which is Sin in it self, before t be brought forth to Action, nd is of that Seed that is ha∣ed in the Womb, and then he Power not being loved, which worketh to save out of he Sin, at length the Feeling of t is lost, and God, the Power, orgotten, and the Creature led nto Captivity, and the Power f death and Darkness comes p from the Pit of Darkness ver the Soul, which bore the mage of him that created it, and o then the the Begetting of the
Power of Darkness, the Prince of Iniquity, the Father of Abo∣minations and Defilements, tha begetting, gets a Birth n th Form of him that begot it an this takes the Dominion ove the Creature, and subjects i unto Vanity, not willingly  but by force, commanding i the Members, and making the to be Servants to Unrighteou¦ness, bringeth forth continu¦ally through the Members that by Authority and Power which at the first was but pe¦swaded and enticed unto, an so the Continuation of Si and the Custom of sinning ta¦keth
away the Sence, so that it becomes Natural to conceive Evil, and to bring forth Mis∣chief, and to act Iniquity; and this is the Nature in which all men are Children of Wrath, one as well as another, that are in it, without respect to Persons, Names, Countries, or any other thing whatsoe∣ver; for Sin is the Transgressi∣on of the Law; and where there is no Law, there is no Trans∣gression; and where there is a Law, there is Obedience required, which not being yielded, the Law is broken, and Transgression commit∣ted;
so that of Necessity the O∣riginal of the pure, righteous, holy Law of God is first, before the Original of Sin, which is the Transgression of it; and this is that which is near to e∣very one, even the Law which they should observe and keep, and fulfill the requirings of it, and not transgress: and who take heed unto this, do well, and those that transgrses this, do Evil, as did Cain, and then Sin lies at the Door, which being finished brings forth Death; and so, as many as have sinned since the Foundation of the World, it hath been by their departing
aside from the pure Law of the Power that made them, in their own Particulars, unto that which their own Hearts lsted after, and so that having con∣ceived in the Womb of Dark∣ness, in the blinded and decei∣ved Affection, brought forth the Sin, which being finished in them, and through them brought forth Death in their own parti∣culars, by what is done in thine own self, and not by that which was done in another long ago. So let none be deceived, but all, both Old and Young, High and Low, Rich and Poor,
mind the pure Law of God in your own Particulars, which by Transgressing and Disobey∣ing, Sin has gotten Head in you, and so the Reign and Dominion of Death is come over you, and the Powers of Darkness have prevailed in your Hearts, and then in the Dark Imaginations of your own Hearts ye have gone to imagine about Original Sin being in Adam, and so Si unto Condemnation and Wrath to come upon you all; But verily, I say unto you, The Original of Sin, and the Law, and their Transgression there of, is nearer unto you tha
Adam, even the disobeying of the pure Light of Christ Jesus, wherewith he hath lighted every one of you withal, which makes manifest unto you what ye should do, and what ye should not do; and who love and obey this, it will lead them to that which was in the Beginning, before Sin's Original was. A few Words concerning such as Mock and Deride at being moved by the Spirit. OH! Ye Blind and Ignorant People, Children of
no Understanding who are so far gone from the Lord God your Maker, and from the feeling of his Power, that it is become a Derision unto you: What Lamentation shall I take up for you, O ye People of England! whose Old Men are Scorners, and thy Children a Genera∣tion of Mockers! In Vain has all thy Profession of the Scrip∣tures been, seeing now ye come to Mock and Deride t the Spirit, which gave them forth: Fear the Lord God ye Ishmaelites, and Repent of the Evil of your Doings, which have for several Years done De∣spight
to the Spirit of Grace, Jeering and Mocking at the Lord's People, who are moved by his Spirit to Worship him, and to Warn you of your Evil Lives, as if there were no such Thing could be known, as to be led by his Spirit. I say, what are you led by in your Worship? if it be not by the Movings and Leadings of God's Spirit? Then who hath required it at your hands? but it seems you are not; for you Mock and Deride at be∣ing moved by the Spirit, and so Mock at the Manner of the Scriptures being given, Holy Men of God Writing them
as they were moved by the Spirit, as saith the Scripture: There∣fore learn Understanding, and mind God's pure Fear, that y may come to feel God's Spirit near you, even in you, mo∣ving out of Iniquity into that which is Righteous, and then ye will leave Mocking at the Spirit; for it hath been your Ignorance of it, has been the Ground of your Despising of it; But now, they that mind the arising of the Light, shall know the Clouds of Ignorance Expelled, and come to the Knowledge of the Manifesta∣tion of God's Spirit, without
which the Mind cannot be Good. And all you little Children, who have been Mocking and Scorning at the Spirit of God, and at the Light, consider what you are doing, you Mock at that which you ought to obey, as hath been proved in this little Book, and so remain Children of Diso∣bedience, in whom the Prince of the Power of Darkness rules in your Hearts, and keeps you from the Knowledge of God, who is Light, in whom is no Darkness, as ou may read in John 1. v. 5. Ad remember this, that Mocking and Scorning, and Jeering, and
Deriding, are all Works of Darkness, and not wrought in the Light, but with the Light are all condemned. S. C. An Exhortation to Families, who have desires to serve the Lord God in their several places, that they may all learn in the Light of Christ Jesus, the Wisdom & Power of God, who is true Teacher. O Ye Fathers and Mothers, stand ia the pure Fear of
the Lord, and wait in his Light, that ye may receive his living Wisdom, and live in it, that so ye may be ordered by it, and with it order all things to God's Glory, and bring up your Children in the fear of the Lord, Watching over them in the Seasoned Savoury Life of God, not suffering them to live in VVildness, nor Idleness, nor Vain Talking (Unreproved) but in the Sober, Meek Spirit, and in the Autho∣rity of God's Lamb, reprove them, and that will reach the Witness of God in them; and Correct them in the Fear and
Wisdom and Freedom of God, in the Patience, and follow not their Foolish Wills, neither Correct them in your own Wills, nor in Hastness, Rush∣ness or Passion; for if ye do, then that will use the Rod, which is to be beaten with the Rod of God, and that wil make your Children mo Stubborn and Wicked, and this will Offend God; but stand ye in God's Counsel, and discou∣rage nothing in your Chil∣dren but Evil, and let them have that which is meet, ju and reasonable, and no more, that none of God's Creature
be wasted; and be ye Patterns and good Example, in all Holi∣ness, Gravity and Uprightness, unto them; and let them have sufficient Liberty to go to God∣ly Meetings, and rather stir them up, and Encourage them to go to such, than hinder or discourage them; and keep your Minds out of them unto the Lord, and let your Love to them be in the Lord, that so ye may feel his Blessing come upon you, and them. And all ye Children who have Parents, honour (and be obedi∣ent unto) them in the Lord, and mind the Light of Christ in you,
and that will not suffer ye to be Wild nor Wilfull, Stubborn nor Vain, but it will check and reprove ye for all Evil; and if ye will own its Reproof, and believe and wait in it, it will lead ye out of all Evil, and it will bring ye in∣to Soberness and Meekness, Ten∣derness and Innocency, and pre∣serve ye in it, and it will bring ye to know and remember your Creator in the Dayes of your Youth, and it will reveal God's Power and Wisdom in ye, where∣by ye will be kept in true order: So, suffer not your Minds to follow Vanity, neither walk in Stubborness towards your
Parents, (nor others) I Warn ye in God's Fear, lest he shorten your days, and cut ye off by his righteous Judgments; but mind his fear, and wait therein, that ye may feel his Grace, and be taught by it, and be obedient unto it, then ye will feel the mercy and blessing of the Lord. And all ye that are Masters and Dames, wait in the true Light, that ye may feel Christ the Power and Wisdom of God to be your Master, that so ye may Rule in your Places in his Fear and Wisdom; and lay no more upon your Servants, than ye would be willing should be
laid upon you, if were  their Places and Condition▪ [Mark that] and forbear thre¦ning them, and be not hasty t turn them away if they be wi¦ling to abide with you, but in pa¦tience and meekness shew them their Place and Service, an therein Teach them, if the know it not; and let them hav for their Service that which i Convenient, Just and Reasona¦ble, that they may have no jus Cause to Mumur or Conplain and keep out of Covetousness, least that hinder you from gi∣ving them sufficient Liberty, (who desire it) for going to
the Meetings of the People of the Lord; and if in the wisdom of God ye see freedom to turn any away, give them sufficient Waring, that they may pro∣vide themselves otherwayes, for this is but just, and reasonable; and be not hasty nor rash with them, nor run into Jangling with them, but if ye have cause to re∣prove them, let it be in the Fear & Wisdom of God, in the Free∣dom and Authority of the Truth & that will reach unto the Wit∣ness of God in them: So be not high minded, but fear, and be patterns unto them in the low∣ly, meek and quiet Spirit: and
bear with the weak, and forgive them that trespass against you, and render not Evil for Evil to any, but overcome Evil with that which is Good, and live in that which overcomes Evil, that so the Truth of God may be exalted over all. And all e that are Servants, live in the Fear of the Lord, and wait in his Light, and be obe∣dient thereunto, and also be obedient (in your places) unt those that are your Masters an Dames, according to the Flesh, not only to the good and gen∣tle, but also to the froward, serving them in Faithfulness and
Uprightness of Heart, doing what ye do for them, as dili∣gently, faithfully and willing∣ly, as ye should do any thing to the Lord, for this is right in the sight of God; and take heed that none of God's Creatures be lost, or wasted under your Hands, through your neglect∣ing them, or sloathfulness in your places, wd do not falsly accuse any, or speak Evil be∣hind any ones Back, thereby thinking to get the Favour o Love of any, or upon any other account; for that is Evil: and be as diligent in your places, when your Masters or Dames
are absent, as when they are present; for this is just and right: and be not stubborn nor wilful, neither use many wors to your Masters or Dames, and if ye know not well how to pe¦form your Service aright, th in true Humility be willing o learn; and take heed of High∣mindedness and Pride, or of be∣ing wise in your own Eyes and when ye have any spare Ti allowed ye, being free fro outward Imployment, see that ye spend it in the Fear of th Lord, in waiting upon him  his Light, that so all vain Tal¦ing, corrupt Communication,
foolish jesting, and all Vanity may be kept out of: and give ye not way to that mind which is Unstable, which would be oft shifting and going from place to place, for this is not right in the sight of God, but wait in the Light, that ye may be staid and settled in your Minds; and if ye see Freedom in the Fear of God (Mark that) to go to ano∣ther place, then give your Ma∣sters or Dames sufficient notice of it: and if any of you, who know the Truth, come to be moved of the Lord to go to any place in his Service, be faithful to the Lord, and when your ser∣vice
which he required of you  done, then return to your place▪ again, except it be otherway ordered in the Fear and Wi¦dom of God; and be diligent in your places, doing the same that ye would others should do unto you in the like condition; and mind the Lord in and above all things, and be faithful unto him, and he will be your Reward. And all ye Fathers and Mo∣thers, and Children, and Ma∣sters, and Dames, and Servants, who have the Creatures of God to buy or sell, or to exchange, live in the fear of the Lord, that ye may feel his Wisdom to
guide you in your Trading, and do not speak better or worse of the Creatures then you know them to be, thereby to get the greater gain; for that is Idolatry, it arising from Co∣vetousness; but wait to feel God's Spirit to bridle your Tongues; and use but few words in your Trading and if ye ask a question therein, do it in sim∣plicity, and keep in the Light, which is equal, that when ye offer or ask a Price for the Cre∣atures, it may be in Equality, and let that be your Rule, and not the Price of the Market, ex∣cept that be equal; for so ye may
reach the equal Principle on in another, and then stand t your Word, and here your Y will be Yea, and your Nay will  Nay, and so ye will be kept in the Doctrine of Christ, with his Light, out of Evil: and ye abiding in the Light, it will bring you to do to every one as ye would be done unto: and take heed that ye stir not up the Impatient, Crooked, Disorderly Nature one in another, with your Words or Actions; but bear one with another, and forgive one another, and when ye tell each other of a Fault, do it in the Fear and Wisdom, and
meek Spirit of God's Lamb, that so ye may restore each other therein; and when ye have any convenient time, assemble your seves together in the Name and Fear of the Lord, and wait eve∣ry particular in the Measure and Gift of God in you, which is given ye to profit withal; and all wait together in the Light, and believe in it, that ye may be Children of the Light, and therein watch unto Prayer, and one over another, and this will beget ye into unfeigned Love; and walking in the Light ye will have true Unity and Fel∣lowip one with another: and
the Blood (which is the Life) o Jesus Christ you will feel clean¦sing you from all Sin, so ye will come into the Unity wit God. Also, to feel his Word, his Power and Wisdom (i you) by which all things were Created and made, and are up∣held, that therein ye may be or∣dered in the particlar, and that therein ye may use and or∣der all God's Creatures to his Glory; and then all false Weights, and Measures, and Wayes, and Worships will be destroyed; and then shall Truth, Equity, Righteousness, and true Order and Mercy prosper, and
run down as a River: So let your Faith stand in Christ Jesus the Light, and Wisdom and Power of God, and then true Worship, true Weight, true Measure shall be set up and esta∣blished, and then shall the Lord be exalted over all the Works of his Hands, and so ye will feel his blessing; unto him belong∣eth Dominion and Honour, for he is worthy of it for evermore, Amen. By George Fox.
The Lamb and his Day Proclamed. THE Kingdom of God is at hand, which comes not with Observa∣tion; Salvation is near unto all that will receive it, Re∣demption is coming in a Time unexpected, and De∣liverance in a Way not known, as a Thief in the Dark is the Heir come, whose light out of drkness
is shining, and that which shineth out of Darkness is it alone that giveth the Knowledge of God, whom to know is Life eternal; and the Brightness of the Day of God is springing forth of Darkness, as the Morning Sun, after the Darkness of the Night, and Glorious is this day of the Revelation of God, to all them that have waited for his Coming, who in the Life of his Power through the Obedience in his love, come to rejoyce in
his Dominion over all the Powers of Darkness for∣ever, and sound forth the Dreadful Day of his Power unto all the Inhabitants of the Earth, from the which Christ the Saviour comes to take Peace, and to bring the Sword of God's Judg∣ments into the Bowels of all the earthly-minded: and in him that judgeth the Se∣crets of all Men's Hearts, do his Followers rejoyce, and proclaim him unto you all, that make an end of sin,
who of the Father of Love and Mercy is tendred unto all that will receive him, that in him who condemns the Evil Deeds and Sin in the Flesh, Salvation might be attained unto, who now comes unto his own, of whom many receive him not; for he is come to judge the World, whom God so loved, that he gave his Son the Light of the World, that whosoever believe in him, (by whom the Secrets of all Hearts are, and shall be
judged) may be saved frm Wrath to come, and find a sure hiding place, when the Wicked shall be cut off the Earth. And now, Who will re∣ceive the Lamb, in whose Mouth there was no Guile? who among the Sons of men will recive him that hath been slain from the Founda∣tion of the World? Who will receive him that is the gift of God, which is perfe? Who will receive him that is a man of Sorrows, whe
Beauty is hid from the Pru∣dent of the earth? Who will receive him that the Priests cry out against, and the Rulers say, away with him from the Earth? Who will come unto the Waters of Life, and return unto the Fountain of living Mercies, that in his Belly the springs of Life may be felt? Who can endure to follow him to the End of the World, whose Kingdom is not of this World, and who recei∣veth not Honour of Men?
Who can hear, receive and keep the hard Sayings, and drink his Blood that clean∣seth from all Sin? Who is willing to receive him that is the Resurrection and the Life, whose presence trou∣bled and terrified his own Disciples, so that their hearts burn'd within them? Who will lay down their Crowns at the foot of him that is the light, and mourn over him that is slain, whom they have pierced, and through patience, long-suf∣fering
and Obedience, fol∣low the one Shepherd in the Regeneration? Even unto them is the Word of Consolation sent. Therefore be awakened, O all ye Rulers and People; let not your Hearts be hard∣ned against God's Witness in you; neither stop your Ears, nor close your Eyes; for of a truth the Lord is at hand; and is come to try you with his loving kindness & with his Judgments. His flock despis'd of men, hath
he sent in the Meekness of his love, to preach the inno∣cent Life of his Son among you, in Meekness, Patience, Sufferings and Tribulations, who being reviled, revileth not again, but in Patience in∣during long Imprisonments, yea, Want and Sickness there, and Abuses, cruel Mockings, Stonings in the Street daily, and Revilings by Ungodly Persons, whose Cruelty is increased, and their Sins multiplyed, in∣creasing to the day of Judg∣ment,
and Righteous Reve∣lation of God's Wrath upon all Unrighteousness of men, who hold his Truth in that which is not his Righteous∣ness, which is now brought near unto all that fear before him in Uprightness of heart, that Truth in the inward parts they might come to know, and in it worship the God of the Spirits of all Flesh. H. S.
Read with Carefulness, and Practise with Diligence. ALL Children that are ten∣der, and young in Years, mind the Lord God, who cre∣ated you and formed you in the Womb, and walk in the Fear of God, that God may bless you in your Growth and Increase of Years, and make you Partakers of his Heavenly Blessings, and give unto you Life everlasting; all follow the Light of the Lord Jesus, wherewith you are en¦lightned,
which shews you that you should not walk in the Foot steps of the Ungodly, in Lying, or Swearing, or Cur∣sing, or Mocking, or Scorning, or Wantonness, or in any Sin, that you may be the Children of the Light, and the Children of God, that God may de∣light in doing you good; all mind the good Example of your Parents, and be ye Followers of the good; but where they are not a good Example to you in the fear of God, let your Modesty and Sobriety and Chastity in Words and
unto them; and if for your well-doing they or any shall hate you, or seek your hurt, still standing in the fear of God, the Lord will keep you above the Hurt of Man, and his Children he will care for. So be not ye Learners of any Evil Example; for all that do learn of the Evil, and follow the Evil, such will the Lord God reward with sore Punishments and Judgments. And all you Wicked Chil∣dren, who are of the Seed of the Evil Doers, that are learn∣ing of the Wicked One to Scoff,
and to Scorn, and to Mock, and to do Wickedly, this unto you is an Evil Example; The Chil∣dren which Mocked Elisha, Two and Forty of them were torn to pieces with two she Bears, 2 Kings 2. Vers. 23, 24. Yet sorer Punishment hath God re∣served in store for all the Chil∣dren of Wickedness and Mock∣ers. Wherefore be ye all Warned, and mind the Light of God in your Consciences, and follow it, that you may receive and partake of the Store of
may receive and partake of the store of God's Mercies, which none that do wickedly have the Promise of. THE END. London, Printed and Sold by A Sowle at his Shop in Devonshire New Build∣ings, without Bishops-Gate, 1681
