c6775 99887077 181803
THE Crafty Lass of the West: Or, A Pleasant Ditty of a modest Maid, who Mortgag'd her Maiden-Head for a High-Crown'd Hat. Tune of Liggan-Water. Licensed according to Order. HEre is a Iest I do protest, Of a young Damsel in the West, Whose wit and beauty did excell Most Maids that in those parts did dwell. Therefore my Friends I pray attend, To this new Ditty which is penn'd; Then if you do not own the same, In troth you will be much to blame. One Morning, Sirs, it happen'd so, She to the Market Town would go, With Purse of Money great and small, To buy a High-Crown'd Hat withall. No sooner was this Lass come there, But she did to a Shop repair, VVhereas her Charms did soon ensnare The Batchelor that lived there. Sweet Sir, said she, a Hat Id have, And let it be as I shall crave, One that is Rich, and light to wear, He soon did fit her to a Hair. Tell me the Price, she then reply'd, Said he, Ten Shillings I deny'd; But I'll befriend thee, Love, he said, Because thou art a handsome Maid. Thou shalt enjoy it for a Crown, If thou wilt let me lay thee down, Vpon a soft fine Feather-bed, And there obtain thy Maiden-head. The Damsel pausing, stood a while, At length she answer'd with a Smile, VVhat Maiden-head, and Money too? I'faith kind Sir, that will not do. He streightways beckn'd her aside, Saying, If she would but abide VVith him, till the next Morning light, He'd give her this new Hat out-right. She did no more disputing stand, But struck the Bargain out of hand; And having given the Youth content, The Hat she took, and home she went. Now as she tripped on the way, The Damsel to her self did say, I with a High-Crown'd Hat am sped, For a meer silly Maiden-head. VVhen to her Mother coming streight, This precious Bargain to relate; Said she, Dear Mother, as I'm true, A Hat I have and Money too. VVhy sawcy Slut, her Mother said, How was the good Shop-keeper paid? He had my Maiden-head, quoth she, VVhich has been long a Plague to me. The Mother then began to raive, And did her Daughter there be slave; Likewise she thrash'd her out of Door, Protesting she'd ne'er own her more. If this new Hat she did not take, And with all hast a Iourney make, To give it him to whom she'd lain, And fetch her Maiden-head again. Much hast to Town this Damsel made, And to the Hatter thus she said; My Maiden-head you must restore, Or else I'm ruin'd evermore. Here take your Hat again she said, For I must have my Maiden-head: Come hither, and lye by my side, I'll give it thee again, he cry'd. Now as the youthfull Shop-keeper, He was restoring that to her, Thrust it in further Sir, I pray, For fear I loose it by the way. Said he, 'Tis well, thou need'st not fear: These words her drooping Heart did chr, She made him Coursies to the Ground, Because she had such kindness found. She to her Mother went with speed, And told her that he was indeed An honest Man, for why, said she, He never made a word with me. But Housewife, had he not been so, It would have provd your overthrow; But since he did it thus restore, Be sure you play the Fool no more. Printed for P. Brooksby, J. Deacon, J. Blare, J. Back.
