E383 99890126 182555
AN ELEGY On the DEATH of Sir NATHANAEL HERN, Kt. An Eminent ALDERMAN of the City of LONDON, who Dyed on Saturday, the 16th of this instant August, 1679. TRiumph, all you triumph, who never see Without a triumph, falling Gallantry. Behold these Corps and triumph: Let some go, Through France to Rome, and in their journy show How we do weep, and what doth cause our Woe. Let them report, how we do here Lament At their Success, while yet they'r innocent. How Death doth list himself, while they stand by, Veiwing him championing for Popery. He doth their Stabs and Poisons supersede; They may confine their Daggers, have no need To sharpen Poisons, to make Patriots bleed: Their work is taken from their hand, and they See England falling, whilst themselves may play: Their Engines are reliev'd, by him whose Course Steals on, disdaining Vigilance and Force: No Guards surprize his Art, no Courts condemn The Malice that Kills us, and Kills for them. Since Fraud and Violence betray'd and slew Godfrey (that word we may now well endow With Power to speak forth, what is great and true,) Since he was so devour'd, by that fell thirst; And so devour'd, because he met it first. England, I think, ne're summon'd was to Tears By an Allarm, that so expresly bears All Characters of Grief upon its Air; As this which now breaks in, and strikes our Ear. My Memory doth not rebuke my Tongue, I think, no other can object, 'tis wrong. Oh then! Let none appear in any face, Which would not well become that solemn Place, In which that Body lies, which not long since As urgently did challenge Reverence, As it now calls for Grief: it loud doth call, It is the Relict of that manly Soul, Which Worth fil'd up, and greatn'd, it broke forth In all his Acts, they Dictates were of Worth: This did inform his Soul, inform his Place, And did adjust him to his Sphere; this Grace Mov'd in his works, in an Heroic Pace. Like some good Angel, managing his Feet To Paths, where Honour his Approach did greet. He to this Conduct did Obedience pay; Allways did ask, always did tread this way: Or rather in this Path his Mansion rear'd, And being once planted, allways here appear'd. Did you find him? this way your Eys you steerd. Yet Honour he ne're woo'd, but did espouse Virtue, and Honour waited in itts House. It saw and praisd him, for he never stray'd From his chast Vows; this he lov'd, this him sway'd. Reflect all you, whose Converse made him yours; (I'le not add Fuel to his Kindreds Grief May Heaven unto it, lend its sweet Reliefe) Collect, pronounce what my Report secures. I'me sure the Store is great from whence you may Call Proofs, t' attest my Truth, his Gallantry. You know his Speech which Privacy conceal'd: For what was Public, Fame to all reveal'd. You saw high Excellence it self display, Seeing his Mind, in his words ope its way, This deckt his Speech with a most constant Ray. You were led to that Closet, where did stand The wonderful Effects of Virtues Hand: You saw, admir'd what your Eys did fill, The noble Products of Celestial skill, No darkning Tincture, of ought base or ill. You knew him to condole his Country's woe In his large Prospect veiwing Blood to flow Bound for our Coast in a tumultuous Throe. He greiv'd to see Unfaithfulness in th' Arms Which should defend his Dear Prince from the harms He did incur, when he for us stem'd storms. He saw Darts pointed towards his Back, whilst Zeal For England's good, enjoy'd his Face to dwell There where the Breach, was making on our Weal He startled at this sight, made Heaven to hear The sad Resentments, started by his Fear. You, that do know these things, Proclaim 'em all; Let London see what fell when he did fall: Pourtray him to the Age, which wants him still, And let it see, what will upbraid its Ill. Sow these Relations, with unwearyed Hands; Labour to cultivate our Barren Lands. Reverse this great Mortality of Faith: Enliven Vertues Ashes with your Breath. Dear GOD! which do'st his worth Remand and Crown, Redeem ours from its dark Oppression; Tho Sowr'd by Sin, let it retrieve its loss. Let it heave off its dull inveterate dross. Let it so sparkle forth, that Papists may Find their Eyes dazled, when they aim at Prey. And may Return to Rome, and there Declare And Curse, HERN'S Last Breath, which Perfum'd our Air. If we dont thus Improve his Loss, e're long You'l hear a Shaftsbury, or Player's gone. All Manhood will renounce our Land, and then, Owls, Dragons, Satyrs, will make it their Scene: You do beat off your Guards, your hands disown, And your selves Prostrate to Destruction. You Bind your selves, and on the Altar lay Your Rights, and Importune the Fatal day, Clearing before-hand him that shall you slay Who then takes up the Standard which HERN bore, To face outragious Vices Swelling Power? If all that can't blame HERN'S Life would agree To follow it, this present Age would see The Dirt clear'd, the next wonder at the stream's Purity: How great a Beauty will our Land put on, Would't not forstal the Conflagration? FINIS.
