F2031 99887148 181861
The Fox too Cunning for the Lyon. OR, The Foxes feast, wherein is exprest Many a witty but most true jest, Both old and young of it take a view, And by experience you'l say it's true. To the Tune of, the Three Cheators. A Den of Foxes on a day Met together as men say, Where they used to frequent, Into a hole then straight they went; Thus one unto the other said, the Foxes wills shall be obey'd. Where a Counsell they did hold Scorning for to be controul'd; One more cunning then the rest In a Robe himself then drest; Then give ear and understand there's many Foxes in this Land. One Robed like a Fryer some say, Did imitate to Preach and Pray Vnto the Géece like Nuns attired, For his heart by them was fired, Beloved sister then he said, draw near to me be not afraid. And although I am not tall I have longing bowells for you all. If they were Nuns he lov'd them dear But they were Géece it doth appear: He did seduce them by a wild, and every one of them beguil'd, A mighty feast they then did hold, Of hollow fouls as I was told; And then went to the Lyons Cave Dearly longing that to have A cunning plot by them was laid, which made the Lyon sore affraid. And by their subtlety (as then) They forc't the Lyon from his den. Then by their subtlety and strength, The Lyon then intrapt at length: Then cruelly they did him slay to have his den therein to play. The young Lyons then did flye, (Not daring for to stay thereby) To séeke more Lyons in a Land The Foxes strength for to withstand; And intending to pursue, are returning with their crew. One Fox more subtle then the rest, Stood strutting up and did protest, That he and his young ones then Would have the dreadfull Lyons den, With one consent perforce (they said) this Foxes will must be obey'd, The Second Part to the same Tune. ANd whilst within that he did stay He frighted all the rest away, The greedy Fox with Price of gore, Did feed on Plate and silver ore: But having fed beyond his strength He fell sick and dy'd at length. The firighted Foxes then return'd But for the other never mourn'd, They drove the young whelp out of his den And possest themselves agen Of their former playing place, To the dead Foxes much disgrace. There was another Fox beside That in his tail did take such pride, So cruelly was he bent then, He fed upon poor wounded men; And now he's gone as I hear tell To fright the Devill out of Hell. Another he had gain'd such power That he held a mighty Tower, That no one durst him withstand, Of such power was his command, But the rest would not obey, But forc't him for to run away. The was a fair kept in the West, And in a Booth they kept a feast, The Foxes hearing of such cheer Put the feasters in such fear, That for fear they ran away, And the Foxes had a gallant prey▪ From the North came such a wind The Foxes fear'd their tayls behind, They sent one then with all speed To beat them back if there be néed: Afterwards they set him free, For of their Rump he must not be. Another Fox had but one eye, After him went a Hue and cry, 'Cause out of sight and under shade, He did use the Cobling trade: For killing many I have heard, He was hang'd up in Pauls Churchyard Of Foxes we no number know, Because that they are Lambs in show. You that hunt Foxes have a care, Least that it do your health impare, And of late to mind I call, I caught a Fox that made me fall. London, Printed for Charles Tyus on London Bidge.
