h2590 99887718 183376
The honest Tradesmans Honour Vindicated. OR, The Bragadocia quel'd, As in this Ditty out is held, OR, A merry Dialogue between a Swash Blade And an Artist of London to vindicate trade: With merry jibes, jears and frumps, To drive melancholly men out of their dumps, Pend to make them merry when Melancholly doth possess the brain. The tune is, General Monk was a Noble man, &c. Gentleman. I Am a gallant Blade indeed, and gay Apparel wear, A fig for Trade and a crown for a Maid, and a fart for sorrow and care: I am a Iovial Gentleman I love Sport and Recreation, Though I have neither House nor Land, I keep my self in good fashion, Tradesman. Some Gentlemens care is a Lass in his lap whil'st he at a Tradesman is flowting, Dol with a dishclout hath painted her face, and scorns with her hands to be working: She thought to be call'd high in name, no less than a Lady I wish. She decked her self in silk and in satten, yet she's but an ugly Puss. Gentleman. Alass good Sir when did you come from the Cities labouring trade, Look back again now towards home, and see what for you is made, Your wife for you has made a Crown, a gallant fair pair of Horns, Whilst you are here in our Country with one that your Calling scorns. Tradesman. It comes into my memory sir now you talk of scorning, Do you remember the Oyster Wench you met with one Munday morning, When she was in her silver lace'd Gown oh then you began to woe her, But when she cry'd Oysters in the town you scorn'd as much to know her. Gentleman. We Gentlemen live merry lives, you but Mecannicks are sir, Therefore to us you must make known when ever we do come sir; You Tradesmen unto it are tyde, you must work hard for mony, Whilst merrily abroad we ride, to hunt the Fox and Coney. Tradesman. Now that you talk of hunting sir, one thing comes in my mind, You nothing have to doe but hunt therefore it comes by kind, A hind I do remember well you lately had in chase, Her belly high begins to swell, and you absent the place.
The second Part, to the same Tune. Gentleman. YOu Tradesman at your work do moyl, whilst we to mirth incline sir: But we do scorn so much to toyle, except it be at the wine Sir: You tradesmen have great rents to pay for that we take no care, We rant and rore it night and day we spend and never spare. Tradesman. Now that you talk of Rents good sir. of Musick and of wine. To pay your debts do not defer, to your Landlady so fine, Her Daughter Dol is in great fear, she shall not see your face, You have left her to shed many a Tear and reap your sown disgrace. Gentleman. If into the Country we but ride, out ten miles from the City, No sooner have they our face spy'd, but this will be their Ditty, Your worships welcome to the town, pray sir what will you have? Thus are we known of every Clown, and of each Fool and Knave Tradesman Sir now you talk of Fools and Knaves, of Country men and Clowns, And of true dealing honest men, that dwell in country Towns, Were't not for them full well I know, long we could not live hear, They toyl to Plow, to Reap and Sow, to feed's with Bread, Béef, and Beer. Gentleman. Sir this I grant for to be true, that we by them are fed; No company I'le keep with you for I am better bread: Seest thou my Rapier by my side, A broad Hat and long curl'd Hair, My Breeches at the knees so wide that they would make four pair. Tradesman. Sir, if for your Rapier you had paid, your Cutler would not frown, Nor your Bever-maker have been afraid of your riding out of Town. Your Taylor he lamenteth still. for a truth I heard it said Oft viewing of his long Bill, which you have left unpaid. Gentleman. Sir, for this present I will rest. and will no more contend, I do protest that man is blest that is the Tradesmans friend, You work and sing all care away, and drink Ale, Beer, and Wine, Whil'st Getlemen do now and then with great Duke Hmmphrey Dine. Tradesman. Good God preserve our Royal King the Yrogeny defend, With the rest of the Royal Off-spring from those that would contend: And God so bless the Parliament that they good Laws may make, Our future dangers to prevent, and thus my leave I take. Finis,
