L37 99886877 181382
A POEM ROYAL TO THE Sacred Maiesty of CHARLES the II. King of Great Britain. AND THE Illustrious Donna CATHARINA His Incomparable CONSORT. By J. L. Esq COnfusion, with grey Winter's snow's dis∣solv'd, Rebellion's ice (that so long time involv'd Our Loyal hearts, chilling the noble Blood That once so vig'rously that Frost with∣stood) Thaw'd by the *Gen. Monk Northern Star; the glor'ous Spring To th' Worlds great wonder did produce a King; Great CHARLES that had so long conceal'd his rays Behind the angry Clouds, he now displays His splendid lustre, and the Flow'ry May Must ever sacred be for that glad Day; The god's confirm'd it; and (in spight of Fear) The Sun and Stars more fulgently appear Th' ensuing May; you would have thought our joys Top and top gallant now; what novel toys Shall the next year bring forth? Fortune 'twas deem'd Had play'd the Prod'gal; and Britain seem'd With triumphs forfeited: But Heaven's Decree, Blisse much above our hopes, we 'gain must see A happy May; great Neptune now must bring A glorious tribute to the Oceans King: Proud of the bliss, his countenance he cheers, And learns to smile, his Charr'ot swift he bears To th' Indian shore, searching that Golden Mair, In hopes some precious Carcanet to gain Some Massie Orient Pearl, or Odour ta'ne Out of the Phoenix Nest; but all the store The Ddy's yeilds too small, he must have more: Then tacks about, fair Lisbon Port's his aim; His Sea-Nympths and loud Fame in's ears proclaim The Infania's rare Accomplishments; 'tis she The war'ry God will court for's Majestie. He offers up his Trident-Fork, his Chair, He charms the Seas to calmness, takes the care Of Pilot, and commands his liquid train Of Nymphs and Dolphins to corrant the Main: Whilst Tryton shrilly founds, Syrens are seen Warbling melod'ously to please our Queen. So once the Cyprian Goddess 'bout her Isle Did sail in state; her triumph did beguile The winged hours, and she her self did please With hopes of being Goddess of the Seas. But lead she seen how far our Queen excels Her fam'd Beauty, how the Ocean swells To bear a Gem more worth then all that e're Trusted themselves unto the Sea-god's care, She'd pull her Altars down, for anger die, Or blush her self into deformity. Mild Zepherus softly fill the expanded sails, The ships glide nimbly, favour'd with fresh gales, Th' unwilling Waves divide, amaz'd to see Upon their backs such beaut'ous Majestie, Whilst the proud billows strive o're deck to glide, In hopes unto her Royal foot to slide And steal a kiss; but curb'd by Neptunes frown, They burst with grief, and in tears trickle down. The sporting Fishes leap along the way, Offring themselves for sacrifice in joy. But England envies that the seas so long Should her so much desired bliss prolong. She grows impatient til the Cornish Hills Salute her Royal Fleet; the news soon fills The neighb'ring shires, they 'larm all the Ile, With joy the Rocks at her approach do smile. But Neptune would by no means leave his Charge Till Europe's *D. York. Mars from's care did him enlarges; Commands him to retreat, and vows himself, To set her safely on the happy Earth. No sooner landed, but the Guns roar joy, The Bonfires aud the Bells make Holy-day. Each Loyal heart exalts, the Muses sing A joyful Meeting to our Queen and King. The well-loyn'd Citizens wil drink a health To Royal Cath'rines Nuptils; may their wealth E're ready be for to support her state; And may Great CHARLES protect her from all hate. May all auspicious stars conjoin to grace Their interviews, and at that blessed place (At the first sight) let showres of Arrows flie, And pierce their hearts, sent from each others eye. And may their love-sick souls (to seek a rest At first salute) steal in each others breast: That sacred Hymen may unite those hands, Whose hearts were join'd before in Cupids bands. Then let our Isles with IO sound, the Night Is sacred to our Soveraigns choice delight; May it prove full, e'relasting, may desire Hourly add Fuel to their Nuptial Fire. May both live long, both love, and happy be In Health, Wealth, Peace, and in Prosperitie. And may this Month, great Sir, a Britains Heir From your Imperial Loyns next year prepare A Princely Pledge of your chast Consorts love, Another CHARLES to reign when you're above Inthron'd; but may that change never draw near Till Nestor's Age upon your head you bear: Your Royal Babe grown Man, that we may be Rul'd still by one of your blest Progenie. LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black-spread-Eagle near the West-end of Pauls, 1662.
