N616 99887671 183294
A New delightful Ballad, Called, Debauchery Scared; OR, THE Beggar wench turn'd into a Devil, Together with the Pollicy of Bumpkin; Giving a peasant Account of Commical Passages between a Country Gentle man, and a London Beggar-wench. Tune of, Ladies of London. This may be printed, R. P. A Country Gentleman came up to Town, to taste the delights of the City, Who had to his Servant a jocular Clown, accounted to be very witty: His master one night got drunk as a Rat, and swore he would turn him away Sir, Left he would get him a bit for his Cat, and into his Chamber convey her. Some jolly Dame he was willing to have, and gave to his Bumpkin a Guiney, Who had the wit not to give it, but save the far better part of the money; To find out a Punck, he walkt in the street, and backwards and forwards kept trudging; At last a young beggar wench he did meet, who was in great want of a Lodging: Sweet-heart (said he) if thou'it give thy consent to go home, and lye with my master, I'll give thee half a Crown for thy content, and save thee from any disaster: It being late, she fearing the watch, Besides it was very cold weather; hat they quickly both made up the match, and trudg'd to his master together. Bumpkin was arth, as he homewards did come he gave her a bout by the way Sir; Then to his master he carried her home, who in a dark Chamber lay sir: He bid her be sure let his master not know, by any means she was a muniper, But bid her to rise before day-light, and go, or Ad-swounds he would heartily thump her. Bumpkin his  to the Chamber he led, and then to his Bed look his way sir, She quickly undrest, and gropt into the Bed, and close to the Gentleman lay sir, Eager of Ioy, he gave her a Kiss, and hug'd her with flaming desire: The Gentleman swore that she smell'd so of Cheese he could not indure to lye by her. He bid her get up to a place in the room, where a Bottle stood of Rose-water, And wash her Face to take away the fume, then come into Bed again after; A Bottle of Ink there happen'd to stand, and for the Rose-water she took it, Pouring a spoonful out into her hand, and over her face she did stroak it. Then to their Ioys they eagerly fell, till at last it began to be Light sir, Then looking he thought her the Devil of Hell, and ran out of Bed in a fright sir; Crying, the Devil, the Devil was there, she being affrighted ran after, In a tatter'd old smock, crying where is he where which put all the street in a laughter. Printed for I. Bissel at the Bible and Harp near the Hospital-Gate in West-Smithfield.
