S1195C 53299241 179978
At Edinburgh the twentie day of May 1645. THe Committee of Estates taking to their consideration the traiterous designes of the intestine enemie against this Kingdome, specially the Towne of Dundie, as being a place of very great importance and concernment, and the diverse assaults made bee them thereupon; Together with the resolution and courage of the Inhabitants of the said Towne, in opposing this Enemie; Whereupon hath followed not only the slaugh∣ter of many of the saids Inhabitants of consideerable condition, but also a great part of the biggings of that Towne, with the Cornes and Moveables belonging to the In∣habitants thereof, hath been burnt to ashes; whereby the said Towne (which was one of the chiefe of this Kingdome)is fearefully defaced, and the Inhabitants, most part of them ruined; the Towne it selfe disabled to undergoe these services and bur∣dens for the publick, which formerly they did, and without supply and help, this so steadable a member of the Common-weale, is like to decay. And the Committee of of Estates finding this Kingdome obliged by the mutuall League and Covenant, not onely to be sensible of their sufferings, for this good and common Cause, but also to doe what in them lyes to set up the losses of the said Towne, and to uphold the same from decay; And being confident of the affection and charitie of all good Patriots, and Christians of this Kirk and Kingdome, for advancement of so good a worke, as is the upholding of the said Towne; which hath been a barre to the overflowing outrages of the publick Enemie, and doth still strengthen themselves against the same, in regard the Enmie does not cease, but is rather inraged with de∣sperate spite and malice against the said Towne. Therefore the Lords and others of the Committee of Estates hath recommended, and be the tenor hereof Recommends the condition of the said Towne to the Christian and charitable consideration of all persons of whatsomever rank, qualitie, or degree, in Kirke and Sate within this Kingdome, and to the whole Judicatories, Civill and Ecclesiasticall within the same. Requesting and desiring them, and every one of them to extend such proportion of their liberality and charitie for the reliefe of the Inhabitants of the said Towne, as the importance of the Cause requires. And the saids Lords hath entrusted the collection of this contribution and benevolence to such persons as shall be nominate and authorized bee the Provest, Baillies and Councell of Dundie. Giving, granting, and committing unto them full power and commission to deale and travell with the whole Noble∣men, Barons, and Gentlemen, Synods, Presbyteries and Sessions of Kirks, Burrows townes and Villages and all others his Majesties subjects to Burgh and Land, anent the benevolence and voluntarie contribution to be given for the supply of the said Burgh. Which Commissioners shall have a book delivered to them be the Clerk of the Committe, whereof every leafe shall be marked be him. And wherein the Committee requests the Contributers to insert their contribu∣tions. And if any by flouth or negligence omitte to doe the same, that the Commissioners insert themselves, and report their diligence herein, with their books to the Committee upon the  day of  To the in∣tent they may know what summes are collected and how the same shall be imployed. And the saids Commissioners shall give their great and solemne oath at the reporting of their diligence and books, that they have not omitted nor left out of the saids books, any of the persons contributers nor summes contributed, Requesting hereby the Mo∣derators of Synods and Presbyteries to give direction to the Ministers of their severall Parishes to stirre up their Parishoners to put to their helping hand to this so important and necessarie a bussinesse. This Commission to indure for the space of a yeare after the date hereof. And the Committee declares, that what shall be gotten for sup∣plie of the said Burgh, be vertue of this Commission, shall bee accounted in part of payment of their losse, for tryall whereof, commission is granted. Extractum Per me. Arch: Primerose Cler: Commiss. Par.
