S1558 52529229 178957
A PROCLAMATION, Adjourning the Parliament from the sixth day of April, to the eighteenth of the said Month 1693. WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great-Britain, France and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith: To Our Lyon King at Arms, and His Brethren Heraulds, Macers of Our privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially Constitute, Greeting. For∣asmuch as; We with the Advice of the Lords of Our privy Council, did by Our Proclamation of the Date the Twenty fifth day of February last by-past, Ad∣journ the current Parliament of this Our antient Kingdom of Scotland, from the First day of this instant Month of March, to the Sixth day of April next to come. And whereas we are informed, that such frequent Adjournments, have begot an Opinion, that Our Parliament is not to Meet, which may make the Members more slow to come at the time after appointed: Therefore a timeous and positive Advertisement is necessary: And now in regard the present State of Our Affairs in this Our antient Kingdom, does require, that Our said Parliament should Meet and Conveen at, and upon the Eighteenth day of the said Month of April next to come: We with Advice of the Lords of Our privy Council, do hereby Ad∣journ Our said current Parliament, from the said Sixth day of April next, to the Eighteenth day of the same Month, at which time We are resolved Our Parlia∣ment shall Meet; Hereby Requiring all the Members of Our Parliament, to give Attendance at Edinburgh precisely on the said Day, in the accustomed Manner, and under the Certifications contained in the several Acts of Parliament. And to the effect new Members may be Elected for serving as Commissioners in the said Parliament for Shires and Burghs, where these formerly Elected and Serving in this Our current Parliament are deceased, We with Advice foresaid, Require the Sheriffs of the Shires, and Stewarts of the Stewartries or their respective Clerks where there are no Sheriffs or Stewarts, Magistrats and Council of Burghs Royal where the Commissioners formerly serving for them are deceased, to Pro∣ceed and make Election and Choice of other Commissioners, in the room and place of these deceased, conform to the Acts of Parliament made thereanent, and make due Intimation for Electing the saids Members in manner therein-mentioned, who are likewise (when elected) hereby required to attend the said Day. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-cross of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-crosses of the whole Head-Burghs of the several Shires of this Kingdom, and there in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make Publica∣tion of the said Adjournment of Our current Parliament of this Our antient Kingdom, from the said Sixth Day of April next, to the said Eighteenth Day of the same Month, And Ordains these Presents to be Printed. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Twenty Seventh Day of March. And of Our Reign the Fourth Year 1693. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. In Supplementum Signeti. GILB. ELIOT, Cls Sti. Concilii. GOD save King William and Queen Mary, Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most Ex∣cellent Majesties, 1693.
