T2499A 53981588 180398
A True and Impartial Relation of a Wonderful Apparition that Happen'd in the Royal Camp in Flanders, the begin∣ning of this Instant September 1692. concerning King William. In a Letttr to a Gentleman in London, from his Friend, a Captain in the King's Camp. LICENSED, September 27. 1692. E. B. IT is not (I presume) unknown to most, of the Dismal Earthquake that happen'd at Brussels, and other places in Flanders, much about the same time there was one univer∣sally felt here: And having received a Letter lately from thence, from a very worthy Friend of mine, (whose Name, not having his permission to reveal, I hope you will not think the worse of the Truth of the matter here related, for my concealing it), who is a Captain in Collonel Stapleton's Regiment, and himself at his return, will, I durst say, avouch the same: He not only gives some Account of that Earthquake, but of things that seem as strange as (I believe, you will find at his Majesty's Return, to be) true; which is concerning his Sacred Majesty King William: And, Gentle Reader, I will no longer detain your patience, but take it as it came to me in the true Copy thereof, viz. SIR, ABout ten days since, one Hussey, a Soldier in my Company, standing Centry about One of the Clock in the Morning, at my Colonel Stapleton's Tent door, there appeared a Spirit to him, viz. A tall Gentleman-like Person, in a Camlet Coat, and short Dark Peruke, mounted upon a fine Dapple-gray Horse; he rushed by Hussey, who bid him stand; the Spirit reply'd several times in a shrill Tone, The King, the King is to be made away, if care be not speedilly taken; or to that purpose; Hussey asked by whom? upon which another Spirit ap∣peared to him on Foot, having the appearance of a stern Black man, full grown, and pretty tall, having on a Blew Campaign Coat, with a Cape, and Black Campaign Peruke, and a Black Hat laced with Silver Lace, and a Silver-hilted Sword; the first Spirit said, That is the Man, take good notice of him, which he did; and then the last Spirit vanished: And Hussey askt the first Spirit, who still was on Horseback, Whether that Person did belong to the Army? the Spirit replied, He was daily busling about the Court, & then the first Spirit vanished, Hussey writ a Relation of this under his hand (being seemingly very well in his Senses), and offered to me upon his revealing it to me, to swear to the truth of it. After which he saw the real Person riding with the King, which appeared to him on foot; and Hussey would have seized on him, but could not come near enough to him at that time, Hussey being on foot, but waited an op∣portunity to do it, some other time, and revealed it at the same time. But at one of the Clock the very next morning after, standing Centry near the same place again, the first Spirit that ap∣peared to him on Horseback before, appeared to him on foot, and with an Angry Countenance said, Now the Business is prevented, no thanks to you; why did not you do your Duty yesterday and with that the Spirit hit him a blow on the back, which hath confined him to the Trench three of four days; and the Spirit said, He is gone back to the French, but was last night shot in the Guts by an Out-Centry of theirs: And it is asserted by a Deserter that came over to us that Night, That such a Man so habited, & as related by the Spirit, was so shot by them, & hath asser∣ted it: Believe it as you please. Hussey is positive in the matter, and I think good to give you a Character of him my self, who I have often sounded about this Business, and neither Threats of Punishment, or Promises of Reward, can make him recant; but he stands to the Truth of what I have here written from his mouth; And I think fit to add so much of my own know∣ledge of him, That ever since I have known him under my Command, he hath behaved him, self with a great deal of Faithfulness, Courage, and Loyalty, diligent in His Duties, observ∣ing the Commands of his Officers, and chearfully obeying them as a good Soldier ought to do; and a Fellow given neither to Melancholly, nor to much mirth, but a harmless good-natured Fellow as any I have in my Company. So I leave you to judge of the matter, which to me is worth the taking notice of; and to you I question not but it will be the same. From the Camp of  Instant. English Stile. This happen'd at the Imperial Camp, a League beyond Valko∣way. I am Your Loving Friend. POSTSCRIPT. Sir, WE have had a great Earthquake here at Brussels last Week, and some Houses are over thrown thereby: There was little  occasioned by it in our Camp; but the shake be∣ing great at His Majesty's Lodging they run so fast out of the Door, that they run over the Gen∣tries; and one of them had three of his Teeth beat out, and some more bruised. Edinburgh, Re-printed in the Year 1692.
