Y124 99884792 183644
THE Young-Mans Repentance, OR, The sorrowful Sinners Lamentation; Being the last Expressions of a Young-man, who having spent all his time in Pleasure and Jollitry, was seriously sorrowful when he came to lye upon his Death-bed, mourning for his mis-spent time, and advising all Young-Men to be mindful of their latter end. Tune is, Aim not too high. This may be Printed, R. P. YOu that have spent your time in wickedness, Now mind the dying words I shall express; Do not, like me, abuse your precious time, Nor waste one moment when you'r in your prime. And do not promise to repent to Morow, Least e're it comes you'r overtook with sorrow; Some are struck dead, you very well do know, How can you tell but your case may be so. See how I languish on my Dying-Bed, To think upon what I have done or sed; But let me now to you a Warning be, Sin to forsake, and shun iniquity. Frequent the Church, to which I once was strange But now repent it, since I now must change This wicked world, and for my Grave prepare, To be where blest, or cursed People are. The sins that once were pleasant unto me, To my poor Soul sad Torments now they be; But he that did his Blood for sinners spill, I hope he will have Mercy on me still. His Mercies see by no means you abuse, For Conscience at the last will you accuse For your misdeeds, and in your Face will flye And sting your souls when you shall come to dye. To others do, as you would be done by, This Reason is, and Iustice certainly, And pleasant is our Creators sight, For he in Iustice always takes delight.
Bad Company see you avoid and shun, Thousands thereby have surely been undone, And brought themselves to their untimely ends, To the great grief and sorrow of their Friends. Lewd Womn by no means do you come near, Least for your pleasure you do pay full dear; That is the Fountain of all Mischief, and Brigs shame and sorrow to our Native Land. But Gods commands obey in evey thing, Amongst the Saints then shall you praises sing; Your Souls be happy when your bodies dye, And you shall live with Christ eternally. But now I'm almost ready to depart, The guilt of Sin doth pierce my tender heart; I tremble when I think upon the bar Where God and his dear Son the Iudges are. And if my Saviour do not stand my friend, On whom my faith and hopes do both depend, My case will prove but bad and I shall be Banisht his presence to Eternity. Amongst the wicked ones I shall remain, In Flames to burn, and feel immortal pain; Blessed God forgive my sins, that I Be freed from pains that last Eternally. O let thy sufferings for my sins suffce, And pardon all my gross iniquities; That after Death my Soul may flye to thee, And with thy Saints for ever blessed be. Thy Mercies do in number far exceed The sins which make my dying heart to bleed: And therein lies the very bounds and scope, That thou wilt grant me that for which I hope. My fainting spirits now I recommend, Into thy hands for now my life must end, And having gained pardon for my sin, When life doth end, my joys will then begin. All you that read these Lines when I am dead, Pray ponder well the words that I have sed; For without doubt you'l find them to be true, And so I bid this sinful World adieu. FINIS.
