982.5 S125869 [ocm]60449081 181179
A wonderfull and straunge newes, which happened in the Coun∣tye of Suffolke, and Essex, the first of Fe∣bruary, beeing Fryday, where it rayned Wheat, the space of vi. or vii. miles compas: a notable example to put vs in remembraunce of the iudgements of God, and a preparatiue, sent to moue vs to speedy repentance. Written by William Aue∣rell, student in Di∣uinitie. Ecclesiasticus. 11. The workes of the Lord are wonderfull and glo∣rious, secrete and vnknowne are his woorkes among men. Jmprinted at London, for Edwarde White, dwelling at the little North doore of Paules church, at the signe of the Gunne. 1583.
Straunge nevves out of Suffolke. IT hath séemed good in the eyes of our God (Christi∣an Reader, no cause com∣pelling but his mercie,) al∣wayes to admonishe and warne before hande, by some extraordi∣narie euent, of the punishmentes and plagues that he will send for sinne, and so great is his loue towardes mankind, whom he hath made, that when he per∣ceiueth his image to be defaced in mans soule, he will not yet strike generally, till he haue warned vs vniuersally, so that before the stroke of his iudgements, he alwaies sendes the messengers of his mercies, which bursting out through ve∣hemencie of his looue, doth put vs in mind of ye waight of his wrath, & albeit yt ye heartes of the wicked are hardened, so yt no iudgement will make them quake, no maruailes amaze them, no wonders wine them, no myracles mooue them, nor mercyes amende them, for that they are of the nature of the stone, which al∣beit it be wet without and séemeth ne∣uer so moyst, yet is it within nothing lesse then harde and drie, therefore the
Lorde giueth them ouer to their lustes, so that they are brambles of the desert, tares of the fielde, chaffe of the Corne, and stubble for the fire, who whyle they heape sinne vpon sinne, and draw sinne together with cart-ropes, who while they multiplie one mischiefe on another gréeue the spirit of God, treade downe the bloud of his Testament, and drinke vp iniquitie like water, who while they eate vp the poore, oppresse the néedie, de∣fraude the simple, and gnawe in sunder the heartes of the innocent, treasure vp vengeaunce for themselues against the day of wrath, to these therefore are the iudgements of God sent to make them without excuse, but to the godly are they giuen for their better amendment, who while they beholde the woorkes of the Lorde wrought onely to this ende, that they should cast off the workes of dark∣nesse, and cloath themselues with the louely garments of light, yt they shoulde mortifie the déedes of the flesh, and liue againe to the libertie of the spirit, that they should put of the olde man with his concupiscences, and put on the new man
Christ Iesus with his vertues, their conuersion should tend to his glorie and their saluation to his endlesse mercye. Philip Melancthon recordeth in his Latine Chronicle, that before the deua∣station of Italie there were séene manye prodigious and woonderfull things, as armed men fighting in the ayre, bloud to flowe out of the earth and to breake out of the harde walles, with manye other wunders which threatened great calamities. Before King Philip inuaded Greece the heauens appeared all bloudie. And if we may credite probable Au∣thors, when Marcus Acilius and C. Por∣tius were Consuls, the Elements ray∣ned mylke, with bloud, and L. Volum∣nius and Ser. Sulpitius being Consuls, of Rome, it rayned fleshe. Also in Luca∣nia a Countrie belonging to Naples, be∣twéene Fuel, and Calaber, before Luci∣cius Crassus was slaine of the Parthians, it rayned corne, L. Paulus and C. Mar∣cellus beyng Consuls, it rayned Wooll, and at that time also hard burned Tyle stones fell downe from heauen.
Before the Warres in Denmarke, were heard the noise and sound of trum∣pets from the skies. The yéere wherein Vespasian de∣stroyed Ierusalem, a starre appeared in heauen in the figure of a sworde, han∣ging ouer the Citie, Wagons appea∣red wandring and running through the regions of heauen, and armed men were séene fighting in the Cloudes. Pope Leo the seuenth, being By∣shop of Rome, the Sunne for certayne dayes séemed al bloody, after which ther followed a greeuous pestilence. In the yeare of our Lorde 1348. Charles the fourth béeing Emperour, certaine Feastes, fell from heauen, the corruption and stinke whereof brought a sorrowfull plague. In the yeare of our Lorde 1356 Ca∣lixtus the 3 béeing Bishop of Rome, among the Sabynes, was brought foorth a calfe hauing but two féete, at which tyme in Rome ouer the gate of Venus It rayned bloode, and the same tyme did it raine flesh in Lyguria. Henrie the first béeing Emperour, in the fieldes of Hemilianus and Flaminius
in Italie, It rained bloode in the Ides of Iune. Innumerable examples, and most straunge wonders could I recite which haue happened in times past among our elders, which would aske a large scope, and open too wide afeelde for me to wan∣der in, which albeit they are reported of credible Authors, yet for that they would séeme rather incredible then pro∣bable to the common sorte, I omitte them, and will drawe to those which we all doe stedfastlie beléeue, and yet in their effectes are farre more strange. Doe we not reade how Arons rodde changed into a Serpent, Exodus. 7. which deuoured vp all the roddes of the charmers of E∣gypt, and of the 10. wonderfull plagues that God sent vpon Pharo & his people. The Children of Israell murmured against God, Exodus. 16. Nombers. 11 and he fedde them with quailes from heauen at euen, and filled them with bread of Man in the morning, they grudged for water, and the Lorde burst the rockes to giue them drinke, so he fedde their hunger with flesh., and quenched their thyrst with water, hée deuided the redde Sea so that they went
through as on drye lande, and closed the waters vpon their enimies like a wall. Corah, Dathan & Abiram, murmured against Moses, and the Lord sent a won∣derfull miracle vpon them, the fast and solid earth opened her bowels, and swal∣lowed them vp, with their families their goodes and all the men that were with Corah, so they went downe into the pit aliue, the earth couered them, and they perished from the congrega∣tion. In the dayes of Iosuah Iosua. 4. the Lorde, shewed wonders vnto Israell for he led them through the waters of Iordan as he dyd in the dayes of Moses through the red & salte Sea, so that when ye feete of the Préestes that bare the Arke of the couenaunt stayed in the waters of Ior∣dane, they weare cut of, and stoode still on a heape, and as soone as the Préests féete weare set on the drie lande, the waters of Iordane returned vnto their place, and flowed ouer all the banckes thereof as they did before. Sundry and manifolde are the exam∣ples of wonders set down or our view in the holy scriptures, in the same booke Iosua. 10
of Iosuah wée reade that when the fiue King, Adoni, Zedek, Hoham, Piram, Ia∣pia and Debir, made warre vpon Gibe∣on, the Lorde discomfited them and threwe downe great stones from hea∣uen, vpon them, so that more dyed with the haile stones then dyed by the swords of the children of Israell, the Sunne stood still in Gibeon, and the moone in the val¦ley of Aialon, tyll the children of Israell weare auenged of their enimies, a hole day stoode ye sonne still in the middest of heauen, and hasted not to goe downe. The lyke we reade of, in ye Historie of Hezekiah, and in bréefe the whole booke of God is a spectacle of his wonders, a glasse of examples, and a mirror of hys miracles, set downe by his spirite for our instructiones, looke through the old Testament, and turne ouer the new, sée if they bée not bothe farsed with won∣ders, and stored with Miracles, where∣fore are they written but for our lear∣ninge? Wherefore weare they don but for our comfort, Quaecunque scripta sunt, ad nostram doctrinam scripta sunt, they weare not onely wrought for olde Is∣raell, but also for vs the redéemed and
chosen people, to teache vs to beware by their daungers, who not regar∣ding the workes of the Lord, did har∣den their hearts against his iudgments: who contemninge the mercies of God in their deliueraūce, were payed home with the terror of his vengaunce, but are there not some Epicures amonge vs that liuinge at their luste, thinke these thinges to bée shaddowes: are there not some Libertines amonge vs, that per∣swade themselues that these thinges be∣ing past, pertaine not to them, and are there not some hard harted Nullafide∣ans, that: scarsly beléeue these thinges, for that they saye they are, Obliterata vetust∣tate: therefore that they might be with∣out excuse, beholde the arme of the Lord is not shortned, nor his power is not a∣bated, but beinge. Semper et vbique idem, he leaues the wonders past, and prickes vs forward with thinges present, he leaueth forraine reportes, and shewes his workes at home, he comes now to our townes, and knockes at the gates of our Citties. O happy wée, if wée take him, O cursed wée, if wée forsake him:
the Lorde hath heard the cryes of hys ministers, soundinge his Gospell, long time amonge vs, but their voices are not harde, nor hys woorde winnes no re∣garde: and therefore séeinge our stonye hartes wyll not waxe softe with the sounde of his Gospell, he prooues if they will melt with the fire of his mira∣cles. It is not longe sythence God sha∣ked the earth in hys anger, when hee was mooued, the earth quaked, and the very foundacions thereof tottered, thinges sencelesse can tremble at Gods iudgementes, but sinful men feare not his furies, for a short tyme hath worne out the remembraunce of so great a wonder: and as that, so all others doo laste wyth vs but nine da∣yes. That Godlye exhortation of Maister Fielde, to the obseruations of the Sabboth, is almoste alreadye forgotten, and that heauie iudgement of Parris garden, béeginnes to flyppe out of remembraunce, for men beginne to flocke theither agayne,
accounting the speciall warning of our GOD, to bée some sodayne accident, that happened rather by chaunce then by choyse, and because they will be as∣sured to scape the daunger of falling, they make account to set fast footing on the grounde as though the earth were not the Lordes and all that is therein, and as though the Lorde can not open the earth to swallowe the despysers of his worde. We haue yet freshe in our remem∣braunce, the gréeuous punishment of M. Brustar, but why do I call him master that being olde was a filthy slaue to his lustes, & the horrible death of his miniō louelie Lais, that loathing labour, liued by luring, but euen as Alcibiades the Athenian was slaine in the filthie acte of his pleasure with his harlot Tyman∣dra, and as Plutarche and Valerius ma∣keth mention vncertaine how: euen so the Lorde strooke this old Lecher with his fine Flora, that both of them were stubble for the fire, leauing the maner of the iudgement, to iudge by the matter that remained, and surely as wonder∣full
a iudgement as euer hath hapned and as harde to be scanned by the de∣uise of mannes witte, that so small a fyre as a lyttle panne of coales halfe wasted, should consume almost the one, and also burne the other to death, but sure a right and iust iudgement that one fierie element beyng visible, shoulde consume another vnuisible as the bur∣ning fire to consume ye flaming luste, for such is the nature of lust, & rightly and fitlye may the heart of a lustfull lecher bee compared to the stone Albestes, that beeyng once on fire, is neuer quenched, nor the lustfull hearte of an olde crooked and consumed adulterer tyll death ne∣uer wasted, but they had their iudge∣ment, for our ensample, and wee may by there perill make our present profite. GOD graunt we may, least a spéedie threatened punishment come vppon vs. This warning was not giuen when the Lorde by a wonderfull worke, dyd shewe his omnipotencie in other places for on Friday the first of this present moneth of Februarie, in the countie of Suffolke at Ipswich, Storcknayland,
Hadley, and manye other places: the Lorde shewed the power of his hand in this straunge and woonderfull effect. Men ryding by the way, as it is credi∣bly reported, felte in a Snowe as it were in a small drizling, a heauier fall of matter then in snowing is accusto∣med to be, and féeling the same to pat somewhat hardly vpon them, by better aduisment perceyued it to bee a contra∣rie matter, and therefore taking of it vp in their handes, they founde that it was Wheate, the straungenesse hereof, did amaze many, who doubting it was some deceipt & coloured deuise, did not greatly beléeue the same, till comming into the townes and villages, and bru∣ting ye report thereof, it caused ye towns∣men and dwellers, to make searche in their Gardens, for as much as they knew that if any such thing fell, it wold there be presently found, neyther could it bee séene in the highe waies, foras∣much as it rayned in so thyn & small an order, yt the moisture & wet, with ye slab∣binesse of the way, did take away the knowledge thereof. But in Gardens
and Closes and by Yardes was founde greate aboundance thereof: there was (at the writyng hereof) in Toune, one Mai∣ster Willyam Geffreies Clothier, acre∣dible man and dwellyng in Ipswhich, who founde of the same in his Garden, and brought thereof to London: and liyng at the George in Lumbardstreate, gaue therof to the Host named Maister Ginue, and to other Gentlemen that desired the same of hym, besides diuers other honest and credible persones dwellyng in that Countie, which lodged at the same place, and faithfully reported the same. Now, as touchyng the maner and likenesse there∣of, it did rightly resemble our common Wheate, sauyng that it was of a softer substaunce, and looked somewhat gree∣ner, otherwise like vnto our Wheate in all respectes: There are that did bite and eate thereof, who doe affirme that it hath a more mealier inwarde substaunce then our Wheate hath, and whiter also with in: and it is reported, that some haue ba∣ked thereof, but whether that be so or no, it is not greatly material, onely the thing is straunge, that any suche substaunce
should raine from the Heauens: but least some should obiect that it might be scatte∣red by the handes of some, in some cer∣taine places. It is assuredly saied that it rained not onely in some one perticuler Toune, but sixe or seuen miles compasse: naie some saie that it was founde also in Essex and other places: neither could it be scattered by men, either by negligence or pretended purpose, for as muche as it was founde in many mens Gardens and Backsides, whereas none could come to plaie any suche pageaunt. This gentle Reader haue I heard tolde of those men them selues inhabityng that Countrey, whereof some substanciall and credible haue gathered and brought to this towne (for triall thereof) of the graine: Lett vs not therefore bee to curious in searchyng out the naturall cause hereof, for were Arictottle aliue with all the Philoso∣phers of the world, thei could not searche out the cause thereof, neither is there any cause to bee founde, but the infringible, will and power of our God, who is Cau∣sa causarum, and causa sine qua non, he it is that is the efficient cause thereof, the
finall cause and ende wherefore he sendeth the same is our repentaunce, that wee be∣holdyng his Omnipotencie, might turne from sinne speedily, conuert to hym haste∣ly, laie holde of his mercie, and by our godly life set forth his glorie: for God, se∣yng his worde daiely preached, his bene∣fites and graces receiued: our peace, wealth, and quiett encreased, and yet our liues no whit amended, beginneth to shoote out the arrowes of his anger, out of the bowe of his iudgement and displea∣sure: and seyng we regarde not his word, he will teache vs by wonders: Sith wee despise the inuisible grace of his Sacra∣mentes, he wil sende vs the visible signes of his plagues and punishmentes: I can not, neither wee maie not enter into the counselles of the Lorde, to saie that this or that will happen or succeede thereof: But surely Marcellus the Heathen man could saie: Prodigia esse deorum iras vel minas: that straunge euents are either the anger or threatnynges of the Gods. And it hath beene approued in all ages, that after suche extraordinarie and por∣tentuous tokens, haue followed straunge
and terrible accidentes, as is plainly to be proued by many and sundry Histories: for thei haue been the forerunners of pla∣gues, of Warres, of Famines, of the death of Princes, of the alteration of sta∣tes, and of innumerable mischeefes, all whiche lett vs leaue to the Lorde at his pleasure, and seeke to preuent them by repentaunce and prayer: Let vs leaue the secrete vnderstandyng thereof to hym, who maketh no man of his counsell: and for so muche as we can not comprehende the same, within the compasse of our ca∣pacities. As Sainct Augustine saieth: Augustin. Dicamus deum aliquid posse, quod nos fateamur inuestigare non posse, in re∣bus enim mirabilibus tota ratio faciendi, est potentia facientis: Let vs graunt that God can doe somethyng, whiche we con∣fesse we can not searche out: For in thyn∣ges that are wonderfull, the whole ma∣ner to doe the same, is the power of the doyng thereof. For as Gregory saieth: Gregory in hom. 1. Rationem de occulto dei consilio quae∣rere, nihil aliud est, quam contra eius cō∣filium superbire: To seeke a reasone of the secrete counsell of God, is no other
thyng then to resist his counsell: And as the same Father saith in the same booke: The miracles of God, thei maie be con∣sidered by studie, but not searched by vn∣derstandyng: And therefore we must saie with the Prophett Dauid. This is the Lords doyng and it is wonderfull in our eyes. For whiche cause Christian Bre∣thren, seyng the Lorde hath by his greate wisedome and power, declared himself in this wonderful sorte vnto vs, and hath as it were, shaken the sworde in his displea∣sure, to signifie vnto vs the waight of his anger. Seyng also wee knowe the cause thereof to bee our sinnes, whiche because thei are outragious, haue therefore incen∣sed the wrath of our GOD: and conside∣ring likewise, that wee knowe the mea∣nes and waies to preuent the wrathe and indignation of God: namely by our re∣pentaunce, by a sorrowe vnfained, a faith assured, with a full purpose of a life amen∣mended: Let vs not slacke to turne to the Lorde, while he now turneth vnto vs: let vs not be slow to seeke him while he may be founde, for if we knowe our Maisters will and dooe it not, wee shall bee beaten with
many stripes. Let it not be saied of vs as it hath beene of the Athenians: among whom when a certaine olde man came in to their Theater, and none of the Citi∣zens would rise and giue hym honour, (albeit, the reuerence of age was confir∣med among them by lawe) he came by chaunce by the Ambassadors of Lacede∣mon, who also came thether to beholde, who perceiuyng the olde man because of his graie heares, rose vp and gaue hym rome: whiche when the Athanians be∣helde, with a great shoote thei praised the deede, to whō one of the Lacedemonians saied: Athenienses quid fit rectum sciunt at illud facere ex toto negligunt: The A∣thenians know what is meete to doe, but thei wholy neglect to doe the same. Euen so Mutato nomine de nobis fabula nara∣tur: Christians knowe what is meete to doe, but thei wholy neglecte to dooe the same. Albertus telleth of certaine Birdes that albeit, thei haue wynges yet thei can not flye; because thei want eyes, and ther∣fore thei rather creepe and hopp vpon the earth then flye any whit at all: and to such maie wee bee compared: For albeit wee
haue the wynges of knowledge, yet wee lacke the eyes of faith: and therfore when wee shoulde flye with our myndes and thoughtes to heauen, for want of faithe, our hartes creepe vppon the yearth, and are settled on yearthly thynges: But as Hierome saieth: Hie. ad deme∣triadem. Non sufficit mandata dei memoriter scire, & opere obliuisci. It is not sufficient to knowe perfectlie the Commaundementes of GOD, and by our woorkes to showe wee haue for∣gotten them: whiche whether we haue or not, is manifest by the wofull spectakle of our sorrowfull daies: in whiche sinne is so setled, and growne to suche ripenesse, that it waiteth but for the sickell of the Lords iudgements. Looke on our pride? are not our men trickt like Monsters, and our women prickt like Players? Bee not the bellies of men like bolsters, and their but∣tockes made like Butterflyes? Are not our women chaunged into the shape of men? how are their heare curld like Ruf∣fianes, and their garmentes made like Maskers? what iettyng and ioggyng, what shoueyng & shouldryng, what nice∣nesse in treading, what iestures in going,
what coiyng in countenaunce, what trife∣lyng in talking: and to be shorte, how are maners corrupted, and all good orders subuerted: Laie this to the touchstone of Gods worde, and see how it agreeth: alas it makes the godly to grone, although the vngracious feele no greefe. Leaue this and looke vppon our couetousnesse, what pittie is there of the poore, and what re∣leefe of many needie: how are rentes rai∣sed, Incombes leueyed, Leases corrup∣ted, Bonds and their forfeites sued, poore needie soules imprisoned, lawes wrested, and truthe little regarded: maie it not be said of our daies as Petronius said of his. Quid faciunt leges vbi sola pecunia regnat, Aut vbi paupertas viuere nulla potest Iam non iudicium est, nihil est nisi public amerces Nulla{que} iustitia est fraus vbi iura regit, Ʋenalis populus, venalis curia primum Ipsa{que} maiestas aere sepulta iacet. What good do lawes where money rainges alone Or where the poore can not obtaine his right, Our iudgement now to common gaine is growne: No iustice is where fraude puts lawe to flight, Men set to sale, the iudgement seate likewise, Honor her self in money buried lyes.
But omittyng this with our Vsurie, Blasphemie, Adulterie, Enuie, Subtel∣tie, Oppression, Extortion, and Briberie seyng we are all corrupte, euen from the sole of the foote vnto the hedde. Seeyng there is nothyng whole in vs, but all wounds and swellyngs, and sores full of corruption: Lette vs desire the Lorde to wrappe vs vp, to binde vp our woundes, and to mollifie vs with the Oile of his grace, for wee are the vnfruitfull Vine∣yard, euen this little realme of England whiche albeit our lande hath been plen∣tifull, yet haue our liues been barren, and vnthanckfull, the Lorde hath hedged vs in with his graces, he hath gathered out the stones of Poperie and errors, he hath planted vs with the beste plantes, name∣ly of sounde Religion, and the truthe of his Gospell, he hath builte a Tower in the middest of vs whiche is his Churche. Wee haue a wine presse the house of pra∣yer, the Lorde hath looked that we should bryng forthe grapes of good life, but we haue brought forthe the wilde grapes of wickednesse, and now our owne consci∣ences can be witnesse, that the lorde hath
doen so muche for vs, as more he could not doe for any Nation: he will therefore take awaie our hedge of defence, namely his mercies, and so shall wee bee troden doune of our enemies. The Lorde hath looued vs with an euerlastyng loue, he hath chosen vs to hym self in mercie, he hath fedde vs with the fatnesse of the yearth, and giuen vnto vs the dewe of heauen: he hath caste a bancke about vs for our defence, and clo∣sed vs in with a wall of strength, he hath with peace sent vs plentie, and with a∣boundance giuen vs tranquilitie. Wee haue a gracious and mercifull Queene to guide vs, indued with wisedome; lear∣nyng and vertue, that laboureth daiely the increase of the Gospell. God hath gi∣uen wise and graue Counsailers, in the middest of trouble to determine our cau∣ses, who care and carke for the defence of our Countrie, and applie their studie for our common weales commoditie, the Lorde hath endewed vs with learned Bi∣shoppes, Pastors and teachers, who ring daiely in our eares, the golden belles of the Lawe and Gospell: who sounde out
of a sweete golden Trompet, the chere∣full allarum against our enemies. Thei feede vs with Manna, beyng Aungelles foode, and giue vs cleare water out of the pure Fountaine: Thei haue stopped vp the muddie puddelles of Popery, and giuen vs to drincke of the cleare Siluer streames of the Gospell. Lett vs not bee vnthanckfull to GOD for them for thei stande in the gappe, to tourne awaie the wrathe of the Lorde, it is the praiers of these, that holdeth backe the angrie hand of the Lorde. Ouid saieth, that Arturus is a Starre, placed nere the Pole Ar∣tick, whiche neuer falleth, but riseth and compasseth continually about the Pole, if this starre should fall, the Pole would by and by faile, and so the whole frame of the worlde should perishe: Euen so these holie and godly men (as no doubte there are some, though the number bee few in this Citie) thei are those that daie and night doe compasse the Pole of this worlde, who continually beate in the eares of the lorde with their praiers, and like this Starre, thei are continuall in risyng, and neuer fall, were it not for
whom, the frame of this worlde had long since been dissolued, but assuredly there being is not long, for these wonderfull tokens and prodigious signes, dooe ma∣nifestly tell vs of the worldes consuma∣tion, let vs therefore watche, for the time is at hande. Lette vs bee wise Virgines with our Oile in our Lampes, that wee maie enter into the weddyng Chamber, whē our spouse Christe Iesus shall come to Iudgement, let vs continue to thende that we maie eate of the hidden Manna, let vs striue valiauntly that we maie ob∣tain the Croune, and gaine the kyng∣dome we haue long hopes for, and heare the sweete and cōfortable saiyng: Come ye blessed of my father, inherite the king¦dome prepared for you, from the begin∣nyng of the worlde, and that this maie speedely come. Lett vs continually crie, Come lorde Iesus, come quickly, bryng vs to the fruition of thy ioyes, and shor∣ten these our miserable daies, that wee maie all with one voyce glorifie thee in thy heauenly kyngdome, and sing that swete song holie, holie, holie, Lorde God almightie: Graunt this O Father for
Christes sake, to whom with thee and the holie spirite be all honor and praise bothe now and for euer. Amen. VVitnesse hereunto, these men whose names doe followe. Maister VVillyam Geffreyes, dwellyng in Jpswhich. John Bull, seruaunt to Justice Germaye. Richard Boothe of Jpswhich, dwellyng with Olyuer Boothe. Richard Kaye: with diuers o∣thers FINIS.
