B112 R221397 [ocm]62369018 187788
A LETTER to a Member of Parliament concerning the Suppression of Piracy. London, March 20. 1699/700. SIR, I Cannot but think it my duty (perceiving that your Honourable House is considering of means for the preventing and punishing both Pyrats and illegal Traders) to give you a short hint of the Reasons why they have grown to a greater heigth in the English than in other Colonies on the Main of America, and a Proposal for the future preven∣tion of them. It may be almost needless to acquaint you that several of our American Plantations are like petty Soveraigntys, having the Choice of Governours, the Power of calling Assemblies, making Laws, raising Mony by some former Grants from the Crown, or at least the pre∣tensions of them. Each of these, Interest being their chief Mover, are restlesly ambitious of advancing their Estates by drawing away the Trade and Inhabitants from other Colonies that are contigu∣ous to them, and more especially from those that are under the immediate direction of the Crown, as the Proprietary Colonies to the Westward, from the Colonies of New York and New England. In order to this they vie with each other, who shall allow their People the greatest Privile∣ges, or most exempt them from any Customs or Duties on Goods exported or imported; which the King's Governments, especially New York, cannot avoid, it being a most necessary Supply for the maintenance of the Government, the guard of the Frontiers from the Insults of those Indians that otherwise would prove fatal in time of War, not only to them but to the neighbouring Colonies. Hence it is that in all the Proprietary Colonies the People pretend to an absolute exemption from Customs and Duties, but what is laid by Act of Parliament in England, and in most to the Choice of all Officers both Civil and Military, in some not excepting the Council nor the Governour. These Officers thus annually chosen, endeavour to do nothing that may disoblige their Electors, lest the next year they are deprived of their Dignities. The Inhabitants of the Plantations abroad are too much addicted to abet and encourage both Pyrats and illegal Traders, as the Persons that they gain no small advantage by cor∣responding with. Hence it is that these Criminals meet with their Encouragement, those Officers that should apprehend, being but too negligent of their Duties, and this from personal Advantages and Gains they receive by them, or through fear of the People by whose favour they stand. The Remedies then seem to be plain and easy, the Bill already read in your Honourable House will undoubtedly give a very great discouragement to Piracy, tho illegal Trade still re∣mains to be suppressed, the Duties accruing to the King to be more effectually preserved, and the Frontiers of the Government better protected against foreign Insults; which I am humbly of opinion might be done, if in the Bill that yet lies before you for the punishing of Governours, &c. you would be pleased by some Clause, To lay all the Colonies on the Continent of America, that carry on the same Methods of Trade, under the same equal Customs on Goods exported and imported, for the maintenance of their distinct Governments, or the defraying a more general Charge. To cause that the Confusion and Anarchy which now so much prevails in some of the Colo∣nies (insomuch that the Council in their Letters home complain they are hardly safe in their Persons or Estates; if by a due and vigorous execution of the Law against Pyrats or illegal Traders, they should incense the People against them) may be succeeded by an exact obedi∣ence to their superiour Officers, which cannot be expected, until a greater Authority than any Proprietary Commission shall appear there. That to obtain this (since Property may be alledged by some, and a right of commissionating and sending of Governours, which they seem to be so fond of, that the most plain Argu∣ments drawn from the inevitable necessity thereof, their own Profit and Advantage▪ the Peace and Prosperity of the People, and the intire Suppression of Pyracy, &c. cannot pre∣vail) I hope you will be instrumental in finding out some ways to bring all these Co∣lonies to a more immediate dependance on the Crown, by giving the King the Nomi∣nation and Commissionating of the Governours and Officers Civil and Military in the re∣spective Colonies, and yet reserving all the Rights and Properties that either the Proprietors at home, or the People there may have to the Lands or Plantations in the said Colonies by virtue of their former Grants from the Crown. I am SIR, Your most humble Servant, J. B.
A LETTER to a Mem∣ber of Parliament concerning the Sup∣pression of Piracy.
