O85B R205790 [ocm]61297111 180638
OBJECTIONS Against Passing the BILL, As Desired by the Proprietors of the Lights Now generally Used. THE Patent under which they pretend to Claim, is granted to Edmund Windus, These dre the Words of their Patent. Gent. on his Petition, That he with great La∣bour and Expence had obtain'd a Discovery of a new Experi∣ment, for the great and durable Encrease of Light, by extraordi∣nary Glasses and Lamps; very useful for the great Improvement of Ship-Lanthorns, Light-houses: dispersing of Light in Mines, and other neces∣sary and like profitable Uses which require Light and Heat: And therefore craves a Patent for 14 Years: Which is accordingly granted. In which Patent, are these Clauses: That if the Invention thereby granted be not a new Invention: Or if Windus be not the first Inventor: Then the Patent to be void. That this Patent is void in Law, is most evident: For these present Pro∣prietors have suggested in Chancery, That the Patent was granted to Windus in trust for one Samuel Hutchinson: (as in truth it was.) And in truth these Glasses used by Hutchinson, and now by the Proprietors, are not a new Invention: Such Glasses for Light having been used in Lanthorns, above Twenty Years since; as will be fully proved if required. And to convince the World that this Patent is void, several Tin-men set up the Proprietors own Lights against them, with∣out any Variation. And the Proprietors brought Actions against them on their Patent. To which the Tin-men appeared and pleaded: And the Proprietors durst not proceed in their Suit. And the Persons who now oppose the Proprietors, will presently try with them the Validity of the Patent, whether good in Law, or not. And have gi∣ven the Proprietors a fair Opportunity so to do, by having now set up a new and better Light of Convex-Glass in the City of London. That the Proprietors knowing the Invalidity of their Patent to support their Pretence to the Convex-Lights: (Of which they have not a Word in their Pa∣tent:) Have in the Bill inserted a Clause to exclude all others from using Con∣vex-Glasses. And if any body do use them, on Oath made thereof before a Justice of the Peace, that he shall grant his Warrant to have them taken down and delivered to the Proprietors. Which is destructive and prejudicial to the Publick, tending to discourage Ingenuity and Invention for the publick Good: (No great or publick Light be∣ing to be made but by Convex-Glasses:) There being a much better Light for the Publick now Invented. So it is also, establishing a Monopoly of a pretended new Invention of Con∣vex-Lights: Which was many Years in Use before the Patent: And executing by Act of Parliament a Patent void in Law, and which can∣not by any means in Law be supported. The which was never done in any time before: It having been the Wisdom of all Parliaments rather to condemn Monopolies, than establish them. And whereas it is pretended, That the Proprietors have been at great Charge about the said Lights, they have had about Nine Years already, and may have upon their Patent (if good) five Years more. But if naught, it is con∣ceived they ought to have no Countenance. For if a Man will lay out his Money in a bad Title, it is conceived a Parlia∣ment will not make that Title good. For which REASONS it is humbly hoped the Bill shall not pass.
