4598 S118625 99853832 177551
TENTATIONS: Their Nature, Danger, Cure. The third PART: BY RICHARD CAPEL, Sometimes fellow of Magdalen Colledge in Oxford. LONDON, Printed by R. Y. for John Bartlet, and are to be sold at his Shop in Cheap-side, at the signe of the Gilt Cup. 1636.
TENTATIONS: Their Nature, Danger, Cure. The third PART. WEe are now in this third part to treat of such Ten∣tations, as doe not use to stare in the face of common Christians: but of such Tentations as startle the consciences of such Christi∣ans as are now 1 Cor. 2. 6. Inter imper∣fectos non∣nulla▪ obte∣gunt, nulla mentiuntur. Aug. de vera relig. c. 28. perfect, as Saint Paul cals them in one place, and become Spirituall in some great degree, as hee meanes by that terme in 1 Cor. 3. 1. another place. For when a man comes once to be
very spirituall, to have an eye to see, and a sense to feele such things, which before hee made no care of, then his heart will ake at some faults, and his soule will smite at such things, which be∣fore he used not to see to be any sinnes at all; or if he did, yet he felt no great bitternesse in them. Paul, because hee had much grace, and was in comparison of many now (as it were) all con∣science, and his conscience was (almost) all tendernesse, a seeing, a speaking, a feeling, and a smi∣ting conscience, therefore hee did cry out for ordinary scapes, O wretched man, a body of sinne, a Law in my members: So Rom. 7. 14. I am carnall: What, simply? No, but he had a quicke eye, and saw too much flesh in himselfe: sold under sin: What a slave to sinne simply? No, no sinne raigned in him, but sold in respect of his flesh, and in re∣spect of his feeling, he felt abun∣dance, it even wearied him out.
Ahab sold himselfe to doe evill. Paul was sold under sinne, hee did not sell himselfe: Ahab sold himselfe to sinne, Paul was sold under sinne. All this cry was not because his sins were so great, but because his heart was so good, and for that he had an extraor∣dinary conscience of his owne. And thus it is (in our measure) with some now, who because they are come to be very hea∣venly, and exceeding spirituall, they finde great trouble for such matters, which others (though otherwise good people) make little or nothing of. But before we come to mention any parti∣culars by name▪ I will first speak of an head or two, under which lye many branches.
CHAP. I. Of lesser sinnes. IT is false divinity for a man to call any sinnes little, simply and with∣out comparison. Sinnes cannot bee little to him that thinkes them little. But yet it is so, that some sinnes in relation to other sinnes, are farre lesser; and so some are great, and some are little. In this sense there are de∣grees of comparison in sinnes and sinning; & some have gone about to tell us which is the greatest sin of all, but which is of all sins the least, I do not find that any man hath beene on that argument. 'Tis enough for us that some sins are a great deale lesser than others, and the same sinne is lesser in one, and at one time, than in another, and at an∣other time. And these lesser sins, when they be of the least size of all both for matter and maner,
yet they may and will make a foule cry in the consciences of some men, who are come to that measure Saint Paul speakes of, Eph. 4. 13. Wherefore, first we are to doe our best to avoid them; simply to bee without them we cannot, but yet we are to stand as free as may bee: and to that end consider but these things: 1 That the least that is, is sinne, forbidden by the great God, and that on paine of dam∣nation, and cost Christ his pre∣tious blood. No sinne, be it ever so little, but hath in it all the na∣ture of poyson. It is killing, it is damning. Be it but a penny, yet it hath the superscription and image of the divell on it. It car∣rieth guilt enough in the mouth of it to damne all the soules in the world, in case all the soules in the world were guilty of it. And what if Saint Paul put it on1 Cor. 6. 9. great sins, that they shut us out of heaven? yet the least sin hath
in it enough to doe the deed. His meaning is, that such great sinnes use not to be where grace is; and when they bee done by such a man, they doe turne away from him the light of Gods blessed face, cast for a time a cloud upon the countenance of the Lord, and they do distresse the heart of such a sinner with a terrible feare: but 'tis not so (e∣ver) with lesser sinnes, because they may and doe use to scape a man without his allowance, and God useth not to shew himselfe in his displeasure against such sinners. Lesser are damnable, in and of themselves: greater sins are not onely, but yet chiefly, the sinnes which doe draw out the anger of God; so that we are to beware most of great and foule faults, the great transgres∣sion, Psal. 19. 13. But yet small debts are dangerous, and so are many, nay one small sinne; and sometimes there is the more danger, for that we thinke there
is no danger. And such sins, of which wee use to say, it is but a little one, we are more apt to al∣low, and consent unto, than to greater, and then, when such a sinne is so committed, and after it is committed, so allowed, there will follow in a tender conscience a maine out-cry. This being a common practice with the divell, to make us make too little of a little sinne, when it is to be done or while it is a doing, but after to make us make rather too much, than too little of it. Consider then, not so much what it is which is for∣bidden, but who it is that for∣bids it, and why, and what is like to become of it: when Satan saith, Doe it, because it is a little sin, Answer, No, I will not do it, I dare not doe it▪ because it is a sin, and God will be very angry with me (nay, say, I will not do it because it is a little sin, and God will be very angry with me) in case I prove Luk. 16. 10. unfaithfull in a
little, especially if it bee not a thing done in Psal. 116. 11. hast, and I have time to ponder on the matter: I must not; it is a most unfaithfull thing to breake with God for a little. Little sins carry with them but little temptation, and then a man shewes much vitiousnesse within, when he sins on a little tentation. 'Tis divellish to sinne without a temptation, 'tis little lesse than divellish to sinne on a little occasion. Many times the lesse the temptation, the greater the sinne. Sauls sin in not stay∣ing for Samuel was not so much in the matter; but it was much in the malice of it, and cost him deare. Say, the guilt is not little when we therefore sinne, because the sinne is little. 2 Secondly, let us not bee made such children, as to thinke that wee shall avoid some grea∣ter sinne by yeelding unto some lesser. For a lesser makes way for a greater, and a lesser sinne thus chosen and yeelded unto,
is greater and worser than the great sinne, had we fallen into it without such choyce; a lesser sin allowed being guiltier than a greater sinne not allowed. Nei∣ther is it a little sinne to com∣mit a little sinne, because it is a little sinne. Againe, in case wee give way to a lesser to avoid a greater, in the course of our cor∣rupt nature we are in the way to doe the greater, and in the course of Gods justice wee shall (a thousand to one) fall into the greater. For if we commit one sinne to avoyd another, it is but just wee should avoyd neither. Let us rather say, sin is not cu∣red nor prevented by sinne. Do not once thinke to avoid a grea∣ter sinne by it; if thou shouldest, yet this little sinne is little to thee no longer, but the wrath is great, and the danger great, and 'tis ten to one, that if we will fall into the lesser, we shall fall into the greater, we having not the law in our hands to keep off sins as we please.
3 Thirdly, bee not deceived, so as to thinke, and say, It is but a little sinne: or, They bee but small, and it is not possible to a∣void them. Take them together, and it is not possible but wee shall sinne some sinnes while we are heere. 1 Joh. 1. 8. If we say wee have no sinne, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. He saith not, and Hoc non tantum hu∣militer dici∣tur, sed eri∣am veaciter: poterat e∣nim Aposto∣lus dicere, Si dixerimus quia non ha∣bemus pec∣catum nos ipsos extol∣limus, & hu∣militas in nobis non est: Sed cum ait nos ipsos decipimus, & veritas in no∣bis non est, satis osten∣dit, eum qui se dixerit non habere peccatum, non verum loqui, sed fal∣sum. Conci. Milvit. can. 6. humi∣lity is not in us, but, and the truth is not in us, to shew, that he that sayth he hath no sinne, speakes not truth. But set them downe one by one, and 'tis easi∣er to avoid this, or that lesser sinne, than a greater. Simply not to sin we cannot; but name this or that sinne, and we may avoid it. As not to eate at all we can∣not: but not to eate of this, or that dish we may. Grace within may, and (if we would) it would keepe us easier from lesser infir∣mities, than from greater sinnes. The reason why we are not kept from lesser, rather than from
greater, is not because that grace in us may not do one with more ease than the other, but because first, God he it is who doth by his actuall assisting and preven∣ting grace keepe us, and not our habits of grace within, (in, and of themselves) and therefore one reason of this is, because he will, and doth suffer us to fall in∣to lesser sinnes, but will not suf∣fer us to fall into greater. So we have in Deut. 18. 14. These Na∣tions which thou shalt possesse hearkened unto observers of times, and unto diviners, but as for thee, the Lord thy God hath not suffered thee to do so. It was not because they were better to God than the Nations, but be∣cause God was better to them. And God doth suffer us to fall into lesser sinnes, rather than in∣to greater sinnes, because lesser sinnes use not so to disturbe our peace, as greater sinnes do; wee having our discharge for them in our generall pardon of grace.
Secondly, we fall into lesser sinnes, rather than into greater, because wee do not take that heed of lesser sinnes which wee do of greater. We are foolish in this, and doe thinke that lesser faults are venial, and do not de∣serve hell: and on these grounds it is, that we hold out against greater, but not aganst lesser sinnes, albeit in and of it selfe it is easier to avoid the lesser; only lesser slips being very many, we doe not eye them so as wee might: againe, we pray more a∣gainst great temptations than against lesser. For we dreame, that of our selves we can resist the smaller and weaker tempta∣tions; whereas 'tis out of our power, without Gods speciall grace in a spirituall and gracious maner, to resist the least motion that is. We must then be at it, and keepe our spirits waking, and know that as wee ought, so we may with weake graces pre∣serve our selves from lesser sins.
In a word, all in generall are notDurand l. 2. D. 42. q. 2. evitable: for while Reason is in her watch against one motion, another on a suddaine steps in, and surpriseth a man ere hee is aware; but when they come one by one in single, it is easier by farre to checke a lesser than a greater motion, as being more avoidable. Thus much for the meanes to avoyd lesser sinnes. Now a word or two how to get off the trou∣ble of minde that falls on the Conscience of a spirituall man for lesser faults. 1 First, thinke it to be a bles∣sed trouble, when we can finde an aking Conscience for lesser evills. It shewes that we are ve∣ry tender, and that wee have much grace, a great deale of the spirit, much light that can see them, much life that can feele them, and can make much of that which others make nothing of. This trouble is mixed with joy, and it ends in comfort, sith
it brings us to the maine ground of all comfort, that is, that wee are in the state of grace. Bee thankfull that thou hast a Da∣vids heart, that can smite thee for a lap of Sauls garment: that thou hast a Pauls Conscience, that can cry out and call him∣selfe wretched man, and sigh af∣ter death, not for greater crosses, but for lesser sinnes. This is a sure testimony of faith: onely wee must see that it be not in hypocrisie, that we do it not in partiality. This were to straine at a gnat; and wee may know, that we doe not swallow a Ca∣mell, if wee straine at a Camell first and most, and then straine at Gnats: Thus if we do, hap∣pie we that have such troubles in our consciences, because such troubles breed and feed heaven∣ly comforts: and what if troubles arise many together, for many lesser leakes in our soules? yet they do not exclude comfort quite, they do onely suspend it
for the present: and how suspend it? not in regard of the roote, but of some fruite: as a sicke man is setled, because he hath and knowes he hath the possessi∣on of his estate, albeit for the present he have not the fruition. Right so, such doe mourne, and they are blessed. Blessed are they that  i. e. as men do at fune∣ralls, Zach. 12. to. as one mourneth for his only sonne. mourn. And why blessed? what? have they com∣fort? No, but they shall have, they shall be comforted: they are blessed that do mourne, not be∣cause they mourne, but because their mourning is some cause, and a signe, that they shall bee comforted. A man then may be a blessed man without comfort in hand as long as hee hath it in hope. A man should not for any thing desire to have his Consci∣ence to passe over lesser faults, without some cry and some touch; it being our infirmity that in troubles of heart we use to cry too much for greater, too little for lesser faults: yet (saving
some frailties in the manner of our trouble of minde) this trou∣ble of heart is (not indeed an happy thing, but it is) an happy signe. 2 Secondly, wee must not judge of the sinne altogether by the trouble we feele, for we are troubled more with horrours sometimes for lesser sinnes, than for farre greater sinnes, Durand. l. 4. D. 33. q. 2. because we have a greater inclination to one sin than to another: and as the Arist. de a∣nima. l. 1. c. 2. Philosopher observes, it is from the body, and the temper thereof that some weaker passi∣ons and affections move us more than some stronger doe: wherefore our trouble must not be our judge. It follows not, this sinne doth trouble mee least, therefore it is the least sinne; this doth trouble mee more, therefore it is the greater sinne: but we must judge of the great∣nesse and littlenesse of sinne by the word, and we must doe what wee can, that our trouble come
chiefly from the right light of our mind, and not from the hu∣mour, the inclination or disin∣clination of the body: next, that our sorrow and trouble carry some proportion to our sinnes: and lastly, that we turne our sorrowes upon our sinnes, to crucifie them, because they so crucifie us; and then, when wee finde that our little sinnes grow lesse and lesse, fewer and fewer, our trouble stands, and runnes right, and wee are happy men when our sins cure themselves, when they eate out their owne guilt and strength. There is no sinne so little but it may grow lesse, and he is in the right who findes this use of his troubles for lesser sinnes, that they wea∣ken under his trouble, and weare away daily. Thus little sinnes hurt not; but when they are seen and allowed, they hurt and damne: and I thinke some are in hell, who never committed such great sinnes, as some have
done, who are now in heaven. Lesser sinnes are of two kinds; First, Arist Eth. 1. 7. c. 7. of precipitaney and hast, when a man ere hee can consider the matter, is on a sud∣daine by imprudencie hurried away with some passion, and is in some sin ere he is aware: So he, (I said in my HAST, all men are liars.) Secondly, of infirmity, when a man wrestles, and hath some time to fight it out against evill motions: but for want of breath and strength, falls and is as S. Paul was, in some Rom. 7. 23. Capti∣vity to the law of sinne. This is worse than the former, because here a man hath while and space to looke to himselfe, but in the former all is in an hurry; hast doth it, and marres all, and there is no time for one to bethinke himselfe: and sins of infirmitie having more of our nature, are more hard to cure, than sudden hasty sinnes of precipitancie; but both are lesser sinnes, and our point is meant of both.
CHAP. II. Of sinnes of Omission. WHen a man is come to some height of grace, then he is wringed in his Conscience, some∣times for doing his duties so poorely, and sometimes for not doing them at all: It is an argu∣ment of a brave spirit to have an heart to ake, and to finde ones blood to rise for omitting du∣ties; and that not for custome, as boyes, who finde something within, when they passe their set times and formes of prayer, but when tis out of Conscience. To mourne over our soules for sinnes of Commission is not so much, sith sinnes of Commissi∣on do more quickly, and more sharpely checke the Conscience, than sinnes of Omission: for that in sinnes of Commission there is both an act, and a defect; but
in Durand. l. 2. D. 36. q. 1. n. 4. sinnes of omission there is a defect onely. Againe, sinnes of omission are against an affirma∣tive law, which doth rather shew us our duty than checke us for vice. And lastly, sinnes of commission doe presuppose the omission of some duty. Where∣fore it is a note of a judgement rightly and clearely informed, and of an heart excellently steeled with grace, when wee cannot finde quiet after omit∣ting duties, but are grieved at the very heart when a duty is omitted; and that chiefest of all, when we finde little feeling in the very doing of such duties. Now if we dare not omit duties, and when through infirmity we doe passe them over, our hearts are in a chafe for it, it is a signe that all is very well with us within: and chiefly in case wee doe finde our conscience complaine for the omission of duties, which nature doth not convince us of, but they are du∣ties
onely because the Word saith so, and wee know them to be duties because in the Word we finde them so. Here now if wee can feele trouble because wee omit the reading of the Word, the hearing of a Sermon, our dutie in prayers, and in the Sacraments, beleeve it, it is a signe of a sound minde, of much grace, and of some growth in ver∣tue. But in case wee can take it to heart, that when wee do do our duties, that we do them no better, in no better manner; that we read the Word so cursorily; we pray indeed, but it is so cold∣ly; wee receive Sacraments when time serves, but it is but in forme, and for fashion: now I say, if we can weepe within, and that betwixt God and our selves without a witnesse, not onely for non-performance of duties, but for our unmannerly doing of them; beleeve it, this shewes not onely that such are holy, but very holy, and passing
good men and women. Albeit troubles for omission of duties be a good signe, yet hee doth not best still who hath least in∣ward trouble, but who hath least cause; and therefore wee are to beware, that we draw not need∣lesse troubles, nor spirituall brushes on our selves; attend and watch over our soules, that when the heart calls, and God calls, we do set about such du∣ties as conscience doth require. As wee must not make duties where God makes none; so wee must not omit, and skip over such lessons as God doth com∣mand us to performe, lest God smite us with some pang of un∣beleefe, as he did Thomas Di∣dymus, for being absent but once from an holy meeting of the A∣postles, (I thinke) on the Lords day. We do not know what may come of it when we misse a du∣tie, 'tis to be expected that the next will be to fall into some sin of Commission. Omission of our
diet will breed diseases, so will omitting of duties breed noi∣ome matter in the soule, and make worke for hell, or for the hysician of our soules. We must dye the death, or take some trong physicke. Naught is like o come of it when we seeme to make conscience of committing sinnes, but not of omitting du∣ies: one being an offence a∣gainst God as well as the other. Let us then see to our matters, that wee doe what is requi∣red, because it is required, and as it is required, and when it is required, and then wee shall have peace within: and when we have done our best, such is our frailty, that many things will scape us, and wee shall through hast or heedlesnesse step over many a dutie; but if wee feele remorse and trouble of heart, we are in a good and excellent estate, very spirituall: onely we must beware that we rest not in our trouble, and thinke that that
is all, but wee must goe farther. A sinfull thing it is, when wee have omitted a duty, to thinke to make all amends with Go and our consciences, by passing thorow the fire of some biting anguish for it: as though this inward bleeding had some me∣rit in it. No, no, it must bring us farther: our troubles must draw us up to Christ. Wee must re∣pent, and be truly and heartily sorry that we have broken with God, that we have not kept our selves up in doing our duties and even vow unto him to bee more strict that way against another time. Grieving with∣out repenting, and repenting without obeying comes to lit∣tle. And for that we are more apt to omit duties than to com∣mit sinnes, wee are to use the more care, that wee hold fast our resolution to performe our obe∣dience to God, to omit nothing for any mans pleasure which God would have us doe. In no
case we are to doe an unlawfull ct for feare, or favour, or at the ommand of man: but for du∣es we may upon the interposi∣ion of authority sometimes mit some things lawfull, but hen they goe not for duties to e done at this time: and some are alwayes sicke or crazie, and annot doe duties in publike, nd of necessity must omit ma∣y duties in private: this is a crosse, not a sinne, thus to omit duties; which wee doe not, be∣cause: by reason of weaknesse we cannot do them. God doth by sicknesse call such to a more ex∣cellent dutie, which is to suffer crosses and sicknesses with pati∣ence, when it is not because we will not, or care not, but because we cannot. The not doing of the duty is a crosse, and not a sinne; wee must then see to it, that we do not slubber over du∣ties, and care not how they bee done, so they bee done: for hee that doth duties the next
way, the next will be, hee will not do them at all; and when we come to omit duties, wee must and will, and shall commit sins. So the issue is, that when it is a duty, and a duty to be done now by us, wee forfeit our peace in case we doe omit the least thing that is: every tittle of Gods Law being better worth than all the world. Wherefore for what is past mourne and spare not, but not as men without hope. The pardon is ready, and was made in Gods minde before we were ever made. We might die in our sins the while, if when we have sinned we were to stay the pro∣viding of a pardon. Chyrurgians have some generall plaisters rea∣dy to clap on on a suddaine, lest the patient dye ere he can make and provide his salve. God in Christ hath all plaisters and par∣dons ready made and sealed: he still offers, 'tis but for us to come and take the offer. Assoon as a duty is omitted, and the
wound begins to ake and fester, away to God, make peace with him, and all will end well. Some∣times wounds trouble us at first: sometimes againe we feele no∣thing while we are hurt, we can∣not tell whether we are hurt or not; but after the wound payes us. And so it is in sinnes of omis∣sion; at first, when it is omitted, we ayle nothing, feele nothing: but when we pause, and blow up∣on it a while, the pang of a ten∣der conscience will come upon us, and we shall finde it bitter. Wherefore goe on without in∣terruption, lose not a stroake. The more we fast, the longer we may: the more wee omit, the longer we may, and shall still, except we returne. Oh returne, give not over so: Sathan doth not meane it shall end thus. Let us get our pardon, make our peace, doe our first workes with advantage. Declining will steale upon us. Lose not a meale. Do all that wee are to doe with all
our heart. Doe what we doe, not onely to stop the mouth of con∣science, but to stop Gods mouth. Doe all for matter; for manner in obedience to him, because he saith it, because hee will have it so: then use our selves to it, and use is a gteat matter; and wee shall finde when conscience and custome come together, it must bee a great matter which must put us by. And when it is rather weakenesse than negligence which doth occasion a default, our peace will hold, the quiet of our minde will not cracke. Not but that the least omission of the least duty that is, is a sinne, but it troubles not, because we have a pardon of course for daily weaknesses, included in that genetall pardon which we have upon our generall repentance. And here wee must see, that our peace for such infirmities do re∣sult out of our generall acquit∣tance, wherein all sins are con∣tained, though none in particu∣lar
named: and not because wee thinke them to be but veniall sins, & have a Pope in our belly, which makes us thinke, that they do not deserve Gods anger. And in some others there is a quiet, because they judge of sin and desert by nature and not by Scripture, and doe conceit of God as of men; and because men do passe over light abuses and petty matters, therefore God also doth (thinke they) not count of them: but this is foolish divi∣nity. For man is no way bound in justice to proceed against a∣buses offered him; and therefore small matters doing him no sen∣sible hurt, he may and doth passe them over: but God hath tied himselfe in justice to enter his action against the least sinne, and in law the penalty is hell. Besides, man being under a law stands bound to skip over such offences against him, but God is under no law of any Superi∣our, but hath onely bound him∣selfe
selfe by a law of his owne justice of his owne making to proceed against all sinnes, except he have satisfaction made him. The right is, that when we feele no grud∣ging for such daily infirmities (after all care had and used) it is because they doe not stagger, nor cause us to doubt of our right to that great and generall pardon, written for us in blood; in the blood of the Lambe. Thus we see what our care is to bee, that wee omit as few duties as we can, and as seldome as 'tis possible: wee see also what our comforts are to be, in case wee fall into omission of a duty; and wee smart for it, to wit, it is a proofe of our faith; a worke of grace, and wee shall come out in better case than ever, and wee shall bee more curious in obser∣ving, and carefull in doing our duties ever after. Next, beware of delaying. I del dyed not (saith David) to keep thy Commandement▪ Psal. 119.
Delayes bee dangerous; our hearts will coole, and our affe∣ctions will fall downe. It is good then to be doing while it is called to day, while it is cal∣led now. Now, now, now, saith David, Psal. 118. 2, 3, 4. There be three nowes, and all to teach us, that for ought we know now or never, to day or not at all, while the heart strikes, else our irons will coole. Sathan hath little hope to prevaile should he put us to omit our duties quite when the clocke strikes, and therefore his skill is to urge us to put it off till another time, as fitter and better: Do it anon, next houre, next day, next weeke (saith he): and why not next yeare? Hereafter (saith he) it will be as well as now. This he saith indeed, but his meaning (by hereafter) is never; and hee that is not fit to day hath no promise but he shall bee more unapt to morrow. We have nei∣ther God, nor our owne hearts
at command: and when we have lost the oppotunity, God to cor∣rect us perhaps will not give us affections. The cocke within shall not crow to awaken us, the Sunne shall not shine, and then we are in danger to give over quite; and if we come once to a totall omission of one duty, why not of another, and of another, and so of all? and then farewell to us. Againe, omission of duties will bring us to commission of the sinne that is contrary to that duty. Men do sin and scandall, (Ps. 119. 11.) Why? because the Word is not in them. They kil∣led Christ: Why? because they received not his Word, Joh. 8. 37. And wee feele that sinnes committed will give a fearefull blow to our consciences. Then he that would not come to that penance, as to be put to it in the court of his owne conscience for committing of sinnes, that man must see to it, that he doe
not omit duties; or if he doe, yet let him see to it, that he make all well againe presently; else the next will be, that he will, and must, and shall fall into the com∣mission of sinne. The summe is, he that will not commit sinnes, let him not omit duties. First, God will scourge omitting of duties with suffering us to com∣mit sinnes, and so we shall sinne. Secondly, omitting duties wea∣kens us, lets Sathan in, and cor∣ruption out: and so we will sin. Thirdly, makes. God in his ju∣stice to give us over; and so we must sinne. Lastly, when we have an extraordinary occasion come in, it is lawfull to omit for a turne or so; the doing of ordi∣nary duties: only we must take two caveats, First, that we double it, and make it up the next time; doe twice as much as we are wont, and as our stint was. Secondly, that we take it as a crosse that wee are necessarily
hindred. If a man make and take occasion to put by the doing of duties, the end will be naught: we are in danger to come from putting by duties, to put them off quite: But now if an occasion be put upon us, it is no sinne to omit; but yet we must take it as a crosse. If we be glad that we have such occasion come in the way, that without sinne we may omit a duty, it shewes hypocri∣sie and deep corruption; but if we be sorry it falls out so, there is no hurt done. So pray (saith Christ) that your flight bee not on the Sabbath day, Matth. 24. 20. Not but that it was lawfull, and no sinne for a Jew to flye on the Sabbath day (for Eliah did flye forty dayes, and so of neces∣sity five or sixe Sabbaths); but yet they were to take it heavily, that (though by a just occasion) they might not enjoy their Sab∣baths: so we are to grieve, that by a just occasion we are put by the doing of our duties. It is
no sinne, but it is a crosse, that by the providence of God wee are hindred, and put to the losse of a duty: If we be glad of it, it shewes much corruption; if we take it as a crosse, it shewes much sanctification. CHAP. III. Of Covetousnesse. COvetousnesse breeds a (tentation) and more (a snare.) It drawes us in, it holds us fast when wee are in. Wee thinke too well of this sinne, and it useth not to vexe us till we are brought to a fight and sense of it. God useth to give men over to some vexing sinne, on purpose to bee even with them for this sinne. Tenta∣tions, base tentations of the se∣venth Commandement are let out often to pay men for this sin of covetousnes, the worse sinne
of the two, take them both in the height of their degrees. For lasciviousnes properly is not, bu covetousnes is idolatry; not so much, because the love of mony makes mony an idoll: for so the Glutton makes his belly his god, but he doth not trust in his belly-cheere, hee thinkes not to bee protected by his belly: but the covetous person puts his trust in his mony; and it is high idolatry to make any creature our confidence, as the World∣ling saith to his wedge, Thou art my confidence: and we find, that the Word is much against the sinne of covetousnes; page af∣ter page there be many sharpe invectives against worldlinesse, and all little enough to bring men to thinke it to be a sin, or such a sin as it is.
SECT. 1. What Covetousnesse is. LEt your conversation (saith Saint Paul) be without co∣vetousnesse, Hebr. 13. 4. How? Be content with such things as yee have. Why? The Lord hath said, he will not forsake us. So then covetousnes is, when wee are not content with what wee for the present have. Oh, but I have nothing! Yes, thou hast the promise, and the promise is all, and hee that hath the pro∣mise hath all. Have wee more, have we little, have we nothing, yet by vertue of the promise we are to bee content: Be content (saith Saint Paul) with food and raiment, under these two heads containing all necessaries. In reason and in nature, hee that hath necessaries for backe and belly is to be content: Houses are not named, for that in those
dayes they were to stand ready to runne from place to place, and to leave house and all behind them. But in Divinity, and in the way of Faith, hee that hath neither food nor raiment is to be content: for the promise is virtually food, raiment, and all. But to come neere the matter; covetousnes doth not properly stand in getting, but in Aristot. eth. 4. c. 1. kee∣ping: for it is opposite to libe∣rality; and liberality is in gi∣ving: Wherefore covetousnesse stands in not giving, in parting with nothing. Hee is greedy to get, but it is that he may save and keep. 1 Cor. 6. 10. Nor covetous, nor extortioners, saith the Apostle plainly; differencing extortion (immoderate getting) from co∣vetousnes, which consists in pinching and saving. So the A∣postle, 1 Tim. 3. 3. Not greedy of filthy lucre, not covetous. So that to be greedy to get filthy lucre, is not formally and pro∣perly covetousnes; but to be co∣vetous
is to bee all for sparing. To get is an effect of covetous∣nesse: to save is the life and na∣ture of covetousnesse. Hence men are more glad of a penny saved than of a penny gotten. Wherefore their plea is to no purpose, who stand upon it, that they are not covetous, because they rake not after that which is anothers, but onely looke to their owne: whereas indeed he is the very covetous man, who is all for saving and sparing, and can part with nothing. SECT. 2. That covetousnesse is a great sinne. WE must bee convinced that covetousnesse, I meane that our covetousnesse is a vice: for it holds something of a vertue, of frugality, which is not to wast that which one hath:
and this makes us entertaine thoughts that it is no vice; and we often say that it is good to bee a little worldly: a little co∣vetousnesse we like well: which shewes that wee doe not in∣deed and in heart hold it to be a sinne. For if sinne be naught, a little of sinne cannot be good: as good say a little poyson were good, so it be not too much. And so we finde, that men will rate at their children for spending, and are ready to turne them out of doores, if they bee given unto wast: but if they be neere and pinching, then we like that too much; and I scarce know a man, who doth use to call upon his children that they spare not, save not. I know youth is rather ad∣dicted the other way, and is more subject to wast, and con∣sume, by reason that naturall heate is quicke, and active in them: and therefore indeed there is more feare, and danger, that they prove prodigall, and
turne wasters; and the more may bee said and done that way to youth: but the thing I presse is, that in case wee see our chil∣dren in their youth to begin to be covetous and worldly, wee call them good husbands, and are too glad to see it so, and are too much pleased with them for it: little doe they thinke that worldlinesse is a most guiltfull sinne in respect of God, and most hurtfull in respect of men. Harke what the Word saith of it, Ephes. 5. 5. It is idolatrie, and idolatrie is the first sinne of the first Table: It is the roote of all evills, 1 Tim. 6. 10. there is no evill but a worldly man will do it to save his purse. Thus David, Ps. 119. 36. Encline mine heart unto thy testimonies, and not un∣to covetousnesse: hee saith not, this or that testimonie, but (as including all the Lawes of God) he saith testimonies: to shew us, that covetousnesse drawes us a∣way, not from some onely, but
from all Gods Commandments So S. Paul, Where covetousnesse is, there are many lusts, 1 Tim. 6. 9. and many sorrows. 1 Tim. 6. 10. It drownes men in per∣dition and destruction, 1 Tim. 6. 9. And such a drowning the Greeke word signifies, as is al∣most past all hope and recovery; the bane of all society. Men cry out of it, because they would have none covetous, none rich but themselves. An hater hee is of mankind; Chrys. in Matt. 26. hom. 81. hee hates all poore, because they would beg some thing of him: and all rich, because they have riches, which he would have. A covetous man would have all that all have. Thus speakes a noble Father, Such believe not the Word, they trust neither God nor man. For he that trusts not God, cannot trust man. It robs God of that confidence wee should have in him, and dependance wee owe unto him: it turnes a man from all the Commandements. Hence
the Prophet David prayes God o turne his heart to his Com∣mandements, and not to cove∣ousnesse, Psal. 119. 36. For not onely we ought not, but, as the phrase is, we cannot serve God and Mammon, Luk. 16. 13. It is impossible for any sinner (as a sinner) to enter into the King∣dome of Heaven, Matt. 19. 26. But there is somthing in it, that it is said to bee an unpossible thing for a rich man, that is, a rich covetous man, to enter into heaven: and perhaps this is thus delivered, because we do thinke that their riches will bee a meanes to bring them to hea∣ven. Therefore Christ, to re∣presse such conceits, saith, that it is not possible for a rich man to come to heaven. Who then (say the Desciples) can be sa∣ved? Who then! which shewes that they were sicke of this dis∣ease to think that if any went to heauen it were your rich men; dreaming that riches were
a good helpe that way. The had no wealth, and therefo were they more apt to admi them, as not feeling what forc in them, to rob God of his fl¦wer, (his trust) which is due un∣to him from his creature: which Christ shews to be his meaning▪ when he adds what a hard thing it is to have riches, and not to trust in them. Wherefore it was an excellent prayer of that wis man, Prov. 30. 8, 9. Give mee neither poverty, nor riches, lest I bee full and deny thee. The danger (as he shewes) of pover∣ty was much; lest I be poore, and steale, and take the Name of God in vaine, either by denying the fact, or by opening the mouths of the wicked: but the danger of riches is more, lest (saith he) I deny thee, and say, who is the Lord? which is farre the greater offence of the two: to take the name of God in vaine is naught, but to deny God is farre worse. A conveni∣ent
estate betwixt famishing and surfeiting is best for the soule, as being that condition, which (as Aristotle sayes, and proves) is easiest of all to bee subject to, and moderated by the ules of Reason. The summe is, that we stand convinced by the Word and Spirit that covetous∣nesse is a foule vice; and that ur sparing more than needs, is (in us) covetousnesse, and that o spare more than needs, as well s to spend more than needs, will (as Solomon saith, Prov. 11. 24.) ring us to poverty, and to worse than poverty. Wherefore ake heed and beware of cove∣ousnesse. Lastly, the sinne is great be∣ause the temptation is not reat. Such have not that to say or themselves which many o∣her sinners have: Chrys. in Matt. 26-hom 82. the com∣lexion of the body helpes for∣ward other sinnes (at least en think so:) a sanguine sappy ody is thought to encline with
some force to the sinne of un∣cleannesse: such againe as are hot and dry of complexion, a most subject to choler, an Physicians are called and used to drive away the edge of these hu∣mors: and in these matters 'tis true that the manners of the minde doe much, ay too much follow the humors of the body▪ but now for covetousnesse, it holds little or nothing of the bo∣dy; and covetous men them∣selves do not thinke nor say that it is long of their complexion▪ and never yet did any goe to physicke for a pill to purge ou this covetous humour. Where∣fore it is only from the evill ha∣bit of the mind, and the depra∣ved complexion of the soule; wherefore this sinne is so much the more culpable, in that it is not at all under the nature o our body, but onely under th corrupt humour of our will. W have medicines to purge cho∣ler, and to purge melancholy▪
but none to purge covetous∣nesse: wherefore in this sinne the complexion of the body is onely a stander by, a meere loo∣ker on. SECT. 3. That all men are more or lesse covetous. THere is no man living but is sickish at least of this dis∣ease. It growes in the flesh, and breeds in the bones of all. Some are given over to it: all are more or lesse given to it. One disease may take away the feeling of another: and so some thinke they are not covetous, because they feele it not; whereas perhaps pride and prodigality, perhaps something else doth master this disease, and keepe it under so, that such feele it not: and if you marke it, such as are trans∣ported with some other passion
of vaine glory or worse, do shew much worldlinesse withall. You shall see how they trouble their owne house, vexing at servants because they get no more, hea∣ving at the wife for that shee saves no more. They about them are scarce quiet in their beds; and yet because there is predo∣minant and prevailing in them some spending humour, forsooth they do thinke themselves, and others must thinke them to bee free from covetousnesse. Where∣as in truth no man can simply wash himselfe from this corrup∣tion; and Martin Luther was out, when he said hee stood free from covetousnesse. It is a chiefe piece of originall sinne, and they that take themselves to be free by nature are least free. For how can they bee freed from it, sith they never in any particular wise prayed against it, or set the Word, or the threatning, or the promise against it? Sinnes use not of themselves to cure them∣selves,
but rather they doe mul∣tiply, and encrease, and grow in our hands, and 'tis our simplici∣ty to thinke otherwise. And therefore such are in worst case of all, who did never set against this sinne in any earnest, because they thought who ever was free from it they were. 1 Poore men they passe it o∣ver to rich men, and alas, what have they to be covetous of▪ as though it came from without. The Apostles were poore fel∣lows, and had nothing to be co∣vetous of, yet (take heed) is not enough, but take heede and be∣ware of covetousnesse, Luk. 12. 15. Hee is a covetous man who loves money, though hee have no money: and I thinke that poore men are generally more covetous and worldly than rich. The sluggard lusteth and hath nothing, Prov. 13. 4. and the cause is, because they do not thinke that they are covetous, & therefore they pray not against
it, and so get no power against it: wherefore the oppression of a poore man (an effect of cove∣tousnesse) is like a sweeping raine, (Pro. 28. 3.) some thunder shower; they take all before them. Sith then it is a sin which is bred and borne with them, ex∣cept poore men be convinced of it, and use the meanes to cure it, they are deadly sicke of cove∣tousnesse. Besides, poore men wonder at riches as at some ex∣cellent thing, whereas rich men finde by experience there is no such thing in riches. 2 Secondly, Rich men, they thinke that they need not be co∣vetous, they have enough. Ge. 33. 9. Esau's is  i. e. I have much. Jacobs vers. 11.  i. e. I have all things. Esau indeed said so, and so did Jacob; but yet in the originall Esau's enough is not the same with Ja∣cobs: one said it and thought it, the other onely said it. But what doe riches serve for? Of all one would thinke, that riches would cure a man of this disease of co∣tousnesse, if of any sin: and yet
we finde that men are the worse this way, the more they have of the worlds goods; and fewell will put out fire, as soone as ri∣ches will extinguish worldli∣nesse. Thus we see the passions of rich men are stronger after riches, than of poore men. Wee never read of any poore man sicke unto death for anothers garden, as King Ahab tooke his bed for Naboths vineyard. In∣deed, if other matters doe con∣curre, and there be a like porti∣on of reason and religion, the poore man hath the advantage of the rich. For the one his de∣sire is to have to live, and there is some limit and stint: but the desire of the rich is to thrive, and there is no limit nor end of that desire. It growes all upon fancie, and for certaine rich men are in greatest danger of all, there being more snares in a great estate than in a little e∣state. Of all they love riches most when it is of their owne
Plat. de Just. l. 31. Dial. 1. Arist. Rhet. l. 2. getting, as wee doe bookes of our owne making, and men doe children of their owne beget∣ting. A state too bigge is trouble∣some, like a shoe too bigge, which hinders our gate as well as a shoe too little. All, both rich and poore, high and low, are so farre covetous as they have not got power against it by the word and promise, by faith and prayer. SECT. 4. That covetousnesse is a dan∣gerous temptation. WE read of the deceitful∣nesse of riches, Matth. 13. 22. Nothing cozens a man so much. Men goe on, and thinke no hurt, & as long as they make profit, they are so pleased with it, that gaine is godlinesse to them: and we (naturally) doe so
admire the things of this life, that we thinke God would ne∣ver give riches to us, did he not love us. Where we love we be∣stow our wealth, and we thinke that whom God loveth he en∣richeth, and whom he enricheth he loveth. And a common speech it is with us, that God hath bles∣sed such or such a man: I knew (say we) his beginning, and how wonderfully the Lord hath bles∣sed him in a short time, & raised him to a great estate; and thus for a time the hearts of wise men are set upon riches. And there∣fore when men come to see with Gods eyes▪ this proves a terrible temptation. For what wee are most vehement after, for that, when wee come to some ripe∣nesse in grace, then wee heare a new note. That which before was scarce a sinne, nay almost a vertue, is now a sinne of sinnes. What I, a Christian; one bound for heaven, to be an earth∣ly minde! I thought i had
the love of the Father, because I had the world at will: but now I see, I feele, I finde to my cost that such as love the world, the love of the Father is not in them, 1 Joh. 2. 15. We cannot bring heaven and earth toge∣ther. There is no mixing of hea∣venlinesse and worldlinesse. I am a man not worthy to looke on God, or to have God look on mee, that have set so much of the world. Now I finde that men do blesse the covetous, Psal. 10. 3. but the Lord abhorres them And God hath given mee over to many other noisome lusts, to make this lust of covetousnesse to be noysome to mee. Ah wret∣ched man, that have beene an idolater now for so many yeares and have made a God of the shels of the Tower, and have e∣ven lost the life of grace for a little clay. And 'tis certaine, that this sinne, when once it comes to be seene in its true and right colours, will stare a man in the
face, and make an hideous cry in the conscience; and many a man hath beene even at the pit of despaire for sucking so after the world, it being a sinne so con∣trary to God and godlinesse: and the longer we are cousened with the skill of hell, and held in the chaines of this corruption, the worse it is when the ulcer breakes forth; and it puts a man even quite besides himselfe. He cannot pray for the world: there is no entrance for the Word because of the world: he can relish no talke but of buy∣ing and selling; getting and sa∣ving is all his life: he is follow∣ed with many dangerous lusts; he growes weary of life and light: and yet all this while a man may stand amongst men for a religious man. A drunkard, and a very religious man one cannot be, but a worldly Judas, an earth-worme, and a very reli∣gious man one may be; I meane, one may bee accounted so a∣mongst
men: chiefly, if so be that we doe vent our covetousnesse, not so much in getting and ha∣ling from others, as in saving and keeping within the com∣passe of our owne; whereas a man may be extreame worldly, and is indeed most properly covetous, when hee is all for sa∣ving, and useth no unlawfull wayes to gaine and rake in from others. And this doth drench men in this earthly humour, that as long as all is but their owne, they thinke all well, and thus they grow secure (though not safe); whereas not to give when wee should, is as bad a piece of covetousnesse, as to get where we should not: and when things come to a reckoning, alas the day that ever Christian soules should tast of such bitter sauce for seeking great things to themselves; and thereby they passe many a lamentable night when they finde out them∣selves to have beene covetous,
who did not once dreame of it. Saint Paul calls this sinne all that is naught. He can scant in∣vent names bad enough for this wickednesse. Idolatry: What else? The roote of all evill, sets all lusts on fire: and lusts in Hippoe: ad: Dem. beasts indeed are unruly, yet they are finite; but in men they are infinite. A Tentation. What else? A snare; and more, drowns men in perdition. Is that all? No, and in destruction too; cloyes a man with many foolish and hurtfull lusts. They thinke they have all the wit who can get money, but their lusts are foolish lusts. They take money to be a great helpe, but it fils a man full of hurtfull lusts; hurt∣full to others and to themselves: for such pierce themselves. How? thorow (not with some onely, but) with many sorrows: yea, and worse yet, for it makes some to erre from the truth; and it had beene better for such ne∣ver to have knowne the wayes
of God. By all which wee see what a great blow it must needs give to the Conscience of a ma of God, when he once sees him∣selfe to bee over head and eares in this vice. Wherefore I con∣ceive it to be a wise speech of the Apostle, Fly these things, 1 Tim. 6. 11. and of another, The best coveting is to covet not to bee covetous. SECT. 5. How to bee convinced of covetousnesse. IF wee will not convince our selves to our comfort, God will convince us to our woe and the Conscience first or last shall bee made to speake when wee have little list to heare Wherefore it is good to be be forehand. We must be made to see it; better now than hereaf∣ter. Be not afraid: What if the
sight of this sinne in the ugly face thereof, and in its particular colours will cost us some hot wa∣ter? There is no danger, 'tis not the way to despaire: but to let all runne, to refuse to looke into the guiltinesse of this sinne, to bee afraid to account (now) with our consciences, is the way to bloody despaire hereafter, to hang in hell, and to hang per∣haps too on earth, before such come to hell. Satan tells us, that now to doe it is the way to me∣lancholy and despaire, that hee may the better fill all full of blood and fire at once hereafter. Bee doing now, and get to bee convinced, not onely negative∣ly, as not to be able to deny it to be a sinne, and that we in ma∣ny particulars are very faulty, but affirmatively to be set down in it, to affirme that it is a very great sin, and that wee have our hearts and hands deepe in this transgression. First, be willing to be convinced of the hainous∣nesse
of this crime. Many in∣deed are willing to be rich, and would indeed be loth ro bee co¦vetous: but because rich they thinke they cannot be, except they be having and saving, there∣fore they thinke it fit and good to be neere: And for a world of particulars in buying and sel∣ling, they would leave them they say, were they convinced that they were covetous practi∣ses. Now they are not convin∣ced, because they will not, not because the case is not plaine e∣nough, nor because there is not enough said to prove such and such courses in getting and sa∣ving to be notorious, and to sa∣vour strong of the earth, but be∣cause they are at a point not to leave them; and therefore they will not bee convinced; and this is, because (as the Apostle saith) They WILL BE rich, 1 Tim. 6. 9. They are loth that their consciences should tell them that they live in sinne.
And wee Divines doe assure men, that it is not sinne to them ill they be convinced; this they catch at, and say that they are not convinced: but our divinity is, when they would faine bee convinced, but are not, not be∣cause they would not, but be∣cause they cannot; that in this case ignorance and non-con∣vincement doth helpe. But now when these men are not convin∣ced because they will not; as when the thing is plaine, and carries convincement in the mouth of it, in this case 'tis all one as though they did what they were sure were a sinne, and worse too: for their not being convinced hath much obstinacyNegligentia addiscendi, vel voluntas non addis∣cendi. Du∣rand. l. 3. D. 22. q. 3. n. 3. and wilfulnesse in it; or at the best, this their ignorance comes out of too too much negligence. These help themselves with this, that they know some good Di∣vines that hold such and such dealings to bee lawfull, as to set or fell money, to sell for day, to
marry for mony, to enclose and depopulate: but that will be no answer to the conscience of  man when it is opened. For ther is scarce any sinne but a ma may sinne it, and say hee is no convinced of it to be a sinne. Fo one Divine holds one thing t be lawfull, another good Scho∣lar holds another thing to be lawfull; and so in the rest  man may picke matter out of se∣verall Divines, some one for one thing, and some one for another, to dispense with almost ever thing. Bee willing then o bee convinced, and the Spirit will convince us that covetousnesse is a sinne, and that wee are all too too worldly, and that in this earthly veine, in many things we sinne all, I am. 3. 2. in all for the manner, in many for the ve∣ry matter. 2 Secondly, it is not enough t be convinced: we must goe fur∣ther. Convincement of it selfe i no note of saving grace. The Di∣vell
sins against convincement, nd so doe all who sinne against nowledge and conscience, and ch as sinne of malice: and the nne against the Holy Ghost is herefore the worst sinne of all, ecause it is cleerly and flat a∣ainst convincement. And herefore to bee convinced is ood, if it come to good and rove good; if we fall to mourne nd to forsake our earthly min∣ednesse: but if when wee are onvinced, we sin and grow ra∣her worse than better, runne a∣way with the bit in our mouthes, then our sinne is the greater and our case the worser because wee are convinced, it hewes wee are growne head∣trong. Wherefore with con∣vincement wee must begin, but we must not end with it. 3 Thirdly, use meanes of be∣ng convinced that wee are worldly and covetous: as by way of faith to beleeve it, be∣cause wee are borne in originall
sinne, and that this is a great and a chiefe roote in our origi∣nall sin to lust after the worldly is an hereditary disease, a sinn lying deepe in our nature; and when men have not killed it, or not crucified the world, the world must needs be their God. Diseases that we are borne with are not cured with ease, as borne blinde, borne deafe; so borne covetous, borne worldly. There¦fore it is long ere one shall get power. I write unto you Fathers, that is, strong Christians, that you love not the world, 1 Joh. 2. 13. that is, no one thing of the world. So that a man may be a very mortified man, a Fa∣ther, and yet be very subject to dote on the world. So those who have done nothing to speake of in any particular man¦ner against this sinne of cove¦tousnesse, must needs be very full without any more question. Every man, and every woman must say within themselves, I
am a covetous man, a covetous woman, and the lesse I have felt t the worse it is, and the more ovetous I am: and if I looke not to it betime, I shall feele it with a witnesse one day. Next, inde out this disease by theJob 31. 25. fruits of it; as thus: I can joy when goods encrease, I can grieve when I receive a losse in mine estate. I can finde my selfe a glad man when I have a commodity to sell, if it be deare: if my ser∣vant, when he comes from town, sell cheaper than before, then I am sorry; if dearer, then I can be glad. Oh this is very cove∣tousnesse. Againe, when a man is loath to part with his money to a good use; here is covetous∣nesse. Men thinke themselves free, because they can poure out their money upon a feast, upon building, upon apparrell, upon their children, upon worse: but say one can doe all this, a man is but a true lover of himselfe: as Luk. 16. 19. that rich man spent
royally on himselfe, he was n in debt to his backe or belly, y a very churle. And Nabal co feast (saith the text) like a Kin yet for all that it was but a m¦sers feast. But if such an one ca finde that a pound is ready thi way, but Gods way (I meane to give to the poore, to besto on a good use, a penny com harder than a pound; here is co∣vetousnesse. In the other cas pride is stronger than covetous∣nesse: but when wee can drop our blood as soone as our m∣ney when it is directly and im∣mediately on God, this is to b covetous. This I finde in my¦selfe, therefore I am hard and covetous, and the end will bee naught unlesse I mend my man∣ners. 4 Fourthly, be convinced i affection, as well as in judge¦ment, not onely to see it to be sinne, and a sinne in thee, but t hate it. Naturally all the waye of a man are cleane in his own
yes, Prov. 16. 2. And though e say wee are all sinners, yet when it comes to particulars, no men doe acknowledge them∣selves to be sinners. A covetous man thinkes all the world to be covetous except himselfe; hee hath reason for what hee doth, o make the most of his owne. He hath Nature and Scripture or it to provide for his owne: and Christ saith, Let nothing be lost. This hinders convince∣ment in affection, in that wee love the sinne, because we love the fruit, the profit of it. The Law will convince the judge∣ment; but it is the Gospel which doth convince the lust and the affection. The Spirit of love doth convince: it is the Spirit of power, 2 Tim. 1. 7. and this comes not by the workes of the Law, but by the hearing of faith, Gal. 3. 2. to wit, by the Gospel. For by the Gospel wee fall in love with God, with Christ, with the promises. Now
a man must love something th is better than the world, e hee cannot chuse but love t world. He must see a better co¦moditie, a truer gaine in Go else he will let his heart goe af∣ter the earth: and hee is to take more delight in heaven, else hee will have his delight in the earth. No man can long hold together without some princi∣pall matter (at least in his con∣ceit) to rejoice in. For the reason why we do delight in such poore matters (as the things of th world are, being compared to the noble minde of a man) is, for that we have no better things to take delight in. Let us learne then to be convinced in our af∣fection of love: first, that the matters here are not worthy ou love: secondly, to know the things of heaven to be infinite¦ly better: thirdly, to acknow∣ledge a soveraigne good in them: fourthly, and to get an as∣surance and a sound taste of
them; and then the world and the things of the world will taste but dead in our hearts. Sweete things spoyle the taste of ones drink: and there is a superexcel∣lent & a transcendent sweetnesse in the delights of the promises, which when wee have caught once, away then with earthly profits, treasures, pleasures, de∣lights: All is but dung and trash, Phil. 3. 8. Honey, and the honey combe is nothing to the con∣tent and sweetnesse we finde in things above, Psal. 19. 10. Some delight in the sweetnesse of things, as younger people; Da∣vid tells them that the word is sweeter than live honey drop∣ping from the very combs: o∣thers again are all for the gaine and profit that is to be made, as elder people; David in the same place tels them that the word is better and more to be desired; What, than silver? No, than gold, yea than much gold (ever∣somuch hee meanes) ay thn
much fine gold. 'Tis then because wee have not tasted that the Lord is gracious, (1 Pet. 2. 3.) that we dote so on this world. If wee had tasted deepe of the heavenly gift, we would not bee so licorish after the world as we be, but would say with David, Psal. 119. 103. Thy words are sweeter unto my taste than hony to my mouth. And, I am now become a stranger in the earth, hide not thy Commandements from mee: doe not suffer mee to hide my selfe from them, but re∣veale them to mee (almost) whether I will or no. Looke upward, and get acquaintance with heaven: Hunt after sha∣dowes and flies no longer: bee for heaven alone. Wee strive to no purpose, and doe but beate the aire as long as we goe about to take our affection from things wee see, till by faith wee see better. Wee must have our heaven in heaven, or else wee shall set up our heaven here on
the earth; see better things to be trusted unto, or else we shal make a God of this world, and trust to lying vanities rather than to nothing. The affection of love being thus wonne, all other affe∣ctons follow after accordingly: and though the judgement should carry the affection after it still, yet alwayes it doth not. For the affections can tell how to bride the judgement, and with their smoake to dazle the eye of our minde, and to woo away the last resolution of our judgement. For the understan∣ding of a man is quicke, and turnes almost at an instant, and therefore to hold the understan∣ding firme to the last it is excel∣lent, to set our affections on things above, and then Pro. 1. 24. the wayes of life will be above to the wise. (So saith Solomon the wise) fooles be for things below, but wise men are all for things a∣bove; above the common strain, above themselves, above the
world: they live in heaven. Let us then seeke (and Tert. de praescrip. c. 9. & 10. finde) the Kingdome of heaven, and for other matters, matters of the world, they will Matt. 6. 3. seeke us. Fall in love with heaven, and the things of heaven, and then wee shall not love the world nor the things of this world. SECT. 6. How to be cured of cove∣tousnesse. WE must know that wee can never be so healed of it, as not to finde and feele some bitter rootes of it, still rea∣dy to set our teeth on edge. Let your conversation bee without covetousnesse. What, simply? No covetousnesse at all! That cannot bee; but let not cove∣tousnesse raigne. Let it not be in us in the guilt or in the power; in our consciences in the guilt, in
our hearts and lives in the power. Be you as free from it as possibly you can, and when wee have all done, say, I am too too covetous still. Lord have mercy on mee; now I am leaving the world I am earthly still: now I am to be weaned I am longing to sucke the breast still: the lon∣ger I sucke the worse I am to be weaned. Christ must be our Ad∣vocate when wee have done all, else wee are gone, wee are un∣done. 1 First, wee must know and confesse that wee can neither pardon nor cure our selves. Age helpes against many sins; here it doth hurt. For to shew us that this sinne is utterly against all reason, when we are old and lea∣ving the world, why then we are worst in raging love to the world: we then sing loath to de∣part with this earth, when wee see that a little will serve to bring us to our grave; and though we are ready to kisse the earth
for age, yet then wee are even sicke after the world; nothing sits so merry with us then as the world. One would thinke that when we have gotten that wise∣dome and experience as to find what the world is, viz. lighter than vanity, yet I know not how the hearts of good men do steale▪ after the world strangely in their old age. Hence we see Solomon, and Asa, and Uzziah fell in their old age. Therefore it is certaine age will not doe it, nor will money doe it. For the more we have the more we de∣sire to have. What makes us set so much of money? One would thinke if riches would cure any sinne, it should be covetousnesse: and many desire it to stay the rage of this affection; but wee see that the richer the harder, part with nothing, as in Dives; like children with mouthes full, and both hands full, yet they will rather spoyle it than give away any: & therefore 'tis out of
our hands to heale this sicknes. And many had made some cure but that they went about it by their own strength; & then we see the more we strive (leaving Christ out) the more covetous we are. 2 Secondly, wee must goe to God and to Christ, first to par∣don it, and then to cure it; and wee must begin at the moare within: else if we lop off the aets and boughs, and let the roote a∣lone, a Non est i∣dem resur∣gere à pec∣cato, & ces∣sare ab actu peccandi▪  Durand D▪ 8. q. 3.  ceasing there may bee for a time, but no healing, no cure done. The love of money doth remaine, and spring up it will againe Mat. 12. 45▪ seaven for one. By faith in Christ, and prayer to Christ sucke the poyson out. Say, Ah Lord, I am so worldly that I cannot tell what to make of my selfe, nor what to doe with my self▪ Help Lord, help quickly, take away the sting, ease my con∣science; take away the strength, ease mine heart; wash away the filth, purge my soule that I may live in thy sight; and then (but
not till then) the Word and or∣dinances will be sweet and good unto my soule. 3 Thirdly, goe to the Bible, set the Word against this sinne: the Word is as plaine as may be against this vice; yet wee see men passe plain places over: and 'tis no small marvell; for Christ was often upon it, that his King∣dome was not of this world. He did shun all earthly pompe on purpose: and yet how did the Apostles themselves dreame of a temporall Kingdome? and e∣ven then when Christ was pres∣sing it hard, that his Kingdome was not of this world, yet then (I say) some of the chiefe A∣postles would needs be great of∣ficers about him when he came to his Kingdome; and being re∣proved for it, and (I thinke) sor∣ry for it, yet they were at it a∣gaine and again, no fewer times than thrice. They did not see the plaine light, because it was an opinion that they had beene
bred in, and made for their pur∣pose. Wee are loth to see what we would not have to be true, and to beleeve things against our minde, bee the places never so plaine. And so it is with a world of particulars in covetousnesse. The word is cleare, and yet wee see how the Apostles themselves did not see the meaning of what the Lord himselfe spake very often in their hearing. Therefore the Joh. 16. 9. Spirit must bee had and used, else all will not doe. The Word cannot worke it without the Spirit: the Spirit will not with∣out the Word; both joyned to∣gether will doe the deed. The heart when it is set upon by the converting and convincing Spi∣rit of God, will yeeld to the Word. A man shall finde that (as other sinnes, so) this sinne of covetousnesse will dy and weare away, now some and then some. It cannot stand before the Word and Spirit of God. In drunken∣nesse▪
and lasciviousnesse, and some other sinnes, Reason may doe somewhat: and men doe thinke that a little drunkennesse is a sinne; but with most a little worldlinesse goes for a vertue: and Reason will plead hard for this sinne. What! men must live as others do: the world is hard, and men must doe as they may. There is no living as others do, that is, growing rich in hast, ex∣cept we do as others do. And till the hearts & wils of men be ma∣stered by the Word and Spirit of God, a covetous man will have somthing to say. He will find one evasion, one distinction or other: and many heape up riches rather for that they would bee set of, and not left out, than for any thing else. Charge (saith S. Paul, 1 Tim. 6. 17.) them that are rich that they be not HIGH MINDED. Men get a fat purse to maintaine an high minde: But when the Spirit comes with its mighty worke, then here I
am, Lord, speake for thy servant heareth (1 Sam. 3. 10.); there is an end of disputing: Sathan him∣selfe hath no more to say. No∣thing under heaven can make the heart of man come downe but the Spirit of God. Men speake but too true when they say, that Preachers shall never perswade them from making the most of their owne, that they will never beleeve such and such propositions which conclude a∣gainst their profit. For all the preaching in the world with∣out the worke of the Spirit cannot reach the heart of a man in any sinne, but chiefly not in this sinne, which hideth in the very bottome of the heart▪ If the Gen. 9. 27. Illabi in ani∣mam conve∣nit soli Deo. Aquin. 3▪ q. 64. 1. c. Lord perswade Japheth, Japheth will and must yeeld, but not till then. 4 Fourthly, desire to bee par∣doned and healed, that God may have the glory, that hee may have the praise of all; and then in the second and third
place wee may come to the o∣ther ends, as that I may have rest in my minde, quiet in mine heart, and in mine house, and that I may finde a blessing from the Almighty; but the chiefe and maine must bee the glory of God: else wee serve our selves, and seeke our owne respects. Excellent is that of Agur, Give not poverty (so that God must give us to bee poore, else all the world cannot make us poore) lest I bee poore and steale, Prov. 30. 8. And what? bee fined? bee made to restore fourefold? bee put into the gaole? No, but lest I take the name of God in vaine: that is, cause men to think ill of God, to see me deny it to his shame and mine, that such a man (as I have shewed to bee) should steale (a base sinne). This is the way to bee cured: else if wee seeke our selves, or our owne soules quiet in it, and doe not begin with the glory and honour of God, wee are like
to lose our labour, and to be as farre off at the last as at the first. 5 Fifthly, pray hard against this disease. It will come and rise in our hearts amaine. The moti∣ons of it od so please, that they are up and past ere they are dis∣cerned, without great care. Wee are to pray to God to give us a sight of this disease in the moti∣ons of it, that wee may by his grace suppresse it ere it rise to its height: and prayer will make us give over to be cove∣tous; but pray in & with the Spi∣rit, and the Spirit (as 'tis in the. originall, Ro. 8. 26.) lifts with us and before us in our prayers. 6 Sixthly, let us exercise our selves in the acts of giving and lending. For sometimes it is a greater worke of mercy to lend than to give. Give much, give often; Eccl. 11. 2. Give (not a little, but) a portion to seven, and also to eight. And, To him that hath shall bee given, Matt. 25. 29.
that is, to him that useth that he hath shall bee more given: hee doth not say hee shall HAVE more, but more shall bee GIVEN. In morall habits the act, and exercise, and use of those habits, doe intend and en∣crease the habits by the force of a customary use of the actions of those habits; as to enure on's selfe to temperate courses, doth encrease the vertue, and aug∣ment the habit of temperance, because there bee seedes of such vertues in our nature to be fetched out. But it is not so in graces, in supernaturall habits of Spirituall and Theologicall vertues. For they are of meere gift, by infusion from heaven, not onely in the habits themselves, but in the degrees and encrease of them, and not by eduction from any power preexistent, or disposition coexistent in our na∣ture. Wee have of our selves no hand in getting or in encrea∣sing spirituall vertues and super∣naturall
habits: only the promise is for us, that in case we do exer∣cise our selves in the duties and actions of any graces, God hath bound himselfe to preserve them, to adde unto them, to en∣crease them, to put more unto the heape, and to cast in some more degrees of holinesse into the old store. We must then in∣ure our hearts and hands to give. And as it is a morall ver∣tue, it will encrease by the force and strength of morall exercise: and as it is a divine quality, so wee shall have more by the meere gift and promise of God. The encrease is the gift of God, 1 Cor. 3. 7. Use makes mastery, and exercise doth make us doe things with ease and delight. There is nothing lost by giving: We shall finde it, saith Salomon, Eccles. 11. 1. But when? after many dayes. Cast thy bread up∣on the waters. As good (say we) throw it downe Thames, wee shall never see it againe. Yes
that wee shall one day. What if after many dayes? yet at last, and at the best it shall be found. How many the word saith not; but 'tis enough that we have a promise that wee shall be payed for giving, and for staying too. Were there no reward proposed & promised, yet this were enough to move us to give, for that it is an honor to be an instrument of Gods glory. We think it a great favour in case wee may bee for the honour of our Soveraigne Lord the King, albeit we gaine not a groat by it, but venture life and all: but now sith we hereby shall not onely be a meanes to glorifie God, but even in this life to reward our selves also, Give therefore a portion to se∣ven and also to eight. Care not how much portion we give, nor to how many (in case wee beg∣ger not our selves by it.) Oh but I doe best to keepe that I have against hereafter. Who knowes what dayes may come?
Ay, because evill dayes are like to come on the earth, what therefore? hide all? give no∣thing? No, no, give the rather: for (saith Solomon, Eccles. 11. 2.) Thou knowest not what evill may come on the earth: There∣fore give liberally, it being the best way to provide against the evill to come. Act. 20. 35. Better it is (said Christ often) to give than to re∣ceive. Wee thinke it better to receive a pound than to give a penny, and we are all for recei∣ving: but it is farre better to give, better for us, better for such as doe receive. Yet we must not therefore give, because we would finde an increase by it in the later end; that were to serve our selves upon God, to give a pur∣pose that hee should give us a∣gaine, and wee get by the bar∣gaine: but in case we should ne∣ver see penny againe, yet wee must give, and give, and give our selves over to giving, and expect our reward in heaven. Now God
in a second and third place to help our infirmities hath promi∣sed us, that our seed shall multi∣ply upon the earth. It is a sow∣ing, and the more seed wee sow, the greater crop wee shall have, and wee shall have heaven and earth too, as farre as is good and fit for us to have, and for God to give: Ay, giving is so rare and admirable a piece of service, that such as have nothing but what they Eph▪ 4. 28. Act. 20. 34. yearne, must worke a lit∣tle the harder, that they may have to give to such as lack. And what if we our selves doe feele some lacke, and are in need? yet we are like to meet with such as need more than we doe, and to them we must give somewhat of that we get by our fingers ends. Besides, this giving increaseth love, not only from them to us to whom we give, but chiefly from us to them to whom we do give. We doe truly and heartily love such as we give unto, more than they doe or can love us
that doe give unto them. For as wee hate such as the objects of our sin and wrong, to whom-we doe any hurt, from whom wee take any thing: as a lying tongue hates those that are afflicted by it, Prov. 26. 28. so on the other side, we love those to whom we doe give, as the objects of our vertues. As our Creatour God loves us because he makes us, so we doe (as it were) set them up and make them; and wee love our children to whom wee doe good, more than they can love us. It is a blessed thing to re∣ceive when a man hath need; but 'tis a more blessed thing to give than to receive. Psal. 41. 1. Blessed (saith the Prophet David) is he that i. e. qui praeoccupat vocem peti∣turi. Aug. in Psal. 103. considereth the poore. What? to say, Alas poore man! the world is hard with him, I would there were a course taken to doe him good. No, no, but so to consider him as to give; to give till the poore man be satisfied, to draw out ones sheafe, ay ones very
soule to the hungry. But what if troubles should come? were it not better to keep mony by one? Mony will not deliver one. It may be an occasion to endanger one, to bring one in rather than to help one out of trouble: but if a man be a mercifull man, God will deliver him either by him∣selfe, or by some other man or matter. Ay, but what if sicknesse come? why the Lord will streng∣then him in the bed of Psal▪ 41. 3. langui∣shing; and, which is a great ease and a kindnesse, God (as it were) himselfe will make his bed in his sicknesse. Here poore people have the advantage: for they are they who can best make the beds of sicke folke, which we see is a great act of mercy, in that it is said, that the Lord himselfe will make their beds in▪ their sicknesse: and there are none so poore but they may make the beds of the sicke. This made Saint Paul refuse to re∣ceive, but ready to give. This
tood for S. Pauls confort: I have (said he) coveted no mans sil∣ver, Act. 20. 33. Hee said not hat he had not taken any thing from any man, but hee had not oved nor coveted any thing that was anothers. Againe, we are not only to be liberall, but in case there be oc∣casion we are to bee munificent also. For he is covetous, not only who is not liberall, but he also who is not munificent. So they were Luk. 23.  commended by Gods own pen who bought unguents & costly spices to embalme the body of Christ after the maner of Princes and Grandies. There∣fore we must not only do things for need, but for state and for ho∣nour; chiefly sith God is not only liberall, but bountifull and munificent to us. I speake of such as are able; for we may not stretch beyond our staple, and poyle all. I must not make my selfe poore to keepe another from being poore; throw my
selfe into the same degree of need, to helpe another in and a∣gainst his need. The Mar. 12. 43, 44. widow who cast in all that shee had, binds us not by her example, because what shee did give, shee gave it rather to and for the ser∣vice of God than to the poore: it was to Gods boxe, not to the poores boxe, shee gave all that she had. So that we may give all to maintaine and hold up Gods worship, but not so in giving to the poore. Her example was admirable to free her from cove∣tousnesse, who could part with all for, and to the Lord; chiefly shee beeing a woman, a sexe through the weaknesse and fears of that sexe, more subject to bee covetous then man. Howsoever when the case doth require, and our estate will beare it, we must not onely be liberall but mu∣nificent: which is not onely an higher step in the same vertue, but another superiour vertue of another kind: for liberality and
munificencie doe differ in the species and very nature: they make two vertues, not two de∣grees of one and the same ver∣tue. To conclude, the rule is, that an excellent and ready way to be able to get mony out of our owne fingers, is to accustome our selves to give much and of∣ten. And as corruption and cu∣stome meeting together, worke very forcibly in sinnes; so in du∣ties, where grace and custome joyne hands, there we finde the worke to be done with delight and ease; and such prove at last to become to bee givers with∣out grudging, 1 Pet. 4. 9. Libe∣rality is a vertue which onely of all vertues is above envie. Some do discommend such as are just, but all commend the liberall and bountifull man, because all may get by him; and therefore we have the advantage of it, that we may study to shew our selves liberall, and not bee vexed with the evill eye of any, but rather
have thankes from God and man: therefore give without grudging, and (as S. Paul hath it, Rom. 12. 8.) with cheerfulnesse; and of a ready minde, 2 Cor. 8. 19. and if the minde be ready the purse will be ready. SECT. 7. Why, and to whom wee must give. TO all, but chiefly to the poore, such as are in need: and need in a case, or in some one particular point may befall a rich man. But when they doe make their owne need, and through pride or folly doe oc∣casion their owne occasions and wants, and do desire that wee should give or lend, here we are to withhold, and not to feed the lusts & humors of men: For in such diseases ranke feeding doth hurt. But when there is a
rue and reall need which God makes, and they themselves doe not make, and cannot of them∣selves put off; here wee are to give and spare not. Give to them that need, to keepe them from need, and so by consequence from sin. For who knowes what need may force a man to doe? Now need is not onely for the belly, but for the backe also, ay and for firing also. Wood was a won∣der Lam. 5. 4. heretofore to be sold at a rate, but now poore people have most to doe to get fire. For they may get a small piece of money to buy a loafe, but cannot get so much together as to buy and get home a load of wood. Besides, there is an use for a poore body to aske a piece of bread and an old garment: but to come to ones doore and to aske for a faggot, a billet, or so, were strange. And therefore it were to bee wished that men would shew their mercy in this case, to provide for poore people,
lest they steale and take the Name of God in vaine. Neither must we take delight in it when wee have occasion to save our selves from giving, if there be a∣ny occasion come in why law∣fully we may, and (perhaps) we must forbeare (as not to give when wee see them cast it away on drinke): but a liberall heart should take it as a crosse; and wee are covetous and out of the way, if we finde that our hearts are glad that we have just occa∣sion (at this present) not to give, and so may (as we thinke) save our money and our consciences also: this is covetousnesse. As also when a man doth give be∣cause hee dares not chuse, but gives to a poore body for feare of his owne conscience, and would rather than any thing that his conscience would give him leave not to give, but to get and save as others doe: here is too much covetousnesse; and therefore when we meete with
fit men, wee must bee glad that wee have meanes and occasion to give to seven and to eight: ay and in cases that bee there∣after, we must give beyond our ordinary ability; give even almost all away, as Mat. 10. 42. Christ inti∣mates, to a cup of cold water: and there is none but hath a dish of water to give; yea cold wa∣ter, as not to be able to be at the Quod lig∣num non ha∣buerit unde calefaceret aquam. Aug. in Ps. 125. charge of heating of it. If it be but a cup of cold water in that hot climate, it is accepted, in and through the promise which is Amen in Christ. Heaven is to be had for little or nothing, for a sigh, for a Aug. hom. 13. cup of cold water. Wherefore it is a great gift of God when a man hath a free heart, and can bee master of his purse, and can turne that he hath the right way: it being conside∣rable that the Lord is sayd to punish in all the Parables of that nature in the Gospell, such as do abuse their substance ei∣ther in too much wasting or spa∣ring;
albeit our greatest dan∣ger doth lye in sparing: this being also proper to this sinne of covetousnesse, that whereas in other vices the Suus ui∣que modus est, tamen magis offen∣dit nimium quam parum. Cic. de Orat. l. 1. excesse is har∣dest to cure, here the defect is most incurable, it being by oddes more easie to cure a wa∣ster than a saver; and the rather, because it doth partake much of frugality, which is a vertue wee all admire. SECT. 8. A removall of such shewes as men have why they may be worldly. THe heart of man is Jer. 17. 9.  &  im∣port crook∣ed, crafty, deceitfull, wretched, desperately sicke unto death. de∣ceitfull and wicked above all things, and the wit of man is active to excuse or defend what ever pleaseth us. If wee cannot say, it is not done, then the next is to say it is no sinne, it is rather a vertue than a
fault. Thus wee see how sinne makes men to fall into errours a purpose to quiet the conscience. As Mar. 8. 15. Matt. 16. 6. Herod fell into the here∣sie of the Sadducees, that there was no being after this life, that death did end it selfe and all, and that there was no pleasure nor paine after death, and all to stupifie his conscience for the murther of John the Baptist. Thus men make it their religion to be irreligious, and pretend conscience in their owne divini∣ty, and all to be of no conscience at all. So doth this sinne of co∣vetousnesse: it makes men coine false Doctrines a purpose to get or save money: as usury to be no sinne, to sell for time to bee no fault, to make the most of ones owne to be frugality and thrift; to suffer nothing (no not the pa∣ring of ones nailes) to be lost, is to follow the counsell of our Lord Jesus. So the Pharisees made it a matter of conscience that Matth. 1. 4, 5, 6. children should starve
their owne parents to give to their boxe. So the Mat. 22. 17. Pharisees would most willingly pay Caesar his due, were it (forsooth) a thing lawfull, sith it was once dedica∣ted unto God. And thus when it was covetousnesse they would faine have it seeme to be consci∣ence; which made them questi∣on the lawfulnesse of paying tribute unto Caesar. But fie up∣on that branch of covetousnesse, which stinks as bad as hell, when under a pretence of Mat. 23. 14. long pray∣ers, they would like a whale de∣voure whole houses. Of whom? of widowes: not of virgins or wives, who were under covert of their parents or husbands; but widowes, weake for their sexe, and lying open to their spoile, because they have what they have at their owne dispo∣sing. And who be they who thus devoure and eate up widowes? why the Scribes and Pharisees, the great Rabbies of that age, who used in their Pulpits to
preach against covetousnesse in others: (a great Rom. 2. 21. aggravation of their sinne.) And what did they devoure? not their money and purses onely, no nor their beds under them only, but their whole houses. And why must they sweepe all thus? Under pre∣tence (saith the Text) of their long prayers: i. e. making them beleeve they should have great benefit by such long prayers; in∣somuch that all that ever the widowes had must ee all little enough to make them amends for the good they should re∣ceive by their prayers. Thus they made whole houses the price of their prayers, which hypocrisie of theirs made their sin the greater; and they did (saith Christ) receive the grea∣ter damnation. Let him goe then for the worst of covetous men, who makes religion a meanes to devoure others, and a cloake for his covetousnesse. And againe, there is a vile deceit, when wee
will bee very mercifull, and give something liberally, a purpose because we thinke God will take notice of us, & blesse us, and make us rich. Thus men abuse God and honest dealing, a purpose to serve their covetous dealings. We must then beware that re∣ligion be not made a cover for our covetousnesse, and that wee doe not say or thinke that it is conscience, when it is covetous∣nesse and nothing else. And this deceit such are most subject to, who are religiously given. Many pretences else men catch at to cover this filthy cup; as to have wherewith to doe good to o∣thers, whereas the more a man hath, commonly the lesse good he doth. Christ and his Apostles did most good this way in pro∣viding for poore people, and poore Churches, and yet they were poore. For 'tis the love (not the lacke) of money that makes men Churles; and the more money wee have the
more wee use to love it, and the lesse willing wee are to part with it. Moreover, it is for∣sooth against Gods Law, say they, to give to beggers: And why? There must (saith the text, say they) be no begger in Israel: But where is that text? not in the Bible that I know of. 1 Sam. 2. 8. wee reade that the Lord lifteth up the begger out of the dunghill, and so should wee: where the hebrew signifies beg∣ger as begger is distinguished from poore: and the greeke word in the New Testament, which is commonly translated poore, signifies Mat. 26. 11. . Tert. advers. Marcel. l 4. c. 14. begger proper∣ly and strictly. The poore (i. e. the begger) you have alwayes with you. Lazarus a begger, Barti∣meus a begger, and others were beggers. David saw none for his time onely. And againe (we say) we desire to be rich, not so much because wee love money, as for that we would not be bur∣densome to others▪ and are loth
to be beholding. 'Tis good not to be burdensome any more than needs wee must: but rich men be usually the greatest burdens of all, and it is pride that wee would not bee beholding to o∣thers; whereas wee cannot live without being beholding one to another: and generally rich men are more beholding to poore, than poore to rich, and poore men may live without the rich better than the rich can without the poore. 2 A second colour is, that they may have to live, and to bring the yeer and world about. Now if we would turne our de∣sire of living into a desire of li∣ving well, this would not be. For wee all doe desire to be here for ever; and we are in our thoughts immortall; for there is no man so old, but thinkes he shall live a day elder; and he that thinkes he shall live a day longer, doth upon the matter thinke he shall live ever, and never dye. And
hence it is, that our desire of ha∣ving riches (wherein we thinke our life consists) doth prove im∣mortall and infinite. 3. A third errour is, that men doe thinke that their happinesse doth consist in the pleasure and voluptuousnesse of the body. Now these lusts cannot be con∣tent with a little, but are with∣out measure, and in a man worse than in a beast. Hence they are apt to study to heape up riches without all stint, that they may have wherewith to serve the turne (not of grace, not of na∣ture neither, but) of sinne and Sathan. Pleasures necessary are satisfied with a little and with ease, being content with things easie to come by: pleasures not necessary, though not sinfull, we need not trouble our selves much about them: but for de∣lights carnall and sinfull, there is no stinting of them, no need, no use of these; they are a bur∣den to nature it selfe, therefore
they are to bee rejected. Thus we see how and why men do not referre money to its right end, but referre all to the getting and saving of money, as to the end of all; and men do make riches to be all in all, and a man is said to bee made when hee is made rich. The glutton would needs bee in his change of suits every day, and fare sumptuously every day (though to fare thus every day tooke away the sense of it). Now thus to weare, and thus to fare are costly ware. Such lusts will aske great cost and charges. Again, rich men thinke of living many Luk. 12. 19. yeares, and so do heape up much wealth to provide for so many yeares; and that night when they are plodding in their beds how to be richer, death comes and their Ps. 146. 4. thoughts pe∣rish in that very day. 4 A fourth deceit is, that men doe thinke that they doe so esteeme of a penny saved, be∣cause they have many children,
and were it not for their chil∣dren to breed them, and to mar∣ry them, they would not care so much as they do for the mucke of this world; whereas the truth is, that they get money for themselves and their owne lusts, and not for their owne children. A world of particulars do cleare this. 1 First; we see men that have no children are more covetous, and stand more upon a penny, then such as have. Neither doth the life of children consist in their riches: wee dreame so in∣deed; but riches and the care of riches doth cause death: and what a madnesse is it thus to bee foolish after riches to pro∣long when it doth shorten life? Such as have children about them are forced by necessity to part with money to provide necessities: and use makes them the more willing and able to part with that they have. Whereas they who have no
children are all for saving: they are put to it but seldome to lay out any thing, and therefore it is death to them to see any thing goe out of their fingers. 2 Secondly, such as have children, and while their chil∣dren are young, doe say and thinke that all their raking and coveting is for children, yet they breed them not the best, but the cheapest way; and when once their children are growne up, can part with nothing to place their sonnes: would faine marry their daughters, but for their blood they cannot abide to part with an answerable portion, not because they have it not, but because they have not a heart to part with it, and so suffer their daughters to passe over the Rom. 7. 36. flower of their youth in great and fearfull discontent. The marriage of the daughter must stay for the purchase, not the purchase for the marriage of the daughter: and when the
heire is up, he is sold rather than married; a great portion is all n all, and the father must have it: so hee is paid many times more than all is worth hee parts with to his sonne. 3 Thirdly, such as say that all is long of children, yet marke such, and if one or two of sixe or seven die, they are rather more covetous and hard than before. There is so much saved, and some necessary laying out bar∣red, and the more one doth save, the more he may still. The rich Luk. 12. 16. churle that was as cove∣tous▪ as ever hee could hold, had no children: so meanes the text by these words, Then Vers. 20. whose shall those things bee which thou hast provided? So that Hold-fast spoken Eccl. 4. 8. Psal. 39. 6. of, who was never satisfied, had no child nor brother. And therefore 'tis a meere mistake for men to thinke they save the paring of their nailes for their children, when wee finde that
this Qui hoc morbo pre∣muntur, & vitam paren∣tum senum graviter fe∣runt, & dulce illud, & na∣turae suavissi∣mum libero∣rum donum, grave & mo∣lestum esse censent: un∣de factum est, ut multi sterilitatem ux orum emerint, ac naturam orbam effecerint, qui etsi filios non interfecerunt natos, attamen ne omnino nascerentur effecerunt. Chrys. Hom. 29. in. Matt. 8. wicked humor doth not onely make brother sicke of brother, sister sicke of sister, children sicke of their father, but even parents sicke of their children: and the best comfort that many parents have when their children are dead and bu∣ried is, that there is one cared for, and so much saved. SECT. 9. A tryall of covetousnesse in us, how farre forth it may bee said to prevaile. ALas the day, it is wofull to see how all sorts of men deny themselves to be faulty in this sinne, wherein they are most faulty. Aske the young man, & he knowes not what it means to be
covetous; his toy takes him an∣other way, hee wonders what you meane to aske him any such question. Aske the aged man, and though by reason of feares and melancholy he is most sub∣ject to this disease, to make his riches his maintenance, his Psal. 30. 7. strong mountaine, yet he denies all, and he (forsooth) hath but a little time to live, and a little will now serve his turne, sith he is even at his journies end; and why should he be covetous now? it is too late now. And indeed because he is now past getting, therefore hee is now the more eager after saving; and yet he must not bee thought to bee worldly (not he.) Come to the poore man, and what should he be covetous of? Alas, he hath little or nothing about him. Come to the rich man, and he hath enough (as he saith) and why should hee bee covetous? though 'tis but from the teeth outward that hee saith hee hath
enough, who hath never enough; and the more he hath, the more he would have: and looke how many thousand he hath, so many thousand he wants. This is not Jacobs enough, but Esaus e∣nough, which albeit in the En∣glish the word (enough) be in both, yet in the originall the words differ; which shewes that the sense in those two brethren was different also. Some purge themselves, for that they can spend with the best; but this is nothing: for the Luke 16. Churle of all Churles could and did finde in his heart to fare royally, and spend like a young Prince on his back and belly; and like another Suet. in Nero. c. 30. Nero he was in his change of apparrell, a new suit for every day, and yet a covetous wretch, a meere earth-worme, not a crumme for Lazarus. Others thinke they stand cleere, because they let others alone with that which they have; but this serves not: for Dives is in Luke 16. 23. Hell, and
his enditement did passe against him, not for taking any thing from any man, but for that he did not Luke 16. ver. 21. distribute of his owne to the sicke and poore. The truth is, we are all too worldly given, and this sinne is in us all, we are more or lesse all of us sick of it, and we have need of a Re∣deemer, and to stand under mer∣cy for the pardon and cure of this sinne; and he that saith he hath no covetousnesse in him is a lyar, and if he persist in this conceit after conviction, fare∣well to him: this canker will gangren his soule, and eate him out for ever. Wee must all cry him mercy, and confesse our selves to be guilty; but yet all are not totally under this cor∣ruption: where it is and reignes, there the estate is naught. Where it is, and molests indeed, but reignes not, there the estate is good for the maine, and will grow better; there is comfort and hope, and such are in Christ,
and may and shall come to good. But how shall I know whe∣ther it reignes in me or not? 1. First, if I use all the means to be convinced, that such saving is covetousnes: though such a man hath much neernesse in him, yet the sinne is not impu∣ted to him; it reignes not be∣cause he sees it not. Many will take nothing frō others, because they thinke it the way that o∣thers shall take nothing from them; but yet they give nothing to others, and thinke no hurt of it for want of light. They see that to be a sinne to take from others by way of injustice, but they see not this to be a sinne not to give to others by way of mercy, it be∣ing much easier to bee convin∣ced of a sin of commission than of omission. In this case it reigns not for want of sight, sith the want of sight is not for want of will to see it to be a sinne, but for want of light.
Secondly, if grace doth make as grieve at the heart after wee have played a covetous pranke, and failed in our duty this way; ut when we have done what we ought in giving, and parting with some of what we have, Sin and Sathan cannot make us sor∣ry; or if we feele some sorrow cut of our flesh for parting with our goods, yet we reflect upon our sorrow, and this sorrow for doing a duty will cost us much and much sorrow: Here cove∣tousnes is indeed, but is not in its reigne; it is in us, but we are not in it. In this case we are in the Spirit, not in the Flesh, al∣beit wee have much, yea too much flesh in us. Here we may cry, Victory, victory. 'Tis danger the sinne doth reigne, 1. First, when a man doth make much of such phrases, and lickes his lips at such places as speake of frugality, and have a shew to excuse his sinne; but
places that are flat against him, and cleere against his sinne he cannot abide, and would bee glad if there were no places i the Word against covetousnes, and had rather than any thing God had not forbidden this sin; and were he to make a Bible, he would leave covetousnes out, that he might enter upon all co∣vetous practices, and his con∣science sit at quiet. This is a bad signe. 2. Secondly, when a man (forsooth) prayes against cove∣tousnes (what else?) but never prayes that hee may be liberall and bountifull. This shewes too much bad bloud. 3. Thirdly, when a man doth use means to increase his greedy desire; as a man may be said to be a drunkard in a high degree, when a man doth use meanes to provoke himselfe to drinking, and to tice downe his liquor. So when a man doth nourish and feed his covetous humour, doth
not set against it, but doth all for t, as to take all our delight up n covetous talke, in covetous company: and in this case it is past question, but that covetous∣nes for the present doth master him, and reigne in him. 4. Fourthly, when covetous∣nes doth grow against the means to cure it, then all is like to be naught. We say a disease is past cure, when it is Mar. 5. 26. worse, and the party is sicker after the use of the physicke which doth use to cure it. And so when the meanes, which should, and (were wee ought) would cure covetousnes, doth rather occasion the sinne to be more strong, and ripen the humour; here covetousnes is in its power: the more the Mini∣ster doth labour against it, the more we Pro. 23. 4. labour to be rich. God doth correct us, and let us bloud, and yet wee grow worse; hee crosseth us in some losses in our goods; we lose them a purpose because we love them, and yet
wee study not how to be more mercifull and pittifull, but how to licke our selves whole againe by saving, how to picke up our crummes again by being neerer than ever; whereas the blow was given in our estate to cha∣stise us, because wee were too neere before. Again, God comes neerer, takes away a wife, a child, because wee say we are so hard, a purpose to provide for wife and children: and do wee mend upon it? Alas no, but ten times harder after wife, or child, or children are dead. We be∣come more covetous, and stand more upon a penny than before. The fewer children the lesse expence, and wee become more troubled for expences, and all our care is to spend lesse and lay up more to the heape still. This is worst of all, when wee are instructed and corrected too in the very kinde, and yet will not learne righteousnesse, Isa. 26. 9. This is a dangerous case,
and such are in danger to be ea∣ten up of the world, and to bee choaked with the cares of this life. But where the meanes doe prosper, & do weaken and lessen the disease, though it bee but a oore little at a time, and there s ever a striving and a groaning hat wee come on in liberality o faster, and we are troubled hat we can be no better in this matter, and yet doe stay our hearts, that Christ dyed for us, nd did do better, and that in im there was no covetousnesse: ere is matter and cause of com∣ort. Humbled we must be, be∣cause there is so much covetous∣nesse in us still: but comforted we may be, because there is no more.
SECT. 10. Helpes against temptations and doubts arising from co∣vetousnesse. WHen a man is once a thorow Christian, and growne ripe and strong in faith, the passions and humors of co∣vetousnesse will pay him home. What, thou a Christian! Is there any hope that ever thou shouldst come to heaven, that hast such passions of love, and affection to the eah? And sure it is a base humor, and fights strongly a∣gainst the principles of our faith, that wee that professe heaven should practise so much of the earth: and our motions to, and in this veine doe trouble us the more, because they move with too much consent and content. The way to settle the heart is: 1 First to consider that more or lesse, there will be some dregs
of this disease in us all till wee die. Nothing will kill this dis∣ease quite but death. It is a sinne that lies so close, that the elder we grow, the more it will worke upon the advantage of age, and we must discontentedly be con∣tented to be exercised with it while we are here: and what is in all, we must beare it when we feele it in us. Are we better than all the world? wee get some ad∣vantage out of Reason, some out of age, some out of example a∣gainst some other sinnes: but for covetousnesse, Reason (as it is in us) is for it; age is a friend to it; and for example, all the world is sicke of the world. As for religi∣on, the power of it is as much a∣gainst this sinne as any, but the profession of it may stand with it as long as it keepes within the bounds of lawfull contract: (but a man may bee very covetous in keeping and holding his owne together). And for shame, it daunts other sinnes; but for
this sinne it hath the voice of the time, and applause of the world, and therefore wee must not be out of heart, but thanke God that we have a minde and an heart set against it. 2 Secondly, a man may come to some good degrees of much faith and sanctification, and yet bee too too worldly, love the world, and the things of the world too much. They were 1 Joh. 2. 15. Fathers, to wit, not children, but men in Christ, to whom Saint John gave counsell not to love the world, nor the things of the world. So that a man may bee a Father in Christ, and yet love the world too much. The Apostles were poore, and so had an advantage against cove∣tousnesse; were bred up at Chirsts feete, were at his elbow, still heard him speake much and often against covetousnesse, saw him in a poore estate in his own person, trusted one that he knew to be a theefe with the keeping
of his purse, lived in a time of persecution, stood in danger of their heads every houre, and yet Luk. 12. 15. Christ saw what their disease was, as it is plaine by the phy∣sicke hee did prescribe them, Take heed and beware of cove∣tousnesse. He doubles his words, to shew in what danger they were of this disease; they had the roote of it in their flesh. And he doth not bid them take heed of it, as though they had no co∣vetousnesse in them at all, but he meanes they must take heed it grow not upon them, that it bring not forth fruit, cursed and bitter fruit. So that wee must hold up in the midst of all that Sathan can object against our estate, by reason that wee are yet so worldly; for that better men than wee, who also lived in freer times, were pestered with this disease: they are in heaven, and so shall wee bee. Alas, our dayes are dayes of peace and plenty, and wee know not what such
tempests and sorrowes meane as the Apostles did runne thorow. And therefore it is no marvell in case we be followed with this sorry guest worse than they were. Answer all with this, Others did well, and came to good for all this disease; it did not damne them, it shall not damne mee. 3 If wee have asked our par∣don, we are safe. For sinne par∣doned is as no sinne. And what if wee fall into the acts of it a∣fresh, and the same acts too? that is not to be wondered at so much in this sinne, sith it is in the habite within, a sinne that is as much naturall as any, and stands in motions within rather than in acts & actions without. Say, I have asked pardon, I doe beleeve my pardon, I am safe. 4 Fourthly, if we have power against it. What power? not such as wee would have, nor such perhaps as some others have. What of that? Ps. 119. 36. David himselfe was faine to pray hard that God
would encline his heart to his Law, and not to covertousnesse. It serves to comfort us, if wee have an heart that can hate it, and a judgement that can con∣demne it. For the power of sinne stands in the love of it. If wee love it not, it is enough: For love will have its way at the last. In case then that wee hate it and abhorre it, and the oftner the motion is made, wee reject it the more, and the faster it comes upon us, wee doe hate it the more, and had rather than any thing wee could rid our hearts more of it than we do, all is well. This is enough to carry us to heaven. And what if some∣times wee are in a maze, and do study, and plod on in covetous prankes a great time, and feele no actuall opposing within all the time? (actuall, I say, for vir∣tuall opposing there is) yet if af∣ter wee come to settle and to thinke of the matter in cold blood, we groane, and doe looke
backe on our owne thoughts with great indignation, hap∣py wee, we are not to bee cal∣led covetous men. It is not the often comming of the as∣sault and motion, but the end and use of it which comes after, that shewes all. It may bee it is suffered to tempt us often that wee may conquer the lust often. 4 Fourthly, desire to be dis∣solved, and to bee set free from this choaking sinne; a signe of great hatred against a sinne is, when we had rather die than be pestred and haunted with such a ghost. 'Tis a devill, and it will fright a godly man: 'tis an An∣gell of light sometimes, and preacheth to us that it is good to save, a vertue, a duty to have wherewith to doe good, to pro∣vide for ones owne, to leave somewhat to children: and therefore if ever we cry out with S. Paul, let it bee in this case, I desire to be Phil. 1. 23. , solvere nau∣tarum instar. let loose, to be free
from this sinne, and to bee with Christ Jesus. We can sigh after death to bee free from crosses, but not from covetousnesse. We rather would live to feed this disease, and to get more goods. Ah cursed companion! Ah dan∣gerous snare! Learne of Saint Paul, who did not desire to die to bee free from persecutions: he did rather glory in them, and desire to live that he might suf∣fer more; but hee did desire to die to bee free from sinne. Wee desire to live to sinne longer, he to die to sinne no more: Ro. 7. 24. Ah wretched man that I am, who shall free mee from this body of death! Ah wretched man, who shall deliver mee from this sinning sinne! Hee that can say this, is in a good estate. When covetousnesse and saving doe please, there is great danger: when it doth vexe and disquiet ones minde, not by reason of the cares of it, but the guilt of it, such a man may live and die up∣on
on it, and venter his soule on it, that hee shall goe to heaven. I speake not that it is lawfull to wish for death simply, but with a tacite submission to the will of God; nor to bee set free from the troubles, and feares, and cares of this sinne, nor that we would not conflict and wrestle any longer; for this were to serve our selves, as not willing to bee at any paines, or to beare any sorrow: wee must rather bee content to be in the combat against sinne as much, and as long as God will have us: But now to desire to be rid of this corrupt affection in hatred to it, as it is a sinne; and though wee feele some carnall love to the world in us still, yet This refle∣cting on our selves for lo∣ving the world is the greatest ha∣ting the world that is, for it is infinite as all reflect acts are infinite one upon another still Scot. Coll. 6. we doe not love this love, but hate it most extremely; and wee would rather than our lives bee gone hence, that we might sinne this sinne no longer; for that it hinders us like another clogge in doing God service, and makes us that wee cannot run the way
of Gods Commandements, and as it is a great and foule disho∣nour to God: In this sense hee that can desire to be dissolved, to be where covetousnesse is no more, that man is in an happy case; and that chiefly, if that we be such as do much feare death, and the feare of death be strong in us; and yet we had rather die than sinne, and doe rather chuse to die than live that we may be freed from this lust: for certaine here is great power against co∣vetousnesse. But for a man who doth not much feare death, for such an one to wish to die rather than to live in this world among so many worldly lusts, is good, I confesse, but not so good a thing, nor so good a signe as it is when one is more strongly afraid of death, and yet death is nothing to him, but doth rather seeke it than shunne it, and all because of this sinne. He feares death very much, but hee feares this divell covetousnesse much more. Here
is faith: here is a picture of libe∣rality. 5 Lastly, if we can pray against this sinne, and the fruite of it, that wee had rather bee poore than covetous, have nothing than love any of the things of the world, and not for forme, but from the heart, can begge of God pardon and power, then we are not in any danger, by reason of the law of this sin (yet) in our members. Many would faine be rich, but would not be coveous, and doe pray against the sin, but not against the desire of riches. They dare not say as Agur, Give mee neither poverty nor riches, Prov. 30. 8. Alas aske thèse, and they will tell you, that they doe thinke that they cannot possibly be rich except they be covetous, and that there is no thriving without it: & yet they will pray not to be covetous, but yet they hold this fast, that they would & mean to be rich; whereas it doth imply, and it is in our English a
contradiction to say 1 Tim. 6. 9. I will bee rich, and yet not couetous. And therefore if wee meane to have ground of comfort, wee must pray against the sinne without all reservation, and leave it to God to dispose of us and our estate for outward things, as hee pleaseth, and say, Lord, ra∣ther than I should-bee covetous give mee not riches, ay take ri∣ches from me, so thou take cove∣tousnes away from me withall. This is right, and hee that can pray so, and doth it from the heart, his heart is upright, and God will bee his friend, and comfort him against all his in∣ward sorrowes, which doe so urge him, for that hee feeles covetousnesse worke so migh∣tily in his flesh. Many feele no trouble, for that they are igno∣rant, and doe see nothing, and doe thinke well of it that their heart is after the world, they thinke they doe God good service to gather riches toge∣ther;
but this is a dangerous depth of error. But for us, let us see it (if any thing) to be a sinne, and a mighty sin. Let us feele it, and spare not to worke much upon our hearts with godly sor∣row. Let us see that wee pray, and lye at God against it day after day: and then when Sa∣tan saith, Thou art not an up∣right man because thou art cove∣tous, ansver, I am, I am: for co∣vetousnesse hath not me, though I have too much of it; it is in mee but not of mee. I hate it, I pray against it, I take physicke against it; It is not in mee in power, and I care not how soone death doth come, that it may not be in me at all. I with Ps. 119. 113. Da∣uid have vaine thoughts, but I hate them; and that is enough. Object. But I see many can part with their money better than I can. Answ. 1 On themselves they may, but not on God; and this proves nothing, sith thou canst
part with as much or more than they, on the Lord. 2 On good uses also perhaps they doe give more than thou dost, who are yet carnall men, but it is to be seene, to be pray∣sed and commended of men, it is not to be seene and allowed of God: and therefore the left hand must know what the right hand doth, else nothing will drop from them: But now though we cannot give so much and so often, yet that we give is as in Gods sight, and in the feare and to the glory of God; and we take all occasions that are of∣fred in secret, and one hand shall not bee acquainted with what the other gives: here lesse given comes to more, sith it is to serve God, than more given when it is given to serve our selves: and a man is not more willing to serve himselfe in any thing more than in reaching to him∣selfe the praise of men: and wee dote more after the praise
of men to be counted and called liberall, mercifull and bounti∣full, than in all vertues againe whatsoever. CHAP. IV. Of Lying. SECT. 1. The greatnesse of the sinne. GOD is not onely true, but truth it selfe, and to lie is a sinne con∣trary not onely to the revealed will, but after a sort to the nature of God: I say (af∣ter a sort) for properly God be∣ing infinite, and there being nothing infinite but GOD, nothing can bee contrary to the nature of GOD, sith no∣thing can be contrary to that which is infinite, but what is also infinite. Besides, one thing can bee properly contrary
but to one thing. Wheras there∣fore lying is contrary to veraci∣tie and truth in man, it cannot in strict and proper speaking, be said to be contrary to the nature of God too: but herein we speak after the common manner of men; and thus we meane when wee say that lying is contrary not onely ro the expressed will, but to the nature of God. God can kill though he can∣not commit murther. Hee can command us to take away, as the life, so the goods of another, he being Lord of life and all; as hee did the Israelites to take a∣way the jewels of the Exod. 11. 2. Egypti∣ans (though perhaps these jewels proved after a snare to them in the matter of the Exo. 32. 4. golden calfe) but yet God cannot lye, nor give command to any man to speake that which is false: in many other sinnes the act is good, the obliquity is naught, here in a lye the very act is an obliquity; a false matter is a lye, bee the
manner what it will. It is not said hee will not lye, but the termes be flat, Hee cannot lie; for whatsoever God can doe, were it done by him, must needs bee good and justly done, other∣wise he should have power to be unjust. His nature is so against a lie, that he cannot commit a lie, nor command us to speake that which in the matter is false, but yet he can permit us to lye, and thus to permit us to lye is good and just. Note, that God cannot be said to sinne, being under no binding law of any Superiour, yea 'tis against his nature to speake that which is false, and things do and must needs work according to the first principles of their nature. Hee cannot lie, not because he is impotent and weake, but because hee is not weake but omnipotent. And as wee hate that most, which is most contrary to our humour: so God hates a lie as a thing con∣trary to the truth, and to his na∣ture,
as well as against his will. All which doth prove, that to lie is to sinne a great sin in it selfe: yet by reason of some circum∣stances, partly in the matter of a lie, partly in our nature, it is a sin that useth not to smite hard on our consciences, till we come to be very spirituall, and much sanctified: but then it cuts deep, not only because it is a very sin∣full sinne, but also for that it is a very base sinne. For sinne is then very faulty, when is is farre off from the nature of God: as that is most cold, which is far∣thest off from the fountaine of heate; most darke, which is most remote from the Sunne the first light. Now this sinne of lying being farre distant from the na∣ture of God, as being (in the sense I shewed) quite contrary to it; this makes it to be in the eye of a super-spirituall man very odious: and when it is once layd on such a conscience, though it grind but slowly, yet
it grinds surely and sorely. Wee reade that the divell is the fa∣ther of lies, Joh. 8. 44. Is he not the father of all sins? Yes, but yet there is something in it that he is said in a strict phrase of speech to bee the father of lies, which is for that hee brought sinne in∣to the world by the way of lying at the first, and doth still main∣taine and propagate his King∣dome by nothing so much as by lies. All the corruption that is in us came from Sathan, but yet this sinne of forging and lying is from the divell more than any, tastes of the divell more than a∣ny. Hence Rom 3. 4. every man is a lier, & so every man is every sinner else; but in a special maner every man is a lier, for that the very first de∣pravation of our nature came in by lying, & our nature doth taste much still of this old blocke to bee given to lying, the divell breathing into us a strong breath to stirre us up to lying. Hence no Psal. 58. 4. sooner do we speake but we
ie. As we are in body subject to ll diseases, but yet some to one icknesse rather than to ano∣her: so in the soule all are apt nough to all sinne, and some ra∣her to one Cic. Tusc▪ 4. vice than to ano∣her, but all are much inclined o lying. A lier then is as like he divell as ever he can looke; s unlike to God as ever he can e. So God is said to hate a lying ongue, Prov. 6. 17. and wee know what S. John saith of such s doe make or love lies, Apoc. 2. 15. Lying lips are an abomi∣nation to the Lord, Prov. 12. 21. Hee that loves lies is, what? an abomination, the very height of all distaste. To whom? not to men, not to Kings, but to the Lord. Which is to bee noted, for that wee can beleeve that God loves the godly, but that he hates the wicked wee are loath to be∣leeve. Moreover, it is a sin that u∣seth to be done without (almost) any temptation; out comes a lie without any occasion, ay ma∣ny
times many have such a veine, that they will lie to their owne hurt, when to speake the truth would serve their turnes better, and make for their ends more: yet they are so foolish, and so wicked, that way, that for their tongues and hearts they cannot chuse but lie. It is a sinne soone acted, it is but to speake a word or two. And for swearing, others may know when wee sweare, but for lying men make the bolder, because it is not easie to finde them out in a lie. And when a man hath used his tongue to a custome in lying, it is hard to forbeare, sith when it is come to an use once there are two things to bee left, naturall corruption and habi∣tuall custome.
SECT. 2. What lying is. ALie (to speake properly) is a signification of that which is false, with a will to de∣ceive the eares of the hearer with that which is not true. So that Ironicall speeches, and some Hyperbolicall phrases are not very lies. Faining, or simulation is not ever lying, when it is only diverse from the truth, and not contrary to the truth. So parents are not Perk. on Gal. 1. 20. thought to lie, when they doe affright their children on just occasions with the bloo∣dy man, the beare, the bulbegger. To conceale some of the truth is no lie. Abraham Gen. 12. 13. said Sarah was his sister, and so shee was, but he had lied, if hee had said shee was not his wife. Jacob is noted in the Scripture to be a Gen. 33. 14. plaine man, no dissembler, yet what saith he? Let my Lord passe on
before his servant, untill I come unto my Lord unto Seir; yet he never meant to come to Seir, nor in these words doth he pro∣mise to come to Seir. So then thou shalt say (saith the King to Jeremiah) I presented my sup∣plication before the King, that hee would not cause mee to re∣turne to Jonathans house to die there, Jer. 38. 26. And no questi∣on thus hee did; but by the Kings command hee was not to tell to the Princes the rest which passed between the King and him. None of all this doth make for equivocation (a sinfull practise crept into the Church now in the latter end of the world). It is wisedome when it is for the glory of God, and the good of all, to hide sometime some of the truth; we are so far from being to tell all, that wee are bound to the contrary, as ne∣ver to speake any thing that is false, so not ever to out with all that is true. Nor doe I justifie
Davids practise in faining him∣selfe to bee out of his minde, 1 Sam. 21. 11. This was not fit for any man, much lesse for a man of his quality, for to save a thousand lives. Had David firmely beleeved that GOD could, and would deliver him from that danger hee was in, which hee ought to have done, hee having a promise that hee must be King after Saul, David needed not to have done as hee did, and God did looke on his upright heart, and did set him free; and David did on that oc∣casion make the 34th Psalme. Albeit it bee lawfull to con∣ceale some of the truth to doe another good, yet wee must not lie to save Job. 13. 7. Gods honour. Offi∣cious lies be sinnes, and were it possible that one by lying might save a mans soule, yet lie hee should not. A man is not to cast away his owne soule to save an∣others, nor to sinne against God for any mans sake. Many measure
matters by the good or hurt they doe: and when by accident a lie may serve the turne, then the lie goes for a vertue; and in the opinion of men he is so farre from sinning who tells an offici∣ous lie, that in their conceit hee sinnes, except hee lie such a li. This is an error, for sinne doth deprive us of a greater good, than all the possible good it may bee thought to bring unto the party whom one thinkes to helpe by a lie: yet 'tis certaine that 'tis besides the nature of a lie to doe any good to any: and Judg. 14 15. 16. Dalilah did lie to save her fa∣thers house from burning, but wee see that her fathers house was burned. And Abraham tels a tale to save his life, and the end was that it proved a dangerous occasion to venter life and all. The way to have saved all, was to have said she was his wife. Plain English is usually best and most beneficiall on every side. Being asked by a lawfull Magistrate, a
plaine and direct answer had beene best, and in likelihood have stood him in best stead; for the King would sooner have ab∣stained from his wife than his sister, Gen. 12. 18, 19. and 20. 5. 9. and 26. 10. It was very ill to en∣danger Sarahs chastity, which was done more by saying she was his sister, than that shee was his wife. God that preserved them notwithstanding their dissimula∣tion, would sure have preserved them in plaine speaking. Againe, if they would make no consci∣ence of murther, is it like they of that land would make any con∣science of adultery? so that we see faining useth to prove but a sorry shift. Whether one may not make use of the lie of another. First, I say in the generall that it is no sinne to make use of the sinne of another; as the taker of money to use in case of his true
need is no way a partaker of the sin of the usurer, who sins in not lending gratis. For this is not to induce another to sin, but rather to occasion him to fall into the lesser sin, that is, that he rather sin the sin of usury than of homicide & undoing another: And this is lawfull, for the man is supposed to bee in danger of perishing by extreme need, in case hee have not money to serve his turne. Jacob did require an oath of La∣ban, Gen. 31. and yet Jacob did know that Laban would sweare by his false gods; which was a sin in Laban, but not in Jacob: and therefore to aske an oath of one who wee know will depose by Idols, in and of it selfe is No sin, which what is it but to make use of anothers sinne? So Act. 23. 6. S. Paul was not ignorant that the Pha∣risees and Sadducees would, and must sinne in falling toge∣ther by the eares, yet hee did, and did well in it, when hee cast a bone betwixt them a pur∣pose
to get his owne liberty. Herein hee did not partake of their sin, because he knew them to be incorrigible, & set in mon∣strous malice. Hee did looke at his own escape (which he might lawfully seeke) he used their un∣avoidable corruption to bring about his owne liberty. So that in such cases a man may use things (in others unlawfull) to bring about his lawfull ends. Neither is this to use unlawfull meanes: For an unlawfull thing may become a lawfull means to purchase our lawfull desires. So in our very particular, a man knows another will tel a lie, & by his lie he is like to receive good, or to be put in case to doe some good, as long as one doth not perswade or cause him to make an excuse, to tell a lie, I thinke it lawfull for one thus to make use of that humor wee see in others to faine matters for our good: I doe not put matter of lying in him, nor provoke him, but I doe
verily thinke that in helping me hee will trip, and use a false tongue. I may make a good use of his lying lips, chiefly if hee might helpe mee without a lie if he would, but I thinke he will not: his sinne is upon him, not on me: I doe onely take oc∣casion to make use of his vicious habit of lying. But am I not bound to professe an outward dislike of his lying, and wish him in any hand to use no lies? Ans. I am bound to abhorre his lying veine within, and that from the heart, but herein I joyne not with him in the sinne; I am not bound to professe out∣ward mislike, and to call upon him to let all alone rather than to lie; for in so doing I should destroy the end in the meanes, and frustrate my selfe of mine owne intentions. And for jesting lies they are worse than officious lies. There is no good meant to any by them. What? to sin against God
and then to say Pro. 26. 19. am I not in jest? It is an evill indeed for a man to sport away his soule. There is no jesting with sin, sin is an edge∣toole. Idle words are under a deepe Mat. 12. 36. censure, and what are idle lies? I confesse pernicious lies are worst, when there is sin against God, and hurt against men: but yet your lying jests are next, and though not so bad as pernicious, yet worse than offici∣ous lies. Saint Paul sets the text against Eph. 5 4. . i. e. the abus jests, bec in Pauls time the Greekes cal∣led scurri∣lous jests . jesting, and what then can be said, when jesting and ly∣ing meet together? All (but of all) such as are given to jesting are to beware of lying in jest, lest they fall into hell in good ear∣nest. Thus we see that lying is a sinne, and what kinde of sinne it is.
SECT. 3. Remedies against lying, and temptations that way. THe trouble of minde, which issues from this sin of ly∣ing, is not great on weaker Christians, because it is not seen in the true guilt of it: but when once we come to bee able to see day at a little hole, and to finde out sinne in its owne nature, then it goes to the heart of an humbled Christian, that he hath lied all maner of lies: then it comes fresh to his minde, that it is a sinne flat and direct a∣gainst the very nature of God, who is not onely true, but truth; that it is not onely a thing which GOD will not doe, but which GOD cannot doe. Now hee sees how bad a vice this sinne of lying is, and the lesse hee thought on it be∣fore, the more it bites now,
that on no occasion a lie was ready; and it vexeth his righ∣teous soule something also, that it is so base a sinne as it is. All sins have a basenesse in them, but lying is more base (al∣most) than any, either for that it comes from feare (and feare is a base passion) or for that it tends to cousening and im∣posture; and this makes this sinne, when it is well weigh∣ed, to make a wofull crie in the conscience of a much mor∣tified and enlightened man. For remedies against the cla∣mour of this sinne, take forth such rules as these: 1 First, make not this sinne of lying worse than it is. Ma∣ny are against it, as though it were almost the sinne against the holy Ghost. Thus wee see mothers will not sit downe by it, but presently correct their children if they tell them a lie. But for other sinnes (as bad, though not in our eyes as base
as this) they will make nothing of them: as they can teach their Peccatum quod tibi non displi∣cet in filio tuo delectat¦te: sed aetas deseruit, non cupiditas. Aug. in Ps. 50. children to bee proud, and call upon them to bee fine: You a gentleman, and be thus, do thus, bee once seene in such beggerly company! And so for the sinne of covetousnesse, their care is to teach them to save, to get, to be rich and worldly; never once angry with them for covetous practises, but doe approve and applaud them: but if a lie fall from their lips, they chide, they fight, as though there were no sinne but lying. Is this sinceri∣ty, to make such respects of sins and sinning, that one must bee condemned, the other com∣mended? whereas pride is a farre greater sinne than lying, and is the cause of most lies that are told. Lying dies when we die, but pride lives when we are dead. We love to bee praised, and commended even after we are dead and buried. I speake not that children are to bee
let alone without word or blow in this cursed sinne of lying, but wee must not teach them to sinne other sinnes, and spend all our zeale on this vice of ly∣ing. Hee that teacheth men so shall bee called the least in the Kingdome of heaven, Mat. 5. 19. To sinne is from temptation, to teach another to sin hath scarce any temptation: therefore the acter of sinne is bad, the teacher of any sinne is worse. To teach any, chiefly our children, to sinne any sin is a great wicked∣nesse; and yet it is common to teach them to be worldly (wee call it thrifty). No mother I thinke to bee found, who doth britch her child for sparing, and saving: but for lying the very hope of the familie must up toties quoties; and they doe lash their children more for ly∣ing, than for all sinnes and faults else; and yet lying is not Idolatry as covetousnesse is: a little covetousnesse is good, and
a little lying is unpardonable with them. And againe, to lie commonly is a sinne that doth lesse hurt to man than covetous∣nesse doth. I feare the cause why parents doe so beare their chil∣dren for their lies, is not for that they sinne against God when they lie, but because it is a disgrace to their children to be lyers, and a disgrace to them to have their children flap them in the mouth with a lie. What? tell mee a lie! Ile teach you better manners. So that upon the matter 'tis not zeale, but pride that makes women fight so for lying. They can (many of them) be well content to have their children lie to o∣thers for an advantage, but not to themselves, and can place them in shops where they make a common trade of lying, but by no meanes they cannot abide that they should make a lie to them. This is pride to be lamen∣ted in the parent rather than the
lie to be corrected in the child. 2 Secondly, make it as great as it is, as neere as we can. Men have some temptation to steale for some profit, to adulteries for some pleasure: but for to lie (as men doe use) on slight or no oc∣casions, makes the sin the worse, as being almost without any temptation. Men think it an or∣nament to their speeches: But can that be an ornament to us, which is an abomination to God? S. Jam. 3. 6. James tells us that the tongue is a world of iniquity. What? is not the hand a world of iniquity too? Is not that set on fire of hell? It is, but not like the tongue. For the hand hath its bounds, and cannot bee all the towne and country over, cannot reach over heaven & earth: but the tongue is able to walke all the world over, can run over whole countries, parishes, houses, doth bite at every body. The tongue is a member apt to move, it turnes up and downe without
any labour, it is not apt to bee quickly weary. Besides, man is a sociable creature, and the tongue is an instrument of so∣cietie, therefore wee are apt to talke. The hand is not for all sinnes, but there is no sinne but the tongue is for it, can sin all manner of sinnes, is full of deadly poyson, poysons all the soule, all the body, all the towne, all the country. Other poyson workes by contract, but the ve∣nome of the tongue works farre and neere. The uncurable poy∣son of aspes, which indeed isr Rom. 3. 13. Aspes poy∣son past re∣medie. Arist. hist. an. 1. 8. 29. Plin. 29. 4, said to bee under the tongue, is the sinne of lying. And it is to some purpose that Saint Paul making the Anatomie of a na∣turall man, doth stand more on the organ, and instrument of speaking, than all the members of the body else. A boasting, a railing tongue are bad enough, but a lying tongue is worst of all, yet a sinne very common. The other sinnes of the tongue
discover themselves, this of lying lyes hid. Wherefore we are to use great heed that we fall not, or lye not in this sinne of lying. There is a way of lying, as Da∣vids phrase is, Ps. 19. 29. and by use we come to a custome, which is as another law. Wee must looke to our selves in foure cases especially. 1 First, when we are baited with some advantage, when by a lie we may get or save. Where∣as gaine got by a lie will burne our fingers, and burne in our purses too. Lie not for advan∣tage sake. Hee loseth indeed, who loseth in the latter end. Now marke the end of your common liers, and a lying tongue many times proves their undoing. 2 Secondly, when it is to a∣voyd the ill will of some great man, or to please some good friend, whom we make and take for an▪ Idol. In that case we are apt to double, to say, and unsay
any thing, we know not, we care not what. 3 Thirdly, when we are about the commending of any good man, or any good thing, then we thinke it no great matter, yea ra∣ther a vertue than a vice, to speak too much, to goe too farre, to borrow a point of the law, be∣cause it is to doe good, as wee thinke, to bring good men, and good things in request. 4 Fourthly, when wee praise our selves. He that saith he hath no sin, 1 Joh. 1. 8. lies, and sinnes the sinne of lying in saying that hee hath no sinne. Now when in these cases wee do fall into some lie notwith∣standing all our care, the medi∣cine is to repent, and then God must either lie (which he can∣not) or else he must forgive us our lie, and heale our tongues, and touch our lips with the law of truth, and settle us, that all is well for all this. Looke upon David, who did lie often, and
Abraham did little better; and what did Peter but lie, and worse? and yet they came to themselves againe, and all went well with them. 3 Thirdly, breake off this custome of false and vaine spea∣king, by an anti-custome, inure our selves to speake the lesse, goe to God to rule that unruly member of ours. As when wee have got a toy by reason of use, and would but cannot leave it, we see it to bee a blemish, then we use to say, Wife tell mee of of such a matter; sonne doe you speake to mee, and rather than faile wee will put our servants upon it to tell us also: and thus many times wee breake off from a foolish custome. And so when we finde that we are gi∣ven to a vaine of lying, and false speaking, what should wee doe but say, Wife tell mee of it, when you heare mee tell a lie; so to our children and friends. Wee all doe shew our selves
content that our very servants should tell us of any blemish by dirt or so in our faces, and we all should desire even our servants to shew us of lies or other blemishes in our soules: do thus, and in time the law of truth will be in our lips. 4 Fourthly, we must be con∣tent to have this sinne of lying to die in us by pieces. It is a disease wee use to recover of but slowly (yet surely) wee shall re∣maine in part what wee were wholly in nature, and it is a sinne very naturall unto us, and rooted deepe in our nature, a sinne fit to serve turnes, and therefore it goes away by degrees, and a foote, as some diseases doe. Wherefore we must not bee dis∣mayed in case wee finde some weaknesse this way more than ordinary. Indeed, if the oftner we lie wee hate the sinne the lesse, and begin to thinke of it, as of a veniall matter, our case is dangerous; but in case we doe
ate it the more the more wee ommit it, and love truth in ur selves and others, and it umble us mightily that we are  often overtaken with a lie, nd wee learne to consider of o∣hers with mercy, and we grow ore and more willing to cast ff this lying skin of ours, why hen happy time that ever we old a lie. Wee must shew no ercy to our sinne of lying, be s cruell as wee can against the ice: but to our selves wee must, hew so much mercy, as not to hinke that wee are utterly reje∣ted, because of a lie or two. He is a Jam. 3. 2. perfect man who can rule is tongue (it is an unruly member) and of all most in the sinne of lying the tongue is ve∣ry apt to trip, and in case wee cannot doe what wee would in the government of the tongue, wee must not despaire, but pray to God to passe over all that is past, to forgive all the lies that ever wee have told: this is a
common sinne of our youth, and too common a sinne of our age: for Arist Rhet. 2. old people are too too apt to talke, and they thinke they may lie by authority; and for the time to come, wee are to pray him to preserve u from the law of lying, to set a doore before our tongues. The Jam. 3 7. Aelian. l. 17. Plin. l. 10. c. 45. creatures a man may tame, yea the fishes of the sea, but the tongue of a man or woman who can tame? God can and will. Ob. But Saint James saith, that out of the same fountaine comes not sweete and bitter, therefore out of the same mouth comes not lying and truth. Sol. I answer, in a regenerate man there are two fountaines, the flesh is one, the spirit is an∣other: out of the spirit comes truth, out of the flesh lying; but the flesh is not the godly mans fountaine: Not I (saith Paul) but sinne that dwelleth in mee, Rom. 7. 20. Hee allowes nothing that comes out of the flesh, hee
wnes it not. Againe, S. James ides those that were bitter nd censorious against the faults f others, have a saying against very body, and thinke that all his is zeale, nothing forsooth ut the spirit. But Saint James hews that this comes from the ountaine of the flesh, and not rom the spirit, as some did reame; for to blesse is sweete, to ensure bitter; bitter and sweete ome not out of one and the ame fountaine; the fountaine of he spirit doth send forth sweete lessings, not bitter censures; it came from flesh in them that they were so bitter against flesh in others. And therfore they did mistake, who did take their bitter speaking against others (though for their infirmities and sins) to come from the spirit. 5 Fiftly, speake with the least. Much speaking breedes much lying. Hee that hath eares toMatt. 13. heare let him heare. So saith Christ often, but we never read,
he that hath a tongue to speake let him speake: rather as Saint James hath it (Chap. 1. 19.) Be swift to heare, but slow to speake, heare much, but speake little. CHAP. V. Of Swearing. TO say much of swea∣ring needs not, ex∣cept where custome hath taken away sense. This sin doth rattle the conscience quickly, but where the sinne is by reason of use growne inveterate, there Hos. 4. 2. oath toucheth oath, and almost as many oathes as words; for which prophane vein we should all mourne, for that it makes the land to mourne, and see to it betime lest it bee (almost) too late; for inveterate sinnes are seldome pardoned. But put case a man doe forget himselfe, and
doe rip up an oath, yet wee must not thinke too much of the mat∣er, but befriend our selves with ope of pardon, else we shall be apt to sweare, and sweare againe, hat if wee must goe to hell wee may goe for somewhat. Hope of pardon is the best medicine (next to the blood of Christ) o cure sinne in the world. It is a sinne so much the greater, be∣cause it is without a sensible temptation: they are not baited with pleasure or profit, but they doe sweare because they will sweare; and such shall one day know, that (without repentance) the Lord hath sworne to bee the destruction of swearers. Briefly, I will put off the matter in a few lines. 1 First, wee must not sweare by the creature. Indeed to speak properly we cannot: for it is no oath in it selfe when it is by the creature. For it is the life and forme of an oath to bee by the Creator; but yet it is an oath to
us, and we must answer for it, or Christ for us. By the creature we must not sweare. 2 Secondly, wee must see that we doe not sweare very oathes, and we to thinke no such matter when wee have done. Many men have oathes as common in their mouthes as can be, and yet thinke nothing lesse, as [gods mee] is swearing by a figure: [gods lord] is an oath without the forme indeed, but yet there is the matter of an oath expres∣sed and the forme implied: and [as I am a gentleman] is little better. Say those termes bee not very oathes, yet deepe protestations they are by the graunt of all, which is enough to cry downe the common and vaine use of such speeches. This we finde as common as may bee amongst the wisest and best sort of people, to fill their mouth with such speeches as these, [as true as I live, and, as I live it is so, or not so:] [as I live it is
thus or thus.] In my opinion this is (to us) no better than plaine swearing. For we finde [as I live] up and downe in the Word as a common forme of an oath, when the Lord is said to sweare: So, as true as I live, all the earth shall be filled with the glory of the Lord, Num. 14. 21. This was an oath. For speaking of this very place the Phalmist saith, that the Lord did sweare (Unto whom I sware in my wrath that they should not enter into my rest, Ps. 95. 11.) Thus then by the voyce of the holy Ghost himselfe (surely as I live) is the forme of an oath, and that commonly in the pro∣phesie of Ezechiel, Chap. 18. 3. & 20. 33. & 5. 11. I cannot but marvel that honest minded peo∣ple, after this hath bin reproved in them & proved to them to be an oath, should yet use it, as they do almost at every third word, & venter the displeasure of God for a foolish phrase. Can one
imagine that these (if cause were) would leave their lives for God, when wee cannot per∣swade them to leave a word or two for the Lords sake? This shewes that it is the Lord who must perswade, and that the Word without his cooperating Spirit will not convince. There is much humor and pride in this. They can say nothing for it, why 'tis good or fit to use such phra∣ses, to out presently with [as I live, as true as I live] onely they have used it long, and now will not leave it, because they will not bee thought to have beene out of the way all this while. Many good people wonder at the Patriarches for their poly∣gamie, what they meant in it; but this sinne of common and triviall swearing is to mee a greater wonder, having lesse temptation in it, and the more use it the more wee should shunne it, and the longer wee have beene in it the more haste
wee should make out of it. Had none but Lamech, and such as Lamech, doubled or trebled their wives, polygamie had beene as strange then in the Church as it is now; but when Abraham, Saint Abraham took to him more wives than one, it went for currant, and grew com∣mon. Right so, if none but vaine and light persons would sweare such oathes, if [as true as I live, and such like formes of swea∣ring] were heard onely from the mouthes of the sonnes of Belial, such oathes had never beene so rife in the Church: but now when grave and godly people make no bones of such swearing phrases, every one thinkes hee may, and (almost) ought to speake as they speake. To doe as most doe is no an∣swer. Wee are to doe as God doth, and as the word would have us speake and doe. Some thinke to put off all with this, that it is but a ptotestation.
But a protestation! Doe wee thinke to cry (but) at a pro∣testation? There is, I confesse, one maine difference betweene a protestation and an oath, that wee may lawfully protest by a creature, but without sinne wee cannot sweare by a creature. But in the matter in hand there is little, if any difference, be∣twixt protesting and swearing. It is a sinne to sweare frivolous∣ly, and so it is to protest frivo∣lously. A vaine protestation comes to as much (for ought I know) as a vaine oath. What∣soever is more than Yea, yea, commeth of that evill one, saith Chtist, Matth. 5. 37. that is, of the divell; and as it comes of of evill so evill comes of it. Let your Yea bee yea, and your Nay nay, lest you fall into con∣demnation, saith Saint James, Chap. 5. 12. So that more than yea, or nay comes from the di∣vell, and brings to the divell: and is not a protestation more
than yea or nay as well as an oath? My meaning is not, that wee should tye our selves su∣perstitiously to those termes, neither doth it warrant us to sweare by yea, or by nay; but wee must see that wee doe con∣sider before hand what wee say, and that wee know things to be true ere wee affirme them, and say (aye): to bee false, ere we doe deny them, and say (no): and that wee should ordinarily content our selves with bare affirming or denying, Eccl. 9. 2. fearing all oathes, all protestations in ordinary communication. What doe these leave for them∣selves in greater matters, who will protest thus for every trifle? I would they that can, and doe acquit themselves, and free their mouthes from vaine oathes, would also as much from foo∣lish protestations. Oathes and protestations are couzen ger∣manes, and hee that makes no care of the one, 'tis but a scruple
that hee makes of the other. Let us then away with petty oathes, made oathes. Sweare not at all, that is, without cause, and often: Know and acknow∣ledge that these oathes wee now speake of, have a guilt in them above what wee thinke of perhaps; that wee sinne in swearing vainely, and we sinne in swearing thus [as true as I live] because wee sweare by a creature, and that frivolously too. Give it over lest God give us over, be willing to be convin∣ced, be willing to leave thy foo∣lery in speaking, and then wee shall bee quickly convinced, and then there is a pardon ready for our folly herein. And what if we be long used unto it? why 'tis a matter of comfort to us, if wee have the wit and the grace with us to breake off an old and long custome, to cure an inve∣terate disease. What if all the Countrey doe use it? it is the more for our comfort that wee
can stand alone, and walke a∣lone with God. Lastly, take heede wee bridle our tongues in our passion: for then a man is not his owne man. Other affections carry one po∣wer of the soule out of the way; but passion overturnes all. Anger (we see) rests not onely in the head, but in the bosomes of fooles, Eccles. 7. 9. Thus we call hang∣man whom wee know never hang'd any man: whore-son, whose mother wee know to bee very chast: theefe, who to our knowledge did never steale. Dogges in a chafe barke at their owne masters: so we in our pas∣sions let our tongues fly at our best friends. To summe and shut up all, wee must see to our lips and words, that they bee et on fire of heaven. Christ saith, that a man is condemned by his words, (Matt. 12. 37.) as though nothing did returne into the condemnation of a man but his words; and indeed a mans
most and worst sinnes be his words. The holy Rom. 3. Ghost is more on the tongue than all the mem∣bers else, as though a man were almost all tongue alwayes: it is a little member, but a world of iniquity, Jam. 3. Not a City or Country, but a world of iniqui∣ty. Rule the tongue and rule all. A man shall eate good by the fruits of his mouth, Prov. 13. 2. He is a perfect man, that can do it: and a Christian should (as all men in all mysteries else doe) desire to be perfect in his facul∣ty; and that he cannot be but by ordering his tongue aright. For the tongue is a very moveable member, which is turn'd up and downe without much labour, or much wearinesse, or any great difficulty. And again, man by his very nature is much given to be speaking: for man is (as before I shewed) a sociable creature, and without entercourse of speech and talke, the society of man with man cannot hold.
Man hath his tongue in his head to that end: and David calls his tongue Psal. 16. 9. 30. 2. his glory: Ps. 57. 8. Awake my glory. They doe ill that say words are but winde: such a winde they are, that without re∣pentance will serve to blow a man to hell. Wee think that our tongues of all members are our owne, Psal. 12. 4. Our eyes, eares, hands, feete are not our owne to use them at our pleasure: but of all our tongues are least of all our owne. There is no one of our members but is unruly: but yet it is not for nothing that the tongue is said to bee an unruly member, Jam. 3. 8. All the members, when they sinne, are set on fire of hell; but none like unto the tongue, none so much, none so often: and therefore we must learne to commit the government of our tongues unto the Lord, that hee would set a doore before our lips, and that hee would keepe the k and be (as 'twere) the
porter to let out words at his pleasure, that our words may be Eccl. 5. 2. but few no more than we can well justifie; that we speake not unprofitably, but to purpose; that our words may bee both food to the weake to nourish the soule, physicke to the sicke in soule to cure the conscience; that hee would put away swea∣ring, lying, and equivocating, which is worse than lying. As Abraham in that he said Sarah was not his wife, did speake doubly: hee did not speake out, and besides his tale he did dis∣semble. To equivocate is upon the matter to lie & to dissemble too. Plaine dealing (ay though it be in sinning) is a jewel, & double dealing is base: a tongue and a tongue is hatefull to God and man, a monster in grace and na∣ture, and therefore bee before∣hand to keepe our tongues from evill, and when we do overlash, speaking foolishly or falsly, lets salve all by confession, and peti∣tion,
seeking to the God of truth for pardon of our lies, and we shall have our pardon: wee need not doubt of our pardon, sith truth it selfe hath made the promise. Have wee spoken foo∣lishly or falsly, and sinned with our words? Why Hos. 14 2. take unto you words: what words? why words of confession, of humiliation, of petition, and the match is made, peace is concluded betwixt God and us. In the Law they offered a calfe, and there follow∣ed attonement, let us offer up the calves of our lips, Hos. 14. 2. the lips made the breach, let our lips make up the breach againe. And (Psal. 85. 8.) God will speake peace to us, alwayes provided that wee returne not againe to the same or the like folly in speaking wee know not or care not what. Be perfect as our hea∣venly Father is perfect, Maith. 5. 48. And Jam. 3. 2. perfect wee are not till wee do rule our tongues, but perfect we are when we doe
rule our tongues: every other creature in his kinde doth, and wee should labour after perfe∣ction. So speake yee as they that must bee judged by the Law of liberty. Iam. 2. 12. FINIS.
THE CONTENTS OF THIS THIRD PART. CHAP. I. TEmptations to lesser sinnes, to spirituall Christians are very grievous. pag. 1 No sinnes are little, simplie and without comparison. 4 The least sinne forbidden and damnable. 5 Wee cannot avoid a greater sinne by yeelding to a les∣ser. 8 Wee must not say, It is but a little sinne, and cannot bee a∣voided. 10 Why wee fall into lesser sinnes, rather than into greater. 11
How to get off trouble of consci∣ence that comes for lesser faults. 13 This trouble is not an happie thing, but an happy signe. 16 Lesser sinnes of precipitancie, and of infirmity. 18 CHAP. II. IT is a brave spirit, that rises at the omitting of duties. 19 Hee is not best still who hath least inward trouble, but who hath least cause. 22 Omitting of duties breeds sinnes of commission. 23. 32 Troubles of conscience must draw us up to Christ. 24 The not doing of a dutie is sometime a crosse, not a sinne. 25 Delay not to amend omissions. 30 Mischiefes of omissions. 33
Caveats in omitting duties on extraordinary occasion. 33 CHAP. III. COvetousnesse breedes a temptation and a snare. 35 What covetousnesse is. 37 Covetousnesse is a great sin. 41. wholly in the minde, not the body. 45 All men are more or lesse cove∣tous. 47 Poore men generally more cove∣tous than rich. 49 Riches are not the disease of covetousnesse. 50 Covetousnesse is a dangerous temptation. 52 How to bee convinced of cove∣tousnesse. 58 The Law convinceth the judge∣ment: the Gospell, the lust and affection. 67 How to bee cured of covetous∣nesse. 72
Why and to whom we must give. 92 A removall of such shewes as men have why they may bee worldly. 96 How farre forth covetousnesse may be said to prevaile in us. 108 Helpes against temptations and doubts arising from covetous∣nesse. 118 CHAP. IV. THe greatnesse of the sinne of lying. 132 What lying is. 139 Whether one may not make use of the lye of another. 143 Remedies against lying, and temptations that way. 148 Foure cases wherein wee must looke to our selves especially. 155
CHAP. V. WEe must not sweare by the creatures. 163 We must see we sweare▪ not very oathes, and thinke them no such matter. 164 Of Protestations, what is to bee thought. 167 Take heede to bridle your tongues in passion. 171 Of equivocation. 174 FINIS.
