C6884 515.l.2[174] R226780 99886923 189668
A TRUE COPY OF THE PAPERS That were Delivered by Mr. William Cress, and Edward Robinson, to the Reverend Mr, Allen, Ordinary; at their Exe∣cution, on Friday the 22d. Instant Decemb. 1699. The True Copy of Mr. Cress's Paper, as Followesh. Good People, I AM Come here to Suffer an Ignominous Death, which nce as little Dreamt of, as any here present do this Day. It is but sit that I should give you some Account of me, and of this Fact for which I Suffer, before I go hence and be no more seen. I was Born in Froome in Sommersetshire of a good honest Fami∣ly; there I lived till 5 Years Old, then my Father Died, and my Mother Re∣mov'd to the Bath, where I remain'd till I arrived to 16 Years: At which time the King coming in, and raising Forces for Irland, I resolved to try my Fortune in a Military Life; being a Soldier under Sr. John Edgworth, for one Year I continued so, and then I Serv'd in Sr. Halbert Cunninghams Regiment of Dragoons for three quar∣ters of a Year, when for a Signal Piece of Service done in the Field, my Collonel gave me a Quarter-masters Commission and in the space of one Year, I was honour'd with that of a Cornet in the same Regiment; And so remain'd till June 97. And then sold my Commission, and came to my Friends in the Bath; where I stayed till June last, when Unfortunutely I came here to lose my Life by an Untimely End, for a Murther Committed on a Woman, who went by the Name of Rose Robinson, whom I now own to be my Wife, being Married to her at Molingar in Irland, as I have acquainted the Reverend Mr. Ordinary; which Murther was committed after this manner: I went to see her, accompanied with my Brother, now fellow Sufferer: Having Drunk hard that Day I called for a Pot of small Beer, and sat down, but quickly fell a Sleep; but before that, I heard the Deceas'd ask Robinson for Money. I had not Slept long till I was awakened by a noise, and then found him depressing the Woman to the Floor with his Hand on her Throat, and his Knee on her Belly; I askt him what was the matter; And he told me she was in a Fitt, I never saw her stir after that, only one Foot as she Died: I layed no Hand upon her, with a design to Kill her, only helpt to pull off her cloaths, and put her to Bed. This is the cause of my miserable Downfal, in Concealing the Murther and assisting him after it was Acted; so I conclude, and wish all the World to take Warning by me, and shun evil Company, lest it shou'd bring them to such Shame and Misery, which I by my wretched Folly have now Just∣ly Incurr'd. December, 22d. 1699.
The True Copy of Edward Robinson's Paper. WOrthy Gentlemen, and all you who are Spectators of this my miserable Down∣fall, which hath happened by my keeping of Evil Company, I desire you for God's sake, and for my sake, who now suffer for it, avoid and fly from it. My Sins are many and great, but I hope God will of his infinite mercy pardon them. As for this Crime, for which I die, I cannot say that I am innocent and guiltless, because I so long concealed this horrid and execrable Murther, which I did at the Perswasion of my Brother, my now Fellow-sufferer, who indeed did commit it. The Deceased had two Children by him, for they lived as Man and Wife; Words arising between them, they seem'd to be reconciled, and lay down on the Bed, drawing the Curtains, so that I could not have any suspicion of an ill Intent; soon after I heard the Wo∣man cry, but I took no notice of it, neither did I know that she was Murthered, till he told me: I conceal'd his Crime, for which I am now sorry. I do heartily repent of my Ill Doings: I desire the Prayers of all good People, and desire you all to take heed of Bad Company. So recommending my Soul into the Hands of my God, I die the Unfortunate. Edward Robinson. These two Speeches, so different about the Executioner of that Barbarous Murther, were read to them publickly, each asserting his Paper to be the truest Account; va∣rious and pressing Arguments were used to perswade them to agree in one Relation, but they were ineffectual. For notwithstanding what was said to them, they conti∣nued jarring and clashing with one another, till the Cart almost drew away: Nay, even then, for a nute or more, Mr. Cress, by way of abhorrence of what the other said, made  Motions with his Trembling Hands towards him. Dated the 22d of De∣cember, 1699. John Allen, Ordinary. ADVERTISEMENTS. JOHN WATTS (Operator in Teeth) lives at the Sign of the Hand and Mouth, and Kings-Arms, within Three Doors of Bride-Lane, Flett-street, he draws and cleans Natural-Teeth, (sets in Artificial ones so firm and exact, as to be eat on, and not discovered by any person whatever from Natural;) likewise sells a Powder to keep Na∣tural Teeth White, Firm and Sound. At the farthest House on the Left Hand, in Clare-Court, over-against Russel-Court in Drury-Lane, Strand. GEntlemen and others may have an Interest made to invest them in Places suitable to their several Qualities and Capacities? We have now several considerable Places, in Town and Country to dispose off, most to be acted by Deputies: We have also several of a lesser value (viz. 80l. 70l. 60l. 50l. 40l. a Year Sallaries) for those that Write and Cast Ac∣counts well: We also speedily and faithfully sollicite all sorts of Causes depending in the Courts of Law and equity, Treasury, Admiralty, Navy Offices. We Buy and Sell Houses Estates Ground Rents, &c. all Persons who apply themselves to us, shall have no reason to suspect being impos'd upon, for our cheif Undertaker is a Gentleman of Quality, well known to many of the Principal Nobility and Gentry of this Kingdom. We think fit to inform the Publick that the Original of this Undertaking in England, was Mr. Alexander Collins De∣ceas'd, who many Years succesfully manag'd it at St. James's for the continuation of it, for the Publick good, the Person of Honour aforesaid has been pleas'd to imploy some near Re∣lations of the said Mr. Collins who manag'd it for a considerable time before his Decease. LONDON Printed for Jer. Wilkins. i White
