D355 99828459 207011
An Historical Abstract of Mr. Samuel White, his Manage∣ment of Affairs, in his Shabandership of Tenassery and Mergen, during Francis Davenports stay with him, in Quality of Secretary: Collected out of the said Daven∣ports own Private Memoirs; for the clearer Discovery of whatsoever may have Relation to the Right Honourable English East-India Company themselves, or others our Country Men in India, through his proceedings, in pre∣tence of his Ministration of that Publick Office under the King of Syam. THE Ship Quedabux belonging to the Nhabob Nurulakhon in Bengala, bound from Sirian, in the Kingdom of Pegu, towards Ballasore, William Morgan Pilot, (I Francis Davenport being then a Passenger on board the said Ship) was on Tuesday the 2d of March, 1685/6, about three Leagues to the Southward of the Land Agoada, and in sight of point Negraes, Pyratically, and without Commission attacqu'd and seiz'd by one Captain Alexander Lessly, in a Ship call'd the Jerusalem, which Captain Coates had, (about three months before) as Pyratically taken from John d' Marcora, an Armenian Merchant at Madapollam; Lessly being then attended with a small Sloop call'd the Malpot, and then both of them wearing the King of Syams Colours. After this seizure of the Quedabux, Captain Lessly conveyed her into the Harbour of Mergen, where the two Ships Arriv'd the 13th of March, the Sloop being in the way thither, overset by a Gust of Wind, and five men lost with her, viz. three English and two Portugueze. On the 14th of March, the Nocquedah and Pilot of the Quedabux, and several Passengers of us were permitted to go ashore at the Town of Mergen, and carried on our Landing (with strong Guards) directly before Mr. Samuel White, at his dwelling House: Here I found Mr. William How entertained into Mr. Samuel Whites particular service, as Steward and Cash-Keeper, who had also been carried in on Ship Mahmuddy, belonging to Meer Facqueer Deun of Metchlepatam, which had been by the said VVhite, Shabander of the Port, Condemn'd as Prize, and dispatch'd to the Coast of Choromondel, on the roaving design, under the command of Captain Edward English. Here I also was inform'd, that the Ship, which this day went over the Bar, and Anchor'd in seven fathom Water, belong'd to Hughly, and was Laden with twenty two Elephants bound thither, having a Portugueze Pilot. Upon this News Mounsieur Carroon, and I, addrest our selves to the Shabander, requesting his permission (since the King of Syam had no Wars with either England or France, and that we were only Passengers in the Ship, now brought into that Port) to depart that Port, with that presenting opportunity of the Hughly Ship: Our business calling us to Bengala, he at first freely consented, and being made sensible that the Jerusalems Sailers, and Souldiers, had imbezelled and spent all our Provisions on board the Prize, gave order to the Purveyor to supply us a new against the next morning. The Shabander also pretended, that he would clear the Quedabux, and recruit her with Water and Plantain Trees, seeming highly to check Captain Lessly for his bringing her into Port, when he had no order for so doing; but the Nocquedah alleadging, his Ship to be in want of repairs; the Monsoon, and the long time the Elephants had been already on board; whereas had she not been intercepted, she might in all probability have been ere then at her intended Port, and that there∣fore he could do no less, then in behalf of the Prince his Master, to protest against the said Lessly and his Abettors, for what Dammages might ensue on this interception of the Ship super Altum Mare. The Shabander, presently in a great rage, ordered her to be unladed, and all the Rubies and other Merchandize to be delivered into his own custody, turning the nine Elephants upon the Nocquedah, to be maintained at his charge, scoffingly telling him, that if he would not take the first offer of his Liberty, he should stay long enough, before he should have asecond made him,
and be taught what it was to threaten a Protest, and at length forc'd the Nocquedah to sign a Pa∣per in the Persian Language, signifying that the Ship was not detained by the said Shabander, but that being out of repair, and the Monsoon now far spent, the Nocquedah thought it not con∣venient to proceed for Bengala, until the Months of August or November: Thus was his Ship ordered to be unrigg'd, and laid by the Walls; Mr. White not sparing to say publickly, on the Nocquedahs signing of the Paper, that the Nocquedahs next August or November, would not happen till latter Lammas. Thus much for the Quedabux. On Munday the 15th of March, my Chest being fetcht out of the Ship, and the Provisions (according to Mr. Whites order) being put into a Boat, which was to have carried us to the Hughly Ship over the Bar, Mounsieur Carroon and my self, went to take our leaves of the Sha∣bander, who dismist us with a great deal of Courtesie; telling us, that he had sent to the Pilot of the Ship, on which we were to proceed, our late Nocquedahs Certificate for Mr. John Tyler, the King of Syam's Agent in Bengala, to produce on any occasion of the Moors being dissatisfied at the Quedabuxes stay at Mergen, and desired, that we also would acquaint whoever enquired into it, that it was the Nocquedahs own choice, since he had been offered a speedy dispatch, if he would have proceeded. As we were putting off the shore in the Boat, the Shabander Mr. White sends order to stop her, and calls me to him, who (when I came to him) told me, that for some Reasons he had, he thought it not convenient, that I should go on that Ship to Bengala; At which when he saw me much surprized, and disturbed, he presently told me, he intended nothing to my prejudice, but had a mind to do me a greater kindness, than I was aware of; saying, that he would give me a good Employment in the King of Syams service, which I refusing to accept, alledging first, The unsuitableness of it to my own Inclinations, having never in my life serv'd any Heathen Prince; nextly, The inconvenience of such an engagement of my self, which perhaps might debar me the priviledge of returning home, when I should have a mind to it: And lastly, The unhandsome∣ness of taking that, or any other Employ, until I had first appeared before my late Masters, and given them an account of the loss of their Ship, besides the dissatisfaction it would be to my Friends, to have me absent, after such a cross Adventure as I had lately met with: He then told me, that if I would serve him, he would order matters so to my advantage, that I should have no occasion to repent my stay on shore, this Monsoon. That he would give me fifteen Tales per Month, to assist him in his particular affairs, and that in the Month of August next, he would put me in Master, and Supra Cargoe of a Ship of his own, which he was resolved to send to the Bay, which would be abundantly more to my Benefit, than to go now a Passenger, when I must expect to lye a whole Monsoon at home out of Employ. This fair offer prevailed with me to stay with him on shore until August next, he further add∣ing, that for the ten Tales worth of provisions, which Captain Lessly and his men had imbezelled of mine, he would see me paid; and as for what in lieu of it, he had already ordered into the Boat, the Purveyor should take it back again. So Mounsieur Carroon staying all this while in the Boat, I had only time, whilst my Chests, &c. were fetching ashore again, to write a few Lines to Mr. Ralph Harwarr, signifying the loss of the Ship Hopewell, and the occasion of my stay here. On Tuesday the 16th. Instant, Mr. Samuel White the Shabander, committed to my care all his Books and Papers of Accompts, which then standing in a very confused posture, he desired me to peruse and digest them into the best and clearest method I could; saying, that he would procure a Writer under me, for Transcribing them fair over after me, in a better hand then he perceived I could write; and first to begin with the Kings Accompts, which referr'd to his oblique dis-burst∣ments out of the Treasury, from January, 1684/, for that he was ordered from Court, to remit them up to the Privy Council in July next, and therefore would have them made up to the first day of that Month, to which I gave my promise to apply my self with all possible diligence. This day Arrived here from Syam, Mr. Tho. Yale, Mr. James Wheeler, and Mr. John Kiddal, with an order from the Lord Phaulkon, to be furnished with a Ship to carry them to Madrass. The first of these was pitcht upon, as a person most proper to accompany the Jewels, which the King of Syam threw back upon his Brother the Worshipful Elihu Yale, on pretence they had been over-valued, which was done at the instance of the said Lord Phaulkon, who was apprehensive that the Kings acceptance of them at such an over-rate, might give an opportunity to his Enemies at Court to supplant him in the Kings favour, by suggesting, that he had covertly Juggl'd with the said Yale, in thus abusing the King. The second (for want of Copper at Syam, and on pro∣mise from the Lord Phaulkon, to be the next season supply'd, with the Amount of the Phenix's Cargoe in that specie) took his passage this way for company sake, having also orders to move the President and Council in the Jewel Affair, in case Mr. Elihu Yale did not comply with expedi∣tion, in taking back the Jewels, and reimbursing their Amount, as he had charg'd them to the King. The third had found so great favour with the Lord Phaulkon, as to be credited for forty Cattees, for which he brought an order to the Shabander, to pay him in Tynn at the Kings price: But the Shabander himself having occasion for the Kings Tynn, paid Captain Kiddal in ready Cash,
or at least charg'd it so in his Books, the said Kiddal being design'd from Madrass to the Bay, to fetch his Wife to Syam. Upon this their Arrival at Mergen, the Dorothy's design for Atcheen was laid aside, and her Cargoe of Rice being sold to Mr Thomas Yale (not without the disgust of Mr. Wheeler) she was pitcht upon to carry them to Madrass. On Wednesday the 17th. Captain John Coats arriv'd at Mergen, from the Coast of Chormondel, in a small Sloop call'd the Robin, which he had built at Madapollam, and brought with him about Forty Europeans, who were full with boastings of the great Exploits which Coats had done against the Subjects of the King of Golcondah, whom they in Bravado stil'd the Enemy, and particularly in taking a Fort at Madapollam, and firing of Metchlepatam: But notwithstanding all this, 'twas easie enough to observe, that Coat's Reception by the Shabander, did not correspond with his ex∣pectation, though (because of these Strangers) the best side was put outermost on both hands. On the 18th. arriv'd from the Coast of Chormondell a Ship call'd the Tokely, belonging to Maho∣met Sadock of this Port, a Moor, and Son to the late Shabander; her Lading consisted chiefly of Salt for Mr. White, and the Ship he immediately seiz'd to himself, for security and satisfaction of a Debt which the said Sadock ow'd him. On Friday the 20th. The Dorothy (Captain John Croply Commander) was dispatcht to carry Mr. Yale, &c. with the Jewels to Madrass. The Shabander, Captain Coats, and my self accom∣panying them on board the Ship down the River, and Coats Sloop following the Ship to take us in when we parted from them. On our return towards the Town in the Sloop, Mr. White began to tax Captain Coats, with his indiscreet management of Affairs at the Coast; telling him, that he must prepare to go to Syam, and there give an Account to the King of what he had done, and particularly blam'd him for the Re-delivery of John d' Marcoraes Money, and bringing away an empty ship, and leaving Don Joseph d' Haeredia behind him upon the Coast, as well as surrendering the King of Golcondah's Ship: Coats pleaded the good Service he had done Mr. White, in revenging him on Ally Beague the Hoble∣dar of Metchlepatam, by putting the Country into a Combustion, which he had done in observance to Mr. Whites private Orders to him; contrary to the express command of the King their Master, and that instead of being blam'd, he expected the Shabander should according to his promise, skreen him from His Majesties displeasure, he having expos'd himself meerly to it for his sake, when they came on shore, they came to so high words, that Coats in a great passion openly slight∣ed the Shabander, and the Lord Phaulkon, and privately ordering his Chyrurgeon to bring him an Ounce of Opium, pretended in sight of us to swallow a large Pill, which stepping into the next room he brought out in his hand, heaving the remaining Opium publickly out of the Window, after he had first shown it to Mr. White, and told him that his unhandsomness had made him take that Pill, which (as he said) was a parcel of the Opium, nor did he cease after this action extrava∣gantly to rail against them both. Mr. White doubting he had desperately poysoned himself, seem'd mightily troubled at it, and sent for the Garrison Chirurgeons, (both Frenchmen) who both came and gave their opinions, that Captain Coats had not swallow'd any Poyson, though his own Chirurgeon affirm'd, that what he brought was Opium, which in observance of his command he had innocently done, not knowing what occasion this Captain design'd it for, however Mr. VVhite for that time humor'd Captain Coats, by courting a Reconciliation, and pretending that he would engage Life for Life, that if Captain Coats would but go up to Syam, he would bring about so, as that all his proceedings should meet with his Majesties approbation, and he not want all the Fa∣vour and Honour he could desire. Coats now seem'd better satisfy'd, was prevail'd with to take (as the Doctors call'd them) needless Antidotes to expel the fancy'd Poyson, and next morning was well recover'd from a feigned Indisposition. They are after this Nights Comical Feat, fast friends to all appearance, and harp no more on the Coast Exploits, only Captain Coats the next day begins to make up his private Accounts with Mr. VVhite, concerning a parcel of Raw Silk, &c. which he had in his own name formerly consign'd from the Coast to Mr. VVhite, and then prepares for his Journey to Syam, and delivers me all his Papers and Journal, relating to his Coast Expedition, to be registred for the Shabander, amongst which the most considerable, and likely to tend to his, or the Shabanders prejudice, was the protest which Mr. Freeman, Mr. VVales, &c. had made against him; Mr. Mallet, and Don Joseph d' Haeredia, in hehalf of the Honourable East-India Company, for dammages sustained by his Hostile proceedings at Madapollam, and some Letters, which the Dutch Chief at Metchlepatam, Laurence Pit had sent him, wherein he also complained of great dammage, and threatned to remem∣ber it in a proper season, together with several Letters from Mr. Freeman, the final answer of which was, Coats Surrender of the King of Golcondahs own Ship, when at the same time, he detain'd the Ship of a Merchant stranger, who was no Subject to that King, with whom he pretended the King of Syam his Master to have War. This accidental and strange difference between these two persons, made me somewhat curious in my enquiries and search into the reason, and first commencement of this, which by what I could collect from all the Letters and other Writings, which had past between Mr. (alias Lord) Phaulkon, Mr. VVhite, and Mr. Coates was this. Mr. VVhite being in a Ship of the King of Syams at Metchlepatam, had received (by the private instigation of Mr. Robert Freeman as he fancy'd) some abuses, and sustain'd some loss by Ally Beague the Hobledar, to the amount 1200 Pagodoes, and afterwards his Ship Spellman being deny'd at the
same Port a supply of Cables, was for want of them cast away upon the Coast, Mr. White being then arriv'd to the Shabandership of Tenassery, by the Interest of the Lord Phaulkon, sues for Let∣ters of Reprizal from his Master the King: The Lord Phaulkon so represents matters to his Ma∣jesty, that he consents to make open War with the King of Golchondah, but first for fashion sake, resolves to demand satisfaction for several affronts, done by the Subjects of that King to his Impe∣rial Crown and Dignity; the Ribarr employ'd to demand redress at the Court of Golcondah failes in his Duty, or at least in their expectation; Coates is thereupon ordered to begin the War, and is furnished with Copper, and other Goods to defray his necessary expence, and entertainment of all the Englishmen he could get into the service for that design, and is in March, 1681/5. dispatcht from Mergen to Madrass, counsign'd to Mr. Thomas Iatt, and thence to go down to Metchle∣patam. In the April following, comes from Court a Revocation of Coates's Commission, with strict Orders to forbid his breaking into a War with the King of Golcondah, or using any act of Hostility or molestation, towards any of his Subjects, with positive command to Mr. White, immediately to dispatch the best Sailer belonging to the Port with that Express, so that it might reach Coates at Madrass: Mr. White could not avoid sending it, but withal sends his own private Orders to Cap∣tain Coastes, to proceed according to his former Instructions, promising to stand between him and all danger, and reflecting highly upon the sickleness, and irresolution of the Syam Courtiers. Coates having advice at Trincombarr of Ivatt's Death, flusht with money, and blown with Ambition, is prepar'd for any undertaking for his great Friend Mr. White; and when Cropley brings him the Letters to Madrass, prefers Mr. Whites Orders to those of the King his master, and ac∣cordingly under pretence of going to look for Don Joseph, and having a leaky Vessel under him, puts into Madapollam, rebuilds his old Vessel, and builds two small ones more, and now having lived at an extravagant rate, and by his careless lavishness made all Sterling, as we say, He re∣solves to fetch it up again, by the seizure of an Armenians Ship, which had (by report) near 60000 Pagadoes in her bound to Madrass; Now is the Country Alarm'd, and Coates inveigling Don Joseph d' Haeredia to side with him, open defiance is proclaim'd: Many of the poor Paddy Boats taken, Robb'd and destroy'd, a small inconsiderable Fort below Nassapore taken and sack't, and the Guns brought away, Metchlapatam skulkingly set on fire, the Companies Goods stop'd in the Countrey (or alledg'd to be) because all this was done by Englishmen, Mr. Freeman appears in behalf both of the Company, the Armenian, and himself, and at length makes an advantage of Coates weakness, according to the Mergen construction of the matter. Whilst these things were thus carried at the Coast, Mr. White himself had an opportunity put into his hands, to break with the Moors, which he was resolved not to lose, not knowing how Coats might succeed in his designs; and 'twas thus. Cropley returning in the Dorothy from Coats, finds at Anchor under Ilha Ferro, a Ship belonging to the Nhabob Mahomet Aminkhon, Laden with Metchlepatam Goods, and waiting for fair Weather to put into Mergen, whither she was bound; he coming in before her, tells the Shabander; who immediately sends Croply out again, with orders to attacque, seize, and bring her into Port as a Prize: He follow'd his orders; Mr. White gives notices of what he had done to the Lord Phaulkon, he construing it (according to Mr. Whites plausible representation of the matter) as an omen of future good success, commends the Act, and prevails with the King to approve it: Now no longer peace with Golcondah, another Gingerlee Ship being in Port, is detained and confiscated with her Cargoe. The Shabander ad∣vises the Court, that many Coast Ships frequented Pegu: The Lord Phaulkon encourages him to way-lay them all, and bring them into Mergen for Examination; so that this year no less then seven Sail have been taken and Prized, and several others paid sawce for their being cleared, only the Henrietta Maria, with her Cargoe, belonging to Mr. Freeman, and his effects on broad the Momuddy escap't; which was done for Reasons no less publick then politick. Of the number of those taken was a Ship called the Sta Cruz, Burthen about 350 Tons, be∣longing to Joseph, Brother to John d' Marcora, who little deserved such usage, as not only being no Subject to the King of Golcondah, but being the Redeemer of many poor English Men, and others, at his vast charge, out of Captivity in Pegu. His Ship, without ever preadvising up to Court, was sent with her Cargoe to Atcheen; Mr. White at one and the same time seizing all, and yet promising to interceed for the restitution of both Ship and Cargoe to him; however he and his Son (being by Mr. White detain'd behind, as pledges for the Ships return; for Mr. White was fearful, least the men he had sent upon her should be either over-power'd, or over perswaded to let her escape at Atcheen) did at length, with much importunity, obtain liberty to go in Person to Court, being full of hopes, that the Lord Phaulkon would be so just, as to take the Case into consideration, and move the King in his favour. This Nocquedah having been inform'd that I came out of England in the same Ship with Mr. Phaulkon, willing to leave no means unessay'd, desired me to write to him in his behalf, which I (not daring to deny any thing, within the com∣pass of my power, to one whom I owed my Redemption from Slavery) accordingly writ, and gave him this following Letter to the Lord Phaulkon.
Mergen 24. March 1684/5. My Lord, THe Signal Obligations I lye under to this Bearer, the Redeemer of my self, and many other Poor Men out of Captivity, call for all the Evidences of my Grati∣tude, that any Opportunity can put into my Hands; so that though long absence, and diversity of Fortunes may have drawn a Curtain betwixt Your Lordship and my self, and put me by all pretence to any Interest with You, from a former Friendship or Ac∣quaintance in any matter that might immediately concern my self; yet in this particular Instance, when my best of Friends require it, I hope I may become Your successfull Hum∣ble Petitioner; That You would vouchsafe him all the favour You can in his present Affair, and then I am sure he will find all the favour he desires, which is the restitution of his Ship and Estate, taken from him under pretence of His Majesties Authority; and though I do not pretend to a Spirit of Prophesie, yet I dare be confident to affirm, that Your Lordship, in doing that just and generous act will find more satisfaction, and reap more true Honour then can be expected from the Ruine of so well deserving an Honest Man, as is Joseph d' Marcora, whose Condition I humbly recommend to Your Gracious Consideration. Your Lordships most Humble Servant, Francis Davenport. APRIL, 1686. The beginning of this Month Arrived the Delight, Robert Mellish Master, from Madrass, with a Cargoe of Cloth, to the amount of six thousand Pagodoes and upwards, in Joynt-stock, between Mr. Thomas Lucas and Mr. Samuel White, the two Owners of the said Ship, in equal proportion, she is sent up with her Lading to Tenassery, for the conveniency of Repacking it into Bales, fit for Transport to Syam, whither it was to be sent, committed to the care of Mr. Francis Heath for Sale. The 9th of this Month also Arrived the Agent from Bengala, Mr. John Thredder Cape Mer∣chant, her Cargoe consisting of Butter, Oyl, Salt, Dammer, Cloth and Raw Silk, in Partner∣ship, between Mr. John Tyler, Mr. Fitz Needham and himself; a part of her and the Cargoe, was by them offered to Sale to the Lord Phaulkon and Mr. White, which latter did at first accept of an eighth at the Price proposed, but in a few days, on second thoughts, recanting; he also wrote up to Syam, disswading the former from being concern'd; however he took off all the Butter, Oyl, Salt and Dammer, which were on good Demand, at a very low Price, not permit∣ing him to sell it to any of the Merchants, who would have given a far greater rate, and left him at liberty to prceed for Syam with his Raw Silk and Cloth, fairly promising that (in considera∣tion of the hard measure Mr. Thredder complained of, in not being permitted to sell his Butter, &c. to the best advantage) he would in absence furnish the Skipper, John Bunt, with Carpenters Timber Plank, or whatsoever else he should want for the fitting his Ship. About the middle of this Month we went up to Tenassery, where the Delights Cargoe was ex∣amined and repackt, and to it was added a quantity of Metchlepatam Goods, to the amount of fourty Cattees, being a parcel of Mahomet Aminkhons Cargoe, which Mr. White found a knack to make clear gains to himself, in disposing at the same time another quantity of the said Cargoe to the amount (as he forc'd the Merchant to take them off) of two hundred Cattees, which very parcel of the said Cargoe he had newly received express order from Syam to remit to Clong: Nay there those Goods being much wanted, and on great demands there; but because by that means he would have lost the opportunity of a snack out of them, he thinks best to pretend the Kings stock of Cash then in his hands to be low, and the Garrison and Port charges being to be defray'd before the close of his Books, he adventured the breach of order, and exposed them to Sale as aforesaid. Captain Coates took his journey hence for Syam the 22th of this Month, and the day before his departure, perceiving him to be very melancholly, I askt him what made him so, where∣upon taking me into a private Room, he produc'd a Paper, which he bad me read; and I found it to be Mr. Whites forementioned order to him, encouraging him (notwithstanding the Kings pro∣hibition) to make War upon Golcondah, by doing what mischief he could at Metchlepatam, or any Ships belonging to that Port, or any part of that Kings Dominions, and assuring him, that he would not only bear him out, but make it redound to his great advantage and honour at the Court of Syam. When I had read it Captain Coats asked me, whether Mr. Whites demeanour to him, since his Arrival at Mergen, had corresponded with those splendid Promises he had made him in that Paper, and whether 'twas reasonable that he should be turn'd over to Syam, to give an account of his proceedings at the Coast; when Mr. White was the only person that put him
Action, and for whose sake alone he had thus embroil'd himself? To which I reply'd, my opinion was, that the exhausting so much of the Kings stock by his twelve months stay at the Coast, without any advantage, was the main reason that made Mr. White loth to pass his Ac∣counts; but that however, Mr. White being very sensible that those orders may at any time be produc'd against him, there was no question but he would use his utmost endeavours to obviate all the blame that the Lord Phaulkon could transfer upon Captain Coats, except in the case of his surrender of John d' Marcordes Treasure, and the King of Golcondahs Ship, and buying of the Danesburg without order; to all which Captain Coats replyed, he could readily answer and ju∣stifie, and that nothing troubled him, but that his first commencement of the breach at the Coast, being point blank contrary to the King of Syams express pleasure, he should now appear to pre∣fer the private Revenge and Interest of his Friend, before his Duty to his great Master, and that he saw no way to save himself, but by letting the King understand the truth of the matter, which could not but be of hazardous consequence to Mr. White, Coats being only at first Commissionated to follow such Instructions from time to time, as he should receive from the Shabander, which Commission also he now shew'd me, together with the revocation, and strict prohibition to mo∣lest or disturb, or use any hostile action towards any of the Subjects of the King of Golcondah, but to return with all possible speed through the streights of Malacca to Syam, with all the English men he could possibly procure, and bring Don Joseph in his Company, the King resolving to War upon Cambodia; to which I had little to say, only advised Mr. Coats to be of good Cou∣rage, and yet very cautious how he prejudiced his old and experienced Friend, telling him, I doubted not, but on his Arrival at Syam, his own ingenuity would suggest to him the most suit∣able and safe methods of proceeding. This month also arrived Don Joseph d' Haeredia, in a new ship of his own, called the Sancta Rosa, Burthen about four hundred Tons, from the Coast; with a parcel of French and Portu∣gueze Souldiers, whom he had encouraged to come over into the King of Syams service, and forty five Prisoners taken by Coats and him out of the Paddy Boats, &c. which they plunder'd or destroyed on the Coast. Many dayes had not past before Mr. White and the Don fell at vari∣ance; though the latter managed matters so subtilly, by a seeming condescension, that it broke not into open flame, be yielding to surrender his Account at Syam, which the Shabander refused to accept, or examine here, which yet the Don thought but reasonable he should have done. The Case was thus: Captain Coats's Vessel, with which he went from Mergen the last year, being too small to carry all the effects, assign'd by the King for his Coast Expedition; Don Joseph makes voluntary offer of his old Ship to serve the King on that occasion, and carry the remaining part of the Goods after Coats to Madrass; Mr. White accepts the motion, and Lades on him in March, 1684/5, the remaining quantity of Copper, Tynn, and Tutenage, with a parcel of Elephants, and dis∣patches him for that Port; he meeting with contrary Winds, puts in to Metchlepatam, and the most of his Elephants being dead by the way, the rest he Lands there, of which (after a great charge in keeping them) only two were sold; the others also dying before he could meet with a Market for them, Ally Beague, by a Wile, gets into his clutches Goods, to the amount of three thousand Pagodoes, and detains them as the King of Syams; Mr. Freeman, with some difficulty, recovers from the Don to the amount of two thousand two hundred eighty nine Pagodoes for Mr. Lucas, on account of Captain Coats, who had also shipt Goods on him for his own account: The Dons old Ship proves unserviceable, he removes her to Madapollam, and sets a new one upon the Stocks, designing her (as Lessly reported) for the Persia Trade, in Mr. Freemans em∣ploy: Coats in the mean time Arrives there, puts him by that design, and draws him into the intriegue, to joyn with him in the projected disturbance, himself had resolved, pursuant to Mr. Whites aforesaid orders, to break out into. The Government jealous of their designs, at∣tempted to interrupt their Building of their Vessels. The Don entertains several Souldiers as the King of Syams servants; they then both stand upon their Guards, and with much difficulty at length, get their Vessels into the Water, only Captain Coats, in a bravado, burnt his old Vessel upon the Stocks, having then thrown away (as per his account) thirty Cattees in the re∣building her; the Factory for shewing them no other then ordinary Civility is embroiled and hazarded; the Companies Interest suffers; and at length Don Joseph, having by the great ex∣pence of maintaining so many Souldiers and Lascars, and the supplies he had afforded Captain Coats, with what Ally Beague detained from him, drain'd his Purse of all the Kings Cash, and was the proceed of what he carried with him; highly opposed Captain Coats in the surrender of the King of Golcondahs Ship to Mr. Freeman, expecting by detaining her, to bring Ally Beague to a complyance and redelivery of what he had sequestred from him: But in the end, Coats over-ruling him, the Ship is delivered back; Coats leaves the Coast, and not long after, Don Joseph leaves Metchlepatam Road, being threatned by a Dutch man that Rode there, goes down to Corrango to water, and there meets with opposition; thence he sails to Vizagapatam, there gets some recruit, and so comes to Mergen, where Mr. White not willing to pass such Account as he thought would not prove satisfactory at Court; and having an Eye upon the Dons Ship, if possible to hook her to himself, referr'd him thither: The Don at first refused it, alleadging that being employed by the Shabander, he was to give his accounts to the Shabander, and to no per∣son else; but at length, upon Mr. Whites large promises of appearing in his behalf to the Lord Phaulkon, so effectually, that the Don might be assured of not only a currant acceptance of his
Account, but great and Honourable Rewards for the good service he had done his Majesty, and an advantagious Employment for his new Ship the next year; he not only consented, but chear∣fully resolved to make his personal appearance at Court. Thus on the 29th of the Month, away marches the Don, big with expectation of no small matters. Here also before our return to Mergen, the Shabander ordered the bringing into him of all the Rents, Penalties, &c. which had been by the under Officers of the Clong, Collected this Year; so that his stock was once more considerably recruited to the amount of 506 Cattees, and leaving Mr. Heath to proceed the next day with the Delights Cargoe, the Metchlepatam Goods, and twelve Pattararaes of Ophium consign'd to Mr. White, from Dr. Ralph Harwar: We this Evening left Tenassery to return to Mergen. Now it may be worth while to Note what is meant by Penalties, and the Methods of Imposing them. THE Shabander is never without his Emissaries and Spies, brib'd for that end, in every Fa∣mily of Note in the Province; and when any of them that are worth the fleecing, have committed any little pilfering tricks in their respective Employments, upon notice given to him, he presently aggravates the Crime to the Lord Phaulkon, who leaves it to the Shabander, to try and punish the fault at his own discretion, which in such Cases seldom fails of commanding a total Confiscation of the Delinquents Estate, and sometimes they are told into the bargain, that it is a great favour in him, that besides, or contrary to the Kings Order, he forbears the ransack∣ing of all the Parties Relations, though brancht out into several distinct Families; that is to say, Fathers, Mothers, Brothers, Sisters, Uncles, Aunts, &c. and by this course he strikes so great an awe into them, that none of them have the courage to enquire into any thing that he does, or presume to make their Complaints to Court, being fearful that his Interest there would crush them to pieces, Stock and Branch. MAY, Anno 1686. The height of business being now over, Mr. White dedicated this Month to his divertisement and recreation, and begun with a design to sound round all the Islands near this Port, and take notice of all the Channels leading to it, for which end he took me with him in the Sloop Robin, being attended by the small Sloop called the Mary, both which Captain Coats had built at Mada∣pollam; but when we came out to the Westward of the Islands, we soon found the Year was too far spent for such an undertaking. The Weather not permitting our stay abroad, he then re∣solved to stand in again amongst the Islands, and take the pleasure of Fishing, dispatching a Pin∣nace to Mergen to fetch down the Fishermen and their Nets: When five or six dayes had past with this pleasant divertisement, an unlookt for and unwelcome summons for Mr. White, im∣mediately to repair to the Court at Levo, dampt all our Jollity; now was it become but good manners to conform our selves to his more reserved and melancholly deportment, and Regis ad Exemplum, nothing but silence among us. To Mergen we return, where he begins to frame an Apology for his non-complyance with the Summons, alleadging not only his indisposition and want of Health, but the prejudice that would accrue to his Majesties Affairs, if he was forc'd by so sudden a removal to leave them in that unsetled posture they yet were in; but two days af∣terwards, before he had dispatcht that Letter, comes another Pursuivant to call him up, and in two days more a third, with an Express, to hasten him up by night or day. Upon which, a Letter is dispatcht to my Lord Phaulkon, of a quite different Tenor, to what was at first prepa∣red, signifying his willingness to come up to Court to take new measures for the business of the ensuing Year, which the present state of Affairs rendred necessary; and nothing but his late being abroad to survey the Frontiers had kept him so long from moving his Honour for liberty to come and kiss his Hand; now all preparation is made for our Journey, the Souldiers and Seamen all paid off, and (which was a trick I had never heard of before) because Mr. White would not appear to be in the Kings Debt, he invented a Muster Role of so many mens names (who for ought any man knows never were in rerum Natura) as swept out of the Kings stock 135 Cattees, as clearly as if they had been lain on a Drum-head in the face of a Regiment, and be∣cause it might be as troublesome to him to have any of the Kings Stores, as well as Cash in his hands, he resolves to make a Ballance of the Clongs Account, by reparting all the remains (the amount whereof per Invoice was 276 Cattees) into separate charges, as already disbursed and distributed upon all the Kings Ships, and accordingly the Kings Godowns were clean swept, and the Shabanders fill'd: Thus was I ordered to close the Kings Books in Duplicates, from January 1684/5 to the 1st of July next, he making the Kings stock at Mergen vanish in a moment: His publick Table now broke off: His Goods and Houshold Utensils all Inventoried; and the keep∣ing of his House recommended to Mr. Hows care, with private Letters and Instructions left for all the Commanders of Ships belonging to the Port, that might be expected to arrive, during his absence. Now also is the difference and fewd, which for four Months together (because
the man had a mind to have shared stakes with Mr. White in the Prize profits) had been main∣tained between himself and Mr. Burneby, with great animosity on Mr. Whites part totally (at least seemingly) laid aside, and Mr. Burneby much courted by him, and pitcht upon to act as his Attorney, to receive and open all his Letters, and take into his possession at present his Plate, Jewels, and a small Box with Rubies; and hereafter whatsoever Goods should be Imported, either for his proper Account, or on Consignment, only what Gold was expected from Atcheen, by Mr. Triggs, being the process of the Success her Cargoe, and the Sancta Cruz (which be∣long'd to the Armenian) was to be paid into Mr. Mellish, he passing his receipt for the same to Tho. Triggs for Account of Mr. White; to him also Mr. White now delivered a parcel of Gold, to answer part of the Delights Cargoe, designing, however squares might go with himself, that Mr. Lucas should be no sufferer. Things being thus setled at Mergen, on the 20th of May we began our Journey; at Tenassery we met a fourth Messenger, and thence proceeded in all hast to Jelinga; there he, Captain Lessly and my self, took our speediest way by Land; they two with Doolies, my self, with an Ele∣phant, leaving Mr. John Turner, his Writer, and Mr. Ware, with several of his black servants, to come after us with the Baggage and Carts. At Peranne we met with two other Bragos Pintados, or Pursuivants, to hasten him up to Court, wheresoever they should meet with him: This hurrying of those Messengers at the heels one of another, gave Mr. White no small jealousie, that all was not well; however there was now no remedy, but go he must; so here we immediately take Boat, and go by Sea to Syam River, Mr. White (now wishing himself no Shabander) in the interim composed himself to recol∣lect, and ordered me to Pen down what he could conceive might have slipt him, that would be likely to prove matter of offence to the King, or the Lord Phaulkon; the heaviest charges, and those which he ordered me to write for his own review, saying, that he expected no worse, were, I. His dispatch of the Sancta Cruz with her Lading to Atcheen, after her seizure upon his own head, without waiting an Order from Court, for either her seizure or dispatch. II. His dismission of Arnold Baroons and Nelcons Ships, who both had in them Subjects and Goods of the King of Pegues, without advising up to Court. III. His forcing from the Merchants, (for he thought, he said, they would call it so) on the two aforesaid Ships for their dismission, to the amount of five thousand and odd Pagodoes, of which he had never advised the truth to Court, nor brought it into the Treasury; he only hint∣ing to his Lordship, that the said Ships belonged to, and the said Merchants, were inhabitants of Madrass, and therefore in respect to the amicable Correspondence, which hitherto had been pre∣served unviolated, between the Honourable English Company, and the Crown of Syam, he had after strict Examination clear'd them; and they at their departure freely made him a small Pre∣sent, which for its inconsiderableness, he hop't might pass as a perquisite to his Office. IV. His Sale of Mahomet Aminkhons remaining part of the Cargoe, contrary to order, it being expresly sent for up to Syam. V. His engrossing all Goods Imported into his own hands, by which means, not only all other Merchants, but even the King himself had been forc't to take of him, and at his price. VI. His neglect in Fortifying the Town of Mergen, which he had represented up to Court, to be rendered impregnally Fortified by his own great pains, and at the Kings vast charge, which he said he was jealous, or the Country people, or the Moors, (his mortal enemies) might have given a truer account of, than he had done. VII. His detaining to his own use a parcel of choice Rubies, taken out of the Pegu Ships, to the amount of 130 Cattees, of which his own Oconta being privy to the act, he was jealous that information might have been given by him. VIII. His dispatch of the Sloop Phaulkon in March last to Atcheen, without orders from Court, which he said, might perhaps prove as hard to answer, as the dispatch of the Sancta Cruz thither, whose motion the former was sent to attend, and Convoy her back to Mergen; and if neither of them should return safe back, he lay liable to a double Lash: That is, to satisfie the King and the Armenian. IX. His detaining of the proceed of the Derrea Dowlets Cargoe, her last Voyage to Atcheen, contrary to the Kings Orders, on pretence that he wanted it, to defray the charges of the Port and Shipping. X. His detaining likewise part of the proceed of the Nonkalays Cargoe. XI. His difference with Mr. Burneby, which had grown to that height, that the Country people, he doubted, took great notice of it, and his acting all the preceding year on his own head, both in issuing out Orders, Instructions and Dispatches to the Commanders of the Kings Ships, and condemning or clearing what, and whomsoever he thought best, without either advi∣sing with the Oyea and Coromocon, or permitting Mr. Burneby to be privy to any thing he did in the Kings Affairs, or so much as Communicating to him those Letters, which always came Gene∣rally directed to them joyntly from Court. XII. And Lastly, (which he said he accounted the deepest and most unanswerable charge they could lay against him, and he was afraid Coats had produced them) his Orders to Captain Coats, for commencing a War with Metchlepatam, flatly contrary to the Kings express Command.
Thus was the remaining part of our passage spent by him in forming fit Answers for what he had recollected, as most likely to be alleadged against him, and being from hence forward more then ordinarily dejected in his Spirits; the day before we got up to the City, he was taken with a strong Feaver. JƲNE, Anno 1686. The first of this Month we Arrived at Syam, about six in the Evening; the next day Mr. White receiving from John Mattheos and Anthony Perez, to the amount of about sixty Cattees, for Goods sent up by them in January last for Sale here, and a parcel of China Ware and other Commo∣dities, which they had invested according to his order, deliver'd all, both the Money and Goods into Mr. Francis Healths possession, and ordering me to stay at the City, until Mr. Turners arrival, took Boat with Captain Lessly, to accompany him for Levo. On the 6th Instant I received a Letter from Captain Lessly, signifying Mr. Whites pleasure, that I should come up with all possible speed, he lying desperately sick, almost past hopes of re∣covery; upon receipt whereof I immediately took Boat, and arriving the 8th Instant at Levo, found Captain Coats and Don Joseph d' Haeredia at Mr. Whites Lodgings, opposite to the Lord Phaulkons House, but himself so very ill that there was no speaking to him: That night hap∣pened to be the Crisis of his Distemper, which being past, his Feaver the next day began to abate, and being informed that I was come up, he sent for me to his Bed-side, and desired me to peruse all his Papers that were in the Escrutore, which was kept for his particular Concerns, and out of them collect and Inventory of all his Personal Estate, and reduce all his Accompts into a Lead∣ger form, and bring them to a Ballance, which accordingly I went about, and in fourteen dayes time compleated; he in the mean time growing somewhat better in Health; so that at length he was able to walk about in his Room. When I had finished, and shewn him the Book, by the Ballance whereof it appeared, that his Estate in England and India at that time, amounted to 1574 Cattees of Silver, besides his Plate, Jewels and Rubies, left at Mergen, to the amount of 322 Cattees, and in his Stock in Partnership with the Lord Phaulkon, 400 Cattees; he ordered me to write out another Leidger by it, only leaving out all his Adventures and Stock abroad, except those wherein the Lord Phaulkon was concerned with him, saying, that he still doubted, whether he should ever recover his sickness, and that the compleat one, which contained his en∣tire Estate both in India and England, he would commit to Mr. Heaths custody, whom he de∣signed for one of his Executors, and the other, which was to contain only that part of his Tra∣ding Stock and Accompt which appeared, and lay depending in the Kingdom and City of Syam, should be left amongst his other Books for the Lord Phaulkons perusal, when he should make enquiry into his Estate: This was done in six or seven days more. And now having gathered a little more strength, he adventured too early over the way to wait upon his Honour, who in two or three days successively that he went to him, not carrying it with his formerly wonted free∣dom and familiarity, by standing longer than he was well able, bare headed in the cold, and being much dejected at the alteration he observed in his Lordships Carriage towards him, he fell into a Relapse, in which, though his Feaver was not so violent as before, yet he had a worse and more dangerous pain in his Stomach and Bowels, which indeed rendered his condition to our appear∣ance desperate, nor yet did his Lordship, notwithstanding he lived so near, and saw one or other of the House every day, so much as once make enquiry after his Health; only the Lady Phaulkon would by Padry Pomaz, send him sometimes what she thought might be grateful to him, and proper for him. Having as aforesaid begun this Month with fruitless visits to his Lordships, and finding himself dangerously Relapst, he sends for me, and in the midst of his Agonies and roaring Pains, dictates a Letter to his Lordship, which he ordered me to send to him by his Servant Joan.: The Con∣tents were to this purpose, for he would not permit me to Register it. He complained of, and admired at the occasion of his Lordships unwonted strangeness to him; That he doubted not but he had many Enemies, who had been secretly endeavouring to possess his Honour with an ill Opinion of him, which was the common fate of most men in publick and weighty Employment: That having now one foot in the Grave, he could safely averr (and nothing troubled his Conscience now so much as that) that he had been always more Zealous for the Honour and Interest of his Master the King, then in his own Devotion to∣wards his Creator, under whose afflicting Hand he now lay, perhaps for no one sin of a more hainous provocation; and therefore desired the favour and satisfaction, before he dyed, of being informed, wherein it was that he stood culpable before his Majesty or his Honour, which kindness if it could not be granted him, he would however lay his hand upon his mouth, resolving to acquiesce in his Lordships opinion of him, which he hoped would not reach him to the prejudice of his Reputation, when in the Grave; for if it should please God to recover him from his sickness, he was so Conscious to himself of his own innocency in all matters re∣ferring to his publick Administration of his great Masters Affairs; That the first thing he would do, should be to throw himself at his Lordships Feet, for an Impartial Sentence of Life or Death, according to his merits, in confidence, that his Lordship would not, without just pro∣vocation, take delight in plucking down the Building which his own hands had raised.
The next day the Lord Phaulkon returned Answer by a Letter; of which this following is a true Copy. July the 10th. 1686. Right Worshipful, WE know no reason you have to charge us with strangeness in our deportment to∣wards you, when you consider or observe our general Carriage towards all other Persons, which we hope is not offensive to any man in particular. The Jealousie you express of having private Enemies, who endeavour to estrange us from you, as 'tis on our part altogether Causeless; so it not only argues you culpable of something, you would not have discovered, but highly reflects upon us, as if we took pleasure in hearkening to the malicious tattling and detraction of over busie men, to the prejudice of those we have thought worthy of so considerable a Trust, as we upon mature deliberation, thought good to confer upon you: Nay, Sir, we must be plain, and tell you, The Shabander has no other Enemy, that we know of, than the Shabander, which your own Hand will evidently make appear. That you are now reduced so near the Grave is matter of trouble to us, and that you may not hasten your self thither, let us, as your Friend, perswade you to Temperance. As to the Protestation you make of your Zeal for His Majesties Honour and Interest, give us leave to tell you, that it is no miracle to see a man drive on his own Ambitious or Covetous designs, under a pretence of promoting his Kings Interest; though we do not desire to charge you with being a Court Parasite. The satisfaction you desire shall be granted you, so soon as you are in a condition to be Examined by our Secretary, who should long since have been sent to you, had we not understood your Indisposition, and be cautioned to be plain, fair, and moderate in your Answers, to whatsoever Queries he proposes to you; avoiding all Passionate Ex∣pressions or Gestures, which may do you much harm, but cannot avail any thing to your advantage. It will be no small pleasure to us, to find you as innocent as you pretend, nor shall we ever take delight to ruine what our Hands have built up; but if we perceive a Stru∣cture of our own raising begin to totter, and threaten our own ruine with its fall, none can tax us with imprudence, if we take it down in time. Thus is your own Metaphor retorted, and the needful in Answer to your Paper of yesterdays date, concluded with our hearty wishes for your recovery, as being Your Friend, PHAƲLKON. This Letter, I could perceive both from his Gesture, and several expressions which he let fall when he gave it me to peruse and file, had very different effects upon Mr. White; some Clauses seeming very tart, and others not only more moderate, but giving him some hopes, that matters would not go so bad as he before suspected. In a few days after this, he was once more upon his Legs, though still very weak; and now he was not so much concern'd about re-establishing himself in his Lordships good opinion, as apprehensive that he should not be permitted to return to Mergen, where he said, not only his Interest, but his Safety invited him to reside, as being there at a great distance from the Courts Eyes, and capable of leaving the Kingdom, whensoever his inclinations or any other considera∣tion should render it either eligible or necessary so to do; for now Coats blows him in the Ear, that his Lordship seemed to be disposed to keep Mr. White near himself, and commit the Tenassery Affairs to the management of Mounsieur Forbien, a young Gentleman, highly in favour with his Lordship, and at present, Governour of Bankoke Forts: This made such an impression in Mr. Whites fancy, that he was easily wrought upon by Coats to believe what he most dreaded, and accordingly (without so much as suspecting Coats double dealing, who made it his daily business to wind himself into his secrets) he presently orders to be drawn out all his Mergen Accompts, and together with the Invoice of all his Merchandize, Ships stores and moveables there, sent them enclosed in a Letter to Mr. Burneby, wherein he impowered him fully to act as his Attorney, and complaining of the alteration he had found in his former Friend the Lord Phaulkon, endea∣vours to possess him with a belief, that the French Interest was now most prevalent at Court: That the said Forbien was to rule the roast at Mergen, and concludes, that all things being like to be suddenly turned topsey turvey, Mr. Burneby's wisest course would be to withdraw, whilst he had liberty; and using what means he could to turn off Mr. Whites effects at any rate, finds
some way for remitting the amount, by Bill to Mr. George White in England, for the said Samuel Whites Accompt, which he thought would be best done by Mr. Lucas's assistance from Madrass, whither (if he saw not Mr. White in person at Mergen before October should be past) he should without expectance of further advices, immediately dispatch the Ship Delight with all his effects then by him, and that if Mr. Burneby himself had no inclination as yet to leave the Country, he would however not fail (in order to the dispatch of the said Ship) to collect all the Debts in those parts, due to the said White; and dispose of his Merchandize, Ships stores, and House moveables, for ready money, at any rate, and not disappoint him in the Lading the produce on her, consigning it as above directed. Mr. How was also written to, to deliver all Mr. Whites concerns, that were in his care, to Mr. Burneby; Mr. Tuttie was ordered to do the like: And these distracted kind of Letters being finished, to prevent interception, a Servant of Don Josephs was pitcht upon to carry it in a Cover, directed to Padre Francis Perez at Tenassery, Mr. White not thinking it convenient that his Lordship should know of his writing to Mergen, which if the man had taken out, a Tarrae would perhaps have come to his notice. The latter half of this month was taken up in Mr. Whites Examination, by the Barcalong, and his Lordship, Syam Secretary, Padre Pomaz a French Jesuite being Interpreter between them: In the end, his Lordship (having kept from all their privities, whatsoever might have proved unanswerable by, and of most dangerous consequence to the Examinant) sends for Mr. White, and tells him, (as he afterwards told me) well Sir, you are clear'd, but you must know that you owe your escape to me, as I owe my self, and all I have to your good Brother George; if I have frown'd on you, read that Paper, and 'twill satisfie you that I had reason; and if that be not enough to convince you, I can produce several of your own Letters wherein you have, so far forgotten your self, as to abuse us with not a few flat Contradictions; and I make no doubt but your Accounts, if throughly scann'd, would appear notoriously unhandsome; but not being desirous to Ruine you, I forbore exposing you or them to the strict Examination which the matter justly required; whereupon he gave him those very Orders, which (I have before said) he sent Coates to make War upon Metchlepatam; which so dasht Mr. White, that he had scarce a word to say, but (as he phrased it to me) though it better to hand a Sail in time, than carry a Mast by the Board: And after a large Recapitulation of several Misdemeanors, he had to charge him with, which yet he had kept from the knowledge of the foresaid Secretaries, without giving him the Liberty to make his Defence, he told him 'twas his pleasure to pretermit them for this time, as they were; and was not willing to have those Faults, which were but too great in themselves, heightned by any Excuses; but hop'd that this would be a Caution to him for the future; Nor was he to think, that though he lov'd his Friend well, yet he would ruine himself to skreen him from that Justice which his own demerits should pull upon him. This month, Captain Coates, and Don Joseph's Concerns came under debate; Captain Coates past Examination, and came off with Applause, having a Gold Hilted Sword, and rich Coat con∣ferr'd upon him, besides the Admiralship of the Kings Naval forces at Siam; but never a far∣thing of Money, of which poor man he stands more in need than of empty Titles; his Accounts past Currant, partly because had he been narrowly searcht into, Mr. White could not have been safe, and partly for that his Lordship knew him to be Insolvent, so that Coates himself could after∣wards boast, that 'twas his Happiness that he was not worth the Fleecing. Don Joseph d' Haeredias Accounts were bandied to and fro at another rate. The Shabander throws him upon the Lord Phaulkon, and he again upon the Shabander, and this vice versa five or six times over, though neither of them had any thing to object against the reasonableness of them; but here lay the choak Pear; the Don had got a good new Ship under foot, which Mr. White (as had been formerly hinted) had a mind to hook to himself, designing her for the China Trade from Tenassery, and just such a Ship as she was the Lord Phaulkon wanted for the Manilba Trade, in company with the French from Pullicherry; now for either of them to pay the Don for her, would not correspond with the new mode, which had supplyed them with several good ones at an easier rate, and yet have her the Lord Phaulkon must, though indeed Mr. White ever intended he should; however the Governour of Metchlepatam had seized on three thousand Pagodoes of his Majesties from Don Joseph. Don Joseph had gone to that Port without orde his new Ship must make satisfaction; but because she might be worth more money then that (for she had stood the Don in more then seven thousand Pagodoes, not being yet quite finished) he must have satisfaction for the super amount of her value; Mr. White is to be Appraisor, and the Don to expect all fair dealing: A better opportunity then this Mr. White could not possibly have put into his hands, to make himself Owner of the Ship, if he were but permitted to return to Mergen; nay he did not stick to say, That if ever he went down thither again, he was resolved o body should have a finger in that Ship but himself, for he was sure, the Don knew not what o do with her, without his help, and that he should never have unless he would part with her, nd the Lord Phaulkon had no such great want of Ships, there was enough besides her; but ays he, this difference between him and the Don about the three thousand Pagodoes, will give me a good opportunity to work her into my own hands, when once I get thither, but I'm doubtful till his Lordship will detain me here. The Mouth was closed with a happy discovery of a conspiracy made by the Macassars, who were secretly abetted by many disaffected persons of great Authority and Interest in the King∣dom. The design was to have fired the City of Syam; and whilst all the Inhabitants were
busied in quenching the Fire, to have made themselves Masters of the Pallace, whilest on the same night a select number were to possess themselves of the Palace at Levo, and murder the King with the favourite stranger, (as they called the Lord Phaulkon) and all the Europeans, being lookt upon as his Creatures But three days before the intended Assassination, some of the Con∣spirators, whose hearts failed them, discovered the whole Plot, whereupon strong Guards were kept, four or five hundred of the Combination seized, several of them, to the number of two hundred, immediately Executed, and so the whole design for that time quasht. The King designing (now the Conspiracy was supprest) to take the first luckly day (which his Talepoys pretended would be the 18th of this month) to remove to Syam; we were ordered to be gone the 10th, on which day we left Levo; in a short time after us, the King and the whole Court, with the Persian Embassadour, and his retinue, came down to Syam; where his Lord∣ship was so taken up with the more general Affairs of the Kingdom, and obliged to so constant an attendance at Court, that now Mr. White could not get an opportunity to wait on him, which however tended not at all to his disadvantage; for the Herbert, Captain Ʋdall, Arriving at this juncture, and bringing Letters from his Brother, Mr. George White, he had not only the oppor∣tunity of answering them, but of contracting a familiar acquaintance with the Captain, and pri∣vately Freighting to the amount of two thousand pound Sterling on the said Ship, consigning it to his said Brother, and Mr. Thomas Povey, without the Lord Phaulkons privity, of whom he still was jealous; though indeed soon after it appeared he had no reason so to be, for the Captain having also brought out Letters from his Brother to his Honour, which gave him a full account of the Reception of his Present at the Court of England, and of his vigorous endeavours to have withstood those powerful Enemies, which his Lordship had in England; together with a short Letter from his present Majesty; he was so well satisfied with the account he had received, as one night to send for Mr. White, and tell him, that he found his Brother George so fast and real a Friend to him, that for his sake Mr. White might ask what he would, and it should be granted him; Mr. White wisely taking opportunity by the foretop, modestly replyed, That he desired nothing but liberty to return to his former station, and that his Lordship would for the future be pleased to prescribe him stated Rules for the management of that employ, that so he might not hence forward be left in the dark how to proceed without hazard of offending. He had his desires granted, and returned home more chearful than ever I observed him to have been since May last, telling me, that now God be thanked he did not fear Forbiens supplanting him, for he was to return to Mergen; and sayes he, his Lordship made me offer of fifty Cattees per month, besides the perquisites of my Employ should be worth as much more to me, if I would stay here with him, and take upon me the place of Viador D'as Fazendas, for the King; and that I should be Enroll'd in the Court Registers as his Successor, in case of his Mortality; but I have with much ado evaded it; for 'tis true, I know he wants some body near him, that might be capable of assisting him with advice; and that he has no body, is his great unhappiness; but I do not on any terms like to be the man, though he has more money in his Coffers, and is Laden with as much Honour as he can well bear; yet I shall look upon my Head to stand a great deal faster on my Shoulders than his, so long as there's ere a Ship or Vessel belonging to Mergen. The whole Kingdom is under a general discontent at this new way of Government; and when∣ever this King comes to dye, not only his Honour, but all Europeans for his sake, must expect a Bloody Catastrophe, which is no more then what his Lordship, but not like a Politician, openly declared a while agone at his publick Table; and though the King should live many years, yet to tell you truly, I am not without strong apprehensions that his Lordship stands but a slippery place; nor would it be a miracle to see a man that hath been raised from so low a degree to such an exorbitant height of favour with a Prince, unable to withstand the shock of an envious Court, and oppressed Kingdom; and in case he once slips, how can I, or any other dependant on him, expect to keep our footing; so that if once I get to Mergen again, I'm resolved never to see Syam more upon such a score as now I came up, but ene make Hay whilst the Sun shines, and draw all my Stock, which now lyes scattered abroad, into as narrow a compass as possibly I can, and  be in a readiness for any Revolution that may happen is Month also Arrived Captain Grimes from Atcheen, in a great Junk of the Kings, who had been a long time out, but at length brought with him the Colwans and Letters which the Josiah had brought out of England, who brought the Original Letters, of which those which came per Captain Ʋdall were Duplicates. The Contract made with Captain Ʋdall, was to carry what Goods Mr. White should ship of the growth of China, or these parts for London, at 31 l. Sterling per Ton; accounting of China Raw Silk, four Chests to the Ton, and of Cambodium, &c. heavy Goods, fifteen Peculls; 'twas also agreed, that Mr. White should give Captain Ʋdall 100 l. Sterling, to oblige him to car∣ry home no Tea in his Ship, but what Mr. White should Lade on board him, paying Freight fo the same as for Raw Silk, but his Lordship having a parcel, which Mr White came to under∣stand, he was resolved to send for England for his own Accompts; and Captain Ʋdall could no with safety refuse to carry, that Bargain was afterwards revoakt. Having towards the end of this Month finished the most material of Mr. Whites Letters, which he deligned for England; so that little remained, save for his Writer, to transcribe them fair over, and affix their Dates; the Maximilian, Mr. Norrington Cape Merchant being design'd for Hughly, I desired Mr. White to dismiss me his Employ, that so I might embrace that first oppor∣tunity
of returning to the Bay, but he would by no means consent, protesting, that so soon as he came to Mergen, the first thing he would do should be to dispatch me in a Ship of his own, with Tynn and Tutenage to Bengala, so that I needed not doubt of being on my way thither in November. SEPTEMBER, Anno 1686. About this time Arrived Mr. Robert Freemans Ship, called the Rubie, from Metchlepatam, Laden with the Goods of that Port, and consign'd to the Lord Phaulkon, in all probability likely to have come to an extraordinary great Market, had not Mr. White interposed to Mr. Freemans prejudice, what lay in his power; for Mr. White declaring to me, that now he had an opportu∣nity to cry quit with Mr. Freeman, for the trouble he had formerly undergone at Metchlepatam with Ally Beague, through his instigation, he was resolved to improve it; and accordingly, not∣withstanding he had by this Ship Rubie, received a Letter from Mr. Freeman, modestly making demand of a Debt, which Mr. White had for some years owed him, with promise of sending a Ship to himself at Mergen very speedily, yet at one and the same time, he prepares a subtle an∣swer to be sent him per Captain Fenn, wherein he professes himself heartily disposed to a Recon∣ciliation, protests his readiness to serve Mr. Freeman with all sincerity, in case he did send a Ship to Mergen, and promises to remit on her, or per the first presenting opportunity, the Ballance of his old Accompt, and endeavours to invite the Lord Phaulkon, to make seizure of the Ship Rubie, with her Cargoe, by a Remonstrance which he presented him in these following words. May it Please your Lordship, THE Duty I owe my great Master, his Imperial Majesty lays me under an in∣dispensable Obligation of Presenting to your Lordships consideration, whatsoever to me appears necessarily conducive to his Honour and Interest, and yet may perhaps in the croud of those momentous Affairs, which employ your Honours Thoughts, escape your notice; which makes me presume to tender your Honour this Remonstrance in Writing, that so it may lye by you for perusal at your more leasure hours. That the disaffection of the English Company to this Place, and their disgusts against you in particular, are as great as they are unreasonable; your Honour may plainly disco∣ver, not only from the Account lately received, of their endeavours to your prejudice in the Court of England, but by their withdrawing their Factory hence, and Childs employing such a malapert fellow as Lake in the business, who has the impudence to affront his Majesty in his own Port; nor can I but admire your Honours Lenity, in conniving at it; but yet I have to offer in behalf of the Company, That it may not per∣haps be so much their choice, as their misfortune, to have a parcel of Servants in India, who make it their study to put all Places in a flame, more then to consult the advan∣tage of their Masters, of which number Yale and Freeman are the main Incendiaries on the Coast of Chormondel, that endeavour to supplant your Honour, and use all probable methods to effect your downfall; as to the former, your Lordship has had suffi∣cient demonstration of his malicious temper about the Jewel concern, by that Scurrilous Pamphlet sent you, which he was ashamed to sign; and the latter, if throughly unra∣vell'd, will not appear to fall a whit short of him in falseness or spleen: 'Tis to him his Majesty is beholden for a Protest against Captain Coats, &c. in the Companies behalf, for pretended dammages by his Majesties War with Golcondah. 'tis he that must be thanked for the re-delivery of the Treasure out of the Ship Jerusalem, and surrender of the Enemies Ship; and not to descend to particulars; 'tis to him his Majesty owes all the disappointment of his Affairs the last Year, upon the Coast; and yet after all this, he can assume the confidence to consign his Ship and Cargoe to you, I hope your Honour will not give him and the World occasion to laugh at your easiness, but make him sensible that you see through his masque, and can resent the abuse, which in this very instance he would cunningly put upon your Lordship. I would not have your Honour think, that I move this with an Eye to my own Re∣venge, for I am perfectly reconciled to him, and have resolved upon a speedy course, to remit him the Ballance of his Accompt; but it is purely in due regard to his Majesties
Honour, and your Lordships Reputation, that I humbly offer my Advice to detain the Ship Rubie and her Cargoe, until you see what the issue of these proceedings of the Company, and their hot-headed Servants, will be, which is the needful relating to this Subject, and is freely submitted to your Lordships better judgment, by My Lord, Your Lordships most Obliged, Devoted, and Humble Servant, Samuel White. This aforegoing is a True Copy of the Original. The Macassar Conspiracy, said to be discovered and prevented the latter end of July last, was now totally quell'd, and the major part of the Plotters utterly cut off. The occasion is this: The Prince of the Macassars despairing to make his escape by flight to his own Country (one of his Captains, and fifty of his Men with their Vessel being cut off at Bankoke Fort, where they were intercepted by private Orders from the Lord Phaulkon to Forbien, though they had a Tarrae to pass the Chain) resolved to submit himself to the Kings Mercy; and accordingly, one Evening, comes boldly at the head of One Hundred of his Attendants, all Armed with their Creeses, to the Pallace Gates; where being demanded his business, he replyed, 'twas to throw himself at the Kings Feet, and accordingly desired admittance into his presence; Answer was brought him, that the King would admit him, but it must be in another posture, and not with Arms, and those numerous Attendants: To which, with some disdain, he again replyed: Tell your Master the King, 'tis the Prince of Macassar that came to have submitted, but not so basely as I find he expects; if he has any thing to say to me, he may find me at my own House: I expect no other but to fall, yet tell him, 'twill be like the fall of a sturdy well Rooted Tree, that crushes all the under Wood near it: So he went away without any thing more said to him. The Syammers privately making all possible preparations to beset and fight the Macassars by Land and Water. On the 14th Instant, the Lord Phaulkon in Person, accompanied with about Sixty English, (amongst whom were Captain Ʋdall, and another Gentleman, that came out of England with him) and about Seven Thousand Syammers with some French, began the fight with the Macassars: Captain Ʋdall, the said Gentleman, Captain Coats, Mounsieur d' Roan, and three other French men were killed the first part of the Battle, but ere night, the Macassars were utterly destroyed, Men, Women, and Children; save only of the Princes Sons, a Boy of about Twelve Years of Age; who being taken Prisoner, the Lord Phaulkon begg'd his Life of the King; it being now resolved, that all the Natives, which could be discovered to have any hand in the forementioned Conspiracy (of whom by this time were more then One Thousand in durance) should on the Kings return to Levo, suffer death without Mercy. Captain Ʋdall being now unluckily killed before Mr. Whites Goods could be Shipt, he must wait Captain Rea's coming up to Town; who being satisfied by the Purser, of the Captains Contract about them, but not knowing that 'twas the major part Bengala Raw Silk, which was to be Shipt under colour of China Silk, promised to stand to it, and sign the Bills of Lading. Now began we to make preparation for Mergen, the quantities of Copper and Tutenage de∣sired, not being procureable, Mr. Heath is ordered to buy up all the Gold he could meet with; Provisions are also made by his Lordship for a Moco Voyage, on the Kings Account; Mr. Franklin design'd on the Armenians great Ship, Sancta Cruz thither, from Mergen, with a very rich Cargoe of China Ware, Tynn, Copper, Tutenage, Aggala, Sappan, &c to the amount of One Thousand Cattees; besides Mr. White had liberty, for his care in dispatching her, to Lade for his own Account One Hundred Tons, in what Commodities he pleased, except those above specified; Mr. White saying to me, that this was meerly a Complement of his Lordship, for that he knew not any thing else that would be worth his while to send for Moco; but how∣ever, he would see what he could do when he came to dispatch her. Mr White now presented his Lordship with six large and fair Ruby Rings, two curious Saphire a couple of Persian Horses, and silver Furniture very Noble; and her Ladyship with two Deli∣cate Rubies, one Diamond Ring with five stones, and a striking Watch; which last returned him a present not despicable, consisting of twenty pieces Rich Silks, and several Curiosities of superfine China Ware: Thus is he again fully restored to his former place, in the Lord Phaulkons Favour.
And now he is order'd to make those proposals he had formerly hinted at in writing by way of Articles, what he thought most conducive to the Government of the province of Tenassery, for his Majesties most advantage, and the satisfaction of the people. In compliance wherewith he draws up sixty distinct Articles, which he presented to the Lord Phaulkon for Approbation: Amongst the rest was, That no Europe Nation whatsoever (the French onely, if his Lordship saw good, excepted) should be exempted henceforward from paying the Customes of all Goods Imported, as all Indian Nations had been formerly us'd to do; and desired that those sixty Articles might be the standing Rules of Government in his province of Tenassery, which his Lordship, that could now scarce deny Mr. White any thing Ratify'd by signing them with his own hand. Though the power therein granted the Shabander was in effect unlimited, and such as rendred the Gover∣nours both of Tenassery and Mergen, no better than Cyphers, and meerly Titular Officers, not∣withstanding there was for Forms sake a Commission Issu'd out in English under the Lord Phaulkons Broad Seal and delivered into Mr White's Custody, which nominated and constituted the Coun∣cil, who were jointly to consult about all Affairs in that Province, whether relating to the Sea or Land, in times of War or Peace, and to resolve at least the Major part of them, on whatsoever was to be done, and though the Shabander Mr. White was the last mentioned in the said Com∣mission, as being the lowest in Rank and Title, yet by Virtue of the aforesaid Articles, the rest of the Council were so ty'd up to his Opinion in all matters of moment, that in effect all the po∣wer was lodg'd in him, so that now the Government was become meerly Arbitrary, and his plea∣sure to be the measure of all their proceedings. There was only One thing which the Lord Phaulkon refused to grant him, which was a Com∣mission for what he had done the last year, in Issuing out all Orders, and Instructions under his own hand, which he desired, alledging, that perhaps he might one time or other be call'd to an Account by the Company for what had past, and he had nothing to shew for his Warrant: which the Lord Phaulkon told him, he could not give him, nor was there any reason for him to expect it; and he thought it might be sufficient, That having acted as he had done the last year, he had befriended him so far, as to keep it from his Majesties Ear; besides, should he Grant such a Com∣mission Ex Post Facto, it might one time or other prove his Ruine. The Persons specified in the foremention'd Commission to Constitute the Council of the Pro∣vince of Tenassery, were Oyea Tannaw. Opra Ballat. Olveing Incabat. Olvang Narine. Ocone Hurelay. Opra Marrat, Mr. Burneby. Olvang Chomoung, Mr. S. White. Mr. White finding he could not obtain a Commission for what he had acted the last year, now desires, that all the Council may be obliged to affix the Seals of their Respective Offices to all Dis∣patches, Orders or Instructions whatsoever, which he should for the future have occasion to Issue out, to any Commanders of His Majesties Ships, whether on Account of War or Mer∣chandize, which was granted him in a Postscript to the forementioned sixty Articles. Now also is Mr. White order'd, to let all his Letters, which henceforward he should have occasion to remit to Court, relating to His Majesties Affairs, be General, sign'd by Mr. Burneby and himself, but never to omit in an accompanying particular from himself to give the Lord Phaulkon an Account of whatsoever he thought not proper to come before his Majesty in Council. The Persian Embassadour being design'd over Land to Mergen, and thence to Persia. The Shabander foreseeing the great trouble, and disadvantage 'twould be to him and his Concerns, earnestly solicited to have that design put by, and at length prevail'd, to his great satisfaction to have them sent Via Surrat. When all things seem'd thus to go according to wish, an unlook'd for, and surprizing Accident happen'd, which damp'd Mr. White at such a Rate, that for two days time I thought no other than that either a Relapse into his former Sickness, or somewhat worse would have been the E∣vent. The Letters written to Mr. Burneby, &c. in July last, and committed to Don Joseph's Servant to be carryed to Padree Fran. Perez, had been intercepted at Tenassery by the Oyea, and remitted to the Lord Phaulkon (who cut off Mr. White's Correspondence, whilst he lay under a Cloud, had given express Order that no Persons should pass between those two Cities without a Tarrae from himself) he presently conculding Senior Ant. Perez, Brother to the said Padree to
have a hand in the private conveyance of that Pacquet, thus Intercepted and Return'd, claps him up close prisoner in Syam Goal. This comes to the Shabanders Ear, and so Examinates him to think that the Lord Phau kon would open his Letters, that I could scarce imagine him to have any Soul; and indeed, had the Lord Phaulkon perused that Pacquet, Mr. White had inevitably been ruin'd, but what I used for an Argument to cheer up Mr. White prov'd a real Truth, viz. That if the Lord Phaulkon were reconcil'd to him, as we had all the reason in the World to be∣lieve he was, he would think it not only below him, but an unfriendly part to shew any jealousie of One, whom he so much respected, by breaking open his Letters; and therefore I advis'd him not only to Patience and Cheerfulness, but to an absolute Silence concerning them to his Lordship, until he saw further of the matter, and accordingly after three days detention of them, the Lord Phaulkon sends him the said Pacquet, with the Seals untouch'd, which Mr. White receiv'd with no small Joy, and after himself had open'd them all, he order'd me to throw both them and the Origin I Registers of them into the Fire; and the next day, he interceeded for, and obtained the Releasement of the old Portugueze Gentleman, but the suddenness as well as unjustness of his Imprisonment (for he had no hand in the matter) had made such an Impression upon his aged Spirits, that he could not recover the Fright, but in a few days after dyed. OCTOBER, 1686. In the beginning of this Month, Mr. White recollecting what he had by this conveyance, and several others Via Madrass, order'd to be remitted to his Brother George, and finding it all to Amount to about Twelve Thousand pound Sterling, thought best for Mortality-sake to constitute his said Brother, and Mr. Thomas Povey of VVestminster, his joynt Attorneys, impowering them to make a Purchase with the said Moneys of Lands for his two Daughters Mary and Susan, and to do the like with whatsoever Sum he should at any time hereafter Consign to them, or either of them; which Letters of Attorney being drawn in Duplicates, one was sent on the Herbert, and the other design'd to be sent by Mr. Francis Heath, who was to go for England, Via Madrass. The Shabander having made the Lord Phaulkon acquainted (who out of a Principle of Generosity, never order'd his last years Books to be Examined) that the ensuing Monsoons Expedition, which then was design'd to employ Eight Sail of Ships, would require a supply of ready Cash for the payment of Soldiers and Seamens Sallaries, and Arrears from the First of July last, besides three Months advance according to the last years Custom; his Lordship order'd the Syam Clong to fur∣nish him with Three Hundred Cattees to carry down with him; but told him that he expected that he should out of the penalties of Offenders, Rents, Incomes of Tynn, and sale of a parcel of Prize Goods, which yet lay at Tenassery, raise whatsoever should be requirable more for that Account: And that for the future, the Shabander (being now impower'd to lay several conside∣rable Taxes on the Jelinga Boats, Jessook Gardens, and Natives Converted to the Mahometan Religion, which according to his own proposals could not Amount to less than Two Thousand Cattees per Annum; besides the Custom of Foreign Goods Imported, none now being to be ex∣cused but only the French, and Six Thousand Peculls of Sappan-wood, to be yearly cut for the Kings Account, with the Engrossing of all Forreign Salt, and imposing it on the Natives at the Kings price, viz. ten Ta. per Quogan (which was nothing but a neat invention of Mr. VVhite to rid his hands of about five Hundred Quogans of that Commodity, then lying in his own Godowns) none being henceforward allow'd to make Salt with Paddy straw, he was not to expect any more Cash from Syam, but be careful that the Port of Mergens Charges were defray'd out of the In∣comes of the Province, it being hoped that by his prudent management of matters, there should be in a little time a considerable Bank of Cash founded in Mergen, so that His Majesty might reap benefit proportionable to the vast Expence, which for these three years last past he had been at, in fortifying that Province, with Garrisons and Shipping. The Imposition on the Natives turn'd Mahometans, or whose Parents, one of them was a Na∣tive, and that other a Mahometan, which was Mr. Whites proposal in one of his sixty Articles, out of the spleen he bore the Moors, looking on them as his Enemies and Competitors, was.   Ca. Ta.     An Oyea 1 10   A Duke An Opra 1 00   An Earl An Olvang 0 15 per Head for A Lord An Ocone 0 10   An Esquire An Omone 0 05   A Gentleman The Mnony 0 02   The Commonalty
Doctor Ralph Harwarrs Opium (sent the latter end of April last, by Mr. Heath to Syam not answering Mr. Whites expectation, it yielding then (by reason of the Macassa distur∣bance) but Six Teculs per Catte) ehe now took for his own Account, at that price, and sent it per Mr. Joseph Norrington to Malacca, designing to draw a Bill on Mr. Tho. Lucas of Madrass for payment of the Amount to the said Doctor. The remains of the Delights Cargo amounting to about Forty Cattees of Silver, being a parcel of Longcloth and Bettelees, Mr. White resolved to take wholly upon his own Ac∣count, and allow Mr. Lucas for his Moiety, but yet thought best to make use of his Name to the Lord Phaulkon in the matter, desiring him to order it into the Kings Ciong, and send the Amount in Copper, at 6 ½ Tale per Chest, on the Arrival of the Jappan Juncks, so early, that he might have an opportunity to remit it to his Friend Mr. Lucas, or For want there∣of in Copangs, it being so requested of him by his said Friend, as he pretended, for I ob∣serv'd, that though his Lordship knew very well, that Mr. White, and Mr. Lucas maintain'd an intimate correspondence with each other, yet he was kept wholly ignorant, that they were Partners in the Delight, and her Cargo, nor did Mr. White, as he would often say, think it prudence to let his Lordship know either what his Stock was, or how, or where em∣ploy'd, more than that part of it, which he had in Company with his Lordship in the China Trade, which now he was resolv'd to make it his business, by little and little, (with what circumspection he could to avoid suspicion) to withdraw, whereas his Lordship, though in vain) endeavoured what he could, to draw on Mr. White do deeper engagement, to those Trade of the Seas, thinking by that means to make surer of him, but that not sui∣ting with Mr. Whites inclinations, or designs, he as subtly finds Evasions, as the other could Arguments to perswade. The Sixteenth of the Month we left Syam, and with Five Merua's began our Voyage to∣wards Queal, The Lord Phaulkon just before our going, sent his Trumpeter to me with Four Cattees of Money, and Two pieces of China Silk, who told me his Lordship had sent me that small Token, and expected my acceptance of it for old acquaintance sake, which I did, and returning him my thanks by the same Bearer, had only time enough to invest it, in what was most likely to yield me good advantage at Mergen, and so took Boat that Night. The Eighteenth we met Mr. James Wheeler at Bankoke, the Ship Phoenix from Madrass, be∣ing coming (though not yet entred the River) for the Copper his Lordship the last year had promised him, He gave Mr. White an Account, that the Coyn, and Bullion, Gold, and Silver which Mr. White had committed to his care in March last, (being part of what he had taken out of the Ships brought in from Pegu) was sold, and the Amount according to order paid into the Diamond Traders, Senior Bartholomew Rodriguez, and Company, for invest∣ment and remittance to his Brother George in England, which they designed to do by the Kempthorn. By him also Mr. White had an Account, how the business was managed in the Jewel Affair at Madrass, and of Mr. Yale's disgusts against the Lord Phaulkon, and that the Company had a design meerly for the conveniency of annoying Tenassery, to settle upon Poynt Negraes, which Mr. White seemed to be very much troubled at, and after Mr. Wheelers parting from us, swore most bitterly he would prevent them, if they were not got thither already, for if they were not there now, they could not possibly get thither, until February next from Madrass. In three dayes arriving from Bankoke at Queal. Mr. White, Mr. Heath, and Captain Lesley posted away for Mergen, with Doolys doubly mann'd, leaving me to follow with the Treasure, with which I hasten'd so speedily after them, as to arrive at Mergen, the first of November, where I found they had got but three days before me. NOVEMBER 1686. In May last I had noted, that the Clong Accounts were ballanced, by being charg'd (I mean all Ships stores) as expended on the several Ships, so that the Kings Godowns being thus emptied, none remain'd, but what the Shabander called his own; and now on our re∣turn, the first work was to acquaint the Coromocon, with the indispensible necessity of buying into the Clong a competent quantity of Stores, for the fitting out of the Kings Ships to Sea, and that Mr. Tuttie had a parcel lying by him, fit for the purpose. Thus did Mr. White at one clap, sell the King his own Goods, to the Amount of Two Hundred and Eighty Cattees of Silver, which now he appointed the Syammers to keep account of their Expence, as he should from time to time appoint the delivery of them out, pretending 'twas a thing he would no longer trouble himself with, or spend Paper about, and 'twas fittest they should be satisfied, which way the Kings Stores were disposed, that so he might not be suspected of imbezling them, or converting them to his own use. The next thing was the payment of the Garrison, and Sea-mens Arrears, which was so dexterously managed by Mr. White, in observance of the method used at the last payment, as to make Three Hundred Cattees do the business of Five Hundred Forty Six Cattees, which I thought was a very smart beginning, after his so narrow escape of a severe ex∣amination
at Levo, and such an Action as made me wish his promised Ship in a readiness, that I might be freed from such a kind of Book keeping. The Tenth of this Moneth putting Mr. White in mind of his promise, made me the latter end of August last, he put me off, telling me that he had a great jealousie (from Mr. Wheelers discourse at Bankoke) that the Company had Wars in Bengala, which made it ha∣zardous to adventure a Ship thither; besides he doubted Mr. Edward Inglish in the Ship Revenge, had been seized on by the Companies Ships; however, if I would have patience to stay till he had certain Advices of Peace or War; if 'twas peace in the Bay, I should without fail proceed in February, and if War, I should not only have liberty to take the first oppor∣tunity of a passage, but besides my Sallary, be gratified for the good Services I had hitherto done him, so as not to complain of the disappointment, in his not sending a Ship of his own: But at length, with much importuning, I obtain'd his consent to take my passage on Authony de Cruz, who designed to sail from Mergen towards the Bay, twelve or fourteen days hence, there being at this time in Port, no less than four Ships bound for Bengala, who had put in here to Winter, viz. The aforesaid Anthony d' Cruz, Skipper, Michael Don Joan d' Leon, and John Graunt. In this interim (Mounsieur D' Houtmeniel in a French Ship, being on the dispatch for Pul∣licherry, the Delight for Madrass, the Dorothy now called the Mergen Frigat, and Robin, now called the Advice, being to go and cruise upon the Coast of Pegu, with strict orders to bring in whatsoever Ships they should meet, and could over-power (without any respect to their Passes) that so they might be examin'd in this Port, and clear'd or condemn'd, as should appear reasonable. I had no want of business to employ my time Night and Day. The Day that Senior Athony de Cruz sailed, being the 24th Instant, early in the Morn∣ing) I carried Mr. White the Keys of his Escretores, wherein were all his Books and Papers, desiring that Forenoons liberty to carry my things on Boad, the Ship being to sail in the Evening; he then told me that he could not possibly spare me at that time, but Don Joan d' Leon would be going in December, and then he would not offer to detain me any lon∣ger, whereupon I consented to stay so long, rather than disoblige him. The 26th of this moneth, all the Soldiers and Seamen were paid advance money, to the first of January next, in which payment the same method was observ'd by the Shabanders express order, to his no small advantage. The last year, check for dispatching the Phaulkon to Atcheen, without order, did not restrain the Shabander from the like practice now, only he was resolv'd to have a plausible pretence for so doing, if it should happen to come to the Court Ears, and so on pretence of her cruising to the South-ward, sends her with ready money to Junkselone, for procura∣tion of Tynn, and thence to Atcheen, to enquire out, and call hither Mr. William Soam, who had now been near twenty moneths gone on a Trading Voyage to those parts, with a Car∣go of a Hundred and Twenty Cattees, the Amount. This moneth the Armenians two Ships, viz. the Sancta Cruz, and the Jerusalem, (now cal∣led by new Names, viz. The St. George, and St. John, the former being called the Kings, and designed, as has been said, for the Moco Voyage; and the latter, the Lord Phaulkon order'd to Pullicherry, with a Lading of Sappan-wood, which his Majesty had given him along with the Ship) were both carreen'd, and got into a readiness, to take in their La∣ding, both of them being to wear French Colours, and their Officers, if procurable, to have been Frenchmen, by a late order grounded upon Mr. Wheelers Account of the Compa∣nies threatnings at the Syam Ships. The last of this moneth, Robert Mellish is dispatcht with the Delight for Madrass, on whom Mr. Francis Heath takes passage, with a parcel of Gold for Mr. Whites Account, to the Amount of between Three and Four Thousand Pound Sterling, which he was to remit by Bill on good security of Diamonds, or otherwise for England, on the same Ship he himself shoul proceed; by him also went Duplicates of the Letters sent for England on the Herbert from Syam, with an additional Letter, giving his Attorneys an Account of the abovesaid remissions, and motioning their sending out of a permission Ship to Atcheen, wherein him∣self would be concern'd Stock and Block Eight Thousand Pounds, and be obliged to have in a readiness, a China and Southsea Cargo for England, to the Amount of Thirty Thousand Pound prime Cost in India, designing also himself to return on her to his Native Country, to which end he further informs them, that he would now make it his business to con∣tract his scattered stock into as narrow a compass as possible, and doubted not but to answer the expectations of whomsoever of his Friends in England, should be concern'd in the said Ship along with him, referring them to Mr. Heath, for a more particular information of the feizableness of his design. At this time he sends the procced of the Delights Cargo in Rice, Tynn, and Teculs, desiring Mr. Lucas to remit his Moity of her Stock and Block for England, setting, or ta∣king to himself his half of the Ship at such rates, as in Conscience he should think reasona∣ble, and that he would do the like with his ¼ of the Ship Phoenix, and her Stock, smoothly excusing his breaking oss of Partnership, and protesting his readiness and devotion to his said Friends Interest, desiring also an Account to be remitted him by the first opportunity,
how matters stood between them, and earnestly solliciting Information, how the Gentiemen at Madrass stood affected towards those on this side, by whom is meant the Lord Phaul∣kon and himself. The like request for News is made to several other Gentlement at Ma∣drass, and Mr. Atford, and Mr. Heathfield desired to send an Account, how they sold the Rubies consigned to them on the Revenge, and whether as they designed, they had remitted the proceed on the Kempthorn. These very Rubies Invoiced at about eighty Cattees were parcel of those mentioned in May last. DECEMBER 1686. A new ship which had been ordered by the Lord Phaulkon to be set upon the stocks for the King, being Lanch'd this last month, and called the Resolution, was now Rigg'd and appoin∣ted to Cruise on the Coast of Chormondell, Alexander Lesly being Commissionated under the said Lord Phaulkons Seal to Command her, and follow such instructions, as should from time to time be given him by Mr. White the Shabander of Tenassery. The Instructions Mr. White gave him, were to make the Land, on the Coast Gingerlee in eighteen Degrees of North Latitude, to feize all Ships or Vessels whatsoever he should meet with, (those of Europe Nations only excepted) and such as he thought not convenient to bring to Mergen, or keep in his company, having first taken out all their Goods, and Men, and secu∣red them as prisoners of War, to burn, sink and destroy the Vessels; To send his Boat on shoar at Chiskercol, and if possible surprise the Governour, or some of the most eminent Inhabitants, and carrying them on board his ship, there propose to them their liberty on such terms, as he might think their Estates, by the best information would reach; which if they complyed with in a limited time, then to release them without any harm to their persons, if they proved obstinate, or broke promise in their payment, then to fire the town, burn or sink all the Boats in the River, and bring off as many Men, Women, and Children as they could seize, securing them on board as Prisoners of War; thence to pro∣ceed to all the Ports, Rivers, Harbours, Creeks, or Bays along the Coast of Chormondell, betwixt that place and Madrass, except only such places where the English, or Dutch had Factories, using the same method of proceeding; and yet for as much as it had been re∣ported, the King of Golcondab would send an Embassadour to the Court of Syam, if any such motion were made to Captain Lesly, he should grant them a safe Pass-port to come to Mergen, where order would be taken for his Reception, according to his quality; but he was not to consent to any Cessation of Arms, or desistance from the prosecution of the above faid instructions, until he should receive an express Order for so doing, or the time therein limited was expir'd, which was the first of May next, for he was to follow this method of Hostility until that day, and then directing his course to Pullicherry, there re∣ceive such Letters, Packets, or Goods as the General, Monsieur Martin, and monsieur Des Lan∣dres Borean should put on Board his ship, and so making all convenient dispatch thence, re∣turn directly to the Port of Mergen. But being thus in readiness to be gone, an accident fell out, which for some days de∣tarded his dispatch. Thus, Unexpected notices arrived from Syam, that a Present for the French King, from his Ma∣jesty of Syam, and the Lord Phaulkon were upon the Road hitherward, which Dr. Hoatme∣niel was required to take into his ship, and carry for Europe, taking also the ship Jerusalem under his Convoy to Pullicherry; now 'twas true though Dr. Hoatmeniel went out of the Harbour the last month with his ship, yet having occasion for some Timbers, for uses at Pullicherry, which he could not be supplyed with at the Town, he stop at Ilha Grande to cut such as he wanted with his own people, and not being gone thence when this news arrived, Mr. White sends down Mr. Burnebey to inform him of it, and propose his staying a few days, for the Presents which were coming. Dr. Hotamentiel tole Mr. Burnebey he was willing on his part to oblige the King of Syam, and his Excellency, what lay in his pow∣er, but his Master the King of France had assixed him a day to sail from. Pullicherry, and the General had limitted him a day for his sailing hence, which would be the next Sunday, and if the Present came in that time, he would be glad of opportunity to shew his readiness for the King of Syams Service, but if not, no consideration could prevail with him to traus∣gress his orders, the Present not arriving in the time presixt by. Dr. Hoatmeniel, the Sha∣bander stops the Resolution, and concludes that he should carry it to Pullicherry, and take the Saint John with her Cargo of Sappan-wood, for his honour, and Allome for himself under her Convoy. Two days after Dr. Hoatmeniel failing from Ilha Grande, the Present arrived at Mer∣gen, accompanied with the usual state of the Country musick, Lesly taking it into the Resolution, was dispatcht with additional Orders to this purpose. That taking the ship Saint John under his Convoy, he should conduct her safe to Pullicherry, and there deliver her and her Lading to Monsieur Des Landres Borean (no Des Landres was to send her in his own name to the Bay of Bengala, there to lade Butter, and Oyl, with some Cloth, and so to return to Syam) and to deliver the Letters with the King, and Lord Phaulkons Presents
for the French King to the General Martine, siring twenty one Guns at his putting them out of the ship. And because Mr. White would make use of all opportunities to his own advantage, more or less, he now draws a Bill on Monsieur Des Landres for delivery of four hundred Pagodos to Captain Lesly, on the King of Syam's account, advising up to Court that he had done it for the supply of whatsoever occasions the ship might have, during that her expedition on the Coast, whereas at the same time he gave Captain Lesly li∣berty to make use of only one hundred of the Pagodos, and ordered him to invest the other three hundred in Brown Bettelees, which he was to keep in the ship untill his return hi∣ther. Lesly was also ordered by Mr. (White in the nature of a Warrant) to discard, and turn out of this ship, whomsoever by word or action, he should during this Expedition per∣ceive to be disaffected towards the King of Syam's Service, and to entertain, and en∣courage as many new men as he could possibly meet with, only not to agree with them for Sallary, or give them any office untill their Arrival here, when according to the Character he should give of them, each man should have encouragement and Employs. By this Conveyance of Lesly in the Madrass Pacquet Via Pullicherry, went also a Let∣ter from Mr. White to his Attorneys in England, under cover to Mr. Francis Heath, to give them notice, that upon later thoughts, and clearer prospect into the unsetled posture which the Afsairs of India were posting to, he had altered his opinion, as to the seiza∣bleness of sending out a permission ship to him, and therefore advised their disistance from the undertaking. Lesly being thus dispatcht, Mr. White (computing the time, when he might reasonably get into eighteen Degrees North Latitude on the Coast of Gingerlee from Pullicherry, allowing fourteen days for his passage from Mergen thither) accordingly drew up orders for Cap∣tain Cropley on the fifteenth of January next to leave Mergen and Elves, with their sloops at the Bar of Sirian, and make the best of his way towards that Coast, in eighteen Degrees Latitude, where he was to ply off and on, (being every day once at least in sight of the Land) untill he should meet with Lesly in the Resolution, with whom he was to joyn Company, Consult, and be assisting each to other in the vigorous, and punctual execution of the fore∣said orders, of which a Copy was remitted to Cropley, and now Mr. White called to mind, what Mr. Wheeler had told him of the design at Madrass to settle upon Point Negraes, and send Mr. Thomas Yale for Governour, which he apprehended would be of very ill consequence to this Port, and therefore resolving to kill two Birds with one stone, he concludes to send two small Vessells, which taking Cropley in their way at the Bar of Siri∣an, should deliver him those Orders, and carry to Point Negraes twenty Lulongs or Syam Soldiers, with a Commander furnished with all necessaries for twelve months time, who should keep possession of the place for the King of Syam, and on the appearance of any ship, let fly his Flag, for which end they were to erect a Flag-Staff near to the most convenient Landing place, and for the better declaration of their business there, they carryed this following Inscription in Capital Portuguees Letters, pasted on a small board, with a small boarded house to shelter it from weather, which was to be placed near the Flag-staff, Mr. White ordering it to be Forged in Mergen, and dated, as if done the foregoing October at Syam. The words these. Por Mandado D' Su Imperial Majestade D' Syam Ningam Forasteiro de qual{que} Naqa pode Abitar on fabricar Algunas Casas on Poragoes Nista Ilha sem Licenqua D' Dita Maj. sob∣pena de ser Tidos por Inimigos D' Su Imperial Coro's Dado em Syam ao 26. De Outobro Anno, 1686. Now whereas Captain Lesly was ordered on the first of May next, to shape his course for Pullicherry as aforesaid, Captain Cropley had orders sent him on the same day, to direct his course to Saint Thome, and thence send a Letter to the President and Council at Ma∣drass, to inform them that he had a message from the Court of Syam, which he was to de∣liver to some of the Council, if they pleased to give him a meeting at Saint Thome, and in case any of them came thither, he was to send his Boat on shoar, and invite them on Board his ship, where he was to read them a Declaration (which for that end was now sent him open) wherein was specified, That he was ordered by his Majesty to represent to them the great abuses M. Elihu Yale had put upon him in the Jewel Affair, as also the affronts done him by the Companies Servants in his own Royal City, To certifie them, of his Majesties kindness for sixty years past to the said Company, and that satisfaction being made by Mr. Yale, the Lord Treasurer would pay the Persian fraight, and release whatsoever he had hitherto detained of theirs, willing them, if they had any Grievances to complain of (though he knew of none) that they would send over two Gentlement fully impowered to treat with his Majestys Ministers of State, and they might expect all the justice they could desire, but if they slighted this proposal, his Majesty had no reason to Court their Friendship.
This Declaration was drawn up by the Shabander, and according to the Lord Phaulkons order to him, should have been sign'd by him, but he (upon my earnest pressing of him to de∣sist, as thinking it not convenient, for that to me it appear'd but one remove from a Decla∣ration of War) was prevailed with, not to sign it, but sent it unsign'd to Cropely, ordering him in a Letter, which accompany'd it, That he and the rest of his Officers after the Publication of it, should sign it, and deliver it to those Gentlemen that should come off to him. At this time also, the Lord Phaulkon sends down express orders to unrig, and lay up the Ar∣menians great ship, and put by the Moco Voyage, keeping all the Kings Goods in the Tenassary Clongs, for their better security, since he had apprehensions, that the Gentlemen on the other side would not fail to intercept her on her Voyage, nor could he think it safe for any ships to go abroad this year upon a Mercantile Account, but gave strict charge, that whatsoever Frigats went out on a design against the Enemy, should be so well equipt, as to be able to encounter any force, the Company could make against them. To this the Shabander (who was mighty fearful of being call'd up to reside at Court, if once the Lord Phaulkon should grow apprehensive of a breach with the English) return'd for answer; that his Lordships orders in laying up the St. George, and putting the Moco Cargo in the Tenassary Clongs, should not fail of all due observance, though he was clear∣ly of a different opinion, nor could he apprehend any danger, had she proceeded; Twas true, he did not question, but Yale had malice enough to put him upon any attempt whatsoever, to the prejudice of his Majesty and his Lordship, but yet he could not believe him so rash, as to break out into any open act of hostility, without order from England, and such a power could not possibly arrive him, until the next year, and that he supposed his Lordship gave too much ear to the reports of Mr. Wheeler, and such as were either strongly prejudiced against Mr. Yale in particular, or took delight in putting the Kings Affairs into a distraction. And indeed this putting by of the Moco Voyage on the St. George, for fear of Mr. Yale, was an acceptable hit to the Shabander, who was clearly of opinion, That if the Company had bro∣ken into a War in Bengala, their hands would be so full, they would not at present break with Syam, especially considering the conveniency their ships by continuing in amity, might have, in the free use of this Point, on any occasion, wherefore having a great quantity of the Kings Goods in his hands, which were likely to lye by in the Clongs, he thought it a brave opportunity to secure into his own hands, to the value of what stock he had em∣ployed with his Honcur at Syam, with whom he did not conceive if safe, being doubtful, that if ever a second difference should happen, the Lord Phaulkon would detain it for reimburse∣ment of the Two Hundred Cattees, which His Majesty had lent Mr. White for Six Years, at his first entrance into his Shabandership, and accordingly he fits out with all possible expe∣dition the ship Tokely, which now he names the Satisfaction for a two-fold reason, as she sa∣tisfied the Moor Mans Debt to him, and as her Cargo would secure him that part of his stock, which he otherwise lookt upon to be in Hucksters hands, though he thought it not convenient, to let his Lorship know one word of it, nor any of the Natives whither the ship was bound. Only one thing was likely to thwart the sorting of the Cargo to his own mind, that was the want of a sufficient quantity of Tynn, for his Lordship had now sent down an Order to him to deliver Mr. John Thredder, One Hundred and Twenty Baharrs, at one Cattee per Baharr, which would so exhaust the Kings store of that Commodity, that he must be forc't to go without it for his Moco design, But to remedy this, he at length finds a way; for Mr. Thredaer coming to demand his Tynn, and producing an order from the Lord Phaulkon for it, he readily tells him, he should have it when he pleased; but his ship being not yet fitted, and being to be laid ashore, and Caulkt, if not new sheath'd, he could not expect to be in a readiness to take it in, until the beginning of February, and therefore 'twould save him so much Warehouseroom, to let it lye where it was in the Kings Clong, till his ship was fitted; Mr. Thredder little thinking of the Snake in the Grass (for Mr. White had strictly enjoyn'd my silence) thanks him for his courteous offer, and Mr. White puts the Tynn on board his own said Ship Satisfaction, and then writes up to the Lord Phaulkon, to incense him what he could against Mr. John Tyler in Bengala, taxing him with the neglect of His Majesties Affairs, in not sending any Advices how they stand there, and insinuating a jealousie of his imbezling the Kings stock, therefore thinks it but reasonable, that his Honour would please to attache the Tynn which Mr. Thredder was to receive, until they had a more satisfactory Account how Tyler had behaved himself. At the same time, with Mr. Thredder came Mr. Nathaniel Russel and his Lady from Syam, full of complaints of the disappointment they had met with there; whither his Lorship had invited them from Surrat, howerver Russel brought an Order for the Shabander, to give him an employ at this place. JANƲARY 1686/7. The first of this Moneth (Don John de Leon designing to sail the third day) I went again to Mr. White to desire liberty to make ready for my Voyage to the Bay, he, was them more averse to part with me, than ever, asking whether I could be so unkind to leave him now, when he
had no body besides my self, that could assist him in his business, or keep him company; now all the ships were gone and going out of the Port, and Mr. How was to go upon the ship Satis∣faction to Moco, if I had a mind to send any thing to Bengala, he would not only pay me what was due to me on Account of my Sallary, but freely give me half a score Cattees to send by the Don, and he doubted not, but my Friends would be well enough satisfied in my staying a Month or Six Weeks longer, for he would not desire me to stay any longer, than till Mr. Thredder's ship was ready to go: As to his offer of the Money, I told him I did not think it safe to adventure any thing by a Stranger, If I went not my self with it, in troublesome times, and therefore I thinkt him for his kind offer, but would not accept of it, but upon assurance that I should go in February, with Mr. Thredders ship (for Mr. Thredder I thought would hardly go himself without his Tynn) I consented to stay till then, and Mr. White so∣lemnly vow'd I should go, if I pleas'd, without further delay upon the ship Agent, and so I consented to wait a moneth longer. Now when I permitted my self to be prevailed with, to make an implicite promise of continuing a moneth longer, depending on a passage in the ship Agent to the Bay, I little suspected Mr. White would have employ'd the next night Ismael Gee, the Serange of the Kings yard, to go and bilge that ship as she lay upon the Ways, which by his own relation to Mr. White the next morning he said he did, by raving open three Butt-heads of her Plank under her Bilge, and that he was then come to tell him the business was done, and the ship now was full of Water at ¾ Flood. 'Twas then about seven a Clock in the Morning, and being charg'd to keep it private, the fellow was dismist, and no sooner was he gone, but Mr. White told me to this effect: Mr. Davenport, your Bengala Voyage in the Agent is over, but you shall be as soon there, as if she had proceeded, only let me enjoyn you, not to speak a word of what you have now heard; I could have kept it from your knowledge, had I not an intire confidence in, and full experience of your secrecy: I promised him that as I had hitherto, so I would still keep my self free from interfering with all matters, not proper∣ly belonging to me. About an hour after Mr. Thredder ignorant of what had past on Mr. Whites part, came to him, and complain'd his ship was full of water, and began to lay the fault upon the carelesness of the Skipper John Bunt, and the Mate Nathaniel Carter; they two transferr'd the blame upon each other, though neither of them could well tell wherein; Mr. White glad to see them all in the dark, as to the truth of the matter, ask't why they would offer to lay an old worm-eaten, weak, rotten ship ashoar, that could not bear her own weight with so much ballast in her. The Skipper reply'd, there was no more in her, than what was requisite; at last Mr. White promis'd when the Tide was ebb'd away, to go and view her, and if 'twas possible to get her off again; he would lend them all the assi∣stance the Port could afford, with which answer they departed, and the ship being after∣wards review'd, was sentenced to be irrecoverably lost. The sixth instant, the Ship Satisfaction failed for Moco, William Ranns Commander, at fifteen Tales per Month, and one per Cent. Commission. William How, Cape Merchant, at four per Cent. Commission, with a Cargo of near five hundred Cattees, the amount of which being so considerable, all possible care was taken to prevent interception for want of the Companies Pass, and Mr. White gave Mr. How a Letter of Request to all English Comman∣ders, and other Officers, signifying his Residence in the Kingdom of Syam, and incapacity to procure their Pass, by reason of his distance from their Garrisons, therefore desired not only that they would permit the said Ship to proceed without molestation on her Voy∣age out, or home, but grant her their Passes to secure her from any farther stoppage, or interruption, which said Letter Mr. How had orders on any occasion to produce, and present to any person that should pretend to stop them; and if that would not do, to tender Bond to the amount of the Ship and Cargo, their value, to answer whatsoever charge or claim should be laid against the Ship, in any of the Companies Ports in India, after her Voyage should be compleated. And if that would not do, then he had a Pro∣test ready drawn, with a Blank for the Commanders and Ships name, that should pretend to intercept him, and carry him into any of the Companies Ports, which he was to in∣sert and deliver in the presence of the Master, and chief Mate of the Ship Satisfaction, but if it proved to be one of the King of England's Frigats, then he was only to insert the Com∣manders name, in the Protest, and not mention the Frigats name, i. e. not to Protest a∣gainst the Frigat because she was the Kings, but only against such a one Commander of such a Ship, &c. Mr. Thredder having lost his Ship as aforesaid (though the manner of losing her was more than he or any belonging to her knew) writes the next day to acquaint the Lord Phaul∣kon with his disaster, and requests, that now instead of Tin he might be paid in money the Ballance of his account, he not knowing how to get Freight for such a quantity of Goods as he had to carry: This Letter he gives to Mr. White to be forwarded to Syam, and desires him also to intercede in his behalf for money instead of the Tin, which he fairly, pro∣mised he would do. The Letter indeeed Mr. White encloses in his own Pacquet, but writes cerning the Tin in a quite different strain, again pressing the Lord Phaulkon to Embargo the Tin on account of Mr. John Tyler, using all the arguments he could, to shew the rea∣sonableness of so doing.
The eighth instant, the ship Bom Success, John Graunt Master (which as formerly hin∣ted, put in here from Atcheen to winter) sailed hence, having Mr. Whites Pass-port to pre∣vent their interception by any of the Kings ships; she belongs one half to Arthur Seymour, and the other half to the Moors merchants in Bengala, her Burthen about a hundred Tuns. The day after her going over the Bar, the Shabander pretending he had been informed, that she had carryed away some Passengers with a Ticket from him, there being then nei∣ther ship nor sloop in the Harbour, ready to send after her, dispatch'd away his own Barge with nine English men well arm'd, to bring her in again: That night they brought her, and the next day being the tenth, the Nocquedah, and all the rest being examined, nothing could be found against them, for he had taken out Tickets for all his Passengers, but how∣ever Mr. White could not be prevailed with to the contrary, but orders the ship to be unrigg'd and unladen, saying if she appear'd to be clear, 'twas time enough to go to Ben∣gala a month hence, when the Goods were unladen, and weighed off at the Custome-house scales, comparing them with the Nocquedahs accounts of the Cargoe, there were four Ba∣hars of Tin more, than what he had in his Invoice: This was pretended by the Shabander to have been Tin clandestinely bought from the Officers of the Clong, and not having been entred in the Custome-house before it was shipt, made the ship lyeable to seizure; however Mr. White kindly offered to write up to Syam about it, and according to the Kings plea∣sure she should be condemned or cleared: The Lascars came and own'd these four Bahars of Tin, saying 'twas what themselves had bought amongst themselves, i. e. The Serango, &c. Officers at Atcheen, and privately laden it without the Nocquedahs knowledge, and that it had never been stow'd in hold, but in their own Births, and that it was not any of the Tin of this place, was easie enough to be seen from the form into which it was cast. But all would not do. Mr. White alledged he could not clear her without the Kings order. The Pilot alledged in behalf of Mr. Athur Seymour, that one half of the ship could not be liable to seizure, it being only let to freight by him, to the rest of the Owners, who were Moors, nor had he on his part broke any orders of the Port, and if the Nocquedahs had, he did not conceive the ship to be liable, but rather the Nocquedahs Purse, Mr. White reply'd, that one half must go with the other, and no man ought to presume to instruct him what was Law or Equity, and the more the Pilot prated, the worse he should find it. He presently writes up to Syam to acquaint the Lord Phaulkon with his industrious obser∣vance of the Rules of the Port, for his Majesties Interest, and that a Moors ship from Ben∣gala having presumptuously broken the orders of it, by carrying off several of their Coun∣try men prisoners of War (which was an absolute untruth) without Licence, and lading Tin clandestinely, without entring it in the Custome-house, he had fetcht her back from Ilha Ferro, and did suppose her a lawful Prize, desiring to know his Majesties and Lordships pleasure concerning it, with all convenient speed. The twelfth of this month, a Moor who had been accused of breaking into the Shaban∣ders Godown under his house (before our going to Syam in May last) and stealing two pieces of course Cloth, having ever since been kept in Irons, had his tryal now before the Co∣romocon, the fact not being proved against him, he was cleared, only on the Shabanders motion, he was to continue ten days longer in Irons before his discharge; four or five days after this the fellow broke, or got off his Irons privately, and made his escape to his Ma∣ster a Merchant at Tenassery, whom the Shabander mortally hated, but was presently by the Shabanders order pursued and caught, and on the twentieth of the month being brought back, when the Shabander was in no good humour, he immediately ordered his head to be struck off, which was accordingly done by a Syammer, at one blow. The intercession of many people to the contrary, not prevailing for the poor mans life, he being resolved, as he vowed with many horrid oaths, and execrations, to make that fellow an example and terrour to all others, that should offer to make their escape, when he had ordered them prisoners. This action was severely censured by all men in private, but none durst openly complain, for fear of coming under the lash of Mr. White's displeasure. At this time was the Derrea, Dowlet dispatcht to Atcheen, Captain Russel Commander laden with three hundred and twenty Quoyens of Rice, two hundred being for the Kings account, and consigned to Captain Russel, and one hundred and twenty for Mr. White's account, consigned to Mr. William Mallet, with six mortevans of Mergen Arrack, and Mr. Mallet having no conveniency to invest his money in Goods proper for Atcheen, desired Mr. White to accept it, at two Teculls a month per Cattee, who accordingly did, and gave his account credit for twenty Cattees in his Books, the sum he left with him. Now also came an order from the Lord Phaulkon, to prepare a ship to be in a readiness, for the transport of two of the King of Syams Colwans to Gombroone. who were to go with a message to the Court of Persia, the ship being to go with a French Pilot, and a Pass sent from the French Chief at Syam, Mr. White immediately returns answer, that the lateness of his Lordships advice, and the want of men, so many ships being already abroad, rendred it impossible to comply with those orders, and farther, that there was not one French man in the King of Syams Service capable to take any Office in a ship, much less to be a Pilot.
The Shabander having now some jealousie, that all was not well in the Bay, or at the Coast, having no news either of Captain English, or the Deans Barge (both of them long since expected) did this month dispatch the small sloop Mary, to Pullicherry with sixty Chests of Copper, consigned to Monsieur Des Landres Boreau, and Letters to the General Martine and him, entreating them to write him back word with all expedition whatsoever news was stirring, which they thought might import the King of Syams, his Lordships, or his own notice, that so they might govern themselves accordingly. By her also he ad∣vises, that he had ordered Mr. How on his return from Moco, which he hoped would be in August, or September next, to touch at their Port, and deliver Monsieur Des Landres twenty thousand Dollars for his account, concerning the dispose whereof, he would write to him more fully by another conveyance, which was to follow in March next. By this con∣veyance, also his Invitatory Letter for sending out a permission ship, was contradicted once again in a Cover to Mr. Heath, to be forwarded along with the Packet to Madrass. in order to the promised Pullicherry expedition in March next, Mr. White having long since cast his eye on Don Joseph d' Haeredias new ship, and vowed that let what would come, that ship should fall into his hand, and no bodies else; He now effects his design after this manner. He frames and orders to be translated into Portuguees a Summons to the Don, to surrender his ship to the King of Syam for the security of the Pagodoes three thou∣sand he owed him on the Metchlepatam Voyage; pretending (though there was no such thing) a fresh and strict order from the Lord Phaulkon so to do, and that if he would take two hundred Cattees of Silver for her, first deducting what he owed the King, the super Amount should be paid him whensoever he pleased, if not the King expected that he should immediately pay in his Debt, which having (as he said) positive orders forthwith to recover of him, to sell her out right on the terms aforesaid, or if not, that if he would let him have her for a Voyage to Pullicherry, he would discount part of his Debt to the King for her freight, and in the interim use his utmost endeavour at Court to al∣leviate, and if possible divert the Kings Demands for the rest. The poor Don quite sca∣red at this unlooked for harshness, condescended to the last proposition, because he could not avoid it, and the ship was immediately ordered to be sitted. FEBRVARY 1686/7. The first of this month came an Answer from the Lord Phaulkon to Mr. White, concerning Mr. Thredders Affair, not at all sutable to his expectation; for he writes word, that 'twas very indiscreet to grow jealous on every occasion of those he emplov'd, nor could it found well for him to deal so unhandsomly by Mr. Tyler, as to detain his Estate without some more ju∣stifiable ground, than a bare possibility, that himself might be knavishly dealt with; there∣fore though he could not comply with Mr. Thredders request (which arrived him the very day he dispacht this Letter to the Shabander, in paying him money, instead of Tinn, nor had Mr. Thredder any reason to expect it, having made his Contract for Tinn) yet he posi∣tively charged the Shabander to deliver him the 120 Bahars of that Commodity, and let Mr. Thredder look out for Freight, where he could meet with it, that not being his business, which when the Shabander had perused, and given me to file, well, says he, I shall have Tinn enough for M. Thredder, before he'll meet with a ship to freight it on. In this Letter came also a very severe check to the Shabander, (whereas he indeed had expected a commendation of his care) that he should offer to send the Kings Subjects out of the Land, without order from Court, and that too upon a matter of such weighty concernment, as to keep possession of an Island, which he had no assurance was properly belonging to, or within the dominions of his Majesty, by which act, he had not only ex∣posed the Lives of so many of the Kings Majestyy's Subjects to the rage of the English, if they should come there with a design to fortifie, but for ought he knew laid the foundation of a War with his Neighbour Princes, whose property it should appear to be, and therefore he strictly charg'd him, immediately to dispatch a small Vessel to bring back Opra Qua, and the twenty Lulongs with all their necessaries, and be more cantious for the future, how he pro∣ceeded in such weighty affairs, without first advising up to Court. In observance of this Order, Anthony Highoe was dispatcht the next day, in a small sloop, who was to take Elves in his way at the Bar of Sirian, and they two, to go and fetch back the Soldiers from Negraes, but to leave the Inscription there. The third of this month, Morgan in the Advice sloop brought into Port the Nossa Sen∣hora d' Monte, d' San Thome, Gabriel d' Rosayro Pilot, whom Cropley, going from Sirian Bar, to Negraes, to carry the Lulong, and water his ship, before he put for the Coast of Gingerlee, had met with, and being ordered expresly by the Shabander, not to take notice of the Com∣panies Passes, in any ships he should meet with, not manned with all English men, had sent her under the charge of Morgan; On her came Mr. Noden, from whom the Shabander un∣derstanding how Affairs went at the Coast and Bay; he was at first fully determin'd to de∣tain, and make prize of the ship; but at length, through my earnest intercession for her releasement, using those very Arguments for his clearing of her, which he brought for the reasonableness of his proceeding to condemn her: He was prevailed with, to think it his
wisest course to dismiss her again, without waiting order from Syam, yet because he would appear zealous for the Kings interest, he takes out all the Madapollam Passengers, paying their Tallicooly to the Captain, and makes them the Kings slaves, and buyes as many more as the free Merchant, or any of the Officers of the ship were willing to part with, and so forcing the Commander to withdraw a protest, which he had made against Cropley, Triggs, &c. in behalf of the owners of the ship for damages, that had and might accrue, and in behalf of the honourable English Company, for the contempt of their Pass, he supplyed him with fresh Provisions for his money, water, &c. and so suffered him to pro∣ceed for Pegu. The eighth of this month came the Lord Phaulkons Letter concerning Mr. Graunts ship, wherein he advised Mr. White to be very cautious in his proceeding to the condemnation of her, since things of that nature might prove of very bad consequence, if inconsiderately rush'd upon, and though he would not have the King lose any thing of his Right, yet he would not have his authority improv'd in every little circumstance to the height of rigour, and therefore if the fault did not appear to be designedly, and notoriously con∣frontive of the Kings Authority, and the Established Rules of the Port it might be suffici∣ent to exact some reasonable Fine from the Nocquedah, and dismiss the ship, without fur∣ther delay, that she might not lose her passage to the Bay, and so perhaps have occasion given them to complain of as hard usage, as if totally confiscated. But Mr. White designing the ship for Atcheen in March next with a lading of Rice, had now laid her on shoar, new fitted her, and new masted her, and was resolv'd not to part with her, but seize upon both her and Cargo, which consisting of Coppar, Tin, Benja∣min, Ganja and China Ware, to the amount of one hundred ninty two Cattees Mergen, according to the Nocquedahs Invoice of prime Cost at Atcheen, he thought would not be amiss to send on the Don's ship to Pullicherry for his own Account; whom he designed should sail the tenth of March, so there was nothing more to be said concerning either ship or cargo; Mr. White pretending both to the Nocquedah and Pilot, that the King had seiz'd upon all, and on the other hand he thought it not convenient to let the Lord Phaulkon know any thing farther of the matter, but that he cleared and dismist her; by which means not only the Moors, but poor Arthur Seymour must lose all, and the Pilot his Sallary, though he paid the rest of the men their wages, because he would not be conti∣nually haunted by them, and refused the payment of the Pilot, because he happened to say, Morgan was a second Tunis. The tenth of this month, Morgan in the Advice-Sloop, under pretence of going to chase the Salitres off the Coast to the Southward, was privately dispatch'd to the Nin∣combers, with a Cargo, which was supposed very proper for barter there. The twentieth of this month, the Mergen Frigat came unlookt for from Negraes, on pretence they could not meet with water enough to recrute them for the Coast design. Now Cropley owned to me, that he was not in want of water, or any thing else, but receiving orders to publish and sign such a Declaration at St. Thoma, to some of the Coun∣cil of Madrass, as might (for ought he knew) one time or other hazard his Neck, and that too upon the single hand writing of Mr. White; he was so far from resolving to execute that his order, that had it not been for the sake of his Wife and Children at Mergen, and that he was afraid the Shabander would utterly ruine them, He would have gone directly to Madrass, and have surrendred up the ship to the Company, for he was very sure those proceedings of Mr. White could never end well, either for himself, or those that served under him. Mr. White though he had ever after this no good will for Cropley, as thinking his pretence of not finding water at Negraes, to be a forgery, yet he was very glad of her return, for ever since Mr. Nodens arrival, he had been very doubtfull of Resolutions safety, and whereas before for want of men, he had endeavoured to wave the Persia Voyage, now he thought it a good opportunity to carryon another design, under pretence that this ship was proper for the Persia Voyage, as being a good failer and well man'd, and that she might be fitted, and victualled time enough to proceed in the latter end of March; and gain her passage, by going to the South-ward of the Line; under which colour, when once she was got ready, and well furnished with Provisions, and all things necessary, without any suspicion of the Natives, it would be no difficult matter to flam them, as he said with a hundred pretences, to excuse her proceeding, and so keep her in a constant readiness (provided the ship Resolution should miscarry) all the monsoon, for any emergency whatsoever, nor was Cropley to know, but that he was to proceed upon her to Persia, untill she was got into a sailing posture, and then he would pitch upon some other person to Command her. Now it is to be noted that Mr. Phillip Noden before his departure hence, gave Mr. White cer∣tain information of the Hon. Companies intentions, ere long to make demands from the King of Syam of Reparation for damages themselves, and sundry Merchants under their protection had received through the rash and unwarrantable proceedings of the Lord Phaulkon, his chief Minister of State, and that Mr. Robert Freeman was the person desgned for the City of Syam, on that affair, and also that they were much disgusted with Mr. White himself, for be∣ing so active an instrument in the prejudices they had received; this (having been as be∣fore
hinted, closely urged by me as an argument for the said ships being cleared, plain∣ly asserting that in my opinion to add this extravagance to all the rest, would be like a mans willfully precipitating himself into danger, and then putting out his Eyes because he would not see it) did so work with Mr. White, that he not only shewed some respect, as aforesaid to the Companies Pass, but also after her dismission, and a more calm re∣flection on the present state of matters, put him upon a more intense and impartial re∣view and consideration of what he had done, during his Shabandership, that might give the Company any occasion of offence, or just ground of complaint against him, saying, that as the Company could not have pitcht upon so sit a person as Mr. Freeman to repre∣sent their grievances at Court, nor one that could more cunningly insinuate himself into the Lord Phaulkon's favour, so no man in India, he was sure, was either so capable, or so much inclined to do him a prejudice at Court, wherefore he ordered me to peruse all his books of Registers, Letters sent or received, orders, instructions, dispatches, or what∣soever Papers might more or less relate to his management of Affairs in the King of Syams Breach with Golcondah and Pegu, and to make my punctual, and impartial Remarks of every individual passage I should happen to meet with, that to me might seem any way ei∣ther unwarrantable, or but tending to disoblige the Company, or any of their Servants on the other side. The dispatch of several Vessels abroad being then in hand, a good part of the month was spent before I had leisure to apply my self to the observance of that order, but when I had at length represented to him, what to me appeared of most importance, relating to the Premises, he declared himself very apprehensive of the danger he was in, having never had any Commission from the King of Syam for making War upon the Kings of Golcondah and Pegu, or their Subjects; and that he had no other warrant for so doing, but bare word of mouth from the Lord Phaulkon, or which was of no more validity in Law, perhaps an approbation of taking that course in a private Letter, and that he did not like it, when his Lordship in September, last refused to grant him a Commission, Ex post facto, though he did so earnestly desire it, which he took for an argument, that his Lordship being apprehensive of the of these Commotions, was resolv'd, if possible, to keep his own neck out of the Collar. And continued Mr. White to me, 'tis only for the discovery of such over-sights, and slips as might prove of dangerous consequence, that I spoke to you to do what you have done, and as you have, primo limine, met that grand one, my want of a Commission, our business must be to study some remedy for it. And now, says he, what do you think best to do in this case? Upon which I replyed, that a que∣stion of such moment, would require time for a deliberate and well digested answer; no says he, but tell me your present thoughts of the matter. Then Sir, said I, I know not at present what to advise you, other than, that if the Lord Phaulkon be sincerely (as by the kind invitation you two days since received from him to live with him at Syam, he pretends to be) your friend, and that you have acted nothing in relation to that War, but either what he was privy to before you did it, or approved it when done, or if once offended at you for it, hath since been throughly reconciled to you again; you, once more, notwithstanding his former refusal, plainly lay open to him your over∣sight in not having a Commission to act by, when you first undertook the concern, and that to obviate all prejudices that may at any time hereafter, for want of one, accrue to you from the pretences of your own Country-men, you do now request that one may be granted you, with which he may, if he pleases, safely favour you, without any hazard of damage to himself. And in the interim, for as much as it will be May or June be∣fore any ship will be dispatched from the Coast for Syam, I would advise you to lay aside the Pullicherry design, and send the Dons Ship laden with Rice, as a present to the Go∣vernour and Council at Madrass for the relief of their Garrison, where you hear there is at present a very sharp Famine, which act would in my opinion so seasonably take off the edge of their ill opinions concerning you, that in all probability they may alter their minds, and totally desist from either making any complaints against you at this Court, or summoning you hence. To the former proposal, Mr. White replied, he knew the King would not now grant him one, and that the Lord Phaulkon would do no such thing, without first acquainting his Majesty, nor was he willing the Lord Phaulkon should take any further alarm from the discovery of any fears in him, saying that it repented him very much that he had already acquainted him with so much of Mr. Nodens news, for, continued he, though he only, t'other day invited me up to Court, I am afraid on that news, he will summon me up, but to prevent that, I'll e'en make it my businese to con∣tradict what I have written him concerning it, and so keep him as secure, and unacquain∣ted with the matter as I can, least I become the object of his jealousie; and so be ser∣ved as I was the last year. To the second he answered, that he could be glad with all his heart to stand fair in the opinions of the Madrass Blades, at the cost of three or four hundred Tonns of Rice, but to send it at such a juncture as this, when they were plotting and resolving his prejudice, would look too like a peace of precariousness, and fear of them; and rather than do any thing that might expose him to such thoughts among any of them, he would run the hazard of the worst they could do to him.
From this we past on to many other Instances, which seem'd to be as well not Justifiable to his Master the King, and his Friend the Lord Phaulkon, as prejudicial to the English Inte∣rest, and reflective on their Honour; in which I used all sincerity and freedom to give him the truth of my Opinion, back't with the best Reasons I had to confirm it; some of which he was pleased to censure, as the product of too much timorousness in his behalf, who was not wholly unacquainted with those Salvoes, which he reserved as yet in his own Breast, for what∣soever exigence, or emergency, but said, he would in their proper season communicate them to me, and for that time he told me he was very highly satisfied to find me deal so freely, and candidly with him, and that had been some, if not the major part of his unhap∣piness, that he never, until he met with me, found one that had Courage enough to dis∣approve to his face any one Enterprize, that ever he propos'd to attempt, or discover'd to them when he had effected, and says he, theres not a Man upon the place, that has the ap∣prehension of a Goose; here's Mr. Burneby is fit to converse with no body, but his Crim. Catwall, and take delight in being the Town Pimp, and disposing of all the Whores to any body that wants one, or keeps company with a parcel of Sailors, that over a Bowl of Punch, will lye worshipping him up, till he thinks himself a Petty Prince among them, and in the mean time near minds the main chance, nay, he's so soft a fellow, as to let his own Ser∣vants cheat him to his face, and run away with the Perquisites of his Office; for I my self have offered him Fifty Cattees a year, for that he never made Five Cattees of, since he came to the place, and to tell him a secret is the same thing, as to publish it about the Town with a Drum, or take a Woman into Council; therefore since I intend to hide nothing from you, I expect your Secrecy, and not only give you the liberty, but enjoyn you on all occasions, that may come under Debate, to deal plainly with me, and speak your own sense of things, and you shall be no loser by it, for I foresee there will be no small bustle, especially since Mr. Yale, the mighty Man of Power at Madrass, has been so highly exasperated about the Jewel Affair, and I am apt to think, disgusted at me, because I have alwayes declined a Correspondence of Trade with him; which no doubt he will, if he can revenge, (though I cannot apprehend how they should have any Order so soon out of England) under the Masque of the Companies Demands, for the wrongs they pretend to have received by his Lordships ill Conduct; in which, 'tis impossible I should escape scotfree, (for with him, and Robin Free∣man together, the Devil will not be able to deal) unless I take some timely course to pre∣vent falling in their Clutches; and continued he, I have in view four several ways to keep out of their reach, which I would have you well consider of, and in eight or four dayes time, give me your Opinion, which of them, (all things well weighed) seems to you most conducive to the security of my Interest, or Reputation, or both; and in the mean time, I my self will make it my business to consider them. I. Whether I should accept of his Honours late Invitation to Syam, and so take that op∣portunity to throw my self into the Kings protection, before the arrival of an English Ship. II. Whether I should continue upon the place, and keeping the Lord Phaulkon and the Na∣tives in ignorance and security, purchase my reconciliation to the Company, and Gentle∣men on the other side, by surrendry of the Port up to them. III. Whether I should apply my self to the fortifying of the place, which I could easily make tenable against any force, the Company can send, and so defend it against them. Or, IV. Whether I should make all necessarie and speedy provision to be gone hence for Eu∣rope, some such way as not to fall into the Companies Clutches. Having taken these Four Quaeries in Writing for my Memorandum, according to his own Di∣ctate, verbatim, quoth Mr. White, give me your Answer, after you have well considered them, and so he left me. MARCH 1686/7. The patching up of a Cargo for the Dons new ship to Pullicherry, which Mr. White now looking upon as his own, named the Adventure, and the preparing of Letters both for that Port and Madrass, to go upon her, together with the endorsing of Musters for Metchelapa∣tam, and the Northern Paintings which the King had ordered the Shabander, and he recom∣mended to Mr. Lucas to provide, the ship being to fail the Tenth of this Moneth by a prede∣terminate resolution of the Shabander, took up my time, until her departure. In few days after her dispatch, Mr. Tracyes unlookt for return with the Armenians small Ship from Pullicherry, where the French would not give her entertainment, together with the fresh news of the Companies designs to break with the King of Syam, confirmed also Via Bengala, by a French Sloop, which arriv'd the same day with Tracy, and brought Mr. White a startling Letter from the President and Council at Madrass, Dated in April last, con∣cerning his usage of the black Merchants on their return from Pegu, but Mr. White, under such apprehensions, that nothing could scarcely please him, that was not precipitantly re∣solv'd on; whereupon delivering all his Letters to me, Here, says he, peruse them: You'l
find the English (as I alwayes suspected) is snapt in the Bay, and 'tis not for nothing, that I so long since repented my giving him that unlimited Bill drawn on Mr. Lucas, to supply him with whatsoever he should require, and to be sure, the King will never allow it me back again, but more than all, the Gentlemen at Madrass are resolv'd to have a fling at me for what I had out of the Black Merchants; yet if they have nothing else to say to me, I fear them not: Agent Masters came well enough off in a like case, and so I hope I shall do: But I wonder, this Letter bearing date in April, they did not offer to meddle with Cropely, when he was at Madrass in June following, and that they never complain'd of me to the Lord Phaulkon, however, continued he, I have thought better of the Commission you proposed to me to send for, and would have you draw me one up presently, as authenticity as you can, in the Names of the Governour and Council of the Province, whose Names and Titles you will find particularly, and at large express'd, in that which his Honour gave out in Septem∣ber last, to constitute the Coromoron, let its Date be sometime in January, 1684/5, and its Te∣nor to warrant and Authorize me, to issue out all Orders and Instructions to Commanders, and other Officers of the King's Ships in the English Tongue, sign'd by my self, conform to the Original Register in the Rolls of this Province, kept in the Syam Language, and says he, when you have done it, I'le send it to Syam, for his Honours perusal, and desire him to remit it to the Governour and Council here, with Orders for them to Translate it into the Syam Language, and sign it, which will be sufficient vindication for me, and may be done without troubling the King about it; to which I reply'd, Sir, Your English Orders being correspondent with the Original Rolls of this Province, in the Syam Language, would in∣deed prove your Commission of sufficient validity, to save you harmless, at least from any blame at this Court, but there never having been any such Rolls kept, nor the Governour, or Council ever more privy to the Instructions, or Orders you have from time to time given out, than is your Cook: How can you expect, though the Lord Phaulkon should so order it, that these men, without first acquainting the Barcalong (which may be of dangerous conse∣quence to both his Honour, and your self) will now be brought to sign any such Commissi∣on, and so pull, they know not what mischief on their own heads: Besides, since that time, the Coromoron have been new modell'd, and several men shifted, and if they should do it, yet I do not apprehend, that such a kind of second hand Commission, without apparent proof of their Power, and Deputation to grant it, could stand in any stead in the Courts of England. At this, Mr. White (with some anger contrary to his former promise) told me, I needed not trouble my self with that, Draw up the Commission, and he would take care of the rest; which accordingly I then immediately did to his approbation, and when he had ordered Mr. John Turner to transcribe it fair over, cancelling the first Copy; he returns the fair one to me, with orders to enclose it in the Pacquet, which was preparing for Syam in two or three days, and to insert a clause in his particular Letter to the Lord Phaulkon con∣cerning it. In this Pacquet he was as good as his word, to contradict the news Mr. Noden brought, and he had (as he pretended) rashly given an Account of to his Lordship, alledging, that by his Advices from Pullicherry, though Mounsieur Martin had ungentilely, and no way su∣table to the treatment their people found at this Court, refused the Saint John, yet the true reason was not either his care of disobliging the English, because they proclaimed, or threatned War with this Crown; for 'twas no such thing, or his good inclinations to the King of Syams, or his Lordships Interest, which made him not detain, what he had not at present strength enough to protect, but merely because his Lordship had consign'd the Ship solely to his Son in Law, Mounsieur Des Landres, without taking notice of him, who as he was General, took it for an affront, and that he had now receiv'd good assurances, that the reports of the Companies successes in Bengala, or intentions of sending any Ships hither, or to Syam, were equally false, though 'twas true, the Company had broken out in∣to a War in the Bay, but had no better success than (what commonly, as he said, attends all their Enterprizes) to be forc't out of their Factories, and in a fair way to lose all their footing there. When these Letters were finished, I put him in mind of the Commission, supposing he had forgot it, to which he answered no, arid bad me keep it by me, until he called for it, What fell next in course, was the forming of his Resolutions, what course to take, and when he askt what, I thought of the proposals he had given me to consider of, I pre∣sented him with this following Answer, which I had kept by me, in a readiness for several dayes. SIR, SInce you enjoyn'd me to use freedom, and declare my own sense of whatsoever matter should come under Debate, I shall do it with as much plainness, as if the Case were my own. As to your first Querie, I must needs say, that I look upon it no way safe for you, and that for several reasons. The King of Syams protection is unsecure, nor can any pretence of your being his Debtor, and detain'd by him on that score, exempt you from the impu∣tation
of Contempt, of your Native Soveraigns Authority, when once you are summon'd by his Royal Proclamation to leave this Kingdom, and repair to England, or any of his Garrisons in India; or if it could be construed in your favour, yet when this Kings Ports come to be block't up, and his Trade stopt, you'l find the Lord Phaulkon in danger of coming under a Cloud, and if he once totters, you must not expect to stand firm: This was your own Opinion in August last; and to follow the method your self took at Peraun in our Journey towards Syam: I have briefly recollected some of those many Slips in your management, since you last came from thence, which I really think you will be blam'd for, if ever you return thither again, and they are these, viz. I. The notorious overcharge of Seamen, and Soldiers Salaries. II. Dispatching the Phaulkon without older, for private Account. III. Drawing a Bill on Mounsieur Des Landres, for Four Hundred Pagodoes on the Kings Account, and converting Three Hundred to private use. IV. Lading the King's Goods for private Account on the Moco ship, expresly contrary to the order, for keeping them in the Tenassery Clongs, V. Converting the Sancta Cruz Gold to private use, expresly deviating therein from the Court order. VI. Detaining One Hundred and Twenty Baharrs of Tynn from Mr. John Thredder, con∣trary to order. VII. Sieving of the Bom Success, and her Cargo, and converting both to private use. VIII. Forcing Two Hundred and Twenty Quoyens of Rice from the Queans, on pretence of Lading it for the King, and converting it to private use. IX. Charging One Hundred and Thirty Quoyens more to the King's Ships, which from Oluang Naces Account, will appear never to have been delivered, but disposed as abovesaid. X. Selling the King his own Stores two or three times over, in the space of five moneths. XI. Using the King's Name to seize Don Joseph's Ship, and converting her to private use, in which particulars, the Lord Phaulkon will esteem himself abused. XII. Dispatching the Advice Sloop (on pretence of crucing) to the Nicobarrs. XIII. Imposing your own Salt on the Natives, on pretence of the Kings, contrary to the express intent of that Article. XIV. Dispatching the Lulong to Negraes, without order. XV. Contradicting your first true Reports made of the Companies intentions to proceed with their Complaints at this Court. XVI. Beheading of a Moor Man in a passionate Humour, when the Law of the Country had clear'd him of the Accusation brought against him. All which I present not to your view with any design to disturb your Spirits, but to let you see, how plain I will be to one, whom I esteem my friend, and I really believe, the most of these Instances, if not more than these, would be severely urg'd against you, to your extreme hazard, when once discover'd, and 'twould be impossible to conceal them, after your surrender of your present employment, and repair to Court. I need urge no more, than put you in mind of the Lord Phaulkons Predecessor, whose Story I had from your own mouth, though I might add the many Enemies you have in this Country, both Moors and Natives, who lye upon the advantage against you. II. As to your second proposal, besides the unhandsomness of the act in it self, if you can effect it, (as 'tis true, your Power being in a manner unlimited over the Natives, will en∣able you to go a great way in such a design) it is odds, if it prove not so far from pur∣chasing you any esteem with your own Country-men, that 'twould not rather expose you to the scorn of all that pretend to either Honour, Honesty, or Policy; and subject the whole Kingdom of England to the reflection of all other European Nations, as well as the jealousie of all Indian Princes. III. As to the third, I suppose you only mention'd it to try, whether I could believe you a Man of such Principles; for I dare affirm, though you are well read, both in Books and Men, yet you cannot bring one instance, wherein Acts of such a nature have not at one time or other met with their just reward, or the Actors, at least been branded with Eternal infamy. IV. As to the last of the four, I look upon it as a Course, not altogether so discommen∣dable, or at least, not so desperate as any of the former, but of great difficulty, for 'twill be August before you can well be in a readiness to go from hence, and then you may expect a Man of War here; or if you can get ready to go in July, and hide amongst the Islands to the Southward, until the Monsoon presents to get off this Coast, yet, your pre∣paration must necessarily be so extraordinary great, that the whole Country will take no∣tice of it, and you may perhaps be unawares prevented on that hand; so that if I might advise, I look upon it most conducive both to your Reputation, and Interest at home, and here, immediately to adjust your Account with the King to the last of February, and re∣mit
them to the Lord Phaulkon for Approbation, and pleading your want of Health, and great desire to return to your Native Country, in order to your recovery. Petition his Majesty to dispense with your retirement from his service, In the mean time, let the Mer∣gen Frigat be made ready, and so you may early enough, in the latter end of April fetch Madrass, where when it appears, that nothing has accru'd through your means to the prejudice of the Honourable Company otherwise, than as an accidental consequence of the King of Syams Commands, (but to make that appear, you must not omit to procure the Commission) you will no doubt not only stop the mouths of a great many, that otherways you will in all probability find widely open to blast your Name with all the detraction, which the sufferings of some, and the envy of others can dictate; but also prevent a mass of inconveniencies, which at this distance you may not perhaps distinctly foresee. Thus Sir, have I observed your Commands by a free declaration of my Opinion, which is humbly submitted to your own more solid Judgment, by Your Faithful Servant, Francis Davenport. This foregoing is a true Copy of the Paper I deliver'd to Mr. White, March 29th 1986/7. All the Reply Mr. White gave to this Paper at this time, putting it after he had read it into his Pocket, was, That he was going to Mary Leslyes, and it should not be long before he resolved on something or other. The next day he calls for me, and tells me, it must now be his whole business to get what Money he could into his hands, that he must now play at small games, rather than stand out: He would take the French Mans Cargo off his hands, which amounted per Invoice to Four Thousand Rupees, and give him Seven Thousand for it, and he doubted not, but to double his Money in a few dayes time, for he would make the Merchants take it off his hands at his own Rates; and besides, those that would have any Butter, or Oyl, should take a proportion of Cloth off his hands, by which means he hoped to get rid of a great part of the Rubbidge that lay by him: To all which I had little to say. But after this his Discourse, hapned a passage, which so far amazed me, that it put me by inquiring of him the reason of it, and 'twas thus. This day the Bengala Ship, (which formerly was called the Bom Success, but now by him named the Resistance) being to sail for Atcheen with Rice, which she was to unlade into the Derrea Dowlet, and with all possible expedition return directly hither, with whatsoever Gold Captain Russel, and Mr. Mallet should have in readiness, about two, or three hours before the Ship was to sail, he bids me fetch the Commission aforementioned, and in my presence, making marks with a Pencil, where the Oyea, and the Coromocon should fix their Seals over the writing (The Commission being writ∣ten length way, on a sheet of large Paper, and begun about the lower half of the sheet) he orders Lewis Lobo his Okone Tuzerkon to carry it to the Coromocon for them, to affix each man his Seal, and tell them it was the dispatch of the Bengala Ship, according to an or∣der from Syam, which I knowing to be so palpable a falsehood, trembled to imagine, where∣in this might issue, fully concluding that the requiring the Coromocon to affix the Seals of their respective Offices, to such a Paper, wherein nothing was written, that they were to under∣stand, and yet any thing more might be written afterwards, above those Seals in their own Language, without their privity, was a clear argument of some dark designs in Mr. White, and that he never intended to acquaint his friend, the Lord Phaulkon with it. When the Tuzerkon brought it back seal'd as above directed, 'twas again committed to my keeping, un∣til Mr. White should call for it, which, pursuant to his orders, I took care to put up, but with more regret than I can express, to find my self also in some measure slurr'd, by being privy to so mean and disingenuous an Action. The 23d of this Moneth Mr. White calls me into his Lodging-Room, and tells me to this effect, Mr. Davenport, I have considered your motion for my going to Madrass, but alas, those Arguments you urge from the stopping of peoples mouths, are not of weight enough, to induce me to take that Course, nor do I know what you mean by that Mass of Inconveni∣encies, which may insue, upon my taking any other; if God send me well to Europe, I shall have as fair play at the Law for my Money, as my Adversaries; and besides, I have by the Dons Ship, Via Pullicherry ordered, you know, the payment of Freemans Debt, if he will be content with the Principal, so that his Mouth will be stopt, and I know of no Debts that I am owing to any body else on that side, so that I expect the less Clamours to follow me to England: To which I reply'd, Sir, Methinks what you now say, should be rather an induce∣ment to you to go to Madrass, for if Mr. Freeman be satisfied, and not your Enemy, since you value no body, but Mr. Yale and him, there may be some hopes that Mr. Yale may also be made in time your friend too; however, if Arguments drawn from the probability of ensuing inconveniency, are of no validity, I have only one more from the Conveniency that will attend your going now to Madrass, to offer to your consideration, and so leave it to your own Judgment, to determine. As you have designed to turn your China, and South Sea Adventures upon Clong, nay, making your self satisfaction out of the King's effects, laden on your Ship for Moco (though by you I must needs say, it will not look well, to leave the Two Hundred Cattees which the King
lent you unsatisfied) so you may not only at Atcheen, in your way take the proceed of the Bengala ships Cargo, and your part of what laden on the Derrea Dowlet, but at Madrass your self receive the produce of the Moco ships Cargo, which, how well 'tis worth your staying for at the Coast, I need not tell you; nay you will be there too before the re∣turn of the Dons ship from Pullicherry, and so may receive there the proceed of what's sent on her, whereas if you conclude upon going for Europe from hence, and an English man of War should happen to come hither in the month of May, or June (as from Ma∣drass you know it may be done very well) I do not apprehend how you can well escape going with him thither, against your inclinations, and to your far greater prejudice than if you prevented their sending you any Summons. Mr. White, with an extraordinay concernedness told me, that I talk'd like one that knew but the shel and outside of things, and that if he was sure, going to Madrass would keep him from going to Hell, he would choose to be damned rather then go thither to be laugh'd at by Yale and Freeman, and, continued he, if ever a ship of the King of England comes to this Port, before I am gone, the Commander shall find me as civil to him, as he can be to me, but if once he comes to tell me that I must go with him, and pretends the Kings authority here, by the living God, I'll pistol him with my own hands, and after∣wards wipe my breech with his Commission. Upon this I offered to withdraw, and was got into the next room, when he called me again; come, says he, I talk what I would do if an English man of War should find me here,, but you need not fear, but I'll be gone out of their way, time enough for Eu∣rope, I am resolv'd, and I think to Persia, and so over Land will be the best course, but whether that way, or by Sea, is time enough to conclude, when I am in a readiness for either. As to the Moco ship, I'll sell her, and her Cargo to any man for three Tekols, and the Pullicherry ship for three more, for 'tis impossible either of them should escape, and therefore I value them not a straw. I am most concerned for Lesly, I am afraid he'll be snapt upon the Coast, and he is the only man for my turn on this occasion, for Cropley, I know is neither well affected to me, nor fit for the business, because of his Wife and Family, and besides whoever else, I shall for want of Lesly be forced to employ, yet I am so embarast with that Family, that I must of necessity carry my Mary (for so he used al∣ways to call Madam Lesly) and her young bantlings along with me, nor can I with ho∣nour, well leave Mr. Russel. Well but Sir, said I, what will become of the Raja Mr. Burneby, will you leave him here exposed to the fury of the Natives, or at best to the Kings pleasure; God damn him, replyed Mr. White, I dare not trust him with secret of such importance, I had as good publish it thorough the Town with a Gong, and besides what tie am I under to take care of him, has not he eyes in his head to foresee the danger, let him shift for himself; yet I do not know, it may be when I am just ready to go, I may take him with me, and that is time enough to tell him, half a dozen silver Plates and Spoons, and a few cloths, with it may be fourty or fifty Cattees in Money makes up his bag∣gage, I need not much fear his over-lading my ship. Thus he broke off at this time. The twenty sixth of the month, 1687. he comes to me in the writing Room, and finding Mr. Turner absent, begins to this effect: The Mergen Frigat shall take in all the Tin, and I'll continue my pretence of sending her on the Kings Errand to Persia, with the Colwans, that so the Country people may not take notice of my putting extraordinary Pro∣visions aboard her, and three or four days hence we will go and sound all about the Islands to the Southward (as I was before designing, if you remember) under pretence of visiting the Fortifications at Nocklay (not that there are any such things as Fortifications there, capable to keep a Tyger from carrying a Buffalo out of the compound, nor indeed is there any occasion for any there) so under that colour I will make choice of a convenient place to hide the Ship in, until the Monsoon will permit my proceeding, and at our return from sounding, I would have you draw up all the Garrison, and Port accounts, for I am resolved to disband all the Soldiers, and discharge all the Seamen, reserving only such in Pay as shall be fittest for my design, and for the more plausible doing it, I would have you also draw up a Declaration to be put up at my Gate, and the Court of Guards, signifying the Kings pleasure, respecting the stating and Limitation of Foreigners wages, imployed in his Service for the future, which I would have you to state according to the Bankoke mo∣del, for that is so low, that I know they will disband themselves, rather than accept it; nor will the blame appear to them, to lie in me. Besides, though whilst I had occasion for men to do my turn, I gave them extraordinary encouragement, yet that being serv'd, I will not be to seek for reasons to satisfie his honour with my disbanding the Soldiers, and if what I write to him about it will not prevent a broad-side of Scolding from him, I can bear it well enough, for before it can reach me, it will have lost its force. The Sol∣diers I know when once Disbanded, will soon disperse, and I shall have the fewer obser∣vers of my preparations, and rather than they should stay here to take notice of what I do, I will find a way underhand to encourage them to go up to Syam, and then give them Tarraes to pass to Tenassery, but clap a stop upon their proceedings any further: which besides the Convenience of being rid of so many eyes, will save an unnecessary ex∣pence to my self, and give me an opportunty (if there should be any occasion) to do my
business better with Natives, against whosoever shall arise to oppose me in my escape, for after the ship is once hid amongst the Islands, which the Natives shall not know where she is, I will always keep the Barge and Sloope Robin in readiness before my door, and a dozen of Country Boats, divided into four Squadrons, continually out upon the scout, and so whensoever an English Man of War comes in sight, I will set fire of the Town, and immediately repair to my ship, where I will give them leave to find me out, if they can, for they had as good look for a Needle in a Bottle of Hay, as for me, if I get but two days start before them. In the mean time before we go a sounding, I would have you pack in the new Chests now made, every thing of value in my House, and numbering the Chests, take an exact Invoice of every thing, valuing it at the real worth in this place, that so I may know both what I have, and where to look for it, upon any occasion, or if any unexpected accident should happen, the Invoice one time or other may stand me in some stead: which I answered should be done, but I desired he would please to be present at the pack∣ing, and rating of them, for his better satisfaction, he said he would be the next day at lei∣sure to go about it. The next day, being Easter-day was improper for any business of such a nature; and Mr. White making a noble Entertainment for all the Europeans on the shoar, was very liberal to all his immediate Servants, both White and Black, from the highest to the lowest; to me in particular he gave two pieces of Silk very rich, telling me at the same time, that he designed a more considerable Token of his kindness for me in a short while, and that he gave me that only in course, because he was minded to give all his Servants somewhat on that Festival, which he said he had designed to have done on the fifth of the month, his Birth day, had he not forgotten it. On Munday the twenty eighth, he asked me if I was ready to go about packing of his Goods, as he had spoke to me on Saturday, telling me that from Nocklay he was intended to go to Tenassery, and thence to the hot waters, and in his way call the Serpacones to ac∣count, what they had done in examining all the Gardens, and fruit Trees, and that he hop'd to get a hundred and fifty or two hundred Cattees out of the Garden Rents; yet before he went for Europe, however he would turn all the remains of his Salt that lay at Te∣nassery upon the Muong at eight Tales per Quoyen, which was two Tales per Quoyen less then the Kings price in the Articles; and says he, I will make the Coromocon do it, by distributing it among the Queans and Nayes, so that I shall have little, or no trouble, nor shall they know but the Salt is the Kings, so I shall receive all my Money at a lump from Opra Ballat, for they dare as well be damn'd as refuse to take it, when 'tis to raise Money for defraying the Garrison, and Port charges, and if it cannot be all collected before I Disband the Soldiers, yet it will be secure enough, when once Opra Ballat becomes obliged to get it in, and I shall have money enough otherways to pay off the Soldiers at my return from Tenassery. After this discourse, observing me to look somewhat dejectedly, quoth Mr. White to me; Mr. Davenport what's the matter with you, are you not well? I answering, yes, God be thanked, I was very well in health: I perceive, says he, then you are dissatisfied in your mind at something or other: pray be plain with me, and tell me what it is? To which I replyed, Sir, 'tis very true, I am much dissatisfied, both in respect of you and my self, in respect of my self, because as you have been always kind to me, so my circumstances are such, that I cannot manifests my Obligation to you in such a manner as I plainly fore∣see, your occasions will require, and perhaps you may expect from me, without my extreme prejudice on many scores, the main ones are these. If I go with you for Europe, and you should have the good fortune to escape Interception, I shall leave my concerns in the Bay, at such uncertainties, and expose my self so much to the censure of all our Country-men in India, who are many of them, but too apt to put the worst Construction upon every persons proceedings, that hath been but once unfortunate, that I much question, whether on my return to these parts again, I should be ever able to retrieve my Reputation, and if I continue with you in the sphere I now move, untill your departure hence, and then stay behind you, what can I expect but to be exposed, if not to the rage and fury of the Natives, yet to the Kings and your Friend, the Lord Phaulkons indignation, as ha∣ving been privy to your design'd escape, and lastly if any Kings ship should arrive before you are gone hence, and you continue in the mind to oppose or cut them off that come upon her, how can I, preserving my Allegiance unblemished, concur with you in so dan∣gerous an attempt. Now in respect of your self I am dissatisfied, because I am apprehen∣sive the course you have resolved on will not prove so conducive to your aims, nor Period in so satisfactory an issue, as I believe you propose to your self: Wherefore I desire you would please to discharge me your Service, that so I may live unconcerned, untill some opportunity presents of going hence; upon which he told me that sooner than detain me, in his Service against my will, he would not only dismiss me but give me a small Sloop to carry me to Bengala, or whithersoever I would go; But I must have patience untill he had got his ship secured out of the way. I then desired him to permit me forthwith to sur∣render up my charge of the Cash, alledging that I met with so many Avocations from his other business, by being obliged to attend every fellow that came to pay in, or receive ne∣ver
so small a sum, that 'twas a great trouble to me, whereupon he immediately after perusal of the Cash-Book, and comparing it with his own Notes, my Receipts, and the Cash then instock, under writ the Account accepted, and delivered both the Cash and Cash Book to Mr. John Turner's custody and care. This afternoon we packt up all his Plate (except a little for daily use) Rich Silks, Jew∣els, Sea-Books, and instruments, &c. as we were about it, he voluntarily began a discourse to me, to this purpose, that he did not forget the promise that he had made to me of one thousand Rupees extraordinary, besides all my Wages, and that if I would but continue with him, and goes only to Persia, he would give me the Sloop Robin (for he should go in Com∣pany to Bussora) freely, and not only so, but I should find him a great deal better to me then all this: To which I replyed, I did not doubt his making good his promise in the least, and I hoped he was well satisfied with the Reasons I had given him before Dinner of my unwillingness to proceed with him, either for Europe, or any whither else, except for Madrass, for things now being likely to fall out unsutable to my former expectations, he could not well blame me, if I desired to be at my own liberty, and live retired, though perhaps it might not prove so much to my advantage, as to be in constant pay, and that however, I would never be backward in any friendly assistance, he might desire from me, only preserving my self free from interfering with the designs he had entred into, relating to his removal hence; He then told me, that I should be at my own choice, and at my liber∣ty to leave him, when I pleased, and all that he desired of me, was to accompany him to Tenassery, and help to settle his particular Accounts with the Merchants. To this I free∣ly consented. On Tuesday the twenty ninth, he orders me once more to bring him the Commission, which the Coromocon, as already said, had sealed, and sending for his Okonta, with another Sy∣ammer (an Escrivan, whom to my knowledge, I had never seen before) into the writing Cham∣ber, Mr. White shuts the door, and dictating to the Okonta in Moors the contents of the Commission, he orders him to interpret it into the Syam Language to the Escrivan, and bid him write it first in a Bapote, and afterwards fair over on the same paper, above the Seals, and the English writing. Mr. White himself Ruling the lines with a Lead Pencil, at such distance as he thought convenient to contain what the Fellow was to write. The Okonta when he saw what was to be done, fell a trembling, and looking most wretchedly, which Mr. White perceiving, ask'd him what was the matter? The man replied, he was afraid if the Coromocon should come to know it, he must certainly lose his head. Mr. White calling him a parcel of foul names, ask'd how he durst pretend to scruple any thing he bad him do; but withal told him he needed not fear, that Paper was not to be shown to any body in this Country, but was to be sent to Europe, whereupon the Okonta and Escrivan went on with their work; and the Commission being thus finished, and the Names of the Oyea, and also the Coromocon (except Mr. Burnebys, for he had not been requi∣red to affix his Seal, nor did Mr. White think fit he should know of it) written by the same Escrivan in the Syam Language, close to each mans respective Seal. Mr. White desi∣red me and Mr. Turner to attest the English writing to be a true Copy of the Original Com∣mission in Syam, instead whereof, I underwrote these words. The Shabander Okonta in Mer∣gen, hath this twenty ninth day of March, 1687. declared what is above written in the Syam Language to contain the true sense and meaning of the subjoyn'd English Writing, Witness our hands. Francis Davenport. John Turner. At which Mr. White frowned, and said, I might have been plainer in my Attestation, but however he gave it me to put in one of the new Chests above mentioned, which I ac∣cordingly did. APRILL, 1687. The first of this month, Mr. White began his progress towards Nocklay, in company with the Oyea, and the Coromocon, and himself attended with Mr. Burneby, Mr. Thredder, Don Joseph, and Captain Cropley in his Gambdia Boat, no man knowing his private design, but my self, who went with only Mr. Triggs in the Shabanders Pinnace, from whom I also concealed it, pretending only to heave the Lead now and then for my own curiosity: Cap∣tain Cropley also had a Lead in the Shabanders Boat, which I put into his mind to carry, pretending according to Mr. Whites orders to me, that I thought't would be a good oppor∣tunity to acquaint our selves with the Channels among the Islands, which few or no English men ever made it their business to search out, and might one time or other stand a man in some stead, if he should happen to fall into the Southward of Ilha Grande. At four days end, I having cast my eye upon a very convenient place for the purpose, and giving Mr. White privately an account of it, he presently goes himself to view it, I fol∣lowing in the Barge, and then finding the inconvenience of so much company, on such a design, return'd to Mergen, and the next day being the fifth instant, after about two hours
stay at his own house, he took his journey to Tenassery, where my time was taken up in ad∣justing Mr. Whites Accounts with the Merchants, he in the mean time prosecuting his bu∣siness, of raising what Money possibly he could, as he had before projected. Now during our stay here, the Lading of so much Tin and Goods, and provisions on Board the Mergen Frigat at Mergen, it seems had not done so privately but the Natives and Moors had taken notice of it, it being unusual to ship so late in the year, when they could not expect to go to Sea. This had occasioned several Rumours, and conjectures among the people, and at length one of the Shabanders Spys brings him word that one Namtula a Moor, and Merchant in Tenassery had reported that this lading of the ship at this time of the year could never be for any good design, and 'twas ten to one if the Shabander had not a mind to pack up his Aules and be gone, when every body least thought of it. Mr. White to prevent the spreading of any such dangerous report, immediately sends for this Merchant, and in great passion taxt him with it, The man denyed it, but that would not do; Mr. White orders him to be first severely whipt with Rattans, and then clapt in Irons, and lead through the Buzzar into the Common Gaol, there to lie four days, most of the eminent Merchants in Town interceded for him, but could not prevail. This action created great animosity, and heart burnings amongst them; but Mr. White valued it not, thinking it the best way thus to stop all their mouths for the future. The fourteenth instant we went up to the hot Waters, and had good divertisement in the Natives Fishing and Hunting, though Mr. White had the best in screwing out of the Sereacons for the Garden Rents in that River, to the Amount of one hundred twenty six Cattees of Silver. The twenty third we returned to Mergen, where Captain Lesly arrived the same day, to Mr. White's great satisfaction, for though he had ordered him to stay Cruising untill the first of May, and then go to Pullicherry, before he was to come hither, yet the Saint Johns Bengala news about English, had made him often wish Lesly here sooner. Captain Leslys arrival put all things upon the spur, there was no time to be lost. The Mer∣gen Frigat is presently unladen, unrigg'd, and ordered to go up to Tenassery, with the King of Syam's Colours, as his ship (for Mr. White had been accustomed at the close of each years-Books, to charge her and the Phaulkon to the Kings account, and afterwards to call them his own again) but the Resolution and Robin Sloop, which were really the Kings, he thought properest for the Design he had in hand, and so called them his own, appoint∣ing them hence forward to wear English Colours in Harbour. Lesly brings news the Mary sloop was taken by Captain Batten out of Pullicherry Road, and carried to Madrass. The French write word of it, and remitt by him a Copy of a Protest, which they had sent to Madrass concerning her, what further private account Lesly gave Mr. White of the state of Affairs at the Coast, I know not, but he is now the chief man in favour, and Mr. White all in a flame to be gone, he now presently gives out to the Syammers, that he had received orders (which was no such thing) from Court to fit, and keep in a fai∣ling posture the best Frigat the King had, which he said was the Resolution, who was to wear English Colours, and wait the Kings pleasure, for her dispatch at an hours warning, whither and whensoever his Majesty pleased, and therefore required the Coromocon, to order with all expedition possible, a supply of whatsoever he should find necessary for the Com∣plete Victualling of her with Rice, Cattle, Hogs, or any other Provisions, that his Pur∣veyor could in so short a time get in readiness, and to that end he would give them out his Tarraes to take all manner of Provision wheresoever it could be found, at the Kings price. In this distraction, and hurry were all things. When On the twenty eighth of the month discoursing with me his over-land design, and com∣plaining, that nothing did so much prejudice his undertaking, as the great disappointment in missing his Moco ship, since if she should happen to return hither safe, she would fall into the hands of either the English, that would lie before the Port, or the Syammers, so that he should never be one farthing the better, for what she brought hither, unless he could have stayed upon the place until September had been over, nor yet could he have the satisfaction to know whether she had put a shoar the 20000 Ry. 8/8. as he had ordered at Pullicherry. I took upon me to tell him, that I did verily believe, and could not perswade my self to be of any o∣ther opinion, then that we should see ships here from Madrass before August. To which he replyed, himself fear'd it was too true, for Captain Lesly had given him a very unwelcome Account, how matters stood. At this word, he flew out and swore, But God damn him he cared not much, he would make fools of one hundred of the King of England's Captains, saying moreover to the same purpose as once before he had said, That if any of them did come hither, before he could get away, so long as they were civil, he would be civil to them, but if ever a Kings Captain, or Lieu∣tenant of them all should come a shoar and tell him, that he must go to Madrass, and should pretend a power to force him thither, he would be the man that would Pistol him upon the place, with his own hands, and wipe his Arse with his Kings Commission, when he had done, that he could soon find ways to dispatch them, and all that belonged to them, adding withal, what a Plague dost think I'm to be scar'd, with the sight of the Kings Flag at a Boats Bow? No, continued he, with an horrid Oath, I know better things, I look upon
the best Commission any man has, that comes out on the Companies concerns, no better than if I had stood by, and seen them that bring it, make it under a hedge: However, if I can get away, I will, and if I cannot, whose soevers lot it is to find me here, they shall find Mer∣gen the hottest place, that ever they came against in their lives, as simply as 'tis fortified, for I am resolved never to go to Madrass, if there come Ten Sail of Men of War to fetch me, and if it does come to that pass, that I am intercepted in my design, I'le defend the place as long as 'tis possible, with the Natives, and when I can hold it no longer, I'le burn it down, and go to Syam by the Light on't, and see who will fetch me thence. I then replying, Sir, I am heartily sorry to hear this, and I would fain hope, that you speak not as you mean; at this Mr. White was transported into a great passion, and said, God damn thee, I see nothing will work with thee; and since I see thou art still resolved to prefer hugging thy own fears and jealousies, before either thy own advantage, or any incli∣nation to my Interest, and art so unwilling to stick by me, when I have most occasion for thee, e'n get thee down stairs out of my House, and never come near me more, but if ever I hear a word out of thy mouth about my business, By the Eternal God, I'le cut thy Tongue out. I immediately withdrew, and went down to my own Room, not thinking it convenient presently to go abroad, lest his Rage might transport him into a jealous conceit, that I was gone to prattle of his passionate humour, which though I thought, had it been in another place, I had been bound in duty to declare his threatning expressions in contempt of his Majesty of England's Authority to some Magistrates, yet to speak of it to any body here, where himself was absolute, would be an indiscretion, little inferiour to Mr. Whites. Wherefore I continued still in my Room, and went not up to Dinner, but about Three in the Afternoon being told that Mr. White had taken his rest, and was now in a calm posture. I sent my Christian Servant one Lazarus Gomez up to Mr. White, with this following Paper. Mr. Samuel White, SIR, That this morning I happen'd by the unseasonable declaration of my opinion to hazard your displeasure; I can't but acknowledge a great indiscretion, but I hope you will not censure it an unpardonable presumption, at least if you please to call to mind that plainness and sincerity, which you have so often, not only expressed your self highly satisfied with, but charg'd me to continue in the whole course of your service; and if by the over officious discharge of my Duty, and observance of your repeated Injunctions, I have offended, I have the less reason to trouble you with any formal Apology, but since you are return'd from Tenassery, and your Affairs in the posture which your self propo∣sed to have them in before I left you. I now humbly request the friendly performance of your promise, which was, that I should be at liberty to withdraw from your employ∣ment, and live retir'd from all publick business. My reasons for this request I have so fre∣quently and fully discours't you, that to repeat them now, would be altogether need∣less: I make choice of this way of addressing my self to you, partly to avoid any further occasion of offence, and if possible, to procure a friendly parting, that so the World may not take notice of any jarrings, to the prejudice of either of us, but chiefly to assure you under my hand, That as I prefer my Allegiance to my Prince, and the Duty I owe my own Country to all private advantages, so no less a consideration, than a hazard there∣of, could have made me, ever since Mr. Nodens arrival at this Port, so solicitous to have declin'd your service, but however you will do me but right, to believe that I shall, not∣withstanding my dismission, continue as true to your secrets, relating to these people as your self can desire, and as becomes one who hath been accustomed to delight him∣self in being justly esteemed. Sir, Your Faithful Servant Francis Davenport. My Servant on his return told me the Shabander had read my Note, and would speak with me, when I came up to him, what says he, Mr. Davenport, then you have no mind to stay with me. Sir, I reply'd, if I have not, I hope you are satisfied in my reasons for it, why says he, you seem by the tenderness, and care of your Allegiance, to suspect that I shan't be gone, before a Man of War meets with me, well I will not go about to convince you of a mistake, as to your own Interest I find you to be in love with, but if you will needs go, I will not detain you, only I would have you make good the conclusive part of this your Paper; you know my Concerns, and your discoursing them, may do me a dis∣kindness, but I have no reason to suspect you in that particular; you may come when you will for your Money, and you shall have it; nor will I forget my promise, or be worse than my word to you, though 'tis too late for you to go now to Bengala, I hope you'l come now and then, and see us. Yes Sir, said I, and serve you too, in any matter that I can, with∣out apparent prejudice to my self; you say very well, said the Shabander, and you shall not find me backward in any kindness I can do you: So he drank to me in a Glass of Bran∣dy, I pledg'd him, and so took my leave. Before I was got down stairs, he called me again; says he, Mr. Davenport, Whither do you intend to remove? Sir said I, I do not yet know, but I think to Captain Cropeleys: Pray tell Cropely, sayes Mr. White, I would have
him come to me in the morning, and receive the Money I borrowed of him last Moneth, for I'le send him, and his Family up to Tenassary, but don't you tell him any thing of that, till I speak to him my self; not I Sir, quoth I, but if he removes to Tenassery, it will be a very good pretence for me to go along with him, under colour of going again to the hot Waters, for my healths sake: Ay, sayes Mr. White, so it will: Thus we parted immediately that Evening, removing all my things from Mr. Whites House, to Captain Cropeleys. The next day Captain Cropely going to attend the Shabander, Mr. White paid him thirty Cat∣tees, which, on occasion of paying for Mounsieur Caroons Cargo, Cropely had lent him, and then tells him he must forthwith remove his Family to Tenassery, pretending he did not know how soon Ships might arrive here, and if there should happen any disturbance in the Town, 'twould be inconvenient to have his Family here, who might be frighted, and it may be worse used. Cropely on his return told me what had passed, and that though he knew very well 'twas for another reason, and not the care of his Family, or their safety, that made Mr. White order him to remove them to Tenassery, yet he would do it, lest Mr. White should take occasion to do him some mischief if he stay'd, for he had told him, that if any Enemy came against the place, himself, if he could not maintain against them, would burn the Town down to the ground. This Evening Edward Tuttie came to see us, and told us the Shabander had ordered him, and his Family up to Tenassery, and had no more discretion, than to tell Cropely, that his business there, was to give the Shabander from time to time an Account how the Moors and Natives censured the preparations he was making to get the Ship Resolution into a sailing posture, and whether he could learn out of any of them, that they had any suspicion of his intentions to leave the place, or any thing else, that he thought might tend to the Shaban∣ders prejudice, not to sail of giving timely notices. MAY 1687. The Ninth this Moneth, all the Soldiers and Seamen (except those employed on the Ship Resolution, and Sloop Robin) were disbanded and discharged, and the Soldiers the next day posted away to Tenassery, with promise of passage to Syam, at the Kings Charge, but when they came to Tenassery, they were there stopt, and not suffered either to proceed, or return, on pretence of waiting for the Kings order. This Moneth the Sloop Phaulkon returned from the Nicobarrs, and the Dons new ship from Pullicherry, where the French would not entertain her, and both of them were immediately unrigg'd and sent up with the King of Syams Colours to Tenassery, though the latter far dif∣ferent from Mr. Whites Solemn promises to the contrary, or the Dons expectations. The Fourteenth this Moneth, the Ship Resolution being richly and deep laden, and provi∣ded (by computation) which Eighteen Moneths Provisions for Forty Men, weighed Anchor, and drove down (without any Sails to the yards) opposite to the great Fort, where she rode two dayes, but did not moor. After two days stay there, commonly every other Night, those on board according to order, tript silently the Anchor, and let the Ship drive as low as they thought convenient, it may 1/4 mile, more or less in a Night, alwayes pretending the next morning that the Ships Anchor came home, and would not ride her; this was practised, until by degrees the Ship had drove out of reach of the great Fort Guns, and down so near the Barr, that at any time in the Night, with the first of the Ebb she might drive over the Barr. The day appointed (as Mr. Burneby afterwards declared for her going to hide among the Islands) was to have been the 26th of the Moneth; but it pleased God to disappoint Mr. White in the very height of his expectations; as to that project, by the coming up to Town on the 23d Instant, towards Evening, of an English Yawle, which brought news of an English Man of War, being arriv'd near the Port. This surprizing news put Mr. White upon his former resolves of defending the place, and accordingly he issues out his Tarraes to summon all the Men in the adjacent Aldeas from Fifteen to Fifty years, to repair immediately into Mergen, on penalty of incurring the King of Syams high displeasure for their neglect, to work upon the Fortifications, and Man the Giliars and Gallies, as occasion should require: The next day, some Thousands of the nearest Inhabitants flockt into the Town, whom Mr. White employ'd in building a great Battery close to the River-side, and planting in it Fifteen great Guns, and making other preparations for defence. Having the assistance of such vast numbers of Men, Mr. White himself attending the work on the 24th, 25th, and 26th of June, in the Night time, that Battery was finished in Three Days and Nights. On the 26th, Captain Anthony Weltden arrived over the Barr, and what past from that time, until the 14th of July, the day of fatal Catastrophe, of so many of our Country∣men, will be best discovered by the distinct Narrative of his management of Affairs in that Expedition. To which I refer The Truth of this foregoing Relation, (agreeing with my own Original Abstract) I do attest this 21st day of February 1687, in Fort Saint George, and oblige my self to Assert, and maintain on all Occasions, by this Subscription of my Name, with my own Hand, Francis Davenport. FINIS.
