R932_variant [ocn]297426166 208158
REMARKS on the ACCOUNT given by the IRISH TRUSTEES in one of their Books called, An Abstract of their Rent-Roll, laid before the House of Commons this Session of Parliament, of the yearly Value of the Estate petitioned for by Lord Bophin and his Children. The Book is Number 2. The Value of the Estate Lord Gallway had in posses∣sion is under the Title of Estates Tail vested in Fee; and of the Estate Lord Bophin had in possession, under the Title of Estates forfeited for Life. BY that Account (wherein no Mistake that might lessen the Value is to be presumed) allowing for Jointures, Mortgages, and the Interest of other Incumbrances there mentioned; the clear present yearly Value of the whole Estate petition'd for, is but—2423 l. 00 s. 00 d. Since this Rent-Roll has been made, several Incumbrances on that Estate not there mentioned, have been allowed by the Trustees, amounting at least to Eight Thousand Pounds, the Interest whereof is to be deducted out of the a∣bove-mentioned clear yearly Rent: So that there remains now of clear yearly Rent but—1623 l. 00 s. 00 d. This, allowing the Trustees Account, is the present Value of that Forfeited Estate: And since this Honourable House, on the particular Circumstances of the Settlement on Lord Gallway, seems to be of opinion that his Estate is forfeited only during Lord Bophin's Life; all the Increase this present yearly Value can ever have, is the Remainder Lord Bophin has for Life on that part of the Estate, which is in Jointure to the Countess Dowager of Clanricard, and that is of little or no value to the Publick, for 'tis only a Forfeiture for Lord Bophin's Life, in case he happens to survive the said Countess Dowager, who is younger, healthier, and more likely to live than Lord Bophin. That part of the Estate of Clanricard, which the present Earl of that Name enjoys, cannot be reckoned on as of any Value to the Publick, for that Earl is no forfeiting Person, he has that part of the Estate to him and his Sons successively; and if he has Issue-Male, as in all appearance he may (for he had lately a Daughter born) his Estate will never become forfeited, and should it, 'tis only for Lord Bophin's Life, in case he happens to survive the said Earl. This is the utmost Value and Computation the severest Accomptant can make of that great For∣feiture so much talked of, and that only for Lord Bophin's Life; and with humble Submission it ought to be no Forfeiture at all, considering the Right Lord Bophin had to be restored by the Articles of Gallway. And it is humbly offered, that the extreme yearly Value of the said Estate, as mentioned in the Trustees said Rent-Roll, without regard to Jointures, Incumbrances, or to what they themselves have set it for, is very extraordinary; for William late Earl of Clanricard, who had the whole Estate in possession, and
did set it to the full, never made of the whole Eastate much above half what that part that is forfeited is now by that extreme Computation valued at, as may appear by his Rent-Rolls in the Years 1685, and 1686, ready to be pro∣duced. 'Tis therefore most humbly hoped, That the Honourable the House of Commons, who seem willing to relieve this unfor∣tunate Family, and have shewed Mercy and Compassion to o∣thers under the like unhappy Circumstances, will have that Regard and Compassion for Lord Bophin and his Children, as not to burden their Estate so far, but that they may have hopes of living sutable to their Quality, and of being hereafter serviceable to England; and this the rather, that the very Tie that is to be upon them of leasing the said Estate to none but Protestants, will reduce the Value there∣of to half what it might be set for were the best Bidders to be Te∣nants, it being very difficult to find Protestant Tenants where that Estate lies, the Yeomanry being all Roman Catholicks; and 'tis reasonably feared, if that Tie and Injunction be not qualified, that the most part of the Estate must lie waste, or be set for little or no∣thing; for the Protestants in that part of the Countrey have already Farms enough, and to be sure will take no new ones, if they have them not at their own Rates.
REMARKS ON THE Value of the Estate petitioned for by Lord Bopbin and his Children.
