10488 99845541 10446
A shorte Re∣capitulacion or abrigement of Erasmus Euchiridion, brefely com¦prehendinge the summe and con¦tentes therof. Uery Profita∣ble and necessary to be rede of all trew Christen men, Drawne out by M. Couerdale Anno. 1545 Timo. ii. Suffer afflitions, as goode and fe∣athfull sowdyars of Iesu Christ .ij. Iob .vii. Syeng the lyffe of man, ys but Abattell or werfare apon the erathe.
Ephes. vi. BE stronge in the lorde, ād in the power of his myght. And put on the armoure of God, that ye∣maye stande stedfaste, agaynste the crafty assautes of the deuyll. For ye muste not wrestelle against fleshe and bloude: But against rule, against po∣wer, and worldly rulers of the darke¦nes of this world, against spretual wic¦kednes, for heauenly thynges. ij. Cor. x Let not youre weapens pertayning to thys battaylle, be carnal thynges, but mychty in God, able to caste dow¦ne strōge holdes, and auer throwe the ymaginacion of mā, ād euery hieth yng that exalteth yt selfe against the know¦lege of God, And bryng in to captiui¦te, al vnderstanding to the obedience of Christo owre lorde and God.
The summe of the prologe. The preface, prologhe or longe epistle, writ¦ten to the right ver∣tuous ād sage father Paulus Uolzius (whom allmightie god euen now this last yeare hath dely¦uered out of this wretched world) de∣clareth euidētly, that though some mē haue euen maried them selues to the vayn pastymes and pleasures of the world. Yet god thorow aduersite (as his accustomate maner is) nurtureth god th¦row ad¦uersite calleth his ow∣ne chil∣dren to re pen∣taunce. and teacheth his owne, chasteneth thē, and calleth them to a Christē life: To the furthuraunce wherof like as euery¦one of us is bounde to bestowe all his laboure and studie. So is not he to be cast awaye, that beyng weake and frai¦le, not onely desyreth to be vertuous, but also is feruent in lerning the waye of godlines: Wherof they are the best teachers, that auoydinge the tediousnes¦se of huge and great volumes, do in∣structe men rather to lyue godly, then to waist their braynes in long and vay¦ne disputacions. For how few so euer they be that geue them selues to ole
doctrine, yet the feare of god (the fruit wherof is eternall saluacion) appertey¦neth vnto all mē. Nether doth anye mā atteyne so nyghe vnto wisdome, as he that is in loue withall, and appeareth not so much lerned himselfe, as he is Who is wysest and best lerned. studious to allure all other (yea aswell frend as soo, aswell turke as Christen) to godlynesse, and is not himselfe ouer¦come with euel, but rather ouercometh euel with good. For as it is a Christen mās parte to saue and not to destroye, so hath the same right true and effectu∣ous diuynite subdued more people in tymes past to the kyngdome of Christ, then any other artilery, weapen or or∣dināce of warre. Yea like as oure most cruell enemies maye be mollified and wonne with benefites and kyndnesse, whan we see nothyng so much as the it health. Euen so in sekynge their de∣struction, we maye sooner turne in to turkes oure selues, then that we shal cause them to become Christen men. Now to considre the corruption of The cor¦ruptnes¦se of the world, this world, and how farre it is out of frame, the darcknesse, the trublous ruf¦flinge, the greate tirannye, auarice and iniquite therof vnpunished: how colde
me are in charite, ād how greatly geuē to ambicion and lucre: Who lamentin¦ge the same, doth not se thousandes of occasions for us all to take better hol∣de of Christes doctryne, and to haue recourse ther vnto? Specially conside¦ring that the cruell Philistynes preuay¦le so greatly, and ceasse not (euen now in oure tyme) to stoppe it vp, wringing and wresting it to their filthie purpo∣ses: oure phi¦listynes yea brablinge and cryeng so sore agaynst it, that for feare mē darre not drynke the lyuinge water therof, but must be fayne to take such corrupte ly¦coure, as come out oft heir all to trodē cisternes: euen earthly thynges for hea¦uenly, pelfare of mens inuencious in¦steade of gods holy commaundmētes. Which trifles yet shal easely of them¦selues vanishe awaye, yf the light of faith be so kyndlind in oure myndes, that we lese not the rule and patron of Christes loue and charite. And doutles it shal further the gospell most notably prestes. yf they that teach it, do excell in the knowlege and life ther of: and yf Pryn¦ces establishinghe no lawes for their pryuers owne pleasure, delite more to refour∣me their people with mercie, thē with
crueltie, rather to defende them, then to pyll or pol them. As for Prynces, they shulde without doute vse lesse op¦pressinge of their people, lesse warryn∣ge one against another, and lesse shed∣dyng of blonde, yf bisshoppes and pre¦stes that be aboute them, were not rea∣dyer to flatre them, then they are since rely to instructe them in Christes doc∣tryne. Which as it manifestly rebu∣keth couetous pharises, ypocrites and proude riche folkes: So doth it openly teach us to do good, and to be meke ād gentle of mynde, euē to oure enemies. Now though Prynces make many lawes wherof Christ is not the authou¦re, yet as they are to be obeyed whan they commaunde that which isiust and right, so is it best to suffre them euen whan they be euell. As touching the The co¦men pe¦ople, comē people, though their estate be lo∣we, their vnder stonding ssrosse and we¦ake, ād they of dewile bound to obeye, yet for asmuch as they perteyne to the mistical body of Christ, they must be nourished, for borne ād cherished after a fatherly maner, vntil they were mo∣re strong in Christ. For euery one is not like perfite in te kyngdome of god.
Therfore he that is called to more ex∣cellentie of giftes, ought (after the ma∣ner of the highest elementes) to drawe other vnto him, and to helpe that his in¦feriours maye be trāsfourmed in to his nature: and not vnder the pretence and cloke of vertue to disagree from the ler¦nynge of Christ, who is the onely mar¦ke which euery man ought to shote at, and in no wyse to chaunge it, but to in∣force himselfe to come as nye it as he can. Which as it is the higheest perfec¦tion alowed of god, so cōsisteth it not in the maner or kynde of lyuinge, not in garmentes, meates or drynkes, but in the affecte and mynde. And like as there is no estate of ly∣uinge but there be some daungers wher into it maye fall, so ought no mā to be displeased, but rather to take it in right good worth, whan he is war∣ned therof. Nether is he a condemner of other men, that faithfully sheweth Noting is fre frō the cauilla∣tion of lewd persons them their dewtie. And yet can ther no¦thing be fre frō the cauillacion of lew∣de personnes: but what so ener is spo∣ken, yea euen to the praise of vertue agaynst vyce, that same is taken to the worst, and iudged of them to be of a
wrong and synistrall opynion. Yea of so corrupte and peruerse iudgmentes are some, that they counte it (euen in prestes) to be but a small vyre, which is most abhominable: and also esteme it to be an hye vertue, which hath but one¦ly the visure and appearaunce of godly¦nes thinkinge thē selues better for the ceremonies, rules ād trifles of mēs in¦uencion, and yet hauynge no conscien∣ce at all to slaundre other men. Nether nede men to feare, that the reprouing of such abuses doth ether subuerte re∣ligion or hyndre true obedience. For whō soeuer the holy goost enspyreth, is of his owne acorde without anye ma¦ner The ho¦ly goost is the an¦thour of obediēce of compulciō readye to obeye, yea euen those rulers that be sharpe and roughe. Who yet neuertheles shulde nomore abuse the obedience of their in¦feriours, then anye man shulde make his libertie a cloake or couer to his car¦nal liuinge. Which though some do, yet ought not other men therfore to be loc∣ked as Iewes in the bondage of cere∣monies. For the more a man is religi¦gious and geuē vnto true godlynesse, the lesse he yeldeth to the ceremonies, of mens inuencion. Wherin yf no man
were snared till he were of parfite ex∣perience, then like as the fewer shulde be disceaued. Euen so doutlesse (acor∣ding to the desyre of all them that be good) the religion of the gospell shulde be so pleasaunt vnto euery man, that they shulde be hartely wel contēt ther with without anye other. And reason it is, that all thinges geue place to the glorie of Christ, wher with Moses reioyced, that his owne honoure was defaced and mynished: like as also the religions of men shulde be, yf they that professe the gospell dyd lyue therafter. For as they whom we now call religious, are nothinhe li∣ke them of the oldtyme, but drouwned in ypocrisie and worldly busynesse, yea nothinge better then other tempo¦rall men, saue onely in appearaunce. Euen so shal the vowes of chastite, pouerte, and obedience be better hepte of him that obserueth the profession of holy baptyme, then they be of them. The rest is then, that seyng the con¦fidence in oure selues is most daunge∣rous, we nether disdayne them that be feble, ner foolishly stōde in oure owne conceate for no dyuersite of lyuinge
from other mē: But rather folowinge the counsaill of Christ, let us euen frō¦oure hertes confesse whan we haue do¦ne oure best, that we are but vnprofi∣table seruauntes. And to the intent that we maye be obedient vnto Christ himselfe, let vs be ready not onely to heare them that call vs vnto him, but also to tollerate and suffre the euell: Neuertheles in such forte, that yf they commaunde thinges wicked and contrary to the doctryne of Christ, we rather obeye god, then men.
The first Chapter. How we must watch and loke aboute vs allwaye, whyle we be in this life. WHo so will esca∣pe the daunger of syme, and prosper∣ously go forwarde in the waye of god∣lynes, must allway The ly¦fe of mā is but a war fayre. considre, that this life of man is a per¦petuall warsart, and must be circum∣specte, that the world with his delyci∣ous and flatring pleasures iugle not his mynde from watchinge, or make him to carelesse, as though he had alre¦ady conquered his enemies: Who, con¦sideringe they be so many, as namely the wicked and craftie deuels aboue us, the world afore and behinde us, yea on the right hande and on the lefte, as∣well Enemi¦es at hā¦de shakyng the wal of oure saules with the gonnes of aduersite, as prouo¦kyng us vnto euell with his vainepro¦misis: Not onely whyle the slipper ād craftie serpent layeth awaythe, euē by oure awne affections and sensualite to entyce and drawe oure myndes vnto
mortal and deedly pleasures, But also whyle we oure selues beare a boute with us the olde earthy Adā, oure ow¦ne most perilous enemie: Consideryn∣ge Isaye, we haue so many deedly ene∣mies, ought we not therfore still to be weaponed ād allwaye to watche: Why slepe we then so fast, geuynge oure sel¦ues to ydilnesse, to pleasure, to reuelyn¦ge, as though we shulde rather lyue in banckettyng, then in warfare against such enemies: Why will we rather ma¦ke truce with vyce and synne, thē with god, whit whom the wicked can haue no peace: namely they that not onely take parte with synne, but vnkyndly also ād wickedly breake their appoynt¦ment made with him: Haue we not in we haue promi¦sed in bapty¦me, to fight al¦waye vn¦der the stādart of christ holy baptyme professed and bounde oure selues to fight faitfully euer vn∣der the standart of Christ oure captai∣ne, to whom we owe more then we ha¦ue to paye: Do not the badges and sig¦nes of baptyme in us testifie, that we are sworne vnto him, neuer to forsake him, wherof the name of Christ also ought to put us in remēbraunce. Why are we then such rennagates, that we not onely take parte against him which
bestowed his owne life for us, but do it also in a filthie quarel, to opteyne no¦ue other rewarde then the very death of oure soules? Yf in these mad warres of men, the miserable souldyours do io¦perde their lyues are pricked and ste∣red vp vnto courage, thorow the gre∣atnesse of the pray, thorow the comfor¦te of the captayne, thorow the cruelnes¦se of the enemies, thorow shame of co∣wardnesse, or desyre of praise. How much more then shulde the hope of re∣warde kyndle us to haue lustie stomac¦kes: whan he that shal quyte oure pay∣ne yf we wynne the felde, beholdinge us, doth not onely comforte us in oure laboures and trauayles, whyle we are yet fightinge, but also geueth us such rewarde as excelleth all the sences ād wittes of man, euen blessed immortali¦te and heauē it self: The hope of which rewarde shulde by reason enflame the quycke courages of gentle stomackes, seynge he that hath promised, can ne∣ther dye ner disceaue. And consideringe he beholdeth us that seyth al thynges, lyke as very sha¦me of cowardnesse at the leest waye shulde moue us to be lustie in this bat∣tayll:
Euē so for asmuch as to be pray∣sed of him is very felicite, why ioperde we not oure lyues to haue this prayse: Seynge now we are so circumspecte in auoyding, the daungers ād death of the body, why perceaue we not the death of the soule whych is much more cru∣ell: Now euen as the body is out of tē¦pre whā it will kepe no meate, so whā the worde of god semeth bitter vnto Tokēs that the soule is sicke. s, yf oure mynde ryse against it, yf ou¦re memory kepe it not, yf we thynke not vpon it, net worke therafter: Yf ou¦re soule grudge, or be weake and faynt to worke the dedes of mercie, to suffre trouble or losse: Yf the eyes of oure mynde be waxen so dymme, that they se not the cleare light of the treuth: Yf oure inward eares heare not the voyce of god: Summa, yf we lacke al oure in¦warde feling and perceauyng of the knowlege of god. It is an euident tokē not onely that oure soule is acrased, but also deed, because god which is the life therof, is awaye For fe∣lyng is a token of life: and like as the body is not alyue yf he fele not the prickinge of a pynne. Euen so whan we are wounded in
oure soule and haue committed euell, yf it greue us not, then is not oure soule alyue, but deed: For the which cause also Christ called the Pharises paynted sepulcres, namely becau∣se they bare deed soules aboute with them Wherfore considering that the bodies of good men are the temple of the holy goost, and for asmuch as (acording to the gospell) the mouth speaketh out of the abundaunce of the hert, No doute we wolde speake the ly¦uely wordes of god and worke his de¦des, yf he oure lyfe were present within oure hertes. Thus though we fight in straunge and wonderfull ioperdies, with many violent and subtill aduersaries, yet ha¦ue we causes sufficient to be of good cō¦forte For though oure enemies be gre¦uous: Causes of con∣solatiō. yet haue we present helpe at hande. Though they be many a∣gaynst us, what matter is it whan god is on oure syde: Yf he staye us, who cā cast us downe: As for oure enemie, he is no new soldyour, but one that was ouercome many yeares agoo, ād ouer throwne by the might of Ies{us} christ: as he shal non also be subdued in us bi the
same power, yf we as lyuely membres remayne in Christ oure heade. For tough we be not strong in oure owne strength, yet in him we shall be able to do all thynges. Yf the ende and victory of oure warre depended of fortune, thē might we donte therof: but it is certay¦ne and sure, namely in the hādes of ou∣re protectoure, whose benignite neuer fayleth man. Wherfore yf whe beyn∣ge thanckfull vnto him that for oure how we maye wynne the fel∣de saluacion first oppressed the tyrannye of synne: Yf we be not carelesse ner neg¦ligent, but with all diligence do oure parte agayne, and be of good comfor∣te: Yf we I saye, fightinge on this ma∣ner do folowe his ensample, nether be¦aringe us to bolde vpon the grace of god, as they do that be carelesse: nether casting awaye the confidence of myn∣de, as do they that mistrust his mercie: Then thorow his strength we shall be sure in conclusion to wynne the felde. The .ij. Chapter, What weapens are to be vsed in the warre of a Christen man. LYke as nothing perteyneth mo∣re to the warre of a Christē mā, then to knowe with what wea∣pens
he must fight, and to haue the sa∣me alwaye readye at hande: Euen so (consideringe the aduersary is neuer ydle) we ought not to ceasse from war¦re, but yf we wil fight against the mul¦titude of vyces, we oughte alwaye to watche, to haue oure mynde armed, ād to take the weapēs of defence, but spe∣cially to prouide us of two, namely pra¦ier two we¦apens ād knowlege, which be the chefe ar∣moure of a Christen man. Perfite pra∣ier lifteth vp te mynde vnto god: know¦lege armeth the mynde with halsome preceptes and honest opynions. These two cleue so together, that the one can not lacke the other: For as the one ma∣keth intercession, so the other teacheth how we ought to praye, namely in the name of Iesu, and what we ought to de¦syre, euen that which is wholsome for oure soules health. Now though praier be more excellent, because she thalketh familiarly with almightie god, yet is knowlege no lesse necessary: Which as it ought not to be vnparfite, so ought not prayer to be faynt, slacke, or with¦out quycknesse. Nether cā we wel per∣fourme the great iourney that we ha∣ue to go, without the ayde and helpe of
these to weapēs. The vse of praier is, not to mōble & bable much, as they do The v∣se of prayer that are not rype in gods sprete. For fy¦ve wordes spokē in knowlege, are bet¦ter, then ten thousand babled with the mouth. Nether is it the noyse of our, lip¦pes, but the feruēt desyre of the myn¦de that god aloweth. Which feruent prayer with like studie or meditaciō of the holi scripture, is able as, wel to put abacke the greate violēce of our enemi¦es, as to make easie any greuous aduer¦site. Yf we with this heauēly Manna¦ād foode of god be refreshed in the fur¦theraunce, of oure iourney, it shal ma∣ke us bolde and strōge, to buckle with oure enemies. For the doctryne of god as it onely is pure and vndefyled (contrary to the nature of mens doc∣trynes) Euen so, to them that spiritual¦ly vnderstōding it, maye abyde the hea¦ryng therof, ther is nothing sweterner more pleesaunt, and therfore the more the doc¦tryne of God. worthy to be searched and wel pōdred. This is the ryuer of cōforte, the foun∣tayne of ease, the wel that refreshed the weerye, the water of Siloe, where the blind recouer their sight. To the studie wherof yf we applie oure sel∣ues
wholly: that is, yf we exercyse oure myndes continualli in the lawe of god, we shal be so armed, that we nede not to feare anye assaulte of oure enemies. Touchinge the heithan Poetes and Philosophers, yf we taist of them mea¦surably, so that we waxe not olde ner ye in them, they are not utterly to be disalowed. Yea what soeuer they teach welle, ought nomore to be despy¦sed, Liberall sciences are not to be dis¦pysed. then was the counsail of Iethro whom Moses folowed. As for such as wryte vnclenly, we ought either not to touch thē, or els not to loke to farre in thē. To be shorte, al maner of lerninge shulde be taisted in due season ād mea∣sure, with good iudgmēt and discretiō, vnder the correctiō of christes doctry∣ne: so that the wisdome of god be abo∣ue al other, oure best beloued, oure do∣ue, oure swete hert: Which maye not be touched, but with cleane and washē handes, namely with high purenesse of mynde and due reuerence: for so com∣minge with re¦uerence ought  vnto it, we shal se the pleasures, delicates and deynies of oure blessed spouse, the precyous Iewels of riche sa¦lomō, euen the secrete treasure of eter∣nal wisdome, Wherfore cōsideringe the
verite of god nether disceaueth ner is disceaued, we ought to geue more cre∣dēce ther vnto, thē to any thynge that we do bodely either se or heare. As consernyng the interpretours of the holy scripture, we ought not to cho¦se Exposi∣tours of scriptu∣re them that teach to brawle and contē¦de, but such as go far thest frō the let∣tre: whose godlynesse and holy lyfe is knowne, whose lernynge is more plen¦teous, ād whose exposiciō is most agre¦able vnto gods worde. Now as we ought to growe vnto parfitnesse and strenght in the knowlege therof, and not still to be children. Euen so yf we will haue it to be sauery vnto us, and to nourishe us, we must not reed with∣out vnderstunding (as clostres do) but breake the codde, and failt of the swet∣nesse within: specially cōsideringe that as it is the sprete and not the flesh that quyckeneth, so wil the father of heauē be whorshipped in the sprete, and not in the barcke of the lettre. Wherfore tough we shulde not despise the wea∣ke, yet ought we to make spede vnto more secrete misteries, and to stere vp our selues ther vnto by offten prayer, till it please god thorow his sonne Ie∣sus
Christ to open it, that yet is shutt, vnto us. Now tho oure purpose, yf we wan¦dryng thorow out al doctrynes, pyke and chose out the best, and by the exam¦ple of the bee, refuse the poyson, ād suc¦ke out onely the wholsome and swete Iuce, it shal arme oure myndes the bet¦ter to a vertuous conuersacion. But that deuyne harnesse which with no weapen can be persed, is fetched onely out of the armory of holy scripture, wher with oure Dauid Christ Iesus brake the forehead of oure aduersary. Wherfore if we list to go vnto the sto∣re house of gods scripture, we shal the¦re In the armou¦ry of gods word are the best we apens fynde the true armoure of this war¦re, valeaunt in god not onely to de∣stroye fortresses and counsails and eue¦ry highe thing that exalteth it selfe agaynst the doctryne of god, but also to resiste in the daye of aduersite, ād to quench al the whote and fyrie weapēs of oure cruell enemie. Such weapens or armoure of light (though we be the refuse ād aut caltes of the worlde) hath almightie god geuen us, to make us stowte and lustie in his warres. For in his armory fynde we the harnesse of
Iustice and verite, the buckler of saith, the helmet of health, and the sworde of of the sprete which is the worde of god: Wherwith yf we be diligently co¦uered and fenced, ther shal no tribulati¦on, straitnesse, hunger, nakednesse peril persecution, &c. Separate us frō the lo¦ue of god. Such armoure, Isaye, shall holy scripture mynistre abundauntly vnto us, yf we occupieng our tyme the rin, do use the same wisely. The .iij. Chapter, How that the first poynt of wis¦dome is, a mā to know him self. Of two maner of wisdomes, the true, and the apparent. YF we thus warre now, intendinge to opteyue the peace which Christ onely geueth, we must strongly fight agaynst oure owne vices, with whom, god oure onely peace and felici¦te, is at variaunce: Of the which felici¦te they are utterly voyde, yea very wretches, filthie and vnhappie, that ly¦enge still in the night of ignoraunce and foolishnesse, are destitute of his wisdome: yf we be wyse, we shalbe conquerours of the enemie. Wherfo∣re
like as worldly wisdome is foolish∣nes worldly wisdo¦me. before god, euen so yf we be wise in him, it oughte not to discorage us, whan the worlde iudgeth us to be foo∣les, to be disceaued, to dote, and to be mad bedlems, because we intende to de¦parte toward Christ. Is not this a mi∣serable blindnesse, sore to be mourned, whan in trifles and thynges of no val¦ue, yea vnto filthynesse and in euel one¦ly, mē are cleare witted: ād in thynges concernyng saluacion and in goodnesse not to haue much more vnderstonding thē brute beestes? O how good a thing is it to haue knowlege, to be willinge to lerne, and to be abedient vnto the trueth? Cōtrary wise a very euel thing is it to lacke knowlege: yea as he is good for nothing which hath no wisdo¦me. So is it a worse thing to disdayne to lerne: But to withstande and repug¦ne the trueth is worst of al, ād farthest To with∣stand the trueth is worst of al. frō grace: Namely, whā mē despise the wisdome of god, ād thinke scorne to be taught of it: For the which cause he himselfe shal utterly forsake thē, and re¦ioyse in their destruction. For to coun∣te it madnesse whan one lyueth godly, is a very beestli ād deuelishe wisdome,
after the which foloweth presumption, blindnesse of mynde, rage and tyrānye of affectious, and finally the whole hea¦pe of all vices and libertie to do what one lysteth, yea custome of synne, da∣syng of the wittes, bodely death, ād af¦terward death euerlastinge. Thus we se that the mother of extreme mischefe is worldy wisdome. But cōtrary wise of the wisdome of god come all good thinges, specially so bernesse, the fru¦tes of gods wisdo∣me. meaknesse, the secrete ioye of a cleare consciēce, which vanisheth not awaye, but groweth to eternall glad∣nesse and mirth. This wisdome must we requyre onely of god with feruent praier out of the vaynes of holy scriptu¦re. The chefe parte of it is to know ou¦re selues, which we shall do the better, yf we well cōsidre, what we be inward and within our skynnes. The .iiii. Chapter. Of the outward and inward man. Almightie god made man at the first of dyuerse partes, coupled with blessed cōcorde: But the ser¦pēt the enemie of peace, put them asun¦der agayne with vnhappie discorde, so wynge the poyson of discension betwe¦ne
them that were honestly agreed. In¦somuch that now nether the mynde cā rule the body without businesse, nether wil the body obeye without grundgin¦ge, For where as in man ther shulde be such an ordre, that like as in a prospe¦rous comynaltye, for auoydinge of de¦bate and strife, the wysest beare most rule, and the subiectes obey their offi∣cers: This origenal decree of nature and first example of honestie notwith∣stōding, the ordre in mā is so troubled, that the subiectes wil not obeye the Sensua¦lite wil not obe∣ye reasō prynce: Yea the corrupte affections and appetites of the flesche stryue to be mo¦re master thē reason it selfe. Which vn¦quiete affections who so ouercometh, the same lyueth ablessed life, mounting vp to celestiall thinges: and as a kyng endowed with wisdome, willing and purposinge to do nothing amysse, no∣thinge against the iudgment of reason, nothinge in ordinatly, nothing fro∣wardly, nothing corruptly. The .v. Chapter. Of the diuersite of affections. THe eternal lawe which god hath created in in the right reason of man, teacheth him to abhorre al
corrupte affections, and not to lyue af¦ter them, which thing euen the heithē philosophers do also cōfesse. Now as we are bound sureli to know what mo¦tiōs we be most enclined vnto, so ought we to understōd, that thorou right reasō (which is the power of gods holy spre¦te) the most violent of thē maye either be refrayned, or els turned in to vertue Trueth it is, that as some mā is more prone vnto vertue thē some, either bi re¦asō Some man is more prone to vertue then some of the influēce of the celestial bodi∣es, or els of oure progenitours, or els of the bringinge vp in youth, ar of the complexiō of the body: Euen so some vices folowe the countrees, some the cō¦plexiō of the body, some the age of mā, some be appropiated vnto kynde. And some tyme an euel disease of the mā is recōpēced with another certayne cōtra¦ry good gifte or propertie. As for the vices that are nighest vnto vertues, we must amēde thē, ād turne thē in to that vertue which they most nighe resēble. For let a man that is soone prouoked vnto anger, refrayne his mynde, ād he shalbe nothing faynt herted, but bolde yea and fre of speach without dissimu∣laciō, The nygarde, by the exercyse of
reason, shalbe thrifftie and a good hus∣band: The flatrer, shal thorow modera¦cion, be curteys and pleasaunt: The ob¦stinate maye be constant: Solemnesse maye be turned to grauite: One ful of foolishe ioyes maye be come a good cō¦panyon. But in any wise must we be∣ware, that we put not the name of ver¦tue to anye maner of vice, as to cal cru¦eltie, iustice: envie, zeale. The waye The waye to felicite. thē to felicite is first to know oure sel∣ues: Secōdly, to do al thinges after the iudgmēt of reasō, whose mouth must not be out of taist, but without corrupci¦on. Now as ther is no greather rewar∣de thē fēlicite: euen so that which vnto oure onely strēgth is hardest of al to do, is most easie yf we loke vnto god oure helper. Wherfore yf we groundi¦ng oure selues vpō a sure purpose of a perfite life, do feruētli set vpō it & go lu¦stely vnto it, no doute we shalbe able to bring it to pas: for to be willinge to be a christē mā is a greate parte of Chri¦stēdome. A good wil doth much And though the beginning of a thing be neuer so harde, yet the waye of vertue in proces doth waxe easie: shal beestes be more ready to be tamed, thē we in our mindes? Sal we for the healt
of our bodies be ruled by the counsail of a phisician beynge a man, and not master our awne affections at the com¦maundement of god him selfe, to haue a quyete conscience al oure whole life? Shal we do more so saue oure bodies from liknesse, then to delyuer both bo∣dy and soule from eternall death? The .vi. Chapter. Of the two partes of man, proued by holy scripture. AShame it is, that in this warre men be so rude and vnexercysed, that they know not the dyuersite betwene reason and affectiōs. For that the philosophers call reason, the same doth S. Paul sōtyme call the sprete, sō¦tyme what re¦ason is. the inward man, somtyme the la∣we of the mynde. That they call affec∣tion, calleth he somtyme the flesh, som¦tyme the body, somtyme the outward man, the law of the membres, and the body of death. And thus oure warre is peace, life and libertie of the soule: but death and bondage of the fleshe, with al his lustes. Now where as Pla¦to put two soules in one man, S. Paul in one mā maketh two men; so coupled togheter, that nether without other cā
be either inheauē or hel. And againe so separated, that the death of the one must be the life of the other. This is the olde debate betwene the two twyn¦nes Iacob ād Esau Iacob ād Esau, which or euer they come to light, wrastle together within their moters wombe. Betwene these two brethren is neuer ioyned parfite concorde. For Esau hateth Iacob, who hauing Esau euer suspected, darre not come within his daunger. With thing auoyde the ioun sail of the flesh shulde teach us to suspecte oure owne sensual fleshe, and alwaye to eschue the counsail therof. Yea mete is it and con¦uenient, that the woman be obediēt to the husbande, that Isaac be more set by then Ismael, that grace increace, and ti¦rannye of the flesh mynishe. For whan carnal affections ware olde, then sprin¦geth vp to blessed tranquilite of an in∣nocent mynde, and sure quietnesse of the sprete. Let not Ismael therfore the childe of the flesh disceaue us with his pastyme and pleasures, but let oure Isa∣ac alwaye suspecte him, and flee the oc¦casions Flee the accasiōs of synne of synne. For ful wilde is the flesh, so that the trouble therof is expe¦dient, to the exercyse of vertue, to the custodie of humilite, to nurtoure us, ād
to teach us whā we are tēpted, first to desire helpe of god: secōdly, that yf we be his, no tentacion can be daungerous vnto us: And finally against al vain glorie, agaynst so wilde and manyfol∣de affections, to be euer stil, wrast∣leng. For by such victory we shalbe su¦re of the blessinge of god: and opteyne grace to be at another tyme much  armed against oure enemie:  halt not on both sydes, but leene more to the sprete of god, then to oure awue carnall affections: Which yf we māfully subdue vnto the end, we shal be sure after these trublous stor∣mes to haue true quietnesse, euen to se the lorde, to taist and fele how swete ād pleasaunt he is, and to opteyne eternal consolacion in him. The .vij. Chapter. Of the thre partes of man. MAn, after the mynde of Origen is made of thre partes. The first parte is the flesh, whe¦rin The flesh, the malicious serpent thorou ori¦genal frespace, hath written the la∣we of synne, wherby we be prouoked vnto fylthynesse, and coupled vnto the
deuell, yf we be ouercome. The secōd parte is the sprete, wher in we represen¦te the symilitude of the nature of god, The sprete. who after the eternall law of his ow∣ne mynde, hath grauen therin the lawe of honestie, wherbye we be knett vnto god, and made one with him. The thirde parte is the soule, partaker of The soule the sensible wittes and naturall moci∣ons, wo yf she forsakyng the flesh  unto the sprete, becometh . But yf she foolowe the corrupte affec∣tions of the flesh, then ioyneth she herselfe vnto an harlot, and is made, one body with her, that beyng an euel, straunge, flatryng, foolishe and ba∣bling woman, breaketh her promes, and forsaketh the husband of her iouth. Wherfore yf we enclyne vnto the spre¦te, it maketh us not onely blessed, reli∣gious, obedient, kynde and mercifull. But also teacheth us to desire celesti∣all and necessary, pure, parfite and god¦ly thinges, to obeye God more then men: and though some affections be disguised with visers of vertue, yet not to be disceaued with them. Yf we enclyne to the flesh, it ma∣keth us beestes, despysers of God,
disobedient, vnkynde and cruel, yea ād causeth us to desire delicate, pleasaunt and filthie thinges. The rule of true The ru¦le of tru¦e godly∣nesse godlynesse therfore is to leene so nighe vnto the sprete, that for any good incli¦nacion or vertue we ascrybe nothinge to oure selues: that we do nothing for our awne pleasure or advauntage: that for obseruyng of outward thinges we iudge not oure selues better thē other men: that we regarde more our negh∣bours nacessite, and be readier to helpe them, then to kepe mês tradicions: that our loue be chaist and spiritual, ād that nothing be so deare vnto us as Christ himselfe. The .viii. Chapter. Certaine general rules of Christen lyuinge. Now to guyde and conueye us out of the blynde errours of this world, vnto the pure and cleare light of spiritual liuinge, we must of vertue and godlynesse make euen a crafft and occupation: the rules wherof yf we do folow, and manfully exercyse oure selnes therin, the holy goost shal bring oure purpose for ward. These preceptes shal do us
much good agaynst blindnesse, against the flesch, and against oure awne wea∣knesse, namely thre euel, that procea∣ding of origenal synne, remayne still in us, to nurtoure us, and for the incre¦ace of vertue. For where as blindnesse cancred with corrupte and euell brin∣ging vp, lewde company, froward af∣fectious, darknesse of vices and with custome of synne, dymmeth the iudg∣ment of reason: so that in the election of thinges we be disceaued, and in ste∣ad of the best, folowe the worst. The first poynt is therfore, that we haue Thre necessari poyntes knowlege to discerne what is to be re∣fused or clene obbolissed, and what is to be accepte. Secondly, where as the flesh draweth us to in ordinate af∣fectiō we must hate that wich we knou to be euel, & loue that which is honeste, wholsome ād good. Thirdly where as infirmite ouercometh us is either with tediousnesse or with tentacion, we must be of good corage: and so contynue in the thinges which we haue wel begon ne, that we faynt not: ād that after we haue set oure hand to the ploughe, we loke not bacward, til we haue optey∣ned the crowue promised.
The .ix. Chapter. Against the euel of ignoruance. The first rule. THe first rule must be, that we so iudge both of Christ and of his We must iud¦ge wel of scrip∣ture, not douting in the promi∣ses of god. holy scripture, that we be sure, how that it greatly perteyneth to oure health, and that though al the world be against it, yet nothing that we percea∣ue with oure natural senses, is or can be so true, as it that is red in the scrip∣ture, enspyred of god himselfe, brought forth by so many prophetes, approued with the bloude of so many martirs, with the consent of all good men so ma¦ny hundreth yeares, with the doctryne and life of Christ himself, with so ma∣ny miracles, &c. Which scripture is so agreable to the equite of nature, ād eue¦ry where so like it selfe, so rauiseth, mo¦ueth, and altred the myndes of them that take hede thervnto, yea ād telleth of so many, great, wonderful and true thinges, that yf we oft considre the sa∣me, it shal stere us vp vnto more fer∣uentnesse both of faith, praier and ver∣tue, beyng sure, that as the rewarde of vice and of these momentany pleasu¦res, is both vexaciō of mynde and eter¦nall
punishment. So vnto good men shalbe geuē and hundred folde ioye of a pure conscience, and finally ouerlas∣ting life. he .x. hapter. The seconde rule. AS the first rule is thā, not to dou¦te in the promises of god. So is With a good co∣rage must we entre in to the way¦e of sal∣uacion the seconde rule, that we entre in tho the waye of saluacion gladly, bold∣ly, and with a good corage: that we be alwaye ready for Christes sake to lese both lyfe and goodes: that we be not negligent, but feauent: that we suf∣fre not the affectiōs of our louers, the pleasures of this world, the care of ou¦re housholde, the chaine of wordly bu∣synesse, to hold us back from the kyng∣dome of heauen. For we must for sa¦ke Egypte, that we turne not agayne to the flesh portes therof: So haist out of Sodome, that we loke not back: So fiee out of Babylon and from the vy∣ces therof, that we do it spedely wit∣hout prolonginge of the tyme: that we trust no longer to our selues, but com¦mitte us wholli vnto the lorde, that we serue him altogether, and no other ma¦ster: that we halth not on both legges.
For the lorde is so gelous ouer oure soules, that he wil haue al that he hath redemed with his bloude, and can not suffre the fele shipe of the deuell, whō he ones ouercame by his deathe. So be there but two waies onely, the one of Two wayes onely saluation, the other of perdicion. The strayte waye is it that we must walke, wherin to, though few do entre, yet must we considre that we are as much bounde as other men, to leade a Chri∣sten lyfe, to take Christes crosse vpon us, and to folowe him. For yf it belōg vnto us to lyue with Christ, and to ry∣se agayne to eternall lyfe, then belon∣geth it also vnto us to dye with him, and to be crucified with him as tou∣ching the worlde, synne ād carnal desu¦res. Which as it is an hard thing and knowne wnto few, so is it the comen and general profession of al Christen men, sworne and promised in baptyme the most holy and religious vowe of all. And though there be neuer so few that perfitly folowe the head, yet must we al enforce oure selues to come ther¦to. For of al Christen men they are the best, that with stedfast hert and purpo∣se are stil mynded so to be.
The .xi. Chapter. The thirde rule. THe thirde rule is, that we utter¦ly despise and count for a thing we must despise what so euer lea¦deth frō the way¦e of Christ. of naught, watsoeuer wold fea¦er us from the waye of vertue and of Christ, Which as it is of al other lifes the most commodious. So euen at the first ceaseth it to be sharpe, and in pro∣ces is made easier, pleasaunt, and delec¦table, wherby we go with sure hope, and that without laboure, to eternal fe¦licite: where as these mad men of the world, with their owne extreme labou¦re, purchase eternal death: non though the waye of godlynesse were much mo¦re laborious thē the waye of the world yet the hope of rewarde and the cōfor∣te of god swageth the tedioussnesse therof, and of bitter maketh it swete. But in the waye of the world, one care ād sorou springeth of an other without any quietnesse. For notging is filthier or more laborious, thē, the bondage of nothing worse, thē to be ser¦uaunt vnto synne Egypte nothing more greuous then the captiuite of Babylō, nothing more intollerable thē the yoke of Pharao ād Nabugodonosor. But Christes ioke is pleasaunt, his burthē is light. Summa
there lacketh no pleasure, where a quy¦ete consciēce is: No misery, where an vnquiete consciēce crucifieth te mynde They that out of the vices of Babilon are conuerted vnto the lord, haue, expe¦riēce herof, and can tel us, that nothing is more greuous, thē vice: nothing mo∣re easie, more chereful, or more cōforta∣ble thē is vertue. Neuertheles though both the rewarde and laboures of ver¦tue and vice where like, yet were is bet¦ter to be vexed with Christ, then to swymme, in pleasure with the deuell: which is so filthie, cruell ād discentful a master, that euery man shulde flee out of his seruyce, wherin is nothing but greuous laboure in purchacyng, sorou ād thōght in lesyng, yea many thousād ioperdies, miserable care, perpetuall tourmēt, mischaunce labour spēt in vai¦ne, much grefe of hert ād mynde. But What they op¦yne that con¦uerte vnto god. who so endeuoureth himselfe with sure purpose to cōe frō the vicious world to a good cōuersaciō in Christ, opteyneth that he seketh, chaungeth trifles with thinges of more value, yea filuer for gold, flynt for precious stōe, findeth bet¦ter frēdes: for outward pleasures and riches of the body, euioyeth such as be  better purer & more certayne:
So that his losse shalbe tourned to ad∣vauntage, aduersite to solace, rebuke to praise, vexacion to comforte, bitter thinges to swete, euel to good. The .xij. Chapter The fourth rule. THe fourth rule is, that we ha∣ue none other marke ād ensam¦ple Christ o¦nely must be the mar¦ke and ensāple of our lyuing of lyuing, saue onely Christ who is nothing els saue charite, simpli¦cite, innocēcie, paciēce, clēuesse, & what soeuer he himselfe taught: To whō we directe oure iourney, yf we be so geuē oneli vnto vertue, that we loue & desire nothing but either Christ, or els for Christ: hating, abhorringe, flyeng & a∣noydinge nothing but onely sinne, or els for sinnes sake. And thus yf oure eye be pure, al oure bodi shalbe bright so that what soeuer honest or indifferēt thing we take in hande, it shal turne to oure welth. As for filthie thinges, ne∣ther advauntagener punishmēt shulde make us to cōmitte them. Meane thin∣ges verely and indifferēt ought no far¦ther to be desyred, then they are profi¦table to a christē liuing. As for an ensā∣ple. Conning or lerning must be loued for christes sake: so that whā we know
him and the secretes of his scripture, we loue him in such sorte, that openyng him vnto other, we both take frute of him our selues, and yf we haue know∣lege of other sciences, we vse them all to his honoure. For better it is to haue Loue is more ex¦cellent then knowle¦ge lesse knowlege & more loue, then much to know and not to loue. This euery thing, so farre forth as it helpeth most vnto vertue, ought chefely to be ap∣plied. But rather ought we to lack them then that they shulde holde us back from Christ: Unto whom we ought to haist so ferueutly, that we shulde haue no leysure to care for other thinges, whether they be geuen us or taken awaye from us: but euen to vse the worlde as yf we vsed it not. After this rule yf we examen al oure studies and actes, than like as hauyng a craft or occupacion we wil not laboure to de¦fraude oure neghbours, but to fynde oure housholdes and to wynne thē vn¦to Christ. Euen so whan we fast, praye or vse any such lyke, we shal not do it for any carnall purpose, but proceade on stil til we come vnto Christ, nether goyng out of the waye, ver doyng or suffring any thing, that shal not myni∣stre
vnto us some occasiō of godlinesse The .xiij. Chapter. The fifth rule. THe fifth rule is, that we counte it parfite godlynesse, alwaye to We must as∣cende from thinges visible, to thin∣ges in∣uisible applie our selues to ascēde frō thinges visible to thinges inuisible. Which yf we do not: then are we no true honourers of god, but playne su∣persticious. And yet beyng straungers in this visible world, what soeuer of∣freth it selfe to oure sensible powers, we considering it, ought to applie the same either to the world angelical, or els to maners, euen vnto god, and to the inuisible porciō of oure selues. And thus the thing that we perceaue bi our sensible wites, shalbe vnto us an occa¦sion of godlynesse: Yea by the light of this visible Sonne we shal lerne, that great is the pleasure of the inhabitaun¦tes of heauen, vpon whom the eternall light of god is euer shyninge. And like wise by the darck night, we shal thynke how horrible it is, a soule to be destitu¦te of the lihht of god: and that yf the be¦autie of the body be pleasaunt, the be∣autie of the soule is much more honest. For the lesse felyng we haue in thyn∣ges
transitory and of the body, ād the lesse we are moued thee with, the more the lesse delyte we ha∣ue in er¦thy thin¦ges, the more pleasu∣re haue we inhe¦auenly. swetnesse we fynde in thinges pertey∣ning to the sprete, ād the better are we aquainted with thinges eternal: to the loue wherof we ought to arrise from thinges tēporal, & in cōparisō of the o∣ther euen to despyse them, and more to fear the disease, poyson ād death of the soule, thē of the body: Yee the wrathe of god, more then any thonder or lichte¦nyng, The misterie therfore in al thin∣ges ought to loked vpō, aswel whā we considre the outward creatures & wor∣kes of god, as in the studie of his holy scripture: the sprete wherof & not the baren lettre must specially be searched out, & the allegories handled, not drea∣myngly allegories. or vnfrutefully, nether with subtyl disputacions) after the maner of oure diuynes, that are to much addicte to Aristotel) but wel fauouredly, after the eusāple of the olde doctours: for in asmuch as it is the sprete that geueth li¦fe & libertie: therfore in al maner lettres & in al oure actes we must haue respec¦te to the sprete & frutes therof & not to the flesh & his frutes: wishing rather to be priuely alowed in the sight of god,
thē opēly in the sight of man: rather to In spre¦te & ve∣rite wil god be worship¦ped. whorsipe god in sprete & verite, then o¦ther wise, rather to eate Christes flesh & drinke his bloude spiritualli, thē oneli with the mouth: rather to be quickened & to haue life in the sprete, thē hanging¦s. Ihons gospel or an Agnus dei aboute oure neckes, to reioyse in any carn all thing, where the sprese is not presēt: ra¦ther to be one sprete with the sprete of christ, to be one bodi with his, to be a quicke mēbre of his church thē without frute to saye or heare many masses: ra¦ther to haue a cleane & saueri minde, ād to studie to walke with christ in new li∣fe, thē to haue the bodi washed, touched with salt, anointed, or sprēcled with ho¦ly water: rather to ropresēt & folou the vertuous & blessed doctrine of sayntes, We must fo¦low christ in his sain¦tes. yea to counterfaite christ in thē, thē to reioyse in touching their relikes, to ho¦noure their bones, or to be buried in a gray freres cote rather to expresse the lyuely and very ymage of Christ set forth in his owne ductryne, ād liuinge, thē to crepe to te crusse, or ta haue at ho¦me a pece of the wod that it was ma¦de of: rather to ascēde to more parfitnes¦se of the sprete, to grou in parfite loue
and charite, and to offre a contrite and humble hert vnto god, then to haue cō¦fidence in carnal thinges, or supersticy¦ous ceremonies, tradicions and inuen¦tions of men: rather to do the thinge that the eyes of god requyre, thē to ple¦ase the eyes of men: rather to procure the quyetnesse, and innocencie of the mynde, and to seke the nourishmēt the rof by the true hearing, seynge and fe¦ling of the word of god in the soule, thē by the outward senses of the body: ra∣ther with inward medicynes to heale the hurtes of the foule, and by the win¦ges of loue to flie vp to the sprere, then crepyng on the ground with vncleane beestes, to be stil vnlerned in the miste∣ries of Christ, or to be destitute of the swete lycoure that commeth of him. The .xiiij. Chapter. The .vi. rule. THe sixte rule is, that varieng as much as is possible both from We must va¦ry from the co∣men pe∣ople, the dedes and opynions of the comen sorte of men, we fette the ensam¦ple of godlynesse at none, saue onely at Christ himself, the onely true patron and fourme of lyuinge, the onely true pathe and right hie waye. For loke as
are the opinions wher with oure myn¦des be instructed, such are also oure ma¦ners and conuersacion. And therfore Christen men in bringing vp their chil¦dren, shulde chefely care, that euen frō the cradle they be Christenly persua∣ded, ād not lerne to synge filthie or wā¦ton songes, to wayle or wrynge their handes for the losse of worldly goodes, to recōpence euel for euell. For towe is not readier to catche fyre, then man is disposed vnto vice: which chefely pro¦ceadeth of euel opinious, whan in stea¦de of a swete thing, we embrace it that is sower, and whan for it that might do us good, we folow our oune dama¦ge ād losse. Wherfore considering that the comen sorte of people and their ma¦ners now adaies be most corrupte, and seyng ther is no worse authour of ly∣uinge thē they be: for asmuch Isaie, as the flocke of good men is but smal, pea¦vice more regarded then vertue. No es¦tate, nothing shulde make us to go frō the trueth, no opynion, no name or parsone of mā shulde moue us to tread one yn∣the from Christes trueth, or from the lyfe of vertue: Wherof non adaies mē are more ashamed, then were the Nei∣then in tymes past: Yea to be a right
Christē mā, is accōpted euery where a very vyle thing: so vayne is the world and in so great reputacion haue thei it to be borne of noble bloud, to be riche, to haue their pleasures, to be strōg and valeaunt, to be praised of the world, to be accōpted worldly wyse: whā in veri¦dede the chefest nobilite of al is to be the child of god, the chefest riches is to true no¦bilite true ri¦ches. true ple¦asure true strength possesse him in whō are al thinges: the chefest pleasure of al is so to delite in Christ, that we be moued with the loue of none other lust: the chefest strength is, whā a mā hath so ouercome himself, that he cā finde in his hert to deipise al iniuries, to recōpēce good for euel, to praie for thē that curse him. The chefest praise of al is, for godlynes sake to be true praise mocked & laughed at of euel men, & to be approued of Christ: the chefest wis∣dome of al is, to be circumspecte in pro¦uidyng true wisdo∣me for the life to come. Summa, we must not cōforme our selues to this world, but so alter oure myndes, that we herken and approue, not what is the wil of mē, but what is the good, wel pleasinge, and parfite wil of god. For yf we moue not the eyes of oure hert from Christ, but folowe
his verite, we shal not go out of the wa¦ye. Yf we walke after his light, so that it shyne vnto us, we shal nether stum∣ble in darknesse, ner fal in to the blyn¦de errours, opinions or sectes of the world. The .xv. Chapter. Opynions mete for a Christē mā. we are not bor∣ne for our selues THis excellent lernyng then of Christ must be stablished in us, that we thinke us not to be bor¦ne vnto oure selues, but to the honour of god and welth of al men. So that louyng him agayne which bestowed himselfe on us all toghether for oure redemption, we also for his sake loue other men, and abhorre their vices: hauing not onely respecte to the¦ir nede, and what we are able to do for thē, but also remēbringe the manifolde causes that by reason shulde moue us to loue them, to tendre them, to be at o∣ne with thē, and not to accompte them as straungers, or to hate thē for any al¦teraciō of vesture or of any such trifle yea in no wise to despise them, but es∣temyng their hurt our awue, to consi∣dre, that what soeuer we haue receaued
it is geuen us to bestowe vpon thē, and to increace in edifieng of them in chari¦te. This lerninge wil induce men to de¦syre no vengeaunce, but to be the sōnes of their father in heauen, to ouercome euell with good, to suffre hurt rather then to do it: to forgeue other mēs offē¦ces: to be gentle in maners: Yf they be connynge, to for heare and amende the ignorance of the vnlerned: Yf they be riche, to be circumspecte in distributin∣ge the goodes that god hath geuen thē; In pouer te to be aswel contēt as other men: In office to be more carefull and diligent in consydering their charge: In notyng the maners of euel perso∣nes, yet not to despise the profession of vertue: In labouring for a comen office or in executing of the same, to do it al∣waye for the profit of the comen and not for their awne singular welth: be∣yng ready, euen with the losse of their awne life and gōodes, to defende that which is right: beyng lothe to haue pre¦eminence, Offices of Chri¦stē men. which yf it chaunce vnto thē yet to thinke that they also haue a lor∣de and master in heauen, euen Iesus Christ, and that no mā is bounde to fo∣low his doctrine more strately thē they
that he will of no man aske more strai∣te accomptes then of them, that they leine not to their awne willes, that they flater not thēselues in euell: that their maners besuch as deserue riches, honoure, reuerence, dignite, fauoure, and auctorite: that they them selues be not giltie in the offences which they do punishe in other: that they despise no man in comparison of thē selues: that in bearinge rule, they mynde not so much to excelle as to profite all men: that they turne not to their awne pro∣fit the thinges which are comen, but be¦stowe that they haue yea and themsel∣ues also vpon the comen welth: that in their titles of honoure they refarre all such thinges vnto god: that in myni∣string their office, they fetch not en∣sample of their predecessours, or of fla¦terers, but onely of Christ: that they be ready rather to lese their domyniōs then Christ, who hath a farre better thing to geue them. For nothing is so comly, so excellent, so gloryous, to kyn¦ges, prynces and rulers, as in symilitu¦de to drauwe nyghe vnto the highest, greatest and best kyng, euen Iesu: Na¦mely, in steade of violence to xeercyse
charite, and to be myuistre vnto all mē. Inconclusion, we must so cleue vnto the lerning of Christ, and be so circum¦specte ther in, that we cloke not oure We maye not clo∣ke our awne vyces with other mens falles. awne vices with other mens failes. For though holy men haue somtyme done any thing not to be folowed (as Dauid, whā he commutted aduoutrie and murther: Salomon, whan he had so many quenes and concubynes. Not, whan he was droncken: Loth, wan he laye with his awne daughters: Mary Magdalene, whan she syune so sore: Peter, whan he denyed the lorde: Paul, whan he persecuted the church of god.) Yet ought we to do nothing that varieth from Christ: but as we ha¦ue bene like other men in synne, so shul¦de we be companyons and parteners also with them that repent and turne vnto god. And as for other mens de∣des, we ought not churhshly so much to barch agaynst them, nether with cru¦elnesse to feare them, as with softnesse and ayre meanes to amend them and allure them vnto Christ. The .xvi. Chapter. The .vij. rule.
THe seuenth rule is, that studiēg We  still be clym∣mynge vp vnto godly∣nesse. diligently to draw on still as ni¦ghe as we can to the beholding of heauēly thinges, we turne oure myn¦des so feruently ther vnto, that the ve¦ry loue of Christ cause us to hate all transitorp and filthie thinges: which shal waxe the more vyle vnto us, the more we set by thinges inuisible. Ther¦fore ought we so to prece vnto the best, that though we be not so parfite in all thinges as we shulde, oure mynde yet be not defyled with greuous offences, but more receaue able of the benefits of god. And though we can not do so well as holy and blessed men haue do∣ne before us, yet let us committe no worse thinges then the heithen: Who though they had no parfite knowlege of god, yet was honestie dearer vnto them, then either fame, goodes, life, or any thing els in the world. And dout∣lesse it shal notably withdraw us from synne, yf we pondre well in our myn∣des we must pondre the com¦moditi∣es of synne. the incommodities ther of, as in∣famye, pouertie, losse of goodes, way∣sting of tyme, the hate of good men, grefe of mynde, miserable vnquietnes¦se of conscience, with thousandes mo
such like inconueniences. Wherfore bet¦ter it is that oure youth beleue this to be the propertie of synne, thē with wo∣full experience to lerne it in them sel∣ues. And though we can not atteyne to the most excellent vertue, yet shal it profit much, yf we beyng but in cyuile or morall vertues, ronne not headlon∣ge in to all kynde of vyces. Notwith∣stonding for asmuch as that is not the resting place and quyet hauen of felici¦te, but a shorter iourney ther vnto, we must pray still vnto god, that he will vouchsafe to plucke us vp to better thinges. The .xviij. Chapter. The .viij. rule. THe eight rule, that whan the storme of tentacion ryseth a∣gaynst We ma¦ye not despayr in god. us, we be not discōtent with oure selues, as though god cared not for us or fauoured us not: but ra∣ther geue him thankes, because he in∣structeth us as his owne heyres, cha∣steneth Tentaci¦on is a signe that god loueth us as his owne most singularly beloued childrē, and proueth us as his owne assured frendes: which is a token that he loueth us, as he dyd the Apost∣le Paul, blessed Iob, & other holy sain∣tes:
Who beyng both great and many haue suffred troubles aswel as we: why shulde we then be discoraged or fal in dispaire, and not rather do oure best to ouercome as they dyd: considering we haue a faitful god, that wil not forsake us, nor suffre us to be tēpted aboue our strength, but make us able to endure. The .xviij. Chapter The .ix. rule THe nyyēth rule is, that our min¦de We must e∣uer ke¦pe wat∣che. be alway watching and cir∣cumspecte against the soden as∣saulte of our enemie: that his tentaciō, suggestion and first mocion vnto syn∣ne, maye be holden downe at the begin¦nyng, whyle it is freshe, and he put bac¦ke to his cōfusiō. For more easeli or mo¦re surely is he neuer ouercome, then bi that meanes. The .xix. Chapter The .x. rule. THe teuth rule is, that what so e¦uer remedi∣es a∣gainst tētacion the enemie tēpteth us, we straight waye either hate, ab∣horre, and defye him, or els pray feruēt¦ly, or get us to some holy occupaciō, set¦tinge oure whole myndes ther vpō: or
els to answere the tempter with wor∣des of holy scripture: Wherof to haue some certayne sentences ready against those inconueniences that we are most enclyned vnto, is very profitable in all tentacions. The .xx. Chapter. The .xi. rule. The .xi. rule is, that in tentacion we nether geue op oure holde, we must nether be faynt harted nerts presum∣ptuous. nether whan we are conforted, waxe wanton, or stond in oure oune cō¦eeates: but whā our enemie stereth us vnto filthie thinges, to beholde, not our awne feblenesse, but to remembre that we maye do al thinges in christ, wo bid¦deth us be of good chere, for he hath o∣uercome the worlde. Againe, whā we haue ouercome oure enemie, or done so me good worke, we must beware that we ascribe nothing therof to oure aw∣ne merites, but thanke onely the fre be¦neuolence of god, of whom we receaue all thinges. Thus against this double mischefe we shal finde double remedis yf we not onely in tentaciō dispeiring in our oune strenght & trusting in the beneuolence of christ, do flee for socou¦re vnto him: but also in our spiritual cō
solacon humbli cōfessing our awne vn worthynesse, immediatly geue him thā¦kes for his benefites. The .xxi. Chapter. The .xij. rule. THe twelfte rule is, that whā we of tētaci¦on must we al waye ta¦ke occa∣sion of vertue. haue auoided the stroke of our enemie, we take his weapō frō him, and smite him with his awne swer¦de: so that whan we are prouoked vnto euel, we do not oneli absteyne from sin¦ne, but therof also take an accasion of vertue, grow stōger in courage, know oure awne weaknesse the better, incre¦ace the more in good dedes, and hum∣ble oure selues the more in al thinges. And thus shal tentacions be euer the renewinge of oure holy purpose, and increace of godlynesse and vertuous lyuinge, thus shal we not onely van∣quisse oure enemie, but yf he begynne with us againe afresh, he himself shall ministre vnto us ā occasiō of godlinesse The .xxij. Chaptrr. The .xiij. rule. THe thirtenth rule is, that in the conflicte and battayl we
be bolde, and behaue oure selues so mā¦fully, We must be bolde, ād after o¦ne tētaci¦on euer loke for another as though we shulde neuer figh¦te more. Neuer theles whan we haue o∣uercome, we must alwaye after one tē∣tacion loke for another, neuer depar∣ting frō our harnes, but alwaye watch and kepe oure standing, aslong as we are in this body. The .xxiij. Chapter. The .xiiij. rule. THe fourtenth rule is, that we fauoure not oure selues in a∣ny In to smallest faultes of al must we not fa∣uoure oure sel∣ues. one vyce, be it neuer so smal. For yf we with Christē hatred ab¦horre one, we must nedes abhorre al. Yea yf true charite haue ones possessed oure hertes, we shal indifferently hate the whole hoost of euel thinges, ād not flater oure selues so much as in the leest. For though we cā not as yet pluc¦ke vp the whole generacion of vyces, neuer theles we must alwaye daye by daye withdrawe somwhat of our euell condicions and euer be addyng som∣wath to good maners. The .xxiiij. Chapter. The xv. rule. THe fiftenth rule is, that in the
conflicte of tentacion we compare not The bit¦ternesse of the fight must we com¦pare to the pay∣ne that folowet¦the syn∣ne. onely the bitternesse of the fight with the payne which folowed the synne, but also the present swetnesse of the sin¦ne that entyceth us, with the pleasure of the victory herafter, and with the tranquylite of mynde that foloweth the same. For as yf we be ouercome, ther foloweth us a more paynful and longer grefe, then we shulde haue had in tyme of fight, yf we had wonne the victory: Euen so yf we be cōquerours ther foloweth us a more greate and lō¦ger pleasure, then was it that caried us in to sinne which was ouercome. Which thing he shal lightly iudge, that hath had experience of both. Wherfo∣re Let us proue what it is, to o¦uercome yf we proue somtyme, what it is to ouercome, the oftner we do it, the mo∣re pleasaunt shal the victory be vnto us The .xxv. Chapter The .xvi. rule. THe sixtenth rule is, to haue ou¦re mindes so armed afore hād, we may¦e not de¦spaire though we lye vnder. that though we be fallen in to synne, and ouercome, we yet despayre not, but thake therby occasion of grea∣ter courage, to wrastle more strongly, to
come againe quickly to oure selues, o take a good hert vnto us, to repaire a∣gaine the rebuke and shame of the fal, with new courage and lustinesse of ver¦tue, after the ensample of Dauid, Sa∣lomon, Peeter, Paul, etc. whom god, no doubte, suffred to fal, leest we after we are fallen, shulde despaire. Wher∣fore yf we ryse vp quicly with a lusty courage, and go to it afreshe both fear¦ser and more circumspecte, oure deedly offences shal grow in us to an heape of godlinesse, while we loue more feruent¦ly, that erred afore most shamefully. The .xxvi. Chapter The .xxvij. rule. THe seuententh rule is, that a∣gainst al maner weapons and We must exercy∣se our selues in the crosse of Christ. dartes of our most wicked ene∣mie, we cast the crosse of Christ, and ex¦ercyse oure selues diligentli therin: not after the comen maner slenderly repe¦ting the storie of his passion, or honou∣ring the ymage of the crosse, or with a thousand signes of it armynge al our bodie rounde on euery syde, or layeng vp at home some pece of that holy  or wepinge for sorou that christ suffred
so great wrong: but as lyuely mēbres of oure head, to mortifie oure awne af∣fections, and so recording the mistery of the crosse, that yf we be ticled with ambition, ashamed to be set at naught in this world, tempted with envie, with glotony, with filthie pleasure, with co∣uetousnesse, we considre to what vyle∣nesse Christ oure head humbled himself how kynde, lonyng and good he is euē to the worst: how he drancke eysel and gal: how ful of vexacion and grefe all his whole life was: how poore he beca¦me for oure sakes. Thus in al tentaci∣ons shal it not be grauous, but plea∣saunt and delectable vnto us, to haue oppressed our awne affetions. The .xxvij. Chapter The .xxviij. rule THe eightenth rule is, that whā any affection moueth us to ini∣quite, We must considre the fil¦thinesse of sinne & the dignite of man. we considre the filthinesse of synne, ād the greate dignite of mā. For seyng that in other trifles we ta∣ke advisement with oure selues, re¦ason it were, that or euer we co∣sent vnto the feynde, we pondred well this most waightie matter,
who made us, in how excllent a state we are set, with how exceading great pryce we are bought, to how greate fe∣licite we are called, how that for mans sake onely, god hath forged the mar∣uaylous buyldinge of this worlde, brought us in to the company of ange∣les, made us his owne children, heyres of immortalite, membres of Christ and of his church, oure bodies the temple of the holy goost, oure myndes the yma∣ges and habitaciō of god: On the other syde to considre, that synne is the most filthie pestilence and consumpcion both of the mynde and body: euē that deedly poyson of the most filthie serpent, and the prest wages of the deuels most mi∣serable seruyce. Thus yf we take good advisemēt, we shal se, yt were not wise¦ly done, for a momentany and poyso∣ned litle shorte pleasure of synue, to fal frō so greate dignite in to so vile estate. The .xxviii. Chapter. The .xix. rule. THe nyententh rulle is, that we we must still ha∣ue in mynde the god¦nesse of god, ād the ma∣lyce of the de∣uell. still haue in mynde the eternall benificence of god, and the wic∣ked noysomnesse of the deuell: namely, with what goodnesse allmightie god
hath made us, with what mercy rede∣med us, with what liberte endewed us, with what tēdernesse he daylie suffreth and susteyneth us wretched synners, paciently lokyng for oure amendment: with what ioye he receaueth us whan we turne agayne: Cōtrarely with how naturall hate ād envie the deuell father of all mischefe, dyd longe agoo laye wayte to oure health, in to what gre∣uous tentacion he hath cast us, ymage∣ninge daylie to draw us in to eternall mischefe. Thus beyng myndfull of all mightie god and his manifolde benefi∣tes, we shal not vnkyndly departe from so noble, so louyng, and so beneficiall a father, to make our selues wilfully bon¦de vnto the deuell, that most filthie and cruell master. The .xxix. Chapter. The .xx. rule. THe twentiet rule is, that we for¦get not but allwaye remembre The dy¦uersite of re∣wardes what great difference is bet∣wene the rewarde of vertue, and the re¦waerde of synne. Yea euen in this worl¦de are the frutes of thē vnlike. For like as the ende of faith is eternall saluaciō in heauē and the rewarde of synne euer
lastinge death in hell. Euen so here in this life, godlynesse, bringeth tranquili∣te ād quietnesse of mynde, euē a blessed ioye of pure & cleane conscience, athing more precious and pleasaunt then all the world: And contrary wise a perpe∣tuall grefe, vnquietnesse ād gn a winge of the mynde (with a thousand other euels) accompanieth synne and wicked∣nesse, euen in this life. The .xxx. Chapter. The .xxi. rule. THe one and twentieth rule is We must be holde the mise¦ry of this pre¦sent life that we cōsidre, how full of gre, fe and misery, how shorte, and transitory this present life is: how on euery syde death lyeth in wayt agaynst us, and sodenly catcheth us: how vnsu∣er we are of one moment of life: how great perill it is to contynuethat kynde of life, wher in yf soden death shulde ta¦ke us (as it often fortuneth) we were but lost for ouer. The .xxxi. Chapter. The .xxij. rule. THe two and twentieth rule is March what extreme mische∣fe folo∣weth, whan men wil not repent. that we fearing the extreme mi¦schefe of impeuitencie, pondre
well, how few of them which haue pro¦longed their lyues in iniquite, be truly conuerted vnto synne, and with due re∣pentaunce reconcyled vnto god agai¦ne. Therfore is it mete, that we beyn∣ge monished, do remembre, how easie it is to fail in to synne, but harde to tur¦ne back agayne. The .xxxij. Chapter. Remedies agaynst certayne vices, & first agaynst bodely lust. TO resiste the lust of the bodi, yf we wil be wel weapened, we the incō¦moditi∣es, of bo¦beli lust must considre the incōmodities therof: namely▪ how filthie & beestly it maketh us, how moment any and bitter it is, hou it pulleth us frō our good na¦me and fame, consumeth oure goodes, kylleth the strength and beautie of the body, decayeth and hurteth health, cau∣seth innumerable and filthie diseases, disfigureth youth, hasteth age, dulleth the witte and sight of the mynde, with∣dra et us from al honest studies, taketh awaye the vse of reason. Likewyse by the hurt that we haue sene other haue thorow their voluptuous ple∣asures, shulde we lerne to auoyde
the fame. And aswel by the ensamples of them that are vertuous, as by the greate commodities of chastite, to be pure and cleane bōth in body and myn¦de: Considering to how mani vayne of fices they be subiecte, that put their hea¦des vnder the girdle of filthie lust: hou it is alwaye coupled with those sinnes that be greatest and most in nombre, hou this life vanisheth awaye faster thē smoke, hou many that folowe such thinges are, taken awaye by soden de∣ath, how sharpe the extreme iudgment of god is, how the ioye of a pure myn∣de is much sweter then the pleasure of synne, how greate benefites the lorde hath heaped vpon us, and al to ma∣ke us refrayne from deedlie ād mortall pleasures, how he alwaye beholdeth us what soeuer we do or thinke, how greatli, abstinacy and frowardnesse of mynde springeth of bodely lust, what greate sorow foloweth therafter: how that the more we are consecrated vnto god, yea the more lerned we be, and the more we haue receaued of his ghiftes. The more vnmete, and the more shame is it for us so to abuse our selues, what estate or kind soeuer we be of.
The .xxxiiij. Chapter A shorte recapitulacion of reme∣dies agaynst the flame of lust JN cōclusiō, yf we bilde sure frō We must a∣uoide o∣sious. the enticynges of the fleshe, we must be circumspecte, auoyding al occasions, moderate in eatynge driue kinge and slepinge, absteyne from plea¦sures, regarde once owre death, behol∣de the deathe of christ, lyue with such as be vncorrupted, eschue the commu∣nicacion of wanton persones, flee ydle solytarynesse and sluggishe ydlenesse, exercyse oure selues in the meditacion of celestial thinges, and honest studies specially of holy scripture, gevyng our selues oft ād purely vnto prayer, most of al whan we be tempted. The .xxxiiij. Chapter TO resiste the vyce of couetou∣snesse, we must cal to remêbrau¦ce the dignite of the estate of man, to the vse wherof almightie god hath created al thinges. And though we possesse riches, yet must we despise them: Yea so farre must we be from al¦carefulnesse of oure liuinge, that we clo¦ke not our conuetousnesse wich the na∣me
of necessite: but first seke the kyng∣dome of heauē, & be sure, that he which maketh prouisiō for the lilies of the fel¦de ād byrdes of the aire, wil not suffre us to lacke: & as we must abhorre wil∣ful begging, euē so possessing money, we must set no store therbye, ner loue it, but be faithful dispensers of it, & of al that god hath cōmitted vnto us: yea though we lese them, yet not to be sory¦e therfore. For they are but aburthen: and though they be accompted among good profitable thinges, yet are they of the lowest sorte, & helpe not vnto ver¦tue, wherof the rewarde is true ho∣nour & not riches: wer with yf any frēd¦shippe, honour or pleasure be gottē, it is but false & fayned. Somwhat therfo¦re shal it moue us the lesse to desyre thē the incō¦moditi∣es of ri∣ches, yf we cōsidre the greate incōmodities of thē: namely, with hou sore laboure & ioperdie they are gotten, with hou gre¦ate thought & care they are kepte, with hou greate sorow ther are lost, hou thei are euen but sharpe thornes, hou harde it is for the riche to entre in to heauē, hou that riches be comēli either vniust¦ly gottē or els vniustly kepte, and how that auarice is playne ydolatrie before
god, whom no man can please, that set∣teth his hert vpon Mammon. The .xxxv. Chapter. A shorte recapitulation of remedies gainst the vyce of auaryce. JN conclusiō, if we wil resiste the vice of auarice, then as we must discerne true thinges frō appa∣raunt, true cōmodities frō false, so must we with oure inwarde eyes be∣holde almightie god, who onely satisfi∣eth the mynde of mā. We must remem¦bre, not onely that we came naked out naked we ca∣me & na¦kd shal we go of oure mothers wōve, and shal naked got hither againe, but also that this pre¦sent life with al his riches is vncertay∣ne: & therfore shuld we turne oure min¦des frō the corrupte maners of the co∣mē sorte, & rather content oure selues with pouertie: considering the fearful woo that christ threatheneth the riche men of this world. The .xxxvi. Chapter Against ambicion, or desyre of honour honour sprin∣ghet of vertue onely.YF ambicion vexe oure myndes, we must be surely persuaded, that one¦ly to be honoure, which springeth of vertue, yea that to be the chefe and oneli honoure, which is praised of god:
and againe, that to be no honoure but rebuke, which is geuen of an vngodly persone for an vngodly persone for an nothing better, then a quyete meane life vnhonest thing. For the more honoure we discerue, the lesse we desyre it, be∣ynge content with the consciēce of well doynge. As for the honours that the co¦men people desyre so greatly, they be but vayne, because that as they geuen of them that put no difference betwene honestie and dishonestie, so are they ge¦uen oft for meane and filthie thinges, and that to the vnworty. Now yf any honoure be geuen vnto us, we ought to referre it al vnto god. Therfore like as nothinge is more ful of prickes, ca∣res, perils and sorowes then the life of greate men, so is nothing better then a quyete meane life. For seyng al ho∣nour is coupled with greate charge, be¦ter it is for us humbling oure selues, to be partakers of mercie, then by ambici¦on to be excluded from the secoure of grace. Wherfore yf the ensample of Christ sticke fast in oure myndes, we shal lerne the better to despise al world¦ly honoure, and to reioyse onely in the crosse of christ. For yf we be dispised of god, and abhorred of his angels, what
good shal wordly honours do vnto us? The .xxxvij. Chaptrr. Agaynst pryde, or swelling of the mynde. UUe shal not swell in our myn∣des, yf we know ourselues, ād we must know oure sel¦ues. accompt what good thinge so euer we haue, to be the gifte of god ād not of us, ascrybing all euel onely vn∣to oure selues. We must remēbre, how filthie we were conceaued and borne, how naked, nedy, wretched and misira∣ble we crepte in to this lighte: how ma¦ny diseases, chaunces, combraunce, gre¦fes and troubles this wretched body is in daunger vnto. For a surer profe of incurable foolishnesse and lack of vnder¦stonding is not, then yf we stand great¦ly in our awne conceate. Wherfore yf for honour, beauty, cōnyng or any such thing, we be moued vnto pryde, the best is to humble oure selues before god, and to considre oure awne deformities, In conclusion it shal chefely refrayne us from pride, yf we pondre well, not we must considre our awne deformi¦ties, onely what we are in oure selues, how filthie in oure birth, and as a buble of water in all oure life, yea euen wormes marte whā we dye, but also what Christ
became for us. The .xxxviii. Chapter. Agaynst wrath and desyre of ren∣geaunce. UUhan grefe of the mynde mo∣uet Wrath is a chil¦dish thinge. us to be auenged, we must remembre, that wrathe is no manlynesse, but a very childishe, feble and vile thing is it to desyre vengeaun¦re. As for another mans foly, we must litle regarde it, yea and beware, lest in auenginge his lewdnesse, we become lewder ourselues: for by reuenginge is no iniurye eased, but augmented: And the longer it endureth, the more incura¦ble it is: But softnesse healeth it, and of an enemie maketh a frende. For no mā can be hurt of us, excepte we will, or excepte we folowe the grefe of oure awne myndes: Yea we will not sticke to forgeue him, yf we thinke not scorne to considre the infirmities that moued him to offende us, or yf we will do any thing for loue and aucturite of the per∣sone, or compare that his offence with As we forgeue so shal we be forgeuē his former benefites, or considre how sore and oft we oure selues trespae agaynst god, who shal euen asmuch for geue us, as we remytie vnto oure bre∣thren:
Which thing yf we do, it is a rea¦dyer waye to opty remission of our synnes, then for obsolucion to rene to Rome, to sayle o. S, Iames, or to bye most large pardons. Wherfore by the ensample of Christ that suffred so much for us beynge his menies, we shulde swage oure awne myndes, and pardon other men, yea euē the vnworthy. And though we be angrie and greued with another mans vyce, yet shulde we loue the parson, and not harden our myndes agaynst him, but agaynst wrathe: beyn¦ge so temperate in oure selues that we suffre not oure awne affections to rule us, but ouercome euell with goodnesse, malice with kyndnesse: which is euen to folowe the parsite loue of Christ Iesu. For as it is the propertie of a wise man to suppresse all displeasure, euen so to folow the appetite of wrathe, is not the poynt of a man, but playnlie of bee¦stes, and that of wilde beestes: which thing we shal, euidently perceaue, yf we beholde oure awne countenaunce in a glasse, whan we be angrie. In conclsion, to what euell so euer we perceaue oure selues to be speically uclyued or stered, whether it bethrugh
vyce of nature, custome, rtuell bringin¦ge vp: Agaynst the assaulte of such ene¦mies, as agaynst the vyce of bachyting filthie speakynge, enuye, glotony, and other like, ther must be certayne rules written in the table of oure mynde, which for forgettinge must now and then be renewed. And we as Christes souloyours must haue oure mynde ar∣med Oure myndes must be armed with prayer with ho¦ly scrip∣ture, ād with ex∣amples of holy men. long afore hande with praier, with noble sayenges of wise men, with the doctryne of holy scripture, with ensam¦ple of deuoute and holy men, and speci¦ally of Christ. And in what personnes so euer we find or perceaue the ymage of Christ, with them to couple oure∣selues, withdrawing us from the company of other, ād making our speciall and familiar aquayntaunce with holy S. Paul and his doc∣tryne. ¶ Imprinted at Ausborch by Adam Anonimus In the moneth of May. Anno. 1545.
