11496 99838541 2923
THE MIRROVR OF MAIESTIE: OR, THE BADGES OF HONOVR CONCEITEDLY EMBLAZONED: WITH EMBLEMES ANNEXED, POETICALLY VNFOLDED. —Nec his Plebecula gaudet. LONDON, Printed by William Iones, dwelling in Red-crosse-streete. 1619.
TO THOSE NOBLE Personages rancked in the CATALOGVE. MY feebler Muse farre too too weake to sing, Ha's got your Honours on her flaggring wing, And borne them to the loftiest pitch she may: Therefore (submissiue) she do's humbly pray, That when her tongue reeles, or Inuention haults, Your Fauours will giue crutches to her faults. Your LORDSHIPS in all dutifull obseruancie, H. G.
❧ A CATALOGVE OF THOSE NAMES VNTO WHOM this worke is appropriated. THE Kings Maiestie. The Queene. The Prince. The Lord Arch-Bishop of Canterburie. The Lord Chancellor. The Lord Treasurer. The Lord Priuie Seale. The Lord Admirall. The Duke of Lenox. The Marquesse of Buckinghame. The Lord Chamberlaine. The Earle of Arundell. The Earle of South-hampton. The Earle of Hertford. The Earle of Essex The Earle of Dorset. The Earle of Mountgomerie. The Viscount Lisle. The Viscount Wallingford. The Bishop of London. The Bishop of Winchester. The Bishop of Ely. The Lord Zouch. The Lord Windsor. The Lord Wentworth. The Lord Darcie. The Lord Wootton. The Lord Stanhope. The Lord Carew. The Lord Hay. The Lord Chiefe Iustice of the Kings-Bench. The Lord Chiefe Iustice of the Common-Pleas. The Lord Chiefe Baron of the Excheaquer. FINIS.
TO THE KING. I R QVI MAL Y PENSE HONI SOIT THose (mighty Soueraigne) are your Graces text, Right King of Heralds, not to any, next: You might their mysticke learning blazon best, But you reserue your knowledge vnexprest: As being most peculiar to you: And yet because the people may allow That which concernes your selfe: Let me to them Vnlocke the value of this prizelesse Iem: The Lyons trebled thus, may represent Your equall fitnes for the Regiment Of this faire Monarchie: Brittaine then Which euer ha's bin stuft with valiant men, May fittest beare a Lyon, vrg'd to spoile: Your Irish Kernes, who neuer vs'd to toyle, Are in their silver-studded Harpe explain'd. These Splendent Beauties limm'd by Natures hand, By grace of Ancient Kings, made Royall flow'rs, But now thrice Royall made, by being Yours.
EMBLEME 1 REX ✚ ET ✚ SACERDOS ✚ DEI ✚ VVHy be these marshal'd equall, as you see? Are they dis-rankt, or not? No: they should be Thus plac'd: for Common-weales doe tottering stand, Not vnder-propt thus by the mutuall hand Of King and Priest, by Gods and humane lawes: Divine assistance most effectuall drawes Kings to confesse, that t'heav'n they homage owe; Which consequently leads a King to knowe, That, that Ambition's by dead Embers fir'd, Which ha's no▪ beyond earth to heav'n aspir'd: Earth can but make a King of earth partaker, But Knowledge makes him neerest like his maker. For mans meere power not built on Wisdomes fort, Dos rather pluck downe kingdomes than support. Perfectly mixt, thus Power and Knowledge moue About thy iust designes, ensphear'd with loue; Which (as a glasse) serue neighbour-Kings, to see How best to follow, though not equall thee.
EMBLEME 2 NVLLVM BONVM INREMVNERATVM SEated on this three-headed Mountaine high, Which represents Great Brytaines Monarchie, Thus stand I furnisht t'entertaine the noise: Of thronging clamours, with an equall poyse: And thus addrest to giue a constant weight To formall shewes, of Vertue, or Deceit: Thus arm'd with Pow'r to punnish or protect, When I haue weigh'd each scruple and defect: Thus plentifully rich in parts and place To giue Aboundance, or a poore disgrace: But, how to make these in iust circle moue, Heav'n crownes my head with Wisedome from aboue. Thus Merit on each part, to whom 'tis due, With God-like power disbursed is by you.
TO THE QVEENE. OF all proportions (Madam) diuers dare Conclude that absolute, which is most square: Well may they proue that Theoreme: for I know Square Bodies doe the most perfection show: Perfection still consisting in this best, To stand more sure, the more it is supprest. Which speciall vertue chiefly doth belong Vnto square bodies, or right do's them wrong: Your Scutchion therefore, and the Honours due, May constantly support your Worth and You; Whose life's drawne out (vnsoild with subiects hate) By such a Samplar, none can imitate.
EMBLEME 3. ❀ VNICA ✚ ETERNA ✚ AL ✚ MONDO ✚ HEre aboue number, doth one wonder sit; But One, yet in her owne, an infinit: Being simply rare, no Second can she beare, Two Sunnes were neuer seene stalke in one Spheare. From old Eliza's Vrne, enricht with fire Of glorious wonders, did your worth suspire: So must, from your dead life-infusing flame, Your Multiplyed-selfe rise thence the Same: She whose faire Memories, by Thespian Swaines Are sung, on Rheins greene banks, and flowrie plaines. Thus Time alternates in its single turnes; One Phaenix borne, another Phaenix burnes. Your rare worths (matchlesse Queene) in you alone Liue free, vnparalle'd, entirely One.
TO THE PRINCE. C P ICH DIEN YOur Princedome's Ensigne here (Right-Royall Sir) May pinion your vp-soaring thoughts, and stirre Them to a pitch of loftier eminence, Then can be reached by base vulgar sense. These Plumes (charact'red liuely signifie Valour in warre, ioyn'd with velocitie. The blacke Prince (bearing Plumes) approues this true, When through the French he like win'gd-lightning flue, And pull'd downe liues about him to the ground, Till he himselfe with death had circled round; His very looke did threaten publicke death: With every stroke fell from him, fled a breath. Arm'd in the confidence of his iust cause, Thus freely fearelesse his foes overthrowes. Those high-borne acts which from his valour flue, With new-additions are impress't in you.
EMBLEME 4. POST ✚ NVBILA ✚ PHEBVS ✚ VVHen Peace (suspecting he would warre inferre,) Tooke Henry hence, to liue aboue with her, She bade Ioues Bird returne from's quicke convoy Of his faire soule, left in Heav'ns lasting Ioy, And mildly offer to your Princely hands, This Embleme of soft Peace and Warlike bands: Both vvhich (vs'd rightly) their large cares extend. To gaine o're others, and their owne defend. Though all bright Honours did their Beauties shroud In his Ecclipse, like Phoebus in a cloud: Yet at your Rising, they more cleare againe Peept-forth, like Sun-shine after clouds and raine. And in your worth their worthinesse displayes To worthiest Princes; as the Sun, his rayes.
TO THE ARCH-BISHOP OF CANTERBVRY. HOw well these sacred Ornaments become One, who by earth walkes t'his celestiall home: The Staffe of Comfort this, to leane vpon, This, Pall of peace▪ these, Crosses vndergone: How easily good men (knowne well by this) Lodge at the Inne of their eternall Blisse: These Fruits, are workes, from Bounty springing found, Perfuming Heau'n, & with Heau'ns bounties crown'd: These shadow'd fruits, but by a figure, shew The Ioyes of Paradise prepar'd for you. Saile thither with good speede then, yet make stay; Good Angels guide you, y'are i'th Abbots way.
EMBLEME 5. MORIR ✚ PIV ✚ TOSTO ✚ CHE ✚ MANCAR ✚ DI ✚ FEDE. THese Hands connext, engird Religion, Deciphring th'holy Concords vnison, Of faiths full harmony: this spiny pale Sharpe conflicts are, who still the Truth assaile: This Heart the Church is, th'holy Ghost being Center, Afflictions may surround, but cannot enter. You are the prime linke of this manuall chaine, Whereby Religion do's its strengthmaintaine: O! may the Reuerend Rest to you sticke fast, That Truth (though long) yet conquer may at last.
TO THE LORD CHANCELLOR. THe North and Southerne Poles, the two fix'd Starres Of worth and dignitie, which all iust warres, Should still maintaine, together: be here met And in your selfe as in your Scutchion set: The halfe Moone 'twixt, threatens as yet no change, Or if she doe, she promises to range, Till she againe recouer what she lost: Your endlesse fame, (so) gaines your Bounties cost.
EMBLEME 6. SVB ✚ VMBRA ✚ ALARVM ✚ TVARVM ✚ NEuer should any thinke himselfe so sure Of friends assistance, that he dares procure New enemies: for vnprouok'd they will Spring out of forg'd, or causelesse malice still. Else, why should this poore creature be pursu'd, Too simple to offend, a beast so rude. Therefore prouide (for malice danger brings) House-roome to find vnder an Eagles wings. You are this Eagle, whcih ore-shades the sheepe Pursu'de by humane wolues, and safe doth keepe The poore mans honest, though might-wronged cause, From being crushed by oppressions pawes. Faire Port you are, where euery Goodnesse findes Safe shelter from swolne Greatnesse, stubborne winds▪ Eager to drench it: but that fearelesse rest Dwels in your harbour, to all good distrest. I bid not you prouide, you are compleate, The good for to protect, or bad defeate.
TO THE LORD TREASVRER. HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE YOur sable Crescent might to some (whose lips Speake ignorance) portend a blacke Ecclipse: I rather thus discerne, how Time would shroud Your radiant Crescent in a sable Cloud: And hold those enuious, ignorant, or dull, That cannot see, your Crescent growing full.
EMBLEME 7. QVI ✚ CVRAT ✚ VIGILANS ✚ DORMIT. THe carefull States-man, who the Key doth carie Of a a Kings Treasury, must not (partiall) varie: But to iust causes compasse still be ti'de: For Iustice (vniust shutting) opens wide, And lets in hard Opinion, to disgrace His Soueraignes selfe, his Person, and his place. Nor must he carelesse slumber: but thus keepe His lids vnshut-vp by soft-fingred Sleepe: And hold a Counsell with the saddest howres Of silent Night: and spend his purest powers In care, to render to whom dues belong, That Subiects may haue right, and Kings no wrong. But you (Great Lord) beare vp this waight of Trust. With a most easie Care, because most iust.
TO THE LORD PRIVY SEALE. HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE THose dressings that adorne both parts of Nature, First, is exprest in this Maiesticke Creature: Next, in these Flowres of Light both which present Your Honours at full height of complement, And Clearnesse, which runnes through your noble Blood, Mixt with this two-fold tincture, Great and Good: What's here but shadow'd then, by outward kind, Bedeckes the nner Roomes of your braue mind.
EMBLEME 12. ET ✚ DEO ✚ ET ✚ PATRIAE ✚ VVHen ere thou draw'st out thy reuenging rod, Let be for Countrey, and the cause of God: Else thy Oblations will thy curses be, When thou encountrest with thine enemy. Nor is it sacrifice that can appease Gods wrath, vnlesse the mans obedience please More then his offering: for if his dull heart Thinkes he inricheth God in any part, By offering Hecatombs, he looseth all: Nay further yet, he giues a sword with all To Heau'ns high Iustice, by inuoking downe Reuenge, in lieu of Guerdon, or a Crowne. Such as were sacrifices once, such bee Our prayers still, and our true Sanctitie: Which is your In-mate, and familiar guest, More clearely seene in You, then here exprest.
TO THE LORD ADMIRALL. HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE YOur sable mullet like a Starre in blacke, Shewes what our honour'd Admirall doth lacke: And shewes as if that Starre of Effingham, Were thus bemourn'd in a briefe Epigram: This may your Pole-starre be, most noble Lord, And guide you vnto that (so much abhorr'd) The mournfull, yet the blessed, Port of death, Blowne by the prayers of all good mens breath.
EMBLEME 9. QVEL CHE DRITTO DA IL CIEL ✚ TORCER NON PVOSSI ✚ SVppose a Globe were fast'ned in the skie, With cordes depending on it quarterly, And men should striue by violence to wrest That cordage to what crooked forme they list, All wise men would conceiue them madly bent, Why should they else impossibles attempt? And we may thinke it as absurd a drift In him, who craftily shall hope to shift When Fate forbids him, or shall hope to thwart The good intentions of an honest heart. For that which heau'n directs (all ages see) May iniured, but not diuerted be. Seeke then no further, honest meanings can Make a plaine minde best policy in man.
TO THE DVKE OF LENOX. HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE VVHat neede I further striue to amplifie Your high-borne worths, and noble dignitie: Then by these beautious flowres, which declare: Your mind's faire puritie, vnstain'd, and bare: These golden Buckles bordring them about, A Palizado, to keepe Foulenesse out.
EMBLEME 10. NON MANCA AL FIN SE BEN TARDA. A VENIRE. THe Wolfe and Lyon once together met, And by agreement they their purpose set To hunt together: when they had obtainde Their bootie long pursude, the Wolfe refrainde No more then formerly, from greedinesse: The Lyon apprehending, that much lesse Might satisfie a beast no bigger growne, Thought all the purchase rather was his owne: And thought suppression of a beast so base Was Iustice, to preserue the common race Of harmlesse beasts; then speedily he teares The Wolfe, to take away their vsuall feares. Eu'n thus when our great Monarch clearely saw, How that insatiate Wolfe of Rome did draw More riches to his coffers, then deare soules To Heau'n, he like this Lyon then controules His vsurpation, deeming him a slaue, Who more intended to deuoure, then saue. But you know best to follow, in free course, The Best in best things, and passe by the worse.
TO THE MARQVESSE OF BVCKINOHAM. HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE ALL that we see is comely, and delights▪ The eyes; which still are pleas'd with pretious sights: And (as your golden Scallops) You appeare To promise (that which we may value deare) More then a glorious out-side, which containes. Meate, not to be disclos'd without due paines: Thus is it scarce to be imagin'd how Desert should paralell your worth, or You.
EMBLEME 11. INVIDIA ✚ SVVM ✚ TORQVET ✚ AVTHOREM. THis glorious Starre attending on the Sunne, Having, from this low world, iust wonder wonne For brightnes; Envie, that foule Stygian brand, T' extinguish it thrusts forth her greedie hand: To catch it from its mounted moving place, And hurle it lower to obscur'd Disgrace: But while she snatches, to put out the flame, Foolishly fiers her fingers with the same. Who others glories striuet' eclipse (poore Elues) Doe but drawe downe selfe-mischiefe on themselues. You waiting on the Sunne of Maiestie May that elamping Heliotropium be: Still bright in your Eclipticke circle runne, Y' are out of Envies reach, so neare the Sunne. Moue fairely, freely in your wonted Orbe, Aboue the danger of Detractions curbe, And her selfe-bursting Brood: sit there, contemne, Nay laugh, and scorne both their despight, and them.
TO THE LORD CHAMBERLINE. HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE NOt because you are given to rage or spoile, Like rampant Lyonse, which deserue a Toyle: Nor yet because your gifts devided be, Do Lyons thus divide themselues in three: But (when provok'd) to shew you can resist, Or shew your courage when Your Honor list: Or thus in number they doe looke one way, To shew, what You command, your friends obey.
EMBLEME 12. CANDIDA, ✚ SAL DA, ✚ ET ✚ IMMOBILE ✚ FIxt heere snow-vested Pietie remaines Al-pure, and in all pure, purg'd from the staines Of all false worship, chaste as aire, vntainted With the foule blemishes of that al-painted Proude Curtizan: nor wander do's her mind, Shee best content in Constancy doth find: To Alethea's pillar close she clings, Maugre the rapting straines Romes Syren sings: Who is athirst, and do's but touch her Cup, Drinkes, with delight, his soules saluation vp. Thus comprehends she ioyes, which most would buy At the high'st rate, in this one Constancy, So aboue others may your Honours shine, As past all others, do's this Forme Diuine, With her ingenuous Beames blaze bright in you, Who's doubly gilt, with Her, and Learning too.
TO THE EARLE OF ARVNDELL. HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE ON Gules you beare the figure of a Bend Betweene crosse crosselets fixt: which all intend Rightly to shadow Noble birth, adorn'd With valour, and a Christian cause, not scorn'd By any but by Infidels, and they Mistaking this, their hel-bred hate display. But to leaue shadowes, you (substantiall) shine With those good things, which make a man diuine.
EMBLEME 13. PACE ✚ FERMEZZA, ✚ E ✚ FRVTTO ✚ ALL' ✚ ALME ✚ APPORTO. ✚ KNow (honour'd Sir) that th'heate of Princes loue, Throw'n on those reall Worths, good men approue, Doth, like the radiant Phoebus shining here, Make fruitfull vertue at full height appeare: T'illustrate this in you, were to confesse How much your Goodnesse doth your Greatnesse blesse, By its owne warme reflexe: Thus both suruiue, And both i'th Sunne of Royall fauour thriue. O may's reuerberating rayes still nourish. Your noble Worths, and make your Vertues flourish.
TO THE EARLE OF SOVTH-HAMPTON. HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE NO storme of troubles, or cold frosts of Friends, Which on free Greatnes, too too oft, attends, Can (by presumption) threaten your free state: For these presaging sea-birds doe amate Presumptuous Greatnes: mouing the best mindes, By their approach, to feare the future windes Of all calamitie, no lesse then they Portend to sea-men a tempestuous day: Which you foreseeing may before hand crosse, As they doe them, and so prevent the losse.
EMBLEME 13. IN ✚ VTRAQVE ✚ PERFECTVS ✚ VVHat coward Stoicke, or blunt captaine will Dis-like this Vnion, or not labour still To reconcile the Arts and victory? Since in themselues Arts haue this quality, To vanquish errours traine: what other than Should loue the Arts, if not a valiant man? Or, how can he resolue to execute, That hath not first learn'd to be resolute? If any shall oppose this, or dispute, Your great example shall their spite confute.
TO THE EARLE OF HERTFORD: THese Lyons gardant wisely seeme to take The name of gardant, for the flowers sake: As if they kept the flower-de-luces thus From them, who any way obnoxious, Might gather them: it is a noble part, To keepe the glories purchas'd by desert.
EMBLEME 12. VNVM ✚ COR ✚ VNVS ✚ DEVS ✚ VNA ✚ RELIGIO ✚ THis Triple Close, if dis-united, none: But knit by faith, an indiuiduall One. Standing vnmoou'd, like an heroicke rocke, Affronts the batt'ries of fierce Enuies shocke. God, Heart, Religion, these, One, made of three, Ioyn'd in vnseuer'd threefold Vnitie, Royall paire-royall (see) three are the same, He that hath this paire-royall wins the game. View, how this heart, and how these hands agree, Whose heart, and hands are one, thrice happy hee. And though two hands, yet but one are these two, Both doe the same, and both the same vndoe. Concord makes in a million, but one heart, Whereat sterne Hate may leuell her fierce dart, And deepely wound too, yet cannot that wound Disanimate, or her free thoughts confound: But with a double Valour she vp-beares Such hearts, aboue the stroke of baser feares. Thus you within haue rais'd vp such a fort, As keepes out Ills, and doth your good support.
TO THE EARLE OF ESSEX. THe chiefest of this Scuchion comprehends Three Torteaux, which vnto all commends A firme and plenteous liberality, Proper to you, and to your familie: And this one vertue, in you (cleare as day) All other vertues elements display.
EMBLEME 16. QVIS ✚ CONTRA ✚ NOS ✚ NO wild, or desperate foole can hence collect Proofe to applaud his vice, or to protect: Nor can this Figure civill warre portend, Whither oppose, or whither it defend: But auntient Valour, that which hath advanc'd Our Predecessours, (while fine Courtiers danc'd) That's heere infer'd, to re-informe the mind By view of instances, wherein we find Recorded of your Auncestrie, whose fame Like forked thunder, threaten'd cowards shame; Who fearing, lest on their debosh'd base merit, Heav'n should drop Bolts, by a flame-winged spirit.
TO THE EARLE OF DORSET. TIs true, your various Bend thus quarterly Describ'd, poynts out the great antiquitie, Of Honour, and of Vertue truely claim'd By You, who haue preseru'd them free, vnmaim'd. Let none that's generous thinke his time ill spent, To imitate your Worths so eminent.
EMBLEME 17. D'ODORE ✚ IL ✚ MONDO ✚ E ✚ D'ACVTEZZA ✚ IL ✚ GIELO. ✚ THe world whose happinesse, and cheife delight, Nay more, whose ▪Wisedome lies in Appitite, Rather then Knowledge; claimes the largest share Of that which pleaseth most: nor doth it care To comprehend a higher mysterie: And therefore well doth nature dignifie Th' ascending point, with heau'ns neere neighbour hood Leauing to earth what's great, to heau'n what's good. Which you perceiuiug, wisely doe bestow, Your thoughts on Heav'n, your wealth on things be∣low.
TO THE EARLE OF MOVNTGOMERY. HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE THe Crescent to a second House belongs, The golden Crescent (worth a Poets songs) Well appertaines vnto thy House and thee, Thou Arch-supporter of Mountgomery. For not the vaprous breath of bad report, Can cloud the splendour thou deseru'st in Court: But as in gold no rust can finde a place, So hath thy Crescent no enforc'd disgrace.
EMBLEME 18. MVSICA ✚ DII ✚ PLACANTVR ✚ MVSICA ✚ MANES. AS busie Bees vnto their Hiue doe swarme, So do's th'attractiue power of Musicke charme All Eares with silent rapture: nay, it can Wilde Reason re-contract, diuorc'd from man. Birds in their warblings imitate the Spheares: This sings the Treble, that the Tenour beares: Beasts haue with listning to a Shepheards lay, Forgot to feed, and so haue pin'd away: Brookes that creepe through each flowr-befretted field, In their harmonious murmurs, musicke yeeld: Yea, senselesse stones at the old Poets song, Themselues in heapes did so together throng, That to high beauteous structures they did swell Without the helpe of hand, or vse of skill: This Harmony in t'humane Fabricke steales: And is the sinewes of all Common-weales. In you this Concord's so diuinely placed: That it by you, not you by it is graced.
TO THE LORD VISCOVNT LISE. HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE LEt there be no addition, this alone Will make an Embleme, and a perfect one. Conceiue it thus then: A Darts forked head Apt to endanger, though not striking dead. Such is, or should be every noble mind, Prepar'd like this in most resolued kind To wound, or kill offensiue iniury, And though vnurg'd, yet threatens dangers nie.
EMBLEME 19. ORDINE ✚ TEMPO ✚ NVMERO ✚ EMISVRA ✚ HEre Sience do's in contemplation sit, Distinguishing by formes, the soule of wit: Knowing, perfection ha's no proper grace, If wanting Order, Number, Time, or Place: The Theoricke and Practicke part must be As heate and fire: the Sunne, and Claritie: Such twins they are, and such Correlatiues, As the'one without the other seldome thriues. How can a man the feates of Armes well doe, If not a Scholler, and a Souldiour too? If either then be missing in's due place, Defect steps in, and steales from all their grace: On good acts you employ the practicke part, The Theory lies lodg'd within your heart.
TO THE LORD VISCOVNT WALLINGFORD. HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE VVEll may you neuer find the want, or loss Of that most hallowed, and instructing Crosse, On which our Saviour di'de: for these will shew The many blessed thoughts of that, in few: Heere you may over-looke the world, and see Nothing so plentifull, as crosses be: Thence you may take occasion to prepare Your soule, to beare those that worse crosses are. These are the badges of Your noble brest, That will conduct You to heave'ns quiet rest.
EMBLEME 20. SOTT ✚ HVMANO ✚ SEMBIANTE ✚ EMPIO ✚ VENENO ✚ THus playes the Courtly Sycophant, and thus Selfe-pleasing Sinne, which poysons all of vs: Thus playd the whore whome the wise King describes: Thus he who rayles at, and yet pockets bribes: Thus playes the Polititian, who will smile, Yet like this Serpent sting your heart the while. Bung vp thyne eares then, or suspect the harme, When sweete Cyllenian words begin to charme. But you, can these vnmask by knowing best How to keepe such from lurking neere your breast.
TO THE BISHOP OF LONDON. TWo swords there be, which all Diuines should take, E're they this victory can perfect make: Preuailing Language is a powerfull one, Zeale for the truth, the other: these haue done More noble acts, then warre could euer boast: Both are in your Field found, though else-where lost.
EMBLEME. 21. ME thinkes (Right Reuerend) here you silence Viewing this Embleme, & it thus bespeake: (breake. Ride on Triumphing, make a glorious shew, Catch those, who onely but thy Out-side know: Hold forth thy witching Cup, aduance thy Crowne, And' Mounted thinke thy selfe past pulling downe: Yet after all, thou canst be prou'd no more, Then a deluding, and deluded whore.
TO THE BISHOP OF WINCHESTER. THe Sword and Keyes to Church-men beene bequea∣thed, Since Paul and Peter were of life bereaued: The Keyes, a type of Prayers, which unlocke Heau'ns glorious gates, to let in those that knocke. The Spirits zealous, and soule-sauing Word, Is shadow'd by the sinne-subduing Sword: Of Word and Sword th'incorporate qualitie Ha's power to heaue base earth aboue the skie. Your powerfull, and victorious elegance, Which ouercomes bold vice and arrogance, Do's proue, no weapons to the Church belong, But such as Heau'n makes to encounter wrong: Nor do's your Gentry differ: Lozenges Are curing Cordials: Gentrous thoughts like these.
EMBLEME 22. SERO ✚ IVPITER ✚ DIPHTHERAM ✚ INSPEXIT ✚ BEhold, on what the Romaine Faith consists: So tost by Errours winds; so lapt in Mists; That their Arch-pilot scarse can rule the sterne▪ He lackes foundation, therefore still to learne How to make's Ship his Harbour. O I wonder Th'ore burden'd Vessell crackes not quite asunder, And sinkes not downe, opprest by its owne weight, With sinfull soules so stuft, and over-freight. The high Auenger (though he seemes to faile) With winged wrath will split their proudest saile. Heau'ns yron-hand (most slowly heau'd aloft) Falls quicke, dead-sure, and home, although not oft. All wish, for their sakes of Romes simpler sort, That you might steere their vessell to the Port:
TO THE BISHOP OF ELY. HOw much more better may you challenge these, Then all your Predecessors, who in ease, And sloath (you being consider'd) did neglect That which deserues a Crowne, or good respect: These then the Heralds may thinke rather due, Not to your place of state, but vnto you.
EMBLEME 23. VNVM ✚ ET ✚ ALTERVM ✚ DIVINVM ✚ REligion still its owne, cannot be lost, Nor from it selfe diuorc'd, though to the most, Who iudge by guesse and slight formality, There might appeare schisme in Diuinity: When not Diuinity, which cannot change, But humane reason to schismes vild doth range: For so the fruites of diuers plants may seeme Diuers in quality: and men may deeme Nature hath err'd in such a serious course, When both consider'd be the same in force. You, that best iudge of Schismes, can clearely see, Error term'd Truth, and Truth term'd Heresie.
TO THE LORD ZOVCU: SEe, how a worthy spirit not imployde May seeme to lookers on, or vaine, or voyd: These golden peeces thus vnshap't, vncoin'd, Seeme as if worth and they were quite disioyn'd: When brasse or copper being stamp't or fram'd Into the shape of plate, is oft misnam'd, And oft mistaken for the purest gold: But you are ever actiue, and vnfold Your pretious substance, that your selfe may take, Honours true stampe; what's counterfeite forsake.
EMBLEME 24. CHIARO ✚ QVIETO ✚ PROFONDO ✚ E. ✚ DIVINO. HEere Phoebus and the Sacred Sisters sit, Chiefely attending Harmonie, and Wit: Who stay to heare the dying Swans to sing Sad Epods; riding on the Thespian Spring. Heere the Wingd-Horses hoofe digs vp that Well Whence gurgle streames of Art, and sacred Skill. Divines (like Pegasus) divinely mooue In Man, springs of profound, and precious loue To heav'nly Wisedome; who t'ech passing by, Poynts out the path-way to Eternitie. And whilst You doe your noble thoughts confine To what Divines preach, You become Divine.
TO THE LORD WINDSOR. ME thinkes, I see in this, the true estate Of man still subiect to a lucklesse fate: As if the greatest Crosse did represent The generall curse, which even all over went. From Adam to his wretched progeny: The lesser Crosses which accompany The greater, be each severall haplesse chance: And all together shew, that ignorance Is irrecoverably blind, where none Prevents what happens thus to every one. But You doe well support the waightiest crosses With Patience, and esteeme them but light losses.
EMBLEME 25. PACE ✚ A ✚ GLIELETTI ✚ E ✚ GVERRA ✚ A ✚ GLIEMPI ✚ E ✚ REI. YEe, whose blind folly doth not so maintaine A former choice, but yee may chuse againe: And yee, whose innocence (not knowing yet The worse from better) carelesly doth let Both rest vnchosen: now begin to make Your new, or first choise, and heere wisely tak e The patterne: if you would encline to Peace, Loue bookes with Vertue stor'd, so will decrease Your troubles: those will bring such powerfull fame, As shall the sternest Lyon soonest tame. Experience leades thee to this certaine choice, Chuse then at first, to grieue, or to reioice. You haue already chosen true Content: Nor needs your Honour euer to repent.
TO THE LORD WENTVVORTH. LEopards haue euer ranked bin among Those nobler beasts, which are both swift & strong. Swiftnes alludes to a dexteritie, Or quicke dispatch without temeritie. Their Strength alludes to Iudgement which indures, When flashing Wit no long delight assures. Make these your owne, and then you beare display'd, Your Scutchions morrall, in your selfe pourtray'd.
EMBLEME 26. IOVIS ✚ APOLLINIS ✚ ET ✚ MINERVAE ✚ IOue, Phoebus, and Minerua were assign'd, To be the three chiefe ornaments of mind. Ioue figur'd Prouidence, Minerua, Wit, Phoebus, Content: and all that purchas'd it Well are they seated in a holy place, To shew the Continent of all, is grace: It seemes that you haue well consider'd thus: The fair'st of titles is, Religious.
TO THE LORD DARCIE. THese health-preseruing leaues thus inly fixt Amongst the Crosselets; shew, heau'ns fauours mixt With all calamities that seaze on man, If patiently he entertaine them can. To find cure then for Crosses, looke aboue: See, ill made well by heau'ns all-curing loue.
EMBLEME 27. ET ✚ TENEBRAE ✚ FACTAE ✚ SVNT ✚ SLeepe, being the type of death: darknesse must be The shade of that, which we euanisht see: Men so departed, that it may be said, A Bird, as well, as such a man, is dead: Chase, while thou liu'st, the cloudes of death away: Or dying, neuer looke to see more day. You haue on earth, so studied heau'ns delight, That you can neuer be obscur'd: though night Should threaten to obscure noone-day, yet will Your Noble mind vanquish deaths darkest ill.
TO THE LORD WOTTON. SEtled afflictions may be well express't Vnder this forme of Crosses, which men blest Haue still indur'd to proue their patience: But I would rather in another sence Haue this appli'de to such a man, whose vowes Haue fixt him to the faith Christs Church allowes: And such a man (scorning vngrounded wrongs) Are you, to whom this fixed Crosse belongs.
EMBLEME 28. TEMPVS ✚ CORONAT ✚ INDVSTRIAM. TH'ascending Path that vp to wisedome leades Is rough, vneuen, steepe: and he that treades Therein, must many a tedious Danger meet, That, or trips vp, or clogs his wearied feet: Yet led by Labour, and a quicke Desire Of fairest Ends scrambles, and clambers higher Then Common reach: still catching to holde fast On strong'st Occasion, till he come at last Vp to Her gate, where Learning keepes the key, And lets him in, Her best Things to suruay: There he vnkend (though to himselfe best knowne) Takes rest, till Time presents him with a Crowne: In quest of this rich Prize, your toyle's thus graced: Euer to be in Times best Border placed.
TO THE LORD STANHOPE. THis enterchang'd variety of Furre, And naked quarters, fitly doe concurre. To shew the seasonable contenting store That rich wise men inioy, alike with poore: Both are prouided (lest they might take harme) To keepe their innocence, both safe and warme.
EMBLEME 29. BIS ✚ INTERIMITVR ✚ QVI ✚ SVIS ✚ ARMIS ✚ PERIT ✚ IMagine heere, Christ strongly fortifi'd, Against the Popes bold herefie and pride: And thinke, whilst his Accomplices combine The Castle of Christs truth, to vndermine; A flame breakes forth, which doth consume them all: So seeking his, they meete with their owne fall. And thus whilst heretickes (like wretched elues) Out-stare the Truth, they doe condemne themselues, Subiected to the twofold victory Of Truth, and of their owne impietie. Take refuge then, in Heau'ns eternall rest, And see Christs foes against themselues addrest.
TO THE LORD CAREVV. THe noblest parts of Wisedome, as cleare wit, High Courage, and such vertues kinne to it: Should ever be proceeding, and goe on Forward, as seeme these Lyons; vrg'd of none. So (like to these) You keepe a passant pace, Till Wisedome seate You in your wished place.
EMBLEME. 30. VIRTVS ✚ VNITA ✚ FORTIOR ✚ FOrces vnited geminate their force, And so doth vertue: never should remorse Nor obstacle restraine that man, who may Strengthen his vertues by a noble way: Who cannot perfect be, needes not repent To add his owne t' anothers President. And he that is entire may therewithall, By others helpe proue more effectuall. So helpe me Learning, as I doe not know, Where I this Embleme fitter may bestowe.
TO THE LORD HAYE. BEauties chiefe elements of White and Red Is all that in your Coate is figured: Nor is it needfull, any thing should be Added to this most copious mysterie: Gules vpon Argent to conceit are playne, And pourtray out a life without all staine.
EMBLEME 31. MERITVM ✚ SIBI ✚ MVNVS ✚ SEe Bountie seated in her best of pride, Whose fountaines never ebbe, ever full tide At every change: see, from her streaming heart, How rivulets of Comfort doe impart To Worth dryde vp by Want; and to asswage The drought of Vertue in her pilgrimage. Looke, how her wide-stretcht, fruit-befurnisht hand Vnlockt to true Desert, do's open stand: But if she should not be Deserts regarder, Yet is it, in itselfe, its owne rewarder. This Emblem's not presented (Noble Sir) Your bounteous nature to awake, or stir: For you are Bounties Almner, and do's know, How to refraine, destribute, or bestow.
TO THE THREE LORDES CHIEFE IVSTICES. BY these life-lengthning Lozenges, are show'n Cares to cure Ills, by times corruption grow'n▪ To comfort Vertues heart, at point to die Of a Consumption, and doth bed-rid lie: This Starre, that Iustice is, which is not blind, (As th'ancient Hieroglyphickes her defin'd) But searcheth out with quicke discerning eye Th'hard difference twixt Faith and Fallacy. These Birds, as yet vnlearnt to light on earth, Figure that Iustice, which from Heau'n ha's Birth, And scornes to looke so low, as base respect Of its owne priuate ends, and Truth neglect. Care, Truth, and Iustice thus vnite, we see Make in their Goodnesse mixt, a Sympathy, On whose ioynt pinions the Realmes Peace vp-towres T'her Chaire of State, subsisteted by your powres.
EMBLEME 32. SIC ✚ VBIQVE ✚ SHe that illuminates the midnight, may Be well admitted to take rest all day: Yet haue our antique Poets rather made Night-wandring Luna t'haue a daily Trade; Reporting, that by day she takes delight To hunt wilde creatures, and then shines at night: Teaching (or I mistake) how Magistrates Should quell Disorders in all ciuill States. In darknesse they should watchfull insight keepe, To hunt out Vice, when men are thought asleepe: For Mischiefe (as in darknesse) skulkes disguis'd, And therefore needs some watchfully aduis'd, Who hauing sented out this secret game, May then pursue them to a publicke shame. But your deepe wisedomes, better know, then this, What in our Common-weale most needfull is.
