12392 99853769 19164
The Groome-porters lawes at Mawe, to be obserued in fulfilling the due orders of the Game. 1. IF you chaunge hands, it is the losse of the Set, 2. If you renounce, it is the losse of the Set. 3. If you leade when your Mate shoulde, it is the losse of that game and vied cardes. 4. If you lose dealing, it is the losse of fower cardes, but if the loser of the dealing deale not againe, you acquite the fower, and no gaine to either of both parties. 5. If you looke either on ye asked carde, or the bottome carde, it is the losse of that game and vied cardes, in whom the fault is found. 6. If you roub (not hauing the Ace) you lose fower, & al the vied cards although you lay downe the same carde which you tooke vp. 7. If you make out the carde when your Mate rubbeth it is the losse of fower, for the roubber must make out the carde himselfe. 8. If you turne vp the Ace of Hartes you gaine fower thereby. 9. If you turne vp the Ace of Hartes, and thereby make either partie aboue xxvi. the contrary part must haue Liuings, but if the con∣trary parte bee xxv. by meanes whereof Liuings sets them out, then is he who turned vp the Ace of Hartes to make for the Set, so that he make not one Game nor the first Tricke, without the consent of both parties. 10. The partie that asketh a carde, may not vie any carde, before the first tricke be played. 11. You may not vie it after your card is led, but the cōtrary part may. 12. Three cardes crossed, no carde by any meanes giuen backe. 13. Neither partie may giue backe his owne vied card, though none be crossed. 14. You may not aske a carde to set the contrary parte or your selfe at Liuings or out. 15. Prouided alwaies, that if the contrary parte bee xxiii. or aboue, by reason that fower sets the other partie behinde the Liuinges, it shalbe lawfull for the partie which is behinde to aske a carde, al∣though the carde so asked put the other to Liuings. 16. Prouided also that if you meane to lead a helpe, you may vie it vpon your owne asked carde, so as it be done before the helpe be out of your hand, the contrary part may pledge you a card after he seeth your helpe vpon the boord, so as it be done before his owne card be played.
