12527 99839307 3715
CORPƲS Christi: BY EDMVND GVRNAY Printed by Cantrell Legge, Prin∣ter to the Ʋniuersitie of Cam∣bridge. 1619.
¶ To the very Wor∣shipfull, RICHARD STUBBE, Esquire. {inverted ⁂} SIR: I request you to bee God-father vnto this In∣fant, as you haue beene sometime vnto my selfe. It is thought an abruptnesse to imprint anything without a Dedication, which makes me thus bold with your name. I hope you will take it at my hands no otherwise then as a token of my thankefulnesse for your manifold and fatherly affe∣ction. In which respect I principal∣ly commend it vnto you: as also
vnto your two Daughters, my Co∣sen Yeluerton, and the Ladie Strange: I must also commend the perusall of it vnto Mr. Ro∣bert Rudde of St. Florence in Southwales, and Mr. Henrie Godly of Onehouse in Suf∣folke, my very good and learned Tutors, togetherwith my singular friend Mr. Doctor Porter of Cambridge. Finally, the vse and benefit of it I commmend, as vnto my Christian Friends the Pa∣rishioners of Edgfield, so also vnto as many as loue the single, gentle, and powerfull truth, espe∣cially in the Text following.
MATTH. 26.26. This is my body. THAT this then is the bo∣dy of our Sauiour, it is without all question: Yea, not onely His body, but euen Himselfe (a part beeing put for the whole) it may be affirmed: but whether it bee His body in∣deed, and substance; or onely by way of Sacrament; that is the ter∣rible and vnappeaseable question at this day. The strife betwixt the Archangell and the deuill about the body of Moses,Iud. 9. might well prefigure this strife, but exceed, it could not. And no maruell if he strife be so great, conside∣ring in the end that one of the
two must be conuinced, both of highest impiety against God, and also of extreame folly amongst men. For whether to deny Di∣uine honour vnto the Creator, or to impart Diuine honour vnto a creature, both are most impious: so againe, to affirme that to be corruptible bread, which indeed is very God; or that to be very God, which indeed is corruptible bread; both are extreamly foolish. You see then, Reader, ow neerly it concernes you to be throughly aduised what part you take in so momental a cause: for if you chuse neither, then are you cōdemnable of irreligion: and if you cleane to the false, then are you culpable of impiety or idolatry, if not bla∣spheming. For the better dire∣cting therefore and stablishing your choice in so concerning a cause; and whereby you may
happily find a thred of expediti∣on vnto the truth herein, wee commend vnto you the perusall of this Treatise. Wherein if you shall but so long indure vs vntill we haue, first laid downe the e∣quity, conueniencie, and necessi∣tie of the one Exposition; and then the vanitie, impiety, and de∣formity of the other; we make no question, but you will more liue∣ly imbrace the truth, and more mortally abhorre the falshood in this point, then euer you did. We then which expound This, to be His Body, onely by way of Sacrament, and as water in Bap∣tisme is His blood; doe take the intent of our Sauiour in this bu∣sinesse to be for the ordayning and fastning a second seale vnto his New Testament: that where∣as now He had vndergone the condition of mans nature, and
was about to finish the price of our redemption; Hee thought good not onely to haue it recor∣ded in Scriptures, and published all the world ouer what he had done for vs (though that might haue beene thought sufficient for beleeuers,) but also to ordaine certain visible tokens and formes of remembring His such perfor∣mance: that so as His word did inwardly, these seales might out∣wardly, seuerally in Baptisme, and ioyntly in this Communion, expresse and impart vnto men the benefit of His incarnation and suffring; and we thereby to haue both His hand and seales to our redemption. Which seales also that they might the more in∣separably be made one with His testament, and withall at the first blush more liuely represent the substance thereof; He thought
good to stampe and imprint them with his owne image and superscription: and therefore here in the text calleth the bread expressely His bodie, as an other Scripture likewise calleth the o∣ther seale, His blood: (the spirit,1. Ioh. 5.. water, and blood are one:) And all this finally the rather, that wher∣as the old Testament had beside the same word inwardly contai∣ning it, also a couple of outward seales to giue a sensibility vnto it; and they also both seuerally, as in the circumcision, and ioyntly as in the feast of Passeouer, in like manner exhibiting the vse and benefit of it; and finally beeing likewise cloathed and stamped with the names of the things sig∣nified (Circumcision beeing cal∣led the Couenant, whereof it was but a seale, and the Feast the Passeouer, whereof it was but a ce∣lebration)
it might hereby come to passe, that the new Testament should most perfitly resemble as well as accomplish the old; and the olde as it did prefigure and fore-runne, so also might it imbrace, acknowledge, and giue place to the newe. Now as tou∣ching our Sauiours forme of speech, in calling that His bodie, which we expound to bee but a Sacrament thereof; wee further adde, that such: concisenesse of speech, is ordinary with the Scipture, with our Sauiour, and his Apostles, and finally with all sorts of men. As for the Scrip∣ture; that euery where vseth such significant figures, and especial∣ly when it poynteth vnto our Sa∣uiour: as, when it calls Him, a rocke, a stone, a lyon, a lambe, a starre, a dore, a vine, the way, the truth, the life, the resurrection, our head, our
roote, our garment, our dwelling, our shepheard, our peace, &c. But aboue all, our Sauiour Himselfe so a∣bounding in this kind, as that He orbare not in His publike mo∣rals (when He meant to be most plaine,) to bid men out off the of∣fending hand, and plucke out the of∣fending eye; as if He expected e∣uen from the vulgar to be other∣wise vnderstood then the letter did import: and as for those of the wiser sort, He often grew an∣gry with them for taking Him at the letter; as with Nicodemus for so plaine vnderstanding His tearme of beeing borne againe; with the Disciples for their no better vnderstanding the leauen of the Pharises; and with the Ca∣pernites for their like carnall vn∣derstanding the eating of His flesh. The Apostles also, as they follow∣ed Him in the steps of His life, so
so did they vsually follow Him in the same character of speech: in so much as Paul was not nice to say plainely,1. Cor 10.4. the rocke was Christ: as also he saith to all beleeuers, now are yee the bodie of Christ,1. Cor. 12.27. and members in particular:Ephes. 5.30. Yea, we are the members of His body, of His flesh, and of His bones. And S. Iohn forbeares not to say,1. Ioh. 5.8. that the spi∣rit, water, and blood, these three are one:Apoc. 1.5. and that we are washed in his blood: both which sayings do giue as great and greater dignity vnto Baptisme, if the letter should be pressed, then the calling bread His bodie, can giue to this other Sa∣crament. And yet should not he be thought (at least) distempred in his wittes, that would hereup∣on inferre a substantiall change of that water? though with farre lesse dishonour vnto God might such a consequence be inferred,
and with farre better colour: for as much as Baptisme (if compa∣risons may be made in holy things) is the Sacrament of our first quickning, as this is of our nourishing; and more noble it is of the two to make aliue, then to preserue life: Baptisme againe beeing but once administred, but this often; Baptisme beeing ex∣pressely charged vpon the Apo∣stles to be administred vnto all nations, beeing also made a Mat. 16.16.ioynt-condition with faith vn∣to saluation, whereas this other in neither case is mentioned: and finally our Sauiour Himselfe o∣penly partaking Baptisme, and gracing it with miraculous ope∣ning the heauens; whereas this, if He did at all partake it, was in priuate, and without any granted miracle. Yea last of all, the Fa∣thers honouring Baptisme with
as high tearmes as might be; one saying of it,Ambr. de. Sacr. 1.5. The water hath the Grace of Christ, in it is the presence of the Trinity. And an other thus; In the Sacrament of Baptisme we are made bone of His bone,Chrysost. in epist ad Eph. Hom. 20. and flesh of His flesh.Aug. de v∣til. per . c. 1. And Austine thus: With∣out doubt euery beleeuer is made a partaker of the bodie and blood of Christ, when in Baptisme hee is made a member of Christ▪ yea, though before the eating thereof hee depart the world.Leo. Ep. 13. And Leo, calling it the wonderfull Sacrament of rege∣neration, saith in an other place of it;Serm. 4. de Nativ. Christ gaue that to the water, which He gaue to His mother. In which sense also Paulinus: The hea∣uenly water (saith he in his poeme) marrieth with elementall water; and so (concipit vndi Deum) the water conceiueth God our Sauiour. So likewise the Rocke which is cal∣led; not the body of Christ, but ex∣pressely
Christ; may it not farre aduance it selfe aboue this bread, if the letter be stood vpon? espe∣cially for that the Rock most mi∣raculously, and Sauiour like, did gush forth water to the refresh∣ing a huge multitude in the wil∣dernesse; whereas this Bread which our Sauiour speakes of, made not the least shew of diffe∣rence from common bread: the Rocke also being but one and the same in particular, whereof it was first spoken, the rocke was Christ; whereas the bread which at this day is administred, is not that bread in particular, whereof our Sauiour said, it was His bodie; nor can attaine to that name and honour, but by the helpe of infe∣rence and figures, and that no lesse then thirty to make their ex∣position good,Iewel art. 12. diui. (as dainty as they are of figures) as a late Father of
our Church hath obserued. A∣gaine, if the letter must be of such force (though the letter is made to serue not to master our meanings) why may not euery beleeuer account himselfe a member of Christ indeed, and substantially according to those alleadged sayings of Paul? especi∣ally considering how the belee∣uers are in Scripture vsually said to be changed, conuerted, renewed, new created, &c. but neuer was it so said of this bread? Or why shall not euery beleeuer expect as well a litterall performance of that promise of Christ, when He saith,Apoc. 3.20. Behold, I stand at the doore and knocke, and willsup with him that o∣peneth? it beeing of the two, more conceiueable (how thinke you) that He should personally be∣come our companion at supper, then the supper it selfe. To con∣clude;
As Christs Apostles, and the Scriptures, so finally all sorts of men, both holy and common, doe ordinarily vse words, both beyond and beside the litterall sense: partly of necessity, when either they be driuen to borrow a word, or the hearer cannot so well vnderstand a proper word; and partly againe for breuity sake (when there is no likelihood to be mistaken,) as when we call hat our hand, which is but our hand-writing; that the Lyon, which is but the signe or pi∣cture of the lyon; that our will, or our deed, which is but a notifica∣ion thereof; or as Ioseph said, the seauen eares are seauen yeares, when e meant they did signifie seauen eares; and Daniel saying like∣wise, the tree which thou sawest it is by selfe, O King; meaning it was tended to decypher the Kings
partly also hyperbollically, when we affirme more then can be, to bring men beleeue as much as may be;Pt 9.1. 1. King. 1.0. which forme of speech the Scripture also does not ab∣horre: and partly finally to make our speech therby the more pear∣cing, significant, and emphati∣call; as when we say, the fields laugh, the sea roare, &c. or when we call that our heart, our ioy, our glory, or our strength, which wee glory, delight, or put confidence in. So as if our Sauiour in the text did either necessarily, (in re∣gard of our weakenes) or briefly, or significantly, or (as departers vse to speake) pathetically, or (as founders take leaue to speake) pe∣culiarly, call that His body, which he meant for a pledge; or earnest seale, signe, token, commemora∣tion, celebration, exhibition conueyance, deed and stae, Ses∣e,
testament; or to vse one word orall, which is generally vsed of ll; a Sacrament of His bodie yet ould not His phrase be thought arsh, intricate, or vnusuall euen  the eares of ordinary men: but nto them which haue their ares neuer so little touched ith the language of Canaan, how n it seeme otherwise then most ire, sincere, and sensible; yea, as itable and proper vnto the nse we plead for, as can be de∣sed. Testimonies out of the Fathers prooue this Sacramentall Ex∣sition, we might alleadge store  as Tertullian, saying thus:Tert. cont. Ma. 3.19.—cal∣g the bread His bodie, to the ende  may vnderstand that hee hath gi∣ bread to be a figure of His bodie. mens thus: The wine signifieth the od allegorically. Origen thus:Clem. pr Alex. in Ped. 1.. If  take this saying [Except yee eate
the flesh of the sonne of man,Orig. in Leu. hom. 7. &c.] ac¦cording to the letter, the letter killeth Ambrose thus:Ambr. de off. c. 48. In the Lawe was shadow, in the Gospell an image, i heauen the truth.Chrys. in Ioh. Hom. 46. Chrysostome thus What is it to vnderstand carnally simply as the things are spoken, an to seeke no further.Hieron. in 1. Cor. 11. Hierome thus Christ left bread and wine, as he th goes a voyage leaues a gage.Aug. e∣pist. 23. Austin thus: By reason of the resemblan betwixt the Sacraments and th things, the Sacraments often take th names of the things: and elsewher *thus,De do∣ctrin. Christ. l. 3. c. 10. This is a perfect way to di¦scerne whether a speach be proper a figuratiue; that whatsoeuer in Scrip¦ture cannot stand with integritie  manners, or veritie of faith, that r¦solue thy selfe is figuratiue: wher upon hee further inferreth, th our Sauiours phrase of eating h flesh, was figuratiue, because acc¦ding to the letter to  a sinfull
calling it also a carnall sense,Ibid. cap. 5. to take figuratiue speaches properly, and a miserable bondage of the soule. But this kind of proofe, which pro∣ceedes vpon testimonies, in this our short intended Treatise, wee purpose to be sparing in both because out of the mouth of two or three, as well as ten thousand witnesses, a truth may be establi∣shed; as also for that late Writers of principall reading & learning, haue alreadie published, and still doe, intire Tractates, containing the full consent of Antiquitie in this point: the corruption also of editions, imperfection of tran∣slations, and vnworthinesse of Authors, may make vs the lesse to set by this Testimoniall proofe in matter of faith; which finally when it was at the best, was ne∣uer esteemed otherwise then a forraine proofe, and such at the
Scripture both olde and newe does rather repell vs from, then inuite vs vnto, when it saith; Say not,Deu 30.1. Rom. .5. who shall goe vp to heauen, or beyond the seas to bring His word vnto vs. for it is very nigh, en  mouth, and in thy heart: which holy direction wee of these latter times may take more especially vnto our selues, for that we liue neere or neerest vn∣to those dayes whereof the Lord thus speaketh;Ier. 31.31. Behold, the daes come when I will put my Law in their inward parts—and they shall no more euery man teach his neighbour: for they shall all knowe me. They there∣fore which find not light enough neere hand; and a it were with∣in doores; let them, if they so thinke good, goe seeke abroad for it: but else when light so a∣bounds in the house (and what house is void of necessary light
when the Sunneshines) then to goe into the yard for it, is but a gadding disposition, and which loues rather to gaze a∣bout then to take paines, rather slouthfull to behold the light then to make right vse of it: the best light also for man to worke by either in things heauenly or terrene, beeing the temperate and shadowed light; that which is so open and glaring beeing a dazler and confounder, and which who so vseth himselfe vnto, may happe in the ende to be depriued of the light he hath, and be driuen to seeke out of himselfe to bee resolued in most palpable things. A nota∣ble example whereof our Ad∣uersaries haue made them∣elues in the present cause. For whilest they would not be con∣ent with that light which the
window of our Sauiours words lets in [Doe this in remembrance of me,Luk. 22.19.] but must needs be rouing and ranging abroad, passing and compassing seas and lands, tossing and ransaking all man∣ner of writings whereby to find in this His Bodie, an other manner of matter then a re∣membrance; it is now at length befallen them, partly beeing confounded in their imaginati∣ons, and partly beeing peruer∣ted in their iudgements (tho∣rough a skorne to bee content wit a home-growing truth af∣ter so great trauells) that now they cannot perceiue a diffe∣rence betwixt His remem∣brance, and His very reall pre∣sence; betwixt the signe, and the thing; the shell, and the ker∣nell; the shadow, and the sub∣stance: whereby finally by the
iust iudgement of God, who suffreth men to beleeue lies which will not obey the truth, they haue not onely lost the substance by catching at the shadowe, with the dogge in the fable; not onely smothe∣red and ouerwhelmed the Sa∣crament, by houering and doting vpon the outward ele∣ment, as children with hug∣ging and dandling choake their birds; but also by conferring vp∣on it the same incompetible re∣spects which their forefathers did vpon the brazen serpent, they haue in the end peruerted it vnto the like abhomination: and in stead of a faithfull re∣membrancer of Gods infinite loue vnto man, erected vnto themselues a most execrable fore-staller of their hearts and deuotions vnto God, and so set
vp the most pernicious Idoll that euer was. Which, Chri∣stian Reader, that you may more plainly acknowledge, do but a while draw neere, and as it were from the toppe of a peere with me, behold what a taile of most fowle, stupendi∣ous, and impious, or rather blasphemous consequents it drawes after it: that so you may, as ex vngue leonem, so also ex cauda draconem cognoscere, and accordingly abominari. For vp∣on their expounding This, in the text, to become His bodie and person indeed; both body, soule, and diuinity, (as the Coun∣cell of Trent decreeth) really,Concil. Trid. less. 2. Can. 3. & can. 1. ve∣rily, and substantially (for els they agree with vs;) iudge whether these Conclusions following doe not spawne and issue; as, First,
That the Mediator beeing  for euer returned vnto the state of glorification; does notwith∣standing ordinarily take vpon Him a forme, farre inferiour vnto the forme of His humili∣ation; as farre as the forme of a loafe or cake of bread, is inferi∣our vnto the forme of a perfect man. That when he meanes to be  adored, and bodily bowed down vnto; then especially He takes vpon him this breaden forme. That when He meanes to be  adored in a breaden forme, He does not create, effigiat, or con∣tract the same, as the holy Ghost did the forme of a doue (to point out vnto Iohn Bap∣tist who was the Christ:) but wil take the forme of that bread which a little before the baker
had made, and which, for ought can be perceiued, still is the same. That he which will be exalted among the heathen, and will be ex∣alted vpon the earth: (Psal. 46.10.) yet will in the Heathens eyes become more meane then the meanest worme, and at least seeme to them no better then a peice of bread. That He which derideth the Idols of the Heathen, for that they can neieher speake, nor stirre, nor saue themselues out of captiuity, (Isa. 42.2.) does notwithstan∣ding present Himselfe in such a forme to be worshipped, which euery liuing thing can make a prey of. That the breaden forme wherein he wil be adored, does there enter, where (Himselfe hath said it, Matt. 15.17.) what∣soeuer
entreth is cast forth into the draught. That He vnto whome it was  an infinite abasement, but once to passe through the purest wombe; does notwithstanding in His highest glory, make His ordinary passage through im∣pure mouthes. That He is incomparably  more present in the mouthes of men, then in the hearts of men: as much as the Sunne is more present in his sphere, then in the eye of the beholder. That as oft as this Body is  rightly administred, so oft there doe concurre many miracles; as amongst others these follow∣ing: 1. An vtter extinquishing and nullifying, or new infor∣ming the substance of the ele∣ments: 2. a retaining the acci∣dents after such substance be
departed, or new informed: 3. An inuesting those acccidents or breaden substances, with the perfect bodie of man: 4. The so qualifying that body, both for shape, quantitie, and pro∣perties, as that it cannot bee outwardly discerned from a morsell of bread: 5. That bo∣dy to be subdued vnto the iawes and digestions of the receiuer, without hauing a bone broken: 6. That the humane bodie which thus is eaten, is alwayes in the heauens notwithstand∣ing: 7. That there beeing but one bodie for all the world, yet shall euery true beleeuer, whol∣ly eat that particular bodie sub∣stantially: 8. That the appea∣rance of all these miracles, is with-holden from sense & rea∣son: 9. That as many seuerall administrations, so many seue∣rall
performances there are of all these miracles: 10. Finally, that the Apostles, and their suc∣cessors for euer, were indued with this diuinitie of power, to cause all these foresaid miracles as oft as they shall thinke good, vnto the end of the world. That He which hath so done  His maruelous acts, as that they ought to bee had in remembrance, (Psal. 111.) Hee which will haue His works considered to the verie sparkes: (Eccl. 42.) And He whose works doe not hinder one another: (Eccl. 16.26.) is not with stand∣ing the author of all those in∣glorious, obscure, and selfe-con∣founding miracles. That all these so strange, in∣tricate, and (to forbeare the qualitie of them) so stupendi∣ous, operatious, and conditions, the Mediatour does ordinarily
vndergoe and performe, for no necessity of man, but this; name∣ly, to assure men of His incar∣nation, and suffering for them. That the meanes of Faith are more hard to brooke, then the Faith it selfe: as much as it is more hard to beleeue, that the Sonne of God does vsually take vpon Him the forme of a peice of bread for me, then to beleeue, that once He took the forme of a reasonable man for me. That miracles are ordinarily afforded to confirme that faith, which had nothing but heating to beget it. That greater miracles are ordinarily afforded to confirme faith, then euer were afforded vnto the first conuersion of any whomsoeuer vnto the faith. That whereas such as will
not beleeue Moses & the Prophets, (Luk. 16.31.) will neither be∣leeue the greatest miracle: yet not withstanding must they which haue Moses, and the Pro∣phets, and the Gospel continu∣ally published amongst them, notwithstanding expect a con∣tinual course of the greatest mi∣racles, toward onely the confir∣ming their beleefe. That He which will not saue  them that goe to sea, but by means, because He will not haue the workes of His wisedome to be idle: (Wis. 14.5.) will notwithstanding vse incredible miracles towards the producing that effect (the strengthning of faith,) which both, doth loose the grace the more it is supported by mira∣cles, and also hath a speciall meanes ordained of God, for the breeding and furthering of
it, namely, publike preaching: and finally, the al-sufficient and most necessarie operation of the holy Ghost, promised and assigned thereunto. That whereas planting and watering are one, (1. Cor. 3.8.) begetting and preseruing (as generation and nutrition) pro∣ceeding of the same causes: yet are such kind of miracles to bee expected, for the confirming and strengthening faith, which are not able in the least measure to beget faith: nothing beeing of force to conuert outwardly an vnbeleeuer vnto the faith, but that which the light of na∣ture (beyond which his capaci∣tie cannot reach) can enter∣taine; whereunto these suppo∣sed miracles are most repug∣nant. That planting and watering
beeing one; and of the two, planting beeing the more no∣ble: yet must the Redeemer in His owne person water, whom by His ministers He daily plan∣teth. That the Sunne in the firma∣ment  so abundantly inlight∣ning and refreshing all crea∣tures here below, by meanes of ordinarie beames without any corporall descending; yet must the Sonne of Righteousnesse, so infinitely surpassing that creature in glorie, brightnesse, state, and vertue, notwithstand∣ing corporally and personally descend (were it no more) for the onely inlightening and re∣freshing His vineyard and plan∣tation. That whereas Kings and  Princes vpon earth haue this prerogatiue, to indow and pos∣sesse
whome they thinke good with dignities and benefits, by the meanes of a Patent, or a Seale, without stirring a foote further: yet the King of Kings hauing giuen His Patents and Seales, His Couenants and Te∣staments, yea Himselfe once, & Sacraments ordinarily, with His grace continually, must notwithstanding come Him∣selfe in person, or else His gift must be of no force. That farre harder burthens are laid vpon the weakest vnder the Gospel, then. vpon the strongest vnder the Law, name∣ly, to beleeue and expect those performances, which are farre lesse expectable at the hands of God, then (the pitch of the strongest faith) the remoouing of mountaines. That Hee which will not
bruise a broken reed, (Esa. 42.2.) but will so tenderly handle and foster it, as shall make it growe together againe; does notwith∣standing deale so extreamely with His littlest ones, as vnlesse they can beleeue that to bee their Sauiour, which all the world would take to be a mor∣sell of bread, they must looke for no saluation. That whereas the strong be∣leeuer  Moses, did doubt whe∣ther water would follow vpon his striking the rocke, (Numb. 20.10.) though God had ex∣pressely promised as much, and was readie to effect it: where∣as also that vertuous Sarah, and the blessed Marie did likewise make question how those mira∣culous conceptions could be∣tide them, which Angels from heauen did sensibly and expres∣ly
promise them: yet notwith∣standing must it be expected at the hands of the weakest belee∣uers, (when they shall see that which is confessed, and must be acknowledged for ordinarie bread) that they presently vp∣on the speaking two or three words, beleeue vpon paine of damnation, that it is out-right become their very God: and that without hauing more mo∣tiues so to beleeue, then they haue to beleeue, a rocke, a lyon, a lambe, or &c. (by which names He is as expressely called, as e∣uer He was by the name of this bread) to be their God. That He which appeared so glorious, and so wonderfull, when He shewed but a little of Himselfe vnto some of his ser∣uants (Moses and Elias) and that but seuerally; yet when He
meanes to make His personall approach vnto His Spouse, the Church, He then on the con∣trary puts off all His glorious apparell; and without so much as a messenger going before Him, without any noise, either of a wind, as at the descending of the Holy Ghost, or of a voice, loud, or soft, to giue no∣tice of His comming, Hee al∣waies exhibites Himselfe vnto her, thus contrarie to Himselfe, in the common, senslesse, and silly forme of belly-bread, made a little before of the Baker, and (a strong motiue vnto the Church, no doubt, to put all her confidence in Him) which euery worme can ouer-ma∣ster. That He which in Scripture  ordinarily conuinceth men of Idolatrie, onely vpon this, be∣cause
they worship that, which their common sense can tell them is a sensles creature: does not with standing ordinarily present Himselfe to bee wor∣shipped in that forme which common sense does generally tell vs is a senslesse creature. That the euidence which our Sauiour produceth to prooue Himselfe to be risen from the dead, (handle me, and see me, &c. Luk. 24.) is not sufficient to prooue, whether that which men handle, see, and tast, bee a peice of bread. That the only powers wher∣by mankind is able to discerne a man from a beast, whereby to auoid killing; a wife from a stranger, whereby to auoid for∣nication; our owne from an o∣thers, whereby to auoid stea∣ling; the hungry from the full,
wherby to practise charity, &c. are notwithstanding generally, either so weake, or so false, as that certainely they cannot dis∣cerne a morsell of bread from the body of a man, a common creature from the Creator. Finally, (to ransacke this  denne of darkenes no further) That wheras the Lord thought it so great an indulgence vnto His most faithfull seruant Iosu∣ah, when He caused the Sunne for a season to stand still at his prayer, as that He decreed ne∣uer so againe to heare the voice of a man, (Iosuah, 10.14.) yet notwithstanding since that de∣cree, He hath bound Himselfe that at the voice, not of one man, but multitudes of men continually succeeding, should bee caused, not a creature but the Creator, not to stay awhile
in the heauens as that planet did, or as Himselfe did when He was beheld of Steuen at his Martyrdome, but to leaue His throane, (His glory at least) and then to descend in such manner and forme, as (did not the ne∣cessity of our confutation driue vs vnto it) were not once to be named. These consequents, Reader, how truly they follow vpon the exposition in question, for bre∣uity sake we leaue to your selfe: onely this you know, that if but one of them all did truly follow (beeing false) it is enough to cōuince the principle it selfe to be according. But if they all, or most of them, doe both true∣ly follow, and also are most false, vile, monstrous, and abo∣minable; then if you can dis∣cerne a lyon by his nayle, iudge
this opinion to be a monster by his tayle of abominations trayling after it: yea say if it be not of the very breed of that Red dragon,Apoc. 12.4. which with his taile drew the third part of the stars, & cast them to the earth: for surely had it strength to his length, what would it else but reach vp to the heauens, and wrestle with the starres, yea fasten vp∣on the throne of the highest? Or say if that Beast could haue more names of blasphemy vpon his head then this hath?Apoc. 13. For if it be Aquin. 2.2. q. 3. a. 3. c. Blasphemy to attribute any thing vnto God, which is not conuenient; then what shall it be to attribute that vnto Him which is as despightfull and re∣proachfull as can be imagined? For what meant Moses when he tooke that golden calfe, and beating it to powder, made
the Idolaters drinke of it? what was his meaning? was it to doe a honour vnto the Idoll, or to ingraine the people in Idola∣try? was it not in his vtmost hate and detestation of the Idoll, and to shewe the people how that which they had made their god, was not able to saue it selfe out of the filthy gutter? Could there then be imagined a more abominable reproach a∣gainst the highest, then once to imagine the like manner of re∣ceiuing Him? Or does their a∣doring Him, as they pretend, before they thus receiue Him, helpe the matter? So did the souldiers first crie, haile King, before they spit on Him; so did Iudas first kisse Him, before he betraied Him; and so their first (like) adoring Him, and (then with their good wills) eating
and swallowing Him vp; what  it else but so much the more lasphemous mocking Him, hen it is accompanied with ch abhominable entertaine∣ment? yea, what more abomi∣nable vsage can be imagined? ore dishonourable to the per∣n of God; more crosse to His isedome, prouidence, iustice, nd gouernement; more re∣ugnant vnto His goodnesse, entlenesse, tendernesse and ercie; more obscuring, con∣unding, defacing, and begoa∣ng His most diuine, most ho∣, most pure, and most glori∣ous attributes, and properties? magine who can? Imagine, O ucifer, if thou canst? and if ou canst not imagine more bellious, more treacherous, ore impious, more hellish pposes against the State and
Person of thy Creator; the (since thy malice is incurable and yet an excellent caldron to boyle thine owne torment) ca out vnto thy imps and furies t ¦plie their fire-workes: for th maine engine wherewith o late thou hast inclosed suc multitudes of Idolaters vnt thy kingdome begins to crac call therefore vpon thy hang men to deuise new tortours, vp on thy pen-men to forge new  authors, to bowell, mangl poison Fathers, and perue Scriptures: let them face dow all the world that all are blin and must be blind in this myst¦ry (of darknesse thou meanest; yea let them turne themselue into Angells of light, and be¦come zealous pleaders of God cause: let them tell vs (among other stuffe) that His body i
of a peculiar nature; for that It could walke vpon the water, could vanish out of sight, and is a glorified body: as if also the body of Peter did not (by the like miraculous suspension) walke vpon the water? as like∣wise Philip vanished out of sight; or as if glorification did take away the bodily nature; or that He spake not of His body before it was glorified? But principally and with most fell violence let them crie, out vp∣on all arguing and reasoning in this busines. And withall let them alleadge, how, God sees not as man sees, nor is affectable as man is; that He often thinkes that precious, which man thinkes vile; He could passe through the wombe of a woman without defilement, &c. but aboue all, let them neuer forget to tell vs of Gods Omni∣potence,
and that we infinitely robbe the same, by denying these their monstrous supposes, as if there were any thing impossible with Him? And thereupon fi∣nally let them glory in the strength of their owne Faith, for that, it is so strong (numbd, seared, and senselesse indeed) as that with ease they can beleeue, that which their aduersaries are afraid once to imagine. And then last of all, let them close vp all with this pleasing con∣ceit, that surely their opinion is inuincible: for why? because (no doubt) it is builded vpon a rocke; yea the most high and mighty Rocke, the omnipo∣tence of God. But, a lasse, poore, miserable, abominable fooles! For if he be a foole that builds (though neuer so good stuffe) vpon a sandy foundation; then
how abominably foolish is he, that builds most rotten and most vile stuffe, vpon the most precious foundation? As if cob-webs were any whit the stronger for beeing built in pallaces? shall they not so much the sooner be swept away? so this their like planting such spi∣der-like, abominable stuffe thus at the right hand of God, so farre shall it bee from getting strength thereby, as that from thence it shall receiue most ter∣rible confusion. The power of God, who denies it, yea wee glory in it that it is omnipo∣tent: all things are possible vnto Him; we know it: Scripture teacheth it: namely, so far forth as they carrie an honour in the performance. For else, why saies an other Scripture, it is impossi∣ble that God should lie? but to
shew vs, that no kind of disho∣nourable actions (whereof ly∣ing is one) may bee ascribed vnto Him: All power also to disgrace, diminish, or destroy (finally) either it selfe or other, beeing impotence and vnstai∣ednesse. Before therefore they had presumed to affirme that God can doe so, or so; they should first with feare and reue∣rence, haue considered whether it might stand with His glorie, so, or so, to worke. For that His power does neuer worke out∣wardly to the creature-ward, but as it is first beckned vnto, and cited by His glory: that beeing the ground and square of all power and possibility whatsoeuer: euen the power of sinne beeing grounded here∣upon, because the glory of God is aduanced by subduing
sinne: All sayings, finally, in∣terpretations, and expositions whatsoeuer, beeing no further allowable, but so farre forth as they make for, or at least may stand with, This diuine Glory. The Church therefore inter∣preting those tearmes of Face, Eyes, Hands, Armes, Wings, Foote, &c. to be attributed vn∣to God improperly, and by way of His gracious condiscen∣ding vnto, and sympathizing with mans nature; because bee∣ing litterally taken, they are de∣rogatory vnto His eternall glo∣ry, whereunto simplicity and v∣niformitie is of absolute necessi∣ty. Are then thy supposes dis∣honourable vnto God? So far then is the Omnipotence from effecting them, or yeelding vn∣to them the least possibility of proceeding from Him, as that
infinitely it barres, repells and abhorres them. True indeed, time was, and wee blesse the time, when He tooke contempt vpon Him; (so loued He the world, mans misery otherwise beeing endlesse;) but what of that? is therefore honour and dishonour vnto Him all one? He passed through the wombe of a woman without defile∣ment; true: but was it without abasement? where then is the merit thereof?Psal. 123 5. Or he that hum∣bleth Himselfe, in that He does behold the things done in heauen and earth; did He not infinitely more humble Himselfe in de∣scending into the heart of the earth? Or because also He was scourged and crucified without any defilement, shall that also be counted all one vnto Him, that so thou mayest crucifie
Him, yea drinke His heart blood againe and againe? We grant also that as He is pure God, He is not onely vnpollu∣table, but also vnaffectable with mans actions. But shall man therefore be carelesse of his actions? The blasphemies of wicked men do no way hurt, or come nigh Him; shall it therefore be lawfull to bla∣spheame? If thou sinnest (saith Iob) what doest thou against Him:Iob 35.6. or if thou be righteous, what giuest thou vnto Him? wilt thou there∣fore be indifferent whether thou sinnest or not, whether thou does well or not? Hee sees not as man sees; well: His Eternall and incomprehensible nature indeed, sees all things in a moment, and without obser∣uing time, place, or circum∣stance: But as He hath set
Himselfe in reference and a∣spect vnto his creature, especial∣ly that creature whose nature He hath assumed, He now hath determined to see, though not peruersly as wicked men, nor shallowly as all men, yet by those courses and formes of conceiuing, which he hath in∣grained His creature withall: And therefore now forbeares not to say,Gen. 18.21. I will goe downe, and see whether they haue done accor∣ding to their crie, and if not, I will knowe: yea, now He will be af∣fected with his creature, will be angred and pleased with it, will accept honour and euen out∣ward respects from it: the holy Baptist therfore professing him∣selfe not worthy to vntie the lat∣chet of his shooes; and the good Centurion esteeming him too great to enter the roofe of his
house: yea now He calls for the bending of euery knee, and the fal∣ling downe before His footestoole, with all possible praise, honour, and glorie. Remember there∣fore, O presumptuous man, (wormes meate, dust, and a∣shes,) remember, that His re∣uealed Law, not his incompre∣hensible nature, must bee thy square and gouernour. His law bids thee euery where ascribe vnto Him all glorie, praise, power, and dominion; giue Him therefore that He cals for: and seeing He calls for honour, see thou offerest nothing vnto Him, but that which, at least, thou thinkest to be most excel∣lent, and most honourable: and whatsoeuer thou wouldest e∣steeme vile, inglorious, or con∣tumelious, if it were offered vnto thy selfe, so farre must thou
be from offring that vnto Him, or supposing it by Him, as thou wouldest be from blaspheming. Thou reachest foorth thy hand in loue or fauour vnto some man; he biteth it, or puts it in his mouth; does hee honour thee in so doing? or if thou ta∣kest such vsage for a fowle in∣dignitie, wilt thou offer the like vnto Him, vnto whome thou owest all honour, feare, dread, and reuerence vnto? Or be∣like when Hee so calls for ho∣nour, glorie, maiestie, &c. Hee meanes some other matter, or retaines some speciall no∣tion vnder those words, which man neuer meant? As if God speakes vnto vs in any other language but our owne? or when He forbids murther, adulterie, stealing, &c. He meanes any thing else by
such words, but as man (the ma∣ker of words, as God is the ma∣ker of all things) intended them to signifie? Then know, O per∣uerse man, that when he gene∣rally calls for honour, glorie, maiestie, wisedome, iustice, &c. to be ascribed vnto Him, Hee meanes nothing else but those respects and offices (saue onely in the highest degree) which man that made those words did first meane to vnderstand by such words; vnlesse thou mea∣nest to make His word of no effect, yea a very snare and in∣tanglement vnto vs, and to speake by contraries, and so to blaspheme it as thou doest his Omnipotence. But finally, were it so that these supposes did not indeed dishonour God, and so consequently might be allowed amongst things not impossible;
must they therefore of necessi∣tie be beleeued? because dooms day may be to morrowe, must it needs therefore so befal? God can raise children out of stones, and humane bodies out of mor∣sells of bread; must it therefore so be expected? does possibility impose necessitie? to what pur∣pose then is there so great la∣bour to prooue a possibilitie of these things, which both they are infinitely shut from, and also were it graunted them, they are neuer the nearer. As little does it helpe them, but more and more condemne them, when they challenge all argu∣ment, and renounce all kind of euidence which either sense or reason offreth in this cause. For are not Sense & Reason the ve∣ry ordinance of God, imprinted in mans nature when it was
most perfect? yea, in the estate we now are in, are they not the onely meanes whereby wee are both capable of His will, stand liable vnto his lawes, and tracta∣ble to His purposes? Does not euery word of God presuppose at least a reasonable vnderstan∣ding, being otherwise as com∣mendable vnto the beast? yea, when the Lord meanes most palpably to conuince men, does He not referre them to their senses? Are not not all His ex∣postulations & messages what∣soeuer, directed vnto the con∣science, whose ground is Sense and Science?Luk. 24 39. does He not send the vnbeleeuer to his touch,1. Cor. 11.14. to feele the truth of his resurrecti∣on? the Ruffian to the light of nature, to see the deformitie of long haire? and the hypocrite to the common opinion, to see
the madnesse of speaking in an vnknowne tongue?1. Cor. 14 23. yea, does He not euerie where conuince men of the greatest sinne, euen of Idolatrie, onely by this; be∣cause they worship that which their common Sense could tell them was a senslesse creature? whereas if the power of com∣mon sense bee so blind, or so weake, or so false, as that it can∣not certainely say, whether the thing it sees, handle, and tasteth bee a morsell of bread or not; how shall it be able to say, whe∣ther that which it worshippeth be a stone or not, yea and that so infallibly, as that the wor∣shipper thereof shall bee con∣demned, by the sentence of the most vpright Iudge, to be an I∣dolater thereupon? For may not the Idolater iustly plead, that howsoeuer his common
Sense told him it was a stocke, or a stone, yet might it indeede bee very God, as well as that which common sense affirmeth to be a morsell of bread, is not∣withstanding very God? And if it be replyed vpon him, that he might haue found Scripture to warrant the person of God in the appearance of bread; may he not readily answer againe, that there is as much Scripture to warrant the person of God in the appearance of a stone, for that the same Scripture cal∣leth as expresly the same God by the name of a stone, and a rocke, whereof for ought hee knowes, his God may bee a peice? And thus by the disa∣bling the iudgement of com∣mon sense, shall the Idolater be furnished with a faire excuse; and may in the ende be iustified
for taking a tree,Isa. 8.17. and making a fire to warme himselfe with one part, does make a god of the other: as wel as they which of the same dough fill their bellies with one part, and then fall downe in a∣doration before the other. So as this renouncing of common Sense, what is it but to cut in sunder the strings of Gods pro∣uidence (wherewith hee leads men in and out before Him, like a flocke of sheep,) and flat∣ly to peruert the rule, and bla∣spheme the proceedings of His Iustice? True indeed, the Scripture often tells vs, that hu∣mane wisedome and vnderstan∣ding is vanitie, foolishnes, yea, enmity with God; partly be∣cause the wisedome of most men is foolishnesse indeed, and partly because in comparison with Gods wisedome, the best
is but foolishnesse: but princi∣pally, because vnder the domi∣nion of vnbeleefe, malice, and concupiscence, it is abused, peruerted, and made enmity with God, as a weapon in the hand of a rebell becomes en∣mity against his Prince: But shall we therefore from these∣like respectiue, comparatiue, and abusiue speeches, proceed absolutely to frustrate and disa∣null the faculties themselues? Because the corruption of na∣ture must be wrought out, must therefore nature it selfe be de∣stroyed? Or because the light of nature must be subiect vnto the Faith (and so is a Prince to his Physitian, or Pilot, in their elements) shall therefore the faith cleane put out the light of nature? does ruling ouer sub∣iects consist in destroying sub∣iects?
cannot my beast be sub∣iect vnto me, vnlesse it falls downe vnder me? or because the Eye cannot heare, shall therefore the Eare put out the eye? So because sense and rea∣son cannot lay hold of future things, shall therefore the Faith deny their iudgement in pre∣sent things? yea take away these reasonable powers, and what shall become of the Faith? can it be ingrafted into the beast? For as the naturall man is the wild oliue, vntill he shoots into the true vine; so is the faith without effect, and must rerurne to Him that gaue it, vnlesse it finds a reasonable (though a wild) stocke to receiue it, and finde materialls vnto it, Or againe, how shall an infidell be conuerted (though in the act of conuersion these naturall
faculties most of all must be re∣strained) if Sense and reason be thus wholly laid aside? For the onely meanes which Grace v∣seth vnto mans conuersion, be∣ing preaching and miracles: take away Sense, and what shall become of preaching? how shall we heare, or how shall we read? So againe take away rea∣son, and what shall become of miracles? how shal they mooue admiration and astonishment, or get acknowledgement? In so much as it might bee a short decision of this whole cause, to retort their argument, and say; Common Sense does acknow∣ledge no substantiall change in this bread, nor any manner of miracle whatsoeuer; therefore no such matter in this businesse may bee supposed. For all the miracles that euer we read of,
not onely were acknowledged by these naturall faculties, but also were immediately directed vnto them, whereby to be con∣uaied vnto the heart of the na∣tural man, toward his conuicti∣on or conuersion. For the first intent of all miracles beeing to conuince vnbeleefe; either in whole, as in the vnbeleeuer, or in part, as in the weake belee∣uer: As for the vnbeleeuer; no∣thing can possibly come at him but that which this naturall light (beyond which he hath no capacity) can entertaine: and as for the weake beleeuer; considering that weakenesse of faith is (in degree) a want of faith, neither againe can he be outwardly wrought vpon to∣ward the remoouing that his weakenes, but by those manner of meanes which can in some
measure worke vpon vnbeleefe it selfe. So as those manner of miracles which this outward light of nature cannot acknow∣ledge, must needs be as vaine (and therefore not of Gods working,) as to point out the way to a traueller, and then to put out his eyes: the proper in∣tent of all miracles beeing this; outwardly to point vnto that supernaturall power, which in∣wardly Grace onely does re∣ueale. True indeed if the light of Grace does affirme or re∣ueale any thing which this light of nature cānot conceiue, or does contrary, there must it be suspended and renounced: but no such matter is there in the present businesse. For nei∣ther does the Scripture, nor (Scriptures expositour) the Church (the onely windowes
of the light of Grace) affirme any substantiall change, any mi∣racle, any con-or transubstanti∣ation whatsoeuer to be wrought at this time. For first concer∣ning Scripture; where does that affirme or import any such mat∣ters? That He tooke, brake, blessed, and gaue bread, &c. all the reports of the first instituti∣on doe auouch: but that this bread was conuerted, changed, or any way in the nature there∣of altred, but as all other bread is by the force of naturall dige∣stion, no Scripture makes any the least mention. It saith, This is my body; true: and who saies otherwise? but what meant He? when He called Peter a stone did he meane to turne him in∣to a stone, as He did the vnbe∣leeuer into a pillar of salt? He called also Herode a fox, Iudas a
deuill, and the Pharisies vipers; Himselfe also is vsually called a yon, lamb, stone, rocke, &c. s we haue noted; cannot these sayings bee true, vnlesse they prooue so indeed? If then the words may haue an other mea∣ing, and that by the law both of common and diuine formes of peech; must we needs suppose ese most incredible, mon∣rous and impious operations, nely for this ende to help the words to a meaning? yea had it ot beene farre better to haue rofessed ignorance of their meaning, then thus to con∣ound and offer violence vnto God, and all his courses to∣ard the filling vp of dead let∣rs with a meaning? Or belike annot the intent of our Saui∣ur in this His Ordinance take ffect, vnles these miracles, and
especially His reall presence a¦waies concurre? So indeed they must say, or else nothing i left them. But say then; wha was the intent of this our Sau¦ours Ordinance? If it was fo His remembrance; we know that the remembrance of a thing is not onely possibl without the presence of it, bu also does necessarily imply th absence of it, and no way po¦sibly can bee one and the sam with it. So farre also is the re∣membrance of a thing from re¦quiring any substantial change as that the more stable the ele∣ments and tokens are, so much the more firme and constan remembrance shall bee cause thereby. Secondly, if our Saui∣ours intent in this His ordi∣nance was not onely for His re∣membrance, (though to say
more, what is it but to adde vn∣to His owne words,) but also to giue the receiuers a full and re∣all possession of Him and all His benefits: yet also may such a purpose be effected, not onely without any compounding or changing of natures, or this re∣all presence, but also without these elements or Sacraments at al; namely, by the publication of the Gospell, wherein these benefits and all manner of pro∣mises, are most immediately tendred vnto the faith of the hearer.Hierom. in Psal. 147. In which respect one of the Fathers forbeares not to say, I take the Gospell to be the Body of Christ, and that more truely then the Sacrament: as also an other;Greg. Niss. in vit. Mos. Who so hath abundantly drunke of the Apostles springs, hath alreadie receiued whole Christ: and a third,Tertul. de resur. The word made flesh, must be deuou∣red
with hearing, chewed with vn∣derstanding, and digested by belee∣uing. Thirdly, if our Sauiours intent was not onely to refresh His remembrance vnto vs, or to giue vs a full possession of Him, but also to giue vs State and Sesne of such possession; yet neither hereunto is either His Reall presence, or these mi∣raculous supposes any way re∣quisite: no more then they bee requisite vnto the same intent in the other Sacrament of Bap∣tisme. Fourthly, if the intent of this our Sauiours ordinance be, not so much for our spiritu∣all partaking Him (which is the worke of faith alone,) nor a∣gaine onely for our visible par∣taking Him, (which is the in∣tent of euery Sacrament,) but further that we may mutually and ioyntly so partake Him,
which is the most proper in∣ent thereof) yet as we be seue∣lly made His visible mem∣ers, by the sensible partaking aptisme, where no such pre∣nce nor wonders are suppo∣d: so may we be ioyntly and utually made His visible bo∣e, by the sensible partaking is communion, though still e elements remaine simple, nd the same. Fiftly, were it to e supposed, that the intent of is His ordinance, were to ue grace and faith vnto the ceiuer; yet as the brazen ser∣ent was neuer more then (as zechias called it) a peice of asse,2 King 18 4. though all that looked vpon did liue thereby: so might these mple elements neuer exceede eir naked and simple natures, ough as many as did eate ereof should get grace there∣by.
Or finally, shall we suppo the intent of this Ordinance  be (as some of the Aduersari would haue it,) for the exerci and triall of our faith, whereb to learne to beleeue His omn¦potence, in first beleeuing H bodily presence in so vnlike appearance? and is this a fit e¦ercise for to learne a weak fai to beleeue, by putting vpon such manner of supposes? h that shall complaine of a wea stomacke, shall he be prescribe to go eate the strongest mea or he that can hardly stand o his legges, shall he for his re¦uery be aduised to runne race then indeed may he that com¦plaines of a weake faith, be w¦shed vnto the exercises of th strongest faith; and hee th would faine beleeue that th Sonne of God was once made
man for him, let him be taught for a preparatiue to beleeue, that hee thus daily takes the forme of a peice of bread for him; and so not only the means shall prooue incomparably more hard to brooke, then the end, most preposterously, but also that which was intended to comfort, or (suppose) to exer∣cise the weake faith, shall ouer∣whelme and breake the backe of the strongest faith: though (who knowes not) the intent of this Sacrament is to refresh and nourish, not to exercise the faith; and that the way there∣unto should be by supplying new strength, and producing more plaine euidence; not by increasing the burthen, and fur∣ther perplexing the Senses. Last of all, what intent or be∣nefit can there be imagined for
the behoofe of man, which our Sauiour cannot effect vnto vs without his bodily presence? yea, the least miracle that euer we read of, and whereunto the Omnipotence of God did least of all descend, were it but the softest voice, or the reaching forth of a hand, &c. would it not far more mooue and worke vpon the hearts of men, (were miracles now to be expected,) then this all-surpassing Reall-presence, and most stupendious concurring operations? Wee conclude then, that no possible or imaginable intent of this our Sauiours Ordinance, does take any the least furtherance by these manner of supposes, but rather is vtterly oppressed and confounded thereby. For whereas the principall intent thereof, is to put vs in minde,
that He tooke the forme of a man for vs: what doe these sup∣poses, but teach the flat contra∣rie, namely, that Hee hath left the forme of a man, and hath betaken vnto Him the forme of common bread; yea, not onely the intent of this Sacrament, but euen the foundation of the Christian faith is distempered; and (as much as in man lyes) o∣uerturned hereby. For if Hee that is a perfect man, seemes to be a morsell of bread; if Hee seemes to be bodily eaten, and seemes to be chewed with the teeth, when indeed Hee is nei∣ther so eaten, chewed, or any way touched: shall not men hereby learne to imagine, that likewise when He was here vp∣on earth, He might seeme to be a man, and yet was not; seemed to bleed, suffer, and die, and
yet indeed did not; and so the life and power of our Saluation to come to nothing? If then neither the words of our Saui∣our, nor any imaginable mea∣ning of them doe inforce this Reall-presence, where is the Scripture that must make vs put out our eyes, and renounce all our wits for gain-saying it? or that Scripture which tells vs that wee must eate His flesh, &c. does it of necessitie bind vs to beleeue, that here it is in the forme of bread? as if the true eating of this flesh indeed, did not consist in our onely belee∣uing on Him, and that before euer we tast of this Sacrament? Or must we suppose, that though no Scriptures expres∣ly affirme these things, yet by inference or circumstance they may imply as much? yea rather
the cleane contrary: For had our Sauiour intended, that this His Ordinance should bee ac∣companied with these so vn∣couth and incredible operati∣ons, together with such defor∣mitie of His presence, would he not haue giuen most ex∣presse intelligence and warning thereof at the first institution? would He haue giuen them no expectation of such wonders toward? no caueat to heare with the right eare, and see with a single eie, as alwaies in matters of more importance then appea∣rance, He vsed to quicken His hearers withall? yea, had the Disciples supposed any such wonders, would they haue bin so silent, without so much as as∣king, how can these things be? or they which were so apt to make questions, and difficulties, and
to wonder at his ordinary mi∣racles;Luk. 5.9. yea, to be so astonished at a strange draught of fishes, could they let passe this masse of miracles vnregarded? Or if they so easily swallowed all these things, how was it that by and by after, when our Sauiour did but say,Ioh. 16.1. Yet a little while, and ye shall not see me; and a little while and ye shall see me, &c. they were so troubled, as that they profes∣sed they knewe not what Hee said? could they conceiue im∣mediately before, how Hee could be here and there, and e∣uery where, in all the corners of the earth bodily present, and at the same time, and yet now could not vnderstand, how a lit∣tle while they should see Him, and a little while not see Him: and that when he told them that He went to the Father? Or must wee
suppose that the Disciples were so fully resolued of our Sauiours deity, as that therfore at this supper they made no maruell at any thing which He said or did. But had it been so, they would neuer so haue for∣saken Him presently after sup∣per, and runne away from Him, neither would they so slender∣ly haue beleeued His resurre∣ction, as to thinke it an idle tale,Luk 24 11. when it was first reported; espe∣cially beeing a thing farre more credible, and farre more be∣comming the Almighty (then the most tolerable amongst these supposes,) and whereof He had often forewarned them, and shewed many experiments of his power therein. But be it so, that the Apostles were so past all maruelling at our Saui∣ours workes: yet could they
be so vnmindfull of the weake beleefe, which future times are more and more subiect vnto, as in their Epistles and Go∣spells to leaue no mention of these wonders, concurring at e∣uery Sacrament, and beeing of such necessitie to be beleeued? which also had they with many repetitions and inculcations put posterity in mind of, yea e∣uen inserted into their Creed, yet all would haue been little e∣nough to haue procured vnto it the meanest degree of vnfained beleefe. Or againe, how is it that they so often rehearse in the Gospells the other mira∣cles, and yet will not vouchsafe any of these once the naming? was His turning water into wine so memorable, and yet His tur∣ning a morsell of bread into the perfect body of a man, or making
them both one (which is worse) not worth the speaking of? Could His multiplying loaues be more wonderfull, then this multiplying humane bodies? or was his transfiguration on the mount more meruailous, then this His transformation, or, transubstantiation, if it were not counterfeit? Or was the Apo∣stles power ouer Scorpions and serpents more worthy to be recorded, then this incom∣parably exceeding (supposed) power ouer the Mediatour, to cause Him corporally to de∣scend, when they and their successors should thinke good? To conclude then, as no Scrip∣ture affirmes or implies, so all circumstances are most contra∣ry to this Reall presence, and the rest of those intollerable suppo∣ses, which the light of nature is
so shent for gain-saying. What then, in the second place, saith the Church? For the Church hauing nothing but either from nature, as they are men; or from Scripture, as they are holy men; it must follow, that where nature and Scripture are silent, the Church must needes be silent.Aug in 3. libris. Nazian. in Poem. Those Fathers also which tooke vpon them to write the meruells of both the Testaments, for as much as they made no mention of these which are pretended, may it not be a faire argument, that the Church neuer knew them? would they haue omitted those wonders, which in regard of obscurenesse more needed, in regard of strangenesse more challenged, and in regard of (supposed) necessitie more re∣quired, notice and Faith at the
hands of men then any of the rest? Yea,Aug Tom 3. l. 3. de trin. cap. 10. hee which writ them at the full (as all things else) least he might be thought of forgetfulnesse to haue left out this biggest miracle, thus saith of the Sacraments in an other place, that because they are knowne vnto men, and by men are wrought, they may haue honour as things ap∣pointed vnto religion, but wonder as things meruailous they cannot haue. Euen thus much alone might it not bee sufficient to conclude the Church to be ne∣gatiue concerning these sup∣poses? or must we rather goe search from age to age, the par∣ticular determination of the Fathers and writers in their times about these matters? So indeed would the Aduersaries haue it: not because they thinke to help their cause thereby, but,
partly because they haue no succour left, where-vnder to shelter themselues, but this pretence; and partly for that by this kind of search, they hope to gaine time, and neuer come to an end. And yet notwith∣standing euen in this kind hath the facility of our writers fol∣lowed them, and discouered vnto the world how the anci∣ent Fathers neuer dreamed of these their monstrous supposes. And for a tast thereof, my selfe was purposed, Christian Rea∣der, to haue noted from the first (in time) of note, Clemens Romanus, and so through Igna∣tius, Iustine Martyr, Ireneus, Tertullian, Clemens Presb. Alex∣andrinus, Origen, Cyprian, Euse∣bius Emissenus, Eusebius Caesari∣ensis, Concilium Nicenum, Atha∣nasius, Cyril, Epiphanius, Ambrose,
Greg Nissen: Chrysostome, Greg. Nazien. Hierome, Austine, Ful∣gentius, Vigilius Concil. Con∣nt. Beda, Theodoret▪ Bernard, rtram Paschaus, Rbanus M. Dru hu Lumbard Bonauen∣ure, Ius canonicum, vntill the imes of the first protestation, he elements in this Sacrament were neuer esteemed to depart with their nature, nor were e∣er counted more then as gnes, seales, tokens, figures, acraments, &c. of this His bo∣y. But, partly for the reasons leadged in the beginning, I orbeare that labour; and partly ecause this kinde of proofe, ough the Authors were ne∣er so worthy, must be answe∣ed in the end as that woman of maria was by her country∣en;Ioh 4.42. now beleeue we not for thy ying, for wee haue heard Him
our selues: there beeing a nea∣rer and more contenting eui∣dence, which the prouidence of God hath ordained, to sta∣blish the heart of man, then the authority of any (especially farre set) whatsoeuer. But as touching the testimonies which they alleadge, we thus shortly answer: First, the Authors which they vouch, so far forth as that notorious Expurgatoriu Index hath had the trimming, or rather the bowelling of them, so farre wee might well returne them, as authors and sayings of their owne framing▪ Secondly, as holy and excel∣lent tearmes and respects as a∣ny of them euer gaue to this Bread; they gaue euery way as holy and as great vnto the o∣ther Sacrament of Baptisme. Thirdly, were it so that neuer so
many made for thē, yea should Angels from heauen teach vs to worship God in the shape or shew of bread, or in the likenes of any thing either in heauen or earth, we must abhor them. Fourthly, were it so that some ate Writers amongst their o∣her workes haue infolded  or rather rehearsed) this heir opinion; yet as holy Aaron was ouer-borne by the multi∣de, to set vp that golden alfe, which the people was so had vpon: so may it be ima∣ined that men, well otherwise ffected, might in the like dread f a more fearce beast, then the multitude, be carried with the reame of the times, and yet etest it as Aaron did, though o more excusable then Aaron as. Last of all; those testimo∣es which they truely alleadge
out of the auncient Fathers, for many hundred yeares to∣gether, immediately succee∣ding the first institution, are vr∣ged and pressed of them be∣yond and contrary to the intent of the writer: namely, by taking those sayings according to the fulnesse and propriety of the letter, which they by way o figure only, hyperbollically, o comparatiuely, vsed to amplifi and exaggerate the worthine of this Sacrament vnto the re∣ceiuer. As one saying of it thus Thinke not that thou receiue bread, or wine, when thou come to these mysteries, &c. euen a neighbours will say when the inuite one another, looke for  good cheere &c. meaning tha good cheere is not the inten of their inuiting: yea some per¦aduenture not forbearing to sa
flatly, that the bread and the wine are conuerted into His bodie and blood, euen as monie may be said to be conuerted into land, a penny into a penny loafe, &c. An other againe saying; the same thing which is beleeued with our faith, is receiued with our mouth: euen as the seale and the instrument, or the instrument and our act is all one. And some finally say∣ing, in the bread, is receiued that which did hang vpon the crosse; meaning, that nothing else is intended in the receiuing that bread, but the benefit of Him that so died. These manner of phrases, and patheticall am∣plifications, the Fathers are not scrupulous sometime to bestow vpon this Bread: yet so as withall it may easily be dis∣cerned, how they neuer had therein any further intent, but
partly to weane the conceit of the receiuer from regarding the belly-elements; and partly by so attributing vnto the signe, the vertue and power of the thing, the spirit of the recei∣uer might the more kindly glide out of earthly shadowes and resemblances, into heauen∣ly apprehensions and fruitions: so as from such kind of compa∣ratiue, ardent, and hyperboli∣call speeches, for any to gather positiue and absolute conclusi∣ons, beside the impiety of it, what is it else but extreame rudenesse and violence? And as well may they conclude,Deut. 9.1. that the Anachims had cities fenced vp to heauen;1. King. 1.40. or that the earth did rend with the sound of musicke; because so saith the letter of certaine Scriptures: or that Dauid was no man, because so
e saith, I am a worme and no an: or, that Paul was nothing, ecause he that planteth, &c. is othing, but God, &c. or, that we ust not bid a freind to din∣er, because our Sauiour saith, d not thy freinds, but the poore, :. euen all these may they nclude, as well as conclude at there is no bread in the Sa∣ament, because a Father th, looke not for bread when ou commest thereunto: yea and  well may they conclude m the same Father, that we ust not thinke to receiue His die at this Sacrament, be∣use also these be his words in  other place; Thinke not that n receiuest by the hand of man,Chrysostom serm de E∣char. 12. e Bodie of God, but that with gs thou receiuest fire from hea∣, &c. Yet these manner of ings they are which the Ad∣uersarie
culls forth; and stretc¦ing them vpon his monstro opinion, according to the v most and hyperbolicall exte of the letter, does thereupo boast, that the Church and F¦thers are wholly of his side: a so as one of the Fathers saith  the Pharisies,Hieron. in Matth lib. 3. cap. 16. that simplicem  quendo literam occidunt fil Dei, may it most truely be sa of them, that by their sticki in the naked letter, they bo (as much as in them lies) kil t Sonne of God, and also poiso the good meaning of the F¦thers, and all for the supporti and maintaining their most ab¦hominable Idol. But, blesse be God, the Church was a¦waies waking, and quicke ¦nough to discouer, and crie o against such abhomination and as shee neuer failed to r¦store
the truth and Sacraments vnto their integritie, as at any time they grewe tainted with vnwholesome compounds, or estered with traditions: so e∣specially hath She in her elder eares, purged and redeemed hem euen with her blood, frō asses of incumbrances and orruptions. In which busines, f Her zeale to restore this Sa∣crament to the first simplicitie, made Her pare it to the quicke, nd withall peraduenture to ereaue it of some allowable re∣spects, yet did Shee therein no otherwise then as necessitie re∣quired: considering how prone ans nature is to goe a who∣ng after euery fancie, and to ne the glorie of the inuisible God, not onely into the simili∣de of a beast that eateth hay, ut also into the similitude of
that which beasts and worme doe consume and eate. For such is the propertie of deceitful errour, when it cannot put the head forward, euen (serpent like) to put the taile forward when it cannot get in by mo likely courses, to fetch about b courses most vnlikely: when  sees vs strongly prouided o the left side, to trip vs vp (assail at least) on the right side: whe it cannot intice vs frō the lou of good things, to make vs do vpon the colours and shadowe of such good things: when  cannot drawe vs from the lou of Scriptures, to make vs fami¦liarly draw so neere, as to pinch presse, and tread vpon Scrip¦ture: when it cannot perswad vs that there is no such fruite i them, then to perswade vs t take the very leaues and lette
for the fruite of them: vnder which oftentimes if they carrie any breadth, it selfe will priuily lurke, and make them swell so fairely, and shew so goodly, as not onely the fruite shall be sha∣dowed and sowred thereby, but also it selfe in the stead thereof most greedily gathered and in∣tertained. As (for a faire exam∣ple) these words of our Saui∣our [This is my bodie,] when it perceiued them to carrie more breadth and compasse then the meaning intended did require; what does it but crowd it selfe within them, and filling them according (indeed) to the lati∣tude of the letter, hath gotten it selfe to be preferred (of the blind) before the meaning in∣tended; namely, because by it the letter is more fully repleni∣shed: euen as the theife, which
therefore challenged the gar∣ment, because his backe did better fit it. And this hath al∣waies beene the practise of this subtile serpent, to worke both backward and forward: as yet more specially we may note in this businesse of the Sacra∣ment. For whereas at first it perswaded men to make no reckoning of it, but to resort vnto it as to an ordinarie feast, as if they had no other houses where to eate and to drinke;1. Cor. 11. Hieron in 1. Cor. 11. and, (as a Father saith) rather to fill their bellies, then for the mysterie: now at last, after they were beaten from such grosse prophanenes, principally by the Apostles ad∣monition, to discerne the Lords bodie (from the vse, not from the substance of bread;) and partly by the diligence of suc∣ceeding Pastors, continually
beating their conceit from minding the outward element, (thinking it needles to put men in mind that still the outward element remained,) what does this cunning serpent, but accor∣ding to his old rule, assaile them with a most contrarie perswasi∣on; that when they would no longer esteeme it (grossely) as ordinary bread, he might make them now beleeue that it was no bread at all; and so conse∣quently (for some thing it must be,) His verie bodie indeed. Euen as those Barbarians did by Paul,Act. 18. when first they iudged him to be some murtherer, and after, vpon occasion of a little mira∣cle, would needs make him no esse then a god; so this sallying eruersenes of man (alwaies bbing or flowing in extremi∣ies for want of foundation to
settle vpon) through the insti∣gation of this crooked serpent, dealing by this Sacrament; whereas at first it esteemed it little, or no whit better then common bread, now, vpon oc∣casion of those wholesome ca∣ueats of the Fathers, will vp∣hold it to be no lesse then verie God: first, not discerning the bodie of the Lord; now will not discerne the body of the bread: first, not discerning the spiritu∣all ende of it; now will not dis∣cerne the elementall beginnings of it: first resorting vnto it to fill their bellies with it; now wil resort vnto it, as if they had no other God, to worship & adore it. Which monstrous extremi∣tie, beeing at first not perfectly discerned; partly because it was so incredible, & partly because the first broachers of it were
construed according to the Fa∣thers phrase, and as hauing no other intent in bestowing such superlatiue tearmes vpon it, but hereby to gaine reuerence nto it, and to preuent a relaps nto that Corinthian grossenes, was therefore accordingly the esse gainesayed: but when the corruption plainely appeared, nd beganne to be authorised; hen did the Church double her most vehement asseuerati∣ons, and protestations against t: yea, they heaped vp their ues for the ramming vp this gappe, which this monstrous opinion began to make, vntill the people of God might bet∣er awake: which when they did; and withall more perfectly e∣spying what a monster made to∣ward them, cried out vnto the Lord of His goodnesse to suc∣cour
them. Then Hee also a∣waked as one out of sleepe, and li a gyant refreshed with wine, d smite our enemies in the hinder parts, driue them home to their dennes, put them to a perpetua shame: And finally, wringing the sword out of the Beasts hand, which while the keepers slept, had made such hauocke withal; restored it in good time vnto the true protectors & de∣fendors of the Faith. Blessed be His Soueraigne goodnesse and Almighty mercy therefore. Notwithstanding as hee which is conuerted, oweth this office of thankfulnes to streng∣then others; and who so is deli∣uered out of thrall, cannot per∣forme a more acceptable sacri∣fice vnto his Redeemer, then by furthering others vnto the like freedome: so does it con∣cerne
vs, not to take our finall est vnder our arbours, or inioy  full fruition of this sweet li∣erty, so long as we know any f the people of God elswhere ill to groane vnder the like aptiuity. For this cause, as they home God hath possessed with temporall power, cannot ore commendably extend it, hen toward the rescuing of hose which so groane and ffer (the persecuting our bre∣ren for the truth sake, beeing farre more iust cause of hosti∣y, then the vexing our con∣derats for trafficke sake:) so e which rather inioy the be∣efite, then haue the command  such outward power, and are iuiledged to sleep (as it were)  the day, in respect of bodily faires, whereby the better to tch in the night vnto inuisi∣ble
busines; what should we d else but lift vp our voices, a aduance our pens, at least, bo for the incouraging the goo hearted vnto perseuerance, a also to keep the drowsie mided from falling into the lipit of darkenesse any mo And the rather, let vs prouo and stirre vp one another so doe; considering the doub diligence of the Aduersary (acording to the children of th generation,) and how vncessa they are (hoping belike wh they cannot preuaile by argment, to tyre by importunit in all kind of writings, paine and trauells, choosing, rath then faile, with those Ephesia to support this their Dia though it be with nothing b hourely out-cries: and shall  then thinke it modesty or po¦cy
to be silent? For what though the cause happily did not need our helpe, or that the truth were plaine enough? what then? Does God call for thy seruice, because He needs it? Is it any thing to the Almighty that thou art righteous? Is it not for thy exercise and benefite, that He puts duties and seruices vp∣on thee, that thou thereby mayst sweat out thy corrupti∣on, gather vp thy scattered soule, make it capable of blisse, and so waxe able to rellish hea∣uenly things? Speake then the truth, O man, whether the truth needs it or not: speake it for thine owne good: for it is sweet: speake it, because thou hast a tongue:Psal. 116.10. I beleeued (saith the sweet Psalmist) and therefore I spake:2. Cor. 4.3. we also beleeue (saith the most feruent Apostle) and there∣fore
speake: Then if we all be∣leeue,Psal. 34.3. let vs all speake, and mag∣nifie His name together: let vs drowne the noyse of iniquity with the voice of truth and righteousnes. And if the Ad∣uersary thinkes with outcries to make great their Diana of the Ephesians; let vs on the contra∣ry be more loud, and more con∣stant to cry, Abominable is Dia∣na of the Ephesians. As for faire and soft courses of argument, it is but lost vpon selfe-condem∣ned heretikes; as we haue more then probability to take these men to be, and that indeed they beleeue not themselues, that, which with extreame ter∣rours and tortours they force vpon the faith of others: whe∣ther it be their pollicie (most damnable though foolish) that by making men swallow this
monstrous opinion, they may then readily bring them to bibbe n all other creeping vn∣cleane errours whatsoeuer: or whether it be their pride, as dis∣daining to be thought euer once to haue erred, but in sharpenes of wit to goe beyond all the world, beyond all sense and reason, yea beyond God Himselfe: or whether it bee their foolish dotage vpon a few late forefathers (aboue a thousand yeares since the first institution) whose blind chil∣dren they choose rather to be, then the right-sighted children of God: though therein also they contrary their best fore∣fathers, which preferred the first rising of the Gospel, before the old Idolls of their heathen parents: or whether finally, the cause be in their siluer-smithes,
and shrine-makers, those chalicers, iuglers, and wire-drawers, which finding daily as much foyson and fa from this breaden, as those Preists of Bell euer found from that bourd, or those Ephesia crafts-men from their Idoll; doe set the people in the like foa∣ming rage against all that go about to vnmaske this thei belly-god: whatsoeuer be the cause of this their wilfull besot∣tednesse, there is no hope to preuaile with them by argu∣ment: all such courses are bu lost labours, and whereby part¦ly they gaine time, as he tha vndertooke to make an asse to speake, and partly wind them selues from the point: choosin with pleaders of fowle cause to be any where rather then i the matter, wherein they kno
they shall be grauiled and con∣founded. To such therefore, Reader, be thou as farre from offering argument, as they will be farre from imbracing the truth, which howsoeuer in o∣ther matters they sufficiently can discerne, and with much perspicacitie afford; yet in this businesse, they are resolued they must be blind, and will be blind: and therefore to offer them light herein, what is it els but to shew them their deadly foe to shoot at? the strength of this their hold beeing affected and wilfull darkenesse. But as for such as haue not yet cast themselues into the nurture of these leaders, and yet do retaine a better opinion of (falsly so called) Catholikes; though knowledge, wisedome, tempe∣rance, iustice, grauity, and cou∣rage
(if these be the onely mo∣tiues of their affection) haue a∣bounded euen in Pagans, hea∣thens, Philosophers, and natu∣rall men, (yea, and a scorne of equiuocation or treacherie a∣gainst their enemies:) yet if they haue not so vtterly re∣nounced their owne light, as not to bee able to discerne be∣twixt the most distant things that are, (the Creator, and the most common creature) such we make no question, will soone be brought to abandon the wil∣full maintainers of this mon∣strous opinion. And as wee hope, a little the sooner, if they shall direct their consideration along, by the thred and byasse of this present Treatise. The principal intent wherof, though it was for the protesting and exercising our due and necessa∣ry
indignation against this I∣doll, which so aduanceth it selfe in the Church of God, and in that very roabe which was or∣dained for the Body of our Lord; yet, as we hope, we haue not so giuen way to our zeale, but that sufficient matter hath gone together withall, as well for the inlightning and resol∣uing others, as for the infla∣ming of our selues. Notwith∣standing, for as much as that Spirit which requireth feruen∣cie, does also commend vnto vs the loue of our enemies, (and who are a Christians enemies, but Gods enemies,) therefore, Christian Reader, according to the example of that blessed Steuen, who at his last gaspe, prai∣d for those which immediately before he had charged with al∣aies resisting the holy Ghost;Act. 7. let
vs also thus farre pray for our Aduersaries: that so farre forth as they doe not maliciously renounce the light, nor witting∣ly make Inquisition for the blood of those that loue the light; they may find at the mer∣cie of God some degree of that Grace, wherewith that raging persecutor Saul, was tempted into the humble professor Paul: yea, Lord; they that are content to part with preferment, liber∣ty, loue of friends, and life (it seemes) rather then with that (falshood) which they are per∣swaded is the truth: would no they doe much more for the truth it selfe? That Truth the which many contemne, (a least which so runne ouer,) le them be vouchsafed: were no their eares bung'd vp, the might prooue vessells farre be
er retentiue, then many which yet are not refused. But ll things shall be done in His e time; to whome be ascri∣ed, all honour, and glory, and raise; all might, maiestie, and ominion; all feare, respect, d subiection; all grace, good∣esse, and long suffering; all art, good will, and good eaning; all thanksgiuing, lo∣ing kindnes, and deuotion, in e loue, grace, and fellowship f the Almighty, Three-in-ne, for euer, and euer, Amen. FINIS.
