12456 99854270 19680
A PVBLICATION OF GVIANA'S PLANTATION Newly undertaken by the Right Honble. the Earle of BARKSHIRE (Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter) and Company for that most famous River of the Amazones in America. Wherein is briefly shewed the lawfulnesse of plan∣tations in forraine Countries; hope of the na∣tives conversion; nature of the River; qualitie of the Land, Climate, and people of GVIANA; with the provisions for mans sustenance, and com∣modities therein growing for the trade of Merchandise: and manner or the Adventure. With an Answer to some objections touching feare of the Enemie. Like as I have watched upon them, to plucke them up, and to roote out, and to throw downe, and to destroy, and to plague them; so will I watch over them, to build and to plant them, saith the Lord: IER. 51. 28. He that obeyeth me shall dwell safely, and be quiet from feare of evill: PRO. 1. 33. LONDON Printed by William Iones for Thomas Paine, and are to bee sold in Trinitie Lane at the signe of the Horse-shooe. 1632.
A PVBLICATION OF GVIANA'S PLANTATION. To all faithfull, and well affected Christians. FOR as much as diverse of this Nation are departed hence into forraine Countries, as well for the propagating of Gods truth (most likely) as their owne pri∣vate benefite, whereby the word of the Lord might bee fulfilled in those Heathen (through Gods infinite goodnes & mercy) as in us Christians formerly saying,Rom. 9. 25. 26. I will call them my people which were not my people, and her beloved, which was not beloved, and it shall be in the place where it was said unto them, yee are not my people, that there they shall be called the children of the living God. Neither is it to be doubted, but that there are divers yet remaining, which retaine the like Christian resolution, but
want of true knowledge of a plantation (that may proove profitable to the Church of God & them∣themselves) causeth such to live heere like plants, which many times prove lesse fruitfull in their na∣turall soile, then when they are removed to places better liking them, for which cause I have thought good at this present, to discover briefly (to all such as are wel affected) the knowledge of a most hope∣full plantation newly undertaken by the right honorable the Earle of Barkeshire (Knight of the most noble order of the Garter) and compa∣ny, for that famous river of the Amazones in America, as by that which followeth may ap∣peare. But before I proceede further herein, I thinke it not amisse to speake somewhat of the lawfullnesse of plantations in forraine countries, whereby such as make doubt thereof, may be beetter satisfied herewith. Now in plantations there are these two princi∣palls to be considered: first, whether it be lawfull to remove from one place or countrey to another, secondly, whether it be lawfull to possesse a coun∣trey already inhabited by others: touching the for∣mer it hath these two severall heads, namely, ordi∣nary, and extraordinary; extraordinary is that when God shall please immediately to cause any man to depart from one country to another, as hee caused Abraham to depart from Haran to Canaan and Iacob to returne from Padan Aram to the land of his fathers,Gen. 12. 1, 4, 5, 31. 3. 18. but no man may now expect any
such removall and calling as these formerly had. The latter of these which I call ordinary, is that when men shall be either moved themselves, or by others to leave their ancient habitation, and goe and inhabite some other place: and this I take to be warrantable from that place of the Kings, where the children of the Prophets said unto Elisha,2 King. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4. ☞ Behold now, the place where wee dwell with thee is too narrow for us, Let us goe now to Iordan that wee may take thence every man a beame, and make us a place to dwell in; and hee answered goe, and one said, vouchsafe I pray thee to goe with thy servants, and hee said I will, goe so he went with them, and when they came to Iordan they cut downe wood. Which worke of theirs (without question) was no other to them then a new plantation, for they seing the inconvenience that was like to ensue by staying longer in their ancient habitation, did thereupon remove to a place more spacious, and commodious for them. ☞ In which progresse of theirs, wee may learne not to conceale any thing to our selves, which may as well prove profittable to others, but discover the same for their good, as doubtlesse the Children of the Prophets heere did. From hence then wee may gather, th men may lawfully remoove with their fami∣lyes from one place to another, and that for divers causes; as here the Children of the Prophets did, by reason of the straitnesse of the land wherein they dwelt: and it is to be feared that
many also among us have as great cause to doe the like, by reason of the daily increasing of all sorts of people, whereby cittyes townes and countries, are so thronged, that men can hardly live well one by another, appeareth by the generall complaint of many in these times. Neither hath the sayd straitnesse alone,2 Kings 8. 1, 2. caused a removall from one place or Country to another,Ruth. 4. 1. 2. but also famine,1 Chro. 10. 7. sword, and other alterations, happen∣ning in the world:Ier. 14. 18. And to speake truely, if that some in all ages had not departed into other countries with their families (as God was pleased to moove them by his divine providence) the world assured∣ly had not beene so much inhabited abroad as now it is,Heb. 11. 37, 38. and men had beene more burthened at home, then now they are: therefore such men deserve ra∣ther to be commended, then condemned by any, ☞ & that because they do nothing herein, but what God hath commanded, to be done, as appeareth Gen.Gen. 9. 1. 1. 28. Bring forth fruit and multiply and fill the earth: and this againe is ratified, to Noah and his sons, saying, bring forth fruite and multiply and reple∣nish the earth, which places, being no way contradi∣cted in all the scriptures (as I coulde ever perceive) are sufficient to proove the Lawfulnesse of plan∣tations in all ages. And the rather, when Kings shal bee likewise pleased to allow the same freedome to their naturall subiects, and that not onely to the poore, but also to the rich, who have the like privi∣ledge of removal, as appeareth by the places before mentioned,Gen. 13. 2, 5, 6, 1. and by that of Abraham and Lot, who departed one from the other, because the Land
wherein they dwelt were so strait that it could not beare them, by reason their substance was so great. So then wee see all men have a like liberty of removing from one place to another, excepting such onely,Rom. 12. 7. which for the time being have any of∣fice, or shall bee married,1 Cor. 7. 5. in which case men ought not to depart from their wives without consent,1 Pet. 3. 7. nor children from their parents without their liking,Colo. 5. 20. 22. nor servants from their Masters without their leave. It remayneth in the next place, that I shew the lawfulnesse of possessing a countrey already inhabi∣ted by others, which is our second question: True it is, that all men through Adams fall were deprived of the glory of God, and worlds good, until by Christ the use of the creatures was againe restored to all beleevers, therfore the right of that which we possesse, commeth now to us by Christ, for which cause, the heathen have no right to that which they deeme theirs,Psal. 115. 16. notwithstanding, the Lord hath beene pleased to suffer such to live on earth with his,Gen. 2. 32. and not to be rooted out from the place of their habitations untill the day of harvest,Isay. 27. 13. during which time the Land wherein such have li∣ved hath beene called theirs:2 Chron. 32. 21 As the land of the Phi∣listims, the land of Egipt,Ier. 37. 7. and of Ashur, of whom it is said,Isay 13. 14. that he returned with shame ☞ to his owne land, and of the Egyptians it is said,Isay. 19. 17. they shall returne ☞ into their owne lande:2 Kings 5. 2.  In like manner, the lande of Iudea and Israel,Psal. 44. 1, 2, 3. being taken from the Heathen (by Gods speciall command and assistance) was afterward called ☞ their owne Land:Ezech. 36. 17. for as the
Israelites land was not the heathens as saith the Pro∣phet,Esa. 14. 1. Lo I raise up the Caldeans to possesse the dwel∣ling places ☞ that are not theirs,Habak. 1. 6. neither was the hea∣thens land the Israelites,Gen. 24. 37. as God telleth Abraham; saying, know for a suretie that thy seed shall bee a stran∣ger in a land ☞ that is not theirs;Gen. 15. 13. from whence we may gather, that God permitteth not his to dis∣possesse a people or nation of their ancient habita∣tion for the enlarging of their owne borders; ne∣verthelesse, if such shall bee willing that Gods people shall inhabit with them, as Abimelech was willing that Abraham should dwell with him in his land where it pleased him,Gen. 20. 15. & 47. 5. 6. and Pharaoh liked well that Ia∣cob and his sonnes should dwell with him in the best of the land of Egypt. In such a case men may doubtlesse possesse a country already inhabited by others: ☞ But the inhabitants of Guiana are willing that our nation should inhabit that goodly and spatious country with them (as appeareth more fully in Mr. Harcourts relation of Guiana dedicated to the Kings most excellent Majestie, 1626) Therefore without all question, the plantations there made of late by our nation are lawfull. Thus having briefly shewed the lawfullnesse of plantations in forraine Countries, for the better satisfing of such as make doubt thereof, I come in the next place to speake somewhat of the nature of the river, qualitie of the land, climate, and people of Guiana, with the provision for mans sustenance, and commodities therein growing, whereby such as are ignorant of the same, might bee encouraged to adventure for the good of themselves, and of
those poore natives, which sit still in darknesse, and in the shadow of death. As touching that great and famous River of the Amazones in America,Harcort. it is called for the excel∣lencie thereof, (by Iosepus A costa) the Empresse and Queene of all Flouds, and for the large extent of the same, it is called by others the sweet Sea, supposed to bee the greatest River (not onely of all India, but also) of the whole world; it is said to slow from the Mountaines of Peru, and runneth with many windings and turnings for the space of 1500 leagues, containing at the mouth thereof neare sixtie leagues in breadth; in it are many I∣lands, divers of which are inhabited by the Indi∣ans; it doth ebbe and flow neare three hundred leagues, and hath in it greate store of excellent fi∣shes for the use of man: of which more shall bee said hereafter, when wee shall come to speake of the provisions of the country for mans sustenance. The quality of the land is of divers kindes; as low, middle, and mountainous, (as here with us) it aboundeth in woods of divers sorts, having plaines in some parts thereof, with plentie of grasse, besides pleasant streames of fresh waters, all which are very needfull and fitting for a plantation. The earth in those parts is of sundry mixtures, as blacke mould, clay, rossey, and such like, be∣sides stone for building if occasion serve. The seasons there differ much from ours, for the dry weather which wee call there summer, be∣ginneth about August, and the raines and windes, which we account there winter, begin about Februa∣rie;
which latter season is termed by us their win∣ter, by reason of the raines then falling extraordi∣narie, and not by reason of the coldnesse of the weather; for there are no frostes or snowes, as with us here, ☞ but a continuall spring and sum∣mer season: for no sooner doe the leaves wither and fall away, but presently it beginnes to spring againe, as here with us some yeares it seemeth the like; for when our autumme proves somewhat warme, then commonly appeareth a second spring, which yet never commeth to perfection, and that by reason of the suns declining from our horizon, and the cold winters present approaching, which causeth alwayes our latter spring to keepe backe, untill the time of our summer season: ☞ which in Guiana is not so, for there is little difference of heat and cold throughout the yeare, but a most pleasant growing weather, which commonly cau∣seth those parts to bee much more fruitfull then many other parts of the world. ☞ The day and night are there alwaies equall, the Sunne rising at six of the clocke in the morning, and setting at six in the evening or neare therea∣bout the yeare throughout. The provisions for diet are many, as first, the roote called Cassavie, of which the Guianians make their bread; there is likewise a kinde of great wheat called Maix, it yeeldeth great increase, and maketh excellent meale, or flower for bread: of the aforesaid Cassavie, and this wheat, is made a sort of drinke called Paranaw, much like the best march beare here with us; other sorts also they
have, which for brevity sake I omit here to speake of. There are Deere of divers sorts, wilde Swine, Hares and Conies in great plenty, besides which there is a great beast called Maipnry which in taste is like beefe, and will take salt; there is also ano∣ther creature which usually commeth into the fresh waters, and feedeth upon the grasse and weedes in the marshes, (and is called by us the sea-Cow) be¦ing in tast like beefe, and will also take salt, as the former; of these there are great store in their sea∣sons, they wil serve wel for the victualling of ships homeward bound, as of late hath beene proved. Of fowles there be divers kindes, namely, wild-duckes, wilde-geese, hennes, herons, cranes, storkes, pheasants, partridges, pigeons, stockdoves, parrats of sundry sorts, besides ravenous fowles, and hawkes, with divers other sorts not knowne in these parts. The variety of fish is great, as first, mullet, sea∣breame, soale, scate, thornebacke, swordfish, seale, a fish like a sammon, but differing in coulour, shrimpes, lobsters, and oysters, other sorts there are, besides freshwater fish of many kindes, which in these parts of Europe are not knowne to us. The fruites there growing are the Pina, Planta∣na, Medler, Plumbes and Nuts of divers kindes, be∣side store of Potatoes, as for the Pina, it exceedeth all other fruites in those parts, being in taste much like ripe straberries with clarret wine and sugar; the Plantana tasteth like an old pippin, the medlers exceede ours in greatnesse, and the nuts in sweet∣nesse.
Having thus briefly touched the severall sorts of provisions necessary for mans sustenance, it remai∣neth I shew the varietie of commodities therein growing for the trade of Merchandise, which in short-time (by Gods assisting our endeavours) may bee brought to returne great profit to the un∣dertakers. The first commodity of estimation there grow∣ing are sugar-canes, whereof in some parts there are store, which by orderly planting and erecting of convenient workes, for boyling and making of sugars, may (through Gods blessing) bee returned yearely great profit to the adventurers, ☞ as the plantation of sugarcanes made hertofore in Barbary by the Moores, and since that in Brasseile by the Por∣tugals may witnesse. There is also cotton wooll growing of the finest sort, it is a profitable commodity, for making of sustians, callicoes and candle-wicke. There is a naturall hempe, or flax, of great use, it is much like raw silke, and is called of some silke∣grasse. There are likewise many commoditie for diers, as namely a red berry called Anotto, which dieth a perfect oringe-tawny in silke, and a yallow in cloath, of which there may bee gotten good store every season▪ for my selfe with some o∣thers setting forth a ship formerly for those parts, (by way of trade) received upon returne, above three thousand waight of the said Anotto, which then bore a good price here, but much better in
the neatherlands, other dyes there are (besides hope of Cutcheneale) which at this present I pur∣pose briefly to passe over. There are likewise found of late, store of Nut∣megs growing, with their Mace, some of which I have recevied upon returne of my foresaid adven∣ture, which noe man (I suppose) but my selfe can shew the like, excepting some gentlemen, which upon request have received some of mee, which no doubt may in short time bee brought to a more fuller perfection, by either cropping the old trees and dreaning the waters from them, or by trans∣planting the young trees, as by experience is com∣monly seene, how that nature is much helped by art and industry. There is likewise Gumma, Lemina, Barrata, Ginnipepper, long Pepper, Cascia fistula, Tobac∣co, spleene stones, speckled wood, Hony and wax▪ As for mineralls, or mynes of mettals, it is very likely, this Country affordeth many, not onely of the basest, but also of the richest, which here∣after may come to bee discovered, if God shall be pleased, which hee grant to his glory, and our good, or that otherwise they may ever lie hid. Now as touching the nature of these people they are generally held harmelesse, tractable, trusty, and somewhat laborious; in which respect they differ much from all other Americans, and which is better to bee liked in them, there is good hope conceived of their conversion to the Christian faith,Act. 16. 9. 10▪ for as the man of Macedonia prayed St. Paul in a vision, to come into Macedonia and helpe them;
so have some of these poore ignorant soules desi∣red Captaine Charles Leigh,Purchas. p. 1021. to send into England for some men to teach them to pray; since which, one being converted,Harcourt. p. 9. and became a Christian, be∣ing at the point of death, desired some of our na∣tion then present, to sing a Psalme with him, which being ended, hee told them hee could not live, & did withall acknowledg, that he had been a wic∣ked sinner, but did hope that hee should bee sa∣ved by the precious blood of our Saviour Iesus Christ; and moreover, hee desired all of them there present, to beare witnesse that hee died a Christi∣an; ☞ yea said hee, a Christian of England. A happy worke no doubt it were to recover those poore soules out of Sathans snare, who are taken captive of him at his will;2 Tim. 2. 26 may wee not well feare, that as hee murthers the body that denies it nourishment when extremity requires it, so doth hee no lesse to the soule of whom nourishment is implored,Alsted chron. in tit. deconuer. and yet hee denieth it; was not the Nu∣bians case most miserable, (once a Christian people in Africa) when having not able Ministers of their owne, they sent to the Abassines their neighbours for teachers, and were denied; did not such deserve worthily the calamity of a perpe∣tuall ignorance, who so uncompassionately sligh∣ted the reasonable request of others?Heylin . 121. on the con∣trary when some of the East Indians sent their Embassadours to Demetrus Patriarke of Alexan∣dria for teachers to instruct them in the faith of Christ, hee willingly condescended thereunto, and sent not onely such as preached true doctrine,
but also adorned the same by a holy conversation, so that by their pious diligence, they wonne many of them to the faith, which was the crowne of their reioycing: and who knoweth, but that he that in∣fused such desires into an inhabitant of the East in∣dies, may worke as powerfully in them of the west, and may likewise blesse these as he blessed them with the lessed light of his most holy word, to which let every faithfull Christian say, Amen. Now seeing that the hope of worldly gaine cau∣seth most men to adventure in one kinde or other, and that the gaine conceived of this plantation may prove very profitable both to the Church of God and all adventurers, it may therefore the better in∣courage & stirre up men of all sorts, to become ad∣venturers herein, ☞ and chiefly such as have recei∣ved of the Lord both grace, and ability, for the fur∣ther setting forth of his glory. And although it cannot bee denied but that our nation of late yeares, hath beene very forward in setling of divers plantations beyond the seas, yet have they not all thereby so much glorified God, as could be wished, nor dealt so faithfully with some adventurers, as was expected, which thing no doubt being considered by many, hath beene the onely cause of keeping them backe from being adventurers; and no marvell, if when wee consider the persons commonly sent (I speake not of all, but of such onely) whose lives being base and idle here at home, can hardly bee expected to be much better abroade in forraigne plantations, which to speake truely, have beene no other (for
the most part formerly) then common sinkes, wherein too many grieved fathers have cast forth their desperate ofspring, and the commonwealth her most lawlesse inhabitants, such as by their con∣versations cause the good name whereby they are called,1 Pet. 2. 12. to be rather evil spoken of amongst the Gentiles, then otherwise: by meanes whereof it hath happe∣ned that the heathen have deemed that God as evil as their owne, whose servants were worse then themselves, doth not God and nature teach, that whatsoever a man soweth,Gal. 6. 7. that shall hee also reape, not grapes of thornes,Matth. 7. 16 nor figgs of thistles can men expect. And now, though plantes of grace (like fruitfull trees) are chiefest to be wished for in al plantations, yet no doubt may civill men be sent in case of want, as natures flowers for ornament: I wish therefore that care were had, ☞ to send those plants, and leave the bad. As for the temper of the climate it exceedeth not so in heate as some men have thought of it, for though the scituation be in part under the equino∣ctial, yet is it habitable, as appeareth by the experi∣ence of our countrimen, which have lived in those parts, and found it both healthfull, and pleasant; for God in wisdome hath so ordered the heavens in their horizon, as that by meanes of a brieze (or fresh gale of winde) blowing in the day time, it quallifieth the heate, ☞ and maketh the climate much more temperate, as with us is often felt the like in heate of summer. Besides the dewes there falling commonly in the night, addeth much to the cooling of that climate,
and which is to bee noted, the continuall absence of the Sunne from the horizon, for the space of twelve houres every day, cannot but cause the temper of that clymate to be moderate, there be∣ing a perfect mixture of heat and cold, each qua∣lifing the other in the space of twentie foure hours by an equall division of day and night, as before hath beene shewed. Their houses are built (most commonly) in length, like our barnes here with us, some of which are so large, as that they containe in them above an hundred persons, having therein hanging beds, (in which they lie) called hamackoes, made of cotten woll very artificially, their vessels for use are made some of clay, of which sort some are so great as that they will containe more then one hogshead of water. They will worke a month or more for an axe of eighteene or twentie pence price; for which they will fell your timber, cleare your ground, plant your sugar-canes, Anotto, and Cotten trees, and build your house after their fashion: ☞ which in other plantations is not so, for in all other our plantations, the adventurers are enforced to car∣ry men over to doe their worke for them, least o∣therwise they bee driven to worke themselves, as Virginia, St. Christophers, and new England; with others can witnesse. Besides which, in most former plantations except new England, men have adventured onely upon hope of one commoditie (as namely Tobacco) but here are many more commodities then one, (as
hath beene shewed) ☞ therefore is this plantati∣on more hopefull then all others: the foundation of which being already laid, may give men better incouragment to become ioynt adventurers here∣in, especially being thereupon presently intressed in the shipping stocke, and profits of the said plan∣tation; for the preservation whereof, wee have not onely sent divers honest and able men (mar∣ren and other) but also some peeces of great ord∣nance, with amunition, and other materials very usefull towards building of a fort, for the better securing of our planters persons from the danger of an enemy; having moreover caused a pinnace to bee sent to abide with the Colony in the river, for their better safetie and trade in the country; ☞ intending likewise this summer (if God shall bee pleased) to sett out a new supply of more men (as artificers and others) besides women, as also more ordnance, amunition, and other materials, fitting for the defence of the plantation, besides another shipp, greater then the former, to stay and abide there together with the Colony in the river, for their better defence and trade in the country a∣foresaid: in which supply I also purpose (God willing) to goe with my wife and friends, to inha∣bit some part of that spacious and goodly coun∣trie. But here some may obiect feare of the enemy.Object. Answ.Answ. it is no other then what hath bin usualy ven∣ted at the first setting forth of al our plantations for America, as Virginia and others can witnesse; and if there were so great cause to feare (as some have
supposed) men would not assuredly have adven∣tured so freely; but this plantation here mentio∣ned is farre from the Spaniards habitation, and therefore lesse cause to be feared. But yet it may bee further obiected,Object. that though the Spanyard bee somewhat farre distant, yet the Portugals in Brasill (being neare vnto it) may prove as ill neighbours as the other.Answ. Answer, if wee consider the spatiousnes of the country (being supposed to bee more then twenty times greater then this kingdome of England) wee have no such great cause to feare them; for if wee like not their neighbourhood, (there being roome enough, and divers goodly rivers besides in the country) wee may (if we please) goe further out of their reach, where no doubt (through Gods assisting of our indeavours) wee may come to returne as great profit (by meanes of sugar canes and such like commodities growing in those partes) as in the river aforesaid: for to speake truly, it were great weaknesse in any to presume to sit neare an enemy, and have not sufficient strength to oppose him, or having roome enough to go out of his reach, will notwithstanding abide neare him; yet I deny not, but that a Colony may bee able to subsist neare an enemy by meanes of fortification, and especially when they are such as feare God, being provided with amunition, victuall, and all other things need∣full for the defence of the same: for to raise a fort for the reliefe of a Colony, and not to victuall it, (as some haue carelesly neglected through indiscre∣tion) were to make it (with such) our peoples
grave, and not their preservation: and if an hun∣dred of our nation, or thereabout (having nei∣ther fort, nor artillery for defence,) were able (not long since) by meanes of the natives, to cause a∣bout eighteene hundred of the enemy to retrayte, and abandon the river, with losse of many of their lives; how much more then being fortified, and fitted with all things needfull for the defence of the same, may wee bee better able, (through the helpe of the almighty) to repell and beat backe a more potent power. Now as the raising of forts for the defence of Colonies, and neglect of storing them with victuall, and other things needfull for preservati∣on of the same, sheweth the great indiscretion of some sort of people: ☞ So in like manner, is their folly as great, who looking after present profit, neglect planting provisions needfull for the preservation of their lives: which wee taking into consideration, have given expresse charge, that first of all they take care to plant provisions needfull for sustentation, whereby they may bee able in short time to subsist of themselves, without helpe of the natives, which usually furnish our English plantations with store of provisions for diet, at marvelous low rates; yet notwithstand∣ing wee have sent thither some few cattell for breed, befids other creaturs, which in those parts have not yet beene heard of by us to have beene a∣mongst them. And if any man shall desire to bee further satisfi∣ed concerning the proceed of the said plantation,
or shall make doubt of any thing, they may please to repaire to the place of meeting (hereafter men∣tioned) and there receive further satisfaction. Now as touching the manner of the adventure, it is as followeth. Every one that shall be admitted into the Colo∣ny, or company of the Right Honourable the Earle of Barksheire for his plantation in Guiana, is to be admitted one of these three wayes, that is to say; either in person and purse, or in purse, or in person onely. The first are called personall adventurers, the second, purse adventurers, and the latter are servants to the Collony. Concerning the former, they are such as not onely adventure their persons, but also their purses; of which sort none may bee admitted un∣der fifty pounds at least, put into the ioynt stocke (being a single share) in consideration whereof, e∣very such adventurer is to have for his personal ser∣vice (over and above the profits of his stocke of adventure) his transportation and diet free, (both in the passage and country,) besides a cer∣taine stipend or yearly allowance (as others) to∣ward the maintenance of his apparrell & bedding, and also aleventh part of a twelfth, of all the pro∣fits that shall arise by the industry and labours of the Collony beyond sea; and lastly, a proporti∣on of land over and besides his stocke of adventure of fifty poundes, or more as every one pleaseth to put in, ☞ whose respect in the Collony, is held fitting to be measured according to the greatnesse of every mans adventure, worth and qualitie.
As for those which are called purse adventurers, they are such which adventure their monies but not their persons, ☞ whose names, and summes adven∣tured, are not onely registred, but also acknowled∣ged by indenture under seale, by Authority from the said Earle, (for their better security, and more assurance of faithfull dealing) to become ioynt ad∣venturers with the said Earle and company, for his plantation aforesaid, and that at every returne, (du∣ring the terme of five yeares) after the first returne from the plantation, every adventurer, his heyres, executours, administratours or assignes, shall re∣ceive the profits of his stocke of adventure, and shal the first returne from the plantation (after five yeares shall be expired) receive out the iust residue and remainder of his stocke of adventure, & profits therof, or may if he please, continue the same lon∣ger in the ioynt stocke then the terme aforesaid, for his further benefit: and shall have more∣over, set forth for his use a proportion of lande cor¦respondent to his said stocke of adventure: and to the ende that every adventurer, his heires, execu∣tors, administrators and assignes may clearely see, that they have the due proportion of the profits of their adventure, it is covenanted in the said inden∣ture, that the heires, executors, administrators & as∣signs of thē shal upon every setting forth & return, see the full summe of all the disbursements, and re∣ceits from time to time, paid and received, tou∣ching the proceede of the said ioynt stocke, and plantation: which in like manner, every adventu∣rer, as well personall, servant, as other, hath the
like indenture for their better satisfaction, and more assurance of faithfull dealing, as aforesaid. Now concerning the latter, which are servants to the collony, they are such, which adventuring onely their persons, are bounde by indenture to serve the said Earle and company in the plantation five yeares, in consideration whereof, the said ser∣vantes, (as well wives, maides, as men) are to have their transportation thither free, as also their diet, lodging, apparrell, and all other materialls needfull, provided for them, at the charge of the ioynt stock, for the terme aforesaid (apparrelling themselves here for the first yeare) and to receive moreover, (for their beter incouragement) a twelfth part of all the profits that shall arise by their labours and industry, and the women a fifteenth (as of sugars, nutmeggs, mace, cotton wools, Anottoes, honey, wax, tobacco, mineralls, and all other such like commodities, as shall be gotten in the planta∣tion, in manner aforesaid) as also at the end and terme of five yeares, every man servant to have li∣very, and season of thirty, and some forty acres of land, and women twenty, which said landes are to be set forth for their use, by the governour, or go∣vernours, and councell then being. And to the end that every one may know what profits are due unto them by reason of their service, it shall be free for them to make choyse of any two or three amongst themselves, which shall once in the yeare, or thereabout (upon reasonable request made to the governour, or governours then being) see the accompts, and what is due unto them up∣on
the foote of the same, ☞ for their better satis∣faction and avoyding of suspition. And furthermore all such servants, as shall bee artificers. As Suger-cane, and Vine planters: Su∣gar bakers, Druggists, Dyers, Lapidaries, Mine∣rallmen, Refiners, Founders, Potashe makers, Bar∣bersurgeons, Ingeners, Gunners, Survayers, Ship-wrightes, Mill-wrightes, Carpenters, Ioyners, Coopers, Turners, Wheelers, Sawyers, Oare ma∣kers, Blacke-smiths, Locke-smiths, Gunn-smiths, Pike-makers, Armorers, Cutlers, Edge-toole-ma∣kers, Ropers, Sayle-makers, Mariners, Net-ma∣kers, Fishermen, Bakers, Butchers, Brewers, Di∣stillers of hot-waters, felt-makers, Spinsters, Wea∣vers, Taylers, Tanners, Curriers, Tawyers of Furres, Fellmongers, Girdlers, Glovers, Shoo∣makers, Potters, Masons, Bricke-makers, Bricke-layers, Basket-makers, Thatchers, and such like; are to receive a ninth part of a twelfth (more then others, which are no artificers, of all the profits that shall arise by their labours, and industry) as a recompence of their severall arts for their further incouragement. And lastly, it shall and may bee free for every servent appertaining to the colony, to put into the ioynt stocke such summes of mony, as they shall be able from under fifty pounds to five (as already some have done) the receit of which summes being acknowledged by indenture, shall be as sufficient a warrant for them to receive the iust profits of the same, correspondent to their severall stockes of ad∣venture, as to any other before mentioned.
And now to conclude, seeing that workes of this nature require some time for preparation of ship∣ping, and all other things needfull for transportati∣on, and that the summer season is most convenient for the performance of the same: it is therefore thought fitting to give notice to all such, as shal be∣come willing adventurours with the said Earle and company, to bring in their stockes of adventure, (so soone as conveniently they may, and the sooner the better, for the reasons aforesaid) to the place of meeting appointed to be kept (for the receiving in of adventurers, and servants to the company) at the house of Mr. Edwards the Kings Pikemaker in Phillip lane neare Cripplegate: London: which first meeting is appointed on thursday the first of March (at two of the clocke in the afternoone) and so to continue every thursday after, untill such time as the ioynt stocke, number of adventurers, and ser∣vants shall be full. Thus having briefly shewed the hopefulnesse of this plantation, above others, whereby such as are faithfull (having ability) might become chiefly adventurers herein, and that such as are outwardly poore (yet rich in faith) might likewise adventure their prayers with them,Iam. 2. 5. for the prosperous suc∣cesse of this new plantation, that it may bee as a Vineyard which the right hand of the Lord hath planted, and may growe up before him in the wil∣dernesse (being filled with the fruits of righteous∣nesse, which are by Iesus Christ, unto the glory and praise of God) amongst the Heathen, who seeing our pure conversation may bee wonne thereby to
the knowledge and love of God our Father, and the Lord Iesus Christ: which that they may so do, grant O most gracious God, that as thou wast plea∣sed to love us, when we were enemies as these, so likewise bee pleased to love these with us, that we and they may both agree to worship thee in since∣rity of heart, and vnity of faith. Which worke of grace and power being thine, O let thy worke and power appeare,Psal. 90. 18. 19. and on thy servants light, And shew unto thy children deare, thy glory and thy might, Lord let thy grace and glory stand, on us thy servants thus, Confirme the workes we take in hand, Lord prosper them to us. Amen. I. D.
