1335 99836595 879
A SHORT AND PLAINE DIALOGVE CONCERNING THE vnlawfulnes of playing at Cards or Tables, or any other game consisting in chance. OFFERED TO THE RELI∣gious consideration of all such as make conscience of all their waies. 1. THESSAL. 5.21. Trie all things and keepe that which is good. Imprinted at London for Richard Boile.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL MA∣STER LIONEL MADDISON, Maior, the Aldermen his Brethren, and the godly Burgesses of Newcastle vpon Tine; IAMES BALMFORD Wisheth the king∣dome of God and his righteousnesse, that other things may be mi∣nistred vnto them. THat which heretofore I haue propounded to you (right Worshipfull and beloued) in teaching, I doe now pub∣lish to all men by printing, to wit, mine opinion of the vnlawfulnes of games con∣sisting in chance. My desirets either in∣formation, if I erre in iudgement, or re∣formation of so leud a practise. But whe∣ther I erre or no (which yet I would glad∣ly vnderstand,Rom. 3.7. for I ought not to teach
an vntruth, though to Gods glorie) yet there is none, zealous indeede against sin, desirous from the heart to reclaime sin∣ners, and who deeply considereth the grieuous abuses, which accompanie di∣cing and carding (as horrible swearing, dangerous quarelling, losse (I say not of good houres, but) of nights and daies, and the pitifull vndoing of too too ma∣ny) but will remember that1. Cor. 6.12. all things are not expedient, which are lawfull, and therefore abstaine from such Heathenish pastimes, that, if by their example they cannot reforme, they may be sure1. Cor. 8.9. they doe not confirme gamesters in their inor∣dinate walking. Which respect, the 7. In∣iunction forbidding Ministers to vse these vnlawfull games, may be supposed to haue. Now that which authoritie ex∣acteth of Ministers, doth Religion re∣quire of all true Professors. For as the one are to be1. Tit 5 3. ensamples to the flocke, so the other are to bePhil. 2.15 lights in the world. And therefore as Paul saith,1. Cor. 8.10.13. If meate
offend my brother, I will eate no flesh while the world standeth: so euery true Christian should say, and that with more resolution (for Play is not so necessarie as meate) If play offend my brother, who seeing me, hauing knowledge, play, is boldned to follow gaming, I will not play while the world standeth. Which care vnto edification, if all, who haue thePsal. 50.16.17. word in their mouthes, and would not bee thought to hate to bee reformed, would manifest in their sincere conuer∣sation; and if Magistrates, who should notRom. 13.4. carrie the sword in vaine, would doe what they may by33. H. 8. c. 9 5. E. 6. c. 25. law, to banish these forbidden past times, or rather lost-times, I doubt not, but that preach∣ing and writing against them would more mightily preuaile, and this good would come of it, many would applie themselues to better exercises, there would bee lesse time mispent in Ale∣houses, and God lesse prouoked to displea∣sure against vs. But these things I re∣ferre
to the consideration of the wise, and this my Dialogue to the iudgement of the godlie, chiefly to you, whose good I wish especially. Farewell: From my studie the first of Ia∣nuarie 1593.
A SHORT AND PLAINE DIALOGVE CONCERNING THE vnlawfulnes of playing at Cards or Tables, or any other game consisting of chance. Professor. SIR, howsoeuer I am perswa∣ded by that which I reade in the common places of Peter Martyr, par. 2. pag. 525 b, that Dice (condem∣ned both by the Ciuill lawes, and by the Fathers) are therefore vnlawfull, because they depend vpon chance: yet not satis∣fied with that which he writeth of Table-playing, pag. 526. b, I would craue your opinion concerning playing at Tables and Cards. Preacher. Sauing the iudgement of so excellent a Diuine, so farre as I can learne out of Gods word, Cardes and
Tables seeme to mee no more lawfull (though lesse offensiue) than Dice. For Table-playing is no whit the more lawfull, because Plato compares the life of man thereunto, than a theefe is the more iustifiable, because Christ compa∣reth his second cōming, to Burglarie in the night, Mat. 24.43.44. Againe, if Dice be wholly euill, because they wholly de∣pend vpon chance, then Tables and Cards must needes be somewhat euill, because they somewhat depend vpon chance. Therefore consider well this reason, which condemneth the one as well as the other: Lots are not to bee vsed in sport; but games consisting in chance, as Dice, Cardes, Tables, are lots: therefore not to be vsed in sport. Prof. For my better instruction, proue that Lots are not to be vsed in sport. Preach. Consider with regard these three things:Ioh. 8.48. 1. Cor. 11.16. First, that wee reade not in the Scriptures that Lots were vsed but only in serious matters both by the Iewes, Ios. 18.10. and Gentiles, Ion. 1.7. Secondly, that a Lot in the nature ther∣of doth as necessarily suppose the special
prouidence and determining presence of God, as an oth in the nature therof doth suppose the testifying presence of God. Yea so, that (as in an oth, so) in a lot pray∣er is expressed or to bee vnderstoode, 1. Sam. 14.41. Thirdly, that the proper end of a Lot (as of an oth, Heb. 6.16.) is to end a controuersie: and therefore for your better instruction examine these reasons. Whatsoeuer directly, or of it sefe, or in a speciall manner, tendeth to the aduancing of the name of God, is to be vsed religiously, Mal. 1.6.7. and not to be vsed in sport: as wee are not to pray or sweare in sport, Exod. 20.7. Esa. 29.13. Ier. 4.2. but the vse of Lots, directly of it selfe, and in a speciall manner tendeth to the aduancing of the name of God, in at∣tributing to his speciall prouidence in the whole and immediate disposing of the Lot, and expecting the euent, Pro. 16.33. Act. 1.24.26. Therefore the vse of Lots is not to be in sport. Againe, we are not to tempt the Almightie by a vaine desire of manifestation of his power and spe∣ciall prouidence, Psal. 78.18.19. Esa. 7.12. Matth. 4.6.7. But by vsing Lots in sport
we tempt the Almightie, vainly desiring the manifestation of his speciall proui∣dence in his immediate disposing, Ther∣fore, &c. Lastly, whatsoeuer God hath sanctified to a proper end, is not to bee peruerted to a worse, Matth. 21.12.13. But God hath sanctified Lots to a pro∣per end, namely to end controuersies, Num. 26.55. Pro. 18.18. therefore man is not to peruert them to a worse: name∣ly to play, and by playing to get away another mans money, which without controuersie is his owne. For the com∣mon saying is, Sine lucro friget lusus, No gaining, cold gaming. Profes. God hath sanctified Psalmes to the praise of his name, and bread and wine to represent the bodie and bloud of our crucified Sauiour, which be holie ends: and the children of God may sing Psalmes to make themselues merie in the Lord, and feede vpon bread and wine not only for necessitie but to cheere them∣selues; why then may not Gods children recreate themselues by lotterie notwith∣standing God hath sanctified the same to end a controuersie?
Preach. Because we finde not in the Scriptures any dispensation for recrea∣tion by lotterie, as wee dee for godlie mirth by singing, Iam. 5.13. and for reli∣gious and sober chéering our selues by eating and drinking, Deut. 8.9.10. And therefore (it being withall considered that the ends you speake of, be not pro∣per, though holy) it followeth, that God who only disposeth the Lot touching the euent, and is therefore a principall actor, is not to bee set on worke by lotterie in any case but when hee dispenseth with vs, or giueth vs leaue so to doe: But dis∣pensation for recreation by lotterie can∣not be shewed, Therefore, &c. Profes. Lots may be vsed for profit in a matter of right, Num. 26.55. why not for pleasure? Preach. Then othes may be vsed for pleasure, for they may for profit, in a matter of truth, Exod. 22.8.11. But in∣deede lots (as othes) are not to bee vsed either for profit or pleasure, but onely to end a controuersie. Profes. The wit is exercised by Table and Cards, therefore they be no lots.
Preach. Yet Lotterie is vsed by ca∣sting Dice, and by shufling and cutting, before the wit is exercised. But how doth this follow? Because Cards and Tables bee not naked Lots, consisting only in chance (as Dice) they are there∣fore no lots at all. Although (being vsed without cogging, or packing) they con∣sist principally in chance, from whence they are to receiue denomination. In which respect a Lot is called in Latin Sors, that is, chance or hazard. And Lyra vpon Prou. 16. saith, To vse Lots, is, by a variable euent of some sensible thing, to determine some doubtfull or vncer∣taine matter, as to draw cuts, or to cast Dice. But whether you will call Cards and Tables Lots, or no, you play with chance or vse Lotterie. Then consider whether exercise of wit doth sanctifie playing with lotterie, or playing with lotterie make such exercising of wit a sinne, Hag. 2.13.14. For as calling God to witnes by vaine swearing is a sinne, 2. Cor. 1.13. so making God an vmpire, by playing with lotterie, must needs be a sinne: yea, such a sin a maketh the of∣fender
(in some respects) more blame∣worthie. For there hee moe occasions of swearing than of lotterie. Secondly, vaine othes most commonly slip out as vnawares, whereas lots cannot be vsed but with deliberation. Thirdly, swea∣ring is to satisfie other, wheras this kind of lotterie is altogether to fulfil our own lusts. Therefore take heede, that you be not guiltie of peruerting the ordinance of the Lord, of taking the name of God in vaine, and of tempting the Almightie, by a gamesome putting off things to ha∣zard, and making play of lotterie, except you thinke that God hath no gouern∣ment in vaine actions, or hath dispensed with such lewd games. Profes. In shooting there is a chance. by a sudden blast, yet shooting is no lot∣terie. Preach. It is true: for that chance commeth by accident, and not of the na∣ture of the game, to be vsed. Profes. Lots are secret, and the whole disposing of them is of God, Pro. 16.33 but it is otherwise in Tables and Cards. Preach. Lots are cast into the lap by
man, and that openly, lest conueiance should be suspected: but the disposing of the chance is secret, that it may be chāce indeede, and wholly of God, who direc∣teth all things, Prou. 16.13.9.33. So in Tables, man by faire casting Dice truly made, and in Cardes, by shuffling & cut∣ting, doth openly dispose the Dice and Cards so, as whereby a variable euent may follow: but it is onely and imme∣diatly of God that the Dice bee so cast, and the Cards so shuffled and cut, as that this or that game followeth, except there be cogging and packing. So that in faire play mans wit is not exercised in dispo∣sing the chance, but in making the best of it being past. Profes. The end of our play is recrea∣tion, and not to make God an vmpire: but recreation (no doubt) is lawfull. Preached. It may be the souldiers had no such end whē they cast lots for Christ his coate, Matth. 27.25. but this should be your end when you vse lotterie, as the end of an oth should be, to call God to witnesse. Therefore as swearing, so lotterie, without due respect is sinne.
Againe, howsoeuer recreation be your pretended end, yet remember that wee must not doe euill that good may come of it, Rom. 3.8. And that therefore wee are to recreate our selues by lawfull re∣creations. Then see how Cardes and Tables be lawfull. Profes. If they be not abused by swea∣ring or brawling, playing for too long time, or too much money. Preach. Though I am perswaded that it is not lawfull to play for any mo∣ney, considering thankes cannot be gi∣uen in faith for that which is so gotten, Deut. 23.18. Esa 61.8. Gamesters worke not with their hands the thing that is good, to be frée from stealing, Ephe. 4.28. and the looser hath not answerable bene∣fit for his money so lost, Gen. 29.15. con∣trarie to that equitie which Aristotle by the light of nature hath taught long since, Eth. l. 5. c. 4. yet I grant that Cards and Tables so vsed as you speak, be lesse sinfull, but how they bee lawfull I see not yet. Profes. Good men and well learned vse them.
Preach. Wee must liue by precepts, not by examples, except they be vndoub∣tedly good. Therefore examine whether they bee good, & well learned in so doing or no. For euery man may erre, Ro. 3.4. Profes. It is not good to be too iust, or too wise, Eccl. 7.18. Preach. It is not good to be too wic∣ked or too foolish, Eccl. 7.19. in despising the word of God, Prou. 1.22. and not re∣garding the weaknesse of other, Rom. 14.21. Let vs therefore beware that we loue not pleasure more than godlinesse, 2. Tim. 3.4. FINIS.
