14931 99855041 20511
A THEOLOGICAL EPITOME OR DIVINE COMPEND, Apparently manifesting GODS greatlove and mercie towards man: not∣withstanding of mans perverse disposition and continuallvnthankefulnesse towards his GOD. BY IOHN KENNEDIE. The mercie of God is aboue all his workes. EDINBVRGH Printed by Iohn Wreittoun. 1629.
SONNET. MY Muse Vrania straine thy sacred voice And lovingly in Faith and Zeale goe sing, Shrill hymnes to Iovah: let thy Soule reioice In blest Encomiums of that glorious King, With Helleluiahs make the Heavens to ring, By Faith, through clouds thy praier so convoy, That hee who framde both thee and every thing, Bee pleasd to shield thy Soule from sinnes annoy, Shall thou not haue great matter then of ioy, When thy Redeemer pardons all thy faults? And thus in peace sayes to thee' come my boy, I will defend thee from the Devills assaults, Sathan in thee no portion sure shall haue, For why, my blood from Hell thy Soule did saue.
A THEOLOGICAL EPITOME OR DIVINE COMPEND. WHen as Iehova did creat, His last worke most perfyte, Like his owne image made he that, In it tooke such delyte. So Male and Female made he man, this excl'nt worke to grace, The breath of life the LORD began to breath into his face. Thus Man being made a living Soule, the LORD him power gaue, O're every fish, and beast, and fowle, and all things life did haue. Then GOD bade Man subdue the Earth, increase and multiplie, And for Mans food the ground by birth, the LORD did fructifie. A garden Eastward GOD did make, in Edens fertile land, Which neither tree nor plant did lacke, such was his blest command.
In midst of this fair garden stood, the tree of knowledge much, To man the rest GOD gaue as food, but this, man might not touch. The tree of life beside this was, and fruitfull trees for meat, Whereof man might without trespasse, by Gods leaue safely eate. But, if the tree of knowledge fruit, he taste, God did bequeath, Man out of Eden hee should root, and cause him die the death. Each sowle & beast which God had wrought as Gods command they came Before the man: as man best thought, to each hee gaue a name. Then God to make he thought it best, for man a helpe or aide, Thus heavy sleepe the man possest, which time the Lord convoyed, A rib out of mans side, and made A female of that bone, Closd vp the flesh againe, and said man should not liue alone:
To man he brought his other part, or second selfe, (quoth hee) Both bone and flesh of mine thou art, thy name shall woman bee. Now man and woman naked were, in Paradice this time, And ne're asham'd till they did erre, committing sinfull cryme. For now the Serpent (subtile beast) perswaded Adams wife, Forbidden fruit at his request, to eate: and said her life Shee should not lose: but God knowes wel (quoth hee) when you doe taste, This fruit; your knowledge shall excell, and you as Gods bee grac't. The woman thinking all was trew, the serpent to her spake, Disiring knowledge: shee some few forbidden fruit did take. Thereof shee ate and gaue her mate, and hee did eat also: Then did they see their owne estate, how they did naked goe.
Therefore some fig-tree leaues they tooke, and sow'd them altogether, Made breeches thereof, now they looke, to runne they know not whether. For why? into the coole of day, in garden they did heare, GODS voyce, where art thou Adam? say most perfectly, come heere? When Adam came the LORD before, he greatly was dismayde, Saying, hee naked was, therefore, to come hee was affraide. That thou wert naked who thee told, (quoth GOD) that thou wast hid, To eate the fruit hast thou beene bold, which I did thee forbid? Then Adam said to GOD againe, the woman thou gaue mee, Gaue it to mee, and wee amaine, did eate of knowledge tree. (Quoth shee) the Serpent me deceav'de, in making mee belieue Great knowledge I should haue receav'd, when I did eate and giue,
This fruite vnto my husband heere, Moving him eate likewise, Thus man who then to GOD was deere, did first his law despise, Then to the Serpent GOD spake thus, 'cause thou this thing hast done, Aboue all beasts I thee accurse, and cattell every one, Thou on thy bellie shall goe still, (O sentence true and just) Since thou mad'st man gainstand my will, thou ever shall eate dust, Betwixt thy seed, and womans seed, shall bee enimitie, Thou's bruise his heele, and he thy head shall breake assuredly. And to the woman GOD said now, thy sorrowes I'le increase, In sorrow foorth thy children thou shalt bring with great distresse. Vnto thy husband, thy desire shall ever subject be, And hee as potent Lord or Syre, shall still rule over thee.
But to the man thus spake the Lord, I'le curse earth for thy sake, 'Cause my command thou hast abhorde, the earth I'le barren make. The earth thus cursd for mans offence, God said: thereon thou's feede, In sweat of face, and euer hence, in sorrow shalt eate bread, Till to the dust thou doe returne, of which thou first was framde, This sentence should make man still mourn and bee of sin ashamde. So, of Gods power let vs cease, to dispute of the same, Who made man of earths superfice, a rare and exc'lent frame. Of basest thing in all the field, God made flesh, blood, and boue, To other things their forme did yeeld, by word and it was done. Gods love in the creation old, to man, his Saincts still sing, Who might haue made man if hee would a beast or creeping thing.
And yet gaue man a liuing spreit, with witt did him indue, Fish, Fowle, and Beast, gaue man for meat and all on earth which grew. Next, in prerogatives Gods loue, to man is eminent, Who gaue him rule all things aboue, beneath the Firmament. And causde him name each other Creature according to mans will, What ere they bee in shape or stature, that name they yet keepe still. Againe Gods loue may well bee seene, to man: who did him place, In Edens garden euer greene, where hee might him solace. With Beasts Fouls Fruits & pleasant flowrs each one of severall dye, Which were refresht by heavenly showres and cherisht by Gods eye. Yet more then this Gods loue wee find, conspicuously appeare, To man-wards, who to mans owne minde made him a helper deare.
Lest hee alone, might too much long, and lest his kinde should faile, By this late helpe GOD made man strong, and on the earth prevaile, Yet though from GOD these gifts man got, as tokens of his favour, The LORD perceaved man did not, of true obedience savour, Therefore in one thing hee restrainde, the man and that was this, Forbidden fruit hee him ordaind forbeare, lest that amisse, Might out of Eden him eject, from presence of his GOD, Who then intirely did affect man; sparing justice rod, Till that in end through curious pride, and covetice of witt Wretcht man from Gods command did slid and did his law omitt. Then foorth the Lord ejected him, to plow the barren ground, In seas of woe he made man swimme, yet would not him confound.
Thereafter Adam Eva knew, and shee brought foorth a sonne, And call'd him Cain; this man slew just ABEL being alone. Then GOD to Cain said anone, (who then in sinne did sleepe) Where is thy brother ABEL gone? Should I my brother keepe? (Quoth Cain) I no way can tell: What hast thou done? truelie Thy brothers blood thou didst expell, from ground cryes vnto mee. Therefore from earth thou art accurst, who op'ned hath her mouth, And blood received, which did burst, from ABELS wounds for truth, So when thou plows the groūd, her strength shee shall not yeeld to thee: And thou a vagabound at length still on the earth shall bee. Farre greatter is my punishment, than able I'me to beare (Quoth Cain): for incontinent who finds me far or neare
Since I am from thy face cast out, a runnagate made still: Who first confronts mee, without doubt, most sure hee will mee kill. Then God again this to him told, who killeth Cain: Sure His punishment shall bee seven fold, which doubtlesse hee's endure. On Cain then God set a marke, lest any kill him might, Of Gods great mercie, thus the sparke was not quite out of sight. Then Cain from the presence went, of his most gratious God, To Edens east side, where his tent, he pitcht in land of Nod. So when that men were multiplied, on earth, and to them borne Were sonnes and daughters they espide, (Gods sonnes I meane forlorne.) That daughters of the men were faire, therefore they tooke them wives, Of all they liked every where, with whom they spent their liues.
Therefore God said, my spirit shall with man not alwayes striue, For hees but flesh subject to fall, Ile him of lyfe depriue. At end of hundreth twentie yeeres, his dayes shall bee no moe, Then from his eyes wypt shall be teares, and rest his labour fro. Giants there were on earth those dayes, when Gods sonnes came (even then) Vnto mens daughters these alwayes, were strong and mightie men. Thus when God saw the wickednesse, of man on earth was great And that mans heart did still expresse. bad thoughts: God griev'd thereat. And that hee made man hee repents, and's sorie in his heart, Because that man his whole intents, from sinne could nee're depart. Therefore God said, I will destroy from earth, and bring to nought, The man, the woman, girle and boy, and all that e're I wrought.
Yet Noah in Gods eyes found grace, and walked with the Lord. An vpright man in everie cace, was hee: Scriptures record. To him God said; Come is an end, of all flesh mee before: And since that man will not amend, but heapes vp sinnes in store, Thou therefore goe, and make an Arke, of Pine-tree I direct: Pitch it both in, and out: remarke that it haue no defect. For on the Earth I'le bring a flood of waters from above. Which shall of breath all things denude, that on the earth doe move. Yet of each sort of liuing thing, two I'le cause come to thee, These thou into the Arke shall bring, that they may saued bee. Gods mercie heere is manifest, to mankynde who convoyde, Him saue through floods: of fowle & beast some seed keept vndestroyde,
He would not root all mankinde out, though man the same deservde, For when the deluge rag'd about the earth: he Noe preservde. But when the flood was overpast, and God did man restore, In Noah: men increased fast, yet did not God adore. Then all the earth one language spoke, each other vnderstood, And from the east they iourney tooke, in Shenars plaine abode, Each one to other said this time, let vs burne bricke anone, In stead of morter they had slime, and bricke in stead of stone. Then said they let vs build a towre, whose top to Heaven may reach, Lest wee bee scattred in one houre, now all were of one speach. But from aboue the Lord did then, the highest clouds come downe, When building were the sonnes of men, to see their towre and towne.
Then said the Lord, the people vow and they all condiscend, To doe this thing: nor can they now, be stopt what they intend, Let vs their language then confound, that never one perceaue Anothers speech: let shame redound, to such as pride now haue. The Lord then scattred them from hence▪ on all the earth abroad, And they left off their building hence, thus were they stopt by God. The name of it they Babell call, because the Lord did there Of men confound the language all, them scattering euerie-where. But yet Gods mercie did extend, here towards man likewise, For though hee did his God offend, by this proud exercise. Yet God his ruine never sought, and yet hee lets him see, That mans best wit and strength is nought without the Lords suppsee.
For even the Lord his owne elect, are subject vnto sinne, As oft it proveth by effect, of weaknesse them within. Though God just Abraham did blesse, with graces manifold, And did by signes and words expresse, to him and Sarah old. That he would make a nation great, of them and of their seed, Yet Sarah thought her old estate, could no wayes children breed, Therefore within her selfe shee laught, (for shee did God mistrust) Saying, since I am old, and fraught with yeeres: shall I haue lust, Therefore God asked Abram why that Sarah his wife smilde, Saying, since I am old, can I in age, bring forth a childe, Shall any thing to God bee hard, at the appointed time, Returne to thee Ile afterward, as one in youthfull prime.
Sarah thy wise shall haue a sonne, but Sarah now denyed, That shee had laught, or such thing do▪ for shee was much affraide. Thus may you see through lacke of faith▪ Gods owne may him commove, Yet tast they not his cup of wrath, though hee doth them reprove. Examples many moe wee see, in Scripture how Gods flocke, Through their great infidelitie, him oft to wrath provoke. When Israelites by Moses hand, from Egypt were conduct, According to the Lords command, as God did him instruct. Hard by Pihahiroth, to grudge, 'gainst Moses they began: Asking why there he made them ludge, to perish euery man. Was there in Egypt ne're a graue, that thou broughtst vs to die, In Wildernesse: for now wee haue (Quoth they) no way to flie.
Hudge mountaines are on the Sea is vs before: Proud Pharohs host behinde vs ride, approaching evermore. But God to Moses said (quoth hee) stretch foorth thy rod, and so The Seas shall soone divided bee, and on drye ground you's goe. But vpon Pharoh and his host, I will me honour get, Who in their strength and chariots boast, thinking they haue no lett. For midst the raging floods profound, without stop or delay, His men and chariots I'le confound, before your eyes this day. As God had said, it came to passe, when Israelits were gone, The Sea returned where it was, Egyptians died eachone, In wildernesse of Shur againe, they water found no where, And then gainst Moses did complaine, when as they camped there.
TO Marah when they came at last, they knew not what to thinke, The waters had so bitter taste, thereof they could not drinke. This place was Marah calde to name, or bitternesse: for why? The bitter taste from water came, no Isralite could try. And now gainst Moses, murmure fast those people vndescreet, Till GOD shew him a tree, which cast in waters made them sweet, An ordinance GOD made them heare, and heere the people prov'd Of all the world to him most deare, and best of him belov'd, Yet when to wildernesse of Sin they came, (betwixt Sinai And Elim) they againe begin, to murmure and to cry 'Gainst Moses and Aaron the Priest, wishing that by GODS hand, In Egypt they had died at least, when ere they left that land;
For when (quoth they) by Egypts pots wee sate: well stuffde with flesh, The bellies full of bread, (GOD wots) wee eate, did vs refresh. Now GOD at evening store of quaile sent them; the morning tyde Great store of Manna, without faile, lay on the mountaine side, Six dayes they did the same collect, for each an Omer full, Heere men may marke a strange effect, though that their braines bee dull. GODS providence to them was such, when they collect this meat, None had too little nor too much, to spare or yet to eate, The sixt day they collected still, as much as serv'd the morne, The seventh, or Sabbath day, GODS will was it should bee forborne. Yet diverse went that day to proue, to find it on the ground, But GOD the occasion did remoue of sinne, for none was found.
Some others heapt it vp therefore, though GOD did them forbid, Vild crauling wormes they got in store, in that which they had hid. And yet into their Sabbaths food, though it was a long kept, GODS providence to them was good, no vermine therein crept: At last they came to Rephidim, where they did much annoy Their GOD: for now they raile on him, that did them there convoy. Because they could no water find, they murmurde at the first, 'Gainst Moses, saying is't thy minde, to kill vs heere with thirst, Then Moses cryde vnto the LORD, saying what shall I doe, This people all with one accord to stone mee almost goe, Then GOD againe to Moses spake, and there did him direct Elders of Israell to take, and rod of great respect
Into his hand, wherewith Hee smote the river: for behold Thy name I will still saue from blotte, as I haue oft thee told. In Horeb on the rocke I'le stand before thee; thou shall smite The Rock with rod, then I'le command the water out come quite, That all the people then may drinke, then Moses did so right. Then through the Rocke the waters sinke, in Israels Elders sight. Then Massah called hee the place. and Maribah, because Of Israels contentious cace, whose temptings had no pause. Now by those proofes wee may perceiue▪ that GODS great mercie yet Is towards man, though hee as slaue to sinne, doth sinne commit. Though Sarah old did misbelieue, GODS promise to her made, And through weak faith her God did grieue God kept what he had said▪
Though Heaven and earth shall passe away and starrs, and Sunne and Moone, GODS blessed Word shall neere decay, what Hee speaks shall be done. For at appointed tyme hee came, which Sarah thought o'regone, And did returne to Abraham, and Sarah had a sonne: In whose seed are the Nations blest, of all the spatious earth, In whom wee liue, wee moue and rest, blest bee that Virgin birth. The covenant which GOD did make, with Abraham Hee kept, For Abrams seed did never lacke, things needfull, though they slept. And though they did their GOD offend, for Abrams sake, therefore Though GOD in Egypt did them send, Hee guards them evermore. And when their number greater was, that Pharoh waxt affraide Of them, yet would not let them passe, but still their journey staide,
GOD then in Egypt wonders wrought, and by his mightie hand, Through the red sea his people brought, drownd all did them gainstand: Yet at Pihahiroth and Shur, at Marah and at Sin, And Meribah they made great sturre, murmuring themselues within: Though so they did, and that God swore, that these should not enjoy, The fertile land was them before, GOD did their seed convoy; For Abrams sake, to that same land, which Hee to him had sworne To giue his seed, to whom as sand in number should bee borne. Thus may wee see GODS clemencie, was, is, and doth remaine Still towards ingrate man, though hee can ne're from sinne refraine, Wee see GODS people whom He lovde, did tempt Him every way, The justest man that ever movde, seven times doth sinne a day.
Then happie are they who die yong, they fewer sinnes commit, Yet babes who lack the speach of tongue, are not found free of it. For though they're free of actuall sinne, yet sinne originall, Which did in Paradise beginne, to hell will bring vs all, Vnlesse GODS mercie vs prevent, by Faith into CHRISTS blood, Wee haue our liues in sinne so spent, nought els can doe vs good. For since Adam and Eue did sinne, and towards GOD rebell, In them did then our sinne beginne, by which wee merite Hell: And if a man though ne're so strong▪ doe wrong but one his like, Must hee not satisfie that wrong, or els let justice strike; Much more then man offends his GOD, who's partie both and judge, And in His hand holds justice rod, where can man haue refudge?
Likewise our fault is found so great, we can it ne're amend, Therefore Gods iustice doth vs threat with shame and fearefull end. But heere Gods mercie doth preuaile, and pacifies his wrath. He satisfaction for our faile, desires and not our death. But what way can wee satisfie, Our God for our offence, Our liues, yea soules, in no degree our misse can recompense. Yet since God sees that wee no way, can expiate his ire, Hee pities vs: if wee assay to doe his blest desire. And then himselfe the way finds out, himselfe to pacifie, Gods mercie great is without doubt, heere towards man wee see. For why the Lord the balme doth finde, to salue vp Sathans wound, Which men could never call to minde, who most in witt abound.
CHRISTS precious blood it is the balme, that salues each Soule its sore, And makes sinnes surging seas be calme, which Sathans rage made roare. It is the ransome must vs saue, from Sathan, hell, and death, The meanes to raise vs from the graue, to gaine eternall breath. So since we see the LORD doth please to saue those who repent, And salue their sin-sicke Soules disease, through grace when they relent, Then let vs striue Him to obey, and glorifie His name, Who loues not see His children stray, nor yet to suffer shame. In sinners death the LORD of blesse, doth not delyte, beleeue, For Hee hath sworne, that He doth wish them to repent and liue. Hee bids them knock, Hee open shall, aske, and they shall receiue, Seeke, and they'le find, and this is all that any heart can craue.
Should then not wee our GOD still loue, who both our horne exalts? And for our well, who from aboue, beggs pardon for our faults, If that a man condemnde to die, were saved by a Knight, Or some great man, would then not hee, serue that man day and night. Through sinne we are condemnd to hell, the great and second death, GOD who in mercie doth excell, vs saues by sacred Faith; And more than this, His only Child, Hee gaue vnto the crosse, For our offences great and vild, the guiltlesse life did losse. And whilst his lyfe they tooke away, Our Blessed LORD said so, Forgiue them FATHER I Thee pray, they know not what they doe. Should wee not then still endevore, to serue the LORD of life, Who hath vs saved evermore from death and Sathans strife,
Who framde vs likewise all of nought, and did our Soules redeeme, From death and hell, whilst Sathan sought of blesse vs to exeeme, For first our GOD graunts to receiue amends for our misdeed, And since amends Hee cannot haue, Himselfe finds the remeed. And last of all, Hee is content, Himselfe the mends to make, And for our sinnes Hee doth assent, His owne Sonnes life to take, What obligation then haue wee, towards our gratious LORD? Who hath from hell thus set vs free, O then in one accord! In Faith, and loue with hearts contreit, let vs our spirits raise, And yeeld to Father, Sonne, and Spreit, Thanks, Honour, Glorie, Praise. FINIS.
