14973 99844910 9765
AN Halfe-penny-worth of Wit, in a Penny-worth of Paper. OR, The Hermites Tale. The third Impression. LONDON Printed for Thomas Thorp, by the Assignement of Edw: Blount. 1613.
To the Right Honourable the Countesse of Sussex. IN times of former ages (honourable faire La∣dy) I haue often heard, that Vsury, Lying, and Flattery, were worse excommunicate out of Court and Common-wealth, then thred-bare cloakes or greasie bootes out of the Presence. O they were vertuous men in those daies, & would giue the deuill his due, if it were but in wearing deuils breeches. Sure∣ly I am growne into such infinite amours of their ho∣nest packe-staffe plainenesse, that sincerely and verily, I do meane, as it were, to imitate it. First, for Vsury, I hate it worse then any empty purse, and you shal haue none of mee, I beseech God to inspire mee but with halfe so many good wordes, as may counteruaile the hundreth part of the principal of your gracious fauors towards me. Next for lying, in no line of this Booke shall you find me lyable, (if I be not condēned for too much speaking the troth, I care not) and to make you know, that I am old Tom-tel-troth indeed, I will giue you a tast whereby you may iudge of the rest. Item. I say I am no Scholler, if that be a lie I referre me to the iudgement of the learned, who if they but pose me in the petigree of a Noune and Pronoune, I straight crosse and blesse my selfe, & thinke they begin to coniure. A∣gaine, I affirme that thus being no Scholler, but a sim∣ple honest Dunce, as I am, that cānot say B to a
Battle∣dore,it is very presumptuously done of me, to offer to hey-passe and repasse it in Print so, when my Ance∣stors scarse euer heard of a Pen & Inke-horne, & much more presumptuously, it being such a course home∣spun linsey woolsey webbe of wit as it is, to shroude it vnder the protection of so high a personage, who are more worthy to patronize the deuine Muse of Apollo, or the thundring spirit of Homer, then this Countrey dance of the worlds end, or harsh Lancashire Horne∣pipe. Taxe me who dare, or who can, that herein my tongue doubles one sillable. Marry some excuse wold do well, for this my Eagle-soaring, and too too fore∣ward attempting, and yet I need not neither, for out of your owne super-abounding good nature you would supply it though I let it alone; & yet I will not let it a∣lone, but throw some light vaile, of spotlesse preten∣ded wel-meaning, ouer it, to huke & mask it from pub∣licke shame & obloquy: Faith, no more but this, I see my inferiours in the gifts of learning, wisedome, & vn∣derstanding, torment the Print daily with lighter tri∣fles and Iiggalorums, then my russet Hermit is, which hath made me the bolder to shoulder in amongst thē. They clap a paire of French spurres on the heeles of Vice to rowell ope the wombe of that resty Iade Ini∣quity, & let all the loath-some guts & garbidge of his panch issue out to putrifie and infect the fresh aire of Pauls Church-yard; I curbe sin with a double snaffle of reprehensiō, & turne & wind him with my smart
wand of correctiō to what vertuous manage I please. There∣forefor my good meaning, not Art, am I to bee seene & allowed. For my insolence in presenting this home∣ly bundle of Hermits wands to so sacred a Madam, vn∣der this couert barron it shall march, that weak houses require the strongest props, and the poore must pay their fines to their Lord or Lady whatsoeuer, be it but in pepper-cornes, or single halfe-pence. My Booke I entitle, A halfe-peny worth of wit in a peny-worth of pa∣per, whereby it drawes somewhat nere to the matter & the purpose. If you accept it well, there is no man that will accept it ill, and except you stray from the worlds ordinary custome (that take Vintners leaden halfe-pe∣ny tokens for sound payment) you cannot accept of it amisse. Imagine this one of thē, for either it will passe for a half-peny or nothing. But soft I haue let passe my last relique of antiquity, which is there horrible and terrible detestatiō of flattery, & my religious cōforma∣tion therunto. I haue proued my selfe guiltles of lying & vsury, & if my Book will not saue me frō being hal∣tred for flatery, I wold it were treason to write & read, or Gal, Gum, & Copperis wherof Inke is made, were held more odious thē poisō: all the flattery that I wil vse (if it be flattery to speak truth) shal be to pronounce that you are truly vertuous, faire, wise, & honorable: & so I leaue you, desiring pardon for my boldnes, and pray∣ing for your encrease of felicity to your dying day. Your Honours most zealous deuoted humble Seruant. Humphrey King.
To all his Honourable Friends, or Honest dis∣persed Wel-wishers whereso-euer. IT would well become a deuote Hermite to begin with Grace and Peace vnto you, but that I hold friuolous, since if you want Grace, go by Ieronimo, you are no friends for me: and if you be not men of Peace, it is not my Hermites Staffe, and my little bucker-clapdish, that will appease you, wherefore Shokkatorum, that which will bee shall bee. If you will bee quiet and leaue your mocking tongue you may, if not, floute on by leaue, the more sport it breeds you, the gladder I am (as the Scotch∣man saies) that I haue it for you. Cunning Lawyers, vpon the false mistaking of a T. or an N. or putting in a dash ouer-plus (if the Debtor bee rich and able roundly to fee them) will make a Writ of Error of any thing: doe not so by mee I beseech you, for I am a very bad writer of Orthography, and can scarce spell my Abcie if it were laid before mee. The Printer may helpe mee to deli∣uer to you true English, but as I am a true man to God and the King, hee findes it not in my Coppy. I meane well, that I am sure, and if I had better meanes to ex∣presse, I would make you better vnderstand it: in the meane time, what is but meane, take it in as good part, as if it were the highest treble that the cleerest Poetical war∣bling throate could shrill or quauer forth. Dangerous mis∣interpreting I feare not,
Since Enuy, that blacke venom'd To ad swolne Elfe, Nere slanders a cleere conscience to it selfe. Onely if you could a little dispence here and there with a hard Rime or two, (in which yet you shall not say but there is some reason) and my verses that are like Cheaters false Dice of high-men and low-men, one while eights, now tennes, another while foure-teenes, and sometimes sixes, I will number you, (though I keepe no numbers) in the fore-most ranke of my benefactors and fauourers. Me thinks a King by birth as I am, should not debase himselfe to intreate so much. And yet I remember an old schoole∣boyes game of King by your leaue (euer since I was a boy my selfe) and so I am afraid you will cry, King by your leaue, we are to haue about with you, beare it off with the head and shoulders how you can. But if you do, vpon all the Cannes and quart-pots about London I will be sworne, (all Wine-pots from this generall rule excepted, for them I haue for-sworne till Michelmas, vn∣lesse the new wine of Peru, that is made of no Grape, but a strange fruite in the VVest-indies, and is more com∣fortable to the braine and the stomacke, then any restora∣tiue or cordiall whatsoeuer) vpon them I say I will abiure and renounce, all claime or interest I haue had in that wicked word of Poetry, and bind my selfe and my heires, neuer more to be publicans and sinners, (or sinners in publique) in that vnfortunate Art of Printing. It hath bene told
mee, that those that are slaine with the Indianspoysoned arrowes, die with their mouthes shut, and how the Butchers in Germany, kill their sheep after the selfe∣same order, by tying a cord about their mouthes, and so strangling them, that their flesh may be more swolne and puft vp: so would I die, by my good will, if this my labour mis-carry, and haue my mouth closed vp from euer spea∣king or writing hence-forward. Had I had learning e∣nough, I would haue framed an inuectiue against lear∣ning, because, I know, none saue the learned will finde fault with me: but seeing I haue it not, I must heere end my Epistle, and desire such as descend to deepely into my shallownesse, no otherwise to esteeme of my writings then of Drummes and Trumpets in warre: which are not vsed so much to stir vp men to fury, as to teach them to march in measure. Yours, as you conceite me, HVMPHREY KING.
HOW dares the Author passe vnto the Presse, Where Satyres, Essayes, Epigrams do swarme, The Comicke, and the stately Tragicke verse, And Caltha metamorphos'd with a charme? A strong imagination wrought this thing, His name being King, he thinkes himselfe a King. In discommendation of the Author. IT is no Tale, the Hermite is beli'd, The Author ouer-aw'd, or much beguild. Time past spoke plaine, and did no vices hide, Time present must be pleased like a child. Christen thy booke anew, then do'st thou well, And call it Truth, a Tale's an Infidell. KIng neuer prou'd more King in any thing, Then in this plaine-song, freedome of a King: Plaine vnaffected stile, yet vices sting; Why (King) I see y faith thoul't needs be King. Conueniunt rebus nomina saepe suis.
TO grace the man whom all the Graces fauour, Lies not within the compasse of my quill, Suffice it his most plausible behauiour, Drawes all the happy choise of wits, and skill, To loue, admire, affect, and dignifie, Himselfe, and these his labours pleasing lines. Mongst whom my zeale presumes to signifie Some loue to him, in whom such vertue shines. An Hermits Tale, an Hermits Heart declareth; Sincere the one, so spotlesse pure the other, That with the vertues euermore it shareth, By no meanes suffering ill the good to smother. Go then sweet Hermits Tale, and tell the wisest, Perfection liues not still in the precisest. Ʋincor, non vinco.
THat I haue lou'd, and most respected thee, True-honest Humphrey: I do heere protest, And that the world shall witnesse it with me, Embrace this signe of loue amongst the rest; Wilt thou haue more? my word I will engage: Nay further yet: Il'e take a solemne oath, By the Red-herring thy true Patronage, And famous Nash, so deere vnto vs both: By all the Bowers that we haue reueld in, Our merry times, that gallop hence so fast, By all the houres we haue together bin, By all our vowes of friendship that haue past: By these I sweare my loue, and thy worke graced, On her rich worth, and honour'd Titles placed.
LAtely the Muses from their forked hill Descending downe into our humbler vale, To taste the fruits of Industrie and Skill In makers of this time: Beheld thy Tale. Which, though it did appeare emptie of Art, (As that thy modestie hath still profest) Yet this faire censure they did all impart: Thy loue to Arts therein was well exprest. But when they saw to whom it was design'd, (A Ladie of her graces; so inspir'd With euery bountie both of forme and mind, As of the Muses selues, she is admir'd) They vow'd, thy worke should liue; and with one voyce, Approu'd thy Iudgement in so sweet a choyce. Suus cuique mos.
AN Halfe-peny-worth of Wit, in a Peny-worth of Paper. ALIAS. ¶The Hermites Tale. VVAlking by a Forrest side, An ancient Hermite I espide, White was his head, old was his face, Pale were his lookes, obscure his place, And in his hand I might behold A booke all torne and very old; I willing both to see and know His place, and why he liued so, Went to salute him, as vnknowne, To be a partner of his moane, He being of an humble spirit, As one that heauen would inherite,
A friendly welcome to me gaue, And brought me to his homely Caue, VVhere he had liu'd full twenty yeares, And for his sinnes shed many teares; Thinking euery howre to die, Knowing the worlds vnconstancie. Then sate he downe, and to me told: I once was yong, but now am old, And welcome is mine age to mee, That no more changes I may see; For I haue seene from time to time, The highest fall, the lowest clime: Contray to that we expect, To make vs know the worlds defect, How time and death doth still presage The ficklenesse of euery age Like to the Moone that hath no power, Louing to change, both day and howre. Vnhappy men that liue therein, VVhere nought is found but death and sin.
Then gentle youth, if you would know Heauens delight, the world forgoe, For wordlings, very seldome can Two Maisters serue, both God and man. For if a man your Maister bee, You then must sinne as well as hee, To smooth his taste, and please his vaine, How much so ere the sinne containe. If he a Tyrant do professe, Then must his seruant be no lesse; Or if an Athiest hee bee knowne, So must you be, or else be gone: For I haue heard a prouerbe old, Be rul'd by him that hath the gold. Such are the errours of our age, VVhen soules for gold are laid to gage: A substance that wise men besot, A pleasure full of paine, God wot. VVhen I was yong, as you are now, I spent my youth, I know not how,
Rating my pleasure at such a price, More worth, then Heauens Paradice. These worldly pleasures are but toies Vnto the high celestiall ioyes, Where God doth sit on Syon hill To giue the doome of good and ill, Then if you knew how sweete it is To meditate on heauens blisse, You sure would leaue all worldly strife And liue with me, an Hermites life. Answere. FAther or friend, what ere you bee, A happy man you seeme to mee, The happiest man this day on earth, Blest in your age, and at your birth; Whose heauenly words my heart hath wonne, To liue with you, and be your sonne:
Leauing the world, too full of woes, VVhere sinnes and errors daily flowes, And take me to your homely Cell, VVhere sweet content doth euer dwell; Then if you please to take the paine, For Christes sake, a soule to gaine, Your counsell graue on me bestow, That true religion I may know: For all Kings Christned are at warres For Conscience, and religious iarres; And controuersies now haue made One King on other to inuade, VVith warre, with death, and famishment, Each other still they do torment; VVith Christians bloud they die the ground, Piercing sweet babes with many a wound, And aged men with siluer'd haires, There groueling lie, in blood and teares; VVhat sinne, what death, so-ere befall, They make Religion cause of all.
A grieuous thing, when they shall come To giue account for all and some Before that God that knowes their thought, If they for true Religion fought: Or whether for ambitious pride They meant Religion to deuide; And so to kindle Gods displeasure For Kingdomes, Crownes, and worldly Treasure; Knowing them all to be illusions, To bring our soules into confusions, And make vs wish, ere we haue done, Such warres had neuer beene begun. Where Christians seeke each others blood, Their meaning seldome can be good. But if our warres were like to them Which were before Ierusalem, Against the Turkes, which there abod, Sworne enemies vnto our God, VVhat happy men then had we bin, So to haue dy'd, and cleer'd our sin?
VVhereas (God wot) we now do goe To seate our Brothers ouerthrow. Alas! if they in warres that die, Did not confesse a Trinitie: Or if that Heathen men they were, VVithout all knowledge, faith or feare Of Christ that dy'd to saue mankind From death and hell, to him assign'd; Then without any offence at all, They might take pleasure in our fall. Hermite. MY sonne of warres you haue complain'd, VVhich is a plague for sinne ordain'd; A plague that God himselfe hath chose, His wrath and iustice to disclose: And for my part, I must confesse, Our sinnes (my sonne) deserue no lesse.
Christ knowes we haue deserued more Then euer our fathers did before: And yet we say, they neuer knew VVhere true Religion euer grew. For they were still instructed then By Friers and Monks, old ancient men, Such as did then attribute all Vnto Saint Peter, not to Paul. Saying that Christ had chose alone, Him for the Rocke, and corner stone, And vnto him the keyes resign'd, To open, shut, to loose and binde. Taking the word as it was spoken, And not the sence it did betoken: And so by Peters superioritie, The Pope doth chalenge his authoritie. But come my sonne, time doth vs call. Wee'l leaue our Christ to iudge of all. And go with me, Il'e teach thee how to spend The Sommer day in solace with thy friend,
Where thou shalt see the pleasure of this wood, Exceeds all other, were they nere so good. Heere dwels poore men that neuer vse to sweare, But yea and nay, and by the weedes they weare. Farre be it from them to wrong his holy Name That gaue them life, and leaue to vse the same. To him they call; and still for mercy crie, Because they know in iustice all must die; They liue secure, and free from any strife, And thinke Content to be the sweetest life: And so it is, to such poore men as these, That looke for nought, but how their God to please. See how they labour all day till they sweate, And take great paines, and all to get them meate. Sauing your Tale, good Father, what be those, That in their lookes decipher many woes, And many times they seeme to make a show As though frō whence they came, they faine wold go, Impatient of the crosses God hath sent Them for their good, because they should repent.
Well said (my sonne) thy iudgement I commend, For Man hath crosses to none other end, And he is happiest that can suffer any For his sake, that for vs hath suffred many. Hast thou not heard a song of Phillida, Of Herpilus, and eke Coren? why these, my sonne, be they. The one is Coren, that once tooke delight his Hawkes to lure, Th'other Herpilus, (poore man) that all paine did endure For Phillida, and that is shee, which oft did flowers twine, And Garlands make of Violets, to please her Corens mind. But he regarded not her loue, nor when she frownd or smild It mou'd not him, he neuer car'd, for once he was beguild.
And yet shee was the fairest Maide that euer nature fram'd, And all the Shepheards would reioyce when Phillida was nam'd. But Time, the enemie to Youth, sent Sickenesse, Beauties crosse, As messenger, to tell her now shee is not as shee was: Her golden haire, her for-head smooth her quicke full speaking eie, Her comely nose, her lips where loue did banquet royally, Haue chang'd their hue, for what can last, or hold that will away? Like Iudas fatall Elder-tree, so lookes poore Phillida. Her haire with Daffadillies dight Ewreth'd with purple-silke, Is now within a night-cap tide, vnkemb'd, as white as milke.
Her fore-head all with furrowes fild that was so smoth and white, Her eies (the Cabinets of loue) haue lost their wonted sight; Her nose is sharpe, her iawes are falne, her lips that were so red, Now lookes like Siluer-ore vntried, and no teeth in her head. Ah sonne, if they in Court that liue did once but thinke of this, They soone would finde amongst themselues how they had done amisse, In pampring vp their filthy flesh which is a slaue to time, An enemy vnto the soule, a masse of filth and slime. But come my son, we'le now go home vnto our homely Caue, And leaue poore Phillida to mourne that wisheth for her graue.
For Herpilus, and eke Coren, of whom the Muses song, They vow'd to die with Phillida, because they lou'd so long. Father, I neuer heard a Tale to moue a man to ruth, And make him thinke of all his sinnes committed in his youth As this which you haue told; A terror vnto those Which in their beauty, wit, or strength, do confidence repose. It is no terror (sonne) to those which meane not to repent, They neuer thinke of crooked age, nor of their youth mispent; But head-long runne from sin to sin, like sheepe that go astray,
Yet now and then for fashion sake they make a show to pray; And come to Church, and knocke and kneele, because they may be taken For honest, good, and godly men, that haue the world forsaken. 'Tis true Sir, I haue heard of those that vnder shew of zeale; Would hate the time, & curse the state, and at the Clergy raile; Ill minded men, enuious, and proud, discentious, full of wroth, Monstrous dissemblers, fild with sin, in whom there is no troth; These zealous men, meane to erect a Church, ere it be long, Where Papist neuer set his foote, nor neuer Dirge was song; Meane while, for feare their faction breake,
they thinke it best behoues them, To meete in Barnes, and there to Preach, euen as the Spirit moues them, And there they pray, before they Preach, in heart, with one accord, That they may neuer laugh, for feare they do offend the Lord; Then starteth vp a brother straight vpon a wicker Chayre, And talkes of sinne, and how it raignes amongst vs euery where; How euery state is discontent, How many sinne, how few repent: What May-poles, and what Whitson-ales, What ringing, and what old-wiues tales, Are now beleeu'd to be the way To saue vs all another day. My son, these men will nere endure the touch, They know too little, and they speake too much,
Their lookes are smoth, like Siluer purifide, They will proue Copper, when they shall be tri'd. I neuer heard of these which seeme so pure, Which for Christs sake wold Martirdom endure, And yet no doubt, as long as peace remaines, Their conscience will endure any paines. But if the God of warre abroad should range, And catch these men that long to see a change, You then should see them all within one day, For very feare of death, to turne Turke-way. But come my sonne, sit downe and let vs eate These homely cates, in steed of better meate, And leaue these men that enuy so the state, To die like dogs, that can do nought but prate. I'le tell you, Father, of a Tale that is in Skeltons rime, A foolish Tale, but yet a Tale to driue away the time; Of a very pleasant lad
my Tale I must beginne, That came into a house, by chaunce, where Sectaries did Inne, And being in their company, not knowing what they were, He was as merry as a Pie, still skypping here and there, Till at the last a ciuill Sire came mildly towards him, And like a man of God, rebuk'd this yong-man for his sinne. This merry Lad, mus'd at the man, as one loath to offend, Saying, if he had done amisse, he would be glad to mend. Night drew on, Supper came in, they all with one consent Desir'd this yong-mans company, and he was well content. He sadly sate all Supper while,
and not a word he said: And as they did, so would he do. They after supper prayed, And Chapters read, and sung a Psalme all to instruct the youth, What great delight he ought to haue in reading of the truth. VVhen that the Lord was serued thus, they cald a reckning presently, And would not let this yong man pay, but thank'd him for his company. This pleasant Lad muz'd at the men, yet being farre from scorning, Intreated them to breake their fast with him the next day morning. They thank'd him all with one consent, but especially Maister Powes, Desired him to bestow no cost, but onely Beefe and Browes. You shall haue nothing ese (quoth he)
welcome shall be your chiefe, And so good-night, vntill we meete all at a peece of biefe, The morning came, & there they met, the boy that knew his time, Set them downe to breakefast straight, and then began his rime. You are welcome heartily, vnto lusty Humphrey, VVelcome here must be your chiefe To a friendly peece of Biefe, Such as was vs'd in ancient time VVhen house-keeping was in prime; VVhen the Biefe and Brewes flourisht, VVhen the silly soules were nourisht, Then 'twas a wonder to the poore To see a Porter keepe the doore, Then were silly harmelesse folkes, Plaine chimneyes then were full of smoakes: Euery table then was spred, And furnisht out with Biefe and bread,
Euery man then tooke a pleasure In his house to spend his treasure. Who was then the Gentries Guest? The Widdow poore, that's oft opprest, The Souldiers with their wounds and skarres Bleeding for their Countries warres. Then in the Country dwelt true pitty, Now Christmas is but for the Citty; A Gentleman of small reuenew, Had then the poore for his retinew. Wast not then a merry time When thy neighbour came to mine, Canst thou lend me twenty pound For to buy a peece of ground? Without statute, or a bond Their word as good as any hand. Then men of ancient calling Loued no pride for feare of falling, Country Russet was their wearing, And Kendall greene, for feare of tearing.
The Clothier scarce the Mercer knew, Now Silke-wormes make the Sheepe to rue, The Plough-man liu'd, sweete was his paine, The Taylor now sweepes vp his gaine. If any now do take compassion, 'Tis to checke the oldest fashion; Yet paying for new fashions gold, In spight of all, the new is old. But what meane I to runne so farre? My foolish words may breed a skarre, Let vs talke of Robin Hoode, And little Iohn in merry Shirewood, Of Poet Skelton with his pen, And many other merry men, Of May-game Lords, and Sommer Queenes, With Milke-maides, dancing o're the Greenes, Of merry Tarlton in our time, Whose conceite was very fine, Whom Death hath wounded with his Dart, That lou'd a May-pole with his heart.
His humour was to please all them That seeme no Gods, but mortall men, For (saith he) in these our daies, The Cobler now his Last downe laies, And if he can but reade, (God wot) Hee talkes and prates he knowes not what, Of May-poles, and of merriments That haue no spot of ill pretence. But I wonder now and then, To see the wise and learned men, VVith countenance grim, and many a frowne Cries, Maisters, plucke the May-pole downe. To heare this newes, the Milke-maide cries, To see the sight, the Plough-man dies. 'Tis a iest to see when they beginne For to plucke downe such wodden sinne. Foolish men, and faith-lesse too, That still professe, and nothing do. The Sectaries were in a rage, and knew not what to say,
They spit, and chafd, and stampt amaine, and would haue gone away. This merry Lad began to laugh, and to them thus replide, You see it stands not with my youth from pleasure to be tide, I loue to sit and laugh, not to offend the wise, I care not for their company that honest mirth despise: Those that be Saints abroad, whose substance shadowes bee, Let them go seeke Precisian-sects, they are no mates for mee. And when you are at home, thinke of this prouerbe told, The Tree is still knowne by his fruite, if it be nere so old. The poore men went away, all discontent in minde,
And had no pleasure to their meate, but left it all behind. Now, Father, be you iudge who plaid the better part, They with their zeale, or else the boy that spoke with all his heart. In sadnesse my good sonne, I neuer yet did heare, A Tale to that effect, so much to please mine eare; My iudgement I will stay, vntill our better leisure, I'le show thee heere a booke my sonne, wherein thou maist take pleasure: Heere shalt thou reade my sonne a volume of dispaire, The death of many a conquering king, their liues, and what they were, The wisedome of this world,
the frailty of our age, Our present time now acting sinne like Players on a stage. I writ it with this hand that once could guide a pen, And set my Launce into my rest as well as other men. But (oh) those daies are past, and now I wish to haue For all my seruice done, a white sheete and a graue. My Caske of steele is to a night-cap turn'd, My shining Armour to a gowne of gray, My youthful heart, which once with beauty burn'd Like dreames illusions, vading passe away, Euen as the night doth from the glorious day. My Naples Courser is a banke of earth, Whereon I sit to manage all my sinnes, Twixt life and death, which are borne mortall twinnes. My bridle now must be my Beades,
The golden bosses bookes, And all my Sonnets must be prayers VVhereon deuotion lookes, My Launce turn'd to a Palmers staffe VVhich once was painted braue, And all my followers be my sinnes, To bring me to my graue. The shield which now my Page Vnto my Prince must giue, Is (time mispent) An aged man. that can no longer liue. Beleeue me sonne, I would not liue For to be yong againe, To be great Emperor of the world The world I so disdaine. Iudge you if I say true, Reade this, and know my mind, They that haue eyes, may see the world, Or else they are borne blind: It is a world of care,
The greatest Prince that raignes Hath not halfe pleasure in his Crowne To equall all his paines. And he that liues in Court, And can but fauour win, VVhat ere he was, he may be sure That all will follow him. The surly Vshers then VVill do him any grace, That told him but a weeke before He did not know his place; His fellowes of the Guard, VVhen he comes to the dore, VVill all stand vp and make a legge, That would sit downe before. But if this man be proud, And full of high disdaine, Caring for nothing else at all But for his priuate gaine. Then Enuy mou'd in heart,
A Iury straight doth call, Inditing that vsurping man Conspiring his downe-fall. And straight he doth informe The Iury what he was, That now vsurpes, and hates the poore And doth his betters crosse. The Poet hearing this, Puls forth a booke of Tables, And makes a subtill rime, Much like to Esops fables; Then being fore-man, tels a Tale That was not much regarded, How men of vertue and of worth, Did wander vnrewarded: So he that liues in Court, And doth not seeke to haue The loue of euery priuate man, And of the poorest slaue, Let him be sure of this,
If Fortune chance to frowne, Enuy in time will turne the wheele And throw him head-long downe. Who would bee such a man When Time his fortune reades, That he must leaue his Offices, And take him to his beades, And in a shirt of hayre, Repent his time misled, And giue his treasure to the poore, Whom hee hath iniured. This were the way to go In peace vnto his graue, For none without they do repent, Can any mercy haue. But liues there such a man? No sure there can be none, We all are Lambes, no Foxes now, The deuil's dead and gone, No sure: if he were dead,
The Poets then would leaue To write of those that follow him, And all the world deceiue. But fare-well to the world Vnlesse I come by stealth, It neuer cares to grace such men As want both wit and wealth. I cannot kisse my hand Nor lout below the knee, Nor take a feather from your gowne, You know such men there be. In world one vndermines another to no end, And worst they speed, who most in hope do spend, Enuide they are, on whom but Fortune smiles, Though those smiles turne to nothing other-whiles. The mighty, seeking
to enlarge their might, Into contempt oft tumble downe out-right. The Lawyers Clyent crouching on his knees, Preuaileth nought, except he bring large fees. The Cittizen, the Scholler, and the Boore, Without a largesse, are thrust out of doore. Brauery, the gallant nouice thinkes doth all, When it consum'd, his credite is but small. Valour and Wit, proud on their tip-toes stand, And thinke chiefe dignities they may command. When that a foole,
a Parasite, a Pander, Betwixt them steps, and they are set to wander. So from the head vnto the foote it fares, Each one supplanteth other vnawares. The wisest builders, against after stormes, Fishing for honour, baite their hookes with wormes; Wormes that do dig and delue for them all day, Yet to all rauenous birds are left a pray. In Common-wealth how many vainely dreame Of Indian Mines, that fish against the streame? How many, that but hauing
one good bite, A nodde, or least glaunce from their Mistres sight, Cost vpon cost, clap thicke and three-fold on, And neuer cease, till they be quite vndone. How many that do fish before the Net, VVho offices before they fall do get, And count all fish into their Net doth chaunce, VVhom nought so vile, but serueth to aduance. All these pursuing gaine, not true content, Fish for their bane, their toile is fruitlesse spent. This is the world my sonne, Then now some comfort giue To me poore man, my time is come I can no longer liue Mine age, my blessed age, VVherein I do reioyce, Hath lent me time for to repent,
And sing with Angels voyce, Hymnes, Anthems, Laude, and Praise Vnto the King of Kings, Which out of this vilde wretched world Poore soules to heauen brings. You Poets all and some That write of Esops fables, Conceiting plots to please the world Notes from your booke of Tables; Me thinkes that A-iax should you call, To make wast-paper of you all That spend your time to please the time, With fictions, tales, and idle rime, Leauing the marke that should be hit, To praise Gods glory, and your wit. Oxford and Cambridge was erected For Vertue, not for vice protected. Ah, sonne, I faint, mine age and I Are striuing now who first should die:
My will is made, I haue no wealth, But wishes, prayers, content, and health, To thee my sonne, and all my friends That credite to this vaine world lends. My swolne-sicke heart, with death is tost, Like to a foote-ball in a frost; God blesse thee sonne, now close mine eyes, I hope my soule to heauen flies. And thus I end my Hermites Tale Which is of mickle ruth, It proues there is no hope in age, Nor certainty in youth. As for this homely Tale, And hee that made the same, Hath neither learning, wealth, nor wit, And scarce can write his name. FINIS.
