15192 99844974 9833
A most excellent and LEARNED VVOORKE OF CHI∣rurgerie, called Chirurgia parua Lanfranci, Lanfranke of Mylayne his briefe: reduced from dyuers translations to our vulgar or vsual frase, and now first published in the En∣glyshe prynte by Iohn Halle Chirurgien. Who hath thervnto neces∣sarily annexed. A Table, as wel of the names of diseases and simples with their vertues, as also of all other termes of the arte opened. Uery profitable for the better vn∣derstanding of the same, or other like workes. And in the ende a compendious worke of Anatomie, more vtile and profitable, then any here tofore in the Englyshe tongue publyshed. AN HISTORIALL EXPOSTVLATION also against the beastly abusers, both of Chy∣rurgerie and Phisicke in our tyme: With a goodly doctrine, and instruction, ne∣cessary to be marked and folowed of all true Chirurgiēs. All these faithfully gathered, and diligently set forth, by the sayde Iohn Halle. Imprinted at London in Flete streate, nyghe unto saint Dunstones churche, by Thomas Marshe. AN. 1565.
I. H. anno. aetatis suae. 35 portrait of John Halle R. M. Corporis effigies quam vides graphice pictam Hauli est, sic pictor fingere tibi velit: At modo si quaeris vultum dignoscere verum, Hos lege, hij vere explicuere animum.
The bookes verdict. AS some delighte moste to beholde, Eche newe deuyse and guyse, So some in workes of fathers olde, Their studies exercise. Perusing with All diligence, Bokes written long before: Wherin they learne experience, To heale both sicke and sore. Whiche I alowe in dede and worde, In those that vnderstande: For otherwyse it is a sworde, Put in a mad mans hande. Let Idiotes and betles blynde, Therfore lay me aparte: Leste contrarie myne authors mynde, They rudly me peruerte. For as he bée doth honie take, From euery goodly flowre, And spyders of the same doe make, Uenim that wyll deuoure: So all that learned men and wyse, To good purpose can vse, The rude that knowledge doe despise, Will euer more abuse. Wherfore all those that vse me right, I shall increase their fame: And vyle abusers all my mighte, Shall be to doe them shame.
VNTO THE VVORSHIPFVL the maisters, VVardens, and consequently to all the whole company and brotherhod of Chirurgiens of Lon∣don, Iohn Halle, one of the leste of them, sendeth hartie and louynge salutation. SYthe the almightie Creator of all thinges, of his mercifull goodnes, only for loue that he had to man∣kynd (who fell by disobedience out of Paradise into miserie) hath cre∣ated medicine out of the earth for man his vtilitie and helpe in the tyme of his sicknes, as the wyse man sayeth, Eccl. 38. And hath ordeined ministers of the same medicine, by a true and perfect order of arte,But of this deuision looke more in my preface to the Reader. deuided nowe into two partes, as the phisicien for inwarde infirmities, and the chirurgien or handeworker for outwarde griefes: It shoulde seme vnto me that they which despise the sayde arte, despise God his gracious giftes, euen as they whiche professe either part therof abusing the same, abuse God his mercifull benefites. And for as muche as suche despisers and abusers, are as well offenders to God, as a detrimente to his creatures: It should seme a thing not vaine or voyde of profite, to reprehende and warne men of suche vi∣ces: specially where they are so frequented, that some by feling, and some by vnderstanding and seyng, dai∣ly
crie out with greuous clamores, of the incommodi∣ous successe of suche wicked factes. First the despisers therof oftetymes (as we se) suf∣fer them selues (thorough hate that they beare to these excellēt partes and the ministers therof) by ne∣gligence to runne to extreame desolation: and ther∣fore many times worthily perishe, as a iuste rewarde for their contempte of God his ordeined remedies. And yet truly I can not but confesse, that the abu∣sers of those thinges are the chiefe cause, of these so great euels and mischiefes: for the experience of their wicked doynges, and the ouerthwarte successe of the same, causeth the ignorant to be at defiāce with that whiche was made for their owne helpe and succoure: so that they often perishe, because they feare to seke remedy: they are so often beaten with the painfull rodde of hatefull abusers. And alas, where as there is one in Englande, al∣moste throughout al the realme, that is indede a true minister of this arte, there are tenne abhominable a∣busers of the same. VVhere as there is one Chirur∣gien, that was apprentice to his arte, or one phisicien▪ that hath trauayled in the true studie, and exercise of phisique: There are tenne, that are presumptious smearers, smaterers, or abusers of the same: yea, Smythes, Cutlers, Carters, Coblars, Copers, Coriars
lether, Carpenters, and a great rable of women: VVhich (as the moste excellent Galen feared to hap∣pen) forsake their handiecraftes, and for filthy lucre abuse phisick, and chirurgerie. The cause wherof the sayde Galen wysely reciteth: for he sayeth, if these sciences had no coligance with other nedefull lear∣ninges, that those inconueniences would therof ensue. I would to God therfore my dere maisters and brethrē, that there might no fault be found in vs, cō∣cerning these thinges: For truly if we weare such men of science, as we ought to be, those false abusers would be more fearful to medle as they doe. For what a sha∣me were it, that suche an abuser in talkinge with a chirurgien in dede, shall apere more perfecte in the knowledge of the anatomie, and the natures of sim∣ples, or the complexion of man his bodie, then he that hath ben apprentice to his arte? Surely me thinketh this were a great occasion, not only to cause these abu¦sers more to presume: but I feare me also that suche thinges haue bene the cause, that suche abusers haue ben defended, of those whiche of righte shoulde haue subdued them. Heare me my maisters and brethren, is ther any philosopher so ignorant in philosophie, that he wan∣teth knowledge, to defende that whiche he doth pro∣fesse, against his contrary? doth he worthily beare the name of a Platoniste, that is ignorant in Plato his
workes? or is he worthy the name of a Musiciā, that hath learned to singe or plaie a fewe songes vpon an instrument, without the knowledge of the principles and rules of musicke? I am sure ye will answere no. If this be true in dede, as I thinke none can denie: Howe can we for shame call our selues Chirurgi∣ens, if we be not able to defende the same arte, to the confutation of the abusers therof. And I suppose verely, that Galen would not haue thought hym self a true Phisicien, if he had not bene able to confute the error of Thessalus and ye empirickes of his time, that falsly abused the excellēt arte of medicine: wher¦of Chirurgerie is the most aunciēt and worthy part, as Cornelius Celsus witnesseth: what so euer in the abusiue deuision is otherwyse pretended. Seyng therfore that it lyeth not in vs to extincte, put downe to silence, or subuerte these abusers: woulde God that we myght at the leaste, (throughe our excellentie) cause them as they are to seme exe∣crable. So that therby, they whiche haue power to re∣dresse these thynges, shall of their owne motion, se∣ing these abuses subuerte them: I meane that wee our selues myght growe to suche perfection, that the workes and knowledge of vs myghte apeare so immaculate, that by our iustnes, their falshode may be sene or knowne, by our cleanes theyr fowlnes,
by our knowledge their ignorance, by our certeyne▪ and true vse: their abusion and vncerteyne aduen∣tures: As eche thinge is knowen by his contrarie. So that at the laste, they thē selues (as Iannes and Iam∣bres, the charmers of Aegipte, although for a whyle they deceiued the kyng, by counterfeiting the myra∣cles of of Moises and Aaron the seruantes of God, yet at the laste confessed, that their owne dedes weare done by deceite, and the miracles of Moyses by the finger of God) shall confesse them selues also to be a∣busers, and we workers by true science. And so at the laste I doubte not, but all mē shall abhorre them. And as abuse groweth into hate and cōtempt, so the right vse shall obteyne loue and credite: so that the good in∣deuour of vs I truste, shall be the fall both of the abu∣sers, and the haters, of our excellent arte. For truly my maisters and brethern, I can not a little commende your late good indeuoures in this be∣halfe. For I presently see a number of diligēt hartes, endeuouryng them selues by all meanes to excelle in all kynde of studies, belonging to their arte and pro∣fession: and as it alredy apeareth vnto me, so shall it shortely to all men, euen as choke peares to our ad∣uersaries. If we may but haue the fauourable de∣fence of you our maisters, as we haue had incourage∣ment therto, by your diligence in repayring our wor∣shipfull
halle, and ye order therof: to the increasement of al kynde of knowledge, belonging to our profession. I therfore, as preparatiue to the reste that shall folowe, dedicate thys my symple laboure, in set∣tyng forth this excellent compendious worke, called Chirurgia parua Lanfranci, vnder your ayde, helpe, succor, tuition, and defence: whiche was translated out of Frenche into the olde Saxony englishe, about twoo hundred yeres past. VVhich I haue nowe not only re∣duced to our vsuall speache, by changyng or newe translating suche wordes, as nowe be inueterate, and growne out of knowledge by processe of tyme, but al∣so conferred my labours in this behalf with other co∣pies, both in Frenche and latin: namely with maister Bacter, for his latine copie, and Symon Hudie for his frēch copie, and other English copies: of the which I had one of Iohn Chāber, & an other of Iohn Yates, both very auncient, with other mo: whose good helpe hath not a little farthered me in these thinges, to the intēt that it might perfectly come forth to a publique profite, whiche to doe I was constreigned, not only be∣cause I would not truste to muche to myne owne rude iudgementes: but also that by the authoritie of dyuers men of knowledge, this excellent worke (as it is wor∣thy) may ye more effectually be alowed and accepted. And this dedication haue I made vnto you, ra∣ther
then (as the common vse is) to noble menne and princes, because ye being fathers and auncient mai∣sters of the same, are better able by perswasion and instruction of doctrine, to defende the same, to the sa∣tisfiyng of all men, then the only name of any prince, or magistrate, whiche defence I doe not desire, be∣cause I thinke the most excellent Lanfranke, to lack authoritie of truthe, to defende him selfe, but only that myne owne imbesilitie and faintnes of name, in setting forthe of this worke, may by your worshipfull aide, succour, and helpe, be fortefied. And thus doing, ye shall not only encourage me for my part, to enter∣prise other thinges vtile and nedefull, but other also, with whom I haue conferred my studies, bothe haue done and doe intende the like, to the increase of the name, fame, and worshippe, of our excellent arte, and the companie or brotherhod of the same. Vnto this worke also is added a briefe Anatomie, necessary for all Chirurgiens, and a table of the in∣terpretation, as well of all maner of strange wordes, as also of all maner of simples, by any occasion trea∣ted of in this profitable worke: By me collected, ac∣cording to myne owne experience and the meaning of good authors, as well ye aunciētes as the new writers. The whiche thing, if it be well approued of you, it wilbe (as the goodnes therof deserueth) The better accepted and receiued of all others, the whiche thing
to see, weare to me for this my good will, a sufficiente recompence. And what profite or commoditie, this worke shall be, (being nowe set forth vulgarly) to all estates of this realme, the excellēcie therof wil short∣ly so proue it by euident experience, that we nede not for that cause here to waste the time with wordes. Therfore that it may so come to passe, that our ende∣uours in generall, as well the maisters as the reste of the companie, maye procede as it is begonne, to the e∣dificatiō and building vp of good science, & to the sub¦uertion of all haters and abusers of the same: I shall not cease, not only to praie to God for helpe therin, whoe is capitaine and author of al goodnes: but also with such poore weapon, as the forsaid capitaine hath lent me, I will not cease while breath is in my body, to lay on with both handes till this battell be wonne, & our aduersaries conuinced and vanquished: which al∣though as I saide afore, they are x. to one, yet truthe being our weapon, and good science our armoure, with our generall the high author of them, we nede not to doubt, but that one shalbe good enough for a thousād, not so strongly armed, but naked men and bare of all knowledge. And in the meane tyme, till we brynge forth our mayne battell, let this worthy Lanfranke skirmishe with thē, as I. Vigo & other haue done. And also let not vs be obliuious, in geuyng thankes to such, good men, as haue in these thinges not a litle furthered our
knowledges: as doctor Recorde, for his Vrinale of phi¦sicke, whiche he dedicated vnto vs: and also doctor Turner, whoe compyled his englishe herale, as he affirmeth for our sakes▪ whiche moste learned and worthie worke ought of vs to be honorably estemed: rather then as it hath been of some moste spitfully de∣spised, for the faulte of the lewde and negligent pryn¦ters: wherwith they seme most shamlesly to charge the author▪ where as accordinge to his desire, they ought rather for their owne profitable vse to amend the same▪ that by their good receiuing and wel vsing of it, he maye be animated, to finishe al ye rest of that worke, according to his former intentes: the which to doe if he be discouraged by our ingratitude, how much the common weale shall lacke that commoditie, let the wyse and learned iudge. I truste I shall not nede to byd you bee thankefull to maister VVylliam Cun∣ningham doctor of phisicke, for his so many learned lectures which he red vnto you in our halle, to your great commoditie, if the faulte be not in your selues: of the whiche to be partaker with you, my frowarde fortune and distance of place (to my no small griefe) would not suffer me. And besides these, diuers other: which (to abreuiate the time) I passe ouer without the rehersall of their names, whose diligence of late hath bene (as vnto you at this daye it is not vnknowne)
to profite the common weale: whose names therfore among vs oughte therby to florishe, and their fame neuer to die or decaie. And then let vs make a gene∣rall proclamation, that who so euer hath professed the noble arte of chirurgerie, and will fighte against the despisers and abusers of the same: let them come vnder the baner of good authores, nowe sent amonge them, by our generall the creator of medicine: arming them selues well with knowledge and good science, and goe forth to battell against these deceiuers, and their capitaine filthie lucre. And their wages shall be well payde them: namely good fame and liuinge in this life, and eternall lyfe after this vale of miserie. The which he grante vs all, that dearly hath redemed vs with his precious bloude, Amen.
VV. CVNINGHAM DOCTOR in Phisique, vnto the professors of Chi∣rurgerie salutations. IT hath euer ben obserued frō the firste creation, that nature (by diuine prouidēce) hath in all ages brought forth excel∣lent, and heroicall persons: to the great comfort of posteritie folowing. For as the Adamāt naturally ceasith not to attracte & drawe to it iron and steele: no more haue these ceased, from the inuention of suche thinges, as vvere nedefull to mans vse. VVhich at the first like as tender and small sedes (by times reuo∣lutiō) haue grovvne to high and mightie trees of small beginnings, by trauelles of noble and ingenious persons, frō age to age, haue sprōg so many sondrie sciences▪ artes, and professiōs, as vve see at this daie. But for that in all times the numbre of these haue been most small, & the multitude infinite of those that folow igno¦rance: prouidēt nature, being yet fruteful, hath brought forth in this olde & feble age of the vvorlde, as vvell as in times past, diuine vvittes: by whose laboures, the treasures of science and knowledge, vnto this present gottē, should be
preserued and defended from perishing, mau∣gre the forse of doultishe ignorance, and can∣card obliuion. Neither in my opinion are they lesse worthy honor and praise, whose famous actes mainteine, and cause freshly to floryshe the precious monumentes of forworne age: then the authours them selues. For as we owe to the one the excellent inuention: so are we debters to the other, for the diligent propaga∣tiō therof to vs their posteritie. Neither are we more beholden to Apollo, for the first inuen∣tion of the nature and vse of herbes: then vnto Hippocrates, who first seperating phisique frō philosophie, made of his elders traditions, and his owne diuine obseruations a noble arte. And yet doth Galen merite no lesse honor & immortall fame then either of them. For he hath largely vttered, that whiche Hippocrates did briefly set out: opening plainly, that which was obscurely writtē, adding that which semed to wante: and commendinge their actes vnto those that shold succede. what grateful mindes we are of dutie constrained to showe to those, that in this our age trauel in diuinitie, phisique mathematicalles, lawe, historiographie, poe∣trie Agriculture, and other profitable studies:
not only the professours, but all Christian pu∣blique weales being tasters of the commodi∣ties (though I be silent) can truly reporte. And omitting that herein might be saide, I torne my penne only to you, the worshipfull bro∣therhode of Chirurgians in London. vvhat prayse and worthie fame, chiefly of you, and then of those which haue nede of chirurgerie, Iohn Halle one of your felowshippe haue de∣serued: these his labours doe apparātly showe. For where as for want of good authors in your owne natiue tongue, chirurgerie haue not a little decaied: she is nowe againe by his pain∣full trauelles not a little restored. And for as muche as in all studies it greatly doth profite to haue first briefe and compendious intro∣ductions: he hath translated a short Isagoge of that noble Chirurgian Lanfranke of Millā, named Lanfranke his briefe. In whiche, whe∣ther Lanfranke oweth more to him for the re∣storing of his decayed worke, or he to Lan∣franke, for the immortall fame hereby obtei∣ned: I can not easely iudge. But this I dare boldly affirme, that Lanfranke before being corrupted, and of small vse: is nowe by the la∣boures of my friende Iohn Halle, purged and
made pure so that henceforth, I may rightly call it Halles Lanfranke. In which is set out cō∣pendiously the curation of woundes, tumores against nature (Lanfranke nameth them apo∣steme) vlcers, luxatiōs, fractures, and of certain griefes and diseases of the eies, with a chirurgi∣call antidotarie. But for because briefe treatises want not obscuritie, especially to the yonger students: Iohn Halle hath made an expositiue table, setting plainly out as well the perfect na∣tures of those simple medicines mentioned of Lanfranke, as also of all the termes belonging to the arte. And where as the preceptes of the arte or approued medicines, can little profit the body of man in all his partes not exactly knowen, he hath also added a compendious Anatomie, in whiche thou maiest easely with∣out great laboure, learne that is herein requi∣site: which booke of al the reste, would not on∣ly be first redde, but also cōmitted to memory. This good halle yet seaseth not, nor suffereth his priuate gaine to call him awaye: but with pitie beholding decaied chirurgery, to be dai∣ly defaced by a rable of rōnagates, hath made against them an historicall Expostulation: in whiche he showeth the difference betwixt the
chirurgien, and the rōnagate abuser. Al which his workes, being set out to your great increase in knowledge, requireth not only present thā∣kes: but a perpetuall memorie to be made a∣mong you of him for euer. This author also hath finished an other worke inuaying against vice, and therfore named the court of vertue: being nowe in the Printers handes. Takinge these therfore his trauelles in good parte, he frely and gladly offereth them to you, you shall both eschewe the suspicion of ingratefull Momus, and geue him occasion to attempte greater thinges, to your cōmoditie and gaine. Fare hartely well, at my howse in Colmāstrete, this .xviii. daye of Aprill. Anno, M.D.lxv.
Thomas Gale maister in Chirurgerie, unto his welbeloued friende Iohn Halle, sen∣deth greting. FOr as muche as translation is the mother of patefaction, and a vertue moste commenda∣ble of al mē, because it vncouereth ignorāce, and illustrateth the knowledge of many no∣table matters vnto the vulgar people: I thought it most mete and expediēt therfore, with some consolation to cō∣fort you welbeloued frend Halle, which peraduēture be∣ing somwhat astonied and afrayde of the cōmon peoples iudgement, would detract that laudable and moste wor∣thy enterprise, which you haue finished: neither would ac∣cording vnto your vocatiō and office publishe your tra∣uell, conteining in it most profitable frutes, by ye whiche the publique welth might be releued, and also your assig∣ned office discharged. I am certeinly assured that you wil obiect vnto me, how that you shall suffer the reprehensiō of many, in alleging vnto you, that you are worthy rather of contumelie and reproche then fame and renowme, for your exercise and labor: Because that euery lādleper & vagabonde therby shalbe made an artist. I put the case that many should inueye these allegations against you, wil you therfore be discouraged, neither wold you fearing their rude iudgement, proffit your natiue countrey? Let me neuer see such causes I beseche you (being of no force) moue you to faint: for if they alledge any suche thing a∣gainst you (as you suppose) it will at the length (as when
it commeth to the eares of the wise) redounde vnto their owne reproche. They can not for mere shame and impu∣dencie saie, that you in the publishing of your booke, will make euery priuate person an artiste: specially when as herein thei incurre mendacitie and falsifiyng the truthe, then the whiche vice nothing can be more detestable and worthy of ignominie. For the most part of men doe know, (specially those whiche are wise and discrete) that you haue not taken vpon you this translation into the vulgar tongue to the ende euery man therby might be made an artiste: (whiche thing could not be brought to passe, if that you ment the desolation of the arte:) but that you do it only for this ende and purpose, that the tyrons and dili∣gent studentes of the noble art, might haue some know∣ledge to lede them, as it weare by a light, vnto more per∣fection. Therfore if you mynde the profit of your coun∣trey, lette not suche allegations dismay your enterprise, but publishe it with spede: For the soner it appeareth, the soner our brethren whiche are but yet contending to obtein ye knowlege of chirurgerie our noble art, shal haue therof profit & vtilitie. And though one of those ignorāt Idiotes whiche seke not to profit their countrey, but al∣ledge suche cauilations as are before mentioned, doe con∣temne both it and you also, yet will a hundred other for one of those, both contemne them in their bestiall despite, and commende you in your good indeuoures, whiche ten∣deth I doubt not to nothing els but the profit of the com∣mon
wealth. Furthermore in publishing of your boke, you shall purchase the fauor and beneuolence of many men, and specially of suche as trauell in the knowledge of our arte: also you shalbe counted herein not only a profitable member of the publique welth, but also a diligēt imitator of your predicessors whiche did translate out of other tō∣gues our famous art into their owne proper languages that to diligent studentes ye art might be made manifest. Of this sort of men many I could resite, but for breuitie I will name but one or two: as for example, Galen that fa∣mous artist translated our art out of many tongues, as the Scithian, Persian, Aegiptian and other more, into his own natiue tongue only, to thende that the studēts might the more easily gette ye profit of the same. Auicē also that excellent Arabian prince, hauing a like regarde vnto his countrey, collected both out of Hippocrates and Galens workes, the effecte of our art, and translated it into his mother tongue, that the knowledge of it might remaine vnto his posteritie. And doubte you not as these men for their great paines taken of loue to their countrey, in the furtherance of this our art, haue had and euer shal haue memoriall renowme, but that you intending none other shal obteine the same. Aspire therfore and take breth vnto you, let no vayne and friuolus opinion ouercomme you, for I see no cause wherfore you shoulde exruciate your selfe. Euery wyse man wyll accepte your inde∣uours, excepte those whiche neyther mynde theyr office,
neither the vtilitie of ye publique wealth: euery good mā will embrase and with great gladnes reuolue ouer your boke as sone as it is published, and wil at the first sight of your good trauell haue you in more estimacion then euer they had. And why? because you set forth the most famous and excellent arte of medicine: then the whiche (as I suppose) there can be none more profitable, and spe∣cially vnto all men, as well emperours & kinges, as other menne of lower estats: For thoughe other artes dooe profit and are moste fit for a common welth? yet for all that the profit of this all men doe knowe to be more vbe∣rius. For without it pleasures were but painful, riches vn∣profitable, company annoyance, strengthe febelnes, bew∣tie lothsumnes, senses dispersed, and finally all thinges in the worlde weare vnpleasant. wherfore lest tediousnes may take place in this my writing vnto you. I will here sease to trouble you any further: loking shortly for the publishing of your workes. Fare you well, at my house in London, the .14. daye of May. Anno. 1565. To the louyng Readers. IF they whiche haue illustrated, The noble arte of medicine, Haue had vnto them ministred, Both mortall prayses and diuine: Then shall not Halle that frutfull tree, Haue lyke rewarde and gratefull thankes, (As those that haue of suche been free,) whiche hath vncouered ignorance.
O Chirons let me neuer knowe, suche famous men as by their payne, Haue opened the buddes that blovve, vvante fame, their vvell deserued gaine. You knovve not vvhat fertilitie, Henceforth may vnto you redounde, Ne vvhat impes of chirurgeri By him may spring vvithin your grounde. Therfore be not in prayses slovve, You chirons that by him may haue, In those your gardens knovvledge grovve, vvherby you may the greued saue. For vvhy by your encouragment, This tree may moe svvete blossomes bloome: And vvhere it hath you one out sent, Sondrie may spring and that right soone. Consider vvhat by courage grovves, And vvhat frutes to men it doth bring: No hart (I thinke) can vvell suppose, vvhat gaine alvvayes by it doth spring. But seing that your minde I see, And also your intent and fact, To incourage this odorous tree, My penne here shall his rase detract.
I. H. To the louing Readers greting in our eternall Lorde, the author of all knowledge. AS ofte as I consider, the diligent care of the quncient authors, to be perfect and exquisite in their arte, not only in their own handy worke, whyle they were lyuing on this earth, but also to put the same in writing, to the behoue of all that should come after: I can not a litle marueyle at the stubberne disdain∣full ignorance of many, in this our wretched age, wherin the noble arte of Chirurgerie is as it were falne into ruyne. For where as in tyme paste there were fewe Chirurgiens, & they very cunning, learned, and expers wherby thei were accepted as pre∣cious iewels or honorable treasures of the common weale: Ther are nowe many, and the moste parte ignorant, wherby they are founde rather hurtfull then profitable: yea very caterpyllers to the publique orders. So that in this case, the tyme present, beyng compared with the tyme past, may be lykened to suche people as would plucke downe in a realme, a hundred castels or strong defensed fortes whiche were made for the faulregarde of the countrey: and in steade therof buyl∣de a thousande cotages, more lyke hoggesyes then houses. Were not this thynke you a goodly change  a fewe number for the greater? What was the cause that Lanfranke wrote so earnestly to his dis∣ciple, that he should kepe his worke from the sighte of ignorant and vnwyse people: But that he feared that by such meanes a tyme migh come, that through the abusion of so many insipient and suche rustical professiors of that arte, it would at the last come to ruine and extreame decaye: so that whatsoeuer therin was ordeyned to the profite of men and their helpe in necessite, should nowe through suche beastes abu∣sing the same, be the next waye to perdition of lyfe and members? Did not Galen here as it were plainly prophecie in his time: which was about a thousande .iii. hundred, and .lxxx. yeres past; (for he was famous, and floryshed in this lyfe, about the yere of Christ .178. in the tyme of Marcus Aurelius Antonius emperour of Rome.) For he playnly sayde, (when he wrote against Thessains:) if phisicke were not vnitted, with other learnynges, that all maner of vyle ocupaciens, would leaue their labour, and become phisitiens: Whiche is come to passe at this daye. Which doubtlesse hath chaunced, not because the medicinall arte, may nowe better wante those worthy pointes of lear∣ning then in tymes paste it might: But rather it hath chaunced, bothe through wante of lawes for the prohibition of the same, and executiōs of them that are: and also (yea chiefly) by the slouthfull negligence of the professors of the same. So that to a number, they haue been and are so worne out of mynde, that howe profitable (yea and what they are) it is vnknowne. Ioannes Fernellius (a righte learned wryter) deuideth (as also o∣thers
doe) his maner of instruction, (and that for the whole arte of medicine) into thre principall partes: namely Physiologia. . de re∣rum naturis disputatio: that is a disputatiō of the natures of things comprehending the discriptions of the Anatomie, of the elementes, of the temperamentes, of the spirites and naturall heate, of the animall faculties, of the humores and naturall functions, and of the sede and procreation: pathologia, i. causarum symptoma tumque inquisitio: Whiche is the inquisition of causes and accidentes: consistinge of the descriptions of diseases of their causes and accidentes, and signes of the vrines, of feuers, &c. Of all diseases both exterior and interior: and Therapeutica,. hoc est medendi ratio, that is the methode or waye of curation: conteyning the maner of purging, of phlebotomye, and all o∣ther wayes of curations. And as these .iij. are together (as most necessary partes of one body) so ioyntly vnited, that neither the last can any thing profite without the first and seconde, nor the firste he perfect and vtile without the se∣conde and thyrde, &c. So doubtlesse can the professor of neither parte lacke any portion of them, without so great imperfection as is his lacke. What shall we then saye of the lyke defecte in any of the three in∣strumentes of the curatiue parte? namely Diatetice, Pharmaceutice, and Cheirurgiee: which haue bene and yet remayne deuided, into (as it weare) thre destincted and seuerall artes, and they so farre the one from the other, as though they had neuer been together: as the com∣mon terme of chirurgery is, it is a solution of continuitie: and is come to a necessitie,Solution of continuitie. that diuers men must professe those diuers partes par∣ticularly, euen so as wyll listeth to limite them: whiche boundes also they may not passe without farther perill. But howefarre the mynde and opinion of Galen was from this, it is manifest. For whiche of his bookes is not stuffed with ma∣nifolde preceptes belongyng to Chirurgerie? And chiefly his bookes intituled de Methodo medendi, & de arte curatiua ad Glauconem, Though in dede it should seme by Cornelio Celso, that it was not then among all the vsers of the same vndeuided: whiche began sayeth he about the tymes of Herophilus and Erasistratus. who in the be∣gynning of his seuenth booke calling Chirurgia the thirde parte of medicine, sayeth. Ea quidem medicamenta atque victus rationem non omittit. Scribonius Largus also in his boke de compositionibus saith thus. Implicitas medicinae partes, inter se ita connexas esse constat: vt nullo modo didui (sine totius professionis detrimento) possint Ex eo intelligitur quod neque chirurgia sine diaetetica, neque hac sine chirurgia (id est sine ea parte quae medicamentorum vtilium vsum habet) perfici possunt. Sed aliae ab alijs adiuuantur, & quasi consumantur, That is to saye.
It is manifest that the entermedled partes of medicine are so con∣nexed together, that they can in no wise be separated, without the de∣trimente of the whole medicinall profession. Wherby it is gathered that neither chirurgerie without the dietetike parte, nor this without chirurgerie, (that is without that part that hath the vse of profitable medicines) can be accomplished: But one is holpen and (as it were) finished by the other. These wordes also doth Philiatros reporte. But why shold I reste here resiting many authorities about a mat∣ter so euident? seyng that to wyse men it nedeth not, as to the folyshe it booteth not. But let the present tyme be iudge therin, howe muche hurt the same causeth. For the persons professing either of these partes are so in hate with the other partes, that they thynke it a dishonor to be acquainted one with an other: For as the sayde Philiatros sayeth, the phisiciens or professors of the dieterike parte, abhorre chirurgerie, as a thing to vyle for their profession. And they that are chirurgiens, estemynge their profession to bee only one parte of physicke, and that for the exterior partes of mannes bodie, regarde not to bee lear∣ned. thynkyng that it is not nedefull to their arte. And likewyse the pharmaceutike parte, trustyng to the learnyng of the Phisiciens and chirurgiens, thynke it no boote to be learned them selues: In so much that olde women must gather their herbes, vnto whome they trust for the truthe of thynges, rather then to their owne knowledge. And the Phisiciens hauing only learning, truste to the Chirurgiens and Apo∣thecaries for experience: and yet in the meane season hatynge either of both, if they medle in the dietetike parte: so that betwene trusting & hatyng one an other, they are all voyde and destitute of perfection. But it can not be gathered that Galen, nor yet Hippocrates, which was before Galen, about .640. yeres, for Hippocrates liued. from the tyme of Artaxerxes Longimanus, vnto Artaxerxes Ochus, that is to saye, 104. yeres: in the whiche season he healed kyng Perdicas of his disease. Whiche Perdicas reigned in Macedonie eyght yeres, which was before Galen his tyme .634. yeres. It can not I saye be founde, that any of these two moste excellent men dyd in their tyme thus vse phisicke, for it may be proued (as it is before playne enough) that they playde the Apothecaries, and as wel made, as deuised their owne me∣diines, and also vsed in their owne persons chirurgeris or the handye worke of phisicke. For otherwyse they could not haue wryten suche perfect bookes therof? neither would they haue taken suche peyne in any arte, wherin they had not muche delyted: or the same greatlye estemed. But our pernicious deuision hath as I lately sayde, brought all to confusion: so that neither parte is nowe vsed only of the experte pro∣fessors therof, but rather of euery smearer, that listeth to abuse them. For as the phisiciens thynke their learnyng sufficient, without prac∣tise or experience: so the chirurgien for the moste parte hauyng expe∣rience
and practise, thinketh it vnnedefull to haue any learnyng at all, which also hath bolded euery ignorant, rusticall, ye and foolyshe wo∣man, to think them selues sufficient to professe and worke, in so noble and worthy an arte. We fynde also by the testimonie of Galen in lib. xiiii. de methodo medendi, that Cheirurgia, hath principally .iii. operations: That is to say, to dissolue the thynge conteyned, to knit or conioyne the thyng separated, and to separate and take away suche thynges as are super∣fluous or vnnaturall. To dissolue the thynge conteyned, to as welle doone by euacuation of corrupted humours, by profitable purgations and good diete: as by bloud lettyng, which the Grekes cell phleboto∣mian, and ventosynge, scarification, incisions, aueries, openynge of apostemes. &c. To knyt the thynge separate, is as well doone by stytchyng and conuenient byndinges, wherby the separate borders of woundes be ioyned together with medicines incarnatiues, congluti∣natiues, and cicatrizatiues: as also in restoring of dislocations, and fra∣ctures: that is to saye, displaced ioynetes or broken bones. To take away superfluous thinges, is to mundifie vncleane sores, from theyr fylthy eschares or cores, superfluous and rotten fleshe, corrupted bones sliuers, arowheades, pellets, or any other vnnatural thinge: And also, separatyng from the body, dade and mortified members whether they be legges, feete, toes, armes, handes, fingers, wennes, wartes, or any other vnprofytable, eminēces, that either payne, anoy, or disfygure the bodye. Of these also hath euery vndiscrete personage snached a piece, in suche wyse, that they runne about and throughe the contrey, and eche coaste of the same, like pedlers, tynkers, ratte katchers, and very vacabundes, some onely to set bones, some to drawe tethe, some to let blood, some to cutte ruptures, and take out stones: but all thys, rather (vnder suche colour) to maynteyne an Idle and theuyshe lyfe, then to profyte the common weale, to the great vprobrie of all the whole pro∣fession of medicine. If (as the learned interprete) this word chirurgia, doth signifye a medicinall operation or working with the hand, which is to be done vpon the most excellent of lyuyng creatures, man his body, yea in hys tender fleshe, among his sensible sinewes, liuely areties, and delicate veynes: how vnmete is it, that euery vncunnyng & vnexercised crea∣ture, shalbe suffred (be they neuer so vnmete) to occupy so excellent an art, playing as it were the marchant venterers, not for gain or losse of goodes and ryches, but for lyfe and death, vpon the body of man. If as (Guido saith) the fyrst point of a Chirurgien is to be lerned: how hapneth it then, that euery ignorant & vnlerned asse, yea very ene∣mies to all lerning and knowledge, be suffred to worke, yea and proue the strange maistries of their fond fantasies, vpon the body of man. If (as Auenoar witnesseth) a Chirurgien ought to be expert, & to haue sene other maisters work, before he venter or enterprise o work hym self, and that he must fyrst learn and knowe, & then after to work and vse experience: how is it then, that all men and women, withoute either lernyng or experience, or any kynd of knowledge: yea only stan∣dyng
in theyr own conceipte, may worke and practise what they wyl, and that without interruption or punyshment for their abusion, vpon the body of man? If as (Haly affirmeth) a chirurgien ought to be a man of good di∣scretion, and no foole nor vnwyttie, nor of rude vnderstanding: but of good memory, good iudgement, and good diligence: why is euery rude rustike, braynsick beast, fond foole, vndiscrete idiote, yea euery bedle baude, and scoldinge drabbe, suffered thus (without all order) to abu∣se this worthy arte vpon the body of man? What auayleth the goodly orders, taken by our forefathers and an∣cient authores, that none should be admitted to the arte of chirurgery, that are miscreate or deformed of body:Properties of a Chirurgien as goggle or skwynte eyed, vnperfecte of sight, vnhelthy of body, vnperfect of mynde, not hole in his members, boystrous fingers or shakyng handes. But contrary∣wyse, that all that should be admytted to that arte, shoulde be of cleare and perfect sight, well formed in person, hole of mynde and of mem∣bers, sclender and tender fingred, hauyng a softe and stedfast hande: or as the common sentence is, a chirurgien should haue three dyuers properties in his person. That is to saie, a harte as the harte of a lyō, his eyes lyke the eyes of an hawke, and his handes as the handes of a woman? What auayleth this order I saye, sithe the contrary in all poyntes is put dayly in vse, and that almost without hope of redresse? Seyng also, that those auncient authors had not only his regarde to the forme of the body, but also and as well to the bewere or orna∣ment of the mynde, & honest conuersation of him that should be admit∣ted to chirurgery,Condiciōs of a Chirurgien as are thes: He ought to be well manered, of good audacitie and bolde where he may worke surely, and contrariwyse, doubtfull and fearfull, in thynges that be dangerous and desperate. He must be gentyll to his pacients, wity in prognosticatiōs and for∣seyng of dangers, apte and reasonable to answere & disolue all doubtes and questions belongyng to his worke. He muste also be chaste, sober, meke, and mercifull, no extorcioner, but so to accomplishe his rewarde at the handes of the ryche, to maynteine his science and necessary ly∣uynges, that he may helpe the poore for the only sake of God: what meaneth it I saye (these thynges considered) that so many sheepe heades, vnwytty, vnlearned, vnchaste, ribaudes, lecheours, fornica∣tors, dronkardes, belygoddes, beastly gluttons, wrathfull, enuious, and euell manered, shall thus myserably be suffred to abuse so noble an arte? yea that they shall also be maynteyned, (in despyghte of those that are men of science indede,) preferred to lyuinges for that profes∣sion, contrary to the ordinances and lawes of a citie, beyng a carpen∣ter, a cobler, or a corier of lether, or whatsoeuer he be: The wyttye, the learned, the man of knowledge, the citizen, and the free man, in the meane season wantyng preferrement and lyuyng? Well, I besech god that there may be some occasion geuē, to procure a redresse, yt none may worke without knowledge ioyned to experiēce: whiche no doubte were the waye to haue perfect men in this arte:
where as nowe it is not lyke that euer there shalbe many. For who wyll set his sonne to schole with coste and great charge, and then put hym to suche an arte wherin is neyther gayne nor hope of prefer∣ment? And is not this a wondrous case, that the arte of medicine is so free for all men to vse that wyll: That the very rustians, and com∣mon barators doe vse the same as a common shifte, wherby to obteine their wycked purposes with the lesse suspicion? Under whiche co∣lour they also ary in townes and cities, hauyng their filthy company resortyng vnto them, without danger of the lawes: so that this noble arte is become (for lack of order) a couert vnto all filthynes and vyc as well thefte and murder, as also moste fylthy whordome. To all o∣ther wycked persons also, whiche despysing all lawes and order, doe vnder the pretence of this professiō, flete & flee from towne to towne, from shere to shere. Through the whiche there are suche filthy vyces mainteined, and enormities suffered, as no honest eare would glad∣ly here it: And therfore I blushe to remember it, and shame to write it. Whiche euels coulde neuer haue been done vnder that couerte, i none but the learned and experte myght haue wrought, and they also admitted by the byshop: as it hath in tymes paste been holsomlye or∣deyned in this Realme. Which lawe, if euery byshop would witsa∣ue to execute in his dioces: there shold (I beleue) be a greater quietnes in the common weale then there is. But if by this litle any man might be stirred with zele, to procure a redresse in these thynges, truly I should recken my selfe amonge the number of them that are happy. Alas there are goodly orders taken, and profitable lawes made, for makyng of clothe, tannyng of leather. makyng of shoes & many other externall thynges: The abuse wherof is but a dearth or disprofite of the purse: and shall there not be a re∣dresse had for the true vse of a science, whervpon dependeth the health of mans body? without whiche, what is mans lyfe but a very misery or wretched werines? The abuse of whiche science is not only a dis∣profite to the purse, but of a farre greater charge: That is to saye, the losse of helth and lyfe. I wyshe therfore, in gods behalfe, that a staye maye be had in these thinges, as wel as in other, & yet not except man his lyfe & helth excel¦leth all other earthly cōmodities: And as man his life excedeth in va∣ine all other possessions of this worlde: that there might likewyse be the more care and diligence for the preseruation therof, then for any o∣ther thyng. For although chirurgiens from henceforth, teache their science to none but to suche as be learned: yet if all that will may vse it without exception, though they were neuer traded vp in the prac∣tyse of the same, there shall remayne styll a great disorder. I am not ignorant, that some men will thinke, that this booke (be∣yng publyshed) wyll be an occasion for suche men to be the bolder to a∣buse the same science. But I knowe and am sure, that they shall not learne in this booke any thyng wherwith to hurte: neither haue I
publyshed the same for them. And farther if any abuser of chirurgery reade this boke, he shall (I trust) so fynd himselfe rubbed on the galle, that he shall be moued (if he haue any shame) to leaue his vice, rather then more to vse it. But what neded we to doubt to set worth all scy∣ence in englyshe, yf by the lawes (as is aforesayd) none myght vse the same, but suche as (beyng expert) are fyrst approued, and then lauful∣ly admitted? Let all yong men therfore, that professe or intende to learne this worthy art, first learne perfectly their anatomy, then the natures and complexions of their pacientes, and then the propreties of their medi∣cines: whych they shall neuer doo, vnlesse they study consequentely to know the vertues and temperamentes of symples: as herbes, seedes, rootes, gummes, trees, fruictes, veynes of the earth, stones, mettals, beastes, fyshes, and fowles: of whiche are made the medicines, wher∣with the Chirurgien muste worke. This is the true way to be a per¦fect chirurgien, and otherwyse not to be atteined, as Lanfranke hym selfe the author of this boke, (as thou shalt rede) affirmeth: who flo∣rished .268. yeres paste, in the time of Edward the fyrst king of En∣gland, and Philyp the fayre reigned then in France. I wyshe therfore, that this boke and suche lyke, should be red of al estates, that they may vnderstand how this laudable science is buyl∣ded vpon reason, and how farre from the trade of true science, these ab∣horfull abusers be: whiche take vpon them to worke in Chirurgery, by thee onely readyng of a booke or bokes, not beyng traded vp in the true practise and experience therof. For as good doctor Record in the Preface to his vrinall of Phisyke saith, what is learnyng vnlerned? or knowledge vnknowen? any thyng els but a vayn name? learnyng then increaseth moste (sayth he) when it is studied of moste: and lear∣nyng then triumpheth moste, when it hath moste fauourers and folo∣wers: and then dothe ignorance (learnings enemy) reioyce most, when learnyng reygneth in fewest, and blyndnes ruleth most: so that then is lernyng most profaned, contemned and hated, when she hath most ene¦mies: That is to say, when most men are ignorant. For that old say∣eng shall always be true, learning hath none enemy but the ignorant. O that this worthy sentence were so wayed and folowed, that the Chirurgiens should not worke vpon any parte of man his bo∣dy, vnlesse they can by reason proue and certifie their pacientes, that suche kynde of workyng is behouefull for their health. For he that hath none other reason, but thus haue I done, or this or thus haue I sene my maister worke, is not worthy to worke vpō the body of mā. But if it were come to this isue, that all men so knewe the reason of this arte, that they woulde suffer none to minister to their diseases, but such as could proue their worke to be good, by reason and true or∣der of science, these hateful abusers could no longer haue place. This notable briefe worke of Lanfranke may satisfie those curious katchers, that finde fault with Vigo, for his great cōpositonis (which they call superfluous) and ample doctrine (whiche they terme te∣diousnes.) For here haue they a briefe doctrine of ryght good effect,
and small compositions of sufficiēt vertues. Which he wrot vnto his frend, as an introductiō to a greater worke: and that performed he af∣terwarde in effect, in the yere of Christ .1296. Whiche also may be an ensample to all maisters vnto their disciples, yt in these dayes vse this arte, specially to suche as rather hyde their science from their seruātes (because perhaps their owne store is not great) then teache them tru∣ly. There be to fewe examples of englysh chirurgiens that haue wri∣ten bookes to instructe their disciples: Though these daies (gods holy name be glorified therfore) may therof lesse cōplayne then many yeres past. I must nedes therfore coūsel all yonge mē (since now they haue so good helpes) to be diligent to learne, and not to spare the very stea∣ling of cunning: that is to saye that they will be so vigilant as to ob∣teyne it, although it be hydden from them. For truly there are many, that take seruantes and apprentises, not for to teache them science, but only to be their drudge, and to doe their toyle and labore: whiche is the cause, that so many come out of their yeares so ignorant. For their intent is to haue seruantes to dooe the toyle in their house, and not to make them cunnyng men: yea and some will refuse a yonge man that is learned, and apte to vnderstande to haue an ignorāt slaue, to beare the water tankard, & sowre pāed suche a one (as the cōmon prouerbe is) that will neuer doe man of sci∣ence harme vnles he steale away his dynner. And yet will suche a one bragge and boaste, at seuen yeres ende, as though he had all the learnyng and cunnyng vnder the sonne, although in very dede, the most knowledge that he hath is, to poule, or shue, drawe a toothe, or dresse a broken pate. Alas is not this a great pytye, that suche a noble arte shall thus be abused euery way, through the fil∣thie lucre & auaricious myndes of men? Is it not a shame to vse such roberie? doe ye not steale lyke robers the seruice of your apprentyses, when cōtrary to your couenantes, ye hyde your science from your ser∣uantes, to whom ye are bound: to teache it? and yet (in the meane sea∣son) receiue the labor of their bodyes, more lyke slanes then men? beside the great dishonor that therby you doe to your own profession, God graunt that I may see this amended, as I trust I shall. In the meane season my counsell shall be, that all yonge men bynge seruantes spare to take no kynde of payne, so that science may be that way atayned. But haue a good regarde that ye haue your for your peny: that is to say, that ye may learne cunnyng for your a∣uel: & when tyme conueniently serueth looke & study in good of the whiche let this Lanfranke be one. Wherin ye may learne in a small tyme, in other long tyme to be sought and not found: for  for my part I must cōfesse, that in so few wordes I neuer reade so perfect science conteyned, as is in this plesant cōpendious worke. for as muche as I knowe, that diuers yonge men haue nede of commodities as well as my selfe, I thought it a dede more com∣dable, to set it forth to a publique profite, then to kepe it owne priuate commoditie. Wherin what soeuer I ounde atin copie, being yet any thing helpfull to the same, I haue put in a smaller letter.
But one thyng yet I must warne all yong men of, that will profite in suche studie as I haue instructed, which is in one pointe to refrain and discente from the most part of yong men: that is to saye, from ga∣mes and spendyng the time in playe: for in my fantasy, who so euer is adicte to play & games shall neuer profite in this arte. For thou shalt fynde it time litle enough for thy study, if thou occupie all thy leysour from thy maisters or thyne owne busines at thy booke, that as thou workest or seest thy maister work: so thou maist therwith vnderstand the reason how, and howe muche suche worke is profytable. And hereof assure thy selfe, that if thou haue not as great desyre to thy boke, as the greatest gamner hath to his game, thou shalte neuer worthily be called cunnyng in this art. For thou must thynke and e∣steme all tyme of leysure from thy worke and busynes, euen loste and euyl bestowed, in which thou hast not profyted somwhat at thy boke. Let thy boke therfore, I say, be thy pastyme and game which (if thou loue it as thou oughtest) will so delight thee, that thou shalt thinke no tyme so well bestowed as at it. Yea thou muste desyre it as the childe doeth his mothers pappe: and so will it nourishe thee, that thou shalt worthily growe and increace to a worshypfull fame of cunnynge and learnyng. And nowe whatsoeuer vnto this work is added by me, as the Ex∣positiue Table, and the natomie: I most hartyly desyre al the good Readers to interprete it to the beste, regardyng the good wyll of the worker, rather then thexcellency of the woorke, whiche I confesse to be very faynt: trustyng that all suche as in those thynges are my mai∣sters and betters, wil rather seke the redresse and amēdement of such thynges as to them shall seme faultie, then disdaynfully to reprehende my good wyll, in settyng foorth of this worke. But as I feare it not in any godly or charitable personage: so am I past care, what be said of suche disdayners as speake euel of the doynges of all men, and yet wyll do nothyng that good is them selues. Not consydering that a hu∣mane creature is not borne into this worlde, onely to profite himself, but much rather to gratifie his frendes and contrey (as Cicero saith) besides Christian charitie, whiche byndeth vs to profyte all men. And our sauiour Christ warneth vs, that no man hyde his talent. Thus (wyshyng to the gentyll readers theyr hartes desyre, that trauayle for the perfectnesse of this art, euen as vnto my self in my moste weighty affayres:) I ende this my symple Preface.
¶Vnto his faithful frende and disciple Bernard: Lanfranke of Milayne, wysheth increase of wisdome, and cunninge. I VVYLL thee to vnderstād, my dere and louing frende, that (through the grace of God, the author of all good∣nesse: I purpose to make a boke here after, wherein I will geue to thee an ample and large doctrine, sufficyente for thy fulle instruction, in the moste excellent Arte of Chirurgery. For in this present little worke: I intend to geue thee but fewe thinges and light, but true & proued, the which allbeit that they be short, yet are they of greate commo∣dity and profit. Set them not at naught: but dispose thy selfe, fully to trust in them: for principally, according to thy purpose, I haue wrytten proued medicines, with the manner of cu∣ring woundes, Apostemes, Ulcers, and Fistules, wyth a little of Algebra, and some curations for the eyes, after the manner, as reason taught me to worke, and by expe∣riment of a longe time, hathe beene by me roborate and strengthened. Trusting so much to the subtilty of thine intellection, that by thy witte, with these fewe things, thou shalt ga∣ther sufficient vnderstanding, to comprehend the know∣ledge of a greater worke, and that thou shalt therby ob∣teyne the name of a greate and renowned Chirurgien.
Wherefore as thou fearest and louest GOD, and as thou tenderest thine owne worshippe and honesty: I re∣quire thee that thou deliuer it, to no rusticall Fooles or Idiotes, leaste by the ignorance of suche, and by theyr rude and vncunninge ministration, this my worke (made for thy loue, to a common vtilitye:) myghte redownde to some per∣sonnes hurte or a∣noyaunce. ¶∴¶
¶The firste parte of thys worke, treatinge of woundes, conteineth .ix. Chapiters Of the Intention of a Chirurgien in generall. The first Chapiter. AMONG AL OTHER thinges, it is expediēt that a good Chirurgien in euery woorke, de∣termine a certaine Intention in generalle,Intention of a Chirurgien & namelye in wounds, wherof we intend first to treate, & then to vse such thinges, as may conuenient∣ly helpe hym to hys Intent. Firste therfore in woundes to be healed,Consolidatiō the Intention is a true Consolidation or knitting together, whiche only is done in a symple wounde made in the fleshe. For other Consi∣milare members, (as bones, sinewes, gristles, pannicles, & the skinne) be not restored by true Restauration or con∣solidation.Spermatike members. For the first mater of them was Sperme in the parentes, and therfore are called Spermatike. Howe be it, when solution of continuitye chauceth in suche members: there is a certaine meane, where by the voyde place of that which is loste is filled againe: yet there are diuers opinions among men, For some say, that Nerues veines, and Arteries, receiue true Consolidation, & some say naye, they be otherwise restored: But certainly I say if the cuttings or departinges be greate, they are neuer
restored by true Consolidation: thoughe sometymes in small woundes they are, yet that very seldome. Notwythstandinge,Fleshe a san∣guin member the fleshe wherof the fyrst mater is bloud, and is therfore called Sanguine, is euery daye gene∣rate, or made in the bodye; & thereof receiueth very restau¦ration. Wherfore, in euery wound made in the fleshe, let thine intent alway be to consolidate it, except any of these vii. thynges folowing, be there vnto a let or hinderance. The first is,Seuen thyn∣ges hinderīg cōsolidation. if there be any Puncture in the sinewes, the second if the wound extend to the bone, the third if wyth the woūd be anye Aposteme. The fourth if there be any euel distemperaunce. The fift is,Pyscrasia. if there be anye holow∣nesse in the wound The sixt if the wound be made with contution. The seuenth, is if the wound be made with a∣ny vememous beast for any of these, of necessity leadeth the Chirurgien to an other intention. As I wyl hereaf∣ter expresse, beginning first at a symple wound, that wā∣teth all the .vii. thinges aforesaid. Of a Symple wound. Cap ii. BE therfore in assurance, whether ye wound be made with the poynt of any instrumēt, whether it be knife, speare, or arowe, or a∣ny other like. For they of all other are so∣nest conioyned, if it touche no Sinewe, Chorde, Panicle, nor the Muscles yt couer the bone, (which thou maist know, by that it is withoute all payne and ache,) It shall be sufficient, that thou onlye put in a tent, enfused in Oile of Roses warme, which ne∣cessarily shall for one day holde the skinne open: & make the patient rest from all manner of exercise of the woun∣ded member. And then if it be without al ache and swel∣ling: thon maiste suffer the wounde to close. Prouided al∣wayes, that the patient rest .ii. or .iii. daies, and he shallbe whole: but if there in be any aking or paine, it is a signe
of ye hurte of a Sinewe, Muscle, Panicle, or Chorde. And then it shalbe conueniente, to iniunde or poure into the whole wounde, oyle of Roses whot, & make a tente, not to greate nor to lōge, and yt it be suche as constreigne not the sinewe, least that there by paine shoulde be induced, and dip the same in Oyle of Roses, and the yolke of an egge warmed, laying there on a Repercussiue of ye same medicine, and annoynte the member all about, wyth a medicine made, ex Olei Rosati Vncia Vna, aceti Vnciis. ii. Boli armoni Vnciae dimidio, & vse thys vntil the paine be slaked, & that the wound yeld Saniem,Sanies. for then it is sure from Apo∣stemation and Spasme. After that put in a dry tent of lint, made of soft linnē cloth, and vppon that a mundificatiue, made after ye ordinaunce hereafter folowing.A mundifica∣tiue. Rec. Mellis Rosacei colati Vncias tres, farine Hordei subtilissimae unci. i. Terebinthinae lotae Vnciae semisse. Boile them a litle together to the perfectnesse of an emplaster: and note that the Te∣rebinthine oughte not to be boyled with the reast, but should be added in the ende of the boiling, & so at the ende he shalbe healed. But if the paine cease not, by the infu∣sion of the Oyle of Roses, & defence of Bole Armeniacke afore sayde. Then let the pacient bloud (if he be stronge,) on the contrary side, but if he be weake, make scarificati∣on, or boxe hym, daily prouoking the duetye of the wombe by a Clyster or suppository if nede require, enioyning hym a streyght and sclender diet, til the paine of the aposteme and the inflāmation be asswaged, and annoynt it al about with the oyntment made, de Bolo armeno, Oleo Rosato, & a¦ceto continuing still as I haue taught. Prouided alwayes that for inflāmation of the pricking of a sinewe, ye admi∣nister there to, no manner of plaster, made of herbes and greace, nor Maturatiues, and for the ache of the mēber, see that thou suffer no hotte water to touche ye same: for all these are causes of putrefaction and perdition, whyche is desolation and losse of the member.
Of wounds cutte after the length of the members. Chap. iii. ANd if the wounde be made with a sweard, or any o∣ther cutting thing after the lēgth, and being so smal yt only a rowle & a boulster, maye holde together the partes conioyned: It shalle suffice, yt you binde the partes together, laying there vpō a bowlster, or pressure of tow wete in the white of an egge, & binde it with conuenient bondes, so shalt thou nede no other medicine. But if it be so greate,The manner of stitchynge woundes. that binding only suffyceth not: then stytch the wound with a square nedle, and an euen threde wexed. And alwayes let the stitches be odde, if it be possible, be∣ginning fyrst at the one end of the wounde, & then at the other ende, after that in the middest: Then on eche syde of the middle stytch, make as many mo as shalbe tredeful obseruing that betwene eche stitch be left the space of an vnche,Or as we say an inche consi¦sting amesure of thre barlye corns in lēgth for so is vn∣cia here taken as you se, and not the Geo∣metrical vnch beynge as some wryte, a mesure of thre finger thicke. that is the bredth of the litle finger, or the middle fynger, leauinge in the inferior or dependant part of the wounde, an open Orifice, wherin thou maist put a tent, by the whiche the wounde may be expurged. And vpon the seame, laie pouder made, de Vna parte thuris, duabus par∣tibus Sanguinis Draconis, & tribus partibus calcis Viae, and somtime Calx Viua alone shalle serue your neede. Vppon the pouder laye a fine clothe, dipped in the whyte of an Egge, bindinge it with conueniente ligature, and boul∣sters, that the seame maye be conserued. And so lette it be annoynted, and chaunged, that finallye it may be con∣solidate. But if in this time, the wounde be altered by the aer, and doe geue Saniem, the stitches also losynge their holde: then mundifye it with a medicine, made ex Vna parte farine Tritici, Mellis partibus .ii. & Aqua partibus .iii. boyled together in forme of a Cataplasma, & in the ende laye vpon the wounde stupes of towe, wette in warme Wine.
Of the woundes of synewes, cutte for the moste parte ouerthwart the member. Cha. iiii. IF the Sinewes of the arme,Woundes made after ye bredthe. hande, or foote, or anye other lyke member be cutte ouerthwarte, (all be it yt Theodoricus & diuers others say the contrary):Theodoricus. yet I say that it is good and profitable, to stitche the sinewes with a needle, when thou sowest the borders or lippes of the wounde, takinge suche holde of the heades or endes of the sinewes that be cutte, that thou mayste iustly drawe them together.The manner of stytchynge sinewes toge¦ther. And vpon suche manner of stitchinge of the Sinewes, putte Olium Rosarum, wherein hathe beene sodden Vermes terrectres proprie lumbrici dicti, and conserue the stitchinge, aswell to consounde the Sinewes, as the outwarde borders or lippes of the wounde. For by thys manner of stitchinge, is made the more noble Consolida∣tion, and perfecter reparation, so that sometime, and es∣pecially in the bodies of children, by suche maner of stit∣chinge, the mouinge of the member is recouered, to the whiche, the Sinewes that were cutte did serue, whyche neuer coulde haue bene restored, vnlesse the sinewe had beene stitched, and haue no feare of anye ache or payne, that is saide to come by the prickinge of the sinewe in the stitching with the needle, for that is aswaged, and imme∣diatelye holpen with the aforesaide Oile, nor the paine hereof can induce no Spasme, for so muche as the whole sinewe was all readye cutte a sunder. Annotations Vpon thys presente chapter. ¶Coeringe the stitchinge of sinewes: mentioned here in thys Chapiter by the author, I wishe no man to stay there on, as an infallible grounde, for it seemeth muche agaynste reason, and the iudgemente of moste learned men. Notwithstandinge manye thin∣ges are tollerable in yonge children, that maye not be done to olde men: and other reasons may be made, as wee to defende this opy∣nion, as the contrarye. But hereafter if God sende leisure, thou shalte haue farther instruction in this, and other like matters. In the mean season haue this good opinion of Lanfranke, yt the lucky successe, of some profes made in that case, caused him so to wryte, for we maye not iudge that suche learned men would publishe, (to the disgrace of all theyr whole worke,) that whiche they thoughte not perfectlye true.
Of the fluxe of Bloud. Cap. v. IF the fluxe of bloud,To stanche the fluxe of Bloud. issuing from a veine or arterie, do let thee in obseruing this ordinaunce, thou mayste re∣streigne it thus. Rec. thuris partes dus aloes parte Vnam, and make it into poulder, and meddle all together, cum albumine oui, to the thicknesse of hony, & pilos leporis, cutte as small as maye be possible, and so temper all together, and put thy finger in the place from whence the bloude issueth, and touche the pulse, holdinge it so the space of an houre, administring thy medicine in great quantity, and in the time of chaunginge, haue good foresight, that thou take it not away by violence. But if it cleane faste to the place, lay on more of the saide medicine in a more liquide forme, vpō the olde medicine, till it falle frō the wounde alone without violence, & then shalle the veines and ar∣teries be knit and healed, and to this medicine there is none like in restreigning of bloud, & knitting the veine. Of woundes, with breaking of the bone wythin the Fleshe. Cap. Vi. VUhen with a wounde in the Fleshe, there is also a wound in ye bone, it behoueth not to heale ye woūde of the flesh,Restauratiō. before the Restauration of the bone, I saye Restauration, because the bone is neuer consounded with a true Consolidation: but in steade therof, groweth a hard Callouse substance of fleshe, called Porus Sarcoides, or Caro Poroides,Porus Sarco∣des. seruing in place of ye bone lacking, which reparation must be loked for, before the wounde in the fleshe be healed,Caro poroides for otherwise there may be no reprati∣on, because the moistnesse of the fleshe will let it. For so much as there can be no reparation, vnlesse the place be dried to the vttermooste: For the bones are moost drye, and the nourishmente of bones, is the matter reparinge
them, whiche is naturallye drye: for to nurishe is none other thinge, but to assimulate nurishmente wyth that whiche is nurished.Nutrition. Wherfore Nutrition is done by the like, as DiminutionDiminution. is done by the contrarye. And nowe for as muche as of all woundes of bones, those of the heade are moste perillous: I thinke it moste meete to begin firste with them, for if the wounde in the head where cranion or the braine panne is broken, shoulde be healed in the fleshe before the bones be repared, it would surelye cause deathe: bothe by reason of ye braines Dilicasie, and noblenesse, and also that worse accidentes folowe thereof, then of the breakinge of any other bone. Of the wounde in the heade, with breakinge of Cranion. Chapi. Vii. VUhen the wounde is made in the heade with brea∣kinge of the Sculle:Woundes in the heade. consider whether it be broken vnto the inward partes or no, that is to saye to duram matrem▪ whiche thou maiste knowe by diuers meanes and waies, partelye by perseuerance, and partlye by infalli∣ble experimentes,Signs of bre¦kynge of the sculle. the signes be these. The feelinge of great paine, vomiting, teares of the eies, crokednesse of the sighte, inflammation or rowlinge of the eies. &c. the expe∣rimentes are these: take a strong threde double twisted,Experiment and wereit, and let the patiente holde it stronglye in his teethe, and begin thou at the mouthe of him, and with thy nailes stretche and streigne oute the threde, til thou come at the other ende of the same, holding it streight a cubite lengthe from the tethe, and make a sounde vpon the threde with thy nayle, and doe so often times. If the patiente maye susteine the sounde, withoute feelynge of peine, then is not the sculle broken to the Dura mater. for if it be broken, he maye in no wise susteine nor suffer the harping of the nayles vpon the threde, or else thou mayst also take and smyte hys head, with a smalle dry wand of
wylowe or of ye Pine tre, & holde thine eare to hys head. And if the sculle be whole,But because neither thys, nor the former way is alway certayne, the best is to lern also other mens waies, that when we know all, we may chose and vse the best, it wyll make an hole sounde: but if it be cutte or broken, it wyll make a dumme noyse, after the comparison of a broken Bell and a whole. And haue no truste in the well eatinge & drinkinge, sleapinge, & goinge to the stoole of yt patiēt (& suche like: of the which bothe Rolādus & Rogerus doe speake, for they are deceyua∣ble. But sōetime it is euident inough to perceaue ye brea∣kinge of the sculle, by the only sighte, or touchinge of the same. Therfore when thou arte certeine that the sculle is broken, marke if the wounde in the skin be lesse then the fracture of the sculle. If it be, make it wyder, if thou se no token of death. But if thou se any token of death, it weare not good to enterpryse any new thing. And when this woūde is enlarged, vncouer as behoueth) al ye breach of the sculle, and marke whether the broken parte be en∣tered vnder the whole bone: or if there be anye broken peces or shiuers, whiche mighte prycke or hurte the Dura mater: for in these two cases thou muste remoue the parte of the bone vnderputte by the breache, and wyth instrumentes conuenient vtterlye take awaye the lytell broken peces: whiche thinge to doe folowe thys ordi∣nance. Marke where the vnder parte ioyneth wyth the sculle, for there it wyll be somewhat dēted, and sometime the whole circumference or cumpasse aboute, wyll be de∣pressed or putte downe. Then for a daye or two poure in to all the broken sculle Oyle of Roses warme: and in the wounde aboue the sculle▪ laye small Plegetes of we, or lytell peces of oulde clothe, infused in Oyle of Roses, and the yolke of an egge whotte. In the seconde or thirde day; laboure gentlye wyth Instrumentes to remove the bone: remouinge all that is to be remoued, by moste ten∣der, and delycate workinge: that thou touche not Duram matrem, or the beginninge of anye sinewe. And remove in like maner; the lytell shiver that greueth the Du mater, if there be .
When the bone is taken awaye, loke that thou haue a fine linnen cloth, wete in Mellis Rosati colati, parte Vna, & Ole Rosati, partibibus duabus warmed: conueyinge it verye tenderlye and warely, betwen the bone and duram matrē. and fylle all the wounde of the sculle tēderlye with suche clothes wete in the same maner. And in the wounde of the fleshe lay towe or lyte, wete in Oleo Rosato, cum Vi∣tellooui admisto: and after that haue a subtyl Plegete made of Towe, that maye comprehende all the wounde of the skin, wete in the same medicyne. And laste of all laye on greate boulsters or pressures of towe, wete in the somer time in colde water, and in the winter in whtte water, and wel wronge, and spreade ouer wyth the medicyne made ex Olei Rosati Vnciis duabus, aceti Vnciae dimidio, Boli Ar∣meni Vncia Vna, the whiche boulsters laye ouer all. Prouided that the heade be shauen before, and so doe still continuallye, till the wounde shewe aboundant qui∣ture. And then begin to putte vpon Duram matrem, of the moste subtille poulder of Incence that may passe through a cearse: and vpon that polder a fine cloth, wete in Melle Rosato, and Oyle of Roses whote: and dresse the clothe euen and smothe, and fille all the wounde in the bone there wyth: fyllinge also the wounde of the skin wyth dry linte, so fulle, that thou suffer not the fleshe in ye wounde to couer the bone, vntill the reparation of the fracture be made. And vpon the woundeof the skyn, laye the mun∣dificatiue aboue saide of Mel Rosarum and Barlye flower, so muche as maye fylle the wounde, and the bredthe of thy fynger rounde aboute the same: and euermore about the same a defēsiue de Bolo Armeno, and in the ende admi∣nister a consolidative, or a cicatrizative, the whiche I wyl describe in the ende of this worcke. And in all other crackes and breakynge of the sculle, whereas be none of the causes aboue sayde, it shall suf∣fyce thee to adminyster to the broken bone, a soueraigne medicyne of Mel Rosarum, and Oyle of Roses warmed:
and fill all the wounde of the skinne, with Oyle of Roses hotte, and the yolke of an egge, till quitture be ingende∣red: and then vpon the wounde, and aboute the same, a defensiue of Bole Armeniake, and whē thou haste made mater, lay on the scull a fine clothe wete in thy Mel Ro∣sarum and Oile of Roses, and fill the wounde of the skyn with drye linte, and vpon the wounde, a mundificatiue of Mel Rosarum, and barlye meale, and aboute the same a defensatiue of Bole Armeniake, and thus doe till it be perfectlie cured and healed. Of the gouernance of all woundes, withoute breakinge of Cranion, whether they be Aposte∣mate, Dyscrasiate, Concouate, or made by contution. Cha. viij. THe gouernance of all other woundes, withoute breakinge of calla maye bee done by stitchinge, and poulder made of calx Viua, as it is sayde in the thirde Chapiter. and ye must not vse Melle Rosarum strai∣ned with oyle of Roses, but onlye Oyle of Roses and the yolke of an egge,Sanies. till Sanies or quitture be dulye ingen∣dered: and after that vse a mundificatiue of Hony, of Ro∣ses, and barly flower, and a defensatiue of Bole Armeny aboute the wounde,A defensiue. for truelye a defensiue of Bole Ar∣meny, is excedinge profitable in all woundes of the body, to preuente and eschue Apostemations. For nothinge is more profitable to the patiente, nor more to the worshyp of the Chirurgien, then to kepe the wounded members from swellinge and Apostemation. &c. for an Aposteme comminge vpon the wounde of the heade, is cause of a∣lienation and of deathe. And if it happen vnto some sine∣wie member, it causeth the Spasme of repletion, mor∣tification, or corruption of the mēber, and of death. And the waye to preuente or eschewe suche Apostemations, standeth in good diete and gouernance of life. Wherfore
in thys place I wil set a diete, as a common doctryne for all wounded persones, bothe in the heade and Sinewys members. First,A general di∣et for woūds let this be as a speciall diete, the croomes of bread washed in winter .v. times in warme water, and after the laste washinge, put theron white suger Roset, and in the Sommer, lette it be washed only in colde water: and nowe and then make the potage with barlye, but let the Barlye firste be soked, and after beaten and hulled, then sodden, and seasoned with Penidies, or Sugar Roset, or wyth Almonde milke, in all manner of woundes saue onlye of the heade.Almondes to be refused in woundes of the heade. Wherin I approue not Almondes, for they haue a manner of fumous propertye, noisome to the heade, and if the patiente be verye weake, or haue naturallye a feble stomacke, he may take small chickens sauced with Agresta, and the fleshe of a yonge Kidde, & the fete of Hogges, all seasoned with Agresta, or with wine of soure Pomgranates, and lette their drincke be wine of Pomgranates: and especially for men woūded in ye head, and sinewye members, geuinge .x. partes of water wyth one parte of wine,I thinke Sirupus de Agresta, is here to be vnderstā¦ded. or Agresta with cleare cold water, and one parte of wine. Or this excellente drinke folowinge, whyche comforteth the stomacke, and defendeth the va∣poures to assende, it quencheth heate, and maketh not costiue: Rec. Hordeimundi, Vncias duas, micarum panis, Sacchari Rosati, Granoriam Granatorum, Singulorum, Vnciā Vnam, Primorū siccorum, numero decem. Lette all these sethe in .x. pounde of water, til halfe he consumed, and then clense it, and kepe it in a vessell of glasse, and lette it be administred colde. And lette nothinge be geuen actuallye hotte, but if the patiente be yonge and Sanguine, and haue bledde but litle at hys wound,Phleotomye for the woun¦ded. if also be he strong, let hym bloud on the contrarye side, but if he be feble, lette hym be veno∣sed. And see that euerye daye once, the dutye of the bel∣lye be prouoked, by a suppositarye if neede be, as when it commeth not of it selfe naturallye. For these thinges
aforesayd, wyth a defensive of Bole Armeniacke, defen∣deth the wounded member from receauynge of super∣fluites. For when euerye course of humores is ceased, then art thou sure that there shall none Aposteme come vpon thee. And after thys by lyttle and lyttle, and not soden∣ly, permitte thy patyente to a larger diete, and also to the vse of wyne,Wyne to be eschewed in woundes of the heade. save onelye to men wounded in the heade, or in the synewye members: and vnto those geue no ly∣cence to drincke wyne, excepte for necessitye of faintnesse of the stomake, or lake of strengthe. And then lette it be lyghte wyne, soure, & well watered. For there is nothing that dothe so muche damage vnto the heade, and sinewes as dothe wyne. And therefore in those maner of woūdes it is not good to graunte drincking of wyne, but onely at the ende of the cure. And when a wounde chaunceth in other bones, & those bones broken: thou shalt heale them after the cure of Algebra: the whyche thou shalte reade in a partycular Chapiter of the same. But if the wounde be apostemate, either for that the Chirurgien knewe not how to defend it,Of woundes apostemate. or that because the tente is to greate, or the vnguente put in extreame∣lye whotte, or by alteration of the aer, or debility of the member receauinge: for surely if it chaunce, notwythstā∣dinge the necessary applycation of due remedies: it is thē a verye evell sygne. Namely that the hurte member is greatlye weakened. Neuerthelesse if suche an aposteme be done in a nervous member, the cure thereof is al rea∣dye taghte. But if it be in a fleshye member, make a Cataplasma, de quatuor partibus Aquae, Vna parte Oli Oliuarum maturarum, & farinae triticeae, partibus duabus. and lay it vpon the aposteme made with the wounde, applyinge it so longe, till the swelling and payne be gonne, and that the wounde caste oute mater aboundantlye. And then laye therto a mundificatiue of honye, meale, and water, till it
be perfectly mundified. For a wounde where in there is an aposteme, neither can nor oughte to be consolidate▪ for all consolidatiues are there vnto hurtfulle: excepte it be fyrste ryped, and the paine aswaged, and then expertly mundified, and laste of all consounded. Also if there be in the woūde any distemperance,Of woūds wyth Dys∣crasia. first let it be cured wyth his contrarye: as colde wyth heate, and heate wyth colde, and so of other▪ and when thys di∣stemperance is remoued: then turne agayne to thy prin∣cipall cure. Moreouer if there be in the wounde anye concauitye,Woundes wyth conca∣uyte or olow¦nesse. or holownesse, it shall firste be replenished againe wyth due fleshe: for if it weare healed aboue and holowe vnder neathe: of verye necessitye there shoulde remaine in the concauity fylthe and corruptyon. The whiche would pu∣trefye the place, and constreigne the Chirurgien to open the wounde againe: and so the laste laboure shoulde be more then the fyrste. Replenish it first therfore with the aboue sayde mundificatyve, layde on the wounde: & wyth the poulder of Incence put therin: or with some other in∣carnatyue, or regeneratyue vnguente, suche as shallbe wryten in the ende of thys boke▪ and then in the ende let it be healed vp. Also if a wounde be made with contusion,Of a wounde made by con∣tusion. or brusyng, as by a falle, by the stroke of a stone, or a staffe, or anye other thinge that is not sharpe: thou shalte not at the first administer therto a consolidatiue: for in everye brusure, the Fleshe and the Sinewes are of necessitye smytten together, (if the member be Sinewye:) and nedes wyll putrefye. Then woulde consolidatiues constreigne the fylthe to tarye wyth in the member, and so all the mem∣ber should be corrupted, or else constreigne thee to open the wounde agayne: whyche shoulde be dowble paine and laboure, bothe vnto thee, and to thy patyente. For longe feblenesse of anye member inueth all the bodye to corruptyon.
Therfore it is fyrste to beOr rather digested. riped, secondly to be mun∣dified, thirdly (if there abyde any holownesse,) to regene∣nerate and incarne it, fourthlye and laste of all to consoli∣date it.Foure inten∣tions to be no¦ted and obser∣ued. Sauinge onlye that if the bruse be but lyttle, it wyll then be soone healed, by annoyntinge the place a∣boute the wounde with Oyle of Roses, and vppon the iuncture strewe poulder of Myrtles, and mundifye the wounde with a mundificatiue of Mel, and then conueni∣entlye heale it vp. Of woundes made with venemous Beastes, as of the bytinge of a madde Dogge, or otherwyse. Chapiter ix. IF the wounde be made with the bytinge of a madde dogge,Woundes venemous. (whych thou mayste knowe by this, a Henne wyll not eate the breade that is infused or infected in the wounde,Experiment to know ve∣nemous wounde. and if she eate it, she dieth therof) my coun∣sell is, that no Chirurgien go aboute to heale or consound suche a wounde at the fyrste, but keepe it open .xl. daies at the leaste, and in places where no danger is of such worke to be doe, it is good to make an actuall cautery, and putte there to hotte medicines: as Salte and Musterde, mixed with Hony, and make Phisicalle remedies, of the whych thys vnder wrytten is the best. Rec. de Cinere cancrorum flu∣uialium adustorū,Phisicall re∣medies, partes quinque, Gentianae, partes tres, terra sigi¦latae, partes sex. All these together make in fine poulder, & geue the patiente euery day to drinke. drach. ii. the space of a moneth, with the water wherein Crabbes or Crefi∣shes are sodden: and after .xl. daies, make Consolidation effectually. & this vnderstande likewise of al venemous woūds. All these thinges considered, thou maiste surelye procede in the cures of woūdes: & I leaue the reste to thine owne discreation. ¶Thus endeth the fyrste parte of thys woorke.
¶The second parte of thys worke ensueth, whiche treateth of Apostemes, and conteineth xv. Chapiters. Of the causes of Apostemes in generalle. The first Chapiter. OF Apostemes, vnderstande that the causes of them be double:Cause of Apo∣stemes. that is to saye, of an out∣warde cause, or of an inwarde cause. Of an outwarde cause,Cause Proca¦tartike, or primitiue. as of a stroke, or of a falle, or of a wounde altered by the aer, or other like. Of an inward cause, as of aboundāce of inward superfluities.Cause intern or antecedent The cause materialle is in .vi. manners: for either it is Humoralis, namelye Sanguine, Cholerirke, Phlegmaticke, or Melancholicke, or els wa∣tery or windye: and that also either symple or cōpounde: although an Aposteme be moste rarelye ingendered of one onlye humoure, as I will here in order expresse: beginninge firste at a Sanguin Aposteme, and so after of the reaste. Of sanguin Apostemes. Cap. ii. IF bloude abounde ouer all the bodye,Apostemes Sanguine. inflaminge and heatinge the harte, and so the bodye, and yet not defy¦led: there is ingendred a continuall Feuer, called Sino∣cha,Synocha. but if it be defyled: then is the Feuer a continuall Si∣nochus.Synochs. but if it occupye not all the bodye, but onlye some particular member, the bloude beinge moste thinne in substance, and flowynge in quality: it maketh a redde
inflāmation dispersed abrode in all the outwarde face of the member,Erysipelas nothum. whiche is called Herisipila notha: because it is made of bloude reduced like to the nature of choler. But if the bloude be groser naturally in substance, and hotte in quality:Carbunculus. then it maketh Carbunculum. Whiche is swarte in colours, and hard in felinge, & in the vppermost parte, of coloure lyke ashes: whyche commeth of adustion. But if the bloude be to muche in quantitye, and yet naturall: then it maketh Flegmonem.Phlegmone. The sygnes wherof is redish∣nesse in sighte, because of the similitude of the humore: hardnesse, for the lightnesse: a depe swellinge caused by the matter in the depenesse of the member, (that is: con∣teyned in the flesh): pulsatyon, or beatinge, by flowinges, whiche are caused by heate, working in the matter: inflā∣mation by the presence of heate multiplied: and sumtime is made the feuer Effimera:Ephemera. speciallye aboute the brdinge of the matter, or quytture. At which time all the forsayd accidentes are more grenous, then when the matter is corrupted, and fullye ryped. Of Cholericke Apostemes. Cha. iii. IF choler beare rule, or haue domination in the bodye,Apostemes Cholericke. (as sometime it hath:) either it is putrefied and defiled, or not:Icterus. If that whiche is not putrefied be in all the bo∣dy, it maketh Icteritiam.Serpigo. If it be in one onely place, it ma∣keth Serpiginem,Tyria. or Thiriam. And when it is defiled, being a∣monge the veines,Tertiana con∣tinua. and continuinge in all the veynes: it maketh a continuall tertian. But if it be speciallye about the harte,Causon. or the mouthe of ye stomache: it maketh a Cau∣son.Tertiana īter nittens. If wythoute the veines. It causeth a tertian interpo¦late.Erysipelas Verum. But if any suche Choler not putrefiedDestitute, lefte, or forsa∣ken. destytute of nature, be gathered in anye outewarde member  it ma∣keth Herisipilam Veram, the signes wherof are these. A red coloure myxed wyth yelownesse, accordynge to the simi∣litude of the matter: a swellinge whiche is caused of the fiery lightnesse of the matter whiche ascendeth: hardnes
it hath, caused by the drinesse thereof: with a prickynge heate, greuynge the hand that toucheth it, whyche com∣meth by the reason of the sharpnesse of the matter. Of Phlegmaticke Apostemes. Cha iiii. PHlegm,Apostemes Phlegmatiue hauinge domination in the body, either it is defiled, or vndefiled. If it be defiled: it is eyther wythin the vessels of the bodye, and maketh Anfi∣merinam continuam sin rigore:Amphemeri∣na contia. or else wythoute the vesselles and maketh an interpolate quotidian,. with rigor. Also if it be not putrefied, it i either ouer all the bodye, and ma¦keth . whyche is one of the kyndes of Hy∣dropsye or else in one onelye place, and maketh in Apo∣steme, called Odema. or Vndnia. The signes whereof are these. whitnesse, of the likenesse of the matter softnesse, as when a man thrusteth in his finger, there remaineth a pitto, whiche is caused of mouistnesse: colde in the feling, because the  wherof it procedeth is colds: & wyth lytell ache or none, because there is no assaulte of heate. Neuerthelesse this apostee is muche more painfulle when it is fully putrefied, then it was before because eue¦ry aposteme, though it come of cold mater, after the fulle putrefaction, receaueth a strāge heat▪ and by this reason is euery exiture,Exiture what it is. (that is euery famous apostme), iudged to be whotte, althoughe it come of a colde cause. As the quotidian and quartane feuers, are iudged hotte sicknes∣ses: and yet they come of a colde matter. Of Melancholike Apostemes. Chap. v. NOw melancholy superabounding, either it is putre∣fied, or not putrefied: and beinge putrefied, either it all the body, or one place. If it occupye all the bodye,Lepra. either it is externallye, and maketh Lepran: or else inwardlye.Quartana con¦t. And then, either the mater is wythin the veines, & maketh a continual quartane: or else wythoute the veines,Quartana In¦termittens. and maketh a quartane interpolate: or else in one place onlye, and maketh Cancrm.Cancer.
But if it be not putrefied: either it is ouer all the bodye and maketh Melanchiron,Melanchiron scirrhus. that is the blacke Jaundies: or else in one place, and maketh a harde Aposteme, called Sclirosin. Wherof these are ye signes, hardnes because of ye drinesse and grosenesse of the humor: without paine, be∣cause heate is absente, & for that an insensible compari∣on of matter occupieth the place: and the coloure is like the colour of the bodye, or inclininge somewhat to leadinesse. for although Melancholy be blacke, yet be∣cause it is ponderous or heauye, the coloure thereof is not presented to the vtter parte of the bodye or skin. and in these signes it differeth from the Cancer.Signes. for a Cācer which commeth of putrefied Melancholy, because it hath gotten vnto it a heate: doth ake and burne, by reason be∣fore shewed, and the veines that are about it are diuers. for thoughe the humor be melancholike whereof it pro∣cedeth: yet in the putrefaction thereof, it receyueth a straunge lightnesse and heate. Whereof the veines com∣prehendinge the Cancer be of diuers coloures, so that they doe assimulate or shewe the likenesse of the disease. and for this cause was it called Cancer, for that it repre∣senteth the forme and shape of a sea Crabbe, whyche is rounde, and hathe manye feete. Of watery Apostemes. Cha. vi. THe watery Aposteme commeth of aboundance of colde vpon the liuer,Apostemes watery. ingenderinge muche wateri∣nesse: and is of the nature of Yposarca: Neuer∣thelesse this waterinesse,Hyposarca. is somtime gathered together in one onlye place of the bodye, and that chieflye aboute the navell: the signes and tokens wherof are these. The coloure is like the coloure of all the bodye: in so muche that if thou felest it with the .ii. fingers of thy .ii. handes, puttinge the one finger a good distance from the other,
thou shalt fele a a floude vnder thy fingers, so that thy one finger shall put awaye the water vnder the other: and it is ponderous, and heauy, withoute any akinge. I haue healed suche an Aposteme with incision, and dryinge of the water, in a womā that had it about the nauell▪ which was as greate as two pound weight of breade. Of wyndye Apostemes. Cha. vii. THe wyndy Aposteme is ingendered of a vapor or wynde,Apostemes wyndie. resolued by the working of feble disoluing heate, not of power to consume it, whiche vapor is sette betwene the coates of the members, and especially in the region of the mouthe of the stomacke, and in the gryndes, so that many beleue it to be a Rupture. yt signes wherof be these. It is harde, with stiffenesse againste thy finger when thou touchest it, and like a bladder it is full of wynde, and if thou smyte theron it foundeth, and the coloure of the place is not changed from the coloure of the body, and knowe that this Aposteme, is muche like∣ned to the hard Aposteme made of pure Melancholy be∣fore specified. But he that cā decerne the difference of ye hardnesse of a stone, from the hardnesse of a hogges blad∣der full of wynde: or betwene a harde thinge, and a thing extended or stretched, maye sone knowe how to discerne the differēce, betwene these .ii. Apostemes. And it is also likened to the waterye Aposteme: but the waterinesse whiche is in the waterye Aposteme, and the absence of water in ye windy Aposteme, sheweth difference inough betwene them. Of the Aposteme called Botium. Cha. viii. THere is also another colde Aposteme,Botium. called Botium, whiche is often placed in the throte, and it is made in two manners. That is: either by matter ingede∣red
of hott apostemes, or of diuersity of putrefied Phleg∣me. Of whych some haue matter wtin, like curded chese, some lyke claye, and some lyke dregges of Oyle, some thicke lyke potage, and some other all grainy, and full of gobbets, of whyche some be mouable in the vpper part of the member, onlys vnder the skyn: and other vnmoua∣ble, and infyred in the bothome of the member, and yet haue no coloure. Of Apostemes of compounde humores. Chapi. x. BY these thynges that are wrytten of symple Apo∣stemes,Apostemes of compound hu¦mores. the knowledge maye be hadde of those that are compound. For if Choler be compounde wyth bloude, in the ingenderynge of Apostemes: the more part beinge bloud,Phlegmone e∣rysipelatodes it is called Flegmon Herisipilades. But if ther be more parte of choler, then of bloude: then is it called Herisipila Flegmonides,Erysipelas Phlegmonodes and they are knowen by signes a∣boue specifyed. There is sometyme compounde together, bloude, choler, and melancholye: and then they make An∣thracem.Anthrax. The sygnes whereof be these, hardnesse, diuersi∣tye of colour in the circuite: and that thinge it hathe com∣mon with the Cancer. But yet there is dyfference: for in thys thynge is more inflāmation and feblenesse of harte: somtyme swoundynge, and tremblyng of the harte, with profundity, or depenesse of sleape: yet not true sleape, but abusedlye so called. And in the vpper parte is a maner if bladder, ashe coloured: whych semeth to be drawne down to the lower partes, as if it were drawne wyth a thre. And thou mayste well know, that it is made of dyuers humores, if thou marke the diuersity of the mater, which shallbe purged after the maturation, in the tyme of mun∣dification. For thou shalt fynde in the mydest of ye toughe matter a harde grosse substance, whyche is (of the com∣mon sorte) called the foote or core of the dysease, the whyche beinge taken awaye, there remaineth an holowe
place: after the whyche, it neadeth nothinge but regene∣ration of the fleshe, and healinge vp of the Vlcer. And thys aposteme is malicious, by the reason of the admiti∣on of contrary thinges. Also if Melancholye be cōpounde wyth Phlegme, Phlegme hauinge the vpper hande: it ingendereth Glandules.Glandulae. But if Melancholye ouercome the Phlegme,Scrophulae. it ingendereth Scrophules. The signes wherof are these: absence of coloure and in feshyon lyke an Almonde. & also they moue as it weare in swimming, and are manye together of one coloure. And commonlye they come vnder the arme holes, in the throte, and in the grindes. And what so euer is all ready spoken of Aposte∣mes, is spokē of those that be made of naturall humores. Of Apostemes of vnnaturall humores. Capi x. IT remaineth nowe yt we speake of apostemes yt come of humores vnnatural, of the which some be very euel and perilous. And who that woulde knowe perfectlye the nature of apostemes, whiche come of vnnaturall hu∣mores: let hym indeuoure him selfe to know the genera∣tion of humores in the body, aswel those that be natural, as those that be vnnaturall: And frequentlye marke the Apostemes that come of the same, wyth the fashion and coloures of them. And the accidents that folow of them, wyth also the matters that procede from them. And so by good Theoricalle knowledge, and long experience: he shalle obteine the vnderstandynge therof, and otherwise not. And hauinge thys, let hym geue prayse to almightie God, who is the author and geuer of all good knowledge and cunninge. And here it woulde be very necessarye, to speake of the generation of humores, bothe naturall and vnnaturall: teaching how they be generate, and of theyr matter and substance. But that we here omitte, because the intention of this woorke is breuity, and is but a fore∣runner to a greater worke: whyche by the grace of God, hereafter shalbe set forthe.
Vnderstand therfore, that of Apostemes made of vn∣natural humors: some be hotte, and some be colde. The colde: are knottes, and knobbes, whiche are rounde in forme, which are oftētimes in the forehead, in the backe of the hāds, and of the fete, and in the ioyntes: and their matter is glasy Phlegme, destitute of heat. And sōetyme there is mingled a sweete Phlegme, with ScrophulesScrophules. & Glandules, whereof mention is made before. Thre are also made Glandules, and Scrophules:Scrophulae whiche whē they come to rypenesse, are called Squamos, the mundificati∣on whereof is harde and difficille.Squamosae. Of Apostemes made of Choler and Melan∣cholye aduste. Cha. xi. OF Choler aduste, and of Melancholye aduste, and of the admistion of them together: are caused diuers Apostemes, after the diuersitie of the quantitie of the humores. and they are accordinge to the diuersitye of the place, and the varietie of the strength, and feblenesse of the member receiuinge to be feared, the daunger or pe∣rill whereof is more or lesse: accordinge to the nobility, or ignobilitie of the member, and speciallye in the legges: of Auicene they are called Canrenae. If they occupy the depest or lowest part of the member,Gangrena. althoughe not all the mē∣ber, it is called of Auicene Ascachilos. But if it occupy al the member it is called Herpes,Aschachilos. this Herpes is made of euel vl∣cers,Herpes. whereto muche corrupt and venemous matter des∣cendeth. And it may also come (as Auicene sayeth, and as I haue sene,) by openinge of any feeble or inflated mem∣ber in the colde aer: for by yt meanes the extreame partes are mortified, because the liuelye heate maye not come there at. So that those mortified extremities corrupte the member, excepte it be restreigned: so that sometime of verye necessitye, the foote muste be cutte offe euen
to the ioynte to saue the legge. Sometime there are also made by the admixtion of the sayde corrupted humores, Bladders, Formica, Miliaris, & Prima, called Ignis persicus. The whiche are all diuers, after the diuersitye of their cōposyti∣on. And of these names is muche diuersitie amonge au∣thores: for whiche diuersitye thou needest not care, but on∣lye haue respecte to their coloures and accidentes. For al∣moste to them all belongeth one manner of cure: as thou shalte perceaue hereafter. Neuerthelesse, these bladders are made of the foresayde mater: sharpe, lighte, and seking waye outward to the skin, by reason of the lightnesse. This Formica,Formica. is also a pustule, but is deper in the fleshe, and sone turneth to vlceration. Miliaris,Miliaris. is made of the same matter: but it is more ashy, because of adustion: and it maketh ma∣nye smal pustules like the sede of Milium, with greate heate and itche.Prima. Primae: are also Pustules, swarte, and hard, hauing aboute them a citrine coloure: whiche are made of yt more parte of choler aduste, and the lesse parte of aduste Melan∣cholye. Of the cure of Apostemes made of an outwarde cause. Chapi. xii. NOwe that we haue brieflye declared,Apostemes the cure of them. the differences of apostemes: it is mete that we resorte to oure pur∣pose, that is to saye to the cure of them: followynge the doctrine of good authores, and oure longe experience. The cure of an aposteme comming f an outwarde cause, if it be of a wounde: is all readye taughte. But if it be of a bruse, a stroke, or of a fall, the stroke of a staffe, or of a stone: the best curation is, (if he that is hurte be yonge & stronge:) to let hym bloude on the contrarye side: but if he be weake to ventose hym,To this me∣dicine in o∣ther coppies is added puls corti∣cis fraxim. and annoynt the place wyth warme Oyle of Roses: strewinge thereon, when it is newlye anoynted, pouder of Mirtilles, for this manner of cure establisheth, and stayeth the place: excepte it be to great a bruse. But if
the place be not defended from apostemation by this medi∣cine, but commeth to exiture: namelye the generatyon of quitture: let it be ryped, and sone opened, where the mater moste dependeth: and mundify the place wyth a mundifica∣tiue, made ex Farina tritici, aqua, & Melle, & after let it be re∣generate wyth fleshe, and then let it be confounded wyth incarnatiues and consolidatiues. Puttynge alwaye aboute the hurte place, a defensiue de Bolo Armeno, Oleo Rosacto, & Aceto,Vnguentū de∣fensim. to the conseruation of the whole partes: least they be also corrupted. Of those consolidatiues, and incarnatiues thou shalt reade in the antidotary. Of the cure of Apostemes, commynge of an Inwarde cause. Chapi. xiii. OF apostemes that come of an inwarde cause, it is to be noted, that either they are resolued, (if they wyll be put backe,) or Indurate: or else they coe to Sa∣niem, or to putrefaction. & although resolution is sōetymes made by repercussiō, as is also somtymes maturation, yet is neyther the one nor the other done properly, but vnpro∣perly. And if it behoued to note exactlye, the cures of these apostemes: It weare nedefulle nowe to amplifye oure ma∣ter, and to describe the cures of them, eche particulerlye. But for asmuche as I haue purposed, and promised, to wryte the moste notab and shortest cures, in the moste shortest maner, for the breuitye of thys boke: I intend not nowe to delaye the tyme in wordes. Therfore knowe this, that thou mayste reduce the cures of all apostemes, vnto one briefe diuision,A whotte aposteme. namelye to the cure of whotte Aposte∣mes and colde. It is the propertye of an hotte Aposteme, eyther to be repercussed, resolued, or maturate. And the propertye of the colde, is to be maturate, to be resolued,
and indurate by exterior heate.A colde apo∣steme. For it is seldome seene that colde Apostemes be repercussed. Begynne therefore in the cure of hotte Apostemes, wyth Plebotomye on the contrarye syde, if he be stronge, and that in the beginnyng of the aposteme, before the confyrmation: For after the cō∣firmation, Phlebotomye is to be done on the same syde where the aposteme is. Or if he be feble wyth ventosynge: enioyninge hym a streighte and colde diete, accordynge to hys strengthes: for all apostemes that come of an inwarde cause are wyth repletion. After the foresaide euacuations: begin to repercusse the mater, and to comforte the member, that it receyue no su∣perfluities▪ excepte one of these .vii. thinges folowing lette thee,Seuen thyn∣ges contrary to repercussiō of aposteme. whyche be hinderable to repessyon. The fyrste is if the aposteme be in a childe. The second is, if it be in an oulde manne. The thirde is in a man newe recoueringe from some disease or sycknesse. The fourthe if the matter be muche. The fyueth is, greate contagion. The syxte is, if it be in the emunctoryes, as in the necke or the throte, in the arme hole, or in the grynde. The seuenthe is if the A∣posteme be made by waye of Deriuation: As when the member that expelleth, is nobler then the member that receaueth. But if none of these seuen thynges appeare in thy waye, then repercusse the matter, wyth the iuyce of some coulde Herbes, as of Solanum (whyche repercusseth wyth preuye Resolution. Or cum Succo Portulacae Slluestris, Vel Vmbilici Veneris: cum Oleo Rosato, pauco aceto, & pauco Bolo Armeno: or with some one of the good repercussiue vnguen∣tes, to be mencyoned in the ende. If the matter by these meanes be not repercussed: ey∣ther because it inclyneth to some quantitye, or that it be somewhat grosse: When thou haste fyrste purged the bo∣dye, begyn to dyssolue it: administrynge a lytle honye with the a foresaide repercussiue medicine, & after resolue strōg∣ly, according as thou seest the course of the mater to seae,
and the payne and the sharpnesse waste awaye, wyth some of the resolutiue medicynes, wrytten in the antidotarye. But if the matter enclyne to Saniem, in the tyme of Re∣percussyon, (whyche sometime is made by meanes of acci∣dentes, & not properly,) or in the tyme of resolution: Then hasten maturation wyth maturatiues. And beinge fullye riped, loke for the ripest, & for the moste dependente place, and ther open it: makinge greate openynges in greate exi∣tures, and smalle openinges in smalle exitures: and thrust oute all the matter softlye, excepte it be verye muche: for then it is not good to thruste oute all at one time, but by leisoure, especiallye when the patiente is feble. And when the place is open, and the matter voyded, in parte or in whole: mundifye the foresayde place wyth mundificatiues that hereafter shalbe wrytten, and then incarne the fleshe: and after consolidate it, with medicines for the same pur∣pose, described in the antidotary. But beware thou make none incisyon, tyl the matter be fullye riped: excepte it be nighe the noble members, or the fundament, or yt ioyntes: or if the mater be readye to corrupte the members. For in these cases it is necessarye to make incision before the rip∣nesse, layinge therto suche plasters as maye not only mun∣difye, but also maturate the reste that is not ripe. And see that in no case in the tyme of resolution, maturation, and mundification, that the Emplasters resolutiues, matura∣tiues, and mundificatiues: be not of to whotte nature, nor to harde, but temperate. For sometyme suche thynges make the aposteme furious. And knowe that whotte sanguine apostemes, nede lyt∣tell repercussyon, and muche resolutyon: and cholericke a∣postemes, neade muche repercussyon and lytle resolutyon▪ and as in this case Phlebotomye belongeth to sanguine men, euen so to cholericke men, belongeth the purgynge of cho∣ler in the bodye. And those apostemes that are made of a∣duste humores, nede onlye repercussyon before the vlcera∣tion therof: and after the vlceration laye no colde thynges
in the vlcerate. But laye aboute it a defensiue of ole Armeniake, to defende the ambulation and corrosion. Of the Anthrax and Carbunculus. ANthrax, & Carbunculus, because one is made of diuers humores, and the other of grosse bloude, as is afore¦sayde: doe require (after Phlebotomye and purgations) emplasters, and meates and drinckes, comfortynge the harte, because of their malice: especially the Anthrax, which is common wyth all other venemous Apostemes. Geue therfore to the patient, a colde and streighte diete: as Pom∣granates, Aples, Peares, Quinces, and wyne of Pomgra∣nates, with .x. partes of coulde water: and let him absteine from all kindes of Fleshe, if it maye be: If not, permit hym the Fleshe of Chickens, dressed wyth Agresta, or wyne of Pomgranates. Unto suche also maye Theriacamaior be pro∣fitablye geuen. But if they haue StuporemStupr. called also Sc∣pen,. and commonlye swoundynge:Of thys mater, loke farther in my table at . let them be raised, with the greate sowndes, of trompetes, and timpanies: Calling them verye loudlye, by their proper names. And laye vpon the harte a coulde emplaster, made, ex Rosarum rubrarum, San∣dali citrint, ana Vncia Vna, Frinae Hordeace Vnciis duabus, & Ca∣phurae, drachmis duabus. Tempered together cum aqua Rosacea, Velsucco pomorum Agrestium. But if the sore be in the former parte, aboute the māmilles, or the breste: let the same em∣plaster be layde betwene the shoulder blades. But some peraduenture may meuaile at the geuing of Theriacamaior,. because it is whotte: but althoughe it bsme not the breuitye of this worke, to dispute of euerye thinge: yet because there hathe bene, and yet nowe is amonges the auncientes, diuers opinions: and because some haue, & doe approue it, and some not: Thou shalt vnderstand although triacle he whotte: yet by hys nobility, and moste profitable composition, there resulteth a moste worthye spiryte, and frendly to man hys cōplexion. And therfore we haue found
it valiente againste venim, bothe whotte and colde: and a∣gainste venimes, that are contrarye to man his nature of the whole kinde. It is founde also to moue the bellye, and to staye the fluxe: and therfore I surelye saye, that as euery thinge, emonge thinges engendering a common complexi∣on,Complexio e∣lementalis. (whiche is called Complexio elementalis), hathe morouer a proper hid nature, whiche is of the whole kynde▪ of hathe Theriaca, beside and aboue the elementary complexion, in yt doinge and sufferinge of thinges, enteringe together hys composition, a hidde property, against all kindes of venim, to man his bodye contrarye. And therfore it profiteth a∣gaynste euerye venemous a posteme: for the example and profite wherof I saye farther, that there came to me in the Citye of Milaine, a yonge man, (broughte by an Apothe∣carye hys frende,) hauynge Anthracem in the partes of the face, whose malyce was so excedinglye encreased, that the whole heade, face, and necke, was incrediblye inflated: and the sycke man was euen nowe in the signes of deathe. For he hadde no pulse, and also he swounded: In so muche that I willed the Apothecarye to leade him home to hys house, for he is a deade man. And the Apothecarye sayd, is ther then none other remedye wyth hym? Then I a little bethinkynge my selfe, saide. Truelye if thou haddest of the best Triacle, and gauest it him in great quantity, perhaps he mighte yet liue: but I beleue it not, otherwise then ve∣rye doubtfullye. The apothecarye then ledde hym to hys house, (scante able to goe), and gaue to him, of approued Triacle aboute ii. drachmes, and laide him in a bedde, coueringe hym, and immediatlye he felle into a swette, whiche begane aboute the head, and diseased place. And wythin a while he swette ouer all: and lo hys pulse returned, and he was comforted. And when hys swette was dryed vp, the apothecarye (of hys owne motion), gaue to hym the same day one drachme more of the same Triacle, and so was he healed: sauynge that there remained on hym a certaine bladerye Ulcer,
whiche after was easilye cured. And surelye I neuer sawe any other man escape, after swoundinge, tremblinge of the harte, and (whiche was the greatest maruelle) wythoute pulse. But I haue sene an infynite sorte, that (speaking and fealinge as it weare no grefe,) weare by me iudged to dye, and haue died: to the greate meruail of their frendes, at the Prognostication. And thus muche haue I sayde to thee of Triacle▪ that thou mayste perchance throughe these woordes, deliuer some man from deathe. And I beseche the omnipotente God, whose name be praysed for euer, to graunte me syn∣fulle man throughe his mercy, that this my litle boke may be to his honour, and the profite of his creatures. But now to oure purpose. After the comfortinge of the harte, and euacuation of the matter: the Carbuncle, and Anthrax, shall be ryped, wyth their proper maturatiues, wherof I wyl make men∣tion in the ende of thys worke. By the whyche remedyes, all other furiouse apostmes maye be cured: namelye, by comfortinge the harte and the member. And after vlcera∣tion, procede wyth the curations that shalle be geuen thee in the Chapiter of vlcers. Of colde Apostemes. Chapi .xv. COlde apostemes are healed wyth the purging of the bodye: to the whych, Trocisus de Turbt is a specialle medicyne. Whiche ws of oure master, as we wyll shewe in the antidotarye. & after the body is purged make resolution, or maturation, (if rsoution can not be made) And in the antidotary thou shalte reade resolutis, and maturatines for these apostemes, Scro∣phules, Glandules and Nodes. And also mundificatiues for the apostemes, called Botia.
¶The thirde parte of thys woorke, conteineth three Chapiters, namelye of Vlcers, the Cancer, and the Fistula. Of Vlcers in generalle. Chapi .i. VLcus, and Vulnus, doe manifestly dyffer▪ for Vulnus is a wounde or a cutte newly made: and an vlcer is a sore, corrupte, or oulde. Althoughe in Phisicke it bee sometimes founde,Arte of medi∣cyne. that an olde sore is of some named Vulnus:Vulnus. but there Vulnus is taken for Plaga,Plaga. and not properly. An Ulcer also differeth from the Cancer, and Fistula, euē asThat is ye generall from the speciall, or the kinde frō the forme. Genus aspecie. For euery Fistula is an Ulcer, and so is euerye vlcered Cancer: but not contrari∣wise. and hereby shall the error of Rogerius, & Rolandus, & Rolandus their errores be manifested: (who saye, that euerye wounde remaining vn∣cured, ii. or .iii. monethes, is not then Vulnus: but is called Cancer, or Fistula.) For all sores, commyng of vlceratyng Pustules, or of the coldnesse of the aer, or of anye corrupty∣on, or (properlye speakinge) by the incision of an aposteme: and also all filthye, and putrefied sores, are vlcers: And yet are they properlye neither Fistules, nor Cancers. For the Cancer, and Fistula, haue theyr proper differences: where in they varye from vlcers, as it shall appeare. In Ulcers therfore, there is some virulencye, with muche liquide cor∣ruption: and that corruption, if it haue a coloure tendinge to citrine, or redde: lette it be washed wyth coulde, and stip∣ticke lotions: as the water wherein Alumen hathe beene re∣solued, and wyth aqua Hordei & Lenticularum & Balistiorum,
bothe composed & simple. But if it be not coloured, lette it be washed with Aqua Mellis: and if the member be coulde i∣noughe, cum Melle & Vino, whiche lotions thou shalte putte into the vlcer. Or if it be holow, cast them in with a sring: continuinge the same, vntill they come foorthe agayne, as faire as they were putte in. But nowe if the vlcer shoulde be crustye, or shoulde haue corrupte fleshe, or fleshe myred cum Sani: Then ought it to be mundified, & Vnguento apostolorum, & Vnguento Viri, which all shal be prescribed to thee in the ende. But if the vlcer be fraudu∣lent: or corrosiue: let the contagion be repressed, by layinge aboute it, the medicyne of Bole, often before shewed. And vppon it some stiptike corrosiue, suche as shall hereafter be geuen thee. After a perfecte mundification, made wyth the emplasters mundificatiues that are shewed and to bee shewed: regenerate the fleshe, and cicatrize the vlcer, wyth medicynes for the same: whereof thou shalte haue plentye, But marke thys well, that the purginge of the body by vo∣myte, healpeth muche, if the euell vlcers be in the neher partes: and by a laxatyue medicine, if they be in the vpper partes. For thys is a waye moste sure, because the matter that ranne to the vlcers, is tourned from the vlcer , and goeth away: wherby the vlcer is the better mundifyed. Of the Cancer. Chapi. ii. VNderstande that a Cancer is eyther vlcerate or not.Cancer. A Cancer not vlcerate, either is mad by growinge euen from the beginnynge of putrefied melancholye, as we haue sayde in the Chapiter of melancholike Aposte∣mes: At whych time it beginneth to shewe lyke a Lupyne, and sometyme it groweth lyke a greate Melon: or else it is made by conuertion of a harde aposteme, comminge of na∣turalle melancholye not corrupted, by layinge to it empla∣sters that are made of hotte inflāmynge thynges: or by thinges to muche atractiue, inducinge humores to yt place.
And thys being Ulcered, is then called a Cancer vlcerate: whiche also maye come f woundes vndiscretlye healed. A Cancer not vlcerate, in the beginnyng therof, is not ea∣sye to be knowne: Notwythstandinge the perfecte sygnes thereof are all readye declared. But the signes of a Cancer beinge vlcerate be these. Firste the brimnies thereof be grosse, harde, reuersed, and curnly wythin: and it tinketh muche. And also this is thereof an infallible signe: If thou washe it wyth lye,For the whyche loke more in an annotation, set at the end of the. 4. part there will come oute superfluityes lyke slimye spittle. The fyrste generall rule in the cure of a Cā∣cer, is, that it is neuer perfectlye healed, vnlesse it be vtter∣lye extirped, wyth all his rootes. And therfore of this rule springeth a seconde necessarye rule, that it oughte not to be cured by cauteryes, eyther actuale or potentialle: except it be in suche a place where it maye vtterlye be hadde awaye. If therfore the Cancer not vlcerate, be in a place replet with veines, sewes, muscles and arteries, as in yt necke, or in the mammilles, or such like: see then that thou enter∣prise not to ripe it, nor breake it, nor cutte it, nor cauteryze it: but purge the bodye wyth some medicyne, that purgeth choler aduste. And geue hym a temperate gouernance of life, forbiddinge all meates, ingrossinge and burnynge the bloude: as Lentiles, Cole wortes, Chese, Beefe, Hares fleshe, Goose fleshe, Duckes fleshe, and Peper: and al other sharp thinges. And anoynte the place, and about the same, wyth this Unguente folowinge: whyche wyll alaye and a∣swage the malice, and defende it from vlceration. Rec. Tutiae lauatae, Cerussae: Ana, partes equales. Incorporate these, cum Oleo Rosato, & succo portulac, or of some other colde herbe. Incorporate this medicyne in a morter of leade, puttynge in nowe of the Oyle of Roses, and nowe of the Juice, tyl the oyntmente be perfectlye made: And anoynte therwyth the place. But if it be in suche a place that it may be taken vtterlye away: Then cutte it awaye rootes and all: lettyng it blede largelye, and thruslynge the blode oute of the cor∣rupted veines, that therby the melancholy bloude maye be cleane wasted. And then canterize it with a whotte Iron, or
a burninge medicine. Laying to it after that, a Cataplas∣ma de Succo Apii, Melle, & Farina Tritice, tyl it be mundified. After the whyche, regenerate the fleshe, and consounde it. But if the Ulcerate Cancer be in anye place nouryshed, so that it maye not vtterly be taken away: Then is it not best to cure it wyth a whotte iron, or a caustike medicine. But it may be palliated by annoynting it with the vnguente of Tatiae and the diete aforesayde: and so maye the patyentes life be prolorged. Of a Fistula. Chapi. iii. AFistulaFistula. is a depe vlcer, whose orifice is streight and the bothome large: hauynge a callous hadnesse in the circite inwardlye, like the quill of a birde: And in this thynge it differeth from an holowe vlcer. For a ho∣lowe vlcer that Rogerus, & Rolandus, and a great many mo, doe nowe a daies calle a Fistula: hathe no inward callous, hardnes, as a fistula hath. And because of that hardnesse, a Fistule is not perfectly mundified by Lotions and Iniecti∣ons, as is a holowe vlcer: but requireth (after the Lotions wrytten in the cure of Ulcers:) that the callous hardnesse wythin be remoued and mundified by cauteries, either ac∣tualle or potentialle. After the whyche thou shalte adminy∣ster vnctuous thynges: as Butter, and other suche lyke as wil supple and lose, the hard eschare or core, that was made by the Iron, or caustike medicine. And after that, mundify it wyth iniections, and Emplasters mundificatiues. And then lette it be incarned, wyth incarnatiues: and at the last consounde it wyth consolidatiues, and Cicatrizatiues. Neuerthelesse note thys for a common remedye, as well in Fistules, as in holowe Ulcers, whyche is also good in a newe wounde: namelye, that thou induce the matter to the place moste dependente, if it maye be possyble, that the venemous superfluitye of the sayde Wounde, Fistule, or
or holowe vlcer, maye the more competentlye be dryed vp, or else prepare the member so, that the Orifice maye be al∣waye dependente. Of cauteryes or corrosiue medicynes, to corrode and cauterize the Fistule, and Cancer: And also the vnctuous medicins to make the eschare fall (made by thē,) thou shalte reade in the antidotarye. And note that the sayd eschare, made by the cauterie or sharpe medicine, ought not to be hadde awaye by vyolence, but muste be suffered: Layinge to the sore, the foresayd medicynes: till it falle away gently, wythout compulsyon. The fourthe parte of this worke, treateth of Algebra, or Restoration. And conteineth ii. Chapiters, the firste of Dislocation, the other of a Fracture. Of Dyslocation. Chapi. i. THe Intention of Algebra,Algebra. is the resto∣rynge of Dislocation,Dislocation. or breakynge of bones.Rstoration Dislocatiō called Laxatio, is the remouynge of the bone out of hys naturall plae. Knowe therefore that almighty God,Cōnexion of bones. (whose name be euer∣lastinglye glorified; and praised,) hath made manye bones in the bodye of manne, for diuers necessarye workes, and operatyons. Wherby necessarilye one member in the body of manne, moueth wythoute another. Knowe therefore that the con∣iunction of one bone with another, is in. a. x. maners. One
maner is by way of insertion of one wyth another, like as two sawes were ioyned together, the tethe of the one saw, fillinge the voidnesse of the other, as doe sometymes car∣uers of tables, and as the bones of the head do ioyn, which are .vi. b. An other maner, is the appodiation, or congrega∣tion (that is to say the gatheryng together) of one bone to ano∣ther,Sterron. as doe the .vii. bones of the breste. The thirde man∣ner is, the fixion of one bone into another, as are the tethe into the Jawe bones. The fourthe maner is the coniuncti∣on of one bone wyth another, by ligamentes goynge be∣twene: As in the ioynte of the shoulder bone, with the ad∣utorio: and so in all other ioyntes. For in yt ioyntes is made a coniunction of one bone wyth another, by the mediation of a harde bodye, insensible, and flexible: whiche passynge oute of the extremitye of the one bone, entereth into the o∣ther: bindinge the bones together. But yet the flexibilitye thereof, obeyeth to the lacertes that moue the member: so that the member maye be bowed, as it is accordante to the same, to doe hys conueniente, and proper office. And as for all other maners of coniunctions of bones, there is in them no naturall, nor voluntarye mouinges: Therfore Disloca∣tions be onlye made in ioyntes. Notwithstandynge cer∣taine openinges, remouinges, dissuerings, or departings, maye other while be made in the coniunctions of other bones. Seinge then that dislocatiō is made only in ioyntes▪ Firste ioyne thou bone wyth bene, as they were at theyr naturalle begīnnyng. And when thou haste so done, take a greate linen cloth, and wete it in a medicine made de Farina Cicerum, Vel Volatica Farin: Tritici, disteperata cum , and binde it wyth gentle bondes, holdinge the place sted∣faste in hys ioynte. And doe not as manye doe now a daes in the time of reduction: for they foment the member with warme water, whych is moste hurtfulle. For thereby the mēber is effblished, rarified, & prepared to receyue super∣fluityes, namely apostemation. But it thou feare peynes▪ anoynte the place, cum Oleo Rosato calido. But if thou weare
not wyth him at the beginnynge, and that it hathe nowe remayned certain dayes displaced, and that so, the place be growne to hardnesse, the humores also ceasynge their na∣turalle course: Then that the member maye be the better restored, it is good that thou fomente the place, not wyth whotte water onlye: but cum Aqua Calida decoctionis Chamae∣meli, Fenograeci, Seminis Lini, Male & Bisimaluae: that by these thinges the place maye be the better restored. Annotations vppon thys Chapiter. a. Wheras Lanfraneus heare speaketh of .. maners of loyninges, & describeth but. iiii. reade for thy larger contētation: the first chapyter of my firste treatise of Anatomye: where thou shalt learne, as wel the names, as the formes, or all manner of ioyninges of bones. b. Because here also, he nameth the .vi. bones of the heade, to proue thys maner of cōnexion of bones: thou maste not gather therof, that all those .vi. bones are so ioyned together, for that weare false. As by readynge the thirde chapiter, in the firste parte, of the thirde trtite▪ of my Anotamye, thou mayste perceaue. Of a Fracture. Chapi. ii. IF anye bone be broken, fyrst reduce hym into his place: and then wete a lynnen clothe in Oleo Rosato,Fractura. and laye it aboute the member. And then lay ouer and about that, an other clothe,Brokē bones wete in the forsaide medicyne, wrytten in the Chapiter of Dislocation. And vppon that clothe, laye smalle boulsters of towe, wete in Albume oui, and ouer that towe, binde splintes wyth cordes. And see that the splintes be made accordinge to the figure and quantitye of the member: bindinge it so that it remoue not, least the re∣mouynge of the member hinder the restoration. lettinge it not to be opened vntill the .x. daye: excepte one of these .iii. thynges folowing, constreigne thee to open it. That is to
wete, muche payne, caused throughe harde bindynge: or by the course of humores,Thre causes which  the Chi∣rurgien to o∣pen a broken bone before the ordinarye tyme.  gatheryng to an aposteme: or great Itch. If paine and ache, or the fluxe of humores be ye cause: vnbinde it and anoynte the place cum Oleo Rosato, and lette hym bloude on the contrary syde. And restreigne the pati∣entes diete: taryinge so till the fluxe of humores be ceased, and then binde it vp agayn. But if Itche be the cause: then vnbinde it, and washe it wyth warme water, & then binde it vp agayne: Lettyng it so continue till it be consounded. I wyll also wryte amonge other consolidatiue medicynes, in the antidotarye: a medicine that is beste in Fractures, and in Dislocations. But note thys, that in euerye worcke of Chirurgerye, it is nedefulle and necessarie, that then in∣deuoure thy selfe to worke, aboue and beyond that whiche thou findest wrytten in bokes, and especiallye in Algebra. For euerye science that dependeth vpon workyng by the hand, is muche fortified by experiment and practise. An Annotation vpon the. ii. Chapiter of the thirde parte. ‡ Bae Viscose are the woordes of Lanfranke, aboute the whiche I was somewhat troubled: for Bae is a worde out of vse amonge the learned, and therfore not to a fewe of them vnknowne. Howe be it I thinkinge (because Lanfran∣cus was of Milayne,) that it myghte perhappes be some Italian worde: thoughte good to conferre the same with some learned Italians, of whome I receiued thys inter∣pretacion: Bae say they is the druling spitlle of suckynge children. And therefore haue I englished Bae Viscose slimy spittle, whyche thoughe I thoughte I myghte safely so doe, ye doe I willinglye abide the censures of the learned.
¶The fifthe parte of thys woorke ensueth, contei∣ning .viii. Chapiters, and treateth of the diseases of the eyes. Of the Composition of the eyes, and the diseases of the same. The fyrste Chapiter. THERE is no disease, in anye officialle member of the body, so hardly knowne of the Chirurgien: as are the diseases of the eyes. And that for the subtiltye of artes composition in them. For the eye is meruailouslye composed, of .iii. hu∣mores, and .vii. coates. Whiche all doe serue to the composition therof, and are bodies moste subtille, and to syghte as it weare incompre∣hensible: but by vnderstandinge, they are verye well com∣prehended, wyth also their composition and vtilities. Unto the eies (thus noblye composed,) doe come certeine veynes, bringinge to them theyr nurishment: and also ar∣teries bringinge life vnto them, bothe so smalle, and fyne: that they are to the sight almoste insensible. And from the firste coniugation, of the .vii. paier of sinewes of ye brayne, in the fore parte of the heade, commeth .ii. sinewes, passing oute of the brayne, by the fore parte of the sculle: whyche payer doe make one holow coniunction, before they passe the sculle, after this maner. X. and as they passe the sculle, are againe deuided in .ii. which doe beare the visible spirite
to the Crystalline humore, whiche is the Instrumente of sight. And yet is holpen in the visible action, of ye humores Albugineus, and Vitreus, and also of the .vii. coatesOther A∣natomistes iudge the , to be but guardones, or as it weare se¦ueral  to ye humores and no wor¦kers in the vi¦sible action.. One of whiche coates called Vuea, is throughe persed, whych per∣cinge is called Pupilla: wherby the proper coloures, formes, and figures, are sent to the visible spirite, throughe a cleare aer. Ther are also made outwardlye eye liddes, hauynge lacertes to moue them, whiche by their closinge, defende the eyes from outwarde hurtes, and also reste them from laboures: and by a smalle passage doe worke theyr actions, whiche are to se thinges visible. It were verye profytable in thys place, to multiplye wordes vpon the declaratyon of the Anatomye of the eyes, and exactlye to notifye all dis∣eases, that myghte happen vnto them, the whyche are ve∣ry manye. But if I shoulde doe so, I shoulde passe yt boūdes of thys lyttle booke. But I wyll geue thee here the cures of infirmities, whiche come to the handes of Chirurgiens, althoughe not all, but some that are cōmon & best known, as Obtalnia, Pruritus, Lachrima, Scabies, Vlcera, Maculae, Catora∣cta. &c. whych all do oftē come to yt hands of ye Chirurgien. Of a disease in the eye, called Obtalmia. Cha. ii. OBtalmia is an aposteme or inflation,. or a course of hu∣mores to the eyes, whiche somtime is litell, & somtime greate, somtime very greate & euel, that whiche is litell, is made of smale humores, and sōtime only of an euel whote cōplexion, or of the heate of the sunne, of duste, of smoke, or of muche watchinge, whiche wil sone be dissolued, & made whole, with temperaer of diete, and the white of an egge beaten & skummed, and so laied to the eyes. This medicine is good for burninge heat, and rednesse of the eyes, whē it is but lytell: & vnto many other infirmities, whiche comme of heat, because ye white of an egge is colde, washing & apt for collyries, hauing a certeine glines being applyed to ye eies, whiche is not founde in other symple medicines. The
greate Obtalmia, is when the eye aketh. The Coniunctiua, being red, and the eye vexed with heat, sharpnes, & teares. The greatest and worste Obtalmia, is that wherin there appeareth no parte of the Coniunctiua, but is couered ouer wyth a greate redde fleshinesse: the whole eye beinge in∣flated, and also the eie liddes, whiche are as it weare reuer¦sed: & thys doth sone vlcerate ye eye. In the greater, & grea∣test kindes, it is necessarye (accordinge to their quantities) to draw bloude from the Cephalica veyne, and also to purge whotte humores: geuinge him lastly a diete so sclender, as the patiente maye continewe wyth: geuinge him also all hys meates actuallye colde, and in like manner what so e∣uer is putte into the eye: whiche when it waxeth whotte, muste be remoued. You maye also for thys purpose, laye to the eye Collyrium Album, distemperatum cum lacte mulieris puellā nutrientis. And emplaster the eye (vntill the inflāmation be remoued,) wyth an emplaster made, ex Rosarum Albarum & Santali Rubriana Vncia Vna, Farinae Hordeaceae Vnciis duabus. Ca∣phurae, drachma Vna, distemperatis cum Aqua Rosacea. And when the course of humores, and the payne is ceased: make fomē∣tation cum aqua decoctionis Rosarum, & pauco Sale. But if thys helpe not, it is nedefulle to aplye therto Collyrium de Thure, to maturate it, & after that Puluerem Citrinum, to mūdify it. If after the Obtalmia, or by the same, there be made an vlcer in the eye: (wherof these are the signes, that in Co∣iunctiua there is a redde poynte, and in the cornea is a white poynte. (Then vse agayne collyrio Albo, to aswage the peine, or if the Ulcer be so greate, that thou feareste the goynge oute of Vuca, or that the disease called Bothor shoulde ensue, (whiche is a certayne eminence, appearinge in the eye, re∣semblynge the graine of a grape:) then shalle Helesr be ne∣cessarye, whiche is to saye Penetratiuum. But if thou feare not thys, and wouldest heale the vlcer, vse collyrio de plum∣bo. If farthermore after consolidation of the vlcer, there do remaine Albula id est Cicatrix, you maye cure the same, cum collyrio de Stercore Lacerti.
Collyrium Album. Rec. Cerussae Ablutae, drachmas decem. Sarcocollae grossae, drach. tres. Amyli. drach duas. Tragacanthae. drach vnam. Opii, drachmae, semissem. Beate all these well, and incorporate them with cleane rayne water. Then let it be very well wrought on a mar∣ble stone, and after make it vp in smalle pelletes, lyke len∣tilles, whiche at your times of nede, you may temper with the milke of a woman that nourisheth a maidē childe, and administer it wyth a fether. Collyrium de Thure. Whiche maturateth apostemes of the eyes. Rec. Thuris. drach. x. Antimonii. Singulorum drach. v. Sarcocollae. Singulorum drach. v. Croci. drach. ii. Conficiantur cum aqua Foenugraeci, ac fiat Col¦lyrium. Puluis Citrinus. Rec. Sarcocollae. drach. x. Aloes. ana drachmas. ii. Croci. ana drachmas. ii. Lycii. ana drachmas. ii.
Mirrhae drachmam. i. Bruse all these together, and vse them. Confectio Collyrii de Plumbo. Whiche mundifieth and healeth the Ulcers of the eies Recipe. Plumbi vsti. Antimonii. Tutiae ablutae. aeris vsti Gūmi arabici Tragacanthae Singulorū drach. viii, Opii drachmam dimidiam. Confectio Helesir. Whiche is to be vsed when thou fearest the eminence of Vuca to passe out, or the disease of the eye called Bothor. Rec. Antimonii Hematitae ana drach. x. Acaciae drach. iiii. Aloes drach. i. Bruse them, and forme them, after the maner and big∣nesse of Peper, cum succo Verbenae, Vel corrigiolae, and when nede shalbe, temper one of thē wyth the whyte of an egge, and applye it. Of Itche in the eyes. Pruritus, called in Englishe Itche, beinge in the eie: is cu∣red by washinge the eye, eueninge and mornynge wyth white wine, wherin hathe lyne Aloe Succotrina, poudered, in∣closed in a piece of linen clothe. Of Scabbes in the eye. Scabies, englished scabes, if they be lighte and newe, are cu∣red by washinge the eie with white wine, wherin hathe bene disolued Coperosa, siue Vitriolum Romanum. Of Teares. Lacrymae, or teares, are cured cū collyrio de Mirobalanis, whose
composition foloweth. Rec. Tutiae drach. x. Coralli Ossium Mirobalanorum Aloes Succotrinae. Sing. drach. ii. Piperis drach. dimidium. Make these in powder moste subtillye, and put therof a litle in the angle of the eye, with a fether. Of spottes in the eyes. Maculae, or spottes, are remoued cum collyrio de Stercore lacerti made on this wise. Rec. de Raspatura Vasorum terraceorū Vitreatorū, id est. Massacimia. (Which commeth from beyond the seas.) Spumae maris. (Whiche is a kinde of Spongia Marina, and is harde.) Stercoris lacerti. Viridis Baurach .i. Salis Gemmae Sacchari Rbei ana. Make of these a moste subtill pouder vpon a marble stone, and after boyle it in libra Vna decoctionis Acori, & Chelido, and drach .x. tille halfe by sethinge be consumed. Wherwith beinge strained, mixe the former pouder, and therof make Collyries. Use one of these, disolued in Aqua Rutae, Vel Foe∣niculi, or else ye maye put in the powder drye. Of the webbe in the eye. Vngula, maye in the beginninge, be cured wyth a Collyrie, whiche is also common to the oulde scabbe of the eye, & the inuersion of the eye liddes, thus made. Rec. Floris aeris drach. iii. Vitrioli Romani Vsti, drach. v. Auripigmenti rubri Baurach. ana dra .i. Spumae Maris. Salis Ammoniaci. drach. ii.
Dissolue the Sal Ammoniake in Succo Rutae, & therwith corporate the rest beinge poudered, and make Collyries, wherof dissolue one with whyte wine, and administer it to the eye. But if it be greate and confirmed, take awaye then, what so euer may with Instrumentes be taken away, and after cure it wyth a Collyrie. Of the disease of the eye, called Cataracta. Chapi. viii. A Cataracte confirmed,Cataracta is not holpen, but only by hā∣dy worke, and to doe that, it is nedeful a Chirurgien doe firste learne, and se it done, of a cunnynge man, that can well remoue, and put it away, wyth an instrumēt made lyke a nedle, whiche muste be pressed into Coniunctiua, fixing it inward Transueraslie, tyll the nedle (whych the workeman shalle still beholde, as it passeth vnder Cornea,) shall come to the water, whyche is placed before the hole of Pupilla, whiche dothe prohibite the sight. And then thou maiste put it dowen til the patient may see: and after that put hym .x. dayes in a darke house, in sylence, without noise and binde vpon the eye an Emplaster, de Bolo armeno, distem∣perato, cum albuinine oui, put betwene .ii. peces of linen cloth. But note wel, that this cure is deceiuable: for it is seldome sene, that it turneth not againe. But yet I haue sene some not turne againe. But if the Cataracte be not confirmed, it is healed wyth often purginge of the head, cum pilulis cho∣chiis,Pichra. & Picra: and wyth abstinence from stronge wyne, and suche thinges as cause fumes in the heade, prouocations to vomite, and indigestion, and wyth a Collyrie of Galles, whyche is made as foloweth. Rec. Fellis aquilae, Vel alterius Cuiuslibet auis,Collyriū de Felli∣bus. seu auium, ex rapina Viuentium, drachmas decem, & let them be dried. Euforbii, Colocynthidis, Serapini, ana drachmam Vnam. Of these make Collyries with the iuyce of Fenell croppes.
But see that thou loke not, for a fulle doctrine of all dis∣eases chauncynge to the eyes, in this litle booke, whyche it conteyneth not: yet haste thou therin certeine good docu∣mentes, whiche shall in theyr cases be proffitable. But if thou desire a fulle and perfecte doctrine: tarye thou for the ende of the treatice, whyche I purpose by Goddes grace to performe. In the meane tyme, (besechinge God to graunte me tyme, & place, to fulfill my purpose,) feare not to worke after these presente doctrines. And nowe take in good parte, this proffitable Antido∣rye, promised in manye places of this booke, conteinynge not onlye suche medicynes, as are by any thinge treated of therin necessarily required: But also their commodious v∣ses. Whiche thoughe they be fewe, yet are they suche, as I haue often proued. As Repercussyues, Resolutyues, Maturatyues, Mollificatyues, Mundificatyues, Conglu∣tinatyues, Consolidatyues, Rege∣neratyues, Mollificatyues of stiffe or hardened ioyntes. Ruptures, Corosyues, and Caustike medi∣cines, with the makynge of Oyles.
¶The Antidotarie conteinynge. xi. Chapiters. Of Repercussiues. Cap. i. AS often as thou wouldest Repercusse, it shall be good to purge the bodye: as to euacuate whotte mater, by Phlebotomye if thy patiēt be stronge: or with Scarification if he be weake, and to pourge the wombe by thys sure medicyne. Recipe. Prunorum numero decem. Violarum siccarum drachmam vnam. Whiche muste be added in the ende of the Dccoctyon, whyche muste be done, by boylinge these in one pounde of water, till halfe be wasted. Then adde thervnto. Thamarindorum Mannae. Medullae Cassiae Sing. vnciae dimidium. And so let it boyle. ii. walmes. Then straine them oute, pressynge them strongly wyth thy handes. To the whych straininge, adde in the euenynge. Corticum Mirobalanorum Citrearum. Pistaciarum in puluere ana drach dimi. Lettinge it stande so all nyghte, and in the mornynge rathe, strayne it againe, and so administer it warme, or else with Pilles, whiche are made as foloweth. Recipe Mirobalanorum Citrearum. Rosarum rubearum ana drach vnam.
Aloes succotrinae, drachmas duas. Scammonii, drachmam semissem. Fiant pillulae, whose dose is .iii. at one time. The mater thus beinge euacuated, or at the least dimi∣nished, vse thy medicines Repercussiues, either symples or compoundes, as cause requireth. Symple Repercussiues, wythoute stoppinge the pores are these, Oleum Rosarum, & Solatrum. Repercussiues that stoppe the pores, are suche. Portulaca domestica. Cucurbita .s. caro eius. Semper viuum. Crassula maior. Fabaria. Symple Repercussiues, with litle stoppyng of yt pores. Cotyledon. Crassula minor. Intubum. Cichorium. Dipsacum. Repercussiues, whiche are also Stupefactiues, are suche as folowe, but they are not to be vsed, but in greate neces∣sitye of intollerable payne. Succus. Lactucae hortensis. Mandragorae. Papaueris. Hyosciami. Opium. Of thinges that are to be powdered, these folowynge are good repercussiues.
Rosa. Santali omnes. Spodium. Gleba armeniae. Terra sigillata. Of these simples, thou mayste make and vse cōpounds, but if thou vse iuises of herbes, and wouldest make them more penetratiue: dde vnto them a litle vineger. Thus also mayste thou make a good compounde reper∣cussiue. Rec. De succo alicuius Herbae de praedictis drach∣mas duas. Olei Rosati, vnciam vnam. Aceti, drachmas quatuor. Or thus: Rec. Olei Rosacei, vncias duas. Boli Armeni, drach semissem Aceti, vnciae dimidium. But if thou shalte feare the corruption of the member, adde thervnto. Terrae sigillatae, drach duas. And this mayste thou applye (as a good Repercussyue, and proffitable defensiue) to any member: whervnto thou fearest anye course of the mater to resorte. But if it be nowe come to the place, and so growne an Aposteme confirmed, or the place be vlcerate, thou shalte then laye no Repercussyue theron. But aboute it, nyghe to the beginnynge of the payne, or place therof. As for ex∣ample▪ if the payne be aboute the ioynt of the foote, lay thy medicyne vpon the same ioynte, extendynge it somewhat vpwardes on the legge. Of Repercussiues, and Defensines, if thou desyre a ful∣ler
doctrine: reade the sacrade booke of Rasis, de unctais, or else tarye for the finishinge of our boke that is to come. Coulde mater properlye is neuer repercussed, but som∣times the collection of suche humores, maye be prohibited in the beginninge, by euacuation of the mater, and comfor∣tinge the member. Whervnto dothe muche auayle the ex∣hibition of Trocisces, of oure maister of famous memorye, Guilbelmus de Saliceto, whose composition is thus. Rec. Turbith albi carnosi & Gummosi. Diazingiberis ana drachmam vnam. Hermodactilorum alborum, drach semis. Of these make one Trocisce cum pauco Sirupo Violarum. This Diazingiber, wherwith this present Trocisce is made is good to be taken symplye euery morninge. For a preparatiue to consume the residue of the mater, to whose composition is required this order. Rec. Zingiberis Albi mundati, vnciam vnam. Glycirhizae Raae, drachmas tres. Granorum Paradisi. Cardamomi. Cubebes Caryophilorum, ana Scriptulos duos. Sacchari albi panis, libras duas. Comfortalyues, comfortynge and deffendynge the mē∣ber, that it receiue not coulde mater are these. Absynthium. Schoenanthum. Abrotonum Spica Mastiche.
Rosa & Oleum eiusdem, because it caleyeth coulde mem∣bers, (vnlesse they be vnmesurablye coulde,) and coleth whotte mēbers. Boyle these thinges, cum Oleo in diploma. And with the oyle anoynte the member, or else thou maist boyle them in wyne, and make an Emplaster, otherwyse they maye be made in powder, and tempered with Oyle, to make Epithema, and let this suffice for repercussiues. Of Resolutiues, and Mollificatiues. Capi. ii. ALlthoughe it be euidente, that Resolutyues wyth Maturatyues, haue greate affinitye in their quali∣tyes, (for they are temperatlye whotte:) yet herein they differ, that Resolutyues haue their substance & heate. temperate, with subtilitie. And therfore they open ye pores and drawe the mater moderatlye. They also comforte Ra∣dicalle heate, and helpe nature to expelle. Now be it if they fynde muche and grosse mater, so that the pores suffice not, (for their smallnesse,) to the excluding of the same, they doe sometime maturate. Maturatyues haue (besyde their moderate heate,) a vis∣couse substance, wherby in stoppinge the pores, they con∣serue natural heate in the place, and so doe they maturate. But if they finde mater little in quantitye, and subtille of substance, they resolue it. Wherfore it is founde, that one, and the same plaster, dothe somtimes resolue, & somtimes maturate. Resolutyues symple are these. Chamaemelum, whiche resolueth, comfortynge also the member. Melilotum & flos eius. Oleum Anethinum & semē eius. Malua siluestris.
Parietaria Sulphur Pinguedo Anseris, Anatis, & Gasmae, And all fatnesses more or lesse. Sambucus Acanthus Brassica & semē eius Styrax liquida Ladanum Mastiche Oesypus Lana succida, and many other. Oesypus, or Hysopus Humida, is thus made? Rec. Lanae ouium, ad Libitum. And laye it all nyghte in water, after boyle it well, and presse it oute, from whiche beinge coulde, scomme of the swimminge fatnesse, whiche is a good resolutiue. A good Resolutyue Emplaster. Rec. Maluae siluestris Foliorum Brassicae Florum Chamaemeli, ana manipulum .i. Boyle these in water and straine them, after this make a poulder, ex Vna parte Seminis Anethi Seminis brassicae tantundem Furfuris, partibus duabus, de quibus fiat Emplastrum
A Resolutyue Vnguente. Reci. Olei Chamaemelini vel Anethini drachmas sex. Cerae drachmas duas. Pinguedinis Anatis & Galinae, ana drach∣mam vnam. Seminis Anethi. Florum Camaemeli puluerizatorum, ana drachmas duas. Fiat vnguentum. An excellente Diachilon. VUhiche resolueth coulde maters, and mollitieth harde maters. Rec. Lithargirii minutissimè triti, libram vnam, Olei. Chamaemelini. Anethini. Liliacei. Yrni, ana drachmas. viii. Mucaginis Altheae. Seminis Lini. Foenograeci.
Ficuum siccatarum. Passularum enucleatarum. Succi yreos. Succi Scillae Oesypi. Collae de corio, ana drach duodecem. Terebinthinae, vncias tres. Resinae Albae. Cerae Citrinae, ana vncias duas. Let all these be boyled together, till the substance incor∣porate, become harder then an Unguente, and softer then an Emplaster. Yet it is to be noted, that sometimes, althoughe by re∣soluynge the mater, it be also deminyshed: the residue ne∣uerthelesse, is ouer muche indurate. And then thou muste mollifye it, whyche thou mayste very well doe▪ by washinge the member lightlye and softlye, cum Aqua calida, vntyll it ware redde, and after by anoyntinge it wyth an Unguene made, ex Olei Veteris, partibus quatuor, & Cerae par∣te Vna. Another Resolutiue, verye profitable for thys purpose, whyche mollifieth Scrophules and Glandules, and prepa∣reth them to resolution, made thus. Rec. Olei veteris, libras duas. And put it in a glasse cum radicibus Altheae, & Cucumeris a∣sinini mundatis, ana Vnclam Vn. and putte the Glasse, wth the Oyle and rootes, in an other vessell of Water, sue-sufferynge
it so to boyle, by the seethynge of the water, vn∣till the rotes be somwhat fryed. After strayne it, adding to that straininge, Cerae, Vncias tres, in sommer: but in Wynter duas. and so shalte thou haue a verye good Mollificatyue, wherwyth thou shalte mollifye, one, or .ii. or .iii. dayes, and an other daye thou shalte resolue, or as to thee it shall seme necessary. And if thou put therto, one tenthe parte of Eufor∣bium: it shallbe verye good for the Spasme. Of Maturatyues. Capi. iii. MAturatyues are these. Malua Hortensis, Pinguis radix Altheae Radix rumecis acuti. Radix Lilii albi. Alium. Cepa. Rapa. Baucia With also many other rootes and herbes, and also Foenumgraecum. Semen Lini. Medulla Tritici. Fermentum. Axungia porci. And all compoundes hauinge temperate heate, wyth slymines. A verye good Maturatyue.
Whiche maturateth Sanguine Apostemes, and all A∣postemes mixed wyth heat, and also suche as are prepared to quitture. Rec. Foliorum maluae Hortensis. Violariae ana, .M. vnum. Altheae Radices duas. After thou haste boyled these perfectly in water, straine them, and stampe them finelye, and of the decoction strai∣ned, reserue one pounde. Then take. Olei veteris, vel axungiae veteris porcinae, non salitae, vncias tres. Farinae seminis Lini. Farinae seminis Foenugraeci, ana vnciam vnam. Farinae Tritici subtilissimae, vncias duas. Incorporate all these, wyth the herbes and rotes, in the reserued decoction, & therof make vp an emplaster, mean∣ly thicke and liquide. But note this, that it behoueth thee not, to putt Foeman graecum therin, if thou feare the inflammatyon of the ma∣ter. Colde maters, thou shalte maturate wyth thys Em∣plaster. Rec. Cepam vnam. Alii, restam vnam, Oua duo.
All rosted vnder whotte ashes, and stampe them finely, whervnto adde Fermenti Acerimi, pondus omnium Ceterorum, and so temperinge all together cum Oleo Veteri, make an Emplaster. For as much as Anthrax, and Carbunculus, are made of grosse mater, (as is aforesayde,) and are bothe, harde to touche, and ready to receiue inflammation of the matter: They will not other wyse be maturate, but wyth a medi∣cyne of incisyue nature, wyth maturation. Which is found in no one symple medicyne, but in Fermento, whiche (for as muche as it is swete, sharpe, and viscous,) maturateth, by vertue of hys swetnesse, and snynesse, and also cutteth and sondereth the mater, by his sharpnesse so that it equal∣lye maturateth. Wherfore in euerye harde matter, it is the fundamente and substance of Emplasters. Take also thys profitable compounde plaster, whiche aggregateth these intentions, (namelye maturation, and incision, to Carbunculum and Anthracem. Reci. Ficuum siccarum pinguium numero duo∣decem. Passularum, vnciam vnam Piperis. Salis Nitri, ana vnciae semissem Fermenti acri pondus omnium. Olei veteris. Aceti fortissimi, ana quantum sufficit. To the confection of your Emplaster. Scabiosa pilosa, also (whych hath leaues somwhat broade nighe the grounde, and a stalke of a Cubite lengthe, wyth a Flower of a blewe coloure, whose leaues are, the nigher
the roppe, the fyner and smaller.) Beinge brused with Ax∣ungia, dothe (as I haue a thousande tymes proued) meruai∣louslye maturate Anthracem & Carbunculum. Of Mundificatyues. Cap. iiii. OF Mundificatyues, some doe mundifye, with maturatien of the remanentes, and they are verye necessarye, when we are constreyned to open the aposme, before perfecte matu∣rity. Also when the mater is partly thynne, and soone maturateth, and partlye grosse and disobediente to maturation: as in Scrophulis, Clandulis, & Bubonibus. And ther are other simplye mundificatyues. To Apostemes well maturated, and to newe Ulcers, thou mayste cōmodiously applye this mundificatiue, which dothe mundifye, incarne and aswage peine. Rec. Vitellos Ouorum crudos, and incorporate them, cū subti∣li Farina Triticea, in the maner of a Cataplasma, and spreade it on a clothe, layinge thervpon an other, de Melle & farina, mixed by equalle porcions. If thou wouldest haue it more desiccatyue, put Farinm Hordei in place of Farina Tritici. An other verye good, and general mundificatiue, which mundifieth, wyth maturation and openynge of the pores, specially mete for apostemes opened before due time: And is proper principallye, to the mundification of the Anthrax, and Carbunculus, and of all vlcers. Rec. Mellis Albi boni. Farinae Triticeae subtilissimae, ana vncias duas.
Temper them firste together, after adde therto. Succi Apii vncias quatuor. Then boyle them on a softe fire, stirringe it continually till it come to perfection. And if thou wouldest mundifye fraudulente Ulcers, whose malice thou feareste. and their mutation into a Cā∣cer: Then supply the place of Succus Apii, cum succo Absinthii. But if thou wouldest maturate hardnesse, as in Scrophu¦lis, & Bubonibus, adde vnto yt medicyne de apio, halfe so muche as that whole recepte. de Cepa, & Lilio Albo boyled in wa∣ter, and well stamped. A good mundificatyue, wyth comfortation of the place made, ex Melli Rosati colati, Vnciis tribus. Farinae Hordeaceae subti∣lissimae, Vncia Vna. And if thou nede this mundificatiue, for woundes in si∣newye places, adde therto Terebinthinae lotae, quartam totius partem. Againe, if thou wouldest it should mundify more strōg∣lye, adioyne therewyth Sarcocollae, & myrhae sextam totius partem. And note, that the medicynes regeneratiues, here to be mentioned, are not wythoute some mundifyinge facultye. But yet are they more desiccatiue. Vnguentum Apostolorum. WHiche mundifyeth mortifyed Fistules, and Crustous vlcers, and allmoste all oulde vlcers, whose confecti∣on is thys. Rec. Ceraealbae.
Picis. Resinae. Hammoniaci, ana drachmas .xiiii. Mirhae, Galbani, ana drachmas quatuor. Opopanacis, drach duas. Bdelii. Aristolochiae longae. Thuris, ana drachmas sex. Litargirii, drach nouem. Floris aeris, drach tres. Olei, libras duas. Let suche gummes as will not be poudered, be infused in vineger, and after that put them in a Calderon, melting also therwyth your wexe, and resine in your oyle, and then streine them all, addynge afterwarde the pouder of youre triable thinges, and stirre it strongly wyth a Spatula. As medicines aggregatiues, & Conglutinatyues, (which are al one:) do differ from regeneratiues, and incarnatiues (whych are bothe one:) So also, bothe the one, & the other, doe differ from Consolidatyues, Citrikatiues, and Sigilla∣tiues, whiche are all one, and the same. Of Conglutinatiues. Cap v. FIrste therfore, medicines Conglutinatyues, are suche as gather together the lippes of woūdes, wherin ther is no losse of substance: and they are desiccatiues, wyth a maner of Conglutinosity, wythout Abstersion. And ther are certeyne symples, whyche doe thys meruailouslye, as.
Calx. Folia Segetis syluestris Folia Liliialbi. Folia Plantaginis. Folia Malorum. Folia Cypressi. Wyth manye other. Of Compounde medicynes, there is one made de Calce, before described, in the cure of woundes. An other common medicyne in Conglutination, and Consolidation, of the brymmes of woundes. Rec. Rasurae panni linei veteris albissimi, ad Libitum. Then take Oleum Rosatum, and infuse therin. Parum Galbant. And wyth these incorporate thy nte, in forme of an vn∣guente, and it will worke the stronglier, if thou adde parum corticum Thuris. Of medicynes Regeneratiues. Cap. vi. MEdicynes Regeneratyues, or incarnatyues, it behoueth to haue Abstersion, wyth Exic∣cation, namelye to scoure awaye grosse su∣perfluityes, & to exiccate the subtiller: which ii. kindes are the grosse superfluityes of the thirde digestion: whiche are of necessitye in∣gendered, in euery holowe wounde. But this doe they dif∣ferentlye. For in woundes of moiste bodies, as of women, children,Echus. evnuches, or of suche as are naturallye fatte, me∣dicines
of lyttle dryinge, are necessarye as. Thus. Vernix. Foenumgraecum. Litargirum. Mastiche. Aloe. Farina Fabarum. And suche lyke. But woundes of drye bodies, will of consequence re∣quire dryinge medicynes. As are these. Aristolochia. Iris. Farina orobi. Farina Lupinorum. And these are muche the dryer, if they be burned. And farther if the wounde haue muche quitture, it nea¦deth the stronger oxiccation, but if it be litle, lesse is re∣quired. Of Compounde regeneratyues, thys pouder is verye good. Rec. Thuris, vnciam vnam. Vernicis. Foenograeci, ana vncias duas. Make of these a moste fine pouder, and put therof into the wounde abundantlye.
Litargirium nutritum also, ingendereth excellentlye good fleshe, corrodeth the euel, and remoueth the scabbe of the eye lidde, and is nurished thus. Reci. Litargirium, ad libitum, in very fine pouder, and putte therto firste, de Oleo Rosato, and after de Aceto, by litle and li∣tle, beatynge it continually in a morter, vntyll it be much augmented, and hathe receiued the force of an Unguente, and thys rectefyeth, whott veterate Ulcers. Of the symples aforsayde, thou mayste also make an Unguente, by adioyning, Vnciam Vnam de puluere pradictorū. Olei Vncias quatuor & Cerae Vnciam Vnam in Semmer, or Vn∣ciae dimidium in Winter. Of Consolidatyue medicines. Cap. vii. MEdicynes Consolidatyues, Sigillatiues, and Ciatriza∣tiues, whiche ingender skyn are these, and suche lyke. Litargirium. Cētaurium minus Ossa Combusta. Cerussa Cortices pini. Resina sicca. Abrotonum assatum. Cortices Olibani. Gallae. Nuces Cupressi. Curcuma. Balaustia And manye others. Of compoundes, the best in Sommer, is Vnguentum Rasis de Cerussa, which is good to ingēder skin, for burnyng of fyer, whotte water and Oyle. For all excoriations, & all whotte vlceratynge Pustules. To the alteration of anye parte in∣to heate, wyth many other. And thus maye you make it. Rec Olei Rosati, vncias quatuor. Cerussae.
Cerae, ana vnciam vnam. Incorporate all together, addinge in the ende. Albumina ouorum duo, & Caphurae drach∣mam vnam. Another good Consoliditatyue. Rec. Resinā Albam, and boyle it in ceto acerimo, and powre it oute all together, into a bason of coulde water, throughe a strainer. Then malaxe and laboure it, wyth handes fyrst anoynted, cum Oleo Rosato: vntill it be whyte, and reserue it to your vse. But in the Sommer adioyne Cerae, partis dimidi. Of the sayde symple medicines, if one parte be takē wel powdered: and de Cera & resina ana pars media, & de Oleo Rosa∣to, partes quatuor, a good sigillatyue vnguente may be made. A verye good Consolidatyue medicyne, whiche consoū∣deth broken bones, and confirmeth luxations, being redu∣ced by cunninge hande. Rec. Farinae Cicerum, vel volaticae Molendini, li∣brae semissem. Mastiches. Tragacanthae. Gummi Arabici, ana vnciam vnam. Mummiae. Armeniae glebae, ana vnciae dimidium. Make them in fine pouder, and mixe them wyth the fyne meale, incorporatynge them alltogether, cum albumine Oui, to the thicknes of honye. Of medicynes, supplynge stiffe members. Chapi. viii.
WHen in anye member beynge healed, (after fracture, luxation, or vlceration, there remayne harde, or stiffe mouyng: then shall suche medicynes be proffitable, as haue power to mollifye, to comforte the sinewes, and to cōsume the mater, receiued and conteined, in and amonge the sy∣newes. Wherof this ensuinge, is a verye good one, whiche I haue often vsed. Rec. Bdelii. Opopanacis, ana vnciam vnam vel sem. Mollifye them in Vino, and melte it at the fyer. Pinguedinis. Porci, vncias tres. Anseris. Anatis. Galinae, ana vnciam vnam. So mixinge wyth them the Gummes. Or otherwyse this. Rec. Terebinthinae. Cerae, ana vnciam vnam, addynge therto. Farinae foenograeci. Farinae seminis lini, ana vnciam vnam. Mastiches. Thuris, sing▪ drachmas quatuor. Vnguentū de adipibus also, is very good to mollify the hardnesse, and helpeth Phthisin, & Tussim aridam, if the brest be anoynted therwith, and is thus made. Rec. Pinguedinis. Anseris. Anatis. Galinae, Porci, omnium recentium & insa∣litarum
Cerae Citrinae, ana. Melte them all and strayne them, whiche beinge coled, wyll be a good resumptyue vnguente, profytable for ma∣nye thynges. Radices Altheae, & Cucumeris asinini. Also boyled, cum partibus tribus Olei, & parte Vna Cerae, wyll make a good mollificatyue. And if thou adde Euforbii parte duodecimam, it wil be a profitable vnguente, for a Spasmate member, and this of Mollificatiues sufficeth. But note this, that as often as thou wilte mollify, with these vnguentes: Thou muste firste foment the member, cum aqua Calida, decoctionis. Radicum Bismaluae. Foliorum Maluae. Florum Chamaemeli. Foenograeci, & Seminis Lini. And after vse the vnguentes. Of medicynes vlceratiues. Cap. ix, Symple medicines vlceratiues, and Cauteries are these. Cortices viticellae. Apiū Haemorhoydarum Pes milui. Thapsia, Cantarides, Alliū mundatū, Cepa, Scilla, Mel anacardi, Alumen fecum,
Realgar, Calx viua, Vitriolum, Virideaes, Flamula, Apium risus. and many other. Of compound medicines, that open apostemes, wythout instrumentes. Note these insuynge. Rec. Mellis anacardi. Picis naualis, ana partes aequales. If thou haue not Mel anacardi, thou maiste thus make it. If thou wilte put Anacardos, into a whotte payer of smithes tonges, and binde them: Ther will sweate oute of them a honye, which is a Cauterye. Or else. Rec. Saponis nigri liquidi, and corporate it, cum Calce Viua, and thou shalte haue a ruptorie vnguente. Also incorporate Ventres Cantaridum, cum fermento, & pau∣co aceto, so shalte thou haue a good vlceratiue medicyne. An other medicine, whiche valientlye, (but not violent∣lye,) corrodeth and wasteth superfluous fleshe. Rec. Hermodactilorum. Floris aeris. Aristolochiae rotnndae, ana. Make them in pouder. An other stronger Corrosiue medicyne, and is very pro∣fitable in veterate crustous Ulcers, and Fistules, and in some Cancers. Rec. Succi Asphodeli, vnc sex. Calcis viuae vncias duas. Auripigmenti, vnciam vnam. Of these make Trochisces, and dry them in the shadow. The best time of makinge them, is in August to be kepte. And when nede is, to mundifye putrefied fleshe, or cru∣stous
vlcers: breake one of them to poulder, and apply it to the vlcer. And note, that as often as thou vsest these medicynes, they oughte not to be remoued: but suffered vntill it, wyth also the eschare therby made, doe of it selfe lose, and falle awaye. And farther, if all the corrupted fleshe be taken a∣waye, or the Orifice sufficientlye inlarged: it is well and maye be mundifyed. But if thy medicyne, haue not at full wrought thy will, in maner aforsaid: Then Iterate thyne Intention, so that thy later medicyne, be lesse forcible, or of lesse quātity, then the former. Althoughe we knowe, manye other medicynes of thys kinde, and also of other sortes aboue sayde: yet sparynge to lengthen tyme, nowe we omitte them: puttinge here but fewe lighte, and onlye proued thinges, accordinge to my promise, in the beginninge of this worke. Of supplyng or losynge medicynes. Cap. x. MEdicines symples, to be layde on the eschare, made by Cauteries, actuall or potenciall, to souple or lose the same, are these. Axungia Vetera porcina. Butirum insalitum. Lardum. And all maner of vnctuouse thinges. Compounde medicynes of this kinde are made, ex Brass∣ca Rubea, baked cum axungia Vetera, and also Cataplasmata, made ex Oleo, pinguedine, & aqua. Allbeit that thys laste wryten, of supplynge or losyng medicines as well as the Chapiter of Oyles folowinge, be not founde, in the cōmon prynted Latine bokes: yet because I haue found thē in other wrytten copyes, bothe English and Latine. I thoughte it not good to omitte them: namelye the former, because it is promysed before, in the Chapiter of the Fistula, & that folowing, for the necessarye vtili∣tye
therof: whyche I translated oute of a Latine wrytten copy, (lent to me, by my verye good and benigne frende, master Bacter as fol∣loweth. The maner of makynge Oyles. Cap xi. THe manner of makynge generalle oyles, is variable, for they are of diuers sortes, as Ole∣um de Ligno, Oleū de Fructibus, Oleū de Semiibus, and Oleum de Floribus, &c. And firste Oleum de Ligno, is thus made. Cutte your wodde in peces somwhat small, and gette you a potte, made fulle of holes, in the bothome, and fille it full wyth your wodde so cutte. Then gette you an other whole potte, and set it so depe into the earth, that the other potte whiche conteineth the wodde, beynge set righte vpon it, maye be wyth hys vpper parte, euen wyth the earthe. Then couer your vppermoste potte, as close as you can, cum luto Figuli: and then make a greate fyre ouer them, vpon the claye, continuinge the same, by the space of a daye, or a nighte. This done, take vppe your pottes, re∣seruinge to your vse, all that you fynde in the lower potte. Oleum de Floribus. You maye make thus. Rec. Florum, vncias quatuor. Olei libram vnam. Boyle them together a longe tyme, in duplice Vase, then straine them throughe a clothe, and putte your Oyle in a glasse, addinge therto newe flowers, as manye as before. Then set it in the Sunne, the space of .xl. daies. And far∣ther, if you woulde haue youre oyle, coulde oyle, you must put to it a litle water of a stronge springe: and so lette it stande a longe time in the Sunne.
Oleum de fructibus: vel de Baccis. Maye be made sunderye wayes, wherof thys is one. Take a good quantitye of berryes, and bruse them wel, puttinge them in Aqua Tepida, and make them softe wyth your handes, put then your water and beries, together in a Caulderne, and boyle them a longe time: after straine all throughe a cloth, into a broade vessel, and flete that cleane off, whiche swimmeth aboue, kepinge it for your vse. Oleum de Seminibus Is otherwyse made thus. Rec. Seminis Sinapii, or of some other sedes a good quanti∣tye. Bruse them smalle, layinge them in a vessell, betwene ii. clothes, the space of .ix. daies, then putte them in a little bagge, and lette the Oyle be strained oute. Of the manner of making specialle Oyles, take these fewe examples. Oleum Laurinum. Is good for the vehemente coulde of Feuers, if you an∣noynte the patiente therwyth, on the reynes of the backe and other exteriore partes of the bodye againste a fyer, whether it be the Oyle of it selfe, or of the beryes, whyche is otherwyse made as thus. Gather first your beryes, & boyle them in Tribus libris Vi∣ni, then strayne oute your liquore of beryes and wyne, and put therto Olei libras tres, lettyng it boyle together agayne, tyll the wyne be consumed. Oleum Sabinae. Rec. Sabinae, librastres. Bruse it small and boyle it, in libris Tribus Olei, till a third parte be wasted, and that the Oyle waxe grene: Then strayne it throughe a clothe and reserue it.
Oleum de Absinthio. Is a soueraigne Oyle, as well for feuers as all other do∣loures, and paynes. Rec. Absinthii mundissimi & optimi, librā vnam. Bruse it, and put it into as muche Oyle, as by reason you thinke sufficient, & make it vp, as in Oleo Sabinae is said. Oleum ex Ruta. Whiche is good for peynes of the eares, & also for peine and ache of the heade, and is made as is Oleum Sabinae. Oleum Sinapis. Is good ad Paralisn, and suche other maladyes. Rec. Sinapii, libram vnam, Bruse it, and infuse it .iii. daies in libris duabus Olei, after boyle it well and straine it. &c. Oleum Hederae. Whiche is profitable ad Phrenitidem, and for the hedache. Take the beries therof & bruse them, & boyle them in suf∣ficiente quantity of oyle effectuallye, and straine it. &c. Oleum ex ouis Formicarum. An oyle verye profytable againste deafnesse, and payne in the eares. Rec. Ouorum Formicarum, ad libitum. Put them in a glasse, cum Oleo, ad quantitatem sufficientem: lettinge it so stande the space of .ix. daies. After that set an other vessell ouer the fyre wyth water, into whiche wa∣ter
when it is whot, put in your glasse of oile, yt by the boi∣lynge of the water in the greater vessell, the Oyle in the glasse maye also boyle: and this is called Diploma, id est Vas duplex, and of some Balneum Mariae. When they haue thus boyled, a sufficient space, strayne your oyle from the egges, throughe a clothe. Thus endeth the Antidotary. The Conclusion. WIth good will therfore, take in good parte this li∣tle worke, and by the doctrine therin wryten, doe thou surelye worke. For in it are conteined, (all∣though it be short,) many good, sure, proffitable, and aproued thinges. But if thou desire to obteine the per∣fection of this science, learne the principles of Phisike, as ye knowledge of thinges naturalle, thinges not naturall, and thinges againste nature. Learne also the Anatomy: which teacheth the formes and natures of compositions, In all the body, of all the members of the same, and also of theyr helpes: namelye the offices whiche they haue in the bodye, and to what vtilitye almighty God created them such, and so. And moreouer frequent the multitude of sicke persons, and of their diseases, and meditate diligentlie, the exquisite workes of men learned, and experte. Note also, the causes and the endes of diseases: with also their accidentes, in the beginnynge, state, and declination. And so by good reason, and longe experimente, thou mayste at the laste, become a worthy Chirurgien, otherwise not: excepte allmightye God worke it, by pouringe on thee, hys speciall grace. Whome I beseche to geue thee hys grace, and me the forgeuenesse of my synnes: to whome be all honor, and glo∣ry, eternally. Amen. Here endeth Lanfrankes briefe.
A necessarye Table, leadinge redilye by the number of the Page, to any thinge that thou shalt desyre to fynde, in thys presente booke of Lanfranke. A. AGgregatiue medicins 61 Albula. 42 Algebra. 36 Almondes to be refused in woundes of the heade. 13 Amphemerina continua. 19 Antecedente cause. 17 Anthrax. 22. 29. 58 Antidotarie. 48 Apostemate woundes. 14 Apostemes and the cause of them. 17 Apostemes cholericke. 18 Apostemes colde. 27. 31 Apostemes the cure of them. 25. 26 Apostemes made of an oute∣ward cause. 25 Apostemes melancholike. 19 Apostemes of choler and me∣lancholy aduste. 24 Apostemes of compound hu∣mores. 22 Apostemes Phlegmatike. 19 Apostemes sanguine. 17 Apostemes watery. 20 Apostemes whotte. 26 Apostemes windy. 21 Aschachilos. 24 B. Botium. 21. 31 Bothor 42. 44 Bubones. 59 Bloud, fluxe of bloud. 8 Broken bones. 38 C. Cancer. 19 20. 33 Cancrena. 24 Carbunculus. 18. 29. 58 Caro Poroides. 8 Catarecta. 46 Cause antecedente. 17 Cause materialle. 17 Cause Procatarctike 17 Cause of apostemes. 17 Causon. 18 Cauteries. 67 Cholerike apostemes. 18 Ciatrizatiues. 61. 64
Colde apostemes. 27. 31 Collyrium Album. 43 Collyrium Corrosiuum. 45 Collyrium de fellibus. 46 Collyrium de Mirobalanis. 44. 45 Collyrium de stercore lacerti. 45 Collyrium de Thure. 43 Complexio elementalis. 30 Composition of the eyes. 40 Confectio Helesir. 44 Conglutinatyues. 61 Connexions of bones. 36 Consolidation. 3. 4 Cōsolidatiue medicins. 61. 64 Consolidatiues for luxations and broken bones. 65 Contusion. 15 Corrosiues. 67 Cure of apostemes. 25. 26 D. Desensiues. 5. 12. 26 Diachilon. 54 Diazingiber. 51 Diete general for the woun∣ded. 13 Diminution. 9 Diseases of the eies. 40 Dislocation. 36 Dyscrasia. 4. 15 E. Emplastrum resolutiuum. 53 Ephemera. 18 Erysipelas nothum. 18 Erysipelas phlegmoodes. 22 Erysipelas Verum. 18 Exiture what it is. 19 Experimentes of a fracture in the sculle. 9 Experymentes to knowe a venemous wound by. 16 Eyes theyr composition and diseases. 40 F. Fermentum. 58 Fistula. 35 Fleshe a sangu in member. 4 Fluxe of bloud in wounds. 8 Formica. 25 Fractura. 38 G. Gangrena. 24 Generall diete for the woun∣ded. 13 Glandulae. 23 Gouernance of the wounded in the head. 12 Grosse and whot meates. 34 H. Herisipula. 18 Herpes. 24 Hidropsies. 19. 20 Hot and grosse meates. 34
Hotte and grosse meates. 34 Hotte apostemes. 26 Hyposarca. 20 Hysopus humida. 53 I. Icteritia. 18 Icterus. 18 Ignis persicus. 25 Incarnatyues. 61. 62 Intention of a chirurgien. 3 Interior causes. 17 Intermittens Tertiana. 18 Intermittens quartana. 19 Itche in the eyes. 44 L. Lacrimae in oculo. 44 Lepra. 19 Leucophlegmatias. 19 Litargirium nutritum. 64 M. Maculae in oculo. 45 Maner of stitching sinewes. 7 Maner of stitching woūds. 6 Maturation. 26. 58 Maturatyues. 52. 56 Mel Anacardi. 68 Melanchiron. 20 Melancholike apostemes. 19 Members sanguine. 4 Members spermatyke. 3 Miliaris. 25 Mollificatiues. 52 Mundificatyues. 5. 59 N. Nutricion. 9 O. Obtalmia. 41 Oedema. 19 Oesipus. 53 Oleum de absinthio. 72 Oleum de Floribus. 70 Oleum de fructubus. 71 Oleum de ligno. 70 Oleum de seminibus. 71 Oleum ex ouis Formicarum. 72 Oleum ex Ruta. 72 Oleum Hederae. 72 Oleum Laurinum. 71 Oleum Sabinae. 71 Oleum Sinapis. 72 Ophthalonia. 41 P. Phisicalle remedies. 16 Phlebotomye belongeth to sanguine men. 28 Phlebotomye for the woun∣ded. 12 Phlebotomye when it is to be done. 27 Phlegmatike apostemes. 19
Phlegmone, 18 Phlegmone erystpelatodes. 22 Porus sarcodes. 8 Proprietas elementalis. 30 Pruna. 25 Pruritus oculorium. 44 Puluis citrinus. 43 Puncture. 4 Purgation of the bodye, be∣fore repercussion. 48 Q Quartana continens. 19 Quartana intermittens. 19 Quotidiana interttens. 19 R Regeneratiues. 61. 62 Remedies phisicalle. 16 Repercussiues. 27. 48 Repercussion. 26. 27. 28. 48 Resolucion. 26. 27. 52. Resolutiues. 52 Restauration. 8. 36 S Sanguine apostemes. 17 Sanguine members. 4 Scabbes of the eyes. 44 Scirrhus. 20 Sclirosis. 20 Scrophula. 23 Scrophulae squammosae. 24 Serpigo. 18. Sigillatyue medicines. 61. 64 Signes of a fracture in the sculle. 9 Symple woundes. 4 Solution of continuity. 3 Spermatike members. 3 Stanche bloude. 8 Stitching of woundes. 6. 7 Stupor. 9 Supplynge medicynes. 65. 66 & 69. Sincope. 29 Synocha. 17 Synochus. 17 T Teares. 44 Tertiana continua. 18 Tertiana intermittens. 18 Theriaca. 29 Thiria. 18 Trochisces de turbith. 1. 51 Tyria. 18 V. Ulcers. 3 Ulceratiue medicines. 67 Vlcus, 32 Vndimia. 19 Vnguentum Apostolorum. 60 Vnguentum Rasis de Cerussa. 64 Vngula. 45
VV. Watery apostemes. 20 Webbe in the eye. 45 Who apostmes. 26 Whot and grosse meates. 34 Windy Apostemes. 21 Woundes. 3. 4. 5. &c. Woundes apostemate. 14 Wounde bothe in the fleshe and the bone. 8 Woundes in the head. 9. 12 Woundes made after the bredthe. 7 Woundes made after the lengthe. 6 Woundes made by confusy∣on. 25 Woundes symple. 4 Woundes venemous. 16 Woundes with concauity. 15 Woundes with Dyscrasia. 4. 15 Wyne to be eschued in woundes of the head. 14 Y. Ydema. 19 Yposarca. 20 Z. Zimia. 19 Here endeth the Table.
¶An expositiue table after the order of the Alphabet, wherin is declared all strange wordes; with also the names and natures of diseases and symples, by anye occasion treated of in thys worke of Lanfranke, gathered by Ihon Halle Chirurgien Uery commodious to the vse of all professors of the medicinall Arte, and especiallye to the Apothe∣caries that are desirous of perfecte know∣ledge in symples.
If reason maye the iustice be, Of this my minde, the truthe to trye: Howe can ther be, dispaire in me, No truthe sithe reason, can denye. Happye it is, when men esteme: All one in truthe, the same to tell. Let no man voyde, of reason deme: Leste he agaynste the truthe rebell.
A Proheme to the Readers of thys Table. ALthoughe it hathe bene the vse of authores, to declare in the ende of their bookes, suche strange termes and darke wordes, as maye seme to some obscure: I thinke it should not be nedefull alwaye so to doe, but that there is such slacknesse in men, and negligence to learne, that they remaine as vnperfecte as a dull boye: who for lacke of capa∣citye coulde neuer procede farther then his crosse rowe. Alasse is it not necessarye that we growe from strength to strength, till we come to a full perfection? Whye shoulde we perswade oure selues, to stande at that staye, with that secte of Phisiciens, whiche haue called them selues Empiri∣cos, or as we call them practisers: not because they helpe their arte firste grounded on learninge and reason, by pra∣ctisinge of anye newe thinge them selues: but because they onlye obserue that whiche they haue seene others doe, be it neuer so base or slender, wythoute anye farther considera∣tion: euen as some also at this daye thinke one salue suffici∣ente for all sores, or with one water to heale or cure all dis∣eases, whiche is as possible, as one shoe to serue iustlye eue∣rye mannes foote. Or should we not rather solow the lear∣ned secte named Dogmatici: sekinge still for learninge, and v∣singe the same by reason, till we haue perfecte knowledge? And what is more cōducible to perfection, then the know∣ledge of symples, with their names and natures: in suche wise that knowinge the nature of the infirmity, there may therby, throughe naturall reason, (ye thoughe there were no practice,) be procured a spedy remedye? Oh that euer we shoulde call oure selues men of science, and yet as thoughe there were no science, we be ignorant of those thinges that we shoulde chieflye knowe, beinge planted amongest vs.
In this case we are lyke the cocke, that Esope speaketh of, whiche in a dunge heape found a precious stone, and on∣lye wondering therat, wished rather for a barlye corne, to satisfy his hunger: what is a man the better for a Jewel, of the whiche he vnderstandeth not the vertue, nor knoweth the value? Let vs therfore endeuour oure selues to knowe the symples, specially herbes, wyth theyr vertues, that we nede not seke for strange drouges, of farre countryes: For trulye I thinke, nature here in our naturall country hath not broughte vs forthe, leauing vs destitute of necessarye medicines to helpe our diseases, but rather hathe created here amongest vs, more apt thinges for oure bodyes, then strange drouges fet so far frō strange nations: whiche erre they come here, haue susteined so many wethers, & abidē so many markets, that they are through age withred to dust. Therfore, as in this litle booke of Lanfranke, there be ex∣cellent medicynes, to cure diseases wyth small composity∣ons and light cost, and that chieflye with symples: so for the necessarye knowledge of the natures and names of those symples, I haue made this table, after the order of the Al∣phebet, that anye suche as shall happen to be doubted of, may easily be found: so that consideringe the natures of the symples, naturall reason may perswade the mynde, of the noble and assured vertues of the medicines. For the good Chirurgien knoweth by the natures of the symples, whe∣ther it stand with reason, the medicyne to cure the disease it was ordeined for or not: therfore, amonge all other, it is a moste laudable studye, to knowe the natures of symples. And in this worke ye shall perceiue that (in diuers thinges) I differ from the common opinion, whiche manye tymes erroniously vseth one thyng for an other: euen as the Apo∣thecaries also (for lacke of knowledge) do oftē sell one thing for an other: as by occasion in this table, ye shall fynde the same by the truthe confuted. For thoughe some may note it a kinde of presumption, to vary from the common opinion: yet may I answer with
Aristotle, that Plato is my frend and so is Socrates, but the truthe before them bothe. And as mine opinion agre∣eth wyth the truthe, I wishe it onlye accepted, and where it will not stand wyth reason and truthe, to be reiected as an vntruthe, and a thing not worthy of credite. For as Plato that diuine Philosopher saythe: if men in resoning, as muche desired the truthe of the thinge it selfe, as they do the maintenance of their own opinions, & glory of their wittes, there should not brede so muche hatred as ther dothe, nor halfe so many matters be left vnconcluded. And as semeth to me this worthy sentence of good Doctor Recorde, (in the .iiii. boke of his castell of knowledge, in the 129. page), may serue well in the lyke sence. Often haue I redde in Galen (saithe he,) and more often haue I sene it by experience, yt better it is for men to want all arte of reasoninge cleane, then to haue suche confidence in a meane knowledge thereof, as maye cause them to de∣ceaue them selues, and to seduce other. As truthe therfore wyth reason will approue these iudgementes, I only wish them to be credited of the studious reader, and otherwyse not. For as I woulde gladlye my selfe embrace the moste truthe, so wold I desire my doinges to be considered wyth moste true authores, without partialitye. But seinge I haue moued here, the studye concernynge the knowledge of herbes, I thinke it good to remember, the scornynge ignorance of some, whiche because they are not experte in the knowledge of symples, scorne the dily∣gence of all other that trauell therin: as thoughe it were a thynge wythoute frute or profyte, thinkinge therby to co∣uer their neglygence, whyle they vpbraide with opprobry the diligence of other men. For as (in the yeare of oure Lord a thousande fyue hun∣dred fifty and seuen,) I came throughe Bucklersbury: loe a certaine woman came to sell hearbes, to the Apotheca∣ryes: and asked if they woulde buye mayden heare. And they desieringe to see it, she shewed to them an herbe.
Nothinge agreinge with that whiche she named: But only that it had rounde leaues, standinge in good order on eche syde the stalke, as maiden heare hathe: but it had little flou∣res like belles, somwhat redishe, mixed with whyte, with a grene stalke, and thicke leues full of iuse: and in all poyntes moste agreinge in likenesse to Nummularia, otherwise called Centum Morbia, and in Englishe two peny grasse: sauing that it was manye partes lesse, and almoste as small in deede as Trichomanes, whiche we call in Englishe mayden heare. Because I neuer saw it before, I toke a small part therof, & bare it wyth me, if haply I might meete with anye, that knewe it, and so to attaine the name therof. And truly, be∣fore that houre were fullye at an ende, I fortuned (through the societye of my reuerende frende master Gale Chirur∣gien of London,) to come into the company of a Phisicien a stranger borne: whome (after diuers communications,) I desired to shew me his opinion of that herbe: which when he had well vewed and also tasted, he answered, yt he knew it not. And because he estemed it a dishonor vnto him with∣oute some excuse or cauilation, he sayde it made no matter to be so precise in the knowledge of herbes: for said he, what nede I occupye manye herbes in a medicine, whereas one wil serue? or what nede I confecte together Solanum, Papauer, Hiosiamus, Mandragora, and Lactuca, when only Hiosiamus, or on∣lye Papauer wil serue my turne? vnto whome I thus answe∣red. Sir (vnder your correction) I graunt it to be true, that manye symples nede not be put together, where one wyll serue the turne, and affirme farthermore that it ought not: for as muche as Galen hym selfe geueth counsell neuer to vse compoundes, where symples wyll serue. But how shall I knowe that Mandragora will serue the turne of Papauer, or Lactuca of Solanum, or Hiosiamus of any of them, if I first know them not all? dothe not diuers regions bringe forthe diuers herbes, accordinge to the diuersities of soyles, and natures of heauenly climates? some place bringeth forthe Hiosiamum and none of the other that ye named: and an other place, an
other, without the rest. If nowe I know not the natures of all, I shall sometime thinke that it is vnpossible to doe a thinge, because I lacke there mine olde practise. As for ex∣ample. I would doe it with Malua, and none groweth there: wheras yet the earthe bringeth forth herbes of the same nature in an other forme: whiche neuerthelesse serueth not my want, and that because I know them not. Wherfore I conclude, that althoughe diseases may be cured with neuer so few, yet is it necessary to know them all. And though he coulde not denye this, yet he fell in rebukinge of Uigo, because in his medicines he vseth suche greate composity∣ons, and saide plainlye that Uigo in that poynt was a foole: so grossly master doctor termed him. But I perceiue what procured master Phissicien to be offended wyth Uigo, he playeth the Phisicien so muche in all his workes: for in the moste parte of diseases that he wryteth of, he describeth an order of life, and also purgation, to take away the originall cause: Happye was he, that he dwelte amongst the Phisiti∣ens of Rome and Italye: for if he had dwelte in this region, he must not haue put his owne knowledge in vse, but haue lefte that to oure doctores. Well the time woulde not then serue vs anye more to reson, but here will I saye some∣what in Uigo his defence. Whereas ye call Uigo foole, because of his greate compositions & costlye medicynes, I answer. Then was Galen also a foole, so was Auicen and Mesues, with diuers other, who deuised the greate compo∣sitions of Theriaca and Mithridatium: which (for all your wis∣dome) in your moste weighty affaires ye are constreigned to vse, for your gaine and worship. Or whye maye not any man put in wrytinge a greate composition, wherin he hath founde vtility, that other after him maye doe the like by his example? But if anye man can oe the like, with anye one or two, the symples chosen out of so many: what hinderāce is the composition to the symple medicine? But I saye, that in the moste parte of medicines, ye muste of necessitye vse compositions, for otherwise trulye the wisest maye fortune
to erre and worke folishly, and that specially in inward me∣dicines, namelye purgations: for as Mesues saith, ther is no symple purginge medicine that can be taken, that leaueth not behinde it some hurte in the body. For the which cause, it is necessarye to compose wyth them, such thinges as haue power to defende the body from the said hurtes, by qualify∣fying the hurtfull proprety of the medicyne. It may please you therfore, to leaue your blamyinge of Uigo: or elsse if his doinges like you not, set your pen to the booke, and make a more perfecte woorke: So shall the com∣mon wea geue you thankes. Otherwise we must necessa∣rily iudge, that ye speake suche vprobrious wordes against Uigo, out of the mouth of enuye. In the meane season, Jexhort all my brethren Chirur∣giens, that they (after due trauels taken in the former par∣tes) moste diligently studye, the knowledge of symples and the natures of them, from the most to the least, so shall you haue perfect knowledge how to worke: whether it be with symples or compoundes, many or fewe. For though Diogines threwe away his drinking dishe as a superfluous thinge, when he sawe an other poore man drinke in his bare hande, yet is it not euell a man to haue in hys house pottes and glasses, yea goblets of siluer & cuppes of gould: for his hand is neuer the farther from him, wher∣in he may drinke if he lift, or when nede constreigneth him, for lacke of an other vessell. What if Diogenes had seene a man lye alonge by a riuer side, drinking of the water onlye wyth his mouth as dothe a beast, woulde he also (trowe ye) haue throwne awaye hys hande? The laborynge man, the poore ploughe man, lyueth as long in good health, wyth martelmasse beffe, bakon, home∣ly cheese, course breade and hin drynke: as the richest noble man, withall his deintye fare he can deuise. Is it necessarye that prynces and noble men therfore, shallbe driuen to that fare, because pore men can so liue? There are diuers barba∣rous nacions of people, that liue only with herbes & rootes,
is it necessarye therfore, that we shall leaue oure fleshe, and fish, and holsome bread? It is an olde sayinge, that store is no sore, and plēty no deinty. Is it not better to know so much, that I may take and leaue, then to know so litle, that I shal many times lacke? Hinder not the diligent mindes therfore, of such as wold learne: for though some thinke it a thinge vnmete for theyr age to learne, yet wherfore shuld they discourage yoūg mē, for whose estate and age, it is most meete to seke for know∣ledge? For whyche cause Aristotle councelled men in theyr youthe to learne, ye (saythe he) allthough it be painfull for it is lesse peyne for a man to learne in hys youthe, then in age to be vncunninge. Oh worthy saying. Thys sentence of Aristotle, I wish ra∣ther to be weyed and folowed, then that any mannes minde should be remoued from study and diligence to learne, with fonde perswasions. Some will saye, I am an olde man, and haue done great cures, and neuer knewe so muche: and my master before me was an auncient man, and was neuer so curious. Surely science at some time florisheth, whych in time to come is darkened againe by ignorance: so that time maketh all thinges old, and after bringeth forth that olde thynges a∣gaine, causing them to be called newe. The frutefull bookes of Dioscorides, Hippocrates, Galen, and Plini, are olde and auncient thinges: ye they were counted so old, that some of them wyth most men were worne oute of minde, and the goodly doctrines also conteined in them. Yet time bringing forthe the same thinges againe in other men, they are called new lerning, ye of some newe fāgles: though it be the very same auncient thinges, & no thing elsse. Such an enemy vnto knowledge is ignorance, euermore murmu∣ring and grudging therat, with hainous reproche. Therfore let all men, that minde to haue perfection of a∣ny good science, arme them selues with patience and constā∣cy, and regard not such vaine iangling: but goe forth to your
businesse, not caring for their bablinge, euen as you may see the very great and stout horsses, shewing the like example: which passe forth on their way, not once regarding the bar∣king of curres, nor shewing anye token of reuengment: for euen suche iangling wil time weare and wast, and consume also suche enuious disdaine. Accept my good will therfore I moste hartelye desyre you, all ye that loue, to learne: for as I loke at your handes to finde good report and loue (whych is the frute of a good gentle inclination: (so I loke at the hands of the enuious ignorant for none other, but the frutes of theyr beastly nature. So that in fyne it semeth that of them I may thus iustly conclude. LIke as the flye, that fedeth styll, In vile corrupte degre: Dothe still despise and hate as ill, All herbes that holsome be. And as the man, whose trade was aye: To scoure the fylthye gonge, Of spicers shoppes was wonte to saye: They stinked very stronge. Or as the swynes filthye desyre: Dothe flee eche holsome place, And for to walow in the myre, More gladlye dothe embrace. In wicked men so wickednes, Wil alway haue a sway: Dispraising still, throughe hatefulnesse, Eche good and perfect way. Fare ye well.
Thomas Halle to the gentle Readers, that thirste for science, wisheth the increase of knowledge in good thinges, and as to hym selfe a Christian felicitye. SEing that (dere brethrē) to publish these gestes, to the prospect and iudgment of the rude multi∣tude (from whose face then it can not be kepte,) is an enterprise no lesse dangerous, then to com¦mit a skiffe or small whirey charged, to horry∣ble tempestes on the raginge seas: howe greate cause hath my brother had, to detracte or delaye the time of publishing the same? yea how lyttle maruel had it bene, if when it was finyshed, he had neuer doen it? So it might otherwise haue ioinde to oure handes: for whose sakes he bothe tooke the paynes, and is content to beare the bitter woundes of scornfull sclaunders dartes, shotte alwaies by the arme of ignorance. Not doubtinge thy good na∣ture to be euer prest, to thinke and saye the best, and to take all thynges tollerable in good parte, wherby thou mayste render to hym his hartes desire: whyche is also no more then duetye, for of mere good wyll I en∣sure thee he hathe done it. Thoughe perhaps it maye more please some man to iudge wt lesse loue, yt vaine glory was hereof the efficient cause. to whome I saye, that vayne in dede are all men and theyr thoughtes: nether is there anye thinge as the Apostle saythe, wherin we shoulde reioyce, or whereof we shoulde boaste, but onlye the crosse of Christe: yt is, hys paciēt death & giltlesse sufferāce, for vs wretches. In respect wherof all other things are very vain. And Gloria sayth Seneca, vanū & volatile quiddâ est, aura mobilius. That is glory is a vain and fletyng thing, and more wauering then the winde. Whiche vaine glo∣rye in deede (as he also noteth in an other Epistle, couplinge it wyth ambition,) hathe doubtlesse caused diuers hyghe potentates to attempt manye dangerous, yea and sometime most wicked enterpryces. And is no doubte at this daye one vice cleauinge almoste in euery mannes bo∣some: so large is follyes reigne. But as lyke Parasites wyth friuolous adulatyons, to rocke suche fooles a sleape (to whome it weare muche more meete wyth bytter tauntes to bridle theyr endlesse arrogancye,) it is not a womanlye fol∣lye, but a very wickednesse, yea more then bestiall: so to withholde good reporte, (whyche is Vera virtutis gloria,) from any that hath of mere good wyll (by anye vertuous trauell) profited the common weale, or (which is worse) in stead therof to calumniate, is a heathenish iniury: (but I might more rightly say an iniury, which ought amōg ye godlesse heathen rather to be sought, but alasse whyche is now among vs chry∣stians much more frequent.) For who planteth a vyneyarde, & tasteth not of the frute? who fedeth a flock, and cateth not of the milke? Of thys glory (as contrary to the former as light vnto darknesse) Seneca speakinge in Epistola. 80. ad Lucilium saythe, Gloria vmbra
virtutis est, etiam inuitos comitabitur. Sed quemadmodum aliquan do vmbra antecedit, aliquando sequitur, vel a tergo est: Ita gloria aliquando ante nos est, visendamque se praebet, aliquando in aver∣so est, maiorque quo serior, vbi inuidia secessit. That is: glorye is the shadowe of vertue, and wyll accompany euen suche as are not desi∣rous of hir, or couet hir not. But as the shadowe goeth sometimes be∣fore, and sometime foloweth, or is behinde: euen so is glory somtime be∣fore vs, and offereth hyr selfe to be sene and somtimes after or behynde vs. And the later, the greater it is, when enuye hathe geuen plac. Hereof also Cicero in Laelio sayth, Praestantes viri nunquam tan∣ta conati essent, quae ad posteritatis memoriam pertinerent, ni ani∣mo vidissent posteritatem ad se pertinere posse. Nonne melius mul∣to fuisset, otio sam aetatem & quietam sine vllo labore & contentio∣ne traducere? Worthye men saythe he, woulde neuer attempt so great thinges, that mighte continue vnto posteritye, vnlesse they did foresee that the posteritye mighte belonge vnto them: For weare it not elsse muche better to leade an idle and quyet life, wythoute any labor or con∣tention? And who so wyll from time to time, marke the conditions of all a∣ges: shall skant fynde one, that for hys labors taken, and perilles sustei∣ned,Cicero pro¦arch poeta. desireth not glory as a reward for his dedes. For the Philosophers them selues, euen in the bookes that they wrote in the contempt of glo∣ry, haue wrytten theyr owne names: so that wherin they despise fame, and nobility, yet would they haue them selues named, & made famoue. And agayne he saythe. Nullam virtus aliam mercedem laborum, periculorumque desiderat, praeter laudis & gloriae: Qua quidem de tracta, quid est  in hoc tam exiguo vitae curriculo, & tam breui, tantis nos in laboribus exerceamus? To saye, vertue desyreth none other recompence of hyr labors and perils, but prayse and glory: whych beinge taken awaye, what is there, for the whych we should in so small and short a course of life, vexe our selues with so great laboures. A like sayinge he hathe in his Philippicis. Nullam mercedem tanta virtus, praeter hanc laudis et gloria de siderat: qua etiam si careat, tamen est seipsa contenta. Quanquam in memoria gratorū hoīm, tanquam in luce posita letetur. which is, Uertue only desyreth none other reward, but laud & glory: which true∣lye if she lacke, yet is she contented: althoughe she reioyce in the memo∣ry of thankfull men, as placed in the lighte. Loe heare see you that true glory or honest fame, is the good reporte of iuste men, for vertuous tra∣uels, and honest desertes: a dette whyche the benefyte receiuers oughte moste willyngly to pay, thoughe not of the deseruers to be ouer busilye craued, seing that as of the wycked, (whose loue is enuy, and his praise sclaunder,) it can not be had: so of the vertuous, who is neuer vnthāk∣full, it can not be wythholden. And whether I may in my brother hys behalf, require this at your handes, as a well deserued duetye, let the thynge it self wyth his frutes
be iudge (least I should say more then me besemeth.) Is firste in trā∣slating, and reducing to perfection, Lanfrancus his lyttle worke of chi∣rurgery, (not the worste wryter of that age, as hys so muche profyta∣ble doctrine, in suche breuity, dothe ryght will declare.) Then for hys exposityue table therof, whiche he hathe gathered and adioyned therto. And lastly for his Anatomy in the end: bothe the whyche, he hathe (at my sute partly) decked with the Greeke, as wel as the Latin names, of symples, diseases, members. &c. as the purpose of teachinge the yoūger sorte gaue occasion: that suche as are as well as I, desirous of know∣ledge in bothe the tongues, myght layntlye receiue some vtilitye, (or at least delight) therby: Trustinge that others will fauorablye permit the same, as a thing to them though not delightful, yet no impediment. In readynge all the which, I trust you wil not repent your paines, for truely these for the most part are not his, but (as ye may easily see,) the authorityes of the moste worthy, and best approued wryters, wher¦in if you shall finde any thinge, (whether it be his owne, or amonge the authorities,) to be misliked: Examine it fyrste wyth reason, vpryghte iudgment, and like authorities. By all the whiche if it be found faulty: Consider, that hominis est errare, (neither hathe anye man as I sup∣pose in humane sciences, otherwise wrytten,) and that muche better it is to erre, wyth the learned and vnder correction, then singularly of self wyll or stubberne opinyon. But opinyon is nowe a dayes so beloued, that men had muche ra∣ther wt toothe & nayle defend the same (yea though truth be therby vt∣terly defaced,) thē to geue ouer to reasō or good authority. which thing ryghte well noteth Seneca sayinge. Inter cetera mortalltatis incommo∣da, & haec est caligo mētiū, nec tantū necessitas errandi, sed erroū amor. That is among other discommedities of mortall men, thys is the dark∣nesse of myndes: not onlye the necessitye of errynge, but also the loue of the same. Whome therfore shall I iudge more happye and wyse, then hym that is free from error, or at least no slaue to opinion: Then the which there is not a greater enemy to truthe and perfect knowledge. Bothe the whyche louynge brethren, I beseche the eter∣nall God to plante in vs, to hys endlesse glorye, and the profyte of hys creatures, and to the vtter banishment of that ougly monster Ignorance. Valete. LIke as an artiste base and rude, All men doe him repute: who knoweth not the instrumentes, wherwith to execute.
The partes belonginge to his arte: Euen so of righte good skill A perfect artist must them knowe And vse them at his will. But if base artes doe this thinge craue, As that moste nedefull is: VVhat shall surgerye then thinke you? Hathe she no nede of this? Yes yes, none more, if ye doe marke, That without instrument, The surgyen can not vse his arte, Nor compasse his intent. Then if to knowe the instrumentes, It is so greate againe: How are we bounde with thankfull mindes, To recompence their paine: who by great labors doe attempt, Those instrumentes to show? Amonge whome Ihon Hall lately did Hys diligence bestow. Setting out to his countrey men, That surgerye professe, The medicinall instrumentes, with their true vse doutlesse.
As herbes, rootes, seades, flowers and iuse, Gumme, barke, frute, and eke wood, with sondry earthes and mineralles, And stones with metalles good. what earthe or water forthe doe bring, To serue the surgiens nede, Exactly penned in this booke Moste easely you may rede. Be thankefull to this Halle therfore, Or elsse be thou silent. Harpocrates be, let Momus From thee be farre absent. Ihon Yates Chirurgien. SInce nowe dere reader for thy sake, Suche profitable frutes to finde, Thy frende refusde no paines to take, Shevve not thy selfe to him vnkinde. For nothing else dothe he desire, But honest fame and glorye true: Vvhiche vertuous trauels doe require, A recompence as small as due. But enuye and vaine pride so flovves, That no man maye so vvell doe ought, That scorne and sclander shall not knovve, Though his good vvill else vvhat haue boughte.
The Preface But one thyng yet I must warne all yong men of, that will profite in suche studie as I haue instructed, which is in one pointe to refrain and discente from the most part of yong men: that is to saye, from ga∣mes and spendyng the time in playe: for in my fantasy, who so euer is adicte to play & games shall neuer profite in this arte. For thou shalt fynde it time litle enough for thy study, if thou occupie all thy leysour from thy maisters or thyne owne busines at thy booke, that as thou workest or seest thy maister work: so thou maist therwith vnderstand the reason how, and howe muche suche worke is profytable. And hereof assure thy selfe, that if thou haue not as great desyre to thy boke, as the greatest gamner hath to his game, thou shalte neuer worthily be called cunnyng in this art. For thou must thynke and e∣steme all tyme of leysure from thy worke and busynes, euen loste and euyl bestowed, in which thou hast not profyted somwhat at thy boke. Let thy boke therfore, I say, be thy pastyme and game: which (if thou loue it as thou oughtest) will so delight thee, that thou shalt thinke no tyme so well bestowed as at it. Yea thou muste desyre it as the childe doeth his mothers pappe: and so will it nourishe thee, that thou shalt worthily growe and increace to a worshypfull same of cunnynge and learnyng. And nowe whatsoeuer vnto this work is added by me, as the Ex∣positiue Table, and the natomie: I most hartyly desyre al the good Readers to interprete it to the beste, regardyng the good wyll of the worker, rather then thexcellency of the woorke, whiche I confesse to be very faynt: trustyng that all suche as in those thynges are my mai∣sters and betters, wil rather seke the redresse and amēdement of such thynges as to them shall seme faultie, then disdaynfully to reprehende my good wyll, in settyng foorth of this worke. But as I feare it not in any godly or charitable personage: so am I past care, what be said of suche disdayners as speake euel of the doynges of all men, and yet wyll do nothyng that good is them selues. Not consydering that a hu∣mane creature is not borne into this worlde, onely to profite himself, but much rather to gratifie his frendes and contrey (as Cicero saith) besides Christian charitie, whiche byndeth vs to profye all men. And our sauiour Christ warneth vs, that no man hyde his talent. Thus (wyshyng to the gentyll readers theyr hartes desyre, that trauayle for the perfectnesse of this art, euen as vnto my self in my moste weighty affayres:) I ende this my symple Preface.
¶Unto his faithful frende and disciple Bernard: Lanfranke of Milayne, wysheth increase of wisdome, and cunninge. I VVYLL thee to vnderstād, my dere and louing frende, that (through the grace of God, the author of all good∣nesse:) I purpose to make a boke here after, wherein I will geue to thee an ample and large doctrine, sufficyente for thy fulle instruction, in the moste excellent Arte of Chirurgery. For in this present little worke: I intend to geue thee but fewe thinges and light, but true & proued, the which allbeit that they be short, yet are they of greate commo∣dity and profit. Set them not at naught: but dispose thy selfe, fully to trust in them: for principally, according to thy purpose, I haue wrytten proued medicines, with the manner of cu∣ring woundes, Apostemes, Ulcers, and Fistules, wyth a little of Algebra, and some curations for the eyes, after the manner, as reason taught me to worke, and by expe∣riment of a longe time, hathe beene by me roborate and strengthened. Trusting so much to the subtilty of thine intellection, that by thy witte, with these fewe things, thou shalt ga∣ther sufficient vnderstanding, to comprehend the know∣ledge of a greater worke, and that thou shalt therby ob∣teyne the name of a greate and renowned Chirurgien.
don, Kent, and Essexe. The thirde is Santonicum, so called of Santonia,Absinthium Santonicum. (a region in Fraunce named nowe Xantongue,) and therfore in Englishe not vnaptlye Frenche Wormwode. The best of these to be put in inward medicines, is the Pō∣tike or Romane Wormwode: neither oughte anye other kinde to be vsed in steade therof: thoughe none of them be wythoute their singuler vertues. Pontike Wormwode, (saithe Galen) is lesse whot then all the rest,De sym. med. facul. li. 6. hauing muche adstriction, but no lesse drying. Santonicū is next in faculties, but somwhat weaker then Scriphio: in heating, drying, and extenuation. Scriphium is colder then Abrotono, but whotter then Pontico, and enemy to the stomacke: for that it hathe (with hys bitternesse:) a certeyn saltnesse, and also some ad∣striction, thoughe but litle: so are also Abrotonum, and Santoni∣cum: onlye Ponticum is acceptable to the stomacke, and of tē∣perament whot in the first degre, and dry in the thirde. Acacia. MEn vse cōmonly the iuyce of Sloes for Acacia, which is not so▪ for Acacia is a thorny tre, growing in Egipt, hauinge whyte sedes closed in coddes, wherowte is pressed a iuyce: whiche beinge dryed is occupied in medi∣cines,De sym. med. facul. li. 6. vnder this name Acacia. It dryeth after Galen in yt thirde degree, and cooleth (being washed) in the second: but vnwashed in the firste, (for by washinge it loseth his sharp∣nesse:) and is of an earthly substance, hauing therwith wa∣tery, and also whotte and thin partes. Where it is layde, it leaueth the place dryed & contracted. The gumme of thys tree is the true gumme Arabike. Acanthus. BRanca Vrsina:Acantha. (whiche is called in Greke , in la∣tine Acanthus,Paederota. and Paederota,) is called in English beares breche, and not beares foote, as some abusiuely bothe
saye and vse, despysinge suche as woulde reforme their ac∣customed error. Dioscorides appoynteth to Acantho leaues lyke letuce, but larger, longer, and indented as Eruca: wher¦by it is euident, that it can not be bearefote. Beares breche groweth in gardines, the leaues wherof (saithe Galen) obteine a moderate digestinge faculty.Li. 6. de sym. medi. facul. The roote is desiccatiue, and lightly incisiue, consisting of thin or tēder partes, and is one of the .iiii. principal mollificatiues. Accidentia. ACcidens generally, betokeneth thinges chauncing, or belonging to substances, whiche they maye haue or lacke, wythout corruption of the same. But accidēts are Phisicallye of Galen thus defined, in the ende of hys firste boke. De methodo medendi. Those thinges, that doe necessarilye folowe that consti∣tution, from whence groweth an action: in vs being whole are named Accidentia:Symptomata. . id est in cursus concursus, uel∣casus. but if we be sicke . Yet are accidentes notes also of griefes, after his mynde, li. i. de locis affectis, sayinge. Ex propriis accidentibus etiam innotescit af∣fectus locus: nam ore Ventriculi affecto, ftidium infestat. That is a place affected is knowen by hys proper accidentes: as the mouth of the stomacke affected, lothsomnesse infesteth the same. And these are termed of oure Englishe Phisike wry∣ters, to falles, or wythfalles. Acetum. CAlled in Greke ,Oxos. Galenus de sym. med. fac. li. 8. & de cō∣positione me∣dicamētorū se cūdū loca li. 3. consisteth of substances, bothe whotte and colde, and they bothe of tender partes, (wherin yet colde hathe the masterye,) and dryeth in the thyrde degree, and hathe Repercussyue, Tenua∣tynge, and discussyue vertues. But yet dyffereth it in fa∣cultyes, accordynge to the temperamente of the Wyne,
wherof it is made. As if it be made of smalle wynes, if co∣leth effectuallye inflammations, and repelleth whotte co∣lerike swellinges, as in Oxicrato. Acorus. WHiche the Grecians calle ,Acoron. Galenus de symp, medi. lib. 6. hathe a roote somewhat bitter, and of pleasante odour, and is whotte and drye in the thirde degree, and of sub∣tille consistence: and therfore moueth vrine, dis∣solueth indurate splenes, extenuateth, and wypeth awaye the hardnesse of the panicle Ceratocides:For the pani∣cle Ceratoci∣des looke in rayne Ana∣mye. whervnto ye iuyce serueth best. And because it is thoughte not to growe with vs, we maye after the myndes of some, substitute for it Ca∣lamum odoratum: or as Galen willeth, Radicem Asari. For truly they erre verye muche,Calamus ado∣ratus. that vse Gladiolo luteo for Acoro. But Doctor Turner taketh rather Galangam maiorem for dyuers reasons to be Acorum,Radix asari. then Calamum aromaticum, as dyuers haue thoughte.Galanga maior Adeps. FOr yt better vnderstāding of these words Adeps,Oxyngion. Suum, Axungia,Suum. (called in Greke ) and Pinguedo, (na∣med in Greke ) and their differēces:Pimele. I refferre you to my Anatomye a place for that moste mete. All the whiche are in compositions of medicines (thoughe the In∣terpretors of Galen doe muche frequente thys woorde adeps,) wythout precise difference vsed for suche greases, su∣ets, or fattines as are tried from the bodyes of beastes. &c. Of the whiche Adeps Leoninus, (saithe Galen) dothe moste valientlye as well heate as digeste.Galenus li. 4 5. et. ii. de symp. med. facultatib. Whervnto adeps pardi, hathe the nexte place, whiche mollifyeth moderatly. The power of adeps anserinus, is lesse heatynge and digestynge, but somewhat more mollifyinge, and consisteth of subtille partes, as dothe the fatte of all byrdes. A little differynge
from this is adeps galinaceus,ac li. 7. de comp medi. secundum g¦nera. consistinge as in a meane: and is a moste familiar medicyne, for inflāmations. Adeps suil∣lus, is of all other fattes, the softest, moystest and weakest and therfore is conueniente for tender bodyes. Now Adeps Caprarū, & Boum: how much the strōger they are, then adeps porci: so muche the more fyttlye agree they, wyth bodyes of harder, or strōger nature, & vnto scirhous hardnesses. &c. The fattes morouer of masculyne beastes are alwaies the whotter and dryer: of the female contrarye, and of ye male gelded, it is euer like to that of the female. Adustio. ADustion, is as well the burnynge of medicynes, by materialle fire, as of humores in the body, by the excessiue distemperature, of potencialle heate therin: Wherof they are called aduste, or burned humores. Aerugo. LOke for it at Flos aris, and at Viride as. Aes vstum. BUrned brasse is of a desiccatyue, and vehemente scouringe faculty: but whotter, and more abster∣siue,Dioscoride li. 5. then burned leade. It bindeth, drieth, repres∣seth, thinneth, and draweth. It purgeth also and healeth vlcers, amendeth the faultes of the eyes, cōsumeth fleshye excrescentes: and restreigneth crepinge, and corro∣dinge vlcers. Aggregatiua medicamenta. MEdicines aggregatiues, are suche as haue vertue to gather, or brynge together, the brimmes of a wound,
or vlcer. Whiche is to be done after perfecte mundificati∣on and Incarnation. Agresta. ALthoughe Agresta whiche the Grecians calle :Omphacium. be properlye the liquor of vnripe grapes,Latine etiam. pres∣sed oute,Omphacion. (whiche some haue ignorantly interpreted the iuyce of Sorell.) I thinke the iuyce of Crabbes, whiche we calle commōly veriuce, may be safely, or without great error, vsed for Agresta. And that the rather, because Lanfran∣cus in the cure of Carbunculi. Willeth Succum pomorum Agre∣stium, to be taken in suche sorte as he often before had done Agrestam. Ueriuce is of colde and drye facultye, whereby it aswa∣geth and represseth, the inflammations of ardent humors, and sharpe, wherby it cutteth and thinneth grosse, & tough Phlegme. And is muche praised, in comforting the weak∣nes of the hart, and in swounding. The Crabbe tree is na∣med in Latine Malus Syluestris.Malus Sylue∣stris. Albula. THat whytnesse of yt Puppill, or vtter part of the eye, which Lanfranke calleth Albulam, interpretyng it Ci∣catricem, is called of others Albugo, and of some Panus, accomptyng therofAlbugo.. ii. sortes: namely Albugotenuis, called in Greke  id est Nubecula,Nephelion. that is a litle cloud, and Al∣bugo Crassa, whiche is thought to be called in Greke ,Argema. wherin the blacke of the eye is whyte, and the whyte of the same redde.Argemos. Algebra, THis Arabye woorde Algebra sygnifyeth as well frac∣tures:Fractura aut restauratio eis. (as of bones, &c.) as somtyme the restauratyon of the same.
Allium. ALlium domesticum uel Satiuum,Scorodon . whiche the Grekes calle , heateth and dryeth by the sentence of Galē in the. iiii. excesse,Ophioscoro∣don. wherin , (id est Allium Agreste,Scorodon A∣grion. that is wilde Garlike) is the more potente. Aloe. ALo is commonly numbered (amōg wryters) of two kyndes only, although ther be found amonge the A∣pothecaries in cōmon practice thre sortes to be sold: namely,Aloe Succotri¦na. Succotrina, Hepatica, & Cabalina. But who so readeth Dioscoridem,Aloe Hepati∣ca. and other auncient wryters, shall perceiue that they knewe but of two sortes, as one fyne and pure, which some calle Aloen Hepaticam. The other, whiche (because it is full of drosse and sande) semeth to be the bothome or refuse of the pure iuyce, they name Aloen Cabalinan,Aloe Cablina because (as I suppose) it not beinge mete for man his bodye, was only v∣sed to heale the diseases of horses. But of yt purest I iudge there is none other difference, but that the same whyche one author calleth Hepaticam, another calleth Succotrinam, whiche also moued Iacobus Syluius to reporte that Dioscorides and Haliabbas praise Aloen Hepaticam: but Auicenna and Mesues Aloen Succotrinam. It is the iuyce of an herb, called in Greke : and in Latine semper Viuum Marinum: In English herbe Aloes, or sea Aigren: whose iuice is brought to vs frō Indi (for ther groweth the best,) is a proffitable medicin for ma∣ny thinges,Galenus, de sym. med. li. 6 through the drying that it hathe, wythout cor∣rosion. It bindeth moderatlye, but is verye bitter, and ther¦fore loseth the belly. It drieth in the thirde degre, & heateth stronglye in the first, or lightlye in the second: and is grate∣full to the stomacke. It glueth together holowe places, and healeth vlcers harde to be cured: Maxime quae in ano & puden∣dis simt, and stieped in water, healpeth the inflammatyons in them, and also in the mouthe and Eyes. In summe▪
Of the fluxe of Bloud. Cap. v. IF the fluxe of bloud,To stanche the fluxe of Bloud. issuing from a veine or arterie, do let thee in obseruing this ordinaunce, thou mayste re∣streigne it thus. Rec. thuris partes duas alos pate Vnam, and make it into poulder, and meddle all together, cum albumine oui, to the thicknesse of hony, & pilos leporis, cutte as small as maye be possible, and so temper all together, and put thy finger in the place from whence the bloude issueth, and touche the pulse, holdinge it so the space of an houre, administring thy medicine in great quantity, and in the time of chaunginge, haue good foresight, that thou take it not away by violence. But if it cleaue faste to the place, lay on more of the saide medicine in a more liquide forme, vpō the olde medicine, till it falle frō the wounde alone without violence, & then shalle the veines and ar∣teries be knit and healed, and to this medicine there is none like in restreigning of bloud, & knitting the veine. Of woundes, with breaking of the bone wythin the Fleshe. Cap. Vi. VUhen with a wounde in the Fleshe, there is also a wound in yt bone, it behoueth not to heale yt woūde of the flesh,Restauratiō. before the Restauration of the bone, I saye Restauration, because the bone is neuer consounded with a true Consolidation: but in steade therof, groweth a hard Callouse substance of fleshe, called Porus Sarcoides, or Caro Poroides,Porus Sarco∣des. seruing in place of ye bone lacking, which reparation must be loked for, before the wounde in the fleshe be healed,Caro poroides for otherwise there may be no reparati∣on. because the moistnesse of the fleshe will let it. For so much as there can be no reparation, vnlesse the place be dried to the vttermooste: For the bones are moost drye, and the nourishmente of bones, is the matter reparinge
them, whiche is naturallye drye: for to nurishe is none other thinge, but to assimulate nurishmente wyth that whiche is nurished.Nutrition. Wherfore Nutrition is done by the like,Diminution as Diminution is done by the contrarye. And nowe for as muche as of all woundes of bones, those of the heade are moste perillous: I thinke it moste meete to begin firste with them, for if the wounde in the head where cranion or the braine panne is broken, shoulde be healed in the fleshe before the bones be repared, it would surelye cause deathe: bothe by reason of ye braines Dilicasie, and noblenesse, and also that worse accidentes folowe thereof, then of the breakinge of any other bone. Of the wounde in the heade, with breakinge of Cranion. Chapi. Vii. VUhen the wounde is made in the heade with brea∣kinge of the Sculle: consider whether it be broken vnto the inward partes or no,Woundes in the heade. that is to saye to duram matrem: whiche thou maiste knowe by diuers meanes and waies, partelye by perseuerance, and partlye by infalli∣ble experimentes,Signs of bre¦kynge of the sculle. the signes be these. The feelinge of great paine, vomiting, teares of the eies, crokednesse of the sighte,Experiment inflammation or rowlinge of the eies. &c. the expe∣rimentes are these: take a strong threde double twisted, and wereit, and let the patiente holde it stronglye in his teethe, and begin thou at the mouthe of him, and with thy nailes stretche and streigne oute the threde, til thou come at the other ende of the same, holding it streight a cubite lengthe from the tethe, and make a sounde vpon the threde with thy nayle, and doe so often times. If the pattente maye susteine the sounde, withoute feelynge of peine, then is not the sculle broken to the Dura mater. for if it be broken, he maye in no wise susteine nor suffer the harping of the nayles vpon the threde, or else thou mayst also take and smyte hys head, with a smalle dry wand of
moniacon,Ammos. of , whiche is sande. This shrubbe, wyth hys roote and frute,Agasyllis de cōpositione med. secun. ge¦nerali. 6. is called . Galen saythe, that Hammoniacum in mollyfyinge obteineth the principalitye, and digesteth meanlye. Amygdala. IN Greke .Amygdala. Of Almondes, that sort whiche for their bitternes are called Amara,Amara. & in Greke : haue tenuating faculty,Picra. wherby they purge, both out of ye bely and the brest by excreations,Dioscori. li. i. Galen, de ali∣mentis, lib. 2. & de symp. med. li. 6. grosse and tough humores: & help obstructions, sprong of grosse and viscous iuyce. They also helpe the paines of the side, of the splene, of Colon, & of the reynes, comming of the same. Howbeit they moue not the bely, neither doe they nourishe muche. The swete Al∣mondes, thoughe (in the vertues abouesayde) the weaker: yet are they moderatly whot, & mete for meates. They al∣so moue vrine, and amend the moist vices of the stomacke. Amylum WHich we corruptly calle Amidian: is that which yt Gre∣cians haue auncientlye called Amelon, and is nothinge else, but the milke or iuyce, of wheate certaine daies steped in water, and then pressed oute, whiche for his myldnes, is vsually put in llyries, as a moste apte medicyne for ma∣ladyes of the eies. For beinge exactlye washed, it hath saith Galen,De com. med. ii. loca, lib. 4. neither sharpnesse, nor adstriction: neyther beating nor coolinge. Anacardus. OR after Ruellius anacardiū: is the frute of a tre, growing in Sicilia, and Apulia, called vulgarly, Pediculus Elephantis. The iuyce wherof is called Mel Anacardi:Pediculus Ele¦phantis. which is a ruptory medicine. Anacardiū (saith Ruelltus) of yt later Grecians, (for ye aūcients make therof no mētion,)Mel Anacardi is a familiar tre among the Indians, & groweth also in the villes of Sicilia, yt throwe out flames of fire:Aetna. wyth a frute like a birdes harte, (wherof it is thoughte to haue his name,) hauinge therin a redde or bloudy iuyce, whiche floweth oute lyke bloude.
Anatomia. ▪Anatome. is the dissection or cutting vp of man his body, or the bodyes of beastes: wherby knowledge may be attai∣ned, by discerning, and considering the partes therof, with their formes, offices, processes, and colligations, one wyth an other: Wherby certeintye is hadde, as wel howe ware∣ly to worke, as wiselye to Prognosticate. Anethum. DIlle:Anethon. whiche the Grekes name , heateth either sō¦what beyōd yt secōd degre,Galenus de symp. li. 6. or within the third: & drieth either in the ende of the first degre, or in the beginninge of the second. And therfore being boiled in Oyle, it deuideth, asswageth paine, causeth sleape, & digesteth raw humores. Antimonium. CAlled also Stibium and Stii,Stibium. is a veyne of earth foūd in siluer mines,Stimmi. like in colour vnto leade, but it diffe∣reth from leade whiche wil melt & not be pouldered. Antimoniū wil be pouldered but rather wil it burn, thē melt otherwise thē by a certein art, & then not easily as lead wil. It hath saith Galen with his desiccatiue facultye (beinge vnwashed) a mighty adstriction,Galen de sym, li. 9. de comp. med. secura loca. li. 4. which by washing is made wel nere vtterly wythout biting, it is necessarily vsed with medicines for the eies, & for his vertues therin, obteined to he called ,Platyophthal¦mon. because it openeth the eyes. Anthrax. ALthough many haue ignorātly deuided Anthracē, from Carbunculo:Carbunculus. as though they were sondry and seueral tu∣mores: it is moste euident that it is one thinge: & that , is the same in greke, wherof Carbunculus, is yt name in Latyne▪ and signifyeth a burnyng cole, whyche thys tu∣more dothe verye muche resemble (in the augmentation,) bothe in colour and nature, hauing also in the declination a blacke crustons eschare, made by aduion, representinge a quenched cole, whiche euidentlye sheweth, howe excessyue heat, ioyned for the moste part wyth venemous matter, is cause of this tumore.
Yet is it notwythstandynge, deuided into kyndes: wherof the greatest and most dangerous sort,In lib. detimo¦ribus praeter naturam. appeareth common∣lye in the time of Pestilente infection: and consysteth (as saythe Galen,) of melancholye aduste. The other sort (beinge not so fearfulle,In lib. de diffe∣rentiis Febri∣um. Cap. iii. and comminge at other tymes,) is made of whotte boylinge or burned bloude▪ whiche semeth to be made, or turned into Melancholy, or as he sayth in an other place, of whotte bloude, turned by adustion into the nature of Melancholye. And surelye thus is Lanfrancus, and other wryters of his time to be vnderstanded, when they speake of Anthrax, or Carbunculus, for so shall they in the reste agree wyth Galen, and other aunciente wryters. Apium. Palustre. Risus & Haemorrhoidum. APium is of diuers kindes. But where Apium is founde in Receptes or otherwyse,Namelye in the aunciente and most ler∣ned wryters. wythoute anye other ad∣dition in the name, it is onlye mente of Persly: thou∣ghe Smalache haue abusiuelye bene vsed for it. And for the better vnderstāding of Apium & hys kindes: take this note. .Selinon Ce∣paeon. Apium Hortense. Persley, or gardin persley .Selinon Agriō Apium Syluestre. Wylde Persley. .Oreoselinon. Apium Mōtanum, uel Montapium. Mountaine Perslye. .Elcoselinon. Apium Palustre, Paludapium Siue, Apium Rusticum. Smalache, Marche, or Marshe Persley. .Hydroselinon Apium Aquaticū, Water Persley. Apiū Saxatile,Petroselinon. uel Saxeū. Saxapiū, aut Petrapium. Stone Persley.
.Hipposelinon Apium equinum. Equapium siue. Olus atrum. Alexanders, or greate Persley. Apium sepis,Selinon Phragmites. uel Apium sepiculare Hedge Persley. And whersoeuer thou fyndest anye kinde of Apium, disa∣greinge, (whether in sense or Interpretatiō) to this order, holde it for false. As for Apium Haemorrhoidum, and Apium Risus: It is but an abuse and confusion, to recken them emonge the kindes of Apium: amonge whome, (either in forme or faculties,) they can haue no place.Batrachion. But are kyndes of Ranunculus, called in Greke , in English Crowfote, and Frogmarche wherof also ther are very manye kindes, and all of whotte and blistering property: wherof loke more in Flnula. Apium saythe Galen,De sym. med. fac. li. 8. is so whotte: Vt Vrinam & menses ceat. It breaketh wynde, but that dothe the sede, more then the herbe, and is to the mouthe of the stomacke moste accepta∣ble. The seade of Oreoselinum, and Hipposelinum, are of lyke vertues, but Oreoselinum is the stronger, hitherto Galen. Api∣um is whotte in the seconde degre, and dry in the middes of the thirde. Apostema. AS .Apostema. Hoc est Spatium, siue interuallum, whyche signifyeth distance or space,Abscessus. is the same whyche the Latines caule Abscessum,Diuctio par∣ticularum. of Abscedo. And Galen calleth it Particularum diductionem, and are certayne dispositions, wherin suche bodyes as before touched together,Li. de tumori praeter natura. are nowe distante, and seuered one from an other. Wherof (saythe Galen,)De arte cura∣tiu. ad Glau∣corem lib. ii. Cap. 6. there must nedes be made a void space, contening some substance, eyther flatuous, or moyste, or compound of bothe. Whiche (if it hange, or tarye longe therin,) receiueth diuers alterations. Wherof the greater, is vsuallye called
Apostema,Pustula. and the lesse Pustula. So is for Exitura, in Lāfranke and others of that age,Exitnra. li. 4. fen. 3. tractacu. 1 and also of a Auicenna, to be vnderstā∣ded Tumor suppuratus: that is a suppurate aposteme, or riped tumore. But of these I nede here make the lesse declarati∣on, for so muche as master Gale, hathe so worthilye, and moste exquisitly in his Institution of a Chirurgien, opened these thinges at large. Where thou maist, bothe in thys & many other maters, be right sufficiently satisfied. Aqua. WAter is of temperament cold, contrarye to fier: and of all other thinges (saithe Galen) the moistest:lib. 1. de com∣positione me∣dicamentorū & lib. 1. de symp. med. fa¦cul. ca. 8. &. 5 and that, as it is vtterly without qualities, (as wythoute taste, with∣out sauor, and moste cleare,) so is it moste pure: And as it bēdeth from this, so receiueth it qualities, to heat or coole, according to the thinges, therwith mixed. Aristolochia. is of .iii. kindes, as Dioscorides saith: & obteineth that name, of the precious helpe that women receiue ther¦by, in their hard labours of children: which doctor Turner hathe therfore moste aptly called in English Birthworte. The first is called Aristolochia rotunda. The second Aristolochia longa. The thirde Clematitis: bisyde these Plinius addeth a fourthe kinde,Pistolochia. called . The Apothecaries haue of longe time erred, in sellinge Holoworte for Aristolochia rotunda: but some of late, haue in the selues reformed this euel, & doe sel the true thing. But surely many women & midwiues do erre muche more gre∣uously in my iudgment, who plāt in their gardens, & vse in womens laboures.Bistorta. Bistorta in the stead of Aristolochia: calling it Astrologia: whyche is of a coolynge and verye astringente nature, & therfore causeth rather retention, thē expulsion: I aduertise all good women therfore, that are willynge to helpe them selues and others, to seke for the true thynge, whiche they maye be sure to obteine, by the aduise of some
learned Phisicien, or experte Chirurgien, at the trusty A∣pothecaries hand. It groweth plentiouslye in Italye, and Aristolochia longa, or at the leasre Clematitis: groweth nowe in diuerse gardens in Englande, as in London: in a gar∣den of master Holande, late Chirurgien to the Quenes highnesse: of whome I had rotes, whiche growe nowe in my gardē at Maidstone. Of Aristolochia and his kindes, read more in master Turners Herballe. And for Bistorta reade Fuchsius,Galenus de symplicibus lib. 6. de historia Stirpium. The rote saythe Galen is bitter and somewhat sharpe, but the rounde is the subtillest. Of the other .ii. Clematitis smelleth swetest, but yet is the wea∣ker. The longe is so subtille as the rounde, and hathe hea∣tinge, and scouringe power, degesting, and scouring away, lesse then the rounde: but heateth rather more then lesse. Aschachilos. EUen as Aschachilos:In libro de tu∣moribus prae∣ter naturam. (whiche Galenus calleth , and Syderationē,) is (saythe he) an vniuersall corruption of solid or massiue bodies, not sparing the very bones: So is Gangrena,Sphacelos. the mortification of such solide bodies, with∣out corrupting the bone,Syderatio. & foloweth great inflammations.Gangrena. Asphodelus. CAlled also Albucum,Albucum. and Hastula regia, and of the Apo∣thecaries Affodillus:Hastula regia Asphodelos. is called in Greke and in English Affodill. And this doubtles it is, that Lanfranke meaneth:Libro secundo whose vertues, (as by Dioscorides it is euident), do most exactly serue to that intent▪ and not the herbes that we cal Affodils,Narcissus. or Daffodils: whyche are no kindes of Albuci, but rather of Narcissi. Au ripigmentum. IS called in Greke ,Arsenicon. and in English Orpiment. It hathe power or facultye to gnawe, to bynde, to re∣presse, to corrode, to excoriate, and to rayse blysters,
euen like fier,Lib. 5. &. 6. Sandaracha. and is found: as saythe Dioscorides, in suche mynes of metalles, as Sandaracha is. Axungia. Loke in Adeps. Balaustium. is after Dioscorides the floure of the wylde Pomgranate,Cytinos. as ,Sidon. Latine Cytinus is of the tame: and .Mali Corium. Latine Sidium uel Malicorium is the roughe rynde or shelle of the same frutes, all the whyche do migh∣tilye coole and dry: and therfor saythe Galen, li. 6. de sympli∣cium facultatibus. They Cicatrize vlcers, and are vsed of all men in medicynes for reiections of bloude, fluxe of the be∣lye, and Dysenteria. Baucia. THat whyche the Apothecaries calle commonly Bau∣cias,Elaphoboscon agrion. is cauled in Englysh wylde Persnippe, in Greke ,Elaphoboscū Syluestre. in Latine Elaphoboscum Siluestre, and of the Herbaries Branca Leonia. It is of temperament after Fuchsius,Brāca leonina lyke to Elaphoboscum Satiuum, sauinge that by reason of a certaine bitternesse, and lighte Abstertion that it hathe it is dryer. Baurach. VVhether it weare the mynde of Lanfrancus, or of some other that hathe since corrupted his worke, to inter∣prete Baurach, (so called of the Arabians) Sal gemmae, it is somwhat doubtfulle: but by the oulde learned wryters, it semeth farre otherwyse, for Baurach, as by them it is euidēt is , id est spuma Nitri, that is the spume or scumme of Nitrum.Aphronitron. It is by the testemonies of Galen and Mesues: of the facultye and nature of Nitrum,Spna Nitri. thoughe somewhat wea∣ker. What Sal Gem is, you shall fynde at Sal.
Bdellium. ,Bdellion. whiche (as saith Dioscorides) some calle , and others :Bolchon. Is the teares, or gumme of a tree, whiche shoulde be bitter in taste,Madelchon. shininge like glew, fatte wythin, easily meltynge, wythoute wode or filthinesse, and smelleth beinge burned lyke a houe:De com. med. secundum lo∣cos, li. 8. It heateth, and, molli∣fyeth hardnesse, moueth vrine, breaketh stones. &c. It mol∣lifieth sayeth Galen sufficientlye, digesteth, and discusseth moderatelye. Bolus Armenus. TErra,Libro. 9. de symplim medicamen. facultatibus. Lapis, Gleba, or Bolus Armenus, after the sentence of Galen, is of colour pale. And cōcerning substance, most apte to be resolued into an equall smothnesse, as lime, and is of a mightye drying power: and therfore is precious, for the Dysenteria, the fluxe of the wombe, spittinge of bloude, Catarhes, and putrefyinge vlcers of the mouthe. Howbeit ye kinde therof, which is commonly vsed in exterior grees: as it is muche more grosse, thē this here of Galen descri∣bed, so is it in eche poynt, of muche lesse vertue, or efficacy. Bothor. THoughe this Arabye name Bothor, he (after the mind of diuers learned,) takē for Pustula generally: yet is it taken of Lanfrancus, Guido de Cauliaco, & others of yt ag more streightly for a kynde of pustule, or exiture, growing in ye eye: which is of Iesu Hali, thus described. Bothor (saith he) is a certeine eminence, or litle Aposteme, as they calle it, whyche cōmeth of moysture,Staphyloma▪ gathered betwene the rindes of Comea: wherof sayth he ther are .iiii. Galen in his defini∣tions, calling it , (id est Vua uel acinus Vua) saith, that it riseth in parte of the pupille, lyke the grayne of a grape. And is made, when throughe peyne and inflamma∣tion,
the pupille is reysed vpon highe, shewinge the figure, of a graine of a grape, as afore. Botium. ABoute this Aposteme,Bronchocele Tumor guttu¦ris. called in greke , hoc est Tumor gutturis. Lanfrancus, and others aboute that time, (thoughe they agree of his place,) do vary in the substance, and mater therof. For Guido saythe, it is an aposteme growinge oute of the necke, engendered of hu∣mores, turned into euel mater. Brunus, and Theodoricus, saye it is a fleshye aposteme, ingendered in the throte: Whyche hapneth chiefly to women, and is of colour like their skin. and Lanfrancus in his greater worke, (agreing wel with ne∣ther of them:) saith it is made of corrupt humores, & chiefly of Phlegme corrupted: But often of whot Aposteme, cor∣rupted by longe retention of the mater, in the place affec∣ted. Howe be it we oughte not to be astoned, at this varie∣tye: since neyther of them, is therof a true description: But rather doe seuerally serue, to seueral kindes therof. Which are of Celsus seuerally described. Brassica. IN Greke ,Crambe. is of .iii. kindes. Esculenta, Agrestis, & Marina, but Esculenta, or Satiua Brassica, (whiche is our com∣mon garden Cole,) is that whiche Lanfranke mentyo∣neth: as well forbidding the vse therof, in the diet of those yt haue Cancrum, (because it ingendereth grosse, and melācho∣like iuyce:) as also teachinge proffitablye to vse the same, in resolution. It is of temperamente whot and dry in the first degre. It hathe by the testimonye of Galen dryinge power, bothe eaten and outwardly applied, but is not very sharpe. It cureth Erysipelata, Phlegmonnasque, that are indurate and harde to heale. Bubo (id est tumor lingiinaribus),Boubon. , Bubo, Phy∣ma, and Phygethlon, saythe Gaenus, are affectes of the Glan∣dules.
Bubo being only an inflammation of them.Libro. i. cap. i. de arte curati∣ua, ad Glauco∣nem. Phyma, is that whych forthwyth augmenteth, and hasteth to supura∣tion. And Phygethlon is eyther Erysipelas in them wyth in∣flammation: or inflammatiō wyth Erysipelate. But Guido (al∣ledginge Auicenne in the end) taketh it three wayes thus.Phyma. Firste saythe he,Phygethlon. Bubo is properlye a sole Aposteme, lur∣kinge in the arme holes, as dothe the Owle in the walles of houses. Otherwise it is more larglye taken, for the Apo∣steme,For the eme orye places, loke in myne Anatomye. that ingendereth in anye of the emunctorye places. And thirdlye for all apostemes (generallye,) that growe in glandulous mēbers. Theodoricus also defineth it to be a great harde, and depe collection of mater, expelled from the prin∣cipalle members, to the places aforesayde: wyth heate and burning. But hereof in Lanfranke I finde no description. And note that as of Guido it may be gathered, this tumore to haue thys name Bubo, of the Owle so called in Latine: so is as well the herbe Aster atticus,Aster atticus. (of the curinge Bubonem in the grindes,)Bubonium. called Bubonium, as also those partes, it re∣ceiuing Bubones. Butyrum. For the substance and nature of butter, loke vnder Lac. Calx viua. OR lime vnsleked:Gale. de sym. med. li. 8. &. 9. dothe vehementlye burne, and Cauterize. But being vtterly extincted, it remo∣ueth the eschare: and in processe of tyme, it wyll make no eschare: although it heat and liquify the flesh. And being often washed, it dryeth much, wythout bi∣ting. It is a kinde of ashes, but of substance more subtil thē the ashes of woode.Titanos. The Grecians calle it . Cancer. OF the Aposteme Cancer,) whiche the Grekes calle ,)Carcinoma. with hys causes, sygnes, and cure: hath Lanfrancus so largely and sufficiently spoken, that here nedeth no more therof be sayde.
but onlye to aduertise men of vnderstanding, rather to be∣leue, not onlye Lanfranke, but also Galen: then by fole hardinesse, (standinge to muche in theyr owne conceytes,) to deceyue them selues and others, by takynge on them thynges vncurable. ,Carcinos. id est Cancer fluuiatilis. The riuer Crabbe, as it is a specialle medicine againste venim,Galenus de Theriaca, ad Pisonem. and the hurts made by virolente beastes: so is it of power to draw out thornes, and sliuers in the fleshe. Cantharis. ,Galenus, libro de theriaca ad Pisonem. is a certeyne flye, of a grene colour. Which being geuen wyth other mete diuretike medicines, dothe purge the renes, and helpeth the difficulty of pissing: otherwise it dothe as wel exulcerate the blader inwardly, as burne and blister the skin, whersoeuer it be applied outwardly. Caphura. OF Camphora, there is varietye of opinyon, because the aunciente Grekes wryte not thereof, neither anye saue only the Arabians. For Platearius denieth it flat∣lye to be the gum of a tree, affirminge it to be the iuyce of an herbe, colde and drye in the fourthe degre. But Pandacta∣rius and Antonius Musa, Brasauolus, alledginge Auicermā and Se∣rapionem, say it is the gum of a tree, or rather saythe Brasauo∣lus, the pithe of the same, colde and drye in the third degre: of a redde and spotty coloure. And is by sublimation (as by the heate of the sunne, or of fire,) made whyte, erre it come to vs: takinge the name CamforCamfor. amonge the Arabians, of Pazor the place where it groweth. Or otherwyse, because it will hardlye be kepte. It coleth inflammations, stayeth the fluxes of bloude, of the hellye, and of the eyes. And hea∣leth whot vlcers, comforteth the senses, and taketh awaye watchfulnesse.
And because it colynge (as before) in the third degre: yet is easilye set on fyre, and yeldeth a cleare flame: and also be∣cause nothinge is more odoriferous: Pandactarius moued be∣like wyth the common principle, that euerye odoriferous thinge is also whotte, accompted it a miracle: contrarye to the minde of Galen,De sym. med. fac. li. 2. cap. 3 who iudgeth them to erre, that gesse the faculties of medicynes by theyr odores. For neither is euerye thinge whotte, (saythe he,) that smelleth well: nei∣ther dothe euerye thinge smell well, that is whotte. Ney∣ther yet oughte any man to pronounce, euerye thinge that stinketh coulde: nor euerye colde thinge, to haue a stync∣kinge sauore. Carbunculus. Loke for it vnder this worde Anthrax Cardamomum. CArdamomum, is of the later wryters distingued into ii. kyndes, Maius & Minus. Antonius Musa Brasauolus reco∣neth .iii. sedes to be amonge the Apotheries vnder that name extant, but neither of them as he also noteth, a∣greeth wyth Cardamomo-Dioscoridis,Dioscorides. who hauynge first she∣wed from whence it is broughte, saythe thus. It ought to be chosen whiche is fulle,libro. 1. fastened, and harde or toughe to be broken, (for that whiche is not so is iudged olde,) sharpe in taste and bitterish, whose odore greueth the head. With thys saythe Brasauolus agreeth iustlye bothe in descriptyon and facultyes Cardumeni Serapionis: but so doe none of the for∣mer of the Apothecaryes, and therfore menne thinke we haue it not.libro. 7. de symp. medi. facultatibus. Galenus measuringe the qualities of Carda∣momum, wyth the temperamente of Nasturtii saythe, howe muche the more swete, and fragrante it is, then Nasturtio. So muche the weaker is his facultye of heate: neyther is it mete to vlcerate▪ yet hathe it therewyth adioyned a cer∣taine bitternesse: wherby it killeth wormes, and with vi∣neger, mundifieth scabbes strongly. Loke more for this in Grana-paradisi.
Carnes variae. THe ingenderinge of fleshe, and what it is: you maye reade in the nynthe Chapiter, of the first treatice, of myne Anatomy. Fleshe (sayeth Galen,) beinge well sodde,De alimentis. li. iii. maketh good bloude: namelye if it be fleshe of good iuyce. Of al meates Caro Suum nourisheth moste. Carobubula also geueth not a litle nourishmente,Hogges flesh Beefe. but is harde to put o∣uer, bredeth bloude to grosse, & apt to cause melācholike af∣fectes. And as to yong men in good habite of body, the flesh of a grown hogge, is better then a pigge: so is veale better then beffe, and kiddes flesh, better then gotes fleshe: whych are muche better & easier concocted. Lambes fleshe is very moist & Phlegmatike: but mutton maketh worse iuyce, and more excrementes. The gotes flesh hath a sharpe & vicious iuyce.The he gotes Fleshe. Kiddes fleshe is not euel for old persons. Caro hircorum is both of iuyce and concoction the worst. The like may be sayde of beffe or rammes fleshe: but of all these the gelded are the better: as the olde fleshe is worse. Hares fleshe bre∣deth grosse bloud, but better iuyce then beffe. Hartes flesh or buckes flesh, is hard to concoct. And make as euel iuyce as any of the rest:De sanitate tunda. li. 5. & therfore are Hartes flesh, Gotes fleshe and beffe, profitable neither for old nor yong. To yōg men mutton is admitted, though to old men it be not commodi∣ous: and muche lesse lambes fleshe. Euery kinde of flying foule, geueth very litle nourysh∣ment, in respect of beastes. The fleshe of soules is easye to concoct, chiefly of yt bird called Attagen, (which some thinke is the woodcoke.) The fleshe of the blacke bird, the owsel & the smal sparowes, are harder: but harder then they, is the flesh of the turtle doue, the wood doue, & the ducke. But to conclude.De sym. li. 11. Cum Cibis etiam aalium mutantur carnes. That is ye flesh of beastes & fowles are altered, by theyr fedinge. And therfore are the birdes alowed, that are conuersant on the swete hilles, in the holesome grauelly woodes, and plesant groues as suche as liue in marishes, or ennes, and fede in the water, are vtterly eschued.
Caryophilli. Loke at Garyophilli. Causon. , id est febris ardens: is one of the continuall feuers, and hath to name Tertiana continua: caused of yelowe choler, putrefied in the veines, (none otherwise then Quotidiana cō∣tinua, commeth of putrefied phlegme and Quartana cōtinua of corrupted melancholy,) and differeth from Tertiani intermit∣tente, for that therin the cholericke humor is caried ouer all the body. But in Ardente febre, it is together with the bloud, conteined in the vessels:De sympto∣matum causis li. ii. ac de tre∣more, palpita∣tione, conuul∣tione, et rigore causyng muche payne & burnyng. Whervnto (saith Galen,) if rigor at any tyme chaunce: the Feuer is therby disolued. Yet some neuerthelesse, make a certain obscure differēs betwene Causon & Tertianam continuam: affirming the cause therof, to be conteined nigher about the hart. And hys ac∣cession to haue no rest, or at the most very lytle in the mor∣ning, (as in Synocho,) and that rather of the colde tēperature of that tyme, then of hys owne nature. Casia. CAsia Fistularis, or Cassia Syringa, is (by the testimony of A∣uicen and Mesues,) meane betwene whotte and colde. But inclining rather, to heat and moisture in ye first degre. It is the frute of a tre, brought forth in hard blacke coddes. Whose inwarde pulpe, is resolutiue, and lenityue, clenseth the bloud, and purgeth gētly Choler & Phlegme. And thys out of the Arabians, for amonge the old Greciās it is not found: who yet haue their Cassiam fistularem, whych is of some taken for oure Cinamome. Cataplasma. , quasi figmētum Crassum: Is that grosse kinde of Plaster forme, that is made of sodden hearbes, Oyles Meales, poulders. &c.
Cepa. CAlled in greke ,Crommyon. is of diuers kindes, as this oure common Onion, called Cepa Escalonia, and wyn∣ter onion called Holekes, in greke , Id est Cepa fissilis. Siues also are thought to be a kinde of O∣mons. &c. Onyons are of grosse substance, whot and drye in the fourthe degre. They doe maturate, attract, & inflame, beinge layde to, they open the Hemorrhoides, and sharpen the syghte made dulle by grosse humores. Cera. WEre:Tyrhenica ce∣ra. uel pōtica. Li. 4. 7. &. 9. de sym. med. fac. & li. 8. de com. med. secū genera. (wherof Galen prayseth that for the best, whiche is called Tyrhenica, or Pōtica:) is of it self amonges thin∣ges concoctine, but weake. Yet hathe it a certayne whotte, and digestiue power, leanynge to the nature of Hony. And beinge put wyth other medicynes, bothe liquide and dry, it is to them as a body: or common receptory substance. Cerussa. IS of coolinge, dryinge, and astringente faculty, called in Greeke , and is made of Leade: by hanginge plates of the same ouer the bapor of vineger,Psimmythion. Gale. li. 9. de sym. med. fac. & li. 1. de cō. med. secun. genera. Sandyx. close coue∣red. It is vsed wyth profitte, and good effect, agaynst whot inflamed vlcers. Cerussa burned til it become in colour lyke Sandaracha, is therof called , & is therby the more sub∣till, but heateth not: so  kepeth the coldnes of Cerussae but lacketh the subtiltye therof. Chamaemelum. CAmomille is called in Greke .Anthemis. There be sher of three kindes.Leucāthemō. That is to saye , id est Chamaemelum Album,Chrysāthemō Heranthemō. . hoc est Chamaemelum Luteum. , Chamaemelum Purpurcum. The first hauing whyte floures. The seconde yelow. The thirde Purple.
They are whotte and dry in the firste degree,Galenus de sym. li. 6. consisting of tender partes, and haue tenuatyng, losing, and digesting facultye. Chelidonium. CAlled in Englishe Salendine,Chelidonion. or Swallow Wurte, in Greke , hoc est Hirundinaria,Hirundinaria. (so called ei∣ther because it bloweth, aboute the returne of swal∣lowes in the spring, and wythereth agayne at their depar∣ture: or else as Plinius wryteth, because the Swallowes did fyrste fynde and vse the same, to restore again their birdes to syghte, beinge made blinde:) is of heatinge, and scou∣ringe propertyes.calenus li. 8. de sym. medi. facultatibus. His roote is geuen (in Vino albo cum aniso,) to the Jaundies that come of the liuer obstructed: and be∣inge chawed, helpeth the tothake. The iuyce of the herbe is vsed in the eye, to sharpen the syght. And thus muche of Chelidonium Maius. For ther is also Chelidonium Minus: which (as it is sharper then the greater,) doth swiftly exulcerate. And the iuyce therof purgeth the head by the nosethrilles. It heateth and dryeth in the beginninge of the fourthe de∣gree, the greater onlye in the thirde. Wherfore that the herbe called of the Latin wryters and apothecaries Ficaria,Ficaria. & Scrofularia minor,Scrofularia minor. in Englishe Pyle worte, (whose Picture is vsually put, and that not of the worste Herbal wryters for this:) is not Chelidonium Minus, it is euident. Whose tem∣peramentes, (thoughe the description of Chelidonium in Diose¦corideDioscorides libro secundo. will suffer it in forme to agree:) are one to an other cleane contraries. Chirurgery. is sayd of euery arte, whose function consisteth, in manualle action or handye operation. But here is it to saye Curatio manualis: that is manualle or handy curinge.
Cicatrizatiua med. CIcatrix is the scarre or token, where a wounde, vl∣cer. &c. hathe bene, Wherof commeth Cicatrizo, id est ad Cicatricem perduco, to heale or brynge to askarre. And therof riseth Medicamina cicatrizatius, Cicatrisinge, con∣sounding, or skin bringing medicynes. Cicer. IS a flatuous pulse, of greate nurishment, mouynge the wombe, apte to ingender mylke, and to prouoke vrine & Menses.Eebinthos. Called in Greke , and is after Di∣oscorides of .iii. kyndes:Diosco. lib. ii. Cicer satiuū. Cicer arietinū Cicer sylue∣stre. namelye Satiuum, wherof afore. Areti∣num, whose decoction breaketh ye stone in the reines, (which is also of .iii. sortes,) and Syluestre. They are all whotte, mo∣deratlye drye, and partners of bitternesse. Wherby they purge the splene, the liuer, and the reines. They mundifye scabbes,Galenus, li. 6. de sym. med. fac. and lepryes. They also discusse the hardnesse of ye stones, and Apostemes vnder the eares, and doe heale in composition, maligne vlcers. Thoughe Cicer agreste, be so muche the whotter and the dryer then Domestico: as it is (then it) sharper, and bitterer. Cichorium. IT is playne by Dioscorides and others,Seris. that thys Greke worde ,Picris. is a name common and indifferente, bothe to Cichorium,Dioscori. li. 2. cum Galeno li. 8. de symp. nedi. faculta∣tibus. & li. 8. de compositi∣one medicaniē torum secun∣dum locos. (whyche is also called ,) and to Intubum, wyth also al theyr kindes. They are cold, somwhat bitter, and moderatly astringente: and therfore moste comodious for the stomache, and conueniente in chiefe for the heat of the liuer. Beinge eaten wyth vineger, they stay the belly. Intubum domesticum is colder then Agreste, whiche is cold and drye in the seconde degre, and bitterer then the tame, (and is surelye the righte Cichorium,) and therefore not at eache poynte so commodious to the stomache. They are (in Cata∣plasmatibus,) good medicynes for the gowte of the feete, and the inflaminations of the eyes. Theyr iuyces cum Cerussa,
& aceto, are for all griefes profitable, that nede coling. And yet that dothe it so moderatly, that euen to colde distempe∣ratures it hurteth not. Colla de corio. LAnfranke meaneth heare by Colla de Corio, that glewe that some (saythe Dioscorides) caule ,Xylocolla. and o∣thers ,Tamocolla. hoc est Glutē, Vel Glutinum taurinum,Gluten, Glutimm tau¦rinum. made of Bullockes hydes. The best is whyte, and shinyng throughe, but the blacker it is, the worse. It resolued in A∣ceto, deliuereth the skin of ring wormes, and lepryes. Bur∣ned blisters, are by washynge them in the decoction therof kept from breaking. And Cum Melle aut aceto, It is pro∣fitable for woundes, and consoundeth them. And as thys beinge made of the skinnes and eares of dyuers beastes, is of diuers sortes, and maye so varye in name: so is there glewe made of diuers sortes of Fyshes, whych is generally called , and may in names particularly vary as the other. They haue all drying faculty, but doe vary in heatynge and cooling, as the substances wherof they are made. Colocynthis. ,Cucurbita Syluestris, Diosco. li. 4. & Galenus de sym. med. fa∣culta. li. 7. called in Latine Cucurbita Syluestris, and of the Apothecaries Coloquintida, is whot and dry in the thyrd de∣gre. It purgeth vehemently, and aswageth the pain of the tethe: being plastred to the nauel, it kylleth wormes. And the iuyce therof grene, helpeth the Ischiada paine. Concauitas. Holownesse. Conglutinatiua medicamina. ARe medicynes that conioyn, and fasten together the sydes, or borders of woundes, vlcers. &c. Whych co∣meth of Conglutino, that is to fasten, or ioyne toge∣ther, as wyth glewe.
Contusio. Contusion is here brusing, of Contundo, to beat or bruse. Consolidatiuae medicinae. COnsolidatyue medicynes, of Consolido, to make fyrme and founde. Lanfranke sayth, that they are all one with Cicatrizasiues, because theyr effectes doe so well ac∣corde, in finishyng the cure of woundes, vlcers, fistules. &c. whyche saythe Galen they doe,De symp, li. 5 not by drawing and liquy∣fyinge the fleshe: but by hardeninge and dryinge the same. Coperosa. It is by Lanfranke all one with Vitriolo.Vitriolum. Loke there. Corallium. WHiche some haue called ,Dioscor. li. 5. Lithodrdron semeth (sayth Di∣oscorides) to be a shrubbe of the sea, which being drawn oute from the depthe: as sone as it commeth into the aer, dothe by and by congeyle and harden.But Brasa∣oius noteth it to obtayne the second de∣gre in heate, for it is bitter saythe he, and hath a certain sharpnesse. It groweth in Syra∣cusa, about the Promontory Pachyno. It is of diuers colours, (other saye kindes,) wherof the redde is the best. It coleth and bindeth moderatly, it taketh awaye the scarres of the eyes, and filleth holowe vlcers and woundes. It is agaynst reiections of bloude, verye efficacious and helpeth the dif∣ficultye of vrine: drunke also wyth water, it wasteth the splene. The blacke coralle (which resembleth a bushy tre,) called ,Antipathes. agreeth in vertues wyth the former, and is thought to differ only in Specie. Corrosiua medicamina. MEdicines that eat and consume suche partes as they are applied vnto, inducing an eschare theron: & com∣meth of Corrodo, properlye to eate or gnawe aboute.
Corrigiola. SO called of the Apothecaries, and of the Frenche men Corrigiole, is oure common knottgrasse, called in Greke ,Polygonon. in Latine Seminalis, and Polygonum mas. For Centum nodia,Seminalis. Sanguinaria, or Proserpinaca, Dioscorides and Galen make onlye two kindes, as Mas & Femina. Thoughe Pltius and other later wryters haue moe. Pylogonum after Galen is of suche a watrye coldnesse, that it cooleth in the seconde excesse,Galenus li. 8. de sym. med. fac. Cum Di∣oscoride. li. 4. or in the beginninge of the third: And ther∣fore beinge applied colde, is a remedye for whotte burning stomaches, for the tumor Erysipelas, and whotte inflamma∣tions. And farther it stayeth all sinxions, by the which rea∣son it semeth to haue drying power, and therfore is a good remedy to Ulcers, and Teters, and glueth together blou∣dy woundes. But the male sayth he (aledginge Dioscorides,) is in all these the more potente. Cortex pini. Loke at Pini Cortex. Cortex Olibani. Loke at Olibanum. Cotonea malus COtonea malus,Cydomos ∣lea. in Greke  is the Quince tree. Ouinces called Cotonea Mala, or Cydonia, are profi¦table to ye stomache, & moue vrine: but yt being rosted more gētly.Dioscor. lib. They are good for ye Dysenteria, for ye fluxe of the bely, & for rotten coughes: & that chiefly being raw. And ye iuyce of thē infused is geuen to the fluxions of the stomache & bely. Being boyled with hony they are the more plesant, bothe to the mouthe and stomache, but then they thycken lesse. They are put rawe in Cataplasmatis, to restreigne the belye, for heate of the stomache, vomites, inflammatyons, and harde Splenes.
Cotyledon. VMbilicus Veneris, (called in Greke , in La∣tine of some Acetabulum,Acetabulum. and in Englishe Penyworte.) Is coulde of temperamente, somwhat moyste, and fulle of iuyce.Li. 7. de sym. med. fac. It groweth on stone walles, and hathe after Galen, a light bitternes, and also a certayne obscure adstringente facultye. Wherby it dothe coole, repercusse, scoure away, and discusse. And therfore healeth wel Erisipelatous inflā∣mations, & Phlegmonus Erysipelata, and is to a whotte sto∣mache in a Cataplasma most commodious.Cotyledon a∣quaticum. An other kinde of this herbe ther is growinge in marishes, whyche is cal∣led Cotyledon Aquaticum, and is of nature very whotte, lyke to the whottest kindes of Ranunculus. Crassula. IS amonge the Apothecaryes of two kyndes: Maior for the whiche looke in Fabaria, and Minor whiche you shalle finde at semper Viuum. Crocus SAffron called in Greke ,Crocos. dothe heate in the se∣conde degree,Dioscori. li. 1. Galenus de sym. med. fac. li. 7. & de com, med. se∣cun. loca. Li. 2. 6. & .9. and drye in the first. Wherof the yelow∣est, and moste odorifferous is best. It mollifyeth and digesteth, namelye Erysipelatous inflāmations, rawe hu∣mores, and virulent affects. It moueth vrine and maketh a good coloure. beinge drunke cum Passo, it defendeth surfe∣tynge: and applied wyth womans milke, restraineth the fluxions of the eyes. Howe be it the continualle vse therof, and the smelling therto, hurteth the head. Cubebe. THe thin odoriferous frutes,Galenus de simplici. lib. 7 (tasted like the rootes of Phu,) whiche the Arabians calle Cubebas: is that which Galen calleth Carpesium, as Auicen, Aetius, Actuarius, & Ruellius, wryte, (whiche yet Leonicenus denieth, and others make therof a doubte.) And is saythe Scrapio, the frute of a tree, growinge beyonde the seas, whose leaues are sharpe lyke a speare. The frute is found among the leaues, round
and somwhat flat. Whihe when it is ripe, is of coloure re∣dishe. Wherin is found a trianguled grain. But this is by the iudgemente of Antonius Musa, the description of Myrtus Syluestris, and the frutes of the same dothe Scrapio call Cube∣bas,Carpesium. whiche differ from our vulgar Cucubis. Carpesium, saithe Galen is like to Ualerian, bothe in taste and facultyes, but hathe more subtiltye, and therefore clenseth, and scoureth more, the obstructions of the bowels, moueth vryne, and purgeth the renes, pained wyth stones. Cucumis asininus. THoughe ther be diuers kindes of Cucumers,Scys Agrios, Dioscorides li. 4. & Gale∣nus, li. 8. desym. med. fa∣cultatibus. (& they not wythout their singuler, & eximious vertues:) we haue here only to speake of the wilde, or leaping Cu¦cumer, called , & of the Apothecaries Cucumis asinus. It is very bitter, and beinge layde to wyth Barlye floure, breaketh euery old coughe. The iuyce of the leaues, instilled into the eares, helpeth theyr paines: and being ap∣plied with Terebinthin resin, it breaketh smal Apostemes. It easeth also the gowte, the totheache, & the Ischiada paine. The roote therof is of abstersiue and mollificatyue facul∣tyes. The iuyce wherof and the rynde, (which drieth more strongly,) geuen together doe purge Choler and Phlegme chiefly in Hydropicis, and putteth forth deiections, wythout hurting the stomacke. Out of the frute saith Dioscorides, is prepared a iuyce, (or else pressed out of the rotes & leaues saith Galen,)Elaterium. called Ela∣terium: whot in the seconde degree, and meruailous bytter. And therfore digesteth, moueth vryne, and healeth paynes of the head. And finallye it dothe all, that the herbe, rote or frute doeth, and that more strongly. Cucurbita. Called in greke ,Colochitha. Dioscor. li. 2. Galenus li. . de sym. medi. faultatibus. is a frute apt to be eatē raw, and is of diuers sortes, differing rather in forme then in fa∣culty. It is cold & moist in the second degre, & therfore stai∣eth thirst. The iuyce of gourds, mixed with the iuyce of ro∣ses, is profitable to ye pains of ye eares, caused of inflamatiō.
The slyces or peeces therof, are layde to the nodle of chil∣dren,Syriasis. againste the vehemente heate of theyr heades, called Syriasis. They coole also the inflammations of the eyes, and the gowte of the fete: and do helpe moreouer, the adustion of the skin, and the vehement heat of feuers. The iuyce al∣so drunke, cum Melle & Nitro, dothe easilye loose the bellye. Cupressus. CIpresse is a tree called in Greeke ,Cyparissos. in La∣tyne Cupressus, and of the Apothecaries Cypressus. It cooleth and dryeth as Dioscorides saythe. Libro. 1. The leaues and nuttes therof, are vsed for those purposes in medicynes. The leaues, braunches, and yōg tender nuttes of Cypres doe drye (saythe Galen) wythout great sharpnes or heate,De sympli. 7. and heale greate vlcers in harde bodies. Curcuma. AS saythe Syluius vpon Mesuen, is that wyth the Ara∣bian, swhiche the Grecians calle , the Latines Rubiam and Rubeam tinctorum,Erythrodanō. and we Ma∣der:Rubia. Thoughe some applye that name to Chelidonio, and o∣thers corruptly to Saffron. And as this hys assertion hath manye learned fautores, and therfore seemeth moste true: so is it verye lyke to be that whiche Lanfranke meaneth, for that it agreeth with his purpose, (Who putteth it a∣monge his consolidatiues,) whiche the other doe not. The roote of Rubia is sharpe, and bitter: and therfore ex∣purgeth the Liuer & the splene:Galemis de sym. li. 6. Prouoketh muche grosse, and sometime bloudye vrines, and scoureth meanlye. And therfore helpeth Morbum Regium,Diosco. lib. 3. or the yelowe Jaundyse. The Ischiada payne also, and loosed members. Defensiuae medicinae. DEfensiue medicynes (of Defendo to guarde, defend and prohibite.) Are of no smalle profite to the Chirurgien hys worke, whose vse and vtilityes
may by the circumstances (where so euer they are mencio∣ned) be easily gathered. Desiccatiua medicamina. DRying medicines (which commeth of Desicco to dry vp) serue often the office of Cicatrizatiues, loke there. Diminutio. Diminution or abatemente. Dipsacum. DIpsacum called also Labrum Veneris,Labrum Ve∣neris. and of the Apothe∣caries Carduus Fullonam, is called in Greke , and in Englishe Teasell.Dipsacos. Ther are two kindes ther¦of. The one the shermen occupye: The other whiche is cal∣led Dipsacum album, serueth after the minde of some,) chiefly for medicines. Radix dipsaci (saythe Galen) dryeth in the seconde degree,Galenus de sym. li. 6. and hathe not a litle abstersion. It healeth (by the testimo∣ny of Dioscorides,)Dioscori. li. 3. fistules, and chappes of the fundamente, beinge brused and boyled wyth wyne, til it be as thycke as were. And further is thoughte to be a remedye, for ryng∣wormes, and hanginge wartes. Dyscrasia. ,De sympto∣matum causis li. 2. id est Intemperies, (that is distemperance) is after Galen Aequalis, which is wythout payne, because ther is in the place affected, a desired nature, (for no bodye is by hys owne nature infested) or Inaqualis, whiche is when a bo∣dye is troubled bothe wyth heate and cold at once, or with drinesse and moisture,De methodo medendi, li. 7. 8. &. 9. more then to nature is conuenient. Whiche sometymes chaunceth, thoughe it seeme vnlyke: and howe greate so euer it be, so muche dothe it moleste. These are eighte in number, and may seuerally chance, to the eyghte symple members: requiringe also, so manye dif∣ferences of curation.De arte cura∣tiua, li. 2. And are eyther symple, whyche maye be. iiii. wayes, whot, cold, dry, or moiste, and maye be cured by theyr contraries: or compound as many wayes, as whot
and drye, whotte and moyste. &c. With these dispositions one part, or moe, or the whole body may be affected. Embrocatio. .Embroche. i. Infusio, Irrigatio, Inspersio, uelliquor e sublime defusus: a pouringe on, waterynge, sprinklynge of Oyle. &c. or let∣tynge it falle, on the affected parte. The late learned wry∣ters calle it in Latine Embrocha, wherof commeth Embro∣cation, as we calle it. Ephemera. WHyche (by changinge .. into .i.) hathe accustomablye bene wryten Ephimera:De differētiis sebriū, li. 1. 2. Is a feuer happeninge chieflye to melancholike persons,De methodo medendi, li. 8. 9. ac. 10. thoughe sometime it chaunce of rawnesse, to biüous temperamentes: springinge of a pro∣catarctike cause, (which is therof an inseparable token, yet therto not proper:)De arte cura∣tiua ad Glau∣conem. as wearinesse, drunkennesse, wrathe, furye, sorowe, and suche other vehemente affectes of the minde: and sometyme of bloude inflamed, or of the tumor Bubo: contynueth wyth a swete or pleasant heate, and incly∣neth with some swete dewe or good vapor: after ye whiche commeth healthe. The naturalle tyme of continuance, is one naturalie daye: wherin it is apte to be resolued, and therfore is called Febris diaria,Pyretos E∣phemeros, Febris diaria, and in Greeke . But thys end it taketh, by good gouer∣nance in the beginninge: whiche if it passe, it sometyme changeth bothe name and nature, and sometime only the name reseruynge the nature. And this state of Ephemera I iudge Lanfranke to meane where he speaketh of Ephemera continua. Erysipelas. :Galenus, de atrabile, de tumoribus praeternatur de meth. med. li. 14. de arte curatiua. li. 2. Is properlye an affecte of the skyn, sprunge of pure choler (beynge made whot;) of coloure yelow, or pale, or of bothe mixedly consisting: much whotter then Phleg∣mone,
and is therefore called Ignis sacer, uel S. Antonii, and of some Ignis persicus. whiche names I thinke in dede may all be applied, to it or hys kyndes. And as for Erysipelas nthunt, whiche Lanfranke mencio∣neth,Erysipelas Nothum. I take rather by hys owne narration, to be Inflamma∣tionem Erysipelatosā. For Erysipelas nothum, may come .iii. wayes, by receiuinge into it selfe by admixtion, anye of the other three humores in lesse quantitye: and hathe to name ,Erysipelas Phlegmon∣des. hoc est Erysipelas Phlegmonosum, uel inflammationis particeps▪ if bloude be therwyth mixed: quasi Erysipelas pituitosum, el oedematis particeps,Erysipelas oedemades Erysipelas . when Phlegme hathe a parte. Or , idest Erysipelas indurantum, aut duritiei consors, be∣cause it is harde, throughe the felowshyp of Melancholye therwyth. Euphorbium. :Euphorbion. Is the gum or teares of a tree, called Euphorbia, growinge in Lybia,Galen. ibro. 3. de symp. li. 6. de coned. secum. genera li. 3. de compmed. secum. loca. li. 1. found out (by the testimonye of Dioscori∣des,) in ye time of uba: and was called by that name, (as saith Ruellius) of his Phisicien. It hath a vehemente whotte, and burninge facultye and profiteth verye muche againste the Spasme, caused by the pricking of tendones. But for that oughte it not to be vsed to newe, (which is of colour cleare whyte,) for the vehemente heate therof▪ Neyther to olde, (which then wareth yelow or pale,) because it is numbred among suche symples, as doe soone lose theyr heat and ver∣tues. And yet continueth it .vi. yeres. Eunuchus. A man is called ,Eunouchos. idest Castratus, when he is gelded, and therthrough becommeth foggy or fatte. Excoriatio Excoriation: is a taking off ye skin, by aing, or blistering, which commeth of Excorio, to flea, or take away the skyn.
Exitura. Goe to Apostema. Faba. CAlled in Greke  coleth & drieth meane∣lye.Cyamos. Yet hathe the meale therof, some abstertion, as also the hulles haue not a litle adstringente fa∣cultye. To be eaten they are flatulēt, though they be neuer so muche sodden: harde to be concocted, and cause spittinges out of the brest,Dioscorid. li. 2. Galenus de sym. med. li. 7. & lunges: but they nurish much. In medicynes outwardlye, they drye vnhurtfullye: and be∣inge boyled in water, were often vsed of Galen, cum adipi suillo, to the goutes of the fete. The meale is incarnatyue, and is put to bruses, and in wounds of sinewes, cum Oxii∣lite, and to inflammations cum Polenta. And is in Cataplasma∣tis moste apte, for swellinges of the pappes and stones. And although many learned men by diuers reasōs (which I omitte) moued of late, doe doubte whether oure Beane maye be taken for Faba,Phasiolus. or for Phasiolo, or otherwyse howe: Yet nede no man doubt (in my iudgement) that Lanfranke as well as many other wryters bothe before him, and long tyme since: haue for Faba vnderstanded the Beane. Fabaria. THat whiche the Italians calle Fabariam, is thought of some to be Telephium,Telephium. and called of others Cymbalion, but neyther of bothe trulye.Cymbalion. The later wryters calle it Crassulam maiorem,Crassula ma∣ior. Licobus Manlius wyth dyuers other, Fa∣bam grossam, we (and also the French men,) cal it Orpin, and aunciently Lempke. whervnto some haue added, (as a kind therof,) the herbe that D. Turner, thinketh to be Caepea of Dioscorides, calling it Fabaria minor, or Fabaria aquatica, and eng∣lishly brooke Lempke.Crassula mi∣nor. But Crassula minor, is (by the commō consente, of almoste all the learned,) that kinde of stone
croppe, that groweth commōly vpon stone walles or hou∣ses, as Sedum dothe, hauinge round blunte leaues, like pud∣dinges or litle wormes, ful of iuyce, called also of the forme aforsayde, Vericularis, in Englishe Wormegrasse: wherof more at Semper Viuum. The later wryters, (for the olde make therof no menci∣on,) doe praise theyr Crassulam maiorem, for the greate efficacy that it hathe, incurynge woundes, in stoppynge of bloude, chieflye for inwarde woundes and vlcers: and for the mer∣nailous profit it geueth, in healinge ruptures. Farina Volatica. THe flyinge meale of the mylle, commonly called mill stuffe: beinge not one, but the meale commonlye of manye graynes together, muste nedes possesse suche facultyes,Galenus de a∣limentis. li. . ac de atenuan te Victus ra∣tione. as the composition maketh: (As wheat is of temperament whot in the firste degre, but neither moi∣steth nor drieth manifestly: And barlye cold and drye in the first degree. Yet dothe wheat flower manifestly moiste, as also Barly meale dothe, somewhat more then the grayne: thoughe Polenta doe drye muche more.) But Farina Volatica, is commonly colde and drye of complexion, and therfore is conueniently put into restrictiues, and consolidatiues. Felles auium. CHoler naturalle,Chole. or the gaule, called in Latyne Fel, and Bilis, in Greke : Is of all iuyces in euery li∣uing thinge the whottest. Whose heate is yet varia∣ble,Galenus de symp. med. li. 10. according to the creatures theyr temperamentes. For as the gaule of the Hogge, is of al other beasts the coldest: so is the gaule of the shepe, of the gote, of the Bull. &c. eue∣ry one in theyr degrees whotter. But the gaules of fowles, (which only Lanfranke hath, are bothe sharper and dryer, then of .iiii. foted beastes. Of
the whyche also, the galles of Hennes and Pertriches, are moste alowed in medicynes: The gaules of the Rite, of the Egle and suche like are  dinge sharpe and bitinge: yea of a grene coles, and somtime srte. And therfore Ga∣len doth warne the same, that Lanfranke neglecteth not: That is; to put vnto any of them the iuyce of Fenell, Mel, and Opobalsamum: whensoeuer you vse them to the eyes. Fermentum. CAlled in Greke :Zyme. is meanlye, whot, consistinge of subtille partes coparcioner of a certaine colde sharp∣nesse,Galenus de sym li. 6. & de comp. med. secun. gen. ra. li. 3. and also of heate, sprunge of putrefaction: and hathe in common, bothe the nature of salte and meale. Wherfore leuen, especially if it be olde draweth from the depthe grosse spirites and superfluous humores, and dyge∣steth them. But what nedeth here thus much, when Lan∣franke hathe so  spoken therof in hys antidotarye. Ficus. THe Figge (and also the tree,)Syce. is called in Greeke . The drye Figges haue a certaine subtiltye,Galenus de symp. li. 8. and doe heate in the firste degre, or in the beginnynge of the seconde: wherfore as well they, as theyr decoction, doe con∣cocte, and digest hard swellinges. But where concoction is chiefly required, they ought to be  with And where rather digestion, Horacea. Fatte fygges haue the more concoctiue power, and soure Figges doe bothe scoure more, and digest. Grene fygges are weaker, yet doe bothe ye moyst, (which hurt the stomache) & the dry, purge the belly. But the fluxe by them moued, is  stayed. Fistula. FIstula saythe Galen, (in his boke of tumores against na∣ture,) Sinus est angustus & longus. &c. A fistule is a strey∣ght and long bosome, like to other bosomes, whyche is muche drawen together, and after also agayne opened. That caue or holowe roome in the fleshe,Sinus. which I haue
Englished a bosome, is there also of Galen thus defyned. When rotten mater, dothe excoriate bodyes, and deuyde the conteniynge from the conteined, or subiect: And far∣ther, it beinge emptyed howe so euer, the partes ddente one from an other, can not recouer their pristinate consti∣tution: thys affecte is called Sinus. Whiche (if it be not with spede cured) dothe gather to it selfe Callum, and in tyme be commeth harde: and then can not be adglued to his partes subiecte. &c. And then doubtlesse it is no longer Sinus, but Fistula. Flammula. FLammula: is one of the kindes of Ranuculus, (wherof ther are very manye,) as are also the herbes, called of Lan∣franke and others, Apium risus, and Apium Haemorrhoidīt, and also Pes milui (as aboue vnder Apium:) and hathe so exce∣ding burninge, and blisteringe powre: (as haue also all the rest,) that it exulcerateth, the eraelles, but chiefly the ly∣er: and therfore is moste pernicious for sheepe, and other beastes feedinge theron.Lancola. It is called also of some Lanccola, and in Englyshe speare worke, for that the leaues therof, haue the forme of a speare head. Flos aeris. IS called in Greke :Chaluan∣thos. some men saith Dioscori∣des haue called it Clauorum Veterum, psegma, that is the scra¦ping, rubbish, or dust of old brasse nailes, or riuers. But a litle after shewing the makinge therof, he saythe it com∣meth of melted brasse, by pouring cold water theron, forth with as it runneth by certain conducts, out of the fornace. Wherby this Flos aris breaketh forthe, and congealeth in many small partes, whiche of theyr formes, some haue cal∣led litle graines.De symp, li. 9 It is by the sentence of Galen, of more sub¦til substance, then aes Vstum, or Squāma aeris: & doth vehemētly scoure, & also biteth much. Wherfore wyth collyries made thereof, the greate roughiesse or ruggednesse of the eye browes are taken away, & other superfluous excrscentes.
And although it be (as you see) moste euident, that Aeris go and Flos aeris are two thinges: yet maye the one in some cases, be circumspectly vsed for the other: after the myndes of diuers learned. Loke more at Viride aes. Foeniculum. FEnell,Marathron. Galenus de sym. med. li. 7 whyche the Grecians calle , doothe heate in the firste degre, and dry in the second, whyche eaten, or the seade drunke wyth barley water, sylleth the pappes wyth milke: Whose iuyce also healeth the web in the eye, and sharpeneth the sighte moste commodiously. The roote and seade of Hippomarathrian doe drye more then Foeniculum domesticū:Dioscorides. li. 3. and therfore seme to stay the belly, and also are able to breake the stone, and to heale the aundies. Foenum graecum. IS called in Greke .Telis. Dioscor. li. 6. de sym. li. 8. dt com. med. secū. gen. li. 7 de com. med. secun. locos, li. 4. The seade wherof beinge well sodden, discusseth and mollifyeth, chieflye wyth some kynde of fatnesse. The dicoction therof hath discussyue, and moderate heatinge propertye, and therfore loseth, and maturateth: and is wonte to mitigate manye paines. It is whotte saythe Galen in the seconde degre, and drye in the firste: Wherby it kyndleth, and augmenteth inflammaty∣ons. For the whiche cause Lanfranke hath frendlye war∣ned vs, to eschewe the layinge of Fenigreke, to whotte in∣flamed members. Yet doth it by his deuiding power, heale suche inflammations, as are more hard then whotte. Formica. OF this tumore called in Greeke ,Mymecia. li. 4. fen. 3. Aulcea, (of whome Lanfranke semeth to take his definition therof,)Primi tracta∣tus. saythe▪ it is a pustule, that commeth out, and causeth a pure aposteme, and is ambolatyue, Whiche per∣happes
vlcerateth, or els wyll be resolued: hauynge a sub∣stance,Li. 4. De me∣thodo medēdi. rounde lyke a lyttle warte, inflamed, and of coloure somwhat citrine. But Galen (rekening it with Veruca, A∣crochordine, and other lyke affectes of the (kinne,) teacheth how with a holowe quille to plucke it out. Affirming also, that some men at Rome in his tyme, vsed to byte them a∣way with their teeth. Neyther of the which wayes, can in any wyse be mete for pure apostemes, eyther vlcerated, or apte to be resolued. Of the lytle Ante or pismire,Myrne. called  doth this tu∣mor take his name, both in Greke and Latin. Of whose egges Lanfranke maketh an oyle, whose vse and vtilitie: there may you fynde. Fraxinus. IT should seme that Lanfranke, taketh the rynde of ash, to be of vertue lyke vnto myrtils, in driyng vp the bru∣sed places, kepyng the same from putrefaction: If it be not added by some other, for I haue perused some copies, whiche haue it not. But Ashe is vertuous againste the swolne splene, and hath dyuerse properties, agreyng with the Mirte tree,Melia. as in learned authors ye may farther reade both olde and new wryters.Fraxinus. The Ashe tree is called in Greeke , and in Latin Fraxinus. Furfur. BRan hath qualities variable,De symp. med. sac. lib. 5. after the kynde of grain that it cometh of. Howe be it, Furfur is commonly ta∣ken for bran of wheate: whiche is sayeth Galen, not so whotte, but dryeth more then the meale, and dothe som∣what scowre. Galbanum. GAlbanum, or as some wryte Chalbanum, after the Greke, which is ▪Chalbane. is sayth Dioscorides, the liquor of a tree, called Metopiū, of a coūtrey in Syria, where it groweth. Which name doth
the Gum also sometymes obteine: For the vnguente Me∣topion is so called, of the admirtiō of Galbanum therwith. And he sayeth that it is adulterate with hulled beanes, resin, & ammoniake.De symp. li. 8 De com. med. secun. genera. lib. 3. 5. &. 7. Diosc. lib. 1. cap. 6. & lib. . cap. 79. It ought to haue Similitudinem Thuris, uel Ammoniaci. It ta∣keth his name ab Albedine (sayeth Antonius Musa Brasanolus:) and therfore the whiter it is the better, and contrariwyse, the worse. Wherfore the Galbanum that we commōly haue, may well be iudged adulterate, or els the dregges & drosse of right Galbanum. It heateth after Galen, in the end of the seconde degree, or in the beginning of the thirde, and dri∣eth in the beginning of the second. Wherby it hath com∣forting, mollifiyng, and degestiue powre, aswageth paine, and is put in maturatiues: and in the prickes or hurtes of sinewes, it helpeth not a lytle to mitigate payne, if the ner∣ues be not bare, for it hath (as haue all other multificatiues) some putrefiyng propertie. Gallae. GAlla (saieth Dioscorides.) is a fructe of the Oke, wher∣of the lesse is rugged, without holes, and as it weare but half growne, & called , and is the best: The other (which is greter) is plain, light, & perced through with holes. They are to vs well knowne: as well by the vse of perfect Galles, which we receiue from other regiōs, as also that we see thē yearly growing plentifully in Kent: (which are ther of ye cōmō sort called oke appuls.) Though they be neuer indurate. And whether ther be seueral kin∣des of okes, wherof (as maister Turner reasoneth,) some beare Galles, and some not, I can not saye: For with vs, fewe okes for the most yeres are without. Howe be it, of maister D. Cunningham I am (through his most friendly conference) informed, that he hath by ob∣seruation founde on okes growyng about Norwich, (wher they are in certayne wooddes very plentifull,) three kindes of fructes: the Acorne, the Oke appull, and the Galle: All
the whiche I haue also by obseruatiō founde in Kent. The Acorne, and the Appull, growyng on the sprigges or bran∣ches, but the Galle, on the leaues of the tree. The Galle (saieth he) waxeth harde, and the outward couering wryn∣kled, and hath been by triall proued good (besyde the natiue adstringent vertue,) to make inke, and blacke colours. Af∣firming also, that the appul is harde in Julie, but hath gro∣wing on it a softe substance, not vnlike to mosse, inwardly more massy, & very stiptike: within the which also are those thinges found, that are in the Galle. Wherof also some old experte husbandmen of Kent, haue no smal opiniō to iudge by them the sequell of the yere. For they breaking them a∣bout their time of withering, doe finde in them some liuing thing. As sometime an Ante, wherof they iudge plenty of grayne: sometime a whyte worme lyke a gentill, wherof they prognosticate morreine in of beastes: And sometime a spyder, wherof they presage the pestilence, or some other lyke sicknes, to folowe among men. Whiche thing also the learned haue not omitted to note, though not in the same order. For Matthiolus vpon Dioscorides hath these wordes. Illud sibi peculiare maiores Gallae vendicauere,In prim. Dioscorii. lib. Cap. Ve∣ro. 124.  .1. Galla. ut quotais aut an∣none fertilitatem, aut sterilitatem, aut pestilentem auram praenūcient: Nam si rumpantur integrae (& quae perforatae non sunt,) aut muscam, aut araneum, aut uermiculum exponent. Si ruiscauolat futuri belli, si repit uermiculus,  penuriae: si currit araneus, pesulenti mor∣borum praesaguim est. Neque cuiquam mirum uideatur, quod ex omni∣bus Gallis ista oriantur animalcula: eterim ego huius rei saepius feci pe∣riculum, nullamque unquam sum cōsequutus prius nō perforatam, quae ex tribus animalibus unum intrase non contineret. Nam foramine con∣specto facile iudicium sumi potest, iam animal exiisse. Dicamus igitur li∣cet, quaercum & fructum, & animal gignere. Cuius rei haud ignari ue∣teres illi patres, non sine causa quercum dixerūt Ioui summo esse dicatā. Whiche may in effecte thus be Englished. This thynge haue the greatter Galles chalenged peculiar to the selues that they can yerely forshewe, eyther plentye or scarcitie of victualle, or a pestilentiall ayre: for if they be broken in sonde, namely those that are not already through pearced.
They confeine either a flie, a spyder, or a worme. If a flye be foūde, it is a prognostication of warre to folow: if a cre∣pyng worme, of the scarcitie of victuall: but if a runnynge spyder, of pestilente sicknesses. Neyther let any man mer∣ueile, that out of Galles those little liuyng thynges should apeare: for this thyng haue I often proued, neither did I euer fynde any, (being not before pearced wt holes,) which conteyned not within it selfe one of the fornamed ani∣malles: for the hole being sene, it is easy to iudge that they are nowe gone forth. Wherfore we may saye, that the oke bryngeth forth frute, and lyuing thynges. Of the whiche, the olde fathers not being ignorant, haue sayde (not with∣out cause) that the oke was edicated to the hyghe Ju∣piter. Galla (sayeth Galen) which is called Omphacitis,De simpliciū facultatibus lib. 7. is a sower medicine and of substance for the most part earthy & colde: wherby it drieth and repercusseth fluxions, constreyneth & fasteneth lose and feble partes. It coleth in the seconde de∣gree, and drieth in the thyrde. The other (whiche is great, yelow, and softe) drieth also, but that so muche the lesse as it hath lesse sower or sharpe qualities. Gangraena. GAngraenae sayeth Galen,De tumo. prae¦ter nat. & de arte curatiua. lib. 2. are suche mortifications not yet absolute, as are made by the greatnes of inflāma∣tions: and are raysed when bloud boyling whotte, an∣nexed to inflāmations, burneth the skynne. Looke more at Aschachilos. Garyophilli. GAryophylli,. (others write Caryophylli,) in Greke : so called, sayth Paulus Aegi neta, quasi folia nucis habentes, that is, hauinge the leaues of nutte trees, odoriferous, and of very good taste. This
hath neither Dioscorides nor Galen: but Plinie maketh mē¦tion therof, saiyng. There is a frute in India called Garyophi∣lon, lyke a pepper grayne, but greater and britler, of colour reddishe vpon blacke, headed like a nayle, with foure den∣ticles spredde lyke a starre: within the whiche lyeth bow∣lyng out a litle rounde button. The tree is of heyght three cubites, hauing litle thick leaues, & a broade woody roote. Cloues are whotte and drie in the thirde degree, very aromatike, and haue almoste the vertue of pepper, but dooe hurt the stomache lesse, & are good against poyson. In lynimentes they haue vertue to consume, dissolue, comfort sinewes, and asswage payne, specially commyng of colde matter. Gentiana. GEntian is an herbe:Gentiane, lib. 3. called of the Grecians , whose first inuention as fayeth Dioscorides, is assig∣ned to Gentius king of Illiria. The roote therof is whot and drie,Galenus De simp. med. li. 6 as the adstringencie and extreame bitternes ther¦of witnesseth: And therfore doth moste effectually purge, extenuate, and scoure away. Wherby it helpeth obstructi∣ons, and is drunke In Vino, cum ruta & pipere againste the daunger of venemous woundes: and is somtymes put into fistules, and hollowe vlcers, to enlarge their orifice. Gingiber. Gingiber is wrytten otherwyse Zingiber, looke there. Glandulae. GAlenus in lib. 13. &. 14. De methodo medendi, defineth Glan∣dules & their natures double, saiyng. Some Glandu∣les there are, placed in the myddes of the vesselles, and of their branches, to defende their strengthe, whose vse
is not great. Other there are (whose vse is greater,) made to receiue, and make spitle, milke, seade, &c. (as thou maiest farther see in myne anatomy, neither are they otherwyse cured, when they are affected Cum scirrho, then other partes of the body: But the other require the parte, with also the corruptiō to be taken vtterly away. They are partes most apte to receiue fluxions, as well for their weaknes and lo∣sens of substance, as also because among all other partes, thei haue (except the alteratiue) almost no natural facultie: and therfor are most swiftly taken, of the tumores Bubones. Glndulae in Lanfranke, are to be vnderstanded of the first sorte of Glandules conteined in the vessels, being affected of Phygethlor▪Scrophula. but chiefly after his minde, of humores phleg∣matike.Stra. For if by melācholy they become scirrhous, he cal∣leth them Scrophulas,Cboras. but Galen nameth them Strumas, and in Greeke . Glycyrrhiza. , whiche is Radix dulcis, and we call it lique∣rice,Galenus De simp. med. li. 6 After the Apothecaries who call it Liqueriti, is indu∣ed with a certeine warming propertie, and yet more colde then man his nature: and muste needes also be moderatlye moyste, as it is moderatly sweete. And therfore to staye thyrste it is moste mete,Diosc. lib. 3. and smotheth or softeneth the roughnes or ruggednes, as well of the bladder, as of the sharpe artery. It is conuenient for the heate of the breste, stomache, and liuer: And drunke Cum passo, healeth the pi∣nes of the renes. The pouder of the roote also dried, hea∣leth sayeth Dioscorides, the webbe of the eye. Grana paradisi. GRana paradisi, are commonly taken for Cardamomo, and are so vsually solde of the Apothecaries.Cardamomū. Not with∣standynge others emōg the learned, thinke the com∣mon
lyttle graynes, to be Grana paradisi. It is a spice of whotte & drye nature, & odoriserous of smel. Whiche I could neuer fynde so perfectly descrybed of any man, as of Rychard Eden, where he wryteth of the twoo fyrst viages▪ of our Englyshemen to Guinea: saiynge that our men might haue ladē their shippes with those graines, by the ryuer Seo. These Graynes (sayeth he,) growe and come forth, in a fruyte muche lyke a fygge▪ whiche (when they are gathered,) are as redde as bloude. They growe not paste a foote and a halfe, or twoo foote from the gro¦unde: And as the fygge hath in it many graynes, so hathe this fruyte. Through the whiche the inhabitantes there make holes, wherin they put strynges, and so hange them to drye, that the sayde Graynes may he the more easely taken out: as all seades and graynes, may moste aptlye be taken from theyr coddes vessicles or eares, when they be very drye. These last haue been taken for Cardamamo minori, and the former solde commonly for Granis paradisi,) for Car∣dimo maiori. And this is the opinion of the later Phisiti∣ens: for Brasauolus noteth three sortes of seedes, which haue been of olde among the Apothecaries,Meligetta. Nigell trina. vnder this name Cardamomum. The one is the trianguled grayne, whiche they sell as is aboue sayde, bath for Cardammo, and  p∣ralisi. The seconde he calleth Meligettan. The thyrde (sayeth he is Nigella Cirrina. But it is the opinion of some learned men, grounded vpon dyuerse reasons, that Cardamomum of the auncientes, is to vs vtterly vnknowne. Gummi Arabicum. GVmmi Arabicum founde (and also so called) of the Arabi∣ns, because it is there moste plentifull, and also Bii∣lonicum & Srasenicum, vpō lyke reason, is ye teares of the thorn tree called Acacia & Spina Aegyptia, described befor in ye
letter A) and therfore may it be called Gummi Acaciae, or Gum∣mi Spinae Aegyptiae, Though the Gumme that is vnder that name commonly solde, be the gumme sometime of the bit∣ter almonde tree, whiche is nexte of goodnes to the beste, sometyme of the Cherry or prime trees, and sometyme of the Elme: and this is the cause why it is foūde of so diuers colours. It is (as the tree wherof it cōmeth) of cooling and drying facultie, without sharpenes or byting: And therfore a commodious lenitiue medicine, for the grefes and peines of the eyes. Hammoniacum. Is to be sought at Ammoniacum. Haematites. , idest lapis sanguinaria, in English the bloud stone▪ So called lyeth Galen, of the lykenes in coloure that it hath with bloude:Gal. De symp. lib. 9. beyng of so muche coldnesse, as it hathe adstriction. Wherfore it is founde a medicine profitable to the eyes: and may be vsed alone, to the roughnes of the eye browes, if it come of inflammatiō. And thus muche of his faculties efficient, whiche are by reason knowne. For the faculties that it hath after the propertie of the whole substance, are neyther knowne by reason, nor methode, but onely by experience. Wherby it stayeth the flure of bloude, the wounde beyng onely touched therwith. It is conuenient for all vlcers, and the poulder therof represseth excrescentes. Hedera. IUye (of the Grecians ,) is after Dioscorides of .iii. kindes,Cissos, lib. 2. namely Candida (which Plinie calleth foemina,) Ni∣gra, (of Plinie mas,) and Helix. Wherof the white reioy∣ceth
in watery places, the blacke to growe vpon walles or trees, and Helix barenly crepeth on the grounde. It consisteth (by the sentence of Galen) of contrary qua∣lities:De symp. lib. 7. as of a certeyne adstryngente substance, whiche is colde and earthy, hauing also some sharpnes: whiche to bee whotte euen the taste proueth. And farther if it be grene, it obteineth a warme and watery substance. The grene leaues therfore boyled in wyne, doe glewe together and brynge to healynge, greate and maligne vl∣cers, and vlcers made with fyre: though by experience, we see them also attractiue, and apte to kepe long open, suche sores as we would not haue healed. And being boyled with vyneger, they helpe the sycke of the splene. The teares or gumme therof kylleth nittes, and maketh balde, and is so whotte, that it priuily burneth. Whiche yet I haue found, to be a meruaylous desiccatiue, and with oyle to asswage peyne. Hermodactylus. THough that kynde of ,Ephemeron. (so called because it kylleth in one daye hym that eateth the roote ther∣of) that is also called ,Colchicon. (of the contrey Colchis, where it did plentifully growe) haue emong many learned men, borne the name of Hermodactylus, and may be one of the worste or nocyue kyndes of the same, accordyng to the descriptiōs of Aiicenna, Serapio, Mesues, & other Arabiās: yet it is not the Hermodactylus that is solde of the Apothecaries. First because the roote of this is rounde on al partes, black or reddyshe, and when it is drye rugged, or wrynkled: whose stalke goeth forth at a rifte or creaste, in the vpper or smallest ende. That of the Apothecaries is rounde on the one syde, and flatte on the other: whyte, and smothe, and without rifte: but hath on the flatte syde, a certayne sha∣lowe dinte, as it weare a cloue cleauynge to the syde of a stalke. Wherin it very well agreeth, with Hermodactylo,
as Paulus Aegineta descrybeth it. The same also doth Cordus inferre, because Colchicum strangleth, whiche Hermodactyli doe not. Who affirmeth Hermodactylus to growe in mowne medowes, and sonny places. Mesues makyng twoo kyndes of Hermodactili, sayeth. It is the roote of an herbe that groweth on the hylles, wherof the one is of a fynger length, the other rounde: and this is eyther whyte, redde, or blacke. Amonge the whiche, that whiche is white, bothe within and without, is the beste: as the redde and the blacke are euell. Whiche (sayeth Scrapio) doe strangle, and therfore may one of these be that kynde of Colchicum, or wylde saffron, that groweth in certeyne gardyns in Englande. But who so woulde note more exactly, Mesues order of deuision of Hermodactilus, may beholde it thus gathered. Of Hermoda∣ctilus ther are two kyndes. Long, as of a finger lengthe. Roūd wher∣of the sortes are three, dif∣feryng in co∣lours, as 1 Whyte wherof ye 2 Redde. 3 Blacke. Best is 1 Uery whyte both within & without. 2 Compacte. 3 Meane betweene harde and softe. All others howe muche so euer they wante of the for∣named tokens, so much are they inferior in goodnes to the beste. Bothe the whiche are euell.
It is whotte and drie in the begynninge of the seconde degree. whose moisture is excrementous, fatulente, ab∣horfull, and hurteth the stomache: chiefly when the excre∣mentes of other partes flowe into the same. It draweth principally from the ioynctes grosse phlegme: And therfor helpeth the gowte, and other paynes of the lymmes, either taken in, or layde to in Cataplasmate,Sperma quo∣que auget. cum uitellis ouorum, farina hordeacea, uel mica panis. It maketh fatte, and is proffitable for vlcers: in that it consumeth the putrefied fleshe, and wy∣peth away the filthines in thē.Hermodacty∣los. It is called , Quasi mercurii digitus, that is, Mercuries finger, or els as o∣thers wyll Hermetis digitus. Herpes. ,De methodo medendi. lib. 1. 2. &. 4. is one of the tumores against nature, that are re∣ferred to Erysipelas, and an affecte or exulceration of the skynne, springing, (by the testimony of Galen) of the same cause: as of bilious excrementes, setlyng in some place. Sa∣uing that the humore therof, is thinner and subtiler then of Erysipelas, wherin also they differ. It is sayeth he, of two kindes.De tumorib. praeter naturâ Herpes exe∣dens. For when the substāce is grosse, it perceth through the skynne with his vlcerations, euen to the fleshe, and is called Herpes exedens: whiche ryghtly in qualitie resembleth the serpente, (wherof it hath his name) in crepyng, and de∣uouring the partes adiacent, and is of the kynde of Erysipe∣las vlcerate. But when it is ingendred of choler not so whotte and sharpe, or (as to some it semeth not all without reason) myngled with some phlegme: It maketh no vlcer, but litle pustules like the graines of Milium, and therfore is called Herpes miliaris:Herpes mi∣liaris. Whiche yet within a while doe dege∣nerate into vlcers. And in his second booke De arte curatiua, he mentioneth a thirde kynde after Herpes exedens, saiyng. But if the humores be thinner, and doe only burne the vp∣per parte of the skynne: it also obteineth a name, and is symply called Herpes.
Hordeum. BAley is called in Greeke , and therof are there dyuerse kyndes.Crite. As Hordeum distichum, wiche is oure sommer barley. Hordeum tetrastichon, bigge barley. Hor∣deum polystichum, of some wynter barley. Hordeum Hexastichū, whiche D. Turner calleth duche barley.Gyocrithō.  .i. Hor∣deum nudum, uel corticis expers, naked barley, &c. Whiche far∣ther to dilate, here is neyther place nor nede. Barley coleth and drieth (after Galen) in the first degree,De alimentis. lib. 1. wherin it differeth from wheate, and hath also a little ab∣stersion,De sym. medi. fac. lib. 7. and in meates excelleth beanes: because it is not wyndy. Barley bread nourysheth lesse then wheate, but prouoketh the belly more: and is vnto men of small or no exercyse, of large nuryshement. So is also Polenta, which is of nature more drye: although Ptisana, doe naturally moyst. And in Libro de attenuante uictus ratione, he saieth: that emong all other breades, barley is vnhurtefull to a sclender diete. Barley meale outwardly resolueth, mollifieth, and matu∣rateth, chiefly whotte affectes, and cholericke tumores. Hyosciamus. HEenbane is called in Greeke ,Hyosciamos. in Latin Hiosciamus, Apollinaris, Faba suilla, & Altercum: of Apuleus Symphoniaca: of others also Fabulum, and Eabulonia: and of some Cassilago, or Caniculata: of the Apothecaries Iusquiamus. Of Henbane there are three kyndes: the blacke, the ye∣lowe, and the whyte. The blacke is our common kynde: Whose seade causeth madnes, and is not allowed. The ye∣lowe groweth in my garden, the seade wherof was geuen me, of maister Roger Lee Doctor of phisicke: which is bet∣ter then the blacke, but yet to be eschued as hurtfull. That whose flower and seade is whyte, I neuer sawe as yet. It is only allowed holsome, beymg colde in the thyrde
degree,Galenus De stp. med. li. 8 and is a narcotike, or stupefactiue medicine: asswa∣gyng peyne, and represseth the inflammations of the eyes: helpeth the gowte,Diosc. lib. 4 and asswageth the swellynges of the breste and stones. Hyposarca. ,Anasarca. Gale. De dig∣noscendis pul∣sibus. lib. 4. called also Sarcites, Hyposarca, and Leucophleg∣matias, is that kynde of Hydrops, whiche (spreadyng it selfe larglyer then the other two Ascites and Tympa∣nites,) possesseth the whole habite of the body, with muche moisture:De pulsuum causis. lib. 4. though the other two dooe yet sende affectes, to other partes then they possesse, whiche is the belye. As to the great arteries, Ascytes, colyng, stretching and aggraua∣tyng them, and Tympanites, filling thē with wynde. Whose coates Anasarca doth lose & mollifie. The Hydropsy cometh diuerse wayes. As by the obstruction and refrigeration of the lyuer, or by Scirrho therin: by the faultes of the breste the splene and the renes, of the gutte Pylorus and Mesente∣rium, or of some one of the small guttes: of the immoderate fluxe of the Haemorrhoides, or of Menses, and of the suppression of the same: and sometime of the vntymly drynkyng of cold water, coolyng the lyuer: Without some vnnaturall affec∣tion wherof, there can spryng no Hydropsie, sayeth Galen. De locis affectis. lib. 5. cap. 6. Icteritia. (whiche taketh that name of the yelowe byrde Icterus,Icteros. called also Galbula) is called in Latin Arquatus,Arquatus▪ Aurigo. Morbus re∣gius. Aurigo, and Regius morbus: in Englysh the Jaundies, or Guilsouth. Whiche is when Choler natural, (through the abundance of the same, or the whotte distemperance of the lyuer and veynes,Galen. de sy∣mptō. causis, lib. 1. or through the obstruction or inbecilitie of the bla∣der of Choler, for then it is mixed with the bloud) is poured out ouer al the body: in so much that it occupiyng the eyes,
A Resolutyue Vnguente. Reci. Olei Chamaemelini vel Anethini drachmas sex. Cerae drachmas duas. Pinguedinis Anatis & Galinae, ana drach∣mam vnam. Seminis Anethi. Florum Camaemeli puluerizatorum, ana drachmas duas. Fiat vnguentum. An excellente Diachilon. VUhiche resolueth coulde maters, and mollifieth harde maters. Rec. Lithargirii minutissimè triti, libram vnam▪ Olei. Chamaemelini. Anethini. Liliacei. Yrmi, ana drachmas .viii. Mucaginis. Altheae. Seminis Lini. Foenograeci.
Ficuum siccatarum. Passularum enucleatarum. Succi yreos. Succi Scillae Oesypi. Collae de corio, ana drach duodecm. Terebinthinae, vncias tres. Resinae Albae. Cerae Citrinae, ana vncias duas. Let all these be boyled together, till the substance incor∣porate, become harder then an Unguente, and softer then an Emplaster. Yet it is to be noted, that sometimes, althoughe by re∣soluynge the mater, it be also deminyshed: the residue ne∣uerthelesse, is ouer muche indurate. And then thou muste mollifye it, whyche thou mayste very well doe, by washinge the member lightlye and softlye, cum Aqua calida, vntyll it waxe redde, and after by anoyntinge it wyth an Unguene made, ex Olei Veteris, partibus quatuor, & Cerae par∣te Vna. An other Resolutiue, verye profitable for thys purpose, whyche mollifieth Scrophules and Glandules, and prepa∣reth them to resolution, made thus. Rec. Olei veteris, libras duas. And put it in a glasse cum radicibus Altheae, & Cucumers ∣sinini mundatis, ana Vnciam Vnam. and putte the Glasse, wth the Oyle and rootes, in an other vessell of Water, suffe∣rynge
sinewes, &c. It purgeth with hony, drye vlcers, and filleth them: so doth it also fistules, and hollowe vlcers. Lacertus. LAcertus, or Lacerta, is a worme or litle beaste, hauynge foure feete, and formed in body like our efte or ewght (which therfore some iudge a kynde of the same,) of coloure in germany ashye or blacke, and of a spanne or of a foote lengthe at the moste. In Italy longer, of coloure grene, & venemous, but yet moste frendly to man, (whose face he delyghteth to beholde,) enemy to serpentes: and for man his cause, (whose spittle he wyll lycke when he fyn∣deth hym fleaping, vsing it as a defence) he fighteth against serpentes, and therfore obteyneth worthilye the name .Ophiomachos Almanzoar, describinge the same medicine for the eyes, that Lanfranke dothe, hath Stercus magni lacerti, that is ye dunge of the great Lizarde: For they are of twoo kyndes. As a greater nowe expressed, & a lesse, whiche is called of some Stellio, because it hath spottes on the skynne lyke to starres. The dunge of the Lizarde, is a medicine proffitable for the eyes, as to sharpen the syght, & to take awaye the itche, and the webbe in the same. The head of the Lizarde, (as sayeth Dioscorides) brused and layde to,Lib. 1. draweth out all prickes or stynges fixed in the flesh, & taketh away spottes, and the wartes called Formicas, .i. Ve∣rca pensilis. and Acrochordonas. The ly∣uer of the same put into holowe teethe, taketh away their peynes. The Lizarde broken, and layde to the stroke of a Scorpion, easeth the same. Lac muliebre. MYlke called in Greeke ,Gala. (whose substance primi∣tiue is bloude:) is of temperament, meane betweene bloud and phlegme, consisting of three substances dyuerse,
and in effectes contrary.Galenus De sanitate tuda lib. 1. &. 5. Namely whayey, whiche is colde and moiste, and loseth the bely: Curdie, whiche is tough, and byndeth the same: and fatty, wherof butter is made, and vsed (sayeth Galen,De masmo. Lib. 3. De alimentis,) in colde contreis for oyle.De methodo medendi, lib.  Of qualities as variable as the bodies are dyuers, wherin it is made: As cowe mylke is most grosse and fatte, (whiche healeth the Dysenteria.)De sym. med. lib. 4. &. 10. Camels mylke leane and moste liquyde. But of all the thynnest and most whayey is asses mylke:De compo. se∣cu loca. lib. 4 And therfore to drye affectes is moste conue∣nient: The meane betwene these holdeth goates mylke: whiche taken without hony is perylous,De Theriaca ad pisonem. because if it con∣geyle in the stomache it suffocateth. Galenus De Euchymia, & Cacochymia) Thicker then whiche is shepes mylke, &c. Mylke generally nurysheth, maketh good iuyce, & pur∣geth the bely moderatly, is profitable for the breste, and healeth the vlcers of the lunges: but to the head that is not very fyrme it is vnprofitable, and the vse therof to the teethe very hurtfull. But of all other womans mylke, (as of the same nature) is to vs most famyliar, and to phthisick persons an excellent medicine: conuenient also for sharpe and bytyng fluxions of the eyes, and inflammations of the same, and to the vlcers of the panicle Cornea. It mitigateth the inflammations of the mouthe, throte, and Vuula, and ea∣seth the squincie: and is geuen as a helpe to them that haue taken corrodyng venyms. The best mylke is very whyte, and without sensible temperament: that is hauing no odor or little, and the same pleasant: but hauing in taste some swetenes, lyke holsome bloude. As that which is in any wyse thervnto contrari, is alwayes euell. Lactuca. is of kynde firste double,Thridax. as Lactuca satiua, or Hor∣tensis, yt is gardin letuce: And Lactuca syluestris, called grene Endyue. Of the first there are dyuerse kyndes, (as there is
also of this:)Dios. lib. 2. as Crispa, so called of his wryncled or curled leaues,Galen. de ali∣mentis. lib. 2. Rotunda takyng his name, of the rounde leaues. and Capitata: that is cabbege letuce, of his headlike roūdnes or Cabbeginge.De attenuate uictus ratiōe. Letuce cooleth and moisteth by the testimony of Galen, according to the temperament,De locis af∣fectis lib. 3. & de symp. med. facul. li. 3. et. 6 of fountaine water, and therfore is commodious to whotte inflammatiōs, and Ery∣sipelata of the worste kyndes. It cooleth the stomache▪ and stayeth thyrste: and therfore sayeth Galen, that he vsed it in his youth to coole with, When choler infested his sto∣mache, And in age, as a helpe against wakfulnes: For the seade prouoketh sleape, and stayeth Geniturae profluuium. The iuice therof neyther resisteth concoction, nor yndeth the belly: But the large drynkyng therof is very dangerous. Laudanum. LApdanum as we barbarously vse to call it, is called of Dioscorides in Greke , of Galen , and in Latin Ladanum:Ladnon. but more commonly of the Apo∣thecaries Laudanum.Cisthos. Galen affirmeth Ladanum to be whotte beyonde the first degree,De symp. me. lib. 7. of a subtyle substance: and hathe vertue to mollifie, resolue moderatly, to digeste, and con∣cocte harde thynges, to amende the deformitie of scarres, to disolue the duration of the matrixe, and to amende other vices therof. It stayeth the faulyng of heare, but yet is not able to heale Alopias, or Opthalmia, which require stronger medicines. Being drunke with wyne, it stoppeth the belly and prouoketh vryne.Dioscor. lib. 1. cap. 10. It is the Gumme of a certeyne shrubbe or bushe, called Cistus,Ledon. or , whiche maister Turner called therfore Ci∣stus ladanifera: and is gathered by drawynge ropes, or suche like thyngs,De com. med. secun. loca. li. 1 through the bushes: or els as saith Galen from the beardes of gotes, which they haue gathered by feding among the same.
Laurus. THe Laurell or Bay tree,Daphne. is called in Greeke , and in Latin Laurus.Dioscor. lib. 1. The leaues wherof doe vehe∣mently heate & drye, but the beries more vehemently: and therfore doe helpe the diseases of the lunges, caused of colde and reumatyke matter, paynes of the eares also, and deaf∣nes.Galenus de symp. lib. 6. The rynde of the roote, is neyther so sharpe nor so whotte, but more bitter, and hath also some adstriction: and therfore is with swete wyne profitable to the breste, and breaketh the stone. The leaues doe sensibly bynde, offende the stomache, and prouoke vomite. Brused and aplyed, they helpe the stingyng of waspes or bees: And Cum polenta & pane, asswage inflammations. Other kyndes of this there are, as Nerium, Laurus Alexan∣drina, and Daphnoides, whiche we call laurialle: but because they are for the more parte rare vnto vs, and not seruyng to any thyng wrytten in this boke: I here omitte to speake any more of them. Lenticula. ,Phacos. Latine, Lens & Lenticula, and in Englyshe Lentilles,Phace. Is a kynde of pulse. whose grayne sayeth Fuch∣sius,Galen. de ali∣mentis. lib. 1. &. 2. is of all other the leaste: of temperamente meane be∣twene whotte and colde, but drie in the seconde degree. Of substance grosse, earthly, austere, and myghtly adstringēt. Wherfore both their substance and seconde decoction,Euchymia & Cacochymia. sup∣presseth the fluxe of the belly, and comforteth the stomache: though ye iuice yet be losing,De sym. lib. . & the first decoction doe purge the same. It is of lytle iuice, and of nurishment grosse and melancholyke, to melancholyke persones dangerous, and bredeth on them Elephantiasim, & Cancrum, and dulleth the syghte.
Lepra. LEpra sayeth Auicen, is as it weare Cancer comtis toto corpori, that is a Cancer common to al the body: wher∣in he sheweth him him selfe to meane,Elephas. Elephantiasis Leontiasis. . i. Morbus foe∣dus. that lothly af∣fecte, whiche the Grecians call , and some , of the greatnes of the disease, ma∣kyng the skinne lose, rugged, and of diuerse colours lyke the skynne of the Elephante: and is of Galen thus descri∣bed. Elephas sayeth he, is a melancholicke affecte, hauing his beginnyng of melancholicke bloud:Lib. de tumor praeter natu. & de sympto. causis. lib. 3. . but in processe of tyme, blacke choler superaboundeth that bloud in quantitie, and then doth the body stynke, and semeth filthie, deformed, and the fleshe blacke, and sometymes is exulcerate. Of the same kynde also is Lepra graecorum, and commeth of a lyke cause, but is more common to the skynne, & is not alwayes so vniuersall: Whiche some (of the lykenes and communi∣tie of the one with the other) haue called ,Psora. id est scabiem, but not without confusion. Guido de Cauliaco, and others of that age, haue rekoned foure kyndes of Lepra, for the which resorte to Serpigo. Leucophlegmatia. , is that kynde of the Hydropsie that is called also Anasarca, Sarcites, and commonly Hyposarca, looke there. Lilium. ,Crinos, Crinō Leirion. Latine Lilium, atque Rosa iunonis, wherof Dioscorides, Lib. 3. mencioned two kyndes: as Album, and Croceum. The leaues & rootes of the white lilyes (for that chiefly is vsed in medicine,) doe drye, digeste, and moderatly scoure away: and therfore Cum oleo rosato are
good for burnynges of fyre. The floures therof consiste of a mixed temperament: as of a substance partly subtil, part∣ly earthy, partly watery, and that temperate. Wherof it foloweth the oyle made of them, to bee of digestinge and mollifiyng facultie, without byting: and therfore is moste conuenient, for the hardnesses of mother, inflammations of the coddes, and apostemes. Linum. FLaxe,Linon. whiche is named in Greeke , (as well as the seade therof called ,Linospermon. id est semen lini,) is of tem¦perament whotte in the firste degree, and meane be∣tweene drye and moyste, obteininge the same faculties that Fenigreke hath, and is in meate flatuous: yet doth it scatter and deuide, and with boyled hony mollyfieth bothe inwardly and outwardly harde inflammations: and be∣yng rawe, taketh away the frecles and litle swellynges of the face. Their brothe leadeth out excrementes, and profi∣teth as well against the gnawyng of the guttes, as also a∣gainst inflammations and other diseases of the mother. Lithargyrus. DIoscorides in his fifte boke and .62. Chapiter (treating of Lithargyros,) noteth three kyndes therof. One to be made of a certeine leady sande in the fornaces, an other of siluer, and the thyrde of leade. We of a common opinion also recken three sortes, as of leade, siluer, & of golde: which two laste are indede both one thing: (though we haue of a long tyme by reason of the name) though Lithargyrum aureū to come onely of golde.Lithurgyros, For , is by common con∣sent interpreted Spuma argenti, and commeth thus: as out of Brasauolus, and Matthiolus, I haue gathered. When the finers of metalles (hauing taken a masse of siluer out of his owne veyne,) woulde trie it from the me∣talles,
myxed therwith, (whiche are lead and brasse:) They put it into a certeyn fornace, being first wrapped in plates of lead, or into muche lead already melted, in the fornace or meltyng pitte: whiche is prepared of ashes after their ma∣ner. On the whiche (beinge melted together) ryseth a cer∣teyne spume, whiche is gathered together with an Iron instrument, and is called Spuma argenti. And the same (if the greater store of brasse therin doe geue vnto it a goul∣den coloure,)Chrysitis. is called , and vulgarly in Latin, by the imitation of the greke, Lithargyrum aurcum, and that only for the coloure: and yet is it not to be doubted, but that of goulde there ryseth also a Spume in the triyng, whiche I thynke may moste worthily be called Lithargyrum auri. An other friuolous varietie of opinions there is, about the sole or symple namyng of the same: for the common opinion is that Lithargyrum so wrytten in receptes, without any other addition of difference, ough to be taken for litarge of lead. Platearius woulde haue it taken for the litarge of goulde: but the ancient and true interpretation, is aboue shewed. Lithargyros dryeth by the wytnesse of Galen,De symp. li. 9. moste mo∣deratly,De com. med. secun. genera. lib. 1. consistynge in a certeyne measure, bothe of qua∣lities and faculties: yet dothe it meanly bynde and scoure, and is by ryght as a meane amonge other metalles. And therfore vse we it, as the matter or substance of others: none otherwyse then wexe, among thynges lyquide. It healeth gaulynges or chafinges: and beynge broken with wyne, auayleth againste vlcers, that are for their moi∣sture harde to heale, and that without gnawynge, if it bee washed. Lumbrici. Looke at Vermes terrestres.
Lupinus. CAlled in Greeke ,Thermos. Galen. de sym. lib. 6. is a kynde of pulse, descri∣bed of maister Turner at large, (who calleth it figge bene) whose immesurable bitternes sheweth it to be whotte and drye, and hath vertue digestiue, and scowryng away. Beyng watered before, they lose their bytternesse, and may be eaten: but they are of grosse nuryshement. They kyll worines eyther layde to, or eaten: they purge also the lyuer and the splene, and drawe out Menses & foe∣tum, cum myrrha & melle. The meale of Lupines boyled in vi∣neger Cum posca aut oxymelite, digesteth blewe hurtes, wen∣nes, and scrofules: and mondyfieth scabbes, scalles of the head, and all maligne vlcers, without mordication: and purgeth the skynne of frecles, spottes, and blewe markes. And thus muche of Lupinus Satiua, for there is also Syluestris, whiche I haue growynge in my garden at Maydstone. whose vertues are lyke the former, but they doe all these thynges more strongly. Lycium. IS the Juice of a thorny tree, growyng chiefly in Capado∣cia and Lycia, of three cubites heyght, (made by boylynge the infusion of the rootes and braunches therof, to the thycknes of hony,)Pyxantha. Lycion. called in Greeke , and of Theophrastus , hoc est Buxus asininus,Oopyxos, Dioscor. lib. 1. which we may call an asse boxe tree: hauynge leaues lyke the bore tree, with a lyght, faste, and bitter frute, like pepper: a pale coloured rynde, (not vnlyke to washed Lycium,) and many croked rootes. Lycium (that liquide medicine,)De symp. me. facult. lib. 7. sayeth Galen, digesteth, and dryeth in the seconde degree, heateth moderatly, and consisteth of dyuers substances: as one of thinne partes, whotte and digestynge, an other earthlye and colde.
Wherof it hath not a little adstriction, and is vsed to the blewe markes of bruses, to the inflāmations of the mouthe and fundamēt, to exulcerations, teters, rottennes, froward and stubbern vlcers, to chafinges, to sanious runnynge eares, and to nayle wheles and putteth from the eyes, the dulnes of syghte. It is conuenient both in drynke and Cli∣sters, for the fluxe of the belly and Dysenteria: and is geuen for the coughe, and spitting of bloud. And thus farre of the true thing. For the Lycium that is now vsed and sold of the Apothecaries, is of the learned iudged conterfeite, & decei∣uable: for that it is not apte to burne, neyther yeldeth a redde spume when it is quenched, as Lycium shoulde. And where Lycium should be blacke without, and redde within It is blacke both without and within. An other kinde of Lycium also doth Dioscorides mentiō, called Lycium Indicum,Lonchitis. made of a plant called Lonchitis: which Dodonaeus affirmeth to be solde of the Apothecaries, vnder the name of Sanguinis draconis,Sanguis dra∣conis. for the which looke vnder the same title. Malua. ,Malache. so called of the Grecians (of , Id est mollire,)Fuchsius de hi¦storia stirpiū. because it mollifieth the belly, (and Varro con∣tēdeth also it to be called Maluam, quasi moluam, for the cause aboue sayde) is of Dioscorides and Galen deuided into two kyndes: namely Hortensis, (for it is planted and groweth in gardines, (and Syluestris so called not because it groweth in wooddes or roughe places, but wildly of it selfe in laye, and vntilled groundes: And so of a great number moe. Hereof there are two kyndes: whervnto some doe also reken Al∣thaea,Dendromala∣che. Aristal∣thaea. or Malua uiscus, called of Aetius , and of Galen : wherof vnder Althaea. Malua agrestis,De alim. li. 2. (sayeth Galen) hath some digestinge, and lyght mollifiyng facultie.De sym. li. 7. But Hortensis is apter to be eatē, and frendly to the belly, but yet hurtfull to the stomache,
and howe muche the more it hath of watery moysture, so muche the weaker are the vertues therof. So is the sede also so muche the stronger, as it is dryer, but Althaea dothe of all other digeste moste effectuously. Of temperamente he sayeth it is whotte, whiche the Arabians seme to deny. Malowes sayth Dioscorides, both healeth the stynging of bees and waspes, and withstandeth the same, and is good for the griefes of the mother, the guttes, and the bladder: and beyng drunke in tyme, is a remedy against al venims. Malum punicum. THe pōgranate is ye frute of trée,Rhoea. called in greke ,Rhoa. in Latin Malus punica, seu granata, and is of twoo sortes: as Satiua and Syluestris, (whose flowres seuerally and their faculties, are touched vnder Balaustium.) A thyrd kynde also there is, that kepeth a meane betwene the wylde and the tame: of whose temperamētes Galenus lib. 8. De symp. med. fac. sayeth thus in effecte. Euery pomgranate hath some ad∣stringent facultie,. i. est ulcus quodd profundū uel foetidum. but that surmounteth not in all: for a∣mong them that are sharpe, some are more swete then sowre: and by the reason of those their chiefe qualities, ey∣ther the one or the other is vsed for beste. Their graynes are of a driyng and byndyng iuice,. i. tuberculum subrubrū mul∣tis radicibus siue pedibus praedium. so are also their flowers and ryndes: of them altogether may medicines be made, very proffitable for ye stomache. Which in Li. 2. De com. med. secundum loca. he affirmeth hym selfe to haue vsed, to the griefes of the nose called Ozaena, & Polypus. And in his boke De attenuante uictus ratione, he disprayseth the pomgranates of Pontus,. i. Oris u¦triculi mordi∣catio. as also he doth al other harde, and pontike frutes. But others sayeth he, ye may moderatly vse, for they are profitable to them that are greued with Cardialgia. lib. 2. De alimentorum facultatibus. Malum. Appuls are called ,Melon. Malū. and Mala, (as the apple tree is
called ,Melea. and Malus) and are generally of two kyndes: Hortense & Syluestre,Malus. (wherof somwhat at Agresta) other wise infinite, and of dyuers natures (as are also their leaues and ryndes.)Galen. de ali∣mentis. lib. 2. The appuls that are adstringente, haue a colde and earthy iuice, and doe coole inflammations of heate and moysture. The sharpe ones are bothe colde and subtyl, and incysiue: of meane temperamente are the swete ones, whiche doe inclyne to heate, as those that are watery and without taste doe bende to coldenes.De sym. lib. 7. Of these vsed accor∣ding to their qualities, may the distemperatures of the sto∣mache be cured: as with the meanly sharpe and with very tarte appuls, you may roborate the lose & feynte stomache, glewe together woundes, and repercusse the fluxe of great inflammations: but suche as are more watery, doe put a∣waye lesse inflammations,. hoc est alui fluor. that doe but nowe begynne. They are generally of harde digestion and ill iuice, but may bee geuen after meate to suche as lacke apetyte, and concocte slowly,. i. Viscerum exulceratio. to suche also as are vexed with womyting, Diarrhoea, and Dysenteria. Wherunto very tarte appulles are moste commodious. Manna. MAnna so called of the Arabians, is sayeth Mesues the dewe of a vapor, lyfted vp and concocted in a tem∣perate and fertille ayre, fallyng (in the twye lyghte tymes sayeth Matthiolus) through plesant aspectes vpon cer∣teyne plantes and stones, wherof there are twoo differen∣ces. That whiche falleth vpon stones, is coagulated round lyke droppes or sedes, whiche oughte to bee newe, swete, whytyshe, or at least a citrinyshe colour. That whiche fal∣leth on plantes, bothe taketh of them some qualitie, and hath myxed therwith some of their leaues and floures, though not muche: wherof that whiche is newe, and why∣tyshe is beste. Of this doubtlesse dyd Galen wryte, In Lib. 3. De alimentis: where he sayeth, that in the mounte Libanus,
men vse yearly to spreade skynnes on the grounde, and af∣ter they beate the trees, gathering vp that whche falleth, and fille pottes with the hony:. whiche they call , Hoc est mel roscidum, & mel . Though Aue∣rois Cordubensis affirme (ot without the opinion of dyuers great clerkes of late dayes) Manna to haue ben vnknowne to Galen, and it to haue comde in vse synce his tyme, be∣cause in dede in all Galens workes, there is no mention therof vnder that name Who mente by Manna (and also Dioscorides with other olde Grecians) a farre other thing, as hereafter will apeare. But Mesues procedynge sayeth, that it somwhat excedeth the meane in heate, scouteth and smotheth the throte, the breste, and the stomache: purgeth choier gentilly, and quencheth thyrste: and mixed wyth strong medicines, it bettereth their actiōs. And thus much of Manna Arabum,Theremiabin. Manna Thris De methodo medendi. li. 13. (who call it also Thereniabin) uel Recentium, na∣med also Manna Orientalis: for Manna Graecorum, called also Man∣na Thuris, are certeyne fragmentes taken out of pure fran∣kincense, whiche Galen calleth the drosse of the same, affir∣ming it to be of the same nature,De com. med. secun. loca. li. 5 how be it somewhat more adstringent, by reason of the frankincense ryndes that are somwhat myngled therwith, wherof also at Thus. somwhat more. Mandragora. ,Mandragoras. . is also called  (saith Fuchsius) a Circe, because it is thought to worke amorous affectes, & of Pythagoras Anthropomorphos, humanam re∣ferens. of the humane forme, that the roote semeth somwhat to represent. About the whiche the dotyng folly of some, and the guylfull knauery of others: haue Fuchsius and maister doctor Turner (our countrey∣man,)Mandragoras Candida. rightwell detected. Hereof after Dioscorides, there are twoo kyndes: as the male, called Mandragoras mas, uel Candida, and also Mandragoras morion, whyche is with vs not verye rare, And the female called Mandragoras foemina,
uel nigra, and (of the lykenes that it hath with the leaues of Letuce) ,Thridacia. vnknowne to vs as yet. It cooleth,De sym. med. facult. li. 7. by the testimonie of Galen, in the thyrde ex∣cesse, though saith he in the appuls ther is not a little heate and moisture: whiche therfore prouoke depe sleapes. The rynde of the roote doth bothe coole and drye. The leaues of mandrage are profitable, as sayeth Dioscordies, for the inflammations and other affectes of the eyes, caused of vl∣cers in them, or in other partes howe so euer: and mete to deuide euery harde tumore. It is of suche mollifiynge ver∣tues, that Iuory (as some thynke) beyng boyled with the roote therof, may be made softe, and apte to be wrought. Massacunia. MAssacunia, (for so fynde I it wrytten in the prynted la∣tin copy, and interpreted the fylinge or scarpynge of earthen pottes glased,) is written of Almanzoar (who for Al∣bula in oculo, maketh the same recept) Masacuma, and Pandacta∣rius wryteth it Massicuma: Who sayeth it is a coloure wher∣with earthen vessels are nealed, and called also of them Pe∣tanum. Shewyng moreouer the opinion of diuers, as that some saye it is the water of glasen vesselles, and others that it is glasse not perfectly boiled, and is the mater wher¦of glasse is made, and vulgarly called Massacocta, &c. Whose vertues, because the mater is vncerteyne, and the autori∣ties scant probable, (for in Galen, Dioscorides, and other auncientes I fynde it not) I leaue to silence. Mastiche. commlōy called Mastix,Dioscor. lib. 1. and of Dioscorides Resi∣na Lentiscina, for it is the gumme or liquor of the tree Lentiscus, (called also in Greeke ) is of tempe∣rament whotte and drye in the seconde degree: Wherof Galen maketh two kyndes,Galen. de sym. faculta. lib. 7. namely Candida, & Nigra. The
whyte mastike sayeth he, (callynge it also Mastiche Chia, be∣cause the beste and fayrest groweth plentifully in Chio) doth bynde and mollifie:Chius is an Isle of the sea Aege. and therfore is proffitable, for the in∣flammations of the stomache, the belly, the lyuer, and the bowelles: To the olde coughe also, and as sayeth Dioscori∣des to the reiectiōs of bloude. It is frendly to the stomache, but moueth belchyng, and is vsed to scoure the teethe and the face. The blacke mastike (called Mastiche Aegiptia) dryeth more but byndeth lesse, & therfore is the meter for suche thinges as require stronger digestion, by euaporation. Maturatiua. MAturatiua medicamenta, siue pus mouentia, are rypyng me∣dicines,De methodo medend. li. 4. or quitture breders. Which heate and moist sayeth Galen, reducyng substāces of dyuers kindes ad pus uel saniem,De sympt. causis. lib. 5. that is to mater or quitture: and commeth of Maturo, to maturate or make rype. Mel. IS called of the Greekes ,Meli. whiche some thynke to be the humore of the ayre purging it selfe, for it is someti∣mes founde to cleaue vpon mens heare and apparell, that are abrode very rathe. wherfore Plinie iudgeth it the swette of heauen, or els a certeine slymines or spittle of the starres.Mel Vernum. And therof are thre kindes: as Melanthinii, uel Ver∣num,Mel . which is gathered in the spring: Mel horaeum, ut aestum, gathered in the sommer:Mel riceum. and Friceum, whiche is smally este∣med,Erica. for that it is gathered in Autumne, when Erica onely bloweth in the wooddes.Galenus de symp. medi. fac. li. 4. &. 7 The best hony is gathered in som¦mer, of Thyme and suche other odiserus plantes, whiche heateth and dryeth in the seconde degree, and mundifieth. Others eyther allowe or disprayse it, in respecte of the place where it is gathered: praysinge Mel atticum for the beste,
next to that Mel Siculum, and chiefly that whiche is called Hybleum of Hybla, a citie of Sicilia, and that because of the plentie of Thyme growynge there. But Mel Sardoum & Ponticum, are (as euell and hurtfull) abiected. Galenus. lib. 3. De alimentorum facultatibus, sayeth that it is founde on the leaues of plantes, but neyther can it sayeth he be sayde, eyther any iuice, frute, or parte of the same. And here must you take Galen to speake of the primi∣tiue matter, or first substance therof. For if there shoulde not be graunted to hony suche a varietie of qualities, accor∣dyng to the plantes wheron it is, As Mesues noteth in Manna: Why should, it haue ben estemed the worthyer, or the vyler, for the plantes wheron it is founde. Hony not well boyled, bredeth certeyne wyndes in the stomache and bowells: but beyng well clarified, it is vn∣wyndie and moueth vryne. It taken without the admy∣tion of water, nourysheth weakely, but emptieth the belly aptly, and eaten largely it moueth vomite: beyng boyled without water, it neither causeth vomite, nor loseth the belly. To olde and colde persons, it is moste commodious: In yonge and whotte persons it turneth into choler. Melanchiron. OF Melanchiron I nede not here saye muche, for Lan∣franke interpretynge it Icteritia nigra, sheweth hym selfe to meane therby that vniuersall effusion of me∣lancholy, which we call the blacke iaundies. The iaundies which the Greekes cal Icteron and the La∣tines Regiam & arquatam passionem,Icteros. Regia passio. Arquata pas∣sio. is an vniuersall effusion of choler, sometyme yelowe from the gaule, and some∣tymes blacke from the splene, caused dyuersly, as by those members inflamed, obstructed, weakened, &c. as before at Icteritia.
Melilotus. THe herbe that we in Englande vse for Melilote, lac∣keth not in my iudgement the vertue that should in Melilote: though it be not in dede the true , but rather a kynde of Lotus syluestris, by the maister Turner, (who taketh it to be Mel frugum, phrastus) and also of Dodonaeus, who by reason of his calleth it Meliotum Germanicam, and Fuchsius Saxisr But the ryght Melilote groweth in Italy, & is therfore cal∣led Melilotus Italica, and of some Sertula Campana, & Coronare∣gia.De sympone. lib. 7. It is whotte and drye in the fyrste degree, Galen saieth it hath more heate then colde, and is somwhat adstringent, but yet doth it digeste and concocte: And the emplaster called Melilotum, is potente in mollifiyng hardnesses, by the testimonie of Galenus and Mesues. Mica panis. CRommes of bread are generally resolutiue: but that doth it more or lesse, accordynge to the composition & handlynge therof.Galen. de ali∣mentis. lib. 1. For bread sayeth Galen made of lyght corne, well leuened, and moderatly baked, is moste easye to cōcocte, so is it of power outwardly to digeste and deuyde: and of consequence if it varie from these poyntes, it is the vnfitter for the one and the other. Miliaris. THe opinion of Lanfrancus, and of many moe about his tyme, concerning the likenes of Miliaris with Formica, semeth to come from Auicen: whoe also teacheth for them bothe almoste lyke curations. But howe farre is it from the mynde of Galen?
Who numbereth Miliarem among erysipelatous tumores, and Formicam among Scirrhous excrescentes. Miliaris named also in Greeke of that forme ,Cenchros. is a tumore vttering certeine litle pustules lyke milet, com∣ming of a choleryck fluxion somwhat sharpe. Wherof locke more in Herpete.Herpes. Mirobalani. Goe to the title Myrobalani. Mumia. OF Mumia (so called of the Arabians.) There is an vn∣certeine varietie of opinions, for diuers great lear∣ned men thinke it to be  Dioscoridis, be∣cause that as Dioscorides sayeth, Pissasphaltos is driuen by lande floudes from certeyn hylles of Apolonia, called Ceraunii montes, and being after cast vp on the ryuer bankes: is by heate baked into Cloddes, whiche doe smell lyke pytche, myxed with Bitumine,Bitumen. wherof it hathe that name. Euen so and with the same wordes, hath Scrapio descrybed his Mu∣miam. But differing from this is that which the most of the Arabians doe mention: who affirme it to resulte of the imbaumyng or spicery of dead bodyes at their burialles, as Ex Croco, Aloe, myrrha, & Balsamo, beyng coagulated & growne together (with the fatte and moysture of the corps) into a bodie, and therfore called Mumia sepulcrorum. But as this composition is very costly, and therfore vsed for the bodies of the nobles:That whiche is don to dead bodies as wt spices &c. is called imbal∣ming though there be no Balsame ther¦in. so are men of some lesse repu∣tation imbaulmed with Aloe, myrrhe, and saffron: neyther of the whiche bodies are easely spoyled of their tombes and spicerie, namely by strangers. Howe be it the poorer sorte, (whiche are the greatest number, the openinge also and re∣mouyng of whose bodies is the more tollerable) are inclo∣sed with Pissaphalto only, because it is of lesse price: for they
vse customably to imbaulme all bodies. But that whiche is nowe among our Apothecaries ex∣tant, varieth from all these substances, and is the very flesh of mans body, as it weare burned to a cole: for both whole armes and whole legges, haue been here not rarly seene, being dryed as blacke as a cole. Wherfore it must nedes be thought, that eyther the merchantes bryng from thence whole buried bodies, or very partes of the same: or els that it becommeth so, by that meanes that dyuers merchantes make reporte of, (if it be worthy credite.) Who saye, that in the farther partes of Aegypte, great driftes of lyghte and moste subtyle sande, are at certeyn tymes remoued (by the change of wyndes) from place vnto place, and therby row∣led vp into huge heapes lyke great mountaynes: and that often tymes bothe men and beastes, happening in the way, are violently swalowed vp and buried therein: so remay∣ning vntyll by a lyke tempeste from the obiect coastes, it be agayne turned ouer, and all such buried thinges are again vncouered: beynge by the whotte and drye nature of the sande so dryed, and preserued from putrefaction. All the whiche howe true it is or may be, for the lacke of experiēce I am not able vndoubtfully to saye, neyther can I (through lykelyhodes) yelde for the same a better defence, then that baked or dryed sande, hath been proued to preserue frutes longtyme vnputrefied: wyshinge that some man of more experience therin, would make the matter more manifest. But certeinly it is mans fleshe, eyther thus or otherwyse dryed into a cole. It is vsed as well in outwarde plasters, as inwarde drinkes, to confounde broken bones and veynes, and to di∣solue congeiled bloud, and stayeth the flure of the same. It helpeth Hemicraniam & Paralism, and the peynes of the heade that come of cold without humores. For it is of heating and driyng facultie in the seconde degre, as sayeth Matthiolus: to whom I remitte the explication of all other his eximiouse vertues.
Mundificatiua med. MEdicinae mundificatiuae siue abstergentes, are medicines that haue powre to mūdify, purify, scoure, or clēse woūdes &c. Whiche if they doe meanly, they are mete incarnatiues for vlcers. It commeth of Mundifico, to mundifie or make cleane: Whiche also riseth a munditie of, cleanes. Myrobalanus. THe etymology of this worde ,Myrobalanos. requireth it to be called Glans odorata, siue unguentaria: though this name Glans unguentaria be much more fitly applyed to :Balanos my∣repsice. for from it differeth Myrobalanos, in figu∣re,Balanus my∣repsica. colour, and faculties, and ought rather sayeth Syluius, to be accompted of the kynde of appuls or prunes. Of Myrobalanes there are fiue kyndes. wherof these these thre Citreae Nigrae, & Cepulae, are thought of some saith Mesues to be the frutes of one tree, whose propertie is to beare twyse yearly: whose first frutes are Citreae, beyng ga∣thered vnrype, and Nigrae or Indae, gathered when they are rype. The seconde and laste frutes are Cepulae. (These all are colde in the first degree, and drye in the seconde.) But Andreas Marinus vpon Mesue, sayeth plainly that they are .v. destincted fructes, of so many seueral trees, and hath lyuely paynted out three of them: whiche also many other haue thought before, because thei vary in faculties. Loe so boun∣tifull hath God ben vnto this our age, as to open merciful∣ly vnto vs (with the landes so longe vnknowne) manye thynges, that to the worthy fathers weare eyther vnkno∣wne, or muche in doubte: For so doth Marmus confesse hym selfe to obteyne this certeintie. They are benigne or gen∣till medicines, and doe strengthen the harte, the stomache, the lyuer, and the rest of the body. 1 Myrobalani Citreae (which are of colour inclining to grene, great, weightie, massie, and within when they are broken,
gummy,) do purge choler abone the reste: and therfore are holsome for whotte and bilious natures, & cum omphacio, uel aqua rosarum, uel succo foenicula they scoure the eyes, and take away their inflammations: their poulder also stayeth the fluxe of them, & cum mastiche dryeth vlcers. 2 Myrobalani Cepulae are blackishe, inclining to rednes, and are phlegme purgers, namely frō the stomache, they strēg∣then also the same & the spirites rational, & sharpen ye sight. 3 Myrobalani nigrae, are of colour blacke, greate, flesshye, and grosse, whose vertues are to purge melancholy, and choler adust: and therfore are profitable for trēbling, pensiuenes, leprosies, quartanes, and other melancholick affectos. But they are all apte to brede obstructions. 4 Myrobalani Emblicae do cole sōwhat,Empelica. & drie in ye first degree. 5 Myrobalani Bellericae are gentill, and doe strengthen, of tē∣perament lyke the first three: They both doe purge putre∣fied phlegme from the stomache, and strengthen the same, The brayne also, the harte, the lyuer, the synewes, and re∣laxed partes. &c. Myrrha. MYrrha,Smirna. whiche the Grekes call , heateth and dryeth in the seconde degree:Galenus de symp. medi. lib. 8. and therfore glueth freshe woundes, especially of the head: Hauing also much bitternes, wherby it killeth wormes. It hath moreo∣uer a moderate abstertion: by reason wherof, it is mixed wt medicines made for the eyes, for the olde cough, & for pein∣full breathing. It hath also power to comfort and to defend from putrefaction, and to expell superfluities. It mūdifieth rotten vlcers,So was myrthe in Ga¦len his time adulterate. and prouoketh sleape. Howe be it the vse of Myrrhe is not altogether hurtles, bothe for that the onely smell therof causeth head ache: and also because in the best myrrhe is founde Opocarpasum,De antidotis. lib. 1. a thyng sayeth Galen, verye hurtfull and deadly, and hath kylled many vnwittynglye takyng it with myrrhe.
Myrrha is the teares or droppyng of a free growynge in Arabia, not vnlike to Spinae aegiptiae, wherof ther are dyuers kyndes. Pediasmos beyng fatty, from the whiche beyng pres∣sed, commeth Stacte. Gabirea, whiche is most fatte, and swea∣teth out Stacten habundantly. Then Troglodytica, whiche is of a grenyshe colour, shyning and byting: whiche is the best and is also of twoo sortes. The fourth is Cancalis, whiche is very olde, blacke, and parched: And this is thought of some to be it, that is commonly solde vnto vs. The fifthe and worst is Ergasima: And the sixt Aminea, not wel approued. An other kynde also there is, called Myrrha Boeotica, because it cōmeth from the roote of a tree, growyng in Boeotia. Myrtus. MYrtles are of an earthly cold propertie,De symplici. lib. 8. as Galen af∣firmeth, hauyng yet some subtiltie and heate, wher∣through they drye myghtily: and therfore are verye profitable to helpe the restoring of broken bones, and stre∣igned ioyntes, and also to drye vp bruses, kepynge therby the places from putrefaction, and apostemations. The Mirte tree,Myrsine uel , My∣rhine. is called in Greeke , and in Latin Mirtus. The frutes or beries wherof, doe the Apothecaries calle Myrcillos. Nodi. NOdus signifieth a knotte, and is here to be vnder∣standed of certeine kyndes of tumores, whiche in roundnes, (and somtyme hardnes,) resemble a knotte:De tumoribus praeter natur Atheroma. comming principally of phlegme, and are chiefly referred to the three speciall tumores, called of Ga∣len , and , so called of the sub∣stances like a whyte potagie confection (called Puls) fatte,Steatoma. or hony,Meliceris. conteined in them. And somtime the nerues become knotty,De mett. odo meden. li. 14. but that differeth from Nodo sayeth Auicen, in that it is not euery waye mobyle or seperable.
Obtalmia. Is shewed at Ophthalmia▪ Oedema. ΟΙδημα,Galenus de tu∣moribus prae∣ter naturam. is one of the foure chiefe and principall symple tumores agaynst nature, softe, lose, and without payne, spryngyng of thynne phlegme or vaporous spirites,De methodo medendi. li. 1▪ & is the same that in the tyme of Lanfranke as well as before and since, was called Vndi∣mia.De arte cura∣tiua. lib. 2. which (when it hath adioyned partly therwith, any of the other three) is called eyther . i. Oe∣dema phlegmonosum, uel Oedema inflammationis particeps, of bloud: . i. Oedema erysipelatosum, aut sacri ignis particeps, if choler be his partener, or , hoc est oedema induratum, siue duritiei particeps, when melancholic is adioyned. More at Vndimia. Oleum. OYle which the Grecians cal ,Elaon. is the iuice of O∣lyues named Oliuae, whiche are the frutes of the tree, Olea in greke ,Elaea. cōsisting of .iii. substāces (as doth mylke,) as of grosse dregges, called Amurca, of an aery essen∣ce, & of a whayey substance. Oyle is of temperamēt meane as it weare, betwene whotte and colde drye and moyste: yet doth it rather inclyne to heate and moisture. But from this meane may it three wayes varie, as firste Omphacinum (made of vnripe Oliues) is somwhat colde and adstringent: as the oyle of through rype olyues (whiche they cal Drupas) doth moderatly heate and moyste.Drupas. Secondly newe oyle is by comparation colde: so swete oyle kept vntyl it be olde, is whotte and euaporatyue. Thirdly it doth moste aptly or redely receyue the qualities, of what so euer by arte
with composed: be they whotte or colde, &c. And therfore sayeth Galen,De symp. me. fac. li. 2. is it worthily accompted, the matter of all other medicines. It moueth the belly: and the reddyshe wheye, beyng ta∣ken away (as by washynge or els howsoeuer) the reste is made whyter, and without byting. The vnctiōs therwith are rather to be vsed to whole bodies thē vnto plethorikes, or to men possessed with rawe humores. Olibanum. OLibanum sayeth Platearius, is whotte and drie in the seconde degree, and is none other thyng but Thus. Whiche Galen sayeth,De sym. lib. 7. dryeth but in the first. It is thought of dyuers men,Dioscor. lib. 1. . qua∣si Thus stilli∣cidiare. (not without great reason, to bee that rounde whyte droplyke gumme, and within fatty, whiche Dioscorides preferreth for the beste, & calleth Thus masculinum, and in Greke Stagonias. Not farre from this is Lanfranke his mynde, who by Cortice olibani meaneth Corticem Thuris optimi.Cortex olibani Ophthalmia. , in Latin Lippitudo. Is the inflammation of that panicle that couereth all the other panicles & partes of the eye, called Tunica adnata (of Galen Agna∣ta) and Coherens, and is of twoo sortes. Vera, comminge of a cause antecedent or interiore, as of fulnes in all the body, of the influxion of sharpe humores, or of grosse and flatu∣lente spirites: & non uera, whiche commeth of a cause proca∣arctyke or exterior, as of a stroke, duste, smoke, &c. Suche a difference of Obtalmia (for so he calleth it) maketh Lanfran∣cus as thou seest, calling it Parua, magna, or maxima. Opium. ,Opio. Id est lacrima papaueris, whiche is the iuice of Papaue∣ris
nigri,De com. med. secun. loca. li. 5 brought by arte into a masse, muste nedes be lyke in temperament to the popye, wherof it is made: and is sayeth Galen the myghtiest among narcotike medicines,De methodo medendi. li. 12. and causeth dead sleape, but ought rarly, in great extremi∣ties (and then warly) to be vsed. For it strangleth, and ve∣hement paynes are often eased therby (beynge vsed alone) for some small tyme: after the whiche it returneth more violently then before. But in euery doubte of this and his vse: let maister Turner be to you a sufficient satisfier. Opopanax. ,Panaces he∣racleion. Succus panace, that is the iuice of the herbe , or Panax heracleum: for of Panax there are o∣ther two kyndes, Asclepium & Cheironium. It is an herbe (sayeth Dioscorides) growyng in Boeotia and Arcadia,Countreis in Grece. with rough her bycoloured leaues, liyng on the grounde, inden∣ted with fyue diuisions muche lyke to fygge leaues, a high stalke, as hath Ferula, whiche is white throughe a certeine mosines, and also beset with little leaues: hauynge moreo∣uer a toppe lyke dylle, a yellowe flowre, and a sede feruent and odoriferous: with many rootes also, springing frō one beginnyng, beyng whyte, of heauy sauoure, thyck rynded, and bytter tasted.De sym. med. facultat. lib. 8. Opopanax sayeth Galen, doth both digeste and mollyfie: and therin excelleth Chalbanum. It heateth in the thyrde degree,De com. med. secundum ge∣nera. lib. 7. and drieth in the seconde, (as dothe also the rynde of the roote, though lesse then the iuice) and that without adstringencie: and therfore is vsed to stuberne vl∣cers, and as an incarnatiue to broken bones. Orificium. ORificium, is the orifice, mouthe, or entrance of anye thynge that is holowe. Wherfore Orificium sinus, uel fistulae, is the orifice or entrance, of a fistule or holow vlcer. &c.
Orobus. SO called of the Apothecaries, folowynge the Greeke, (which is ,Eruum. and the Latine Eruum) is englyshed of D. Turner, a bitter fitche: who treateth therof at large.Galenus De a∣limentis. lib. 1. It is a certein pulse, and a foode (for his vnpleasant∣nes) meter for bullockes then for men, but are vsed in me∣dicines that purge grosse humores,De attenuiāte uictus ratione De symp. me. facult, lib. 8. from the lunges and the breste. The whyte bitter fitches, are lesse medicinable then the yelowe or the pale. Eruum dryeth in the thyrde de∣gree fully, and heateth in the first: and farther, howe bitter so euer it be, in the same measure doth it cutte insonder, scowre, and open obstructions: beynge twyse sodden, it lo∣seth his vnsauorines, and also his scowring and incisiue po∣wer, and so dryeth without great bytternesse. It is diure∣tike and (copiously taken) causeth pyssyng of bloud. Diosco∣rides sayeth, that of them by parchyng and gryndinge is made a meale, whiche with hony mundifieth vlcers, ke∣pyng dyuers angrye sortes of them, from crepyng and cor∣rodyng: being made into paste with wyne, it healeth vene∣mous bytinges, and scowreth the skynne of freckles and spottes. Ossa combusta. OF burned bones thus sayeth Galen.De sym. med. facult. li. 11.  Morbus comi∣tialis. They drye and digeste, and chiefly as some saye, the bones of a man. I haue knowne certeyne of our contreymen, that by geuyng mans bones burned in drinke, haue cured in many Epilepsiam and Arthritin, all this Galen. A great desiccatiue they must nedes be, for that burnynge addeth to the bone more drynes,, i. ar∣ticularis mor∣bus. whiche was before of his owne nature colde and drye. Oua. EGges sayth Galen in his boke last cited,Ouum. are not partes of animals, but answer in proportion, to thynges su∣perfluous
or more then nedeful.Galen. de ali∣mentis, lib. 3. They are made for propa∣gation and perpetuitie, and are profitable, as for foode. Whervnto the egges of Phesantes and hennes, are the beste: As of the Goose and the Ostriche, are the worste. Egges that are meanly sodden,Oua tremula, Ouum sori∣lium. (called therfore Tremula) are for nourishment best of all other. Sorbilia oua (which be sodde in water tyll it be whyte) doe nuryshe lesse, but are easyer to put downe,De euchymia et cacochymia and smothe the roughnes of the sharpe ar∣terie. Sodden egges are of harde concoction, of grosse nou∣rishment, and are hardly put ouer: but grosser and more fumous iuice doe rosted egges make, and tary longer in the stomache. But fried egges are euery way of worste nurish∣ment, and doe corrupte other meates eaten with them. Lastly, egges prepared with oyle, wyne, and the sauce Garo, and after meanly baked or rosted,Oua suffocata and called Oua suffocata, are better then sodde egges or rosted, and are colder then the equall temperament. The whyte of the egge is accompted of the number of medicines not byting,Albumen ou and is vsed not onely to the eyes, but also to all other thynges that require gentyll medicines: as ad Vlcera cōtuinacia & pudendorū acedis: so is also the yolke, (whiche aswageth payne. The whole egge is vsed Cum oleo Rosato, for inflammations: but in all these thynges oughte newe egges to be taken, and the olde refused. Oua formicarum. SO vnspeakable is the careful loue of our merciful God towardes his creatures, that he maketh ye litle Ante & hir egges, medicines for their health. Thei ar foode for Beares, and their egges (sayeth Plinie) are to them a hol∣some medicine, when they are greued. Oxalis. , so called as well of the Apothecaries as of the
Grecians,Rumex. of the sharpe taste that it hath, is one of the. iiii. kyndes of Rumecis,Lapathum. or Lapathi in Dioscorides, called also of some ,Anaxyris. and commonly Acetosa, and is of two kyndes, Maior and Minor, the first knowne to all, the other not so. It cooleth with a pleasant sharpnes, and is therfore with vs in great vse. The iuyce therof cooleth & represseth chole∣ricke inflammatiōs of the stomache and the liuer, and pre∣serueth from pestilent infections if the leaues be chawed, and the iuice swallowed downe: as haue dyuers learned men of late practise writen, by whose iudgement it is of tē∣perament colde and drye in the seconde degree. Papauer. OF Popy with the Grecians called ,Mecon emeros Mecon agrios Mecon rhoeas Mecō ceratitis Papauer cornu¦tum. Mecon aphrodes. i. Papauer spu∣meum. there are many kyndes, as . i. satiuum, . i. syluestre, . i. fluidum uelerraticum,  cornutum uel cor∣niculatum, Spumeum & Herculeum: of euerye of the whiche there are also diuers kyndes, whiche here it were to longe to discusse. They doe all coole. The whyte seade of Papaueris Satiui, prouoketh sleape moderatly, and therfore it is eaten in bread and with hony. But of the wylde ones, the seade of Papaueris fluidi, called al∣so Rhoeas,Galen. de sym. Lib. 7. (because his floures doe sodaynly falle,) doth coole more myghtyly, and therfore can not be vsed alone with∣out hurte.Galen. de ali∣mentis. lib. 7. That of the kynde of Papaueris syluestri, or wylde Popye, whiche hath a sittynge bowle, hathe in the same a blacke medycinable seade, whiche cooleth myghtylye: but the seade that is founde in the longe wylde popye bowles, is of all other the metest for medicine, somniferous, and stoppeth suche spyttinges, as the cough bryngeth from the lunges and the brest, and is conuenient for Catarrhes and thynne destillations from the head. It cooleth so muche, that it may induce bothe dead sleapes, and death also, vn∣warly vsed: for it cooleth in the fourth and last degree.
Parietaria. VUlgarly Muralium,Muralium because it deliteth to growe on stonewalles: Of some Vrceolaris,Vrceolaris because it serueth well to scowre glasen vessels. It is called in Greeke (sayeth Fuchsius,He. of the rough scade therof, which wyl hange on mens clothes,Perdicion. and , be∣cause the byrde Perdix (whiche is englyshed the Partriche,Perdicis.) deliteth to fede theron. It constreigneth or bindeth strong∣ly, and scoureth awaye with colde moisture:Galer▪ de sym. Lib. 6. and therfore healeth whotte inflammations, from the begynnyng to the state, and is also layde in Cataplasmatibus ad Phygethlon in the begynning. The iuice therof dropped into the eares, hel∣peth their phlegmonous paynes. Passula. CAlled also Vuapassa,Astaphis & Staphis e∣ros. and in Greeke , with vs reysons, ar grapes prepared by arte as are fygges: and therfore (sayeth Galen) haue Vuae passae,Dried or pre∣pared fygges. the same affinitie with grapes, that Caricae haue with figges.Galenus De a∣limentis. lib. 2. Whiche beynge made of tame or tylled grapes, haue concoctiue, adstringente, and meane digestiue facul∣tie: but the wylde are vehement sharpe,De atten uictus ratione and therfore doe purge and scoure the head myghtyly. Grapes doe not exquisitly maturate in colde regions, muche lesse reysons:Desymp. li. 6. and as they beyng swete, are the whotter, so are the sharpe ones colder, whiche doe roborate the stomache, and con∣stipate the belly, and that, the tarter the more: among the whyche, the reysons that are of a meane swetnes, keepe a meane constitution. In these as there is a moderatiue ver∣tue, so haue they also a meane clensinge facultie: wherby they put awaye the small gnawynges of the monthe of the stomache. If they be not adstryngent, they helpe not the lyuer or ye splene, but the affectes of the brest & lunges.
Of reysons they are beste that are fatte, and haue a tender skynne: whiche if they be colde are made the better, by ta∣kyng from them their graynes, when they haue been ste∣ped in water. Though in Cilicia there doe growe reysons, bothe full and small, without graynes. Pes milui. It is mencioned vnder the title Flamula. Phlegmone. ,, enim sanguis est. Id est inflammatio, uel collectio, , hoc esta sanguine dicta, written moste commōly hithervnto (with muche rudenes) Flegmon, is properly a symple tumore (as Galen sayeth) and an affecte of the fleshie partes,De tumoribus praeter naturā De methodo med. li. 5. 14. comming of a greater fluxe of bloude then they nede, or can natural∣ly susteyne. Whiche sweateth through the coates of the veynes lyke a dewe: wherin they gather together to them selues a tumore, with heate, rednes, stretching, resisting, and pulsatiue or beating payne: whiche is propre to great inflammations. And thus much of the simple tumore. For when so euer it chaunceth to haue some portion of anye of the other three humerall tumores adioyned therwith: there resulteth a compounde name, suche as the mixture requireth, as choler therwith cōcurrent, maketh the name , quasi inflammatio ignis srcrae seu ig∣nitae rubedinis particeps. Phlegme coupled therwith, nameth it , id est inflammatio laxa, uel Oedma∣tis particeps: But melancholy therwith, is called , in Latin inflammatio dura, siue duritiei consors, as of the reste. Pili leporis. Seyng that heares (whose cause efficient as Galen wit∣nesseth,
is of grosse and slymy superfluities) is colder & drier then any other parte of the bodie,Demetho  li. 14 yea then the bones: By the mindes of Aristotle,De temp. lib. . Cōstantinus, Galenus, and Albertus Mag∣nus: nedes must the heares, of the Hare be moste colde and drie, (and therfore restraining and bynding) whiche is of all other a beaste moste melancholike and timorous. For the whiche cause (sayeth Galen) is he and the Harte,Deusu par∣tu lib. 1. indued with swifte bodies. Pinguedo. PInguedo, is with vs the grease or oylye fatte of bodies, of men or beastes, for the whiche looke more at Adeps. Pini Cortex. THe rynde of the Pine tree,. (called in Greke , and in Latin Pinus,) brused and layde to, is profitable by the testimonie of Dioscorides,Lib. . for chafinges and vlcers that are ouer all the body: aud also for burnynges cum Manna & Spu∣ma argenti. Beyng vsed cum Serato myrtino, it healeth suche vl∣cers of delicate persons as refuse sharpnes. Brused cum atrimento sutorio, it restrayneth crepyng vlcers: and in suffitu, & partus & secundas eiicit. The leaues of the same brused and applied, doe mitigate and represse inflammatiōs. They ease with vineger the totheake: and a dragme weighte of the same druncke in Mulsa, is profitable for me diseased in the li∣uer. The ryndes of the appuls or nuttes of the Pine tree, dooe in drinke as doe the leaues. Wherfore Lanfrancus, by Cortice pini, must be vnderstanded to meane the rynde of the tree, whose properties doe beste agree with his intente. Piper. OF the Grecians called ,Peperi. is of thre kyndes, be∣side Piper siluestre, as Longum, Album, & Nigrum. Which
all (sayth Galen) doe heate and drye,De symplici. lib. 8. and are vsed (as in Di∣trion peperon,) to digeste rawe humores: and drunke Cum Vino, doe helpe the stomache cooled by colde alimentes. Black pepper is to be chosen, that is neyther sclender, rug∣ged, nor hauing a grosse rynde: whiche twoo notes doe also commende the whyte.De sanitate tuenda. lib. 4. The long pepper ought to be sound, without holes, and that neither by brusing nor steping wyl be resolued, but will kepe still the nature of pepper. And where as the olde wryters (ledde thervnto, as it should seme, rather by heresaye then experience,) Esteme them al the frutes of one tree, gathered at seuerall seasons: The opinion of the later wryters, for dyuerse considerati∣ons thervnto repugning: I referre you to Matthiolus, and to maister D. Turner, his worthy worke, wherin he hath not only made hereof out of eche sorte large demonstra∣tions, but also moste learnedly hath he explicated manye doubtes: whiche vnknowne, myghte through ignorance haue wrought many euels (as no doubte) long tyme here tofore they haue done. Pira. Of Pira I haue wrytten benethe at Pyrum. Pistacia. , so named bothe in Greeke and Latine, and vulgarly Fistici, are the frutes of a tree, growyng (as sayeth Dioscorides,) in Syria, lyke to Pine nuttes: whiche Doctor Turner describeth also at large. They are after Galen, frendly to the stomache,De sym. med. facultat. lib. 8. subtill, bitteryshe, aromatike, and somwhat adstryngente: And therfore of small nurysh∣ment, mete for a sclender diete, good to comforte the liuer, and to open the obstructions of the same.
Pisum. (sayeth Galen) doth in his whole substance resem∣ble the beane,Pison. (if I may so englyshe Faba,De alimentis. lib. 1.) and are in lyke maner taken. They are not so wyndy and doe in al things excelle beanes,De euchyria  saue that they haue not so muche stowring power, and therfore doe tary longer in the belly. But to knowe howe Pisum, (wherof neyther Dioscori∣des nor Galen haue made description.) may be our peason or no: haue recourse as before to maister D. Turner. For to repete that here, whiche an other hathe already so com∣modiously sayde: would but make my booke vnneefully to swelle, and with knowne thynges satigate the reader. Pix. NAmed in Greke ,Lib 3. is after Dioscorides of three sortes,Piss. Liquida, Viscosa, and Arida. Pix liquida (sayeth he,) is gathered out of the fattest portions of the trees Picea and Pinus, whiche of some was called , in Latine Teda,. affir∣ming it to be a vice or Canker of the trees afore saide: con∣foundyng the vanitie of some that haue counted Teda a tree speciall.Teda. Hereof the beste is sincere lyghte, and shining, whiche by boylynge waxeth thycke,Palimpissa Bsas. and is called , Idest Spissa pix uel Pix bis cocta: wherof one parte waxeth clammy, and is called , quasi pix Viscosa, the other is drye, and named ,Colophona Pix arida. (of the citie Colophon of Libia or Graecia, from whence it was wonte to be brought.) In Latine Pix Arida, and commonly Pix Graeca, whiche oughte to bee pure, fatte, odoriferous, resinous, of reddyshe coloure, and hea∣teth and drieth,De sym. lib. 8. by the sentence of Galen in the seconde de∣gree: but doth more drie then heate. The liquid contrarily doth more heate then drie, hauynge also subtill partes,
and therfore helpeth asthmatike persons. They haue ab∣stersiue concoctiue, and digestiue powre, as in taste a lyght sharpnes and bitternes: so beyng mixed with wexe, they take away leprosy nayles, and scoure Lichenas. They also beyng put in Cataplasmatis, doe concocte harde tumores: and to all these is Pix liquida the better, and filleth vp the holow∣nes of vlcers: but the drye is more apte to glewe together woundes. But Peter Martyr, in his Decades of the Spanyardes their voyages and gestes in the west Indies, sheweth of a harder and stronger kynde of pyche: (and therfore better for shippes,) flowyng out of a roche in Hispaniola. Whiche (or the lyke thynge) myght be the cause of the name in that whiche we commonly call stone pyche. In the whiche Isle sayeth he, there is also pyche made of twoo seuerall trees: the one is the Pyne tree, (commonly knowne,) the other is called in that countrey language Copeia.Copeia. The leaues wher∣of is a spanne broade, almoste rounde, thicker then double parchment, merueylous tough, and is apte to be wrytten on with wyers of metall or woode, and that on both sydes. And whyle the leafe is fresh and newe, it sheweth the let∣ters whyte vpon grene: but when it is olde and drye, it be∣commeth harde and whyte, like writing tables of woodde, and the letters yelowe: for it wyll neuer lose them, by wa∣shyng or any other wayes, saue only by fyre. Plaga. PLaga, is taken as wel for euery vlcer or sore generally, but chiefly for suche as hadde their begynninge, Proca∣tarctice that is from without,Vulnus. Plaga noua. as for euery new woūde or cutte, strype or hurte. And so doth Lanfranke vse it, cal∣lyng Vulnus Plagam nouam aut recentem:Vlcus. Plaga antiqua and Vlcus he calleth Plagam putridam, uell antiquam.
Plantago. IS of the Grecians called ,Arnoglossos uel arnoglossō quasi agnina lingua, and is (though Dioscorides mencion but two,) of dyuers kyndes, as Maior, media, & minor, Aquatica also and Marina: Wherof Plantago maior,Galenus De symp. me. facult. lib. 6. whiche Lanfranke meaneth, bothe cooleth and dryeth in the seconde excesse, and hathe some sowernes by reason of hir earthly partes. The medicines that are both colde and adstryngente, are mete for rebelli∣ous vlcers, rottenes, and fluxions, and therfore for Dysente∣riis: for they staye the flowynges of bloude, and coole things burned. They heale woundes, both new and old, and glew together their holownes. But of all other suche medicines planteyne is chiefe, or at the least seconde to none, by rea∣son of his meane and conuenient temperamente, for it is drye without bitynge, and colde without stupefaction. The seade and the rootes are of lyke faculties, sauyng that they are dryer, but not so colde. The seade is subtyll & the roote grosse. The leaues also dryed are subtill, and of lesse coo∣lyng. The rootes are vsed for paynes of the teethe. The leaues also (but muche more the seades) are geuen for the obstructions of the lyuer and splene. Plumbum vstum. LEade is called in Greke ,Molybdos. Galenus de symp. medi. lib. 9. and is of coolyng facultie, hauing moreouer, not only much moiste sub∣stance congeyled by heate: but also some acry and ear∣thy essence. It being burned and after washed, helpeth to fylle vp and heale vlcers, as well suche as are cancrous, as those that are called Chironii, but vnwashed it is a helpe for frowarde vlcers. Porus sarcodes. THis Greeke worde ,Poros. permitteth dyuers inter∣pretations, and is taken for a waye, a passage, a tracte,
a iorney, a caue, a bosome, a couered hole, a vessell, (and plurally are small sweatyng holes,) for luere also, som∣tyme for money, and lastly, (which is nyghest our purpose) it is a stony hardnes. And Tophus articulorum, is called Poros, (for Tophus is also and that more proprely a stone:Tophus,  stone which is apte to be resolued into sande. whiche Uergill in his Georgikes termeth Tophus Scaber.) Wherof Galen thus sayeth. When rawe phlegmatike humores, by liyng long hydde in the lymmes or ioyntes, doe becomme grosser and more viscous:De com. med. secun. loc. li. 10 ther are of thē ingendred Tophi, and Calli. Wherfore this substance repletiue, the worke of nature, of the grosse nushment of the bone (commyng as a lygature betwene the endes of the broken bones,De arte medi∣cinale. of sub∣stance harde, but not britle) may well be called ,Poros Sarcodes Callus. quasidurities Carnosus, as it is of Galen called Callus. Whiche also somtyme sygnifieth the circulare or quilly hardnes of fistules,De methodo medendi. li. 6. and is commōly taken for the hardnes both of the palmes of the handes, and soles of the fete, in∣gendred by labore or exercise. Portulaca. POrtulaca,Andrachne. called in Greeke , is of two kindes. Hortensis (whiche Lanfranke calleth Domestica),De symp. li. 6. and Syl∣uestris: and is after Galen, of a colde & watery tempe∣ramente, and coolyng in the thyrde degree, and moystynge in the seconde: hauynge also some tartnes, and therfore stayeth whotte and bilious fluxions, and by a certeyn clam∣mynes that it hath without bytynge, it easeth the teethe when they are on edge. It helpeth greatly the burnyng beates of the belly, layde to the waste or the mouthe of the stomache, and that in hectike feuers. And (because it is re∣stryngente) is profitably geuen to Dysentericis, mulitbri pro∣fluuio, and to reiections of bloude: but to these the iuice is muche more efficatious then the herbe. Another herbe there is also, called Portulaca marina, only of the likenes that the leaues therof haue with porcelane,
whiche yet (in other pointes vnlyke) is not to be numbred with these. Neyther ought I here to ouerpasse, that the thyrde lytle kynde of Sedum,Illecebra. called Illecebra is of some Gre∣cians named .Andrachne.Agria. Pruna. AVicenna. lib. 4. Fen. 3. tract. 1. describeth Prunam,Ignis persicus. and Ignem persicum, bothe in one chapiter, not without some confusion of the one with the other, and bothe with Formica. First estemyng both the names, to serue for euery blysteryng, corrosiue, and eschare makynge pustule. And a little after he sayeth, that Pruna is that, whiche maketh the place blacke as a cole, without moisture, hauynge a small eminence lyke a lupine, somtyme with a pustule and som∣tyme not: hauyng itche ouer all. And somtyme dothe Ignis persicus or Pruna, more larglye blyster, and purge suche a quitture, as a place burned or cautrized doth. The place be∣ing ashe coloured, blacke, or leady, and compassed aboute with a vehement inflammation without perfecte rednes. And agayne, Ignis persicus is the more sharpe, and of the swyster apparition, and motion: Pruna the slower, and lying deper. The beginnyng of both is of burned choler myxed with melancholie, (and therof commeth the blacke eschare in both.) Ignis persicus consisting of the vehementer choler, and Pruna of the myghtier melancholye. It they chaunce in the fleshe, they are the soner resolued: but if in the sinewes, they sticke the faster, and resolue the slowlyer. Thus farre Auicen. And yet confessyng after, that the name of eyther, may be geuen to both: and affirmeth them often to come of a pestilentiall feuer. Nowe Pruna and Carbunculus, in the qualitie of names as you see differ not: and howe muche their efficient causes, signes, and propreties doe varie: After these descriptions therof, by comparing them together, it is easy to see.
Prunum. THe plumme tree or Damsen tree, called in Greeke, ,Coccymelos. and Prunus is of many kyndes, both tame and wilde: wherof maister Turner hath egregiously wrytten.Coccymelon. The prune (called ,) is a fructe sayeth Galen,Galen. de ali∣mentis. lib. 2. of small nuryshment, but doth meanly moyste and coole the belly, and by his moisture and stimines, subdueth the same,De sym. lib. 7. and that the better if it bee boyled cum Melicrato: But this doe the newe moyst ones, more then the olde and drye. The damascen prunes also, (which are acounted best) lesse then the Spanysh prunes, whiche are praysed nexte. The best prunes are great & lose, hauing some adstriction. The wylde prunes or plummes, are euidently adstrin∣gent, and therfore doe staye the belly, and are conuenient, for the inflammations of Columella, and other partes of the throte. Pyrum. PEares are called in Greeke ,Apion. i. pyrū Apios pyrus. Galen. de ali∣mentis. lib. 2. (as the tree is called ,) and consiste of three partes, as an earthy, a wa∣trie, (whiche are both colde,) and a temperate. Wher∣fore to be eaten, they are frendly to the stomache, staye thirste, and nuryshe somwhat. Peares thynne slyced, so dried,De symp. me. fac. li. 6. and after boyled, are vsed in wynter for meate. Outwardly applyed, they drye and coole moderatlye, and therfore doe they glewe together woundes.Achrades Which to doe the wylde peares,. i. py∣rum syluestre. (called Pyra syluestria, in Greke ) because they are moste adstringente, are moste mete. Quartana febris. THe quartane feuer, is either interpolate, and named Quartana intermittens, uel exquisita, or continuall, & therof called Onartana continens, or continua. The first is ingen∣dred
of a melancholike humore putrefied,Galen. de dif∣ferētiis febri∣um. lib. 2. or a splenatyke affecte, whose rigor is in the begynning not vehement, but lyke the colde that men commonly fele in moste vehement frostes.De arte cura∣tiua. lib. 1. Whiche yet in processe of tyme augmenteth euen to the state, with colde so vehement, as if the bones would breake, but not pungitiue as in the tertian. The pulse is slowe and rare: The augmentation, vigor, and mouyng of of heate, are contrary to the tertian. The humore kyndleth slowly lyke to a stone, or other lyke colde and drye thynge, whiche is the cause of so muche longer intermission therin, then in the Quotidiane. Quartana continua (whiche is rarly sene) is ingendred of me∣lancholy,De morborum temporibus. putrefied in the vesselles, euen as is Qnotidiana con∣tinens, or continua, caused of phlegme in like maner putrefied wherin they both differ from the lyke named intermittent feuers, and in that they are neuer without a feuerous ha∣bite, vntyl they cease for all: though yet they haue some re∣mission betwene euery fitte, and therin differ they from the feuers Synochis, wherin there is no remission but conti∣nuall burnyng. Quotidiana febris. Quotidiana uera, siue exquisita, is described in the title Amphe∣merina febre, and Quotidiana continua, immediatly aboue at Quartana. Rapa. RApa or Rapum,Congylis. is (of the round forme that the roote iath,)Gongyle. called of the Grekes , uasi bolus rotundus,Galen. de sym. lib. 6. in Englishe a Rape, or Turnep: and is of temperament, whotte in the seconde de∣gree and moyste in the firste:Dioscor. lib. 2. and therfore may Lanfranke well place it with his maturatiues. The roote of the same sodde doth nuryshe, but is harde to cōcocte, and ingendreth
wynde and sede, troubleth the stomache, & somtyme byteth the same:Galenus De a∣limentis. lib. 2. and the more if it be rawe. The decoction therof is somtime applyed to ye goute. The roote rosted vnder ashes cum cerato rosacco, is good for vlcerated kybes. The tender stalkes eaten, doe moue drine. The seade is put amonge anodyne medicines, and is drunke as a helthfull medicine against venim. Condite in brine, they nurishe the lesse, but increase apetite the more. Realgar. A Most vehement corrosiue medicine, and is made (as is sayde In opere pandactarum) ex sulphure, Calce uiua, & au∣ripigmento: whiche mortifieth fistules, & corrodeth de∣plie. And is also called Soricoria, because it killeth rattes, as it doth also the wormes of horses. But Brasauolus in examine suo symplicium, sayeth, that they are deceiued that thinke the true Risagallum (for so is it more fitly named) a thing artificiall, for it is founde sayeth he, in the same myne with Auripigmento, and is of the same kynde: beyng in dede a medicine hurtfull and venemous. Regeneratiuae medicinae. REgeneratiue medicines, are of nature lyke to intar∣natiues, as in restoring or renewing of flesh, bone. &c. and commeth of Regigno, to regender or brede againe. Repercussiua medicamina. CAlled also Repellentia,De com. med. secund. loca. lib. 3. are after Galen thinges sharp, tarte, and adstringent: hauyng by the same power to put away or driue backe the fluxions of humores, and ryseth of Repercutio or Repello, to constreygne or dryue backe.
Resina. REsina,Rbet. whiche the Grecians call , signifieth the oyly teares of trees, whiche wyll burne with fyre, and easily be commired with oyle, and moste hardly with water. As Gummi signifieth the watery teares of the same: for in the fyre it wyll crackell, and wyll in water be easily disolued, but not so in oyle. Resines doe al heate and drye.Dioscor. lib. . Wherof Resina terebinthina, is of Dioscorides called the beste: whiche also Galen appro∣ueth, begynnyng with Resina lentiscina,De sym. med. facultat. lib. 8. and geueth to it the firste place, saiyng. Besyde the litle adstriction that is ther∣in, (wherby it is so commodious to the weaknes and in∣flammations of the stomache, the liuer, and the belly,) it al∣so dryeth without bytinge: for it is verye subtyle without sharpnes. Of Terebinthinae resinae he sayeth, that it is prefer∣red to the reste: hauyng a manifest adstriction, but not lyke to mastyke. Howe be it, it hath adioyned a certeyne bitter∣nes, and therfore digesteth more then mastike, &c. of dy∣uers other. But this worde Resina, so written alone, is al∣wayes taken for our common Rosin. Resolutiua medicamina. MEdicynes resolutyues, are called also Discutientia, a Discutiendo, aut resoluendo: That is of discussynge, dy∣soluynge, vnlosynge, dischargynge, or wastynge a∣waye. Restauratio. REstauration, vnition, or reparation, is the first and principall intention, of the Chirurgien in euery dy∣uorse of vnitie.
Rigor. is that swifte and frequent motion,Rhigos, Palpitatio. (contrary to Palpitationi,) whose motion is litle, softe, & rare, whiche Ga∣len calleth compounde,De sympto. causis. lib. 2. as of a cause against nature and of a facultie animall (as of the vertue expulsiue) procurynge a sensible coldnes,De palpita∣tione trē. cō. & rigore. and an vnequall and inuoluntary mouing of the whole body, wherin it differeth from Horore (whiche is an vniuersal affecte of the skynne only,) and from Tremore whiche possesseth somme one member,Horor. and may by the wil be resisted.Tremor. But that rigor that is wonte to come on sicke persons, and called Rigor morbosus, is by the opinion of Hippocrates, a certeyne peynfull coldnes,De Crisibus. with an vnequall mouinge or shakyng of all the body. This may dyuersly chaunce, euen to whole bodyes as of heate, or of colde, or of a viscouse hu∣more, (to the first coolyng is a remedy, to the second heate, to the thirde concoction or euacuation, or both.) Somtyme of the heryng or seyng of horryble and fearfull syghtes, or noyses, phlegme also bredde without a feuer by idlenes, ill order of diete, and entryng the bathe after dynner: to the olde auncientes vnknowne.De differētiis febrium. lib. 2. And though it be euident, it to come of a natiue heate, yet commeth it also dyuersly, as well of colde viscous phlegme as of whotte and sharpe hu∣mores,De morborum temporibus. and sometyme of a iuyce myxed of heate and colde, as in quartanes, but in mixed compounde feuers, the rigor is neuer vehement. It to chaunce to a weake body, in a cō∣tinuall feuer is an euyl signe: and also when it wyl not at all, or hardly be put away. Rosa. IS named in greke of the pleasant sauour therof quasi bene olens,Rhodon. & is deuyded into kyndes diuers, wherof the auncientes haue lefte no memory. The powre of roses
consisteth sayeth Galen of a whotte & a watery substance together:De sym. lib. 8. And also of two other qualities, as bitternes and byndyng. The flowerwhereof is more adstringent then it selfe is, and therfore desiccatyue. Mesues appoynteth them the faculties of coolyng in the first degree, and driynge in the seconde. The iuyce of Roses sayeth he, whiche is seue∣red from the earthy substance therof, heateth nyghe to the firste degree. It openeth, mundifieth, resolueth: and pur∣geth gently by experience (sayeth Syluius,) both choler and water, though the olde wryters saye not so muche. Lyke properties to these hath Syrupus and Vnguentum rosarum. They strengthen the harte, the stomache, the lyuer, and the retentyue facultie. They are good in bilious feuers, to coole inflammations, to mitigate the paynes made by thē, and prouoke sleape. They moue sternutatiōs, and are hurt∣full for catarrhous persons: but they bynde and strengthen the Vuula and the throte, and take awaye surfetyng. The whyte roses doe purge little or nothyng, but doe bynde and strengthen more then the redde. Rumex acutus. CAlled in Greeke ,Oxylapathon. is one of the kyndes of :Lapathon. so called , quod uacuat uentrem, because the leaues of eche kynde therof doe lose and emptie the belly. The kyndes of Rumex are foure, Rumex acutus, wherof here. Rumex satiuus, called for his greatnes ,Hippolapatō Anaxyris. & of other fondly Rhabarbarum. Rumex syluestris, called also , & ,Oxalis. wherof afore. The fourth hath leaues lyke planten. About the which kyndes, because ther is some controuersie rysen, in that Aetius describeth his Oxi∣lapathon, otherwyse their Dioscorides doth, appoynting his sharpnes to consiste rather in taste then in the harde and sharpe substance of the leafes pointe: and that to speake of it here so largly as D. Turner hath done, would vnnecessa∣rily augmente this briefe worke: I sendethe thyther.
Of Rumex acutus,De symp. me. fac. li. 7. Galen saith, that it doth (of a mixed tem¦perament) both digeste & repercusse: The seade wherof is of so manifest adstriction, that it staieth ye Dysenteria, & the fluxe of the wombe.De alimentis. lib. 2. The rusticall women, (lustyng when they are with chylde) and gredy boyes, doe vse nowe and then to eate it rawe: whiche nurysheth but litle more then La∣patho. But that the roote of Lapathi acuti doth maturate, I fynde not in any other autentike author: and therfore is Lanfrākes experience only to be trusted vnto. Or els per∣haps he myght meane some other herbe: but what, it is doubtfull. They prayse it in the healyng and dryuing away of dyuers apostemes: Whiche to doe it semeth of them ra∣ther to be gathered by deuydinge, then by maturation. Ruta. RUe is called in Greeke ,Peganon. because by the great heate and drynes therof, it coagulateth sede, for  (id est coagulare, uel in glaciem cōtrahere) sig∣nifieth to congeyle or coagulate, Teste Plutarcho. It is of two kyndes, Hortensis & syluestris: wherof the one is as rare, as the other is common.Dioscor. lib. 3. It is in taste both sharpe and bitter, kylleth wormes,Galen. de sym. lib. 8. and is of temperamente whotte in the thyrde degree. The wylde Rue in the fourthe, and dryeth myghtely: and therfore is of power to deuide and cut inso¦der grosse and tough humores, and to moue bryne. And is good for paynes of the ioyntes, and the dropsie. The iuyce therof heated in a pome granate rynde, is put in to the eares to ease their peynes: It also sharpeneth the eye sighte. Eaten rawe or condite with salt, & layde to cum melle & succo foenicult, it putteth away their dimnes: and mit∣tigateth their peynes, beyng layde to cum Polenta. It is mor∣ouer of subtil partes, and destroyeth wyndes: and therfore pursueth strongly the inflammations of Colon, and other interior partes, & restreyneth venereous appetites: beside the incomparable vertue that it hath against poyson, and all venemous woundes.
Sabina. SAuyn is that continuall grene shrubbe, that is cal∣led in Greeke ,Brathy. uel Brathys. seu . And therof are there two kindes after Dioscorides. The one with leaues lyke to Cupresso, to vs well knowne: The other resembleth in forme, the leaues of the Tamariske tree, and is here rare. It heateth (by the sentence of Galen) and dryeth in the seconde degree,De symplici. lib. 6. Consisting of moste subtill partes, of taste lyke the Cipers tree, but that it hath more sharpnes, and lesse adstriction: And therfore is whotter, and dothe more myghtily digeste. It stayeth spreadyng or eatynge sores, a∣swageth inflammations, and breaketh Carbuncles: But for his great heate and drynes, is vnmete to heale woūdes. Being drunke with wyne: Menses, Vrinasque prouocat by his subtill substance, and dryueth out euen bloud by the vrine. Foetum etiam uiuentem interficit, & mortuum educit. Saccharum. SAccharum,Sal Indicus. Mel arundineū is called of the moste auncient Archigenes, and other olde wryters Sal Indicus, and Mel arundineum. Dioscorides. lib. 2. Cap. 74. Hauing spoken of dyuers kyndes of hony: sayeth. There is also an other kynde of cōcreted or hardened hony,Saccharon. which they call , founde in India & Arabia felici, in the redes, coacted or fastened like salte, and breaketh betwene the teethe as salte doth. It is mete for the belly, and profitable to the stomache, and hel∣peth the griefes of the reynes & bladder: being layde to, it putteth away ye causes of darknes or dimnes of ye eye sight. Galen in his .vii. boke of the faculties of simple medicins, in the chapter of Mel, sayth. But Saccharon whiche is brought from India and Arabia Felice, groweth together or becom∣meth harde on redes, and is a kynde of hony: not so swete as ours, but of like vertues, in scouryng & digesting. And in that it is no enemy to the stomache as is ours, nor cau∣seth thirste: so muche differeth it frō our hony in substance.
Plinie sayeth, it is hony gathered together as bygge as hasell nuttes, whyte lyke gummes, of great vse in medi∣cine. Alexander Aphrodisaeus sayeth, that whiche the Indians cal Saccharum, is the curdes or heauy partes of hony, the sonne thyckenyng or hardenyng the dewes, and conuertyng thē into the swetnes of hony. By these and lyke authorities, doth Fuchsius seme very learnedly to proue our sugar not to be Saccharum Candum, or Salem Indum of the auncientes: affir∣ming our sugar to be none other, but the iuyce of a plante of a proper kynde, well brused and pressed out, (and is then of colour, rather blacke or reddyshe, then whyte,) and by heate of the fyre, in boyling and purifiyng or scumming, it hardeneth and becommeth sugar: and the more it is boy∣led and purified, the whyter it is. Ioannes Manardus sayeth he, a man of moste sharpe iudgement. Lib. 2. Epistolarum suar medicinalium wryteth, that by the Portugales and Sicilians he knewe the plante, from the which sugar is pressed: and sayeth that it is sowed of seade in moyste places, and is out∣wardly lyke a great rede, but inwardly moste vnlyke: as fnll of pulpe, heauy, softe, and ful of iuyce. A rede contrary∣wyse is harde, lyght and empty. Nowe seyng that the sugar of the auncientes, came of a naturall dewe sayeth he, and the mater of hony, fyrst made glewye by the colde of the nyghte, and after harde by the heate of the sunne: whyte by nature, and breakynge be∣twene the tethe lyke salte, (Ours being softe, and may as hony be swalowed,Saccharum Tabarzeth. tyll by fyre it be hardened.) That han∣gynge vpon redes, and after Galen, shoulde not moue thyrste so muche as hony,Candum. uel Candidum. whiche ours doth: It can not be oure sugar. But contrary to this are the myndes of Brasauolus and Matthiolus, who denye Saccharum, of the auncientes to be any kynde of hony, or to come of the ayre: because what part of the ayre so euer (saye they) doth coagulate by colde, the same wyll by the heate of the sunne not harden, but euaporate
or vanyshe awaye, as wyll Manna recentium: whiche neuer waxeth so harde, that it wyl breake betwene the teethe like salte, but wyll rather be chawed as it were wexe. Who also iudge that plante (about the whiche Fuchsius thus argueth) to haue been of his exterior forme called Ha∣rundo,Harundo Sac∣charifera. though it be not holowe or emptie as a rede, & doe cal it Harundine Sacchariferam: confessyng yet with Fuchsius, that our sugar is Factitium quoddam, non naturale, and of the same iuyce made perfecte by boylyng, as before. But Sal Indus (saye they) is of the same substance, and for very fulnes issueth or sweateth out, at certeine ryftes of the same, and chiefly a∣bout the ioyntes or knobbes: where (saye they) it is by the heate of the sunne hardened and whytened. Claymyng also herin Plinies former authoritie to leane with them, in that he lykeneth it to gummes: Noting also that the auncientes did neuer saye, that their Saccharon dyd fasten or growe together on the leaues, as dewes are most apte to doe. Brasauolus also semeth to proue, that the makynge of su∣gar of the iuyce of Canes, and of the rootes of the same, was in vse before the tymes Galen and Dioscorides, by the testimonies Marcus Varro, Statius Papinius, and Strabo: who ly∣ued al before Galen. But Matthiolus alloweth not the swete pressed out liquores, whiche they mention, to be of necessi∣tie Saccharon: because the Indians pressed out suche iuyces from the rootes of dyuers plantes and trees, as well as of Canes. Neyther yet (though it be called Saccharum Tabarzeth or Saccharum Candum) is it our sugar Candy: whiche is not brought from India. But the Uenetians immitating na∣ture as muche as may bee, doe make it, by boylynge oure whyte sugar foure or fyue tymes, puttinge redes therin, wheron it may hange lyke lumpes: And wrappe it in cot∣ten, as though it came from the easterly regions. Neyther knowe I any thyng at this daye extant with vs, that may so well be lykened to Saccharum Arundineum, as may the why∣test sugar Candy, that we haue amongest vs: for the other
is also not naturall, but artificiall: nor white but yelowysh. And that iudge I Lanfranke to meane by Saccharum rubrum. Loe, thus doe we se, how this our infortunate and mise∣rable age, is not only bereft of this & many other Iewels and commodities: but also (whiche worse is) so drowned in obliuion of the same, that what they are or weare, we are either vtterly ignorant or very vncerteine. Sal. SAlt, generally called Sal, (wherof there are dyuers kindes,Hales ex li∣bris Galeni De symp. fa∣cult. li. 4. 9. 11.) is also in Greke in lyke maner called , and is made partly by arte, of sea water in the bayes, dryed through the heate of the sunne, and called Marinus: and of certeyne salt lakes by boylyng (whiche is called Lacustris siue Stagneus:Sal Marinus. and partly natural, digged out of the earth, and is therfore called Fossilis,Sal Fossitius. whiche doe both alyke drye migh∣tyly, but differ in this. That Sal Fossilis is of substance more compacte, grosse, and more adstringent: and beynge put in water, wyll not disolue as the other two sortes wyll. They haue also an obscure adstriction, wherby they thycken and bynde suche fleshe as is salted therwith: for it wasteth a∣way moyste substances, and byndeth the solid partes. For the whiche Sal Fossilis is best: next good to it is Sal Marinus. The thyrd rome holdeth ye salt that is made in the welles, & salte pooles. Of all the whiche, we haue only the vse of Sa∣lis Marini & Lacustris. Howbeit, in some partes of Calabria & Germania, and in all Pannonia, Sal Fossitius is their vsuall salte. For the whiche (sayeth Brasauolus) they digge & vndermyne certeyne hilles, of two myles in lengthe, estemyng that for beste whiche is whyte, fast, and shyning: but that whiche is moste bright and glistering like to Crystall, doe the A∣pothecaries (folowing the Arabians) therfore (or els for the rarenes of the same) call Salem Gemmae. Whiche for a truhe Manardus doth auouche: affirming him selfe to haue sene in Pannonia dyuers lumpes or cloddes of digged salte, shynynge so bryght, that suche as sawe it, thought it to haue ben very Christall. This sayeth Matthiolus, beyng cast into the fyre, neither cracketh nor leapeth out, as the other sortes wyll:
but gloweth as Iron therin. Salte sayeth Dioscorides, dothe bynde, scowre awaye, purge gentlye, scatter abroade, represse, and extenuate. But in that, one more thē an other as before. It defendeth from putrefaction, and is put in medicynes that mundyfie scabbes. It represseth ye excrescentes of the eies, & cōsumeth the webbes in the same, and taketh awaye other fleshye eminences. It put in Clyscers, loseth toughe and glasye phlegme from the belly. Outwardly applyed, it putteth away werynes, helpeth hydropicall tumores, and in fo∣mentations dothe mitigate paynes: Cum oleo & aceto, it sta∣yeth itche, & easeth the quincie, cum melle, aceto, & oleo. It is drunke cum Oximeli, after Opium and musheromes, to resiste strangling: and is profitable to all poysoned woundes, and venemous hurtes. Howbeit, Sal by Mesue, is deuided into foure principall or notable kindes, as 1. Sal panis, wherin are cōteined al the former sortes, as Marinus, Stagneus, (eche of the which is cal∣led Factitius) and Fossitius (called also of Syluius, Hammoniacus, & Communis) which ought to be white, bright, not stony, thick, and equal.Sal Gemes is as you see a kynde of Salis Fossitii or els must it varie frō Sale Gemmeo Dioscoridis. 2. Sal Gemmae whiche will easely cut or rente, & is lyke to the Cristal. 3. Sal Naphthicus, of colour blackysh, and smelleth like Bitumen: and 4. Sal Indus. Which is reddysh, or rather blackish, and is the strongest: next to it is Naphthi∣cus: Thirdly Gemmeus, and the weakest is Fossitius. Salte is whotte and drie (sayeth he) in the second degree, and howe bitter soeuer it be, so muche the whotter and drier it is. Of Sal Naphthicus, Dioscorides maketh no mencion, but Galenus lib. 4. &. 9. De symp. sayeth yt a certeine salt called Sodo∣minus, is made in ye sea of palestin of Syria, called Mare mortuū, wherin muche Bitumen is ingendred: and Naphtha is a kynde of Bituminis, wherof ye said salt is called Sal Naphthicus: wher∣of also in Plinie is almost a like sence. What the Arabians ment by Salem Indum, it is hard to know. But what the Gre∣cians ment therby, is shewed aboue vnder Saccharum. Salte consisteth of an carthye substance, bitter by ad∣ustion, and of an vnsauory watery substance.
Whiche two if they be equall, make a salte sauoure. If the earthy substance be the stronger, it wyll be bytter: but if the watery, it wyll haue an easy saltnes. Sal Ammoniacus. ,Hammoniacos Halos. quasi Sal arenarius, so called because (as some wryte) it is by dyggyng founde in long pie∣ces vnder sande, or els of his natiue place (as aboue of the Gumme Hammoniacum) is more commonly and moste corruptly called Sal armoniacus, and is of two sortes. Namely, the naturall called Natiuus,Sal Ammonia∣cus natiuus. whiche is thought to be con∣teyned vnder the sortes of Salis panis, and shoulde in colour be lyke Alumen Siston, and shyning: beyng so salte, that it is of vnpleasant taste, but profitable in medicine. Sal Ammoniacus is (sayeth Dioscorides) peculiarly praised,Dioscor. lib. 5. if it may bee easyly cutte or clefte into streighte flakes or sclyces, with vs bothe out of vse and knowledge, though in tyme longe synce better knowne.Sal Hammonia cu factitius. The other whiche we haue is artificall, and therfore called Factitius, and is chiefly occupied of Goldsmythes: and oughte not to bee v∣sed in steade of the true thynge, otherwyse then in muche lesse quātitie. But Galen biddeth vs substitute in his place Salem Capadocum.Sal Capadocus And dyuers other learned men, Salem Gem∣neum. His vertues are like the vertues of salte. Sal Nitrum. ALbeit (as moste true it is) that our Salte petre is not ,Nitron. of Dioscorides,Litron. Galen, Plinie, and other auncient wryters, whiche is naturall, com∣myng of certeyne waters in lakes: and should be lyght, rose coloured or whyte, cleauyng or openyng it selfe into many pores, lyke a spungy substance. But our Salt peter (which is artificiall) is glisteryng whyte, (if it be good) or els blac∣kyshe, (if it be not made perfecte by boylyng) solide and weyghty.
Nitrum also is taken cum Lacerpitio, of suche as fele not their meate (whervnto salt peter is not the metest:) yet surely is it euident, that Lanfranke and many others right learned, both of his tyme and long since, ment according to the vul∣gar opinion, (though not without great errore,) that which hath ben commōly called Sal petrae, When they wrote Sal Nitrum. But Mesues sayeth,The old trans¦lators vse this Araby worde . But let yt be no pre¦iudice to anye truthe. that of Nitrum, there is one mineral or naturall, and an other artificial called Spuma Nitri, white, lyght, salte, and bityng, and weaker then the naturall Ni∣trum. An other artificiall Nitrum also there is sayeth he, strō∣ger thē Nitrum, and called Flos parietis uel salis. Hetherto Me∣sues. And this doe I with Syluius take to be Sal petrae, (if it may in any wyse be founde among the auncientes) better knowne as it semeth now, to the Apothecaries and to Gū∣ners, then in olde tyme to the auncient wryters. Nitrum sayeth Mesues, is drye in the thyrde degree, and and whotte in the begynnyng of the same: But after Aui∣cen only in the seconde.De sym. lib. 9. It is (sayth Galen) of power meane betwene Aphronitrum & Salem, and by burning is more sub∣tyle: and therfore draweth the nygher Aphronitrum. It dryeth and dygesteth,Dioscor. lib. . and is put (sayeth Dioscorides) into emplasters, yt drawe out, discusse, & extenuate: & scow∣reth awaye leprosies. Whiche (if it be taken inwardly) cut∣teth, and thinneth, grosse and toughe humores, muche stronglier then salte: and is taken both rawe and burned, against the suffocations of Musheromes. Sambucus. SAmbucus, which is called in Greeke , semeth sayeth Fuchsius to be so called of Sambix, the first fynder therof, or of the musicall instrument Sabuca: and therfore (after Quintus Serenius) ought it rather to be called Sabucus. There are of the Elder two kyndes, the one a tree called symply, by that general name Sambucus. The other a shrubby herbe
called Ebulus,Chamaeacte. and in Greeke , Quasi Sambucus hu∣milis, in Englyshe Walle worte, or Daneworte. Whiche to haue both heatyng and driyng facultie, the bitternes and meane bynding therof, doth sufficiently declare, according to the mynde of Galen: though some wryte that it cooleth. It dygesteth also & glueth together. Dioscorides saieth that they drye, drawe out water, and hurte the stomache. Their leaues sodde and eaten, doe purge choler and phlegme: and with wyne, doe helpe the byte of the viper. It mollyieth the mother, correctynge the affectes of the same. The freshe and tender leaues, applied cum polenta, mi∣tigateth inflammations, helpeth burnynges, and the by∣tinges of dogges,Sambucus montana siue syluesiris. and glueth together depe and fistulous vlcers. Two kindes more hereof are of ye late wryters mē∣cioned as Syluestris, beyng a more shrubby tree with beries alwayes redde: and Palustris growyng alwayes in ye fennes. Sanguis draconis. BLoude sayeth Galen,Haema. called in Greeke , varieth as the natures of the beastes, from whence it floweth. The bloude of one being thinne & liquide, of an other dryer, an others bloude is whotter, but no bloud is colde. Sanguis draconis, soundeth dragons bloud: about the which there are not a fewe opinions. Some iudge it the iuyce of an herbe,Cinnabaris. others the gumme or liquor of a tree, and Plinie calleth it Cinnabarin. who sayeth that the Elephāt, beyng in the conflicte betwene hym and the dragon, (whose mutual hatred neuer ceaseth,) strangled: falleth with great weight on the dragō and dasheth him in sonder. The bloud of both the whiche running forth together,Who repro∣ueth Plinie in many thinges is after gathered made in a lumpe, dried and kept for medicine: and this Leonicenus as well as diuers others, disapproueth not. But that Cinna∣baris, is Legitimus sanguis draconis, is farre from truthe, as here after shall appere. First Dioscorides treateth of Cinabaris, in his fifth booke (as Galen also doth,) among mineralles, (not speaking a worde therof in his second boke, where he trea∣teth
of dyuers bloudes) saiyng: that some men estemed it to be Sanguinem draconis, because that suche as then was, would scantly serue the painters to varie a colour with. Second∣ly,. Theophrastus maketh it a metall, growynge in Hiberia and Colchis. None otherwyse sayeth Aucrois also, of Cinnabaris. But that whiche we haue cōmonly to be solde of the Apo∣thecaries,But the ∣son of the na∣me is hard to be knowne. semeth (not without the authoritie of diuers lear¦ned men) to be the teares or gūme of a tre growyng in A∣phrica, whose rynde may be sene in the lumpes of the same: whiche as Matthiolus iudged, might be Ginnabaris Dioscoridis. Scrapio also mencioneth a kinde of Sanguinis dracois, to bee the iuice of an herbe, whiche he describeth both in forme & faculties, as Dioscorides doth ye fourth kinde of Sideritis, cal∣led Achillea Sideritis: whiche Brasauolus wysheth to be in vse a∣mong the Apothecaries, rather then the gumme that they haue. Thus doe you se here three sortes of Sanguinis draconis, variyng eche from other as notably as may be. Sanguis draconis sayeth Platearius, hath byndyng and conso∣lydatiue powre, and is profitable for the spyttyng of bloud, bledyng at the nose or els where. Vnde, menses cum Corrigiola∣sistit. Sanies. SAnies, is generally taken for that superfluous liquide substance that floweth from euery vlcer, regularly or otherwyse, of what kynde or qualitie soeuer it be, and as it differeth in coloure, substance, or qualities, so is it kno∣wne and called by seuerall names, (as well as the vlcers from whence it floweth,) As by destinction a pure, Sanies purulens: a sorditie, Sanies sordida, or filthy matter: a Viro irulens, or venemous. But thou shalt perceiue Lanfranke alwaies (for the moste part,) to meane by Saniem, the same quitture, whyte and thicke to beholde, light to touche, and equall, or eche waye lyke to it selfe, and not stinkyng: whiche Galen calleth Pus laudabile,Lib. 1. de diffe∣rentiis  cap. 6. and we good or well digested matter. But in apostemes otherwyse as before.
Santalum siue Sandalum. OF the wooddes called Sanders (wrytten commonly Sandali,) there is among the olde Grecians no menciō founde, vnlesse their opinion should be of force, that woulde haue Santalum rubrum,Aspalathus. to bee Aspalathum Dioscoridis: whiche Serapio doth manifestly confute. For in wrytyng of Santali, he yeldeth no testimony of Dioscorides (as elswhere he is wonte,) but the authorities of his owne contrey men: wryting also of Aspalathi vnder the Arabik name Darsisaban. And farther Santalum is the woedde of a taule streight tree, but Aspalathus is a lowe shrubbe, odoriferous, and bitter in taste: neither of the whiche is founde in Santalo rubro. Of the Arabians therfore, was it first founde and described. Santalum (sayeth Matthiolus) groweth in certeyn great and thicke wooddes of both the Indies, and is of three kyndes: wherof Santalum Pallidum or Citrinum is beste estemed. The next place hath Santalum Album. The thyrde and worste, is Rubrum, whiche is without odore: but the other doe smell well. They are colde (by the testymonies of the Arabians) in the thyrde degree, and drye in the seconde, hauynge byn∣dyng, coolyng, and alteratiue vertue: And therfore are vsed to mitigate thirste, and the whotte distemperance of the lyuer, and for choleryke vomites. Santalum rubrum doth pry∣uatly resiste defluxions, and is profitably applyed Ex succo so∣lani, uel Sedi, uel portulacae, to vehement inflammations, & the gowte of the feete. Santalum Candidum atque pallidum layde to the forehead, cum aqua Rosarum, doe ease the peynes of the heade: and beyng drunke, doe merueylously helpe whotte stomaches. They doe (sayth Auicen) most effectually make gladde, and strengthen the hearte. Sapo. SOpe,Quoniam sicut spatha incidit whiche the Arabians cal Sabon, is of diuers kindes in opere pandactarum. As Sapo Gallicus, Sapo muscatus, and Sapo Spatharenticus, so called of his excedyng sharpnes and cut∣tyng,
and is also called Mollis, niger, & Iudaicus, wherwith they washe sylke.Gutta uel  qua pria  ponariorum. The softe or graye sope, is made of the stronge lye called Capitellum, and oyle together. Hard sope hath in composition in the steade of oyle, shepes talowe. They are of a hote and composed exulceratiue operation, and doe scoure, putrefie, and maturate, harde apostemes. Sarcocolla. IS the Gumme or liquore of a tree growyng in Persia, as wytnesseth Dioscorides, Like the poulder of Frankyn∣sence, redde or pale, or as Mesues sayeth whyte, and bytter: and is called in Greeke , id est glutinum carnis,De sym. med. facultat. lib. 8. because it glueth excellently fleshe together. Galen sayeth that it dryeth without bytyng, and therfore is of po¦wre to adglutinate woundes, and to staye the fluxe or run∣nyng of the eyes. It heateth after Mesue, in the seconde degree, but drieth lesse. It concocteth or maturateth, scou∣reth, openeth, and digesteth. Inwardly, it purgeth rawe phlegme and other grosse humores, frō the brayne chiefly, from the sinewes, the ioyntes, and the lūges: And therfore is profitable for olde phlegmatike, asthmatike, and coug∣hing persons, and pelpeth Ophthalmia, and other diseases of the eyes. Scabiosa pilosa. SCabiosa,Psora. whiche Actius calleth , quasi scabiem Sanante, (because it healeth scabbes) is an herbe wherof ye greciās neyther olde nor late writers, haue left any light. Though Mathaeus Syluaticus, (as reporteth Iacobus Manlius) affirmeth it to be  of the Greciās:Stobe. whose sentence hath few lear∣ned fautores,) Whervnto there are referred fyue kyndes: wherof the first two differ not but in greatnes, for the one is muche lesse then the other. The thyrde is called Scabiosa Ouina. The fourth Iacea nigra, and vulgarly Materfilon. The
fifthe whiche Fuchsius (imitating a certeine olde writen her∣ball,) calleth Succisam.Succisa. The common sorte (ledde by a moste vayne superstition, that the diuell of enuye to mankynde & his felicitie, should haue bytte awaye, this precious roote:) haue named Morsum diaboli,Morsus Dia∣boli. quasi a diabolo praemorsa, & in english diuels bytte, of some Matfelon, but moste aptly heary sca∣biose. This doth most iustly agree, both in forme & vertues with Scabiosa pilosa, that Lanfranke describeth. For it is vsed sayeth Fuchstus, as a present remedy to maturate and heale Carbuncles, eyther brused grene and applyed to the same, or the wyne drunke wherin it was boyled: and is nowe founde to haue discussiue, and incisie facultie, and vsed to dissolue coagulated bloud. This Succisa, hath ben thought of some to bee Geum Plinii: Whiche with greater reason, is more aptly aplyed to Caryophyllata. They are all vnmea∣surable bitter, and therfore must nedes be hotte and drye, and are in qualities lyke Succisa. Of Scabiosa, in opere pandactarum, I fynde as foloweth. Men saye that S. Urban at the peticions of a certeine asthma∣tike sister of his, (that vsed scabiose continually,) sente to hir thee verses, of the vertues therof. Vrbanus pro se nescit pretium Scabiosae. Nam purgat pectus quod comprimit aegra senectus. Lenit pulmonem purgat laterum regionem. Apostema frangit, si locum bibita tangit. Tribus uncta foris anthracem liberat horis. Whiche may with a fewe moe wordes thus in verse be englyshed. To Urbane him selfe, it is vncerteine. Howe many vertues, in scabiose reygne: But excellently it clenseth the breste, Of sicke aged folke, that there are opreste. The pypes of the lunges, if rough they apere, It maketh them smothe, yea gentle and clere.
The roumes of the breste, that we the sydes call, It purgeth well, from incombrances all. If it be drunke, so that it touche the place, Apostemes it breakes, by peculiar grace. Without to Carbuncles, if it layde be, It doth lose and breake them, within houres three. Scammonium. ,Scammoni  Scammonia. orum est. so called Per Antonomasian, is the iuyce of the herbe  prepared, & called them Diacridium. The Romains also doe (after the place) name it Colophonium. Scammonia, saith Dioscorides, putteth forth grosse, fatte, & many brāches, frō one roote, of the length of thre cubites, with the leaues of Helxinae (whiche we call byndwede,) or of Juie:Dioscor. lib. 4. but softer, rough, and triangled, a floure white, roūde and holowe, lyke a maunde basket, or bell formed cuppe, & of heauy smell. The roote is very longe, of a cubite thyck∣nes, and whyte, with a heauy sauoure, and a heauy iuyce. Whiche is thus gathered. The roote (the head therof beyng first cutte of) is made holowe with a knife, that the iuice may runne out into the holownes: whiche is taken in vessells, and dryde. The scā∣monie is praised that is light, cleare, thinne, of coloure most lyke to glewe of lether, called Glutinum taurnium: Like a mu∣sherum, with fine pores or fistules, suche as is brought frō Mysia, a region of Asia. And trust not it that will only ware white, being touched with the tongue: for so will that doe, that is adulterate with the iuyce of Tithymali, wherof the greatest token is, that it burneth not the tongue vehemēt∣ly, as the right Scāmonie doth. One drachme of the iuyce drunke ex aqua pura uel muls, purgeth downwards choler & phlegme.Volubilis Conuoluulus. Mesues writing of fiue kindes of Volubilis or Con∣uoluulus, describeth the fifth kynde therof (whiche groweth in Antiochia, Armenia, Arabia, & Turchia) to haue a roote like to Bryonia or bigger, like a great gourde, a stalke .ii. cubites lōg with little narowe leaues, formed like a fethered arowe, and falling of at euery light occasion: hauyng more plentie
of mylky iuyce then the reste, wherof scāmonie is made: and therfore is called the mistres of mylke geuing herbes. It is hotte and drye in the seconde degree (or rather with Galen in the begynning of the thyrde.) &c. In the chapiter of Scammonium he sayeth, that Scāmonie is of purgynge me∣dicines the strongest. And after he hath shewed diuers ma∣ners of gathering, driyng, workyng it in paste, and sealyng it: he sayeth that it should be cleare lyke gummes, or whi∣tyshe, or of dyuers colours, chiefly that which floweth first. The same touched or rubbed, with spittell or water, ge∣ueth mylke. It ought also to be tender, brittle and easye to be pouldered, lyght, and referring the propre odoure of the herbe: but that good, not stynkyng. From the which notes howe muche the more it differeth, so much the worse it is. It may be kept twenty yeares, but the older it is the wea∣ker. It is hotte and drye in the thyrde degree, bytter and sharpe: but not so sharpe as the herbe. It cutteth, scoureth, and purgeth yelowe choler, by attraction frō out the bloud, euen from the extreme partes: so muche is his furious ve∣hemencie. It hurteth the harte, the stomache, the liuer, and the guttes, and troubleth the other bowelles, subuerteth the stomache, taketh away appetyte, moueth abhorfulnes, stirreth thyrste, and ought not to be geuē to cholerick per∣sons, and such as are apte to take feuers. When it is taken, heate, colde, colde frutes, colde water, long sleape, exercise, wrath, and other vehement affections of the mynde, ought to be aduoyded: and so goeth he forth to the corrections of the same. But nowe whether Scammonia Dioscoridis, and Volubilis quinta Mesuae, be one herbe vnder two names, or not: whose descriptions, though (beyng precysely examined,) they doe not exactly agree: yet are they (as you see) of no small affini∣tie. And may haue the more, for that Mesues dispraiseth for nought, both the herbe and the iuyce of his coūtry: Wher∣of belyke he made his description, or els perhaps of suche a one, as he knewe not otherwyse then by reporte of others. For so are ryghte well approued authores, some tymes
founde to doe. I leaue it to the wise and learned to discusse: rather then rashly to affirme any thyng, wherof I haue neyther sensible knowledge, nor iust assurance: and that the rather because ryght worthy wryters doe leaue it in doubte. But that Scammonium Dioscoridis is as vtterly out of vse as vnknowne, there is no doubte. For we haue none that maye in any wyse bee compared therto: for our best may rather be adiudged Scammonium Iudaicum, uel Syriacum, whiche Dioscorides estemeth moste vile. And farther .xv. graynes of the common Scammonium, hath ben sene to purge the belly often, or with dyuers stooles: whiche by the testi∣monie of Dioscorides a whole drachme shoulde scarsly doe. Wherfore Andreas Marinus, wysheth vs diligently to serche out, and prudently to vse our owne natiue medicines. For we haue in our regions (sayeth he) medicines that (if they were ryghtly knowne and prepared,) would purge muche more luckily then Scammonium, or vnknowne Turbith. For if the best beare with it so many nociue qualities, as aboue is shewed: what then doth the worste, wherof we haue the vse? Whiche truly moued Brasauolus to wyshe, that it had neuer come to the handes of men: as a thyng more hurtful then profitable. Scarificatio. SCarificatio uel cutis Sculptura,Characa. englishly Scarfication, is cal∣led in Greeke , Hoc est Sculpo, Rado, uel Scarifico,, to rase, garse, or scarifie the skynne. Schoenanthum. ,Schoenth Schoenos aro∣maticos. Lib. 1. quasi Schoeni, uel Schini flos, It is the floure of the swete rushe called , hoc est iuncus odo ratus. This rushe sayeth Dioscorides, must be chosen redde and newe, bearyng fyne flowres with redde fragmentes, whiche beyng rubbed in the hande smelleth lyke the rose:
and byndeth the tongue with a fyery byting. The flowres, the stalkes, and the rootes wherof, are in vse. The flowre sayeth Galen (which we handle,)Galen. de sym. lib. 8. doth heate and bynde mo∣deratly, neyther lacketh it a subtill nature: and therfore Vrinam & menses mouet, geuen in drinke, or in fomentations: and profiteth also the inflammations of the lyuer, the sto∣mache, and the belly. But the roote is more adstringente, (though the flowre also doe bynde with all his partes:) and therfore is myxed with medicines that are geuen for spyt∣ting of bloud. Hitherto Galen. And for as muche as these flowres are not now brought vnto vs, yea and in Uenice rarely sene: (wherat our mer∣ueile may be the lesse, synce Galen noteth thē in his time to be very rare:) The learned phisitiēs haue therfore councel∣led to vse, The tenderest or vppermost partes of the herbe or rushe. But our Apothecaries, (saye they) goynge to Ue∣nise, are deceyued in Iunco odorato: & buye eyther in the steade therof, or mixed therwith, certeyne tender strigges of Iunci palustris, that is the marshe rushe, or rushe of the fennes. It is commonly called Pastum uel palca Camellorum, or Ca∣melles strawe. Scilla. , called also of some Scylla, Cepe muris, & Cepa marina of the Apothecaries Squilla, in englyshe squille or sea onyon, hath sharpe feruent, and cutting power, and heateth in the second degree. It mollifieth the belly, moueth vrine, is good for the hydropsie, for the iaundis, for the paynes of the belly and the olde cough. Whervnto it helpeth much (by ye minde of Galen) to be rosted or sodde,Galen. de sym. Lib. 8. rather then rawe: for so is his vehemencie diminished. Hereof see more in D. Tur∣ners herball. Scirrhus▪ ,Scirrhos. Sclerotes. Id est durities, writen of old Sclirosis,
is (as I gat her of Galen in diuers places) a tumore against nature, and an affecte of harde and thicke partes. (Whiche yet to take, the lyuer & the splene are moste readye) harde, without peyne, and sometyme without sense. Whose fyrste cause sayeth he, in his booke of tumores against nature, is double: as of grosse & toughe phlegme, and of the dregges of bloud. Whiche also is double, wherof the one doth Hip∣pocrates call blacke: The other also is blacke, but proper∣ly called blacke choler. And in his fifth booke of symple me∣dicines, he affirmeth it to sprynge of colde and grosse hu∣mores:De arte cura∣tiua. lib. 2. as of melancholy, or of grosse and viscous phlegme, (ouermuche dryed, and impacte in the pores of the skynne) or of bothe: and chanceth often by ignorance, (throughe the vse of vehement byndyng and coolyng thynges,)De com. med. secun. loc. li. 6 to inflam∣mations, and Ignibus sacris. If it come of phlegme, it hathe some obscure sense, & is curable with mollificatiues, though hardly: but that whiche commeth of melancholyke iuyce, is cancrous (the partes affected vtterly without sense,) and vncurable: and is by mollyficatiues exasperate. And as the pure Scirrhus, made of melancholy, maye in mixtures receyue any of the other three humores:Scirrhes oede∣matodes. so may it in name variably chāge, and be called of phlegme ,Scirrhos phle∣gmonodes. Id est Scirrhus oedematosus, Of bloude , Hoc est inflamationis consors,Scirrhos Ery∣sipelatodes. or of choler, and is named , quasi ignitae rubedinis, uel sacriignis particeps. Scrophula. Scrophula, (so called of Auicenna, Guidone de Cauliaco, Bruno, Theodorico, Lanfranco, and others, a Scropha, a pregnante soowe: because it or the lyke, is a disease cōmon to hogs) is a harde Scirrhous tumore, in the glandules of the share or arme holes, but chiefly in the necke, and called in Latin Struma,Struma. Choas. in Greeke : as the inflammatiō in them, hath to name Phygethlon. Looke more at Bubo and Glandulae.
Seges syluestris. SEges, signifieth moste commonly standyng Corne. And where Lanfranke hath Folia segetis syluestris, I know not howe to vnderstand hym therin, vnlesse he meane ther∣by some kynde of the wylde cornes, that vsually growe in Italy: as Milium, Milium Indicum, (which they call Sorgos,) Pani∣cum, Bromus, &c. Wherof the poore nedy wretches there, make their breade, especially of Sorgos. But whiche of these (if any) he meaneth,De symp. li. 7 it is harde to gesse. But Galen in glu∣ing together woundes, and healing vlcers, (which is Lan∣franke his purpose) prayseth Milium for the best. Semperuiuum. SEmperuiuum, whiche we may moste aptly call Aygrene, is called in Greeke ,Aeizoon. id est semperuiuens, because it lyueth styll and kepeth grene, both wynter & sommer: neyther dieth it by any iniurious wether. Truly a singuler miracle of nature, that an herbe so colde and moyste, grow∣ing on the house toppe, (a place moste drie, and subiecte not only to the parchyng bemes of the Sunne in sommer, but also to the moste colde frostes, and vehemente stormes of wynter,) should yet lyue and be grene. Wherof indede, manye suche as are ready to conuerte those merueylous workes of God, (that their brutyshe eyes can not otherwise beholde) into moste horrible supersticions: haue conceiued a moste vayne opinion, that lightninge coulde not hurte the house on whose toppe it grewe: and haue therfore called it Barbam Iouis,Barba Iouis. and is of three kyndes: as Sedum maius, wherof hitherto. The second is Sedum minus,Sedum Trithales. called also in Greke , for that it bloweth thryce in the yere, and therof is there Mas & foemina. The male hauing a yelowe floure, the floure of the female is pale or whyte, and is called Vermicularis, and
Crassula minor. There semeth also (sayeth Dioscorides) to be a thirde kynde,Andrachne a∣gria. Telephiō called of some , id est portula∣casyluestris, of other , and of the Romaines Illecebra, of nature very hotte, contrary to the reste. Sedum sayeth Galen,De symp. e. fac. li. 6. (both Maius and minus) dryeth lightly, and byndeth moderatly: yet cooleth it in the thyrde degree. Wherin also a watery essence, beareth the maisterie: and therfore auayleth ad erysipelata, Herpetes & Phlegmonas, com∣myng of a fluxion: and is an excellent repercussiue. Serapinum. COruptly so called of Apothecaries, but more trulys Sagapenum,Dioscor. lib. 3▪ is the iuyce (sayth Dioscorides) of an herbe lyke to Ferulae, growyng in Media: wherof the beste is shyning through, and of a bryght or shining yelow coloure without, & whyte within: with an odore meane as it were betwene Laser and Galbanum:De antidotis. sharpe in taste, and will (sayth Galen) sone resolue in water. It profiteth in the peynes of the breste and the sydes, to olde coughes, conuulsions and ruptures, and expurgeth the grosse phlegme of the lunges. Sagapenum (sayeth Galen) is whotte and of subtyll partes as are other liquores:De sym. med. facultat. lib. 3. But obteyneth a certeine abstersion, wherby it purgeth and extenuateth the scarres of the eye: To the dulnesse also, and the dimnes of the sight, commyng of the grosnes of humores, It is a good medicine. But the plante lyke to Ferula (wherof it commeth) is weake and vn∣profitable. Serpigo. I Cān not better expresse Lanfranke his minde of Serpigo▪ then hym selfe hath done, in the thirde treatice and first doctrine of his greater worke, saiyng. I saie therfore that Serpigo is an exasperation of the skynne, whiche crepeth hi∣ther
and thither, called in Frenche Derbes, in Lumbardy Dembeda, or Volatica, of others Ignis uolaticus, and commeth of burned humores, assaultyng the skynne with exasperatiō or roughnes▪ wherby I iudge him (and others without nū∣ber) to meane none other thynge, then Galen doth by Her∣pete symplici. But looke more at Herpes. Howe be it, of Thiria, (whiche he ioyneth as a partener, with Serpigine, and to come of the same causes:) Looke more at his place in the letter T. For in his workes I fynd ther∣of no farther explication. Howe be it, Guido, Rolandus, and Rogerus, with dyuers o∣thers liuing about that time, make foure kyndes of lepro∣sies, (a diuision in Galen and the auncientes not founde,) which may come of the foure humores burned, as Alopecia, whiche commeth of burned bloud,Alopecia. (though Rolandus saye of phlegme.)Lepra leonina Lepra Elephā¦tia. Leonina, that springeth of burnte choler, infecting the bloud. Elephantia commyng of melancholie, (Rolande sayeth of bloud.)Thiriasis lepra And Thiriasis, caused of salt phlegme putre∣fied, after Rolande of melancholie: so called say they a Thiro, that is of an adder or viper: because it is scaly & loseth the skynne, as doth the adder. Wherin there is putrefaction, both of the skynne and fleshe, and also pustules. Which na∣me (if it may be of the Greke deriued) I iudge to come, , Hoc est a serpente, uel fera aut noxa belua. That is of a serpent or some cruell or hurtfull beaste, Vt uipera uel lupus. haue ye old greciās generally taken pro bestiis uenenatis,Therion. that is for venemous beastes, & such as leaue venim behind them,Theriomata.  e∣nim tetrum ul cus est. with their stroke or bite: wherof cōmeth , Id est tetra, uel uenenata ulcera. That is cruell or venemous vl∣cers. And so of Theriacalia, that is thynges or rather medi∣cines that resiste venim. But at Thiria you may reade som∣what more. Sinapis.
SInapis,Napy. is called in Greeke . Of Sinapis, Plinie maketh thre kyndes,Sinepy. but it is of Dioscorides vn∣deuyded.Dioscor. lib. . Who mēcioneth but one, callyng it Sinapi horrense, whiche we call garden mustarde or sendew sede: and ther∣fore may a wylde also be there vnderstanded: For the third Rapistrum of the late wryters, is vsually put. Musterde heateth and dryeth,De symplici. . lib. 8. (by the mynde of Galen,) in the fourth degree. It is profitable for the diseases of the throte, causeth nesyng, and draweth downe rewines from the head. &c. Solatrum. OF Solanum,Strychnos. whiche the Greekes name , both Dioscorides and Galen,Strychnos Ce∣paios. doe make foure kindes. The first is , Solanū hortense, with vs night shade,Strychnos Ha¦licacaos, Physalis. or petimorell. The seconde , Id est uesicaria, which we call wynter cherie, and fol∣lowyng the Apothecaries Alkakenge.Strychnos hyp¦noticos. The thirde is called of Galen , a consiliando somno, somniferum, of prouokyng sleape. The fourth (quod ad insaniā adigat,) they call ,Strychnos Manicos. Id est furiosum. A fifth also haue the late wryters founde and added,Vesicaria pe∣rigrina. calling it Vesicariam peregrinā. Soanum hor tense, whiche doubtlesse Lanfranke meaneth by Solatrum, doth Galen also call Esculentum,De alimentis. lib. 2. because in time past it was planted in gardyns, and vsually eaten, but we vse it rarely, sayeth he as an aliment, (because it nourisheth litle,) but as a medicine often.De symp. li. 8. It cooleth and byndeth in the seconde de∣gree: outwardly applied, they heale maligne vlcers. Spica. SPicanardi, for so sayth Nicolaus in his recepte of Dazingiber, or as some haue it Spicaindica, or Nardus indica, is so called sayth Galen, in his first booke, De antidotis: because it in forme resembleth an eare of corne, for it is in deede a roote, and is called also of lyke reason in Greeke .Nardu Sta∣chys.
It is hotte in the thyrde degree, and drye in the ende of the second,De sym. me. facult. li. 8. consisting of a sharpe adstringent, and light bit∣ter substance: Therfore is the roote bothe drunke and out∣wardly applyed, conuenient for the lyuer and the stomache. It moueth vryne, healeth the gnawinge of the stomache, & drieth the fluxions of the head, breste, and belly. Whervn∣to Nardus Indica, whiche is the blacker, is stronger then Syriaca.Nardos Celti∣ca. Nardos oreia. Other two kyndes there are, , Hoc est Gallica, & . id est Montana. Spodium. POmpholix sayeth Dioscorides, differeth from Spodio, on∣ly in specie, not in kynde. And as the twoo kyndes of ,Cadmia. are the earthy or stony partes of the oure of brasse, dryuen vp from the fornace, when the brasse is in melting or purifying, as ashes or soote: and cleaueth to the sydes, vaultes, and walles, of the fornace or melting house. Some for the lyghtnes therof rysing,Cadmia botry∣itis quasi asi∣nosa. and cleauynge in the hygher partes, and called : The other weyghtier partes, that cleaue therfore in the lower places of the wal∣les,Cadmia placi∣tis uel . quasi crustosa. they call : So not only of brasse, but also of Cad∣mia broken, and by the industrie of the founder or worke∣man, sprinkled in the fornace, and at the last burned, com∣meth both Spodium and Pompholyx. Whiche by the cunnyng blowyng of the bellowes, doe rise from the fornace. Wher∣of some ryseth,Pompholyx. and hangeth to the walles and couerynges of the house,Spodion. and is : white, fatty, and so light, that it may flie away in the ayer: and parte, whiche is , so called , id est a cinere sordido, That is of ashes myxt with dead coales, and rubbyshe: falleth on the flower: and is of colour black, weyghtie, and ful of heares, & chaffe, as the swepyng of the brasyers flowre. Whervnto sayeth Gallen,De sym. lib. 8. that seameth to be lyke in facultie, whiche is cal∣led
Antispodium, whiche is not to be vsed where Spodium may be had: neyther yet Spodiū, if you may get Pompholyx. Which if it be washed, is well nere the beste of all other medicines that drye without bytyng. And therfore is a mete medicine for cancrous and maligne vlcers: and is also put into col∣lyries that heale the webbes of the eyes, and staye the fluxions of the same. And farther is a very good remedy, ad pudendorum, acsedis ulcera. Spuma maris. , is called of the Apothecaries Spuma maris, that is the spume or fome of the sea, wheron the bir∣des called Alcyones, are sayde to make their neste, & is therfore called Alcyonium: though Plinie (whose sentence therin is lesse allowed) affirme it to come of ye Alciōs nests. It is after Dioscorides and Galen, of fyue kyndes, (wherof Plinie doth mencion but foure.)Galen. de sym. Lib. 11. The first is grosse, weigh∣tie, sharpe in taste, without lyke a spunge, of heauy smell lyke rotten fyshe: and is founde chiefly on the shores. An o∣ther is lyke the pin in the eye, or a spunge: lyght, full of ho∣les,Phycs, id est Alga. of forme somwhat longe, and smelleth lyke the sea we∣des, called Alga and . The thyrde is in forme lyke a worme,Sea girdle. softe and of purple colour: whiche they call Milesum. The fourth is light and ful of pores like the second,Milesum. and re∣sembleth the moyste woulle, called Lana succida. The fifth is fashioned lyke a mosherome, without smoothe, within rough, lyke the pumyse stone, of no sauoure, but of taste sharpe. They doe all scoure awaye and dygeste, hauyng all a whotte and sharpe qualitie. The firste twoo doe helpe scabbes, skuruynes, leprosies, and take awaye spottes and morphewes, and scoure and bewtifie the skynne: whiche the fifte can not doe. The thyrde is of all the reste the sub∣tillest, and is good for the affectes of the reynes, and blad∣der, and for difficille pssynge: And beynge burned, dothe cure with wyne Alopecias. The fourth hath also the same
vertues, but is muche weaker. The fifte is of all the reste the whoteste: inso muche that it burneth the heare, and ex∣coriateth and exulcerateth the skynne. Styrax. or Styrax calamita a moste pleasant gumme, is the teares of a tree,Dioscor. lib. 1. sayth Dioscorides, lyke to the quynce tree: wherof the beste is fatty, pale or yelowe, and gummy, with whyte lumpes, yeldyng when it is melted a liquor lyke ho∣ny: and kepeth long his good sauour.De sym. med. facultat. lib. 8. That whiche is drie, is of Galen dispraysed: who sayth that it doth heate, mollifie, and concoct.De com. med. secundum ge∣nera. lib. 7. Stacte. And therfore helpeth the cough, catarrhes, di∣stillations, and murres. Menses prolicit, eyther drūke or layd to. That whiche is commonly called Storax liquida, is the fat∣ty substance, called , pressed out of Myrrhe: and chiefly of that kynde that is called Myrrha gabirca. Wherfore looke more at Myrrha. Sulphur. OR Sulfur is named in Greeke ,Theion. & is of two kindes, (vnder yt which Plinie reconeth. 4) The one (which is the beste) is called ,Apyron. Hoc est uiuum, uel ignis non ex∣expers,Theion pepy∣romenon. & is taken out of the veyne without any boylyng. The other , id est igne incoctum, that is boiled sul∣fur.Dioscor. lib. 5. The best Sulfur uiuum, ought by Dioscorides to be fattye, greene, not stony: but bright, and shyninge lyke the glowe worme. Euery Sulfur (sayeth Galen) hath drawyng power, is whotte of temperament of nature discussiue,De symplici. faculta. lib. 9. also swiftly concoctiue, and of so subtile essens, that it layde to, resisteth the peryls of many venemous woundes: and is a medicine approued, to heale scabbes, leprosies, scuruines, & itche. Syncope. , Id est animi deliquium, uel praeseps uirium lapsus, that
is the defecte of the mynde, or a sodeine slyding away of the strengthe of the body, and commonly called swoundynge, and is caused dyuersly.Galenus de me¦thodome.  Somtyme of euel & sharpe iuyce, or of raw humores, about ye mouth of the stomache: of vnme∣surable bledyng, swetyng, & fluxe of the belly, great peyne, vehemēt mouing, immoderate watche, or emptines: of ter∣or also, and feare, and of suche lyke perturbations of the mynde, and conuersation in stynkyng ayre. Whose sygnes are rare and obscure pulse, coldnes of the extreme partes, sweat of the face, the skynne of the same losynge his bew∣tie, and almoste a resolution of the whole body: which must be cured as variably as the causes efficient are dyuerse. Howe be it, the paroxisme presente, is after the mynde of the learned, (led by reason and knowledge) Thus to be suc∣curred. First throw into his face violently rose water, with vineger, or cold fountayne water: wherby the astonied spi∣rites maye be reuyued: And that in Sommer, a burnynge feuer or the cause whotte. The extreame partes ought also in eruptions to be bounde. And rubbe the legges, if the e∣ruption issue aboue: the armes if beneathe. But principal∣ly and with spede, are the nosethrilles, and the mouthe to be stopped (and as some wyll also the eares:) That the ayer alreddy drawne in, and passinge into the inwarde partes, and by and by is ready to issue out, So made whotte by of∣ten mouyng to & fro, may goe agayne vnto the harte: that by heatyng the same, the spirites may be quickned and re∣uiued. And then forthwith is it expedient, to reuocate the mynde with thynges odoriferous. For nothyng by the te∣stimony of Hypocrates, lib. de alimento, doth sooner call againe the spirites. &c. By the whiche, and by bowyng moderatly the body: I haue often brought again, euen such as all men presente haue thought dead. And thus much, because Lan∣franke appointeth thē to be reuiued, by the noyses of Trū∣pettes & tympanies: Which (if they were necessary) yet are they instrumētes, at so sodeine exigentes to vnredy, & to call the person loude by his owne name. Whiche truly I iudge
as vayne and rydiculous, (or worse) as the strokes and buf∣fettes, that the rude multitude vse. For if it be (as by the authoritie of Galen aboue, and as we see it is) the defecte of the mynde, a losse of strengthe, and a generall depriuation of sense: what can the eares doe more by hearyng, then the eyes by seyng? Or rather, howe can the eares heare more then the eyes see? or the handes and other partes of the bo∣by feele. But this notwithstanding, I denie it not, but that the sodeyne noyse of trumpettes or drummes, may in the tymes of great incisions, and suche like daungerous enter∣pryses, both reteyne and quicken so the spirites (not yet loste,) that swoundyng may therby be euited, wherof also I haue had the experience. Synochus. THose feuers (sayeth Galen) that haue one only acces∣sion or fitte,De methodo medendi. li. 9. continuyng from the beginnynge to the ende,Synochos. and that many daies, are called , id est con∣tinentes, seu continuae, whose cause efficient is yelowe choler, and is of nature double.Synochus pu∣trida. The one hauyng a manifest putre∣faction, and is therfore called Synochus putrida: and the other vtterly without ye same,Synochus non putrida. called Synochus non putrida, whych is a kynde of diarie feuer: (and are of Lanfranke, and dyuers other for distinction sake, called Synochae.) And because the remission of the fitte is wonte to chance, by the transpira∣tion or breathyng out of feruent humores, (for they neuer breathe out at all, in vehement stipations,) A fytte of many dayes must nedes be made. When in suche feuers there is no occasion, that may rayse the begynnynge of an other ac∣cession: It persisteth a feuer, both of many daies, and of one accession, without the inuasion of an other: neyther refer∣ryng quotidian, tertian, nor quartan. For as much therfor, as of these twoo,De differētiis febrium. lib. 2. cap. 2. & ulti. a feuer may be maynteyned: both that all the vapor may not passe out, and that the same may heate whatsoeuer it toucheth: There must nedes be three diffe∣rences
of Synochus. For some continue from the begynnyng to the ende,Pyreti. of one greatnes: and are called in Greke ,Homotoni, uel Amastici Anabatici sue epamastici. Paracm. stici. hoc est eodem uigore permanentes. Others doe augmente and still adde to somwhat, called , quasi incrementum suscipientes. And some demi∣nishe by litle and litle, whiche they call , Id est decrescentes. Tamar indus. ΟΞυφονὶξ,Oxyphoenix is called in Latin Syluestris palma, that is the wylde or sower Date tree, whose fruite is called of the Arabians Tamar indus, and maye bee called in Greeke ,Oxyphoenico∣bal. os. and of some , quasi fructus uel dactilus palmae acetosae, uel syluestris. Whiche last hath not withstanding some learned aduersa∣ries. But their opinion semeth moste false, that thynke Ta∣mar indum and Myrobalanon to be all one: for Tamar Indus hath a curnell or stone, whiche Myrabolani haue not. They are sayth Mesues, sharpe or sower dates (like saith Syluius, vnto the sede of Cassia) and the fruytes of the wild Indian date tree: A medicine excellent and hurtlesse. Of the olde aunciēt writers eyther vnknowne, or vnder these names vnmensioned, colde and drie in the seconde degree: After Auerois in the thirde. By the whiche reason, it repres∣seth the sharpnes of humores, purgeth choler, and mitiga∣teth the feruoure therof, and also of the bloude: & healeth the iaundies, and sharpe continuall feuers. It stayeth vo∣miting, quencheth thyrste, and euery burnyng of the lyuer and stomache. But to colde stomaches, it must not be geuē alone. The beste Tamar Indi should be freshe, fatty, syncere, and tender, in taste sharpe swete, of colour blackyshe, and shynynge, myxed with heares, as it weare with certeyne rootes.
Terebinthina. ,Terminthine Rhetine. Resma terebinthina, is the liquide gūme of the tree Terebinthus, among the Greekes called ,Terminthos. and sometyme : The leaues and flowres wherof are drye,Terebinthos. and bynde and heate in the secōde degree.De sym. me. facult. li. 9. Terebinthin sayth Galen, is preferred amōg other gummes, hauyng a certeyne adstriction: but not so mani∣fest as hath Mastiche.De com. med. secund. genera lib. 2. But it hath a certein bytternes, wher∣by it digesteth and scoureth, more then Mastiche. It purgeth strayte passages, and draweth from depthe more then the reste:De com. med. secun. loc. li. 8. and because it is of qualities moste moderate, it is moste safely admyxed with medicines that heale vlcers, whiche should be without byting. But neyther is this our Terebynthine, whiche is the gumme of the tree Laryx, and called Larigna,Larigna. (not without his specyall vertues,) nor yet as some suspect the finest that we haue,Terebinthina ueneta. callyng it Terebinthinam Venetam: For it is (as many learned affirme) A resine ta∣ken out of the rynde of the younge whyte fyrre tree,Abies. called Abies,Resina oleosa. and was of the auncientes called Resina oleosa. The de∣termination wherof I referre vnto them againe. Terra sigillata. Earth called of the Latins Terra,Ge. Chthon. in Greke , is vsually that, whiche beinge put in water dissolueth: and is diuers kyndes. For so muche as the body of the earthe is of nature drie, & vtterly voyde of fyrie substance, euery earth drieth without bityng: Wherof many, (namely such as are mete for medicine) are in Dioscorides treated of at large.Dioscor. lib. 5. Among the which ,Ge Lemnia, id est terra lēnia. Id est terra lemnia, (sayth he) gro∣weth in holes, lyke cunny borowes, and is broughte from a fenny place out of the Isle Lemno. which the inhabitantes gather, and myxing it with goates bloude, they make it in lytle cakes or loues, and signe it with the image of a gote: & therfore call it ,Sphragis egos Hoc est sigillū caprae, or rather
as Galen wil,De symp. me. fac. li. 9. (who of purpose to se it, visited the place abo∣ue sayde) because it is impressed with the sacred signet of Di¦ana: but nowe is it marked with the Turkyshe sygnet. He maketh therof three differences.Lemnia sphra¦gis. The firste he also cal∣leth Leminam phragidon, whiche it was not lawfull for any to touche,Lemnia miltos but their women priestes, and differeth from Lē∣nia rubrica, (called in Greeke , It est terra sigillaa rubea,) in that it defileth not the fingers when it is touched, as Lemnia rubrica doth: and is of colour yelowe, lyke the hyll in Lemno. wheron there is neither stones, trees, or plantes, growyng: So muche sayeth he is this earth visited. To the thyrd, he geueth neither name nor description, but sayeth that it hath scouring faculties. The other two ar of driyng facultie, and are vsed for the Dysenteria, against the venime of beastes, or hurtfull medicines, and also for all olde and malignant vlcers. Tertiana febris. THe tertian feuer, is eyther continuall, and called Ter∣tiana continua:Galenus de dif¦feren. febrium lib. 2. or els hath intermission, and is named Tertiana intermittens. (Lanfranke calleth it Interpolata,) whiche is double. That is Tertiana pura, uel exquisita: & tertiana notha, siue spuria. Exquisita tertiana intermittēs, is caused of yelow coler, dilated by the sensible partes of the bodye, and ke∣peth her owne pure and sincere nature, and chaunceth to younge choleryke persons, in Sommer, or in whotte and drie regions: inuadynge with a vehemente rigor, (wherin it differeth from Febre ardente,) lyke the pryckynge of ne∣dles (and therin differeth from a quartane) whiche indu∣reth not longe:De tamoribus praeter naturā De arte cura∣tina. lib. . but soone foloweth vehement heate, and muche sweate. This feuer endureth not aboue seuen Pa∣roxysmes, neither doe any of thē excede the space of twelue houres, Tertiana notha intermittens, is made for the most part, whē choler is mixed wt phlegme, either grosse or thin, & som¦times though rarely, with melācholie, which passeth oftē, both in numbre & space of time, the paroxysmes aboue sayd.
But not so vehement, neyther doe the signes of digestion so sone appeare. For Tertiana continua resorte to Cauon. Thapsia. ,Dioscor. lib. 4 Ideo aliquibus erula sylue∣stris nominatur so called (sayeth Dioscorides) because it was firste founde in the Isle Thapso, is an herbe lyke to Ferula, in his whole nature, hauyng a sclenderer stalke, with leues lyke fenel. And on euery branche a spokye toppe lyke to Dylle, with yellowe flowers, and a sede lyke Ferula, but broder somwhat, and lesse: hauyng also a long , blacke with∣out, and whyte within: sharp also, and couered with a thick rynde. The rynde and the milky iuyce therof, dooe purge choler, but is perylous to take without great prouydence. It is by the testimonie of Galen,De sympto. causis. lib. 6. of a sharpe, and a myghty heatyng facultie, ioyned with moisture: And therfore dra∣weth violently from the depth, and that which it draweth it digesteth. The iuyce hereof, (whiche is by arte gathered from the roote) is so vehemēt sharpe, that the very breathe of the same, maketh the face and other naked partes of thē that gather it, to swell excedyngly, and to ryse in pustules. Thymum. THymum or Thymus, is also called in greke , which name also it hath almoste in euery language, though not the same thyng euery where: for Theophrastus and Plinie,Thymum albū Thymum Cre¦ticum. mencioneth two kyndes, callyng them Album & nigrum, as also Dioscorides doth, though not wher he descri∣beth Thymum creticum, that is Thyme of Candy, whiche is called ,Thymos Ce∣phalotos. Hoc est Thymum capitatum: but in his chapiter of Epithymum, whiche he affirmeth to come, a Thy∣mo duriore satureiae simili, that is of a harder Thyme, lyke to Sauerie:Serpyllum hortense. which I take to be our Thyme, and is of the odor that it hath lyke to Serpyllum, called Serpyllum hortense. Thymū sayeth Galen,De symp. li. 6. cutteth and heateth vehemently, and ther∣fore
Vrinam & menses prouocat, foetumque potum euellit. It pur∣geth the bowelles, and ioyneth with other medicines at∣tractiues, prepared for the brest and the lunges. Thus. INcence (called in Greeke ) as well as the tree,Libanotos. wherof it commeth (called ,Libanos.) is called in Latyne Thus:Dioscor. lib. 1. and groweth in Arabia. Herof Dioscorides maketh foure sortes.Libanos stago∣nias, quasi  licidiare. The best sayeth he, is Thus masculinum, of his owne nature rounde like a drope, and therfore called , whyte, vndeuisyble, fatte within when it is broken, and burneth spedely: hereof at Olibanū. That of In∣dia is of swarte and reddishe colour, and is made rounde by industrie: as first by cutting it in square peces, & then tour∣nyng it in vesselles till it waxe rounde,Syagrum. but in tyme it war∣eth yelowe:Libanos ato∣mos, quasi sec∣tiones nullas ostendens. and this they call , or Syagrum. The second place hath Thus arabicū, growing in Smilo: which some call Copiscum, of colour darke yellowe. An other kinde there is,Thus Copiscū Thus amomite Cortex Thuris called , of some Candidum, whiche cleaueth to the fyngers, as doth masticke. Cortex thuris, whiche is the rynde of the Incense tree, is here also to be remembred: which ought to be new, thicke, fatty, swete smellyng, not rough, & without skinnes. Here∣of also commeth Manna thuris or Manna graecorum, hauing also sayeth Galen, some of the rynde therwith, wherof in his place. Thus heateth (sayeth Galen) in the second degree, dri∣eth in the first,De symp. li. 7. and hath some adstriction. The rynde drieth in the seconde degree, and byndeth euidently. It is of gros∣ser partes then Thure, hauing litle sharpnes: and therfore is vsed for the griefes of the stomache, spitting of bloud, fluxe of the belly, and Dysenteria. Thus mollifieth, swageth peyne, cōcocteth, and bredeth quitture. But that in temperate na∣tures: for in moyste bodies it ingendreth fleshe. It putteth away the dymnesse of syghte, purgeth, filleth, and healeth, the vlcers of the eyes, and all other hollowe vlcers: gueth
bloudy woundes, and stayeth all eruptions of bloud. Thiria. is a disease of the head,Ophiasis uel de medēdi methodo. and hath sayeth Fuchsius (in his first boke De medendis morbis) no latin name, but is cal∣led of the Arabians and barbarous phisiciens Tyria. By the whiche worde they vnderstande all serpentes, but chiefly the Uiper: whiche therfore I thynke to come of this greke worde , and so of that kynde of leprosie, whiche is a∣mong that sorte called Theriasis, as aboue at Serpigo. Euen as plantes sayeth Galen are of twoo causes vitiate,De methodo medendi. li. 14 namely some by the vtter lacke of nuryshyng iuyce,De com. med. secun. loc. li. 1. dried & withered: other by the same cōtrarie to their own natures, are infected: so are the heares through the vtter defecte of their slymie nutritiue iuyce, and also by the same vitiate corrupted. For through the vtter lacke therof commeth Caluities, but of the same corrupted, riseth , and .De definitio∣nibus. And as in Alopecia the falling of the heare is circu∣lare, changing into a golden colour or like the foxe, (wherof it hath that name,  quidē uulpes est: so in Ophiasi, yt af∣fected parte of the head is pilde,Alopex. after the maner of Ser∣pentes, receyuing therof also his name: Ophis enim serpens est. Tragacantha. ,Dioscor. lib. 3. is a bright shyning gumme, leane, lyght, sincere, and swetishe: whiche runneth out of the roote of a pricky shrubbe, called also Tragacantha. whose roote is broad, wooddy, & stiffe in the toppe of the turfe: From the which doe strong lowe branches spreade very broade: wheron do growe many smale thinne leaues, hydinge vnder them selues whyte, stiffe, and streight thornes. The gumme, whiche we call commonly Dragagantum, stoppeth the poores of the skinne, as gumme doth: whose most vse hath been in medicines for the eies, for the cough, for horsenes, & rough∣nes
of the pypes and yawes, and other distillations: against peyne of the reines, and corrosions of the bladder. Triticum. WHeate called in Greeke ,Pyros. is after Galen, of fyrme nurishment,De  uictus ratione and bredeth a iuyce grosse and tough, and therfore is Alica (whiche also nurisheth strongly) forbidden in them that are apte to breede the stone, or to haue obstru∣ctions in the liuer: exterially vsed,De syp. li. . it heateth in the first de∣gree, but neither can it drie nor moiste manifestly. What∣soeuer is made of Amylum, is then it, both colder and drier. The Cataplasma that is made with bread, digesteth more thē with wheate, by reason of the salte and leuen: whiche hath power to drawe vp and digeste, thinges that lye depe. Turbith. TVrbith is estemed a barbarous name, geuē to a roote, whiche is called Turpetum, wherof among all menne, there is no small ambiguitie, nor a fewe opinions. For Syluius and Manardus, doe make therof a destinction, in .iiii. sortes, whiche I thoughte good thus to gather. Turbith siue Turpetum. The one, whiche some call Turbith Dioscoridis. Radix pityusae, whiche hath the leaues of Pinus. Serapionis. i. Radix Tripolii Dioscoridis. Vulgare. i. Radix Tithymali foeminae siue myrtites, so called be∣cause it hath leaues like to Myrtus. Or Radix Alipi, after Matthiolus vnder the autorities of Actuarius, who calleth it Turpetum album. Mesuae. Is the roote of an herbe, whose leaues are like Fe¦rula: wherof thei dare not geue sentence. Howbeit Brasauolus iudgeth it the roote of Tithymali myrsites but that would Matthiolus refute: who semeth by reasons to proue that Turbith Mesuae & Actuarii is none other thynge then the roote of Alipiae. And so of our common Turpetum.
Wherfore knowyng that there are at this daie, not a fewe diligent men in this kinde of studie: namely in the serching out of suche vnknowne symples, & the certeintie of thinges so vncerteyne and doubtful: (least they should wante a iust occasion, to examine suche conditions of plantes or rootes, as shall in anywyse be lyke to any of these.) I haue set here (for the sakes chiefly of the meanly learned) the seuerall de∣scriptions of the kindes of Turbith here mēcioned: Namly suche as haue not before in the Englyshe tongue been pu∣blyshed. For Pytiusa and Tithymalus myrtites, are of D. Tur∣ner right well described. Whiche therfore I touche not. Turbith Scrapionis siue Tripolium,Dioscor. lib. 4 Graece , groweth by the sea sides, in places that are by the tydes washed, and by the ebbes left againe: so that it groweth neither in the sea, nor on the drie grounde: with a lefe like to Glastum, but thic∣ker, and a stalke lyke the Date tree, deuided in the toppe. whose floures (as men saye,) doe thrice in one daye change their colours: beynge whyte in the morninge, purple at noone, and crimson at nyght: whose rote is whyte, odorife∣rous, and whotte in taste. Of the whiche, two dragmes drunke in wyne, draweth out water and vrine by the belly, and is put into medicines that resiste venym. ,Dioscor. lib. 4 in Latin Alypum or Alypia, is a bushie and reddish herbe with sclender stalkes and thinne leaues: hauinge a softe thinne flowre, and of them plentie, & a sclender roote lyke the roote of Beta, full of sharpe iuyce, with seede lyke the sedes of Epithymi: whiche purgeth blacke choler, if it be taken with an equall portion of Epithymum, with salte and vineger: but it doth a litle exulcerate the intraelles. It groweth in places nighe the sea, chiefly and most plē∣tifully in Libya: though much of it doe also growels where. Turbith sayeth Mesues, is a mylky herbe, hauynge leaues lyke Ferula but lesse: wherof there is Hortense and Syluestre, of the whiche also some is great, and some little: whyte (also) yelowe, ashe coloured or blacke. Praysinge that whiche is
Gummie, white, empty, and like a reede, with a plaine and ashy rynde, or as it weare baked vnder ashes, beyng mean∣ly newe and easy to be broken: but that saieth he, whiche is not gummie, is weake and troubleth the belly: dyspraysing also the yelowe and the blacke, the grosse and the leane. The curled or wrynkled rynded also, whiche is as it were sinewy within when it is broken, which is the wilde. The olde is weake: The newe dothe lesse trouble and o∣uerturne the bowelles. Some doe adulterate it, by anoyn∣ting the rynde outwardly with melted oyle: but being bro∣ken, it is not gummy within. And where as the roote of Thapsia is numbered amonge the sortes of Turbith: whiche the Apothecaries thinke to be theyrs. Andreas Marinus, calleth it Turbith apulum, affirming it to be that whiche mesues calleth Crassum. The fraude wher¦of beynge at the laste discouered, it was reiected & put oute of vse: for though it purge phlegme as doth the right Tur∣bith, yet that doth it violently, and with the great damage of the principall members. Whose faculties you may far∣ther reade before vnder the propre title therof. Mesues of his Turbith sayeth, it is whotte in the thirde degree, purgeth meanly by attraction, rayseth wyndes, that ouerturne the stomache ad nauseam: and dryeth, being purged from the thinne excrementes therof. Turbith cor∣tected draweth out grosse, toughe, and putrefied phlegme, from the breste, the stomache, and the sinewes: Euen from the ioyntes and farthest partes. Tutia. TVtia or Tuthia,Pomphlyx. is called in Greke , for the whiche looke in Spdio. Verbena. VErbena or Verbenaca, is of two kindes, described of Dios∣corides in two seuerall chapiters, callyng them both
,Peristereon. but the seconde , Hoc est sacram her∣bam:Hierabotane. for whose vertues and larger discription, Looke far∣ther in maister Turners herball. Vermes terrestres. VErmes terreni,Lumbrici. called also Lumbrici & Intestina terrae, beyng drunke in passo, doe prouoke vrine, heale the iaūdise, and driue away tertian feuers: brused and layde to cutte synewes, they glewe them together merueylouslye, and are good for the crampe. Being boiled cin adipe anserino, and poured in, they heale the peynes of the eares: If they be boyled in oyle, and put into the contrarie eare, they help the peyne of the teethe. Vernix. OUt of the Juniper tree sweateth certeine teares, in the spring tyme chiefly: and therfore called Vernix, quasi Vernus ros, beyng of the colour and smell of fran∣kinsence: Whiche hardened by heate, becōmeth a gumme. Whiche sayth Fuchsius, (the Arabians, not without a great confusion of names,) haue called Sandaracham, whiche sayeth Serapio, is whotte and drie, harde, and somewhat bitter: and is brought from the lande of the Christians. And the Apo∣thecaries cal it Vernicem.Sandarache. But farre is it from  of the Grecians and Latines: whiche is a stone, founde sayeth Plinie, in the mynes of golde and syluer. Brasauolus sayeth, that Sandracha is nothynge els but the redde partes of Auripigmentum, so made by the more natural boylyng: for there may a kinde of Sandaracha be made, by the artificiall boylyng of Auripigmentum. And therfore may the one, (namely Sandaracha,) be called Arsenicum rubrum, and the other (that is Auripigmentum) Arsenicum Croceum. Matthiolus also sayeth, that Sandaracha and Auripigmentum,
are both of one kynde and facultie, neyther differ they in any thynge, but only that the one, (to wytte Sandaracha) is more concocted in the bowelles of the earthe then the o∣ther, whiche is Auripigmentum: and are therfore by the same reason in subtilties of vertues, more excellent the one then the other. Dioscorides (the surest grounde herein) sayeth, that Auri∣pigmentum is founde in the same mines that Sandaracha is, a∣lowyng that whiche is fyerie redde, or lyke to Cinnabar: playne, pure, brittle, and smellynge lyke Sulphur. It is geuen cum mulso, to them that spytte rottē phlegme. The smoke hereof is taken in, agaynste the olde coughe. Lycked in with hony, it cleareth the voyce: and in pylles is geuen, to harde breathyng. Unto whiche vertues, not only Plinie, and other Latines doe agree of the same: But also the Arabians, the more to augmente their error, of their gummy Sandarachae: twoo thynges bothe in substance and nature, (as you see) moste contrarie. Wherfore, when you shall among the Greeke authors fynde Sandaracha, you muste vnderstande the same that Di∣oscorides wryteth of, called afore Arsenicum rubrum: But if among the Arabian wryters, you must take Gummi iuniperi. An other kynde of artificiall or adulterate Sandaracha there is, made of Serussa burned in the fyre, tyll it haue chā∣ged his colour, and is called Sandix: wherof Plinie maketh mencion. Vernix out of the later wryters hath the facultie to staie the fluxe of bloode at the nose: if it be layde to the forehead, cum Candido oui. And taken with the poulder of Frankin∣sence, or the poulder therof supped in a rere egge, suppres∣seth vomityng: and layde to, or taken with the same, fir∣meth the laxatyue bellye, defendeth the fallynge of destil∣lacions, dygesteth the phlegme in the bowelles, and kyl∣leth wormes, and other lyuynge thynges in the same.
Mensium fluxus continet: beyng put in, it dryeth the moiste ho∣lownesses of fistules: And helpeth the ryftes, cones, or chappinges, of the handes and feete. Vinum. OUlde wyne hurteth the synewes, and other wynes the senses:Dioscor. li. 4. though they be in taste swete. And ther∣fore ought they to be ware therof, that fele weake∣nes in any of their bowelles: But beyng taken in smal quā¦titie accordyng to strengthe and delayed, it is vnhurtfull. Newe wyne infiateth, doth hardly concocte, and breedeth many vayne dreames: and moueth vrine. That whiche is of meane age, wanteth both the fourmer faultes: and ther∣fore is vsed in the diet, both of sicke and whole. The white and thynne wyne, is to the stomache profitable, and easily dispersed into the members. Black wyne is grosse, hard to concocte, nourisheth fleshe, and causeth dronkennes. Yel∣low wyne, as it holdeth a middle colour: so hath it faculties meane betwene both. But when health quaileth, or is cra∣sed, the whyte wyne hath moste prayse. Wynes also differ in sauoure. For swete wyne as it cōsisteth of grosse partes, so doth it difficilly breath out of the body, inflateth the sto∣mache, and troubleth the belly and bowelles, as doth newe wyne: but moueth dronkennes lesse, and is moste apte for the reynes & bladder.De methodo medendi. li. 3. Tarte wyne doth more swiftly passe through by the vryne: but maketh peyne in the heade, and bredeth dronkennes.De arte cura∣tiua. lib. 2. Sharpe wyne is for the digestyng of meates into the membres, moste commodious: restreyneth the belly and other fluxes, &c. Wyne saieth Galen, gleweth together holownesses,Oenon uel Inon. and is a conuenient medicine for all vlcers. The Greekes doe call it . Viola. Viola, so writtē symplie without an adiectiue, is alwayes
taken for the blewe or purple violet, called in Greke , Idest Viola nigra or purpurea: and of some Viola mura∣ria. Some holde that it is called , because the nymphes called Ioniae, gaue first the floure therof vnto Jupiter as a gyfte. Others because when Jupiter had turned the Nym∣phe Io into a cowe, the earth gaue furth violet floures, as a pasture or foode for the same. But many other herbes ther are, that are called Violae, wherof here to speake weare as nedelesse as superfluous. Mesues geueth to violettes, cold∣nes and moystnes in the first degree. They are somnife∣rous, purge choler, staye thyrst, and quenche all inflamma∣tions: and therfore are applyed, for the burnynge heate of the mouthe of the stomache and the eyes. Viride aes. IS called also Aerugo,Aerugo rasilis uel rasa. that is the ruste of brasse. Of this Dioscorides maketh two kyndes. The one is called Aeru∣go rasa or rasilis, and is made sayeth he, by coueryng a ves∣sell of moste strong vineger, with a cauldern or other lyke vessell, or wt plates of brasse, so close that no ayre may passe between: whiche after the tenth daye beyng opened, that Aerugo that is, must be scraped or rubbed of, &c. Otherwyse dyuersly. The other he calleth Aeruginem scoletiam, and no∣teth therof two sortes.Aerugo scole∣tia. The one he calleth Fossilē, that is dig¦ged, for it is taken out of the earth: The other Factitiam, which is made by beatyng or labouring the sharpest white vineger,Aerugo fossilis in a brasen morter,Aerugo facti∣tia. with a copper pestell, till it re∣ceyue a thicknes of filthe: Then must it bee beaten toge∣ther in the Sunne in the canicular dayes, cum alumine rotun∣do, & sale fossili, uel marino, uel nitro, tyll it growe to a thicknes, and receyue the colour of Aeruginis: and when it becommeth lyke wormes,Aerugo uermi cularis. it must be kepte. This therfore hath been called of some Vernicularis. A fourth kynde also of Aerugenis, sayeth he,Aerugo aurifi∣cum. is made by the goldsmythes, of the vryne of chil∣dren, in a brasen morter, with a pestell of the same: wher|
wherwith they soulder golde. Of the which kyndes of Aeru¦genis scoletiae, Fossilis is the beste: nexte to that is Aerugo derasa: the thirde place hath Factitia, whiche yet is moste adstrin∣gent and bytinge. Aerugo aurificum, answereth to Aerugini rasae. Here mayst thou see good reader, the difference betwene Aeruginem & florem aeris,Aerugo. whiche is in his place described. All the Aerugines,Flos aris. doe bynde, extenuate, and heate. They amend the scarres or blottes of the eyes, cause teares, staie creping and eatyng sores, and defende woundes from inflammati∣ons. They purge filthie vlcers, & cum cera & oleo, they heale the same. Put into fistules with Ammoniaco, in yt maner of a collyrie, they errode the callous substance of them: and are profitable for the swellynges,De methodo med. li. 3. and excressentes of the gum∣mes. The poulder of Aeruginis (sayeth Galen) put alone into vlcers,De comp. me. secund. genera lib. 2. &. 4. suffereth them not to putrefie: but it bringeth pein, and byting, not a little: gnaweth, and maketh inflāmations. Virulentia. VIrulentia uulnera, uel ulcera, virulent or venemous woūdes or vlcers: a uiro, whiche is venyme or poyson. Viticella. THe herbe vulgarly called Viticella,Bryonia. is called in Greke ,Psilothron. in Latin Vitis alba psilothrum,Ampelos leuce and of the Apothecaries Brionia: in En∣glyshe whyte vyne or brionie. The roote and the iuyce of Briony (sayeth Mesues) purgeth the brayne, the synewes, and the breste, of rotten phlegme moueth vryne, and ope∣neth the obstructions of ye bowelles. But he appointeth the tēperamēt out of Dioscorides, (who yet leaueth all thinges without degree of temperament,) to heate and drie in the thyrde degree. They vse sayeth Galen,De symp. li. 6. to eate the braunches therof in the spryng tyme, as a meate (for the adstriction therof,) ac∣ceptable
for the stomache. But to that adstriction it is sharpe, and somewhat bitter: and therby moueth vryne moderatly. The roote hath a scouring, driyng, and moderat heating power: and therfore drunke, softneth the harde splene, and layde to cum ficubus, healeth Psoram, & lepram. &c. It is somtymes mixed with corrosiue medicines. Vitriolum Romanum. DIoscorides wryting of Chalcanthum, (which the Grekes call , the Arabians Zeg, the Latines Vitrio∣lum, because it shineth lyke glasse,) and Atramentum sutorium, ad atro colore: because it was vsed to dye leather black,) saith that in kynde it is but one thynge: but deuydeth it into three differences. As one, which congeileth of certeyne hu∣mores, gathered together drop by droppe into certeyne holes of the earth: and therfore is called , hoc est Stillatitium. An other is made by a symple reason in caues, beyng after poured out into certeyne diches that are made holowe:Chalcanthum. whiche is properly called , Id est Concretitiū. The thyrde is called Coctile,Stalacticon. and is wonte to bee made in Spayne:Pecton. beyng moste weake and vnprofitable. But a∣mong the late wryters there is not a little confusion of names therin. For Matthiolus speakyng of the time present, sayeth, that of Chalcanthum there are twoo kyndes in Hetru∣ria. The one growyng of it selfe in the earth by concretion, and is vulgarly called Coppa rosa.Coppar osa. The other is arteficiall: whose chiefest ve is for dyers. whiche is either the better or the worse, as well for the dispositions of regions and ce∣lestiall climates, as for the mater wherof it is made: But it is proued that Vitriolum Romanum, excelleth the reste of the arteficall kyndes, though it be of weaker or vnperfecter co∣lour. The seconde place hath Cyprium, but was of the aunci∣entes praysed for the beste. That whiche is brought from Germanie, is weaker then any that is in Italy: & for that it hath blewe coloure, it deceyueth many.
Among the Apothecaries there are twoo kyndes: na¦mely Vitriolum symply so called, (whiche sayeth Brasauolus, some haue falsely called Cholcothar,) and Vitriolum Romanum: (whiche is sayth he, Antiquorum misy.) And is harde, lyke vn∣to gould, shyning lyke the starres, and beyng broken, gli∣stereth as with golden sparkes: All the whiche notes he affirmeth exactly to agree wt Vitriolo Romano of Germanie. And for the better vnderstandyng of his mynde therin, take these notes, as he for the same reason, drew and gaue forth the same. Vitriolum, Atramentum, and the Arabike worde Zeg, are sayeth he, cōmon or generall names, to all the sortes therof as they folowe. Antiquorum. i. Zeg rubeum Serapionis.Sory. Antiquorum,Chalcitis. i. Colcothar Serapionis. For ye late wryters erre saith he that cal Vitriolum Vstum Colcothar, whiche ought rather to haue ben called Chalcitis. . i. Zeg uiride,Misy. Vitriolum Romanum. But out of Germanie saieth he ther is brought romain vitriole whiche is more harde & of ye∣lowe coloure. . i. Bities,Melanteria. atramentum metallicum. Chalcanthum, atramentum Sutorium, Vitriolum. Herevnto it is to be noted, that Chalcanthū doth by lēgthe of tyme, or by present burnyng the same, degenerate into Chalcitin: whiche yet is suche as beyng disolued in water, wyll agayne become Chalcanthum. And these names sayeth he, doe so mutually answere to them selues, that hereby thou canst not erre. Howe be it, (as Matthiolus moste truly sayeth) Calcitis My∣sy & Sory, haue ben long vnknowne, neither is ther almost any that can saye that he hath sene those very thynges: yet doth the sayde Matthiolus reporte, that it chanced him, (after long diligent serche but al in vayne,) to come at the laste to the sight of them, by the meanes of a certein Apothecarie:
Whose diligence God graunte ours to folowe. They were founde sayeth he, about Trident. But in that Musa Brasauolus, affirmeth that kinde of Chal∣canthum, whiche is called Romanū, to be the true Misy, semeth to stande saieth he,But note what is sayde before of vitri¦oleum of Ger¦manie. both against truthe and reason: both be∣cause Vitriolum Romanum, is neyther of a golden coloure, nor glistereth as with sparkes when it is broken, but is more lyke the substance of glasse: And also that Misy is no medi∣cine arteficiall, but is without arte made in the bowelles of the earth. Chalcanthum hath power to bynde, to heate, and to induce eschares. Latas uentris tineas necat, drachmae pondere deuoratum, aut cum melle linctum, and moueth vomite. Beynge drunke with water, it helpeth against the venim of Musheroms. It pur¦geth the head beyng watered, & dropped into ye nosethrilles with woulle. Of Chalcanthum, that is estemed beste whiche is blewe, rare, faste, and shyning: suche is Stillatitium, called of some Lonchoton. The next is Concretitium, but the arteficiall is ap∣ter for dyers, & to make blewe colours with, then the reste: but for the vse of medicine weaker. Vlceratina medicamina. OR exulceratiua medicamina, are suche medicines as by Corrosion doe excoriate or exulcerate: and cōmeth of Vlcerare, or exulcerare, to blister or make vlcers. Vlcus. GAlen in his fourth booke De methodo medendi, sayth: Est itaque morborum genus, diuortium continui uocatum. Quod qui∣dem in carnosa parte, ulcus: in osse fractura: in neruo conuulsio appellatur. &c. That is. There is one kynde of diseases, called the sun∣dryng of vnitie. whiche in a fleshie parte, is called Vlcus, In the bone Fractura, and in the synewe, conuulsio. &c. Whervn∣to
quitture is alwayes incident: and maketh an exacte di∣stinction, between it and Vulnus. More of it, and the deui∣sions therof, you may see in maister Gales institution. It is called in Greeke ,Elcos. wherof commeth , Hoc est lethale,Elcos aniaton. seu insanabile ulcus, a mortal or vncurable vlcer. Vmbilicus veneris. Looke for it at Cotyledon. Vndimia. OR Ydema,Ydema. or after others Zimia, but more rightly Oede∣ma,Oedema. is after Guido, and diuerse others of that age, of .ii. sortes: naturall and vnnaturall: the naturall caused of naturall phlegme, or thinner then the same. The vnna∣turall is none other wyse made, but either by the admirtiō of other humores: as choler, phlegme, &c. Or by their affe∣ctes in ye same, as by heating driyng. &c. Loke more at Oedema Vngula. OR Vnguis in oculo, is that whiche we call the webbe in the eye:Vnguis. Whiche groweth sayeth Galen, to the pan∣nycle that couereth the eye outwardly,De symptoma¦tii causis. lib. 1 Vsque ad Iridis coronam, called agnata, or cohrens. Whiche pannycle (sayth he) beyng compased with inflammation,De trem. pal∣pi. con. & ri∣gore. maye by accidens im∣pedyte the syght of the eye: but Chymosis and Vnguis, doe by a chiefe and principall reason, hyde and darken the pupill: euen as the greate vnnaturall tumores of the cheake.Chymosis. Vulnus. IS proprelie Plaga noua uel sanguinea, in Englishe, a newe and bloudie wounde, or not anious: For then is it no longer a wounde, as before vnder the titles Plaga & ulcus. Zingiber. OR Gingiber, in Greeke , hath of an olde opiniō been iudged the roote of pepper: but that doth Pliny denie. And Dioscorides describeth ginger in a seue∣rall chapiter, after he hath spoken of pepper, saiynge. Gingi∣beris,
is a plante of his owne kynde, growyng in Arabia Tro∣gladytica, which they vse grene for many thinges, as we doe Ruta, mixing it with their first meates and drynkes. The rootes of this are little,Cyperus. lyke the rootes of Cyperus, whyte, and odoriferus, and in taste lyke pepper: they oughte to be chosen that are without woodwormes. They ar kept with salte, because they will otherwyse soone putrefie: and are brought into Italie, in earthen vesselles. Ginger is con∣uenient in meates and in sauces, hauyng healyng and con∣coctiue power. It gently mollifieth the belly, is vtile for the stomache, And efficatious for the dymnesse, or dulnesse of sight. It is put in medicines against venym, and answereth in summe, to the vertues of pepper. Hetherto Dioscorides. Galen sayeth it heateth,De sym. lib. 6. but not at the first as pepper, & therfore is to be estemed of subtiller partes: and semeth to retayne in it selfe a certeyne grosse and vnlaboured humi∣ditie,Piper longum. lyke Piperi longo: And therfore doth the heate continue longer, that is made by ginger or longe pepper, then of the whyte, or blacke. They that haue seen Ginger in India, (saith Ruellius,) affirme it to haue a creping roote, with knottes and ioyntes: From the whiche, and from the stalke, commeth often new rootes, geuing twise or thryse in the yeare leaues lyke a reede, but not so long: and that it re∣sembleth wholy Gramen, neither is there any thing in that region more com∣mon. FINIS,
THough enuie me accuse, In suche as wyll disdayne: It can not make me muse, nor nothyng vexe my brayne. For they that doe misuse, Their tongues in suche a case: Wyll styll them selues abuse, In runnyng of that rase. But reason is myne ayde, To take my cause in hande: And I nothyng afrayde, With hir in place to stande. Hauyng my hope so stayde, That those that lyste to rayle, Wylbe ryght sore dismayde, When reason shall preuayle. For truthe by reason strong, Wyll haue the vpper hande: When enuie vyle and wronge, shall fayntly flee the lande. And truthe hath alwaye been, A daughter vnto tyme: Whiche as it hath been seen, Detecteth euery cryme.
¶A very ample and necessarye Index or register, drawne after the Alphabet, whiche leadeth verye redilye by the numbers of eche Page, to all suche names and necessarye notes, in this expositiue Table, as are with∣oute the Alphabete in the titles of the same: name∣lye all suche as are in the matter, by the occa∣sion of the intituled names treated of. A. ABies. 126 Abscessus. 13 Acantha. 2 Acetabulum. 30 Acetosa. 82 Achillea sideritis. 107 Achrades. 92 Achras. 92 Achrocordon. 41 Acmastieos Pyretos. 145 Acoron. 4 Acte. 105 Aeromeli. 67 Aeizoon. 116 Affodillus. 15 Agasyllis. 10 Albucum. 15 Albugo. 6 Albumen Oui. 81 Album Piper. 85 Album Santalum. 108 Album Thymum. 123 Alcyonium. 121 Alexanders. 13 Alexandrinus Laurus 59 Alga. 121 Alica. 131 Alipia. 132 Alipion. 132 Almondes. 10 Alopecia. 118. 130 Alopex. 130 Altercum. 52 Alum. 8 Aminea Myrrha. 76 Amomite Libanos. 129 Ampelos Leuce. 138 Amphemerinos Pyretos. 125 Amygdale Picra. 10 Anabaticos Pyretos. 125 Anasarca. 53 Anaxiris. 82. 97 Ancerinus adeps. 4 Andrachne. 90 Andrachne Agria. 91. 117 Anethon. 11 Anfimerina. 9 Antes egges. 81 Anthemis. 24 Anthropomorphos. 67
Antipathes. 28 Antispodium 121 Aphrodes mecon. 82 Aphronitrum. 16. 105 Apion. 92 Apios 92 Apium haemorrhoidum. 39 Apium risus. 39 Apolinaris. 52 Apulles. 65 Apyron Theion. 122 Aquaticum Apium. 12 Arabicum Thus. 129 Ardens febris. 23 Argema. 6 Arida pix. 87 Aristalthaea. 64 Armeniacum. 9 Arnoglossos. 89 Arquatus morbus. 53. 78 Arsenicon. 15. 134 Asari radix. 4 Ascites. 53 Asclepium pariax. 79 Ashe tree. 41 Asse boxe tree. 63 Aspalathus. 108 Astaphis. 83 Aster atticus. 19 Astragaloton Stypteria. 8 Atheroma. 76 Atomos libanos. 129 Atramentum metallicū. 139. 140 Atramentum Sutorium. 139. 140 Aurificum aerugo. 137 Aurigo. 53 Auripigmentum. 94. 134 Aygrene 116 B Balanus myrepsica. 74 Barba Iouis. 116 Barley. 52 Baye tree. 59 Beanes. 56 Beares breeche. 2 Belericae myrobalani. 74 Bilis. 37 Bismalua. 8 Bistorta. 14 Bitterfetche. 80 Bities. 140 Bitumen. 72 Blacke iaundies. 54. 70 Blewe floure deluce. 55 Bloude stone. 48 Botia myrrha. 76 Bolchon. 17 Bones burned. 80 Boscas. 87 Botryitis Cadmia. 120 Boum adeps. 5 Bran. 41 Branca Leonina. 16 Branca Vrsina. 2 Brasse burned. 5 Brathy. 99 Brathys. 99 Brimstone. 121 Bromus. 116 Bronchocele. 18 Bryonia. 138
Bubonium. 19 Burned leade. 89 Buxus asininus. 63 C Cabalina aloe. 7 Cadmia. 120 Calamita Styrax. 122 Calamus aromaticus. 4 Calamus odoratus. 4 Callus. 39. 90 Chamaeacte. 106 Camelles strawe. 114 Camfor. 20 Cancrena. 20 Candida hedera. 48 Candum Saccharum. 100 Caniculata. 52 Capadocus Sal. 104 Capitata lactuca. 58 Capitatum Thymum. 128 Caprarum adeps. 5 Carbunculus. 11. 91 Carcinoma. 19 Carcinos. 20 Cardialgia. 65 Cardumeni. 21 Carduus fullomim. 33 Cariophyllata. 110 Carpesium. 31 Cassia Syringa. 23 Cassilago. 52 Caucalis myrrha. 76 Causos. 23 Ceitica nardus. 120 Cenchros. 72 Centum nodia. 29 Cepa marina 14 Cepe muris. 114 Cephalotos Thymos. 128 Cepulae myrobalani. 74 Ceratitis mecon. 82 Chalbanum. 41 Chalcanthum. 139. 140 Chalcitis. 140 Chalcuanthos. 39 Chamaeacte. 106 Charama. 113 Cheironium panaces 79 Choeras. 46. 115 Chole. 37 Choler. 37 Chrysanthemon. 24 Chrysitis lythargiros. 62 Chthon. 126 Chymosis. 142 Cinnabaris. 106 Cipressus. 33 Circaea. 67 Cissos. 48 Cisthos. 58 Cisthus ladanifera. 58 Citreae myrobalani. 74 Citrinum Santalum. 108 Clematitis aristolochia. 14 Cloues. 44 Coccymelon. 92 Coccymelos. 92 Coctile chalcanthum. 139 Colchicum. 49. 50 Colewortes. 18 Colocintha. 31
Colophonium. 111 Coloquintida. 27 Concretitium Chalcanthum. 141 Continens febris. 124 Continens quartana. 92 Continens tertiana. 23, 127 Continua quotidana. 93 Conuoluulus. 111 Conuulsio. 141 Copeia. 88 Copiscum Thus. 129 Coppa Rosa. 139 Corall. 28 Cornutum Papauer. 82 Corona Regia. 71 Crambe. 18 Crepinge teter. 117. 118 Creticum Thymum. 128 Crinos uel Crinon. 60 Crispa Lactuca. 58 Crithe. 52 Crocos. 30 Crommion. 24 Crommion Schisthon. 24 Crommes of bread. 71 Crowfoote. 13 Cucumers. 31 Cucurbita Syluestris. 27 Cyamos. 36 Cydonios Melea. 29 Cymbalion. 36 Cyparissos. 31 Cytinus, 16 D Damsen tree. 58 Daphne. 59 Daphnoides. 59 Darsisahan. 108 Das. 87 Date wilde. 87 Dembeda. 118 Dendromalache. 64 Derbes. 118 Diaria Febris. 38 Diarrhoea. 66 Diductio particularum. 13 Dille. 11 Dipsacos. 33 Distichum Hordeum. 52 Dockes. 97 Dragagantum. 130 Dropsye. 53. 60 Drosomeli. 67 Drupas. 77 Durities. 114 Dysenteria. 66 E. Ebulus. 106 Effimera. 34 Egges. 80 Elaea. 77 Elaeon. 77 Elaphoboscum. 16 Elaterium. 31 Elcos. 142 Elcos Aniaton. 142 Elder. 105 Eleoselinon. 12 Elephantia. 118 Elephantiasis. 60 Elephas. 60 Emblicae myrobalani. 74
Embrocha. 34 Endiue. 26. 55 Epacmasticos pyretos. 125 Ephemeron. 49 Ephemeros Pyretos. 34 Epithymum. 129 Equapium. 13 Equinum Apium. 13 Eranthemon. 24 Erebinthos. 26 Ergasima Myrrha. 76 Erica. 69 Eruum. 80 Erythrodanum. 32 Escalonia Brasca. 18 Escalonia Cepa. 24 Esculentum Solanum. 119 Eunuchos. 35 Euphorbion. 53 Exquisita quartaae. 92 Exquisita quotidiana. 93 Exquisita tertiana. 127 F. Faba grossa. 36 Faba suilla. 52 Fabulonia. 52 Fabulum. 52 Factitia arugo. 137 Fatte. 4. 85 Febris ardens. 23 Febris diaria. 34 Fenell. 40 Fenigreke. 40 Ferula. 117 Ficariae. 25 Figge. 38 Fistici. 86 Flaxe. 61 Flegmon. 84 Fleshes diuers. 22 Flos Parietis. 105 Flos Schini. 112 Floure deluce. 55 Fluidum papauer. 82 Fossilis aerugo. 137 Fossitius Sal. 102 Fractura. 6. 141 Frankinsence. 129 Frogmarche. 13 Furiosum Solanum. 119 G Gabirea Myrrha. 76. 122 Gala. 56 Galanga maior. 4 Galinaceus adeps. 5 Galles. 42 Gallicus Sapo. 108 Gardine persley. 12 Garyophillon. 44 Gaule. 37 Ge. 126 Ge Lemnia. 126 Gemmeus Sal. 102, 103. 104 Geum Plinii. 110 Ginger. 142 Gladiolus Luteus. 4 Glans Vnguentaria. 74 Glewe. 27 Glutinum. 27 Glutinum carnis. 109
Gongyle. 93 Gongylis. 93 Gourdes. 31 Graeca pix. 87 Great persley. 13 Guilsoughte. 53 Gummi arabicum. 2. 47 Gummi hederae. 49 Gummi Iuniperi. 135 Gymnocrithon. 52 H. Haemā. 106 Haemorrhoidum apium 13. 39 Hales. 102 Halicacabos Strichnos. 119 Hammoniacos halos. 104 Hares heare. 84 Harundo Saccharifera. 100 Hedge persley. 13 Helxine. 83 Henbane. 52 Hepatica aloe. 7 Heracleon panaces. 79 Herba Sacra. 134 Herculeum papauer. 82 Hermetis digitus. 51 Herpes. 118 Hexastichon Crithon. 52 Hiera botane. 134 Hippolapathon. 97 Hippomarathron. 40 Hipposelinon. 13 Hirundinaria. 25 Holekes. 24 Holithocke. 8. 64 Holowe wurte. 14 Homotonos pyretos. 125 Honye of the ayre. 67 Horned popye. 82 Horor. 96 Houslike. 116 Hydrops. 53 Hydroselinon. 12 Hygra Stypteria. 8 Hypnoticos Strichnos. 119 I Iaceanigra. 109 Ibiscos. 8 Icterus. 53. 70 Icthyocolla. 27 Ignis persicus. 91 Ignis Volaticus. 118 Illecebra. 91. 117 Indae myrobalani. 74 Indicus Sal. 99 Inonsiue oenon. 136 Intemperies. 33 Intermittens quartana. 92 Intermittens tertiana. 127 Intestina terrae. 134 Ion. 137 Iudalcus Sapo. 109 Iudaicum Scammonium. 113 Iuncus odoratus. 113 Iuncus palustris. 114 Iusquiamus. 52 Iuye. 43 K. Knotgrasse. 29
Knottes. 76 L Labrum Veneris. 33 Lacrima papaueris. 78 Lacustris Sal. 102 Ladanifera Cisthus. 58 Ladanon. 58 Lanceola. 39 Lapathon. 82. 97 Lapdanum. 58 Lapis Sanguinarius. 48 Larigna resina. 126 Laurell. 59 Lauriole 59 Leade burned. 89 Leapinge cucumer. 31 Ledon. 38 Leirion. 60 Lemniage. 126 Lemnia miltos. 127 Lemnia rubrica. 127 Lemnia Sphragis. 127 Lemnia terra. 126 Lens. 59 Lentilles. 59 Lentiscina resina. 68. 95 Lentiscus. 68 Leonina lepra. 118 Leoninus adeps. 4 Leontiasis. 60 Leontion. 60 Letuce. 57 Leucanthemen. 24 Leucophlegmatias. 53 Leuen. 8 Libanos. 9 Libanotos. 129 Lilye. 60 Lime vnsleked. 19 Linon. 61 Linospermon. 61 Lippitudo. 78 Liqueritia. 49 Liquida pix. 87 Litarge. 61 Lithargyros. 61 Lithodendron. 28 Litron. 104 Lizarde. 56 Lonchitis. 64 Lonchoton. 141 Longum piper. 85 Lotus syluestris. 71 Lumbrici. 134 Lycion. 63 M. Madelchon. 17 Mader. 32 Malache. 64 Malicorium. 16 Malowe. 64 Maluauiscus. 8. 64 Malus. 66 Malus granata. 65 Malus Syluestris. 6 Manicos Strichnos. 119 Manna Thuris. 67. 129 Marathron. 40 Marche. 12
Marina portulaca. 90 Marinum Absinthium. 1. 2 Marinus Sal. 102. 103 Marshe malowe. 8 Marshe persley. 12 Masculinum thus. 78 Massa cocta. 68 Mastiche. 126 Mastix. 68 Materfilon. 109 Matter. 107 Mecon. 82 Melanacardi. 10 Melarundineum. 99 Melaetherium. 67 Mela. 65 Melea. 66 Mel Frugum. 71 Meli. 69 Melia. 41 Meliceris. 76 Meligetta. 47 Melilote. 71 Mellago. 67 Melon. 65 Melroscidum. 67 Mercurii digitus. 51 Metopium. 41 Milesum. 121 Milium. 116 Milium indicum. 116 Mille stuffe. 37 Mirrhe. 75 Mirtles. 76 Misy. 140 Mollis Sapo. 109 Molybdos. 89 Montapium. 12 Morbus Regius. 53. 70 Morsus Diaboli. 110 Mountaine persley. 12 Muralium. 85 Muraria Viola. 137 Muscatus Sapo. 108 Musterde. 119 Myrcillos. 76 Myrmecia. 40 Myrmex. 41 Myrsine. 76 Myrtites Tithymalos. 131 Myrtus Syluestris. 31 N. Naphthicus Sal. 103 Napy. 119 Narcissus. 5 Nordos. 120 Nardos Celtica. 120 Nardos Oreia. 120 Nardus indica. 119 Nardu Stachys. 119 Nasturtium. 21 Nephelion. 6 Nerium. 59 Nigella Citrina 47 Niger Sapo. 109 Nyght shade. 119 Nigra hedera. 48 Nigra Viola. 137 Nigrae Myrobalm. 74 Nigrum Piper. 85 Nitrum. 104
Nitrum. 104 Nubecula. 6 O Obtalmia. 78 Oenon uel Inon. 136 Oleosa resina. 126 Olus atrum. 13 Omphacinum oleum. 77 Omphacitis. 42 Omphacium. 6 Onions. 24 Onopyxos. 63 Ophiasis. 130 Ophiomachos. 56 Ophioscorodon. 7 Opion. 78 Opocarpasum. 75 Oreoselinon. 12. 13. Orpin. 36 Ouina scabiosa. 109 Oxalis. 97 Oxos. 3 Oxylapathon. 97 Oxyngion. 4 Oxyhoenicobalanos. 125 Oxyphoenix. 125 Oyle. 77 Ozena. 65 P Paederota. 2 Palea Camellorum. 114 Palimpissa. 87 Pallidum Santlum. 108 Palpitatio. 96 Paludapium. 12 Panaces heracleon. 79 Panax. 79 Panicum. 116 Pannus. 6 Papaueris Lacrima. 78 Paracmasticos pyretos. 125 Paraphoros Stypteria. 8 Pardi adeps. 4 Parietis flos. 105 Particularum diductio. 13 Pastum Camellorum. 114 Peares. 92 Peason. 87 Pecton Chalcanthon. 139 Pediasmos myrrha. 76 Pediculus elephantis. 10 Peganon. 98 Penyworte. 30 Peper. 85 Peperi. 85 Pepyromenon Theion. 122 Perdicias. 83 Perdicion. 83 Peristereon. 134 Persley. 12 Petymorell. 119 Petrapium. 12 Petroselmon. 12 Phace. 59 Phacos. 59 Phasiolus. 36 Phlegmos. 84 Phorimos Stypteria. 8 Phragmites selinon. 13 Phycos. 24. 121 Phygethlon. 18
Phyma. 18 Physalis. 119 Picea. 85 Picris. 26 Pilosa scabiosa. 110 Pimele. 4 Pinus. 85. 87 Piper. 142. 143 Pismire. 41. 8▪ Pison. 87 Pissa. 87 Pissa spalthum. 72 Pitche. 87 Pitys. 85 Pityusa. 131 Placitis uel placodes Cadmia. 120 Placitis Stypteria. 8 Planten. 89 Platyophthalmon. 11 Plinthitis Stypteria. 6 Plume tree. 92 Polygonum. 29 Polystichon hordeum. 52 Pomgranate. 65 Pompholyx. 120. 133 Pontica cera. 24 Ponticum absinthium. 12 Popie. 82 Porci adeps. 5 Poros. 89 Proserpinaca. 29 Prunes. 92 Psilothron. 138 Psimmythion. 24 Psora. 60. 109 Pura tertiana. 127 Purcelane 90 Purpura Viola. 137 Purulens sanies. 107 Pustula. 14 Pyretos phemeros. 34 Pyros. 131 Pyxacantha. 63 Q Quartane feuer. 92 Quotidian feuer. 93 Quince. 29 Quitture. 107 R Radix alipi. 131 Radix asari. 4 Radix dulcis. 46 Radix pityusae. 131 Radix tithymali foeminae. 131 Radix Tripolii. 131 Ranunculus. 13. 39 Rapa. 93 Rapistrum. 93 Rasa aerugo. 137 Regius morbus. 53. 70 Resina lentiscina. 68. 129 Resina oleosa. 126 Restauratio. 6 Reysens. 8 Rubrum santalum. 108 Rhetine. 95 Rhetine terminthine. 124 Rhigos. 96 Rhoa. 65 Rhodon. 96
Rhoea. 65 Rhoeas mecon. 82 Risagallum. 94 Romanum absinthium. 1. 2 Rosa Iunonis. 60 Rose 96 Rosin. 95 Rotunda lactuca. 58 Rubia. 32 Rubea tinctorum. 32 Rubrum santalum. 108 Rue. 98 Rusticum absinthium. 1 Rusticum apium. 12 S Sabucus. 105 Saccharon. 99 Sacra herba. 134 Saffron. 30 Sagapeman. 117 Sal gemmae. 16 Sal indicus. 99 Sal Petrae. 105 Sandaracha. 16. 134 Sanders. 108 Sandix. 24. 135 Singuinaria. 29 Singuinarius lapis. 48 Sanguis draconis. 64 Santonicum absinthium. 2 Salte. 102 Sarcites. 53 Sarcodes poros. 90 Sauin. 99 S Antonies fier. 35 Saxatile apium. 12 Saxifragalutea. 71 Scabiose. 109 Scammonia. 111 Schinos. 68 Schinos aromaticos. 113 Schoinuanthos. 113 Schiste stypteria. 8 Sclerotes. 114 Sclirosis. 114 Scoletia aerugo. 137 Scorodon. 7 Scrosularia. 25 Scrophula. 46 Sea onion. 114 Sea wormwoode. 14 Sedum. 91. 116 Selinon. 12 Seminalis. 29 Sepiculare apium. 13 Seriphium absinthium. 1. 2 Seris. 26 Serpillum hortense. 128 Sertula campana. 71 Seuum. 4 Sharp dock or sower dock. 97 Sicys agrios. 31. Sideritis. 107 Sidium. 16 Sinepy. 119 Singrene. 116 Sinus. 38 Siues. 24▪ Smalache. 12 Smyrna. 75 Solanum. 119 Soniferum solanum. 119
Sondering of vnitie. 141 Sope. 108 Sorbilia oua. 81 Sordida sanies. 107 Sorell. 81. 97 Sorgos. 116 Sory. 140 Sothernwood. 1 Spatharenticus Sapo. 108 Speareworte. 39 Sphacelos. 15 Sphragis agos. 126 Spina aegiptia. 49 Spissa pix. 87 Spodion. 120 Spuma nitri. 16 Spumeum papauer. 82 Squilla. 114 Squinantum. 113 Stalactichon Chalcanthon. 139 Stacte. 76. 122 Stagonias libanos. 78. 129 Staphyloma. 17 Staphis. 83 Steatoma. 76 Stibium. 11 Stimmi. 11 Stillatitium Chalcanthū. 139. 141 Stoebe. 109 Stone croppe. 36. 37. 117 Stone persley. 12 Storax. 122 Strongyle stypteria. 8 Strychnos. 119 Struma. 46. 115 Stypteria. 8 Succisa. 110 Succorie. 26 Succotrina aloe. 7 Suffocataoua. 81 Sugar. 104 Suillus adeps. 5 Suppuratus tumor. 14 Sutorium atramentum. 140 Syagrum thus. 129 Syce. 38 Sycis agrios. 31 Syluestre apium. 12 Symphoniaca. 52 Symptoma. 3 Syriacum Scammonium. 113 Syriasis. 32 T Tabarzeth Saccharum. 100. 101 Taurocolla. 27 Teasell. 33 Teda. 87 Telephium. 36. 117 Telis. 40 Terebinthos. 126 Terminthine rhetine. 126 Terminthos. 126 Tetrastichon Crithon. 52 Tetter. 117 Thapsia. 133 Theion. 122 Thereniabin. 67 Theriasis. 130 Therioma. 118 Therion. 118 Thermos. 63 Thiria. 118
Thiriasis. 118 Thridacia. 68 Thridax. 57 Titanos. 19 Tithymalos myrsinites. 131 Tophus 90 Tremula oua. 81 Tremor. 96 Trichites Stypteria. 8 Tripolium. 131. 132 Trithales. 116 Tumor gutturis uel inguinarius. 18 Tumor suppuratus. 14. Turnep. 93 Turpetum. 131 Tyme. 128 Tyrhenica cera. 24 Tyria. 130 V Ueriuce. 6 Vermicularis. 37 Vermicularis aerugo. 137 Ueruen. 133 Vesicaria. 119 Vesicaria peregrina. 119 Uineger. 119 Virga pastoris. 3 Virulens sanies. 107 Viscosa pix. 87 Vitis alba. 138 Ulcer. 88. 141 Vlcus. 88 Vnguis. 142 Volatica. 118 Volubilis quinta Mesuae. 111. 112 Vrceolaris. 83 Vua passa. 83 Vulnus. 88 VV Warte. 41 Water. 14 Water persley. 12 Wexe. 24 Wheate. 131 White wyne. 136 Winter onion. 24 Wormwode. 1. 2. Wylde date. 125 Wylde persley. 12 Wylde plum or prune. 92 Wylde rue. 98 Wyne. 136 X Xylocolla. 27 Y Ydema. 142 Yelowe flowre deluce. 4 Yelowe iaundies. 53 Z Zeg. 140 Zime. 38 Zimia. 142
IOHN HALLE CHIRVRGIEN, vnto the yonge studentes of Chirurgerie, and to all the louing readers sendeth greting, be∣gynnyng first with this sentence of the diuyne phylosophier Socrates. He that will seke, and knoweth not Howe muche in more or lesse, Can neuer tell whan he doth finde, An ayde for his distres. THerfore Galen, the Prince of phisiciens, in the .vi. boke of his therapeulike methode affir∣meth, that Chirurgiens being ignorant of the Anatomie, may erre in many thinges, specially in their incisions. For (sayth he) if they knew what vnitie and combination the members of the body haue one with an other, & howe they procede: If hurte happen vnto thē, thei might perceiue whether the nerues, or other mēbers hauing proper office or nedfull action be cut or not: and so to iudge truly of their worke, and to be certeyne in theyr incisions. To the confirmation of whiche sentence, Henricus de Ermunda villa, compareth the chirurgien ignorant in Anatomy, to a blynde mā whiche would hewe a pece of tymber: For as a blynd man, that hew∣eth on a logge, knoweth not howe muche he should hewe therof, nor in what maner, (and therfore commonly erreth, in hewyng more or lesse then he ought to doe:) so lykewyse doth the chyrurgien that worketh on the body of mā, not knowing the Anatomy. And that it is of neces∣sitie, the chirurgien to knowe the Anatomie, the sayde Henry appro∣ueth by an euident argument: for euery workeman (sayeth he) should knowe the subiect of his worke. But the subiect of chirurgerie is the body of man, whiche therfore ought to be knowne of the chirurgien. Whiche knowledge of mans body or any part therof, can no wayse be attained but by Anatomie. Anatome so called of the grecians is sayth Carolus Stephanus, the dissection of man his body, by reason and iudgement, administred as as well in the symple partes as in the cōpounde, to the perfect know∣ledge of them. For truly, the perfect knowledge of partes doth chiefly consiste in indagacion or diligent exquisition, of substance, quantitie, forme, number, situation and connexion.
The vtilitie of Anatomye, (as the sayde author defineth) is, that those incommodities and dangers, whervnto the body is often sub∣iect, may be the more easely preuēted or defended. The which incom∣modities doe runne in dyuers partes and offyces of the body, and also may greatly offende: For there are very fewe members (or rather none) that are formed vnto no vse, or that dooe not exercyse theyr gyfte, eyther in theyr owne office or in helpyng some other action. And in the proheme of hys seconde booke, vehemently praysing the vtilitie therof, he sayeth: for what in comparyson, is more to bee wyshed for then the absolute knowledge of Anatomye? What is more excellent? what to the physicien more profitable? What to the chyrurgien more worthy? The whiche who so endeuour to gette and the same obteyne, are onlye worthyly called physiciens and chyrur∣giens: neyther is there ought that maye more commende the phisicien or chyrurgien, then the same Anatomie. Whiche studie who so setteth at nought, I knowe not what in suche men and their artes maye be praysed. For when the myndes delectation is coueted, or perfection and an absolute arte sought for: what doth so muche delyght or moue ingenious wyttes, as the dilygent editions, difficultly searched out of our founders, in the procreation of this Micro cosmos or lytle world? and surely Medicine without Anatomie, shalbe neyther arte nor any thyng els. This beyng true, as I thynke no learned or reasonable man wyll denye, howe vntruly doe (in these our daies) a great number beare the names of physike and chyrurgerie: or howe ill deserue they to be cal∣led by those honorable names, (being not only ignorāt in the Anatomy them selues, but also disdainfully contempne & reproue, both the thing it selfe, and all suche as trauell ther is, eyther to profite them selues or others) let wyse men iudge. These thynges considered, it may seme necessary, that the neglygent myndes of suche, as lyttle esteme this delectable fountayne or swete well sprynge of theyr profession, be spurred forwarde vnto vnderstan∣dyng by some compendious treatise, that may farther there trauell, or cause them at the least (their dull slouthfulnes set a parte,) to procede forwarde, not turnyng backwarde nor loyteryng by the waye, til they haue scaled the forte of perfection, and wunne the citie of science. But if I shall at this tyme determyne a treatyse of so hyghe a pro∣fession, of whiche also so many noble clerkes haue wrytten before, whiche shall be pervsed of so many at this present, ye iudged also of those that are to come: howe shall my handes refrayne from fearfull shaking, or my face from bashfull blushynges: sythe my simple and indigested frase, must shewe it selfe before so many excellent, euen such whose intellection wyll them leade my rudnes to controwle. Whiche I feare muche the rather may chaunce, because that of some one thing many tymes dyuers authers make dyuers difinitions: for dyuers mē haue dyuers myndes, and diuersitie of myndes, causeth dyuersitie and
varietie in opinions: whiche happeneth not only in this profession, but also in all sciences, yea and most of all (whiche is lamentable) among the diuynes or teachers of christen theologie. Yet not withstanding I doubt not, but whosoeuer shall indifferētly beholde this simple treatyse without parcialitie, conferring the same with the most accepted authors, they shall fynde the same both soun∣dyng with truthe and reason. But truly the malyce of men so excedyngly encreaseth, that no man no not the best learned, (muche lesse I,) can doe ought without re∣proche and slaunder: yea and that chiefly by men of his owne profes∣sion. Oh how hatefull and vyle a matter is this, and a playne demon∣stration of enuy, when one man of science shalbe asked by a stranger. what opinion he hath in an other man of science that he knoweth, he shall answer, he is a good herbarian, he knoweth well herbes: or he is good at the Anatomie. I know nothing els of hym. They that are perfect in nothyng them selues, haue euer in readynes suche disdeyn∣full reproche to hyde their owne ignorance: as though a man, beynge excellent in any other thing, it proued hym to be ignorant in all other: Whiche thing if it dyd proue I myght thus answer. It is better to be perfect in some one thyng, then to medle with many thynges beyng perfect in none. And yet as it is euydent to proue, it argueth no suche thyng but rather the contrary: for he whose capacitie hath atayned, to the perfect knowledge of any one part of science, is the better to bee hoped in that he shall procede to the pure sincerite of all the reste. For the phylosopher compareth the wytte of man vnto Iron: for as I∣ron, the more it is scoured the bryghter it is: so the wytte of man, the more it is vsed or occupyed, is alwayse the finer and the better. Certaynly the remembrance of suche disdainful obiectiōs, (when I had already finyshed this thyng) made me in doubte to put forth thys worke: but that my frendes with whom I conferred my doynges, earnestly perswaded me not to regarde the rage of enuye, so longe as truthe would beare out it selfe, whyle tyme consumed bothe selander and also enuy, the author of all reproche: and that I should in no case cease to doe that should profite many, for the euell of a fewe: whiche thynke it an hyghe poynt of knowledge, to munte and speake euell of the doynges of all other, whyle they them selues doe nothynge wher∣with to profite any. Seyng therfore I shall procede in this simple worke, I thynke it good first to declare what names the learned Anatomistes haue geuen to the body of mā. For though dyuers haue vsed the bodies of beastes for Anatomies, yet seynge that the bodye of man is the subiect of our worke, we (settynge a syde all other) wyll treate onlye of it. Whiche is called in Greeke Mycro cosmos, in Laun Minor mundus, in En∣glyshe a lyttle worlde: because in the same (euen as in the frame of the greate worlde) so manye wonders maye bee seene of natures workes, to the hyghe honor and glorye of almyghtye God. Maye it not be proued, that the brayne (lyke vnto the heauens,)
hangeth without any maner of staye or proppe, to holde vp the same? nay, It is so euident, that euery learned Anatomiste wryteth of the same, as a thyng not to be doubted of: and therfore iudge the same to haue a certeyne lykenes with the heauenly nature. And as the world hath two notable lyghtes to gouerne the same, namely the Sonne and the Moone: so hath the body of man, planred lykewyse in the hyghest place twoo lyghtes, called eyes: whiche are the lyghtes of the body, as the Sonne and the Moone are the lyghtes of the worlde. And it is also wrytten of some doctors, that the brayne hath .vii. concauites, be∣ing instrumentes of the wyttes: which answere vnto the .vii. spheres of the planetes. And to be briefe, it is a worlde o beholde, and a won∣derful wonder to thynke, that as great merueyles maye bee seene, wrought by God in nature in this litle worlde man his body, as ther is to be considered in any thyng in the vnyuersall great worlde, aboue or benethe at any tyme. Secondly, it is called a common weale, for as muche as there is therin conseyned as it were a ryghteous regiment, betwene a prynce and this subiectes: as for example. Let vs call the harte of mā a king, the brayne and the lyuer the chiefe gouernours vnder hym, the sto∣mache and the guttes, with other aperteinyng to nutrymente, the of∣ficers of his courte, and all the members vniuersally his subiectes. And then let vs see, if any man can deuyse any necessary instrument of a common weale, nedefull for the wealth of the same, from the hyghest to the lowest, that the lyke shall not be founde in the body of man: as it is so well knowne, to all those that trauel in the knowledge of Ana∣tomie, that I nede not here muche therof to wryte. Can it be percey∣ued that the hande or the fote, or any part of them or such lyke (which we may lyken to the labourers, or as some call them vyle mēbers of a common weale,) at any tyme to resiste or rebel against the harte their soueraigne lorde, or any other officer vnder hym their superiors? no truly. The body of man is a common weale without rebellion: the kyng so louyng his subiectes, and the subiectes so louyng their kyng, that the one is euer redy to mynister vnto the other all thynges nede∣full: as if the harte by any occasion susteyne damage, as we may see in the disease called Sincope, or swoundyng. At suche a tyme I saye the face, the handes, and the fete, are founde colde and without felynge, strengthe or lyfe: and what proueth it, but that as louynge and obe∣dient subiectes, they thynke nothyng theyr own wherof the harte hath nede, whiche is their lorde and gouernor? yea they vtterly depryue thē selues of altogether, to serue and please theyr lord. Immediatly as the swoundyng ceaseth, the bloude resorteth to the face, she handes and the feete are warme agayne: as it were benefites done, rendered agayne with thankes and ioye. And is not suche a lorde and kyng worthye of good subiectes, that for the helpe of one of the leaste of them, wyl spend all that he hath, so long as lyte endureth? as if a mēber be hurte, wher∣by any veyne or artery is cutte, the bloud or spirite will issue in suche
wyse that it wyll not cease commyng thyther so longe as any is lette, if it be not in tyme preuented. Oh kynd and gentyll gouernour, oh wel wyllyng and obedient subiectes. Thirdly, the body of man is called in greeke Anthropos, & in latin, by interpretation Arbor euersa, as we myght saye in Englysh, a tree turned vpside downe. For as a tree hath his roote in the earth, gro∣wyng with his body and branches from the earth vp towardes the heauens: so contrariwyse, man hath his roote (whiche is the head) vpwarde towardes the heauens, & all other partes descendyng down¦wards to the earth: which standeth by good reason, that for this cause man of al otherthinges vnder heauen should be most excellent, & by the vse of reason receiued of the soule (and of the same immortalitie) most like vnto god. Consideryng therfore that the body of man is so precious, it shoulde seme that the science that serueth to kepe the same in healthe, or to re∣store health beyng loste to the same, should be a thyng of no smal value, but rather of great regarde. Therfore as I iudge, they erre not that esteme the medicinall arte next vnto diuinitie: for as muche as diuy∣nitie is the meane wherby the soule is saued, & chirurgery the meane to saue the body: whiche is next in value vnto the soule. Wherfore as they which lytle esteme that arte, (wherof the office is so precious) seme very vnwyse, and to wante vtterly the vse of reason: so is it a great enormitie for any to enterpryse to vse that arte, not able to cō∣prehende the knowledge of the same. For the which cause, that I myght partly helpe younge studentes, (as I am one my selfe) to the ataynyng of some perfectiō, I haue here gathered a lytle worke, conteynyng three shorte treatyses of the Ana∣tomy or dissection of the partes of man his body. Wherin I wyl not he so curious, as to take vpon me the precise numberyng of euery smal and difficulte parte, nor to be exquisite in the dyuersitie of names: but only shewyng suche number and names briefly, as serue moste to the commodities of the chyrurgiens intelection, with an order of conduci∣ble notes, howe to vse our handy worke of medicine, (called in greke Chirurgia) vpon the body of man or any parte therof: whether it be ncisions, cauterizations, bloudlettyng called phlebotomy, or ventosing called also cuppyng or boxyng, scarification, or openyng of apostemes on what parte of the body so euer it be, that none error be committed in the same. For of the contrary, as of the vncunnyng doynges of any of these, commeth dyuers dangers, as the depriuation and losse, both of members and lyfe. And (as it may euidently apeare) for that cause was the cutting out of dead bodies first put in vse: and the large volumes wrytten therof by auncient authors, declare their intent to be chiefly for that thing. So that as Guido affirmeth, Anatomy is .ij. wayes to be learned, The first and beste by cuttyng of dead bodyes: The seconde by doctrine wrytten in bookes. Of this later maner, we shall by the grace of God in this short trea∣tyse saye a lytle, as occasion serueth, and as the smalnes of the volume
wyll geue me leaue. Beyng therto somwhat encouraged, by the ex∣ample of good maister Ucarie, late sargeante chyrurgien to the que∣nes highnes: Who was the firste that euer wrote a treatyse of Ana∣tomie in Englyshe, (to the profite of his brethren chirurgiens, and the helpe of younge studentes,) as farre as I can learne. Wherin I haue omytted narracion by tables or payntyng out of pyctures: thin∣kyng it more profitable for learners, to exercyse the cuttyng out of bo∣dyes them selues, then to beholde the grauyng or paynting of others. For Galen sayeth in his seconde boke of the vse of partes, that who∣soeuer wyll be a dyligent beholder of the workes of nature: It beho∣ueth hym not to beleue only bokes of Anatomie, but rather his owne proper eyes. Notwithstanding if hereafter it shal seme good to my frendes, that I Ierate this worke with augmentations: I wyll surely not re∣fuse to doe whatsoeuer shalbe thought profitable to the cōmon weale, and commodious to the studentes in this arte. Wherin I desire the studious readers not to iudge of me, that I trust euer ye more to mine owne iudgementes, because I haue so boldly done this thyng, but ra∣ther that as I affirme all that I alledge by authoritie, so woulde I gladly be taught where I make any fault, of those ye are my betters. For I esteme not my head so good, neither thynke I it so cleare and voyde of error, that I should in this worke be so exquisite as to satis∣fie all men in their variable iudgementes: but verily thynkyng my self faynt of perfection, desiryng in my harte that the faultes of this my worke, may cause some man of charitie to sette forthe a more excellent worke, to dashe this out of name and countenance: so that I myghte therby be instructed of that whiche I longe moste for, earnestly desire, and thirste to learne. If this my simple worke may geue that occasion, at the leste I shal hartely reioyce therin: for though I be vnperfect, yet if myne vnper∣fectnes may be a cause of perfection, bothe vnto my selfe and other: it were as I suppose a good chāce. For (as ye diuines interprete) the vn∣belefe of Thomas, was a great helpe to the faythe of vs all that come after: for because of his vnfaythfulnes Christe shewed hym selfe, & his precious woundes also, after his resurection: whiche caused not only Thomas to beleue vnfaynedly, but vs all to be put out of doubt & a∣certayned of the glorious resurection of our mercie seate Christ Je∣sus. Whom I moste hartely beseche to kepe you moste gentle Rea∣ders, that wytsafe me your good wyll and fauourable reporte. And to sende both vnto you and me, (through the shy∣ning beames of his eternall grace,) A bryght, cleare, and frutefull vnderstandyng of that whiche we moste earnestly couet to learne. Amen. (∴)
¶The fyrst treatyse OF ANATOMIE, VVHICHE brieflye sheweth the natures numbers and names of all the symple members, with the diuersyties of their v∣ses and vtilities, whether they bene Sperma∣tike or Sanguyne, and conteyneth xiiii. Chapiters. The Argumente of the fyrst treatyse. FOr as muche as no man is perfecte in the composition of anye thynge, that is ignorant in the symple partes ther∣of: it is necessarie that I declare fyrste, the knowlege that I haue collected of experience,Symple mē∣bers. and oute of good Authors, concernynge the symple members of man ne his bodie,Consimiliaria membra. before that I speake of the anatomye in general. These are called symple members, or consimi∣liares:The nerue, ye vaine and the artery ar also organca mem¦bra Galen. lib. 19. Vtilit. Bones, Gristles, Lygaments, Synewes, Chordes, Muscles, Panicles, Arteryes, Ueynes, Fleshe, Fatte, and the Skynne, besyde the heares, and the nayles. Which al∣thoughe, some haue called members, are not members in dede, but rather the superfluities of mēbers: As I intende to declare in this worke, thorowe the permission of God, for whose helpe and grace it is nedefull that I praye, that in these .iii. lytle treatyces I dissente not from the truthe. Of the bones. The fyrst Chapter. WHerfore after the example of good buylders, (who be∣gynne at the foundation ascendyng vpwardes) I will begyn at the bones, (whiche are the foundations wheron
all other members are supported and borne) and so procede outwarde in order to the reste.. Sicca anatome cadauer assic∣catum. The doctryne of bones ob∣serued in anatomye is called of Galen Osteologia and O∣steotome. The whole frame whereof beyng dryed and reser¦ued to anatomye, is cauled Sccletos in Latine Cadauer assicca¦tum and vulgarlye Sicca anatome. The bones then called in Greke Ostea,. i. Os. and in Latyn Ossa are symple members, similare, spermatyke, colde and drye of complexion, insensible and inflexible, that is, withoute felynge, and not able to be bowed. Of bones there are ma¦nye and diuers in mans bodie, aswell concernyng theyre number as theire forme or figure, and that because of the nede or necessitie of their dyuers & variable offices, whiche they haue in the bodie: their connexions and ioyninges to∣gether, being also diuers, haue dyuers names accordingly. Whiche ioynynges are deuyded, Fyrste into .ii. speciall sorres. Articulatio. The fyrst is called in Greke Arthrosis and in Latyn Articulatio, whiche is the moste open and euident maner of Joyning. Vnio naturalis The seconde, whiche the Grekes calle Symphisin, is named in Latyn Vnio naturalis, and in Englyshe a natu∣rall vnion, whiche is a more hydde, and obscure ioyninge. The fyrst maner called articulation is also farther deui∣ded: fyrste into two sortes, as a priuie or hydde connexion (such as are sene in the bones of the sculle) called in Greke Synarthrosis, Coarticulatio. and in Latine Coarticulatie: and a plaine conspi∣euous maner, as in the armes and hyppes, called in Greke Diarthrosis and in Latyne Dearticulatio., Dearticulatio This dearticulation is farther of the Grekes deuyded into .iii. maners, as Enar∣throsis, Arthrodi and Gyngismos.. Enarthrosis is when the large holownes of one bone receyueth the fullnes of an others eminence, as in the hippes. Arthrodia is when ye sha∣lowe holowne of one is moderatlye aperynge vpwarde, the headde of the other depressed downe into it: as ye se be∣twene the spondilles, and the rybbes. Gynglismos is when they so Joyne, as it semeth they enter mutuallye one in to an other, as the spondylles one to an other, also the shoul∣der, the cubyte, and the mydle Joyntes of the fyngers.
Coarticulation is also triplie deuided,. i. Sutura  as Sutura, Compho∣sis & Hormonia▪ Sutura is when bones ioyne lyke a seame Se¦wed in moste euident & conspicuous maner, whiche in the heade maye diuerslie be sene. Comphosis is when bones are infixed one to an other as are ye tethe in the iaw bones.  Har¦monia called also Comssura is a ioyning by a simple line with out indētinges, as in the Chin, the Share, & some bones of the heade.Comssura. But note here that chirurgiens cōmonlie call al seames in the head comissures: which comon maner I al∣so haue obserued in my generall anatomie, lest yt otherwise I should of the moste part of readers not be vnderstanded. The second speciall maner called Symphysis hath also .ii. differēces: as in soft bones, which excrescentlie or musherū like ioyne simplie together: & in harde bones which by som¦what cōming betwene, are so by nature vnited & cōioyned, that thei cleaue together. & this later maner is of iii. sorts,, called of the Grekes Synchondrosis, Synneurosis, & Syssarcolis. Syn¦chondrosis is, when grystles beneficially enter betwene thē, as in the wrest & diuers other partes. Synneurosis is, wher si∣newes helpingly go betwene the bones, & Syssarcolis (so cal∣led of Galen) is when by the helpe of flesh goyng betwene bones are ioyned together. And as bones haue variable names according to their places formes & offices,Ceruix  Collum, Capita Nodi. & likewise their ioyninges: so haue their partes formably also. As the sclender processes or forthe goynges of bones are called in Latyn Ceruices & colla as we may say the neckes of bones, i. Tuberculū. whose extremes beyng blunte and rounde, are called Capita Nodi, Apex a∣licius rei. & Condili, the headdes or knottes of bones: and suche is the thighe bone, wher it entreth the share bone. But yt which endeth in a pointed processe without a rounde head, doth also cease to be called Ceruix,, id est Pixis. and is called in Greke o¦rone or Coronon, the crown or toppe of a bone. The holownes of a bone (receyuing the heade of an other) beyng large and depe,Acetabulum aque oe cauum. is called in Greke Cotyle, in atyne Acetabulum, and vulgarlie Pixis, in Englishe, the bore or cup of the ioynte. But suche a holownes as is more superficial and shalowe is called of the Grekes Glne, of the lykenes it
with the bosome of the eye, whiche is the holowe entrance towardes the eye. The number of bones in mannes bodie, after Auicen. are. 24 8. but other whiche more preciselye number the bones in the handes & feete,. Os sesaminū uel sesamiaeū. cauled Sesamina or Sesamiaeossa, with diuers other acompte them to be. 370. and I fynde reaso¦nable causes, whye that the bones are so diuers, and many in number: namelie that one member maye moue, and re∣moue withoute an other. I meane that an other be not for∣ced to moue with it: Whiche otherwyse coulde not be, yf there were not diuers bones. Secondlie that some (hauing their forme or figure for that vse) myghte defende, as the walles of a stronge defenced forte, the principall mem∣bers: and those are the bones of the heade, and the breste. Thirdlye, that some shoulde as foundacions beare vp and susteyne all the reste: and those are the bones of the rydge (called in Latyne Spina,. i. Spina, Sentis, uel Aculeus, Vertebra in Greke Acantha, and particularly Vertebra, in Englishe Spondilles or tournyng ioyntes) and also those of the legges. And finallye, that some maye ful∣fylle and strengthen holowe places, as doe the bones of the handes and fete. Of the Cartilage or Gristle. Chapi. ii. THe seconde of symple members is the Gristle, which the Grekes call Chondron,. i. Cartilago. and the Latines Cartilagi∣nem: and is in hardnes nexte to the bones, (the Ana∣tomie whereof is called in greke Chondrotome:) but they are somewhat flexyble, and colde and drye of complexion, and insensible, as are the bones. And I fynde syxe causes, or commodities whye the grystles were ordayned. The fyrste cause is,The vse of grystles. that the continuall mouynge of the harde bones in the Junctures mighte not be done without detri∣mente to the lygamentes, yf the grystles or Cartilages were not a meane betwene the sayde lygamentes and the bones. The seconde cause is, that when anye contusion, or
bruse, happeneth in softe members, the sayde delicate mem¦bers are the better defended, from the hard extremities of the bones. The thirde cause is, that in the Joynctes the endes of the bones, (whiche are gristlye) myght more ease∣lye, and with nymblenes be foulded, and freated together, withoute offence or hurte of one towardes another. The fowerth is, that in some places that are meane betwene harde and softe, it is necessarye to sette a gristle, as in the throte boule, or wynde pype, called Arteria aspera: For there it doth howlde and beare off the fleshe, that the passage of the wynde or breathe be not interrupted or let. And also in that place the grystllye substance helpeth muche to the sounde of the voyce. Fyftlie I fynde, that a gristlye sub∣stance is necessarie in the borders of the eyes. Sixtlye, they are behouefull in the nose and eares, for there they do bothe drawe abroade, and susteyne, and beare vp the softe partes: where as otherwyse they woulde nether be forma∣ble, nor yet do theire office, or naturalle operations. Of the Lygamente. Chapi. iii. THe thirde sorte of symple members are the ligamēts called in Greke of Hyppocrates Syndesmi and in La∣tine Vincula or Lygamenta, Vinculum si∣ue ligamentū. which are spermatyke and flexible,. but yet insensible, and cold and dry of complexion: whose anatomie is called in Greke Syndesmotome. And I fynde that ligamentes in the bodie haue .iiii. necessarie v∣ses:Utilities of lygamentes. The fyrste is, they bynde the bones together. The se∣conde is, they profyte muche in adioynynge themselues to synewes, to make the chordes, and the muscles. Thirdlye they are restynge places, to diuers of the synewes. And fourthlie diuers inwarde members, as the matryr, the re∣nes, and such lyke, are by them vpholdē and susteyned. And they are made flexible, because that otherwyse the ioyncte whiche by them is houlden together, woulde not haue mo∣ued, without an other had moued with him. And they are
made insensible, because otherwyse they might neuer haue suffred the labour and payne, in mouyng and turnynge of the ioynct. And note that some lygamētes bynde the bones inwarde, and some outwarde. For the whiche cause some Authors Judge them to brede of the bones, although they bee of the nature of the synewes. And Galen saythe, in the .ii. boke of the vse of partes, that the couplynge of bones together, is by the byndinges of stronge branched lygamentes. Of the Nerue or Synewe. Chapi. iiii. THe fowerth of simple members is the synew, named in Greke Tonos or Neuros,. in Latyne Neruus, and hys dissection Neurtoe, which is spermatike, colde and drye of complexion, flexible, and sensyble, strong & tougbe, meane betwene harde and soft: hauynge theire begynning from the brayne, and the marrowe of the backe. For there come from the brayne. vii. payre of synewes, that are cal∣led sensityue:Nerui sensorii and from the marrowe of the backe, procede xxx. payre of synewes, accordyng to the numbre of the spon¦dils: and one more, whiche spryngeth alone by hym selfe from the laste spondill, or loweste of all in the ende of the rydge, and therefore named Neruus sine pari. And these sy∣newes that procede from the marrow of the backe ar cal∣led motyue synewes.Nerui motorii So that from the brayne, & from the marow of the ridge together,Number of sy¦newes. procede or come forth .xxxvii. payre of synewes, and one odde one. From all the whiche doe procede diuers and manye sy∣newes, ramifying and spreadyng themselues, into innu∣merable branches, extendyng euen to the extreame partes: by the which we not onely fele and perceyue in euery place as they passe, bothe the comforte of healthesome and sem∣blable thynges, and the greffes of vnhelthsome and con∣trarye thynges (whiche we cal peyne:) but also we haue by them onely, the power of mouyng euery member, namely
sense of the sensityues, whiche therefore are the more deli∣cate: and mouing of the motyues, which for that action are more stronge, after this saying of Galen. Quoniam enim sen∣sus nonsine dispositione quadam nerui, motus autem in faciendo sol actionem obtinet: merito sensorius mollior, durior autem motorius ner¦uus factus est: that is, Seyng that sense hath his workynge by a certeyne disposition, but motion onely in doyng: The sensityue sinewe is conuenientlye made the softer, or more delicate, and the motyue the harder. And to ende with ∣rolo Stephano we maye saye, non esse omnino motum neque senti∣ri dolorem, nisi ubi neruus est, aut partibus uicinus, aut iis counitus. That there is no mouyng, neyther payne felte, but where there is a sinewe, eyther nighe the partes greued or conioy∣ned with them. Of the Chorde or Tendon. The .v. Chapi. THe fyfthe are the Chordes or Tendons, (called in Greke Tenonta & in Latyne Tendines) that beare the name of symple members, Tendo. Official, and spermatike: but they are compounde of Lygamentes, and toughe sy∣newes: and therefore are they stronge and towghe, colde and drye of complexion, meane betwene harde and softe: (or as Galen sayth,De motu ∣culorum libro so much harder then the synewe, as it is softer then the Ligament), sensible, & flexible. And ther are certayne causes to be consydered: why the chordes were compounde, as I sayde, of synewes and ligamentes toge∣ther. The fyrst is, that the synewes, beyng altogether sen∣sitiue, suffice not alone to susteyn the great labour and tra¦uayle that the tendon necessarylie doth suffer: wherefore beyng compounde with the insensyble ligament, there is made a temperature betwene sensible & insensible, yt so the mouing may neither be paīful, nor vtterly without feling. And by reason of the synewie substance of the chordes they
haue motyue vertue, accordynge to the appetyte, or will of the soule, or desyre of the mynde. Moreouer I fynde that these chordes or tendons growe out of the fleshy muscles: and that for good consyderation, & great skyll: for on these muscles haue the chordes a restyng place, after their great trauayle.The muscle. Musculi siue Lacerti. And these fleshie muscles are clothed with a thin skyn or panicle, whiche panicle serueth as well, to kepe the fleshe of the muscle in due forme: as also that the sayd mus∣cles should moue alone accordyng to the wyll, without the disturbance of the partes adiacent, or next them. And I vn∣derstande, that this musculous fleshe hathe within it ma∣nye smalle fybers or thredes of a synewie substance,Will in mus∣cles. wherein there is noted to be wyll, and those thredes come to the composition of the tendons. And three proper∣ties is to bee noted in the will of these aforesayde mus∣cles: that is to saye, length wherein is conteyned the ver∣tue attractiue: bredthe, wherein is the vertue expulsyue, and ouerth wartues: in whiche is the vertue retentyue: and at the endes of those muscles, these fybers or thredes, ga∣ther themselues together agayne, and make an other mus∣cle: and so haue they their generalle procedynges, thorow oute all the bodie.Number of muscles. Iohannes de Vigo aleagyng Auicen. num∣bereth the muscles to be. 531. but here I omytte, to declare the profe of the sayde number, by resiting them particuler∣lie, accordynge to their places, trustynge that this is suffi∣ciēt, in this briefe treatyce. The muscle is called in Latine Musculus a mure,Musculus Mus. that is of a mouse, and therefore in Greke also , for as a mouse is biggest in the myddest, & smal∣lest at bothe endes, so is a muscle. And it is lykewyse called a lacerte, of the lytle beaste named a Lyzarde, and in Latyne Lacertus.Lacertus. Thus in thys .v. chapiter I haue shewed aswell the nature, aud makynge of the muscles: as of the chode or tendon. The description of the mnscles by order of anatomye do the Grecians calle Miotomen..
Of the Pannicles The vi. Chapiter. Of the Arterie or Pulse. The .vii: Chapiter. SEuenthlye, i. spiritus. se∣mita. the Artery or Pulse, called bothe in Greke and Latine Arteria, and in olde Englishe the Wosen, (whose dissection also the grecians call Arteriotomen,) is a member symple and spermatike, sinewye and holow, ha∣uinge his beginnyng at the heart, and it bryngeth from the same spirite and life, vnto all the members of the body:Arteria. and it is of complexiō cold and dry.Wosen. And euery artery hath two coates, excepte onlye Arteria Venosa,Arteria Ve∣nosa. called in Englyshe the vēnalle artery, (because he hathe but one coate as hathe the veyn:) whose office only is (being implanted in the lunges) to conuey freshe ayer alwayes to the heart. That the great
heate of the hearte, caused by hys continualle motion, maye therby be refrigerate, cooled, & mitigated, by entring yt least ventricle therof, euen as the arteriall veyne, called Vena ar∣teriosa,Vena arterio∣sa. which (comming as some affirme, from the bothome of the hearte, on the ryghte syde) beareth bloude and spirite from the hart to the lunges, to quycken and nourish them. And hereis to be noted a notable error or ouersyght in booke of Anatomye, whereas this arterialle veyne is acounted all one wyth Arteria magna▪ and allo the offyces bothe of the venalle arterye and the arterialle veyne, are applied to the venalle arterye only. All the other arteries, haue eche of them two coates,Utilitye of arteries. that the spirit of life in them conteyned, maye the better and more certainlye be preser∣ued from hurte outewardlye: and also that the sayd liue∣lye spiryte, maye be the better reteyned wythin, that it passe not oute before hys tyme, tyll all the extreme par∣tes haue it minystred vnto them. Where as if it were preuented before it came at them, there woulde folowe mortyfication of the members: for the arteriall spiryte is more subtyll, and pearceth soner vnto the quickenynge of the members, then doothe the venalle or nutrimen∣talle bloude. Therefore one coate would not suffyce to ca∣rye it to those extreme partes, but that it woulde be pre∣uented and wasted by the way, before it come to thē: Wher¦of woulde folowe the incommodities before resited. Of the Veyne. The .viii. Chapiter. EIghtlye, (the veine named in Latin, Vena, , as some wyll, because bloude commeth therby to all par∣tes of the body,. in Greeke Phlebion, and the dyssectyon of them Phlebotome, is a symple member, as is the artery, colde and drye of complexion, and Spermatyke, but as the
arterye hathe hys beginnynge from the hearte, so hathe the veyne his beginnynge from the lyuer:The vse of veynes. and it bryn∣geth from thence nutrityue bloude, vnto all the mem∣bers of the bodye, to nourishe them wyth. And I vnder∣stande as well by experyence, as by that whiche I reade, that there is no more difference betwene the veyne and the arterye, but that one (hauynge two coates, and com∣mynge from the hearte,) is the vessell of vitall and spiri∣tuall bloude, and the other (hauynge but one coate, com∣mynge from the lyuer,) is the vessell of nutritiue bloud. And thys is generally in all veines, except only the arteri∣all veyn whych (as in the seuenth Chapiter I sayd) pro∣cedeth immediatlye from the hearte. And amonge all the veines there are two moste pryn∣cipalle, from whyche the braunches of all the reast procede: that is to saye, Vena porta,Vena porta. and Vena Coele, whiche some calle Vena Caua,Vena coele. r Magna, and these two haue their beginnings in the lyuer.Vena caua. I fynde n Regiine sanitatis salerni, the num∣ber of veines in mannes bodye to be three hundreth,Number of vaynes. thre score, and fyue wyth these woordes. (Ex tricentenis decies But I thyncke thys number to be mente of taye notable veynes, whyche by order of Anatomye, maye be made open to the senses, and not precyselye of all: for they braunche oute into innumera∣ble braunches, tyll they come to the verye smalnesse of heares, as it maye be perceyued in the pannicles, and some thyn skynnes, as the eye lyddes, and the skyn of the yarde, and diuers other places, and are therefore called Venae Capillares. Of the Fleshe. Chap .ix. NInthelye,. Caro. the fleshe (called in Greke Sarx, and in La∣tine Caro,)  a symple member, and sanguine, ingen∣dered of bloude, and congeyled by naturall heate, therefore it is whotte and moyste of complexion.
And I vnderstande, that there are thre kindes of Fleshe, founde in the body of man.Fleshe is of thre kyndes. The fyrste kinde is very or true fleshe, wher of there is but lyttle fore founde in the bodye, and that is amonge the gummes or tethe, and in the heade of the yard. The second is vniuersall, mixed wyth the mus∣cles,The vse of Fleshe. asertes, or brawnes. The thirde is founde in knottes, and curnels. And the profytable vses of the fleshe, in the bo∣dye are diuers, and many. For some are as clothes, or gar∣mentes, so defende the bodye from distemperāce. And some defende the bruynge of harde thynges, and other some ser∣ue to keepe the bodye moyste, and temperate, in the time of heate,True Fleshe and labor. More ouer the true and pure fleshe, wher¦of I spake fyrste, serueth to fulfylle the voyde places, and is founde in the partes aforesayd. And of the vse of musculous fleshe I partly spake afore,Musculous Fleshe. wher I treated of the chordes or tendones.Glandulae siue adenes. The vse and profitte of the glandulous or curnelly flesh, is to turne the bloud which it receyueth in∣to hys owne coloure:Glandulous Fleshe. as the fleshe of the ma  or wo∣mans brestes, turneth the . And as the e∣sticles, thorow theyr glandulous or  substance, tur∣ne the bloude vnto sperms: and likewise I reade that the curnels vnder the iawe,Prouidence of nature. turne the bloude into ttell, to moist the mouth and the tuge: Oh wonderfull prouidence of nature, that ordeyne  nothynge wythout a special cause, euer one thing, serueth in helpe and supply the neces∣sitye and lacke of another. Of the fat▪ The .x. Chapiter. TEnthlye the fatte called Pimele,. and in latyne Seuu, is a symple member, but not Spermatike. And three kyndes of fatnesses are founde in the body: namelye Pinguedo,Pinguedo. Aleps and Axungia. That whiche is called in latine Pinguedo is made of a subtill portion of the bloude, beynge congeyled together by the coldnesse of the outwarde par∣tes, and it is of complexion colde and moiste, Insensible, and intermedled betwene the skyn and the fleshe.Adeps. Aeps dyf∣fereth
not muche from Piguedine, sauynge that it is depar∣ted from the fleshe,The vse of Fatte. and is muche lyke vnto a fatty oyle, be∣inge poured or spreade oute, amonge the synewye or thinne skinnye partes: that theyr drinesse mighte alwayes be moi∣sted, wyth suche naturall lyquor, or fatnesse. And this Adeps is ingendered, oute of the fatter partes of the bloude in Ve∣na porta, and spredde forthe by thin and small vaines, whych as it approcheth to the colde and drye partes, congeyleth to such a thicke substance.Fatte is in quāt, more or lesse accor∣dyng to com∣plexion and place. For the proofe wherof as wel those persons, whose bodyes are cold and Phlegmatike, as those places that are in bothe, moste cold and temperate, (by their distance from the liuer:) haue more quantity of fatte, then suche as are of hotter complexion, or the nygher to the ly∣uer: as wytnesseth Galen, in libro. 16. de Vsu partium, ac in li∣bro. 1. de tempera nentis. Muche lyke vnto thys is Seuum, which yet is somewhat thicker.Axungia. Axungia whiche the Grekes calle Oxyngion is of the kynde of,. Adeps. Pinguedo sauinge onlye that it is outwardlye departed from the fleshe, where it moysteneth the drye partes, by reason of his vnctiousnesse, as dothe A∣deps in the partes aboue specifyed. Of the skyn. Cap. xi. THe eleuenthe, and the laste of the symple members is the skyn: whiche is officiall; and partly Spermatike, stronge and toughe, flexible, and sensible, thyn and temperate: and two kyndes of skynnes principallye, are found in the body. The fyrste is called Panniculus carnosus,Membrana. carnosa. or membrana carnosa, & thys skyn be wrappeth all the bodye wythin, and vnder the vttermoste skyn.Panniculus carnosus. And as Galen saythe, in libro. 3. de anatomicis administrationibus, & libro. 16. de Vsu partium, ther commeth vn∣to thys Fleshye panicle, and through it, the veines, fibres, and stringes of the sinewes, that nourishe and geue felyng to the outwarde skyn. The second skin, is that which coue∣reth, & be wrappeth all the body outwardly; and is the very tue skyn, which is properly called in latin Cutis, & in greke
Derma.. i. cu∣tis Vel pellis And this skin hathe diuers natures and properties, accordynge to the dyuersityes of places in the bodye. For as Galen wryteth in hys second booke De Vsu parti, the skin of the palmes of the handes, of the soles of the feete, of the forheade, and allmoste all the face, wyth other partes, can hardlye be fleyne, by reason of the muscles and tendones, that are graffed and rooted in it.position of the skyn. And thys skyn as I reade and learne, is throughe the cunnynge of nature, made and ordeyned, of dyuers and sondrye partes: as of Fybres, of Nerues, of veines, and arteries, and suche other. And thys worke hathe nature wroughte for dyuers causes.The vses of the skyn. The one is, that therby it myghte be temperate, by the hauynge of parte of euerye qualitye. Wherby also it obteineth the ver∣tue of felynge and sensible iudgynge, of euerye qualitye: as excesse of heate, or colde. &c. and myghte therof informe the common wyttes, that the partes agreued myghte attayne from them some helpe, or succour. Another cause is, that by the meanes of veynes and arteryes so produced, it myghte euer be nouryshed, made moyste, warmed, and comforted: Wherby also the partes lying and beyng vnder it inward∣lye, might be the better preserued: And also that woundes, vlcers, contusions, wyth other like chaunces, myght be the soner and the easilyer cured, healed, and closed vp agayne by the reason therof. And note that on the vppermost partes of this skin, is a very thin insensible rimme or skyn, which is of the Grecians called Epidermis,. i. summa cu∣ticula. and of the Latynes Cuti∣cula, or Eflorescentia cutis: and ryseth in blisters when the skin is burned, scalded, or by any meanes excoriated. Of the heares and nailes. The .xii. Chapter. FInally,Pili & imgues Superflui∣tyes of mem∣bers. Anatomistes recken the nailes, and the heares: which yet are no mēbers, but rather ye superfluityes of members, as I sayde in the beginning. Whiche super∣fluityes come of grosse vapores, myed and condescended
with viscous matter, by reason wherof the pores in the skin suffyce not to auoyde,Generyon of heares and nayles. or expell them, wherefore they growe forthe in suche harde toughe, and dry substances: yet thou∣ghe it be true in dede, that they are but superfluities of mē∣bers,The vses of the nayles. they haue vses verye necessarye in the bodye. The nayles defende the fyngers and the toes from greate bru∣ses: and they comely beutifye the fyngers, causynge them to take the better holde,Grosse hu∣mores expel∣led by nayles. and serue to clawe and scratch the bodye when it itcheth: wherby muche noyous and fylthys humores are the better auoided. For the skin, wherof we laste spake, beynge full of pores or smalle holes, ordeyned of nature,Pores in the skyn. to expel such moistures and vapores as are noi∣full to the body, hathe often times the saide pores opilated, or stopped: throughe the which stopping not only itche, but diuers other euels happen to the members. Wherfore the clawing or scratchinge of the nayles, is in suche case vtyle and profitable: for as muche as the sayde scratchynge is a meane to open the pores.The vses of heare. And the heares, are also necessary for diuers vses: the fyrste is, it defendeth the brayne from to muche heate, or to muche cold, and from other incommodi∣ties. Also it maketh the figure or forme of the face, the more comelye and decentr: and by the heare of the face, man and womā differ much, & by the colour of the hear, we know the complexion of the brain, and the other principal members. Grosse vapores also and umosities,Grosse va∣pores purged by heare. in places nedefull, are by the heares the more easilye expelled: as experience pro∣ueth ye swette and grosse vapores come soner forth, where there is muche heare growynge, then where there is lytle heare, perceiued or sene. Of the difference betwene the symple members and the compounde. Cha. xiii. IT is mere nowe, sythe I haue called these members sym∣ple, that I shewe wherefore I call them so, and to shewe the difference betwene those that are symple, and them that are not symple. For howe maye they be called symple, if there be not also compounde members, wherby the sym∣ple
maye be knowne, as eche thynge is knowen by his con∣trarye? I saye that the symple members are two wayes to be knowne from those that are compound, by two notable dyfferences. Firste a symple member, if it he deuided in ne∣uer so manye partes,The difiniti∣on of a sym∣ple member. the least parte beareth the name of the whole, as thoughe it were the whole thynge: As for exam∣ple, the least parte of a bone, is called bone, the leaste parte of a synewe, is synewe: and the leaste parte of the fleshe is fleshe, and so forthe o all the reaste that are called symple. For Totum similare praedicatur de suis partibus. For the whyche cause, as I sayde in the begynninge, they are also called in greke Homocomres, i. similaris. cu¦ius pars ean∣dem rationem idemque nome cum toto ob∣tine. in latin Similiaria, or cō∣similaria membra that is to saye lyke for the leaste part is like it selfe in the whole. Contrariwise, it is nor so of the com∣pound members. For if a pece of a hand, an arme, a legge, a foote, a face, or a heade be seperated from the whole, it can not beare the name of the whole thinge, from whyche it is separate: & therfore are they not called Cōsimilaria, as are the symple members,The definiti∣on of a com∣pound mēber. but rather Dissimilaria, and in Greke Ano∣mocomeres, that is to saye, vnlyke, because a parte of them, beinge separated from the whole, is not lyke, but vnlyke it selfe in the whole:. i. quod ex dissimilibus cō¦positum est partibus. for I can not call a pere of a hand, a hand nor a pece of a heade, a heade. &c. Secondlye the compounde members are so called, because they are composed together of dyuers of those that are called symple. As for example, my hande is a compounde member: for it is composed of bones, gristels, pannicles, ligamentes, muscles cortes, sy∣newes, arteryes, veynes, fatte, and skyn. &c. Contrariwyse the symple members, wherof we haue spoken in all this ly∣tell treatise, as a bone, a gristle. &c. are alone symple of them selues, wythoute anye other to be named in them. And thus haue I proued sufficientlye, the difference betwene ye sym∣ple members and those that are compounde: And haue she∣wed, howe that euerye member that is called compounde, hathe hys composition, of dyuers of them that are called symple.
Of the difference betwene the Spermatike and the Sanguine members. The .xiiii. Chapter. ANd nowe also since I haue called some of those sym∣ple members spermatike, and other some sanguyne: I thincke it good also, that I shewe you howe I vn∣derstande,The definiti∣on of the sper∣matike mem∣bers. for what cause they are so called. I saye therfore, that spermatike members are so called, because they haue theyr bredynge and beginning of spermatike matter: And are once ingendred and made, by the sperme or seede of the parentes, and neuer after. For the which cause we saye in chirurgerye, that spermatike members neuer receyue true regeneration, nor true consolidation, when anye solution of continuitye, as a wounde, vlcer, Fistule. &c. happeneth in them: But are fayne an other way to be holpen, through the greate prouidence of nature, whyche as I sayde before, leaueth nothynge destitute of succoure, in necessitye: for a certeyne substance resemblynge fleshe,. called therfore Poros Sarcodes, or as Lanfranke termeth it, Caro Poroides, is gathe∣red together, fulfyllinge the place, and seruinge in the stede of that whiche was loste, or separate. And this is the helpe of spermatike members, whiche of complexion are cold and drye: wantinge all other matter of perfection, wherby they myghte be truelye consolidate or regenerate.The definiti∣on of a San∣gume mēber. But contrari∣wise, the Sanguine members, so named because their bre∣dynge, and beginning is of bloude, (called in Greke Haema and Phlegmos,). i. sangus are daily regenerate, and made in the bodye: Because their sayde firste matter, whych is bloude, is euer∣more renewed, and made agayn in the body. So that when suche solution of continuitye, as is sayde before, happeneth in them, there is made againe perfecte restauration, or true consolidation For bloude they verye substance, and fyrste matter, is euer redye at hande, to make perfecte agayne the same thynge, so wasted or separated. And truelye thys see∣meth to me a necessarye thinge, for the chirurgien to knew:
that when he seeth a wounde, or anye disease in the mem∣bers,Solution of continuitye, what it is. that maketh solution of vnitye: that is to say, that se∣parateth, that whyche before was whole and grewe toge∣ther, he maye Prognosticate, and iudge truelye, whether there maye be made true consolidation or not. For suche true and certeine Prognostication bringeth the Chirurgi∣en to estimation and worshippe.Prognostica∣tyon. And thus I vnderstande the difference betwene the spermatike and the Sanguine members, and what vtilitye it bringeth to the Chirurgien to haue the true knowledge of them. The Conclusion. PEraduenture it will nowe be thoughte meete,The definity∣on of mem∣bers, what they are. that I shoulde have defined what a member is. For why shoulde suche wordes be multiplyed, wythout perfecte knowledge vppon what grounde they are spoken? I saye therfore by the authoritye of Galen, in the firste boke of the vse of partes. A member is a body, that is not wholy separate, nor wholye conioyned to an other. And after Aui∣cenn in the plurall number. Members are bodies, that are ingendred of the firste commixtion of humores. And final∣lye I fynde▪ that in the Anatomye there ought .ix. thynges to be soughte, for the furtherance of knowledge. that is to wite: the composition, the complexion, the substance, the quantitye, the number, the fi∣gure, the operatiō, & the vtility or vse of members, and what diseases maye chaunce vnto them. The ende of the first Treatise.
The second treatyse OF ANATOMIE, VVHICHE compendiouslye declareth the necessitye, and necessarye vse, of .ix. knowledges, to be consydered in the Anatomy of members, throughout the whole body. The argumente of the seconde Treatise. BECAVSE THAT IN the ende of my collection of symple mē∣bers, or fyrste treatice, I resited .ix. thin∣ges to be considered in Anatomye, lea∣uynge the same wythout farther decla∣ration: I thinke it good nowe to proue the necessity of those .ix. knowledges in a short treatse by it self, before I enter any farther into the Anatomy generally. For if the meaninge of thinges be wel discussed, and declared before hād, it shall make the matter manifest, and void of obscurity, when a man shall talke of those thinges, in tyme & place requisyte. The which thing to doe, it is nedeful that I craue the gentle pardon of those that in this thing are my betters, in bearing with mine im∣becillity or weaknes. For truely I came but latelye oute of the shell, euen as a birde that is not fully fledge, nor able to fly: trusting yet hereafter to haue my winges better fethe∣red, that nowe be so stobbed, and vnapte to serue the turne. In the meane season, to shewe you what I am willynge to doe, if I coulde brynge it aboute: Loe here is the collection, that I haue gathered of these .ix. thinges to be considered in Anatomy. That is to say, the composition, the complexion, the substance, the quantitye, the number, the fygure, the operation, and the vtility of mēbers, and finally what dys∣eases may chaunce to anye of them.
Of the composition of members or Combination. The fyrste Chapiter. FIrste the composition of members in Anatomye,Membrorum Compositio uel Combina∣toi. is nedefull to be knowne, whiche some calle combinati∣on, or knitting together of members. And thys com∣bination is as well vnderstāded, in the composing to∣gether of qualities or temperamentes, in the symple mem∣bers: as in the cōposition of diuers symple members in ma∣kynge a compound member. Therfore although this word composition, belonge chieflye to the compounde members, yet is there also a composition,Composytion in symple mē∣bers. or combination, to be sought in the symple member, Althoughe not in substance, yet in quality, as for example: When we saye whot and moiste, whotte and drye,Qualityes. or cold and moyst, cold and dry. For when there is more then one qualitye named in a member, then is there in that member combination, or couplinge toge∣ther of qualityes. So that we maye saye, thoughe the mem∣ber be symple in matter & substance, yet is it of a compound complexion: for otherwyse it must be called hotte only, cold onlye, drye or moiste onlye: Whiche we fynde in no wryter of Anatomye.Composition in euery mem¦ber. Therfore it muste folow, that in euery mem∣ber there is a composition to be soughte: thoughe not (as I sayde in substance yet in temperament of complexion. And howe necessarye, bothe these compositions, or combinatiōs are to be considered of the Chirurgien, I thincke there be none so ignorante, but that he doothe perceyue if euer he redde or sawe Anatomye, or hathe heard it redde. And the composition of euerye member in substance, is so euydente in euerye worke of Anatomye, that to prolonge the tyme therwyth in thys place, should be bothe vaine and tedious: therfore we leaue thys matter aus wyll speake of the com∣plexions of members.
Of the complexion of members. The .ii. Chapiter. SEcondlye,Complexio membrorum. the complexion, of euery member is muche to be noted, whether it be hotte, colde, drye, or moiste. But truely, I haue redde of no member symply so e∣stemed, but rather of a compounde complexion, as I sayde before: As cold and moist, as is the brayne: hotte and moyst, as the lyuer: and so forthe, as ye maye reade in anye wryten Anatomye: and as I intende by the grace of God to declare in myne. And the complexion of all the symple members I haue sufficiently declared in my firste treatise. But heare note, that when we calle any member, cold and moyste, or colde and drye, it is not for anye peculier, or pre∣cise facultye therein, as in the fyrste Elementes: but onlye by comparison of one member wyth an other, or one parte wyth an other. For we can not calle the brayne cold and moiste simplye, or absolutelye, but in comparynge it wyth the liuer or heart, (whiche in respect of it are hotte,) and not otherwyse: for as Guido saythe, all members be naturallye whotte. The complexion of euery member thus knowne, it shal be the easier to cure diseases in them. For what auaileth it that we reade in Galen, that whot members must haue hotte medicines, for the preseruation of theyr natural tem∣perature, and likewise that colde members muste haue colde medicines: If I vnderstande not whyche member is hotte, and whiche is colde: whiche is drye, and whyche is moyste? For who can preuente the daunger that he suspec∣eth not, or take awaye the enormitie that he knoweth not? or howe shall the Chirurgien cure the excesse of any distem∣perature: as excesse of colde or heate, drinesse or moistnesse by coolinge the heate, heatinge the colde, moisting the dry, or dryinge the moysts, as Galen teacheth: If be vnderstand ether the temperature, nor distemperature of anye mēber?
I maye therfore conclude, that it is necessarye that a Chi∣rurgien knowe the complexion of euery member in the bo∣dye of man: Whiche body of man is the subiecte of hys sci∣ence, as Guido saythe. Of the substance of members. The .iii. Chapter. THirdlye in order foloweth the substance,Membrorum substantia. whiche in euery mēber is muche to be regarded. Of the sub∣stance of symple members, I haue allredy sufficiēt∣ly spoken in my first treatise, whether they be hard or softe, or meane betwene harde and softe: and when these wordes, hard, soft, or meane, be spoken of in any mēber, by order of Anatomy, it is alway mēt of ye substāce. And truly it is very necessary for ye exact knowledge of euery disease, & ye redye curation of the same, to cōsider the substance. Fore∣uery member when it is diseased, the sayd diseases therof, receaue their names accordinge to the substance: as I wyll in the ende of thys treatise shewe, when I speake of the dis∣eases, that may chance vnto the members. And as ye disease receiueth a name, accordinge to the substance of the mem∣ber: so euery member receiueth diuerslye diuers remedyes, accordinge to their substance. For the bones, whose sub∣stance is hard, requireth remedies: alltogether diuers fro any of the other members, whose substance is eyther softe, or meane betwene hard and softe. Whiche members also, whether they be soft or meane, require remedies also accor∣ding to their substance. I meane here, by remedies handye operations: for as medicynes are made accordynge to com∣plexion, so muste hande worke be done, accordinge to the substance: Whether it be in bynding, rowlyng, bolstering, or anye other worke. For if I knowe not what remedye, euerye member in the bodye, accordynge to hys substance, maye susteyne, or rather dothe necessarily require: howe can I anye otherwyse doe but erre? for if I shall woorke in the bones, as apperteyneth to the Fleshe, and in the
Fleshe, as apperteineth to the bones: Who can doubte, but that of necessitye I muste make a greate confusion? and thys as it semeth to me, maketh a sufficient profe, that it is necessary in members to knowe their substance. Of the quantitye of members. The .iiii. Chapiter. FOurthlye,Membrorum quanitas. the quantity is nedefulle to be consydered in members. That is to saye: muche or little, greate or smalle, for howe can we exactlye knowe anye veyne, arterye, or synewe. &c of other members in the bodye: s if we shall vse Phlebotomye,. or anye other handye woorke in the bodye, if we lacke this principall consideration of quan∣titye? For euerye veine is knowne and named muche what by his quantitye, in respecte of others. And as thysis an easye thynge to doe in conspicuous, large and greate veines: so is it a thynge of more cunninge and difficultye, to take a veine, that is tender smalle and obscure. And also in the aforsayde worke, and all other ope∣rations of Chirurgery, the consyderation of quantity shall muche farther knowledge, in auoidynge of daungers. For if we knowe what quantity, euery member beareth in his place, by mesuring and consideringe the quantitye, we shall auoid the more easely all dangers, that maye hurte or offend them. And euery member beareth quantitye accor∣ding to ye place. For al veines, arteries synewes & muscles bear diuers quantities according to their diuers places: as veines and arteries, at their first beginning of theyr proce∣dinges from their originalle places are great: and waxe e∣uer smaller, as they approche to the extreme partes. The bones also, throughe the wonderful prouidence of nature, are muche or lyttle in quantitye, accordynge to the necessy∣tyes of the places where they are: For where the members be greate, and muche nourishmente required, there are the veynes also greate, to supplye and serue that nede.
And where there is muche nede of lyuelye spirite, there be greate arteries: Where muche neade of mouynge is, greate sinewes and Chordes: and where greate neade of strengthe is, there are great bones: as in other places that are lesse, lesse members serue in euerye degre. And thys is the mesuringe of quantitye, throughe out all the whole bo∣dye, euen as necessitye requireth. The quantitye of eche member particularlye, is to be shewed when they be particularlye treated o: as I haue done sufficientlye, of the symple mēbers in my first treatise. But note, that there is an other consideration of quan∣titye of members: for diuers members haue diuers quanti∣ties in muche or lyttle, accordyng to the complexions of the body.That some members va∣rye in quanti∣tye, according to complexion For the phegmatike haue muche fatte, and the cho∣lrick little fat or none: The Sanguine haue muche flesh, and the melancholike haue verye little fleshe. And that it is necessarye for the chirurgien, to knowe these thynges, no resonable man doubteth, as I thinke. Of number in members to be obserued. The fyfthe Chapiter. FIftlye the number of all sortes of members,Numerus membrorum. are to be hadde in minde: as I sayde in my first treatise, of the number bothe of the veines and sinewes, and also of the bones and muscles. For as it was exactlye consy∣dered, of auncient authors, what quantity members were of: so is it noted, what number there be of them. For as it is a wonderfull plesante consyderation of natures workes, so is it muche commodious in the handye woorke Chirur∣gerye, to vnderstande howe number and store of euery sorte of members, is geuen to eache parte of the bodye, to serue turne accordinge to nede. Who can but wonder at natures prouidence,God of Na∣ture. (whye saye I not rather the God of nature) to ordeyne the order of number so wel in the bodye of man. There bene ordeined two eares, that if one be interrupted
of hys offyce, by any meane or chaunce, the other may serue the office of hearinge. Like wise there are two eyes, that if one be hurte, the other maye serue: that the body be not left wythout that helpe. Haue we not also two legges and two armes, for like consideration? so are there also payers of sy∣newes, going forthe through all the body, bothe sensityue, and motyue: That by the reason of store, when hurt happe∣neth to one,Prognostica∣tion by num∣ber. the other maye serue. Whiche is necessary for the Chirurgien to consider, that he maye Prognosticate in euerye wounde, the danger that muste of necessity folowe. For if he knowe the number of sinewes, and how many of that number are offended: he maye easilye iudge bothe the qualitye and quantitye of the offence, and also what defecte may therof ensus. And likewise is to be vnderstanded of the number of veines, arteries, and all other members. Of Figure to be considered in members. The .vi. Chapiter. SIxtlye the figure,Membrorum figura. forme, or proportion, of euery mēber, is much to be regarded. For there was no member for∣med in the body, wythout a special cause, why the same fygure, or proportion was geuen to it. The bones of the heade are knytte together wyth the comissures or seames, makinge by that ioyning a rounde shape or figure.Round forme For as the Philosopher sayeth, that forme of all other is most cer∣tain, from danger and harme. For all stripes, and all chan∣ces that happen to a round proportion, are forced to slippe, slide,Flat forme. or glaunce: but on all playne and flatte formes, the force or violence of all hurtes tarye, staye, and pearce, to the greater detrymente of the partes so hurte or striken. Ther∣fore it is ordeined, as I sayde in my firste treatyse, that all bones, that are sette to defende from hurtes the principalle members, haue theyr figure or forme for that vse moste cō∣ueniente, and sure: that is to saye rounde For as well, the bowt forme of the ribbes, in their knittying together, make a rounde figure, for the surer defence of the hearte, and the
members wythin the brest, as the bones of the head, for the defence of the brayne. The veynes are formed rounde and holowe, to carye the bloude throughe the bodye, as water pypes carye water from the conduict head to serue a whole citye. The arteries haue like proportion, to carye lykewise the liuelye spirite, whereby all the members of the bodye liue. The muscles, or braunes, are formed lyke a mouse, as I sayde in my firste treatise, bigge in the middest, and smal∣lest alwayes towardes the endes: that the bodye in no place lacke a comely figure. The brawnes of the armes, ye caulfe of the legge, the fyllets of the backe, the comelye fygure of the face, and all the other partes: are made in suche comely decente, and beautifull forme, throughe the variable figures of the muscles. The ligamentes, are made in the forme of bandes, to binde the ioynctes together. And to conclude brieflye, eche thinge in the world, as well as the body of man, is of smal regarde, if it lacke the decente fygure, or proportion that it oughte to haue. And finally, no chirurgien can worke assu∣redly or cunningly, in the body of man, if he knowe not the figure of euery member or parte. Of the operation of members. The. Vii. Chapiter. SEuenthly the operation that is in members,Operatio Membrorum is to be learned, of him that will be a chirurgien: And howe those operations are conueied and caried, to serue the nede of euery part. And to talke of operations, it were mete to vse thys worde partes, because it includeth more, then this worde members: for we can calle none of the. iiii. humores members, yet are they partes of the body. So are the three spirites to wite the animall, vitall, and natu∣rall: (though in dede many learned men, haue vpon diuers reasons,Sense, motiō Spirite and life. denyed any thyrde or naturalle spirite to be:) The animall spirite geuing the operatiōs of sense, and mo∣tion. The vitall, geuinge spirite and life to all the mem∣bers.
The natural, nurishment to all the bodye. The vitall spirite beinge made in the harte, the animall in the braine, the naturall in the lyuer. And both these laste, animall, and naturall, are made of the firste called vitall. The vitall spi∣rite is caried into all partes, by the arteries. The animall, by the sinewes, the naturall in the veines. And of the ope∣rations of these, all other partes of the body, take their ope∣rations. As ye operation of feling, of mouing, of hearyng of seing, of smelling, of speaking: yea all operatiōs procede of the first operations: of whiche first operations procedeth ye forsaide spirites. The firste operations are these, which are also called vertues, or faculties, and are in number foure, namely attractiue retentiue, alteratiue, and expulsiue. And these four are in euery part of the body that is nurished, or yt serueth to nurish other: The attractiue faculty being done by hotnesse and drinesse, the retentiue by coldnesse and dri∣nesse, the alteratiue by hotnesse and moistnesse, the expul∣siue by coldnesse and moistnesse. And through these naturall vertues or faculties, are the iii. digestions wrought and accomplished in the bodye. The first of these digestions is in the stomache, the seconde in the liuer, the third is vniuersally in the veines. I vnderstand al¦so yt there are iii. poures in the body: Animall, vitall. & Na∣turall: & this last poure called naturall, is deuided into these iiii. forsaid operations or vertues. And as I said before, all operations of euery mēber, are receiued of these first opera∣tions: whether it befeling, mouing, tasting, seing, hearing, smelling, or any other, yt any man can deuise or name. For of the first foure is made nutrition, without the whyche no member maye lyue, nor growe. Muche lesse haue anye ope∣ration or facultye. Therefore, when anye member is hurte or offended, we oughte to call to minde, what operation be∣longeth to the parte so hurt: and howe that member recei∣ueth the same. As for example: the operation of felyng and mouynge, is caried by the animall spirite in the synewes, vnto all members.
So dothe heate and lyte come to all members, by the vitall spiryte in the arteryes. And the nutrimentall bloud, by the naturalle spirite in the veines. If therfore in any member, anye of these be so offended that there is no hope of recoue∣rye: we maye boldlye Prognosticate, that the operatyon of that member so receyued is voyde and frustrate: Because the meane wherby it was atchiued is destroyed. Euen as no water can come by a conduict, to a house or a city, when the pype is cutte or broken by the waye. But farthermore, if anye member lacke hys natural or due operation, so that he can not doe his office, neuerthelesse no hurte perceiued in the outwarde partes: then muste we consider, whether it be felynge, mouinge, or strengthe that is lacking. Which thinge knowne, knowinge also by what meane, the sayde member receiued his operation nowe beinge lost: It shall be the easyer to deuise a remedy to cure and helpe the same. Therfore, that it is necessarye for the Chirurgien, to know the office or operation of euerye member, as I thinke, nea∣deth no farther proofe. Of the vtilitye or office of members. The .Viii. Chapiter. EIghtlye the vtilitye or offyce,Offitium uel Vtilitas mem¦brorum. that euery member hath in the bodye, is greatly to be noted: for euerye member in the bodye hathe a speciall office by hym selfe, wher∣by he is necessarye to the body. And therfore when he is lac∣kinge, the bodye is destitute o that necessarye thynge: euen as a common weale that lacketh his officer. What mem∣bers in the body are called official, ye shall vnderstand in ye generall Anatomy. Notwithstanding, there is no mēber in the body, that is wythout his vtility: yt is to say, that hath not a profitable vse in the body. But for as muche as in my collection of the symple members, euerye member hathe his vtilitye declared, where he is spoken of: I shall nede the lesse in this place to tarye vpon it. But this brieflye I saye: the bones are the susteiners of the bodye. The gristles are
formable additions. The ligamentes binde the ioyntes to∣gether. The muscles make a comelye forme. The synewes carye the felynge and mouinge vertue. The veine caryeth the nutrityue bloude. The arterye caryeth the vitall spirit. The fleshe filleth the voyde places. The fatte moysteneth the drye partes. The skin couereth and clotheth the bodye. These are brieflye the offices or the vtilities of all the sym∣ple members. By whiche the chirurgien taketh great note: As well to kepe the bodye in healthe, as to cure it when it is diseased. Of the diseases that the members are subiecte Vnto. Capi. ix. NInthlye and laste,Diseases chā∣tynge to the members. we oughte to note, what diseases maye chance to anye member, and whyche bene cu∣rable. For there be diuers members, that when they be wounded, receaue no curation. Namelye the brayne, the heart, the stomache, and suche guttes are not fleshye, and other suche lyke. And farthermore, as I sayde in my fyrste treatise▪ that spermatike members receiue no true consoly∣dation.Therapeut. And as Galen sayth, in li .iiii. therapeut in ye cure of vl∣cers, (confutinge the error of Thessalus:) The diseases, name¦lye solution of continuity, .i. fractio uel fractura. receiue diuers names, according to the diuersitye of the members, and their substances. For the breakynge of bones are called in Greke Catagma, and in Latine Fractura. To the fleshe happeneth woundes, vlcers, bruses,, .i.  tumores & Apostemes. Solution of continuity in ye synewes is called Spasmos and in the lygaments Thlasma in the muscles Apospasma, con∣tusio. or Rhegma. Or as we saye in playne Englyshe. The synewes suffer crampes, palsyes, and con∣uuition: The bones breakinge: The ioyntes displacynges, The Fleshe woundes, .i. . bruses. &c. And to all the other mem∣bers happeneth diuers peines, of diuers names, as well by the excesse or corruption of any of the .iiii. humores:. i. e∣ruptio siue ruptura. as also of ventositye, or windinesse, and waterye humores. The ioyntes or sinewye members, are greued wyth aches, and
gowtes. And fathermore apostemes, vlcers, cancers, fistu∣les, and such like: Do happen among the members, diuers∣ly in diuers places of the bodye: receuynge theyr names of∣tē times according to their places, as it is wryttē of, by our auncient authors. whome I iudge it expedient to reade and discretlye to folowe. The Conclusion. LO, thus haue I ended this seconde treatise, althoughe grossely, and vnlearnedly: trusting notwithstandynge that it wil be gently borne withal. Truly my masters and brethren, these are but eares of corne, that I gleaned in tymes paste after the bindinges of the plentifull sheues of others: trustinge to God that hereafter (thoughe not yet,) I shall be able to binde sheues of myne owne, and scater some eares, for suche as muste gleane, & gather their handfuls of other mens leuinges: Nether wish I, yt we should any lon∣ger liue, then we should shew our selues profitable one to an other. In the whiche, as we maye learne in holy wrytte, and as the deuines, continually blow in our eares, we shall be knowne to be the seruantes, of oure Lorde and sauyoure Jesus Christe. Who taught his discyples to loue an other, Sayinge, by this ye shall be knowne, to be my discy∣ples, in that ye loue one an other. The whiche loue God graunt vs all. Amen. The ende of the seconde Treatise.
The thyrde treatyse OF ANATOMIE, BRIEFLYE shewing the forme, the making, and the natural ope∣rations or offices of euerye member, inwardlye and out∣wardly, from the heade to the feete. And howe the handye worke of Chirurgerye oughte to be done, in eche parte of the body. The argumente of the thyrde Treatise. THoughe I meane here accordinge to promise, to wryte generally of Anatomy: mine intente is not to name or expresse euery small and difficult deui¦syon of partes. For though the body of man be fi∣nyte, & may be comprehended, as cōcerning al that is nede∣ful & necessary vnto knowledge: yet I esteme it as vnprofi∣table as vnpossible, to make explicatiō of euery extremity. for sure it is not possible otherwise thē by cogitatiō to know exquisitly euery small mēber. wherfore the aunciēt Chirur∣giens deuded ye bodye into diuers members, so far as was requisite to chirurgery, & the necessary knowledge howe to worke in the same. The rest (being ouer curious, & thought as vnnedefull of such plain deuisiōs, as ye worke intricate,) was left by argumētes to be ministred to ye senses of the in∣genious, by cogitation and reason. But to the baser sort of lesse capacity: it was thought sufficient to warn them of dā∣gers, by certain brief & general rules. as to know wher vei∣nes weare by bleding, & arteries by beating or pulsation. And in all members that did moue and feele, they iudged nerues or sinewes to be, both motiue and sensityue. And as those wayes are verye briefe, so semeth their ende and com∣modity very small. But to our purpose. That offēce & error may be aduoided in chirurgery, thro∣ugh ignorance of Anatomy: as when incision. Cauterizati∣ons, Phlebotomy, ventosyng, scariications, openyng of A∣postemes, & suche lyke are to be done on the bodye of man.
I meane here to declare the names, natures, operatyons, compositions, beginninges and endinges of as many mem¦bers, as to the Chirurgiens intellection is conuenient. Aduoiding neuerthelesse as nere as maye be, all obscu∣ritye and tediousnesse, leaste in goinge about to be so precise and exact in the extreme deuisions and spreadinges of eue∣ry parte, (garnishinge and paintinge the same wyth suche large expositions, as it would necessarily require:) I should rather become an heauye fatigation or wearinesse to the readers, then anye thynge vtile or profitable to theyr vn∣derstandinge. Wherfore ye shal note by the way, that the body of man in the order of Anatomye, is deuided into. lii. ventrycles or principal partes, beside the members called Artus. The thre ventricles are these: the head, the brest, & the belly: wherof I wyll treate in the fyrste, the thirde, and the fourthe partes. The members called Artus or the lymmes, are the armes and the handes, wyth the legges and the feete: & of these I speake in the se∣conde and fyfte partes. The syxte parte is of the names, (bothe in La∣tine and Englishe) from the head to the fete, of all exterior partes of the bodye, as they are called of the moste lear∣ned Anatomistes.
ventral view of male anatomy
dorsal view of male anatomy
The fyrste parte of the thirde treatise, wherin is declared the Anatomy of the heade, wyth all hys partes, as well conteinynge, as conteined, and also the necke and throte, vnto the shoulders. ☞Of the brayne, wyth hys substance, complexion, forme, and office, wyth the number of hys ventricles, and the meruailous motyons of the same. The fyrste Chapiter. AS IN THE FIRSTE treatise I began with the bones, the foundations of all other members, because by them all others are sup∣ported and borne: so it heare semeth vnto me best, seing man is called of the Grecians Anthropos, .i. homo.  atque . (as I haue before opened) to begin at the roote of the tre: and first at the inner part therof, and from thēce to procede to the vtter, and then in order to the trunke, or stocke, and last∣lye to the braunches. Then, sithe the brayne, and heade, by consent of all lear∣ned authores, is the roote of the body: at the heade, (called in Latine Caput and in Greke Cephale,)Caput. wyl I begyn, by consi∣deration of Anatomye:. firste of the conteyned, and then of that whyche conteyneth. The brayne therfore I say, whych the Grecians (lackinge for it a propre vocable▪) haue called cephalon because that (as some will,) Cerebrum it is , that is in the heade, and is called of the Latines Cerebrum, is a principall member: whose substance is sayde to be ma∣wye, and it is also soft, and whyte of coloure: The more
outwardlye the softer and the duller whyte: but the more lower and inwarde, the more massye, toughe, and perfecter whyte it is. Of complexion it is cold and moiste: and of ge∣neration Spermatike: for as saythe Galenus, libroprimo de se∣mine. Generationem ex solo semine habet. The forme euer agreing wyth the shape of the sculle inwardlye. In the inferior, or lower partes inwardly therof,Uentricles. are certein ventricles, which after the minde of diuers authors, are diuerslye deuyded of some into thre, and of others into foure: yet doe they conso∣nantlye agree in the whole, concerninge theyr particuler offices. The aforsayde substance beinge opened,Glandulouse partes. there are seene certeine glandulous bodies, here and there amonge hys partes of substance diuersly dispersed: which are neither so firme nor so whyte, but wannishe, and also more moyste and clammye, then the brayne it selfe: amonge the whych, the recrementes of the brayne are thought to be gathered, from whence they passe into the ventricles. These ventry∣cles, (as is sayde) are moste commonlye numbred three, yet Galen confesseth foure, whyche Lanfranke graunteth, for the manyfest deuisyon of the large holownesse in the fore-parte into two. Whych as sayth Carolus Stephanus, beynge ouerthwartlye deuyded: that is the vpper parte from the nether mosie by an ouerthwarte incisyon, dothe with hys boughtes and Cryckes on eche syde muche represent the forme of a mannes eare. The thyrde then is the myddlemoste: and the fourthe is behynde, in an other lyttle brayne, called also in atyne by diminution Cerebellum,Cerebellum. and of the Grecians Parencepha∣lis,. and also of Erasistratus, Epencranis. And thys parte is compacte together, differynge euy∣dentlye from the reasie of the brayne,. interhedged wyth the Pia mater, as the other substance is: but it is deuyded outwardlye, as it were into manye thyn, and sclender cy∣cles, neyther is it so whyte as the reasie of the brayne, bu composed, as of certeyne hillockes couched together: of
curdy and britle substance, wherin is conteined abundance of spirite. Furthermore,Humore in the ventril in the concauityes or celles of the for∣mer ventrycles, there is founde conteyned, a certen ye∣lowishe waterye substance: whyche is iudged to be the re∣purgynge or syncke, of the humores of the brayne, trans∣cente from the glandulous bodyes before mentioned. Whyche humores, when so euer they superabounde, doe fall downe by common passages, into the trenche ouer the rouffe or palate of the mouthe, ordeyned to receiue ye same: from whence it is expelled, as well forwarde by the nose∣thrils, as backwarde into the mouth. Wherof in his place more shall be sayde. But vppon thys humore, in these former ventrycles, is a certayne bodye, wouen together of infinite veynes and arteryes, commynge from the hearte, growynge aboute the meruaylous nette called Rete Mirabile confirmed with a coate of Pia mater: and thys contexed bodye, is peculiar∣lye called of some Choriformis membrana.Choriformis membrana. And it so swym∣meth in the foresayde humore, beynge so slacklye bound and loselye tyed, bothe to the bothome, and the sydes of the holownesse, that it deerreth, and strayeth to and fro, in the sayde humore: folowynge notwythstandynge, the exacte forme of the Crickes and corners of the said ven∣tricles, euen to the arche or vaulte. Whose offyce is to woorke in the ventrycles, inspy∣ratyon, epyratyon, and efflatyon: vnto whyche mouinge, doubtlesse the whole substance of the brayne geueth place,The braynes motyons. and is therby caused to moue and heaue. The proofe of whyche operatyon maye be manifestlye seene, and the braine euydentlye to moue: bothe in yonge infantes, erre theyr mouldes be closed, and also in suche as by chaunce haue theyr sculles broken.
Wherof Galen,. i. di latatio, uel de∣stinctio. vpon good reason did attribute Diastolen, & Systolen also to ye brayne: and also by this workinge, the vi∣tall spirite in the arteries, is there made animall. In the boughte or bosome of this Choriformis:. i. con¦tractio, uel correptio. are the spirites recey∣ued and conteined, as yet grosse and vnpure: that by the for∣mer ventricles, they may there be wroughte and prepared, before they enter the middle ventricle, and the sēses therof. Wherin they are made also yet more perfecte, that after∣warde they maye descende, into the .iiii. or laste ventricle of Cerebellum: and to this purpose certeyne passages, wayes or pores, are ordayned, to leade the said spirites from one cell into another. Which that it should not to sone, or vntime∣lye be done: There is a certeine delicate glandulous bodye ordeyned, vnderlyinge the holowe pore, (wherof I doe im∣mediatlye make mention) called Conarion, because it repre∣senteth the forme of a Pine apple,. i. ux pinea, uel figu¦ra ex lato in a∣cutum deinēs called Conus. Whiche by his naturall propertye stoppeth the pore, in suche wise that the sayde spirites maye not be caryed before theyr time, into the Cerebellum. The lyke wherof may be seue in a glandule, lyinge vpon the gutte Pylorum: whych wil suffer no substāce to passe oute of the stomache into the sayde gutte, before the full tyme and complete ende of digestion. There is moreouer a certeyne holowe pore,The pore de∣uidynge the ventricles. whyche of some is called the thyrde ventrycle, and of other a perforati∣on onlye: Constitutynge the thyrde ventrycle to be ye vaul∣ted body, aboue the common holownesse of the former ven∣trycles, (whyche because it is lyke an arche or vault) is cal∣led of the Grecians Camarion, Fornix siue. Corpus for∣nicatum. and Psallioides, the common sorte call it Fornicem and Corpus fornicatum. Whyche vaulted body was of nature made in the brayne, that the vpper sub∣stance of the same, myghte be the stronglyer susteyned. But nowe concernynge the sayde pore, whych some, yea and Galen hym selfe, constituteth the thyrd ventrycle: It is dyuerslye wouen together, his vpper partes being couered, of a subtill panycle, but there not weake: whyche also rea∣cheth euen to the holownesse, of the hyndermoste ventricle. There are also on the sydes belongynge to the sayde pore,
certeine longe and sclender emynences, growing oute from the substance of the brayne,Glutiae▪ called Glutiae, or Naticulae: whose nighe concurse and vicinitye passinge together,Naticulae. thou maist saythe Galen, liken aptly to buttockes, touchynge together one an other: thoughe some likeninge them to the testicles,. had rather call them Didymia.Anceformes But they are called of the late wryters Anceformes, because they are like boughtes, or but∣tockes. And these Anceformes do strengthen and thrust toge∣ther ye wormlike processe,Epiphysis. Vermiformis called Vermiformis epiphysis: whose function is chiefly, to stoppe and open the pore, by contrac∣tinge together, or distending it selfe by length in the same, wherof also it hathe hys name: whose end or extreme part is aboute the lower parte of the thirde ventricle, called of ye Grecians Scolecoides. . But for the copiouse declaration of the causes of these and other names, wyth many other cir∣cumstances herevnto belonging, for briefnesse sake here I leaue the louynge reader, vnto the perfecte ennarratios of Galenus, Vesalius, and Carolus Stephanus: where thy desyres maye be satisfyed at the full. And nowe accordinge to the grounded iudgementes of the learned,Sense  wyttes. I will procede to the senses, or wittes, conteyned and wroughte in these celles. In the fyrste parte of the former ventricles, are founded the common wyttes or senses,Cōmon  or .v. wytte. called otherwise the .v. witts: as hearinge, seinge, smellinge, felynge and tasting. And in one parte of this also is sayde to be the vertue of searchyng, called Phantasia:  whyche vertue taketh all the formes or or∣dinances, disposed of the aforsaide .v. wyttes, accordinge to the mouinge and remouinge of sensible thynges. In the o∣ther parte of the sayde ventricles, is ordeyned the vertue i∣maginatiue, which representeth to the vertue memoratiue, what so euer it receiueth of the common wyttes:Uertue ima¦ginatyue. as ye shape or forme of sensible thinges &c. as they were receaued from withoute. In the mydell cell or ventricle is constituted the vertue cogitatyue,Uertue cogi∣tatiue, or esti∣matyon. or estimation: whyche pondereth, wayeth, iud∣geth, and declareth, all suche thinges as are therto offered and broughte from the aforsayde vertues. Nowe lastlye, the
fourthe or hyndermoste ventricle of Cerebellum, conteineth and preserueth in it selfe the vertue memoratiue:The vertue memoratiue. Wherby it is noted the cell or store house, of that excellente vertue of memorye, or remembrance. From the whyche Cerebellum (at the extreme partes therof) procedeth forthe the Medulla, or pithe of the backe,Nucha. whyche as Galen sayth, is of one sub∣stance with the brayne: and is clothed wyth lyke panicles, passynge downe in the holownesse of the spondilles, or tur∣ning ioyntes,. i. Spi∣na dorsi. euen to ye end of the ridge And as the whole frame of spondils together, is (of the likenesse it hathe by reason of his manifolde scraggy processes with the thorne) called Spina dorsalis in Greke Mtiaea acantha:. .i. medulla dor¦salis. So is this mar∣rowe called Ntiaeos myelos, id est dorsalis, uel spinalis medulla, and vulgarlye Nucha. The .ii. Chapiter. ☞Of the softe and also the harde panicles of the brayne, and the vi∣cinitye that they haue wyth the skyn coueringe the sculle, and ne∣cessarye notes therof gathered. Then of the braynes increasyng wyth the mone, and by what meanes the brayne is purged of his excrementes. ANd immediatlye aboue the brayne and the reast be∣fore spoken of, is ordeyned a verye tender skyn or coueringe, called in Englishe the softe pannicle, in Latine Pia mater,. i. pia mater siue te∣nuis meninx. & Tenuis meninx▪ being yet of a more stronge and toughe substance then the brayne, that it maye defend and saue the brayne and his delicate partes, from the hard∣nesse of the harder pannicle, and the bones of the scull. And thys softe mother or tender pannicle, is thinlye and fynely wouen together of veynes and arteries, in a fine netlyke, or copweblyke sorte. And it is deuided, lying lose from the brayne, leaste it shoulde be a burden to the same, offendynge it therby: sauynge in certeyne places, where veines and ar∣teries procede from thys tender pannicle, enterynge into the spaces and deuisyons, of the partes and ventrycles of the brayne. Wherby (or by suche rather as he gathereth to∣gether, frō al parts of the brain) he sucketh of ye brainy sub∣stance,
yelding also to ye brain, by those veines & arteries, nu∣rishmet, & liuely spirit: which spirit being ther farther dige∣sted, or by the naturall workynge of the brayne altered: is made accordant to the vertue animall. And in thys pānicle are these veines implanted, least otherwise lyinge lose, they might be thruste together or disordered, by the beatynge of the brayne. Then nexte aboue thys tender pannicle or softe veyle, is constitute the stronge mother, or oughe veyle, called the harde pannicle,Dura mater. in latine Dura mater, or Crassa meninx:Crassa meninx▪ whyche is harder and tougher to the ende that it maye defende the brayne and the soft pannicle, from the hardnesse of ye bone, by the valiente strengthe therof. And it is wouen together clothlyke, by a stronge holdinge or compaction together, of arteries and veines wherby it is thicke and stronge. It is also seuered and deuided from the softe pannicle general∣lye, saue onlye where certeyne veines and arteries go from hym to the saide subtill veyle, or delicate pannicle, to helpe, comfort, and corroborate the same. Neither hath this harde pannicle, his continuance wyth the scul, called Caluari, af∣ter any touchinge or cleauinge sorte, but is seperate from the same, least it shoulde receiue generall hurte therof, by reason of the bones hardnesse: except only in the seames or commissures of the sculle, wheras certeine fyne and small eary veines aud arteries,. procede from it through ye sayde seames: as well to preserue the same from fallynge downe on the brayne as also to the makinge of the skyn,  immedi∣atlye coueringe the scull, called therfore Pericarnion. Where∣fore it appeareth by reason, that all cuttynges, raspynges, trepanynges, or boringes, are to be auoided in the seames of the scull, vnlesse verye greate necessitye constreigne: least dangerous and deadlye accidentes folow, bothe to the hard and softe pannicle, and also to the brayne and that by the naturall affinitye and vnity, they haue ne wyth an other. The like feare and consideration oughte to be, as well at the coniunction, as at the opposition of the mone wyth the Sonne. For the brayne hathe then a merueilous sem∣blance,
with the sea and waters, whyche at those times, haue their full & spring tydes. For euen so dothe the brayne seme to flowe, bearinge vp the sayde pannicles so nighe the sculle, that it myghte be sone hurte wyth instrumentes at suche a time. And here is to be noted a maruelous prouision of nature in the scull, that at suche risinge of the pannicles by flowinge of the braine, the conspicuous veines and arte∣ries of Dura mater be not hurte: nor by the hardnesse of the bones pressed together: wherby ye course of the bloud myght be let. For euery such veine, and branche of veine, hathe in the scull an holowe gutter, to lye in safelye wythout hurte, or let of course, as in the insyde of euery scull maye be sene, bothe greate and small gutters, according to the quantity, forme, number, and diuersitye of veine braunches in the harde pannicle. Now the superfluityes of the braine are expelled in this sorte.Purgation of the brayne. From the former and middle ven∣tricles, they fall downe by two euydente wayes into a rounde and holowe receptacle, commonly called in Latyne Lacuna,Lacuna. whiche doctor Langton englisheth a dropynge pan: but the grecians (because of the forme, whyche is wide a∣boue,. and euer the lower the narower, with a perforation in the bothome after the maner of a funnell) moste proprely call it Choanen, and the latynes Infundibulum. By the whyche funell hole,Infundibulum. it passeth the strainynge glandule, called Aden colatorius:Adē colatorius  os cribrosum▪  hoc est Spon∣giosum. and then throughe the strainynge holes of the bones, hauyng the offyce of a syue, & the forme of a spunge, and are therfore called in Greke Ostea Isthmoidea, but more proprelye of Hippocrates spongoidea. Whose passages ende in∣to the holownesse of the palate ouer the mouthe, whych ho∣lownesse being destingued with a pillourlike processe, hath two perforations into the nose, called in Latine Nares, that is the nosethrilles: throughe whyche the sayde superfluitnes are purged forwarde.Nares. And it hathe also by the Gargarion backwarde other sufficient passage,Gargareon. wherby by snuffing in∣to the mouthe, there maye be sufficiente purgation, as ne∣cessitye requireth.
The thyrde Chapiter. ☞Of the scull wyth hys forme and office, the number and names of bones, wherof it is composed: wyth theyr forme and propreys, and the like of the seames or commres therof. VPon these .ii. pannicles, . Duram matrem, & Piam matrē, is ordained the bones of the scul, (called in greke and in latine Caluaria:). hiche is deuided into ire, be∣syde the bone called Paxilla.. Whose begynning is at the end of the hinder bone of the head: . whose shape or forme is lyke the letter. V. or as some wryte like yt Greke letter Lamba, or as Iohannes de Vigo sayth, lyke thys figure 7. And the afor∣sayd Paxilla, vnderbeareth in ye hinder part al the bones of ye head, & therfore is called the bearer vp or ye wedglike bone, of the Grekes Sphenoide, & of the latins Cuneus, for it is like a wedge. . The first bone of ye scul is the bone of the foead, and it is called Coronale, whose forme & shape is in maner of halfe a circle, procedynge forthe into the fore parte, and is fastened with the bone of the nose in the forepart therof, in the maner of a sawe, wt the temple & wyth other partes. And he is fastened to the vpper iawe also in the maner of a sawe: & there is made a kynde of fasteninge, in the  or fashion of a crosse,Parietalia  lateralia whose vpper seame is long. Then ye two wall or side bones of the head called Parietalia, or Lateralia in greke Bregmatis ossa are ioyned together in the myddest of the head, wt a seame in the manner of a saw, betwene them selues,. & with the bone called Occiput, or Os la , whych is ye hinder bone of the heade, like this letter. . as I sayde be∣fore, whiche Lauda, is also vulgarelye called Occipital and vnder this bone is set the bone called Paxilla as it is aboue wrytten, called also more commonly Basilare: & it is not fa∣stened, wyth suche euident seames to him, as other are: but it only vnderbereth hym. And vpon the syde bones, or wall bones on the left side, & on the right side are, ii. bones (vn∣der the which be the eaces) called Ossa mendosa, and in greke Lepids, whych be not fastened to the syde bones wt seames, but by ioyning or settyng of part vnto part, in the maner of scales.
For the which cause Galen calleth them Cortices & squanas,Cortices. and other Ossa Squamosa,Squaae. and in the lower parte of thys bone (beinge harde and stonye,Os Petraeum. and therfore called Petraeum, or Pe∣trosum being also a parte of the bone Mendosum) behynde the vpper iawe,Os Petrosum. is (in eche of them) a greate hole by the whych passeth the synewe of hearinge.The commis∣surres of ye scull . Thus may you see, that the bones comprehendynge the brayne, are numbred to be sixe, besyde the bone whiche beareth vp all the react, fulfillynge the forme or shape of the head,Sutura. . Si∣milis. named axilla as is aforesaid. And note that the seames of the scull, as it is wytnessed (ex Galeno de ossibus,. i. Sutu∣ra arctalis aut Coronalis. in all the whole doe represent the fygure of thys letter. H. Notwithstandynge, the seame of Osis Laudae, beinge lyke the Greeke letter Landa. is called therefore Su∣tura Landoeides uel graece, Labdoeides Raph. And the seame of ye Coronall, is called in Greke Stephanaea,. e∣nim coron sig¦nificat. in latine Coronalis & Arctualis or the shippe seame, because it representeth the forme of a bote or shyppe. The thirde ryghte or streighte seame passinge betwene the bones Paritalia,. i. tunica Cal∣uariam conte∣gens. and touchynge wyth his endes the coronal and occiptall bones, is called of the Grecians Obeliaea Raphe, and in Latine Stura Sagittalis. The .iiii. Chapter. ¶Of the skyn couerynge the scull, then o the fleshy skin, and the vi∣termoste of all, where in is the neare, wyth a conuenient note con∣cerninge incisyons of the heade. IMediatlye then vpon the scull,. is fixed and set the panni∣cle, called Peicranion: whiche enuironeth, compasseth, and incloseth all the whole substance of the scull: and is tyed to the pannicle wythinforthe, called Dura mater. by small veines and arteries, passynge through the seames of yt scul, as before is sayde. And vpon this skyn is situate an other thick,Membrana carnosa. lacertous, & fleshy skin, which is Membrana carnosa, cō∣mōly foūd eche wher vnder the true skyn, aboue ye which is ye said true skyn,Heer of the heade. (in whiche groweth the heare of the heade:) whyche is wouen together wt veynes, arteries, & synewes, cōming from wythin forthe: and especially it is wouen of
the synewes, whych come from the holes of the firste and se∣conde spondilles of the necke, whiche medle them selues wt veines and arteries, weauing together the skyn couerynge the scull. And this skin is made harde, hauing in hym selfe a thin lytle fleshy substance, whiche maketh it the greater and the thicker.NOTA▪ And vnderstande well here, that when cut∣tynges muste be made in the heade, that they shall be best & moste formable, that be made accordynge to the growing of the heares: for why the sinewes of the fleshye skin procede that waye for the moste parte.Incisions of the heade. And it is to be noted, that in∣cisions ought not to be made generallye after the procedin∣ges (by length) of the graynes: as for example. In the fore¦heade, the graines of the skyn goe ouerth warte, and yet the cuttynges, and especiallye those that be depe, oughte to be made after the lengthe, crosse and ouerthwart the graines: for the synewes of the head procede according to ye lengthe, and not after the graynes. The .v. Chapiter. ¶Of the nose. IN the fore parte of the heade, betwene the eyes is consti∣tuted the nose: Whiche is made of bones and grystles, lacertous flesh and skin, called in Greke Rhia and in la∣tine Nius. For the better declaration wherof, firste note, yt there are two notable processes,. holowe, and of a sinewye substance, commyng from the brayne, taking roote not far from the synewes of syghte, whiche some men (estemynge them sinewes) cal Neruos Olfactibiles:. affirming them to pro∣cede of the third coniugation of the brayns sinewes. But o∣ther more diligently waying their beginninges and proce∣dynges, deny them to be proprelye synewes, (with whome I consente) naminge them only the organes of smellynge. And these organes haue at their extreme endes wythin the forheade, at the vpper end of the nosethrilles certeine emi∣nences lyke in forme to the tetes or neples of womens bre∣stes,
and these receyue the odoure,Uertue of smellynge. smell and sauoure of all thynges, plesante or noysome, throughe the nosethrylles. whiche nosethrils or nose holes,. Nares. call them as you lyste, are common wyth the gutter ouer the palate of the mouthe, whiche gutter as is before sayde, hathe also wayes by the gurgulion into the mouthe: by reason whereof, when the mouthe is shutte, the ayre maye passe in and oute throughe them,Utiiltyes of the nose. by the drawinge of the lunges. And as Galen sayth, the nose is the principall setter forth of the face, concerning the fauoure or due proportion therof: For where the nose wanteth saythe he, there the face is muche deformed and lothelye. And the nose is an offyciall member, and the in∣strument of smellynge, by the meanes of the aforsayde Or∣ganes, and standeth out a lytle conuenient way, wythoute the rest of the face. And because the creast bone of it, which deuideth the nosethrils, and maketh them twayne, hathe a gristlye addityon,The gristlye addityon of the nose. the nose is flexible, and may be somwhat bowed, accordyng to the wyll, whiche is so ordained by na∣ture, that it may the more conueniently, be purifyed & clen∣sed from the filthe whyche the brayne is purged of, by that necessary meane. And finally the nose, through hys forsayd office of smelling, presenteth to the common wittes, the sa∣uor of all thinges, either plesant or noyful to the same. The .vi. Chapiter. ☞Of the eyes. THere are also in ye forepart of the head,Oculus. vnder ye forhed ordained .ii. eies, which be cald yt watch mē of yt body & therfore haue their place so high, as it is most mete for that office. And as Galen witnesseth in the .vii. boke, de Iuuamentis, & the second chapiter, the braine & the head were chiefly made for the eies, that they being the instrumentes of syght, and the guiders and leaders of man, myghte be set in the highest place, of all the frame of the body, there to be as▪ vewers, and espyers of all maner of thinges. Euen as it were watche men, whiche are for that intente sette in the highest place of a city,, i. oculus. and they are called in Greke Ophthal∣mi, and in latine Oculi. And they are constitute and made of
thre humores,. l. V∣siuus, uel perspectiuus neruus. &. vii. coates or tunicles, after this maner as foloweth. First out of yt forepart of the braine, procedeth, ii. holow sinewes called Nerui optici, whiche as Galē declareth in the .iiii. boke, de morbo & accidētibus in the first chapiter are holow as a rede, & that for .ii. principal causes. The first is, yt the visible spirit might passe aptly to the eies.Uisible spirit The second is, yt through thē the forme of visyble thinges might redily be presented to the common wittes, & they are ye fyrste paire of ye synewes of ye brain. And immediatlye after their proce∣dinges they vnite thē selues into one sole holownes, & from ye holownes they go forth in twaine, & as they go out at the holes of the scull, they be clothed with the .ii. panicies of the braine, eche panicle geuing a propre coate of his owne sub∣stance vnto them. And of these synewes with their two clo∣thinges aforsaid, and of the skin couering the scul are br the forsayd tunicles or orbes,: Retifor∣mis Ocul Tu∣nica. in which the .ii. humores are holden and conteined. These coates are numbred .vii. by re∣son of their diuersities, in place, forme, and office, as ye shal hear. First of the optike sinewes bredeth the most fine and tender tunicle, called of Galen backwardly, or inwardly Am¦phiblestrocides,▪ i. tu∣nica ararosa uel aranae  Humor Cry∣stallinus. & in latine Retiformis tunica, because it resēbleth a nette: but forwardly, or outwardlye, it is called in Greke Arachnoeides, and in latine Aranea tela: because it is like a cop∣web: and herein is holden the cristal humore which is like∣ned of diuers authors to a haile stone, and is called in latine Humor Crystallinus. Then of Pia mater bredeth a skinne, whose inwarde parte,. i. tuni∣ca Similis se∣cundis. because in some poynte it is lyke to Chorion, (whyche is the seconde birthe couerynge,) is therefore called in greke Cheroeides, and in Latine Secundina: but in the forparte it is called in Greke Rhagoeides, and in Latine, Vuea, because there it resembleth the grayne of a grape,. i. V∣uea ocula tu∣nica. beynge as some wryte of a blacke coloure. A part wherof is planted in the myddest, beinge in forme lyke the couer of a morter, composed of many fyne streames, lyke the heares of the eye lyddes or beames of the Sunne,Humor aque∣us, uel Albu∣gineus. deuyding through yt forme the waterye humore before, called Aqueus, and Albugineus,
and the glasy humore behynde (called Vitreus,)Humor Vitre∣us. a sonder: and hauynge a rounde hole in the middest, conteineth edglynge the crystalline humore, muche lyke as the Horizonte com∣prehendeth the Globe. And then the rest of Vea forwarde, (which hath in the middest a certeyne hole, wherin is made the pupille:) conteyneth in his circuit the humore Vitreus. Thirdlye of dura mater, is made an other tunicle, named in greke Ceratoeides,. and commonlye in Latine, in the hyn∣der parte or inwardlye Scerotica, and in the forparte out∣wardly Cornea: because it hathe there the likenesse of a most brighte or cleare lanterne horne:Tunica Corne∣a, uel translu∣cida. and this conteineth with∣in it all these coates, and humores all ready sayde. Then laste of all, of the pannicle Peric anaeum bredeth an other tunicle,Sclerotica. called Cohaerens▪ and Agnata, and vulgarlye Coniunctiua:Cohaerēs, Ag∣nata. whiche couereth all the eye, sauinge that part of Cornea, whiche appeareth in the middest of the eie outward, and couereth the Pupilla,Coniunctiua. whiche is the blacke of the eye, a∣boute the whyche is a circuite called Iris,Pupilla. or Corona. And this Coniunctiua is it that is called the whyte of the eye,Iris. Corona. and the circles of these tunicles, in theyr endinges, or goinge toge∣ther in the fore parte of the eye, do make the circuite aboue sayde: which beinge of diuers and for drye coloures, is cal∣led Iris, because in that propretye it resembleth a rainbowe. Thus loe haue I shewed as briefly as may be, how and wherof these tunicles are constitute: in what manner also and order, they conteine the .iii. humores of the eye, and for what cause these tunicles are numbred seuen: althoughe it maye be as trulye sayde, that there are but .iiii. as the inge∣nious of the wordes afore maye easilye gather. And from the seconde coniugation of sinewes of the brayne, doe pro∣cede the sinewes whiche enter into the makyng of the .vii. muscles: wherof the eye hathe power to moue, and turne e∣uerye way, according to the will. In the corners of the eyes are fartharmore curnels, by the whyche are ingendered, and from the whiche are shedde the teares that at anye time flowe from the eyes, after the opinyon of diuers learned.
Outwardlye also the eyes haue lyddes, i. Palpebra a∣liquibus ta Gena. whose offyces are as well to preserue by winckinge, the eyes from hurte outwardlye, as also to close them from the lyghte, geuyng them rest in tyme of sleape: but chieflye of all, they defende and couer the eyes, from to muche vehemente brightnesse of any lyght, or from the sodainnesse therof least the visible light of ye eies, should therby be cōfounded. For by thys be∣nefite of liddes, the eies are meruailously eased, comforted, and the syght (as it were by renuing) refreshed. And the veynes that come to the eyes, and eie liddes, do come braū∣chynge from the veine of the temples: wherof it appeareth, that when anye course of humores, as whot bloude or any other moisture, doe runne from the brayne and the head in∣to the eyes: it shall be profitable to cutte the braunche (that commeth from the temple veine) ouerthwarte, or a crosse: for so shall the superfluous course of suche humores be stop∣ped. And I fynde also in good authores,NOTA. yt the Phlebotomy of the foreheade veyne, & also of the veines by the nose, cal∣led Triplices, are moste necessarye for to helpe the diseases of the eyes. The .vii. Chapiter. ¶Of the vpper and the nether Jawes, with the number, figure, and seuerall offyces of the teethe. VNder the eyes (in the forparte) and vnder the nose is the vpper iawe,Maxilla supe∣rior. called Maxilla superior, the bones wher¦of are of diuers authores diuersly nūbred. For Gui∣do (aledginge Galen for his authority) saythe, that there be ix. bones in the vpper iawe: vnto whome Brunswike con∣senteth wythoute contradictyon: whiche opinyon Geminus thinckinge to disproue, reasoneth thus. There can not be founde .ix. bones (saythe he,) vnlesse the nether iawe be ac∣counted wyth the vpper, and then there shoulde be .x. for the nether iawe is made of .ii. bones: wherof I gather that Ge∣minus accompted but .viii. thoughe he after (forgettyng him
selfe) wher he numbereth generally all the bones affirmeth xii. But Lanfrancus and Vigo accompte vpon .xiiii. not shew∣inge their compactions, but affirmynge the same to be vn∣knowne, or at the leaste harde to be founde. Notwythstan∣dynge Carolus Stephanus notinge their negligence doth proue xv. particuler bones in the vpper iawe. But that is by ac∣comptinge the Basilare bone among them, where the two former authores put it among the bones of the scul, so that the number of .xiiii. as wel as .xv. are both true, their min∣des vnderstanded, and their order considered. But who so will vnderstande their seuerall names and numbers, with also their true seates and conexions, let them reade Carolus Stephanus, where they may be satisfied, which here for brief∣nesse sake I omit. And nowe of the tethe called in latine Dentes. Dens. in Greeke Odontes (wherof as wel in the vpper iawe, as also in the ne∣ther iawe are fastened in some .xvi. and in others but .xiiii) there are. i. in∣cisores dentes . i. Canini den∣tes. .iii. sortes or orders. The firste are the fore teethe called in Greke Odontes tomici, and in Latine Incisores or cut∣ters. The seconde are those sharpe or poynted ones, among which are the eye tethe, so called because daungerous acci∣dences doe folow to the eyes, by the drawing or pluckynge oute of them: and these are of their sharpnesse called dogge tethe, and therfore in latine Canini, and in Greke Cynodōtes. The third sort are the tuskles which the Grekes call Gom∣phious & Mylas, i. molares  enin mla. est. the latines Maxillares & Molares, yt is gryn∣ders. And vppon this vpper iawe is fastened a pannycle or skin, growing of the pannicle coueringe the bone of ye for∣heade, and of the thirde payre & of part of the fourthe paire of synewes of the brayne, and the parte next vnto him, and of the seconde paire of synewes of Nucha. And thus is there made a conueniente skyn to couer hym. And the synewes that come to this makynge, come partly from the brayne, and partlye from Nucha: whiche geue felynge and mouyng to the face, and to the palate in the roufe of the mouthe, and to the nose: and that mostelye, in the enterance of the ma∣kinge of the muscles, at these aforsayde partes. Wherfore
the incisyons that oughte to be done in these partes, as in the vpper iawe or the nose,Incisions of the vpper iawe and t∣nose. must be done accordynge to the goinge of the graines of the skyn. For the goinge of the graines, and the procedynge of the synewes in the nose, and in the vpper iawe, is all one way, and nothynge con∣trarye. And from the seconde, thirde, and the fourthe payer of si∣newes of Nucha,Of the nether iawe. commeth synewes to the muscles of the iawes, whiche moue the nether iawe or cheke hone. Thys nether iawe is made of two bones,Maxilla infe∣rior. whiche he ioyned to∣gether in the maner of sawe: & in the hinder part they are ioyned wyth the knottye parte of the iawe.Galenus de A∣natomica admi∣nistratione. lib. 4. In whyche ne∣ther iaw also be fired in some .xvi. & in som but .xiiii. tethe: and aswell the tethe in the vpper iawe, as also those in the nether iawe, are bounde with the coupled bindinges and skinnes, that proceade of Pericranium, whiche is made of the harde pannicle of the brayne,NOTA. as is aforesayde. And this is the cause that ache of the tethe is oftentymes cause of payne in the heade and braine,Emuctorye place of the brayne. and bringeth dysease and offence, to all the whole heade. And vnder the iawe and eares, where the glandules or curnelles are, is the emunc∣torye place, wher as the braine purgeth it selfe of all vene∣mous and vnnaturall thynges, by puttynge forthe of A∣postemes. The .viii. Chapiter. Of the lyppes, the chekes, the mouthe and the Tungue. VPon the vpper and the nether iawes are fixed yt lipps called in greke Chiloi in latine Labia,. i. la∣brū, uel labiū. whych are dores to the mouthe, ayders of speache, and instruments of
pronunciations.. i. Gena. And also the chekes (called Gena, in Greke Blephara) the seates of shamefastnesse, the prospectes of man hys complexion, and the walles of the mouthe: Whose of∣fyces are manye and diuers. But to auoide all ambiguity, these chiefly are in them to be noted of the good chirurgiē. They are consimilare, compound, musculye, sinowye, skin∣nye, and of spongye lose partes, suche as (if they be wasted) are vnpossible to be restored. Wherfore greate hede oughte to be taken that no substance in them be wasted or loste, for if there be, the Cicatrix will puckar them together (lyke the gatheringe or shrocklynge of lether or parchmente at the fyre, in suche wyse that the mouthe wyll be drawne a wrye. And farther if (they being worne throughe) their sub∣stance be in greate quantitye wasted, it is not possible to be so repaired, that there shall not euer after remayne a whole throughe. So that in suche case many tymes, the tethe euer after are seene throughe the chekes, and the substance of meate and drinke is redye there alwayes to issue out, when the partye so greued eateth. Wythin this compasse then is the mouthe enclosed, of the whyche all wryters of Anatomye note .v. thinges to be consydered. To wete the tungue, the tethe, the lyppes, the palate or roufe of the mouthe, and the Vuula: of all whiche (because I speake particularly of them:) I nede not here to saye anye more generallye: Wherfore I will nowe procede to the tungue. Betwixte the vpper iawe and the nether,The tunge. . Lingua. is sette the Tungue, called Lingua, in greke Glossa. The whych is made of a soft flesh and whyte, veiny, chordy & sinewy: and it ta∣keth his sinewy substance of the syxte payer of synewes of the brayne: and is called there the synewe of speakynge. And of the seuenth payre of sinewes of the braine, ye tongue receiueth the synewe of mouing. And it is to be noted, that the tungue, the roufe of the mouthe, and the stomacke, with the pype therof called Oesephagus, are clothed all wyth one sensible synewye pannicle, comminge from the brayne: as experience proueth, that who so toucheth the tongue or
roufe of the mouthe nere the throte, the stomacke wil tikle, and caste vp by vomite,Utilityes of the tungue. all that is in it. And iii. causes I fynde why that the tungue was ordeyned The first is, that it is a helpe to tourne the meate in the mouth, that it maye the more effectuallye be ground small, and chawed wyth ye tethe. The seconde offyce of the tongue is, to decerne the taste of thynges, whether they be sweete or soure, bytter, sharpe, or anye other: presentinge or enforminge the same to the common wyttes. Thirdlye it is the instrumente of speache, for wythoute the tungue, there coulde be perceiued no distinction of voyces,Ueines vn∣der the tūgue nor of words. And vnder ye tungue are .ii. veynes,NOTA. whych appeare, when it is lifted vppe, which are opened for diseases of the tūgue and the throte:Angina grece. . as Angi∣na, and other affectes. But here oughte heede to be taken, that Phlebotomy be not done in the tūgue, vnlesse there be a generall bloud lettynge before, or elsse ventosynge in the shoulders, or elsse that the bodye be purged, wyth a medi∣cyne or a clister. For the Phlebotomye of the tongue draw∣eth, augmenteth, and multiplyeth the disease in the roote of the tungue: and especiallye if the bodye be replete or stip∣tike, vnlesse some of those remedyes goe before, of whych I haue spoken. The .ix. Chapiter. ☞Of the eares. NExte after the iawes,. i. Auris, plurale  aures. Vnde . i. auri∣cula. and vnder the bones Parietalia, on the ryghte side and on the lefte syde, are ordeyned the eares, (which are called in Greke Ota, and in La∣tine Aures:) and set on eche syde vpon the harde bone Petrosū, whyche is a parte of the bone Mendosum, hauynge in the ho∣lownesse therof a wrinckled crookednesse, endinge wyth a number of pores. By reason of whiche crookednesse, there maye passe no instrument into the eares, be it neuer so fine no not a bristle, (as Galen saythe in the nynthe & eleuenthe bokes of the vse of partes.) Unto whyche holownesses on
bothe sydes doe come the synewes of bearinge, called Nerui audibiles,Nerui audi∣biles. which are of the fifthe coniugation of synewes of the braine, whyche are sayd to be holow. And wheras they come to the holes of the eares, they are wrythed muche like a vine presse, and are made at the endes like the heades of wormes, and vpō these bones is made & groweth a brode gristle, whych we cal ye ear, wheron are planted certeyn sē∣syble synewes, cōminge frō the skin that couereth the scul: wherwt also are conioyned some soft fleshy partes, & certen wryncles of veines and synewes halfe round.NOTA. Whyche the chirurgien must cut accodinge to that forme, when anye cuttynges be nedefull in that place. The .x. Chapiter. ¶Of the necke wyth the .vii. turnynge ioyntes therof, and his other contentes. VNder the heade in the hinder parte is the pith or ma∣rowe of the backe called Nucha,Nucha. and in greke Notiaeos Myelos,. i. Me dulla Spinalis. Spondils of the necke are vii. (vnder & about ye which are ye .vii. spondilles or turning ioyntes of the necke called Septem Ceruicis uertebrae.) Out of the which Nucha betwene the spondilles, go out .vii paier of sinewes, so yt the fyrst payer go out of the first holes of the spondilles. The which holes are set against ye begin∣nyng of Nucha, wheras the sayde Nucha departeth from the brain. And this first payer, spread thē selues vpon ye skin of the heade, and there are made parte of the muscles. The se∣conde paire goe oute of the seconde hole, betwene the fyrste spondill and the second, and it goeth to the skin of the head, and geueth mouinge vnto it: and in some partes, it ioyneth it selfe wyth the muscles of the neeke, and the cheke bones, and geueth mouing vnto them.Or rather at a hole that is made on eche syde betwene every .ii. spon¦dilles. The third paire goe out of the third spondill, whyche are spred and departed, vnto the mouing of the brode bone of ye shoulder. The fourth pair, in like maner goe out of the vpper holes of the fourth spon∣dill, procedinge from thence to the muscles, as well of the forepart, as the hinder parte of the backe. The fifthe payre
goinge oute of the vpper holes of the fyfthe spondille, are spread vpon the muscles of the midriffe, and to the muscles mouing the heade, and after to the muscles of the shoulder blades. The sixte paire goeth oute of the vpper holes of the vi. spondil. The .vii. pair likewise goeth out of ye vpper hole of the seuenth spondil, which in their goinge out are depar∣ted vpward and downward, vpon the muscles of the necke, the head, the brest, and the throte. And after the synewes & muscles,Ueines of the necke. there are ordeined in the necke, veines & arteries, both opē and hid. & in the neck be .ii. veines openly appearinge behinde the eares: Of the which the cuttinge is dreadefull and dangerous, because of the naturall heat in thē receiued of the hearte, and the af∣finity they haue with the brain. For whē they are cut, ther foloweth wounding, and diseases of many kindes, of their great bleding. And after the cutting they will not lyghtlye be stopped: whervpon oftētimes foloweth death. And ther∣fore it plainly appereth, yt in al the apostemes of ye necke, or in what case or disease so euer happen in the necke, wherin cutting must be had: that those cuttinges muste be done ac∣cording to the length, because of ye growing of the sinewes, & members of the necke.NOTA. And the aforsaid veines & arteries the which he there tied together, ought to be considered, for frō those manifest veynes & arteries vnder the eares, there procede together other veines and arteries, in such wise, yt ye can not perce nor cut the veines, but that the arteries al¦so must be perced and cut: of which doing should succede the dangerous accidentes aforesayde. The xi. Chapiter. ☞Of the throte and the contentes thereof, as the wynde pype, and the Epiglot, the Uvula, and Almondes of the throte. &c. IN the forpart of the spondils of the necke beside ye throte, is set the pipe of the stomache, (called Meri or Oesophagus) by whome meat & drinke passeth to the stomache, whych is made of stringes, veines, and arteries, commynge from the sixte payre of
And it is fastened in the throte wyth the sharpe arterye or pype of the lunges called Arteria aspera in greke Tracheia artes∣ria,. i. aspe∣ra Canalis qua Vox editur. Pharynx and Larynx (thoughe some deuiding it somwhat more exactlye applye these two laste names, and that most truelye, to the vpper parte of the same) whiche is made of gristles and of synewes,. i. fi∣stula spiritalis comminge from the syxte payer of synewes of the braine: and it is grainye and hathe lyttle hoopes, in the vtter parte. And where as it groweth wyth Oesophago (or the pipe of the stomache,) in the vpper ende, it is euen and softe. And the throte is the beginninge of the sayde conductes or pipes, in whyche there is an emptye place, where as are fixed the two amigdales:Amigdales of the throte. that is to saye, the two peces of fleshe of the forme of two almondes, one on the ryghte syde and an other in the lefte. And these amigdales be fle∣shye and sinewye, that they maye be the stronger: for they geue enterance to the meate and drinke, that it maye easily passe into the conduicte (called Oesophagus.) And they also help the aer,. i. Ligula. Lin∣gula siue mi∣nor lingua. to enter into Tracheia arteria by the Epiglot, for vpon the vpper ende of these wayes or pipes is a certayne coueringe, whiche the grekes call Epiglottiden, and the La∣tines. Ligulam. That in the time of eating, there enter into ye sharpe artery & so to the lunges no hurtfull thyng, nor a∣ny thing but aer, or thynges like vnto aer. And thou shalte vnderstande by Epiglottiden, the knotte in the throte, at the ende of the pipe, whiche knot falleth downe, and maketh diuers voyces. And when a man eateth or swaloweth hys meate, it couereth Arteriam asperam, or the waye of aer: but when one speaketh, it is turned vpwardes, so restinge erec∣ted betwene bothe the passages, vntill throughe the occasy∣ons aboue sayde, there be nede of lyinge downe agayne as before. For as we may see, when men doe talke and eate bothe at once, it often chaunceth, that a cromme falleth in∣to ye sharpe artery: at which time they can not leaue cough∣inge, til the sayde cromme (or what so it is) be cast forthe a∣gayne.Operculum Laringis. And thys Epiglottis is also called in Latyne of some Operculum Laringis.
And aboue the roote of the tungue is a certeyne instru∣mente,. . Columus Columella aut Gurgulio that cleaueth to the palate in the inner parte of the mouthe, called in greke Kion, of the auncients Gargareon, and in Latine Gurgulio: whiche is necessarye to breake the aer, and to make diuers voyces. And sometime it happeneth, yt it excedeth his due forme by diuers affectes, by the whyche also it varyeth by names: as when it excedeth in lengthe, it is of that forme called Columella, and when in roundnesse like a grape,Vuea. Vuula. it is called Vuea, or Vuula. Upon these pipes are ordeined diuers synewes, greate & small, open and priuye: whiche come from the syxte and se∣uenth payre of synewes of the braine, and they are medled with the muscles of the necke and throte, with the thyrde and fourthe paire of synewes of Nucha. Upon the righte side and vpon the lefte side of the pype of the longes,Guidegi Iugulares. called Arteria aspera, are certeine greate and manifest black veines, called Guidegi & Iugulares and vnder them are. ii. arteryes: of whose cuttinge and persynge, the bloude runneth from the hearte and lunges,NOTA. from whence they come. Wherby the lunges are diseased and hurte, and theyr naturall poure hindered and let, and also it bryngeth diseases to the hearte, whervpon often times sodaine death foloweth:Incisions in the throte. And therefore all the incisions that be made in the throte, oughte to be done after the lengthe. wherefore it is necessarye that we eschue the veines of the throte, and especiallye those that be greate, and those that e called Iu∣gulares or Guidegi. For vnder euerye veine of the throte, is hid an arterye, in the which, there procedeth spirite of life and natural heat, immediatlye from the heart and the lunges. And therefore it openly apeareth that all cuttings of thys place are dreadfull and perillous.NOTA. Understande that the throte is fastened to the furcle of the brest,Pixis gulae. in the place called Iugulum, or Pixis Gulae▪ whyche is the boxe, or holownesse of the throte: and the necke is faste∣ned wyth the hynder parte of the seuenthe spondill, whych is the fyrste spondill of the brest: and also it is fastened with the spade bone of the shoulder, that it maye moue the bet∣ter,
and the more mightilye, when nede requireth: That the shape and forme thereof, maye also be sene the fayrer and the better. And betwene the shoulders behynde, at the nether ende of the necke,Place for ventsynge. are ventoses vsed, for diuers diseases of the heade, and the partes therof: both wyth scarification and wythoute scarifica∣tion, as in good authors ye shal rede, & as the experte Chirurgien, knoweth by experi∣ence.
THE SECONDE PARTE OF the Anatomy, treatinge of the forme and shape of the shoulder, and the adiutory of the arme, the hande, and the fyngers. The .i. Chapiter. ☞Of the shoulder and the chanll bone. AFter the neck and the throte, as wel on the righte side as on the lefte,Humerus. is ordeined a shoulder, called Humerus, in greke Omos, and of some Brachiō. Wherin there are i. hume∣rus. .iii. bones knyt, that by the meanes of that forme and shape, the makinge therof may be the more noble and fayre: and al∣so the more profytable to mouynge and workynge. The firste of these bones, is the broade bone of the shoulder, whyche manye learned men calle Scoptulum opertum,. i. Humerus latus. and the Grecians O∣oplatan. i. humerum latuni, and we vulgarlye Spatulam: whose forme and fashion in the hynder ende or parte towarde the necke,Spatula. is broade lyke a bakers pele. And in hys lengthe he hathe an edge, that stretcheth to the heade of thys bone to∣warde the shoulder, passynge endlynge to the broade ende, whiche is towarde the necke. In whiche brode ende is knit a gristle, whiche spreadeth a longe besyde the spondilles of the brest, vnto the seuenth spondill of the necke. And on the other ende, towarde the shoulder, this bone waxeth greate, in the ende whereof is a holownesse, whiche is called the boxe of the shoulder bone. Wherein the rounde heade of the adiutorye turneth, as it accordeth to necessitye in the workinge of thys member.
Thys bone was made in this manner, that the bones of the brest and of the necke, shoulde be the stronger and surer in the shoulder, and that the adiutorye shoulde not be dislo∣cate or put oute of ioynte, for euerye lyghte cause. And by this it manifestlye appeareth that the bone of the adiutory, can not be dislocated backwarde. In the former parte of the shoulder, i clauis  ut Clauis a clau dendo. Iugulum. Iurcule. is ordained a bone called Clauis, or Iugulum, in greke Cleis, and in English ye fur∣cule or canel bone, which is tyed with the broade bone, be∣inge the seconde of the .iii. bones of the shoulder: and it is there sette, that this member maye abide the better in hys strengthe, and to beare vp that place, that it goe not oute forwarde by anye small or lyghte occasion. And thys bone is lesse then the broad bone of the shoulder in his knitting, that the shape of that place maye be the fairer and ye more formable, and also that it shoulde not let the mouynge of the adiutorye. And so it plainlye appeareth, by reason of the beinge lesse of thys bone in that parte: that the round∣nesse of the adiutorye maye be dislocate forwarde. And after these bones, there are insensible ligamentes, whyche binde and knit those bones together. And there is a certeine lygature in the middle of the aforesayde boxe or holownesse, entering the round end of the adiutory: whych knytteth the said round end wt the aforesayde boxe. Of the breakinge and ouer stretchinge of whyche,NOTA. succedeth a con∣tinuall departinge: so that therby the restoringe of the dis∣location is letted or hindered: In so much that other whyle when the bone is reduced, and broughte agayne to hys si∣tuation and being, after the restoringe therof, it will leape or springe oute agayne.Emunctorie place of the hearte. And vnder the shoulder, betwene the arme and the bodye, is the place emunctory, wheras the hearte dothe sende forthe (in the time of Pestilence or other venemous feuers,) suche thynges as are vnto hym noious and contrarye: as experience proueth, of the filthye Apostemes that there come forthe at suche tymes in that place.
The .ii. Chapiter. Of the bone adiutorium, then of ye elbow, the arme & the hand, wyth the number, figure, and offyces of the bones, and other partes in these conteyned. THe thirde bone of the shoulder is the adiutory, which is rounde wythout,Os adiutoriū.  and holow within, called Brachion .i. humerus▪ and commonlye Aditorium os. Thys bone is greate, thyn, and in hys holownesse full of marowe, of whiche marowe he receiueth necessary moyst∣nesse. And his vpper ende is rounde, goinge into the bore of the shoulder bone, where it is knytte and turneth aboute: holdē betwene his ligatuues, wyth the other two bones in that place, as it is a boue sayde. The other ende of the adiutorye is fastened wyth the ii. cubite bones or fociles, whereas he hathe .ii. knottes in forme like pullyes, whiche enter into the holowe cuppes and cauities of the two Focilles per Enarthrosin, whose names are beneth wrytten: wherof the vpper focil or cubite bone is the lesse, and stretcheth from the thumbe vnto the ioynte of the elbowe. But the other bone is somewhat greater and longer, stretchynge from the nether parte, that is from the lyttle fynger to the elbowe: and lyeth vppon the ther wyth a little bearinge out like a birdes bill, in length to the adiutorye: whyche bunche or knobbe maketh the forme of the elbowe when it is bowed▪ whyche was made, that this fasteninge wyth the ende of the adiutorye, wyth the rowle or pulley thereof in the holowe cuppe, shoulde be the more strong. And that it shoulde not be dislocate or vn∣ioynted, wyth anye small occasion: Therefore is the vpper focile supported vpon the heade of the adiutorye. And thys place is bounde wyth stronge insensible bondes, that by that meanes the situations of the bones maye be stronge: and that they maye abide when a man lifteth burdēs, and that the arme goe not backwarde, nor outward. And there the nether focill or maior bone of the cubitte, aboute thys
passynge oute, hathe his shape or forme somwhat bowing. Then nexte after the elbowe, are the .ii. focilles aforsayde: The vpper most wherof is called in Greke Cercis, in Latin Radius and Focile minus. Radius siue fo¦cile minus. The nethermoste Pechis, in Latine Vlna, Cubitus, and focile Maius: whiche are knit together end∣longe,. i. Vl∣na Cubitas, uel focile mi∣nus. by the meanes of ligamentes goinge betwene. And the lesse bone goeth into the greater, beinge made bothe as one. And they are ioyned, with the compaxion of bones in ye wrest, called Carpus, or Brachiale: which is made together of the .viii. bones called Rasseta, foure of them beinge ordai∣ned wythoute the hande,. i. Carpus, uel Brachiale. to the endes of the two focilles: & the other .iiii. be knit and bound together with the bones, of the holowness of the hand,Ossa Rasseta manus. called Ossa metacarpii. And these bones haue no marowe in them, because of their thicke and harde substance: But the focilles haue marow in them, for the cause before tolde in the bone called Adiutorium. And all∣thoughe it shewe not in the lesse focill, so manifestlye as it doth in the greater or maior bone, yet in the lesse focill is a certeine holownesse, in which is found moistnesse, in ye ma∣ner of marow, which serueth there in the stead of marowe. And after these bones Rasseta, are constitute the bones of the palmes of the hands, called Ostea metacarpi .i. Postrachia∣lia,, id est Post∣brachiale, pal∣ma, uel manus pectus. Palma, uel manus pectus, whiche are foure in noum∣ber, and are ioyned closelye together, per synarthrosim wyth ye forsayde bones Rasseta. And they are ioyntlye knit together at the other end, wyth the bones of the .iiii. fingers: and not wyth the bones of the thumbe. For the fyrste great bone of the thumbe,For Synar∣throsis, loke in the .i. chap. of the fyrste treatise. is knitte to the ende of the vpper focill in the ioynte, and is therby made more stronge in mouynge, then the other four: and also by that meanes it is the more seme∣lye and comely ioyned. So of the palme together wyth the fyngers is made vp the hande,. i. Manus called Manus in greke Cheir. In euerye finger wherof are thre bones, called Digiti, or Os∣sa digitorum,Digiti, uel os∣sa digitorum. saue in the Thumbe whiche hath but it: so yt in the fingers & the thūbe of eche hād, are .xiiii. bones. Wher¦fore wyth the bones Rasseta, which are eyght in number, (besyde the bones Sesaminat) all the bones of the arme from
the shoulder to the endes of the fyngers, are in nūber .xxx. Upon these bones and ligamentes hithervnto descry∣bed, are ordeined synewes which come from the .vi. and .vii payre of synewes of Nucha in the neck: and from the fyrst of Metaphrenum. Of which synewes (being cōpound & mixed wt ligamentes, and intermedling of fleshe,) are made muscles or brawnes, whiche moue the shoulders, the adiutorye, the elbowe,Muscles of the brayne. and the arme. In the ende of these muscles, come oute Chordes, whereby the fyngers are moued, & the low∣er members. Of whiche muscles, there is one greate and manifest, in the middest of the adiutorye, so that some parte of him is wythin, and some parte wythout: from ye whyche are departed the Chordes or tendones, that moue the arme after diuers partes. And in the arme is an other open and manifest muscle, beinge without the arme, and bespredeth the arme about: from whiche departeth diuers tendones, whiche moue the fingers inwarde and outwarde, as nede requireth. The .iii. Chapiter. ¶Of the veines of the arme, with their beginninges & procedynges, and howe incision is to be done in the arme and hande. AFter these muscles are ordeined veines, open & pri∣uy, which serue to Phlebotomy: of the whiche there be .vi. in number. Wherof the firste is departed frō the veine vnder the arme hole,Ueines of the arme .vi. for Phlebotomy. or from the veines shewed in ye arme holes▪ which passeth by the shoulder (& is therfore called Humeralis) in the nether parte or syde of the arme, go∣ing to the vpper part of the elbow:Cephalica ue∣na. Humeralis uena. and there it is called Ce∣phalica. For he procedeth of the veine, of which the one part, goeth vp to the braine, & nurisheth those partes, and the o∣ther part nourisheth the members of the armes, by reason wherof, he is so called. And secondlye from Cephalica, there procedeth a branche, whiche apeareth betwene the thombe and the forefinger,Cephalica ocularis. and there it is called Cephalica ocularis.
Thirdlye from this shoulder veine, commeth forth a great conspicuous braunche, beneathe the boughte of the arme in the insyde, and from thence passeth slopewise ouer ye small of the arme, and there is called Funis brachii,Funis Brachii. spreading from thence wyth diuers braunches to and on the backe of the hande. From the arme hole in the inside, commeth the fourthe veine seruinge to Phlebotomy, whiche goeth by the inner syde of the adiutorye vnto the elbowe,Basilica siue Hepatica Ve∣na. and apeareth in the nether side of the boughte of the arme, and is called Basilica or Hepatica, which procedeth towarde the hand, by the low∣er focille: and then there departeth from him a braunche, whiche lyeth in the backe of the hande, betwene the lyttle fynger and the nexte adioyninge, and there is called, of diuers men by diuers names,Saluatella si∣ue. Splenatica as Saluatella or Plenatica, wyth suche other: and it is the .v veine of Phlebotomye. Sixt∣lye in the middest of the boughte of the arme, there appea∣reth an other veine, whyche is made of .ii. branches conioy∣ned together in one: whereof the one springeth of Vena Ce∣phalica the other commeth from Vena Basilica. Thys veyne is called Vena Purpurea,Mediana siue. or Nigra, Communis also, Mediana, and of some Cardiaca:Cōmunis siue. and commonlye with eche of these veynes preuilye or apertlye,Cardiaca uena there is accompanied an arterye. Also the muscles of these places are made of sinewy fibers, with mixinge of fleshe and sinewye pannicles, procedinge styll after the lengthe. Of veines, arteries, and of feelynge sy∣newes, is made the vtter skin: wherby it is nurished, and made sensyble. And as well the vei▪ whereby it is nourished, and the arteries wherby it ha se, as the sinewes, wherby it hathe felinge and mouinge, procede in the arme, all accor∣dinge to the lengthe.NOTA. These haue we made open and plain, to the vnderstandinge, because it behoueth the Chirurgien to haue respecte, howe he maketh incisions, (as in opening of apostemes or otherwise) in these places. For whye, for as muche as all the muscles, synewes, tendones, arteryes, and veines of this place: (namely from the shoulders, to the
endes of the fingers,) goe and procede after the lengthe: it requireth,Incisions in the arme. that the incisions and cauteries of those places, shoulde be done alwaies, accordinge to the procedynge of the aforsaide members in lengthe. And it semeth that the veine Cephalica, whyche is in the bought of the arme, and sheweth hym selfe in the vpper fo∣cile, goinge for the betwene the thumbe and the forefinger: serueth to the head, and the partes therof. And likewise the veine that is in the lower parte of the bought of the arme, called Basilica, whose branche (as I saide before) appeareth betwene the litle finger and the ringe finger, (and there is named Saluatella, serueth to the liuer and the splene: because it procedeth from a parte of the veine that nurisheth the lo∣wer members. And also the cōmon veine, whych apeareth in ye midest of ye bought of ye arme, semeth to serue both to ye vpper and the nether partes: and that because he groweth bothe of the shoulder veine called Humeralis,Humeral Vena. and of the arme hole veyne called Axillaris,Axillaris Vena. as it euidently appereth. And note, that all the veines here specified, procede of that parte of Vena concaua that ascendeth vp to the hart, put∣ting forthe one greate braunche into the holownesse of the same. And after so ascendinge, is yet deuided on eche syde into .ii. branches: of the whiche one branche spredeth to all the rybbes, to Pleura & Diaphragma, nourishing them. The o∣ther goeth to the fore parte of the brest, and so to the place of the furcle: where it is againe triplye deuided. Wherof one braunche ascendynge by the necke vp to the heade, is deuy∣ded into all partes of the same: The seconde goeth to the shoulder, and the thirde to the arme hole. Of whyche two doe procede all the deuisyons, whose names and places of section, are here declared: wherby it appeareth what coligance and vnity, these veines haue with the heade, the hart, and the liuer.
THE THIRDE PARTE OF Anatomy, which sheweth the shape & forme of the furcules, and of the ribbes, of the brest, and the chine bone of that part, vnto the mouthe of the stomache. The .i. Chapiter. ¶Of the brest and the .xii. turninge ioyntes of that region, wyth the rybbes and other bones, and partes, as Pleura. &c. VNder the throte, in the foreparte therof, are ordeined the .ii. bones called Claues & Furculae,Clauis, Fur∣cula. and of some Iugula,Iugulum. in english the canell bones: which he round wythout, and holowe wythin. And they are faste∣ned at the one end in the shoulder, as I haue shewed in the. ii. chapiter: At the o∣ther end they are fastened together with the vppermoste parte of the brest,. at the pit of the throte. At which pit beginneth the region of the brest,i. Os prectoale holdinge in the forepart of Pectorale called of Galen Sternon, whych is constytute but of. iii. bones, althoughe some number them vii (as you se Lanfranke doth,) accordinge to the. vii. longe ribbes of eche side ioyning to them, whiche are in dede fa∣stened to those ribbes, & eche of them to other, with a gri∣stelly substance, that extendeth it self with a scelder flexi∣ble poynt, beneathe those bones, (like ye poynt of a sworde,) ouer the mouthe of the stomach: and therfore is called of dy∣uers authors in greke Xiphocides,. and in latin Scutiformis, or Ensiformis.i. ensiformis, uel in ensis ef∣figiem exiens. Whiche by his bowing geueth roume to the sto∣mache: and yet by his gristlye hardnesse defendeth it from hurt. And in that place, or nighe to the same beneth, is the mouth of the stomache,. enim ensis est. And this lengthe, wt the knittinges
together,. i. pectus, uel Spiritalū p¦ium domicili∣um & mum∣mentum. of gristlye substances, and the makinge of these bones, wyth the ribbes in the ridges, is proprelye called the brest, in Greke Thorax, and in Latine Pectus. And of rybes there are on eche side .xii. called Costae, whyche are fastened wyth. xii. of the spondils, whiche are proprelye the sponils of the brest, est Spinae pa a Ceruice ad cinctū prote∣sa. metaphreni Vertebrae. and called therefore Metaphreni Vertebrae: as the nexte of the spondilles downe warde, whiche be .v. in num∣ber are called Lumborum Vertebrae, the spondilles of ye reines. And those. xii. ribbes are bowinge, in the maner of halfe a compasse: of the which there are vii. called Costae Verae which beinge fastened at the hynder endes, wyth the spondilles of the backe,. i. Vertebra uel secundum Vul¦gos Spondyliū Costae Verae▪ Costae Spuriae▪ are byggest in the myddest: whose former endes are fastened wyth the gristles of the. iii. bones of Sternon: & v. of those. xii. rybbes are shorte, and reche not to Sternon, as doe the other. vii. but are only fastened in the spondilles be∣hynde, & therfore called Costae Spuriae, in English fals ribbes, or backwarde rybbes: because when the formoste endes of them be bowed downe, they bow vpward againe. For they haue no fastening at the fore endes,. i. Costa secūdū Aristot. aliis Latus. at  pro Pleura in∣telligitur mē∣brana Costas succingens. as haue the. vii. greate ribbes: whyche are fastened as I sayde ere while wyth the bones of the brest, and take their knittinges of them. & note that alonge the syde, vnder or within these ribbes, is a pan∣nycle or skyn called Pleura, wherin is engendered the inflā∣mation called Pleuritis, and in Englyshe the pleurisye. The. ii. Chapiter. ¶Of the hearte. ANd wythin those bones,. i. laterū dolo, & cōpunctio, Costalis, at ue¦re Succingēti mebra mor∣bus, uel i∣matio. that is to saye the bones of the brest, the rybbes, and the spondilles of the same, wythin the holownesse that is made of them, I saye is the heart, named in Greeke Cardia, and in Latyne Cor, confyrmed and sette. Whiche because he is the pryncipall member,. i. Cor atque  of all other members, and the beginning of life, is thus sette in the myddest of the breaste, as orde and kinge to all the rest: of whome he is obeyed and serued,
as a prince of hys subiectes. And the hearte hathe bloude in hys owne substance, wheras all other members haue it but in arteries and veines: and in the hearte is the nutrityue bloude made liuelye spirite, and caried forth in the arteries, whiche in the hearte haue theyr beginnynge, as I sayd suf∣ficiently in the firste treatise. And the heart is couered with a stronge pannicle called of the latines Capsula cordis,. Tunica Cor contegens. and of the Grecians Pericardion. And from the hearte procedeth the greate arterie, whiche is called in latine Arteria magna, from whome brauncheth and procedeth all the other arteries, yt are in anye member of the bodye: by whiche meanes the spirite of life is caried to all the members of the same,Arteria mag∣na. as it is sufficientlye saide, in the firste treatise and the. vii. chapi∣ter. And the hearte is an offyciall member, spermatike, and of a lacertous substance: The greate ende wherof in his be∣ing, leaneth and inclineth moste vnto the ryghte syde, and the small ende leaneth moste vnto the lefte syde. And in the hearte haue the venall arterye, and the arteriall veine their begynninges: of whose processes and offices I speake im∣mediatlye hereafter in the lunges. Here also mighte be to greate purpose declared, the great secretes of these firste mouinges, whiche are in the hearte, called in greke Systole,. and Diastole, in latine Contractio, & Di∣latatio,1. contractio, uel compressio whiche are compared in this orbicle, (of diuers lear∣ned men) to the primum mobile or firste mouer, in the greate orbe. For these mouinges are the first cause of all other mo∣uinges:. i. dilatatio, de∣stinctio, & in terdum diuisio as of pulses in the arteries, and so of all the rest. But because those secretes passe the capacitye of the cōmon sorte: and also that I should breake my purpose of briefnes, I omit them, and wil now speake of the lunges or lightes. The. iii. Chapiter. ☞Of the lunges, and theyr partes and offyces. THe lunges also called in Greke Pneumon and in latine Pulmo,. 1. Pulmo. are set in the same holownesse, which are cold and moist of complexion, and is deuided into v. lobes
or partes: iii. or the ryght syde, and. ii, on the left. And ther is also the pannicle Mediastinum, being of like composytion wyth Diaphragma. And as Diaphragma deuideth the region of the brest and the partes therof, from the belly, so dothe Me∣diastinum deuide the lunges and the brest into.Mediastinum. ii. seueral par∣tes, after the lengthe. And thys deuisyon of the lunges in partes was ordeined, that if one part perishe, an other may serue the turne. And. iii. kindes of vessels we finde in the lunges worthy of note.. The firste is an arteriall veine (mencioned in the firste treatise, chapi. 8.) comminge from the hearte, and brancheth into ye lūges: bringyng from ye heart liuely spirite and nutrimentall bloud vnto them. The seconde is a venal arterye, (wherof I haue spoken in the firste treatise cha. 7.) conueying from all partes of the lunges into the lefte ven∣tricle of the hearte, freshe aer: as well to temper and myti∣gate the greate heate thereof, as also to be made there (by mixinge wyth moste fyne bloude) pure and liuely spirit, by the workynge of the hearte, to be sente to the great arterye: and from him by all other arteries, to all and euerye parte of the bodye.Arteria as∣pera. The thirde is Arteria aspera, throughe whome the lunges drawe in and put forthe aer: for whose farther description, looke in the ende of the firste chapiter of thys treatise. And from the firste spondill of the brest, whiche (if ye be∣gin to number at the vpper end of Nucha) is the. viii. spon∣dill of the ridge:. Stupor . from this spondill I saye, commeth two si∣newes, which geue felyng and mouing to the whole brest: for of them are made the muscles, and the mouing synewes of that place. And note, that some of the mouinge synewes and muscles of the brest, moue according to the wil, whiche for the moste parte come from the. vi. and. vii. paire of sy∣newes of the brayn, and of Nucha: and some synewes moue by the natural makinge of the brest. Which is knowne by the disease or sicknesse, called Apoplexia: The cōdition wher∣of is suche, that before the time of the sycknesse, the breste moueth: but in the houre of sycknesse it can not moue. For
in the time of sicknesse in this disease, the braine is founde stopped, from whence these synewes procede: so that by the sayde stoppinge of the braine, the animall spirites be suffo∣cate, and may not distende in the sayde synewes, to do their operation in mouynge. The. iiii. Chapiter. ¶Of the veines of the brest, and their beginnynges and procedinges, and howe incisyon shoulde be done in the brest, and the partes thereof. THe veines that are in the aforesaide skin deuidinge the brest, (nourishynge those partes,) come from the seconde branche of Vena caua:Vena caua. whiche is the lesse of the two greate veynes, that haue theyr begynninge, in the ho∣lownesse of the liuer. Whiche braunche commeth into Dia∣phragm: or the midrife, & frō thence it goeth endlōg into th forsayde skyn, whiche deuideth the brest called Mediastinum. And wyth these goe other veines, whiche come from the thirde branche of vnknowne veines, in the ryghte eare of the hearte.. But the arteryes, whiche come to the forsayde skyn and the brest, procede or issue of a braunche that com∣meth from the greate arterye, whiche groweth in the lefte eare of the heart. And euerye arterye brancheth forth vnder the veines, so that euerye member that is nouryshed by veynes, is quickened and kepte by the liuelye spirite of the arteries: whiche procede vniuersally vnder the said veines. And know that all the veines and arteries, which come o∣penly to the nurishinge of the members of the brest, and es∣pecially in the vtter part, procede in their going, according to the length of the ribbes, and of the bones of the brest: ye and so doe also the greate synewes, whiche come to the ma∣king of the muscles of the brest: hauing their beginnyng of Nucha,NOTA. wythin the spondills of the same. Wherfore it euy∣dentlye appereth, howe and in what maner the apostemes of these places shoulde be cutte, and howe cauteries oughte to be done in the same, when nede requireth.
Therefore as muche as maye be, they oughte to be done in those places, accordinge to the goinge of the rybbes in lengthe: and so shall there no synewe be hurte, nor errore committed. For when incisions and cauteries be thus done accordynge to the lengthe, and that in the vtter moste, low∣est, and moste dependente places: of suche worke I saye, commeth the spediest, shortest, and fairest ende of urations. And moste prone, apte, and redy to di∣gestion, mundification, consolidation, de∣siccation. &c. as experience manifesteth. THE FOVRTHE PARTE OF Anatomye, whiche declareth the forme and shape, of the whole sircuite of the wombe, namelye from the mouthe of the sto∣mache vnto the hanches, and of the spondilles of that region. The. i. Chapiter. ¶Of the region of the bellye, and the pannycles of the same, and the bones of that parte. THe third ventricle is the belly, called in latine Venter,Venter. which albeit that we here recite last, is ye firste pece of worke, to be begun in order of diection of the bodye, least otherwise putrefaction hinder the whole worke. It be∣ginneth at the lowest ribbes, and endeth in the grindes and share, and this whole circuit is verye lose and softe. First then vpon all the rest is the vtter skin, cōmon to all the bodye. In the whiche aboute or very nere the middes of the bellye, is seene as it were a little rounde pyte or hole:
whiche is an ornamente not vnsemelye to that parte, com∣monlye called in Englishe the nauell,. in greke Omphalos, in latine Vmbilicus.i. Vmbilicus. From whiche a certaine holow tying, like in forme to a gutte, procedeth: infestinge it selfe in the ho∣lowe syde of the lyuer. The offyce whereof was in the mo∣thers wombe, to bringe bothe bloude and spirite from the mother, to the liuer of the childe, and so from the liuer to all the members of the bodye: and also to expel (after digestion) the superfluous iuyce, whiche after the birthe is the vrine, and passeth by the yarde: and afterwardes the nauell hathe no office that we reade of in Anatomye. Nexte vnder the skin of the belly is ordeined fatnesse, and also vnder that fatnesse. viii. muscles, whych accorde to the necessitye of that place: the makynge and office wherof we wil anon declare. And note that all this whole substance of muscles, fatnesse, and the skin together, vpon the regyon of the bellye, is called of the Arabians Myrach, of the Grekes Epigastrion,. i. Abdomen. Venter exteri¦or, uel sūmus Venter. and of the Latines Abdomen, de Abdendo, that is of coueringe: because it couereth and closelye hideth, all the entraels. Wherin by the waye their errore is to be noted, that take Myrach to be a symple and particulare pannicle, wheras in dede noe suche pannicle as they imagine, can be founde by Anatomye. And farther Galen councelleth, that in all woundes of the bellye, wherin SiphachSyphac. is cutte: that in stitchinge of the wounde, we shoulde sewe or take holde (in the stitchynge) of Syphach wyth Myrach: whiche councell can stande wyth no reason, if Myrach be anye other wyse to be vnderstanded then as I haue sayde before. And vnderese muscles in the forepart,. is ordeyned an other skyn or pānycle,i. omentum uel zirbus adi pinus. (vnder the whych is the calle, which is called in Greke Epiploon, in latine Omentum, or barbarous∣lye zirbus adipinus, and also the guttes, vnto the testycles & coddes. And this pannicle or skin, is called Siphach or Perito∣naeum:Siphac. of the breakinge of which Siphac, it happeneth that zirbus and the guttes fall out into the codde.. i. Tu∣nica incestina circundes. But sometyme of the sayde goynge oute of zirbus and the guttes, there fal∣leth onlye a swellynge in the flanke: and then may the chi∣rurgien
knowe, that the rupture or breakinge of Siphac, is not great. Which may lightly be holpen wyth emplasters, conuenyente and restynge, by lyinge vpon the backe, wyth vnder shorynge and proppyng of the body: as for that cause and place shall seme conuenyente. And vnder this Siphac,Ossa  is ordeyned the bones of ye share, called Ossa pectinis, or Coxendices: whyche bones are made af∣ter the forme of a halfe circle or compasse: sauynge in the vpper parte towarde the nauell, they haue some going out. And in the share, the endes of them are bound and knytte wyth the hanche, and there they become sundrye: that they maye susteyne those partes wyth their hardnesse. The. ii. Chapiter. ❧Of the yarde, and the coddes, and of the matrix. VNder or betwene the lower partes of these bones, is placed the yarde or instrument of generation: which the grecians call Caulon,Caulis. , i. Virgairi Penis. the latines Caulem, Virgam & penem: and consysteth in substance, partlye of ligamentes, (namely. ii. and they holowe eche waye, as it were all one thinge: suche as else where are not founde. These being re∣plete wyth spirites, doe erecte the yarde, wyth the helpe of two muscles lyinge to the sides of the same.) Partlye of no∣table veynes and arteryes, commynge from the greate ves∣selles aboute Os amplum: and of synewes that sprynge from the common stocke of suche as descend to the mouing of the inferior partes. The head or extreme ende wherof, is thou∣ghte to be pure and symple fleshe,. a similitudine eius, ideoque latine Glans. and is called in greke Ba∣lams, in latine Glans, beinge couered wyth a double skin na∣med Posthe & Praeputium: To the end yt the sayd fleshye heade maye be preserued from hurte: and also, that by rubbynge vp and downe,. i. Prae∣putium aliqu∣tins que ipsa Virga. or forewarde and backward of the skin, vp∣on the heade of the yarde, there be prouoked and styrred, the greater, and more aboundante appetite, in the acte of gene∣ration. And that by suche rubbynge, and mouynge of the
skyn, vppon the heade of the yarde: the seede by the swel∣lynge of the same, maye be the more aptlye, and better cast out, into the vesselles of generation in women, in tyme of the sayde acte. Farthermore from the Syphach goe downe two pipes, the lower partes wherof be made,. Geminus, at hic paniculus duplici sinu te¦stes continēs. . i. Tes∣tis siue Testi∣culus. and becommeth there a dou∣ble bagged pannicle or skin in the codde, conteyninge the stones: and is therfore called Didymos. Whych stones or te∣sticies, called in Greeke Orchees. in Latine Testes, are of sub∣stance saythe Galen, holowe, lose, fleshy, and softe: Whose firste coueryng is white, and bloudlesse, called Dartos. Un∣der the whyche as some wryte, is an other tender whyte tunicle or couering, whiche they call Erythroeida. Whervn∣to belonge sundry vessels, of substance (for the most parte) harde,De Vsit pars tium. li. 14. . thicke, and stronge: As some to bring bloude and spi∣rit, from Venacaua & Arteria maxima, to the testicles, and cal∣led therfore Vasa semen adferentia, and also Praeparantia: because they doe not a little alter suche bloude as they brynge, and prepare the same.i. Tunica dēsa testes tegens . But yet worke they it not to perfectyon, for so shoulde the testicles be depriued of theyr office, of in genderinge sperme: for the whiche errore Galen reproueth Aristotle.i. Tunica te∣mis, testes in∣terne tegens. . Whiche vesselles as they enter the substance of the stones, doe passe throughe a manifest glandule, cleuing to the vpper parte of eche stone: whyche helpeth muche the preparatiue facultye, and is called Epididymis, and of some also Didymos.i. Semen geni∣tale siue prole ficum. Other vesselles also there are to the stones belongynge, called Vasasemen deferentia, (or rather Eiaculatoria,) that carry the sede (nowe labored) to the yarde, and there and thence, throughe the vrine passage out of the same. &c. Leaste anye man shoulde iudge two passages to belonge to the same:i. non nullis te¦stium muolu∣crum, at Gale∣no Glandula quaedam est, utrique testi adnata. one for sperme, and an other for vrine. Yet are there not∣withstandyng two holowe ligamentes, (and they not with oute deuisyons,) whyche by receiuinge spirite into them selues, doe erecte the yarde, as before. Ouer those pipes or conduictes, (comminge from Perito∣nio,)
and also the stones is appoynted the vttermoste skyn,. i.  at hic . or purse of the testicles, called in Greeke Oscheon, in Latyne Mentula & Scrotum. And in women in steade of the yarde, is the necke of the Matrix, called Ceruig Vteri, whose porte or entrance is called Vulua. Whyche is made of a stretchyng synewye substance: That it maye conuententlye stretche in the tyme of childe bearinge, as nede requireth. And it hathe inwardlye therewyth,Vls. (as a manne hathe outwardlye) two testicles or stones. Neuerthelesse, they be smaller, flatte, and rounde, in forme of an Almonde: and the necke of it in comparison to the testicles or coddes, is of the forme and shape of a mannes yarde, as it were turned inwarde. And the heade of thys necke, in the tyme of castynge forthe of the seede toucheth theese testi∣cles, & moueth them to cast forth theyr seede the better, into the holownesse of the matrix. And next after this necke in∣wardly is the matrix it selfe, or the wombe, called in greke Metra, Vte¦rus siue ma∣trix. and in Latine Vterus: whyche is the fielde of genera∣tion of mankinde, and is placed betwene the gutte Longaon, and the bladder: and is much lyke the bladder in forme, and inwardlye (as some will,) lyke a paynted hearte. Of com∣pounde substance: as sinewye, veinye, and of arteries. The rest of the makynge wyth the offices and propreties wher¦of (: as in Coitu, and conception, the growing of sperme into Embrio, and of Embrio to a lyuinge creature, of delyuerance or byrthe, the issuinge of the secundine, abortion and the cau∣ses therof, wyth also all their circumstances: as the varte∣tye of vayne opynyons aboute the number of celles in the wombe, the openynge and closinge of the same, the course of menstruous termes: Wyth also the consection and ta∣kinge oute of a lyuinge chylde, from a deade woman, or a deade childe from a liuing woman:) I here willingly omyt as thyngs only appertaining to the wise, discrete, and lear∣ned: who are wel able to seke the same, in suche learned au∣thores, as haue largelye and plainelye wrytten thereof:
and I will procede orderlye, to the bones and muscles of these partes. Notwithstandinge note this, that the fleshe and skynnes of these partes, are to be delte wythall to chi∣rurgerye, as is to be done with the yarde, the coddes, and the partes to them nyghe adiacente. The .iii. Chapiter. ☞Of the bones of the backe parte of these partes called turnynge ioyntes, and the muscles of the belly, with theyr forme & proprety, IMmediatlye, after the .xii. rybbes, and the spondilles of the brest, are ordeyned as I sayde in the firste chapiter of the third part,Lumborum Vertebrae. . Lumborum uertebrae, whiche are the v. spon∣dilles of the reynes. And they are fastened and ioyned in ye nether part towardes the fundament, wyth the brode bone of the rumpe called Platy & Hieron in greke, in latine Sacrum Latum & Amplum:i. Os Latum, Sacrum uel Amplum. whyche after Carolus Stephanus, and others is made of .v. bones (ye some say of .vi.) ioyned by Symphysin. How be it Galē saith, in li▪ de ossibus but of. iiii. being vnlike in forme to the rest of the spondilles.. i. A∣pendix. caudae icuruae similis ossisacro ad∣nato. Whervnto at hys in∣ferior partes, is the laste gristiye bone of the ridge knytte, called in greke Coceyx, in latine Os caudae, beinge also made of. iii. partes: The last & third part wherof is simply gristly. And from euery. ii. opposite holes of the spondiis, is duely brought forth a pair of synewes: & from the tail or end of ye chine, goeth forthe but one syne we alone, for it hathe but one hole: and is therfore called Neruus sine pari. And these sy∣newes, that come from these. v. spondilles, come to the ma∣king of the muscles of the belly. And from the holow veine commeth certeyne braunches of veines, to the nurishing of the sayde muscles: as from the greate arterye commeth al∣so branches of arteryes, vnto the sayde muscles of the belly, whych bring quicknesse, and heat vnto them. And of these muscles of the belly, are .viii. as I sayde be∣fore,Muscles of the belly .viii. of the whyche there be .ii. that come downe straighte a longest the bellye, hauinge their begynninge at the sharpe
gristle, or shielde of the brest, and ende at the bones aboue the priuy members called Ossa pectinis: and therfore are cal∣led Musculi recti.Musculi recti. Then ther are other two fixed to the rydge whyche goe transuers from the sydes, crosse the bredthe of the bellye:Musculi and therfore are called Musculi transuersi, or Late∣rales. Then are there .iiii. that are called Musculi obliqui: of the which there are .ii. that are called Obliqui ascendentes, because they spreade as it were cater cornered vpwarde: and the o∣ther ii. are called Obliqui descendentes, because they crosse slope wise, the other .ii. cater cornered downwardes. So that the graynes of the descendentes, crosse the graynes of the ascē∣dentes,The power attractiue. in maner and forme of this letter .X. and by the ver∣tues of the longe strayte muscles is made the power attrac∣tiue: throughe the whyche is drawne downe as well by the intraels, as otherwyse, all the superfluities of the dygesti∣ons: as vrine, wynde, and earthly ercrementes. And by the vertues of the transuers muscles,Retentyu is holden the power re∣tentiue: wherby all thinges are kepte, and conteined til na∣ture hathe wroughte in them, her kynde and offyce in dige∣stion.Expulsye. And by the oblique muscles, is made the power and strengthe to expell, auoide, and put oute suche voide excre∣mentes, as nature willeth to be expelled: whether it be v∣rine,NOTA. ventosity or ordure. And note, that after Galen in hys treatise De iuuamentis, all woundes or incisyens made in the myddest of the bellye are more daungerous,Woundes made in the bellye. then those that are made in the sydes: because the partes on the sydes are more apte to be handled, to take forth the entraels, then the middle partes be: And also that the woundes, persynge the wombe, wyll scarselye receaue incarnation, excepte Siphach be stitched to Mirach. The .iiii. Chapiter. ☞Of the midriffe, and the partes nexte vnder it, as the lyuer, the gaule, the milte, wyth the .ii. greate veynes, as Porta & concana
WIthin this holownesse of the belly are the noury∣shing members,The nury∣shing mēbers aboue the whyche and vnder the spirituall mēbers, is a certeine sinewy member, broade and flat wouen together of muscles, great arteries and veines, and is therfore of Galen numbered a∣monge muscles of the brest: Which doth moue, and is cau∣sed to moue, by the drawing in and out of aer. Thys mem∣ber departeth and deuideth the spirituall mēbers, from the nourishynge members:. i intersti∣tum, uel sep∣tum transuer∣sr, siue Sep∣tum pectorale and is called of the Grecians Dia∣phragma or Phrenes, and in latine Septum transuersum, in Eng∣lishe the midriffe: Which holdeth his place like the flappe of a bellowes in that operation. And when that member is hurte or wounded, it is sayde to be incurable and mortall: because of hys noble makinge, and delicate substance, and his nedefull and profitable workinge: whyche when it is wounded, is made voyde and of none effecte. Under the mydryffe is the lyuer set on the ryghte syde, called in Greke Hepar, and in latine Iecur: whyche is a pryn∣cipall member,. i. Iecur officiall, and concernynge his firste creaty∣on spermatike, & of substance as it were coagulated bloud. And to hym is knyt and bound a lyttle nette, which is the roote of all the veines in the bodye,The lyuer. bothe inwardlye and outwardlye: and he is clothed with a synewy pannicle. And of thys nette (beyng the spermatike substaunce of the lyuer) there is by natures prouidence ingendered .ii. great veynes.Vena Porta, Porta Hepatis siue porta Ie∣coris. Whereof the fyrste is called Vena porta, Porta Hepa∣tis, Porta Iecoris: from whome proceadeth the number of veines called Meseraicae, which are vnto Verae portae, as the branches of a tree vnto the roote or stocke of the same. The office of whiche veines is to drawe the Chilous iuyce from the bothome of the stomach and diuers guttes,Venae meserai¦cae. to the lyuer: where the seconde digestion is made.Vena Choele. The seconde veyne is called Vena choele,Vena concaua siue or Vena concaua, and of some Vena Ramosa. And this veyne wyth hys rootes, draweth all the bloude from the lyuer,Vena ramosa. caryinge the same by hys vniuersalle bran∣ches, into all the bodye: and in thys veyne wyth hys bran∣ches is the thyrde digestion fulfiiled and made. From thys
Vena Choecle, there are certeine veines, which goe from hym to the reynes,Verae emul∣gentes. called Venae Emulgentes, or Vasa Emulgentia: whiche drawe the waterye thin substance, from the bloude into the reines or kindes,Vasa emul∣gentia. as it weare whey deuyded from pure milke. For whiche cause the Phisitiens call the vrine, Serum Sanguinis,Serum San∣guinis. the whaye of bloude. And in ye midest of ye chest of ye liuer, is set ye blader of choler, commonlye called the gall, in Greeke Cystis choledoche, and in latine Folliculus fellis, or Vesicula fellis: Whiche is an offici∣all member, spermatike and sinewy. From the whyche de∣parteth two holowe pipes,Vesicauel Folliculus fel∣lis.  istis fell  i. fel  bill, tum fla∣ua, tum tra. wherof one beareth choler, (cal∣led Fel & Bilis, and in Greke Chole) to the stomache, to helpe therby digestion: whiche also beinge sharpe and bitter, doth mightilye scoure awaye the remanentes: The other cary∣eth of the same matter to the gutte Pyloron, whyche by the aforsayde qualityes purgeth from the same and from the rest of the guttes, their sliminesse and excrementes. On the left syde (as in the vnworthyer place) is sette the splene, commonlye called the milte, in Greeke Splen, and in Latine Lien: whyche is a member spermatike, and officiall. And is fastened wyth the liuer, by certeine waies or vessels that goe betwene them: whereby the grosse and feculente partes of the bloude, are broughte from the lyuer vnto the same. Which kepeth them (by conuerting them as it were into hys owne substance,) vntil by nature hir impulsyon it be set out, to serue else where some necessary purpose. wher in the mean time it is deuided, and extenuated, and made a commodious nutriment to the splene: & that by the meanes of certeine arteries proceding from the great artery, imme∣diatly as it is passed throughe Septum transuersum. Of this melancholike iuyce (called Chole or rather Melā∣chole,. Bilis Atra. and in latine Atra bilis) That which is left or spared of the aboue said nutriment, doth nature vse (euen as she doth yelowe choler) to stirre vp appetite by his sharpnesse and sournesse in the mouth of the stomache. And also (conueying the same eche way by passages conuenient,) to helpe ye ver∣tue retentiue bothe in the guttes and stomache.
The .v. Chapiter. ¶Of the stomache and of the guttes, of Mesenterium, and of the veines called Haemorrhoydes. IN the myddest of those members is the stomach, called Ventriculus, in greke Stomachos: whyche is a member com∣pounde and spermatike,. i. Ventriculus Os Ventris. synewye, and very sensible, and is made of .ii. coates: of the whyche the innermoste is syne∣wye, and the outmoste is fleshy. And is to all the members of the bodye, as the earthe is to all thinges ingendered in the same: so that all other members of the bodye, require of hym the substance wherby they are nourished, (as Galen saythe in the firste chapiter of his booke De Iuuamentis.) Whose vpper parte is straighte and narow, and his nether parte verye wyde and large, and his lower parte is ended in the place of the nauell:. i. in∣testuium.  i. intestinū sta∣ti ex pyloro. and is called the fyrste vessell, wherein nature maketh and fulfilleth her firste naturalle dygestion. Wherfore it is called the chest or store house, for all the meat belōging to the body, and the cooke also which dresseth meat for all partes of the bodye: for in the bothome of the stomache, is made principally the digestion, wherby all the members of the body do growe, and are nourished. And to the stomache is tyed,. i. Agnatio uel ortus. fastened, and continued one gutte, whyche after the difference of places is deuyded, and called by diuers names: generallye Entera in greeke, Intestina in latine: whose diuisyon is into .vi. partes. Wherof the firste beinge in lengthe. i. Ianitor siue ostiarius, hic enim infimum Ventriculi o∣rificium, quod dum coquitur ad Vnguem clauditur. .xii. inches, is named Dodecadactylos & Ecphysis, in latin Duodenum. The vpper end wherof, which is fastened to the nether orifice of the stomache, being as it were the gate of the same: (for by the helpe of a glandule therin, it stoppeth so closelye the passage, that nothinge can passe out therat, till concoction be fullye fynished,) is called Pyloros, in latine Portenarium: that is the porter or dore keper. The seconde or nexte gutte vnto this, is called Exortus & Ie∣iunium that is the empty or fastinge gut:Exortus. Ieiu∣nium. so called because it
is euer founde voyde or emptye. .i. graci∣lae le intest. . i. Vnum  Ventreuel cauum. In this chiefly (in Duodeno, also and in the bothome of the stomache,) are fixed certeyne cleane and subtill veines, (whose continualle drawinge, is the cause of emptinesse in the same.) whyche before and al∣so hereafter, I call Meseraicas. By the which they expell and the lyuer draweth to him selfe, the best and purest iuyce of the meat and drinke,. i. In∣testim crassio∣ris, pars supe∣rio. that are in those members concocted. Wyth the lower ende of Ieiuni, is knit the longe gutte, that we call the small guttes, the greekes Ileon, the latines Tenue uel Subtilae, and is of lengthe .xvi. cubites. Herte vnto thys is Monoculos called also Caecum intestinum, or Saccus, in Englyshe the sacke or blinde gutte, because it semeth to haue but one hole in the vpper end: for the other ende is like the bothome of a sacke or bagge. Unto the whyche is adioyned Colon or the rounde gutte: whervnto also is anexed the laste gutte, (as a parte of the same,)Longaon Inte∣stinum rectū. called Langaon, & Intestinum rectum: whyche commeth straighte downe by the spondilies of the reynes, and is ended in the fundamente. Note also that the guttes haue theyr situation wyth a certeyne member,. i. Mesenter. Mesaraica uasa. called Mesenterium, in Greeke Mesaraeon: whiche is a notable texture of innumerable veines and ar∣teries, whiche are called Mesaraica Vasa, being ye first veines: throughe whome the nutrityue iuyce as yet but rawe, is drawne oute of the stomache, at the bothome of the same, and caried to the gates of the liuer, there to be the seconde tyme concocted.Porta Hepatis And these veynes doe spring out & ramifye of the veyne, called Porta Hepatis, & are wholy couered and defended wyth pannycles and ligamentes, whiche are also common to the guttes: and this Mesenterium, beinge taken oute of the body, is lyke the cape of a shepheardes cloke, the backe parte wherof is full of kurnels, or glandulous fleshe: which as I remēber, the butchers when they take this mē∣ber oute of swyne and other beastes, do call the Trowe. It growinge faste to the backe, is the staye to all the guttes, that they moue not, from theyr due and conuenyent places. And from the lyuer and the splene come fiue veynes, to the fundamente or ende of Longaon, called Haemorrhoides, for the
melancholy bloud that they shede: and when they be swolne or open, quasi fluxus sanguinis, quo∣niā ab his flue∣re saepe solet. the disease is called Haemorrbois, and commonlye the Emeroydes or Piles. The .vi. Chapiter. ¶Of the bladder, the kidneis, the water pypes, and the wayes gene∣rallye of vryne. VPon the gutte Longaon, or betwene Longaon, and the share in a man, and betwene the matrixe and the share in a woman, is set ye blader, called in latine Ve∣sica,. i. uesica and in Greke Physe: The whyche is the vessell of vrine, beynge of a sinewye substance, and the necke therof is fle∣shye or musculye. And it is made of .ii. coates, the whych be ii. skinnes: and in the bladder are manye small veynes and arteries, of whyche it purchaseth nurishmente and lyfe. The necke of it passeth for the vnder the bone of the share, whiche in his goinge forthe vnto the outmoste partes, is made small: and the waye of vrine that cometh from it, is made in the maner of a greate veine, and it entereth the substance of the yarde, passynge forthe throughe the fleshe, in the lower partes of the bladder: and parteth in a maner the fleshe of the yarde in the middest, and by that parte go∣eth oute the vrine. In the yard there areTwo holes in the yarde. .ii. holes, though both not through persing the same. One passing through, by the which vrine is cast out, and that is fastened wyth the necke of the blad∣der: The other cominge from the stones entereth the afore¦said, by the which the sede of man is cast out. And this is fa∣stened
wyth the vessels of sperme,Vas Fiacula∣torium. and is called Eiaculatorium Vas, wherof also aboue. And in the beginning of the yardes holownesse, these two are made one. And in the necke of a womans blader, there is nothyng soughte, nor purchased, concernyng knowledge: for it is ve∣ry shorte and strayte, and the nature of hir is not caste oute in this maner: but commeth à fundo Vteri per ceruicem eius: nether dothe the vrine passage helpe anye thynge thereto but serueth onlye for the expulsion of vrine: wherein yet both great and small stones, are often sene. In the ende of the .xii. spondils of the rybbes, and vnder the firste spondill of the reines,The teynes. . i. Ren. are set the reines or kyd∣neis, called in Latine Renes, in Greeke Nephroi, wythin the holownesse of the bodye: the righte kydney beinge euer pla∣ced hygher then the lefte. Whose offyce is to conuerte the aforesayde whayey substance of bloude, conueyed into them by the meanes a lyttle before in the .iiii. chapiter mencyo∣ned into perfecte vryne. In echo of the whyche kidneis is a certeine fyne straiuynge waye implanted, called of Galen Porus Vreticus,Porus Vreti∣cus. throughe whyche the whey of bloude, sucked in by Vasa Emulgentia, from the holowe veine and greate ar∣terye,Vasa Emulgē∣tia. is conueyed oute of the kidneis into the water pipes, called in Greeke Vretheres, and in Latine Meatus Vrinarii: whyche from thence descende,. i. Vrinarii me∣atus  passynge crokedlye downe, tyll they be ioyned by the nether endes, wyth the vtter skyn (nyghe the necke) of the bladder: percynge also immediat∣lye the inner skyn thereof. Wherof it obteyneth a certayne lyttle couerynge like a flappe,. i. uri. resembling bothe in forme and function suche as we see in pumpes and sluces: whyche by the fallynge course of vrine, is driuen o∣pen at the entrance therof into the bladder: but after war∣des fallynge to agayne, it so closelye shutteth the entrance, that (as Galen saythe) not onlye vrine, but also ayer is prohibyted to goe backe agayne into the sayde water pype.
And it is manifest that the synewes of those places, come from the spondilles of that parte, and the veines and arte∣ries of those members, goe as doe the veines of the bellye and the flanke: That is to saye, after and accordinge to the riuels, wrinckles, graines and the growinge of heare in those partes. And therefore it is good, that the incisyons of those pla∣ces, be done after the procedinge of the graines: and also o∣peninge of apostemes, and workinge wyth cauteryes, ou∣ghte to be doone in these places in the forsayde maner, that we commit none error. THE FIFTHE PART OF ANA∣tomye, whiche expresseth the forme and shape of the hanches, the thighes, the hammes, the shynnes, and the feete, and of the members conteined in them. The i. Chapiter. ☞Of the hippes and hanches, the grindes, the thighes, and the knee wyth theyr partes. IT behoueth nowe that we speake orderlye of the bones of the hanches or hippes, whyche are two in number, one on the ryghte syde, & an other on the lefte, fastened by gristles & li∣gamēts behinde to the holye bone, & likewise before, one wyth an other: wheras the vpper partes of thē,Ossa Ilium. (bearing vp the guts so named) are called Ossa Ilium,Anchas. and vulgarly Anchas: and at the nether partes depen∣dynge Ossa pubis,Ossa Pubis. or Pectinis, where also they are streighter, & narower together in men then in women.Ossa Pectinis. Towarde the
sydes (furthermore) outwardlye, they haue in eche a many∣fest greatnesse, wherin is a holownesse, called the bore or cuppe of the hippe:. i. Os Coxen. and there are they called in Greke Ischia, and in latine Coxendices. Through at whyche boxe, passeth a hard and stronge insensible ligament, from a muscle lying wythin the share, enteringe the rounde ende of the thyghe bone: wherby it is therin firmlye fastened. Which ligamēt if it be broken by the dislocation of the thighe bone: ye bone can neuer be restored to endure in hys place, nor the ioynte made perfecte gaine. Wherfore the chirurgien may helpe the ache, & payne of the member, caused by the dislocatyon: but restore it to continue he cā not, for it wil eftsones leape oute againe. Outwardlye is thys ioynte bound with strong insensible ligamentes, and also wyth synewes & Chordes. And in the insyde of this ioynte betwene the legges,Emunctorye place of the lyuer. are the emunctorye places, called the grindes or shares: where as the lyuer hathe his clensinge place, in the tyme of Pesti∣lence, or anye lyke venemous infection, as ye may perceiue by the apostemes there put forthe, at suche tymes: euen as the harte putteth forthe in the arme holes, and the brayne vnder the eares, or in the throte. And in the grindes are founde certayne curnels or glandulous fleshe, euen sche as are founde vnder the iawes, and in lyke places. Then after the ioyntes of the hyppes, are ordeyned the thigh bones,. called Femora, Femina, and of some Coxa, whych wythin are holow, and ful of marow, and wythout round: and the vpper ende of thys bone, as I sayde afore, is fastned wyth the cuppe or boxe of the hippe: wher as it turneth and moueth, in the time of mouing of the thigh, legge, or foote. And the nether ende entereth into the boxe, or cuppe of the focill of the shinne: and there it is fastened wyth the shinne bones. This ioynte is also bounde wyth stronge insen∣sible ligamentes, which be ordeined in euery iuncture, that the rubbynge or mouinge of the ioyntes, should not be felte painfull or vneasye, as we sufficientlye haue declared in the firste treatise of the symple members, in the third chapiter. And vpon this ioynte of the knee, in the forparte therof,
is sette a rounde gristlye bone,. i. Os seu Conchula quaedam genu contegens. called in greeke Epigomatis & Mola, in latine Patella uel Rotula Genu, in Englishe the rotule of the knee: whose offyce is to defende the ioynte, and to make the mouinge therof the more easy.Patella siue Rotula genu. The .ii. Chapiter. ☞Of the shynnes, of the ancles, the feete and the toes, the bones and other partes: of their composityon, with the figure and num∣ber of them. ANd after the knee,. i. Su∣ra atque pas∣s uertitur i bula, uelacus. are ordeined the .ii. bones of the legge.. i. Ti∣bia, aliis tamē cōfuse interdū Crus atque fe mu Vertitur. Whyche are fastened after the lengthe, in the nether ende, wyth the ancle and the hele, & are plan∣ted in them. And they are called the .ii. focils of the legges: that is to say the greater focill and the lesse. The biggest is that which is vppermoste on the shin, called in greke Perone and in latine Sura,Malleoli. & Focile maius. And the least is that which they commōly call the splint bone,. i. Os quoddam aliquotiens ip∣se Talus. in the calfe of the legge, called in Greke Cneme, and in latine Tibia & Focile minus. And in the lower endes, these ii. bones haue .ii. additiōs called Malleoli, whyche are the ancle bones: vnto whyche is knytte,. i. Os Calcis, Os cal caneum. (nexte forwarde vnder them) a bone called in greke Astragalos, and in latine Talus. Nerte vnto these behynde is ioyned the hele bone, called of the Grecians Pternan, of the latines Os Calcis, i. Similis Sca∣pha nauiū quo rundā generi. or Calcaneum. Then nexte before is the in∣steppe bone called (of hys forme) the shiplike bone, & there∣fore in greke Scaphoeides, and in latine Nauiforme. Then fol∣lowe the .iiii. bones, called Rasseta pedis, and wt thē together Tarsus. Of the which one in ye innersyde of the fote, is called in greke Cyboeides, in latine Cubiforme, and in Englyshe the cube bone or the dye bone: .i. Speciem Cu∣bi referēs, hoc est quadratum  aeri similis. because it is euerye waye square lyke a cube or dye: and the other .iii. are called Chalcoidea: Unto this Rasseta are immediatlye ioyned the .v. bones of the plante of the foote, called in Greke Pedion, in latine Pe∣cten, or Planta pedis: whiche answereth nighlye to that parte of the hande called Metacarpium. i. Pla¦a pedis pars, uel platapedis Immediatlye vnto theese endlonge ioyne the bones of the two toes, (as in the hande
of the fingers,Digiti pedis▪) called therfore Digiti pedis, whych are .xiiii. in number, for in euery toe of the foote are .iii. bones, saue onlye in the greate toe, in the whiche is but .ii. bones: be∣cause that toe nedeth no greate mouynge, neither is it ne∣cessarye to hys forme and shape.Bones in the leg numbr. . And thus it apeareth, that in the legge and foote, from the hyp to the toes, are contei∣ned .xxxi. bones. The .iii. Chapiter. ❧Of the synewes, veynes, arteryes, and muscles of the whle leg, of theyr beginninges procedynges, formes and offyces, and howe incisyon or other lyke handye worke ought there to be done, wyth also the veynes of section for Phlebotomye. FRom the holes of the .v. spondilles of the reynes, and from the holes of the last bone of the ridge,Synewes of the legges. (as Galen saythe, in the .xiii and .xvi. boke of the vse of partes,) Come synewes, whyche procede by the hynder parte of the hanches or hippes, after the lengthe therof: and these synewes, geue vnto these places feling & mouyng, & wilful stirring.Muscles of the legges. They are there also medled wt flesh, making mus∣cles, wherby not only those mēbers are seuerallye moued: but also such formes & fashiōs as they haue, are thereby so institute and made. For from the endes of the muscles thus made, procede chordes, whiche moue the nether and the vp∣per end: and especially the knee, the shin, & the legges. And there appere vnder the knees or hammes .ii great chordes, the which moue & draw the legge bothe in and oute: and all these synewes, muscles, bondes, and tendones, of the thigh and legge, procede longwise. After the lengthe of those mē∣bers, there come also brāches from the sayd sinewes: which come from the holes of the spondilles of the reines, into the greate and small muscles of the legges. From the nether endes wherof come the mouynges of the fete, and the mē∣bers therof: as the hele and the toes. &c. And from the sydes of the knee, and also from the bone called Patella genu, & in the calfe of the legge, procedeth a cer∣ten
knitlynge together of synewes and muscles, which are noble and delicate. Of the woundinge and prickinge of whyche, procedeth greate payne, accidens, and disease vnto the rootes of them: in suche maner, that oftentimes the chi∣rurgien can by no wisedome & cunnyng, brynge remedy to the patient, or saue hym frō death. wherfor the wounds of those places, are dangerons and dredfull, and many times vncurable, as some authores haue wrytten. And from the greate holowe veyne, called Vena Coele, or Vena Caua,. i. Concauus. Vena Caua. whyche hathe hys begynninge in the liuer, as as it was aforesayde, and from the greate arterye, whyche commeth from the ryghte eare of the hearte, as it was also sayde: From this veine and arterye. I saye, commeth branches of veines and arteries, downe to the gryndes or shares, from whence they procede, branchinge downe with the synewes and muscles of the thighes, legges, and feete: and procede still after the lengthe, as doe the synewes and muscles, euen vnto the endes of ye toes, geuing nourishmēt and life, vnto those mēbers. And of these together, is made and wouen the vttermoste sensible skyn of those partes. And therfore it manifestlye appeareth, how the openinges of apostemes oughte to be done in these places.Incisions in the thyghe. That is to say in the thyghes, the legges and the feete: yt the cuttinges and cauterizations, ought to be done according to ye length of the spondilles, and of the bodye. And from the greate branches of Vena concaua, that come into eche thighe, there are certain branches procedinge, the which are veines necessary to Phlebotomy for diuers cau∣ses:Vena pople∣tica. as in phisike, & also in chirurgery it is to be red. wherof the first appeareth in the hamme, called Vena popletica. The second in the inside of the ancle,Saphena. called Saphena, and of some Malleolaris.Malleolaris. The third in the outsyde of the ancle, called Ischi∣atica.Ischiatica Vena. The fourth is betwene the litle toe and the next adia∣cent, called Renalis. And this semeth sufficient in respect of the rest of the worke to be spoken,Renalis Vena of the veines of the legges, and fete: namely suche as serue to Phlebotomye.
THE SIXTE PARTE, VVHICH brieflie in one Chapiter sheweth the names as well in Latine as in Englishe, of all the exterior or outwarde partes of man his body, from the heade to the feete. FIrste, the crowne or vpper parte of the heade, where the heare groweth or turneth euerye waye, is cal∣led in latine Vertex: the fore parte wherof is called Sin∣ciput, and the hinder parte Cciput. Then the face, whiche is called in Latine Facies: the vp∣per parte wherof, whyche we call in Englishe the forhead, is called in Latine Frons: the browes of the eyes are called Supercilia, the eye lyddes Palpebrae, the corners of the eyes An∣guli Oculorum and the eyes Oculi. The nose is called in latine Nasus, the cheekes Genae, the nosethrilles Nares, the lippes Labra, the mouthe Os, ye tunge Lingua, and the rouffe of the mouthe Palatum: the iawes are called Maxillae, as the vpper iawe Maxilla superior, and the na∣ther iawe Maxilla inferior, Dentes the teethe, and the chynne Mentum. The partes aboue the eyes and eares, whiche we call in Englysh the temples, are called in latine Tempora: the eares are called Aures, the heare Capilli, and Barba the bearde The parte of the necke behynde, reachinge from the no∣dle to the nether spondill or turnynge ioynte of the necke, is called in latine Ceruix: and the foreparte of the necke, whych reacheth from the face, to the beginnyng of the breast or ca∣nell bones is called Collum: the throte is called Gula ye shoul∣ders are called Humeri, the vpper parte of the shoulder is lu∣gulum, and the shoulder blades Scapulae. The vpper parte of the arme, continuinge the lengthe of the adiutorye bone, from the shoulder to the elbow, is called
Brachlum the boughte of the arme Gibber, the elbowe Cubitus▪ The part betwene the elbow & the wrest, which we call in English ye cubite, is called in latine Vlna: ye wrest Carpus, the hands Martus, the palme of the hand Palma: the thumbe is cal¦led in latine Pollex, ye forefinger Index, ye middle finger Medius the ring fynger, whych is also called the wedding finger, is called Medicus ye litle finger or ear fīger, is called uricularis. The arme holes are called in latine Axillae, the breast Pe∣ctus, the sides Latera, the pappes or dugges Māmae, the nep∣ples or tetes Papillae, the back Dorsum, the nether parts wher of next vnto the hippes, are called in latine Lumbi, in greke Lagone, in Englishe the loynes. The bellye is called Venter, the nether parte thereof Imus Venter, the nauell Vmbilicus, and the side betwene the bellye and the back vnder the ribbes, is called Hypochondria, which we may call in Englishe the waste. The grinde or share is called Pubes, betwene the whyche are sette the priuye members, vnder the bothome of the be∣ly: whiche some call the genitales. wherof that part which we call the yarde, is called in latine Virga▪ or Caulis: the fle∣shye head wherof is called Glans, and the skin couerynge the same Praeputium, the coddes or balock purs Scrotum, and the stones Testiculi. The buttockes are called Nates, the fundament Anus, the hippes Coxendices, the thighe Femur, the knee Genu, the hammes Poplites, the shinnes Tibiae, and the caulfe of the legge Sura. Then folowe the feete, whyche are set vnder the legges: as the handes are vnder the armes: and they are called in latine Pedes, the sides wherof which we call in English an∣cles, are called in latine Malleoli, and the hinder part whych we cal the hele, is named Calx, or Calcaneus. The holow of ye foote is called Planta, & the treading place is named Vestigiū. then procede there forth the toes, as in the handes there do fingers, which bothe are called in latine Digiti: the toes be∣ing called Digiti Pedis. And as wel on the toes as on the fin∣gers are nailes growing, which are called in latin Vngues.
Thus to the honor and glory of God, that so wonderful∣ly hath wroughte in natnre, I haue shewed suche thinges, as in the bodye of man is to be considered, in order of Ana∣tomye: as farre as my simple knowledge was then able to collecte: partly as I haue obserued by experience, and part∣ly as I could gather of good authores: euen suche auncient wryters, as in this worke I haue by occasion aleaged, and also some newe wryters of Anatomy, of oure time: as Vesa∣lius, Carolus Stephanus &c. as wel of ye inwarde, as of the out∣warde partes: that yong studentes maye haue therof some profite, as I my self haue learned and profited in gathering of the same. Desiering all those, to whōe any thing herein wrytten shall seme vnperfect, grosse, or vntrue, that of their gentlenesse they wil bestowe their laboure, and sette forthe the frutes of their good and laudable studies, in amendyng that to them shal seme amysse: euen as I haue bene to shew my good wil, in doing of this briefe and symple thyng: and wil also be most glad, at their handes to receaue wyth con∣dinge thankes and laud, suche learning as may amend my fault, or redresse mine error: that the truthe maye also in these thinges be published, to the contentation of all gētle, & wel willing mindes. (wherat some mighte seme astoned, through ye variety of opinion in wryters, whych neuerthe∣lesse shot al at one marke for ye most part, and vtter their sē∣tences, ye seme so variable, to one end & purpose, if they be in differentlye wayed, and vnderstande: though yet euery one sawe not all, no not the moste autentike.) That is to saye, that by the knowledge of the situation of all members in the bodye, there maye be a safe and cunning workynge in Chirurgery vpon the bodye of man, to auoyde er∣ror and offence. For the whyche cause I haue in thys worke rather vsed that order, then to be precise in numbers, or curiouse in names.
ventral view of male anatomy
dorsal view of male anatomy
The Conclusyon of the whole worke. NOw to conclude this general and third treatise, and so of thys whole worke, confessynge mine imbesility, and want of perfection: thus muche I saye that the bodye of man, wherof we haue brieflye treated, is (as all other crea∣tures are) made and compacte of the foure Elementes: That is to saye, Fyre,Elementes. Aire, Water, and Earthe. As their verye proper∣ties maye be perceiued in the foure humores in manne:Humors. namelye bloude,Bloud. Phlegme,Phlegme. Choler, and melancholye: For the whyche cause,Choler. the sayde .iiii. humores are called of the learned sort,Melancholye. the sonnes of elementes. For as the fire is hot and drye, so is choler: and as the ayre, is hotte and moyste, so is bloude: as the water is colde and moyste, so is Phleg∣me: and as the earthe is colde and drye, so is melancholye. And of those foure humores are the foure complexions na∣med:Complexion. as Sanguine, Cholericke, Phlegmatike, and Melan∣cholike. Yet not wythstanding we call no man so, because he is made of one onlye elemente, or that he is indued wyth one onlye humore: But contrarye, as I sayde before, euerye person is made of foure elementes, and hathe in hym foure humores, but not euerye man in a lyke temperature: And that is the cause, that one man is named of one humore, and an other of an other. As when bloude excedeth, or sur∣mounteth in anye bodye the rest of the humores, that per∣son is called a Sanguine man: not because he is all of bloude, but because bloude beareth in the bodye moste do∣mination. And so likewyse it is to be vnderstand of all the other three: & to be called of choler, cholerike, of Phlegme, Phlegmatike, of Melancholye, Melancholike. And also I
vnderstande, that in the complexions, is a deuision of nyne temperamentes: of the whyche, fyrste there be .iiii. symple. That is to saye, hotte, colde, drye, and moyste: whereof there are two actiues, that is to say workers, and the other two bene passiues, that is to saye sufferers. And brieflye to saye, hotnesse and coldnesse, be actiues, drinesse and moyst∣nesse be passiues. And by the combination or bindinge to∣gether, of two of the aforesayde foure, the one alwayes be∣inge actiue, the other passiue, are the other foure made: that is to saye, the compounde complexions, as hot and moyste, colde and moyste, hotte and drye, colde and dry. The ninthe whyche differeth from all these, is the verye true tempera∣mente, and maye be called a iuste and true complexion▪ euen as it were measured by waighte: nether excedinge o∣ther in anye qualitye or quantitye, but being a iuste tempe∣ramente, measured of equall portions of euerye qualitye. So that we could not call a man of suche complexion, san∣guine nor Cholerike, Phlegmatike nor Melancholike: but rather a man of a perfect complexion or iust temperament. whych perfecte temperature, is as it wer a tryall, or touch stone: to trye and proue all other complexions by. For the nerer to this temper, any mannes complexion dothe draw, the more perfecte it is: and the more it differeth from this temperamente, in anye qualitye the worsse it is, and the more dystemperate. Therfore, he that wyll iudge truely of complexions must alwayes haue in hys Imagination, the foresayde perfect temperamente. To be briefe, euerye creature on earth, or in the worlde, of these elementes, haue their beginninges: yea the worlde it selfe, vnder the starres is nothynge else. And because the bodye of man aboue all other thynges,Mio  Minor  of these foure hathe moste perfecte temperamente, it is called in Greeke Micro Cosmos: that is to saye a lyttle world. For it is a little world in deede, to be consydered in order of Anatomye: yea a won∣derfull worlde, suche a worlde, as the great worlde in dede, was made for the onlye sake of it.
And as some haue named it a lyttle world, so haue other some called it a common weale, a royall kingdome, and a righteous regimēt: For in this common weale, was neuer found rebellion, but euery subiecte seruisable to his gouer∣nor, and euery superior tendering the wealth of his infery∣ors. Oh worthye common weale, by whome all common weales may take sufficient example and vewe, howe to go∣uerne, or to be gouerned. Oh wilfull and negligent man ye runnest a stray, as one not knowinge the rule of righteous∣nesse. What nedest thou a preacher in suche a case: where thou arte sufficiently taught if thou wilte learne in thyne owne creation? Oh whye shoulde that creature be brute, or insypient, or as a saluage beast, whiche for his wonderfull giftes, geuen him of God in his creation, is called a lyttle world, or a common weale? what a strange thinge were it, that he whyche is a common weale in hym self, and carieth continually wyth in hym selfe, the perfect image of a com∣mon weale, shoulde in a common weale, be a cause of a cō∣mon destruction? I leaue here many thinges, to be considered in complexi∣ons, with many other thinges whyche were necessarye for this place: but because they are sufficiently treated of all re∣dy in our vulgare tungue, by diuers learned men, and that of late yeares, I willinglye omit them: consideringe that it would be rather a note of presumption or vaine glory, then ought else: except I coulde mende or better their doinges, that haue wryten therof all redy: vnto whome I cōesse my selfe not worthy to holde the candell. Wherfore gentil readers, wishing you moste hartily wel to fare, I end this worke of Anatomy: desi∣ring your gentle hartes, in this to accept my good will, and take it in good part.
Who can but praise, and eke extolle, The worthy arte chirurgery: whiche builded is on reason whole, As ye may well perceiue and see: And nothing out of reasons reache, In any pointe doth it conteine. Then to their arte they are a breache, That reason haue in suche disdeine. Sithe reason doth attaine the skill, Of euery member in his place. All men of arte, should beare good will, To reason and the same embrace. For by hir lore ye shall attaine, All knowledge good for to aduance. And shall withstande the proude disdaine, Of those that dwell in ignorance. VVherfore of truthe I can not seace, To maruell muche at momus secte: Sithe nothing can their wittes releace, with ignorance so muche infecte. For what a mome was he that sayde, These bokemen can but talke and prate, And we are they that with our aide, Doe all the cures in eche estate.
An other saieth I can not talke, But I will worke euen with the beste, Thus stubbernly these buserdes walke, Vpon their blinde customes that reste. For if their talke any truthe had, A blind man might colours decerne, And euery foole and peuish lad, Might doctors be and neuer lerne. But who so doth them rightly marke, Shall finde them meter for the carte, That grope thus blindly in the darke, Then haue to doe in suche an arte. Therfore who so will perfect be, To reason let them nowe resorte, And flee from suche as disagree, From resons rules in suche a sorte.
A necessary table exactly drawen by the alphabet as the former, directing the reader uery commodiously by the numbers of the pages to all suche names and nota∣ble matters as are in this briefe Anatomie conteined. ABdomen. 72 Acanthe. 4 Acctabulum. 3 Actiues. 95 Aculeus. 4 Aden colatorius. 42 Adenes. 12 Adeps. 12 Adiutorium os. 60 Agnata tunica. 48 Agnatio. 80 Albugneus humor. 47 Amigdales of the throte. 56 Amphble stroeides Chiton. 47 Amplum os. 76 Anatome sicca. 2 Anceformes. 39 Anchas. 84 Ancle. 86. 90 Angina, 53 Anguli oculerum. 89 Anomoeomeres. 16 Anthropos. 35 Anus. 90 Apexossis. 3 Apoplexia. 69 Apospasma. 29 Aqueus humor. 47 Arachnoeides Chiton. 47 Aranea tela. 47 Arctualis sutura. 44 Arme. 61. 89 Arme holes. 90 Arteria. 9 Arteria aspera. 56. 69 Arteriall veine. 69 Arteria magna. 68 Arteria uenosa. 9. 69 Arterie. 9 Arteriosa uena. 69 Ariteriotome. 9 Arthrodia. 2 Arthrosis. 2 Articulatio. 2 Assiccatum cadauer. 2 Aspera arteria. 56. 69 Aspera canalis. 56 Astragalos. 86 Atra bilis. 79 Attractiue power. 77 Audibiles nerui. 54 Auricularis digitus. 90 Auris. 53. 89 Auulsio. 29 Axilla. 90 Axillaris uena. 65 Axigia. 13 B Backe. 90 Balnos. 73 Barb. 89 Basilre os. 43 Basilica uena. 64▪ 5 Bearde. 89
Belly. 71. 72. 73. 90 Bilis. 79 Blader. 82 Blepharon. 49. 52 Bones. 1 Bones nūbred vniuersally 4 Bones of the arme. 61. 62 Bones of the breste. 66. 67 Bones of the hanche. 84. 85 Bones of the legs & feete. 87 Bones of the sculle. 43 Bothome of the belly. 90 Brachiale. 62 Brachii funis. 64 Brachion. 59. 61 Brachium. 90 Brayne. 35 Brayne purged .ii. wayes. 42 Braynes complexion. 36 Braynes motions. 38 Braynes substance. 35 Braynes ventricles. 36 Bregmatis ossa. 43 Breste. 66. 67. 68. 69. 70. 90 Butockes. 90 C Cadauer assiccatum. 2 Caecum intestinum. 81 Calcaneus, 90 Calcis os. 86 Calfe of the legge. 90 Calx. 90 Camarion. 38 Canalis aspera. 56 Canell bone. 59. 60 Canini dentes. 50 Capilli. 89 Capita ossium. 3 Capsula cordis. 69 Caput. 35 Caput ossis. 3 Cardia. 67 Cardiacauera. 64 Carnosa membrana. 44 Caro. 11. 12 Caro poroides. 17 Carpos. 62 Carpus. 62. 90 Cartilago. 4 Catagma. 29 Caua uena. 11 Caudae ossa. 76 Caulis. 73. 90 Caulos. 73 Cephalica uena. 63. 65 Cephalica ocularis. 63 Cephalos. 33 Ceratocides chiton. 48 Cercis. 62 Cerebellum. 36 Cerebrum. 35 Ceruices ossium. 3 Ceruicis uertebrae. 54 Ceruix. 89 Ceruix uteri. 57 Chalcoeides. 86 Cheilos. 51 Cheir. 62 Chekes. 52 Chin. 89 Chiton. 9 Chole. 79 Choler. 79. 94 Chondron. 4
Chondrotome. 4 Chorde. 7 Choriformis membrana. 37 Choroeides chiton. 47 Cistis fellis. 79 Clauis. 60. 66 Cleis. 60 Cneme. 86 Coarticulatio. 2 Coccyx. 76 Coddes. 74. 90 Cogitatiue vertue or estima¦tion. 39 Cobaerens tunica. 48 Colla ossium. 3 Collum. 89 Colon. 81 Columella. 57 Columna. 57 Combinatio. 20 Comissures. 44 Comissura. 3 Common weale. 96 Cōmō wittes or .v. wittes. 39 Communis uena. 64 Complexion. 21. 94 Complexio membrorum. 21 Cōplexion of the brayne. 36 Compositio membrorum. 20 Cōpositiō in euery mēber. 20 Cōpositiō ī simple mēbers 20 Compounde mēbers. 16 Compounde and simple mē∣bers howe they differ. 15 Compressio. 68 Compunctio laterum. 67 Conarion. 38 Condylos. 3 Coniunctiua tunica. 48 Consunilaria membra. 1. 16 Contractio. 9. 38. 68 Contusio. 29 Conus. 38 Cor. 7 Cornea tunica. 48 Corona. 48 Coronale os. 43 Coronalis sutura. 44 Corone. 3 Coronon. 3 Corpus fornicatum. 38 Correptio. 38 Cortices. 44 Costae. 67 Costae uerae. 67 Costae spuriae. 67 Costalis dolor. 67 Cotyle. 3 Coxae ossa. 85 Coxendix. 90 Coxendicum ossa. 73. 84 Cranion. 43 Crassa meninx. 41 Cribrosum os. 44 Crowne of the head. 89 Crystallinus humor. 47 Crus. 86 Cubiforme os. 89 Cubite. 90 Cubitus. 90 Cuneus. 43 Cuticula summa. 4 Cutis. 13. 14 Cutis eflorescentia. 14 Cyboeides. 80
Cynanche. 53 Cynodontes. 50 Cyste choledoche. 79 Cystis choledochos. 79 D Darton. 74 Dartos. 74 Dearticulatio. 2 Definition of members. 18 Definition of a compounde member. 16 Definitiō of a sanguine mē∣ber. 17 Definitiō of a simple mēber 17 Dens 50. 89 Dentes canini. 50 Dentes incisores. 50 Dentes molares. 50 Destinctio. 38. 68 Diaphragma. 70. 78 Diarthrosis. 2 Diastole. 38. 68 Didymia. 39 Didymos. 74 Differēce betwene sanguin & spermatike mēbers. 17 Difference betwene simple mēbers & compoundes. 15 Digitus. 62. 90 Digiti pedis. 87. 90 Digitorum ossa. 62 Dilatatio. 38. 68 Diseases chauncing to the members. 29 Dissimilaria membra. 6 Dodecadactilos. 80 Dogge tethe. 50 Dolor costalis. 67 Dorsalis medulla. 40 Dorsalis spina. 40 Dorsum. 90 Dugges. 90 Duodenum intestinum. 80 Duramater. 9. 41 E Eares. 53. 89 Ecphysis. 80 Eflorescentia cutis. 14 Eiaculatorium uas. 83 Elbowe. 61. 90 Elementes. 94 Emoroydes. 8 Emulgentia uasa. 83 Emūctory place of ye brain. 51 Emūctory place of ye hart. 60 Emūctory place of ye liuer. 85 Enarthrosis. 2 Encephalos. 35 Ensiformis. 66 Entera. 80 Enteron. 80 Epencranis. 36 Epidermis. 14 Epididymis. 74 Epigastrion. 72 Epiglottis. 56 Epigomatis. 86 Epiphysis uermiformis. 39 Epiploon. 72 Eruptio. 29 Erythroeides. 74 Estimation. 39 Exortus. 80 Expulsiue power. 77
Exterior uenter. 72 Eyes. 46. 89 Eye browes. 89 Eye liddes. 49. 89 Eye tethe. 0 F Face. 89 Facies. 89 False ribbes. 67 Fantasie. 35 Fati & the vse therof. 12. 13. 29 Fatie quantitie therof accor¦ding to complexion. 13 Fel. 79 Fellis uesicula. 79 Femina. 85 Femora. 85 Femur. 90 Fibers. 8 Figura membrorum. 25 Figure of members. 25 Fyngers. 62. 90 Fistula spiritalis. 56 Fiue wittes. 36 Flatte forme. 25 Flaua bilis. 79 Flesh & the vse therof. 11. 12. 29 Flesh of thre kindes. 12 Fleshe glandulous. 12 Fleshe musculous. 12 Focile maius. 62. 86 Focile minus. 62. 86 Folliculus fellis. 79 Forme and substance of the brayne. 35. 36 Forhead. 89 Foote. 86 Fornix. 3 Frons. 89 Funis brachii. 64 Furcula. 60. 66 G Gargareon. 42 Galle. 79 Gena. 52. 89 Generation of nayles and heares. 15 Genitale semen. 74 Genu. 90 Gibber. 90 Glandula. 12 Glandula testi adnata. 74 Glandulouse fleshe. 12 Glandulouse partes in the brayne. 36 Glans. 73. 90 Glasey humore. 48 Glene. 3 Glossa. 52 Glutiae. 39 God of nature. 24 Gomphioi odontes. 40 Gomphosis. 3 Gracile intestinum. 81 Grindes. 84. 90 Gristle. 4 Gristley additiō of ye nose. 46 Guidegi. 57 Gula. 55. 89 Gurgulio. 57 Guttes. 80. 81 Gynglismos. 2 H Haema. 17
Haemorrhoides uenae. 81 Haemorrhois. 82 Hamme. 90 Hanche. 84 Hanche bones. 84 Hande. 62. 90 Harmonia. 3 Harte. 67 Heare of the head. 44. 89 Heare & the vse therof. 14. 15 Hearing sinewes. 54 Head. 35 Heele. 98 Hepar. 78 Hepatica uena. 64 Hieron osteon. 76 Hippes. 84. 85 Holowe pore deuiding ye vē∣tricles of the brayne. 38 Homo. 35 Homoeomeres. 16 Humeralis uena. 63. 65 Humerus. 59. 61. 89 Humerus latus. 39 Humores. 94 Humor albugineus. 47 Humor aqueus. 47 Humor Crystallinus. 47 Humor uitreus. 48 Humor in the ventricles of the brayne. 37 Hypochondria. 90 I Ianitor. 80 Jawes. 49. 50. 51. 89 Iecur. 78 Ieiunium. 80 Ileon. 81 Ilium ossa. 84 Imaginatiue vertue. 39 Imus uenter. 90 Incisiōs of the head. 45 Incisiōs of the eares. 54 Incisions of the chekes, the Jawes, and the nose. 51 Incisions of the throte. 57 Incisions of the arme. 65 Incisions of the brest. 70. 71 Incisions of the thighes legs and feete. 88 Incisores dentes. 50 Index. 90 Infundibulum. 42 Interstitum. 78 Intestinum. 80 Intestinum caecum. 81 Intestinum rectum. 81 Intestinum tenue. 81 Inuolucrum. 9 Joyninges of bones. 2 Iris. 48 Ischias. 85 Ischiatica uena. 88 Ischion. 85 Isthmoidea ostea. 42 Iugulares uenae. 57 Iugulum. 89 Iugulum os. 60. 66 K Kidneys. 83 Kion. 57 Knee. 85. 86. 90 L Labdoeides raphe. 44
Labi. 51. 89 Labra. 51. 89 Lacertus. 8 Lacuna. 42 Lagone. 90 Lamdoides Sutura. 44 Laringis operculum. 56 Larinx. 56 Latera. 90 Lateralia ossa. 43 Laterum dolor. 67 Latum os. 76 Lauda. 43 Legges. 86 Lepides. 43 Lien. 79 Ligamente. 5 Ligamentum. 5 Ligula. 56 Lingua. 52. 89 Lingula. 56 Lippes. 51. 89 Liuer. 78 Longaon. 81 Loynes. 90 Lumbi. 90 Lumborum uertebrae. 67. 76 Lunges. 68 M Malleolaris uena. 88 Malleolus. 86. 90 Mammae. 90 Manus. 62. 90 Manus pectus. 62 Maruelous nette. 9. 39 Matrix. 75 Maxillae. 49. 50. 51. 89 Meatus urinaru. 83 Mediana uena. 64 Mediastinum. 69 Medicus. 90 Medius. 90 Medulla dorsalis. 40. 54 Medulla Spialis. 40. 54 Melanchole. 79 Melancholia. 79 Members compounde. 16 Members defined. 18 Members simple. 16 Members sanguine. 17 Members spermatike. 17 Members varie in quantitie according to cōplexion. 24 Membrana. 9 Membrana carnosa. 13. 44 Membrana choriformis. 37 Membrana Costas Succingens. 67 Membrorum complexio. 21 Membrorum compositio. 20 Membrorum figura. 25 Membrorum morbi. 29 Membrorum numerus. 24 Membrorum offitium. 28 Membrorum operatio. 26 Membrorum quantitas. 23 Membrorum substantia. 22 Membrorum utilitas. 28 Memoratiue vertue. 46 Meninx crassa. 41 Meninx tenuis. 40 Mendosum os. 44 Mentula. 75 Mentum. 89 Meri. 55
Mesaraeon. 81 Mesaraica uasa. 81 Mesenterium. 81 Mesaraicae uenae. 78 Metacarpii ossa. 62 Metacarpion. 62 Metaphreni uertebrae. 67 Metaphrenon. 67 Metra. 75 Micro cosmos. 95 Midriffe. 78 Milte. 79 Minor lingua. 56 Minor mundus. 95 Mirach. 72 Mola. 30 Mola. 86 Monocoelos. 81 Monoculus. 81 Morbi membrorum. 29 Motion. 26 Motions of the brayne. 37. 38 Motorii nerui. 7 Mouthe. 51. 52. 89 Mus. 8 Muscle. 8 Muscles numbred. 8 Muscles of the arme. 63 Muscles of the belly. 76. 77 Muscles of the legges. 87 Musculous fleshe. 12 Musculus. 8 Musculi uentris recti 77 Musculi obliqui ascendentes. 77 Musculi obliqui descendentes. 77 Musculi transuersi. 77 Myle siue myla. 50 Myotome. 80 N Nares. 42. 46. 89 Nass. 45. 89 Nates. 90 Naticulae. 39 Naturalis unio. 2 Nauell. 90 Nauiforme os. 86 Nayles. 14. 15. 90 Necke. 54 Nephros. 83 Neples. 0 Neruus. 6 Nerui audibiles. 54 Nerui motorii. 7 Nerui olfactiles. 45 Nerui optici. 47 Nerui sensorii. 7 Nether Jawe. 5. 89 Neuros. 6 Neurotome. 6 Nose and the vtilities ther∣of. 45. 46 Nose thrilles. 46. 89 Notiaea acantha. 40 Notiaeos myelos. 40. 44 Nucha. 40. 54 Number of members.. 24 Number of bones. 4 Number of muscles. 8 Number of sinewes. 6 Number of veines. 11 Numerus membrorum. 24 Nurishing members. 78 Nurishmēt of the body how it commeth. 27 O
Obeliaea raphe. 44 Occipitale os. 43 Occiput. 43. 89 Oculus. 46. 89 Oculi angulus. 89 Odons. 50 Oesophagus. 55 Offitium membrorum. 28 Omentum. 72 Omoplata. 59 Omos. 59 Omphalos. 72 Operatio membrorum. 26 Operation animall. 26 Operation of members. 26 Operculum laringis. 56 Ophthalmos. 46 Opticos neuros. 47 Orchis. 74 Organica membra. 2 Os. oris. 52. 89 Os. ossis. 2 Os amplum. 76 Os calcaneum. 86 Os calcis. 86 Os Caudae. 76 Oscheon. 75 Os Coxae. 85 Os Cribrosum. 42 Os iugulum. 60. 66 Os latum. 76 Os lauda. 43 Os occipitale. 43 Os pectorale. 66 Os petraeum. 44 Os sacrum. 76 Ossa bregmatis. 43 Ossa coxendicum. 73 Ossa digitorum. 62 Ossa ilium. 84 Ossa isthmoidea. 42 Ossa metacarpii. 62 Ossa pectinis. 73 Ossa petrosa. 44 Ossa pubis. 84 Ossa rasseta manus. 62 Ossa rasseta pedis. 86 Ossa spongoidea. 42 Ossa squammosa. 44 Osteologia. 2 Osteon. 2 Osteos. 1 Osteotome. 2 Ostiarius. 80 Ostium uentriculi. 67 Os uentrs. 80 Ota. 53 Otion. 53 Ouros. 83 Ouron. 83 Oxyngion. 12 P Palatum. 89 Palma. 62. 90 Palpbra. 49. 89 Pannicles. 9 Paniculus carnosus. 9. 13 Pappes. 90 Papila. 90 Parenephalis. 36 Parietlia ossa. 43 Patella genu. 86 Paxilla. 43 Pechys. 62 Pectn pedis. 86
Pectinis ossa. 84 Pectus. 67. 90 Pectus manus. 62 Pedion. 86 Pellis. 14 Penis. 73 Perceptio. 39 Pericardion. 9. 44 Pericranaeum. 41. 44 Pericranion chiton. 41. 44 Periosteon chiton. 9 Peritonaeum. 9. 72 Peritonion chiton. 72 Perspectiuus neruus. 47 Pes. 90 Petraeum os. 44 Petrosum os. 44 Phantasia. 39 Pharinx. 36 Phlebion. 10 Phlebotome. 10 Phlebotomia. 23 Phlegme. 94 Phlegmos. 17 Phrenes. 78 Physe. 82 Pia mater. 9. 40 Pili. 14 Pinguedo. 12 Pithe of the backe. 40. 54 Pixis. 3 Pixis gulae. 57 Place emunctorie of the brayne. 51 Place emuctorie of ye hart. 60 Place emūctorie of ye liuer. 85 Place for ventosing. 58 Planta pedis. 86 Platy osteon. 76 Pleura. 67 Pleuritis. 67 Pneumon. 68 Pollex. 90 Poplites. 90 Pore deuiding the vētricles of the brayne. 38 Pores in the skinne. 15 Porta hepatis. 78. 81 Porta iecoris. 70 Portenarium intestinum. 80 Porus. 17. 38 Porus sarcodes. 17 Porus ureticus. 83 Postfrachiale. 62 Posthe. 73 Powers attractiue, retenti∣ue and expulsiue. 77 Praeputium. 73. 90 Prognostication. 18 Proleficum semen. 74 Prouidence of nature. 7 Psallioeides. 38 Pterna. 86 Pubes. 90 Pubis ossa. 84 Pulmo. 68 Pulse. 9 Pupilla. 48 Hurgation of the brayne. 42 Pylorus. 80 Pymele. 12 Q Quantitas membrorum. 23 Quantitie of fatte and other mēbers varieth according to place & complexion. 24
Quantitie of members. 23 R Radius. 62 Raphe. 3 Raphia. 3 Rasseta ossa manus. 62 Rasseta ossa pedis. 86 Rectum intestinum. 81 Ren. 83 Renalis uena. 88 Rete mirabile. 9. 37 Retiformis tunica. 47 Reynes or kydneis. 83 Rhagoeides chiton. 47 Rhegma. 29 Rhin. 45 Rhinia. 46 Ribbes. 67 Roote of the bodie. 35 Rotula genu. 86 Rounde forme. 25 Ruptura. 29 S Saccus. 81 Sacrumos. 76 Sagittalis sutura. 44 Saluatella uena. 64. 65 Sanguine members. 17 Sanguine & spermatike mē∣bers how they differ. 17 Sanguis. 17 Saphena uena. 88 Sarx. 11. 12 Scaphoeides. 86 Scapula. 89 Sceletos. 2 Schiatica uena. 88 Sclerotica tunica. 48 Scolecoeides. 39 Scoptulum opertum. 34 Scrotum. 75. 90 Sculle. 43 Scutiformis. 66 Secundina tunica. 47 Semen genitale. 74 Semen proleficum. 74 Semita spiritus. 9 Sense. 26 Senses or wyttes. 39 Sensorii nerui. 7 Sentis. 4 Septum pectorale. 78 Septum transuersum. 78 Serrata consutio. 3 Serum sanguinis. 79 Sesaminum os. 4 Sesamodes ostea. 4 Share. 90 Shinnes. 86. 90 Shoulder. 59. 89 Sicca anatome. 2 Sides. 90 Similaria membra. 1. 16 Simple members. 1. 16 Simple and compound mē∣bers howe they differ. 15 Sinciput. 89 Sinewes. 6 Sinewes numbred. 6 Sinewes of hearing. 54 Sinewes of nucha. 6. 54 Sinewes sensitiue. 6. 7 Sinewes of the brest. 70 Sinewes of the legges. 87
Siphac. 72 Skyn. 13. 14 Skin & the vse therof. 14 Solutiō of continuitie. 18. 29 Sspasma. 29 Spatula. 59 Sperma. 74 Spermatike members. 17 Spermatike mēbers frō sā∣guine how they differ. 17 Sphen. 43 Sphenoeides. 43 Spina. 4 Spina dorsalis. 40 Spinalis medulla. 54 Spirite and lyfe. 26 Spirite visible. 47 Spiritus semita. 9 Splen. 79 Splenatica uena. 64 Spondilles of the brest. 67 Spondilles of the necke. 54 Spondilles of the hanche or reynes. 67. 76 Spondilion. 67 Spondilium. 67 Spongiosum os. 42 Spongoidea ostea. 42 Squammae. 44 Squammosa ossa. 44 Stephaniaea raphe. 44 Stephanos. 44 Sternon. 66 Stomache. 80 Stomachos. 80 Stones. 74. 90 Stupor corporis mentisque la∣guor. 69 Substance and forme of the brayne. 35. 36 Substance of members. 22 Substantia membrorum. 22 Subtile intestinum. 81 Summa cuticula. 14 Summus uenter. 72 Supercilia. 89 Superfluities of mēbers. 14 Sura. 86 Sutura. 3 Sutura arctualis. 44 Sutura coronalis. 44 Sutura labdoeides siue libdoides. 44 Sutura obelaea. 44. Sutura recta uel sagittalis. 44 Sutura Stephaniaea. 44 Symphysis. 23 Synanche. 53 Syncondrosis. 3 Syndesmos. 5 Syndesmotome. 5 Synneurosis. 3 Syphac. 72 Syssarcosis. 3 Systole. 38. 69 T Talus. 86 Tarsus. 86 Tela aranea. 47 Temples. 89 Tempora. 89 Tendo. 7 Tendon. 7 Tenon. 7 Tenue intestinum. 81
Tenuis menhoe. 40 Testiculus. 74. 90 Testis. 74 Tetes. 90 Tethe. 30 Thighe. 85. 90 Thighe bone. 85 Thlasis. 29 Thlasma. 29 Thorax. 67 Throte. 55. 89 Thumbe. 90 Tibia. 86. 90 Toes. 86. 87. 90 Tomici odontes. 50 Tonos. 6 Torning iointes. 4. 54. 66. 76 Tracheia arteria. 56. 89 Translucida unica. 48 True fleshe. 12 Tuberculum ossis. 3 Tungue. 52. 89 Tunica. 9 Tuskles. 50 V Vasa emulgentia. 79 Vasa semen adferentia. 74 Vasa semen deferentia. 74 Vas eiaculatorium. 83 Vena. 10 Vena arteriosa. 10. 69 Vena caua 11. 70. 78. 88 Vena cephalica. 63 Vena coele. 11. 78 Venae capillares. 11 Venae emulgentes. 79 Venae iugulares. 57 Venae mesaraicae. 78 Vena humeralis. 63 Uenall arterie. 9. 69 Vena ischiatica. 88 Vena magna. 11 Vena malleolaris. 88 Vena popletica. 88 Vena porta. 11. 78 Vena ramosa. 78 Vena renalis. 88 Vena Saphena. 88 Venosa arteria. 9. 69 Venter. 71. 72. 90 Venter exterior. 72 Uentosing. 58 Uentricles of the braine. 36 Ventriculi ostium. 67 Ventriculus. 80 Venniculi forma. 39 Vermiformis epiphysis. 39 Vertebra. 4. 67 Vertebrae ceruicis. 54 Vertebrae lumborum. 67. 76 Vertebrae▪ metaphreni. 67 Vertex. 89 Uertue cogitatiue. 39 Uertue imaginatiue. 39 Uertue memoratiue. 40 Uertue of smelling. 46 Vesica. Vesicula fellis. 79 Vestigium. 90 Ueyne. 10. 11 Ueyne arteriall. 69 Ueynes numbered. Ueynes of the arme. 63. Ueynes of the .
Ueines of the necke. 55 Ueines of ye legges & feete. 88 Ueines vnder the tungue. 53 Vinculum. 5 Virga uirilis. 73. 90 Uisible spirite. 47 Visiuus neruus. 47 Vitreus humor. 48 Vmbilicus. 72. 90 Vngues. 14. 15 Vnio naturalis. 2 Upper iawe. 49. 89 Vretheres. 83 Vreticus porus. 83 Vrina. 83 Vrinarii meatus. 83 Use of chordes or Tēdons. 8 Use of fatte. 12. 13. 29 Use of fleshe. 12. 29 Use of gristles. 4. 28 Use of nayles and heares. 15 Use of sinewes. 7. 29 Use of the skinne. 14. 29 Use of veines. 11. 29 Vtilitas membrorum. 28 Utilities of arteries. 9. 29 Utilities of bones. 2. 28 Utilities of members. 28 Utilities of the nose. 46 Utilities of the tungue. 53 Vuea. 57 Vuea tunica. 47 Vuula. 57 VV Waste. 90 Water pipes. 83 Watry humor in ye eies. 47 Wayes of vrine. 83 Will in muscles. 8 Wormy body or wormlyke processe. 39 Wosen. 9 Woundes in the belly. 77 Wreste. 62. 90 Wynde pipe. 69 X Xyphoeides. 66 Xyphos. ensis. 66 Y Yarde. 73. 82. 90 Ymen. 9 Z Zirbus adipinus. 72
¶An historiall expo∣STVLATION: AGAINST THE beastlye abusers, bothe of Chyrurgere, and Phy∣syke, in oure tyme: with a goodlye doctryne, and instruction, necessarye to be marked, and folowed, of all true chirurgiens: gathered by Iohn Halle Chyrurgyen. EOr as muche as in the Epistle and Prefaces, I haue declared the dishonor that the noble arte of medicyne sustey∣neth, by deceauynge Fugitiues, and other false abusers: I thinke it good here to blasen the dedes of some, in this our tyme, that it maye apere, that not withoute a sufficiente cause, I haue so there of them com∣playned. FYrst there came into the towne of Maydstone, In the yere of our Lorde. 1555. a woman whiche named hir selfe Jone, hauyng with hir a walkyng mate, whome she called her husbande. This wicked beast toke hir Inne at the sygne of the Bell, in the towne aforesayde. Where she caused within short space to be published, that she could heale all maner, bothe inward and outward diseases. One pouder she caried in a blader, made of the herbe Daphny∣des, and Anise sede together, whiche shee (as an onelye sufficient remedie for all grefes) administred vnto all hir folishe patientes, in lyke quantite to all people, neyther re∣gardyng tyme, strengthe, nor age. Al the tyme of her being there, (whiche was about .iii wekes) there resorted to her company, diuers Ruffians, and vacaboundes, vnder pre∣tence of being diseased, & sekyng to her for remedye: so that
hir false profession, was vnto their wicked behauioure, for the tyme in that to wae a safe supportation. This is beastlie deceauer, amonge manie others tooke in hād an honest mās child, who had a suppurat tumor in his nauell, percynge dangerouslye the panicles of the belye: to whome she administred the sayde pouder in great quanti∣tye, in so muche, that the childe dyd vomyte continuallye, for the space of halfe a daye and more, withoute ceassynge: whereby the sayde aposteme brake. The parentes of the chylde then feared much, by the gre∣nousnesse of the syghte, that his stomache woulde breake: whiche may be thought that in very dede it so dyd. For in processe of tyme, ther issued out by the orifice of ye same, vii. wormes at .vii. seuerall tymes (suche as children are wont to auoyde, eyther vpwarde or downwarde, from the sto∣mache and gutte called eretes .i. Rotun) with also a cer∣tayne yelowe substance not stinkynge, suche as we some∣tymes fynde, in the stomaches of dead men, when we open them. This fearfull syght I saye, caused the childes parentes to sende for me, to knowe therein myne opinion and coun∣sell: vnto whome I prognosticated (as I sawe good cause,) that the mater was very dangerous, and not lyke to be cu∣red. But this beastly forme of a woman, hearynge me so saye: answered that she douted therein no daunger, and far¦thermore offered hirselfe to be locked vp in a chamber with the chylde, and that yf she healed him not, shee myghte be punished: with a great deale more circumstance of prating and deceytfull braggynge wordes. Unto whose moste wic∣ked and diulyshe boldnes, I thus answered. Wher as you saye that ye doubte not any daunger in this childe, I verye well beleue you: for ignorante fooles can doubte no perils, and who is bolder then blynde bayerd? howe shoulde they doubte that knowe not what a doubt meaneth. Notwith∣standyng, this preheminence you deceauynge renegates haue, ye maye bragge, lye, and lace, tyll ye haue murdered
or destroyed suche as credyte you, and then are ye gone, ye shewe your heles, and that is onelye your defence. But ho∣nest menne of arte muste haue truthe for theyr defence, and experience of their true worke, and maye promyse no more then they may performe. What shoulde I make manye wordes, the parentes of the child all to late discharged this deceauer. And the child notwithstandyng the counsell had of dyuers learned men, dyed afterwarde of the sayde grefe. But the sayde deceauer accordyng to my Prophecie, after .iii. dayes ran away, she and her walkyng mate, robbynge their hoste where they lay, of the shetes, pillowheres and blankets that they laye in. And by their entysement of one of the mayd seruauntes of their sayd hoste: They hadde muscadell serued them in steade of bere, whyle they laye there for the moste parte: whiche entyced seruant ranne awaye also with them, and coulde not synce be herde of. Secondly in the yere of our Lorde. 1556. there resorted vnto Maydstone one Robert Haris, professynge and pre∣tendyng an hyghe knowlege in Physike: vnder cloke wher of he deceaued meruaylouslie with vyle Sorcerie. This de¦ceauer could tel (as the folish people reported of hym,) by on¦ly lokyng in ones face, all secrete markes & scarres of the bodie, and what they had done, and what hadde chaunced vnto them all theyr lyfe tyme before. Wherwith he had so incensed the fonde and waueryng myndes of some, that pitye was to here. Amonge whome one woman (whoe for hir yeares and professiō, ought to haue bene more discrete:) When I reasoned with hir agaynste his doynges: she er∣nestlie affirmed, that she knewe well that he was then dy∣stant from hir, at the leaste .vii. myles, and yet she verelye beleued that he knewe what she then sayde. Oh greate beastlynes and infydelitie, specially in suche as haue borne a face to fauour the worde of God. Well for iestyng a lyttell agaynste the madnes of thys deceauer, I hadde a dagger drawne at me not longe after.
The wordes that I spake were to his hostes, when I sawe him goe by, in this wyse. Is this (quod I) the cūnyng soth∣sayer, that is sayde to sye at your house? Sothesayer quod she: I knowe no suche thynge by him, therefore ye are to blame so to name him. Why quod I, suche men and suche enformed me that he can tell of thynges loste, and helpe children and cattell bewitched and forspoken, and can tell by lokyng in ones face, what markes he hathe on his bo∣die, and where, and tell them what they haue done, & their fortune to come. Yea and all this in dede he can doe quod she. Why then he is a Sothesayer and a Sorcerer quod J. Well quod she yf he haue so muche cunnyng in his bellye, he is the happyer, and it is the more ioye of hym. Nay quod I, it were mere folyshnes for hym to carye his cunnynge in his bellye: and why, quod she. Why quod I, thynke you that men of lerning and knowledge cary their cunnyng in their bellies? Wher els quod she, and why not? Mary quod I, yf he should beare his cunnyng there, he should alwayes waste it when he went to the priuye, & so in time he should lose all his cunnyng. Thys beyng merylye spoken: turned me afterwards not to a litle displeasure, euen at their han∣des, where I had deserued and loked for frendship as of du¦tie: but I must cease to marueyle any longer at this, when almoste euerie suche abhominable vylaine is defended vp∣holden, and mayntayned, by suche as of righte, and accor∣ding to the holesome lawes of this realme, shoulde punishe them for these their abusions. Yet surelie the grieffe were the lesse, yf onely the blynde, & supersticious antiquitie, had a regarde and loue to suche deceauers. But nowe a great number that haue borne an outwarde shewe of great holy∣nes, and loue to Gods holie worde: We see them seke day∣lie, to suche oelishe Wyches and Sorcerers, If their fyn∣ger doe but ake, as though they were Goddes, and coulde presentlye helpe them wit wordes: although they knowe that God in his Israell, hath called them an abhominaci∣on, and hath farther commaunded, that none suche should
be suffred among them to lyue. Thyrdlie in the year of our Lord a thousand syue hūdred fyftie and eyght, there came to Maydstone one Thomas Lufkyn, by occupacion a Fuller, and burler of clothe, and had bene brought by (by reporte of diuers honest men,) at the fullyng mylles there besyde the towne, neuertheles he had ben longe absent from that contrie, in whiche tyme he had by rouing abroade becomde a Phisicien, a Chirurgien, an Astronomier, a palmister, a phisiognomier, a sothsayer, a fortune deuyner, and I can not tell what. This deceauer was the beastliest beguiler by his sorcerys that euer I herd of, making Physike the onely colour, to couer all his crafty thefte, and mischieues, for he set vppe a byll at his fyrste commynge, to publishe his beyng there, the tenour wherof was in effect as followeth: If anye manne womanne, or childe, bee sicke, or would be let bloud, or bee diseased, with anye maner of in∣ward or outwarde grefes, as al maner of agues, or feuers, plurises, cholyke, stone, strangulion, impostumes, fstulas kanker, goutes, pocks, bone ache, and payne of the ioynes, which commeth for lacke of bloudlettyng: let them resorte to the sygne of the Sarazens hedde, in the easte lane, and brynge theire waters with them to be sene, and they shall haue remedie. Byme Thomas Luffkin. Unto this Diuell incarnate, resorted all sortes of vayne and vndiscrete persons, as it were to a God, to knowe all secretes paste and to come, specially women, to know how manie husbandes and children they shoulde haue, and whe¦ther they shoulde burie their husbandes then lyuing. And to be brefe, there was not so great a secrete, that he would not take vpō him to declare, vnto some he prophecied death within a moneth, who thankes be to God are yet lyuing, and in healthe. All this he boasted that he could do by A∣stronomie. But when he was talked with of one that had but a yonge and smalle skyll in that arte. He coulde make no directe answere no more then puppe my dogge.
This beaste coulde wyth a wodden face, bragge, face, and set oute his maters wyth boulde taske: that the symple people was by him, meruelously seduced to beleue his lies, and boastinge tales. Amonge manye that talked with him, one of mine ac∣quaintance asked him this question: sir quod he, if you be so cunnynge as ye are named, or as you woulde fayne be este∣med to be, Wherfore goe ye, and trauaile ye, from place to place? For beinge so cunning, ye can not lacke wheresoeuer ye dwell: for people will resorte vnto you farre and nere, se∣kynge vpon you: so that you shoulde not neede thus to tra∣uaile for your liuynge. Unto whome he made thys beastlye answere, I knowe quod he by Astronomye the influence of the starres and therby perceaue, when and howe long any place shall be vnto me fortunate: and when I perceaue by the starres, that any euell fortune, is like to chaunce to me in that place: I streighte waye wiselye auoid the daunger, and goo to an other place, whereas I knowe it will be fortu∣nate and luckye. For what vse they to cloke theyr vilanies wyth, but Astronomye, Phisicke, and Chirurgery, as I she∣wed you before. But thys false knaue had answered more truelye, if he had sayd thus. Though for a tyme as all newe angels are highlye sette by and meruailed at, amonge the folishe and rude people, so naughtye false merchantes wyth their craf∣tye, and vilainous feseightes, maye for a time haue credits and successe accordynge to theyr wicked expectations: yet in a whyle wyth vse, the people will begin to smell oute, and be werye of theyr doynges, whiche they at the fyrste so gredelye did seeke, for the strange newes. For suche false deceauers, perceaue and knowe, that the fonde myndes of the common rude multytude of people, at the fyrste, in see∣kynge to see straunge thynges, are madde of desire. And as they are vnreasonable in seekynge the newes, so are they sone werye of the vse therof: for muche familiaritye engen∣dereth contempte, euen in good thinges. Therfore when men begin to perceaue, and to espye the crafte and subtilty
of suche deceauers, it is time for them to change their place that they maye the easilyer deceaue agayne, where ther: falshode is strange and newe, and all together vnknowne. If I saye he hadde thus answered, he hadde sayde the very truthe. Thys deceauer hadde sufficiente audacitye, wyth talke to sette oute hys falshode, and to beare downe all that be ignorante, so longe as hys knauerye knackes were vnknowne. Well the ende of hys being there, was as it is common wyth them all, wythoute anye difference, for he sodainlye was gone wyth manye a poore mannes monye, whyche he had taken before hande: promisinge them helpe, whiche onlye he recompensed wyth he winge of hys heles. Fourthlye, in the yeare of oure Lorde a thousande, fyue hundred and three score. One Ualentyne, came into a Pa∣ryshe, in the welde of Kent called Staplehurste: wheras he changed hys name, callynge hym selfe master Wynk∣fylde: affirmynge hym selfe to be the sonne of a worshipful Knight of that name. Thys abhominable deceauer, made the people beleue, that he could tel all thinges present, past, and to come: And the very thoughtes of men, and theyr dis∣eases, by onlye lokinge in theyr faces. When anye came to him wyth vrines: (whyche commonlye in the countrye they bring in a stone cruse,) he made them beleue, that onlye by feling the weight therof, he would tell them all theyr disea∣ses in their bodies, or wythout: And other while made them beleue, that he went to aske councel of the deuel, by going a litle asyde, and mublyng to him selfe, and then comming agayne, would tell them all and more to. For what care or shame of euell haue these hell houndes who see theyr abho∣mination: but euen as the Ape tourneth his filthye partes to euery mannes syghte: so shame they not to acknowledge thē selues to haue conference wt the diuell, yt so yet all wyse men may know theyr dedes to be all diuellish. wherin the vaine opinion of some, (though not of the wysest sort,) hel∣peth thē not a litle▪ who esteme those dampnable artes to be hygh poyntes of learnyng. Oh Ethike madnesse.
This beastlye beguyler so incensed in shorte space the vayn myndes, of the rude and wauerynge multitude of people: that he was sought vnto, and estemed more a greate deale thē God (oh Heathenish and Idolatrous people, not much vnlyke this was their outragious madnes to their peuysh pilgrimages: wherwith in times past they were most mise¦rably bewiched). Yea suche a wonderfull fame and brute, wente abroade of his doynges, that some of the verie wor∣shipfulles of those partes were striken with admiration, and desyre to seke to him, to knowe manie good morowes. Wherof also he would not a lytle bragge and boaste. But as tyme reuealeth all thynges, so this deulyshe beaste in short tyme was knowne in his righte kynde and name: and that he had .iii. wyues lyuing at that present: of which the fyrst lyued very porelye and myserably in Canturbury: The second after she knewe his wickednes, departed from him, and maried after with a preste. The third whiche he at that present had, he maried at Westmynster, as I was credible informed, beyng there a riche widowe. But nowe after this vylaynie was knowne by his fyrst wyse cōming to Staplehurst, he ran awaye from hyr also, leauynge hyr desolate, vndone, and in muche miserie for he had spent all her substaunce by riotous fare. For he was reported to fare at his table lyke a Lorde, and was serued as fynelye as a Prynce: but suche shamefull dedes can neuer be withoute wicked ende, at the leaste at Gods hande, thoughe it be ne∣glected of the Magistrates. This laste wyfe beynge sente on his errande to Mayd∣stone, to an Apothicaries wydowe for certeyne drougges, chaunced to forgette some of their names: wherewith the women beyng bothe not a lytle troubled the Apothecaries wydowe asked whye her husbande dydde not wryte for hys thynges, wherunto his womanne answered, that Mayster Wynkfylde was a ryght Latynist, for he coulde wryte no Englyshe. By this ye maye perceaue he was a well lear∣ned manne.
This woman beyng as I saide lefte desolate, maried af∣ter with one Thomas Riden, who was his man, who went together to Westminster, there to dwell: whither not lōg after, this Winkefield came, minding agayn to se∣duce the woman to folowe hym, as before she had. Who, so detested, his late beastly vsance, that she complayned him so to the Archebyshop of Canturbury, & other of the quenes maiesties honorable councell: that he was long impryso∣ned in the gate house,He was whypped. and for his wickednes sore punyshed. Yet in the ende beyng delyuered, he ceased not any whit to vse his olde practise: for he came immediatly, to Robardes∣bridge in Sussexe, where he wrought the lyke wickednesse as afore. and beyng there espied, within a whyle, with di∣uers wycked factes, he remoued: puttyng on a brasen face, & came again into Kente▪ to Staplehurst: wher he freshly re∣newed, the vse of his odiouse feates: for the which maister Bisley, person of Staplehurste, caused him to be ascited of the ordinary to the spirituall courte, as an adulterer, and a woorker by diulishe and magicall artes. Wherfore he re∣moued two myles from thence, to a paryshe called Marden, thynkinge him selfe therby the more salfe: but the lawe notwithstāding, proceded so against him, that he was ther vpon his contempte excommunicated: and yet neuer lefte his olde fashions. He spent in his house weekely sixe pound (as dyuerse honeste menne reported,) in meate and drynke: with suche resorte and banketyngee, as it was a wonder to see, whereby he not a little augmented his fame: the people resorting to him farre and nyghe, for he woulde tell them suche wonders, that all had hym in admiration. But especially, he was cunnyng. to inchaunte women to loue, and did for rewardes, dyuerse feates in suche cases: & lastly, he began to worke properly for himself as foloweth. At a paryshe called Loose, in the hundred of Maydstone, a certayne blynde man, called blynde Orgar, hadde a wyfe who was sycke of dyuerse aches and swellynges, who hea∣ryng of this marueilous monster: sente hir daughter vpon a wednesday, downe to Marden, with hir water, to this
maister Wynkfelde: who so inchaunted hir, that she for∣gate hyr waye home to hyr father and mother, in so muche that hyr mother thoughte hyr losse: for she taried there tyll the saturdaye folowyng. Then takynge hyr waye home∣warde, and beyng come halfe waye, hyr mynde was so in∣toxicate, that she retourned backe agayne to hyr louer: who louyngly (fearynge leaste hyr frendes shoulde make excla∣mation therof,) accompanied hir, tyll she was nyghe at home: and then returnyng, he promysed hyr, to come to hir mother by a certayne daye: whiche he in deede performed. And so fylled he the symple woman, with suche flatteryng, and craftie perswasions, and fayre promyses of healthe: that she thoughte nothynge to whotte, or to heauy for him, no, not hyr daughter, as it apeared: for he forsoke Marden (where he was .xii. pounde in debte, & vpwarde) and came to inhabite at Loose, in this poore blynde mans house: in so muche that in a whyle, all people theraboute spake muche shame, that it was suffered. The whiche reporte, at suche tyme as it came to the eares of the worshipfull Justices thereaboutes: with also the trade of his former lyfe: the complaynte of dyuerse ho∣nest men, whose money he had taken, and deceaued them: and the clamour of his creditours, to whom he ought, as is aforesayde:) They sent out their warrante, to all Consta∣bles of that hundred, chargynge them to aprehende, and brynge hym before them at Maydstone, the thursdaye fo∣lowyng. Who beynge warned therof, by certeyne disem∣blyng men, and chiefly, a flatteryng minister: he fledde & coulde not be founde, neyther was he synce heard of in that countrey. This lāter fitte chanced in the yere of our lorde, 1562. in lent. Many more particuler histories coulde I here wryte of his detestable factes: but to auoyde prolixi∣tie, I leaue them at this tyme, trustyng that this may suf∣fyce, to describe what he is, and to geue al men warning of hym and all other lyke deceiuers. The truthe was so: he hadde no learnyng in the world, nor coulde reade Englishe, (and as I suppose, knewe not a letter, or a. b. from a bateldore,) as it was well proued, yet
made he the people beleue that he coulde speake Latin, Greek, and Hebrue. Item in the yere. 1562. there came to the town of Maid∣stone, an olde felowe, who tooke vpon him, to heale all di∣seases, as a profounde phisitien: whom (forbecause men had been so deluded, by diuers former deceiuers) I caused to be examined, before the officers of the said towne. And when he was asked his name▪ he said John Bewly, secōdly wher he dwelte: and he answered at London, in the old bayly, a∣gainst syr Roger Chamley: Thirdly, if he were a phisitien, he sayde yea. Fourthly, where he learned that arte, and he sayde by his owne study. Fiftly, where he studied it, he an∣swered, in his owne house. Sixtly, what authours he had redde. He sayde Eliote, and others Seuenthly, we asked what other: and he sayd, he had forgotten. Eightly, we as∣ked him what weare the names of Eliotes bookes: he sayd, he remembred not. Then we brougth him an Englyshe boke to reade, whiche he refused: but when he was com∣maunded to reade, he desired vs to be good to him, for he was a poore man, and in deede coulde not reade: and sayd, that he intended not to tary there, but to repayre home a∣gayne. This beyng done on a sondaye, after euensong: his hoste was bounde for his foorthcōming the next daie: when vpon his humble sute, he was let goe: beyng warned with exhortations, to leaue suche false and naughty deceytes. Farther in the same yere, one Williā a shomaker, came into Kente, pretending to be very cunning, in curing disea∣ses of the eyes. And being brought to a frende of myne, to haue his iudgemēt in ones eye, wherof ye sight was weake: first putting them in muche feare, of the eye: he at lengthe promised, to doe great thinges therto. But the frendes of ye partie diseased, destered me first to talke with him, to vnder¦stande his cūning, which I at their request, did at a tyme a∣pointed, & asked him if he vnderstoode, what was ye cause of hir infirmitie, he said he could not tel: but he wold heale it, he doubted not. Then I asked him, whether he were a sur∣gien, or a phisitiē: and he answered no, he was a shomaker, but he coulde heale all maner of sore eyes.
I asked him where he learned that: he sayde that was no matter. Well sayde I, seyng that you can heale sore eyes: what is an eye, whereof is it made, of what members or partes is it composed? ad he sayde he knewe not that. Then I asked hym if he weare worthy to be a shoemaker, or to be so called, that knewe not howe, or wherof a shoe was made? he answered no, he was not worthy. Then sayde I, howe dare you woorke vpon suche a precious, and intricate member of man, as is the eye: seyng you knowe not the nature therof: and why, or by what reason, it doth see more then a mans nose, or his hande dothe. He answe∣red, that though he could not tell this: yet coulde he heale all maner of sore eyes. And that where as maister Luke of London, hath a great name of curyng eyes: he coulde doe that which maister Luke could not doe, nor turne his hand to. Thus bragged this proude varlette against and aboue, that reuerent man of knowne learning and experience. And I sayde I thought so: for maister Luke sayde I, is no shoemaker. Well sayde he, I perceiue you doe but skorne me, and flunge out of the doores in a great fume. And could not be caused to tary and drynke by any intreaty, neither haue I since that tyme heard any thyng of hym. What other men and women besydes these, haue come into the forsayde place: If I should rehearse them, and the discourse of their doinges: It weare to tedious, yea it wold abhorre any honest mans eares to heare of it. There came a woman thither (as she reported hirself) a ministers wife, (but I thynke she falsely lyed,) in the aforesayde yeare. The officers hearing of hir prophession, called hir before them, and examined hir: with whom she was so stoute, as to say (when she was warned to departe the towne, in payne of inprysonment,) these wordes. I haue quod the, trauelled through all partes of this realme, and I was yet neuer for∣bidden in any place, to minister my physike, and hath (sayde she) your towne a priuilege aboue all other, to forbydde me to doe good, and to heale the queenes liege people? Then was she asked what authoritie she hadde, or of whom she
was allowed thus to dooe, or what certificat she hadde brought with hir, to witnes with hir, of hir good behauour in places where she was before? And she sayde she was ne∣uer before so examined, neither feared to be put to suche tri∣all, neither sawe she euer the place, that a woman coulde fynde so little curtesie: especially, sithe she asked nothynge gratis of any man, or otherwyse then for hir mony. these stoute wordes notwithstanding, she was expelled ye towne. And not long after came thither a makeshifte, with two men wayghting on hym, as very rakehelles as him selfe, bragging that he was a profounde phisicien: & being called by the officers to examinatiō, was so streyghtly charged, yt he confessed himselfe and his men, to be felowes in frend∣shippe, and all of one krewe: and that this was a shifte, mutually deuised among them to get mony: and so weare they expelled the towne: or rather they shifted sodainly a∣way, for feare of punyshement: whiche if they had taried, they could not haue escaped, so good then was the mynde of the officers for that yeare. And nowe one historie of the tyme present, to knitte vp this my tale of vagabondes, & rennegates most hatefull. One Robert Nicols, a false deceiuer, and moste igno∣raunt beaste, and of the profession of vagaboundes, (as weare his former felowes:) Hath in tymes passed boasted him selfe to haue been the seruaunt of maister Uicary, late Sargeant Chyrurgien to the Queenes highnes. But now the matter being put in triall, he ayeth he was apprentice with a priest. Among whose wicked & prodigious doynges, (whiche are infinite,) one very notable chaunced in the yere of our lorde. 15. 4. the. 26. of September. He poured in a purgation to an honest woman of good fame, one Riches wydows, of Linton (a paryshe three myles distant from Maydestone): whiche within three or foure houres at the moste, purged the lyfe out of hir body: so violent was this mortal potion. The womā being before in perfecte health, to all mens iudgementes: beinge onely of simplicitie per∣swaded to take the same, by the deceiuable perswasions of
this Nicols: Who made fayre wether of all thynges, and hir to beleue, that he would deliuer hir of such diseases, as in deede she had not. For he should haue had by compositiō, xx. shillinges for the saide drynke. For this murderous facte, he was by the Queenes ma∣iesties Justices, apprehended, and imprisoned in the Gaile of Maydstone. Where he was communed with all, concer∣nyng his knowledge and doynges, and for what cause he gaue hir that purgation, and howe she was perswaded to take it. He answered, that he knewe by hir complexion, that hyr lyuer and hyr lunges weare rotten, and therfore he coulde hyr so. Whervnto one replyed saiynge, naye, she was not sycke, but thou tauldest hyr so for thy fylthye lucre, & she beleued thee. And because (as thou saydest) thou knewest all this by hyr complexion, I praye thee what complexion am I of? He answered, you are sanguine. Then was it asked hym, whether it weare proper to a sanguyne man, to haue blacke heare, as that partye hadde on his hearde? To▪ this he answered, O, ye wyll saye ye are more a the Choler. Then the partie gaue hym hys hande to feele, whiche was commonly colde, saiynge: is a Cholericke man wonte to be so colde? Whiche when he hadde felte, he sayde: O then ye woulde be of the fleme. Then was he asked, what is a sanguine man, or why is he called sanguine? He answered a sanguine man, is he that hathe a good disgesture. Mary as thou sayest quod the demaunder, here in haste thou shewed howe great thy cunnynge is in iudgyng complexions. Then was it saide to hym, ye professe bothe Phisicke and Chirurgerit: What authours haue you redde? He answered Vigo, and Gasken. Then was it demaunded, what medicyne gauest thou the woman wherwith thou haddeste so euyll lucke? And he sayde Catapussis. Then beynge rebuked, for that he would take on hym to geue medicynes inwardlye, whereof he knewe not the names, muche lesse the natures: He sayde, as stoutely, as obstinatly, that he knewe as many purga∣tions as ye partie that reproued hym. Then he asked hym of
foure or fiue, suche as came first to minde, as Tamar indes, Myrobalanes, Agarick &c. Of all ye which he sayd he knew none. Then was he requyred to name them that he dyd know. And he sayde he knewe Catapussis and Catapistela. Then was he asked what Catapistela was: Why quod he to the demaunder, doe not you knowe it? No sayde the partie, not by that name. And it was further asked, whe∣ther it weare an herbe, a roote, a tree, a stone, the houe, horne, or tayle of a beaste, or what it was? Nicols answe∣red that it was none of those, but a thynge made beyonde the seas: It is not made in Englande quod he, I thynke it be made in Fraunce. Then was he agayne reproued, for his beastly braggyng. And here maiest thou see quod the person that reasoned with hym,) thyne owne ignoraunce, in that thou sayest it is made, where it is in deede the fructe of a tree, called Casia Fistula (as I thynke thou meanest,) and not Catapistela. And he answered (not withstandyng his for∣mer impudencie,) it is so: saiyng also thus, oh, you call it Casia, belyke because it is lyke a case. Then this man begynning to proue his cunnyng, in the natures of symples, asked hym the nature of Peper. He sayde it was hotte in the firste degree, and colde in the se∣conde. Why then sayde the demaundaunt, what saye you to the nature of an oyster? And he (answerynge as before of the temperamente,) sayde colde in the fyrst degree, and hotte in the thyrde. Then was it sayde to the standers by, here may you see his beastly ignorance, dyd ye euer heare that two contraries▪ coulde dwelle together and agree in one subiecte? Whervnto this lewde felowe moste proudly answered. Though I can not reason so well as you, but am confounded at your hande: yet haue I done great and many cures, whiche sayd he commeth of somewhat: though you saye I knowe nothyng. After this one asked him if he weare by authoritie admitted, accordinge to the lawes of this realme, to vse Phisicke and Chirurgery, as a practiser of the sam. To whom an other sayde: thynke you that any such ignorāt asse as this is, can be any where so admitted?
Unto all this he sayde, if none should be suffered to vse thē but the learned, or suche as are permitted: a great manye poore people should perishe for lacke of helpe. To this he was answered. Naye, rather a great numbre, that are daily kylled or lamed. by suche ignorant beastes as thou arte, might (by the benefite of nature, and other good helpes of cunnyng men) recouer right well and lyue: If such as thou art weare not. Among other questions of the Anatomie, to al the which he answered as beastly, as in other thinges before: It was asked him what the splene was, and he answered, that it was a disease in the syde, baked harde lyke a bisket: deni∣yng that there was any thyng called the splene, but the di∣sease (sayeth he) so called. Then was it further demaunded of him (because he bo∣asted muche of Chirurgerie,) what a wounde was? and he answered a wounde is a hurte or a bruse. What is an vl∣cer then sayde the opponente he answered, an vlcer is a wounde. And then beyng asked whether a wounde and an vlcer weare all one, he sayde, a wounde is that whiche is newe, and an vlcer is that whiche is olde. To this it was replied that an vlcer might also be newe, and that it was an vlcer, though it weare but one daye olde. After this he sayde that he knewe an vlcer with a Canker, also a Mar∣mole and a Fistula. Wherfore he was asked what was a Canker, and he sayde. A Canker is when an vlcer doth by rankling become a Canker. Whervnto one replied saiyng. A Cancer may in dede be vlcerate and is often so: but that euery vlcer may by rankling (as thou saiest) become a Can∣cer: it hath not been redde nor seen. But then he sayde that he spake of a Canker & not of a Cancer: for a Cancer sayde he is when an vlcer stynketh. Muche more could I wryte of his beastly answeres, if I thought this not enough, yea to much, except it weare bet∣ter. And though I thinke this enough, to greue any wyse mans eyes to see, or eares to heare: yet shall I desyre them to beare with a worde or twayne more, that what they are,
euen the vnskilfull may perceiue, and learne to beware of them. A certaine pacient of myne, (hauing lately been cured at my hande,) metynge with this Nicols at his brothers house, reasoned with hym of a payne that he sometyme hadde in his hyppe: I trowe quod he, ye cal it a Sciatica, doe ye not? Yea sayde Nicols: there is a Sciatica, and a Sciitica. Then sayde my pacient, I neuer hearde my Chyrurgien name any suche. Who is that sayde Nicols? and my pa∣cient named me. Then began Nicols to praise a neighbour of myne, saiyng that he was cunninger then I: but my pa∣cient praysed me, to be cunninger then my neighbour. Yea sayde Nicols, in talke: Halle can talke better. Then sayde my paciente: I hadde a greuous sore legge, with greate a∣postemacions and hollownes: wherfore, if he coulde haue done nothing but talke, he myght haue talked long enough to my legge, before it would so haue been whole. Unto the same man also he made his vaunte on a tyme, that he sawe his maister, close a mans head together: that was clefte from the crowne of the head, down to the neck: who sayde he was after healed, and did liue. This shamles lye, beyng hearde of a mery man: was with an other like lye quited, on this sorte. Tushe (sayd this mery man) I haue heard of as great a matter as this. For a certaine man, fallyng into the handes of theues, was robbed: and his head was so smoothe cutte off, that it stoode styll vpon his necke tyll he rode home: whose wyfe metyng hym at the dore, perceiued his bosome bloudy, and asked hym if hys nose had bledde: whiche wordes when the man hearde, he tooke his nose in his hand to blowe it, and therwith threw his head in at the dore. And nowe as it is tyme I leaue also this monster, least I should to muche weary the louynge reader, with the long readyng of these moste friuolous cō∣munications, and tragedious doynges, (which I haue with griefe of harte written, trusting that it will not onely be a warning vnto some, that they committe not their lyfe and
health insicknesse, vnto suche lyfe purgers: but also that it commyng to the handes of some vertuous meane, may with the pitie of other mens myseries, moue them to la∣boure, to the most of their power, to redresse these euels.) Omitting also one Carter, otherwyse called Caruell, o∣therwyse Maye. Who is a Sorcerer, and a worker by dy∣uelyshe spirites, clokyng the same vnder the colour of Phi∣sick: and hath done much mischief among the people, wt his abhorrefull doynges. Whiche I will hereafter (as leysoure and occasion shall serue,) farther declare. I will here also omitte to talke of Grigge the Poulter, with diuers other, whose endes haue made their doinges knowne. And also of a Joyner in London, a Frencheman borne, that is of late becomme a Phisitien: who is estemed at this daye, emong dyuerse ryght worshipfull, to be very learned, and cunnyng, that knowe not his originall: yea, they call him doctor James. But an honest woman, an olde neighbour of his, (not longe synce) at a mā of worshyppes house in Kente, merueyled to see hym in suche brauerye, and lordly apparell: Who when she tooke acquaintance of hym, he wronge hyr harde by the hande, and rounded hyr in the eare, saiyng: If thou be an honest woman, kepe thy tongue in thy headde, and saye nothinge of me. For surely, a monstrous great legende should I make, it I shoulde here recite all suche, as I haue knowne & heard of. But if any man would knowe more, of the doynges of these deceyuers & runnegates: let hym reade a little booke, called a Galley late come into Englande, from Terra Noua, laden with Phisitiens, Apothecaries and Chirurgiens, &c. The author wherof I knowe not. Also let them reade a little worke, entituled A Poesie, made in forme of a vision, &c. lately imprinted. Also let them reade the verses of ma∣ister Bulleyne, in his Bulwarke, In the Dialogue be∣twene sorenes, and Chirurgery: where he ryghte truly, & pleasantly, describeth them in their ryght colours. In the which boke also in diuers places, he noteth ye sleighty prac∣tises,
of such abusers as he hath knowē, in diuers coūtreis. What shall we thinke Diogenes would saye, if he now li∣ued, and sawe so many rusticall craftes men leaue their misteries, and become Phisitiens? seynge he sayde to one that was a weake wrestler, (and after became a Phisitien,) these wordes in effecte: what intendest thou nowe quod he, craftily, and priuily be reuenged of them that weare wonte to vanquishe or ouerthrowe thee? Or what would Socrates nowe saye, who saide (upon like occasion) to a payn∣ter, that became a phisitien? nowe thou workest subtillye (quod he,) for wheras before thyne errors were espied, and iudged of all men: nowe thou wylt hyde them in the earth, or bury thē in ye grounde. Meanyng (wythout doubt) yt such phisiciens are more like to kil mē, the to saue, or heale thē. Well sure if there were good orders in all places, & the holesome lawes of this realme well executed: there coulde none such dereyue, with theyr running about, and kreping into corners, vnsuspected, & examined. For it is easy to cō∣iecture, or rather perfectlye to knowe, that no honest cun∣ning man, that meaneth trulye, and instlye, will refuse to dwell and continue, in some estemed city or towne: (for vn∣to such wise and learned men delight to resort,) and to run about here and there, through all the realme, thus like va∣caboundes, to deceiue the vnskilfull people, wyth theyr beastly doinges. I trust yet one day to see it better loked on. And in the meane season let a great many abusers (whome I knowe especially in Kent, bothe men and women, & haue not here named them,) repēt and leue their wickednes. Otherwise let them assure them selues, I wil no more stay to publysh them with their wicked doinges, & knauery knackes, brin∣ging thē into this register, thē I haue don to setforth these. It shall behoue euery good chirurgien therfore, to place hym selfe in some good towne, or famous citye, and surelye the people will resort vnto hym, and send for him at theyr nede, to hys sufficient profit and liuing: neither wyll anye good man despeyre of thys.
It can not be without suspicion therfore, either of ye lacke of cunnyng, or of a deceiuable false conscience: that a Chirur∣gien, or Phisitien, shall refuse to fire himselfe constantly in some dwellyng place, and to become a wanderyng fugi∣tiue, as these were and are, of whom I haue wrytten. Not withstanding, I am not ignorant that constante dwellers may be also deceauyng abusers: so long as ther is no punyshment, nor execution of lawes to the contrary, as for example. One named Kiterell, dwelleth in Kente, at a parysh cal∣led Bedersoen: that hath been all his lyfe a sawyer of tym∣ber and borde, a man very symple, and altogether vnlear∣ned: Who at this present is become a Phisitien, or rather a detestable deceauyng sorcerer. He wyll geue iudgement on vrines, and whyles that he loketh on the water, he will grope and fele him selfe all about: and otherwhyle, where as he feleth, he will shrynke, as though he were pricked, or felte some great paine. Then he tourneth to the messenger and telleth him where, & in what sorte the partie is gre∣ued: whiche maketh the people thynke him very cunning. They seeke to hym farre and neere for remedy, for suche as are bewyched or inchanted: and as they cōmonly terme it, forspoken. What stuffe this is, let the wyse and learned iudge. And he hath so prospered with these doynges, that in shorte space he hath been able, bothe to purchase and buylde, as I am credibly enformed, of diuers men that doe knowe and haue seen the same. For there are many that reporte, (and they no smal fooles,) that he hath cured suche as al the learned Phisitiens in England could doe no good vnto, beleue it who wyll. Not withstanding Cardanus a learned Philosopher, in his worke De Subtilitate, in the tenthe booke therof, intituled of spirites or diuels, seemeth to proue that there are cer∣tayne griefes, chaunsing sometime to mans body by en∣chauntement, or the workyng of cursed sciences: Wherof for so muche as phisicke and chirurgerie, knowe no cause,
they are also to seeke of a remedy. For in these laudable artes, there is a reasonable cause founde of euery disease: vpon the reason wherof, ther is ordeined a remedy. But when through diuilyshe and wicked sciences, there is any sycknesse procured, wherof the laudable arte of medicine knoweth not ye cause: so can it procure no helpe. But only by helpe of some of those sciences most detestable, must the same be taken away agayne: so that it seemeth to be a com∣mon composition among them, the one to tormente the bodies, both of man & beastes, that an other may be sought vnto, to remedy the same: So one beyng euer a workynge instrument to an other. For the sayd Cardanus beyng a lear∣ned Phisitien, and great Philosopher of our tyme, of My∣layne, citeth for an example, a merueylous historie, done in the same citie: whiche I wyll here wryte, that the gentyll reader may by comparing the same with others: the better vnderstand the great subtilties, and wicked workynges of such kynde of persons: the historie is as foloweth. Dygressing a whyle from that whiche we haue sayde, we wyll now rehearse what we this last yere haue sene. A certayne wyse in the citie of Mylayne, beyng come of a no∣ble stocke, was sycke of a whote or burnyng vrine, with a continuall desyre to expell the same. About the whiche the moste famous Phisitiens of our sayde citie (beyng seuen in number, besyde other strange ones, with also the Chi∣rurgiens) were conuocated, I my selfe beyng present: and yet we all could not well agree of the cause of hir griefe. For some estemed it to be a stone, one called it Erysipelas, cō∣monly called sayncte Antonies fyre: an other an vlcer, o∣ther named it an harde tumor, called Scirrbus: other sayde it was a Cancer, some affirmed that it was an Aposteme, & some that it was certayne vessikes or blisters: but reme∣dies ther could none be founde against those affectes. But through whotte fomentations, there were certayne ves∣sikes or blisters made, which were cutte. And through the vse of those violent tormentes, there folowed an inulun∣tary
emission or lettyng goe of vrine, wherof ther folowed to hir at .ii. tymes, a dangerous accidence namely a spasme or crampe, without pulse or strengthe. Thus beynge tor∣mented by this malady, seuen whole monethes without remedy, she was of the Phisitiens forsaken, and in vtter despeyre of helth. And certainly she did not feigne hir grefe consyderynge that she drunke so many bitter medicines, with sufferyng so many fomentations and perfumes, per∣mittyng also that secreate place to to be seene, of so great a nūbre of Phisitiens, beholding it by a glasse: obseruing also the diete so longe a tyme, sufferyng bloudlettyng, suffering the forsayde vessickes to be cutte, and the application and working of so many corrostues or burning medicins, which procured escares, besydes Iron instrumentes and fyre. Wherfore we beyng out of comforte, and vncertayne of the sycknesse, at the last, they condescended to my sentence: whiche was not the greatest absurditie of all, as hereafter shall apere, whiche sentence was grounded on this argu∣ment. That the disease dyd waxe worse, and grewe more and more, through the medycines. The payne was conti∣nually in the place, where the necke of the bladder dothe ioyne with the necke of the matrix: with a great extenua∣tion or fallyng away of the bodie into leanes, with suche a face as is described of Hippocrates. The emission of vrine, was not voluntary, though ther were a continual desire to doe it. There were vlcers also about the place, which were made partly through the heate and sharpnesse of the medi∣cines, and partly through the importune attraction of Irō. Neuerthelesse the burning of vrine did not onely remaine but increase, she euermore hauing a feruent desire to make water, in so much that some Phisitiens did thinke that ther was a stone in the bladder: albeit the serching with an v∣rinary instrument, called in Greke Catheter, tooke awaye that opinion: But nowe at the laste when it was published al abrode, yt this woman was extremely sick, there stepped forth to hir helpe, one Iosephus Niger, a renouined professor of the Greke letters: who was of some suspected to be an
inchanter, or worker in the wicked sciences: This woman hauing a sonne of .x. yeres olde, which was scoller to the said Joseph, & of him instituted vnto letters. This Joseph brou∣ghte with him a glasse of Cristall, in forme of a triangle, wherin he caused the childe to looke: who said that therin he sawe three foule & ougly spirites, standing on their feete before his mother. & when he had whistered other wordes in the childes eare, the childe saide that he sawe an other spirite on horseback, more high and great thē the other .iii. with a sceptour threforked, or of three prickes, who bounde the other three spirites, one after an other, and beinge so bounde, he did them vnder his saddel: whiche done, he deli∣uered his glasse to be kepte. Why should I stand so long re∣hersing this history? This woman hauing some perswasiō by this arte doth fall on sleape, hir grefe, hir burninge, and hir apetite to make water doth cease, ye rosiall colour came again in hir face, hir flesh was restored vnto a good liking: so that anon after she conceiued: and thus was she well & perfectly healed. And for the proofe herof, I haue to witnes all the familiars of the woman, all the phisitiens conuoca∣ted, and the effect it selfe. For where as before she was a dead body, now may eche one see hir in health. And now it must folowe (seyng that there can be founde none other cause) that this woman was healed by a spirite, or by imagination, or by hope. For if the childe spake the truthe, (Iosephus dissembling the matter for feare of ye law:) she was healed by a spirite. If ye child were taught & instru∣cted before of Iosephus, to speake al that he should require of him, then it was a subtiltie, wrought for the health of hys mother: & so it should apeare, that she was healed by imagi∣nation, or by confidence. And surely this doyng were mer∣ueilous, seynge Joseph woulde take no rewarde, neyther knowe I to what ende suche a subtiltie or fraude shoulde extende: not onely because he tooke no mony, but also con∣sideryng, what infamie woulde succede, in as muche as he knewe not, what good, or ill successe woulde come, of suche an enterpryse. Wherefore it is lyke to bee true,
that she was healed of a spirite. Thus farre Cardanus. It may chance nowe, that some whose myndes are al∣ready affectionate to these artes, will saye: yt it is necessary that such men should be, for the comforte of them that haue neede, when as no helpe otherwise wil serue. To whom it may be answered: that if they be Christian mē, they ought not to seke helpe at diuels: sithe ye holy ghost by the mouth of sayncte Paule hath warned, that no man doe euell that good may come therof. Farthermore, if none suche (as god in his holy lawe hath commaunded) were suffred to lyue, there could no suche inconuenience chaunce, wherby any man should haue neede to seke to them for helpe: seynge that there is neuer any neede of their ayde, but where the effect is first caused, through the wycked workyng of those damnable artes. But let this suffice that we haue spoken, concernyng the wycked abuses of Phisicke and Chirurge∣rie: and lette vs nowe procede to the dutie of the Chirur∣gien, and the good obseruation of his office: whiche wyll a∣uoyde these and all lyke abuses, whervnto at this day (God amende it) Phisicke and Chyrurgery, is made a cloke. For none of these false merchantes wyll wyllyngly be called, by the name of that whiche they moste vse: but they wyll be called Phisiciens, Chirurgiens, and Astronomers, when they can as muche skyll in any of them as brute beastes. And concernynge the behauour, that is requyred in a true Chirurgien to his paciente, & of one Chirurgien to an o∣ther concernynge councell, honeste workyng and know∣ledge: I haue thought good to gather the councels, and good documentes, of dyuers good and veterate authores, (and haue formed the same into Englyshe verses, or me∣tre:) and here to place the same, for the better instruction of all yonge Chirurgiens: that it may as well be easy to le∣arne, as apte to be kepte in memorie, of all wyllynge lear∣ners.
HArke and drawe nere ye younge studentes, Your eares loke ye vnclose: The worthye arte Chirurgery, To practise that purpose. And marke what the greate masters saye, That here before haue wroughte: And did to theyr disciples leaue, In wrytinge what they taughte. And to theyr scholers did descriue, A briefe methode or waye: Commaundinge them the same to marke, On thys wise gan they saye. VVhen thou arte callde at anye time, A patient to see: And doste perceaue the cure to greate, And ponderous for thee. See that thou laye disdeyne aside, And pride of thyne owne skyll: And thinke no shame counsell to take, But rather wyth good wyll, Gette one or two of experte men, To helpe thee in that nede: And make them partakers wyth thee,
In that worke to procede. For in so doinge thine honestye, Thou shalte well kepe and saue: Also thy patiente therby, Righte greate comforte shall haue. By thys meanes thou mayste haplye learne, ryghte seldome sene before, Of thee, or hym whyche fyrste thee taughte: Thoughe thou haue cunnynge store. And also if onghte goe a wrye, Or hinder in thy cure: The one maye mende the others faulte, while frendship dothe endure. The wounded or sore man also, Shall haue no cause to grudge: In you suche vniformitye, whyle he maye see and iudge. And farthermore thou haste thy parte, Bothe of profyt and fame: when that your worke hathe good successe, And luckilye dothe frame. And if it happe to frame amisse, Suspicyon can be none:
Sythe thou haste soughte all meanes of healthe, And wouldste not be alone. So eche man shall with other beare, Thy iuste cause to defende: All wise and learned men also, Shall thee prayse and commende. For all that be discrete doubtlesse, wyll iudge thee to be wyse: In that thou doest desyre to learne, And augmente thy practise. And wylte not that throughe negligence, And pride of thine owne waye: Thy pacient in paine shoulde spill, To perishe and dekaye. Thy purpose thus thou shalte attaine, wyth ease and honestye: where otherwyse it maye thee brynge, Shame and ignominye. And farther if thou waye it righte, It is easie to gesse: That better two, then one alone, All errores maye redresse. For as all men that here doe liue,
Borne in this wretched vale, Are fraughted full of errores greate, Oure boote mixed wyth bale. From whyche the prudent Salomon, was neuer voide and free: As of him selfe he wryteth playne, who so will reade maye see. So if thou in Chirurgerye, Alone wylte walke and wade: Thine errores will thy worke confounde, And all thine honoure quade. Sithe Bernarde knewe not all hym selfe, Thinke neuer in thy minde: But that at laste by painfull proofe, Thou shalte thine errores fynde. For errores not staide at the firste, But suffred to procede: To mischiefes greate as Plato saythe, will growe in verye dede. But the beginninge if thou stoppe, By good counsell and pure: All doubtfull thynges thou shalt preuent, And harde diseases cure,
For all to late comes remedye, when throughe thy negligence: The griefe is growne paste aide and cure, And all experience. But one thinge note, when two or moe Together ioygned be: Aboute the paynfull patient, See that ye doe agree. See that no discorde doe arise, Nor be at no debate: For that shall sore discomforte hym, That is in sycke estate. And when alone with your sore man, One of you is presente: Defame nor dispraise in no wise, The same that is absente. For noughte can more discomforte him, That lies in griefe and peyne: Then heare that one of you dothe beare, To other suche disdeine. wherfore what so ye haue to saye, In thinges aboute your arte: Let it be done among your selues, In secrete and a parte.
wyth one consent vniformlye, Comforte the wounded man: But vnto some good frende of hys, Expresse all that ye can. And let them knowe the daunger greate, That like is to succede: Prognosticatinge wittilye, And in conuenient spede. wherfore eche one of you shall take, At other his counsell: Howe that in moste conuenient wise, Ye may the griefe expell. And so that one in anye wise, From other nothinge hide: But by all meanes consulte, and for The sicke mannes healthe prouide. For in that nede if any doe, His counsell kepe a loofe: And so the wounded man decaye, It shall be his reproofe. See that for goulde or couetise, Ye take no thing in hande: whiche incurable for to be, Ye doe well vnderstand.
Or oughte vnlesse to cure the same, Thou haue some perfecte grounde: For if thou doe, it will thy fame In vtter shame confounde. Looke of thy selfe in anye wise, Thou make no praise nor boste: For that shall turne to thy dispraise, when thou doest vse it moste. See thou dispraise none other man, His error thoughe thou knowe: For sure an other for thy plage, Shall thee like curtsye showe. Commende the dedes of eche good man, The best loke that thou saye: So shall good fame redounde to thee, From all men day by daye. Not onlye in chirurgery, Thou oughtest to be experte: But also in Astronomye, Bothe preuye and aperte. In naturall Philosophye, Thy studye shoulde be bente: To knowe eche herbe, shrubbe, roote and tree, Muste be thy good intente,
Eche beaste and foule, wyth worme and fishe, And all that beareth lyfe: Their vertues and their natures bothe, with thee oughte to be rife. And in the grounde metall and stone, And veines of earthe also: Their powres and vertues in degre, Shoulde not be hid the fro. But chieflye the Anatomye, Ye oughte to vnderstande: If ye will cure well anye thinge, That ye doe take in hande. For by the same aboue the rest, Ye shall greate fame deserue: The life of man from manye streightes, To saue and well preserue. withoute the knowledge of whyche arte, thou canste not chose but erre: In all that thou shalte goe aboute, Thy knowledge to preferre: As if ye cutte or cauterize, Or vse Phlebotomye: Ye can not but erre in the same, withoute Anatomye.
He is no true Chirurgien, That can not shewe by arte, The nature of eurye member, Eche from other aparte. For in that noble handye worke, There dothe nothinge excell, The knowledge of Anatomye, If it be learned well. Endeuoure therfore by all meanes, The same to knowe and cunne, For when thou haste it perfectlye, Thine arte is halflye wunne. For therby shalt thou vnderstande, Of eche member in dede, Their nature and their offices, And howe they doe procede. And vnto what good vse they serue, As well the leaste as moste, And by their hurte Prognosticate, what action will be loste. wherby of knowledge and greate skill, Thou shalt obteine the brute, And men to thee in generall, For helpe shall make their sute.
wherfore all honour, laude and praise, To God ascribed be, The Father, Sonne, and holye Ghoste, One God and personnes three. PErhappes nowe some man wyll obiect and saye, that it is not possible alwayes to obserue these rules. For if I dwell farre from expert men of whome to aske councell, and peraduenture ammatched in the place where I dwell, with some braggynge proud boye, that came latelye oute of his prentishode: who shall for lacke of knowledge and discretion seke myne infa∣my and dishonour, and is therfore not mete to associate my selfe wyth, but rather to be auoided. To this I answer that it behoueth a good chirurgien to be ingenious, & that in this case is thy remedy. To be inge∣nious, is to be apte to deuise newe remedies for new disea∣ses, and suche as thou haste not before seene nor hearde of. In suche a case in deede it behoueth thee to be verye poly∣tique, and that allmightye God maye the better prosper all thy workes and deuises. Serue God faithfullye in hartye contemplacions daye and nighte, desiringe God for Jesus Christes sake hys dere sonne oure sauyoure, to enspire thee wyth suche grace, that thou maiste to his honor and glory, ende all suche enterprises as thou takest vpon thee to doe: (Of whyche prayer I will hereafter wryte an example,) for if God be on thy syde, feare not who so euer be agaynst thee. And that thou mayste the better knowe what thou doste, that wilt be a chirurgien, and what thou takest vpon thee to professe: knowe oute of good and learned authores, what Chirurgerye is. And so shalte thou be the better able wiselye to worke alone, where the nedefull society of coun∣sell dothe wante. Chirurgery therfore (as Angelus Bolognius in the prologe to his boke of the cure of externall vlcers sayeth) is ye moste
aunciente, ye the moste sure and excellente parte of the arte of medicyne, whiche worketh by handy operation. For the name thereof whiche was geuen thereto by moste auncy∣ent authores, signifieth nothynge elsse: For Chirurgery is Operatio Manualis that is handye worke. Wherfore syth it is a parte of Phisike, we can not so rightlye name it in Eng∣lishe, as to call it the handye worke of medicine. And far∣thermore the arte of medicine or Phisicke (wherin Chirur∣gery is comprehended) is an arte, and so it oughte to be na∣med, and not a science. And chirurgerye is not an arte pro∣perlye of it selfe wythoute Phisike, or seperated from the same, as some doe thinke: neyther can Phisike be an whole and perfecte arte wythout Chirurgery, as some woulde i∣magin. For sythe they are both partes one of an other, how can they be deuided or seperate wythout detriment to them bothe? For it is not a whole body, that lacketh one of hys chiefe members or partes. For nether can Chirurgerye be perfectlye learned wythoute theorike, nor Phisike wyth∣oute Practise. And wheras Theorike and practise goe not together, whether ye call it Phisike or Chirurgery, I dare boldlye affirme, that there is in them no manner of perfec∣tion worthy commendation. Yet some there be that thinke that onlye to Phisike belongeth Theorike or Speculation, and that to Chirurgery belongeth onlye practise: but howe farre their iudgementes differ from truthe let euerye wyse man iudge. What knowledge is there in Phisike, that is not requisyte in Chirurgerye? whether it be Gramer, Phi∣losophy, Astronomye, Anatomye, or anye other? ye the very iudiciall of vrine, and the pulse: as good Doctor Record our worthye countrye man witnesseth. wherfore I affyrme, ac∣cordynge to the sentence of moste wise authoures, that the knowledge of Chirurgerye consisteth in .ii. thinges: name∣lye speculation and practise: & therfore it is not only a wor∣kinge, but an excellente knowledge and vnderstandynge howe to worke well and perfectly. But the effectuall actes of Chirurgerye in deede (as Guido saythe,) consyste in cuttinge, in knittinge, in bindinge, in purgyng, purifying,
and exercisynge the handye operation: and all this vpon the bodye of man, to heale or bring health to the same, as much as is possible. Whiche addition we put to, because it neuer hath ben, is, nor shalbe possible for any chirurgien to heale all that are diseased and sore. Therfore we maye thus con∣clude, that chirurgerye is an arte bothe workynge and tea∣chinge howe to worke vpon the bodye of man, to heale all suche diseases as are possible to be cured. Nowe therfore let the good chirurgien (that wil auoyde wicked crafts and abuses) first learne, and then worke and vse experience: wherin thou shalt vnderstande that the on∣lye readinge in bookes is not sufficient, as manye a one at this day, (to the great hurt of muche people) thinketh. For there is no science that can wythoute seinge the practyse and experience of cunnyng masters therin, be learned: and surelye in the arte of medicine, (chieflye chirurgerye) prac∣tise and experience is the chiefest learnynge: although with oute other learnyng (I confesse) no man can attayne to the perfection that therin is required. And for this dothe lear∣ninge (in bookes conteined chieflye serue, to teache men to knowe the workes of learned masters of old tyme. But as∣sure thy selfe (what so euer suche masters haue wrytten,) thou shalt neuer perfectlye digest to thine owne vse, anye thinge in them: except thou be able to ioyne by comparison, that which thou haste sene in other mennes workes before thine eies, and in the practise of thine owne handes, wyth that whiche thou findest wrytten in olde authors: for lyttle profit, swetenesse, or vnderstandinge shall one gette of au∣thores, except he see the same also put in practise. Therfore when thou haste sene proued by cunning masters ye whych thou haste red, thou arte truelye learned in thine arte, and therfore apte to worke and vse experience thy selfe. And this regarde to experience in learninge made So∣crates say, that lerning ought not to be wrytten in bokes, but rather in mennes mindes. For this excellent Philoso∣pher well perceiued, that the committinge of cunnyng to wrytten bookes, made men to neglect the practise and ex∣perience
of their wittes, by meanes whereof they became vncunninge. Galen also hathe frendly admonished vs, that we ought nor, (if we will be perfectlye cunninge) to trust onlye to do∣ctrine wrytten in bokes, but rather oure propre eyes: which are to be trusted aboue all other authores, ye before Hip∣pocrates and Galen. For wythout the eyes consent (saith Socrates) the eares oughte not to be trusted: for the eares are subiectes and often deceiued: but the eyes are iudges bothe true and certaine. As I woulde therfore that all Chirurgiens shoulde be learned, so woulde I haue no man thinke him selfe lerned, otherwise then chiefly by experiēce: for learning in chirur∣gery, cōsisteth not in speculation only, nor in practise only, but in speculation well practised by experience. Therfore when we saye that a chirurgien muste firste be learned and then worke: It is not ment that any man by the reading of a booke or bokes onlye, may learne how to worke: for true∣lye that hathe caused so many deseiuinge abusers, as there are at this daye. Good chirurgien therfore haue a regard to these things, euen as thou wilte answer for the same at the dredful day, when the eternall Lord and almighty master, shall call for accompt of eche mannes talent: whether they haue gained therwith accordinge to his will, or whether they haue abu∣sed or vainlye hid the same. Furthermore these thinges considered & obserued, it is expedient chiefly & before all thinges yt thou haue Goddes feare alwaies before thine eies, that thou leade a vertuous life, and (as nere as God shal geue thee grace) vnsported to the world: doing iust & vertuous dedes, abhorring & abstai∣ning from all viciousnesse. Let wicked pride be farre from thy hart, and rather wt all humility confesse, that thou canst doe nothing of thy selfe, (as thou canste not in deede,) but through the grace and mercifull fauoure of God. Likewise auoide enuye and wicked wrathe, be neyther wrathfull nor enuyous, that an other man of thyne Arte hathe better successe then thy selfe: but rather endeuoure
thy self in the feare and seruice of God, to learne to doe bet∣ter, and to excede others. For to a diligente and willynge minde, there is nothing to harde ne impossible. Let charitye surmounte couetise, so that it haue no place in thy harte: otherwise then it shallbe requisite for thee to liue like a man of science with a decent and honest mainte∣nance of necessaryes. Let no slouthe cause thee to neglecte thy cures wherof thou haste takē charge, least through thy negligence they pearishe, and their bloud call for vengance on thee at the handes of God. In anye wise be thou no lechoure, but adorne thy life wyth honest, chaste, and sober manners: for that vncleane and filthye vice is muche to be abhorred in a Chirurgyen: consideringe the secretes of manye honest folkes, that to hys charge and cure muste be committed. Lastlye and aboue all these, beware of dronkennesse, a vyce that was neuer more vsed, then it is of manye at thys tyme. For when hathe this vile reporte (or rather reproche) gone of so manye as it dothe at this daye, he is a good chi∣rurgyen in the forenone? O abhomination of all other in a chirurgien to be detested. But how vnmete suche are to be chirurgiens, I haue touched more at large in my preface. Let vertue therfore I saye be thy guide: let hir be bothe thy rule and compasse, wherby to frame all thy doinges. And consider that chirurgerye is a arte to heale dyseases, whyche is a vertuous exercise, ye a gifte of Goddes spiryte as saythe S. Paule: and therfore can neuer be well vsed of vicious personnes, althoughe they haue neuer so much ler∣ninge. For vice and vertue can neuer accorde, but alwayes one is expelled by the other, for two contraries can neuer a∣gree in one subiecte. Consider also howe by vertuous and holye lyfe, and by faithfull prayer the very angelles at Goddes appoyntment haue descended from heauen, to aid and helpe men in thee nede, teachinge them remedies for diuers griefes: as holye Raphaell was sent to Tobye. And as thou mayste reade in the .xxxviii. chapiter of Jesus the sonne of Sirache wher he
(treatinge of the Phisitien) saythe. The houre maye come that the sycke maye be healed throughe them when they praye vnto the Lorde, that he maye recouer and get health to lyue longer. Loe here mayste thou see that thy duety is to praye vnto God for thy pacient, and for helpe and grace to heale him. Praye therefore faithfully vnto God: serue hym deuoutlye, call rightlye vpon his holy name day and night, wyth an holye abstinence as scripture teacheth, not omyt∣tinge dedes of almes, the frutes of perfecte faythe. Moreouer be not ingrate nor vnthankefull vnto God, when he sendeth good successe to thy businesse, good lucke to thy handes, and graunteth thee thy hartes desyre. For vnthankfulnesse many times is the cause that our prayers are not heard. Praise God therfore for his benefites, & pray faithfullye to hym in all thy streightes of nede, and this do∣inge be sure that God will prosper all thy wayes, and geue good successe to all thy workes. Take here therefore an ex∣ample of prayer whiche thou mayste vse I trust to the glo∣rye of God. A prayer necessarye to be sayde of all Chirurgiens. O Almightye, eternall, impassible, and incom∣prehensible Lorde God: whiche haste created all thinges of nothinge, and man out of the slime of the earthe, settinge him in paradyse to liue euer in felicitye: from whiche he most disobedientlye fell into this worlde of infyr∣mities. Whiche infirmities yet neuerthelesse thou haste (of thy greate mercye) so pityed: that for the helpe and curai∣on of them, thou haste (by thy speciall grace) geuen vertue vnto trees, herbes, rootes, beastes, foules, fishes, wormes, stones and metalles. And in fyne hast left nothing, among all that thou haste made wythout a propre vertue, for man his vtilitye and helpe in tyme of neede: and haste also moste
graciouslye geuen knowledge vnto men, for to vse and mi∣nister thy creatures to the helpe of their griefes. Graunte vnto me moste mercifull God, that (as I truely beleue and faithfully trust, that all healthe and vertue commeth from thee,) I maye so knowe and vse thy creatures to the helpe of my christen brethren and neighboures, in that arte that I throughe thy prouidence, haue from my youthe vp bene trained and instituted vnto: that not onlye I for the prospe∣rous successe of mine arte, but my poore pacientes also and all other together, maye praise and honor thy holy and bles∣sed name. which liuest and reignest one God in Trinitye, and Trinitye in vnitye, world wythout end. Amen. Another. O Lorde God euerlasting and almighty chirurgi∣en, who only art the Lord that healest Israell: (yt is thine elect). And hast created medicin out of the earth (of no wise man to be abhorred) so that bitter water was made swete by the ver∣tue of a tree: that men mighte learne therby to knowe that thou haste geuen vertue to all thinges, and hast geuen wis∣dome and knowledge vnto men frō time to time, that thou maist be honored in thy wonderous workes. For Salomon spake of all rotes and trees, euen from the Cedar that gro∣weth in Libanon, vnto the Hisope that springeth out of the wall. Ye he spake also of beastes, foules, wormes, and of fi∣shes. I reade also O Lorde that by a little meale, the bitter∣nesse of Colocinthis was cured in the potage pot of the pro∣phets children: And by a plaster of figges kinge Ezechias was healed of his sicknesse sore. I also remember that by ye gaule of a fyshe, the blindnesse was taken from olde To∣bies eyes. Innumerable O Lorde are the testimonies of scripture, beside dailye experience: whiche prouoketh and stirreth me to laud and praise thy moste glorious name. I beseche thee therfore, oh moste mercifull Lord, that I maye so vse, and all my patientes so receiue thy creatures, that
thou so graciously haste ordeined for medicine, that health may be obteined, and thy name for the same euerlastingly honored. Graunt this oh lorde, holy and euerliuyng god, for the merites of thy dere sonne our only sauiour and mercye seate thy holy wisdome Jesus Christ, in whom is all vertue to cure all thynges worlde without ende. Amen. A praier to be vsed of the good Chirurgien before he conclude to take in hande the curation of any harde and difficulte thing, at any mans impor∣tunate sute and requeste. O Almightie lorde God heauenly father who by thy diuine prouidence forseest and disposest all thinges to thy glory and the profite of thy churche. Thou seest all thinges before they come to passe, and thinges that yet are not are with thee as though they were: but man thou hast inclosed within metes & boundes of knowyng thinges after they are chanced: so that we only iudge of thinges pre¦sent, & as for thynges to come, we can not before hande cer∣tenly decerne them. Not withstanding for so much as thou hast mercifully decreed through our lorde Jesus Christe, that all thinges turne to the beste to those thy chosen chyl∣dren, who rightly loue and feare thee: Thy strengthe sup∣plieth our weakenes, thy wysdome our folye, & thy know∣ledge our ignorance: And causest vs neuerthelesse to fele by faithe in our soules, that whiche our carnall senses can in no wyse taste. My prayer therfore oh mercifull lorde, is that of thy gracious goodnes and merciful benignitie, thou wilt so forsee and prouide for me most vnworthy and wret∣ched sinner (yet thy seruant through Christe) that I neuer take vpon me to cure either this or any other thing, vnles thy godly will be, that I may through thy grace so ende the same, that not only I may thereby attayne an honest fame, and the partie greued ioye, gladnes and health: But chiefly that we both and all other good people (the same conside∣ryng) may remember thee with thankes, lande, honor, and
prayse, for thyne abundant mercie grace and vertue to our lyues ende. Graunt this O Lorde God eternall and omni∣potent, for the sake of thy euerlasting word, thy dere sonne our only sauiour and mediatour, by whome thou workest all in all thynges: who lyueth and reigneth with thee and the holy ghost, one God in Trinitie, and Tinitie in vnitie worlde without ende. Amen. ¶Nowe that after my symple skill I haue formed praiers mete for Chirurgiens, I thinke it mete to shew also an example howe to prayse God for the good successe of the chirurgiens busines, as foloweth. O Eternall father, almyghtie God maker of al things, howe great & glorious are all thy wōderous workes, thy louyng kyndnes and mercies to mankynde ex∣cedyng them all: for thy benefites bestowed on mankynde are infinite and incomparable. Among whiche thy crea∣tures and workes of thy handes, I moste poore vnworthy man and wretched sinner, haue endlesse cause to acknow∣ledge thy grace and mercies. If oh lord I should once imagin to gratifie thy goodnes, beholde what hath mortal man to geue vnto God? or what hath man that is not Gods? neyther hast thou O God any nede of man, or ought that man hath. But not withstan∣dyng, thy sonne our sauiour by diuyne prouidence hath sa∣tisfied for vs thy wyll, and apeased thy wrath, iustly bente on vs for our manifold sinnes: And through the holy ghoste thy spirite of truthe (who leadeth vs vnto all truthe) we are informed, that thou askeste of vs from henceforthe no more, but a lyuely sacrifice of thankes geuyng and prayse of thy holy name. Wherfore not withstāding mine vnworthines, through Christe I am boldened (fully hopyng that of thy great mer∣cye thou wilt fatherly accepte the same) moste hartily to thanke thee with all my harte and soule, for the good suc∣cesse that thou haste geuen to the exercise of my handes to
brynge euen wonderfull thinges to passe. Wherfore O Lorde holy and iust: all possible thankes, honour, glory, and prayse, be geuen vnto thee. Beseching thee (for Jesus Chri∣stes sake) to geue me grace that I neuer forgette or put out of mynde for any thynge whyle I lyue, to remember styll to offer thee this sacrifice, so that I receyue not this thy great graces vnthankefully vnto my lyues ende: and after this lyfe that I may with the holy patriarkes, prophetes, Apostles, Euangelistes, Martyrs, Confessors, Angels and Archangels, synge with incessant voyce before thy throne, holy, holy, holy, Lorde God of Sabaoth for euer and euer. Amen. Finally, see that ye ascribe al honor vnto the holy Trini∣tie, and seke not in any wyse your owne prayse and vayne glorie, least ye therein displease GOD and iustely prouoke hym to withdrawe his grace frome you, whose instru∣mentes ye are, whyle ye dooe well, as is the hammer in the hande of the woorke manne. For as sayeth the pro∣phete Esaie, Cap. 10. Num gloriabitur securis aduersus eum qui asecat? aut serra magnificabitur aduersus eum qui se tractat? Quod per∣inde esset ac si uirga sese eleuaret cōtra eū qui ipsam fert, et baculus sese extolleret quasi lignum non esset. That is, Shall the axe boste it selfe against him that heweth therwith? or shall the sawe bragge against him that hādleth it? Which were euen lyke as if the rodde did exalte it selfe against hym that beareth it and the staffe should extolle it selfe as though it weare no woode. FINIS.
Our miserie and fraile estate, In nothing is declared more, Then in our errors rathe and late. That chance when least we loke therfore, Yea and also whiche yet is more, we many times put faultes in vre, when from them we our selues thinke sure, wherfore sith it is destinate, And none can clerely it withstande, with loue and with most friendly rate, Before to rede thou take in hande This worke, let all the faultes be scande, And by this rule the same redresse, Leste faultes good frutes to muche opresse. ¶The errors of Lanfranke his briefe. Page, Line, Error, Correction. 4. 12 14. 14 Contution, Contusion, 6 31 tritici, triticeae, 7. 70. 11.8 olium, oleum, 9 11 dilicasie, delicasie, 11 3 partibibus, partibus, 12 13 concouate, concauate, 15 3 hurtfulle hurtfull, 30 13 profite proofe, 34 14 actuaile actuall, 34 37 Canterize Cauterize, 53 2 Sulphur Sulphur 67 6 Raedices Radices ¶Errors of the margent. 19 7 Lencophlegmatias Leucophlegmatias, 29 12 fraximi fraxini,
¶Errors in the Expositiue table. Page. Line, Errors, Correction. 15 30 24 2 32 17 arabian's arabians 43 16 morrein in of be∣astes morrein of beastes 48 14 Sanguinaria Sanguinarius 58 25 opthalmia Ophthalmia 61 6 of mother of the mother 82 24 Syluestri Syluestris 104 12 Siston Sciston 109 21 pelpeth helpeth 111 9 them then 113 24 Scarfication Scarification 114 33 Sclirocis Sclirosis 119 4 sendew senuye 124 7 bobye bodye 127 5 Leminam phragidon Lemnian sphragidon, 140 16. 17 Colcothar Cholcothar Errors in the margent of the same. 6 12 eins eius 18 4 Crambo Crambe 67 7 Theremiabin Thereniabin Errors escaped in the Anatomie. 12. 16. 20 in ye     28. 36 titles parte Treatice 22 9 sussiciently sufficiently 40 12 Motitiaea Notiaea 61 7 Aditorium o Adiutorium o 64 15 Plenatica Splenatica 76 30 arieries arteries 81 10 Subtilae Subtile 89 18 nather nether
¶Errors in the margent of the same. Page, Line, Errors, Correction. 3 14 Ceruix ossium Ceruix ossis or Ceruices       ossium 6 1 29 11 contutio contulio 39 4 anciformis anceformes 40 13 teuuis tenuis 56 6 63 61 muscles of the brayne. muscles of the arme
