1538 99842337 6982
HONI·SOIT QVI MAL·Y PENCE BATMAN vppon Bartholome, His Booke De Proprietatibus Rerum, Newly corrected, enlarged and amended: with such Additions as are requi∣site, vnto euery seuerall Booke: Taken foorth of the most approued Authors, the like here∣tofore not translated in English. Profitable for all Estates, as well for the benefite of the Mind as the Bodie. 1582. LONDON Imprinted by Thomas East, dwel∣ling by Paules wharfe.
CONSERVA ME DOMINE THe Bat vnknowne, yet this his natiue soyle, And beares, that Parentes had, by Martiall prowesse toyle, From Swoll as may appeare, of Germane race in deede, By Emprour Charels he, that gaue each one his meede. The Moone increasing showes, that Iustice (aye) must grow And AEgles winges, of white, and red, the Lawes to vse below, The mecke and milde to guide, the wicked to displaie, As heretofore (when vertue shall) restore that did decaie, The Starres, triangled set, declares not one, but all, Should know their Prince, their Land, their Frend, least ouer soone they fall. The Shield of glittering Gold, reportes a Gift of Grace, And Starres aboue the Moone, foretells some noble race: So borne in one Field, as the Athuauncer will By light of light, (euen God aboue) whose powre continueth still.
¶TO THE RIGHT HONOVRA∣BLE Lord, Henrie Cary, of the most noble order of the Garter Knight, Baron of Hunsdon, gouernour of the Queenes Maie∣sties towne of Barwicke, & Lord Warden of the East Marches of England, anemptest Scotland, & one of the Queenes maiesties honorable Counsaile, his singular good Lord: Stephan Batman wisheth; the feruent zeale of Gods truth, and long continuaunce of prospe∣rous health, vvith the increase of much honour. THE prudent and most wise king of the world, Solomon, in his Pro∣uerbs, among many sentences of profound sapience, saith, that those which be wise shal haue honor in possession: Also that the prosperity of the right Honourable shall not decay, because they shall be had in an euerlasting remembraunce, O happie birth wherevnto many are borne, to double honour: among men on Earth, among Angells in Heauen. Seeing therefore that wisdome is the onely preferrour to honour, how much is he, to be had in speciall reuerence, who in very deed sayth. I Wisdome dwell with Counsaile,Pro. 8. and find out Knowledge and Vnderstanding. By me Princes reigne, beare rule, and Noble men doe iudge the Earth, I haue bene from euerlasting, I was before the foundations were laide, therefore harken vnto me: Doe iustice, heare the oppressed, defend the innocent, forget not to doe good to al men, but specially to those, that are of the householde of Faith: let not your hands be open to receiue, and shut when you should giue: Be mercifull, for our heauenly Father is mercifull, who in ve∣ry deede is the Wisedome, whereof I haue spoken, and the same, from whome all ac∣tions of good directions proceedeth: by whose incomprehensible grace I haue ben made able to renew and finish an olde auncient booke, containing the properties of sundrie things, the discription of Countries, dispositions of creatures, operation of Ele∣ments, effects of simples, and such lyke, no lesse needfull then profitable, as shall ap∣peare, by perusall thereof: Beseeching your honour to accept this my Dedication, (not as a defendour of some friuolous fantasie) but as this booke shall deserue, being read ouer, wherein I doubt not, but that your honour shall finde many things to your contentation. This I end, depending on your honourable furtheraunce, when Oppertuniti shal minister Occasion, and in the meane time, I shall not cease to pray vnto God, whose merciful pro∣uidence guide you, with his endlesse prosperitie, and all Christi∣an magistrates. Your Honours Chaplaine, at commaun∣dement. S.B.M. Vesper. Accept the trauaile of him that wisheth prosperitie to his Countrie: for the gift of knowledge is greater, then the patrimonie of many friends.
TO THE READER. Itale in his discrip¦tion of Britaine, printed Ana. 1548. reherseth Barthel∣mevv, but not Glāt∣uile, to be in Ed∣vvard the 3. time.THIS booke, beeing first set forth, in the yere of our Lord God. 1360. The Author whereof is reported to be a Franciscan Frier, of the no∣ble familie of the Earles of Suffolke, (named Barthelmew Glantuile) who studeously gathered this singular worke, for the most part, of the properties of those things the which he had found written in the Bi∣ble, to the onelye benefit of his Countrie: which booke, was had in great estimation among the learned, as well beyond the seas as at home, vntill within 60, yeares past, there sprang vp famous, and worthy persons, of singular perseuerance and learning: which from the course of auncient beginnings, set foorth the same that was formally written of, with additions aunswerable to time present, vsing new Ti∣tles, wherevnto is added so much as hath bene brought to light by the trauaile of others, as Conradus Gesner of Tygure, Phisition, writing of the nature of beasts, birds, fishes, & Serpents, Fuchsius, Mathiolus, Theophrastus, Paracelsus, and Dodoneus, these wrote of the natures, operations and effects of Hearbs, Plants, Trees, Fruit, Seeds, Met∣talls and Mineralls. Sebastian Munster, Henry Cornelius Agrippa, and others of A∣stronomie and Cosmographie. Abraham Ortelius of Antwarpe for maps & discrip∣tions: all which woorkes hath done great good in diuerse and sundrie Common wealths. I haue therefore as an imitator of the learned, for the good will I bare to my countrie, collected forth of these aforesaid Authors, the like deuises, which they in times past gathered of their elders, and so renuing the whole booke, as is apparant by additions, is brought home, the Master, the Pilot, and the profit thereto belonging, de∣siring the well acceptation of the same, and the friendly correction, if anye wordes shall happen to be mistearmed in the imprinting (hoping that there will be found very fewe.) Farewell in the Lord Iesus, from whose magnificence floweth the spirituall knowledge of our per∣fection, both heere and in the world to come. Stephan Batman, professour in Diuinitie.
THE PROLOGVE of the Translator. TRue it is, that after the noble & expert doctrine of wise and well learn∣ed Philosophers, lefte & remaining with vs in writing, we knowe that the properties of thinges followe and ensue their substannce. Héerefore it is, that after the order and the distinction of substaunces, the order and the distinc∣tion of the properties of things shall be and ensue. Of the which things, this worke of all the bookes ensuing, by the grace, helpe and assistaunce of Almighty God, is compiled and made. Meruaile not ye wittie & eloquent readers, that I thiu of wit, and boid of running, haue trans∣lated this booke from latin into our vul∣gar language, as a thing profitable to me, and peraduenture to manye other, which vnderstand not Latine, nor haue not the knowledge of the properties of things, which things be approued by the bookes of great and cunning Clearkes, and by the experience of most wittie & noble Philosophers. All these properties of things be necessarie and of great va∣lew, to them that will be desirous to vn∣derstand the obscurities or darknesse of holy Scriptures, which are giuen to vs vnder figures, vnder parables & sēblance or likelihoods of things naturalls & ar∣tificialls. S. Denis that great philosopher and solemyne Clearke, in his booke na∣med, The heauenly Hierarchies of An∣gells, testifieth and witnesseth the same, saieng in this manner: Whatsoeuer a∣ny man will coniect, faine, imagine, sup∣pose, or say: it is a thing impossible, that the light of the heauenly diuine bright∣nesse couered and closed in the Deitie or in the Godhead, should shine vpon vs: if it were not by the diuersities of holy couertures. Also it is not possible, that our wit or intendement might ascende vnto the contemplation of the heauenly Hierarchies immaterials, if our wit be not led by some materiall thing, as a man is ledde by the hande: so by these formes visibles, our wit may he ledde to the consideration of ye greatnes or mag∣nitude of the most excellent beauteous claretie, diuine and inuisible. Also, the blessed Apostles Paule in his Epistles re∣citeth this, saieng: that by these things visibles, which are made and be visible, man may sée and know by his inwarde sight intellectuall, the diuine, celestiall, & godlye things, which are inuisibles to this our naturall sight. Deuout Doc∣tors of Theologie or Diuinitie, for this consideration, prudently and wisely read and vse natural philosophie and morall, and Poets in their fictions and fayned informations, vnto this fine and end, so that by the lykelihoode or similitude of things visible, our wit or our vnderstan∣ding spiritually, by cléere and skilfull vt∣teraunce of words, may be so well or∣dered and vttered, that these things cor∣poralls may be coupled with things spi∣ritualls, and these things visibles maye be conioyned with things inuisibles. Excited by these causes to the edifieng of the people contained in our Christian faith of Almightie Christ Iesus, whose maiestie diuine is incomprehensible, and of whom to speak it becommeth no man but with great excellent worship and honour, and with an inwarde breadfull feare. Loath so offend, I purpose to say somwhat vnder the correction of excel∣lent learned Doctours, and wise men: what euery creature reasonable ought to beléeue in this our blessed christian faith. FINIS PROLOGI.
¶The names of the Authors to this Booke, in what time, and of what profession, AVgustine the famous Doc∣tour in Christs Church, born in Affricke, in a towne cal∣led Gathensis, was of such excellent wit, that in his childhoode, hée learned all the seauen lyberall Sciences without an instructour. He was won∣derfully learned, especially in the doctrin of Plato, whereby he was the rather in∣duced to imbrace the Christian fayth. He fauoured the errours of the Mani∣ches, but by the continuall prayer of his good mother Monica, and the perswasi∣on of Saint Ambrose, he was at last conuerted to the true faith. They both replenished with the holy ghost did sing together the psalme Te Deum, aunswe∣ring mutually one to the other. After∣ward in prayer, writing and preaching, he so profited, that he was had in great reuerence of all men, and wrote more Bookes then euer did any in ye Church of the Latines. He lyued seauentie sixe yeares, and was Bishop of Hippone a Citie in Affricke fortie yeares, and dyed in the yeare of our Lord, foure hundred thirtie seauen. Amandus, was Bishop of Traiectē∣sis in Vascouia, a man learned and of godly lyfe, about the yere, foure hundred eightie. Ambrose was Bishop of Millaine, the yeare of our Lord three hundred sea∣uentie and thrée: a Romane borne, of a noble and auncient house, and had bene Consull. As this man (béeing sent by Valentinianus ye Emperour to Millaine, to pacifie a sedition) perswaded the peo∣ple to concorde, sodaynly the voyce of an Infant was heard of all men, which cryed: Ambrose is worthie to bee Bi∣shop. Which voyce so feruently stirred the people, that they all condescended to make him their Bishop, notwithstand∣ing he was not yet baptised, but new∣lye instructed in the faith, they compel∣led him to take the Office, and foorth∣with all the people of Lumbardie agrée∣ed in one opinion of the Faith: a rare forme of election. Hée was of singular holynesse, gentlenesse, wisedome and ler∣ning, &c. Thomas de Aquinus, borne in Sici∣lia Doctor, of the order of a Friar prea∣cher, Disciple to Albertus Magnus, in the Prouince of Apulia, descended of noble Parentage, an excellent Diuine. He wrote foure Bookes of Sentences, and was called the Angelicall Doctour. Manye preposterous fables haue bene written of him, onely this, that he was notwithstanding his learning, verye superstitious. He flurished about the yeare 1274. After Lanquet, one thousand two hundred fiftie and eight. Ancelme was Archbishop of Caun∣terburie,Eng. first a Muncke, in which time he wrote diuers Bookes, Cur Deus Homo, De libero Arbitrio, De simili∣tudinibus, Monologyon, De praedestina∣tione, &c. This man was simple in shewe, and subtill in disputation, a spe∣ciall fauourer of the Romane relygion, He flourished about the yeare of Christ one thousande one hundred and sixe, af∣ter Lanquet. This Ancelme is sayde to bée the cause of Cleargies diuorce from theyr wiues. Aristotle Sonne of Nicomachus the Phisition, borne in Stragera in Greece, consuming his youth ryotous∣lye: hée was after Scholler to the no∣ble Plato twentye yeares continuallye. Hee excelled all men in sharpnesse of wit, and knowledge in diuers Scien∣ces: wherefore King Philip of Mace∣donia, sent him his Sonne Alexan∣der to teach, saieng: Hée thanked God that hée hadde a Sonne borne in his time. This man began a seete, the followers whereof, were called Peripatetici. Hée taught in Athens after
Platoes death foure and twentie yeares. Hée was bannished out of Athens, be∣cause it was supposed hée déemed not well of theyr Goddes. It is written, that hée dyed by this occasion: as hée went by the sea side among fishermen, they tolde him a Riddle, which when by long studye hée coulde not assoyle, for shame and sorrowe hée dyed. Hée was lyttle of personage, crooke backed, ill shapen, and stutting. He was thrée hundred fortie fiue yeres before Christs Incarnation. Auicen or Abicen, a famous Phisiti∣on, whom some suppose to be of a Citie in Spaine called Hispalis, or Ciuile. Hée was excellently lerned, and wrote in the Arabick tongue many noble workes of Philosophie, naturall and Metaphisicke. He comprehended Phisicke in fiue Uo∣lumes, wherein he calleth himselfe, the Interpretour of Galen: he was about the yeare of our Lord 1151, and was (as some suppose, poisoned by Auerois, whom he slew before he died. Auerois a great Philosopher, & Phi∣sition enimie to Auicen, & also to Christ, and for his great Commenes written vpon Aristotle, he is named Commen∣tator. He was about the yeare of our Lord 1145. Appollonius, borne in Greece, about the yeare of our Lord 90. He profited so in learning that being but a childe, was a learned Philosopher, he followed the sect of Pythagoras, going alway in linen, and neuer eating any thing that had life. Notwithstanding his great learning, yet trauayled he into Aegypt, Persia, Ae∣thiopia, & Iudea, & returned into Greece, and Rome. After a while about the age of 80. yeares in great assemblye of peo∣ple was sodainly conueyed away, no man knoweth how nor whether, as Philos∣tratus who wrote his life saith. There were other also of the same name. Eng.Alfredus Anglicus of Beuerley priest, a man of singular vtteraunce, learned in Diuinitie, Philosophie, Historie, and Mathematickes. He flourished about the yeare of our Lord. 1087. as sayth Iohn Bale, a worthye Historiographer of late memorie. Asclepiades a famous Phisition. Al∣so a Philosopher, the time when he flo∣rished is not certaine. Basilius a man of great vertue & ler∣ning, borne in Cappadocia, of a noble house, being very skilful in Rhetoricke, Logicke and Philosophie, disputing at Athens, and there obtained such fame, as in procéeding farther he became Bishop of Caesarea, & taught the people the true fayth. He was exiled by Valens the Emperour, but reuoked from exile. He flourished about the yeare of our Lord, 367. and dyed the yeare of Christ. 387. There wer two other of ye same name. Alley. Beda Angliae, a famous lerned man:Eng. for his modestie, vertuous life and lear∣ning, surnamed, Worshipfull Bede. Hée wrote the historye of the Saxons apart, whose hystoricall methode, diuers wri∣ters since haue followed. He flourished about the yeare of our Lord 724. after Lanquet. After William Alleye Bishop of Exceter in his Miscellenca, Beda was an Englishman, and lyued in the time of Iustinian the seconde, he was also in the time of Iohn ye 6. Bishop of Rome, When the Sarazens arriued out of A∣frica to inuade Spaine, then Bede with his letters, sollicited the Princes to re∣couer it againe. He wrote many works both in the Gréeke and Latine, especial∣ly one notable worke, De Natura, & temporibus, which is diuided into thrée bookes, hée wrote aboue an hundered bookes, of which some be fained in his name, he had two bretheren learned, whose names were Strabo and Haimo. He trauayled other countreyes, twen∣tie nine yeares, and being of the  of 72. dyed Anno. 734. Bernard, was borne in Burgondy, in the Castle of Fountaynes, of noble lyg∣uage, he became a Muncke in the Mo∣nestarie of Clareuallencis, gane himselfe so studie, and wrote diuers Bookes, as De Consideratione, ad Eugenium Pa∣pam, De Cantica canticorum, De amore Dei, Librum meditacionum, and manye other Homelies, Epistles and Sermons. He was about Anno. 1112. and lyued to the yeares of 63. After the Legenda, de∣ceased.
Anno. 1156. Boecius a learned man and Se∣natour of Rome, who lyued in the time of Theodoricus and Odeacer, Kinges of the Ostrogothes, that is East Gothes, now vnder the gouernment of the kings of Denmarke. Gothia, an Ile by Den∣marke called Gutland, not farre from Norway. This said Boetius, (the friend of Manlius Seuerinus) a Poet and Phi∣losopher, among diuers excellent works he wrote De consolatione Philosophiae, De trinitate & de vnitate Christi, de To∣picis, he flourished about Anno Domi∣ni. 473. he dyed about 520. Croni. Basis a Philosopher. Busus a Phisition. Ciprianus of Carthage in Affrica, was there Bishoppe, in whose youth he was dedicated by his parents to the diuel, as Iacobus de voragine, Henricus de Eufor∣dia, and Voleteranus doe write, he was conuerted from the law of the Pagans, he was an excellent Rethoritian, a carefull Bishoppe, and a faythfull ouer∣séer of the Church, he tooke great paines in deliuering and helping of Martires, for being absent, he woulde write vnto his Priests & Deacons, that they should with care and diligence embrace & make much of the Martires, which were cap∣tiue. The fortitude and godly stoutnesse of his minde in executing of his office, the third Epistle of his first booke do de∣clare  neither did there lacke in hint, wisedome and circumspcaion. Besides this; he was of a singular modestie, for he would take vpon him to do nothing, without the consent of his fellowes in office. He was beneficiall and kind to∣wards his poore bretheren, and such as were straungers, &c. He had not withstā∣ding his vertues, errours, as appeareth in Sermo. de lapsis. 5. in Sermo de Elce∣mofina. He called Tertulians works his Master: he suffered manye daungerous conflictes: he inueighed earnestly against Heresles and Idolls, he wrote a pleasant stile. He was banished to exile by Vale∣rianus. Emperor of ye Romans. Paternus the Proconsull being dead, Galeanus Maximus who succéeded Patemus, com∣maunded his seruaunts, to carrye Cy∣prian in a Carte to the place of punish∣ment, where the Lieuetenaunt beeing a∣bout to do sacrifice vnto his Gods, brake out into these words. Thou hast liued a great while being of a pestiferous mind, and hast gathered vnto thée, men of a wicked conspiracie, & hast bene an open enemie vnto the Romane Gods, and theyr holy lawes: neither could the god∣ly and sacred Princes, Valerianus & Ga∣lenus, reduce thée by anye meanes vnto the sect of their ceremonies: after which words he was slaine with the sword. At this time Sixtu, was bishop of Rome (as Eusebius writeth) in the yeare of our Lorde, two hundred fiftie and nine. Alleye. Cicero a Senatour among the Ro∣manes, in his youth of a meruaylous pregnacie of wit, whom the excellent O∣ratour Appolonius, greatly extolleth, for what subtiltie was in Logicke, what commoditie in morall Philosophy, what secret knowledge in Philosophie natu∣rall, he knewe it. After many verations and conspiracies against him, one He∣renius the homicide of Antonie, as Cice∣ro fled, ouertooke him, and smote of his head and handes, and brought them to Antonie &c. He flourished about for∣tye yeares before the Incarnation of Christ. Cato was not first a surname, but a name of merite: for the auncient Ro∣manes called him Cato, that was wise by much experience. Of this name, two there were most excellent for their learning, gouerment and wisedome. For the one being made Consull, wan moe Cities in Spayne, then he had abo∣den dayes in that Countrey: in which iourney, he retayned to himselfe, nothing of all that was founde there, but meate and drinke onely. He made his souldiers rich, giuing to euerye of them, for re∣warde, a pounde wayght of Siluer, saieng: Better it wer that may Ro∣manes retourned agayne to Rome with Siluer, than a fewe with golde. This Cato was before Incarna∣tion of Christ, one hundred eightie and two yeares. The other Cato, was called Vticensis,
because he slew himselfe in the Towne Vtica: he dyed before the Incarnati∣on 44. yeares. D. Cooper. Scipio Affricanus, was of a wonder∣full towardnesse: this draue Anniball out of Affrike: he subdued the citie of Carthage: he after many learned & wise perswasions, greuously tooke ye vnkinde dealing of the Senate, went from the Citie of Rome, to a maner place, which he had at Linternum, and ther ended his lyfe, when he had lyued 54. yeares, be∣fore the incarnation of Christ, about 145. yeares, that yeare was Corinth in Greece destroyed. Constantine, a Phisition, of ye name many, forth of diuers prouinces. Chaldeus, an Astronomer of ye coun∣try of Assyria, Solmus and Plinie name that countrie Chaldae, where the great Citie of Babylon stoode. Damascen a D. in Diuinitie verye famous, called Iohn, of Damacenum Monach, for his Angular wisedome, was had in great estimation of Theodosius, Emperour of Constantinople, the yeare of Christs incarnation 440. as saith the Author of Supplimentum supplimenti cronicarum, foli. 168. liber. 9. He wrote 4. bookes of sentences, also a booke tituled, No man hath seene God at any time: De¦fide, of faith: of Christian baptisme: Item Cur Deus & Homo sit: In two books, he wrote of Mettalls and Phisicke. In the third part of Lanquets chronicle, fol. 242. is expressed of one Damacenus, a Philosopher who flourished 1352. The first of these, I take to be the Au∣thor to Glantuyle. Damascius an hystoriographer, which in ye time of Herodotus, wrote of things done, before the warre of Peloponnesus, about Anno.452. Demosthenes a Prince among the Grecians, and a singular Philosopher, a∣bout Anno.345. before Christ. He was disciple to Plato: he stammered in his speach, he put small stones in his mouth, and inforceing to speake treatablye, at last attained to pronounce very plainly. He was also an excellent Orator. Dioscorides called also Pedacius, and Phacas, a worshipfull knight of Egypt, who ioyning learning with chiualrye' being in the Romanes Hoast in dyuers countryes, in times vacant from Bat∣tayle, made diligent search for ye figures and vertues of diuers hearbs, and other things necessary for medicin, and wrote most truly of them in Greeke, as Galen testifieth. He liued vnder Cleopatra and Antonius, about Anno before Christ. 47. Democritus, an excellent Philoso∣pher, being a childe, learned of the wise men of Chalda, Astronomie, and theyr Diuinitie: after he went into Persia, to learne Geometrie. After, he returned to Athens, where he gaue his possessions and riches innumerable, vnto the weale publyke, reseruing a lyttle garden, wher in he might at more libertie, search out the secrets of nature. He wrought ma∣ny wonderfull workes in naturall phi∣losophie and Phisicke. When he beheld the Citizens of Athens, he continuallye laughed at their foolish diligence, which spared no paines to get uthoritye and riches, that they were not sure to kéepe: which laboured to get their children great possessions, who either died before their Fathers, or els ouer liuing them, shortly spēt away, al yt their fathers left them. But the Athenians not percep∣uing the cause of his laughter, thinking him mad, caused Hipocrates the Phisiti∣on to goe vnto him, who perceiuing the occasion of his laughter, sayd: Demo∣critus is not mad, but the Athenians be mad, at whom he doth laugh. He was before the Incarnation of Christ. 492. yeares. Donatus, a Gramarian, Master to Saint Hierome. About Anno.350. ano∣ther Donatus martired vnder Iulian the Apostate, or forsworne Christian. Also Donatus a notable Heretike, that helde opinion Christians to be no where but of their Congregation. Of the same opi∣nion are the Heretikes of the Familye of loue: Donatus was a Numidian, a∣bout the yeare of our Lord thrée hun∣dred fiftie and thrée. Another Dona∣tus Aretinus Bishoppe of Etruriae, a man of holye lyfe, persecuted vnder Iulianus.
Dionysius Areopagita, a famous Philosopher of Athens, and Disciple to Saynt Paule. He onelye, of all the Heathen Philosophers, beléeued Saint Paule preaching of Iesus Christ. And before, when as he was in Ae∣gypt, whether hée went for learning sake, and beeing there, together with Appollophanes who was his Instruc∣tour, beyonde all compasse of rea∣son did see the Eclipse that was at the death of Christ: Eyther (sayd he) the God of Nature suffereth vyolence, or els the Frame of this worlde will be now dissolued. He wrote to Timo∣theus Bishoppe of Ephesus, twelue bookes De Diuinis nominibus, of the heauenlye Hierarchie, and manye o∣ther excellent workes, as Suydas wit∣nesseth. Escicius or Euscicius. Disciple to Gre∣gorius Nazianzenus. Eusebius Pamphilius, Bishoppe of Caesarea in Palaestine, wrote tenne Bookes of the Ecclesiasticall Historye. He was about the yeare of our Lorde, after Sebastian Munster, thrée hundred flue, after Cronicarum, thrée hundred seauen. Eraclytus, or Heraclytus, a Philoso∣pher, which alwayes wept when he be∣helde the People, considering how bu∣sie they wer to gather treasure, and how negligent in the well bringing vppe of their children: his workes, of purpose were obscure, and harde to be vnder∣stoode. When hée was olde, hée fell into a Dropsie, in which, neglecting Phisitions, he wrapped himselfe in Cow dounge, and so lyeng a sleepe in the Sunne, was torne and deuoured of Dogges. He had no master, but by his owne nature and dilygence preuayled to great knowledge: he lyued in the time of the last Darius, and wrote manye things of Philosophie in vearses. Ari∣stotle doth often vse his testimony. He was about the yeare before Christs in∣carnation, foure hundred eightie, Sebas. Munster. Epinus. Euclides, the name of a famous Ge∣ometrician, Scholar to Socrates, of Me∣garensis, a Countrey in Achaia, about the yeare foure hundred twentie & two, before Christs Incarnation. Egidius, a Greeke Philosopher. Also a Phisition, and a Monarke, who wrote diuers Bookes, among the which he tituled one, De venis. He flourished about the yeare of our Lord, seuen hun∣dred fourteene. Fulgencius, of the Nation of Apher in Aphrica, Bishoppe of Rupensis or Ruspensis, an excellent Doctour. To these thrée Prouinces hee trauayled, in Sardinia, in Affrica, and among the Vandales, to establish the Christian faith, both by teaching, preaching, and perswading. He wrote thrée speciall Bookes. De Trinitate, De libero arbi∣trio, De regulis fidei, with diuers o∣thers. He flourished about the yeare of Christ 500. Fisiologus. Gregorius called Nazianzen, leauing his studye of Philosophie, with all na∣turall Sciences, did with Basilius of Cappadocia, fall to the reading of holy Scriptures. Hee was of noble Paren∣tage, and a Romane borne. He wrote to Procopius, that hée neuer sawe a good ende of anye of the Counsayles, among the Bishoppes of Rome. Therefore af∣firming that all of them had euill endes he left not much authoritie to be attri∣buted vnto theyr Decrees and Coun∣sayles. Alley, and Legen∣da, Authours. Gilbertus Magnus, a verye lear∣ned Writer, who flourished about the yeare of our Lorde, nine hundred nine∣tye and two. There was also ano∣ther of that name, beeing called Gil∣bertus Anti Papa, that contended a∣gaynst Gregorye the Pope, in the yeare one thousande seauentie and sixe. For the Papacie betwirte these two Prelated and theyr assistauntes, as it appeareth in Supplimentum Suppli∣menti Cronicarum, was much slaugh∣ter, bloud shedde, and discorde. Li∣bro. 12. Galenus the sonne of Nicon a fa∣mous Geometritian: In Phisicke hée was so excellent, as hée may iustly seeme
to bée raysed by diuine prouidence, at that time to make perfect that noble art, and to confound the manyfold sects and errours, with which as then it was defaced, vntill hée was fifteene yeares of age, hée was brought vp by his Father in Gramer, Logicke, and Arethmetike, after he gaue himselfe to more grauer studyes of Philosophie, wherein he pro∣fited. After 18. yeares olde, his Father by a dreame was admonished to sette his sonne to studie Phisicke, in which arte within fiue yeares, hee so notablye preuailed, that hee not onelye passed all his equalles, but his masters also that taught him, hée was adorned with the ornament of honour and good gouerne∣ment. In teaching hée vsed an excel∣lent order and methode, that his workes are wonderouslye estéemed of all that knowe what learning meaneth: So much hée tendered his owne Countrye, béeing borne in Pergamos, a famous and rich Citie in Asia the lesse, that hee chose rather in his later time, to liue there in meane estate, then with the Emperours of Rome in great estima∣tion and dignitie, hee liued (as some doe write) neere an hundred yeares, hee flourished in the time of Marcus Co∣modus, and dyed onelye for feeblenesse of age, after the incarnation of Christ, about 160. yeares. Galen maketh reporte of one speci∣all medicine (that happened to him by chaunce) to cure the Gout, which is to take olde, sowre, or tart Cheese, and with a Gammon of Bacon to be sodde together, and to bée pownd in a mor∣ter, vntill it be flat like a plaster, this sayde to the aking ioyntes, diminisheth the knots, and aswageth the paine. Hugutio was Duke of Pisan in Greece, it seemeth because hée is let by Bartholome for an Authour, that hee wrote of the nature of some thing: hée vanquished the people of Hetruria, at the mountaine called Catinum, this man flourished about Anno Domini. 1320. Of this Hugution the Authour of Sup. Siph. Cronicar. calleth him Hu∣gutio Flagiolanus of Pisan and Lucensi∣um, the Tyrant, he was a scourge to the Florentines: it maye bee that there was some other of that name, but I finde no sufficient Authour to auouch it. Hysidorus or Isidorus, was Bishoppe after Leander of Hispalensis, now called Sibilia or Siuile in Spaine, a man of sin∣gular learning and cloquence, hée wrote diuerse bookes, Ethimologarum, de sum∣mo bono, Allegoriarum, De Astronomia, Domino & silio, Deum & homo, De vi∣ris illustribus, & vocalis Grammatices, Historiarum quoque ab Adam, vsque ad haec tempora, that is vntill that time in the which he wrote. De gestis Longa∣bardorum, with others, he flourished a∣bout Anno Domini. 615. Innocentius, because there are di∣uerse of that name, if there were anye worthy the name of learned, I suppose the first and second that were Bishops of Rome, &c. Iosath a Caldean Hystoriogra∣pher. Ipartus or Hypareas Mathematicus, he was about the yeares before Christ, 368. Iuuenall, a Romane Poet, which wrote Satyres, flourished about the yeres after Christ. 88. Iohannicus. Kalixtus, Graecus siue Atheniensis, (because of his learning and study) borne at Rauena, a citie in Italy, beeing after Bishop of Rome, ordained the foure yéerely fasts, about Anno Domini. 220. if mine authour haue not mistaken this Kalixtus for some other. Lentippus. Michael Scotus, I finde not of what country or profession, onely of Iohannes Scotus, two of that name, the one flouri∣shed about 890. borne in Scotland, a man had in greate estimation of Carolus. 3. Emperour of the Romanes, for his lear∣ning and wisdome, the other was a fri∣er of the order of the Minorites. & Prea∣ther, who flourished about Anno. 1030. and was called Iohn Dunus or Dunce, otherwise Scotus. Macrobius the name of an olde wri∣ter, a Philosopher about the yeer of our Lord. 156. Mercurio, Miselake, Astrologus.
Nazarenus of Nazareth, if signifieth a man dedicated onely to the seruice of God, in the time of the persecution of the Christians, there was one Nazarius conuerted to the faith by Linus Bishop of Mediolanum (ye cheife citie in Lum∣bardie called Millane) and after dyed a martyr about Anno Domini. 70. Ano∣ther Nazarius a Rethoritian, in Anno Domini. 334. some take Mediolanium, for Mediolamum, which is the name of Orlyance in France: also a citie in West∣phalia in Almaine, called Munster. Ninus Delphicus of Delphos, in Greece, from whence was heard the O∣racle of Apollo, it maye bée the name of some writer, not lately recorded. Origen called also Adamantius, (borne at Alexandria in Aegypt) was sonne of Leonides ye Martir, a man of most excel∣lent doctrine and vertue from his child∣hood, (Saint Hierome writeth, that Ori∣gen wrote, 6000, bookes, which he testifi∣eth himselfe to haue séene) when he came to the age of. 79. yeares (as Nitephorus writeth) he dyed, it séemeth he dyed in great miserie and pouertie at the Citie of Tyrus, and was there buryed. Orosius the Historiographer flourished about Anno Christi. 400. a reuerend Priest, borne in Spaine, expert in Histo∣ries, he wrote. 7. bookes against them that said, that the decaye of the common wealth of Rome, hapned by the doctrine of Christ, he was sent by S. Augustine to S. Hierome, who was then in Iudea, to learne of him the reason of the state of the soule. Ouidius, surnamed Naso, borne in Sul∣mo (a towne in the country of Peligna) in Italy, brought up in Rome, and dili∣gently instructed in Latine letters from his tender age, he gaue most diligent stu∣die to the making of vearses, from the which he was withdrawen by his Fa∣ther, and put to learne Rethorike, wher∣in he so profited, that hée shortlye after became equall with the best Orators of that time, and was aduaunced to be Se∣nator, notwithstanding be gaue his stu∣die to Poetry: wherin by nature he was excellent, he was in good fauour with the Emperour Augustus, of whom at the last he was exiled so Pontus, where hee spent the rest of his life, in a towne cal∣led Tomos, the cause of his exile, was for abusing Iulia the Emperours daughter, as some suppose, and for making of the booke of the craft of love, wherby young mindes might be stirred to wantonnes: he liued at the time that Christ our Sa∣uiour was conuersant with vs heere on Earth. Oribasius Medicus of the Country of Sardus or Pergamus, which flourished in the yeare after Christ. 369. when Auso∣nius the Poet, Eutropius, Sextu, Rufus, and Ammianus, Historiographers, were likewise in estimation. Petrus Seuerus, whether the Apostle, or Alexandrinus, that vertuous Bishop and Martir, or anye of the 60. Peters, whereof the last is called Petrus Medi∣ces, I referre at this present. Pamphilius (the name of Neocles son) a Philosopher of Athens, Platos Schol∣ler. Also a Priest of Caesaria, which was martired about Anno Christi. 280. a ve∣ry eloquent man, in life a true Philoso∣pher, he was the famousest man in that time, a Grecian borne. Patricius borne in Wales,At Pen∣dias. for a time had his above in Scotland, and was af∣ter Bishop in Ireland: the first yt brought the Irish men to the Christian sayth. Ther is another named Patricius, Saint Martines sisters sonne, which I suppose is but the onely Patricke, because the au∣thor in Super. & Sebastian Munster a∣gree both on one computation, Anno Christi. 429. This Patricke was a zea∣lons Christian, and died at Glastonbu∣ry in Somerset shéere, notwithstanding many fabulous and superstitious toyes the wicked haue fathered on that good man. Chester sayth in Policronicon, that Saint Patricke in his time was borne, whose Father had to name Calprum, which was a Priest & a Deacons sonne, that was named Fodun, Patriks mothers name was Couches, Martines sister of Gallia, that is France, he was called Pa∣tricke for his temperance and wisdome, that is to say, father of Citizens, hée li∣ued the age of. 122. yeares, vntill the time of Aurelius Ambrose, king of ye Britans.
Papias a notable Gramarian of Lumbardie, verye learned in the Gréeke tongue, wrote a booke tituled Vocabi∣lorum, and flourished aboute Anno Christi. 1199. as sayeth Seb. Mun∣ster. Papias also Bishoppe  of Hieropoli∣tanus, a Citie in Asia, beeing ouer a∣gainst Laoditia, who was sayd to be the Disciple of Saint Iohn the Apostle and Euangelist, a man of singular learn∣ing, aboute the yeare after Christ. 132. Plato, the Prince of Philosophers (in wisedome, knowledge, vertue, and elo∣quence, farre excéeding all other Gen∣tiles) was borne in Athens, his Father was named Ariston, béeing of an aun∣cient and honourable house, his mother Parectonia, descended from the lignage of the grane Solon, lyeng in his Cradle, Bées were founde to bring Honnie into his mouth, without hurting the childe: his diuinours did interprete to signifie, that from him there shoulde flowe eloquence most swéet and delecta∣ble. ¶ Before I passe farther to speak of this Heathen Philosopher, I doe much meruaile (yet vnder the discipline of the lerneder sort) why diuers other famous men, concerning their learnings & wise∣domes of later yeares (and also Christi∣ans) notwithstanding no lesse superstiti∣ous then those Pagan Bentiles were I∣dolatrous, why many be left out and not repeated as Authors, as well as these arre fetched Philosophers, séeing that they deserue by the ballaunce of equi∣tye no lesse renowme, as if they were learned and wise, yet were they no Christians, or beléeuing Iewes. If those of our time (as by my Cataloge shall appeare) were as learned, wise, and discréete concerning writing, and yet superstitions: as you refuse not the Gentile because of his Idolatrye, refuse not the Christian because he is super∣stitious, for in disdayning the supersti∣tion of the one, and accepting the Ido∣latrye of the other, you doe then main∣taine the old errour and condempne the new vice, take therefore of both of them that which is requisite concerning knowledge and learning, and refuse both (as it is necessarye) concerning Idola∣trie and superstition. As for example, betwixt Plato and Patrike, Rabanus and Pythagoras, &c. I omit héere the wonderfull dreame of Platoes Father, and lykewise Platoes amorous vearses, which after hée came to heare Socrates, hée threw into the fire and burned, hee heard the Philosophers and Geometri∣tians of Greece, & afterward went in∣to Italy, Affrik, and Aegypt, to heare the diuine and mysticall sciences, and it is also thought that he hearde some of the Prophets, (about which tune was Ie∣sus the sonne of Sirach,) since there hée founde in his workes sentences not ab∣horring from our Catholyke faith, hée was expert in martiall affayres, he chose a place by Athens called Accademia, where hée taught, and therfore his Dis∣ciples were called Accademici, there was in him a meruaiteus sharpnesse of wit, with an incomperable dexteritie in disputing, and making aunsweres, &c. He dyed writing, of the age of 81. yeres, before the incarnation of Christ. 342. yéeres. Plateaurius Medicus. Permenides or Parmenides a Philosopher of Athens, about the yeare before. Christ thrée hundered and fiftye yeares, the Disciple of Anaxagoras, he was a Philosopher of noble paren∣tage. Plautus a Comicall Poet, borne in Vmbria, a parte of Italy, when he had spent all his substaunce on players gar∣ments, and thereby was brought to ex∣treame pouertye, hée was faine for his liuing to serue a Baker, in tourning a Querne of hand mill, yet wrote hée elo∣quent and pleasaunt Comedyes, he was in the time of Cato Censorius, an hun∣dered ninetye and thrée yeares before Christ. Persius the name of two lear∣ned Romanes. Also there was one Persius, a Satyricall Poet, Flac∣cus Aulus, the sonne of Flaccus and Fulua of Ethrurie or Hetruscum, which is the Countrye of Tuscan,
nes sent  of ligh∣in the firmoment, , such affiaunce had  these dayes to Prodiges, he was at the time of the Euangelistes about 47. or 55. yeares after Christ, he was bu∣ryed in Rome, at the age of 66. yéeres. Plinius Minor, or secnodus Veronen∣sis, a Philosopher and Phisition, the el∣der Plinie wrote ye most excellent work, called the Historie of Nature, the other wrote eloquent Epistles, supposed after Christ. 72. yeares: the young Plinie was also called Cocilius Plinius, nephew to the first Plinie by his sister, who wrote an Oration to Traiane the Emperour, in his commendation, which Oration is named Panegericus. In the which he giueth thankes to Traian, who made him Consull. Percianus. Pythagoras Samius, Philosopher a∣bout Anno before Christ. 534. in the la∣ter end of the fourth age of the world, a famous Philosopher in his time, whose Schoole was not occupyed in naturalls and Astronomie, as others, but in Areth∣metike, Geometrie, and Musicke, which he reduced first into sciences, and albeit in his time none was comperable to him in wisedome, yet would he not be called a wise man, but a Philosopher, that is, a louer of wisedome, his doctrine is said to be diuine, those whome he taught hée ioyned to kéepe silence fiue yeres, the oc∣casion supposed was, that in those fiue yeares they might as well by experience of priuat practise, as reading, become the more able to teach in theyr common wealth. (It were not a misse if in the Church of England, those gréene braines which come from the Uniuersities at 18.19.20.21.22.23. and 24. yeares, hauing passed the Gramer, and procéeded Bat∣thelers of Art, should by and by be suffe∣red to take the place of experienced and elder persons (to become Preachers of the sacred Gospell of Christ) vntill they had farther studyed priuatly, & had con∣ference with the elders, the want of such good order is the cause of so many con∣tentions in the Church, as is to bée la∣mented,) he neuer woulde doe sacrifice with any bloud, he woulde eate nothing that had lyse, he continued his lyfe in wonderfull abstinence. After the compu∣tation of Seb. Munster hée liued aboute Anno. 590. before Christ. Rabanus was a Monacke and Arch∣bishoppe of Moguntinus, Mentes, a Ger∣maine borne, but first he was Ab∣bot of Fuldenzis, he wrote certain bookes in Diuinitie vppon the Chronicles and Machabees, beside certaine Sermons: It séemeth that he wrote some feastiuall of Saints dayes, he flourished about Anno Christi. 840. Robertus Lincolne called Grosted,Did by an Epistle reproue Pope In∣nocent, affirming that the preching friers and minorit friers wer infected vvith he∣resie. in Henrie. 3. time, Anno Christi. 1253. a man so singularly learned, that of his owne coasts and charges, hée sent ouer sea into diuers places farre and néere for Hebrue bookes, Gréeke bookes, & others, wherein consisted anie matter for the establishing of christian faith, and was able to translate the same into Latine. Richard de sancto Victore, ordirus re∣gularum, of Saint Augustine, a Doctour in Paris, the chiefe Citie of Fraunce, sayd to be (as those which deserue praise of later times) he wrote. 39. seuerall books, as saith my Author Sipli. Cron. fol. 217. hée liued about Anno Christi. 1130. Simon Corum. Stephanus Strabus a Monacke of the Region of Fraunce, flourished aboute Anno. 844. the Commentator of the workes of (Rabanus the Germaine mo∣nacke, Archbishop of Mentes) he wrote a booke De officijs Ecclesia, vnto Lodowick the Emperour. Solinus an historian and Oratour, a∣bout the time of Iulius Caesar, before Christ about fiftie yeares. Symonides a Poet of Greece, borne in the Ile called Caea, who was the first that inuented the vearses called Lyrici, he was about the yeares before Christ. 663. Termegistus. Theophrastus the olde Philosopher, a prndent person. 170. yeares before Christ. Titus Liuius an excellent Historian, or writer of Historyes, about Anno. 180
before Christ. Also there was Titus Li∣uius Magnus, an Hystoriographer, about the time of Ouidius Naso, which I sup∣pose to be the excellentest writer: he flou∣rished. 20. yeres before Christ. He lyued 80. yeares, buryed at Patauium: he dyed about the fourth yéere of Tiberius Cae∣sar, Patauium a citie in Italy called Pa∣dua or Pauie, nigh vnto Venice. Also a Citie in Bithinia, nowe called Pol∣men. Theophilus Medicus, de vrinis. Ptholome the name of many famous men, whereof Philadelphus, Disciple to Strabo the Philosopher, builded the no∣table Librarie at Alexandria, and was there burned of the Romanes, the other restored the Mathematicall sciences, hée was in the time of Antonie the Empe∣rour, he also wrote diuers works. Varro a noble Romane, also singu∣larly learned, before Christes incarnati∣on. 4. Virgil the famous Port of Mantua, a noble Citie in Lumbardie, where Vir∣gil was borne, with whome flourished Horace, Ouid, Salust, Liuius, Hortensius, Antenodorus, with many others. These men were in the happie time of Iesus Christ, his comming in the flesh. Gilhelmus Couches. Ypocras a Philosopher. Ysaac. The first inuenter of LegikeZeno a Philosopher, called Zeno Elo∣ates, by adoption became Permenides sonne, about. 340. before Christs incar∣nation. This béeing taken of Nearchus the tyraunt, was stamped to death in a morter, whose constancie for his coun∣tryes safetie was inuincible. Zoroastes Magnus, a king of the Bac∣trians, in the time of Ninus, and was be∣fore the warres of Troya. 400. yeres, he first, as Plinie writeth, inuented Magi∣cal arts, and was in many other things excellently well learned, hée left bookes written, he was slaine with fire from heauen. This was that Zoroastes that laughed the same daye in the which he was borne. Andrew Bord of Phisicke Doctour, an English man, The Breuiary of health, printed Anno. 1547. Andrew Theuet his Antarctike or new found world, printed, and from the French translated. Anno. 1568. Barnadine of Escalanta, of the realme of Galisia Priest, his discourse of the East Indias, Anno. 1579. Sir Humferie Gilbert Knight, his dis∣course to Cataia. 1579. Ortelius, otherwise Abraham Horte∣lius, his vniuersal description of ye whole world. A Dutch man. Hernan Lopes, a Portingall of Ca∣staneda, his discouery of the East Indias, translated into English by Nicholas Lichfield, gentleman, 1582. Cornelius Agrippa forth of his secrets of Philosophie. A Spaniard of excellent learning. Anno. 1530. he was a knight in the court of Charles, the 5. Emperour, & had to name Henrie Cornelius. Doctor Turner Phisition, Anno. 1551. one that for his trauailes in forren coū∣tries, for the onelye benefit of this our realme of England, deserueth perpetuall praise. Sir Thomas Eliot knight, in his booke The Castle of health. 1541. Thomas Lanquet Historiographer, whose work was afterward finished by T. Cooper. Thomas Cooper, Doctor of Diuini∣tie, & Bishop of Lincolne, who set forth the great Dictionary called Thesaurus linguae Romanae & Britanicae, an excel∣lent worke printed Anno. 1578. Anthonius Roberger, his Chronicle printed Anno. 1493. Iohn Stow, in his last abridgement. FINIS.
¶ A GENERALL TABLE, CONTAINING THE number of the Chapters in euery seuerall booke, and how to finde the especiall matters contained in the same. Liber primus. OF the Trinitie. fol. 1. Of one and his vnitie. fol. 2. ¶Liber Secundus, contai∣neth 20. chapters. The first of Angells. 2. What Angel is, after Da∣mascenus. 3. Why an Angell in bo∣dyly shape is painted. 4 How Angells be descri∣bed. 5 How Angells be compa∣red to materiall thinges. 6 of the order of Angells Hierarchies. 7 of three Hierarchies. 8 of the order of Sera∣phin. 9 of the order of Cheru∣bin. 10 of the order of Thrones. 11 of the middle Hierarchy. 12 of the order of domina∣ons. 13 of the order of Princi∣patus. 14 of the order of Pote∣states, or potentates. 15 of the third Hierarchy. 16 of the order of ver∣tues. 17 of the order of Archan∣gells. 18 of the order of Angells. 19 of euill Angells. 20 of peruerse Angells. ¶Liber tertius, containing Chapters. 24. Of the properties of the soule. 1 of the discription of man. 2 of the inner man. 3 of the soule. 4 How the soule is decri∣bed of the Philosophers. 5 Howe the soule tooke name. 6 Of the powers of the soule. 7 The same to be Vegeta∣bilis in working, Sensibi∣lis through life, Rationa∣lis by perceiuing. 8 of the soule Vegetabile. 9 of the soule sensible. 10 of the inner sence. 11 of the vertue of sensitiue imagination. 12 of the vertue motiue. 13 of the reasonable soule. 14 of the vertues of the soule. 15 of the vitall vertue. 16 of the Animall vertue. 17 of the visible vertue. 18 of hearing. 19 of Smelling. 20 of the tast. 21 of touching. 22 of those things that are required to the perfection of nature. 23 The pulses. 24 of the diuersitie of pul∣ses. ¶Liber quartus containeth chapters. 11. 1 Of the foure qualities Ele∣mentaries. 2 of coldnesse. 3 of drouth. 4 of moisture. 5 of meate and drinke. 6 of humours, of the gene∣ration, effect, and working of them. 7 of bloud. 8 of the euill propertye of bloud. 9 of Fleame. 10 of Cholar. 11 of Melancholy. ¶Liber quintus containeth chapters. 66. 1 of the properties of the members in generall. 2 of the propertyes of the head. 3 of the braine. 4 of Caluaria, the skull. 5 of the eyen. 6 of the disposition of the eyes. 7 of the blacke of the eye. 8 of the eie liddes. 9 of the browes. 10 of the forehead. 11 of the Temples. 12 of the Eares. 13 of the nose. 14 of the cheekes. 15 of the beard. 16 of the ies. 17 of the lips. 18 of the chinne. 19 of the mouth. 20 of the teeth. 21 The properties of Spet∣tle. 22 of the voice. 23 of the throate. 24 of the necke. 25 of the shoulders. 26 of the armes. 27 28 of the hands. 29 of the fingers. 30 of the nailes. 31 of the side. 32 of the backe. 33 of the breast. 34 of the Paps. 35 of the lungs. 36 of the heart. 37 of the breath. 38 of the stomacke. 39 of the liuer. 40 of the gall. 41 of the splene. 42 of the bowells. 43 of the kidneyes.
44 of the bladder. 45 46 of the vrine. 47 of the belly. 48 of the nauell. 49 of the genitalls of both kindes. 50 of the buttockes. 51 of the thighs. 52 of the knees. 53 of the legges. 54 of the seete. 55 of the sole of the foote. 56 of the heele: 57 of the bones. 58 of the marrow. 59 of the gristle. 60 of the sinewes. 61 of the vaines. 62 of the Flesh. 63 of fatnesse. 64 of the skinne. 65 of the haire about the body. 66 of the haire on the head. ¶Liber sextus, containeth 30. Chapter. 1 Of age. 2 of death. 3 of the dignitie of man. 4 of the creatiō of the child. 5 of the little child. 6 of a child. 7 of the maide. 8 of the mother. 9 of the daughter. 10 of a Nurse. 11 of a midwife. 12 of a seruant woman. 13 of a male. 14 of a man. 15 of a father. 16 of a seruant man. 17 of an euill seruant. 18 The conditions of a good seruant. 19 of a good Lord. 20 of an euill Lord or lord∣ship. 21 of meate. 22 of drinke. 23 of dinner and fasting. 24 of Supper. 25 of sleepe. 26 of sleepe, what it is. 26 of waking. 27. 27 of dreaming. 28 of the operation of drea∣ming, tituled Additi∣on. 29 of trauaile. 30 of rest. Liber septimus containeth 72. Chapters. 1 Of infirmities. 2 of head ach, and of the causes and signes there∣of. 3 of medicines and remedies for ach and paine of the head. 4 of the pose, rume, or snee∣uell. 5 of the phrensie, and theyr causes. 6 of madnesse, & the causes and signes thereof. 7 of gnawring, dizinesse, and forgetfulnesse. 8 of giddinesse or light wit∣ted. 9 of waking. 10 of the falling sicknesse. 11 of sneesing. 12 of head aking. 13 of the crampe. 14 of the palsie. 15 of the disease of the ey∣en. 16 of the webbe in the eye. 17 of the infection of the eye. 18 of running of teares. 19 of default of sight. 20 of blindnesse 21 of deafnesse. 22 of Polipus, superfluous flesh. 23 of the disease of the nose∣thrills. 24 Of stinking of the mouth. 25 of the tooth ach. 26 of the tongue and lacke of speech. 27 of hoarsnesse. 28 of squinacie and strang∣ling of the throat. 29 of the difficultie of brea∣thing 30 of corrupt Spettle. 31 of the Tisike. 32 of heart quaking. 33 of the feauer. 34 of the feauer Emera. 35 of the feauer Etike. 36 of the feauer putrida. 37 of the tokens of feauer putrida. 38 of the feauer quotidian. 39 of the Tercian. 40 of the feauer quartane. 41 of the feauer quotidian. 42 of Fleagme. 43 of neesing. 44 of loathing or fainting. 45 of vnmoderate appetite 46 of yoxing. 47 of spuing. 48 of ache of the belly. 49 of torment. 50 of Dissenteria. 51 of Lienteria. 52 of the dropsie. 53 of the Iaundise. 54 of the Emeroides. 55 of the ache of the reines. 56 of Hernia. 57 of Arthetica passio. 58 of Gutta sciatica. 59 of Podagre. 60 of a Postume. 61 of Blaines. 62 of Pustules or wheales. 63 of scabs. 64 of dry scabbes and itch. 65 of Lepra or meselry. 66 of the French poxe. 67 of the morphew. 68 of venimous wormes. 69 of the biting of a madde dogge. 70 the remedye against the biting of a madde dogge. 71 of medicines.
72 Drawing medicines. Liber octauus. Chap. 45. 1 What the world is. 2 of the distinction of hea∣uen. 3 Of the Christaline and watry heauen. 4 Of heauen Emperiall. 5 of shining. 6 of the Sphere. 7 Of the circles of hea∣uen. 8 of the circle Galaxia. 9 of the Zodiake. 10 of the signe Aries. 11 of the signe Taurus. 12 of Gemini. 13 of Cancer. 14 of Leo. 15 of Virgo. 16 of Libra. 17 of Scorpio. 18 of Sagittarius. 19 of Capricornus. 20 of Aquarius. 21 of Pisces. 22 of double mouing of the Planets. 23 of Saturne. 24 of Iupiter. 25 of Mars. 26 of Venus. 27 of Mercurius. 28 of the Sunne. 29 of the Moone. 30 of certaine priuities of the Moone. 31 of the head and taile of the Dragon. 32 of the Starre Cometa. 33 of fixed Starres. 34 of Polus. 35 of Arcthurus. 36 of Orion. 37 of Hiades. 38 of Pliades. 39 of Canteula. 40 of Light. 41 of shining. 42 by shining. 43 of the light beame. 44 of shadow. 45 of darknesse. ¶Liber nonus contuneth 34. Chapters. 1 Of the diuision of time. 2 of Time. 3 of the yeare Solare and Equinoctiall. 4 of the yeare Lunare. 5 of the spring time. 6 of Summer. 7 of Haruest. 8 of Winter. 9 of Ianuary. 10 of February. 11 of March. 12 of Aprill. 13 of May. 14 of Iune. 15 of Iuly. 16 of August. 17 of September. 18 of October. 19 of Nouember. 20 of December. 21 of Weekes. 22 of the dawning. 23 of midday. 24 of the euening tide. 25 of the night. 26 of the Sabboth. 27 of the time of the new Moone called Neomia. 28 of Septuagesima. 29 of Quinquegessima. 30 Of Quadragessuna, Lent Of fasting. 31 of Easter. 32 of Penticost or Whit∣sontide. 33 of Cenophegia, a feast in September. 34 of Eucenia, what it is. ¶Liber decimus, wherein is contained 10. Chapters. 1 De materia et forma, of Elements. 2 of forme. 3 of Elements. 4 of fire. 5 of Flame. 6 of Smoake. 7 of Coale. 8 of a Sparke. 9 of Ashes. 10 of Ashes. ¶Liber vndecrimus contai∣neth 16. Chapters. Of Aire & his impres∣sions. 1 of fire perpendicular. 2 of windes in generall. 3 of windes orientall. 4 of Cloudes. 5 of the Rainebow. 6 of the Dew. 7 of Raine. 8 of a drop. 9 of hoare Frost. 10 of tle. 11 of Snowe. 12 of Mist. 13 of Thunder. 14 of coruscation and ligh∣tening. 15 of Fulmine, another kind of lightening. 16 of light winde. ¶Cap. 3. Of the foure Ele∣mentes, and the qualityes, forth of Henrie Cornelius Agrippa 4 of the consideration of Elements. 5 of the wonderful natures of fire. 6 of the wonderfull nature of the water, the aire, and the windes. 7 of the kindes of thinges compound. 8 How the Elements are in the Sturs, in spirits, in An∣gells, and finallye in God himselfe. 9 of the vertues of naturall thinges, next of all depen∣ding of the Elementes.
10 of the hidden vertues of things. 11 How hidden vertues are powred into the kind of things from the Idee, &c. 12 How to get ones owne Genius, and to seeke out his nature. 12 13 That euery man hath three keepers, and from whence each of them pro∣ceedeth. 12 14 How diuers vertues are infused into diuerse medicinalls, euen of one selfe kinde. 13 15 Stones, from whence the hidden vertues doe proceede. 14 16 of the spirite of the world, &c. 15 17 How wee ought to seeke and make tryall of the vertues of things, &c. 16 18 How the operation of diuers vertues are powred out &c. 17 19 How by strife and friendship the vertues of thinges are to bee found out, and experienced. ¶Liber duodecimus, con∣tuneth 38. Chap∣ters. 1 Of the Eagle. 2 of the Golhauke. 3 of Alieto, the Faulkon. 4 of Bees. 5 of the Owle. 6 of the Doue or Culuer. 7 of the Curlew. 8 of the Storke. 9 of the Crowe. 10 of the Rauen. 11 of the Swanne. 12 of the Gnat. 13 of Cicada, the grasse∣hopper. 14 of the Phoenix. 15 of the Crae. 16 of the Cocke. 17 of the Capon. 18 of the Hen. 19 of the Gripe, or Gris∣son. 20 of the Gerfaulcon. 21 of the Swallow. 22 of the Kaladrius. 23 of Laurus, the sea cob. 24 of Locusta. 25 of the Coote. 26 of the Kite. 27 of the night crowe. 28 of the Miredrumble. 29 of the Pellican. 30 of the Partridge. 31 of the Pecocke. 32 of Sparrowes. 33 of the Estridge. 34 of the Turtle. 35 of the Vulture. 36 of the Vlula. 37 of the Lapwing. 38 of the Reremouse. ¶Liber. 13. containeth chap∣ters. 29. 1 Of water and his pro∣pertie. 2 of pit water. 3 of a riuer. 4 of Arnnis, a riuer. 5 of the riuer Gion. 6 of Tigris. 7 of Euphrates. 8 of the riuer Dorix. 9 of Iordan. 10 of the riuer Alba. 11 of the riuer Gaza. 12 of a Lake. 13 of the lake Aspalti. 14 Of the lake Tiberia∣dis. 15 of the ponde Genesa∣reth. 16 of a Pond. 17 of a Lake. 18 of Waues. 19 of Whirle-pooles. 20 of Streames. 21 of Alluniont. 22 of deepnesse, 23 of the sea. 25 24 of Mare magno me∣diteraneo. 26 of Pelago. 27 of a Drop. 28 of Foame. 29 of Fish. Of the Fish Remora that stayeth a ship. Reade in folio 199. b. Of the Tiburon & the Ma∣nate, and the great Tor∣tuse, in fol. 201. Liber 14. containeth Chap∣ters. 57. 1 Of the Earth, and his partes. 2 of an hill. 3 of Arrarath. 4 of Bethel. 5 of Caucasus. 6 of Heball. 7 of Hermon. 8 of Ebron. 9 of Aethiopia. 10 of Aetna. 11 of the hill Esau. 12 of the hill Ephraim. 13 of the hill Phasga. 14 of the hill Gosor. 15 of the hill Galaad. 16 of the hill Garasin. 17 of the hill Gelboe. 18 of Golgotha. 19 of Gaas. 20 of Ebron. 21 of the hills of Israel. 22 of the hilles Hiperbo∣rei. 23 Of the Hill Came∣lo. 24 Of the Hill Liba∣no. 25 Of the hill Moria. 26 of the hill Nebo. 27 of the hill Hor. 28 Of the Mount Oli∣uet. 29 Of the Hill Olym∣po.
30 of the hills Oreb. 31 of the hill Pernassus. 32 of the hill Ripher. 33 of the high cragges. 34 Of the hill Sephara. 35 of the hill Segor. 36 of the hill Sinay. 37 of the hill Sion. 38 of the hill Selmon. 39 of the hill Sophu. 40 of the hill Saron. 41 of the hill Seon. 42 of the hill Semeron. 43 of the hill Seir. 44 of the hill Thabor. 45 of the hill Ziph. 46 of a Downe. 47 of a Valley. 48 of a field Campus. 49 of Ager, a field. 50 of Perdium. 51 of a Mede. 52 (of a Desart. 53 Concerning the same.) 54 of a Caue. 55 of a Ditch. 56 of a Den. 57 of a Quarrey. The .15 booke containeth in Chapters. 177. vnto the di∣scription of the whole worlde, by Ortelius, and that parte containeth 7. Chapters. 1 Of the world. 2 of Asia. 3 of Assiria. 4 of Arabia. 5 of Armenia. 6 of Aradia. 7 of Albania. 8 of Attica. 9 of Achaia. 10 of Archadia. 11 of Alania. 12 of Amazonia. The addition of the Ama∣zons. 13 Almania. 14 Anglia. 15 Aqiutania. 16 Andegauia. 17 Aluernia. 18 Apulia. 19 Affrica. 20 Asturia. 21 Arragonia 22 Babylonia. 23 Bactria. 24 Braciana. 25 Brabancia. 26 Belgica. 27 Bithinia. 28 Britania. Of Britania also. 29 Boctia. 30 Boemia. 31 Burgundia. 32 Capadocia. 33 Caldea. 34 Cedar. 35 Cancia. 36 Cantabria. 37 Chananea. 38 Campania. 39 Cauda. 40 Cilicia. 41 Cipris. 42 Creta. 43 Ciclades. 44 Choa. 45 Corcica. 46 Dalmacia. 47 Dacia. 48 Delos. 49 Dedan. 50 Europa. 51 Eulath. 52 Aethiopia. 53 Aegypt. 54 Ellade. 55 Eola. 56 Franconia. 57 Francia. 58 Flandria. 59 Fenicia. 60 Phrigia. 61 Fricia. 62 Insules fortunatis. 63 Galike. 64 Galatia. 65 Gallicia. 66 Gallia. 67 Gadis. 68 Gretia, with the Addi¦tion. 69 Gethulia. 70 Gorgones. 71 Gothia. 72 Gnido. 73 India, with the Additiō. 74 Hircania. 75 Idumea. 76 Iudea. 77 Iberia. 78 Italia. 79 Hispania. 80 Hibernia. 81 Icaria. 82 Iland. 83 Caria. 84 Carthage. 85 Carinthia. 86 Cathay. 87 Corscica. 88 Lacedemonia. 89 Lectonia. 90 Liuonia. 91 Licia. 92 Lidia. 93 Libia. 94 Lothoringia. 95 Lucitania. 96 Mauritania. 97 Macedonia. 98 Magnetia. 99 Messia. 100 Mesopotamia. 101 Media. 102 Melos. 103 Midia. 104 Misena. 105 Moscouia. 106 Mithilene. 107 Nabathea. 108 Norwegia, & Norma∣nia. 109 Numidia. 110 Narbonia. 111 Ophir. 112 Hollandia. 113 Orchada. 114 Paradiso. 115 Parthia. 116 Palestine. 117 Pamphilia. 118 Pannonia Hungaria.
119 Paron. 120 Pentapoli. 121 Percia. 122 Pirenca. 123 Pigmea. 124 Pictauia. 125 Picardi. 126 Ramathea. 127 Rencia. 128 Riualia. 129 Reinconia. 130 Roma prouincia. 131 Romania. 132 Rodo. 133 Ruthia. 134 Saba. 135 Samaria. 136 Sambia. 137 Sabaudia. 138 Sardinia. 139 Sarinata. 140 Samo. 141 Saxonia. 142 Sclauia. 143 Sparta. 144 Seres. 145 Selandia. 146 Semigallia. 147 Gallia Senonensis. 148 Siria. 149 Sichmea. 150 Scithia. 151 Sicionia. 152 Sicilia. 153 Sirtes. 154 Scotia. 155 Suetia 156 Scondia. 157 Sueuia & Tanatos. 158 Trapobana. 159 Thracia. 160 Traconitida. 161 Thessalia. 162 Tenedos. 163 Thile. 164 Tripolitana. 165 Trogodia. 166 Troiana. 167 Thuscia. 168 Thuringia. 169 Thuronia. 170 Vasconia. 171 Venetia. 172 Westualia. 173 Vironia. 174 Winlandia. 175 Vitria. 167 Island 177 Zeugia. ¶Next followeth forth of Ortelius, the last descrip∣tion. The Introduction of Ves∣per. Orbis terrarum, the map of the whole world. America. Asia. Affrica. Europa. Of India. The Empire of Turky. ¶The 16. booke contai∣neth Chapters. 104. of stones. 1 Of Arena. 2 of Clay. 3 of Alabaster. 4 of Golde. 5 of Laten. 6 of Auripigmentum. 7 of siluer. 8 of quicke siluer. 9 of Adamant. 10 of Amatist. 11 of Achate. 12 of Abeston. 13 of Absciso. 14 of Alabandia. 15 of Argirit. 16 of Astrione. 17 of Alectoria. 18 of Asterides. 19 of Amatites. 20 of Bitumino. 21 of Berill. 22 of Calculo. 23 of a Whetstone. 24 of Calce. 25 of Cemento, 26 of Carbunculo. 27 of Crisoprasso. 28 of Calcidonia. 29 of Crisolito. 30 of Celidonia. 31 of Christall. 32 of Ceraunio. 33 of Corallo. 34 of Corncolo. 35 of Dioniso. 36 of Diadoco. 37 of Ere. 38 of Electro. 39 of Echit. 40 of Emachit. 41 of Eliotropia. 42 of Enidros. 43 of Episte. 44 of Excoleceros. 45 of Yron. 46 of Ferrugino. 47 of Gleba. 48 of Gemma. 49 of Gagat. 50 of Galectile. 51 of Gelatia. 52 of Geraticen. 53 of Iaspis. 54 of Iacincto. 55 of Irido. 56 of Ienia. 57 of Kamau. 58 of Kalbrate. 59 of Kalcophano. 60 of Ligorio. 61 of Lippario. 62 of Margarite. 63 of Magnete. 64 of Menolite. 65 of Menophit. 66 of Mirite. 67 of Medo. 68 of Merchite. 69 of Marmore. 70 of Nitro. 71 of Noset. 72 of Ochino. 73 of Optallio. 74 of Orite. 75 of Petra. 76 of Pario. 77 of Prassio. 78 of Pirite. 79 of Pionite. 80 of Panteron.
81 of Plumbo, lead. 82 of Puluere. 83 of Quirin. 84 of Quandros. 85 of Rabri and Rubies. 86 of Reyben. 87 of Saphyro. 88 of Smaragdo. 89 of Sardio. 90 of Sardonice. 91 of Solis gemma. 92 of Silenite. 93 of Stanno. 94 of Sulphure. 95 of Sale, salt. 96 of Topazio. 97 of Turquesses. 98 of Turgote. 99 of Terra sigillata, and Tartara. 100 Of Vitro, Glasse. 101 of Ydaci. 102 of Yrachite. 103 of Zimiech. 104 of Zingutte. ¶The 17. Booke contay∣neth 197. chapters, of trees and hearbes. 1 OF a tree. 2 Of Arbor Aroma∣tica. 3 of an Almond tree. 4 of Firre tree. 5 of Aloe. 6 Aloe, the Addition. 7 of a reede. 8 of Amomum. 9 of Aneto. 10 of Aniso, 11 of Allio. 12 of Wormwood. 13 of Apium. 14 of Aristologia. 15 of Agnus castus. 16 of Artemisia. 17 of Oates. 18 of Balsamum. 19 of Bidellio. 20 of Buxus. 21 of Balaustia. 22 of Beta. 23 of Cedar. 24 of Cipressus. 25 of Ciprus. 26 of Cinamomum. 27 of Casia. 28 of Casia fistula. 29 of Calamus. 30 of Calamus vsualis. 31 of Calamus scripturalis. 32 of Caparis. 33 of Cardamomum. 34 of Calameent. 35 of Carix. 36 of Carduo. 37 of Carica. 38 of Comin. 39 of Coriander. 40 of Coloquintida. 41 of Cou. 42 of Crocus. 43 of Cep. 44 of Cepe canino 44 of Cucumere. 45 of Cucurbita. 46 of Celidonia. 47 of Centaurio. 48 of Daphni. 49 of Diptanno. 50 of Draguntea. 51 of Dragantum. 52 of Ebenus. 53 of Edera. 54 of Elitropium. 55 of Eleborus. 56 of Esula. 57 of Eruca. 58 of Enula. 59 of Epithimum. 60 of Ebulus. 61 of Ficus. 62 of Fraxinus. 63 of Fagus. 64 of Faba. 65 of Frumentum. 66 of Farrea. 67 of Farina. 68 of Fermentum. 69 of Fumo terrae. 70 of Foeniculum. 71 of Ferula. 72 of Foenum. 73 of Flagella. 74 of Fructum. 75 of Germen. 76 of Gramen. 77 of Galbanum. 78 of Gutta. 79 of Gariophilum. 80 of Gemisca. 81 of Grano. 82 of Gith. 83 of Ilex. 84 of Iuniperus. 85 Of Isopus, and Ia∣ceros. 86 of Iacinctus. 87 of Iusquianus. 88 of Castanea. 89 of Lauro. 90 of Lentiscus. 91 of Lilium. 92 of Lactuca. 93 of Lappa. 94 of Lappates. 95 of Legumina. 96 of Lens. 97 of Lino. 98 of Malus. 99 Of Malus Grana∣tus. 100 of Morus. 101 of Mutus. 102 of Mirra. 103 of Mirrum. 104 of Mandragora. 105 of Milium. 106 of Menta. 107 of Malua. 108 of Nux. 109 of Auellana. 110 of Nardus. 111 of Oleum. 112 of Oleum Oliue∣tum. 113 of Oleaster. 114 of Olus. 115 of Ordeum. 116 of Palma. 117 of Palmes. 118 of Propago. 119 of Platinus. 120 of Populus. 121 of Pino. 122 of Pinea.
123 of Pice. 124 of Pirus. 125 of Prumus. 126 of Papyrus. 127 of Paliurus. 128 of Papauer. 129 of Plantago. 130 of Petroselium. 131 of Piper. 132 of Pulegio. 133 of Porro. Of Polanda. 134 Of Quercus. 135 of Quisquilie. 136 Of Rofa. 137 of Radix. 138 of Rampuo. 139 of Resina. 140 of Rubus. 141 of Ruta. 142 Of Saltus. 143 of Salix. 144 of Sambucus. 145 of Saliunca. 146 of Stacten. 147 of Storax. 148 of Sicomorus. 149 of Spina. 150 of lignis Sethim. 151 of Sentrix. 152 of Sepes. 153 of Sudes. 154 of Siliqua. 155 of Sinapis. 156 of Semen. 157 of Stipula. 158 of Simila. 159 of Scopa. 160 of Stupa. 161 Of Taxus. 162 of Tabula. 163 of Trabes. 164 of Terebinthinus. 165 of Thina. 166 of Tirsus. 167 of Tignis. 168 of Triticum. 169 of Tisana. 170 of Tribulus. 171 of Thimus. 172 of Thimiama. 173 of Thus. 174 Of Vimen. 175 of Virga. 176 of Virgultum. 177 of Vitis. 178 of Labrusca. 179 of Vitulamen. 180 of Vinea. 181 of Vua. 182 of Vua immatura. 183 of Vua passa. 184 of Vinum. 185 of Vinum rubrum. 186 of Mustum. 187 of Wine compound. 188 of corrupt wine. 189 of new pressed wine. 190 Of the place where wine is pressed. 191 of violets. 192 of the Elme tree. 193 of the nettle. 194 of Darnell or Zizania. 195 of Ginger. 196 of Zedoariun. 197 of Sugar. ¶Liber 18. containeth 117. chapters, of Beasts, and their qualities. 1 OF Beastes in generall. 2 Of Beastes in speciall. 3 Of the Ramme. 4 of the Lambe. 5 of the Sheepe. 6 of the Female their dis∣ease. Of Alce the Indiā Buck. 7 of the Boare. 8 of the Asse. 9 of serpents and Adders. 10 Of Aspide. 11 of Arena, spiders. 12 of the Bee. 13 of the Oxe. 14 of Bubulcus. 15 of Buffe. 16 of the Cockatrice. 17 Of the Rubeta or Frog and of the toades stone, as big as a pease, and not as a peach. 18 of the Bombax or silke worme. 19 of the Camelion. 20 of the Camelioperd. 21 of the Camelion worme 22 of the wilde Goate. 23 of the tame Goates. 24 of Goates. 25 of hounds. 26 of Bitches. 27 of all sorts of dogges. 28 of whelpes. 29 of the Beauer. 30 of the Hart. 31 of Ceraste. 32 of a horne. Of the addition of Co∣nies. 33 of the Crocodile. 34 of Adders. 35 of Deere. 36 of the Dromedarie. 37 of the serpent Dipsas. 38 of the Dragon. 39 of the Horse. 40 of the Mare. 41 of the Colte. 42 of the Elephant. 43 of the Elephants. 44 of Elephants teeth. 45 of Elephants vertue. (In what coast Elephants breed, & of the country of Presbiter Iohn, after Hortelius description.) 46 of a Kidde. 47 of the Malshrag. 48 of Fauni and Satiri. 49 of Foemina. 50 of Foetante. 51 of Foetu, birth. 52 of Ficarius. 53 of the Ampt. 54 of Formicaleon. 55 of the drone Flye. 56 of the Gripe. 57 of Bats. 58 of Flindermice also. 59 of Hinnulus. 60 of the Goate. 61 of Hiena. 62 of the Porcapine. 63 of the Hedgehog. 64 of the young Steere. 65 of the Lyon.
66 Of the Lionesse. 67 of the Leoperd. 68 of the Hare. 69 of the Linx. 70 of the Snaile. 71 of the Woolse. 72 of the Mule. 73 of the Mouse. 74 of the Weasell. 75 of the Fyrtet, 76 of the Cat. 77 of Noctiluca, and of Odonta. 78 of the wilde Asse. 79 of the Onocentaura. 80 of Orix. 81 of a Sheepe and theyr profite. 82 of the Panther. 83 of the Parde. 84 De Pilofis, wilde men. 85 of the Poe Bucke, 86 of the Pigmeis. 87 of Swine. 88 of a Lowce or Lyce. 89 of Fleas. 90 of the Rhinoceros. 91 of Frogges. 92 of the Salamander. 93 of water leach. 94 of the Lizard. 95 of Serpents. 96 of the Ape. 97 of Mermaides. 98 of Scorpions. 99 of a Sowe. 100 of a Bull. 101 of a Goate bucke. 102 of a Moale. 103 of the Badger. 104 of the Tiger. 105 of a Mothe. 106 of wormes. 107 of snailes. 108 of the Tortuse. 109 of a Caue. 110 Idem. 111 of a Calfe. 112 of a Beare. 113 of the female Beare. 114 of a Foxe. 115 of Wormes: 116 of little womes. 117 of viperous serpents. The Addition of Vipers. ¶Liber 19, containeth 37. chapters. 1 Of colours. 2 of the Materia of cou∣lours, 3 of the generation of colours. 4 of White. 5 of Russet. 6 of hot and cold. 7 Colours in generall. 8 of seauen colours, and the Addition. 9 of changeable colours. 10 of colours in the eye. The rest intreateth in 27. parts of colours. ¶The Addition of cou∣lours to limne with, & how they must be v∣sed. 38 of odors and perfumes. 39 of the effectes of o∣doures. 40 of stinking vapour. 41.42 Idem. 43 of sweete sauour, and his effects vnto the 52. 53 of liquors. 54 of Honic and his pro∣perties. 55 of the Honic combe. 57 of Meede. 58 of Claret, a drinke compound. 59 of Pigmentum. 60 of Oximell. 61 of Waxe. 62 of milke, vnto 71. 72 of Whey. 73 of Butter. 74 of Cheese.75.76. 77 of the vertues of di∣uers things. 78 of rottennesse. 79 of Egges. The rest concerne weights and measures. Finis huius Tabulae.
¶Another Table containing the principall matters in this Booke, and where to finde them. Liber. 1. 2. OF Contrition, confession, and satis∣faction. folio. 2 Of the aeternitie. fol. 2. Scala vnitatis. Presumption the woorke of Disorder. chapt. 7. folio. 5 Of Archangels that are aboue Ang. fo. 9 Of the soule, cap. 18. folio. 10. Addition. Liber. 3. Of the soule to be, to be well, to be best, cap. 3. folio 16 The sight of the eye, cap. 17 folio. 18 When instrumēts sound best, ca. 18. fo. 19 Naturalis, Vitalis, Animalis, cap. 22. fol. 22. Liber. 4. The equalitio of elements, cap. 4. fol. 27 Cause of Surfet, cap. 5. fol: 28. Addition. 3. Of the ceremonies of the dead, ca. 7. Addition. fo. 2 Agilitie of women, cap. 7. folio. 30 Liber. 5. Lamiae or night consumers, cap. 2. fol. 36 The place of imagination, cap. 3. fol. 36. b Tokēs of the brain distepred, ca. 3. fo. 37 Of forgetfulnesse, ca. 5. fol. 38. Addition. To know if the sick shall dye, ca. 7. fo. 39 A token of death, cap. 13. folio. 42. The benefite of concert is speah, 9 folio. 44 Madnesse and forgetfulnesse, ca. 21. fo. 46 Mans fasting spettle doth kill Serpent, cap. 21. folio. 46.b Flyes haue none other soūd but by their wings, cap. 22. folio. 47 Cause of bloud, cap. 24. folio. 48 Humours, cap. 26. folio. 49 Of foure kindes of leprosie, ca. 28. foli. 50 The Goute in the feete, Idem. folio.b Of consumption, cap. 32. foli. 53 Of vntimely birth, cap. 34 fol. 53.b Anoyance of the heart, cap. 36. 55.b The harmonie of the elemental humors, cap. 41. 58 Carnall lust, cap. 49. fol. 62. Addition. Corruption of the Flesh, cap. 62. 67.b Liber. 6. Of conception, cap. 4. folio. 72 Of chusing wholsome Nurses, ca. 5. 72.b Of taking heede of matching with an vncleane Stocke, cap. 6. fol. 73 Against dronkennesse, cap. 20. 78.b Of modest Musike, cap. 23. 81 A disquiet minde is enemie to digestion, cap. 24. 81.b Liber. 7. Hemicranis, the megrime, cap. 3. folio. 87 A hot impostume, cap. 5. 88 Three kindes of falling Euills, chapt. 10 folio. 90. Addition. Foure kindes of crampes, cap. 13. Addition. 91. Deptiuation of fight, cap. 20. 93 Of stinking breath, cap. 23. 95 Mans body is of spirite, humor, & mem∣bers, cap. 33. 98.b Of Dropsies in the belly, cap. 52. 107 Goute in the ioyntes, cap. 57. 109 About what time the French Poxe be∣gan, cap. 66. 114 Liber. 8. The celestiall world, cap. 1. folio. 118 Concerning the heauens, ca. 3. 122. Ad. Castor & Pollux, cap. 12. 126 Why the Planets were called by proper names, cap. 23. 130. Addition. The Sunne eight times as big as the earth, cap. 28. 133 Of the twelue orders of blessed spirites, cap. 45. 140. Addition. Lib. 9. Mans lyfe is comprehended in seauen triumphs, cap. 2. folio, 142. Addition. Note all the Additions vnto the eleuēth chapter folio 146. and Addition. 146. Foure manner of resisting temptations, cap. 50. 150 Liber. 10. Containeth the operation of fire. Liber. 11. That the cloudes be neerer to the earth, then to heauen, cap. 4. folio. 160.b Of the renewing of the Rain-bow ca. 5, Idem folio. That the Rain-bow shall not be seene fortìe yeares before the Dome. 161. A note of great secret. 167 Liber. 12. The Grashoper maketh noyse, not by
voyce, but with his legges, ca. 13. fo. 183. Liber. 12. Those springs whose current is towarde the rising of the Sunne are wholsom∣mest, cap. 3, folio. 191 Of Scilla and Charibdin, ca. 23. 196. Eeles grow of deaw in May, ca. 29. 198 Liber.14. the first Table expresseth. Liber. 15. Of Athiens, cap. 5. folio. 213 The originall of the Amazons, ca. 62. 215 Of Antwerpie, ca. 13. folio. 215. Addition. Of Britaine added. folio. 219. Read al the Addition of this booke. Liber. 16. Of precious stones. Read also all the Ad. Liber. 17. Of hearbes and trees, whose speciall ver∣tues are disclosed in their Additions. Liber. 18. Of the pith in the ridge bone of a man, commeth a serpent, cap. 9. folio. 344. The Basiliske. Addition. cap. 16. 351 The Crocodile, cap. 33. folio. 359. Add. Of English Grypes, cap. 56. 368. Of Sheepe & their discommoditie, ca. 81. folio. 376. Addition. Read also the Additi. to the chapters of this booke. Liber. 19. Addition of the 117. chapter, of Vipers and ingraters of markets. Of Linning in the 19. booke, which is the skilfull placing of colours. Of Measures in fol. 418. newly added. ¶A necessarie Catalogue, of the most hardest olde English words, how they maye be truly vnderstood after our vsuall speaking, as well in all other old Copies, as in this booke: next vnto euery such word, is the knowen English. Angells inwit, heauenly knowledge. A∣raied, furnished, skilled, or beautified. Attercop, a spider. Arerid, lifted vp. A spiracle, a loftie sentence or a quickning conceipt. Arbalastes, crosse-bowes. Anon, spéedely or shortly after. A seeth, that is an attonement. Ayen, againe. A swap, a blow or stroke on any part of the body, dusset signifeith the same, & also a cuffe. Benimmeth, witholde or kéepe. Botraces, venemous frogs. Bounching, bending or swelling. Blenching, mixing, & sometime dazeling. Beshine, to give light vnto, or illuminate. Beshined, lightned, or beauti∣fied. Burgening, when the young twigge appeareth. Buffing, stutting or stamme∣ring, somtime it signifieth bosting. Bloo∣nesse, yale or wan. Bolisme, immoderate appetite. Botchy, swelling vp or cocke∣ling. Behoteth, promiseth. Breechmē, Ma∣riners or saylers. Boistous, grose, or stub∣berne. Bedes, petitions. Cleeretie, brightnesse. Couenable, néedful, Couth, that is know or knew. Curtels, Nerues and small rinmes in the bodie. Clight, closed or fastened togethers. Cle∣ping, promising. Descriued, reuealed. Doome distributiue, particular iudgement. Dole, sorow. Dee∣ming, to suppose. Drastes, refuse or loes of wine, or of humor. Dennes, caues or ho∣low places, distingweth, diuideth. Deale, to bestow or part. Dread, to be in feare. Decorate, to beautifie. Defieng, to digest. Dunch, deafe or herd of hearing. Dulcet, sweet, pleasant or daintie. Dunder, thun∣der or tempest. Exciteth, stirreth or inlardgeth. Enchesō, forfait. Ensinement, perseuerance. Eleing∣nesse, waiward and solitary. Eald, olde. Fundement, foundation or beginning: it is taken for the longation: which is ter∣med the art hoale, or arse gut, it maye be called the venticle for the stomacke. Feat, neat or clenly. Feruor, seruēt or ear∣nest. Gendrid, begotten. Gastnes, appara∣tions. Grollēg, wallowing of ye stomach. Gostes, spirits. Gropeng, féeling. Griesely, fearefull to beholde. Goushes, streames. Grees, degrées, qualities or parts. Gnau∣reng, forgetfulnesse. Gabbing, prating, or vnseemly speaking. Highted, beautified, or to make handsome. Houen, to aduance or set vp. Hearingles, deafe. Hirelings, ser∣uants. Hiew, shape or séemlinesse. Horie, mouldie or fended. Hele, to couer or o∣ucreast. Hem, them. Intelligence, vnder∣standing. Inwit, conceit of minde. Insun∣did, confounded. Innermore, before writ∣ten.
K, cut off. Leden, guide, Lore, still. Leches, sur∣geons. Lendes the flankes and thigh. Melling, conioyning. Malshragges, Ca∣terpillers Palmers, & Cankers. Me∣nace, to threten. Misticke, secret. Much, is taken for quantitie. Meede, reward. Nemped, disclosed. Neneeuen, Tempe∣rance. Nenet, will not. Nesh, softe. Obstacle, stubborne or wilfull. Onid, mixed and ioyned. Out take, except. Pampination, pulling leaues, that grow too thicke. Partner, pertaker, sometime for a companion. Percase, likelihood. Quitted, to discharge. Ruthe, pitie or compassion. Ripe men, haruesters, & learned men. Rock, shake. Rabbish, foole hardie, or malepart, & snat∣ching. Reeses, waues of the sea. Ren∣leth, mixed together. Reling, muldering or ready to fall a sunder. Stretchable, vpright. Siker, safe. Spiri∣tuelte, puruie or well meaning. Shapes, differences of bodies. Stempnes, subiec∣tions. Stable, stedfast. Sturdie, stoute, strong or valiant. Stithe, afrend or clime. Stammering, uetull. Stalking, sew go∣ing. Speedfull, ready. Squitter, menstru∣all, or matter corrupt: sternes, sterce∣nesse, or stubborne. Sauation, saluation, or preseruation. Spended, consumed. Smacke, taaste. Seecheth, séeketh, shaad, shadow. Siketly, warely or safelye. Sig∣neth, expresseth. Thraldome, Bondage, Thyted, cut, as with a knife. Tourmentes, Engines. Trow, suppose or déeme. Thirleth, pear∣ceth, entermixeth or seteleth. Vncunning, wanting skill. Vnweuid, vnperfect worke. Violaceus, fretting. Vores, for owes of land. Vindiation, gathering ripe grapes. Vnneth, scarely Welthfull. fruitfull. Wittie, discéete: Wreche, reuenge. Wosen, the strot boll, or entraunce to the stomacke. Wood∣nes, madnesse. Weene, to thinke. Wap∣peng, quaking. Woos, vapour. Woo, griefe of minde. Welkin, the bright aire aboue the cloudes. FINIS.
¶INCIPIT LIBER PRIMVS DE TRINITATE. THe Father, the Sonne, the holy Ghost, be thrée persons by personal pro∣perties, but the absolute properties be common to all thrée persons, but some of these properties be more appro∣pried to one then to another: As thus, power is appropried to the Father, to the Sonne, wisdome is attributed, & to the holy Ghost is attributed grace. The Father is God, ye Sonne is God, the ho∣ly Ghost is God: And these thrée per∣sons be not thrée Gods, but one verye God euerlasting, one essence, or one bée∣ing, euer perdurable, or during without measure, not chaungeable, almightie, one substaunce, and in one nature simple. The Father is of nothing precedent, the sonne is of the Father, the holy Ghost is of the Father & of the some proceding; without beginning of time; & without end. The thrée persons be one substance together, with one perdurabilitie toge∣ther, and one is equall to the other in all manner of perfection, and each one is Omnipotent or Almightie, and one be∣ginning of all things, created of nothing: or made of nothing: creatour of all cre∣atures, visees or inuisibles, spiritualls or corporalls. The which creatour by a mightie vertue, from the beginning of time; created together the creature ange∣like, and the worldly nature, of nothing, or of no matter precedent. This creatour then made man, & nature humane com∣mon to the first two natures: for man is of body corporal, & of soule he is made spiritual. From this holy trinitie, at con∣fusion vial mittion of pershifs is voided, For the Father is another, the Sonne is another, the holy Ghost is another: nor the father may not be the sonne, nor the holye Ghost: nor the sonne may not bee the Father, nor the holy Ghost: nor the holy Ghost may not be the Father nor the sonne: but to these thrée persons is one essence or being, and one nature common, the which is the beginning of all things, and out of this beginning ther is no beginning: These thrée persons be one God, one essence indiuisible or vna∣ble to be diuided, one substaunce and one nature. The Father  no greater, nor of greater power then is the sonne: nor then the holy Ghost is, for the vnitie of the diuine essence or béeing, is equall or like in power to the Father, to the sonne, and to the holy Ghost, and this holy tri∣nitie is one God, the first beginning, without beginning, not created nor be∣gotten, not passible, nor mortall: mightie of power to make all things without number, and without end, fountaine of all goodnesse, and of all vertue, which by his incomprehensible knowledge know∣eth all things present, and to bée, & may we euery thing that he will, but he will not doe euery thing that he may, for hée might destroys all the world, and yet he will not doe it howbeit that his diuine essence, or béeing, may not be pertia lye knowne or comprehrtoe by any reaso∣nable and mortall creature, yet there is not any imortall person; hauing the vre of discreation, but that he will confesse there is a God, which is the cause and beginning of all things, howbeit there is no man of , and one vn∣derstanding, that can sufficiently seadeth
or finde what thing God is properlye, after the greatnesse of his most excel∣lent maiestye, but onely the Father, the Sonne, the holye Ghost, bee one trini∣tie in one vnitie, one vnitye in nature & in essence, one trinity in thrée persons, so named trinitie, as one vnitie of thrée persons, which be vnited together in one nature. Under this forme rehearsed, it sufficeth to euerye christian creature to knowe the trinitie, and in especiallye to them which bée of the common sorte or state. The knowledge of the names of GOD is not required as necessarye to euerye man to knowe, for they bée many in number, and eue∣rye name that is of God, it sheweth or signifieth the godly essence or being, or it signifieth the godly or diuine per∣fection, or it sheweth the diuine or godlye persons. The names signifi∣eng or betokening the diuine essence or béeing,Essentials bée called names Essentialls. The names which betoken or sig∣nifie diuine or godlye perfection, bee called names Perfectionals.Perfecti∣onalls. The names shewing, betokening, or specifieng the godlye or diuine persons, are na∣iued Personalls,Personals Vocalls. or Uocalls. These three manners of names bée diuided in∣to manye other manners of names which of necessitie bée to bée learned of these greate and cunning Doctours of Theologie or Diuinitie, which bée to vs, or of right ought to bée, tea∣chers and Preachers of the worde of God incornate, and to shewe vs en∣sample of good lyfe by theyr vertuous liuing, and euer to be stronge and mightie, and readye defendours of our Christen faith, and on the holy Church or Congregation by theyr excellent perfect science and unning. It is right necessarye to vs that liue in this but Christian faith, to excesse truelye, and sldalye to beléeue, that the Sonne of the Father of Heauen, which is without beginning coeternall to his Father and to the holye Ghost: by the whole consent: of this, blessed Trini∣tie, and ore unitie, and bye the coope∣ration of the holye Ghost, hée entered into the wombe al the most pure, most immaculate, most cleane, most vertuous, most humble, and most méeke Uirgin Marie, in whome was neither spot nor riuell of sinne, after the salutation of Gabriel the Archangel when shée had answered these words of méeknesse: Behold the hand maide of the Lord, bée it done to me after thy word. Thus this blessed sonne of God, not leauing or forsaking the Godhead, tooke mankinde vnto the Godhead, and is perfect God, one with his Father in godhead, he is also perfect man, & in his māhead he is lesse thē his father is, & in his manhead hée is in Hebrewe named Iesus, in the Gréeke tongue hée is cal∣led Sother,Iesus. Sother. Saluator. & in the Latine, he is called Saluator: and euery name of these thrée, in our language, is to say, our Sauiour. He is also named Emanuel, which name by interpretation of our lan∣guage, is to saye, God is with vs. After his most blessed Natiuitye, hée proued in his humanitye, that hée was perfect God, for hée coulde all Science without anye teacher. He al∣so chaunged pure Water into Wine, hée gaue: sight to the man that was borne blinde, hée sayde openlye to the Iewes and to the Pharesies, I, which speake to you am the beginning. Hée sedde manye thousandes of peo∣ple with fewe Loues of bread, and with fewe Fishes, the Winde and the Sea obeyed to his commaunde∣ment, hée raised Lazarus from death to lyfe, which was foure dayes dead, and stinking in his graue, in these, and in manye moe excellent myracles, he shewed that hée is perfect God. Hée also shewed that hée is perfect man, for hée eate and dranke, and slepte, and so tooke increase in nature as man doth, hée wepte, hée fasted, he suffered all the miseryes and wret∣chednesse of man, excepte sinne. It lyked him also to fulfill, to per∣fourme and to accomplishs all the wordes that the holye Patriares and Prophets hadde vttered and spo∣ken of him longe before: Also hée tooked our humanitie, and solto ful∣fill the propesies, bee suffered,
that his humane nature should be taken by the kissing of his vnkinde disciple, and most horrible traitour Iudas. And by the cruell persecution of the Iewes, af∣ter many punishments, they blasphemed God, before Pilate, cried wickedly: Cru∣cifie, crucifie him: and so vnder Ponci∣us Pilate he suffered to be crucified, and vpon the Crosse he died in his humani∣tie, and was interred and buried. And notwithstanding that his Sepulcher or graue was sealed and signed, and kepte with Knights, yet the third day by his Godhead or diuinitie, he rose in his hu∣manitie, and the. xl. day ensewing, he as∣cended into heuen, and sitteth ther at the right hande of his father: and he from thence perfect God and perfect man, is to come, and to iudge the liuing & dead. In the dead is vnderstoode the bodye, which hath bene mortall, and in the ly∣uing is vnderstood the soule which is spi∣rituall and immortall. Before this Iudge Christ Iesus, which is God and man sitting in his throne of iudgement, all reasonable creatures shal stand. And he shall set all the godlye on his right side, and all the wicked on his left side, and all shalbe iudged after their tes and déeds, and after their thoughts, as they haue ben guided in their bodies, well or euill: then the good shall haue blisse eternall, and the euil and accursed, shall haue and suffer euerlasting paine. Wherfore euery christen man & woman haue this blessed Trinitie, the Father, the Sonne and the holy Ghost, stedfast∣ly grounded in their faith, as one perfect vnitie. To this Unitie in Trinitie, and to this Trinitie in one Unitie, mankind be neuer vnkinde, for this blessed Iesus our Sauiour, the seconde person of the Trinitie, which with his father & with the Holy ghost is one God, one essence, & one vnitie: which Iesus also of his infinit goodnes, of his excellent pitie, & of his most plentuous mercie, suffered pa∣tiently most horrible paine and passion, and death in his humanitie, for to re∣déeme all mankinde. And for this his vnsearchable good, not able to be spoken, and inenarrable or not able to be talked or told great excellent and mightie kind∣nesse, he desireth of man but this gift, sai∣eng thus: Giue me thy heart, & it suf∣ficeth me. Man if thou loue almightie God, thou beléeuest & trustest in God: & thy true and stedfast beléefe is but a thing dead without good works, Because good workes proceede of faith, as by good works each faith is expressed.Addition Therfore euery man & woman do euer good déeds, & haue good thoughts, & let thy language be good: and whereas that by humane fragilitie or frailtie, thou trespassest a∣gainst the commaundement of almightie God, yet sée that thou dispaire not: for the good Lord of his aboundaunt grace, hath giuen a law for trespassors in this present lyfe, that is to say, Contrition,Contriti∣on, that is thine own con∣sciece iud¦ging thy sinne. Confessi∣on, thy de¦claration for thy consciēce to God. that thou hast sin∣ned. Satisfac∣tion, in that faith assueth from a penitent hart, that thou art forgiuē of thy sinne. Confession, and Satisfaction. And euery reasonable creature taking this waye, maye be sure that almightie Christ Ie∣sus very God and man, is Mediatour in his perfect humanitie to the highest and most blessed and inestimable diuinitie or deitie, for all mankinde. ¶Sith it is perillous to euery earth∣ly man, & in especially to him that hath a thin wit, and litle comming, as I know that I haue, to wade dépe in these mat∣ters of Diuinitie, I will treate no far∣ther thereof at this time. The holy tri∣nitie giue vs grace, that we may truelye and faithfullye beléeue, and stedfastlye stande in our beléefe, and that charitie may raigne among vs Christen people. ¶I haue thought good for the father expressing of God, to set before thee, the first Ladder of Henry Cor∣nelius Agrippa, taken forth of his booke, tituled, De occulta Philoso∣phia. NOw let vs perticularlye determine of the numbers themselues, because number is nothing but a repetition of one or vnitie. Let vs first consider what one is, for one doeth most simply pearce euery number, and being the common measure, originall, and fountaine of all numbers, doth containe euerye number onely ioyned in him, voyd of all great∣nesse, alwaies the self same, & vnchange∣able,
wherefore being multiplied in it selfe, doth bring forth nothing but it self: it is indiuisible void of all parts, but if at any time it serne to be diuided, it is not cut a sunder, but multiplied, to wit, into vnities, yet none of these vnities is greater or lesse, then the whole vnitie, euen as part is lesse then the whole. Wherefore it is multiplied, not into parts, but into it selfe, and therfore some haue called this Concord, some Pietie, some friendship, because it is so knit, yt it cannot be cut into parts, & Marcianus after Aristotle affirmeth, that Cupid is so named, because it is one alone, & wold euer haue himselfe to be sought, & hath nothing besides, but being voide of all elation or couple, doth wrest his owne heates to himselfe: wherefore one, is the beginning, and end of all things, hauing no beginning nor end, nothing is before one, one is the beginning of all things, & all things are euen vnto one, and beyond it there is nothing, and things that are, desire the very one, because all things procéed of one, & to the end, that al things may be one, it must néedes be, that they participate from that one, & as al things procéed from that one into many, so eue∣ry thing that indeauoureth to that one from whom they proceed, must of ne∣cessitie put of multitude, wherefore one is referred to almightie God, who foras∣much as he is one, and innumerable, doth create innumerable things of himselfe, and containeth them within himselfe: wherefore there is one God, one world of one God, one Sunne of one world, & one Phaenix in the worlde: one king a∣mong Bées: one Bel-weather among sheep: one leader in the herd: and Cranes follow one, & many other creatures wor∣ship the vnitie. Among the members of the body, there is one beginning, of whō the residue are ruled, whether it be the head, or as some would haue it, yt hearte. There is one Element ouercomming & pearcing all things, which is fire. There is one thing created of God, ye subiect of all wonderfulnes, which is in heauen & earth, it is in act Animall, Vigitable, & Minerall, found euery where, knowne of very few, expressed of none with his pro∣pet name, but couered with innumerable figures & ridles, without the which, nei∣ther Alcami, neither naturall magicke, are able to attaine to their perfect end: frō one man Adam all were brought forth, through him alone all died: Through Ie∣sus Christ alone they wer again born a new. And as the Apostle Paul saith,Ephe. 4. One Lord, one faith, one Baptisme, one God & father of all, one meditour of God & men, & one most high creatour, which is aboue all, through all things, & in vs al, for there is one God the father, frō whō all things are, and we in him, one God, Iesus Christ, by whom all things are, & we by hi, one God the holy Gohst, in∣to whom all things, are, & we into him. Scala vnitatis. IOD. IN the world bearing the plat∣forme of all. Ther is one diuine essence, the fountain of all vertue, and power, & his name is expressed in one most simple letter. The Intellectuall world. Soule of the world by the which all things liueth. One most high intelli∣gence the first creature, the fountaine of liues. SOL. In the Celestiall world. In the Elementall world. The Sunne. The Philosophers stone. One King of stars, fountaine of light. One substaunce of all ver∣tues naturall & superna∣turall. COR. In the lesser world. In the world Internall. The heart. Lucifer. One first liuing, & last dieng. One chiestaine of the rebel∣lion of Angels and darknesse. The rest of the Ladders shalbe diuided into those places requisite, for the setting forth the names of God, and knowledge of hidden mysteries.
¶INCIPIT LIBER SECVNDVS. Of Angells. Chap. 1. MAlach in Hebrew, Ange∣lus in Gréeke, Nuncius in Latine, is to bée vnder∣stoode, a messenger in English. For by warning of Angells men knowe Gods will, and so Angelus is a name of office and not of kinde. And Ange∣lus is a Spirit: but when God sendeth him forth, then hée is first properly na∣med Angelus. Painters paint Angells with wings because of their swiftnesse of flight. And so simple men knowe the swift working of Angells by that man∣ner of painting. And for the same cause in the olde time, Poettes painted the winde with wings, as saith Isid. lib. 7. Chap. 7. What Angell is after Da∣mascenes minde. Chap. 2. DAmascene saith, that Angell is Sub∣stantia intellectualis, alway moue∣able, frée, and bodilesse, seruing God by grace, and not by kinde, and is pertaker of immortalitie. For he may not die. Of this discription of Angels kind, ma∣ny māner properties of Angels be to vs shewed and knowne. An Angell is said, Substantia intellectualis. For by reason of the spiritualtie of his substaunce, and of the singular puritie hée perceiueth in himselfe all formes intelligible, that is to vnderstande, all shapes and lyke∣nesse that hée needeth to haue. For to haue cunning and knowledge of things hée apprehendeth shapes and liknesse intellectuall, that may moue his vnder∣standing to witte and wisedome. And inasmuch as hée is farre from the bon∣dage of earthly matter, insomuch hée is the more perfect in contemplation of spirituall and vnmateriall thinges: So it is sayde plainly in Libro Causarum. For spirites that hée also named vnder∣standing, be full of shapes and likenesse, because they haue knowledge and cun∣ning. Therefore in them shineth all manner of vnderstanding, as in the bo∣dies of men their secrete motions doe declare in the witte to haue know∣ledge of thinges.Intelli∣gence of Angela is a singular freedome not sub∣iect to tēp¦tations. Sicut ibidem di∣citur consequenter. Moreouer, Angells kinde passeth all bodilye kinde in sub∣tiltie of his Essentia in simplicitie, and in cléernesse of his conceit, and ability of his frée aduisement. This Angells kind hath no succour of bodily matter. Ther∣fore materiall corruption maye in no wise be according to him. Therefore no knowledge by bodily wits may let this fore knowledge that is godly, for an An∣gell hath forséeing in a manner as God hath. Therefore hee is aboue time, and vnderstandeth all at once: and not one thing after another, or one thing of another, as the conclusion of the premi∣ses, as mans vnderstanding and assu∣raunce of the minde, gathereth know∣ledge of some thing, through, or of the knowledge of other things. It séemeth that such comparison as is betwéene a simple thing and a thing compound, ey∣ther else betwéene a point and a line in béeing,That which is simple is one thing and that vvhich is cōpound, is diuerse or manye things. such is the comparison betwéene Angelles knowledge, and mans per∣seueraunce, in vnderstanding and dée∣ming Also no mallice withdraweth nor turneth away the wil of an Angell from the seruice of his Creator. There∣fore inasmuch as the substaunce of an Angell is the simpler, and more far from all condition of matter. Insomuch, the lykenes of God shiueth yt more expresse in him, and in him as it were in a full cléere mirrour, the shining of God ap∣pearth the more cleere. And the influence of blisse is the more worthy, insomuch
as the Angell ioyneth him by his owne will, the more perfectly to the apparant truth, that maye not be chaunged, as Gregory saith: Almightie God made the kinde of good Angells good, but muta∣ble. So that they that woulde abide, might bée assured of grace, & by so much the more increase reward, in how much they setteled the effect of their will with studie, without chaunging in God: al∣so Saint Gregorie sayth: Angell in the contemplation of his Creator is aboue the thing that may be chaunged, but in that he is a creature, he hath subiections of chaunging. Denis sayth, In Angells three things must bée had in considera∣tion, Essencia, by the which they haue béeing: vertue by the which they haue might: and working, by the which they are exercised. The Essencia of them is simple and vnmateriall, pure, distinct, and discréet. This vertue of them is frée, vnderstanding, louing, and without cea∣sing. They haue might and power frée∣ly to choose, to vnderstande, and to loue: and to God to be ioyned without chaun∣ging: also they haue a vertue of wor∣king, for they doe all thing without a∣biding or tarrieng, they put of al aduer∣sitie without withstanding, and without withsayeng: alway they be nigh vs, and serue vs without ceasing: and their wor∣king, is willing, sodeine, profitable, and honest. For they serue GOD without constraining, and doe his heastes so∣deinly and in an instaunt, and putte not off till on the morrowe: all good and profite they procure with greate héede taking: they bée occupied in lawfull déedes and honest, that bée without blame: then it is truth that in an An∣gell is three manner vertues, of know∣ing, of working, and of béeing. For hée knoweth God aboue himselfe, in a mir∣rour of euerlasting during, without a∣ny intermission. Hee seeth alway the face of the Father. Mathew. 18 Angels alwayes beholde the face of my Father which is in heauen. Psal. 10. He appre∣hendeth all things that is without him∣selfe, without anye collection, and hol∣deth in minde within himselfe, with∣out forgetting, all that hée apprehen∣deth. Angells haue this vertue of wor∣king, mightely, swiftly, and profitably, and without ceasing: and they also haue vertue to be steadfast, in the sim∣plicitie of their kinde. For they are not altered by deedly subiections, ney∣ther they haue no contrariousnesse of passibilitie, neither bee lette with charge of flesh. They bée also in stead∣fastnesse of grace and of blisse. For they bée subiects to the lawes of God, and be not contrary therto by none affection nor deede. They bée godly and not tormented with the pricke of enuie: and forasmuch as they be pure and cleane, they bee not defiled with anye affection: and they be steadfast in the dignitie of office. They are the substaunce of well minding, and therefore contrarye to euill dooing and they that bée Souereignes bée Princes ouer the other without tyrannie: also Angells kinde is ioyned nigh to the first lyght, that is God, and therefore it is full of more copious light: and so much the more déeper it draweth of the Well of lyfe, the more néere it ioyneth it selfe to the first light in beholding the minde: and it receiueth alway the more principall Theophanias, that is lyght and shining of GOD, insomuch as it tourneth it the more perfectlye to the highest good by loue, that chaungeth not: and so that light, that is euerlasting, first it commeth vppon Angells, and by Angells it commeth downe to vs and therefore by Angells lawe came to men:Gen. 18 Exo. 3 and for that first shining com∣meth to Angelles from the Father of lyght. Denis calleth Angelles Al∣gamatha, that is, most cléere myr∣rours, receiuing the lyght of GOD. Vnde in libro de diuinis nominibus. Chap 6. Denis sayth in this manner. An Angell is the Image of GOD, the shewing of hidde lyght, a myr∣rour pure and most bright, with∣out spot, without wemme, or other de∣filing. And if it were lawfull to saye, hée receyueth in himselfe all the fayre∣nesse of the well shape, godlye for∣mitie
and of pure declaration in him∣selfe, as it is possible to take and de∣clare goodnesse that is hidde. He is named the Image of God, for lykenesse and shape in vnderstanding and readi∣nesse: For lyke as God seeth all things without aduice and conference, so doeth Angells, for they see not by meane, nei∣ther apprehend by bodelye wit. Also hée is called the shewing of hidde lyght: for he taketh by influence the sight of the Godhead, that is in it selfe incomprehen∣sible and hidde, and sendeth it foorth, and sheweth it to other, and maketh it knowen to them that are lower. And he is called a myrrour, for he is able to receiue the lyght of God, and is called a pure myrrour, for the kindly purenesse of his substaunce, for he hath no bodelye filth, he is immaculate, he hath no went of originall sinne, he is not defiled with contagion of deadlye sinne, he is with∣out spot of veniall sinne. He is sayd re∣ceiuing fairenesse of the likenesse of the Godhead. In a speciall manner of knowing, he is lyke to the Godhead, and also hee de∣clareth to them that are lower the incomprehensible and hidde: swéetenesse of the goodnesse of God. For what hée taketh in contemplation and tasting by the gifte of God, he sendeth it forth, and maketh it knowen to them that are lower. Iohn Da∣mascene a Monace or Monk, about An¦no 400.Dumascene in his seconde Booke and third Chapter sayth, That Angells are lights intellectuall, hauing lyght of the first lyght, and they néede no tongue neither eares: but without words and voyce they vnderstande and know euery others thought and will. And they are not contayned in a bodelye place, not within walles neither cloyster bodelye inclosed, and be not bodelye long, nei∣ther broade, neither thicke, but they be intellectuallye nigh and present, and worke in euerye place where God bid∣deth them. Also they are spirites kind∣lye strong and swifte to doe Gods will: and they are sodainelye founde in eue∣rye place, where God willeth and be∣thinketh, dispensing those things that be about vs, and helping vs after Gods owne will. They are aboue vs, and neuerthelesse about God. It were harde to mooue them to euill, for thereto they are contrarye: & that is of grace, though it be not of inde. And as it is possible, they bée in contemplation of God, and haue theyr delyght and lyking in him: and séeing they are spirituall and bodilesse, they néede neyther, wedding nor corporall ioyning. ¶How an Angell in bode∣ly shape is painted. Chap. 3. ALso though Angelles kinde haue no matter neyther lyneations and shape of bodye, yet by a morall de∣uise, many things are imagined, as God lyke an olde man: euen so Angells bée paynted in bodely lykenesse, and Scrip∣ture maketh mention, that they haue diuers lymmes and shapes. But by de∣nominations of lymmes that are séene, vnséene workings of heauenlye per∣seueraunces, are then thereby vnder∣stoode. For when Angells are paynted with long lockes and crispe haire, there∣by is vnderstoode their cleane affections and ordinate thoughts. For the hayre of the head betokeneth thoughts and af∣fections that doe spring out of the roote of thought and minde.A compa¦rison. Men saye that they haue cares, be∣cause they receiue the inspiration of God, and that they knowe and vnder∣stande. Paynters make to them nose∣thrilles, and not without cause: For they voyde vices and: sinnes as it were stinking thinges: and they loue ver∣tues, as it were swéete smelles. And they seperate trueth from falshood, ma∣king distinction betwéene cleane and vn∣cleane, stinking and sweete smel∣lyng. Ofte men make mention that they haue mouthes, tongues, and lyppes, be∣cause they shewe, ou vs as it were in∣speaking the priuities of God: and they
are alwaye busie wayting and attending in the praysing of God. And they be painted beardles: for to take consideration and héede, that they passe neuer the state of youth, neyther ware feeble in vertues, neither falc for age. Men saye that they haue téeth, because grace, that they receiue of God, they vse to part and deale it to other, as it were chewing and grinding, and therby their might and power is betokened. They haue armes and handes, for by theyr might in working they sustaine our in∣firmities. And cease not to holde vp and defende good men, that God hath chosen. Men saye, that they haue heartes and breastes, for because they haue life lyke to the lyfe of God, and worke openlye to helpe vs to receiue the grace of lyfe, and such lyfe as God hath. They haue ribbes and sides, for they haue safelye in themselues all the giftes of grace, and by kéeping of them all thing is sure and safe in good men. Men say, that they haue flankes and thighes, but hidde with clo∣thing, for they haue within themselues, grace and vertue, hid from fleshly men. éete they haue, but as it were alwaye bare, for the mouing of their affection to Godward is sequestred from all deadly lyking. ¶How Angells be described. Cap. 4. ALso Angelles be painted in manye manner shapes wonderfully altered, as Saint Denys toucheth in the end of the Angelicall Hierarchie. Truely they be paynted feathered and winged: for that they are of contrary cause & clenne from all earthlye cogitation. And they be lifted vp in effect and knowledge, and rauished to the innermost contemplati∣on of the loue of God. They are cloathed in flerie redde cloathes, for that they be wrapped in the lyght and mantell of the knowledge and loue of God. They bee cloathed with lyght as with a garment. Psal. 104. They are gyrde with golden gir∣dles, for that they be so clipped with the habite of vertues, that they neuer slyde to vice neither to sinne. They beare in hande authorities and scepters, for after God they giue all rightfull iudgements, and rule and gouern right∣fullye all that is in this worlde, that we knowe with vtter wittes. They beare in theyr handes swordes and speares: for by vertue that is giuen to them, they warre, and destroye the vp∣roares and the enforcings of iends, and of other that are rebellyous. They be séene to haue Trowells, and hanging plommets, and measures, and worke∣mens tooles: For by prouision of An∣gells, God vseth to tourne euill men to good, and moueth them that they might bée made the habitation of the Holye ghost. They haue in their handes, rule, lyns, and measures, for they diuide, meate, & weigh all mens works good & euill. And they are sayde to haue Phy∣als with swéet smelling things: for by dooing of them our wounds are brought to grace of health. And it is read, that they be girde as they were apparayled readye to goe and walke forth on their waye: for by their helpe and guyding, godlye disposed men be alwaye brought home into blysse! Also they be sayde to beare pennars and inke hornes, and other instrumentes of Writers: For that, that through theyr dooing, the pri∣uitie of Gods will, is oftentimes reuea∣led and knowen. They bée furnished in armes, and weapon of battayle and of warre: For that by helpe of them, good men are of∣ten succoured and defended, in warre and in battayle of bodye and of soule. And the harpe: For that they that are worthye to bée comforted, by theyr helpe and prayers, fall not into sor∣rowe of despayre, and so to be with∣out hope. They beare Trumpettes in theyr handes, for that they call and comforte and excite vs to profite alwaye in good∣nesse. Manye such manner things are written of the araye and doing of An∣gells, that betoken theyr meruaylous workes.
¶ How Angells be compared to materiall things. Cap. 5. ALso they be likened to other things, that be taken & transmpt of natu∣rallsAppea∣ring in that shape that they are not. For to signifie and declare theyr profound and secret workings: example. They be likened to windes, for yt they flye and passe sodainely, so their déedes and workes. They be called cloudes, for that they be rauished towarde God by very contemplation. They be lykened to fire, for that they be wholly inflamed with burning loue of God, and as fire they shine in knowledge, and burne in loue. Now they are named golde; now siluer, and now latten, for they haue pure shining, as light, and be adorned with the wisedome of God. They be lykened to Carbuncles & Saphires, and to other precious stones that be sad and bright, for because they be firme in the grace of God, and confirmed in the blisse: and by their presence, all that is in heauen and in earth, is wonderfully beautified. They are called Lions, for that they be grisly and dreadfull against wicked spi∣rites and to sinfull men: or els as the Commentor vpon the Hierarchie Ange∣licall saith, because when they aspire to the contemplation of God,A good note. that was knowen afore, is wiped out of minde: when cleerenesse that is desired, is open∣ly knowen, to the soules that desireth: for a Lyon vseth to wype awaye his owne steppes with his tayle. They are called Oxen, for an Ore eareth the land, and maketh it able to beare fruite: So Angells make mens soules able to receiue graines of vertues and of gifts. They are called Eagles, for that they beholde strayght and stiffelye in God, that is the Sunne of righteousnesse, without dazelyng of theyr eyenWith a stedfast aith.. They are called Horses for by the Lawe of obedience, they be subiecte to God, that is Lorde aboue them. Sometime also they are called white Horses, for the bright and cléere knowing of God. And sometime blacke Horses, for they maye not comprehende the Maiestie of God at the ful: for blacknes is darke coulour and dimme. Sometime redde Horses, for they shewe dread of righ∣teousnesse and equitie. And some time of diuers coulours, for the variable vse of power that they haue receyued. The vttermost coulours are mixed to∣gether, and by the perfect vertue of An∣gells, the first are ioyned and tourned to the seconde, and the seconde to the first, and be tourned either into others loue. And they be called firie Riuers, because they receiue streames or flow∣ings of diuine grace, and they shedde out plenteouslye that neuer fayleth of fresh streames of Gods grace, and powre out to other in plentie of lyfe: and therefore they are lykened to a fi∣rie Riuer. Also they be called Chari∣ots, for in a Charyot is manye things carried at once: For they bée by one assent borne vp, associate and coupled togethers, in the ioyfull companye of God. They be also called Whéeles: For as a Whéele windeth and tourneth a∣bout, and mooueth alwaye about the selfe Center: so Angells are in contem∣plation, and mooue about that thing, that belongeth to God, as it were a∣bout the centre or poynt in the middes of a compasse intellectuall: for theyr de∣sire maye not be quenched, and what they desire, passeth theyr uite and might. And therefore also they are lykened to Chariots and firie wheeles. For that they come downe to subiectes, and illuminate them, and so goe vp a∣gayne, and guiding euermore by con∣templation. And they present to our Lorde, prayers and inwarde cogita∣tions of good men: and bring dead mens soules into Abrahams bosome, and into the Countrey of blisse. And they are called Surgeons and Phisi∣tions, because they cure and heale soules. And they be also called Smithes, for that they prepare for vs ghostlye weapons.
They be called watchmen and war∣deins, for they béeing neuer ouercome with sleepe of wanting skill, warne men of perills that may fall or come to passe. And they also bée named Har∣uesters, for they gather the people that is chosen into the Garner of the king∣dome of Heauen. And they bée called Souldiers, for they warre and fight for vs against wicked fiendes. And they be called Dukes and Leaders, both be∣cause they teach vs the manner of figh∣ting against Ghostly enimyes: and al∣so for they shewe and teach vs the way to the countrie of blisse. In these and manye other figures and lykenesses, Angells vertues be to∣kened to vs, and vnderstoode in Scrip∣tures, touching the substaunce, ver∣tue, and working of them. But these few that be set héere for example shall suffice at this time. Of the orders of Angels Hie∣rarchies, and of their offices. Chap. 6. SEeing that the properties of An∣gells be in part rehearsed and de∣termined in generall, as it belongeth to this worke, wée shall intreate of all the Hierarchies of the orders of An∣gells: that wée maye knowe the of∣fice, conuenience, and difference of all the orders by theyr proper condi∣tions. Of the three Hierarchies. Chap. 7. THE holy man Saint Denis spea∣keth of thrée Hierarchies, the first is aboue heauen, and standeth in three persons, the seconde in heauen, and stan∣deth in holy Angells, the thirde vnder heauen, and standeth in Prelates. De∣nis sayth, that a Hierarchie is an or∣deined power and might of holy things: and reasonable, holding a due princi∣palitye ouer Subiectes. Thrée Hie∣rarchies bée in heauen, the highest, that is called in Gréeke Epiphania, and is described of Denis in this manner. Epiphania is in the burning hot affecti∣on in the highnesse of high motion and vnderstanding, and in the ballaunce of the perticular iudgement. And this Hie∣rarchie conteineth thrée orders. Scra∣phin, that passeth other in burning of loue: and Cherubin, that is ioyfull in priuiledge of cunning: Thrones, that passe other in perpending of righteous∣nesse. And of the other two Hierar∣chies, wée shall speake héereafter in theyr owne place. In euerye Hierarchie néedeth thrée thinges, order, cunning, and working. For as Denis sayth, a Hierarchie is a godly order, cunning, and worke, lyke God, as it is possi∣ble likening and supposing thereto the illuminations by proportion, taking héede to the lykenesse of God. Loe hée setteth thrée in the discription of an Hie∣rarchie, order, cunning, and working: for if one of these thrée should want, it is no Hierarchie. Therefore a Hierar∣chie is sayde a godlye order, as it were a might that is ordeyned and dispo∣sed after Gods owne will. Therefore in order is office noted, in cunning, rea∣dinesse, in working seruice.A good note. Without order presumption is the worke, with∣out worke negligence is the order, with∣out cunning, the worke is then reproua∣ble, and the order is vnprofitable. And therefore as well in order as in cun∣ning and working, euerye. Hierarchie followeth the conformitie and likenesse of God: And by the manner and mea∣sure of his illuminating that God gi∣ueth thereto, bée profitth in his order, and supposing rightlye, and working well, to the following of God as néere as is possible, hée ascendeth vp. Such is the disposition betwéene the Angells of the order of Hierarchies. They that be of the higher orders, re∣ceiue more plenteous light of God. And then to those that bée lower then they in order, they transfound and departe the lyght, they receiued. For this lawe is holden and kepte in the order of Angelles in participation of grace and of blisse. Some be the first, and some the seconde, and some the laste: as they the which in order and in re∣ceiuing
and taking of kinde are péere∣lesse: they be also vnlike and not equall in taking and receiuing of blisse. Ther∣fore Saint Denys saith, that it néedeth that the higher Angelles alwaye teach and leade the nether and lower Angels, that they may bring them to the diuine brightnesse and illumination, abduction, and communication, and induction by conuersation, in illumination by know∣ledge, in knowledge by perception. For as Saint Gregory. 1. Mor. saith, Some are nigh God by contemplation, and some goe outwarde by seruice and wor∣king: and yet they that goe outwarde, passe not awaye from the inner contem∣plation. For alway they sée him, that is present in euery place that they come in. The excellencie of orders is assigned by the worthinesse of gifts, for by diuers simplicitie of kinde and Essencia, and cléerenesse of kindly wit and wisedome, and by different fréedome of aduisement, the orders receiue and haue diuersitie. For they that he more subtill in kind, and haue more cleere perseueraunce and wisedome, the gifte of larger grace, they are more worthy than the other. Ther∣fore all the orders of Hierarchies haue proper giftes by the which they worke, and proper qualities, by the which they rule their workes, for no Angell hath leaue to take vpon him a worke or déed, that belongeth not to his order, and to his office. The perfection of the order of Hierarchies standeth in such a point, that they that be cléere beautifieth other, and they that be pourged, pourge other: and they that be made perfect, make other perfect. For the order is such, that they that e first purged, e afterwarde, illu∣mined and beautified; and then made perfect. For after purgation followeth illumination, and after illumination the consummation of perfection, and so the higher orders immediatelye receiue of God purgation, that they may be cleane and cléere: and perfection, that they may bée perfect. And then by order of the disposition of God, the higher Angelles cleanse, illumine, and make perfect the lower Angells. But theyr purgation is not to be vnderstoode of corruption of vi∣ces and of sinne, but more verely imper∣fection of goodnesse. For Saint Denys saith, to the likenesse of him that hath no contagion neyther uncleannesse, it néedeth that Angelles be cleane of vn∣cleannesse and confusion, shining in ho∣lynesse and truth, and perfect in good∣nesse. Amongst these most holy orders, some be the first, and some be in the middle, and some the last and lowest. The first illumine, the last be illumi∣ned, the middle illumineh the last, and be illumined of the first. ¶Of the order of Seraphin. Cap. 8. AS of the more worthie, first wée shall beginne to treate of the first order, that is Seraphin. Thereof spea∣keth Isidore. li. 7. and saith, Seraphin is a multitude of Angells, that is to vn∣derstande, burning or setting a fire, for betweene them and God, be no Angells meane. And therefore the néerer they bée to God, so much the more they are infla∣med and lightened in the cléere bright∣nesse of the lyght of God. And there∣fore men saye that they vayle and wrap the face and the féete of our Lorde. For the other Angelles sée not the ma∣iestie of our Lorde more cléerelye than these doe. And therefore they be inuy∣roned with so-much the more bright∣nesse, in howe much they be inflamed in burning affection of the inwarde loue. And so the proper office of these Angells is to burne in themselues, and to moue other to burne in the loue of God. Wée maye take the principall and speciall properties of this Order of Denys wordes, that sayeth learned∣lye in this manner. The first Hierar∣chie of Heauen is hallowed with well excellent Essencies, and haue an Or∣der higher then other, sitting nexte God. And therefore the first workings of
knowing of God be born into this Hie∣rarchie, as into the Hierarchie that is next God, and it followeth. Seraphin is alway moueable about things diuine, & is hot, without ceasing, sharpe and pas∣sing seruent, alwaye of busie motion that boweth not, the bringer againe of subiects, actiuely exemplicatiue, making them hot, and raing them into the like∣nesse of firie loue of heauen, cleansing offering not intermixed, and may not be quenched, and hath lightnesse of light, & property to giue light to make darknesse knowne, and to pursue it. These wordes be full diuine, and passe all mens wit, touching the darke and mysticall mea∣ning of them. But yet as I may, though it be doubtful & beyond common skil, I shall vndertake somewhat to declare the meaning of these words. For it seemeth that Denis hath meant that the disclo∣sing of the properties and office, ma∣keth knowen to diuerse, discreation and participation of grace in the Angels that be named Seraphin. For the name of Seraphin meaneth moueable, & sayth so by liklyhoode, the kinde of firie loue, by the which the affection of an Angell, is moued and rauished, retourneth into God. But this mouing is quiet, cau∣sing, augmenting, and fulfilling. Also he moueth incessably, for such a loue falleth neuer, neither resseth to desire him, that he loueth. He is called hot; for ye strength of loue exciteth and moueth, as it were heate, to the feeling of swéetnesse. And therefore he putteth to Acutum, sharpe. For the strength of loue pearceth into the innest of the maker and creatour. And so: Acutum, sharpe, betokeneth a manner violence of loue, that entêreth and pearceth into the thing that is lo∣ued Also he saith, Super ferudum, pas∣sing feruent, for though the loue stretch into the innest of the Godhead, yet hee reaseth not to sée all about by affection: So that the thing that he taketh not at the full by the inwit, he comprehendeth somewhat by tast of contemplation. As a thing that boileth by strength wel∣meth and leapeth, and throweth & shed∣deth it selfe all about: So the affection of an Angell forsaketh nothing, that hee taketh héede of, but the more he know∣eth, the more he desireth to knowe. Hée sayth also, Inflexibilis motionis, moo∣uing that faileth not, for though Angels loue moue into God, yet he is inflexible, stedfast, and faileth not. For he will not lese in no manner wise that thing that he loueth: and so he is moueable & ceaseth not, and that intentiue and in∣wardly. For he setteth his intent into the inward of God. And so he is alwaye moueable and resteth not in himselfe: but he is busie to set his intent in God, but inwardly that he fléete not outward, and he is in all, wise, inflexible & stable, and turneth neuer from him, to things that be without him. Also he saith, Supposi∣torum reductiuum, able to bring againe the neather. For an Angels loue stretch∣eth alway to the ouer, that is, to that a∣boue from whence the cause of his loue commeth: but he goeth not awaye from the loue of the neather. But he calleth & bringeth the neather orders to be part∣ners of the illumination and brightnes of God. Also he saith, Docere actiuum et exemplificatiuum, he desireth to teach and giue good ensample: For his intent is not onelye to bring the neather or∣ders to loue God, that is highest: but al∣so by example he sheweth them that be of the neather orders, how and in what manner, he that is most good, shoulde be beloued aboue all things. And how men shall turne to God by loue, and doe all thing after his will. Therefore he saith, that the loue of them is heating & rea∣ring vp into such a manner heate. For therefore they trauaile, that the neather orders burne and be seruent, though not all alike, but differently. And he saith not that, as though the lower Angells were cold or dead, but it is sayd, because the subiect orders are excited and stirred by them to the more larger affection of loue. And therefore it followeth. Igne∣um celitus & holocaustomatis purgati∣uum. A firie thing of heauen, that pour∣geth offering. For the fire of God ligh∣teth the first Angels, that they may light other, and lighteneth them, from whose light other are become bright shining al∣so, & purgeth them, that they may cleanse
other. For the fire of God burneth soft∣ly and sweetly, and burneth not to wa∣sting neither to apparing, but to clean∣sing and to pourging. Therfore he faith, That he cleanseth offering: For as he is the luminator at full, so he cleanseth at full. And he cleanseth not from in∣fection of anye vice or sinne: but from the imperfection of goodnesse. For that is perfect purgation, where no correction is, but all perfection. Also Seraphin is sayd, vertues, Multimoda & multi fida, a vertue of many wayes and of manye faiths.So said, because our redeptiō stand∣eth by the gifte of faith. Of many wayes, in that he is moued in desire & working many man∣ner wise. Many faiths in that he is beu∣tified in possessing: many wayes, in that he passeth forth searching: many faiths, in that he pearceth and findeth. He pas∣seth forth by manye wayes and diuers affections, and commeth to one God, and one lyfe comprehendeth all things toge∣ther. Also the name of Seraphin, mea∣neth the thing that is not put by, ney∣ther intermixed: for without any vay∣ling of figure or of creature set betwéen, he loueth to sée God: and of the plentie of the well of euerlasting lyght he is brightened without anye meane set be∣tweene, that he may brighten other: and he is lightened, that he may light other. And so the Angells of that order, are more worthy then other, for they take the influence of their perfection of God, without any meane set betwéene: and giueth the same foorth to other without withdrawing, and haue it in possession, and keepe it without léesing. They slack neuer, neither withdrawe them from that loue of God, neyther tourneth theyr intent from GOD. And they leade the neather orders toward God, & ceaseth not for trauayle, neyther for annoye. This may suffice of the proper∣ties of Seraphin. ¶ Of the order of Cherubin. Cap. 9. THe second order is called Cherubin, and is to vnderstand, plentie of cun∣ning. Isidore lib. 7. saith, Duely excepted Seraphin, Cherubin are the highest companies of Angelles. For the neerer they be set to the wisedome of God, the more large gifte in them appeareth of the fulnesse of God. Therefore worthe∣ly the order of Cherubin are ordayned after the order of Seraphin. For after the gifte of Charitie, of which gift Se∣raphin hath the name, the most excellent gifte is the gifte of wit and wisedome, and of the knowing of the dignitie of God: of the which gifte Cherubin hath the name. For the beame of the lyght of God, shineth principally in the Angells of this order, touching the farre excéeding participation of the knowing of God. Therefore Denys sheweth the proper∣ties and effects of the Angelles of this order. cap. 7. where he sayeth, That the knowing of Cherubin teacheth what he knoweth. And these words signifie, that Angells of this order are called Angells that knowe and be knowing, for they passe other in the gifte of the wisedome of God: also he nameth them De vidi, God seeing, for the excellent sight that they haue of God. For they haue a more cleere contemplation, then other haue of Gods maiestie: and they be said, Altis∣sime dacio racionis luminum accepturi: Of the highest gift of reason receiuers of light. Thereby he meaneth, that the or∣der of Cherubin, is passing other filled of the light to God. Also these Angels haue the gift of the fairenesse of God in the first vertue that worketh: for by the lyght of diuine wisdome, they be in con∣tēplation of ye fairnee of god. Also therby he meaneth, that in them & by them the first vertue ye worketh, yt is to say God, is séene most clearely. Also he is called, Sapientifica traditione repleti, full of giuing of wit and of wisedome, for by the wise tradition of the Creator, they deale the gifte of diuine wisedome, to some more, and to some lesse. Also they haue communicatiue cunning. For the lyght of wisedome, that they receiue largelye, it passeth by them, to diuers others. For the fulnesse of lyght that they receiue, they giue forth and commit to other. And also they are named takers of
lyght of pure contemplation and of sim∣plicitie without meane. He calleth the lyght the illumination and glistering, by the which lyght he commeth to ye pure and cleare contemplation, where the ver∣tue of God is, not in image, in figure, or in anye meane creature: but by it selfe, and in it selfe. Also they are called filled of the food of God, and of his house, and of the vnitie that giueth lyfe of the feeding of God. For in that they be fed with the lyght of knowledge, they be re∣freshed with the swéetnesse of loue. For it were no great profite to inspire with knowing, but there followed therewith soode of the holy spirit, that is, of féeding by loue. Also this feeding is called house∣hold, liuely, and onely refection. House∣hold, for that it is prepared for friends & so; meynie, belonging to ye house. And it is sayde lyuelye, because it maketh and giueth lyfe to each, that is feddé with such meate. And it is onelye and singu∣lar: for it is not tasted with straunge lyking, that is to meane, not with flesh∣ly sweetenesse. And though it bée onely feeding or meate, yet manye manner of feeding is found in this onely meate. That when this one meate is taken,The raide sa∣ m God, is  feeding. full and very feeding is found. ¶Of the order of Thrones. Chap. 10. THe thirde order is the order of Thrones, and this order hath the name of the gift of dome. For that God sitteth in them, and giueth his sentence of iudgement, and by them he disposeth all subiects, as saith Isidore. Therefore the vertue of Gods equitie is lykened to a firie throne in Daniel, yt is to meane, for cerenesse of knowledge, for by them, God foreseeing euery thing, discusseth readely all things, and for swiftenesse that nothing may withstand or let. Then these Angells, in which righteousnesse of Gods iudgement specially shineth, he called Thrones, of Isidore. And there∣fore Denys calleth them the highest seates, for they be high vp authoritie of God, as it were instruments of Gods Iustice, ordained to gouerne: higher, for that they followe the rule of the righteousnesse of God in iudgement, but highest, for that they be re the pre∣sence of God, in the disposition of the Hierarchies. Strongly placed, for that they are couenablye and conuenientlye ioyned, touching the ioynture and con∣uenience of the iudgements of God. For it is determined and conuenient, that euery man receiue for trespasse paine, and for righteousnesse blisse, and such reward as his worke asketh, acception or reiec∣tion: and therefore payne accordeth co∣uenably to trespasse, and blysse to righ∣teousnesse. For if trepasse and blysse, payne and righteousnesse agree not, they shoulde not haue a seate ordayned coue∣nablye togethers. For compaion and vpright iudgement is the rightfulnesse of Domes. The seates are frée of all shamefull subiection: For euer the more subiect they be to GOD that is aboue them, the more worthye they are to bee made high by him, and in him, Sedes De sere, seates that beare God, for they beare God that is aboue them, and they set foorth and shewe the might of God by diuine mouings, in creatures that he subiect. Seates that belong to the comming of God, that is aboue vnmateriall, and aboue worldlye taking. For they take the knowledge of God without stu∣dye and wearinesse, and sendeth it forth to the lower, without grieuous suffe∣raunce, and without withdrawing. Whereby they teach vs ghostlye, that we putting aparte materiall and earth∣lye things shoulde appoynt and make vs meete to receyue things that euer∣laseth. Also these seates are without ende, that is to vnderstande, without begin∣ning and ende. For in God, to whom they are nigh, is founde neyther be∣ginning neyther ende. So the Thrones receyue the vertue of God, and sen∣eth the same to the lower. They make themselues subiect to God obedientlye and not of anye necessitie, but by ve∣rye freedome, they shewe themselues subiect in all deedes.
¶Of the middle Hierarchie. Cap. 11. ISidore saith, That the middle Hie∣rarchie cōtaineth these thrée orders, Principatus, Potestates, and Dominati∣ones. Denys calleth this Hierarchie E∣piphonomia, that is diuine brightnesse with reuerence, their parteners setting forth, and teaching the vse of the Lord∣ship, and putting awaye of a thing that is contrary. The first difference is sayd for Principatus, that haue the gift of re∣uerence passing other: whose office is to teach, to exercise, and to do reuerence to them that be worthy, after the diuers degrées of Prelacie, as it is written: Cui honorein, honorein, Honor to whō honor pertaineth. Rom. 13. But the vse of Lordship belongeth to Dominations, which teach ye lower to gouerne, not by lyking and desire to be aboue and ouer other, but after Gods owne will, to rule one another: for God will that men be aboue other men for profite, and not for pride, that they may teach and informe them in the faith and in good manner of lyuing, and not to be outragious in the giftes that are fréelye giuen to the Lordship. Constraining of might & pow∣er belongeth to the order of Potentates, that mightely put off fiendes, that they grieue vs not so much as they woulde,Addition Preuenting vngodly desires, & vnlaw∣full lustes. And so is the disposition of the middle Hierarchie sette: though it séeme otherwise ordained, after Isidore and Gregory, but that belongeth not to this worke. ¶ Of the order of Dominations. Cap. 12. THe fourth order is Dominations, as Isidore saith, which are aboue and excell other in powers and vertues, for they be aboue other companies of An∣gells and Lords, and are called Domi∣nations. Gregory sayth, The office of this order, is to teach and informe men, what is néedefull in spirituall battayle, to vse in the office of Prelacie. Also they informe Prelates of the Cleargie, how they shall behaue themselues in go∣uerning of subiects, without oppression & tyrannie. Denys sayeth, That the ser∣uice of these Angels, is to put of distrust and dread, and tourne to God, without bending to worldlye profite, and serue him without ceasing: which by a singu∣lar excellencie, shape onely a behest and commaundement, a sure information & warning in the neather order. The An∣gells of this order be frée of all manner oppressing and ouersetting, that they maye fréelye be reared vp to God ward, and be subiect to none that is lower thē God: & so they be subiect to none other, but to him alone, and by an vniuersal ex∣cellēcie they are far aboue all subiection: yet so yt no vyolence of tyrannie bendeth them to oppresse and ouerset the neather Angells. Therefore Denys sayth, That they vse their Lordship with vnlykenes of tiranny. They haue seuerity in might, and with seueritie, fréedome in goodnes: and whiles the time of Dominations, power, and might is vsed, fréedome is not taken away in their dooing, about the nether orders, yet by this liberalitie their might is no manner of wise dimi∣nished. But conforming themselues to God, as much as is possible, they follow the rule & lawe of their president. They neuer turne them to vanitie, but alway to the highest God, that Denys cal∣leth (One) that is to vnderstande, U∣niuersall. On him they set their eyen, and turne not awaye the sighte of theyr vnderstanding, from him that is Lorde of all: and therefore they are parteners, as it maye be of the forme and lykenesse of God, as Denys sayth. And so Dominations are the first in the seconde Hierarchie. ¶The order of Principatus. Cap. 13. THe fift order is called Principatus: and holye men declare, that this order teacheth men of low estate to doe reuerence to them that be greater and in higher estate of dignitie, as to Kings,
Princes, and Prelates. Of the Angells of this order Denys saith, that to Prin∣cipatus belongeth leading to bring king∣domes to the lykenesse of God. For it belongeth to these Angells of their of∣fice, to teach and bring the other more lower ordinately to God, and to teache the lowest person to be reuerenced in himselfe, and in his neighbour, and spe∣cially in a Prelate. Denys sayth, That therefore they are called Principatus, for that to them it belongeth to turne or bring other to ye first & principal begin∣ning, that is to God: the which they followe as it is possible, and as far forth as it is lawfull in office of presidence, they be lykened to the Prince. For Isi∣dore lib. 7. sayth, That Principatus are they that be ouer the companies of An∣gells, for that they ordaine and dispose the lower Angelles to fulfill the diuine seruice. They haue the name of Prin∣cipatus: some there be that serue, and some that stand by,Psa. 68. 17 Thousands of thou∣sands serued him, & ten hundred thou∣sand stood by. Dan. 7.9.10. ¶Of the order of Potesta∣tes. Cap. 14. THe sixt order is the order of Pote∣states, & they are called Potestates, as Isidore saith, for the euill Angells be subiect to them. And they haue ye name of Potestates, for by their might, the euill spirites be restrained, that they doe not so much harme as they would. Gre∣gory saith, That the office of these An∣gells is to comfort them that trauayle and fight in ghostly battayle, and to de∣fende them, that they be not vyolently ouercome of their enimies, and to helpe mightely that good men haue the victory. Héerto Denis accordeth and saith, That the seruice of Potestates is to kéepe wa∣relye, that no wicked thing grieue, nei∣ther annoye good men. And Gregorye sayeth, That Pote∣states in their Order, perceiue more mightely, that euill spirites are sub∣iect to their disposition, the which be re∣strained by Potestates, that they grieue not men so much as they would. Of this Potencial vertue, Denys saith. This holy Potestates haue equal might with Dominations, and receyue and kéepe méekely the same diuine giftes in theyr degrée without confusion. For they tyrannouslye commaunde nothing contrary to the lower: they assay to do nothing by vyolence and force: but cal∣leth ordinately the lower Angells to the lykenesse of GOD. And ceasse not o bring thē, Ad Potentificam & causalem potenciam, that is to God, that may all thing, and is cause of all thing intellec∣tually, farre passing worldly dooing. So that by these properties of the lykenesse of God, the middle dispositions of the supernall knowledge, may be illumined and beautified, pourged and made per∣fect. Also as these Potestates are tourned to the lykenesse of God by meane of the higher Angelles: so by theyr meane the neather Angells are brought also to the lykenesse of God. So that all the orders, highest, middlemost, and lowest, be made partakers of darke and mysticall purga∣tions, illuminations, shinings, and per∣fections. ¶Of the thirde Hierarchie. Cap. 15. THe thirde Hierarchie is called Ephi∣onia, and contayneth thrée lower or∣ders, that is to suppose, Uertues, Arch∣angelles, and Angells. And thereto ac∣cording the lower Hierarchie is described in this manner. The lower Hierarchie, is a godly principle of nature, méeting with the lawes of kinde, and shewing secrets as he maye take discréete of na∣ture, méeting with the lawes of kinde. This pertayneth to Uertues: for they haue might to do myracles, and to heale sorrowe and sicknesses aboue Natures skill. Shewing mysteries: this belon∣geth to Archangells and to Angels, by a maruelous discréete passe, from the one to the other: this is referred to the diffe∣rence of Archangells and Angells. For the greater, as Archangels reueale grea∣ter mysteries, and the lesse, as Angelles, shewe the lesse screcies.
For by Archangells were shewed, the greater secrets vnto Prophets, us this:Esay. 7. 14. Ecce virgo concipiet, &c. Behold a vir∣gin shall beare a sonne, and thou shalt call his name Emanuel. And by Angels is shewed the besse,Psal. 68. as this: Episcopa∣tum es accipiat, &c. His habitation bee voyde, and no man bee dwellyng therein, and his Bishop right let ano∣ther take. And this was sayde of Iudas the traitour that hung himself:Acts. 8. and Ma∣thias was chosen Apostle in his stéede. Ephionia is sayd of Ephi, that is, vnder, and Phanos, that is, shewing. For the lykenesse of God is shewed in a lower manner in orders of this Hierarchie, then in other orders of the higher Hie∣rarchie. ¶Of the order of Vertues. Cap. 16. THe seuēth order is of vertues. Uer∣tues be a company of Angells, and their seruice is to vertues and to do mi∣racles, in them principally the vertue of God shineth: and therefore they be cal∣led vertues as Isidore saith. The An∣gells of this order, receiue illumination, purgation, and perfection of the orders of the middle Hierarchie. Therefore De∣nys saith, that vertues haue strength to worke as God graunteth them, yt which strength chaungeth not. In this they be formed and lyke to God: for they haue taken unchangeable strength of vertue, to doe all edes. And therefore Denys touching the working vertue of these spirites saith, That the name of these ho∣ly vertues, meaneth a mightie strength, that chaungeth not, that is giuen them asset the lykenesse of God, the which is neuer ble uer vnstedfast to receiue the illuminations and shewing of God: as though-he-would meane, In yt these Angells be called vertues, it is knowen that they are confirmed & like to God: for the vertue of God is strong & migh∣tie to  and which not for difficul∣tie of ty worke, and  vnstedfast to dure and  and wearieth no, neyther fée∣bleth for so long ing  of . So these Angelles  lyke for they are found strong, and incomtable to doe all déedes. Therefore they be vertuous, not onely in working, but also in recei∣uing of lyght and of brightnesse. For the vertue of these Angells, though it séeme feeble and vnstedfast, is likened to the vertue of God, and is not féeble, but by grace they are likened to the vertue of God They be féeble concerning their vn∣ablenesse without God, by condition of kinde, but they are not féeble by any ∣ruption: but they receiue all that is due to a creature, that is to meane, suffici∣ent strength according to the kind there of. Therefore Denys sayth, that the haue motion like to God, that beareth them stedfastly, into the passing Essence of God, for by that vertue, they and us to God w: and therefore theyr vertue is borne vp, into the passing vertue of the Creator, therfore the likenesse of the Image of God is found in them. The likenes of that they resolue, they send it forth to the neather Angells, they take by gifte, and giue foorth by example. De∣nys saith, that the office of these. An∣gells is to teach Prelates to doe the of∣fice of Prelaie, profitably, and pelys, and stedfastly, that they may beare their sharpe patiently: Gregory. 4. Mor, saith. That the office of these Angelles, is to teach them that haue vertue, how they should in themselves repaire the image of God: and reforme it, and kéepe it, and e it mightely.  so by the seruice of these Angels the vertue of doing mi∣racles, is graunted to the perfect, that they may be brought to the first state, in the which God made man to his owne Image and lykenesse. By such miracles shewed, the Angells of this order sée al∣waye and behold the vertue of God, and tremble an contemplation thereof: but this feare, inred  fliring to set foorth the will of God, as not painfull, but it is rather wonderfull, & not dredfull feare, as saith Gregory in Mor. li. 4. Of the order of Archangells. Cap. 17. THe eight order is of Archangels that is to be , highest messen∣gers,
or Princes of messenges, as sayth Isidore. For they holde the Principate among Angels, termed Dukes, leaders, and Princes. For vnder their order, to euery of the Angells their offices are as∣signed:Zat. 2.3.4. For Archangells be aboue An∣gells,The An∣gell that talked vvith mee vvé sorth and an o∣ther An∣gell vvent out to meet him & said vn¦to him: run, speak to this yoūg mā, & say Ie∣rusalem shall bee inhabited vvith out vvalles. as it is said in Zachary, where the greater Angell sayd to the lesse: Go & teach this childe, &c. For if it were so in the office of Angells, that the greater apointed not the lower, they would not hade said so, speaking as to a man: it seemeth therefore that one Angell learn∣eth of another. These Archangelles are oft knowen by their proper names, so that by their names, their conditions and workes be shewed.Luk. 1. 19. 16. ForI am Ga∣briel, that stande in the pre∣sence of God, & am sent to speake vnto thee &c. Gabriel was sent to the holye Uirgin, to giue warning that he was comming, that should haue the victory against ye stends, that are called, Aere Potestates. Gabri∣el signifieth ye Fortitude of God.Tob. 12. 15 I am Ra∣phalone of the 7. holy An∣gelles. which pre¦sents the praiers of the saints &c. And Raphael, the Medicine of God, & was sent to Toby, and did lay medicines to Tobies eyen, & healed him of his blind∣nesse, and so of other, Hetherto speaketh Isidore. lib. 7. cap. 5. Gregorie saith: that the office of these Angelles is to teache good men, and help them of those things that concerne theyr faith, as of the com∣ming of Gods sonne, and of his déedes and lawes. Denys faith, that it belong∣eth in Archangells, to shewe Prophecies to Prophets, and to put off frendes that haue mastrie buenmen, that they gréeue them no more: as it belongeth to Po∣testates to put off euill Angels, that they take not vpon them things that belong∣eth to God. Also Archangells are more worthy then the inferiour Angelles, and they be séene before other in message, because they be more perfect, so that both great and lesse, be seruiceable to the set∣ting forth of the glorie of God: and by theyr dilygence the lower Angells are informed towarde God, as much as is possible. Also they consent in one vnitie, gathering Angelles to that chiefe Prin∣cipium, in teaching of the Angells vn∣der them by ordinate leadings and vse, by the which it belongeth to teach and to lead the other neather. Angelles that follow. Also these Archangells be in the middes, among the orders of the nea∣thermost. Hierarchie: and therfore they take illuminations and shinings of the higher Angells, and the same shewe and teach forth to the nether Angells: in the which Angells of all Angells, the dispo∣sition Hierarchie is perfectlye constitute, fulfilled and complete of thrée ternaries of the orders of Heauen. ¶ Of the order of Angells. Cap. 18. THe ninth and the last order of An∣gelles. Angelus in Greeke Malach in Hebrewe, Nuncius in Latine: and is to vnderstande a Messenger in Eng∣lysh and in French. For Angelles were wont to come in message, and giue pro∣phets warning of our Lordes will. An∣gelus is a name of office, and not of kinde: for an Angel is alwaye a spirite, and is named Angelus first; when hee is sent in message. Paynters paynt Angells with feathers and with wings, to be token theyr swifte passing and mo∣uing, as Fables of Poettes tell that Windes haue feathers, as it is writ∣ten,Psa. 104.3 Qui ambulat super pennas ven∣torum. Hetherto be Isidores words, lib. 7. cap. 5. Denys sayth, that the Angels of the nether order, be not partners of the illu∣minations of ye higher orders: for they part not with thē, but they take part of thē. For ye higher Angels first take illu∣minations of God, & then beare they il∣luminations forth to the knowledge of other, and be called the first messengers: and the other be called after, and the last messengers. Also Denys saith, that Angells lifte vp or inspyre, and bring men to the knowing of GOD, and teach and informe them that they maye lyue righteouslye. Therefore, though these Angelles haue no other lower Angelles vnder them, and are not aboue any other An∣gelles not they haue vnder them the Orders of men, ouer whome they are ordayners and disposed of them.
AdditionFor the soule beeing the bodyes lyfe is the watch by the which the bo∣dyes expresseth the workes of na∣ture, charged for a time while the bo∣dye is apparaunt: the course runne, the soul: retourneth subiect to motions di∣uerse, by higher Angells. They be stirred vp by the loue of God in themselues, and be formed by ye ward of them, and passe forward vnder them∣selues by defence of them that they shal rule.Act. 12.7. 8.9 Peter was deliuered by ye An∣gell forth of prison. 2. Re. 19.  The An∣gel a∣woke Eli∣ah vnder the Gine∣pertree. and sayd, Arise and eate. These Angells haue many man∣ner effects: For the Angells that bée or∣deined singularly to our kéeping, pricke vs to good, and wake vs that we sleepe not in sinnes and in vices. Act. 12. Also they refresh vs Ghostlye, that we fall not vnder the burthen of the way into our countrie. 3. Reg. 9. Also they put off fiendes, that they hurt vs not. Tobie. & And they informe vs in doubts,  make vs certeine. Dan. 11. 10.Dan. 9. 21 22. As Dani∣el was in praier. Gabriel spak vnto him, sai∣eng, I am eōe forth to giue thee knovv∣ledge and vnderstan∣ding. Also an An∣gell leadeth vs that we wander not out of the way. Tobie. 5. Exod. 32. Also hee commeth to vs and comforteth vs in sorrowe and in woe. Luke. 23. Gen. 16. Where it is read that an Angell com∣forted Agar that wept full sore: also they haue compassion of vs when wée sinne, least we fall in dispaire and vaine hope. Esay. 24. Iudic. 2. And they assist vs quicklye least wée shoulde fall. Esay. 24. And they helpe vs against enimyes that wée bée not ouercome. Gen. 32. & secundo Macohebrum penul. Also they heale our woundes that wée dye not. Tobities.Toby. 5. 4. When he vvēt sorth to seeke a man, hee found Ra∣phael the Angell vvhich accōpanied him in his iourney. And they bring our sinnes to minde, that we should be ashamed there∣of. Iosu. 2. And they warne vs of Gods will, that we maye doe thereafter. Luke. 2. And they put awaye lets, that wée may serue our Lord, Exod. 23.Exod.  the Lord promised to send an Angell before his people. Sed precedet te, &c. And they visite vs oft, and warne vs, that we trespasse not. Esay. 40. Secundum penam, &c. And they bée always in the presence of God to haue contemplation. Luke. 1. & Dan. 7. Decres centena millia, &c. Also in prayeng they get vs remission. Iob. 33. Sicut fuerie. And they cease neuer to worshippe and praise God. Esay. 6. Apoc. 5. Non habient reqdiem, &c. And they behold God face to face with∣out vaile put betwéene. Mat. 18. Angeli corum, &c. And in their substance and vertue, they bée not grieued with the weight or peise of the bodie. Luke. vlti. Spiritus carnem et ossa, &c. Also hée is aboue tune, and worketh in time. For as Dems saith, the secret vnderstanding of an Angell is like to God, and work∣eth sodeinly. Therefore he vnderstandeth and knoweth sodeinly without circum∣staunce or conference of one thing to an other: and by the vertue of his substance he doth all his déeds in one instant: an instaunt is a during that abideth not. For an instaunt is, and neuer was, ney∣ther shall bee. The Philosopher calleth an Angell Intelligencia  and in Libro de Causis, it is written, That an Angell is made in the Orizont of time, and eter∣nitie euerlasting. TREVISA. O∣rizont is a straunge tearme and much vsed in Astronomie: and to inquire and knowe, what the Orizont signifieth,What an Orizontis take héede if a man stand on a great hill, either in a great plaine and large, so that hee sée the Firmament or Skye all a∣bout without anye lette, hée shall séeme that the Skye toucheth the earth all about him on euerye side, and that a Circle of the Skie compasseth the earth all abouts, as farre as his sight comprehendeth. That Circle is called Orizont, and is the middle Circle be∣twéen the parte that we sée of Hea∣uen, and the part that wée see not: and this Circle is betweene the foresayde partes, and is the neathermost of that one, and ouermost of that other: and so is Angells kinde and mankinde ouer those thinges that hée made, and passe, and fall by passing of time, and neuer in degrée of euerlasting. Then consider of the endlesse great∣nesse of God, that euer was, and euer shall bée, without beginning and with∣out ending. For euerys Angell shall but euer without ending: and no An∣gell than euer without beginning   ye Angell was made. Also if men bee affraide with the sodeine presence of an Angell, consider that nd Angell eth comforte vnto them, with swéete dooinges, and
swéete shewings, as saith Ambrose. Lu. .ibi. Ve timeas Zacharias, &c. A fiend or euill Angell doth the contrarye, for whome he affraieth with his presence, he smiteth them with more dreadfull feare, as saith Ambrose. Also an Angell is seene when he will. And when he will he is hid from mans sight, as saith S. Ambrose in the same place. Also an An∣gell when he will taketh a bodye coue∣nable to his working, that he maye bée séene: and when he hath done his office, he seaueth that body that he tooke.Iud. 13. 25 idem cap. 14.19 Sampson. Iud. 14. Euauit, &c. And the spirit of the Lord began to strengthen him in the host of Dan, And the spirit of the Lord came vppon him, and hee went downe to Ascalon. Also though an Angell tooke a body for any needfull dooing, hée doth not quicken that bodye, neither gi∣ueth thereto lyfe, but onely he moueth it. And so sometime it seemeth, that hée eateth and drinketh as a man, and yet be eateth not neither drinketh: But by his might he destroieth and washeth the meate, as appeareth. Tobie. 12. Where it is said. It seemed that the Angell eate & dranke, &c. Also an Angell eateth for no néede, but only by might. For as Austen saith vpon Luke, the last Chapter. The Sunne beame wasteth the water by might, but the earth swalloweth by ne∣cessitie, And so eating was by might tou∣ching the shewing of the meate and the wasting, but it was not néedfull to the féeding of the body. So these light things and plaine, that be said of good Angelles shall suffice at this time. ¶ Of euill Angells. Chap. 19. Of this go¦uernmēt of Angels manye haue disli∣ked, but seing that bodies he guided by spirits, & spirite by Angels, & Angels AS a good Angell is giuen to men for helpe and kéeping, so to eue∣rye man is giuen an euill Angell to as∣sailing & attempting. The head of these euill spirites and leader, is Lucifer, the which as Gregory saith, hath that same, for he was made more cléere and height then other Angells. For the first Angell was beautified as a precious stone for whilest he was aboue all the compaes of Angells, by comparison he was the more bright and cléere then they. But he waring proud against his Creator, lost light and cléerenesse, and fairenesse:by God, it is a rare question. and as he was worthy, he gate him a foule darke shape of Apostacie. Thereof spea∣keth Damas. li. 1. Chap. 18. Of these ver∣tues of Angelles, he that was aboue other, and to whome God had commit∣ted the charge of the earth, was not made euill by kind, but good, and of the maker, no fire of maltice in himselfe, not suffe∣ring the illumination and worship, that the maker had giuen him: by election and choise of his owne frée aduisement, hée turned out of kinde into a thing that is aboue kinde: and became a rebel against God, and failing of the first good, came in∣to euill. Et infra. He was of the creator made light, and by his owne will he be∣came darknesse. Also with him was sent out an endlesse multitude of Angels, that followed him, and were ordeined vnder him, and wilfullye became euill, and fell out of good into euill. Also it is sayd, that they haue no power neither vertue a∣gainst men, except it be graunted by the disposition and sufferaunce of God: But by sufferance of God they disguise them∣selues, and take what manner Image, fi∣gure, or shape them liketh. Then it see∣meth that all mallice and vncleane thoughts come of their dooing, the which they may put in mans thought: But they may not doe to: men by violence & strength. Also that death of men is a chaunge of life, the alterations of Angels losse of son. After fliding, Angels lack the cléere prosēce of God, as after death men lacke life. Hetherto be Damascenes words. Also Gregory saith, that grace hath forsaken him, and he abideth obsti∣nate in mallice, so that by his will, hee will nothing that is good. He hath frée aduisement, but it is borne downe, and bendeth alway to euill, without ceasing: So that alway he forsaketh the good and chooseth the euill. Therefore it happened as Cassidore sayth, he willed and coue∣ted to vsurp ouer the Godhead; and ther∣by lost prosperitie: also because he in an vndue manner coueted highnesse, that belonged not to him, therefore by a right decrée he fell downe into a lowe place.
As he that bare himselfe not rightfully in the highest place, should nowe by the order of righteousnesse holde himselfe in the lowest place. Therefore Saints call him Diabolus, a Diuel, as it were De∣orsum ruens, falling downe.Deorsum rucus. And hée hath many other names, by the which his wickednesse is knowne by significa∣tion of names. Hée is called Demon, and Plato in Thimeo calleth him Ca∣codemon, that is to vnderstand, know∣ing euill. For Demon is to vnder∣stand, knowing. And he is called so for sharpnesse that hée hath of kindly wit. Hée is sharpe in wit of kinde, and by experience of time, in knowing and vn∣derstanding of Scriptures, as sayth Be∣da, and also Damascene. Chap. 18. Héere∣of speaketh Isidore. lib. 7. chap. vltimo, and sayth that the Gréekes call fiendes wise, that is, cunning. For they knowe before manye thinges that shall fall and come after. Therefore they bée wont to giue many aunsweres. For in them is more knowledge of things then is in men, and that is the more because of subtilnesse of wit, and for long conti∣nuaunce and experience, and somewhat they knowe by reuealations of good An∣gells, by the commaundement of God. These fiendes bée nigh in kinde to the bodyes of the aire: For before they tres∣passed they had heauenlye bodyes. And fithence their sliding & fall, they be tur∣ned into qualitie of ayre. And they bée suffered to holde these spaces of the darke ayre, that is to them a prison vnto the dome. These bée the Angells that trespassed, and their Prince is the Di∣uell. Also he is called Sathan, that is to say, contrarie, or an aduersarie. For by corruption of mallice he is contrarye to God, as saith Hierome. By desperate attempting hée taketh more vppon him then he may doe, as saith the Glose. E∣say. 16. Maior est arrogancia eius, &c. His bragge and his boast is more then his might. For as Hierome sayth: He had leauer be, then not bée, because hée woulde fight against God, though hée knowe, that his harme should encrease thereby. Also hée is called Beemoth. Iob. 40. Ecce Beemoth, Beemoth is as much to say, as an Oxe, or a beast.Of some taken for the ∣uncerot & Ele∣phant, beasts of gret force & hignes. signifieng the whale or furious dragon. The fiende, as an Oxe desireth to ae heye, with the tooth of his temptaion, seeketh to chewe and to frette the cleane lyfe of good men. The fiende loueth fleshlye likinges. Also he is called Leuiathan, that is, a thing put to. Iob. 40. For as Gregorye sayth, hée putteth harme to harme, and ceaseth not to put paine to paine. Alwaye as the trespasse of him & of his, increaseth, so the paine in∣creaseth also. Also hee is called Appolli∣on in Gréeke, that is, a destroyer, as appeareth Apocalipsis. 15. For by mal∣lice that stirreth him, he desireth to de∣stroy the goodnesse of vertues that God planteth in the holye Church, and a∣mong good soules, as it is sayde in the Psalme,Psa. 80. 13 Exterminauit eam aper de sil∣ua, &c. Also hée is commonlye called Diabolus, that is, fléeting downeward, by vnderstanding in Hebrewe. For hée dispised to stande in peace in the high∣nesse of Heauen, hée was worthy to fall downeward by the weight of his pride. And hée is called Criminator in Gréeke, a curser and blamer, either for that hée intiseth or inflameth vnto offences and sinnes, or else for that hée infecteth in∣nocently good men with blame and false accusations, as it is sayde Apocalip∣sis. 12. Proiectus est accusator, &c. and as saith Isidore. Ethimol. . 8.Tobie . The accu¦ser of mē is cast dovvne. Also be∣side these names in holye writte, his mallice is many wayes noted. For hée is called a Serpent or a Dragon, for his venimous and guisefull cruelnesse. Apocalipsis. 12. Hée is called a Lyon for his open violence. 1. Pet. vltimo. Tanquam Leo rugiens. And he is called a Boare, for he is obstinate and rooted in shrewdenesse. Esare. 25. And hée is called a crooked and waywarde Addar, for his looking in the darke ayre. And therefore Austen rehearseth Platoes opinion of fiendes, that hée called Ca∣codemones, super Genesisliber. 8. & habet. liber. 5. siue distinctio∣ne. 8. Caput. primo. And sayth, that Fiendes bée called ayrelye beastes, for they liue in bodyes that be airely.
And therefore not to be ouercome by death. For the element that is more able to suffer then to work, hath the masterie in those manner of bodyes. Also Austen in the worke De ciuitale Dei. li. 8. saith, That is, by signi∣fication, as vvhen a man in consciēce is greued, & cannot vtter the agnie of his mind.Demones, fiends be beasts that suffer in the hidden intelligence, reasonable in thought, euerlasting in during, airely in body. Austen saith in this manner, re∣hearsing the opinion, and meaneth, how the fiend was put out of the place that is called Coelum Imperium. Blessed heauen, out of the bright place of lyght, into this darke ayre, & is prisoned therin to suffer w & sorrow: when God suffe∣reth him, hée taketh a bodie of the aire, that the lyfe of men be haunted & stirred to businesse by his dooing or tempting. Therefore Esaye calleth him a Smith blowing coales, and shaping vessel to his worke. For by his haunting and assay∣ling, the life of good men, that be vessels of grace, are assaied and proued. Esa. 54. 16.17. I haue made a Smith, &c. Thus he is called by these names, and by ma∣ny other, by the which his venemous woodnesse is shewed. Beda in the glose vpon this place. 1. Pe. vlti. Circuit que∣rens quem deuoret. He goeth about & seeketh whom he may deuour & eate, sayth: He goeth about as an enimie be∣sieging closed walls, and spieth where he may enter and come in by the féeblest side. He sheweth vnlawfull shapes to the eien: to the intent that by the sight hée might destroy chastitie. He tempteth the cares by song and melodie, that he might make the christian strength féeble and faint: he prouoketh the tongue by re∣buke and soule reproch. And to take re∣uenge, hée tempteth the hande of them that suffereth wrong, and stirreth there∣to, he promiseth worldly worship, that he might cause the honour due to Hea∣uen to be sette at naught. If he may not deceiue with slow temptings, he putteth too feareful appearaunces and doubting. He is gilefull and deceiuable in peace, & violent in persecution. Therefore the wit should be as redy prepared to withstand him, as he is to impugne and assaile, He∣therto he the wordes of the Glose. ¶ Of peruerse Angells. Chap. 20. EUill Angells consenting to the will of Lucifer, that fell downe, he clo∣sed in this darke ayre, as it were in pri∣son without recouerie. They fell out of light into darknesse, out of loue into hate and enuie, out of most high health into wretchednesse, as saith Gregorye. Also fiends, as they haue more perseue∣rance or lesse, some be souereignes ouer fiends, & some be subiects to other fiends, as saith Ambrose vppon Luke. For though fiends be obstinate in euill, yet they are not spoiled vtterly of sharp wit. For as Isidore saith, they haue thrée mā∣ner of sharpnesse. For some things they knowe by the subtiltie of kinde, & some by experience and during of times, and some things they know by reuealation, and shewing of holy spirits. Also ye fiends as Austen saith, by sharpnesse of witte know vertues seruiall of things, that we knowe not. The which séedes they sowe by couenable and temporate commixti∣ons of Elements, and so they bring forth things of diuerse kinde. For what that kinde may do by it selfe in due time, the same the diuell may do sodeinly by swift hasting of the worke of kinde. So by craft of fiends Pharaos witches made so∣deinly serpents and frogs, as sayth the Glose, super Exod. Also all the intent of fiends is to do euill, and to molest & disquiet good men. And therefore oft they trouble the Ele∣ments, and make tempests in the Sea, & in the aire. They corrupt and destroy the fruit of the earth, as appereth Apoc. 7. And much more harme wold they do, wer it not the good Angels ye withstand their mallice: and therefore because they trespasse continuallye wheresoeuer they goe, they beare alwaie with them their pain, as saith Gregorie. Also Gregory. li. Mo. 32. saith, Fiends desire alway ye wo & sorrow of good men. But if they haue no power of God, they be notThey can doe no more thē is per∣mitted them. sufficient to the article of temptation. Therfore when they haue done one hurt or euill, they sodeinly make them ready to doe a∣nother.
And so when fiends shuld be put out of that men that they were in, they raied that they might enter into swine. For to the end they might fulfill theyr mallice, they desire also to grieue brute beasts, when the might of God letteth them, that they may not molest mnal so li. 14. after the diuers complections of sendry men, they ordeine whiles of tem∣tation to catch them. For they tempt light conceited men to lechery, and euill disposed men to discordt and strife, and fearefull men to vaine hope, and proude men to take too much vpon them: Also in li. 22. First the olde certaine tempteth, as it were counsailing, he entiseth liking attempts and vnlawfull, after he draw¦eth to delectation, & at the last so consent: and when he hath a man in, he ouerset∣teth him with a violent vsage & custome: wherfore of him it is said: Iob. 41. Str∣gt caudam, &c. Also Gregory saith, li. 32. The guilefull entin ouercommeth no man by might, but by guile of ve∣nimous perswasions, and by the guilfull counsells he slaieth. For while liking things appeare or séeme pleasantly, they bend the heart to euill. Item. li. 25. Now he appeareth to men as he is lost. And now as an Angell of light; he sheweth himselfe, Item. li. 34. In the ende of the world, he shall be so much the more ser∣uent to madnesse, through mastre, that he is so nigh to ye doe, & to paint internals. Item. ibidem. Their the false cannt shal séeke and bethinke wickedly all that hée with, then wilt hee aduce thē proude folke an high: and by him man shall be dampned by his one déeds, and he shal wickedly shew all the euill that he can. Item ibidem. li. 34. When all the cōpa∣nie of heauen cōmeth to iudgement, then ye old enimy the diuel, the grisy beast: streng, shall be brought forth before the doing as a prisoner. And he shall be put into the fire of hell without end, and his inherents with him: Where shall bee a wonderfull sight when this huge of grislye beast shal be shewed to ye eyen of good mē. These fewe of full manye properties of euill spirits, & of the effect of them spo∣ken, shall suffice for to passe shortly. And who that desireth to knowe the proper∣ties, workes, and priue false accusations of this Sathanas, let him throughly read Gregories booke vppon Iob. And special∣ly the two last Chapters. 40. and. 41. FINIS SECVNDI LIBRI. ¶ INCIPIT LIBER TERTIVS ¶ Of the properties of the soule reasonable. BY the help of Iesu Christ, in the foresaid bookes, we haue brought in brieflye some properties of bodi∣lesse substance, of ye essence of God, & qualitie of An∣gels: Now with his helpe we shal turne our sle to bodily creatures, and we shal begin at the worthiest of creatures, that to man, that hath kinde and propertie as well of bodies as of spirits. ¶ Of the description of man. Chap. 1. A Man is of all other creatures néerest in likenesse vnto God,Isidorus. milde after kinde by the lawe of reason, receiuing doctrine and skill, hauing the Image of God by the might of knowledge, and the likenesse in power of louing. Farther to the intent the properties of men shuld be the more openly known to vnlearned mē & simple, of his parties, of yt which he is made & cōposed, we shal shortly begin to intreat: and first of ye worthier kind, yt
is the soule, by the which man agrieth with Angells. For by the soule man is lift vp to heauenlye thinges, aboue the kinde of bodie. For as Isidore sayth, by a misse vse, Homo, a man, hath ye name of Homo, the earth: sith that he is not made only of body, but composed of body & of soule. And therefore a man is called Antropos in Gréeke:Antropos. of Ants. & Tro∣peo: Homo conuersus. A man grovving vvith his head or roote vp∣vvard. By Antropos is vnderstoode vprightlye formed. For the spirit is lifted vp by gouernaunce, to the contemplation of God his maker: wher∣fore the Poet saith. Prona{que} cum spectant animalia eçtera terrā, Os homini sublime dedit coelumquè videre. Iussit & erectos ad sidera tollere vultus. The meaning is thus, other beasts looke downeward to the earth. And God gaue to man an high mouth, and com∣maunded him to looke vp and beholde heauen: & he gaue to men visages looking vpwarde towarde the starres. And also a man shoulde séeke heauen, and not put his thought in the earth, and be obedient to the wombe as a beast. Isidore speak∣eth of a double manner man,That is, to voide excesse. of the in∣ner man, and vtter man. And first wee shall treate and procéede of the in∣ner man. ¶Of the inner man, the soule, Chap. 2. FIrst it is to vnderstand, what thing the reasonable soule is, and of what disposition, & what is the meaning of the Etimlogie, and the pronouncing of this name, Anima, a soule. Then of the might & vertue therof. And thirdly of the effect & working therof. Fourthly, of the per∣fection and comparison, that is to witte, what is the propertie thereof, when it is ioyned to the bodie, and when it is departed from the bodye. The reasona∣ble soule, of the which we intend héere to speake, is defined of some Saintes and Philosophers, as a spirit: And of some other, as Anima et spiritus, soule and spirite. In that the soule hath the kinde of a spirit, S. Austen defineth it in libro de motu cordis. ¶Yet of the Soule. Chap. 3. A Soule is an vnbodilye substaunce intellectuall, that receiueth lyght of the first, by the last relation: By this definition we know the first and cheife propertie of the soule. For mans spirit receiueth the lyght of God next after Angells. Also in that it is a soule, it is defined in two manners. For it is ioy∣ned to the bodie in two manners, that is to vnderstand, a mouer to the thing that is moued, and also as a shipman is setteled to the shippe. And thereto accor∣ding Remigius defineth a soule in this manner. A soule is a bodilesse substance ruling a bodie. And Saint Austen in the booke De anima et spiritu, saith in this manner. A Soule is a certeine sub∣staunce, partener of reason, betaken to a bodie that shall be ruled. Of the which definition some propertie is taken: That is, that the soule by a certeine ne∣cessitie of loue & gouernaunce is kind∣ly giuen to the ruling of the bodie, that is ioyned thereto. And héereby it appea∣reth, that the soule is not streighted, nei∣ther spread in length, neither in bredth in the bodie, that he ruleth and gouer∣neth: but by the vertue of the soule the body all about is ruled and moued. As Calcidius putteth example in Commen∣to super Thimeum, of the Spider that sitteth in the middle of the web, & féeleth all manner of mouing, & toucheth the webbe either within or without: So the soule, abiding in the middle of the heart, without spreading of it selfe, gi∣ueth lyfe to all the bodie, and gouerneth and ruleth the mouing of all the luns. In that it is compared to the body, that it is ioyned vnto, as forme and perfecti∣on. It is defined of the Philosopher in lib. de Anima, in this manner. A soule is Endelichia, that is, the first act or per∣fection of a kindly bodie, that hath lims and might to haue life. By which defini∣tion it is manifest, that though the soule be ioyned to the bodie, it may not be fa∣stened to all manner of bodyes, but one∣ly to a kindly bodie, that hath lummes,
and is first kindlye disposed to receiue a reasonable soule. Also in ye it is a soule and spirit, it is defined foure manner of waye. First in comparison to creatures generally, as in the booke De anima & spiritu, Austen saith in this manner: A soule is made to the likenesse of all wis∣dome, and beareth in it selfe the liknesse of all things. For it is like to the earth by Essentia: to water, by imagination: to Aire, by reason: to the Firmament, by vnderstanding: to the knowledge of heauenly ioyes. In the sixt manner it is defined in comparison to God, as to his maker, thus. A soule is like to God, a quickening of lyfe. Héereby we knowe that the soule is not begotten of the fa∣ther and mother, but it is compound and created of God to the liuing of the bo∣die. Also in the seauenth manner it is described in comparison to God, as to the end that he is made, thus: A soule is a spirit intellectuall, ordeined to blisse in it selfe. Héereof shineth the propertye of the soule, that is to meane, that the soule béeing departed from the body is not onely beautified with Angelles, or as an Angell is, but the felicitie thereof is inlarged, and in the bodie glorified. Iohannis Damascene. Homel. 26. com∣prehendeth all these differences and de∣finitions vnder a generall discription, and sayth, That a soule is a substaunce liuing, simple, and bodilesse, in his own kinde vnléene with bodilye eyen, ney∣ther shall die, and is the reasonable vn∣derstanding, without shape of limmes. And it vseth a bodie, and giueth there∣to heart of lyfe, and of growing and of begetting, and hath none other vn∣derstanding, but in it selfe it is most pure and cleane. And as the eye is in the bodie, so is the intellect vnderstan∣ding in the soule, and it hath frée ad∣uisement and will, and is chaungea∣ble by couenable will. For it maye fréelye take eyther refuse. All these the spirit taketh of his grace, that made him, and of him hée hath béeing a kinde. Hetherto speaketh Iohn Damas∣cene. Bernard describeth a right such properties and saith. O thou soule, beau∣tified and made fayre with the Image and lykenesse of God, spoused in spirit, with Faith: bought with Christs owne bloud, assisted with Angells, pertaker of blisse, heyre of saluation, and par∣tener of reason. What hast thou to doe with the flesh? By which thou suffe∣rest much. By these many and diuerse definions, and descriptions, diuerse and sundrie properties of the soule be know∣en, touching his béeing of kinde and of grace. ¶How the soule is of Philoso∣phers described. Chap. 4. BUT what thing a Soule is, it is vnknowen to many men. For in this matter wée reade, that olde Phi∣losophers gaue diuerse, and as it were contrarie determinations. In liber de Anima, Aristotle rehearseth the Pla∣to sayde, that a soule is a béeing mouing it selfe. And Zeno sayth, that a soule is a number that moueth it selfe. Pytha∣goras calleth the soule Harmonie, a con∣cord of melodie. Paphinons calleth it Idea, a manner example. And Asole∣pides calleth it a manner of corde, that setteth the fiue wittes a worke. Hipo∣cras calleth it a subtile spirite spread through all the bodie. Eraclius the Phi∣losopher, calleth the soule a lyght, or a sparcle of béeing. Democritus cal∣leth it an vncerteine spirits Atho∣mis, a little thing, as it were of the meates in the Sunne beame, and so hée sayth, that all the bodye of the soule is such a lyttle thing. Permenides saith, that it is made of earth and of fire. Epicurus sayth, that the soule is a man∣ner kinde of fire and ayre. Ipertus saith, the soule is a firye strength. Iuxta il∣lud: Igneus est illis vigor et coele∣stis origo. Sith that wise men haue spoken so many wayes, and so diuerse∣ly of the soule: at this time onelye this shall suffice that is sayde of holy men. That the soule is a manner of spiritual and reasonable substaunce, that GOD maketh of naught for to giue lyfe and perfection to mans body. And because it is a substaunce that maye receyue contraryes: It receiueth vnderstan∣ding,
and yet is subiect to forgetting, vertue and mallice without chaunging or léesing of his substaunce. And be∣cause it is bodilesse, it is not spread in length neither in breadth in the bodily wits. Inasmuch as it is simple in kinde, therfore it may grow and ware, neither more neyther lesse one time then at an other. And therefore in the greater bo∣dye it is no greater, nor in the lesser bo∣die lesser, as sayeth Austen. Also though it bée simple and not chaunge∣able in his substaunce, yet it hath ma∣ny sundry mights and vertue. For mul∣titude in might and vertue, maketh him neither more ne lesse in kinde, but the multitude of might and vertue be∣longeth to the dooinges and effects. And so hée is not more in thrée vertues then in one, neither lesse in one then in thrée: And thus it is known, that ye soule hath many propertyes and definitions, tou∣ching what thing the Soule is, and the condition of the Soule shall bée more cléerelye knowne by the setting of the name. ¶How the Soule tooke name of the Gentiles. Chap. 5. ISidore sayeth, that Anima the Soule, was named of the Gentiles: For that by their opinion it is winde & breath: For we by drawing of ayre at the mouth séeme to liue. But this opini∣on is openlye falsée, for the Soule is put into the bodye, long before the ayre bée taken at the mouth. For it liueth bée∣ing in the mothers wombe, when our Lorde maketh the Soule, and putteth it therein. And it is called Soule be∣cause it liueth, and it giueth lyfe to the bodie, that it is put in. And it is called spirit, because it hath in it selfe, spiritu∣all, animall, and kindlye lyfe: And be∣cause it maketh the bodye Spirare, that is, to breath. Also the same thing is Anima and Animus: but Anima lea∣deth the lyfe by reason, and Animus by counsaile and guiding. Therefore Phi∣losophers saye, that Anima, that is a lyfe, abideth with Animus, that is coun∣saile. Also Anima the Soule, is cal∣led Mens, the Minde, because it appa∣reth aboue as head, or because it min∣deth. By the Soule, man is the Image of God. Also many names of the soule bée so coupled together, so that often∣times one name is put for another, and the Soule that is one, is called by di∣uerse names in diuerse respectes. It is called Anima, while it is in the bodye and giueth it lyfe. Mens whilest it hath minde, Animus, whilest it hath will: Racio while it déemeth or iudgeth rightfully: Spiritus while it breatheth: Sensus while it féeleth. And for these propertyes of the Soule, cunning, that is the qualytie of the Soule, is called Sciencia, and hath the name of Sen∣sus, féeling. Hetherto speaketh Isidore. liber. 15. Chap. 14. ¶Of the powers of the Soule. Chap. 6. THE Soule is one in substaunce, and hath many vertues, and ma∣ny manner of workings: thereby it néedeth to shewe diuerse parting of his might and vertues. The Soule is com∣pared to the body, and to this end, and to this act. Touching the comparison to the bodie, the Soule hath fine man∣ner of mightes and vertues. The first whereof, as Austen saith, is féeling, and by that vertue the Soule is moo∣ued, and taketh héede to the bodylye wittes, and desireth those things, that belong to the bodye. By this vertue a beast is mooued to desire the thing that is lyking, and to eschewe the thing that is grieuous. The seconde power is wit: that is the vertue of the soule, whereby shée knoweth things sensible and corporall, when they bee present. The third is imagination, whereby the Soule beholdeth the lyekenesse of body∣lye thinges when they bee absent. The fourth is Racio, Reason, that déemeth and iudgeth betwéene good and euill, truth and falsenesse. The fifte is Intel∣lectus, vnderstanding and inwit. The which comprehendeth thinges not
material but intelligible, as God, Angel, and other such. The three first ver∣tues, feeling, bodily wit, and imaginati∣on, are situate in the soule, that it is coupled to the body, and giueth life and innerwit & vtter wit to perfection of the body. And these thrée vertues be com∣mon to men and to other beasts: But the other vertues, acio and Intellectus, be in the soule, in that it may be departed from the body, and abide departed as an Angell, and that by two manner of re∣spects. For it beholdeth the higher things and so it is called Intellectus: and be∣holdeth the neather things, and so it is called Racio. In that the soule is compa∣red to this end, it hath thrée manner of vertues, one is Racionalis, whereby it taketh héede to the thing that is true: The other is called Concupisubilis, whereby it taketh héed to the thing that is good, the third is called Irascibilis, and thereby it taketh héede ye thing that is great and huge, and to the thing that is euerlasting. In the Rationali is know∣ledge of the truth, in Concupiscibili, wil and desire of good thing: in Irascibili is flight of contrary, that is, of euill. And so euery vertue thus considered taketh in this manner knowledge of the truth, ei∣ther that it desireth good, either indeuou∣reth to flie harme. All the wits come of that vertue Rational and apprehensiue. All affections and desire, of Concupisci∣bili and Irascibili. Which affectios bée foure, that is to say, Ioy, Hope, Dreade and Sorrowe. The first two come of Concupiscibili, for of the thing that we couet and desire, we haue ioy, and in ioy∣ing we hope. The other two, dread and sorrow, come of the Irascibili. For of things that we hate we haue sorrowe, and in sorrowing we dread. These foure affections be the matter of all manner vices and vertues, as it is in another place shewed, and that appereth by Au∣sten in the booke De Ama & spiritu, where all those thinges are decla∣red. ¶Of the powers of the soule. Chap. 7. IF we take héed to the soule in com∣parison to his working, wee finde three manner of vertues, Vegetabilis, that giueth lyfe, Sensibilis, that giueth feeling, Racionalis, that giueth reason. In diuerse bodyes the soule is sayde to be thrée folde, that is to saye, Vegetabi∣lis that giueth lyfe, and no féeling, and that is in plants and rootes, Sensibilis, that giueth life & féeling, and not reason, that is in vnskilfull beasts, Racionalis that giueth lyfe, féeling, and reason, and this is in men. The Philosopher lyke∣neth the soule that is called Vegitabi∣lis, to a Triangle. For as a Triangle hath thrée corners, this manner soule hath thrée vertues, of begetting, of nourishing, and of growing. And this soule Vegetabilis is lyke to a Triangle in Geometrie. And hée lykeneth the soule Sensibilis, to a quadrangle square, and foure cornerd. For in a Quadran∣gle is a line drawne from one corner to another, before it maketh two Tri∣angles and ye soule sensible maketh two triangles of vertues. For where euer the soule sensible is, there is also the soule Vegetabilis, but not backwarde. And hée lykeneth the soule Racionabi∣lis to a Circle, because of his perfection and conteining. For of all the figures that be called Isoperimetra, that is of al the figures of the same length the Cir∣cle is most, and most conteineth. Though the soule reasonable be made perfect in cunning and vertues, as it is sayde in Liber de Anima: it is most per∣fect, and most may conteine in the man∣ner of a Circle, touching the kindly ver∣tues. And therefore who that hath the soule reasonable, hath also the power Sensibilis and Vegetabilis, but not con∣trariwise. ¶Of the Soule Vegetable. Chap. 8. THen the Soule Uegetable, that giueth life, hath vertue of beget∣ting, that is néedefull to multiplye and bring forth his kinde, vertue of nourishing to keepe a singular thing in
kinde, and vertue of waring and growing, to the perfection thereof. Also to this vertue Vegetabilis: that giueth life, serue foure vertues, that is to be vn∣derstoode. The vertue of appetite, that ta∣keth what is néedfull to foode: the ver∣tue of Digestion, that parteth the thing that is couenable, from a thing that is not couenable in foode: retentiue, which transmitteth or conueieth it, that is con∣uenient in foode, to all the partes in beasts, and to all the boughes, twigges, springs, and plants, and fastned to them, to restore the lust or liking say or iuyce as well in plants, as in beasts: The ver∣tue Expulsiue is, which expelleth and putteth awaye that that is vnconueni∣ent and hurtfull to kinde. Also there bée other vertues that serue and minister to the vertue Vegetabilis, Immutatiue, Informatiue, Assimulatiue, Perforabi∣lis, Aspera, Leuis: the differences of which is not our intent to pursue: For they be openly knowen in Liber Iohan∣nicij. Chap. 2. Therefore gather you shortlye of this that is sayde, that the soule by the vertue Vegetable in plantes, brin∣geth forth other of the same kinde, and multiplieth and kéepeth that that is brought foorth in kinde. And whatso∣euer is néedfull to foode, it desireth, re∣ceiueth, incorporateth, and inioyeth. And it putteth and excludeth awaye that that is not according. Also by the vertue Generatiue, to whome serueth Pasitiue, it multiplyeth and bringeth forth things of kinde. And by the ver∣tue Nutritiue, it comforteth and féedeth kindes that bée multiplied. Also by the vertue that is called Augmenta∣tiua, it maketh the bodie increase and growe, and bringeth it to a due sta∣tute and quantitie, and maketh it per∣fect. Also by age and passing of time this manner soule faileth, & at the last when the bodie dieth, it consumeth. And these things that be sayd héere of the soule, called Anima Vegetatiua, shall suf∣fice. ¶Of the soule sensible. Chap. 9. DE Anima sensibili, of the Soule that giueth féeling, somewhat shal shortlye be sayde, touching the diuer∣sitie of the might and vertues there∣of. For the vertue of féeling hath place in the most subtile Chambers of the braine, and giueth quicke moouing and féeling in all the limmes, and that by sinewes and small vaines that spring out of the braine, and spreadeth into all the partes of the beast. The Soule sensible, that giueth féeling, hath dou∣ble might and vertue, that is to wit, of apprehending and of mouing. The vertue of apprehending, that is a man∣ner knowing, is departed in twaine: into common or innerwitte, and into perticular or vtter wit. The vtter wit conteineth the sight, hearing, smel∣ling, tasting, and touching. And this wit in his Organes is brought to ef∣fect in this manner. There is a sinew that in the crafte of Anathomia, is called Obticus,Neruis Obticus. and is an hollowe si∣newe, and commeth from the braine to the eyes, or to the blacke of the eien, parting. And an other commeth to the eares: and the thirde to the nosethrilles: the fourth to the tongue, and to the roofe of the mouth, and the fifte braunch∣eth and commeth in cordes to the in∣strumentes of touching, and spreadeth through all the bodye. By these si∣newes the spirite of féeling is dispear∣sed into all the bodye: and by ver∣tue thereof all the bodye is able to féele and to moue. And so by vertue of sprea∣ding and of shedding of that spirite into all the sinewes, arterye vaines or Muscles, all the matching or ma∣king of the bodye, is founde able to moue. ¶Of the inner Sense. Chap. 10. THE inner vertue is parted in thrée, by thrée diuisions in the braine. For in the braine bée thrée small celles,
that is to say, the formost in which the vertue Imaginatiua worketh. There those things that the vtter wit compre∣hendeth without, be ordeined and put to∣gethers within, as saith Iob.Iob. 1 The mid∣dle chamber termed Logica: therein the reason sensible or vertue Estimatiua is a maister. The third and the last, which is Memoratiua, the vertue of the mind. That vertue holdeth and kéepeth in the treasure of the minde, and knowne by imagination and reason. The vertue of the sensitiue ima∣gination and memorie. Chap. 11. THE vertue of féeling that commeth of the soule sensible, is a vertue, by which the soule knoweth & iudgeth of coulours, of sauours, and of other obiects that be knowne by the vtter wits. The vertue imaginatiue is it, whereby wée apprehend likenesse and shapes of things of perticulars receyued, though they bée absent: As when it séemeth that we sée golden hils, either else when through the similitude of other hills we dreame of the hill Pernasus. The vertue Estima∣tiue, or the reason sensible is it, whereby in being héedfull to auoide euill, & follow that is good, men be prudent & sage. And this vertue Estimatiue is common to vs & to other beasts: As it is séene in hounds & also in wolues: but properly to speak, they vse no reason, but they vse a busie & strong estimation, but héereof we shall speake in another place. But Memorati∣ua is a vertue conseruatiue or recorda∣tiue, wherby the likenesse of things, least they should be forgot, we lay vp & safely reserue. Therefore one said, the Memory is the coffer or chest of reason. Of the sensible vertue motiue. Chap. 12. VErtue sensible that moueth is parted in thrée. One parte is called Natura∣lis, the other Vitalis, and the third Ani∣malis. The vertue that is called Natura∣lis, moueth the humours in the body of a beast by the vaines, & hath a principall place in the liuer. For that it worketh there principally. The vertue that is cal∣led Vitalis, is the vertue of life, & hath mouing by the throat, or artery pipes, in the which it moueth the spirits yt com∣meth from the hart. For this vertue hath place in the heart. And of the heart sprin∣geth the hollow or artery pipes, as the vaines spring out of the liuer. The heart is so hot, yt if it wer not slaked with cold aire and breathing, it should be stifeled in it selfe in the same heate. Therfore it néedeth to breath & to drawe in aire by the lungs and organe, to slake the heat & the burning thereof. The vertue that is called Animalis motiua, hath place in ye small chambers of the braine. Out of the braine all the sinewes spring by meane of the ridge boane, and of the marrowe of the bones therof. This vertue moueth all the lims. For first it moueth the si∣newes, muscles, and brawnes: and these moued, they moue other limmes spéede∣ly in euery parte. And for that, that it moueth the handes, it is called vertue operatiue working. And for that that it extendeth to the féete, and moueth them to walke, it is called the vertue progres∣siue, going. For thereby beastes haue their kindly mouing and going. Then gather briefly the properties of the soule sensible, that belongeth to this treatise. The soule sensible that giueth féeling, is a certeine spirituall substaunce more no∣ble and more worthy then the soule Ve∣getabelis, that giueth life: And lesse no∣ble and lesse worthy then the soule Ra∣tionalis, that giueth reason. For the be∣ing and the working of this soule, that is Sensibilis, is dependant of the bodie, that it is in, and maketh it perfect. There∣fore when the bodie dieth, the béeing and working thereof dieth also of the Uege∣tatiue spirit departed from the bodie. But while it is in the bodie it hath ma∣ny noble workings and dooings. For it maketh the bodies of beastes to haue fée∣ling, and maketh perfect the inner kinde and the vtter knowing, as to ye lims re∣quire, & th all ye lims in euery part. Also it deaeth spreadeth his vertue in∣to al the parts of the body. Also as ye lims be more noble, so it doth more noble déeds
in the bodie. Also it is the cause of sléep∣ing and of waking in beasts. Also if the vertue thereof be gathered into the inner places of the bodie, it worketh the more strongly. And when it is spread into the vtter offices, and occupied in many pla∣ces, it worketh the more féeblye: For while it falleth heede to the sight, it fée∣blesh and slketh in the hearing, and so of other. Therefore it is sayd. Pluribus intentus, minor est, ad singula sēsus. That is to vnderstand, the wit, that taketh heede to manye things, taketh the lesse heed to euery therof. Also in the vttermost and in the more excellent fée∣lings, the vertue thereof is dulled, but it hath liking in meant féelings. Also the vertue and working thereof is a let, so the spirit sensible, when his waye and passage is foretolde and warned by stop∣ping of the wayes, poores, and small holes in the bodie, as it falleth in them that haue the Palsie or Epilepsia, that is the falling Euill, or other such disea∣ses. And the vertue thereof is dissol∣ued and vnloose, by too great heate, that dissolueth and stretcheth the poores, or small holes in the bodie: as by to great colde, constraining, shutting, or stop∣ping the small holes, it is let to spread it selfe into the partes of the bodie. Al∣so by sweete smelles, the vertue in a beast, that was lost, is restored: as it is corrupt and grieued by stinking smells. But now of the vertue sensible this shall suffice. ¶Of the soule reasonable. Chap. 13. THe soule reasonable, or the vertue of vnderstanding that is called In∣tellectus in Latine, is separated by two chiefe workinges, in one manner it is called Intellectus speculatiuus, and in a∣nother manner it is called Intellectus practicus. In that it vseth contemplation it is called Speculatiuus. In that it wor∣keth it is called Practicus. And by this roote mans lyfe is separated a sunder, that one is called Vita actiua, life of working, and that other is called Vita contemplatiua, lyfe of contemplation. Then the reasonable soule is euerla∣sting, incorruptible, and may not die, Wherefore his principall act and déede, that is Intelligere, to vnderstand, is not dependaunt of the bodie. And it liueth perfectlye, and vnderstandeth when it is departed from the bodye, yea, and the more it drowneth it selfe into the bodie, the more slowly and the lesse per∣fectly it vnderstandeth. And the more it withdraweth from the bonds and liking of the flesh, the more easilye and cleere∣ly it vnderstandeth. Heere I call drow∣ning, either by imagination of fantasie, or by liking of the flesh, or by loue of worldly alluring. Wherefore Grego∣rye saith. As a man is made in the middle betweene Angelles and beasts to be lower then Angelles, and higher then other beastes: so hée hath some∣what that accordeth with the highest, and somewhat that agréeth with the lowest. With Angell the spirt hath, that he maye not die: and with other beastes he hath a bodie, that must dye. And therefore if the soule by reason tur∣neth toward God, it is adorned, illumi∣nate, and amended, and made perfect. But if it tourne by affections towarde creatures, it is made darke, corrupte, and debased. Though the soule in it selfe be euerlasting, and not deadlye, yet it is passible and must suffer through the bonde of the bodie, that it is ioyned to. Therefore in liber de Anima & spiri∣tu, Austen sayth, that soules that liue in bodies, by loue of sensible things they loue bodyly lykenesse and formes: and when they passe out of the body, in the same bodilye liknesse, they suffer as it were bodily paines And therefore there they may be holde in bodily paines: for that they were not héere cleansed of the corruption of the bodie. Héereby it is knowne, that though the soule be cleane and pure in his owne kinde, it taketh vncleannesse of the flesh, sish it is origi∣nally infected. As wine and other licour taketh infection of a vessel that is sustie. And therefore when it is departed from the bodie, it beareth with it selfe the bo∣dies filths. Declaring that after this life there is no redemption, for in this lyfe all the penitent are cleansed and newly reuined vnto God by grace.
Then gather thou héereof, that among all creatures, the reasonable soule pre∣senteth most openly, the lykenesse of the Image of God: and that because it hath thrée manner of mights and vertues, though it be one and simple in kinde. Al∣so it containeth in it selfe the lykenes of all things: and therefore the soule is named the lykenesse of all things, as Austen saith. Also the soule being once made shall endure euermore in bodie or out of bodie. For as Cass. saith, It shuld neuer be sayde, it was made to the I∣mage of God, if it wor closed within the bond of death. Also it is the perfection of a kindly body with lims: and there∣fore the mor verelye it maye make all the bodie perfect in euery part. Also by his owne kinde it maye kindlye deter∣mine a lyking to good and euill, truth or lyes. Also by diuers vertues it maye knowe lykenesse and shapes of diuers things both present and absent. For it knoweth things materiall, present & ab∣sent, by hir owne natural shapes: and he knoweth vnmaterial things, by hir own presence, as Austen saith. Also by the re∣flection of it self aboue it self, she know∣eth it selfe, as the Philosopher saith. For séeing & vnderstanding she knoweth hir selfe. Also as a Table she taketh kindly illuminations and impressions of diuers things, and for that it coueteth kindlye to be incorporated, & to be ioyned there∣to, it desireth kindly the felowship we the body. And kindly it desireth good & fly∣eth euill, though it choose euill other while for want of aduisement: but by kinde it forsaketh euill, and grdgeth there a∣gainst, as Saint Austen saith. So the soule vegetatiue desireth to be,To be. the sen∣sible desireth to be wel,To be vvell. and the resona∣ble soule desireth to be best:To be best. and there∣fore it resteth neuer, till it be ioyned with the best. For the place of the rea∣sonable soule is God, to whom warde it is moued, that it may rest in him. And this mouing is not by changing of place but rather by loue and desire. These pro∣perties of the soule that be rehearsed be∣fore, shall suffice. Of the vertues of the soule, ca. 14. NOw after we haue circumspectlye spoken of the properties of ye soule, in it selfe and in hir body: there remai∣neth to sée and to treate of the vertues, by the which she is mightie to vse wor∣king in ye body. This vertue is a might of the soule essentially giuen to worke and doe hir déedes in the body. For by this vertue she giueth ye body lyfe, draw∣eth togethers, and openeth the heart, the organe, and small wayes in the bodye alway, and giueth to the body that hath a soule, féelyng and skilfull mouing, as Con. saith lib. 13. Also this vertue hath thrée parts: one is called naturall, and is in the lyner,The liuer the other is called vitall, or spiritall, & hath place in the heart,The hart the third is called Animal, & hath place in ye brayn.The braine. In beasts & in plants ye working of the vertue yt is called naturall is the common working, that ingendereth, fée∣deth, and maketh to growe, as Con∣stant saith, and hir ingendring or gene∣ration (as it is heere taken) is the chaunging and tourning of the substance of the humour, or the séede into the sub∣staunce of a beast or of a plant, done by worke of kinde. And this vertue begin∣neth to worke from the time of ingen∣dring to the perfecting of the plant or beast. But to this kindly generation, two vertues serue, that is to wit, Immuta∣tiue and Informatiue: For the vertue Immutatiue is she, that turneth & chan∣geth the substaunce of the séede, into the substaunce of all the partes of the plant or of the beast. And this vertue maketh this chaunging and turning, by meanes of ye foure first qualities, yt is to wit, hot,Hot. colde,Colde. wet,Wet. and dry.Drye. For by heate & wet she worketh ye softer substance, as flesh in beasts, flowers and say in trées: by hot and drye, she worketh the rootes in plants, and the heart in the beastes: by wet and colde, she worketh leaues in plantes, and haire in beastes: by colde and drye, she worketh in sinewes and boanes of beastes, and in stockes and ryudes of trees and of plantes. But the seconde vertue that is named Informa∣tiua, is néedfull to the kindly working in generations.
For this vertue ordeyneth and distin∣guisheth the forme and shape of things, that is gendred couenably in all ye parts. For this vertue pearceth what shall be pearced, and holloweth what shalbe hol∣lowed, and smotheth what is rough, and the ouersmooth maketh rough, and sha∣peth and maketh perfect the vtmost side of euerye parte. These two vertues, Immutatiua and Informatiua work no longer then the thing that is ingendred, as beast or plant, be fully brought into being of kinde. And therefore it néedeth that the vertue Nutritiua follow anone to the same, and kéepe the thing that is engendred. For the vertue Nutritiua, is helper and seruaunt to the vertue Ge∣neratiua, and maketh the thing that is ingendred, growe and stretch in length, bredth and thicknesse. And the vertue Pascitiua helpeth and serueth to the ver∣tue Nutritiua. For she setteleth and ma∣keth lyke in the lims the meale that the beasts tooke: and repaireth and restoreth what that is dissolued & lost by strength of heat, or by any passion of ye ae. And therefore wonderfull kinde made this vertue of féeding, helper to the vertue of nourishing, and made both seruaunts to the vertue of gendring.Gendring is the be∣getting cause Wherefore to this vertue of féeding, foure particular vertues serue, that is to wit, the vertue of appetite, that draweth to the synmes kindly foode. And to the food of the flesh it draweth temperaunce of bloude, to the foode of the braine and of the lunges, temperaunce of sleame, and so of other. Also the vertue digestiue helpeth there∣vnto, and departeth in the foode kindlye from vnkindly, and deuideth pure from vnpure. Also the vertue holding, which kéepeth the food that is digested, & it that is now by worke of kinde concode or sodde, she sendeth to all the limmes, and incorporateth and maketh it lyke, & mo∣ueth it. Also the vertue Expulsiua, put∣teth off the superfluities, that the lyms draweth to them, and be not worthy to be knit to the lyms. And therefore as the vertue of appetite worketh with hot and drye, and the vertue digestiue with heat and wet, and the vertue retentiue with cold and dry: so the vertue expul∣siue worketh with cold and moyst. ¶Of the vertue vitall. Cap. 15. AFter the vertue of kinde followeth the vertue vitall, that giueth lyfe to the bodye, whose foundation or proper place is the heart: out of the hart com∣meth lyfe to quicken all the lyms. The vertue of quick and kindly mouing, hel∣peth the working of this vertue, where∣by the hart and organe, and smal wayes be opened and spread, and drawen toge∣ther. And this dilation or spreading, is called the mouing of the heart from the middle into all the vtter partes. And so contrariwise constriction or the drawing together, is called, the mouing from the vtter parties towarde the middle of the hart, as it is séene in belowes of smiths. This vertue of lyfe openeth the heart by working of the lunges, and draweth in aire to the heart, and sendeth it foorth from the hart to ye other lyms by small wayes. And this vertue by the helpe of the vertue that closeth and openeth the heart, worketh and maketh breathing in a beast. And by breathing the breast moueth continually, but the sinewes and fleshly parts be first moued. But this blast or breath is néedfull to the slaking of vnkindly heate, and to the food of the spirite of lyfe, and also to the gendering of the spirit, that is named Animal, that giueth féelyng and moouing. For the kée∣ping of the kindly heate, is a temperate indrawing of colde ayre, and the kéeping of the spirite that is called Spiritus vi∣talis, of whose temperaunce the spirite is increased that is called Animalis. And therefore nothing is more néedfull to kéepe and to saue the lyfe, than breath well disposed and ordeined in all points. All this saith Constantinus in Pantign. Without meate and drinke a beast may liue for a time, but without breth draw∣ing of colde aire, a beast maye not endure in good case long, but the breath is corrupt and destroyed by straightning the pores, through the which the beast by a kinde of stranglyng, dyeth. The breath is corrupt first by euill dispo∣sition of the brayne, for if the brayne be
let of his office in any wise for defaulte of influence of spirites, then opening and closing of the heart fayleth: and then néedes must the beast be stiffeled, as it is séene in Apoplexia, and in other such causes. TREVISA. Apoplexia is an euill, that maketh a man léese all manner féeling. Also the same falleth by hurting of the heart, when the humours be voyded, that should kindly be therein: for so the spirites be voyded, and the at∣traction of the aire hath no place. And it fareth so in sodain smiting of the kind heate into the inner parts of the heart, as it happeneth in fearfull men in let∣ting bloud, that other while sayle and sowne. And so it happeneth of the in∣fection of the lyuer. For corruption of the lyuer taketh awaye generation of cleane pured bloud, that féedeth kindlye heate: and if kinde heate fayle, the spi∣rite vitall sayleth, and consequently the breath particularly or vniuersally is let. And so it happeneth in searching & pear∣cing of the lunges, as it fareth in them that haue the Tisike, in whom the breth straighted, vanisheth awaye by priuie hoales, and is not sufficient to temper the beate of the heart. And so it fareth in all repletion, and specially by sodayne filling of the inner veynes of the body: as appeareth in them that be sodaynlye stiffeled in the water: in whome the pores being let, the breath by a vyolent ouercomming and renting of the inner powers is stopped. Also by great corrup∣tion of the aire as in pestilence time, and in corrupt aire, when the spirite vitall eschewing his contrary, closeth himselfe in the inner parts of the heart, and so be∣ing ouerset with aire that is corrupt, may not rule the heart and other lymmes of the body, but faileth in himselfe, and as it were, sodainly vanisheth alwaye: and then thereof commeth death. Also of in∣fection and corruption of the humors of the breast, and of the breast plate and bone, as it is seen among those that haue the dropsie, pore, scurffe, canker, woolfe, & leprosie. Also by the stopping of the or∣gane & wayes that commeth from the langs, as appereth in them that haue the pirre & stifles, & be putrified and thicke breathed, and other such. Also by speciall corruption of the heart, as by biting of an Adder, or of anye other venemous worme: whole venyme pearcing to the heart, ouercommeth the kindly heat, and so stoppeth the way of the breath. Also by too much refraction of hot aire, as chaunceth in ouer hot stewes or bathe, or in the most feruent heate of ye Sun, that rerefieth & openeth the pores ouer measure, and so maketh too great exhala∣tion and wasting of the kinde heate: and so the colde aire that is drawen in, suf∣ficeth not to slake the heate superfluous, that is not of kinde, and so the breath is let. Also the same chaunceth of the duor colde aire yt draweth together ye brawns and the sinewes of the breast: and there∣by the vertue of breathing is let, as it chaunceth in them that sléep vpon snow. And the same other while chaunceth by stopping of a veyne of the heart, that is called Vena concaua, the holow veyne: when that veyne is stopped and closed, the way of the passage is let, by ye which way and passage, the bloud must go from the liuer to the heart, to féede and nou∣rish the spirite vitall. For when the heate wareth abundaunt, and the humor is withdrawen, the beast is stiffeled: for the breath sufficeth not to coole the hart. And so it fareth by ouerburdening of cholar on of other humors, in the most subtill, veynes of the heart, as appeareth in sharpe seuers, in the which the breath saileth. Also by ouer vyolent strayning of the throte and of the arteries: as we may sée in them that be hanged & stran∣gled, in the which the breath beg ∣ped, the heart sodainly burneth  beast dyeth forthwith. By these  and many other, the vertue, vitall  by default of breath. Of the vertue spi∣rituall, commeth wrath, fighting, indig∣nation, spite, and such passions, that arise in brute beastes through mouing of the spirital vertue with vehemencie, & with∣out discretion: but in men such passions be ordred and ruled by a certaine reason of wit. And of the vertue spiritall or vi∣tall, that is said shall suffice. ¶Of the vertue Animall. Cap. 16.
THe vertue that is called Virtus a∣nimalis, hath seate and place in the ouermost part of a man, that is to wit, in the brayne, and hath thrée parts. Or∣dinatiua, sensitiua, & motiua. That part that is named Ordinatiua, fulfilleth the brayne by it selfe alone. For in the first part in the formost chamber it ordeineth the fantasie or imagination: in the mid∣dle chamber it ordaineth the vertue esti∣matiue and reason. And againe in the vttermost chamber, it maketh perfect the memorie, and the memoriall asse: For what the vertue imaginatiue shapeth & imagineth, she sendeth it to the iudge∣ment of reason. And what that reason faketh of the imagination, as a Iudge, iudgeth & defineth it sending to the me∣mory: ye memory receiueth those things that were put in the intelled or vnder∣standing, & kéepeth & saueth the stedfast∣ly, til shée bring them foorth in act and in déede. The second vertue that is Sensi∣tiua, is formed in this manner. By meane of sinewes that be very tender, the spirite Animalis passeth forth out of the innermost chambers of the braine, of whom the sense is formed, and some be sent with the spirite Animalis to the eyen, to quicken the sight, and some to the nosethrilles to increase the smelling, and so of the other. Of the wittes, the sight is most subtill, for the kinde there∣of is firic. The hearing hath much of the ayre, for it is a sound of ye aire, stri∣ken, & then the more subtill is the smel∣ling, for the kinde thereof is smoakie. Then ye taast, the kinde thereof is wa∣try. And the last & most boystous of all, that is the seelyng: for the kinde there∣of is earthie, and is néedful to féele hard things, as bones and sinewes, rough and smooth, colde and hot. Of these senses, euery one hath his office, to haue ye like∣nesse and shape of the obiects: and what they take of that they féele, they present to the inwits. TREVISA. The obiect of the eye, is all that maye bée séene: and all that may be heard is ob∣iect to the hearing: and all that maye be smelled is obiecte to the smelling, and so of the other senses. ¶Of the vertue visible. Cap. 17. THe sight is most simple, for it is firie,Visus. and diserueth sodainely things that are farre off. The sight is formed after this manner. In the middle of the eye, that is the blacke thereof, is a certaine humour most pure and cleare. The Phi∣losophers call it Christalloides, for it taketh sodainly diuers formes & shapes of colours, as Christall doth. The sight is a wit of perceiuing and knowing of colours, figures, & shapes, and vtter pro∣perties. Then to make the sight perfect, these things are néedfull, that is to wit, the cause efficient, the lymme of the eye conuenient to the thing that shall bée séene, the aire that bringeth the likenesse to the eye and taking héede, & easie moo∣uing. The cause efficient, is that vertue that is called Animalis. The instrument and lymme is the humor lyke Christall in either eye cléere & round. It is cléere that by the cléerenesse thereof, the eye may shine about the spirite and aire: It is round, that it be stronger to withstand griefes, for a rounde shape hath no sides or corners, that containeth superfluityes that should grieue it. The vtter thing, helping to worke, is the aire, without which being a meane, the sight maye not be perfect. In some beastes to profit the sight, néedeth the cléerenes of aire, and in some the darknesse, and in some the meane, not too darke nor too cléere. For in Cats néedeth darknesse, in Reremice, or Bats and in other flieng beasts née∣deth meane, as it shall be shewed heere∣after. And it néedeth to take héede, for if the soule be occupied about other things then belongeth to the sight, the sight is the lesse perfect, for it déemeth not of the thing that is séene. And easie mouing is néedfull, for if the thing that is seene, moueth too swiftly, the sight is combred and disparced with too swifte and conti∣nuall mouing, as it is in an oare, that séemeth broken in the water, through the swifte mouing of the water. Like∣wise also an euen long trée moued swift∣ly séemeth rounde. How the sight is made, olde men had diuers opinions.
In pri. cap. Perspectiue, the Philosopher saith, that in thrée manners the sight is made. One manner by straight lynes, vpon the which, the lykenesse of ye thing that is séene, commeth to the sight. Ano∣ther manner vpon lynes rebounded a∣gaine: when the lykenesse of a thing commeth there from to a shewer, and is bend, and reboundeth from the shewer to the sight. The thirde manner is by lynes, the which though they be not bent and rebounded, but stretched betwéene the thing that is séene and the sight: yet they passe not alwaye foorthright, but other while they swarue some whether aside from the straight waye. And that is when diuers manner spaces of diuers cléerenesse and thicknesse, be put betwéen the sight and the thing that is séene: and sometime the spaces be of diuers kindes, as when one is thicker, another thin∣ner. And sometime there commeth a meane of another kinde, but the beame or bright likenes is broke, but if it come vpon a line that falleth straight, & Per∣pendiculariter vppon the same middle second occurring. And I cal a line to fall Perpendiculariter vpon a plaine thing, Ad angulos rectos, that is straight and a crosse wise: and vpon a round thing, if it fall into the middle thereof. To the sight, for to speake in the first manner, néed nine things principally, as they be rehersed ther. The first is firm∣nesse or good disposition of the organe or instrument of sight. The seconde is a thing that may be séene set afore ye sight: for in ye manner the sight séeth nothing.The sight of the ere is a figure of the vvorld: but if the same thing, from the partes, wherof commeth likenes vpon ye straight lynes, that fall into the middle of the eye.The vvhole cō¦passe, are presetati∣on of the endlesse heauen: All which lynes drawen from all the parts of the thing that is séene, make one stéeple, the poynt whereof is in the blacke of the eye, and the broad end in the thing that is séene as appeareth in this figure. The tri∣angle for∣shevveth ye distance of sight, and ende of time.A and B be the Aristrées, when the séeing direct lye beholdeth the poynt, C. when it beholdeth ye point D. Then these two B C procéeding frō the eyes, be called axiltrees, for they pro∣céede immediatelye from the eyes, by meane to the thing seene. The third is distance proportional. The fourth D C is a certaine stede or place, not too farrre from the lyne of the sight. For though a thing be right before the eye, if it be too far ther from, it is not distinctly known. Axis visualis is the cléere beame or line, the whichlis vnderstood to be deduct from the middle of the sight, to the poynt of the thing séene directly to the opposite, in the mids of the sight, as appereth in this figure A B. The fift is sadnes or thick∣nesse of the thing that is séene. For  be all cleare and without thicknesse,  the aire is, then that is not séene, as saith the Author of the science Perspectiue, that is, the science of the sight. The sixt, is due greatnesse of the thing yt is séene. For a thing may be so lyttle, yt it cannot be séene in no space: for there is no sight but by appearance shapen top wise, that commeth to the eye, yt which if it be ve∣ry little, it shal occupie a very smal part of the sight, & the sight may not sée, but when a part of the vttermost thereof is changed to the likenes of the thing that is séene. The vii. is clearnesse of ye space, that is betwéene the eye & the thing that is séene: for if the space be thick, it letteth the likenesse of that thing, that it may not come lightly & in due manner to the black of the eye. The viii. is light: for the visible lykenesse of the thing, can not chaunge the sight without lyght. The ninth is time for the sight must haue time, as it is proued in Perspectiue: for though a thing come sodainly before the sight: it is not knowne readily and di∣stinctly without some aduisement had, the which needeth time and leasure. And therefore it needeth also that the soule take heede, as it is sayde before. Also the Philosopher sayeth, That not onelye the lykenesse of the thing seene commeth to the sight after a steeple wise, but also the lykenesse of the sight, strotcheth to the thing that is spread, vp∣pon such a steeple in the same place. In lib. 19. De Animalibus, Aristotle saith, That seeing is nought els, but that the sight passeth out to the thing that is seene.
And thereto agreeth Austen super Ge∣nesis, lib. pri. & VI. musice, wher he saith, that nought commeth from the thing that is seene, but the likenesse thereof, nor from the sight to the thing that is seene, but the lykenesse of the sight. For nothing of the substance of the eye com∣meth out, but out of the eye commeth a small appearaunce, that is shapen as a stéeple or a top, and the broad end there∣of is spread vpon all the vtter parte of the thing séene. Also the Author of Per∣spectiue, li. i.proueth, That nothing is séene, but by sight that ariseth vpon the thing that is séene, & is multiplyed spée∣delye from the wide thing to the eye. Therefore néedes is required the thirde stéeple of the same light. And of all these thrée stéeples, the poynts are in the eyen, and the broad endes in the things that be séene. Therefore when the lykenesse of the thing commeth to the sight vpon these thrée stéeples, then the likenesse of lyght and colour, passe by the small for∣tells and humors of the eye, euen to the humor that is called Christallinus, like Christall, and there the soule beginneth to giue iudgement of the thing that is séene by that lykenes, but there it is not fulfilled and complete, but the lykenesse is multiplied forth, euen to the sinewe, that is called Obticus,Neruus Obticus, an hollow sinew, that is hid in the vtter part of ye braine: and ther is the vertue of sight in maure and roote in the first and principalll sub∣iects, and is one: for els euery thing that is seene should séeme two things, because of the two eyen, if they continued not to one lymnie, in the which is the onely well of the vertue of sight, and springeth to the blacknesse of the eye. The Author of Perspectiue sheweth all this. Hée sheweth & expresseth another reson of the sight. li. 3. ca. 11. He saith, that ye spirit vi∣sible, ye eye & the aire, be cléere bodies, the whith lyghten euery other, & make eue∣ry like to other. For the aire, that is next the thing that shall be séene, taketh a likenesse of the propertie of that thing: and in that lykenesse the aire prosereth it selfe to the eye, whereof the spirit vi∣sible taketh a lykenesse. For this vertue of sight, shewing it selfe to the vtter∣most part of the black of the eye, is ioy∣ned to the aire, and is likened and made as it were one therewith: & by meane of the aire, the color is brought and pre∣sented to the iudgement of the soule. For the aire is lightly chaunged and li∣kened by diuersitie of shapes, that are therein. As we sée, that the aire that is nigh the Sunne beame, is coloured and dyed, by red cloath set betwéene. And therefore it is no wonder, though ye eye take likenesse and shape of a cléere thing that is next thereto. Then touching this worke it is now to gather shortly, that the sight or vertue visible is more sub∣till and more liuely than the ether wits, and Visus, the sight, hath the name of Viuacitas, that is, liuelinesse, as saith I∣sidore. Also it is more worthie than the other wits, and therefore it is set aboue the other. Also in effect, as it were a vertue of fire, it is more mightie than the other wits: For the other wits knewe things that be néerer, but this wit by his vertue comprehendeth things farthest of, vnder a right corner and stéeple sight, iudgeth and discerneth after the nobler kinde and disposition of the organe, and discerneth in an easie manner betwéene things to be séene. Wherefore Aristotle lib. 12, saith, that good sight and sharp, is of temperate humour. And therefore Fowles (as the Eagles) with crooked clawes, be sharpe of sight. And that is through the pure and subtill humour, and temperate being, and purifieth that that is in the organe of the sight. And such Fowles sée their pray out of farre and more high places. And such Fowles fiye higher in ye aire than other fowles. But Fowles that remaine on ye ground, be not sharpe of sight: therefore they sée their meate nigh and not farre. Also, Lib. 19. he saith, that yeolow eyen be not sharpe of sight by daye, nor blacke by night, for scarsitie of humors. The yeo∣low eye moueth greatlye, and therefore the vertue of sight is féebled. Blacke cy∣en moue lesse, for multitude and plentie of humors, and the sight of the night is feeble, and the humour by night moueth heauely. Therefore the spirite visible is closed in, and by humor letted. Also the
sight of olde men is not sharpe, because their skins are riueled. Whereby it ap∣peareth, that the vertue of the sight is feeble or strong, by goodnes or feeblenes of the lymme. And he saith, When the eyen of beasts haue lyds, and the humor in the blacke of the eye is cleane and temperate, and soft mouing, and the skin vpon the blacke, tender, supple or thinne, then the sight is sharpe and may sée far. But yet he discerneth not perfectly farre off betwéene coulours and difference of the body: but yet the sight of such beasts is better, than the sight of them that haue much humour in the eyen, & haue no heling nor eye lyddes. For by conti∣nuall opening, the spirite Visibilis is to diminish, and the blacke of the eye is lyghtly grieued and hurt, and so the sight is let. But in men helyngs and eye lids cause the contrarie. Also there it is sayd, that cause of a sharpe sight, in séeing a farre, is for the place of the eyen: For big and ouerswellyng eyen, be féeble of sight, and sée not so well a farre: but déepe eyen see perfectlye a farre of. For the mouing thereof is not departed, nor consumed, but goeth foorth right, and the spirite visible passeth straight forth to the things that be seene. And so if there bée no heling nor couering without the eye, néedes the sight must be féebled, and shal not sée a farre. Hetherto speketh Aristo∣tle lib. 12, & 19. And this that is said ge∣nerally of the properties of the sight, shal suffice at this time. For other things shall be knowen héerafter, wher we shal treate of the propertie of the eye. ¶Of the hearing. Cap. 18. THe vertue of hearing, hath effect and doing in the lims of the eares.Auditus. And the hering is properly a vertue ye percei∣ueth so winds: & to make perfect hearing, foure things at the lest be néedful, yt is to wit, the cause efficient, a couenable lim, a niene space bringing ordinately ye sownd to the wit, and the soule  taking héede thereto. The cause efficient is the ver∣tue that is called. Animalis audibilis, of féelyng and hearing. The couenable lim is a gristle bone set in the care, and is hollow and drye and some deale harde, wound & wrapped as a wispe or wreath. It is hollow, that it maye containe the spirite and arre in the hollownesse ther∣of. It is woond & wrapped as a wreath, least the spirit of hearing should be aslo∣med and hurt by sodam and strong smi∣ting. And therefore by circularitie of the limme, sownd temperately receiued, beateth not againe the spirit of hearing, but maketh it perfect, and is liking ther∣to. Also it is harde and drye, that so the smiting of the aire may bée made better and stronger, and the sownd the more. As in tabers and timbrels that sownd bet∣ter in the Northerne winde that is cold and drye, then in the Southerne winde, that is méeke, moyst & soft,When in¦strumēts sod best as Constan∣tinus and Aristotle say. The space that bringeth is aire rebounding, that goeth into the holes of the eares, and smiteth the gristle bone, that is the first instru∣ment and lymme of the hearing, and it needeth that the soule take heede, ForAs vvhe a man is spoken vnto: The mind ba∣sied ano∣ther way: vnderstan∣deth not vvhat was spoken. so long as it is thoughtful and intendeth to diuers things, it is the lesse mightie to doe the deed of the vertue of hearing, as we sée in many, that be beset all about: for welnigh they heare nothing, while the thought taketh no héed. And therfore nothing is perceiued by hearing. Hea∣ring is made in this manner. Two si∣newes come out of the inner part of the brayne, & be fastened in the gristle bone of the eare: by the which sinewes, the spirite Animalis is brought to the fore∣said gristle bones, to which gristle bones the vtter aire referring the shape & lyke∣nesse of some sownde is meanlye ioyned thereto, and so the aire that is smitten, smiteth those gristle bones, and in them being the spirit, by the propertie of the aire, that is therein smiting, the sinewes is chaunged. And so the spirite taking a lykenesse turneth to his Cell fantastike, & presentoth that lykenesse to the soule, & so the hearing is made perfect. Wher∣fore it appereth, that the hearing is aire: for alway it is multiplied by reboūding. And therefore it is, that kinde set, ye it of hearing, in the middle of the rounde head, as Arist. saith li. 12. For ye hearing, as it were in a manner winding about
taketh the aire, that is smit all about, and not straight and forthright. Also this wit, like as the other wits be, is grieued and destroyed with too great noyse, and is pleased and preserued with temperate sowndes. Wherefore in Exa∣miron, Ambrose sayth, that men of the Country where the riuer Nylus ariseth, are voyd of hearing, through the horri∣ble roaring and noyse: because that the Riuer falling downe from the top of the high hill, smiteth into the eares of the men of the Countrey, & so maketh them astonied & deafe. This wit as the other wits haue, hath ofte many griefes. For sometime it is all lost, and is then called deafenesse: & somtime it is diminished, and is then called heauinesse of hearing: and sometime it passeth out of course. The cause of the griefe commeth some∣time of default of the brayne, or of a si∣newe that is the waye of the hearing: and if that sinew be stopped or grieued with some euill, that letteth the office thereof. And also of default of the eares, for sometime they be corrupt and grieued with diuers humors, and sometime rot∣ten filth-therein, stoppeth the hollownes thereof. And sometime grauell and pow∣der falleth therein, and letteth the passage of the aire, that it may not come to the spirite of hearing. And sometime the si∣newes of hearing be grieued by itching and fretting of wormes. And sometime the instruments and lyms of hearing, be infected and grieued with corrupt ayre, hot or colde. And sometime it is let by winde and great ventositie closed in the pores of ye sinewes of hearing: as appe∣reth in them that séeme that they heare pipes, hornes, or belles. By all which things, the hearing is diminished or lost: as it shall be sayd after in the treatise of the eares. ¶Of smelling. Cap. 19. Olsactu.THe wit of smellyng, perceiueth and knoweth smelles. And to make this wit perfect, the spirite Animalis is néed∣full, as the cause Efficiens, dooing. And it néedeth to haue the lymme expedient, that is to wit, perfect disposition of the nosethrills. In the which are small pée∣ces as it were of flesh hanging downe∣warde, and shapen as teates, the which be the proper lymmes of the smellyng, and receiue the spirite Animalis, by cer∣taine sinewes that come downewarde from the brayne. The nosethrills be not properly ye instruments of smellyng, the which are gristly, and therefore they be insensible, as appeareth by them yt haue the nosethrills cut away: For though it be cut off, the beast léeseth not his smel. Likewise if we passe by stinking places, and holde still our breath, we féele not the stinking aire, yt commeth in at ye nos∣thrils: & that is because those smal péeces stopped as it were by a quicke mouing, they be strained, and these péeces be hol∣low, & full of hoales as a spounge. They be hollow, that in their hollownesse and holes, they may take in the smoake that is resolued, and commeth from the thing that is smelled. And they are full of holes as a spounge, that the vertue that draweth may be strong in them: and therfore the vtter working of ye ayre, is néedfull, for to take lykensse of the aire, that commeth from the thing that shall be smelled, the which lykenesse the aire hath of the same thing that shall bée smelled. And that lykenesse the aire hath of the smoke, that commeth of that thing that shall be smelled, and so the smell is made in this manner. The spirite that is called Animall, is sent from the brain to these péeces shapen as teates, and commeth thereto by certaine sinewes, that are called Nerus odorabiles. And the smoake of the body or swéete smel∣lyng thing being resolued, is meddeled with the ayre: the which the small cham∣bers of the brain draw to them by those two small teates, & change & turne it in∣to their owne lykenesse. And so by that chaunge and likenes made in that man∣ner by working of the spirite Anima∣lis, the effect of the smell is made. The sumous smelling belongeth to the kinde or matter: for therby it commeth: ye smell is nought els but a substance airis or fa∣mous that commeth of a body. This fu∣mous aire or vapor, the braine draweth to it selfe, as néedefull and liking, as
the heart doth the breath. And by the drawing of this aire the braine is tem∣perate and comforted, as the heate of the heart is swayed by drawing of the breath. If the vapor be loathsome, stin∣king and corrupt, it corrupteth the spi∣rite that is called Animall, and oft brin∣geth and gendreth pestilent diseases. And so the vertue of smellyng is oftentimes letted in doing and in working, some∣time by the euill complection of ye brain, sametime by too great repletion of rawe and corrupt humours in the sinewes of smellyng, as appeareth in them that haue the pose and rewme running at the nos∣thrills. Sometime for euill dispositions of instruments of smelling, that is when they be too strayte or too wide: the pow∣ers ouer straight, the smellyng is hinde∣red, and when too open, the braynes is distempered. Sometime by superfluous stopping of ouergrown flesh, as in byles: sometime by infection of postumes or of euill and corrupt humours. Sometime by fretting or caruing, that is when the flesh appeareth as if it were raced with a pin, as commonly in March, the winde choppeth the flesh of the face and hands, of some hot and drye humours, as ap∣peareth in them that haue the canker. And this power of smellyng through the subtiltie thereof if it be well disposed, comforteth the vertue Animall, & clean∣seth superfluous frō fumositie. And con∣trariwise when it is infected or corrup∣ted by any hap, the vertue of ye beast is hurt and let in his workings. In lib.12. Aristotle saith, That the sense of smel∣lyng is nought els but drawing in of the aire in a Beast that hath a nose, which is a member set in the middle of the other senses, in the formost parte of the head, for the helpe of the breath. Euery beast that hath lungs, hath a nose, other some beake or bill, in stéede of a nose, in helpe of the breath. Wherefore it appeareth, that the instrument of smel∣lyng, is not onely in Beastes for high∣tinesse and fairnesse, but also to make perfect the vertue of the spirite, that is called Animalis, and to help and streng∣then the vertue of lyfe that is in the heart. This vertue of smellyng is in fourt sooted beasts: and so by smellyng onely, they can discerne betweene hearbes good and venemous, & specially in Apes, that know their meat by smelling, as wel as by tanst, or rather better. And this ver∣tue is strongest in Hounds, yt which lead onely by the smell, follow the orous or steps of beasts, and by liuelines of smel∣lyng finde them out. Also smelling is in Fowles, and specially in Griphons, the which, as saith Ambrose in Exameron, and Isidore hb. 12. cap. 6. haue so quicke smell, that they smell carrion ouer or beyond the sea. In these & other works and conditions of kinde, men may won∣der of the wisedome of God, that maketh vs by these and by other such things to knowe somewhat and to vnderstande: how by these things that be felt and ma∣teriall, we shall excite the inner dooing of our heart to knowe by lyttle and lit∣tle the spirituall things that be aboue our common intelligence: and that to doe in this work is principally my end and mine intent. And this that is said of the smelling shall suffice. ¶Of the taast. Cap. 20. THe taast is properlye a vertue of knowing sauours.Gustu. The which taast sensibly to make perfect these causales, are necessarie, effectiue, materiall, and in∣formatiue, the which are spoken of in other senses of perseueraunce in nature. For the vertue that is called, Animalis, is cause efficient doing and making: The cause materiall and instrumentall is properly the tongue, with his arteries: and that maketh the vertue of tast per∣fect. The tongue, touching the complec∣tion of the substaunce thereof is hollow, moyst, and vnsauourie. It is hollow, to receyue in the hollownesse thereof the humors that come of the thing that shall be tasted, it is full of holes, to the in∣tent that that is thicke or subtill of the thing, that must be tasted, maye enter fréely to the sinewes of the tongue: and that the vertue that draweth should bée more strong to make the dooing per∣fect.
It is moyst, that it maye helpe to the dissolution of things receiued. As if a∣ny things that are put too the tongue, either to the roofe of the mouth, be hard or drye, by the moysture of the tongue, they shall be the easilier tempered, to be ate and couenable to all manner dige∣stion and resolution. The tongue also is sauourlesse, that it maye the bet∣ter take all manner sauour of things, as the water, the which if it had a de∣termined sauour, it might not take the sauour of another thing. Last is made in this manner: Two sinewes be pla∣ced in the middle of the tongue, yt which are spread into manye boughes called Radices, and braunches to the vttermost sides and parts of the tongue: and by these sinewes the spirite that is called, Animalis, is brought into the tongue. Therefore when the thing that must be tasted, entereth into the tongue, either into poores & holes of the sinewes, ye spi∣rite that is named Animalis, that is therein, taketh a lykenesse of the proper∣ties thereof, the which afterwarde it presenteth to the high perseueraunce of the soule. The taast is more boystous & thicke than the smell, as much as sumo∣sitie is more subtill than water. For the smell, of kinde is smoakie: but the fée∣lyng of taast, is a moyst waternesse, as sayth Constantine. This sense is néed∣full to saue the body and the lyfe of a beast. For if the tast be corrupt or faile: the vertue of féeding fayleth. And so the substaunce of the beast fayleth by lyttle and lyttle. The taast is corrupt, when his instrumentes are hurt and grieued, or when corrupt humours haue mastrie in them, and that is, when it féeleth not the sauour of things, either when it fée∣leth not that sauour as it is. And that falleth, if a singular humour hath maste∣rie in the substaunce of the tongue. As by example: If red cholar haue maste∣rie, all séemeth bitter: & if salt fleme hath masterie, all thing séemeth salt: and so of other. As it fareth of them that haue the feauers, in whom the masterie of a cor∣rupt humour, corrupteth and destroyeth the taast. Also it is chaunged, and hurte by the mallyce of the thing that is ta∣sted: as it fareth in the taast of an Aloe, and other things that be passing bitter, for by the force or vnsauerinesse there∣of, the taast is very much grieued. The taast hath lyking in swéete things, for that lykenesse that it hath with swéete∣nesse. For that swéetnesse that standeth in hot and moyst, is like to all the mem∣bers yt be most specially fed with swéete foode. For swéete foode nourisheth much, and is lyghtly lykened to the members and lims, as saith Isaac. in Det. ¶Of touching. Cap. 21. TOuching is the wit of knowing di∣uers things,Tactus. that are to be touched, for by the vertue of touching, the soule knoweth hot and wet, colde and dry, soft and hard, smooth and rough. Or as A∣uicen sayth, The touching is a vertue, ordeyned in the sinewes of all the body, to knowe what he toucheth. Though this vertue be in all the parts of the bo∣dy, yet it is principally in the palme of the handes, and in the soles of the féete, the which kinde temperately for this re∣son hath ordained, that they should the lyghtlyer perceiue and féele things colde and hot. These partes be hollowe, that things to be felt may the better be per∣ceiued, and that things to be helde, maye the better and more strongly be holden. They féele temperately, that they maye take the lightlyer the lykenes of a thing that is temperate. Things that maye be fealt, may be called the composition of the first qualyties, and certaine conueni∣ences to them, as rough and smoothe, harde and softe. In the vttermost héer∣of, the vertue of féelyng is grieued and hurte, as in the thing that is eyther too hot or too colde: for kinde hath ly∣king in the meane, as luke warme. To make this vertue perfect, these things néedeth to the cause efficient dooing, and that is the deriuation of the spirite A∣nimall to the instrumentes of féelyng: also a conuenient instrument, and that is in two manners. One is the si∣newes that commeth from the braine, and bringeth the spirite Animall, to all the lymmes.
The second instrument, is the flesh, in the which be inclosed and fastened, the sinewes by the which the vertue of fee∣lyng worketh. For by meane of the si∣newes, the lykenesse of the thing that is felt, is brought to the perseuerance of the soule. Also the third necessarye thing is the vtter workings, so that the thing that shall be felt, be nigh the lim of feeling, of the which thing the spirit animall, that is in the flesh and in the sinewes, taketh the lykenesse, and being lyke, presenteth the properties of the thing touched, to the soule, and so this vertue is complete and perfect in his doing, as saith Constauti∣us. That when all ye other vertues, haue a proper member & organe specially ser∣uing to their working, this vertue of fée∣lyng alone, is generally in all the lims, except ye haire & nailes of feete & handes, in the which is no sinewe, and so conse∣quently no feeling: but euery of the ver∣tues haue certeine, place, instrument, & lym, to his working and mouing, in all & euery vertue. This vertue aboue all other is much earthly and boystous, and therefore because of lykenes, it knoweth and perceiueth more perfectly than other vertues, hard and rough, and such other lyke earthly passions. Though this ver∣tue by reason of the obiects séemeth to be more boystous in the subiect then other powers: yet it is supposed more profi∣table then other vertues. For though the other vertues may in some manner of wise be without féeling: yet they can∣not be complete and perfect, without the vertue of féeling, as saith the philosopher: and so the touching is more general than the other, both because it is shed into all the parts of the body, and also because it helpeth all the other vertues, & special∣ly the tast. These two vertues, that is to say, the tast and féelyng, be more con∣tinually with the heart, & therefore they be more of the being of the beast, & de∣termine more openly of things that feele and know. Euery lym hath one sinewe or two, by which the vertue of féeling & spéedie mouing is made complete & per∣fect: as it is found in the Anathomia of Constantinus. This vertue of féelyng, is grieued and hurte sometime, as the other vertues are, and is sometime all lost, where feelyng and speedie mouing sayleth, or is wholly diminished, as it happeneth in the lymmes that haue the Palsie & be be. Also it is some∣time diminished, as we see when a lymme is a sléepe: when through anye stopping or constrayning of the lymme, the spirite of feelyng may not fréely passe by that lymme. Also it is hurte by euill complection of the brayne, as in them that haue the fallyng euill, the which, in the houre of the euill, féele not, nor take no héede of touching of fire. Also it suf∣fereth by chaunge of the aire without, as when the fingers be combered and crooked for great colde: in the which ex∣pedient mouing is let, and so one fin∣ger maye not beclippe another. Also by cutting of the parts of the body: For a ioynt cut from the body, féeleth nothing at all, though it be all to torne or burnt. Also a lymme that remayneth still in the body, if it by any chance be dead or rot∣ten looseth all féelyng: ye vertue of féeling is in so much the more grieued, in how much it is the déeper wounded in the si∣newes of feelyng. Also when the griefe of the vertue vitall is ioyning to the thing hurtfull, by discontinuation of the parties, the thing causing the griefe of the member, specially hurteth the feeling, and maketh in the body sore passion & chan∣ging. For euery thing that is fealt, ma∣keth a chaunge in the lym of ye féelyng. as saith the Philosopher. Also things that be felt by féelyng, make mo chaun∣ges, then things felt by other mouings. The vertue of féeling, is more boystous and more materiall then other vertues: and therfore it holdeth the more strong∣ly the impressions & putting off things, that please or grieue. Also because the touching, is an vniuersal lyuing vertue, in all the parts of a beast: therefore if the power of touching be all lost, the subiect of all the beast is destroyed. It is not so of other powers: For though the sight be lost, the other vertues of the beast be not therefore destroyed. Yea, sometime they take the better héed to theyr working and dooing. But if the féelyng be lost, all the powers are
destroyed. And so it appeareth, that the vertue of touching, is the grounde and the foundation of all the other vertues. Also when the other foure powers, each hath his singular and proper sense, and obiect, that is to wit, that falleth in one sense and not in another, as the sight knoweth hiew and colour, and the taast knoweth sauour, &c. The touching alone is the vertue, whereto all the other lims of the vertues, imprinteth their passi∣ons. It is common to all wittes to haue proper obiect things and sensate, in the which they erre not by hay. For a perticular wit may erre for some thing that falleth. For as Aristotle sayth, Such a thing maketh the fantasie in doubt oft, as appeareth in ye sight, yt dée∣meth a great star but small & little, for the farnes of place of & like And the tast yt supposeth bitter to be swéete, through infection of the roofe of the mouth, and so it happeneth of the other. It is common and generall, that all the perticular vt∣ter wits, that come from the inner moo∣uing, that is called. Sensus communis, Common moouing, procéede as it were lynes out of the middle thereof, to eue∣ry singular vtter power, and maketh it perfect, and the instruments thereof, by diuers dispositions that belong thereto, and bringeth the lykenesse thereof to the full mouing. Through ye which agréeing vertues, all the properties of touching, and the working that belongeth thereto, they iudge of and the discerne. And this that is sayd of the properties of the vertues of this inwarde working of the senses sufficeth at this time. ¶Of those things that are required to the perfection of nature. Cap. 22. AS wits and vertues are néedfull to the ruling of kinde, so to the perfec∣tion thereof, it must not be without some spirits: by whose benefite & contuiuall mouing, both wits and vertues in man and beasts be ruled to worke & do their offices. For we speake héere of a spirit, A spirit is called a certain substance, sub∣till, and airie, that stirreth & exciteth the vertues of the body to their doings and workes: or as it is written in the booke Spiritus & Animae, A spirit is a subtil body, by the strength of heate multiply∣eng in mans body, giuing lyfe by the veynes of the body & by the veynes and pulses, giueth to beasts, breath, life & pul∣ses, and working voluntary mouing and vertue, by the meanes of finewes & mus∣cles, in bodies that haue soules. Physi∣tions say, that this spirit is gendered in this manner wise. While by heat wor∣king in the bloud, in the lyuer is caused strong boyling and séething, and thereof commeth a smoke, the which is pured & made subtil of the veynes of the dyuer, & turneth into a subtill spirituall substance and airely kinde: and that is called, Spi∣ritus animalis. For kindly by the might thereof, it maketh the blo subtill. And by lyghtnesse thereof it moueth ye bleud, and sendeth it about into all the lyms. And therefore this spirite properlye ru∣leth and gouerneth the kindly vertue of lyfe, as sayth Constant. And this same spirit tourneth toward the heart by cer∣taine veynes. And there by mouing & sting togethers of the parts of ye hart, the spirit is more pured, and turned into a more subtill kinde. And then it is cal∣led of phisitions Spiritus vitalis, because that from ye hart, by the organe & veyns, & small wayes, it spreadeth it selfe into all ye lims of the body, & increseth ye ver∣tues spiritual, & ruleth & kéepeth ye works thereof. For out of a hollownes of ye left side of ye hart commeth an arterie veyne, & in his mouing is parted in two bron∣ches: the one thereof goeth downward, & spredeth in many boughs & sprayes. By meane of the which ye spirit Vitalis, is brought to giue ye life, to al ye nether lims of the body. The other bough goeth vp∣ward, & is again parted in thrée branches: the right bough therof, goeth to the right arme, & the left bough to ye left arme ga∣ly, & spreadeth into diuers sprayes: & so the spirit Vitalis is spred into all ye bo∣dy. & worketh in the arterie veynes the pulses of life. The middle bough exten∣deth it selfe to the braine, & other higher parts, & giueth life, and spreadeth the spi∣rite Vitalis in all the parts about.
The same spirit pearcing & passing forth to the hollow place of the braine, is ther more directed and made subtill and is chaunged into ye spirit Animal, which is more subtile then the other. And so this Spiritus animalis is quickened in the formost Concauit or hollownesse of the braine, and is somewhat spread into the limmes of féeling. But yet neuerthelesse some part thereof abideth in the foresaid cels that Sensus commnrs, the common wif, and the vertue imaginatiue may be made perfect. Then hée passeth into the middle cell that is called Logisties, so make the intelligence & vnderstanding perfect. And when he hath informed the intellect, thē he passeth forth to ye place of memory. And bearing with him ye prints of likenes, which be made in those other cells, he laieth them vp in the chamber of Memory. From the hindermost part of the braine, he pearceth & passeth by the marrow of the ridge bone, & commeth to the sinews of mouing, that so sedain mo∣uing may be of full working in all the parts of the neather body. Then one and the same spirit corporall, subtill, and airely, through diuerse offices in diuerse lims, is named by diuerse names. For by working in ye liuer it is called Spiri∣tus Naturalis,Naturalis. in the heart Vitalis,Vitalis. & in the head Spiritus animalis.Animalis. We may not beléeue that this spirit is mans reasona∣ble soule: but more truly the chaire or vpholder therof, and proper instrument. For by meane of such a spirit, the soule is ioyned to the bodie: and without the seruice of such a spirit, no act, the soule may perfectly exercise in the bodie. And therefore if these spirites beée dimini∣shed, or lette of theyr working in anye worke, the accord of the bodie and soule is resolued, the reasonable spirit is let of all his workes in the bodye. As it is seene in them that be amazed, and madde men and franticke, and in other that ost leese the vse of reason. And that is because the instrument of the spirite is hurt by some humour either by some wounde. And if these spirites be com∣forted, the Soule is comforted: And if they bée feebled, either fayled, the Soule is feebled in his working, tou∣ching the ruling of the bodie: as sayth Constaninus. And touching this present treatise, that that is spoken of those spi∣rites shall suffice. Of the pulses. Chap. 23. FOr that the pulse is a kindly work∣ing and effect of the spirit Vitalis, it belongeth that we declare somewhat of the pulses, and of their properties The pulse is a moouing? uinde by opening & closing of the heart and of the vaines. Then sih the heart, being in continu∣all-mouing, from the middle to the vttermost parte, in the mouing of the bloud and heate, and in the pulse of the spirit vitall is continuallye moued, by such a mouing he openeth towarde the vtter parts. And when he moueth back∣ward from the vtter parts towarde the middle, then he is constrained and clo∣sed. Wherefore the opening of the heart is to drawe in colde aire, and the clo∣sing thereof is to put out airie fumositie or smoake, and these two be cause of the pulse. Moreouer the pulse is needfull, that the disposition spirituall be vnder∣stood, and the working thereof knowne. The pulse beginneth at the heart, and spreadeth by the vains to the vtter parts of the bodie. And it sheweth the state of the heart, and the working therof. Phisi∣tions vse to finde ye pulse not in all parts of the bodie, but commonly in ye armes. And that by mouing of the vaines. For in some partes, they may not well bee discerned, because they be farre from the middle of the heart, and in some hiding of the heart that ruleth and gouerneth: & in some for straightnesse of the bones: And therefore olde wise men chose the vaines of the arme to assaye the pulse, And that because it was more easie, more profitable, and more honest. More easie, for that fleshly partes hide not the vaine: More profitable, because the vains of the arme be neérer the heart then the other: More honest for that thereof commeth no shame to the Phisition, nei∣ther to the sick man. It were vnséemely and vncomely to vnheale the priuy lims. The pulse is felt and knowen by setting
to of the fingers vppon the place of the pulse. And that is vsed with a discreete handling, and that otherwise in a strong man thē in a feeble man. For in a strong man and fleshly, with strong and harde feeling: and in a leane man and féeble, with ease and soft handeling. Touching this, it is to wit, as Constantions saith, that there bée many manner of diuer∣sities of pulses, the which be referred or redused to ten. The first is knowne by length & bredth of quantitie: and this is in thrée manner wayes. One is a greate pulse, when he spreadeth in length and breadth, and déepnesse of the vaine. And this pulse great and strong commeth of the strength of the spirit: by the which the pulse is spread abroad, and néedeth to bée kéeled of the softnesse of the limmes, that is, seruing to the spreading abroad. Also some pulse is litle, slow & straight, when it returneth to the middle, that is inward toward the heart: And that is for default of vertue, and for scarcitie of heate. And some is temperate, when it draweth not to the middle, neither to the vtter sides: This temperature com∣meth of more bloud & lesse water. Also the pulse is knowne by the time of mo∣uing, and so he is called swift, slow, and meane: hée is called swift because he mo∣ueth oft in short time, and that commeth of strong heate & vertue. And slowe, for that he moueth and smiteth field in long time, & that cōmeth of defalt of vertue & slacknes of heat: the meane betwéen this is praised. In the third manner, the pulse is knowne by the strength of ye vertue. And touching that he is strong, féeble, and meane. It is strong when it seemeth that by strength it putteth away from it, the finger that toucheth it. And that commeth of the strength of vertue and of the softnesse of the limme that easily moueth. He is féeble when he smiteth féebly the finger: and commeth of fée∣blenesse of strength, and of hardnesse of the limme that is repugnant. The meane is temperate betwéene those two. In the fourth manner he is known by the dis∣position of the lim. And then he is called hard and soft, & meane. It is hard when it séemeth that he withstandeth with a manner sharpnesse & hardnesse. And that commeth of the drinesse of the vesselles thereof. It is soft when the fingers feele it with a great slownesse of mouing: so that it seemeth yt they pearce it. And that commeth of wet and moisture. The meane betwéene these two is temperate. In the fift manner he is knowne by ful∣nesse & meane voidnesse. It is full when it séemeth to abound in moysture. And that commeth of greate repletion of bloud and of spirit. He is voide when he séemeth to be swollen, but yet when it is touched, the fingers sinke in, as it were in a voide thing. The meane betweene these two is temperate. In the sixt man∣ner, the pulse is knowne by the qualitie of the vaines, and so he is departed into hot, colde, and meane. He is hot, when the fingers feele the substance of vaines hot. And that commeth of the hot mat∣ter that is therein, that is of the winde and hot bloud. The cold pulse is vnder∣stood in a contrary manner. The meane betwéene these two is temporate. In the seuenth manner, he is known by work∣ing and resting: and so he is departed in thicke, thin, and meane. He is thick, that in his opening smiteth oft the fingers ends, and sodeinly goeth awaie. And this commeth of strength of heate and de∣fault of vertue. The strength of heat sée∣keth remedie of colde and of kéeling: the default of vertue, when it may not once nor twice, nor thrice, then he trauayleth in appetite of succour. The thinne pulse commeth of the contrarie cause, that is to wit, of slownes of heate, & of strength of vertue. The meane betwéen these two is temperate. These seauen manner pul∣ses be notable and easier to know then the other. Of the other thrée pulses, the first is departed, and that one parte is called Pondus Laudabile, and the other Non Laudabile. The second is depar∣ted, that one part properly Concors, or according, and that other is equall. And the third is departed by lesse disconten∣ding. And so that one parte is said to bée ordinate, and that other not ordinate. And for the most skilfull Phisitions may scarcely knowe these thrée pulses, therefore we leaue them and passe forth.
But yet if there be any that wold know them in lib. Pantegni Constant. Chap. 3. He shall finde them declared cléerelye and expresly at the full: out of ye booke we drawe what we expresse of this mat∣ter. There it is disputed largely of the pulse, Caprizante, Marcellino, Cerino, Neruiculoso, Formidante, Estuante, & Tremente: Of the which we will not treate at this time. For that the matter is hard, and also for many singular pul∣ses. And also for yt it seemeth not greatly néedfull to this treatise. ¶Of the diuersitie of pulses, Chap. 24. Pulsatilis Venae.THE pulses varie in many things: First for diuersitie of male & female. For in males that be of stronger kinde, the pulse is stronger then in female, that are féebler of kinde. And yt is because kind in females vseth oft to site twice to fulfill in females, that he doth in males with a strong pulse at once. Also the pulse varieth by complection, for if it be hot, it maketh the pulse the stronger, the more, and the swifter. And if it bée cold, it maketh ye pulse litle, feeble & slow. But if it be moist, it maketh the pulse soft and thicke. If it be drie, the pulse is sharpe and hard. Also the pulse varyeth because of diuerse dispositions in the bo∣die. For the pulse is more strong & liue∣ly in leane men then in fat. And one cause is, that the soft flesh hideth lesse the vaines: or else because kindly heate is more in leane men then in fat, stronger heate maketh stronger pulse. Also the pulse changeth, & varieth for diuersitie and chaunge of age. For children haue swifter pulses then old men to coole and slake the kindly heate. For in children, heate is stronger then in olde men: For the greatnesse of heat maketh the swift∣nesse of the pulse, and the féeblenesse of the vertue that sufficeth not at full to drawe colde aires at once, as it is sayd afore. Younglings through the aboun∣daunt vertue in them, haue strong pul∣ses and swift. But olde men contrary∣wise haue the pulse little, feeble, slowe, and thin. And that because the complec∣tion of them is more colde: and there∣fore it neede not to drawe so much cold aire to the cooling of the heart: In other ages, as they bee néere young or olde, so the pulses be more like, both in males, and in females Also through the chaun∣ging of time. For in the spring time, through temporaunce of colde and heate the pulse is strong: and in haruest like∣wise. For al temporance easeth and hel∣peth the vertue of kinde. And forasmuch as Summer is hottest, it maketh ye pulse féeble and lyttle, and that through the greate opening of the breast, and of the pores. For by reason of such opening, the vertue vanisheth and is féeble. And therefore the pulse yt is féebled may not be great. In winter bcause it is cold, the pulse is slowe, but yet it is verye strong. The slownesse commeth by rea∣son that it néedeth not to haue great coo∣ling. It is strong by reason the kinde heate gathereth into the inner partes of the body, wherby it comforteth the pulse, when the heate is not exceeding: But the Summer heate suppresseth eyther. Also by reason of diuers climates and Countryes, for they that dwell in hotte Countries, as in Aethiopia, haue swift pulses, as it were in Summer: And they that dwell in cold Countryes haue pul∣ses like the winter pulse. But they that dwell vnder the line of the euennesse of daie and night, haue meane pulses, as it were in Spring time or Haruest. Like∣wise hot ayre, colde, drie, or temperate, varie and chaunge the pulse. Also in women that goe with children the pulse is variable and chaungeable. For from the beginning to the sixte moneth, the pulse is strong, thicke, and swifte. For the heate of the childe, helpeth the kinde heate of the woman: and the strength of the woman is a meane enen to that time: and the childe is yet but lyttle, and draweth but lyttle féeding of her bodye: and therefore the pulse is yet temporate. In the seuenth month the childe is waxed more, and there∣fore it néedeth more féeding. Where∣by the kinde is grieued, and so the pulse is féebled. Also for the chaung∣ing of sléeping and of waking.
For in sléeping the pulse is wont to bée little and slow: and after sléepe strong & great. For then the kind heat is comfor∣ted: but yet if the sléepe be too long, the pulse waxeth thin and féeble. Wherfore if a man be sodeinly awaked of his sléep, otherwise then kinde will, anone ye pulse is found swift and thicke, quaking, and inordinate. And if he take his rest after such fright, againe the pulse turneth to his former estate. Also through trauaile and businesse of the bodie, if it bée tem∣porate, it maketh the pulse strong, great, swift, and thicke. For by temporate tra∣uaile the kinde heate is stirred. But if the trauaile passeth temporaunce, the contrary happeneth, the pulse is lyttle, hard, slowe, and thin. For in them that trauaile so, the vertue faileth, and kinde heate is dissolued, and then the pulse is féebled. Also through vse of often bath∣ing. For they yt hath temporatly in hot water, they haue the pulse strong, great, and thicke, and that is through the com∣fort of kinde, and of destroieng of super∣fluitie of moisture. But in them that a∣bide too long in the water, the pulse is made féeble: But yet the swiftnesse and thicknes abideth as it was afore hand. Also likewise they yt hath them tempo∣ratly in cold water, haue ye pulse strong and swifte, and that chaunceth through ioyning togethers of kindly heat & com∣fort of the vertue that commeth of tem∣porance of the vtter keeling. But to long abiding in such a bath, feebleth the pulse and the vertue. And that happeneth more in leane men then in fat, through cold∣nesse that commeth to the vtter partes to sodeinly. And as it were without let, pearcing in, and as it were constraining the partes about the heart more then inough. Also through diuerse taking of meate and drinke. For too much meal & vndigested féebleth the pulse. But meat moderatly taken and digested, & spread into the limmes, by stirring vp the ver∣tue, augmenteth the pulse. Also moderate drinke, and digested, maketh the pulse strong, great, and swift. Hot drinke ma∣keth the pulse swift and thicke, but cold drinke maketh the pulse thin & slow. Al∣so through diuerse passions of the soule. For wrath maketh ye pulse swift, strong, and thicke: & gladnesse maketh it meane. Also dreade or feare maketh the pulse swift, inordinate in quaking: and so doth sorrow. And so of other passions it hap∣peneth. And this that is said of the pro∣perties, vertues, effects, and working of the might and strength of the soule, tou∣ching this treatise is inough at this time. Now somewhat shall be said, by the help and grace of God, of the properties of mans bodie Of the which body the soule is act and perfection. FINIS LIBRI TERTII. ¶INCIPIT LIBER QVARTVS. ¶Of the properties of the cor∣porall substaunce. TO treate of the proper∣ties of mans body, and of the parts therof, we shall first begin to treate of the qualities of the elements and of the humors, of the which the body is made. ¶Of the foure qualities Elemen∣tarie. Chap. 1. ELements there are foure, & so there be foure qualities of Elements, of the which euery bodie that hath a soule, is composed and made, as of matter. And namely mans bodie, that is noblest a∣mong all the Elements, and most nobly ordeined among all things, that be com∣posed
and made of diuerse thinges, as it that is assigned to ye proper instrument, or organe of the reasonable soule, in his works, as well of kinde as of will. So mans bodie is made of foure Elements, that is to wit, of Earth, Water, Fire, & Aire: euery seuerall hath his proper qua∣lities. Foure be called the first and prin∣cipall qualityes, that is heate, cold, drie, & moist: they be called the first qualities, because they slide first from the Ele∣ments into the things that be made of Elements. They be also called the prin∣cipall qualities: for of them come all the secundarie effects. Two of these qualy∣tyes be called Actiue, able to worke hot, and coldnesse. The other two bée drye and wetnesse, and be called Passiue, able to suffer. And so as these qualyties preuaile and haue maisterie, the Ele∣ments be called Actiue and Passiue a∣ble to do y&e suffer. The first two be prin∣cipally called Actiue, not because they worke alone, for the Passiue qualityes worke also: for there is none idle qua∣litye in the bodie: But therefore they be called Actiue, for by the working of them the other be brought in & kept and saued. For heate sometime bringeth in and kéepeth moistnesse, and somtime dri∣nes, as it is séene in salt flesh. For ye beat of the Salt dissolueth the parts that bée earthly, watry, and airebrand so by stac∣kening and softening of the heate is in∣duced moistnesse: Heate bringeth in dri∣nesse, for the heate working in moyst∣nesse dissolueth it first, and when it is dissolued consumeth it. And so drinesse which is the first of heat is induced, and also kept. Then heate is the qualitie of Elements most Actiue, as it séeneth by ye effect thereof, while it worketh on anye thing, First it dissolueth the parts ther∣of, the which when they be dissolued, the thing is made féebler, that was stronger, by the ioyning togethers of the partes. And therefore the act of the thing that worketh, maketh lesse resistaunce. Also heate is the subtile, worker of all that is ingendered, and the cause effec∣tuall principally of the whole Genera∣tion. Heat is of two manner wise, heate of the Sunne, or heauenlye, gendering. And this heate gendereth and saueth. And therefore sometime Frogges bée gendered in the Ayre by the heate of heauen. That other heate, is the heate of the Elementes, and gendered: and this heate corrupteth and destroyeth, as when the Beames of lyght com∣meth togethers in a certaine point of a cleere bodye. As if the Beames were compound in a mirrour, there might be kindled and burned cloth or such lyke, by the rebounding of the Beames. Al∣so it bringeth and leadeth the neather thinges to the ouer. For making moo∣uing from the middle to the vttermost, it dissolueth and turneth what is earth∣lye into watrye, and watrye into aire∣ly, and airelye into firie. And so bring∣eth the neather and the middle into the ouer. Also it softeneth and maketh soft things that bée harde. For working in great boistous substaunce, mollisteth it dissoluing: as it is séene in mettall that melteth with heate: For dissoluing earthlye thinges into watrye, maketh them tender. Also softe thinges and fléeting it maketh it harde, as it is séene in an Egge that is roasted.Of an Egge. For when the moyst and most subtill partes bée wasted awaye, it maketh harde the earthlye partes that abide. And so the Egge waxeth hards: and harde and thicke thinges it maketh subtille, while it mooueth from the middle to the vt∣termost partes, by his strength it dis∣solueth and dealeth the thing that it worketh in, and maketh it couenable and agréeable to his working. While it trauayleth to make a thing simple, it must néedes make it subtill, for the simplenesse of a boystous thing, is the subtilnesse that commeth in, by withdrawing of fastnesse and thicknesse of partes: as it is séene in Ise,Of Ise. that is made subtill when it is thawed by ente. Also heate by his vertue clean∣seth mettalles, and destroyeth the ruste thereof, and other filth. For work∣ing in the substaunce of the same met∣tall dissolueth it. And if it findeth a∣nye thing of drosse, eyther of ruste, it departeth and destroyeth it. If if bée an Golde, the strength of the heate
melteth it, but it is not destroyed. For fine golde though it melt with heate, yet it looseth nothing of his weight. Also heate accidently corrupteth, as it hap∣peneth, when it dissolueth more then it wasteth, then the humours rot and bee corrupted. As it fareth in a wet moowe of wheate, where the heate closed therin, resolueth and dealeth the water into smoake. And the smoak holden close in, softneth the graines, and rotteth and cor∣rupteth it. Also heate maketh kindlye heauy things light. For when the moy∣sture is wasted by heate, the weight is the lesse. And so the substance of ye thing is made more light. And by heat work∣ing in moysture, smoake is gendered, the which smoake is made light & purged, & turneth into a subtil & light substance of aire, and maketh the thing that it is in the more light. And therefore it is, that the bodyes of beasts that be aliue, are farre more lighter then the bodyes of beasts that be dead, through the heat and spirit that is conteined in the organes & vaines: and so bodies of beasts be lighter after meat, thē afore, for comfort of heat. Also it happeneth, that with working, heate maketh things heauie. For wor∣king in the substaunce of a thing, it con∣sumeth & wasteth the most subtil & light parts: & grose & ponderous parts abide. And then the thing is more sadde, fast; and also the more heauie. Also by ope∣ning of small holes & pores, by strength of the heate, the spirits be drawen out, by whose absence the bodie is made lighter, and by presence of them the bo∣dy is the more heauier. Also heate gen∣dereth beautie and red coulour. For hee working in ye matter, resolueth ye earth∣ly parts, and turneth them into watrye, and into airely, & firely. And then firely parts inclose the vttermost parts of the thing, & giueth it a likenes. And so firely coulours that is red, be gendered as it is seene in roses. Wherfore when by heat, hot humours be multiplied in the body, or in the heart, then by spreding of these hot humours in the vttermost parts of the bodie, red coulour is increased. Also it happeneth that heate discouloureth a thing. For by heate opening the pores, humors and spirits goe out and vanish. Whose presence causeth good coulour, & by their absence coulour is lost: Then discoulour is gendered, as it is seene in a red rose, that waxeth white in the smoak of Brimstone. And if heat be strong, it slaieth kindlye. For while the last mo∣uing worketh in the substaunce, at last it dissolueth it, and in dissoluing destroy∣eth it at the end. And it happeneth that heate saueth the lyfe: for by heate that giueth mouing to the heart and to the spirites, the spirites be restored in the bodie. And the foode is equally dispear∣sed into the lims, and so the bodie hath lyfe. Then of this that is saide, gather thou, that heate is an Element in pro∣pertie most able to work, most pearcing, most moueable to moue, gendred of mo∣uing of beames, and multiplyeth it selfe, and commeth to other, and chaungeth into his owne likenesse things that hée worketh in. And giueth lyfe to thinges that be dead and destroyed with colde,As also of flies that be reui∣ued by ye heat of the Sun. & renueth them: as it is séene in rootes & plants, that die in the winter colde, and reliuen in the heate and springing time. Heate bringeth the neather thing to the ouer, and draweth and destroieth super∣fluities, and clenseth filth and hoarnesse. And in diuerse matters it worketh di∣uerse effects, and sometime contraryes. And therefore now it maketh thin and soft, and melteth, and openeth, and re∣turneth: Now it maketh thicke & hard, and constraineth and maketh to shrink, and it stoppeth, and saueth: and now it destroieth. And by his vertue it chaung∣eth sauours. For heat chaungeth sowre things and sharpe, into swéete, as it is seene in fruites, and in grapes. Also pas∣sing great heate turneth swéete thinges into bitter and salt. For by passing great heat burning the bloud, the bloud tour∣neth into Colera. And by greate heate, water by strong séething, consuming partes ayrely, and the earth remaining, the water turneth into substannce of Salt. And heat defieth and séetheth rawe things, and ripeth gréene things, & ma∣keth fruit ripe. Therefore in hot Coun∣tryes fruit so sooner ripe then in colde,
and also more swéete. And heate bring∣eth forth matter, and shape lykenesses that be hidde in the matters, as in small beasts and wormes. For by working of heate, golde, siluer, and other mettals be brought forth of stones, and be beautifi∣ed in a more noble shape. And by heate that dissolueth and cleanseth ashes, the ashes turne to glasse: And so it appea∣reth, that heate of aire and of kinde is minister and seruaunt. For by meane of heate the noblest shapes and likenesses as well of kinde as of craft, that be hid, commeth forth in act and in déede. Also heate tt is printed in the aire, gende∣reth raine: and clowdes, thundering and lightening, and dew, and other such. For by the vertue thereof that worketh and draweth diuerse vapours, drie & moist, be drawen vp to diuers places and regi∣ons of the aire, the which gathered to∣gether into clowdes, and the heate inclo∣sed altereth and chaungeth them into di∣uerse kindes, which at length it dissol∣ueth: and béeing dissolued, some into Snowe, some into Hails, and some into raine, sprinckleth them all about into the earth. And heate raiseth the bodie that it is in; from the middle to the ouermost roundnesse, as it is some in the Ele∣ments, in the which heate hath the ma∣sterie: as in the Ayre & in the fire, that is farthest from the middle of the earth. And also this is séene in Oyle, that flée∣teth and swimmeth alone, and in all other things, in which heate hath ma∣sterie. Also it sheweth the disposition and qualitie of the body that it is in. As appeareth in the bodye, that heate hath the masterie ouer. For as Constantinus sayth, libr. . cha. 16. If the body be hot, then is much slash, and little fatnesse, redde coulour, much haire blacke or redde, hotte touching, good vnderstan∣ding, a man of great facunitie, a quicke goer, vardye, wrathfull, louelye, leche∣rous and desiring much, and hastelye defien, or of good digestion, of sharpe voyce, shamefast, of strong and swifte pulse, Constant sheweth these signes, and many other, by the which an hot bodye is knowne. This sufficeth at this time that is spoken of the proper∣tie of heate. ¶Of Coldnesse. Chap. 2. COldnesse is a working propertye of an Element qualytie, more weaker in working then heate. For thereof the moouing is from the vter partes, to the middle. And therfore it maketh the partes of the bodye that it worketh in, to drawe néere togethers. And there∣fore it worketh his effect in the bodye more slowlye, and with the more diffi∣cultie. Also though it coole kindlye, and maketh colde, yet otherwhiles it hea∣teth. Wée sée in the winter, that when colde stoppeth the holes and powers of the bodie, the hot fmositie draweth in∣warde, and hath not the frée out going, for that they bée held within, they smite togethers and heate themselues. And so other whiles the colde that is with∣out, maketh heate within. And colde maketh thicke and sadde: for colde ma∣keth the partes moue toward the mid∣dle, and so the partes cleaue néere to∣gethers, for the parts were before from the middle farre a sunder, by moysture put betwéene: but by drawing toge∣thers of that moisture, the partes drawe toward the middle, and bée néere togethers. Also though colde bringeth the partes toward the middle, and kind∣ly ioyneth them together: yet it happe∣neth that it departeth and dealeth the parts a sunder, as it is séene in ye braine that is thrust with colde, by strength of the using the moisture that is therein, is wrong out, and falleth of, by diuers E∣muntoryes of the braine, & is shedde or spilt, as appeareth in them that haue the catarre or ruine in the breast, caused of colde. Also kindlye colde maketh sadde and rough: for when by working of colde, the partes come and cleeuie néere togethers, all the thing is made more sadde and boystous. Farther by colde thrusting together firie partes, then hée thicked into airely, and airely,  wa∣try, and the watry into earthly, and so the whole is made groser. But it happeneth colde maketh the thing subtil. For when by colde constraining and thrusting
the partes together, much moysture is thrust and wrong out, the which moy∣sture conteined in small holes and pores, maketh the thing sad and boy∣stous. Then if the moysture bée away, the thing is more subtill, as it is séene in a skinne that is washed and wrong. Al∣so though by constraining the partes to∣gether, and wringing out the spirites, maketh a thing kindlye heauie: yet if happeneth that colde maketh a thing light: for by wringing out of ye moisture the which greeued, all the thing is made light. Also temporate colde kéepeth and saueth things aliue. For while by colde moisture, the incensing and killing of heate is let, and so as the moysture is resolued little and little by the powers: euen so lyttle and little it is wasted: and so heate is let that it may not dis∣solue the thing. Also by the benefit of colde a thing is kepte without stink∣ing, and so in colde places, and caues, caions without stinke, through colde lyttle and little are wasted. Also small holes and powers bée closed by con∣straining of colde: and to the rooted hu∣ bée let that they may not drawe the vtter to the inner, yet accidentlye colde corrupteth and destroyeth. For when colde letteth defieng and digesti∣on in the stomacke, the working of kindlye heate is letted. And corrupte humours be gendered, of the which fol∣loweth corruption of the body, while the corrupte humours bée incorpo∣rate and knit to the bodye. And that is séeneth woundes, to the which bée layde colde salues and medicines, which constraine and cause the powers for to bée stopped, and so the new sumo∣sities make the flesh softe within, and fretting and corrupting it, they make it to rot. Also by kinde, colde causeth and ma∣keth things so be discouloured ill, as we see in Winter the heate of the bodie, or of the heart, voiding his contrarie, and leadeth the humour and the spirit with him inward. And so the vtter side of the alt made weake, of heate maketh euill coueao. As it appeareth in lippes and cheekes. But it happeneth that cold ma∣keth things well couloured. For it con∣straineth and stoppeth the powers. And so the humours and the spirites be helde in, and by their presence the vtter side of the skinne is couloured. And by kind too great colde slaieth. For if it constraine and stop to soare, the spirites faile in the heart. And so if the heart be dead, from the which procéedeth life so the other partes, the other parts must needes die. Also through too greate colde, féeble heat is quenched. And so the spirit Vitalis, of lyfe, lacketh foode and is stifled.The Scot¦ish lacks & puffies which grovve of rotten wood & salt water But it is straunge in shapes, that colde giueth life, as it is séene in a manner kinde of birds that grow out of trées, that spring∣eth as it were swellings, and burgenen out of trées in stéed of fruit. But as long as they be in the trée, they haue no life. And the Commentator Super librū Ve∣getabilium saith, that hapneth through the porrositie of the trée that draweth the sumositie from the rinde. But when the holding breaketh, the birds fall into the water. And the colde stoppeth the holes and the powers without, and holdeth the sumositie within: the which beate to∣gethers are pured and made subtill, and are turned into a spirit. And by the mul∣tiplieng and spreading of that spirit into all the partes, she sayd birds take lyfe, and turne into a manner kinde of birds. The which be much vnlike to other birds in complection and in kinde. They haue little flesh and lesse of bloud: and therefore they bée couenable, so saith the same Commentatour. But to them that marke it well it ministreth matter of the praising of God ghostly: for spiritually it representeth them, that the spirit of God gendereth by the trée of the crosse in the water of following:Regene∣ration. in the which is not great desire of flesh and of bloud: the which reléeued by spirite, desire, and couet to flye to hea∣uen with all theyr might and strength. But thereof wée shall speake after. Al∣so colde is the mother of whitenesse and of palenesse, as heate is the mother of rednesse and of blacknesse. And so in hot Countryes blacke men and browne bée borne, as among the Moores. In colde Countryes white men bée borne.
As among the Selauons, as sayth Ari∣stotle in li. de coelo & mundo. And hée telleth the reason why, & sayth, That in cold Countries, the Mothers of women be disposed to conceiue such children. Therefore they beare children with white skinnes, that haue long, yeolowe, soft, and straight haire. The contrarie is in hot countries. Where women beare children that haue blacke cripse and lit∣tle haire, as in the Negroes Countrie. Then colde sheweth it selfe in the bo∣die, that colde hath the mastery within. For in the bodies that colde hath the masterie ouer, the coulour is white, the haire soft and straight, the wit hard and forgetful, little appetite, much sléep, heauie in going and slow, as saith Con∣stantinus. li. 1. Chap.17. This shall not alway be vnderstood to be in euery colde néedelye, but in comparison to the com∣plection of the heate, that hath mastery, and in proportion of the hot land to the colde region, authours say these things, and haue lefte them written in theyr bookes to them that come after. This that is sayd sufficeth of the properties of colde at this present time. For other pro∣perties be known to the contrary of that is said afore of heate. ¶Of drought. Chap. 3. DRought is an Element quality pas∣siue able to suffer: and is brought in, now by heate, and now by colde. But it followeth more with heate then with colde. For drought is the file of heate. Drought is saide as it were without moisture: For drought and moisture be contrary. The principal effect of drought is to make drie: as the effect of moy∣sture is to make wet, and hath many se∣condarie effectes: as to make thicke, rough, and to cause slow mouing to con∣sume, to destroy, and slay. And that pro∣pertie that drieth, draweth principallye the moyst parts from the vtter partes, towarde the middle: And for that a moist thing shonlde not all to shedde the substaunce of it selfe by fleeting, drought putteth it selfe as it were a bounde, to lette the fleeting and shed∣ding: As we see in Cliffes in the Sea brimmes, the drinesse of the Grauell set∣teth abound to the Sea, and where the kindly drinesse of the earth hath the ma∣sterient suffereth not the sleeting surges or violent waues of the Sea to passe a∣ny father, as saith Gregorie super. Iob.38.Iob. 26. Qui posuit mari terminum, &c. He hath set boundes about the waters, vntill the day and night come to an end. And Hierome super Ieremy saith the same.Iere. 5. Posuit arenam terminum mari, &c. Feare ye not me saith the Lord,Psa. 22. or will you not be afraide at my presence, which haue placed the sande for the boundes of the Sea, by the perpetuall decree that it cannot passe it, and though the waters thereof rage, yet can they not preuaile, though they roare, yet can they not passe ouer it. And the Philoso∣pher saith the same more plainely. Then drines that is not perfectly bound in his alone equalitie, reboundeth and thickeneth the moist qualitie, that is in it superfluous, fastned and congeled, and is a stedfast héeding of the fléeting there∣of. For drinesse is the euill or enimy of heate, that is stirred vp by moouing, ey∣ther by working, it dissolueth and dis∣pearseth the moisture, or by ouerwork∣ing it consumeth it altogethers, thus spread in the limmes, it draweth forth moistnesse and humour, and maketh the body drie, and shriueleth the skinne together like a withered skinne. Also drinesse hath somtime moisture: for if it mooueth towarde the middle, it con∣straineth and draweth the limmes toge∣thers: And so by constraining the wet∣nesse is wrongen out, the which before was shedde through the bodie, and so the bodye séemeth to be wet, that was before drie. Also we sée vpon the kind∣lye drie hilles, hearbes growe that bée moist of kinde, as the hearbes that bée called Simbalaria, Vermicularia, Cras∣sula,Hon slike Prickma∣dam. Orprone. and other. And this is no won∣der. For the drinesse that taketh héede by kinde to saue the Hill, and kéepe it in his drinesse, and that by drinesse that is like thereto, and by the vertue attractiue, of drawing, it draweth too nourishing, and seedeth things that is drieng.
And hateth moisture and filleth it, as hid contrarye, and putteth of anone to the rootes of the hearbes that be in the vt∣ter part of the hill, and be put out of the inner partie, as it were things superflu∣ous and néedlesse. And so rootes draw to them humours, that be nourished ther∣with, and made moist. Héereto accordeth the Commentours reson super librum Methororum, where he saith, that wels and riuers springeth out of mountains, and hilles, for mountaines be full os holes, cliffes, and dennes: and haue within much hot aire: And the moun∣taines drawe much thinges to them, by reason of boydnesse, and also because of hotte ayre, that is closed therein. And what that is drawen like to the hill in drinesse, is corporate and fastned there∣to. And what is vnlike or disagréeing in moisture, is put of, and gathered in one place, and that the last is put out by heads of Welles. And pearcing, hollow∣ing, and springeth awaye, and thereof come riuers. Then drynesse draweth to it selfe what is néedfull, and fasteneth thereto what is like, and putteth there∣from thinges that bée superfluous and vnlyke thereto. Also drinesse by kinde maketh things leane in flesh, and bar∣ren in grounde. For if drinesse haue the masterie in a thing, it wasteth the moi∣sture that it findeth therein, and so that thing becommeth leane. Also drinesse maketh things hard. For it destroyeth the moisture that maketh it softe: as wée sée in many things, especially in clay, the which when it is drie, is hard. Also drinesse working in a subtill thing, as in airely substaunce or watrye, maketh it more subtile and more cléere. As we sée when the Northerne wind bloweth, the aire is the more drie and subtill. It may happen that drines maketh things soft. For when the drinesse wasteth the moi∣sture that fasteneth the parts together, then followeth consequently the separa∣tion and softnesse of the partes, as wee sée in old trées and timber when drought hath wasted the moisture thereof, they be soft and fall into pouder, that is softe to handle and to féele. Also kindly drinesse maketh things rough. For drinesse wor∣king wasteth the moisture that hee fin∣deth, & hardneth the moisture yt he maye not wast in the vtter partes, and so the vtter parts be vneuen with hollownes sunk, & with hardnesse crumpled, wherof commeth roughnesse, which is nothing else but an vneuennesse in a hard thing. But so it happeneth, yt sometime it ma∣keth things smooth: as when ye heate is sharped by drines, which heat by his ac∣cident dissolueth the humours, & the hu∣mours so dissolued, sweateth outward, & maketh the thing soft & smooth. Also dri∣nesse maketh slow moouing. For by ma∣stery of drinesse, the parts that are aire∣ly and watrie be made thicke & grose, & turne into earth, and the thing is more heauy and more slow to mouing. Also by too great drinesse the spirits be put out, and by the multitude of them the bodye moueth the more swiftlye,The vital moistues is decrea∣sed by ouer much dri∣nesse. then when drinesse maketh the lesse spirits, the bo∣die moueth the more slowly. But some∣time drinesse helpeth moouing. For dri∣nesse mouing to the middleward equal∣ly, it leadeth the vtter parts to the mid∣dle. And the partes binde about in a roundnesse that may be rowled. And by reason roundnesse hath no corners to let it, by his rowling is the more able to moue. Also moderate drines wasting the superfluities of moisture, maketh spirits subtill and pure, and maketh them more swift. For they béeing purged from the superfluitie that grieued the bodye, they make the bodie more apt and able to the same mouing. Also by kinde drinesse destroyeth and wasteth the humours:The losse of apetite breedeth leanesse. it maketh the bodie voyde and leane, and poore of féeding and wasted. Also by kinde, drinesse derstroyeth:Drinesse procee∣deth of heate a∣boūding, it killeth & bodyes of men & beasts. for it de∣stroyeth and constuneth the moysture substantiall, that féedeth the bodie mate∣rially, and ioyneth the partes togethers. And destroieng of such moisture is cause why a bodie that hath a soule, or a bo∣die without soule, is destroyed and wa∣sted. Also speciallye drinesse destroieth bodyes that haue soules: for kindly spi∣rits and natural spirits that be of moist smoke it dissolueth, when that moisture is wasted: then lacking matter and spi∣rit, of necessitye the body dieth.
And so drinesse is the worst qualitie and slaieng, if it excéed, when it is not cleane put out by abundance of moisture:Addition but yet by hap it giueth life. For sometime rumatike humours commeth to the spi∣rituall parts, and stoppe the waies of the spirit, and bee in point to stifle the bo∣die. Then commeth drinesse or drie medicines, and worketh and destroyeth such humours, and openeth the waies of the spirit, and so the bodie that is as it were dead, hath liuing. Though drinesse be néedfall in euery bodye that is made of Elementes, to wast the superflui∣tie of moisture, and to coarte the same moysture, and also to excite slacke heate: yet drines slayeth, and is the worst qua∣lytie, when it passeth the due proportion in bodies. For it is wont to gender in bodyes full euill sicknesses and hurtful, as the Tisike, and Etike, and other such euills, the which may scarcely be holpe by succour of medicines. Also by consu∣ming & wasting of the humours of fee∣ding it drieth the bodie, and draweth the skinne togethers, and maketh it riueled, and hasteth: age, and maketh the bo∣die euill couloured and deformed, and is cause of inordinate thirst. And maketh the organes the enterance into the sto∣marke, rough, and letteth the voice, and maketh it hoarse, and spoileth the head of the haire, and maketh it bald, & draw∣eth togethers, & maketh crooked the toes and fingers of the féete and hands: as it is séene in leporous men. This that is sayde of the effects and properties of dri∣nesse is sufficient at this time. ¶Of moisture. Chap. 4. MOisture is an Element quality pas∣siue, able to suffer, obedient to wor∣king and printing of the Actiue, & wor∣king qualities, and taketh sodeinlye the working of heate and colde. Moisture féedeth all bodies, and specially the bo∣dies that haue soules, and maketh them ware and growe, and keepeth them, and restoreth that which is left in the body. For by moysture and heate all thinges be bread, as the Philosopher sayth, and things ingendered both nourisheth and féedeth, as we see in rootes and seedes. For the graine that is put in the earth must first bée nourished with moisture of water and of aire, and be spread and opened abroade by kindly heate that is closed therein. And at the last by kindly working of heate, the moysture béeing resolued, sendeth the more grose and rarthlye partes thereof downewarde to the earth, the which parts the earth fa∣keth within it selfe, and mixeth and quaileth them by heate that is therein. And tourneth them into the kinde of a root by conioyning of moisture. And that moisture of the roote left behinde, and so bread in the roote, the humour that it findeth, draweth into the earth lyke it selfe. And also it draweth by the draw∣ing vertue of heat that is closed within. And when it hath so drawen, it turneth into the féeding thereof, as much as sufficeth. And heate dissolueth and dea∣leth, and maketh subtill that other part, that néedeth not to the féeding thereof. And the root sendeth it vpward, and tur∣neth it first into the substaunce of the chawing, and then into the substance of the stocke either stalke. And at the last into the substaunce of boughs & twigs, and leaues, and blossomes, and of fruit. And for moisture it is the séeding and matter of all thing that liueth. It shew∣eth that moisture féedeth all thing that liueth, & is ioyned thereto: and moisture by shedding of it selfe, maketh such thinges waxe and grow in length, déep∣nesse, breadth and thicknesse. Also moy∣sture restoreth what is lost in bodies that haue life and soule. For by heate working alwaie within and without, bodies be consumed and wasted, & shuld bastely and soone be destroyed: but if it were restored againe by moysture. And therfore by cōtinual drawing to of moi∣sture is néedfull, that the restoring of what is lost by continuaunce, the bo∣dye may bée restored and saued. Also moysture kéepeth and saueth these nea∣ther things that bée vnder the Moone. For by continuall gathering of beames and light in the ayre and earth, so great shoulde be bréeding of heate and of dri∣nesse that the ayre shoulde fall a fire, and burne the vtter side of the earth.
But if the working of heate were not mittigated by the moisture of aire and of water, & wer reduced by due proportion to temperatnesse. And therefore God set∣teth to the well of heate the well of all humour, as Macrobius saith, that the vi∣olence of heat might be tempered by the presence of humour set, to withstand it. And so the shape of the world may bée saued:The equa¦litie of elements is the worides cause & continu∣aunce. for else by too great heate it shuld sodeinly faile. Also moisture ioyneth to∣gethers the partes of the earth. For the earth is so drie, that euery part thereof shoulde fall from other; if it were not inistened with moisture of water. Therefore kinde made mountaines and hills hollow, and the earth with caues, vautes, and cliffes in places, and full of holes. That so by cause of vorvnesse should bée great drawing in of ayre and of water, to slake the kindly drieng of the earth, and the partes thereof, that else woulde fall. And so as bloud doth, runuing through the vaines of the bo∣die, the same doth moysture in the vains of the earth. For it moysteneth the dri∣nesse of the earth, and disposeth it to beare fruit. And moysture hath certeine properties and effectes, that be the first and kindly. And some that bée secunda∣rye, and some Casuall, as other qualy∣ties haue. By kinde moisture is moue∣able, fléeting, and euill bounding in it selfe but yet it is staide by other bound, as sayth the Philosopher. And it mak∣eth moue from the middle outward, and shedding it selfe in fleeting, it should de∣stroy whollye his subiect; if nothing let∣ted the fleeting therof, the which shoulde bounde his fléeting by reduction to the middle. As wée see that of drinesse of grauell to the Sea, cliffes and stronds stopped, and holde in the stoud of the Sea and turneth it somewhat inwarde. Also by kinde, moisture maketh things softe. For by withdrawing and spréeding thereof, it slacketh and draweth a∣broad, and maketh softe the harde com∣pact partes of the matter. And it hap∣peneth that moysture maketh harde: as wée sée in Postumes and Botches, in the which colde humours come to∣gethers, and smiting the most partes to the colde middlewarde, they come thicke and harde. And oftentimes the partes chaunge into Skliresim, that is hardnesse. The same happeneth of ouermuch heate, wasting the moist partes, the which when they bé wa∣sted, the greate partes and sadde be thrust togethers, and made harde. Also by kinde, moisture cleanseth &: for by softening therof, and of the parte, by the which it is shadde, it slacketh the senowing partes, and departeth them a¦sunder, and maketh them slipper and slidinge, and moueth and washeth them awaye, as it is séene, naistely, in water that is moist, and washeth by kinde, and most cleanseth hoarie things. And that is speciallye if it helpe the moisture: as it is séene in Branne of Wheat or of Rie; and in the root of a plant that is named and properly called Bryonie in Latine, and also in Sope, & in Meale of Beanes, and in other such.Bryonie. Vitis Siluestris Sigilium heatae Mariae. For all these wash away the falth of the face and of all the bodie, and maketh pure and cleane. Also for he moueth kindly from the middle towarde the vt∣ter partes, and that moouing is not full strong of it selfe, but stowe in compari∣son to the moouing of the heate: and so moisture sheddeth it selfe principally in∣to the sideward, and stretcheth not much vpward without helpe of heate. But other while heate hath washerie therin, and worketh therein, the most matter béeing obedient; stretcheth it selfe euery whether,  is vpward, & in length: for the strength of heate beareth it vp∣warde, & sheddeth euen to the lifter most pates: And so  vp and  vp∣on in length. And bodyes in the which heate hath the ry, kindly and ge∣nerally they the higher; longe and more nder, then such bodye,  the which much moisture soh the masterye and steele heate: worketh, contrarye the ss fsindo. And therefore, hot men;  ho levike, the substantiall humour of heate béeing obedient to the work∣ing, be shore longer, that is to witte, the flumaticke, and in all extremy∣tyes of the eddye, the other partes
and circumstaunces equall héere & there, running together in slendernesse & length they be more apte. If there be much heat and much humour, not too much nei∣ther too lyttle to the working of ye heat, but couenably and measurably, then the bodies euery wayes be great, high, long, and broad. They be high through the heate that beareth vp to the topwarde, the most subtill parts of the moysture. Broad and thicke, through the vertue of heate that sheddeth the sad parts of the moisture, as it néedeth to euery side, and vniteth one part to another: so moisture maketh kindly things smooth and softe: for if moystnesse be shed into the vtter parts of a thing, it filleth all the voyde places thereof, and maketh them euen & plaine, and so it maketh smooth and soft. But yet it happeneth sometime it ma∣keth rough, as when in some case, hot humours and cold fléeteth and commeth together to one place. The hot humors beare vp the vttermost parts of ye thing, and colde humours beare downwarde the vttermost partes: and so contrarye humours, worke contrariousnesse & vn∣euennesse, with roughnes in ye vtter part of the body. Also if moysture be in the body temperate, as it néedeth, it helpeth all the working of the soule, and of the body also. For of humours the spirites that rule the body, be bread and conser∣ued therein. Also the vertues of the spi∣rits worke their effects in all the lyms of the body sensitiue and motiue, by mi∣nistration and seruice of humours, as it appeareth in the vertue of sight, which by meane of a Christiall humour, work∣eth the sight in the eye. Also the vertue of taaft béemeth neue betwéene sauors, but by meane of the humour of spittle, and so of other. For if the substauntiall moysture be destroyed or corrupted in the body, all the working of the soule is let. If there be in all the body, or in any part thereof too much moysture, yt maye not be ruled of kinde, then moysture is cause and matter of rotting and of cor∣ruption, & bréedeth in the body full euill passions & sicknes: as it is séen in Apo∣plexra,The lass of natural seelyng. in the which euill superfluitie of moisture, occupieth so al the chambers & dennes of the braine, that the spirit, that is called, Spirites Animalis, maye not passe by the sinewes of feelyng, to make the body feele and moue: and so taketh from the soule his working in the body: And also it taketh from the body feeling and mouing; and bringeth in at last, stif∣lyng and death: as sayth Galen in the Commente super Aphoris. exponens verhū Hippocratis. Soluere Apoplexi∣am fortem impossibile ell: dobilem ve∣ro noo facile. Moysture of fleame occu∣pieng all the region of the brayne, stop∣peth the wayes of the sinewes, that the spirite Animalis, maye not come to the neather part: and so the breath is stop∣ped, and the lyfe ended. This moysture defaulteth sometime in qualytie, & some∣time in quantitie, and that sometime by an inwarde cause, and sometime by outwarde cause. By inwarde cause, as by euill complection, when the hurtfull moysture is rooted in the lymmes, and may not be dissolued & wasted by kindly heate, neyther be chaunged from his ma∣lyce: Such moysture in diuers places of the body breedeth-diuers sicknesses, as it is seene in Epepsia, the fallyng Euill, when it commeth of the stopping of the powers and braye: and also of ye drop∣sie; when it commeth of euil complection of the lynes. Also of an outward cause, as of things, that Iohannieus and Ga∣e rall vnkindly things, as aire, meate, and drinke, sléeping and waking, fasting, and too much eating and drinking, wor∣king, trauellyng, and rest. All these, if they be taken as kind as keth, they breed and kéepe substaunciall moysture, and repayre and restore what is lost. And if they bée taken in contrary man∣ner, they haue contrarye effect and doo∣ing. For then they bréede vnkinde moysture, and cause diuers grose and heauye humoures to increase, or els they corrupt, alter and chaunge kindly moysture, as sayeth Galen in Apho∣rismo. Hippocratis particula tertia fuper illum locum, Immutationes temporum maxime generant morbos, &c. That is, The often course and chaunging of times most bréedeth sick∣nesses.
Galen saith, That Ipocras meaneth, that times of the yeare bréed not sicknes, but chaungings of complection of the selfe time. When the complection of ye ayre, which ought to be according to ye time, is turned into the contrary: as when the complection of Spring time, that should be hot and moyst, turneth, and is made colde and drye, as it were in Haruest time, and so of other. For if the aire of Spring time be generallye colde & drye, and in the Winter afore, the aire was as it were in Spring time hot & moyst, then it must néedes followe, that manye men shall be sicke in Spring time. And also women that goe with childe, shall be beliuered afore their time by little oc∣casion. And Galen telleth this reason: For by the moysture and heate of the Winter that was arose, much moystnes is bred in bodyes, & knitting of fleame. If the aire in Spring time be colde and drye in the beginning: it closeth small holes, and suffereth not the fumositie to passe out, and the heate holden in, dissol∣neth the superfluitie of moysture, that was bred in the Winter. And for yt the heate is féeble, and maye not dissolue it, neither make therein perfect digestion, nor wast it at the full: it sendeth that moysture vndissolued, now to the ouer lymmes, and now to the neather: where being mired, it is cause of diuers euills: as if it goe vp to the head, it maye bée cause of rume and of hoarcenesse: if it go into the bowells, & the fleame be salt, it bréedeth Dissenteriam, a fluxe, that hi∣deth the guts, and so of other. The same reason may be in women, yt be deliuered afore their time: for that moysture flée∣teth to the place that is called, the Mo∣ther, and grieueth it, and softeneth & sla∣keth that that should hold the childe, and so the childe is borne afore the time. And Auicen assigneth another cause, And thus must we vnderstande of other passions of the aire, and of the time: that the qualitie of that aire is chaunged by too great heate, that disolueth either wasteth too spéedely: either by too lyttle heate that putteth not off the superfluitie at full. And so we should vnderstand of too great colde, that closeth poores, & hol∣deth the humours, and draweth them to soone togethers. But of hotte ayre and colde, this that is sayde shall suffice at this time. ¶Of meate and drinke. Cap. 5. OF meate and drinke if appeareth. For that by withdrawing of féeding of meate and drinke moysture is with∣drawen, and drinesse commeth in, and thereby the heat is the stronger, and fin∣ding not wherein it should worke, tour∣neth it selfe to the substancial moysture and working therein, maketh it hollow and wasteth it, and returneth.Cause of suiset. If meate or drinke passeth measure, moysture pas∣seth too swifte, and kinde heat féebleth, for it is not sufficient to worke digesti∣on, but yet heate doth what it may: For it dissolueth somewhat of the superflui∣tie of the meate yt is taken. That that is resolued, when it is great smoake and vndefied, it commeth vp to the brayne, and smiting Miringas, Euapora∣tiō to the brayne. the smal Curtels thereof, hurteth and grieueth them sore, And bréedeth sometimes the Migram, An aking in the forepart of the head,Addition where through the abundaunce of the moyst humour, the eyes waxe bleare and dimme: and other euill passions of the head. And sometime that malitious smoke smiteth to the rootes of yt sinews of féelying, and passeth into yt innermost partes of the sinewes in his sharpnesse and force, and letteth the spirite of fee∣lyng that is therein and grieueth him: and so it distempereth the substance and the vse of reason, and taketh awaye the kindlye mouing of the tongue, that tel∣leth what reason meaneth, and maketh the tongue stammer and fayle, as it is séene in drunken men. Also oftentimes, it letteth and destroyeth altogether kind∣ly mouing: as appeareth in them that shake and quake, and haue the palsie. And no wonder: For the powers that should rule in the sinewes and all the members and lymmes be ouerset, as ouerflowed with a vapor infecting kind∣ly iuyee in the bodye, but that sharpe smoake having masterie, and coueting to subdue yt kindly vertue, purposeth and
striueth to beare downward the member or lymme. And so of this double con∣trary mouing one heauing vpward, and another thrusting downward, a trem∣blyng or quaking of the lymmes is ofte ingendered. And at last if this vertue of ruling be all ouercome, then the palsie or death hath masterie in such bodyes. And therefore the wise mans counsayle is best, that saith: Hurt not thy selfe vpon all manner of meate.Addition Many meats haue diuers taasts, that breedeth sundry ope∣rations, & is the cause of incurable dis∣eases, in nice and daintie mouthed bo∣dies: for in many manner meates is di∣uers sicknesse. Also too much sléeping, breedeth the same euill and sicknesse in the body. For in sléepe the vertues are féebled, and the working of féeling, and of kinde be strengthened within. And so the gates being closed without, yt heate is comforted and strengthened within, and draweth too many humors, yt which it may not dissolue neither wast. And then great superfluitie hauing the masterie, the which kinds can not rule, then of necessitie, followeth death and stiffeling.Addition Also licouresnes of meates wasteth the powers, & lecherie the senses: These bee two delectable Diuelles, that kill the bodye, be∣side the soule. As it is séene in them that sléepe after that they haue taken medicines, and also in them that be newly let bloud. In them that wake too much, the contrary cause lykewise wor∣keth. For in them the humours & the spirites be wasted too much, and therfore oft death threateneth or menaceth. Also the same cause of stifling, is in them, that eate and drinke beyond measure: and the same reason of fayling, is in them yt fast more then nature can beare: and be con∣sumed and wasted. Also be that trauay∣leth ouer measure, destroyeth & wasteth himselfe by too strong heate, that wasteth the humours too sore. In them that rest too much, the cause is contrary: For in them yt drawing too of moisture, passeth measure. And there is none euaporation, neither deliueraunce of the superfluities, neither subtiliation of the spirites. And therefore necessarilye the superfluitie of moysture is disposed to rotting and cor∣ruption. In these manners, and in many other infinite, the elementall qualities be in theyr kindly workings hindred. As it is knowen by the foresayd reasons that we haue shortly gathered of the words of Constantine in Pantegni, and of Ga∣len in Commento Aphorisio, Hippo∣cratis, & Epidimiarum, of euills yt com∣meth by ouermuch moysture. And ther∣fore we will passe ouer, and describe the properties of humours, that be composed of these qualyties: of the which euerye bodye is made, that hath a soule and fee∣lyng, either reason. ¶Of humours, and of the gene∣ration, effect and working of them. Cap. 6. A Humour is a substaunce actuallye moyst, by ioyning of elementall qua∣lities, and is apt to nourish and to feede the members, and to comfort the work∣ing thereof kindly, or casually to let the workings thereof. For humour is the first principall materiall of bodies that haue féeling, and chiefe helpe in theyr working, and that because of nourishing and féeding. Constantinus saith, That the humours be called the children of the Elementes. For euerye of the hu∣mours commeth of the qualytie of the Elements. And ther be foure humours, Bloud, Fleame, Cholar, and Melan∣choly: and are called simple in compari∣son to the members, though in respect of the Elements, whose children they bée, they be composed. These foure humors in quantitie and qualytie, obseruing euennesse, with due proportion, make perfect and kéepe in due state of health, all bodyes hauing bloud: lyke as con∣trariwise, by their vnequalnesse or infec∣tion they ingender and cause sicknesse. These humors be néedful to the making of the bodye, and to the ruling and kéep∣ing thereof: and also to restore what is lost in the body, as saith Galen super Aphoris. The body runneth and drop∣peth, as in sweating, spitting & other such. Also alteration chaungeth oft cold into heate and returneth.
Also the body hath corruption, and that commeth of too much running and drop∣ping, and of too long chaunging. Then to restore in the bodie what is lost by running and chaunging, & amend euill alteration and changing, and some deale to withstand corruption, the presence of the foure humours, is necessary that the body animally, by their meanes may be kept safe. These foure humours be bred in this manner. When meate is recey∣ued in the place of concoction, that is in the stomacke, first the more subtill part and fléeting thereof, that Phisiti∣ons call Perusmaria, is drawen by cer∣taine veynes to the lyuer. And there by the working of kindly heate, it is chan∣ged into the foure humours. The brée∣ding of thē is made & beginneth in the lyner, but it endeth not ther at ful. First working heate turneth what is colde & moyst into yt kind of fleme, & then what is hot & moyst, into the kinde of bloud: and then what is hot and drye into the kinde of Cholera: and then what is colde and drye into the kinde of Melan∣cholia. Then the processe is such First, fleame is, bread, as an humour halfe sod: second bloud, that is perfectly sodde: the thirde Cholera, That is ouer sodde: the last is Melancholia, that is more earth∣ly, and the dregges of the other. And so such is the ouer as Auicen saith. The bréeding of Elements be straight, and re∣turning into the same. For of aire fire is bread, and of fire aire, and euery Ele∣mēt of other. The bréeding of & humors is straight, and not by contrary. By sée∣thing bloud is bred of fleame, and not that if retourneth. Likewise bloude is made cholar, by great heate drieng and making subtill the humour, but not that it returneth. And by burning of cholar in lyke manner Melancholia is made, and not that it retourneth. For it fareth in the bréeding of humours, as in the bréeding of wine of Muste, as saith Con∣stantine.The plea∣sant taast thereof. For when Muste is feruent, a manner some is brend, that commeth vp and fleeteth aboue, and another earthlye substaunce goeth to the bottome, and the thirde is water: and as that is more or lesse, the Wine is féeble and lesse hot. And the elder it is, yt hotter it is, through the resolution of such watrinesie: And when it is full sodde, then the Wine is most cleere. So in the humours is one part that is light and commeth vpward, and that is Cholera: another, as it wer drasts, and goeth downward, and that is Melancholia: the third, as it were raw, and that is fleame: the fourth, is biud, remayning in his purenesse, and is clen∣sed from other humours. But no bloud is to cleane pured, but that it is some∣what meddeled with other humours. And therefore by meddling of other hu∣mours, bloud chaungeth kinde and cou∣lour: For by meddling of cholar,Hovv to knovv by letting of bloud the humor of the parue it sée∣meth red and by melanchely it seemeth blacke, and by fleame it seemeth watrie, and somie. ¶Of bloud. Cap. 7. ISidore saith, The bloud hath this name Sanguis of Gréek, for yt bloud sustaineth strength, helpeth, and confir∣meth the lyfe: For Sancire, is to vnder∣stand, Confirme. While bloud is in the bodie, it is called Sanguis in Latine: and if it be shedde, it is called Cruor, as it were running and falling. For when bloud is shed it runneth and falleth. O∣ther call bloud, as it were swéete and soft, for it is swéete and soft in taast and in touch. Pure bloud & whole togethers is not but in young folke: for Phisiti∣ons say that bloud wasteth by age: ther∣fore in old men is shaking and quaking for default of bloud. Bloud is properlye the gouerning of wit: therefore it is the manner of womē to scratch their chéks in sorrow. And red clothes be laid vpon dead men, in remembraunce of theyr hardinesse and boldnesse, while they wer in their bloud. Hetherto speaketh Isi∣dore lio. 4. Cap. 2. It appereth in the time of the Saxons,Addition that the manner ouer their dead was a red cloath, as we now vse a black. The Pagans refused blacke, because it repre∣senteth darknesse, tearmed the infernal colour: and so did the olde English. The red of valianncie, and that was ouer Kings, Lords, Knights, and valy∣aunt
souldiours: white ouer Cleargie men, in token of their profession and honest life: and ouer Virgins and Ma∣trones. This order appeareth to be be∣yond 800. years. Constantine sayeth, that among the foure humours bloud is most praised and most friend of kinde, through euen and perfect séething there∣of: the which temperate heate maketh of the pure and airely matter to the no∣rishing of the body. Constantine saith, that there is kindly bloud, and some vn∣kindly, and some kindly bloud is in the organes and some in the veynes. The bloud yt is in the organes, is more hot, more subtill, more red, more cléere, and more swéete in sauour then that other bloud. It is more hot, for that it is nigh the heart and spirites: more subtill, for that the heate of the heart maketh it subtill and cleere, and that is, for that in sweating and breathing out by ye thicke concauites of the organe; it shoulde not lightlye slide into other members. It is more cleere, through the vertue of Cholera that is therin. It is more sharp through the agmenting of heate. The bloud that is contayned ur the veynes, is hot and moyst, meane between grose∣nesse and subtill, and very swéete in sa∣uor, without any euill tas: as soone as it is out of ye body, very shortly it cōgea∣leth, & turneth into clous: & so such bloud betokeneth that the lyuer is temperate. But if it be subtill and watrye and not of good smel, nor of swéete sauour: it sig∣nifieth intermiting of an humour that infecteth the bloud. Then it goeth out of kinde, and tourneth into vnkinde bloud, which is so called, either because it tur∣neth out of his kinde generation, and is corrupt; as in leprous men, or els for vn∣coueable matter, of yt which it is bred, or for a rong humor, with the which it is meiled: A lyttle of Cholera or of another infecting humor midled with pure bloud, infecteth the bloud, & draw∣eth it to the lykenesse of his owne qua∣lytie. Hetherto speaketh Constant. Pan∣cag. 9. cap. 4. Aristotle lib. 3. Animal. putteth other properties of bloude, and saith, that euery beast that hath bloud, hath lyuer and heart: and therfore eue∣rye beast that hath no bloud, is of lesse bodie and vertue, then beastes that haue bloud: and if the flesh be cut, the bloud runneth out except the flesh be dead or corrupt. Also in euery beast of good dis∣position, is temperate bloud, not too much in them that drinke new wine: neither too lyttle in them that be fat of body: for beasts that be very fat of body, haue but lyttle bloud, for as fatnesse wareth, the bloud diminisheth. Also euery body that is sanguine rotteth soone, and speciallye nigh the bones: for a man hath verye subtill bloud, in respect of other Beasts, and other Beasts haue blacker bloud & thicker then mans bloud, and namelye Bulls and Asses: and in the nether parts of the body bloud is thicker and blacker then in the ouer parts. Also bloud when it bréedeth in great quantitie is cause of sicknesse: for it commeth thinne, and is made watry, and therefore perchaunce a man sweateth bloud, and that is as I suppose, through much superfluitye of thin bloud: and kinde thinketh to dis∣charge him of that superfluitie, and so it throweth the watry parts to the vtter∣most of the skinne, and auoydeth them by sweating. Also when a man sléepeth, very lyttle bloud appereth, and no won∣der, for than kinde draweth it inward to helpe the vnkindly vertue, that by ye be∣nefite thereof she may doe hir workes: and so when the bloud is farre within, then the vtter partes of the bodye are pale and bloudlesse. And therefore is it, that if a sléeping body be cut or sticked, there commeth not out so much bloud, as should if he were waking. There it is sayd, that if bloud be sodde and distil∣led, thereof we may make fallowe and greace. And that perchaunce is, the vnctuoye thereof by temperate seething is crudded, and beeing white, as tourned into tallowe or faite. Also if bloud be altered from the course of his kinde, and is corrupt: it will goe out of the stomacke, and from the nose∣thrilles. Also when blouds rotteth in anye member, but it be taken out by skill or kinde, it tourneth into venyine and scaba.
Hetherto speaketh Constantine lib. 3. and in lib. 12. he saith, that the veynes be the vessells of bloud, and thereof it followeth, that bloud is the last meat of beastes, that haue bloud. Also bloud is friend of Nature: and a beast that hath no bloud, is fedde with things that ac∣cordeth to bloud: as it is séene in flyes and wormes that sit on flesh, and sucke out the bloud, and take thereof their fée∣ding. And so if a beast be not fed with this meate, he is leane and of euill dis∣position, and when he is fed therewith, he wareth, and is in good disposition, by the effect of foode of such meate. And if the bloud of the which ye meate is made, be clérre and good, the body is whole: and if it be euill, the body is sicke. Also, for default of moysture,As vvhen a man af∣ter great heate by ouer much drink dan∣teth the povvers: likevvise a Horse vvhose grease is molte, by colde vva∣ter suffo∣cateth, & is choked. earthly bloud con∣geāth hastely and soone. And therefore euery beast yt hath subtill bloud, cleane, & hot, hath better wit than other beasts: for cleane bloud subtill and hot, and of more mouing, is more according to the wit and derstanding. Also a beast yt hath no bloud, is more fearfull, than a beast that hath bloud: and therefore hée that hath cleane bloud, hot, and lyght, is but little moued for dread. Also yt bloud of a Bull congealeth and cruddeth more itily, than ye bloud of all other beasts. For the bloud of all other beastes con∣gealeth lesse or more except the bloud of an Hart and of an Hare. and of beasts that be lyke to them: of which yt bloud congealeth not, as Aristotle saith lib. 3. Se. 2. The bloud of a Bull, cruddeth most swiftly, & that is because through excesse of heate and drinesse, and so if Bulls bloud be dronken rawe, it slayeth as venyme: and so it is sayd of a Phi∣losopher that dranke ye bloud of a bull, & slew himselfe.Themist∣ocles of Athens. Also Aristotle li. 33. saith, that bloud is hotter in ye right side, than in the lefte side: and therfore for the strength of hot bloud that is in that side, the right hand, is generally more ready and able to worke than, the lefte hand. Therfore Liber primus Aristotle saith That the Lion: mooueth the right foote before the lefte. And Super Aphoris. it is saide, That if a woman that is with childe with a Masculine, be sodainelye called, the moueth first the right foote:Agility of a vvoman and that proceedeth of the hot bloude, that worketh at the sull in hir, that con∣ceiueth a male childe. Also in eodem li. it is sayd, that bloud is first and prin∣cipall matter of the heart and of the ly∣uer: and therefore the heart is hollowe, to receiue the more bloud, and thicke, to saue and kéepe the bloud, & in no mem∣ber the bloud is without veynes, but in the heart onely, and the bloud goeth out of the heart by certaine veynes to other places of the body, & the bloud commeth not from any other places to the heart: For the heart is the wel and beginning of bloud, and the first member receiuing bloud, as it is knowen in Anathomia,By incisi∣on, scarifi¦eng, and diuiding the craft of knowing the manuer, and order of setting of parts of the body, and by the manner of generation: For the first bréeding of the heart appeareth san∣guine. Therefore Aristotle saith, That the heart is set in the middle, to shed out the bloud, as it were from the middle or center to the vtter parts, and to all the other members. And therefore he saith, yt the hart is ye middle & rhise member of al the beast: and therefore all that haue bloud, haue a heart, for of necessitie the heart is the principall cause of bloud, & not the lyuer. Aristotle saith all this openly li. 13. though it be otherwise writ∣ten, of the principall beginning of bloud, in bookes of Phisitions, but we haue not to doe with that strife: For either posi∣tion or opinion serve vs touching our meaning. Then of the sentences of the foresaid Authours, gather shortlye: that kindly bloud, is pure, hot, moyst, subtill, and swéete. And also it kéepeth the kind vertue of féeding: and bloud is the seate of the soule, and containeth it; and is the perfector of youth, & alterer of com∣plection, and kéepeth and saueth ye heart and spirits, and maketh them glad and waketh love: and shedding it selfe in the vtter part of the bodye, maketh it of good colour and hiew and if bloud be whole and temperate, if it is peth health, & if it be corrupt, it breedeth corruption, as appeareth in lerie, which is corrupt bloud in the wells, and with other hu∣mours mingled, & tempreth the mallice
thereof, and bloud by his vertue swa∣geth smarting of eyen. And as Constantine saith, The bloud of Doue, or of a swallow drawen out of ye right wing, and dropped hot in the eyen, wipeth a∣way the spots of the eyen: Such bloud is full firie and able to heate and to dis∣solue, as the Commentator saith, In vi∣atico, in tractatu de pannicul. & macul. oculorum in fine. ¶Of the euill propertie of bloud, Cap. 8. OTher properties there be of bloud, that be lesse to praise then the fore∣said properties. For how much bloud being well disposed, is more friendlye & profitable to nature: so much the more when it is corrupt, it is hurtfull thereto, and causeth grieous sicknesse in the bo∣dy. For mallice of other humours, med∣led with bloud, is not sodainly felt: for it is hid, because of friendship that bloud hath to kinde: and therefore kinde is not ware of the mallice of other humors that be hid vnder ye friendship of bloud, and so the kinde dreadeth not the griefe of the humours that be so hid: as it fa∣reth in feauers that are called Hemitri∣taeon,Hemitri∣taeō, more the a ter∣cian a vet¦ing leuer & other that be medled. In which, red or burnt cholar medled with bloud, is not so soone knowen to kind nor phi∣sitions, as Galen saith super Aphorls. Also if ther be superfluous bloud in ye bo∣dy, it breedeth wonderful euills in men, except it be ye sooner voyded by kinde or by Phisicke: as it fareth in that bloud, that is called, Sanguis menstrualis, the which bloud in womē through too great moysture, and for default of heate, if it be holden beyond due time, is cause and occasion of full great griefes and sicke∣nesse. For sometime it stiffeleth ye prin∣cipall members: sometime it causeth dropsie. & sometime the phrensie, or other open diseases, as that corrupt bloud too long held and shut in, is sent forth so di∣uers places of the bodye, as it is more plavnly contayned in lib. Palsionarum Galen. And therfore against such perils, the best remedy is to voyd such corrupt bloud quickly. And it is no meruayle, if bloud thus corrupted, grieue so the bodye that it is in, seeing also it chaungeth wonderfully and inserteth other bodyes.Mēstruall bloud is poyson. For lib. 10. cap. 12. Isidore saith, by the touch of the bloud menstruall, fruite groweth not, but dryeth and is burnt, hearbes dye, trees loose their fruite, yron is fret with rust, brasse and mettall wareth blacke: if hounds eate thereof they ware mad. And a thing that is called Glutinum as∣palti, is so hard yt it may not be delaide with water nor with fire. And if yt bloud, Menstrualis touch that Glutinum as∣palti, it all to falleth, as Isidore saith. This bloud is bred in womens bodyes, of superfluitie of moysture, and féeble∣nesse of heate. And therefore that it shuld not grieue kind, it is gendred in the Mo∣ther, as into a poumpe, from the which if it be expulsed & put out in due man∣ner, it cleanseth and caseth all the body, and the Mother disposeth and maketh a∣ble to conceiue. And therefore, Aristotle saith. lib. 9. Menstrum in fine mensis in muli∣eribus maxime viget: et ideo tune v∣tiliter expellitur sanguis talis: quia si∣cut dicit Isid. lib. 16. sanguis menstrualis non habet certam temporis reuolutio∣nem: sed in maiore parte accedit in di∣minutione Lunae, & hoc est rectum: quia corpora animaliū sunt tune tem∣poris frigidiora: & alteratur sanguis, & efficitur ex eo superfluitas menstrualis: quae si tune expellitur, talis euacuatio laudabilis est & naturalis: quia si vitra tempus, vel propter grossiciem sangui∣nis, vel propter altitudinem matricis, vel propter defectum expulsiue vir∣tutis retincatur, multis molestijs peri∣culosis, corpus mulieris aggrauatur. Quod quidem geueraliser est verum, a quarto decimo anno vs{que} ad quinqua∣genum: quia in iuuenculis meatus sunt angusti, & virtus debilis. A quinqua∣gelimo veroanno in antea sanguis, mi∣noratur & figescie, calor destiuit & tepescit: vnde istae duae aetates a tali immundicia sunt immunes, scilicet se∣nectus vetularis, & iuuentus puellaris, retmet ramen natura sanguinem men∣strualem post mulierum impregnatio∣nem
ad nutrimentum foetus & concep∣tus conseruationem: vnde Arist. li. 15. Menstrum est fanguis non purus: sed indiget digestione operatiua: hic san∣guis mixtus cum spermate, cibus est in animali: vnde mulier, post conceptio∣nem, frequenter patiens fluxum men∣strualem, solet facere abortiuum: aut enim debiliatur foetus, aut moritur: & hoc propter nutrimenti subtractionem: vnde retentio sanguinis menstrualis sig∣num est impregnationis, ex iam dicta causa: quod autem superfluit de san∣guine menstruali, detrahitur ad mam∣millas, vt inde lac generatur: materia enim lactis, est sanguis decoctus in mammillis: vt dicit Aristo. lib. 16. & 18. Lac inquit est sanguis digestus, non corruptus. Item oportet vt fluxus sanguinis menstrualis actualiter sit in corpore, antequā muher impregnetur: sicut dicit Aristo. li. 15. & Con. sicut o∣portet arborē primo florere, quā fructus facere. Item quodo venit talis flux∣us, naturaliter semper accidit in aetate Lunae, aetati etiam mulieris conuenenti. Item aues & animalia non patiuntur talem fluxum: quia talis superfluitas transit in plumas & in pilos: vt dicit Arist. Itē dicit Ruffus: mulieres nimis se exercentes, & sepius mouentes, non multū menstruant: sed quae quiescunt, & multū comedunt, suauiter{que} viuunt, tales multa purgatione indigent. Item quando sanguis talis, vel frigidare, vel crassirie ora venarum constrinengte de∣bito modo non exit, ad exeundum ali∣as vias querit: vt venas nariuu, & emorroidarum, quas si clausas inuene∣rit, ad alia membra se diffundit, & gra∣uem naturae infert passionem: nam ta∣les, vt dicit in viatico Const. defectum appetitus patiuntur: nam cibaria bona abhorrent: puluerem vero carbonum, & laterum appetunt, & similium: nam sanguis retentus in maliciosum fumuin terrestrem & ponticum conuertitur: quo rapto, ad orificium stomachi, ap∣petitus rationalis subuertitur, & irra∣tionalis generatur. Vnde omnia talia corpora, sunt maximis morbis appa∣rata. ¶Of fleame. Cap. 9. IHohannicus saith, that eame is an humour halfe sedde by working of vnperfect heate, of colde matter & moyst by kinde gendred. And Aristotle lib. 15. saith, that fleame is an vndissolued su∣perfluitie of meate. The same is ye mat∣ter of bloud and of fleame: but they bée diuers by more seething or lesse: and so of fleame is made bloud by more strēgth of working heate, and not returning. Bloud tourneth neuer into fleame, as cholar chaungeth into melancholy: but not againward, as saith Auicen. Fleme is an humour kindlye colde, moyst and wearish: and kinde sendeth that humor into the members and lymmes to be made pure, that the body be nourished by that humour defied. It is to note, that some fleme is vnkindly and some kind∣ly. Kindly fleame is colde, moyst, and white in color, and fléeting in substance, of sauour somewhat swéete. in tast, ey∣ther all wearish and vnsauourie. It is bred in the lyuer, where is the place of heate. And it is apte to be tourned and chaunged into bloude: and when the chaunge is full made, the body is sustay∣ned thereby. And though fleame of it selfe be thicke and vnsauery by strength of heate that chaungeth it, yet it taketh the lyknesse and sauour of bloude, that is swéete: as appeareth by the fleame, that is called swéete fleame, And so for the néerenesse and lykenesse that fleame hath with bloud, fleame is néedefull to all the lymmes of the bodye. And ther∣fore prouident kinde, made fleame to passe with the bloude, through the veynes of all the bodye, both for néede & for profite. For as Constantine sayeth, If that bloud fayleth, heate dissolueth fleame: For it taketh héede to féede the mem∣bers and the lymmes thereby. And so Fleame is nobler than Cholera or Me∣lancholia. For these may not be ruled to the bréeding of bloude of them. And by the benefite of bloude, all the lymmes of the bodye preuayle and bee fedde.
Also the presence of fleame is néedfull with the bloud, yt the feruour & strength of bloud may be tempered: and with the fléeting of fleame, the thicknes of bloud may be kept in temper: so yt the bloud may be borne about to the feeding of all the members more lyghtly & speedelye. Also fleame is profitable to make moyst the ioynts and other moueable partes, with the moysture therof, that the ioynts and parts be not let of theyr office, by heate of mouing, neyther by hot bloud, neither by drnesse that might fall. Ther be ome anne, of vnkindly, fleames. Same is sower, colde and drye, through minglyng of melancholy: and some is salte, hot and drye, through infection of red Cholera: some is swéete, through meddlyng of bloud: and some is glas∣sie, and so called for lykenesse of coulour of glasse: Such fleame is far from heat, and therefore it is thicker then other manner flemes, and harder to dissolue, & to turn into bloud. If this humor be cor∣rupt, it bredeth diuers sicknesses in ye bo∣dy: ye superfluitie of this fleme is know∣en,The fleg∣matike. as Constantine saith by diuers to∣kens. For a very fleumaticke man is of body vnlastie, heauie and slow, dull of wit, and of thought forgetfull, softe of flesh and quauie, of coulour white in the face, fearfull of heart, full of spitting, se∣uelyng and rooking, full of sloth and slee∣ping, and of lyttle appetite, and of lyttle thirst, but if the fleame be salt. For then through medlyng of hot humour, a salt sauour is felt in the mouth: soft, yeolow and straight of haire: soft, great & slowe of pulse: his vrine is white, thicke, raw, and euill coloured: in stature hée is fat, great and short, and crooked in extremi∣ties, & his skin is playn & smooth with∣out hae. He dreameth and hath sodain appearances of great ouerflowing of wa∣ters and raine, and of sailing and swim∣ming in colde water. Men of this complection haue ofte colde euills, and be payned with them, and namely in Winter for then the qua∣lyties of fleame, coldnesse and moysture be strengthened, as saith Constantine. Looke before for the properties of colde and moyst. ¶Of Cholar. Cap. 10. ISidore saith, that Cholera is sayde, for that that in a cholarick humor, Calor, that is the heate, passeth tempe∣rance. Some Cholera is kindly. & some vnkindly. Naturall cholar is kindly hot & drye, subtill in substaunce, cléere & red in color. & bitter in sauor, with a certain sharpnesse: the which the more hotter it is, the redder it is in colour, and ye more bitter: the which when it is dealed in two parts, of the which one passeth forth with the bloud, and the other is sent vn∣to the chest of the gall. That that goeth with the bloud, entermixeth with the bloud, because of necessitie and helpe. For it is needful, that it be mingled with the bloud, to make it tēper & feede ye cho∣larick members for in ye bloud it needeth yt there be red Cholera indéede, after the due proportion of thse members. Also, Cholera helpeth and maketh the bloud subtill, that it may passe he more lyght∣ly by straight wayes, to fade the inner parts of the body. That other parte of Cholera, is drawen to the Sybet of the gall, and is sent thereto because of neede and of helpe, for that is néedfull for clen∣sing of all the bodye, and feeding of the gall, and also to helpe the stomacke, and to heate the bowells, and to pricke them that they may discharge them of super∣fluities. Therefore of it falleth gnaw∣ing and passion Coli: for the waye is stopped, that is betwéene the gall and bowels. Unkindly cholar is it that com∣meth of strong humours medled there∣with. For if redde Cholera be mingled with watrie fleame, then is bred Cit∣na cholera, that is lesse ht & more noy∣full then other Cholars: & if the fleame be more great and thicke, then is bread red and yeolow cholar. These two man∣ner of Cholers be notable. The thirde manner Cholera is called Prassiua,Virida. and is gréene of colour, bitter and sharpe, as an hearbe that is named Marubium,horehoūd or blacke archangel Sea-gir∣dle, be∣cause the  blade, Faci. or Porrus in Latine: and that manner Cholera is bred in the stomacke of thē, that vse continually to rate hot hearts, as léekes, onyons, garlyke, and of such
kinde. And if it happen that cholar ta∣keth strength of such greene hearbs and rawe in colour, and so it seemed to Ga∣len. Auicen noteth, that Praxina is gē∣dred of a yeolow cholar, when it is ouer∣burnt, for when it is burned, burning bréedeth blacknesse therein, by which blacknesse medled with citrine, gréene colour is gendred. The fourth manner of Cholera is called Erugmosa, rastie, that is bred of Cholera, that is named, Prassina by more burning: for when it is so burnt, that the moysture thereof is dryed, then it draweth the whitenes of ashen colour. For in a moyst bodye, heate bréedeth first blacknesse: and then when the moysture is all destroyed, it bréedeth a manner of whitenesse, as it fareth in trées and wood, that by burning first turne into coales, and then into ash∣es. But colde contrariwise, in a moyst body bréedeth whitenesse, and in a drye body blacknesse: but this last manner of choler, is worse & more venemous than all the other. The venemous qualytie whereof, bréedeth in the body euill passi∣ons of pestilence and of death, as Herisi∣pila, & Noli me tangere, &c. Then this kindly Cholera if it passe not ye bounds of kinde, it maketh other humours sub∣till, and comforteth digestion, and clean∣seth congealings and corruption, & ma∣keth the body stretch in length, breadth, and thicknesse, and bréedeth boldnes and hardinesse, mouing and lyghtnesse, & stir∣reth to wrath and desire of reuenge: and also prouoketh to ye works of Venus, & helpeth the vertue expulsiue, and cléereth thicke matter, and maketh it to mooue from the middle to the vtter parts, and chaungeth the vtter partes, in cou∣lour of citrine and blacke. And so cho∣laricke men be generally wrathful, har∣die and vnméeke, light, vnstable, vnmer∣cifull: in the body long, slender, & leane: in colour brown, in haire black & crispe, hard and stiffe, in touch hotte, in pulse, strong and swifte, the vryne of them is thin in substaunce and subtill, in colour, faire, shining and cléere. If this cholar be corrupt in anye parte of the bodye, it bréedeth euill passions in the bodye. Of the which passions, these are the generall signes and tokens, as Con∣stantine sayeth in Pantegni. liber. 9. ca. 2. If corrupt cholar haue masterie in the body, the skinne is yeolowe, either citrine, and also there is a default in the vertue of appetite, bitternesse is felt in the mouth, so that swéete things seeme bitter, and sauouey, vnsauoury. There is pricking and burning in the stomack of a hot fume, that puncheth and nip∣peth the sinewes of the stomacke, loa∣thing with cholarick spuing, with thirst and drinesse of the tongue. The same hot smoake dryeth the wosen that is called Trahea, and that humour of spit∣tle, aboute the sinnewes of the tongue. There is also hollownesse of eyen, with moyst respect, the pulse is subtill, swifte and thicke: red vrine and high of colour, sore head ach, waking, chang∣ing of minde, fearefull sights in sléepe: For such men dreame of fire, and of lyghtening, and of dreadfull burning of the ayre, which is caused of fierye smoake, that chaungeth stronglye the brayne and the vertue imaginatiue. And this that is spoken of cholar, and of the spices thereof sufficeth. ¶Of Melancholy. Cap. 11. MElancholy is a humour boystous and thicke, and is bred of troubled congealyngs of bloud: and hath his name of Melon, that is blacke, and Ca∣lor that is humoure: wherevpon it is called Melancholia, as it were a blacke humour: and so Phisitions all it, Cho∣lera nigra, blacke cholar: for the cou∣lour thereof declineth toward blacknes. Some melancholy is kindlye and some vnkindly: the kindly melancholy is colde and drye, that is bred in bloud, as the lées is in wine: the substance wher∣of is thicke and earthy, the sauour ther∣of, is betwéene swéete and ower, brack∣ish. This manner melancholy is diuided into two partes, the one abideth with the bloud, and setteleth therewith into the members, because of neede and of helpe. If néedeth that it be meddeled with bloude, to make the bloude apte and couenable to féede the melancholye
members: for it thickeneth the bloude, that it leete not from digestion, by cleer∣nesse and thinnesse. The second parte is sent to the splene, for neede and also for helpe. It needeth, both for cleansing of the bodie and the splene: it is a helpe, that it flowe into the mouth of the sto∣macke, and to make it strong and thicke, and make it to itch, and so to wake hun∣ger and desire of féeding. That parte of melanchloy, that is superfluitie of bloud, passeth to the splene, and that that goeth from the splene, néedeth not to the fée∣ding of the splene, and as redde Cholera helpeth the stomacke to put off superflu∣itie downward, either inwarde: so me∣lancholy helpeth the vertue of appetite aboue. It is called the dregs of bloud, more verely then Cholera, or fleamefor it soketh and is seperated from bloud, as the thicknesse of vryne, or dregges of y∣rour. Nothing sweeteth neither com∣meth out of fleame, for the clamminesse thereof, nor lykewise of Cholera, for the substitie and cléerenesse thereof: & ther∣fore it is not called the dregges of Cho∣lera, neither of fleame. The vnkindlye melancholy, is not as dregs or groundes of a thing, but as burning of ashes, and that falleth by these meanes: Heat wor∣king ouermuch in ye substaunce of fleme, burneth it: and by ouermuch burning, turneth it into burned Cholera. And if the humour be first subtill and watrye, when it is burnt, it is made salte: and if it be troubled and thicke, it draweth to sowrenesse ward: and if the bloud bée burnt and tourned into ashes, the ashes thereof are salte, with a lyttle sweetenesse: and when kind melancho∣ly is burnt, the burning or ashes therof, is sower as vineger. And if it fall vpon the earth, it boyleth, and the smel thereof is heauie and sower as vineger, ye which flyes shun and voyde for horrible sauor thereof, and the sowrest part thereof is worst. And if the substaunce thereof bée boystous and thicke, when melancholy is burnt the ashes thereof is lesse sower with a lyttle sharpnesse, the which when it falleth vpon the earth, boyleth lesse, & grieueth the members lesse, and is not so malytious nor so venem, neyther sayeth so soone as the first. This blacke Cholera is ce to kind, and hath apt∣ly euill deedlye analytis, and breedeth euills incurable, as canker, lepry, & other such. By burning of fleame, of bloud, & of kinde melancholy, vnkinde and worst melancholy is bread: and when by s∣thing the bloud is bred of fleame, and Cholera of bloud by strong heate, and of Cholar, melancholy: and of that bur∣ning, that infecteth the kindly humour, that worst humour is happely bread, as Coa. saith li. pri. ca. 24. Of this humour hauing masterie in any bodye, these bee the signes and tokens. First the colour of the skinne chaungeth into blacke or bloo: sower sauour, sharpe and carthye is felt in the mouth: By the qualytie of the humor, the patient is faint, and fearfull in heart without cause: and so all that haue this passion, are fearefull without cause, and oft sory, and that is through the melancholy humour, yt con∣straineth and closeth the heart: and so if we aske of such heauie folkes what they scare, or wherefore they be orye, they haue none aunswere. Some sup∣pose that they shoulde dye in some so∣daine vyolence: Some dread emnitie of some man: Some loue and desire death. Wherfore in li. Passionm Galen saith: It is no wonder, though they that suffer Choleram nigram be very sorie, & haue suspition of death For nothing is more dredfull outward in the body than dark∣nesse. And so when any obscure thing he∣leth the brayne, as melancholy fleme, the patient must needes dread: for he bea∣reth with him the cause why he shoulde dread. And therefore he dreameth dred∣full darke dreames, and very ill to see, & of stinking sanr and ll, of which is bred Passio melancholia. Also it com∣meth of a madnesse, and of disposition of melancholy, when such haue lyking and laugh alway of sorrowfull things, and make sorow and dolor for ioyful things. Also such holde their peace when they should speake, and speake too much when they should be sill. Also some dee themselues that they be earthen vesse, and feare to be touched, leat they break. And some thinke that they close ye world
in their fist, and in their handes to con∣taine all things: and therefore they put not out their hands to take meate: for they dread that if they should put forth their hands, part of the world should fal and be lost. Also some imagine, that an Angell holdeth vp the world, and would for wearinesse let the world fall: and therfore they heaue their hands & shoul∣ders to holde vp the world, that séemeth to thē is in point to fall, & rore & scrike strongly, & striue if Phisitions make thē holde downe their handes. Also some thinke that they haue no heads: & some wéene that they haue leaden heades, or Asse heades, or some other euill shaen fashion. And there be other, which if they heare Cockes crowe, they lyfte vp their hands and armes, and smite them∣selues, and singing thinke themselues to be Cockes: & at the last they be hoarce for great crieng, and dumbe also. Also some fall into euill suspitions without recouerie: and therfore they hate, blame, and confound their friends, and somtime they smite and slaye them. Melancholy men fal into all these & many other wō∣derfull passions, as Galen, Alexander, & many other Authours say, y• which pas∣sions it were too long to recken all. And this we sée each day, as it fell late of a Noble man, that fell into such a madnesse of melancholy, that he in no wise could be perswaded, but yt he was a Cat, and therefore he would no where rest, but vnder beds, where Cats waigh∣ted after Mice. Moreouer in punishment of sinne, Nabuchodonosor was puni∣shed with such a payne, as it is written in stories, that seauen yeares he thought that he was a Beast, through diuers shapes, lyke a Lyon, an Eagle, an Oxe, and other. Now haue we treated sufficiently of Melancholy, and of other humors kind∣ly and vnkindlye, as it appertayneth to this worke, at this time. FINIS LIBRI QVARTI. ¶INCIPIT LIBER QVINTVS. FOrasmuch as we haue spoken of the properties of humours, we shall speake now of the dispo∣sition of members, that be made of the foresayd hu∣mours and first of the properties therof in generall, and then of each somewhat in speciall. ¶Of the properties of members in generall. Chap. 1. AVicen saith, that members are bo∣dyes made of the first meddlyng of humours. Either as it is sayde, Secun∣dum Iohannem, A member is a stedfast and sadde parte of a beast, composed of things that be lyke either vnlyke, and is ordayned to some speciall office: and by that it is called a stedfast parte, it is seperated from the part that is not sted∣fast, as a spirite. In that that it is sayd to be made of things that be lyke and vnlyke, it is vnderstoode, double di∣uersitie of members, simple or vnlyke: and compounded, or of office. For the members be called members lyke and simple, the whole parts be of the saure kinde with the whole, as euerye part of bloud is bloud, and so of other. And such simple members, and lyke, are rather in kinde, than the members or lymmes of office: for the simple, be partes of the lymmes that are composed: And the simple partes are rather in kinde, than the
thing that is composed. The members and the lims be composed to sée, to féele, and to mooue, and bée instrmments of the soule, as hand, foote, and eien, & other such bée néedfull in diuerse qualities to the working of the soule, kinde maketh instrumentes of bodye couenable to the vertue of ye soule. The soule hath diuers vertues, & therefore diuerse members & limmes be néedful, as it fareth in hands, in the which be manye fingers and di∣uerse in qualitie and quantie, that they may holde great things as well as smal. And for the soule hath thrée manner workinges, which be called Animalis, Naturalis, and Spiritualis, Feeling, Kindly, and Spirituall: the members and limmes bée néedfull to these work∣ings of the Soule: And so the members that followe the vertue Animall, be cal∣led Animata, which bée néedful to shape féeling and spéedie mouing in al beasts, as the braine, the sinewes, the eyen, and other instruments of féeling. The mem∣bers that be obedient to the vertue of liuing, be called spirituallye Vitalia, which bée made to draw breath and spi∣rituall lyfe, to slake heate, and saue the lyfe, as the heart, the lungs, and such other. The members yt serue the vertue of kinde, be called Naturalia, & Nutriti∣ua, of ye which some bée Nutratiue, the which change ye meat into substance of members. As the stomacke, the liuer, and such other: and some serue to gen∣dering, and to kéepe & saue the things of kinde, that generally be distinguished by speciall, and speciall, by singulars. For when all the singulars shall be cor∣rupt, it néedeth that it be restored by the vertue of the gendering, and so sa∣ued in speciall béeing, that it be not all lost. Some other members serue to these members Generatiue, and helpe them, and members helpe eyther other. And of these members that serue and bée profitable in many manner wise, some make ready, some purge, and cleanse, and some defend, and some beare a∣bout. So the first bée they that make readye, as the limmes of wittes that serue the braine, the heart, the lungs, the liuer, the stomacke, and the limmes for meate. The second be they that beare, as the sinewes, the which receiue the spi∣rit Animall of the braine, and carrye it to euerye member to make moouing and féeling. Also the organe serueth the hart, the vaines, and the liuer, for the wosen taketh the spirit of the heart, and bea∣reth it forth to make the pulse: and the vaines take bloud of the liuer, to nou∣rish and to féede the bodie. The third be they that purge and cleanse, that is to wit, they that put off superfluities and things that grieue. As the holes of the nose in the head, and the waye by the which the heart sendeth out superfluitie of smoake to the lungs till it bée put all out. Also the case of the gall, and the splene cleanse and purge the liuer from superfluities of cholar and melancholy, as the reines cleanse from watry mat∣ters. The fourth be they that defend, as the two skinnes and the skul defend the braine from grieuing and hurting. Phi∣sitions furthermore call these two skins the hard Mother & the middle mother. Also the bones of the breast defend the heart, and the brawnes, and the snailes of the ribbes defend the liuer. Among the spirituall members, the heart is chiefe: for it is the principall well of all the life and foundation of kindly heate. The lunges, the skinne, the brawnes, and wosen, be helpers thereof, by whose mouing aire is drawne to coole the hart, and to remoue therefrom fumous super∣fluous heate. The defence whereof, are the thinne skinnes, that be within: of the midriefe and other such members of kinde, and of féeding, the liuer is chiefe, therein is digestion made, by the which all the bodye is fedde. To the seruice of the liuer, the members that be nigh ther∣to be ordeined. Héereof it followeth that some members be principall. For of other members they bée principles, rootes, and originalls: and some bée the members of office, that receiue of the foresayne members the influence, and working of vertue: and kéepeth the best, and also serueth euerye other. And some bée lyttle, that Constantinus calleth Onuomeria, that is simple part.
For they be of one kinde with their parties touching nature: For euery part of visible flesh is flesh, and euery parte of fatnesse is fatnesse, and so of other. Then gather thou of those foresayde things, that the membes of kinde, ordei∣ned by crafte, make the bodye that hath soule perfect, and they take of the soule, the influence of vertue. Also they be ioi∣ned together in a wonderfull proporti∣on, that is called Armonica, for ye more be coupled to ye lesse, & so the lesse to the more, with the sinewes and other bands. Also these members serue each other, & know their works and vertues. For the ouer giue influence and gouernaunce to the neather: and the neather holde vp the vpper: The middle and the ineane couple, and ioyne the ouer and the nea∣ther in working For the eye ruleth the neather members: the féete and the thighs helde and beare vp the waight of the other members: and the hands and the armes helpe & defend both the head and the feete, the ouer and the neather. Also as long as the members be ruled by the soule, they be profitable & whole, to perfect working and perfection of the bodie: but if they loose the gouernance of the spirits, they be grieuous to the other part of the bodie. Also the members of cleane and pure complection be more a∣ble to be obedient to the working of the spirites. Therefore Liber 18. Aristotle sayth. That the head hath little flesh, and little fatnesse, to haue the better wit and vnderstanding. And that one cause is, because the spirit in the sinews of e∣ling is much let in his passing by hard∣nesse and greatnesse of flesh. Also the members be so set togethers, that for their binding and ting togethers, euery hath compassiō of other. And ther∣fore the member that is lesse grieued, hath compassion of the member that is more grieued. And therfore if one mem∣ber be hurt, the humour of the other members runne and come to the sore place: as it is sayd in Aphori. The grea∣ter sore and ach that chaunceth in one member, swageth the ach of another member, and taketh away most part of the ach thereof, as it faceth in them that haue the phrensie, in ye which if yt thighs and armes be hard wrong, the ach of the head ceaseth. For ye spirites & humours runne and come to the member yt is hard wrong whereby the head is eased. Also the more noble ye members be of sub∣staunce, and of making, ye more grieuous∣ly, and the sooner they féele the griese of any hurt: As it fareth in ye eye yt is more grieued with a little dust, then the hand or the foote is with a great wound. And yt is for the nobilitie and preciousnesse of the eie. For the spirite of feeling hath more masterie in the eie then in other members. And so a very litle hurt in ye ioyntes of the members, in the sinewes of féeling, is most grieuous. For by let∣ting of such members, the vertue of fée∣ling and moouing is principally and most hastely let. And the armonie, accorde, or ioyning of all the bodie is dissolued: Al∣so by errour of kinde ingendering of members, sometime it happeneth, ye su∣perflueus and monstrous members are made, as is said, Li. Animal. 17. and that oft time beasts are séene with one body and many heads, nor that is no wonder but because it is seldome seene. Also som∣time in the Egge be two yolks, that bée diuided in two, and one webbe and call. And that happeneth through comming togethers of two séedes, that drawe ey∣ther to other in diuerse imes not long a sunder. He sayth also that it happeneth oft of such an Egge commeth a member wonderfully shapen, as a chicken wt one bodie, and one head, and foure féete and foure wings, as Aristotle saith ther. And this wonderfull errour happeneth most in shéepe and Goates, and in beastes of many broodes: And therfore he saith, that in old  & Goat Buck was seene wt bornes in the thighs. This wonderfull shape in members superfluous, falleth generally of superfluitie of matter, and default of the vertue informatiue, as hée saith in the same booke. Wherefore wée ought to esteeme, yt this wōderful shape in members cōmeth of ye matter: when the vertue of working is strong, and the matter is little, and by some occassion di∣minished, then it happeneth that manye members be seene, and in all his default
and lacke: for the vertue, through the default of kinde, might not at the full worke, as it intended, as saith the same authour. The vertue operatiue strongly working, worketh nothing perfectly, or at the full. Augustinus. liber. 16. de Ci∣uitate Dei. chap. 8. speaketh of men, that be called Cenocephalos, and be wonder∣fully shaped, and haue hounds heads, and, barking in stéed of voice: And of other without nowles and neckes, and with eien in the shoulders. Also he sayth that in his time was a childe borne, that was two in the ouer part, and one in the neather parte. For he had two heads, two breasts, and foure hands, and one bellye, and two féete. And manye such things Austen there rehearseth, in all which is assigned errour of kinde. Also among the members is great diuersitye in dignitie and in order. For some giue of themselues, and take not of other, as the heart that taketh not of other, as A∣ristotle saith. Neuerthelesse the heart giueth to other liuing and moouing. And some giue and take as the liuer and the braine taketh strength of the heart, and be principles of vertues: For they giue vertues to the other members. And some mēbers neither giue vertues nor take, but stand in their owne vertue by the skill of Phisitions, as the members of one kinde. And some members take and giue not, as the members that bée instrumentes, the which take of the braine the vertue of féeling or of moo∣uing, and sometime of either. But the vertue that they take, they sendeth not to the other members: For the eye can∣not giue the vertue of sight, that it re∣ceiueth of the braine, to the féete, or handes, or other member: neyther the care the hearing. And neuerthelesse these members bée most néedfull to the bo∣dye. For by their proper office they rule all the other members of the bo∣dye: excepte perchaunce by some mis∣hap they be lette in theyr working, as hurt, or when they bée corrupt. It is proper to all the members of office, to put themselues in perill for the princi∣pall members, as sometime the hande putteth it selfe kindlye without all ad∣uisement for the defence of the head or heart. Also a member that is in good health, helpeth the member that is sicke and sore, and drawing the matter of the disease to it selfe, is wont to cleanse and ease the member that is sick, and so oft the whole member is hurt for the sore member. If a member bée rotted, either dead  it is grieuous to it selfe and to all the bodie. And there∣fore is there none other remedie, but cut it off, that it destroye not nor cor∣rupt all the bodie. And this that is spo∣ken of members in generall shall suffice at this time. ¶Of the properties of the head. Chap. 2. AMong the principal members of man,Cephalis Caput. we shall first beginne to treate or the head. For the head is first and principall part of a man among all the vtter mem∣bers of the bodie, touching place and of∣fice, the head hath the best principate. Isidore liber. 10. chap. 2. saith, that the head hath this name Caput, of Capere, that is to take: For all the wits and si∣newes haue and take beginning and spring of the head. Also out of the head springeth all cause and reason, of lyfe, of thirst, and of féeling. In the head all the wits bée séeme, and therefore in a man∣ner it presenteth the person of the soule, that counsaileth and ruleth the bodie. Then the head is principall place and seate of the wits, Principium, and be∣ginning of all the senses organike, and the proper house or habitation of the vertue Animalis, shedding out, and sen∣ding forth to all the lower members fée∣ling and moouing: And hath seauen holes, that be instruments of wits, and answere to the seuen speres of planets, as some men suppose. And so the head is worthyer and more noble then all the other members. For it is gouernour and ruler of all the body, and giueth ther∣to perfection of vertue to doe his work∣ings of féeling. And therefore the head hath by kinde the highest place of the body, to rule and dispose all that be there vnder, by the order of kinde as Haly
saith Super Tegni Galen. The disposi∣tion of all the head is knowne by thrée things, that is to wit, by the quantitye thereof, and by that that commeth ther∣of, and by haire that groweth thereon. For the head shuld be meane betwéene great and little, and proportionate in quantitie to other members. For if the head be too lyttle, it is not to praise: for it betokeneth default of matter, and fée∣blenesse of the vertue informatiue. And likewise if the head bée too greate, it is not to praise: for that commeth of the default of vertue working, and of super∣fluitie of matter, as Haly saith. Also the shape of the head is round, and that is to put off griefes and hurts, & for to take and receiue the better of the braine. And neuerthelesse the head is somwhat euen∣long, and about the temples some deale plaine. For the perfection of a good head is, when it is disposed in roundnesse to the lykenesse of a ball of waxe, thrust together betwéene two handes, or be∣twéene two péeces of woode, for such a ball is round. And yet neuerthelesse, in eyther side it is somewhat plaine. In the fore parte the head is some deale com∣ming narrowe, and high, and that is to withholde the bagge of the braine. In the fore parte of the hollownesse of the head, out of the which come the sinewes that make the fiue wits. In likewise it is some deale narrow in the hinder part, for to take and receiue the bagge in the hinder part, out whereof commeth mar∣row of the ridge bone, and the sinewes that make spéedi mouing. Also it is a token of a good head, when the members that come thereof, and be next adioy∣ning thereto, be of good perfect dispositi∣on. As and if the necke be strong and meanely great, & all the sinewes strong, and great, and of good mouing. Also the head is knowen by haire that groweth thereon. For the disposition and com∣plection of the head is knowne by the qualitie and quantitie, the swiftnesse or slownesse of growing of the haire. For much haire and crispe, and soone grow∣ing, betokeneth the heate and the humor of the head. And againeward, as it shall be said within of the haire. Haire well disposed in growing on the head, as long as they sticke fast to the head, they ey hyght, and defend the head. And if the haire be away and cleane plucked from the head, the head is foule and vnséeme∣ly, as it fareth in balde heads and bare a∣fore, or behinde in the nowle or powle. Also the head is made of many bones, and that is for defence of the braine: for the substaunce of the braine is tender & soft. And therefore it might bée lightlye hurt, were it not that the skull & other bones defended it from vtter huries and griefes. Also somewhat it hath of flesh∣nesse, that is néedfull for the temporance of the bones and sinewes, least too great colde of bones should grieue the tender∣nesse of the braine by some manner occa∣sion. But the head in his owne compo∣sition hath little fleshnesse and satte in comparison to other members. And that is for the sharpnesse of wit and helpe of vnderstanding. Aristotle lib. 12. Also the head though it séeme hard in compositi∣on of his parts, and namely in ye bones: neuerthelesse within it hath much soft∣nesse and marrowe. For all the shape of the bodie hath moysture of the softe∣nesse of the braine, that is closed within the bones. Also the head hath many si∣newes in his first composition: and that was néedfull, for the ioyning and knit∣ting of vnlike bones: And also for the working of spéedie moouing. For by si∣newes the soule worketh moouing and féeling in the bodie. And without a si∣new comuting from the head, is no mē∣ber coupled to another: But if that ver∣tue be let that commeth by sinews from the head, by vice and corruption of si∣newes, the vniting & the ioyning of all the bodie faileth. And the head is the chimney and healing of all the bodie. And therefore it taketh and receiueth in it selfe many sumosities, that come out of all the bodie. Also kinde made all the substaunce of the head, full of holes and powers priuely and openly: priuely, that by the secret powers, the superfluitie of priuie sumosities may be voided and put out. Openly, that the open sumosities and boistous filth may be voyded and cleansed by open and sniting holes. Also
the head hath some properties, that be∣tokeneth default of kinde, as it appea∣reth in heads wonderfully shapen. For Aristotle. liber. 12. saith, that sometime it happeneth, that one heart is in a beast, and yet it séemeth to haue two heads, or many members. And contrariwise, sometime there séemeth to be two hearts and other members, and yet there is but one head. But all this is euill shape. And that falleth not but by er∣rour of kinde, eyther superfluitie of matter, either else by sailing of vertue, as Aristotle proueth liber. 18. Where he saith, that the cause of such euill shape is not but in the matter. And then it followeth. Such euill shape happe∣neth in beasts that gender many broods, and happeneth selde in women except it bée in women of Aegypt, yt beare many children more then in other Countries, or more then women of other lands, ex∣cept there, where other women bée like to the women of Aegypt. Also when the head, which is the roote of all the bo∣dye, and of all corporall vertues, the first and principall foundation, is well disposed and ordered, all that bee vnder the head, bée in ye better disposition and state. And againewarde, if the head bée corrupt and distemporate, with Sintho∣ma, of corruption of head ach: néedes must the neather members of the bo∣dye be diseased. Sometime the head is diseased with an inwarde cause, as by these passions that bréede and come of the braine, with such as long thereto, as it fareth in the head ach, phrensie, and Epilencia, the falling Euill, and such other. And sometime he is diseased by an outward cause, as by chaunge of heate, or colde, or otherwise distempered ayre, or anye other reason. And some∣time by ioyning and binding of other members. As fareth in the stomake, that is full of corrupt humours, for the su∣mosities delaide, by reason they be nigh, they couet to come to the braine, and the hollownesse, if they finde any voide, to fill: and they thrust and stretch the skinnes of the braine, and so pricking, they breede ach in the same skinnes. Al∣so the same commeth of great fasting and abstinence, as it fareth in them, that fast and wake too much. For as Galen sayth, long watching breedeth head ach. Also the same commeth of great resec∣tion, as it happeneth in dronken men: For the superfluitie of sumositie that commeth of winde, commeth vp to the braine, & puncheth and pricketh it; and maketh the head to ake and suffer ma∣ny euil passions. Also Constantine saith, that all the ach of the head commeth of the stomacke reléeued, when the sto∣macke is voyded, and is augmented, when the stomacke is filled with meate, that tourneth into euill qualyties. Also as Aristotle sayth liber. 12. Kinde hath ordeined in the head wittes and in∣struments of wittes, by the nobyltye of them, and as it néedeth to the beast. And therefore kinde hath set the eyen in the formost and vpper parte of the head be∣cause the beast shall sée what is afore him. For the witte of sight is more sub∣till and more noble then other wittes. Kinde hath set the instruments of hea∣ring in the middest of the round head: for limmes of hearing, heare not onely forth right, but all about. Kinde hath set the wit of smelling after the eyen, as middle and meane betwéene the sight and the taast. For the wit of smel∣ling is more boistous then the sight, and more substill then the taast. The tongue is sette last, that is the instru∣ment and limme of taast and touch, the working whereof is about great and boistous substaunce. And so if the wits be so ordeined, the head is perfect and perfection and ornament of all the body. And as Aristotle saith, the limmes and wits be not so well set in the heads of foure footed and vnreasonable beastes. For the eares of such beasts bée in the ouer parts of the head: and so appeareth that such a beast is not right, neither vpright of bodie, but looking downward to the earth. Also sometime kinde goeth out of the way and erreth in some men wonderfully shapen, that haue all the body of a man, saue onely the head. For they haue the face lyke a grim beast, or as a hound, as Solinus telleth. Also kind erreth in some beasts strāgly shapē, as it
fareth in a beast that is called Lamia,Lamie, a kinde of womē, by vvhose sight in∣fants are frighted, & becō Elues, they be al¦so those that bee called La∣dies of ye Fairies, vvhich do allure yōg men to cō¦pany car∣naly with them, & after those men are cōsumed by leche∣ry, they de¦uour thē. that hath as the Glose saith Super Tre. an head as a maide, and bodie like a grimme beast. And it is sayd that when these beasts Lamie, will take any man, first they flatter with him with a wo∣mans face, and maketh him lye by them while he may indure, and when he may no more accomplish their lecherie, then they rent & draw him with their téeth, and slaieth him, and eate him. Of the Braine. Chap. 3. AS Constantine sayth in Pantegni. li. secundo. ca. 11.Vitalia capitis, Cerebrū. the braine is a white bodie without bloud, and hath much of spirit and of marrowe, and is distingui∣shed and departed in thrée cels or dens, and is the beginning and principall of the sinewes of all the bodie. And it is closed and conteined within two thinne skinnes, which be named the milde and harde mother: and is set in the highest place of the head, as in the most excellent place of the bodie. The braine is white by kinde, for to receiue the lykenesse of all coulour, and hath much of the spirit for to haue much mouing therein: and also hath much marrow, to temper and slake the sharpnesse of heat, that is bread and commeth of moouing. And hath but little of bloud, least it should be infected and smitten with the coulour therof: and so all things that is apprehended should séeme redde. Also it is moist and with∣out bloud, that it may soone be chaunged and likened to the kinde of féeling, as sayth Constantine. And it is diuided in thrée celles or dens: For the braine hath thrée hollowe places, which Phisitions call Ventriculos, small wombes. In the formost cell and wombe imagination is conformed and made, in the middle, reason: in the hindermost, recordation & minde. The formost is called Prora in Latine, as it were a fore shippe. And the hindermost is called Puppis, as it were the after ship. This Puppis, the hinder part, is the lesse part. For fewe sinewes come thereof. And this Puppis is hard, that the sinewes of mouing may moue the easilier and the sooner. And is colde and drie, and hath little of spirit and of marrowe. Colde for it should holde the better and the sooner. It hath litle of spi∣rit, to bréeding of rest. It hath little of marrowe in comparison to the formost parte, that it be meanely harde, that the printing of shapes and likenesse be ther∣in the longer holden. Prora the formost part, is more soft, and hotter, and more floating. More, that the sinewes of fee∣ling may come thereof. Soft, that the si∣newes of féeling may be disposed to re∣ceiue the sooner the doing of féeling. Hot∣ter, to bée the more able to receiue the shape and forme. More fléeting, & more moyst somewhat, that the sinewe of féeling be the easilyer moned. The cell & the wombe, in the middle betwéene Prora and Puppis, is hot and moyst, & hath more of spirit and more of marrow then the other. More of spirit, that more perfect discreation be made therein by reason, as in other members by digesti∣on cleane and pure, is departed from vn∣cleane and vnpure. And hath much of spirit, to haue much moouing and much marrow, to temper the moouing of the soule, that it may the better deeme and know, what it conceiueth. In these three cells and wombes bée thrée principall workings. For in the first, shape & like∣nes of ye things be felt, is gendered in the fantasie or in the imagination. Then the shape and lykenesse is sent to the middle cell, and there beThe place of imagina∣tion. domes made. And at the last after dome of reason, that shape and likenesse is sent into the cell and wombe of Puppis, and betaken to the vertue of minde. The braine is round, to be the more able to receiue spi∣rits, and also that it bée not lightly hurt. To defend the braine two garments bée néedfull, which be called the mothers of the braine: the one is great and is cal∣led the hard mother, and it is set vnder the skull: But in the middle braine, it waxeth greate, and is sadde to haue the more strength: and is not ioyned to the skull, but departed therefrom, and be∣clippeth the braine about: This harde mother is néedfull to defende the milde mother that is more tender, from the hardnesse of the skull, and to binde toge∣thers
the vaines and the organe or concauite of the braine: And also to ful∣fill the voide places, if there be any. The second web and skinne is called Pia ma∣ter, the méeke mother, that is set vnder the hard mother, and is neher and softer then the hard mother, & compasseth the substance of the braine, and departeth a∣sunder the foresayd cells. And the milde mother is not superfluous neither to much: for it harboureth & holdeth toge∣thers the veines of the braine within. And kéepeth & knitteth the braine toge∣thers, that it flow not neither faile by ye fléeting and softnesse thereof. Also this milde mother helpeth and beclippeth the braine, and defendeth it from the harde mother. Also by vaines that it hath, it nourisheth the braine, and by the organe and small vaines that it conteineth, it sendeth spirit thereto. Also the braine is a member moouing and ruling all the lower members of the bodie, and giueth to all these limmes féeling and mouing. If the braine be let, all that is in the bo∣dy is let: And if the braine be well, all that is in the bodye is the better dispo∣sed. Also the braine hath this property, that is éeleth and followeth the mouing of the Moone. For in the waring of the Moone, the braine wareth: and waneth in substaunce of vertue in the waning of the Moone. For then the braine gathe∣reth togethers in it selfe, and is not so fully obedient to the spirit of feeling, and that is séene in Lunatike, and Epalen∣tike men, that bée most gréeued, when the Moone is newe, and also when it is olde. And that is it that Aristotle saith liber. 12. of the signes good and bad of the braine. Of the braine he sayth, When it is too drie either too moist, doth not his worke and déed: but maketh the bo∣die colde, and melteth the spirite. And therfore falleth sicknes of loosing of wit, and of vnderstanding, and dyeth at the last. Also beastes that haue too greate braine bée full slouthfull, and that hap∣peneth by reason of moisture that is re∣solved and commeth thereof, & changeth into smoake, & stoppeth the vaines of the braine, and causeth sléepe. Also Aristotle sayth in the same place, that the braine hath in it selfe no feeling of touching, as the bloud nor other superfluities animal, hath no féeling of touch, and is not in the bodies of al beasts but to ye preseruation of kinde. And, which is wonder, yt braine giueth feeling to all the parts of the bo∣dy: and notwithstanding of it selfe, and in it selfe it feeleth nothing. Also he saith in the same place. Euery beast that hath bloud, hath braine, or some other mem∣be in stéed of braine, as a beast with ma∣ny féete, and other that be lyke thereto. And though euery beast that hath bloud hath braine, yet the braine conteineth no bloud in the substaunce of his marrow, as Aristotle sayth liber. 3. Also liber. 16. Aristotle saith, that the substance of the braine is colde and moyst, and therefore it is set afore the well of heate of the beast, that is to wit, the heart: to moy∣sture & to temper the superfluitie of heat and drinesse of the arterves or small vaines, of the which the cau of ye braine is wone. For Haly sayth, that artery, the small vaines come out of the heart: of yt which is made a meruailous cause, in which the braine is wound & wrap∣ped, and in that caue the spirit of féeling is laied and ruled: and by that spirit the vertues of the braine passe to other mē∣bers. And therefore as Aristotle sayth there, the braine is the first member in the making of a beast, and after the ma∣king of the heart. But Galen saith, that the braine, that is well complectioned ought to be tēperate in foure qualities, But as Haly sayth there, the kindlye complection of the braine ought to bee more colde and moyst, then hot and dry. And that is néedfull to coole the foresaid caue, and to sake the accidentall heate of the braine that commeth of the con∣tinuall moouing thereof: alsō liber. 15. Aristotle saith, that among all beastes, to his quantitie, onely man hath most braine, for the heart is most hotte, and therefore by masterye of heate and of good complection man is of good wit, and of more vnderstanding then all other beasts. And children may not long hold vp their heads, for greatnesse and heauinesse of the braine: till it be made lighter by heate of the heart, and of the
arteryes and organe. Good disposition of the braine and euill is knowne by his deedes, for if the substaunce of the braine be soft, thinne, and cléere: it receiueth lightly the féeling & printing of shapes, and lykenesses of thinges. He that hath such a braine is swift, and good of perse∣ueraunce and teaching. When it is con∣trarye, the braine is not softe: ey∣ther if he be troubled, he that hath such a braine receiueth slowly the féeling and printing of thinges: But neuerthelesse when hée hath taken and receiued them, he keepeth them long in minde. And that is signe and token of drinesse, as sluxibility & forgetting is token of moi∣sture, as Haly sayth. And so it is to vn∣derstand of other qualities.Token of a hotte braine and dry Ensample. If a man bée busie and mooueable, by vsage vnstable and variable, hardy, and wrathfull, it seemeth that such one hath a hot braine. And the contrarye betoke∣neth the coldnesse of the braine. And if he be a sluggard and slowe and sorrow∣full and sleepie,Of a cold braine, moyst. it is a token of a moyst braine. And in likewise if he be a great waker, and strong of minde, it signifieth drinesse of braine.Dry brain If there be passing great moysture with heate, then ther is much superfluitie, and many diseases chaunce to ye head. Hot and moist,Moist braine by heat di∣stempered grieue such a one, and namely the Southerne ayre, and the Northerne winde helpeth: such a one is very sléepie, nor he maye not wake long time. And when he slée∣peth, it happeneth him to haue Subeth, that is, false rest:Vnkindly rest. and hath troubled sight, and vncléere wits. If drinesse in∣creaseth with heat, ther falleth and com∣meth worse Synthomata, euills & sick∣nesses, sauing there bée not so many su∣perfluities. Such haue their wittes suf∣ficiently cléere and cleane from superflu∣ities. But they wake more then other men, and they be hardie, great boasters, or vaine speakers, and vnstable, and such waxe bald after youth, though they haue much hayre afore. Also if cold pas∣seth with drinesse, such bée wont to haue cléere wits, and cleane wayes from su∣perfluities in youth, & vtterlye without sicknes, but when age cōmeth they waxe feeble for a light cause, & olde age com∣meth swiftly. And it appeareth soone in ye head, for they haue soone hoare haires. And if the drinesse be stronger then the colde with hoarinesse, they waxe balde. And if the cold be stronger then ye drines then they waxe not bald: but when ye cold passeth with moisture, then cōmeth deep sléepe. And the wits of such men be euil, and ther is much superfluitie. And if the colde either the moysture waxeth strong, such a man falleth into Apoplexiam, that is an euill, that withdraweth a mans minde and mouing, and féeling: or else hée falleth into a palsie, eyther dieth. And he that is so disposed shall not be bald, as Galen saith in Tegni. and in the Comment. Halye sayth the same. But this sufficeth that is spoken of the properties of the head and of the braine. ¶Of Caluaria. Chap. 4. CAluaria is the formost parte of the skull,Calua the skinne. and hath that name Caluaria, of balde bones for default of haire. And is called VertexVertex, the toppe or crown of ye head also. And so Liber de∣cimo, cap. secundo. Isidore sayth, that Vertex is the part of the head without, there the haire is kit, there the haire is woundē. So Occiput the powle is ye hin∣der part of ye head, as it were set against Capitium. The formost parte of ye head waxeth soone bald for drines therof. The ouer part latter: but the powle last or neuer, and that is for superfluitie of hu∣mours. Of the properties of the haire, seeke more within. Of the eyen. Chap. 5. LIbro. 10. chap. 1. Isidore sayth,Oculi. That the eyen bée sayde as it were hidde. For the liddes couer and hide them, that no griefe come to them or hurt them, or else they be so called because they haue light secretly hid within them. Among all the wittes, the eyen bée next to the soule. For in the eyen is all the iudge∣ment of the Soule. For in the eyen is séene and knowne the disturbaunce and gladnesse of the Soule. And also loue and wrath, and other passions.
They bée called lyghts, for they receiue light without, and conuey it and send it forth. The eyes bée the instrumentes of sight, as Constantine saith. And they bée two, least if by happe the one were diseased, that other might supplye the lacke thereof. And for the eie is in steede of a write, or a spie, kinde setteth them in the highest place of the bodye. The eye is made of tenne things: Of seauen smal curtils, and thrée humours. Among the humours, the first is Whitish, the second Cristaline, the thirde Glassie. The seauen curtills bée seauen skinnes, either webbes, that beclippe the foresayde humours, and diuideth them a sunder. And in the middle of these hu∣mours the sight is formed. And they be of kinde so ordinate: togethers, that foure bée in the formost parte. Of the which the first is called Tela Aranea, as it were the webbe of a Spider. The se∣cond Vuea Grapic: The third Cor∣nea, Hornie: The fourth Coniunctiua, Able to ioyne. And thrée bée in the in∣ner part, the which three, bée called Re∣thina, Sderina, and thtica, that is, hard, as it shall bée shewed héereafter. But among all these, one alone is the instrument of sight, that is the humour Cristalline. And hath that name of Cri∣stall: for it is lyke Christall in cou∣lour. This humour Christallinus, as Constāntine sayth, is white, bright, cléere and plaine without: and is set in the middle of all the other, that all the other shoulde serue it euenly. It is pas∣sable, cléere, and bright, that it may the sooner bée chaunged into coulours oppo∣site, and haue & take lykenesse of all coulours indifferently. Also it is round in shape and substaunce, that it bée not lightly hrt and grieued. And also that no superfluitie be gathered in ye corners thereof: by the which superfluitie, it might happely bée grieued. And because it shoulde not be too much moueable by too much roundnesse, it is somewhat plaine, to be of measurable swiftnesse. For euery thing that is all round (hurt) in the sides is vnstable, and vnstead∣fast, as Constantine saith. And that by this humour the sight is made, it is thus proued. For it ought to bée closed be∣tweene this humour and the spirite of fight, as some humour or other thing: the working and the dooing of sight is away and faileth. For the spirite of sight may not pearce, and come therto sor the let that is betwéene. This humour spring∣eth of the ouermost parts of the braine, that be pure, thinne, and bright, that letteth not passing of light. And pro∣perly to speake, this is the blacke of the eie: and is called the middle of the eye, or the point of the eie, & therin is porper∣ly the vertue of sight, & of seeing. Wher∣in vnto vs beholding néere, appeare cer∣teine Images, as it were in a mirrour: but thereof we shall speake heereafter. This humour is set in the middle of the other two, betwéene the glasse and the white. The glassie humor is cleane, pure, & bright as glasse, so ye we may see there through, and is called Gelados in ye lan∣guage of Arabia, & helpeth in two man∣ners. First & principally it taketh bloud to nourish the humour Cristalline, & ma∣keth it white and able to turne soone in∣to the substance of the humour Cristal∣line. It is not conuenient that so cleane & pure a humour should receiue vnpure feeding: the which it should doe, if ye red bloud not defied, not whited, not made subtill, were by any occasion medled wt the humor Cristalline. The second wise it helpeth & defendeth & kéepeth the hu∣mour Christalline frō touching & sharp∣nesse of tunicles: the which in respect thereof be hard & more boistous. Like∣wise the humour that is called Albugi∣neus, the which by another name is cal∣led Euagaidos, is in ye further part: & hel∣peth the Cristalline in two manners: for it saueth him from hurting & grieuing, & by his moisture tempereth the Christal∣line, for the humour Albugineus in the yen is more moist, & the Christalline yt is called also Christallidos is more drie. Also this humour Albugineus by his thicknesse gathereth togethers & comfor∣teth the spirit of sight. These thrée parts of ye eie, though  they be called humours, yet they be not properly humors: for they be not soft & fléeting as humours be, but they haue much more thicknes in them∣selues
then humours haue. They be also liuing bodies, and haue kindly vertues, the which long to no humor: yet they be called humours: for they haue more soft∣nes & more cleerenesse then other mēbers of ye body. And they be more obedient to the working of ye spirit & vertue of féeling thē other lims of féeling. These three hu∣mors be departed a sunder with ye rumes inner & vtter, for they shuld not be med∣led togethers. These seuen curtils be or∣deined in this manner. Fast by ye humor Christalline in the neather side is ye cur∣tel that is called Rethina,A rume. and springeth and commeth of the vaines and hollow∣nesse of the skinne that is called ye mid∣dle mother, in manner of a web or aul, & beareth feeding with her to the humor Vitreus: & sendeth feeling by ye sinewes thereof to the Christalline. Next to this Rethina, immediatly followeth ye second curtel, that is bread and commeth of the middle mother: & feeddeth & defendeth ye curtel Rethina, that it be not by any hap broke or hurt. The third curtel follow∣eth, that is called Sclirotica, yt is ful hard & commeth of the hard mother of the braine, and defendeth all the other from the hardnesse of the bone, & is as it were the bend of the eie. In the formost part next to the Christalline humor, is imme∣diatly the curtel that is called Tela ara∣nea, & is called so for the subtilnesse ther∣of, that it may be passable to the spirit, & is bread & commeth of that most subtill parts of the curtill that is called Rethi∣na. This curtil is set betwéene the Chri∣stalline humour, & Albugineus: and kée∣peth that they fret not togethers. This curtil Tela aranea ioyned with the inner part Rethina, maketh ye first roundnes. For these two curtills close the humor Christalline within them. After this fol∣loweth the curtill that is called Vuea, Grapie, & hath that name, for it is like in coulour to a blacke grape, & that by wise counsaile of kinde. For all the other, that we haue spoke of in the composition of the eie be white & cléere, and sheddeth the spirit of sight. And therefore it néedeth to haue therwith the curtill Vuea, gra∣py, to gather light in ye eie by the black∣nesse thereof. For blacknesse is a cou∣lour that gathereth sight. And also this rume is full of holes, as a Spunge, and conteineth thrids of sinewes, as Constā∣tine saith, to cleanse & to purge the hu∣mour Christalline, frō superfluous moi∣sture. This curtell Vuea, Grapie, is ioy∣ned in the farther part of the head, with ye curtel Secundina, in the inner part: the which so ioyned, maketh ye second round∣nesse, and closeth the humor Albugineus, that kinde setteth there to make the spi∣rit cléere, and to giue kind of moisture to ye humor Christalline. After this curtell followeth the curtell that is called Cor∣nea, Hornie, and hath that name of the doing therof. For it is sul like to a bright horne, and is bright and cleere to ye spi∣rit of sight. And by the brightnes & cleer∣nesse thereof: and by the reason of some∣what of thicknesse therof: it helpeth som∣what the spirit of sight, to gather ye sight, Also because of strength therof and sad∣nes, it defendeth the inner curtells, that be lesse strong from vtter griefes. And this curtell Cornea, hornie, is ioyned to ye inner curtell, that is called Sclirotica, hard, and maketh another roundnesse. For these two curtells, Cornea, the vt∣ter, and Sclirotica, the inner conteine and close within themselues all rounde, the humour Vitreus, Glassie. At the last in the vtter part of the eye without is set the curtell Coniunctiua, the commeth downe from the braine panne, and coue∣reth not all the eie, but remaineth in the corners of the eien, and bindeth and holdeth them, that they abide in a due stedfastnesse. The disposition of the eies. cha. 6. TO the eie so disposed & perfectly mē∣bred, the spirit of sight is brought in this manner. From the formost part of ye braine come out two hollowe sinewes, which be called Optici, which fixe them∣selues in ye substance of the humor Chri∣stalline. These two hollow sinewes bée pight in ye eien, & come either ouerthwart either crosse wise, & be ioined in a point: & that maketh kind wisely, yt if that one eie be closed or let, the spirit of sight may come to that other, & do ther perfectly his
déede, and so the blacke of the eye in the art of seeing is comforted by the ioyning of the vertue of sight, as it fareth in shoo∣ters, that close that one eie for to shoote the more euen. Also the spirits Vitalis be therefore ioyned together, that by su∣steining of each other, they may bée the more strong. And therefore also they come and méete together in the bounde of touch, that one thing séeme not twaine, the which should fall, if eyther eye a sunder sawe his owne Image. Therefore it néedeth, that the vertue of sight be conteined in one limme, in the which is one well of vertue, that sprin∣geth into ye black of the eie, as saith the Authour of Perspectiue, as it fareth in them that set theyr fingers vnder the eyen, in which the blacke of one eye is borne downewarde, and the blacke of the other eie vpwarde. And so the spi∣rite of sight is departed and dealed, and one thing séemeth twaine. And the cause is, for the light commeth from the one eie vpward, and from that other down∣warde. And so the beame of light yt com∣meth from either eie, touching the vtter∣most part of the thing that is séene, set∣teth not the space, for the aire is be∣twéene, and so he séeth as it were two bodies, and yet there is but one. Neuer∣thelesse euery squint looker séeth not so, though his eies be vneuen. For stéepely the beame passeth by a right line to the vttermost partes of the thing that is séene, as it is said afore in ye third booke, in the Chapter of the sight. A well dispo∣sed eye is considered touching the per∣perfect composition of his parts, as it is said afore. Also touching the scituati∣on: for it challengeth the highest place, for the dignitie of his subtiltie, & name∣ly for the néerenes it hath with the soule, as sayth Isidore and Aristotle also. And touching due proportion of quantitie. For the eie ought not be strained too far out, neither lifted vp too high. For that betokneth disturbāce of discretiō: neither to déep in. For ȳe betokeneth default of matters & of vertue. Then ȳe mene is wor∣thy to be praised: but li. 19 Aristotle saith that a déep sight séeth a far. For it is mo∣ued & lightned ere it come out of ȳe lim, and the light is not departed neither de∣led: but the beame of ye sight passeth forth right to the things that are séene, as it is shewed before of the sight. Also it is con∣sidered by diuers mouings: for it ought to moue meanly: For if ye eie be to much mouing, it betokeneth excesse of heate, & betokeneth also vnstedfastnes of thought and mutablenesse of affection. If it moue too slowly, it betokeneth the contrary dis∣position, that is excesse of colde and obsti∣natnesse of thought and of will. Then meane mouing is to be praised: for it sig∣nifieth easie perceiuing of the minde, and in things perceiued, due fastning. Ther∣fore Aristotle saith, li. 12. that the clo∣sing of the eye must be meanely swifte, for if it be of great opening and of little closing, it betokeneth shamefastnesse and folly, as he saith li. 1. But if the opening be too slowly, it betokeneth default of vertue & compaction of matter in the si∣newes: For it is not obedient so ye wor∣king of the spirit,Addition as it fareth in them yt haue Lethargia, Forgetfulnesse, this im∣pediment cōmeth through colde rume, if not of some ouer moistered impati∣ence, & doth lie in the hinder part of the head or braine pan. Also the eies be considered properly touching the perfec∣tion of their working: For if the eie ap∣prehendeth well and lightly, without a∣gaine smiting, & déemeth of that he séeth, it betokeneth good disposition, as it fareth in the eien of Egles, that spéedely behold and sée the Sun in roundnes. The wor∣king of the eie is déemed & considered by sharp & dim. For he that hath a subtile sight, séeth well a far off & néere, because the sight is much, it séeth a farre: for it is subtill, it hath a full discerning of things that be séene. For an eie of litle sight, as Aristotle saith. li. 19. shall not sée well a farre, for the thicke spirit séeth much a farre, because of his bignesse: but not per∣fectly because it is thicke. A little spirit & subtil, séeth nigh & perfectly, & not a far, for the scarcitie of ye spirit of sight. For when he séeth perfectly, yt is by reason of the subtilty therof. Little sight & thicke seeth not a far, & that is for scarcitie ther∣of, nor seeth, not perfectly, for ye thicknes therof. For the thicker & the more trou∣bled
spirit yt a man hath, the féebler and the vneasier of sight he is. Also the eye is déemed by chaunging of colour: for li. 19. Aristotle saith, the eien in the beginning of bréeding, be of gréene coulour: and then they chaunge into black, either into yeolow, either into anye meane coulour séemely thereto. For if ther be much hu∣mour & little spirit of sight, disturbed by any happe, the blacke coulour therein is strengthened. If there be little humour & féeble spirit of sight: the coulour shalbe yeolow. For as Aristotle saith, yeolow∣nes of eien is mouing of féeblenesse. And if the humour be meane, & the spirit tē∣porate of cause according to whitenesse & blacknes the coulour is diuerse. If ye eien be black, they be of sharpe sight by day, by reson of gathering togethers of light, & of humours in the same lim of ye sight: and by night they be dim of sight. For the light of the night is féeble, & the hu∣mour of the night is kindly of more hea∣uy mouing, as Aristotle saith. A yeolow eie contrariwise is feeble of sight by day & strong by night. For the matter of yeolownesse that is brighter of it selfe when it is ioyned to the daye light, is more darke, & therefore ye spirit of sight, the light remaining, is féebled in ye déede of fight. By night the spirit of sight in the eie is holpe by cléerenes, that is con∣teined within a little humour, & the day light passeth, and there abideth in the eie the vertue of séeing and of deeming some deale in darknesse, as it fareth in Cats, Also the eie is knowen by disposition of the parts that be about it. As of the eye lids and browes. For if the eye lids yt be the helers & couerers of the eyen, be full of flesh within, and of superfluitie of hu∣mours, they hinder sight. For such eye lids by cause of their little mouing, put not of thick aire. Liber primo Aristo∣tle sayth. If the place of teares that fol∣loweth to the corner of the eie, be much fleshie,Of fleshie eyes. as it fareth in the eie of Kites: it signifieth wilynesse and euill fortune. Séeke for other properties of the eie be∣fore in the treatise of sight. And this that is sayd of the composition, ffectese, and dooings of the eyen, is sufficient at this time. ¶The blacke of the Eie. Chap. 7. LIber. 12. chap. 2. Isidore sayth, that the blacke of the eye, wherein is the vertue of sight, and is called Pupil∣la in latine, for the final images that be séene therein. And small children bee called Pupilli. And the blacke of the eye, is so called, because it is cleane and pure as Puella, a little maid childe. Phi∣sitions say, that the Images that we sée in eyen, bée not séene in eyen of ye them, that shal die,A secret to knovve if the sick shall die thrée dayes afore. And if the sayd Images bée not séene, it is a cer∣teine token of death. The blacke hath a∣bout it a circle yt is called Corona. By ye Corona the blacke of the eye is mar∣ked and bounded. And the white parts of the eye departed therefrom. This Co∣rona by the roundnesse thereof highteth the blacke of the eie all about. And in this Corona is yt most fayrenesse of the eye. Hetherto speaketh Isidore. Halye saith, that in the blacke of the eye as in glasse appeareth Images of their things, that be séene in the eye. And all that is in the eye, of reumes and humoures, eyther they helpe or serue the blacke of the eye: And therefore it sitteth in the middle, as a Quéene. The blacke of the eye is little in quantity & most in ver∣tue among all the members. And ther∣fore as it is least, it taketh and com∣prehendeth things that be most of spi∣rit, that commeth of the braine with∣in, and taketh lykenesse and recey∣ueth without by lyght. And so by light it taketh in it selfe the lykenesse of the thing that is séene, and sendeth it to the perseueraunce of the Soule. For from all partes of the thing that is seene, lines come togethers and make a Pi∣rami in a toppewise, either in a shield wise, of the which steeple the sharpe ende is in the blacke of the eye, and the broade ende in the thing that is seene, as it is shewed afore of the sight, looke there: this blacke of the eye perceiueth & hath discouering of the coulours and shape of all thinges by the vtter parts. And hath lyking in the middle coulours
and figures of shapes, as by the lynes perspectiue are expressed, and is corrupt in the vttermost partes, eyther at least is heauie and faint by contrariousnesse, as saith the Philosopher. Also it séeth & déemeth al things, that is without it, & set afore it: but it neuer séeth it selfe by lynes, vpon the which the lykenesse of the thing that is séene commeth to the sight. But when it séeth it selfe, that hap∣neth by reflection and rebounding of beames, that is, when the likenesse of the thing that is séene, is first multiplyed, & reboundeth to the myrrour, and from the myrrour againe to the sight, as sayth the Authour of Perspectiue. And there∣fore peraduenture the spirite of sight, hath lyking in the sight of a myrrour. For it is somwhat fortified and streng∣thened: as it were tourned agayne to it selfe, by reflection or rebounding of the beames. Also the blacke of the eye comprehen∣deth all things by a corner: For whe∣ther the lymmes passe out of the blacke of the eye to things that be séene, eyther come to the blacke of the eye from the thing séene: alway they be ioyned in the middle or center of the black of ye eie, as it wer in a corner, corner wise, for yt cor∣ner is the touch, & méeting of two lines. And forsomuch as the lynes, by yt which the sight is shapen, are ioyned, and as it were cornered in the middle of ye blacke of the eye: Therefore the Philosopher saith well & properly, that the eye seeth all things by a corner. Also among all the parts of the bodye, the blacke of the eye most soonest feeleth: and for the no∣bilytie and preciousnesse of the complec∣tion thereof, it is most passible: And therefore it is soonest grieued and hurte, and worst and hardest and most daunge∣rous to be healed. And therefore kinde hath giuen thereto curtills or rimnes, and couerings of defence, that it may so the better put off win & without things that grieue. Of these properties and pas∣sions of the eyen, and of the blacke ther∣of, serch within, in a special treatise. li. 6. ¶Of the Eye lyddes. Cap. 8. THe Eye lyddes be couerings of the eyen, and are called in Latine Cilia, and hath that name of Celare to couer; For they hele & couer the eyen in saue∣gard, as saith Isidore lib. 11. cap. 2. The eye lyddes be in substaunce nowie and thinne, for easie mouing. For by theyr continuall mouing they put awaye the aire: and so they kéepe and defende the eyen without from grieuing and hurting of the aire. These eye lyddes are called Cilia in Latine, and Palpebre also: for Palpitando, as it were ofte féelyng: they moue alway: for they close vnselye to∣gethers, to féede the busie mouing, as saith Constantine and Isidore also. The eye lyddes be warded and kepte with rowes of hayre, to put off if anye thing fail or chaunce to come neere the eyen, when the eyen be open: and to sléepe the more quietly and surelye, while the eyen be closed therein. Also that they meanly may, cutting the ayre, quicken, kéepe, and saue the sight cleere & bright. Hetherto speake Isidore. cap. sup. Con∣stantine saith that the eye lyddes haue haire, not all straight, but somewhat bent and crooked. And that kinde hath wisely ordayned, to make them more a∣ble & stronger to close themselues, and to put off more mightely griefe & hurt if a∣ny fall. Also in growing, these eye lyds haue of kinde a certaine quantitie: and thereof the haire of them spreadeth not, neither wareth not, as the heate of the head, but they haue a certaine poynted proportion. And therefore Constantine sayth, that the eye lyds be not soft, ney∣ther full of poores, but rather harde, that the hayre that groweth thereon: may be hard and somewhat crooked and bend. And that they shoulde not growe too soone in length, as an hearbe yt grow∣eth in harde lande, is lyttle and vp∣right, and not as that hearbe yt grow∣eth within softe lande. Kinde giueth these eye liddes the beautye of the bo∣dye, and to helpe the eyen. And there∣fore Libe. 12. Aristotle sayth. That eue∣rye beast that gendereth onelye, hath haire on the eye liddes, and euerye foure footed beast, closeth the eye with the ouer lidde.
A bird in stéede of an eye lydde, hath a heler to couer and kéepe the sight:A cōtrary closing of the eye. and closeth ye eye with a web, ordained ther∣fore in the vttermost parts of the eye: & for that the kinde of the eye is watrie & moyst, therefore it néedeth such a keep∣ing. Also euery bird closeth the eye with the nether lydde. Also euery foure footed beast that wanteth eye lyddes, is féeble of sight, as it fareth in Fish, Hares, and such other, as Aristotle saith li. 4. &c. ¶Of the browes. Chap. 9. THe browes be called Supercilia, be∣cause they be set aboue the eye lids, and they be furnished with much haire to the intent to helpe the eyen, to put off the humour and sweate that com∣meth downe from the head. The middle space betwéene ye browes, bare without haire, is named Intercilium, as Isidore saith lib. 11. The browes helpe the eye lyds, as saith Constantine, to kéepe that no griefe nor hurt come to yt eyen from without. Also they adorne and make the person to seeme honest and faire. For no man is séemelye without browes. Browes haue a vertue hid, that sheweth outward the passions of the soule, as saith Aristotle. For when the browes be straight as lynes, they signifie wo∣manly softnesse, either lightnesse of head. Also hanging browes ouer measure, be∣tokeneth an enuious man. As Aristotle saith lib. pri. Also high browes & thicke of haire, signifie hardinesse. And euen-long browes with little haire, signifie towardnesse. Also if they be thick with long haire, somewhat shaddowing the sight, they betoken passing excesse of heat. Also if they be much fleshie, and lyttle haire, they signifie harde and blunt wit, for the colde that hath masterie in the principall members. Also, if they bée without haire they signifie corruption of yt bloud within: as it fareth in leprous men: either wasting of kindly humors, as in Ethykes and such other:Febris hec¦tica, or Hectica passio, the feauer E∣tick a kind of consūp¦tiō by cō∣suming of bloud. eyther stopping of the veynes of the humours, as it fareth in them that are gelded. And we see that they ware and grow against age, insomuch that they let the sight, ex∣cept they be cut or shorne, as saith Ari∣stotle. lib. 3. Also he saith there, that in them that vse much the seruice of Ve∣nus, hayre of theyr browes fayleth, or turneth white. That is for wasting of moysture, and for default of vertue, and for increasing of colde of the brayne: for too much drinesse bréedeth baldnese, and passing colde hoarenesse, as it is sayde afore. Of the Forehead. Cap. 10. THe Forhead is called Frons, & hath that name of the holes of the eyen, as Isidore saith. And the forhead shew∣eth outward the imagination and dispo∣sition of the thought by gladnesse or he∣uinesse. Constantine saith, that of verye truth and soothnesse, the forhead is aboue halfe rounde, and not full hard neither full softe. And that is néedefull that it be temperate yt it hurt not, neither griue the place that is nigh to the eyen. It is safely warded and couered with the skinne to defend it selfe, and to conti∣nue the other lymmes of féelyng, and to hight or adorne all the head. The ver∣tue and worthinesse of all the beast shi∣neth namely in the head. The Philosopher saith, that the for∣head of a man and woman, is the seate of shame and of worship. And that is for the highnesse of the vertue imagina∣tiue. By the vertue imaginatiue, things that be sorrowfull either gladde, seemely either vnséemelye, are sodaynly brought to the perseueraunce of reason, and there they be déemed. Also the forehead is the tower of defence of all the sinnewes that come downe from the brayve, to make the féelyng somewhat perfect. Within the hollownesse of the Fore∣head commeth downe sinewes to all the lymmes and instruments of the ne∣ther powers. By the seruice of which sinewes in the house of reason, is iudge∣ment made of all things that is felt and knowen. And therefore Gregory saith, That the forehead is the worthiest part of the vtter head, wherein is set the print
and token of the Crosse, that was som∣time token of payne and of torment, and now hath place in the forehead of Em∣perours. Then a forhead well disposed sheweth all things that be sayd afore: but and it be passing out of kinde & out of meane, it signifieth and figureth other things as the Philosopher saith. Aristo∣tle saith, liber. 1. If the forhead bée too much, it betokeneth slownesse, or selfe-will, that draweth to follye: and when it is meanely lyttle, it betokeneth good∣nesse of vertue. But when it is too high, and it were round without, it signie∣fieth excesse of cholar and of feruour, & sharpnesse: and ofte such be disposed to the passions of Cholera, as to frensie & madnesse. In comparison to other mem∣bers of the face, the forehead hath lyttle of flesh and of fatnesse. And Haly and Aristotle saith, that the cause thereof is: for that much flesh and superfluitie of fatnesse letteth wit and vnderstanding. And therefore too much flesh in the fore∣head with a manner shining and stret∣ching of the skinne, is a token of cor∣ruption, as it fareth in leprous men. Al∣so too much leannesse of the forehead, & riuelyng of the skinne, is a token of de∣fault of the braine within, and finall wa∣sting of the subtill humour, as it fareth in olde men, that be beyond helpe consu∣med, spent, or wasted by age, either sick∣nesse, and euill of long time. ¶Of the Temples. Cap. 11. THe Temples are called the mem∣bers of the head, that lye in the left and in the right side of the head, & haue that name, because of continual mouing. For they be changed as it were sundry times, as Isidore saith lib. 11. cap. 2. And Constantine saith, that they be bones set on either side of the eyen, the which bée somewhat soft and sinewy, and that is néedfull to make perfect the mouing of the eyen. For the spirite of féelyng is brought to the lymmes of the senses, by the temples and by sinews. And also, as the science & crafte of Anathoma mea∣neth, the spirite Vitalis is sent from the heart to the brayne by the temples, and by some organes of veynes. And so for gendring of sinewes of féeling, and for the organe and veynes of pulse, in the place of the temples, the temples be pas∣sible, and easier to be hurt and grieued: and therfore a beast striken in the place of the temples, dyeth lyghtly forthwith. For as Aristotle saith lib. 19. the smi∣ling that falleth vpon the boanes of the temples is deadly. For if they be woū∣ded, the beast is in perill And that chan∣ceth by reason that the humour that is in the Temples passeth hastely out for thinnesse of the bones. And the temples ware gray soone, for scarcitie of humour, and for drinesse that hath masterie ther∣in, and because they be able to be tour∣ned to the kinde of olde. Also the tem∣ples haue dennes and holes within, ther∣fore they receiue the humour that com∣meth from ye braine, & bringeth the eyen a sléepe. And if the said dennes and holes be pressed and wrong, then by trapping of the humour that is contained within the Temples, the teares fall out of the eyen. ¶Of the Eares. Chap. 12. THe Eare is the Instrument of hea∣ring, and hath this name Auris, of Haurio, to take and catch, and for because he taketh and catcheth ye voyce & sound, or because Greekes cal a voyce, Auden∣siden: and so the eares be called as it were Audes, hearers: for the voyce smi∣ting and comming to the windings of the eares, maketh sound and noyse: by which the eares take perfection of hea∣ring. The ouer most part of the Eare, is called Pinnula in Latine: Did men call it Pinnum, sharpe. Haec Isidorus. The substaunce of the very eare is griftly for two causes that are néedfull to defende the same, that nothing hurtfull fall into the hearing, as the eye lyddes defende them: and also to helpe the hearing. For when the voyce of the ayer smi∣ting, commeth to the gristle bone, there it is greatly holpe and then it entreth into the holes that be the proper instru∣ments of hearing.
Those holes be set in a stonie bone, in yt which sinewes be fastened that come frō the braine, and bringeth to the eares fée∣lyng and mouing, and bringeth lykenes of the voyce that is receiued in the holes to the iudgement of the soule. And these holes be wreathed and wound as a spin∣dle of a presse or vice: and that is, that colde aire should not enter too swiftlye, to grieue the inward celles or ye sinews, and to kéep that nothing hurtful fall in, to let the instrument or lymine of hea∣ring, as it is sayd in Pantegni. lib. 4. ca. 16. The eare is grieued in many man∣ners. For sometime by a postume, that is therein,A materie sabstance of the co∣lor of the braine. and so commeth Quitter out of the eare. Also by wormes that créepe into the holes of the eares, & by wms bred therein of corrupt humours and rotted: the token whereof, is itching within the cares and tickelyng, and the mouing of such wormes is felte. Also, the eare is grieued by a Wormes, lyke Malshaue, and by superfluitie of flesh, when euill humours be gathered therin, Also it is grieued by euill disposition of the sinewe that commeth and entereth into the eares, as it fareth of sounding, ringing, and such things that fall and come of wind in the skins of the brain, and be closed in part of the sinew Auri∣cularis. Also it is grieued by thicke hu∣mours that moue therein, and then the head is grieued with sound and noyse in the eares. Also the hering faileth, for de∣falt of vertue of hering, or by riueling & shrinking of ye sinew of feelyng, as it fa∣reth in old men. Also somtime hapneth deafenesse, when the childe is bred in the mothers wombe, when kinde is want∣ing and not sufficient to pearce an hoale in the lymme of hearing: and that is for default of it selfe, or els for that the matter is not aunswerable to kinde. Al∣so it is grieued by sharpe sicknesse, when cholaricke humours going vp to the braine, letteth the hearing. It helpeth such, if Cholera be purged by digestion. Wherefore it is sayd in Aphorism. If Cholera be wasted in deafe men, deafe∣nesse is taken away. Huc vs{que} Constā∣tinus. Also lib. 11. Aristotle sayeth. The lymme of hearing is full of the kindly spirite. For lyke as the kindlye spirite maketh the mouing of the pulse in the veynes, so it maketh in the eare the ver∣tue of hearing. And for that all thinges bée learned by the power of hea∣ring. And it is sayd there, that the making of the eares is an open kno∣wen web and containeth things, and is slender, and that for the subtiltie of the selfe hearing. Also the hearing is feebled in time of moyst complection: & name∣ly in them, that ofte serue Venus. And that through the disturbaunce of the spi∣rites, yt maketh the hearing perfect. For as Aristotle sayth, too oft seruice of Ve∣nus grieueth the body and the hart: Ha∣ly saith the same. Aristotle saith lib. 12. in a man the eares be kindlye set in the middle of the round head: for the eare heareth not onely straight one wayes, but rather all about on euery side. In foure footed beasts that haue ye head han∣ging downward to the earth, and body not reared vpright: the eares be in the ouerpart of the head, as it fareth in Or∣en, Asses, and Horses: and the eares of such beasts moue greatly, & that for the high place. And for yt they moue much toward diuers places, they take sownd & noise by much reboūding. Also Ari. saith there, that no beast that layeth egs, hath cares growing vpright without: But yet such beasts haue some priuy wayes. And also birds & fowles, which fly, haue none eares outward: neuerthelesse they haue a meane hole, and an open way, by the which they heare perfectly. AlsoConcer∣ning na∣ture. a∣mong all these beastes a mans eares moue least, and also be shortest in dimen∣tion of seituation and place: but to heare they be most: able and liuely: as it is sayd lib. pri, and that is through good∣nesse of complection. Wherefore if there be great excesse in the greatnesse of the eares of a man, with other signes and tokens agreeing thereto: it is a token of dulnesse, and of slow wit and vnder∣standing, as Aristotle saith. ¶Of the Nose. cap. 13. ISidore saith, that the Nose is the instrument of smellyng, & hath the
name of the nosethrills. And the nose∣thrills be so called, for that by them wee smell, sauouring and vitall things, and discerns betwéene swéets and stinking. And so because smellyng remaine to vs by them: they be called nosethrilles, as by the contrary, men blockish, carelesse, vnskilfull, and ignoraunt, be called, as it were without nosethrills. Constan∣tine saith, that the nose hath two holes, that is diuided a sunder by a manner gristle bone; and one of these two holes, commeth to the hollownesse of ye roofe of the mouth: and that other passeth to the skinnes of the brayne, to drawe the ayre to the brayne, and to bring the spi∣rite of féelyng to the nosethrils to make the sense of smellyng perfect. The first hole is néedfull to put off superfluities, that come from the brayne: & the other to draw spirite and breath, and to make perfect the smellyng. But properlye to speake, the instruments of smellyng, be two holow fleshy peeces, that hang from the nosethrills as it were scales that re∣ceiue first in themselues the aire that is drawen, and then sendeth it into the in∣ner part of the brayne. To these teates the vtter nosethrilles serue drawing in aire, and closing it within themselues, & making it subtil, that it be lightlyer and the more perfectlye changed and likened in the lymmes of smellyng. A sinewe commeth from the brayne, and entereth into the sayd teates of the nose, and gi∣ueth to them the spirite of féelyng, as saith Constantine. Then by meane of the ayre, the nose draweth in a fumositie that ioyneth it selfe to the spirite of fee∣lyng, the which spirite taketh lykenesse of that smoake, and presenteth it in the brayne to the gouernment of the soule. Therefore Constantine sayeth, that the nose is needfull to drawe in ayre tem∣perately, to cleanse and pourge ye braine by suiting places, and to temper ye kinde heate in the dennes and chambers of the braine: and also to giue perseueraunce to know smokes that be resolued & dis∣pearced from what substaunce it be, whe∣ther it smell swéetely or stinke seruent∣ly. And therefore lib. 12. Aristotle saith, the wit of smellyng is departed, as is the wit of hearing. And except it were so, it should not doe the acte and déede of smelling, and also the witte of smellyng should not be, but to draw in ayre in a beast yt hath a nose And this lim, yt nose, is in the midle of ye formost part of the head, and for that kinde setteth the nose in the middes of the three instruments of flyng, as it were the tongue in the ballaunce: for mouing of the breth that is needfull to the other wits. Then ga∣thers briefly by these-things aforesayd. yt the nose is a member of office, to knowe and drawe, and to put out ayre, to déeme smellyng, to clense and to purge ye brain of great superfluityes, to serue the spirit of feelyng, and by drawing of ayre to open and close the lungs. And therfore as Constantine saith, the nosethrills bée set not euen afore the lungs, but thwart ouer, that the colde aire that other whyle commeth to the lungs should not grieue them: and if dust or anye other thing entereth with the ayre, it should not an∣noye the lunges. And also as Gregorie super Cantica sayeth, The Nose be∣seemeth most the Face, insomuch, that if the nose lacketh, all the other parte of the face is more vngoodly and vnseeme∣ly. The disposition of the nose should be meane, so that it passe not due manner in length, breadth and highnesse. For if the nosthrills be too thin, either too wide: then by great drawing in of aire, they betoken fiercenesse of heart, and indig∣nation of thought. For by disposition of the members of the bodye, the affections and will of the soule are foreshewed & déemed, as it is sayd, Iu principio Phi∣losophiae: For the accidents of ye soule be often chaunged according to the acci∣dents of the body as white wine, taketh the lykenesse and coulour of a redde glasse, that it is poured in. And therefore meanes of disposition betokeneth means of goodnesse, as the Philosopher saith in libro suo In principio super Pronosti∣ca. Gaien saith that the nose is let of this dooing and working. And there hée sayeth also, that a sharpe nose, and hollowe eyen, &c. through strength of heate that wasteth moysture.
A token of death.And therefore if the nosethrilles ware sharpe, and the eyen déepe, in sharpe fea∣uers, it is a token of death. And that falleth to the nosethrils, as Galen saith, when the kinde heate is so féeble, that it maye not stretch and spreade it selfe into the vtter partes. And therefore it followeth, that the spirite & bloud maye not come together to the vtter partes. And then through colde that slayeth, the lymmes shrinke togethers, and the heart is altered, and then commeth sharpnesse of the nosethrils, that is the worst signe and token, and the deadliest, of them that haue the ague. Also the nose is let other while, as Constantine saith lib. 9. cap. 15. by euill disposition of the brayne: Sometime by stopping of the sinewe of smelling, sometime by fulnesse and re∣plection of stinking and corrupt humors in the teates of the nosethrilles. And somtime by bréeding of superfluitie and corrupt flesh in the holes of the nose, as in sniuelards and leapers. And this grie∣ueth not onely the smellyng: but also it decayeth the voyce. And sometime it is grieued by superfluities of humors, that flitte into the dennes and chambers of the brayne: and chat commeth of disso∣lution and dealyng of heate, either of too great constrayning & closing that com∣meth of colde: as it fareth oft in a reuine that falleth to the breast. And sometime by repletion and sharpnes of the veynes. Neuerthelesse bléeding at the nose, is speciall cause of dissolution of the euill in many sicknesses, & certayne token of recouery and of health, as it fareth in sharpe Agues, that ende and passe away ofte by such bleeding. And in Aphoris. it is saide, it is good for a woman De∣ficientibus mentruis, to bléede at the nose. ¶Of the Cheekes. cap. 14. Bucca. Faux. Gena.THe Chéekes be the neather partes of the eyen, wherof beginneth yt beard, as saith Isidore li. 11. cap. 2. For Genos in Gréeke, is Barba in Latine, in Eng∣lish a beard. The same parts are called Maxilla in LatineMaxilla, is ye bone of the cheeke. Mala, is the roūd vnder the eye., & haue that name of Malis, per diminutionem. Male be called high, and are partes set vnder the eyen, for defence of the eyen: and be cal∣led Male, either for that they wer round vpward to the eyen, which the Greekes call Mala, or els because they be aboue Maxillas, the chéekes: and so Maxilla is the Diminutiue of Male, as Praxil∣lus is the Diminutiue of Palo, as sayth Isidore. It requireth heedfulnesse,Addition. to vnderstande of Malae, Malae is the leure or space of the face, which is close to both sides the nose, from the roofe of the mouth, vnto the eye browes. Constantine saith, that ye chéeks be made and compounde within, of si∣newes and of bones. And the bones ther∣of be ioyned to the braine pan, yt which be therfore compound and made of ma∣nye diuers péeces, least if one haue anye hurt, the other should be grieued. And outwardly they be hot and fleshie, to tē∣per and asswage the colde of the bones, and of the gristles of the eares and of the nosethrills: and also to serue and succour by their heate the limmes of fée∣lyng that be all about them. And ther∣fore the chéekes be set vnder the eyen, to defend and saue them. They be set in the middle of the senses, for seruice of foode. They be hot and fleshie, to slake the colde lymmes of féelyng. They bée white and red to hight the face, & make chéere. The most fairenesse in man is in the chéekes, as saith Constantine, & in the chéekes the complection of man is most knowen. For if they bée much reddie, & medled with temperate white∣nesse,Sanguine hot and moyst. and not fat in substance, but mean∣lye fleshie, they betoken hotte and moyst complection, and temperatenesse thereof. But if they be of white colour, without meddelyng of rednesse,Fleame, cold and moyst. and in substaunce fat, and softe, and quauing: they betoken excesse of superfluitie of colde and moysture. And if they bée browne in colour,Cholar, hot and drye. either citrine or peo∣low, and thinne and leane in substance, they betoken mastery of too gret drought and heate, as it fareth in cholaricke folkes. And if they be as it were wan and in colour blewish,Melācho¦ly, colde and drye. and of lyttle flesh in substaunce, they betoken excesse and superfluitie of colde and drinesse: as it
fareth in them that be melancholy. And the cheekes shewe not onely the diuersi∣tie of complection, but also the qualytie of affection and will of the heart. For after the affections of the heart, by so∣daine feare, either ioye, they were so∣daynly pale or red. This saith Constan∣tine. ¶Of the beard. Cap. 15. COnstantine saith, that the beard isBarba. the seemlines and ornament of mans face: and so appearing and couering the cheekes, in one part it beautifieth, and in another it helpeth: for by the hairinesse thereof, it defendeth the sinewes of the chéekes from colde aire. And therefore the beard is a needfull feature for the cheekes, and the beard is a token of ver∣tue and strength of kindly heate. And this is ye cause why a man hath a beard, and not a woman: for a man is kindly more hot then a woman. And therefore in a man the smoake, that is matter of haire, increaseth more than in a woman: and for that kinde sufficeth not to wast that smoke, it putteth and driueth it out by two places, in the head and in the beard. And therefore sometime women hot & moyst of complection haue heards, and in the wise men of colde and drye complection, haue lyttle beards, and ther∣fore on men that be gelded, growe no beards: for they haue lost the hot mem∣bers that should bréed the hot humour & smoake, the matter of hayre. And so it followeth, that thicknesse of the beard is signe and token of heate and of substan∣tiall humour, and of strength, and a cer∣taine assay to know difference betwéene men and women. In children grow no beards, though they be hot and moyst: for the superfluitie of the sumositie, that is, the matter of hayre, pas∣seth and turneth into the waxing and fée∣ding of children. Huc vsque Constant. And Aristotle sayth li. 19. that ye haires of the bearde, lyke as the haires of the head, in the disposition thereof, presenteth and sheweth the qualytie of the vapour or fat humour, of the which they be gen∣dred: for if the humour be smokie, hot, and drye, the haire as well of the beard as of the head, shall be crispe and curled. And that falleth, because they passe by two contrarye wayes: For the earthie parts moue toward the neather partes, and the heate moueth toward the neather parts: and so the haire is curled and crispie for feeblenesse thereof. And that happeneth through scarcitie of moysture, and multitude and plentie of the earthy part, and so by great heate they be cris∣pie and curled. But if the vapour be ful moyst, the hayre shall be softe and long: for the humour runneth making slippe∣rie till it come to the haire. And there∣fore the haire of the head & of the beard of them that dwell in Thracia,Thracia, a Region in Europe, in vvhich standeth Constan∣tinople, same time called By∣zantium. be softe and smoothe: For their complection is moyst, and the arye that they dwell in is moyst. And contrariwise it hapneth in men that haue drye brayne, and dwel in hot regions and countreyes, for the dry∣nesse of the ayre that they dwell in. And he saith, That the coulour of the hayre of the bearde, chaungeth by chaun∣ging of age: and therefore in age the beard wereth hore, for féeblenesse of heat and plentie of colde. And sometime the hayre of the beard falleth away, through withdrawing of heate and of moysture, as it feth in men that be gelded, and sometime through corrupt humours, as it fareth in lepers. For as Aristotle sayth, The fallyng of haire,As ye Bay tree, the Boxe, and Holme, with o∣thers of that kind. is lyke to the fallyng of leaues of trees, and the cause heereof is, withdrawing of hot hu∣mours and fat: and therefore the leaues of trées in which is fat humour fall not. Huc vsque Arist. lib. 19. ¶Of the Iawes. Cap. 26. ISidore sayth Libro. 11. That Man∣dibulae the Iawes,Mandibu¦la ae. Gingiua. ae. haue that name Mandibulae of Manducare to cate. Of the iawes, one is the ouer iawe, in which the ouer teeth be fixed: another is the neather iawe, in which the neather teeth be rooted. And the ouer iawe hath this propertie, that in euery beast it is stedfast and moueth not, except the Cro∣codile,Crocodile this defor¦med beast is bred in Aegipt, & cōmon in the riuer Nilus that moueth the ouer iaw against kinde of all other beasts, and holdeth the neather iawe still, and moueth it not, as saith Aristotle lib. 3.
The Iawes be made and composed of diuers hard bones, bound and knitte togethers with diuers sinews & strings. And that is needefull for the centinuall mouing, and for neede to open and close, as sayth Const. And they be as it were two milstones, that continually to bruse and grinde the meate, moue themselues thereto: and so they serue all the body of meate. The iawes be dypped about and heled with fleshly perceils and sin∣newie: which are called Gingiue, and that is the more to strength the putting and setting of the téeth in the depth of the iawes, and for to serue the sinewes of the teeth of foode, and to slake ye cold∣nesse of the teeth. And Isidore saith, they haue that name Gingiue, a gignendis dentibus, of gendring of teeth. For the teeth be bred and nourished in them, and yet they be made to fasten the téeth, and are also needfull to heale the teeth, for if ye téeth wer bare they should be lothsome and not faire. Also they be beclypped a¦bout with ye skins of the lips, & that doth kind, for they shuld not only help ye teeth and the chéeks within, but also to defend them from outward griefes: and so it hapneth that the gummes be corruptAluding vnto the vnclean∣linesse of men. in beasts, sometime by retchlesnesse, & some time they be infect and corrupt by rooted humours, and then they bréede diuers griefes and diseases, as strench, falling out or wagging of the teeth. ¶Of the Lips. Cap. 17. ISidore saith, that Labia the Lyps,Labia. haue that name of Lambendo, to lyeke. The ouer lyp is called Labium in Latine, and the neather is named La∣brum. Constantine sayth, that the lyps be néedefull, for they defende to hele and couer the téeth. And they be also sinewy, and be mate of diuers strings, that so they maye be more able to seele and to moue. For to the forming of the voyce they open and close themselues: For if they be cut off, eyther let by stopping, by shrinking, or else by riuelyng, wordes maye not bee perfectlye pro∣nounced. Also the lyppes are softe and fleshie: and that is néedfull to temper the hard∣nesse of the téeth. For the teeth and the sinewes of them which be cold of kinde, should bée too much grieued with ayre that is colde, if they were not defended by the couering of the lyppes. Also the vtter parts of the lippes be ruddye, and that happeneth, as Constantine sayeth, through subtiltie of the skinne of the lyppes, which casilye receiue some deale a ruddye qualytie of a sanguine beate, and therefore the ruddinesse of the lyps, is a token of cleane & pure complection, without medling of troubled bloud, and of the inner vertue: as contrary wise, wannesse of lyppes is token of defaulte of vertue and kindly heate. Also the lyppes be thinne in substaunce, to be the more plyaunt to mouing, and the more able to put in, and for to cut the ayre, that when it is drawen so darnly, it griue not with chilnesse, the inner parts. And therefore the lippes put themselues agaynst the colde ayre, and pureth and cleanseth it, that it maye the more sweéetelye and profitablye bée drawen inwarde. All this sayeth Constan∣tine. Aristotle liber 12. about the ende, sheweth lyke properties, where he saith, That mans lyppes be softe and fleshie, and may be seuered and departed for pre∣seruation & keping of the téeth, & for to be equall to pronounce a word. And there∣fore the lyppes haue trouble vse & ser∣uice, as the tongue, that is made to taast moysture and to speake, as Aristo∣tle expressely sayth, and therefore it née∣deth that the lyppes be moyst. For if the creation of the lyppes were not of such disposition, the tongue might not reach to the lippes to speake, and to pro∣nounce many manner of letters. For some letters be pronounced by smiting of the tongue, and some by closing of the lips. And therfore making of the lyps is needefull, that the working of kinde should be best. And therefore mans rsh is verye softe, for man is of good fée∣lyng and taaste, more than other beastes. All this telleth Aristotle Li∣bro. 12. Then consider thou, that the lyps be
comely lyniments and couerings of the téeth, to kéepe and saue, and temper the hardnesse of the téeth, by their softness, & to shape the voyce or speach of al lettrs; to put off colde and hot aire, and to ma∣nifest the default and strength of vertue; by rednesse and palenesse of them, and be the proper limmes of vertue interpre∣tiue, to expresse the passions of the soule, that is to wit, hatred and friendship, so∣row and woc. And therefore it is sayd, that quaking of lyps in frensie and other sharpe sicknesses-betokeneth death, as it is said in Pronosticis and this sufficeth at this time touching the lyppes. ¶Of the Chin. Cap. 18. Mentum.THE Chinne is called as if were the foundation of the iawes, for that they spring and grow of the chin, as Isidore saith. The shinne hath two boanes, as Const. saith, and these said bones be ioy∣ned togethers in the middle, where the small téeth are pight, that be Quadrupli and Pares, and the endes of these bories be departed, and haue two forkes or twists: that one is sharp, and the sharp∣nesse thereof is pight therein as a man∣ner bonde, which bonde stretcheth from the side of the temples: and therby ope∣neth and closeth the other forke is great and rounde, by the roundnesse whereof the chin is soft as saith Const. For this member is néedfull for the spring of the iawes, and for the fastening of the nea∣ther téeth, & for kindly or spéedie closing and opening of aire: and is also coue∣nable for the complection of the face, and for the perfect finishing of the face. And if the chinne be proportionate to the forhead, it maketh faire and séemely all the face. All this saith Const. In the chin of a beast is the most strength for the hardnesse of the bone, and for ye hard compaction of the sinewes, and for strong rooting of the téeth. And therefore beasts suffer not lightly to be handeled by the chinne: For if their chinne be broke, all theyr cruelnesse and fircenesse faileth, as their weapon were lost. As it is written 1. Regum. cha. 17.1 Sa. 17.24 I caught him by ye lavve, & smote them and slew him, & so thy seruaunt slevvt he Lea and ye Beare, &c. Os. Dauid brake ye beares chin, and deliuered the shéepe out of his mouth &c. By touching the chin of a man is token of loue and of trust. 2. Reg. 16. Ioab held the thin of Amasa, as though he would kisse him, &c. Of the mouth. chap. 19. THE mouth is called Os in Latine, for that thereby we put in meate, as it were by a doors, and put out spittle and breath: either for that out of the mouth words come, as it were but at a doore, as sayth Isidore. And also Isidore sayth, That the mouth is the messenger of the soule.The bene¦fit of con∣ce, is speech. For we tell out by the mouth, what we conceiue beforeth soule and in thought. Gregorie sayth, That the mouth is closed & compact with ma∣ny kéepings and wardes, as with téeth, and lippes, that by so many meanes the witte and the soule may determine and abuise first what to speake, ere that anye word be spoken, that the word may ra∣ther passe by the lim then by the tongue. Constantine saith, That the instru∣ment of the mouth is néedfull to receiue feeding and nourishing. For no member in a beast is nourished, but it receiue first nourishing at the mouth. For the mouth first receiueth meate, and chew∣eth and seasoneth it, and maketh it able to digestion, and sendeth it to the sto∣macke, and therefore kinde maketh the mouth moyst within, to temper and chaunge the easilyer the drynesse of the meate by moysture of the mouth. Also kinde maketh the mouth sinewie and meanelye harde and hollowe. Sinewie to féele the easilyer the sauour of the meate: Hard, that it be not grieued and hurt with roughnesse of the meate: And neuerthelesse it is not made too hard, but meanelye harde: least the sense of taast shoulde be lost by too greate hardnesse. The mouth is hollowe and round with∣in, that the meate taken may moue the easilyer hether and thether, and that breath may passe by the téeth without let. Also the mouth is néedfull to drawe the aire and breath. For the aire and breath drawen in by the mouth is chan∣ged, purified, and made subtile in the hollownesse thereof.
And is so sent by the organe of ye lungs, to coole the heart: without coolyng wher∣of, the heart shuld be burnt and destroy∣ed by too great heate. Also the mouth is néedfull to shape the voyce, and for that intent the roofe of the mouth is hollow, that the doubling of the tongue, maye moue the easelyer to shape the voyce, & moue vp and downe. Also it is profitable to put out and east off the great super∣fluities, that come of the braine to the lunges: the which superfluities, when they be cast out by the dore of ye mouth, in the heart and the braine of the beast, the spirite vitall, doth his office more spéedelye. Also it is profitable to dis∣charge the féeding members of superflu∣itie: for when the stomacke is charged with rawe humours, kinde working by the vertue of out putting, cleanseth the stomacke by the office of the mouth, as saith Constantine and Galen super il∣lud Aphoris, saith: In spewings & pur∣gations that be hastely made, if they be made as they should, they profit & helpe: and the contrary falleth, if they are not made as they shoulde. Constantine in viatico saith, that the mouth is grieued sometime by forenesse and sicknesse of the lymmes that be nigh thereto, and is grieued with pimples & blaynes, and with whelkes and botches, and with such other, and with corrupt humours that fall to the mouth from other places. And if the mouth be red and some deale browne, and hot, and aking, and burn∣ing: the matter is of bloud and Chole∣ra. And if it be much blacke, it is the worse and the more grieueus, and the more to dread least it bréede a canker. It happeneth that totches bréede in the mouths of sucking children: the which totches come of sharpnesse of milke and of corruption thereof. Hetherto speaketh Constantinus in viatico, &c. ¶Of the Teeth. cap. 20. Dentes DEntes in Gréeke be called Edentes, as it were cleauing & diuiding all that commeth betwéene them, as sayth Isid. And Const. saith, that the téeth be a cer∣taine manner of plants sticked and pight by rootes and mores in the bones of the chéekes & of the chin. And Con. saith that a man hath .xxxii. téeth: sixtéene be set in the chéeke bones, foure of them be set in the formost part, and be called Pares;Pares. and Quadrupli also. And these téeth bée broad and sharpe, & Phisitions call them forcutters; for they be able to carue all thing, and all thing that they reteyne, they brus and bite asunder. And there be other two that are called Camni. & they be set beside the téeth that are na∣med Quadrupli,Quadru∣pli. and they be sharp in the endes, and be able is bruse and grynde harde incates. And Isidore saith, That they are called Canini, Boundish, to the lykenesse of houndes téeth. And houndes with the sayd téeth gnaw bones  and be stronger and sharper, longer and roun∣der, than the téeth that be called keruers: and therefore some men call them the necke of a maide, and what the first téeth may not kerue and breake with biting, they betake it to these téeth, as to ye strō∣ger to bruse & to bite. And there be other x. in either part of the ouer iawe, that he set beside the keruers: and these be broad and great, and they be Molares, grinders, and they be apt to grind meat, for the thing that is bitten and broke by the foretéeth in the mouth, commeth be∣twéene the grinders, as saith Isid. Then in the ouer iawe are xvi. téeth: foure of which are called Quadrupli and Pares, keruers, and two; which be called Cani∣ni,Canini. houndish, and x. which be called, Mo∣lares,Molares. grinders: and so many be set in the nether iawe, or in the chin. Then touch∣ing their number and office, the téeth bée parted and diuided in foure manners, for some be keruers, which be foure, two a∣boue, & two beneth: & these be first séene. And some are Pares, & they be foure, two aboue & two beneath, & be set in eyther side beside ye kerners, & touch each other. And some be called houndish, which are foure: two aboue & two beneath, striking each other. Some are called grinders, which be xx. ten aboue and as many be∣neth, & they touch each other, & grinde al∣way as milstones, ye meate yt the other téeth began to kerue. And all these bée pight and rooted in the iawes, & be some∣what forked and twisted, but diuer slye.
For the formost which are called Qua∣drupli and Pares the foretéeth, haue but one little forke or twist, or one roote, Ca∣nini the grinders haue thrée forkes or foure, as sayth Constantine. The qua∣lytie of a man and of a woman, by com∣mon skil, sheweth ye number of téeth: for a man hath mo téeth then a woman, as sayeth Constantine and Isidore. Also the téeth be diuided and knowen by age: for Aristotle lib. 2. saith. That téeth in olde men and beasts be generally black and not sharpe: as it fareth in hounds, whose age is knowen by the téeth. For young hounds haue white téeth and sharpe, and olde the contrarye. Out of this generalitie Aristotle exceptoth the téeth of horses, that ware white by age. Also there it is sayd, it néedeth to know, that beasts with many téeth ioyned to∣gethers, be of long life: and beasts with few téeth set thin and a sunder, be of short life. Also there it is said, that eue∣ry foure footed beast, that getteth & gen∣dereth a beast lyk to it selfe, hath téeth. Also mans foreteeth falleth in youth, and not the chéeke téeth, and that happeneth perchaunce for this cause, for féeblenesse of the forkes and twists, and of ye rootes: and for the contrary cause, the chéeke téeth fall not so soone. And it is generall in other beasts, that there fall not anye tooth, before such other spring and grow in their stéede. Also Aristotle li. 12. saith, that euery beast that lacketh téeth in the ouer iawe, is drye and of earthie kinde: and euery beast that hath téeth in ye ouer saw, is lyke to fatnes. Also li. 13. he saith, kind doth not make any thing, but that that is best & most perfect. And therefore it néedeth that yt matter of carthie part draw in some beasts toward ye ouer part and turne into téeth, mans haire, and feathers, and in some beasts into bornes, and therefore a beast with hornes, maye not haue téeth in either iawe. Also li. 16. he saith, Onely téeth among other bones grow while the beast dureth: and that is knowen in téeth that ouergrowe, and by leaning and bowing & side, touche each other: and the cause of the growing of them is for the working of them. For if they should not grow, they should bée soone wasted. And therefore the téeth of beasts that eate much, and haue no great téeth, be soone brused and wasted: and therefore kinde wisely gathereth ye téeth togethers for age and ende, els if lyfe dured a thousand yeare, alwaye shoulde grow téeth more and more. And so li. 2. he saieth, Téeth that growe within the gums, growe not in men and women, but after twentie yere, and in some wise they grow in women after fortie yeares with full fore ach. Also li. 19. he sayeth, sharpe téeth be néedefull to bite first the meate, for it néedeth to bite rather then to grinde: and therefore they growe the sooner, for that they be lesse: for the lesse thing groweth by heate sooner than the more thing. Also the heate of milke ma∣keth téeth grow soone: and therfore chil∣dren that sucke better milke haue teeth sooner. Also he sayth there, that the fore∣téeth grow in a thin bone and a féeble, & therefore they sayle soone. Hetherto spe∣keth Aristotle. And Constantine there to saith in viatico particula. 2. The help of the téeth is great, and with helpe, a great hightinesse of the body, that is to vnderstand, if the téeth be not fore: for in sore téeth the working is corrupt. And the passions of the téeth be diuers, which part of diuersitie is openlye knowen to the sight, as chill, rottennesse, stinking, breaking and brusing, holes mouldring or fallyng, watring, and such other. The part not apparing, is hidde, as when the téeth ake sore, and yet they séeme to be in good case without. The cause of such aking is humors that come downe from the head, eyther vp from the stomacke, by meane of fu∣mositie, either els by sharp humours and beating in the gums: and then is sore ach felte with leaping and pricking, through the mallyre and sharpnesse of the humours. And if the ach come of the head, the head is heauie, and aketh in the face, that commeth of red bloud, or of Cholera, that commeth downe to the rootes of the téeth. And if the ach come of the stomacke, the aking and paine is felt in the stomacke, and ther goeth & burst∣eth out continuall belching. Also some∣time téeth be pearced with holes & some∣time
by worms they be changed into ye∣low colour, greene, or black∣al this com∣meth of corrupt and euill humours, that come downe of euill meates by the sin∣newes to the strings of the téeth. Also sometime the téeth shake and wag, and that is for humours that be in ye rootes of the téeth. For if the humdre be sharp, néedes the teeth shall haue hoales, and stinch and matter shall bréede iu them. And if Wormes be the cause, full sore ache is bred: for they eating, pearce in∣to the subtill sinew, and make the téeth to ake, and grieue them very sore, by fore humors within either without, that infecteth the sinewes of feelyng, and sée∣meth sometime to sléepe, because of great colde, as by snow or yce, that conseray∣neth the sinewes of the téeth. Also some∣time, the téeth fall-out, because of great moysture that looseth the striuges of the téeth. And sometime by great drynesse, as it tareth in olde men, whose téeth fall out through withdrawing of moysture of feeding. Constantine rehearseth these and many other passions of the téeth, but these shall suffice. Then vnderstande, that the téeth be rooted and sticked in the iawes, as in their preper ground & soun∣dation, and by reson of colde hauing ma∣sterie in them, they be whiter than other bones, and for that they be hard, they be not easely hurte. The substaunce of the téeth eeleth not, for they haue not powce of féelyng, as sayth Constantine. And therefore a broken tooth aketh not: yet it is sayd, that a tooth is grieued and aketh, through the sinew of feelyng, that in the roote thereof, is often hurt and grieued. Teeth be bound within with si∣newes; and téeth passe the bounds of the flesh; and they feele, no sorenesse within themselues; and be closed with lrye, that they be not scene: it is vncomely when they be seene, except it be in laughing: And the ouer and the neather come ofte togethers, and touche each other: and though the neather moue sometime, the ouer be stedfast and moue not, and be ordinatelye ordeinos, speciallye to shape the voyce of word and of speaking, and they serue all the body. Of the tongue. Cap. 21. THe tongue is called Lingua in latin,Lingua. and hath that name of Lingere, to lyeke: for it liketh meate. Or by the tongue, the sounde of speaking bindeth words: for as a weast tepreth strings, so the tongue smiteth the euery, as saith Isidore. The tongue is the instrument of taast and of speaking, as saith const. and is made and composed of soft flesh, full of hoales lyke a spounge. It is sin∣newie, for feelyng and moouing: it is ful of holes, that the sauyour: may pearce and come the rasilyer to the sinnewes, that make the taast, to the which ome ma∣ny veynce full of bloud, therefore it is red in colour. All this worketh it by the same skinnes that close the space of the mouth and oofe acue: and on the ouer side the tongue is all seene, on the nether side it is seene to the strings, by ye which it is fastened to the chinne, and so the rootes and mores of the tongue, and the subtill sinewes by the which it laketh feelyng and mouing of the spirites, be hid and vnseene. As Const. saith, in some the tongue is constrayned more than it needeth; insomuch that it maye not moue into diuers parts, therefore it nee∣deth to at the strings to haue the larg∣er mouing be all the space within the mouth. The tongue is subiect to haue many passiers and grieses, as in the sub∣stance therof, & in the sinewes, that cme, theet & therefore in Viatico Cons.saith, The tongue of a beast is seth quiet mo∣uing, & the vse of speking, the cause ther∣of commeth of defalt of  of ma∣ni ye braine by stap∣ping of ye wires, by ye which, ye vertue of feeling passeth: somtime of a postume, either of vlains ye rise on ye tongue: som∣time by yeper defaults in ye substance of ye tongue, as euill cōplection; by ye which ye feeling  stpered by too gret heat or colde, or monsture, or drinesse, or a po∣stume, or wolting, and such other. And if the tongue be grieuouslye swollon, it betokeneth encosse of heate: and if it be white, it betokecneth coldness; & if it be soft, it betokeneth moysture: and if it be drie & rough, it betokeneth drinesse. And all such things, let the vse of the tongue,
or take away all the vse or part therof. If the tongue seemeth whole and with∣out wemme, and the speach fayleth: the default commeth of the braine, or of the sinewes of feeling stopped. Some∣time loosing of speach commeth by loosing of wit, as in phrensie and Litargi.Madnesse and for∣getfulnes. Hi∣therto speaketh Constantine in viatico. In Pantegni, Constantine assigneth other defaults of the tongue, where hée sayth, That there ryse broad blaines spread into the vtter skinne of the tongue, as it faceth in children that suck euill milke: And these blaines be some∣time white, and sometime blacke. And sometime happeneth a Postume in the tongue, that maketh it greatly swollen, and passeth out of the mouth: and that Postume is called, outlawing of the tongue is called. And another Postume of the tongue Rana, a Frogge. For be∣cause it is bread as a Frogge vnder the tongue, and taketh awaye and benim∣meth the vsage of the tongue. And so it is called a dumbe Frogge, for the effects and déed Also there is an other postume of the tongue, full of bloud, whereby all the tongue is gréeued, and the speath and tast is le. By gleamie humours, that haue maistery in ye tongue, ye sence of tast is corrupted and chaunged so that sweet things séeme bitter and wearise: and contrariwise as sayth Galen. Also Ga∣len sayth, that sometime it happeneth, that the tongue stuffeth and flamereth by too much moisture when the stringes of the tongue may not stretch and spread into the utter parts thereof for too much moysture, as it fareth in dronken men, that stamer when they bée soe much in moisture in the braine. Therefore Ga∣len sayth, that kindlye stamering men,  through too much moisture of the braine, or else through too much moi∣sting of the tongue, or for both. Also that superfluitie of moysture is the cause why that some men maye not readilye pronounce all letters: but sometime sowne it for I, other C, for L, as it fa∣reth in children that spel and corrupt ma∣ny letters, and cannot pronounce them, All this sayth (Galen er Aphoris. lpod. . Ratteling men moyste: for too much moysture of such men, which is cause of ratteling, commeth to the stomacke, and maketh oft the bow∣ells slipper, and bréedeth Diarrian,Diarrian, Dialym. that is the flire of the wombe, as sayth Ga∣len. Also in Paotegi, Constantine saith, that in the sides of the stringes of the tongue be some veines that serue the tongue of spittle, and these veines spring out of the beginning of the tongue. And of these veines come a flumatike moy∣sture, that is called spittle, and so Phisi∣tions call them the veines of spittle, and the hours of spittle. The beginning of the tongue, wherof the veines come and spring, is white kirnell flesh, and brée∣deth spittle, that moysteth the tongue, and tempereth drinesse of mead in∣treaseth the iuyce thereof, as it shall bée sayd after. Aristotle. b. 6. saith, that some sheep haue white vaines vnder: ye tongue, and they haue white lambes: and some haue blacke vaines, and they haue black lambes. Then galyer briefly of that is said, that the tongue is a substance  bloudie, and holow, and receiueth the in∣fluence of spirit, and is hot and moist in complection, and slender and euerlong, in disposition shapen as a swoorde in the formost part, redde in coulour, set in a holow & moist place, to moue easily, to fore the speach And voice, to know sa∣uiours, to moist the month by emission of spittle, & to tell the mouing of thoughtes of the soule. And it is closed with ye téeth and lips, as with double wal, and in ma∣ny beasts concerning the forme, it hath a diuers shape. For in some beasts it is short & great, & in some contrary wise. They that haue great tongues heuie ho∣low or sad voice, and contrariwise: and some beasts haue tongues meltineable & healthful, which commeth either of the goodilesse of kinde & of some other hidden prope, as the tongue of a hounde, as sayth Cassioderus: and some Hane slai∣eng tongues & venemons, threnath mal∣lise & woodnesse of the humour hath mastery therin, as ye tongues of serpents, adders, dragōs, & of a wood hound, whose biting is most venemous, his tongue hāeth alway without ye mouth, & droppeth veill, corrupteth & inketeth ye water, in
which it falleth in, and who that drink∣eth of that water shall become mad, as sayth Auicen and Constantine in trac∣tu de venenesis animalibus & venenis. And Aristotle sayth, that the tongues of Adders be blacke, wan, or reddish, speck∣led, sharpe, and in moouing most swifte. And that happeneth through the mad & venemous humour, the which so swiftly moueth the tongue, that one tongue sée∣meth forked and twisted. And though the tongue of an Adder, that is called Aspis in Latine, is full of deadly venim while it liueth in the bodie of the Adder:Aspis a ser¦pēt whose dead tongue gi¦ueth war∣ning of venim. yet when it is taken from the bodie of the Adder and dried, it looseth the venim: and by it is knowne when venim is present. Therefore in the presence of ve∣nim such a tongue vseth to sweat. Ther∣fore such a tongue is néedfull and profi∣table, and is accounted precious among treasures of kings, though it were vene∣mous, &c. ¶The properties of Spittle. Chap. 12. THe spittle is a flumatike humour, bread in the kindly vaines of the tongue, as sayth Constantine. Spittle is kindly moist and white in coulour, and by continuall mouing of the tongue, and the spirituall instruments it is fomie, wearish, and sauourlesse. For it is able to take all manner fauour. For if it had a certeine sauour of his owne, it shoulde not receiue other sauour. Also Constan∣tine saith, that the spittle is meane be∣twéene the skill of tast, & the thing that is tasted. For nothing is tasted by the wit of tast, but if the sauour thereof bée presented by the spittle in the limme of tast. Therefore the Spittle is chaunged and lykened by the sauour of the thing that is taasted. Constantine sayth, that Spittle is néedfull to moyst the mouth, that the mouth be moysted by the bene∣fit of the spittle: and also to prepare the first digestion. For drie meate taken in the mouth, may not be sent profitablye in the stomack, except it be wet first, and moysted by the spittle. For without help of spittle, a drie thing may not be easily swallowed. Also the Spittle is profita∣ble to either verding of superflutie of ye braine, and of the lungs. For such sni∣tings made hard or clawmie with heate or with colde: cannot so castlye be spit∣ted and pot out by the doore of ye mouth, but if they be first made able and supper to passe out by helpe of the humour of spittle.Of fasting spittle. Also the spittle of a man fasting: hath a manner strength of priuie infec∣tion. For it gréeueth and hurteth the bloud of a beast, if it come into a blee∣ding wound, & is medled with ye bloud, as in Tractatu de venenis the foresayd Authours tell. And that peraduenture is, as saith Auicen by the reason of rawnes. For rawe humour medled with bloud, that hath perfect digestion, is contrarye thereto in his qualitie, and disturbeth the temperance therof, as Authours say. And therefore it is that holy men tell. & Pli∣mus sayth. That the spittle of a fasting man slayeth Serpents and Adders, and is venim to venemous beasts, as sayth Basilius super illud verbum in exemo∣ron:Mans fast¦ing spitle doth kill serpents. He shall bruse thine head, and thou shalt lie in a waite vpon his héeles and steppes Gen. 3. Also as Galenus super Aphotis. sayth, In the spitting of rawe humour & filth, is isik and fluxe bread: And where the spittle is held and with∣drawen, men die, &c. Tisike men alway cough because of the Botch, of the lungs. And by spitting they discharge themselues of the matter, of the botch of the lungs, as well as they may. But yet death followeth, when they may not spit. For spittle helde and kept in with matter, stoppeth the vaines of the holes within: and so men yt haue the Tisicke be stifled and die. Also as Galen sayth in li. Gil. betwéene. Sputum and Saliuam, there is difference. For spittle that is called Saliua in Latine, is the super fluitis of kindly féeding of the breast, and gendereth in good digestion. And the spittle that is called Sputum, commeth to the breast by diuerse kindly courses, and by courses that be not kind∣ly, and is not alwaie digested and defi∣ed. And therefore Sputum, that Spittle in sharpe Agues, and Postumes, if it passe easilye with tokens of digestion,
and without trauailous cough, it betoke∣neth strength of vertue, and failing of the euill: and it is sayde in Pronostre. and againe ward. Therefore Golen and other Commentours there tell, that in eyther spitting wée shall take héede generallye of thrée things: of Coulour, small, and Sauour: For if the spittle be blo in co∣lour,Bloo, is a bliewish rawnes of the hu∣mour. it betokeneth hurting and grieuing of the heart, and of the spirituall mem∣bers. And if it be redde, meddeled with rotten bloud, it betokeneth Botches of ye lungs. And if it be stinking in sauour it betokeneth corruption within. Also if it bée bitter either sowre in sauour, it betokeneth that corrupt humours haue mastery in the stomacke & in the lungs, or else in the substaunce of the tongue. Also much spittle is a token of flumatik complection: therefore in olde men is much great spittle and thicke, gleamye, and reaming, after the strength of colde, and wasting of the substanciall moy∣sture. Of the voice, Chap. 23. Vox. A Uoice is a very thin smiting of the ayre, and shapen with the wrest of the tongue, as saith Isidore & Priscian. The instruments of the voyce be many as sayth Constantine, that is to wit, the lungs, the arterye strings, the throate, and lidde of the organe, the mouth, the téeth, the lippes, and the tongue. For without the seruice of these, the voyce is not shapen. And some of these receiue the voice as the lungs, with the recepta∣cles, organe, and pipes thereof. And some order the voire, as the lidde of the wo∣sonThe a∣taunce of the thro as Constantine sayth, that maketh the voice faire & strong, when it is pro∣portionate to other instruments: and it tempereth the aire that commeth in, and letteth and kéepeth that the ayre passe not too soone out; and saueth and letteth the throat, and the organe from dust, that would fall therein. Some send out the voice, as the pipes of the lungs and the organe, that be as it were pipes: the which if they bée lyght, cleane, tempo∣rate, and smooth: they make the voyce euen and temporate. And if they bée rough, and ouer measure broade, ey∣ther straight, or else, too much awrye, they make the voice ouer sadde or slen∣der sowne or vneuen. Then to shape the voice, the aire is receiued in the leaues of the lungs, and by ordinate moouing of ye organe, the aire commeth out of the mouth: and so by swifte mouing of the air and by stretching of the instru∣ments of the voice, the sownd is made; the which in the mouth of a beast is brought forth, and shapen with the wrest of the tongue, is called of wise men a voice. Hue vsque constantinns is Pan∣te  liber 4. Aristotle sayth, that the lungs be the first receiuers of the voice. And therfore euerye beast that is with∣out lungs, is without voice and speach. Speaking is distinguishing of voice. And so euery beast that hath no tongue vntyed, as he sayth-Ibideni. ées and Flyes haue no voice,Flies haue none o∣ther soūd but by theyr vvings. but they make & noisy in flieng, stretching, and drawing, two wings by the aire, that falleth be∣twéene the bodie and the wings, and so doe long Flies. And by experience they make no sownd sitting, but onely flieng, but a Frogge hath a proper voice, and his tongue is applyed to the mouth a∣fore, And that part of the tongue that is nigh to the pipe of the lungs is vntied. And therefore he hath a proper voice, and it is called coax in Latine. And maketh not that, but in the water onelye, and namely in the male in time of bréeding, when he calleth the female by a voyce knowne. The Frogge multiplyeth the voice, when he putteth the neather iawe into the water, and stretcheth the ouer iawe. And by stretching of the two iawes, they make a noyse and voice. And for the greate force of stretching, theyr eyen shine as Candles. They sing and crye more by night then by day. For then is the time of theyr, gende∣ring. Also there he sayth, that small birds crie and chatter more then great, and namely in time of gendering: for then is greatest chattering and crieng of birdes. And he sayth, that the Cocke croweth ofte after battaile and victo∣rye. Also it is so among birds and foules,
that the male crieth and not the female. As the Cocke and males of Quailes. Speaking is appropried to mankinde: Men that bée kindly dombe be deafe they haue voice, & all vndistinct as saith Aristotle also in Eodem liber, he saith, that all females haue smaller and shar∣per voice then males, except the cowe, that hath greater voice then the bull. Al∣so there he saith, that pasting of spearme in males is in the time of chaunging of the voice, and that is in the time and end of 14 yeares yet sometime the voice changeth sooner in some men, which sig∣nifieth the stirring of Venus. And there he saith. When horse beginne to gender, theyr voice is greater, and likewise the Mare, but the voice of the Mare is more cleere: also the voice of the Males change when they be enamoured. Also in lib. 8. it is sayd, that the voice of all foure foo∣ted beasts chaunge, & bée made lyke the voice of women when they be gelded. And liber. 19. it is said, that the cause of sharpenesse and of chaunging of voyce, is by chauging of age. For the voyce of young beastes is sharper then the voice of olde: and the voice of women is shar∣per then the voice of men: and the voice of all beasts is sharper in youth then in age. And he sayth, that many females and many younglings crie with a sharpe voice, for by féebless they moue but lit∣tle and scarce aire, and that that is little and scarce, is mooued swiftly, and swift is sharpe: The heauinesse of the voyce followeth the slownesse thereof, & much aire is slowly nideed. Males and olde men moue much aire, and therfore they haue greater voice. Males haue stronger sinewes and strings then females: and olde men haue stronger then children, & vngeldod haue stronger then gelded. Hi∣therto speaketh Aristotle. Then an euen, close and strong binding and a pis∣ant voice, meane betwéene heanie and sharp, is good & pleasant. As contrariwise a voice quaking, hoarse, and rough, fée∣ble, and discording too heauie, or too sharpe, is euill and dispraised. For a dis∣cording voice & an inordinate, troubleth the accorde of many voices. But accor∣ding voice swéete and ordinate glad∣deth and moueth to loue, and shewesh out the umors of the se, and wishes∣seth the strength and vertue of the spi∣rituall members, and shewesh purenesse and good speak on of al them, and reser∣ueth , & putteth of desease & sor∣row. And maketh to be known the male and the female, and get , and wmneth praising, also chaungesh the affectinn of the hearers as it said in ye sbles of one Orpheus,Orpheus a Thraciā born, very∣cunning on the sharp As for his musicke to trees stones, & beasts, was Anti∣thecin, it ended to check idle, euill, and en∣seemely manners. that pleased trees, woods, hills, and stones with swéete melodie of his voice. Also a farre votte is according and friend to kinde, and pleaseth not one∣ly men, but also bruite, beasts, as it fa∣reth in Oxen that hée tired to frauaile more by wéere long of the herde, shew by strolies and prickes. Also ildes and foules haue liking in melody of swéete voice, in so much that oft by swéete noise the soules bringeth them to grinnes and snares, as the Poet sayth. The pipe sin∣geth swéetly while the soule deceiueth the bird. Also by swéet songs of harmony and accord of Musicke, sicke men and fran∣tike come oft to their witte againe and health of body. Wherevpon Constatinus in viatico particula. 2. cap. 1. de amore, que dicitus hereos, sie dieit.Fevv such handles of musick in these daies, for then the Couters, Prisons, Marshai∣se, and Kings beneth. vvold not be so full of poore oppressed debters. A preordi¦naunce of God not common to nature. Some men haue solde that Orphe∣us reporsed: Emperours desire mée to feasts, to haue liking of me, but I haue liking of them, which would bend theyr hearts from wrath of mildnesse, from sorrow to gladnesse, from couetousnesse, to largenesse, from dreade to boldnesse. This is the ordinaunce of Musitions, that is knowne aboue the swéetnesse of the soule. And with swéete melody some∣time frends be put of, & compelled to passe out of bodies: as it fared in Saule, out of whom an euill spirit was compelled to passe by the voice of Dauid, as it is written. 2. Reg. 17. Now it is knowne by these foresayd things; how profitableAs profi∣table as an clo∣quent tongue with good con¦ditions. is a merry voice and swéete; And contrarywise is of an vnordinate voice & horrible, that glad∣deth not, neither comforteth: but is noi∣full and discomforteth, and grieueth the eares and the wit. Therefore Capitulo supra dicto Constantine saith: That a
Philosopher was questioned, why an horrible man is more heauie then anye burden, or wit.Because he wan∣teth both speech & manners. And men seeing that he answered in this manner. An hor∣rible man is burden to the soule and wit &c. ¶This sufficeth at this time of the voice good and euill: for it is rehersed a∣fore of thinges letting the voice in the treatise of the tongue, and yet it shall be spoken of héereafter. Of the throate. Chap. 24. THE throate is the vttermost parts of the pipes of the lungs,Gutter ris lugu∣lus, Cur∣gulio, & Canna Pulmonis the lung pipe and vvesen. as sayth Constantine, and is of double helpe. The more and the first is to draw and send aire, the second is to receive and bring in meate and drinke, and to make the voice and sownd. The substaunce of this pipe is grislye and harde, that when the ayre goeth out, the voice shuld bee cleere. For the hearsenesse of the voice commeth of the moysture of the organe of the lungs. The voice is made and composed of thrée gristells, the first is knottie and bending outwarde, and within hollowe. The second is more then the first, and is set fast in the mouth of the stomacke. The third gristell is in the middle betweene the first and the se∣cond. Of these three gristells the throate is made, as it were cheined togethers, that it maye open and close. And all the substaunce of the throate is closed with∣in the same clothing and skinnes that cloth the tongue and the roose of the mouth. The hollownesse of the throat, in the which ayre commeth in and out, hath a bodye composed lyke the tongue, of gristells, fatnesse, and skinnes. And Phisitions cal it ye tongue of the throat, or Cataracta: and is the first instru∣ment of the voice, as it is sayde. And the voyce may not bée, but if this Cata∣racta waye bée closed. For if the waye of the throate bée open, the voyce maye in no wise bée: for the ayre passeth out little and little. And therefore the ware of the throate is needfull to with-holde and ose in the breath. And for that the throat is somtime grieued by humours, that come downe from the head, thereof commeth hearsnesse of ye throat & cough, & sometime it happeneth by drawing of corrupt and drie aire. And sometime it chaunceth by entering in of dust. There∣fore the throate hath nerues and gristels to withstande and let the dust, & other such grieuous thinges, that they enter not to the lungs: and that is needfull to make the voice fayre, strong, and rea∣die. And it releeueth the aire that com∣meth in, and tempereth the coldenesse thereof. Therefore some men die when that the tongue of the throate is cut: for then too much ayre entereth and cooleth the throat and the lungs, then the throat is a needfull instrument to make & shape the voyce, and to bring in meate and dislike to the first place of digestion. that is the stomacke: And is long and round to drawe in and put out much aire: the more easily to coole the heate of the heart, and it is more hollowe in ey∣ther end, and straight in the middle to shape the voyce the better. And it is made and composed of diuers gristells, that couer themselues in a cup, to bee the stronger, and to bend it selfe the easilier, to varie the voyce by tendernesse of the gristell. inde ordeineth wisely aboute the throate, double oce, néedfull to a beast, and double hollownesse of waye. It hath a pipe waye to drawe the ayre and breath. And it hath an open way to take meate and drinke. And this double waye is departed in two, by a couering that is called Epiglotum: and is in the vttermost part of the throate, as it were cloth or héeling to couer the two holes of the throate. And when kinde desireth meate, the hole of the breath is closed, & the hole of the receiuing of the meate, openeth it selfe. And in likewise when kinde desireth breath, the other hole of the throat closeth, and stoppeth it selfe at ful. Also the throat is oft greeued by com∣passion without, and by many griefes, and sometime by vnwise and vnware taking of meate and drinke. For if the meate some in at the way, by ye which breath is drawen. ye waye of the spirite and breath is lightly closed and stopped,Greedye apetite is hurtfull. and the beast is choked & stifed. Some∣time
by gathering of humours & ruine. The humours come from the head the pipes of the throate, and they maketh there a postume: and if the matter bée cholarike and coniealed, it stifleth & ouer-commeth the body spéedely. For as Con∣stantine saith, It straighteth the breath, so that the sicke man may scarcely take meate and drinke, and is full of griefe and sorrowe. And if the matter bée of bloud, the sicke man séemeth full of cor∣ruption in the bodie,Cause of bloud. red in the face, the vaines be full, and the pulses: the swel∣ling is hot and swéet by plentie of bloud. And if the matter be of redde Colera,Of Cho∣lera. then the forehead aketh, and hath great anguish Then is great heat with great thirst, and bitternesse in tast. And if the matter be of Flegma.Flegma then the tongue not onely aketh but swelleth, and is softe. And if it be of falt steame, all that com∣meth in the roote seemeth salt: & the voice is made like as it were the voyce of young whelpes. For by drinesse of the salt steame, the arterie Trachea is made straight, as sayth Constantine. And it happeneth, that this matter is sometime all gréeued within the skinne, that de∣parteth the way of the breath, that is cal∣led Trachea arteria,Trachea arteria, ye vvesand or throat boll. from the way of the meate and drinke, that is called Isopha∣gus, and brédeth Squinanci, that slayeth in one daie: For by pressing and thru∣sling togethers the waie of the breath: the frée passage of the ayre that shoulde come to the heart, is forbid and let, and by wringing and pressing of Isophagi, the way of meate and drinke is forbid & let. And sometime this matter is gathe∣red within, and sometime without, and then againe it is called quinanci and is not so perillous as the other. And sometime all the matter is without, and is called Sinancia, and is lesse perillous. In all these is strong ach of the throate, and namely in the first with stifling of the voice, and straightnesse of breath: and so full the sinewes be of Squinantia, and the chéekes haue so the crampe, that vnneth the téeth may be opened with an hammer. And the tongue is so shortned that it is vnneth drawen out or neuer. In all these euills that grieue the throat, swift breathing is a good token: for: then the waye of the breath is not ouer pres∣sed. Therfore it is not in daunger of stif∣fling. Nothing is more to dread in this euill then loosing of breath: For a beast may not be without breath the. 27.That is the space of a qua¦tet of an house, that is minutes. & the end 7. after in minutes, in one houie. part of an houre, without great perill. These euills and many other the throate inf∣fereth, as Constantine saith, as with whelks, pushes, & swellings, immoderate thirst, hoarsenesse of voice, that commeth of so much moisture shedde in the way of the pipe of the throate, and letteth the voice: and sometime taketh it away, and roughnesse of voice that commeth of dri∣nesse of aire, either of the bodie, of the meate and of drinke, either of dust that maketh the instrument of the voyce rough. This that is said of the voice suf∣ficeth at this time. Of the necke. Chap. 25. THE Necke is called Collum in La∣tine,Collum. because it is great and round, & beareth and susteineth the head. The for∣most parte is called Gula, and the hin∣der Ceruix, the nowle, as sayth Isidore: And hath that name, for by that parte the marrow commeth to the ridge bone. Therefore Ceruix is sayd. Quasi via ce∣rebri, as it were the way of the braine, as sayth Isidore. The necke is a round member, and racane betwéene the bodye and the head, and is bonnie, made and composed of many bones and sinewes. It is boanie to be the more strong to susteine and beare the head. It is sinewy to make quicke mouing, and to send fée∣ling to the neather partes of the bodie. The necke receiueth and taketh of the braine influence of ye vertue of mouing, and sendeth it by sinewes to the neather parts of the bodie. The necke ought to haue a concord and proportion with the head. For if the head bée temperatye great, and the nape of the necke in mea∣surable quantitie, it betokeneth lightnes of complection and disposition, as sayth Constantine. And if the head be little, & the necke great, not proportionate to the quantitie of the head, it betokeneth great superfluitie of matter, and default of the
vertue Informatiue of shaping. And such an head is trauailed & grieued with head ach, and ach of the eares, as sayth Constantine. Aristotle. li. 14. saith, that the disposition of the necke varieth and chaungeth in beasts and in soules. For in foure footed beasts with thicke bodies and meane thighs, the necke is short and great: and much strength of such beasts is in the necke. As it faceth in Oxen, Bulls, Beares and Wolues, the most strength of thē is in the bone of the neck: and therefore Oxen be commonly yoked by the necke. And beasts with long thighes and greate bodies haue oft long necks, and that is néedfull for to pasturs or feede. As it faceth in Horses, Camels, Hartes, and such other beasts. And the most fairenes of an horse is in the neck. For by the beginesse, and thicknesse, and stretching thereof, he is accounted fierts in courage of many men. Also in eo. li. Ari. saith, ye soules yt haue crooked bills, hath short neckes, as it farth in Goshaukes, Eagles, & Sparhaukes. And soules that haue long billes and straight, haue long neckes, as it fareth in Crames, Hearnes, Bées and Ganders: and that is for to get then meate in déepenesse of moeres, fennes, and riuers. Also he sayth there, that all soules that haue long bills, haue great neckes and thicke, and flye with the neckes straight out, and if they haue long néetres and stretching forwarde, they bēnd and plye them as it wet fol∣ding or pleytes, when they flye. Also he saith, that if a beast hath long thighs, he hath a long necke: and if he hath short thighes, so hath a short necke. Euerye beast that hath a necke, and he breathe not, he hath none aire within. Also eue∣ry beast that hath a necke, hath lunges, and that beast that draweth no ayre in, hath no necke. All beasts that forward winde them∣selues round as a ring, haue no necke distinguished from the body as fiste. Celes, and adders, and such other long wormes that head themselues, and that for they haue no shoulders. For nothing is called the neck, but that member that is betwéene the head and shoulders, as saith Aristotle there. ¶Of the shoulders. Ca. 26. MAns shoulders are called Humeri in Latine,Humerus for distinction betwéene man and other beasts, and so our shoul∣ders be called Humeri, and haue armes, as saith Constantine. And the shoulders are composed of diners bones, of which theScoptula operta. Scapula . shoulder blades be chiefe, & are called blades, for ye they be shapen as a broad sword. Spaton, is to vnderstand, broad, & these bones be néedful, as Con. saith, for double cause, either so defend the breast, that it be not greued behind by outward things: or els to binde togethers the bones of the shoulders, that be hollowe within, and bending outward. The hol∣lownesse within is néedfull to helpe the ribbes, and these bones haue knottes, which be called the eyen of the shoulder blades, as Phisitions lay, and haue that name of office: for as the eyen defend and ward all the fortparts of the body, so these defend and kéepe behinde the breasts and ribs: these eyen be hollow, that the sharpnesse of the shoulders may enter. The shoulders blade hath two sharpnesses, that one is behinde lyke to a rauens bill, by the which the shoulder blade is bound to the forke, that it e not out of his ouer place inward: heer∣to kinde sendeth and setteth that other sharpenesse of the shōulders, that it shuld not passe our downward. The twisted forkes be néedfull to binde the shoulders, and to depart them from the breast. The bones of them be round without, & hol∣low within, and bound to the tendernes of the breast, and behinde to the place called, the rauens byll. The bondes of them be griftly bones, and are called, the heads of the shoulders, and onelye set to cheyne or fasten the shoulders lynke wise togethers. Héereof & follow∣eth, that the shoulders be néedfull to defende the spirituall members, and to binde and cheyne togethers the boanes of the breast, of the armes, and of the ribbes. Also to beare by the boanes and ioynes of the necke. Also they are néed∣full to beare burthens and wayghte,
for by reason of their boninesse and sin∣newinesse, they be verye strong & migh∣tie. Also after the head, the necke is highest of the bodye aboue other lyms, that be set vnder the head, as it fareth in all beastes. And sometime the shoul∣ders be grieued without by woundes & by diuers hurtings, and by continuance of great trauayle and bearing: and then they be chiefely cured by rest, or by annoynting with some oyntments. And Aristotle saith li. 7. that men vse to an∣noynt the ioynts of the Elephaunt with Oyle Olyue, the more easelye to suffer trauayle and charge of bearing, and to sleepe the better. Also sometime ye shoul∣ders be grieued by flowing of humors, that come to the ioynts in the sinewes of the shoulders, by the which, the sin∣newes are grieued and let in their ef∣fectes and dooings. And sometime the ioyntes are full of superfluitie of hu∣mours, by the sharpnesse and byting whereof, ache breedeth in the sinewe of feeling. ¶Of the Armes. Cap. 27. BrachiumARmes are called Brachia in Latine, and haue that name of Darim in Greeke, that is strong as sayth Isidore. In the armes be brawnes-called Tho∣ri, and they be of great strength, and are called Thori, for that they be defending members, as sayth Isidore. Constan∣tine sayth, That the arme is made of two boanes: one is aboue, that is cal∣led the ouer Cubite: and the other is beneath, that is called the neather Cu∣bite. The neather boane is more than the other; for the bearer shoulde beée more stronger than the thing yt is born. The arme is cheyned together with the ouer shoulder, and is itte with most strong sinewes: by cane of which sin∣newes, the arme taketh féelyng and spée∣die mouing & sendeth it after to ye hande. The armes be round, to be more able to worke, to moue, and to withstand the better, that they be not lightly grieued. And they be bending any pant in thrée ioynts, that is to wit at the hand, at the elboe, & at the shoulders, to be the more able to quicke mouing, & more ready to be obedient to ye commandement of the will. Also in comparison to other lims, ye armes be lesse fleshie, & that is through the substance of bones & sinewes, of the which they be cōposed, & to haue ye more vertue & strength: For in the armes is the most strength of a man, to beare, to lyfte, to hold hard, to put from, to fight, & to worke. Also the bones of the armes be great, hard, holow, and ful of marow. They be great & hard, that they breake not lightlye: they are hollowe, that they should not be too heauie by massiuenesse. They are full of marrow, to moyst the drye and hard bones by fatnesse therof: and that the spirites that come from the sinewes and veynes be saued by tempe∣rance of marrow, and nourished. They are cloathed and couered with skinne, brawne and strings, with flesh among: that they should not be lyghtly hurt & grieued by any thing without. And also they are couered in ioynts & whirlbones, with gristles, that the sinews of féeling he not grieued by hardnes of bones, that smite and moue together, & that the same bones in their ioynts, moue the more speedely by smoothnesse and softnesse of gristle, and that they be not taried, ney∣ther let by méeting and féeling of rough∣nesse. Also for that the armes are nigh the heart, they take spirite and pulse by veynes and strings and diuers chaung∣ings, for to know and shew the state of default or profit in the veynes of pulse. Also for the armes are nigh the braine, they haue a kindly and a priuie accorde with the head, and take of him influence of priuie vertue And therefore for de∣fence of the head by féeling of kinde, & without aduisement, ye arws put them forth against hard strokes. Also ye veyns of ye body, & namely they that are about the head and the heart, & the liuer; come together: in the hands and the fingers, & féede them. And therefore they that féele themselues full of bloud & grieued, vse to open some veyne of the armes: and so the armes are oft times wounded and grieued to cause the other lims to haue the profite of good heale. Also Phisitions say, as it is written in
libro de Flebothomia,Flebotho∣mia, is  eare d e of  o es. Fle and Tema that is ope¦ning or cutting of  aine. In Latine it is na∣med Mi∣nucio san∣guinis. In Eng∣lish, let∣ting of bloud. he that is sick on one side of the bodie shall open the vaine on the other side. And so he that is grie∣ued in the right side is let bloud in the left side, and so of other. Except the mat∣ter be venimous, or else postate. For then the bloud should not be drawen to the other side, least the venim of the mat∣ter passing by the heart, either by some other member, that is noble, bée hurt and griued as it is said ther. Also the armes for profit of other partes of the bodye, serue each other: And for kéeping of other members, they bée wounded and stri∣ken and made to bléede, and they faint or yéeld not, and they abide strokes. Ga∣len sayth, that the armes haue this pro∣pertie, that what the heart loueth, the armes loue and imbrace it cheerefullye. And whom they know, that the heart lo∣ueth, they belip it, and set it as nigh the heart as they maye: Insomuch that if they might, they woulde print it in the heart all that the heart loueth. Also in Acutis Febribus,A sharpe or deadly feauer termed the pestilent Ague. vncouering and put∣ting out of bare armes is token of death. ¶This that is spoken of the armes, and of the properties of them sufficeth. ¶Of the hands. Chap. 28. THe hand is called Manus in Latine, for that it is the gifte of all the bo∣die, as sayth Isidore.Manut. Manciola For the hande ser∣ueth the mouth of meate, and disposeth and doth all workes. By the hand wée receiue and giue. And abusiuely the hand is called a crafte or a worke: as it is sometime sayde of a Painter or a wri∣ter: He hath a good hand, that is to vn∣derstand, a good skill of writing, eyther of painting. Dextera, the right hande, hath that name of Dare, to giue. For as Isidore sayth, Suretie of peace is giuen with the right hand, and he is witnesse of faith, trust, and saluation. And this is that Tully meaneth. I gaue publyke fayth vppon beheast of the Senatours, that is to say the right hand. And the A∣postle Gala. 2. When they perceiued the grace that was giuen vnto mee, Iames, Cephas, and Iohn, which are counted to be pillers, gaue to me and Barnabas the right hand of fellowship, &c. The left hand is said as it were suffering the right hand. For it suffereth the right hande worke and hath that name Sinistra, of Sinere, to suffer. And the hand is called Palma, when the fingers be straight cut: and fist when they be closed in And ye list is called Pugnus in Latine, & hath that name of Pugillus, & is called Palma, whē ye hand is straight cut as it were beauhs and braunches spread. Also the hand is a great help and ornament of the bodie: & is the proper and principall instrument of touching and of feeling. For no part of the bodie toucheth and feeleth so surely as the part of the hande, as saith Isiderus, & also Constantine. And Constantine saith, that the hand in the vtter part is made of nine small bones and diuers, without marrow, and be sad bones. And hath so many bones to be moueable. The bones be of diuerse shapes: Some be knoe, some be hollow, and some straight, that when they be all ioyned togethers, they may be as it were one bone. And these bones stand of two orders, of ye one side with the roots of the fingers, and of that other side with the two armes they bee cheined and strongly bound. The ouer cheining haue thrée of these bones that enter into the hollownesse of the armes: by the which fastning the hand openeth and closeth sidelong. And the neather cheining and the lesse is ioyned to the inner end of the arme by sharpnesse ther∣of. And this cheining maketh moouing forward and backward. The hollownesse of the hande is cal∣led Vola, and is the inner parte, that the wit of touching and of feeling, hath most working in. And therefore in that parte it is the more fleshie, and more softe, for good touching and feeling: and hath two partes. Pecten the combe is one parte, and the other parte is the fingers. Pecten, the Combe, is the space of the hande within the fingers, and is composed of foure boanes: For if it happened that one were hurte: that other should not bee grieued. In the hol∣lownesse of foure bones of the Combe, that commonly be called the Palme, the foure fingers be set and closed therein.
And therfore Aristotle. li..  14. saith, that the hand is not one instrument but ma∣ny. For kinde hath giuen to man in∣struments according to his vertues: as the hands, in which bee many fingers & diuerse, that they maye thereby holde small things and great. For as he saith, The making of the hande is proporcio∣nable to many workes, and to contrary workings: and is diuided and straigh∣ted into many parts: And a man may vse one part alone, or two, or mo, in di∣uerse manners. The palme of a mans hande hath this propertie, yt it is neuer heary with∣in, though haire growe without on some handes: and that doth chaunce most in handes of males, and that is for plen∣tie of heate that hath the masterie. And the right hande is of more strong heate, & hath more driesse then the left hand. And therfore the right hand is lighter & able to worke then the left hand. Ther∣fore. li. 2. Aristotle saith, that foure footed beasts that gender beasts haue foreféet in stéed of mans hands. And the left foote in such beasts is not so frée, neither so light of mouing as the right foote is, as the left hande in a man is not so able to work as the right hande, except the Ele∣phant. For as Aristotle saith. liber. 1. the Elephant hath a long nose like a trump, which he occupieth in stéede of handes: and with that nose he taketh meate, and putteth it in his mouth, and with that nose he putteth drinke into his mouth, and no beast may doe yt with his Nose but he. Among Birdes and foules, the Popingay and the Pellican vse ye foot in stéede of an hande. For the Popingaye taketh meate with his foote and wetteth it in water, and when it is wet putteth it in his mouth with his foote: and so doth the Pellican that is called also Porphirio. The hand is grieued in ma∣ny manners, by the Crampe, shrinking of the sinewes, by crookednesse, by dri∣nesse, by blaines and whelkes, by kit∣ting and cheines, by fretting of worms, by itching and tickeling, by wrasting and wrenching of ioyntes, by Chiraga Passio, that is the gout in the handes. The cause of shrinking & crookednes cō∣meth sometime of hot humours and dry, which dry the sinewes: either of cold hu∣mours & moist, which infect the sinews, & closeth ye passage of the spirits, as it fa∣reth in Paralitisis & Leprosis,Paralisis Dissolu∣cio, the palsie. the handes of whom be shronke, & crooked by reason of corrupt humours that dry and destroy the sinewes.Plora, Le∣pra, the le¦prosie, it hath four names. The hands be dried by wt∣drawing of due féeding. As it fareth in olde or ueraged men, and in men that be defaced & ouercome with great tra∣uaile of fastings, & ouerféebled with age, trauaile, & disease.Elephāci∣a, Leoniva. Tiria, & Alope∣cia. And sometime by di∣stemperance of heate & excesse, that wa∣steth ye moisture, as it fareth in Tisiks, Ethiks, & such other. And sometime by vice & default of the vaines and of the sinews, yt which he stopped: and so by de∣fault of humours & of spirits, the vertue of ruling is let: wherby yt hands die, and leeseth strength & fatnesse. Blaines and swelling bladders be bred & come of su∣perfluous and corrupt humours, which come to the vtter parts: and so the flesh within is wasted and corrupt in the vt∣ter side, and the skin swollen vp is tur∣ned & chaunged into blaines & bladders, clifts & chins, and other such, come of hot humours & sharpe, and of fumosities be∣twéene the skin & flesh, that cut the skin, & with their sharpnesse they diuide and pearce the vtter flesh: & first they cause itching, and tickeling, & afterward great ach and smarting. Also corrupt humour hid in the skinne, when it is not put out neither wasted by kinde heate, and lyt∣tle and lyttle, it is corrupte more and more, and is chaunged and tourned into small wormes: The which wormes little and little eate and fret the skinne, and cause tickeling and itching. And bre∣king out of ioynts sometime happeneth of falling, either of smitting, eyther of hard thrusting and wringing. For by such violence the limme falleth out of ioynt and of his place: And then cōmeth sore aking & smarting, & all the hande is made vnmighty to worke any workes. The same hapneth also of some inwarde cause, as of too much humour cooling and slippering, and slaking the sinews of the ioyntes. And so lightly the limme fal∣leth out of his place. The passion which
is called Podagra in the féete,The gout in ye feete. is called Cirogra in the hands, and is bread and commeth of great humours and rawe, gathered in the ioynts. Therefore the ioynts of the toes & fingers waxe hard, and be made as it wer knotty. And such sicknesses bée called Longa artherica, & are bred in the hands. And scarcely to be cured or healed, if it hath long indured, as it is sayde Super Aphoris. Manye other diseases occupie oft the handes, as blaines and such other: but this that is sayde shall suffice at this time. Saue onely this woulde bee noted, which is spoken in Aphorisin. that a woman vseth not the left hand and the right all alike. Uppon which word Galen saith, that males worke alyke with both the handes, which we neuer sawe, neyther heard of no woman. And that commeth of default of her kinde. For except shée is strong to worke with the right hand, so much she maye the lesse with the lefte hand. Males haue strong sinewes and brawnes in either side: and they haue stronger heat then women: and for that cause it happeneth oft, that they worke with the left hand, & with the right hand also. ¶Of the fingers. Chap. 29. Digitus. THE fingers be called Digiti in La∣tine, & either they haue that name of Decem, that is the number of tenne in English, for they be tenne other of this word Decem, in English seemely. For they be séemely set and ioyned, and they haue among themselues a number  or∣der right faire, as saith Isidore. The first is called Polex, the thombe: for that among other hée hath most vertue and might. The second is called Index and Salutans, and is called Demonstratiuus, the shewer. For with him we gréet, and shew, and teach all thing. The third is the middle finger, and is called Impu∣dicus also.Inamis digitus, of some cal∣led the fooles fingers. The fourth is called Annu∣laris, the ring finger: for thereon the ring is borne. And also he is called Medi∣cus or Medicinalis, the leech. For with him they doe Colerium about the eye. Colerium is a principall medicine for ye eie. The fift is the little finger, and is called Auricularis, the are finger, for with him we clawe and picke the eares, as saith Isidore. Constantine sayth, that the fingers bée composed and made eue∣rye each of thrée bones cheined toge∣thers. And the foure fingers be cheined and bounde to the sayde combe of the hande: and the thombe is ioyned with the inner cheining of the arme. The nea∣ther péeces and knobbes of the fingers be greater and broader then the ouer, as the bearer is stronger then the thing that is borne. They ought to be broader and more stedfast, as saith Con. li. 3. Aristo. saith, that the moueablenes of the fingers is conuenient to take & to hold. And the fingers be proportioned in slendernesse & length & departed a sunder. In the ends they be warded with nailes. And the more euen that they be, and the more bending and pliant: the more couenable they be and able to diuerse works. They be but little fleshie, for casinesse of moo∣uing and of touching and groping. For nothing in the bodie knoweth and dée∣meth so easily betweene things that bee touched and felt, as the ends of the fin∣gers. And that may hap is through the quicke liuelinesse of the sinewes, that be bend againe in the ouermost parts of the fingers: and for softnesse and smooth∣nesse of the skin in the vttermost parts of the fingers, as sayth Constantine, and the fingers haue these propertyes: they be greater afore meate then after. And therefore a ring that is straight on a finger, and may scarce bee taken of a∣fore meate, may easily bee taken of after meate, as it is sayd Super Aphoris. A∣ristotle sayth. liber. 8. that water soules haue betwéene theyr toes and clawes, as it were a skinne, and their dwel∣ling is in waters. And foules with toes, and clawes diuided, and cloaue footed, dwell properlye nigh water, and bée fed with meat that groweth on the land. And these foules eate no fish, neither liue with rauine, as doe foules with crooked toes & clawes, that eat all beasts yt they may hunt & take: & they liue by bloud, & yet they eat not each other: but they spare foules of their owne kind. And so do not
fish, for they eate fish of their owne kind. Of the Naile. Chap. 30. Vuguis.THE naile is the vttermost part of the finger, set in the ouermost part thereof. And Constantine sayth, That it is ioyned verye nighe thereto with flesh and skinne: and the bounds there∣of bée full of strings. And to the nailes come vaines and sinewes, and arteries, to giue them féeling and kindly helpe. The nailes grow in length & in breadth proportionate to the fingers. And that that groweth ouer and passeth the touch of sinewes hath no féeling. And there∣fore they bée cut and pared without fée∣ling of sore and of smarting. For the growing and féeding of the naile is like to the growing of haire. And there∣fore in growing they passe the endes of the fingers, as sayth Constantine. The naile is bread of certeine fumosities, that are resolued from the heart, and spread on the fingers ends, where ye fumosities entering in, are dried with the vtter aire, and chaunged into the substaunce of the naile, as it is sayde in the booke of Pro∣nosticis, in the comment. And they bée made to helpe and succour the fingers ends to defend them and saue them with hardnesse, or they should else for tender∣nesse be lightly hurt and grieued. And so nailes help & strengthen much ye fingers. The naile is softer then a boane, and harder then flesh or gristell. And hath some deale disposition & kinde of horne: For they be cleere and plaine on the vt∣ter part thereof, cleane & bright as horne. And so therin is séene a māner of bright∣nesse and shape. And for the naile is bred of fumositie of the hart, liuing and dieng of the heart is in the nailes most openly shewed. For if the heat of the heart fai∣leth, the nailes waxe blacke and pale. And therefore by chaunging of them, shrinking and riueling, bodeth and beto∣keneth quenching of heate, and dieng & slaieng of kinde, as it is said in Prono∣sticis. Also Aristotle. li. 7. saith, that the clawes of Egles waxe crooked and dull when they sit a broode vpon Egges, and féedeth their birds: and their wings waxe white and féeble. And the Egle hath this propertie, that when he sitteth on a tree & resteth the beholdeth oft his clawes, and dreadeth least they waxe soft and tender. For he hath clawes in stéed of wepons. And therefore least his clawes should be hurt & grieued, he setleth not gladly vp∣pon a stone. And whē he resteth, he ben∣deth and closeth in his clawes, yt so they may be kept and saued without harme & griefe: So doth the Lion, and beasts with crooked claws: also li. 8. he saith, ye whole footed foules drinke not, except a fewe: and al foules yt haue crooked claws, haue crooked bills, and short and great necks, and eate flesh and hunt birds, but they eate no birds of their owne kinde, ney∣ther pursueth, neither praieth on thē, to the intent to eate them, but they fight to∣gethers, and hurt one another with their bills, and with clawes, they teare each other for the females and for neasts. In all beasts and foules be diuerse manner of clawes and nailes, touching their dis∣position and also their dooing. For in a man the nailes ence and adorne the hands: and in foules and birds they fence and arms the féete. And in some beasts the nailes & houes be round and whole, as in horses, in some they be long and clouen as in swine. li. 13. Aristotle saith, That euerye beast hauing stiffe stan∣ding haire, hath clouen féete, as Swine. And kind setteth strength in the clawes & nailes of beasts: and therfore li. 14. Ar. saith, that kind alway setteth strength in lims & members, that beastes vse, as in féeth that be as it were yron, and in the clawes and nailes, for strength and help. Of the side. Chap. 31. THe side is called Latus in Latine and hath that name of Latere,Latus. to lurke, either to be hid. For when a man lyeth, the side is hidde. And there is both the left side and the right side of the bodye, that is called in Latine Dextra & Sini∣stra: and in ye right side is most able mo∣uing, but the left side is more strong and more couenable to ye burthēs & charges: & therfore ye left side is called Leua in La∣tine, & hath ye name of Leuare to heaue, &
lyfte: for it is more able to lyfte and to beare some thing, as sayth Isidore. That side beareth the shield, and the buckler, sword, the quiuer, the knife and other burthens, that the right hande maye bee ready at lybertie to doe what it shall, as sayth Isidore. The sides be speciallye strengthened with the bones of ribbes. And the ribbes be called Costae as Isi∣dore saith: because the ribbes kéepe the inner part of the body, and all the softe∣nesse and tendernes of the belly, is wise∣ly kept and saued by the office of ye ribs. And the side ribbes be made and com∣pounded of many bones ioyned & bound to the bones of the ioyntes of the ridge bone, and of diuers gristles, that ioyne the foresayd bones together, as sayeth Constantine. And these boanes haue the lykenesse of halfe a Circle: & when they be ioyned togethers to the ioyntes of the ridge bone and of the brest boane, they séeme to make a full circle, as saith Constantine. The boanes be fourtéene saith he, set in the either side seuen, seuen on the one side, & seuen on the other, the which be bound togethers to the closure of the breast, with seuen tender boanes, that be as it were of gristly kinde. Of which the endes are tender and gristlye, shapen as the poynt of a sword, and set vnder the mouth of the stomacke for de∣fence thereof, and of the heart. And so in the making or composition of the ribbes and breast, in all be two & thirtie bones, of the which fourtéen be in the sides, & in the composition of the brest, ten. Behind in the ridge be eight gristle boanes, to∣gethers as sayth Constantine. It hap∣peneth that the side is ofte griued, som∣time by cause that is without, as by fal∣lyng, breaking, smiting, and other such. And sometime by cause that is within, as by fléeting and concourse, and com∣ming togethers of the humours to the place and hollownesse of the small ribs. And somtime a postume is bred therin, as it fareth in a plurisie, that is bred and commeth of a postume, that is in ye ten∣dernesse of the rybbes. The tokens ther∣of be ache of the side, cough, and Febris Acuta, and is speciallye knowen by bloudie spittle: if it come of bloud, by citrinesse or yeolow: if it come of Cho∣lera, by white spittle: if it come of fleme, by bloo spittle: if it come of Melancho∣lia, but it bréedeth selde of Melancholia, as it is contayned in Practica. Such postumes when they be rooted and pight in the side, then they be cause of sore ach, stiffeling, and burning, and then he that hath that euill, may not rest vpon the side that the postume is on. Therefore it is said in Pronosticis, that it is a good signe that a sicke man in Febribus acutis, lye on his side, & specially on his right side. For that betokeneth, that the nigh pla∣ces haue no postume, and that the spiri∣tuall members be frée, and haue large place to open and to spred, and so a man breatheth the better: for neither the sto∣macke, nor other members grieueth, nei∣ther thirsteth the spirituall members. Also it happeneth, that vnder the small ribs in a voyde place, winde is gathered and closed within the small skinnes of the ribs, and by the stretching thereof is bred sore pricking and ache. And some∣time it happeneth that the place is stop∣ped and made hard by gathering of great humours. And so the side places be ha∣ed and rent, eyther made too harde, ei∣ther shrunke, eyther too much heaued vp. And therefore it is sayde in Pronosticis Hippocratis, In the small ribs if they are without ache and sore, and if they be softe, and well com∣pounded in euery side, it is good. And if they ake, or haue the Crampe, and be drawen togethers, as it fareth in the Crampe: If there be onely great quaking and leaping in anye of them, it betokeneth woe and sorrowe, either ra∣uing, &c. ¶And that is a speciall token in Fe∣bribus Acutis, and specially if the sight of the eyen bée horrible staring and in∣ordinate, as sayeth the same Com∣mentatour. And if the mouing of the Eyen bée ordynate, it is not so great dreade of rauing in Acutis, Vt dicit Idem. ¶Of the Backe. Chap. 32. THe ridge is called Dorsum in latine,Dorsum. and hath that name of hardenesse,
for it is the hardest part of the body, as it were a stone strong to beare, and to suffer durable, as saith Isidore. And the ridge hath another name, that is called the backe: for therevpon we lye backe∣ward and vpright on the earth, and so may a man doe, and not other beastes, for other beasts lye on the wombe, ey∣ther on the side: and therefore it is vn∣properly sayd, yt any beasts haue backes, as saith Isidore. But it maye be called backe, for beating and bearing, for it is beaten with diuers manner of whips: and not onely the backes of beastes, but also the backs of men that be prisoners, as saith he. Or as Remigius saith, This word Tergum maye be said of Teros in Gréeke, that is round in Latine: For the ridge of a beast hath a manner of roundnesse, for all the bones in the body be founded in the ridge, as a ship on the keele. Constantine saith and Isidore al∣so, that ye ridge beginneth from the nape of the head, and stretcheth néere to the kidneyes: and the ridge is made & com∣pounded of diuers bones and ioynts, and that for foure causes. First, for he is the foundation of all other, and thereon all the other bones be set, as the shippe is on the keele. The second, for it is ye defence and healyng of the inner partes. The third, for it is help and succour of the si∣newes, that come from the brain down∣ward to diuers parts of the body, to giue quk mouing and féeling in euery part. The fourth to beare marrow that com∣meth down from the braine and to kéep the marrowe, and saue it from griefes, within those powers. The ridge boane of a beast is made and compounded of many bones, that they may the easilyer rise and settle vp themselues, and bende, and to beare more strongly charges and burthens. And the ridge boanes be cal∣led Spondilia in latine, and are hollow, that the marrowe of the ridge bone, that Phisitions call Nucha, may the easilyer be borne and come to the neather mem∣bers, to make the quicke mouing: and the same kinde and vertue is as well in the braine, as in the marrowe of the ridge bone, as saith Constantine. And there∣fore it is cloathed with a double skinne, as the braine is, as saith he. And there∣fore if this marrowe in the ridge bone, bée in anye wise let either hurte, the vertue of féeling is hurt in working and doing, as it is when the braine is hurt, and therefore if this marrowe be hurt, the beast dyeth lightly, & therefore kinde maketh the ridge bones hard & sinewy, & also picked and sharpe, for the more de∣fence of the marrowe, and for the more easie withstanding and putting off, of hurting and wrong. The skinne of the ridge is harder and thicker than the skin of other parts of a beast, and that is for the cause aforesayd, and the ridge suffe∣reth many griefes within and without. For without it is beaten and hath ma∣ny griefes. Within it suffereth shrink∣ing of sinewes, to much replection of hu∣mours, stopping of the veynes and the gates of the spirites, sore pricking and putting, and stopping, and griefes of di∣uers goutes and dropsies. ¶Of the Breast. Cap. 23. THe breast is the ouer bonie parte be∣twéene the paypes and teates, and is called Pectus,Pectus. because it is next betwéene the head and the paps, as sayth Isidore. Isidore and Constantine say also, that the originall of the breast is set within the ridge and is very hollow, to kéepe and to saue, and to defend the inner members, as the heart and the lunges, with other spirituall members. The great hallow∣nesse of the breast is néedefull and profi∣table, that the lungs may close and open to coole the hot smoake of the heart. And it is bonie and full of sinewes, for the more strength and stronger defence of the members of lyfe. And the breast is compassed and defended within with skinnes, and a manner of fatnesse to nourish and to saue kindly heat, and to asswage the coldnesse of boanes of the breast plate. Constantine saith, That in the breast be two hollownesses departed in twaine with some manner skinnes: and this departing is néedfull to kéepe the breath in one part of the breast, if it happen that it were lost in the other: and so to saue and to kéepe the lyfe of
the beast in the other part. For if either hollownes were grieued, and the breath stopped, then the beast should soone dye. Also the heart and the lunges be bounde togethers with skinnes of the brest, and they be wrapped therein, that they pase not out of their place, as saith Constant. li. 2. ca. 15. Then the breast is the foun∣dation of the paps & nipples: and that is not onely for beautie and fairenesse, but also for néedfull helpe of the breast, with his fleshinesse, it healeth: and tempering the bonie coldnesse thereof, couereth and defendeth from outwarde hurte of colde aire. And so the breast is the most noble member of man: for it is the place and seate of wit and wisedome, & the house of heate of lyfe and of strength, & if the brest be wel disposed and in good poynt, with all that is therein, all the strength of ye body is comforted in his working. And contrary, if the breast be grieued, al the making of the body is disgraced, and the breast is grieued many wayes. Som∣time by great colde, constraining the si∣newes & strings of the breast bone, they be grieued and hurt, and be let in theyr works and déeds. And somtime by great heate and drinesse, wasting the substaun∣tiall humour therof, and constraining or shrinking the sinewes of the breast, as it fareth inPtisis, the Greeke vvord. Ptisicis and Etiis, that be spen∣ded & wasted with too great heat. Some∣time by too great moysture of bloud, ei∣ther of fleame,Consūp∣tio. a con¦sumption or vvast∣ing in age Etica. Hec¦tica a con¦sumption in youth, not light∣ly cured. comming and fillyng the waies of ye breast, & so somtime follow∣eth stifling, and somtime hoarcenes, and somtime withdrawing & léesing of voyce, as saith Const. Sometime of a corrupt humour gathered in the skinnes of the brest, that bréedeth a postume in ye brest, and letteth the breath, and so sometime the beast is stiffeled. Somtime the brest is grieued by gathering of other mem∣bers that be grieued, for if the throte bée grieued, or the lungs, or the stomacke, needes must the breast be sore & sharply grieued, and the griefes of the breast bée most perillous, & namely they within, for the nighnesse of ye hart, that is the place of life: and therefore a little pricking or pinching in the breast within, is more sore than a great wound in the arme or in the thigh without. Diuers dispositi∣ons of the breast is in men & in fowles, as sayth Aristotle. For men haue broad breastes and somewhat bending in the right side and left, and that hollow ben∣ding is token of oldnes and of strength, and no beast hath paps in the breast, but men and Elephants, as saith Aristotle lib. 2. And some beastes haue pappes in the side, or in the wombe, as Swine, Hounds, Asses, Bine, Sheepe, and other such. A beast that hath pappes in the wombe bringeth forth manye moe at a time, (as it fareth in Houndes and Swine) then those that haue teates in the breast, as it fareth in women and E∣lephants, that gendreth neuer but one, as saith he lib. 5. And Fowles haue ge∣nerally sharpe breastes, and namelye fowles of praye, with crooked billes and sharpe clawes, and little flesh, and good flight and sharpe sight: for they see their meate very farre off. And therefore such fowles flye vp in the ayre, much more higher than other Fowles, and that is for praye, as sayth Aristotle lib. 2. The sharpnesse of breast is a token of bolde∣nesse and of gentlenesse,the sowse or coun∣ter mue of the Hake. as saith Isidore of a Goshauke, that is of more boldnesse in brest, than in bill or clawes, and more armed with the breast, than with bill or clawe. And therefore the Goshauke is bolde in the breast, and in the ayre hée smiteth his praye to the ground. ¶Of the Pappe. Cap. 34. THe pap is called Mammilla in latin,Māmilla. Sororia. Vber. & taketh that name of roundnes, for Maso in Gréeke is round in Latine, as saith Isid.The nur¦sing brest. The teate or nipple is ye head of the pap,The mai∣dens brest The vvo∣mās brest. that the child sucketh and ta∣keth betwéene his lips, is called Papilla in Latine, & hath y• name of Palpare to grope: for ye childe oft toucheth it, & gro∣peth therafter. Also ye paps be called V∣bera in latin, either for yt they be full of milk, or of humuors of milke, as it wer a bottle. For after ye birth of a childe, if bloud be not wasted with feeding, it cō∣meth by a kind way into ye paps, & war∣eth white by vertue of them, and taketh the qualitie of milke, as saith Isido. And Constant. saith, that the pappes be made
and compounded of a manner kernell substaunce, that is soft, fleshie, and white: as the kinde of milke is. The veynes & strings in the kernell substaunce of the pappes are medled: by the which bloud with breath is conueyed to the pappes. The paps be set in the breast to be nigh to the heart, that by decoction of ye heate of the heart, the bloud maye the easelyer be turned into the kinde of milke: For bloud commeth by an hollow veyne to the heart, and then to the breast, & pear∣ceth at last and commeth to the pappes, and in the hollow flesh of the paps, the bloud by vertue of heate, tourneth into the substaunce and hinde of milke. And the flesh of the pappe hath dens & holes as a spounge, and therefore it is méete to breeding of milke to the féeding of anye childe. The pappe hath this propertie, as it is said vpon Aphoril. That the paps of a woman that shal haue childe before hir time, ware softe and tender, as sayth Hippocrates. Also he sayth, That if the right pappe of a woman that goeth with two children,A note of vntimely birth. wareth tender and soft, the man childe shalbe borne before his time: and if the lefte pappe waxe soft, then the female shall be borne before hir time: and if both the pappes grow tender and softe, both the children shall be borne a∣fore their time. And in Commento Ga∣len telleth the cause héereof, and sayeth, that the smalnesse of the pappe betoke∣neth scarsitie of milke: and therefore if the childe hath not due feeding, hée must needs be dead born before his time. Also Hippocrates saith ther, that in wo∣men in which superfluitie of hot bloud turneth to the pappes, betokeneth mad∣nesse. Galen telleth the cause thereof, & sayth, that when superfluitie of seruent hot bloud commeth to the pappes, if it may not be turned into milk for passing great heate and abundaunce therof, then it is dispearced and turned into sharpe smoke, and goeth vp to the head, & trou∣bleth the brayne, and so breedeth mad∣nesse. Also he saith there: If thou wilt make the bloud of Menstruum in a wo∣man lesse, thou shalt set a coppe to ye pap,Copping, or boxing to ye veyns which come from ye Mother, as sayth Galen: and by such manner of drawing, the superfluitie of bloude, is drawen to the paps, and so the neather bleeding of Menstruum is diminished, as Galen rehearseth. Also he sayth, If much milke run out of the pappes of a woman, that goeth with childe, it is a token that the childe is feeble: and if the pappes be harde, it is a token, that the childe is féeble, for the milke is not di∣minished, by reason that the childe is fée∣ble to receiue and tourne it into his fée∣ding. Therefore too great dropping of the pappes is a token of corruption and im∣perfection of the childe as saith Galen. And if the pappes be meanly hard, it is a token of the childes health. For too great smalnesse and leannesse of the paps after the conception, is a token that the childe is féeble and corrupt, and it is a token that the childe shall be dead born, or els to be borne afore the time, as saith he. And if a woman be with childe of a man childe, the right pappe is more then the lefte: and if she be with childe of a female, then is the left pappe more than the right: and that is first knowen, when the childe beginneth to moue himselfe, as sayth Aristotle liber 19. Also as he sayth, ofte time by reason of too muche milke and crudding thereof, the pappes ware ouer harde. And if there growe a∣ny haire while the brests e ouer hard, there commeth a great sicknes and sore, that is called Pilosa,Addition (A kindly humor lacking heate or moysture, is turned to vlceration, and beginneth his swellings like a ball or wenne: but if the hu∣mour retourne shortlye after delyue∣raunce, then Pilosa disolueth into his former kinde,) and the ache ceaseth not till matter and corruption commeth out as saith Aristotle. Also he sayth lib. 6. that beastes with many pappes, bring sorth manye at a time, and they haue teates diuided, as it fareth in a Bitch, and in a Sowe. When a Sowe far∣roweth, shée giueth the first pappe to the first Pigge, and the nexte to the se∣conde, and so of the other. And beasts with fewe teates bring foorth fewe at a time, as a Woman and an Ele∣phant,Women are lyttle behol∣ding to Raolo me, that let a vvo∣man be∣tvveene a Sovv and an Ele∣phant. that hath teates set afore in the breast.
Then the pappe is a néedfull member to feede and nourish the childe, & to take menstruall bloud to turne into milke: & to cause ye bloud that is vnpured, to dis∣solue, and to make it white, swéete, and thicke, and to defend the breast and the heart, and to know Sexus and ages, and is shewer of corruption. And the pappe is rounde, euenlong, sinewye, fleshre, dennie, and fully set to the teeth of chil∣dren. ¶Of the Lungs. Cap. 35. Pulmo.THe lunges be the bellowes of ye hart: for in the lungs is a spirit that blow∣eth and moueth, and receiueth and put∣teth out aire. Or els, the lungs be called Pulmo in Latine, because it beateth in opening of it selfe, that it maye take in breth, and thrusting together may: put it out.Addition Vnto the lungs belong the thote boll, that is to say, the gul of the throte, the lung pipe and weo pertaining to the lyghts and to the heart, conueying aire to them both, and diuideth it selfe by many pipes within the lungs. The lungs or lights, are called the bellowes of the body, for it draweth and sendeth forth againe the aire, with the which, the hart & other members be tēpered, and fashioned much like an Oxe hofe: and is in continuall mouing, in draw∣ing in and out of breath, as saith Isidor. And the lunges are made of flesh softe & airely, full like to the fome that is run & crudded, as saith Con. The lunges help∣eth the heart, and beclippeth it al about, and serueth the heart of colde ayre to make it temperate: also the lunges bée the instrument of the spirite and of the voyce. The spirite and breath is néede∣full for the heart to draw in aire to coole the heart, and to put out superfluitie and fumositie by chosing of the lunges. And therefore the lungs be a meane betwéen the heart and the throate, that colde aire breake not sodainly into the heart: but rather to temper the ayre that is recey∣ued. Also the lunges are the lykenesse of a lyttle folde, that kéepeth colde ayre to swage great heate of the heart, that is néedefull to make the voyce, and hotte ayre that is néedfull to the heart and to the breath. For without the lungs may no voyce be formed neither breath, as sayth Aristotle li. 13. And for these cau∣ses the flesh of the lunges is softe, and smooth, and hollow, to chaunge the ease∣lyer ayre into his owne kinde, that the spirite of lyfe may so passe easely, into the hollownesse of the heart, to kéepe and saue the lyfe of a beast: and it is gene∣rall as Aristotle saith, that euery brea∣thing beast hath lungs, and all beastes that goe doth breath, and some water beasts doe breath, as the Dolphin. Also euery beast which gendreth hath blacke lunges, and much bloud through ye heate of kinde. The lungs of a beast, which layeth egges is lyttle and drye, and may swell, and is hollow, as saith Aristotle. And as he saith lib. 13. some beasts haue no lungs, but they haue branches in stéed of lungs. Also lib. 16. he saith, that euery beast that hath lunges, is hotter than a beast that hath no lunges: and a beast that hath lunges, hath much bloud in comparison to a beast that hath no lunges. And the lunges be grieued many wayes: Sometime by the reumaticke humor comming to the pipes of ye lungs, and then be diuers passions bred, by di∣uers floating of humours to the princi∣ples of the lungs, as Squinancie; tisike, cough, hoarcenesse, hasknesse of the voyce, and such other. And sometime by gendring of humours in the wosen and pennis of the lunges: and so commeth Tisike, and other dreadfull passions, as it fareth in them, that spitte bloude and corrupt matter, as sayeth Constan∣tine. Also sometime the lungs be grieued by botches in the substaunce thereof, and that commeth of sharpnesse of a humor, which fléeteth to the substaunce of the lunges and such a passion is not light∣ly cured.Vlsuratiō Pestuma∣tion. For when the substaunce of the lunges hath botches by the sharpnes of the humour that commeth thereto,Congel∣lation. it may not be lyghtly closed and cured, for the tendernesse and continuall mouing of the lunges. And so then the aire drawen in at the
hole of the botch broken vanisheth ease∣ly away: and therefore it sufficeth not to temper the heate of the heart, but oft for scarcitie of aire drawen in, the heart it selfe fainteth and dyeth. Also libr.13. Aristotle saith, that if a beast draweth breath in and out, while that he eateth, and so some part of the meate falleth in∣to the hollownesse of the pipes of the lunges, then the beast cougheth, and sometime by mishappe is strangeled and choaked. For coughing is nought els-but mouing of ye vertue of the soule to put out superfluities, that be about the instruments of the spirite, as saith Con∣stant. Then gather ye by these things aforesayd, that the lunges be the proper instrument of the heart, for it cooleth the heart, and by subtiltie of his substaunce chaungeth the ayre, that is drawen in, and maketh it more subtill. The lungs shapeth the voyce, and ceaseth neuer of mouing. For it closeth it selfe and spre∣deth, and kéepeth the aire to helpe the heate in his dennes and holes. And ther∣fore a beast may not lyue vnder the wa∣ter without stifling, but as long as hée maye holde in the ayre that is gathered within. The lunges by continuall mo∣uing putte off ayre that is gathered within, either cleanseth and purgeth it, and ministreth continuall and couena∣ble féeding to the vitall spirit, and depar∣teth the heart from the instruments of féeling, and breedeth fomie humours, and beclyppeth a side halfe the substaunce of the heart.A hate∣ning of death. And when the lungs be grie∣ued by any occasion, it speedeth to death ward, and letteth and disquieteth ye wor∣kings of the vertue of lyfe. All these things saith Constantine by order. AdditionNext vnto the lunges, is the mid∣dresse, called Diaphragma, Septū trans∣uersum, and Precodi, it is a thicke skinne, which diuideth the vpper part of the body from the neather part, that is to say, the heart and lunges from the splene and liuer. ¶Of the heart. Cap. 36. Cor. Cardia.THe heart is tearmed Cor in Latine, and hath that name of Cura, busines, for therin is all businesse and cause of wit and of knowing: and is nigh the lunges to be tempered by remedie of the moyst lungs, if it be het with wrathe. The hert is set in ye middle of ye body of a beast, to giue & to sende lyfe & mouing to all ye mēbers of ye body, as saith Isid. And Constantine sayth, That the heart is a fleshie substaunce, dennie, hard, hol∣low, euen, long, and round, and the heart is hollow to kéepe heate, and the heart is the foundation of powres to all the bo∣dy, and it is dennie and hollow, to moue it selfe the more easely closing and ope∣ning: and it is hard, that it be not light∣ly grieued and hurt: and it is round, to haue therein the more plentie of spirits: and it is euenlong, shapen as a toppe, to make the working of kinde heate that commeth alwayes into the sharpe ende, the more strong. And the heart is set betwéene the two hollownesses of the breast, in the middle of the beast, that the spirite of lyfe may come from the heart, as it were from the middle of the vtter parts of all the body, and the head of the heart that hath the sharpe ende, is set in ye left part of a mans body. And for that the sharpe ende of the heart, hath most strength in that side, and the spirit of lyfe is therein, therefore in the left arme the pulse is most strongest, and the heart li∣eth toward the left side of a man, to tem∣per the coldnesse of the left side by heate of the heart. And the hart hath two hol∣lownesses, one in the left side, that com∣meth sharpe: and one in the right side, that is within, and these two hollownes∣ses be called the celles of the heart.Celles or concauits And betwéene these two celles, is one hole, that some men call a veyne, other, an hollow waye. And this hole is broad afore the right side, and straight afore the left side. And that is néedfull to make the bloud subtill; that commeth from the right wombe to the left, and so the spirit of lyfe maye be bred the easelier in the left wombe. Augustine in the booke, De differencia spiritus & animae, saith, that in the right wombe of the heart is more of bloud than of spirite: and in the left wombe the contrary. For there the spirite of lyfe is wedde to giue the beast
lyfe, and commeth by certayne veynes spread all about. The lefte part of the hart hath two holes, one within ye vees of the veyne that bringeth bloud from the heart to the lungs: The other hole is it, from the which commeth the great∣ter arterie, that is the shape and forme of arterie veynes and wayes, of all the bodie. And the pulses thereby be bredde in the heart, and namely in the left syde, for the cause that is sayd afore. Also the right part hath two holes, one commeth & entreth into the veyne which is called Concaua, and bringeth bloud from the Liuer to the holownesse of the hart. And of the other hole commeth ye veyns of the organ and his wayes, to féede the lungs. And these holes be couered with certain small skinnes, the which skinnes open and send bloud from the heart. And the they close and let the comming againe. In either wombe of the heart is a peece formed as an eare without. And these two peeces be called the eares of ye hart: and in them the veynes, organnes, and stringes he placed The hart hath in the bredth thereof two grystly bones, which be called the seates of the heart. About the heart goeth a maner clothing, that is called the shryne and cofre of the heart. And this clothing is fastened with the clothings or pacles of the breast. This clothing is not ioyned to nigh the heart, least the mouing of the hart should be let, which is nedefull to the hart for the foundation of kindely heate, where∣by a beast is bred.Speciall kindeling of kindly heate. Hue vsque Constan∣tinus. lib 4. cap. 21. Also Aristotle li. 1. sayth, that there is no member in which bloud is so set as in the heart: Bloud is placed in the lungs, but it is more sted∣fastly placed in the heart. Also as he saith lib. 11 the hart is set of euery beast in the myddle of the breast, except man. For the heart of a man leaneth towarde the left syde. And the sharp ende of the heart leaneth inward to the breast, in all bea∣stes, except fishes. For in them the sharp ende is hanging towarde a parte of the head, in the place of ioyning of the gylls. Also he sayth there, that euery beast that hath bloud, hath lyuer and heart. Also libro. xii. he sayth, that in the heart is the well and the beginning of the veynes & the first vertue which breedeth bloude: and the bloud of the heart, is cleane, cleere, hot, and of greater feeling, and ac∣cording to wit and vnderstanding. And he sayth ther, that the well or beginning of feelyng of beasts, is in the heart, and the wits of feelyng, are continually with the heart. And lib. 13. it is sayd, that the heart is set in the formost parte of the breast, in the middle: for it is the well of lyfe, and all mouing and all feeling is therein. The feelyng and mouing is not but in the former part of the heart, and therefore meane and last is distinguish∣ed. And the breath goeth first into ye in∣ward part of the heart: and the kinde of making and composition of the heart is of veynes, for it is of the kinde of veynes. And the scituation or place of the heart is conuenient, for it is set in the ouer place and in the formost: For because it is more noble, it is more kind∣ly ordayned in the nober place. Among all the members, the heat is most no∣biest: and therefore it is set in the mid∣dle of the body, as it is most expedient: for it is the accomplishment and perfec∣tion of the beast, and no member is so néedfull to the lyfe, as is the heart. Wherefore if the heart be hurt, ye beast cannot lyue: and therefore the bodye of the heart is in the middle: and the ma∣king thereof is in a sad body, & thicke, and kindly hollow. For the well of the veynes spring thereof: and it is hol∣low to receiue bloud, and is thick to saue it, and is the well of mouing, and in no member is bloud without veynes, but in the hart alone: for bloud commeth out of the heart, and goeth into the veynes: and no bloud commeth to the heart out of other places. For the heart is the be∣ginning and well of bloud, and the first member that hath bloud, as it is shew∣ed in Anathomia. For the making of the heart séemeth first of bloud, and is the beginning & wel of mouing, of liking & of vnliking. And generally of all wits, the mouing beginneth of the heart, and thervnto resorteth, and the vertue therof is spred & straight into all the members, & after one manner. And in some beasts
is a bone founde in the heart to susteine the heart, as bones bée set in other mem∣bers. And in the hearts of beasts of great courage be thrée wombes or cells. And in the heart of a beast with a little heart be onely two chābers. And for this cause a wombe ought to be in the heart of a beast. For the heart must be the place of receiuing of pure bloud & temperate in quātitie & qualitie: and is ful hot & moist, for the heart is a member, in the which is the first vertue. Huc vsque Ari. li. 13. where he speaketh much of this matter. Also liber. 16. he saith, that the heart of a beast must be complement, therefore the heart is made first, because of the heate of the heart, & for the springing of veines out therof, kinde hath set afore the heart a colde member, that is the braine. And therfore the head in generation is created after the heart. And it happeneth that the heart is grieued either by binding toge∣thers of other members (as sayth Con∣stantine.) Or else by distemperaunce of it selfe. For if passing heat haue mastrie in the heart, the bloud of the heart boy∣leth and moueth, and so the vitall spirite is grieued. For if the heart be constrai∣ned by ouermuch colde,Anaoian∣ses of the heart. the bloud is congealed, and therefore commeth death. And sometime the heart is grieued by some Postume, that infecteth the coffer thereof: and then the beast liueth not long. Also the heart sometime quaketh, & that commeth of watrie moisture shed and spread in the skinnes of the heart, the which moisture letteth the due ope∣ning and closing thereof. And so it sée∣meth to a sicke man, yt the heart moueth from place to place. Also it happeneth that the heart hath a default that cōmeth of wasting of spirites, and of spirituall vertue and of passing out of spirits. And this doth chaunce either of too great re∣pletion that grieueth and confoundeth the vertue, or else of too greate wasting, that wasteth the vertue, as it fareth in them that haue a Cardiaca,Cardise passio, the cardiacke passion, it is about  heart, be∣ing dep∣led and ouercome vvith fat∣nesse. and in some men that sweate too much or drinke too sharpe drinke. Also sometime the heart is grieued by some sumosities & smoake, corrupt and venimous entering to the heart, and corrupting the openings of the heart, wherevpon death followeth a∣none. Also sometime the heart is grie∣ued by stopping of the hollowe vain, whereby the bloud that is the féeding of the heart, and of the vitall spirit, is war∣ued. In these manners and in many other the heart is grieued as sayth Constant. liber. 9. chap. 23. Galen in Tegni. sayth, that the vertue and complection of the heart is knowne by these tokens:The com¦plection of  heart. That is to wit, by greate breathing and blow∣ing, by swifte pulse and thicke, and ha∣stie, by swift working, by wrath, hardi∣nesse, and madnesse: by largenesse of brest and hairenesse thereof. All these bée tokens that heate hath masterie in the heart. And al the tokens contrary to those betoken the contrary héereof. Upon the which place Haly in his commeth saith, that in a man the heart is as a root and a more in a trée. The organe or long pipe that commeth of the left cell of the hart, is like the stocke or legge of the trée: the which a good waye runneth forth as boughs of a trée into two partes, of the which one goeth vpward and that other downward. They spread abroad & diuide as it were spraies or small boughs into all the bodie, euen to the arteries of the head. And when the heart openeth, all the organes & vaines open together: & when the heart closeth, they close also: and by opening of them colde ayre is drawen from the vtter part of the heart to the in∣ward part thereof: and in closing there∣of foule smoake that is bread in them, is wrong out and drawne out some deale: and by ye drawing out thereof the com∣plection thereof is made euen. And as he saith the vertue of moouing that is pight in the heart, runneth and passeth by the weson & vains to euery part of the body, and bringeth to euery of them proper life and proper kinde heate. The breast ser∣ueth the heart in opening of it selfe, and drawing in of colde aire, and closing of it selfe, and putting out of smeakye vapour that is bred in the heart. Where∣fore if the breast, weson, and vaines, and other instruments of lyfe be safe, the vertues be concordaunt in theyr work∣kings: and if they bée sicke and grie∣ued, the vertues bée not obedient.
Therefore the goodnesse and euill of lys that serue, either helpe or let the heart to worke and to doe the dades thereof. And therefore when the heart is strong, and hath the members therto obe∣dient, both in opening and closing well disposed, then commeth from the heart strong breathing, and strong pulse, and strong working, after the goodnes of the member and of the vertue. And when the vertue is feeble and slacke, it may not spred the wosen and veynes into euery place of the body, and therefore breath∣ing is lesser, and pulse also. Also if the heart be too colde and too moyst, and the pulse softe, the man is berest of boldnesse and hardinesse, and is fearefull and slow, and bare of haire in the breast, for scar∣citie of smokie vapour, of yt which haire is bred. And if the heart be too drie and colde, it maketh the pulse rough, harde, and small, & slow breath and selde, name∣ly, if the beast be lyttle & straight. Huc vsque Haly super Tegni Galen. AdditionThe heart is the principall member of a man, & it is the member that hath the first life in man, and it is the last thing that doth dye in man. The heart doth viuificate or quicken all other mē∣bers: and it is sooner decayed of vital operation, by thought and care, than by distemperaunce of homour or vnsatia∣ble sufet: and yet the gretest of these euills, is to be auoyded in time, by a godly regard and Christian abstinence, And this of the heart sufficeth. Of the breath. Cap. 37. Anheli∣us. rinus. Peuma∣Respira∣tio. Sraculū Hippaco.THe breath is the mouing of the hart and of the lunges, gendered through drawing in of colde ayre, to temper kinde heate, and expulsing out of the same ayre: for the heart by no meanes can suffer the lacke of drawing of aire, for if the heart should rest a lyttle while of drawing of aire, it should be grieued, or fayle. And therefore the heart hath contrary mouings: For it openeth the lunges, and draweth in ayre: and clo∣seth the lunges, and putteth out ayre. And so the breath by drawing in of aire tempereth the heate of the heart, and by putting out of ayre, it cleanseth ye heart of smokie vapour, and also it seedeth and nourisheth the spirituall lyfe. Also by strength and feeblenes of breath is shew∣ed the state of the spirituall members: as it is sayd afore of the properties of the limges. Also in breathing there is more ayre drawen in, than is put out. For a great deale turneth into the seeding and nourishing of the spirituall life: and the breath is taken within the lungs, and the beast lyueth without stffeling, as long as the spirite is cloased within the instrument of breth. Also when the in∣struments of the breath be grieued, the spirites are corrupt, and chaungeth after the qualytie of the lymme and the in∣strument that is grieued, as saith Con∣stantine. The breath is sometime grieued by default of vertue that moueth and ru∣leth the sinewes. Sometime by stopping of the instruments of the spirite, that commeth of great and thicke humours, or of great ventositie and winde, that stoppeth the waye of the breath: or els of some postume of the lungs, that grie∣ueth the cloathing and the skinnes of the heart: or of the great heate of the heart, hauing masterie in the substance of the lunges. By reason of all which diseases, the breath is made feeble and scant. And if the breath be swifte and lyttle, it betokeneth strong heate, that stifleth and ouercommeth the vertne, and namely if the touch be hot, and if there followeth thirst and drinesse of the tongue. And colde breath and lyttle in Febribus acutis, is token of death: for slownesse of breath betokeneth default of vertue of out putting: and coldnesse be∣tokeneth quenching of kinde heate: and default of vertue in the substance of the heart, and of the instruments of spirite. Also chaunging of breath commeth of vniuersall corruption of the inner mem∣bers, as it fareth in leprosies, in yt which the breath stinketh and is corrupted, and infeteth the aire that is nigh. Where∣fore the blowing of such is wont to in∣fect those that come neere them: it infect∣eth and corrupteth the ayre neere about, lyke as the hissing of the Serpent, cal∣led,
Regulas, whose blowing corrupt∣eth the aire, and slaieth the birds eng, as Aucen and Constantine say. ¶Of the Stomacke. Cap. 38. Stoma∣chus.THe stomacke is the doore of the wombe, and taketh meat and drinke, and sendeth it to the guts, as sayth Isi∣dore. And Constantine saith, That the stomacke is round, euenlong, hollowe within, rough in the bottome, manifolde and fleshly, and hath two mouthes, one aboue and another beneath. And it is rough and manyfolde to holde the better the meate that it taketh: for if it were slipper and smooth within, by slidernesse thereof the meate should passe out with∣out digesting. And it is fleshie in the bo∣tome to comfort digestion. The flesh of the stomacke is hotte and also moyst:Ventricu∣lus. of which qualities the digestion is specially strengthened in the bodie of the beast. And it is round to be more able to take & receiue the more meate. And if the sto∣macke were of another shape, three cor∣nerd or such other, uill humours there∣in shuld easily be gathered to corruption, and rotting. For such a shape might not for corners be dryed and cleansed of su∣perfluities. It is euenlong for yt it should not presse and thrust the spiritual mem∣bers by too great roundnesse therof, & also that it may the more easilye be ioyned with the ouer & the neather parts. Fur∣ther the stomacke, and specially of man, is straight in the ouer part, and wide and broad in the neather parte, and that also is néedfull. For sith a man goeth more vpright then other beasts, his meate go∣eth downward alway: And therefore the neather breath and widenesse of his sto∣macke is profitable to take therein the more meate & drinke. Also it is sinewie to haue the more subtilnesse of feeling & vertue and strength of appetite. Also it is compassed in with yt liuer to haue of the liuer the more heat to conco & digest the meat and drinke. For the liuer with his fiue pipes beclippeth the stomacke, & gi∣ueth it heat: and taketh inyee, grease, and humours, whereof bloud is bred by cer∣teine veines, yt the Phisitions call Mise∣acas, & turneth grease,Attrac∣tiue, Nu∣tritiue, Con or∣matiue, drawing, nourish∣ing, and comfor∣ting the bloud. iure & humour into bloud by strong working of heate. And Constantine saith, if the stomacke be substauntially hot, it digesteth well great & grose chawed meates, and wast∣eth liking meates, and digesteth too soone, and for likenesse it desireth most hotte meate, & may not suffer hunger. And if ye stomack be cold, it defieth not wel great meat, and is soone grieued therwith, and chaungeth them some into sowre & cor∣rupt humours. And a dry stomack is soone a thirst, and a little water sufficeth not thereto: and if the water be to much, it maketh roring & rolling in the wombe. And if the stomacke be moist, it thirsteth not: but it desireth moist meat, & desireth but litle. Hue vsque Con. li. 1. ca. 13. And he saith. li. 9. cha. 26. that to the stomack chaunce diuerse griefes: as euill digestiō, fumosities, flure, spuing, yering, blowing, swelling & belking: and these come of di∣uers causes. For somtime they chance of euill complection: somtime of too much emptines: somtime of too much repletion of meate & drinke: somtime of too great sharpnesse & biting of humours: somtime of putrifaction of the heart: sometime of default of vertue digestiue: sometime of the qualitie of ye meate, which if it punch and pricke, the stomacke is tormented & pricked, and compelleth it to passe out: or else if it bo gleamie the stomack is made slipper, and so the meate passeth out ea∣sily: And sometime griefe of the stomack commeth of the féeblenesse of the vertue of outputting: and griefe of the stomack commeth not onely of it selfe,Either by vomiting or laske. but also of company and by meanes of other mem∣bers. And the stomacke is the purueiout and husband of all the body, and the sto∣macke taketh feeding for all the mem∣bers: and serueth all the members ther∣of, as it needeth, as sayth constantine. Through the pipe called Gula,Addition and the interiour Colli Fistula, the inner pipe or conduct of the necke that commeth frō the neck to the stomack, & through it is conueied the meate & drinke, which by the mouth is sent into the stomacke, the vpper parte of the sto∣macke is called, Os Stomachi.
¶Of the Liuer. Cap. 39. Aepar. lecur. epar.THe Liuer is called Epar in Latine, and lecur also, and if hath that name for fire hath place therin, that passeth vp spéedely to the braine, & commeth thence to the eden, and to the other wittes and lyins. And ye luler by his heat draweth inward sweat and iuyce, and turneth it into bloud, and serueth the bodie and members therewith to the vse of féeding: and is called Epar, for that it féedeth such members. In the lyuer is the place of voluptuousnesse and lyking of the flèsh,In y• tem∣ples of the pagan Gentiles, the lyuer was sacri∣ficed: read more of this in y• Chroni∣cle of the doome. the endes of the lyuer be called Fibre, for they be strayght & passing as toūgs, and beclyppeth the stomacke, and giueth heate to digestion of meate & and they be called Fibre, because the igroman∣cers brought them to the Altars of their God Phoebus, and offered them there, and then they had aunsweres. Huc vs∣que Isidorus. Constantine sayth, that the syuer is a member, hot, hollow, and slender, set in the right side of the beast, vnder the stomacke, to helpe the first di∣gestion with his heate: and also hée is loudy and e in colour, for the vnpour thereof is turned into humour of blod, by full great heat: and he is some drale hard, that he be not soone Suf and grie∣ued, and the liuer is diuers in men in  neilie of parte, for in men it is grea∣ter, than in other beasts of the same quantisie. The number of parts thereof, in some is double, & that is at the least: in some treble, or quatreble, or at ye most quintreble. And out of the broad hollow∣nesse of the lyuer commeth a veyne, that Phisitions call Porta: & this veyne, or he come out,Vena porte is departed in fiue small veynes, entring into parts of the lyuer. The lyuer draweth in his hollownesse, the vapour of the first digestion by cer∣taine veynes, and by boylyng of kinde heate doth make digestion: secondly, it tourneth the bloudie lumpe, into y• kinde of foure humors: and what is hot and moyst passeth into the kinde of bloud, & is receiued and kept in the veynes: and what is hot and drye passeth into ye kind of Cholera, and is receiued properly in the skibbet of the gall: and what is cold & drye passeth into the kind of Me∣lancholy, & his proper receit is ye skibbet of the splene & what is floting and ra∣trie, passeth into fleame, and the receiuer thereof is the kings. Héereof it follow∣eth, that the lyuer is the chiefe founda∣tion of kindly vertue, and gretest helper of the first digestion in the stomacke: & the lyuer maketh perfectly the second di∣gestion in the stomacke, in the hollow∣nesse of his owne substaiunce, and depar∣teth cleane and pured, from vncleane & vnpured, and sendeth féeding to all the members, and excited loue or bodelye lust, and receiueth diuers passions. And the lyuer is grieued sometime by great seruent heate, that openeth the poores within: by whose opening, the vertue dimishing away, the liuer worketh more sacklye. And sometime by ouermuch colde, which letteth the vapours that is drawen, to be turned into bloudy kinde: and héereof many times commeth the dropsie. For the dropsie is nothing els, (as the Philosopher saith) but errour of the vertue of digestion in the hollownes of the lyuer: for if this vertue erte and faile in his working, néedes the bloud is corrupt, and if the bloud be vndissolued, the body that is fed therewith swelleth and stretcheth, and thereof commeth the dropsie. Also the lyuer is grieued by euil cōplection of his substance, & that is by ye distemperance of ye foure humors: the which distemperaunce hath mastery in the lyuer. Also it is grieued by stop∣ping of his veynes: for it happeneth oft that the great humors and gleymie are gathered in the veynes of the lyuer, and so when the bloud is closed, and maye not passe out, it causeth strayghtnes and stopping. The same also channeth by too great heate, drying the bloude hu∣mour, and making the substaunce of the veynes of the lyuer straight, that ye bloud may not fréely shedde it selfe to féede the other members of the bodye. The same may happen sometime by too great colde congealyng the humours, and making straight the wayes of the lyuer, and tes∣ting the passage of bloude to féede the members.
The same also happneth by an impo∣stume, grieuing the substaunce of the li∣uer, and bréeding matter therein. Al∣so the same happeneth by winde inclo∣sed, stretching the tender skinnes of the lyuer, and also by discordaunce of mem∣bers breeding woe and sorrowe. Also it is ofte grieued by vnmeasurable passing or running out of bloud, that commeth of opening of the veynes, that spring out of the lyuer: and that commeth of too great sharpnesse of bloud, or els of too great replecion, or féeblensse of vertue of holding, or of too great businesse and labour, as Constan, sayth. And yet of the kinde & tokens of complection of the liuer Galen saith in Tegni, a token of ye liuer when it is hot, is largnesse and widenes of the veynes that be not pulses. Upon this place Haly saith, when great heate hath the masterie in the liuer, the liuer is more, and the veyne thereof wareth more wide and great: and when that veyne is great, all the veyns that be not veynes of the pulse, in all the members be great,yelowish cholar. and the bloud thereof is hot, & sometime, thereof is bred Citrina Cho∣lera. And by continuance and passing of time after the state of youth, the citrius Cholera is burnt, and thereof is made blacke Cholera, and diuers passions are bred, increase, and come of such Cholera, And sometime the coldnesse of the heart with andeth the passing and ouer great heate of the lyuer: for the lyuer is ruled & gouerned in his working by ye heart, as by the superiour and more noble and worthier member. And this same sayth Aristotle lib. 13. where he setteth yt hart before the lyuer, as ruler and gouernour thereof. Also Galen saith, that the heate of the hart tempereth ye coldnes of ye ly∣uer, & signe & token of coldnesse and dri∣nesse of the lyuer, is straightnesse of the veynes & scarsitie of bloud: as softnes of veynes & much bloud, is token of moy∣sture. Also Haly sayth, that the lyuer is the well of moysture of the bodye, and therefore if the lyuer that is the roote and well of humour be drye, it may not worne nor chaunge any member of the bodie to humour, neyther to moysture, to withstand his drinesse. The drinesse and the moysture of the lyuer is more or lesse after the dispositi∣on of the heart. Then the lyuer is a no∣ble and precious member, by whose al∣teration the body is altered: and the ly∣uer sendeth féeding and vertues of fee∣ding to the other members, to the nea∣ther without meane, and to the ouer, by meane of the heart, as Galen saith. Yet contrariwise Aristotle saith, lib. 13 that the heart doth all that is aforesaid, by meane of the lyuer; which of these opi∣nions is of more truth and certaintie, & put and leaue to the iudgement and dis∣cretion of other men. The lyuer is none other thing,Addition than congealed bloud, which doth ralifie the stomacke like the fire vnder a pot, and doth make digestiō, & as the third prin∣cipall member in man, in whom rest∣eth the animall spirites. And whereas many affirme, that mans lyuer maye waste, it is not so: yet may the lyuer haue many and diuers infirmities, as heate, water gulls, kernells and opilati∣ons, with such lyke diseases. The lyuer is hot and drye. ¶And this that we haue treated of at this time is sufficient touching the properties of the lyuer. ¶Of the Gall. Chap. 40. THe Gall is called Fel in Latine,Fel, chola for it is a case of a thin sell, and conay∣neth humour that is moyst and bitter, for red Cholera hath masterie and do∣mination therein, as sayth Isidore.Addition And the gall receiueth the refuse and dregs of the bloud, and it cleaueth chiefely to the lappes of the liuer. For the case of the Gall is a certaine skinne, set vpon the bounch or rising of the lyuer, and hath two sprayes: by the one therof, red Cholera is borne to the guts, to comfort ye vertue of out putting, yt the guts may be purged and cleansed the better, & the more easilye, by the sharpnesse of that Cholera: By the other spraye, Cholera is brought to the stomacke, that it maye with heate thereof helpe the vertue of digestion. Then the Gall is a member hot and
dry,The Gall hot and drye. set on the rising part of the lyuer: & is the propre receiuer of red Coler, and helpeth to clense the bloud from red Co∣ler. For by the presence of Coler the bloud should be burnt, but if the super∣fluitie therof had a place within the case of the Gall, and the Gall by heate ther∣of helpeth and susteineth the séething of meate and drinke, and perteth and suc∣keth by his subtiltie, and poncheth and prycketh by his byting and sharpnesse, and gnaweth and byteth the guttes, and exepteth and styrreth to put out super∣fluities and styncking things: And the Gall for great heate is most bytter, and by medlyng thereof with sweetenesse of the bloud, chaungeth or altereth. Huc vsque Constantinus, Aristotle, lib. 3. sayth, that the Dolphyn hath no Gall: and all kynde of foules and of sysh, and all maner of beastes, which lay Egges, haue Galles. Some haue more and some haue lesse: And by some manor of wise it is in subtil waies, that stretcheth from the Liuer to the guttes, by one maner, these waies stinken: And one maner the Gall is in a gutter diuersly, for some∣time in the nether, and sometyme in the myddle, and sometime in the ouer, and some foules haue Galls priuely hyd in a gutte, as Culuours or Doues, and wa∣ter Crowes, and Swallowes. And some haue a great Gall on the Lyuer, and in the wombe, and in a gutte, as in a Gos∣hauke, and in a Kite or Glede. Also, lib. 14. Aristotle sayth, that some beasts haue no Galls, as Horses, Mules, Asses, and Olyphants. The Camel hath no Gall distinguished, but he hath smal veynes, in which is gall. Also some men haue great gall in the Lyuer, and some haue not so great. And the Gall is a certaine superfluitie, which is gathered as dragges in the Wombe: But yet kynde vseth superfluitie to cer∣taine help and succour. In them that haue the kynde of the Lyuer whole and sounde, and well disposed and ordred, and haue kyndely swéete bloud, no Gall is founde: Or if it be founde, it is but lyt∣tle, and that in right small veynes. And therefore theyr. Lyuer that haue no gall, is of good colour, and more swéeter then the other. In a beast that hath Gall, is somewhat, which is of very swéet smell, founde vnder the Gall: For by gathe∣ring of the Gall into one place, the other parts being nigh ther about, are the swée∣ter and more pleasant. Also the Gall by his subtiltie & sharp∣nesse, arueth and cutteth great humors, and wasteth them by his dryenesse. And therefore to clense the eye sight, and to make it cleare, and to put of the impedi∣ment and lette of the spirit of lyfe, and namely the Gall of & oshauke; and of other foules, which lyue by rauine, is ne∣cessary, as sayth Con in Viatico. And by continuing hease, and great boyling of the humour of the Gall, comming again to the Lyuer, the bloud is infected, which being infected, bothe after the nourish∣ments that are sent to féede the mēbers, and apphyreth and enfedeth them: and also maketh and causeth the skinne to be yelow of colour or els gréene, or blacke. The tollens of those passions be these: The infection of all the body, thirst, byt∣ternesse of ye mouth, che of the forhead, rynging in the eares, yelow brine with yelow some continuall yelow spewing. And sometyme it happeneth, that the pooes of the case of the Gall be stopped and letted: And then Coler infecteth the Lyuer, and bréedeth the same maner of passion. Therfore in Viatico, Con saith, that when the case of the Gal is greued, that than saylleth the vertue thereof, by the which he vseth to drawe out the red Coler of the Lyuer: And so the Coler a∣byding with the bloud, the bloud is dy∣ed & chaunged. Also he sayth, that when Apostume is bred in the wayes by the which Coler passeth to the Gall, the Coler turneth to the Lyuer, and passeth about with the bloud into all the body. For if the nether hole be stopped, than Coler passeth vp to the ouer waye, and to the stomacke, and than the fare is yelow, and the mouth is bitter and dry, burning and thirst in the stomacke. The Uryne and dyrt commeth whyle, for that Coler is farre from the Lyuer and the Keynes; where the Uryne is wont to be dyed. And if the ouer hole be stopped, than Cōler dyeth the nether
partes: And tokens be séene that be con∣trary to the foresayd tokens, as Con∣stantine sayth. The gall lyeth vpon the liuer like a bladder, hauing a skin ea∣sie to breake, named Cista Fels, the Filme of the Gall. ¶This that is spoken and treated of the Gall, sufficeth touching to this matter. ¶Of the Splene. Cap. 41. Splen. Liena.THe Milt is called Splen in Latine, and hath that name of Supplere, to fulfill: for it supplyeth the lefte side be∣fore the lyner, that it be not emptio. And some men suppose,The har∣monie of the Ele∣mentall humours. that the mylt in the cause of laughing. For by the Splene we are moued to laugh: by the Gall, we be wroth: by the Heart we be wise: by the Brayne, we feele: by the Ly∣uer, we loue. ¶And if these be in good state, whole, and well disposed, the beast is all whole, as saith Isidore. And Constantine saith, That the mylt is set in the lefte side, & the shape thereof is euenlong, & is som∣what hollow toward the stomacke, and rising vp toward the ribbes. In these two places it is bounde with certayne small clothings. And men say, that the mylt hath two veynes, by the one ther∣of, he draweth to him blacke Cholera, of the bloud of the lyuer, and by the other he sendeth that that sufficeth to the sto∣macke, to comfort the appetite thereof. The mylt helpeth to sulfill the default of the body in the left side, and to an∣swere to the lyuer in the other side, to the conseruation of ye stomacke, to draw to him the dregges of bloud, for clean∣sing of the lyuer: and to send what suf∣ficeth to the appetite and desire to com∣fort the stomacke. The substaunce of the mylt is thin and hollow, to drawe easelye the humour of dregges: and he is blacke, for the lykenesse of black Cho∣lera, that he receiueth and contayneth: and he is also set in the left side, between the ribs and the stomack, for temperance and cooling of the lefte side, and for to saue the heating of the stomacke, to whom he is ioyned. He is somewhat hard, that he be not lightly hurt by quan∣titie and qualitie of the burnor of dregs, that he draweth and taketh. The mylt is ofte grieued: sometime by the default of vertue of containing and holding, and that is, when he maye not drawe to it selfe humour, nor is not able to sende it that is drawen to another place. And sometime by stopping, when great hu∣more and gleymie be gathered, and stop∣peth the wayes of the mylt, and let the working thereof. Also sometime, by too great repletion of humours, for humors fléeng to the mylte are drawen thether, for kindly working therrof, and maye not be doyded at the full, and therefore the humours encrease gleymie and hard in the hollownes of the mylt, insomuch, that it seemeth, that the mylte groweth bigger. But by the sentence of Hippo∣crates, if the splene be great, the body wi∣thereth and fadeth: and if the mylt di∣minisheth and fadeth, the body fatteth. Therefore if the mylte be somewhat more drawing to lyttlenesse, than to muchnesse, it is a signe and token of good complection, as saith Constantine lib.9. cap. 22. The mylt is a spongeous substance,Addition lieng vnder the short ribbe, in the left side, by which equall of kinde, man is disposed to mirth, otherwise there fol∣low, the passions of sadnesse. ¶Of the Bowells. Cap. 42. THe bowells be commonly called the guts,Viseribus Albegmi∣na. Viseus. Intestina. Entera. which are set vnder and subiect to the members of life, as saith Isidore. And they be called Intestina in Latine, and be bounds togethers within with a bonde, and beare a manner seruice and reuerence to the higher members, and he their necessary instruments, and they be called Viscera in Latine, as it were ha∣uing life: for they be néere about those places that be nigh the heart, where the lyfe is bred and ingendred. Huc vsque Isidorus. And Constantine saith, That the guts be members, which holde euery each other within hollow and round, set into the wombe in length and in bredth, The making and substaunce of them,
is like to the stomacke. And they be nū∣bered fire principall guts: three of them be subtill, and be ioyned aboue: and three are grose, and begin from beneath. The first gut of the three subtill guts, is cal∣led, Duodenum, for in his length by the measure of euery man, he containeth twelue inches: & this gut stretcheth vp by the ridge, and bendeth toward no side. The second gut in Latine is called le∣iunium, to vnderstand in English, fast∣ing: for he is alway voyd of meate and drinke. And wise men and practisers tel, that when a beast is dead, that gutte is alwaye founde voyde and emptie: But some men say, as such as knowe Ana∣thomia, yt this gut putteth of all things from it selfe, and holdeth nothing to his owne feeding. The thirde little gut, is called in Latine Subtile, much lyke to the second, but he is neuer found with∣out somewhat of meate. Among ye other great guts, the first is called in Latine, Orbum, and hath a mouth in the subtill ende: and that gut hath that name, for he is in rest, as it were made a window, without the other mouth. And when other guts haue two mouths, that gut hath but one: and therefore he fareth as a sack, for he receiueth much, and putteth out but lyttle, in comparison to other guts. The seconde gut is set vnder Or∣bum, which is called the sacke, and this second gut is named leon:Of lleon. For in that gut is the sicknesse that is called lliaca pasaio gendered. The third gut is named Colon, in the language of Gréeke, and is ioyned fast to the neather opening of al the body: and in this gut is bred a right grieuous sicknesse, that is called Cellica pssi, that commeth either of great straightnesse of that gut, or els of gathe∣ring of great and colde humours, that stop that gut within, as saith Constant. and Galen super Aphor. By that that is afore sayd, it is knowen whereto the guts be needfull. For they chaunge the meate into féeding, and receiue the su∣perfluities in their hollownesse to dis∣charge kinde. And also heereto is néede∣full roundnesse of guts, and swellyng & solding, as sayth Constantine, that the meate from the stomacke cleaue some part in the hollownesse of the guts, and to put out superfluitie, and to hold what is néedefull for the beast: and they bee round, least any superfluitie gathered of the stomacke shuld abide in any corner, and breede corruption in the guts. Also the guts be clothed with two full subtill clothes and small, either wrapped there∣in, and that is needfull: for if the one were grieued, the other cloath may help. Also the guts be some deale folded and rough within, and the folding thereof is straight in bredth, to put out the super∣fluitie of dregges, and to with-hold co∣uenably what is needfull to foode. Also the guts be clustered and bound toge∣ther, so that the lesse may haue succour of the more, and small and feeble of the greater and stronger: that the working of the vertue of kinde, be made perfect & coueable to put out superfluities, & to with-hold what is needfull. Also liber. 2. Aristotle saith, that the kinde of guttes varieth and chaungeth in quantitie and qualytie by diuersitie of teeth in the iawes of a beast. Therefore he saith, that in all beasts with teeth in either ia, the gut is lesse than the gut in beasts with∣out teeth, & no beast hath an euen strayt gut, except he haue teeth in either iawe. And he saith there, that the wombe of a serpent is straight & like to a large gut, and if he be little by kind, he hath a gall in the guts, & if he be great, he hath a gal vpon ye liuer. Also li. 13. he saith, That all beasts with large & straight guts be full great gluttons: for by scarsitie of vse of meat & indigestion, he desireth indigest superfluitie of meate, & the meate passeth soone out, & therefore he desireth much, and seeketh meate alwaye. The guts and bowells are grieued in many manner wise, as saith Con∣stantine libro 9cap.26. Sometime by a cholariche humour, or by a melancho∣licke humour, fretting the guttes, and gnawing and bréeding the flure that is called Dissenteria, that is a right euill passion, and ofte bringeth to death as it is sayde in Aphorsin. If blacke Cholar come out in the beginning of a Flure, that Flure is deadlye. Also sometime by gnawing, punching,
and wounding of the guts, and that is by an vtter impostume, breeding matter & punching in the clothing of ye guts: or els by outward hurting & grieuing. Also they be somtime grieued by wind inclo∣sed, that haleth & stretcheth ye clothing & sinewes of the guts: and that is a bitter and grieuous paine, so that sometime it séemeth that the guts be fretted & woū∣ded: Also sometime by a humour great and sleumatike that stoppeth the nether parts of the guts, and letteth the out passing of the orders and bréedeth an E∣uill, which is called Iliaca passio, or els that euil which is called Collica passio,Of Colō. And each euill is pestilent and deadly, & full seldome healed and cured, and ofte slayeth the second day or the thirde, ex∣cept men haue succour hastely. For the other passions of the guts, seeke in the Treatise, De infirmitatibus, & Collica passione. ¶Of the Kidneyes. Cap. 43. THe kidneyes are called Renes in La∣tine:Renes. Nephroi, ye reyns of a mans backe. for of them springeth the hu∣mour Seminall, as sayth Varro, for the veynes and the maraow, sweate out a thin humour into the kidneyes, and that lycour is ofte resolued by the heate of Venus, and runneth and commeth, and sheddeth it selfe into the place of gen∣dring as sayth Isidore. And the place which is in the sides of the ioyntes of the ridge, in which be the seates of ye kid∣neyes, be called the loynes: and be cal∣led in Latine Lumbi, for lust and liking of the fleshly acte, as saith Isidore: For in men the cause of bodely lust, is in the kidney and loynes. And Const speaking of the kidneyes sayth, that they be made to sucke wa∣try humour from the lyuer, and to clense and purifie it, and the purgation there∣of, which is the vrine, the kidneyes sen∣deth to the bladder by the wayes of the vrine: and so sayth Haly also, Super Tegni. And he sayth, that the highest maker and Creator hath made and or∣dained two kidneyes to drawe watrye moysture of bloud from the lyuer, and to sende it to the bladder to passe out. A∣ristotle lib.13. saith, That the reynes bée made for the bladder, that so the work∣ing of the bladder, should be the better and the more perfect: For the reynes cleanse the superfluitie of moysture, that runneth to the bladder. Also he saith, that the right reyne is higher than the lefte, in euery beast that hath reynes, and that because in the right side, the heate is higher and stronger. Also he sayth, that in all beasts which haue reynes, the left reyne is lesse fatter than the right, and higher: For kinde in the right side is more light, and of more mouing & heate, for heate dissolueth and wasteth fatnes. Also the reynes be the vttermost of the inner members, and therefore they neede greate heate. Then consider, That the reynes are hot, and keepe kindly heate, and they temper the coldnes of ye ridge and of the ioynts of the ridge bone, and drain watry humours from the lyuer, & dyeth and coloureth bloud, and comfort∣eth the vertue of kinde, and bréedeth Se∣minall humor: and they be fleshly, hol∣low, round, and couered with fatnesse. They are fleshly and powrie, to drawe and to receiue the easelier, watrie super∣fluitie: they are round, that they should not gather no humour to rotting & cor∣ruption: and are cloased and warded with fatnesse, that they be not grieued with the coldnesse of the ridge boanes: and they receiue certaine veynes of the stomacke, that come out of the lyuer. In the which veynes the superfluitie of hu∣mour in the second digestion is brought to the reynes. Therefore if the sayde veynes be stopped and let in their office, the reynes be grieued and the liuer also. Sometime in the reynes fail diuers griefes, as sayth Constantine lib.2. cap.34. If the veynes of the lyuer be stop∣ped, the reynes lacke humour of blend to their féeding, and therefore they were leane & small. And if the neather wayes of them be constrained or straighted with heate either with colde, then by ye pre∣sence of superfluous humour, that com∣meth into their substance, they be ouer∣much stretched and dilated, and so con∣sequently corrupted, or els the humors being fordried, they putrifie and tourne into the stone.
AdditionThe reynes are also sundrye wayes grieued, with a postumate winde, that commeth of extreame colde, or of a fer∣uent heate. ¶Of the Bladder. Cap. 44. THe bladder is called Vesica in La∣tine,Vesica. Cystis. A mans bladder. and hath that name for taking and receiuing of winde, as sayeth Isi∣dore: for by drawing and receiuing of wind, the bladder openeth and spredeth: as contrariwise by sending out of winde it closeth and goeth togethers. And is cal∣led Vesicula in Latine as it were the diminutiue of Vesica, and it hangeth as it were a birds croppe vnder the throte, lyke a purse, in the which the first meat of the foule is receiued, and kept therein to the second digestion, that shalbe made in the guysarne or mawe: and the meat is kept in that croppe, as it were in a proper spense and sellar against hunger that may come. But as we speake heere (as Constantine sayeth) The Bladder is a cauie skinne, and rounde, and hollow as a sacke, close on euery side, ex∣cept the ouermouth alone, and the sub∣stance thereof is hard, that it be not gre∣ued by biting and sharpnesse of the U∣rine, the which is receiued & taken ther∣in: and it is close in euery side downe∣ward, that the lycour that is drawen in, be not sodainly put out, and vnuolunta∣rily, and so the vrine goth in by an hole, and out by the same, as it is shewed in Anathomia. Also the bladder is round, to open and spred as the cleansing and purging of bloud wareth more, and to be the more able to receiue the pourging & clensing, yt is vrine. Also li. 13. Ar. saith, that euery beast that hath lungs thirst∣eth much, & for him néedeth moyst meat more than drye: and therfore ye bladder is néedfull to receiue the moysture of such superfluitie. Also he saith, that no beast with feathers, with scales, with rindes, neither with shells, hath bladder, except the Lortell of the sea and of the land. For in such beastes the superfluitie passeth into féeding of fethers, scales, and such lyke. Also li. 3. he saith, that euerye beast that gendereth hath a bladder, and those which laye egges haue none: ex∣cept the kinde of Eutes: and moysture commeth net out of the bladders of dead bodyes. In one manner, drye superflu∣itie is gendred in the bladder, and there∣of commeth the stone. Also li. 6. he saith, That in euery beast without a bladder is easie out passing of durt, and of super∣fluitie of moysture. The bladder,Addition receiueth the vrine di∣stilled from the lyuer & the reynes of the backe, by the powers named Vriti∣des or Vrichides, the bladder may haue many impediments, as scabbes, vscerati∣ons, inflamations, and also a quaking debilitie, that such a diseased cannot hold his water. ¶Of the Vrine. Cap. 45. ISaac saith, that vrine is the purga∣tion of bloud and of humoures,Vrina. and is gendered and bredde by working of kinde, for it taketh beginning of the ly∣uer, and substaunce and colour in the reynes. For watry substaunce of bloud is sent by certayne subtill veynes to féed the reynes. And so when it commeth to the reynes, there it is dried and cleansed, as Ware that is molten and purified, and made perfect. And by the strength of heate of the lyuer and of the reynes it is dryed and couloured, and so it swea∣teth and passeth forth by certaine holes and poores into the bladder, and is ga∣thered and brought into the hollownesse therof: and so after y't this moist substance and fleeting is put out of the bladder, it is vrine, and hath that name, for it is Vritiua, burning and biting For as E∣gidius saith, what that the vrine touch∣eth it viteth, dryeth and burneth: For if hath burning and drieng kinde, and therefore it helpeth against scabs small and great, against Uleynes and whelks, if the diseased be washed therewith. Also, li13.Arist. saith, that vrine dronken help∣eth Splenetikes, & clenseth rotted woūds and scabbed places. Urine medled with the gall of a Goshauke,A medi∣cine for the eyen. & wisely and wa∣rely dropped in the eyen that be anoyn∣ted therewith, fretteth, gnaweth, and doth awaye webbes and filth of the eyen,
as saith Constantine openly, and Galen also. And therefore men shall not be squeymous of vrine, for in many things it is profitable and needfull: and U∣rine also hath that name of Vrith, a word in Gréeke, that is to vnderstande, shewing, for it sheweth and maketh the inner parts knowen: for we haue know∣ledge of the vrine, and be certified, how it standeth with the inner powres. For it sheweth and maketh vs knowe, the state of kindly vertue of the lyuer, and in other neather members, and that by the substaunce and colour of vrine: and namely by diuers regions thereof, that Phisitions name Iposlasim. For if that region that is in the bottome of ye ves∣sell be white, fattie, well coued, and not departed: it betokenctly strength of ver∣tue and full working of kindly heate in the sayde members. And by the middle region of the vrine, that Phisitions call Eueorima, we déeme suppose, and iudge, of the heart and of the members that be nigh thereto. For if the vrine in the mid∣dle thereof be well disposed in substance and colour, not bloo, nor wanne, neyther darkned nor shadowed with myst, it be∣tokeneth that the spirituall members be well disposed in substaunce and colour. And by the ouer part of the vrine, that Phisitions call Nephilem, we déeme of strength of the vertue of féelyng, that is in the region of the head: for if there be a circle, not too great, red, blewe, nor gréene, not grauellous, neither, corny, but temperate in colour and substaunce, it betokeneth that the braine, and all the other members that serue the vertue of féelyng, be safe & sound: and if the signes be contrarie in the vrine, it betokeneth contrary disposition of the body. Urine is iudged and déemed namely by the sub∣stance and colour: for if it be thinne in substaunce, it betokeneth drinesse of hu∣mour that hath the masterie: and if it be thicke, it betokeneth moysture of the humour that hath the masterie: and if it be meanly, it betokeneth temperatenesse, euennesse, and meane disposition. And vrine is déemed by colour: for it hath many colours, to the number of xx. as saith Isaac and Egidius. Of the which coulours, some betoken strength of heate, or els of colde, & some feeblenes, and some in a meane. For yeo∣low colour and lyke to milke, and such other, betokeneth féeblenesse of heat: and a déepe red betokeneth strength of heat: Dorrey and citrine, and light red, beto∣keneth meanly. Also among these con∣lours, some betoken death, as blacke, gréene and blew: and some default of digestion, as white, milkish and yeolow: and some beginning of digestion, as whitish and pale: and some perfect digestion, as citrine and reddish: and some passing strength of heate, as redde, and lyght red: and some burning, as pas∣sing brownnesse: and some passing bur∣ning and death, as black and greene Yet blacknesse commeth sometime of colde, that quencheth vtterly all kinde heate, & then commeth blewnesse afore: But when it commeth of the last burning, then commeth greenesse afore. It longeth not to this worke, to determine and rec∣ken the particular circumstance of these colours: but who that wil know them, let him read the bookes of Isaac, Theo∣phill of Constantine, and of Egidius, in them it is treated of vrine full perfectly. Vrina is the Latine word,Addition in Greeke Curia: and as Egidius hath written, Vrina is deriued of Vrith, which by demonstration is to say, shewing: For by the Vrine, the humane dispositions are shewed, vnto the which belongeth sufficient learning, and well acquainted experience, thereby to discerne the hi∣postasie, the qualitie and quantitie of vrines, the sexe and kinde, the youth, aged, and decrepite. And touching U∣rines, let this suffice at this time. ¶Of the Belly. Cap. 47. ISidore speaketh of thrée manner of wombes,Venter. Aluas. the one is called Venter in Latin, the other Vterus, and the third Aluus, Venter is that wombe, that ta∣keth and digesteth meate and drinke, & is séene outwarde, and is called Ven∣ter, for by Venter the wombe, meate and drinke, Venit commeth into all the body. Aluus is the wombe that taketh
meate and drinke, and is manye times cleansed.Vterus. Properly to speake Vterus, is the wombe of a woman, in which she conceiueth, and is called Vterus, for that she is conceiued and forward with child, as saith Isidore. Then Venter is the wombe that taketh the féeding of all the body, as Constant. saith, and is ye place of féeding and norishing and fundament of the first digestion and of the seconde: and the making therof is hot and moist, and that is fleshly because of digestion, & it is wrapped about with diuers subtill nerues and skinnes: and that is for the kéeping & sauing of the entrayles, whose disposition is round and euen-long: it is round, for the taking of meate & drinke, and for the containing of the members of féeding: it is euen-long, for easie ioy∣ning with the ouer partes and the nea∣ther: and this wombe challengeth place in the middle of the body, to deale and sende feeding to the ouer & to the nether members. Then this wombe among all the parts of the body, is most softe and vnstable, and is yet more profitable than other: for as the nourisher of the body, it taketh and séetheth meate and drinke, to féed all the members of the body, and sendeth due féeding to euery member, & gathereth many superfluities in it selfe, for the féeding of other members, and it putteth them out, for it may not sustaine them long time: & hath diuers griefes, that come of euil disposition of the mem∣bers of féeding, that this wombe contay∣neth in it selfe: the which griefes ye née∣ret they be then to the belly and mem∣bers of lyfe, the more perillous they be. The wombe is oft grieued by great ful∣nesse and repletion. And on the contra∣rye, if it be grieued by too great auoy∣dance, it is succoured by too great reple∣tion, as it is said in Aphor. Also the wor∣kings of ye wombe be diuers by diuersi∣tie of times. For in Winter kinde heate closed in the inner parts of the wombe, worketh strongly: and therfore in win∣ter is greater appetite and stranger di∣gestion, as it is sayd in Aphorism. In Winter and springing time wombes be hottest of kinde, and of longest sléepe. ¶Of the Nauell. Cap. 48. THe Nauell is in the middle place of the body,Vmbili∣cus. Om; ha∣los. and is called Vmbilicus in Latine, as it were the middle bosse of twayne as the middle place of a buckler as saith Isidore. And by the Nauell the childe is holden and fed in the mothers wombe. Constantine saith, that the na∣uell is made and composed of sinewes, veynes and issues: and by the nauell the childe in his mothers wombe draweth and sucketh subtill bloude, and taketh breath by the sayd issue. In the birth cre, the childe come out, the nauell breaketh off fast by the Mother, and commeth forth with the childe, and the midwiues binde the nauell in the length of foure inches: and of that binding commeth the vttermost ende and roundnesse of the nauell. Huc vsque Constantinus. Et su∣per Ezec. 16.Hierome saith in this man∣ner: It is a kindly thing to children, when they are first borne, that the nauel be cut, and then to be washed with wa∣ter, and to haue away the bloud. The thirde to dyre vp the humour of ye childe in the Sunne: The fourth to be wrap∣ped fast in clothes, that the tender lyms fall not neither appaire. Also thereon Gregory sayth, that a childe in the mo∣thers wombe taketh féeding by the na∣uell, as trees & plantes by the rootes, with an hid humor of the earth are fed. And the genitals of women are set in the na∣uell, as the genitalls of man is set in the loynes. And therefore vnder the name of the nauell is signified lecherie. In Iob.40.Iob. 40. Behold now (Behemoth) his strēgth is in his loynes, and his force is in the nauell of his belly. Arist. li. 13. speaketh of the nauell, and sayth, that euery beast that gendereth with egges or laiding of egges, hath a nauell in tune of birth, and when the bird is waxed, the nauell is hid & not séene, for it is continued with some gut, by some part of & veynes. Also 6 he saith that the making of the nauell, is not but as it were & rinde, that contay∣neth veines & is continued with ye child. And by veynes of the nauell as it were by conduits or pipes, bloud runneth from
the place that is called the mother, to the feeding of the child. Then the child war∣eth and thriueth well by the nauell, as it is sayd in the same booke. The nauell hath diuers impediments, it may fall out by ouer straining, and thereby come to Apostumation. ¶Of the genitalls. Cap. 49. THe genitalls be the parts of the bo∣dy, that (as the name teacheth) haue vertue of gendring and getting of a childe,Pudenda. The mē∣bers. Genitalia Membra. Pudica. Verenda. as saith Isidore. Also for shame, these parts are called Pudenda, ye shame∣ly part: and therefore they be couered and hid, for that they haue not the same manner of fairenesse, as other members haue that be openly seene: and therfore they be counted vnhonest. Among the genitalls, one is called the pintle, Vere∣truth in latin: either because it is one∣lye mans member: or els for that it is a shamefast member, of Verecundo, or els for Virus Sperme commeth out thereof. For properly to speake, the humour that cōmeth out of mankind is called Virus, as saith Isidore. And other members be ground & fundament of ye vertue of gen∣dring, as ye ballock stones, that are called Tefticuli in Latine, the diminutiue of Testis witnesse: their number begin of two, without witnesse of which two stones, no man is perfect. These stones serue the pipe & giue it séede, & they take the séede of the marrowe of the ridge bone and of the reynes, to the acte of gen∣dring or begettiug. Huc vsque Isidorus. Constantine saith, that the substance of these stones, is made of vddry and crud∣dic flesh, white, soft and not full sad and hard and that is for kéeping and sauing of heate: and for changing of bloud into whitenes, which is done by strōg heat, in their substance that séetheth the bloud, & turneth and maketh it while. And these stones be called principall members, for they be the proper instruments of princi∣pall working of the kinde vertue of gen∣dering. And if they be cut off, meanelye strength passeth, and the male complecti∣on chaungeth into the female complecti∣on. And therefore li. 3.Aristotle saith, yt if men be gelded Ante pollutionē in somno, thereafter groweth no haire in ye body. And if they be gelded Post polu∣tionem, then except ye haire of the brest, all the haire of the body falleth away & becommeth as it were a woman softe & féeble of heart and of bodye. Therefore li. 8. Aristotle sayth, That the voyce of men when they be gelded, chaungeth, and be as the voyce of women: and al∣so the figure and shape of them chaun∣geth. And when beastes are gelded in youth they ware great and large: and if they be gelded after perfection, then then they encrease not. Also if Hartes bée gelded after perfection, they encrease not. Also if Hartes be gelded or theyr hornes growe, their hornes shall neuer growe:Of hornes grovving. and if they be gelded after that theyr hornes are growen, then the hornes grow no more, and such Hartes chaunge not, neither cast not theyr hornes, as other doe that be not gelded. Also there it is sayde, that if Calues bée not gelded soone after one yeare they shal be lyttle: and he saith, that when they be gelded, the rootes of the sinewes and strings are drawen out. And if there bréedeth a postume in the place of the wound, men shall burn one of the stones that is cutte off, and laye the ashes to the postume. Also some beastes bée gelded onelye for the gendring stones. as Castors and Bausons: which when the hunters pursewe them, they bite off their owne stones with their teeth, be∣cause the hunters shoulde pursewe them no more. And he sayth, that the males of the wylde Asses gelde with theyr to the their Coltes and bite off theyr stones: but the females beware, and hide the Coltes from the males, that they be not gelded. Also lib. 16. it is sayd, that the stones of Fowles be small after the time that is ordeained to them to gen∣der by kinde, insomuch that then they appeare not: but then they growe full fast, when the time of loue draweth on, Then the priuie stones with other meē∣bers that serue the priuie stones be the head and well of the humour seminall, and first foundation radicall thereof. For as Constantine sayeth, The kindly getting and gendering of beasts
God hath ordained and made couenable members, in the which he hath sette the cause and the matter of generation: the which may not come forth indéede, and take effect, without affection of loue. In the members genitall God hath sowen such an appetite inseperable, that euery beast should be stirred and comforted to conserue and multiply beasts of his own kinde: and that is done by mouing of God, least that the gendring together be∣ing abhorred, the generation of beastes should be lost. And to fulfill such gene∣ration, it néedeth that two beastes come togethers, male and female, of the séede of them euery beast is increased: so that in one of them that is the female, is as if were the cause materiall and suffera∣ble, and in the male is the cause formall, and principall working. Therefore lib.5. Aristotle sayth, that the generation of beasts hath double cause, that is to wit, male and female. Of the male commeth cause of mouing and of shape: The fe∣male is as it were the matter: Of the commition of both, commeth the crea∣ture, &c. Then God ordayneth the mem∣bers of them that gender, that the one should giue the matter seminall, and the other should receiue it. And God that is most wise, maketh these members to their working, so that they may not be better neither more perfect, as saith Con∣stantine. But truly manye misuse these members, that vse them not to ye fruite of generation, but rather against the or∣der of reason, and lawe of kinde, not to get children, but to foule first, and filthye liking of lechery. And therefore I lette this matter passe with silence, Ne forte spermatis explanando originem, pro∣gressum vel finem videar carnalibus occasionem cogitandi cornalia exhibe∣re. Of this one thing I warne all folke. that no man suppose, neither take on him to misuse the office of the foresayde members by lewd lyuing. For whosoe∣uer he be, that sapeth with the genitall members, and wilfullye vseth them in fleshly lyking, otherwise then is graun∣ted by lawfull gene∣ration of children, he looseth God the Father and beginner of kinde: and he shall haue no place a∣mong the children of blisse, in the gene∣ration of righteous men, except that hée doe worthelye repent and amende. For misuse of generation offendeth and doth wrong to the Father of yght, and is worthye great payne and punishment: and besides that, it resisteth grace, and woundeth kinde, and leeseth company of Angells, and winneth the paine of hell, and blemisheth fame, and wasteth sub∣staunce, and is spoyle of endlesse blisse, as saith Saint Ambrose. Carnall lust is lyke vnto the Horse∣leach,Addition whose propertie is, once tasting of bloud that seemeth pleasaunt, cea∣seth not drawing of the same vntill he burst: euen so, an vnbrideled will, flesh∣ly giuen, continueth so long in whole∣dome and vncleannesse, vntill the pa∣trimony be diminished, the bodie con∣sumed, and the soule confounded. It tourneth prosperitie into beggerye, health into sicknesse, the soule into sinne: to the bodies couering, the Le∣prosie, Podegra, the Poxe: in steade of Hauke, Hound and game, the canker, woolfe, nittes and lyceum steede of re∣nowme, shame of bodely seeing, griefe of conscience, and contempt of lyfe. Therefore, let the vnsatiable minded know, that with the nat they flye in securitie for a while, by the lyght of fire vntill the flame being touched, and then sodainly is espyed the force ther∣of. The loue of the world consist in these. 3. things, The lust of the flesh, The lust of the eyes, The pride of life: but as the sweet smell of a perfume, la∣steth but a while, euen so good coun∣saile taketh small roote to conuert the wicked. Propertius. Scilicet in insano nemo in amore videt, to liue in immo∣dest loue, is to be aliue in another bo∣dy, and dead in their owne. The adul∣terous fornicators seeke to see signes and tokens, they shal perish, & their po∣steritie shall bee rooted out at the last, and their portion is prepared with the Diuell and his Angells. ¶Of the Mother. Cap. 49. THe Mother in a woman is a singular member, disposed as a bladder, & kind
hath ordeined that member to take & re∣ceiue ye humor seminall. Unto the which the menstruall superfluitie of humours, (as it were to a pumpe of the womans body) floweth, the which for ye menstrual flowing & reflowing thereof, is called Menstruum. For ye superfluitie is wont to follow the course of the Moone, as saith Isid. And it is called Muliebria also & du∣reth & lasteth kindly in women, as long as they haue vertue to conceiue childrē: and when Muliebria faileth, thē faileth the vertue of conceiuing. And it is called Muliebria, for in women alone this in∣firmitie is found. For onely a woman is Animal menstruale, as saith Isido. By touching of such bloud, fruite springeth not, neither buddeth, hearbs die, and trées loose their fruit, &c. Séeke the propertie & kinde of this bloud afore in the thirde booke, in the treatise of humours. This Menstruum is the beginning of mans generation, & common foode of rich and poore, of noble and simple in the mother wombe, héerewith the field of our birth is moisted, and the child is fed héerewith while he is in his mothers wombe. And the mothers womb hath two cels or hol∣lownesses, the right cell is it in ye which the man childe is bread: And in the left ell is the maide childe conceiued. The child yt is conceiued some deale in both, hath disposition of either sexes male and female. In Anathomia it is sayd, that the mothers hath thrée cells in the right side propried to males, and thrée in the left side ordeined to females: And in the middle is conceiued Hermophroditus, yt hath both sexes male and female.That is, when the childe hath both members. And the childe that is conceiued in the Mother is called Fetus in Latine. The childe hath that name Fetus of Fouere, that is ten∣derly fed and nourished. The thin bag or skinne that the childe is wrapped in, is called Secundina, which commeth out with the childe when it is borne. And if it ha that by any chaunce Secundina a∣bideth in the mother after that the childe is borne: thereof commeth great perill, except it be put out and holpe of kinde, or else by medicine. The mother hath many griefes: somtime by conteining too much superfluitie of humours, and that is by a clammie humour that stoppeth the mouths of the vains, or else of cold, that constraineth, or else of drinesse that wasteth. And these diuersities be known by their owne proper signes and tokers. Also it is sometime griued with too much flowing & shedding of menstruall humours: and that commeth eyther of too great abundance, that kinde maye not holde, or else of too great violence of sharpnesse and byting of humours. And if this euill be olde or of long continu∣aunce, scarcely it may be cured & holpen. For if the months of the vaines haue bene long open, it is hard to close them. Also the mother is grieued with stifling: in that passion it séemeth to the woman that she shall be stifled.The cause of sodain sunding in vvome. For the mother presseth the spiritual members, and that commeth of too greate repletion of hu∣mours that stretcheth the mother in length and breadth: or else it chaunceth of a corrupt & venimous fumositie, that cōmeth of some corrupt humuor, & filleth the hollownes of the mother, & maketh the mother to ouerstretch in widenesse. The Mother hangeth betweene the splene and the bladder,Addition but somewhat higher then the bladder, the bottome or hollownesse is extended vnto the nauell, & is the place of the first Frag∣ma, of conception called Embrion, be∣ware of carnall copulation. And so ye ful mother asketh more place, & thrusteth vpward togethers ye spirituall mēbers: wherby the woman is nigh sti∣fled. Also the mother somtime falleth too much forward, either to ye right side, or else to the left side: & sometime goeth out of her own place. And ye commeth of sla∣king of sinews, therof, & of superfluity of humours, ye charge sore & grieueth ye mo∣ther. And somtime the mother is grieued with sore ach & punching of postumes: whervpon followeth grieuous ach pric∣king & burning. Also when she is concei∣ued with childe, the mother is grieued with ach & stretching of powers ye com∣meth of mouing of the child,The nerer the time of bring∣ing forth the child, refrain co¦pulatiō stifseleth the pow∣ers killeth the seede and ossed∣eth God. & namely a∣bout the time of trauailing of child: For in ye time the child moueth more strong∣ly thē afore. Therfore néeds ye mother is greued: it is most specially griued in tra∣uayle,
when it thinketh to discharge it selfe, and the outpassing of the childe by some manner happe is let: which some∣time happeneth through the straightnes of the wayes of the Mother: and some∣time for too great fatnesse of the woman: and sometime for greatnesse of the child; and féeblenesse, and for default of vertue of out putting in the body of the woman that trauayleth of childe. And somtime it happeneth that the childe is dead, and therefore it may not help it selfe to come out of the mothers wombe. And some∣time the woman supposeth that she go∣eth with childe: and she beareth in hir wombe some manner lumpe wonderful∣ly shapen, as sayth Aristotle lib 18. Also after in purgation, it happeneth women to haue an euill, that is called Mola.Molon, called Mo∣la matri∣cis, an im¦postuma∣tion or lump cō∣ghitinate or gedred in ye place of cōcep∣tion. For sometime a man laye by a woman, and after a certain time she thought that she had gone with child: for hir wombe began to rise and swell, and tokens of going with childe were séene in the wo∣man: and when the time of birth drew nigh, she brought foorth no childe, & the swellyng of hir wombe abated not, but she endured so thrée yeares: and at last she trauayled, and brought forth a lump of flesh, so hard, that scarcely it might be cut, either seperated with yron: & such a lumpe is called Molia in Latine. And there Aristotle saith, that this hapneth, when the matter that is conceyued, is stifled with a vapour & humour of euill digestion: for then such a lumpe is bred (that is called Mola) in the Matrice or Mother, &c. In these mannets and ma∣ny other, the wretched Mother is grie∣ued very sore. ¶Of the Buttockes. Ca. 50. THe buttockes be called Nates in la∣tine,Clunis. Nates. and haue that name because the bodye resteth on them, while we sit or ride, as saith Isidore. And the flesh in the buttockes is frumpled and knottie: because they should not ake by wayght and heauinesse of the bodye that sitteth thereon. And so the stocke of the bodie is borne vp, which beginneth at the necke, and stretcheth to the buttockes, us saith Isidore. Constantine saith, that the buttocks be full of sinewes, and that is for to binde the ioynts of the thighes to the stocke of the body: and therefore they be fleshie, to temper the coldnesse of the sinewes and bones and to defend the féelyng of the sinewes as saith Constan∣tine lib. 3.Cap. 8. The decay of the buttockes,Addition is vn∣constant dyet, much lechetie, and cold sitting. ¶Of the Thighes. Cap. 51. THe thighes be called Femora in La∣tine,Femora for in that place of the bodye is distinction and difference betweene male and female: and the thighs stretch from the flanke and the chest, and from the buttockes downe to the knées. The thighes moue in ioynts: and the hollow parts of the sayd ioynts are called Ver∣tebra in latine, and Coxae, as it were ioyned to an Axell trée. The thighs bend inward and not outward, vnder, and not aboue, as the armes doe, and therefore some men call them Suffragines, as saith Isidore. The thighes be made & compo∣sed of great bones, as saith Constantine. li. 3.ca. 8. They be all hollow aboue, and bending afore, and haue two sharpnesses: the greatnesse is néedfull, either for that they be the foundation of the bones, or els for that they beare ye great brawnes and sinewes, by the which the féete are plyably moued. Also crookednesse and bending of the vtter parts is néedefull, that the brawnes and sinewes may haue place: for if they were within, they shuld be hurt and grieued. Also these same two bones be some deale rounde in the inner side, and that is néedfull: For if they were crooked onely on one side, then all the body should be crooked & vneuen. Also hollownesse is néedfull with the in∣ner bending and roundnes, that the pey∣ses thereof, may be the more stedfast. The hollownes is néedfull to haue some ente∣ring into the hollownes of ye legs Also ye thighs be couered & warded with flesh & with brawnes, that the bones may haue helpe and succour against outward hurts and griefes, and also to temper the cold∣nesse
of the bones, Further they be t aboue, and small beneath: and thus is needfull, for they are meane betwéene: the ouer, partes and the neather. And there∣fore they must haue due proportion to euery part. The thigh is the strongest part to the bodie,Addition vnto the which was assigned by God in Exodus, the. 28. chapter, That not only the vpper couering to the bo∣dye, but also thou shalt make them lin∣nen breeches to couer theyr priuities, from the loynes vnto the thighes shall they reach. It appeareth in those daies, no great choice of apparell, 1519. yeares before Christ, notwithstanding of so great antiquitie, is the making of ap∣parell, although Adam & Eues aprons were long before. Of the knees. chap. 52. Genibus.THE knées be the ioynts of the thighs and legges, and bée called in Latine Genua. For they be shapen in the mo∣ther with the cheeks, and they long ther∣to: and they be of kinne to the eyes, the iudges of teares and of wéeping. For the knées haue that name Genua of Ge∣ns the chéekes. For when a child is gen∣dered, hee is so shapen; that the knées be vpwarde. And by iust ioyning of the knees the eien be shapen and made hol∣lowe, either round. Secundum verbum philosophi. Genua cōprimit arta gena. Which is to vnderstand, Men wéepe the sooner if they knéele. For kinde will that the eyen and knées haue minde, where they were togethers in ye mothers wōbe in darknesse or they came to the lyght. Hucisque Isidorus. Constantine saith, lib. 2.chap. 8. That the knées be a man∣ner round bones, gristly, & hollow. They be hollow & round, for that the legges and whirlebones should be the easilyer ioyned in the hollownesse of them: They be sinewie, that the legges be not light∣ly departed from the ouer partes: And also they be sinewie that the workings of the spirite of feeling may bée sent to the neather partes to cause moouing in them. Also for continual mouing ye knees be slender and poore of flesh and fatnesse. For if they wer much fleshie, they shuld be lightly stopped. And so ye working of ye vertue of feeling shuld be let by great∣nesse of flesh. And therfore the knees be∣cause they be sinewie, they haue greate feeling and be lightly hurt, when the si∣newes of feeling be grieued outward or inward, as sayth Constantine. Of the legges. Chap. 53. THE legges are called Crura in La∣tine, and haue ye name of Currere,Crus. Cucibus. the shank or shinne bone, to ye vvhich is the calfe, the featur of the leg so runne: for with them we goe and run. Also they be called Fibie, for they be like pipes and trumps in shape and length, as sayth Isidore. And Constantine saith that the legges bée meane betwéene the feete and the thighes, and be cheined to them with sinewes and strings, by the which, the influence of going & mouing of the vertue of ruling, passeth and com∣meth to the féete. They be made of full strong bones, and be as it wer pillers of the bodie, able to beare the weight of the body. And they be couered on the ouer part within with brawnes & with flesh: that so in the folding of them with the thighs, they shall neither grieue nor bée grieued of the thighs. And so the flesh of the legs is set in ye ouer side within as a piller, or els as a boteras to holde vp the weight of the body. And also they be si∣newie that they may be the more able & strong to swift mouing. And they be ful of marrow, yt the liuely vertue of ye beast the which is dealed and spread by the sinewes and strings, may be preserued & kept: And also to moyst the drinesse of the bones with moisture of the marow, as saith Constantine. Of the Feete. chap. 54. A Foote is called Pes in Latine,Pe. Pous. In the feet grow diuerse impedi∣ments, ye gout cal∣led Poda∣gra, also Elephan∣cia, which is a svvel∣ling and the crāpe and hath that name of Podos in Gréeke as saith Isidore. For the féete setting to the ground one after another goe forth. The foot is the vttermost part of a man and beareth vp all the bodie. Constant. sayth that the foote is made of 44. bones, of the which bones two be the héeles, and two of the cheines or ancle bones, 10. of the combe, and 30. of the foes.
And the sole of the foote is fleshie and plaine, forward and backward, and some deale hollow in the middle. It is fleshie to defend the sinewes, strings & veynes from hardnes of the bones. It is plaine, to haue footing, and to be more ready to beare that is set thereon. It is hollow, to haue succour in the hollowe place, if the plaine slide or faile. The bones of the féete be bound with diuers sinewes and bonds, and that is néedefull to haue more strength, for strong sustenaunce of the body, and also for that the féet shuld haue the more easie mouing. Féete of beasts be diuers: For Aristotle libro. 14. saith, That some footed beastes haue feete afore and behinde, and some haue in the sides, as a beast with bloud and with many féete: and the propertie of that kinde of beasts, is to haue féete in the former part of the bodye, and the cause thereof is, for that the former and the hinder are ioyned and houed in one place. Also Ibidem he saith, that in foure footed beasts kinde hath set the fore féete in stéede of the handes: the hinder féete be necessary to beare the wayght of the beasts. And it was much necessary, that foure footed beasts shuld haue foure féete, for all the body of them boweth kindly toward the earth, and also is moued to the earth with all beastly appetite: and therefore it néedeth to haue so many vn∣dersettings and vpholders, that such a beast may the more ably & quickly moue, and goe, and stampe. Also therefore the hinder feete be néedefull: for Arist. saith, the fore part of the foure footed beast, is more and more large than the hinder part. And therefore for to rise vp and moue themselues, and to moue lyghtlye before and behinde, the hinder féete are needfull. The contrary is in children: for the ouer part in children is heauyer than the nether, and therfore they créepe on féete and handes, and vse their hands in steede of foure féete in créeping, for they may not reare vp their bodies, be∣cause ye ouer part of ye body is more than the nether. This changeth yet in youth, for yet in youth, the nether part wareth, and the ouer part wareth lesse than the nether part of the body, and so by lyttle and little he reareth himselfe vp an end. But the disposition of foure footed beasts is contrary: for the nether part is first very great, but in youth the ouer parte wareth and areareth, and therefore the rearing vp of the head and foreparte of horses, is much more than the hinder part. And there it is said, that the token and signe héereof is, that a colte touch∣eth his owne head with his hinder foote: but when he commeth to age, he cannot doe it. Also Arist. li. 2. saith, that the lesse foote of such beasts on the fore parte is not so frée neither so lyght in mouing, as the left hand of a man, except the E∣lephant. Also there it is sayde, that the Elephant in sitting, bendeth and boosteth his feete, but he may not bend his foure féete at once, for heauinesse and wayght of his body, but he foldeth and bendeth the hinder féete as a man doth. Also it is sayd there that Volatile bendeth ye hin∣der féete backwarde and the wings for∣ward, which be in steed of handes.Flieng things. Also ther it is sayd, ye generally in beasts the right foot moueth more than the left, and therefore it is sayde, That some beastes moue first the right foote when they shall goe or step, as the Lyon, Camell, & Dro∣medarie. But yet somtime some beasts moue first the left foote, as the Fore and Woolfe, that haue féete and legs longer in the left side, than on that other. And therefore they halt alway, and reare and rise vpward from the left side toward the right side. Also generally in beastes the right foote hath more heate in mouing & strength than the lefte foote. Super A∣phorism. Galen sayth in taken héereof, That if a woman which goeth with childe stande vpright, and both hir féete together, if she be with a childe Mascu∣lyne in hir wombe, and is sodaynly cal∣led, she moueth first the right foote to come to the callyng: and if it be a maid childe, she moueth first the lefte foote. Also he sayth libro 2.& 3. That euerye beast with many toes in the féete; haue many children, and contrariwise. And the féete of foure footed beasts are made of bones, & sinewes, and of lyttle flesh. And also the féete of fowles and of two footed beasts, except mans féete; which
hath much flesh beneath, and that is to defend the manifold & diuers bones and sinewes. Also some beasts vse the foote in stéede of the hande, as an Ape among foure footed beasts, & the Popingay & the Pellycan among the sieng fowles: for they feede themselues with the foote. And he saith lib. 13. that no beast with many cliftes in the feete haue bornes. And yet euerye beast with long strouting tuskes in the mouth, is cloue footeed as ye Bore, Also he saith lib. 14. that in ees ye hin∣der feete be more then the former, or middle, for going, and to rise from the earth when they lyst to take their flight, and their waye. Item libro. 16. euerye beast with many clyfts in the foote, gen∣dereth blynde whelpes, as the Lyon, the Hound, the Wolfe, and Fore. Then to haue in remembraunce the properties of the foote: the foote is the vttermost part of the beast, ordained for perfection ther∣of, and it is long, plaine and hollow, for shape and printing of the Fore: and is distinguished with toes, for his strong holding: bonie and sinewie for better during. And is néedefull in beastes for the rearing of them and mouing, & also for ward and defence of them In foules clouen feete and crooked clawes are néed∣full to get their liuing. In fowles clo∣sing of the feete is needfull for their lea∣ding, stirring and ruling in waters. And this sufficeth touching the feete. ¶Of the sole of the foote. Cap. 55. Planta.THe sole of the foote is the vttermost part of the beast, and is called Planta in Latine for it is plaine: and it is néed∣full that it be plaine, to sticke the faster in the earth, as saith Isid. And it is heled and cloathed with harder skinne than the other part of the body, least it bée so∣dainly grieued with thornes, bryers, or with other prickes. And therefore of breasts the féete are wrapped, wounde, and armed with clawes, hooues & soles, that they are not lightly hurt with trea∣ding. And the soles of the feete beare all the heauinesse and waight of the bodye. And therefore they néede hosen & shooes, deast they be hurt and grieued, as sayth Isidore. ¶Of the Heele. Cap. 56. THe héele is the hinder part & the ne∣ther of the foote, and is called Calca∣neus in Latine: for with them the fores or steps be pight and printed in the earth as saith Isidore. And the heele is round, that it be not lightly hurt: & it is euen long to be fast sticked and printed: and it is sad, that it be not soone brused: and it is bound to the anckle bone with soft bondes and strings, to moue the casely∣er vpward & downward. And hurtings and woundes of the héele, be harde to heale, both for scarsitie of flesh, and also for continuall mouing, as saith Con∣stantin lib. 2.cap. 10. Calcanei,Additionthe heeles of a man or wo∣man, may diuers times come by infec∣tions, as the gout, straining, the crampe, the kybes, and such like. ¶Of the bones. Cap. 57. Ossibus.FOr that it is sayd and treased of the principall members, and of the mem∣bers of office, now we purpose to treate of those mēbers, which be made of parts like, and of their conditions, and first of the bones. As we speak, heere is a thing made of partes lyke, and hath the same name & kind, that the parts therof haue: as bones be made & composed of bones. The bones be the sadnesse of all the bo∣dy, as saith Isidore, for the strength of a beast is in the bones. The bones be cal∣led Ossa in Latine, and they haue that name of Vsto, to burne: for in old time the bones were burnt. Or els as some other suppose, the bones haue that name Ossa in Latine, of Ore, the mouth: For that in the mouth the bones be séene. For in euery place they be hid or coue∣red with flesh and skinne, except the mouth alone; in the which the bones of the téeth be seene. The bones of the head are called Compago: for that they bée ioyned togethers and bounde with sin∣newes, as it were with glew. The ouer endes of the bones be called Verticolae,
as it wer turnets and winders, or whir∣lers, and be warred with great knots. And they haue that name, because they turne and winde in clitching, binding, & stretching of members, as sayth Isidore lib. 11.Constantine saith lib. 2. that the boane is the hardest and dryest parte of the body of a beast, and that is néedfull, either because the boanes be the founda∣tion of all the body, vpon the which, the building of all the body is set, and ther∣fore it néedeth that the bones be strong: or els because they defend ye inner parts from griefes that might hap and fall by diuers things that be without. Many & diuers bones are in the body, and that is for more sadnes and strength of the bo∣dy, or for easinesse of mouing, or to a∣uoyd great griefes from the body: & such bindings and accordes be betwéene the members of the body, that if one be gre∣ued, they are all grieued. And therfore kinde doubleth well nigh all the mem∣bers, that if one be grieued, the other may haue compassion and helpe him: & therefore it néeded that many boanes were made, and diuers in quantitie, for in great members be great boanes, and in small members, small bones. Also some bones be vnlyke in quantitie, and diuersly shapen, for some be long, some be round, some are hollowy, and some massiue and sad. They be sad, for the more stedfastnesse, and hollowe for the more lightnesse of mouing, for kinde be∣cause the bones are great and mouable, maketh them hollow: the which bones for two causes are full of marrowe, one is, least they should breake by reason of their hollownesse, and to be fedde by the marrowe. Therefore by the wosing of the marrowe, which woseth out by the bones at the poores, the flesh that is next the bones is swéeter than other flesh. Also the bones are bound and strayned togethers with certaine sinews, for that they should not fall, neither depart asun∣der by great mouing: and for that they should helpe each other the more effectu∣ally. In the first ioyning of ye bones is a manner of glowy and gleymie moisture, because the bones should the more ease∣ly moue togethers: & in the endes they be cloathed with gristles, for that they should not be grined with fretting. Huc vsque Const. li. 2. ca. 51. Aristotle li. 12. saith, that the boanes were created for the sauegard of the soft body: For the bones thereof are full harde. And in a beast without bones is a member accor∣ding to the sayd bones, and is in ye steede of bones: as small hairy bones in Fish And as the heart and the lyuer, be head and well of all the veynes, so the ridge bone is wel and head of all other bones: for on the ridge bone all other bones be mored and sounded, as the ship on the heele is builded. Also the kinde of bones is continued with the ridge bone, because the ridge bone kéepeth and saueth ye ten∣derne sof the bodies of beasts: and the bones that be nigh the wombe are lyt∣tle, because they should not let ye rising of the wombe, when beasts eate & drink. Also generally and commonly the bones of males are stronger and more harder, than the bones of females: and specially the bones of a Lyon, out of yt which, if they be strongly striken togethers, fire shall spring and come out, as it were out of stones: and the bones of fowles, are féebler than of other beasts. Also Arist. li. 3. saith, that ye bones that be cut, grow no more, like as the gristle doth not. For the making of gristles is like to the ma∣king of bones: & though hornes, nailes, and clawes of beasts, and bils of foules, maye be made softe at the fire, crooked, straight and bended: yet bones may be made neither softe, crooked, nor euen, but bones may be cut, bewen and hacked: Item, idem li. 2. Beasts that haue hairie prickes in stéede of boanes, haue lyttle bloud. Also euery beast that hath téeth in euery iawe, hath bones with marrowe, and the marrow of them is lyke to fat∣nesse or grease. Some bones be thicke & hard, whereby they séeme to be wildout marrowe, as bones of Lyons & of Eli∣phants: for the marrowe of such beastes lurketh & is hid in the poores of ye bones. Then gather of this that is spoken, that the bones are the foundation of all the body, and be colde, hard, and drie. And be∣cause colde hath masterie in the bones, they be white, strong, and stedfast.
And they be hollow within, and full of marrow, and are bound togethers with sinewie bondes, and beare euery each other continually. For the lesse be mo∣red and rooted on the more, and the more be couenably ioyned to ye lesse, by ye wō∣derfull craft of kinde. The bones be co∣uered and cloathed with flesh and with skinne, and are by the sustentation of both flexible: and they are bound toge∣thers with ioyntes, with sinewes, and strings and receiue temperance of kind, heate of flesh and bloud. Also the bones feele not, but in case the bones bée hurte either grieued, they grieue the body full sore, and namely, if they be broken or sore hurt, and that is, because they bée nigh ye sinews, with whose bonds they be knit together: bones be somtime grieued by outward doing, as by breaking, cut∣ting, smiting, hewing, wrasting & falling out of ioynts, and such other. And som∣time by doing & workings that is with∣in: and that is oftentimes of sretting & gnawing of woode and enraged matter, as it fareth in them that haue an euill and disease that is called Herisipila, which some men call the holy fire. AdditionHerisipulas is the Greeke word, a∣mong the Latines named, Apostenia calidum, of some tearmed Ignis facer, the shingles, which is a burning humor pricking: whose blisters are lyke wheales of white matterie colour, and beginneth in the necké and shoulders. Sometime by ouermuch gathering and repletion of humours in the ioynts of the boanes, as it fareth of them that haue the gowte. And sometime they are grieued by corruption of the marrowe that is within, as it falleth in Leapers. And sometime of wasting of humours of the marrowe, as it fareth in them which haue the Etike, or be wasted and consumed: and the déeper in the hollow∣nesse of the boanes, the boane ache is rooted and maured, insomuch it is the more grieuous and perillous: And so the corrupt boanes doe corrupt by lyttle and lyttle the flesh that is next to them, and maketh them to rot. ¶Of the marrowe. Cap. 58. MEdullaMedulla. in Latin, is in English, ma∣rowe, and hath that name, for that it moysteth the bones, and it comforteth and tempreth the coldnesse of them, as sayth Isidore. Constantine saith, That the marrowe is in substaunce hot and moyst, and is bred into the hollownes of the bones, of ye most purest parts & vne∣tuous humours of nourishment. And so the marrow by the heate thereof, tempe∣reth and coldeth the bones, and with his moysture, moysteth the drynesse of the bones, and by his substantiall propertie if feedeth, nourisheth and saueth the ver∣tue of féeling: for the marrowe recey∣ueth of the brayne influence of spirites, & namely of the ridge boanes, the which marrowe is called Nucha among Phi∣sitians. And this marrowe by meake of certaine veynes, serueth those members, which are set beneath the necke, and gi∣ueth to them féeling and mouing, as saith Constantine. lib. 2.cap. 10. Also Isidore saith, that the marrow by ye sub∣tiltie and moyst vnctuositie thereof, wo∣seth and sweateth out at the beanes a lycour, which is thin, and by the Uene∣riall heate, this licour is resolued in the reynes of beastes, and bréedeth lyking of lone and of lust. Looke before in the Chapter of the reynes. And therefore beasts with bones full of marrow, haue great lyking in lust, as saith Varro. And beasts that haue sad bones and voyde of marrow, are seldome moued to bodelye lust as the Eliphant. Vàrro saith, That the marrowe followeth the kinde of the stone: for it waxeth when the Moone waxeth, and when the Moone waneth, it minisheth. And by priuie inspiries and sentings, it féeleth the vertue and the strength of the Moone, and followeth the Moone in waxing and minishing: as it fareth in beasts and in trées, which haue passing plentie of humours and of war∣row, in the full of the Moone, and great scarcitie thereof in the new of ye Moone. And therefore in the new of the Moone it is not good to grasse trées: for ye fruit shall be full of wormes, and lyghtly rot.
And this perchaunce happeneth by rea∣son of superfluous moisture, that the graffe then gratfed receiueth in the say: And the superfluitie thereof may not bee ruled, neither haue digestion of kinde. Therefore such humours sent to ye fruit is cause of bréeding of wormes, and of soone rotting. Also Aristotle, li. 12. sayth, that a beast which hath téeth in eyther sawe, hath the marrow like to fatnesse: And some beasts haue but little marow, as a Lyon which hath hard boanes and thicke, in whom is but little marrow, and some doe faine, that the Lyon hath no marrowe at all. Dioscorides sayth, That marrowe is full medicinable and also healthfull, and namely of foules and of wilde beasts For it healeth breaking out, stripping, chins, cliftes, and whelks of the lippes, and slaketh ache in sore eares: and maketh softe the hardnesse of kirnells: And healeth the blaines of the féete: and ass wageth smarting and sore∣nesse of the throate, and of the brestes. and teates. And it is a principall reme∣die for the Tisike and Etike: And it hath vertue of recouering. Therefore it re∣storeth to the members the humour that is lost. Of the gristle, chap. 59. A Gristle is the tendernesse of the bones, and is called Cartilago in La∣tine, because it maketh no greate griefe though it be folde and bended, as sayth Isidore: as it fareth in the Nose and in the eares, and in the ends of the ribs: For the gristle is harder then the flesh, and softer then the bones And kind hath made such places of such disposition, be∣cause they should not breake when they should bée folded or bend, as sayth Con∣stantine. libro. 2.cap. 9. The Gristle doth cloath and arme the endes of the boanes, that they bée not grieued with fretting togethers, and that the boanes should be the easilyer ioyned to ye flesh. Aristotle liber. 14. sayth, That the gri∣stle cut groweth not againe. For the making thereof is like to the making of the bones. Also the gristle hath no féeling of it self, but only the sinew ioyned ther∣to, is cause of feeling & of moouing, when it feeleth or moueth, as saith Constan∣tine. In the middle of ye heart of a beast is a gristle bone set in the bredth therof, and that is called the seate of the heart, as saith Constantine. li. 3.cap. 20. Of the sinewes. Chap. 60. THE sinewes bée some of the partes of the bodye,Neruus of ye Greekes is called Neuerous which may haue diuers im∣pediatis, by cut∣ting, strai¦ning, by ye tranp, & numnesse and bee called Neuros in Gréeke: because the ioyntes bée fast coupled together with the sinewes: And it is certaine that the sinewes make most vertue and strength. And the thick∣er that the sinewes bee, the more sted∣fastnesse commeth of them, as saith Isid. And Constantine saith, that the sinewes bee néedefull, to beare and to bring fee∣ling and moouing to the members, and namely to the gristles and bones, and to such that haue of themselues neither fee∣ling neither mouing. And the braine is chiefe foundation of the sinewes: for it is the well of wilfull moouing & feeling. For all sinewes spring and come out of the braine, or else out of the marrowe of the braine, that is of the marrowe of the ridge boanes. Such a meane is néede∣full, least if they all shuld come without meane from the braine, either in break∣ing they shuld be griued, or else for farre way from the well of féeling, in the deede of féeling, and in the might of giuing of lyfe, they should lacke in might. Then those sinewes, which come and spring out of the braine, bée more softer then they which procéede and come out of the marrowe of the ridge boane, for they bée more hard. And those sinewes which come & growe out of the formost parte of the braine, be most softe: for they beare féeling to the other. For soft∣nesse chaungeth into féeling hastely. The sinewes which come of the hinder parte of ye braine, be more harder to suffer mo∣ning: For soft things break lightly with switt mouing. Sixe paire of sinewes come frō the braine. The first paire passe to the eyen; and to the other lims of fée∣ling, to giue to thē féeling & mouing: and these be more hollowe, greater, and sof∣ter then other sinewes.
And they be more hollowe, to giue more plentier spirits to the wits: And they be more greater, that the substaunce of them breake not in the hollownesse: and ye they may haue shut in them the more plentie of spirits. Also they be soft to make feeling in them the more spéedely proceede. In the out passing of the braine the sinewes be nesh and soft, but the far∣ther they be from the braine, the harder they be in kinde. ¶The second paire of sinewes begin∣neth behind the first: and that paire cō∣meth out by a certaine hole, that is nigh to the hollownesse of the eyen, and gi∣ueth mouing to the cien. The third paire beginneth behinde the second, and com∣ming by the eate of the head out of the hinder part of the braine, is departed in foure perticular sinewes, and spread in∣to diuerse places in a net wise. The fourth paire is ioyned to the first payre before: but beeing afterwarde departed therefrom, spreadeth into the milde mo∣ther, to giue thereto féeling of touching. The fift paire, in his out going is de∣parted into two sinewes. The one wher∣of commeth into the holes of the eares, and spreadeth there, and giueth hearing to the eares. That other commeth by the care bowes to the chéeks, and sprea∣deth and helpeth the working of mem∣bers there about. It seemeth that the sixt paire commeth out of the hinder part. And out of euery each of these thrée come sinewes, to ordeine féeling and mouing, and spreadeth in lyke vpwarde and downwarde. And yet besides these paires, there commeth one out of the hinder parte of the braine. And of this paire the marrowe of the ridge boane, commeth and springth. This spreadeth into the partes of the tongue and of the throate, and giueth to them féeling and mouing. Except these foresayde si∣newes, all other sinewes of the bodye, come out of the braine by meane of the marrowe of the ridge bone. And the si∣newes be accounted in all to the num∣ber of. 32. paire and one odde sinew. And all these bée spread, dealed, and fastened in euery side to the chinnings of the bo∣dy, by wonderfull crafte of kinde. Haec vsque Constantinus. lib. 2. cap. 12. Item liber. 3. Aristotle saith, that in the place of bones is the multitude of sinewes: and a sinew stretcheth kindly in length and not in bredth, and is greatly stretch∣ed out. And about the sinewes is much vntuous moysture, which kéepeth and saueth the sinewes. And euery beast that hath bloud hath sinewes: and a sinewe which is cut a sunder and detrenched, groweth neuer after, neither the sinew which is slit and clouen, closeth nor ioy∣neth, lyke as a veine doth. For if a veine be slit and clefte, it will bee soone ioyned whole againe. Also he sayth. liber. 29. That the most vertue of a beast is in the sinewes, and namely in a Bull: For the elder he is, the stronger and the har∣der he is, and the harder be his sinewes, and therefore it maye bée drawne and stretched in length, and straighted as a corde or rope. Then gather of this that is sayd, that a sinew springeth and com∣meth out of the braine. And receiuing thereof féeling and moouing, doth distri∣bute the same to the other members: And coupleth and bindeth togethers the other partes of the bodye, and is softe in the out comming, and hard forthward. The sinew in the hollownesse and void∣nesse therof receiueth spirit, and kéepeth it. And by the folding thereof the sinews bend and folde the limmes that be flexi∣ble. And as sayth Constantine, they in∣dure diuerse griefes, as cutting and slit∣ting, pinching and pricking, and slaking, and stopping, as appeareth in Pantegm. li. 9. cap. 8. &. li. 11. Of the veines. Chap. 41. THE Uaines haue that name,Venis, Sthegmos. There bee manye principall vienes in man, ie∣diana, Ca∣diaca, Ca∣phalica, Sophena, Basilica, ¦patica, Si∣uatella, siō these chiefe veins pro∣ceede all  veines by which  body is cheri∣shed. for that they be Viae, the waies, conduits and streames of the fléeting of bloud, and sheddeth it into all the bodie. For by the veines all the members be moysted and fed, as sayth Isidore. And Constantine sayth, That the veines spring out of the liuer, as the arteries and wosen doe out of the heart, and the sinewes out of the braine. And veines be néedfull, as vessells of the bloud, to beare and to bring bloud from the liuer to féede and
nourish the members of the bodie. Al∣so needely the veines bee more tender & softe in kinde then sinewes. Therefore that they bee nigh to the liuer may som∣what chaunge the bloud that commeth to them. And all the veines are made of one curtill, and not of two, as the arte∣ries and wosen. For the arteries receiue spirits, and they kéepe and saue them. And the veines comming out of the ly∣uer, sucke thereof, as it were of theyr owne mother, feeding of bloud, and dea∣leth and departeth that féeding to euery member as it needeth. And so the veins spread into all the partes of the bodye: and by a wonder wit of kinde, they doe seruice each to other. Also among other veines open and priuie or secret, there is a veine that is called Arteria,Arterie, be like veins, in ye watch be the vitall spirits, ha¦uing their begin∣ning of the heart. which is needfull to kinde to beare & bring kind∣ly heate from the heart to all the other members. And these arteryes bée made and composed of two small clothings or skinnes called curtills: and they bee lyke in shape, and diuerse in substaunce. The inner haue wrinckles and folding ouerthwart, and theyr substaunce is hard and more boistous then the vtter be. And without they haue wrinkles & folding in length, of whome the sub∣staunce is harde for néedfulnesse of mo∣uing, opening, and closing. For by ope∣ning doth receiue it selfe from the heart, and that by the wrinklings and folding in length. By closing it selfe doth put out superfluous sumositie: which is done by wrinkling and folding the curtelles ouerthwart in bredth: in the which the spirit is drawen from the heart: Wher∣fore they bee harder without then all the other veines, and that is needfull, least they breake lightly and some. Also these veines spring out of the lefte hollow∣nesse of the hart. And two of that side bee called Pulsitiue: Of which, one that is the innermost hath a soft skinne: and this veine which is called Pulsitiue, is needefull to bring greate quantitye of bloud and spirits to the lungs:Of being and vvor¦king of  povvers. and to receiue in ayre, and to rieddle it with bloud, to temper the feruentnesse of the bloud. This veine entereth into the lungs, and is departed there in manye manner wise. ¶The other arterie is more then the first, and Aristotle calleth it e, this arterie commeth vp from the heart and is diuided in twaine, and the one parte commeth vpward, & eth bloud that is pured and spent of lyfe to the braine that so the spirit of feeling may be , nourished, kept, and saued. The other part goeth downewarde, and is departed in many manner hase toward the right side & toward the left. Huc vsque Con∣stant. li. 2.cap.12. ¶Then marke well, that a vaine is the bearer and carrier of bloud, eyer, and warden of the life of beasts, and con∣teineth in himselfe the foure bloudy hu∣mours cleane and pure, which be ordei∣ned for feeding of all the partes of the bodye. Moreouer a veine is hollower, to receiue bloud the more easilye, and as it néedeth in kinde, that one veine bring and giue bloud to another veine. Also a veine is messenger of health and of sick∣nesse For by the pulse of the arteries and disposition of the veines, Phisitions deeme of the féeblenesse and strength of the heart. Also if a vaine be corrupt, and conteineth corrupt bloud: it corrupteth and infecteth all the bodie, as it fareth in lepers, whose bloud is most corrupte in the veines, of the which the mem∣bers be fedde by sucking of bloud, and taketh thereby corruption and sicknesse incurable. Also the veine of the arme is ofte grieued, constrayned, and wrong, opened and slit, and wounded to releeue the sicknesse of all the bodye by hurting of that veine. Also the veines that bee ouermuch straighted or wrong with far∣nesse or with flesh, haue lesse of bloud and of spirit then the other veines. And therefore in the substance of such veines kindly heate faileth, and the spirite vi∣tall is lessed. Therefore such beasts liue and indure the lesse time, as saith Con∣stantine. liber. 11.cap. 17.Aristotle. lib.2 saith, If a veine be cut or slit, it maye be healed and ioyned againe, and so may not a sinew, Item ibi. li. 6. Such as the veines be vnder the tongue of a beast, such is the coulour that that beast brin∣geth forth. And therefore hée sayth,
That sheepe with white veines vnder ye tongue, haue white lambs. And in like wise sheepe with black veines vnder the tongue, haue blacke lambes. If ye desire to know more of this matter, seeke afore in the chapter of the tongue. Of the flesh. Cap. 62. Caro, qua¦si anima carens. Sarx, Creas. The flesh of man is manye waies cor¦rupted, by dropsies and putre¦fieng of bloud.Flesh is called Caro in Latine, and hath that name of Carie, that is mat∣ter and rottennesse, as saith Remigius. Gregory saith, that the flesh is oft chan∣geable, and therefore it rotteth hastely. And Gregory sayth, That there be ma∣ny manners of flesh: For some is flesh of Fish, some of Fowles, and some of Serpents, and some of Adders. And in this mans flesh is priuiledged, for man is formed to the noblest and worthyest, that is to wit, is ioyned to the reasonable soule. Therefore it is aboue wonders, and most wonderfull, that in the last time mans flesh is made Gods fleshe, when Gods sonne became man, and dwelled among vs. When the flesh that was traile and brittle of mankinde, was made highest aboue other, when it was ioyned to Gods sonne, as sayth Grego∣rie. Constantine sayth, That flesh is kindly hot and moist, and feedeth kindly heats, and couereth sinewes, boanes, and braine, and defendeth them, and tempe∣reth the coldnesse of them. And there is thrée manner of fleshes, some is medled with muscles, sinews, and strings, and is called brawne: the other manner of flesh is temperate betwéene hard and soft, and is called gristlely, the third is kirnellye. And pure flesh is most in the ridge and in the gummes. The flesh that lyeth in the vtter partes of the bones, that rest∣eth vpon that flesh, is as it were a néed∣full Tapit of casement for ye sayd bones. The flesh of the ridge boane is néede∣full both within and without, for two causes. For it heateth the marrow of the ridge boane, and filleth the hollownesse betweene the ridge boanes, and also kee∣peth and saueth the sinewes that come vpwarde and downewarde, that they breake not nor faile, by reason of the long waye, and the flesh specially de∣sendeth the ridge from distemperate aire, and from vtter griefes and harmes. The flesh that is betweene the teeth kee∣peth and saueth the moores and rooes of them: and feedeth these moores and rootes, and maketh them steadfast and stable. Knottye fleshe hath thrée proper∣tyes. One maketh wet and moyst, as the flesh of pappes and teares, and the kir∣nells vnder the tongue, which breedeth spittle, for the mouth, the tongue, and the cheekes, that they bée not let of mo∣uing with too great drinesse. The other parte that is kirnelled and knottie, fil∣leth and occupyeth voyde places, and succoureth the deines and the sinewes, and receiue the superfluitye that wo∣seth out of them. The thirde parte of flesh beclippeth the stomacke and the guttes: And with this parte is medled certaine netes and causes of sinewes, veines, and wosen, which bring moo∣uing and féeling to the inwardes. Nor theyr waye should not bee sure, with∣out this kirnelled flesh were so spread, that the sinewes and the arteries might rest easily therevpon: And also that the sinewes and the arteryes maye finde a soft place to flye to for succour, if it hap∣pened them to méete with any thing that should grieue them with hardnesse. Huc vsque Constantinus. li. 2.cap.14. Flesh that is temperate and meane betwéene fat and leane is good & healthful, namely if it be not medled with corrupt bloud, nor bred thereof, nor fed therewith. For such flesh is the beginning of corrupti∣on, as sayth Aristotle. libro.3. And like∣wise Constantine. libro. 11.cap. 17.Ari∣stotle liber. 12. saith, That too much flesh letteth the workings of the spirite. And therefore the head is not made of much flesh, that it may be of the better witte and perfect vnderstanding. Item. liber. 1. If the place about the oyen haue much fleshe,A signe of euill dispositiō it betokeneth euill disposition, guile, deceit, and euill custome, and de∣fault of vertue Informatiue. And so if there bée too much flesh, and the vertue of formation and shape bee féeble: then wonderfull passions and euills breede in the bodie, as Arist. lib. 16. sheweth an en∣sample of a woman, that supposed that
she was with childe, and at last shée brought forth a grislye lumpe of fleshe, which is called Mola among Phisiti∣ons, &c. Also the very pure flesh is ten∣der and softe: and therefore it will not away with trauaile. Wherefore liber. 2. it is sayd, that the fet of a Camell haue much-flesh, as the féete of a Beare, and therfore men make to the Camell strong shooes of haire and of Leather, when hee shall worke, to kéepe him from ach and sore hurting. Also (as hée sayth Li∣bro. 12.) The flesh is not the first mem∣ber of féeling, neither a member conur∣nient to féeling: But the sinewe, which is within the flesh, is the limme of fée∣ling. And therefore dead flesh féeleth nothing, nor flesh which is cut and de∣trenched ail of. For it hath not the well of feeling of it selfe, but of sinewes. Therefore if the sinewes bée corrupte or stopped at the full, the flesh féeleth no∣thing, as it fareth in limmes, which be talten and vexed with the palsie. All Fowles with crooked billes and sharpe clawes, be fedde with fleshe, and wilde beastes also, and fleshe is the praye of such Fowles, for néede of meate and of foode, as it is sayd. Liber..14 And foules of praie that bée but little fleshye, bee bolde and hardie, and good of flight, and sharpe of sight, as it is there sayde. And Fowles of greate fatnesse, bée slowe of moouing and of flight, and they be more fleshie in Winter then in Summer. For in Winter the powers bée closed, and the humours ware thicke and tourneth into flesh and fatnesse: and also by rea∣son of rest. For then Fowles moue lesse from place to place, as saith Isaac in Dietis. Of Fatnesse. Cap. 63. Pinguedo puueli, vvordes that sig∣nifie fat∣nes which cometh to pore men through sloth, refu¦sing lavv.FAtnesse is a moyst thing, and sitteth vppon the small celles and places as sayth Constantine. For subtill bloud and vnctuous gathereth no fatnesse in hot places, there it may enter and pearce. But when it commeth to places, that kindlye are colde, there it congealeth at last, and tourneth into fatnesse. And that kinde doth for right greate néede, to temper with the moysture of fatnesse the sinewes and selles,full exer∣cise: vnto rich men by too much su∣perfluous feeding and rest. which be kind∣ly drye, that they shoulde not lyghtlye breake by some happe that might fall: And also to kéepe and saue with fat∣nesse that that is betweene the inner partes from colde aire that is without, as sayth Constantinus liber. 2. cap. 14. And Aristotle. liber.2. saith, that fatnesse is bread in the bodies of beasts, of bloud vndigested and vndested, and namely for scarcitie of moouing. And the more the fatnesse increaseth and waxeth, the more the bloud minisheth and vanisheth. And therfore in right fat men, is little bloud. And hée sayth, Libro. 16. Moouing wast∣eth and destroyeth fatnesse, and so doth heate also. Therefore in all beastes the right reine hath lesse fatnesse then the left reine, and is higher in place and stéede. For in the right side, the heate is more stronger then in the lefte side, and of more mouing. And Constantine saith, That fat bodies and too full of grease, be worst, and appropried to most worst euills and sicknesses. For in such bo∣dies oft kinde heate is stiffeled: And by stopping of fatnesse, the waye of the spi∣rit is closed and forbarred: And the in∣fluence of the spirites maye not come to rule the sinewes and arteryes. And hée sayth, that all fat bodyes fall into long sicknesse, which bée harde and slowe to heale: and that is for the great superflu∣itie of humours gathered together in them. For such bodyes charged with fatnesse, moue not themselues to trauell, whereby kindly heat should be augmen∣ted. And so the fatnesse congeled is dissol∣ued: and then kindly heate fayleth, and sodeine death followeth, but if there bée succour the sooner, as sayth Constantine liber. 11.cap..17 Then consider, that fat∣nesse by vnctuositie therof is fire nutra∣tiue: & for light aire that is therin, it pas∣seth into the vttermost part that is of a thing: & diminisheth the strength of yt si∣newes and ioynts, & defendeth them: and flaketh the strength therof; & maketh soft the skirt and stoppeth the neather pores and kéepeth and saueth kindly heate: and filleth and replenisheth the hollownesse and voidnesse of the body. And stretcheth
out the wrinkling of the skinne: And presseth the vaines and arteryes of the body, and letteth the working of féeling and reason, and sloweth perfect gene∣ration of beasts. Also it is said in Aph. That a woman yt is too fat, conceiueth not till-shée become leane: and it is no wonder:Nota. For the fatnesse letteth & stop∣peth the way of the mother. Also greace and fatnesse doth moyst things: and are not soone drie. Wherefore. li. 3.Aristotle sayth, That the broth of beastes with much greace renleth not, as the broth of a horse, or of a Swine. Item, euerye beast with greace not departed from the flesh, hath but lyttle fatnesse in the wombe. And when the wombes bée but lyttle, the flesh is verye fattie. Item hée sayth, that that is nigh the blarke of the eie in all beastes is full fat, though the eye be hard. And euery beast with much tallowe hath little séede: whether it bée male or female. And beastes with téeth in either iawe, haue no tallowe. Tallow congealeth anone when it is taken out of the bodye and set in colde ayre. Pin∣guedo, Adeps, and Aruina, bee all one touching theyr substaunce. But Isidore saith, Aruina is that fatnesse, that clea∣ueth to the skinne: Adeps is that fat∣nesse that beclippeth the guttes, and kée∣peth and saueth the members within. Zirbus is called a thinne skinne, vnto the which that fatnesse cleaueth that ma∣ny call Alluta: whereof followeth this verse. Intus adeps, aruina foris, pingue∣doque queuis. Which is to vnderstand, that in the beast is fatnesse, that is cal∣led Adeps, Aruina without, & both with∣in and without it is called Pinguedo, fatnesse. Of the Skinne. Chap. 64. Pellis, Cutis, Chros, Derma. be names for the skinne. The skins of men be of diuerse colours, ac∣cording as to cōplec∣tions be, reddish, blacke, pale, vvhite, brovvne, tavvnie greenish, & vvatry.THe Skinne is the vttermost part of the bodie of a beast, and is called Cutis in latine, for it couereth the body, and is oft cut and coruen as sayth Isi∣dore. For Cutin in Gréeke, is Incisio in Latine, that is, cutting in English. Also the skin is called Pellis in Latine, and hath that name of Pellere to put of: For it putteth off the vtter griefes of the bodie, as winde, and raine, and suffe∣reth Sunne burning and other griefes. And when the skin is flaine, & is draw∣en of, then it is called Corrium, that is saide of Caro in Latine, flesh. For the flesh is couered with the skinne, as saith Isidore. Then the skin is the vttermost part of the body, and beclippeth the flesh and bones, & couereth and defendeth all the inner parts, & is now stretched out, and now drawen together, after as the diuerse néeds of the body axeth. Also for defence of the inner part of the body the skinne putteth it sefe forth against di∣uerse griefes of the aire. And the skinne hath a kindly thinnesse, as sayth Con∣stantine, for that it shuld not occupy the body ouer measure. And the skinne is sad to conteine the more easily the parts which bée within, and also to lette and withstand the vtter griefes. In men the skinne is more nesher and softer then in other beasts. And that is for to haue good touch and feeling. For if the skinne were harde and thicke, as the shell of a fish is, it should not féele any thing. And if they were rough and hairye, as the skinne of an Asse: then it should féeble and appaire the witte of féeling and of groping. Therefore in the palme of the hand the vtter skinne is more and sof∣ter then in other partes of the body, that it should the rather be chaunged to tou∣ching. And the skin is all full of poores, and namely the skinne of the head, and that is néedefull to put off superfluous fumositie. For by heate the pores open, and the superfluitie that is betwéene the fell and the flesh, is put out by va∣pours and sweating. Also mans skinne is not in all mem∣bers like: For the skinne of the visage is more tender and thin, and more subtil then other: And that is for the perfectnes of féeling and shewing of fairenesse. For if the skin of the visage were too great, men shuld not sée there through the red∣nesse of bloud: Also if it were thicke, it were not according to ye working of the wits, yt be in ye visage: and ye skin is so fast ioyning to ye body, yt it may not easily be flaine & departed therfrom, & namely in ye soles of ye féet, & in ye palms of the hands:
in the which it cleaneth to the sinewes of the heart, and brawnes as saith Con∣stantine. Aristotle li. 3. saith, That after the coulour of the skin the haire and the nailes of beasts vary. For if the skin be black, the haire and the nailes be black. And if the skin be white, the haire and the nailes be white. And euery beast that hath bloud hath a skinne. And if the skinne be hurt, or if it be flaine off, it hath no féeling. And the skinne hath this propertie, that if in a place without flesh, it bée cut off, it groweth no more, nor draweth not together, as it fareth in the Nauell, and in the breadthes of the eye liddes. Also liber.19. In some beasts the skinne is small and thinne, and in some greate and thicke, as the humour small or great hath the masterie. And in a great skinne groweth great haire, and in a small skinne small haire. And in age the skinne waxeth great and harde, and shrinketh and riueleth, for defaults of heate, and consuming of kindlye hu∣mour, and then the beautie chaungeth. Also the skinne is oft grieued as other members bée. Sometime the cause is without, as with wounds and slitting, with heate of the Sunne, with burning, with hot and colde, wherewith it wax∣eth pale, wanne, and bliewe, and taketh many diuerse vnséemly coulours: Som∣time the griefes of the skinne come of a cause that is within, as riueling, which commeth of wasting of the substantiall moysture, as it fareth in olde men and women. Sometime of infection of hu∣mours, as it fareth in leprous, and in thē that haue the Morpheu. For kinde put∣teth out from the inwarde partes the matter that is infect to the skin: and that matter abideth vnder the skinne, and chaungeth and infecteth the skinne. Sometime it is grieued with scales and sometime with itching, with drye scabs and wet: Sometime with striping and pilling, and with many another griefe. And skinnes of beasts be right necessa∣rie for men, for right many manners and diuerse vses, as for clowting, and for armour, for writing, for bootes & shoes, and for many other necessaryes, the which were long to reheare. And scarce is any beast found, but that his skinne is couenable to some vse of mankinde. If the skinne be white it doth come of fleme,Addition if red, then of bloud, if blacke of blacke Choler, if Tawnye or shining of coulour, adusted, if gray∣ish or greenish, then of melancholy & colde humours. Of the haire. chap. 65. THe haire is called Pilus in Latine,Capillus, Thrix. Crinis, Pili. of Pellis the skinne, for the haire com∣meth out of the skinne as sayth Isidore. And the haire is bred and commeth out of a fumositie, hotte and drie as sayth Constantine. For when the subtil smoak commeth out of the powers, it is dryed with the aire without, and when the vt∣ter softe smoake commeth out, there is not dealed to giue it full passage. But the aire letteth the passage of this softe smoake, and dryeth it and tourneth it in to the kind of haire. The  aire helpeth & highteth the body, as saith Const. li. 2.& vltimo. And liber. 3.Aristotle saith, that haire groweth not but in the bodyes of beasts, which gender and get beastes. And the haire is diuerse by diuersitie of skinne of the beastes, in the which it groweth as it is sayd, liber. 19. for beasts that haue greate skinnes, haue greate haire, and that is for the multitude and plentie of the earthly part, and also for widenesse of the veines and poores. And if the skinne be continued and thick, the haire is full thinne and small, for the straightnesse of the waies. And when the humour of fumositie that is in the skin drieth swiftly, there groweth not much haire nor long: And if that humour be great, thicke, and fat, the haire is then contrariwise. And therefore the hayre of mans head is full long, because that humour is fat of kinde, and drieth not so soone. And therfore men and women that dwell in moist countries, and haue moist complections, haue esh haire and softe, As men and women in Thracia.Thraciana And contrary wise,Luteciana men and women that dwell in hotte and drie Countryes,Indians. haue hard haire and crispe.Britana. And name∣ly
if they haue complections according, for by heat there the haire is bent, riue∣led, and pinched, as it is sayde there. And the haire groweth crispe and comming out of the skinne: for it ccommeth out by two contrary wayes. For the earth∣ly parte of the hot, fumositie and drye, comming out of the skin moueth down∣ward: and the part hot and light, moo∣ueth vpward: and so the haire is bowed and bent, riueled, and pinched, and made crooked and crispe. And when beastes that haue haire waxe old, then the haire waxeth hard and more stiffe then they were before; as feathers of fowles waxe  in age, and that is for scarcitie of sdurs. Also there it is sayde, That  man is gelded, there groweth the haires on him neuer after: and that  scarcitye of humour, and through iiition of heae and humour in the principall members. Item, sometime the haire chaungeth coulour, that is by reason of some cause without. For as it is sayd there. . Hot water maketh white haire, and colde water maketh blacke haire. And the cause is, for in hot water is more, spirit then in cold water. And therefore when the water heateth, thereof commeth whitenesse. As it fa∣ in some. And this chaunge acciden∣tally of ye haire, is as wel of small haires of the body as of the head. But it com∣meth not alway of changing of hot wa∣ter or colde. Of the Haires of the head. Chap. 66. HAires of the head be called Capilli in Latine, as saith Isidore, and bee made to hight the head; and to kéepe and saue the braine from colde. Haire shorne is called Cesaries: Shearing beséemeth well a man and not a woman. Hayre vnkit, is called Coma in Gréeke, wo∣mens haire is properly called Crines in Latine. For womens haire is dealed, shedde, pleated, and bounde with laces. And so the pleates of womens haire be knitte and bounde with laces that bée called Discriminalia in Latine,Huc vs∣ Isid. And Const. saith, yt the haire of the head commeth out of fumositie thick grose, and hot. And that fumositie com∣meth of hot, firic, and intensiue hu∣mours, and passeth out at the pores of the head. And is dried with aire that is without,As it appe∣reth after male fac∣tors haue ben excem¦ted, their haire & nailes haue gre∣vven lōg, vntill the moist hu∣mour be dimini∣shed. and so tourneth into the substaunce of haire, while this humour groweth, the haire groweth, that is bread and commeth thereof, and is nou∣rished therwith. And who yt looseth this fumositie, looseth also ye haire of his head. And ye hair hath ye quality of this fumosi∣ty: for if this fumositie be black, ye haire is black: And ther is much haire when ye fumositie is much, and scarcitie of haire, when it is scarce. And when this fumo∣sitie faileth, the haires fal off, & the man is bald, for the haire groweth no more. And in this case medicines help not: and if such fumositie faileth not, but is infec∣ted or let by some other humour: then failing and lack of haire is not properly baldnesse, but a speciall euill yt Phisiti∣ons call Allopecia.Alopecia, a kind of leprosie or srse By that euill, ye nou∣rishing of the haire being corrupt, the haire falleth, & the fore part of the head is bare, and the fore skin of the head is ye fouler. Such men fare as foxes do: for the haire of them faileth haply through immoderate heate. Allopes in Gréeke & Vulpes in Latine, is called a Foxe in English. For such other passions & cau∣ses of failing and default of haire, search inner in the treatise of the infirmities, of the falling of, and of the faults of the haire. Of the hoarenesse and the cause thereof séeke likewise there. Also looke before in the treatise of the head, where ye shall finde the disposition, kinde, and diuersitie of the complection of the haire, by the equdition of Galen, Halye, and Hippocrates. But of hoare haire take héede, as Constantine and others Au∣thors tell For the masterie of colde fleine: and moist héedeth hoarnesse. For of white fumositie and colde commeth hoarnesse of the haire of the head, and of the other haire of the bodie. Arist. saith, that the hairs of the temples hoareth sooner then the other haire: & that is for scarcitie of humours and for the mastry of the coldnesse of the boanes there∣of. Then hoarenesse betokeneth length
of lyfe and of age, and the quenching and passing of fleshly lyking, the stint∣ing and flieng of vices and lyking of childhood, and ending of this lyfe, & need∣full tidings of the new lyfe that com∣meth afterward. Baldenesse is priuation and default of haire, and commeth of default of fumositie in the foreparte of the head, as saith Constantine. And it commeth sometime of great abstinence, and of default of moist fumositie, that is the matter of the haire, as Aristotle sayth liber.3. The oft seruing of Venus maketh the haire to fall, and broodeth baldnesse little and lyttle. And if it fall in youth, it groweth againe. And if it fal∣leth afterward youth is gone, it grow∣eth no more. Then it followeth that haire falleth in the fore part of the head, and such falling and default of haire cau∣seth baldnesse commonly. And it falleth off, either for the skinne is too thin, or for scarcitie of humours. Haire falleth not behinde the powle, and that is for sad∣nesse and thicknesse of the skin, & thick∣nesse of pores and of cleauing ofhumour that is there, wherby the haire is fastned and nourished, as saith Galen super A∣phorism. And there it is said, That chil∣dren and women ware not balde, and that is for plentie of moisture in theyr heads. Also gelded men ware not balde: and that is through chaunging of theyr compleition, and for masterye of colde, that closeth and stoppeth the powers of the skinne of the head, and holdeth to∣gethers ye fumositie that it may not passe nor vapour out, but in women and in gelded men, eyther haire falleth and ay∣leth, as saith Aristotle. lib.19. Then the haire of the head, keepeth, highteh, de∣fendeth, and heateth the head. And if a man be without haire on the head he seemeth the more unhonest. This defaulte falleth in youth, but most in age: for the foresaide causes and rea∣sons. AdditionAll manner of haires come of grose matter or fume, being hot, wher∣fore this common Prouerbe be is vsed: Vir pilosus semper est luxuriosus, A man that is full of haire, is lecherous. There are seauen seuerall coulous of haires. The first Albrone haire, yeolow haire, red haire, black haire, flaxen haire, gray haire, and white haire. Alborne haire and yeolowe haire deeme a gentle nature, where the con∣dition & complection be of like good∣nesse, proceeding of Sanguine, bloud. White and flaxen haire, of Flegmae, redde haire, of grole humours and ill bloud. Blacke haire, of cholarike humours mixt with melancholy, Gray haire, de∣fection of naturall heate, and corrupte fleame: euery haire hath a hollownes, forth of the which the powers streme, the haires of man haue diuerse impedi∣ments, it may be eaten with wormes, it maye fall, it maye also stinke and wi∣ther. FINIS LIBRI QVINTI. ¶INCIPIT LIBER SEXTVS. FOrasmuch as it is sayde in speciall of the properties and partes of man, nowe it followeth to speake of the pro∣perties of him in generall and in speci∣all, touching the diuersitie of age and of sexes, and also touching many diuer∣sities
of kindly and vnkindly things: for by all these diuers and contrarye parts, of man is knowen. ¶ Of the age. Cap. 1. REmigius saith, That the age of man, is nought els but tenour and during of kindly vertues in conside∣ration, meane betwéene contrary mouing, or els meane betwéen quiet and rest: for héere∣by man passeth and moueth,Ioh. 19 and neuer abideth, in the same state. Or as Isi∣dore sayth, the age is the space of the life of a beast, & beginneth from ye concepti∣on, and endeth and sayleth after age. Isi∣dore saith and Constantine also, That there are many diuers ages. The first is called Infancia, childhood without téeth, and lately got and borne, and dureth sea∣uen months, and is yet full tender & soft and quauie and clammy. Therefore in that age a childe néedeth alwaye tender and softe kéeping and féeding and nouri∣shing. And childhoode that bréedeth séeth endureth and stretcheth seauen yeares. And such a Childe is called Infans, that is to vnderstand, not speking, for he may not speake nor sound his words perfect∣ly: for ye téeth be not yet perfectly grow∣en and set in order, as sayth Isid. After∣ward commeth ye second age yt is called Puericia, childhood: which dureth and lasteth other seuen yeare, that is to the ende of fourtéene yeare: and hath that name Puericia of Pubertas, or els of Pupilla, the black of ye eye, for as yet the children are pure, as the blacke of ye eye is, as Isidore sayth. And after that com∣meth the age that is called Adolescen∣tia, the age of a young striplyng, & dureth the thirde seauenth yeare, that is, to the ende of one and twentie yeares, as it is sayd in Viatico: but Isidore sayth, that it endureth to the fourth seauen yeares, that is to the ende of eight and twentie yeares. But Phisitions account this age to the ende of thirtie or fiue and thirtie yeares. This age is called Adolescen∣tia, for because it is full age to get chil∣dren, as saith Isidore: and able to bur∣nish and increase, and hath might and strength. Isidore saith, yet in this age the members are softe and tender, and able to stretch: and therfore they grow by vertue of heate that hath masterye in them, euen to the perfection of comple∣ment. After this Adolescentia age, com∣meth the age that is called Iuuentus, and this age is meane betwéene all ages: and therefore it is strongest, and lasteth as Isidore saith, to xlv. or .l. yeares, and there endeth. And Isidore saith, this age Iuuentus hath that name of Iu∣uare, that is to helpe: for in that age a man is set in his full increasing, & there∣fore he is strong to helpe at néede: & Isi∣dore saith, that after this age Iuuentus, commeth the age that is called Senecta: and is the middle age betwéene the age that is called Iuuentus, & the second age ye Isid. calleth heuines or sadnesse. This age accordeth to old men & sad, for to cal Iuuentus young. In this age olde men drawe from youth to the second age: For such men be not in the second age, but their youth passeth, as saith Isidore. And vpon this age commeth the second age: & some men suppose, yt this age endeth at ixx. yere, and some suppose that it endeth in no certaine nūber of yeares. But af∣ter these ages, all the other part of mans lyfe is accounted Senectus, or Senium, the second or the last age. Isidore sayth, that this age is called, Senectus, for pas∣sing and sayling of wit: for by reason of age, olde men doate. Isidore saith, that Philosophers tell, that men that haue colde bloud, be nice and fooles: as men in whom hot bloud hath masterie, are wise and readye. Therefore olde men whose bloud wareth colde, and in whom the bloud heateth not can but little good. Also for gréat age olde men doate and are mad: and for lust, lyking, lightnes, and play, children knowe not what they should doe, as sayth Isidore. The last part of age is called Senium, it is so cal∣led because it is the last end of age & of lyfe. This age bringeth with it manye domages, and also profits good and euill, as sayth Isidore. Good for it delyuereth vs out of the power of mightie men and tirants, and maketh an ende of bodilye
lust, and breaketh the braydes of fleshly lyking, and hath wit and wisedome, and giueth good counsaile, as many olde men doe. It is the ende of wretchednesse and of wor, and beginning of wealth, and of ioye: It is ye passage out of perill, & com∣ming to the price: It is the perfectnesse of meedfull deedes, and disposition to bée perfect. And this age bringeth euilles with him, as saith Isidore. For it is wretched with feeblenesse and noye: For manye euilles come, and sicke∣nesse in age is noyous and sorrowfull, for two things there be, ye destroy yt strength of the bodie, sicknesse and age, as sayth Isidore. In these olde folke kinde heate is quenched, the vertue of gouernance & of ruling fayleth, and humour is dissol∣ued and wasted, might and strength pas∣seth and fayleth, flesh, fatnesse and fayre∣nesse is consumed and spent, the skinne riueleth, the sinewes shrinke, the bodye bendeth and crooketh, forme and shape is lost, and fairenesse of the body brought to nought, all these fayle in néed. All men despise the olde person, and are heauy and weary of him. The olde man is trauai∣led and grieued with coughing and spit∣ting, and with other griefes, vntill the ashes he resolued into the ashes, & pow∣der into powder. By this space & passing of time and of age Philosophers describe mans lyfe: in which passing of time & of age, man chaungeth and draweth al∣way towarde his ende, and to the gates of death. Huc vsque Isidorus. ¶Of Death. Cap. 2. DEath is called Mors, for that it is bit∣ter: or it hath that name of Mars, that is fained to make death. Isid. spea∣keth of thrée manner deaths. The first is bitter, the seconde too soone, the thirde commeth in time. The first is death of children, the seconde of striplyngs, the thirde kindly, and is death of olde men. Euery dead body is called Funus or Ca∣dauer, a carrion. It is called Funus, of Funibus, ropes: for men in olde time, bare ropes burning, with wore: about them, before a poore mans beyre. And Cadauer, carrion hath ye name of Cade∣re to fal, for the dead body falleth and is throwen into the graue. And it is cal∣led than Detunctus, for it hath left the office of lyfe. And it is called epultus, put aside, for it is put aside and buryed. Hue vsque Isidorus. li. 16.ca.2. Seeke the other properties of death farthermore in the ende of this sixt booke, in the chapter treating of the infirmities. Death is an eternall sleepe,Addition a disso∣lution of the body, a terior of the rich, a desire of the poore, a thing inherita∣ble, a pilgrimage vncertaine, a sepera∣tion of the liuing: Death is the scorge of all euill, & the chiefe reward of the good: Secundus. ¶Of the dignitie of man. Ca. 3. HEereafter it followeth to speake of the properties of man, and first of his childhoode and of his generation and getting. For his making and creation is more excellent, than the making of other beastes: by so much that man is more worthy than other beasts, not one∣ly in soule, but also in most temperate complection of the body. For Aristotle libro.2. saith, like as a gobbet or a péece of golde or of siluer, is in comparison to the money with perfect coyne, so be all dispositions of other beastes, in com∣parison to man, if comparison be made betwéene them and man. And therefore for that man is the worthiest of all cre∣tures, kinde ordeineth wittely and wise∣ly to giue to man diuers members and noble, to accorde to diuers noble work∣ings. Therfore of his creation & making touching the body, somwhat shortly shal be treated and said. ¶ Of the creation of the childe. Cap. 4. ABout the begetting and generation of a childe, it néedeth to haue conena∣ble matter, and spéedefull place, and ser∣uice and working of kinde, that is to wit, heat, as the cause efficient working and doing, and spirite that giueth ver∣tue to the body, and gouerneth and ru∣leth that vertue. The matter of the child is humour Seminalis, that is shedde, by working of generation, and commeth
of both the partes, of the father and the mother. First this matter is shed in the place of conceiuing abroad, and by the drawing of vertue of kinde, it is gathe∣red togethers in the cells of the mother. And is medled togethers by working of kinde heate. For if the digest bloud of the father and mother were not med∣led together, there might be no creation neither shaping of a child. For ye matter of bloud that commeth of the male is hot and thicke. And therefore for the greate thicknesse thereof it maye not spread it selfe abroad. And also for ye passing great heate, the matter of the childe should bée destroyed and wasted, but it receiued tē∣perance of the womans bloud, that hath contrarye qualities. This matter gathe∣red in the cell of the right side of the mo∣ther, falleth to a male kinde. And in the lefte side to the kinde of a woman a female. And this diuersitie falleth for mastery of heate in the right side rather then in the lefte, as sayth Galen. Con∣stantine, and Aristotle. liber. 15. If the vertue of the bloud of the Fathers side haue the masterie, the child is like to the Father, & so againeward. And if the ver∣tue be like strong in either of them, the childe is like both Father and Mother. This matter is fodde within by the ver∣tue of kinde heate, and is beclipped with a little skin, and ronleth as milke.Congea∣leth, as renet doth the milke This skinne is the matter of Embrioms, that is the healing and the couering of the childe, and so the childe is layed therein in the mothers wombe. And this skin commeth out with the childe, when it is borne, when the stronges bée broke with the childe, with the which the childe is tied to the cells of the mother. And if it happe by any chaunce, that the skinne abide still in the wombe, after the childe is borne, then the woman is in perill. Then to the matter conceiued, and by vertue retentiue ioyned, kinde sendeth forth menstruall bloud, and by heate and humour of that bloud ye childe that is conceiued is fedde and nourished, with such a foment and nourishing the fielde of our generation & birth is moi∣sted and sprong. For as Galen and Con∣stantine say: When the séede ranled and cherneth as milke, when it is full of spi∣rit, and of kinde heate, it draweth to it selfe féeding and nourishing, and that is by veines and arteryes that bréede and spring of the substaunce of the séede, and bée ioyned to the menstruall bloud. And that is néedfull, that the matter of the childe haue nourishing and féeding that commeth thereto by veines and spirit, that commeth thereto by arteries & wo∣sen. By these two, that is to wit,Conuey∣ance of aire the matter seminall and humour of nourish∣ing and féeding, kind heate that is closed within, doth shape the members of the bodie of the childe, and that by might and vertue informatiue of shaping. For of the Essentia of the séede, it shapeth the braine, bones, griftles, fees, skinnes, sl∣newes, veines, and arteryes, wosen and pipes. And of menstruall bloud, kinde shapeth the liuer and al the fleshly mem∣bers, of the which the substaunce is bred and commeth of bloud. And first kinde shapeth the principall members, as the heart, the braine, and liuer, which are the foundation of the other members: and in beginning while these be a lumpe of bloud, they bée full nigh togethers, but afterward they be diuided and departed a fonder. Of these thrée foundations spring other thrée: Of the braine spring the sinews, and the marrow of the ridge bone: of the heart, arteryes, wosen and pipes, spring: and veines of the liuer. When these foundations be made, kind maketh and shapeth bones to kéepe and saue them. As the skull to kéepe & saue the braine, and defend it, and the ribbes of the breast to defend the heart, and the ribbe of the side to defend the lider: and so of other. After these bréede and spring other members, later then these, as the hands a, féete, and such other. These bée not shapen all at once, but lyttle and lyttle one after another. The childe is bred and commeth forth in foure de∣grees: Thē first is when the séede is nigh as it wer milke: The second, when the seede is become into bloud, yet then is not the liuer nor the heart, nor the braine perfectly shaped, but they bée as a lumpe of bloud, and this degrée is cal∣led Fetus by Ipocras speach. The thirde
degree is, when the heart, braine, and li∣uer are shapen, and the other members vnshapely, and not diuided: The last de∣gree is, when all the members be like euen shaped: and this degree is called, Iasans of Ipocras, for now the bodye is made and shapen with members and lyins, and disposed to receiue the soule. Then it receiueth soule and life, and be∣ginneth to moue it selfe and sprall, and to put with feete and with handes, and if it be a female, it moueth in the lefte side, and if it be a male it moueth in the right side as saith Galen. In the degree of milke this matter is vii. dayes, in the degrée of bloud ix. dayes in the degrée of a lumpe of flesh xii. dayes, and in the fourth degrée before full persection xviii. dayes, whereof follow these verses: Sep in lacte dies, ter sunt in sanguine terni.After 46. dayes the Childe hath full shape. Bis seni carnem, ter seni membra figurant. That is to vnderstand, The matter of the seede abideth vii. dayes in milke, ix. in bloud, and xii. in flesh, & then in xviii. dayes the members be shapen. Then from the daye of conception to the daye of full complicion and the first lyfe of the childe, be xlvi. daies, so that the first daye and the last be accounted in ye tale: & by this appeareth, that in xlvi, dayes,6. daies af∣ter. 40 daies, life entereth the conti∣nual pro∣portiō of the first creation. the childe is alyue, and full shape touch∣ing the effect and doing of generation. And in this manner Austen accompteth the buylding of the Temple vnder the number and tale of xlvi. yeare, and com∣pareth and likeneth thereto perfection of the body of Iesu Christ. Super. lo. 9. & li. 4. de Trin. ca. 5. Ther among other he sayth these words,A good note. xlvi. times vi. dayes be CC. dayes and lxxvi, which number of dayes make ix. months and vi. dayes. And it followeth in the same chapter, And it is written, that our Lorde was borne in the viii Kalendes of Ianuarie. Then from conception, that was from the viii. Kalendes of Aprill, to the daye of the birth, yt was the viii. day of Ianu∣ary, be accounted CC daies, lxxvi. ye con∣teineth the number of xlvi. times vi. In so many yeres the Temple was buyld∣ed, &c. And li. 3. ca. 34. Const. saith, that a male childe that shall be borne in the viii. month, is formed in thirtie dayes, & full shaped in lxx. dayes. Then he saith, that a male child of x. months is formed in xlvi. dayes, and at the full in lxxxx. In the same place the time is described of the first life, and full shaping of a maide childe, but I passe ouer shortlye, taking heede hereto, that the female is more slowly formed and shapen at full than a male childe. Therefore the leede that the male commeth of, is more stronger and more, hot, and in more hotter place recei∣ued, than the seede that the female com∣meth of. Also Constantine and Galen saye super Aphor. that Ipocras sayeth, That euerye childe mooueth in eight monthes, and if he were than so strong, that he might passe out in anye wise, then he should lyue. And if it purpose to passe out and may not passe out, then it is féebled & grieued with trauell of that mouing, so that when he commeth out, in the next month after, he shal not long liue. And if the birth abideth to the ninth month, or till the beginning of the tenth month, then ye childe becommeth strong, and is born without perill, as saith Con∣stantine li. Pantegni. ca. 34. ¶Of the little childe. Ca. 5. THe little childe is conceiued and bred of séedes that haue contrarye qualities: and the place of the male is in the right side, and of the female in the left side. And he is fed and nourished in the mothers wombe with bloud mēstru∣al. Of such vile matter and vnstable man taketh his nourishing and féeding from the beginning by working of kinde, and helping of the vertue of heate, stretching out all the members that be shaped lyt∣tle and little, and not all at once. Christ alone was all at once shaped, and distin∣guished in his mothers wombe, when he was conceiued therein as saith Austen. When the soule entereth, life is shed in therwith & féeling also, and the childe fée∣leth the clipping kindly of a small skin: & when that skin breaketh, the child mo∣ueth, & with that mouing, the mothers wombe is striken and grieued full sore. When kinde hath full wrought creati∣on and shaping of the childe, if hée be
whole and sound, then the eight or ninth or tenth moneth, he forceth himselfe to come out of the wombe, and in the out-comming, he is beclipped with a skinne that is called ecunna: and in his out going, the mothers wombe is tra∣uayled with full hard throwes and sore, and that happeneth if the childe bee too hastie outward. Then when he com∣meth out into the aire that is too hot or too colde, he is put to wretchednesse and to woe: that witnesseth openlye his kinde wretchedly crieng and wéeping. The childes flesh that is new borne, is tender, softe, quauie, and vnsad: there∣fore diuers remedies and foode be neces∣sarie to the childe, as saith Constantine li. 3. cap. 32. And he sayth, that children that be new borne shoulde be swathed in Roses pouned with salte, that theyr members may be comforted and deliue∣red, and cleansed of clammie moysture. Then the roofe of the mouth and gums, should be froted with once fingers wet in Honie, to cleanse and comfort the in∣ner part of the mouth, and also to excite and to kindle the childes appetite, with swéetenesse of the honie. And he should be ofte bathed and anoynted with Oleo Myrtino or Rosaceo, and all the lyms should be anoynted & rubbed with this Oyle, and namely the lyms of males, the which because of trauayle, ought to bee more hard and sad, than the lyms of fe∣males. And also it is néedfull, that they should be brought a sléepe in darke pla∣ces, till their sight be gathered and ioy∣ned: for a place that is too bright, depar∣teth and diuideth the sight, and hurteth the small eyen, that be yet full tender, & ofte maketh children to looke a squinte. And therefore they shuld not be brought nor layd into bright aire, least the spirite of sight be diuided and departed. And of all things it néedeth to beware of euill milke, and of corrupted nourishing and féeding, that the children be not fed ther∣with: for by vncleannesse of Nursses, & sucking of clammie milke lyke glewe, commeth full many sores and griefes, as whelkes, blaines, pimples in the mouth, spewing, feuers, cramp, the flixe, and such other. And if the childe be sicke, medi∣cines shall be giuen to the Nourse, and not to the childe, and she shall be ruled according to good dyet: so that the ver∣tue of the Nourse be in sléede, supplye, and fulfill the default of the childe, as saith Constantine there. For of good dis∣position of the milke commeth good dis∣position of the childe, and contrariwise.There must bee hede ta∣ke in chu¦sing hole¦some nu∣es, and cleanly. For of corrupt milke of the Nurse, com∣meth vnkindly sores and griefes in the childes lyttle body: and that is by rea∣son of the tendernesse of the childes kind, and also for the easie changing of milke foode. And for tendernesse, the lymmes of the childe maye easelye and looe boowe and bende, and take diuers shapes, and therefore childrens members and lyms, be bound with lysts.  other couenable bondes, that they be nt croo∣ked neither euill shapen. Séeke in the fifth booke of the nauell, there it is ex∣pounded more largely. Also for that chil∣dren take much foode, they néede to are much sléepe, that the naturall heate may be receiued into the inner parts, to make good digestion of their meate and drink. And therefore by exciting of kinde, nur∣ses haue a custome to rocke children in cradles, to comfort kinde heate, with ea∣sie and temperate mouing. And to bring the children softly and lyghtly on sléepe by resolutions and giuing againe of fu∣mosities in their braines. Also they vse lullings, and other cradle songs, to please the wits of the childe. Héereto Aristotle sayeth lib. 2. that a childe hath much braine, and full great in comparison to his body. Therefore the euer part of a child is greater and heauier than the ne∣ther: and therefore in the beginning of his walking, a childe créepeth on feete & handes, and then afterward, he reareth vp his body a lyttle: for the ouer parte minisheth, and wereth more lyght, and the nether parts were and become more heauye. Then the age of the first child∣hood that is within seauen yeare, end∣eth in the beginning of the second child∣hoode, that is betwéene seauen and fourtéene. ¶Of a childe. Cap. 6.
A Childe that is betwéene vii. yeare and xiiii. is called Puer in Latine, and hath that name of Puritas, clean∣nesse, as sayth Isidore. And the childe is properly called Puer, when he is way∣ned from milke, and departed from the breast, and knoweth good and euill and therefore he is able to receiue chastising and learning, and then he is put and set to learning vnder tutours, and compel∣led to take learning and chastising: Chil∣dren of this age be hot & moyst of com∣plection: and in such children for strayt∣nes of veynes, mouing of Venus hath no great masterie, till they coue to the yere of Puberte, that is when ye nether beard haire groweth first in the flesh, and ther∣fore for purenesse of kinde innocencie, such children be called Pueri, as saith I∣sidore. Then such children are softe of flesh, lythie and plyant of body, able and lyght to mouing, wittie to learne, & leade their liues without thought & care, and set their courages onelye on mirth and lyking, and dread no perills more than beating with a rod, and they loue an ap∣ple more than golde. In the time of Pu∣berte when the haire groweth on the neather beard, they be not ashamed to be séene naked and bare, when they be prai∣sed, or shamed, or blamed they set lyttle thereby. Through stirring and mouing of the heate of the flesh and of humours, they be lightly and soone wroth, & soone pleased, and lyghtly they forgiue: and for tendernesse of body they be soone hurt & grieued, and may not well endure harde trauayle. For uing of hot humours which haue ye mastrie in thē, they mooue lightly, and be vnstedfast and vnstable. Through great and strong heat, they de∣sire much meate: and so by reason of superfluitie of meate and of drinke,It is very expedient for yoūg people to take heed that they mach not vvith those that come of a corrupt or leprous stocke. they fal oft and many times into diuers sick∣nesses & euills. And those children which be gonoéd and gotten of corrupt father and mother take corruption of them, as it fareth in children of leprous men, and of those men which haue the sicknesse called Pdagre, which of a corrupt hu∣mour of the father and mother, are cor∣rupted with leprosie and with gout. By voyce yt lae, we perceiue betwéene chil∣dren and men of full age. Therefore li∣bro. 3. Aristotle saith, that in children the voyce chaungeth not, vntill the de∣siring of Venus come: For when chil∣drens voyce chaungeth it is a token of Puberte, and then they be able to gen∣der and get children Sith all children be tached with euill manners, and thinke onely on things that be, and regard not of things that shall be, they loue playes, game, and vanitie, and forsake winning and profite: and things most worthye they repute least worthy, and least wor∣thy most worthye. They desire things that be to them contrary and grieuous, and set more of the image of a childe; than of the image of a man, and make more sorrow and woe, and weepe more for the losse of an apple, than for the losse of their heritage, and the goodnesse that is done for them, they let it passe out of minde. They desire all thinges that they sée, and praye and arke with voyce and with hande: They loue talking and counsayle of such children as they be, and auoyd companye of olde men: they kéepe no counsayle, but they tell all that they heare or see. Sodainly they laugh, and sodainly they wéepe. Al∣way they crye, iangle, scorne & disdaine, that vnneth they be still while they sleep. When they are washed of filthe, anone they efile themselues againe. When the mother washeth and kometh them, they kicke and srall, and put with feete and with hands, and withstandeth with all their might. For they thinke one∣lye on wombe ioye, and knowe not the measure of theyr wombes:Or euer they be re¦die cloa∣thed. They de∣sire to drinke alwaye, vnneth they are out of bedde, when they crye for meat canone. ¶Of the maide. Cap. 7. A Maide childe and a amoysell is called Pùella, as it were cleane and pure, as the blacke of the eye, as saith I∣sidore. Among all things that be loued in a maiden, chastitie and cleannesse be loued most. Men behooue to take héed of maidens, for they be hot & tender of com∣plection small, pliant and fayre of dispo∣sition
of body: shamefast, fearefull, and merry touching the affection of ye minde. Touching outward disposition they bée well nurtered, demure & softe of speach, & well ware what they say, and delycate in their apparell. For as Seneca sayeth, that séemely clothing beséemeth to them well, that be chast damoisells, &c. Puel∣la is a name of age, of soundnesse with∣out wem, and also of honestie, as sayeth Isidore. For commonlye we vse to call maidens damoisells, and a maide is cal∣led Virgo, and hath that name of gréene ago, as Virgo a rodde is said, as it were Vndis gréene: or els a maide hath the name. Virgo, of cleannesse without cor∣ruption, as it were Virago: For shée knoweth not the very passion of women, as saith Isidore li. 11. &. 12. Arist. saith, that euery woman generally hath more nesh and softe haire, and more pliaunt than a man, and longer necke, & the cou∣lour of women is more white than of men, and their faces and chéere, is mer∣rie, softe, bright, and pleasing, and haue small bodies and straight from the shoul∣ders to the nauell, and more large from the nauell to the knées, and longer downward to the soles of the feet. Their hands and the vttermost parte of theyr members be full subtill and pliant, their voyce small their speach easie and short, lght in ng and short shepe, and light wit and head, they be soone angrie, and they be merciable and enuious, bitter, guilefull, able to learne, and hastie in ly∣king of Venus. Therfore li. 8. Aris saith, that of all kindes of beasts the female is more feeble than the male, except the fe∣males of Beares and Leopardes: For then be rounted more cruell and more hardie than the males. And in other kind of beasts ye females be easier to be taught and be more guilefull, and be more softe, and more busie about norishing, féeding, and kéeping of their young. And for that a woman is more méeker than a man, she wéepeth sooner, and  more enuious, and more laughing and louing, and the malice of the soule is more in a woman than in a man. And she is of feeble kind,A pretie mixture in a vvo∣man. and she maketh more leasings, & is more shamefast, and more slow in working and in mouing than is a man, as sayeth Aristotle. lib. 8. Of the Mother. Cap. 8. THe mother is called Mater,Mater. for shée profereth and putteth forth the breast to giue the childe, and is busie to nou∣rish and so kéepe it, and the childe in the mothers wombe is fed with bloud men∣struall, but when the child is born, kinde sendeth that bloud to the breasts, & tour∣neth it to milke to féede the childe, and so the childe is more better and kindlye fed with his owne mothers milke, than with other milke. The mother that con∣ceiueth with liking, trauaileth & bringeth forth hir childe with sorrow and woe, & she loueth the childe tenderly, and clip∣peth and kisseth it, and féedeth and nori∣sheth it busily. Also after that the mother is with childe, she sheddeth not menstru∣all bloud: for as Arist. saith, it turneth into féeding of the childe. The mother is lesse grieued if she go with a male child, then when she goeth with a maid child: and therefore she is fairer of colour, and lighter of mouing, as Aristo. saith. And Aug. saith, The néerer the time of birth the mother is, the more she is grieued & trauailed with mouing of ye child. Arist. saith, and Galen also super Aphor. that the tokens that women goe with child, be if they desire diuers things, & chaunge colour, & were wan vnder the eyen, and the breasts were great, and little & little the wombe ariseth, and with greatnesse of the child, the mother is stretched, their stomackes wamble, and oftentimes they be ready to spewe, they be very sad, and can away with no labour, in trauails of childe they be compelled to crye & light∣ly perish, & namely young women with small members and straight. The more woe and sorrow women haue in trauel, the more they loue the childe, when it is borne  and they kéepe and nourisheth, & instrudeth it the better. The lettes of a woman in conceiuing & féeding of a child, sake afore in the fift book, wher is trea∣ted of the mother and breasts. Further∣more in the same it toucheth of death birth, and of the causes thereof.
¶Of a Daughter. Cap. 9. A Daughter is called Filia,Filia. and hath that name lyke as Filius a sonne, of Fonere, to succour and féede, for the mo∣ther féedeth the daughter, & giueth to hir matter to féede other, for the same ver∣tue of conceiuing that the mother taketh of hir father and mother, she leaueth hir daughter, as touching the seede of gene∣ration. The more lyke the daughter is to the mother in discretion of sexes, the more beloued is she of hir.Motherly affection. A daughter hath the same properties that he rehear∣sed afore of a damoysell & a maide child. Looke in the chapter next afore. ¶Of a Nurse. Cap. 10. A Nurse hath that name of norishing, for she is ordained to nourish and to féede the childe.Nutrix. Isidore sayth, that in fée∣ding and nourishing of the childe, the nurse is in stéede of the mother. And therefore like as the mother, the nurse is glad if the childe be glad, and heauye if the childe be sorye, and taketh the childe vp if it fall, and giueth it sucke: if it wéepe she kisseth and lulleth it still, and gathereth the lymmes, and bindeth them together, and doth cleanse and wash it when it is desiled. And for that it cannot speake, the Nurse lispeth and sowndeth the same wordes to teach more easelye the childe that cannot speake. And shée vseth medicines to bring the child to co∣upnable estate if it be sicke: and lifteth it vp now on hir shoulders, now on hir handes, now on hir knées and lappe, and lifteth him vp if it crye or wéepe. AdditionIf the nurse haue a stinking breath, it is not good to chaw the childes meat fasting, for if in kissing of young in∣fants a stinking breath infecteth the tender powers, much more sooner doth such chawed food, breed the soū∣ding euill, of the which proceedeth the falling sicknes. Cold pap made of Rye flower is also dangerous, and beere that is ouer bitter with hoppes. And she chaweth meate in hir mouth, and maketh it readye to the toothlesse childe, that it may the easilyer swallow that meate, and so she feedeth the childe when it is an hungered, and pleaseth the childe with whispering and sos when it shall sleepe, and  it in swéete cloathes, and righteth and stretcheth out his lymmes, and bind∣eth them together with cradle bondes to kéepe and saue the childe, yt it haue no miscrooked lims. She batheth and anoin∣teth it with good anoyntments. Seeke a∣fore Cap. de Infanculo. Of a Midwife. Cap. 11. A Midwife is a woman that hath craft or skill to helpe a woman that tra∣uaileth of childe,Obstetrix. Obstetri∣cem. that she beare & bring forth hir childe, with the lesse paine end sorrow, and for that the childe should bee borne with the lesse trauayle, she anoyn∣teth and balmeth the mothers wombe, & helpeth & comforteth hir in that wise. Also she taketh the child out of ye womb, and knitteth his nauell foure inches long, with water she washeth away the bloud of the child, and bayneth him with salt and honie to drye vp the humours, and to comfort his lyms and members, and swatheth him in clothes and clouts. Seeke afore in libro. 5. in the chapter of the nauell. ¶Of a seruant. Cap. 12. A Seruant woman is ordeyned to learne the wiues rule,Ancilla. and is put to office and worke of trauaile, toylyng, and stubbering, and is fedde with grose meate and simple, and is cloathed with cloathes and kept low vnder the yoke of thraldome and of seruage, and if shée conceiue a childe, it is thrall or it be borne, and is taken from the mothers wombe to seruage. Also if a seruing wo∣man be of bond condition, she is not suf∣fered to take a husbande at hir owne will: and he that weddeth hir, if he bée frée afore, hée is made bonde after the contract. A bonde seruaunt woman is bought and solde lyke a beast: and if a bonde seruaunt man or woman be made frée, and afterward be vnkinde, he shall
be called and brought againe into charge of bondage and of thraldome. Also a bonde seruaunt suffereth many wrongs, and is beate with rods, and constrained and helde lowe with diuers and contra∣ry charges and trauailes amongst wret∣chednesse and woe, vneth he is suffered to rest or to take breath. And therefore among all wretchednesse and woe, the condition of bondage and thraldome is most wretched, as sayth Rabanus, ex∣pounding this word Ier. 9. Ye shall serue straunge Gods, that shall not suffer you to rest day nor night. It is one proper∣tie of bond seruing women, and of them that be of bond condition, to grudge and to be rebellious and vnbouom to their Lords & Ladies, as saith Rabanus. And when they be not held lowe with dread, their heartes swell and wee stout and proud against the commaundements of their souereignes: as it fared of Agar a woman of Aegypt, seruaunt of Sara, for when she saw that she had conceiued and was with childe, she despised hir owne Lady,A slovve hose must haue a quicke spur: & a malepart seruaunt meate, drinke, lodging, counsell worke, & stripes. Gen. 16. and woulde not amende hir: but then hir Ladye put hir to bée scourged and beaten, and so it is written that Sara chastised hir and beate hir, &c. Dread maketh bonde men and women méeke and lowe, and goodly loue maketh them proud and stout, and despitefull, as it is said there. And it is written, he that nourisheth his seruaunt delicately, shall finde him rebell at the ende. Séeke far∣thermore in the Chapter Nequam. ¶Of a male. Cap. 13. A Male is called Masculus,Masculus. and Mas∣culus is the diminutiue of Mas, ma∣ris. And in all kinde of beasts the male hath the principate, touching the worthi∣nesse of sees, that is, distinction of male and female as saith Isidore. The male passeth the female in perfect complecti∣on, in working, in wit, in discretion, in might and in Lordship. In perfect complection, for in comparison the male is hotter and dryer, and the female the contrary. In the male are vertues formall and shaping, and working, and in the female materiall suffering and passiue. There∣fore Aristotle li. 5. saith, that a man is as it were forme and shape, and a wo∣man is as it were patient and suffering. Also the male passeth in kinde working: for generally kinde working is stronger in the male than in the female, for in him is more vertue and strength, and therefore a man is called Vir in Latine, and hath that name of passiue strength, as saith Isidore, for the sinewes and brawnes of men be grounded in grea∣ter strength, and therefore they be apt to strong works & déeds: the bones of males be stronger, greater, harder & sadder in the ioyutes, and therefore they be kindly more strong for all manner of workes. Also Constantine sayth, that in males the heartes be large and great, therefore they be able to receiue much plentie of spirites and of bloud: And therefore through the great abundaunce of spirits and hot bloud, a man is more hardy then a woman, for in her the cause is contra∣rie: And through strength of heate and vertue of drie complection, no man hash the passion menstruall as women haue. All superfluities that bée bread in mens bodyes, are eyther consumed by greate heate, or els turned into haire, or are voi∣ded by businesse and trauaile: Also the conditions of man and woman be diuers in discreation of wit: For in all kinde of beastes the male is more craftye and warye then the female, to voide and to scape ginnes and griefes, and other pe∣rills, as sayth Aristotle. li. 5. Therefore a man passeth a womā in reson & in sharp∣nes of wit & vnderstanding, as saith Au∣gustine. And by authoritie of the Apostle he setteth a man afore a woman in dig∣nitie and worthinesse of the Image and likenesse of God: And by reason of this dignitie a man passeth a woman in au∣thoritie and might of souerigntie. The authoritie of teching and souereignty is graunted to men & denied to women, as for custome & vsage 1. Cor. 6.1. Cor. 6. The Apo∣stle saith, I suffer not a woman to teach in the Church or congregation: For it is written: Under mans power thou shalt bée, and hée shall be thy Lord. Gen. 3.Gen. 3. Then men be more drie and hot then
women, more strong and mightie, more bolde and hardie, more wise and witty, more stedfast and stable, and loue wo∣men iealously. And also beastes fight for their wiues, as Aristotle saith, They be also more harder of body, more rough & htcie, and haue a more greater and gro∣ser voyce, and be more sterne and feare∣full of looking in all manner kinde of beasts except a owe, whose voyce is greater than the Bulles, as sayeth A∣ristotle. Also in euery kinde of beastes, the male hath mo téeth than the female, and néedeth more meate and féeding for the body, & that is for the great strength of heat yt hath ye masterie in males, that wasteth soone the moysture of meat and of drinke, as saith Aristotle lib. 3. ¶Of a man. Cap. 14. A Man is called Vir in Latine, & hath that name of might and strength, as saith Isidore. For in might and strength a man passeth a woman. A man is the head of a woman as the Apostle sayth, and therefore a man is bounde to rule his wife, as the head hath cure and rule of the body. And a man is called Mari∣tus, as it were warding and defending Matrem the mother, for he taketh ward and kéeping of his wife, that is mother of the children. And is called Spnsus also, and hath that name of Spondere, for he betrotheth and bindeth himselfe: for in the contract of wedding, he plight∣eth his troth to leade his life with his wife without departing, and to paye hir his debt, and to kéepe  and loue hir a∣fore all other. A man hath so great loue to his wife, that for hir sake he aduente∣reth himselfe to all perills, & setteth hir loue afore his mothers loue, for he dwel∣leth with his wife, and forsaketh father and mother: for so saith God, A man shall forsake father & mother and abide with his wife.Mat 19. Afore wedding yt spouse thinketh to winne loue of hir that hée weth, with giftes, and certofieth of his will with letters and messengers, and with diuers presents, and giueth manye gifts and much good and cattell, and pro∣miseth much more. And to please hir he putteth him to di∣uers playes & games among gathering of men, and vseth ofte déedes of armes, of might and of masterie, and maketh him gaye and seemely in diuers clothing and araye, and all that he is prayed to giue and to doe for hir loue. he giueth and doth anone with all his might, and denieth no petition that is made in hir name and for hir loue. He speaketh to hir pleasantly, and beholdeth hir chéere in the face with pleasing and glad chéere, and with a sharpe eye, and at last alien∣teth to hir, and telleth openly his will in presence of hir friendes, and spenseth hir with a ring, and taketh hir to wife, and giueth hir giftes in token of con∣tract of wedding, and maketh hir char∣ters and déedes of graunts and of gifts, He maketh reuells and feasts, and spow∣sailes, and giueth many good giftes to friends and guestes, and comforteth and gladdeth his guests with songs & pipes, and other minstralsie of musicke. And af∣terward when all this is done, he brin∣geth hir to the priuities of his chamber, and maketh hir fellow at bed & at boord: and then he maketh hir Lady of his mo∣ney and of his house, and meynie, and then he is no lesse diligent and carefull for hir, then he is for himselfe: and spe∣cially louingly he aduiseth hir if she doe amisse, and taketh good heed to keepe hir well, and taketh héede of hir bearing and going, of hir speaking and looking, of hir passing and againe comming, out and home. No man hath more wealth, than he that hath a good woman to his wife: and no man hath more wo, than he that hath an euill wife, crieng and ianglyng, chiding and scolding, dronken, lecherous and vnstedfast, and contrarye to him, costly, stout and gaye, enuious, noyfull, leaping ouer landes, much sus∣pitious and wrathfull. Fulgencius tou∣cheth all these things in a certaine Ser∣mon that he maketh De nupjs in Ca∣na Galileae: and so he lykeneth Christ to a good man, an holye Church to a good wife, and the Synagogue to an euill wife that breaketh spousehoode. In a good spouse and wife behoueth these conditions, that she be busie and denout
in Gods seruice, meeke and seruiceable to hir husband, and faire speaking & goodly to hir meynie, merciable & good to wret∣ches that be needie, easie and peaceable, to hir neighbours, ready, ware and wise in things that should be auoyded, migh∣tifull and patient in suffering, busie and diligent in hir doing, manneilye in cloa∣thing, sober in mouing, warie in speak∣ing, chast in looking, honest in bearing, sad in going, shamefast among the peo∣ple, merrie and glad with hir husband, & chast in priuitie. Such a wife is wor∣thie to be praised, that intendeth more to please hir husband with such womanly tewes, than with hir broyded haires, and desireth more to please him with vertues than with faire and gaye cloathes, and vseth the goodnesse of matrimonie more because of children, than of fleshly liking, and hath more liking to haue children of grace than of kind. These properties be∣long to a good wife, which sufficeth at this time. ¶Of a Father. Cap. 15. Pater. Genitor.A Father is the well and head of be∣getting and gendring: and naturally the father desireth to multiply his kind in children, to the ende to kéepe and saue in his children the kind, that he may not kéepe and saue in himselfe, as saith Con. Therefore by the office of kinde he de∣parteth and sheddeth out his substaunce to the generation of children: and yet for all this lyking and departing the sub∣staunce of kinde, he receiueth no diminu∣tion.He is no vvhat the lesse in be die. And he gendereth children lyke to himselfe in kinde and in shape, and namely if the vertue in the fathers seede passeth the vertue in the mothers séed, as saith Aristotle. lib. 8. And therefore by procreation of children the father is di∣ligent and busie, and loueth kindly his childe, insomuch, that hée spareth his owne meate to feede his children. And that is generallye true in all kinde of beasts except fewe, in whom kinde goo∣eth out of kinde, and therefore they bée not busie and careful about their young, but they doe beate them awaye, as A∣ristotle libro. 6. sayth of the Eagle, that with his bill and wings beate and driue awaye their young. A man loueth his childe, and féedeth and nourisheth it, and setteth it at his owne boorde, when it is wayned, and teacheth him in his youth, with speach and words, & chasteth him wt beating, & setteth him & putteth him to learne vnder ward & kéeping of war∣dens and tutours. And the father shew∣eth him no gladde chéere, least he were proud, and he loueth most the sonne that is like to him, and looketh ofte on him, and giueth to his children, cloathing, meate and drinke, as their age requireth, and purchaseth landes and heritages for his children, and ceaseth not to make it more and more, and fayleth his purcha∣ses, and leaueth it to his heires. And a fa∣ther is called Pater, and hath that name of Pascendo to féede, for he féedeth his children in their youth, and is fedde of them in his age:Addition (Very fewe children feede their parents as they ought, but rather wish them awaye, and receiuing their goods, and little esteeming theyr persons: in which so doing, they pur∣chase highly the vengeaunce of God.) as it fareth in fowles of rauenous kind, as Aristotle saith, for of such fowles, the young féede the olde, when they maye not for age get their owne meate. Ther∣fore for their reward and meede, long life is graunted them that worship and sustaine father and mother, as saith Am∣brose. For it is written: Worship thou thy father and mother, and thou shalte liue long vpon the earth. Exod. 20. & Ecclesiast. 3.Exod. 20, Eccle. 3. He that worshippeth his fa∣ther, shall haue long lyfe. Therefore the Glose sayth: To worshippe father and mother is the fayrest heste in commaun∣dement of the second Table, and so it is a great heste in méede and rewarde. And to trespasse agaynst that commaunde∣ment is greatly to be punished. Pro. 30.Pro. 30. Who so laugheth his father to scorn, & setteth his mothers commandement at naught, the rauens of the vally or brook pick out his eyes, & deuouted be he of the young Eagles. Therefore the Fathers cursse, grieueth the children, as it fared in Chams children, that were bonde and
thrall, for Cham offēded his father. Ge∣nesis. 9.Gen. 9 And so children shall worshippe the father, and sustein and forbeare him, reioyce, defend, magnifie, praise him, and heare and follow him,James. 2. Vt dicit Glo. ibi. If ye be Abrahams children, doe Abra∣ham: déeds and workes. The child commeth of the substance of father and mother, & taketh of them feeding and nourishing, and profiteth not neither liueth without help of them. The more the Father loueth his child, the more busily he teacheth and chasti∣seth him, and holdeth him the more straight vnder chastising and lore, and when the childe is most loued of the father, it séemeth that he loueth him not: for he beateth and grieueth him oft, least he drawe to euill manners and taches, & the more the child is like to the father, the better the father loueth him. The fa∣ther is ashamed, if he heare anye foule thing told by his children. The Fathers hart is sore grieued, if his children rebell against him. In feeding and nourishing of their children standeth the most busi∣nesse & charge of the parents: Heritage is kept for children in hope of issue. Oft by lawe for grieuing and despising of the Father, the childe is punished and disherited, and none vnkindnesse is more then vnkindnese of euill children, if they helpe not the father and mother in time of néede; as they holpe them some∣time. Oft for reuerence of the father and mother, men doe the childe great wor∣ship: and men giue them greate giftes. Lawe will that the eldest sonne haue the more parte of the heritage. But for wrong done to the Father, the ryght of the eldest sonne is taken from him, and giuen to another son, that is more wor∣thy to haue the heritage, & the name and right of the eldest sonne. As Hierome sayth in the Glosa Genesis. 49.Gen. 49 Ruben mine eldest sonne, &c. Thou hast lost the right that thou shouldest haue. By right the first sonne of the birth shoulde haue the heritage, kingdome, and Priesthood Then children which should by kinde be noble, rich, and frée, as the Father and mother be, for their trespasse bee made vile and poore seruauntes and thralls. Séeke afore in the Chapter De malo puero. Of a seruaunt. Chap. 15. A Seruant is called Seruus in Latine,Seruus. and hath that name of Seruare, to kéepe: for sometime prisoners were kept eyther to be beheaded, or to bée raunso∣med as sayth Isid. Or else they haue yt name of Seruire, to serue: for they bée put to vile seruice of office, that bée not couenable to Lords, nor for theyr chil∣dren. And Isidore sayth, That there bée thrée manner of seruants: some seruants be bond, and borne in bondage, and such haue manye paines by lawe, for they may not sell nor giue away theyr owne good and cattell, neither make contractes, neyther take office of dignitie, neyther beare witnes wtout leaue of their Lords. Wherefore though they be not in child∣hoode, they bée oft punished with paines of childhoode. Other seruauntes there bée that bée called Empticij, the which be∣ing taken with straungers and aliens, and with enimies, bée bought and solde, and held lowe vnder the yoake of thral∣dome. The third manner of seruaunts bée bounde fréelye by theyr owne good will, and serue for reward and for hire. And these commonly be called Famuli, and haue that name of Famulando, ser∣uing, as sayth Isidore. Wicked seruante haue many euill conditions, the which be rehearsed before in sactatu de An∣cilla. Of an euill seruaunt. Chap. 16. HEereto shall be put the conditions of an euill seruaunt: For he is noy∣full as well to himselfe as other in ma∣ny things: When he is dronkenly, he le∣seth and spilleth his Lords good and cat∣tel, or else taketh it by theft and spendeth it. Ec. 19. A dronken work-man shall not be rich: also he is slow & idle, & then he lee∣seth in idlenes the time yt is graunted to trauaile in, as ye husband said to the ser∣uāts, why stād ye héere all day idle. Ec. 33 Set thy seruant to work yt he be not idle,
so it is conuenient for him.Eccle 33. Send thy seruant to work that he go not idle, &c. Also hée is a great spender of his Lordes good and cattell, and spendeth and wasteth all. Mat. 18 The rent gatherer was defamed to his Lord, that had wasted his good and cattell also he is slow, sleepie, and vnlu∣stre, and forgeth all his Lords néeds, and leaueth them vndone Ecc. 37. it is sayde. Treate and talke of worke with a slow seruant. And Luk. 19. it is sayde, The slowe seruaunt hidde his Lordes talent in the earth, and went his way. Then it followeth, that an euill seruant and head strong, setteth more by himselfe then of his Lorde. Ecclesiast. 10. I haue seene seruaunts on horsebacke, &c. Et Prou. 29 By a seruaunt when he reigned, &c. Also he is couetous, and turneth the winning of his Lord vnto his owne vse and pro∣fite Ensample of Eliseus seruaunt, that asked money in his Lordes name, and tooke it and hidde it. 4. Regum. 5.An euill seruaunt seeking cō¦panie of  refuseth ye hot, & in sling th the  rich and scite poore. Also he is proud and presumptuous, & despiseth his Lorde commaundement, as Miphi∣bosth e of his seruaunt Ziba. My Lord and king, my seruant despiseth me, and would not saddle mine Asse. 2 Reg. 16. Et Iob. 19. My seruaunt, &c. They bee harde of heart and malitious, yet they couet and desire to haue grace of other men and when they haue it, they shew none to other. Math. 18. I forgaue thee al thy debt, because thou praidst mée wicked seruaunt. Also he is vnware and vnaduised, forgetfull and vncunning, hée hath no minde that hée shall giue to his Lord accounts of his outrage. Luke. 12. My Lord tarryeth to come: also hee is wrathfull, deceiueable, and trecherous, & disturbeth and grieueth all the meynie. Lu. 13. If a seruant beginneth to drink, and is dronken, and smiteth and beateth the meinie: his Lord shall come, &c. He is an euil speker and tale teller of al thing, and namely he speaketh euil of his Lord, as it fared of Ziba, Miphiboseths ser∣uaunt, that accused him to the King. 2. Regum. 15. Ecclesiast. 7 Heare not a ser∣uaunt that speaketh ill to thée: also if he be delicatly vsed, he presumeth and with∣standeth his Lord. Prou. 29. Who that nourisheth his seruaunt delicatly, he shal finde him rebell: And it becommeth not a seruaunt to haue lyking and deinte∣ous things: Also he is full of fraude and of guile, and layeth a wait to entrap his Lord, and sometime slaieth and spil∣leth him 4. Regum. 29. The kings ser∣uauntes set a waite vpon him, and slew him in his owne house: Also hée doth his Lorde wrong, and flyeth srom his Lord, and forsaketh him, and goeth and serueth his Lordes aduersarye. 3. Reg. 2 Semey seruaunts fledde into Geth: Et primum Reg. 25. Seruaunts encreased that fled from theyr Lords: And when he is euil and doth amisse, scarcely he lea∣ueth his malice for words. Ecclesiast. 23 As a seruaunt arained, that is to vnder∣stand, chastised with torments ofte, a∣mendeth him not of his trespasse, but wereth more angry and wroth: As who sayth, A seruaunt is not amended with tormentes, but rather appayred. For when he is vnkinde, he knoweth not the grace that his Lorde doth vnto him, but he thinketh that his Lord doth for him by dutie and debt more then by grace. Eccle. 3 Slake thine hand from thy ser∣uant, & he asketh fréedome: Also though he doe amisse, and is blamed of his Lord without scourging, scarcelye he will knowledge the truth. Ecclesiast. 42. The worst seruauntes side must blade. Glos. The seruaunt that is not chastised with words, must be chastised with wounds: And for that he is guilefull of deceiptes, and hateth trauaile, if hee be called to worke and trauayle, he faineth that hée sleepeth: and as though he heard not, he tourneth him from that one side to the other side. Prou. 29. A seruant may not be taught, for he heareth what thou saist, and hath despite to giue an answere. Et Luke. 12. A seruaunt that knoweth his Lords will, and will not do it, shall bée beaten with many stripes. The conditions of a good ser∣uaunt. Cap. 18. THE condition of a good seruant stan∣deth in diuerse doinges: For a good seruant wil be taught, and is wittie and ready to vnderstand. Pro. 28. A wise ser∣uaunt shall haue mastery and Lordship
vpon nise children. Et Ecclesiast. 7. If thou hast a wise seruaunt, let him be to thée as thine owne soule, &c. Also a good seruaunt is meeke and seruiceable to do whatsoeuer becommeth him: In Psalte∣rio. O Lord I am thy seruaunt, and the sonne of thy seruing woman or hand∣maide. Philip. 2. He méeked himselfe and tooke the shape of a seruaunt. Also hée is merry and glad at meate. It is seemely that a seruaunt be merry and gladde of chéere: For all the seruice displeaseth, if the seruant haue no glad chéere. Gene. 45. And we shall be gladde to serue the King: And Esaye. 60. My seruauntes shall be gladde, and praised for ioye and gladnesse, &c. Also hée is good and gra∣tious to speake with. And seruauntes bée well loued, if they bée goodlye and good to speake with: And therefore it is sayde of Dauid, that serued Saule. 1. Re∣gum. 18. Dauid was loued of al the peo∣ple, and most of the Kinges seruauntes: And there it is sayde: Loe thou pleasest the king, and all his seruants loue thée: Also he is manly, bolde, and hardie, and putteth himselfe against the enimyes of his Lorde. 1. Regum. 15. Let no mans heart faile for him, I thy seruaunt shall goe and fight against the Philistines, &c. And he is trusty & true in things that is betaken him, and busie to pursue his Lords néeds. Luk. 19. Well be thou good & faithfull seruant. Et Ecclesi. 12. My ser∣uant Moses is in all mine house. And he is méeke & skilfull to procure the profit of his Lord. For a good seruaunt taketh more héede to multiply and increase his Lords goods and cattell then his owne. For in multiplyeng of his Lords goods and cattell, hée procureth his owne pro∣fite. Luke. 19.Luke. 19. 10. talents supposed to bee in value. 100 poundes, euery ta∣lent, by ye which is signified many giftes. The noble man called his seruauntes, and betooke them ten Mi∣nas: (Mina is a certeine weyght and value) and he said to these seruants: Mer∣chaundise with it till I come, &c. Also a good seruaunt is wise, and ware, and cunning to giue accountes and reco∣ning of what hée hath receiued and de∣liuered of his Lordes goods and cattell: For hée hopeth certainly to haue mede and rewarde for making good accounts. And for such thinges that bée not ac∣counted, he is alway in doubt & in dread: As it is sayde Luke. 19. Loe Lorde thy Mina hath made ten Minas: And his Lorde sayde to him, And bee thon ha∣uing power ouer tenne Cities: Also a good seruaunt is busie, and studieth with all his heart and thought to araye and ordeine for his Lords profit, rather then for his owne, and hee ordeyneth for his Lordes meate and drinke, and bedde, or hée dispose himselfe to eate or to goe to bedde, or to take anye other rest. A good seruaunt accounteth neuer profite done to him, while he séeth that his Lorde, trauayleth. Luke. 12. Which of you hath a seruaunt, and commeth out of the fielde, and sayth first to him, Sit thou downe. Therefore 2. Regum. 10. Vrias is commended, that sayde to Dauid: My Lorde Ioab, and my Lordes seruaunts resteth on the grounde in the fields, and shall I goe into mine house and eate and drinke, &c. A true seruaunt that fea∣reth his Lorde, and knoweth his com∣ming disposeth not, nor arayeth himselfe to bedde nor to sléepe before the com∣ming of his Lord. Luke. 12. Well is the seruant, that his Lorde findeth him wa∣king, when he commeth: Also a busie ser∣uaunt waketh when other men sleepe, to kéepe safe his Lord. Therefore Dauid blamed worthely Abner and the other seruauntes of king Saule, that were slée∣ping. 1. Regnm. 26. None was waking, but all a sleepe. And it followeth: Yee bée children of death, that keepe not our Lordes commaundements: Also a seruant that is louing and diligent in his Lords seruice, is alway ready with his hand, and hath a waite vpon his Lord to do what that shall please him, that hee hath no lack neither default of seruice, or to receiue some benefie of his good lord. Psalmo. As the  of a seruing woman is in the hands of her Ladye, &c. Also a good seruaunt ceaseth neuer of trauaile, and he is neuer idle, but alway busie a∣bout the profit of his Loode, for when hée doth eate or fast, sleepe or wake, his wit and thought in alwaye to ordeyne and doe the profite of his Lorde. Iob. 13. As an Hart desireth shadowe, and the hired man abideth, &c. Also a good
seruaunt is neuer costly to his Lorde in meate and drink neither in clothing, but sometime he holdeth him content with an olde cloth of his Lords all the yeare long, hee knoweth that hée shall haue more of his Lord when his seruice com∣meth out. And therefore in the lawe it is commaunded, that a Lord shal not let his seruant goe from him in the seuenth yeare without meat and drinke and clo∣thing on his chiefe couenant. Exod. 21. Et Deut. 15. Also a seruaunt that is ver∣tuous and well taught in manner and conditions, is oft gratious & well allow∣ed in the sight of his Lorde. Therefore a wise seruant doth his businesse to serue his Lord curteouslye. For sometime a Lorde loueth cleannesse more then ser∣uice. Psalmo. He that goeth in the cleane way serued me. Ec. 7. If thou hast a wise seruant, be he to thée as thine own soule, &c. Also a good seruaunt grudgeth not, neither plaineth not against his Lorde, though he blame him, and tell him his defaultes. For he knoweth well that a good Lord will not blame his seruaunt wrongfully, and such blaming tourneth to his profite, &c. Eccle. 10. Frée men and children shall serue a wise seruant, and a man that is taught, will not grudge, though men tell him his de∣faults, but he is rather very glad. Pro. 9. Tell a wise man his default, and he wil loue thee: and tell a foole his default, & he shall hate thée. Of a good Lord. Chap. 19. AS this name seruaunt is a name of subiection, so this name Lorde is a name of souereigntie, of power, and of might. And therefore rightfull Lordship is ordeined of that Lord, of whom com∣meth all might and power. For without a Lorde might not the common profite stand safly, neither ye company of men might be peaceable or quiet: For if pow∣er and might of rightfull Lordes were with-halde and taken away, then were mallice frée, and goodnesse and inno∣cencie in no safety, as sayth Isidore. Also rightfull Lordshippe ouersetteth not his subiects by tyranny, but defendeth them, and putteth off and beareth downe their aduersaries and enimies: Also the might of Lordes forsaketh not seruaunts, but putteth it selfe for subiects against might and strength, that is against the subiects. Also Gregory saith, and so it is knowen, that this name Lord, is a name of might and of right wisenesse. For our Lord is rightful, and loueth right wisenesse, & his face séeth equitie: And therfore a rightful Lord by way of rightfull lawe, heareth and determineth causes, pleas, & strifes, that be betwéene his subiects, & ordeineth that euery man haue his owne, & draw∣eth his swoord against mallice, & putteth forth his shield of righteousnesse, to de∣fend innocents against euill doers, & de∣liuereth small children and such as be fa∣therlesse & motherlesse, and widowes of them that ouerséeth them: And he pur∣sueth robbers and rouers, théeues, & other euill doers: and vseth his power not after his owne will, but hée ordeyneth and disposeth it as the lawe asketh: And so this name Lord is a name of equitie, and also a name of fréedome and of frée heart. For righfull Lordes bée frée, and méeke of heart. And as it is sayd Hest. 23. When I had subdued all the world to my Lordshippe, I neuer misused the greatnesse of my might and power: but I would rule my subiectes with milde∣nesse and softnesse, &c. Therefore the ve∣ry Lord sheweth himselfe frée of gifts and speach to all men, except euill doo∣ers: and loueth more to bée loued, then feared. He knoweth not that hée hath Lordshippe ouer men that liueth right∣fully, but ouer beasts: that is to vnder∣stand, ouer beastiall men that be wick∣ed and euil, as Gregorie sayth vpon Ge∣nesis. 9. Yeur dreade be vpon all beasts, &c. A man, sayth Gregorye is not sette ouer reasonable beasts, but ouer vnrea∣sonable beasts, that he should not onely be dreaded of men, but also of beastes. Kind bringeth forth al men like in pow∣er & might: But for diuerse worthinesse the dispensation of Gods worde setteth some men before other: that he that dre∣deth not the righteousnesse of God, may dreade ye punishment of mans strength, and so for dread of our Lord he shall not
be proude: And hée commaundeth that they be not busie to winne and get their owne ioy and stoutnesse, but to saue and maintaine the right of subiectes: For they haue no Lordshippe ouer men, but ouer beasts. For in that parte that they bee beastiall, they bée put vnder Lord∣shippe Also this name Lorde is a name of gentlenesse and of noblenesse, as it is sayd Deut. pri. I haue taken of your lyg∣nages wise men and noble, and haue made them Lordes, Princes, and Tri∣bunes and Centuries: For Lords ought to be noble and gentle of heart, of flesh, and of thought. Therfore Ambrose saith, that among beasts kinde setteth them to be chiefe, which be most noble and most strong, and maketh them kings, Dukes, and leaders of other: As it sareth a∣mong beasts and Fowles, and also a∣mong Bées. Among them all, those that haue most noble conditions of the gifte of kinde, bée set before, and haue mastry in Lordshippe ouer the other. So that man may learne to bée a Lorde noble by reason and grace, sith that beasts bée by kinde aboue other beasts. Also this name Lorde, is a name of worshippe and of dignitie, as the Apostle saith, Ad Eph. 6. Seruants be ye obedient to your fleshly Lordes with feare and dreade and sha∣king, &c. Rightfully a Lorde receyueth of his subiects worshippe and reuerence, and by the worthinesse of his office hée maketh his subiectes worthye to haue worshippe: For by reason of one good king and one good Lorde, all a Country is worshipped and dreade, and enhaun∣ced also. Also this name Lord is a name of peace and suretie. For a good Lorde ceaseth warre, battaile, and fighting, and accordeth them that bée in striefe. And so vnder a good, a strong, and a peacea∣ble Lorde, men of the Country be defen∣ded and safe. For there dare no man as∣saile his Lordshippe, nor in any manner breake his peace. Of an euill Lord or Lordship. Chap. 20. AS nothing is more profitable to the common profite, then a good rightfull Lorde,: So nothing is worse then an euill Lorde. For an euill Lorde ouerset∣teth and pilleth his subiects that he shuld helpe, and holdeth them hard & straight, that scarcely they abyde in office and ser∣uice. Mich. 2. Yée that take violentlye the skinne of the proude, &c. For giftes and bribes violateth iustice, and déemeth not for the poore. Mich. 3. Harken you Princes that hateth rightfull iudgement, yée receiue of the people rent and tri∣bute, and defende them not against eni∣mies, that rise vppon them. Ecclesiast. 13. Hée punisheth and scourgeth them cruelly, which assent not to his mallice. Esay. 19. I shall giue Aegypt into the handes of cruell Lordes, &c. Ierem. 6. Hée is full cruell, &c. He chalengeth other mennes good, and thinketh that all thing is his owne. 1. Reg. 8. Hee shall take thy children and thy fieldes, &c. Hée desireth more to be feared then loued. Baruch. 6. Shewing dread to nations. Videte ergo. &c. Hée desireth to haue reuerence and worshippe of all men. Daniel. 2. Falleth downe and worship the Image, &c. Hee destroieth the lawes and statutes of olde men, and ordeyneth his owne. Esay. 10. Woe to them that make euill lawes, and hideth theyr mallice and cruelnesse vnder the lykenesse of rightfulnesse. E∣saye. 52. Lordes trauaile and ouersette wickedly and oft the people with exac∣tions and tillages: Esaye. 3. Exactours spoyled my people. Et Daniel. 10. It is said of an euill Lorde, that he desireth to haue occasions and coulour to take some∣what by extortion. Esaye. 52. Assur with∣out cause layeth chalenge on him, and he loueth lyars, and priuy and euil tale tel∣lers and backbiters, & boweth his eares to heare theyr counsells. Prouerb. Prin∣ces that heare gladlye wordes of lea∣sings, &c. To no man hée holdeth fayth nor couenaunt. 1. Mach. 16. The King and Prince swore to them. And then it followeth: Hée saw the strength and brake anone the oath and truce: He atrayeth to him deinties and liking meate and drinke of other mennes trauaile, Psal∣mo. They haue deuoured my people as meate and bread: Ensample of Bal∣tazar. Daniel. 5. Et Ezech. 19. And he re∣warded
them worst that serued him longest, most truely and best, as Laban woulde haue rewarded Iacob, that sayd: But my Fathers God had bene nowe with mee, on this manner thou wouldest haue left mee naked and bare. Also hée thinketh that no man serueth him kind∣ly, and therefore he weeneth that all that is done to him is done of due debte, as it is sayde Iudith. 3. With these déedes that they did, they might not swage the madnesse of his breast. Also when other trauaile, he occupieth him in drink∣ing and in playeng. Ecclesiast. 10. Woe is the lande, that hath a childe King, and a Prince that eateth earely, Et. 3. Re∣gum. 20. The king dranke vnder his tent madde drinke, &c.3. Kin. 20 Benhadad did drink till hee was drōk, both hee and 32. kings that holp him Of the properties of man touching the dinersitie of members, of age, and of sexes, and diuers qualitie, this is sufficient at this time. Nowe of some accidents ye fal about man by kind on other wise also, by the helpe of Christ somewhat shall be said: And first of meat and then of drinke, then of waking and sleeping, and then of businesse, and then of trauaile. ¶Of Meate. Chap. 21. SIth we haue spoken of the proper∣tyes of man touching those things of the which man is kindly made: Now we shall speak of the propertyes of those things, which kindly kéepe man in bée∣ing. And they be those, as Iohn sayth, Aire, businesse, and trauaile, rest, meate, and drinke,8. Preser∣uatiues. watch and sleepe. For with∣out these mans body is not kept. Deere we follow not by order, for afterwarde in their places accordingly we shal speak of these things. Then speake wee first of meate as much as sufficeth: For as Constantine saith, meate is the sub∣staunce that is able to be turned into the essence of the bodie that is fedde, and en∣creaseth the bodie, and maketh it more, and féedeth and susteineth it: For the heate of the inner and vtter members worketh alwaie, and dissolueth and wa∣steth: And so thereto néedeth continu∣all restanration to restore what is wasted & spended: Meate that is taken turneth into the likenesse of the body, and passeth into the kinde thereof. And so in meate preparation thereof goeth before, and then commeth chewing, and then it is receiued into the place of digestion: And fourthly digestion is made, and then de∣parting of the pured part from the vnpu∣red parte: Fiftly, that that is pured is drawne and departed into all the mem∣bers: Sixtly, it is turned into the lyke∣nesse of the kinde of members. For if it were not made lyke to the members, it should neyther be incorporate, neyther turned into the kinde thereof. At the last after all this, the meate is incorporated and tourned into the kinde of the bodye. For that which is hotte and moyst, pas∣seth into the kinde of bloud and of flesh: And that, which is colde and drye, into the kinde of sinewes and of boanes, and so of other: In younglings meate taken and corporate, nourisheth and increaseth the bodie: In olde men it repaireth kinde heate, and restoreth that which is spent and wasted, and kéepeth the bodie that it be not all lost. Of meate be many di∣uersities: Some meate tourneth soone into bloud through his substantiall moi∣sture and heate, and for lykenesse that it hath to bée bloud. And some contrary∣wise for a contrary cause tourneth later into bloud: Some meate nourisheth much, for it bréedeth much bloud. And some nourisheth lyttle, and chargeth the bodye more then it féedeth: yet some∣what it refresheth the bodye. And gene∣rally all meate which bréedeth good bloud is more conuenient in ruling of health, yet to men that trauaile groser meate is conuenient, that breedeth thicker bloud: Also, all meates that bréedeth much bloud; haue but lyttle superfluitye. And contrarywise the meate that bree∣deth little bloud, bréedeth much superflu∣itie: and generallye by the diuersitie of meates the complection of members bée diuerslye disposed, and take the qualities of the bodie, as sayth Constantine. liber. 1. About meat of these thinges men shall take héede, as men doe about dicting, as Galen saith Super Aphorism. That is to wit: Of meat the substantialitie, the qua∣litie, the quantitie, the néede of him that
eateth, & of conenable time. It néedeth al∣so to know the substance and qualitie of meats, for the kéeping & ruling of mens bodies. For some meate nourisheth purely and chaungeth eastly: And such meate kéepeth and saueth kinde. Some is meane meate, and that is lightly tur∣ned into helping of kinde. And some meate is pestilentiall, and corrupteth kinde, as venimous meate, which chaun∣geth all kinde, and destroyeth the bodye. Therefore it needeth to knowe the sub∣staunce and qualytie of meate, that men take not venim in steede of meate. Qua∣lytie of meate is knowne either by the remission and slaking of the qualyties of Elements, that is to vnderstand, by full little colde, heate, drinesse, or moisture, and so meate is colde or hotte in the first degree by the vttermost hugenesse of the same qualities, that is by most heate, drynesse, colde, or moysture, and so meate is colde, hot, drye, or moyst in the fourth degrée: or else by the meane of those qualyties, and so meate is in the thirde degrée, or in the second, as it hath more or lesse of those qualities. Also Constan∣tine sayth, That men must take héede that some meate is subtill both in sub∣stance and in qualitie, the which meat is soone digested: and much therof naurish∣eth but little. For as Aucen saith, such meat bréedeth subtil bloud, which is soone wasted in the members: and therefore it nourisheth but little: as he saith. And some meate is greate and harde to dee, and lyttle thereof nourisheth much. For it breedeth grose blond, which is not soone spended neyther wasted in the members. For as Isaac sayth, small meate and subtill bréede small bloud and subtill, and so contrariwise. And some is temporate in substaunce and in quality, and that meate which is cleane and pure, is commendable, which is not too great, neyther too small, neyther too sub∣till, and is good and wholesome, and so in contrariwise. Auicen sayth, That raw and gréene hearbs and fruite are not full good meate by reason of they: passing moysture, which maketh the bloud full watrye, and disposeth it to rottennesse. And therefore they bee rather medi∣cinable then meate. Meate shall be like and of one manner, which that men eate at one meale, for diuerse meates nourish diuerslye. For Auicen sayth, in taking of diuerse meates at one meale, the one manner meate is corrupt, while another is a digesting, and the sto∣macke is ouerfilled, and is stretched a∣broade. In meate men shal take héed of quan∣titye of silling and of working For men shall take héede,Manye or diuerse sorces of neates at one nicle, is not wholesoe  the  in∣iection whether it bee too lyt∣tle or too much, or else meane betweene these twaine. For if the meate bée too much, then it grieueth kinde, and stret∣cheth the stomacke, and bloweth it and bréedeth fretting and gnawing in the wombe, and increaseth vnttears and Postumes, and prouoketh wamblnges and spungs, and it euentheth and slisee∣leth kinde heate, as too much Oyle quen∣eth the lyght of a Lampe: and it bree∣deth the Crampe, and shrinking of si∣newes, and it procureth Botches, S, and Mostumes, and lsleth age and death: against the which death a man supposeth to defende himselfe with mul∣titude of meate and drinke. If meate bee too scarce, it sobleth kinde, and ap∣paireth the sight, and the other wities, and bréedeth falling of the haire and baldenesse, and hasteth the diseases cal∣led Luike and Etike, and maketh the body leane, and it bréedeth worse sick∣nesses and euills, then doth too greate re∣plecion. In Aphorism it is sayd, That in scarcitie of dyet, sicke men fall most. Meanenesse of meate is good, for it re∣storeth that the which was lost in the bodie, and kéepeth and saueth vertue and strength, and increaseth bloud, and tem∣pereth heate, and sharpeth the wit, and giueth vertue of working, and giueth and saueth health of bodye, and bree∣deth swéete sléepe soft and lyking, wher∣fore if the meate restoreth more, then was wasted and lost by working of heate, then the meate increaseth the bo∣dye, and maketh it more, as it fareth in younglings. And if the wasting and losse bee more then the meate restoreth, then the bodye wareth leane, lesse, and sayleth, as it fareth in age. And if
the restoring and the losse by euen & lyke, then it kéepeth the body in one state, as it fareth in young men. Men shuld take héed to meat, or to the dooing thereof, in com∣parison to them that eate thereof. AdditionThe rath and greedy feeding with a licorousnesse to tast of many dishes, for a present pleasaunt eating, followeth a pining surfet, or sodaine choking. For one meate accordeth to a whole man, another to a sicke man, one to a young man, another to an olde man:one to him that trauaileth, another to him yt resteth. For many meats be wholsome to an whole man, which be poison to a sicke man. Also in whole men is difference: for Garlicke and Pepper is remedy to some fleamaticke man, and venimous to some cholarike: And lusquianus, Henbane, is mans bane, & best beloued meat to spar∣rowes and Curlews, as sayth Galen. Al∣so meate shall be diuerse, as diuerse euils aske. For some meate is wholesome in the feauer quarten, that is poison in the agne. And some that is good in the begin∣ning of euill, is grieuous when the euill is at the highest, for then little meat shal be giuen to the sicke man, as saith Ipo∣cras and Galen. For then kind is altoge∣ther occupied about digestion of the euil, wherefore then his doing should be lessed and let, if it be occupied about much and great meat. Also other meate and other∣wise giuen is needfull in turning euills, and long during. And other in contrarye euills. For in the beginning it is dread∣full, least vertue saile, and therefore née∣deth the more meate, in contrarye euill it is dreade of increasing of the euill: therefore the sick man shall haue the lesse meate. The féeding shall be after the ver∣tue and strength of the sicke man, and af∣ter the qualitie and substance of ye meat: And héereby profit of meat is déemed and knowne. Also in another manner a yoūg∣ling shall be fedde, and a young man, and in another manner the olde man,The infāt must not be sed as the yoūg man, nor  middle aged as the olde. For in olde men, abstinence of meate is soft and easie, and in children and young men harde and vncasie, according to the sayeng of Ipocras. Olde men may most easilye fast, and then sadde men, somewhat easilye, and children maye least fast. For in olde men kinde heate is féeble, and in other strong. And there∣fore more meate néedeth to swage the heate in young men and in children, and lesse in olde men. And for the same cause resting men shall eate and drinke lesse then trauailing men, for heate is strong in trauailing men, and féeble in resting men, as it shall bée shewed after∣ward. Also in féeding, men should take héede to couenablenesse of time. For men néede greater and larger diet in winter then in Summer, as Ipocras saith. The wombs in springing time and in Winter bée kindly full hotte, and of long sléepe. Then in those times many meats shall bée giuen, for then kinde heate is much nourishing and féeding, &c. And in Winter is strong appetite and digesti∣on, for heate is full strong. And in Sum∣mer it is contrarie. For in Winter kind heate commeth inwarde, and is gathe∣red within, and in Summer it draw∣eth out, as it were for lyking of like∣nesse of the vtter heate: And is effused, diuided, and departed, and is lesse in the bodye within. Therefore Winter time because much is digested, the appetite is much excited and mooued, as it fareth in children which haue much heat, and therefore greate appetite, and much e∣siring néedéeth much meale. And lyke∣wise is it in Champions, and harde and strong, and trauailing men, in whem because of strong and harde trauayle, the kinde heate is the more: And therefore to them néedeth greate abundaunce and much meate and drinke, as Galen set∣teth an ensample there. Then meate is right necessarie & néedfull to euery beast, and most according and conuenient, when it is of one manner, and tempo∣rate, and not too much neyther too lyt∣tle. For often too greate repletions of meate, is cause of death of bodie and of soule, and namely after great hunger, great repletion of meate is perillous, as sayth Auicen: For then kinde desireth more, then it maye defie. And therefore then meate shall bée taken against appe∣tite and saturite.
Of drinke. Cap. 22. DRinke is a fléeting substaunce néede∣full to the séeding of a beast, as sayth Constantine libro. 5. Capitu, 27. Drinke is needfull for many manner of causes, for it moysteth the drie bodie, and resol∣ueth and tempereth what is moist in the body, and restoreth the body: & by drinke meate is brought into far place, ye which meate for his thicknesse and boistousnes may not passe by narrow waies & streight without helpe of moisture of drinke. And Constantine saith, and Auicen also, that ther is thrée manner diuersities of drink. For some drinke is onely drinke, as wa∣ter ye nourisheth not the bodie: and some drinke is both drinke & meat, as Wine, which as Constantine saith, beareth meate and nourishing into all the partes of the bodye, and nourisheth and bea∣teth the spirit and the bloud, and com∣forteth kinde heate: and some drinke is medicinable, and is not taken by man∣ner and waye of drinke, but by the lawe and rule of medicine, as Sireppes, Dri∣mell, Decisakara, and such other: And as Constantine sayth, to kéepe healthe, and to heale sicknesse, water is néedfull. And therefore it néedeth a Phisition not to bée negligent to knowe the conditi∣ons and kindes of waters, that hée may take good waters: and to beware of euill waters. Some water is fauourie, and some vnsauourye. Sauourye water is cléere of substance, of a well that sprin∣geth Eastwarde, and is lyght, and soone hot and soone colde. And such water as Constantine sayth, is good to kéepe and heale, and not grieuing, for it commeth soone out of the meate. And by reason it is cléere, it is cleane and not meddeled with filth, nor with hoare: and by reason it is lyght, it is easie to defie. And for y• it is soone hot and soone colde, it is sub∣tile of substaunce. And so if thou wilt knowe of two waters whether is more subtill in substance and better to drinke, wet thou a linnen cloth in that one wa∣ter, and another cleane linnen cloth in the other: and hang them both to drye against the Sunne: and which of those two clothes wareth soonest drye, the water, that it was wet in, is the more subtill water. Next unto this wholsome∣nesse is the water that springeth North∣ward, and is set betwéene the East and the North. For by reson that it springeth Northward, it is open vppon the North windes, with the which it is tossed and made subtile and in winter it is kindly hot, and in Summer cold. For the Nor∣therne colde driueth in the heate into the inner partes of the fountaines, that lye open against it. And that heate that is gathered within with standeth the colde, and so it heateth some denie the water of ye well: the contrary is in Sūmer, for thē the heat of the aire ouercōmeth the cold, and driueth it to the heads of the wells, and so the colde being there gathered and ioyned, cooleth the water as sayth Ma∣chrobius and Constantine. Also the wa∣ter that springeth and runneth strongly & swiftly out of mountaines vppon cléere stones or grauell, hath the second degrée in wholesomnesse, as the water of some great riuers, as saith Constantine. And Constantine saith, that raine water is better then other water, more sauourye, more light and cleane. Ipocras saith, that raine is smoake of water, that the sonne draweth vpward: And for the kind of the Sun is to draw vpward what y• is most subtill, therfore raine water is better thē other water & more defied: but for subtil∣tie thereof it will soone putrifie. But yet as Constantine saith, it is not to be bla∣med for rottennesse, for it is worthye of praising for the subtiltie and cléerenesse thereof. For all water that is soone cor∣rupt, is subtill, and grieueth when it is rotted: For it bréedeth hoaresnesse and Feauers, and is best if it bee not rot∣ted, and therefore it néedeth to be well ware of rotting: Also Constantine saith, Water that is gathered of smallest rain séemeth best, and after that the raine wa∣ter that falleth with thunder is best. For the thunder with his mouing maketh the smoake thereof cléere & subtill. And also Constantine saith, that who that drink∣eth oft colde water, shall not escape from colde sicknesse, namely in his age. Con∣stantine sayth, that hot water washeth ye fasting stomacke, & purgeth & cleanseth it of drasts, of meate & of sleme and of all
other rottennesse, and cleanseth and lax∣eth, and purgeth the wombe, & reléeueth and comforteth kind. If it be too oft vsed, it noieth and grieueth, for it softeneth the stomack, and distroubleth and letteth the vertue of digestion and maketh bloud runne out at the nosethrills. Also hotte water is best, fasting early, and namely, to them that bée onke ouer night. For Auicen sayth, That olde wise men wit∣nesse, that sodden water maketh small swelling and pearéeth and entreth most. For bodyes that bée medled therewith, bée dissolued and departed by working of the fire, and bée compelled to goe down∣ward: And heereto hée sayth. That cor∣rupt phisitions suppose, that what is sub∣till breatheth and: passeth vpward in sée∣thing: and that which is great, thicke, and not subtill, abideth still: but this false. For all the substaunce of water is made of one manner part. But so great séeth∣ing might bée, that nothing should abide but drasts alone and earthly partes. As it faceth of water, of the which Salt is made by strong séething And water mol∣ten of Snowe and of Haile is earthlye and worst of all, except water of lakes and marreys, beware of all these waters. For as Constantine saith; they make the spleane greate, and hurt the humour and the stomacke, and make the skinne foule and vnseemely, and bréede diuers feauers and stones: and if they may not bée all es∣thewed, by authoritie of Auicen, they may be boiled and sodde. In librro Met. Aristotle saith; that water of Snow that is molten with heat, commeth not againe to the first cleernesse and subtiltie. Foure manner of waters be vnsauorie, as Con∣stantine saith. For some is salt, and some smoketh of brimstone, & some of slime, and some of mettall. And men saye, that salt water biteth and fretteth the guttes, and taxeth and maketh soft the wombe. But salt water oft dronken wasteth hu∣mours, and bindeth and maketh the wombe harde. And drieth the bodye, and maketh whole Scabbes and itching: and it helpeth them that haue the dropsie, if it bée eate or dronke: Brimstone water doth cause colde euills: it heateth the si∣newes, and wasteth the humours be∣twéene the skinne and the flesh. Looke afterward, ye shall more plainly vnder∣stand the vertue of Brimstone. Slunye water and glowie, cooleth and drieth, and stencheth running of bloud, and bealeth Emoroydes. And mettally water follow∣eth the booing & kind of mortall. For the water that passeth by beuis of yron, stop:peth and hardneth the Wombe, and com∣forteth the members: and vnstoppeth the splene, and helpeth Postumes. Water of metall of Brasse, helpeth moisture, and straineth Stranguria. We that hath that disease or euill that is called Stranguria; pisseth oft and little. Water of the met∣tall of siluer cooleth & drieth. This man∣ner of waters is not much vsed in freed of drink: but it helpeth onely to ye vse of the medicine. And some drinke is both meate and drinke, as Wine Ehere is di∣uersitie in Wines' touching their sub∣staunce. Some wine is greater and har∣der, and more nourishing then other. And some wine is subtill and of lyttle nourishing, which passeth soone out of the stomacke, and withdraweth cholarik and head ach, and maketh one to pisse fast. And some wine is meane and temporate in working. Without this consideration of wine touching the substance. Constan∣tine saith, That men shall take heede of wine in soure manners, as by diuersitye of time, by liking of smell, by sweete sa∣uour, and by cléerenesse of coulour. In time wine is diuerse, for wine ye in new wrong and pressed, passeth not the first degrée in heate. In libro de simplics me∣dicina Galen sayth, That Wine is made of foure substaunces. Of watrye, airye, firye, and earthlye, in longetin the wa∣trye parte is consumed and wasted, and the airye parte is comforted. Dide wine is better and better then other. Also in smell and insauour Wine is diuerse. For some wine smelleth sweet and nou∣risheth well, and some is strong of smell and breedeth euill bloud, and the head∣ach. Also in taft wine is most diuerse: for some wine is swéete in tast, & nourisheth more then other, & moistneth the womb: Some is ponlike, and comforteth the stomack, and malteth harde the wombe,
and griueth the breast with the purte∣nance. Some is sower, other some is bit∣ter, and lesse hot than other wines be. Al∣so in colour and hiew and heate wine is diuers: for some is white and lesse hot than other: and some is citrine, & more hot, and pearceth through all the mem∣bers, as Constantine saith, and bréedeth the cholarike bloud, and causeth the head ach: and some is browne and more no∣rishing: and some is redde or reddish, & that is more hot than the other. But for it is more earthly & greater than white or citrine, it is not so pearcing neyther hurting. Wine which is meane in all the foresaide conditions is better than other, for it comforteth kinde heate, and nourisheth lyfe in all the members, and bréedeth gladnesse and hardinesse, and giueth vertue to the bodye. And voydeth red cholar, with sweate & with vrine, and tempereth blacke cholar, and restoreth & moysteth the members that be foredried by the default of humours, and restoreth might and vertue, and fat∣teth the body, and creiteth appetite, and helpeth and succoureth the vertue of di∣gestion, and sharpeth the wit and vn∣derstanding, and openeth the stopping of the spleane, and of the liuer, and de∣stroyeth and consumeth superfluitie in the bodie, and doth aware webbes and blearenesse of the eyen, and causeth faire speaking, and breaketh stones in the reines, and sheddeth & bringeth out gra∣uell of the reines, and it is good to heale woundes, and helpeth menstruts, and it is good to whole men and to sicke, if it be taken to euery one in due manner, if wine be taken out of measure, it is no remedye to him that mistaketh it, but death and venim, as it is sayd innermore of dron∣kennesse, looke there. The third manner drinke is drink and medicine, as Drimel and strops: For such drinke is wholsome and healthfull, for it defieth humours in the body, and dealeth and putteth them out. And sometime it layeth, and some∣time it bindeth, and maketh harde the wombe, and sometime it cooleth and dri∣eth, and sometime it heateth, softeth, and moisteth. But I leaue to the Phisitions those differences of drinks. Wine as sayth Cententius,Addition where it is immoderatly vsed, maketh a sick slo∣macke, a feeble braine, and an emptye purse, it stirreth to lechery, phrensie & villany, and bringeth a man and woman in hatred of the godly, and contempt of God. ¶Of Dinner and fasting. Chap. 23. MEate and drinke is ordeined and conuenient to dinners and to feasts,Con̄ Prand̄. for at fests, first meat is prepared & made in a redinesse, guests be called togethers, formes, & stooles be set in ye hal, & tables, clothes, and towells bee ordeined, dispo∣sed, and made readye, Guests be set with the Lorde in the chiefe place of the boord, and they sit not downe at the boord be∣fore the guests wash their handes. Chil∣dren be set in theyr place, & seruants at a table by themselues. First kniues, spenes and salts, be set on the boorde, and then bread and drinke, and many diuerse mes∣ses, householde seruauntes busilye helpe each other to doe euery thing dilligently and talke merrily togethers.Modest musicke huneslive taken, re∣uiueth  spirits & quickneth appetite. The guests be gladded with Lutes and Harps. Now Wine and nowe messes of meate bee brought forth and diuided. At the last commeth fruit and spices, and when they haue eaten, boord clothes and reliefe bee borne alwaye, and gustes wash and wipe their hands againe. The graces be sayd, and guestes thanke the Lorde. Then for gladnesse and comfort, drinke is brought yet againe. When all this is done at meate, men take their leaue, and some go to bed and sleepe, and some goe home to their owne lodgings. Of the supper. cap. 24. SUpper is called Cena in Latine, & hath that name of Cenon, that is common, by reason of communitie of them which supped togethers. In olde time men vsed to eate togethers in open place, least sin∣gularitie should bréed lechery.A good note. But Cena may be sayd of Cenos, that is shadowe. For then for scarcitie, men vsed to suppe in secret & priuie places, as sayth Papy.
And more verily Cena is said of Scinos, that is an hound: for lacking and defaul∣ting of loue and charitie. Each person ta∣keth vpon him to eate his owne supper. 1. Corinth. 9. All that is rehersed afore of dinners & of feasts accordeth to the sup∣per also. Many things bee necessarie and worshippe the Supper, and were all in Assuerus feasts, as it is written Hest. 1. The first is couenable time: for it is con∣uenient y• a supper be made in due time, not to early nor too late. The second is co∣uenable place, large, pleasant, & healthye. Therefore it was sayd of Assuerus, that he made his feast before an Orcharde, which was hewen downe. The third is the heart and glad chéere of him that ma∣keth the feast. The supper is not worthy to be praised, if the Lord of the house bée heauy chéered.A disqui∣et mind is enimy to digestion. Hest. 1. When he wereth hot. &c. The fourth is many diuerse mes∣ses: So that who that wil not of one, may tast of another. Hester. 1. There were brought in dish vpon dish. The fifth bée diuerse. Wines and drinkes: Hester. 1. Wine was brought, &c. The sixt is cur∣tesie and honestie of seruaunts. Hester. 1. He ordeined of his Princes to bée mai∣sters ouer the boords, &c. The seauenth is kinde friendshippe and companye of them that sitte at the Supper. Hester. 1. He made a feast vnto al the Medes. The eight is mirth of song and of instru∣ments of musicke: Noble men vse not to make suppers without Harpe or sim∣phonie. Luk. 15. When he heard the sim∣phony and Cornemuse, &c. The ninth is plentie of light of Candles, and of Pric∣kets, and of Torches. For it is shame to suppe in darknesse and perillous also for flyes and other filth. Therefore Candles and Prickets bee set on Candlestickes, and Chaundelers, Lanternes and lamps, be necessary to burne. The tenth is the diliciousnesse of all that is set on the ta∣ble: For it is not vsed at supper to serue men with greate meate and common, as it is vsed at Dinner, but with speciall light meate and dilicious, and namely in Lordes Courtes. The eleuenth is long during of the Supper. For men vse af∣ter full ende of worke and of trauayle to sit long at the Supper. For meate eaten too hastely, grieueth against night: Therfore at the supper men shoulde eate by lesure, & not  hastely. Therfore As∣suerus fest dured by ye space of. C.aies. The twelfth is surenesse:It shall not be a∣misse to vse a con∣uenient time at supper, so that gree∣dines for∣get not ye hungry, & ryot ye needye. For without harme and domage euery man shall bee praied to the supper  supper that is fréely giuen, it is not honest to compell a man to pay his st. The thirtéenth is softnesse & liking of rest and of sleepe. Af∣ter supper men shal rest, for then sleepe is swéet and liking: And therefore beds of Iuorie and of gold were spread vpon the pauement in Assuerus Pallaice, as it is said Hst. 1. For as Constantine sayth, when smoak of meate commeth into the braine, men sléepe easily. AdditionYet the too curious may be counsai∣led to beware of nisenesse, & prodiga∣litie, which spendeth credite, and other mens goods, wherby followeth too ma∣ny bankerouts. Of sleepe. Chap. 25. ARistotle saith, that sléepe is the rest of vertues of feeling and of mouing, with strength of naturall vertues: For the vertue of feeling and mouing is bound in sléep, and the kindly vertue then most strongly worketh: That is the vertue of digestion, that is in sléepe comforted and strengthened. In libro de quā. nime, Au∣sten saith otherwise, he saith yt sléepe is a kindly vnféelingnesse, common passion both of body & soule: So is sleepe cōmon to both. For (as he saith) sleep is a kindly vnmoueablenes, & a help of ye wits. That he saith, a kindly vnsensiblenesse, is sayde for a difference of those things, which be against kinde: Wherfore he saith, yt sléepe is the priuation of waking, as blindnesse is priuation of sight: For priuation de∣stroieth vertues & things of kinde: But sléepe helpeth & comforteth kinde, & is as kindly as waking. Also the soule hath no liking in priuation, & hath liking in sléep: and so sleepe is not priuation, but it is a kindly disposition: Sléep is defined other∣wise in this manner. Sléepe is a liking passion yt stoppeth the wayes of ye braine, & of the wits, and comforteth the kinde vertue, and reduceth the kinde heate out of the vtter partes to the inner partes:
In sléepe the inner partes heate, and the vtter partes coole: and so when the heat is déepe within, the lymme of the com∣mon wit is bounden, the which lymme is Centrum and middle of all the parts, and all the particular wits spring out therof, and stretch as lynes drawen from the middle poynt of a circle to the round∣nesse thereof. Then if that lym be stop∣ped, ye particular vertues may not stretch to the vtter parts of the lymmes of wit and of féelyng. And that maketh kinde, because a beast should rest of wilfull mo∣uing: for it is impossible to moue vo∣luntarily away. Constantine in Panteg. sayth, that some sléepe is kindly, & some vnkindly: but thereof we shal speak no∣thing at this time. Kindly sléep commeth of temperate moysture of the braine, as of smoake that is moyst and cléere, that commeth from all the bodye vp to the brayne, and that smoake thicketh the spi∣rites, and lleth the sinewes, and so bin∣deth the wits. Austen saith In predic∣to li. That sléepe commeth either of the meats that come in from without, or els of a temperate humour within, ye which when it is resolued, coueteth to come to the braine, and there being resolued, the colde parte droppeth downewarde, and the heate passeth vpwarde. And the colde dropping downward swageth the heate of the heart, and letteth the proces of workings. And Austen sayth, and A∣ristotle also, that the heart is the well of workings, and all good and euil sprin∣geth out of the heart. In sléepe the ver∣tues of féelyng and of mouing, rest, and the vertues spirituall and naturall be as they were before hande, as it is séene & knowen by pulse, breathing, and digesti∣on: for in sléepe is best digestion. And Auicen describeth sléepe, and sayth, that for to speake naturally, sléepe is the tur∣ning againe of the spirite from the lims of féeling and mouing to the well, with which well the instrumentes of the spi∣rites haue spring and beginning. And kinde sléepe is againe tourning of the spirites from deepenesse and fastnesse, that meate and drinke may be defied, as it fareth in sleepe of trauayling men: in them sleepe is dead and fast, for the su∣perfluitie of resolution of spirites. Kinde desiring addition in substaunce of spirites, fasteneth the spirites deepe in the inner parts, and hideth him therein: and so in them, the sleepe is more fast & long. And in that manner slept Ezechi∣as, and so they sleepe that be voyded with laxatiues and medicines: For much of the substaunce of the spirites, is resolued with the superfluities. This sleep is pro∣fitable, and restoreth them to their might and vertues as Auicen sayth. Also Ari∣stotle sayth lib.3. Sleepe accordeth to euery beast, though it be in some beasts full little and prime. Heerby it is know∣en, that the material cause of sleepe, is a smoake of indigestion, resolued of the bo∣die. The cause formal in the head, is the common wit, that is the well of sinews of feeling, that be stopped and bounde, and the beast resteth, and all the mem∣bers are recreated. Constantine sayth, that the working and dooing of sleepe, varieth in double manner, touching quantitie & great matter, that is founde, in the bodie. Touching quantitie of the matter, if the matter be too much, the vertue of digestion fayleth, and the body is made moyst & colde, for humour is de∣parted and dissolued, and so kinde heate is quenched, and fleame is made more, & kinde heate lesse. And if the matier be too little, the vertue of digestion fayleth, and the bodye is dryed, and if the mat∣ter and meate be moderate, the meats is well digested, and the bodye fattened, the heart comforted, kinde heate made more, the humors made temperate, & wit made cleere: also working of sleep varieth by matter yt it findeth: for if the matter be much, and kinde heate feeble, by sleepe is caused resolution of more humors, in∣to which kinde heate entering is ouer∣come and quenched. Therefore it is hid∣den, that they that take drinkes & be let bloud should not sleepe, least there be so great resolution of humors in the sleepe, that kind may not rule them. But if the meat be temperate and also the humors, kinde heate is gathered inward by sleep, and defieth meat and drink, and maketh the humours temporate and the bodye moyst, hot, and fat.
Then know thou heere shortly, that sléepe gathereth kinde heate inward, and cooleth the outward parts, and draweth bloud therefrom, and heateth, & féedeth, and comforteth the inner partes, and ri∣peth and seetheth that, which is vnpure and rawe: and quieteth and comforteth the vertues of féelyng & of mouing. And if it be temperate in qualitie & in quan∣titie, it releeueth the sicke man, and beto∣keneth that kinde shall haue the maste∣rie and the victorie of the euill and good, turning and chaunging: If sléepe doth the contrarye, it is suspect, as sayeth Constantine. ¶Of sleepe. Cap. 26. Hypuos. Sopor. SompnusTHen in sléepe take héede of his will that sléepeth, for he disposeth him willingly to sléepe: for Auicen faith, that sléepe is nought els but appetite of rest, in the vertue of feelyng. Also of shortnes of sléepe, for when a man disposeth him and layeth him downe to sléepe, his pur∣pose is to rise soone. Also of vnitie, and ioyning of vertue in sléepe: for the ver∣tue that is shed in waking, is gathered and ioyned in his body that sleepeth, as Auicen saith. Also of his vnféelingnesse that sléepeth, as it is knowen by things that are before sayd: for it hapneth ofte that a man sléepeth so strongly & so fast, that vneth he feeleth any thing without; though he be beaten. Also the sweetnes of rest: for swéetenesse in sleeping ma∣keth him forget all manner of trauailes that were, and also be. Also he is in sure∣tie that sleepeth: for while he sléepeth he dreadeth not the cruelnesse of his enimy. Also chaunging and diuersitie of his shape that sleepeth: for without hée sée∣meth dead, and alyue within: pale with∣out, and ruddie within: colde without, and hot within: without all the vertue of working sheddeth it selfe, as it is two contraries, but within all the vertue ga∣thereth it selfe togethers. Also men shal take héede of diuersitie in sléeping, for some beasts sléepe with eyen closed, and the lyddes fast togethers: and all such beastes haue sharper sight than other beastes that sléepe with open eyen, and vnclosed, as Arist. saith: and therefore fish haue féeble sight, for they cloase not their eyen in sléeping, and as he saith li. 4. Fish resteth in sléepe, but that is litle, for they wake sodainly and flee. Seeke before lib. 5. in the chapter of the eye lyd and of the eye. Also men take héede of imaginations, of dreames and of fanta∣sies: for in sléeping, for meddeling of re∣son with fantasies, the soule thinketh of manye fantasies: and the soule know∣eth some deale by imagination the like∣nesse and the shape thereof, and hath no full iudgement of these things and fan∣tasies: and therefore ofte when a man waketh, he taketh no héede what he séeth in his sléepe. Also men shall namely take héede of profite that is in sléepe: for if the sléepe be kindly and temperate, it doth to the body great profite and many com∣modities, as it is said before in ye words of Auicen and of Constantine: & name∣ly for that then is wrought good digesti∣on, & pure things departed from things that is vnpured: for that yt is pure & like to the bodie, is then ioyned to the bodie: and that which is vnpured and vnlyke to she bodye, is seuered from the bodye by working of the vertue expulsiue of out putting. Of euill sléepe and vnkinde∣ly, looke farthermore in libro 7. de Li∣targia. Much sleeping commeth of flegma∣tike humour and rume:Addition little sleepe commeth of great studie or weaknesse of powers. ¶Of waking. Cap. 26. WAking is a certaine disposition of a beast,Vigilans. when the spirite is sent and ome to the instruments of féelyng and of mouing, that the beast maye vse the same instruments: and so waking is nought els but frée shedding of spirites into the lyms of féeling and of mouing, & doing the worke of the animate vertue in the body. Waking is none other, then lacke of might for to sléepe, that is su∣perfluitie in waking, and commeth of out passing of ye féeling of kindly disposition. And the cause thereof is sometime heate and drinesse of complection.
Sometime for heate the spirite moueth alway outwarde, and so the beast maye not rest. Somtime for euill matter that grieueth ye bru as it fareth in thē that be disposed to phrensie & o madnes som∣time for  vapor yt disturbeth ye brain of the nearnesse that of, as it fareth in thē that be disposed  some disemiteth of leyune matter, as moysture that is in the braine, as it saveth in olde foreliued men: Sometime the cause is bodely and spirituall sorow, and neither of them suffereth the spirite to rest. Sometime the cause is euill di∣gestion and great repletion, that ouerset∣teth & presseth the spirite of feeling and suffereth it not to rest, as if fareth in thē that be ouer dron̄kes for in them yt sharp smoake of wine sticketh and pricketh the sinewes of feeling, and grieueth them, and suffereth them not to rest. And such men be ofte disposed to death or to wood∣nesse: but they be soone hokn & brought on sleepe either by crafte or by kinde. Kinde waking cooleth the bodie within: for in waking, heate commeth outward: therfore it heateth ye vtter-parts. And if waking passeth measned, it increaseth heate, and maketh the bodie leane and drie, and grieueth the eyes and the eye lids. and dimmēth and féebleth the sight, and bréedeth the head ache, and féebleth all the body, and destroyeth it. Measura∣ble waking heateth & moysteth the sto∣macke, and the vtter parts: for heate & moysture commeth thereto. And if wa∣king passeth measure, then of strong mo∣uing of the spirites, commeth heate and drinesse, and wasting within & without, and grieuing of kinde. Moderate & mea∣surable waking accordeth to trauaylyng men to winne and to get the more méed, & to discouer & wait of sodain deceipts of enimies, & to abide their Lord, to receiue him with good cheere, & is cōfort to them that receiue medicines, yt it grieue them not: to sick men, & to them that haue Li∣targie, the sléeping euill, that they maye the sooner be whole: to wayfaring men that they forget not their iourney with sléeping: to heardes that they take no harme by wolues and of other enimies: to praieng men̄, that they leese not the crowne that is graunted to them that wake. Happy are those seruants whom the Lord shall finde waking. Luk. 12. ¶Of Dreaming. Cap. 27. DReaming is a certaine disposition of sleeping men,Somnier s and printeth in theyr wit by imagination, shape and lykenes of diuers things, as Gregorie sayth, and also Microbius De soo Scipionis: Dremes commeth and falleth in ma∣ny manner wie. For because of binding and ioyning, that the soule hath with the bodye, dispositions & passions that spring of the bodye, rebounde in the soule by a manner application of the flesh. There∣fore ofte in sléeping, the soule séeth suche Images and lykenesse of things, as it assayeth sometime waking. And vnreasonable beasts haue dreames also, as Aristotle saith libro. 3. For an hound hath dreames, as it seemeth by his barking, and an horie, as it seemeth by his neighing. And sometime suche dreames come of too greate repletion ei∣ther of too great lasting; and sometime of great imagination and thought, that is before in waking. Heereof super Ge∣ne, li. 12. Austen speaketh and saith, that as flesh that is vtterly subiect to the spi∣rite is called spirituall, so the spirit that followeth alway the flesh is called flesh∣ly and beastiall. And therefore it is no wonder, though the spirite that follow∣eth the flesh, present in himselfe carnall images. Also he saith there, in sleepe we sée images and likenesse of things and of bodyes, and not the selfe things: but yet the lykenesse of things of that we see in dreames, we cal by ye names of ye things, and apropriate to them the names of the things, for likenes of things. In waking we comprehend and take in wit ye shape & images of things. But in sléeping the spirit seeth ye images of things. Also som∣time dreames be true, & somtime false: somtime cléere & plaine, & somtime iron∣blous. Dreames yt be true, be sometime open & plaine, & somtime wrayped in fi∣guratiue, misticall, dim & dark interpre∣tation, as it fared in Phara dreames. Such impression and printing is made
in his wit, that sléepeth, by inspiration of God, and sometime by seruice of An∣gells, as it fared of Iacob, that sawe in his sléepe popler yeardes, and an Angell that sayd to him, take those yeardes, &c. Gen. 30. And somtime by scorne and de∣ceipt of euill spirites, as it fareth in fan∣tastisies and false Prophets, and them that be taken. Héereof Austen speaketh there and saith, that when a good spirite taketh and rauisheth a mans spirite into these sights, without doubt the said ima∣ges yt be séene, be images of some things: and it is good to knowe the sayd things, for that knowing is Gods gifte. Some∣time Sathans Angell disguiseth him, as though he were an Angel of light, & ma∣keth such Images to beguile and deceiue men to his purpose, when men beléeue him in doings that be openly good. Whē such dreames come by reuelation, sober vnderstanding déemeth readyly with help of Gods grace: All dreames be not true, neyther all false. For somtime by dremes God sendeth certaine warnings and to∣kens of things that shall befall: Also di∣uers dreames come of diuers causes, sometime of complection, as he that is Sanguine hath glad & liking dreames,Sanguine Melan∣chuli. Color. Fleame. the melancholious dremeth of sorrow, yt Cholarike, of firy things, & the flematike of Raine, Snow, and of Waters, and of such other watrye things. And euerye man dreameth dreames according to his complection, wit, and age, as sayth Con∣stantine. And sometime dreames come of appetite, affection, and desire, as he that is an hungred dreameth of meate, and a dronken man that is thirstie, dreameth of drinke: and of the contrary therof, lack and default of meate and drinke. The more such a one dreameth, that he eateth or drinketh, the worse hée is an hungred or a thirst: when he is waked. Sometime of great study and thought set on a thing, as a couetous man alwaye dreameth of golde, and that he counteth and telleth his money, & maketh it lesse either more: Somtime of euill disposition of ye brain, as it fareth in them that be disposed to phrensie and to madnesse: They haue wonderfull dreames, that neuer man heard speake off before. For as vapour infecteth and varyeth the cell of fantasie, euen so the dreames doe varie and hée diuerse. Sometime of corrupt bloud: For they that haue infect and corrupt bloud, thinke that they goe in corrupt, stinking, and vncleane places. Sometime of lyke∣nesse and chaunging of ayre. For ayre disposed to lykenesse and to chaunging, chaungeth and lykeneth the bodie to his owne lykenesse. And so the smoake that is then resolued and departed, maketh newe impression and printings in the braine, and thereof commeth vnlyke and diuerse dreames. Sometime of diuerse a∣ges and chaunging of age:Yet laugh they in their sleep and make prettie counte∣nances of the liking of some¦thing. small children dreame not. Therefore Aristotle. lib.4. sayth, That among all beasts, namelye a man dreameth most, and children, dreme not before fiue yeares. And it followeth. In olde time some men and women had no dremes in theyr youth, and after they had dreames in their age, and died soone after, or had great sicknesse. Addition. AFter the opinion of the learned as fol∣loweth.Addition Iudg. chap. 7. ver. 3. Beholde I dreamed a dreame, and loe a cake of Early bread tumbled frō aboue into the hoast of Madian, and came euen to a tent and smote it that it fell, it ouerturned it, I say, and the tent fell downe, &c. Héerby we may learne that dreames of prophe∣sieng are by God, giuen vnto the enimies of godlynes, & to that nation, that afflic∣ted the holy people and the Church, and this is not the first time, for vnto an E∣thnike king, namely Pharao, were fatte and beasie kine: full and emptie cores of corne shewed by God in a dreame: vnto the Baker also and Butler, were shew∣ed things also that should come to passe, and afterward Nabuchad-nezar, which lead awaye the Israelites captiues, sawe twice dreames that had significattons: But this is more meruailous which is héere declared, the dreame néedeth no Io∣soph or Daniel for an interpretour: for that which the Souldier by the inspira∣tion of God dreamed, his fellow Souldi∣er expounded: And his neighbour aun∣swered and saide. This is nothing else saue the sword of Gedeon, the sonne of Ioas, a man of Israel, God hath giuen in∣to
his hands Madian and all his hoast: wherefore God gaue vnto vngodly men, both a true dreame, and also a faithfull interpretation thereof, and that confirm∣eth that frée gifts of grace are common, both to the godly and vngodly. Where∣fore it is not méete that any shuld boast of them, for they testifie not the holynes of men, but onely the lyberall bountiful∣nesse of God. As touching dreames, the Ethnikes and Peripatetikes, Aristotle, Hippocrates, & Galen, and other famous philosophers haue written many things, amongst thē Aristotle in his litle booke, De diuinatione per smniū (if it be his book) saith first, that this kinde of diuina∣tion seemeth not vtterly to be reiected. A farther discourse of dreames is expressed in ye Commentarie vpon ye booke of Iud∣ges by Doctor Peter Martir, where he saith, that dreames be abscure & foolish, & idle men do dreme of many vanities, by the meanes of those humours that lye inwardly hid. But the cause why they which are a sléepe, and not they which are waking, doe by sight faéele the nature of those motions, is this: because at the beginning they are lyttle, and when wee are waking, the sense of them flieth from vs: for by stronger motions of outward things which appeare before our eyes, we are drawen another way: but being on sleepe, we cease from outward labors, and are voyde from the course of grose sensible things: wherefore the sights & Images which are by the humours con∣tinuallye moued, are better comprehen∣ded of the fantasie when weare on sléep, then when we are waking: and when we sleepe, we farte better fée small things, than we doe being waking & whereby it appeare, because we thinke that noyses be they neuer so small, are great thun∣ders: and if any sweete fleame stick per∣aduenture vnto the tongue or roose of the mouth, it séemeth to vs that we tast honnie, sugar, swéete wine, and pleasant meates, yea, sometimes we thinke, yt we gladly eate & abundantly drinke: where∣fore those motions of humore which are intal, are in sleep shewed to be as it wer wonderful great: for which cause Phisi∣tions do héerby know very many begin∣nings of diseases. Dreames also are cer∣taine signes of ye affections of ye minde, as of couetousnes, hope, ioy, and mirth, & also of qualities: the fearfull dreame, that they flye daunger: the couetous, yt they imbrace riches: the lecherous, that they unbrace those, which the day before they secretly desired: the wrathfull, that they are fighting, killing, robbing, and brauling: the carelesse, that they are pi∣ping, singing, whisteling, hawking, hunt∣ing, dauncing and such lyke. Yet, with euery one of these vanities, is one com∣plection touched, but it followeth, as the youthfull humors increaseth and dimi∣nisheth both in man and woman. Also in sleepe many are molested with Ephi∣alte & Hvhiati, that is Iucubi & Suc∣cubi, which some Authors call arce, night spirits: rather diuells, which I sup∣pose to be wicked spirits who being not able to preuayle in the day, de defile the body in ye night: ye Phisitians do affirm, these are nothing els but a disease, so is al mans infirmities a disease to ye body, & a disquiet to an honest and chast mind As touching what is the outwarde cause of dreames, by ye colour of ye skie & clowds, or by the craking of ye crowes, clustring of flyes, bellowing of cattell, working of pismeres, stones sweating, kennels stin∣king, & such like, notwtstanding ye altera∣tiō yt foloweth, yet is it no certain diui∣natiō. Homer & Virgil made two gates of dreames, one of horne, ye other of yuo∣rie: ye of horne (as they say) pertaineth to true dreames, & that of yuorie to false, & they seme yt the gretest part passe throgh ye gate af yuory, & not through yt of horn. As touching ye dreames sent of God, or moued by ye diuel. 2. things are leguired: ye first, ye manner of ye visiō, ye secōd, iudg∣ment, for ye better vnderslāding of ye holy & former apperantes: as in Esdras, Za∣hary & Ioseph. Tertulian in his booke De anima, maketh mention of certain of those dreames yt hapned amōg Ethniks, as ye dreame of Astiage of his daughter Madane: also of Philip of Macedon, & of Iulius Octuius, whome M. Cicero be∣ing yet a boy, thought he saw him in his dreame, and being awake, as soone as he met him, he straight waye knewe him.
Philo a Iewe and Cyprian wrote of dreames, that they are sometimes war∣nings sent by God, which serue to the edification of the Church. Augustine in his 12. booke De Genesi ad literam the third Chapter sayth that there are three kindes of dreames: The first pertaine to the outward sense which is called cor∣porall: The second spirituall, which con∣sist of Images, and haue place about the fantasie, or power of imagination: The thirde he nameth intellectuall, because they are comprehended onely by reason and iudgement of the minde. The diuell is the cause of dreames also, Augustine saith, that one by dreames declared in what houre a Priest would come vnto him, and through what place he would passe. And we are not ignorant that the Ethnikes had Oracles, where men were all night to obtaine visions & dreames. Such a one was the oracle of Amphi∣arus sonne of Oeleus an Argiue, and a Southsayer, being compelled by Adra∣stus to goe to the Citie of Thebes, as soone as he came thether, the earth ope∣ned and swallowed him vp. Amphilo∣chus a Philosopher, Trophonius, & Aes∣culapius, in those places the diuell shew∣ed vnto those which slept, the remedyes and medicines to heale such as were sicke, and therewithall also, gaue aun∣swere of other matters. Supernaturall sleepes and dreames doe come of God from aboue by good Angells, by ye which God reuealeth his will to whom it ple∣seth him, and we vnderstande that those kinde of dreames, doe much differ from those that be naturall, because they are of more certaintie, and sealed and confir∣med from aboue, so that the veritie of the same cannot be ambiguous or doubt∣full. S. Augustine in his Epistle to E∣uodius the 100. Epistle he saith, I wold to God I could discern betwéén dreames which are giuen to error, and those which are to saluation, neuerthelesse we ought to be of good chéere, because God suffe∣reth his children to be tempted, but not to perish. It is also-written by S. Au∣gustine in his booke De Ciuitate Dei, cap. 20. Iucubus doth infest and trouble women, and Succubus doth infest men, by the which words it is manifest, that the godly, chast, and honest minded, are not free from this grose subsection, al∣though more commonly the dishonest are molested therewith. Some hold opi∣nion, that Marline, in the time of Vor∣tiger king of great Britaine. † 70. yeres before Christ, was borne after this man∣ner. Hieronimus Cardanus in his tre∣tise De rebus contra naturam, séemes to be of opinion that spirits or diuels may beget and conceiue vnt not after ye com∣mon manner, yet he reciteth a storie of a young damoisell of Scotland which was got with child of an inchaunted di∣uell, thinking that he had bene a fayre young man which had layen with hir, wherevpon she brought foorth so defor∣med a monster, that he feared the behol∣ders, and was by them burned. It see∣meth not by any reason of man, that a diuell or spirite, should beget on a natu∣rall bodie either sonne or daughter, ex∣cept they in possessing new slaine or dead bodies, vse those powers that may come to a forme and shape forth of that bo∣die wherein it is infused, or that those spirites be not of that subtill Materia that the Demones are, but a more grose and earthie cause, as Nymphae, Drya∣des, Hobgoblins and Fairies. For that it is no straunge secreat to disclose that in fewe yeares heere in Englande,Lyelmaho Enile Narf. two seuerall persons came acquainted with women as they thought, and knowing them carnally vanished awae and one of the persons kept coane nr a fewe times, but how he prospered after, there is lefte no cause of triumph. Edward Fnton in his booke of the secreates of Nature; the seauenth-chaptor, reciteth forth of Iames Roffus in his bookes Dr conceptu & generatione homiris, that in his time, there was a wicked spi∣rite, had to doe by night with a com∣mon woman, being transformed into the likenesse of a man, wherevpon shée became immediately with shilde, which when she perceiued, she fell into so straunge a kinde of disease, that hir en∣trayles fell from hir, which could not be holpen or made sound by any deuise of Phisicke.
Wicked spirits are neuer vnpossessing nor meresing those ye appertain vnto that kinde, which is lyke vnto themselues, for womē may conceiue in euill thought the formed shapes that the deepe impres∣sion of the minde is fixed vnto, at con∣ception: and men also diuelishly think∣ing of filth, beastly and deformed man∣ners, shapes and formes, in their heate of generation, doe powre forth to ye ma∣nifesting of Gods high Iustice, ye thing no lesse monstrous by natures corrupti∣on, as also by the present diuelish and vncleane intention: by the which it may be sayd, that diuells doe in deede beget sonnes and daughters. I would to God that the foule lust of such vncleannesse, were banished foorth of England, which will neuer be, vntill discipline pinch the great as well as the small: for the one presuming so much of the lybertie of the other, both goe without punishment, and the glorie of God diminished. The cause of this impediment. In the bodye commeth a vaporous humour or fumositie rising from the sto∣macke to the braine: it maye come al∣so through surfet and dronkennesse, and sleeping vpright, these bréede dreames & disquieting of the powers, make men to seeme or deeme that which is the contra∣rie. Likewise the vapour of golde & sil∣uer do so incense the braine and inflame the stomacke, that many times Iustice mindes to punish, when he thinketh no∣thing lesse. Thus ye goodly are disquieted, by missing of that sight, that they would gladly see, and tho wicked triumph, as though they wer not séene nor perceiued. The remedie. Kéep good & tēperated dyet, for some eat too much, and many other wold eate if they had it: as for those that disdaine to work, those are worthy to fast. Also take héed of lieng vpright, for too much lieng vp∣right, bréedeth the cause of stiffeling of the body, and the endlesse damnation to both soule and bodie. Of trauaile. Cap. 29. TRauaile is néedefull for kéeping and sauing of kinde,Sucre as it is said in Pan∣tegni: Ther is double manner trauaile, of spirite and of wits, and bodely tra∣uayle. Of spirite and of wits, as studi∣eng, waking, wrath, sorrow, businesse, and such other: if they be proportionate to kinde, they helpe much the health of bodie and foule, as it shall be sayd after∣ward of the accidents of the soule, in the ende of the seauenth booke. Sometime bodely trauayle is temperate, and some∣time not temperate. Tēperate is meane betwéene féeble and strong, great and lit∣tle, swift and slow, that doth not alway increase in heate or in drinesse: Tra∣uayle that is not temperate, passeth this temperatenesse: and if it passeth much, it heateth and dryeth in the beginning and if it dure long, by dissolution and wast∣ing of strength and of vertue, and by euaporation of spirites, it cooleth & dry∣eth. Constantine sayth, that thrée man∣ner profites come of trauayle: For it exciteth kinde heate: and wasteth and destroyeth superfluitie: and maketh the members hard and sad. Sometime bo∣dely trauaile is vniuersall, and some per∣ticular. Uniuersal is, when all the mem∣bers moue, as in deluing, iournieng, and such other. In particular trauayle, some lymmes and members rest, and some moue and trauell, as in sewing, writing, and such other. These diuers trauailes, diuersly exercise the body according to the sundry offices and craftes of men. Some trauayle heateth and dryeth the body, as Smithes crafte: for the ayre that bloweth in the forge, is hot & drye, and it heateth and dryeth the Smithes. Fishing crafte doth the contrary: for it cooleth and moysteth. Some perticular trauayle is strong, and some féeble, and some meane. In trauaile men shall take héede of qualitie and quantitie of time and place: in quantitie, that it be not too much or too little: in qualitie, that it bee not too slowe, or too swifte: but meane trauayle is good and profitable. Before meate is best time of trauayle, that su∣perfluities, that be made slipper and sli∣ding may be voyded by trauaile, yt meate and drinke be not corrupt with such su∣perfluities. After meate trauaile helpeth the vertue of digestion, to seeth and defie
meate and drinke, so that the trauell bée temperate. For too much trauell is not good, for it heateth the inner partes and the vtter also. Men shall take heede of place, for some place is watrie, and coo∣leth and moysteth, as the place of Fish∣ers: and some is drye, & hath woode and trees, as the place of hunters: and so such a place heateth and drieth by heate that commeth of trauayle and of walk∣ing about, and so of other. Sometime men asked of a wise man, whereto tra∣uaile was néedfull. And he aunswered and sayd in this manner: Honest tra∣uayle is the true kéeping and warde of mans lyfe, pricking of his kinde that sleepeth, the fyle of heate of sléeping, wa∣sting & destroyeng of superfluities, cha∣stising of vices, death of euilles, and of sicknesse, medicine of sorrowe and woe, winning of time, debt of youth, crudition of young folke, ioye of age, helpe of soule, and enimie of idlenesse, the mother of all euills: forseeth he alone forsaketh tra∣uayle, that will misse and lacke ioye of wealth and lyking. These foresayde wordes be contained in Fulgencius ser∣mon that he made against idle men. There that word is expounded: Hée eate not idle bread. In that Sermon, he prayseth much good businesse of trauell, but in the ende of the Sermon, hée set∣teth deuoute idlenesse of contemplation, before businesse and trauaile: and saith, That for idlenes of contemplation, Ma∣ry shall not be accounted among idle women, but rather she shall be set be∣fore all other. How shoulde she eate idle bread, that is full of bread of lyfe, and that brake bread to other, which with good prayers, with ensample of good con∣uersation, and with good wordes and teaching, sedde and nourished them that hungered and thyrsted after Iustice. Then Mary that helpeth with good prayers, and draweth other to good lyuing, with good conuersation, and teacheth well with preaching, break∣eth bread, &c. Of rest. Cap. 30. REst is ceasing from businesse & tra∣uayle:Quittus. for lyke as exercise is neede∣full for the kéeping and saluation of kinde, so lykewise is rest, for rest to the full ende of mouing and of trauayle. For without rest nothing dureth finally, for that which alway lacketh rest, is not du∣rable. Therefore heauen, that is most moueable, draweth to rest with his mo∣uing. Also the Sunne, the Moone, & the starres, fire, aire, and water, and all other things yt moue by course of kinde, draw finally to rest. Wherefore Aussen saith, That rest hath kindly an inclination to∣warde the middle, and therefore it is the head and disposition of gathering and onyng of parts in their owne place.Ioyning. And therefore all that is ordayned to rest by course of kind is accounted more noble and more worthye when it is fi∣nallye in rest, then it is when it is in mouing: as the ente is more worthye, than those things that be ordayned for the ende. Insomuch as rest is contrarye to trauayle, men shall take as good heed of rest, as is requisite touching the effect, in as many manner wise, as of trauell. Some rest is of spirits and of wits, and some is bodely rest: and each of them if they be méete or equall and proportio∣nate to kinde, be healthfull & wholesome to body and soule, and saueth and kéep∣eth mans health: but if they be not, then is it cōtrariwise. Also somtime, rest is too much, & then it bréedeth, norisheth, & multiplieth euill humors, & bringeth in corruption: for water rotteth if it rest too long: & all yron, and all maner of mettal, rusteth, if it be long vnused, or too lyttle vsed. And sometime rest is too little, and that lykewise is vicious. For it refresh∣eth not kinde that is wearie, neyther reléeueth féeblenesse, neyther restoreth that which is wasted. Meane betwéene these twaine is good: for it comforteth kinde heate, and recreateth the wits, and helpeth digestion, and cleanseth some-deale the body. Also touching qualytie, some is very rest, and is good, if it be not too much: and some is not very rest, as in them which haue the feauers, theyr rest is not full good, as it shall be sayve afterward.
AdditionWhat is the rest of perfection. Psalmes. 4 15, 16.55.TO vse moderate labour, by the ex∣cercise of the bodie, but being guy∣ded with a conscionable minde, bringeth forth fruites, acceptable to God and man. What difference is betweene the bodye and the minde. The same that is betwixte the soule and the body: for the soule worketh by motion, and the body by action: the bo∣dely work is not knowen but by labor, which requireth rest after trauell, as ab∣stinence doeth require saturitie. The soules immortall rest is, when the la∣bour of the body is discharged by death, to that paines be diminished, rest is pre∣serued, so the body, from corruption, to the minde from transgresion, in ye hope of resurrection vntill spirituall perfecti∣on bring vs forth in the spirite, as it did sometime in the flesh: in earth for a time, in heauen for euer. EXPLICIT LIBER SEXTVS. ¶INCIPIT LIBER SEPTIMVS. DE INFIRMITATIBVS. CAPVT PRIMVS. AFTER that we haue (by the help of God) ended the Treatise of the properties of things that per∣fourme and help, and succour and kéepe and saue mans kinde: we shall speake of those things that fall to man against kind, and that destroye and corrupt his kinde. Thrée things there be that grieue mans kinde, that is to wit, cause of sicke∣nesse, sicknesse it selfe, and accident that followeth sickenesse. The cause of sick∣nesse is it, whereof commeth euill and vnkinde disposition in the bodye, as euill complection, or too great repleti∣on: or too great abstinence, or defaulte of vertue, or chaunging of qualyties, and dissolution and departing of conti∣nuaunce. All those be cause or occasi∣on of sicknesse. Iohannes sayth, That sickenesse is the thing, whereby the complection of the bodye is grieued and noyed, as by feauers, and postumes, and such other. Accident is a thing that followeth these passions, that commeth and is brought into the bodye, whether it be agaynst kinde or not,Cephalea. Peripuen∣mona in slamation of ye lungs as head ache in Cepha∣tico: or not agaynst kinde, as appea∣in Peripleumonia, the chéekes were redde. Good disposition of bodie is called health, by the which mans body in com∣plection and composition is in such state, that it maye fréelye and persectlye doe his workes and déedes. And if kinde slyde out of his temperatenessie, it falleth into euill and sicknesse. For of distem∣peraunce and vneuennesse of humours, happeneth lyke disease, as feauers, drop∣sie, and such other. And of euill dispositi∣on of members commeth sickenesse and disease, lyke as blearinesse in the eye, and goute in the hande, and of euill dis∣position
both of the humoures, and of members commeth euill vniuersall,Cancer v∣niu Elephans. a kind of leprus, that stineneth the ioints. as Elephantia or Lepra. Then euery euill is lyke, and infecteth the humours and members that be lyke, as Feauers and such other. Other vnlike, and letteth the lyms office, or els vniuersall, and cor∣rumpeth and destroyeth kinde, within and without. ¶Of head ache, and of the causes & signes there∣of. Cap. 2. Cephalea Dolor ca¦pius, do∣lor ingens in capito. extreame paine of the head. SOmewhat shall be sayde of the properties of these euills and sick∣nesses, of the causes thereof, of the ef∣fectes and doing, signes and tokens, and of remedies of them: not of all, but onelye of those that holye Writ maketh generallye minde of. Therefore héere is no charge of the order of processe. Then first we shall beginne of the pas∣sione of the head. Esay p. Euerich a∣king head, &c.Psa. 1. ve. .6. The whole head is sick, and the whole heart is heauie, from the soale of the foote, vnto the head, there is nothing whole therein, but woundes and swelling, and sores full of corruption: They haue not bene wrapped, nor bounde vp, nor fastened with oyle. Constantine sayth, that head ache, is named Cephitica, and commeth in two manners, either of things that be with∣out, as of smiting: or of hotte ayre, that departeth, and dissolueth: or els of colde ayre, that constrayneth. In the se∣conde manner, head ache commeth of some cause that is within, and that ey∣ther of some priuate cause, that com∣meth not but of the head, or some of far∣ther cause, as of the stomacke. And if the ache commeth of a priuate cause, eyther of the faulte of the onely qualy∣tie, namely of coldnesse, or of heate, or els of vice of humours, as of bloud, of fleame, of Cholera, or Melancholia. Augmen¦teth and lessenethAnd if this ache commeth and goeth, it is a token and signe that it commeth of the stomacke. Therefore Galen sayeth, if ache be in the head, and commeth of no cause that is without, then sharpe humoures grieue the stomacke, and if the ache be continuall, it commeth of hu∣mours, and if it come of bleud, the head is hotte, and the forhead heauie. For the sorther parte of the head is the siege and seate of bloud, the eyen come reide, and the veynes of the face be full. And if it commeth of fumosities of Cholera, heate is felte in the nosethrilles, and drynesse in the tongue, waking and thirst lacketh not. Ache is more felte in the right side than in the lefte side, for there is the place of Cholera, the face & eyen be citrine, and the mouth is bitter.yelovvish If it come of Melancholia, the ache is more on the lefte side then in the right side, with colde and waking and heaui∣nès, and the face is of earthly colour and hiewe, the eyen be hollowe, with blea∣rinesse, and sowrenesse of the mouth. If it comieth of fleame, there follow∣eth ache that grieueth. Superfluities come out of the nose and at the mouth, and sometime with cough and beanye sighings and groanings: the face is pale, and somewhat swollen, the eyen are bleared, the mouth is wearish and vnsauorye: and the ache more in the hinder part of the head, for there is the place of fleame, and commeth ofte of fleame in winter in olde men, and com∣meth neuer by it selfe, but of some other euill, that commeth before. For in some euills féeding fleame is rauished to the braine, by working of heate of feauers, that maketh it smooth, and is gathered in the hinder cell, be∣cause of lykenesse, and bréedeth a Po∣stume: the signes thereof are continu∣all Feuers, vryne discouloured, and the sayd oppressing and wringing of the eyen, and false sléepe: and if the sicke man bée called, vnneth he aunswereth. Therefore in Libro Institutionum Ga∣len sayeth, That it néedeth to know, that the head is departed in thrée parts or in foure. For bloud hath masterie in the forhead, and Cholera in the right side,The polle and fleame in the nolle of the head. Head ache commeth in this manner, and in many other, as of sharpnes & do∣ing of strong wine, ye smoke wherof pin∣cheth
and pricketh the small fells of the braine, and bréedeth great disease in the head. Huc vsque Constantinus. ¶Of medicine and remedies for ache and paine of the head. Cap. 3. THe head is grieued within with an ache and an euill that Phisiti∣ons call Emigranea, as saith Constant.Hemicra∣nia, the Megrime, of Hemi, the mid∣dle, & of Craneum the skull: because the paine keepeth the mid∣dle part of the head, & so set∣cher's a compasse about the temples, yet some∣time the griefe wil be more on ye one side, than on the other. And he saith, this ache and euill is most griuous: for who that hath that euill, feeleth in his head, as it were beating of hammers, and may not suffer noyse, nor voyce, nor light, nor shining. And this euill is of cholarike smoake with hotte winde and ventositie, & therefore he fée∣leth in his head putting & pricking, bur∣ning and ringing. Also the head is grie∣ued specially without in the skinne with pimples, and whelkes, and scabs, out of the which commeth matter much lyke to honie, and therefore Constant. calleth such a scab, Fauum an honie rombe: for such whelkes haue small hoales, out of the which matter commeth, as honie out of the honie combe. And this euill com∣meth of vicious and gleymie humour, which commeth to the skin of ye head, and bréedeth therein pimples & whelks. Also the head is ofte diseased with a fa∣miliar passion, that children haue ofte, & by Constantin that euill is called Squa∣ma, a scall, and we call that euill Tinea a Mothe: for it fretteth and gnaweth the ouer part of the skinne of the head, as a Mothe frelteth cloath, and cleaueth thereto without departing, holding the skinne right fast. And such an euill brée∣deth passing great itching and fretting & clawing, of that itching falleth manye scalls. This euill commeth often to chil∣dren that haue great plentie of bloud, & for softnesse of the skinne, and for plen∣tie of meate and drinke. This infirmitie doth come of rume,Addition and winde intrussed in the head, and cannot get out but by medicines: the easiest remedie to cure the same, is stemulations and mustard layd to the temples. ¶Constantine sayth, that meate and drinke ought to be withdrawen from such children, and to haue it but mode∣rately. Then when the humour is auoi∣ded, thero ought to be done thereto oynt∣ments and other remedies. And also Constantine saith, that to children suc∣king, the best remedie is, to let them bloud in the veines behinde in the carrs, and to annoynt the sore place with the same bloud, while it is hot and subtil: for with the heate and subtie therof, it openeth the poores, and entereth, and departeth, and wasteth, and destroyeth the matter. And because that often these scales cleaue to the rootes of the haire, it maye not be easely cured and healed, but if the matter be first drawen out of the head right by the roote: the which euill and malady if it be olde, vnneth it may be healed and saued. Also vnneth suche scall or scurffe is healed, but that some token of scaldnesse or pyldnesse is lefte and senne alway afterward. Also ye head is grieued without, in losing the hight∣ing thereof, as when the haires of the head fal away, and the head wereth bald. as it is rehearsed and said before in the fifte booke, in the chapter De Capillis, looke therein diligentlye. Also the head suffereth in the haires therof, a fretting, gnawing, and vnhightinesse, that Phisi∣tious call Furfurisca. For sometime in the head by the rootes of the haire,Dandrufe. breed scalles, like to branne, and commeth of the vice of the brain, either of the fumo∣sitie that commeth of the head to nouri∣shing and féeding of the haire: but this vncleannesse must busilye be helpe with cleansing, washing, and with medicines: lyke as lyce, nittes, and small wormes must be voyded out of the head, by need∣full medicines. Constantine sayth short∣ly, that the foresayd passions of the head be holpe in this manner. If the ach and sore commeth of euill humours, and of repletion thereof, as of euill bloud, or of other euill humours: we shall let the Patient bloude in the veyne that is called Cephalica,A chiefe veine. and cleanse the bodye with couenable medicines and purgati∣ous, and namely if it be of the matter, that is in the stomacke, it is needefull to make the patient spewe, and bring out
the matter with couenable medicine, and when the body is cleansed and pur∣ged, then men should poure warme wa∣ter on the head, handes, and feete to open the poores, and that ye fumositie may the easlyer passe out of the body: and if the hinder part of the head aketh, then wée must open the broad beyne in the fore∣head, and drawe out bloud. And Con∣stantine sayeth,To rub. That it is good to garse the legges beneath, that the humoure, fumositie and spirites that are cause of the head ache, may be drawen from the head downward to the nether parts: and if the forther part of the head aketh, we must cause the nose to bleede: and if the humour be hot and cholaricke, we shall helpe it with colde medicines and moist. The temples, the nosethrills, & the veins and pulses, we shall annoynt with wa∣ter of Roses, and milk of a woman that feedeth a male child, and labour to bring the patient a sleepe. And if the matter be colde and gleynne in the mouth of the stomacke, when the matter is defied, we must giue a spoonefull of medicine Cola∣tura vomitus Patratiue. AdditionBeware of Garlyke, Onyons, hy∣bolls called Scalions, heady wines, han∣ging downe the head, of Venerius acts, and surfetting the stomack. And if the matter be in the ground of the stomack, we must bring it out with couenable medicines, & vse balmes and ointments that be meanly hot, & dit yt is meanly hot, & so it is to vnderstand, & so we hele contraries with contraries.Cephalar∣gia. Soa. & Cepha∣a. be in e pnes  head. And if the head ache be without vicious humour, and commeth of some passing qualytie, then the patient needeth no purgation but rather alteration. And if the faulte be in qualities: we must vse contrarye alities. And if the ache commeth of too great repletion of meate or of drinke, as it fareth in lutous or dronkē men: then the best remedie is to drinke hotte water in great quantitie, and then with in a while after, busie him for to spew. If thou wilt vse strong medicine, goe to the Booke called, Viatio Constan∣tins. This sufficeth to the readinesse of a wise man. ¶Of the Pose. Cap. 4. IVdith. 8. Burning heate came vp∣pon Manasles head, and he dyed, &c. Manasles the husband of Iudith,Addition as he was diligent ouer them that bounde sheaues in the fieldes, the heate came vpon his head, and he dyed at Bethuha his cit, and was buried beside his fa∣thers. The cause of hasting of Monasses death, was immoderate and passing run∣ning of rue out of the head to the in∣ner parts, and by that vyolence of burn∣ing heate, dissoluing and shedding the humours of the head, as arnard touch∣eth. Such a running heate as Phisiti∣ons meane, commeth in the head, of ma∣ny and diuers causes: sometime of hot aire, dissoluing and shedding fleeting hu∣moures: sometime of colde aire thrust∣ing and wringing the brayne, and wrin∣ging out the partes that are most fleet∣ing: sometime of great abundaunce and plentie of humours, which runne and droppe out for straightnesse of place and of holding, and that commeth of the inner heate, that disolueth, and de∣parteth, and sheddeth the humours. Or of colde thrusting and wringing out, or of moyst, that maketh slypper & sliding: and sometime of fleeting and running and shedding themselues: sometime of feeblenesse of the vertue of hlding.Cataros is the  called al∣so Catar∣rus, a Ca∣taru, In∣undai or Distill∣tio, those commeth of ume, the which doth di∣still from the heae into ye sto∣macke, & sometime cōmeth so that the povvers a stepped. The running that commeth of too great plentye of humours, hath such signes and tokens, The bodye is plectoricke and replate, the place is some deale swollen with slype eyen, great super∣fluitie commeth out of the nose, and at the mouth: and the bodye is heauye. If the running rume commeth of dissol∣uing heate, these be the signes and to∣kens, The face is redde with redde veynes namely in the eyen, there be yet running hotte teares biting the eyen, and heating the skinne, and the heate is felte deepe within. If it commeth of colde thrusting and wringing, it is kno∣wen by those tokens: the face is pale, the teares be cold, and colde is felt deepe within.
If it come of fléeting humours and thinne, it is knowne by great superflui∣tie that commeth out of the nose and mouth, and by dropping and gleiming therof. Then if superfluitie be the cause, the cure is by voiding of superfluitie, namely, if the running humours run to the spiritual members by out thrusting and wringing. If the running be colde and moist, best remedie is the contrary, hot and drie, withholding & wasting the humour, as Laudanum, Thus, Storax, & Castorium. If the running be hot, bée it refrained wt colde bauming, as with sée∣thing of roses & raine water, & with the same roses held to the nosethrills. Also as long as the running of such a rume is violent, no plaister nor ointment shal be done thereto, for then ye dissolution & running shuld be the more, as saith Cō∣stant. nor none other water shalbe pow∣red on the head, but water of roses or of Wiies, if the rume commeth of heat.Willows, the leaues sodden in water. ¶Of the phrensie, and the causes and remedyes thereof. Chap. 5. DEuterenomij. 28. Our Lorde shall smite thée with woodnesse, and losse of wit and of mind, and with stonings, &c. Heere hee calleth woodnesse phrensie, that Constantin discribeth in this man∣ner. Phrensie (he saith) is an hot postume in certeine skins and tels of the braine,A hot im∣postume. and therevpon followeth waking & ra∣uing. And so phrensie hath that name Frenesis, of frenes, fells that beclippe the braine. And it cōmeth in two māners ei∣ther of the red Cholera chased & made light with heat of it selfe & of feauers, & made woode and rauished vpwarde by veines, sinewes, wosen, & pipes, & gathe∣red to a Postume, & so into the kinde of phensie: or else it commeth of fumosity & smoake, that commeth vpward to the braine, & distroubleth the braine, and is called Perafrenesi, yt is no very phrensie, and the phrentike person suffereth ma∣ny dreadful accidents, as too great thirst, drinesse, blacknesse, and roughnesse of tongue, l great griefe and anguish, and rough, and sowning for default of spi∣rits, and chaunging of kinde heae into vnkind. The patient is red, if it come of bloud, and Citrine, if it come of Chole∣ra. This passion commeth to hot men & dry in Summer: and al those haue com∣parison to cholera. Parafrenesis cōmeth of binding togethers and company of other members, as of a postume of the stomacke, or of the mother, & when these members be brought to their own for∣mer state: then the braine turneth again to his owne good state: & then this euill Parafrenesi is cured, and then the man is saued. But if the postume be in the substance of ye braine, then is the phren∣sie worst and most grieuous: & therefore most perillous. These be the signes of phrensie, discouloured vrine, during the Feauer, with woodnesse and continuall waking, moouing, and casting about the eyen, raging, stretching, and casting out of handes, moouing and wagging of the head, grinding, and gnashing to∣gethers of the téeth, alwaye they will arise out of theyr bedde now they sing, nowe they laugh, nowe they weepe, and they bit gladly, and rent their keeper and Leach, seld bee they still, but crye much. And these be most perillouslye sicke, and yet they wot not then that they be sicke. Then they must bée soone holen least they perishe, and that both in diet and in medicine. The diet shall be full scarce, as crums of bread, which must many times bee wet in Water. The medicine is, that in the beginning the patients head bée shauen, and wa∣shed in luke warme Uineger, and that he bée well kept or bounde in a darke place. Diuerse shapes of faces and em∣blaunt of painting shall not bee shewed before him,Vexed. lest he be tarred with wood∣nesse: all that be about him, shal be com∣maunded to be still and in silence, men shal not answere to his nise words. In the beginning of medicine he shal be let bloud in a vaine of the forhead, and bleed as much as wil fill an Egge shell. Afore all thing (if vertue & age suffreth) he shal bleede in the head vaine: by medicine di∣gestion shalbe procured, & red Coler uē∣ched. Ouer al things wt ointmēts & bau∣ming, mē shal labor to bring him asleep.
The head that is shauen, shall be plai∣stered with lungs of a Swine, or of a Weather, or of a sheepe, the temples and forhead shal be anointed with the iuyce of Letuse or of Popie. If after these me∣dicines be laide thus to, the woodnesse dureth three daies without sleeping and discouloured vrine: there is no hope of recouering: but if ye vrine begin to take good coulour, and euil signes wexe lesse, there is hope of recouering. Addition. AdditionAS concerning phrensie or madnesse, which is a disease very daungerous to cure, if the vitalls be ouer ruled by a strong spirit, as all diseases, are spirites seueralles, so this disease of phrensie is a token of a déepe displeasure from God, when it remaineth vnto the ende in the possessed, as plainely appeareth. Also the same disease with diuerse others, ha∣uing bene a long time, and many thou∣sand yéeres past, powred on man, decla∣reth vnto vs the greate wickednesse of former ages, and as I am assured, to this ende, that as we in these latter a∣ges doe abhorre so lothsome infections, shoulde also for the auoiding of them, hate and resist the causes of their conti∣nuall increasings, which cause is, the wicked desires of the flesh, no lesse pro∣curing the same, but rather more then in times past. Yet such euer hath ben, that wonderfull goodnesse of God to man ward, first to blesse, forth from whose blessings procéedeth great prosperitie to the bodily benifit, as Exaltation, digni∣tie, renowne, honour and worshippe, to gouerne not onely men, but Diuells, in the subduing whereof, the benefit of the blessing appeareth, if thus blessed on earth, much more blessed are those in heauen: Contrary for a iust reuenge of contempt, followeth the curse, and with it commeth depriuation, indignitie, bon∣dage, dishonour, and reiection, on earth vnto man, from heauen vnto God, on the body, ye Pestilence, ye Consumption, the Feauer ague, the veruent heat, the Swoord, blasting, Mildewe, the heauen shall be a brasse, that is, there shal come no moistnesse to comfort the earth, the Botch of Aegypt, the Eerodes, the scab, the itch, that thou canst not be hea∣led. And the Lord shall smite thée with madnesse and with blindnesse, and with astonieng of the heart. Phrenitis is a Gréeke worde, and signifieth disguised vsage constrained, also Sysen or Kara∣bitus, the barbarous word is Frenisis, in English, a phrensie or madnesse: an im∣postumation bread & gendered in the Pellyces of the braine, named in La∣tine Pia mater, the which Apostumati∣on, doth make alienation of mans mind and memorie. There is another acci∣dent Phrenyse, the which is ioyned with another sicknesse, as a Phrensie with a Feauer, or with a Plu∣rise, and such other lyke, which disease doth commonlye come of a bylous hu∣mour, oppressing the braine, in some an inflation, or fume of corrupt ayre: The accident Phrensie commeth two waies, through hot fume ascending from the stomacke to the braine, ye second through colligation of the nerues and sinewes, which the braine hath with the mid∣driffe. If hope of cure bée, then let the patient bloud forth of Cephalica vena, restraine the possessed of his will, which commonly is to murther, not too hotte, temporate ayre, and diet, and for a time darknesse, to take away the imagination that commeth by the sight, yet there is one kinde of phrensie or madnesse that is worse then all these, which is disdain of knowledge of the truth, wilfull af∣fection, ignoraunce, and hate to bée re∣formed, from the which miserable bon∣dage, good Lorde deliuer the oppressed, and comfort the reléeued. Timerousnes is a king of weake distemperaunce, which if it continue, it bréedeth Luna∣cie, phrensie, and madnesse, the best cause to cure the abundance of distempered bloud, is musicke, and merrie company, little meate, sweete smells, and cleanlye lodging, because it commeth of a grose and watrie humour, thicke, that doth stifle the vitalls. ¶Of Madnesse and the causes and signes thereof. Chap. 6.
Mania, Insania, Furor. Madnesse of phren¦sie, of hu∣mour, & of posses∣sing.AMentia and madnesse is all one as Plato saith, Madnesse is infection of the formost cel of the head, with pri∣uation of imagination, lyke as melan∣choly is the infection of the middle cell of the head, with priuation of reason, as Constant. saith in libro de Melancolia. Melancholia (saith he) is an infection yt hath mastry of the soule, the which cō∣meth of dread and of sorrow. And these passions be diuerse after the diuersity of the hurt of their workings: for by mad∣nesse that is called Mania, principally ye imagination is hurt. And in the other reson is hurted.Opressed. And these passions come somtime of melācholy meats, & somtime of drinke, of strong wine, that burneth the humours, & turneth them into ashes, sometime of passions of the soule, as of businesse & great thoughts, of sorrow, & of too great studie, & of dread: sometime of the biting of a woode hounde, or of some other venimous beast: somtime of corrupt and pestilent aire that is infect: somtime of the mallice of a corrupt hu∣mour, that hath the mestry in the bodie o a man prepared to such sicknesse: and as the causes be diuerse, the tokens and signes be diuers.Diet cu∣reth phrē∣sie, leting bloud cu¦reth hu¦mour. & both vvith ear¦nest pra¦er vnto God cu¦reth pos¦session. For some cry & leape, & hurt & wound themselues & other men, & darken & hide thēselues in priuy & se∣cret places: of whose disposition & diffe∣rence it is rehearsed before in the fifth booke, where it is treated of the passion of ye braine. The medicines of them is, yt they be ound, that they hurt not them∣selues and other men. And namely, such shall be refreshed & comforted, & with∣drawen from cause & matter of dread & busie thoughts. And they must be glad∣ded with instruments of musick, & some deale be occupied. And at the last, if pur∣gatiōs & electuaries suffice not, they shal be holpe with craft of Surgery.Or skill. Of gauring and forgetfu∣lnesse. Chap. 7. Want of perseue∣rance or knovv∣ledge.DEut. 28. God shall smite thée with blindnesse. and another letter saith Stupore. And Stupor is called a dis∣ease of the soule, and Constatine sayth, Stupor is blindnesse of reason: And it is, as it were sleep within the eyen clo∣sed, when for default of spirits the soule déemeth not nor discerneth things, that be sensible seene: As the Sodomits were satten at Lots gates, as the glose saith Gen. 30. and Sap. vltimo. Constantine saith, that this Stupor gaug com∣meth in two manners: For either it cō∣meth of perturbation that taketh no heed: or it commeth of superfluitie of hu∣mours, that stoppeth & letteth ye wayes of the spirits in the braine, as it fareth in dronken men: or else it commeth of cold aire, that presseth & wringeth the si∣news of feeling, as it fareth in them that be frosen in Ise, or in Snowe. Also it cōmeth of complection of all the braine, as it fareth of Apoplexia, an euill yt ta∣keth away mouing and feeling, & also in Litargia, the sléeping euil. And also Stupor is called a letting and stunieng of the lims, & a crooking of the vtter parts of the body, when for colde it séemeth yt the lims shrinke & sleee. Damascenus speaketh otherwise of Stupor, & sayth that Stupor is a wondring of a newe thing, &c. Héere Stupor is taken for a manner sléeping sobernesse, the which is a certeine disposition of full grieuous sicknesse, & namely to Litargi that is a postume bread in the hinder cell of the head, & hath that name Litargia of Le∣thos, that is forgetting, for it induceth forgeting. It is oft in old men & in win∣ter, & commeth of fleme: And it cōmeth neuer it selfe, but it commeth alway of some former sicknesse: for in some sick∣nesse fleme is bred by working of a se∣uer heate and boiling, is rauished vp to the braine: And in the hinder cell it is gathered together by reason of accord & likenesse, & gendreth a Postume, whose tokens be continuall eauer, vrine dis∣couloured and thick, shrsting of ye eien, false sléepe, and if the patient be called, vnneth he answereth, & if it hap that he answereth he raueth, & speketh vanity: he lieth vpright, and if he be turned for a time to lye n his side, by his owne rease he turneth himselfe anone, and lyeth vpright, and is full cold in the vt∣ter parts. The remedye of this is, that the sicke man be laied in a light place,
and that there bee talking and greate speaking and disputation, and that he be drawen and haled strongly by the haire of his beard and of his head, and that his face bée ofte washed with colde water and his féete froted oft vnder the soles, and that sinking thing smoaking bee put to the neather partes, as Goates horne burnt, and such other. And ouer all thing he shall haue a clister, & snee∣sing shal be excited, the head shal be sha∣uen & froted with things that openeth the poores, and annointed with mustard & with such other: snéesing in this cause is best token and signe. If sléepe conti∣nue & quaking, with mouing of armes, and gnashing of téeth followeth theron, it is token soone of death. And take heede, that if hee that hath the phrensie falleth in Litargi, that is the worst. And if he that hath Litargi, falleth into phrē∣sie, it is good. All this I haue drawen out of Plato and Constantine. Of Giddinesse. Chap. 8. OUR Lord hath medled spirit of gid∣dinesse. Esaye. 19. The Lorde hath mingled among them the spirit of er∣rours: and they caused Aepypt to erre in euery worke thereof, a a dronken man staggereth in his vomit, in stead of the spirit of wisdome the Lord hath made them giddy, with the spirite of errour. Constantine saith, that giddines is false dome and corruption of the sight and of the spirite of feeling: For by that dome it seemeth sodeinlye that all thing goeth about and is darke. The cause thereof is too much plentie of hu∣mours with ventositie meddeled. For those humours moue in the head, with ventositie that commeth vp from ye bo∣die, and from the stomacke to the brain. If this euill be onely in the braine, the patient féeleth heauinesse in the head, noyse in the hearing, and corruption in the smell: and such a giddinesse passeth not easilye. And if it commeth of the stomacke, the patient éeleth abhomina∣tion, and wambling, & ach in the mouth of the stomacke: but such giddinesse com∣meth and goeth. For when the fumosity commeth vp, thē the giddince beginneth: & when it commeth not vp then it cea∣seth. The remedie héereof is, if other things letteth not, the patients foot shal be set in hot water. And he shall be let bloud, and vse medicines purgatiue, and forbeare wine, for wine dissolueth: & he shall forbeare swelling meats & great. And spewing shall bee excited,Stirred or prouosed for that is still good. Of Waking. Chap. 9. WAking ouer measure is default of might to sléepe, and is an euill of the braine contrary to Litargi. And this euill commeth of too greate moouing of the braine, and drinesse of redde Colera, or blacke, of intemporate heate, and of too salt humours. Of all those commeth inordinate waking, and anguish follow∣eth, coulour chaungeth,Surmi∣sings. & busie thoughts increase, and rauing and vnreasonable suspecions, the bodye wexeth leane and drie, the vertue of digestion is corrupt, all mans complection chaungeth, the eye liddes and face swelleth, and full euill sicknesses bréed in the bodie. That these perish not, men shall hastelye pro∣uide a medicine to cure them. Men shall annoint their faces and temples with things that bréede sleepe, womans milke is good to bring them on sleepe, the body shall be fed with good meats. Looke afore in lib. 6. Of the Faling sicknesse.Epilencia. Chap. 10.Epilepsia. Culcio Morbus cōmaialis Morbus sac. HE fell downe to the earth foming, &c. Mat. 9. Constantine and other authours call the falling euill Epilencia, and in olde time this euill was cal∣led and named Gods wrath:Morbus aculeus Biotbus Caducus, Morbus Mahome∣tus. As Con∣stantine sayth, Epilencia is a meist hu∣mour, by the which the chambers of the braine be not perfectly stopped, the which humour letteth the soule that i the spirit of feeling,Ira Dei. Zoilei, so called of Plini, and this dl is a sche∣me infla∣mation & to declare his wor∣king & dooing, vntil the way of the brain be vnstopped of that humour. This euil is called in passion Yeranoxon, that is the holy passion, for it occupieth the ho∣ly
part of the body, that is the head. And it is called Hercudis also,serning of ye body eruents umor. for it is strong as Hercules was. Also it is called the faling euil, & hath that name of yt doing therof: For it stoppeth the sinews, & ma∣keth the members, that be instruments of vertues, poore of the gouernaunce of spirits, & destroieth them. And therefore in this euil men be compelled to fal. Al∣so this euill Epilencia is nigh of yt kind of Apoplexia: for one is the place of both, & the matter, of the which they bée bread: for it is colde and cleauing. And they be diuerse in that that Apoplexia stoppeth all the chambers of the braine, with priuation & diminution of feeling, and of moouing: And Epilencia letteth not all, but the principall chambers of the braine, & hath the name of Epi, that is aboue, & Lenpsis, that is hurting: for namely it grieueth and hurteth the ouer parts, also it is called childrens euil, for oft children haue that euil. He that hath this euill falleth sodeinly, the mouth is drawen awrye & a side, & the face also, with quaking of the neck, of ye noll, & of all the bodie, with grislye grashing of the téeth, and foming at the mouth, and outputting of many superfluities. Phi∣sitions call this falling euill the lyttle Apoplexia, & commeth of thrée causes, as Constantine sayth, eyther of flema∣tike or melancholyke humoures, that bréede in the further part of the braine, or els of ventositie colde and grose that hath the mastry ouer the braine, or ouer some other mēbers, or ouer the stomack. For there is a humour bread in that member, and the smoke therof commeth vnto the braine, and with the thicknesse of that smoake, the wayes of the spirits of féeling are stopped, and thereof com∣meth the falling euill. Constantine sayth, That this disease commeth at a certeine time. Therefore Galen sayth, yt Epilencia, that commeth in ye wering of the Moone, betokeneth, that the kinde thereof is moyst. For all thing that is moyst increaseth, when the Moone wex∣eth. And the kind of this euill that com∣meth in waning of the Moone, is most colde, and some deale moyst. There bee thrée kindes of Epilenci, as there are thrée manner of places that it is in. One manner euill of this kinde is called Epilepsia, and is in the head, and commeth of matter that is onely in the braine, another is called Analepsi∣a, and commeth of matter that is in the stomacke, not in the hollownesse but in the sinewes and arteries of the stomack, by meane of which boiling matter is rauished to the braine. The thirde is called Catalepsis, and commeth of mat∣ter that is in the vttermost partes, as in the hands and éet; and is knowne by his owne signes and tokens. For they that haue and bée possessed of that euill Catalepsis, féele and knowe when the euill commeth. For they feele a manner grudging as it were by the noyeng of Amptes,Stinging of Pis∣meres. or mouing of some manner winde of the matter that commeth vp∣ward: And often for shrinking and streightnesse of the vtter parts, they bée kept from falling, and as Galen sayth, often these haue the Feuers. For with∣out boiling and séething, heate of Fea∣uers, vnneth may the matter be raui∣shed from the neather parts to the ouer. They that haue and be possessed of that manner euill that is called Analepsia, are sore grieued with repletion of the stomacke, and namely in digestion and bolking, and of loathing of meate. And also they be ware afore of their falling. And they that haue that euill that is called Epilpsia, they féele not afore hād, when they shall fall, but they trauaile with continuall griefe of the head: These euills come sometime of bloud, and of fleame, and oft of Melancholia, and these causes bée knowen by theyr owne signes and tokens, and namely by disposition of the body, Sanguine, Fle∣matike, or Melancholyke. By a red face, pale, and wanne, by age, by coun∣trie, and by dyet. If it commeth of me∣lancholy, it grieueth and huteth most in the waning of the Moone: If it com∣meth of bloud or of fleme, it sheweth it selfe most in the ful of the Moone. These euills bée most during, and harde it is to heale them, but yet medicine and dyet helpeth them. It needeth that they absteine themselues and spare euill
meates, and from the seruice of Venus, and great companye and gathering of men: For in such places oft theyr axes taketh them.Grieues Them needeth to vse good meates and light and temporate, more in the morow tide, and little or naught at euen. And they should temporatelye drinke wine, and bee purged with me∣dicine, as the humour that is in the fault requireth. The expediment of Pla∣to against Epilence, he saith, that men shall by garsing drawe out thrée drops of bloud of the shoulders,Boxing or launcing. and profer thē with a rauens egge, to the patient, in the end of his acces. Also he saith, that the Egges of a rauen helpe much.Whether to eate or to Imel to he writeth not: Dong. Also he sayth, ye Pany borne & dronken helpeth much: and this confirmeth Galen, Con∣stantine, and Dioscorydes. And he saith, that the Ruynnyn of an Hare dronke, helpeth much the Epilentike, that is him that hath the falling euill: for that Ruynnin letteth the humor to be dissol∣ued and shed, the which humour com∣meth vp and stoppeth the braine. And he sayth, that the liuer of an Asse roasted helpeth, if it be eaten, and the liuer of a Goof, if it bée giuen to them that haue that euill, it moueth and stirreth that euill. Constantine telleth many other experiments, of the which we shall not speake at this time. AdditionThese three kindes of falling euils, Epilepsia, in their falling foame at the mouth, and this is the common falling, sicknesse. Analepsia, where they doe fall, they shall defile themselues, & not some at the mouth. Catalepsia, whether they be taken open eyed, or halfe clo∣sed, yet for the time they shall see no∣thing, neither can they moue or stirre, heare nor speak, and seemeth dead for a space: Purge rume, which is the chie∣fest cause of this infirmitie. Of sneesing. Chap. 11. JOb. 41. His snéesing, &c. Constantin saith,Sterna∣tio. That snéesing is a violēt mo∣uing of the braine to put out superflu∣ous fumosities thereof: and it commeth of diuerse causes. For sometime kinde self worketh and laboureth busily to put out of the braine superfluities of smeak that bée cause of euill: or of breeding of some vire. For mane braine is more moyst then the braine of other beastes. And so humours, that be there gathered be put out with sneesing by help of kind. And sometime sneesing commeth of strength of euill & sicknesse, more thē by outputting of kinde: as it happeneth in Corica & Peripleumonia. So it fareth in stopping of the nose by fifth, and & also in a postume of the lungs. Also snéesing commeth sometime in this mā∣ner: The pipes of the mans nosethrils be short: & therefore hurtfull things come soone to ye braine from without, as dust, cold aire, heate of the Sunne, and such other. And when such things come to the brain, it moueth to put them of with his mouing and strength, and so com∣meth snéesing: The which if it chaunce when one is vexed with a sharp ague: or without rume, it is a good token For it betokeneth ye kinde is comforted, to put off things ye annoieth it. And if it come with a rume, it is an euill token. For it betokeneth plentie of euill matter, and therfore snéesing is Sintenica & incresing of rume. And therfore in Pluresie (a po∣stume on the ribs within) and other such euills of euill matter, snéesing is an euil token. Then snéesing moueth the brain, and dischargeth all the braine, and smi∣teth and shaketh the body in his outgo∣ing. And by violent mouing of the aire, snéesing maketh noise in the pipes of the nosethrills. And if it dureth more then it shuld, after ye out mouing of superflu∣itie of fumositie, it grieueth. For it ma∣keth to greate dissolution, and exciteth sometime, and breedeth grieuoues euills and sicknesse. Therfore it shuld be stin∣ted with medicines, as with fumigati∣ons that maketh it stint, and repay∣reth the spirits, and wasteth superflui∣ties, as with Camamell, Mentastrum, Rosa, Ircos, Nigella, and such other. Sneesing is a good signe in an euill cause,Addition this impediment commeth of di∣lation of the powers of the braine, or of coldenesse, or heate in the heart.
Of head aking. cap. 12. OUr Lord set a token in Cain, that was quaking of head. As Strabus saith in Gloa.Tremore. Enerye man (sayth Strabus) that findeth mée by quaking of head and moouing of woode heart, shall knowe that I am guiltye to dye. Constantine calleth head quaking Iac∣titatio. And head quaking commeth of default and feeblenesse of vertue Regi∣tiue, in the sinewes of the necke bones, and in the brawnes of the members. In this euill bée two contrarye moouings, one vpwarde and another downeward, kinde worketh the ouer, and the disease the neather. The euil laboureth to beare downe the member lower. And kinde that hath not forsaken the gouernance of the mēber laboureth to rule it & set to it in his owne steed: and so kind laboureth to reare vp the member. And therefore quaking cōmeth of such contrary moo∣uing. The cause of the beginning is de∣fault of vertue ye moueth the brawnes, as saith Constantine: and somtime this vertue faileth because of euill complec∣tion: and for accidentes of the soule, as for dread, for gathering of spirits to the heart. Therefore the members drawe downeward by their weight and hea∣uinesse. And so for kinde hath not suffi∣saunt spirites comming togrihees, to rule the members, it may act at the full holde the members steadfastly in theyr owne place: and therfore followeth qua∣king anone. And such quaking is a manner disposition to Palsie, and name∣ly if sléeping follows with quaking: the cause whereof is coldnesse, running and hardening the substaunce of the si∣newes, that the vertue of feeling maye not thir it and passe therby. And euery Palsie with quaking is more easie to heale,Pearse through. then the palsie that is without quaking. For in the first, the member hath not lost all kinde, as it hath in the second. Such quaking with sléeping shall be cured & healed with medicines, that heate and comfort, and dissolue and consume and wast, as with Theodori∣con, Iralogodion, and such other. Also bethes bee good, and frotings, with hot and opening hearbes and fumigations, that the closing poores maye be opened, that the superfluitie of humours maye be wasted, the spirits excited, and the si∣newes comforted. Of the Crampe. cap. 13. A Cramp is a violent shrinking of si∣newes,Spasmos. Cōultio Kindly mouing. taking awaye and hindering wilfull moouing. And such shrinking commeth sometime of too great repleti∣on, sometime of great abstinence, some∣time of too great colde,Contrac∣tio Neruo∣rum. Very cold as it fareth in handes and lippes that bée sore a colde, that finneth they may speake or clitch, or stretch theyr fingers. Such shrin∣king that commeth of vtter colde is holpe with heat, and néedeth none other medicine. But yet let the patient take heede, that hee put him not sodeinly to greate heate, For of sodeine smiting of coldnesse to the vtter partes of the si∣newes commeth full sore ach. And so the vtter partes of the limme shall ake full sore. The shrinking that commeth of abstinence hath these tokens. Some∣time commeth before passing running of bloud, or of the wombe, or of the mo∣ther: sometime trauaile or abstinence ouer his might, that trauayleth or ab∣steineth: Sometime passing heate, as in a mans body that hath a sharpe A∣gue: Sometime déepenesse and ach of wound, sharpnesse and strength of me∣dicine taken. In all these the Crampe commeth of too greate drinesse of kinde and of wasting of substantiall moy∣sture. And therefore the sinew shrinketh and riueleth, as Parchment put in the fire. And therefore the waye of spirites in the sinewes be stopped, and the ver∣tue of lyfe and of ruling is let. All such Crampes be deadly, if they endure. Therefore it is said in Apho. the cramp of cholarik is mortall. In the beginning hot womans milke helpeth this cramy, if it be done hot thereto & if it bee shed all about vpon the brawn of the chéeks and vpon the ridge bone and the necke, and the roots of the sinewes. Also water with Wooll and Oyle bound vppon the place of sinewes helpeth. The third
manner of Crampe that commeth of re∣pletion, falleth oft to fat men & fleshly,Corpolē. and wel fed, and gorrells: And commeth of shedding & spreading of the sinewes: and is more easily holp. For it is holpe with hot ointments, with baths, & snee∣sing, and laratiues, as Constantine tra∣cheth. If feauers come vpon this shrink∣ing, that is best remedie. And therefore it is sayd in Aphor. Feauers comming vpon the crampe, helpeth the euill. This Cramp hath three manner of lunds, one is called Epitestanus, when the hinder sinewes shrinke and haue the Crampe: That other is called Eprocustenus, & is when the further sinewes toward the brest shrink: And the third is called Ce∣thanus, and is when the farther and the hinder shrinke. In these three kindes of Crampes is no perfect cure, when they come of abstinence as it is sayde. AdditionThere are foure kindes of Spasmos or cramps, the first is named Empro∣sthotonos, the which is whē the head is drawne downward to the breast. The second is named Thetanos, & that is when the forhead & all the whole bo∣dy is drawen so vehemently, that the body is vnmoueable. The third is na∣med Opisthotonos, & that is when the head is drawn backward, or the mouth is drawne towarde the eare. The fourth kind is named. Spasmos, the which doth drawe the sinewes verye streight & asperusly in the feete and legges. Of the Palsis. chap. 14. Paralisia. DislolutioPAlsie is a hurting of parte of mans bodye with minishing, or with pri∣uation of moouing, or of feeling, or of both, and commeth sometime of colde constraining: Sometime of humours stopping: sometime of heate wasting and ruling the sinewes of feeling: Som∣time of a wounde cutting and depar∣ting the sinewes. For by these causes and other the spirite of féeling can∣not haue his passing to the instru∣mentes of féeling and of moouing. And so if the sinewes of feeling and of moouing bee stopped at the full, or cutte, the member lseth feeling and mo∣uing. And if the stopping bée not full, neyther the passing of spirites, not war∣ned at the full: then commeth qua∣king by reason of the matter bearing downewarde, and of the vertue of ru∣ling bearing vpwarde, as it is sayd be∣fore. Palsie commeth speciallye of su∣perfluitei of meate and drinke, namely of drinkes: For of meate and drinke is great breeding of humoures and dis∣solution and shedding: and thereof commeth needely stopping of the si∣newes. Also the Palsie commeth of colde constraining and rining the sinewes. Sometime the Palsie commeth of an∣other euil, as when the lesse Apoplex∣ia endeth: Some Palsie is vniuersall, and some perticular, the vniuersall oc∣cupyeth the halfe deale of the sicke man, the perticular Palsie occupieth one part, as the hande or the foote or the tongue. Also the matter of that stopping that breedeth the Palsie is sometime in the head and well of sinewes, and some∣time in the member Peralytike. If the matter and causes bee in the head and well of sinewes, then is stonieng and vnfeelingnesse about the places that bée nigh thereto, as in the face, and in the beginning of the ridge. And if the matter and the cause bée in the mem∣ber Paralitike, then onely that member is grieued, and not the other partes, as Galen sayth. And hée sayth, that hee did sometime awaye a Plaister, that Sophista had done vppon the hande, and did it vppon the necke. And so it fol∣loweth, that as the diuersitie of place of the euill asketh, the manner of me∣dicine is diuerse. Palsie that commeth of keruing and cutting of sinewes is incurable, and may not bee soone holpe Also vniuersall palsie in all men, and namely in old men is vnneth curable: but in young men me∣dicine worketh more swiftly and more effectually Then to helpe the Palsie we shall vse first medicine,Sosinc. that esheth and lareth both within and without: and then medicines that drie and make
hard. For if we did thereto first medi∣cines that drie strongly, then the fleeting and moyst partes should be wasted, and the other deale should be more hard and thick: And so the hardnesse is the worse to be tempered, dissolued, & wasted. And therefore men shall worke wisely in the foresaid manner. Then let the members be purged within with couenable me∣dicine, and without softned with couena∣ble ointments. And he shall vse Sage & Castorie in seething of Wine. Seech other medicines in Plato & in Vatico Constantine. AdditionHemiplexia, Semiapoplexis, Semi∣apoplexia, are three perticular names, for the Palsie. Also the perticular pal∣sie doth rest in a perticular member, as in the tongue, head, arme, & legge, consider that all shaking passions bee not palsies. Loke in the Chapter Tre∣more. Of the diseases of the eyen. Chap. 15. Passioni∣bus oculo∣rum. Oculu. Opthal∣mos. TEching and smarting of the eien commeth sometime of outwarde things, as of wounds, departing & dea∣ling the continuance of the eien, and of dust, that hurteth the eien and the tender substance of them: & of smoake that dim∣meth the eien and maketh them smart: and of colde winde smiting the spirit of sight: Also of hot aire that dissolueth and departeth: also of too great brightnes of the Sun, or of other bright things, that departeth and sheddeth the spirit: Of too great darknesse that defoileth the spirit of sight, and of vnordinate dyet, & of continuall dronkennesse that dim∣meth the sight: of fleshlye lyking and ofte seruice of Venus, that corrupteth and dissolueth the spirites & the humour Christallin: Somtime of inward matter & causes, as of humours hot or cold, dry, or moist: and then the first & chiefe ach & smarting commeth of inward things, which breed a postume vpon ye white of the eie, of humours ye slow & come of the black of the eye, & make a postume. And that commeth of feeblenesse of the eye, yt it receiueth, & of plentie or of sharpe bi∣ting of humour that fleeteth & commeth from the braine. And in such a postume the eie swelleth: weepeth & is red and feeleth ach and pricking, heat: burning, namly, when (h is the cause, thē it seemeth that the eie were pricked with néedles: and if a cold humour be ye cause, or els entositie, ye eie is haled & grieued by night, & is clāmed: full many humors run & fleét, & be clammy, & is most pai∣ned with humour and sleame. And if bloud be the cause, then is great itching, many teares & hot in the outgoing ther∣of, light pricking, more swelling, ach. & smarting most in the forhead, & is most grieued in ye houre of bloud. If this euill commeth of outward things, the patient shall be brought to rest, & sleepe with his head areared on high, & for running of teares, he shal the shining & brightnesse of light. To void dissolution & shedding of light, he shall not speake least ther be great dissolution of the brain by forcing of the voice: He shall aue colde meat, & of light digestion, least the fleeting of rame increase: He shal drinke cleere hot water: for it wasteth smoakes by ye kind of his smoak, & comforteth the sinews, & swageth burning and pricking: He shal vse temporate baths of fresh water. If this be done, there neede no other medi∣cines: and if ye ach come of inner humors yt the default is in, they shall bee purged or withdrawne by bloud letting, or by couenable purgation of medicine: Men shall do within binding medicines, sla∣king & healing as water of roses, with womans milke, as Constant. saith. The tears shal be stinted with restrictortes & stintings. Then in the beginning men shal do therto light reperessiues & swa∣ging medicines inward, & in the maca∣sing meanely Daslelutiles, & in the end: Consumtifes, & alway with these Con∣fortatifes. About a postume of the eye. Maturatiues shal neuer be put, least the tender substance of the eie be destroied, if quitter come out. Moreouer if ye mat∣ter be very hot, & the ach strong, strong Percussiues shal not be done therto: for the matter might sodeinly be smitten to ye sinew Opticum, holow: & by stopping might induce blindnesse for euer more
Blearinesse of eien is claminy & glewy superfluitie of the eien cleuing to ye lids, & commeth of flumatike & melancholik humours, & beginneth in the corners of ye eien, & maketh the eie lids great, & ouer cōmeth them, & this destroieth the haire of the lids, and maketh the eie lids as it wer péeces of raw flesh. In bleared eien the black is whole & sound, as it is said in Glosa Leuit. 21. but the humour fal∣leth away, the eie lids were great: And by oft washing therof, ye eie sight appai∣reth: & tokeneth them that haue a cléere wit in knowldege of truth: but ye worke of fleshlye life maketh them darke and dimme. Of the webbe in the eyen. Chap. 16. THere is another euill of the eiē, that we call a webbe, and Constantine calleth it Albugo, or Pannus, & breedeth in this manner. First a rume runneth to the eien, and thereof commeth an euill that is called Obtalmia, a shrewd blea∣rinesse and ach, & a postume: Of which, if it bée euill voyded, remayneth a light spot or infectiō, & in lōg processe of time furneth & groweth into a web, & cōmeth thicke, & occupieth more place then all ye blacke of the eie: This web increaseth into Pannus by more thicknesse, & occu∣pieth more place, for it occupieth all the blacke of the eie: and at last it turneth into ye kind of a naile of the hand, & so it is more thicke and hard: and euery each of these is incurable, if it be old: But it shall be dealed and déemed as the place asketh, that it is in. If it bée about the humour Christallin déep, during halfe a yéere, it is incurable. And in the begin∣ning it maye vnneth bée holpe. If it be bound vnder the kertill of the eye, that is called Cōiunctiua, or aboue it, during ten yeres it may be holpe. Then when this mole is fresh & little, red Popie séed sufficeth to help it, as Constantine saith. Red Popie séede is hot in the first degee, and dry in the second degrée: And there∣fore it hath vertue to make thinne, and to wast and to destroy. Also Philoso∣phers tell, as Constantine sayth, That the bloud drawen out of the right wing of a Coluer, or of a Swallowe, or of a Wipe, and done in the beginning vpon that mole, clanseth it mightely. For the bloud of these foules heate and dissolue strongly, by kinde of the foules that it commeth of. AdditionThere is a hot impostume in the eye called Ophtalma, Obtalmia, & Hip∣popia, which commeth of colde rume. Of infection of the eie through indurate bloud, chap. 17. THE eien haue another passion that defileth them, and that is infection of bloud. Constantine ralleth it a croust of bloud, and it bréedeth when bloud commeth by anye happe to the eyen, and is dryed as a croust. Also it happe∣neth that bloud woseth out of the veins and of the pipes, and commeth to the eyen: And some veines are broke or be hurt in the kirtell that is called Con∣iunctiua: And then such default in the eye commeth of bloud that commeth so to the eye: Coluer bloude or Turtell bloude, dissolueth and departeth this bloud, that is so renied, as Constantine saith: So doth womans milke with insence, and so doth fresh chéese medled wt hony without salt, if it be done there∣to. Constantine teacheth many other ex∣periments and assaies. On the eie lid groweth Ordiolus, like a corn, it cōmeth of corrupt bloud,Addition whose recourse is more to one place then to another. Of vnlawlawfull running of teares. chap. 18. VNwilfull or quicke mooing of teares fall in the eien somtime of outward cause,Lactime. Dacya. as of smiting dissolution & depar∣ting of hot aire, or of constraining of cold aire, or of biing of smoke, or of distrou∣bling of dust, or of smelling of sharpnes of Onions, & other smel of sharp things: and somtime of inward causes as of hot humors or of cold, or of plētie of humors that fal out for default of place to abide
in, or of feeblenes of vertue Contentiue of the braine, or of strength & might of the vertue of out putting If hot humors bée the cause, the eien be red, & the teares that droppe downe, heate and burne the face. And hotte things grieue, and colde helpe. And if the humours be colde, the eyen be wanne, and the teares be cold, & bite or fret not ye face. Cold things grieue and hot helpe, if the teares come of smi∣ting, and other outwarde causes. The chiefe remedie is clene ware and pure,Coōmin. with pouder of Commin chased and oft plaistered for it doth away the ach and teares & wens. If it be with a wound, it is holp with Surgery. To ye other out∣ward causes sufficeth comforting or ba∣thing with luke warme water: so that the warmnesse draw more to cold then to heate. If it come to running & plenty of humours, then he shal be purged, and he shall haue Diadibam with wine sod with Frankenscence, and that is prin∣cipall in this cause. Restraining shall be made about the temples, and about the forhead, and all these helpe against run∣ning of teares, that come of hot causes or of colde. Of the default of sight. Chap. 19. DEfault of sight in the eien falleth & commeth of many manner causes: Sometime of euill complection somtime of corruption of fumosity ye cōmeth out of ye stomacke, sometime of stopping of ye sinew yt is called Neruus opticus ye he∣low sinewe, and of straight wayes of webs, of moles, of the crampe, & of other such Somtime of mordinate diet, of lōg sicknesse, of fasting, of seruice of Venus, & of many other causes, as of age, & such other. Then the causes shall be distin∣gued & known by their own signes & to∣kens. For it the default commeth of fu∣mositie of the stomack, ye default of sight it not continuall, but it commeth & go∣eth. For it waxeth and waneth by diuer∣sitie of meat & drinke. If it come of de∣fault of the braine, the default is conti∣nuall before meate and after. If it come of stopping of the sinew, the substaunce of the eie is pure, bright, & cléere. Other signes & tokens be knowne openly. Thē to put of this default, if it commeth of euill humours of ye stomacke, ye stomack shall be cleansed & purged, & al the body, and namely the head: And then men shal lay too remedies, as the place asketh: he which remedies be found in Vatico, and in other authours. Of blindnesse. chap. 20. BLindnesse is a priuation of sight:De priua∣tione vi∣sus. 1.aecus. Caecitas and a man is vereft and depriued of his sight, sometime for default of the mēbers or lims, and for vnproportionated of the blacke of the eie to the spirit of sight. For to make & shape the sight, needeth due proportion of the member & lim, that receiueth the spirit, as it is sayd before de Vsu. li. 3. Sometime for stopping of the inner sinews, for if the sinew, that is called Opticus, carrieth & bringeth to tho eie the spirit of sight, if that sinewe bee stopped in the beginning thereof, or in ye middle with ouergrowing of flesh, or with superfluitie of some clammye hu∣mour, then the vertue of the sight hath no passage to come to the blacke of the eie, and so blindnesse is bred in the eye. And somtime it is caused through con∣sumption & wasting of humours and of spirits, as it fareth in olde men, whose eyen first were dimme, and then they haue default of sight: and at the last the vertue of sight faileth, and they loose all their sight. Somtime blindnesse cōmeth of outward cause, as by wounding of ye eien, and by too great & continuall wee∣ping, and by dissolution and departing of the substance of the eyen, & by thicking and hardning of the curtills of the eien, and by compaction of humours in the eye. For then the blacke of the eye by sodeine swelling and wasting of sub∣stauntiall humour, hath no waye to the spirit of sight: And therefore such com∣paction causeth blindnesse to the eye, by sodeine drieng of ye substantial humour: as it happeneth in ye blacke of the eie in some mē yt take drenches & be let bloud,Purgatiōs which falleth somtime in peril of blind∣nesse through too great bléeding.
Somtime for too sodeine shedding of the spirit of sight, with drieng of the sub∣stantial moisture, as it fareth in a are that is as it were sodeinly made blinde with beholding and looking on a bright burning Bason. The cause of his blind∣nesse is the beholding of the bright tur∣ning and shining Bason, the which fity vertue of the Bason destroieth and wasteth the cul of the eie,The im. and the hu∣mour Christalline. And the brightnesse therof is vnproportionate to the spirit of sight, and departeth and sheddeth it, and so of necessitie bréedeth blindnesse. Also among all the passions and euills of the wittes of féeling, blindnesse is most wretched, as Constantine sayth. For without any bond, blindnesse is a pri∣son to the blinde: And blindnesse begui∣leth ye vertue imaginatiue in knowing: For in déeming of white,Supposeth the blind wee∣neth it is blacke: and againeward. It letteth the vertue of aduisement in dee∣ming. For hée deemeth and aduiseth and casteth to go Eastward, and is beguiled in his dome, and goeth West ward. And blindnesse ouerturneth the vertue of af∣fection and desire. For if men profer the blind a siluer penie & a copper to choose the better, he desireth to choose the siluer penie, but he chooseth the Copper. The blind mans wretchednesse is so much, that it maketh him not onely subiect to a childe, or to a seruaunt for ruling and leading, but also to an hound. And the blind is oft brought to so great neede, that to passe and scape the perill of a Bridge or of a Foorde, hée is compelled to trust in a Bound more then to him∣selfe: Also oft in perills where all men doubt and dread, the blinde man for hee séeth no perill,Is void of daunger. the blind is sicker. And in likewise there as is no perill, the blinde dreadeth most He spurneth oft in plaine way and stumbleth: Oft there he should heaue vp his foote, he boweth it down∣ward. And in likewise there as he shuld set his foote to the ground, he heaueth it vpward. He putteth forth the hand all a∣bout groping & grasping, hée séeketh all about his way with his hand and with his staffe. Selde he doth ought sickerly, welnigh alway he doubteth & dreadeth,Warily. Also the blind man when he lieth or sit∣teth thereout,Without doores. he wéeneth yt he is vnder couert: and oft times he thinketh him∣selfe hid, when euery body séeth him. Al∣so when the blinde sometime listeth vp his face and eyen toward heauen, and to the sunne, the cléernesse of heauen cō∣forteth not his eyen: The Sun beame is present to ye blinds eie, but he know∣eth not the vertue & the effect of ye Sun, as Gregory sayth. Also sometime the blind beateh and smiteth, & grieueth the childe yt leadeth him, & shall soone repent the beating by doing of the child: for the child hath minde of the beating, & forsa∣keth him, and leaueth him alone in the middle of a bridge, or in sōe other perill, & techeth him not ye way to void the pe∣rill Therfore the blind is wretched, for in the house he dare nothing trustily do, & in the way he dreadeth least his felow will forsake him But yet in this point the condition of blind men is better thē the condition of seeing men. For eien be enimies and theeues, and robbe mans inwit, while we followe the desire of eien, wee bée made subiectes to right cruell enimyes, as the expositour saith super illud trenorum. Mine eye hath spoiled and robbed my soule. Better it is to man to be blind, and haue hie eien put out, then to haue eyen, and bee de∣ceiued and beguiled with pleasures and flatterys thereof, as Gregory sayth vppon that word. Mat. 9. Better it is for thee to go without eyen into ye life, then to haue eyen, & to be sent into fire without end. Of Deafenesse. Chap. 21. DEafnesse is priuation and let of hearing,Cophosis Surditas Deafnesse that is the gate of the inwit, as Constantine sayth. Sometime it happeneth, that the hearing is all with∣drawen and lost, and then it is proper∣ly called deafnesse, and commeth of hu∣mours, that stoppe the sinewes of hea∣ring, and the hoales of the eares: Inso∣much that no manner noise may come therin: And sometime by lesse humours it is some deale taken away, and then it is called thicknesse of hearing.
Somtime there is noyse therein and ringing, so that the patient weeneth, that he be fast by a mill, or by organes: and this commeth of great and thicke vento∣sitie closed within. And sometime this is continuall: and then it commeth of some priuie and speciall cause. And som∣time it commeth and goeth, and then it commeth of some farre cause. Somtime for stopping, nothing is heard outward, but the hearing is set a worke with in∣ward things:Thinketh or suppo∣seth. so that the patient weeneth, that the noyse be without, that hée heareth, though it be within, and so the hearing is deceiued. In many other wise mans hearing is let. Sometime in the eare is ache or a postume, and commeth of heate that dissolueth and dealeth, or of colde that reueth and constrayneth. And if it come of heate, the ache is sharpe, & the place is redde: hot things grieue, & colde helpeth. And if it come of colde, the ache is heuie and grieuous, and the place is pale: colde things grieue, & hot things helpe. Sometime it commeth of an hot postume, and then with the foresayde signes and tokens is a strong feaver Al∣way with a postume of ye eare commeth a Feauer, but more lyght and with lesse ache, when colde is the cause, then when heate is the cause. Sometime is lefte in the eare, a wound of an olde Postume, and that is knowen by ache and by tic∣kelyng, and also by quitter that runneth out thereof.Matter. Sometime wormes bréede in the eares, of hot humors and clammy, by inclosing of the spirite of life: the to∣kens of wormes is itching and tickling, and sometime they be seene in the eares, if the eare be set in the Sunne. Some∣time the ach commeth of outward cause, as of entring therein of water or of gra∣uell. And sometime of smiting, the to∣ken whereof is bléeding. But sometime it commeth of superfluitie of bloud, and straightnesse of the place. Vnde Con∣stantinus: If bloud commeth sodainly out of the eares, and without ache, and without cause openly knowen: it be∣tokeneth that somewhat is in the head, that kinde laboureth to put out, and tra∣uayleth therefore, then in the beginning it néedeth that the eares be cleansed. Séeke other passions of the eares, spo∣ken of before, in li. 3. de Auditu, & li. 3. de Aure. for there this matter is great∣ly treated of. Then if the ache of ye eare, commeth of heate & without a postume, the helpe is with colde medicines, and alteratiues: for the sore place shall bée baumed wt oyle of roses or of vyolets, and with such other. Such Oyles luke warme shall be dropped into the eares. And if it come of cold & without a Po∣stume: the cure is with hot alteratiues, as with Oleo urino, Rutaio, & other such. And if it be with a hot Postume: then men must worke first with colde maturatiues, rippings, and then wh mundificatiues: and in a contrary cause we must vse contrary medicines. And if the postume be broke, which is knowen by the running of the quitter, then first the wound shall be cleansed, and then healed and closed. The cleansing thereof is with honie meddeled with wine, and dropped therein. It is healed and closed with powder of Frankencense and Ma∣sticke, and other such. If wormes bée therein, or come thereto: then bitter ioyce shall be dropped therein, as of per∣sile, or of wormwood, and of leeke. Also bitter oyle of bitter Almondes shall bée dropped in, into the eare: with such me∣dicines Wormes be slayne, and when they be rotted, they come out with quit∣ter. And if grauell come into the eare, it must be wiselye drawen out: and if it may not be, the eares shall be baulmed with hot oyntment, and men shall excite snéesing, or sucke it out, or drawe it out with an horne, or with a cupping-cup. To put off deafenesse or at lest to be re∣léeued, many things helpe, that Constan∣tine speaketh of: but among all, Balsa∣mum dropped into the eare helpeth best, but yet if deafenesse be from the birth, it is vncurable. Also if it dureth 3. yeres, vnneth it is holpe. The ringing of the eares that commeth of ventositie, shall be holpe with things that extenuate vē∣tosities, as with Anneis, Calament, Ori∣gon, and such other: with stiffeling ther∣of ringing of eares is holpe. This suffi∣ceth to speake of the passions of ye eares, and of remedies at this time.
AdditionAlso three causes there are of this impediment that may come to a man: by nature, if so not curable: the second, by some stroke, which hauing ouer∣stunned the powers, will hardlye bee recouered: The thirde by humor the which doeth opilate and stoppe the Organes of hearing, there is cure, take the gall of an Hare, mixe it with the greace of a Foxe, and with blacke wooll, install this into the eare, also the fat of an Ele, and also take the iuyce of wormewood, temper it with a Bulls gall, and so in blacke wooll stoppe the eare, &c. ¶Of Polipus superfluous flesh, Cap. 22. Polipus. Excrecen∣sia carnis in naso, a fleshy hu∣mor grow¦ing in the nose.POlypus is superfluitie of flesh grow∣ing of the nosethrilles, bredde of su∣perfluitie of humours. Alwaye with this passion & euill commeth horrible stinke: and yet he that hath this euill, feeleth not the stinke, and that is for stopping of the sinewe of smelling Such one dée∣meth not betweene good smellyng & stin∣king. But stench of the nosethrills and Polypus commeth in this manner: thick humors and gleymie run & come to the flesh within the nosethrills, & ther were thicke, and hard, and turne as it were in∣to the substaunce of flesh by long time, and by working of heate: the which matter being corrupted, a sumositie that is resolued and commeth out thereof by breathing that is meddeled with the aire, bréedeth great stench: and such an euill is called Polypus. And sometime moy∣sture commeth downe to the nosethrils, and the spongie poores of the nosethrills drinketh vp that moysture, and ther that moysture rooteth, & bréedeth corruption and stench. And sometime hot humours by their sharpnesse bréedeth whelkes in the nosethrilles, and these whelkes brée∣den as it were botches, and fleyn the place: and so as well of corruption of flesh and of humours, as of straightnes of breathing, when the braine maye not be purged, of necessitie there breedeth stench. Then the first remedie agaynst this passion and euill, is, that the head be purged with strong and couerable medicines: and then the running of hu∣mours shall be let. Secondly, the Pati∣ent shall drawe and sucke in at the nos∣thrills hot water, that the gleymie hu∣mours maye be dissolued and departed, and brought out of that place. To clense the nosethrils helpeth Pilulae Deacasto∣riae, with the iuyce of rewe, and luke warme wine resolued and put into the nosethrills. To let the running of the nose, the graines of white Thus helpeth wonderfully, if they be ofte taken. And if this euill Polypus be conformed first with purgations and with vnstopping powders, and with fretting medicines, it shall be holpe that waye, or els by cut∣ting and keruing,Launcing. Skill, Addition as it is more plainlye taught in the crafte of Surgerie. Of two kindes, the one is a bytle nose, sometime as big as a cats head: the other is, impostumation growing within the nosethrills, and causeth the diseased, to speake in the nose, termed snoching: and the nose swelling out∣ward, is called a gawdie nose, or a toti nose. The cause commeth of grose hu∣mour, or pullyng much the top of the nose. The cure or remedy, the powder of Dragagant with a little hopie, and make a tent, & put it vp into the nose∣thrill: or the iuyce of blacke iuie, in cotten. ¶Of the disease of the nose∣thrills. Cap. 23. OFte the nosethrills haue running of bloud, and that commeth in mals, onely of three causes. The running com∣meth from the braine, & then it commeth with snéesing & with ach, & pricking in ye forhead: or it commeth from the lyuer, and then the ache is in the right side, & bleeding at the right nosethrilles: or it commeth of the mylt, and then the ache is in the lefte side, and bléeding in the lefte nosethrill. Beside all this, in women bléeding commeth of the mo∣ther, and then the ache is about the na∣uell. Sometime this bleeding is profita∣ble, and sometime not profitable. When it happeneth in a sharpe ague, and in
phrensie, in the daye of chaunging by mouing of kinde, and then it is wont to be good, & not good when it commeth be∣fore the day of chaunging:Before ye chaunge or nevv∣bloone. for it is good when it commeth before the chaungable day through great boylyng and feruour of ye bloud within: which wt his sharpe∣nesse, maketh running and bleeding. In this manner and many other, commeth fluxe & bleeding, whether the bleeding be of chaunging or following the euill, the bléeding shall not be stinted in the be∣ginning, least it let the chaunging of the euill: or least the bloud drawe to some other parts, and make worse tokens fol∣lowing ye euill, as stiffeling & such other. And if the bléeding increase too hastelye, and the patient is strong in ye place ther the sore is, he shall be let bloud: and al∣so the vtter parts shal be bound & strōg∣ly constrained, and restraining medicines shall be put to the Temples and to the forhead: and water with vinegar shalbe throwen in the face. If the bleeding commeth of the liuer, a copping cup shal be set vpon the place of the liuer: and if it commeth of the milte, set it on ye milt: and if it commeth of the mother, set it on the mother, or vpon the pappes. AdditionRiues in Greeke, Nares in latin, the nostrells, which be the organes of the braine, by which the braine doth at∣tract and expulse the aire, without the which no man can liue, & without the nosthrills no man can smell: & the nos∣thrill; be the emunctory places of the braine, by the which reume is expulsed and expelled. The cause of this impe∣diment commeth. 3. manner of wayes, through abundance of humor. Also by apostumation, lieng betwixt the brain, & the organs of the nostrels. The third commeth by apostumation growing in the nosthrills. The remedie, sternutati∣ons, gargarises: beware of too much drinking of wine, & of the fat of eeles and Samon. ¶Of stinking of the mouth. Ca. 24. Fetor nari¦um or Fe∣tor aisella¦ru, stench of the mouth.STinking of ye mouth cōmeth some∣time of corruption of the téeth, and of the gums, & sometime of whelkes & of pimples of the mouth, & of the roofe: somtime of euill disposition and doing of the breast, & of the spirituall members: sometime of rotted humours of the sto∣macke: and somtime of vniuersall and whole infection of the bodye as it fareth in Lepers,The breth of the le∣pers doth infect the breath of them stinketh & infecteteth other: sometime of eating of stinking things, as it fareth in them that alwaies eate garlike, onions, & léekes: & somtime of the corruption of the spiritu∣all members, & of the vniuersall corrup∣tiō of those humors, which be infect: this stinking may be hid & not cured, for such stink is continuall, & cōmeth by seasons. The stink that commeth of ye vice of the stomacke is colde, & commeth & goeth in a manner, for it is great afore meate and little after meate by noone:Fasting breath is stronger▪ but after meate al∣most  away for the time. and this may well be cured with cleansing & swéete smelling, & comfortatiue medicines. Thē first the matter that is in the stomacke & is cause of the stink, shall be defied, de∣parted, & put out: ofte after eating, spuing shall be excited, that the chambers of the stomack, may be clensed & purged of rot∣ted meates, & the patient shall beware & spare meates, yt be disposed to rotting: & he shall vse swéete smelling wine to com∣fort him. If it come of other cause, as of rotted téeth or of gums, the téeth shall be drawen out that be the cause thereof: or the gums shall be froted & cleansed with séething of roses in wine: or they shall be washed with vineger luke warme: the gums and the rootes of the téeth shal be froted and clensed with powder of Thus and Masticke and with honie. To chew cloues is a good helpe to mitigate the loathsome ayre for the in∣ner parts,Addition but the rankenesse that com∣meth from the arme holes, must be cu∣red by letting bloud, or some good purgation, & commonly such children as be begotten in such heate of bloud: are choaked in the matrixe, and so bee dead borne, or if, they lyue, they are very scuruie & scabbed, & of a grose complection. ¶Of tooth ache. Cap. 25. TOoth ake commeth sometime of the vice of the stomacke: Sometime of vice of the braine, when colde humours
or hot rumaticke infecteth the sinewes of the teeth: and breedeth ache: of vice of the stomacke, when it commeth of hot humours that be in the stomacke, from the which sumositie being resol∣ued and dealed, commeth vpwarde, and biteth, and pricketh, and grieueth the si∣newes and rootes of the teeth, and brée∣deth therein ache and stench also. If it come of sharpe biting humours, the ache is sharpe and pricking, with rednesse of the face, with roughnesse and drinesse of the throate, with thirst and bitternes of the mouth. If it come of colde humors, the ach is lesse with griefe of head, with swellyng and palenesse of face, with so∣wer bolking and vnsauerines of mouth, tooth ake, that commeth of ye braine, du∣reth long, without comming and going: for sometime it dureth ten houres, and more. The ache that commeth of ye sto∣macke, dureth some houres or three, and resteth afterward. The causes of Tooth ache (as Const. saith) are rottennesse and stench, breaking and thirlyng, wagging and fayling, and heare, and filth. The teeth be thirled,Riuen or crackt. and sometime broke, and sometime chaunged and tourned in cou∣lour, they be sometime citrine, greene, or blacke: and all this commeth of rotted moysture, that commeth out of the sto∣macke, to the sinewes and strings of the teeth: and thereof commeth locking, wagging, & mouing, & sailing of téeth: for sharp humours in the roots of the téeth, thirle the teeth, & wasteth them, and ma∣keth them wagge: and so they be cause why teeth fall, when the rootes fayle and rot. Wormes bréede in the cheeke teeth of rotted humours that be in the holow∣nesse thereof: & this is knowen, by itch∣ing, and tickelyng, and continual digging and thirling, and by stenche that com∣meth thereof, and in many other wise. Looke before, in libro quinto in the tre∣tise of teeth. These sorrowfull passions of teeth if they come of vile humors that be in the brayne, or in the stomacke, the teeth shall be ofte purged & cleansed, and made cleane with couenable purgations and cleansing. Of all those Constant. speaketh at the full. Wormes of ye téeth be slaine with Mirre and Opum: teeth that wagge, be fastened with Ensence, and Masticke, and the same doth Garga∣rismus made of gallis and of the skin of a Pomegranade, & of Balausha with vineger. Of the paine of the teeth in young folke,Addition it commeth of distemperaunce of bodely heate, as in pastimes, when the body is ouer hot, they take a sodaine colde, which increaseth rume, congea∣leth bloud, and breedeth winde, which passing through the nerues & orgaines doe hasten pricking in the stomacke, gnawing in the bowells, and aking in the teeth. ¶Of the tongue and lacke of speach. Cap. 26. ALso the tongue is grieued in manye manner wise,Glossa. Glotta Lingua, ye tongue sometime with palsie, and then it léeseth wilfull mouing & vse of speaking, as sayth Constantine. The cause thereof is default of the vertue of mouing, that is excited by the spirit that commeth from the braine, or it commeth of the sinewe that beareth the vertue of feeling, if it be stopped with humoures, or with a postume: either it commeth of the vice of the tongue his own substance, as of euill complection of the tongue, & distemperance that cooleth, or els of cold, or of heat & drines, or els of some humor. Also somtime the tongue hath a postume, and then it swelleth: and sometime of a fléeting humour that slaketh ye tongue and letteth the speach, and the sinewe of the tongue is softened & made too moyst and too softe, and then due speach maye not be shaped by the tongue, that is so lyghtly softened and slaked: somtime by too hot humours and drye, ye tongue is shronke and riueled, & then the speach is all lost: sometime the tongue is grie∣ued with sore pimples and whelkes, and then he is let in tasting and in speking. Then if the substaunce be whole and sound without any wem, and the speach is lost, that vice commeth of the braine,Extemity or of a certaine sinewe that is stopped. Somtime the leesing of speach commeth of the leesing of wit, as it fareth in fren∣sie, there a man vseth not imagination
in minde and reason, and therefore it is no wonder, though ye speach be lost, that is the instrument of reason. Looke before in li. 5. de lingua sane & infirma. AdditionBy the tongue is not onely the be∣nefite of taste, but also the expressing of mans minde: the tongue may haue diuers casuall impediments, but let all men take heede of voluntary euill, ly∣eng & slaundering: the swelling of the tongue commeth of superabundant reume, or surfet. ¶Of hoarcenesse. Cap. 27. Raucedo Brauchos hoarienesHOarcenesse commeth of manye cau∣ses: for it commeth of drinesse or of moysture; or default of spirites of ver∣tue. Of drinesse in two manners: for dri∣nesse maketh the waye of ye voyce rough or straight: and of that roughnes com∣meth hoarcenesse & letting of the voyce. Also of drinesse commeth strayghtnes of pipes, and pressing of the lunges, and so followeth roughnesse, and hoarcenes, and letting of the voyce. Also of moysture in two manners, either of moysture con∣tained in the veynes, and namely in the bloud, or els of steame dropping from the ouer parts: for much bloud stretch∣eth ye veynes, & maketh ye waies straight, and so the voyce is let. And also steame dropping into the wosen & pipes of the lunges worketh the same lets: & so for default of spirite and vertue, the voyce is lette: as it is knowen by that, that the strengthe of the voyce, commeth of the spirite and vertue. Then if hoarcenesse commeth of drinesse, it is knowen by drye cough, that grieueth & letteth the spirit in ye wosen of ye voyce, or sometime it commeth vppon another sicknesse, and by compassion: and so there followeth another euill, whē it commeth of drinesse, that maketh the pipes of the lunges straight and drye, and grieueth and noyeth the spirite. Then bréedeth the cough of moysture, that droppeth out of ye braine In this manner breedeth cough, that letteth the voyce. Or els hoarcenes is knowen by pinching and pricking, as it were of thornes in the spiritual mem∣bers, and as it were in the smalnesse of the necke, and leannesse of all the body. And it is knowen that bloud is ye cause, by a cough that is some deale moyst, and by rednesse of the face, by swellyng of the veynes, and sweetenesse of ye mouth. We knowe that fleame is the cause by cough that is some deale moyst, and by vnsauerinesse of the mouth, and by plen∣tie of spittle. We know that default of spirite is the cause by féeblenesse & lean∣nesse of all the body, and by seauers that goeth before, or fasting, flxe, and all that maketh the bodye leane. Then if this hoarcenesse commeth of hot cause & drye, the patient shall abstaine and spare salt meates, colde, drye, seyed and rosted, and he shall vse temperately colde and moist, and meanely hotte. If this euill commeth of bloud, he shall bleede: and if it come of fleame, men shall giue him purgatious, and other medicines, shal be needefull in a colde cause. And if it come of default of spirites, it shall be holpe with resumptiues, and with conforta∣tiues. The same is the cure of hoarcenes and of cough Therof looke in Plato and in Constantine: Hoarcenesse commeth of a great heate,Addition and a sodaine colde taken vpon the heate, or by ouer straining the voyce, by late drinking, and sitting vp; also of infection from the inner parts, and that is a signe of leprosie. The re∣medie is water of scabous, & of fell, of hecris & buglosle, of each a quanti∣tie mixed, and thereto sugar canne: drinke sixe spoonefulls morning and euening. ¶Of squinancie or strangling of the throte. Cap. 28. SQuinancie is strangling of the throte, and commeth of a Postume that is in the throate: and there are three man∣ner of Squinancies.A dange∣rous  that must haue helpe pe∣dely. In the first, all the matter is gathered within in a smal lease betwixt the wosen of voyce, and the pipe that taketh meate and drinke: and is knowen by a strong ache and sore with∣out any swellyng seene without: and if the mouth be opened, there is no swel∣lyng seene within.
And is also knowen by sharpe seauers, and by letting of the voyce, and also by the patients owne dome,His ovvne gu. for he may no∣thing swallow: and this manner Squi∣nanci is incurable, for often it slayeth a man the first daye. The seconde man∣ner Squinanci is when the matter is gathered in lesse quantitie within, and in more quantitie without: and this Squi∣nanci hath all the signes that the first hath, but it is not so strong, and some swellyng is seene without, and this mā∣ner Squinanci is vnneth cured. The third manner is, when all the matter is gathered without, and is called Sinancia. The tokens thereof be strong swellyng without, softe feuers, and lyttle ache, without difficultie of breathing, and this manner of Sinancie slayeth not, but if the swellyng draweth inwarde. This euill commeth principally of bloud, and secondarily of fleame and Melancholia, and neuer of Cholera: these causes are knowen by their owne tokens & signes. The first ruring of this euill, is letting of bloud vnder the tongue in much quā∣titie, and garsing and copying or horn∣ing in the necke,Imboxing and in the shoulders: then shall be layde to medicines, that case, ripe and cleanse. Looke before in li. 5. of the throte. AdditionAugina, termed Sinachi or Chinan∣chi, among the Grecians, the barbarous word is Squinancia, the Squinci: where∣of are supposed foure kindes. The first appereth not outward, & that is death, except a very speedy preuenting the cause. The second doth somewhat ap∣peare more inward then outward, and that is not so daungerous as the first. The third doth appeare inward and outward, and that is not so perillous as the second: howbeit it continueth lon∣ger than the other. The fourth doeth onely appeare outward, and that is not perillous. The cause is of reume, that descendeth from the head to the throte: it may come of vaporous humours, as∣cending frō the stomack to the throte. The remedie: first, letting of bloud in a veyne named Cephalica. The second, purge the head with pilles of Cothie. The third, vse gargaries & clysters, let the patient abstaine from meate that is costiue or binding, and if a bibit serue, haue the present company of no coue∣tous Phisition: least while he looke for reward, the sicke gape for winde. ¶Of the difficultie of brea∣thing. Cap. 29. DIfficultie and hardnesse of brething,Asthma Anlichte shortnese of de. is called Asma, and commeth of dou∣ble cause. Of drinesse that straineth the lungs: for when ye lunges cannot fréely open and close, there followeth Asma: or when the lunges to let by some hu∣mour that is gathered in the vttermost parts of the lunges, they are pressed and wrong therewith, that they maye not freely open and close, and then is a man∣ner Asma, that is called Sanguissugiu, and hath that name of Sanguisluga, of a bloder, or of a leach: for with vyolence it draweth ayre to coole the heart. Som∣time is much humour within the pipes of the lunges, which letteth and stoppeth the lunges, that they may not fréely bée closed, and then it is called Anhelitus: for in this manner, trauayleth the pati∣ent in out putting of breath. Sometime is much humour within and without, wherfore the lungs maye not fréely close and open: and then is that same man∣ner of Asma,Onhop∣noisis. ects spi∣ratio ralled Ortonia, euennesse of breathing, for the pacient trauayleth lyke much in drawing in and putting out of breath.Slote brethm hapneth to those that may not lye dowar in their been And so are there thée manner of Asinis, difficultie of breath∣ing, as humours let the lunges in thrée manners. If it commeth of drinesse and heate, it must be holpe with Oynt∣mentes, Electuaries and Syrops. colde and moyst, and againe ward. Looke in Plato. This infirmitie commeth by tough fleame being in the pipes,Addition or els that there is some fault in the lunges, that may be putrified, the sirop of Isop is good: but beware of cheese, nuts, and new bread crusts.
¶Of corrupt spettle and blou∣die. Cap. 30. Sputum. Ptisina. Speule.ALso about the spettle commeth passi∣ons, as it fareth in Empticis, in whom the spettle is quitterie & venemous, and also in Emptoicis, in whom the spettle is bloudie. Emptisna is a passion when men spit quitter, and this passion is in reumatike causes, and in them that haue postumes vpon the ribbes inward, and in the lunges, and in other postumes of the stomacke, and of the breast, and of the lunges. This euill commeth in this manner wise: while some humour drop∣peth from the ouer parts into the lungs. the lunges be smit and beate, and of the beating the lunges are defiled, and of the defiling bréedeth quitter, or whelkes, and botches bréede in the lunges, or humour commeth to some place and bréedeth a postume, and is there gathered and tur∣ned in quitter, and is afterward put out and boyded by strength of kinde, or by coughing & spitting of quitter. But eue∣ry man that spitteth quitter, shall not be called Empticus: for Pleuretici, yt haue a postume vpon the ribs inwarde, & ma∣ny other that spit quitter, be not Emtici: but they are Emtici that be corrupt with infection of the lungs, and with quittery disposition thereof. The tokens thereof be these: quitter spettle, leane bodyes, small neckes, cough, difficultie of breath∣ing, bolning of the face, and the round∣nesse of the eyen swelleth and aketh, E∣moptoici be they that spet quitter: and that commeth of the opening of some veyne, or of superfluitie of humours, and of fumositie thereof: by biting & gnaw∣ing of some veyne, and by passing heate: for heate openeth the poores, and bloud woseth and commeth out. And men say that it commeth out by Diabrosim, that is by sweating: and then the bloud that commeth out is cléere, and little, & pure, and without ache, and the breath séemeth hot: ofte the bloud commeth from other members, and turneth to the mouth, as from the braine, and then it is with red∣nesse of face and of veynes of the eyen: and manye times it commeth from the lunges, and then the bloud fometh with cough and trauaile, and ache in the right teate. And so of other members,Right breast. in the which Cholaricke bloud is put out and purged, nowe at the nose, nowe at the mouth, by vertue of kinde in diuers ac∣cidents. And so the first passion, that is quitterie spettle, shal be holpen with me∣dicines, that dissolue, mundifie, & cleanse, but beware that it turne not into Ti∣sike: for long Emptima after Fluresim, a postume vpon the ribbes within, fur∣neth into Tisike within fortie dayes, as Ipocras sayeth. And the seconde passion of Emoptoicis, shall be holpe with me∣dicines, that cleanse and constraine. By a mans spettle,Addition are discerned the sundry infirmities of mans bodye: as if the spettle be white Viscus, the sickenesse commeth of fleame: if black lyke the colour of leade and clammie, the sickenesse commeth of melancholy: if the spettle be citrine, yeolowish, or glassie, then the sickenesse commeth of cholar: if tawney or a reddish mat∣terye coulour, the infirmitie commeth of bloud. The whitte spettle not knot∣tie, signifieth health. The foamie or froathie spettle, a rawe stomacke. The gleerie spettle lyke cleere horne, slacke, rawe and slowe of digestion. Vide in Viatico, & in Plato. ¶Of the Tisike. Cap. 31. TIsike is consumption and wasting of kinde humour of the bodye,Pertisi. and commeth of whelkes and of botches of the lunges: and sometime of a reume dropping from the head into the lunges, and smiteth the lunges ofte, and thir∣leth them and maketh holes therein, and whelkes and botches, as dropping of raine perceth a stone. And it commeth sometime of too great drinesse of the lunges, that is soone rent when it is dry∣ed like as a vine leafe in the ende of har∣uest is blowen awaye with a lyghte winde. And sometime it commeth of bloud, when some veyne is broke in the lunges. Such bloud sometime turneth into quitter, and infecteth the lunges, and bréedeth therein whelkes and botches. Therefore Ipocras sayeth, that of bloud and of spettle, commeth Tisike and Fluxe.
By botching of the lunges, all the body is wasted in this manner: First, the lunges by opening thereof, draweth in arce from without, and serueth the heart thereof to swage the kinde heate of the heart, and when the lunges be grieued with whelkes and botches, and féeleth the grieuing, they withdraw their mouing, nor they spread nor open not duely, and so they serue the heart vnsuf∣ficiently of ayre. Therefore heate incre∣seth little & little, & the body is little and little wasted: for a feuer Clike commeth with Tisike, which wasteth ye substanti∣all moysture of ye bodie, for euery one yt haue the Tisike, hath the Etike: but not againe ward. Such a passion is not rasely curable, for it wereth stronger & stronger. And Constantine telleth the cause and saith, That euerye wounde is harde to heale, but if it be cleansed: and the botche of the lunges maye not bée cleansed but with cough, and the cough suffereth not the wound to be closed and sowlded: for it spreadeth and openeth. Therefore more quitter is gathered ther in: while some deale it gathereth, and some deale it purgeth: and so the Po∣stume is incurable, while it is so vnsted∣fast. Then he that will heale the Tisike, shall first heale the wound of the lungs, or it putrifie. Of Tisike that is confor∣med, these be the tokens and signes, con∣tinuall heate, softe in the palmes of the handes, and sharper in the soles of the féete, rednesse in the chéekes, straightnesse of breath, thirst, with roughnesse of the tongue, smalnesse of necke, wasting of all the body, shrinking and riuelyng of nayles and of vtter partes, lownesse of the roundnesse of the eyen, ache in the lefte arme vp to the shoulder, falling of haire: & that is a token of death yt com∣meth soone, as stinking spettle, & quitter, & more stinking than it was wont, beto∣keneth full corruption of the substaunce of the lungs. Such a one shall be fedde with dyet, that cooleth, sowdeth, and re∣storeth, with meanly colde medicines, that swage the heate of Feauers, and laxeth meanlye the wombe. But ouer all things beware that he be not too soone laxed: For of great Flure commeth death in, and lyfe goeth his ware, as Egidius sayth. Medicines that moyst and dos wast humours helpe them. Pertisi I take to be Disma,Addition or O∣thomia whesing, that cōmeth of viscous fleame, letting the Organes, for that the patient is more pained to draw in his breath, thou to put forth. Drinke Pti∣sane well sodde of barley, and running water, with a little licoras, and Carda∣mum, which is a kinde of graines. ¶Of heart quaking, & the disease Cardiacle. Cap. 32 HEart quaking or Cardicle is an euil the it is so called,Tromos in grecke. Tremore or lectiga¦ris, or Morbus officialis Cardiaca passio. because it commeth often of default of the heart: And there is a double manner of Cardiacle: one is called Deaforetica, that is, opening hoales and poores, for it followeth ope∣ning of poores: the other is called Tre∣mens quaking: for it is selt with a man∣ner quaking and mouing of the heart. The first, Diaforetica, commeth of a hot cause, and of distemperaunce of heate a∣bout the spirituall members. And so the poores are opened, and humours and fu∣mositie be resolued and shed, the which fumositie commeth out at the poores, & is made thick, and turneth into sweate, & of such sweting oft commeth Dropsie or Etike: and ofte such swowne for default of vertue and of strength. The Cardiacle that is called Tremens, qua∣king, commeth of a colde cause, some∣time of melancholike, and sometime of fleamatike: for superfluitie of such hu∣mour in the lunges, presse and wring ofte eyther chamber of the heart, and the substaunce thereof: And so the moouing of the heart is let, and such bée sodeinlye stiffeled. And therefore such an euill is called Tremens, qua∣king: For if thou holdest thine hande vppon thy heart, thou shalt not féele the heart open nor mooue in due man∣ner, but with a maner quaking & simple moouing. Sometime the cause is with a light Feauer, and sometime with a strong Feauer: and then is more pe∣rill.
And sometime it is without a feauer: and sometime melancholy is the cause, & such fall into the euill that hight Incu∣bus, or Phraltes, Sometime it commeth of default of the lyuer, that sendeth not sufficient féeding to the heart, and there∣fore the heart fayleth and is féeble, as Constant. sayth. Sometime it commeth of euill disposition of other members, & the heart is grieued by company there∣of. As when running, fléeting, smoke, or other humour (that is greuous) commeth from the braine, or from the stomacke: and so the substance of the heart is hurt and grieued, and fayleth: and therefore such heart quaking commeth of sharpe∣nesse of smoke, or of matter that pitcheth and pricketh and bitcth the substaunce of the heart, and so bréedeth quaking there∣in. Also ther cōmeth thirst, through pres∣sing and wringing of the heart, and for strength of heate: and so commeth dry∣nesse, and thirst, and séething, and lowde breathing, for the ayre, for it may not open it selfe. Also quaking commeth of melancholike smoke, of drinesse distour∣bing the spirit. Also sloth commeth: for kinde heate fayleth, and thereof bréedeth sluggishnesse and sloth. Also of default of the heart, & of féeblenesse of spirits com∣meth swoning that is called Spasmati∣on, & that cōmeth somtime of accidents of the soule, as of dread that closeth the heart lightly. Some of too great ioye, or of wrath, that openeth the heart to soone and so spirits passe out by Euaporations, Solutions, and shedding. Sometime it commeth of accidents of the body, as of euill complection, of great repletion of meate and drink, or of great abstinence, of stopping of the veynes, & of pressing and wringing of spirites: and somtime of too great sweating. And of this swo∣ning, some that swowne dye sodainly, if the hallow veyne be stopped, by yt which veyne the bloud and the spirite of lyfe commeth to the heart: or if the way bée stopped, by the which the lunges receiue colde aire, & put from them superfluitie of fumosifies. And somtime it commeth of great pressing of the full stomacke, or of great pressing of the mother. In all these perills if humour be the cause, that humour shall be purged in due manner, that is in default. Men shal giue the patient medicines confortatiue and reparatiue, that restore the spirites, and bringeth them againe. If it come of great sleeting and running, or of great sweating, the running shall be stinted, & the sweating let. If it commeth of great repletion the stomacke shall be voyded & discharged. Against heart quaking, men shall giue confortatiues, as Diamarga∣ricon, electuaries and medicines, in the which with other confortatiues, is put Muste, gold, or Margarite, or Pearles, & bones of the heart of an Hart, Ambre, Lignum Aloes, and Spodium: for all these helpe agaynst the Cardiacle swo∣ning and other such euills of the heart. namely, when they come without Fea∣uers, for in the Feuers we shall giue no hot medicines. Another declaration concerning the trembling of the heart.Addition The cause of this infirmitie commeth of euill hu∣mours, which be in the cells about the heart, it may come also of much swea∣ting, or weakenesse of bodye, of grose∣nesse of bloud, and of melancholy, the humours stopping the celles next the heart breedeth tremblyng, of whence proceedeth thirst, and deepe fetching of winde, as also dulnesse, feare, and sorrowe. To cure the same vse Ma∣ces in your meates, and mirth with godlye companye, and beware of pen∣siuenesse. ¶Of the feauer. Cap. 33. THe feuer commeth of dissemperance of the heart: For as Constantne sayeth, A Feauer is an vnkinde heate, that commeth out of the heart, and pas∣seth into all the members of the bodye, and grieueth the working of the bodye. Also in Epid. Ipocras sayeth, That a Feauer is a heate, that passeth out of course of kinde, and grieueth the works of kinde. And Auicen sayeth in this manner: A Feauer is straunge heate kindeled in the heart, and commeth out thereof, by meane of spirites and of bloud, by veynes and wosen into all the
body, and burneth therein, and that bur∣ning grieueth the workes of kinde. Also Ipocras saith, a Feauer is a flame that commeth from the breast, and passeth into all the body. As mans body is made of three things, so be there three diuers feuers.Mans bo∣dy is of spirit hu∣mor, and members. Mans body is made of 3. things: of subtill things, as of spirites: and flée∣ting things, as of humors: and of more bodely things, as of the members. Then the first manner feuer is, when the spi∣rites be distempered in heate, and is cal∣led Effimera, one dayes feuer. The se∣cond is in humours, and is called Febris putrida, rotted. The third that falleth in the sad members is called Ethica. And Constantine saith, that Galen lykeneth those feuers to good lykenesses. Effime∣ra that feuer (saith he) séemeth lyke to hot wine, of which wine if a bottle be full, néedes the bottle wereth hot of the heate thereof: And the same working commeth of an hot spirite about the hart and all the body. And Febris putrida, rotted, is lyke to hot water: For when hot water filleth a colde vessell, it hea∣teth the vessell by heate thereof, and so hot humours heate all the bodie and the members. And a feuer Etike is lykened to an hot vessell full of colde water: for cold water taketh heate of a hot vessel. So a feauer Etike, when it is rotted in the members heateth the heart, & distem∣pereth and chaungeth the other humors of the bodye. ¶Of the Feauer Effimera. Cap. 34. GAlen saith, that Effimera, one dayes feuer, hath that name of Effimeron, that is to vnderstand, simple: for it com∣meth of distemperance, that is in a sub∣till substance, as in a spirite, or as Isaac saith in li. febrium, that this feuer hath this name Effimera of Effimeron, a fish of the Sea, that dyeth the same day that he hath first lyfe. Or els as Masters tel, that feuer is as it were the heate of one day: for in Gréeke, Meron is a day, and his heat passeth seldom yt space of a day, for alwaye it faileth soone after a daye, or turneth into feuer Putrida or Etike, as Const. saith, & Isaac also. And this fe∣uer commeth of an inward cause, & also of an outward cause: and it commeth of an outward cause in two manners, of colde or of heate: of colde, as of sodaine coldnesse of the aire, when the poores bee sodainly closed without, hot fumositie is stopped and closed within, & of the bea∣ting, mouing, and stirring of this sumo∣sitie heate is increased and strengthened, and thereof commeth distemperaunce of the heart. Sometime it commeth of di∣stemperance & heate of the aire, or of the sunne, when ye spirit of féeling is distem∣pered by smiting of the sunne beames: and for company and ioyning of spirites and of humors, all the man is distempe∣red. Somtime of inward cause: for by heate of spirits & of humors, in some case mans complection is soone chaunged, as by too great trauaile, and by too great vse of hot meate, & of hot drinke, as of white wine and such other: by too great vse thereof, ofte the heate kindleth and wer∣eth strong, and bréedeth the feauer Effi∣mera. Among other feauers, men fall soo∣ner and lightlier into this manner of fe∣uer, and is harde to heale, and is peril∣lous and grieuous, if it turneth into the feuer Putrida or Ethica. And this feuer commeth specially of some postume that bréedeth in the clift betwéene ye buttocks, & vnder the arme pits: the which Po∣stumes Phisitions call Bubones: and therfore not without a cause it is said in Apho. All euill feuers be in Bubonibus, except Effimera. Signes & tokens therof is ye vrine not far from whole vrine, some deale high of colour, & some deale cleane and subtill, the pulse is hard and swift, and ofte smiting, not much passing out of temperatenesse. The other vertues, as appetite & wilfull mouing, be lyttle changed. This feuer is soone helpe, if the patient vse couenable diet, and is well ware of that thing that grieueth. ¶Of the feuer Etike. Cap. 35. THe feuer Etike hurteth and grieueth the sadde members, and hath that name Ethica of Ethis, that is Habitudo hauing and during, as it were a feauer
tourned into during disposition. Some∣time the feuer Etike is an euill by it selfe, and sometime it commeth by reson of another disease: and commeth some∣time of too hot meate & drink, and some∣time of great trauayle and businesse, as of great studieng or of waking, and of other such that heateth the spirite of fee∣lyng: and so the spirite of lyfe, and also kinde moysture is made hot and lesse, and so the Etike is bred. Also sometime it commeth of another euill, as of Effi∣mera, or of the feuer Putrida, that com∣meth and goeth, or of a sharpe, and of an hot postume. For ofte it happeneth, that Effimera passeth the thirde daye in one qualytie, and appeareth in the skinne of the patient a manner darkenesse, wan∣nesse, yeolownesse, and wasting, & then that Effimera chaungeth into Etike. E∣tike commeth most of Effimera, yt com∣meth most of anguish, wrath, sorrowe, hate, studieng, great waking, and by such lyke businesse of the soule. And it com∣meth of a feuer that commeth and go∣eth on this manner: For vnkinde heate heateth and dryeth the members, and al∣so of an ague, for it heateth ye bloud, or hath masterie and wasteth the substan∣tiall moysture, When bloud is made thin, it is not due feeding of the mem∣bers, and so followeth consumption and wasting: as it fareth in a trée that is dried in Summer by heate and drinesse of the aire that wasteth the moysture: or of scarcitie of feeding, as it fareth in win∣ter, when the leaues fall: or of corrup∣tion of feeding, and of medling & chaun∣ging to euill medlyng and qualyties, as to glassinesse, and brimstoninesse, and other such: as it fareth in mens bodies, and sometime remouing of foode is cau∣sed through default of might in digest∣ing of meate and drinke, and restoring of that which is wasted and spent, as it fa∣reth in olde men. And sometime strong heate hath the masterie in the body, and drieth and wasteth substantial humour and moysture of members: and that fal∣leth ofte and commeth ofte in Etike of an ague, or of accidents of ye soule, when the bloud within chaungeth the radicall members out of their sauour: as it fa∣reth in postumes of long time during, that heate the bodye and wast it: and be sometime cause of the feuer Etike, or of disposition. Generally these be signes and tokens of such a feuer, noyfull heate euen and like in all the parts of the bo∣die. The second token is, that the heate is lyght and not pricking, so that the pa∣tient feeleth vnneth that he hath the fea∣uers. The thirde signe is, that the cou∣lour of the patient is wan as lead, or els yeolow. The fourth token is, that ye bo∣die is rough, the eyen hollow, with drye blearinesse, for the moyst féeding of the eyen is withdrawen. Particular signes be diuers, as such a feuer is diuers. This feuer is diuers, as the humidities are di∣uers: for Auicen saith, that ther be foure moystures. The first is in the vttermost parts of small veynes, that entreth into the Essencia of members and of partes lyke: and when this moysture ouer∣wereth, then commeth a feauer that is called Putrida, and no Ethica, but ther∣of lightly commeth Ethica. The seconde moysture is in the poores of the members of parts that be like, as a deawe, and is called a drawe of Authors: and when that deaw is uer chafed, then commeth the first manner of Ethike. The thirde moysture is chaunged & turned by wor∣king of members of parts that be lyke, in part of kinde and complection of the manner of members, & standeth in steed of things that be lost and wasted: and therefore Authors call it Cambium,Cambiū. chaunge: as when it is ouer chased, then commeth the second manner of Ethike. The fourth moysture bindeth and conti∣nueth all the members together, & com∣meth of moysture Sparmatike, and this is called Glutinum,Glutinū. glewing of partes, and when it is wasted, it maye not bée restored: and héereof commeth the third manner of Etike, that is incurable. For if this moysture might be restored, there might be againe tourning from age to youth, as Auicen saith. And so as Isaac sayth in lib. De Febribus, the first man∣ner Ethike is lyghtly curable, and harde to be knowen, but if heate increaseth & dryeth: the moysture that is nigh, is dryed.
And then commeth the seconde manner Etike, and this is light to know, and hard to be healed and cured. And when heate increaseth so much, that it dryeth the moysture, that bindeth the members to∣gethers, then commeth the third manner Etike, that is easie to know, and impossi∣ble to be cured. In the first manner of Etike, with generall signes which be re∣hersed before, heat increaseth afore meat. In the second, heate is felte more after meate, and in the thirde, most. In libro Febrium, Isaac telleth the cause thereof, and sayeth, that moysture of meate and drinke is contrary to the kinde heate. And therefore sometime it stiffeleth All vnkinde heate, as in the first manner E∣tike, that féebleth, and therefore before meate is great heate: and if heate that is féebled within, sufficeth not to stiffle vnkind heat, it is excited by his cōtrary, and flyeth his contrary, and commeth to vtter members: as when colde water is throwen on a lyme stone, yt is burnt, and not quenched, as Isaac sayth. The thirde manner Etike is openly knowen, for the face turneth into a pale coulour and hiewe: for the subtill moysture is fordryed, and for default or vertue, the nosethrills be thin and sharpe, the eyen be hollow, the temples be rough and not plaine. For when the humours be wa∣sted, the roughnesse and ioyntes of the boanes be séene, the mouing of the lyds and of the browes are heauie, for dri∣nesse of the eyen, and therefore the eyen cloase wilfullye, as they were heauie of sléepe: and for default of ver∣tue and strength they be felt cold & drye but by abiding, alway commeth vp more colde and more. If they be vncouered and naked, it séemeth that they haue no guts, and the groping of them is as the groping of a bourd. If the skinne bee areared, it commeth not downward for default of moysture. The pulse is féeble, thicke, and harde: the vrine is like oyle in lycour, and if it be shedde on a stone, it séemeth as oyle. The first manner of this euill must be soone holpe, that it fall not into the seconde manner Etike, that is harde to helpe. And it is holpe by meane dyet and temperate, and by medicines that beare downe heate: and that comfort and resto∣reth that which is lost. And heereto hel∣peth namely an Electuary, that is caled Electuarium patris, and he must vse to be bathed with roses, violets, hockes, and other harbes that comfort and moyst. And the bath shall not be too hot, but as it were luke hot, least the humours be to soone wasted: and men shall not long a∣bide in the bath. He shall be annoynted with an oyntment, that restoreth, and cooleth, and maysteth, as with oyle of vi∣olet, with white home, with milke of a woman that féedeth a male childe. And specially Platenar.. saith, yt Goats milke, in the which stones of riuers are quen∣ched, helpeth them that haue the Etike & Tisike, if they take it fasting, while the stomack is voyde. This feuer Etike, or Hectica passio,Addition is taken for one of the kindes of a con∣sumption, because it consumeth the na∣turall humiditie in man: that is to say, it doth, consume bloud, and so conse∣quently nature. The causes of this fea∣uer, tis by too much medling with wo∣men, as also long continuaunce of sick∣nesse. It may come of extrme labour, which few hurt themselues with or by debilitie of some principall member. There bee three kindes of this feauer: the first as a vehement heate, which is in the bloud, distempering the heart: the second, an ardent heate inflaming the principal members, through the ca∣lidetie of bloud: the thirde, doth ari∣fie and drye vp the naturall humiditie in  man. Qualitie the heat of the bloud, wih colde hearbes, barley water, and perate meates. ¶Of the Feauer putrida. Cap. 36. FEbris putrida, & rotted feauer hath that name of rotted humours, of the which it is bred. And Isaac saith, yt this rottennes cōmeth in this manner: of euil humors & of superfluitie thereof gathered in some part, by strange heate & vnkind, yt cōmeth by some chance, ther is a man∣ner distroubling & mouing of these hu∣mours,
and by that straunge heate, the humours boile and be not defied, neither departing is made betweene the euill parts and the good. And so the good parts be not cleansed, but medled with ye euill partes by such boiling. And therefore needes the parts be corrupt and rosed. Then when thicke matter and grease and gleamye, so ioyned in the bodye, mooueth by heate, it needeth that it bee resolued and shedde into vapour, the which vapoure entereth into the thing that is moyst and thicke, and bideth there, and mooueth and biteth it selfe, and may not fréelye passe out for great∣nesse and thicknes of matter that letteth it: And so it is corrupt and rotten. And to this manner rotting, the complection of young folke is disposed, namely their complection is hot and moyst, and bée not disposed thereto, when the heate and moysture passeth. And colde com∣plection and dry is not so disposed to rot∣tennesse. And therefore selde olde men haue rotted feauers, for drinesse of com∣plection drieth and ioyneth humource, and letteth and withstandeth the depar∣ting and shedding of matter that is and bee meame disposition to rottennesse. For coldness fresheth, and letteth the heart that maketh boiling and seething. Then it is openlye knowne, that the cause that maketh rottennesse is moy∣sture, that disposeth, and heate that moo∣neth humours, and maketh them boile: And the dregges thereof bée not depar∣ted nor cleansed, but alwaye medled to∣gether, as Isaac sayth. Therefore néedes they bee disposed to rottennesse, and namely straightnes and closing of pores in the bodye, helpeth to this rottennesse. For when the poores bée straight and stopped, the superfluitie may not bée re∣solued nor departed, nor passe out. And therefore it néedeth that the more moo∣uing of humours be made by heate, and more mouing and corruption: namelye, when such heat is vnkinde, & ruleth not kind but corumpeth it. Also these causes of rotting haue other causes without▪ yt helpe them in working, as vnmoderate dyet and trauayle and also inordinate medicines, & other such, that worke and bring to corruption and  wards, when they be take  warde to the body in vue manner and vnce∣uenable time. Then of moisture, so cor∣rupt in some part of the body is resol∣ued a hotte, and a corrupt smoake that goeth to the heart, and distempereth and grieueth the heart, & then this smoake theddeth it selfe into the veyns, and bree∣deth in the body and pipes a retted fea∣uer, as Isaac saith and Constantine al∣so. Then such rotted matter that is cause of a rotted feauer, is either conteined in some hollownesse of the bodie, as in the stomacke or in the liuer, or some where cise, and then it is cause of a feauer that is called Interpolata, ye commeth & go∣eth: or it is cōteined in ye veines or pipes, & then it is cause of a feauer continuall. The cause of the continuance of a rot∣ted feauer is corruption of a humour, & constraining of a vapour, that inflameth & burneth in pipes & veines. And so the cause & the solution of al rotted feuers is knowne in generall, whther they bée continuall or discontinuall. The tokens of the Feauer Pu∣trida, chap. 37. OF these rotted Feuers procéed some generall signes and tokens.Febris pu∣trida, or Humora∣lis, the pu¦trified hu¦mours. The first is, for the matter of such a feuer a∣bideth long in the bodye: And when a straunge cause commeth thereto, it hea∣teth & rotteth in déed The second signifi∣cation is, that before such a feauer com∣meth grilling and colde, namelye if the matter be within the veines & nigh to the members of féeling. For of cold mat∣ter cōmeth some smokes yt grieueth the sinewes of feeling, & thereof commeth grillings, shiueriug and colde. The third signification is, yt such a feuer commeth and goeth by seasons, and ceaseth open∣ly, as it sureth sometime in continuall feauers. The fourth is, for such a feauer bréedeth most anguish, for plentre and thicknesse of smoake that is bred of rot∣ted matter: And therfore heate and ver∣tue be ordeined, that kinde may deliuer it selfe of that same smoke. And this time is diuers by diuersitie of matter in
subtiltie and in thicknesse. For if the matter be subtill, & the vertue strong, it is lightly dissolued and shedde into the body: And the vertue cōmeth againe to ye mēbers as before hand: And if the mat∣ter be thick and the vertue féeble, it is ye contrary. The fifth token is in the state of ye Feuers, for then come accidents yt betoken the complection of rotting, as of head ach, euill breath, thirst, and such other. The sixt is when bodies bée not full clensed in the resting of the Feuer: but yet euill qualities abide in the bo∣die: for which qualyties féeblenesse a∣bideth in the bodie, and the feuer and the axes come againe. The seauenth is, that it abideth not in one manner estate, as other Feauers dot in the solution, but it resteth all in seasons, & passeth as in con∣tinuall Feauers betwéene axes. Manye other signes ther are, that be shewed in perticular Feauers. AdditionThis Feauer maye come diuerse wayes, by alteration of aire, by inordi∣nate labour, ouermuch riding & tra∣uailing, by surfet: vse good diet. Of the Feauer Cotidian. Chap. 38. ChāgableOF Feauers that come and goe, some come of simple humour rotted with∣out the veines and pipes, as of kinde fleame, commeth a very Cotidian: of red Cholera, a Tercian: of blacke Cholera, a Dutane. And some commeth of an humour compounded, as a Cotidiane: some commeth of a sowre fleme, & some of glassie fleme & some of swéete fleme, and some of salt fleme. And these diuer∣sities of Feauers be knowne by theyr owne signes and tokens. And common∣ly in this Feauer commeth head ache, wearishnesse of mouth, heuinesse of bo∣die, first the colde, and thereafter ye heat, and euery daye axes: and yet worse, for some daye commeth double axes.Ague courses. The matter of these Feauers shall be defied, departed, and put out with couenable medicines, and ruled with couenable di∣et. But beware the Phisitian, that it tourne not in Nuartane, or in Etike. This Cotidian vexeth daylye,Addition his beginning is cōmonly after salt fleame, there followeth drinesse & thirll, if the sleme be sweete, then followeth sleepi∣nesse, & dulnes, if the sleme be owre, followeth paine in the stomacke, and vomiting. Of the Feauer Tertian & his signes and cure. ca. 39. A Feauer Tercian commeth of Cho∣lera rotted without the veines and pipes,Febris ter∣ciana. and is not gathered to a postume. Some Tercian commeth of kind Cho∣lera, and some of vnkinde Cholera, as of ritrine and yelow Cholera. If a Ter∣cian commeth of kind Cholera, these be the signes and the tokens. It grieueth from the middaye vnto the third, and namely about the thirde houre: First with shiuering and colde, and then with heat and with ach of the forehead, with bitternesse of mouth, with thirst, with ringing of the eare, and with much wa∣king, the vrine is red, subtill, and thin, and may haue in grieuing and trauaile 24. houres at the most, and 24. houres in rest. And as the matter is diverslye set, and in diuerse places, so signes and tokens be diuerse. For if the matter bée in the mouth of the stomacke, the ach of the forehead is the more. And also thirst with roughnesse & drinesse of the throat, and of the mouth, and desire and will of∣spuing, the vrine is high of colour. And if the matter be in the guts, the foresaid signes be not so strong and high, but the ach is about the nauell, and the vrine is more high of colour. And if the mat∣ter be in the liuer, or in the case of the gall, the vrine is more couloured with yeolow fome aboue and about. If the Feauer commeth of citrine or yeolow Cholera, the signes and tokens be some dene diuerse. For it grieueth first with shiuering, and then with heate, and mo∣ueth betwéen the houre of Cholera & the houre of fleame, & the vrine is yeolow meanly and thin, but drawing more to∣ward thinnesse, & moueth in vncerteine houres: for it commeth sometime sooner, and sometime later, & hath the foresaide
signes, that is to wit, ach of the forhead, &c. But they bée more slacke then the first. The feauer is somtime simple, and sometime double, as the Cotidiane or Continuall. That feauer is simple that commeth of one matier, rotted onely in one place, & that feauer is double, that commeth of diuerse Cholera rotted in diuerse places: As a feauer continual is double, that commeth of diuerse fleme, rotted in diuerse places. The signe and token of such a Tercian is, that it grie∣ueth euerye daye. First with shiuering, and then with heate, and is most grie∣uous from the third daye to the thirde daye, and in diuerse houres. The vrme is meane in substaunce, and some deale redde, and somewhat beshaddowed a∣boue. And so when the cause of a sim∣ple feauer Tercian is knowen, then first diet shall be ordeined, as age, time, and qualitie of kinde as keth. Then shal fol∣low couenable medicines. First ye mat∣ter shall be defied with a sowre srop, Then when the matter is defied, it shal be purged with laxatiue Drimell, and with other couenable medicine. If the matter be in the mouth of the stomack, spuing shall bée excited: but the matter must be first defied. For it néedeth to doe medicine to remoue the matter that is defied, and not to moue rawe matter, as it is said in Aphor. And the matter digested is knowne by the timelye and sooner comming of accesse, and by slack∣nesse of shieuering and of colde. And by increasing of heate, and by long during affliction, and by thicknesse of vrine. Then when such signes bée séene of di∣gestion, the matter of the Feauer shall be purged, whether it be double or sim∣ple, but alwaye with consideration and cautile: So that if the matter bée sim∣ple, the medicine shall be simple, and if the matter be double, the medicine shall be double. AdditionThis Feauer vexeth euery second daye, and there may be a double Ter∣cian. This commeth of Cholar, & vex∣eth in the vaines, the Feauer Causon vexeth to the lungs. Of the Feauer quartane, his signes and remedies. Chap. 40. THE Feauer quartane commeth of Melancholia rotted without the veines and pipes,Febris quartana. and not gathered to a postume. And this feauer commeth som∣time of kinde Melancholia, and some∣time of Melancholia that is vnkind. Of a feuer quartane that commeth of kind Melancholia, these be the signes and the tokens: It grieueth from the fourth daye, to the fourth daye, with grilling and rising of the haire in the powers first: And then with light heate, and hath foure and twentie houres in the geatest trauaile, and 48. in rest: And trauaileth and grieueth in the hours of Melancholia, that is before the ninth houre, and kéepeth certeine tunes of ar∣cs. After the axes, the vrine is somwhat yeolowe, and is in the dayes of rest, as it were rawe and pale, or somewhat white and thinne. If the matter bée in the stomacke, the mouth is sowre, with mistering of the eien, and turgidi∣nesse, and with other euill signes and in∣ordinate, with elengenes, and sorrowe, with dread anguish, and woe, and other harde passions of the soule. In the body is heauinesse and stownesse, and indige∣stion, and swelling of Ades, heauinesse of the thighs, legs, and ioyntes, vnrest of waking, dread in sléeping, wannesse in nailes and lippes, and namely in the time of axes, ach in lyndes and loines, and of the left flanke and small ribbes, with swelling of ye splene, with strength of appetite. For heauie melancholik hu∣mour putteth downe meate and drinke, to the bottome of the stomack. And ther∣fore the mouth of the stomacke is void, and appetite is excited. There be other manner Feauer quartanes, that come with medling of some other humour, and are called Nothe. And in such feuer uartanes signes be diuerse, which bée medled with melancholike humour: But our purpose nowe is to declare the difference of those feauers. Then when the cause of the nartane is kno∣wen in his owne diuersitie, strong me∣dicines that defie, shall be giuen at the
beginning: for the matter is sad & thick. And therfore men shall giue medicines, which defie the matter and cleanse, as Oximell simple and Squiliticum, and other such: when the matter is defied, it shall be cleansed and purged with medi∣cine, that is appropried therto. He shall be bathed and slewed with hot hearbs, which open and close, but let him be∣ware of melancholike meats and grie∣uous. Hée shall vse Electuaries and hot powders, that comfort & wast, & chaunge the melancholike humour: And he shall vse medicines yt glad, as Drascene, Dia∣borage, Leticia, Calingale, & other such, and he shal be annointed with hot oint∣ments that comfort. AdditionEuerie third day, that is to say, two dayes whole, & one sicke, & ther may be a double Quarten. This commeth of melancholy, or of cholora adusted, who that hath this disease with the blacke launders, shall hardly be cured: vse to purge as aforesaid. The Feauer continuall.cap.41. Febris acuta. The sharp Cotidian Continuall Feauer commeth of hu∣mour rotted within the veines, of the which humour smoake commeth to the heart, & grieueth the heart, and brée∣deth in the bodye & Feauer that is cal∣led Continuall. Sometime this humour is simple, and sometime double  Sim∣ple when bloud rotteth in the veins and bréedeth continuall Feuer, that is called Sinochus. And when it rotteth not, it creaseth in quantitie and is ouer set: and the fumosities that be moued and bra∣ten, bee made hot and distemporate and distempereth the spirit of lyfe. And there commeth the Feauer that is called Si∣nocha in flatiua swetting. And somtime Cholera rotteth in the most subtil veins of the mouth, of the stomack, of ye heart, of the liuer, & of the lungs, that is called Causen: for it burneth and kindleth the spirituall members. And sometime it rotteth in other veines, & is called Ter∣ciana, and continuall: and somtime Cho∣lera, & bloud rot togethers in the veines and pipes, and if the more part of bloud rot, then it is called. Sinocides. And if the more parte of Cholera rotteth, the Feauer is called Causonides. Then for diuerse causes bee diuerse signes of the feuer that be called Sinochides, these bee the signes and tokens thereof: The Feauer is continuall, and there is sharp ach of the forehead and temples, strong thirst, réetnesse of mouth, redde vrine and thicke, and some deale wanne The same signes almost be in the Feauer that is called Sinocha Inflatiua, except wannesse of vrine. Also the eien appere bolning outwarde, with fulnesse of veines, and rednesse of face, and heaui∣nesse of all the body. And in Causon, and in the other, the vrine appeareth redde, and subtill within, shaddowed with a manner of blacknesse with so great ach of the forehead and temples that the eien & the temples seeme as they were pear∣ced with nailes, with coulour in the bo∣die medled with yeolownesse. Thust ceaseth not, with steadfast waking, and toughnesse and burning of the tongue, with hard wombe: of Cholera if it haue a default in qualitie or in quantitie, then commeth the re of the wombe, & cho∣larike spuings and the same signes & to∣kens appeare in Causonide and Si∣nochide, and the diuersitie thereof is knowne most by vrine. In these conti∣nuall Feuers, that teme of bloud, & men shall be let bloud in both armes, if strength and age will suffer. The dyet of such shall bée scarse and elde, as crummes of bread washed in water, prunes sod; and such medicines as shall abate and chaunge the bloud, as a sowre siroppe of violet and other such Against accidents of these euills, as against  a∣king and ach of the forehead. and other such, it néedeth most to take héede: Sometime this euill endeth with sweate healthfullye, and sometime with bleeding at the nose, or else where. He that hath this Ague, a smokye house, a lowsie bed, & a curst queane,Addition shal not neede the Phisition, neuerthe∣lesse kepe good diet. Addition: FEbris Ephemera, or Febris Diaria,Addition this feauer is the original other of all Feauers, this name Ephimer is said
signifie a beast about the riuer Hyp∣panis, that dyeth the same daye it receiueth lyfe, called Ephimeron, Aristotle. So commonlye this Feauer in one daye is vexing and voide. This commeth of inflamation of the vitalles, sometime of fretting, anger, thought, sorrowe, or of greate hunger and thirst, as also by breaking of dy∣et: The chiefest remedye is tempo∣aunce. Febris Sinochos, a Feauer without rest, continually vexing. Febris Sinocha, this both differ from Sinochos, because the vexed féeleth some rest. Febris Homothena, is knowne by the vrine, that is dimme and swart in coulour. Febris Augmastica, The Urine is bliewishe and watrye in a disea∣sed. Febris Epamastica, The vrine is red and bright, these thrée vrines doe of∣ten visite those that bée sicke in theyr finger and greate toe, and sometimes they cannot tell where. Neuerthelesse, (Conceit) which is the mother of (Fol∣lye) through too much nicenesse increa∣seth to disease in déede: Wise Phisi∣tions canne tell howe to cure such Patients, unto whome is ministred golden Angelles, for daintye sim∣ples. The cause of these Feauers doe come of the aboundaunce of wealth. Febris Ardens, This is a violent Feauer, hotte and firye, one of the worst, verye daungerous, this com∣meth of Cholar, differing but lyttle from the Feauer Tercian. For the matter is in the hollownesse of the lunges and liuer, and is cause of great drynesse in the mouthe. Use Cas∣sio Fistula, and the stroppe of Uio∣lettes. Febris Emphisodes, this commeth of great heate, and after two or thrée fittes the Patient breaketh out into whelkes and scabbes aboute the mouth and nose.Squamule This commeth of the in∣flamation of the Liuer, to cure this Feauer, and also to preuent all other Feauers whatsoeuer, so preserue in men theyr naturall strength, and in women theyr beautie and youth. You must use of Lycoras one Dunce, of Carawaye séede halfe an Dunce, of Cardamum halfe an Dunce, of Sage, Hisoppe, and Cardus Benedictus, of each halfe and handfull. Of Galingale minor, a quarter of an Dunce: then bruse your drugges, and binde toge∣ther your hearbes, and féeth all in a Gallon of pure running water, vntill halfe a pinte bée diminished, and in sée thing lette it bée verye close couered, and so let it stande or euer you straine the same sixe houres. Then lette your sodden Licoras and Cardamum, re∣maine in your strayned drinke, and so vse thereof Morning and Euening at your discreation, for fouretéene dayes, &c. Which obscrued, I doubt nothing more, then that this me∣dicine will bée too good for: some, that maye chaunce to bée vnthanke∣full. Febris Hemitricea, This Fea∣uer commeth of a Cholarike humour mixt with fleame. Febris Epialtes, This procée∣deth of grose fleame, and maketh the interiour partes to bourne, and the exteriall partes of the bodye colde, there must bée medicines to dissolue the Fleame, the patient is thirstye, and the tongue furred and rough. Febris Liparios, This is the Leprous Feauer or scurnye, and commeth of hotte Cholarike humour mixte with corrupte fleame, causing the inwarde partes of the bodye to bée colde, and the outwarde partes to bée hotte, first purge Flegma and Cholar: sweate three or foure houres, and refraine the open ayre. Drinke scuruie Grasse in white Wine, warme the iuyce, two dayes, two houres before meate. Febris Tetrahea, This is a feauer vexing euerye parte in the bo∣dye, this commeth of rotten mat∣ter, and likewise of superfluous dregges indigested, and this Feauer
ingendereth the blacke saunders, hée that hath this Feauer is often yaning, prouide to bée purged, but not rashty. Febris Erretica or Commixta, the commit Feauer, this commeth of two causes, thicknesse of bloud, the second of of Cholar and fleame not naturall, let the paient bloud in Cphalica, if of bloud: if of Cholar in Mediana: if of fleme in Sophena and Cardiaca, taking heed: both to ye age, strength and youth of the patient. Febris Pestilencia, or Epidimea, the pestilent agu or Feauer, this commeth of infection of aire, & many other waies, Mitridate in Barlye water is good to drinke. Thus have I gathered the Feauers togethers, forth of sundry Authours, to the end that they may be the better kno∣wen, and for the same remedye of the diseased. Of fleame. chap. 42. SOmetime fleame rotteth in the veines & pipes, and bréedeth a Fea∣uers Cotidiane continuall. The signes & tokens thereof is continuall heat, and most by night, without warning of com∣ming, heauinesse of head, and wearish∣nesse of mouth. Urine with light cou∣lour, it is thicke, and hath eighteene houres in most trauaile; and sixe in false rest. And somtime Melancholy rotteth in the veynes and pipes, and bréedeth a Quartane continuall. The tokens thereof is continuall heate, but most al∣way from the first day to the fourth day, and commeth without warning, with shiuering or grilling, heauinesse of head, soft heate, not ull strong And the diffe∣rence of this last Feauer is not lightly knowne by vrine. Also sometime fleme rotteth without, and Cholera within, & then commeth a Feauer that is called the lesse Enutritheus. The signes there∣of be the same that be of a continuall Cotidiane, and then with the same signs late commeth colde, but namely the vt∣ter parts wexe colde, the head is heauy, and the eie lids be uer set with false sléepe. And this Feauer hath eightéene houres in most trauaile, and sixe in the meane, but that meane in the Cotidi∣an continuall. Sometime fleame rotteth within, and Cholera without, and brée∣deth a Feauer, which is called the mid∣dle Enutritheus. The tokens thereof are continuall heate, but it is strongest from the third day to the third, and commeth with grilling and with shiuering, with head ach, and with thirst, and hath.36. houres in most trauaile, and.12. in false rest. The vrine is red, and some deale wan, & meanely thicke and thin Some∣time Melancholia rotteth without, and Cholera within, and bréedeth the greate Enutritheus, that hath more heate and all accidents worse then the first. Som∣time the vrine is greene somtime black, sometime wan & discouloured: And all these be tokēs of death: & hath 40. hours in ye most trauel, &.12. in ye lesse trauell. An vntunning Phisition maye vnneth know & éeme the kinde, & the diuersity of these double Feuers: For as Hippo∣crates saith in Aphor. There be not al∣way certeine tokens of euills that bée sharp, nor of health, nor of death, as Ga∣len saith: for in such euills sometime a perfect Phisition erreth for swiftnesse of moouing of the matter and the euill, and also for default or vertue of the pati∣ent, the which the Phisition knoweth not. And therfore to speake of these fea∣uers, we shall make an ende. And that which we haue spoken of before is kno∣wen by the dctrine of Isaac, Constan∣tine, Auicen, Alexander, & also Galen. And it is not vnknowen, that the lesie Enutritheus is cured with difficultie, and the middle vnneth, but some∣time it is curable, and the greate neuer: but by Gods owne hande, as Galen sayth. Of rising or standing of haire. Chap. 43. RIsing or standing of haire is a cer∣teine shrewde disposition,Hoilpila tio. that com∣meth in the bodye of feauerish matter,The stan∣ding vp of a mans haire. and commeth before the ares, and shew∣eth of the comming thereof. And it com∣meth of colde smoake, that is resolued, & shed of colde flumatike matter or me∣lancholik.
And this smok al to sheddeth it selfe sodeinlye into the members of the bodie, and toucheth the sinewes and the brawns, and maketh with his cold∣nesse, that the skin shrinketh together. and so straining the mores and the roots of the haires, closeth and stoppeth the pores. And this cold smoake causeth the haire to arise and stande vp rough and straight. Therefore Isidore saith, That the rising & standing of the haire with gastlye affraye, is called Horripilatio. And commeth when the haire of the head ariseth and standeth vp for some feare and gastfulnesse. For sodein dread gathereth heat to the inner partes. And therefore the vtter partes béeing with∣out heat runneth & reueleth togethers. And so in the vtter partes of the skinne vnwilfullye the haire riseth and stan∣deth. The same cause and reason is in rising and standing of haire and qua∣king and cold grilling and shiuering in them that haue the Feauers, as Con∣stantine saith. Of loathing. chap. 44. IN the members of féeding fall di∣uers passions and euills, as in the stomacke Fastidium, wambling and ab∣homination, chaunging of appetite, per∣braking, and such other, as Constantine saith: and Fastidium is vnwilfull abho∣mination and wambling of meate and drinke, and most gréeueth the vertue of féeding and of nourishing. For as Isid. saith, Fastidium is sayd as it were ma∣king noise and disease. For a man that hath abhomination,Disliking. hath noise and dis∣ease in things that another hath solace and liking. This euill abhomination commeth in thrée manner wise. In de∣fault of spirits or of stopping of the si∣newes of féeling, or of to great repletion of humours hotte or colde. The first is knowen, for while spirites bée instru∣mēts of vertues, to excite them to their dooing and working, by defaulte of spi∣rits, the working of the vertue of kinde appetite is lost. Also the second is know∣en, for the appetite of the stomack is cal∣led desire, & commeth of double vertue of the vertue of kinde appetite, & of in∣fluence, & helpeth the vertue of féeling. Then when the sinewes of féeling bée stopped, ye spirit of féeling may not come downe to the mouth of the stomacke to make appetite, and not causelesse when the principall cause sayleth the appetite faileth. The third is knowen, for sith that appetite commeth because of lere∣nesse & voidnesse.Emptines. Then when repletion commeth of humours, the appetite is let. These bée the tokens when the appetite faileth, for default of spirites, Leanesse of all the body, that commeth of feuers, of too great fasting, of waking and of flixe of the wombe. Wée knowe step∣ping of sinewes, by that the patient hath no liking in things that he taketh, and then the stomack hath great indig∣nation and wambling: for it is cooled for default of spirits. Also for the same cause, the meate seemeth colde in his pas∣sing. We knowe superfluitie of hot hu∣mours by bitternesse of the mouth, of drinesse of the tongue with thirst, by hot fumositie and smoake, that hildeth and strippeth the rouse of the mouth. Also there is sometime yeolow spuing. Wée know when hot humours be the cause, by some vnsauory or stinking bolkings, by indignation, and by wambling and heauinesse of the stomacke. Then if de∣fault of spirites be the cause, men must work against those things, which make default of spirits. For if default com∣meth of a feauer, men must worke a∣gainst the feauer: and if it commeth of fasting & of wast of the body, men shall restore that which is wasted with meat, and electuaryes, which comfort, and so of other aromatike things, men shall make sawce that restoreth the spirites, and that comfort the mouth of the sto∣macke, as of Uineger and of Mintes, and other such well smelling thinges, shall be held to the patients nose. If stopping bée the cause: If nothing else letteth, it is good that the patient bée let bloud in the middle veine of the right arme, and men shall giue him hotte medicines that departe, and also hotte things that comfort, as Dyacy∣minum, and other such: except too great
heate be the cause, then men shall vse a sowre sroppe, and then the matter shall bée auoyded and purged with couena∣ble medicine. And if colde humoures bée the cause, then the stomacke shal be purged with Benedicta, or with other couenable medicine, & with hot things it shall be comforted, diuers meats shal be proered to ye patient, though it be some deale gréeuous, if he desireth them, so yt the appetite may be excited, as Hippo∣crates saith, liking meat shall be set be∣fore the patient, & liking drinke, though they be somewhat worse then the best meate and drinke. Addition.This impediment commeth of a colde fume, mixt with melancholy & fleame. Also of foolish feare of a fae heart, and of a foolish conceit. Of Bolismus vnmoderate ap∣petite. chap. 45. BOlismus is vnmoderate and vnmea∣surable,Bulimos. and is as it were an hounds appetite,Hunger. and commeth of coldnesse of the mouth of the stomacke, and hath mastry with some humour. For strong colde by strength of thrusting & of pressing, thru∣steth and beareth downe the meate and drinke that is taken downward to the neather parts, and so the stomack emp∣tieth, by reson of voidnes & lerenesse, de∣sireth and hath appetite. The stomack is cooled by many causes, as by too cold di∣et, and other such. And Galen saith that Bolismus commeth of too great heate of the nether members, whose veins draw from the liuer, & the liuer draweth from the stomack by certein veins yt be called Miseralce. And therof commeth sodeine empting of the stomacke, & so commeth strong appetite, as it were of an hound, & vnmoderate. And is knowne by déepe vrine, for it commeth soone, & the vertue faileth not thereby. And colde medicines & grose diet helpeth them that haue this euill. These be tokens of this euill: A man hath vndue appetite, & eateth more then the common doing is: & yet of his great eating the bodye is not amended, but is rather made leane and wasted: With this euil oft commeth the flixe of the wombe. Also sometime the appetite chaungeth & desireth nofull things, as coles, earth, salt, and other such. And it commeth of melancholike humour, or cholarike, yt infecteth the mouth of ye sto∣mack, & maketh it as it were hairy: and so ye stomack infected by reason of like∣nesse, desireth such things, as it fareth in women that goe with child, and in them that withhold menstruall bloud. In thē smoake is resolued & departed, & cōmeth out of vncleane bloud, & infecteth the si∣newes of féeling in the stomack, & chan∣geth appetite & desire. Then against this euill Bolismus hot things shal be taken, yt comfort the stomacke, & also vnctuous meates, that be araied in great fatnesse, so that the fatnesse fléet in the mouth of the stomacke, & bréede wamblings & ab∣homination And if a cold humour and fleamatike be the cause, as it happeneth oft: then the stomacke shall be cleansed within, with hot electuaries, & without comforted with hot ointments. In such a manner an inordinate appetite shalbe cured. This greedie appetite is soone quē∣ched,Addition the cause commeth of a cold sto∣macke, good sauours and wholesome smells, be good to reuocat this impe∣diment. Of yoxing. Chap. 46. YOxing is a sowne of a violent moo∣uing of the stomack,Singultus Alexos, Ligmos In Arabia Alsoach, Hicket. and commeth of a crampy disposition of ye stomack: and it commeth of two causes. Principally of too great repletion or of abstinence & wa∣sting, & somtime of cold: by these māner causes ye sinews of ye stomack shrinke & riuell, ye which being shronk, yt bottome of ye stomacke is araied vpward, & the vertue of ruling & gouernance laboreth to settle ye bottōe & bring it into his own kind place: and so of such mouing vp∣ward & downward cōmeth a noise yt is called yoxing, as some men tel: or els as it séemeth to me when ye bottome of the stomak is arered, ye aire yt is in ye middle passeth out, & voideth by strēgth of put∣ting of ye lungs: & méeteth wt other aire, & passeth by straight passages, & maketh a
noise, which is called yoxing. When it commeth of repletion, it cōmeth with spuing of humoures, or of meate: and then commeth volkinges of diuerse sa∣uours, as the superfluitie of humours is diverse. The disposition of bodie is ple∣terike, and also too great diet commeth before hand. If it commeth of abstinence and fasting, it is knowen by a feauer or by a flixe of the wombe, or by bléeding, and by other tokens that make the bo∣dye leane and megre. But and it come of cold, it is known by coldnesse of aire, or else by colde diet vsed before, and by such other. Against yoxing that com∣meth of repletion, men shall vse spew∣ings and other doings, that voydeth and heateth, and dryeth. Against yoxing that commeth of abstinence and fasting, if it bée without a Feauer, men shall vse things that restore and moyst. And if it commeth with a Feauer, it is the more perillous. Against yoxing that cō∣meth of colde, men shall vse things that be hot in themselues, and in working. Also snéesing helpeth, and it bée excited: and dreade is good if it come sodeinlye,Sodeine disquiet. or if some shamefull dooing be put a∣gainst the patient. For heat gathered in∣ward by shame or by dread, dissolueth & departeth the fumositie & smoake, that is the matter of yoxing. This Alsoach commeth of a colde stomacke, or of some euill about the heart, it commeth of ouermuch drink∣king. Aqua Composita and Licoras, is very good, and ginger brused grose, & mixt in clarified honnie, & so swal∣lowed downe. Of Spuing. Chap. 47. Vomitis. Emitos. VomitingSPuing is a violent casting of meat, and of drinke, & of humours, out of the stomack, and commeth in this wise: either by strength of kinde, or by some accident of lykenesse: and somtime superfluitie of hot humours abounde in the stomacke, and sometime of cold hu∣mours: And sometime heate maketh sée∣thing in the stomacke, and dissolueth and departeth humours, and putteth them out, and that out putting is spuing. As a strong colde in the mouth of the stomacke, by strength of pressing, put∣teth downeward meate and drinke, and is cause of out putting beneth foorth, so heate that hath the masterye, mooueth meat and drinke and humours vpward, and is sometime cause of out putting a∣boue foorth. And sometime is caused superfluitie of meate and of drinke, the which when kinde may not rule it and defie it, she putteth it awaye, and dely∣uereth her selfe thereof, as of thinges which grieue and noy her. And somtime it commeth of qualitie of meate or of drinke, and of sharpnesse & biting therof, that pricke and bite the sinewes of the stomacke, and excite spiewing. And som∣time it commeth of féeblenesse of ver∣tue of with-holding, and strength of the vertue of out putting: So that the sto∣macke may not holde for straightnesse, foode that is receiued: and therefore it ca∣steth it out. And sometime it commeth of strength and biting of medicine: and sometime spuing commeth when the neather partes of the wombe bée stron∣ger, and putteth the superfluities therof vpwarde to the ouer partes. And kinde maye not holde them, but hath abhomi∣nation and abhorreth them, and put∣teth them out by spuing. Also some∣time it happeneth by pressing and rea∣ring of the stomacke by noyfull compa∣ny of other members, when they bée by casualtie gréened, as of the mother. And so oft spuing is a token and a signe, that a woman goeth with childe, as Galen sayth. Spuing is good when it commeth of the vertue and working of kinde, or when it commeth as it shoulde, and when it must bée done by help of medicine: and when it commeth in the day of chaunging, and the patient is reléeued thereby. Good spuing clean∣seth the stomacke, and helpeth and ser∣ueth the vertue of digestion: and dischar∣geth all kind, and reléeueth all the body of man of full many sicknesses and euils. And doth the contrarye if it be not good. And kindly before all spuing, general∣lye commeth moouing and quaking of lippes, and forcing and anguishe of the spirituall members, wambling and
abhomination, opening of the mouth, stretching of the tongue, stretching of veines, of pipes, and of sinewes, teares in the eyen, running out of sweate, chaunging of the throate, and bitternesse and infection of the tongue, of the palat, and of the mouth. Then if spuing bée néedfull, be it excited: and if it be to much and noyfull, bée it restrained and let. A∣gainst spuing that commeth of colde cause helpeth hot medicines and con∣formatiue, both electuaries and oynt∣ments, as Diacetontem calidum, Dya∣ciminum, and other such. And against an hot cause helpeth colde medicines and drie, withholding and constraining me∣dicines, as Zuchara, Rosacea, Diaradon, Tosandall, and other such. AdditionInuoluntarie comming of this dis∣ease, is by mallice of the stomacke. Of ach of the belly, and of the stomacke. Chap. 48. Dolor. fretting in ye bodyWOmbe ach commeth of many cau∣ses, as of heate that dissolueth and departeth: Of colde that constraineth and wringeth: of winde that stretcheth and reaueth, of a Postume that ouer∣setteth and thirsteth, of hotte humour or colde, that maketh the chambers and the dennes among the foldings of the stomacke gleamie. Whereas heate is the cause, the ach pitcheth and pricketh, the bolking is some deale hotte, the Urine is thicke, meat is well defied, the spittle burneth with bitternesse of mouth, cho∣larike durt, and yeolowe vrine. And if colde with the humour bee the cause, the ach is grieuous, great meat is euill de∣fied, and lyght and subtill better. Oft commeth spuing that is flumatike, and raw, hardnesse of the wombe, and sowre bolking. If ventositie bée the cause, it is knowen by routing and rolling, and hurling, and noise, and vnsauourie bol∣kings, by the which bolkings the pati∣ent raueth. If a Postume be in the sto∣macke it is knowne by a feauer that cō∣meth therewith, and by pitching & pric∣king and by burning and indigestion, and by haling & stretching of the mouth of the stomacke. Then if heate with humour bée the cause, the humour shall bee purged with his owne medicines, yea, & the stomacke shall bée comforted with colde electua∣ries, and baumed without with colde oyntmentes. And if colde with humour bée the cause, it is curable in the contra∣rye manner. And, if ventositie bée the cause, it is curable with medicines that wast ventositie, as with Diamara∣trum, Diaciminum, and other such. Great ventositie in the body, and name∣ly in the wombe, bréedeth ach and gna∣wing, when ventositie putteth him∣selfe among humours, as sayth Con∣stantine. And therefore it néedeth to suc∣cour with medicines that dissolueth and wasteth ventosities of the wombe. And therefore Constantine sayth, That a cupping cuppe without garsing shall be done about the Nauell, to drawe the ventositie outwarde from the inner partes. For as he saith, ventositie grée∣ueth more in manye causes then hu∣mours, as it fareth in them that haue the dropsie: Of them he setteth an ensample in the same Chapter. Then who so will kéepe continuall health of bodye: shall kéepe the stomacke, that it take not too much meat, for perfect and chiefe medi∣cine is abstinence, as Constanst. saith in 3. chap. De Fastidio. Fretting of the guttes commeth of emptinesse of the body,Addition to poore men for ck of meat, vnto the rest by dis∣order, many wayes. Detertura torment. Chap. 49. AS Constantine sayth,Tormiui∣um. Gnawing in ye belly. ofte in the wombe is ache and torment, that commeth of humours engleymed in the guttes and bowelles: As the ach that is called Iacus and Colicus, Iliaca pas∣sio, and Colica passio, and other such. Sometime these passions and euilles come of winde and fumosityes, that stretch and hale the bowelles that bee folde and crumpled: Sometime of super∣fluities of humoures, which grieue the substaunce of the bowells and guts: and
somtime of some Postume, that hurteth and grieueth the substance of the bow∣ells. Sometime of the great multitude of Wormes that gnawe the bowelles and guttes within: Sometime of com∣pany of other members, that bréede ach in the bowells: Sometime of sharpnesse of humours, that fret and bite the sub∣staunce of the bowells, and bréed therin whelkes and botches. And these euills & passions haue their owne proper cau∣ses and signes. Then rawe ventositie & thick resolued & departed from humors, when it is closed with durt in the bow∣elles, it bréedeth much gnawing and tor∣ment. And if the fumositie or winde be resolued & departed frō bloudie matter, the ach shall bee stinking as the Com∣mentour sayth. And if it be resolued of Cholarike matter, it is pitching and pricking. And if it bée resolued of Flu∣matike matter, it is called Extensiuus, stretching and running. And if it bée resolued of melancholik matter, it is cal∣led Grauatiuus, fore & grieuous. And if it be resolued of glassie fleame, it is called Congelatiuus, fréesing. And if it bée re∣solued of ventositie alone, then it is cal∣led Dolor deambulatiuus, wandering & walking, so saith the Cōmentator word for worde Super Io. and masters and authours vse these words. This passion and euill shall be cured with medicines, that cleanse and voide, and destroy and wast winde and ventosities. For when greate superfluities and gleamie fill the bowells, they bréede therein right grée∣uous passions and euills. For the bow∣elles bée bounde and glewed with glea∣mye superfluitye, and therefore kinds may not deliuer it selfe of superfluities: Therefore néeds followeth ftretting and gnawing of the inner parte, pressing and wringing of the neather partes, and full greate disturbaunce of the ouer parts by smiting of fumosities, and of smoak. And sometime death commeth & distruction of the bodie, as it fareth in I∣liaca and Colica passione. Oft in such a case men laye to first, things that nesh and moyst the harde matter: and then some deale biting medicines, and at the last néedeful medicines that clense and purge. And so when the inner partes bée discharged and purged, all the kinde shall bée brought into due state and be∣ing. When a Postume occupyeth the stomacke or the bowells, of the matter and stretching of the Postume is great ach and heauinesse in the stomacke, and also in the guts and bowels, and by the qualitie of the matter, and of ye postume, the anguish & ach is séebler and stron∣ger. For in the more subtile and smaller guts the postume is kept, the more grée∣uous and perillous is alwaye the ach, for the place and way of the passing of durt and of wind is more straight. But héereto within and without succoureth & helpeth medicine, that meaely cooleth & swageth, because of the Feauer, and by reason of the matter riping and clean∣sings because of heate and of healing, and sowning, because of the Postume, and of the Botch that commeth after, least the place abide botchy not well hea∣led. All these and many other be known in Viatico, and in Plateario: but it wer too much to set them all héere. When Lumbrici, wormes of ye womb be cause, then is most ach. Lumbrici bée long wormes and rounde, and sharpe at the endes, bredde in the inner partes of the bowells, of gleamie and rawe humors. And when they be in the smallest and longest bowels bred, they be called Lū∣brici, for they be long as Constan. saith. And if they be nourished and fed in the neather great bowels, than they be cal∣led Ascarides & Cucurbini. And of these worms be diuerse manner of kinds and shapes, as they be bred of diuerse mat∣ters, for of salt fleame commeth long Wormes, small, and sharpe. For the heate of that fleame, that moueth from the middle toward the vtter part, draw∣eth a long the matter and kinde of the worme. And drinesse mooueth towarde the middle, and may not spread the mat∣ter abroade, but draweth it togethers, and rolleth it, and maketh it rounde. And therefore Wormes that be so bred be long and rounde. And wormes that be bred of swéete fleame bée long and broade: they be long because of heate, for heat draweth a thing along. And they be
broad, for humour sheddeth & spreadeth abroade. And wormes that be bread of sowre fleame that is colde and drie, be short and rounde. For eyther quali∣tye mooueth towarde the middle, and is contrary to length and breadth. And wormes that be bread of kinde fleame, that is colde and moyst, bée short and broad: short for the coldnesse, and broade for the moysture. And these Wormes be called Ascarides and Cucurbins. For they bee lyke to the séedes of Gourdes. Glassie fleame, for too great colde brée∣deth nothing that hath lyse. These wormes bréede hard ach and torments, and gnawing. Therwith commeth fea∣uers, itching of nose, gris ating of teeth, abhomination of meate, stoning and ra∣ning, and léesing of wit, crieng in sléepe, quaking of bodye, putting out and gna∣wing of the tongue, when they haue nought else betwéene theyr téeth. And this commeth for company that the guts haue with instruments of wittes and feeling, and with the chéekes. Then as Constantine saith, it néedeth that these Wormes be soone put out, least they de∣stroye and wast the body, and make the members soft. They bée not put out, but if they bée dead. For while they bée aliue, they cleaue to the guttes, and vnneth goe out. But when they be dead, they bée horrible to kinpe and abhomi∣nable, and so kinde casteth them out. But sometime they passe out, but they be as it were dead and dye anone. Al∣so they bée slaine with bitter thinges, as with Wormewoode, and such other, as Constantine rehearseth in the same Chapter. And all such bitter thinges shoulde bée giuen with honnie, or with milke, or with some swéete things. For wormes loue swéet things: and when they take to them so swéet things, they take bitternesse therwith, and slay them∣selues. For there is the hooke hid vnder meate. When the mother or the bladder is grieued, the bowelles bée grieued for company. For when the necke of the bladder is stopped, the bladder stretcheth through the vrine that is withheld. And when the bladder is stretched, ye gut that lieth thereto, is pressed and wrong, and let of putting out of durt: and so of ven∣tositie and wind closed within commeth Coliea passio. Constantine sayth, That this passion is bread in a gutte, which is called Colon, that is to say, hollowe: that gut is the bum, and is in the right side of the neather wombe, be clipped as a girdle euen to the left side. And this passion hath seauen manner causes, as Constantine sayth. The first is firye heate and cholarike, meddeled with fea∣uers, and drieng and dardning the moi∣sture of durte, and letteth outpassing and deliueraunce of durt. The seconde cause is thicknesse and greatnesse of dry and stopping meates, that let delyu∣raunce and out passing of durt. The third is gleaming flume, letting and stopping the wayes of the neather deli∣ueraunce. The fourth is thicke and greate ventositie and Winde, meddeled with gleamie humours, stretching and haling the gutte. The fifth is a Po∣stume bread in the gutte, letting frée out passing of durte. The sixt is multi∣tude of short and broad wormes, and of long and rounde Wormes, that bée dead, and cleaue togethers in this gut, & may not haue passage to voide out ther∣of. The seauenth is vnféelingnesse of the got, that feeleth not the griefe of durte, neyther putteth it out. This passion, of what cause so euer it come, grieueth and tormenteth the body grieuously, & hath generall and proper accidents: For gene∣rally therewith commeth spuing, abho∣mination and wambling, fretting, and gnawing, passing ach and sore in that side of the wombe, and hardnesse of the wombe. And if it commeth of hot cause, it séemeth that the wombe is sticked & pricked with néedles. And so the patient dyeth, but if he haue some remedye. And if it come of a colde cause: then is felt great gréenaunce, but the ach is not pas∣sing but in one place. And if it come of winde and ventositie, the ach stretcheth and spreadeth, and chaungeth place with grinding and swelling. If it com∣meth of a Postume, there is heate with ach, and Feauers with thirst and with roughnesse of tongue: If it commeth of Wormes, there is torment and ach and
abhomination. And sometime he casteth out wormes at the mouth. And shortly to speake, the euill is pestilent and r∣reyne, slaieng anone, but if there be ha∣stely succont and remedie. Then first the causes of the euill shall be swaged, dissolued, shedde and destroied with ba∣things and beatings, which dissolue, de∣part, and melte the matter, & with oynt∣ments, as Anacison, Irilion, and such other. If it ceaseth not by medicines that swage, then men shall take strong medicines, that dissolue, cleanse, and pourge: as it is contayned in Via∣tico. This passion hath a cousin, that is called Ilica passio, and hath that name of a gut that is called Ilion, and is a small gut and long, beclypping other guttes a∣bout, and he is vncouered and bare of flesh. Therefore therein is great féeling, and so this passion is called one of the euills, that is named Peracute, verye sharpe. For as Galen saith, it slayeth in one daye, or in twaine. And therefore it is more perillous than Passio colica. But it is cured in such a maner as Pas∣sio colica, for it is bred welnigh of such causes, but most of a postume, as Con∣stantine saith. AdditionLumbrici, or Elmitha are long white; wormes in the mawe, stomacke, and guts. The remedie is to take garlike; and vse it with meate. Addition. AdditionOF diuers kindes of wormes in the body, as Vermes, which ye Grecians all Scolices, Lumbrici, Ascarides, and Cucurbiti. Lumbrici be long white wormes in the body. Ascarides be smal little wormes as bigge as an haire, and halfe an inch of length, and they be in a gut called the longation, & these wormes lye ickeling in the undament, or fat hale. Cucurbiti, be square wormes in the body: some of the fashion lyke vnto maggets, of a swarte darkie coulour. Also there are oftentimes in young children, wormes like vnto Bombax, of halfe an inche long, hauing sixe féete, of a pale coulour, and some browne. There is also Sirones, which frette the handes, and in the féete termed Degges, Then is there also the King-worme, named Impetigo. There are Tettar wormes, care wormes, and wormes in the téeth: Oyle of bitter Almonds drop∣ped in the eares, and the iuyce of Rewe, and Oyle of Wormewoode, killeth the wormes in the eares. To cure the bex∣ing of Astarides, Garlicke in meates, because they bréede of cholar and fleg∣matike humours. For the dispatche of Lumbrici, take worme seede brused in Ale, or swéete wines fasting. Cucurbi∣ti, these wormes lyeng in the mawe, come of abundaunce of fleame. Aloes cicotrine is good to kill these wormes, and Garlike with the meates for nyne dayes. Impetigo, Zerua or Zarua, called of the Gréekes Lichen, of some Lichena. There are two kinds, the visurous scab and watrie is called a King worme, the other is a drye Tettarithis is infectious, and is soone taken by lyeng in an vn∣cleane bedde. The drye scabbe commeth of melancholy, the wet commeth of pu∣trified fleame and corrupt bloud. Som∣times there groweth wormes in the bo∣dy of vnaccustomed formes, after the su∣perfluousnesse of the humour, by yt which they are ingendered, some two, thrée, foure, fiue, sixe, or seauen yeardes long, some round, and some flat, and of the co∣lour of ashes, and of Crickets without féete. There are that haue féete verye short, as the Caterpiller: whereof some be two inches long, and some more. Forth of the secrets in nature procéede many deformed and rare wormes, which sometimes amaze the beholders. To kéepe the bodyes from such wormes, kéepe temperate dyet, and when there is fealte within the body any vnwon∣ted fretting or gnawing, drinks the filyng of the Elephants soothe, made into a kinde of duste, with the pow∣der of the Leaues of Tamariske, or els of the Pomegranate, in a temperate Aqua vitae, and it shall speedely destroy all such impediments.
¶Of Dissenteri. Cap. 50. Dissinteri a alo cal¦led xul∣ceratio in restinoru A slixe.ALso the wombe is grieued with sly∣ding and slippernesse, and with sharp biting of meate and of drinke, and of hu∣moures: as it fareth in thrée manner flixes of the wombe, which are named, Dissenteria, Lienteria, and Diarna. These be thrée diuers flixes: for as Con∣stantine saith, and Plato also, Dissenteria is a flixe of the wombe with flieng and shauing of the guts, and with bloodie dirt, and hath that name of Discenden∣do, to cut and diuide: for in that euill the guts be cut, and diuided. And com∣meth of kinde Cholera, or vnkinde: and fretteth and gnaweth, and flyeth & sha∣ueth the guttes. And sometime of salte fleame: & somtime of Melancholia adu∣sta: somtime of euil disposition of the li∣uer, & is called Epatica. For the lyuer is called in latine Eparepats: Sometime of féeblenesse of the vertue of withhold∣ing, that mye not with-hold the bloud: sometime of too great plentie of bloud, & namely of them that haue some member, or some lim cut of. For when bloud, that is vsed to feed and to nourish ye member that is cut off, findeth not that member to féede, bréedeth superfluitie in the liuer, & is cast rit for default of place to kéepe it: and is called properlye Dissenteria. And commeth ote of euill disposition of the guts: and then bréedeth thrée man∣ners thereof. In the first, the fatnesse of the guts is resolued and shedde, and the durt séemeth as it wer washing of flesh. In the second, the celles among the fold∣ings of the stomacke be shauen, & is like to shauing of parchment. In the thirde the guts come out as small péeces, and then be séene resolutions & departings, that be fleshly, sinewie, with pipes & wo∣sen. The first manner maye well be cu∣red, the second vnneth, and the third ne∣uer. Also Epatica may vnneth be cured. Then of this flixe that is called Dissen∣teria, the signes be bloudie durt, fretting and gnawing of the wombe, pinching & pricking ache: and sometime the ouer∣most guts be shauen, and sometime the middle, and sometime the neathermost. And by this diuersitie the ache is di∣uers nowe in the ouer-most wombe, now about the nauell, and now about the neathermost: and by diuersitie of the causes, the medicine is ofle diuers. Then first men vse to clense the humor, where the default is in, and then to stint the flixe, and that with sirops and Elec∣tuaries, with plaisters and oyntmentes which stoppe and constraine: and inward medicines helpe best, when the matter is in the ouermost guts: the vtter me∣dicine helpeth best, when the matter is in the neather guts. Then stopping medi∣cines and constraining, shall be both me∣dicine and diet. This infirmitie commeth of vnna∣turall cholar or of salte fleame,Addition of Me∣lancholy, as also by some impostuma∣tion from the liuer, and by vlceration in the bowells, and it may come by great straining. ¶Of Lientaria. Cap. 51. LIenteria is a flix of the wombe,Lienveria Imperfect digestion Leuor. with out passing of meate & drinke, with∣out digestion, and without any changing made in meate or in drinke: but right as it is taken, so it passeth out at ye nea∣ther ende. And commeth sometime of shauing of the dennes and foldings in the stomacke: and therfore the stomack may not with-hold meate and drinke. And sometime it commeth of gleymie and fleamatike humours, that cleaue to the foldings of the guts and stomacke. And sometime of a postume, for then the stomacke is grieued with meate and drinke: and therefore by doing of kind, the stomacke is moued to put out meate and drinke, ere it be deffed. This euill shall be cured as the foresaid euill that is called Dissenteria. Diarria is a sim∣ple flixe of the wombe, with but pas∣sing of defied meate and drinke, with∣out bloudie dirte: and commeth some∣time of multitude of meate and drinke, and of fléeting and sharpnesse thereof: and sometime of Cholera, which hath default in quantitie more than in qualy∣tie: for if the default were in qualitie, then the flixe shuld be called rather Dis∣senteria,
than Diarria. And sometime it commeth of humours, which runne and fleete from the head to the guts, and ey∣ther biteth them or maketh them slipper: and then the patient shiteth foame with blowen belles, as Hyppocrates saith, They that haue seamie dirte in the flixe that is called Diarria, haue fleame run∣ning from the head. This flixe is cured by scarce dyet, for multitude of meat and drinke is the cause. If it commeth of sharpnesse of humoures, men shall giue medicines that coole and moyst. And if it commeth of humours that fléete from the head, men shall giue such as destroyeth Fleame, and maketh it stint. AdditionThis infirmitie doth come of sodain sliding of the meate out of the sto∣macke, the mawe and the guts, without perfect decoction and digestion. Of the Dropsie. Cap. 52. Anasarca Iposatea, a kind of Dropsie. yposarca, Sarcites.THe Dropsie is an errour of the ver∣tue of digestion in the liuer, and brée∣deth swellyng of members as Constan∣tine saith. For while the vertue of di∣gestion is féebled in the lyuer, much su∣perfluitie is bred in the bodye, the which superfluitie is put out by strength of out putting, and bréedeth blowing & swel∣lyng of members. And the Dropsie com∣meth of thrée causes generally: Of vn∣kinde with-holding of superfluitie, and of vnkind running of moysture, of prin∣cipall distemperance of qualyties of the lyuer. For while superfluities be with-helde against kinde, as menstruate bloud and corrupt, and other such, the with-holding thereof ouersetteth vertues and bréedeth superfluities: of the which com∣meth boling and swelling of members. Of vnkinde running of moysture, com∣meth dissolution and departing of spi∣rites, and féeblenesse of vertues. And superfluities that come of indigestion, breede swellyng of members by distem∣perance of qualities. The vertue of digestion in the liuer, erreth in foure manners, as qualities be ioyned in foure: and so commeth foure manners of Dropsies, by passing and ex∣cesse of foure qualyties. The first Dropsie is called Leto∣flumo: and commeth of distemperance of coldnesse and moysture, and hath that name of white steame: for Lentes, is white. The seconde is called Hippo∣rca or Asurca, and commeth of di∣stemperaunce of colde and drinesse. The third is called Aschides, and commeth of distemperaunce of heate and of moy∣sture. The fourth is called Tympani∣tes, and commeth of distemperaunce of heate and drinesse. These Dropsies come in this man∣ner. While moysture and drinesse be di∣stempered in the lyuer, the vertue of di∣gestion is féebled, and therefore when that is feebled, many superfluities are bred, and the vertue of out putting put∣teth them to the vtter parts: and so ther∣of commeth great bolg and swelling. When coldnesse and drinesse be distem∣pered in the lyuer, then likewise ye ver∣tue of digestion is distempered and fee∣bled, and also the vertue of out putting is somewhat feebled. And therefore hée putteth not out superfluities to the vt∣termost parts of the skinne, but the su∣perfluities be helde in vnder the flesh. And therefore this manner Dropsie is called Bypposarca, that is to vnder∣stande, vnder the flesh, or fast by the flesh. Of distemperaunce of heate and of moysture, by dissolution and shedding of spirites, commeth feeblenesse of ey∣ther vertue of digestion and of out put∣ting: and therefore superfluities be not put out of all the bodye, but they are with-helde within betwéene the wombe and Siphac.Asites. kindes of hdsp in the belly. And this Dropsie is cal∣led Aschites, for if the wombes of them bée smitten, they sownoe as a Flac∣ket or a Bottle, for Arch is called a Bottle. By distemperaunce of heate, and of drynesse, spirites are dissolued and shedde: and so eyther vertue is fée∣bled. And then the superfluityes that come of indigestion, which commeth of heate, and of drynesse, tourneth into greate and thicke smoake, and are not putte out of all the bodye, but with-held about the wombe.
Timpani¦tis, that vvhich causeth ye bellye to swell, and is cause of shorre breath. And this manner dropsie is called Tim∣panitis, for if the wombe be smitten, it sowneth as a Taber or a Timbroll. Then in the first manner Dropsie, is boyling and swellyng in all the bodye: the vtter part is white and nesh, and if ones finger be thrust into the flesh, it maketh as it were an hole or a pit, and that pit ariseth afterward as high as the other flesh: the vrine is discouloured white and thicke. In the second man∣ner Dropsie, is not so great swellyng, but their flesh stinketh, the vrine is dis∣coloured and thinne. In the thirde, the wombe is blowen and swollen, & sow∣neth if it be smitten as a flacket, & the vrine, is red and thicke. In the fourth manner Dropsie, the wombe is straight and strongly haled, and sowneth as a ta∣ber or a timbrell, the vrine is coloured and thin, the necke and other parts bée made small, and the nosethrilles sharpe, the eyen hollow and round: the first two manner Dropsies be curable, ere they be confirmed and rotted: the seconde two, ere they be rotted and confirmed, be vn∣neth curable, and after neuer. Then he that hath the Dropsie is swollen in the body, softe, grieuous and heauie, and is thirstie, and the more he drinketh, the more he thirsteth, and the more he drin∣keth, the more he fayleth little and little, & swelleth also. To thē which haue such diuers Dropsies, men must giue diuers medicines: But such medicines helpe them, the which destroy and wast ven∣tosities, and winde, and humoures be∣tweene the shinne and the flesh, & com∣fort the vertue, which destroyeth super∣fluities in the liuer. Of all these Con∣stantine speaketh himselfe onely. AdditionAbundance of salte fleame and wa∣terish and ouer feeding of rawe and moyst meates breedeth the Dropsie. ¶Of the Iaundise. Cap. 53. Hictericia or Icteri∣cia, the Iavvnes.THE Iawndes is a defiling of the skinne without vneuennes thereof. And there be thrée manner of Iawndes, as it is said in Plateario: yeolow, which commeth of kinde Cholera, gréene, and blacke. The first is called Aurigo, for it maketh a man yeolow as golde. The second is called Pegenitis, which is to vnderstande, gréene: For it is grieed with gréene Cholera. The third is called Melanchyton, that is to say, blacke: for it commeth of blacke Cholera burnt. It commeth of strong heate and seething of bloud, passing & chaunging into Cho∣lera, and of passing heate that infecteth the bloud: and therefore this Cholera is borne with bloud to the vtter part of the skinne, and chaungeth and infecteth the skinne. Sometime it commeth of stopping of the oner or the neather hole of the case of the gall: and so Cholera reboundeth to the liuer, and infecteth the bloud: somtime it cōmeth of a postume, or of a continuall feuer, which changeth and burneth the bloud. Somtime of cor∣ruption of aire, or of meate & drink cor∣rupt: or of biting and stinging of a ve∣nemous worme which créepeth. In this manner the bloud is infected, and is sent to féeding of members, and as the bloud is infected, so it infecteth and corrupteth the members. With most hot Iawndes commeth infection of all the bodye, hea∣ting of the right side, i st, bitternes of mouth, ache of the forhead, ringing in the eares, vrine coloured, and the foame thereof yeolow, or greene, or blacke, and all that commeth out of the body, which is infected with the same colour. If it commeth of stopping of the ouer hole, it changeth and dyeth all the nether parts, so that they be all strongly dyed. And contrariwise, if it commeth of the nea∣ther stopping: all the ouer parts be more dyed, and the nether lesse. And if it com∣meth of a feauer, by vertue and strength of kinde, and after the seuenth daye, in some daye of chaunging, with slaking of the feauer, and with reléeuing of the pa∣tient, and with withdrawing of the acci∣dent, it is a good token: such colouring betokeneth that the matter of the Fea∣uer is than purged. And if it cōmeth by strength of accident, as it fareth ofte be∣fore the seuenth daye, it betokeneth pe∣rill. For it is a signe and a token that the matter commeth vpwarde, for lyke∣nesse, or for fumositie, or for sharpenesse and biting, as Galen saith openly vpon
Aphor. And oft such a passion and euill is cured by bloud letting, and by medi∣cines, which coole and chaunge, layd to: and namely vpon the region of the ly∣uer, for there the bloud is most infected, as in his owne well. Also men giue them inward in dyet, & in medicine those things, which swage and cleanse bloud, and chaunge euill disposition of bloud. And if it commeth of stopping, men giue medicines which shed and open: but not too hot, as it is said in Viatico. AdditionThese three kindes of Iawnes. Agri∣aca yeolow, of some Penateleon the greene sicknesse: Melankyron, the blacke Iawnes. The yeolow Iaundes, commeth after long sicknes or thought. The greene Iawndes commeth of yeo∣low cholar, mixt with putrified fleme. The blacke Iawndes commeth of cou∣lour adust, or melancholy and putrifi∣ed bloud. ¶Of Emoroides 1. Cap. 54. Haemer∣rhoides. Emerodes and pilesEMoroides be fiue veynes, which stretch out at the arse, of the which veynes come diuers passions and euills, as bolning & swellyng, with-holding, & flixe. And somtime by vertue & strength of kind, superfluities be sent & drawn to the said parts, & the saide veynes beeing broken, the superfluities be thrust out, & the body is deliuered of many sicknesses and euills. But if the flixe and running passeth measure, then come many euils. And when they be held by custome, then followe full great sicknesse and euilles, as Dropsie, Tisike, Madnesse, Melan∣choly. These veynes swell in this man∣ner. The foresayde superfluities & dyrte commeth downe to the mouthes of the veynes, and stoppe and make the sayde mouths thicke: and thereof commeth swellyng. Sometime the mouth of the veynes, be riuen togethers, & made voy∣stous and thicke, with strong drinesse. And sometime they be burnt of Chirur∣gions for too great running, and scarres of the burning are séene, and then they are vnneth opened or neuer. Sometime the heads of the veynes be stopped by thicknesse of bloud: and somtime opened ouer measure by sharp∣nesse and fléeting of bloud. With too great holding commeth these signes hea∣uinesse of head, palenesse of face, & wan∣nesse, heauinesse of loynes and of ioynts, disposition to Dropsie and to Tisike. With great fleeting and running, com∣meth feeblenesse and leannesse of bodye, changing of colour and of hiewe, ache & gnawing in the neather part of the bo∣dy. And if it be continuall and passing measure, it bréedeth full great passiens and euills. And if the mouthes of the veynes runne too swiftlye, they shall be stinted with medicines that stint by lyttle and lyttle. But namely if the E∣uill be olde, least the bloud, be sodainlye smit to some member, and then a worse euill is bred thereof. Therefore Hippo∣crates sayth, To them which heale olde Emoroides, but if they leaue one vn∣healed, it is perill. And if they be too lyghtlye cloased, they shall be opened with medicines that soften and open. Emerodes or pyles,Addition be veynes in the extreame parts of the longation, to whom doth happen diuers times two sundry passions, the first is lyke teates, and they will bleede, they be very E∣merodes, the other be lyke wartes, and they will itche, and water & smart, and they be named the Pyles: and in the same place doth breed other infirmi∣ties, as the falling out of the funda∣ment, fistels, festures, and Puxe. These impediments commeth of malitious humours of the mawe, and in the guts. The powder of ginger, and of a gall, wherewith inke is made, mixt with linseed oyle, & put to the place, is very good. ¶Of ache of the reynes. Cap. 55. AChe of the reynes in Gréeke is cal∣led Refrenesis,Nephroi, Rines, the reynes, of a mans backe the which ache hath affinitie with the euill is yt called Colica passio. But they be diuers: for Colica passio chaungeth and is vnstable, for it chaungeth euery daye from that one side to that other. The ache of the reynes is stable and stedfast.
The loynes and reynes haue ache and passion, that come somtime of swelling, Sometime of repletion of humoures, sometime of winde and ventositie, and sometime of the stone. All these bréede full great ache and griefe, and namely if heate be the cause: and the signe there∣of is the high coulour of vrine, sharpe ache and pricking. If colde be the cause, the vrine is rawe, and the ache slowe. The stone and grauell, and other diners superfluities breed osle in the reynes: & that commeth namely of drinke of sli∣mie water, and of grose dyet. For ther∣of commeth stoppings in the reynes or in the bladder, and sometime chaungeth into substaunce of stones or grauell, by working of strong heate. They yt haue the stone, haue manye disaduauntages, that is to wit, difficultie of pissing, with Colica passio, and other such: for by stop∣ping of the stone, the wayes of pissing be stopped, and then commeth Stranguria, when a man passeth with difficultie dropping meale. Sometime the wayes be all stopped, and pissing is all for∣bode, and that euill is called, Dissuria: for of gleymie humoures in the reynes and in the bladder commeth the stone, in young men, namely in the reynes, and in children in the bladder, for the necke of their bladder is straight, and letteth the passage of the matter, and so the stone is bred, as Costantine saith. Also in chil∣dren the vrine is thicke, because of glei∣mie dyet, and gleymie things is more a∣ble to be rouled & to cleaue togethers: and therefore ofte the stone bréedeth in small children. And if the stone or the matter be in the reynes, it is knowen by sléeping of the foote and leg on the lefte side. And if it be in the bladder, the ache is about the share and twiste, betwéene the genitours, and the hole at the ridge bones ende. Also the grauell that com∣meth of the reynes be redde, and if they come of the bladder they be white: and a stone that is bred of gleymie humour, is easely dissolued and brought out: and if it be bred of grauell, it is hard to dis∣solue and to be broken. And in women the stone bréedeth more seldome than in men, for the wayes be more large, and heate and drinesse more féeble, to make the humours rotlewe: and also oft pur∣gations,Copy or quauie. for they be purged of many su∣perfluities by mēstrual bloud. He yt hath this euill, shall be purged in this man∣ner: They shall be ofte bathed in hotte baths, that dissolue, and open: and they shall be fed with meate and drink that is easie for to desie, & cōforted with me∣dicines, that dissolue, and open, & cleanse: and they shall be occupied with some bu∣sinesse: and sometime they shall be ta∣ken to surgerie, and namely children, and then young folke, for in age cutting is perillous, for after fortie yeare this E∣uill is incurable, as it is sayd in Aphor. After fortie yeare, be that hath the stone is not saued. Sometime commeth vn∣willyng pissing, and that euill is called Diampnes, or Diabethica passio.Diamp∣nes a pas∣siō in the bladder: this dis∣cale must bee cured with skil∣full medi∣cines, and not vrish hasly cor∣rections. And Constantine sayeth, that it commeth of default of vertue of with-holding: for there is great strong drawing of hu∣mours to the reynes, and great super∣fluitie commeth to the bladder, the which the bladder not being able to sustain, put∣teth out with pissing. Also sometime it commeth of softening of sinewes, and of slaking of brawnes in the necke of the bladder. Sometime of heauinesse of sléepe, and of multitude of humours, as it fareth in children that vnknowenlye pisse in their beddes, and in dronken people: and it is the propertie of them that haue this Euill, to bée a thrist alwaye, and maye vnneth haue wa∣ter inough,Diabetica passio, im¦moderate pissing. as Constantine sayeth: and therefore as they drinke the water, so they pisse it. Sometime it chaunceth of a humor that stoppeth sodainly yt wayes of the pisse and wringeth out by strength of pressing the moysture that is therein conteyned. To them that haue this foule euill, things that slake heate be néedfull, and sharpe sauouring things, that com∣fort and quench the heate of the reynes, and bringeth the sinewes that be softe∣ned to their owne due state, and this is done by drenches, electuaries, plaisters, & oyntments. But a wise leach and a re∣die, shall alway beware, that he lay not in this case, medicines that be too moyst, for they making it more softe shoulde
grieue: Nor too drye things, for suche should sharpe the heate, but they shall laye too, now these, now them, that the sore place be moistéd and cooled by cold things, and that the moysture be con∣strained by drye things, & the sore mem∣ber comforted. Ouer all things the dy∣et shall be temperate: for too hot things grieue the reynes and loynes. Also too colde things let the vertue of digestion, in substaunce and hollownesse of the ly∣uer. It is good to giue to such men tem∣perate and compouned medicines: for ofte the mater is such and the cause also. AdditionDiuers impediments are in the back, the cricke, aking, straining of powers, abundaunce of reume is the cause of paine. ¶Of Hemia, Cap. 56. Kyli. Names.HErnia is a skinne in the wombe, and is called Siphac, and breaketh some∣time. Siphae is a skinne that departeth the bowels from the gendring members: as Diafragma is a skinne, that depart∣teth and is set betweene the bowelles & the spirituall members: and so Hernia is as it were the neather midriffe, and Diafragma the ouer midriffe. And for Hernia the neather midriffe holdeth up the bowells, if it hap that this Hernia be broke, a great deale of the bowels fal downe into the codde of the genitours. Then if it happen that this skin, that is called Hernia be broke, by stretching and reaching, or working of heate con∣strained, or laked and softened by moy∣sture: then it falleth that the bowelles slide downward into the codde of the ge∣nitors, and that not without great sore∣nesse. This skinne is dealed or slaked, sometime by an outward cause, as by too great trauaile of bodye, or by great strogling and wrastling. Sometime by smiting or by falling, or by such other. And sometime by too great wayght and weying downewarde of the other mem∣bers, and by forcing; as by too great sin∣ging and crieng. Sometime by an outward cause, and by great strength of heate and sharpnes of hot humours cutting and slitting the skinne. Sometime by too great moy∣sture, slaking & stretching the sinewes and brawnes, and in what manner it befal, it is more resely curable in the be∣ginning, and namely in a young men. And if that breach be great and old, and with breaking of the sinew, it is soudred vnneth or neuer. For it is healed with great difficultie, as Constantine sayeth. But ofte it is saued by dyet and medi∣cine: and sometime by cutting and sur∣gerie. Then Authours tell, that slopping things helpe such men, and medicines that soudreth, both in meate and in me∣dicine, as Electuaries taken within, and baulmings, and bathings, and Oynt∣mentes without. Ouer all things it is saide, that scarce dyet is best, and conti∣nence, namely of the seruice of Venus, and of all mouing. And such men shuld ouer all things beware of things that bréede ventositie, and winde, and swel∣ling. For as the Commentour sayeth, Ventositie and winde, grieue most Her∣nious men that be so broke. Ther are three speciall kindes,Addition Hernia aquosa, Hernia ventosa, Hernia carno∣sa, waterish, windy, & fleshy. These im∣pediments be ingendred in the coddes. Also there is Euterocela, Epiplocela, & Hidrocela. The first of these is, when the guts fall out of the bodye into the codde: ihe second is when the Pellicle or small rime falleth downe with the guts into the codde, the third anoyeth the stones. There is also Parocela, Sar∣cocela, Circocela, Flesh groweth in the codde about the stones, the swelling in the veynes, and the stayeng of the rupture. ¶Of Arthetica Passio. Cap. 57. ARthetica is an ache and euill in the fingers and toes,Morthus atculuis the goute in the oynis. with swelling and fore ache. And when it is in the fingers, it is called Ciragra, and in the toes it is named Podagra. If it be in the whitle∣bones and ioyntes, it is called Sciatua passio, commeth of cholaricke bloud, and fleamaticke humour, and commeth most of reumaticke cause.
If bloud be the cause, it is knowen by rednesse of the place, and by heate and swellyng of the beynes of the sore place, and of all the bodie, by hot dyet had be∣fore: and most by age, and by a region like, for it moueth most in spring time. If cholaricke humour be the cause, it is knowen by full strong ache, and sore∣nesse, and by stretching and halyng, and drynesse of sinnewes, by heate of his owne place, by colour redde, meddeled with yeolow, and by swellyng. And moueth most in Summer, and most by hot dyet and drye, and in such a coun∣trey, and ofte many cholaricke superflu∣ities are cast out by spewing and shi∣ting. Hot things grieue, and cold things helpe and comfort. And if steame be the cause, it is knowen by disposition of steame, contrary dyet, by like ache, by swellyng of the place, by sore ache and strong, by little rednesse or none. If it commeth of rumatike cause, it is know∣en by heavinesse of the hèad, by mouing of humoures, tinglyng and fléeting in the ridge beane, and about the shoul∣ders. This euill is worst, for it draweth togethers & maketh the sinewes of the fingers, toes, and the féete to shrinke together, and draweth out and wasteth substantiall humours in the handes, and maketh them drie, and clighted, and clo∣sed, and vnmightie to be opened: also it maketh the ioyntes of the fingers vn∣séemely with knottie bunches. But this sicknesse maye soone be healed, & when it is olde, vnneth it is curable, namely, when it is tourned into knottie harde∣nesse: and so the matter that is in de∣fault, shall be pourged with couenable medicine, and the patient shall be lette bloud. If bloud be the cause, the heate shal be smit againe with cold medicines. Sometime colde humour is the cause, and then it shall be daulmed and com∣forted with hotte Playsters and Oynt∣mentes. And the patient shall abstaine from great meates, and namely from such as bréede winde, and swellyng, for ofte bentositie and winde maketh this euill more grieuous. AdditionClaragra, Podagra, Sciatica, is the goute in the handes, feete, & hippes. The cause of this infirmitie, commeth of corrupt bloud, as also of fleumatike humour, or els of a choloricke humor. If it come of bloud or rumatike flume, the place will swell and be redde, and the veynes full. If of cholar, the place swelleth not, but is drye, smooth, and leane, with pricking and burning. If this disease haue continued, after fortye yeares it will be hardly cured. The remedye is to auoyde contagious meates and drinkes, as winesthat bee pearcing, newe beere, and ale, hotte bread and cakes, all shell fish, and water foule, Pigeons and Eeles. Vse Bathes, such as the learned Phisitions shall appoynt, Oyle of swallowes, Oyle of Frogs, Oyle of leate, & to conclude, Oyle of Patience. ¶Of Gutta Sciatica. Cap. 58. GVtta Sciatica is an euill that com∣meth of humoures, which fall downe into the great sinnewe, that is betwéene the greate brawnes of the haunche as Constantine sayeth. And commeth of gleymie humoures gathe∣red together in the hollownesse of the ioyntes, and of the haunche. Sometime of bloudie humoures meddled with cho∣lar. And all these are cause of ache, the which ache stretcheth into the legges, and anone to the héele, and also anone to the lyttle toe. The cause thereof is, as the Com∣mentatour sayth, that from the whirle∣bone in the middle of the haunche, & of the legge, passeth a sinewe to the vtter anele bone of the foote, and scam those to the lyttle toe: and this is cause, why in this euill, ache stretcheth to that litle toe. And therefore it is, that they that haue the stone in the reynes, féele in that place tinglyng and sléeping for stopping of the sinnewe, wherefore the spirites maye not come to that place in due manner. And the ache is sometime in one side, and sometime in either: but it is worse in the lefte side, than in the right side.
And the cause thereof is, for in the right side is more heate than in the lefte side, and therefore it dissolueth and defieth the matter there gathered more easelye: and in the lefte side is lesse heate, and the matter is more sad and thicke, and worse to defie and destroye. In this E∣uill is little ache, quaking, pricking and burning, namely in young men of hotte complection, and namely if heare be the cause: and in that cause it helpeth and profiteth to be let bloud in the veyne which is called Sophena, and that veyne is vnder the ancle bone. Also the Pati∣ent shall be purged and healed, as in the euill, which is called Passio Arthetica. Also euery one which hath this passion Sciatica, as he that hath Pasio Arthe∣tica, shall beware of too great repletion of meate and of drinke, and namely of the workes of Venus: for it sharpeth most rume, and letteth digestion, for losse of spirites and of pure bloud and cleane, as Constantine saith. Also the body shal be first purged and cleansed within, and then men shall laye too playsters with∣out, as the place of keth. For medicine helpeth and profiteth lyttle without, but if the matter, which is ye cause of ye euil, be withdrawen within, as Con. saith. Also he saith yt Dioscorides saith, that it helpeth them much, yt haue this euil that is called Sciatica passio, if the sore place be comforted with hot dirte of a Cowe. For it dryeth mightely, namely if it be tempered with Galbanum, and franken∣cense, and with vineger. ¶Of Podagta. Cap. 59. COnstantine sayth, that Podagra is a sore euill in the féete, and namelye in the wrestes and soles, with stretching of the sinewe and quaking, and commeth of euill humoures, which fall downe to the wrest of the féete. And if the humors be colde and thicke, then is great stret∣ching and swellyng, but the ache is not full pitching, nor great swellyng maye not be, for the féete haue but little flesh, and therefore they maye not stronglye swell, for swellyng bréedeth in fleshly members. This euill bréedeth in them, which lyue casely and softe, and trauayle but little: and cleanse not the body of super∣fluities of humours, namely if they eate much and drinke. For of such thinges, come superfluities of humoures, which bréede reumes, that drop downe to the féet, and namely when they be féeble, and may not put off the kinde of superflui∣tie. And that commeth most of the ser∣uice of Venus: for that service moneth and shaketh all the cheyning & ioyning of the bodie, as Constantine sayth. Also it heateth, and therefore it moueth hu∣mours, and flaketh & breaketh sinewes. And therefore it happeneth, that gelded men haue not Podagra, for they serue not Venus: nor likewise children nor women but seld, and that is because they be purged with menstruall bloud. Ther∣fore Ipocras sayth, that women haue not Podagra, except in case that menstruall bloud fayle. If this euil commeth to young men in Spring time, it is cura∣ble: but if it commeth in Haruest, and indureth to Winter it is hard to heale, as it sayd in Aphor. And the Commen∣tour telleth the cause thereof, by dome of Astronomie in this manner.The age of the Moone. The first age of the Moone he saith, is hot & moist: The second, is hot & dry: The third, is colde and drye: The fourth, is cold and moy,  the first age, by heate, the matter is departed, and by moisture, shed: In the second age and the fourth, the matter is kept, and is perfectly de∣fied. In the first age of the nexte Moone thereafter it is perfectly defied. And so in the seconde age of the hot Moone and drye, the matter is all wasted: & within sixe wéekes, which contaíneth xl. dayes, the euill is full cured, & namely in Sum∣mer, for in Haruest and in Winter the matter is thikckened & sadded, and is not obedient to digestion. Then first, the matter of this euill shall be purged, and after in the beginning it shall be smit a∣gaine with colde medicines laid too with out: hot medicines which dissolue and shed, shal not be laid too in the beginning while the cause is renmatike. And if the matter be colde, the renme must be the more excited and stirred.
And therfore in the beginning, men shal vse strong Repercassiues in a hot cause, and lesse strong in a colde cause, lease the matter were hard. Then he shall haue stewings and balming, and oyntmentes hot or cold as the matter requireth. The patient shal vse lyght and temperate di∣et, and he must beware ouer all things, of the seruice of Venus, and he shall vse lyght and also meanly trauaile. ¶Of a Postume, Cap. 60. Aposte∣ma. Postume. A Postume is gathered of superfluitie of humours in some member, and maketh rotting and swellyng as Con∣stantine saith. It falleth sometime, that a member impossumeth through an out∣ward cause, as Constantine saith: as of smiting, of a wound, of falling, of break∣ing, and brusing, and boyshing, and hur∣teling: for of all such things, humoures moue ofte and come to the sore place, & putteth and hurleth euery each with o∣ther, and wereth hot and rotteth. Som∣time a postume commeth of an inward cause, as of superfluitie of corrupt hu∣mors, that oft runneth and commeth to∣gethers to a certaine place, and that in two manners: for sometime by gathe∣ring of matter in their owne member: & somtime by running of matter out of one member into another: and such run∣ning hath many causes, as Constantine saith. The first is strength of the mem∣ber, that putteth off noyfull things: for some principall and noble members dis∣charge themselues of superfluities, as the braine dischargeth himselfe of fleuma∣ticke humour, and of sumositie. The se∣cond cause, is féeblenesse of the member that receiueth: for féeble members re∣ceiue superfluities, which come downe from the ouer and stronger members, as the skin & the flesh. The third cause, is multitude of humors, the which, when great superfluitie of them is in the more veynes, they be shed into ye lesse veynes, & enter into the substance of members, which be of parts like: and that which is more than is néedful to yt food, tunneth to the member, and the way is closed, & maketh a postume. The fourth is large∣nesse of the veynes, by whom those hu∣mors run easely from member to mem∣ber. The fifth cause, is moysture of hu∣mors and subtilnesse, the which of easie mouing be casely shed: and when they be shed, they are gathered in some mem∣ber, and there they be helde and thrust by straightnes of the member, and huried, and defiled, and disposed to rotting. The sixt cause, is the disposition of the mem∣bers: for kindly the nether members re∣ceiue supersluitie of the euer members, as the members of the head put downe their superfluities, somtime to yt brawnes and veynes of the throte, & so commeth Squinancie. Sometime to the members of the breast, and so commeth hotches & postumes in the lungs. A postume com∣meth in this manner: While humours haue default in quantitie, and maye not be wasted by heat, nor put out by strēgth of vertue, they be receiued in the hollow∣nes of members, & ther boyle & putrifie, & as peast set in an ouer, & dryed by fire, receiueth a manner crusting in the vtter side, vnder the which crust the paast is softe: so the humour gathered, by heats boyleth and maketh a manner crust a∣boue, vnder the which crust rotted hu∣mor is bidde, and swelleth: and such a swellyng is called Apostema. And som∣time it commeth of ventositie and of minde, and is called Bubo. Sometime of a simple humour, as of bloud, and is called Fleugmon. The tokens thereof, be rednesse which commeth of the cou∣lour of bloud: hardnesse commeth of multitude of matter, and of heate, which wasteth and consumeth watry matter: quapping and leaping, by reason of ven∣tositie and of sumositie: shifting & put∣ting, sore ache, by reason of stretching: heate, by reason of hot matter: & swel∣lyng, by reason of multitude of matter. In this manner is made a Postunis of simple Cholera and red, and is called, Herisipila, that is, holy fire, Per Anti∣frasin, that is to say, by contrary man∣ner of speaking. And another maner postume com∣meth of pure Cholera, and gnaweth and fretteth ye member yt it is in, & is called among Phisitians. Herpes Essimoncus,
as it were gnawing and fretting it selfe. In the same manner wise a postume commeth of fleame, and is called Zuma, or Palus. For right as in moores and in maraise, is much superfluitie of slyme & of wose, so in this postume is much su∣perfluitie. And if thou thrustest thy fin∣ger therevpon, it denteth in: for the run∣ning matter withdraweth, and letteth not the finger to enter, and then in the middle is a pit, as it were the bore of an hole, and when the finger is awaye, the matter commeth againe, and filleth all the place. The tokens of these Po∣stumes be whitenesse, for the matter is white: softenesse, for the matter is flée∣ting: and soft ach, for the matter with his coldnesse swageth the feelyng. In a postume that commeth of red Cholera, the signes be as it were coutrarye: for the heate is strong, because that ye mat∣ter is full hot: it is redde with yeolow∣nesse, for the Cholera is not red, but yeo∣low: great ache and pricking, for the matter is sharpe. Of Melancholia com∣meth a postume, and if the matter be all without, the postume is called Schrosis. And if the matter be some within, and some without: then commeth a postume which is called Cancer, a Canker, to the lykenesse of a Crab. For in lykewise as a Crabbe is broad by the ridge, and the armes stretche by the sides: so in this postume is a manner swellyng in stéed of the ridge, and the braunches of hu∣mors stretch hether and thether in stéed of armes. Also it croepeth little and lit∣tle, gnawing and fretting the flesh and sinewes slowly to the sight as it were a Crab. The signes therof be, great hard∣nesse, for when the matter is earthly and melancholike, it is full thicke and sadde: the colour is wanne, for the matter is not all blacke: the ach is scarse or none for vnféelingnesse thereof, for the matter hath two slayeng qualities, coldenesse, and drynesse: and it gnaweth and fret∣reth alwaye, and costumpeth the flesh a∣none to the rootes of the sinewes, and infecteth the bones that reach thereto: and therefore this euill is as it were pe∣stilence euill. Among these gnawing & fretting postumes is such an order. For Noli me tangere is a cankrie postume in the sace, and fretteth little and little, and lesse then other: and the Canhertretheth more than the postume, which is called Lupus. And Herisipila the holy fire, fret∣teth most. And Fistula the fester fretteth not, but rotteth within, and maketh the flesh rotlewe, & the sinewes shrinke,th vve or  alue. and draweth them to quitter, and corrump∣eth sinewes sometime, and maketh the bones to fall. And it commeth often and many times of a wound, which is euill kept, when the bone, which is there vn∣der is infected with quitter, and so the féeding that commeth thereto, tourneth into this manner, for because the vtter part breaketh and the wound runneth, sometime the wound is closed, and som∣time it, breaketh againe, and if the Fe∣ster be full colde, vnneth it is curable. Ofte about the wound, be manye open holes: For a fester hath a deepe wound within, and a straight and a narrowe without: and the Caker in contrari∣wise hath a wide wounde without, and straight within: and therefore it is more harder to helpe. Sometime as fester com∣meth, of a reume, or of an olde wounde, & sometime of a postume euill healed, & namely if the postume and the wounde be made too moyst, and hath many holes, out of the which holes issueth water of diuers colours, now white, now yeolow. And ofte these holes be cloased in one place, and breake out in another. Other postumes there be, which come of con∣trary matter, as it fareth in a postume, which is called Antrax, which Constan∣tine calleth Carbunculus, for it burneth as a coale: and it commeth of full wood matter and venemous, & of matter that is compowned, & it is knowen by those lynes, which be therein of diuers cou∣lours: and is shaped lyke vnto a rodde, and therein be some lines red and blou∣die, and some yeolow and cholaricke: some be somewhat white and fleuma∣tike, and some wanne and melancho∣licke: Some cleare, and come of salte fleame, and so of other vnkinde hu∣moures. The tokens of that Postume Antrax, be passing ache, burning and pitching, and pricking in the ground.
In the head of the postume bréedeth a whelke or a blaine, which betokeneth and signifieth, that heate followeth the humour that hath masterie, and hath in a gathering a shape lyke vnto a rodde, di∣stinguished with lynes of diuers cou∣lours, and it séemeth that it is drawen to the grounde thereof with a manner thred fastened to the vtter parte of the bladder in the middle. To heale and to saue postumes, men vse in the beginning, Repercussiues, but if the matter be woode and vene∣mous, as it fareth in Herisipila, holye fire, and in the postume which is called Antrax: for in such, men shall not laye Repercussiues to ye sore, but rather those things that swage and ease, least the venemous matter be smitten inward to the inner members, and so cause more griefe and disease. Then when the Po∣stume is in state, men shall vse tempe∣ring things and shedding, and softning, and cupping. And when the postume is opened, or els broken, and the matter brought out, then men shall vse medi∣cines that close and souder, & that bréed good flesh. To other postumes, which hane worse accidents and stronger, men shall vse such medicines, as men doe vse against the Canker and Festure, & other such, for there as kinde fayleth, the pati∣ent shall be first cleansed within. And men shall ordaine therefore remedye as the place as keth. Against the Canker, men shall minister medicines, which burne and fret the dead flesh. Against a Fester men shall vse medicines, which diye, and wast, and cleanse, and washeth of the quitter. And if these profite not: then he shall be put to Surgerie. For it is more safetie, that one corrupt part of an whole body be burned or cut away, then all that other deale be spilte and corrupt and vtterly destroyed. Further∣more afterward against venomous po∣stumes, as against postumes, which be called Antrax,Antrax is a felon or whisslavv men shall ordaine a re∣medie wately and soone: for he slayeth soone, but if succour come redely & soone. Then it is good counsayle, but some o∣ther things let, to let bloud in the be∣ginning, in the same side, in ye next place to the gathering of the postume. For it is not sure in such a case to lette bloud in the contrary side, least the mat∣ter be drawen into the body, & to noble mēbers, while the matter is venomous, and than it is needfull and good to drink Triacle with hot wine, and to annoynt therewith the sore place. For if the tri∣acle be proued,Triacle in a plaister. and it be a very Antrax, the Triacle shall drawe out the matter that is drye and venemous, and he shall dry it so, that thou mightest make pow∣der thereof, as it were ashes: and then Triacle shall be layed too fresh often∣times, till the postume breake, and when it is broke, it is no dread of perill. The yolke of an egge baked with salt, work∣eth the same, if it be often layde to the postume, for it swageth and easeth the same, and breaketh the postume, as the Commentour saith. Apostumes be of diuers causes, and breede in sundrye places: the inwarde Apostumes be most daungerous, which are in the head, stomack, lunges, splene, and bowells. Flegmon, commeth of bloud. Zimie of fleame, or Zunia. Herisipila commeth of cholar, Cancri or Sclitos, of melancholy, or cholar a∣dusted. Byles, botches, blaynes, and such lyke, be lesse daungerous, so that in the comming foorth, for want of skill, they bee not sunke in againe: for where there is not sufficicieut heate of bodye to force them foorth, they stop the powers, and suffocate to death. ¶Of Blaynes. Cap. 61. VLcera he called some blaynes,Vlcera, Water blaines & flock to. that spring all about in the bodye, and commeth ofte of the humour that is betwéene the skinne and the flesh: and are called Vlcera, as Constantine say∣eth In fine Viatici: For in the vtter part of the skinne, by sharpnesse of hu∣mour, they make departing of conti∣nuaunce. The matter of them is subtil moisture of bloud, or of cholar, that cōmeth from the inner parts to the vtter, & anone to the vtter skin of the bodye by vertue &
strength of kind, or of accident of euills. Suth blaines defyle the skinne, and they make it vnseemely and loathfome: And bréedeth tickeling, itching, and bi∣ting in the flesh, and reaueth the skinne from the flesh. And sometime if they be continuall, they bée messengers and pro∣nostifie the perill of Leprehoode. Who that desireth to bée frée and to be deliue∣red of them, shall not leane to be purged within of hot superfluities of humours, which infect and corrupt the body. Then he shall vse dry bathes, which consume and waste meanelye the humours, that make these blaines in the fleshe, and in the skinne: as quantitie and qualitye asketh. And hée shall spare dronken∣shippe, and too laxatiue dyet. And he shall withdrawe him from trauayle and bu∣sinesse. Of Pustules. Chap. 62. Pustule. Wheles or pushesPUstules be called gatherings of Po∣stumes and superfluitie in the vtter parte of the bodye: and bée bred little and little, and in sundry wise. For kinde putteth off noyfull superfluityes to the vtter partes of the bodye: the which blaynes come often and spring of super∣fluitie of meate and drinke: and nouri∣shing of the bodye. And therefore skil∣fully wise and discréete men call them Pustulas, & Pabulas also, as Remigius sayth. And therefore they hight and bée called Pustule. For they bée small and little blaines of venimons and burning quitter, and of rottennesse, which is con∣teined within them, as Isidore sayeth. And Constantine sayth, that those fore∣sayd blaines bée called Variole; the poxe in children: and also sometime in men of age. In small children such blaines bée healthfull: and is a good token of health, that commeth afterwarde, as the Commentour sayth. There the Poxe bréede of corrup∣tion of rotted bloud. For in children and in young men, if the poxe breake not out, it is dread that Leaperhood com∣meth afterward. For it commeth in chil∣dren of menstrual bloud, which they wer fed with in the mothers wombe. The which bloud is put out to the vtter parts, by vertue and strength of kinde. And the children be deliuered of perill, yt shoulde haue sallen afterward. Also it happeneth in men of full age, and in olde men in Feauers about the time of chaunging, that such blaines breake out by vertue and strength of kinde putting out of the kinde of the Feauer to the vtter partes. And therefore neither in these, neither in the other, shall be Repercussiues laide too, least the matter be borne inward: for it is somewhat woode.Of a pesti¦lēt force. Neuerthelesse a∣bout the eien in this rase men shall lays some light repercussiues, least the quittet of blaines hurt some curtill of the eye, or the blacke of the eie. In all other places a readie Phisiti∣on draweth such kinde to the vtter partes, as farre forth as he may, except the place about the eyen. For there the matter shall be smit againe, and brought into other places, least the matter that is wood and violent, griue and hurt the ten∣der substance of the eyen. Also a readye nurse, and a readye Phisition both in a child, and in a man of age shall be ware, that such blaines be not broke nor ope∣ned before, namely about the face: nei∣ther for itching nor for any other cause, least vnséemely and foule pittes abide in the face alwaye. Of many other causes such blaines and Poxe bréede in the bo∣dy: Now of flumatike matter commeth white and softe and running: nowe of cholarik matter commeth sharp pitching and hard. For cholarike humour shedde betwéene the skinne and the flesh, ope∣neth and biteth the skinne by heate and sharpnesse, and bréedeth many blaines, in the vtter parts of the skinne, but they bée very small and lyttle, as it were the seedes of Milij. And therefore among au∣thours this euil is called Herpes, or Mi∣lij, or Granulosus, an euill full of grey∣nes. Of what matter so euer it be that such bleines come, if they come oft and continually, it is good, that the matter which the defaulte is in, be pourged with due medicine. And then if the bo∣dy be full repleate, he shal be let bloud, or be cupped or horned. And the patient shal bée holpe with due bathes, which drye
and wast huomurs, and also with coue∣nable ointments. AdditionIf the pushes or poxe be white, of fleame, if red, of ill bloud, if drie and harde, of Cholar, is blacke, then of me∣lancholye, which is a token of death. Of Scabbes. chap. 63. Psora. Scabies. Scabbes.A Scabbe is corruption of the skinne, and commeth of corrupt humoures, which bée betwéene the skinne and the flesh and hurteth & noieth, and gréeueth and desoyleth the body. For as Constan∣tine sayth and affirmeth, Kinde putteth out euill humours, and voideth them to the vtter partes of the bodye, to cleanse and purge the inner partes. And if those foresayde humours bée subtill and small, then they be easily and lightly dis∣solued and wasted by fumosities and sweate. And if they be great and thicke, they be vnder the skinne, and breed scabs in the bodie. And humour so closed be∣twéene the skinne and the flesh, if it bee cholarike, and some deale with helde, it bréedeth a drye scabbe and not quitiery, with chinnes and cliffes, with itching & pitching. And if the humour be fleama∣tike: oft it maketh great scabs & white, with scales, and without great itching: for wet scabs with quitter and scales, with lyke itching, sheweth and betoke∣neth, that the bloud is medled with Cho∣lera: And commeth oft of great repleti∣on of the bodye, and also oft of sicknesse tant came before: by the which sick∣nesse the vertues be oppressed and ouer∣set, and superfluities increase. Also in some men is an olde scabbe, that com∣meth of default of the spleane. And such a scabbe though is passe, it commeth lightlye againe. Scabbes bée curable with medicines that drye and consume, and wast and cleanse within and with∣out. AdditionScabi be diuerse, as Scabies fursure∣a, and Scabies sabina, some scabbes are like Hoppes, some like branne. Of a drie scabbe and itch. Chap. 64. A Drie scab is corruption of humour betwéene the skinne and the flesh,Impetigo A kind of Ring∣worme that chaungeth and grieueth the bodie, and maketh it itch. For some Cholarike superfluitie, that is smoaky, is put and throwne from the inner partes to the vtter part of the skinne, and infecteth the skinne, and maketh it full of smal pim∣ples & scabs, as though it were sprinke∣led with Branne. And than the skinue is infected with small chins and itching. And sometime this infection commeth of too strong Cholarike matter: or of me∣lancholike, as Constantine sayth. And this euill is called Impetigo. For it let∣teth and grieueth the skin and the flesh, namely with tickeling and itching. Also this euill is called Serpigo, as it were a créeping euill. For it créepeth into all the skinne, as it were a Serpent or an Ad∣der, and infecteth the skinne, and desoy∣leth it with small scabbes after scratch∣ing and clawing. Sometime this Euill beclippeth the skinne of some lim all a∣bout, as it were a girdell, and such a scab is called Herpes Cingulus among phi∣sitions. But Impetigo is an other euill then Serpigo. For Impetigo commeth of more rising, and of more firie matter: for it commeth of Cholar. And therfore it maketh euenlong holes, straight, and full small, and moue alway vpward as fire: But the other manner seab that is called Serpigo, commeth of matter that is lesse firie: And therefore it mooueth not vpward, but it beclippeth the mem∣bers all about. Therefore it is sayd as it were créeping all about. This euill shal be cured with stewes and baths, yt open, consume, and wast, clense and wipe, and also with ointments. He shall be an∣nointed with ye iuyce of Ebuli, Sambuci, Iappatij, Fumiteriae, and other such. Af∣terward he shall vse baths of swéete wa∣ter, as Constantine sayth. And men say, that the spittle of a fasting man helpeth against this euill. Alway this euill hath fellowship of passing biting and itching, and of desiring of frosing, rubting, scrat∣ching and clawing. Thereof commeth a manner false liking and qualitie, yt is re∣solued of hot smoake and sharpe, yt biteth
and fretteth the skinne, and that smoak is resolued of hot matter. And such a li∣king is false and gréeuous. For it ma∣keth the skin discōtinued & ful of blains, and aketh and smarteth full sore at the last end. Of Lepra Meseltie. cap. 65. Lepra.LEpra, meselrye, is an vniuersall cor∣ruption of members & of humoures, and hath beginning of the veins, and full increasing without the veines: for when the humours be corrupt, the members yt be nourished and fed with humours bée sone corrupt. Constantine sayth that euery each Elephancia or leperhood hath beginning principallye of corruption of Melancholia. Therefore Constan. saith, that Lepra is an euill cold and dry, and commeth of blacke Cholera and strong, rotted, & is séene in the vtter part of the body. And it cōmeth of foure rotted hu∣mours, that were strong and be corrupt & chaunged into blacke Cholora, as hée saith ibidem. Humonrs with she which Melancholia is medled, may not rot at the full in the veines, & for that melan∣choly is colde & drie and so contrary to rotting: And so the humours meddeled therewith may not rot full, ere the me∣lancholy be incorporate. And haue abi∣ding in the members, in the which is full rotting. And of that rotting com∣meth Lepra meselry. For the humour melancholy by reson that it is hard, sad, & fast: it may not rot but in the abiding of time. And if it hp in any wise, that it rotte in the veines, it shoulde rather bréed a feuer then Lepra. In foure man∣ner wise Lepra is diverse, as the foure humours be passingly and diversly med∣led One manner Lepra commeth of pure Melancholia, and is called properly Ele∣phancia:Elephācia & hath that name of the Ele∣phant, that is a full great beast & large. For this euill grieueth & noieth the pa∣tient passing strongly and sore. Therfore this euill is more harde and fast, and worse to heale then other. The second commeth of melancholy and of fleme, & is called Tiria,Tiria. or Serpentina and hath ye name of an adder that is called Tirus. For as an Adder leaueth lightlye his skin and his scale: so hee that hath this manner Lepra is oft stript and pilled and full of scales. The third manner Le∣pra commeth of melancholy, infecting of bloud, and is called Alopicia,Alopecia and Vul∣pina: For Alopes in Gréeke, is Vul∣pes in Latine, a Fore in English. The Fore hath a propertie, that his haire sal∣leth in Summer for heat of bloud in the liuer: So oft his haire that hath this euil, falleth from the browes, & from other places. The fourth manner leperhood cō∣meth of red Cholera, corrupt in the mē∣bers with melancholy, & is called Leo∣nina,Leonina. and hath name of the Lion, that is most hottest beast, fierce and cruell. And this manner Lepra commeth most of fer∣uent humour & passing malitious: And therefore it fretteth as a Lyon, and de∣stroyeth all the members. Then princi∣pally of corrupt Melancholia commeth Lepra that is called Elephancia. Of cor∣rupt fleme commeth Tiria, that is called Serpentina: And of corrupt bloud com∣meth Alopecia, that is called Vulpina also. Of red Cholera commeth the worst of al, that is called Leonina. These foure manners of Lepra haue some common signes and tokens, & some special signes: by the which their speciall diuersitye is busily known. Universally this euil hath much tokens & signes: In them the flesh is notably corrupt, the shape is chaun∣ged, the eyen become rounde: The eye liddes bée riueled, the sight sparkleth, and namely in Leoninn: the nosethrills bée straighted and riueled, and shronke: The voice is horse, namely in Elephan∣cia: Swelling groweth in the bodye, and many small botches and whelkes, harde and rounde in the legges, and in the vtter partes: Féeling is some deale taken awaye: The nayles bée boystous and bounchye, as they were scabbed: The fingers shrinked, and crooked: and the handes bée as they were drye: The breath is corrupte, and oft whole men be infected with the stench there∣of: The flesh and skinne is fattie, inso∣much that they may throw water there∣on, & it is not the more wet, but the wa∣ter slideth off, as it were of a wet hide:
There is also itching, sometime with scabs, and sometime without scabs, also in the body be diuerse speckes, now red, now blacke, now wan, now pale. In the legges be many specks and whelks, and bée now seene and anone vanished: and now broken out, and nowe shrinken in againe. And among the whelkes of the legges, if thou findest one that is more and fowler then the other, it is a token that the lepra is fastned and confirmed, The tokens of Lepra bée most séene in the vtter partes, as in the féete, legges, and face: and namelye in wasting and minishing of the brawnes of the body. Aboue all these conditions of Lepra euery each manner Lepra hath his owne proper and speciall tokens, by the which he is knowne. For they that haue that Lepra that is called Leonina, their cou∣loure is more yeolowe and citrine then other: And also their eien be more spark∣ling, and more strouting out, and moo∣uing, and the skinne more rough, with more chinnes and cliftes oft times: And they haue more fretting and itching then other, and bée more fret and gnawen in all the members at the last. In them that haue the Lepra that is called Allo∣picia, all the haire of the eye liddes, and of the browes fall: and the eyen swell greatly, and bée full redde: In the face be redde pimples and whelks, out of whom oft runneth bloud and matter: In such the noses swell and be great, the vertue of smelling sayleth, and the breath stin∣keth right fowle: and in the gums is full great infection and corruption. In them yt haue the Lepra that is called Tiria, be soft swelling pimples & whelks: The skin is somewhat whitish & swolne, and somewhat shining with manye lice and wormes. In them be these conditions & many other full euill that come of cor∣rupt fleame and vncleane spittle, gleamy and quittery: The nosethrills be stopped, and other such diseases there be. The ey∣en wéep and run, for resolution and shed∣ding of superfluitie of moysture, the lippes and gums rot, the wosen of the voice is rough, and the voice is hoarse. If they bee let bloud, the bloud turneth into fléeting substaunce, and the parte thereof that is sadde, is white or whi∣tish. And if it be washed, it renleth a∣none, as milke doth, with running, and that in greate quantitie. In them that haue the Lepra that is called Ele∣phancia, the colour and hiew is emulous following & sewing: the face is leadish, the haire of the browes falleth, the eyen be round and the nosethrilles straight: The brawnes bée wasted: and that is commonly in all drye Lepra, more then in moist. Féeling faileth, namelye in the biggest fingers, it increaseth slowly: but when it is increased, it maketh chappes, chinnes, and cliftes: If they bee lette bloud, the bloud is wanne, or browne, and the more it is frotted, the blacker it is, and the harder. In the middle of that bloud be as it were white veynes, and braunches and bowes of sinewes, and that is common in all Lepra. Le∣pra commeth of diuerse causes besides the foresayde humours, as of dwelling and inhabiting and kéeping-companye, and oft talking with leprous men. For the euill is contagious, & infecteth other men.Leprosie infecteth Also it commeth of fleshlye lyking, by a woman soone after that a leprous man hath laye by her. Also it commeth of Father and mother: and so this con∣tagion passeth into the childe as it were by lawe of heritage. And some∣time it falleth when a childe is concey∣ued in menstruall time: And also when a childe is fedde with corrupt milke of a leprous Nurse: and sometime it com∣meth of an outwarde cause, of insect and corrupt ayre. Sometime of euill dyet, as of melancholyke meate, too colde and drye, as of flesh at Kotheren, of As∣ses, and of Beares, & of such other.Baren kine oftē bulled. Asses & Beares flesh. And sometime it commeth of too hot meates, as of long vse of strong pepper, and of garlike, and of such other: And somtime of corrupt meates, and of meates that he soone corrupt, as of meselyd Hogges, of flesh that haue péeces therein,Mesesid Porke and is in∣fected with such poison and graines. And of vncleane wine and corrupt: som∣time of biting of a venimous worme, that infecteth & corrupteth the substance of humours and of members. In these manners and in many other the euill of
Lepra bréedeth in mās body: but howso∣euer it be gendered, vnneth it is curable, but by the helpe of God, if it bée confir∣med: But it may be somewhat hid and let that it destroy not so soone. The pa∣tient shall beware of hurtfull meates, & speciallye of those that bréede melancho∣ly, and also of meates that ouer heateth the bloud. Then he shall vse small and couenable diet, & meats that be not cor∣rupt, neither able to be corrupt soone: And if bloud be the cause, as in Allopecia: then he shall first be let bloud: and then be purged with due medicines. In other manners of Lepra it behooueth first to take medicines, and then to be lot bloud, if it néedeth, and else not. For it shoulde gréeue, if it néeded not, as Constantine sayth. Then hée shall vse due medicines within, and couenable plaisters and oint∣ments without, to withstande the acci∣dents. To heale or to hide Lepra as Plato saith, best is a redde Aer with a white womb, if the venim be away and the taile and the head smien off: and the body sod with léekes,Soakes sh. if it bée oft take & eaten. In the same wise  wine, in ye which it rotteth, if the patient drinketh ofte thereof. And this medicine helpeth in many euills: as appeareth by the blind man to whome (he saith) his wife gāue an Adder with garlike in stéede of an Ele,A Soake. that it might slay him, and hée eate it: And after that by much sweate he re∣couered his sight againe. De Morbo Gallico. Of the French Poxe Chap. 66. Morbus Galicus.IN times past they were called the Spanish Poxe, about the yeare of our Lorde God. 1493. This pestiferous euill crept among the people, it first ap∣pered at Naples,This chap∣ter is ad∣ded. in ye frēnch mens host, (whereof it tooke the name) afterward the French men loathing the name of French Poxe, tearmed it the Euill of Naples, Sithence which time, it is be∣come the euill to change Countryes. Notwithstanding it was diverslye cal∣led, as Iobs scabbes, gers Euill, Fiacres sicknesse. The wiser sorte of people did interpreate this disease to bée the wrath of God, a disease of much filthinesse, it is to be taken by drinking with those that haue this Euill, with vsing to their stooles of ease, and Pri∣uies, and soonest with lyeng in theyr beddes, of the cause of this disease. In∣to what disease the French Poxe are tourned, hewe men sought to preuent the same, and of the discription of Gu∣aiacum, Reade the booke Tituled Mor∣bus Galicus, sette forth by Nicholas Massae, Doctour of Phisicke, a Veneti∣an, Anno. 1532. and translated by Tho∣mas Poynell of Marten Abbeye Cha∣non. Anno. 1533. It may easily bée per∣ceiued that Bartholomeus neuer knew of this euill, nor a multitude of other woodes, trées, plants, hearbes, stones, wormes, fishes, birdes, séedes and peo∣ples, which in this worke thou shalt finde, as the place requisite shall declare. Also of this Morbus Galicus, or Variole Maiores, of some named Mentagra, the French Poxe, there bée diuerse, some be moyst, some bée weasing watrishe, some bee drye, some bée like King∣wormes, some bée fistuled, some be feste∣red, some cancarous, some bée lyke Wennes, some bée lyke Biles, some bee knobbed and knurred, and some bée vlterous, hauing a drye scabbe in the middle, some haue ache in the ioyntes, and no outwarde signe of the Poxe, and there is smal Poxe. The abhominablest and filthiest taking of this disease, is by carnall copulation with those yt haue it. The diet made with Guiacum is the ap∣proued remedy. Use counsaile of the phi∣sition. Of the Morphew. cap. 67. MOrphea is speckes in ye skin, & com∣meth of corruption of meat & drink: And yt which is leper in ye flesh, is Mor∣phea in the skin.Morphea Also some Morphea is white, & cōmeth of fleme, & some is black, & commeth of Melancholia, & some is red & commeth of Cholera or of bloud. The Morphea yt commeth of Melancholia & of steme, is hard to heale: And ye Morphea yt cometh of bloud is more easie to heale. Morphea is vncurable, if the skin of the fire liepight and pricked with & néedell
and bléedeth not, and if it bléedeth then it is curable.A sauce flume face, is a priuye signe of leprosie. And Morphea is all in the skinne, and Lepra is both in the flesh & in the skinne. This infection differeth but little from the infection that is cal∣led Gutta rosca, that infecteth the face with small and soft pimples, and com∣meth of gleamie, bloudye, and cholarike humours that bée betwéene the skinne and the flesh. In this passion, first the patient shall be let bloud, and the inner humours shall bée purged, and bée holpe with stewes and baths: And so the face shall bée comforted, and the pores hall bée opened, & the matter shall passe out: then the sore place shal bée washed with medicines that cleanse and drye, and annointed with couenable ointmentes. Also Constantine sayth, that annointing with the warme bloud of an Hare is good against this infection.Bloud of a Hare. For it de∣parteth and smiteth againe, and wast∣eth the bloud that is betwéene the skinne and the flesh. Aboue all things against such an Euill which commeth of humour, that is betwéene the skinne and the flesh, Fimus terrae is best in bathes and in stewes, in diuers séeth∣ings of stroppes and ointmentes. In drinke it purgeth and cleanseth pim∣ples, whelkes, scabbes, and itching, and drieth superfluitie of humours betwéene the skinne and the flesh, and helpeth and succoureth them that bee disposed to Lepra. ¶Of venemous Wormes. Chap. 68. OUer and beside the foresayd euills and passions, which bée rehearsed and described before, most perilous death and euills happen and come to man∣kinde by wicked venim. And for that all kinde of venim is contrary to the com∣plection of mankind, it slayeth sodeinly, but men haue the sooner helpe & remedy. Some venim commeth of corruption of meate and drinke: And some of biting, of créeping wormes and of adders, and of serpents, and of other beasts, of whom their humours and téeth be venimous to mans body Also some venim is hot and drye, as the venim of an Adder, which is called Tirus,Looke in ye 18. boke Tirus. and of an Adder that is cal∣led Vipera, and other such. And some ve∣nim is colde & drie, as the venim of scor∣pions: and some venim is cold & moyst, as the venim of Spiders.Of the poi¦son of Spi¦ders & of Scorpiōs. The venim of Serpents & Adders is diuers in mal∣lice, as Auicen saith in Cade venonosis. For the venim of males is more sharp and strong then the venim of females. And yet the female Serpents haue moe téeth then males, and therefore they be taken for ye worse, as Auicen saith there: Also the venim of the olde Serpents is worse then the venim of the young: And of great and long, worse then of ye short of the same kinde. Also the venim of them that abide in hills and woodes is worse, then of them which bée nigh cliffes and banks of waters. Also ye ve∣nim is worse that commeth of one that is fasting, then the venim that commeth of one that is full. Also venim is sharper in Summer then in winter: And adders and Serpents sting sooner at the middes of the daye, then in the morning: And sooner by day then by night. For by heat the venim is shedde into the vtter parts, and is in time of coldnesse. as it were frosen in one place. The venim of the Adder that is called Tirus, and of the Adder that is called Vipera, and of all other Adders though it be hot, yet it hap∣peneth, that of theyr biting commeth he∣uinesse and coldnesse, by reson of slaieng & quenching of kinde heat, by contrary∣nesse of venim. For kinde heate by shed∣ding and sprinckling therof heateth the body, when it is ouerset: And as it were queint by strength of venimme, it hea∣teth the vtter partes. Hotte venimme gathereth not togethers the hot bloud of the heart: but it departeth and shed∣deth kinde heate, and slayeth it. Uenim of a Cockatrice is so violent that it burneth all thing which is nigh it:This is of no assu∣red testi∣monye, but by cōicture. And so about his denne and his hole nothing waxeth greene. It slayeth sodeinly birdes and fowles that flye a∣fore his denne. All beasts that come nigh be astonied and moue not, but fal down, and so die, onely by his venimous sight, or breathing or whisteling And he that
is bitten of him, melteth and swelleth, and casteth venim, and dieth sodeinlye. Uenimme of the Cockatrice is so vio∣lent and strong; that if it be touched with a Spears the touches shall féele the violence of the venimme,  Auicen telleth of and that touthed such a worme with his speare in India, and seeth with fall downe dead, and his horse also. Hée that is hurt of a Cockatrice, hath such a token, the body chaungeth sodeinly into gréene coulour & hiew, and sodeine death followeth. And there within the place where ye Cockatrice dwelleth the venim of an adder that is called Aspi is worst, for it slayeth within two hoares or thrée. The tokens of his biting bée those: So∣deine chaunging coulour of the skinne, great poring, sodeine coldnesse of mem∣bers; sléeping, and déepe closing of the eie¦liddes, great and strong thirst  so that the patient thinketh that he dieth onely for thirst. The venim of another man∣ner adder, that is called Aspis, and is cal∣led also Spuens, spitting, by reason that he slayeth with his spitle, his spitle is so violent, that it slayeth al thing that hath lyfe, if it toucheth that spittle. It slayeth and it be felt. But he that is venimmed féeleth of the first sore & great ach about his bowels and guts, and hath darknesse of eyen and closing, and strong sléepe, with the crampe and resting of the necke and pulse inordinate. And against that venimme helpeth no medicine, but onely cutting off, or burning of the mem∣ber, in the which the venim is cast. For burning fordrieth and closeth and stop∣peth the waies that the venim may not passe vnto the heart. Also the venim of a Dragon is full malitious, & his venim is most in the tayle, and in the Gall. With that venim commeth most heaui∣nesse of bodie, swelling of lippps, and giddinesse, dunnesse and darknesse of the eyen, destroieng of reson, inordinate mo∣uing and féeblenesse of vertue. Uenim of a Scorpion slaieth, but if men haue re∣medy the sooner: Thereof commeth bur∣ning & pricking about the member that is stung. And when it commeth to the heart, the patient swoneth, and breaketh out, & sweateth: And it closeth the heart, of the last, and fréeseth the body with his coldnesse, & thereof commeth death and destroieng of lyfe. Séeke afterward of the propertie of the Scorpion in the last booke. Among all the venimous beates,Addition a∣ber is most pernitious, for he is as a can∣ to himselfe, a poison to his neigh∣bour, and the diuell before God. Of the biting of a madde dogge. Chap. 69. ALso the biting of a woode hound is deadly and venimous. For as Con∣stantine saith, an hound is cold and dry, and in men blacke Cholera hath the ma∣strie, And when that Cholera is altered & rotted, it hath masterie in the body, and maketh the hound wood. For the fumo∣sitie that commeth of blacke Cholera is strong, and infecteth the braine: And so when it commeth aboute into diuerse partes, it infecteth the sayde partes, and then maketh them venimous. Therefore when he biteth anye man, and the veni∣mous spittle commeth into the wounde, the humours and spirites be infected: and the venim that is therein is drawne to the place, that is lyke to the place, in the which the venimme was bread, that is the braine, and then the man is wood. And if he bite another, he infecteth him, and maketh him woode also. And such venimme is perillous. For it is long hidde and vnknowne, and increaseth and multiplieth it selfe, and is sometime vn∣knowne to the yéeres ende, and then the same day and houre of the biting, it com∣meth to the head, and bréedeth phrensie. By féeling of kinde other hounds know and féele a woode hounde: and barke at him, to make him a feard, as saith Con∣stantine. For they féele and knowe, that he is contrarye and noyfull. This ve∣nimous woodnesse falleth most in Har∣uest. For then, because of likenesse, Cho∣lera increaseth, and also in springing time. For then heate is shedde, and not wasted. And so by moouing, it waxeth strong: and commeth out by kinde. For a woode hounds tongue is so venimous, that it maketh the hound to reyle and
stagger, as hée were dronken, and to goe about yaning and driueling, with the tongue hanging out and if his driuelling fall into the water, it infecteth the water, and who that drinketh of that water, shall be Idropicus and woode; Looke o∣ther properties of a woode hounde after∣ward in the Chapter of a dogge. They that be bitten of a woode hounde; haue in theyr sléepes dreadfull sightes, and bée fearefull astonied, and wroth without cause: And they dread to be séene of other men: and barke as houndes: And they dreade water most of all thing, and bée afeard therof ful sore, and scoymous also: And then is this euill vnneth curable. Huc vsque Constantinus. Also there bée manye other venemous things, and pe∣rills of venim: but of such as holy writ maketh special minde, we treat on Ther∣fore touching this worke, the other shal passe at this time. But onely I thinke and hope, that men shall take héede and know that venim worketh in the bodye ful many diseases without number. For all the kinde of venim is contrary to the kind and complection of mankind. When it hath mastery in the body, it distempe∣reth all the kinde, and corrumpeth and chaungeth the spirits and humours with his mallice and sharpnesse. And first ve∣nim assaileth the noblest part of the bo∣dy, that in the place next about the heart: and smiteth with sharpnesse the spirites of féeling in the braine, and distroubleth the limmes of the wits, and of féeling: and féebleth sodeinly their working and theyr dooing: and finiseth and woun∣deth the sinewes, and infecteth the veins and the wosen: and maketh them rough and riueled: and breedeth in the inner partes sore forment, burning, gnawing, and biting. And now if burneth, now it fréeseth, now sheddeth, departeth, and re∣solueth: Nowe it wasteth at full; and fordrieth the substantial moysture of the heart: while it burneth the inner parts, it cooleth the vtter partes, and againe∣warde, it maketh the vtter parte of the bodye full hotte: And yet with his cold∣nesse it staieth, and constraineth the bloud in the veines of the heart. By bréeding of venim in the mēbers, his body swel∣leth, and wexeth nowe pale, nowe glis∣ning; now sode∣nly gréene, nowe blacke and by diuers speckes, which defouleth she body without: his malice is know∣en within, & it bréedeth in the stomacke abhomination, and noifull and horrible wambling▪ And with his sharpnesse it perceth, thirleth, and gnaweth the mem∣bers of life: Therfore to suffer & withstād his rise, kinde is vnmightie, and faileth and is ouercome at the last, and the ve∣nim hath masterie in the body, and tur∣neth the humours to his owne, likenesse, and maketh them venimous and noyful and greeuous. And therefore it is peri∣lous to touche such bodyes as bee infec∣ted with venim. For by euaporation and out springing, ofte such bodyes in∣fect and corrupte all thinges neere them. Also though venimme be horrible and enimye to kinde; often it happeneth that d is desired of kinde; not for himselfe, but for some swéet thing med∣led therewith, which is friend to kinde: For oft the strength of venimme is hid vnder swéet things and sauourie. Ther∣fore Constantine teacheth; that a man that dreadeth uenim, should not only be∣ware of stinking and bitter things, but also of swéete things sauoury, and salte, and sowre, and of other such. For ofte the mallice of venimme is hidde vnder such things as kinde desireth. Also Con∣stantine teacheth for to knowe by effect and doing, whan venim is taken in meat or in drinke: and sayth, That if a man feeleth burning in meate or in drinke, and the Crampe followeth therevpon a∣none or swelling in the fingers or in the nailes, it is venimous and mortall. And thereof commeth tokens in the fingers & in the nailes, which he made and brend of fumositie of the heart: in token that venimme hath mastery about the innner parts, and sheddeth it selfe thence to the vtter partes. And farther it followeth there: also if he gepeth and driueleth, and the lippes smart and tingle, and if hée féeleth heat in the tongue, and sweateth, and is vexed straight about the heart, & the eyen dim and darke: it néedeth him to host with medicines, or els he dyeth hastely. Then against venim taken into
the bodye, it is a generall medicine to excite spuing, to voyde and put out the venemous matter aboue the spuing, ey∣ther beneth with a clistery: Then with Wine, that Sowthistle is sodde in, hée shall take Triacle that ouercommeth ve∣nim: then hée shall bée purged and ba∣thed, as it néedeth against the venim, and shall bléede at last: His diet shal be or∣deined, that he be fed with fat meates, and meate that stoppeth the veines, that leadeth to the heart: that the veni∣mous vapour and fumositio come not to the heart. In this cause great nuts and Auellanes, and drye Figges helpe. For they drawe and consume, and wast ve∣nim. And therefore they be good before meate and after. Also Constantine saith, that Balsamus with womans milke hel∣peth right soone against the burning and sore ache, which commeth of venemous things. Also there it is sayde, That no cause was of making of Triacle, but onelye to destroy venimous things: and that it doth in thrée manner of wise: for it foredryeth and wasteth venimme: for therein be many thinges that haue ver∣tue of drieng. Also by his vertue it put∣teth out venim. For therein bée many things that bée priuye propertyes con∣trary to venimme. Also it comforteth the members: and therefore against venim it giueth the members might and strength to withstand. For therin be many things that comfort, and if it bée perill to abide and Triacle maye not bée sound: Then as Galen sayth, Garlike shall be brused and sodde anone to dissolution, with a fat hen, and then men shall giue the patient the iuyce to drinke. For it is contrary to venim, and swageth inward burning in a wonderful manner. Therfore Garlike is called Tiriaca rosticorum, Triacle of vplandish men. Also as Constantine saith, without Garlike the iuyce of a hen helpeth. Also liber de simplici medicina, it is sayd, that some things be contrarie to venim, and drawe it out from the in∣ner parts by heate and subtiltie of theyr owne substance: as a Cocke and an hen slitte, and layd to the venimous biting. Also some thinges be contrarye to ve∣nimme by lykenesse and subtiltie of their owne substaunce, and striue against the substaunce of venimme: and therefore by theyr owne lyknesse they drawe ve∣nim to themselues of a priuie property, as ye flesh of an Adder that is called Ti∣rus, is contrary to venim. And some by double or simple working and vertue strieue against venimme, as Calamunte, luyre of Caule, Orobi Grana, Citra Ipe∣ricon, Nasturcium, Rew, Salt, Léek, A∣ristologia, nuttes eaten with Rew, the root of Aspiragi, and the séede thereof al∣so, Balsamum, vineger, bloud of an Hare, the milke of an Asse, childrens pisse, an Irchins stones, gendering stones of an Hart, and of an Asse, dried and broken, Castorem, Garlike, Gencian, mint, Dip∣tanum, and many other without num∣ber. For because the perills of venim bée many, therefore the goodnesse of God or∣deined passing many Triacles and reme∣dies: but for cause of ensample, these shall suffice now at this time. Venemum is called Ios, a subtill matter that nature abhorreth.Addition In times past at Rome they would poison soules with Idolatry, and mens stirops & sad∣dles with a venimons villany. The remedye against the biting of a madde Dogge. Cap. 70. AGainst the biting of a madde hound,Digma. Morsus. Biting. and of other venimous beastes, wise men and ready vse to make the wounds bleede with fyre or with yron, that the venimme maye come out with bloud that commeth out of the wounds. Men vse to doe thereto wormes that are cal∣led Leaches,Horse∣leaches. and bloud suckers, and al∣so Cuppes and hornes, to drawe the ve∣nimme from the inner partes. Men vse to gine inwarde thinges, that bée contrarye to venimme, whether it bée simple or double. Triacle and other such thinges, bée made in a playster, and layde to the woundes without, as Nuttes stamped together with Gar∣lyke, Rewe, and Salte And also Nuttes chewed, and layde vppon the bitten place. And with these foresayde thinges,
Dioscorides saith, That crabs of riuers haue a priuie vertue against this venim. And therefore Constantine teacheth to giue to such men Triacle with water of a crab. Also ashes of crabs with Genciā, is a perticular remedy against such biting of a wood hound. And against this biting helpeth specially the iuyce of Capritoli, Onions, Rew, Nuts, Garlike, Salt, the twigs of a fig trée, Mint, Orobum. All these, or some of them with vineger and honny, be wholefully laide to such bi∣tings For as Constantine saith, all these draw to themselues venim, & with their heate and drinesse they dissolue, destroy, and consume it Against biting & stinging of a Scorpion the chiefe remedy is oyle, in the which a Scorpion is drowned or sod, and laide to the place that is strong. Also if the same Scorpion or another be brused and laied to the wound, it is the wholesomest remedie, for the venimme of stinging turneth againe into the body that it came out of. Also Constant. saith, That Butter of the milke of a cow, hel∣peth much against the venim of a Scor∣pion. Butter by his fatnesse stoppeth and dissolueth, and wasteth by heat, and clen∣seth, and wipeth by cleannesse and moy∣sture. Then Butter eaten ascendeth to ye heart and stoppeth the waies, that the smoake of venim may not come to the heart. Also crabbes of riuers helpe, if the ashes of them be eyther by themselues sod or roasted and burne vnto ashes, and mingled with milke of an Asse, as sayth Constantine. Also as he saith, Casteri∣um and Brimstone helpeth, for either is hot and drie in the fourth degrée. And therefore they helpe against venim. For they dissolue by heate and wast by dri∣nesse. Against bitings of adders and ser∣pents, and against the biting of an Ad∣der the which is called Vipera. First the venimme shall be drawne cut with cups, or with hornes, or in some other wise sodeinly: And he shall take Triacle with water of the séething of Gencian, of Rew, or of Mint. And the Triacle shal be laide about the place, and vppon the wound: or garlike broken with salt and rew, if the Triacle faileth. In the begin∣ning the member that is bitten or stung, shall be straightly bound, that the smoak of the venim, may not freely breake into the inner parts, and men shal help with∣in with things that be contrarye to ve∣nim. Also Constantine saith, that against such venim the brain of an hen & lambes dung, & the iuyce of ye twigs of Pomgra∣nates helpeth well. For as the Cōmen∣tour saith, these dissolue venim & maketh it ready to be wasted. Lay vpon the place where the Hor∣net,Addition Waspe, or Bee stingeth, a gadde of colde steele. Of medicine. Chap. 71. TO giue couenable and true medicine against diuerse sicknesse and perils,Pharma∣ria, or A∣cesis, Medicina Medicine Schato∣phagos. a good Phisition needeth to looke well a∣bout, and be full ware and full wel adui∣sed: For nothing letteth more health of sick men, then vncunning and negligence of Phisitions. On the Phisitions side, it néedeth, that he forget nothing yt belong∣eth to the euill. Also that he be diligent & busie in things that belong to the crafte of medicine: and hée must be ware & ad∣uised in all things. Also to heale & saue effectually: him néedeth to know & vnder∣stand the complections of men, composi∣tions, mixtions, & medlings, both of the humours and of the members, & to vn∣derstand and knowe the dispositions of times, the conditions of male & female, and age. For one manner medicine née∣deth in winter, & another in Summer: And one manner in the beginning of the euill, and another in the full, and another in the passing thereof: One in childhood, & in youth, another in full age, another in olde age: one in the males, another in fe∣males. And him nedeth to know causes & occasions of euills, & tokens, signes, and accidents of all manner euils. For medi∣cine may neuer be sikerly taken,Truely. if the cause of the euill is vnknowne. Also him néedeth to know complections, vertue & working of medicinable things: For but he knew what medicine is simple, what compowned, what cold, & what hot, what worketh and amendeth the bodie, what kéepeth heale, and healeth sicknesses: What hardneth and constraineth, and
softneth and laxeth: Hée may neuer safe∣ly passe forth and worke in medicine. Also therefore it néedeth to knowe the qualities of hearbes, and of other medi∣cinable things, and diuersitie of degrées, what is hot and drie, what is colde and moist, in what degrée, if he will not erre in his office. And therefore him néedeth to knowe the during contrarinesse, sim∣plenesse, quantytie and qualitie of ye pa∣tient, & his vertue and strength, and fée∣blenesse. For a chaunging euill, that is long induring, néedeth stronger medi∣cine, then an euill that is new, and hath not long indured. Also a simple euill shall be healed with a simple medicine, and an euill that is compowned of con∣traryes, shal be healed with compowned medicines. For selde a simple medicine heleth a sicknes that is compouned. Also against an hot cause néedeth a colde me∣dicine: and against a colde néedeth an hot medicine: and against a medled cause néedeth a medled medicine. And therefore a Leach and Phisition that is wise and ware, and knoweth the euill, tempereth the qualitie, as the quantitie and quali∣tie of the euil asketh. Also when he séeth that the euill commeth of repletion, hée helpeth it by voiding of the matter, and by scarce dyet. And if it commeth of ab∣stinence, he healeth it with repletion. Al∣so the office of a good Phisition standeth in inquisition and searching of the cau∣ses and circumstaunces of the euill. For he searcheth and séeketh the cause, by light, by handeling, and groping, by v∣rine, and by the pulse: When the cause is knowne, if the matter be hidde déepe within, thē he vseth drawing medicines. And if the matter bée in the fore parts, and without, he laboureth to drawe the matter to the stomacke, that he may the asilyer bring it thence. And if the mat∣ter be hard and sad, he giueth medicines that dealeth and distributeth, and all to kitteth, that the matter may be soft, and made ready and easie to voydaunce. Also when the matter is defied and drawne, he vseth the third time laxatiue medy∣cines, that the matter that is defied & dra∣wen; may be lead out by a couenable re∣gion, by spuing, or by shiting, or by swea∣ting. And when the matter is couenably voided, he vseth the fourth time certeine medicines to comfort kinde that is wery and féeble by violence and strength of medicine. And when kinde is comfor∣ted, he vseth certeine medicines resump∣tiue and restoratiue to that, that is lost by strength of the euill, or of medicines. And the restoring shall be made and gi∣uen little and lyttle, and not sodeinlye, by couenable and temporate dyet. For in them, which are so purged and clean∣sed, often kinde desireth much, and so many times the patient taketh more thē he can digest, without he bée restrained, in gouernance of diet by a phisition, ware and wise. At the last when kinde is resto∣red and brought into the former state, he teacheth to vse certeine medicines, pre∣seruatiues, least he that is healed and re∣couered, fall into a worse sicknesse. For such things be couenable, bathes, bloud∣lettings, electuaryes & moderate trauell. For such things awaketh kinde heate, and discharge kinde of superfluitye of humoures, and helpe and comfort dige∣stion. And if the matter bée fléeting or softe, or thinne, then hée vseth constrai∣ning and dryeng medicines, and reper∣cussiues. And when the matter is restrai∣ned and with-helde, a wise Phisition v∣seth to giue couenable laxatiue medy∣cines, to bring out humours that be dis∣solued before, and now constrained: least they abiding still there, eyther fléeting to some other parte, doe putrifie, and so bréed a Feauer, or else ingender another disease: and restraining is wont to be made little and little, least the matter be smitten sodeinlye and fall to some noble mēber, & bréed a more gréeuous sicknes: also purgation is wont to be made then: and then, that it be not sodeinlye done. Then medicine is wont to bée made in thrée manner wise, eyther dissoluing and vnbinding, constrayning and bin∣ding, or restoring. For other bodyes which bée full, bée dissolued, or those that bée vnbounde, bée constrayned, or that which is lost in the bodye is re∣stored: With laxatiue medicines we at and vnbinde, as with Scamonie: With binding medicines wée binde, as
with Achacia: and with medicine which stoppeth, wée restore, as with meate and drinke that nourisheth and feedeth, and with Electuaryes arrayed there∣fore.Prepared. ¶Then consider thou shortly héere∣off, that a Phisition visiteth ofte the houses and countreies of sicke men: And séeketh and searcheth the causes and circumstaunces of the sicknesse: and arraieth and bringeth with him diuers and contrarye medicines: And he refuseth not to grope and handle, and to wipe and cleanse priuie mem∣bers and woundes of sicke men. And hée behoteth to all men hope and trust of re∣couering of heale: And saith that he will softly burne that which shall bée burnt, and kitte that which shall bee kitte: And least the whole part should bée corrupt,Few Phisi¦tions and Chirurgi∣ons vse in these daies such diligence. he spareth not to burne and to kit of the part that is rotted: and if a part in the right side aketh, he spareth not to smite in the lefte side.. A good Leach leaueth not kitting or burning for wéeping of the patient. And he hideth and couereth the bitternesse of the medicine with foure manner of swéetnesse. He drinketh and taasteth of the me∣dicine, though it be bitter: that if be not against the sicke mans heart: and refraineth the sicke man of meat and of drinke: And letteth him haue his owne will, of whose health is neither hope nor trust of recouering. He doth away rotted & dead flesh, that is disposed to corrupti∣on, and with bitter and fretting medi∣cines, and cleanseth running scabs with drieng medicines. And after medicines that slay and burne, he swageth the ach of wounds with comfortable and liking medicines: and when a wound is clensed he heateth the place thereof. And for in∣ward euills gréeue more then outward, a wise Leach taketh héed to cure & expel first inward aking, and cureth the mat∣ter that is harde and corrupte within, with medicines of digestion, as with Oximell, and with sowre strop: And first he dealeth it, and kitteth it, and maketh good to digest, and maketh it readye to the outpassing and voidaunce. For as it is said in principie Aphor. It néedeth by medicine to put off that thing that is defied, and not that thing that is rawe. For when the matter is digested and defied, and made able to voidance, dra∣wing medicine draweth the matter so defied, out of the inner and further parts to the vtter partes. And héereto hel∣peth some bitter things, as Irapigra, and Ieralogodion, and other that smac∣keth of Aloe. For such bitter thinges pearce & come more sooner to the further partes, and cleanse more the vtter parts then other medicines. The third time couenable medicine voydeth and putteth out matter that is so voided and thro∣wen, but that is done warily, least there be too great auoidance: for it grieueth the body, that it is féebled therewith. And sometime is more voided of good hu∣mours then of euill, according to that Hippocrates sayth: it is enimye to kinde and deceiuable, to voide and to put out much sodeinlye, or to heate or to coole. A good Phisition taketh heed to the mat∣ter of the euill, and of the place of the matter: and also of the might and of the strength of the patient: and thereby hée varieth his medicine: for if the master or humour that is in default be voided, it helpeth much the sicke man: and if it help not, the sicke man is more gréeued, as I∣pocrates saith. Medicines doth consist of two things,Addition in Theorike which is specula∣tion, and in practise, how to frame the medicine to cure and hasen health, and to turne the complections into theyr kindly order and operation, the science is honourable so the Phisition be ho∣nest, and such a one as will not dis∣dayue the poore in theyr necessi∣tie. ¶Of drawing medicine. Chap. 72. DRawing medicine worketh by subtiltie and heate of substaunce. By his subtiltye it thirleth easilye,Soeth in to ye inner partes. and by heate it draweth yron and ma∣nye other thinges that sticketh with∣in, and humours that bee farre with∣in.
Also medicines of digestion be néedefull when the matter is full harde and sad: for it cutteth and dealeth the matter, and so maketh it able to be put out, and ther∣fore it worketh by cutting and depart∣ing, and maketh it thinne. And by the subtiltie of his substaunce, and by helpe of heate, it departeth one part of ye mat∣ter from that other, as it fareth in me∣dicines,Sosien which nesh the matter. Also somtime laxatiue medicine purgeth mat∣ter which is defied, and dissolueth and draweth, as Scamonie, taken in the sto∣mack sendeth from it selfe subtill smoke, which thirleth easely and dissolueth hu∣mours, and maketh them abhominable to kinde, and draweth them by helpe of the vertue of out putting: and when they be drawen, she casteth and putteth them out of the body, and some laxe with their gleyminesse and make slipper, as Mercury and Hockes, and other such: and some perce humors with their sharp∣nesse, as Euforbium: & some with their fatnesse and glewing, thrusting and pres∣sing, as Mirabolianis: and some with their saltnesse biting the guts, as ye séede of Attriplex: some with their swéete∣nesse and moysture by shedding ye guts, as Cassia fistula. Also binding medicine worketh by colde and heystous things in substaunce: for the colde parts be ga∣thered togethers, and be let to pearce by the greatnesse of the parts. Sometime they bréed great humours; and therfore they constraine and stop, and comfort the vertue of with holding, as Esula: some constraine and stint bloud, as Corallus, Bolus, Emachites, Plantago, and other such. Some binde the wombe, as Cico∣nia, Mora, Kos, and other such manner. Also hardning medicines renleth ye mat∣ter and maketh it thicke,Cōieleth and that they doe, by things that be full colde & drye, either moyst, as by Sillium, Semper vi∣ua, Portulaca, Solatrum, and other such. Also softning medicines work by things which be meanly hot, and much moyst, and so doth ripping medicines also. Al∣so opening medicines haue vertue of bur∣ning and of making thin: for they open the wayes which be stopped, and make thin humors that be gleimie and thick, and doth that by hot things and drye. Also a cleansing medicine worketh ei∣ther by vnbinding, as Calamentum, or by softening, as Cassia sistula and Fal∣lowes: or by clensing, as wiping away filth and hoare, by his eat thinesse & dry∣nesse. Also there be manye other diuers medicines, as slaieng, fretting, gnawing, & burning, Diaforetica, repercussiues, mi∣tigatiues, swaging, and other such: Of whom it is treated in lib. De Simphei medicina. But héere we shall make an ende of the seuenth Booke of this present Uolume, which sheweth the infirmities, euills, and diseases of mans body, and of the other part, of medicines and things néedfull for those infirmities. FINIS LIBRI SEPTIMI. ¶INCIPIT LIBER OCTAVVS. DE COELO ET MVNDO. SEeing that we haue by the holy of God, full ended the treatise of mans body, of God & of the properties of Angels and of men, & of accidents, & conditons of men: now we shall speake of the pro∣perties of the world that we sée & féete, by the helpe of God, which is sent to vs from aboue: that we may drawe occa∣sion to the praising of God, for the pro∣perties of working of the maker & con∣ditor of all things: for vnséene things of God, be séene and knowen by thinges
that be made and vnsderstood, as the Apo∣stle saith. Rom. 8.Rom. 8. We looke not on the things which are sene, but on the things which are not seene. And therefore we shall shortly put to this worke, some properties of this world and things that be therein,2. Cor. 4. that we may by lykenesse of bodely properties the more easily vnder∣stand mystike & spirituall mening in ho∣ly Writ. And we shall begin at the pro∣perties of the world. ¶What is the world. Cap. 1. The world be∣ring the platform of all. The Ce∣lestiall vvorld. The Ele∣mentall vvorld. The lesser vvorld.AS Marcianus sayth, the world is said in thrée manner wise. For Diuine vnderstanding is called the world, that is to wit Mundus Archetipus, and is bodilesse, vnséene, and euerlasting. And to the ensample thereof, the world that we sée and féele, is made and wrought, as Boetius saith: Thou bringest forth all things of high ensample, thou fairest, bearest in thy minde, the fairest worlde, and makest and workest by a lyke I∣mage, &c. ¶In the seconde manner, the world is called all things that is contained in the roundnesse of heauen. As heauen, in the which the starres shine: and fire in which all things heate: aire, by the which all things that hath lyfe bréedeth & pro∣ueth: & water that beclippeth the sides of the earth: earth, that sustaineth and holdeth vp, and féedeth all these lowe things of this worlde. Of which it is sayd, The world is made by him. Ioh. 1. Iohn. 1.In the beginning was the worde, and the word was with God, and God was the word. The same was in the begin∣ning with God. All things were made by it, & without it was made nothing that was made, &c. In the third manner, man is called, the lesse world, for he sheweth in him∣selfe likenesse of all the world. And so the first world is euerlasting & during in thought and minde of God. The second world is euerlasting by the wil of God, and taketh euerlasting being and sprin∣ging of him. The third world is some∣what euerlasting, & some deale passing, bearing in it selfe likenesse of all things. Before it is treated of the first worlde, and of the seconde: Now of the world that we féele and sée somewhat shall be spoken. Then Marcianus saith, the world is an vniuersall gathering together of things, which be made, and is all round, as it were a sphere or a ball: for the vt∣ter parte of the world hath shape & like∣nesse of a sphere, and of a circle. And as Marcianus saith, ther was no shape nei∣ther likenesse so couenable to the world, as a round likenesse and shape, and that for perfection of all things: and for the likenesse that the world hath in euerla∣sting being with his worker, that is wt∣out ende and without beginning. And Philosophers diuide all the worlde in two parts: of ye which twaine, the more noble and simple is the ouer parte, that worketh and stretcheth from the circle of the Moone to the region of planets. The other part is the lower, and suffreth and stretcheth from the circle of the Moone downwarde to the middle poynt of the earth. Marcianus describeth ye lower part of the world in this manner wise: The world he saith is a circle of foure Ele∣ments, which be found all round, in the manner and forme of a sphere: and the earth is placed in the middle: and the o∣ther deale is rauished about the mouing of heauen, to the making and forming of this world. The vertue of God made & ordained Primordial matter, in ye which as it were in a massie thing, the foure Elements were potentially, and not di∣stinguished in tale and number, as they are now: but they were meddeled. And that Mussa and lumpe Plato calleth Yle in Thimeo. And thereof the wisedome of God made and brought forth all the Elements, and all that is made of Ele∣mentes, & ordayned them in their owne qualyties & place. For that which was hot and drye, in that manner passed in∣to kinde of fire, and because of lyghtnes thereof, the wisedome of God set it aboue other. And such as was most colde and drye, passed into kinde of earth and for heauinesse and sadnesse thereof, he set it beneth that was hot. And moyst he put into kinde of ae, and such as was cold and moyst, passed into kinde of water.
And as these two Elementes be more light, cléere and subtill, he set them be∣tweene fire and earth. In Timeo, Plato as he might, described this first matter, in this manner. Yle the first matter he saith, was without qualitie and quanti∣tie, without colour, and shape, and lyke∣nesse, without plate and tune, betweene some substaunce, and no substaunce, &c. These words be full hard to vnderstand, but they be in this manner expounded: for it is said, that that matter was with out quantitie: not for that they were cleane without all quantitie, but for it had no certaine quantitie knowen to vs: as men saye, that a Giaunt is endlesse much, for he passeth ye quantitie of men. Also that matter is said without qualy∣tie: for it had no name specially of any qualitie, for it could not be sayde, more hot than colde, nor againward: and so of other qualities. And he sayth, without colour: for it had no colour of kinde of any Element. It was without time, for as yet was no time, nor passing of time, when this matter was made. It was without place: for it had no certaine place, more vpward than downward, nor more breadth than length. It was by substaunce, and no substaunce was be∣fore this matter, but some substaunce, was thereafter. Then the materiall be∣ginning of the neather world, was that vnséene matter, that is the first matter that is common and able to receiue all lykenesse of shapes and qualytie. And is also kept and saued, vnder diuers kindes and shapes: for this mat∣ter abideth not corruption, touching the substaunce thereof, though it be continu∣ally chaunged, touching the qualyties that chaungeth. For this matter that is now raren̄ed and made thin, abideth vnder the forme and shape of fire, and vnder fire, shall by and by, by thickning doe on kinde & matter of aire, that was before vnder the shape, and forme, and matter of fire. Héereof it followeth, that the first matter, of the which the world is kindly made, is ingenerable and incor∣ruptible. And of that matter all materi∣all things begin, and turn again to that matter, as into the Mother. And so the world is made of many composed things and contrarious, and yet in it selfe it is one world: for the world is one in tale and number, and not many worlds, and that is for the vnitie of matter, as it is said in li. de coelo & mundo. The world occupieth all his matter, as it saide there in  mundi eternitate. Then the world, of the which we speake at this time is not diuers in it selfe: neither de∣parted in substaunce, though contrari∣ousnesse be found in parts thereof tou∣ching contrarinesse of the qualities: for the world hath most néedfull accorde in all it selfe, and as it were aecorde of musike, though it séeme that it hath vn∣likenes in soure of his parts for contra∣ry qualities, as Austen saith openly, su∣per eo. This world (he saith) shal passe touching this passibilitie and kinde and shape that it hath now, but it shall a∣bide euermore touching the substaunce and kinde, as it is sayde there. And the Glose saith there: Hence and earth shall passe, &c. Mat. 5. Héereof it followeth, that the world is wonderful because of chan∣ging thereof. But neuerthelesse, for the nobilitie of his matter, vertue & work∣ing of his shape, & so for easie might of bréeding, and of generation of things: the world is not to be praised so much, as God the maker of the world, is to be praised ouer all things. Nothing in the whole frame of the world is so vile, nor so low, nor pertykell, in ye which shineth not praising of God in matter and in vertue, & in shape: & the matter & shape of the world is some difference, but that is with accord & most peace: for yt parte of the world that is most pure & cleane, & simple & noble, hath ye more vniforme inclination & appetite to receiue ye more noble forme & shape: & the more spiritual the matter is, ye more inclination & appe∣tite it hath to spirituall forme & shape, & so the matter of heuen, requireth & née∣deth the more simple & noble forme and shape, then ye matter of ye Elements. Al∣so ye matter of heuē is more noble & sim∣ple in ye more noble body, as in ye Sun, thā in ye moone, or in Mercury, or Mars, & the matter of elements, is more noble in fire, thā in ye aire, or in other elemēts.
And so the matter is more great & boy∣stous in earth, than in other Elements, for therein be more parts of matter ga∣thered, as Aristotle saith. Therefore (hée saith) that of an handful of earth is made ten of water.Multipli∣cation. Also the matter of one E∣lement is more cleane and pure in one part, than in another, as it is said in pri. Mecho. For the ouer parts of fire, bée more noble and simple than the nether: and the middle partes of the earth bee more great and sad, and lesse cleane and pure. And for that the meddled bodyes be made of the Elements, all the partes of the Elements be more pure and noble: the medled bodies be more simple pure and noble: and as it is againwarde in Elements, so it is againward in medled bodies. Also more noble matter of the world, néedeth more noble forme & shape, and therefore the matter is disposed, as the forme and shape as keth. For if fire shall be made of earth, it néedeth that the greatnesse of matter of earth bée made subtill and pure, and more spiritu∣all and simple: that it may be clothed in a more simple forme, that is forme and shape of fire: and shortlye to speake, it néedeth that the matter be arayed & dis∣posed, after the propertie of forme and shape. Also men take héede of the nobi∣litie of the world, by the more noble and worthy partes thereof: and also by the more noble workings and doings. And therefore the ouer part of the worlde, is counted more noble and worthy. For the matter ther is more cléere and pure, and the shape is fairer, & the vertue is more in the ouer parts than in the nether. For the world at all is the more faire & séem∣ly, by as much as the nether foule part of the worlde, is arayed with the more fairnesse and blisse of the ouer parte, as Austen saith. Some perfection of ver∣tue and of charitie, that passeth in the o∣uer parts sheddeth it selfe continually to∣ward the fairnesse and perfection of the nether parts. Also things that séeme and shew, that the nether part of the world, hath lost in fairnesse & in light, that that part recouereth in grace & vertue of plen∣teousnes. For no lesse wonder is of ver∣tuous plenteousnesse of the earth, in be∣ring and bringing forth of hearbs, trées, and of fruite, and in diuers gendring of beasts, and of créeping wormes, in di∣uers bréeding and gendring of mettall, & of pearles and of stones: then it is to wondring of the cléernes of heauen with diuersitie of circles, and roundnesse and starres thereof. And though the worlde be arayed with so many noble and wor∣thy differences of things by might of the vertue of God: yet touching the nether part thereof it is subiect all about to ma∣ny defaultes and wretched conditions. For though the world séeme father and forth bringer and feeder of bodies, yet it is prison of spirites, and most cruell cri∣ling of soules, and is place and stende of full many wretchednesse and paines: for the world is place of trespasse & of guilt, the habitation of pilgrimage, & of woe, of wéeping and of teares, of trauell and of faintnes, of fearfulnesse and of shame, of mouing and of chaunging, of flowing and of ouerturning, of passing and of cor∣ruption, of insolence and perturbation, of violence and oppression, of deceipt and of guyle. In the worlde is nought els found but vanitie, wickednesse, couetous∣nesse, anguish, soyling & age. The world draweth to him, and loueth those that be knoweth: and putteth away and be∣spiseth them that he knoweth not. The world is noyfull to many men, and pro∣fitable to sewe at the last. The louers thereof the worlde deceiueth and beguy∣leth: For the world promiseth manye things, but at the last it payeth few or none, and reseth not to sewe and to take them that dispise it, and that in the ma∣ner of a shadowe: and is brifie and in∣tendeth to dye his sutours that followe him. And therefore oste times those that it most beareth vp with riches and wor∣ship, it maketh most poore, and brareth them downe at the last. And to vse Gre∣gories worde, We shall flye the world, though it please vs with wealth: for he that knocketh with so much woe & sor∣rowe, what els cryeth he, but that hée should be forsaken? And this of the properties of the world in generall, shal suffice at this time.
¶ Of the distinction of hea∣uen, Cap. 2. NOw putte we our handes by helpe of Christ, in describe some properties of heauen, & of the parts therof▪ for heauen is the place and dwelling of An∣gels, and of good men  saith▪ and as holy men tell, one heuen is seene, and another heauen is unseene. The heauen that is seene, is many manner wise as the Glose saith, super Deut. 0.ibi., Loo heauen is the Lords thy Gods, and hea∣uen of heauens. Heauens be seaven, na∣med in this manner; Aereum, Ethereū, Olimpeum, Igneum, Firmamentum. A∣queum, Emperium celum, heuen of An∣gels. The heuen that is called Aereum, is the middle place of the roundnesse of the aire, that is not full of great & boyst∣ous vapours of water and of earth, and so that part of the aire; that is more pure and cleane, and lesse medled with the ne∣ther qualities: for the purenesse & clean∣nesse thereof, and cleernesse of kinde, it is called heauen, as it is said Mat. 13. The foules of heauen eate it, &c. Celum ethe∣reum, as some men say, it is yt is called, the ouermost part of the aire, yt is nigh ioyned to the fierie roundnesse, and is called Ethereum: for it is bright and shining. For that part betweene the fire and the aire is nigh the fire, and recey∣ueth of the fire light and shining, for E∣thereus in Greeke, is named brightnesse, either shining as Isidore saith. And Coelū igneum, firie heauen, as some men meane, is the middle of the round∣nesse of the sphere of fire: and that is for the purenesse, subtilnesse, highnesse, and working, that the fire hath passing other elements, and for other properties, that the fire hath for nighnesse to the round∣nesse of the Planets. And Gregory saith vpon that place of Iob. Behold and see Etherea, &c. By that name Etherea is vn∣derstood all the space yt is from ye Moone, euen to the stars yt be night, in ye which space us roundnesses & circles of ye seauen Planets. Séeke within De Ethere, what Marcianus meaneth thervpon. Alexan∣der ordeineth the seuen heauens, & saith in the manner: The first heuen giueth light in one manner wise, & is not moo∣ued, and as called Celum : the second also  saith giueth in one man∣ner wise lyght, and is called Celum: A∣queum  as it were of kinde of water or of christall stone. The third heuen giueth light, not lyke bright in euery part, & is moued as the heauen of starres. The fourth heauen receiueth light without heate, and is called: Olim∣picum. The fifth receiueth light in heat, and is called Clum igneum as ye fourth heauen. The sixt receiueth light, and is ioyned with the other part, and is called Celum Ethereum, bright shining hea∣uen. The seuenth receiueth lyght, and is ioyned with the nether part, & is named Celum Aereum, of the kind of aire: and so it séemeth, that they call Olympium the space of the roundnesse of the Pla∣nets: for that space is alway light and shining. And the firmament they cal the first heauen and the last, as philosophers meane: in the ouermost part wherof be the bodies of starres. For Philosophers set but onely one heauen. But as Basili∣us saith in Pxomeron, the Philosophers would rather gnaw and fret their owne tongues, then they would assent, yt there be many heauens. Aristotle in libro de causis elementorum, describeth that hea∣uen that is called Firmamentum, in this manner. Heauen (he saith) is the fift E∣lement, seuered from the nether Ele∣ments, and distinguished by propertie of kinde: for it is not heauie, for thea it might come downward: nor lyght, for then it should stye and moue vpwarde. For if it wer one of yt foure elements, or compowned of the foure, then corruption might come therin in all, or in some part therof. And as it is sayd there: The crea∣tor set it to be well and cause of genera∣tion and coruption. And therefore that heauen is kindly mouable without rest: and the mouing thereof is rounde about the middle, vpon a lyne that is named Axis, that standeth thee pight vnmoua∣ble betwéene two starres, that be called Polys, that be the most South starre, & the most North starre: the which North starre we call the shipinans starre.
And that heauen hath ende touching length and bredth, & stretching of place: But it is endlesse touching mouing, for it moueth by a suer of endlesse might: that is by God himselfe, that is most high and glorious without end. Hether∣to speaketh Aristotle lib. de causis Ele∣mentorum And also be calleth these Poles, two starres, in the highest endes of heauen, set in the middle thereof, one aboue, and another beneth: the one there of, is set aboue in middle of ye Heauen. Northwarde, and is called Polus Arti∣eus: and that other is set against him South ward, and is called Polus Antar∣ticus, as it were set afore the starre, that is called Polus Articus. Betwéene these two Poles, as it were betwéene his two endes, heauen moueth: so that the grea∣test Circle of heauen commeth not euen round ouer our heads: For they two Poles be not lyke high to vs, and heuen moueth from the East to the West, and from the West againe till be come to the East, and all that waye like swifte, lyke as a whéele moueth about the ax∣eltrée. And therfore Aristotle vnderstan∣deth a certaine line that stretcheth from that one Pole to that other Pole in straight length, and about that line, all the roundnesse of heauen moueth lyke swifte: and that lyne be calleth Axis, as the Commentator sayth there. Of the kinde of this heauen, it is treated In li∣bro de coelo & mundo, secundum no∣uam translationem. Heauen (he saith) is one thing compowned of marter, for it containeth the kinde, of the which hea∣uen is named, which is the last passing of all. And it foloweth in the same booke: There be not many heauens, nor wer, neither shall be, for heauen is one per∣fect and complete at full, and nothing is lyke thereto: and without heauen is neither place nor body, nor widenes, nor fulnesse, nor time, that is number & me∣sure of mouing. Therefore there is sted∣fast life, that is to wit beyond the last, & that life is endlesse: For that lyfe nei∣ther saileth, nor endeth, and that is very lyfe. Also he saith there, that heauen is not made nor gendred, but it is simple, and the mouing thereof is euen, and ther in is no diversitie: & the mouing there∣of, is singular, and round about: and the moouer thereof is a spirite, that mooueth it by his owne will: and the beame of heauen is continu with the beame of fire, and ioyned there with to profite of lyfe of the men which abideth. Also the firmament is called heauen, for it is sad and stedfast, & hath a marke, that it maye not passe: and so for full great abiding of his stedfastnesse, it is incorruptible & vnchaungeable both in substance and in shape. And the shape thereof is rounde about, and hollow within to be warde: and round about toward them which be aboue heauen, but the roundnes bendeth from them ward. The mouing thereof is kindly round about, and a flonte,Bias or o∣uerthwan and round about from the East to the west, and rolleth about, & draweth with him by simple mouing, and lyke swifte in the space of a night and a daye, all that is there vnder, euen to the place of the fire: and so he rauisheth and leadeth a∣bout with himselfe, the roundnes of the seauen Planets. And Rabonus saith, all that is there vnder, is obedient in one manner order, and not distourbed to the vertue of mouing thereof. Also he saith In expositione super Genis. The ver∣tue of mouing thereof stretcheth euen to these nether Elements. And so men sup∣pose, that it draweth about with him∣selfe the ouermost fire, and also the wor∣king of ye vertue of mouing therof, com∣meth euen to the aire, and also euen to the waters: in the which waters touch∣ing ebbing and flowing, it maketh in the most part increasing & decresing, & these thrée Elements, Fire, Aire, and Water be obedient to some manner mouing of heauen: but they follow it not in one manner wise, nor in one order, but some lesse, and some more, as it is said before. That which is more lyght and pore, is more obedient, and that which is lesse light and pure, followeth more slowly, & is lesse obedient. The earth is not obe∣dient to the mouing of the vertue of he∣nen, to take thereby chaunging of place, though it be obedient, and receiueth di∣uers impressions, to bring forth of it selfe, diuers manner of kindes. Then as
Rabanus saith, there the firmament hath touching, mouing, lyke swifte passing, ordinate, and not distourbed, and is swiftest of all mouings. Therefore lest the shape of the world should fall, by the swiftenesse of the mouing thereof, it is tarried by ordinate mouing of the Pla∣nets: and so the strong swiftnesse of his mouing, is made moderate by con∣trary mouing. Also it moueth without trauayle: for the parts chaungeth place and stead, the whole heauen chaungeth no stead nor place: and though these ne∣ther things be distourbed, and happely vnstedfast, heauen with his roundnesse and circles forsaketh not, nor leaueth not the sad tenour of his order, namely in a poynt. Therefore the mouing of heuen, is the first subiection of all time, & man∣ner and rule of all other mouings. Al∣so the firmament by his mouing is prin∣ciple working and doing of generation and corruption in the lower world And as Rabanus sayth, the cause thereof is, for the firmament sendeth the vertue of his lyght, that is effectiue cause of gene∣ration to the earth, as to his owne mid∣dle, and gathereth his owne beames, & ioyneth them in the vtter parte of the earth. For as it is shewed in Scientia Perspectiua, euery each round body and hollow, and bright in euery each poynte thereof, sendeth a beamie lyne into the middle of that bright body: that is to vnderstand the vtter part of that middle: and the néerer euery beamie lyne is to other lynes, which goe out to the mid∣dle, the more stronger he is to print in effect thereof and doing. And their strēgth commeth of nighnesse of one lyne to an other: and thereof it followeth, that for the bodye of heauen is round, hollowe, and also bright. And this earth in com∣parison to the greatnesse of heauen, is ac∣counted but as it were a poynt: for the earth is the middle point, that therin is ful great gathering of heuenly beames: and of the vertue and touching of those sayd beames, commeth full great genera∣tion and foorth bringing of things that are bred in earth, which is the middle of the firmament. And though heauen be Principium, and Well of generation: yet in it selfe it receiueth no generation, nor corrup∣tion, nor decreasing nor increasing: for heauen in his substaunce hath much sim∣plenesse and likenesse, cleannesse & pure∣nesse: and hath no departing nor con∣trarinesse in the parts, of the which it is compowned, and therefore of it selfe it hath no might to corruption. And Ari∣stotle argueth, in li. de coelo & mundo thus. All corruption (he saith) commeth of contraries, and nothing is sound con∣trary to heauen: wherefore heauen is not corrupt. Also though heauen in it selfe be lyke in partes: yet needeth it to haue manye diuers roundnesses and circles in shape and greatnesse, that differ in length and breadth, and that of diuers habitations, which be néedefull to things that shall dye, as Aristotle saith in li. de causis E∣lementorum. For if the neather worlde shuld receiue influence of beames in one manner disposition and measure, féeding of them that should dye, and generati∣on of all the neather things should faile: and therefore it is néedefull that heauen moue a slont, that by arising and going downe of Circles, now cold, now heate,Bias may be bred in the middle. For if hea∣uen moued straight towarde vs, all things that be there we dwell, should be consumed and wasted with heat or with colde, as Aristotle sayth. Also men take not only héed in heauen of purenesse and incorruptiblenesse of matter, but also of fairenesse and cleerenesse of shape. For as Aristotle saith in li. de sensu & son∣sato, Heauen in his owne kind is bright, but in the parts thereof is diuersitie. For in stars is more gathering of light, than in other parts of heauen. Where∣fore in shape heuen hath roundnes, hol∣lownes and vtter roundnesse, with cléer∣nesse and brightnes, and euennesse in the hollow heauen, and diuersitie in parts. Wise men tel, that of méeting of round∣nesses, and of contrary mouing of Pla∣nets commeth a swéete harmony: wher of speaketh Macrbius in lib. Ciceronis, expounding the dreame of Scipio: In putting & mouing of these round worlds commeth the sweet sound and accord, &c.
Also it is said in libro de coelo & mun∣do, in fine: that heauen with continu∣ance of his moouing setteth a light flame on that thing which it mooueth vppon. Therefore the aire is set a fire, with mo∣uing of heauen. For mouing is cause of heat. Therfore there it is saide, that it is perceiued, that of moouing commeth heat kindly, & of rest commeth coldnesse. And therefore heat softneth matter & depar∣teth it, & coldnesse gathereth & bindeth it. Therefore the parts of the Elementes, which be nigh to the mouing of heauen, be more hot then the other parts of the neather world, as it fareth in fire & aire. And in ye third Element, yt is the water, mouing is féebled. And therfore therin is coldnesse, but not in the vttermost. In the fourth element, that is earth, because it is far from the heauenly mouing, is con∣straining to the vttermost, through ab∣sence of heate & mastry of coldnesse. And therefore the earth abideth resting, and euerlasting, that it moueth not, as Arist. saith there. Also men take héed of the no∣bilitie of heuen in simplicitie of his sub∣stance, in purenesse & euerlastingnesse, in brightnesse & cléerenesse of shape, in roūd∣nesse, in euennesse of mouing, & swift∣nesse, & vertues in highnesse of place. For touching the place therof it is most farre from the middle of the earth in stretching of quantity: For the greatnesse thereof passeth imagination and measure of rea∣son. In might, for it ruleth & gouerneth and ordeineth and measureth all that is there vnder: And that is more wonder∣full, heauen ordeineth and measureth, & amendeth and chaungeth all the neather things, that taketh neuer chaunging of thing which is lower then it selfe, nor that thing which is vnlike thereto in kinde, confirmeth it selfe in anye vertue to the heauenly body. Of the Christalline or watry hea∣uen. Chap. 3. THe sixt heauen is watry or cristallin. And is made by the might of God of waters, which be set aboue in the firma∣ment. For authority of holy writ telleth vs, ye waters be set aboue heauens: which be so light & subtil, yt ther e turne,  heuenly kind.setteled. And therfore they be pigut there. But Beda saith, yt those heauenly  waters be hanged aboue the firmament, not by the thinnesse of waters, but by ye cléere & subtill vertue of God: and that to temper ye swiftnesse of the firmament, or to swage the heat yt commeth of ye swift mouing of the Firmament. For Bedas opinion was, ye heauen is strie kinde, as Plato and his followers say. Therefore Beda sayth, that heauen is of subtill and firie kinde, round, and set lyke far from the middle point of the earth. And there∣fore it séemed to Beda, yt therfore it was néde, yt there were waters to bring that heauenly heat to temperatnesse: and that the nether world shuld not take domage of the burning of heauen. Some say that Saturnus, that starre is colde, and that he hath of cold kind of those waters, which be set aboue the tap of heauen: and that because yt the plece therof is nigh to the firmament. Also they say, that the firma∣ment by vertue of those waters is colde and cooleth the roundnesse which Satur∣nus is in: for it is next thereto. But how this might be reasonably done, it is not cléerely knowne to them that vse reason. For seeing that watry substance, by reason of both his qualytice, moisture and coldnesse is contrarye at all to fi∣rie substaunce: It is not cléere inough to Philosophers, how betwéene bodies that be so diuerse and contrarie, might vnitie and accorde be found in any wise. And neuerthelesse it is written. Iob. 38. Hée that maketh accorde in his high things. Iob. 38. ver. 19. Where is the way where light dwelleth, and where is the place of darknesse. Verse. 24. By what way is the light parted, which scattereth the East winde vpon the earth. Verse. 33. Knowest thou the course of heauen, or canst thou sette the rule thereof in earth. Verse. 36. Who hath put wisedome in thy reines, or who hath giuen thy hearte vnderstan∣ding. Therefore Philosophers that search and inquire, as I thinke the inner point of Philosophy more clergealy,Diuinely. and inner to the grounde, haue another opinion,
and meane otherwise. For Alexander sayth, that those waters, which are a∣boue heauen, be not set there as colde fleeting, and moyst, nor as s, frore; and heauie: for these be properties, and haue contrarinesse among themselues, and bee contrary either to other. But more be∣rely by the ordinaurie of the wisedome of God, those waters that be vpon or a∣boue the firmament, be in the most noble condition of their owne kinds se in that place by Gods owne doing: inasmuch as they be next to heauenly kinde. And this propertie of kinde of cléerenesse and brightnesse is properly and kindly found in kinde of water. And by cause thereof it hath likenesse, and accordeth with Ce∣lum imperium,God seat and also with the firma∣ment: therefore our Lord hath set wa∣ter beneath, vnder the reason of colde & moyst, with other néedefull conditions to generation and corruption: but he set waters aboue by reason of cléernesse, as it was néedfull to the conseruation of the world. And therefore he saith, that hea∣uen is called watrie and christalline, be∣cause of ablenesse to mouing, & of cléere∣nesse: for it is cléere as christall, and re∣ceiueth light and fulnesse of lyght of the ouer heauen, which is called Celum im∣perium, and sendeth that light, which it receiueth, to the nether heauen: and it is called heauen, for it is vnknowen & bu∣séene of vs: and it is called Cristallinū, for it is hard as Chrystall, and not onely therefore, but because it is euenly bright & cléere: & it is called Aqueum, watrie: for it hath mouing as it were water of his subtiltie and moueablenesse: and it is moued, and moueth the next heauen thereto, and the said heauen moueth forth the heauen that is next thereto. And therefore that heauen that moueth the nether mouable things saueth principal∣ly the nether mouable things, as Alex∣ander saith. Addition. AdditionTHe varietie of opinions concerning the Heauens, doe manifest the in∣certaintie of humane skill: neuerthelesse wise men espie, that where ther is cause of learning, so long laborious studies are not spent in vaine, as appeareth by these thrée seueralls, p. C. Carlile. The number of spheres, as the truth is, and as Plato and Aristotle de∣scribeth them. Nouus iste orbis, qui & Firniamen∣tum dicitur, Aristotle vocatur pri∣mum mobilē, seu supremuscibis. The first (for lacke of the figures) is the seate of the holy and blessed Trini∣tie, God the Father, his Sonne Iesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost the thirde person, the Archangells, Powers, Po∣tentates, and Angelles, the soules of the Elect, which are departed in the Lorde and Sauiour Iesus Christ. The second: the twelue Signes. The third, the seauen Planettes: these con∣tatrie seauen heauens. Then followeth the foure Elements: whereof the earth is lowest. The twelue Circuies are vnder, and inclosed of coelum Empe∣rium. Some of the Mathematicians, omit the burning heauen, and adde the tenth, which they call Primum mobile, and the ninth, which they call, Secundum mobile, as thus: Primum mobile, se∣cundum mobile, Firmamētum, Saturne, Iupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercury, Luna, Ignis, Aire, Aqua, Terra. The Schoole men omit the seate of God, & in the place of it, they put thrée moe, as appeareth in this resitall. The ninth Coelum Aqueum, or Christalli∣num, or Adamantium, the waterish, or ycie, or harde heauen, as harde as an Adamant stone. The tenth Primum mobile. The eleuenth, Coelum Empe∣rium, the burning Heauen: Coelum Emperium, Primum mobile, Coelum Aqueum Christallinum Adaniantiom, Firmamentum, saturne, Iupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercurius, Luna, Ignis, Ayer, Aqua, Terra. ¶Of heauen Emperio, Cap. 4. COelum Empereum is the first and highest heauen, the place of Angells, the Countrey and habitation of bles∣sed
men. And hath that name Empire∣um, of Pir, that is fire. For it is fullye called fire, not for burning, but for light and shining, as Isidore sayth. For this heauen is most bright and shining, and giueth lyght and shining vnto the hea∣uen Christalline, that is next thereto. And this heauen of his owne kinde is in parts lyke without starres, and sha∣pen all rounde, as Damascenus saith. And it is round, for to contayne spiri∣tuall and bodely things and it is kindly quiet, immeucable and vnmoued. And so that heauen is not néedfull for conti∣nuance of generation of lower thinges: but, as Alexander saith, For complec∣tion and full perfection of the worlde, and of bodyes, as certaine endes aske, which are ordayned according to the middle: The one ende is most darke, as the Earth. The other most lyght as Coelum imperium. Either bodye, vt∣termost, and highest, and lowest, is for it selfe vnmouable and quiet. Rabunus describeth the properties of this heauen, and taketh the wordes of Basilius in Exameron, and saith in this manner: Coelum Emperium, is the first bodye, most simple in kinde, and hath least of torpolentnesse: for it is most subtill in the first firmament, and foundation of the worlde, most in quan∣titie; bright in qualytie, round in shape, highest in place: For it is farthest from the middle point of the world, and con∣taineth spirites and bodyes, seene, and vnséene: and is the highest dwellyng place of God. For though God be in euery place, yet it is sayd specially, that he is in heauen: For the working of his vertue shineth most ther. And ther∣fore heauen is speciallye called, Gods owne seate: For in the bodye of the worlde, the kinde of heauen is fayrest, as Damascene saith, and in heauen the vertue of God worketh most openly. ¶Of Ethere shining. Chap. 5. EThere in Gréeke is shining, and Isi∣dore saith. The ouer parts of fire, & of aire are called Ether, where is euer∣lasting shining of lyght and of bright∣nesse. And Anaxagoras saith, that that name Ether, is the name of fire. And as Aristotle sayth, he troweth that, for the burning, which commeth of the swifte∣nesse of the mouing thereof: and so A∣naxagoras meaneth, that all thing which burneth is called by that name Ether. And Alarcianu saith, that Ether is the place, which is departed from the nether worlde, and is vnséene in comparison to yt nether, which suffereth many manner diuersitie and chaunging. For in Ethe∣re, in that place is day euerlasting, no night commeth after day light, and no wonder: for the shadowe of the earth, which is cause of the night, commeth not in so high a place, as is that place, which is called Ether, as in li. Metheo∣rorum Arist saith, that Ether is nought els in kinde, but one element, & is none of the foure Elements: For all thing which is aboue ye roundnes of ye Moone, is of kinde departed from the kinde of the nether elements. Therfore Ether is neither heauie nor light, nor thinne nor thick: nor may be departed by thirling & holing of another bodie. For no corrup∣tion nor alteration may come and enter into the kind which is called Ether, nei∣ther into all nor into part thereof: and if it came, as had composition of the E∣lements, then corruption shoulde come therein. But yet Anaxagoras saith, that Ether is the aire, which is set a fire. And he saith, that sometime it cōmeth down∣ward, and is hid within the earth: and for the subtiltie thereof, it is ruled now vpward, now downward: and therfore commeth earth shaking, of the vertue of Ether closed in the inner partes of the earth. But Aristotle sayth, that this sai∣eng is erronious: For a subtill thing moueth not downward: and also though it moued downwarde, yet it should not make such working. And as Macrobi∣us sayth, The shining of Ether vnder the roundnesse of heauen, blaseth and shineth into all the roundnesse of the worlde: and contayneth in it selfe the roundnesse of the seuen Planets, which moue agaynst the mooing of the Fir∣mament. And the neather parte of the
aire with swiftnesse of his mouing, set∣teth on fire the ouer part of matters E∣lementall: and of that setting on fire, the roundnesse of fire is gendred and bred, as it is sayd, in libro de coelo & mun∣do in sine. And Ether is not set on fire, by the matter that is so set on fire. For it taketh no chaunging of the neather things, though those neather things take chaunging thereof. ¶Of the sphere of heauen. Cap. 6. Sphaera.THe sphere of heauen as Isido. sayth, is a certaine kinde shapen all round, and moueth all round about the middle thereof in euen space of times, from one poynt to the same. Philosophers tell, that this sphere hath neither end nor be∣ginning: and therefore because of the mouing about thereof, it is not soone knowen, where it beginneth, and where it endeth, and no shape is so according to heauen, as the shape of a sphere, both for the simplicitie therof, and for contei∣ning and receiuing, and also for likenes and accord, as Isido saith. Also Alphra∣gas sayth, that the sphere is the round vttermost part of the heauenly body, in the which the fired starres be contay∣ned. And this sphere goeth about vppon two Poles, the one thereof is by North, and goeth neuer downe to vs, and is called Polus Articus, the North pole: the other is Polus Antarticus, that is, the South pole, and is neuer seene of vs: and that is, because it is farre from vs, or els because the earth is betweene vs and it. Betweene these two Poles, as it were betweene two endes of ye world, the sphere of heuen moueth and turneth round about, and with the mouing ther of, the starres that be pight therein, are borne & rauished about,Dravven. out of the East into the West, and againe out of the West into the East, in mouing of a day and a night, in the space of soure & twen∣tie houres And the sphere of heuen mo∣ueth about with so great swiftnes, that but if the Planets met, and letted the swifte mouing thereof, and made it mo∣derate: the shape of the world shoulde fall. And therefore as Alphraganus saith, the seauen roundnesse of Planets, be vnder the sphere, euery one meeting and crossing other. By the which round∣nesse, the Planets passe with couenable meeting, and meete and come against the ramishing of the stemament, and with∣standeth and tarieth the swistnes there∣of. And all the body of the sphere, moo∣ueth a slont about the middle, that is a∣bout the lyne that is named Axis, and Axis is a certaine line vnderstoode, that stretcheth straight by the midle of a bal, or of an other thing from one Pole to a∣nother: by such a line vnderstood in he∣uen, the roundnes of heuen moueth as a whéele moueth about the axitree. The endes of this line that is named Axis, be called Cardinales coeli, and be pight in the foresaid poles, and are called Car∣dinales, because they moue about ye hol∣lownesse of the Poles, as the sharpe cor∣ner of a doore moueth in the herre. And those Cardinales be hollowe and crooked inward, as Isid. saith. And halfe ye sphere is called Emisperium, that is, the parte which is all seene of vs, and for desaulte of our sight. It séemeth that it toucheth the earth: and the Circle, to the which the sight stretcheth and endeth, is called Orizon, as it were the end of the sight, as sayth Isid. Then knowe thou heereof shortly, that the sphere of heauen is a bright substance, and shineth euen to the middle thereof, that is to the earth, and the roundnesse thereof is most farre from the middle poynt of the earth: and ther∣fore the substance of these things which be full great in heauen, seeme full little to our sight: and that is for they be far off. And this sphere containeth all the nether things, and ordaineth and infor∣meth them all, and is cause effectiue of generation and of liuing, and rauisheth and draweth to it selfe contrary things: for by violence of his mouing, it draw∣eth after him the Planets, which mette with him, and passeth forth with harmo∣nie & accord. For Ari. saith in li. de pro∣prietacibus Elementorū, of ordinate mo∣uing of the sphere, and of the contrarye meeting of Planets, in the worlde com∣meth harmonie and accord.
And so Macrobius saith: in putting & mouing of the roundnesse of heauen, is that noyse made, and tempereth sharpe noyse with lowe noyse, and maketh di∣uers accordes and melodie: but for the default of our hearing, and also for pas∣sing measure of that noyse and melodie, this harmony and accord is not heard of vs. In likewise as we may not perceiue and see the Sunne moue though he moue, for the cleerenesse of beames ouercom∣meth the sharpnesse of our sight. ¶Of the circles of heauen. Cap. 7. CIrcles of heuen be many: of ye which twaine be seene, the which twaine bée called Galaxias and Zodiacus.Addition Zodiacus, an ouerthwart circle deui∣sed to be in heauen by the Astronomers, to declare the course of the Sunne al∣way, betwéene the Tropikes of Cancer and Capricorno. To which poyntes when it commeth either in the déepest of winter, or in the highest of Summer, it declyneth by little and little backe a∣gaine toward the Equinoctiall. This Circle hath the name of the figures of beastes, that are imagined to be in it, to expresse the natures of the twelue Signes, which are within the compasse of the same. The other are vnseene, as the Circle that is named Equinoctialis, that de∣parteth heauen in two partes euen like: the which two parts be called Emispe∣ria. And that Circle Equinoctialis, tou∣cheth the Circle that is called Zodiacus, in two Signes, that one is named A∣ries, and that other Libra, the weigher and the Ballaunce. The other Circle is called solsticialis estiualis, that is, The stinting of the Sunne in Summer: for when the Sunne is therein, the Sunne is stinted in the Summer, and the daies begin to were shorter. This Circle tou∣cheth Zodiacus, in the signe that is cal∣led Cancer, the Crabbe: and is as it were the ioyning of our dwelling coun∣trey. And another is called Parallelus, or the Circle Septemtrionalis, and is na∣med Articus also, and is as it were the departing of our dwellyng place. And the Circle that is towarde the Circle, which is called Torrida zona, which is as it were the ioyning of Torrida and of our habitation, toucheth the Circle which is named Zodiacus, in the Signe which is called Capricornus: And this Circle is named Solsticialis Hyemalis, of stinting of the Sunne in Winter. For when the Sunne is in that Circle, the Sunne stinteth in Winter, and the dayes beginne to were long. Another Circle there is, that is called Paral∣lelus. (AdditiōParalleli, lines in the sphere of the world, equally distaunt, whereby the Sunne passing, causeth variation in the houres of the day) and is called Antar∣ticus also, and is in the South, afore the North Circle, which is called Paralle∣lus Articus. And these fiue Circles are called Paralleli, as it wer Circles lyke farre a sunder. Beside these be two Cir∣cles, either called Colurus: ye one is na∣med Colurus septentrionalis, the North Colurus, and beginneth from the North Pole, and passeth round by the Signes that are called Cancer & Capricornus, & tourneth againe to his owne beginning. That other is called the South Colurus, (AdditiōColuri, are two great Circles in the Sphere, which doe declare the time cal∣led Aequinoctia and Solstitia, that is to saye, when the daye and night be e∣quall in length: also when the daye is longest, and the night at most length) and passeth by the Signe Libra, into the Signe that is called Aries, and turneth also againe to his owne poynt. And co∣luri are sayde as it were colla Tauri, and haue that name of the tayle of a wylde Oxe, that arreareth his tayle, and maketh an vnperfect Circle: And Collurus is said as it were an vnperfect Circle. The tenth Circle is called Orizon, that is, making ende of the sight: In that Circle it seemeth, that heauen and earth be coupled togethers. And there is a South circle that betoke∣neth and marketh that part of the circle, and is called Zodiacus, in the which part
it séemeth that the Sun, is like far from the East & frō the West. And these two last circles be not in the sphere, but vary and be diuers, as diuers aspects asketh. Huc vsque Isidorus. li. 3. AdditionOrizon is the furthest parte of the firmament that mans eie can discerne, or determine. Of the circle Galaxia. Chap. 8. GAlaxias is a circle of heauen, and is more faire and bright then other cir∣cles of heauen, and passeth by the mid∣dle of heauen, and beginneth from ye East and passeth to the North by these signes, which are called Cancer & Capricornus, and turneth againe to his owne point. And this circle is called the milky circle: For among all circles of heauen, that circle is most bright and cléere, and most notable. And therefore by night ir ruleth and leadeth ship-men, and waye-faring men. And the more cléere the weather is by night & cold, the better is the percei∣uing of this circle. By the opinion of the common people, the circle Galaxias is ye vore of the passing of the Sun, that the Sun leaueth after him when he passeth in that circle. But Aristotle sayth yt this is false. For if Galaxias were of the im∣printing of the passage of the Sun, then must this printing be in the signes, in the which the Sunne passeth with other moueable starres. And we sée that this is false. For it passeth the boundes of the circles, which are called Zodiacus, wher the Sunne commeth not nigh: as it is sayde in Libro Meth. Therefore A∣naxagoras and Democritus sayde, that Galaxias is of reflection and reboun∣ding of light towarde the ayre, as it were in a mirrour. But this is false, as Aristotle sayth. Therefore if it were so, Galaxias shoulde chaunge place, as the lyght chaungeth, and this is false. For wée see, that Galaxias is alway in one place, and passeth not thence Ther∣fore Aristotle sayth in this manner. Fire, which is nigh to the roundnesse of heauen, is shining and bright. And in the place where Galaxias is séene, bée many small starres and bright, and in those starres shineth that brightnesse. And therefore that place séemeth most bright with beames of light, and passeth not out of one place of the roundnesse of heauen. Huc vsque Aristoteles liber. pr. Methreorum. cap. 2. Of the Zodiake. cap. 9. ZOdiacus is a circle that passeth a∣slont, & is departed euen in twelue partes, the which twelue partes Phi∣losophers call signes. And these signes shewe to vs in what parte of heauen the Sunne and the Planettes are in. Then the twelue signes bée twelue spaces di∣stinguished in like much, knowen of A∣stronomers by notable starres, and euery each signe is departed in thirtye degrées, and euery each degrée is sixtye minutes, and euerye minute is sixtye scruples. So that sixtye scruples make one minute, and sixtie minutes make one degrée, and thirtie degrées make one signe. And these signes bée called by their owne proper names: As Aries, the Weather: Taurus, the Bull, and so of other. They be called beastes, not for that beastes be set in heauen: but for in effectes and dooing they present some propertie of such beasts: as it shall be said héere following. Among these twelue signes, foure bée Cardynall signes, as Isidore sayth: as Cancer, highest, and Capricornus, lowest, Aries and Libra in the middle. The first twaine bée called Signa Sol∣sticiaria,The Sun is in the highest. those bée the signes in the which the Sunne stinteth. For in Can∣cer the Sunne stinteth, and commeth no néerer to vs warde: And in Capri∣cornus hée passeth no further vpwarde.The Sun is lowest. In the first hée maketh most long daies and short nightes: And the seconde againewarde: and in the other two signes the daye and night bée lyke. And in Libra is euennesse of daye and night in Haruest: and then in eyther time dayes and nightes bée lyke long: also in these signes there bée thrée fy∣rye,Fire. that bée Aries, Leo, and Sagit∣tarius: and there bée thrée earthye,
that be Taurus, Virgo, Capricornus.Earth. And there bée thrée ayrye,Aire. that bée Ge∣mini, Libra, Aquarius. And there bée thrée watrie,Water. that bée Scorpio, Cancer, Pisces. Among these signes, they that bée firye and ayrie, bee hotte and male, and daye signes. And they that bée wa∣trie and earthie, bée colde and female, and nightish signes. Also among these, foure bée mooueable, that bee the foure cardinall signes, that bée Aries, Cancer, Libra, and Capricornus: for in these signes time chaungeth. And foure bée pight, in the which time is pight: that bee Taurus, Leo, Scorpius, and Aquari∣us. And foure be common, in the which they bée meddeled: that bée Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius, and Pisces. And these signes bée called houses: for they bee the home and dwelling places of Planettes. And of these houses, some bée called the houses of Triplicitie, and some of exal∣tation. For those signes that accord in one kinde, make a Triplicitie, and haue one name, & so they be ordeined in foure parts of heauen. For in the east part bée the firie signes,East. Aries, Leo, & Sagitarius: The earthy signes be Taurus, Virgo, & Capricornus in the South.South. The airie be Libra, Gemini, Aquarius, in the West.West. Watrie bee Cancer, Pisces, scorpio in the North.North. And among Triplicities of houses, those that be in the East be stron∣ger in theyr working and dooing than the Weasten, the Northern, or the Sou∣thern: For more noble planets haue ma∣strie therin. For the Eastern Triplicitie, that is the first, hath the Sunne by day and the Moone by night, and Saturnus is partenee with them by daye and by night. And West in Triplicitie hath Saturnus, Mercurius, and Iupiter. And the Northen Triplicitie hath Venus, Luna, & Mars. And the Southerne Tri∣plicitie hath Saturnus, Mercurius, and Iupiter. Also signes bée called houses of exaltation and rising. For as Planettes be more or lesse enhaunced in degrées of signes, the more vertuouslye and perfect∣ly they woorke. For the Sunne hath his vertue & exaltation in ye eightéene degrée of Aries: and his falling in the degree of Libra, Venus hath her blisse in Piscibus, in the eight and twentie degrée, & her fal∣ling and her discomfort in such a falling of the signe, that is there afore, that is Virgo. Mercurius ariseth in Virgo, fif∣téene degrées, and falleth in Piscibus in as many degrées. The Moone ariseth in Cancer in the third degrée, and falleth in Scorpion in as manye degrées, Satur∣nus ariseth in Tauro in one and twen∣tie degrées, & falleth in Aries in as ma∣ny degrees. Mars ariseth in Capricor∣nus, in seuen and twenty degrees: and fal∣leth in Cancer in as many degrées. Iupi∣ter ariseth and Caput draconis in Ge∣minis in thrée degrées, and falleth in Sa∣gittario, in as many degrées. Cauda the taile of a Dragon ariseth in Sagittario, in thrée degrées, and falleth in Geminis. Beside these euery each signe is departed in thrée partes, the which partes bée cal∣led Facies. The beginning of which is from the first degrée of Aries, and dureth to the tenth degree: the second dureth to the. xx. the third dureth to the thirtye. The first part that is called Facies is gi∣uen to Mars, the second to the Sun, the third to Venus. The first Facies of Taurus, and is gi∣uen to Mercurius: the second to ye Moone, the third to Saturnus. The first Facies, of Geminis is giuen to Iupiter: The se∣cond to Mars: the third to the Sunne. The first of Cancer to Venus: the se∣coude to Mercurius: the thirde to the Moone The first Facies Leonis is giuen to Saturnus: the second to Iupiter: the third to Mars. The first Facies of ye signe that is called Virgo, is giuen to the Sunne: the second to Venus, the third to Mercurius The first Facies of Libra, is giuen to the Moone: the second to Sa∣turnus, and the third to Iupiter. The first Facies of Scorpio is giuen to Mars, the second to the Sunne, and the third to Venus. The first Facies of Sagittarius is giuen to Mercurius, the second to the Moone: ye third to Saturnes The first Fa∣cies of Capricornus, is giuen to Iupiter, the second to Mars, the third to the Sun. The first Facies of Aquarius is giuen to Venus, the second so Mercurius, the third to ye Moone. The first Facies of Pis∣ces is giuen to Saturnus, the second to Iu∣piter,
the third to Mars. Then a Planet that is in his house, hath fiue starres: in degrée of exaltation and arising, he hath foure: in the house of the Triplicitie, he hath thrée: in ye part that is called Facies, he hath one or two. And among the Planettes hée that is most abundaunt in number, passeth most in strength. And euerye each Planette is more strong in his owne house, than in anothers house. And so by strength of the signe that a Planet is in the Pla∣net is strengthened  and is feebled of feeblenesse of the signe that hée is in. As a strong man is more strong on a strong horse than a féeble. And therefore as Misael sayth: Astronomers in thoy domes and in their iudgements take heed of the houses ascendents.The whole art resteth on deeming & aming That is to vn∣derstand of arising of signes, and digni∣tie of Planets, that they may déeme and gesse what shall befall by principate and masterie in houses, in Angles, or as∣cendents anglye either falling from an∣gles. And also some signes bée called Do∣mus angules, as the Cardinall signes, of the which wée haue spoken before, that be Cancer, Libra, Capricornus, and Aries: And some signes bée called Domus succedentes, following Angu∣lis, as Taurus, that followeth the signe that is called Aries: and Leo, that fol∣loweth the signe which is called Can∣cer: and Scorpio that followeth the signe which is called Libra, and A∣quarius, that followeth the signe, which is called Capricornus. And some bée called Domus cadentes de Angulus, falling from Angelis, as Gemini, Vir∣go, Sagittarius, Pisces: as it is séene in Misael his figure. And by rising and going downe, Oppositions and Coniunc∣tions, and aspects of these signes diuers and contrarye things fall in this world. For as the same Authour saith, they bée in strength of kinde, and both gendered vnder a strong signe, male, ascendent, and arising: and vnder a strong Pla∣net, with good aspect therin, bee of strong and good dispsition in their kinde: and againeward. Also houses that bée called Domus Anguli, the first house is Easterne, that is the signe which is called Aries: and the Northerne house is Cancer: and the West Angule is Libran and the Angule of the earth is Capricornus. These foure Anguler signes bée of most vertue: and the Easterne more than the Westerne: and the Northen more than the Southerne. And the angle of the earth is lesse strong than the other an∣gles, as the same Authour sayth. The signes that bee called Domus succeden∣tes, be of meane effect and vertue: and the second signe, that is to witte, the se∣cond signe from Aries yt is Taurus, and the fourth signe, the fifth, the eight, the eleauenth: and among these signes or houses, the eight is worst working and betokening: and therefore Astronomers cal it Domus moris, the houss of death: and the other signes bée called Domus cadentes, faing houses, that bée the fourth, the fifth, the sixt, the ninth, and the twelfth, and bée of feeble effect, and of worst betokening, and namelye the sixt and the twelfth: and the cause there∣of in, as the author sayth, for in the signe that is called the sixte house, Mars is worde and Master: and therefore it is called the house of sicknesse and of fée∣blenesse of all things: and in that signe is the ioye of Mars, and in the twelfth is the ioye of Saturnus: and therefore it is called the house of enmitie, of forrow, & trauaile: also signes that be called Do∣mus, beholde euerie other, and haue as∣pect euery each to other: so it is sayd, that there bée three principall aspectes, that bee called Sextilus, Timus, & Quartus. Aspectes is called Sextilis, when a Pla∣net in any signe ascendant arising, hath aspect to the thirde before him, and to the thirde after him: and that from the third to the leauenth Ensample. If any Planet be in ye beginning of Aries, hath aspect to the Planet, that is in the head of Gemini before him: and to him, that is in the beginning of Aquarius, after him that is in the leauenth signe: and this aspect is called Sextilis: for it hol∣doth the sixt part of heauen, that is six∣tie degrées, and such aspect is laudable, fortunate, good, and gratious.
It is the signe of meane loue as Astro∣nomers tell, as the foresayde Authour meaneth. The third aspect is from ye fift signe to the ninth. Ensample. A Planet that is in the beginning of Aries, hath aspect to him that is in Leone before him and to him that is in Sagittario, after him, that is the night signe. And this as∣pect is called Tercios, and Trinus also: for it conteineth the third parte of hea∣uen, that is fire score degrées, & this as∣pect is best. For it is in the signe of per∣fect friendship and loue, as the Authour sayth. Notes re∣quisite.The fourth aspect is from the fourth signe and the ninth. Ensample. A Planet that is the beginning of Aries, hath as∣pect to him that is in the head of Cancer before him, & to the Planet that is in the head of Capricornus after him, or behind that is the tenth signe. And this is called Qitartus, the fourth: For it conteineth the fourt parte of heauen, that is foure score degrees and tennt. And this aspect is euill: for it is the signe of wrath and enuyd, and enmitie, and in perfection, as the foresaid Authour sayth. And coniunc∣tion & appostion be not aspects: but som∣time they be called aspects by misersing & chaunging of that name aspect. Then when the first signe hath aspect to the leauenth; as Aries to Libra, it is called Aspectus oppositus, and is worst: for it is the signe of perfect enmitie, & signifi∣eth and betokeneth worst haps, & name∣ly if Mars haue such aspect to Saturnus, or to the Sunne: And when a Planet commeth with a Planet in ye same signe ascendent, or in the next signe there be∣fore, or behinde: then it is called Con∣iunction. And this Coniunction may bee good, if that the Planets be good. And a∣gaineward euill,Sapiens dominabi¦tur austris if the Planets be euill, as the Authour saith. And all this is said in figure, that the Authour maketh and setteth. Of Aries. chap. 10. GAther we kinde of all signes arowe, and by order, taking beginning of the signe that is called Aries. Then Aries is an Casterne signe, as it is said. For as a Wether in lieng vpō one side, turneth & chaungeth by equall times, so the Sun being in that part of the circles Zodia∣cus, that is called Aries, maketh euen∣nesse of day and night, and maketh the artificial daies and nights like long. And Misael sayth, that Aries is a firie signe, male, and a dayes signe and vnstable, and the house of Mars. The Sunne is Lord thereof by day, & Iupiter by night, And Saturnus is partener with thom. And this signe Aries is of the first Ers∣plicitie. The first Facies is giuen to Mars the second to the Sunne, the third to Venus.Shape in Aries. And of mans bodie Aries hath mastrie in the head and face, & maketh much haire in ye bodie, & maketh ye body and face crossed and heauie eyen, short eares, and long necke, and is the house of lyfe, and of the birth of man: For as that signe goeth vpwarde from he nea∣ther parte of the earth toward the ouer partes of heauen; & turneth againe from darknesse so light: to both a childe that is borne passe out of darknesse. And by vertue of that signe the thing that is hid commeth into light, and priuie things be knowne to wise men. And is Alboma∣sat telleth in libro de motibas astrorū. In going downe (he sayth) of the third or of the fourth degrée of Aries, the signe a∣riseth that is called Libra, and mooueth the aire. In the tenth degrée seth the starre that is called Almareth and Al∣phet, and maketh the aire cléere and bright. In the 25. degrée Pliades the lea∣uen starres goe downe,Pleiedes, the seuen starres. when the Sun, or the Moone, or any of the Planets com∣meth into the first, second, or third degrée of Aries, then shall be clowdie weather,  winde of the South colde and tempest. In the second degrée of Aries, or in the ninth shall be great heate. Of the signe Taurus. cap. 11. TAurus,Al herbs, stones, fruits, ser∣pents, & seeds, of; operatiō, in the 4. degree of this con∣iunction. as Misael saith, is an earth∣ly signe, colde, pight, and a nightye signe, the house of Venus, the second, ex∣altation of the Moone in the fourth de∣grée: Venus is Lorde thereof by daye, and the Moone by night. And Mars is partener with them: and of the Tri∣plicitie
he is the second.Taurus are vncu∣rable poi¦sons swer or fresh in tast, these ha∣stē sodein death. The first Facies is giuen to Mercurius, the second to the Moone, the third to Saturnus, and hath mastrie of mans body in the necke and in the throate, and giueth large face and crooked, heauie nose and long, large nose∣thrills, heauye eyen, haire standing, and blacke and a greate necke, and maketh a man thamefast, and to walke honestly, and neuerthelesse in vaine & in idlenesse.Shape in Taurus. And he is the house of substance, and of riches, and possession, of receiuing and giuing, and is called Taurus, a Bull, for a Bull earing maketh the land plente∣ous and rich. Also when the Sunne is in Tauro, land may be eared, and is co∣uenable to be tilled, and to beare fruite, as saith Albumasar. In the first degrée Taurus, ariseth the starre that is called Paluit. In the sixt degrée ye constellation that is called Orion, goeth downe, and the aire chaungeth. In the eight degrée Phades, the seauen starres arise and di∣strouble the aire. In the 16. degrée, the starres that be called Hiades arise, and distrouble the aire. Of the signe Gemini. cap. 12. AS Misael sayth. The signe that is called Gemini is airie, male, meane, and a day signe. The house of Mercurij, exaltation of Cauda Draconis, the star that is called the Dragons taile, is in the third degrée thereof. Saturnus is Lorde by daye, and Mercurius by night. And Iupiter is partener with them, & of the third Triplicitie. The first Facies is gi∣uen to Iupiter,Shape in Gemini. the second to Mars, the third to the Sun, & hath mastry in mans body, of the shoulders, armes, & handes, & maketh a man faire, couenable, and of meane stature. And if Mercurius be con∣iunct thereto, and be fortunate: he dispo∣seth a man, and maketh him able to lec∣ture and to writing. And is the house of kinred, and nigh sibnesse of counsaile, of religion, and of truth. Of good meat and of sléepe, as Albumasar sayth, when the first degrée of this Gemini goeth downe, the starres arise yt be called Hiades, and change the aire, and thereafter Archites & Echites, that be called Aquila, the Ea∣gle in eightéene degrées, & Delphini in ye sixe & twētie degrée. This signe is called Gemini, that is to meane twins, as Isi. saith. Fables of Poets meane, that these twins were Castor & Pellux, two bre∣thren borne at one burthen, and wereful strong men. And because of them it is sayd, yt the Sun is then in Gemini. For when the Sun is in ye part of heauen, ye vertue is doubled to make the neather world plenteous. And then sometime be many warres and strifes betwéene kins∣men & cousins. Also Isid. telleth another tale, & saith, yt when Castor is ouer & ru∣leth the neather things, then Pollux is ouer & ruleth the ouer things, & againe∣ward. And Marcianus sayth, that that is feined. For sometime in Summer, when nights be most short, one part of the con∣stellation goeth downe, & the other part, that is ye forth, ariseth and goeth vp. And therefore it is saide, that the one brother oweth heauen, and the other hell. (AdditiōCastor and Pollux, as Poets haue feined were two twins, begotten on Le∣da, ye wife of Tindarus king of Laconia, (with whō as it is feined) Iupiter in the likenes of a Swan, did accōpany, for in those daies inchātment & witchery, holpe to further much iniquity, & the childrē so begotten, felt Gods vengeāce secretly, she is said to hatch two egs, of ye one came Pollux & Helena, which was rauished by Paris, for yt which came Trois destruc¦tiō, & of ye other came Castor, & Clitēne∣stra, ye wife of Agamēnon, king of Mi∣cene in Greece, now called Peleponuesi∣us: the tide egs are ye two princes, ye hus∣bād & ye adulterer: those two Castor & Pol∣lux, deliuered ye seas frō pirats & rouers, & therfore being counted Gods of ye sea, were called on by mariners in time of daunger, & tempest Occasion of this was taken of the star called Gemini, into the which it is feined those two brethrē wer turned: ther are two lights which do of∣ten settle on ships called Castor & Pol∣lux, which if they ascend is a token of fair weather, if they falen ye seas a shew of tempest, this is common. Of the signe Cancer. chap. 13. THe signe yt is called Cancer is watry female, vnstable, a night signe, the house of the Moone, eraltation of Iupiter
in the fiftéenth degrée thereof. Venus is Lord thereof by day, and Mars by night: and the Moone is partner with them. And he is of the fourth Triplicitie. His first face is ioyned to Venus, the seconde to Mars, the thirde to the Moone:Shape in Cancer. and hath mastery in the body ouer the brest, ribbes, and lunges: and maketh great∣nesse in the bodye. For from the middle he maketh a man great and euill shape, & boistous, and vpward subtill, and ma∣keth short teeth and crooked: and is cal∣led the house of the father and of vines, and of all things that grow vpon earth: of castles, of towres, of townes, and of Cities, of treasure hidde, and of heritage. Heereof speaketh Albumasar. And when the fifth degrée of this signe Cancer go∣eth down, the signe that is called Capri∣cornus ariseth, and chaungeth the aire. In the leauenth degrée Orizon ariseth and chaungeth the aire in heate. In the 29. degrée ariseth the sharpe star, that is called Canicula,At vvhich time be∣ginneth & dog daies vvhich is saide the time of infection & seemeth a full hound. And then is greate disturbaunce in the aire, and as Isidore sayth, This signe is called Cancer, the Crabbe. For the crab is a shelling beast, and goeth backward: So the Sun, when he goeth in that part of the circle Zodiacus, that is called Can∣cer,Dies cani culares. he goeth backwarde in the eight de∣gree of this signe Cancer. Also then the Sunne is high toward the roundnesse of the sphere, toward our dwelling place: and is set in earth that he may not passe higher: and then he turneth againe, pas∣sing by the nether signes euen to Capri∣cornus. AdditionCanis is a starre in the Firmament, rising the. 17. Kalends of August, & go∣eth downe within. 40. dayes after: in which time being called the dog daies, this starre ioyning with the sunne in the middest of the firmament doubleth the heate, &c. Of the signe Leo. chap. 14. AND Misael saith, The signe that is called Leo, is firie, male, pight, and a daye signe, the house of the Sunne, and his exaltation, the Sunne is his Lord by day, and Iupiter by night, and Saturnus is partener with them. And he is of the first Triplicitie. His first face is giuen to Saturnus, ye second to Iupter,Shape in Leo. the third to Mars, and helpth in a man the sto∣macke, brawnes, heart, and ridge, & ma∣keth a man great vpward and small be∣neath, of greate heart and fierce, with small legs, & be called, the house of chil∣dren, and of new clothes, of free men, and of goods, and this sayth Albumasar. In the fourth degrée of Leo, Aquarius, and Clion ariseth,Clion. a starre. and the ayre is chaunged. In the ninetéenth degrée Cancer ariseth and Capricornus goeth downe. And that signe is called Leo, for the Lion is stron∣gest of beasts, namely of heate, and spe∣cially in the fore part: so the Sun ente∣ring into that part of this signe, printeth in his beames more sharply, then he doth in the ende when he passeth out of the signe, as Isidore saith. Of the signe Virgo. chap. 15. THE signe that is called Vrgo is ear∣thie, colde, meanly, and a night signe: the first house of Mercurius, and the ex∣altation of Mercury is in the fifth de∣grée therof. Venus is his Lord by day, & the Moone by night, and Mars is partner with them, and is of Triplicitie the se∣cond. His first face is giuen to the Sun, the second to Venus, the thirde to Mer∣curius. Of the parts of man he hath in cure the wombe and guts,Shape in Virgo. and maketh a faire person, faire eien, faire face, & séeme∣ly, and he swageth the will: and is the house of sicknesse, of seruaunts, men and women, and of beasts, and betokeneth right wisenesse and chaunging from place to place. And this signe is called Virgo, a maide: For a maide is barren, and without fruite: so the Sun entering the part of Zodiacus, that is called Vir∣go,The Zo∣diake de∣clining wasteth with his heate, humour and moisture: and so maketh the earth barren of fruite. Of the signe Libra. cap. 16. MIsael saith, that the signe that is cal∣led Libra is watrie, male, vnstable, a daye signe, the house of Venus, the first
exaltatiō of Saturn, in 21. degrées therof. Venus is his Lord by day, & Saturn{us} by night, Mercurius & Iupiter be both part∣ners with them, of Triplicitie in ye third: His first face is giuen to the Moone, the second to Saturnus,Shape in Libra. the third to Iupiter. In mans body he ruleth ye nether parts, the wombe, the guts, and the nauell. And he is the house of wiues, sponsalles, and marriages, of strife, thefte, and robberye, and this saith Albumasar. In the fifth de∣gree of the signe of Libra, the starre that is called Leo, ariseth and chaungeth and heateth the aire. In the. 2. degrée ariseth Corona, and maketh much troubling of the aire. AdditionCorona, the signe of Ariadne (the wife of Theseus king of Athens, who was much defaced by breaking his fayth which he had promised to the daughter of Minos, king of Cret, leauing her in the Ile Naxas, notwithstanding she sa∣ued his life) which hath nine starres in forme of a crowne. And in the .23. degrée ariseth the starres that be called Hyades and Ves∣pertio, and then is more perturbation of ye aire. And thereafter ariseth Virgo. And this signe hath his name of Libra, of a ballance that is ye instrument of wei∣eng. For the Sunne being in that part of heuen yt is called Libra, maketh daies and nights euen like and long, as Isidore saith. Of the signe Scorpio. chap. 17. MIsael sayth, the signe that is called Scorpio, is watrie, colde, pight, and a night signe, the first house of Mars, the exaltation of no Planet. Venus is his Lord by daye, and Mars by night: and the Moone is partner with them, of Tri∣plicitie is the fourth. His first face is gi∣uen to Mars, the second to the Sunne, the third to Venus. Of the part of man, it serueth the members of generation, the bladder and the reines: & giueth a ruddy face and litle, much haire, small eien, long legs, & great féete. And he maketh a man light and vnstable, wrathfull, & a lyar. And is called the house of death, and of trauaile, of harme, & of domage, of strife, of battaile, of guilefulnesse, and feluesse, and of wit. Heereof speaketh Albumasar.Shape in Scorpio. In the second degree of Scorpio the stars Hiades arise, and causeth greate di∣sturbaunce and distemperaunce in the aire. (AdditiōHiades are seuen stars, whose names are Ambrosia, Eudora, Palitlioe, Coro∣nis, Plexauro, Pytho, & Tythe, they bée troublous, and raise stormes & windes. They go down the .14. Kalends of May: Poets haue named them the daughters of Atlas & Aetheria, wherfore they be al∣so called Atlantides: Atlas of Maurita∣nia, as the Gréeks supposed, did first find out the course of the stars, by an excellēt imagination: it is supposed he was a∣bout the yéeres. 1599. afore the incarnati∣on: of so great antiquitie is the science of Astronomie. And thereafter ariseth Taurus. In ye 22. degrée therof Pliades go downe: & thē the wether & the aire is cléere. And that signe is called Scorpio. For a scorpion is a beast that stingeth gladly with ye taile. Also the Sun being in that parte of Zo∣diacus, that is called Scorpio is cause of hurting, and of punching of mans body. For then he withdraweth and giueth lesse heate to the ayre, whereby the ayre béeing distempered in colde, gréeueth and puncheth the bodye soone, as Isidore sayth. Of the signe Sagittarius. Chap. 18. MIsael sayth, that Sagittarius is a wa∣trie signe, male, meane, and a daie signe, in exaltation of Cauda draconis, the Starre, in the thirde degrée thereof, the Sunne is his Lorde by day, Iupiter by night, Saturnus is partener with them of Triplicitye. The first face is giuen to Mercurie, the seconde to the Moone, the thirde to Saturnus. Of mannes partes hée disposeth the eyen,Humane feature. and maketh long haunches and legges, and euen long face and small chinne, and maketh a man fayrer behinde then before, and maketh small haire, and a great womb, and he maketh a man haue liking in moouing.
And therefore hée is called the house of trauailing men, of truth, of wisedome, of mastrye, of worshippe, of wit, and of cunning and knowing of Starres, and diuination of dreames. And heereof spea∣keth Albumasar. In the second degrée of Sagittarius, Plyades arise, and go soone downe. And the head of Scorpio aryseth, and then is strong turbation of the aire. In the seauenth degrée the starres Hy∣ades go downe, and the aire is chaunged. That sign is called Sagittarius,Sagittari∣us arrows are raine, haile, & novv. ye archer: For as an Archer sendeth his Arrowes: so the Sunne when he is in that part of Zodiacus, sendeth to vs Raine, haile, and Snow. Of the signe Capricornus. Chap. 19. MIsael sayth, That the signe that is called Capricornus, is earthie, cold, vnstable, a night signe, Saturnus first house. The exaltation of Mars is in ye 28. degree therof. Venus is his Lord by day, and the Moone by night, and Mars is par∣tener with them of Triplicitie, and is the second. The first fate is giuen to Iu∣piter, the second to Mars, the third to the Sunne. In mans body he beholdeth the knées, and giueth small leggers and drye bodyes,Shape in Capricor. rough face and hairie, guilefull & wrathful. He is called the house of Lord∣ship, of worshippe, of king and of king∣dome, of blie, and of imperie, of riches stollen and hidde Héereof speaketh Al∣bumasar. In the fourth degrée of Capri∣cornus, Cancer ariseth in 38. degrées, the head of Cancer goeth downe, and ye head of Capricornus ariseth. And is called Ca∣pricornus. For as a Goat buck is a beast with hornes standing vpwarde: so the Sunne, when he is in that part of Zodi∣acus, maketh the stinting of the Sunne in the winter, and then he beginneth to stie vpward by signes toward Aries and toward Cancer. Of the signe Aquarius. chap. 20. MIsael sayth, That the signe that is called Aquarius, is male, pight, a daye signe, the house of Saturnus: but is exaltation of no place. Saturnus is his Lord by daye, and Mercurius by night. Iupiter is partener with them of Tri∣plicitie, as in the third. His first face is giuen to Venus, the second to Mercuri∣us, the third to the Moone.Shape in Aquarius And it is sayd hée hath Lordshippe of mans legges vn∣till the anckle bae, and maketh a man gladde and ioyfull, and a greate waster. And maketh a faire face, and well colou∣red. And of some hée maketh one legge longer then another, and he is called the house of friendship, and of Merchandise, & faire, of fortune, of rent, of tribute, and substaunce, of riches, of king, of knight, & of foot men. Heereof speaketh Albuma∣sar. In the fourth degrée of Aquarius, the signe ariseth that is called Leo: In the leauenth degrée, the starre that is called Stella regia, and the starre that is called Lampades, goe downe and chaunge the aire, & thereafter Capricornus, & the head of Aquarius ariseth. Fables meane, that that signe Aquarius is ye butler of Gods, and giueth them water, and therefore he holdeth a potte. And therefore then it is saide, that Sol is in Aquario: for that time the aire is made thicke, and hath much water bead: and then is more raine then in other times, as Isidore sayth. Of the signe Pisces. chap. 21. MIsael sayth, That the signe that is called Pisces, is watrie, colde, meane, and a night signe: the house of Iupiter, but exaltation of Venus in the 27. de∣grée. Thereof Venus is Lorde by daye, Mars by night: and the Moone is part∣ner with them, of the Triplicitie in the fourth. His first face is giuen to Satur∣nus, the second is Iupiter, the thirde to Mars. Of mans bodye he ruleth the féete, and giueth large breast, little head,Shape in man. a flowrishing beard and faire. And ma∣keth a man white, of great heart, with rounde eyen: And that signe is called the house of enmitie, of Asse, of horse, and of euery wast that is ridde vppon. And betokeneth trauaile, wo, & sorrowe, backbiting, deceipt, and guile, euill will, and prison: Héereof speaketh Albumasar
In the tenth degrée of the signe yt is cal∣led Pisces, Virgo ariseth in the 12. degree, Thele, yt is the signe yt is called Libra, ariseth: in the .19. degrée, the signe that is called Cancer ariseth: in the .24. degrée, Orision, & the signe that is called Aqua∣rius arise. And this signe is called Pisces, the fish, for that time is generation and froting of fish. For when the heate of the Sunne ariseth, humoures be dissol∣ued and parted, and then fish vse to shed their séede, as Isidore sayth. And so A∣stronomers meane that these be the pri∣uie properties & vertues of the .12. signes of heauen. And I haue put these proper∣ties of these .12. signes to this worke, suppossing that it is profitable to them that read ye names of them in holy writ, to finde and knowe shortlye, what olde men meaned and vnderstoode of them in olde time. And why & wherfore Astrono∣mers, that take héede of the course of the Starres, set such names to these twelue signes. For by rising and downe going, and conspect and sight these 12. signes, that be called also Domus, houses: di∣uerse and wonderfull chaunges fall in these neather partes of the worlde, as it is sayd. For the ouer bodies of heauen alter and chaunge these neather things, and make in them diuers impressions and printes. And by these twelue signes, moue the Planets that be called Sidera errancia, not for they erre, for they haue most certeine moouing and discreet: But they be called Errancia, for it is know∣en that they holde theyr course against the course of the firmament. And there∣fore of the moouing of Planets, and of their place and effect, somewhat shall bée shortly sayd, both in generall and in spe∣ciall. Of double mouing of the Pla∣nets. chap. 22. ALL the Planettes moue by double mouing, by their owne kinde, moo∣uing out of the West into the East, a∣gainst the moouing of the firmament: And by other mouing out of the East into the West.Contrary mouing. And that by rauishing of the Firmament. By violence of the fir∣mament they bée rauished euerye daye out of the East into the West. And by theyr kinde moouing, by the which they labour to moue against the Firmament, some of them fulfilleth theyr course in shorter time, and some in longer time. And that is for theyr course bee some more and some lesse. For Saturnus aby∣deth in euery signe thirtie moneths, and full endeth his course in thirtie yeare. Iupiter dwelleth in euery signe one yere, and full endeth his course in .12. yeare. Mars abideth in euery signe .45. dayes, and full endeth his course in two yeres. The Sunne abideth in euery each signe 30. dayes and .10. houres and Semis, and ful endeth his course in .CCClxv. daies, and sixe houres. Mercurius abideth in euery signe. 28. dayes and sixe houres, & full endeth his course in .CCCxxxviii. dayes. Venus abideth in euerye signe . daies, and full endeth his course in CCCxlviii dayes. The Moone abideth in euery signe two daies and an halfe, & sixe houres, and one bisse lesse: and ful en∣deth his course from point to point, in 27. dayes and eight hours. And by ente∣ring and out passing of these .7. starres, into the .12 signes, and out thereof, all thing that is bread and corrupt in this neather worlde is varyed and disposed: and therefore in the Philosophers booke, Misalath. chap. 1. it is read in this man∣ner. The highest made the world to the lykenesse of a sphere, and made the high∣est circle aboue it moueable in the earth, pight and stedfast in the middle thereof: not withdrawing towarde the left side, nor toward the right side, and sette the other Elementes moueable, and made them moue by the moouing of seauen Planets, and all other starres helpe the Planettes in their working and kinde. And therefore the working of the Pla∣nettes is lyke to the stone Magnas, an Adamant, and to Yron. For as Yron is drawne to that stone, so euery creature vpon earth, hath a manner inclination by the mouing of the Planets. Couenable sitting, and destruction commeth by moo∣uing and working of Planettes: the working of them varieth and is diuerse by diuersitie of Climas and Countryes.
For they work one manner thing about the land of bliew men, and another a∣bout the land and countrey of Slauens: and therefore as he saith Caput. quarto. Take héede of coniunction of Planets in these signes. For if many Planettes bée coniunct in watry signes, in the space of the yeares, it betokeneth much raine: And if they bée coniunct in firie signes, it betokeneth drinesse and hunger, that commeth of passing heat and drinesse: and if such a coniunction be in signes that be ayrie, it betokeneth much winde: And in the signes that be colde, it betokeneth heauinesse of colde, & of temporatenesse of heate. And yet in the same booke. ca. 8. it is said, that gifts of signes increase in theyr working by coniunctions of the Planets in good or in euil. For if the pla∣nettes bée good, they betoken good, and if they bée euill, they betoken euill. For as bee sayth, Some Planets bée male, euill day signes, heauie, colde and drye: as Saturnus. And some bée good, male, a day Planet, temporate, hotte, and moyst: as Iupiter. Mars is male, a night Pla∣net, and bréedeth heate and drynesse. Venus is female, a night Planette, meane, betweene hot and colde, and moi∣sture. And Mercurius is of temporate kinde, a day Planet, nowe male, nowe female. Therefore he tourneth himselfe soone to the kinde of the Planet, that bée is coniunct with. And so with good Planettes hée is good, and with euill he is euill, and with meane hée is meone. Also the Moone is a female Planet, and a night Planet, colde, and passing moyst. Therefore Astronomers meane, that some Planets in their doing and effects be good, as Iupiter and Venus: for they greeue nothing, but helpe and saue both their owne, and the things that bee not theyr owne, as farre forth as they maye. Other Planettes bée euill, as Mars and Saturnus, not for that they gréeue alway theyr owne, but they helpe onelye their owne. And some moue as the Sunne, the Moone, and Mercuryus. For they helpe theyr owne, and bée nowe good and now euill to other: and namely, as they bée conioyned in diuerse houses of signes, with Planets good or euill. For with good they bée good, and with euill they bée euill. As these seauen Planettes oft worke, they haue might and power in ofte generation of men, and of other heastes. For as Astronomers meane,C: genera¦tion cau∣ses super∣naturall, naturail. and Galen, and other wise Phisitions, Saturnus with his coldnesse and dry∣nesse, congeleth the matter that is concei∣ued in the mother, and maketh it thicke: And in the seconde moneth Iupiter gi∣ueth spirits and members: In the third moneth Mars maketh the bloud thinne, and humours thicke,This is a fallax, of erfortie daies, the feature in perfect. except he mea∣neth the povver of euery sēce and ordeineth and compowneth. In the fourth moneth the Sunne giueth spirituall lyfe to the liuer and to the heart. In the fifth moneth Venus maketh perfect and disposeth the members and limmes of féeling, and of office, as the eares, nose, and other such. In the sixt moneth Mercurius com∣powneth all the holes and holow mem∣bers, and tongue, and nosethrilles. In the seauenth moneth the Moone departeth and distempereth members in their owne place and stéed, and therefore then a child is borne profitable and healthfull, and if the childe put off the birth, euen to the eight moneth, then the childe dieth. For then the might and vertue of Sa∣turnus commeth yet againe, for with his either qualitie, colde and dry, he bindeth and slayeth the childe. And in the ninth month Iupiters vertue commeth againe: for he nourisheth and kéepeth the childe with his temporate heat, therfore a child that is borne that time, shall liue, and also the child that is borne in the begin∣ning of the tenth moneth, maye haue help and life, for then againe Mars reig∣neth, and by his heate and drinesse, the childes members bée strengthened, and therfore the child by benefit of heate and of drynesse, commeth out: mightie and strong Planettes haue those workings, and many other generall and speciall in the neather bodyes, and namelye when they haue Lordship and mastery in theyr owne home and house, for euerye Planet hath his owne house as Albumasar say∣eth. For Saturnus his owne first house is Capricornus, and also Aquarius: Iupi∣ters house is Pisces & Sagittarius: Mars
house is Aries, Libra, & Taurus, Mer∣curius house is Virgo, Libra, & Gemini, the Suns house is Leo, the Moones house is Cancer. In these .12. houses & signes, the 7. Planets be Lordes and Masters, and passe & mooue therein by diuers moo∣uings: and now be in exaltation & are∣ring, and now falling and abating. And in these signes the Planettes moue and abate with double moouing, and mooue by accidentall mouing and rauishing of the Firmament, out of the East into the West: and by kind moouing, the which kinde moouing is double, the first and the second. The first moouing is the round mouing, that a Planet maketh in his owne circle, and passeth neuer the marks and bounds of the circle. The se∣conde moouing is that he maketh vnder the Zodiacus, hauing aspect to the same circle, & passeth alwaye lyke great space in a like space of time. And the first moo∣uing of a Planet is made in his owne circle that is called Ecentricus, & is called so, for the earth is not the middle therof, as it is the middle of the circle that is called Zodiacus, & therfore the circle of a Planet is called Ecentricus, if the vtter roundnesse thereof passeth about ye mid∣dle point of the earth, and departeth the earth euen a twaine, and his middle point of the earth: but his middle point is without the middle point of the earth. And this circle Ecentricus is double, that is to wit, difference and equance. For to the Planets are assigned thrée circles, as sayth Ptho. That is to wit, equance, dif∣ference, and Epiciclus. The circle that is called Difference, is the circle of a Planet, in whose roundnesse alway moo∣ueth Epiciclus of the same Planet, and is called therefore difference, because it bereth ye circle Epiciclus. Circulus equans is called that circle, about whose middle point moueth the point of Epiciclus, that Planet mooueth euen about, and is cal∣led Equans, euening, for therein the Pla∣net holdeth euen by his course: Epici∣clus is a little circle that a Planet de∣scribeth and goeth aboute therein by the moouing of his bodye, and the body of the Planet goeth about the round∣nesse thereof: and so in the ouer side of that circle that is called Epiciclus, a Pla∣net moueth from the West, Eastwarde. And in the nether part therof he moueth from the East, Westward. And therfore it sheweth that the Sun & other Planets moue in theyr owne circles: and first lyke swift, though they moue diuerslye in diuerse circles. Also in these circles thrée manner mouing of Planets is full wisery found of Astronomers, that bée called Motus directus, Stacionarius, and Retrogradus. Motus directus is with right moouing, when a Planet mooueth streight from the beginning of a signe, towarde the ende thereof, and Motus Retrogradus, againeward, that is moo∣uing backwarde, when a Planet moo∣ueth backwarde frontwarde the ende of a signe, toward the beginning. Stacio∣narius is when it séemeth that a Planet standeth and abideth as it were in the middle: So that it séemeth that it moo∣ueth not vpwarde nor downewarde, to∣ward the beginning, neither toward the ende of the signe, and alwaye Directo, forth right moouing is in the ouer parte of the circle that is called Epicicli:. And alway Retrogradation, moouing back∣ward, is in the neather part: And Stacio, stinting and abiding or hoouing, is in the middle. The diuersitie whereof Phi∣losophers assigne in many manner wise. But this Retrogradation, backwarde mouing, hath place only in fiue Planets, and not in the Sunne nor in the Moone, for the Sun & the Moone haue no back∣ward mouing, though they moue in the circles Epicicl and that is as some men meane, the Sunne beames: for the ver∣tue of the Sun beames because of back∣ward mouing. For the vertue of the Sun beames doe otherwhile put off Planets, and make them moue backwarde, and sometime draweth them, and maketh them as it were standing and abiding, as Alphtagoranus saith. Other causes yt cōmentor assigneth: but these suffice at this time. Then consider thou héereof, ye planets be stars Erratice, mouing diuers∣ly, & distinguished by .7. circles & round∣nes, as in place & vertue, so in effect they be diuers & sundry, as Beda saith in li. de naturis rerū. These stars work & change
the elements, and bréede all that is bred, and corrupseth al that is corrupt, and al∣so with their contrary moouing they tar∣ry the swift moouing of the body of hea∣uen, and be cause of tempest, & of cléere wether, and of plenteousnesse & of bar∣reee, and flowing and of ebbing of tho sea, & parseth euerye each with other of quality & of vertue. For as Beda saith: when any of the planets commeth into others cle, hée departeth with him of qualitie and of vertue: and also by aspect that euery each hath to other, & by Con∣iunction, they chaunge their qualities and effects For the goodnes of a goodly starre, chaungeth and abateth the presence of an euill star; & againward, the mallice of a malitious star is tempered & abated by the partened of a goodly starre, as Albu∣mat saith, and Ptholomeus. Also by or∣dinate eleuations, and rising and aba∣ting of them in their circles and round∣nesse, and by meeting of their circles, they be arose of ther king, of noise, & harmo∣ny, as it is said in i ro do quimque sub∣stantsis. And as Macrobius saith, be∣twéene the sphere of Saturnus and of the Moone, all the consonancie and accord of musicke i sound. And they shining with the Sun, hide his light, and receiue per∣fection of the vertue of the Sunne. And the higher circles they haue, in longer time they fulfill their course. Of Saturne. chap. 23. IN (Additiō the beginning of the Planets, shall be set forth what manner of persone these were, of life and conuersa∣tion that the starres were named by for the better vnderstanding of this science. Saturnus the sonne of Coelum and Ve∣sta, who married Ops his owne sister, his eldest brother named Titan percei∣uing his Mother and sisters, more bent to haue Saturne his younger brother to succéed in the kingdome, yelded his right therein to him for his owne life time, on this condition, that he should not bring vp any ue male, but the heritage shuld come againe to his children, wherefore Saturne vpon this couenant made with his brother, vsed to kill and deuour all ye male childrē, & brought vp only ye daugh∣ters, Ops therefore his wife, hauing brought forth on a time Iupiter & Iuno, shewed Iuno to her husband, but Iupiter she conueied priuely, to the Coribants (ye Priests of the Idol Cybele, inhabiting ye mount Ido in Phrigia; & from thence to Ido in ye Ile of Greta) to be kept & brought vp. Likewise afterward being deliuere of Neptune, she conueied him also secret∣ly to be kept & nourished, & lastlye saued by like meanes her third son Pluto. But whē this was known by Titā yt his bro∣ther had kept vp his men children, & ther∣by the kingdome shuld go from his line, his sonnes & he ioyntly made war vpon Saturne, in the end whereof Saturne and Ops his wife were taken & kept in pri∣son, vntil such time as Iupiter comming to age, ouercame the Titans, & deliuered his father & mother. But forasmuch as Saturn vnderstood by orade that he shuld be driuen out of his kingdome by his sonnes, he laid wait to destroy Iupiter, wherfore Iupiter made war on his Fa∣ther, & chased him out of his kingdome of Creta, into Icoly where he hid himself a long time in that country after called Latinum. Saturnus hath that name of Satu∣rando, making fulnesse and plentye, his wife is called Opis of Opolentia, fulnesse and plentie, that sheweth to man and to beast, as Isidore saith, and Marci∣anus also. Fiables speake of him and say, that he is painted as a most sorte ∣fall man: for his owne sonne gelded him, and his genitours wer throwen into the Sea: and thereof commeth Venus. Misa∣el sayth, that Saturnus is an euill willed Planet, colde and drie, a night Planet and heauir. And therefore by fables he is painted as an old man, his circle is most farre from the earth, and neuerthelesse it is most noifull to the earth: And for that he is far from ye earth, he ful endeth not his course before .30. yeres. And gréeueth more, when he goeth backwarde, then when he goeth forth right. And therefore by Fables it is feined, that hee hath a crooked hooke, and is pale in coulour or wanne as Lead, and hath two deadlye qualityes, coldnesse, and drynesse. And
therefore a childe & other broodes, that be conceiued & come forth vnder his Lord∣ship, dye, or haue full euill qualyties. For as Ptholomeus saith, in libro de iudicijs Astrorum, he malteth a man browne and fowle, misdoing slowe, and heauie, eleinge and forie, seldome gladde and merrye, or laughing, and therefore Ptholomeus saith, they that be subiect to Saturnus, haue ofte euill drye chinnes in the hinder part of the foote,Dispositi∣on. and be yeo∣low of coulour, and browne of hayre, and sharpe in all the body and vnseemly, and be not skoymous of soule and stin∣king clothing, and he loueth stinking beastes and vncleane, sower things and sharpe: for of their complection melan∣cholike humour hath masterie. Ptholo∣meus speketh of this Saturnus, and saith, that vnder Lordship of Saturnus is Ca∣pricornus and Aquarius. His Lordship is in libra, but in Aries he draweth out his kingdome. Under him is contei∣ned life, building, doctrine, and colde place and drye. In dome and iudgment he betokeneth sorrow, wee, and cleing∣nesse. His colour is blacke and leadye, and he is false: and when Saturnus com∣meth into Iupiters circle his mallice a∣bateth, and colour chaungeth by reson he is néere to Iupiter: for though he bee kindly leady, yet by cleerenesse of Iupi∣ter, when he is coniunct with him, he is made white and bright as Ptholomeus, saith. ¶Of Iupiter. Cap. 24. IVpiter (Additiō succéeding Saturne in his kingdome of Creta, fell in loue with, Danae the daughter of Acrises, king of Argiues, vnto whom (béeing inclosed in a strong Tower) Iupiter came in the forme of a golden Raine, in at the house toppe, and gat on hir Persrus, who was afterwarde, a valyaunt Knight, hée gaue the name first to the countrey and people of Persia. By this: Fable is signified, that Iupiter sene treasure prinely vnto Danae, and also to them that had the kéeping of hir, where∣with they being corrupted, suffered Iu∣piter to enter into the tower, & accom∣plished his pleasure. This declareth the force of mony and giftes in assaulting of chastitie: notwithstanding he was va∣liant and wise, yet was he giuen to le∣cherie, destowring maides, and deilyng wiues, and after his death was extolled for a God: he had to wife his sister Iu∣no, called also Hera.) Errour of Nations, and faining of Poets meane, that Iupiter was highest father of Gods. Iupiter is a goodly pla∣net, hot and moyst, male, and a day pla∣net, temperate in his qualyties: In co∣lour siluerte, white, bright and pleasing: and therefore ofte Philosophers set the cause of wealth in Iupiters Circle, as Marcianus sayth. This Iupiters Circle is next coniunct to Satarnus circle: and therefore for highnesse of his circle, in twelue yeares he full endeth his course. This Iupiter by his goodnesse abateth the mallice of Saturnus, when he is in the ouer part of his circle, that is con∣iunct to the circle of Saturnus: and ther∣fore Poets feigne, that he put his father out of his kingdome, as Marcianus saith, and Isidore also: for by his presence he abateth the kinde mallice of Saturnus. This Iupiter coniunct with good Pla∣nets, maketh good and profitable impres∣sionsm these nether Elements, & there∣fore Astronomers tell, that in mans bo∣dy he helpeth to fairenesse and honestie: for he giueth white colour & faire, med∣led with rednesse: and giueth faire eyen and téeth, and faire haire, faire beard and round. As Ptholomeus saith, he hath ma∣sterie and rule of the aire, of bloud, and of sanguine complection. Héereof speak∣eth Ptholomeus, Under Iupiter be the signes, that are called Aquarius & Pisces, and be his house, and raigueth in Can∣cer, and in Capricornus his kingdome passeth Under Iupiter is contained ho∣nour, riches, & best clothing. In iudgmēt and dome of Astronomers, he betoke∣neth wit and wisedome, and reson, and is trustie and true. And therefore as A∣stronomers tell, when he is séene in his circle that is called Ascendens, he beto∣keneth reuerence & honestie, & faith, and learning, and he shall be ende to salvati∣on, & so he comforteth the goodnes of all
the signes, and he betokeneth in them good, when he is found in them, except in the twelfe: there he sayth, that Iupi∣ter betokeneth, thraldome, pouertie, sor∣rowe, and eleingnesse, and discomforte in foure footed beastes, and in meynie and seruaunts, as Misael saith, & Ptho∣lomeus also in like wise. ¶Of Mars. Cap. 25. MArs (Additiō tearmed God of Battell, and onely Iunoes sonne, without com∣pany of hir husband. The Poets fained that Mars neuer had father, because hée hated peace: for the nature of bastards, is commonly to be either very fearful, or very venturous, and most commonly de∣lighting in those exercises, that be aun∣swerable to heady, trayterous, & vnséem∣ly practises. Iuno found in the fieldes of Olenius a floure, with ye which as soone as she had tasted, conceiued and brought∣forth Mars.) Mars was taken and helde for God of battell among Nations and People: for he is an hot Planet & drye, male and a night Planet, and so hath mastry ouer cholar, fire, and cholaricke complection, & disposeth to boldnesse & hardinesse; and to desire of wreake. Therefore he is cal∣led God of battayle and of warre, and commeth next after Iupiter, and goeth before Venus, and therefore by nighnesse of either starre, his noyfulnesse is tem∣pered. In colour he is bright, and shi∣ning, and firie, as Marcianus saith: and therfore he hath more vertue & strength in heating, than other Planettes as the same Author saith. Ptholomeus sayeth, That this Plannet disposeth mans body to length and to smalnesse: & that is because of his heate and drynesse, but this is in youth: For in age, by heate that wasteth, and drynesse that maketh to shrinke, he disposeth to stooping and crookednes. And he disposeth the soule to vnstredfast wit & lightnes, to wrath, & to boldnes, and to other cholarick passions. And also he disposeth and maketh able to firie workes and craftes, as Smithes and Bakers, as Saturnus disposeth men to be earth tillers, and bearers of heauy burdens: and Iupiter the contrary dis∣poseth to lyght craftes, for he maketh men able to be pleaders, changers, hand∣lers of siluer, writers, and other such, as Misael saith ca. 12. Also (as Ptholomeus saith) vnder Mars be these Signes Scor∣pio and Aries, and be his houses, and he raigneth in Capricorno: but in Cancer is the passing of his kingdome. Under him is contayned warre, battel, prison, & enmitie: & he betokeneth wrath, swift∣nesse, and woundes, and is redde, and vntrue, and guylefull: and Mars abi∣deth in euery signe fortie dayes and six∣téene houres, and fulfilleth his course in two yeares. ¶Of Venus. Cap. 26. VEnus (Additiō the Goddesse of lasciuiousnes and wanton lust: by the which is signified, vncleanly copulation, she came of the kindred from Saturne. Loe, of what antiquitie is whoredome among the Pagan Gentiles, and still maintai∣ned, of those, that should be Christians, specially forbidden by God in the 20. of Exodus.) Venus, that is called Lucifer al∣so, as Misael sayeth, is a goodly Plan∣net, female, and a night Planet in his qualyties, in heate and moysture tem∣perate. This Planet onely passeth the Circle, that is called Zodiacus, in two parts, as Beda saith, and is named Ve∣nus, for men saye, by his qualytie hot & moyst, he exciteth to loue of lecherie, as Isid. saith. Alway he is nigh the Sunne, and goeth before him, and then he is called Lucifer, a daye starre: another time he followeth the Sunne, and then he is called Vosper, an Euening starre, as Beda saith, he hath colour white & shining, as Electrom, that is mettal, that is most white and bright, as Marcianus saith: for among all starres, Venus shi∣neth most comfortably and whitely. And therefore he is called cléerenesse: for he sendeth from himselfe cléere beames of lyght: and therefore he maketh sha∣dowe when the weather is faire and cléere. He goeth before the day and Sunne,
and warneth that the daye commeth a∣none, and the Sunne rising. When hée is in the same signe with the Sunne, he is hid with the cleerenesse of the Sunne, and then he is not séene, When Venus is higher than Mercurius, then he is slowe in mouing, and againward, when he is lower than Mercurius, he is slow∣er, as Marcianus saith. In thrée Semi∣toni, Venus runneth to the sunne, and abateth his mallice, as Ptholomeus saith. In mans bodye he disposeth to faire∣nesse, volupt and lyking, in touch & fée∣ling, in smell and taast, and in song: and therefore he maketh singers, louers of musicke, and makers of confections of spicerie and spicers, goldsmithes, & tay∣lours to shape womens cloathing, as Misael sayth. And Ptholomeus sayeth, that vnder Venus be these signes, libra and Taurus, and be his houses, and hée reigneth in Piscibus, and in Virgine his kingdome faileth and passeth. Under him is contained loue, friendship, and pilgri∣mages: and betokeneth winning, ioye, and blisse, and he is true, and he abideth in euery signe nine and twentie dayes, & full endeth his course, in CCC .xlviii. dayes. ¶Of Mercurius. Cap. 27. MEcurius (Additiō the sonne of Iupiter by Maia, whom Poets feigne to haue wings on his head and féete, to signifie, that talke (which is represented by the person of Mercury) doeth quicklye passe through the aire. He is feigned to be messenger of the Gods, because that by speach and wordes, all things are de∣clared. He was counted God of elo∣quence, Merchandise, feates of actiuitie, and thefte also. He first inuented the Harpe, and on his sister Venus begats Hermaphroditus, that was both man and woman.) Misael saith, that Mercurius, is a Planet temperate, and a night Planet, now male, now female: for he tourneth himselfe soone to the Planet that hée is ioyned with: and he is made good with good, euill with euill, and meane with meane, and euill willed with euill wil∣led: and therefore in the ouer parte of his place he medleth his qualyties with the qualyties of Venus. And therefore Poets feigne, yt he did fornication with Venus, as Isidore saith: and he is called Mercuri{us}, quasi medius currens, as run∣ning in the middle betwéene Venus and the Moone, as Beda saith. And therefore he is ioyned with Venus, in the ouer part of Venus circle: & with the sunne, in the neather parte of the Circle of the sunne. And also his circle commeth into the circle of Venus, in the ouer parte of that circle: & into the circle of the sunne, in the nether part thereof: and when he is in the ouer part of his circle, he is better séene, and lesse hid with the sunne. And sometime he shineth before the sun, and sometime he shineth after the sunne going downe, and therefore of simple men he is called Vesperus. It is sayde, that he is Lord of waters, therfore Lu∣canus speaketh of Mercurius and sayth: The Lord of waters much smitten. Also Poets call him, God of faire spea∣king and of wisedome. Therfore Ptho∣lomeus saith, that he maketh men stu∣dieng in science of numbers and louers thereof: for he disposeth and maketh men able to science and vse of calkling and of accompts: and therefore he is called God of Merchants, for accompts is most néedfull to Merchants. Also he is called God of wrastling, as Isidore saith: for he wrastleth with the sunne, as he wold ouercome him: for alwaye he passeth nigh the sunne, neuer passing xxx. degrées from the sun. Therfore he is selde séene, for he is hid vnder the Sunne, and for heate of the sunne he is painted wanne and browne, and for his swiftenesse, he is called in Fables the ouer runner of Gods: for now he passeth with ye sun, now before the sunne, & now after the futi. When he commeth before the Sun, it seemeth that he standeth next the sun beames, & is called Stacionarius: & when he commeth after the sun, he semeth Re∣trogradus, going backward, as Macro∣bius saith: vnder Mercuri{us} be these signs, Gemini & Virgo, & he raigneth in Vir∣gine, but in Piscibus his raining passeth.
He abideth alway within in the Sunne one Signe afore, or one behinde. Under Mercurius is contained, fortune, buying and selling, and gift: and he betokeneth wisedome and wit, and with good Pla∣nets he is good, and euill with euill. Hée abideth in euery signe eight and twentie dayes and sixe houres, and full endeth his course in CCCxxxvii. dayes. Huc vsque Ptholomeus. Of the Sunne. Cap. 28. THe (Additiō Sunne, is named Sol, Phoe∣bus, & Titan, which was the elder brother of Saturne, not that the Sun had his beginning of Saelum, but Coelum, a celando, made and set by God almightie and called it the great lyght to rule the daye, which Sunne is placed among the seauen great Starres, called the seauen Planets: so named by the first inuen∣ters of Astronomy, to ye ende they might he seuerally discerned and knowen. The Sunne is the fourth in place, as it were a King in the middest of his throne: for vnder him is Luna, Mercurius and Ve∣nus: and aboue him in position & place, he hath as many, that is to wit, Mars, Iupiter, Saturne, by the which placing is expressed the most mightie ordinaunce of God, to the benefite of Nature.) Isidore saith, that the Sunne is said, as it were Solus lucens, alone shining: for that he is the well of all light. And by his beames, the ouer bodies and the ne∣ther be lightned. And Misalath sayeth, that the Sunne is a gratious Planet of himselfe: but somtime by coniunction, he is made euill, and is male and a daye Planet, hot and drye: for the Sunne quickneth all thing, and giueth all thing lyfe, forme, and shape. For as he sayth, The Sunne is more in quantitie, in working, and in cléerenesse, than all the starres in heauen: for he hath more plen∣tie and sadnesse of lyght, and he is also more in might and in multitude of ef∣fects and dooings. Also he is more in euennesse of mouing: for he moueth al∣way forth right, and in his owne circle: and holdeth him alwaye in the middle, vnder the circle that is called Zodiacus, for his circle passeth straight by ye mid∣dle lyne of Zodiacus, and passeth neuer the boundes and the markes of the Cir∣cle Zodiacus. And therefore his mouing in his owne Circle is euen and lyke swifte, though it seeme somtime that hee moue vneuenly swifter either flower, in comparison to other things. Also as the Circle that is called Zodiacus, is distin∣guished in twelue spaces, that are called twelue signes: so the Circle of ye Sun is distinguished in twelue spaces, that be called signes; and euerye of these signes, containe xxx. degrées: and euery degrée, lx. minutes: & euery minute, lx. seconds. And when the Sunne passeth from one poynt of his circle, and commeth againe to the same poynt: he passeth by these twelue Signes, and this passing is called the circle of the aire: and he passeth not fully a degrée in a kindly daye, that is a daye and a night, as Albumasar ac∣counteth it, but he passeth lix. minutes, & viii. seconds, or lviii. so that of the last minute remaine two seconds, or lii. that be not passed: and so much lacketh, that the Sunne passeth not a ful degrée in one naturall daye. Then by his mouing or∣dinate, and by his course not distourbed, he ordayneth and disposeth, and perfect∣eth all thing in this world. Héerof spe∣keth Ambrosius in Exameron, and de∣scribeth the vertue of the Sunne, and sayth in this manner: The Sunne is the eye of the worlde, and mirth of the daye, fairenesse of heauen, measure of times, vertue and strength of all that is gendered, Lord of Planets, fairenesse and perfection of all the stars. Also Mar∣cianus sayth the same in this manner: The Sunne is the Well of inwit, and minde, and of reason: head and well of lyght, king of kinde, inwit of the world, shiner of heauen, moderatour of the fir∣mament: for therefore he moueth against the firmament, for to make his mouing moderate and temperate, and therefore he is called the brightnesse of heauen. For as Macrobius sayeth in libro Ci∣ceronis. The definition of Plato was, that the light of all the roundnesse of Circles, commeth of the Sunne. And Plato in Thimeo saith in this manner:
God the master of things, maketh wa∣rely and wisely the most deere light, that that we call the Sunne, by whose brighte∣nesse and shining, heauen and all the ne∣ther things be lightned, & and he is mea∣sure of that that hath life. And in libro de Elementis Aristotle saith, That the Sunne hath his owne light, and the stars and the Moone receiue light of the Sun, as a glasse set before a candle receiueth lyght of a candle. And therefore: Mar∣cianus saith; that the Sunne passing at the middle of the circle that is departed in signes, sendeth from himselfe twelue beames, by the which the ouer bodyes, and the nether are lightened. Of these vertues and properties of the Sun spea∣keth Dionisius in libro de Diuinis no∣minibus cap. 5. and saith in this manner: The Sunne that hath his owne being, and is one manner shining light, inligh∣teneth many Essencias and qualities of things, that be seene and felt, and bée di∣uers in being: and that lyght the Sun renueth and féedeth, and maketh plente∣ous, encreaseth, chaungeth and setteth in place, and planteth, renueth ministereth all thing: and so of these words the pro∣pertie of the Sunne is knowen in his owne kinde, and in his owne effect. For in his owne substance he hath most sim∣plicitie: for he hath no substanciall com∣position of parts vnlike, nor of contrary parts, as the foure elements haue, and things that be made of Elements: but he hath all manner simplicitie in his own manner, kinde, lykenesse, and accord. And therefore he hath euerlasting being and during in his substaunce, without corruption: for the compowning of cō∣trary things is the well of corruption; as Aristotle saith. And of this simply∣citie the Sunne hath lyghtnesse in sub∣staunce: for thicknesse and boystousnes of naturall partes, is cause and well of heauinesse: and of the lyghtnesse the bo∣dy of the Sunne hath ablenesse to moo∣uing, for light bodyes doe moue easely, & the Sunne is most swifte of subtiltie of his substaunce and of ablenesse to mo∣uing: for he hath most actualti & ver∣tue of working. For the more simple that a thing is kindly, the more might it hath to diuers workings and dooings. And therfore couenably Dionisius saith, that the Sunne is a lyght, euen and like shining: for in his light he sayleth ne∣uer; though it séeme sometime, that his light is taken away from vs, when the earth or Moone is set betwéene him and vs. Also he hath vertue of renewing: for he openeth poores & holes of ye earth, and bringeth foorth that is hid in mores and rootes, and cloatheth and reneweth the ouerpart of the earth, with hearbes, twigges, and flowers, for by entering of the vertue of the Sunne, that pearreth to the inner parts of the earth, that is in winter time like an old thing, that is fordryed and withered: the earth is eue∣ry yeare renewed with gréene things & faire. Also he hath vertue of nourishing: for the Sunne beame commeth into the inner parts of mores, rootes, and séedes: and dissolueth & departeth the moysture of the earth with his owne heate, and is lyke in his vertue of drawing, to the vertue of the séedes, mores and rootes: & therfore he draweth to him of that moy∣sture, and tourneth it into féeding & no∣rishing of things that spring of ye earth. Also he hath vertue to kéepe and to saue things of the nether world: for elements that be contrarye rach to other, because that they be so contrary, they should de∣stroy themselues, except they were recō∣ciled & saued, by influence of the vertue of eauen, and so kept in due béeing, as Alexander saith. Also he hath vertue to make perfect things: for elemental heat beginneth to work in generation of bo∣dies, and heate of the sunne perfecteth, & bringeth forth to due and full ende, as A∣lexander saith. Also he hath vertue of di∣stination, and of making of knowing: for colours of things, kindes, and of shapes of things, which be vnknowen in dark∣nesse and vndistinguished, by the presence of the lyght, and brightnes of the Sun, they are knowen & distinguished a sun∣ner. Also he hath vertue of vnitie & ac∣cord, aud that of himselfe: and also by accident, is of himselfe, for he ioyneth, re∣concileth and accordeth the Planets, in their owne effectes and doings. Also he accordeth togethers, elements
that be contrary, wherefore as Marcia∣nus saith, and Macrobius also: the Sun is the middle among the Planets: for to make harmonie and accord of heauen the Sunne in his owne circle, maketh that thing, that the middle string maketh in an instrument of musike. Also by ac∣cident heate, he ioyneth things that are of one kinde, as he dissolueth and depar∣teth things that be of diuers kindes: for as the matter asketh, in which he work∣keth, now he gathereth, and now he de∣parteth. Also he hath vertue of plentiful vertuousnes, for he giueth vertue of ge∣neration to these nether things, to bring forth things of diuers kindes. For (as Ari. saith) A man and the Sunne gende∣reth man, for nothing bringeth foorthe srulte, nor groweth, but the Sun beame reacheth thereto. Also he hath vertue of comforting: for as the Sun ariseth about the circle y• is called our Orizont, vertues of beastes be made stronger, & euen till y• Sun come to the middle of ye heauen, they increase: and in his passing West ward & down∣ward: for his farnesse, bodies be féebled in their vertues, and fall as it were a∣sleepe: as it fareth in flowers, that open in the Sunne rising, & close in the Sun going downe as Alexander sayeth. Also he hath vertue of chaunging, of orday∣ning, and of distincting of times: for pas∣sing downwarde by the South signes, he maketh the dayes more shorte, and rising vp by the North signes, the daye is more long. Also he changeth y• daies, for ye Sun shining vpon earth, maketh the day, & as the disposition of ye Sun is diuers,The. 4. horses of Phoebus. Red, white, yeolovv, blacke, Gules, Argnt, Or, Sabella, Pyrois, Fuous, Aehon, Philegon. their names. ye day is diuers. For first ye Sun is red in the dawning, then he shineth in the morrow tide, and then at noone he is hot, & pale at euen. And therefore it is feigned, yt he had foure horses: of whom the first was redde, the second bright, the thirde burning, the fourth louing the Earth, as Beda sayeth. Also (as Beda sayeth) if the Sunne be speekled, or hid vnder a cloud, betokeneth a rainy daye: if he be redde and pale, betokeneth a day of tempest: and if he séemeth hoarish in the middle, so that he shine in ye mid∣dle, and sende out beames towarde the South, betokeneth tempest, moyst, and windie: if he be pale, and falleth among blacke clowdes, betokeneth Northerne winde, as Beda saith. Also he hath ver∣tue to comfort the nether things, as Isi∣dore sayeth, that by farnesse and nigh∣nesse of the Sunne, mens faces & beasts bodies be disposed in strength and heat. Therefore Marcianus saith, that by con∣stellation of the Sunne, men be fayre and nimble id wift. And therefore in Faes, he is paynted with feathers, and with chiteish face: and therefore he is called Phoebus, that is farre. Also Peholomous saith, that the Sun maketh a man corpulent, great of body, faire of face, & welt coloured, with great eyen, & maketh a man able to all works of gold; if he be in his owne exhaltation: & to all workes of brasse he disposeth, if he be in his abating. Also he hath vertue of cleansing and of purging, for by spre∣ding of his beames, he clenseth and clée∣reth the ayre, and disperkleth and shed∣deth, and dryeth away pestilent aire. Also though he be not hot of himselfe, yet he hath vertue of beating, of éeming, & of burning. And that commeth of con∣traction, and of rebounding and méeting of his beames, and mouing of the ouer par of the body, and namely if the bo∣dy which the beames come vpon, bée a shewer, and cleane and bright, as it is sayd in the science of Perspectiue. Also he hath vertue of drawing too, for by his heate, he draweth out of the Sea fumo∣sitie and vapors, and maketh them thick and turneth them into clowdes: and when they be so made thicke and clow∣die, he dissolueth and sheddeth them in hayle, now in raine, and now in snowe, Therefore Marcianus saith, that it is sayd in fables, that the Sunne was fast by the Occean, and that the vapors that were drawen vp, urned into nourishing and féeding thereof. And therefore some men tell, that strong heate commeth be∣fore strong rayne: and that is for great drawing of vapours, by strong impressi∣on of beames of heate, in the wombe, and hollownesse of a clowde, as Aristo∣tle sayth. Also he hath vertue of giuing lyfe,
that is séene and knowen by that that nothing may lyue, but there as the Sun beame may reach. And therfore Ptho∣lemeus saith in the same cooke: Under the Sunne is the Signe that is called Leo, and is his house: and he raineth in Ariete, and his reigne passeth in Libra, and vnder him is contained spicerye, winning, faires, and fortune: and he be∣tokeneth spirite and soule: and his cou∣lour is white and red, and is trustic and true, and full endeth his course in thrée hundred dayes. lxvi. and sixe houres. Also among all Planettes, he disposeth most beasts to boldnesse and to liuelinesse. And though he be most in quantitie, and most swift in mouing, his greatnesse & swift∣nesse of mouing is vnséene: for though he be eight times so great as all ye earth,The Sun 8. times as big as the earth. as Macrobius saith: for highnesse of his place, vnneth he séemeth two foote in quantitie. And that he is without com∣parison more than he séemeth, it is kno∣wen by that, that he seemeth more in his arising & downe going, when he is most farre from vs, than he seemeth in ye point of the South, when he is most nigh to vs. And so it is knowen that in behold∣ing of him our sight is beguyled. And that is openlye declared in his moouing. For he mooueth swifter than an arrowe, and neuerthelesse it séemeth not that he moueth. for great cléerenes and passing of his quantitie, so the swift∣nesse of his mouing escapeth our sight. And this that is sayde sufficeth at this time. ¶Of the Moone. Cap. 29. THe Moone is called Luna,Luna. Decor noctis. Bona dea Berecyn∣thya. Duana. as it were one of ye lights, that is to vnderstand principall & most, for he is most lyke to the sunne in greatnesse and fairnesse, as Isid. saith. For as it said in Exameron: the Moone is the fairnesse of the night, & mother of all humours, minister & Lady of the sea, measure of times, follower of the sunne, changer of the aire, and hath no light of hir selfe, but borroweth & ta∣keth of the plentie of the Sunne, and ta∣keth forme, shape, and figure of the Sun, as he is far or néere to the Sunne: Also the Moone lacking lightnesse of hir selfe, taketh lyght of the well of  of the Sunne And therefore it is sayd  E∣lementorm in Aristo. That the Moone is alway halfe shired of the Sunne and re∣ceiueth light, and reboundeth it towarde the earth: for he hath kinde like to a shewer, that hath no proper colour, but taketh lyght of another: and the neerer he is to the Sunne, the more he looseth of his lyght to the earth-ward, but the cléerenesse, that he eeeth in the nea∣ther side, towarde heauen therefore he is the more shining vpward in the euer side. And therefore when he is coniunct with the Sunne, he sendeth no light to the earth, but is in the side of heuen and vpward fully shining. And against and, when he is before the Sunne is all shi∣ning toward the earth, and nothing to∣warde the heauen, as Beda sayeth, and Macrobius also. Also the Moone chain∣geth figure and shape: for he sheweth towarde the earth a diuers face of his lyght: for now the showeth hir selfe sha∣ped bow wise, and now as a circle and round to the sight of men, now Moy∣noydus, now Dictotomos, now Am∣phitricos, now Pancilenos. And he is Moynoydos, when he is new and see∣meth horned: and is Dictotomos, when he is as it were halfe full, and is eight dayes olde: & he is Amphitricos, when it is doubt of his full roundnesse when he is eleuen or twelue dayes olde: and he is Pansilenos, when he shineth at ful, when he is fourtéene dayes olde. Also the Moone sheweth hir selfe in three states: for he is with the Sunne in coniuncti∣on, when he is next to the Sunne or a∣side, when he passeth fro-ward the Sun, or when he is all afore the Sun. When he goeth first fro-ward the Sun, hee see∣meth with hornes as a bowe, & then al∣way the hornes be tourned Eastward: & when he commeth again to the coniunc∣tion, he receiueth the same figure & shape & then the hornes be alway turned west ward: & in that side that is turned from ward the Sun, he seemeth alway voyde, and in the side that is toward the Sun, full of lyght. The Moone increaseth all humours: for by priuye passings of kinde, floude
and ebbe is increased and multiplyed. In hir waning the marrow of ye bones, the braine of the head, and humoures of the body be made lesse: and in wexing and increasing of hir, they are increased, and therefore all thing hath compassion of the default of the Moone. Also she draweth to hir waters of the sea, for as the stone Adamas draweth after him yron, so the Moone moueth and draweth after hir the Occean sea. Therefore in the rising of the Moone, the sea swelleth and increaseth, and floweth by East, and ebbeth and decreaseth by West: and a∣gainward when the Moone goeth down, the sea floweth by West, and ebbeth by East. And as the Moone hath more lyght or lesse: so the sea stretcheth or with∣draweth in his flowing and ebbing, as Marcobius sayth in lib. Ciceronis. The sea of Occean, in the increasing of the Moone holdeth this maner: for the first day of the Moone he is more full then he is wont, and is at highest: and decrea∣seth and waneth the second daye, and so he withdraweth before the seuenth day. Then againe he increaseth and spring∣eth seuen dayes, so yt the fourtéenth daye the spring is at the highest: and so al∣way in the new Moone, the spring of the sea is highest, and also in the full of the Moone. Also the Moone gathereth deawe in the aire, for she printeth the vertue of hir moysture in the aire, and chaungeth the ayre in a manner that is vnséene, & breedeth and gendereth deaw in the vt∣ter part thereof: for we sée that ye more cléere that the Moone is in the Summer time, the more plentie of deaw is séene vpon the grasse and hearbs. Also among planets, the Moone ful endeth hir course, in most short time: for hir circle is more short: and therefore in the space of sea∣uen & twentie daies and eight houres, he passeth by all the signes of the Circle that is called Zodiacus, as Ptholomeus sayth. And therefore Ptholomeus spea∣keth in this manner of the Moone, and sayth, that vnder the Moone is Cancer, & is hir house, and she raigueth in Cancer, and the passing of hir raigne is in Libra, and is a cold Planet, and passing moyst, female, and a night Planet, & abideth in euery signe two dayes, sixe houres and a halfe: and full endeth his course, in seuen and twentie dayes & viii. houres. Among all the starres that he called Er∣ratice, the Moone passeth in most vncer∣taine and vnstedfast mouing: For be∣cause of shortnes of his course, he passeth and walketh now vnder the Sun, now behinde and after the sunne. And when the sunne passeth by the South & lowest Circles, then the Moone passeth by the North and lower circles: and then the Moone is vpright as a boate, and hath hornes vpwarde: but when he is vnder the Sun, he hath hornes boowing toward the earth, and when he wayneth, he is a∣reared, as Beda sayeth. Also when the Moone is betwéene vs and the sun, then ofte is Eclypse, that is default of ye sun: and this default may neuer fall by kind but in coniunction of the sunne & moone, when the Moone chaungeth. And this coniunction is in the lyne, that is called, Linea eclyptica, and is the middle lyne of the circle that is called Zodiacus, and the Eclipse falleth alway when ye sunne is in the head of the Dragon, & the Moone in the tayle againward. Héereof speak∣eth Albumasar in libro de motibus pla∣netarum, and saith: If the Moone mée∣teth with the Sunne, & passeth euen be∣tweene vs and the sunne, he maketh vs haue default of the sunne beames: and that is in Capite or in Cauda Draco∣nis, in the head or in the tayle of the Dragon: what is Caput & Cauda dra∣conis, it shalbe sayd héereafter. Also when the earth is betwéene the Sun and the Moone, the Moone lacketh his lyght, and is Eclipsed. Heereof speaketh Marcianus in lib. de Astro. and saith in this man∣ner. The Moone going vpward or down∣ward, falleth into the Sun line if hir be xxx. dayes olde. When he is all vnder the sunne, he darkneth and taketh away the light of the sunne, and maketh dark∣nesse in earth: and maketh not this de∣fault in euery moneth, for he is not al∣way in the same line, that is euen and straight lyne betwéene the sunne and the earth. And the same default falleth on the Moone, when the Moone is all before the sunne, and is fifteene dayes olde.
For if the Sunne be then vnder the earth, and maketh shadow of the great∣nesse of the earth, that stretcheth to the lyne that is straight afore the Sunne, and if the Moone commeth into that line, hir light is taken away: for the shadow of the earth is euen set betwéene the Sunne and the Moone. Then the Moone is not so clipsed euery month: for he is not full in the line that the clipse is in, & that shadowe is not euen betwéene him & the Sunne: & therfore his light is not euery month taken away. Also somtime the Moone containeth in it selfe, a man∣ner darknesse and dimnes, and that com∣meth of qualytie of his owne body, that is kindly darke: for he hath no lyght of himselfe, but of the Sunne: or as some men meane, that darknesse commeth of the shadow of the earth, of the which is rebounded a maner dimme spleke in the body of the Moone, that dimmeth some deale his lyght: and that is most, when he is nigh to the earth, the Moone taketh some manner hoare and filth as Marcia∣nus sayth, and when he passeth vp to the higher circles, he is bright and cleane, & then he seemeth not wemmed, with no speckles, and smotching, as Marcianus saith. Also the Moone signifieth and beto∣keneth chaunging of times and of wea∣thers: for (as Beda saith) if the Moone be redde as golde in the beginning, then he betokeneth windes: and if ther be black specks in the ouer corner and luemmes, he betokeneth raine in the beginning of the month: and if he be red in the mid∣dle, it betokeneth faire wether and cléere in the full of the Moone: and in night rowing, if the Moone lyght spranckleth on the cares, then tempest shall come in short time, as Beda sayth. Also in ye har∣monie of heauen, the Moone maketh the heauiest sowne,The dee∣pest bace. as Marcianos sayth: for in the circle of the Moone is an heauie sowne, as a sharp sowne is in the sphere of heauen yt commeth of ordinate sowne, and of sherking of the mouing of the cir∣cles, and of the roundnesse of heauen. And as he saith, thereof commeth most swéete melody & accord. Also the Moone giueth plenteousnesse to the séedes of the earth: For in rayng she ouer séedeth, that profiteth by deaw, that falleth of the body of the Moone as he saith: and ther∣fore in Fables she is called Proserpina:Procerpi∣pina, the vvife of Pluto, daughter to Iupiter she is takē sometim for the Moone. For Nations call the Moone Goddesse of séedes that be throwen in the earth. Al∣so she is called Diana, Goddesse of woods and groues: for the giueth light to wilde beasts, that gather their meate by night in woodes and groues. And therfore na∣tions cal the Moone Goddesse of hunters, for hunting is ofre in woods and groues: Diana, & daughter of Iupiter flieng the company of men, for hir chai life: she is also taken for & moone. and therefore they painted a Goddesse, with a bowe in hir hande, for hunters vse bowes. Also though the Moone bée colde and moyst, yet he taketh heate of nighnesse of the circle of the Sunne, for by heate and drinesse of the Sunne, his passing coldnesse and moysture is tempe∣red, for that he shoulde not in comming downe toward the earth, make winter euery month, as Macrobius saith. Also as Albumasar saith, the Moone cleanseth the aire, for by his continuall mouing, he maketh the ayre cléere and thinne: and so if mouing of the sphere of the Moone were not, the ayre should be corrupt with thicknesse and infection that should come of outdrawing by night of vapours and moysture, that great corruption shoulde soe thereof. Also Astronomers tell, that among all Planets, the Moone in ulyng hath most power, ouer dispositi∣on of mans body: For as Ptholemeus sayth, in libro de iudicijs astrorum. Un∣der the Moone is contained sicknes, losse, feare and dread, and bomage. There∣fore about the chaunging of mans body, the vertue of the Moone worketh princi∣pally: and that falleth through the swift∣nesse of his mouing, and for that hee is nigh to vs, and also for the priuie pow∣er & might that is kindly in the Moone: and therefore a Phisition knoweth not perfectly the chaunging of sicknesse, but if he know the effectes and workings of the Moone, in mans bodye. Therefore Hippocrates in principio Pronostico∣ruin, speaketh of the Moone, and sayth in this manner: A certaine starre is of he∣uen, in the which a Phisition must take héede and vnderstand it, the purueyaunce thereof is wonderfull and dreadfull. And Galen in commento de diebus creticis.
saith: A Phisition must take héede and aduise him of a certaine thing, that fay∣leth not, nor deceiueth, the which thing, Astronomers of Aegypt taught, that by coniunction of the bodye of the Moone with starres fortunate, commeth dread∣full sicknesse to good end: and with con∣trary Planets, falleth the contrary, yt is to euill ende. And therefore a Phisition, that is perfectly wise and ware, by Hip∣pocrates learning, shall behold first the Moone, and when he is full of light: for then humours increase in men, and ma∣rowe also, and increasing in the Sea, & in all worldly things. Then when the sicke man falleth in his bedde, it néedeth to sée and knowe, if the Moone passeth then out of coniunction: for then the sicknesse encreaseth, till the Moone come to the degrée of opposition, that is afore the Sunne in the full of the Moone, and if he be then with an euill Planet, or in an euill signe, and hard aspect to yt hoose of Mars, that is the viii, signe, that is to meaning: If the Moone haue aspect to Mars, that is called the Lord of yt signe, named Scorpio, then of death is dread, & if the Moone be with a good Planet, & in a good house and signe, and hath aspects to the Lord of the house of lyfe, that is Mars, That is Lord of Aries, that is the first signe: then is hope of lifes & so men shall see and doeme of other, as it is sayd in the booke that Hippocrates made, and hath the name, De Iudicajs infirmitacis secundum Luuam. ¶Of certaine properties of the Moone. Cap. 30. ALso the Moone hath some proper∣ties, which he not full good, as well in substance as in effect: for that he hath substanciall darknesse, because yt he hath no light of himselfe, as other Planets haue: and he is most vnstable, for no starre passeth so about by all the partes of Zodiacus, as the Moone doth. And al∣so of euill willed starres and grieuous, he taketh euill qualyties and griefes: for as Ptholomeus saith, the Moone with euill Planets is euill. Also the Moone by his sitting betwéene vs and the Sunne, taketh from vs the cléere lyght of the Sunne: and when the Moone commeth into the shadowe of the earth, he léeseth his lyght and faire∣nesse, and perfection. Also for he is nigh to fat ayre and to the earth, he taketh a fowle sleke and vnseemelye, of shad∣dowe,To armed the man in the Moone. of the ayre, and of infect ayre, as Marcianus saith. Also the farther the Moone goeth fro-warde to the Sunne, the more light he taketh and cléerenesse, in the side that is towarde the earth: and the more he fayleth and abateth in light in the side that is toward heauen. Also he hath many euill effectes and doinge, for as Ptholomeus saith, The Moone maketh a man vnstable, changeable,Not in vvill but in work∣ing. and remouing about from place to place. And be maketh a man euill disposed and disordered in the eyen, and he maketh in a man the one eye more then that other, or he maketh him looke a squint, & some we or a Pearle in the one eye, and hée sayth more heereto, that a man in whose complection the constellation of yt Moone hath masterie, shall not be without de∣fault or a wem in his eye, & that happe∣neth by reason of yt passing moysture of ye Moone, that is nigh to the eyen, & dis∣poseth the humors of the eyen to so euil and shrewde qualitie. Also it is sayd in lib. Milala cap. 5. that the Eclipse of the Moone, if it be in Winter, in colde signes, betokeneth passing coldnesse and great binding in earth and in ayre, and in waters, and if it be in watry signes, it betokeneth full great plentie of raine & of water: & if it be in nirie signes, it betoke∣neth perit of tempest & of windes. Ptho∣lomeus & Albumasar say, that the Moone when he is in yt secōd signe after yt ascen∣dent,Obserua∣tiō begat expencce vvhereof preece¦deth cu∣stōe, but beware of deste∣nie. betokeneth discomfort, wo, sorrow, & losse of cattel by théeues & robbers. Also in the fourth signe, & in the art, and in the right, he betokeneth wrath, anguish, with drawing, & chaungeablenesse of ye people, & betokeneth the tenth signe, yt who yt then beginne to rebell shall be soone set down and in ye twelfth, he betokeneth let, strife, hardnesse, & prison of friends. And in all other houses & signes he hath good effect, and betokeneth good, namelye if he be in companye with good Planettes.
By diuers age of the Moone, menstruall humours in women moue, and braine in heasts, and diuers passions be excited in bodies by vertue of the Moone, as it fa∣teth in them that haue the fallyng euil. This that is sayd of the properties of the Moone, and of other Planettes is sufficient for this time. ¶Of the head and taile of the Dragon. Ca. 31. TWo starres there be, that be no pla∣nets, but it séemeth, that they haue kinde and effect of Planets: and they be called Caput Draconis, and Cauda, the head of the Dragon and the tayle. And they moue with the firmament, & followe his course: and so they passe from the signe that is called Leo, into the signe that is called Cancer: and from that signe that is called Cancer, into the signe that is called Gemini, and so forth. And the Dragons head abideth in euery signe, 18 monethes, that is a yeare and an halfe, and the taile also: and full en∣deth his course in. 18. yeares, and if the head he in any signe, alway the tayle is in the signe that is euen afore him, and the wombe in the fourth signe, and if the head be in Cancer, the wombe is in A∣ries, and the taile is in Capricornus. And if the head be in Leone, the wombe is in Cancer, and the taile in Aquario: and so of other signes. And therefore because of contrarie aspect, the taile is alwaye be∣nimous. And the head hath his exaltati∣on in thrée degrées of Gemini, and his a∣bating in thrée degrées of Sagittarius. And againward: the taile hath his exalta∣tion in the third degrées of Sagittarij, and falleth in the thirde degrée of Gemini. And héere we must take héed, that when the Moone is coniunct to the head of the Sun, or to the taile, being nigh the degrées of coniunction, by. 12. degrées thence or within, alway the Eclipse shall be more or lesse, as the head or taile commeth nére of father to the degrée of coniuncti∣on. And this hath a speciall place in the Eclipse of the Sun. In the same wise it shall be helde in the Eclipse of the Moone. For if the Moone commeth in anye signe with the taile, and the Sun is with the head in the signe that is euen afore: then shall be the Eclipse of the Moone. And againewerd: if the Sun be with the taile in any signe, & the Moone with the head in the signe that is euen afore him: then again shall be ye Eclipse of ye Moone. And if he commeth in the same degrée: then the Eclipse shall be gneral: and so he must come in ye head or in the taile in yt same degrée, or nigh .12. degrees thence. or within, if the Eclipse shall fall. And so in the coniunction, the Sunne & the Moone must be in the same signe, or in the same degrée, and in the same minute, & in the same degrée. Héereof it followeth, that though the Moone be ioyned with the Sunne, and chaungeth euery moneth, he maketh not Eclispe alway: for they come not alwaie togethers vnder the line of Eclipse. For yt Moone chaungeth not, neither hath con∣iunction alway in yt same degrée, neither the head and taile méet alway in yt con∣iunction, nor oppsition of the Sunne and the Moone. Of the starre Cometa, chap. 32. COmeta is a Starre beclipped with burning gleames, as Beda doth say, and is sodeinly bred, & betokeneth chan∣ging of kings, and is a token of Pesti∣lence, or of war, or of winds, or of great heate. Sometime it séemeth, yt such stars so beset with blasing beames, moue with the mouing of Planets: And somtime it séemeth that they be pight & not mouea∣ble. And alwaye (as Beda saith) they be séene in a certaine place of heauen: And they passe not by diuerse parts of yt Zo∣diac, as Planets do, but if séemeth yt they be in yt circle that is called Laclens, or Galaxia, & they spread their beames to∣ward the North, and neuer towarde the West. And therefore they be not seene in the West side. And they be séene but in short space of time, that is seauen daies: but sometime it is séene the space of. 8. daies, as Beda telleth. Whereof it is yt this star that is called Cometa commeth and is gendered, whether it bée of Pla∣nettes, or of starres that bée pight:
alway he is séene in the firmament in the North side as he saith. Héereof it fo∣loweth, that the starre that was séene in the birth of Christ was not Cometa, for he passed and moued out of the East by South toward the West: and so moue not the starres that be called Stella Co∣mete, as Chrisostomus saith. ¶Of fixed starres. Cap. 33. STellae be called starres, and haue that name of Stando, standing: for though they moue alwaye, yet alway it séemeth that they stande, as Isido. sayth. And they be called Sidera, and haue that name of Considerando, taking héede: for of them Astonomers take héede, and by them giue iudgements and dontes, and knowe what shall befall. Also they hée called Astra, and haue that name of Au∣stros, or of Anastros: for by opposition, bodies of some starres, be pight in the where of the firmament, as nayles in the roundnesse of a whéele: and that is troth of some, and namely of the more great, as Isido, sayth. And Alphraganus saith, that a star is lyght gathred in his roūd∣nesse and sphere. Therefore the more ga∣thering of lyght is in the substaunce of the body of a starre, the more he is in quantitie, in fairenesse, cléerenesse, and al∣so the more in might and vertue. Also he calleth starres of lyght: for that they be bright bodyes, and giue to men & beastes, by night when it is dark, the comfort of lyght, and ornate & hight the ouer parte of this worlde, and as farre foorth as they may, they be in stéed of the Sunne, of whome they receiue lyght, and by continuall sending out of beames, they cleanse and pourge the aire: by vertue of them, corruption of pestilence is taken away from the nea∣ther worlde. Also by vertue of stars. E∣lements that be contrary each to other, be conciled and accorded, and lightened with euerlasting shining of starres. By heate of them all things the nourished & saued: for after Plato (as Beda sayeth) the starres be of firie kinde, for manye men in olde time sayd, that heauen with lyght and ornaments thereof is of fierie kinde. And Aristotle and other Philo∣sophers meane & vnderstand, that heuen is the fift Element, distinguished from the foure Elements in kinde and in pro∣pertie, and they saye, that the starres hée not colde nor hot in substaunce, no more than the heauen is: they be but hot on∣ly in working, effect, & doing. For hea∣uen by continuall and euerlasting m∣uing, heateth that thing, vpon the which he moueth, and so heauen and the starres heate and coole these nether things: for by mouing and rebounding of beames, they heate and bréede vertue of heate in the vtter parte of a bodys that is afore them. But whereof the starres be made, certaine it is, that they be of most pure and simple kinde, and not corrupt. Len∣thing their shape they be most bright, & also they be round in figure, and be sad, and sound, not hollowe, nor hoaly in the vtter part: they be plaine and not rough nor corued: in place they be highest, in mouing they be most swifte, in quanti∣tie they be most great and huge, though they same lyttle, for farnesse of place, in number and tale: onelye he knoweth how many they be, that numbreth and telleth the starres In might & working, the stars be most vertueus among bo∣dies: for the starres grauer, and change and saue the nether things. The starres by out sending of theyr beames, lyghten the darkenesse of the night, & full ende theyr course in spheres and circles, and moue in one swifenesse no tune more swiftlye than other: and they hide theyr lyght in presence of the Sunne, of whom they receiue lyght. In theyr comming and rising, they chaunge the ayre in many maner wise: for they make now tempest and now faire wea∣ther and cléere: as Beda sayth. Also by chaunging of coulour, and sprincklyng of beames, they betoken, nowe good happes, and nowe euill, as Astronomers tell. Also they be gracious to shipmen, and shewe their waye in the middle of the Sea. Where starres be coniunct nigh togethes, they giue the more lyght, and bee more fayre and bright.
As it fareth in the seuen starres, & in the stare of the circle the which is called Ga∣laxia, that is Watlingstrete. And though they shew so greate fairenesse because of company & gathering, togethers, & also be more bright and cléere, being coniunct then else, yet for to take héede of each by himselfe, they séeme not faire. And the cause thereof is (as Marcianus saith) for passing brightnesse of ones shining, ta∣keth away the default of another, and so when one lacketh and faileth, ano∣ther that is more cleere amendeth & ful∣filloth. Also for fairnesse of place, starres séene to men vnlyke greate: for some séeme more and some lesse. For Albuma∣sar saith: The more euen the starres be straight ouer our heads, the lesse they soeme in quantitie, and more little to our sight. Againeward: The farther they bée from the place that we be in, in their ari∣sing and downe going, the more greate they séeme generally to our sight. And al∣so they séeme more great in quantitie in the downe going, then in the rising, as Beda sayth, A point is called Ceneta ca∣pitis nostri, & is the point that is aboue heauen ouer our heads. And so it is sayd, that a thing is in the Ceneth of our head, when hée is aboue streight ouer our heads: for Ceneth is called a straight set∣ting oūer our heads, and the reason ther∣of is for this cause, as hée saith, for va∣pours that come vp from the earth, suffer not the beames to come straight & euen to our eien: & therefore the eie is decei∣ued in such a sight. For the eie wéeneth that it taketh in himselfe what is beset in the aire, and lightened with the Sun beame. But Algazel sayth, such a fight is deceiued: as the sight of a Candle is séene without let of an eie that is whole, but of a bleare eie it is not séene without likenesse & shape of a manner of a raine∣bowe. And an eie that is deceiued, wée∣neth alway to sée in another thing, as in light that it séeth, and wéeneth that is in another thing that is not, but rather in the same eie, as Auicen saith, Capitu∣lo de obscuriefare isus. Seeke before of the sight. Also Marcianus sayth. That starres passe in there circles with har∣mony: for all tunes and accord of musike be found among starres, nor the wright of the neather bodies make not discord in the melodye of the ouer bodyes: neither in melodie of the middle bodyes. Nor againewarde, the sharpnesse of sowne of our bodyes, destroy not the sowne of the neather heauie bodies, as Marcianus saith Aristotle saith in libro de coelo & mundo, that stars be of the matter of the bodye of heauen, in the which they bee pight. And therefore they bee kindlye cléere and bright, as the heauen is, in the which they goe about. All the starres haue lyght of theyr owne out of the Moone. But though Starres haue lyght of their owne: yet to perfection of their light, they receiue supplyment and helpe of the Sunne. Starres communicate and part each with other theyr lyght: For one maketh another more cleere, and the goodnesse of the one stretcheth the good∣nesse of another, as it is saide In libro le coniunctionibus Planetarum. Also starres be conteined in their owne pro∣per circles and place: and therfore though the circle of one méete sometime with the circle of another, and entreth therein, they forsake not therfore their owne cir∣cles and place, nor let them that they méete, nor doe wrong none of them to other, Also (as Marcianus sayth, Some starres arise sooner, and go sooner downe: and some starreo arise later, and goe la∣ter downe: and some arise together, and goe not downe ot once. And this diuer∣sitie of rising and going downe, salleth and commeth of vneuennesse of circles, in the which they bée seene going downe or arising. For by highnesse or low∣nesse of the bodye of heauen, the starres arise and goe downe in diuerse times: also Starres chaunge and distinguish times, yeares, monethes and dayes. For (as Aristotle sayth, in libro de pro∣prietatibus Elementom) chaunging of tune is not but by chaunging of starres, in diuers signes, and aboue the seauen Climates and countries, as by chaunge of the Moone in euery xxviii. dayes, or by chaunging of Mercurius and of Venus, in euerye tenth moneth, or in lesse time: or by chaunging of the Sunne in euerye yeare, or by chaunging of Mars in two
Yeare, or of Iupiter in. 12. yeare, or of Sa∣turnus in. 30 yeare, or by coniunction and termutation of Triplicitye in .CCC.. yeares. Or else for chaunging of round∣nesse and circles of Starres, that bee pight: for they chaunge in one degrée in a C. yeare, the chaunging of them fal∣leth in euerye. xxxvi. C. yéere. And this is the greate yeare, that is the last of all things. Huc vsque arislot, in codem libro. In libro Ciceronis Macrobius sayth, That the ende of this greate yéere is when al the starres and Planets, that be in heauen, passe from a certeins place, and goe about, and come againe to the same place, as Philosophers say, after. 15. M. yéere. But whatsoeuer Philosophers tell héereof, we shall holde certeinly: that that belongeth not to vs to déeme, what time the last end shall come. And when it shall be, hée onelye knoweth, that is maker of times, and conteineth in his might and power, moments and times. Of Polus. Chap. 34. AS Beda sayth, Polus is a right lyt∣tle starre, of the which all the ouer part of heauen is so called. And two Po∣lis there be, that one is called Articus or Bovealis, that alwaye shineth to vs, and neuer goeth downe to our sight. For al∣waye hée is aboue vs: And bée hath that name Polus, of Pollendo, shining: for he shineth alwaye to the worlde. The other Polus is called Antarticus, that is to wit, the South or the raine star, and is afore the North starre that is called Polus articus, which is alway vnséene to vs. Betwéene these two Polis, as it were betwéene the endes of the world, the fir∣mamēt moueth alway. These two Polus moue neuer out of theyr owne place, but yet they bée borne rounde about in the circle of the sphere. A line that is called Axis, stretcheth by the middle point of the earth from pole to pole. About the which Axis all the swiftnesse of the fir∣mament is rauished and mooueth. And this line yt is called Axis is not material: but rather a certeine intellectuall line, & stretcheth from pole to pole, euen streight as a line in drawen euen & streight from one point to another. About this ne that is called Axis, as it were about the middle of the world, the firmament pas∣seth about with endlesse rauishing. Then the Pole is a starre higest in place, most swift in moouing, and least in quantitie to our sight: though he bée full greate and huge in himselfe: and hée is most profitable in effect. For by the place of this starre, place and stroedes and boundes of the other starres & of circles of heauen be knowen. Therefore Astronomers be∣holde most this starre. Then this starre is described of most short circle: for hée is farre from the place that wée bée in, hée hideth the hugenesse of his quantitye for vnmoueablenesse of his place: and he doth certifie men most certeinly, yt behold and take héede thereof. And therefore hée is called stella maris, the starre of the sea. For he leadeth in the Sea men that saile, and haue shippe mens craft. And because of his place, tho middle of all heauen is knowen, and by the going aboute of certeine Starres, that hee cal∣led Arcthurus, the starre which is called Pelus, is distinguished from other stars. Arcthurus is like therto, & is common∣lye called Charlemaynes Waine. And this starre hath that name Polus articus of Arcthurus: for it is nigh thereto, as Beda sayth. Of Arcthurus. Chap. 35. ARcthurus is a signe made of seuen starres, set in the line that is called Axis, and goeth about in himselfe, as Isidore sayth. The circle of these seuen starres, for it goeth about as a waine, is called among Latines, Septentrio, & Septentriones also. And is commonlye called in English Charlemaines waine,Septentri∣ones. The seue starres, vvhich are seene, Charles waine, or Vrsa ma∣ior. and he goeth not downe: for that these seauen stars be full night to the pole, that is the highest starre. And the same circle is called Artophilax: for that it follow∣eth a signe that is called Visa: Olde men called the same circle sometime Boetem: for that it is nigh the signe that is named the waine, and is signe that many men behold, & is arated with many stars: a∣mong yt which is the signe Arcthurus, yt
is properlye a Starre sette behinde the taile of the signe that is called Visa ma∣ior, the more Beare. And therefore all that constellation Arcthurus, hath that name of that starre, as Isidore saith, and hath worthely that name Arcthurus of Artando, binding & knitting. For of the first part thereof cold ariseth, by reason it is farre from the heate of the Sun, & by cold the holes and pores of the earth bee constrained, bound, and stopped. And the seauen starres appeare with beames of light, and or bright forme and shape. Of which foure, the first bée ordeined, as it were a quadrangle, with foure sides, each against other. And the thrée that followe bée disposed as it were halfe a circle, and they bée set vnder the pole, about the line that is called Axis. And therefore alwaye they winde rounde a∣bout the pole, as it were about the mid∣dle point, as Gregorie saith. Always these starres winde and tourne round a∣bout that lyne that is called Axis, as a Beare doth about a stake. And therefore that circle is called the more Beare, as Macrobius saith. Alway this circle win∣deth round about, and goeth neuer down out of sight, as Gregorye sayth. When thrée starres goe vpwarde, foure goe downewarde. And againeward. When foure goe vpwarde, three goe downe∣warde, as Gregorie sayth. Among all the high circles, the circle of Arcthurus is highest. For it is next to the Pole, and sheweth him most to mennee sight, and is séene euery time of the night, but if it happen, that it be let by mistres, or clowdes set betwéene him and the sight. Among the middle starres of Arcthos, falleth downe as it were a Dragon, or a flying starre in lyknesse of lightning: and d Draco, as Marcianus saith. a teth in his comming with spran∣cling burs, namelye in Winter, and betokeneth and signifieth stronge frost on water, and on earth, as Marcianus sayth. Of Orion, Chap. 36. ORion is a signe which ariseth in Winter;Oriō, this star in na¦med of Orion, & sonne of Neptune. and exciteth Waters and tempestes. And Orion is dimme, and bréedeth and bringeth foorth windes and tempestes, and Orion hath the name of rising and hugenesse of waters, as Isidore sayth. In his rising hée gende∣reth and dréedeth tempestes, and chan∣geth the ayre, and is disposed and sha∣pen as an armed man, stretching out his feete and armes. And his length and longitude stretcheth nigh to the breadth and latitude of thrée signes, as Marcia∣nus sayth. And hée shineth most in the signe that is called Taurus as hee sayth: And Orion is a constellation most nota∣ble, because of hugnesse, and also of faire∣nesse: and also because of dispesition and vertue. For it stretcheth out of the signe, that is called Aries, to the signe yt is cal∣led Gemini, as Marcianus saith. And al∣so he maketh with his brightnesse, those thrée signes the more faire and cléere, as he saith: and he is shapen in the order of starres, as it were a knight giroe with a Swoorde. Of him speaketh Marcianus, and saith in this manner: Amtus etjam fragrans splendebat in armes, that is to meane, hée armed also burning brighte shone in weapon and armes. But as he sayth, brightnesse of Orion betokeneth faire weather and cléere: and again ward: His darknesse strong weather and tem∣pest. When the Sunne is in the signes of Orion, which bée Taurus and Ge∣mini, then bourgene and spring al things that receiue féeding and nourishment of water, of aire, and of earth, as he sayth. After this constellation Orion commeth and followeth a starre that is called Co∣nicul, and is euill willed and noyfull, as Astronomers tell: and fables meane, that that star was Iupiters hound, as hee telleth. But this Cannicula is not that noi∣full star, that is called Canis, and ariseth in the signe yt is called Leo. Of the which starre certeine dayes haue their names, and bée called Dies caniculare amonge Philosophers, as Gregory sayth. Then Orion in his first rising betokeneth tem∣pest and weather, and afterwarde fayre weather: and worketh with the Sunne, to make the earth plenteous: and when the Sunne is in the signe, that is called Taurus, Orion withdraweth him as
though he hide himself vnder the Sunne beames, nor then hée sheweth not his cléerenesse to the neather things. And hée ariseth againe in Iuly, when the Sun ascendeth in Gemini, to the higher circles when the earth hath most distemperance of aire in hot qualitie. Of Hyades. Chap. 37. Of these stars there is mentiō before.HYades called Situle also, be rainye stars. For in the arising of them fal∣leth much raine, as Isidore saith in libro tercio. For that time by violence of the heate of the Sunne,They bee also cal∣led Atlan¦tides. vapours bée drawen vpward, of the sea and of the land, more strongly then in other time. And he resol∣ued and shed, & turned into raine by mo∣uing of those stars that be called Hya∣des. And therfore the stars be called Hia∣des, & Situle, as it were suckers. For it is said in fables, that they drawe the hu∣mours to themselues, & do resolue them and temper them, as Iginius saith. And these stars haue their place & stéed in the front of the signe that is called Taurus, as Marcianus saith. And when the daye lengthneth, and the Sun goeth vpward, and is more seruent: then commonly Hi∣ades be first séene, as Gregorie sayth, su∣per Iob, 20. When Saturnus pusheth them: then they bréede diuerse tempestes and wethers, as Beda sayth. In the ri∣sing of those starres, that be called Hya∣des, fruites and cornes growe plenteous∣ly. For then they bée well sprong with raine. This constellation Hyades hath many full cléere stars set about him, and ariseth in the sixtéenth degrée of the signe that is called Cancer, and they distronble the ayre in their arising, as Albumasar saith. AdditionThe Romanes call these starres Sun∣culae. Of Pliades. cap. 38. PLiades be seauen Starres, and haue that name of Pluralitie. For they bée many, and bée set nigh togethers: but yet distinguished a sunder, as Grego∣rye sayth. And Pliades arise in Win∣ter. And the more cléerer and colder the aire is, the better they bée knowen and distinguished from each other. One is séene shine among those seauen, which sheweth not it selfe at the full, neyther fullye hideth it selfe. Their place is be∣twéene the knées of the signe which is called Taurus, as the Authour Isidore saith, and Gregory also. In the month of Iune the Sun taketh his course and his way by those .7. starres pliades. And then the heat of the aire is tempered by raine of springing time. And at this time the earth is arraied with fairenesse of flow∣ers, as Marcianus saith.The chief of the 7. stars is cal¦led Maia of ye name of Maia the mo∣ther of Mercurius And for this cause it is said, that Juno loued ye Cor∣desse Maia. And it is seined, that she was one of the .7. stars pliades. And shée was Mercurius mother. Thus meaneth say∣ning of Poets, as Marcianus saith. And Albumasar saith, that plyades the seauen starres, doe arise in the .16. degrée of the signe that is called Taurus, with other starres that be called Hyades, and they distrouble the ayre with theyr moo∣uing. Pliades the seauen starres which mar∣riners vse in trieng of coasts: Poettes seigne them to be the seuen daughters of Licurgus or Atlas. Of Canicula. Chap. 39. CAnicula is a full seruent starre, and ariseth in the .29. degrée of the signe that is called Taurus, as Albumasar sayth. In the arising thereof is a great disturbaunce of the ayre and weather. And of this starre the dayes, that bée called Dies caniculares, haue that name: in which dayes it is sull perillous to be let bloud, or to take laxatiue medi∣cines: that is for passing distemperaunce of the ayre in heate. And therefore in Aphorism. Hippocrates sayth, That be∣fore that starre Canis, and after that Starre, and vnder that starre Canis, lax∣atiue medicines noieth and groweth.Forbeate to take purgatiōs There it is sayde in Commento, that before the rising of that Starre, and in the rising, and anono after the rising thereof, it is perillous to giue laxatiue drinkes. For then the ayre is hotte and drie. And that commeth of an hotte
signe, and of the hot starre, and of the Sunne, that is then with that star Ca∣nicula, in the signe that is called Leo: for with little medicine the bodie should be made too hot and to drie, and therevpon happely shuld come to a feauer. And also the medicine shuld wose and passe out, & work the lesse. For then holes and pores be open and wide, by reason of the heate of the aire. And there Galen saith, That strong heate without forth, draweth out the strength and vertue of the medicine. And therefore hot water is contrarye to laxation, if the heate of the aire be strong at that time. Also the inner vertue is then féeble, & is made more féeble by drin∣king, or by letting of bloud. And the Ca∣nicular daies begin in the fiftéenth Ba∣lends of August: and they end in ye Nonis of Septembris. And so they be euen fiftie, as it is sayd there. Of light. Chap. 40. Lumen.AS Basilius saith, Light is a kinde in all his partes lyke. Authours speake diuerslye of lyght, what it should bée in deede, whether it bée in substaunce or ac∣cident. Aristotle sayth, That lyght is no bodye, nor streaming out of a bodye. And Damascenus saith, That light hath no substaunce of his owne. And Austen sayth super Genesim. ad litteram, That the lyght is a bodylye substaunce, most simple in kinde of bodyes, and most multiplied and increased in diuerse mat∣ter of workings, most moueable, and passinglye thirling and pearcing, and least letting, and most breeding, and most highlye accordeth and reconcileth things the which bée diuerse and contra∣rye, and is most conuertible, and is grounde and beginning of highest natu∣rall motion, and most perfectible, most gladde and most communicatiue: ther∣fore in bodyes nothing is more profita∣ble then light: and nothing more con∣uenient and conenable, nothing more sayre, nothing more swifte, nothing more subtill. nothing more inpassible or wemlesse, nothing more vertuous found then light. Also Lux and Lumen is light in English, but in Latine is diffe∣rence betweene those two Nounes. For Lumen is a flowing and a streaming that floweth out of the substance of light: but Lux is the sustantiall well, vpon the which Lumen is grounded. For if light in it selfe were accident, needs by it self it wer accident to some thing: & accident by it selfe hath cause of beeing of very forme of his obiect. And so if light in the aire wers accident, it shuld haue cause of being of the very forme of the aire: & that may not bée. Also light chaungeth his subiect, as it is knowne. For light is first in the East, & afterward in the West. And the East light gendereth light that is nexte thereto: & so forth euen to the West: And accident chaungeth not his subiecte, nor worketh not without his subiect, but ther in. And héereby it séemeth that light is not accident. Also if light were accident of the ayre, the aire should sodeinly moue with ye wind out of the East into the West, as the mouing of light is sodein. And so the aire moueth not sodeinly, nor anye other element. Also nothing is more worthy & noble then light: & accident is lesse wor∣thy then the substance: And so it séemeth yt light is not accident. For aire is much lesse worthy, and lesse noble then light. But if light be a body, it is hard to know and vnderstand, how & in what manner light is in the aire, or in any cléere bodie, as in Christall. For two bodyes maye not be at once in the same place. Neuer∣thelesse it is not inconuenient nor im∣possible to set, that lyght is a bodylye substaunce, and that it is at ones with another body: for we see water and ashes ioyned and meddeled togethers, sauing bodie and place of both. And the contei∣ning of either distinguished from other, and the parts of eyther conteined with∣in his owne vtter parte. In what man∣ner wise so euer they be meddeled toge∣thers ashes and water, the water abideth in his corporalnesse, by ioyning and con∣tinuing togethers of his partes: and ashes in his body also. But for this med∣deling and ioyning togethers, they bée not two bodies in the same place: But the water hath his owne place, and the ashes his owne place. So light may bée in the aire, or in euerye each other body,
sauing the corporalitie of either, and contuniaunce of theyr substantial parts. And so light entering into the inner partes of the ayre, or of Christalline, hath his owne place, beclipping aboute his vtter partes. And that place distingui∣sheth light from the substaunce of the bodie, to whome it is ioyned, though it may not for simplicitie of his substaunce bee felt nor seene. But yet it is more wonder, that many lyghtes, which bée brought in one place, and the lyghtes meddeled together, and though they bée ioyned and vnited, yet neuerthelesse the substantiall forme of each light is saued, by the which forme euery of them is di∣uerse from other, though none of them be materiall cause, or formall to other, as Dionisius teacheth openly, in li. de diui∣nis nominibas, and saith in this manner: When lightes (saith hée) of lampes bée in an house, and bée one whole lyght gathered togethers, and bée common to all, yet they haue a prime distinction be∣tweene themselues, and be distinguished a sunder, by one distinction, and by distin∣guished vnity. For wee see when manye lampes be light, for one light, one claere∣nesse commeth of all theyr lightes, and shineth without knowing distinction. And no man (as I thinke) can sequester the light of one of them from the lyght of another: nor out of the ayre that they be in, while they bee all together: nor  by sight one from another, while they bee altogether shining, all the lyght seemeth one without distincti∣on. And if one lampe bee withdrawen, it taketh not awaye anye thing of the others light, nor leaueth there of his owne light. For as it is sayd, there is a perfect rutie vniuersallye meddeled, and no confusion in anye parte. And the vni∣tie is so much in this bodylye ayre and materiall light. Lue vsque Diomsius. In these wordes Denis seacheth open∣lye, that lights bee ioyned togethers, and the substantiall propertie of each is sa∣ued, and accident properties, and taketh with them both in comming and go∣ing. Also Denis sayth, that light that is cal∣led Lux in Latine, is a substance being in it selfe: and thereof commeth beaming & a manner shining of other bodies For al∣waye Lux, light, shineth in it selfe. Ne∣verthelesse it shineth not alway but only when it sindeth a body with matter dis∣posed and able to be lightned, as Austen saith: for substance of heuen is very light, that hath the first place in bodies: and neuertheles heuen lightneth not in dark∣nesse nor by night. Then alway light shi∣neth inuisibly, and in darknesse: but it shineth not alwaye sightlye. And there∣fore euery creature feeleth the vertue of light. For vertue of lyght worketh vn∣séeingly, feeling and moouing in beasts, as it is sayde in libro Fontis vitae. Also in libro de ludicijs astrorum, Albuma∣sar saith, that Hippocras taught, yt but if the life of stars, tempered the thicknes of the ayre by night, all bodyes with soules should be destroied: and neuerthe∣lesse it is certain, ye of light of stars is not séene by night, for impression of working of light is knowen in toe sea that ebbeth & floweth by respect of the Moone to some part thereof, whether the Moone lighten the aire or no. Also though the thinkes, holes, and dens of the earth, bée not light∣ned: yet the vertue of light worketh in them, as it is séene in cares of mettall, & in other things that be gendred and bred déepe within ye earth And shortly to speak the presence of light is néedfull in euery body yt is medled; by the which contra∣ries in elementes be ioyned. Also light sheddeth it self from the highest heauen: yt is called Coelum imperium, euen to ye middle of the world, & is one in his sub∣stance, and simple in more and roote, yet is it variable after the diuersitie of bodies that receiue it, whether it be the Sun, or the ouer bodyes, or neather, wherein is one substaunce, vertue, and working of light, though there be no vertue of ligh∣tening therein. This is the first gende∣ring light that was made the first daye, as Basilius saith, that is aboue the Sun, and other lightes and starres that were made the fourth day.The light luneth is darknesse Iohn. 1.5. Therfore the Sun, and other starres, be bearers of the first light: which through taking of body∣lesse lyght, they bee suffisaunt to euer∣lasting lightening, without losse of
their owne substaunce. Therefore this light stretcheth into euery place, and per∣secteth and dispoleth all bodyes, some more and some lesse. Then it is moare, rooe, and fundament of all shining, and is one in substaunce: and of none of the lower bodyes conteyned accidentallye: but it conteineth all bodyes, and is for∣mall in comparison to them, though it be materiall in it selfe, and is in place and steede: And therefore for light is ma∣teriall, it maye haue diuerse partes in diuerse place. And for it is forntall, it hath indeede diuerse partes in diuerse place. For what the matter may haue in power, the forme hath the same in effect and déed. Heereof it followeth openly, that for lyght: in kinde of bodyes hath least of matter, and most of forme, lyght is more néere in kinde to fourme then to matter: And therefore because of matter, it is in the least stéede, that is a point. And because of forme, it is in euery place and stéede. For euerye thing mooneth to his owne forme as Aristotle sayeth. And therefore the nobler that it is, the more it extendeth hiss matter, as Algazel sayth. Wherefore the forme of light, be∣cause it is the most noble of bodilye formes, it stretcheth and spreadeth most his matter: and therfore onepoint of light or of shining, were suffisaunt of it selfe to lighten all the worlde: For the no∣blenesse of matter, and for most adual∣nesse & doing of forme, as Algazel saith: & Then light is one simple and vniforme, in his essence, though bodies of light bée diuerse & distinguished & sonder. Though they séeme in one act gathered lyke, yet one lightening commeth not in the sub∣staunce of another, though it séeme to the sight that they be ioyned in one lyghte∣ning and light. Then it is not inconue∣nient to set two bodyes together in one place, if one of them bée subtile and for∣mall, and as it wer complement and per∣fection of the other: and that other ma∣terii vnperfect. And two bodye that be blessedfull (as bodyes shall  the bli of heauen) maye not be in  place and stéede. For neither of their ay be materiall in no we or that other But a bodye that is vfull, and ano∣ther that is not blissefull, may bée toge∣thers in the same steebe and place, with∣out inconuenience, as saith Austen open∣ly. And Basilius sayth, That light is most moueable. For it moueth it selfe without ceasing, & gendereth light in lines, forth∣right, and in roundnesse all aboute: And mooueth and sheddeth it selfe into all partes about: and touching it selfe it mo∣neth sodeinly: For light is more able to work & pearceth, & commeth into the in∣nest part of euerye thing, without lette and tarrieng. And sight gendereth things that bée diuerse and vnlyke, and ioyneth and accordeth the contraryes, that bée in Elements, and in middle bodyes. And also by outcasting and stretching, and onercasting, breaking and rebounding of beames, light bringeth forth all thing, and kéepeth and saueth them in béeing, or disolueth and vndoeth theyr being, as Calcidius sayth Super Tmeum. Also lyght gonerueth and ruleth lyfe, and during of all thing, & multiplyeth it selfe gendering: for lyght gendereth lyght, and lyght that is gendered, gendereth lyght that commeth after, and lyghte∣neth forth: and so in an instaunt, one point that is product, filleth all the world of lyght and shining. Also lyght shew∣eth it selfe and other things of heauen by his incomparison in the vtter parte of a moyst bodye, and cléere light worketh diuerse effects. And as Austen sorth, light putteth of darknesse, and vndoeth cleyngnesse and discomfortes: and de∣stroyeth false waiting and spicing. Of lyght commeth surette, it bringeth forth all gladde, and merrye kinde and shape. And bringeth in fourme and fayrenesse to all things & for without light all bo∣dyes tenidius hidde and vnknowne. Doe awaye lyght (sayth Daiuascene) and all things be vnknowne and abide in darknesse. Then (as Ambrose saith, and Masilius ad,) Lyght is the fayre∣nesse of euery creature that is séene: The grace whereof most in sight and behol∣ding, that maketh other members and partes of the worde, wortye to be pleased: And this same (as Basinus saith) is aboue heauen most peaceable wel ng place of lld and of Sates.
This is by ensample the shewing of the  trinitie. This lyght without di∣minishing of it selfe, sheweth and shod∣deth light, which receiued in the ouer parte of a darke bodie, doth not drowne and déep it selfe therein touching ye like∣nesse of sight, but touching might and vertue. Isidore saith, lyght hath manye other propertyes worthy to be praysed, in substance, vertue, & working: nothing is sound more cleere, and pure then the substance thereof. Therefore though it passe by vilenesse and filth, it is not de∣filed: Nothing is more actuall in deede then the vertue therof: Nothing is found more profitable in bodyes then the wor∣king thereof. Of shining. chap. 41. SHining is springing and streaming out of the substaunce of light. And commeth out of light without mingling of any other nature. And duteth as long as the light, of the which in commeth, as Austen saith. As saue as fyre is, as soone, is shining. Therefore if fyre were euer∣lasting, shining were euerlasting: Also shining commeth of light without di∣minishing of light, and without dry∣ling of the cleannesse of lyght, and with∣out discontinuance thereof,Ezecli. 10. with shew∣ing of it selfe and of other things, and with multiplieng of it selfe, as Basilius sayth. Of beshining. chap. 42. BEshining and light he diuerse as Species a genere. For euery shining is light, but not againe ward & euery lyght is shining: for euery shining is a certain out streaming of the substaunce of light, receuied in the aire, or in another cléere bodie, and shed all about. And as the au∣thour of Perspectiue saith, in thrée man∣ner shining is found. For some shining is called Lumen reflexum some Frae∣tum and some Directornos Reflectum i beshining, as from a mirrour or a shew∣er, or from other glistering bodies that rebound againe the shining that they re∣ceiue. And then that shining that reboun∣deth againe is called Lumen reflexum. The other shining that is called Lumē fractum, is when shining commeth to a bodie, that is seene deale thicke or hard, that it may not receiue & take lyght in it selfe, but for the matter and kinde of that body is not full obedient, that shi∣ning passeth not foorth light, but blen∣cheth aside from the right passae, and such shining and brightnesse is called Fractio radi). The third manner of shi∣ning is called Lumen directum, that is not put of nor findeth matter in ebedirit in no manner wife. And posseth fraly, and doth perfect working. And this shining maketh the ayre perfect and o∣ther cleere bodyes, and highteth formes and shape, and sheweth shape and fi∣gures, and comforteth and gladdeth ey∣en, and exciteth & waketh men of sléepe, of sluggardye and slouth. And printeth lykenesse and shapes, and Imaes in the vtter parts of mirrors and of bright glistering bodyes. For shining com∣meth to the vtter part of a glistering bo∣dye, and reboundeth agains in angles and corners, that bee lyke murb. And printeth therein shapes and fourmes of all bodyes. And so it setteth for the vtter parte of a mirrour by Imogad shape, the thing that is wilbent by substaunce. Also stmi taketh perfection by the dis∣position of the matter, that it commeth in. For his clerenesse increaseth in cléere matter and eleoue, and abath in scule matter and darke. For in déere matter as Christd  and aire, it findeth no let. Therefore into sith a matter, it put∣teth, one his vene shining beames, and sheweth toc Denis sayth, And the more perfect lye it is printed into a bo∣dye the more largelye it is rebounded thence, and stremeth to the or in bodies. And when it commeth to grose matter & borthous, thred it hath dimme distribu∣tion of working: as when it is shedde into fatre mai, it is vnperfectlye ta∣ken so that sin it is shedde and & but, is seemeth darke. And so the saines of the matter letteth distribution and poining of the shining of the matter, that is ta∣ken. Then in cléere and pure substaunce shining as perfectly seene and increased:
in great and thicke substance, it is dimi∣nished. And so it followeth, that pure matter and subtill, taketh shining of light, perfectly. And it is founde, that drme matter, boystous, and thicke, putteth off shining of light, and bright∣nesse. Of the light beame. cap. 43. A Light beame is a bright streame of a bodye of lyght, by the which beame, lyght and shining doth his wor∣king, as Beda sayth. And some beame passeth straight forth, and commeth of the bodye of light, moouing by a straight line without blenching, and commeth to the middle point, and is called Perpen∣dicularis and Rectus: And some beame commeth of a bodie of lyght, and findeth a cleere body, and passeth not forth right, but sidelyng and blenching, and this blenching is called breaking of the beame. And such a light beame is called breaking of the Beame. And such a light beame is called Radius colleteralis, & Confractus. And the Sunne beame passeth straight foorth from the bodye of lyght, or blencheth aside, and méeteth with a bodye, that putteth and smiteth the light againwarde: and such a smi∣ting and putting is called bending of the beame: and such a Beame is called Radius reflexus, as the Authour of Per∣spectiue sayth. And so a Beame of light is moueable, and cleere, and bright, and rounde, and right of it selfe, and most conteined if it be of a straight Beame: and it happeneth sometime, that a light or bright beame is broken and shuft a∣side, or againeward, by the disposition of matter that it findeth and toucheth. Such a beame is closed in a hollowe clowde, and most worketh and maketh diuerse formes, coulours, shapes, and figures in the Clowde, or in the ayre, as it fareth in the coulours of the Raine-bowe, that is not else called, but entering of light beames into an hollowe clowde and wa∣tyre, as it is sayde libro Mecherorum: alwaye sodeinlye by moouing of beames that moue continuallye and sodeinlye, it happeneth that the ayre about is sette a fire: and namelye if the beames meete in the place of rebounding. For there the beames be gathered, and beat each other: and so they are cause why the ayre a∣bout is oft set a fire, as it fareth in Chri∣stall, and in Berrall. For if such a stone be set afore the Sunne, and put thereto, it shall set it on fire. Of shadow. cap. 44. SHadowe is setting of a thicke bo∣dy and diuine afore lyght, or afore a bodye of light. And thrée manner kindes bée of shadowe by consideration of Philosophie. It happeneth, that a bo∣dye of lyght is rounde, and sometime more then the bodie that is set before the lyght, and sometime euen as much, and sometime lesse: If it bée euen as much, it maketh the shadowe euen as much rounde, and such a shadowe is called Chelindroydes, that is to vnderstande, Like round. If it be lesse then the Ob∣stacle that letteth light, it maketh the sha∣dowe stretch abroade, as it were a Pa∣uier: and such a shadowe is called Ca∣thaloydes. And if the bodye of light bée more then the bodye, that letteth lyght, it maketh the shadowe stretch foorth sheeld wise, and the point forwarde: and such a shadowe is called Conoydes. Héereof it followeth, that the Sunne, for it is more then all the earth, maketh the shadowe Conoydes, that is, shapen as a shielde. Then happening, that the earth béeing euen set afore the Sunne in a cer∣taine manner assigned, it maketh the shadowe stretch so high, that it stretcheth to the Moone, and infecting the Moone, maketh Eclipse thereof: But when the Sunne passeth besides the sphere of the earth, the point of that shadowe passeth aside into some parte that is there a∣fore: and then the Moone is fréely séene shining. And when the Moone is euen straight betweene vs and the Sunne: then the Moone maketh the shadowe sha∣pen as a pauier: and therefore the Moone beshaddoweth the earth, and maketh a perticular Eclipse. For such a shadowe is not suffisaunt to couer all the earth, for in some place, the earth is lightned with
the Sunne beames. By such a shadowe commeth eclipse in one Climate & coun∣trey though another Climate bée lighte∣ned, as Albumasar saith: and shadow∣eth and beareth downe the Sunne, and hideth the shining of the Sun beames, & causeth barrennesse of the earth: and is friendly, & féedeth adders & serpents: and cooleth men and other things that bée too hot: and letteth and tarryeth riping of fruit and of corne: and striketh men and beasts with many manner feauers & dreades horrible. And though it be no body of kinde: yet it sheweth shape and likenesse of body, and shapeth it selfe by mouing and rest of bodyes. For when the body mooueth, the shape moueth and resteth when the body resteth: and follo∣weth them that goe: and flyeth them that pursue. Also the longer the day is, and the higher the Sunne is in heauen, ye shorter is the shadow of the body that it maketh. And againward. And therefore in the Sunne rising, & also in the going down, the shadow is more then at mid∣day. Of darknesse. Chap. 45. DArknesse is absence of light, and is called Tenebre of Tenendo, holding. For it bindeth and holdeth the eyen, that they may not sée the Sun nor any other light: and so darknesse is nought els but priuation. Also darke aire is called dark∣nesse: and so is the shadow of a dim bo∣dy, as Basilius saith, and is contrarye to light both in qualitie and in place Dark∣nesse bringeth in feare & dread, and with∣draweth fairenesse of coulours, and aba∣teth shame, and nourisheth sléepe & simn∣ber. AdditionI Haue thought good to set before thee, forth of the booke de Occulta Phi∣losophia of Henne Cornelius Agrippa, his Ladder, wherein is the wonder∣full compact of the vniuersall diuision of the number of. 12. beginning with the twelue orders of blessed spirits, omitting the. 12. names of God. Seraphin, Cherubin, Throni, Dominationes, Potestates, Virtutes, Principatus, Archangeli, Angeli, Innocentes, Martires, Confessores. The .12. Angells presidents ouer the signes. Malehidel, Asmodel, Ambriel, Muriel, Verchiel, Hamadiel, Zuriel, Barbiel, Aduschiel, Hananell, Gabiel, Barchiel. The .12. Tribes. Dan, Ruben, Ihuda, Manasse, Asser, Simeon, Isachar, Beniamin, Neptalin, Gad, Zabulon, Ephraim. The .12. Prophets: Malachias, Aggaeus, Zacharlas, Amos, Oseas, Micheas, Ionas, Abdias, Sephonias, Naum, Abacuck, Ioel. The .12. Apostles. Mathias, Thadaeus, Simon, Iohannes, Petrus, Andreas, Bartholomeus, Philippus, Iacobus, Thomas, Mathaeus, Iacobus minor. The .12. signes in the Zodiack. Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpius, Sagittarius, Capri∣cornus, Aquaries, Pisces. These are in the celestiall world. The .12. Moneths. March, Aprill, May, Iune, Iuly, August, September, October, Nouember, De∣cember, Ianuarie, February. In the elementall world. The .12. Plants. Elelisphacos, Orthios.Peristereon, Hyptios.Peristereon, Symphytus, Cyclaminus, Calamin∣thus, Scorpiuros, Artemsia, Anagallis, Lapathus, Dracontea, Aristolochia. The .12. Stones. Sardonis, Sardius, Topazius, Chalcedonius, Iaspis, Smaragdus, Berrillus, Ame∣thystus, Hyacinthus, Chrysopassus, Christallus, Saphirus.
The .12. principall members. Caput, Collum, Brachia, Pectus, Cor, Venter, Renes, Genitalir, Anche, Genua, Head, Necke, Armes, Brest, Heart, Belly, Reines, Members, Hippes, Knées, Ctura, the shanke. Pedes, the féete. The .12. pointes of the dampned Diuells. Pseudothie, False Prophets: Spiritus mendacij, Lieng spirits: Vasa iniquitatis, Uessalls of iniquitie: Vltores celerum, the last sharpnesse or endlesse torment. Prestigiatores. Iuglers, Cosoners, and Scorners: Aerae potestates, airie gouernors: Furae seminatrices malorū, sowers of desperate discord: Criminatores, siue explo∣ratores, False accusers, and outragious railers. Tentatores, siue insidiatores, Prouokers and inticers: Malefice, Witches, Apo∣state, Reniers of the faith: Infideles, Unbeléeuing. These .12. sortes of peoples, framed to the. 12. sortes of wicked Diuells, are made one in the proportion of endlesse dampnation, euen so, in the gouernment of euery. 12. is specified the most vnsearchable will of God, howe farre man hath power of gouerning, and by what effectes he is gouerned, the knowledge where∣of, is the gifte of God, the benefite of men, and the alteration of all other crea∣tures. Blacknesse, is darknesse, a grisly hiew to tell, a bright shining cleerenesse, doth punish in the hell: On earth it giues dought, in heauen eternall ioy, in hell, contrary turning the wicked to'anoy. This is the might of God, for lasting soules to know that bodies haue possest, perpetuall ioy or no. His mercie, moue vs still, of mischiefe to beware, his loue, accept our will, to him our soules prepare. A note also of the foure seasons of the yeare. The Spring time is hot and moist, and continueth so long as the Sunne is in Aries, Taurus, and Gemini, March, Aprill, May, which is from the .10. of March, vnto the .12. of Iune. The Sunne is hot and drie, conned from the beginning of Cancer, vnto the ende of Virgo, Iulye and August: September, that is from the .12. of Iune, vnto the .14. of September. Harnest is colde and drie, that is from the beginning of Li∣bra, vnto the end of Sagittarius. October, Nouember, December, counted from the 14. of September, to the 12. of December. Winter is colde and moyst, continuing from the beginning of Capricornus, to the ende of Pisces, Ianuarie, Februarie, March, Capricornun, Aquarius, & Pis∣ces, that is from the .12. of December to the .10. of March. A briefe note how to vnderstand the Ephimerides. Understand ther be seauen Planets, the highest, Saturne ♄, then Iupiter ♃, Mars ♂, Sol ☉. Venus ♀ Mercury. ☿, and the Moone ☽ A coniunction is figured ♂, and it is when an other Planette is ioy∣ned with the Sunne, or Moone, or others among themselues within one degree. The Sextile aspect or radiation is thus expressed, ✶ and it is within as degrees, the one from the other. The quadrant aspect thus □, 90 degrées distant. That Trine thus, △ separated. 120. degrées. The opposition thus ☍, 180 degrées, the one distant from the other. These followe by order. Aspects. Coniunction ☌, Sextile ✶, Quadrat □, Trine △, Opposition ☍. Planets. Saturne ♄, Iupiter ♃, Mars ♂, Sol ☉, Venus ♀, Mercurie ☿, Lunae ☽.
Signes, Aries ♈, Taurus ♉, Gemini ♊, Cancer ♋, Leo ♌, Virgo ♍, Libra ♎, Scopio ♏, sagittarius ♐, Capricornus ♑, Aquarius ♒, Pisces ♓: FINIS LIBRI OCTAVI. ¶INCIPIT LIBER NONVS. DE TEMPORVM DIVISIONE. AFter that we haue spoken of yt properties of heauen, & of the parts thereof, of the which holy writ ma∣keth meneth: now we wil speak shortly & compendi∣ously of the effect & doing therof. That is to vnderstand, of the properties of time, & of the parts thereof. Mouing hath cause first & principally of trendling about of heauen: The mouing thereof is first and euerlasting, as it is said mli, de coelo & mundo: and this is not like to ye corrupti∣ble & chageable mouing of nether thinks, corporall & visible: but it is the cause of ye neather mouing. For ye mouing of yt nea∣ther things yt be gendered cometh of the mouing of ye round spheres and circles: that bée aboue: and that mouing is in∣corruptible, and alwaye in one state, as Aristotle sayth there. And moouing is passing from one ende to another con∣trarye ende: as it is sayde in the ends of the same booke. For all that chaun∣geth from the contrarye, is chaunged in∣to contrarye. And there bée sixe manner moouings, that bée called Generation,vi. man∣ner of mouings Corruption, Alteration, Augmentati∣on Diminution, and Chaunging, touch∣ing place, as hée sayth there. And some moouing, that is chaunging touching place, in trenling and rounde winded about: And some is streight and foorth∣right: and some is compowned. And a thing that trenleth rounde a∣boute chaungeth not place, atouching All the whole: but touching partes there∣of. That that compasseth rounde about, sometime chaungeth place: as it fareth in moouing of Planeties. And straight forthright moouing chaungeth alwaye place, as long as it mooueth indéede. For eyther it mooueth from warde the mid∣dle towarde the roundnesse, as Fire, Aire, and other such lyght bodyes that mooue vpwarde, or againeward, it mo∣ueth downewarde towarde the middle, as water and earth, and other such hea∣uye bodyes. And there bée sixe manner moouings of straight and foorth-right moouing. For streight and foorth-right moouing is rightsomes or leftsomes, forthwarde, or else backewarde, vp∣warde or downewarde. And moouing that is compowned is of two contra∣rye moouings, as the moouing of a fire-brande. And this moouing hath this pro∣pertye: for of strong in ing withmeth heate, As at fareth of the moouing of the first sphere and rodurnesse: by moo∣uing and roting thereof, the ayre is alwaye set a sixe, as Aristotle sayth. And by mouing Lead omeoth, that is therein, as hée sayth. Also moouing maye not bèe meaten and measured but by measure of the space in the which moouing is. And all thing that mooueth either it maketh by propertye as the stone Adamos mooueth (by strong dra∣wing) pron or by violence,The load stone. as a Shippe mooneth by strong shoouing of winde: eyther wilfullye and by his owne will, as the bodye mooueth, as the Soule will. And there is double moouing
of mutation and chaunging: either the mouing is of chaunging from place to place, or of chaunging of disposition, mo∣uing into another disposition. Moouing from place to place is kindlye or by strength: as when a stone is let fall, the more that it commeth downwarde, the swister is his mouing: and so that mo∣uing wexeth stronger towarde the ende thereof: and when a thing moueth by vi∣olence, the strength is the beginning of of the mouing: and the farther it is from the beginning, the seebler is the mouing: as it fareth in an arrow, that commeth out of a bowe, which flyeth so farre, that at last it pearceth nothing nor grieueth. Also mouing is cause of gene∣ration, and of all chaunging of the nea∣ther things, and of generation of heate & of burning and of setting a sixe, & of sub∣tiliation of water and of the aire. Moo∣uing comforteth kind heate, and maketh appetite and desire, and helpeth larats medicine to cleanse the body. Heerof spea∣keth Hippocritos and sayth: If thou wilt hauethy body cleane, take Hellebore.Hellebor. (AdditiōElleborum albus, in English Ling∣wort, the roofe whereof is néesing pouder, there is also Elleboru niger, the hearbe named Beares foote, or Lertwort, or Setwort. This hearbe must be discreet∣ly taken.) Also if the mouing be outward from the middle toward the ranesse, moo∣uing shall spread and stretch abroad the matter  and if it be againward, from the vtter roundnesse toward the middle, it gathereth the parts of the matter toge∣thers, and maketh them: thicke and vin∣ding. Also temperate mouing képeth & saueth kinde of men and beasts, and in∣temperate mouing destroyeth it. ¶Of Time. Cap. 2. TIme is measure of changable things, as Arist. saith De quinque substan∣eijs, Time is number and tale, numbe∣ring and tellyng, in all thinges that are numbred and folde. Or els as Rabanus saith, Time is dimention of changeable things, touching mouing and abiding, & dureth in moueable things, as Austen saith. Nothing is more precious than time. Wherefore of each possession two may be had togethers or moe: but of time two moments may not be had to∣gethers. And time lost cannot be reco∣uered, for losse of time is short, chaun∣gable, vnstable, and vnreconerable, for it passeth with mouing and mouable body, and beginneth therwith: and where mo∣uing sayleth, then time endeth. And ther∣fore time shall not indure alwayes: but it shall cease, when nothing shall be but Eternitas, euerlasting, as Austen saith. (AdditiōThe state of mans life, is compre∣hended in vii. triumphs. Loue ouercomes Man, Chastitie ouercomes Loue, Death ouercomes Chastitie, Fame ouercomes Death, Time ouercomes Fame, Eter∣nitie ouercomes Time.) Nothing is more common than time: for it is egally common to all thing. Nothing is more passing than time: for time resteth neuer, but when it begin∣neth it beginneth to decrease and lessen. And againswarde: for the time that is present, is ende of the time that is pas∣sed, and beginning of the time that is comming. For all time varieth in thrée manner wise, that is to wit, Time that is passed: present, that is now: and fu∣ture, that shall be. And so shortlye to speake, in this manner euery time was, is, or shall be, by rising of time, of his diuersitie, succession of partes, that come each after other, alway is daye & night, as: beda sayth: but in one place is day, and in another is night: and some where is daye, some where is night. Nothing is more vncertaine, than time, nothing is more vnperceptible, nor more vnknowen of it selfe. For as Isi∣dore sayeth, Time is not knowen by it selfe, but onely by workes and déedes of men. Nothing is more chaungeable that time: and therefore no thing is more perillous in the body. For as Hippocrates sayeth, The chaunging of times gendereth most e∣tis. For sodayne chaunging of colde into heate, chaungeth and appay∣reth bodyes: and that is, for that kinde suffereth not sodayne chaungings, as he sayth.
Therefore ofte sodaine chaunging of time, is cause of sicknesse. Also nothing is more healthfull to the bodye, then is time that is temperate in his qualyties. Therefore it is sayd in Aphor. If times be in good temperature, as the time as∣keth, then be good states: and sickenesse come most to good ende in such times. Also though time be so chaungeable, yet nothing is more continual than time: for parts of time be contained. Therefore Marcianus sayth, That time that wer∣eth olde in Winter, quickeneth again in springing time. And againward (that is so reneweth.) Gal. 6.While we haue time, let vs do good vnto all men, but specially to those that are of the household of faith. ¶Of the yeare solate and Equi∣noctiall Cap. 3. AS Isidore saith, & yeare is the full course, and passing, & winding about of the Sunne, when he commeth againe to his owne place, in CCC lx v dayes, & a quadrant, that is sixe houres. And a yeare is called Annus, & hath that name for it commeth about, as months come a∣bout therein: and therefore a yeare hath that name Annus, of An, that is abouts, as it were a circle that commeth againe into it selfe, and is renewed. Therefore among the Aegyptians, before that let∣ters were found, the yeare was betoke∣ned by a Dragon painted, biting his owne tayle, and comming againe into it selfe. As Isidore sayeth, there be diue  yeares: for the yeare of the Moone is lesse then the Sunne by xi. dayes: and the yeare of of the Sunne hath twele monthes, and each planet hath his yere, in the which he full endeth his course: as Mars in two yere, Iupiter in twelue, and Saturnus in thirtie. And there is a great yeare, that is called Annus mon∣danus, and that yeare is (as Arist. saith) when all the starres come to their owne first place and poynt that they were made in. And (as Arist. saith) This yeare com∣meth about in xxxvi. M yere, as it is said in libro de proprietatibus elementorū. And Plato and his sutors tell, that this yeare commeth about in fiftéene thou∣sand yere, as Macrobius saith, in li. Ci∣ceronis. And some yeare is called Usu∣all, as is the yeare of the Sunne, & con∣tayneth foure times, Winter, Springing time, Summer, and Haruest: and are called times in their qualyties, because they temper each other, as Isido. sayeth. And they be called Curricula, for they runne and come each after other, & abide neuer in no state, as Isid. sayth. In these foure Times of the yeare, commeth twise Solstitia, stinting of the Sunne in Winter and in Summer: and twice Equinoctia, euennes of day and of night in Ver and in Haruest, Solsticium is the most euenesse of daye and night: and commeth when the sunne entreth in∣to the signes that are called Cancer in Summer, and in Caprirorno in Win∣ter: and is called Solsticium, as it were stinting of the sunne, and that for dou∣ble cause, either in Summer or in win∣ter, for length of dayes and nightes, it séemeth that the Sunne stinteth and a∣bideth in Summer, aboue our dwellyng place: for in either stinting, it séemeth that they stint and abide. For in Sum∣mer it séemeth that the Sun may come no néerer vs than he doth: and in win∣ter it seemeth he maye passe no farther from vs then he doth. Equinostium is most euennesse of the daye and night ar∣tificiall, and falleth when the Sun com∣meth into the signe that is called Aries, or into the signe that is called Libra: the first is in Springing time, and the se∣cond in Haruest. I omit the rehersal of fasting daies,Additiō because they were supersticiously tear∣med, Triaduan. Also the yeare of the Sunne is the common yeare, & beginneth in Ianuary, and endeth in December, & in the space, in the which the Sun goeth about in the signe that is called Zodiacus, thrée hun∣dred dayes, thrée score and fiue, & a qua∣drant, and sixe houres: and is the fourth deale of a naturall daye. And these sixe houres be accounted in common yeares, and gathered in the Bisexte. And the Bi∣sexte is gathering of eightéene houres, which commeth in three yeares, with
sixe houres of the fourth yeare, to make a full daye of foure and twentie houres. And the yeare Bisextilis, hath that name of the gathering thereof, as Beda saith: & is called Bisextus, for every yere, when it falleth in Februarie, the sixt Kalen∣dis is twice accounted. Or els it is cal∣led Bisextus, for that day is gathered of Bisse momentis. For of thirtie momēts in the which the Sunne abideth in each signe passing thirtie dayes, and of thir∣tie trienties be gathered sixe houres in a yeare: and so in thrée yeares be gathe∣red eightéene houres, and in foure yeare sixe houres, and these houres put toge∣ther in the fourth yeare, maketh a daye, that is called Bisextilis, as Beda sayeth. But héereof looke in the Compost. ¶Of the yeare Lunare. Cap. 4. THe yeare of the Moone is sometime called the space, in the which the Moone passeth about from one poynt of Zodiacus, to the same poynt agayne. And that space cōteineth (as some mē meane) seuen and twentie daies and sixe houres. And sometime the yeare of the Moone, is called the space or time, in which the Moone moueth round about, from con∣iunction to coniunction, that is, from chaunge to chaunge. And this space passeth the first, by two dayes and sixe houres. And it is sayd, that the Moone is in the coniunction, when the Moone is e∣uen straight vnder the Sunne, when no parte thereof that is towarde vs is shi∣ning: and the Moone is all bright, when it is séene at full. Also after the coniunc∣tion and change, the Moone passeth from the Sunne, and leaueth him in some cer∣taine point of Zodiacus, and findeth him not there when he commeth againe, for the Sunne passeth in his owne course. Therefore the Moone must spende two dayes and sixe houres, or he can take the Sunne, and such a space of time is cal∣led Lunacio, & is commonly called one Moone. Sometime a yeare of the Moone, is the space that containeth twelue Lu∣nacions, twele Moones: & Compotiffes departeth those twelue Moones, in sixe e∣uen and sixe odde, as the months be euen or odde: for an euen month aunswereth to an odde month, and an odde month to an euen moneth. Then a yeare of the Moone, that containeth such twelue mo∣neths, containeth thrée hundreth dayes and foure, for it containeth sixe times thirtie, and as often nine and twen∣tie dayes, that make so great a summe: and so it followeth, that commonly the yeare solare, passeth this yeare of the Moone by eleuen daies. And this passing, maketh the Prime of the Moone change euery yeare, and also the age thereof in the beginning of months: so yt if Prime be this yere in the fifth day of a month, the next yeare after the Moone shall bée twelue dayes olde, in the fifth daye of that moneth. And sometime some yeare of the Moone is called Embolismalis. Embolismus is incresing and excesse, by the which the yere of the Sunne passeth the yeare of the Moone: and in certaine yeares of such Embolismus, gathered to∣gethers, commeth vp xxx dayes, yt which xxx. dayes be accounted for one Lunaci∣on, one Moone: and the yeare in yt which such a Lunacion of xxx. dayes falleth, is called Annus Embolismalis, and there∣fore the third yeare is Annus Embolis∣malis: for in that yeare commeth vp a Lunacion, a Moone of xxx. dayes, & thrée dayes leaueth ouer, for thrice xi. make thrée and thirtie. Also the sixt yeare is Embolismalis, for then commeth vp a Lunacion, a Moone of thirtie dayes, and then leaueth other thrée daies, sixe in all. Also the eight yeare is Embolismalis in this manner: The sixe that leaue ouer thirtie in the sixe yeare, are put and done to two and twentie dayes, that come of the increasing of the seuenth and of the eight yeare, that make eight and twen∣tie dayes. But for to haue in the eight yeare a Lunacion Embolismalis, of thir∣tie dayes, we must borrowe two dayes of Embolisme, that is the encreasing by eleauen dayes of the nexte yeare there∣after. And so it is accounted foorth, e∣uen to the ninetéenth yeare, when the Circle and the course of the Moone is fullye ended. The which Circle and course, contayneth twelue common yeares, and seauen Embolismalis: In
each of them be thirtéene Lunations: for the third yeare is Embolismalis, the sixt, the eight, the eleuenth, the fourtéenth, se∣uentéenth and the ninetéenth, & the other be called common yeares. And among the Hebrewes men take most héede of obseruaunce of the yeare of the Moone: and therefore it is called Annus legalis, the yeare of the law, for all the feastes of the lawe, were helde by the course and age of the Moone. And therefore among them such a yeare beginneth from the Lunation of Aprill, as Beda saith. And in Exod. 12. cap. it is said: This month shall be to you, beginning & first of mo∣neths of the yeare. Also ouer and all without the yeare that is called vsuall, & common, and Legalis, is a yeare yt is cal∣led Emergens: when for some notable cause that falleth, the time that commeth after, is accounted frō that notable cause, as the Gréekes account times & yeares, from the first Olympias, and Christian men from the Incarnation of our Lord, and so of other. (AdditiōLegalis, was a time appointed for the giuing vp of iudgements against captiues and malefactors, the one before the time of haruest, and the other after.) Heerefore it happeneth ofte, that the middle of the yeare that is called Lega∣lis, is the beginning of the yeare that is called Emergens, and againward: & héer∣by manye countries in the Bible, hée brought to accorde. But of diuersitie of yeares, this may iustice at this time. TREVISA. (AdditiōEmergens, was a time of the yere, in the which the Auncients came foorth to determine of weightie matters for their Common wealth.) When Troy was destroyed, ye Gréeke were ioyfull thereof, and ordayned ther∣fore to haue euerye fifth yeare once, a great solempnitie, and déedes done at the foote of the hill, that then was called, Mons Olympus. And they called the first fiue yeres the first Olympias: and the second fiue yeares, the second Olym∣pias, & so forth: and they reckoned their yeares by yeares of Olympias in this manner. The first yeare they called, the first yeare of the first Olympias, and the second yeare, the second yeare of the first Olympias, and so foorth of the first fiue yeares. And the first yeare of the second fiue yeares, they called the first yeare of the second Olympias, & the second yeare, the second, and so foorth. (AdditiōOlympias is the space of 5. yeares, whereby the olde Gréekes did account as we doe now, by the yeres of our Lord: as the first Olympias, the seconde, the third, &c. Glareanus writeth, that Olim∣pias is the space of foure yeares, and that they which take and write otherwise, are deceived.) ¶Of Springing time. Ca. 5. SPringing time is ye beginning of the yeare, that beginneth when the sunne is in the first parte of the signe that is called Aries: and beginneth to passe vp∣ward, toward the North by a right line, as Constantine saith In Pantegni libro quinto, capitulo tercio. And a right line is that that longeth not to the North, nor the South, but is like farre from either Pole, and springing time dureth vntill the ende of the signe that is called Gemini, as long as the sun passeth thrée signes, of the which, each hath his owne month, that pertaineth to springing time. The first month belongeth to the signe that is called Aries, and beginneth from the eight daye of March, and dureth to the seauenth daye of Aprill. The second month pertaineth to the signe that is cal∣led Taurus, and lasteth and dureth from the seuenth daye of Aprill, to the eigh∣téenth daye of Maye. The third belong∣eth to the signe that is called Gemini, & lasteth from the eightéenth daye of May, to the seuentéeth daye of Iune. And springing time is betweene hot & colde, most temperate betwéene Winter and Summer, meane in qualytie: and part∣neth with either of them in qualitie, for then bloud beginneth to multiply in bo∣dyes of beastes: and humours that were bound and made thick in Winter, begin to moue and to be dissolued by heate of springing time. Also springing time in qualyties is temperate, and most health∣full, and least grieuous and sicklye, as
Constantine saith and Galen also. For in these two qualities kinde hath liking. For heate is cause effectiue, working, nourishing and increasing, and the me∣ture is cause materiall: and therefore in springing time bloud is most gende∣red, that is most néedfull to nourishing of the body. If springing time passe his owne kinde, it bréedeth many sicknesses and euills. Therefore it is sayde in A∣phor. If the winter be drye, and spring∣ing time and Haruest moyst and rainge, then néedes in Summer be bredde fea∣uers, blearinesse of eyen, and flixe: name∣ly of them that be moyst of kinde, as the Commentour saith. In winter daye humours, by coldnesse be with-held and made sharpe: and in springing time, that is distempered in coldnesse and in moy∣sture, many superfluities be bred and re∣solued, and shed by heate. For in Sum∣mer, for heat is not mightie to wast such humors and superfluities, it rotteth, and so bréedeth feuers, ague, and many other euills. And if Winter be hot and moyst, and springing time colde and dry, néeds men were sicke in Summer, & women that goe with childe, bring foorth & haue dead borne children: whereof Galen in Commento telleth the cause, & sayth: that when the bodies of women, that goe with child, in winter be hot & moyst, than they be tender, wany, and not sad. Therefore colde ayre of springing time, commeth sodainly into the inner partes of a woman, and grieueth and hurteth the childe. For by coldnesse and drinesse that be flaieng qualities, the childe is slaine, and the child so slaine, gréeueth the strings and breaketh them, and so néeds the woman hath a dead borne child. Al∣so springing time openeth the earth, that hath bene long closed and bounde with colde, and bringeth forth mores, rootes, & hearbes, that were hidde in the earth, and hyghteth the Earth, and renew∣eth it with floures and hearbs, and ex∣citeth birdes and fowles to hetering & to loue  clotheth and hightesh all the ouer part of the earth, with a wonder∣full . Therefore springing time is called Ver, and hath that  of Vi∣ror or s Vigore, yt is to understand of greatnesse, or of vertue: for then hearbs and trées beginne to spring and to rere gréene, with bin genings and twigges. Springing time is the time of gladnesse and of loue: for in springing time, all thing séemeth glad, for the earth wexeth greene, trees burgen and spred, medowes bring forth floures, heauen shineth, the sea resteth and is quiet, fowles sing and make their neasts, and all thing that sée∣med dead in winter and wittered, be re∣newed in Springing time. Therefore Marcianus calleth ye cléerenes of ye aire in springing time, Iupiters lauhing: & water in springing time is vnwhole∣some to drinke, for it is made great and thicke with vapors, that be resolued and shed, also it is infected with frogges and other wormes that then bréede: and ther∣fore if it be néedfull to drinke water that time, Constantine counsaileth to séeth it first, that it may be cleansed & purged by boyling. ¶Of Summer. ca. 6. SUmmer is hot and drye, and begin∣neth when the Sunne is in the first part of the signe that is called Cancer: and then the Sunne is most high aboue vs, and beginneth to passe downe lyttle and lyttle, euen to the ende of the signe, that is called Virgo, and Summer hath three months right as springing time, as Constantine saith. The first month be∣longeth to the signe that is called Can∣cer, and lasteth from the xvii, daye of Iune, to the eighteenth day of Iuly. The second, when the Iunne is in Leone, and dureth from the xviii day of Iuly, to the xvii day of August. The third beginneth when the sunne commeth into the signe that is called Virgo and dureth from the xvii daye of August, to the xviii. daye of September, as Constantine saith. Then Summer is hot & drye, & bréedeth Cho∣lerum. For in Summer the suns course is highest, and most straight ouer our heads, and printethful strong workings in our bodyes, lyke as he doth in the neather thinges. Therefore he dissol∣ueth and wasteth superfluityes that hee gathered in Winter. And if Summer passe his temperatenesse in wether, then
ofte he gendereth hot sicknesse and drye, as Constantine saith. Then the sunne maketh the dayes long, and the nightes short, and ripeth fruite and flowers. For then by his great heate, he maketh dige∣stion of humours in fruite, and tourneth them with good digestion, and incorpo∣reth and ioyneth them to the fruite, and fordrieth & wasteth superfluities at full, and so he maketh caues and pits in the earth. For by his heate he wasteth and dryeth the moyst parts, and by his dry∣nesse he wringeth and ioyneth togethers the carthie partes, and he openeth and chinketh the earth: for when the wa∣trie parts, that be cause of ioyning toge∣thers of parts, be wasted and dryed, then it néedeth, that onepart be departed from another, and so be made clifts and chins in parts of the earth. And so Summer drieth marreises and moores, and wast∣eth moysture, and maketh them rough and hard, and clinkerie, and full of pits and hoales. And the working of Sum∣mer by subtiltie of heate, commeth into the hollow parts of beasts, and dryeth & wasteth humours, that be betwéene the skinne and the flesh, and all to sheddeth them, and maketh beasts swifte, and so he destroyeth and wasteth superfluitie. Also by opening of pores, spirites passe out by exhalations, & substantiall moy∣sture, and by vapours: and therfore ver∣tues be féebled, and also made faint, of his either qualities, and so commeth ex∣citing and beginning of Cholera. And therefore he bréedeth hot feauers. Sum∣mer féedeth Bees that gather hony, with his flowers. Also by night be bréedeth deawe and moysture, and springeth ther with grasse and hearbes, that he fordrye them not by heate of the daye In Sum∣mer time fowles sing and make most melodie: and to bréede birdes, namelye wilde fowles be comforted. Shadow of things be shorte in the middle of the Summer. ¶Of Haruest. Cap. 7. HAruest is called Autumnus, & hath that name of Augendo, increasing: for that time, namely, corne and fruit, be augmented and plenteously gathered in barnes. For all the trauayle of ye yeare, is then most, and corne and fruites bée gathered and brought into barnes. And therefore is comparison betwéene Haruest, and them that be nourished in Iu∣nos fable, because of plenteousnesse, as I∣sidore saith. (AdditiōCeres of the kindred of Iuno, the daughter of Saturne and Ops, called al∣so Isis, was wife of Osiris king of Ae∣gypt (who as the Gréekes suppose) did first inuent the sowing of wheate and barley, which before did growe wilde a∣mong other hearbes: also that she did first make lawes, whereby Iustice shuld be equally ministred to all men: violence and wrong being by feare taken awaye. Herodotus writeth, that the Aegypti∣ans affirms Ceres and Bacchus to heare chiefe rule in hell. Plentie and riot, with forgetfulnesse of diet, abuseth the benefit, surfetteth the body, & damneth the soule. Ceres betokeneth encrease of graine, be∣cause she is called Dea frugum of the frugalitie which commeth of earth and séede. Saturne is sayd to be a deuourer of children per Antethesis, for that the earth as the yéeldeth increase, doth re∣ceiue all into hir againe. Bacchus was the first that in Greece found the man∣ner of planting Wines, and the secrete of pressing Wines, called Liber Pater, by an Adage, the father of libertie, In Vino veritas, when men be dronk, they disclose all, and when the wine is in, the wit is out, all superfluous bankets and riotous excesse are called Conuiuia Bacchanalia, dronken feasts,) For Haruest maketh men busely oc∣cupied about gathering of corne and of fruite, and spoyleth the fieldes of corne, and spoyleth trées of fruits, and by dri∣nesse and coldnes he slayeth burgenings and leaues of trées, & maketh them fall, and the earth barren and bare, and with draweth the vertue of budding and of springing. Also haruest is colde and dry, and bréedeth humour. Melancholike, that is colde & drie. Haruest beginneth, when the Sunne entereth and commeth into the first part of the signe that is called Libra, when the Sunne is in the right
line that is called Linea Equinoctialis: for he is like farre from the North and from ye South. Haruest time hath thrée months that serue it, as Constant. saith. The first beginneth, when the Sunne is in Libra, and lasteth from the xvii. daye of September, to the xviii. daye of Oc∣tober: and then the Sunne beginneth to withdrawe in the middaye. The se∣cond month is, in which the Sunne is in Scorpione, and lasteth from the seuen∣teenth daye of October, to the xviii. daye of Nouember. The third month is whē the Sunne is in Sagittario: and lasteth from the xvii. daye of Nouember, to the xviii. daye of December, as Constant. sayth. Haruest in his qualitie is contra∣rie to springing time: and therefore that time bréedeth many euill sicknesses. Thereof speaketh Hippocras in Apho. and sayth, In Haruest falleth sharp sick∣nesse and deadly. Upon that place Ga∣len sayth, that Haruest is more pestilen∣ciall than other times, and more euill in manye things. First for chaunging of time: for now he is hot, and now cold: also for he commeth after Summer, and findeth many hot humours, that be full hot, because of heat that was in summer, and the colde of Haruest smiteth againe such humors to the inner parts: & suffer not them to passe out of the bodies. And so such humors rot, and bréede full euill sicknesses, and Quartanes, & feuers that vnneth be curable: & that is because Har∣uest is cold and dry & inordinat, therfore in haruest too great drines doth consume & wast substanciall moysture, & maketh bodies féeble & faint. And for diuersitie & chaunging of aire, pores & holes in bo∣dies be now sodainly opened, & now so∣dainly shut: and so hot fumosities are with-held, which for that vertue maye not put them out, of multitude & sharpe∣nesse of matter commeth deadly sicknes & euills. Also Haruest time is noyfull & grieuous to them that haue the Tisike: for with coldnes & drines therof, he for∣drieth & renteth ye lungs, as it wer Pam∣pin; the floure of a vine: and therfore he grieueth them sore that haue the Tisike. ¶Of winter. Cap. 8. WInter is called Hierns, and hath that name of Eundo going, either passing: for in Winter time the sunne goeth about and passeth after in a shor∣ter circle than in Summer time, & ther∣fore he maketh shorter dayes & longer nights as Isidore saith. And as Constan∣tine saith, Winter beginneth, when the sunne is in the signe that is called Ca∣pricornus: and is the end of the descen∣tion and the lowing of the sunne in the middaye, and then beginneth little & lit∣tle to passe vpward against the North. Also Winter hath thrée months yt serue him. The first beginneth in Capricor∣no. and lasteth from the eightéenth daye of December, vnto the seauenteenth day of Ianuarie. The second is when ye sun is in Aquario, and lasteth from the sea∣uentéenth daye of Januarie, to the xvi. day of Februarie. The third moneth is, when the sunne is in the signe, that is called Pisces, and lasteth from the xvi. daye of Februarie, to the eightéenth day of March. And Winter is colde & moist, and nourisheth steame: but in Winter coldnesse hath more masterie than moy∣sture, for then is great binding and frée∣sing of aire and of water, for the great farnesse of the Sunne: of the which far∣nesse commeth great coldnesse in Win∣ter time. And so Winter is all contra∣ry to Summer. Therfore all thing that liueth and springeth by benefite of sum∣mer, fadeth and dyeth by hard cruelnesse of winter: and the foores and the signes of summer that is gone, is all destroyed and brought to nought in Winter time. In winter time, snow and greatnesse of water is multiplied: in Winter time pathes & wayes be made slipperie and fennie, but the pores of the earth & chins be constrained & frore, & made hard with cold, frost & ice. In winter al bodies haue longer shadowes than in sumer, & pores of the earth be closed, and therefore in the vtter partes bodies were colde, but within the hot parts flye coldnesse that haue mastrie, and be gathered and ioy∣ned togethers. And therefore waters of déepe pits and of wells be felt more hot in Winter than in Summer: for kinde heate slyeth coldnesse that hath mastrie,
and be gathered and ioyned togethers. And therefore waters of déepe pits and of wells, be felt more hot in winter than in summer. For kinde heate flyeth cold∣nesse, that is contrary thereto: and draw∣eth into the inner partes of the earth, & closeth it selfe in veynes of deepe pittes and welles, and therefore by reason of the presence of the heate, the water of them fréeseth not. Also sharpnes of win∣ter maketh men sluggards and slowe in working: for coldnesse constrayneth the sinewes, so that they shrink some deale, wherefore members stretch not to work so easely as they doe in Summer. Also by coldnesse of Winter pores be cloased, and kinde heate draweth inward, & com∣forteth the vertues of feelyng, wherefore appetite is awaked, and more meat and drinke néedeth than in other times. Therefore Hippocras sayth in Aphor. that in winter time by kinde, bellyes be more hot and of longer sléepe than in other times. Therefore in these times of Winter men shall take more meate, for heate is great and strong, and néede the more nourishing. Also when Winter passeth his owne qualities: diuers sick∣nesses & euills bréed in bodyes: for by reson the poores be closed, many humors be gathered in the hollownes of bodyes, the which humors find no waye to passe out. And so they wexe hot and rot. And thereof néedes commeth diuers sicknes∣ses and euills. ¶Of the monthes. Cap. 9. Ianuarie. A Month is called Mensis, and Men∣sis is a Nowne of Gréeke, drawen of the name of the Moone: for in the language of Gréeke, the Moone is called Mene. And among the Hebrewes law∣full months haue names of the mouing of the Moone, and not of the course of the Sun. And Aegyptians first for ye swift∣nesse of the Moone, tooke the the name of a month of the course of the sun: for the course & mouing of the sun, is lesse swift than the mouing of the Moone, and may be more easily knowen, as Isidore saith. and there be thrée manner of monthes,manner of mōths one is the month of the Sun, & dureth as long as the sun abideth in one signe, in his course, and is called Usuall, and is the space of dayes that is contained in our Martiloge & Kalendis. (Additiō. Martiloge, was a booke of all ye dedication of saints, and Englished by Richard Whicford, Priest, and brother of Syon, by Rich∣mond, a fond booke.) Another month is called the month of the Moone, & is that space, in the which the Moone passeth frō one poynt in the firmament, and com∣meth againe to the same: and containeth xxvii. dayes, & vii. houres. For the Moone abideth in euery signe two dayes, & two parts of an houre: and for he abideth in euery signe two dayes, and the signes be xii. thereof commeth xxiiii. dayes: and for he abideth in each signe sixe houres, therfore commeth thrée dayes: then these iii. dayes put to xxiiii. dayes, make xxvii. dayes, and vii. houres. Otherwise a mo∣neth of the Moone is taken for a ful lu∣nacion, which dureth from chaunge to chaunge, as it is said before hand. Looke before. Also a month cōtaineth 4. Wéeks, and a weeke seuen naturall dayes, and a day foure quadrants, & a quadrant cen∣taineth sixe houres, and an houre foure poynst, and a poynt x. moments, & a mo∣ment twelue ounces, and an ounce seuen and fortie Attomos, and Attomus is no farther departed for his shortnesse. And months vsuall be twelue, of the which the first is called Ianuarie, & hath that name of a God fained, that is called la∣nus: for to him that month was hallow∣ed. And now that month is called la∣nuarius, for he is bond & gate of ye yere: and he is painted with two frontes, to shew and to teach the beginning & ende of the yeare, as Isid. saith, & he is painted eating, & drinking, wt a cup, for that time beasts néed great plentie of meate, for their appetite is strong, most because of entring of heate to the inner parts. And this mōth hath lōg nights of xvi. houres, & short daies of 8. houres. (Additiō Ianus, some suppose to be Saturne, some to be Iaphet, one of ye sons of No. Ianus was also a place in Rome, whether vsurers resorted, as at Paules church in London, a place most vnreuerently vsed. Ianus was figu∣red double faced, signifieng constancie, and diligence.
He was King of Italy, so named of Ica∣lus, from whome proceeded the name of the Countrey now called Italy. ¶Of Februarie. Cap. 10. THe second month is called Februa∣rius, and hath that name of Februo which was a fained God, and is called Pluto also, for in olde time, the moneth was sanctified and hallowed to him. For olde errour of nations sanctified and ha∣lowed Ianuarie to the higher Gods, and Februarie to the neather Gods: & there∣fore Feuerill hath this name Februari∣us, of that sained God that is called Fe∣bruus and Pluto also, and is called God of hell. And this month is full rainye & and watrye, for rising of vapours and of moysture that turneth into raine: & therefore it is sayde, that the Sunne is that time in Aquario, for great plentie of raine. And Februarie is painted as an old man sitting by the fire, heating & warming his feete and handes: for that time is strong cold, for the Sunne is far, and hath bene so long time And among all months. Februarie is the least mo∣neth, for he hath but right and twentie dayes, when it is not Bisexte, & in ye Bi∣sexte he hath nine and twentie dayes: and among the Hebrewes Februarie is called Sabath, and among the Greekes, he is named Xendicos. His might hath fourteene houres, and his daye ten. (AdditiōFebruus, a name of Pluto, the son of Saturnus and Ops, and brother to Iu∣piter & Neptune. Which comming to the diuision of their fathers kingdome: the West part toward the lower sea, fell to Pluto, the youngest sonne: the East part to Iupiter, and the Ilandes to Nep∣tune. Héereof began the Poets Fable, that Iupiter was King and God of hea∣uen, Pluto of Hell, Neptune of ye Sea. Plutus is called God of riches, whome Poets aine to be lame, when he cōmeth to a man, and to haue winges when he departeth: By that deuie signifieng, that riches are long in getting, but quickly vanish awaye, if they be not well guyded. He is also imagined to be blynde, as more often lighting on vn∣worthy men, and naughtie persons, than on such, as for their vertue are most worthy to be inriched.) ¶Of March. Cap. 11. MArch is called Marcius, and hath that name of Mars the Authour of Romanes Or he hath that name, because that the beasts and fowles be moued to serue Venus, as Isidore saith, and then females desire male: and for a male in latine is called Mas, that moneth is na∣med Marcius. And among the Hebrues the month of March is called Adar, and among the Gréekes, Distan: and hée hath one and thirtie dayes, and his night hath twelue houres, and his day twelue, and in the month of March is euenesse of daye & night in springing time, when the Sunne holdeth the middle lyne be∣tweene North and South. And there∣fore in the moneth of March, the pores and holes of the earth bee opened, and humours begin to moue vpwarde in beasts, in trees, and hearbes. Therefore March is paynted as it were a Gardei∣ner: for that time superfluities of vines, and of other trées be shred and pored. And in March the time is full chaunge∣able and vnstedfast: and therefore that time bodyes of men chaunge full soone and easely. And in March water is not very wholsome to drinke: for then wa∣ter is namelye infected by shedding of séede of fishes and of Frogges. For the Sunne in the beginning of March is in the middle of the Signe, that is called Pisces, fish. (AdditiōMars signifieth force: his Chariot. violence of the swiftnes of ye blustering winds & hayle: ye names of his two hor∣ses, Terrour & Feare, that commeth to Cattell, Birdes, Fishes, and men, kil∣lyng the increase, with exchaunged tempests. ¶Of Aprill. Cap. 12. THe fourth moneth is Aprill, and is called Hiar among the Hebrewes, Xandicos among the Gréekes: And hath thirtie dayes. His night hath ten
houres, and his daye xiiii. and is called Aprilis in Latine, as it were Aperilis: for that time all things open, and then burgen flowers, and leaues spring and come out of the earth and of trées, and therfore Aprill is painted bering a flow∣er.Some thing is spoken of before in ye Planets. For in that moneth the earth begin∣neth to be closed and arraied with flow∣ers. And this month is called Aprilis, as it were Asfrondilis of Affron, that is, séede: for that time the pores of the earth being opened, the fieldes be apt to be cared and tilled, & apt to receiue séede, when the Sunne about the middle of March, commeth into the signe, that is called Taurus, the Bull. ¶Of Maye. Cap. 13. THe fifth month is Madius or Maius, May: and hath that name Maye, of Maia the mother of Mercurius. Or he hath that name Maius of Maioribus, the more worthy & gretest of Romanes: or he hath that name Madius of Ma∣defactione, wetting and moysting of cayne: for in that time the starres arise that be called Pliades and Hiades, and other rainye starres: and by vertue of them commeth raine and deawe to wet and moyst and bespring séedes that bée sowen. Among the Hebrewes, this mo∣neth is called Starba, and among the Gréekes he is called Antimoseos, and hath xxx. dayes, and his night is eight houres, and his daye xvi. And Maye is a time of mirth, of loue, of gladnesse, and of lyking: for most in Maye birdes sing and make ioye, and then Kings go forth to warre and to make battailes. In May woodes wexe greene, Medowes spring & flourish, and well nigh all things, the which be alyue, be moued to ioye and to loue, and therefore it is sayd, that in the middle of May the sunne commeth into the signe that is called Gemini: For then is temperatenesse of aire & mirth, and liking is doubled among men, for Maye is a time of solace and of lyking. Therefore it is painted lyke a young man riding, and bearing a fowle on his hande. Of Iune. Cap. 14. THe sixt month is called Iunius, and hath that name of Iunioribus, youn∣ger men, for the people of Rome wer de∣uided in parts and tentes, and compa∣nyes of younger men, and of elder, as I∣sid. saith. The month of Iune is end of springing time, & beginning of Summer, and is called Thebatch among the He∣brewes, and Deseos among the Gréeks, & hath xxx. dayes, & his night hath sixe houres, & his daye xviii. And is the mo∣neth of stinting of the sun, for in ye mid∣dle thereof, the sunne commeth into the signe, that is called Cancer, and then the heate of the sun drieth humors in mores & rootes, & all thing draweth to ripenes: & therfore he is painted, as mowing hay, for that time haye is ripe in medowes. ¶Of Iuly. Cap. 15. THe seuenth moneth is called Iulius, and hath that name of Iulius Caesar, because he was borne in that month: or as it is saide, in that moneth he was made Emperour. And this month is cal∣led Canilis among the Hebrewes, & Pa∣netnos among the Gréekes, & hath xxxi. dayes, & his daye hath xvi. houres, & his night hath viii. And this month is most feruent: for in the middle of this month the sunne beginneth to be in Leone, & the Canicular daies begin. And therfore is great passing heate in that time, be∣cause of the hot signe, and also because of the most hot starre. Also yt time all hot passions & euills increase, & that time is most disconuenient & vnaccording to me∣dicine. That time by full great heat cō∣ming inward, & wasting moysture & hu∣mour, the Corne ripeth. And therefore Iulius is painted with an hooke, reaping Corne: for then is couenable reaping time. And this month is changing and unstable, whose heat is strong in the be∣ginning, and slacker in the ende. ¶Of August. Cap. 16. THe eight month is called Augustus, and hath that name of Augustus the Emperour: and this month is called E∣bal among the Hebrewes, & Ior among
the Gréekes, and hath xxxi. dayes. His night hath x. houres, and his daye xiiii. In this moneth corne is gathered into barned: and therefore he is painted with a flayle threshing corne, and maketh the earth bare, & spoileth it of corne & fruite. And therfore it is sayde, yt the Sun in ye middes of August, commeth into the signe that is called Virgo, the maide: for a maide is barren and without fruite, so the earth is barren and bare, when he is spoyled of corne and fruite. ¶Of September. Cap. 17. THe ninth month is called September, and hath that name, because hee is the vii. month of temperate rayne, that is to vnderstand after March: for then ofte is plentie of raine. And this month is called Tarsa among the Hebrewes, & Corios among the Gréekes: and hath xxx. dayes: his night hath twelue houres, and his day xii. In this month is euen∣nesse of daye and night in haruest time: for in the middle thereof the sunne com∣meth into the signe that is called Libra. And this month is the ende of summer, and beginning of Haruest. In this mo∣neth, Grapes be ripe: and therefore hée is painted in a vineyeard, as a Gardener gathering grapes in a basket. And this month is chaungeable and vnstedfast. In his beginning heate is strong, and withdraweth and abateth in his end: and hath haruest coldnesse. Among the He∣brewes this month was full solemyne. For among them the seuenth daye, the seuenth month, and the seuenth yeare, were in great worship. ¶Of October. Cap. 18. THer, moneth is October, and hath that name, because he is the viii. af∣ter rainy time, and is called Marizon a∣mong the Hebrewes, and Hiperbeos, a∣mong the Gréekes: and hath .30. dayes His night hath .14. houres, and his daye. 10. which is yet hot in the beginning, but he gréeueth bodies with colde at the cad: and therefore it is said, that in his middle the Sunne commeth in the signe yt is called Scorpio. Scorpio is a worme pleasing in face, and stingeth with the taile. For this moneth is kindly colde and drie: bee dryeth the earth, & dispo∣seth it, & maketh it able to be sowen with séedes: Therefore in Winter séedes bee sowen. And therfore this month is pain∣ted in the lykenesse of a sower, that sow∣eth his séede. Of Nouember. cap. 19. THE eleuenth month is Nouember, and hath that name, because hée is the ninth after reinye time, and is called Caseu among the Hebrewes, and Dyos among the Gréekes: And hath thirtye dayes. His night hath 16. houres, and his day eight. This month for his coldnesse thirleth inward, & gréeueth bodies right sōre. And therefore it is sayde, that in the middle of this month the Sun com∣meth into the signe that is called Sagit∣tarius, the Archer. This month with his drinesse and cold, constraineth & bindeth & drieth, & maketh leaues of trées fall. And closeth & stoppeth pores in beasts. And ga∣thereth humours inwarde, and fréeseth them, and gréeueth & pricketh. Therefore at that time beastes waxe fat and tallo∣wie, and namelye swine. And therefore this month is painted as a churle bea∣ting Okes, and féeding his Swine with mast and Akornes. Of December. chap. 20. THE twelfth moneth is December, so called because hée is the tenth after the reinie time. And December is a wa∣ter month: and is called Thubeth among the Ebrewes, and Epileos among the Gréeks, and hath .31. dayes: his night hath 18. houres, & his day hath .6. And in this month is Solsticial: for in ye middle ther∣of the Sun entreth into the signe of Ca∣pricorno. And when it is so farre from our dwelling, yt it may no farther passe toward the South: then it tourneth a∣gaine little and little from the South circles, and styeth vp by the North cir∣cles, and the end of Haruest is the begin∣ning of Winter: and stretcheth vnto
the xvii. daye of March, and then begin∣neth growing time. And in that month for sharpnesse of colde, fowles & beastes that be fed in house be quiet and of lit∣tle mouing, and therefore they wexe fat, and therefore that time they be slaine. And of these monthes, a yeare is made, as well of the Sunne, as of the Moone. FOrasmuch as the learned by theyr obseruations,Addition haue written of diuers perilous dayes to happen in euery mo∣neth: and considering how necessarye it is that those dayes bee expressed, for the auoyding of manye daungers, notwithstanding, the Ordinaunce of God, can alter both the times and sea∣sons. Ianuarie hath eight such dayes, the 1. the 2. the 4. the 5. the 10. the 15. the 17. the 19. Drinke white wine this month, if thou bée able: or els vse temperate dyet. Februarie hath thrée dayes, the 8. the 10. the 17. these not so euill. Be circum∣spect of the 26. daye, the 27. and the 28. Eate no broathes, wherein is Mal∣lowes, &c. March hath thrée dayes, the 15. the 16. the 19. not so euill as the 28. daye. Swéete meales are good to eate this moneth, young Lambe, Meale, and Pullaine. Aprill hath two dayes, the 16. the 21. The 7. daye and the 8. the 10. the 20. vse hot and comfortable meates of light digestion. Maye hath thrée dayes, the 7. the 15. the 20. These not so euill, the thirde the sixt, rise early, and breake thy fast in a measure. Iune hath two, the 4. the 7. These not so euill, the 10. the 15. the 22. Sage and Lettuce are good in Sallets: and sometime to drinke colde water, is not hartfull. Iuly hath two dayes, the 15. the 20. Abstaine thy bodie, beware of lust, and lecherie. August two dayes, the 19. the 20. The 29. and 30. Mesraine strong drinks and hot spices. September hath two dayes, the 6. the 7. The 3. the 4. the 21. and 22. eate good fruites that nourish. October one daye, that is the 6. The 3. the 16. the 24. Drinke good wine and auoyd discord. Nouember hath two dayes, the 15. the 19. Beware ye blde not the 5. day, the 6. the 28. the 29. December hath thrée dayes, the 6. the 7. the 9. Take héede of the 15. 17. 22. Warme not thy féete too hot, nor let not thy selfe bloud, except an extremitie vrgeth: frequent the Temples for thy Religion, and obay thy Lord God, and make much of the Phisition. ¶Of the Weeke. Cap. 21. A Wéeke is called Ebdomada. and also Septimana, seauen night: and haue that name of the number of sea∣uen dayes and nightes. By ofte com∣ming about thereof, moneths, yeares, and times passe. And a wéeke beginneth in the one daye, and endeth in the same: The partes thereof be dayes artificiall and naturall. Dayes be called Dies, and haue that name of Dijs, Gods. Men in olde time hallowed the names of dayes, to certaine starres. They gaue the first daye to the Sunne, that is Prince of Starres, and Lorde of Plannets: and therefore the first daye is called Dies Dominica, the Lordes daye, and Sun∣daye. Also that is priueledged in manye wise, for in a Sunday the world was made, and in a Sunday our Lorde was borne, and in a Sundaye, our Lorde a∣rose from death to lyfe, and in a sundaye our Lord sent the Holy ghost to his dis∣ciples. And they gaue the second daye to the Moone, that is next to ye sun in huge∣nes & brightnes. The third day hath the name of Mars: & so of ye other. And some day is called Dies Aegyptiacus, & some not so. Dies Aegyptiacus is ye day, in the which God sent some wreake into Ae∣gypt. And for there be .xxiiii. Aegiptians daies, it followeth that God sent mo wreakes vpon the Aegiptians then ten,
that be most famous among other. The daies Aegiptiac he set in the Balender, and be called Dies mali, euill daies: not for some thing should be spared in those daies, that should not bée spared in other daies, but for to haue in minde the mi∣racles and wonders of God. Some daye is artificiall and some naturall. Artificial daye is the space in the which the Sunne passeth about in our sight from the East to the West: and is called Dies artifici∣alis, craftie: for hée hath diuersitie as it wer by craft, by diuerse place of Climats and of countries. A naturall daye is the space in the which the Sunne passeth a∣bout, out of the East by the West, into the East againe. And such a day contei∣neth .24. houres. And the day artificiall of euennesse of daye and night, conteyneth 12 houres, and in other times more or lesse, as the daies waxe longer or shor∣ter. And some day hath the name of Ka∣lendes, and some Idibus, & some of No∣nis. And the first day of a moneth hath the name of Kalendis: And is called Kalende, of Calo, that is to cal. For then men vse to call merchaunts to Faires. And it was a solempne feast that is called Festum Neomenie, the feast of the newe Moone. For then the Moone was seene to be newe. None bée sayde as it were Nundine, faires: for then faires, begin. And Idus is to meane Diuisio, depar∣ting, for then faires were departed. Héereof we haue thrée diuersities of daies, Kalendis ordeined to hallowing, No∣nis ordeined to chaffer,To buy or sell. & Idus ordeined to departe and passe home from Faires. And a daye naturall hath xxiiii. houres, in the which the Sunne is borne about all the earth by rauishing of the firma∣ment. The partes of a naturall daye he Quadrantes, Hora, Punctum, Momen∣tum, Vncia, and Athomus, Quadran is the fourth part of a daye naturall, and is the space of sixe houres: and an houre is the sixte parte of a quadrant: and an houre the .xxiiii. parte of a daye naturall. And is called Hora as it were the ende and the lesse parte of time: as the brim of a riuer or of the sea is called Ora, as Isidore sayth: And a Puncte is the fourth part of an houre, and is called Momentum, as it were Minimum, the least and most straight time that hath name of meeuing of starres, Vncia is the twelfth parte of a moment. Athomus is the .xlvii. parte of Vncia, and is called Athomus, as it were without diuiding and parting: For diuiding and parting of time, passeth no further then Atho∣mus. Also the daye receiueth shining of the Sunne, and receiueth lyght, and sendeth it forth to other things. Therefore this name Dies commeth of Dian Gréeke, & Dian is to vnderstand, cléernesse, as Isi∣dore sayth: Also the daye describeth and distinguisheth moneths, yeares, & times, of all course: And passing of time is ac∣counted and reckoned by number & sum of dayes. Also as the Sun passeth néere or farther, the daies lengthen and shor∣ten: Therefore because that the Sun is farre from vs in Winter, daies be shor∣test, & in Summer longest. For in Sum∣mer the Sun is most high in vs: also the day hideth the starres and the ouer bo∣dyes of heauen: for the more cléere yt day is, the more the starres bée hidde from our sight. Also the daye distinguisheth cou∣lours and formes, and shapes of things, that bée séene: For figures, fourmes, and shapes that bée hidde by night, be séene by daye, as Beda sayth. Also the presence of the day comforteth and glad∣deth birdes and foules. For in springing of the daye, the birdes bée ioyfull and sing: Also the daye comforteth way∣faring men, and maketh them sure in in peace: And is enimye to théeues, and maketh them dread: for théeues dread by day. Also the cléernesse of the day voideth and putteth off darknesse of the night, & commeth soone after, and the more tem∣pest and disturbance that is in the night, that passeth, the more desirous is the pre∣sence of the day that followeth. Also the daye chaungeth his state: for he waxeth longer or shorter: and the shorter he is in Winter, the longer he is in Sum∣mer. Also the day waketh & putteth of heaui∣nesse, sleep, & slouthfulnes: for yt day is or∣deined
to trauaile of men. And the more the day draweth to an end, the more the wise work-man busieth to make an end of his daies worke. Of the dawning. chap. 22. THE dawning is end of the night, that passeth, and is beginning of the daye, that commeth after: and is called Aurora, as Isi. saith, as it were a golden horne: for if sendeth shining coulour, as it were coulour of gold: And therefore in the dawning, the Gréekes call the Sun Crilodomus, that is to vnderstand, the house of golde. For his beames shining, doe shewe golden creastes. Or els he is called Aurora, as it were wether dew∣ing. For in the dawning dew is gende∣red: and by the moisture therof the earth is watred and sprong, and the heat of the ayre tempered: and the dawning hath light of the Sunne, & is more cleere then the night, and more darke then the day. The day exciteth cleane birds, and daye foules to dye and to sing, and driueth & feareth away night soules. In the spring∣ing of the dawning, flowres that be clo∣sed, open: and hearbes and grasse, that wither and fade in great heat, arise and reare vp theyr heads. In the dawning vertue and strength of wit and of féeling be comforted. In the dawning sicknesse of beasts is lighted and abated For in ye dawning, sanguine humour hath princi∣pall mastry, as Constantine sayth. The dawning followeth the kinde of spring∣ing time euen to Undern, and middaye followeth the kinde of Summer, and the euentide followeth the kinde of Haruest time, and night is called and lykened to Winter. In the dawning, for mastry of blod, sléepe is swéete and wholesome. Also that time most speciallye Cockes be excited to crowe. And in the dawning Lucifer, the starre ariseth, and warneth of the Sunne rising, & of his soone com∣ming. The dawning beginneth from the end of darknesse, and wareth perfect, and passeth to the perfection of light, & chan∣geth his coulour in the arising of the Sunne. For the sheweth, now yeolowe, nowe redde, and nowe golden coulour. This diuersitie commeth of diuerse qua∣litie of vapours or of clowdes, in the which is printing of the Sunne beames, as Beda sayth. Dawning is Aurora: and Aurora and Diluculum, is all one, and is called Diluculum, as the bright and lyght beginneth of the day. For Di∣luculum, as Isidore sayth, is end of the night and beginning of full lyght, relée∣uing and easing of sicknesse, spéeding and deliueraunce from enimyes. For in Di∣luculo, that is the dawning, enimies fly and théeues also, as he sayth. Mane and Diluculum is all one. For Mane is full of lyght, and is called Mane that is good, for nothing is better then lyght, as Isi∣dore sayth. Mane the early dawning, is beginning of trauaile, ende of sléeping, time of sobernesse, and perfect digestion and ended, and maketh an end of yt night lyttle and little, and passeth soone, and sheweth qualities, figures, and shapes of things. Of Midday. chap. 23. MIddaye is called Meridies, as it were the middle of the day. For at middaye the Sunne is séene in the mid∣dle of heauen, and is in the middle point betwéene the East and the West: and is séene lyke far from other. Or els midday is called Meridies, as it were cleere: and the day is most cléere and pure, when ye Sunne shineth out of the middle of hea∣uen, and lighteneth all the world with euen cléerenesse, as Isidore sayth. This houre is most hot and dry, and most like in qualities to Summer: and that is for many manner causes. For then the Sun is most streight ouer our heads, for the streight reflexion and rebounding and doubling of the Sunne beames, and for streyghtnesse of the lines, vnder yt which the beames be thrust togethers. Also that time for multiplication and comming together of beames the aire is full hot. And therefore then is most heate gende∣red in these neather things. And in the houre of midday each body maketh most short shadow. And then the shadow stretcheth fromward the Sunne toward the North. And the more the Sunne pas∣seth
fromward the South circle, the sha∣dow of a body is the more long, as Beda sayth. In the midday flowres and hearbs fordrie: but fruit and corne do most ripe, then beasts drawe to shadowy places, for strong heat of the Sunne: and some rest in their owne dennes and hidels. In the middaye venimous beastes, as Ser∣pents and Adders gréeue most. For then they cast soone and shedde their venim. Also in the morrow tide, for coldnesse of the night that is passed, they waxe colde. And therefore in them the strength of venim abateth: but it waxeth hot in the middest of the day. Therefore that time they bée more feruent to sting, and shed, and cast venimme, and so in the fer∣uent middaye they goe out of theyr holdes and dennes, and put them foorth for to haue heate of the Sunne, as Isi∣dor saith. Of Euentide. Chap. 24. EUentide is called Vespera, and hath that name of a West starre, that is called Vesperus. For Vesperus is a star that followeth the Sunne, going downe: & commeth with darknesse that follow∣eth, as Isid. sayth. And euentide is called Serum, late: & hath that name of gates closed. For when euentide commeth, gates be closed and shutte, for that all thing that is in house shoulde bée more safe. Also the euentide is called Crepus∣culum, as it were light that is in doubt, when it is not certeinlye knowen be∣twéene lyght and darkenesse, as Isidore sayth. Then at euen the daye endeth, and the Sunne beames be withdrawen. For aboue the earth against euen, sha∣dowes of bodyes bée most long, And flowres that open against the Sun, close for absence of the Sunne. Also pores of bodyes that bée opened by heate of the daye, close for slacknesse of heate in the euentide, exhalation, vapours, and fumo∣sities that bée of miste and of clowdes, bée resolued in the euentide. Men and beastes, and also Fowles and Birds, be∣cause of resolution of fumositye in their bodies be then disposed to rest & to sleepe. Night Fowles, and Owles, and night Crowes come out of theyr holes to get theyr meate in the euentide. Heards ga∣ther flockes of beasts out of Léeses in∣to foldes, or into other places of coue∣nable rest. In the euentide vnneth bée Houndes knowne from Wolues. In the euentide for rising of enimyes and of Theeues, Worke men and Wat∣ches and Wardennes bée sette and or∣deyned in walles and Towres. Also in the euentide, labouring men bée re∣warded and payed, and they goe to rest. Of the night. cap. 25. NIght is called Nox, and hath that name of Nocendo, noyeng. For Night noyeth the eyen: for it taketh away from the eien his perfection, that is the déede of séeing: For night hideth coulours of thinges, in whome the eye hath liking: And the cause of night is shadowe of the earth that is betwéene vs and the Sun, and withdraweth from vs the Sunne beames, and letteth vs to haue sight of the Sunne, and taketh from vs the lyght thereof: The night is cold and moyst, in qualyties most lyke to Winter. Therefore night is couenable to rest of beastes, and néedefull to wor∣king of kindly déedes and effectes: and so night is time of sléeping and of rest, that the vertues that bée distracte spark∣led and made féeble by daye waking, maye bée ioyned and rested by benefite of night: and so ioyned and gathered, maye be comforted. For night shoulde not bée all without light, it is beshy∣ned with brightnesse of starres: and so by moouing of Starres, the passing of the course of the night is knowen. And also thicknesse of ayre of the nyght is tempered by moouing and shining of starres. And therefore men that passe by the way or saile in the sea, may soone goe out of the way, but if their way bée ru∣led and ledde by moouing, and place of starres. Al sicknesse generally is stronger by night then by daie: The ende of night and comming of daye is knowen by cro∣wing of Cockes. Also by watches and wardes of Knightes, the night is de∣parted
in foure, as Beda sayth. For the first waketh in the first quarter of the night: the second in the second quarter: and the third in the third: and the fourth in the fourth, that is at Cocke crowing. For they wake alwaye in Castles: for alway they haue minde and finde some∣what, that they dread, as he sayth Su∣per. Lucam. cap. 12. And yet more, the night of it selfe brin∣geth in horriblenesse and feare, and con∣teineth fantasies and deceits: for moe fantasies bée seene by night then by day. And also men that sléepe by night, sée more fantasies, that men that wake by day, as it is sayde there: Much haue I suffered by night because of him. Mat. 27 Also night bringeth in thicknesse and in∣fection of aire: for of fumositie and moist vapours, and exhalations commeth so great chaunging and infection of ayre, that vnneth men, beasts, and things, that haue life should liue, if that the Moone & the starres with theyr moouing did not withstand and let such mallice, as Alb. sayth. Also night sheweth things that be hid in the cléernesse of day as it is kno∣wen. For starres be hid by day, and shine and be séene by night. Night féedeth vn∣cleane beasts: For Boares and other wilde beastes hide themselues, and lurke in dennes and ditches by daye, and goe about by night in vineyardes and fields. And oft night giueth to euil doers hardi∣nesse and suretie, for by day theeues and robbers dread to be taken: & be by night bolde and hardy to all euill déedes: as Gregory saith. The night gréeueth them most that be in peril of the sea, for when night commeth vpon them, that bée in perill of shipwracke, vnneth they maye escape any weather, as Gregory sayth. The night wasteth the halfe parte of mans lyfe slitye: for wée spend as much time sléeping, as wée doe waking by daye: and so night withdraweth touching trauaile, the most parte of our lyfe, as Galen saith. Of the Sabboth: cap. 26. SAbbatum is chiefe feast of the wéeke, touching hallowing. Therefore the seauenth day was ordeined of our Lord. For the seauenth daye our Lord rested from all manner working. Gen. 2. Ther∣fore among the Hebrewes no worke of seruage, was suffered to be done on the Saterday: but seruants, women & beasts should rest in the Saterdaye. Also in the Iewes houses no fire should be kindled in the Saterdaye: and meate that was néedfull, was dressed and made readye in the day before. In the saterday men were arrayed with theyr best clothes, and the people vsed plentie, commonly of the best meate. And the temple for loue of prayer was more frequented thē in other daies. In the Saterday the greatest sacrifice & offering were alway brought and done vpon the Altars. Alway in the Saterday Priests declared and expounded the law to the people in their Sinagogues. And they sung solempne Psalmes, & idle wal∣king about was fordidden: for the space of the way of Saterdaye, was called the space onely of a. M. paces. For it was hol∣den vnlawfull to goe more waye in the Saterday, as the Glose sayth Super ac∣tu Apost. In the Saterdaye it was not graunted to weare armor but in defence of the lawe: as it is sayd Libro. 1. Mac. 2. Then the feast of the Saturday was betokened the rest of the soule, & it was ordeined, that he that brake the Saterday shuld be staine without mercy. As it fell of him that gathered wood in the Sater∣day, that the people stoned to death, by the bidding of our Lord. Of Neomenia. chap. 27. AMong the Hebrewes Neomenia,Neomenia The time of ye newe Moone. and a new Moone is all one, and was so∣lempnly holden in Kalends of the Mo∣neths, in the worship of our Lorde, that renueth all ordinaunces. And as nations did in the beginning of moneths in wor∣ship of the feigned Goddesse Diana and Iuno, the Hebrewes did in worshippe of the Creator in Kalends of monethes. And therefore the beginning of moneths be called Kalende, as it were worship∣ping, as Isidore sayth. Or hée hath that name of Calo in Gréeke, that is to vn∣derstand calling: for the comming of this
this solempnitie shoulde be knowen by Trumpets and Clarions And by trum∣ping the people wer called to this feast, that is called Neomenia. This Feast was right high and holy: and therefore it was worshipped with spirituall hosts and offerings. And the people were called speciallye to meate and to Feast with trumpes and clarions in the Ka∣lendes (AdditiōAlso of the Prime the common rule is, that Sunday Prime is dry weather. Munday prime wet. Teusday prime, cold and windie, Wednesdaye tempestuous, Thursday faire and cléere. Friday chan∣geable, Saterday, rainie, the thrée dayes from the chaunge, is the prime day. How many miles the Moone is from the earth, and euery Planet from other. As some haue published, it is from the Moone. 15750. miles. From the Moone to Mercury, is .12812. miles. From Mercury to Venus as many miles. From Venus to the Sunne, is .23437 miles and a halfe. From the Sunne to Mars, is .15725. miles. From Mars to Iupiter, is .78721. miles. From Iupiter to Saturne, as manye miles. From Saturne to the Firmament, is 120485 miles. The whole summe from the earth to the firmament, is .280734. miles and a halfe. Of Septuasgesime. chap. 28. SEeptuagesimè is the space of .70. daies: & stretcheth from the sunday, yt is called Septuagesima, to ye saterdaye in Easter wéeke: yt is called Sabbatū in Albis. These .70. daies betoken those .70 yéeres, in yt which the children of Israel wet bomde in seruage in Babylon, & wet continually al those .70. yeres in wretch∣ednesse, & in sorrow: but they toke leaue of Ciro ye king, & came again with ioy & worship, when those .70. yeres were en∣ded. And by these .70. yeres of thraldome in Babylon, all ye time of our life is beto∣kened: all the while it is subiect to sin or to paine. And therfore the sin of the first man with paine that he had for it, is red in holy Scripture in the first Sunday, when Septuagasima beginneth. And so in token of the wretchednes of this world, songs of wealth & of ioye be still: & wed∣dng & spowfalls be suspended,Marriage forbidden till it be after Easter. For by ye passion of Christ, shraldome of sin of mankind, is released: but yet paine dureth & abideth. As ye peo∣ple of Israel made great ioy & mirth for their fréely cōming againe into Ierusalē: but neuertheles for hardnesse of the way they trauailed full sore. So we passing toward our country, make ioy because of our redemption: but yet we make sorow & wo for our sins. When the Septuagesi∣ma of this life is ful ended:The .70. yeares. then we shall shine in white in presence of the lambe: for when ye trauell of this life is ended: & that we come to the Sabboth of endlesse rest: then we shal haue ioy & double stole, yt shal be restored to vs that time. In to∣ken of wretchednesse of this life, and in the gospel be taught to trauell in ye vine∣yard of our Lords Sabboth. Of Quinquegesima. cap. 29. QVinquegesima is called as it were .5 times 10, & betokeneth forgiuenesse, For the 50. yéere was called Annus iu∣bileus & was most solēpne & holy among the Hebrews. For in yt yere men yt were banished, shuld come home again. & debts shuld be forgiuē, & losse shuld be restored: And Quinquegesima beginneth the third sunday after Septuagesima: & endeth in the sunday of yt resurrection For it beto∣keneth ye state of grace, to yt which we be restored by ye benefit of penance: and ther∣fore fasting of holy church beginneth in ye middle of the wéeke of septuagesima, & then oft we rehearse yt .51. Psalme in the seruice of yt day. For it is a Psalm of pe∣nance, & is said welnigh in al yt houres, & ye Psalm is called Miserere mi deus, the hallowing of the fiftie yere, that is called Annusiubileus, & began, as Hebrues tel, before the law, yt is to wit, before Abra∣hams time: yt deliuered his nephew Loth, yt was then .50. yere olde: & therfore after that time the fifty yéere was held among Abrahams children: and that was af∣terward allowed in time of the lawe, be∣cause
of mistike meaning,Secret re∣uealing. as it is sayde in Numeris. Of Lent. Chap. 30. LEnt is called Quadragesima, and is the space of fortie daies, as Isidore sayth: And beginneth from the first-sun∣day of lent, and stretcheth and lasteth to ye Cene of our Lord,Maunday thursdaye that is shere thurs∣day. In the which Cene and supper our Lord beganne the Sacrifice of the new Testament, and fedde vs with Angells bread. Therin is betokened, that he that doth full penaunce of Lent, and full en∣deth ghostly this lyfe, shall haue ioy and company finally of contemplation & sight of God. Quadragesima, Lent, is the time of chiualrye of christen men: in the which time wée fight sharplye against vices and sinnes. For this number of dayes we take to our chiualrie, not one∣ly by ensample of Moses and of Elye, but also by following of Iesus Christ, that fasted so many dayes as it is read. And well in these number of dayes wée fast. For this number ten doubled foure times, presenteth and betokeneth the ten commaundements, and the foure Go∣spells, by the which Gospells armes and weapon nowe of our aduersary is putte off, and lande of life is there got by lawe of heritage, as the lande of behest was graunted to the children of Israel after that battaile and fighting of fortie yéere, in desert and wildernesse. Also the fruite of our chiualrye is shewed vnder this number. For this number of for∣tye, if the partyes that depart it bée ga∣thered togethers, make the number of fiftie. The which number betokeneth forgiuenesse of death, & restitution of heri∣tage that was lost. And héerby it is shew∣ed that in fighting against vice & sinnes, we get mercy and forgiuenes of sinnes, & be made heires of euerlasting good and riches. And in this number wée hallowe to our Lorde tithings and first fruites, for the tithing of thrée hundred dayes and sixtye. wée fast sixe and thirtye daies; and for the tithing of fiue dayes and sixe houres that be ouer of an whole yéere, wée fast one daye that the summe bée payed to GOD for tithinges of a yéere, seauen and thirtye fasting dayes: and the dayes of our foure times bée there offered for first fruites. And this we doe, that wée that offer to God first fruites of our time in fayth of the Tri∣nitye, and the first fruites in contem∣pletion and fulfilling of the terme com∣maundementes by faith and good déedes, may come to the worthinesse of the first birth, and to the pennye of euerlasting wealth. manne of resist∣ing temp∣tationIn the Tract bée shewed foure man∣ner of impugnations and of temptati∣ons. Of the which the first is lyght and priuie, that is night dreade. The second is lyght and openlye knowne, that is an Arrowe flyeng by daye: The thirde is heauie and open; that is the méeting of the middaye féende. The fourth is pri∣uie and heauie, that is the dooing and walking in darknesse. Against those so manye impugnations, wée bée warded and succoured with spirituall armour, to the which the Apostle in the Epistle tea∣cheth & calleth vs, where he sayth: Put wée be foorth, as seruauntes of God by armour of righteousnesse and of vertue of God. And among all times of the yeare, the Lent time is most worthy and noble. For Lent is time of quickening. For the earth that séemed as it were dead in Winter time, quickeneth againe and waxeth greene in Lent. Also Lent is time of renewing: for the earth is ar∣rayed and renewed with hearbes and flowres, and tréees with braunches and leaues. Also Lent is time of conceiuing. For then the vertue of generation is most strong in beasles, trées, and hearbes. Therefore all thing that springeth on the earth, groweth and burgeneth that time. Also Lent is the time of making nests, and of bréeding. Therfore Turtles and Storks, and other fowles and birds, that be vnséene in Winter, come in Lent and bée busie to make theyr neastes. Al∣so Lent is time of medicine and of pur∣gation. For then in bodyes bée humours mooued most to passe out: and there∣fore it is couenable time of medicine: also Lent is time of winning and of chaffer.
For then the earth is disposed to be ca∣red, and the sea to saile in. And therefore in Lent and springing time, for hope of winning, men vse to goe about, and vse diuerse merchaundises. Also Lent is time of shredding and of paring,The time of graf∣fing, plan∣ting, and sorting seedes. and to cutte off superfluityes: and therefore in Lent Uines and other trees, bee cut and pared and shredde of superfluities. Also Lent is time of bourgening of Uines, that bee cut and pared. For superfluitye of hu∣mours, that is in the roote commeth out by vapours, and droppeth and passeth out when the Uine is cutte. Also that time the vertue of bourgening breatieth out in diuerse partes, and sheweth it selfe: in twigges. Also Lent is time of sowing, and of graffing. For in Lent seedes bée sowne on the earth: and graftes be graf∣ted on the trées. Also, Lent is time: of dew & of raine, to spring and to moyst; and to nourishe the seedees that bée: so∣wen, as Albumasar sayth, and Leda also. Addition. Examples of fasting.AS for fasting of that originall procee∣ded further: for the vse of flesh & wine from Adam. till the time of Noah was vnknowen: And Moses forbare meat. 40 daies, and Belias did likewise; our Saui∣our Christ fasted the seeke space, and God pardonce the Niniutes of their crimes; because they fasted with repeutance. The Iewes also in their lawe, so oft as they either asked any benefit of God, or woulde pacifie his wrath, or rendes thankes, for his benefites, or kepte anye solemyes feasts, vsed commonly to fast. And es he kéepeth not the loue fast, which forbeareth flesh, or forgoeth his supper, but he that minisheth his affecti∣ons, abating his anger, swaging his pride, modifieth his desires, mortifieth his lustes, kiffereth patiently all aduersi∣tie that chaunceth to him, that man is the true faster. Albeit the other is a co∣adiutor to that thing, and helpeth much that purpose. Therefore to the intent wee might reclaime such corruptions of our olde Adam, the Apostles did ordeins the fast of Lent, as Hiemme in an Ca¦pistletd Marcella doth plaine deriate. Wherefore they that referre it to The∣lesphorus bée deceiued,Theles∣phorus did ap∣point it before Easles. for hée did not institute it first, but appointed that it shoulde bée kepte afore Easter, and ad∣ded another wéeke to it, that wée call Quoquagsima, this wéeke hée com∣maunded Mites to fast more then the laitye, because they, which ought to bée holyer then the rest, shoulde in this ordinarye fast, showe more abstinence then the other. The Apostles also insti∣tutes, that thrée weekes after the natiui∣tie of the Lorde named Christide, should be solemptye fasred, which constituti∣on  is a while kept vniuersallye, albe∣it & canne her sake it to bée amities∣on of olde Romane feases, which thrice in the yeare had sacrifices, for the prospe∣rous soceesse of theyr corne. The one Venali, for the wines, the other Robi∣gaa for all their graine, least it should be mildewed. The thirde Horalia; for all their fruites. These vaine superstitione; olde Bishoppes of Rome tourned to a godly vse, and transposed then feasling, than the ather at the contemplation of our prayers and fastings.Superstiti¦on turned into reli∣gion. God might pro∣sper the increase of all fruites; to the su∣stentation of vs his creatures. Poli∣dure Vurgil in his:  booke, and 3. Chap∣ter. Ieiuniom is called in Hebrew Zon, a fast is a discipline & chastesing of the bo∣dye, taken willinglye for the time pre∣sent, by the which wée are made hum∣ble before GOD:  thereby be∣reaue the body of nourishment, that it may obey the spirit: There are two ne∣cessities which make vs fast, yt is a pub∣like necessitie & a priuate: Publike neces∣sitie is,Ioel. 2, Ionas. 3 when some calamitie, either pres∣seth or necsay to come vpon the Church of God: the example thereof  appeare in the Scriptures Priuate necessitie is, when any man doth it, eling himselfe to be vexed of his owne lust or concupis∣nce, from the which he taketh away the amise, yt it may the lesse instance & burne. The whole ye of Christans must bée a fast, as Christ exhorteth vs sayeng: Couete  graue iuea v stra cra∣pula veebriet ; Lake héed least your heddes bée laden with surfettes or with dronkenesse.
I doe euidently finde hath in the olde Testament & in the new, yt fasting was cōmanded. But on what daies we ought to fast, or not to fast, I do find commaun∣ded neither of God, nor of the Apostles. So Austen saith, Nahil prodest tota die longum duxisrie lejunium, si po∣stea sua vitate ciboium vel nimietate a∣nima obruatur: that is, it doth nothing auaile to fast all the daye, if afterwards the soule be ouerwhelmed with delicate meates, &c. Origen writeth thus, Ieiunio sic ad∣hibenda temperies, vt corpus vestrum, nec situritas excitet, nec inedia immo∣derata debiliter: Fasting must so be tem∣perated, that neither fulnesse may excite and stirre the bodye, neither immoderate hunger may weaken the body. I reade an olde verse in which is con∣tained the vse, and abuse of fasting: this is the verse. Abstinet aeger, egens, cupidus, gula, Simla, virtus. The sicke man fasteth because he hath no appetite to eate, or by the reason of some medicine receiued. The poore man lasteth because hée hath not for to eate. The couetous man fasteth to spare meate and drinke. The gluttenous man fasteth, that he maye after eate the more gréedely. The Ape, that is the hypocrite; fasteth to séeke the praise of man. The godly man fasteth to mortifie his flesh, & to mourne for his striues. Looke for this, further discoursed in the Miscellane of Dallen. Of Easter. chap. 31. EAster is called Pascha in Gréek, that is to vnderstand, passion, or suffe∣ring: That commeth of Patin, that is to suffer. And is called in Hebrew Phase, that is passing or passage. For in the Paske of Hebrewes, & Lambe, was of∣fered, roasted and eaten, and nothing thereof lefte till on the morrowe. And that which might not be eaten, was burnt in the fire with hast, and it was eaten with wilde Letuse, and with the purest bread. It was forbidde and com∣maunded, that men that were vncleane and not circumcised, shoulde not eate thereof. The Hebrewes were gird and shoddde, when they shoulde eate thereof. Each man that eate thereof should holde a staffe in his hande. Postes of houses were bawmed with bloud of the lambe, and the vertue of the Angell that flewe the first birthes, was withstoode there∣by. For he had no power to greene there, as the postes of the house were baumed with bloud of that lambe. In eating of that offered Lambe, our Lorde passing through Aegypt, the people of the Ae∣gyptians were smitten: and the people of the Hebrewes were deliuered out of the cruel Lordship of the Aegyptians. And so because the first birthes of Aegyptians were slaine, the first births of Hebrewes were hallowed, and offered, and after ea∣ten. After the eating of the Lambe, the people following a piller of fire, and of a clowde, were lead without hurt through∣out the red sea, and Pharao and his hoast that pursued them were drowned. And finally, for theyr deliueraunce and drow∣ning of their enimies, they sung laudes to God: as sheweth Exo. 12. & .14. And there∣fore in mind of slaughter of the Aegypti∣ans, and of deliueraunce of the Hebrewes came vp an vsage in ye country of Iews, that at Easter, of tiro, yt were dampned to death, one should be slaine, and that other shoulde be deliuered and passe frée, as it is open: Mat. 26 And this Easter of Iewes was figured and prophesied of the Easter of christen men: in the which Easter by the bloud of the cleane Lambe without wem, that tooke away the sinnes of the worlde, all that bée chosen, bée quit and raunsomed out of the seruice of féends. By the lambe they that be chosen make passage from fleshe to spirite, and from the olde an to the new, and out of the world to heauen, out of shadowe to light, out of figures to foothnesse, and out of seruage and thraldome, to the fréedome of the blisse, of Gods owne children. And therfore Easter day is time of glad∣nesse and of ioy, time of honesty and re∣newing, time of cleannesse & of purenesse and of ioyfull refection and féeding: for children of the resurrection bée solemp∣ly fedde, not with sowre dough of mal∣lice,
but with pure meat of swéetnesse & of soothnesse. Alway we hallow Easter day on the Sundaye in springing time, when the Moone is yet at the full. And alwaye we hallowe Easter daye on the Sunday, for reuerence and worshippe of the resurrection of our Lorde. And wée hallow it not alway in the fifteenth day of the Moone, as the Iewes doe, least it should seeme that we hold the same law, following the meaning of the Iewes. Al∣so to speake largely of Easter, our Ea∣ster stretcheth to manye dayes: first to Palme Sunday, the which is commonly called the Easter of flowres. For that day our Lord was receiued with boughs and braunches of trées. Also this day is priuiledged: for the day the children of Israel vnder Iosua passed Jordane drye footed, and entered and came into the endes and countries of the lande of be∣hest, andaeate: of the fruite of the lande of Canaan, and anone Manna was giuen, wherewith they were fed in desart 40. Winters, as it is sayd Iosua. 2. Also the same daye that it fell, that time was Palme Sunday. And our Lorde droue out of the temple buiers and sellers, after that he was receiued worshipfully with boughs and braunches of Palme and of Oliue. Also the daye of Cene, that wée call shéerethursday, perteineth to Easter. Of Pentecost. chap. 32. PEntecost was a solompne feast among the Hebrewes, as it is yet among vs; and it is the fiftie day after Easter. For as the people of Israel in the fiftye daye after that they had hallowed Easter in Ramosse, they came to mount Sinay, and receiued the lawe, as it is saide Exodus 19. So, the fiftye day after Christs passi∣on, the holy Ghost was giuen to the A∣postles in likenesse of eye tongues: for that they shoulde bee renable of speach, and haue good facunditie in all manner of language, and seruent in loue of chari∣tie. This feast is called Penthecostes, & hath that name of Pena, that is fiue, and Costes, that is tenne. For fiue times ten dayes passeth from Easter to Pen∣thecost: and be departed and diuided by seauen wéekes, for seuen manner graces that was giuen to christen men in com∣ming of the holy Ghost. And about Pen∣tecost is time of chiualry, & also of orped∣nesse. And then young knightes bée girde with the swoord of chiualrie: and then is time of cleannesse of drynesse: For then the Sun heateth strongly the ouer parte of the earth, and wasteth and consumeth the sliminesse, and al superfluities of hu∣mours: and so hée cleanseth and dryeth the earth. Also then is ye time of all glad∣nesse, of ioye, and of mirth. For then all beastes and foules liue in most loue. Al∣so it is the time of nurth and of gréene∣nesse: for namely then hearbs be greene, and woods bourgen, spring, and spread Also it is the time of good smelles and of swéetnesse. For flowres in gardens, woodes, and mower giue swéet smels all about. Also it is the time of swéete∣nesse and sauour: for then heat of hea∣uen defieth moysture in flowres, and chaungeth them, and turneth into swéet∣nesse: And therefore then is couenable time to make home, & namely that time Bées vse and haunt hearbes and trées, because of the flowres, as Aristo. sayth: and the honny that is gathered in sprin∣ging time, is much more swéete then honny that is gathered in Haruest time. Also it is the time of riping: for in hot countryes about Pentecost, corne is ripe and gathered: and therefore in li. Num. it is called the time of new fruits. For in the Feast of Pentecost it was ordeined that men shoulde offer bread of new corne: also then is the time of pa∣sture, & of plentie of hearbes & of grasse: and therfore then as well horses as other beasts be fat for the plenty of new grasse: also then is the time of hardinesse and of boldnesse: for that time by strong im∣pression of heate of the Sun, Cholera is kindled, and by kindeling thereof about the heart, wrath and hardinesse is excited in beasts: and therfore that time is most couenable to moue warre and battell a∣gainst enimies. Of Cenophegia. Cap. 33. CEnophegia is a feast among the He∣brewes, and it is called Pitching
of tentes: and was hallowed in minde of the spéede and passing, when they passed out of Aegypt, and dwelled in tentes, as Isidore sayth. And so Ceno∣phegia hath that name of Scenon, in Gréeke, that is a tent. And this solemp∣nitie was hallowed alwaye in the moneth of September: for when all the fruites were gathered, they gaue of each tithing to our Lorde. And namely then they vsed gladnesse, ioye, and mirth, and couered theyr houses with boughes and braunches: and they bare in theyr hande fruite, that were Apples of Ceder. And in the tenth days of that moneth they hallowed thrée manner of feastes the selfe same daye, that is to witte, the feast that is called Festum expiacionis: and another Feast that is called Festum afflictionis: and the third feast, that is called Festum propiciacionis. For the same daye the highest Bishoppe cur∣red and came in with bloud of a redde young Oxe, and washed and cleansed that holye place, that is called Sancta sancturum. And therefore it was cal∣led Dies expiacionis, the daye of clean∣sing: The same daye the people fasted, for theyr trespasse that was done in worshipping of the Calfe in desart. And therefore it was called Dies afflictio∣nis, the daye of punishing. And that day was called Dies propiciationis, the daie of mercye and forgiuenesse. For in such a daye they hearde tell that our Lorde was pleased, and hadde forgiuen them the trespasse of worshipping the Calfe. Of Encenia. Chap. 34. ENcenia is the dedication and hal∣lowing of a new Temple: for Co∣mon in Greek, is new in English. The Iewes hallowed this solempnitye in di∣uerse times of the yeare, at the Tem∣ple was new builded, or else new ap∣parelled in diuerse times: as it is read that Iudas Machabeus hallowed and renewed the Temple.  Ma∣rhab. 4. FINIS LIBRI NONI. ¶INCIPIT LIBER DECIMVS. DE MATERIA ET FORMA. THE foresayd treatise en∣ded of the propertyes of time, and of the partes thereof. Nowe wée shall treate of the neather and materiall creatures, of the propertyes of Elementes, and of those things that bée compounded there∣of. ¶Matter and fourme bée princi∣palles of all bodilye things, as it is sayde in libro de vnitate materie & forme. And priuation of matter and fourme is nought else but destruction of all thing: and matter contrarye to vnitye and vnlyke thereto, as it is said there. And the more subtile and highe matter is in kinde, the more able it is to receiue forme and shape. And the the more thicke and earthlye it is, and the more féeble from heauenlye kinde, the more féeble it is to receiue impressi∣on, printing of forme and of shapes, as it is sayde in libro de quinque Iub∣stontiis. And as it is sayde there, mat∣ter hath this propertye, that it taketh forme and shape, and to bée taken and helde, and is not helde. And matter is principall and beginning of distinc∣tion, and of diuersitie, and of mul∣typlyeng, and of thinges that hée
gendered: as it is said in Septimo Meta∣phisice. For thing that gendereth, and thing yt is gendered be not diuerse but touching matter. And therefore where a thing is gendered without matter, the thing that gendereth, and the thing that is gendered, be all one in substaunce and in kinde. As it fareth of the persons in the trinitie. For matter is caused of two, dealing and departing a twaine of singu∣lar things, as Aristotle sayth 4. Me∣taphisice: the departing and dealing of speciall in singular things is by matter, and not by forme, as it is sayde. 10. Me∣taphisice: and so in substaunce, and be∣ing vnder one fourme, is one matter, and vnder manye bée manye matters. Also proper matter proprieth to him his owne fourme. Also matter of naturall things, is matter that maye bée endlesse béeing, because of continuall quantitye and matter is subiect of continuance, & quantitie in length and breadth & déep∣nesse. Therefore accidents may not be de∣lee, but by the dealing and quantitye of his subiect. Also matter is called  for he may be dealed in endlesse many parts, for he hath appetite to endlesse manye formes and shapes: and therfore be cause that his appetites be not restrained, nei∣ther limited in certaine. And for he hath inclination to endles many formes and shapes, is called endlesse, & not that his vertue is endlesse, & not limited in cer∣tein, neither constrained as the vertue of God. And therfore Plato sayth, that mat∣ter floweth without streightning  but if fourme stint the fléeting: and therefore bodyes that haue much of the matter, and little of fourme, waxe and growe hugely, as it fareth in trées. And there∣fore bones haue title féeling: for they haue much earthy matter, as Auice saith: and in matter is hid a manner actiue might, that is a manner of vnperfect forme: and this might is commō to two contraries. Therfore when that might is brought to déedes, & hath taken shape, anone he hath appetite to be vnder a contrary shape. As this might is indifferēt to heat & to cold, when he hath indéede receiued heate, a∣none he hath appetite to receiue contra∣rye. And so no formes of things, that be corruptible and genderable, may suf∣ficiently and at full haue actiue might in matter. But that alwaye it hath ap∣petite to be fulfilled by another shape. And that fourme is not fullye, it maye not bée brought into the matter but by corruption of the sonne that is therein: then as the vertue of the thing that wor∣keth and commeth into the matter, and corrupteth and destroyeth the forme that is therein: So it exciteth the actiue forme to a contrarie forme: and giueth thereto some more perfect being, till it be vnder the most perfect being of forme. These properties and many other, matter hath, and it were to long to recken them al in a row. But looke before in li. S. de Boni∣tate mundi. Of forme. Chap. 2. OF the propertyes of matter, that bée now rehearsed, followeth the proper∣tyes of the selfe forme. And Aristotle saith, in lib. de quinque substantijs. For∣ma, is as it wer light giuing to al things fayrenesse, being, and signe and token. And forme or lyght that is shedde and commeth into matter is féeble and darke, as ye receiuing of matter asketh. And of forme is diuersitye, by the which one thing is diuerse from another, as hée sayth. And some forme is essentiall and some accidentall. Essentiall forme is that, that commeth into matter, & maketh it perfect: and accordeth therewith to the perfection of some thing. And when Forma is bad, then the thing hath his béeing. And when Forma is destroied, no∣thing of the substaunce of the thing is found: Therfore in Philosophie it is said, that Forma with matter is cause of all accidentalls. And Forma accidentalis is not the perfection of things, nor giueth, them being, as it is said, S. Metaphisice. But each forme accidentall néedeth a forme substantiall, that is cause of forme accidental: and each forme is more simple and more actuall and noble then matter. Therefore in li. de Anim. libus Aristo. saith, that forme hath it selfe as, it were a man. For it may informe many mat∣ters, as a man may bring many women
with child. And so the forme asketh, that shall bée printed in the matter, the mat∣ter ought to be disposed, and also arraied. For if fire shalbe made of matter of earth it néedeth yt the matter of earth be made subtill, and pured, and more simple. And if againewarde: then againewarde. And forme maketh matter knowne. For mat∣ter may neuer be séene nor felt but by substantiall forme & accidentall, but it be by waye of priuation: As darkenesse is seene, is seeing nothing: and silence is knowen, if no sound be heard, as Calcidi∣us saith super Pla. And the Commentor super .1. Metaphisice, saith, That matter is cause, that we sée things that be made. And so nothing is more common and generall then matter: and neuerthelesse nothing is more vnknowne then is mat∣ter: for matter is neuer seene without forme, nor forme maye not bée séene in deede, but ioyned to matter: and where∣as is more of forme, ther is lesse of mat∣ter: as it is sayd .4. Metap. And again∣ward, where more is of matter, there is lesse of forme. And the further matter is from nobility of forme, the more grose it is and vnpure, the more vnworthy & darke. And some forme is spirituall, and some corporall and bodylye. And some corporall forme is heauenly forme: and some elementall. And heauenly forme is to active, that it fulfilleth all the appetite and desire of his matter. Therefore for the presence of the forme, the which ful∣filleth and perfecteth wholy the heauen∣ly matter, the substaunce of heauen may not be destroyed nor corrupt, but rather by his forme that is most perfect in his déede, is kepte in euerlasting béeing. The elementall forme maye not fulfill so great might in his matter, nor make so perfect the appetite thereof: and there∣fore hée leaueth somewhat of his mate∣riall might of the matter not perfectlye fulfilled: wherefore alwaye elementall matter requireth newe forme. And there∣fore such bodyes bée alwaye, corruptible in might, and all indéede: and the more noble and spirituall the forme is, and the more separated and sundered from the conditions of matter: the more a∣ble he is to worke, and the more vertu∣ous: as it fareth in Angelles, whose substance hath no bring of matter, as it is sayd .3. De anima. In thinges that haue matter, is not intellect. Neuerthe∣lesse I affirme not, that Angelles haue not matter in their forme: but whether the béeing of Angells be onely compoun∣ded of spirituall matter and forme, or no. This is helde for certeine, that the substance of them in comparison to bodi∣ly things, is most simple and most actu∣all: as a spirituall forme is more ac∣tuall then a bodily forme as Albumasar sayth: and so in comparison to matter of euery medled body, the forme is more noble: and the forme of element is more noble then the forme of a medled body: and the forme of the fifte bodye, that is heauen is most noble. But in noblenesse and actualtie in déede of spirituall forme, whether it bée Angel or mans soule, pas∣seth without comparison all materiall formes: and of properties of matter and of formes, & as it longeth to this worke: this that we haue treted sufficeth for this time. Of Elements. cap. 3. AS Constantine sayth, Elements bée simple and least particle of a bodye that is compownded: & it is called least touching vs. For it is not perceiued by wittes of seeling. For it is the least parte, and last in vndoing of the bodye, as it is first in composition: and is cal∣led simple, not for that an element is sim∣ple, without any composition, but for it hath no partes that compowne it, that be diuerse in kinde and in number, as some meddeled bodies haue: as it fareth in mettalls, of the which some partes bée diuerse: For some parte is ayre, and some is earth, and so of other. But each parte of sire, is fire, and so of other. Elementum hath that name, as it were Ilementum, as Isidore sayth, of Ile: for that he hath matter of all bodyes, and as it were the first foundament: and other men meane, that hee hath that name, as it were Elementum, or Alimentum. For all bodyes be nourished, fedde, and increased, by qualityes of Elementes,
Qualities of Elements be roure: Two worke, as heate and colde: and two of them suffer, as drinesse and moysture. The accord and difference of these, bée more plainly described before in ye third booke: Looke there. Euen betwéene the qualities of elements, is contraciousnes and strife, by reason whereof they work togethers, and suffer, and ingender, and corrupt. And though the Elements bée neuer so contrarye, euery each to other: yet by influence of heauen, and vertue of Planets, they be reconciled in their doo∣ings, and brought to accord: and there∣fore they be onyd & ioyned with a won∣derfull bond in kinde. For fire and aire accord in heate, though they discorde in drinesse and moystnesse: and ayre and water accord in moysture, but they dis∣corde in heate and coldnesse. And wa∣ter and earth accord in coldnesse, though they discord in moysture and drinesse. Fire and earth that be elements in place most farre asunder, accord in drines, and discord in heate and coldnesse: for earth is substantially most colde, and fire most hot: and of the foure elements these two be most noble, & most pure of substance, and most light, that be aire and fire, and therefore they moue fromward the mid∣dle toward the roundnesse, and moue kindly vpward. And these two elements take noblenes and worthinesse touching vertue in working & substance of ye body of heauen, of yt which they receiue influ∣ence of mouablenesse and of vertue: for the vertue of heauen giueth first influ∣ence vpon the sphere and roundnesse of fire, and by and through the fire, vppon the roundnesse of the aire: and therfore these two Elementes be more high in place and stead, than other Elementes: more able to moue, more pure & cleane, and subtill, in substaunce, more cléere and bright in forme, more vertuous in wor∣king and déede And the two neather E∣lements, water & earth, be kindly more heavie than the other twaine, and moue fromward the roundnesse, towarde the middle downward, and by gathering of parts & compaction, they be sad and boy∣stous and therefore they be thicker, sad∣der, & dimmer, than the other twaine, & more materiall, & haue more of matter, than of forme: & so for sanesse from the sphere a roundnes of heauen, they bee not so obedient to the vertue of mouing of heauen as the two other elements bée. And elements be neuer idle: but be con∣tinually in doing & suffering: & so they neuer rest, nor cease off generation & mo∣uing. And though the earth rest of mo∣uing, yet it neuer resteth nor ceaseth do∣ing & working: and as they be not idle from dooing, so they bée not barren of araieng or adorning, for each Element hath his araieng & ornament. The fire hath stars, the aire hath birdes & fowles, the waier hath fishes & beasts yt swim therin, ye earth hath beasts ye moue & goe therein, as Beda saith. Of the which by helpe of God, somewhat shallbe shortly sayde. ¶Of Fire. Cap. 4. FIre is a simple body most hot & dry, as Const. saith, & hath kinde appetite to be aboue the aire: & if fire be violent∣ly holden in the aire or in the earth, it passeth little & little into softe aire, & va∣nisheth, as Isid. saith. Denis in Hierar∣chia Angelica cap. 12. teacheth the pro∣perties of fire, and saieth in this man∣ner: Fire is a sensible bodye, more ex∣cellent and subtill than all other bodely things, and is next the spirituall kinde: and thereby it is shewed, that it is most vnlike to other things. And fire is in all things, & custometh to giue it self into al things, & is not remoued out of all thinges. But yet it is priuy & hid, vnknowen, vnmeasured, vnseene, & some∣deale bodilesse: mightie to his own wor∣king, moueable, giuing it selfe some deale to all thing that commeth him nigh, and moueth all things that be partners with him, and reneweth all thing, and is war∣den of kinde, and brightneth with wrap∣ped brightnesse, he is cléere distinguish∣ing, sprankling, and leaping, feeding, and moouing vpwarde, and passing downe∣warde, sharply high, & not taking shame of decreasing, alway moueable, taking, & chaunging, comming againe into it selfe and working mightely.
These words of the holye man Denis, are most darke and mistike, and descri∣ueth fire touching his substaunce, vertue, and working: and for declaration of the foresayd words we shall shortly reherse the words of the Commentour vppon the same place. For among all elements, fire hath the highest place, and that for he hath most light kinde, and therefore he is called high, for he wāting weight, séeketh and desireth the high place: and is aboue all other elements. And except fire, all that is bodelye, is kindlye vnder fire, among all Elements, fire hath the most pure and subtill kinde: and there∣fore he is called some deale bodilesse, for by reason of subtilnesse of his substance, it is not séene without subiect matter. Therefore it séemeth, that fire is most nigh to spirituall kinde: for some deale it séemeth, that fire is middle and meane betwéene séene things and vnséene. In∣asmuch as he nigheth to nether thinges, he is bodilesse: and inasmuch as he nigh∣eth to the ouer parts, he is bodelye. Also he hath kinde more actual & more strong in working, than other Elements, and therefore he is called vnmesured, for his vertue and working increaseth without ende: For if matter that fire worketh in, were endlesse, as long as the matter sufficeth, fire faileth not, but worketh al∣way. Also he hath full priuie kinde, and therefore he is called hid: for in his be∣ing, he is not sensibly séene: And hée is called vnséene and vnknowen, for fire is not perceiued, without matter subiect, that is the matter that fire worketh in. Also what fire is in his beginning and substaunce, vnneth wit maye know. Also he hath vertue and kind more mo∣uable than other Elements: and there∣fore he is called mouable and mightie of all things: for in fire is the head & ver∣tue of mouing, for he moueth himselfe and other, and is not moued by thinges that be lower than he. Also he hath kind more cléere than other neather things: therefore it is sayd, that he brightneth, for he brighteneth all things with his cléerenesse, but that is with wrapped brightnesse. For bright beames of fire, shine without, but they be wrapped, for they foume againe to the priuye bosome of their owne substaunce, and bée hidde from our sight and féelyng. Also of sub∣tiltie of his substaunce, fire hath vertue more sharpe and more thirlyng than o∣ther Elementes. Therefore he is called sharplye passing, for by mouing of his owne vertue, he entreth and thirleth all things without resistaunce and let: and so fire hath vertue to make himselfe and other things knowen and séene, and to make difference and distinction. For in shewing of himselfe, he sheweth other things that be present, and presenteth co∣lours, figures and shapes to them to the eyen, and therefore he is called cléere, & openly discréete and distinguished. Also fire hath vertue to drawe nether things to the other, for the matter in which fire worketh, fire maketh stretch, & maketh it thin, and departeth it, and draweth it vpward by vyolence of his heate: ther∣fore he is called feeding beneath, & draw∣ing vpward. Also fire hath vertue of re∣newing: for all things were aged, and olde, and fayle, if they be not kept & sa∣ued by vertue of fire, as it fareth in old men, in whome kinde heate fayleth. And he is called renewer of all things, & war∣den of kinde: For without vertue of fire may no vertue of bodely kinde, en∣dure nor abide. Also he hath vertue of chaunging: For hée ouercommeth all things, that he worketh in, and chaun∣geth it, and tourneth it into his owne kinde. And therefore hée is called receiuing, and taking, and chaunging: for the matter in which he worketh, hée receiueth and taketh, & forfaiteth it not, but wasteth it, and tourneth it to his owne lykenesse. And fire receiueth and taketh, and is not receiued nor taken: for when that thing is which he work∣eth is spent and wasted, he withdraw∣eth, and leapeth and turneth againe: and therefore he is called leaping, and tour∣ning againe. Also he hath vertue and kinde to commune and to spred himselfe without dimunition and decreasing. And therfore it is said, that he taketh not, nei∣ther receiueth despite nor villany of mi∣nishing and decreasing: for as fire in∣creaseth not, when he burneth outward,
so when he is receiued, he minisheth oot nor taketh worship, in that it séemeth, that he increaseth and wareth: nor a∣lanie in that he séemeth lesse, and decrea∣seth. Also fire hath: vertue and kinde of purging and of cleansing: for fire purg∣eth and cleanseth off sinder and rushe: & amendeth mettall, yt he may not wast Also he hath vertue to chaunge sauours and humoures, and therefore he seetheth and defieth in the body, humours, & was steth superfluities, that be therein; & ma∣keth them ofte sauourie and wholesome: Also he hath vertue for to shed and spred his substaunce into the substance of all meddeled bodies, for in all things, hée is closed and vnséene, though he cannot bée séene indéede closed in all things: & this is knowen, for of froting and smiting of hard bodies together, fire commeth, and is smitten out of bodyes, in whome men déemed no fire to be. Also fire, by his substantiall subtilnesse, hath vertue to ioyne and vnite himselfe to other bo∣dies, as it fareth in fire hot yron, and in burning coales full of flame, and in other such: in the which all the partes of fire be ioyned to all the partes of yron, & to all the parties of coales, that it woulde séeme one substaunce, and the sensible di∣stance of the other, is perceiued nothing at all. Therefore Philosophers define thrée manner of kindes of fire: for fire is light, and fire is flame, & fire is coale, Fire is in his owne sphere, light: but fire is called flame, in airy matter: and in earthly substaunce and troubly, & boy∣stous matter, fire is called coale. Fire hath these properties and many o∣ther. Socke before li. 2. in tractatis de or∣dine Seraphin, and li. 3. in tract de qua∣litatibus element. ca. 3. of heate: and this that is now spoken, is sufficient for this time. ¶Of flame. Cap. 5. FLame is a firie matter spread in ay∣rie substaunce. For aire of subtilnes of his substance, & mediamly néerenesse the which it hath with ye sphere of fire. it is light fired, and chaunged into fierie nature: and as the substaunce of aire is more pare, so the flame is more lyght & cleare, and séemeth more lyke to kinde of lyght. And he oueth kindly vpwarde, and stretcheth from euerye parte of the thing that is kindered, and commeth by by  into a sharpe shape, as it were into the shape of the poynt of a toppe, or of a sphere, and is shapen in the end as a Pine apple; & so in his poynt & sharpe ende he pinteth therein the working of his heate full strongly. And therefore in the most innermost point of his shape, that in a top wise, he is most hot, & set∣eth on fire, and burneth soone, matter that he toucheth: and he is coale red, after as the matter that he worketh in, is disposed: and so if the matter be trou∣bly,If the fire be thicke vvith smoke. he giueth him and darke lyght: and again ward, if the matter be pure & cléere he shineth and giueth bright beames all about. Flame: lighteneth darke things, and sheweth things that he hid, and ma∣keth them knowen, & sheweth the way to wayfaring men, and the perilles of wayes: for by reason of his lightnesse, and mouablenesse of the airie matter, in the which flame worketh, he is in con∣tinuall mouing, and resteth neuer. A full little puffing of winde, kindleth and stir∣reth vp flame: and if the puffe be too strong, it sheddeth and quencheth flame. Alwaye flame purteth the ayre not vp∣ryght, but a manner winding about. Therefore be mooueth round about, and kindeleth things that he toucheth, do de Marcianus sayth. Therefore Volcanus was lame,Vulcan is termed to be Iupi∣ters smith & is also take a forfite. when Iuno had throwen him to the grounde, as faining of Poets means. By violence of his meaning staine smileth together parts of the matter, that he worketh in, and maketh noyse and downe; by smiting and beting togethers of the parts. Flame busieth to moue vp∣ward, & draweth from the neather parts, vpward, to the which he is incorporate. ¶Of smoke. Cap. 6. SMoke is a vapour dissolued and de∣parted by vertue of heate, out of the most subtill partes and humoures of matter: and hath heauie parts med∣deled with lyght partes, of whome hée
taketh darknesse and luteh. And there∣fore he maketh the aire blacke, and tur∣neth it into smoakie kinde: and smoke of the thicknesse of his matter; taketh bitternesse. And by the sharpnesse there∣of, he grieueth eyen, aside aheth them drop out scares, and griueth the sight notably, and pearceth and commeth in by his sharpnesse, to the braine, and grie∣ueth the spirite of féeling; and kindly spi∣rite also. And therefore in Animali∣um it is sayd, that smoke of the snuffe of a candle, grieueth females that goe with childe: insomuch that if a Marc in tra∣uayle of foalyng smelleth such a smoke, she shall soale a dead, cole. Also smoke is enemie to Bées, and grieueth Faw∣cons and other wales of praye. Also smoke dyeth soone after that he riseth, as the Glose sayth: vpon is the worde, Si∣cud virgolae fumi: for it moueth swifte∣ly vpward, and passeth awaye, and vani∣sheth hastely or sodainlye. Smoke comm∣eth of fire, and is séene ere the fire bée séene, and is moued with the winde, and disparpled, and diuersly borne about. Al∣so smoake sheweth out of what part the winde bloweth: for smoake is mooued thetherward as the winde bloweth it, as Gregory sayth. Smoke maketh the hou∣ses blacke, and infecteth them; and nou∣risheth, and gendreth soote in the roofe, & in the walls. Smoke draweth to cor∣ners and places, and printeth therein; & abideth also for a token of infection. Al∣so smoke that is resolued, and commeth of swéete smelling spicerie, pleaseth, the swit of smelling, and is good for ye braine: for it comforteth the spirits of the brest, and of the heart, & restoreth the head, and straineth and bindeth noyous run∣ning of rume, and dryeth and consumeth and wasteth and straineth such; nl running and openeth pores that be stop∣ped, and pearceth and commeth inward to comfort the sinewes, and driueth a∣way Adders and Serpents, & and other venemous beasts that créepe. For Ad∣uersarie Serpents hate all smoke: and namely smoke of good smelling, as Gre∣goryCalled & fumositie of & brain hoyling from the stomach to the head, or euapora∣tion. saith. Also smoke that is cese hardene commeth of meate and of drinke,  Strength of heat commeth vp to ye braine, and stoppeth the sinewes of séelyng, and bréedeth sléepe, & bindeth the vtter wits of séelyng: and to gathereth kinde heate inward, and comforteth and helpeth the vertue in the inner partes. And if the smoke be Melancholike, or too sharp and iting, or venemous, and resolued, and nueth of meate or of drinke, or of oy∣full medicine, is passeth vp to the braine, and grieueth the vertue of féeling, and bréedeth dread and feare, as it fareth in Melancholike men: and awaketh fren∣sie: and woodnesse, as it doeth in them that haue Litargie, sléeping euill. Also he withdraweth wit & vse of reson, as it doth in Epitentes, that haue the fallyng euill, and bringeth in many other euill passions and oyfull to the bodye. Also in sake that is drawen vp out of ye earth or out of the sea by vertue of heate, in∣fecteth the aire, and maketh it thicke, & bréedeth clowdes and myste, and is mat∣ter of winde and of emness, and of other passions of the ayre, and withdraweth from vs the Sunne beames in the ayre, and maketh them dimme. This that is sayde of smoake is sufficient for this time. ¶Of a cole. Cap. 7. A Cole is re incorporate indéede, and ioyned to earthie matter, as Gregory saith: and so are by his incorporation and ioyning to greater and thicker parts of earthy matter and medled therewith, is held beneth by a certaine violence of kinde. And so as fire in flame moueth vpward, so in a cole it falleth and mo∣ueth downward by heauinesse of mat∣ter, Also when a cole is set on fire, it turneth into rednesse, & when it is quen∣ched, it is wrapped in blacknesse, and lée∣seth all the first fairnesse and lykenes of fire: and the fairer it was by his first ioyning to the fire, the more vnséemelye he séemeth, & the more vnlyke in quen∣ching of the fire. And in a cole substan∣ciall moysture is all wasted, and therfore it is soone broken and brused, when the humour that hath cause of ioyning  parts is all wasted by violence of fire. And therefore in a coale, that is quen∣ched
one part is soone broken from ano∣ther: For in his substaunce is nothing founde of moysture, by the which the parts cleaue, and were there held toge∣ther, as Gregory saith, when onely the earthly parts leuen and abide by mastry of drinesse, is oft soone set on fire: but af∣ter yt he is kinled he is as soone quēched, or sooner, so that therin is nothing found nor séene of fire, and that is because of the blacknesse. By his blacknesse a coale defileth and smotcheth, and berayeth all thing that he toucheth. Also fire of a cole hath most sharpe fire, and most mightie in working in thirling and in percing; Therefore by his sharpnesse coale sou∣dreth yron, and desolueth and slaketh the parts thereof, and maketh it soft. Also with his sharpnesse, coale grieueth the head, and coale raked in ashes, hold∣eth and kéepeth aire, and cole vncouered and set in colde aire, falleth into multi∣tude of ashes, and sodainly vanisheth a∣waye by it selfe, as Gregory sayth. And ire of a cole burneth and grieueth the soales of the féete, that tread thereon. Cole quēched, through if grieue not with burning, him that treadeth thereon, it maketh crushing and great noyle. ¶Of a sparkle. Cap. 8. A Sparkle is a lyttle particular of fire, broke of fierie matter, by vertue and réese of fire, that departeth it. Therefore the mouing of sparckles is sodaine mo∣uing: for it is sodainly departed & dea∣led, and moued vpward, but by heauines of the earthie matter, it falleth to ye mid∣dle downward, at last. Also for ye mouing thereof is cléere and bright as a starre, by shedding of fire, and sparcklyng in the earth, it séemeth gréene with beames of light: and therfore the mouing ther∣of, is as the mouing of fire worketh and is vertuous. For of a lyttle sparckle in a heape of towe or of tinder, commeth sodainly a great fire. By chaunging of aire, sparkles vanish sodainly & be quen∣ched, and abideth nothing of them but ashes. By temperate blast of wind, spar∣kles he kindled, and quenched by strong blast, and thirleth the ayre by putting: but in thirling ye aire, it changeth & soin∣deale altereth it: the stronger the fire is, the mouing of sparkles and swiftnesse is yt more. Of gréene matter & of moist, commeth great sparckles and strong, thirling and pearcing in the toing and working: but they be fewe, & not right many in number. ¶Of ashes called Fauilla. Chap. 9. AShes be called Fauilla, and haue that name of Fouendo, nourishing & kéep∣ing, for they kéepe fire and couer it, and Cinis is little ashes left of quenching of sparkling matter, as Isid. saith, & Fauilla is small ashes, pale & dry, & light in the vtter part of a firie coale cleauing ther∣to, and dimmeth the shining therof, and slaketh and abateth the strength and the feruentnesse of the coale, and it is spark∣led with a little puffe and blast of wind: & when it is sparkled, dreth it is euer af∣ter gathered again, as Gregory saith. It is soone set on fire and on flame; but for default of féeding, it is sodainly quench∣ed: also fixie embers is rauishing of wind: & when it is quenched, it moueth down¦ward by his own weight: for it moueth downward by his owne mouing and is born vpward, by ye force of other things. ¶Of ashes called Cinis. Cap. 10. AShes be called Cinis, & hath ye name of Cadendo, falling; for it falleth & is gēdred & resolued of substance of earthy matter by strength of heat, as Isid. saith: & ashes be lost & of vnworthy colour, of bitter and sharp biting sauor, & haue full little & small partes, yt be soone scattered with a little blast. Also ashes haue vertue of cleansing: therfore it is good & helpeth to washing of clothes. Also it hath ver∣tue of gnawing, & biting, & of drieng, as Con. saith. Also if ashes be hot, it kéepeth & saueth fire that is rated therin, & if it be cold, it quencheth & destroieth fire, that is raked therin, also by great blowing & violence of fire, ashes changeth his viles obscure shape somtime into the lykenes of glasse, and into firie likenesse & cléere.
For of the matter of ashes, glasse is made, as Gregory saith. And ashes hath this default & imperfection, that though he be euery daye aoysed and wet, and sprong with raine, yet he is alway bar∣ren. And so the earth, that ashes touch∣eth, it maketh not plentrous: but if the earth be barren, ashes maketh it more barren, and more vile and vnséemely in all things. FINIS LIBRI DECIMI. ¶INCIPIT LIBER VNDECIMVS. DE AERE ET EIVS IMPRESSIONIBVS. AYre hath that name, for he bea∣reth the fire, and is borne of the water, as Isidore saith. And some of the aire per∣taineth to the er∣thy parte, & some to heauenly kinde, as Beda saith: for the ouer part of the aire, is pure & cleane, cléere, easie and softe: For mouing of stormes of winde and of weather, may not reach thereto: and so it pertaineth to heauenly kinde. And the neather part is nigh to the sphere of water & of earth, and is troubly, great and thick, compact of moyst and earthy vapours and cor∣pulent, longeth to earthy parties. And this parte of aire bringeth foorth of it selfe diuers kindes of things. For as I∣sidore saith, aire strongly moued, maketh windes, lightning, and thundring: draw∣ing together it maketh cloudes, thicke, and rainy: and when it is congealed, it maketh snow and hayle: and when it is disparckled, it is cléer weather, as I∣sidore saith, and Beda also, & hath more thicknesse and cléerenesse than other E∣lements. And Constantine sayth, That aire is a simple Element, substauncially moyst and hot, by his owne kinde and substaunce. He is moyst, and by kinde, of the roundnes and sphere, that nigheth thereto, it is hot, and therfore by proper∣tie of either qualitie, the aire stretcheth kindly all about, from the ouer parte of earth and water, is the sphere of fire. And by subtiltie of his substaunce and thinnesse, aire is cléere and bright: and so because of his cléerenesse, he receiueth influence of the vertue of heauen, and impression and printing of the lyght of the sunne, and are giueth breathe to all men and beasts, and is breathing of all men and beastes, and proper dwellyng place of fowles and birdes, and he crea∣ture with soule, may lye and: ene without aire. And because of his sub∣stanciall lightnesse, aire is kindly moua∣ble and also chaungeable, and maye bée turned into contrary qualities. Therfore ofte times he is chaunged by vapoure of the earth and of the sea; for if the a∣pour stinke, and is srape and veno∣mous, the aire is corrupted and inceted, to the which, such pestilentiall vapor is meddeled.  if smoke be resolued and commeth of pure substaunce and cleane, and is of y uou and smell, by in∣corporation and medlyng with such a swéete smoke, the aire receiueth and ta∣keth a qualitie that is friendly to kinde. Also the aire that beclippeth be, is to be most pecable and necessary, for néed of breth, and also for continuall fostring and nourishing of the spirituall lyfe. And if the aire be cléere, bright & cleane, then the humours and spirites shall be cleere and bright: & if it be troubly and mystic, humours shall be troublous and spirites shal be great and thicke and in∣fected, as Constantine saith, and Phila∣redus also.
And so the aire is the Element of bo∣dies and of spirits, for venting of aire, comming to spirits, is cause of amende∣ment of them, and of cleansing, and of purgation, and of swaging and letting humours, that they be not burned. For aire receiued and drawen by the lungs to the heart, and by the heart to all the body, giueth temperance therto: and so the aire transposeth and changeth most the body: for he passeth to ye inner parts, and the spirites, and is meddeled with the substaunce of them, which giue lyfe to the body. And so if that the ayre bee pure, and meane in his qualities, & tem∣perate, it profiteth most to kéeping and sauing of life: and if it be corrupt and distempered, then aire grieueth most the body and corrupteth it, as Constantine saith. And the farther aire is from the earth and the néerer heauen, the more cleane and pure it is, and the more like to the cleannesse of heauen: and the nee∣rer it is to the earth, the more colde and fat, and the more lyke to the qualytie of the earth it is. And so of vapours, that be drawen from the earth, into the inner parts of the ayre, diuers and contrarye things be gathered in the ayre: and the more great and thicke the ayre is, the more strongly the Sunne printeth ther∣in heate of his beames, by rebounding and smiting togethers, and breaking of beames of the Sunne And of rebound∣ing of the Sunne beames in moyst aire and thicke, diuers coulours be gendered therein, as it is sayde, lib. 3. Meth. as it doth in the rayne bowe, and other such impressions. And thicknesse of aire com∣meth of thrée manner causes: Of va∣poures that meddle their earthie and greater parts with ayre: or of coldnes, that fréeseth the colde parts of the ayre: or of generation of new aire, taking in it selfe medling thereof, and by putting it to the first aire, the aire is made thick, as the Philosopher saith. And thicknes & subtilnes of aire, commeth of contrarye cause: of wasting of vapours that come vp of strong heate, that make the ayre thinne and cléere: of generation and fi∣rie partes that be gendred of parts of the aire, by ye least thinnesse of his moy∣sture, made by certaine working: and by strength of heate, the aire is turned into firie kinde. The substance thereof & qua∣litie of aire, chaungeth in many manner wise, as he saith, and first by nighnesse to the sunne, or by vertues of the sunne: for the aire is made hot, when the Sun nigheth to vs ward, as he is made cold, when he passeth farre from vs. Also by chaunging of rising and downe going of starres: for starres, as well Planets as other, be cause, why the aire changeth in his qualyties. For when the Sunne is with a starre, that breedeth cold, as with Saturnus, in a colde signe, then is bredde strong colde in the aire: and if the Sun be with an hot planet, as with Mars, he is cause of passing heate in the aire. And so it is to be vnderstoode and perceiued of other. Also chaunging of aire com∣meth of diuers disposition place & stead of the earth, for in the North side, ayre is colde and drye, the South winde is hot and moyst, the Westerne winde is colde and moyst, the East winde is hot & drye. Also of highnesse and lownesse of the earth: for in mountaines and hilles the ayre is colde, and in valleyes hot: & Const. telleth the cause thereof in Pan∣tegni, & saith, that the Northerne winde commeth out of a high place, from a high circle, and so he passeth freelye and with∣out impediment, and commeth to his place, and stirreth & moueth airy things, and maketh them subtill, & so maketh them colde: for all subtill things, while they be high, by mouing be made colde: and in valleyes and lowe places, ayre abideth and resteth, and so is hot. But Mcrobius telleth and sheweth another reason, and sayth, that this commeth of gendring of beames of lyght, which are multiplyed in valleyes: and for thicke∣nesse of vapours, that be thicker in val∣leyes than in mountaines & hilles: and therefore snow melteth sooner in vallies than on hills, for in valleyes more heale is gendered of the Sunne beames, than on Mountaines. And this accordeth with Aristotle. 1. lib. Met. cap. 4. where he saith that multiplication of lyght beames comming to the earth, as to the middle poynt, is cause of this heate.
And also such rebounding and gathe∣ring of lyght beames in sharpenesse of corners, and also abiding is cause there∣of. Also chaunging of ayre, commeth of nighnesse of the sea: for nigh the North sea, the aire is colde and drye, by colde vapor and dry, that commeth of the sea: for there heate is féebled, and hath lyttle masterie, and therefore the North sea is but little salt, and the Sea that is called Ponticum is as it were frost. The con∣trary is the South sea, for the cause is contrarye. Also chaunging of the ayre commeth of nighnesse of carrion, or of marryse, for by corruption thereof, the aire is infect and rotted, and made pesti∣lentiall: and this rotted infection of aire commeth oft in the ende of summer and of haruest, for then by his owne kinde, the aire is thin and cleane, and therefore it is the more chaungeable. Therefore such corruption falleth therein by med∣deling of euill fumositie, that commeth vp of the rottingnesse of carrion and of marryse or of other corrupt things, as Ioh. sayth. Therefore this that is sayd of the ayre in generall, sufficeth at this time. ¶Of fire parpendicular. Cap. 1. NOW we must speake of impressi∣ons, that be gendred in the aire: and first of the impressions that be gendered and come of hot vapour and dry, as the impression that is called, Ignis perpen∣dicularis. That impression is sometime seene in the ayre, and seemeth fire: and is nought els but impression gendred of hot vapour and drye, that is drawen vp in the first part of the aire with breadth in the neather part, and length in the o∣uer parte, with figure and shape of a flame, shaped as a shielde, and kindeled by fire and mouing of heauen. The se∣conde is called Ignis longus, long fire, and is impression gendered of hotte va∣pour and drye, in the ouermost parte of the ayre without breadth openlye kno∣wen, in comparison to his length, and is set on fire and flame, by mouing of the firmament, and by vertue of fire, & this impression is called, a Dragon spowt∣ing fire. The third impression is named Candela, and is gendred of hot vapour and drye, in the ouer parte of the aire, with little length and bredth euen lyke much: but for because of fire, and mo∣uing of heuen, it séemeth round in shape, burning as flame. The fourth impres∣sion Aristotle calleth Aslub, and is double: one moouing vpward, and ano∣ther downwarde. And this impression is gendered of subtill vapour, hot and drye, in the ouermost part of the ayre, with great length and breadth, and pro∣portioned togethers when it is strongly set on flame and heated by fire, and by mouing of the firmament, then it moo∣ueth vpward for subtilnesse of matter, and for strength of burning flame. Ano∣ther impression is called Aslub descen∣dens & is gendered of hot vapour, dry, and thicke, with euenly length & bredth, & is gendred in ye ouer part of ye middle region of the aire, and is set in burning flame by fire and by mouing of heauen, and moueth downward, because of cold that is there about, and because of hea∣uinesse of great matter and thicke, as A∣ristotle saith. These be impressions, that the people wéene to be starres, that fall by night downe from heauen, and flye vpward to heauen. (Additiō. As concerning the wonderful ope∣rations of fire, it is reported off in holy scripture, that Sidrach, Misach, and A∣bednagon, being cast into the hot bur∣ning Ouen, the fire did them no harme, and yet it vsed his owne kinde, to burne vp the formentors. It also consumed the sacrifice of the prophet Elias, against the mallice of the false Prophets of aal. It consumed the Captaines ouer fifties at the voyce of Eliah. The Lorde God appearing to Moses, was seene in a bush of fire, and yet the bush not burnt. Poli∣derus Virgilius, in his eyght booke of the Histories of Englande, maketh mention of Emma, mother of Edwarde, the seconde King of Englande, béeing vnusllye accused by Goodwyn, which after manye attempted iniuryes, cea∣sed not to accuse hir of adulterye, with the Bishop of Winchester, the King there-with greatlye disquieted:
the Queene to open view cast hir selfe into a great fire, before hir entrance ther in, cried with a lowde voyce, that these burning flames might consume hir bo∣dy, if she were culpable of the faultes, whereof she was wrongfullye accused: and hauing ended this talke, she passed through the fire, in good safetie, so the great astonishing of the King and be∣holders. Guendolena, as Gratianus in his Chronicle reporteth, ye wife of Hen∣ry the 15. Emperour of ye Almaines, try∣ed hir accusation in like sort. It is also written of Policarpus, whome the Ro∣mane Emperour Verus, persecuted, with other Martirs. He being cast into the fire, the fire vanished away, & when those wicked tirants could not preuaile by fire, they slew those holy people with swords and weapons, whose bloud cry∣eth vengeance for such tiranny. Manye hidden vertues are in fire, and wonder∣full operations, it bréedeth kindly heate in bodies: it is the Nurse of lyfe: it ap∣peareth airie in the Sunne, from the Sun, in Comets: it kindleth in hearbs, plantes, mettalls, wormes, fishes, and stones. ¶Of Windes in generall. Cap. 2. THere be other impressions ingende∣red of drye vapour, as winde, the which (as Aristotle saith) is mouing of drinesse of vapour, drawen vp from the middle of the earth with ayre, and incor∣porate in the aire with some heauenlye vertue. And so (as Beda saith) winde is nought els but aire moued and shuffed about, of fumosities and smoakes, that come vp from the earth, and shoueth & putteth the ayre, winde is gendered, as he saith. But in Topicis, Aristotle re∣priueth this description: for a thing that is described is not generallye shewed of his description: For not euery ayre that is moued, is winde. It needeth that there be full strong shouing and putting, and that a great deale of the aire be put and shufte long time, els it is no winde. Therefore Constan. defineth the winde in this manner: Winde is cold vapor and drye, resolued and departed out of the earth and of the water, by heate and by his incorporation, putting and oo∣uing the aire strongly. Other men put, that the cause of winde is clowdes that be in the aire, and moue and thrust with their heauinesse and waight, & shooueth hether and thether, and of such mouing, and putting, and shaking of clowdes, commeth winde. And other tell, that winde is gendred of beating together of armes of the Sea in foure parts of the land. For if the South arme of ye Sea beateth and striueth in the North, then the sea moueth Eastward: and by the mouing thereof, aire is moued, and ther∣of commeth a winde, that is called Sub∣solanus, the Southeast wind. And when he beateth and striueth in the west: then commeth a winde, that is called Zephi∣rus, the west wind: & againward. And if the East arme and the west arme beate and striue in the South, then commeth a winde, that is called Auster. If it be in the North, there commeth a winde na∣med Boreas. Of other middle ebbing & flowing of the sea, they say, side windes be gendred. And yet other men tell (as Beda saith) that out of dens of the earth, commeth wind in this manner, for aire is of slipperie kinde, and therefore he en∣treth and commeth into dennes of the earth, and passeth out thereof, and when any part inforeeth to come in, h̄ is stuf∣fing & strife, & the aire is moued & ther∣of commeth wind, & therfore Elia regio is called the kingdome of windes, for it is a countrie full of dens vnder ye earth. And Aristotle alloweth the first reason of generation of windes in . Metheo∣rum. There he saith, that there be two kindes of vapours, that be draen by heate vp from the earth. The one is moyst, and is matter of raine & of wa∣ters, as it is either more or lesse thinne. The other vapour is drye, and is matter of all windes. And whereof soeuer it be, that wind is gendred, this I know, that winde is mouable, and not resting, but shufting in the aire, and maketh therin mouing and shufting. Also winde ma∣keth tempests, and stormes in the sea, and in the ayre. And also winde, that is moderate & not contrarious to ship∣men,
leadeth and speedeth them in theyr wayes: and againeward. If winde bee contrarious and vnmoderate, then hee bringeth perill and dread, and tarryeth and letteth both way and speed. Also by his subtilnesse and violence, winde per∣ceth and commeth into the inner partes of the sea, and reareth vp great tempests and great waues in the sea, and stretch∣eth them, and maketh them spred into contrary countries and parts. Also for the North winde is colde and drye, it purgeth and cleanseth raine, and driueth away clowdes and mistes, and bringeth in cléerenesse and faire wether: and a∣gainward, for the South winde is hot & moyst, it doth the contrary deedes: For it maketh the aire thicke and troubly, & bréedeth darknesse, as Beda sayeth. Also when the winde findeth resisting and let, then he sheweth his might the stronger: and then he sheweth most his strength and violence: for then he throweth down houses and trees, that withstandeth him, and ouerthroweth them, and therfore it is called Venius, as Isidore sayth, for it is mightie and vyolent: for his might and strength is so much, that not onely he breaketh vp stones, and renteth vp trees: but also he disturbleth heauen and earth, and maketh great tempest in the sea, as he sayth. Also winde clenseth su∣perfluities of humours, and wipeth off slippernesse and vncleannesse: for wayes that be made slipper and fowle with great raines, be made cleane and fayre by blowing of winde. Also a temperate blast of winde quickneth and kindeleth fire and flame: and if the blaste bee too swifte & too strong: it quencheth both fire and flame Also in his arising, winde is vnseene and hid: but by gathering of parts of vapours that be gathered, some and some in the earth, winde wexeth more and more, and sheweth it selfe. And therefore in libro Meth. it is said, that windes be feeble, when they arise of the earth, and strong afterwardes by multitude of vapors, that be therafter ga∣thered in great multitude in the ayre. Also winde moueth a slonte, and a∣bout: for vapour that commeth first vp∣ward, blencheth afterwarde, and moo∣ueth rounde about in a Circle of the earth: and therfore his mouing passeth aslonte or rounde about. Also a strong blast of winde, beareth vp strawe, and small chaffe, and sparckleth powder and ashes, and bloweth and stretcheth blad∣ders by entring into them. Also winde entreth and commeth into the hollow∣nesse & parts of the earth, in the which be many hoales, and winde gendereth earth shaking, when it is cloased in the hollownesse of the earth. For then it is shaken and shuft, and put in the wombe of the earth, and thereof commeth earth shaking, as Aristotle sayth. For winde openeth holes both of earth, & of beasts bodyes, & commeth into the inner parts of the earth by subtilnesse of his owne substaunce, and entereth, and is cloased therin. Also winde commeth into watry parties, and maketh water arise in the ouer part with some thervpon. Also the winde maketh the ouer parte of water, holly and vneuen. For water should be euen & plaine aboue, if it moued not by blast, shouing, and putting of winde, as Isidore saith. Also windie vapor, that is resolued by strength of heat, out of meat and of drinke or of other humors, bree∣deth in bodyes many passions and euils. For if such a winde be closed in the sto∣macke or the inner partes of the guts, it bréedeth gnawing full grieuous, and many other euil passions and sicknesses, as Dropsie, Gowte, and such manner euills. Also in the eares winde maketh whistling, whorling, and ringing. And so winde letteth and infecteth the spirite & wit of hearing. ¶Of winde orientall, and Subso∣lane. Cap. 3. WIndes be twelue, foure of them, are called Cardinales, chife winde, and eight Collaterals, side windes. And the first of Cardinall Windes, is called Subsolanus, as some men meane. But among other men, it is called Eu∣rus, the East winde, that ariseth in the East vnder the Circle, that is called, Paraellelus Equinoctialis: and some∣time there is great patting and sho∣uing
of aire, that commeth of passing beating of earth and water into airie matter: and thereof commeth a winde, that is called Subsolanus, the East wind: for it ariseth and commeth forth vnder the Sunne, for it commeth foorth vnder the circle that is called Toerida Zona, vnder whom the sunne moueth alwaye. This winde hath two windes Collate∣ralle that is to wit Volurnus, that is the North East winde. And toward the South, a winde that is called Eurus, that is the Southeast winde, and be in this verse. Sune Subsolanus, Vulturnus, & Eurus coy, That is to vnderstand, that these three windes, be East windes, and these windes be hot and drye: hot, for they bidelong vnder the Sunne, & drye, far ye East sea is full far from vs. Ther∣fore ere the East winde can come to vs, if he hath moist humour, it is cleane wa∣sted away by heate of the Sunne: and the euen East winde is emperate in heate  when at turneth in the East Northeast wind, then it drieth of things: and when it tourneth into East South∣east winde, then he gendreth clowdes. And (as Constantine saith) East windes be wholsome in the beginning of ye day for they come of aire that is subtill and temperate: For as he saith, the ayre of East lands & countries is cleere & pure, & also dry and temperate betwéene cold and moyst. Therefore such a winde ma∣keth waters cleere and of good sauour. Therefore East windes keepe and saue bodies in health, for temperatenesse of their qualities: and also for in East landes and countries is more plentie of fruites and flowers, than in the Northe and in the West countryes. Also diuers requies that conne Eastward, and ca∣ter into the East sea be better and more wholsome & cléere than other. For by meeting of East windes, and by beating & rebounding of the Sun in his arising, waters be made cléere and cleane. The second Cardinall and chiefe wind is Fa∣nomus, the West winde, and ariseth in the West ouer ye circle yt is called Pa∣rallelas Equinoctialis, of euennesse of day and night. And this winde hath be∣side him two windes, the one is called Circius, the West Northwest wind, the other is called Zephirus, ye west South∣west winde, and be contamed in this verse: Circius occalo Zepo Fa∣nomus slot, That is to vnderstande, these thrée windes blow out of the west. And the West winde is called Pm∣us: for he nourisheth and feedeth things that be gendred as Isidore sayth, or he resolueth and vnbindeth winter,  brin∣geth forth grasse, hearbes, and tures. And this west winde is temperath cold and moyst: colde, for the sunne abideth but a little while in the west, & it com∣meth to vs, before it taketh heate of the snne beames: and so western windes be most wholsome & temperate in the ende of the day, for then the sun is in ye west, and purifieth and cleanseth the windes: For west countries and lands, haue not and perfectly temperate in heate and hu∣mor. Therefore their waters be chaun∣gable and troublous, for because that in the beginning of the day, they be not di∣gested by the sunne beames. For in the beginning of the day, in the East lands, windes be very colde, and hot at euen, as Const. saith. The third Cardinall & chiefe winde is Affer, the Southerne winde: and he ariseth vnder the South stare, that is called Polus Aniticus, by the same cause as did the first wind. And this winde hath two windes beside him: that one is Eastward, and is cal∣led Nothus, the Southeast winde: and the other is Westward, and is called Affrics, the South Southeast winde: which be contained in this verse: Ar∣die medio, Nothus haeirt & Affricus Austro. The meaning héereof is yt these thrée windes blow out of the South: & the South winde is called Ausser, & hée hath ye name of Hauiendo, drawing, for he draweth by waters. And this Sou∣therne winde is hot and moyst and ma∣keth lightning and grose aire and thick, and norisheth myst with heate, & be ope∣neth pores, and multiplieth and bringeth forth much raine with his moisture, as Isid. saith he bréedeth tempest in ye sea. for he bloweth vpwarde, as Beda saith. Also he openeth the pores of bodyes, and letteth vertue of feelyng, and maketh
heauinesse of bodie, as Ipocras sayth. Southerne windes (he saith) gréeue the hearing, & be dim, and they greeue heads, & be slow, and also vnbinding. For Sou∣therne winds vnbind humours, & moue them out of the inner parts outwarde, & they cause heuinesse of wits & of feeling: they corrupt and destroye, they heat, and maketh men fall into sicknesse. And they bréed the gout, the falling euill, itch, and the ague. Also the Southern wind riseth in a circle and place nigh the star that is called Polus Antarticus, & therein maye no man dwell for the coldnesse thereof. And therfore he is kindly cold & dry, tou∣ching his owne arising, as the North winde that bloweth out of the contrary line, that is called Axis. But when the Southern wind passeth by Torrida Zo∣na, which is hot, there he taketh heate. And for yt he cōmeth toward the South, wher is more plenty of waters, & places full of vapours & of dew:ther he getteth to him moisture. And so among vs he is hot, & moist. And other while he bloweth yt the aire is ful of ye foresaid vapor, & so falleth into raine. And because he putteth & shooueth the aire out of large countrie into streight country, therfore he maketh the aire thicke, & thereof come clowdes. And for those clowdes that be betwéene vs and the Sun, the Sunne beames bée thereby dimmed, as Isidore sayth. And the Southerne winde hath many noble propertyes, for it is softe wind & maketh soft: and is hot & moist. And giueth vs raine & dew, & openeth pores of ye earth, & bringeth forth hearbes, and grasse, and séeds, & nourisheth & fedeth, and maketh them growe and spring, and reneweth the other parte of the earth, and chaun∣geth in foules and birdes olde pennes and feathers, and dissolueth in the body colde humoures and thicke, and exciteth to come out of the body, sweat, euopora∣tion, fumositie & superfluity of humors, and bringeth out of the dennes of the earth créeping beastes and earthlye wormes. The fourth Cardinall and chiefe winde is called Borias the Northerne winde, and ariseth vnder the starre that is called Polus Articus, the Ship∣mans starre: and commeth of the  causes, of the which the foresayd winde commeth, and hath by his sides two windes: that one is called Aquilo, and is by West, that is the Northwest winde: That other is by East, and is called Chorus, the North Northwest winde. These windes be conteined in this verse: At Borias Aquilo veniunt et chorus ab alto. The meaning there∣of is, that these three windes blowe out of the North. And the Northern winde is called Borias, and hath that name of certaine mountaines, that bée called I∣perbore. For they blowe out of thicke mountaines, as Isidore sayth. As the Southerne winde of the Prouince of Affrica, is called Affricus, because hée bloweth most out of that countrey, also the North winde is called Septentuo∣nalis: For he bloweth out of the parte of the North line, that is called Axis, and he riseth out of watrie places, that bée frore and bounde, because they bée so farr from the circle of the Sunne. And they blowe out of the high moun∣taines, out of the which they come to vs. And for that out of that place va∣pours may not be dissolued, for the great freesing, therefore the Northerne winde maketh the ayre bright and cléere, and beareth downe and putteth of pestilence, that commeth of the Southerne winde, as Isidore sayth. For by great strength of his coldnesse, the Northern winde con∣strayneth and bindeth the ouer parte of the earth, and of water, and chaungeth them, and tourneth them now into kinde of Ise, and now into kinde of Christall, as the hardnesse is more or lesse. Then these thrée windes for they be colde and drye, make bodyes harde, and open pores, and purifie humoures, and cléere spirites and wittes, and they helpe the vertue of digestion, and comforteth the vertue of with holding: and maketh pe∣stilential aire wholsome, & increaseth the vertue of generation. Therefore libr. 14. Aristotle sayth, that in conceiuing of a childe, if the winde bee in the North, the child shall be male, and againeward: if the winde be in the South, the childe shall be female. Also libro. 5. cap. 7.
Constantine sayth, that the Northerne winde constraineth euill humours, and holdeth and letteth them, that they shall not fall nor come in the other members. Neuerthelesse hée bréedeth cough, because of drynesse of breast, and maketh the bo∣dyes on earth rough, & clinkereth with his coldnesse & drynesse, and maketh si∣newes to be constrained, & smiteth them and maketh them straight: therefore hee gréeueth members, and letteth them of working, & gréeueth and corrupteth blos∣somes, flowres, and fruite, and smiteth vines that burgen and blowe, and spoy∣leth heardes and trées, and greyues, and dryeth vtter and inner humoures: and therefore he is noifull to them that haue the Tisick: by his drinesse he renteth the lungs, and maketh in them pimples and whelkes, as Galen sayth; his winde is colde and drye, and commeth out of a straight Country into a large Country, and maketh the ayre subtill and thinne, cléere & drye, and fréeseth the moist parts both of earth and of water, and ioyneth them in the vtter partes. And therefore he is called Aquilo, Quasi aquas li∣gan, for hée bindeth waters, as Isidore saith. Of Clowdes. chap. 4. A Clowd is animpression made in the ayre, in the middle of many vapours, gathered and bread into one body, in the middle region of the ayre, thickened to∣gethers by coldnesse of place. And so a cloud is commonly matter to snow, raine, and hatle. And a clowde is gendered in this manner: The heat of heauen by his owne vertue, draweth to it right subtile vapourable parts of water and of earth, and wasteth the most subtill partes thereof, and maketh the other deale thick, and ourneth it into a clowde of ayre. Thereof speaketh Isidore and sayth, That a clowd is thicknesse of ayre, ga∣thered together by drawing of vapours, and of fumosityes of the earth, and of the Sea. Also by lyghtnesse of ayre and put∣ting and shouing of windes, the substance of the clowd moueth hither & thither and about. And a cloud is kindly hollow, with many holes as a spoung: & therfore he re∣ceiueth soone impressions of the ener bo∣dies. And therfore by entring and incom∣ming of the Sunne beames, a cloude re∣presenteth and sheweth diuerse formes & shapes & coulours, as it doth in the rain∣bowe, that is not else but a certaine dewe clowde in his substaunce, diuersly shapen, and colours gendered by the Sun beames: and a clowde is hollow within: and by his figuration and shape with the sphere of heauen, to the which he is nigh: the clowde is rounde, without and aside, the clowde hath no certeine forms nor shape propried. For when a clowde com∣meth aside halfe nigh to another, eyther confirmeth himselfe to other in figure and shape, as Beda sayth. Also by light∣nesse of his owne substaunce, a Clowde moneth vpward and moneth more swift∣ly or slowly, as it is more or lesse putte with the winde. Also the more subtile and pure the vapoures bée, of the which a Clowde is compownded, the more shining and bright impression of the Sunne beames, the clowde receiueth: and for that the clowd is cleere, it passeth there through, but it bee when the substaunce thereof is there gathered in the ayre of fumosityes that hée greate and thicke. For then the clowde is thicke and darke, and taketh awaye from: vs the lyght of the Sunne, and taketh it out of our sight, if he bée set betwéene vs and the Sunne; Also a clowde sette betwéene vs and the Sunne, swageth and bateth the heate thereof. Therefore the presence of clowde is pleasing to reaping men and to other, that trauaile in strong heat of the Sunne. Also a clowde by heate of the Sunne re∣solued and departed into raine, maketh the earth plenteous, and to bring foorth hearbes, grasse, and seedes: and that by out shedding of raine. Also for a clowde is full nigh, is as it were mother of all things that be gendered in the ayre, and certayne common matter of diuerse thinges, hee sendeth to the earth of his owne substaunce. And that is knowen: for now he reineth, nowe hée hayleth, nowe hee snoweth, nowe he lyghteneth, and nowe hee thundereth. Also a clowd is gathered of waters of the Sea, and being
brought vp afore the Sunne, by the bene∣fit of the heat of heauen, tourneth all the falnesse and bitternesse into freshnesse. For such is clowde commeth of the wa∣ter of the Sea: neuerthelesse when hee is parred with the Sunne, it hath neither smacke nor sauour of the sea. Also a cloud is profitable to the earth, when he is re∣solues and fallen into raine. But hée is full gréeuous and noifull when he tour∣neth into winde:That the clouds be neerer vn¦to ye earth then vnto heauen. for then he gendereth groan tempest both in sea and in lande. Also as Cloude that hangeth on high in the  of the ayre, séemeth ioyned next  heauen: and is neuerthelesse with∣out comparison néerer to the earth then to heauen Also meeting & comming toge∣ther of Clowdes, setteth oft the ayre on fire an, and ingendereth lighte∣ning and thundering: Also sometime of winds  in hollownesse of Cloudes, commeth in odeine breaking of partes of Clowde. And by such departing of part from at the Cloude maketh greate  nd thunder. Also when corrupte vapoures bée there drawne vp out of  and ditches, and from carteins,  corrupt thinges, of theyr in∣cooporation in substaunce of Clowdes, nowhere shall great corruption, pestilence, and infection. Also the néerer the clowde into the earth and the farther from hea∣uen; the more in quantitie he sheweth to the sight of them that beholde them. Therefore the greatest clowde, when he is nigh heauen séemeth least. And yt which is least in it selfe séemeth most when hee is nh to the earth, as Beda sayth. Also oft a clowde that is gendered onelye of drye vapours and windy is deceiuable: for the signifieth and betokeneth raine, & paieth nought but winde, and whirling winde. Also rainy clowdes, if they fall sirily and at once to the earth: where they fall, there they bée noyfull, for they do bround. But if they falt some & some and dropying meale, they giue great pro∣fit so fruites that growe. Also oft as a Clowde bespringeth the earth with drop∣ping, but wasteth himselfe in ah be∣springing. For when hée bespringeth at her things and moysteth them, by his owne dissolution hée bringeth himselfe to nought; as Gregory sayth.The vio∣lent mee∣ting of ye cloudes is by ye some of strong windes. Also when one Clowde is contrary to another, hee is cause of tempest and of motion in the ayre: for contrarynesse and méeing of Clowdes commeth of contrarye parting and shoouing of windes. And therefore of beating of clowdes commeth great moo∣uing in the aire. Of the rainebow. cap. 5. THE Rainebowe is impression gende∣red in an hollowe clowde and dewie, disposed to raine in endlesse many out∣ters, as it were shining in a mirrour, and is shapen as a bow, and sheueth diuerse coulours, and is gendered by beames of the Sun, or of the Moone. And is but seld gendered by beames of the Moone, no more but twice in fiftie yéeres, as Aristo. saith. Also the Rainebowe that is called the heauenly bow, is a watry cloud,Of the re∣nuing of the raine∣bowe. thir∣led with the Sunne beames into all the parts thereof, as Marcianus saith & is cal∣led a bowe, for the lyknesse of a crooked bowe. For he sheweth a round backe in the high parte of the clowdes, & beareth & stretcheth a manner of hornes or corners to the earthward, as Isidore saith. And in this bow some manner things belong and perteine to generation thereof, and some to shape and figuration thereof; & some to the vertue and working thereof. Tou∣ching, the generation thereof, it is consi∣dered, that the substance thereof is gen∣dered of shining rebounding of beames of light in a heauie clowde, and a rainye. Also that alwaye he hath respect to the Sunne with full face, and the Sne is euen afore the bow, and hath respect ther∣to. Also the bowe ariseth in a circle wise from the earth, euen to the heauen: for he toucheth the earth with lin horses, and heauen with the backe. For the more hee is before, and stretcheth downeward, the more he ariseth in roundnesse, and into fi∣gure and shape. He is rounde as a circle and cléere as it were a mirrour: and in coulour he is in marrye manner of wise diuerse and singularly singular. For in the rainbow because of his cléerenesse, b séene diuerse formes, kindes, and shapes, that be contrary. Therefore the bow see∣meth couloured: For as Beda saith, it ta∣keth
coulour of the foure Elementes. For therein as it were in any mirrour, shineth figures, and shapes, and kindes of Elements. For of fire he taketh redde coulour in the ouermost part, and of earth gréene in the neathermost, & of the aire manner of browne coulour, and of water somedeale bliew in the middle, as Beda sayth. And these coulours bée or∣deyned togethers and sette in order, as Aristotle saith to libro Meth. And first is redde coulour, that commeth out of a lyght Beame, that toucheth the vtter part of the roundnesse of the Clowde: Then is a middle colour somdeale bliew, as the qualitie asketh that hath mastry in the vapour, that is in the middle of the clowd. Then the nethermost séemeth in gréene coulour in the neather part of a clowde there the vapour is more earthy. And these coulours bée more principall then other. Forasmuch as the Philoso∣pher saith, yt no Painter may paint nei∣ther feigne all the coulours of the Rain∣bow. And Aristotle sayth, that the cause of the Rainbowe is smiting againe and rebounding of beames of lyght, that turne againe to contrary vapour in the clowde, as brightnesse shining in water, shineth in the ouer parte, and tourneth againe to himselfe. And for the Raine∣bow is not séene but by the Sun beame by day, or by the Moone beame by night: the sight thereof is lette by troubling of ayre, or by féeblenesse of sight, or by darknesse and thicknesse of the Clowde, that withstandeth and letteth the shy∣ning of beames. And the Rainbowe is séene in rainy time: for then there is re∣solued superfluitie of vapours, that was in straighted in the clowdes. And thereof commeth a lyttle dewing, in the which shineth the beame that is there afore, and so the Rainebowe is shapen, and taketh thereof diuerse coulours of di∣uerse vapours, in the which the beame shineth, as Aristotle saith. Touching the vertue thereof and the working, the bow is set afore the Sunne, and tempe∣reth and swageth the strong heat there∣of. And by resolution thereof and depar∣ting and tourning into raine or dewe, the Rainebow, quickeneth and desprin∣geth the neather thinges, and maketh them plenteous: By the shape thereof and figure, and many diuerse coulours, it highteth ouer thinges, and maketh them fayre and seemelye, and betoke∣neth greate moysture in the ayre. And therefore (as Beda sayth and the Maister of Storyes) fortye yéere before the dome, the Rainebowe shall not bee seene, and that shall be token of drieng & of default of Elements, as he sayth.That the rainbovve shall not be seene 40. yeares before ye dome. The Rainebow betokeneth peace and accord betwéene God and the world, & sheweth and informeth and bringeth to minde that Gods dome by water is passed: and also certifieth vs of the Sunne. For by his presence the Rainebowe sheweth in what side the Sun is in heauen For the Rainebow is neuer on the same side of heauen with the Sun, but alway be∣fore. For when the Sunne is in the East the Rainebow is séene in the West, and againeward. And when the Sunne is in the South, the Rainebow is seene in the North. But the Rainebowe is neuer seene in the South, or high middaye, as Beda saith. The Philosopher telleth the cause thereof. For in the high middaye, when the Sunne is euen in the middle of the world, then the beame thereof shi∣neth all about like, and therefore he shi∣neth no more in one side then in another. And therefore in the point of very mid∣daye the rainebowe is séene in no side, as Aristotle sayth. And is full seldome séene by night, but in ye full of the Moone, as Beda sayth. And that falleth not but twice in fiftye yeares, as Aristotle sayth. Of the Dew. chap. 6. DEw is impression gendered of colde vapour and moist, not gathered in∣to a bodye of a Clowde in the neather parte of the middle space of the ayre, méeting with some lyttle colde. And Aristotle saith, that there is no dew but when the Southerne winde bloweth. For dewe is lyttle raine, and raine is much dew. And so the Southerne wind by his moisture gendreth and nourisheth dewe. And the Northerne winde by his
drynesse licketh vp dewe, and thrusteth togethers, and bindeth it with his strong cold. Also the Moone imprinteth her moi∣sture in the earth, & is cause of gendring and dew therein, as Ambrose sayth, and he calleth the Moone mother of dew. And therefore by night by vertue of yt Moone, in the aire dew ariseth vp priuelye, and commeth downe at last, and is séene, and sheddeth & falleth lostly on the ouermost parts of grasse and hearbs. In his rising & downe comming dew giueth vertue & strength to trées, hearbes, and grasse, and things yt the heat of the day had dryed, wasted, & bowed downewardes: & them the night dew apparaileth and restoreth and maketh them stand vpward. Also in the tops of hearbs and grasse dew gathe∣reth it selfe in drops: And as though it would vpward to his generation, to the which alway it ascendeth, it hangeth it selfe in the ouermost part of leaues & of grasse: also dew susteineth not ye strength of the Sun, but is dissolued & falleth anon by working of ye Sun beames, & vanish∣eth away: but it forsaketh not his vertue yt is printed in the aire. For by presence of his shedding in yt aire, it leaueth open∣ly the effect of his vertue in grasse and hearbes & séedes. And though dew bée a manner airy substance & most subtil out∣ward, neuerthelesse in a wonderful man∣ner it is strong in working & vertue: for it moistureth the earth, & maketh it plē∣tious, & maketh floure, pith, & Marrowe, increase in corne & graines:Sappe to increase. And fatteth & bringeth forth broad Oysters & other shell fishes in the sea, and mamely, dew of springing time. For by night in Springing time Oysters open them∣selues against dew, and receiue dew that commeth in betwéene the two shels, and holdeth and kéepeth it: And that dewe so holden and kept, féedeth the flesh, and maketh it fat: And by his incorporati∣on with the inner parts of the fish brée∣deth a full precious gemme, a stone that is called Margarita. And the more noble that the margarite is,Common Pearles. the more white it is, & the more in quality, as it is sayd in li. Gēmarum. Also the birdes as rauens, while they he whitlewe in feathers, ere they be blacke, dewe féedeth and sustey∣neth them, as Gregory sayth. Also dewe cooleth & tempereth the aire that is made hot by the heat of the day: And if it be made to cléere and thin by the heate of the day, dewe by his incorporation ma∣keth it temperatly sad & thick, as Albu∣masar sayth. Also dew withstandeth and beareth down the strength of venim in venimous beasts, that their venim may not be shed by night so much as by day. Therefore Adders and serpents lurking among grasse, hurt men that passe by but little, while flowres, grasse, and hearbes, be dewed: Also though dew séeme in it selfe sauoured as water, and werish, ne∣uerthelesse in might, effect, & dooing it is most sweete, & cause of honny & of Man∣na in hearbs & flowres. For in some coū∣try of Gréece hony is gendred in flowres that commeth of the dew of heauen: & al∣so Manna in some hearbs, as it is said in Plato: also dew gendred in corrupt aire, is corrupt by corruption of the place, & corrupteth other things: And so such dew insedeth tender flowres, and cor∣rupteth gréene corne, when it is eared, as Gregory sayth: And such corruption is called Erugo and Rubigo.Robigo, the blast in vines & corne. Also as the Glose saith super primum Ioelis, ther it is said, yt their life of Brugus rubigo shall fret. That which is left of the Caterpil∣ler, the Grashopper shal eate. The can∣ker shall also consume the residue. Ioe. ver. 4. Brucs is the broode of long flyes that destroy corne and grasse. Hieroni∣mus saith, that Rubigo is when the ten∣der corne is smitten and burnt with noi∣full dew: and both the cares and stalkes turned into red or foule blacke coulour. And this mischiefe wasteth & destroieth altogether stubble & hey:so far forth, that they be not profitable neither to meate nor to doung. Some men meane yt Ru∣bigo is the mildew. Of Raine. Chap. 7. RAine is impression that commeth of much colde vapour and moist, there gathered in a cloude, the which vapour is more in quantitie and substance then ye matter that dew commeth of, & more cooleth and moysteth then the matter
doth. For suuiosities that be drawen out of the waters & of earth by strength of heate of heauen, be drawn to the nether∣most part of the middle space of ye aire, & there by coldenesse of the place they bee made thick, & then by heat dissoluing and departing the moisture therof, & not wa∣sting all, these fumosities be resolued & fallen & turne into reine and showers, as Be. saith, Raine is called Pluuia, & hath ye name of Pluralitate, pluralitie of drops, as Isi. saith. For it falleth and commeth downe then, & then, & dropmeale. And al∣so rain is called Imber, & hath that name of Imbuendo, for it springeth & tempe∣reth the earth, & maketh it beare fruite. For land and earth that is not besprong with raine, is barren: And the farther the dow of the which raine is gendred, is from ye earth, & the neerer heuen: ye more softly the raine commeth downe, & with ye more small drops: And ye nigher such a clowd is to the earth, the raine falleth swiftlyer commonlye and with greater drops. Also winds that blowe vp in the sea, gather much humour of the outer partes of the water, and bearing them vp with them into the aire, at last they rne thē into matter of raine. When ther is much matter in a watry clowd, & the clowd is very thick: the impression of beames is strong vpon the clowd, & of great gathe∣ring of beames & rebounding therof cō∣meth strong heat, & at the last by vertue of yt heat the clowd is dissolued & falleth & turneth into strong raine. As we oft s, yt after strong heat cōmeth strong raine, as Beda saith. Also sometime is so great generation of heate by gathering of beames, & by rebounding therof about ye clowds, yt the vapour is as it wer burnt: & by strong burning heat it turneth into red cholar. And therefore sometime the people thinke yt it raineth bloud,Euery red cholar ha fal∣leth, is not blud as some suppose. as A∣ristotle sayth. And raine water is full constraining & binding, and therefore it restraineth & hindeth flure of the womb; as Constantine sayth. But raine water is subtill & light of substaunce, and hath more airinesse & more lightnesse of ayre then other waters: And therefore it is seene chaungeable, and turneth soone into contrary qualities. And therfore it taketh corruption & rotteth soone, as Constant. saith. But it is more fresh and swéet then other waters, when it abideth in his own cléernes & vertue. Then if raine be temperate in quality & quantity, & agrée∣able to ye time, it is profitable to infinit things. For raine maketh the lande to beare fruit, & ioyneth it together if there be many chinnes therin, and aswageth & tempereth strength of heat, & cléereth the aire, & ceaseth & stinteth windes, and fat∣teth fish, and helpeth and comforteth drye complection, as Constantine sayth. And if raine bée euill and distemperate in his qualities, and discording to place and time, it is gréeuous and noyfull to many things. For it maketh déepnesse & vncleannesse, & slippernesse in waies & in paths, and bringeth forth much vnprofi∣table hearbes and grasse, and corrupteth and destroyeth fruites and sades, and quencheth in seeds the natuall heat, and maketh darknesse & thicknes in the aire, & taketh from vs the Sunne beames, & gathereth mist and clowdes, and letteth the work of labouring men, and farrieth and letteth riping of corne and of fruits, and exciteth ruine and running fluxe, & increseth & strengtheneth al moist euills, & is cause of hunger, and of famine, & is cause of corruption, & of morein of beasts & shéepe: for corrupt showres do corrupt the grasse & hearbes of pastures, whereof commeth needful, corruption in beasts, as Constantine saith. Of a Drop. chap. 8. A Drop is moyst vapour departed and dealed into full small partes. And droppes bée greate when the dayes bée hotte, and partes of Clowdes bée de∣parted that were before gathered with colde as Aristotle sayth. And where heat is in the ayre, if colde come thereto, the fréesing of water or of vapour is more strong. Therefore in libro Animalum Aristotle saith, That fishers cast hotte water on their instruments and takles, that they may be the sooner frore to sinke the sooner. And the néerer a drop is to the earth, the more great it is: & againward.
For the littlenesse thereof and ye round∣nesse is caused as long as he bideth in the aire farre from the earth, as Aristo∣tle saith. And it is moist, soft, cléere, and bright: and doth moyst seedes, grasse, and hearbes, and slaketh heate and bur∣ning of the aire, and cleanseth and pur∣geth the ayre. And though a droppe bée most soft in substaunce, yet it thirleth stones with oft falling. Séeke within li∣bro. 12. Of hoare Frost. chap. 9. HOare frost (as Aristotle sayth) is va∣pour frosen, or else impression gen∣dered of colde vapour and moyst, not gathered in the bodye of the Clowde, frore in the middle space of the aire, by coldnesse of place and of time, in which is no part of heate, as Aristotle sayth. Therefore in hoare frost is hardnes, that commeth of coldnesse of place & of time, in which it is gendered. For coldnesse draweth and gathereth together the parts of vapours: and so maketh the sub∣staunce of hoare frost, harde. And be∣cause of full great coldnesse, hoare frost is white, and maketh hearbes and flow∣ers, vppon the which it falleth to wy∣ther, and burneth them, and it vanish∣eth awaye by  lyttle beame of the Sunne, and tourneth againe into dewe: For hoare frost is nought else but dew frosen, as Beda sayth. For dewe com∣meth downe to the earth, and taketh by colde of the night, white kinde, hard, and colde: and so turneth it selfe in the vtter part into the substaunce of ye hoare frost, as he saith. Of Haile. chap. 10. HAile is fréesing of drops of raine by strength of coldnesse and of wind in the aire, as Aristotle saith. For impres∣sion is gendered of cold vapour & moyst, chased and driuen by colde to the inner part of the clowde, and that by mastrye of heats that is about. And haile is gen∣dered in clowdes that be farre from the earth, as he saith. And therefore the cause of generation therof, is vapour receiued in the hollownesse of a clowd, the which vapour is made thicke by coldnesse of ye ayre. For the moyst parts voide and flye heate of the aire, & come togethers into the inner parts of the clowde, and there finding vapor, they gather the parts ther∣of, & congealeth and fréeseth them into the substance of haile: And therefore is ofter haile in Summer then in winter. For lightly strong heat letteth gendring of hayle, for it dissolueth and departeth vapour, and suffereth not the parts ther∣of to be gathered togethers. And so doth passing colde in Winter. For then is no heate in the ayre that colde should flye and put it selfe within the Clowde. And haile is small and round, and com∣meth out of the highest places, as Ari∣stotle sayth. And the cause of his smal∣nesse and roundnesse is his tarrieng and abiding in the aire long time: and so of his long trendeling about commeth his roundnesse, and his littlenesse com∣meth of heat of the aire, that wasteth and resolueth the watrye partes thereof. In Haile gendered in places nighe to the earth, the contrary falleth, and that is by contrary causes. And so haile, through hoist ousnesse of the winde, that violent∣ly shoneth and putteth it, and through heate that dissolueth, it falleth downe swiftly to the earth, and spreadeth vpon the earth as it were salt. Haile gréeueth much corne, fruites, and flowers, and falleth more ofter by day then by night. And the cause is, for the heate of the day driueth coldnesse into the inner partes of the clowde: and also the Northerne winde is colde and drie, and freeseth and constraineth the dew yt commeth downe of the aire, and tourneth it into the sub∣stance of the haile, as Beda saith. Of Snowe. chap. 11. SNowe is impression gendered of colde vapours and moyste, in the lowest parte of the middle space of the ayre frore into the bodye of a Clowde by meane coldenesse in comparison to hoare Frost: and that is because of meddeling of heate in parte. The which heate béeing closed in the sub∣staunce
thereof, and not ouercome, a∣none by colde that is thereabout, dry∣eth the substaunce thereof, and softeneth it: and taketh whitenesse in coulour be∣cause of mastrye of colde at last: And for stretching and spreading of the parts of the Clowde: And for the coldnesse that is féebled, of heat the matter is broke in broade partes, as it were splentes of shelles, and that for féeblenesse of the vertue that breaketh, as Aristotle sayth. Then Snow is gendred is a cold clowd, but not so colde as that, in the which haile is gendered: and that witnesseth the softnesse of Snowe. For heate med∣deled with Clowdes letteth the partes therof, that they may not be made thick, nor stronglye gathered together. Then Snow is more harde and dry then wa∣ter, and that is by coldnesse constraining and binding, and is softer then Haile, and that is by meddeling of heate in the wombe of the clowde: and is white by mastrye of coldnesse in the vtter parte thereof. With little heate Snowe mel∣teth into water, and it chaungeth soone both out of hardnesse and whitenesse. By abiding of Snowe vppon the lande, the lande is fatted: for by his coldnesse he closeth the pores of the earth, and so by heate gathered inward to mores and rootes of hearbs and séedes, the inner hu∣mours be drawen to moores and rootes, and gathered togethers as glewe: And therby is land fatted: and Snow slayeth and destroyeth wades, and superfluitie thereof, and nourisheth and feedeth good hearbes, and maketh them ranke. Also Snow by his presence couereth and hi∣deth stinking places and doung hilles, and waies and paths, and letteth by his spreading, way-faring men, and tarryeth them. And in the high Sea Snowe fal∣leth seldome, as Beda sayth. The cause thereof is, for fumosities and exalations thereof be continually shuft and spark∣led by winds that blow therein, and are the mowe be thicked and turned into snow, they be resolued and tourned into raine or into mist. Also Snow is noy∣full to wilde beastes: for it hideth and couereth their Leeses and pastures, and sheweth and discouereth theyr hauntes and steppes. And so in Snow time they be soone taken with hues. And Snow is oft in high places and mountaines. And, abideth and endureth longer time in mountaines and in hilles, then in val∣leyes and low places. For in hilles cold winds be fréely more strong then in va∣leyes. And also valleyes and low places be more hot then hills and high places. And that is for more gendering and re∣bounding of the Sunne beames. And therefore more Snow is in mountaines then in valleyes. Also Snow melted by strength of heate, moisteth and sltneth the earth: the which it maketh hard, and constraineth by constraining of coldnesse before that it is molt, as Gregory saith. Also snow for softnesse & lightnesse of his substance, maketh no sound or noyse in his falling down to the earth, but falleth priuely & softly, out of a priuy place of ye aire, & setteth himselfe vpon the earth, & spreadeth all about like. And snow with his swiftnesse and fairenesse comforteth eyen to behold therin:  if men behold too long, it dispearpleth and appaireth the spirit of sight. Also Snow water by his potentiall and actual coldnesse refrai∣neth and bindeth fluxe of the wombe, and smiteth, and shrinketh, and stoppeth sinewes, and in them that drinke snow water continually, it breedeth mestrual superfluitye of great botches vnder the chinne, and maketh the members aston∣ed, and as though they were a sleepe, and that soone: and it gendereth the stone in ye bladder, and feedeth forth cold dropsie, as Constantine sayth. Of Mist. Chap. 12. MIst is impression made of resolution and falling of clowds that be fallen into reiny water, as Arist. saith. For va∣pours so resolued & fallen & shed & spred into all the parts of the aire, breed & gen∣der must; and ye neerer mist is to ye earth, the more thicke and darke and cold it is found. And when it is high from ye earth, it is more cleere & more nigh the Sun: and therfore it is more colde and darke. And when mist is all smitten with the beames of the Sunne, it falleth downe &
turneth againe into the matter that it tame of, and vanisheth and falleth. And so the aire is purged, and then it betoke∣neth faire weather and cléere. And some∣time mist is corrupt by vapours, of the which it is gendered, and is ful gréeuous and corrupteth veynes that burgen, and breedeth in beasts diuerse sicknesses and euilles. Mist is friend of théeues, and to euill doers, for it hideth their spiers and waitings. And myst letteth waye-fa∣ring men and Pilgrimes, for in greate mistes waies be vnknowen and vncer∣teine. Mist withdraweth from vs light and beames of the Sun, and other stars, and therefore it is full heauy & perilous to shipmen, as Beda sayth. For while darke mist couereth the sea, & occupyeth it, the sternman doubteth, and cannot know whetherward he shall stir the ship a right. Of thunder. Chap. 13. OF impressions that bée gathered in the aire of double vapour, the first is thunder, the which impression is gen∣dered in watry substaunce of a Clowde. For moouing and shaking hether and thether of hotte vapour and drye, that flyeth his contrary, is beset and constrai∣ned in euery side, and smitte into him∣selfe, and is thereby sette on fire, and on flame, and quencheth himselfe at the last in the clowd, and breaketh the cloud, as Aristotle sayth. Or thunder is gen∣dered by beating and smiting together of clowdes, as he sayth: when clowdes bee mooued and shuft by contrarye windes, then the clowdes smite togethers, and of theyr violent breaking commeth greate strokes and noise in the aire, that was called thunder among olde men. Thun∣der is called Tonitruus, or Tonitruum, and hath that name of dread and feare, for the noise feareth men that heare it, as Isidore sayth. For Tonus and So∣nus is all one. For sometime it smiteth all thing so hard, that it séemeth that it renteth and cleueth heauen. For when a storme of ful strong winds commeth in∣to the clowdes, and the whirling winde and the storme increaseth, and séeketh out passage: it cleaueth and breaketh the Clowde, and falleth out with a greate réefe and strong, and all to breaketh the parts of the Clowde, and so it commeth to the eares of men and of beastes with horrible and dreadfull breaking and noyse. And that is no wonder: for though a Bladder be light, yet it maketh greate noise and sound; if it be strongly blowen, and afterwarde violentlye broken. And with the thunder commeth lightning, but sightening is sooner séene, for it is cléere & bright: and thunder commeth later to our eares, for ye wit of sight is more sub∣til then the perseuerance of hearing. And therefore first he sheweth light & bright∣nesse by shining yt commeth before, ere we heare the noise & sound, yt commeth afterward. As a man séeth sooner ye stroke of a man that heweth a trée, then he hea∣reth the noise of the stroke. Huc vsque Isid. And this reason that Isid. maketh of the cause of thunder, accordeth somwhat with the Philosopher, yt saith, that thun∣der is a spirit of windes receiued in the bosome of clowds, & breaketh by the ver∣tue of his moouing, and renteth all the partes of the Clowde, and maketh great quaking, noise, and sound, and thunder. Therefore héereto hée sayth, That thun∣der is the sound of the spaces of the aire that runneth therewith. In libro Meth. Aristotle saith, That thunder is nought else, but quenching of fire in a Clowde. For dry vapour arreareth and setteth it on fire and on flame, with heate of the aire, & when it is closed in a clowde it is sodeinly quenched. And of such quench∣ing the noise of Thunder is gendered. As when firie hot yron is quenched in water, it maketh greate boyling and noyse. Oft thunder commeth with ligh∣tening: and then hée gréeueth much, as Beda sayth. And so it scorcheth fruit, & corne, when he commeth without raine. And if he commeth with raine hée doth good, as he sayth. And thunder with his mouing, beateth and smiteth all thing: & stirreth the braine, and feareth the wit, and distroubleth & stirreth and coump∣eth wine in Tuns,Egereth vvines, & seieth beers & Ale. as Aristotle sayth. And if it come in bréeding time of foules, it gréeueth their egges, and maketh wo∣men
that trauaile of childe, ofte to haue dead borne children, and smiteth with his roes, and throweth down high tow∣ers, and destroyeth high trees, and wrin∣geth them out of the grounde. And al∣waye hée gréeueth oft and more strong∣ly in high places then in lowe, as Be∣da sayth, and maketh a manner of win∣ding, and as it were a rounde voice, and smiteth the ayre all about with a man∣ner of running, euen so that it maketh and sowndeth somewhat as it were in the manner of rowling and hurling of whéeles, as C. Isidoras sayth. And by this manner of wise such a round sown and noyse commeth of roundenesse of Clowdes, out of the which, vapour and winde that is cause of thunder, is diuerslye wagged and shapen. For it mooueth now vpwarde, now downe∣warde, nowe forwarde, nowe back∣warde in hollownesse of the clowdes. Of Coruscation. cap. 14. ARistotle sayth, that this word Coruscacio, betokeneth diuerse man∣ner of lightening: and lyghtening is properly called Coruscatio: and that manner of lightning is séene in the aire sodainelye, and is the appearing and shewing of subtill vapour set on fire. And that shewing passeth and vanish∣eth awaye in the ayre, without com∣ming downe to the earth. And ano∣ther manner lyghtening is called Ful∣gur, and Fulguratio also, and is subtile fire, but this is more thicke and greate then the lyghtening that is called Co∣ruscacio, and commeth downe to the earth, and pearceth and thirleth grasse and hearbes, and other softe thinges, as Philosophers tell, as it is rehear∣sed in Tecio Phisice Algazelis. Additiō.Lightening doth also melte yron, and burneth not Lawne or silke, it scor∣cheth steshe, and swelleth bodyes of beasts and men: among all Trées, the Laurell is least blasted. Of Fulmine. Chap. 15. THE lightening that is called Ful∣men, is vapour sette on fire, and so fast and sadde, and falleth downe with great swiftnesse, and is of more strength then the lightening that is called Ful∣gur. And this lyghtening smiteth, thir∣leth, and burneth things that it touch∣eth, and multiplyeth, and cleaueth and breaketh, and no bodilye thing with∣standeth it. And so (as Isidore sayeth,) Fulgurare and Ferire to smite is all one. For as he saith, this manner lyghtening Fulgur, is compownded of the most subtill parts of Elements, and hath ther∣of more might and strength of pearcing and of thirling. And therefore Isidore calleth this manner lyghtening a stroke of the darte of heauen, and is gende∣red and bread of greate vapoure, com∣pownded of diuerse contrarie things, the which vapour is arreared and drawen vp and set on fire and on flame by great strength of fire, and is shuft and putte by beating and shoouing, and putting of Clowdes, and commeth downe with greate violence out of the hollownesse of clowds, as it wer a firye stone. For such lyghtening beaten together as it were stones, is séene bright and running a∣bout in the ayre, by force and strength of the burning flame. And though it bée of firye kinde, yet by violence of moouing against the kinde of fire, hee is compelled to come and mooue downe∣ward as Beda saith. And in his comming downe hée setteth on fire and burneth, and hath this name of Fulgur therefore, as Isidore sayth. Also hée peareceth and thirleth, and cleaueth, and renteth: and then hée is called Fulmen, as hée sayth. Also where he burneth, he gendreth ther∣with full euill stench and smoak, and fal∣leth oft vppon high places. In strong Summer and strong Winter is lygh∣tenings but seld: but in the beginning of Haruest, and in the ending of spring∣ing time, as Beda sayth, liber. 2. cap. 52. In Winter and in Summer is lightning selde. For in Winter because of colde the vapour in the ayre is not set in fire: and in Summer because of drynesse and subtilnesse of ayre, is no gathering of vapour in the Clowdes. And in Haruest
and in springing time, the ayre is moo∣uable and some deale thicke and dimme. Therefore then it lyghteneth oft. Also Chap. 53. hée sayth, that there bée manye kindes of lightenings For those yt come drye, burne not, but cleaueth and depar∣teth, and those which come moist, burne not, but swell and scorch. The third manner lightning, which is called Clarum, is of a wonderfull kinde: for he catcheth and draweth wine vp of the Tonnes: and toucheth not the vessell, and melteth golde and siluer in pursses, and melteth not the pursse. What thing lightening is, and whereof it commeth, diuerse men tell diuerse∣ly. For Epedocles sayth, that lightening is fire hidde in Clowdes, and is gende∣red of the Sunne beames. But Aristo∣tle sayth, that this is false. For if it were so, of euery Clowde should come lighte∣ning: For in euery Clowd bée Sunne beames hidde. And Anaxagoras sayth, That lightning is of aire that commeth downe into a clowde, or to a clowd, and hideth it selfe therein, and the working and shoouing thereof is lightening, and when that fire is quenched in watrye Clowdes, those bubbelings and crac∣king of that quenching is called thun∣der. Other saye, that lighting commeth of hot windes and drie, closed straightly in clowds, by the which windes clowds burne, and bée set on fire: And the fire that commeth from then is lightening, and the shining thereof commeth soo∣ner to the sight, then the noise and sound to the hearing. Other says, that lygh∣tening is not gendered by fire, but by imagination of shining water which is séene by night in Clowdes by ye bright∣nesse of shining starres. But Aristo∣tle sayth, That this is errour. For ligh∣tening is séene by day vnder the Sunne beames, as well as by night. And A∣ristotle meaneth, that vapour is gathe∣red in the Clowdes, and is set on fire by strong beating togethers and hurling of Clowdes, and so is made the matter of lyghtening, and for that it hath some earthye partes, by weight and heaui∣nesse thereof it mooueth downewarde. And for that those lyghtenings bée of strong subtilnesse, and not of strong set∣ting on fire and burning: therefore they seeme white, and therefore they corrupte not, neither infect bodyes that they touch. Huc vsque Aristoteles in liber. 2. Methe. Also the moouing of lyghtening is sodaine and vnware. For sodeinlye it is séene from the East, and in the West, & sheweth his moouing sodeinly, and hy∣deth it sodeinly. And as Gregory sayth, it commeth out of his mother, as sodein∣ly as the twinckling of an eie; and tur∣neth sodeinely, and forsaketh not the place, that it is gendered in. By his so∣deine mouing, it smiteth their sight that looke thereon, and maketh them dreade, and spreadeth it selfe into all the world by seeming, and opinion, and dome of sight, and commeth before the thun∣der, and giueth warning of his com∣ming. Lightening is good and profi∣table, if it come with Raine: And if it come without anye raine, it gréeueth tender fruites and flowres, as Beda sayth. Of Aura, light winde. chap. 16. AVra is light winde mooued, and it slaketh and cooleth them that bée hotte: and heateth them that bée colde. And the more pure and cleane it is, the more wholesome and pleasant it is, and if it be temperate, and passeth not due qualyties of time: then it is most accor∣ding to mannes lyfe, and kéepeth and saueth health. And if it bée in the contra∣rye manner, then it is most noyfull. For then it bréedeth Pestilence & great corruption. For Pestilence is corruption of aire, and commeth of drynesse and of distemperaunce of raine: And falleth oft for trespasse of mankinde, as Isidor. saith, And is called Pestilencia, as it were Pa∣stulencia. For it passeth all the kinde of man, and taketh pasture or féeding there∣of. For when the waters and raine and aire bée corrupte, the which wée breath and eate, and be fed therewith: anone wée bée corrupt and ouercome with diuerse sickenesse and euilles, as it is sayd be∣fore in the same booke, where it is trea∣ted of the propertyes of the ayre.
But this that is said shall suffice at this time. Of the foure Elements, and their qualities and mixtures togethers, forth of Henrie. C. Agrippa, de occ. Phi. Which are newly added. First boke Cap. 3.THere are foure Elements, and first grounds of al corporal things, Fire, Aire, Water, & Earth, of the which all things ellemented in these lower things are made, not in manner of heaping vp together, but according to transmutation & vniting. And again when they are cor∣rupted, they are loosed againe into Ele∣ments, neither is there any of the sensi∣ble Elementes pure, but according to more or lesse they are mixed together, and apt to bée transmuted one into ano∣ther: Euen as durtye and loosed earth is made water, & that beeing ingrosed & thickened, becommeth earth, and beeing euapored by heate tourneth into Ayre, and that waring hot, turneth into Fire: and this beeing quenched tourneth into Aire, and béeing made colde of his adu∣stion or burning, becommeth earth, or a stone, or Sulpher, as it is made mani∣fest by lightening. And Plato thinketh that the earth can neuer bée tourned in∣to anye other Element, and that other Elements are turned into this and that Element, and one into another. The Earth then not chaunged, is diuided from the more subtill, but béeing mixed or loosed into those which dissolue it, doth againe passe into it selfe: And euery one of the Elements hath two speciall qua∣lities, the first of which it kéepeth to it selfe, in the other as a meane, it a∣gréeth with the qualitie following. For the fire is hot and dry, the earth dry and colde, the water colde and moyst, the aire moist and hot. And in this sort according vnto two contrary qualities, the elemēts are contrary to themselues, as Fire to Water, and Earth to Aire. Moreouer, af∣ter an other sort, the Elements are con∣trary one to another, for some are heauy as the earth, and the Water, and other light, as the Aire and the fire, wherefore the former are Passiue, but ye latter Ac∣tiue, as the Stoks haue tearmed the: Wherefore Plato moreouer difemanish∣ing after another sort, assigneth to euery one throe qualities, to wit, to fire sharp∣nesse, thinnesse, and mouing To ye earth bluntnesse, thicknesse, & rest. And accor∣ding vnto these qualities; Fire & Earth are contrary Elements. And ye ofter ele∣ments do borrow qualities of them, so yt the aire taketh two qualities of ye Fire, thinnesse and mouing, & one of the earth, to wit, bluntnesse. Contrariwise ye wa∣ter taketh two of the Earth, darknesse & thicknesse, & one of the fire, to wit, moo∣uing; but the fire is twice thinner then the aire, thrice more moouing, and foure times more sharpe, ye aire is twice shar∣pen then ye water, thrice thinner, & foure times more mouing, therefore ye water is twice sharper thē ye earth, thrice thin∣ner, & foure times more mouing: where∣fore as the fire is to the aire, so ye ayre is to the water, the water to ye earth, & againe as the earth is to the water, so is it to the aire, and the aire to the fire: and this is ye roote & foundation of al bodies, natures, vertues, & meruailous works: and he that knoweth these qualities of Elements, and the mixing of them, shall easily bring to passe meruailous & won∣derfull works, and shal be perfect in na∣turall Magike. Of the three folde consideration of Elements. WWherefore there are foure Ele∣ments as we haue faide,Cap. 4. without whose perfect knowledge we can bring forth no effect in Magike: & euery of thē are thrée folde, yt so the number of foure may fil vp the number of .12. and so pro∣céeding by the number of 7 to the num∣ber of .10. one may come to ye vppermost vnitie, whereof all vertue & wonderfull worke do depend. Wherfore in the first order, are the pure Elements, which are neither compounded nor chaunged, nor suffer mixing together but are incorrup∣tible, & not from the which, but by the which, the vertues of all naturall thinge are brought to effect: none is able to ex∣presse their vertues, because they can do
all in all. He that knoweth not this can∣not attaine to any worke of meruailous effects: The compounded Elements are manifold, diuers, & vnpure, yet apt to bée brought by art to a pure simplicitie: which being then returned to their sim∣plicitie, their vertue is aboue all things, giuing a full perfection of all hidden o∣peration, and woorkes of nature, and these thinges are the foundation of all naturall magike. The Elements of the thirde order first and by themselues are not Ele∣ments, but compounded againe, diuerse, manifolde, and apt to bée chaunged one into another. They are the infallible meane, and therefore are called the mid∣dle nature, or the soule of the middle na∣ture, there are very few that vnderstand theyr profound mysteryes. In them bée certaine measures, degrées, and orders, as a full perfection of euery effect in each thing naturall, celestiall, and supercele∣stiall. The things are wonderfull and full of mysteries, which maybe wrought by magike, as well naturall as diuine, for by them the bindings, loosings, and transmutations of all things are made, and the knowledge and foretelling of things to come: Also the banishment of naughtie spirits, and the winning or obtaining of good spirites, doth descende from them: Wherefore without these thrée fold Elements, and the knowledge of them, let no man trust that he is able to worke anything in the hidden science of Magike and nature, and whosoever knoweth howe to reduce one into a∣nother, the impure into the pure, the manyfolde into the simple, and kno∣weth howe to discerne the nature, ver∣tue, and power of them, in number, degrées, and order, without diuisi∣on of substaunce, he without doubt shall obtaine the perfect knowledge and wor∣king of all naturall things, and heauen∣ly secrets. ¶Of the meruailous or wonder∣full natures of Fire and Earth. FOr the working of all meruailous things,Cap. 5. saith Hermes, two are suffici∣ent, to wit, Fire and Earth: The one is the Patient, the other the Agent: Fire as sayth Dionisius commeth cléerely in all things, and through all things, and is remooued, is lightsome to all, and also is hidden and vnknowen when it is by it selfe, no matter comming, in the which it may manifest his owne action. It is vnmeasurable and inuisible, able of it selfe for his owne action, moue∣able, giuing it selfe to all, after a sorte comming néere vnto it, making newe, a kéeper of nature, a giuer of lyght, for his brightnesse couered all aboute, in∣comprehended, cléere, seuered, reboun∣ding backe, mounting vpwarde, going sharplye, high, not to bée diminished, alwayes a moouing motion, compre∣hending another, vncomprehended, not wanting another, priuelys growing of himselfe, and manifesting the greatnesse of himselfe to receiue matters, Actiue, mightye, at once present to all men, vi∣siblye it suffereth not it selfe to be neg∣lected, and as a certaine reuengement, generallye and properlye, vppon the sodaine bringing it selfe to a reckoning to certaine thinges, incomprehensible, in palpable, not diminished, most rich of himselfe in all traditions, Fyre is a huge and a greate portion of the thinges of nature, as sayth Plinye. And wherein it is doubtfull, whether shée consume and bring foorth more thinges. Fire is one, and pearcing tho∣rough all thinges as sayth the Pytha∣gorians, but in heauen stretched a∣broade and shining ouer all, and in hell straightened, darke and tormenting, in the middle partaking of both. Where∣fore the fire is one in it selfe, manifolde in the recipient, and in diuerse distri∣buted with a diuerse marke as Cle∣anthos witnesseth in Cicero, where∣fore this fire which wée vse commonly by chaunce it is in stones, which is stricken out, with the stroke of Stéele, it is in the Earth, which smoaketh by digging, it is in the Water, which warmeth the Fountaines, and
Welles, it is in the déepe Sea, which being tossed with winds, wexeth warm, it is in the ayre, which oftentimes wée sée to were warme, & all lyuing things, and Uegitables, are nourished with heate, and euerye thing that lyueth, ly∣ueth by reason of the included fire. The properties of the fire supernall, a∣boue, are heate making all things fruit∣full, and lyght, giuing life to all things. The properties of the fire infernall, are a burning, consuming all things: and a darkenesse, making all things bar∣raine. Wherefore the heauenlye and lyght fire, chaseth away the Demones, or Spirites of darkenesse: and this our woodden fire driueth awaye the same, as farre forth as it hath the lykenesse, and the carriage of that vppermost lyght: yea, also of that lyght, which sayeth, Ego sum lux mundi, I am the lyght of the worlde, which is the true fire, the Father of lyghtes, from whome, euery good thing giuen, doeth come: casting out the brightnesse of his fire, and communicating it first to the Sunne, and to other heauenlye bodyes, and by these, as it were by meane instrumentes, powring in that, into this our fire. Wherefore, as the Demones or spirites of darkenesse, are strongest in darkenesse, so the good De∣mones which are Angelles of lyght, doe receiue increase from the lyght, not one∣ly of God, of the Sunne, and of hea∣uen, but also of the fire which is with vs. Héerevpon the first most wise ap∣pointers of Religions, and Ceremo∣nyes, decreed, that prayers, psalmes, & all rights, shuld not be dōe without lights. Héerevpon grewe that Posie of Pytha∣goras: Ne loquaris de Deo, absque lumine, Speake not of God without lyght. And they commaunded for the driuing awaye of naughtye Demones, that lyghtes and fires shoulde be kin∣deled by the carcases of the dead, and not to take them awaye, vntill that the purgings béeing ended by the holy right, they were put in buriall. And almightie God in the olde Lawe, didde requyre that all his Sacrifices, should bee offered with fire, and that fire,So lyke∣vvise in ye funeralls of the Ro¦manes, were put lampes, vvith fire, that con∣tinued a long sea∣son. shoulde euer burne on the Altar, which also among the Romanes, the Priests of Vesta, didde alwayes keepe bur∣ning. As for the Earth, it is the Bace, and the Foundation of all the Ele∣mentes: for it is the obiect, the sub∣iect, and the receiuer, of all the beames and influences of heauen. It contay∣neth in it the seedes, and seminall ver∣tues of all things, therefore is she called Animall, Uegetall, and Minerall, which béeing made fruitfull by all the other Elementes and Heauens, is apte to beget all things. Of it selfe, it is receyuer of all fruitefulnesse, and as it were also, the first springing Pa∣rent of all things, the Center, foun∣dation, and mother of all things. Take of it anye portion bée it neuer so secrete, washed, pourged and ground small, if thou lette it stande for a season abroade, by and by béeing made fruitefull by the power of the Heauens, and as it were great with young, bringeth foorth from it plants, wormes, lyuing creatures, Stones, and also brighte sparckles of met∣talles. Therein are excéeding great se∣creates. If at anye time it be pourged by the workemanshippe of fire, and brought to his singlenesse, by due wash∣ing. It is the first matter of our creation and the truest medicine of our restau∣ration and preseruation. ¶Of the wonderfull natures of the Water, the Aire, and the Windes. Chapter. 6. THE other two Elementes, are of no lesse power, to wit, Wa∣ter, and Ayre, neyther doeth Nature cease to worke in them wonderfull thinges. For so great is the necessi∣tye of Water, that without it, no li∣uing creature can lyue, no hearbe, nor Plant, without the moystening of
water, can burgen or bud forth. In it is the seminarie vertue of all things, first of liuing creatures, whose seede is ma∣nifest to be watrye: and although the seedes of shrubs and hearbes are earth∣ly, yet it must néedes be, that they must be corrupted with water, if they are to be fruitefull, whether it come to passe, through ye imbibed moisture of ye earth, or through dew or rain; or through wa∣ter of purpose put vnto it: for water and earth alone, are described by Moses, to bring forth a lyuing soule: but to the water be appoynteth a two folde bring∣ing forth, to wit of things swimming in the water, and of things flieng in the aire aboue the earth. Moreouer, of things brought forth of ye earth, part are bound to the water. The same the Scripture doth testifie saieng: That after the cre∣ation, shrubs and plants budded not, be∣cause God had not rained vpon ye earth. So great is the power of the Element, that the spirituall regeneration cannot be without water, as Christ himselfe witnessed to Nichodemus. There is al∣so an excéeding great force thereof, in religion, in purgings, and purifications, and of no lesse necessitie than of ye fire. The commodities thereof are infinite, and vse manifold; and all things do con∣sist of the power thereof, as that which hath the force of begetting, nourishing, and increasing. Wherevpon Thales Mi∣lecius and Hesiodus, did appoynt the water to be the beginning of all things, and sayd that it was the auncientest and the mightiest of all Elementes, because that it ruled ouer all the rest. For (as sayeth Pliny) the water deuoureth the earth, it quencheth ye fire, it clymbeth a∣loft, and by stretching abroad of clouds, it challengeth heauen vnto it, and the same fallyng downe, is the cause of all things growing vpon the earth. There are innumerable wonders of water, set forth by Pliny, Solinus, and many Hi∣storians. Of whose wonderfull vertue also. Ouid maketh mention in these vearses. Hamos sand. Iupiter Hamon, of ye san∣die place, vvhreon he built his towerAT noonetide, horned Hamon, doth, thy water cleere, wexe colde: and wexeth hot when Sunne doth set, and eke the daye vnfolde. Report doth goe, the water of Athainas sets on fire wood when the Moone doth wane, and into small Orbes doth retire. The Creones a riuer haue, which dronke, doth stonie make the entrailis, and doth harden all, that of the moysture take. The riuer Crathis and Cibaris, that neere your quarters hee, doe make folkes hayre lyke Amber, and lyke golde as is to see. And which more meruayle is, there are that haue great power to change, not bodyes onely, but mindes also: which is a thing full strange. Who hath not heard of water fowle, that Salmacis doe breede: and of the lakes of Aethiope, which makes men madde indeede: Or bringeth them to deadly sleept, if they thereof doe drinke. Who so doth seeke to quench his thrill, at Clitorius brinke, He shunneth wine, and ioyeth still, in water cleere alone. Then runneth out Lincestus streame, like vnto which is none: Whereof who so with measure doth, receiue within his brest, faltreth as the Dronkards doe, which pure wine esteeme best. There is a lake in Arcadie, Pheneus hight of olde, suspected for the doubtfull streames, in which be not too bolde, By night, at what time who so drinkes, they hurt, but not by daye. Moreouer Iosephus maketh menti∣on, of the wonderfull nature of a cer∣taine riuer, running betwéene Archea, & Raphanea, Cities of Siria, which runne with their full chanell, during ye whole Saboth, by and by as it were fayling through the stopping of the fountaines, for sixe whole dayes together, a man may passe drye shod, through the chan∣nell, and againe the seauenth daye, the
causes of nature being not knowen it returneth to the former abundaunce of water, wherefore the inhabitants call it Sabbatheus, by reason of the vii. daye, holy among the Iewes, and the Gospell doeth beare vs witnesse, of the Pro∣batica the fish ponde,Silo. into the which af∣ter the water was moued by the An∣gell, he which first came into it was de∣lyuered of what disease soeuer. The same vertue and power is read to haue of the Nimphes Iomdes, which was in the territorie of the Aelians,Aelians. by the riuer Cytheron into the which, he that went with a sicke body, went out of it whole and sound, without any griefe of body. Pausanias reporteth that there is in Liceum a Mountaine in Arcadia,Liceum. a fountaine which was called Agria, vn∣to the which, as often as the drouth of the Countrey did threaten spoyle to the Corne, the Priests of Iupiter Liceus, entring after sacrifice offered, worship∣ing the holy water, with holy prayers, holding a braunch of Oke in his hand, thrust it downe into the water. Then the water being moued, the vapour bée∣ing from thence lifted vp into the ayre, became clowds, which méeting together, did ouercast all the skie, which not long after, tourning into raine, did wholsom∣ly water the whole region. But concer∣ning the miracles of water, besides ma∣ny other Authours, Ruffus Ephesius, a Phisition, hath written wonderous things, and found in no other Authour that I know of: it remaineth to speak of the aire. This is a vitall spirite, go∣ing through all things that are, giuing life to all things, and making them to stand together, binding, mouing, and fil∣ling all things. Héerevpon the Doctors of the Hebrewes, doe not recken it a∣mong the Elementes, but as it were a meane & a gliew, ioyning diuers things in one together, and reckoning it as it were the resounding spirite of ye worlds instrument: for he doth next of all con∣ceiue in himselfe, the influence of all ce∣lestiall things, and doeth communicate as well with other Elements, as with euery mixed thing, and doth no lesse re∣ceiue & retaine in him as it were a cer∣taine heauenly glasse, the shape, forme & kinde of all things, as well naturall, as artificiall, and of speaches whatsoeuer: & carrieng them with him, & imprinting in them, as well in sleepe as in waking, the bodies of men and liuing creatures, doth enter in through the poores, and ministreth matter of sundry wonderful dremes, diuinations & soothsaiengs. Héer∣of also men saieth,A note of gret seet. that it commeth to passe, why one passing by a place, in the which a man hath bene slaine, or a car∣kasse newly hidden, doth tremble with feare and dread: because the ayre bée∣ing there full of horrible shapes of mur∣thering, doth moue and trouble the spi∣rite of the man, whilest together it is drawen in, with ye lyke shapes & formes, whereof it hapneth that feare insueth, for euery sodaine impression doeth astonish nature. For this cause, manye Philoso∣phers haue supposed, that the aire is the cause of dreames, and of manye other impressions of the soule, by the bring∣ing of shapes, similitude, or showes, which are fallen from this, and spea∣ches multiplied in the very aire, vntill they come to ye senses, & at length to the fantasie and soule of the receiuer, to wit, that soule, which being cléere frō cares, & not letted, & méeting with such shapes, is by thē instructed, for ye shapes of things, although of their owne nature, they be brought to ye senses of men & liuing cre∣atures, yet from heauen while they are in the aire, they may get some impressi∣on, whereby together with the aptnesse, they are rather caried from the disposi∣tion of the receiuer, to the sense of one, then of another. And for this it is pos∣sible, that naturally & without all super∣stition, by ye meanes of no spirit, a man may in a very short space declare to a man, the conceit of his minde, be the di∣stāce & dwelling neuer so far: although ye time wherin this hapneth cannot possi∣bly be mesured, yet within 24. houres yt must néedes be done, and I know how to doe it. Moreouer, the Abbot Triteni∣us, in times past knowe it and did it, And how certaine shapes not onely spi∣rituall but also naturall, do flowe from things, by influēce of bodies frō bodies,
and doe waye strong in the verye ayre, and doe offer and shew themselues vn∣to vs,Weders by light and by mouing, both to the sight, and to other senses also, and sometimes do worke maruailous things in vs, as Platinus doth proue & teach. And we doe sée, how when the South winde bloweth, the aire is thickned in∣to thinne clowdes, in the which as in a glasse the Images being farre distant, of Castles, of mountaines, of horses and men, and of other things, are reflected, which immediately at the falling of the clowdes vanish awaye. And Aristotle in his Meteors, doth declare the cause, for that the raine bowe is gathered in a clowde of the aire, from a certaine simi∣litude of a looking glasse. And Albert sayth, that the shapes of bodyes by the force of nature, may easely be expressed in the moyst aire, after the same sorte, that ye Images of things are in things. And Aristotle reporteth, that it happe∣ned to one, through weakenesse of his sight, that the next ayre vnto him was his glasse, and the visible raie or beame, was striken backe vnto him, and could not enter: wherevpon which waye hée went, he thought that his Image went before him face to face: likewise by the skilfull workmanship of certaine glas∣ses, the Images which we will see in the aire, are also cast a far off out of the glosses, which then ignorant men séeing, suppose that they sée the shaddowes of spirits or ghosts, whereas for all that they are none such, but certaine Images like to themselues, and voyde of all life. And it is knowen if a man be in a dark place and voyde of all lyght, sauing that some where the Sunne beame enter in through a very lyttle hoale, if a péece of white paper be put vnderneath it, or a plaine glasse, those things are séene in it, which abroade the Sunne giues lyght vnto. And there is another illusion more meruailous, where when Images are painted by a certaine workmanship, or letters written,Hovv to knovv the secret of thy friēd, farre off. a man in a cléere night, doth set them against the beames of the full Moone, through whose images mul∣tiplied in the aire, and drawen vp, and cast backe, together with the beames of the Moone, some other man being priuie to the matter a great wayes off, séeth, readeth, and knoweth them, in the very dish or circle of the Moone: which doubt∣lesse is very profitable skill to bewray secrets, to cities and townes besieged, in times past, practised by Pythagoras, and at this day not vnknowen to some, and to my selfe. And all these things, & greater, are grounded vpon the very na∣ture of the aire, and haue theyr reasons out of Mathematike and Optike.Perspecti∣ue. And as these Images, are reflected to ye sight, so are they often times to the hearing, which is manifest in the Ecko. But they haue more hidden workmanships and skilles, that a man also a farre off, may heare and vnderstande what ano∣ther speaketh and whispereth in secret. The windes also consist of the Ele∣ment of the aire, for they are nothing els than the ayre moued & stirred. Of these ther are foure principalls, blowing from the 4. quarters of heauen, to wit, Notus from the South, Boreas from the North, Zephyrus from the West, and Apelio∣tes or Eurus, from the East: Which Pontanus comprehending in these two pretie verses sayth. A summo Boreas, Notus imo spirat Olympo. Occasum insedit Zephirus, venit Eurus ab ortu. Fell Boreas blowes from heauens high, but Notus blowes his blast From lowest part: Zephire from West: Eurus from East doth cast. The South winde is meridionall, clowdie, moyst, hot and sicklye, which Ierome calleth the butler of raine, and Ouid thus describes him. The South winde flyeth with moist wings, hauing his terrible countenance couered with pitchie blacknes, his beard is loaden with showers, water floweth from his hoare haires, clowdes sitteth vpon his browe, and his fethers and bo∣some are wet. And Boreas being contrarye to No∣tus, is a Northerly winde, vyolent and sounding, and shril, which scattering the clowdes, maketh the aire cléere, and frée∣seth the water.
Ouid bringeth him in speaking of himselfe in this sort: Apta mihi vis est, &c. I haue an apte or fit force where∣with I driue away sad clowds, I shake the Seas, and ouerthrow currey Dakes, I harden clowdes, and I driue downe hayle vnto the earth. I my selfe, when I haue gotten my brothers in the open aire (for that is my fielde) I striue and struggle with so great indeuour, that the middle of the aire doth ring with my shaking, and sixe leapeth out of ye hol∣low clowdes. Euen I when I haue en∣tered into the round holes of ye earth, & haue fiercely set my back vnder chinkes below. I stir vp spirites (I make ye Di∣uell to stir) & set the whole world in a shaking. But Zephyrus ye West winde, which is also called Fauonius, is verye light, bloweth from ye west, & brething pleasant∣ly, is cold and moist, thawing frosts, and snow, & bringing forth grasse & flowers. Contrary to this is Eurus, which also is termed Subsolanus & Apeliotes,A breeder of Cater∣pillers, &c vvormes that grow blow∣ing from ye East: this winde is watry & clowdy, & of a swifte deuouring nature. Of these; thus singeth Ouid, Eurus ad Auroram, &c. Eurus goeth to Aurora, & to ye king∣dome of Nabathium, to Persia, & to the quarters lieng vnder the beames of the morning. The euening & the sea show∣ers, which are warme with ye Sun goo∣ing downe, are next to Zephirus. And shiuering Boreas inuadeth Scythia, & the 7. starres. The contrary ground is moi∣stened with continuall showers & raine from the South. ¶Of the kindes of things compound∣ed, what relation they haue to the elements, & how the Elements thē∣selues, agree with the soule, senses, and manners. Cap. 7.AFter ye 4. simple elements, immediat∣ly follow 4. kinds of perfected things cōpouned of thē, which are stones, met∣tals, plāts & liuing creatures: & albeit to ye generation of euery of them, all Ele∣ments do agrée in composition: yet eue∣ry of them, doth follow and imitate one principall element, for all stones are earthly, for by nature they are heauy & descend, & are to framed by drouth that they cannot be molten. But mettalls are waterish, and apte to flowe, and which naturall Philosophers confesse, & Alcumistes do proue, are ingendered of a viscus or slimie water, or els of wate∣rish quick siluer: so plants agrée with the aire, that vnlesse they burgen vp a∣broad, they proue not: so all liuing crea∣tures haue a firie force, & a heuenly be∣ginning, & fire doth touch them so néere, that when it is quenched, immediately all the lyfe doth faile. Againe, eueryone of those kindes is seuered in it selfe, by ye degrées of elements, for among stones they chiefly are called earthly, which are duschie and heauy: and waterie, which are cléere or maye be seene through, and which do consist of water, the Christal, Berell, the Pearle in shells: and they are airie, which do swim vpon the wa∣ter and are spongeous, as the Sponge, the Pomis, and the Tophus. There bée that are firie, out of the which fire is set, and sometimes is resolued into it, or are ingendred of it, as the vnder stone, the stone called Pyretes, & as Abeston. Likewise among mettalls, lead and sil∣uer are earthly, quicksiluer is waterish, copper & tinne are airie, gold & yron are firie. In plants also the rootes doe imi∣tate the earth, by reson of their thicknes: the leaues the water, by reason of their iuyce: the floures the aire, by reason of their subtiltie: the seedes the fire, by re∣son of their begetting spirit. Moreouer, some are called hot, some colde, some moyst, some dry, and borrowing to them the names of the elements from their qualities. Among liuing things, some are more earthy than others,Animales and inha∣bite the bowells of the earth, as worms called Easses, Moles, and many créeping things: some are watrie, as fishes: some are airie, which cannot liue out of the aire, as the Birde of Paradise, and the Camelion. There are also that are fie∣rie, as the Salamander, and certaine Crickets: and which haue a certayne fierye heate, as Pigeons, Ostriges, Lyons, and those, which the wise man
calleth, beast breathing out a fierie va∣pour. Moreouer in lyuing creatures, the bones represent the Earth, the slesh the Aire, the vitall spirit the Fire, and the humours the Water: and these also are diuided or parted by the Elementes, for red cholar giueth place to the Fire, bloud to the aire, fleame to the water, blacke choler to the earth. To conclude, in the very soule, as August. witnesseth; the vnderstanding representeth ye fire, re∣son the aire, imagination, the water, and the scuses the earth. And these also a∣mong themselues are diuided by Ele∣mentes, for the sight is firie, neither can it perceiue without fire and lyght: the hearing is airie, for sounde is made by the striking of the aire: but smell & tast are referred to the water, without whose humour, there can be no sauour nor smell: to conclude, all the touchings is earthly, and requireth grose bodyes. Moreouer, the deedes and operations of men, are gouerned by the Elementes: for a slowe and heauy moouing, betoke∣neth the earth: feare, sluggishnesse, and a lyther worke, signifieth water: chéere∣fulnesse and friendly manners, the aire: a sharpe and an angry vyolence, the fire. Wherefore the Elements are the first of all things, and all things are of them, and according vnto them, and they in all things, and through all things, spred abroad their force. How the Elements are in the heauens, in the starres, in spirits, in Angels, finally in God himselfe. Cap. 8.THE consenting opinion of all the Platonikes is, that euen as in the worlde, béeing the chiefe patterne, all are in all: so also in this corporall world, all thinges are in all, yet in diuers manners, to wit, according to the na∣ture of ye receiuers: so also the elements, are not onely in these inferiour bodies, but also in the heauens, in the starres, in spirites and Angelles, to conclude, in God himselfe, the worker and chiefe pa∣trone of all. But in these earthlye bo∣dyes, the Elements are certaine grose formes, drowned matters, and material elements. But in the heauens, the ele∣ments are through their natures and strengths: to wit, in a heauenlye man∣ner, and much more excellent then be∣neath the Moone: for there is a heauen∣ly massinesse of the earth, without the grosenesse of the water: and an agilitie of the aire, farre from fleeting abroad: the heate of the fire is ther no burning but shining, and quickening all thinges by his heate. Moreouer of the starres, Mars and Sol are fierie, Iupiter & Ve∣nus airie, Saturne and Mercury wate∣rish, and they are earthlye, which inha∣bite the eight Orbe, and the Moone also, (which notwithstanding,Cōiecture. of most men is thought to be waterie) forasmuch, as lyke to the earth it draweth vnto it the waters of heauen, with the which, shee being moystened, doth through the néer∣nesse, poure them vpon vs, and makes vs pertakers of them. There are also among the Signes some herie, some earthly, some airie, some watrie, and the elements rule in the heuens those soure triplicities, distributing to them the be∣ginning, the middle, the ende of euerye Element: so Aries hath the beginning of fire, Leo the proceeding and increase, and Sagittarius the ende of fire: Tau∣rus hath the beginning of earth, Virgo the procéeding, Capricornus the ende: Gemini hath the beginning of aire, Li∣bra the procéeding, Aquarius the ende. Cancer possesseth the beginning of wa∣ter, Scorpio the middle, Pisces the ende. Wherefore of the mixtions of these pla∣nets and signes, together with the Ele∣ments, are wrought all bodyes: and be∣sides spirites by this meanes are diui∣ded one from another, that some are cal∣led firie, some earthly, some airie, some watrie. Héerevpon those foure riuers in Hell, are sayd to be of diuers natures, so wit, Phlegethon firie, Cocytus ayrie, Styx watrye, Acheron earthly. And in the gospell we read of the fire of hell, an euerlasting fire (into the which the accursed shall be commaunded to goe). And in the Reuelation we read of the great poole of fire. And Isaias speaketh of the damned,Cap. 20. The Lorde shall strike them with corrupt aire.
And in Iob, They shall passe from ye wa∣ters of snow, to ouermuch heate. And in the same we read, of the darke earth, and couered with the dimnesse of death, of the earth of misery & darknes. Ther∣fore also these Elements are placed, in the Angels & blessed intelligences, which are aboue, without the compasse of this world: for there is in them a stablenes of essence, & an earthly force, whereby the seates of God are made strong: there is in them also gentlenesse & pitie, which is a watry vertue making cleane. Héer∣vpon the Psalmist speketh of ye waters, where of heauen he saith, Which rulest the waters that are aboue him. There are also in them aire, which is a subtill spirit: & loue, which is a bright fire. For this cause, the holy scripture calleth them the wings of the winde, & els where the Psalmist speaketh of them thus, Which makest thy Angells spirits, & thy Mini∣sters a burning fire. Of the orders of Angels also, the Seraphin, the Vertues, & the Powers are firie: ye Cherubin earth∣ly: the Thronenes & Archangels watry: the Dominationes & Principalities ay∣rie. And concerning the very chiefe Pa∣trone, worker of al things, is it not read? Let the earth be opened, and bud forth a Sauior. Is it not said of the same? The fountaine of the water of life, cleansing and regenerating. Is not the same the spirit breathing ye breath of life. And the same also as Moses & Paule doe testifie, is a consuming fire. Wherefore no man can deny, that the elements are found e∣uery where & in all things in their man∣ner. First in these inferiour bodies, but dredgie & grose, in ye heuenly bodies pure & cleane: & in the super celestiall bodies liuely and blessed on euery side. Where∣fore the elements in the chiefe Patron, are the Idee, or conceits of things to be brought forth: in ye intelligenties, ye os∣red powers: in the heauens, ye vertues: in the bodies beneath, the groset formes. Of the vertues of naturall things, next of all depending of the Elements. Chap. 9.OF the vertues of naturall thinges, some are Elementall, as to make warme, to make cold, to make moyst, to make dry: & are called the first operati∣ons or qualities, & according vnto Arle. For these qualities alone, doe altogether alter the substance, which none of the o∣ther qualities can do, but some are in the things making, cōpounding such by the elements, euen beyond the first qualities, as are Maturatiue, digestiue, resolutiue, mollificatiue, induratiue, stiptike, ab∣stersiue, corasiue, caustic, apertiue, eua∣poratiue, comfortatiue, mitigatiue, con∣glutinatiue, opilatiue, expulsiue, reten∣tiue, attractiue, repercussiue, stupisac∣tiue, elargetiue, lubrisicatiue, & many o∣thers: for the elementall qualitie hath much to do in mixture, which worketh not by it selfe: & these operations Quali∣tates secondariae, because they follow na∣ture & the measure of the mixture of the first vertues, euen as of them at large it is handled, in the bookes of Phisitions, as Maturation or ripening, which is the working of naturall heate. according to a certaine measure in ye substance of the matter. Induration or hardening is the working of coldnes, likewise also, Con∣gellation, & so likewise also of the lyke. And these operations do somtime worke vpon ye limited mēber, as prouoking v∣rine, or milk, or ye menstrual, & are called the 3. qualities which solow ye fecond, as ye second do ye first. Wherefore according to these first, second & third qualities ma∣ny diseases are cured and caused. Many things also are done by Art, which men do much wonder at, as is ye fire, burning water, as in ye fire Ignis Grecus. Many cōpositions whereof Aristotle teacheth in a treatise written héerof. In like ma∣ner, ther is also made a sire yt is quench∣ed in oyle, & is kindled with colde water when it is sprinkled vpō it, & fire which is kindled wt raine or wind, or with the sun: and ther is a fire called Aqua ardens, which is very well knowen, & wasteth nothing but it selfe: & ther are vnquench∣able fires, & continual lamps, which can∣not be quenched wt wine, nor water, nei∣ther by any meanes: which séemeth alto∣gether incredible, if it had not ben for ye famous lampe yt once gaue light in the temple of Venus, wherin ye stone Bestus did burne,Beston. which being once kindeled, is neuer quenched. Cōtrariwise also is pre∣pared
some thing apt to burne yt it may not be hurt by fire: & ther are made con∣fections, with which the hands being an∣nointed, we may carry yron red hot, or put yt hand in molten mettall, or to goe into the fire without any harme, & such like: & ther is a kinde of hempe or flare,The  folde for the hae of the Sat∣lamander by the vvhich many e deceiued. which Pliny calleth Asbestū, ye Greeks terme it Asbeston, which is not consu∣med with fire: wherof Anaxelaus saith, that a tree yt is therwith inuironed, is fel∣led with deafe strokes, and that are not heard. Of the hidden vertues of things. Chap. 10.THere are moreouer other vertues in things, which belong not to any E∣lement, as to put away poyson, to driue away carbuckles or botches, to draw y∣ron, or some such other thing: & this ver∣tue is ye sequell of the kinde or forme of this thing or yt thing. Wherfore also in a small quantitie, it hath no small effect in working, which is not graunted to ye e∣lementall qualitie. For these vertues be∣cause they depend much vpon the forme, therefore with a very small, matter, they can do very much: but ye elemental ver∣tue because it is materiall, doth desire much ster to doe much. And they are called hidden properties,Why hid∣den pro∣perties are so termed because theyr causes are hidden, so yt mans vnderstan∣ding is not able in any wise to finde thē out. Wherfore ye Philosophers haue at∣tained to a very great parte of them by long experience, more than by ye search of reason. For as in ye stomack yt meate is digested by heate which we know: so is it transformed by a certaine hidden ver∣tue which we knowe not, not by heate truly,Meate be¦ing sod, is the same, but not in the sto¦macke. for so in the chimney at the fire it should rather be transformed, than in the stomack: so are there in things, qualities, overthrowing ye elements, as we know, and are so created by Nature which we wonder at, and oftentimes are ama∣sed yt we know them not or seldome, or neuer sée them, as it is read in Ouid of the Phoenix, a bird alone, among all o∣thers renewing hir selfe. There is one bird that repaireth hir selfe, and eft soones soweth hir selfe, the Assyrians call hir Phoenix, and in ano∣ther place, the Aegyptians méete toge∣ther at the wonder of so great a sight, & their reioycing companye saluteth the rare birde. In times past, one Matreas made the Greekes and the Romanes greatlye to wonder at him: he said that he brought vp a wilde beast, yt which deuoured him∣selfe: wherefore also at this day, many do yet carefully search out, what yt wilde beast of Matreas may be. Who doth wō∣der at fishes digged out of the earth, of the which Aristotle, Theophrastus and Polibus the Historian, haue written, and that which Pausanias hath written, of singing stones, are all workes of hidden vertues. So the bird called an Ostridge, doth digest cold and hard yron to the no∣rishment of his body, whose stomacke is said, not to be hurt with burning yron. So that little fish called Echines, doth so bridle the violence of the windes, and tame the rage of the sea, that how cruel soeuer the stormes are, be there neuer so many sailes full of winde, yet with his touching alone, he doth so calme & cōpell ye ships to stand, yt by no means they can moue: so yt Salamāder & the crickets liue in the fire, & albeit they séeme somtimes to burne, yet are they not hurt. The like matter is said to be of a certaine Bitu∣men like to Pitch, wherewith the wea∣pons of the Amazons are saide to haue bene smeared ouer, which is taken a∣way neither with sword nor fire: wher∣with also, the gates of Caspia, made of brasse, is fabulously reported, to haue ben varnished ouer by Alexander Magnus. With the lyke Bitumen also, ye Arke of Noe, is read to haue ben glued together, continuing yet from so many thousande yeares vpon the Mountaines of Arme∣nia. There are manye other of these meruayles scarcely credible, but yet are knowen true by experience. Such as an∣tiquitie hath lefte in writing of the Sa∣tyres, which lyuing creatures doe con∣sist of a shape halfe like a man, and halfe like a beast, yet capable of speach & rea∣son, one of which, Saint Hierome re∣porteth did once speake to Saint Anto∣ny the hermit, & did condemne in him ye
errour of the Gentiles, in worshipping of liuing creatures, & did pray him, that he would pray to the common God for him: & affirmeth, that one of them in times past, was brought openly aliue to be seene, & immediately was sent to the Emperour Constantine. ¶ How hidden vertues are powred in∣to the kindes of things from the I∣dee, or conceipts through the resons of the soule of the world, & beames of the starres, and what things doe most of all abound in this vertue. Cap. 11.THe Platonikes report, that all ye bo∣dyes belowe, are Ideadit or concei∣ted by the vppermost Idees or conceits: and they define an Idea to be one, sim∣ple, pure, vnchangeable, indiuisible, incor∣porall, & euerlasting forme aboue bodies, soules, & mindes, and the same to be the nature of all Ideas. And first they place the Idees, in ye very goodnes it selfe, that is in God, by the manner of the cause, to be differing onely among themselues, by certaine relatiue reasons: least whatso∣euer is in the world, shuld be alone with out any varietie, and yet to agrée among themselues in essence, that God may not be a manifold substance. Secondly, they place them in the very intelligible part, that is in the soule of the world, proper∣ly by formes, & moreouer differing one from another in perfect formes: so that all the Idee or conceipts in God, are one forme, but in the soule of ye world many: they are placed in the mindes folowing or ioined to the body, or seuered from the body, seuered now more & more by a cer∣taine participation, & by degrées: they place in nature, as it were certaine seeds of formes below infused from the Idee. Finally, they place them in the matter, as shadowes. Besides this, there are so many seminall reasons of things in the world, as there be Idees or conceites in the diuine minde, by the which reasons, it hath builded it selfe in the heuens, be∣yond the starres euen shapes, and hath imprinted properties in them all. Wher∣fore of those stars, figures & properties, al the vertues & properties of kindes be∣low do depend, so that euery kinde, hath a celestiall figure agreeing vnto him: from whence also, proceedeth vnto him, a meruailous power in working, which proper endowment, it receiueth frō his Idea, by the seminall reasons of ye soule of the world. For the Idea or conceites are not onely the causes of the beeing of any kinde, but also are the causes of eue∣ry vertue, that is in such a kinde. And this is the cause that many of the Phi∣losophers saye, that by certaine vertues, to wit, hauinge a certaine and a stable reason, not of chaunce, or casuall, but effectuall, but mightie and not fay∣lyng, working nothing in vayne, no∣thing without purpose, the vertues being in the nature of things are moued, which vertues doubtlesse are the operations of the Idee, which fall not, but be accident, to wit, through the impuritie and vne∣qualitie of the matter. For after this sort things euen of one kinde, are founde more or lesse mightie, according to the impurity or misorder of the matter. For all ye influences of the heauens may bée hindred by the vnabilytie of the matter. Wherefore the Platonikes vsed to say in a Prouerbe, that the heauenly vertues are infused, according to the merit of the matter: whereof also Virgil maketh mention when he singeth. Igneus est ollis vigor, & coelestis origo: Seminibus quantum non noxia corpo∣ra tradunt. Those seedes haue so much fierie force and heauenly beginning, as the vnhurt∣full bodies doe slacken: wherfore those things in the which the Idea of ye mat∣ter is not dipped, that is, which receiue greater similitude of seuered things, haue more mightie vertues in operati∣on, like to the operation of the seuered Idea or conceit. Wherefore the sight of heauenly things, is the cause of all the noble vertue, that is in the kindes be∣lowe. ¶ How to get ones owne Genius, and to seecke out his nature. AS in heauenly things euery countrey hath a certaine star & heuenly image,Lib. 3. Cap. 21.
giuing influence, to it more then other: so also in supercelestiall things, it get∣teth a certaine intelligencie & vnderstā∣ding, ruling & desending it, with infinite other ministring spirits or Demones of his order, which with a common name, Beni Heloim Sabaoth, that is, ye sonnes of the God of hoasts. For this cause, as often as the most highest doth determine of any warre, slaughter, desolation of a∣ny kingdome, & subduing of any people, in these lowermost parts, then no other∣wise, then these things shoulde come to passe vppon the earth, there goeth be∣fore a conflict of those spirites aboue, as it is written in Esay, Vicitabit vnto in terra: of which conflict of spirits & rulers we also read in Dan. 10. to wit, of the Prince of the Kingdome of the Persi∣ans, of the Prince of the Greekes, of the Prince of the People of Israel, and their conflict together, whereof also in times past Homer séemeth to haue writ∣ten. Tantus Coelesti rumor, precrebuit Aula, Cum saeua alterni ruerunt, in praelia Diui. Neptunum contra bellabat Phoebus A∣pollo. Aduersus Martem certabat Pallas A∣thenae. Iunoni obstiterat bello pharetrata Di∣ana. Latonam telis volucer Cyllenius vr∣get. So great a rumour was in heauens court aboue, When that the Gods together rusht, in cruell bloudy warre. Then did the God Apollo sight, a∣gainst God of the Sea. Pallas also Athena hight, against Mars did contend. Diana with hir bowe and shaftes, resisted Iunos force. And Mercury did with his Dartes, Latona sore assaile. Notwithstanding forsomuch as in e∣uery country there are all kindes of spi∣rits & Demones: yet those are ther strō∣ger then the rest, which are of the same order with the ruler of that region. So in the region of the sunne, the spirits of the sunne are of more force than the rest. In the region of the Moone, those spirites of the Moone: and so of the residue. And héerof it ariseth & followeth, that when we change places & countries, diuers e∣uents of our matters and affaires ofter themselues & followe, els where, héere or there, more fortunate: to wit, where the Demon or Genius shall haue grea∣ter power: or we shall get ther a stron∣ger Demon of the same order. So men borne vnder the sunne, if they goe into a countrie or prouince, where the Sunne ruleth, that is vnder the sunne, become there much more fortunate, because they shall haue there, their guides or Genij stronger, & more profitable: by whose ex∣cellent rule in that place, all their mat∣ters oftentimes are brought to happie endes, euen contrary to opinion and the measure of their strength. Héereof it is, that ye choice of ye place, countrie, & time, where a man doth exercise himselfe, ac∣cording to the nature and extinct of his Genius, and also dwelleth and haunteth, doth very much auaile to the happinesse of his life. Moreouer, the chaunging of his name oftentimes doth auayle, for séeing that the properties of names, are the declarer of things, as it were by a glasse, declaring the conditions of theyr formes. Thereof it commeth to passe, that the names being altered, it hapneth oftentimes, that the things are altered. Héerevpon the holy Scripture not with∣out cause, bringeth in God, when hee went about to blesse Abram and Iacob, to chaunge their names, to call the one Abraham and the other Israel. And the wise men of auncient time do teach one to knowe the nature of euerye mans Genius by the starres, and their influ∣ence, and by the aspectes of the same, which are in euery ones natiuitie: but with such diuers and contrarie doctrine among themselues, that it is very hard for a man, to be able to take out of their handes these Sacramentes of the Hea∣uens. For Porphirus sheweth out the Genius by the starre being mysteries of the genitour.
But Maternus séeketh them out, ei∣ther thereby or by the Planets, which haue there many dignities, or either by him, whose house the Moone shall enter into, after yt which she possesseth when a man is borne. And the Chaldees sear∣cheth not out the Genius, but by ye sun, or by the Moone. But others, and many of the Hebrewes, thinke good to searche him out of some quarter of the heuens, or of them all. Other séeke for the good Genius, from the 11. house, which there∣fore they call Bonus Demon, & require the naughtie Genius from the 6. house, which they call Malus Demon. Where∣fore séeing the search of these is verye painfull and secret, we shall much more easely search out the nature of our Ge∣nius by our selues, heedefullye working those things, which our minde doth pre∣mit vs, from our first age diuersly dra∣wen with no cōtagions, or those things which the minde being pourged from vaine cares, and sinister affections, im∣pediments being layd aside: the minde also doth prompt, the instinct of nature doth teach, and heauen incline. These without doubt are the perswasions of the Genius, which is giuen euerye man from the beginning of his natiuitie, lea∣ding vs, and (perswading) vs to that, wherevnto his starre doth enclyne vs. The Starre is but the instrument, the Planet is the same: The signes also doth represent, Iehouas mightie name. In that all things created weare, each other to supply: The strong, each feeble doth vpreare, who can the same deny. As God is soule to euery man, and life to creatures all: So rules he them that ruleth vs, when starres by name he call. Disdaine not then the noble skill of Planets course and tide: For they doe rule thee by Gods will, yet God is still thy guide. The gift of thine immortall state, is faith to God aboue: Which teacheth thee by reason heere, how God imparts his loue. Glis. in lib. ani. ¶That euery man hath 3. keepers, and from whence each of them procee∣deth. EUerye man hath a thrée-folde good Demon for his keeper,Chap. 22 the one holy, the other of his begetting, the thirde of his profession. The holy Demon accor∣ding to ye learning of the Aegyptians, is assigned to yt reasonable soule, descēding not from the stars nor planets, but frō the supernall cause (euen from God, the very ruler of ye Demones or Angels, & is vniuersall aboue nature. This Demon directeth ye life of ye soule, & doth alwaies minister good thoughts to ye minde, con∣tinually working in vs by illumining, although we do not alwaies mark him, but when we are purged, & liue quiet∣ly, then we perceiue him, then he doeth as it were speake with vs, & doth make vs pertakers of his voyce, being present before, in silence, & doth alwaies studie to bring vs vnto a holy perfection. By the help of this Demon also, men maye auoid ye mallice of desteny, which if hée be religiously worshipped of vs, in ho∣nestie & holines, which we knew Socra∣tes did. And ye Platonikes think, he doth wonderfully help vs, by dremes, tokēs, & signes, & putting away euill things, and carefully procuring vs good things: wherfore ye Pithagorians were wont to pray to Iupiter, yt he wold deliuer them from euill, or would shew thē frō what Demon might be performed. The De∣mon of begetting, which also is called Genius, doth descend from ye disposition of the world, & from the starcy circuits, which are occupied in generation. Ther be some which thinketh, yt the soule bee∣ing now about to descende into ye body, doth naturallye choose vnto himselfe, a kéeper out of the company of yt Demo∣nes, and not so much to choose vnto him this guide, as againe also, to be wished by him to defend him. This Demon be∣ing ye executor & kéeper of life, doth win life vnto ye body, & when it is in ye body, hath a care of it, & helpeth man for the very same office, to yt which, ye heuenly bodies haue appointed him in his birth. Whosoeuer then haue receiued a fortu∣nate Genius, are made in their workes
vertuous, mightie, & prosperous, where∣fore of the Philosophers, they are sayd, to be Bene fortunati, or Bene nati. The Demon of profession is giuen by the starres to whom such a profession or sent, is subiect, which any man shall professe, that the soule sometimes, doth priuelye wish, when now in this body, he hath be∣gun to vse choyce, & hath put on man∣ners. This Demon is chaunged when the profession is changed, & according to the worthines of the profession, they are present with vs, more worthy, and also more higher Demones of profession, which successiuely haue a care of yt mā, which daily getteth this & that Demon of profession, as he doth climbe vp from vertue to vertue. Wherefore when pro∣fession doth agrée with our nature, there is present with vs, the like Demon of profession, and agréeable with our Ge∣nius, & the life is made more quyet, hap∣py and prosperous. But when we take vpon vs a profession vnlyke or contra∣ry to the Genius, our life is made labo∣rious, & troubled with iarring aiders, so commeth it to passe, that some man may profit in some Science, or Art, or mini∣stery, in short space and labor, which in other things he laboureth in vaine, with much  weale & studie, and although no Science, no Art, no vertue, be to be dis∣pised, yet to the end thou maist, liue pro∣sperously, & deale luckely, chiefly knowe thy good Genius, & thy good nature, and what good the disposition of ye heauens, and God the distributer of all these, doth promise these, which distributeth to eue∣ry one as him listeth: follow the begin∣ning of these, professe all these things, be occupied in that vertue, to the which the almightie distributer aduanceth thée and guydeth thée, who made Abraham excell in righteousnes & gentlenes, Isa∣ac in feare, Iacob in strength, Moses in meekenesse & miracles, Iosua in warre, Phines in zeale, Dauid in religion and victory, Solomon in knowledge & praise, Peter in faith, Iohn in charitie, Iames in deuotion, Thomas in wisdome, Mag∣dalen in contemplation, and Martha in seruice. Wherfore haue a care to climbe vnto the toppe of that vertue, wherein thou shalt féele thy selfe to profit easely, that thou maist perseuer in one, that art not able to perseuer in all: yet despise not as much as thou canst, to profit in ye rest, & if thou shalt haue agréeable kee∣pers of nature & profession, thou shalt feele & double profit & increase of nature & profession. But if they be vnlyke, fol∣low the better, for sometime thou shalt perteine more good to growe vnto thee by a worthy profession, then by thy birth or natiuitie. ¶How diuers vertues are infused into diuers indiuidualls, euen of one selfe kinde. THere are also singular & wonderfull endowments as well in many of in∣diuidualls,Chap. 13. as in the specialls, euen from the figure of heauenly things & seituati∣on of the starres: for euery indiuidual, when he beginneth to be vnder a deter∣minate Horoscope & heauenly constel∣lation, draweth therwithall with his be∣ing, a certain wonderful vertue of wor∣king, & suffering a wōderfull thing, euen besides that whith it hath from his spe∣ciall, as well by ye influence of heauenly things, as by the obedience of ye matter, of things generable to the soule of the world, which doubtlesse is such, as the obedience to our bodies, is our soules: for we féele yt in our selues, which wée conceiue to euerye forme, cur bodye is mouch pleasantly, or fearfully, or by fli∣eng away: so oftentimes ye soule celesti∣all, when they conceiue diuers things, then ye matter is moued therevnto tho∣rough obedience. So in Nature, manye things appeare monsters, by ye imagina∣tions of ye vppermost mouings: so also, not only things naturall, but somtimes also things artificiall, conceiue diuers vertues, & this hapneth most of al, if the soule of ye worker bend it selfe thereto. Wherfore Auicenna saith, what things soeuer are done héere, they must néedes vs before in ye mouings & conceptions of the stars & Orbes: so are ther in things, diuers effects, inclinations & manners, not only framed by the varietie of the matter, but of the varietie of the influ∣ence, and of the diuersitie of the forme:
and this same not through ye specifical, but through ye perticular & proper diuersitie. And the degrées of those are diuersly di∣stributed by God, ye very first cause of al, (who continuing one selfe same, distri∣buteth to euery one as him listeth) with whom notwithstanding the second cau∣ses, & the Angelicall & the heauenly cau∣ses do worke, setting in order the bodily matter, & other things cōmitted to them charge, wherefore God infuseth all ver∣tues, through the soule of the worlde, yet by a peculiar vertue, of Images and ru∣ling intelligencies, & by a concourse & a certaine peculiar & harmonicall consent of the beames and aspects of the starres. Stones. From whence the hid∣den vertues doe proceede ALL men know that the Loadstone hath a certaine vertue,Chap. 13. wherewith hée draweth yron, & that the Diamond with his presence taketh away the vertue of ye Loadstone: so Amber & Geat, being rub∣bed & warmed, draweth chaffe or straw: The stone Abeston being kindled, is ne∣uer or scarcely quenched: The Carbun∣cle giueth light in darknesse: Aetites, or the Eagles stone being laid vppon, both strengthen the ofspring of women and plants, & laid vnderneth draweth them. The Iasper stone stancheth bloud: ye litle fish Eckines staieth a ship: Rubarb expel∣leth choler: The liuer of the Camelion burned vpon ye tiles of an house, rayseth raine and thunder. The stone Helitro∣pius doth dazle the ies & maketh him yt carrieth it inuisible. The stone Lincuri∣us taketh away illusions from the eyes. The fumigation of Lipparis, maketh al beasts to come abroad synochitides bri∣geth out the Ghosts below. Anachitides doth make the Images of heauenly bo∣dyes to appeare. Ennectis laid vnder thē which are a sléepe, maketh them to haue Oracles. There is an hearbe in Aethio∣pia, wherwith they report that standing pooles are dried, and all things shut are opened. And wee reade that the kings of the Persians gaue Embassadours the hearbe Latax, that wheresoeuer they came, they shuld haue store of all things. There is an hearb called Spartanica, or Herba Scytica, which beeing tasted or helpe in the mouth, they report, that the Scythians doe indure hunger and thirst .12. dayes together, and Apulei∣us sayth, That hée was taught by a di∣uine power, that there were many kind of hearbes and stones, by the which men might get them an euerlasting lyfe, but that it was not lawfull that men shuld haue the knowledge of them, who ly∣uing, but a small time, did gréedly séecke to doe mischiefe, and dare to attempt a∣nye wicked act, that if they should haue anye longer time, they would not spare God himselfe: but from whence these vertues are, none of them haue lefte in writing, that haue set forth greate vo∣lumes of the propertyes of things, not Hermes, not Pochas, not Aaron, not Orpheus, not Theophrastus, not The∣byth, not Zenothenus, not Zoroafter, not Enax, not Dioscorides, not Isaac the Iewe, not Zacharias of Babylon, not Albert, not Arnold, and yet all these haue confessed, as Zacharias wri∣teth to Mitridates, that theyr greate force, and mens destinies, are in the vertues of hearbes and stones, where∣fore a higher speculation is required, to know from whence these things doe come: Alexander the Peripaletike, not leauing his sences and qualyties, thinketh that these things procéedeth of the Elements and theyr qualities, which perchaunce might bée thought true, vn∣lesse these qualityes be of one selfe kind, and the operations of stones many, a∣gréeing neither in the kinde, nor in the kindred. Therefore the Accademikes with their Plato,Generalls. Specialls. attribute these vertues to the Idee or causeites, the shapers or former of thinges. But Auicen∣na doth referre these operations to the intelligences, Hermes to the starrrs, Al∣bert to the speciall formes of things: And albeit these Authoures séeme to bée against one another, yet none of them if he be well vnderstood, doe swarue from the truth, forasmuch as all their saiengs in many things doe agrée to one effect: For God the beginning, the ende, and originall of all vertues, doth first
of all, giue the seale of Ideas or con∣ceits, to the intelligences of his mini∣sters, which as faythfull executors doe seale with an Ideall vertue all thinges committed vnto them in the heauens & starres, as it were instrumentes, which heauens and starres in the meane sea∣son doe dispose the matter, to receiue those forines which do rest in the diuine Maiestye: As Plato sayth in Tnee, to be diuided by the Starres, and the gi∣uer of formes hath distributed them, by the ministrye of the intelligencies, which he hath appointed rulers and kéepers o∣ver his workes, to whom that faculty is committed, in things committed vnto them, yt all the vertue of stones, hearbs, mettalls, and of all things else, should be from the very intelligences bering rule. Wherefore forme and vertue, doth first procéed from ye Idee or conceites, next frō the intelligences ruling and gouerning, afterward from the aspects of ye heuens ordering, lastly from the ordred complec∣tions of the Elements, correspondent to the influences of the heauens, by whom the Elements bée ordered: Wherefore such operations are had in those inferior things, by expresse formes, but in ye hea∣uens by ordering vertues, in the intelly∣gences, by meanes comming betwéene, in the chiefe Patrone by the examplar Ideas, consents or formes, all which must néeds agree, in the execution of the effect and vertue of euery thing, wherfore ther is a wonderfull vertue and operation in euery hearbe and stone, but greater in a starre, more then also euery thing get∣teth himselfe many things from the ru∣ling intelligences, but chiefly from the vppermost cause, wherevnto all things, as depending one of another, and made perfect, are corespondent, sounding in our melodious consent, alwayes praising to∣gether ye almighty worke, with certeine himnes, euer as they are willed by those holy youths singing in the Chaldes for∣nasse, blesse the Lord all things yt spring vpon the earth, and all things that moue in the waters, all birds of the ayre, shéep, and cattell together with the children of men: wherefore there is no other cause of the necessitie of effectes, but a conec∣tion of al things, with the first cause and corespondents to these diuine patternes and euerlasting Ideas or conceits, from whence euery thing in the chiefe pat∣terne hath his determinate peculiar place, from whence he leueth and taketh his beginning. And wherein all the ver∣tue of hearbes, stones, mettalics, liuing creatures, words and prayers, and of all things which are from God is ingrassed, which although it worketh by the intel∣ligences and heauens on those bodyes belowe, yet oftentimes omitting those meanes, or suspending their ministrye, God immediatlye doth those thinges of himselfe, which then are called wonder∣full workes, for with the rule and or∣der of the first cause, the seconde causes which Plato, and others call ministers, doe of necessitie worke, and of necessitye bring forth their effectes, yet oftentimes God doth so end or suspend them for his plesure, that they quite leaue of from the necessitie of his rule and order. And these are the excéeding great wonders of God. So the fire in the fire of the Chaldes burned not the youths. So the Sunne at the commandement of Iosua, went back from his course for the space of one day. So at the praier of Ezechia: the Sunne went backe .10. lines or houres. So at Christs passion in the full of the Moone, the Sun was eclipsed. And the resons of these operations cannot be found out or atteined vnto by no discourse of reason, by no Magike, by no knowledge bée it neuer so hid or profound, but are to bée learned and searched out by Gods Ora∣cles alone. Of the Spirit of the world, what he is, and that he is the bonde of hidden vertues. DEmocritus and Orpheus,Chap. 14. a man of ye Pithagorians, most carefull séeking out the force of heauenly things, and the natures of things belowe, sayde that all things were full of the Gods: and not without a cause, for there is nothing of such excellent force, which being voide of Gods helpe is content with his owne nature. And they called the diuine ver∣tues
spread abroade in things: Gods; which Zoroaster named Diuine alurars, Scynecius, simbolicall intice∣mentes, others liues, others also soules, and saide that the vertues of thinges did depende of them: because it concerneth the soule alone from one matter to be extended to other things, about the which shée worketh, as a man which extendeth his vnderstanding to things intelligible, and his imagination to things imaginable, and this is that which they vnderstood, saieng. To wit, the soule of one sence or béeing, goeth out, and entereth into another thing, be∣witcheth it, and letteth his operations, e∣uen as the Diamonde letteth the Load∣stone to drawe yron: but forasmuch as the soule is primum mobile, and as they saye, Sponte et per se mobile, and the body or matter of it selfe not able to moue, and swaruing far from the soule. Therefore they say that a more excellent means is required, to wit, that it is as it were not a bodye, but as it were now a soule, or as it were not a soule, as it were now a bodie, whereby to wit, the soule is knit to the body: and they feine that the spirite of the worlde is such a meane, to wit, whome we tearme the quinticense, because he doth not consist of the foure Elementes, but is a certaine fifth, a thing aboue them or beside them: Wherefore such a spirite is necessarilye required, as a meane by the which the heauenlye soules are in the grose bo∣dye, and bestowe wonderfull endow∣ments. This spirit doubtlesse is in a manner such in the body of the world, as ours is in mans body: For as the power of our soule, are through the spirit giuen to the members: so the vertue of the soule of ye world is by the quintecense spread ouer all, for nothing is found in all the world which wanteth the sparke of his vertue: yet more and most of all, it is powred in∣to those which haue drawen in verye much of such a spirite, and it is drawen in by the rayes of the starres, as farre forth as the thinges make themselues confirmable vnto them: By this spi∣rit then, all hidden propertye is spread abroade, vpon hearbes, stones, and met∣talls, and vppon liuing creatures: by the Sunne, by the Moone, by the Pla∣nets, and by the Starres, higher then the Planets: And this spirit maye the more profite vs, if a man knowe howe to seuer him most of all from other Ele∣ments, or at least very much to vse those things which most of all abound of this spirit: for those things in the which that spirit is lesse plunged in the bodie, and matter is lesse ministred, do work more mightly and perfectly, and also doe sooner ingender and beget a thing lyke vnto them. For all vertue generatiue and of séede is in it, wherefore the Alcumisla indeauour to seperate that spirite from golde and siluer, which béeing well seue∣red and drawen out, if afterwarde they applye him to any matter of the same kind, that is, to any of the mettalls, they shall immediatly make golde or siluer: And I my selfe know how to doe it, and once sawe it: but I could make no more golde, then the wright of that gold was, out of the which I drew the spirite, for seeing that spirit, is forme Extensa,Stretched out and bent in. & not Intensa, he cannot alter an vnperfect body into a perfect, beyond his measure: which notwithstanding I deny not, but that it may bée brought to passe by some other skill. ¶How wee ought to seeke out and make tryall of the vertues of things, by a way taken of a si∣militude. IT appeareth then that the hidden properties are not ingraffed in thinges by the Elementall nature,Cap. 15. but from aboue, are hidden to our sences: and finallye vnneth knowen to reason, which doubtlesse procéede from the lyfe and spirit of the worlde, through those beames of the Starres, which canne bée sought out by vs none otherwise, then by experience and coniectures, wherefore thou gréedye man which desirest to trauayle in this studye, oughtest to consider that euerye thing mooueth and tourneth to his lyke,
and inclineth to himselfe according to al his might, as well in propertie, to wit, in hidden vertue, as in qualitie, to wit, in vertue elementall:Propertye consists  hiddē vertue, but quali∣ty in ver∣tue ele∣mentall. sometimes also in very substaunce, as wee see in Salt, for whatsoeuer standeth long with salt, doth become salt, for euery agent when he shall begin to doe, doth not moue to a thing lower then himselfe: but after a sort, as much as may be, mooueth to his lyke, and match: which also manifestlye we see, in sensible liuing creatures, in whom the vertue nutritiue doth change meate, not into hearbs or plant, but doth turne it into sensible flesh, wherfore those things in the which there is the excesse of any qualitie or propertie, as heat, cold, votonesse, feare, sorrow, anger, loue, ha∣tred, or any other passion, or vertue, whe∣ther it be in them by nature, or some∣times also by act or chance, as boldnesse in a harlot, doe most of all mooue & pro∣uoke to such a qualitie, passion, and ver∣tue. So fire mooueth to fire, and water moueth to water, and bold person moo∣ueth to boldnesse. And it is knowen a∣mong the Phisitions yt the braine helpeth the braine, and the lungs, the lungs. So they say, that the right eye of a Frogge, helpeth the right eie, the left eie the left. Beeing hung about the necke in a cloth of a naturall coulour, helpeth bleared∣nesse.Whether a Tor∣teise or a Hedghog The lyke also they report of the eyes of a Crab. So the féete of an Hedg∣hogge are good for the gout, so bound, that foote may be hung to foote, hand to hand, the right to the right, the left to the left. After this sort they say, that euery barren liuing creature, prouoketh to barrennes. and of him most of all the stones, and the matrite or the vrine. So they say that a woman conceiueth not, that taketh mo∣nethly of the vrine of an Elum, or anye thing stiped therin. If thē we wil work for any propertie of vertue, let vs séeke for liuing creatures or other things, in yt which such a property is more excellent∣ly, and of them let vs take the part, in yt which such property or vertue hath most force. As if at any time we will prouoke loue, let vs séek for some liuing creature, which most of al loueth, as are ye Doue, the Turtle, the Swallow, and the Wag∣taile, and of them let vs take the mem∣bers of the parts, in the which the vene∣rial appetite haue the most force, which are the heart, the stones, the matrixe, the member, the sperms, and the Menserum: & let that be done at such time, as these liuing creatures are most of all deligh∣ted with such affection or desire, and bend themselues to the same, for then they greatly prouoke and cause loue. In like manner to increase boldnesse, let vs séeke for a Lyon or a Cocke, & of them let vs take the heart, the eyes, or the forehead, and so must we vnderstande that which Psellus the Platonike sayth, that Dogs, Crows & Cocks, tend to watching: so do also the Nightingale, ye Bat, & the night Rauen, and of those chiefly the head, the heart, and the eyes. Wherefore they say, if a man carry about him the heart of a Crowe, or a Bat, he shall not sléepe vn∣till he put him away: The same doth the head of a Batte bound drye to the right arme of him that is awake: for if hée bée put vpon one sléeping, it is sayde he will not awake vntill the same be taken a∣way. In the same manner a Frog and an Owle doe make one to speake, and of them chiefly the tongue and the heart. So the tongue of the water Frog layde vnder the head, maketh a man speake in his sléepe, and the heart of an Owle laid vpon ye left brest of a woman sléeping, is sayd to make hir vtter all hir secrets: the heart of a night Crowe, and the fat of a Hare layd vpon the brest of one sléeping, is reported to doe the lyke. In the same sort all liuing creatures of long lyfe, are good for long lyfe, and which to euer of them haue in them a renewing vertue, are good for the renwing of our bodies, & restoring of youth, which the Phisitions often times haue shewed themselues to knowe, as it is manifest of the Uiper & the Serpent: and it is knowne that the Hartes renewe their olde age vp eating of Serpents. In the same manner the Phoenix is renwed by the fire which be buildeth for himselfe. And the like vertue is in the Pellican, whose right foote if he put vnder hot doung three moneths af∣ter, a Pellican is thereof ingendered a new. Wherefore some Phisitions by
certaine confections of the Uiper & He∣leborus, and by the confected flesh of some such liuing creatures, doe promise to re∣store youth, and otherwise restore if, some oftentimes also they profer such youth as Medea promised aud restored to olde Pelias her father. It is also belee∣ued that the bloud of a Beare drawen out of a fresh woūd, by layeng thy mouth thereto, doth by this kinde of drinke in∣crease the strength of the body, because that liuing creature is very strong. How the operations of diuerse vertues are powred out from one thing to another, and doe communicate the one with an∣other. Chap. 16THou oughtest to knowe that the power of naturall thinges is so greate, that not onely they mooue all things that are néere them by their ver∣tues, but also besides this, they powre into them the lyke power, by the which through the selfe same vertue, they also mooue other thinges, euen as wee see in the Loadstone: which stone doubtlesse doth not onely drawe yron rings, but al∣so giueth them a force by the which they may doe the lyke: wherof Augustine and Albert do write yt they sawe. In ye same sort it is sayde, that a common strumpet in whome there is boldnesse (and bash∣fulnesse,) is banished through the selfe same property, doth moue al things néere vnto her, which afterward yéeld the same to others. Therefore they say, that if one put on the smocke of a whoore, or carrye with him a looking glasse, wherein shee dayly sawe her selfe, hée shall become bolde, vnfearefull, shamelesse, and leche∣rous. In like sort they say that the cloth that hath bene at a buriall, doth gather thereby a certaine saturnall property of sadnesse: and that the rope wherein one was hāged hath certaine marualous pro∣perties. Like to this is that which Ply∣nie reporteth, if one cast earth vnder a gréene Lizaard that hath his own putte out, and to gather in a glassy vossel shut close, vp rings of Massie yron or golde, when it shall appeare, that the Lizarde hath receiued his light through ye glasse, the rings are good against bleared eies: The same also is of force in a Wesell, whose eyes beeing put out by pricking, it is euidēt also that they haue seene again. Likewise also rings are put for a certein time in a Sparrowes or Swallowes neast, which afterward is vsed for loue or good will. ¶How by strife and friendship, the vertues of things are to be found out and experienced. IT now resteth to sée that all things haue betweene them loue and dis∣cord,Chap. 17. & euery thing hath some thing to be feared, and horrible, discording and ten∣ding to destruction. Contrariwise some thing reioycing, cherishing, & comforting: So in Elements, fire is contrary to the water, & the aire to the earth, but yet they all agree together againe in heauenly bo∣dies, Mercury, Iupiter, Sol, & Luna, are friends to Saturne: Mars, and Venus are his enimies: al the planets sauing Mars, are Iupiters friends: so also all hate Mars sauing Venus, Iupiter and Venus loues sol: Mars, Mercury, and Luna are his enimies, all loue Venus, sauing Saturne. Iupiter, Venus, and Saturne, are friends to Mercurie: Sol, Luna, and Mars are his enimies, Friends to Luna, are Iupiter, Venus, and Saturne Mars, and Mercu∣ry, are his enimies. There is another en∣mity of the stars, to wit, when they haue opposite houses, as Saturne to ye lyghts, Iupiter to Mercury, Mars to Venus: & the stronger enimitie of them is, whose exalations are opposite, as of Saturne & the Sunne, of Iupiter and Mars. but the strongest friendship is of them which a∣grée in nature, qualitie, substance, & pow∣er, as Mars with Sol, and Venus with Luna, likewise Iupiter wt Venus. And there is a friendship of them, whole ex∣altation is in the house of another, as of Saturne with Venus,One a∣gainst an∣other. of Iupiter with Luna, of Mars with Saturne, of sol with Mars, of Venus with Iupiter, of the Moone with Venus. And such as are the friendships & enmities of the bodies aboue: such are ye inclinations of things
vnder them in those inferiour bodies. Wherefore these friendshippes and enmities are nothing else but certaine inclinations of things among thēselues, in desiring such a thing or such a thing, if it be awaye, and to be moued vn∣to it, vnlesse it bée letted, or to repose it selfe in that it hath gotten, in shunning the contrarye, and fearing to come néere it, & not to rest content therewith. Wher∣fore Heraclitus béeing lead with this o∣pinion, did confesse that all things were made by strife and friendship. There are also inclinations of friendships in Uige∣tables and mineralls, as the Loadstone hath to yron, the Emeralde to riches and fauour. The stone Iaspis to child-birth. The stone Achatis to eloquence, ANap∣tha, draweth fire vnto it, and fire leapeth into it wheresoeuer it be séene. Likewise the root of ye hearb Aproxis draweth fire vnto it frō a far off, as Naptha doth: and ye lyke inclination is betwéene the male & female date trée, of whō when a bough of ye one shal tuch a bough of ye other, they fold thēselues into a natural imbracing, neither doth ye female bring forth fruit wt∣out the male: And the Almond trée gro∣wing alone is unfruitfull: Uines loue the Elme trée, and the Oliue trée, and the Mirtle loue one the other: likewise the Oliue trée, and the Fig trée. But among the liuing creatures, there is friendship betwéene the black bird and the Thrush, betwéene the Choffe and the Hearon, be∣twéene, the Pecockes and the Doues. FINIS LIBRI VNDECIMI. ¶INCIPIT LIBER DVODECI∣MVS. DE AVIBVS IN GENERALI. FOrasmuch as the treatise is ended of the properties of the aire, and of things that bee gendered therein: it is couenable to this pre∣sent volume to treate of some things, which belong to ye worship and adorning thereof, that in those as in other creatures, the mightie magnificēce of God may be praysed. ¶To the ornament of the aire belon∣geth birdes and foules, as Beda saith: and therefore by the helpe and goodnesse of Iesus Christ, somewhat of them shal be treated consequently in this Booke. Not of all, but onely of such birdes and foules, which be speciallye spoken off in the text of the Bible, or in the Glose. And first we shall speak in generall, and then in speciall, and that by the order of A.B.C. ¶Birdes bée called Aues, as it were Deuie, as it were without way, as Isi∣dore sayth. For their wayes in the ayre, bée not distingued in certaine. And birds with mouing of wings,Limited or diui∣ded. diuide & departe the aire, but anone after the flight, the aire closeth it selfe, and leaneth no signe nor token of their passage & flight. And foules bée called Volucres, and haue that name of Volare, to flye, for birdes flye with wings, as Isidore saith, and there∣fore they bée called Alites, as it were A∣lates, that is mouing and rearing vp thē∣selues with wings. For they flye not without wings,Lift vp of mount a loft. nor areare themselues from the earth vp into the aire without ye benefit of wings: or else a bird is called Ales, and hath that name of Alendo, fée∣ding. For he is fedde of him that féedeth birdes and foules of heauen, and giueth meate to all flesh, as Isidore sayth. The conditions and properties of birdes and foules, be knowen by many things: by theyr substance and complection. For the substance of birds and foules is made of
two middle elements, that be betwéene the two Elements that be most heauie, and most light. For in their compositi∣on and making, ayre and water hath most mastrye: and therefore they haue lesse of earthly heauinesse, and more of lightnesse of the ayre, then beastes that goe on land, and swimme on water: By lightnesse of their substance they be born vp into the aire, as Isidore saith. And the aire that is closed in the hollownesse of pennes and feathers, maketh a Birde lyght, and disposeth and maketh him a∣ble, and helpeth him to mooue vpwarde. Therefore the more birdes haue of hol∣lownesse of pens & multitude of feathers, and the lesse flesh, the more easily they reare themselues and flye vpward: As it fareth in Fowles of praye, that bée dis∣charged of weight and flesh, & flye most high, and be wonderfull sharpe of sight, and full bolde and hardie, as Aristotle saith li. 12. Also the condition of Birdes is knowne by generation, for they haue a seminall vertue of kind pight in them: And by vertue thereof they be kindlye moued to increase their kinde by déede of generation, and to kéepe their kind in or∣der, as it is said of Aristotle. li. 6. All birds (he saith) and foules, when they bring forth birds, lay egges, though it cannot bée séene in all for scarcitye. And the beginning of generation of a Birde, (as it is sayde there) commeth of the white, and his meate is the yolke. And after ten daies of the generation, a birde is full shapen in all parts, and the parts be openly distinguished & knowen. But then his head is greater then all the body. And if the egge shell were then broken, the head shoulde be founde bow∣ed vppon the right thigh, and his wings spread vpon the head. When the gene∣ration of all the members is perfectlye made, and liniation and shape of the members, the shell breaketh, sometime the eightéenth daye, or the twentye day, as it fareth in hennes. And then the chickens come out of the shell aliue bée∣ing full shape, and sometime twaine out of one shell. But among such twinnes that come out of one shell, the one is more, and that other lesse, and more wonderfullye shapen, as he sayth there, liber. 6. Among all beasts that bée in order of generation, birdes and foules bée most honest of kinde. For by order of kinde males seeke females with busi∣nesse, and loue them when they be found, and fight and putte them in perill for them, and bée ioyned to them onely as it were by couenant, and wedding loue. And nourish and féede onely the Birdes that they gette. And so kindlye they déeme and knowe betwéene sexe and sexe, male and female, except fewe, whome kinde goeth out of kinde, as A∣ristotle sheweth an ensample of the Par∣tridge, that forgetteth his sexe, that is to vnderstande, distinction of male and female: and so be sayth, that the male leapeth vpon the male, and the female vp∣pon the female. But of the egges that come of such treading come no birds, but they bée as winde Egges, and take an e∣uill sauour of such treading, and an euill stench. Also it is sayd of the Culuour cocke, that when he is old and may not tread, but onely bill, he leapeth vppon another Culuour cock. And birds and foules gen∣dering kéep couenable time: for in spring∣ing time, when the generation commeth in, birdes crie and sing, males drawe to companye of females, and desire each o∣ther of loue, and wooe with beckes and voyce, and build neasts, and laye egges, and bring forth birdes: and when the Birdes be gendered, they féede and nou∣rishe them, and bring them vp: But when the office of generation is full en∣ded, then they cease off song, and departe from each other, and come not together till the time of generation commeth a∣gaine. Also Birdes and fowles bée knowen by the places that they dwel in. For some birdes & foules (as it séemeth) loue com∣pany, and dwelling nigh men, as hennes, Géese, Sparrows, and Storkes, and swa∣lowes: And some dreade and flye, and be afearde of conuersation of men, as fowles of woodes, of mountaines, of ri∣uers, and of marreyes. For by theyr di∣uerse complections, they seek & challenge diuerse manner of places to inhabitie in.
For those that be colde and moyst of kinde vse marries and riuers for gathe∣ring of meate, and for making of neasts, for sitting on broode, and for to bring vp and nourish vp theyr Birdes, as Cootes and wilde Mallards, and Swannes: In whome (as Aristotle saith) kinde ordei∣neth wisely: For they haue broade clo∣sed and hollow féete for néedfull swim∣ming, that they maye by the breadth of theyr fooe the better put and shooue the water backwarde. And so when water is shooued backwarde, they stretch them∣selues forward, as it were rowing. Also they haue broad bills for to gather grasse and rootes, cutte them and bite the more couenable. And long neckes to take vp their meate the more calilier out of the déep waters, and also to seek meat in déep∣nesse. And birdes and fowles that bée of more hot and drie kinde, dwell in moun∣taines, and on high rockes and stones, as Birdes and foules that liue by pray, as Eagles & Fawlcons, and other such, to the which (as Arist. saith) kinde giueth crooked clawes & strong féet and sinewy, and crooked billes and sharpe, to holde strongly theyr praye, and to drawe and eare flesh the more easily: and such birds and Fowles haue little flesh and many feathers, and be full bold and hardy, that they may be ye more swifter of mouing, and the stronger of flight, as Aristotle sayth. Also they haue long tailes, subtill, and thinne, by the which they rule them∣selues in flight, as the helme ruleth and stirreth the Shippe. And as Aristotle sayth libro penno. All such foules loue desart places and wildernesses, and may not dwell with anye of theyr fellows, but put from them their owne Birdes. And anone when they maye flye, they beate them with their billes, and driue them out of theyr neast, and suffer them not to liue in theyr companye, as Ari∣stotle sayth. These and other Fowles of praye, haue diuerse manner of dooing in taking of praye. For some take theyr praye slyeng in the aire, and réeseth ne∣uer on pray vppon the ground. And some contrary wise take theyr praye on the ground, and they neuer gréeue theyr pray in the ayre. And certaine wilde Fowles as Culuours knowe well the diuers do∣ing of such Fowles in taking of praye. And therefore when they see the pray ta∣kers of the ayre, they flye to the ground: And when they see the pray takers of the grounde, they flye sodeinly vp into the aire. And they that were in perill on the ground, are sure and safe in the aire, as he sayth. Also some wood foules vse and dwell in woods, and in thicke toppes of trées. And some of these bée more milde then other: as Birdes that sing in Summer time with swéet notes in woods & trées, as Thirstils and Nightingales, & other such that sing most speciallye in time of loue: And they make theyr neastes in shrubbes and in bushes, and sit busilye abroode vpon their egges, and loue theyr birdes, and bring them vp. And other birdes there bée, that loue namely fields, and vse to bée therein and gette them meate, and eate continually of the fruite of the earth: as Cranes & Géese, both wild and tame. And such foules loue to dwell togethers, both on the grounde and in the aire, and go and flie in heardes, and loue their owne kinde, and make a king among them, and bée obedient to him, and flye in order and in araie, and fight somtime full strongly among thēselues, and rent and wounde and pull ofte each other with their billes: But after that fighting, as they were reconciled, they flie togethers, & leaue not therefore com∣panie: And they haue foreknowledge of tempest of weather, and when they see that it commeth, they gather and crye: And they ordeine watches, and in wa∣king chaunge plates. All this is contei∣ned in Exmeron of Basile, and of Am∣brose also. And lykewise it is read in Aristotle. Also Aristotle putteth more héereto, & saith, that the Crane that wal∣keth for the watche by night, holdeth a lyttle stone in his foote, that if he hap to fall a sléepe, he maye bee waked by falling of the stone. And also if a Crane loose his fellowshippe, he flyeth vp high, and cal∣leth and crieth and seeketh his fellowes, and till he findeth them, vnneth he com∣meth downe to haue meat: also he saith,
that the king of those Birdes always lighteth down first, and ariseth first from the earth, and taketh first his flight. Also he arreareth vp his head & looketh about after then other, and if hée see one comming, hée cryeth and waketh all his fellowes, and warneth them of pe∣rills. Also the propertyes of some Foules bée knowen by diuersitye of eating. For some eate nothing but flesh or, bloud, as all the birdes and foules of pray with crooked beakes and sharpe clawes, that eate all beasts that they may hunt: But they hunt not nor eate no fowle of their owne kinde, as fish eate fish of their own kinde, as Aristotle sayth li. 7. And such birds and foules drinke neuer water, as he sayth there. And there be other birds that eate one∣ly seeds and fruit, and hearbes that grow on the ground, as Doues and Turtures and Geese both wilde and tame. And o∣ther foules there be, that onely eate now flesh, and nowe fruite indifferentlye, as gladly that one as that other: as foules of rauen kinde, as Choughes, Crowes, Rookes, Rauens, and Pies, of the which Aristotle sayth and Basilius also, That foules of Rauens kinde feede their birds in youth, and the young féede the olde in their age. Also when the olde waxe fee∣ble, the young helpe them, and beare them on their shoulders, as he sayth. And in all such Fowles kinde mildnesse is praised, that men may bée ashamed to withdrawe or to denye to serue Father and mother, insomuch he knoweth that Birdes serue and helpe each other, as Ambrose sayth. Also the propertyes of birdes and Foules bee knowen by dis∣position of members. For as Aristotle sayth, Idecimo tercio. In this all foules accorde, that all Foules haue billes, that are not founde in other beastes. But they be diuerse in disposition: For some haue short billes and broade, and theyr lyfe is quite and milde, for such a bill is able to take meate that is nigh. And some haue long billes and sharpe, for they take theyr meate out of déepe pla∣ces. And some haue sharpe bills and croo∣ked, for such a shape it needefull to eate, to hale and to drawe, and to rent rawe flesh. And all Foules haue these proper∣ties, that euerye foule hath two féete as a man. But in disposition of féete and of legges is most diuersitye found. For the feete of clouefooted foules bee strong and sharpe, for they bée able and according to pray and to hunting: And the féete of water foules be close, hollow, and broad: for they bée able to swimme. And all foules with long féete, haue long necks, and flye stretching out theyr neckes. And if the necke bée small and féeble, hée beareth it downe in flyeng. And it is ge∣nerall, that euery foule that hath a shorte eecke, hath shorte thighes, and againe∣ward. And euery foule hath a nauil whē he is bread. But when the foule wareth, the nauill is hidde and not seene. For it is continued with a gut by a vaine that is within. Also properties of foules may be kno∣wen by swift or slow bréeding of birds, as a Culuour that breedeth tenne times in one yeere, and some laye many egges as an hen: and some lay oft as hens and Couluoures, and hennes that laye many egges, die soone, as Aristotle saith. lib. 5. And foules with crooked clawes that eat flesh, laye seldome egges, for they lay but once a yeare, except the Swallowes, that onely among foules that eate flesh, laye egges twice a yéere. And foules waxe sicke when they sit abroode vppon their egges, as it fareth in the henne, and in the Eagle, of the which it is sayd. li. 6. For then the Eagle is sore gréeued, and her wings waxe white, and her clawes goule and féeble. Many other properties be of foules, the which were too long to recken all a row. Héere it née∣deth onely to knowe that among other kinde of beastes, generally Foules are most pure and lyght, and noble of sub∣stance, and swift of mouing, and sharpe of light, of flesh of good digestion, and good sauour, and turning into féeding & whol∣some. Also foules be full busie in making neasts, and bréeding and féeding of theyr birds. This that is said in generall shal suffice at this time. Of the Eagle. chap. 1.
NOw it perteineth to speake of birds, and foules in perticular, and first of the Eagle, which hath principalitye a∣mong fowles. Among all manner kinds of diuerse fowles, the Eagle is the more liberall and frée of heart, as Plinius saith. For the pray that she taketh, ex∣cept it be for great hunger, shée eateth not alone, but putteth it forth in com∣mon to fowles that follow her: But first she taketh her owne portion and parte. And therfore oft other fowles follow the Eagles, for hope and trust to haue some part of hir pray. But when the pray that is taken is not sufficient to her self, then as a king that taketh heed of a Comint, hée taketh the bird that is next to him, and giueth it among the other, and ser∣ueth them therewith. And she setteth in her neast two precious stones, which hée called Achates. The one of them is male, and that other female. And it is sayde, that they maye not bring foorth their birdes without those stones. And she layeth in her neast that precious stone that is called Achates, to kéepe her birdes from the venimous biting of crée∣ping worms, as Plinius saith. And ye Ea∣gle is called Aquila, and hath that name of sharpnesse of eien, as Isidor. sayth. For she hath so strong, and so sharp, and cléere sight, (as it is sayde) that when shée is borne and flieth vp into the aire, and ho∣ueth aboue the Sea so high, that vnneth shée is seene with mans sight. And out and from so great highnesse, shée séeth a smal fish swimme in the Sea, and falleth downe anone, as it were a stone, and ta∣keth sodeinely the fish, and draweth the prays that is so taken sodeinelye to the cliffe. And is a Birde hotte and drye of kinde, and desireth prays, and is ryght strong, bolde, and hardye, passing the strength and boldnesse of other birdes, and his strength is most e wings, féete, and bill. For hée hath sinewye wings, and little flesh, and therfore in his flight hée may well awaye with trauaile. For in comparison to the greatnesse of his bo∣die, he hath but little flesh, & therefore hée hath much strength and vertue. Also hée hath many feathers, and therfore he con∣teineth much lightnesse. And among all Fowles, in the Eagle the vertue of sight is most mightye and strong. For in the Eagle the spirit of sight is most tempe∣rate, and most sharpe in act and deede of séeing and beholding the Sunne in the roundnesse of his circle, without anye blemishing of eyen. And the sharpenesse of her sight is not rebounded againe with cléernesse of light of the Sunne, nei∣ther dispearpled, as Ambrose sayth. Also Ambrose sayth, and Aristotle libro. 20. that ther is one māner Eagle that he cal∣leth Almachor, and is ful sharpe of sight, and shée taketh her owne birdes in her claws, and maketh them to looke euen on the Sunne, and that ere their wings bée full growen, and except they looke stiflye and steadfastly against the Sunne: shée beateth them, and setteth them euen be∣fore the Sunne. And if any eie of any of her Birdes watereth in looking on the Sunne, shée slaieth him, as though he went out of kind: or else driueth him out of the neast, and dispiseth him, and set∣teth not by him: and the birde that be∣holdeth and setteth his eie steadfastly vp∣pon the Sun, she féedeth and loueth him as her owne birde, lyke to her in kinde: and though she sette her sight neuer so straight and steadfast on the Sunne, yet she casteth her eie to waite and espie af∣ter her praye, as Gregorye sayth. And Aristotle. libro. 12. sayth, that cloue footed Birdes neede sharpe sight. For they see meate from a right farre place: & therfore the Eagle flieth higher then other fouler, and therfore she buildeth her neast in ful high rockes, there she maketh her neast sure, and defendeth it with highnesse of place, as Grego. sayth. The Eagle dwel∣leth sure and safe in most high places, and neuerthelesse because of meate shee looketh and seeth these lowe places: He flyeth highest vpward, and commeth so∣deinlye downewarde, when hee séeth a carrion, or some other pray, he desireth. (AdditiōIn the .11. of Leuiticus wherin is ex∣pressed of beasts, fishes, & birds, which bee cleane & to be eaten, ye text saith, these be those kinds of birds yt shall not be eaten. The Eagle, the Gosehawke, the Ospray, the Uulture, the Kite, and all Rauens,
the Estridge, the night crowe, the Cockoe, the Hault, the Fawlcon, the Cormo∣rant, ye great Owle, the Back or flinder∣mouse, the Pellican, the Pie, the Storke, the Iay, the Lapwing, & the Swallow, the Gléed or Bussard, the Redshanke, the Swan, the Stork, the Hearon, De. 14. ye Eagle is called in Hebrew Neser, of the Chaldes Nisra, of ye Persiās Ansi mureg, of ye Latins Aquila, his colour is brown on the backe, & somewhat whitish, graye on the brest, yeolowish legged, blacke ta∣lented & sharpe sighted: he is enimy to ye hart, to the Hare, and to the dragon, he ouercommeth the hart or stagge, by ligh∣ting on his head: hauing gathered on his wings a great quantitie of dust, taketh hold of his hornes, and by beating of his wings, he forceth the dust into the Hart or stagges eyes, and ceaseth not vntill he hath ouer wearied the beast that he fall downe, of the which he taketh his praye, & leaueth the rest. The Hare she striketh on the head, and carryeth cleane away, & so of young kids, lambes, pigges, & géese. Gesner in his third booke of birds. Seba∣stian Munster, &c. Also the Eagle is a foule that seldome sitteth a broode, and seldome hath birdes, and nourisheth and féedeth her birds. Libro sexto Aristotle saith, yt the Ea∣gle laieth thrée egges at the most, & thro∣weth the third egge out of the neast: for she sitteth a brood heauylye thervppon. And he sayth furthermore, that at that time she is so much féebled, that she maye not well hunt birds of other foules: for then her clawes be crooked, & her wings waxe white, and then she is sore grée∣ned in féeding of her birdes. And if it happeneth that ye Eagle hath thrée birds, she throweth out one of her neast, for difficulty of féeding and nourishing: But a bird that is called Ossifraga, & is called Cebar in the language of Arabia, féedeth ye bird yt the Eagle casteth so haply out of her neast, as he sayth. Also he sayth, that there be diuerse kinds of Eagles, & they feed diuersly their birds: for Eagles with white tailes, trauaile more in féeding of their birds, thē Eagles with black tailes, which trauaile lesse in such dooing. And when her birds bée ready for to flye, shée putteth them out of her neast, and exci∣teth and comforteth them lyttle and lit∣tle for to flye, and maketh them fast and to be hungry, for to haue the more desire to come after her into the aire, because of meate. And if it happen that they bée slow to passe out of her nest, then she smi∣teth them with her bill, & withdraweth from them their meate, to constraine thē in that manner to passe out of the neast. And after that they be full in strength and in feathers, she driueth them awaie from her, and is no more busie aboute thē, except one manner kinde of Eagles, that Aristotle calleth Athat, that thinke long time on her birds. And when her birds flye, she flyeth with them, and gi∣ueth them meate, and flyeth sometime a∣bout them, and taketh heede of them, and is ready to withstand other foules, if it so be that they come to grieue or to noy hir birds. Aristotle toucheth all this. li. 6. as Gregory toucheth super Iob. It is said of the Eagle, that when hir young birds be newly hatcht: and vn∣mightie to take & receiue and defie great meat, then ye mother sucketh bloud, & flee∣ting humour out of her pray, & holdeth it in her mouth, and putteth the bloud and such humour to the mouthes of her birdes. And féedeth them so with lyght meat, till they bée strong and able to re∣ceiue & take stronger meate. And héereto Austen saith and Plinie also, that in age the Eagle hath darknesse & dimnesse in eien, & heauinesse in wings. And against this disaduantage she is taught by kinde, to séeke a well of springing water, and then she flyeth vp into the asre as farre as she may, till she be full hot by heat of the aire, and by trauaile of flight, and so then by heate the pores be opened, & the feathers chased, and she falleth sodeinlye into the well, and there the feathers bee chaunged, and the dimnesse of her eien is wiped away and purged, and she taketh againe her might and strength. Also he sayth, that when the Eagle ageth, the bill wareth so hard and so croo∣ked, that vnneth he may take his meate. And against this disaduantage he findeth a remedy. For he seeketh a stone, against
the which he smiteth and beateth strong∣lye his bill, and cutteth of the charge of the bill, and receiueth meate and might and strength, and so becommeth young againe. And as Plinius saith, The Eagle fitteth on a rock or on a trée, & setteth the sight of her eyen against the cléernesse of the Sunne, or casteth her eien, & looketh hether and thether to espie her pray, or else beholdeth her owne clawes alway. Her gall is full medicinable: for when it is done in Collirijs, it sharpeth the sight, and helpeth against dimnesse, and other diseases of eien, as Dioscorides saith, & Constantine also. And hath some proper∣tyes lesse worthy to be praysed, as is a Birde passing in heate and in drynesse: and therefore he is bolde and hardie and wrathfull: And for strong wrath is not but in bodies of great drinesse, as Arist. sayth libro decimo sexto. The Eagle is enimy to innocent birds and foules, and pursueth them with her clawes, and ta∣keth the Birde, and smiteth the head with her bell: and hath a lowing voyce, and generally fearing all other fowles. For in the sight and hering of the Eagle all foules of other kinde dreade, and also foules of pray. Therefore Plinius saith, That the gentle fawlcon or other such foules vnneth take prayes on yt day, that they heare the Eagle. And that perchance commeth of great dreade. For generally all foules haue dread of the Eagle, that taketh her pray onely in the aire, & they dread lesse ye Eagle that taketh her praye on the ground, & least of all that Eagle yt taketh her praye on the water. For no foules dread ye Eagle, but foules yt haue their liuing and conuersation in the wa∣ter alonely. And such an Eagle goeth much out of kind & of noblenesse of those Eagles that take their pray in the aire, & on the earth, and that Eagle dreadeth the Vultur. Aristot. li. 15. saith, that such an Eagle Amachel dwelleth & abideth nigh the Sea, and fast beside greate lakes and ponds, and is fedde with birdes that bée nigh the sea. When they come out of the water, & happen to sée the Vulture com∣ming, they will be afearde, and so they flye to the water, but the Vulture, that hath a right-sharpe sight, flyeth alwaye about that place: and if they flush out of the water into the ayre or into the land, the Vulture taketh them anone. And such an Eagle be long in the water, he is stifled. And ye Eagle hath one foote close and whole, as the foote of a Gander, and therwith she ruleth her selfe in the water, when she commeth down because of her praye. And her other foote is a cloue foote, with full sharpe clawes, with the which she taketh hir pray. And ye Eagles fethers haue a priuie fretting vertue, as Plinius saith. For he sayth, yt the Eagles feather done and set among feathers of wings of other Birds corumpteth and fretteth them.A vvōder¦full and true se∣cret ap∣prouedly tryed. As strings made of wolues guttes done & put in a lute or in a harpe among strings made of shéepes guts, do destroy, and fret, and corrumpe the strings made of shéepes guttes, if it so be that they bée set among them, as in a lute or in a harp as he saith. Also the Eagle loueth not company: but voideth and flyeth companie, as Aristo∣tle saith libro primo. It is not possible, that foules with crooked clawes shoulde abide with any of their fellowes. Also the Eagle hath claws in steed of sworde. And therfore when he sitteth on a stone he closeth in his clawes, and as it were hideth them within the fleshe, that hée hurt them not, neither smite them a∣gainst the stone, as Aristotle saith, li. 13. A foule with crooked clawes bideth not long vppon trées, nor vpon stones. For the kinde of their clawes is contrary to these two thinges. Also he is right cru∣ell against her owne birds, when theyr eien be closed against the Sun: For then she supposeth that they be not her owne birds, when theyr eyen be closed against the Sunne. Also to teach and to com∣pell them to take praye of other birdes, she beateth and woundeth them with hir bill, as Plinius saith. Of the Goshauke. chap. 2. THE Gosehauke is a royall foule,Acciptre, a kinde of Eagles. The Gos∣hauke. & is armed with more boldnesse then with clawes, and as much as kinde ta∣keth from her in quantitie of body, he re∣wardeth her with boldnesse of heart, as
Isidore saith. And as he sayth, shée is a couetous foule to take other foules, and for the taking of other fowles, and for pray she is called Accipiter & Rapter, ra∣uisher. Also Basilius in Exameron sayth: that such Haukes be cruell against their birds: so that they take from them meat when they be flegge and ripe, and they beate and driue them out of their neast, as the Eagle doth hir birds. And for shée doubteth least they be not hardy, she com∣forteth and exciteth them to bée bolde, and hardye, and to take pray, least when they bee full of age, they shoulde be dull and idle, and accustome themselues more to the séeking of meate, then to be bolde, and of hardye courage, as Beda sayth and Ambrose also. And some such Hawkes bee théeues of the aire onelye, and some of the earth onely, as Eagles bee diuerse, as Aristotle sayth in his sixt booke. The first manner of Hawkes take onelye flyeng Birdes, and the seconde manner of Hawkes smite and réese on birdes that sit on the earth, and Doues know which is which, and they knowe the diuersitye of Eagles, as it is sayde. And Accipiter is an hot fowle and dry, and poore of charge of flesh, and addres∣sed with diuersitie of pennes and of fea∣thers, and is in fairenesse of fethers most like the Ostridge, and not pere thereto in boldnesse of heart: And shée flyeth nowe vp to the aire swiftly, and so high that no man can see her: and then fal∣leth sodeinly downe vpon her pray: and her breast is most sharpe, and couered with little flesh. Thereof Aristotle spea∣keth, and he sayth lib. 14. that the more sharpe her breast is, the better shée is of flight. For if she had a full broad breast, she should moue much aire, and shoulde be slowe of flight. And her breast is not fleshie, but it is sharpe: and should be fee∣ble, if it were couered with much flesh: as it is said there. Her most strength is in ye breast, & in the clawes, & in hir bil, with ye which soone she taketh out the braine of her praie. Her gall is medicinable and profitable medled in Colbrijs medicines of eien: and it sharpeth the sight of eien, & destroieth and wasteth white speekles, which be in the eien: and so doth her dirt also: & the Gosehauke hath this propertie as Gregory saith, that in age when shée feeleth her selfe grieued with he heauines & waight of feathers, she spreadeth her winges against the beames of the Sun, when the winde is South, and so by so∣deine weather and resoluing heate, the pores be opened: and when the pores be so opened, she smiteth and flappeth her winges, and in so dooing the olde feathers leape out and newe growe: and so the new fethers maketh her in better state, and the more able to flight: and two kindes there be of such Fowles, for some be tame, and some be wild: and he that is tame taketh wilde fowles, and taketh them to his owne Lorde: and he that is wild taketh tame foules. And this Accipiter is of a disdaynous kinde. For if shee fayle by anye happe of the praye that she ryseth too, that daye vnneth she comes to her Lords hande: and he must haue ordinate diet, ney∣ther to scarse nor too full. For by too much meate she waxeth fat, and then she waxeth ramayous or slowe, and disday∣neth to come to reclaime: and if the meat be too scarce, then she fayleth, and is see∣ble and vnmightye to take her praye. Also the eyen of such Birdes shoulde ofte be siled and closed, or hidde, that shee bate not too oft from his hand that bea∣reth her, when she seeth a birde that she desireth to take: and also her legges must be fastened with gesses, that she shall not flye freely to euery birde. And they be borne on the lefte hand, that they maye some what take of the righte hand, and be fed therewith. And so Acci∣pitres, such fame hawkes be kepte in mewes, that they may be discharged of olde fethers and hard, and be so renewed in fairnesse of youth. Also men giue them meate of some manner of flesh, which is some deale venemous, that they may the sooner change their feathers, and smoake grieueth such hawkes and doeth them harme, as Beda saith: and therfore their mewes must be far from smoakie places, that their bodies be not grieued with bit∣ternesse of smoake: nor their fethers infect with blacknesse of smoake. They should be fed with fresh flesh & bloudye, & men
should vse to giue them to eate, ye harts of foules that they take. All the while they be aliue, and be strong and mightie to take their pray, they beloued of theyr Lords, and borne on handes, and set on pearches, and stroken on the breast, and on the tayle, and made plaine & smoothe, & be norished with great businesse & di∣ligence: but when they be dead, all men holde them vnprofitable & nothing worth, and be not eaten, but rather thro∣wen out on dounghills. Of Alieto. Cap. 3. HalietusAS the Glose saith Super Deutro. 14. Alietus & a Fawcon is all one bird, which coueteth praye, and is right bolde and hardie, and assaileth birdes & foules, that be much more greater than they, & réeseth on them, and smiteth with breast and with féete. Some men meane, that Alietus is a little bird, and taketh other small birds. Thereof speaketh Auctour Aurora and saith. Sparrowe hauke. The Hob∣bie. The Mer∣lin.Obtinet exiguas Alietus corpore vires. Sunt & aues minimae, praeda cibusque suus. That is to saye, Alietus hath small vertues and strength of body: and small birds be his meate and his praye. And some men meane, that this bird assaileth onelye feeble Birdes and vn∣mightie: and héereby it seemeth, that Alietus and a little Sparrow Hawke is all one, that is called a Musket in French, or els it is called, the Sper∣hawke. Of Bees. Cap. 4. ISidore saith, that Bées are called Apes for they are gendred without feature, or for that they knit themselues together with féete. Isidore sayeth, that they bée cunning and busie in office of making of honny, and they dwell in their own pla∣ces that are assigned to them, and chal∣lenge no other place but their owne. And they builde and make their houses, with a passing wonderfull skill, and of diuers flowers: and they make hony combes, wound and writhen with waxe very cu∣riously, and fill their celles, with many young. They haue an hoast and a king, and moue warre and battaile, and flye and voyde smoke and winde, and make them hardye and sharpe to Battaile, with great noyse. Many haue assayed & founden, that often Bees are gendred & come of carraines of dead flesh. And for to bring forth Bées flesh of calues, which be slaine, is beate that wormes may bée gendered and come of the rotted bloud, the which wormes after take wings, & are made Bées, as Béetles be of Oxe dounge, as Isidore sayth. And Ambrose in Exameron saieth, That the proper∣ties of Bées are wonderfull noble and worthy. For Bées haue one common kinde as children, and dwell in one ha∣bitation, and be closed within one gate. One trauaile is common to them all, one meate is common to them all, one com∣mon working, one common vse, one fruite and slight is common to them all, and one generation is common to them all. Also maidenhead of body without wemme, is common to them all, and so is birth also: for they be not medled wich seruice of Venus, neither resolued with lecherie, neither brused with sorrowe of birth of children, & yet they bring forth most swarmes of young. For where all other Fowles, bring foorth vnneth one birth in a yeare, euery one Bée bringeth foorth two, and passeth other, with dou∣ble plenteousnes of increase. Bées make among them a King, and ordayne among them common people. And though they be put and set vnder a King, yet they be frée and loue their King, that they make by kinde loue, and defend him with full great defence, and holde honour and wor∣ship to perish and be spilt for their king, and do their King so great worship, that none of them dare goe out of theyr house, nor to get meate, except the King passe out, and take the principalytie of flight. And Bées choose to their King, him that is most worthy and noble in hightnesse and fairnesse, and most cléere in mildnesse, for that is chiefe vertue in a King. For though theyr King haue a sting, yet he vseth it not in wreake. And kindly, the more huge Bées are, the more
lighter they be, for the greater Bées are lyghter than the lesse Bées. And al∣so Bees that are vnobedient to the king, they déeme themselues by theyr owne dome, for to dye by the wound of theyr owne sting. And of a swarme of Bees is none idle: some fight, as it were in battayle in the field against other Bées: some be busie about meate: and some watch the comming of showers: & some behold concourse and méeting of deawes: and some make wexe of flowers: and some make cels, now round, now square, with wonderfull binding and ioyning, & euennesse. And yet neuerthelesse among so diuers workes none of them doeth aspye nor wayte, to take out of others trauayle: neither taketh wrongfullye, neither stealeth meate, but each séeketh and gathereth by his owne flight & tra∣uayle among hearbes and flowers that be good and couenable. But Bées haue their stings, and they shedde venyme a∣mong honny, if anye thing ouersetteth them, and they put their lyues with a kinde of reuenge, for defence of theyr houses. Also though they be feeble in strength of body, yet they be full strong in might and vertue of cunning: theyr fruite is softe and swéete to all thing, by his swéetnes he maketh iawes swéet, and healeth woundes, and giueth medi∣cine to inward botches. Huc vs{que} Am∣brosius. Other properties Aristotle tou∣cheth libro decimo, where these be set in. Also among other things they saye, that workings of Bées are diuers, for some bring to the hiue, things that need to araye for hony, of sprayes and flow∣ers of trées, and of hearbes, and namely such things that be some deale gleymie and glewie, and bameth therewith the hiue, and that they do for noyful beasts. And if the entering of the hiue bee too large, they make it narrow and straight: and they gather honny, and first they be∣gin to make the house that the King shall dwell in, then they make houses for other Bées, that kéepe the hiue, and they take waxe of floures, and gather it with their forséete, and then they gather to the middle féete, and then to the ouer most ioynts of the hinder féete: & then they flye therewith, and then the heaui∣nesse of the Bee is knowen: and when a Bee flyeth, be taketh no heede of the diuersitie of flowers; nor leaueth one flower for another, all the while that he findeth therein that is needfull, and tur∣neth then againe to hir owne place char∣ged. But how they gather honny, and what is the matter of honny, we maye not lyghtly distinguish by feelyng: but they haunt much gladly leaues and flow∣ers of Olyue, and abide therevpon long time for thicknesse of leaues, and when their king may not flye, then a compa∣ny of Bees beare him. And if the rector be on liue, the males be in one partie, & the females in another partie, and if he be dead, the males be with females in one house: and the rectours females, is much more than the females of ye other Bées, and hath a more stōrg sting than ye male. And many males be wtout stings, & they flye, as though they would sting with stings, and yet they may not. The rectors be of two manners, the one is blacke, and that other is red, and this is the better, & is a good little Bee, round and thicke in it selfe, and small in the middle, as though he were girded, and meanly rough. And Bees are diuers in feeding, for some be fedde with flowers of gardens, and there be other manner Bees, which be fedde with flowers of Mountaines: and those that be fedde in trees of Mountaines be lesse than other, and stronger, and may better away with trauayle. Also Bees sit vpon the hiues, and sucke the superfluitie, that is in ho∣nie combes: and it is said, that if they did not so, thereof should spiders be gen∣dred of that superfluitie, and the Bees should dye, and when there is but little honnie in their houses, they forsake and come out of their houses, and fight with them that will take away their honnie: and therefore they be seene ofte sitting a∣bout their holes, as it were readie and a∣rayed to withstand and defend, and the shorter Bees fight with the longer with strong sight, when they eate much hony, and they busie themselues to driue these out of the hiues, which do not make ho∣nie and labour.
Also the Kings be not séene without the hiues alone, but they haue a great com∣pany of Bées about them: and the king is in the middle, and he passeth out three dayes before the out passing of ye young Bées: then few Bées come out and flye about the hiues, and departe themselues in companies, and with euery King go∣eth one companie. And if it happeneth, that one part of the Bées set against the other, then these few Bées that remaine, goe to another King, and forsake theyr first King, and they goe to the King that hath most number: and if the King whome they forsake, doeth followe after them, they kill him. Also when Bees sting, they dye right soone after, if they sting in all their sting, and drawe it not out of the place that is stung, for ye sting may not all come out, except some gutte come out therewith, and the rectours of Bées sting seldome. And if any Bee dye in the hiue, the other Bées drawe him out: for this beast is more cleanly then other beastes, and therefore they cleanse flieng, and not in their hiue, for stinking sauour grieueth them full sore, & likwise so doeth winde also. Therefore if there be great winde, the wardene of the Bées shall couer the mouth of the hiue, that the winde come not into the Bees: and if the hiues stinke in any wise, they will forsake their hiues, & if it hap that the Bées abide therein, they shall take sick∣nesse of the stench. And when they rest too much, they were sick, and they throw and put out idle Bées from their compa∣ny. And hot places be according for thē in Winter time, and colde in Summer time. And if a man leueth to them much hony, they will not worke much there∣after: and if he leaueth too little, then they wexe slow to worke hony. There∣fore the warden shall leaue them hony, as the multitude of thē is more or lesse, and if they lacke honny to ease, then the warden shall féede them with figges, and other swéete meates, least they shoulde dye. And when they gather them toge∣ther and striue within the hiue, it is a token that they will depart thence and forsake the hiue: and therefore the war∣den must powre some swéete wine into the hiue, and then they will abide still. Huc vsque Aristoteles. liber. 8. sie 9. Also liber. 4. he sayth, that Bées make no noyse but in styeng and spreading out and drawing in their wings by the ae, that falleth betwéene the wings and the bodyes. Also the hinder féete of them bée longer then theyr fore féet for going, that they may soone arise from the earth, whē they will flye, as he saith. lib. 14. Also sometimes Bées haue a sicknesse, that Aristotle calleth Karoys. l. 8. And that euill commeth of little wormes, which be gendered in the hiue, and commeth of corrupt hunnie combes. And when those worms he waxen, they make a web like to the web of a Spider, and hath mastry ouer all the hiue. And therefore the hun∣ny waxeth corrupt, and the Bees waxe sicke and die. Also li. 16. hée sayth, That Bées are not gendered by the seruice of Venus. In those yéeres that be dropping, many Bees are bread and gendered. For by moy∣sture superfluities be multiplyed in bo∣dies. And in temperate yéeres bée fewe birds of Bées, as he saith. Item in dietis particularibus it is sayde, that Bées that eat flowres of Almond trées, make more temporale hunnye then other, and more sauoury, and lesse sharpe: and that hun∣ny most cleanseth spirituall members. And Bées that eat wormwood and other bitter hearbes, make hunnie lesse swéet: But yet that hunnie cleanseth most the stopping of the splene, and openeth the li∣uer, and helpeth them that haue the drop∣sie, and helpeth the biting of a madde dogge. Look more of hunny in Tracttau de liquoribus. And the other propertyes of Bées, shall ye finde in Littera. A. in Tractatu de animalibus secundum Pth. et Auicennam. Of the. Owle. chap. 5. THe Owle is called Bubo, & hath that name of the sound of her voice, as I∣sidore sayth. And is a wilde birde char∣ged with Feathers. But she is alwaye holde with slouth, and is féeble to flye. And dwelleth by graues by daye and by night, and in chinnes. And Diuinours
tell, that they betoken euill: for if the Owle be séene in a citie, it signifieth de∣struction and wast, as Isidore saith. A∣ristotle saith li. 8. that the Chough fight∣eth with the Owle, for she is féeble of sight at midday, and séeth more clearely by night than by daye. And for ye cause the Chough taketh the Owles egges, & eateth them by daye, & the Owle eateth the Choughes egges by night: for the Owle is stronger by night than by day, and the Chough is stronger by day than by night. And other fowles flye about the Owle by day and pul him, and ther∣fore with the Owle, fowlars take other birds and fowles. The fighting of these birds (as the fighting of other beasts) is not but for meat, or for dwelling places. The crieng of the Owle by night, beto∣keneth death, as Diuinors coniecture & déeme. The Owle is fed with dirt, and other vncleane things, and is hated of other birds, and haunteth Temples by night to haue hir fill of oyle of lampes: and namely in fethers and in beake, she séemeth lyke to fowles of pray. But she is all vnlike to them in boldnesse and in vertue. And when birds and fowles as∣sayle the Owle, she lyeth vpright, & de∣fendeth hir selfe, with hir beake, & with hir feete and they hunt and ate mice, & reremice, and flye about by night, & hide them in thins and walls by daye. (AdditiōOf the kinde of Owles, there bée many, as Gesner tearmeth them Solita∣rie, the one called Tachmas of gréedines, the night rauener. Foure kinds are cō∣mon: the first is reddish browne, full of fethers, & is the greatest, and is called the Asse Owle, because his fethers sticke vp on both sides his head like hornes: the seconde, is more graye, and somewhat whitish breasted, finely spotted, and hath a more shriking voyce: the third kinde is lesser and of browne colour, with the which the birders make stales to take small birds: the fourth is least of all, & bréedeth in stonie rockes, and is ash co∣loured. Read Gesner.) ¶Of a Culuer or Doue. Chap. 6. CUluers are called Columbe, & they haue that name of Colore, of ye neck: for in the necke their feathers be sprong with many diuers colours, as Isid. saith. And Culuers be milde birds and meeke, and haunt and loue company of men, & haue conuersation in their multiplieng. In olde time men called them Venerias, lecherous: for they vse ofte neasts, and conceiue with billing and loue; and use much lecherie. And therefore a Culuer is called Columba, colens lumbos, as it were tilling landes and reynes, as Isid. sayth, For Culuers lay in all times and haue birdes, if their dwelling be hot, & their meate ready. And they haue better birdes in haruest than in springing time or in summer, and that for plentie of meate, as Isid. saith. li. 5. Arist. speaking of the kinde of Culuers saith, That the Culuer is a lecherous birde, and they kisse or bill each other, before their trea∣ding. And if the old male may not tread, yet he ceaseth not to bill. And often the female leapeth vpon the female, when the male lacketh, and so in kissing & bil∣ling, they cast not Semen: but of such manner treading sometime come egges, and of such egges come no birdes, but they be as winde egges. And all birdes that be like to Culuers, lay in springing time twice or thrice, and lay two egges, and lay not the third time, but when the second laieng is corrupt and destroyed. Also li. 6. he saith, that for the most part, Culuers haue two birdes, male and fe∣male, and the first bird is male: & some time one bird is hatcht and commeth out of the shell in one daye, and the other on the morrowe. And the male sitteth on brood by day, & the female by night, & the first egge filleth it selfe, and sheddeth in twentie daies, and first the Culuer pearceth the shell, and then dealeth it. And male and female heateth the birds in one time, and the female is more busie about the birdes than the male, and lai∣eth egges ten times in one yeare, and sometime xi. times or xii. as in Aegypt, and the male treadeth the female after one yeare. Also lib 8. he sayeth, That when the Culuer hath birdes, anone the male ru∣leth the birdes: and if the female tarie ouer long ere shée come to the Byrdes,
for sorenesse of the birth, than the male smiteth and beateth hir, and compelleth hir to sit hir selfe vpon the birdes. And when the birdes wex, the male goeth and sucketh salte earth, and he giueth and putteth it in the mouth of the birdes to make them haue talent to meate. And when the male will put the birds out of the neast, he treadeth them both. Also Culuers haue this propertie, as Turtells haue: they areare or lyfte not vp their heads when they drinke, ere they haue dronke inough, and generally they liue and bréeds fiftéene yeares. Huc vsque Arist. But the properties of Cul∣uers, that are vsuall and notably know∣en, the Glose toucheth vppon this sen∣tence: Oculi tui Columbarum. Cant. 1. Where it is sayd, that a Culuer hath no gall, and hurteth, and woundeth not with the bill, but his owne pere. And moreo∣uer he maketh his neast in dennes and holes of stones, and féedeth others birds, and draweth to the companye of Cul∣uers that wander and straye about, and abideth nigh riuers, and eateth the best greynes, and hath groning in the stéede of song: they flye in flockes, and loue companye, and they defende themselues with the wings & with the bill: and they eate no carraines, nor other vncleane things. The Culuer feedeth two birds. The Culuer sitting on riuers, séeth the shadow of the Goshawke comming, and as seene as it séeth the Goshawke, it flyeth into the inner place of an hoale, and there hideth it selfe, as sayeth the Glose vpon the foresayd sentence. And as Constantine sayth in Viatico, The bloud of a Culuer is medicinable, for it is sayd, that the bloud drawen vnder the right wing, and dropped in hot, swa∣geth and slaketh the ach of bleared eyen: and hath burning dirt, and throweth it out of the neast, and custometh and tea∣cheth hir birdes likewise to cast it out, as Aristotle saith.The pro∣pertie of Doues. The Culuer is mes∣senger of peace, ensample of simplenes, cleane of kinde, plenteous in young, fol∣lower of méeknesse, friend of companye, forgetter of wrongs: and the more it is feathered, the more plentuous it is in kinde founde. Therefore rough soo∣ted Doues bréede well nigh in euerye month. The Culuer is kindly fearfull, & seldome in safetie, but when shée is in an hole of stone, and there she resteth for a time. The Culuer is forgetfull, & therefore when the birdes are borne a∣waye, she forgetteth hir harme and da∣mage, and leaueth not therefore to build and bréede in the same place, as Ierome sayth, Also she is nicely curious: for sit∣ting on a trée, she beholdeth and looketh all about toward what part she will fly, and bendeth hir necke all about, as it were taking aduisement: but oft, while she taketh aduisement of flight, ere she taketh hir flight, an arrowe flyeth tho∣rough hir body, and therefore she fayleth of hir purpose: for that that she was a∣bout long to doe, she performed not in due time, as Gregory sayth. Also as it is sayd In dietis perticularibus, Culuer flesh is hard to digest, and gleymie, and therefore it giueth great nourishing and thicke, & namely flesh of young Culuers. But when they begin to flye, because of mouing and of trauayle, it looseth much of that heauinesse, and the flesh is made more light and more able to digest: and the elder it is, ye harder it is, & the worse to digest, and the worse nourishing it gi∣ueth to bodies. Also sometime a same Culuour is found and faught to beguile and to despise wilde Culuours, & leadeth them into the net. And to deceiue them the more stilye, it goeth with them into the Fowlers net, & suffreth it selfe to be caught & wrapped therein, and draweth them toward meate, as it wer in liknes of friendship, but so in féeding, draweth them to grins and to their destruction. Also (as Ambrose sayth in Aegypt & in Syria, a Culuer is taught to beare let∣ters, and to be messenger out of one pro∣uince into another. For it loueth kindly the place and the dwelling, wher it was first fed and nourished, and be it neuer so farre borne into farre country, alway it will returne home againe, if it be re∣stored to fréedome: and oft to such a cul∣uer, a letter is craftely bound vnder the one wing, & then it is let go: then it fli∣eth vp into the aire, & ceaseth neuer till it come to ye first place in which it was
bred. And sometime in the way ene∣mies know thereof, and letteth it with an arrowe, and so for the letter that it beareth it is wounded and slaine, and so it beareth no letter without perill: for ofte the letter that is so borne, is cause and occasion of the death of it. (AdditiōOf Doues likewise, there are di∣uers sortes, the Stock-doue or Wood∣coyst, the house Doue, and the Turtle doue: these are common. The flesh of these Doues are contrarye to those bo∣dies that are grieued with the goute, for that they cause ache of bones, heate of bloud, and ripen postumate humoures. The flesh splitted hot, and layd to anye part of the bodye, draweth the humour, where the Phisition will.) ¶Of a Curlewe. chap. 7. CUrlewes are called Cotumices, and haue that name of the sownd of the voyce. And be certaine birdes, that the Gréekes call Ortigias, for they wer first séene in the lande that is called Ortigia, as Isidore saith. These birdes haue cer∣taine times of comming, and make and lead flockes, and they dread the Gosse∣hawke, and while they sée the Goshauk, they arise not from the earth: & therefore they be called Ortigometra. Also these birds haue guides and leaders as cranes haue: and for they dread the Goshauke, they are busie to comforte the lea∣ders, by the which leaders they be ware and warned of their perill and harme, that they be not taken with the Gosse∣hawke.The Cur∣levv hath ye falling euill. Onely those birdes haue ye fal∣ling euill, as as a man hath, and the spa∣rowes also. And they passe the Sea, and when they be wearie, they fall downe vpon the water, and rest vppon the one wing, and maketh his sayle of the other wing. His best meate, is venemous seede and graines, and for that cause in olde time men forbad eating of them. And an hearbe that is called Eleborus, is Curlewes meate, and if another beast eateth it in great quantitie, it is peril∣lous and poyson: for beasts haue broad and wide veynes, by the which ye smoke passeth, and by strength of that hearbe, the heart is sodainly cooled and dead: and Curlewes haue straight veynes about the heart, and therfore venemous smoke hath no through passage, but he bideth in the stomacke, and is there defied & made subtill, and so it grieueth them not. And we call in common speach Coturnices crebros a veloci cursu, for swifte run∣ning, for he runneth vpon the earth most swiftly, And such birdes loue birdes of their owne kinde: and therefore euerie of them cry to other, and come together, as Ambrose saith. (AdditiōCoturnix, is thought to féede on venemous séedes, and therefore not to be very wholsome. ¶Of a Storke. chap. 8. A Storke is a water fowle, and purg∣eth hir selfe with his owne bill: For when she séeleth hir selfe griened with much meate, she taketh Sea water in hir bill, and putteth it in at hir har∣der hole, and so into hir guttes, and that water suitneth the hardnesse of ye meat, and biting the guts causeth them to put superfluities. Also this bird easeth egs of Adders and Serpentes, and beareth them for best meate to hir birdes, as I∣sidore saith. And this bird is called Si∣conia, as it were Sicannia, for he smiteth or flappeth with his bill, and maketh a noyse as it were with a Cane or a great Réeds, as he saith. Also he is messenger of springing time, and in hir comming, betokeneth noueltie of time, and is ene∣mie to Adders and Serpents, and beat∣eth and slayeth them with hir bill, and sometime swalloweth and deuoureth them, and haunteth and loueth company of men, and therefore they make theyr neasts on houses that men dwell in, & they leane not lightly their first neaste, except they be compelled. But ere they go into other countries against Winter, they fill their neasts with earth, & draw the twigges and thornes of their neasts with fenne, that no tempest of winde should breake it nor throw it downe in Winter, and in hir comming againe in springing time, she occupieth the same place, and defendeth the neast from other that would occupy it: while the female liueth the male accompanieth not with
another with seruice of Venus, but kée∣peth truely to hir in neast and in office of generation. And if the male espieth in any wise, yt the female hath broke spouse∣hood, she shall no more dwell with him, but he beateth and striketh hir with his bill, and slaieth hir if he may, as Aristo. saith. The male treadeth not the female but in the neast: and in sitting on brood, the male and the female chaunge times, and loue their birds, & kéepe them with right great affection, and for busie sitting vppon them, their fethers fall, and when the male trauayleth about meate, the fe∣male sitteth in the neast, and againward. And when the male commeth home, the female flyeth out for meate, and then the male sitteth on the neast, as Ambrose saieth. Storkes flye ouer the Sea, in flockes, and flye together into hot coun∣tries, and in their passing, Crowes flye with them, & passe before them, as it wer leading the Storkes, and withstand with all their might, fowles yt hate Storkes, as it is sayd in Exameron. And though storkes eate venemous beasts, as frogs, Adders and serpents, and other such, yet neuerthelesse the venime ouercommeth not, neither chaungeth their kinde, but is to them féeding and nourishing, that is venimous to men and to other beasts: for by vertue of heate, that hath mastrie within them, the mallice of venime is quenched. Also when their birdes are haught, they haue féete, legges, and bills full blacke, as Swans haue, but ye black∣nesse passeth away lyttle and lyttle. And the more olde they were, the more redde they haue legs, féete & bills. (Additiō.A Storke is in shape like vnto the Heron, but more biggeriall white sauing the top of his wings: his bill and legs red. Naturally he is enimie to ye serpents and killeth them: when they be olde, their young féedeth them, and prouideth meate for them. These bréed in Germa∣ny, on the house tops, & as it is said, of e∣uery third brood, they put forth one yoūg, to the honour of the houses, whereon they bréede.) ¶Of the Crow. cap. 9. THe Crow is a bird of long lyfe, and is called Cornix among latines, that is a name of Gréeke. And Diuinoures tell, that she taketh héede of spiengs and awaitings, and teacheth and showeth wayes, and warneth what shall fall. But it is full vnlawfull to beléeue, that God sheweth his priuie counsaile to Crowes, as Isidore saith. Among manye diuina∣tions, diuinors meane, that Crowes be∣token rayne with greding and crieng, Corax, Corax, as this vearse meaneth. Nunc plena Cornix plumam vocat improba voce. That is to vnderstande, Nowe the Crowe calleth rayne with an eleinge voyce, and is a iangling bird & vnmilde, and grieuous to men there they dwell, as he sayth, and eateth vncleane meates and venomous, and lyueth right long. In age their fethers wexe white. But in flesh within, the longer they liue, the more blacke they be, and hateth the fore ouer all other beasts, and fighteth against the Sparhawke, and against the Gosse∣hawke, as Isidore saith. And is busie and gréedy, and contrary to the Eagle, & other birds of pray, and for she dreadeth to touch the Eagle, with crieng she pur∣sueth the Eagle. But she hath not alway profit of hir gréedinesse: for somtime, af∣ter that the Eagle hath made as though he gaue no force, sodainly he smiteth the Crow with his bill or slayeth hir, when she commeth néerer the Eagle than shée shuld. In Exameron it is said of ye crow that Crowes rule & lead storkes, & come about them as it were in routs, & flye a∣bout the Storkes, & defend them, & fight against other birds and fowles that hate storkes, & take vppon them the battell of other birds, vpon their owns perill. And an open proofe therof is for in that time ye storkes passe but of ye country, crowes be not séene in places, thers they were wont to be, & also for they come againe with soe wounds, & with voice of blood, that is wel knowen, & with other signes & tokēs, & shew yt they haue ben in strōg fighting. Also there it is said, yt the mild∣nes of the bird is wonderfull: for when the old crowes in age be both naked and bare of couering of fethers, then ye young nowes hide & couer them with their fe∣thers, and gather meate and féede them.
And sometime when they were olde and féeble: then the young Crowes vn∣derset them, and reare them vp with their wings, and comfort them to vse to flie, to bring the members that be disea∣sed into state againe. Of the Rauen. Chap. 10. THe Rauen is called Coruus of Co∣rax also, and hath that name of the sowne of the throte, as Isido. sayth. The Rauen beholdeth the mouth of hir birds, when they yane. But she giueth them no meate ere she know and sée the like∣nesse of hir owne blacknesse, and of hir owne colour and fethers. And when they begin to wexe blacke, then afterward she feedeth them wt all hir might & strength, as Isidore saith. It is sayd that rauens birdes be fed with deaw of heauen all the time that they haue no blacke fea∣thers by benefite of age: for all ye time they be not fed with their vsuall meate, which is carren or other stinking things, but with benefit of the deaw of heuen, as Austen saith. And ye rauens in dead carrens, goe into the priuie places with in as Isid. saith, and is a crieng fowle, and hath diuers sowne and voice: for a∣mong fowles, onely the Rauen hath 64. changings of voyce, as Fulgentius saith: and is guilefull bird, and taketh away things theeshly, and layeth and hydeth them in priuie places. Also he is an vn∣cleane bird, and sitteth vpon carrens, and asketh and taketh meate of venemous and vncleane things, and as Diuinours meane, the Rauen hath a manner vertue of meaning and betokening of diuinati∣on. And therefore, among Nations, the Rauen among foules was hallowed to Appollo, as Marcius saith. Aristotle li. 6. speaking of the Rauen saith, that one∣ly the female sitteth on broode twentye dayes on the egges, and the male bring∣eth to hir meate, and they haue manie byrdes, and sitteth on broode twentye dayes, and for they be many, they throw away some of their birds: For fowles, which haue many birds throwe awaye some of them. Also li. 8. he sayth, that the blacke ra∣uen fighteth with the Asse and with the Bul, and flieth vpon them, and grieueth them, and smiteth with the bill, and smiteth out theyr eyen. Also there it is sayd, that the blacke Rauen is friend to the Foxe: and ther∣fore he fighteth with the Brocke or Badger, and with other small beastes, to helpe the Foxe. Also ther it is sayd, that rauens fight stronglye, and smite together with theyr weapons, that he bills, clees and wings: and be that is ouercome, is obedient to the Conquerour. Huc vs{que} Aristot. Also onely the Rauen layeth egges, and bréedeth in the middle heate of sum∣mer against kind of other fowles. Ther of it is sayd, that the rauen laieth egges, and bréedeth in the middle heate of the summer, nigh to ripe fruite. ¶Of the Swanne. chap. 11. THe Swan is called Cignus in latin, & Olor in Gréeke, for he is all white in feathers: for no man findeth a black Swan. Olor is Gréeke, and is to vnder∣stand white, as Isid. saith. The Swan is called Cignus, and hath that name of Canendo, singing. For he faineth swéet∣nes of swéet songs, with accord of voice, and he singeth swéetly, for he hath a long neck diuersly bent to make diuers notes. And it is sayd, that in the countries that be called Hiperbores, that the harpers harping before, the Swans birdes flye out of their neasts, and sing full merely, as Isidore saith. And as Marcius and Ambrose say, shipmen trowe, that it be∣tokeneth good, if they méete Swans in perill of shipwracke. Alway the Swan is the most meriest bird in diuinations: shipmen desire this bird, for he doppeth not downe in the waues, and therefore he was hallowed to Apollo as Marcius sayth: and his most strength is in the wings. When the Swan is in loue,A fond fayning that a svvanne singeth, vvho hath but a naturall voice, as other birdes haue. hée seeketh the female, and pleaseth hir with beclipping of the necke, and draweth hir to him ward: and he ioyneth his neck, to the females necke, as it were binding the neckes together. And after the trea∣ding, the female smileth the male, and fli∣eth him, and the male batheth him ofte after the treding, and so doth the female also, ere she take any meate.
And when she shall dye, and that a fea∣ther is pight on the brayne, then she sin∣geth: & against the vsage of other beasts in stéede of groning, the Swan singeth, as Ambrose saith. The Swan hath most white fethers without any mingling of blacknesse or other colour, and hath blacke flesh, and hard to be digested, and hath a bill with a manner bounching, that distinguisheth the sight from the smell and tast, and the bill is full blacke within, and inwarde full thicke. The Swan putteth downe his head into the water, and séeketh his meate, & cutteth it: and though he be nourished among fish, yet he eateth them not. Also if bread or other meate be throwen to him, he withdraweth and giueth place to fish that followeth him, and séeketh and gathereth his meale of hearbes, grasse, & rootes. And he hath blacke feete and close, and hole & broad, & full able to swim: and in swimming he vseth that one foote, in stéede of an oare, and the other foote in steede of a stirrer, and ruleth himselfe therewith, and dwelleth in lakes and in pondes, and maketh his neast nigh wa∣ters, where vpon fewe stickes throwen togethers, the Swan sitteth on broode, & bringeth forth birdes, and féedeth them busily, and bringeth them vp, and coue∣reth and defendeth them with winges, bill, and hissing. And if any man come toward the Signets, the Swan putteth hir selfe among the birdes, and prepa∣reth to make resistaunce, and ceaseth not to defend hir birdes, and is a birde of great wayght and heauinesse, and of much flesh in bodie: and therefore shée loueth rest, and flyeth but seldome. But wilde Swans flye with strong flight, with their neckes strayght for∣warde, and féete straight backwarde: But they are not so great of bodye, nor so fat as tame Swans that be nourish∣ed and fed nigh places thereas men in∣habite in, as Marcius saith. ¶Of a Gnat. Chap. 12. A Gnat is a little flie, and is called Culex, and hath that name of Acu∣leo, a sting: for he sucketh bloud, & hath in his mouth, a pipe like a prick, & there∣with he pearceth the flesh for to suck the bloud, and is accounted among Volati∣les, as the Bee is, though he haue a body of a worme, with many feete: For hee hath wings and flyeth therewith, and is gendred of rotted or corrupt vapours of carrens, and corrupt place of marreyes. By continual flapping of wings, he ma∣keth noyse in the aire, as though he hur∣red: and sitteth gladly vpon carraines, botches, scabbes, and sores: and is full noyfull to scabbed Horses, and sore backed, and grieueth sléeping men with noyse and with biting, and waketh them of their rest, and flyeth about most by night, and pearceth and bileth members vpon the which he sitteth, and draweth toward lyght, and gladly he seeth lyght, and so vnwarely he falleth into a Can∣dle or into the fire, and for coueting to sée lyght, he burneth himselfe ofte. And is best féeding to swallowes, for Gnats be taken for best beloued meate to swa∣lowes that flye in the aire, & hunt flies. And they are called Sciniphes, that is to vnderstand small flies, but most noyfull in stings: for Scines in Gréeke, is Mus∣ca in Latine, a flye in English: and ther∣of commeth Scinomia, a houndes flye, & with such flies the land of Aegypt was smitten, as Isidore sayth. And Scinomia is the worst kinde of flyes, with greater bodye and broader wombes, than other flyes, and lesse flight: but they be full tender, and cleaue fast in the members of beasts, on the which they smite. In wooll, haire, and bristles of beasts, and namely in hounds, such a flye hideth hir selfe, and sucketh and drinketh bloud: in∣somuch that she gnaweth the flesh, and maketh it swell with botches and pim∣ples, as it fareth in eares of old hounds, the which eares such flyes gnawe and make them swell and full of sores. And so it is no wonder though such Flyes stinke right foule, that are fedde with such corrupt meates and humours.
¶Of Cicada. chap. 13. THere is a manner Grassehopper, that is called Cicada, and hath that name of Canendo, singing: For with a full little throte, he maketh right swéet me∣lodie, or shapeth a wonderfull song, as it is said in Exameron. AdditiōIt is falsely applied, for the Grasse∣hopper maketh a chirring noyse, with quicke moouing of his hinder long thighes, against the scale of his side, like as the edge of a knife against a glasse being drawen too and fro, maketh an noise, that setteth teeth on edge. I haue diligently tried the same, so that Bar∣tholome was heerin deceiued, for want of experience. This Cicada in the middle heate at midday, when trées breake with heate, then the more cléere aire she draweth, the more cléerely she singeth. Also if a man poure oyle vpon this Cicada, he dyeth a∣none. For the poores be stopped, that they may not draw breath, but if men forth∣with poure vpon them vineger, anone they be reléeued, for the strength of vi∣neger openeth holes & poores that were stopped by binding of oyle, as Ambrose saith. AdditionThe kinde of the Grashopper is to consume all greene things, and is one of Gods plagues for sinne. Of the Phenix. Chap. 14. PHenix is a bird, and there is but one of that kinde in all the wide worlde, therfore ignorant men wonder therof: & among ye Arabians, there this bird Phe∣nix is bred. He is called Singularis, a∣lone, as Isid. saith. The philosopher spe∣keth of this bird and saith, that Phenix is a bird without Make, & liueth iii hun∣dred, or v. hundred yeares: when ye which yeares be passed, she féeleth hir owne de∣fault and féeblenesse, and maketh a nest of right swéete smelling stickes, that be full daye, and in Summer when ye west∣erne winde bloweth, the stickes and she neast be set on fire with burning heate of the Sun, and burneth strongly, then this bird Phenix commeth wilfully in∣to the burning neast, and is there burnt to ashes, among these burning stickes, and within three daies a litle worme is gendered of the ashes, and waxeth little and litle, and taketh feathers, and is sha∣pen and turned to a bird. Ambrose saith the same in Exameron, of the humor or ashes of Phoenix ariseth a new bird & waxeth, & in space of time he is clothed with fethers & wings, & re∣stored into the kinde of a bird, and is the most fairest bird that is, most like to the Pecocke in feathers, & loueth wildernes, and gathereth his meate of cleane grains and fruits. Alanus speaketh of this bird & saith, that when the highest Bishoppe Onias had builded a temple in the citie of Heliopo∣ly in Aegypt, to the likenes of ye temple of Hierusalem, and the first daye of Ea∣ster, when he had gathered much swéete smelling woode, and set it on fire vppon the Alter to offer sacrifice: to all mens sight, such a birde came sodeinly, and fell into the middle of the fire, and was burnt anone to ashes, in the fire of the sacrifice: and the ashes abode there, and was busi∣ly kept and saued by the commandement of the Priest: and within thrée daies, of these ashes was bred a little worme, that tooke the shape of a bird at the last, and flew into wildernesse. Of the Crane. chap. 15. A Crane is called Grus, and hath that name of her owne voice. For she cry∣eth with such a voice, as Isid. saith. And is a bird of grease winges, and of strong flight, and flieth high into the aire to see the countryes, toward the which he will drawe, as it is saide in Exameron: and is a bird that loueth birds of his own kind, & they liuing in company together, haue a king among them, & flie in order, ruled as Ambrose saith. And the leader of the company compelleth the company to flie aright, crieng, as it were blaming with his voice. And if it hap yt he waxe hoarse, then another crane commeth after him, and taketh the same office: and after they fall to the earth, cryeng for to rest: and when they sit on the grounde, to keepe and saue them, they ordein watches that they may rest the more surely: and the wakers stand vpon one foote, and each of
them holdeth a little stone in the other foote, high from the earth, that they may be waked by falling of the stone, if it hap that they sleepe, as Aristotle saith. Also in youth cranes be coloured like ashes, but the longer they liue, the blac∣ker they be. And if anye of them goe a∣misse out of the company, they crye and seeke their fellowes that be lost. Also Cranes when they knowe that the Fawcon or ye Goshawke commeth, they turne vpward their bils, and defend themselues as well as they may, with sharpnesse of bills. (Additiō.The Crane is of an Indie colour, with a redde plat on his head: but the Cranes of the East Indias, are white bodied, red headed and some greenish. Sebastian Munster writeth yt the cranes fight with the Samoyes a shorte dwarffe like people, &c. ¶Of the Cocke. chap. 16. A Cocke is called Gallos, and hath that name of gelding, for among fowles onely the Cocke is gelded, & men in old time called them Gallos, that were ker∣ned, as Isidore saith. Plinius li. 29. cap. 4. speaketh of the Cocke and sayth, that Cocks flesh raw, and layde hot vpon the biting of a Ser∣pent, doth awaye the venime, and to the same his braine is good, taken in drink. And if a man be noynted wt his great, or with his iuyce, he shall be sure from Panthers and Lyons. And if the bones of a Cock or of an Hen, be medled with gold when it is molte, they destroy and wast the golde, and so Henne boanes be venemous to golde, and that is won∣der. Also the Cocke is hot and drye of complection: & therefore he is full bolde and hardie, and so fighteth boldly for his hens against his aduersaries, and assay∣leth and reeseth on them, and teareth and woundeth them with his bill, and with his spores, and when he hath the mastry he croweth presently, and ere he croweth he beateth himselfe with his wings to make him the more able to sing. And he vseth late in the night to crowe most cléerely and strongly, and about the mor∣row tide, he shapeth tight voice & song, as Ambrose saith. The Cocke beareth a redde combe on his head, in steede of a crowne, which béeing left, he looseth his hardinesse, and is more slowe and cowardlye to assayle his aduersary. And he loueth ieolouslye his hennes: and when he findeth meate, he calleth his Hennes, together with a certaine voyce, and spareth his owne meate to féede them therewith: and he setteth next to him on the rooste, the hen that is most fat and tender, and leueth hir best, & desireth most to haue hir pre∣sence. In the morrow tide when he fly∣eth to get his meate, first he layeth his side to hir side, and by certayne tokens and beckes, as it were long aches, he wooeth and prayeth hir to treading. And he fighteth for hir speciallye, as though he were iealous, and with bill and spores he chaseth and driueth away from him other Cockes, that come nigh his hennes. And in fighting he smiteth the ground with his bill, and reareth vp the feathers about his necke, so make him the more bold & hardy, and mooueth the feathers of his tayle vpwarde and downward, that he maye so the more ably come to the battaile. And he bree∣deth a precious stone called Aflecte∣, like to the stone that is named Cal∣ceduneus,Manye haue writ¦ten by heart say bu fere by capr∣ence. & the Cock beareth that stone, and because of that stone (as some men trow) the Lion dreadeth and abhorreth, & specially if the Cocke be white: for the Lyon dreadeth the white Cocke, as Pli∣nius sayth. The Cocke hée searcheth his meate with his bill and feete, and setayeth and ouertourneth strawe and duste. And when hée findeth a grayne, hée calleth, and cackeleth to him his Hens. Also the Cocke dreadeth the Eagle and the Gossehawke, which take theyr pray on the ground. For such sowles of pray, spye and wayte for Birds which goe on the grounde. And the Cocke is right sharpe of sight, and therefore he looketh downwarde with the one eye to search his meate, an vpwarde into the ayre with the other eye, that he might beware of the comming of the
Eagle, and of the Goshauke. And if be set one of them come a farre, anon he crieth to the hens, and flieth away, and hideth himselfe in houses among stones, or in hedges, as he saith. Also a right aged Cocke laieth egges, in his last ende, and the Egges are small and full round, and as they were wanne or yeolow. And if any venimous worme sitteth on brood on them in the canicular daies, of them bée bred and growe Coc∣katrices, as Beda sayth. Constantine speaketh of Cocks, and saith, that young Cockes be more harde to defie, and lesse moyst then Hennes. Also the flesh of Cockes is some deale euill sauoures, but that sauour wasteth away when it is sod. And if the guts of an old Cocke be thro∣wen away, and the Cocke stopped full of gardeine Saffron, and of Polipodie, and sodde in fiue pound of water till the water he nigh all wasted,A restati∣tiue me∣dicine. this Cocke is most profitable to them that haue the euil, which is called Cholera passi. For it purgeth gleamie & flumatike humour, & helpeth them that he melancholy: and putteth out great ventosity of ye stomack, and abateth ach and sore, and helpeth swelling and ach of the wosen, and hel∣peth against the long during of feauer Etike, as hée sayth. Of the Capon. Chap. 17. THe Capon is of a cocke, made as it were female by caruing away of his gendering stones, & is all changed in cō∣plection, as other beasts that be gelded, & looseth his boldnesse, & his voice and song, and knoweth no difference betwéene the houres of the night, nor beateth himselfe with his wings, nor araieth himselfe in fighting, but he sitteth on broode vppon Egges that be not his owne, as it were an henne, and taketh vppon him the of∣fice of a female, and feedeth chickins that bée not his owne, and leadeth them a∣bout, and clocketh as an hen, and calleth chickins together, clocking wt an hoarce voice, and accompanyeth with hennes, and eateth with them of their meate, but he feedeth them not, he is fasted with them, but he fatteth not them. And the Capon is more coward of heart then the Cocke, and more moist of flesh, and more soft of feathers, & somtime his feet be bro∣ken to compell him to sit on broad vpon egges, his spurs either be made blunt, or else they fall. When he is fat, his féet be bound togethers, and his head hangeth downe toward the ground; and is borne by the feet to faires and to markets. But Constantine speaketh of a gelded Cocke and saith, that the flesh of grided Cockes is more couenable then the fleshe of other fowles, and bréedeth more noble nourishing and better bloud: And theyr braine is better, and more profitable then the braine of other foules. Of an Henne. chap. 18. THe henne is called Gallina, and hath that name of Gallo, the cocke, as the Lyonnesse hath the name of the Lyon. And as some mē meane, if her members were medled with gold when it is molt, the gold should wast, as Isidore sayeth. The Henne is a soule of great laieng and bréeding, and layeth many egges with∣out treading as Aristotle sayth, libro. 5. And they bee called winde Egges, and bée more vnsauourye and lesse worthye then other Egges. And some hens haue alway twins, two chickens in one shell. And one of the twins is little, and some∣time wonderfullye shapen. After that they sit on broode three daies, anone to∣kens and signes of Chickens bée seene: And the Chicken is bread of the white, and nourished with the yolke, as hee saith. Also hens that laie too much be not of long lyfe, but they die soone, as it is sayd lib. 6. Other properties of hens that bée known nigh to all men, be touched in the Glose super. Mat. 18. There it is sayd yt a hen is a mild bird about chickens: for she couereth chickens vnder her wings, and defendeth them against the Kite, and taketh sicknesse for sorrowe of her chic∣kens, and looseth her feathers, and féedeth her chickens more then her selfe. And when shée findeth meate, shee clocketh and calleth her chickens together, and to defend her chickens, shée putteth her
selues against a stronger then hir selfe. And also shée fighteth with a man for defence of ye Chickins. When the chic∣kins bée dispearpled, shée clocketh and calleth them together, and nereth them wider her wing. And defendeth them, that they bée not taken with Hawke, nor with Kite, and her kindlye loue a∣bout her Chickinnes is knowen by roughnesse of feathers, and by hoarsnesse of voice. Of the Gripe. chap. 19. A Gripe is called Griphes, and is ac∣counted among Volatiles Deutrono∣mi. 14. And there the Glose sayth, That the Gripe is foure footed, and lyke to the Eagle in head and in wings. And is like to the Lion in the other part of the body, and dwelleth in those hilles that be cal∣led Hiperborei, and bée most enimies to horses and men, & gréeueth them most, & layeth in his neast a stone that is cal∣led Smaragdus, against venimous beasts of the mountaine. (Additiō.Of this kind of straeing beast, ma∣ny bée in doubt whether there bee any of them in the worlde, notwithstanding it séemeth by credible writers that ther are diuerse, especially among the Hiperbo∣rie, people dwelling in the furthest parte of the North, and as some suppose vnder the North pole, called Polus Articus. Pomponeus Mela writeth, that the coū∣trie is but little, hauing the Sunne ouer them, and is fertill of it selfe, the people very iust, liuing longer and more plea∣sauntly then other men, alwaye without businesse and labour, (knowing neyther warre nor debate) (as Mela and Soli∣nus write) making good chéere with their neighbours. And hauing grlondes on theyr heads, they throw themselues from a certaine rocke into the Sea, estéeming that to bée the best death, and forme of burieng: The Gripes are of coulour of a dark Oker on the bae, their breast of purple coulour, their wings browne and white, their talents blacke, and the beak turning, as doth the Eagles, be is more higher then the Lion, the hinder féet clo∣uen, as the Stagge, able to carrie awaye the waight of two men, a stagge, or the like beast. Of the Fawlcon. chap. 20. THe Faulcon is called Herodius, and is a royall fowle, and desireth praye, and vseth to sit on his hand that beareth him, and is a bolde birde and an hardye, as is the Gosehauke: and hath little flesh in comparison to his bodye, and hath many feathers: and therefore he is more lyght to flye. For in him is little thing that beareth downewarde, and much that beareth vpward, as Gregory sayth. And therefore he is right lyke to the E∣stridge in boldnesse and strength: and also much like thereto in diuers feathers and coulours. The Faulcon is full bolde and hardy, with most sharpest breast, & with strong clawes, & hurteth more his pray with rising theron with his breast, then with his bill, or with his clawes. And is so greate hearted, that if he fayle of his pray in the first flyght and réefe, in the second he taketh wreake on himselfe. And so if he be wilde, vnneth that day he seeketh praye. And if hee be tame, as it were for shame he flyeth aboute in the ayre, and then vnneth he commeth to his Lordes handes. For he holdeth himselfe ouercome, & as it were put out of kind, if he taketh not the foule that he flyeth to, as Gregorie saith. This foule or bird is commonly cal∣led Falco, and Fulica also, as the Glose sayth Super Spalmum. And among all Birdes and Fowles, these Fowles haue little affection, and take little héede of their Birdes, as it is said in Exameron. With the same office of businesse, that he feedeth his owne birds, with such seruice he taketh and féedeth the birds that the Eagle throweth out of her neast, and is vnknowne to him. He flyeth and voideth carrion, and toucheth not stinking flesh, not in strong hunger: But he may well awaye with trauaile, and absteineth and abideth till he maye finde couenable praye, which he séeketh, as Gregorye saith. (AdditiōHawkes of pray are the onely pa∣stime of Princes: and next for idle per∣sons,
that set more by an inch of pleasure thē an ell of thrift, who bestow in Hauks & hounds, more then would suffice twice as many poore men: for sometime the taking of some one pray of .vi. d. ye charge of so much wonne, stands them in twen∣tie markes, which is according to the olde Prouerbe, What is a Gentleman but his pleasure: but who is more gen∣tle, he that fauoureth the poore to the pro∣fit of a common wealth, or he that lasci∣uiously spendeth more in one yéere then his parents got in .20. I referre to the prudent.) Of the Swallow. chap. 21. A Swallow is called Hirundo, as it were Arundo ab aere, and hath that name of the ayre, for hée taketh not his meate sitting, but flyeng in the ayre, as Isidore saith. And is a crieng fowle, and flyeth not euen but hether and thether, and sometime about, and is busie in making neastes, and in feeding of birds. And he saith also, in making of neasts, the Swallow is most cunning. For vnneth mans wit were sufficient to make of a∣ny matter, the worke that the Swallow maketh and shapeth of claye onely with her bill. Moreouer, the Swallowe is full of feathers, and lyghtest and most swiftest in flight of Foules: and therefore other fowles réeseth nor distroubleth not the Swallow, neither the Swallow is pray to other Birdes. And flieth ouer the sea into hot countryes, in which Countryes he abideth in Winter, as men suppose. And also they kéepe certain times of their comming and going. Their againe com∣ming is token of springing time, and witnesse of the faire Summer, & resplen∣dishing weather, as Ambrose saith libro sexto. Aristotle sayth, speaking of the swal∣lowe. li. 6. That a wilde fowle treadeth not nor laieth egges but once a yeare, ex∣cept the Swallowe which layeth egges twice a yere, but somtime the first egges be broke by coldnesse of Winter, and the latter egges be complete and bring forth birds. Also there it is sayd, that birdes that eate flesh, lay not egges twice a yeere, ex∣cept the Swallowe, that hath sometime Birdes twice a yeare. Also there it is sayd, yt if a man put out the young swal∣lowes eien, yet their eien come agayne, for shee fetcheth an hearbe that is called Celidonia, and baumeth the eien of her birds with the iuyce thereof, and so their eien be restored to them againe. as Ma∣cro. saith. I once proued this,Addition but it toke not that effect, yet founde I stones of straunge coulours. Also in the Swallows wombe be two stones sound, of the which one is whi∣tish, and is called the Female, and the other is red, and is called the Male. For hée is more vertuous then the white. These stones bée called Celidonij, and bée precious stones, namelye when they be taken out of the birds ere they touch the ground, as it is sayde in Lapidae: there their vertues be described, as Con∣stanine saith Bloud drawen out vnder the right wing is medicinable to eyen, as bloud of a Doue is. Their durt is full hot and full gnawing: and there∣fore it gréeueth eien. And the Swallowe techeth her birds to throw durt out of ye neast. And there be two manner of swal∣lowes, some are great of body, and haue blacke ridges and red breasts, and white wombes: and these loue mens compa∣nye, and make neasts in mens houses. The other bée lesse of bodye, and haue blacke breasts, and make their neasts in holes and chins of roches and of rockes, fast by waters. But both kindes make their neasts is earth or in clay, and both theyr tayles bée forked as a payre of shéeres. These are called Martines,Addition and are good to eate. Also it is saide, that among Swal∣lowes is one manner kinde, and other Fowles dread that kinde, yea, ye Eagle & the Goshauke dread and flie ye swallow, as it were their enimie, and dare not fall on their pray, while they sée ye swallow, for they dreade the biting of her. For peraduenture it is venimous, as Plinius sayth. And Swallowes fight agaynst
Sparrowes, and come into their neasts, and driue them out with biting & scrat∣ching. (AdditiōThis is called the sea Swallowe, that is as big bodied as a Thrush, and very short legged, and of a meruailous swiftnesse, all blacke sauing th toward the legges is gray. Of Kaladrius. chap. 22. AS the Philosopher saith, the Birde that is called Kaladrius, is white of coulour, and hath no parte of blacknesse. And the neather part of his leg cleanseth and purgeth dimnesse of the eyen. His kinde is such, when a man is helde in great sicknesse, this birde Kaladrius tur∣neth away his face from him that is sick, & then without doubt the man shall die. And if the sicke man shal escape, the bird Kaladrius setteth his sight on him, & be∣holdeth him, as it were fauning and plea∣sing: and this bird is other then the bird that is called Calandra, that singeth as a Thrustle, as the Glose saith, Deut. 14. There it is said, that Calaudreon is ano∣ther then Calundre, &c. (AdditiōGesner sayth, that Calandra, is a small Bird like the Larke, and is suppo∣sed to be the woode Larke, after Doctor Turnar, as for his singing at anye mans féete lyeng sick, if he be to be made tame, may héereafter be better knowne. Of Larus. cap. 23. THE bird that is called Larus inha∣biteth somtime in waters and som∣time in the land. Therfore in Aurora it is written. Latus est fluminis habitator et incola terrae, Nunc natat vt pisces, nunc volat inslar auis. That is to vnderstand: Larus dwel∣leth both in riuers and lande, and swim∣meth as a Fishe, and also flyeth as a Bird. AdditionThis is taken for the Sea cobbe, & all other birdes of that kinde. Gesner. Of Locusta. chap. 24. LOcusta hath that name, for it hath long legges, as the shaft of a Speare. Therefore the Gréekes call her Hasta∣gion, as Isidore sayth. And these wormes that be called Locust haue no king: and yet they passe forth ordinatly in compa∣nyes, as it is sayde Prouerbiorum. 30. They eate each other, for the more eat∣eth the lesse, and bée séene in Summer, & hidde in winter. And their hinder legs be longer then their fore legs, as the Glose sayth super. 1 Ioel. And first when hée is young, hée is Athalabus, and afterwarde when the wings bée growen he is made Locusta. And gréeueth more in youth while he is Athelabus, then in age when he is Locusta. And hath a square mouth, and a sting in stéede of a taile, and croo∣ked, and solding legges. And they eate burgenings of trées and of hearbes, and gnawe them, and are gendered of the Southerne winde, and excited to flight, and they die in the Northerne wind. And in leaping they areare themselues, and in rearing they fall, & are fatted with flow∣ers of Almons. Also this worme Locusta for the most part is all wombe: and therefore it hath neuer meate inough. And hath but one gut, and that is alwaye full of filth, and of vncleannesse: but alway he is hungred while he liueth: and if he findeth anye thing gréene, he gnaweth & cesaeth not. With little colde he falleth as he were dead. But he quickeneth againe with heate of ye Sun: and their dirt wormes be gendered. (AdditiōThis straunge kinde of Flie hath long hinder legges, as the Grashopper, he burneth corne with touching, and de∣uoureth the residue. In India be of them thrée foote in length, which the people of the country doe eate. D. Cooper. Of the Coote. Chap. 25. THE Coote is called Mergulus, & hath that name of oft dopping and plun∣ging. For by oft putting downe his head into the water, and dopping there vnder, hee sheweth signes and tokens of wea∣thers: and before the comming of tem∣pests of the Sea, he flyeth crieng to the shoare. For it betokeneth most certeinly full strong tempest in the Sea, if Cootes
flie crieng to the shore, as Isidore sayth. The Coot maketh her neast close by the root of reeds vpon few stickes, & féedeth & nourisheth her birds with wonderfull af∣fection and loue of kinde: And anone as they be hatcht, they follow the dam, and dread not to flie vp and down on diuers waues of the sea, & they hunt and gather water wormes, & fish to fill their wombs with. In winter for scarcitie of mouing, they be fat: & in Summer for fréedome of flight they be poore of flesh and in fat∣nesse. And when they be pursued with rauishing birds, then they flie to water, & be deliuered by manner of plunging and of diuing. AdditionThe Coote is blacke, his legges grey, and his flesh grose. Of the Kite. cap. 26. A Kite is weake in flight & in strēgth, Therefore he is called Miluus quasi, molliter volans, as it wer weakly flieng: For he is borne vp aboue the aire with light feathers, & hooueth there as he were vnmouable. And in flieng it séemeth vn∣neth that he moueth the aire with softe touching. And is a bird that may well a∣way with trauaile, & therefore he taketh Cuckoes vpon his shoulders, & beareth them, least they faile in space of long wayes, and bringeth them out of ye coun∣tries of Spaine,Many se∣crets in nature  kno∣wen yet t this is doubtful. as Isid. saith. And he is a rauishing foule, and hardy among small birds, & a coward & fearefull among great birdes, and dreadeth to lie in waite to take wilde birdes, and dreadeth not to lye in waite to take tame birdes, and ly∣eth oft in waite to take chickins, & them that he findeth vnware, he saieth, and he eateth carrions and vncleane things, & for little meate to fill tho wombs, he fle∣eth all about the ayre: and is taken with the Sparhauke, and for his faintnesse and towardnesse hée is ouercome of a Birde that is lesse then he. And in youth there seemeth no difference betwéene the kite & other birdes of praye, but the longer hée liueth the more he sheweth that his own kinde is vnkinde. And there is a manner kite that taketh birds in the beginning, and afterward he eateth guts of beasts, and taketh vnneth afterward-flyes,The Bus∣sard wher¦of are i kinds, the one haun¦teth vvar∣rens and parks, the other cō∣mon. and small wormes, as Aristotle saith. And he dieth for hunger at the last, and is a cruell fowle about his birds, and is sorry when he séeth thē fat. And to make thē leane, he beateth them with his bill, and withdraweth their meate, & hath a voice of plaining, and of moane, as it were messenger of hunger. For when hée hungereth, hée seeketh his meate wée∣ping with voyce of plaining and of moane. Of the night crowe. cap. 27. THE night crowe is called Nictico∣rax, and hath that name, for he lo∣ueth the night, and flyeth and seeketh his meale by night, and crieth in seeking: and their crye is hatefull and odious to other birdes, as Isidore sayth. And is a Birde that flyeth the lyght, and maye not sée the Sunne, and haunteth & dwel∣leth in burials and in places of dead men: and they make their neasts in walls and in places with chinnes and hoales, and eate the Egges of Doues and Choughs, and fight with them. Also this Birde is called Noctua, as it were sharply séeing by night: for by night she maye sée, and when shining of the Sunne commeth, her sight is dim. The Iland Creta hath not this Birde, if hée commeth thether out of other lands, he dyeth anon as Isi∣dore saith. (AdditiōThis kinde of Owle is dogge foo∣ted, and couered with haire, his eyes are as the glistering Ise, against death hée vseth a straunge whoup. There is another kinde of night ra∣uen blacke, of the bignesse of a Doue, flat headed, out of the which groweth three long feathers like the coppe of a Lap∣wing, his bill gray, vsing a sharpe voice, whose vnaccustomed appearaunce, beto∣keneth mortalitye: he prayeth on Mice, Wéesells, and such like.) Of the Miredromble. Chap. 28. THE Miredromble is called Onacro∣calus, and is a bird that maketh noyse
in the Winter, and hath small chins in his iawes, in which hée taketh first meate, and then sendeth it to the second wombe: For he hath two wombes, in that one onelye hée taketh meate, and in that other onely he séetheth and defieth. But the first is taken in stéed of the crop of the throat, as Isidore saith. In Gréeke Onacrocalus is called a Birde with a long bill: and there be of two manner kindes: One is a water foule, & that other a foule of desart, and he that dwelleth in Water, is a bird of great gluttonye, and putteth the bill downe into the water, and maketh a greate noise, and is eni∣mie namely to Eeles, & the pray that hée taketh, he swalloweth sodeinly, & sēdeth it into his wombe. And then he cheweth and moueth his iawes, as he held meate in his mouth. This Bird resteth on the cliffe, and turneth vpward his bellye to saue himself against the réese of the Gos∣hauke, that he maye in that manner the more safelye rest and sléepe, as Isidore sayth. (Additiō.Of these kindes of Cormorants are diuerse, whereof the one called Ono∣crotalus, is as bigge as a Swan, which putting his head into the water, brayeth like an Asse. Of water Fowles, there are diuerse sortes that are héere omitted, be∣cause of the hinderance of other Authors: as the Mallard, the Ducke, the Bitter, of Wigen, the Teale, the Puffin, the Barnacle, the Bargander, the Gulles, the Twite, the wilde Goose, and Sheldrake, with many others.) Of the Pellican chap. 29. A Pellican is a Birde that is called Porphitio. Leui. 11. and Deut. 14. And is a Birde of Aegypt, and dwelleth in desart, beside the Riuer Nilus: and is accounted among vncleane birdes by the lawe in Leuit. And there be two manner of Pellicans: One dwelleth in water and eateth fish, and the other dwelleth on land, and loueth wildernesse, and eateth venimous beasts, as Lisardes, and other such. And all that the Pellican eateth he plungeth in water with his foote, & when he hath so plunged it in water, he put∣eth it in his mouth with his own soot, as it were with an hand. Only the Pellican and the Popiniay, among foules, vse the foote in stéed of an hand. Also of the Pellican, the Glose speak∣eth super Psalmum, & the same Plinius saith in this manner. The Pellican lo∣ueth too much her children. For when the children bée haught, and begin to waxe hoare, they smite the father and the mo∣ther in the face, wherfore the mother smi∣teth them againe and slaieth them. And the thirde daye the mother smiteth her selfe in her side that the bloud runneth out, and sheddeth that hot bloud vppon the bodies of her children. And by vertue of the bloud the birdes that were before dead, quicken againe. And in the Glose vpon that place of the Psalme.Psa. 10.6 Factus sum sicut Pellicanus. It is sayd that the Pellican slayeth her Birdes with her bill, and maketh sorrowe thrée dayes, and then sheddeth her hot bloud vppon them, and maketh them aliue againe in yt manner. Magister Iacobus de Vitri∣aco in li. de mirabilibua orientalium re∣gionum telleth another cause of the death of Pellicanes birdes. Hée sayth, that in Aegypt is a bird yt is called Pellicanus, a Birde with greate wings, and most leane. For all that he swalloweth passeth forth anone behinde: for hée hath a right slipper gut. And therefore hée maye not holde meate till it be incorporate. And the Serpent hateth kindlye this Birde. Wherfore when the mother passeth out of the neast to get meate, the serpent cli∣meth on the trée and stingeth & infecteth the Birdes. And when she commeth a∣gayne, shée maketh sorrowe thrée dayes for her Birdes, as it is sayde. The (he sayth) shée smiteth her selfe in the breast, and bringeth bloud vppon them, and rea∣reth them from death to lyfe, and then for greate bléeding the mother waxeth féeble, and the Birdes bée compelled to passe out of the neast to gette themselues meate. And some of them for kinde loue féede the mother that is féeble: and some be vnkinde and care not for the mother, and the mother taketh good héede there∣to, & when she commeth to her strength, she nourisheth and loueth those Birdes
that fedde her at her néed, and putteth a∣way her other birdes, as vnworthye and vnkinde, and suffereth them not to dwel nor liue with her. Of the Partridge. chap. 30. THe Partridge is called Perdix, and hath that name of her owne voice, as Isidore saith, and is an vncleane bird. For the male lepeth vp and treadeth the male: And strong liking of lechery for∣getteth the sexe and distinction of male and female, as Isidore sayth. And is so guilefull, that the one stealeth the Egges of the other, and sitteth abrood on them. But this fraude hath no fruite, for when the Birdes bée haught, and heare the voice of their owne mother: they for∣sake her that brooded them when they were Egges, and kept them as her owne Birdes, and tourne and followe theyr owne mother naturall, as Isidore sayth, and Ambrose also. And the Partridge trauaileth not in layeng and in brooding, lyke as other foules doe, as Arist. saith. Some Fowles (he sayth) bréed and gen∣der lightly, as the Partridge. And ye mo∣ther of the Partridge flieth all about the hunter, till her birdes be flowen. And af∣ter the birds be flowen, shée the damme flyeth after, and calleth her birdes: the which young Partridges soone after they be hatcht they follows the damme, and séeke their meat. And the Partridge hath few fethers and much flesh: and there∣fore he is féeble of flight, and in flight he riseth but little from the ground, and fal∣leth oft to the ground after a little while. Also ye Partridge dreadeth ye Sparhauk, and flieth her: and as long as hée séeth the Sparhauke in the aire, he riseth not frō ye earth into the aire. And at the noise and ringing of a little bell, he flyeth a∣bout vppon the ground, and falleth into the net or grinne ere he be ware. Plini∣us. lib. 29. ca. 6. saith, that the Partridges gull, with euen weight of honnie, cléereth much the sight, and therefore it shall bee kept in a siluer boxe. Theyr eyen with hony sod in a brasen vessell, helpe to heale the pimples of eien. (AdditiōThe Phesant is also delicate foule both of beautie and  the  the Owell, the W dainty Goodwille.  Ile of Eiery, the  She welar, with many  smaller sorts. As by  is  bed their properties and landes.) Of the Pecocke. chap. 31. THe Pecocke is called Pe, and hath that name of the sounde of his voice. His flesh is so harde that vnneth it rot∣teth, and is full hard to soothing, as Isi∣dore saith. And Aristotle sayth, that the Pecocke liueth twentie yeare, and hath chickens in the end of three yeeres, & after his wings bee couloured. And the Pe∣hen sitteth abroode thirtye dayes, and a little more: and soone after the shelles be cloue, and hath no chickens but once a yeare, and layeth twelue Egges or few lesse. And the Pecocke leeseth his fethers when the first tree leeseth his leaues, and his fethers grow first when leaues be∣gin to grow on trees, as Aristotle saith. And the Pecock is a bird that loueth not his young: for the male searcheth out the female, and seeketh out her Egges for to breake them, that he may so occupy him the more in his lecherie. And the female dreadeth that, & hideth busily her egges, least the Pecocke might soone find them. And Arist. sayth, that the Pecocke hath an vnstedfast and euill shapen head, as it were the head of a serpent & with a crest. And he hath a simple pace, and small necke, and areared, and a blew breast, and a taile ful of bewty, distinguished on high with wonderful fairenesse: and he hath foulest féet & riueled. And he wondereth of the fairenesse of his fethers, & areareth them vp, as it were a circle about his head, and then he looketh to his féet, and seeth the foulenesse of his feete, and lyke as he wer ashamed, he letteth his fethers fall sodeinlye: and all the taile downe∣ward, as though he tooke no héed of the fairenesse of his fethers: and hath an hor∣rible voice. And as one sayth, he hath a voice of a féend, head of a serpent, pace of théefe. And lib. 29. cap. 6. Plinius sayth, yt the Pecock hath enuie to mans profit,
and swalloweth his owne durt: for it is full medicinable, but it is sold found. Of Sparrowes. cap. 32. SParrowes bée small birdes, and bée called Passerci, of Patuitate, little∣nesse, as Isid. saith. And the Sparrowe is an vnstedfast bird with voice and iang∣ling: and maketh theyr neasts nigh to dwellings and habitations of men. And is a full hot bird and lecherous. And the flesh of them oft taken in meat, exciteth to carnall lust, as Constantine sayth. Sparrowes laye many Egges, and are full busie to bring vp their birdes, and to feede them. And she maketh her neast in hay and in fethers, and kéepeth her neast cleane without durt. And therefore shée throweth the durt of her Birdes out of the neast, and compelleth her Birdes to throwe their durt out of the neast; and they féede their Birdes with Spiders, Wormes, and Flyes: and they eate ve∣nimous seedes, as of Henbane, without hurt: and they haue sometime Leper and the falling euill: and the female liueth longer then the male, and the male is iea∣lous of his wife, & fighteth oft for her, as Aristotle saith: and the sparrow dreadeth the Wéesell, and hateth her, and crieth & warneth if ye wéesell commeth. And wai∣teth and biteth and billeth for to haue the neasts of Swallowes, and they loue their owne kinde. And birdes that other Sparrowes leaue by some hap, they ga∣ther & feed & nourish, as they were theyr owne. And if it happeneth that one of thē is taken in a grinne, or in other manner wise, she crieth for help. And a multitude of Sparrowes be gathered togethers to deliuer that that is taken, and spéede and hast with all their might. (AdditiōThe more of that which proueth heate, she sooner is wasted the inner ver∣tue, the cause of the gout, if not the lepro∣sie, hastours of death.) Of the Estridge. cap. 33. THE Estridge is called Strucio, and hath that name of a word of Gréeke, as Isidore saith. For that he hath a bodie as a beast, & fethers as a sense: and also he hath two féete, and a bill as a foule: but for weight and heauinesse of body be fli∣eth not with foules in the aire. She laieth egges as other foules do, but she neglec∣teth to brood her egges, she which egges be raken in grauel, and on be brought forth by heat & nourishing of the dust, as Isid. saith. And Aristotle speaketh of the Strucio, and saith, that the Strucio in ma∣king is like to a foule, and in some point he is like to a foure footed beast. For hée flieth not vp into the aire; for his wings be not couenable to flight, but in the ma∣king therof is thin, as the making of her selfe, & for he is some deale shape as a bird he hath many fethers in the neather part of the body, & hath two féete as a foule, & is cloue footed as a foure footed beast: and the cause thereof is, for by the greatnesse of his body, he is likned to a foure footed beast, and not to a foule, and is so hot, that he swalloweth and defieth and wa∣steth yron. And Auicen saith, kinde that is wise and ware in all thing, graunteth to the Strucio a propertie to lay greatest egges and hardest of shell, that being oc∣cupied about the generation of them, heat may be temperate; for if the heat should be too vehement, it shoulde be cause why he should die the sooner. Other properties of the Estridge Gre. toucheth super lob. 29. where it is sayde, that fethers of the Strucio be like in colour to the fethers of ye gentle Fawlcon, but not in vertue: the fethers haue the likenesse, but he lacketh swiftnesse of flight. He spreadeth out his wings to flie, but yet he riseth not vp frō the earth: He is clothed with thinne fe∣thers, & made heauy with a great body. And when the time is come that they shall laye egges, they heaue vp their eyes and behold the stars that be called Vir∣gilie or Pliades: for they laye no Egges but when the constellation ariseth and is séene. And about ye month of Iune, when they sée those stars, theyd digge in grauell and laye there their egges, and couer and hide them with sande. And when they haue lefte them there, they forget anone where they layed them, and come neuer againe thereto. But the grauel is chased with the heat of the Sunne, and heateth
the Egges that be hidde, and bréedeth birds therein, and bringeth them foorth: And when the shell is broke, and birdes come out, then first the mother gathereth and nourisheth them: And the birde that shée despised in the Egge, shée knoweth when it is come out of the Egge. And therefore it is sayd to Iob. Hée is made harde to his owne children, as though he were not his owne. ¶Also the E∣stridge hateth the horse by kinde, and is so contrary to the horse, that he may not sée ye horse without feare. And if an horse cōe against him, he raiseth vp his wings as it were against his enimye, and com∣pelleth the horse to flie with beating of his wings. AdditiōOf the fethers of the Estridge, the plumage is made for Princes, and no∣bles to weare in their hats, caps, and o∣ther furniture.) Of the Turtle. chap. 34: THE Turtle hath that name of the voice, and is a simple Birde, as the Culuour. But is chast, farre vnlyke the Culuour. The Turtle is a chast Birde, and hath that name of conditions. For he followeth chastity, and if he léeseth his make, he seekth not cōpanye of any other, but goeth alone, and hath minde of the fellowship yt is lost: and groneth alwaye, and loueth and chooseth solitarye place, and flyeth much company of men: Ne∣uerthelesse he commeth downe into Or∣chards & gardens, and feelds of men, and there eateth, wherby he liueth. And when he hath meate, hée passeth againe to high hills, and to priuie places of woods. Hée commeth in springing time and warneth of nouelty of time with groning voyce. And in winter he léeseth his fethers, and then hée hideth him in hollowe stockes. And against Summer in springing time when his fethers spring againe, hée com∣meth out of his hoale, in the which hée was hid, and séeketh couenable place, and stéede for to bréede in. And among thick boughes and trées, of harde stickes and knottie shée maketh her neast, and lay∣eth Egges therein and sitteth abroode, and hath Birdes, and féedeth and nou∣risheth them, as Aristotle sayth. The Turtle layeth Egges twice in Spring∣ing time, and not the thirde time, but if the first Egges bée corrupt. And Tur∣tles laye and bréede fiftéene yeare, and lyght not vppon slinking things, ney∣ther vppon carrion, because of meate: for she eateth not carrion, but for meate for her birdes, she seeketh out cleane grains, and gathereth them in cleane places, and liueth thereby. When other Birds sing, she groneth, and his Birdes bee hot and moist, as Culuour Birdes, as Constan∣tine sayth: and that witnesseth heauinesse of flight. But when he beginneth to flie, his flesh is made more hot and lyght, and more better to defie. Also the bloud of her right wing is medicinable, as the bloud of a Swallowe, and of a Culuour or Doue. Of the Vulture. chap. 35. THE Uolture hath the name of slowe flight, as Isidore sayth. For of the plenteousnesse of much flesh, hée lack∣eth swiftnesse of flight. And some men tell, that her treding is not medled, but yt she conceiueth, and is conceiued, and gen∣dereth, and is gendered without ioyning of treading: and they tell, that they live an hundred yéeres, as Isidore sayth. This Birde is cruell about his owne Birdes, as the Kite is. And if shée séeth her birdes too fatte, shée beateth them with her féete and bill to make them leane by sore beating and biting, as Pli∣nius saith. Also he sayth, that in this Birde the wit of smelling is best. And therefore by smelling he sauoureth carrions that bée farre from him that is beyonde the sea: and againeward Therefore the Uul∣ture followeth the hoast that hée maye féed himselfe with carrions of men, and of horse. And therefore (as a Diuinour sayth) when many Uulturs come and flie together, it betokeneth battaile. And they know that such a battaile shall bée, by some priuie wit of kinde. And Aristo∣tle speaketh of the Uulture and saith, that he fighteth with the gentle Falwcon, and slyeth about him, and when hée hath
ouercome him, he dieth. He eateth rawe flesh: and therefore he fighteth against other Foules because of meate, and hée hunteth from middaye to night: and re∣steth still from the Sunne rising to that time. And when hée ageth, his ouer bill waxeth long and croked ouer the nether, and dyeth at the last for hunger, as Ari∣stotle sayth there. And some men saye, by errour of olde time, that the Uulture was sometime a man, and was cruell to some Pilgrimes; and therefore hée hath such paine of his bill, and dieth for hun∣ger, but that is not lawfull to beléeue. And so he saith, when he of his meat leaueth reliefe, hée leaueth not that o∣ther foules, as the Eagle doth, but layeth it in his neast to féede with his birds: for he getteth not ligthly meate: and theyr neasts be on high mountaines, & in thick woodes. And if he séeth any fowle flye a∣bout his birdes, he beateth them away: and féedeth his birds till they may flye: & then he driueth them out of the neast, and suffreth them not to come nigh that place. Also in lib. de Almacar, he sayth, that ther is a manner water foule that drea∣deth the Uulture, and therefore flyeth to the water: and the Uulture flyeth about farre from thence, and is sharpe of sight, and waiseth when the foule cōmeth out of the water: & then he taketh that foule if he may. Also the Uulture is a much stinking foule and vncleane, and his flesh is most hard and of euill sauour, and of heauye smell. And therefore it is not profitable for mans meate: For carrion he ligh∣teth lyghtly to the ground. But when he is alighted, vnueth he riseth againe frō the ground, as Gregory sayth. Hée fly∣eth high, and séeth carrions that bée full lowe: and for loue of carrion he com∣meth downe from the high country of the aire, to the grounde, as he sayth. And when any beast setteth vpon him he bea∣teth his wings against the winde: and so he, riseth from the ground: and flyeth into the aire more by helpe of the winde then by his owne strength. And héereto lib. 29. ca. 3. Plinius saith, that among foules the Uulture is con∣trary to serpents. For if his fethers be burnt, the smell thereof driueth awaye Serpents. And the heart thereof maketh a man siker, and safe that brareth it a∣mong Serpents and wilde beastes. His heart bound in a Lions skinne, or in a Wolfes skin driueth away féends. His fethers bounde to the lefte foote of a woman, that trauaileth with childe, deli∣uereth her swiftly. But then it must be taken away lightlye, least the entrayles followe and come out after, Ointment made of Uultures grease, and oile that is called Oleum myrti, & Waxe, helpeth si∣newes, & beasts also. His right foot bound to the left foote, healeth that aketh; the left foote also healeth the right foote. His tongue plucked out with yron, & hanged about a mans necke in new cloth, ma∣keth a man gracious, to get of a mā what he desireth. So it is sayde, his boanes burnt to ashes, and medled with Celido∣nia, and giuen to beastes, healeth theyr euills. Huc vsque Plinius, cap. 36. He saith that bloud of Uultures, with the hearbe yt is called Cabeon, or els Came∣leonte, and Celdra, healeth the Leper. AdditiōThe Uulture is called a Geir, lyke vnto an Eagle, a bird of a fierce stomack, there are diuerse kindes, there is one kinde lyke the Fawlcon, bigger billed, & talented. Read Gesner. Of Vlula. chap. 36. VLula is a fowle that hath that name of shrieching and crieng: And ther∣fore among Diuinours with cryeng he betokeneth aduersitye, as Isidore saith. And héerby it séemeth that Vlula and the Owle be all one, and among Diuinours her voyce is vngratious. Super Esai. 14. the Glose sayth in this manner. Vlula is a Bird of the quantitye of a Crowe, sprong with speckes, and pitcheth his bill into a myrye place, and maketh a greate sound and noyse. And héere∣by it séemeth that Vlula is a mice drom∣ble, that is a Birde of the marryes, and dwelleth in myrye places. Séeke before in the Chapter of the Miredrom∣ble.
Of the Lapwing. chap. 37. THE Lapwing is called Vpupa a∣mong the Gréeks: for he eateth mans durt, and is nourished and fed ofte with doung, as Isidore sayth. For it is a bird most filthy and vncleane, and is copped on the head, & dwelleth alway in graues or in durt. And if a man annoint him∣selfe with her bloud when he goeth to sléepe, in his sléepe he shall sée féends busy to strangle & snare him: and her heart is good to euill doers, for in their euill doo∣ing they vse theyr heartes. Of this birde Philosophers tell, that when he ageth, so that he may neither sée nor flie, his birds pull away the féeble fethers, and annoint his eyen with iuyce of hearbes, and hide him vnder their wings till his fethers bée growen:They call it yt black plouer. and so he is renued, and fly∣eth, and séeth cléerely, as Isidore saith. Of the Reremouse. chap. 38. THe reremouse is called Vespertilio, & hath that name of the euentide.The Bat, or Reare∣mouse, or dormouse For it hating light, flieth in the euentide with breaking and blenching, and swifte moo∣uing, with full small skinnes of her wings. And is a beast like to a mouse in sownding with voice, in piping, and crieng. And he is lyke to a Birde, and also to a foure footed beast: & that is but seld found among Birdes. Huc vsque Isidorus. Also super Esaiam. 2. the Glose sayth that these Reremise flye light, for they be blinde as Moles, and lyke pow∣der, and suck Oyle out of Lampes: And they hide themselues in chins and cliffes of walles, and be most colde of kinde. Therfore the bloud of a Reremouse an∣nointed vppon the eie liddes, suffereth not the haire to growe againe, as Constan∣tine saith. And that perchance is because it stoppeth the poores with his coldnesse. And when he poores be stopped, haire groweth not againe. AdditiōIn the Iland of Catighan are cer∣taine greate Battes, as bigge as Eagles, of the which the trauailers of the West Indias report they tooke one: they are good to be eaten, and of tast much like a hen: Folio. 439. in the third Decade, & .. booke Folio. 128. The trauailers ouer in the straights greatly tormented with the bi∣ting of Bats, which are ther so noisome in the night, that if they bite anye man in his sléepe, they put him in daunger of life, onely wt drawing of bloud, insomuch that some haue died thereof, falling as it were into a consumption through the malitiousnese of the venimous wound, &c. FINIS LIBRI DVODECIMI. ¶ INCIPIT LIBER XIII. DE AQVA ET EIVS ORNATV. FOrasmuch as the proper∣ties of fire & of aire are de∣scribed, now it is conueni∣ent to remēber somewhat the effects & doing of wa∣ters as it belongeth to this worke. And water is called Aqua, as it were Equa, euen. For it resteth neuer of mouing, till the ouerside therof be euen, as Isid. saith. li. 12. Also Const. saith, that water is a colde element & moist, & more subtill then earth, & bright & cleane, and not held in with his owne markes and bonds. For water shuld all to shed & fall to naught, except it were stopped & held in with other marks and bonds then his owne. In Exameron Basilius describeth ye properties of water in general & saith: that among all elements water is most profitable, for water maketh heauen tē∣perate, and the earth plenteous, and in∣corporateth ye aire with vapours, & ma∣keth
it thicke, & stieth vp on high, & cha∣lengeth heauen. Water is cause of al that is bred & springeth: for it bréedeth corne & fruit, & bringeth forth trées, hearbs and grasse, & wipeth of filth, & washeth awaye foulenesse, and giueth drinke to man and beast. For water ioyneth with ye earth, & pearceth & filleth it, & nourisheth the heat of heauen, & tempereth al ye nether things. For but if these neather things were tē∣pered in their mouing about, they should burne & be wasted by strēgth of heat: this water dronke of beasts leadeth forth the meat & feeding into liuing of flesh. This giueth spirit & breath to fish, as the aire giueth to other beasts, & ioyning of bodie & soule. This shed into the inner parts of the earth, ioyneth ye parts therof. For by strength of great drines ye earth shuld fal to pouder, but if the partes were ioyned together by moisture & water. Also this passing by the inward waies of ye earth, taketh changing in likenesse & coulour, & sauour of place by which it passeth. And therfore water is, and séemeth now salt, now sweet & fresh, now cléere, now trou∣blous, now thicke, now thin. For water hath no determinate quality nor colour, nor sauour, to ye intent it shuld so be able to take easily all coulours & sauours, and therefore ye more cleane & pure ye water is, ye more dark & dim it seemeth, when ye Sun beames come not therein to giue it colour & hew. This moueth from ye mid∣dle toward the vtter roundnes, & stinteth not till the vtter partes thereof be made euen, & the parts therof like far from the middle point of ye earth. Also this taketh light of the Sun beames, & reboundeth it againeward toward heauen. And for it hath ye vtter part of a mirrour, & sheweth his kinde, by working and doing of light rebounded, likenesse & Image of things be séene therin, and the faces of them that looke therin, be knowen & séene therin, as it were in a mirrour. Also this sheddeth abroad the beames that thirleth the substaunce thereof, and spreadeth them more largely in breadth, & therefore it maketh things that be séene therin seeme more then they be in them∣selues. These generall properties of wa∣ter, & many other thou maist find in Exa∣meron. And there be many diuerse wa∣ters as he saith. For water springeth & cōmeth of the aire, as raine water. And for this is heuenly water, it is most pro∣fitable to things that grow in earth. O∣ther waters spring & walme out of ye in∣ner parts of ye earth, as well water & pit water. And some water passeth & rūneth on the earth, as water of riuers: and some water beclippeth the féeds of the earth, & of ye roundnesse thereof, as the sea of Oc∣cean, & of middle earth, that is mother & generall head and spring of all waters, as Constantine sayth. Then raine water is of it selfe, bright, cléere, thin, light, and sauourie. The cléerenesse therof sheweth, that none other thing is meddeled there∣with. And the lightnesse and sauourynes of it, sheweth the subtill substance there∣of. Among al waters this is best to plen∣teousnesse of ye earth, & namely when it falleth with thunder. For with his mo∣uing, thunder smiteth of vapours: and so maketh the water subtill & cleere, pure and cleane. And the water that is med∣led with Snow, or molten of Snow, is worse and not good for them that be fa∣sting. For it smiteth the stomake, and ri∣ueth it togethers, and bréedeth cough, & setteth the téeth an edge, as Constantine saith. Of diuersitie of waters, and diuerse qualitie and working thereof, séeke be∣fore lib. 6. of drinke. chap. 31. there yée shall finde it more plainely declared and open. And after Raine water, Well water is best, namely if it spring out of stones, or fall downe of high wells. For the wel is head and spring of liuing water, that springeth and runneth continually out of priuie veines of the earth. Therefore a Well is called Fons, as it were Fouens, nourishing, or Fundens, shedding, as Isi∣dore sayth. And hath priuie comming out of the veines of the earth. And hath his springing and rising out of daye wayes of stones, and a Well multiply∣eth his waters, and communicatiueth himselfe: for hée hideth himselfe to no∣thing: And communicatiueth and par∣teth himselfe as well to Pilgrimes and straungers, as to men of the same coun∣trye.
Also he cleanseth himselfe and other things: for well water that runneth out of sad stones is cleere, and cleanseth of most filth and hoare also. Also a well re∣nueth himselfe, and altreth other things, and helpeth, for alwaye he renueth his waters, and giueth benefice of renuing & altring, to things that plunge thēselues in welles, as the Glose sayth super psa. Also it abateth thirst, and cooleth and re∣fresheth wayfairing men in heate, & gi∣ueth to them that be a thirst, drink, that is contrary to heate and drinesse. Also a well maketh the places plenteous yt bée nigh thereabout, for places that be nexte to wells, commonly haue mo hearbes & grasse, & floures, & be more fructuous thā other. Also a well in the middle therof, springeth first vp of the earth, & casteth away from it selfe pouder & grauell yt be in his way, for a well springeth & walm∣eth vp by violence of his mouing, & pas∣seth through ye earthy parts, & departeth and dealeth part from part, & sheddeth & sparpleth them asunder. Also a Well be∣cause of his cléerenesse (as it were a myr∣rour) sheweth shapes and likenesse of things that be there afore: and therfore men that looke in wells, sée therin theyr owne faces, and as well the riuelyng & other speckes that defile the fairnesse be seene in water of wells. Also a well by qualytie of times, of winter and of Summer chaungeth his owne qualitie. For as Macrobius saith, in winter a well is hot, & cold in Sum∣mer time: the cause therof is, for in win∣ter heate flyeth and voideth the master of his contrary, and draweth inward to the inner part of a well, and by presence of that heate and continuall beating, the mouth of the well is hot: and the con∣trary in summer for contrary cause, for because of heate yt hath masterie in the aire in summer, coldenesse flyeth to the inner parts of wayes and veynes of the wel, and therefore water that springeth, is found the more cold that time. Also by the highnes of place of ye springing of water, the well sendeth his water: for ye water is led as high in pipes, as ye place of spring of the water is, that he spring∣eth in: for if a well springeth in ye top of an hill, oft by pipes the water is led to ye same highnes into another hill, & is not led higher than his own springing place, except it be by violence. Also though a well be little in his owne spring: yet for it springeth continuallye, it is originall cause of manye great Riuers, for there is no Riuer, but it springeth out of some Well, knowen or vnknowen, as Isidore saith. Also a well amendeth water of lakes, and other standing wa∣ters, as it were quickning thē with ver∣tue. For when a wel is litle & springeth or passeth by a great lake, it maketh the water therin ye more wholsome, & the fish yt is therin ye better in point & state. Also a well taketh & receiueth heat, vertue, & sauor of waies & veines of ye earth, yt it passeth by, as Isid. saith. Therfore wells be now hot, now colde, now smelling of brimstone, after ye diuers qualities of the earth that it passeth by, as Isid. saith li. 12 In Italy is a well, & the water thereof, ofte healeth sore eyen: Also in Affrica is a well, and the water thereof maketh the voyce well sownding and singing. Also in Boetia be two Welles, that one ma∣keth good minde, and that other maketh forgetfulnesse. Also in Aethiopia is a well of red colour, and he that drinketh thereof, shall anone be wood or mad. Also in Cecilia be two wells, and one thereof maketh females barren, and that other maketh them that be barren, able to con∣ceiue. Also in Idumea is a Well, that chaungeth colour foure times a yeare: for thrée moneths it séemeth troublous, as it were tempered with powder, thrée months red as bloud, thrée months green, and thrée months a manner blue. Men of that Countrie, call that Well, Iobs Well. Also in Siloa at the foote of the mount Sion, is a well that runneth not alway, but certaine daies & houres. Also in Sar∣dinia be hot wells that helpe eyen, and reproue théeues for their euill doing, & maketh them knowen by blindnes. Also he saith yt in Egipt is a well, in ye which burning brondes be quenched, & quench∣ed bronds are kindled. Also among the Garamantes there is a Well so cold by day, that it may not be dronk, & so hot by
night, that it may not be touched. Huc vsque Isidore. Héereof it followeth, that a well hath sauor and kinde of his owne ground. For if the ground be swéete & pure, the water shall also be swéete and pure, and againward. Also if the ground be brimstonie or slimie, the water shall sauour of brimstone and slime: and so if the well in his own spring be corrupt and vicious, all that runneth out is vi∣cious and corrupt. AdditiōThere are in Englande, Waters that cure lame and diseased: at Bathe, at Saint Anne at Buckstone, & New∣man regis. ¶Of Pit water. Cap. 2. A Pit is called Puteus, and Puteus, is a lake digged and dolue, and hath that name Puteus of Potus, drinke as Isidore sayth: for of sweating and wo∣sing of clyues and dennes of the earth, water springeth, for then the small in∣ner veynes of the earth be broke, and the water wose out as it were smoking. And of that wosing, pit water is gende∣red, as he saith. And as Constant. saith, among waters, pit water is thickest and worst to defie, for saltnesse of the earth, and for standing of the water, and also for déepnesse and farnesse from the aire. By riuer sides pit water is soone found, and the substance of that water, is like∣ned to the complection of the riuer wa∣ter: and when a pit is nigh another, the deeper pit draweth the water of the pit that is of lesse déepnesse, and gathereth that water to it selfe, and taketh sauour of the earth and ground that is there a∣bout, and therefore the water is shewed now salt, now fresh. Also pit water ofte taketh corruption, when it is not moued, and therefore to make pit water cleane, & pure, it néedeth that it be oft moued & drawen: and the néerer that pit water is to the veyne of the earth, the more colde and the more fresh commonly the water is found. Also in winter seldome or neuer pit water fréeseth. For by pre∣sence of colde aire in Winter time, heate that is contrary to colde is there put in∣to the inner parts of the pit, and there∣fore the water therof is changed by hot vapor, and is not suffered to freese, but is founde more hot in Winter, than in Summer. Also for déepnesse of his place, pit water is got with difficultie, and is vnneth caught or drawen without great triall and crafte. ¶Of a Riuer. Cap. 3. A Riuer is called Flunius, & hath that name of Affluendo, running. For as Isidore saith, it is euerlasting running: for it runneth continually, and ceasseth not to runne, but if the head thereof be stopped or turned and let. It is to know in a Riuer is euerlasting running and déepnesse of place, and winding and tur∣ning of mouing: for ofte a riuer runneth, by ful long space of countries & lands: al∣so ye head is knowen of ye well spring, & the finall end whetherward it runneth, and the maner of springing. For euery riuer commeth originally out of the sea, by priuie wayes, and springeth out in Well heads, and passe oft into the sea, by waies and passages that be knowen, as the Glose sayth, super Eccle. pri. there it is sayd, that all the riuers runne into the sea. There Ierome sayth thus, Phi∣losophers tell, that swéete Waters that runne into the sea, be consumpt and wasted by heate of the Sunne, or els they be foode and nourishing of saltnesse of the sea. But our Ecclesiastes, the ma∣ker of waters sayeth, That they come agayne by priuie veynes of the earth, to the Well heades, and commeth out of the mother, that is the sea, and walmeth and springeth out in Well heades. Also it is to be considered, in a riuer the corpes, and the mouing betwéene, & from the the beginning to the ende, and also the sauour and swéetnesse, for riuer water is driued end clensed in veynes of wels, by whom he passeth, and is spoiled of saltnesse, and taketh fauour, & is able to be dronke, and turneth into sweéetnes as Isidore saith. Also as to the sight, the faire cléernes thereof is to be considered. For the sub∣stance thereof taketh lyght, and is cléere,
as a myrrour, and so images & things, that be obiect thereto be seene in waters of riuers. Also touching the substaunce of a riuer the cleannesse and purenesse is to be considered, & the course thereof is downward & swift, & swiftnes is more vertuous: for it beareth downe all lets that it findeth in his course, and no∣thing withstandeth the rauishing there∣of. For with his swiftnesse he beareth forth with his course all that is throw∣en therein, or els driueth it to ye brinke, and brimme, and moueth and beareth shippes laden, and putteth them foorth with his course, and moueth about, and turneth full swiftly full heauie whéeles by violence and strength, and taketh in himselfe hoare and filth, that is throw∣en therein: but by swiftnesse of moo∣uing, he departeth and disperpleth such filth and hoare. And a riuer clenseth him selfe and the place that he passeth by, & reneweth waters of lakes and of ponds, there he commeth in, and kéepeth them from corruption, and féedeth and nouri∣sheth fish of diuers kindes, and clenseth and doth away stench and euill sauour, and changeth ye qualities of fish of lakes and of marches. Also touching the effect and doing, a riuer hath many profitable things, that be couenable to the vse of men: For he warneth to nothing his benefice, but cō∣muneth to all men as much as it selfe, for he serueth euen lyke both men and beasts, lesse and more, and cleanseth and doth away filth and vncleannesse both of bodies, and of cloathing, and refresheth & cooleth them that be hot, and féedeth with drinke them that be a thirst, and moyst∣eth and maketh plenteous the place that is nigh thereto by influence of his hu∣mours, and moysteth rootes and féedes, & maketh them great and fat, as it fareth in Aegypt. There when séedes lye sow∣en as it were in gardens, all the fieldes take moysture of the riuer Nilus, as Ra∣banus saith super Deut. cap. 11. with his course about the Cities, he wardeth and strengtheneth them, and other dwelling places, and bringeth to Cities victualls, and Merchaundises, & maketh men rich, and gathereth together heapes of grauel and earth, and maketh Ilards, and also couenable place for succour and strength. Constantine speaketh of Riuer water & saith, that riuer water is best that run∣neth Eastward,Those springs, vvhose current is tovvard ye rising of the sunne are whol∣somest vvaters. and springeth and com∣meth out of high Mountaines: and the riuer water that runneth West warde, lesse worthy. Also he sayth, that the far∣ther the riuere be from Cities, the more cleane they be and pure, and the more couenable to féeding of fish. Also filth & hoare of cities be cast into riuers, & wa∣shing & bathing of siex & of other things, of the which the riuer water sometime taketh corruption, as he saith. Riuer wa∣ter is good, that runneth swiftly: strōg∣ly vpon smal stones & grauelly ground, or vpon clay ground, sad, sauory & cleere, for it taketh sauour and coulour of the ground that it passeth by and therefore as well the names, is the properties of Riuers be diuers as the Glose saith  per Gen. 2. And though riuers haue cō∣mon head spring of the Sea, yet neuer∣thelesse of the place that  springeth vp in, and of the country, that he passeth by, he taketh sauour and colour and name. And though a riuer taketh in it self ma∣ny waters and streames, that run there∣to, yet as long as the proper well sprin∣geth of a lake, he léseth not soone the first name: for he corporeth and ioyn∣eth to himselfe waters, and runneth ther¦to, both in name & in substance. There∣fore though a Riuer be little and small, when he beginneth to spring out of the first well, yet ye farther he passeth frō the head spring, the more he wexeth by run∣ning & comming of waters & streames, as it doth in Danubio, a riuer of Ger∣many, yt is called Downow in ye cōmon speach, wherof Isi. li. 13. speaketh & saith, yt this riuer springeth & cōmeth out of ye hils of Germany in ye west side, out of a litle well, & runneth Eastward, & taketh to it selfe lx. riuers, & falleth into the sea, named Pontitū in 7. mouths: & alwaies alike that riuer is profitable, while hée passeth not the bonds of his brinke, bor∣ders & brims: but sometime by great raine, or by melting of snow the water ariseth, & passeth the chanell & brimmes. And then ofte he destroyeth and drow∣neth
the playnes of the countrie, that is there nigh. Of riuers be two manner kindes, as Isidore sayth. One is called a lyuing ri∣uer. Whereof Virgil saieth, Donec me flumine viuo abluero, &c. That other maner riuer is called Torrens, and is a water that commeth with a swift réese, and passeth: and is called Torrens, for it increaseth in great raine, and fadeth in drye weather. And the Gréekes gaue thereto a name of Winter, when it in∣creaseth, and we gaue thereto a name of Summer, when it falleth and dryeth: & the course of such a water is full swifte and strong, and therefore it ouerthrow∣eth and beareth downe all that it méet∣eth with, it selfe is swifte and strong in mouing, and there it runneth it breketh earth, and diggesh and maketh dennes therein, and gathereth strawe and stones on a heape, and leaueth behinde a marke and token, and destroyeth waies, & drow∣neth things that be nigh therto, and fal∣leth into the sea. ¶ Of Amnis, a Riuer. Cap. 4. AMnis is a Riuer arayed and sette with woods and groues, with trées & bushes, as Isidore saieth, and hath that name Amnis of Amenitate, mirth, for such a place is mery. And ther by grow medicinable hearbes in great plentie, & wilde fowles nestle, and breed in ye course and streame thereof, and wilde beastes take drink and coole themselues in burn∣ing heate, and nigh thereto be léeses and pastures in great plentie, which are long in verdure faire and greene. And there be some riuers, of the which holy Writ maketh speciall mention, as Phison, Gi∣on, Tigris, Dorix, Euphrates, Iordan, & other. And Phison is that riuer that is called Ganges also, as Isidore saith. lib. 13. and hath that name Ganges of a king that is called Gangantes. This Riuer commeth out of Paradise, and passeth a∣bout the lande Eiulatha a Countrey of Inde, & is called Phison, yt is to vnder∣stand, fellowship, for he taketh in it selfe ten riuers: also Phison is to vnderstand changing of mouth, for it chaungeth the qualitie that it hath in Paradise, & that in thrée manner wise, as the Master sai∣eth In Historijs. In colour he is cléere, and some where dimme, and some wher troubly in quantitie. For some wher he is little, and some wher huge and great, and some where wide, and some where straight in feeling, for some where he is colde, and some where hot. In this Ri∣uer is much golden grauell, and manye precious stones. Also in the cliffes and brimmes thereof, grow trées & hearbes with swéete smellyng, and is medici∣nable. Amnus a Riuer in the Iland Doli∣ca, in Arabia.Addition ¶Of the riuer Gion. Cap. 5. THE riuer Gion is called Nilus also, and is a riuer of Mesopotamia, and commeth out of Paradise, and is called the ioyning of the earth, or earthye, for it is troubly, carthic, slimie, & wosie, & a∣riseth not far from Athlante, & passeth a∣bout the land Aethiopia, and commeth downe by Aegypt, and moysteth the Playnes thereof. And so Super Amos, he saith vpon that word, Defluit, quasi riuus Aegypti. That Riuer Nylus, by disposition of God, moysteth all Aegypt once a yeare, and heapes of grauell close the mouths therof, that it falleth not in∣th Sea, and after the moysting of the lande, the heapes of grauell diuide and fall away, and Nilus turneth againe in∣to his owne chanell, and passeth into the sea, and is swallowed into the Sea at the last. This riuer Nilus féedeth & no∣risheth many manners of créeping & ve∣nemous beasts noyfull and grieuous, as Crocodiles, and a little beast, which is called Enidros. Of whom Isidore li. 12. ca. 2. saith, that that beast Enidros, is a little beast, and hath that name Enidros, for he dwelleth in waters, and namelye in the riuer that is called Nilus. And if this little beast findeth a Crocodile slée∣ping, he walloweth and wrappeth him∣selfe first in senne and wose, and then commeth in at the mouth of the Croco∣dile and goeth into his wombe, and all to renteth his guts and slayeth him, and
so yeth. Also sup. Eccelesi. 24. There the Glose saith, that Gion, that is riuer Ni∣lus is troubly, and draweth much slime and wose and there because of slyme and woe that he beareth with him in his course, he maketh the land that he o∣uerpasseth to be full plenteous of corne, and fruite. (AdditiōGyon called Nylus, a famous and great Riuer, running thorough Aethiopia and Aegypt, and is suppo∣sed to bée one of the Riuers of Para∣dise, called in the holye Scripture, Ge∣hon, that signifieth the breast of slowing foorth, that as creatures are nourished of milke, so is the soyle by ouerflowing the valleyes. Albeit it seemeth to me vn∣lykelye, forasmuch as in Genesis it is written, that Gehon inuironeth all Ae∣thiopia, where is no mention made, that it passeth through Aegypt, albeit ye Ae∣gypt and the Riuer Nilus, were more nigh to Moses, when he wrote, the booke Genesis, then Aethiope was, and also Nilus was famous for the vertue of the water thereof, which ouerflowing the countrey of Aegypt, made ye ground wonderfull fertill many yeares after: so that without labouring ye earth brought forth abundaunce of sundry graines and plants delectable and profitable. Also beastes of sundry kindes, without other forme of generation: especially, when the Riuer came to the deepenesse of 40. Cubites. Likewise, when it exceeded not eight cubites, there succéeded much fa∣mine and scarcitie. D. Cooper in his Dictionarie. Nilus the most famous Riuer of the world, from the time that the Sunne be in Tropico Cancri, vntill it come vnto the Equinoctiall line, in Libra againe, with an huge aboundaunce of water, doeth ouerflowe all the Downes, and playne Countryes of Aegypt. By the altitude and deepenesse of the floude, the Aegyptians foresee the plentye and scarcitye of fruites to come. Po∣lidore Virgil in his first Booke, xv. Chapter.) ¶Of Tigris the Riuer. Ca. 6. TIgris is a riuer of Mes, and commeth out of Paradise, and passeth foorth against Assyries, as Isid saith, and passeth into the Red sea after many tur∣nings and windings, & hath this name Tigris, for strong reese and swiftnesse, as that beast that is called Tigris, that runneth with great swiftnesse. And Io∣sephus sayth, that Tigris ariseth in Ar∣menia, of the same Well, of the which Euphrates ariseth, & is called Tiglth,Tigris ∣risieth ellan arrow in the . that is to vnderstand, sharp or straight, for he runneth straightly and sharply, as it were an arrow. Therefore in ye lan∣guage of Persia, Tigris, and swift, & an arrowe are all one. (AdditiōThis mightie Riuer runneth to∣ward ye East side of Assyria. Gen. 2. ca.) ¶Of Euphrates the riuer. Cap. 7. EVphrates is a riuer of Mesopota∣mia, and commeth out of Paradise, & is most copious in gems and precious stones, and runneth by the middle of Babilon. This riuer hath that name of plenteousnesse, for in Hebrue Euphrata is to meane fruitfull, and runneth in some place of Mesopotamia, and moist∣eth the land, like as Nilus doth Aegipt. And Salustius that is most certaine of authoritie sayth, that Tigris & Euphra∣tes spring out of a well in Armenia, and passe forth by diuers places, & betweene those two, is a space of lande of manye miles. And the land that these two ri∣uers beclippeth is called Mesopotamia. Huc vsque Isid. lib. 13. cap. 1. ¶Of the Riuer Dorix. Chap. 8. THe Glose super Eccle. 14. saith, that Dorix is a riuer, and hath another name, and is called Arxis, or Arpsis, a riuer of Armenia, and riseth & commeth out of the same hist with Euphrates, and hath yt name for his swéetnesse & might. He ouercommeth & throweth downe all thing, that is in his waye, as Isidore saith libro. 13. And so when Alexander would passe there ouer, he made a bridge
theron, and the riuer arose with so great strength and violence, that it all to brake despiously ye bridge. This riuer ariseth a lyttle from the head of Euphrates, and runneth thence to the Sea, that is called Mare Caspuim, as Isidore saith. And is called Dorix among the Gréekes, of a part of their lande, for in that countrey where that riuer runneth, their language is called Lingna Dorica. The Glose saith super Ecclesiasticum. 14. This ri∣uer seemeth as it were an arme of Ti∣gris, or els of Euphrates, or els of ey∣ther: for it springeth and riseth out of the same Well in Armenia. Therefore it is sayd, that he hath plentie of preci∣ous stones, and of wel sauoring hearbs, which be couenable to medicines: For Dorix is to be vnderstoode, medicine of generation. Also he saith, that he com∣meth out of Paradise by mouing of Ti∣gris and Euphrates. ¶Of Iordane. Cap. 9. IOrdane is a Riuer of Iurie, & hath that name of two wels: one of them is tailed for and the other Dan, as Isi∣dore sayth li. 13. And ariseth vnder ye hil or mount Libani, and departeth Araby and Iurie, & passeth by many windings about, and by Iericho, and runneth into the dead sea, and is therein swallowed and wasted. When wheate is ripe, that oft ripeth in Palestine in springing time, this riuer ofte ariseth more than in any other time, & that falleth of much raine, and of melting of snowe, as it is sayd in Histor and in Glosa super Iosu. 3. There it is sayde, Iordane filleth the drinkes and the brimmes of his chanell in reaping time &c. t in Ecclesiasti. 24. the same is sayd. This riuer hath many priueledges. First, for he departeth the country of right beléeuing men, from the country of misbeleeuing men, for he de∣parteth Iurie from Araby. The second, for he departed himselfe in presence of the children of Israel, & made them way and passage, to goe into the lande of be∣hest with the Arke of our Lord, as it is sayd Iosua. 3. The third, for he washed and cleansed Naaman of Syria of his le∣prosie. 3. Reg. cap. 5. The fourth, for by the diuiding of it selfe, it bare witnesse of the holinesse of Elias, & of Eliseus, for he was obedient to both their comman∣dements, as it appeareth 4. Reg. 2. The fifth, for agaynst kinde of other waters, he hid not in his bottome yron that fell therein, but cast it vpward, and areared it to the Prophets kinde, that had lost it, that he might it take, as it is read . Re. 6. The sixt, for he was worthy to be ha∣lowed by touching of the most cleane flesh of our Lord, and by meane thereof our Lord gaue vertue of ghostly gende∣ring to waters, and ordained the Sacra∣ment of saluation of mankinde in wa∣ter, as it is sayde Luc. 2. The seauenth,At ye bap∣tisme of Christ. for in Iordane Iohn Baptist was wor∣thy to see heauen open, and to heare the voyce of the father, when he vnderstoode the mysterie of all the Trinitie in chri∣stening of our Lord. (AdditiōIordane, a faire riuer in Iudea, which deuideth Galile from the residue of Iu∣dea, and falleth into the Red sea.) ¶Of the riuer Albana, and Pharphar. Cap. 10. OTher Riuers be rehearsed in holye writ,Abanah. as Albana and Pharphar, that be riuers of Syria, and runne and passe by Damaske, and by the course and passing thereof, the gardens of Damaske be wa∣tered & moysted, & made plenteous, with multiplication of diuers trées, of corne, hearbes, and grasse. Of these riuers it is written 4. Regum 5. (Additiō.Damascus a famous citie in Siria, supposed to be the first that euer was inhabited.) Of the riuer Gazan. cap. 11. GAzan is a riuer of the Medes, and hath another name, & is called Idap∣sis also, & hath that name, of one yt was King of Medes. And he riseth in ye East, and is receiued in ye Red sea. Upon this riuer, two lynages and an halfe, which were taken Prisoners, by Salmanassar King of Assyria, and held in bonds, wer led and brought among the Assyrians,
and compelled to abide exiled, as it is sayd 4. Reg. cap. 18. as two mages wer helde in thraldome by Nabuchodono∣sor vpon his riuer Chobar, and helde in Babilon long time, as it is sayd, Ezech And Chobar is a riuer in Babilonia, & sheddeth himselfe into the marreise of Babilonia, and riseth out of Tigris or of Euphrates, and turneth againe into the riuer of Chobar, or into one of them, as Ierome saith super Ezech. In some part of his brim be plentie of willowes and of sodge, as he saith vpon this place of Esa. 18. Vltra torrentem salicis duce∣ris. And he called this riuer, the riuer of Babylon, vpon ye which riuer Gods peo∣ple made no ioye, but wepte and made moane, as it is written. By the waters of Babylon we sate downe and wepte,Psa. 13. when we remembred thee O Sion. And many other riuers be right famous, but of them we shall not speake at this time: for we haue no mention of them in the Bible. (Additiō.Idaspes, a riuer running in Par∣thia and Indie, and at last falleth into the great riuer Indus. In this riuer is found much golde and precious stones. Of a Lake. chap. 12. A Lake is receiuing of priuy waters, in the which water is taken & helde, and is not medled with waues, nor eb∣bing nor flowing, as Isidore sayth li. 13. And Greekes call a Lake Limum, that is a ponde: for wells fall into Riuers: and riuers runne into the sea, and a lake standely in a place and floweth not, and therefore is called Lacus, as it were a place of water as Isidore sayth: for the water that he taketh by springing or by running thereto, passeth not out thereof into other places. Fish of such a lake as Constantine sayth, is not so good as ri∣uer fish: for by his wose and slime hée maketh fish that breedeth therein, smell of slime, and fish of the lake breedeth su∣perfluitie of hearbes and grasse, & nou∣risheth frogges and many wormes. Running water commeth into lakes, & maketh their water more fresh, and kee∣peth them from corruption, but ofte by too great comming of water in, lakes and ponds be broke, and all that hath bene long time therein nourished is sodainly destroyed. And lake water is more thick than riuer water, and worse to drinke: for such drinke oft taken, gendreth and bréedeth many euills in the body, as it is said before in li. 5. of drinke. And lake water taketh diuers vertues of place & ground where it is gathered, as Isidore sheweth ensample li. 13. ca. 3. of diuersitie of waters, and sayth: That in Aethio∣pia is a lake, wherein if a body be wa∣shed, he shineth as though he were an∣noynted with oyle. Also in Affrica is a lake that maketh good voyce, and able to sing. Also in Italia is a lake, that noy∣eth greatly them that drinke thereof. Also in the waters Reatins, hoofes and cls of beasts be made hard, as it is said. And in the lake that is called Affalti∣des, a lake of Iurie, nothing may sinke, that hath lyfe and soule. Also euen there is a pond, in the which nothing fleeteth, but sinketh and is drowned. Also in Concidie is a lake, that is three a daye bitter, and as ofte fresh and sweete. All this Isid. telleth in the foresayd booke, & all this and other such diuersitie of pit water and lake water commeth of di∣uers qualitie of veynes of the earth and ground, by the which such water passeth, or els of kinde and disposition of the ground, where such water is gathered. ¶Of the lake Asphalti. ca. 13. THere is a lake, that is called Lacus Asphalti, and is also called the dead sea, for his greatnesse and deepnesse, for he breedeth nor receiueth nothing that hath lyfe. Therfore he hath neither fish∣es nor foules, but whensoeuer thou wol∣dest haue drowned therin any thing that hath lyfe with any crast or gin, anone it plungeth and commeth again vp, though it be strongly thrust downward, it is a∣none smitten vpward, and it moueth not with the winde, for glewe withstan∣deth winde and stormes, by the which glew all water is snt. And therin may no ship row nor sayle, for all thing that hath no life sinketh down to the ground.
Nor he sustaineth no kinde, but it bée glewed, and a lanterne without his light sinketh therein as he telleth, and a lan∣terne with light fléeteth aboue. This place is called Lacus asphalti, the place of glew, or it is called Mare salinarum: and is in Iurie betwéene Iericho & Za∣chan. The length thereof stretcheth euen to Zoroas of Arabia, vii. C. lxxx. fur∣longs in length: and the bredth thereof stretcheth a C. furlongs, or vs{que} a vicina Sodomorum. Huc vs{que} Isid. lib. 13. ca. 3. De lacu & stagnis. As the master saith in Historijs 3. ca. de subuersione Sodo∣morū, in sine, this lake casteth vp blacke clots of glewe, and therefore it is called Lacus Asphaltides. In the brim thereof trées grow, the apples wherof be gréene till they be ripe. & if ye cut them when they be ripe, ye shall finde ashes within them. And thereof Iosephus saith, Fabu∣la terrae Sodomorum fidem, &c. And so it is sayd in Glosa super 2. pe. ca. super locum illum, Ciuitates Sodomorum in cinerem redigens, seruare voluit Domi∣nus regionem, contra positam speciem pressione pene. And there growe most faire apples, that make men that sée thē, haue liking to eate of them, and if one take them, they fade and fall in ashes, & smoke as though they were burning. (Additiō.Asphaltites or Asphaltum, a lake of Syria, called Mare mortuum: therein is the lime mixt wt brimstone, called Bi∣tumen or Asphaltum, wherein no liuely thing can drowne. Some suppose, that in that place stood the Cities of Sodoma and Gomorrha.) ¶Of the lake Tiberiadis. ca. 14. THe lake that is called Tiberiadis la∣cus hath that name of a towne, that is called Tiberiadis, that somtime Herod builded in worship of Tiberius the Em∣perour. And this lake and pond is grea∣test and most healthful and wholsome of all the lakes of Iury, and more spéedfull in cause of health. And stretcheth lx. fur∣longs, as Isidore saith lib. 13. (Additiō.Tiberias a Citie in Galilee: Ie∣sus passed ouer the sea of Gallilee, which is the sea of Tiberias, & fed 5000. foules with 5. barly loaues & 2. fishes. Iohn. 6.) ¶Of the pond Genesar. Cap. 15. THe pond called Genesar as it is said there, is the most greatest lake in Iu∣dea, & stretcheth C. lx. furlongs in length and lx. in bredth, with crispe water and calme, and not strong winde, but they be crispe of themselues, & so Genesar is a word of Gréeke, as it were gendering calme wether to it selfe. Lakes yt stretch by great space & long, be moued by ofte blowing of winde & wether, & therefore ye water therof is ye more fresh & swéete, and the more able to be dronke. Huc vs∣{que} Isid. This lake for his greatnesse, is oft called a Sea in the Gospell, but not that it is a sea, but for it séemeth so great a water that commeth of Iordan, as the Glose saith, super Io. ca. 6. For the He∣brues vse to call such a gathering of wa∣ter a sea: & therefore it is oft called a sea. (Additiō.Genezareth a great mere or pond in ye land of promission, called also Mare Tyberiadis, whereon Christ walked as on dry land, & called to Peter, comforting the disciples, that thought he had bene a spirite. Math. 14. Mar. 6. Of a Pond. cap. 16. A Pond is called Piscina, and is water gathered to féeding of fish, though oft gathering of water without fish, is cal∣led Piscina by contrary meaning, as Isi. saith. To the goodnesse of a pond, néedeth sadnes of ground: also it néedeth cleannes of water, which runneth & commeth ther¦to, & continuall running & comming, for wheras the ground is fennie and mirie, ther well sauored fishes may not be no∣rished, for wher fresh water runneth not nor cōmeth, standing water is soone cor∣rupt: & therfore to renew & refresh ponds, fresh water is led & brought by gutters, conduits & pipes, & the heads of pondes be strengthned wt banks & walls, for the water shuld not passe out too soone. Also some pondes haue streames to water & moyst gardens & orchards. Also néere to ponds, trées & hearbes be fruitfull. ¶Of Riuus a lake. Cap. 17.
A Lake is called Riuus, and hath that name of Rigando, wetting and moi∣sting, as Isidore saith. For out of the well or out of the lake, stremes be led to wet and to moyst gardens: and a lake hath the kind and effect of his welspring. Out of the head well by running of the lake, come riuers and lakes, as Anselme sayth. A lake washeth and cleanseth oft vncleannesse, and maketh the earth plen∣teous, and giueth drinke to beasts & to foules, and nourisheth and saueth gréen∣nesse and vertues in hearbes and in flo∣wers, & draweth with him small stones, and grauell. ¶Of Fluctu, wallowing. Cap. 18. sea vvauesWAllowing of the sea is called Fluc∣tus, and hath that name of Flutu, blowing or blast: For by putting and shouing of windes, water is moued and shuft, and the ouer part therof that moo∣ueth alway, is called Vnda, the waue, & hath that name Vnda of Eundo, going, and passing: for continually it moueth, and resteth neuer, as Isi. sayth li. 13. And wallowings of the sea smiteth together, and shoueth and putteth each other, now vpward, now downwarde. By oft smi∣ting together, it gendreth some of him∣selfe, and medleth with himselfe grauell, and diuers particles of the ground, and bereth them vpward, & putteth & shoueth fishes, & amendeth them, & maketh them better by swiftnes of mouing, & by com∣ming into it of windie aire, wallowing of the sea ariseth and swelleth: and mo∣ueth now vpward, now downward, by swift putting and shouing of wind. And moueth and shoueth the aire by smiting together, & bréedeth winde, & beareth vp ships, & putteth them to cliffes & brims: And beareth them with him, & holdeth them straight, & maketh sound & noise, & is alway mouing, & may not rest: for ey∣ther it faileth at ful, or moueth & sheddeth himselfe about. Of Whoorlepits. cap. 19. A Whoorlpit is called Gurgis, and is a déep place in a riuer, & hath that name of Gutture, a throat, as Isid. saith. For it swalloweth in waters yt come there∣to, & throweth them vp againe. So for his déepenesse he moueth rounde about, whirling & rebounding: Therfore swim∣mers be oft perished. Also fish hide them∣selues most in whoorlepooles, and are vn∣neth taken, while they come out of the whoorlepoole. ¶Of Streames. chap. 20. A Streame taketh ye first course straight and continuall of water or of Riuer, and commeth out of the well head, and leaueth no chanell of his way, for he be∣ginneth to run out of the well head, and runneth continually within the boundes of his chanel, til he come into the sea: and diggeth and wasteth his owne ground, & is most couenable to row & saile in, & fee∣deth & nourisheth great fish. For cōmonly the streame hath most fresh water & most cleane ground, & runneth more swiftlye then any other part of ye riuer. And ther∣fore he draweth & beareth forth ships & boates full swiftly, and bundels of trées & wood. And therefore he hath that name Trames, of Traho trahis, or Transmitto transmittis, to bring or to send, or for hée draweth swiftly all thing that is set ther∣in, and bringeth it ouer. And the more fresh the streame is in his owne course, the more swift it is, and the more swift he beareth forth, and draweth all thing with him. Of Alluuione. cap. 21. THere is a manner running water that hath two names in latine, one is Al∣luuio, nis: and the other name is Alluui∣es, & is priuie and still rising of water, & hath that name of Abluendo, drawing and washing: for he washeth the earth that he passeth by, and breaketh thereof, and wasteth it. And therefore vnderhoa∣ling and vndercréeping and wasting vn∣der brimmes that bée hoaled and hollow by water, is called Alluuio. Iob. 14. It is said by vndercréeping and priuy run∣ning of water, the earth is wasted lyttle and little: and then the more strong the
running and course that passeth by pri∣uie hollownes and brims and cliffes is, the more perillouslye he destroyeth and wasteth the sadnesse thereof, for the other part of the brim outward séemeth sure & sad without, for there the destroying and wasting thereof is not séene within: and therefore his foote slideth the sooner that treadeth therein. For the inward sad∣nesse is wasted, & the priuie hollownesse is hid and vnknowen, as Seneca saith. Of deepnesse. cap. 22. AByssus is déepnesse of water vnséene, and thereof come and spring Wells and riuers: for out of the déepnes come all waters, and turne againe thereto by priuy waies, as to the mother of water, as Isidore saith li. 13. And therefore A∣byssus is said, as it were Abuisus, vn∣séene and out of sight, for the déepnesse thereof may not be séene. Or Abyssus is sayd as it were sine abisso, without cléerenesse, because of farnesse from the well of lyght, it is without hightinesse & fairnesse of lyght, as Iohn Damascene sayth. Abissus is nought els but much water, and the ende and deepnesse there∣of is vnséene, for shining of light stret∣cheth not, nor reacheth to the ende ther∣of. Or els Abissus is said as it wer sine base, bottomlesse, and the ground thereof is not séene with eye. And therefore it was the primordiall and first matter in the beginning of the world, & because in ye beginning it was not distinguished by certaine forme, it is called Abyssus, as Austen would meane. Therfore li. con∣fessionum 12. he saith, that Abyssus, is that bodely thing that God made to bée matter of bodely things, and that mat∣ter was with forme and shape without order and without light. And so Abys∣sus is that same thing, which is Ma∣teria prima the first matter, as Austen saith in li. de Symbolis. And he saith, that by this name Abissus, holye Writ called and approued the matter that was made of nought, to be first taker and re∣ceiuer of shapes, and that by the most or∣dinate gift of God, & for therof all thing that hath shape and forme, shoulde bée shaped and formed: & so the same mat∣ter is named water, for because that it is fleeting, and running, and mouing, & also for it taketh and receiueth all manner of formes and shapes. In likewise it was called earth, for the kindly stedfastnes or sadnesse, by the which it was subiect to generation & corruption, and it was cal∣led Abyssus, for vnshapefulnesse, for it was distinguished with no forme nor shape. And it was called water for able∣nesse to take vpon it forme & shape, for by that ablenesse it might take all man∣ner forme, and shape & qualitie, as Aust. saith. Also Abissus, yt is, déepnesse of wa∣ter, hath of it selfe dimnesse & déepnesse, & receiueth all water & lycour that run∣neth thereto, & hath neuer inough: for it taketh neuer so much water, but it may take more, and maye neuer be stopped, nor laued, nor emptied, & is cōmunicable. Of the Sea. cap. 23. THe Sea is called Mare, & is gathe∣ring of water both fresh and salt, as Isid. saith lib. 13. And hath properly that name Mare, for the water therof is bit∣ter, as it is sayd there. And innermore it is sayd, that the sea is called Eqoor, & hath ye name of equalitie, euennes, for it is euen and plaine: for though wallow∣ing & waues of the sea, wallowe and a∣rise, as it were mountaines and hils, yet when ye tempest ceaseth the sea is plaine againe, as he saith there. Psa. 89. Thou rulest the raging of the sea,Addition thou stillest the waues therof when they arise. ver. 10. Also the sea is called Pelagus, as it were Pellens vndas, putting waters & waues: for in the sea is continuall moo∣uing & putting of waues & stormes. Al∣so (as he saith) though ye sea receiueth wa∣ters of all wels & riuers, yet by so great comming of waters, the sea is neuer the more: & that is, for ye sea is so great, that the waters that run therto be not séene, or els for the bitter water destroyeth & wasteth the running water: or for the clowdes draw to them much water: or for the winde beareth some thereof a∣way, and the Sunne dryeth some: or for
the swéetnes of water is dryed & clensed, and turneth again by some priuie holes, and commeth oft to the heads and wels or riuers. Huc vsque Isidorus li. 13. And Ambrose sayth, and Basilius in Exame∣ron, that the Sea is gathering of water, multiplyed by diuers places and names: but by continuation is all one Sea, al∣way mouing and sounding, and foming, and followeth the kinde of the Moone in flowing and reflowing, by whose vertue and influence it is led. The Sea is head and receipt of Riuers, and fountaine of showers, and the thing whereby people farre a sunder may come together, and the sea helpeth in néede, and is succour in perills, and spéedeth passengers short∣nesse of wayes, and furthereth profite, and winning or traffike of trauaylyng men. Also in libro Metheororum Aristo∣tle sayth, that the sea is head and wel of all waters, and dispersed into other seas. And the cause why the sea is bitter and salt, is, for in it be two vapours: one is moyst, and that other drye, subtill & wa∣trie. And of the vapours that be moist and thin, the more subtill partes be wa∣sted by mouing of the sunne, & the thick∣er part abideth and is made hot and salt and bitter by heate of the sun, as sweate and vrine: For by burning, a thing is made bitter, when the earthy parts abide after that the watry and moystie partes are consumed and wasted. And of bitter∣nesse by more strength of burning com∣meth saltnesse, as it doth in ashes: For water that soaketh through ashes, is salte. In cod. li. Arist. saith, that salte wa∣ter of the sea, is more heauie and thicke, than fresh water: for sea water is more grose, and fresh water is more subtill & thinne: the token thereof to know it is so, is this, for an egge fléeteth in salte water, and sinketh downe in fresh wa∣ter: and a ship falling in fresh water, sinketh déeper than in salte water. And therfore in the dead sea sinketh no beast, nor is gendred, for therein drinesse hath the masterie. Also in li. de Animalibus he saith, that in the sea is water, and the saltnesse may be drawen out thereof: for if a man take a vessell of the earth, new and rawe, and closeth the mouth thereof, and throweth it emptie into the sea, and leaueth it ther a day and a night, fresh water shall come therein. Also in li. Metheorum he sayth, the fresh water riseth vpward for freshnesse and lightnesse, & salt water falleth down∣ward for his heauines, and what is salt abideth in the earth, and what is swéet thereof, woseth out. Also in li. de elementis he sayth, that the sea in his working followeth the kinde of the Moone, as it is knowen. For alway when the Moone, ariseth in anye time of the daye or of the night, then the sea in that country wher the Moone ari∣seth, stretcheth it selfe, and withstandeth the course of riuers that runne thereto, and shoueth and beareth againe ye riuer water toward the place that it commeth from, as it were shouing by violence. When the Moone is in the lower course, water beginneth to wane and ebbe, and when ye Moone ariseth, water beginneth to wexe and to flow: and so as yron fol∣loweth the Adamant stone, so the sea fo∣loweth the course and the kinde of the Moone, Séeke before in li. 8. ca. 29. Also after the rising of the starre that is called Canicula, the Sea wexeth thick and changeth colour: and is now gréene, now blewe, now troublous, now cléere. In wexing of the Moone, the Occean holdeth this order. The first day of wex∣ing of the Moone, he is more copious than other times: for then the sea is most full and high, and thereafter he abateth and lesseneth the second day, and so downe∣ward each day euen to the seuenth day, and than the sea is in his last default or ground ebbe, and beginneth then againe to spring more and more euen till the vii. day, so that when the Moone is xiiii. daies olde, and at the full: then agayne is the sea full in his highest spring, & be∣ginneth to breake and to wane & vadeth other vii. dayes, so that when the Moone is xxi. daies olde, the sea is againe at the lowest ebbe, and yet springeth and in∣creseth other vii. dayes, so that when the Moone is xxviii. dayes olde, then the sea
againe is at the highest spring: & so al∣way euery month, ye sea changeth foure times in breaking and springing, twice in increasing, and twice in decreasing as the Moone wexeth and waneth. And so alwaye the sea is at the highest and in most strength, when the Moone is full shining, either toward heauen, as in the new Moone: or els toward the earth as it doth in the full of the Moone: and the more the Moone profiteth or falleth in taking or loosing of hir light, the more the sea ariseth or abateth in ebbing and flowing. Also in li. vegitabilium, Arist. saith, that the ground & shore of the sea, is hard, sad, and grauelly, & it is a token of saltnesse, that the sea is vpon grauell, for therin the dry earthy parts haue ma∣stry, because they be salt, & the existence of the water, dealeth the clay or wose in his owne parts: and therefore earth that is nigh the sea is grauellous. And among the grauell of the sea oft be diuers pre∣cious stones of vertue bred & gendred, & made faire & clene by froting of grauel, & there through they be cast to lande to the cliffes, by mouing of waues of ye sea, yet beside these properties of the sea, bee some other properties, knowen nigh to all men. And yet because of simple men, I thinke it good to recken them heere a∣rowe, to haue matter to shewe hidden & priuie things to simple men, by ensam∣ple and likenes of such properties. The sea cleanseth it selfe and throweth out of it selfe all carrens and vncleane things, and smiteth off and putteth out all that be vncleane and dead by strength of mo∣uing, as Gregory saith. Also the sea shed∣deth it selfe by full priuie veynes of his déepnesse, and giueth alway water of his flowing both to wells, and to riuers, as Ierome saith super Eccl. Also ye sea brin∣geth forth wonderfull beastes and fishes wonderfullye shapen of many manner formes & shapes, for ye sea bringeth forth more wonderful beasts, & more wonder∣ful things than doth ye land, as Rabanus saith super Eccl. 43. There it is said, yt there be passing noble and wonderfull workes, & diuers beasts, &c. (Additiō.Item in Psa. 104. ver. 20. O Lord how manifold are thy workes: in wis∣dome hast then made them all, ye earth is full of thy riches, so is the great and wide sea also, wherin are things créeping innumerable, both small & great beasts. There go ye ships, & there is that Leuia∣than, which thou hast made to take his pastime therein. These waite all vppon thée, that thou mayst giue them meate in due season. When thou giuest it thē, they gather it: and when thou openest thy hand, they are filled with good: when thou hidest thy face, they are troubled: when thou takest away their breth, they dye, and are turned againe to their dust: when thou lettest thy breach goe foorth, they shall be made, and thou shalt renue the face of the earth.) Also though the sea be substanciallye soft and running, yet it bringeth foorth most hard things, both with lyfe & with¦out lyfe, as it doth with shell fish, & fish with hard skins & shells, & the stones be commonly precious, that the sea casteth vp to the lande. Also though the sea bee not able neither lyking to be dronk tou∣ching sauor & tast, yet it is ful profitable in effect and doing, for it saueth & healeth many sicknesses, for it heleth men of the dropsie, of botches, pimples whelkes, & of other scabbes, and of many other e∣uills, as Constantine saith. Also though the sea, in it selfe be salt and bitter, yet by swéetnesse of veynes of the earth, by whom it passeth, it changeth his sauour, and taketh freshnes & swéetnes by clen∣sing and drieng of the earth, by ye which it passeth, as Macrobius saith, and Ari∣stotle also. Also be the Sea neuer so vnsaurryt and bitter, yet it nourisheth and fée∣deth full fresh Fish. For the Sea hath a priuye swéetnesse and fresh∣nesse, which the Sea Fish sucketh and taketh, whereof commeth coue∣nable feeding and saueur, as Ambrose sayth. Also the sea is mouable without rest, and by his owne mouing it keepeth and saueth his owne substance from perill of corruption: for by continuall roing, it is made more cléere therein, and is so kept from perill of corruption, so that it rotteth not.
Also though it bée running and not stan∣ding by it selfe, neuerthelesse it is stinted and held in by other things, so that it pas∣seth not easily ouer the bonds of his own cliffes, as it is sayde Prouerb. 8. Iere. 5. Iob. 38. Also by his bitternesse and salt∣nes it swalloweth & withdraweth fresh∣nesse of wells, and of other running wa∣ters. For the farther running water is from ye entering into ye sea, the more fresh it is helde. Also by beating and smiting together of his armes, by the which it be∣clippeth the lande, it breedeth & gendreth contrary windes, as Beda sayth. Also it is most noifull to them that be not vsed to be therin, for it breedeth dread & feare, & head ach, and spuing and bol∣king, and withdraweth appetite of meate & drink. Also of the vaporation of fumo∣sities that it casteth vpwarde, it breedeth mist & clowds, and maketh dimnesse and darknesse in the aire, & taketh from vs ye beames of the Sun & bateth heat therof. Also though it haue no coulour of his owne, it chaungeth colours by quality of winds. For nowe it is whitish and yeo∣lowish, now white & cleere, & now black, as Isidore saith l 13. Also the sea conteineth in it selfe many perills. For with a little blast of winde in the sea, be tempests and stormes. And therfore the sea is called Fretum, as Isi. saith, as it were hauing feruent & strong mouing. As it fareth in the sea yt is called Mare Cicilium, in ye which sea for feruēt∣nes of mouing, making of noise & crieng,Scilla is a daunge∣ion rock in the sea by Cicil be, vvhere of came this vvord Decid. 1. in Scylla ca¦riens vita  be Scilla & Caribdis, as it is said, Scilla and Caribdis be two perillous places in the sea, in the which many shippes bée soone perished, Scilla is a great high rocke in the sea, hauing many rocks & heads, & the waues of the sea beate theron, & ma∣keth an horrible noise. And if ships fall therin, in any wise, they escape not perill of wrack. And Caribdis is called so, for it swalloweth shippes in many priuy swal∣lowes. For ther ye sea is ful of swalows, as it wer flowing in it selfe, whirling a∣bout, turning & winding. And therfore it draweth to it ships, and swalloweth and drowneth them, and thrice a daye he ca∣steth vp great wallowing waues, & swal∣loweth them thrice a day. For it swon∣geth water and swalloweth it, & casteth it vpward, that it may swallow it again, as Isidore saith lib. 13. capitulo de Esti∣bus maris et fretis. Also in the sea is another notable peril, that is vneuennesse of ground, when the water is ful déep in one place, in another thereby vnneth is water to wade in, and this perill is called Cutis, for there is grauell gathered in heapes. For Cutis is Greeke, and is to vnderstand, a draught. And Papias saith, yt in the sea of Aegypt be many such Cutis, and they bée med∣deled therewith. And so it is sooth, that passing of the sea is perillous for priuie rockes that be hidde vnder the water: & also for heapes of grauell that be dra∣wen and gathered togethers. For in such pces shippes be most hassely broke. A∣nother peril is called Bithalassum, when a shippe laded smiteth on a ground that hath much glow, slime & wose: & may not deliuer it self neither passe out therof for toughnesse & holding of slime & of wose. And Hugo saith, that Bithalassum is slime & an ouerhid print, and left in slime & wose. But the Glose saith, that Bitha∣lassum is méeting of two seas. And the maister in Historia sayth, that Bithalas∣sum is called ye tongue of ye earth straight hether & thether, beclipped with the sea. And is called Bithalassum, as it were a Sea departed by the earth, that is be∣tweene two parts of the Sea. For Tha∣lassum is Greeke and is vnderstoode the Sea. Then when a shippe smiteth in Bithalassum, the foreshippe abideth still and mooueth not, and the hinder shippe is broken behinde with strong swift∣nesse of the Sea, that falleth thereon, and ouertaketh it, as the maister sayth there. ¶Also generally men that passe the Sea be in perill: because of aire and winde, or because of the Sea. For in the sea be many stones and rockes hidde. Or if it bée set and beclipped with greate rocks, it is not passed without perill: or if the ground be vneuen: now areared on high with heapes of grauell, nowe déepe as a swallowe: then eft passage is let. But when the Sea is aboue troubly and too high by winds and stormes, & waues be∣ting, & smiting togethers with stormes
wallowings that wallowe vpward and downeward, then it is perill of the sayle. For oft in such times the ship is broken or drowned with contrary stormes. Also a perill commeth of wether that is trou∣bly and dim and misty, and then it is ful perillous to passe the Sea, and namelye, when the shippe is sodeinlye driuen into a perillous place, and the perill is not knowen. And also huge & great windes be most dread, and namely if so bée that contrary windes arise. For then is pe∣rill and dread of breaking of the shippe. And so the more the ship is moued and put toward the hauen by blowing of one wind, the more she is driuen and put to∣ward peril by strength of another strong winde, that is contrarye, or else is helde long time in daunger to be lost betwéene contrary wallowings and waues. Also perill commeth of féeblenesse of the shippe that is charged. For it is perill and not safe to saile in a shippe or boate that is too lyttle, or féeble, or broke and clouen. For such a shippe or boate is not safe among stormes and waues of the wilde Sea. For because of lyttlenesse thereof it is ouerthrowne and ouertur∣ned with stormes and waues of ye wilde sea, or for féeblenesse broke with strong blast of windes, or sunke & drowned by water that commeth in at chins & holes: & namely such a ship commeth slowlye & late to ye hauen. And namely when good marriners lacke in such a ship: for then is most perill in the sea, when the shippe hath an vnready gouernour & vnaduised. In these manner perills, and in manye other, be men that saile in ye Sea, both of middle earth and of Occean, as Isidore sayth. Both Gréekes and Latines call the sea Occean, for it beclippeth ye round∣nesse of the earth about, as it were a cir∣cle. For Occean goeth all about the sphéere that wée dwell in: And hath that name Oceanus, of swiftnesse. For it pas∣seth & goeth swiftly about ye earth, or for it shineth with a manner coulour of red and gréene. And is called Oceanus, as it were Ceanus, that is a circle of heauen, as Isidore sayth. lib. 13. The Sea Occe∣an beclippeth the hemmes of lands, and oft commeth and goeth ebbing and flow∣ing. And in blowing of windes Ocea∣nus remooueth Seas, or bloweth them vp. And though it be all one Sea in con∣tinuaunce thereof, yet by coasts & coun∣tryes, it taketh diuerse names of landes and Countryes that bée next thereto, as the French Sea, of French men: and the British Sea, of Britons: and the Ead∣dish sea hath that name of Gades, where the entering out of the great Sea out of Occean is opened: there Hercules, when he came thether did set his pillars, trow∣ing or supposing that there was the ende of the earth. Huc vsque Isid. li. 13. (AdditiōThe Sea water doth make pow∣dered flesh fresh, and the fresh flesh sa∣uourie.) Of Mari magno meditaraneo. Chap. 25. THE greate sea of middle earth com∣meth out of the West, and out of Occean: and passeth towarde the South, and then goeth toward the North, and then is called ye great sea. For other seas be little in comparison thereof: and is cal∣led ye sea of middle earth. For he passeth by the middle of the earth euen to the East, and departeth and dealeth thrée partes of the earth, which be called Asia, Africa, and Europa. Of whom the first coast is called Sinus Iuspauicus, and Hi∣bericus and Balearicus, and the coast that passeth by the coast of Nerbon is called Gallicus: Then followingly in the coast that is called Ligusticus, and passeth by ye citie of Geen, & is next thereto. After is the coast that is called Tirrenus, that stretcheth to Italy: then the coast that is called Siculus, passeth out of Cecilia to the lande of Crete, and then it stretch∣eth to Pamphilia and to Aegypt. And the coast of Helespontum passeth by di∣uers turnings, and bendeth Northward, and at the last beside Greece and Illiri∣cum, it waxeth narrowe to the straight∣nesse of seauen furlings: And then it pas∣seth the Sea that is called Ponticum, and waxeth straight, and maketh the sea that is called Propontides, that is in the straightnesse of .50. paces: and then he is made and called Bothorus and Tratius,
and that place is called Propontides: for it commeth before ye sea yt is called Pon∣ticum: and that same place is called Bo∣phorus, & hath that name of straight pas∣sage & narrow waies of rothexen, as Isi. saith li. 13. And frō thence passeth & sprea∣deth the greatest coast yt is called Ponti∣cus, & hath behind the marreis yt is called Paludes Meotides. And for cause of ma∣ny riuers & fresh waters that come ther∣to, that sea is more fresh & more mistie, & hath no great fish but the fish yt is called Foca, & the fish that is called Delphi∣nus. And as the earth, though it be but one, hath diuers names bicause of diuers places: so this greate sea hath diuerse names in diuers countries & lands. Huc vsque Isid. li. 13. Great coasts of the Sea be called Si∣nus: and hath diuers names, as of the Sea of middle earth, one coast is called Ionicus, and hath that name of Io, a king of Greece: and men of Athens be called Iones. And therfore the sea that is called Ionicum, stretcheth frō Ionia to Cecilia. And euen in the sea Occean the greatest coasts be Caspius, Indicus, Persicus, A∣rabicus, which is called the red sea. And that sea is called the red sea, for he is co∣loured with red waters and waues, and is not such of kinde, but it is dyed, & ta∣keth such coulour of banks of red grauel or sand, that be nigh therto. For all earth there about nigh to the sea, is red of cou∣lour nigh as bloud. Therin is found most sharp Uermilion: & other diuers colours that serue for Painture. And so for the earth hath such kind, the sea is made red by beating of water & of waues vpon ye cliffes: And therfore in these cliffes be red precious stones found. For small stones of that ground be wrapped among ye gra∣uell of that sea & of the ground, & so they kéepe still the coulour. This sea is depar∣ted in two coasts, that one is called Per∣sicus in the East, and the Perses dwell there: And that other in the West side is called Arabicus, and the Arabees dwell there, as Isidore saith li. 13. Of Pelago. chap. 26. PElagus is the bredth of the sea with∣out cliffe, and without hauen, as Isi∣dore saith: And hath most déepnesse and vnstablenesse, and continuall moouing, and gendereth and féedeth Whales and other diuers wonderful fish, and bréedeth many vapors & fumosities, & hath therof thicknesse and mist: and taketh many di∣uersities of coulours by diuersities of windes, & gathereth about a fome of smi∣ting and beating of waues, and crieth & maketh great noise: and a crieng sea & an vnpeaceable is perillous, as is sayd be∣fore of the Sea. Of a drop. cap. 27. A Drop is a right little part of the sea, or of water, or of raine, departed by some violence from the whole: & is called Gutta, when it standeth or hangeth on euesings or on trées, as it wer beglewed, as Isid. saith. And when a drop falleth, it is called Stilla, & thereof commeth Stilli∣cidum, as it were a falling drop. A drop whether it be called Stilla or Gutta, when it is departed frō a watry clowde, by the vertue of heat, or by strength of winde: then it falleth downwarde by his owne heauinesse & weight. And a drop is called Stilla, while it falleth, & Gutta while it standeth or hangeth. A drop hanging, fal∣ling, or standing, is in substaunce most cléere, round in shape, little in quantity, & great in vertue. For it moisteth the earth that it falleth vpon, & maketh it plente∣ous & fruitfull: and féedeth & nourisheth roots & séeds, and maketh them grow, and quickneth & saueth gréenenesse in trees, hearbes, and grasse. And féedeth and nou∣risheth fish in the sea: and maketh Oy∣sters fat, and bréedeth in them pearls and precious stones, as Isidore saith, & name∣ly the drop of dewe. And though a drop be most soft, yet by oft falling it pearceth that thing that is right hard, as this verse sayth, Gutta cauit lapidem, non vi, sed sepe cadendo. That is, a drop pearceth a stone, not by strength, but by oft fal∣ling. Of Foame. cap. 28. FOame is called Spuma, and hath that name, for it is foamed or skimmed, as
Isidore saith: And is gendered of the cor∣ruption in water. Therefore shoulde all thing that is sod in water bée skimmed and purged of foame. Foame commeth & is gendered of winde, closed in the ouer part of the water that is moued by some māner of mouing. And therfore for light∣nesse of aire that is closed therein, water foamèth, and the foame fléeteth aboue the water. And foame is soone gendered by beating together of waters & of waues: but it is soone departed and sparyled. Sometime foame of the Sea is gathe∣red among stones, and by feruent work∣ing of the heate of the Sunne, that fal∣leth thereon, it is made hard, and turneth sometime into a Pomise; and sometime into a Spunge. (AdditiōThe Pomise stones are common∣ly blacke and gray, hollowe like a hunny combe. The Spunge is soft and hollowe much like the lungs of a beast, these serue to diuerse purposes. Of Fish. chap. 29. FIsh is called Pisces, and hath that name of Pascendo, feeding, as Isidore sath libro. 12. cap. 6. Fish licketh the earth and watry beaches, and so get they meate and nourishing. Also they bée called Reptilia, créeping, because in swim¦ming they séeme as they did créepe: for in swimming they créepe, though they sinke downe to the bottome. Wherof speaketh Ambrose in Exameron, and sayth: That betwéene fish and water is greate nigh∣nesse of kinred. For without water they may not long liue: And they liue not long with onelye breathing, without drawing of water. And they haue a man∣ner lykenesse and kinde of créeping. For while a fish swimmeth, by shrinking and drawing together of his bodye, hée draweth and gathereth himselfe into lesse length: And anone stretcheth himselfe a∣gaine, and intendeth to passe forth in the water. And by that dilligence hée put∣teth the water backwarde, and passeth it selfe forward. Therefore he vseth fins in swimming: as a soule vseth fe∣thers in flieng. But all other wise in swimming a fish moueth his fins from ye hinder part downeward: And as it were with armes or Ores he clippeth the wa∣ter, and holdeth it, and stretcheth himselfe forward. But a bird moueth his fethers vpward, & gathereth the aire, and com∣pelleth it to passe out backward by large stretching of windes: and so by violent putting of aire backward, the body mo∣ueth forward: And kindes of fish bée di∣uerse in many manner wise. For by di∣uersitie of place that they bee gendered in, and of meate that they be fedde with, and of coulour and shape, by which they be distinguished of substaunce, of which they be compounded. And of the vertue, by the which they worke diuerslye. In place that they be gendered in, is greate diuersitie, and in their dwelling and abi∣ding: for they builde onely in water: and sometime dwelleth in land, and som∣time in water. And such a manner fish (as Isidore sayth) is called Antiphidia & Dubia in Latine, for he vseth to goe in the land, and to swim in water, and hol∣deth the office of kinde, as fishes that be called Foce, Cocodrilli, Castores, Hip∣potami, that be water horses, and other such. Fishes haue names of land beastes, as Sea houndes and Wolues: For they bite other vnreasonable swallowing and deuouring and hurteth them sore, as Isidore sayth.As Tortei¦ses and Crabbes. Among them that abide onely in water, some abide onelye in the sea, and some in riuers and ponds, and in other fresh waters: and some be meane betwéene those two manner fishes,Lopsters, and Crei∣fishes. and turne and come now to fresh water, and now to salt water to get them meate.A the Sturgeon and the Salmon. And fish that come out of the salt water, into fresh, haue liking in the freshnesse thereof, and be fatted: and againe warde: and this fish now abideth in the sea,The Seals The Lam¦pray, the Tench, & Carpe. So like∣vvise the Hadocke is blinde in ye fresh vvater, & the Cun∣ger & do thertly die. and nowe in fresh water. And many Riuer fishes may not tast saltnesse of the Sea. For it he catcheth salt water, hée dyeth sodeinelye, and tourneth by the wombe and fléeteth aboue the water, & that is to∣ken of death in all manner of fish both of sea and of fresh water. And fish that is bred in the Sea hath harde scales and thicke, because of drinesse of the salt wa∣ter. And riuer fish haue subtill scales, and soft backe bones. Backe bones in fishes
bee needfull to restraine the flesh thereof that is fleeting, for kinde softnesse there∣of. And Auicen teacheth to choose good Fish by kinde of the place, wherein they be nourished and sedde. And in liber. 2. cap. 7. he sayth, That in this manner choice of fish is in place, in which it dwel∣leth. For such as abide in stony pla∣ces bée best and swéetest, and in fresh running water, in which is no corrupti∣on, nor any slime or wose, nor standing lakes, nor in Welles, nor in small pittes that runne not in riuers, in whom be no Wells: and hée sayth there, That some Sea fishes bée good. For those that bée subtill bée best, and bée nourished in the deepe Sea, and no where else. And fish that abide in waters, that bee vnhéeled with blastes of winde, that bloweth the water somtime frō them, are better then those that bée not so serued. And those that be in waters that be strongly moo∣ued and continually laboured, bee better then those that bée in standing Water: and so Sea Fish is better then Riuer Fish. And Riuer Fish better then lake Fish, namely, if they be farre from the ri∣uer and from the sea. For they that haue rest in their rottennesse and filth, are not washed neither cleansed by riuer that cō∣meth therein, nor by sea. And therefore such fish is euill sauoured, & soone rotten. Also both sea fish and riuer fish is better in the North sea, and in the East Sea, then in the South sea: for by strong blasts of winde the water is moued and clean∣sed and made subtill. And therefore Fish of that water mooueth more and trauai∣leth, and be more cleansed of their super∣fluitie. Also in kinde of Fish is diuersity, not onely in diuersitie of place, that they may dwell in, but also in diuerse place of ge∣neration. For some be gendered by lay∣eng of Egges,Rovv and melt. and shedding of pesen, and some by gendering together of male and female, and by shedding of sperme. Héere∣of Aristotle speaketh li. 5. and sayth, that it falleth in kinde of fish that lay Egges and pesen, that when the female layeth egges or pesen, the male commeth after & sheddeth his milke vpon the egges: and all the egges or pesen that bee touched with the milke of the male shall be fish, & those that be not touched with that milke shall not be Fish. For the female layeth many egges or pesen, & swalloweth the more part of them, and also many other bée spilt in slime and in wose, and none thereof bée saued but such as bée layde in places where the milke of the male is shedde. For if they were all saued: then there should bée too many fishes gendred. And fish kéep & saue euennesse and make, in their owne kinde, as Aristotle sayth there. And he saith, that there was ne∣uer fish founde, that made generation with fish of other kinde. Also fish loue their frye, and féede and nourish them long time, as Aristotle sayth there. All Fish feede and kéepe their young, except Frogges. Also there it is sayde, that Riuer fish and fish of marrcis, shedde more theyr pesen, and ofter then other fish. For com∣monly and for the most parte, they cast and shed pesen and milke after fiue mo∣neths: and all other Fish bring foorth fish after one yeare, and small fish bring forth their broode in place, wherein is but little water, fast by rootes of trees, canes, and reedes. Also there he saith, that the more part of the pesen is lost, when the female shed∣deth pesen swimming about, if the male be not present: and then of the séede & pe∣sen is no fish shapen. And also they be eat of other fish and of birds. Also there it is said,Feles grovve of devv in May and aire. that some Fish be gendered without egges or pesen, or without generation of male & of female: & be gendered of slime & of wose, of gra∣uell, & of rottennesse yt is vpon the water. Also it is sayd, that in time of generati∣on, males and females of Fish swim to∣ther as a slocke, and swim with theyr makes, and many of them bée sick when they bréede: and therefore that time they be most taken. Also there it is sayd, that some fish gender froting the wombe on grauell. Also in li. Iorath de Animalibus it is said, that a Fish yt is called Effime∣ron is bred without generation betwéene male and female:Epheme∣ron a beast a∣bout the riuer Hyp¦panis. And when he hath li∣ued thrée houres of a day, then he dieth: and there is a Fish that is called Mu∣rena,
a Lampray:This is not likely because they are fourtie th spaune. that of his like concei∣ueth not, but of an Adder, which hée cal∣leth to loue with hissing, as Isidore saith lib. 12. cap. 6. The Greekes (he saith) call this fish yt is called Murena, Stairmam, for he hol∣deth himselfe in circles. They tell, that this fish is a Female, and conceiueth of the Serpent. And therefore Fishers call it with hissing and whisteling, and ta∣keth her in that wise. Unneth she dyeth, though shée bee smit with a staffe: and if she be smit with a rod, she dieth anone. It is certaine that the soule of this fish is in ye taile, for they say vnneth she is slain, though she be smit on the head. And if she be smit on the taile, or if the taile bée smitte of, she dyeth anone, as it is sayde. And the contrary is of the Serpent, for if the head bee broke and brused, or cut off, ye Serpent dieth anone, and if the taile be smitten, he liueth long time. Also Iorath sayth, that the Serpent doth awaye his venim ere he gender with the Lampray: But when the deed of generation is done, he taketh his venim againe: and therfore in conceiuing, the Lampraye taketh no venim of the Serpent, nor gendereth not of serpent kinde, but onely of his owne kinde, as he saith. (Additiō.The Adder is venimous in bo∣dy and spearme: the Snake is not so.) Also fish conceiue of dew onely with∣out peson, and without Milk, as Oisters and other shell fish. Héereof Iorath speak∣eth & saith, that fish that be called Elich come out of the water by night, & cōceiue in land of the morrowe dew, and bring forth their broode: And in waning of the Moone their shells be voide. Also fish is stirred to conceiue and to bréed by rising and downe going of Starres, as Iorath sayth, and Isidore also. So he speaketh of fish that bée called Australis, and sayth, that fish of that kinde arise, when the stars that bée called Pliades begin to goe downe, and be not séene till Pliades a∣rise againe. And though fish gender and be gendered: yet no manner of kinde of cleane fish haue gendering stones, nor no kinde of Serpent, nor no kind yt hath no féet: and also they haue no paps nor milke, except ye Dolphin that hath milke, and giueth her children sucke while they are little, as Aristotle sayth, lib. 6. And Isidore. libro. 12. cap. 6. sayth, that the Dolphins bée called Symphones also, & they haue that name, for they followe mans voice and come together in flocks to the voice of the simphonie, and hauing liking in harmonie: and in the sea is no∣thing more swifte then Dolphins bee. For oft they startle and ouerleape ships, whose leaping and plaieng in the wauce of the sea betokeneth tempest. And in the Riuer of Nilus is a kinde of Dolphins with ridges, thoothed as a Sawe, that cutteth the tender wombes of Cro∣codiles, and slayeth them, as Isidore sayth. Also fish kinde is diuers in manner of foode and of nourishing. For libro. 2. Auicen saith, that that Fish that eateth good hearbes, grasse, and roots of plants, bée better then they that eate filth, that is throwen out of cities into watry pla∣ces: and in Exameron it is sayde, that also Fish bee diuerse in eating. For some eate each other, and be fedde with each others Fish, and the lesse is the mores meate: and so the greater eat them that be lesse, and so he that eateth the one, is eaten of other at last, as Aristotle sayth libro. 6. and he sayth, That a fish that is called Carabo, ouercommeth greate Fi∣shes & eateth them: and another that is called Multipes ouercommeth the Cara∣bo, and eateth him: also hée sayth, That fishes be fedde with dung and with durt, and with fenne, as the Carabo: and ther∣fore he is heanie, and much fen is found in him: and Fish that eate other fishes haue strong teeth, as that manner Fish that Greekes call Phagion. Isidore saith, that that Fish hath so hard téeth, that he eateth Oysters in the Sea: and there∣fore he is called Dentrix, as it were a fish strongly toothed, and hath that name for greatnesse and strength of téeth: and in Exameron it is sayd, That other Fish haue lesse tooth and ne and thicker, and more sharp, that they may soone cut their meate that they take: and they swal∣lowe it anone, least the meate that they hold in their mouths should be borne a∣way by strength of water.
Also other Fish séeke theyr meate fro∣ting in grauell, as Isidore sayth. lib. 12. And he sayth of the sea swine, that is commonly called Suyllus, that while hée seeketh his meat he froteth vnder water in the ground, as it were a swine: and hath a manner mouth about the throat, and gathereth no meate but he pitcheth ye snowte in grauell. Also lib. 7. Aristotle sayth, That for the more parte, Fish eate Fishe, and eat each other in time of bréeding, except the Fish Fuscaleon. And generally Fish bée gluttenous, and couet much meate, & namely the Fish that is called Habatue: and therefore his wombe stretcheth, when he is fasting, and ofte hée bloweth out his wombe, and maketh it stare, and throweth from him other Fish: for his wombe stretcheth to his mouth, and hath no stomacke. Also of Fish is diuersitie of time and place of meate. For some Fish séeke theyr meate onelye in Water, and some by night vpon the land, as Hippo∣tamus the water horse, and hath that name, for he is lyke to a horse in ridge & in mane, as Isidore saith, and abideth in water on the day, and eateth corne by night, and is bread in the riuer Nilus, as Isidore sayth. And as Aristotle sayth libro. 7. Generally Fish trauayle more by day then by night, and more before midnight then after. And therefore as Aristotle sayth, they bée hunted before the Sun rise, and then Fishers set theyr nets, for that time Fish see not. Full well they sée when light increaseth: but by night they seeke theyr meate by smel∣ling. For they haue lyking in things of good sauour. And therefore liber. 4. it is sayd, that kindes of fish smell and heare: and therefore it commeth ofter into new tackle, that is set for it, then into olde: & commeth not lightly into olde tackle, but into newe: and bee oft beguiled by smell, as Iorath sayth. And hée sayeth, that there is a great fish in the sea that is called Belua, that casteth out water at his iawes, with vapour of good smell, & other fish feele the smell, and follow him, & en∣ter and come in at his iawes following after the smel: and he swalloweth them, and is so sed with them. Also he saith that there is a fish that is called Faste: ye wa∣ter that he taketh in his mouth wareth swéete, and small fish follow him and go in at his mouth, & he taketh them sodein∣ly and swalloweth them anone. Also hee saith, that Dolphins know by the smel, if a dead man yt is in the Sea eate euer of Dolphins kinde: & if the dead man hath eaten therof, he eateth him anone: & if hee did not, he kéepeth and defendeth him frō eating & biting of other fish. And shoueth him & bringeth him to the cliffe with his owne wroting. And Aristotle sayth the same and Plinius also. Also li. 7. Aristotle saith, that fish that liueth in cléere running water, fall not vpon stinking things, but vpon things of good sauour: & so doe birds and fowles of such water. And in winter, fish die out of the sea, and seeke heate nigh to the land, and there they séeke their meate, & doth the contrary in Summer: for then they flye from the heat into the déep sea. Ther∣fore in Winter they be hunted nigh the land: and in Summer in the deep sea: for immoderate heat gréeueth fish. Item in eodem li. he saith, yt some fish die for heat when the star ariseth, that is called Canicula. Also great colde graueth them sore, and namelye them that haue stones in their heads, as Crabs, & other such. For the stone in the head runneth and fréeseth, and such a Fish dyeth soone. ¶Also kinde of fish hath diuersitie of shape, and of disposition both in quality & in quantitie. For there is some kinde of great huge fish, with great bodies & huge, as it were mountaines and hills, as Isi. saith: such was the whale that swallowed Ionas the Prophet, his wombe was so great that it might be called hell: for the Prophet saith: In that wombe of hell he heard me. And ther be some fish so small, yt vnneth they be taken with hooks, as Isi. saith, li. 12. Asforus is a litle fish, & for li∣tlenesse it may not be taken with books: and there it is said, yt Enchirius is a fish vnneth halfe a foote long, and hath that name of Herendo, cleauing: for though he be full little of body, neuertheles he is most of vertue: for he cleaueth to ye ship & holdeth it still steadfastly in the sea, as
though the ship were on grounde there∣in. Though windes blowe, and waues arise strongly, and woode stormes, that ships may not mooue neyther passe. And that Fish holdeth not still the shippe by any craft, but onely by cleauing to ye ship. Latines call this fish Moron. For by strength he maketh the ship to stand, as it is said. (Additiō.As touching this strange fish, whose smalnesse wt his vertue of staieng ships, doth passe mans reason: the Grecians cal Ethneis, of the Latines Remora, because she doth stay ships. Opianus and Aelian write, that he delighteth most in ye high seas: he is of length a cubit, that is halfe a yard, of a browne coulour, like vnto an Eele: diuerse opinions are of this fish, but all authours agrée yt for a manifest truth such a kind ther is, wherof one of these Fishes stayed the Galley of Caius Caesar. Plinie meruailing sayth: Oh strnunge and wonderfull thing that all the windes blowing, and the most furi∣ous tempests raging, notwithstanding the violence of the Tame, yet doth this small Fish holde steadie the ship where∣to he is fastened. so greate is the secrete of nature, by the ordinaunce of God. Moreouer by trauailing the coastes of America, the later trauailers reporte to haue felt the strength and vertue of the same kinde of fish.) Also in Exameron it said of the same Fish, that when he knoweth and feeleth, that tempest of winde and weathers bée great, he commeth & taketh a great stone and holdeth him fast thereby, as it were by an Anker, least he be smitten away, & throwen about with waues of the sea. And so he saueth not himselfe by his own strength, but helpeth to saue himselfe by heauinesse and weight, that is not his owne. And is made stedfast and stable a∣gainst the comming of tempest & storme: and ship men see this, & beware that they be not ouer set vnwarilye with tempest and with stormes, as Ambrose saith, and Beda also. Also li. 4. Aristotle saith, that the fe∣male fishes be more long then male fi∣shes: and haue more harde fish. And males be more harde before, and also a∣boue: and females be more harde behinde and beneath. Also lib. 2. Auicen sayth, that those Fishes be best, that haue not full grease bodyes, neither too harde Fish and drye in whome is not too great fatnesse: nor too much griffle, in whome is no euill smell, nor euill sauour. Those that be of sweete sauour, be conuenient and couenable, not too fat, nor with superfluitie of fat∣nesse nor sowrenesse, which stinketh not, anon as it cōmeth out of the water. And those fishes that be somewhat harde, bée better when they bée salted. And among Fish that is harde of Fish, that is best, that is least soft. And so in Fish diuersi∣tie is knowen of substaunce and of qua∣litye, for as he saith, generally fish is cold and moist: but yet some bée hotter then other some in comparison of the complec∣tion of fish, & namely when they be salte. And therefore when they be fresh, they breede watrye fleame, and softe the si∣newes, and be not according but to right hot stomackes: and if they be salted, they be more according to the stomacke, and also to medicine. And heads of salte fish burnt, healeth the biting of a madde dogge, and the stinging of a Scorpion, and rooteth vp dead flesh in Botches, and helpeth rotted and festured Bot∣ches. Also the iuyce of euerye Fish helpeth against venim that is dronken, and a∣gainst venimous stinginges, and hath many other effectes, as it is sayde there: But this that is sayde of theyr qualitye and substaunce shall suffice now in this place. ¶Also Fish bée diuerse in sharpnesse of feeling, and in sleyght of witte: for many be very warye. And some be won∣derfully sleight and wily to scape, when they be ware of gins of Fishers, as Isi∣dore saith. lib. 12. And he saith, that there is a manner fish that is called Mu∣gil, which is full nimble and swist. For where he is disposed to swimme, and is ware of grins, and pearceth them, & that he is beset with fishers: he turneth sodein∣ly backward, and ouerleapeth the net so swiftly, that it seemeth to them, which are present, that he flieth as a bird.
(*Mugil, a Sea fish, of all scaled fi∣shes the swiftest, of coulour white, ha∣uing a great belly, and in gréedinesse vn∣satiable, when he is full he lyeth still in one place, and béeing afrayde, hideth his head, as if the whole body were also hid∣den. They are so desirous each of others kinde, that when fishers hauing gotten a male fish of that sort, fastned on the line or craft, all the females resorte vnto it, and so be taken, and lykewise doth the males, they be of the Greekes called Ce∣strei, Plotae, and Cephali.) Also in lyke wise it is sayd there of a Fish which is called Estaurus: For a∣mong Fish, onelye that Fish cheweth his kudde. And it is sayd that this Fish is right wittye. For when he knoweth that hee is entered, and is within the daunger of the Fishers ginne, hée reeseth not foorth headlong, neyther putteth his head betweene the rowles of the gunne: but he beateth fast on the other with his tayle, and beginneth to make him away with breaking and renting of roddes, and so pasieth backwarde. And if it hap∣pen that another Fish of the same kinde seeth his doing, and how he trauaileth for to break out: he busieth to helpe him, and taketh his tayle in his mouth, and helpeth as hée maye to drawe him out, and deliuer him of the ginne. And yet he sayth, that the Cunger hath manye wiles, and is wittye and wylye of get∣ting of meate: for when hee seeth meate on a hooke, hee dreadeth the hooke, and biteth not the baite, but holdeth the hooke with his sinnes, and letteth it not passe till hée haue gnawen the meate. ¶Also the Crabbe is enimye to the Oyster. For hee liueth by Fish thereof with a wonderfull witte. For because that hee may not open the harde shell of the Oyster, hée spyeth and awayteth when the Oyster openeth, and then the Crabbe, that lyeth in waite taketh a lit∣tle stone, and putteth betweene the shelles, that the Oyster maye not close himselfe: And when the closing is so let, the Crabbe eateth and gnaweth the Fish of the Oyster. Oysters bee called Oilica, and haue that name of shelles, that defend and warde softe fish within. And the Greekes call an Oyster Tllm, and all that Fish with the shells is cal∣led Ostrium in the Newter gender: but the Fish thereof and the meate that is wtin the shels, is called Ostrea in the Fe∣minine gender: And such shell Fish bee called Conche and Conchilia also: for when th Moone falleth, such Fishes bee voide: And the waxing of the Moone in∣creaseth the humoure, and the humoure vanisheth, when the Moone vanisheth. And therefore shell Fish ware, when the Moone wareth, and bée voyde, when the Moone waneth. And in shell Fish bée Pearles bread. And thereof speaketh Pli∣nius and other that write of such things. For by night shell Fish come to cliffes, and conceiue Pearles of the dewe of Heauen. And therefore the shell Fish be called Conchile and Margarete, and He∣relie, when in theyr fish precious stones be pight. And that precious stone that is gendered of dewe in Springing time, is most worthy and noble, and the more white and bright he is, the more effec∣tuall and vertuous it is held. And some shell fish is called Murice, and haue that name of roughnesse and sharpnesse, and haue another name, and be called Con∣chilia. And if they be kitte about with yron, of them drop teares of red colour, and with those teares purple is died, and this coulour and hiew is called Ostrium. For it is taken of the humour of shel fish, as Isidore saith. ¶Thou maist finde all these proper∣tyes and kindes, and many other in lib. Plinij, and Aristotle, and Isidore, and in Exameron Ambrosij, and Bas. but for that we will not noy them that shal read héerein, this is inough of this matter at this time. Also Plinius saith, and Isidore libro 12. that there be in waters. C.xliiii. man∣ner of kindes of fish. And many of them knowe the order of theyr time, by a man∣ner wit of kinde: and some goe about in theyr own place without chaunging: and some liue without consideration of time: and some conceiue whelpes by deede of generation betwéene male and female, as the Whale.
Also the Whale and Balena is al one, and Balene be anou great and huge, and be called Belue ab emittendo, of outca∣sting and shedding of water. For they throwe water higher then other greate Fishes of the Sea. For Balen is vnder∣stoode out casting. And the whale is cal∣led Cete for hugenesse of bodye, as Isi∣dore sayth libro. 22. Also in libro Iorath it is sayde. That the Whale hath great plentye of spearme. And after that hee gendereth with the Female, superfluitye thereof fleeteth aboue the water: And if it be gathered and dryed, it: tourneth to the substaunce of Ambre.Of ye shed of the Whale commeth Sperma Cete. Heereof commeth the siveet Amber greece. And when the Whale hungereth sore, hée casteth out of his mouth a vapour, that smelleth as the smell of Ambre. And Fish haue li∣king in that smell, and for the odour and smell of that vapour, they goe into the Whales mouth, and bée so deceyued and eaten. Also (as he sayth) in this fish earthly matter hath more mastrye then watrye: And therefore hée is soone great and fatte. And so in age for greatnesse of bodye, on his ridge powder and earth is gathered, and so digged together, that hearbes and small trees and bushes grow thereon: so that that great Fish séemeth an Ilande. And if shippe men come vn∣warily thereby, vnneth they scape with∣out perill. For hée throweth so much water out of his mouth vpon the shippe, that he ouerturneth it somtime or drow∣neth it. Also hée is so faste, that when hée is smit with Fishers dartes, he feeleth not the wounde, but it passeth through out the fatnesse: But when the inner Fish is wounded, then he is most easily takē. For hée may not suffer the bitternesse of the Salt water, and therefore he draweth to the shoare warde. And also hée is so huge in quantitie, that when he is taken all the Countrey is the better for the ta∣king.Of the Whales flesh com¦meth the train oile vvhich is a rich mer¦chandise. Also he loueth his whelpes with a wonderfull loue, and leadeth them about in the Sea long time. And if it hapneth that his whelpes bée let with heapes of grauell, and by defaut of water: hée ta∣keth much water in his mouth, and throweth vppon them, and deliuereth them in that wise out of perill, and brin∣geth them againe into the déepe sea. And for to defende them, hée putteth him∣self against al things that hée meeleth, if it bée noyfull to them, and setteth them alway betwéene himselfe and the Sunne on the more safer side. And when strong tempest ariseth while his whelpes bee tender and young, he swalloweth them vp vnto his owne wombe: and when the tempest is gone and faire weather come, then he casteth them vp whole & sound, as he sayth. Also Iorath sayth, That against the Whale fishteth a Fish of Serpentes kind, and is venimous, as the Crocodile: and then other fish come to the Whales tayle, and if the Whale be ouercome, the other Fish die: and if the venimous Fish maye not ouercome the Whale, then he throweth out of his iawes into ye water a fumous smell most stinking: and the Whale throweth out of his mouth a swéete smelling smoake, and putteth off the stinking smell, and defendeth and saueth himselfe and his, in that manner wise. (AdditiōThe two enimies of the whale is the Swoord fish and the Flaile fish, by the one be is forced to leaue the déepe, by the other he is beaten downe, so that it hap∣peneth often times, in his flieng from thē he is fastned on shelues and sounds, aud so taken.) Addition. SInce the time of Pliny many won∣derfull things haue hapned,Addition ye other no lesse famous writers of late yeres haue as diligently set downe in writing. For Plinie lyued about the yeare after our redemption .100. which is .1482. yeares past. Also Plutarke, rogus Pompeius, anno .214. Beda Anglicus, anno .724. this was a famous writer in those daies. His booke called Anglica Historia, hée gaue to Offrike, king of Northumberland, Paulus Longobardur Diaconus, an Hi∣storian. Anno .800. Strabus Monacus, Anno .840. Iohn Serapion. Anno .1140. with diuerse commendable Writers, although the later sorte, vntill the time that Bartholomeus tooke his booke of properties in hande, (who
among the rest wrote after diuers copies such as eyther to auoide idlenesse, they imagined, or else their natures béeing chaunged, may as hardly of this last age be beléeued) as appeareth by my notes set ouer against euery Chapter, where any notable thing worthy of plainer skil is set down thronghout the whole booke. I finde latelye printed in the historye of the West and East Indias, a pretie dis∣course of fishing, & of the names of some Fishes that Plinie speaketh not of, brée∣ding in those coasts, as the Moxarre, Di∣ahace, Dahaos, delicate fish: Palamite, Lizze, Polpi, Chieppe, Xaibas, with sun∣dry other that are not named. The most chiefest sorts that the Indians is saith to make account of, are thrée sorts of fishes. The great Torteise, whose shells are an ell in length, and in breadeth more then fiue yards, which I take to be the whole compasse, for obseruing the forme of pro∣portion: the Tiburon and the Manate, the Tiburon is a very great fish, & verie quicke and swift in the water, and a rauenous fish, they are taken by follow∣ing the shippe, although vnder saile, yet will the fish flote after, the space of an hundred and fiftie leagues: they are ta∣ken with double hookes fastned to strong roapes, whereon is fastned flesh or fish, these fishes haue their téeth double row∣ed, and doe bite daungerously, they are so great, ye twelue or fiftéene men are searce able to drawe them forth of the water, from sixe foote in length to twelue foote, & two yardes broade, informe like to the Soule Fish, and in such sorte skinned rough, the flesh is verye good and whole∣some. The Fish Manate is bigger then ye Tiburon, the head of this fish is like to ye head of an Ore, with also like eyes: in stéed of foure legges, he hath two short stumpes, flat and finnie, wherewith hée swimmeth, and is very gentle and fame, and commeth often times forth of ye wa∣ter, and créepeth on land néere the shore, where if he find any herbage, he catcth it, this fish is takē wt harping yrons & hooks, this fish is reported to be ye best of all o∣ther great fishes, for yt his flesh being cut is hardly discerned from béefe, in colour raw, & in tast being soddē, & wil abide pon¦dring with salt, as our Béefe doth, & the young of these fishes eat like veale, sweet & delicate. There is also ye Vihuella, this fish bereth in the top of his head a long blade, a strong and sharpe finne lyke a swoord, and is bigger then the Manate, of some called the Swoord fish, but not of that kinde, that is néere the coasts of Spaine, Fraunce, England, and Ireland. Many fishes there are, that doe flie with broad fins, as the Bats doe with theyr tylme wings, so long as their wings bée wet, for they are so thinne, that by the sodaine drieng of the aire and wind, bée∣ing stiffe, they fal into the water againe. Also of the taking of Whales in Russe and of the trade of fishing in other coun∣tries. Read the Decades, and the disco∣uery of ye Indias. Ges. in his booke of fish. FINIS LIBRI XIII. ¶INCIPIT LIBER XIIII. DE TERRA ET EIVS PARTIBVS. AFter that by the help and grace of God, ye treatise is ful ended of the properties of the ouermost shining body, that is heauen, & of the middle shining, & cléere bodies, of fire, aire, & water: now last it is to speak of the properties of ye lowest bo∣dy, yt is sad & dim, both in general and in speciall. The lowest body & vttermost in comparison to heauen, is earth. Of whose cōmon properties somwhat shall we say in this worke: & that touching ye quality, substance, conteining, or ornamēt therof,
The earth conteineth for ornamēt with∣in, quarry, dare, & al that groweth vnder ground, as stones, & mettal, & other such. Wherfore without he conteineth things yt we know & sée, as beasts, trées, hearbs, and grasse. Of them all, som what shal be set in this treatise, as it séemeth that holy writ maketh minde therof, for simple mē thinke yt it is inough to set héere simple things, yt wel nigh all men know. Ther∣fore héereof we shall somwhat rehearse, & giue greater things to greater men: and in the beginning of this worke, we will make a protestation yt we set héere of our own, little or right naught. But héere we shall set on a rowe authoritie of holye Saints, & some Philosophers, as we haue done before in other bookes. Of the Earth. chap. 1. ANd so the éarth is set in the middle space of the world like farre from all parts of heauen & is called Terra in la∣tine. & betokeneth all ye roundnesse of the earth in ye singular number, & all ye parts therof in the plural number, as Isi. saith. And he saith that earth is called Terra, & hath ye name of the ouer part Que tera∣tur, yt is trode. And is called Humus also, & hath ye name of the sea that is moist & ioyned thereto. And is called Tellus, for we take fruit therof: & is called Ops, for it heapeth with fruit. And is called A∣rida, for it is able to be cared and tilled or for it is distinguished frō water by his owne drines, & is moist, & hath moisture of water, yt is nigh therto, as Isi. saith. Ba¦silius in Ex. describeth ye properties of ye earth, & saith in this manner. The earth is ye lowest body & middle, & like far from the parts of heauen, & therfore wise men call it ye middle of heauen, & amōg al bo∣dies the earth is most corpulent, & hath least of subtilty & of simplicitie, & is the other foundation of ye world: & is colde & drie in kind: & is least in quantitie in cō∣parison to heauen, though it be most in it selfe: In qualitie it is obscure, & of it selfe darke, & is round in shape, & not abiding together but by glew of water. And the whole earth resteth, though parts thereof moue often. And is habitation of bodies that haue life, and is called the stoole of Gods owne foote. Esa. 66. This saith the Lord, heauen is my seate and earth is my footstole. Mat. 5. But I say vnto you, sweare not at all neither by heauen, for it is Gods seate, nor yet by the earth, for it is foot∣stoole. The fairenesse of this element is least in ye body of ye world. For ye the working of ye might of God is least seene therein: And therfore it is said, yt God toucheth ye earth with his lowest foot: for in compa∣rison to the greatnesse & fairenesse of hea∣uen, it séemeth that highnesse of this wis∣dome of God, sheweth least in ye body of earth. And though the earth be lowest in cōmparison to ye body of heauen, yet ne∣uerthelesse it taketh most influence of ye lights of heauen, & is therfore most plen∣teous, as mother of al: and bringeth sorth many, diuers, & most contrary kinds: and for yt it is in ye middle of heauen, it taketh on euery side influence & effect of heauen. And so that ye séemeth to lacke therin of nobility in substāce, is recouerd in effect & in vertue. For in a manner it bringeth forth some more noble kinds, then doth heauē yt is high with stars, as we sée. And for highnes the earth conceiueth & brin∣geth forth creatures with life, féeling, & reason as Basi. saith. Also heereto he saith as ye Philosopher saith, that ye earth is e∣uen way with his owne weights, & eue∣ry part thereof busieth with his owne weight to come to the middle of ye earth. By that busieng & inclination of partes, ye whole earth hangeth in euen weight a∣boue the middle point, & is euenly held vnmouable, as it is written. Psa. 19 The heauens declare the glorie of God, and the firmament sheweth his glorious worke. Psa. 24. The earth is the Lords, and all that therin is, the cōpasse of the world, and they that dwell therin. For he hath sounded it vpon the seas, & established it vpon the flouds. Thou hast founded ye earth vpon his sta∣blenesse, &c. And therefore li. 12. Isi. calleth ye earth Solum, for it is a sad element, & bereth vp all ye elemēts of euery body be it neuer so heuie: therfore all heuy things yt be aboue & from the earth, be without rest til it come to the earth that is sted∣fast
and stable, and rest when they come to the earth, and for the worthy proper∣ties and noble effectes of the earth, er∣rour of nations faineth, that earth was God indéede. And therefore in old time, they did all reuerence and worship ther∣to, as Isidore toucheth li. 8. in Tractat de Dijs gencium & nominibus. cap. . And saith, that in olde time men called the earth Ceres, the mother of God, and hath that name of fruites that it bring∣eth foorth: for it defendeth and nourish∣eth all that néedeth meate and drink, for ye earth is mother of plentie, for nothing on liue may grow, but if it be rooted and maured in substaunce of earth. Also it is called Ops, riches, for the earth is better than other riches: and also of the earth euerye creature on liue, hath riches of meate and of liuelode. And also is cal∣led Vesta the Goddesse, either for it stan∣deth stedfast, or for it is clothed wt trées, hearbs, and grasse. And he saith, ye Earth taketh colour of séedes, leaues & grasse, which wither and fade in winter: and of wether in springing time, and in sum∣mer: for then it is clothed and hid with grasse, hearbes, & floures, and is spoyled thereof in haruest and in winter. And in signe & token of so great plentie, a great female Image was made, & called Alma mater, ye high mother. And ye Image was crowned wt towers, & she was set in a chaire, & Lions followed & wer subiect to hir, & she hare a key in ye one hand, & a ta∣ber or timbrell in that other hand: and hir chare-men brandished swordes that they bare on hande: And it was fay∣ned, that Cockes followed the good wife that sate on the chaire. And ye earth was called Mother, for she bringeth forth ma∣ny things, and bréedeth meate and foode to all things, which should els dye: & is called Mater Alma, the high Mother, for she féedeth all beasts, & is nourisher of e∣lements, as Isid. saith. And it is said, that she beareth on hir head a crowne wt to∣wers, for ye earth is adorned with so ma∣ny great Cities and Boroughs that bée builded therevpon: and is borne with a chaire of wheeles, for ye earth hangeth in the aire that moueth, and is sustained therein: and she sitteth in a moouing chaire, for though other things moue, it is sayd, that onely the earth mooueth not. And in that that Lyons be mylde & subiect to the Image of the earth, it is to vnderstand, that euery kinde, though it be neuer so siece or cruell, in time of eath he shall be ouercome and subiect to the earth: and for that she beareth a key in hir hand, she betokeneth, that ye earth is cloased in winter, & opened in spring∣ing time, that fruit may grow & spg: & for that it is said, ye Cocks serue ye earth, that sheweth, that birdes & fodles éed seedes of the earth. Therefore fowles néede to follow the earth, & lyght downe there to finde therein séedes and me. The sound and noyse of the  be∣tokeneth, that in tillyng of fields is noise of instruments, of cultures, of share, & of mattockes, that are of brasse: For in olde time the earth was filled with in∣struments of brasse, re yron was found, as Isidore saith. Hir seruaunts be segned girt with swords, and betokeneth that ofte for to defende and winne earth and lande, is warre and battaile, and swordes drawen therein. In this ma∣ner and in many other, the properties of the earth, be described in mystike mea∣ning of fables, as it is sayd and rehear∣sed of Isidore. And though the earth be among Elements most stable, as it is sayd and rehearsed yet by effect and doo∣ing, it is most passible of Elements. Al∣so though it be colde in substance, yet it conteineth in it selfe firie vapours, that come out therof, as it doth in the hil, that is named Aetna and Vulcanus; as he sayth there. Also, though the earth bée blacke and vnséemly without, yet with∣in it containeth many precious things: for by imprinting of influence of heuen, in ye inner veynes of ye earth, be gendred precious stones & noble mettall: & so the vertue of ye earth is hid within, by these likenesses that be without. Also ye earth is beclipped about with the sea, and is beset and beate with the armes thereof, and is by priuy waies, thirled with moi∣sture of the sea, least the earth and the partes thereof should fall into powder, by masterie of drinesse, as Beda sayeth. Also though the whole Earth be founde
and sad in substaunce thereof, yet euery part thereof moueth kindly towarde the middle point, and because of meddeling of firie and of airie parts, the earth is in some parts thereof hollow and dim, and spoungie, and smokie. And windie vapor commeth into the hollownesse thereof, & shaketh & moueth parts of the earth, and bréedeth earth quaking as Ari. saith lib. Metheor. Colde winde (saith he) mo∣ued in the wombe of the earth, maketh that mouing yt is called earth quaking. And there it followeth, as noyse & sound commeth of diuers beating and froting in the aire of bodies together therein, so noise and sound commeth of diuers sha∣king and mouing of windes that are hid in the earth, and thereof this is to∣ken, for it resteth not till ye earth cleaue, and the winde with a voyce issueth out, &c. And there Aristotle saieth also, that in places where strong concourse & running is of ye sea, & mouing of waues, and in places with much thinnesse in the earth, is strong earth shaking, as it fell in Hercules time in some Ilandes, in whom the earth began to rise, as it had bene an hill. Then the place cloue, & out came a great wind, & it destroied a great Citie, whereof there remaineth remem∣braunce to this day. Also he sayth there, that with eueth shaking commeth a ma∣ner dimnesse, that hideth the sunne with out clowdes, all the while the earth sha∣king dureth, by reason of darke vapors and great. And before the earth quake, commeth a token and sheweth his com∣ming, a long clowde and straight as a line is séene in heauen before the going downe of the Sun. And there it is said, that somtime the earth quake commeth in Eclipse of the Moone: for then ye heat of the Sunne commeth not to the ayre to make it cléere, nor to wast the vapor, that is cause of the earth shaking. Also in li. de vegitabitibus Aristotle saith, that earth shaking is not in graue∣ly place, but in place with many dennes within, and hardnes without, as a place of hills and of mountaines: For if the place be not hard and sad without, the vapour issueth and passeth out by little & little, and so much vapour gathereth not together yt it is strong inough to mooue the earth: but when the place is hollow, and full of dennes & holes within, & sad and hard without, the parts of vapours be gathered together, and then is strong shaking, so that sometime it cleaneth & enteth the earth. Than in place that is all full of holes, falleth not lightly earth shaking, by reason that the vapors passe out continually, neither in places that be full harde and sadde, for there maye not much vapour enter, because of straight∣nesse of place and partes. But it fal∣leth in places that be hollowe within, and harde and sadde without. Huc vs∣que Aristot. Also for the earth is an Element, the whole earth is lyke in substaunce to all the parts therof: but in qualitie ye earth is diuersly disposed in diuers parts, and chaungeth complection & kinde by med∣lyng of qualyties of other elements, and is not all of one manner of disposition, but chaungeth now colour and now sa∣uour. This diuersitie commeth of many manner of causes, and in many manner of wise: sometime of highnesse & low∣nesse, for the high place is aboue, and the low beneath, and the ouer place is not so hot as the neather. For as Macrobi∣us saith, the printing of the sun beames is more strong in low places thā in high, for the aire is more thicke in valleyes, than in mountaines: therefore in val∣leyes is more gathering of sun beames, and more hurtling and smiting of great aire and thitke. In mountaines & hills the aire is thin and cléere, therefore the beames be sparpled and not fast helde together: and so the lesse heate is gen∣dred there. Also by diuers taking of the sunne beames, for that that taketh most and strong sunne beames is most plen∣teous and fruitfull. And land that is far from the sunne beames, is lesse able to beare fruite and corne. Also by diuersitie of kinde of winds, for land on whom Eastern wind blow∣eth continually, is temperate hot, and as it were meane betwéene moyst and dry, as Constant. saith. Therefore such land is full plenteous in bearing of flowers fruite and corne, and most couenable for
habitation of mankinde. And therefore the Westerne winde longeth to colde∣nes and moysture, and maketh the land lesse temperate, and therefore Westerne winde is lesse plenteous. And Northern winde drieth and cooleth land, yet by re∣son of cleane aire, it maketh it subtil and pure, and so in the North, men be high of stature & faire of shape: because of the outward aire, the pores be stopped, and kinde heate is helde within, by vertue whereof, the stature is great, & the shape of body faire and seemelye. And for the Sothern winde is hot and moyst, it ma∣keth the land that it bleweth continu∣ally on, troubly, hot, and thicke, and sad: therfore men of the South land, be con∣trary to men of the North lande in sta∣ture and in shape, and therefore men of such lands be not so bold and hardy, nor so wrathfull and angry, neither so great anglers and boasters, as other be, as Constantine sayth. Also the qualities or properties of the earth are diuers, as it is nigh to the sea, or far from thence: for land yt is nigh to the South sea, is more hot and moyst, than land that is nigh to the North sea, for hot vapour & moyst, commeth out of the South sea, and hea∣teth the land that is nigh thereto. The contrary is of the North sea, therfore the sea that is called Mare Ponticum, is fre∣sher or lesse salt, than other seas: for cold∣nesse hath more masterie therein, and therfore cold vapour that commeth ther∣of, cooleth land yt is nigh therto. Also land changeth & is diuers by working & tra∣uell of men, for the more land is delued, and eared, & ouerturned, the vertue that is therein, is the more medled with all the parts thereof, and so laud is amend∣ed and made more able to beare manye manner of Corne and fruite. And when land lyeth long idle and resteth it pareth, and is the worse to beare corne and fruite. Also if good lande be bedewed or be rained, if fasteth and amendeth: & grauelly land and stony is the worse, for it is the more hard. ¶ Of an hill. Cap. 2. AN hill is high swellyng and rearing of the earth or of land, onely at foote touching other land: or els hills be cal∣led mountaines, for they passe vpwarde aboue that other deale of the lande, as Aristotle saith. Also in libro de propri∣etatibus Elementorum, Aristotle saith, that some men haue sayd, that the earth was first made round and plaine, and no mountaines, nor vallyes were therin, for all was shaped all round, as ye euer bo∣dies be: and so cause of mountaines & of valleyes be nought els but mouing of waters that dig and weare the soft parts of the earth, & the hard parts that maye not be digged, be made Mountaines, and places that wer digged deepe, wer made for the sea and for riuers. Also in libro Metheororum Arist. saith, that somtime mountaines be made by strong earth shaking: for somtime the earth is lifted vp and made a Mountaine, as of a great raine of water, commeth hallownes, and is made a valley. Also there he sayeth, that the comming and the going of the sea, weareth and breaketh the lande in some place, and maketh hills, and some∣time the Sea healed all the lande, and bare alway the softe parts thereof, & let the hard abide, and threw the mud toge∣ther, and that wered drye when the sea, was passed, and tourned to hilles. Also mountaines be hard and sad, reared from ward the earth toward the heauen, but they are grounded on the earth, and be some∣time full of hollownesse and of dennes & so because of voydnesse, it draweth and sucketh in water, and when the hollow∣nesse is full, water runneth and spring∣eth out at well heads, and is cause of e∣uerlasting springing and running: and so it is knowen that mountaines with hollownesse & dens, draw & sucke in hu∣mor & moisture, & send therof out alway. Also mountaines containe noble mettal, for noble mettal is mined out of veynes of mountaines. Also mountaines eare fruit & swéete smelling things, for clean∣nesse of aire that hath mastry in tops of hills, fruit that groweth on hils is more pure & more sweet, than fruit that grow on valleyes. Also hills receiue sooner the sunne beames, than do vallyes, and hold them longer time. Also hilles gender exhalation, smokes and vapours, and of
gendring therof, in ye aire come clowdes vpon tops of most high hills, and there∣of commeth rayne but seldome, as in the top of mount Olympius as Arist. saith: and that is for cléernesse of aire, and for scarciue of vapour, for vapour is spen∣ded and wasted ere it maye come to the toppe of the hills. Also the hills be set a∣gainst the windes & stormes, more than valleyes, and so because of cold that hath the mastry on hills, snow lyeth on hils, and is frosen with colde winde, that is therein. And therefore snow lyeth and a∣bideth longer on hills than on valleyes: as it doth in mount Caucasus and in Li∣bano, and in other such high hilles, that be alway white with white snowe, as Isidore saith. Also hills be ofter smitten with lightning, than valleyes, as Isidor. saith, therefore the hills that be called, Montes Pirenei, haue that name of fire and of lightning, for fire is called Pir, in Greek. Also the hills that are called Ce∣raunci, haue that name of oft smiting of lightning: for lightening is called Ce∣raunos in Greeke as Isidore saith. Also hills that be most high, be best places to stand on to looke about, to wait and spie for comming of enemies: men go vp to top of hills, and waite about, and warne of perills that they sée a farre. Also hills be sound, sad, and strong in kinde, there∣fore they be most able places to buylde in Castles and towers, and so dwelling and abiding on hills, is more sure than in valleyes, and namely if they may not be mined for hardnesse and sadnesse of ground, and be so high that it is hard to take the waye vpward. Also for in hills is plentie of hearbs, grasse and lease, they be according to pasture of sheepe, and of other beasts, for hearbs & leese of moun∣taines, are more wholsome and better to defieng of beasts, than grasse and hearbs that grow in valleyes, though they bée generally more ranke and fat, for humor of feeding that norisheth hearbs & grasse, is more subtill and pure, than humours of plaines and valleyes: and therefore heate of heuen defieth that moysture, and turneth sooner, and changeth it into sub∣staunce of hearbes and of grasse, both for subtilnesse of that humour, and for cléer∣nesse also of the aire, that is there. Also in hills be higher trées and thicker bu∣shes, than in valleyes, therefore Moun∣taines accord to wilde beasts and fowles to bréed and to dwell therein: therfore when wilde beasts be hunted with hun∣ters in valleyes, they flye to the Moun∣taines, and be there safe. ¶Of the hill Ararath. cap. 3. ARarath is the highest hill of Arme∣nia, therein Noes ship rested after the floude, as Isidore saieth, and yet to this day the timber of that shippe is séene in that mountaine. And that hill hath ma∣ny names. Iosephus speaketh of that hil, and sayeth in this manner. The place where Noes ship is, the Armenians call it Egressorium, & yet men of that coun∣trie shew timber that was left of ye ship. And (as Iosephus saieth there) Berosus Caldeus maketh minde of that shippe in this manner. It is sayd, that the ship that came into Armenia, is yet some part about the hill Cardiens, and thereof fal∣leth glew, that men vse most to cleanse. Also Iosephus Egypcius, and Manslus Damescenus, in 96. hist. libro. write in this manner. In Armenia is a great hil that is named Baris, and it is sayd, that in time of the great floud, many fled and were saued therein, and that one came in a ship to the top of the hill, and some of the timber was there kept long time. Also the Mountaines of Armenia, are called Ceraunei, for highnesse and ofte beating of riuers: for a riuer is named Cerannus in Greeke as Isidore sayeth. These hills begin betwéene Armenia, & Hiberia as Isidore saith, at the ports of Caspis, and stretcheth to the well, where the Riuer Tigris beginneth, as Isidore sayth. ¶Of the hills Bethel. cap. 4. THe hils of Bethel be in Iurye, nigh to Ierusalem, where the house of our Lord was builded in Salomons time. The hils of Bethel haue plentie of wood and of trees, of hearbs and of grasse, and be full of sweete smelling things.
Therefore Hart and Roe young & olde, be therein. (Additiō.Beth-el signifieth the house of God. Bethel, the name also of a Citie, in the Coasts of the Tribe of Beniamin and E∣phraim. It was distant from Hierusa∣lem thrée miles. It was first called Lu∣za: but after when Iacob being in that place, saw the Lord standing vppon the ladder, he called it Bethel. In this place Bethel, Hieroboam set vp the idolatrous worshipping of one of ye golden Calues. In this place, the children which moc∣ked Elizeus the Prophet, were torne, & rent, and killed of Beares. ¶Of the hill Caucasus. Chap. 5. CAucasus is an hill in the East and stretcheth out of India to the hil that is called Taurus, and hath diuers names by diuers nations that dwell nigh those hills, as Isi. saith. In ye East it ariseth & is a great hill, and for white snowe ly∣eth thereon, it is called Caucasus: For whitenesse is called Candor in ye East∣erne language. And so the Cities that be nigh to this hill, call it Crocasim: for Acasim in their speach, is vnderstoode whitenesse or snow, as Isidore saith. (Additiō.Caucasus, an hil, one of the highest in all Asia, scituate aboue Iberia and Al∣bania, on the North part, and is a part of the mountaine Taurus. One of the partes of this hill, deuiding India & Me∣dia, stretcheth towards the Red sea. Philostratus. ¶Of the hill Heball. Chap. 6. HEball is a Hill that is beyonde Ior∣dane. Thereon stoode the fire ligna∣ges after the passing of Iordane to curse all those that held not the x. precepts, as it is written Deut. 26. And men say, yt it is an hill with hollownesse and dens, and is ofte moued with earth shaking: and that accordeth to the meaning of his name: that is to vnderstande, an olde swollowe. Also this was the hill of cursing and of banning: for theron men prayed wickedly for them that trespas∣sed. And this was helde an hill of dis∣praising and despite. For 6. of the most vnworthy lynages that came of seruing women, were set vpon that hill Hebal to curse the people. Deut. 27. (Additiō.And these shal stand vpon ye mount Ebal to curse, Ruben, Gad, Aser, Zabu∣lon, Dan, Nepthali, verse. 13. declaring that they shoulde haue cause to feare God for his vengeance, if they woulde not obaye him for his loue. On this mountaine was vttered the 12. curses, a∣gainst abhominable sinnes. Read the Chapter. ¶Of the hill Hermon. chap. 7. HErmon is a lyttle hill, and standeth vpon Iordane. Thereon is plentye of hearbs and of grasse, of léese, & of good pasture: for the foote thereof is scatered and moysted with the riuer of Iordane, and in the top with plentie of deaw that commeth from heauen. And it is embe∣lished with running & influence of wa∣ter, therefore on that hill were ye beasts fed that should be offered in sacrifice in the temple, and for the beasts that were fed and fatted with plentie of deawe of hearbes and of grasse of that hill wer of∣fered in mount Syon, that was in the Temple: Therefore as the Hebrewes did, the Prophet sayde that deawe of Hermon commeth downe to the mount in Syon, and might not be as the letter sayth: For Mount Syon is more high than Mount Hermon, and they be also farre a sunder. For this cause it is said, that the deawe of mount Hermon came downe to Mount Sion,Psa. 133. for grasse & fat∣nesse of beasts that wer sedde in mount Hermon, were offered in Sacrifice in Ierusalem, to increasing of the fire of the Altar: And therefore Hermon is to vnderstande lyght areared, as the Glose sayeth super Psalmum. For why lyght increased on the Altar, when fire of Sacrifice was fedde with such foode.
¶Of the hill Ebron. Cap. 8. EBron is a hill in Iurie, as it is sayd, Iosu. 14. Therein is a Citie most fa∣mous, and hath the name of that hill, & is called Ebron, as Rab. saith. The vale thereof is called Vallis Mambre, that belonged in olde time to the friendes of Aner and of Eschol, and was their pos∣session. And it is sayd in Gene. that this hill is a solempne place, because of holy Patriarkes, whose bodies rest therein, as it were from ye beginning of ye world, and the greatest Patriarke Adam lyeth there. Also most mightiest men had this hill in possession, as it is sayde Iosua. 15. Ther it is sayd, he put out of that place Calet, the children of Emoth, Sisay, A∣chimaan and Ptolome. Also in this hill, as the most sure place, our Lorde ordey∣ned the beginning of the Kingdome of Dauid, and warned him by inspiration, that he should come thether after Sanles death, where when he had raigned seuen yeres, he was at last king of all ye whole kingdome of Hierusalem. In olde time first men called this hill, Kariatharbe, that is to vnderstand the Citie of foure: for there rested the bones of foure yt wer most famous, as Ierome saith, that is to wit, Adam, Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob. (Additiō.In the land of Canaan, Iosua blessed Caleb the sonne of Iephunie, and gaue him for inheritaunce Hebron, the Kene∣site, because he followed constantlye the Lord God of Israel. And the name of Hebron, was called in olde time, Kiri∣ath-Arba, which Arba was a great man (a huge Giaunt) among the Anakims.) ¶Of the hills of Aethiopia. cap. 9. THe hills of Aethiopia be seuen, as it is sayd: among them the mount of Atlas is chiefe,Atlas, is ye name of an hill in Barbarie, high and small, which per¦ceth the clovvdes. as Isid. saith, li. 14. ca. 4. In the West Aethiopia is hilly & gra∣uelly, and wast in the middle Eastward, and stretcheth from the west side of the mount Atlas, to the endes of Aegypt, & is cloased in the west side with the Oc∣cean sea, and in the North side with the riuer Nilus. In the mountaines, and also in the playnes of ye lande, be much peo∣ple & folke wonderfully shapen in face, and horrible in figure and shape. Also in that lande is great multitude of wylde beasts and cruell, and of Serpentes and Adders: and there is Rinocerota, that is the Unicorne, a beast with one horne. There be Camells and Libbards, there are Cockatrices & most great Dragons: & out of their braines be taken precious stones. Ther is Iacinctus found, & Chri∣soprassus also: there Cinomon is gathe∣red. There be beasts gendred wilde and fierce, as Dragons, Strucions, Ostriges, Elephants and Apes. Huc vs{que} Isidor. Also there it is sayd, that betweene Cy∣rene and Aethiopia is a Well, that coo∣leth in the heate of the day, and heateth in the coldnesse of the night, against kind of waters of other Wells. ¶Of the hill Aetna. Ca. 10. AEtna is an hill in the lande or Ile of Cecile, and cut of that hill breaketh fire wt brimstone, as it were in hell, as Isidore sayth lib. 14. cap. 7. It is sayde, that this hill hath dennes full of brim∣stone in the Southeast side, & those dens stretch vnto ye sea, and receiue waues & waters, and gathereth winde, and that winde bloweth out brimstone, and gen∣dreth fire thereof. Also out of that hill, breketh bright burning smoke, and com∣meth to the land, as Isi. saith there. Also it is sayd, that in this hill, a certaine fi∣gure appeareth, & oft men of that coun∣try heare about this hill Aetna, groning, like a cōplaining voyce of dole, & sorow, and of woe. Therefore many déeme that there is a place of paine, and some soules be pained therin: but I affirme not that, but it seemeth that S. Gregory, in his Dialogue, thereof maketh minde. (Additiō.Aetna, otherwise called ye mount Gibello in Cycill, whereof Saint Au∣gustin hath made oft mention, is a mer∣uailous hil, at the foote whereof is a lit∣tle towne of the same name, & woods, & trées of diuers kindes planted. On the toppe thereof is a barraine ground mixt with ashes, in Winter time couered with snowe.
This containeth in circuit twentie fur∣longs, and is inuyroned with a banke of ashes, of the height of a wall. In the middle is also a rounde hill, of the same colour and matter, wherin be two great hoales, fashioned like vnto two cuppes, which be called Crateres. Out of these doe rise sometime sundrye great flames of fire, sometime horrible smoke, some∣time are blowen out burning stones in infinit numbers. Moreouer before that the sayd fire appeareth, there is hearde within the grounde, terrible noyse and roaring: and also (which is more mer∣uaile) when the smoke and fire is most abundaunt and feruent, yet round about the toppe of the sayd hill, are alwayes seene snowe, and hoare frosts. Plyme writeth, that the fire appeareth alwaye at night. Of the hill Hecla in the Ile of Ise∣land, from the toppe whereof, is cast foorth the blacke and graye Pommice stones, wherout issueth a hideous flame, stinking of sulphure, and within a dred∣full noise. The common people of that Countrey, beléeue the sayde place to bee a part of hell, because there are diuers apparations of ghostes, that shew them∣selues visible, and profer their seruice to men. They appeare for the most part in the forme of those, which by vyolent ad∣uenture haue bene killed or drowned: callyng men by their names, and bid∣ding them goe to the Mount Hecla. In the olde time the marriners termed these Goblines, Polantines: vpon what occasion I finde not written. Onely the soyle distaunt from the hill, is verye fruitfull ground: as writeth George A∣gricola.) ¶Of the hill Esau. Chap. 11. THe Mount Esau and Mount Seyr, is all one. In this hill is the Citie Idomea,Idumea, a region in Siria ioin∣ to Ae¦gypt, and ordering upon Pa∣e. and hath that name of Esau Iacobs sonne, that first builded that Ci∣tie, as it is sayde, as Ierome sayeth su∣per Abdian, for Esau was called Seyr, and Edom. Also heereof the Glose spea∣keth super Deuteronomium 2. and say∣eth, that Seyr is an hill in the lande of Edom, where Esau dwelled in the coun∣trey of Gabalena: where first dwelled Torrens, and him slewe. Chodorlao∣mor Genesis. 14. And this hill is called Seyr, that is to vnderstande, rough and hayrie, and hath that name of Esau, that was rough and hayrie. In this hill in∣habited first the Horreysees, men of Giaunts stature, that were horrible by expressing of the bodye, as the Glose sai∣eth super Deut. 2. These huge men wer put out, & Esaus children dwelled there, as it is sayd Deut 2. Also the hills of the land of Edom, be most high, and so it seemeth in some place that it toucheth the clowdes. And those hills be full of hollownesse and dennes, as the Glose sayth, Super Abdian: wherein men dwell in Summer, for the heate is so great and streng. ¶Of the hill Ephraim. Chap. 12. AN hill or mount Ephraim, is speci∣ally called mount Ephraim: therein Iosua the sonne of Nun, tooke possession, as it is sayd Iosua. 19. and builded there a Citie, and dwelled therein. And as A∣damantius sayeth, among hilles of that lande, this hill was most famous with hearbes and trees, and most full of fruit, and most high in place, and most fayre in sight, and most healthsull in ayre, and most fruitfull: for well streames com∣passe and moyst this hill: Therefore that place was couenable for Ihesus to dwell therein, that is called Iosua also, as Adamantius sayth. In this same hill Iosua lyeth buryed, in the North side thereof, as it is said, Iosua. 24. Also this hill, is nigh Sichem, that was a Citie of succour, with suburbes therof in mount Ephraim, as it is sayd Iosua. 20. There be Iosuas boanes buryed, as it is sayde Iosua vltimo. Also in this hill, Iosua layed the kniues and tyles of stone, with the which he circumcised the children in Desart, as Adamantius sayth super Io∣sua. cap. 20. Also in Mount Ephraim, dwelled Debora, a woman that was a Prophet,
and sate vnder a Palme, that was be∣twéene Bethel and Rama, as it is sayd, Iudreum 3. Also mount Ephraim had many peritcular hills and dennes: For all the lot of the linage is most in moun∣taines and in woodes, as it is sayd Iosu. 17. Also in these hills were slaine the Princes of Madian, Oreb, and Zeb, and their heades were borne to Ierion o∣uer the riuer of Iordan, as it is said Iu∣die. 7. Also in Ramatha, on the mount of Ephraim, Samuel the Prophet was born as it is said, Regum. 1. Also in the same hill Samuel dyed and was buried. 1. Re∣gum. 25. Of the hill Phasga. chap. 13. MOns Phasga is a hill most huge, & containeth in it selfe many perticu∣lar mountaines, for in this hill be Aba∣rim and Nebo, two hills, vpon whome Moses went vp to sée the countreyes of the land of behest or he should dye, and is buryed in the valleyes of the same mountaines, in the fields of Moab, as It is sayd Num. 27. Deuter. vltimo. This hill was in the Countreyes of the Mo∣abites and of the Ammonites, and de∣parted all their land from the lande of the Amorites, the which land after was possession to Ruben and Gad, and halfe the lygnage of Manasse, as it is sayde, Deut. 3. The rootes of these hills, touche the Red sea, that is the saltest sea that is, as it is said Deut. 3. both in text and Glose. And so these hills depart the land in which the Moabites and Ammonites dwelled in, and the lande that the Chil∣dren of Israel tooke in possession, and so Moses came vp to the top of that hill, & behelde out of that place, all the lande of behest, and dyed on that hil, and was bu∣ried in the valley of the same hill, in the fieldes of Moab, and is vnknowen vnto this daye. Balaam the Diuinour went on this hill Phasga, with Balaac king of Moab, to curse ye folke of Israel, but our Lord turned his curse into blessing, as it said Num. 23. And so it is knowen, that this hill was an hill of departing, for it departeth lands of euil men and of good. Also these be the hils of blessing, for out of this hill, by Balaam our Lorde gáue his blessing to the children of Israel and to the people. Also this is the hill of spi∣eng, of sight, and beholding, for out of this hill Moses espied & beheld, the coun∣tryes of the land of behest. Of this hill Ierome speaketh in li. de nominibus la∣corum, and sayth that Abarym is that hill, in which Moses dyed, in the land of Moab, against Jerico in ye top of mount Phasga, & the Countreyes all about hath the name of that hill, and is called phas∣ga, & is shewed to them that go from Li∣dia to Mesebon, that is called Nebo also. Of the hill Gosor. cap. 14. GOsor is an hil or a downe of Moa∣bites: and this is a part of ye mount Phasga. Balaac led Balaam on that hil to curse Israel, Num. 23. So saith Hiero∣nimus lib. supradicto. ¶Of the hill Galaad. cap. 15. AS Ierome saith, Galaad is the mount to the which Iacob came the 7. daye from Carron when he fled Laban: and he saith, that it is in the backe of the landes of Fenix and Arabia, and ioyned to the hilles and dens of Laban, and stretcheth ouer Iordane to the land that was som∣time the lande of Seon, king of Amor∣reis, and fell afterwarde into the handes of Ruben and Gad, and halfe the King∣dome of the lignage of Manasse. In that hil is a citie builded, that hath such a name, and is called Galath, of the sonne of Machir, the son of Manasse. Among o∣ther mountaines this is most noble: for it is a mount of pasture & refection: for it is most fertil of fruits, of léese, & of wels: also this is a moūt of medicine & of helth, for in Galaad is rosen found that healeth wounds sicknesses and sores, as it is said Ier. 9. Galaad also is an hill of couenant, of surety, and of reconciliation: for in the mount Galaad, Iacob made couenant and suretie with Laban, and was wholy re∣conciled to him: as it is sayd Genes. 31. Also it is an hil of witnesse, as it is said there. Therefore there it is said, that the name therof is called Galaad, that is vn∣derstand,
the hill of witnesse. Also it is the hil of buieng and selling: for oft chap∣men came to the mountains of Galaad, to buy swéete spices, as it is said. Gene. 32. He saw chapmen come out of Galaad driuing toward Aegypt. ¶Of the hill Garasim. Cap. 16. AS Ierome sayth, Garisim is a Hill fast by Iericho, and mount Eball is nigh thereto against Garisim. In these two hills, blessings and cursings were cried and shewed to the people, yt should come into the land of behest, to comfort them, that loued the lawe, and to drawe them to God by blessing: & to feare them that would breake the ten precepts, by cursings. Also in Garisim, sixe of ye most noble and worthy men with Priestes, cried and shewed the blessings, and ther∣fore was brought vp an vsage, that that hill shoulde be in great worship among them yt should come after, & shuld be fre∣quented, because of sacrifice & of praiers, therefore was strife of praiers betweene the Iewes and the Samaritanes. For the Samaritanes set mount Garisim before: & sayd that it was more couenable place to praiers then the Temple in Ierusa∣lem, and the Iewes said the contrarye, as it is sayd Iohn. 3. both in the texte and Glose. ¶Of the hill Gelboe. cap. 17. AS Ierome saith, Gelboe are hills of Aliens and straunge Nations, sea∣uen mile out of Sitopoli. In which mountaines is a great stréete, that is cal∣led Gelboes. In these hills, Saule with his sonne Ionathas, was perished and o∣uercome with the Philistines, as it is said 1. Re. ca. vlti. Aud Dauid had indig∣nation of them, and cursed them for the slaughter of the people, and in cursing he mad: them drye and barren, as the Glose sayth 2. Re. 1. And saith, that these Mountaines of Gelboe were plenteous before the cursing: and it is sayde, they remaine yet vnder cursing: also no raine commeth therein any time, as it is said. ¶Of the hill Colgatha. Cap. 18. AS Ierome saith, Golgatha is ye mount of Caluarie, there our Lord was nai∣led to the crosse for saluation of man∣kind: & yet this day it is shewed in Helia in the North side of the mount Sion, & is called the place of Caluarie: for there condemned men should be beheaded, as Isidore saith. (Additiō.Caluaria a common place of buri∣all: some men suppose, that it was the place where Adam the first man was buried neere to Ierusalem.) ¶Of the hill Gaas. cap. 19. GAas is a lyttle hill in mount Ephra∣im in the possession of Iosua the sonne of Nun ther Iosua died, and was buried in the North side of the same mountain, as it is said Iosu. vlt. His graue is there shewed to this day, as Ierome saith, li. supra dicto de nominibus. Of the hill Ebron. Cap. 20. EBron is a little hill in the lignage of Iuda, against the North, 22. mile out of Helia. There is a great towne that is called Ephrata, as Ierome saith. (Additiō.All these aforesaid places, in times past called Palestine, or the lande of pro∣mise, they are now inhabited by ye great Turke, the enemy of Iesus Christ.) ¶Of the hills of Israel. Cap. 21. GEnerally the Mountaines of all the land of behest, both on this side, and of that side of Iordane, be called moun∣taines of Israel, and be oft taken for the land of the ten lygnages; that was full of mountaynes, namely of Dan and of Ephraim. For the ten lygnages challen∣ged that name of Israel vnder Ierobo∣am the sonne of Naboth, that was of Ephraim, and reigned first in Sama∣ria, ouer tenne lygnages, as Ierome sayeth.
And it is sayde also in Historia. lib. 3. Regum 13. these mountaines were full of good pasture, and plenteous of fruite, and of good corne, of Oliues and of trées with fruite, and medicinable hearbs and sweete spices. Thereof speaketh Isidore lib. 14. ca. 3. and sayth, that Samaria, is a Countrey of Palestine, & tooke that name of a towne, that was sometime royall in Israel, and now is called Sabastia. This Countrey is to Iury word, and like ther to in hinde: for it is rich of diuers ri∣ches, and beareth noble corne and fruite, and is nobly endowed with water & ri∣uers, and is rich of balme. And so by grace of Elements the Iewes meaned, that honny and milke springeth in that land, for because of great plentie of leese & of pasture in the mountaines of this land, for endlesse many shéepe and other beasts in flockes, be in mountaines ther∣of. Also there be plentie of Bees, which gather hony, & be fed with great sweete∣nesse of hearbs and floures. Also in those Mountaines for temperate aire, & plen∣tie of deaw, corne & fruite ripe full soone, and there was mined golde and siluer, & other mettals. Deu. 8. Out of the veynes of the mountaines of Israel come wells, and riuers: and most firme places are builded in those mountaines. Also wilde beasts, as tigers & Lions, dwell in those mountaines and woods. ¶ Of the hills Hiperborei Chap. 22. THe mountaines of Scythia, be called Motes Hiperborei: for the Nor∣therne winde bloweth thereon, as Isid. sayth. li. 14. ca. 1. Also Ca. 3. Isidore saith, that many hills of Scythia be full rich, neuerthelesse in many places of them is no dwellyng for mankinde. For in ma∣ny places of the mountaines of Scithia, is right great plentie of gold and of pre∣cious stones, but for hugenesse of Gri∣phons, men come thether but seldome. In those hils are the best Smaragdis, and most pure Christall, and be sent out of the mountaines of Scythia, into other landes. And there are sharpe woods full of wilde beasts, of Leopards, Tigers, and of Panthers. Also therin be Hounds so great and huge, and so fierce, that they beare downe Bulls, and slaye Lyons, & namely in Albania and Hircania, that be countreyes of Scithia, with many hilles and mountaines. (Additiō.Hyperborei. People dwelling in the farthest part of the North, and as some suppose, vnder the North Pole cal∣led Pelus Arcticus.) Of the hill Carmelo. ca. 23. CArmelus is a mount of Iury, therein is a Citie that is called Carmela, & ther is two maner Carmelus, & of either mountaines, either is called Carmelus. One is on ye ouer side against ye South, therin Nabal liept flocks. 1. Reg. 21. The other mount Carmelus is in the other side of the land toward the sea: in either is good pasture, fruite, hearbs and grasse. Of the hill Libano. cap. 24. MOns Lihani, is the highest mount of the Prouince that is called Pro∣uincia Phenicis. Of this mountaine pro∣phets make mention: & hath that name Libanus, of Thus that is gathered ther, as Isidore saith. His farther parte to∣ward the East is called Aurilibanus, as Isid. saith. Also Libanus is called white∣nesse, for it is white with snowe, both winter and summer alway, and the snow ther, is neuer clene molten, but alway in summer in diuers places therof is snow found. And Libanus is head and Well spring of riuers and of wels: for as Ie∣rome sayth, at the foote thereof springeth two wels, Ior & Dan, & come togethers and make the riuer Iordane. Then Li∣banus is a mount of much swéete smel∣ling, for ther growen hearbs of sweet o∣dor and smell, and also trées that beare frankencense, whose chosen gum, ye Phi∣sitions call Olibarum, as Hieronimus saith. Also it is the mount of suffisance & of plentie: for through plentie of deaw & of raine, that commeth ther full oft, ther commeth plentie of beasts, léese and pa∣sture, of best fruite and ripe: and there∣fore in mount Labars & pastures therof,
were beasts fed and norished, that should be offered in the Temple. Also it was a Mount of most passing highnesse: for as Rabaus sayth super Reg. Mons Liba∣nus passed all other mountaines of the land, and therefore shipmen that came to Tirus, ful farre sayling in the sea, might see this hill, & know by the highnes ther of, to what hauen they should drawe, as he saith. Also it was the mount of influ∣ence, that fayleth not of continual sprin∣ging, and euerlasting moysture. For though he be drye without, yet he hath within most noble veynes of water, as it doth in pits of springing water, and runne alway with strength out of that mount that is called Libanus, as Salo∣mon meaneth Cant. 4. Quasi Puteus A∣quarum. Also this is the mount of trust and of suretie: for he that resteth in mount Libanus, is strong and safe from all maner of venimous beasts & serpents, for hearbs, grasse, and trees that growe there, driue them thence with odour and smell: for Cedars that grow ther, driue away all manner of venemous beasts & creeping wormes, & suffer them not to liue there, as Ierome sayth. Also it is an hil of fairnesse and of nurth, for wonder∣full highnes of Cedars & of other gréene trees, and continuall gréennes of hearbs and of grasse, and swéetnesse of song of birds, and plentie of riuers and of wels, make this mount Libanus merrye and lyking. Also it is a mount of medicine and of health, for there growe swéete smelling spices, that helpe and be reme∣die and medicine against manye endlesse sicknesses and euills. There be Cedars and Palmes: and Cipres and Oliues, & the licour and resins of them, be chiefe medicines against euils & harmes of di∣uers sicknesses. Also it is the mount of gladnesse & of mirth, for on the hilles of Liban growe plentie of the best vines: which make men glad and merry. Also it is the Mount of worship & of dignitie, for among all the mountaines of Syria, mount Liban hath principate in high∣nesse in plentie, in mirth, and in whole∣some aire, as Ierome saith. (Additiō.Libanus a mountaine betwéen A∣bia & Phaecia, whereon grow verye high trees, especially the Cedar trees.) Of the hill Moria. Cap. 25. MOria is a mount in Ierusalē, where in Slmon temple was builded, as it is said 2. . 3. And Du bought this mountaine of Ornan Iebusei, for two hundred sycles of gold most pure, to builde theron an Altar to our Lord, whē for the numbring that Dauid made, the people were smitten. In this mountaine he offered to our Lord and prayed, and our Lord heard him out of heuen in the fire vpon the Altar of sacrifices. In this mount Arah, in offered sacrifice for I∣saac, and our Lord had bad, ye Isaac shuld be offered in that same place. Genes. 2. where Ieromes Glose sayth vppon this word. Go into the land of sight, & offer thy sonne vpon one of the hills, &c. The Hebrues meane, that this is the hill, in which afterward the Temple was buil∣ded in the floure of Ornan of Iebuici, in the moūt Moria, that is vnderstood, ligh∣tening and beshining, for there is Dabir, that is the Oratory of God, & the lawe, and the spirit, that inspired Prophets, & teacheth men soothnesse, as Ierome saith. Men deemed, Iacob slept in ye same place, and saw Angells comming downward and vpward vpon a ladder, as it is said, Gen. 28. where the Glose saith vpon this word: héere is not els but Gods house. This is said, for he saw that the temple and worshipping of God shuld be in that place. And this place was a little hil be∣side mount Sion, where Dauids tower was after made. And heereof it foloweth, that mount Moriah, was a mount of re∣uelation & of sight, & a mount of sacrifice and of praiers, a mount of prophecie, & of teaching, a mount of light and of shi∣ning, a mount of oft cōming of Angels, a mount of appearing of God, a mount of forgiuenesse and mercie. ¶Of the hill Nebo. Cap. 26. NEbo is an hill in the land of Mob, in the top of mount Phalga, against Iericho. Out of that hill, Moses saw the lande of behest, and dyed there, when he
had seene the lande, as Ierome saith, and the storie. Num. 27. ¶Of the hill Hor. Cap. 27. MOunt Hor, is a hill in the vtter∣most Countries in the lande of E∣dom. In that mountaine Aaron dyed by wrech of God,Wrath or displesure because hee had displeased God. the fourtéenth yere af∣ter that he came out of Aegypt, when he was Cxviii yeres olde, as it is sayde, Num. 28. And there was the thirtéenth mansion and abiding, in the which the Children of Israel, dwelled and abode, af∣ter that they came out of Aegypt, as it it is sayd. Num. 20. When they mooued their tents and panillions from Cades, they came into mount Hor, that is the vttermost countries of ye lande of Edom. In this foresayd hill Aarons sonne Ele∣azar tooke vpon him first the principate of Priesthood. ¶Of the hill Oliuet. Cap. 28. MOunt Oliuet is a Mount in Iurye nigh Ierusalem, and had that name for most plentie of Oliues, that growe therein. Therefore Austen super Iohn, calleth it the mount of lyght, the mount of fatnesse and of feeding, the mount of medicine, of curation and of helpe. And he sayth so, because of great plentie of Olyues that growe therein. And ye fruit of them is vnctueus, shining and liking, for as Isidore sayth, the oyle of Oliues riseth out of bitternesse of the roote, into the féeding of lyght, into medicine of wounds, and into refreshing and feeding of the hungry. At the foote of this mount Oliuet runneth a brooke that is called, Torrentem Cedron, betwéene the drink thereof, and the mount was an Orth∣ard, in which our Lord oft times ente∣red because of prayer and rest, and there was he first taken in a garden, that is called Gethseman, as it is sayd Ioh. 19. For in the foote of that hill, fast by the brooke Torrentem Cedron, was some∣time a lyttle towne, that is called Geth∣semany, and yet that time there wer or∣chards of that towne, as Austen sayth, and ofte our Lord vsed that place of or∣chards. And that mount was in ye East side of the Temple, and therefore it was beshined of the sun rising in the morew side, and of light shining of the Temple in the euen tide by night. And therefore it was worthelye called the mount of light, for it receiued light both of heauen and of the Temple: and also it gaue to other plenty of oyle and matter of lyght, as Aust. sayth. In this mount was a li∣tle stréet, that was called Bethphage, that longed to the Priests In the side of this Hill was a Citie that was called Bethania, that was the Citie of Martha, of Lazarus, and of Mary, as the Glose sayth super Math. 21. And out of this Mount our Lord ascended vp into Hea∣uen, and shal appeare at the day of dome about the same mount, as it is sayde, Actes. 1. Both in the ferte, and in the Glose. In this mount Salomon build∣ed Temples & high places, as it is sayd. 3. Regum. 9. cap. And therefore it is cal∣led mount Oliuet, that was the mount of forgiuenes and of mercie. And it was called the mount of offence and of tres∣passe, for as it to said 4. Reg. 23. in those mounts Salomon offended and trespassed against his owne God. ¶Of the hill Olympo. Cap. 29. OLympus is a Mount of Macedonia, and is full high, so that it is sayde, that the clowdes be ther vnder, as Vir∣gil saith, Olympus passeth the clowdes, and is called Olympus, as it were Ola∣lampus, that is to vnderstand, as it wer heuen. This mount departeth Macedo∣nia & Thracia, & is so high, that is passeth all stormes & other passions of ye aire: & therfore Philosophers went vp to sée the course & places of starres, & they might not line there, except they had spounges with water, to make the aire more thick by throwing and sprinkling of water, as the master saith in Historis. (Additiō.Olympus, a mountaine or hill in Greece, betwéene Thelalia & Macedo∣nia, aboue yt which appereth no clowde, and therefore among the Poets it is v∣surped for Heauen. Plutarchus in vi∣ti Amilij, sayeth: That it is tenne furlonges in heyght, and a furlonge is taken for the yght parte of a mile
and a mile is a thousand paces, so that the hill after that measure, was a mile & a quarter high, vpright is a great height: but I take it to be after the paces of Hercules, which is sayd to be doubled, so that the hill vpright might be two Eng∣lish miles and an halfe: but after ye fur∣long of the Persians, which they cal Pa∣rasaugam, which conteineth the space of sixe miles and a quarter, each surlong a∣mounteth to 60. miles. Of the hills Oreb. chap. 30. Oreb is a moūt of Madian, as Ierome saith, nigh to Arabia in the desart, to whom in ioyned the desart of Sarasines, which is called Pharao: & mount Oreb & Sion is all one, as Ierome saith. In this mount Moses sawe many sights, as it is Exo. 3. Therein he sawe the bush burne, that was not wasted with burning. There he heard our Lord speake to him, and commaunded to him many things, as it shall be rehersed after in the mount Sinay. Of the hill Pernassus. cap. 31. MOunt Pernassus is in Thess. lia., as Isidore sayth, nigh to Boetia. And ye mount hath two tops arcared high. as it were vnto heauen. In which tops Apol∣lo and Liber Bacchus were worshipped sometime, because of the mirth of place, & for great plantie of wine and vines. Of the hill Riphei. chap. 32. HIgh mountaines that bée in the head of Germanie, be called Montes Ri∣phei, as Isidorus saith: And they haue that name of continuall blasts and strong réesing of winde and of tempestes. For Ripheus is Gréeke, and is vnderstoode a strong blast: and they be called Alpes, that is vnderstood mountaines. To the toppes of them is no way, but high féete of downes, and of other lower moun∣taines. And in these high mountaines is Snowe alway, manye clowdes, heades, springs of welles, and of greate riuers, and beastes fierce and wilde, and manye manner of Birdes and Fowles with winges, that shine by night, as Isidore sayth. Of high Cragges. cap. 33. HIgh cragges be highest mountaines, most sadde and strong passing the high tops of other mountaines, and re∣ceiue always rooses of tempestes, and showres of raine, and therefore the earth is full washed aboue, & the harder partes of the mountaines be made more harde and turned to stones, and made endlesse many cragges. And though cragges bée neuer so hard and rough, and sharp with∣out, yet within they e somewhat spun∣geous and hollowe. Therefore eft hu∣mours that bee drawne &  hered ther∣in, breake and spring out at : and windes and watere come into hol∣lownesse and denues of cragges, and hee sometime cause of earth sooing. And sometime by violence and strength of the shaking, the cragges all to breake & faile: birds and fowles, as Egles and Uulars come to the toppes of those cragges. Also cliffes on the Sea bee soone wasted with cragges, and with leaping of them, and with strong réeses of stormes and waues, that smite against harde cragges, and co∣uenable places for defence and strength bee found on cragges. Dens and neasts of Fowles and beasts bee made in crags: loppes of cragges bée wrapped and be∣clipped with mistes and with clowdes. In the Sunne rising toppes of cragges bée shined with beames of the Sunne: and cragges bée called Rupes, for they bée hard to break. For without strength of yron cragges bee not mooued. And al∣so out of deepe veines of cragges preci∣ous stones and diuerse kindes of mettall be oft digged and drawne. Also the most high strouting partes of cragges be called Scopuli, and haue that name of Scopin, that is to spie and maite, for out of such cragges, right farre places be perceiued and espied. Of the hill Sephara. cap 34. SEphara is a mount of ye East in Iu∣rye, as Ierome sayth, nigh thereto
dwelled the children of lethan, the sonne of Hember, Iosephus sayth, they came after in Sephora: to the which place Sa∣lomons shippe came with merchaundise, and chaffer commonly in thrée yere. This place is the land Tharsis, and an hauen of the sea. Thence Salomons seruauntes brought golde and siluer, Apes and Pe∣cockes and Elephants téeth, as it is saide 3. Reg. 10. Of the hill Segor. cap. 35. SEgor is a lyttle mount, & is called Balo also, and is nigh Sodoma, as Hie∣rome sayth. In that mount was a Citie builded, that was saued at ye prayers of Loth. There grow vines and balme, and apples of palmes, a token of the old plentie, and is vpon the dead Sea. And therein afterward was set succour of de∣fence of Romanes: thereof speaketh Esa. 15. Whereon the Glose sayth, that it was called an Heighfer: For is held fast liking of lechery, for it was twice smitten, and fell downe at the third time with earth shaking, and shuld haue stood strong, and abid, if they had not sinned after the deli∣uerance. Of the hill Sinay. cap. 36. SInay is a mount, and Oreb is a parte thereof, and is in Arabia in the pro∣uince of Madian. Of this mount speak∣eth Iesephus li. secundo Ant quitatum, and saith, that Sinay is a high mount and a noble, and worthy to pasture, and bea∣reth best hearbes and grasse. And it was supposed ye God dwelled there: and ther∣fore durst no man keepe shéepe there, for the Shepheardes durst not presume to walke there. Moses came towarde this mount, and sawe a wonderfull sight. For hée sawe that fire burnt a bush, and wa∣sted it not: neyther appaired the gréene∣nesse, neyther flowres thereof, neyther spraies that bare fruite, though the flame was swift, and full strong & mighty. And out of that fire our Lord spake to Mo∣ses. Also in libro. 3. he sayth, that Moses went vp to Sinay, that is the most high hill in that country, and because of his highnesse and greatnesse, and high strou∣ting crags, it is not onely harde for men to come thereto, but also it maye not bee seene without trauaile. Therefore it was saide that our Lorde dwelled about it. This mount was dreadful to all men, so that no man durst come thereto. About the foote of this mount the Hebrewes pight their tents, and were worthy to see God in fire, and in a clowd, and to heare him speake personallye. This mount is called Mons Sinay, the moūt of dwelling of our Lord, and oft conuning of Angels, mount of light, & of burning flame, moūt of clowdes and of darknesse, and inourd of raine and of dew, mount of Pasture, and of séeding, mount of wisdome and of lore. For out of that mount our Lorde taught Moses and the people, and gaue them lawe, mount of forgiuenesse and of mercy: For out of that foresayde mount gifts that were not before hearde, were graunted to the people: Mount of righte∣ousnesse, menassing and threatening. For he was dreadfull to them that saw him. Mount of lightening and of séeming and blasing, mount of trumpes and of trum∣ping: Mount of friendship and of truice. For by the lawe there our Lord ioyned and knit the people there to him in euer∣lasting truice: Mount of purenesse and of cleannes: Mount of gladnes, of solace, & of nursh, for none might come to this moūt but those that were cleane in body and in soule. Also they that were cleane before our Lorde, eate and dranke with ioy and mirth. Then mount of forgiuenesse, of mildnesse, and of pitie: mount of sacrifice and of prayers, for they did sacrifice to our Lorde, and heard that our Lord was pleased and had mercie on them by pray∣ers of Moses. (Additiō.Sina, or Sinai, a mountaine in the de∣sart of Arabia, called also Oreb. It is of Solinus called Casies: Iustinus calleth it Synaeus. On that hill God appeared to Moses, and deliuered to him the Tables of the lawe. Meade heereof more at large in the olde testament. Exod. 20. It is al∣so a citie of Mesopotamia. Of the hill syon. cap. 37.
MOunt Sion was a mount in Ieru∣salem, therevppon was Dauids Towre set for fairenesse & defence of the Citie. In the one side of mount Sion was the temple, as it were in the mid∣dle betweene the towre and the lower ci∣tie, for strength of the towre shuld defend the citie. And therfore oft holy writ cal∣leth Ierusalem the daughter of Sion, as the mother defendeth the daughter, and the daughter is subted to the mother, so the lower citie was subiect to the temple and also to the towre. And among other mountains, mount Sion was of so great authoritie & worthinesse, that not onely the citie of Ierusalem, nor onelye Iurye had the name of Syon, but also all holye Churches, that is gathered both of Iews and of Nations, had the name of mount Sion, and is oft in Prophesies called si∣on, as in this place: Mount syon is founded in ioye of all the earth, the sides of the North,Psa. 43.2 the Citie of the greate King. For mount sion was full high and full excellent, great, strong, and sted∣fast, full plenteous and fayre, and most merrye and trustye, and most sure, most rich and ioyfull, perfect, rightfull and ho∣lye: Mount of lore and of teaching, as it is written Esay. 2. Out of Sion shall come lawe: mount of prophesie and of re∣uelation. Of the hill Selmon. chap. 38. SElmon is a mount in the lignage of Ephraim, nigh to the coastes of the linage of Manasse, Abimelech went by into this hill, when hee fought against the Sichimites, as Ierome saith. And it is read Iud. 9. that this mount is thicke of trées: and hath much shadow. Therfore Selmon is vnderstoode shadowe, and is a moist mount with water and Snowe, and is fat and full of pasture, as it is sayd in Psalmo, anon they shall be made white in selmon: it is the mount of God, the fat mount. Of the hill Sophin. chap. 39. SOphin is a mount in the lignage of Ephraim, in ye place of Charmachen, where Samuel was borne, as Ier. sayth, it was a place set full high and plenteous of hearbs & of grasse, & moist with water, & full of hearbes & of trees, and of liking. Of the hill saron. chap. 40. OF saron it is sayde Esaye. 35. That saron is a mount betwéene mount Thabor and the ponde Tiberiades. And of that mount all that land and country hath the name, and is called Sarona yet to this day, as Ierome saith. Also all the Countries and lands from Cesaria Palestina, vnto the Towne that is called Ioppe, is called Sarona. Neere to this mount be plenteous fields in fruit grasse, and corne, as the Glose rehearseth and saith super Esay. 28. Of the hill seon. chap. 41. DEutronomij. 4. it is sayde, That mount seon is a parte of mount Ga∣laad, that stretcheth by desart ouer Ior∣dane to the place, in the which Seon diuelled, king of Amoreis, and fell to the lot of Ruben and Gad, and of halfe the lignage of Manasse, as Ierome saith vpon Iere. 46. vppon that word Assen∣dente Galaud, &c. Look before in ye mount Galaad. Of the hill semeron. cap. 42. SEmeron is a mount, of whome it is written. 2. Par. 13. Now in that mount is the Citie of Sabalte, there resteth the Reliques of Saint Iohn Baptyll, as Ie∣rome saith. And Samaria was built some∣time in the same mount. And thereafter all the land had the name of that Citye, and was called samaria, because of the mount this Citie was most strong and most hard to winne. Therefore the king of Assyries with a great host, and most great araye of warriours besieged the Citie thrée yeare continually, and might neuer winne it by strength, but vnneth with strong hunger. But as Ierome saith & Io. also. He shuld neuer haue than ye ci∣tie, if men yt dwelled therin had not offen∣ded the God of Israel, and had trusted
stedfastly in him, & had forsaken his law. Looke the properties of this mount before, De montibus Israel, there it is fully shewed. Of the hill Seyr. cap. 43. OF mount Seyr is the most mention made in holy writ, and that mount is called also mount Edom. Also thereof it is treated at full before: looke de monte Edom, that is called Monte Esau, for E∣sau had thée names. Of the hill Thabor. cap. 44. THabor is an hill in the middle fielde of Gables, as Hierome sayth super lere. cap. 36. And is a mount with won∣derfull nurth & highnesse, & distanteth ten miles from Diocesaria toward the East: And was in the marches of Zabulon, I∣sacar, and Neptalym. Among the moun∣taines of the lande of behest, this mount was most famous because of place, of plentie of mirth, of strength, and of sted∣fastnesse. For the soile of that mount bea∣reth vines, oliues, and other trées verye apt to beare fruit. Ther the aire is whol∣some, and ost deaw and swéete raine, as well in the morning as in the euening, there be high trées that léese not their leaues nor gréene coulour in winter nei∣ther in Summer. There is songs of ma∣ny diuers birds and soules: & their voice is liking to the hearers, and diuersitie of coulour of their fethers is pleasant: to the sight; and sweetnesse is liking to the tast, many birds and soules haunt that place, therefore there be manye Fowlers that lie and lay nets, springs and grinnes, as Hierome sayth vpon this place, Osee. 3. As a net is spread vpon mount Thabor, &c. Passing all other the presence of our Lord maketh commendable this mount and most worthy to be praysed: for with his comming therto our Lord made this mount worshipfull. For in this mount our Lords taught, in this mount because of praiers our Lord abode by night som∣time, in this mount our Lorde fedde the people both with bodily meate & Ghost∣ly: In the top of this mount our Lorde shewed himselfe bassefull, and chaunged his figure passingly before his Disciples, and gaue them reuelation in his owne body, of blisse and cleerenesse, that euer shall last. (Additiō.Tabor a mountaine in the Coun∣trie of Galile, where Christ was trans∣figured. Of the hill Ziph. cap. 45. ZIph is a mount with much shadowe, therein Dauid hidde himselfe when hée absented him from Saule: & is beside Charmela in mount Carmell. In the which mount Nabal Cormolites dwel∣led sometime, that came of the kinde of Calef, as Ier. sayth. And that mount hath many woodes, vushes, and trées without fruite, and manye laundes, and wilde beasts, as Roes and wilde Coates be in this mount. And this mount is full of deunes and of dry ditches and holes, and therefore it is a couenable place for bani∣shed men and théeues to hide them ther∣in. And is perillous to straungers that know not the waies therin: for they may lightly leese themselues. Of a downe. chap. 46. A Downe is a little swelling or area∣ring of earth, passing the plaine ground, and not reaching to highnesse of an hill. For a downe is lower then an hill, and higher then the plaine: And is called Tumulus, as it were swelling lande, as Isidore sayeth: and so ofte a down is the foot of an hill. For by downs oft we goe vp to high hills. And downes are called Colles, and haue that name of Colendo, tilling. For they be tilled with lesse trauaile then hills. And men dwell in them sooner then in hills: and they re∣ceiue sooner the good aire and heate of the Sun, then the lower lands: and therefore fruit ripeth sooner in downes. Also downes be more bedewed and be∣rained then valletes: therefore fruit that groweth in downes is more swéete and sauourie, then fruit that groweth in val∣leies. Downes be meane betwéene the lowest plaines of the lande, & the highest
toppes of hills: therefore aire is more thicker and greater in downes, and more hot then in hills, and more small & cléere then in valleyes. For downes receiue of the ouer bodies, more cleane and noble impressions and influence, then in val∣leyes. And therefore fruit, hearbes, and grasse that grow in downes, be better & more wholsome then those that grow in valleies, and in other places, as Constan∣tine saith. Also downes take sooner ye shi∣ning of the Sunne beames, and swifter moisting of the clowdes, then valleyes. Also from mountaines vpon the downs, come downe brookes and streames, and after from downes they runne to val∣leies and fields. Of a Valley. chap. 47. A Ualley is lowe landes set betwéene mountaines, as Isidore sayth. And a valley receiueth and beareth the water that commeth of streames, & of wells: and so valleies be moisted with streames that come out of mountaines. And by shed∣ding therof they bée endowed with flow∣ers, hearbs, and fruits, and with greene twigges and branches, and be shadowed by rearing and highnesse of hills, and of downes. Also in vallies is most méeting & gathering, and rebounding of Sunne beames: And therefore more hotter im∣pressions be gendered in valleies then in mountaines. And also snow melteth soo∣ner in valleies then in mountaines, & by shedding thereof, the places that be nigh be wette and moyst, as Macrobius saith. And therefore valleyes bée déemed by as∣saye, hotte, trowblye, thicke, and vapo∣rous. Men that dwell in valleyes bée oft times gréeued with hot euills: and moyst, as Constantine sayth. Houses that stande in valleyes, bée lesse gréeued with weathers then houses that stand in mountaines. For mountaines stande be∣twéene & defend the valleies from strong reefes of weather and stormes. Also men that dwell in valleyes be seldome gréeued with earth shaking. And the cause is, for in valleyes the partes of the grounde be set and thrust and cleaue stronglye toge∣ther. Therefore the winde maye not ea∣silye thirle those partes, and come into such grounde. For those partes bée not hollowe neyther full of hoales. There∣fore they mooue not nor wagge with strength of winde, that commeth there∣in, as Aristotle sayth. Also filth and vncleannesse commeth into valleyes, and abideth there long time: for the aire that is in valleies is soo∣ner rising of great smoakie vapours and of mist then in mountaines. And so the parts of the valleies are more déeper to∣ward the centre, then of mountaines, and are more farther from the circumference of heauen. Also in valleies for great com∣ming of water, sme and sen be heaped together, and make so great marreis and mires that they be hard for to passe, and by reason thereof passages ouer are found with greate difficultie. Also for plenty of humour, grasse and hearbes growe most in valleies, willowes, & other trées, with∣out fruite growen in valleyes, more then in mountaines. Of Campus. chap. 48. ONe other maner field is called Cam∣pus, & that manner of fielde is plaine grounde and lowe, as a valleye, and not reared on high as mountaines, as Isi∣dore saith: and is called Campus for e∣uen and plaine footing therein. And hath that name of Camis, Gréeke: And Camis is vnderstoode, shorte, euen, or playne. And Campus is a plain place and not til∣led nor eared with plough, nor dounged with durt, but is namelye ordeined for walking and playeng, and vse of déedes of knighthoode. And is nigh to a Citye, that is common place ordeined to sight of all men, and to vse of the communaltye: and it is appropried to no man, but assig∣ned to the profit of all men. Of Ager, a field. cap. 49. THere is another fielde that is called Ager, and hath that name, for some what is wrought therein, as Isid. sayth. lib. 15. And Varro saith, euery such fielde eyther lyeth, and is a standing place, or beareth trées, or is able to pasture, or lieth
to leese for beasts, or beareth flowers, & is necessarie for Bees. Therefore as men of olde time meaned, that lande that is tilled is called Ager, and that land that is vntilled is called Rus, as woode and layes, wherein is both milke and beasts. And of this name Rus the vplandish mē haue their name and be called Rustici. For that was the first and idle felicitye of vplandish men. And also such a fielde is called Pascuus: for men that diuide and departe fieldes leaue such a field to their neighbours to pasture and to leeses. And Aluuius is a fielde, that is made a field little and little by drawing & ouer∣turning of riuers. And so Artihmus is a field that is not conteined in certaine measures of lines, but the endes thereof stretcheth to mountains, and Towres, & riuers. And so a field that is first eared is called Noualis, or a fielde that lyeth voyde euerye other yeare to renewe his vertue. For a field that is called Noualis beareth fruit once and resteth once with∣out fruit. Also sometime a field is called Squalidus, as it were Excolidus, & hath that name, for he passeth out of tilth, as Exconsul is he that leaueth the office of consull. Sometime the fielde is called V∣liginosus, yt is vnderstood alway moist: for that is sayd to be moist, that is some∣time drie. But Vligo is kinde humoure of land, that neuer passeth nor neuer fai∣leth. Huc vsque Isid. lib. 15. cap. 14. Then the field is a place of businesse, of trauell, and of sweate. For the fielde is ylled with trauaile, beaten and digged with tockes, dolue and turned with spades, opened & cared with cultures and shares, and sowen with seeds, raked and couered with rakes and harrowes, and moysted and watered with dew and with raine, closed about with hedges of thornes, strained in Winter with frost and with cold, and withered in summer with bur∣ning and with heate, and is filled in Springing time, and in Haruest time fruite is gathered, and the fieldes be ea∣red againe. And so the fielde is always trauailed with one trauaile or with o∣ther. Of Predium. cap. 50. PRedium is a field or demaine, that an husbande ordeineth for himselfe, and chooseth before all other, as Isidore saith. And properly it is a place, in which an husband buildeth his house and dwel∣ling place in the middle of his owne fieldes. Or it is called Predium, for that in olde time men held fieldes, that they tooke in battaile and in war, in the name of a pray, as Isidore sayth: and is called Predium, as it were Preuidium, puruei∣aunce. Of a Meede. cap. 51. A Méede hath plentie of heye to féede beastes with, and is called Pratum in Latine, and the olde Romanes gaue thereto that name: for it is a place alway ready and prest, and néedeth not trauel of tilling, as Isidore sayth. And such pla∣ces be called Prata, for they be alwaye readie to beare grasse and hey, and Prata, méedes, be watred and moysted with riuers, streames, and wells. And for plen∣tie of humours it giueth alway feeding and nourishing to moares and rootes of hearbes. And meedes be springed with hearbes and grasse, and flowres of diuers kind: and therefore for fairenesse & gréene springing that is therein, it is saide, that méedes laugh. Also méedes for they bée greene, they bée lyking to the sight, and for swéete odour, they bée liking to the smell, and feeding the tast with sauour of theyr hearbes and of theyr grasse. Hearbes and flowres of méedes giue ho∣nie to Bées, and bréed plentie of milke in beasts & in flocks, & heale woundes, and remedie against diuerse sicknesses and euills. Of Desart. chap. 52. DEsart is a space of land, and is called Desart: for it is forsaken of manye men to dwell therein, and to come therto: therefore men labour it not nor dwell therein, as Isidore saith: and that happe∣neth sometime, for the lande is barren, or for the ayre is not temporate, or for default of wells and water, or for de∣struction
made with enimies. And so de∣sart is not laboured, & is full of thornes and pricking bushes, and is place of cree∣ping wormes and venimous beasts, and of wilde beasts, and it is the lodges of va∣nished men and of théeues, land of thirst and drinesse, land of burning and disease, lande of wasting and of horrour, land of misgoing and of erring. For in desarte wayes bée vnknowen, for the downes and pathes be not worne nor troden, but they be growen and full of Broome, of furres, and of shrubbes, and of other bu∣shes without fruite, and the plaines bée full of grauell and of stones, of fenne and of cloddes, and of other lets that greeue trauailing men. And bée called Desarts, for they be not sowen, as Isidore sayth. And so places of woodes and moun∣taines, that bee not sowen be called De∣sertes: and also places that men dwelled in sometime, and be destroyed by some happe, bee oft called Desarts, as Isidore saith. Of Heremo. chap. 52. HEremus is a wayles wildernesse, and there dwell but fewe, excepte wilde beasts and fierce. Therfore men that de∣sire to dwell in wildernesse and out of mens sight and company, be called Her∣mites. And Heremus is declined He∣remus, Heremi, and hath that name of contrary meaning: For Hereo, heres, is for to say, to tarry and abide: For fewe men tarry & abide therein. Or Heremus is said, as it were cleaning land: for com∣monly land that is called Heremus, and Solitudo, is hard, fast, and sadde. In her∣mites place and solitarye, wilde beastes walke more freely, and abide more surely then in other places: for thicknesse of bushes and many woods, wild foules and Birdes sing there most sweetly, and also make their neasts. And for manye wilde beasts & foules haunt such places, though they bee solitarye: yet sometime hunters come thereto: and also there fowlers hide otten their grinnes and their nettes. Also men that inhabite in that place liue in much trauaile. For now they bée gree∣ued with Frost, and now with burning of heate, now falleth vppon them dewe, now raine, now hoare frost, and nowe Snowe. And they bee selde ouerset but haply by theeues or by hunters. Therfore these places of Hermits haue much gree∣uaunce & trauaile, neuerthelesse it hath a vauntage of commoditie and rest. Of a darke Caue. chap. 53. A Darke caue is called Antrum, & hath that name of Atro, blacke: for there∣in is blacke and feareful darknesse, as I∣sidore saith. And is properly a lurking and hiding place of beasts that dwell in tennes and hoales: therfore in such pla∣ces beastes lye and espie and waite their pray. Antrū is called Specus, a place to abide in, to waite, and to spie. And hath that name of Speculando, waiting and espieng. For ther they wait & espie beast∣ly, & spie their pray, as Isi. saith. And this place yt is called Antrum is colde in Sū∣mer & hot in winter, and necessarily for wild beasts to feed & to hide therin their broods & their whelps, & stinketh of sweat and vapours of beasts. Of a Ditch. chap. 55. DItch is called Fossa, and hath that name of Fodiendo, deluing: for it is a place made déep by strength and craft, and with wit of deluers mooued: And the more the lande is arreared aboue the brinke, the déeper the Ditch is within: And the more high and déepe the Ditch is, the more harde and perillous it is to passe ouer: for a man may soone fall ther∣in, and after the falling it is harde to a∣rise and come out of the Ditch, as Gre∣gory saith. Therefore also Ierome saith. super Ez. 19. yt a lion is taken in a ditch: for in the bottome of a ditch is a sheep or a Goat put, and by the smell thereof the Lyon commeth into the ditch because of pray: But when he is therein, he is there helde, that he may not go thence. Also by the ditch in the one side is a place digged, as it were a den: and therin is set a trap, as it were a coffer, ye closeth soone, and is hard to open. And when the lion seeth yt he may not passe out of ye first ditch, he drea∣deth
the comming of the hunter, and go∣eth into the second ditch, and is closed in the trap that is ordeined there: and so he is taken and held prisoner, as Hierome saith. Also ditches be néedfull, for with ditches cities and castles be strengthned against enimies. Also place of lands and bounds of mansiōs be departed with dit∣ches. And some ditches be full of water: and therein is fish nourished & créeping wormes of diuers kind. Therfore a ditch is called Fouea, as it were féeding and nourishing of liuing water. For in dit∣ches is water nourished and kept, both running and standing Water. Nowe come brookes therein, and now raine, and now well heads and streames of spring∣ing water spring and rise therein. And oft a ditch is the chiefe strength and suc∣cour of all fortresses, walled townes and castles, when the Ditch is arayed in good order in bredth, in length, in highnesse, & in deepnesse: to a place that is so streng∣thened is no comming, but if men passe ye ditch with filling and stopping, or by boate, or by bridge, as Hierome sayth. Of Spelunca. chap. 56. SPelunca is a Ditch or hollownesse vnder the earth: and hath that name Spelunca, of speculando, waiting & espi∣eng. For because of widenesse thereof it is an able place to abide in, & to behold & look about. And hath a wide mouth at en∣tring, and open toward the light, and a straightend within. And so spelunca is a place vnder the earth: first shewing light at the entring, and then darke & troubly in passing inwarde. And in the farther end hard & straight, and rough & ragged in the outgoing at the farther end: if so be that the out going may be found, as Da∣mascene saith. And namely in other pla∣ces there stones & mettals be digged and mined, be such hollowe ditches and dens vnder the earth, & left so hollow & void, when stones and mettalls be voided and taken thence. And the ouer part is vnder∣set with poasts & pillars, that it may not fal. But oft by great heauines of ye earth, those pillars be ouercharged, & fal for soft∣nesse of their owne matter: or the ground beneath is moist, and falleth, & the pillars fall, and so all those that be therin be de∣stroied and vtterly spilt. Therefore it is harde and perillous to abide in mines vnder the earth. For they are colde and moist, darke, vnstable, and vnhelthy. And they be rough, hard, and heauie aboue: & hollowe and déepe beneath. Also such places bée couenable to hiding and lur∣king of wilde beasts, and to put therein filth and vncleanenesse, and to dwelling and abiding of Serpentes and of other beasts. Of Cauerna. chap. 57. CAuerna is earth or lande digged and made hollowe, and hath that name of Cauando, digging and making hol∣lowe. For some parts of the earth be dig∣ged and made hollowe and departed a∣sunder with créeping wormes & beasts or with thrusting of parts, or with voy∣daunce and out casting. And in cauerns Mice and créeping wormes take theyr dennes and neasts, and flye therto, when they sée and dread perill or harme with∣out. Also to hollownesse of trées and of stones, sometime birds and foules flie, as Culuours and Turtles, when they dread the Egle and the hawke, comming in the aire. Also hedghoges, connies, and hares to hollowe stones, when they heare houndes, and knowe that hunters come. Also in holow holes and dens of the earth and of trées, Bées make honny, and some manner of foules make ther their neasts and lurke therein. Also in hollow dens lie Adders and Serpents that hurt and sting with venimous biting, man and beast, that come nigh to such dens. And more∣ouer when the earth is hollowe and full of dennes, it shaketh oft and mooueth by winds that come therein, that filleth the dens, and gendereth earth shaking there∣in, as Aristotle saith. FINIS LIBRI XIIII.
¶INCIPIT LIBR XV. DE PROVINTIIS. OF the parts of the earth, & of diuers prouinces, by the which the world is gene∣rally departed, somewhat by the helpe of God shall bée shortlye added to this worke. Wée will singularly intreate of them all, but onely of such, of which holy Scripture maketh oft remembrance. Of the world. cap. 1. THe world wide is departed in thrée, as Isidore saith li. 15. For one part is called Asia, another Europa, the thirde Affrica. These thrée parts of the world were assigned not like much in old time, by mē, for Asia stretcheth out of ye south by the East vnto the North. And Europa out of the North vnto the West: But Affrica stretcheth out of the West & pas∣seth by ye South, & Asia conteineth onely one part, yt is the halfe part of ye land that men dwell in: & the other two countries contein the other halfe. The great sea cō∣meth out of the Occean, & stretcheth be∣twéene these parts, & departeth thē asun∣der: therfore if thou diuidest the world in two parts, of the East & of the West: In one part is Asia, and in the other is both Affrica & Europa. And so Noes sonnes departed and diuided the world after the floud among them: Sem with his ofspring had Asiam, and Iaphet Europam, Cam Affricam, as the Glose sayth super Ge∣nes. 10. and super Par., 1. Gregory sayeth the same, and Plinius also. Of Asia. chap. 2. ASia is taken for the halfe part of the world, and had that name Asia of a woman that helde the kingdome of the East in olde time, as Isidore saith lib. 15. This Asia disposed into the third part of the world, hath by the East the rising of the Sunne, and by South Occean, and stretcheth vnto our Sea, and endeth by North at lake or marreyes, that is called Meotides, and at the floud Tanay. And hath many prouinces and regions, and diuers nations, and wonderful in liuing, manners, and figures and shapes of body, & be wonderfully diuers, in will, heart, & thought. Theyr names and places wee shall shortly set, following the order of A.B.C. Of Assiria. chap. 3. ASsiria is a Country and prouince of Asia, and hath that name of Assur the sonne of Sem, that first dwelled ther after the floud. This Prouince hath Indie in the East side, and stretcheth to ye country of Media in the South side: and hath in the West the riuer Tigris, and in the North the hill that is called mount Caucasus. Where be the gates of Cas∣pic, as Isidore sayth liber. 15. Also out of that country came first ye vse of porpute, the ointmentes both of haire and of bo∣dies: also odours and smells: and there∣of sprang the lecherye of Romanes, and of Greekes, as Isidore sayth. And is a land most temperate in temperate coun∣tries: But in many places in the vtter∣most ends from distemperate places, the land is vnpassible in beasts and serpents, & also in manners of men, as Psini. saith li. 3. Where he discribeth the creenesse of the men. The Assinalis dwelled in this prouince, & hath that name of Assur: they were most mightie people, and helde in olde time the middle country of the land from Euphrates vnto the ende of Indie, as Isidore saith. li. 19. (Additiō.Assyria, a region in Asia; called now Syria, in english Surrey, which marcheth on ye East vpon Indie, on ye West vpō ye
noble riuer of Tygris on ye south; it hath the country Media, on the North, the hil Caucasus. Assur a city in India, buil∣ded by king Salomon. Of Arabia. Chap. 3. ARabia is a Prouince of Asia, and is called the holy Prouince: for there groweth Thus, as Isidore sayth lib. 15. There is most plentie of Trées that beare frankensence, and other with swéet odour and smell. For the which fragrant and aromatike sauour, the Gréekes call it Eudemon, and the Latines Arabiam, that is vnderstoode blessed and holy, as he sayth there. And in farre parts of this Arabia growe most Mirre and Sina∣mum, and other medicinable things bee there in great plentie: There breedeth a Birde that is called Phoenix, and there is great multitude of other things, and of diuerse wilde beastes and Fowles. Al∣so in Arabia be diuerse precious stones, as Isidore sayth, Plimus and Orosius. There is as these Authours saye, thrée manner of Sardomes, and a precious stone that is called Ires, and manye di∣uerse precious stones in number bee found. And there be sounde many Dra∣gons, and some Adders, and in the heads of them be sound diuers precious stones. And in that land is Saba, and is so cal∣led of the daughter of Iupiter. And is a parte of the land of Arabia, stretching vpon the sea that is called Persie, & end∣eth towarde the sea that is called Mare Arabicum. Looke within in Saba. (Additiō.Arabia in Hebrew Saba, is a country in Asia, diuided into thrée regiōs, Petra, deserta, & Foelix, Petrea, (signifieng sto∣uie), marcheth on Aegypt and India. Plinie calleth it Nabathea, the chiefe Ci∣tie thereof is called Petra, now called A∣rach, in holy Scripture it is called Petra deserti. By this Countrey the children of Israel passed out of Aegypt, it is as strabo writeth, plaine, inwroned with Rockes of a greate height, wherein bée many springs of fresh water. Without the circoit toward India, the more parte of the Country is desarte without wa∣ter.) (AdditiōThere is the greate mountaine Sina, called of Ptholome Mnes, where the olde lawe was giuen to Moses, and where the bodye of the holye Uir∣gin Katherin was buryed. Also ano∣ther mountaine called Casius, where the greate Pompeius is buried. Ara∣bia deserta, of Strabo called Senaetis, hath on the South the mountaine of Arabia soelix, on the North Mesopotamia, on the West Petrea. The people of this Country haue no certaine habitation, but dwell in tents, Arabia soelix on the South, lyeth betwéene the two Seas Arabicum and Persicum, which is so plentifull, that it bringeth forth corne and fruites twice in the yeare. They haue plentie of all fruite and cattell, ex∣cept Horses, Mules, and Swine: of all Fowles, except Géese, Cocks, and Hens. And there groweth all kinde of Spices, and swéete gummes. The Townes are vnwalled, because the people doe liue al∣waye in peace. D. Cooper in Thesaurus.) Of Armenia. chap. 5. ARmenia hath the name of Armenus, the companion of Iason of Thessali, ye which whē he had left king Iason, he ga∣thered together the folke yt were sparpled abroad & tooke Armenia, & called it after his owne name, as Isi. saith li. 15. This is the land of Ararath, into ye which Senna∣cheribs sons fled when they had flame him in his praiers in ye temple of his own God, as the story telleth li. Pe.pri. And ye mount, vpon the which Noes ship rested after the floud, is called Ararath: and this Armenie is set betwéene mount Taurus & caucasi, & stretcheth frō Capadocia, to ye sea Caspium. And hath on ye North side ye Mountains Ceraunos, of ye which ye ri∣uer Tigris ariseth, as Isi. saith. There is two Armenias, ye ouer & the neather. And ther is two Pannonia, & in either of them is oft found wōders, & things wōderfully shapen: But there, wher ye land of Arme∣nie toucheth ye brinks & brime, of Tigris & of Eufrates, it is most fruitful wt herbs, corne, woods, & fruit. But it is full of di∣uers kinds of wild beasts and cruell, and
Serpents and Adders, as Isidore say∣eth. And Plinius speaketh much heereof libro. 2. (AdditiōArmenia, the name of two Regi∣ons. Maior and Minor Armenia maior hath on the North, Colehis, Iberia, and Albania on the West parte Capadocia: on the East part of the Hircan sea: on the South Mesopotamia: & the moun∣taine Taurus, Armenia minor hath on the North and West part CAPPADUCIA, on the East, the noble riuer Euphra∣tes, and Armenia minor, on the South parte the mountaine Taurus. The Ar∣menians were christened of late yeares, but now they be subiect to the Turkes, Latines, and Grecians: They haue one great Bishoppe, whom they call Catho∣licum, they kéepe holy neyther the Na∣tiuitie of Christ, nor his Baptisme, say∣eng, hee néeded not to be purged nor clen∣sed of sinne. Also they take from all Sa∣craments the vertue to conferre grace: They est-soones baptise those that  from the church of the Latines to them, sayeng, that they bée not of the Catho∣lyke sayth. They say that no man may bée christened, vnlesse he receiue the Sa∣crament of the Altar, and that infants néede not to be baptised, affirming that in them is no originall sinne: That the holy Ghost proceedeth of the Father, and not of the Sonne. That the Sacrament of the Altar maye not bee consecrate of bread cleane without leauen. Also in the consecration they put no water to wine: Moreouer, they saye that the receiuing of the Sacrament profiteth onelye the bo∣dye: That when Christ descended into hell, he led with him all the soules yt were there: That matrimony is no Sacramēt, and may be dissolued at the will of the man or woman: That Christ did rise the Saterdaye after good Fridaye: all these are saide to be their opinions, & are condemned as errours by sundrye coun∣sells.) Of Aradia. chap. 6. ARadia yt is called Aradine also, is an Iland yt is all one citie, & standeth in the sea of middle earth, not far from Ti∣rus, as ye Glose saith super locū illū s. 27. Children of Aradine in thine armie, &c. & be seemely men and cunning in bat∣taile of the sea. They of Aruad were with thine host round about the walls. Psa. 11. Of Albania. chap. 7. ALbania is a prouince of ye more Asia, & hath that name of the colour of men. For they be borne with white haire: and is a more colder land then other lands of Asia. This Albania hath in the East side the sea Caspium, & riseth by the coasts of the North Occeane: & stretcheth forth by full barren places & desart, to ye marreis that is called Paludes Meotides. In this land be great hounds, so huge in body & so fierce in heart, yt they throw down bulls, & stay lions, & ouercome & throw downe Elephauts, yt be strongest of huge beasts: Plimus sheweth an ensample of an hoūd of Albanie, that was sent to Alexander, & ouercame in a furlong a Lion, a Bore, and an Elephant, as he saith li. 8. cap. de cambus Albanie. And the men haue eien painted, and yeelowe in the blacke, that they sée better by night then by daye, as he saith, and Isidore also libro. 9. And Solinus telleth the same for mer∣uaile. (Additiō.Albania a County in Asia, hauing on the East ye sea Caspium, on the West Iberia, on the North the hills Caecasus. The people ther were first poore and sim∣ple, & as shepheards: not hauing know∣ledge of money, nor of anye number a∣boue one hundred, liuing by exchaunge, not knowing weight, measure, nor hus∣bandrye, and yet ready in warres. They honoured for God the Sunne and the Moone, hauing among them (as Strabo writeth) sixe and twentie languages, and as manye Kings. Of these people are supposed the Albanises that dwell in Morea, sometime called Peloponesus which be nowe vnder the Turke, or vn∣der the great Cane.) Of Attica. chap. 9.
ATtica is the same prouince, that was the olde Grecia, a parte or the Ci∣tie thereof was sometime called Athens.Athens  & fa¦mous vni¦uersity of Greece, and the place of eloquēce. And was sometime nourisher of Philo∣sophers, and mother of liberall lectures: and in Greece was nothing more noble, nothing more worthy, then that Citye, while it gaue businesse to study of loue of wit, and wisdome, as Plinius saith and Isidore li. 15. Plato of Athens was Doc∣tor of all the Prouince of Attica, yt was Grecia. (AdditiōAthenae the famous Citie of A∣thens, betweene Macedoma and Achaia, in the Sea coast, it once was called Actae, and after Attica. This (as Hy∣ginus sayeth) was first builded by Ce∣cropt, and called Cecropia, afterward by Mopsus, Mopsopia, and last of all A∣thens, of Minerua, whome the Gréekes call Athenam, for they reporte that Neptune and Minerua contended for the name, that it was agréed betwéene them, that he shoulde haue the name that gaue vnto mankinde, the wor∣thyest and most profitablest GIFFE, where∣vppon Neptune brought foorth an horse, and Minerua an Oliue tree. The mat∣ter beeing put to voyces which was ye most profitable, Neptune was cast by one voice, and gaue place vnto Mi∣nerua. This Uniuersitie was the in∣uentour and diuisour of all liberall Artes and Sciences, and the mother and nurse of all auncient Philosophers, Oratoures, and Poets: and therefore was called as it were the mart towne of all good learing, whether they resor∣ted to studye, out of all partes of the worlde. D. Cooper. The∣saurus.) Demosthenes with noble speaking made this Citye haue a great name, pas∣sing long time during, as Salustius say∣eth. But passing all other Ariopagita Saint Paules Disciple, commendeth and maketh famous this Citie. For by his greate wit and profounde wisedome hee lighted all partes of the worlde, as say∣eth Epiphanius in the commendation of Denis Ariopagite, and Isidore sayth the same. Of Achaia. chap. 9. AChaia a Prouince of Grecia in Eu∣rope, so named of a king, that was called Acheus in old time: This prouince is almost an Iland, for it is inuironed all about with the sea, except by North ther he ioyneth to Macedonia. For hée hath in the East side the sea Cirenen: & in the North East ye Gréekish sea, & in ye south the sea Ionium, & in the South & West the Ilands that be called Cassodie. And onely in ye North side it ioineth to Mace∣donia, and Achaia, that is Grecia. The chiefe Citie of that Prouince is Co∣rinthus, a place most strong, as Isidore sayeth. libro. 15. For vnneth is anye waye to come thereto for highnesse of place, and much solke, and for highnesse of the Sea, and also for strength of Walles. Corinthus, the sonne of Ho∣testes builded this Citie. And among the Gréekes this Citye is called Co∣rinthia, which is to vnderstande seruice of the common weale, as Isidore sayeth li. 16. (Additiō.Achaia a parte of Greece, CONTAYNING these countries, Attica, Floetia, Me∣garis, Aetholia, and Phosis, it hath on the West Epire, on the East the Sea Ae∣grum, on the North Macedonia, on the South the sea Creticum. There is another Achaia in Peloponesus, now called Morea, where was the citie of Pa∣tras, in which Saint Andrew the Apo∣stle was martyred.) (Additiō.Conrinthus, a famous, rich, and great city in Achaia, scituate in the nar∣row straight, entring into Peloponesus, nowe called Morea: By reason of the commodious scituation for resorte of merchaundise out of all Countryes, it was the greatest mart Towne in all the worlde, and thereby rose to so great wealth and power, that the Romanes beganne to suspecte and feare them, wherefore on a time, when with proude woordes they abused ye Romane Ambas∣sadours, (as Stra. writeth) they cast vrine on their heads, as they passed through the Citie, the Romanes taking therwith
great displeasure, sent there Captayne Mummius against them, who besieged the Citie, and within short space, so de∣stroyed it, that scantly anye token of so noble a citie which in few yéeres remai∣ned: At the burning of it, so many rich and costly Images, of sundrye sortes of mettall were melted, that thereof after was founde a kinde of precious brasse, called Aes Corinthum, which long time after was had in great estimation. This scornefull Corinth and rich citie was de∣stroyed about the yere of the world.3818 before the comming of Christ .1 45. yéers. Lanquet in his Cronicle.) Of Archadia. chap. 10. ARchadia is a Prouince set betwéene the Sea Ionium, and the Sea Egeum, as Isidore saith. Archas, Iupiters sonne put out the men yt dwelled in this land, and called the land Archadia by his own name. And afterward the land was cal∣led Sicionia, of a king which is called Sicionius, as Isidore saith. li. 15. (Additiō.Archadia a Country in Gréece set in the middle of Peloponesus, or Morea, so called of Archas the son of Iupiter, who reigned there. It was also called Pelasgia, Parrhasia and Liconia, there was the Bagpipe fist inuented. Also the senne Leina, where Hercules slewe the Serpent Hydra, is there: with the riuer Grymanthus, a mountaine of the same name, there is also sound the stone Abe∣ston, which being once hotte may ne∣uer be quenched, and is of the coulour of yron.) Of Alania. Chap. 11. ALania is the first part of Cilicia, that is the first and most land & Country of Europa, the which Europa beginneth from the riuer of Tanay, and stretcheth downewarde and Westwarde by the North Occean, vnto the end of Spaine, ye Southeast part therof stretcheth vpward from the sea Pontus, & is ioyned all to ye great sea: And is ended at the Ilande yt be called Gads, as Isid. saith li. 10. And so Alania is the first part of Cilicia:  Alania stretcheth frō ye marreis Paludes Meotides, vnto Denmarke, and is a sall broad lande, and conteineth many fierce and strong nations, and is vnder a colde Clima, and lyeth fromwarde the East to∣ward the North. Of Amazonia. chap. 12. AMazonia, womens land, is a Coun∣try, parte in Asia, and parte in Euro∣pa, and i nigh Albania, and hath that name of Amazonia, of women yt were the wiues of the men that were called Goths, yt which men went out of the ne∣ther Scithia, as Isidore saith li. 9. & were cruelly slaine, and then their wiues tooke their husbands armour and weapon, and téesed on the enimies with manly heart, & tooke wreake of the death of their hus∣bands. For with dent of woord they flew all the young meles, and olde men and children, and saued the females, and de∣parted prayes, and purposed to liue euer after without companye of males. And by ensample of theyr husbandes that had alway two kings ouer them, these women ordeyned them two Quéenes, that one was called Marsephia, and that other Lampeta, that one shoulde tra∣uaile with an hoast and fight against e∣nimyes, and that other should in ye meane time gouerne and rule the communal∣ties. And they were made so fierce war∣riours in short time, that they had a great parte of Asia vnder theyr Lordshippe nigh an hundred yeares, among them they suffred no male liue neither abide in no manner wise. But of nations yt were nigh to them they chose hus bandes be∣cause of children, and went to them in times that were ordeined, and conceiued children, and when the time was done that was ordeined to the office of con∣ception: then they would compell theyr louers to go from them, & get other pla∣ces to abide in, & would slay their sons, or sende them to theyr Fathers in cer∣taine times. And they saued their daugh∣ters, & taught them to shoot and to hunt. And for the shot of arrowes should not be let with great breasts, in the seauenth
yeare (as it is sayde) they burnt off their breasts, and therefore they were called, Amazones, that is to vnderstand with∣out breasts, as Isidore sayeth lib. 9. In olde tune men called them, Vnimam∣mat. And as it is said, Hercules adaun∣ted first the fiercenesse of them, and then Achilles: but that was more by friend∣ship than by strength, as it is contay∣ned in déedes and doing of Greekes, and the Amazones wer destroyed & brought to death by great Alexander  the story of Alexander sayth not so  but it is sayd, that Alexander demaunded tri∣bute of the Quéene of Amazons, and she wrote to him againe by messengers, in this manner. Of thy wit I wonder, that thou pur∣posest to fight with women, for if For∣tune be on out side, and if it happen that thou be ouercome, then art thou shamed for euermore, when thou art ouercome of women: and if our Gods be wroth with vs, and thou ouercommest vs, it shall turne thée to little worship, that thou hast the mastrie of women. The noble King wondred on hir an∣swere, and said, that it is not séemely to ouercome women with sword and with woodenesse, but rather with fairnesse and with loue, & therefore he graunted them fréedome, and made them subiect to his Empire, not with violence, but with friendship and with loue. ¶As concerning the Amazones, for the better credite of so straunge a mat∣ter, I finde set forth in the Araso∣take, of Andrew Theuet: which booke, he dedicated vnto Monsig∣neur Francois, Gonte de la Roche∣foucand. Anno .1558. Chap. 63. AdditionTHe Spaniards did so much by theyr iourneyes, that they arriued in a Countrey, whereas were inhabiting A∣mazones,Amazons of Ame∣rica. the which would neuer haue ben thought: for that Historiographers haue made thereof no mention, because they knew not this countrey late found out. Some may saye, that they are not Amazonists, but as for me. I iudge them such, séeing that they liue euen so, as we finde the Amazonists of Asia to haue li∣ued. You shall vnderstand, that these A∣mazones of which we speake, are rety∣red, inhabiting in certaine Ilands, which are to them as strong holds, hauing al∣wayes perpetuall warre with certayne people, without any other eterie, euen as those of whom former writers haue mentioned. These warlike womē of out America being fortified on Ilandes, are most commonly asseyled of their Ene∣mies the barbarous Indians, that aryue on the shores of these Amazones, with barkes and other vesselles of a straunge forme, whereof some are of the skinnes of beasts, set out & stiffened with a kinde of slender frame: with these they assay∣led their enimies, they fight with bowes and arrowes, the women defende them with the like courage, vsing a straunge kinde of our crieng noyse: they make their bulwarkes with the shels of Tor∣teyles, which be very great and strong. I finde by the , that ther are three sorts of Amazones all alyke differing onely in places & dwellings. The most auncient sort were in Affrica, among yt which were Gorgonists, yt had Meduse for their Quéene. The other wer in Sci∣thia, néere to the riuer of Tanais, which since haue reigned in a part of Asia, néere to the riuer Hermodon. And the thirds sort of Amazones, are those which wée doe troate of. There is diuers opinions why they were called Amazones: the most common is, for because that these women did burne their breast  theyr youth to be more apt in warre, ye which I finde very straunge, and report me to medicines, whether they can burne those parts without death, knowing the ten∣dernesse of the flesh, and the restenesse to the heart. As concerning the Etimo∣loglae of this vowell. A priatiue, and of Maz that signifieth bread, for that they liue not with bread but with other things, which is as absurd as the other, for in that time they might ll manye that lyued without bread; Amazones, as the Troglodifes, and many others. In like manner all the Indians. The word Mazo signifieth nourishes with∣out womans milke, the which is most
likest to be true. Howsoeuer it is, these women are named warlike. Moreouer, ye shall note, that the Scythians, which we call Tartarians, being driuen out of Aegypt, subdued the greater part of A∣sia. In the meane time, the Scythians absenting themselues too long frō theyr wiues, and although being requested to make returne: regarded more the hoped victorie in Asia, than the companye of their wiues, was the cause of so strange & diuision, as is now discouered of. These wiues voyde of hope, and head strong in furie, chose two chiefe Gouer∣nours ouer them, Lampedo & Marthe∣sia, that they, not onely defending theyr country from inuasion of their enemies, in maintaning their libertie: but also made many Conquests in Europe and Asia, euen vnto the riuer Hermodon. These women to maintaine their poste∣ritie, did offer themselues to their neigh∣bours, without any other kinde of ma∣riage, and of the fruite that procéeded, they killed the males, and reserued the females for warres, their weapons wer bowes and arrowes.The ori∣ginall of Amazons of Ameri¦ca, are vn∣certaine. The Amazones of America inhabite in little lodgings, like boothes or Cotages. They vse the com∣pany of men secretly and by night (for increase) they kill the males,Supposed the scarre red brood of Pātesil¦la, vvhich vvas at ye destructiō of Troia. and they traine vp the female children to the ex∣ercise of shooting. When in fight, they take anye of their enimies, they hang them vp, tied by one leg or arme to trées on the top boughs, and so shoote them through with many arrowes. These flocking together, greatly amazed the Spaniards, who saluted them with Gun shot, to ye spoile of many of those women. ¶Of Almania. Cap. 13. ALmaine is a noble Countrey and a worthy in Europe, & hath that name of the riuer Lemanus beyond Danubius oud, as Isidore saith, wher men of that land dwelled, & wer called Alemanni, & haue that name of the riuer Lemanus, & this land is called Germanie also, as Isi. saith li. 15: There he saith yt after Den∣marke, that is ye end of the nether Siria, cōmeth Germanie, & hath in ye East side the riuer Danubius, in ye South ye riuer Rhene, & in the North & west ye sea Oc∣cean. And there be two Germanies, the ouer that stretcheth to the high moun∣taines, that be commonly called Alpes, into the sea of middle earth or Adriati∣cum, where the great sea endeth & stin∣teth in the Country Aquilia, by ye mar∣rise therof. The other Germanie is a∣bout the riuer Rhenum. And either Ger∣many is a rich land & noble of strength, and of riches, and of men that be good warriers, and for plentie of gendring of people, it is called Germany, as Isi. saith li. 15. for it gendreth gerise & huge people. And Isid speaketh of them & saith: that the nations of Germany be many, and haue huge bodies, and be strong & migh∣tie, bolde and hardie of heart, and wilde, occupied with houndes turning on hun∣ting, faire of face, and well shaped with long haire and yeolow lockes, free of heart, mercy and glad, & namely Saxons, that passe other in those foresayd things. Isid. speaketh of them and sayth: That the nations of Saxons is set in the ends and cliffes of Occean, and be full swifte and mightie, and be called Saxons, for they are most strongest kinde of men; & better than other on the sea, for they pur∣sue not their enemies onely on land, but also on sea. They pursue them ye grieue them, as they were wood, they are strong and hardy, their lands be full of fruite, & moist with water, and with best riuers. Also in their mountaines be myned all manner mettals, except tinne. Also in ei∣ther Germany be other prouinces, that be not lesse worthy, as Astria, Bauaria, about ye riuer Danubius, & sueuia & Al∣satia about the riuer Rhenum, & manye other, yt it were too much to rehearse thē. Of the Saxons of Germany came ye En∣glishmen & their Ofspring, & had the I∣land Brittaine in possession. English mē follow their language & maners in ma∣ny things yet vnto this day, as Beda saith li. de gestis Anglotū. Looke with∣in this letter. S. de Saxonia. (Additiō.Germany, is a country called of some Dutchland, of some Almaine. It is de∣scribed by Ptholome ye 12. cha. to be boun∣ded on ye west with the riuer of Rhene:
On the North, with the sea Germanicus Oceanus. The Southwest part with the riuer Donowe, vnto the hills of Sarma∣tia. The name of Germany extendeth now farther: for there are contained, many great Countries and cities, which sometime were part, of Gallia Belgica, that is to say, from the riuer of Rhene, Westward, vnto our Sea, Mare Brita∣nicum.) (Additiō.Ancon is a parte of the Riuer of Nilus: also a notable Citie and hauen in Italy, in the Country Picenum, which standeth vpon the sea Adriaticum: and was so called because the Sea-bankes there, doe bend in formelyke to an arme with the elbowe. It was first buyl∣ded by People of Syracusis, afore the incarnation of Christ .179. yeares. And the hauen was augmented by the noble Tranus Emperour of Rome. After it was destroyed by Saracens, and eft soones builded and inhabited, and is now a fa∣mous Citie.) (Additiō.Anwarpe, a notable Mart towne, in Brabant, called Antwerpia, of sūptu∣ous & faire building, very rich in merchā∣dize. The inhabitants of late yeres, sur∣mounting in attire and banquetting, are somewhat giuen to drunkennesse and le∣chery.) Of Anglia. cap. 14. ENgland is the most greatest Iland of the Occean, and is inclosed all about with the sea, & departed from ye roundnes of the world, and was called sometime Albion: and had that name of white Rockes, which were séene on the Sea cliffes. And by continuaunce of time, Lords and noble men of Troye, after that Troye was destroyed, went from thence, & were accompanied with a great nauie, and fortuned to the cliffes of the foresaid Iland, & that by Oracle of theyr fained Goddesse Pllas, as it is sayd. And the Troyans fought with Giaunts long time that dwelled therin, and ouer∣came the Giaunts both with crafte and with strength, and conquered the Iland, and called the Lande, Britaine by the name of Brute that was Prince of that Hoaste, and so the Ilande is named Britaine, as it were an Ilande con∣quered of Brute, that time with armes and with might. Of this Brutes Of∣spring came most mightie Kings. And who that hath lyking to knowe their déedes, let him read the Storye of Brute. And long time after the Saxons wan the Iland with manye and diuers harde battailes and strong, and their Ofspring had possession after them of the Iland, & the Britons were slaine or exiled & Sax∣ons departed the Iland among them, & gaue euery prouince a name, by the pro∣pertie of his owne name and nation, and therefore they called the Iland An∣glia, by the name of Engelia ye Quéene, the worthiest Duke of Saxons daugh∣ter, that had the Iland in possession af∣ter many battailes, Isid. sayth, that this land is Anglia and hath that name of Angulo, a corner, as it were lande sette in the ende or a corner of the world. But Saint Gregory séeing English chil∣dren to sell at Rome, when they were not christened, and hearing that they wer called English children: according with the name of the countrey, he aunswered and sayd. Truly they be English, for they shine in face right as Angells, it is néede to sende them message with word of saluation: for as Beda sayth, the no∣ble kinde of the Land shone in their fa∣ces. But of this land Plinius and Oro∣sius speaketh much. Isidore sayeth and toucheth in some more opēly, than other, that speake thereof more darklye. Bri∣taine, that now is called Anglia, is an Iland set afore Fraunce and Spaine, & cōtaineth about xlviii. times .lxxv. miles. Also there be many riuers and great, & hot welles. There is great plentie of mettalls, ther be plentie of the stones A∣gates, and of Pearles: the grounde is speciall good, most apt to boare corne and other good fruite. There be namely ma∣ny shéepe with good wooll, there be many Harts and other wilde beasts: there bée fewe wolues or none, therefore there be many shéepe, and maye be safelye lefte without ward in pasture and in fieldes, as Beda sayth.
Therefore one describeth the Englysh land in metre, as it followeth. Anglia terra ferox, & fertilis, angu∣lus orbis. Insula praediues, quae toto vix eget orbe. Et cuius totus indiget orbis ope. Anglia plena iocis, gens libera, apta iocari. Libera gens, cui libera mens, & libera lingua. Sed lingua melior liberior{que} manus. These verses shew, that England is a strong land and sturdie, and the plen∣teoust corner of the worlde, so rich a land that vnneth it néedeth helpe of any land, and euery other land néedeth helpe of England. England is full of mirthe and of game, and men oft times able to mirth and game, frée men of heart and with tongue, but the hand is more bet∣ter, and more frée than the tongue. And he accounteth much other wor∣thinesse, both of the men and of the I∣land, which were too long to set héere all arowe. Looke within the chap. of Brit. (Additiō.Anglia, the realme of England, part of the Ile called Britaine. The people are called Angli, of a people of Saxony, which wer at ye time most of reputatiō, & therefore their name longest continu∣ed, as well in the people as in the coun∣trie. Read more thereof in Brit. as fol∣loweth cha. 28.) ¶Of Aquitania. chap. 15. THe Countrey of Aquitania, Guyan, is a Prouince of Gallia in Europe, as Isidore sayth lib. 15. And hath that name Aquitania, of bending and wind∣ing waters of the riuer of Leyre, which is the boundes of that lande in manye places, and compasseth it nigh all about, and is a fruitfull land, merry and noble, with townes, cities, castles and towers, moyst with waters and faire Riuers, Woodes, fieldes, gardeines, and medes, set with vines and with vineyards, with trées and fruite of diuers kindes, riche with diuers riches. Many perticulars are contayned vn∣der this name Aquitania, as Plinius sayeth. This lande hath in the Northe west side the Sea Occean, as Orosius sayeth, and that Coast of the Sea is called the Gyanish Sea: & hath Spaine in the west side, and Gallia Lugdunen∣sis in the North and in the East, and stretcheth to the Prouince of Narbon, in the Southeast, and in the South, as Orosius saith. (Additiō.Aquitania, Guyan, accompted to be the thirde part of Fraunce, hath on the West the Occean sea, on the North the riuer of Loyre, or (as Cesar writeth) the riuer of Gerond, on the East the parte of Fraunce called Lugdunensis: on the South, the mountaines Pireuei, which deuided Fraunce from Spaine. Albeit a parte thereof, containeth Gascoyne, Foix, Bigor, and a fewe Countreyes more.) ¶Of Andegauia. chap. 16. ANgeo is a Prouince of Fraunce, and nigh to Gyan, and stretcheth vnto li∣tle Britaine, and the chiefe Citie there∣of is called Andegauis, and by the name of that Citie, all the Prouince about is called Andegauia, and this land beareth wine and fruite, and is rich of all fruite and goods, and is like to Aquitaine with vineyards and fruite. ¶Of Aluernia. chap. 17. ALuerne is a Prouince of Fraunce Lugdunens, the chiefe citie thereof is called Mounte clere. This hath Germa∣ny in ye northeast side, & Italy is in the South side, & the prouince of Narbon in the west, & that part of Fraunce that is called Gallia Belgica in the north: & is a land with many woods & trées, with mountaines & pasture, and beastes tame and wilde, with fruite, corne & wine in many places. Of Apulia. chap. 18. APulia is a Countrey vpon the sea in Italy, that is a parte of Europe, and is departed from ye Ile of Cecilla, by an arme of ye sea, & is a land wt much folk, with gold & siluer, wt much swéet oyle,
and wine, & is noble & strong with noble cities, castles & townes, & is plenteous, & beareth corne, & fruit, & is the end of Eu∣rope against the South, and is departed from Barbary onely by the sea. And it is sayd, that therein be hot wells, which be medicinable to sicke men. The chiefe citie of that land is called Brundusium. The Gréeks builded that citie somtime, and it hath that name of Brunda in Gréeke, that is to vnderstande, Hartes head: For that Citie is shaped as an Hartes head with hornes, and so dispo∣sed, as Isidore saith libro. 16. cap. de no∣minibus ciuitatum. Beside this land ly∣eth a land that is called Campania, mo∣ther of corne and of fruite: & by plen∣tie thereof, many prouinces be sustained both on this side of the great sea, and also on that other side. (AdditiōApulia, Puel a part of Italy, borde∣ring on the sea Adriaticum, a countrey populous, and hath in it manye townes and castles, abundaunce of Corne, wine, Oyle, and good Coursets for the warre. The chiefe citie therof, is Brunducium. There is also the mount of Saint Mi∣chael, called Garganus. This Countrey is called by other names, as Iapigia, Messapia, Calabria, and Salentina. The people are called Apuli.) ¶Of Affrica. Cap. 19. AFfrica, as some men meane, hath that name, as it were Aprica: for it is cléere and open to heauen, and to the Sunne, for it receiueth no strong cold, as Isidore. saith lib. 15. Other men meane, that Affrica hath that maine of Affer, the sonne of Abraham, begot on Cethu∣ra. And it is sayd, that he conducted an hoast toward Libia, and ouercame his e∣nemyes, & dwelled there, & called them that came there afterwarde, Affros, as Isidore sayeth libro. 9. &c. And Affrica beginneth at the endes of Aegypt, and stretcheth by the South and by Aethio∣pia, vnto mount Athlante, and is be∣clypped in the North, with the sea of middle earth, and endeth in the sea Ga∣diad. This lande is called the thirde part of the world, and is diuided against Asia and Europa. In this Affrica bée many Prouinces, as Libia, Cyren, Tri∣pol, Bizaneicum, Carthage, Mauritania, Aethiopia, and many other. And that part of the world that is called Affrica, is lesse in space, than Asia or Europa: but to the quantitie thereof, it is more rich and more wonderfull in qualitie, for it is more rich of golde and of pre∣cious stones, and also of fruite, of Corne, and of Olyues. Also therein be manye wonderfull kindes, figures and shapes, of men and of beastes, which shall bée knowen, when the Countreyes of Af∣frica be described by their owne names. And is more burned with the heate of the Sunne, than other landes, and is in∣uironed with diuers endes of the Occe∣an, and is barraine in many places, be∣cause of heapes of grauell, and therein be Satires, Woodwoses, Tigers, and horrible beasts, as it shall be more kno∣wen after. (Additiō.Affrica, the third part of the world, wherein is Carthage, Numidie, and all the countries now called Barbary, and also the great countrey called Aethio∣pia. Affrica semper aliquid noui ap∣portat. A Prouerbe applyed to vncon∣stant and wauering persons, neuer content with one state, but alwayes de∣sirous of nouelties. The most noble cap∣taine Scipio, was called Affricanus, be∣cause he subdued that country, and con∣quered Annibal, & the people of Affrica was named, Scipio Affricanus Maior. This Publius Cor, Scipio was a Ro∣mane. ¶Of Asturia. Cap. 20. ASturia is a Prouince of the hether Spaine, in the march of Europe and Affrica, as Isidore saith lib. 15. And so they that dwell nigh the riuer Histuri∣um, be called Astures. Their country is closed about welnigh with woodes and mountaines, as he saith. Onely the peo∣ple of ye land, be more pleasing in heart and will, and more frée of heart, & more goodly than other. The Citie is called, Metro. In that lande is scarse of wine, of wheate, and of oyle.
For the land is colde and not full able to beare such corne and fruite, but there is passing plentie of myle and of chest∣ns. It is said that there growe many manner fruite and apples, of which they make them drinke in stéed of wine, and also they be most rich of beastes, wilde and tame. And (as it is saide) the people is more generallye and kindlye merry and glad, with noble voyce to sing, and swift in course and in running, strong and hardie in battaile, séemely of kinde, faire of shape, after the dispositi∣on of the country and of their land: they be light of tongue to speake to scorne o∣ther men. (Additiō.Asturia a countrey in Spaine, be∣twéene Galitia and Portugall: which sometime was famous for mynes of golde, and ambling hackneies called A∣stureones. D. Cooper in Thesaurus.) ¶Of Aragonia. chap. 21. ARagonia is a Prouince in Spaine, with plentie of Uineyardes, and of corne, moyst with Wells and with Ri∣uers. Aragothes dwelled therein some∣time, and of them the Country hath the name yet to this day. For the Nations of Gothes, dwelled in that Prouince sometime: and so Aragonia is sayd, as it were Aragotha, as Isidore sayeth. The riuer Hiberus runneth there, the chiefe Citie thereof is called Cesar Au∣gusta. (Additiō.Augusta Cesarea, a citie in Spaine, vpon the riuer Iberus. Iberia, the aun∣cient name of Spaine.) ¶Of Babilonia. chap. 22. BAbilonia is a Prouince of Asa in Chaldea. In the head thereof is the Citie Babylon, of whom the lande hath the name, and is called Babylonia: and was so noble that Chaldea, Assiria, and Mesopotamia passed into the name ther of sometime, as Isidore saith li. 15. Most noble riuers run thereby, among whom the chiefe riuers are Tigris and Eufra∣tes, that spring out of Paradise. And it is the best lande to beare all manner of Corne and fruite, and wine, and it is ful of swéete spices, hearbes, and trées, and most rich of precious stones, and of di∣uers mettalls, with most plentie of Ca∣mells, Horses, Asses, and Mules, & other beasts. Therin is plentie of wild beasts and wonderfull, & wonderfully shapen, and namely in Desart place. The chiefe Citie thereof, was called sometime Ba∣bylon, that is to vnderstand, confusion: for the language was confounded of them; that buylded the tower Babel, as it is sayd, Ge. 11. Ierome super Esay. 11. describeth the greatnesse thereof, & saith, that Babylon is the chiefe Citie of the Chaldes, the walls thereof were xvi. M. paces in square from corner to corner, that maketh in all lxiii. M. paces, and so the wals were accounted for two leages and an halfe. Also there was a Tower, of thrée thousand paces high, which con∣taineth of high two leages batred in bredth. The matter thereof was made of vurnt tyle, that may not be departed nor vndound, & therfore it might not be destroied with fire nor with water: & for there was confusion of language, it was called Babel in Hebrew, and Babylon in Gréeke: and thereof all the lande a∣bout hath the name, and is called Babi∣lon. And there raigned somtime ye most mightie King Nabuchodonosos, among other nations of the world, that is made subiect to the Empire of Chaldes, hée made also Iewry thrall, and therefore in his Neuewes time Balthasar, Babylon was all destroyed by Cyrus and Darius Kings of Persia and Medes, and it was neuer buylded againe, but of the spoyle thereof were two Cities buylded, that one was called Sephon, as Ier. sayth. And the place that Babylon was in, is desart, and norisheth nothing but beasts wonderfully shapen. Looke afterward, in Chaldea. (Additiō.Babilonia, the Countrey wher the Citie of Babylon stoode, on the North it is bounded with Mesopatamia: on the West, with Arabie the Desart: on the East, with Susian: on the South, with the Red sea. In this Countrie is Chal∣dea, on the which standeth the great Ci∣tie
Babylon, and signifieth confusion or mixture. It was the name of a To∣wer builded by Nemroth, before the in∣carnation .2741. yeres. At the building héereof, was ye first confusion of tongues. This was done in the land of Sennaar, in the countrey of Chaldea. The Tow∣er was in height fiue miles, one hundred seauentie paces. Afterwarde the Citie was inlarged by Semiramis. It contai∣ned in compasse sixtie miles. The wals were in height thrée hundred féete, in thicknesse of breadth seuentie fiue féete, and had an hundred gates of Brasse. There ranne through the middle of it, the famous Riuer Euphrates. D. Coo∣per in Thesaurus.) ¶Of Bactria. chap. 23. BActria, is a Countrey in Asa, and hath that name of a Riuer, that is therein, that is called Bactrus, as Isido. sayth libro 15. The plaine parts there∣of that beare corne, are compassed about with mountaines. The contrarye parts to those, the riuers of Inde close about, and the other deale, the Riuer Ochus incloaseth. And therein are Camelles, most strong, that neuer stomble, as Isi∣dore sayth. (Additiō.Bactria a Citie in the farthest part of Persia, the People whereof are cal∣led Bactri, and Bactriani, in whome is such inhumanitye, that when theyr Parentes be verye sicke or olde, they throw them vnto fierce Dogges, which doe rent them in péeces, and deuoure them. The women of that Countrey vse sumptuous apparayle, with swéete Oyntments, and other riche attyre, and are of their Seruauntes more obayed, and reuerenced than the men are. They neuer come abroad, but on Horse back, with riche Ornamentes of Precious stones and Iewells. Chastitie they re∣garde not, but make themselues, com∣mon both to theyr Seruauntes, and to Straungers, theyr Husbandes finding no fault thereat, ouer whome they séeme to haue dominion.) Of Braciana. chap. 24. BRaciana, is a Countrey in Affrica, and hath that name, of two most noble Townes: that one is called An∣dromethus, and that other Byzancium. This lande is plenteous in Corne and in Oyle. The grounde thereof is so fat. that séede that is sowen therein, increa∣seth and multiplyeth it selfe an hundred folde, as Isidore sayeth, libro. 15. ¶Of Bragmanis looke in the end of this Booke. (Additiō.Byzantium, a Citie of Thrare, now called Constantinople, sometime buylded by Pausanias Duke of Spar∣tans. The Inhabitants whereof were called Byzantij: afterward, it was aug∣mented by Constantine the Emperour, and was the chiefe and head of all the Empire Orientall. It is now vnder the Turke, who wanne it the yeare .1453.) ¶Of Brabantia. chap. 25. BRabant is a Prouince in the ende of Germanye, and stretcheth to the Countrey of Fraunce, that is called, Gallia Belgica, and hath the Riuer of Rine & Frisia, in the East side, & Brit∣tish & Flaunderish Occean in the North side, and the nether Fraunce in the west side, and the higher Fraunce in the South side. And the water that is cal∣led Mosa runneth by this land, & Scal∣dia the Riuer, entering with floud and ebbe of the Sea, with diuers other smal riuers & fountaines, that moist the land. This lande in much parte thereof is apte for Uines, it is heighted with Woodes, Downes, Meddowes, and Or∣chardes: it aboundeth of trées that beare fruite, of beastes wilde and tame, as hartes, wilde boares, hares and connies: & in this land be many famous townes. This lande beareth well fruit, and is ful of men of séemelye stature, and fayre of shape: and be men of warre, bolde & har∣die against their enimies, pleasing & qui∣et among themselues, deuout men, good∣ly and benigne.
(Additiō.Mosa Fluuius, a riuer which is cal∣led the Maze, and runneth betwéene the Dutchye of Brabant, and the lande of Luke. ¶Of Belgica. chap. 26. BElgica is a Prouince of Fraunce in Europe, and hath that name of a ci∣tie, that is called Belgia, as Isidore sai∣eth lib. 9. This Prouince (Orosius say∣eth) hath Germany, and the Riuer of Ryne on the East side, and the moun∣taines that are called Alpes Pennine, in the North east side: and the Pro∣uince of Narbon is in the South side. Therein is the Citie of Arelatensis, & hath the Prouince of Lugdunensis in the West, and the Brittish Sea in the North west and Britaine, that is Eng∣land, in the North side. This lande is plenteous of corne and of fruite, and beareth wine in many places, and is ful of men, and is strengthened with Cities and with townes. And the men he fierce by kinde, as Isidore sayeth libro. 9. The men be bolde and hardye, the lande is moyst with waters and Riuers, and faire with plenteous fieldes, and woods, and meades, and full of noble beastes, with fewe beastes wonderfully shapen, with few venemous beasts except frogs & Adders. And generally and commonly this lande is peaceable and quiet, and this land of Belgica, hath many diuers people and countreyes, with somewhat diuers language. (Additiō.Belgae, The people that inhabite the Countreyes and Townes, incloa∣sed with the Occean sea, and the Riuers of Rhene, Mame and Seyne, wherein be the Cities of Tryre, Coleyne, Ma∣gunce and Reynes. Also the Countryes of Flautiders, Hollande, Gelderlande, Iuliers, Cleues, Henawe, part of Frie∣land, Picardie, the greatest part of cam∣paine, and all the Forest of Arderne. It was sometime called, Gallia bel∣gica.) ¶Of Bithinia. chap. 27. BIthinia, (as Isidore sayeth) is a Prouince of the lesse Asa, in the be∣ginning of the Sea that is called Pon∣tus towarde the East, and lyeth afore Th, and hath had manye names some time, for it was first called, Bi∣thica, and afterwarde Bithinia, and had that name of a King that was cal∣led Bithinius. This is the more Phri∣gia, and the chiefe Citie thereof, was called Nicomedia: thether Hannibal, Prince of Carthage fledde, and dyed with venyme, as Isidore sayeth libro. 15. Fenix buylded first Bithinia, that was first called, Miramunda, as Isi∣dore sayeth. (Additiō.Bithinia, a Realme in Asa, which now the Turke hath: on the North, it hath the Sea called Ponticum: on the South, Mists, and Phrigis. It was called also Bebrytia, and after Myg∣bonia. Nicomedia a noble Citie in Bithi∣nia, where Constantinus Magnus the Emperour dyed. It is now called of the Turkes, Nicho. Hannibal the sonne of Hamilcar, the most noble and valyaunt Capitaine of the Carthaginensis who making warre with the Romanes sixtéene yeares, con∣tended with them in prowesse and pol∣licie, winning from them theyr Domi∣nions in Spaine and Italy. Finallye, béeing vanquished by Scipio, he fledde to Antiochus King of Asa, afterwarde to Prusias King of Bithinia; of whom vnder the coulour of amitie he was be∣trayed, and shoulde haue bene deliuered to Fleminius, that time Embassadour to Prusias: But Annibal perceiuing it, choosing rather to dye, than to come in∣to the handes of the Romanes, tooke poyson, which he had kept for that pur∣pose, sayeng: Let vs delyuer the Ro∣manes from the axe mid feare, which they haue of vs, with a fewe wordes of indignation, and so dyed, before he might be deliuered. D. Cooper. ¶Of Britania. chap. 28. BRitaine is an Ilande of Occean, in Europe, and stretcheth foorth along, and hath Fraunce in the South side, as Orosius sayeth.
This lande hath in length the space of foure score myle, and in breadth two hundred miles, and in that place there is the endlesse Occean Sea. There are the Ilandes Orchades: twentie of them are Desarte, and thirtéene be inhabited. Then commeth the Ilande Tyle, seuen dayes sayling from thence, as Plinius sayeth libro. 4. and Isidore. 15. AdditionThis Ilande Tyle, was thought to be the vtmost Ile in the West. And this Ilande Tyle, is departed farre from the Ilande of Britains, as Orosius sayeth, towarde the North, Northwest, and standeth in the middle Occean, and is knowen but to few men, for it is so farre in the Sea, as Plinius saith libro. 4. chap. 17. This Britayne lyeth betwéene the North and the west, afore Germany, Fraunce and Spaine, with right farre way betwéene. First this land was called Albion, and hadde that name for cause of white rockes and cragges that be about the land. After∣ward it had another name of Brute, and was called Britaine. And at the last it was called Anglia, and had that name of Germaines that dwelled there. Lake before in Littera A. of Anglia. Also another lesse Britaine is vpon the Occean of Gyan, in the countryes of Fraunce. In that lesse Britayne dwelte and doe yet vnto this daye, Britons, that lefte the more Britaine for fierre∣nesse of Germaynes, and yet there is the Nation and also the name of Britons. And though this Britaine bée worthye and noble in manye things, yet may not the daughter be pere to the mother, & so the lesse Britaine maye not be pere to the more: And is skilfullye called the lesse Britaine, for it maye not be pere to the more Britayne, in the number of People, nor in noblenesse of grounde and of lande. Addition. The resitall by D. Cooper, forth of his booke, Thesaurus lin∣guae Romeo &  of Britaine. BRitayne the most noble Ile of the worlde,Addition wherein be contayned Eng∣londe, and Scotlande. It lyeth from Germany, West: from Fraunce and Spaine, West Northwest. The forme therof is lyke a Triangle: the length is extended into the North to the further∣most part of Scotland, called Calidonia, which Plinius, Solinus & Martianus do agrée to be 800. miles. The bredth of it after Martianus, is 300. Italian miles. The narrowest distaunce betwéene this Ile and Callis sands (called of Plinye, Gessoriacum in Gallia) is 50. Italian miles, it is now gessed to be 30. English miles. Of ye first naming of this Ile, is yet no certain determination: forasmuch, as there remaineth no auncient Historie making thereof remembrance, the olde Britaine bookes (such as were) being all destroyed by the Saxons: who indeuo∣red themselues to extinct (or blot out) vtterlye, the honourable renowme, with the name of Britones, lyke as ye Goshs dealt with the Romanes. Also the parte of Titus Liuius, where the Conquest of Britaine is remembred, with the Histo∣ries of Iulius Rusticus, and diuers o∣ther noble Writers, that wrote special∣lye of this Countrey, are vtterly perish∣ed. Such as remaine, as the Commen∣taryes of Iulius Caesar, Cornelius Ta∣citus, Diodorus Siculus, and they that wrote of Cosmographie, haue omitted the originall beginning of the name. The Historye of Gyldas the Briton can not be founde, who was after the Saxons had inuaded this Realme: and therefore might lacke such Bookes, as should best instruct him. As for Beda sée∣meth to haue séene nothing written of that matter. For where he sayeth, that this Ile tooke the name Britania, of the inhabitants of Britayne in Fraunce, it is nothing lyke to be true: For that Countrey, was (not long before the time of Beda) named, Armorica, and Armoricus Tractus, when this Ile was called of most auncient Wri∣ters, Brittania, and (as Solinus wri∣teth) séemed to be another worlde,
forasmuch as the West parte of Gallia, was thought to be the vttermost parte of this world. Also Iulius Caesar wri∣teth, that the places of this Ile were vnknowen to French men, sauing to a fewe Merchaunts: and yet they knew no farther, than the Sea Coaste next toward Fraunce. Moreouer the same Britons affirme, that it was lefte a∣mong them in remembraunce, that the innermost part of the countrey, was in∣habited of them, which had their first be∣ginning in the same Ile. This well con∣sidered, with the authoritie of the Wri∣ter, both an excellent Prince, and also a great learned man, and os himselfe in this Ile, it is not to be doubted, but that he most diligently searched for the true knowledge of the uncientie thereof, &c. And yet, because this Ile, excelled all the other in euery condition, it was of some priuately called Albion, that is to saye, more happie or richer. This coniecture, approcheth more nigh ye true similitude, than the other mentions, except there be any auncient historie, before the time of Gefferie of Monmoth or Beda, which may more probably consute that I haue declared: to such will I gladlye giue place. Finallye, I thought it alwayes more honoroble, to haue receiued the first name by such occasion as I haue reher∣sed, and the generation of the Inhabi∣tants of this lande, to be either equall with ye most auncient, or mixed with ye most wise & valiant people of Greece, vanquishers & subduers, of Troians, thē to take the name & first generation of a vaine Fable, or of a man, if any such were, which after he had slaine his Fa∣ther, wandred about ye world vncertaine where so dwell. Also to aduaunt vs to come of the Troyns, anisers of their awne countries destruction, by fauola∣ring the adulterye of Pée and Helena. Of whome soeuer procéeded anye other notable monument, but that they were also breakers of their oath and promise Yet this follye is founde almost in all people, which contend to aetheir P genitours comes first from Troy which fantasie maye well be laughed at among wise men. The faith of Christ was first receyued in this realme, after the incar∣nation. 156. yeares. Britaine or Brutaine, which by two names is called Englande and Scot∣lande, is an Ilande in the Occean sea, sertuate right ouer against Fraunce. One part of which Ile, Englishmen do inhabite, another parte Scottes: the thirde, Welsh men: the fourth parte, Coreth men. All they, either in lan∣guage, condition, or lawes, doe differ a∣mong themselues. Iohn Stowe in his description of England, &c. The chiefest Citie is London, stan∣ding in Middlesex, on the North side of the Riuer of Tamise, over which Ri∣uer, is a great Bridge placed, of stone hauing buyldings verye rare, and mer∣uailous, &c. Englande is fruitefull of Beastes, and aboundeth with Cattell, whereby the Inhabitaunts be rather for the most parte, Grasiers than Plough men, because they giue themselues more to féeding, than to fillage. The originall from Brute, of the Realme of England, (notwithstanding Lanquer yéeldeth not that it was vn∣inhabited when Brute arriued (after common Historyes,) the yeare of the worlde, 855. and the yeare before the incarnation .1108. Whereof after Brute, Locrine, hée hadde the middle parte of Britaine, nowe called Englande, with the superi∣oritie of all this Ile: vnto Camber hée gaue Wales, and to Albauact Scot∣land, &c. Of Boetia. Chapt. 29. BOetia is a Prouince and a parte of Hellades in Gréece, as Isidore say∣eth, libro. 5. And hath that name of Boan Oxe, for this cause. For while Coamus the  of Agenor, by com∣maundement of his Father sought his Sister Etop, that Iupiter had ra∣uished, and might out finde for, and mading sae his Fathers wrath, hée determined in his mine to lyue of Ex∣ile, and while it happened that hée fol∣lowed
the fore and trate of an Oxe, hée founde the place where the Oxe rested, and he named it Boetia, by the name of the Oxe, and there he buylded a Citie that was named Thebes, and there hée helde ciuill battailes some time, & there were borne Apollo and Hercules, the elder man of Thebes. This same is called Eumona, and hath that name of a Well that there is, that was hallowed to Apollo sometime, as Isidore sayeth, libro 15. In this lande is a lake of mad∣nesse, so that who that drinketh there∣of, he shall burne in woodnesse of leche∣rie, as he sayeth libro 14. chap. 3. De Aquia. ¶Looke before of Welles. (Additiō.Boetia, is a Countrey in Gréece, wherein was the Citie of Thebes. Now it is called Vandalia. It was sometime called Annia, Mesapia, Ogi∣gia, Cadmeis, and Hyantis.) Of Boemia, chap. 30. BOeme is a part of Messis, towarde the East side and West by Germa∣nie in Europe, and is cloased about, with most greate Mountaynes and thicke, and high woodes, and is depar∣ted from Germany and Pannonia, and other nations, with mountaines, woods, and Riuers, and is full straunge in ma∣ny places, with high mountaines, and is full faire in Plaines of fieldes, and of meedes, and most wholesome in the as∣pect of euery blessed land to beare corne, and fruite. And hath plentie of Wiues, and Uineyardes of Corne and of fruite, and most rich of golde, of siluer, and of Tinne, and of other mettalls: moyst with Welles and with Riuers, for a Riuer watereth and moysteth the lande that is called Albia, a most noble Ri∣uer that riseth out of the mountaines of Boemia, and also many Riuers, which runne together to Praga, that is a roy∣all Citie. In the mountaines thereof, are plen∣tie of trées of Pines and of Fyrre. And there bée hearbes without number, not of Pasture, onelye and of léese, but also of swéete Spiceries and medicinable hearbes. These be many beasts of diuers kinde, as Beares, Hartes, Capreole, Tragollaphi, Bubali and Bisontes. And among these wilde beasts, ther is one as much as an Oxe, and this beast is strong and fierce, and hath great hornes, and large, and defendeth himselfe with them, and hath vnder the thinne a great bag, and gathereth water therein, and heat∣eth that water in that bagge wonder∣fullye, and in his running he throweth that water vpon hunters and houndes, that come too nigh him, and that water scaldeth off their haire, and burneth hor∣ribly all thing that it toucheth. And this Beast is called Bom in the language of Boeme. And this lande is compassed with Morauia and Panonia in ye East side, and with Polonia in the North, & with Austrich in the South, and is com∣passed with Bauaria Germanica, and with the matche of Misseneme in the West. (Additiō.Boemia, a Realme called Beme, inclosed with the boundes of Germany, hauing on the East side, Hungarie: on the South Bauier: on the West the Countrey Noricum: on the Northeast, Polonia. It is equall in length & bredth, each of them being about thrée dayes iourney. It is inuironed with the fa∣mous Forest, Sylua Fierc. Through the middle thereof, passeth the great Ri∣uer Albia, and the riuer Moltania: vp∣on the riuage whereof, is set the chiefe citie Braga or Praga: the language there is ye Slauone tongue. Notwithstanding in the churches, ye people are taught in ye Dutch tongue; in the churchyardes, they are taught in ye eme tongue: they vary from the Romane Church, in sundrye opinions, and do scorne all Ceremonies. In some places it is sayd, they priuelye obserue the sect of the Adamites, and Waldenses, in the act of lecherie. These Heretiks tooke their beginning of a Pi∣rard that came into the land of Boine, & said that he was ye son of God, & named himselfe Adam: he commanded all men & women to go naked, & as they liked in iust, so to goe together, &c. This horrible and most filthy sect began. Anno. 1412. Read Thesaurus.)
Of Burgondia. cap. 31. BVrgoyne is a parte of Fraunce Se∣nonens, and stretcheth vnto the mountaines that bée called Alpes Peni∣nos, and hath that name Burgun∣dia, of bourough Townes: For the East Gothes made there manye bou∣rough Townes and strong, when they shoulde goe into Italye. The lande is strong and full of mountaines, and of pasture, and of woode in manye places, and moyst with streames, Riuers, and waters: And beareth well in some pla∣ces fruite and corne, and is in many pla∣ces barraine and drye, and vnmoyst and colde nigh the mountaynes, by reason there is much Raine and Snowe. And they that dwell nigh the mountaynes, haue greate Batches vnder the chinne, of oft vse of the Snowe water. There∣in bée abundaunce of wilde beastes, as Beares, Boares, Hartes, and manye o∣ther. Of Capadocia. chap. 32. CApadocia is a Prouince in the more Asia, and in the ende of Syria, and toucheth stemenia in the East side, and the lesse Asia in the West, and the fieldes that hée called Consirij Campi, (the which the Amazones hadde some∣time,) in the North side and the Sea Tymericum. In the South side the mountaine that is called Taurus, and thereto belongeth, Cilicia and Isauria, euen vnto the Sea that is called Silicus sinus, that is afore the lande of Cypres, thereby runneth the Riuer Albis, that diuided sometime the Kingdomes of Li∣dia from the Perses, as Isidore saith lib. 15. and Orosius lib. primo. These men came first of Mosoch, the sonne of Ia∣phet: And so yet there is a citie among them that is called Moreta to this day, as Isidore sayth lib. 19. Cappadocia a Countrye of A∣sia, hauing on the South Cilicia and the mountaine Taurus, one the East Ae∣menie, and diuerse other nations, on the North sea, ye Euxinum, on the west Ga∣latia, and is diuided from Armenie the more, with the famous Riuer Euphra∣tes. In this Countrye are bread plentye of excellent good horses. It was some∣time called Alba Syria, because the peo∣ple there bée whiter then in the other Syria. The people thereof bée called Cappadoces, whose conditions are repu∣ted so ill, that among the common peo∣ple, if one had béene séene to be of ill fashion, they woulde saye hée was of Cappadocia. In that Countrye were borne Basilius Magnus, and Gregorius Nazianzenus, two holy Bishops and ex∣cellent Doctours.) Of caldea, chap. 33. CAldea is sayde as it were Casidea, and hath that name of Caseth, the sonne of Nachor, that was Abrahams brother, as Isidore sayth libro. 9. And so Caldei is said as it were Cassedei, & hath that name of Casseth. And that land is most large, and lyeth beside Euphrates, therein is the holde that is called Du∣ran. In that fielde Gyauntes came toge∣thers after the floud, and did builde the Towre Babel by counsel of Nembroth, of that Towre the citie that there is builded hath the name, and is called Ba∣bilon. And afterwarde all the countrye a∣bout was called Babylonia, as it is sayd afore cap. 2. ¶But héere is to vnderstande, what Orosius sayth of Babylon libro. 2. The first King (he sayth) among the Assyries, that might passe other, was Ninus. When Ninus was slayne, his wife Semiramie Quéene of Asia, made the Citie of Babylon more, that Nembroth had begunne, and shée resto∣red the Citie, and ordeyned that Citye to be head and chiefe of the realme of As∣syries. And that kingdome stood strong∣ly M.C. lxiiii yeares, vntill the reigne of Sardanapalus him slewe Arbates, Pre∣sede of Medes and then beganne the Realme of Assyaies to perish. But it vtterly perished when by Cyrus & Da∣rius Babylonia was so destroyed, that vnneth men might thinke, that so
strong a Citie might be taken. For that citie was disposed as a castle with walls lyke long and square. The greatnesse & strength of the wals may vnneth be sup∣posed. For the walles were fiftie cubites thicke, and as much in height, and the ci∣tie about was foure hundered and foure score furlongs. The walls were of burnt tiles tempered with glewe, and without was abroad Ditch and large séene farre thence. Into that ditch ran the riuer all about the citie. And in the Front of the walles were an hundred Gates, and a∣bout the walls were dwelling places for them that shoulde defende the Citie, and those places of defence were wonderfully strong and huge. And though that Citye were so strong, yet it was soone ouer∣come, taken, and beate to the earth. For Cyrus diuided the Rider in thrée hun∣dred and thrée score channells, as hée had before diuided the Riuer Ganges, when he was wroth with the riuer, he diui∣ded it in thrée hundreth and thrée score parts, for one of his knights was drow∣ned therein. And so when this riuer was withdrawne, that ranne about the Ci∣tie, the citie was the sooner taken, as saith Orosius. And ye same yéere in which Ar∣bates began to destroy Babilonia, Rome began to be sounded: and so in one accord of time, that one citie fel downe, and that other arose. And when ye first kingdome of the East failed for age, then the king∣dome of the West beganne to arise and to striue. (Additiō.Chaldea, a Country, which (as Stra∣bo writeth) ioyneth to Arabia and to the Sea Persicum, Solinus and Plinius name that country Chaldaea, where the greate Citie of Babylon stoode. In the newe Cards and mappes, it is set in this wise: On the West it ioyneth on Mesopota∣mia, on the North vppon Assyria and Media on the East vppon Persia, on the South vpon Arabia deserte, and so it is farre from India. They haue a proper language somewhat like to Hebrew, but their letters are vnlyke to anye other. Strabo meaneth the Country where the people Calybes dwell, Chaldea.) Of Cedar. chap. 34. CEdar is the name of a Countrye, in which dwelled the Ismalites, that were the children of Cedar, that was Is∣maels eldest sonne. For Ismael was A∣brahams sonnè, otten on his seruaunt Agar, a woman of Aegypt. And more truely they be there called Agareni then Savaceni, though they mistake the name of Sara in vaine, and be proud therof, as though they were gendered of Sara, as Isidore sayth li. 9. These men builde no houses, but goe about in large wilder∣nesse, as wilde men, and dwell in tents, and liue by prayes, and by Uenison. And therefore Ismael was called Onager, a wild Asse: as the Glose saith: super Ge∣ne. 16. This was a fierce man, &c. And he saith, that he shall passe the woodnesse of all beasts, and gréeue sober men and easy. For, as Methodius sayth, yet hereafter they shall once be gathered together, & go out of Desart, and winne and holde the roundnesse of the earth, eight wéekes of yéeres, and theyr way shall bée called the waye of anguish and of woe. For they shall ouercome Cities & kingdomes. And they shall slay Priests in holy places, and lye there with women, and drinks of ho∣ly vessells, and lie beasts to Sepulcres of holy Saintes, for wickednesse of chri∣sten men, that shall be that time. These & many other things he doth rehearse, that Ismaelits men of Cedar, shall doe in the wide worlde. Cedar a Region in Arabia.Addition Of Cancia. chap. 35. CAncia, sent, is a prouince of Eng∣land vpon the British Occean. The chiefe citie thereof is called Eusterbu∣rye, and the land beareth well to me and fruite, and hath many woodes, & moist with welles and riuers, and is noblye endowes with Hauens of the Sea, and rich of riches, and chiefe in wholsomnesse of heauen. (Additiō.As concerning the setting forth of Rent, a prouince worthy of praise, as al∣so Master W. Lambert for his singular penning of the same, with others, in the booke intituled, The Perambulation of
Kent, is sufficiently set downe the ferti∣litie of the soile, the good disposition of the inhabitants, and their modestie: the one∣lye platforme and beautie of Englande, whose customes and manners are of greatest antiquitie, libertie, and seruice: Kent lieng in ye Southeast region of this realme, hath on the North the riuer of Thamise, now called Temmes, on the East the Sea, on the South the Sea and Sussexe, and on the West Sussexe and Surreye, it extendeth in length from Wicombe in the frontires of Surrey, to Dele, at the sea side .50. miles: And retch∣eth in breadth from Sanhirst (néere Ro∣berts-bridge in the edge of Sussex) to the North point of the Ile of Greane, almost 30. miles, & so hath in circuit .150. miles, or thereabout. Of Cantabria. chap. 36. CAntabria is a Prouince of Spaine, and hath that name of a Citie, and of the Riuer Hyberus. The men thereof bée vnsteadfast in heart, apt to steale and to robbe, and gladde for to striue, and alwaye readie and prest for to re∣ceiue strokes, as Isidore saith libro. 9. Nigh to this lande is Celtiberia, and hath that name of Gallis Celticis and Hiberis. (Additiō.Cantabria people of a Countrye in Spaine called now, Biscay.) Of Chananea. cap. 37. CHananea is a Country in Siria, that was after the sloud in the possession of the children of Chanaan, that was the sonne of Cham. And of them were tenne Nations, as Isidore sayth lib. 9. And 8. Nations of them were of the children of Chanaan, in which the curse that was gi∣uen to them by Cham was ordeined, as it were by heritage: and therefore by bidding of our Lord, ye children of Israel put them out, and occupied their lands, as Isidore saith li. 9. (Additiō.Cham, called also God Cham, is the name of dignitie of the greate Empe∣rours of Tartarians, called the greate Cham of Cathay, or Cambalo, whose dominion extendeth from the furthest parte of the East, vnto the Countrye of Russia North West, and so vnto the North west, and so vnto the North Sea, on the South east, vnto Persia: so that by the mappe appeareth, there is vnder him as much maine lande, within litle; as is the residue of all Asia, Europa, and Affrica.) Of Campania. cap. 38. CAmpania is a Prouince of Italye, betwéene the Territorie of Rome and Apulia. The chiefe Citie thereof sometime was Capua, builded by Sil∣uius king of Albanes. And hath that name of Capacitas: For the land there∣of receiueth all manner of fruite of su∣stinaunce, and is the head of all the Ci∣ties of Campania, and this Citie, Rome, and Cartage, were reckoned thrée of the greatest Cities: and sometime all Italy had the name of this citie, and was cal∣led Campania. Many ether Cityes fa∣mous and full of men and rich, pertei∣ned to the Prouince of Campania, as Neopolis and Penteolis, where Uir∣gills Bathes were in worshippe some∣time. And is a land with plenty of corne, of Wines, of Oliues, of wilde beastes, and of diuerse manner of fruite. There is another manner Campania called Ci∣salpina, and is a prouince of Fraunce Senonens, the chiefe citie therof is Tre∣ueris. (Additiō.Campania a country in the realme of Naples, which was accompted the most fertile and pleasaunt country of all the world.) Of cauda. chap. 39. CAuda is called an Iland yt is narrow and straight in the beginning, and then breader, and hard entering and tra∣uailous, as it is saide in Actibus Apost. ca. 27. And this Iland is betwéene Ciria and Italye, by Creta and Sardina. (Additiō.But anone after ther arose by a stor∣mye wind called Euroclidon, that is the North cast wind, or euery East winde that is stormie. And when the Shippe
was caught, & could not resist the wind, we let her driue, and wer carried away: And we ranne vnder a little Ile named Clauda (this Ile was West & by South from Candie, straight toward the goulfe Sirtes, which wer certaine boling sands that swallowed vp all that they caught) and had much a doe to gette the Boate. Act. 27. vers. 14.15.16. Of Cilicia. chap. 41. CIlicia is a Prouince of lesse Asia, and hath that name, as men tell, of Iupi∣ters eldest sonne, as Isidore saith lib. 15. This prouince hath Liciam in the west side, and the Sea Mare siculum in the South, and in the East the toppes of mount Taurus, in the North the Riuer Cignus runneth through the land. The chiefe Citie thereof is Tharsimonia, that is called Tharsis: there was Saint Paule borne. And Coroscos is a towne thereof, and there is much Saffron and best smel∣ling, and passing golde in colour, as Isid. saith lib. 15. Additiō.Cilicia a country in Asia, partly inclo∣sed with the highest part of ye mountain Taurus, and hardest to passe by, Strabo diuideth Cilicia into two partes, one cal∣led Tracher, that is to say, rough or roc∣kie. The other Campestris, that is to say, plaine. Iosephus writeth, that it was of olde time called Tarsus, or Tarsis, one of the sonnes of Iaphet, the youngest son of Noe, Herodotus sayth, the people were called Cilices of Cilix, the sonne of Agenor king of Phaenicia, where before it was called Hyppateus. Saint Hie∣rom interpreteth Cilicia, a congregation, a lamentation, an assumption, a lamenta∣ble challenge or vomit. The people were by nature inclining to lyeng and stea∣ling, whereof growe this Prouerbe, Cy∣lix non facile verum dicit. The Cili∣cian not lightly sayth true. A Prouerbe applyed to a couetous man, which alway lieth for his perticular aduantage, as now a daies most men doe which liue onelye by stealing. Of Ciprus. chap. 41. CIprus is an Iland, & hath that name of Ciprus, a Citie that is therein, as Isidore sayth lib. 15. This land is called Paphon, and was sometime hallowed to Venus, and was full famous sometime, & namely of mettal of copper. And the vse therof was first found there, as he sayth. The land beareth wine, and the wine of that place is full strong. Now many Ci∣ties be therein full noble: Among whom the chiefe Citie is called Nichosia. The land is inuironed all about with the sea, and is within all ful of woods and fields, of modes, of viniards, of corne, & of fruit: and is moist with wells and riuers: and rich of many riches and liking. Oft this land is called Cethim in holy writ, as I∣sidore saith lib. 11. And hath that name of the sonne of Iosan, the nephew of Ia∣phet, as Isidore sayth. Orosius li. 1. spea∣keth of this Iland, and sayth: that the I∣land Cyprus is inuironed with the Sea yt is called Mare Siriacum in ye west side, & with the sea that is called Mare Pam∣philicum in the North: and with Aulone & Cilicio. And is inuironed in the South, with the sea of Siria, and of the prouince Fenix, and conteineth in length an hun∣dred thrée score, & fiftéene thousand paces, and in bredth a leuen hundred paces and fiue and twentie. (Additiō.Cyprus an Ile in the Sea called Carphathium, against the country called Syria, on the North it hath Cilicia, on the South and the East Aegypt. It is in length after the description of Strabo. 175. miles, after eight furlongs to the mile: Some suppose it was at the first a portion of Syria, diuided by Earth∣quake. This country aboūdeth in wine, Oyle, mettall, Uitrioll (called Copporas) and Canes, whereof Suggar is made. Also Venus was there had in greate re∣uerence, insomuch that men, before they did sette forth theyr daughters in marri∣age, offered them to such straungers as came into the Countrye, to bée by them deflowred, and afterwarde (with the game so gotten) married thē to husbands. Of Creta. chap. 42.
CReta is an Iland of Gréece, and hath that name of one Crete a king, yt dwel∣led there: and stretcheth in great length betweene the East and the West, and is washed with waues of Gréece in ye North side, and with waues of Aegypt in the South side: And was sometime posses∣sed with an hundred noble Cities. And therefore it is called Centapolis, that is to vnderstand, a land with an hundred ci∣ties. And this land was first enable with eares, armours, and arrowes. This was the first land that wrote lawe, and gaue lawe written with letters, & taught first companies of horse men. Therein was studie of musicke first found of Ideis, and taken to other men in the worlde about, and there musicke was vsed, & the studie thereof increased and made more. Therin be many beasts, Goats and Hartes, and right few wilde Goates, Wolues, Fox∣es, and other noiful beasts be none ther∣in. There are no Serpents nor noyfull Wormes. And if they bée brought the∣ther out of other Countryes they dye a∣none. This land is friend to Uines, and beareth trées and medicinable hearbes, as Diptanno & Alnos, and such other: and al∣so that land bréedeth precious stones, and also a stone that is called Iothed actili∣cus, as Isidore saith lib. 15. And though it be an Iland free and cleane of any nota∣ble venim, yet neuerthelesse therin bréed Spalangie, that be venimous Spiders. Huc vsque Isidorus. li. 15. Plinius telleth the same at all points. li. 4. Orosius spea∣keth of the same Iland, and saith. Creta endeth in the East at the sea Carpaceo, & in the West & in the North at the Sea Creticum, & in the South at the sea Li∣bicum, that is also called Adriaticum: and hath in length of paces. M. C. lxxx. vii. and in bredth a M. and fiftie. Looke the dispo∣sition of Dedalus house in Creta. Isido∣rus liber. 16. in capitulo de Ciuitati∣bus. (Additiō.Creta, an Ile lyeng betwéene Pe∣loponnesius, and the Rhodes, it hath on the North parte the sea Aegeum and Cretense: on the South the sea of Ae∣gypt, and Asric. It is now called Can∣dic. In this Ile was Iupiter nourished, whom the Painims named their chiefe God. There Minos reigned, & Radaman∣thus gouerned vnder him most exquisite iustice: Of whose lawes, other countries tooke their first patrone: yet notwithstan∣ding the people of that countrie wer no∣ted to be bicious, & shamefull liers, as E∣pimenides wrote in a verse; resited by S. Paule, in his Epistle to Titus, saieng. ca. 1. The Cretians are alwayes liers, e∣uill beasts, and slow bellies. This wit∣nesse is true: This is nowe vnder the Turke.) (Additiō.Daedalus the name of an exellent Carpenter of Athens, which first founde the Sawe, the Twible, and the uger, & made the place in Crete called Laby∣rinthus, or a Maz, as for pleasure are made diuerse in Gardens, but this was a strong hold.) Of Ciclades. chap. 43. CIclades were sometime Ilandes of Greece, as Isidore saith lib. 15. And men thinke that they be called Ciclades, for though they be farre from the Iland Delos, yet they be scituate about Delim: for ye Greeks called it the round Ciclum. But some men mene, that they haue that name Ciclades, because of rocks & crags, that be about them: These Ilands stande in the sea that is called Hellespontus, betwéene the sea Egeum and Malcum: And be inuironed with the sea Indicum, and be in number 54. And stretch from the North toward the South fiftie thou∣sand paces, and fiftie thousande from the East toward the West, as Isid. saith: and after Orosirus M. CC. And as hée sayeth, the first of these Ilandes Eastwarde is Rodus, and Northward is Cenedo, and Southward Capaduce, and Westwarde Citeras, and these lands end Eastward at ye cleaues of Asia, Westward at the Sea Icatum, Northward at the Sea Legeū, and Southward at the Sea Charpati∣um. (Additiō.Cyclades, the fiftie Iles in the Sea called Aegeum.) Of Choa. chap. 44.
CHoa that is called Choes also, is an Iland, and belongeth to the Prouince of Athica: therein Hippocrates the phi∣sition was borne. And this land was first endowed with cloth making, as he saith. Also in that Ilande be noble horses, of whom Salomon had greate ioye in olde time, as it is said 3. Reg.1 Reg. 10 1. Reg. af∣ter ye Gen chap. 10. wher it is said, that horse were brought to him out of Choa. (Additiō.Salomon had horses brought forth of Aegypt, and of Coa, which in the Eng∣lish translations is lefte out. (The Ile Coa.) Additiō.Hippocrates the name of a most excellent Phisition, scholler to Democra∣tes, & liued in the time of Perdicas king of Macedonia, in his court. Artaxerxes king of Persia, wrote of Hippocrates in this manner, to Hystanes his liuetenant of Hellespont, as Gwydas witnesseth. The greate king Artaxerxes to his liue∣tenant Hystanes sendeth gréeting. I haue heard of the same of the noble phisition Hippocrates, sée therefore that thou giue him as much mony as he wil desire, wt al other things necessary, & send him to me: he shalbe in as great honor wt me, as the best in all Persia, &c. He died béeing. 104. yeres of age. Ther wer also of the same name and stocke fiue other, all notable & famous men in Phisicke, but this, farre passed thē all, he flourished about ye yere of the worlde. 4760. after Munsterus of his discréete manners and stature, forth of the Cronicle, Cronicarum. folio. 73. hée forbad all volnptuousnesse, which he a∣horred: of graue manners the onely orna∣ment to his Disciples, hée was of small stature, faire & wel fauored, but great he∣ded, not easily moued nor hasty to speak, saieng: He that will bée frée, let him not desire that which he cannot haue: Hée that will have that which he desireth, let him desire that which he may haue: He that will liue peaceably in his lyfe, lette him be like vnto him that is bidden to a feast, who giueth thanks for all yt is set on the table, & grudgeth not for the want of any thing.) The horses that were bred in this Coa were of great price, whereof 6. where ioy∣ued in euery chariot, & euery horse valued at 100. cicles of siluer, which amounteth after 15. pence the cicle, & euery cicle halfe an ounce, to ye sum of 6. li. 5. shillings e∣uery horse, notwithstanding there were vsed sundry cicles of diuers values, which I omit, & the horses might be of greater value. Of Corsica. chap. 45. COrsica is an Ilande wt many prouin∣ces, & is corner wise in shape, & hath ye sea Tyrenicum in the East side, & the ha∣uen of ye citie of Rome: and Sardinia in ye South side: & Belliares in the west, & the sea Ligusticum in the North: and cōtey∣neth in length. C. ixi. thousand paces, and 26. thousand in breadth. (Additiō.Corsica an Iland in the middle sea, be∣twéene Gean & the Ile of Sardina called Cors. It is nowe vnder the citie of Gean or Genua, which citie hath ben oftētimes reedified, the people are called Ianewaes, Romane Italians. Of Dalmacia. chap. 46. DAlmacia a Prouince of Gréece by olde departing of land, and hath that name of Delim, the greatest citie of that prouince. This prouince hath Macedonia in the East side, & Messia in the North, & Hystria in the West, & endeth at the Sea Adriaticum in the South, as Isi. saith li. 15. & Orosius saith the same: Men of that land be mightie & strong, & giue them to prayes, to robbing and stealing, & manye of them be Sea théeues. (Additiō.Dalmatia a part of the great coun∣try called Illiria or Slauonia: it hath on the west Croatia: on the East Bossina, on the North the great mountain Alba∣nus mons, and the country called Seruia: on the South the sea Adriaticum, or the goulfe of Uenice. Of Dacia. chap. 47. DEnmarke is a Countrie in Europa, and was first occupied with Greeke Danes, as it is sayde: And is diuided in many prouinces and Ilands, and stretch∣eth to Germania. The men thereof were
sometime fierce and right great warri∣ours: and therefore they were Lordes of Britaine. of Norway, and of many other Ilands and countries: But li. 9. Isidore saith, that the Danes came of Gothes. And some suppose that they be called Da∣cos, as it wer Dagi, men come of Goths. But of what nation the Danes be come of first, this is certaine, that there bée many of them, and be séemely of stature, and faire of haire and of face, and gene∣rally faire of body and shape. And though they be fierce against enlinies, neuerthe∣lesse they be kindlye milde of heart and pleasing to all innocents. (Additiō.Dacia a country beyond Hungaria: they doe not well which call Den∣marke, with this name, which is Da∣nia, Danes. Denmarke is also cal∣led Danomarchia, a people quicklye moo∣ued to reuenge, wary in buieng and sel∣ling, regarding their lawes, which being once established, may in no wise be tyed to their purses: sometime the olde con∣querours of England, a people wel min∣ded to religion, their originall is suppo∣sed to come of a people called the Goths. Of Delos. chap. 48. DElos is an Iland of Gréece, in ye mid∣dle of those Ilandes that bée called Ciclades, & hath that name, as it is said, for that yt after the floud, when the night was darke many moneths, that Ilande was lightened with the Sunne beames, before all other lands. And for yt he was first shewed, it is said it hath that name Delos, for Delon is Gréke, and is vn∣derstood, openly shewed. Also that lande is called Ortigia, for the Curlewes were first séene, and the Gréekes called them Ortigias. In this land Latone bare Ap∣pollo, as Isidore saith lib. 15. And Delos is the name of an Iland, and of a Citye also. (Additiō.Delos, an Ile by Gréece, where A∣pollo and Diana were borne, and is one of the Iles called Cyclades.) Of Dedan. chap. 49. DEdan is a country in Ethiopia in the West side, as Isidore saith, liber. 9. there be many Elephants, & much abun∣daunce of Iuorie, and woods of Firre, as the Glose saith super Eze. 7. Of Europa. chap. 50. EVropa is called the thirde part of the worlde, and hath that name of Euro∣pa, the daughter of Egenor king of Li∣bia. Iupiter rauished this Europa out of Affrica, and brought her into Creta: And called the most part of the lande by her name Europa, as Isidore saith, li. 15. Orosius speaketh of Europa, and sayth, yt the country of Europa & people therof be∣gin at ye mountaines that be called Mō∣ces Riphei, & at the marreis that is called Paludes Meotides, that be by East. And come downward toward the West by ye banks of the North occean, vnto ye coun∣try that is called Gallia belgica, and vnto the riuer Renum, that runneth to ye occe∣an, & then ye countries stretch to the riuer Danubius, yt is called Hisirius also, that is by South, & passeth Eastward into the sea that is called Pontus, & is a coast of the great sea. And li. 15. Isidor. sayth, that Europa beginneth at the riuer Tanay, & stretcheth westward by the north occean vnto the ends of Spaine. The East and the South parte thereof ariseth from the sea that is called Pontus, & is all ioined to the great sea, & endeth at the Ilandes of Cades. The first Country of Europa is the nether Scithia, & beginneth at the marreis Meotides, and stretcheth be∣twéene Danubius & the North Occean, vnto Germania, as Isidore sayth lib. 15. And for straunge nations the land is spe∣cially called Barbaria: and the nations be in al 54. as Orosius saith. Among whom the first is Alania, that stretcheth to the marreys Meotides, and following is Go∣thia, then Denmarke, and after Germa∣nia, then Gallia and the land of Britain, Orchades, and many other Ilandes, & at last the lesse Spaine. In the ends wher∣of Europa endeth Westward. And in the ouer part of Europa in ye South be ma∣ny great coūtries and lands: As Pano∣nia,
Messia, Tracia, Grecia, with her boundings, & Italia, with the countries & Ilandes thereof. And though this part of the worlde be lesse then Asia, yet it is pere thereto in number & nobles of men. For as Plinius saith, it nourisheth men that be more great in bodye, more strong in might and vertue, more bold of heart, more faire & seemely of shape, then men of the countries and Ilands of Asia, or of Affrica. For the Sunne abideth long o∣uer the men of Affrica, and burneth and wasteth humours, and so maketh them more short of bodie, more blacke of face, with crispie haire: and for yt the spirites passe out at poores that be open, they bée more coward of heart. And the contrarie is of men of the North land, for the cold∣nesse that is without stoppeth the pores, and bréedeth humours of the bodye, and maketh the men more full and great, and the colde that is mother of whitenesse, maketh thē more white in face &  skin. And for ye vapours and spirites  smit∣tén in ward, it maketh them hotter with∣in, & so the more bolde & hardie. And the men of Asia be meanly disposed in that: And their first land is by East, as Plini∣us saith. (Additiō.Europa, the thirde parte of the world, diuided from Asia, with the great Seas, Hellespontus, Propontis, Bos∣phorus, Thracius, and Pontus Euxinus, and hath the vttermost boundes in the North east, the riuer Tanais. And from Affrike it is diuided by the middle Sea. It was also the name of a faire may∣den, daughter of Agenor, King of Phoe∣nicia, whom Iupiter (transforming him∣self into ye likenesse of a Bul) did rauish, as Poets writ) that is, forgetting kind∣ly vertue, béeing ouercome in the Uir∣gins beutie, setting all humanitie aside, vsed the force and violence of a tyran∣nous beast,) it is also saide, that Iupiter carried her away by force in a Ship, in the decke or most whereof was a Ban∣ner or streamer, wherein was painted a Bull.) (Additiō.It is better that Princes bée repro∣ued for theyr faultes, béeing aliue, then after theyr death to bée so reported off, yt the concealing of their wickednesse for the time present, afterwardes is become more ignomious and shamefull, to theyr continuall reproch for euer.) (Additiō.In the later and of this booke, you shall finde a farther discourse of this Eu∣ropa forth of Ortelius.) Of Eiulath. chap. 51. EIulath is a prouince in the ouer In∣de, & beginneth in the East, & stretch∣eth by long space of landes towarde the North: and hath that name Eiulath of Eiula, oue of the children of Hebe, Pa∣triarke of Hebrues, as the lose sayeth super Genes pri. and on: where Eiulath is rehersed among the children of Hebar, yt came of him and of his sonne lectane The riuer Ganges runneth by this land, and that riuer hath another name, and is called Phison in Genes. lib. 4 cap. 20. Plinius lib. 3 cap. 20. praiseth that riuer wonderfully, & saith that Ganges is a ri∣uer of Inde, and receiueth into himselfe many, & as it were endlesse riuers great inough to rowe and to saile in, as Idap∣sen, Cantabeian, Bisepin, & many other, and is neuer broader then fifty furlongs, neither déeper then 15. paces. This riuer runneth about the lande of Eiulath, in which land is much gold and spicerie, as Bedelium, and precious stones, as Oni∣chius, Carbuncles, and other such, as hée sayth, and the Glose super Genesis. In this lande be manye speciall Countries, in whome be many Elephantes, as it is sayd. (Additiō.In the second of Genesis, the rier Pison compasseth the whole land of He∣uilah, where there is golde, and the gold there is very good, there is Edelium and the Onix stone. Euille or Heuilath, a coū∣try in the Orient, about the which the ri∣uer Pison, which we call Ganges, yt com∣meth out of Paradise doth runne. D. Cooper. Of Ethiopia. Chap. 52. EThiopia, Negroes lande, hadde first that name of coulour of men. For the Sunne is nigh, and roasteth and
toasteth them, as Isidore saith li. 15. And so the coulour of men sheweth ye strength of the starre, for there is continuall heat. For all yt is vnder the South pole about the West is full of mountaines, & about the middle full of grauel, and in the East side most desart and wildernes: and stret∣cheth from the West of Athlant toward the East vnto the ends of Aegypt, and is closed in the south with ye occean, & in the North with the riuer Nilus. In this land be many natiōs with diuers faces won∣derfully and horribly shapen: Also therin be many wilde beasts and Serpents, and also Rinocerots, and the beast that is cal∣led Camelion, a beast with manye cou∣lours. Also there be Cocatrices and great Dragons, and precious stones be ta∣ken out of their braines. Iacinctus, and Chrisophrassus, Topasius, and many o∣ther precious stones be founde in those parts, and Cinamum is there gathered. Ther be two Ethiops, one is in the east, and the other is in Mauritania in the West, and that is more néere Spaine. And then is Numedia, and the prouince of Cartage. Then is Getula, and at last against the course of the Sunne in the South is the land yt is called Ethiopia a∣dusta, burnt, & fables tell, yt there beyond be the Antipodes, men yt haue their féete against our féet, as Isid. saith lib. 15. His wordes be set héere before de Ethiopia. Also he saith li. 9. yt the Ethiopiās haue ye name of Chus, of whom they tooke their beginning. Chus in ye Hebrue tongue is called Ethiops. These men came sōtime frō the riuer Nilus, & dwelled beside Ae∣gypt, betwéene the riuer Nilus & occean: in the South nigh vnder the Sun: of thē be much people, as Esperes in the West side Garamantes, & Troglodites, & other, of whom Plinius speaketh li. 5. ca. 10. The men of Ethiopia haue their name of a blacke riuer, & that riuer is of the same kind with Nilus, for they bréed réedes & bull rushes, & rise and ware in one time: In the wildernesse there be many men wonderfully shapē: some oft curse ye Sun vtterly in his rising & downe going, and they behold the Sun & curse him alway; for his heate gréeueth them ful sore: and other as Troglodites dig them dens and caues, & dwel in them in stéed of houses: & they eate serpents, & all that may be got, their noise is more feareful in sounding, then the voice of other. Other there bée, which like beasts liue without wedding, & dwel with women without law, & such bée called Garamanis, other goe naked & be not occupied with trauaile, & they bée called Graphasants. There be other, that be called ennj, & it is said, they haue no heads, but they haue eyes fired in theyr weasts. And there be Satyres, and haue onely shape of men, and haue no man∣ners of mankinde. Also in Ethiopia bée many other wonders, as he saith lib. 6. cap. 11. there be Ethiops (saith he) among whom all foure footed beasts bée brought forth without eares, and also Elephants. Also there be some that haue an hounde for their king, & diuine by his moouing, and doe as they will. And other haue three or some eyen in their forehead, as it is said, not that it is so in kinde, but that it is feigned, for they vse principall looking and sight of arrowes. Also some of them hunt lions and panthers, & liue by their flesh: and their king hath onely one cie in his forehead. Other men of E∣thiopia liue onely by honny suckles dried in smoake, and in the Sun, and these liue not past fortie yeares. (Additiō.Aethiopia, a great country in Af∣frike, containing two regions, the hether and the further Aethiop. The hether, that is aboue Aegypt, hath on the north Aegypt, Marmarike, and Libia, on the West the inner Libia: on the South the further Ethiop, on the East the red sea: In this country is the Ile Meroe, where Saint Mathewe is reported to haue preached ye Gospell. The further Ethiop hath on the North the inner Libia, & the hether Aethiop: on the West and South ye occean sea, on ye East the goulfe called Barbaricum, in this country be ye moun∣taines out of which Nilus (in whose brinks and banks the Crocodiles bréede, which are the destroiers both of men and beasts) issueth.) Of Aegypto. chap. 54. Egipt was before called Esea, & after Egiptus of Danaus brother that after
reigned therein. In the East side vnder the red sea, this lande ioyneth to Siria, and hath Libia in the West side, and the great sea in the North side: and passeth in¦ward in the South side, and stretcheth vnto the Ethiops, as Isidore saith, lib. 15. and is a country not vsed with dew, and wherein falleth no raine. And onely Ni∣lus moysteth that lande, and tunneth there about, and maketh it plenteous with rising and waxing: and hath plen∣tie of wilde beasts, and féedeth a greate deale of the world with wheat and with corne & fruite, & is so plenteous of other merchaundise and chaffer, that it filleth nigh all the worlde with ndfull mer∣chandises. In the end of Aegypt is Cano∣pia, that hath that name of Canope, that was Menelaus gouernour, and was bu∣ried there. Huc vsque Isidore. li. 15. And was first called Mepphayna of the sonne of Cham, as Isidore saith lib. 9. In this land be many perticular Prouinces, and full famous cities, as Memphis ye Epha∣sus builded: that was Iupiters sonne, and Raphnes the chiefe citie of Aegipt, He∣liopoleos, & Alexandria, & many other, as Isidore saith li. 16. And Oosius saith, that there are two Aegipts, the ouer and the neather. The ouer stretcheth into the East in length, & hath in the North side the sea of Arabia, & occean in the South. For it beginneth out of the West & of ye nether Aegipt, and stretcheth Eastward, and endeth at the redde sea. And contey∣neth 24. Nations. In the ouer Aegypt be many diuers desartes, in whome are many monstrous and wonderfull beasts. There be Perdes, Tigres, Satires, Coc∣katrices, and horrible Adders and Ser∣pents. For in the endes of Aegypt and of Ethiopia, fast by the wel where men sup∣pose is the head of Nilus that runneth by Aegypt, bée bredde wilde beastes, that be called Cacothephas: the which beast is little of body and vncrafty of members & slowe, & hath a full heauy head. And ther∣fore they beare it alway downeward to∣ward the earth, & that by ordinaunce of kind for saluation of man kinde, for it is so wicked & so venimous, ye no man may behold him right in the face, but he die a∣none without remedy. For he hath the same mallice that the serpent Cockatrice hath, as Plinius saith, li. 8. cap. 22. Also in Aegypt be full many Crocadiles & Hip∣potami, that be water horses, & namelye about the water of Nilus. (Additio.Aegyptus, a countrie called Aegypt: on the West it is bounded with Libia, and the Countrye called Cyrenaica, on the North with the sea Mediterraneum, and part of India, on the East with Ara∣bia, and the Arabian sea: on the South with Athiopia. This country although it raine there but seldome or neuer, yet by the ouerflowing of the riuer Nilus, it is made so fertile, that it hath abundance of all things sauing vines, and bringeth sorth strange beasts. Canopos is an Ilé at the entrie of Nilus, and took his name of Canapus, that was maister of Mene∣laus ships. Memphis a great and famous citie in Aegipt, &c. This country tooke his name of Aegyptus, sonne to Belus, king of Babylon, Aegypti nuptiae, & prouerbe spoken by vnluckie marriage, because the fiftie sons of Aegyptus, married the fifty daughters of his brother Danaus, were the first night all sauing one, slaine of their wiues by the counsaile of their fa∣ther. Of Ellade. chap. 54. ELlas Elladis is a prouince of Gréece in Europa, and had that name of king Hellena Deucalions sonne, after him the Gréekes were first called Elle∣nes. In this Prouince is the Countrye Attica, wherin sometime was the noble Citie Athens, mother of liberall artes, nourysher of Philosophers: sometime Gréece had nothing more worthye, nor more noble then this citie. Next thereto is the Prouince Achaia, as Isidore say∣eth libro 15. In this one Countrie Ellas be two Prouinces, Boetia, and Pelopo∣nensis. Of the first, that is to wit, Boe∣tia, it is spoken before. To this Country Ellas, belongeth the coast of the sea, yt is called Hellespōtus, wherin be many great wounders, as Plinius saith, li. 6. ca. 3. By Hellespōtus Tranges, Pergamcus saith, that there be many manner of men, that he called Ophioges, that hele smiting of Serpents with their téeth and groping,
and onely with their hand laide to, they drawe out slayeng venimme. Also Varro sayth, that yet there bée some whose spit∣tle is medicine against the stinging of Serpents. Hellespontus, is a coast of the sea of middle earth, as Isid. saith lib. 13. in the North turning and going in great goings and turnings beside Greece and Illiocum, and is drawen by straightnesse of 7. furlongs, where Xerxes the King made a bridge of ships, and so hée went into Greece for to warre there. The same water spreadeth and maketh the coast of the sea the which is called Propontides; the which anone is constrained into ∣tye paces. That coast of the sea hath the name of Helles the sister of Frixus, shée fledde the mallice of her stepdame, and fel into ye sea & was drowned: and of that falling, the sea & the lande about had the name Hellespontus. (Additiō.Ophiogenes people of Hellespont, which heale the stinging of Serpentes with touching the place.) Of Eola. chap. 55. EOla is an Ilande of Cicilia, & hath that name (as it is sayde) of Eo∣lu the sonne of spote, which Eolus P els faigne was king of Winds.Aeolus. ye king of ye vvinds &c signifi¦eth the vi∣olent blu¦stering or ouer blo∣ing ships, trees, and building. And that was sayd, as Varro saith, because he was ruler of ye Ilands yt he called Eolas and for that of mistes and fumeus va∣pours hee told to vnwise man of windes that should rise: and therfore they thought that he held the windes n s: power,  and had might ouer them, as Isidore sai∣eth lib. 15. The Iles that he called Eola bée nine, and haue that name of him, and hée also called Vulcan, for the fire burneth therein, as in mount Ethna, as he sayth. And each of those Ilands hath his owne name, the first is called Lip∣pata, the second Gtha, of most high cliffes so called; the thirde is called Strogile, the fourth, De and so of o∣ther. (AdditiōEola is a region of the Gréeks in A∣sia, betweene Ionja & sodae, it is also a region conteining seauen  betweene Italy and Cicilia Aeolia the daughter or néece of Aeolus, also a countrey néere vnto Hellespont, called sometime My∣sia Of Franconia. chap. 56. FRanconia is a prouince in Germania in Europa, & hath that name of men yt dwelled therein, & were called Franci: the chiefe citie thereof is called Herbipolis, & standeth on a greate riuer that is called Mogun. That prouince hath in the East side. Th ing  Sancon,Megun∣tia, a no∣ble citie in Germa∣nie called Nentz. in ye South side ye riuer Dtid, & Bva in ye west, the countries: Sutula & lsacia, & in the North the country of ye Ryu. The chiefe y therof is Mgtia, & stādeth vpon ye Kind,  the riuer Migs commeth into ye Kine. This Freeconia is a full good land & plentie of corn, of woods, and strong of Castles and Towne, and full of peo∣ple. Of Francia. chap. 57. FRaunce is called Francia and Gallia also, and hath first that name Francia, of men of Germania, that were called Franci, as Isidore saith: & hath the Kine and Germany in the East side, and in the North east side, the mountaines Alpes Pooni, & In ye South ye prouince of Nar∣bon, & in ye North west the British occe∣an, & in the North the Iland of Britaine. traudre was called Gallea bulgica, and has ye name of city Belgis, as Isi. saith. li.  15. This last of Feure is a ran coun∣try, & plentifull of trees, of vines, of corn, and of fruits, & in noble by the affluence of Riuers and fountaines, through the borders of which anderun side most no∣ble riuers; that is to wite Roden, and thens, as Isidore saith lib. 5. Therin be noble charmes & stones both to build & to eate  uses vpon, & speriti  special  stories, & ely in the growne about Partes, that is most pas∣sing namely by  faite &  called Gip, ye me of that Counti is call Plas∣stre in their lg e, for the growne is glasse & bright, &  ye minerall vertue tur∣neth into st h bist ed  water and  into ∣ments and to thereof is made dres &
vautes, wals, and diuers pauements: and such ciment laide in worke, waxeth hard anone againe as it were stone, and in Fraunce be many noble & famous cities, but among al Paris beareth the price,Paris cal∣led some∣time Lu∣tecia. for as sometime the citie of Athens, mother of liberall artes & of letters, nourisher of Philosophers, & well of all sciences, made it solempne in science & in conditions a∣mong Gréeks, so doth Paris in this time; not only France but also all ye other deale of Europa. For as mother of wisdome, she receiueth all ye commeth out of euery country of the world; & helpeth thē in all that they néede, & ruleth all peacably and as a seruaunt of truth,The good re∣porte of France in times past, and the euill demenor, by mur∣der of late yeres agree not vvell to∣gether. she sheweth her selfe debtie to wise man & vnwise: this ci∣tie is full good & mightie of riches, it re∣ioyseth in penee there is good aire of ri∣uers according to Philosophers, that bée faire fields, medes emditalhs to refresh & comfort the eien of them yt he weary in study, ther be couenable streets & houses, namely for studiers. And neuerthelesse ye citie is sufficient toxiteius & to sld all other yt come therto. And pusseth al other cities in these things, & in such other like. Of Flandera. chap. 58. Flanders is a prouince of Gallia bel∣gica, by the eliffes of the occean, & hath Germania in the east side, and the Iland of Britaine in the North and the French sea in the West, & in the South ye parte of France that is called Gallia Seonen∣sis, and Burgoine. Though this prouince be little in space, yet it is wealthy of ma∣ny speciall things and  For this lands is plenteous, and full of pastures of eatiell and of beastes yall and reth of the best townes, haneris of the sea; and of famous riuers, and well nigh all about is moisted with Scaldeli. The  ther∣of be séemely: and faire of dy & strong, and they get many children. And they bée rich of all   chaften, and generally faies and serlye of face, milde of will and faire of speach, sad of beering, honest of clothing, peace∣able to their owne neighbours, true and trustie to straungers, passing withyr in Wooll craft, by their carftie working, a great parte of the worlde is succoured and helped in woollen clothes. For of the principall Wooll, which they have out of Englande, with theyr subtill crafte bée made many noble clothes, and bée sent by sea and also by land into many diuerse Countries. And the lande is plaine, and beareth good corne. In many places ther∣of grow many trées, but not many woods. There be in some places marrises and moores, in which they digge turues and make fire thereof in stéede of wood, often times therof is made hot fire and strong, and more effectuall then of wood, but that fire is lesse profitable touching the ashes, and heauie sauour and smell. Of the Prouince Fenicia. Chap. 59. FEnix is a prouince, & hath that name at Fenice the brother of Cathini. For Fenix was put out of Glebis The bis in Aegipt, & driuen into Sir, & reigned in Sidon, and called the land after his own name Fenicia. It is the land wherin Ti∣rus is, against the which spake Esay, as Isid. saith li. 15. & 9. This lande hath A∣rablam in the East side, and the red Sea in the South, & the Sea of middle earth in the West, and mount Lebanian in the North. And so this land is best in trées, chiefe in corne & fruite, with most plen∣tie of ke, of Olle, and of bonnye: In this land be  ye mou fields moisted with wells, and other Gaters. In those most ities bee  into  of diuers ine. (Additiō.Phoenicia, or Phoenice, a region in Siria nere to India:) Of Phrigia. chap. 60. FRigia is a prouince of the lesse Asia, and hath that name of Frigra the daughter of Europa. This Countrye is nigh to Ga in the North side; and Liddonia in the South: & femeth in some part to Liddia in the East side: & endeth at Hellespont  in the North, as Isidore saith, libro. 15. There be two lands, and either is called Frigia  the thore Frigia hath ther in Smirinam, & Hillium is in ye
lesse. The riuer Hernicis departeth Li∣caonia and Phrigia as he sayth. And Phrigiacis called Dardanica, and hath that name of Dardanus, he came out of Greece with his brother Dracius, and warne Phrigia, and reigned therein, and called the lande Dardanica by his owne name: and Dracius occupyed Dra∣chiam. (Additiō.Phrigia, a Realme in Asia the lesse, hauing on the East, Cappadoria: on the South. Lycaonia: on the West, Troas on the North, Galatia, Dar∣danus the name of a Prince, raigning in that parte of Phrigia, where Trota stedde, which was of him called Dar∣dania.) ¶Of Frista. chap. 61. FRista is a Prouince in the lower partes of Germanye, and stretcheth full long vppon the Clyffe of Occean, and beginneth from the end of the Kine, and endeth at the Danish Sea. The men of Germany, call men of this land, Frisones, & betwéene them and ye Ger∣maynes is great difference in cloathing, and in manner.: For welnigh all men be shorne rounde, and the more noble they be, the more worship they account to be shorrse the more nigh. And the men are high of body, strong of vertue; statue and flerce of heart, and swifte, and nimble of body, and they vse yron speares in stéeds of arrowes. The lans is plaine with much léese, and pastures, and with grasse & hearbs, and without trées and woode, and they make fire of rwes full of glowe, and of the ouge or Deni and Kine dried and burned. The minde free, and not sub∣iect so Lordship of other Nations, & put them in perill of death euss of r duttie, and they had rather dye, than bée vnder the . There∣fore they for sae dignitie of  end suffer short  and to bée grea∣ter among them; vnder the Liti of igg  but they subiect to iud∣ges that the  house of themselues from yere so yere which  be Communni∣tie among them. They loue ∣tie, and punish all the vnchast, right gre∣uously: and they keepe their Children chast, vnto the time that they are of full age, and so when they be béedded, they got manly children and strong. (Additiō.Frisij, People of Holland, where∣of the Countrey is called Friseland.) ¶Of Insulis Fortunatis. ca. 62. THe fortunate Ilandes stand in the Occean, afore the lefte side of Mau∣ritania, and be full nigh to the West. And be departed a sonder with the sea, as Isidore sayth, lib. 15. And be called the Ilandes of Fortune, for plentie of all manner of good and namely of Corne & of fruits. And for noble ground and plen∣teous, the errour of Nations & makings of Poets déemed, that these Ilands wer Paradise, as Isidore sayth libro. 15. and Plinius saith the same li. . ca. 53. And he saith that there grow trées of Tlt foote. Therein to plentie of apples, and multi∣tude of Byrdes, and much hony & milke, and namely in the Ile that is called Ca∣prana, which hath that name of Goates and of Wethers, for full many be ther∣in. There be wonderfull strong hounds, and namely in the Ile that is called Ca∣naria, the which hath that name of the huge number of great mightie hounds. (Additiō.Fortunatae Insulae, the fortunate Iles which wet in ye great Occean sea, & of Pliny are heeried to be & of Solinus  of Ptholome a which he calleth also, ye Iles of ye Gods: for ye wholsomnes of ye aire, & winds blowing ther. Also ye plen∣tie of good fruits; & fertiltie of ye grow. It is thought of soone mē, to be those Iles, which are now called Canaria, distaunt from spaine toward ye west. 12 do. miles, after ye account of Petrus Martir. Of these Iles are founde to be 7. in number. First about ye yere of our Lord 405. a French more called Betimlio,  ye cō∣maundement of Katheren, then Dulicite of Castell, found two of them, and called the one Launcelor, and the other, Fae Vnu. South after, one  in this He∣ & his wife found other two, & called ye  Forream, & the other Gomera. Af∣ter yt the great Canaria was found, by fus de Vris, & Michael de Moxico
Last of all, by commaundement of Fer∣nando; & Elizabeth, late king & Quéene of Spaine, Teneriph and Palma, were found by Alphonsus Lugo, so that now all the seauen Iles, be vnder the Domi∣nion of the King of Spaine. Notwith∣standing, some suppose, that these be not the Iles, which were called Fortunatae, but rather those, more south, called now of the Portugals, Insulae capitis viri∣dis. D. Cooper.) Of Galilea. chap. 63. GAlilea is a countrey in Palestina, and hath that name, for that the men thereof: he more white than men of o∣ther countries of Palestina: and Gali∣lea is double, the ouer and the neather, and they ioyne togethers, and stretcheth vnto Siria, and so the Prouince of Fe∣rus. In either is grounde: very apte is be are corne and fruite. There is plentie of dines, and of olyues and of water, for in some part thereof, the riuer Iordane runneth thereby. There be most noble lakes, profitable and healthfull, and bée there called seas for hugenesse and mul∣titude of Fishes. And (as Isidore sayth) ther is the lake that is called Lacus Ti∣beriadis, and hath that name of a iowne that so is called, and is more wholsome than all the other, and more effectuall to health and preseruation of bodyes. And containeth ten, forlongs, Looke before in the Lake Tiberiades and in Lacus Ge∣nesar  ractatu de A & stagt. AdditionGalilea, a countrey which cheth on Synas Arabia, & Ayps. Of Galatia. chap. 64. GAlatia is a Countrey in Europe, and hath that name of French men that dwelled therein and were called Galles as Isidore, sayeth, libro. . & . The King of Bithinia, called the Gallen to helpe him and he had the victorye, and departed, the kingdome with them, and the Galles were afterward  & with the Greekes, and were called Gallograth but now they haue name of the olde Galles, and he called Galli. This land is full ide and large, and most plente∣ous, and containeth a great deale of Eu∣rope, and is now called Kufenea of ma∣ny men. (Additiō.Gallatia, or Gallogrecia a Coun∣trey in the lesse Asia, is ioyning to Phri∣gia and Lidia) Of Gallitia. chap. 65. GAllitia is a Prouince in Spaine, and hath that name of whitenesse of: the men that dwell therin, for they be more white, than men of other Countryes of Spaine, as it is sayd. This land beareth well corne and fruite, and is nigh to the Occean, there is plentie of much good & cattell. The men say, that they come of the Gréekes: and so they be strong in kinde wit, as Isidore sayeth libro. 9. For after the battaile of Troye, manye of the Gréekes, came into Gallitia, and abode there. ¶Of Gallia. chap. 66. GAllia is a Prouince of Europe, be∣twéene the mountaines Alpes Pn∣nine, and the British Occean, and hath that name of olde time of whitenesse of men: for Gallia Gréeke, and is sayd, milke. Therefore Sybel called them Gal∣les, that is to say, white: and shée sayd, that milke necks should be wreathed in golde: for by diuersitie of heauen, face and colour of men, appeare the diuers qualyties of their stomacks and bodies, Rome gendreth beuismen, Gréece light, Affrica nylesalt, and Fraunce, kindles ere men, and sharpe of  Isidore sayeth lib. 9. This land hath Germanye in the East side: Spaine in the West, Italy in the South, and  in the North, at the British Occean, as, Isid. sayth. Sometime this lande was diui∣ded in thrée ports that was called To∣g, Celtica and Belgica: but now French man dwell in these Prouinces and, of them the doubt hath that name, and is called F:  is Litters.  and of Francia. (AdditiōGallia at noble Region, set be∣twéene S  the
bordereth on the mountaines Alpes. That which ioyneth to Germany, was called Belgica, and was contained be∣twéene the riuers Scalde and sequana, or Seyne. That parte which marcheth to the mountaines, was called Celtica, or Lugdunensis, and was contained be∣twéene the riuers Seyne and Garumna, or Geronde. That which bordereth on Spaine, called Aquitania, was bounded with the mountaines Pyrenaei, Caesar boundeth the parte called Celtica, with the riuers Rhene and Gerond. Agtip∣pa describeth Gallia betwéene the riuer Rhene, the mountaines Pyrenei, the Occean sea, and the mountains Geben∣na, and Iura. Moreouer, that which is now called Lumbardie, was called Gal∣lia Cisalpina.) ¶Of Gadis. chap. 67. GAdes is an Ilande in the ende of Spaine, and departeth Affrica from Europe, wherein Hercules set wonder∣full and noble Pillers, in token of con∣quest. And thence commeth springing of the Sea Tirrenum, out of the wells of the Occean, and is departed from the next land sixe score paces. The Tyres came from the red sea and occupied this Iland, and called it Gadis in theyr lan∣guage, that is to vnderstand, separated; for that Gadis is compassed with ye Sea about. Therein groweth a trée that is like to Palme, the gumme thereof lyke glasse, maketh a precious stone, that is called Ceramina, as Isid. saith li. 15. And this land maketh many countries of the world, rich of fruite and spicerie, and namely Countries of the west. (Additiō.Gades, two Iles in the further part of Spaine beyonde Granate, which in worthinesse of men before time haue ex∣celled. For at one time, there were in Rome 500. men of this Countrey Citi∣zens of the order and state of Gentle∣men. In the lesse of those two Ilands, it is reported that grasse is so battling, as the milke of the beasts doth cast no whaye, nor can haue any chéese made of it, vnlesse it be mixed with much wa∣ter. It is written moreouer, that vnlesse the beastes there féeding, be often let bloud, they will within thirtie dayes be stiffeled and dye with fat. Which ferti∣litie may séeme to giue occasion of the Fuble of Gerions beasts, that Hercules droue away. ¶Of Grecia. chap. 68. GRecia hath that name of Grecus, & King that dwelled therein; and gaue thereto his owne name, as Isido. saith, lib. 15. The Prouinces thereof he eyght, Dalmatia in the West, then is Epyrus, after Helladas, then Thessalia, after that Macedonia, and after Achaia: & twaine in the sea, creta and cyclades, and is a Countrey most wide and large, and hath many other names, and is full plentifull of riches both of the sea, and of lande, & is Lady of many Kingdomes, nourisher of chiualrie, mother of Philosophie, fin∣der and mistres of all good sciences. In olde time, men thereof, were the best warriors, and indued th giftes of wit and of wisedome: they were faire & most eloquent speakers, subiect to latre, milde to strangers, peaceable and easie to men of that land, and were wroth and high hearted to men that would do wrong to their neighbours, and would not suffer it, but withstood such wrongs, with all their might, as Varro telleth, in libr. de laudibua Grecorum. (Additiō.Grecia, (the fountaine of prowesse and doctrine, and nourse of eloquence) a great and famous Countrey, containing these noble Regions, Epyrus, Acarna∣nia, Aetolia, Phocis, Locris, Achais, Messenia, Laconia, Argos, Megaris, At∣tica, Boetia, Doris, Phthiotia, Thessalia, Magnesia, Macedonia, and Thracia. All the which of late yeares, were vnder the yoke of Christs religion, and now alas, to the great discomfort of all perfect chri∣stian men, are vnder the most cruell sub∣iection and seruitude of the great tirant the Turke, & become barbarous, liuing in the beastlye superstitions, of the false Prophet Mahomet.) Addition. GEre I haue thought good for ye better vnderstanding of ye christian reader,Addition to note what Mahomet was, which the
great Turke so highlye extolleth. Ma∣chumet was first a poore man, & a buyer and seller of Camells. Afterward he fell acquainted with an Heretike Monke, called Sergius, by whose meanes he de∣clared himselfe to be a Prophet, & tooke vpon him as well to reforme the olde Lawe, as the newe. He wonne great Realmes, and at the age of fortie yeares dyed (as some suppose) of the falling sick∣nesse, which he long time did dissemble faining, that the Angell Gabriel, was sent to him in message, whose brightnes he might not sustaine. Mahomete or Machumet, had to his father, one Abdalla, by stocke an Aun∣cestrie, a Persian or Arabian borne, and had to his mother Emma a Iew, & was borne in Iesrab, on a munday, being the 12. daye of the moneth Rabe, about the yere of our Lord 597. or .621. his father dyed a litle before his birth. His geneologie is reuolued with mon∣strous and blasphemous sables, vnto the time of Seth and Adam, he was borne without any doloust or paine felt by his mother: and when he was circumcised, he was merry and laughing, but whe∣ther this is to be beleeued, iudge you. At the very houre and time of his death, the Idolls fell downe by themselues, & Lu∣cifer was taken of Angells, and drow∣ned in the déepe Sea Alcazum, from whence after fortie daies, being escaped, calling together a counsaile of Diuells, he complained of the destruction of his kingdome, beside many other friuolous and lyeng wonders. As touhing his education, that the Birdes and Windes did strine for his bringing vp, and that he was commit∣ted to one Halima: and that an Asse, inclyning hir selfe downe said of Ma∣homet, Hic est sigillum Prophetarum, also how thrée men drew out his bow∣ells, and cleansed the Diuells porcion, out of his heart, &c. Mahomet coulde neyther read nor write, as he himselfe testifieth, In Al∣carono Azoara .17. being vtterly vnskil∣full and vnlearned in his youth. He had a great ioulte head, a face mixed with white and red, a long beard, and he was swift, and of very nimble féete. He had a quicke, subtle and craftie wit: and ler∣ned all manner of sects. Simoneta li. 4. cap. 36. Sergius the Bestorian Heretike com∣ming to Mecha, instructed him, worshi∣ping Idolls with his error, and delyue∣red vnto him, certaine rules out of the olde and new Testament. Mahomet maried one Eadiga, a rich widowe, whom he allured to loue him by Art Magieke, or witchery. And be∣cause he was often troubled with the falling euill, he made his wife beléeue, that so often as he fell, the brightnes of the Angell Gabriel was ye cause, whose presence his bodely force, could not a∣bide. Of his function, of his workes, of his doctrine, of his prophecies of his cō∣flicts, of his filthy lusts, and of his death: read the booke tituled, The Poore mans Librarie, set forth by Master William Alley, Bishop of Exceter .1560. Of Gethulia. cap. 69. GEthulia, is a prouince of Affrica, and hath that name of Gréeks, the which descended either of the Gréekes, or els of those men that remained of the Na∣tion of the Gothes, as Isidore sayeth, lib. 9. They gathered a great hoast, and sayled into the parts of Libia, and those there their place, and be there to this daye, and for they come of Greekes, by deriuation of name, they be called Getu∣li. And therefore is an opinion among the Gréekes, that that Nation is néere of kinne vnto them, as Isidore saith lib. 9. Beside these men, dwell Gelones, peo∣ple, that stretch from the South to the Hesperie Occean, which men goe about and straye in Desarte. This name Ge∣lon came of an Iland Gaulon, that is beside Aethiopia, where no Serpent is bred, nor may liue therein, as he sayeth. Also in the ende of Affrica, be as it were beastiall men that be called Gara∣mantes, and haue that name of Gara∣mant the King, the sonne of Apollo. He buylded there a Towne, and called it Garama, by his owne name. Plynius speaketh of them and saith,
that they be verely departed, and farre from company of mankinde. (Additiō.Getae, a People which some suppose to be those, which are in Norwaye and Gothia. Some say that they be more in the Northeast in Scythia, pertaining to Europe: some thinke that it is ye Peo∣ple of the Countreyes Valachia, and Transyluia.) ¶Of Gorgones. Cap. 70. GOrgones be Iles of Occean, afore the forland that is called Vesperaserus. Therein dwelled women that wer cal∣led Gorgones Feminine, and they are said Alith Veloci, in English swifte, for roughnesse and sharpnes of body, &c. and of them the Glandes had the name, as Isid. saith li. 15. (Additiō.Gorgones, monstrous women, which were vanquished by Perseus, a noble Knight, which delyuered a faire Lady, called Andromada from a Whale, and also slew Medusa, which turned men in∣to stones: whether by hir pride, hir hayres were tourned to Adders, or by lecherous lust she brought all hir louers to a shamelosse forgetfulnesse, for that Serpents signifieth pride, and lecherye, shamelesse hardinesse.) ¶Of Gothia. cap. 71. GOthia is a Prouince of the neather Scythia in Europe, and hath that name as men suppose of Magog the son of Iophet, as Isidore sayth libro. 9. And so he sayth, that those old Nations wer called both Gethas and Gotos, and wer sometime most strong men and huge of body, & vsed most dreadfull maner of ar∣mor and wepous. And men déeme, that children that came of them occupied the most part of Europe and of Asia: For their children be Danes & manye other Nations in the West. Getuli in Affri∣ca, and Amazones in Asia, came of the Children of the Gothes, as he sayth li. 9. & 15. And this land is yet full wide, and hath in the North side, Norwaye, & Denmarke, and is compassed with ye sea Occean in the other sides. To this Countrey belongeth an I∣lande that is called Gothlandia, and is called the Iland of Gothes: for Gothes dwelled there sometime. The Iland bea∣ceth well Corne, therein is much Pa∣sture, and fish, and occupied in manye manner merchaundises and chaffer: for many manners skinnes and plentie of money other merchaundise and chaffe are brought out of diuers landes and Countrayes in Shippes to that Iland. And bée dde thence by Occean into Germanye, Fraunce, Britaine, and Spaine. (Additiō.Gothi, and Gotthi, an Ile by Den∣marke, called Gutland, not farre from Norwaye, from whence the people first came, vnto whom resorted a great mul∣titude of other people, as well out of the Countreyes now called Prussia, Liuo∣nia, Russia, and Tartaria, as diuers o∣ther parts called Scythia, and making sundrie Kings, did deporulate and bring in subiection, the more part of Europe, and finally destroyed Rome, and inha∣bited the parte of Italy, now called, Lumbardye, and lykewise subdued the Realmes of Castile, and Arra∣gon.) ¶Of Gnydo. chap. 72. GNidum is a Countrie in an Iland a∣gainst Asia, betwéene Siria & Italia, toward Pamphiliam and Ciliclam, ly∣eng against Creta, as it is sayde in the Glose super Acta Aposto. 27. Gnydus, a Citie in Licia.Addition ¶Of India. chap. 73. INde is a Countrey in East Asia, and hath that name of the Riuer Indus, and is cloased therewith in the West. This Countrey stretcheth from the South side into the East, and out of the North vnto the Mount Caucasus. Therein are manye manner of men, and Townes, and also the Ilande Tra∣bo, fult of precious stones, and Ele∣phauts.
Therein be also the Ilands Grisa, and Arge, that are plenteous and rich of gold and of siluer, and also profitable in trées that neuer léese their leaues. And in In∣die be most noble riuers, Ganges, Indus, and Hippanes, that adorne the Coun∣tries of Inde. Also Inde is most whole∣some in Westerne winde, and beareth corne twice a yeare. Therein be men of dyed coulour, and great Elephants, and Unicornes, and Popiniayes, and Hebe∣ous a trée, that so is called, Cinamom, Pepper, and a réede that smelleth full éete. It sendeth out thereof precious stones, Berillus, Chrisoprassus, Carbun∣cles, Adamantes, Margarites, and Uni∣ons, that great Ladies so feruentlye de∣sire. There be hills of golde, and it is impossible to come thereto for dragons and Griphous, and for many manner of men wonderfully shapen, as Isido. saith: and all these foresaid words be his, libro decimo quinto. Also among all Coun∣tries and landes of the world, Inde is greatest, most rich, most mightie, & most full of people. Therefore Plinius. li. 6. ca. 19. telleth wonders of the might & mul∣titude of the Indes. And he saith, that in Inde be many kings, and some of them hath vnder him foure hundred thousand men of armes, and some sixe hundred Cuneos of horsemen, and 9. thousande Elephants, that take wages euery daye, and so the land is most full of riches. And some one hath sixtie thousand foote men, and a thousand horse men, and sea∣uen hundred Elephants, & alwaye these men be arayed to warre and to battell, and so the land is strong, mightie & rich. And as it is sayd there, some of the In∣dies till the earth, and some vse chiualry, and some vse merchaundise and lead out chaffer,The com¦mōvveale very vvell gouerned some rule and gouerne The comminte at best. And some be about the kings, and some be Iustices & domes men, some giue them principally to Re∣ligions, and to learning of wit and of wisedome: and as among all Countries and landes Inde is the greatest & most rich: so among all landes, Inde is most wonderfull. For as Plinius saith li. 7. chap. 3. Inde aboundeth in wonders, by a long space toward Aethiopia. In In∣de be many huge beasts bred, and more greater bounds, than in other lands. Al∣so there be so high trées, that men may not shoote to the top with an arrowe, as it is sayd, and that maketh the plenty & fatnesse of the earth, and temperatenesse of weather, of aire, and of water. Figge trées spred there so broade, that manye great companies of Knights may sit at meate vnder the shadowe of one trée. Al∣so, there are so great réedes and so long, that euery péece betwéene two knottes, beareth sometime thrée men ouer ye wa∣ter. Also there be men of great stature, passing fiue Cubites of height, and they neuer spet, and haue neuer head ach, nor tooth ach, nor sore eyen, nor they bée not grieued with passing heate of the Sun, but rather made more harde and sadde therewith. Also their Philosophers, that they call Gimnosophistae, stande in most hot grauell from the morning till euen, and behold the Sunne without blemish∣ing of their eyen. Also there, in some mountains be men with the soles of the feete turned backward, and the foote also, with eight toes in one foote. Also ther be some with houndes heades, and be cloa∣thed in skinnes of wilde beasts, & they barke as hounds, and speake none other∣wise: and they liue by hunting and fow∣ling, and they are armed with theyr nayles and féeth, and be full many, aboue sixe score thousand, as he sayth. Also a∣mong some nations of Inde, be women that beare neuer childe but once, and the children were white haired, anone as they be borne. There be Satires and o∣ther men wonderfully shapen: of them it is spoken in the treatise of monstrous beasts. Also in the ende of Inde, about the rising of Ganges be men without mouths, and they be cloathed in mosse, and in rough hairy things, which they gather of trées, and liue commonly by o∣dors & smell at the nosethrills. And they neither eate, neither drink but only smel odors of floures and of wilde appples, & liue so, & they die anone in euill odor and smell: and other there be, that liue full long, & séeme aged neuer, but dye as if were in middle age. Also some be hore in youth, & black in age. Plini. rehearseth
these wonders and many other moe. Addition. AdditionINdea, a great rich Countrie, called in English Indv, lieng on the South part of ye world, which as Ptholomeus wri∣teth, is diuided into two parts. The one is called Indie within the riuer of Gan∣ges, which on the west is bounded with Aracosia and Gedrosia: on the East, hath the great riuer called Ganges: on the North with the hill called Imaus: on the South and West, with parte of the Indian sea. The other part of Indie wt∣out Ganges, is bounded on the west with the sayd riuer Ganges: on the North, with part of Scythia and Setica: on the East with the Region called Sinaruni: on the South with the Indian sea. Nearchus, great Alexanders Admirall, affirmed (as Aanus writeth) that it was foure months iourney by ye plaines of Indie, Megasthenes saite, that the breadth of Indie, from the East to the west, cōtaineth 16000. furlongs, which is 2102. miles. The length frō ye North to the South 22000 furlongs, which is 2850. miles. Caesias affirmeth it to bee as much as the residue of Asia: but O∣nesicritus which wrote the actes of A∣lexander, denieth it to be the third parte of Asia. There are alwayes two Sum∣mers, and fruites and graine twice ga∣thered. The windes be alwayes tem∣perate, the beastes and Fowles much greater, than in other Countreyes, and of more diuers kindes. The names of the Countreyes and Cities there, be now otherwise, than they were in the time of the auncient Writers. They which bee now knowen, shall bée de∣clared in their places, with the moun∣tants and riuers which are great aboue all other. (Additiō.Of the thrée principall riuers in In∣die, Ganges, Indus, and Hyphasis: Ganges, a great Riuer that diuideth Indi, called in holye Scripture Phi∣l. one of the foure riuers which come soorth of Paradise. Iosephus doth in∣terpert if Inundation The bredth ther∣of (as Sohos writeth) is in the nar∣rowest place eight miles, in the brodest, twentie miles. Ananus writeth, that where it is narrowest, it is in bredth one hundred furlongs, which is eight miles. In many places, it spreadeth so wide, that where the gerunde is most plaine, nor any high place appeareth, no man may discerne anye thing of the o∣ther side: in the shallowest place, it is an hundred foote deepe. There runneth into it, seauenteene great Riuers, euerye one of them able to beare a shippe. In this Riuer of Ganges is an Ile, and therein a great Citie, called Palibetia, the Country is called Phrasia, the king whereof as Plyme writeth lib. 6. cap. 19. hath alwayes in wages 600000. foot-men, 30000. hors-men, and 9000. Elephants.) (Additiō.Indus is a notable Riuer, that commeth from the great Mountaine Taurus, and incleaseth Indie on the West, and runneth into the Indian sea. Into this Riuer runneth nineteene great and famous Riuers, the least of them is more, than the great Riuer of Donowe. Where he is broadest, Stra∣bo sayeth, that they which doe write most moderately of Indus, doe affirme, that he is in breadth fiftie furlongs, which is twelue miles and a halfe. The water thereof causeth great fertilitie, when it ouerfloweth, and thereof many sundry pleasant and wholsome fruites, doe spring without labour.) (AdditiōHypasis, or as some doe write, Hypanis, Arianus calleth it Hyphasis, a great Riuer, which runneth out of the mountaines of Scythia into Indie, and commeth into the famous riuer of Gan∣ges, and is in breadth seauen furlongs, as Diodorus writeth, libro. 17. The streame thereof is so swifte, that no man may passe euer it, by the space of fiue dayes sayling. The water is fresh: af∣ter that it commeth within foure daies sailyng of the sea, it is wonderfull bit∣ter, by reason of a bitter Fountayne, which runneth into it. At this Riuer, the great Alexander finished his iour∣ney, and went no farther into Indie, but did there set vp twelue Altars of Stone, euerye of them fiftye Cubites
in greatnesse. D. Cooper. ¶Of Hircania. chap. 74. HIrcania, is a Prouince in Asia, vn∣der the mount Caucasus, and is a lull wide countrey: and there be manye men of diuers Nations and tongues, as Isidore sayth lib. 15. Also Orosius saith, that the land stretcheth from the mount Caucasus vnto Scythia. Therein are fortie foure Nations, that passe right far and wide for plentie of the lande. Some of them till lande, and some liue by hun∣ting, and some be cruell and beastiall, and wonderfullye shapen, and lyue by mans flesh and drinke mans bloud, as Isidore sayeth libro. 15. And he sayeth there, that Hircania hath the name of a Woode, that is called Irrana, and ly∣eth toward Scythia, and the Sea Cas∣pium is in the East side, and the more Armenie in the South, and Albania in the North, and Hiberia in the West. And it is sharpe of woodes, with plen∣tie of many great wilde beastes, Par∣tes, Tigres, and Panters. There brée∣deth birdes that are called Hircanic, their feathers shine by night, and such birdes are founde in Germany, as Isi∣dore sayeth. In the time of Macha∣beus Iohn Hircanus, the sonne of Si∣mon the chiefe Priest, ouercame ye men of this Hircania. And the sayde Iohn was called Hircanus because he ouer∣came that Countrey, as the master say∣eth in his historie, in the beginning of the storie of the Gospell: and Hierome saith the same. (Additiō.Hyrcania, a Countrey in Asia, Hyrcanum mare, the Sea now called, Marc Abacucke, or Mare de Sala.) ¶Of Idumea. chap. 75. IDumea is a Countrey in Arabia, and hath that name of Edom, that was Esau Isaacs sonne: for Esau Isaacs sonne was called so. Also Esaus children that was also called Edom, did expulse, and put out the Amorreis, and dwelled in that lande, and called it Idumea af∣terward. Idumea is to vnderstande, the lande of Edoms children. And Idumea and Palestina, are departed by certaine Desarts. The bordets of Idumea stret∣theth vnto the Red sea, and this lande is strong, and full of mountaines, and is scituate vnder strong heat of ye Sun: therefore people of that Country, make them houses and caues vnder the earth, to héepe them from strong heate of the Sunne, as the Glose sayeth super Ab∣diam. (Additiō.Idumea, a Region in Syria, ioyn∣ing to Aegypt, and bordering vpon Pa∣lestine. Of Iudea. chap. 76. IVry is a Countrey in Palestina, and hath that name of Iudas Ia∣cobs sonne. Men of his lygnage, were Kings therein. This land was first cal∣led Canaan, & had that name of Chams sonne: or els of ten Nations of Cha∣naneis, the which being expulsed & put out, the Iewes possessed that lande. The length thereof beginneth at the stréete Arpha, and stretcheth vnto the stréete Iuliatem, whereas is the com∣mon dwelling of Iewes and of Tires. The breadth thereof stretcheth from mount Libanus, to the side of Tiberia∣des: & in the middle of this Iudea, is the Citie of Ierusalem, as it were the na∣nell of all the Countrie and lande, and is rich of diuers riches, and beareth well corne and fruite: and is onely endow∣ed with waters and riches of Baume. Therin be many trées, Cedars, palmes, Cipres, and other noble trées. Therein be many vines and vineyards, Pome∣granardes and Olyues. The lande is rich of milke and of honny, therefore, by the grace of Elementes, the Iewes suppose that this land was promised to their forefathers, and that it flowed milke and honnie, for it was promised to them by aprerogatiue of name, as Isi. sayeth libro 15. cap. 4. Plinius speaketh of this land & saith, that Iudea is a part of Siria, & stretch∣eth farre and wide, and is next to Egipt
and Arabia, and the countreyes therein be departed with sharpe mountaines, & the Riuer Iordan runneth there, and de∣parteth Galile from other Countreyes of Iudea. In Iudea is Ierusalem, and is the most noble Citie of all the Cities of the East, and in Iudea be hot wels, and healthfull. Also in the ende thereof is the dead sea, that is called, Latus Asphal∣tes, and is so called, for it bréedeth no∣thing that hath life: but therein is glewe, and nothing liueth therein: if a∣ny thing aliue be throwen therein, it swimmeth aboue, and this dead Sea, swalloweth the riuer of Iordane, and spilleth good water medled with water of pestilence. (Additiō.Iudea, a Countrey in Asia, which hath on the West, Mare Cyprium, on the North, Phoenitia, and Syria: on the East, Arabia: on the South, the Lande of Aegypt. It receiued the name of Iudas the sonne of Iacob, the Patriarke, where before it was cal∣led Chananaea, of Chananaeus the fourth sonne of Cham. Of the miserable estate of these peo∣ple, remaining a common example vnto all nations of the world, to beware (that they likewise giue not ouer themselues, to open resisting of the truth of Iesus Christ, against the Maiestie of God, lest they come likewise to be dispearsed, and made a scattering generation) which for their common contempt of Christ, as va∣gabonds, driuen forth of euery Christi∣an Kingdome. Iudei, not onely the people of Iudea: but also they be so called, which doe ob∣serue their superstition. They were ex∣pelled out of the Realme of Englande, in the time of King Richard the first, for their crueltie in slaieng of Chri∣stian Children: lyke as they haue bene out of Fraunce, and Spaine, and now of late out of Portugal.) (Additiō.In Iurye is God knowen, his name is great in Israel. At Salem is his tabernacle: and his dwelling in Si∣on. Psal. 76. Iurie the lande of promise wherein Christ was borne. Israel are the faythfull congregation. Salen is Ie∣rusalem. Sion the place of Dauid, on mount Sion  aboue Ierusalem and in Ierusalem was the holy temple. Of Iberia. chap. 77. IBeria is a Country in Asia, and nigh the sea that is called Pontus, & ioyneth to Armenia. In this land grow hearbs, that bée good for Diers, as Isidore saith lib. 15. (Additiō.Iberia the auncient name of Spaine, also another Countrye nigh to Armenia, it is of some written with H. Of Italy. chap. 78. ITaly is a greate Countrie in Eu∣ropa, and sometime Gréekes dwel∣led therein, and was therefore called the greate Grecia, as Isidore saith, lib. 15. And after that lande was called Sa∣turnia, and had that name of Satur∣nus the King. For when Saturnus was put out of his place by Iupiter, hée hidde himselfe there. And this land was called Italia at last, and had that name of Italus King of Cicile, that reigned therein. The length thereof is more then the breadth, and stretcheth out of the North north West, to the East North east, and is closed in the South with the sea Terrenum, and in the North with the sea Adriaticum, and endeth in the West at great mountains called Alpes. This land is most fayrest in all things, most kind ground to beare plentye of foode: therein be noble wa∣ters and lakes, as Benenatum, Auer∣num, and Lucrinum, and many other Riuers, as Eridamis, or Padus, Tibe∣ris, Herianus, and other such. There∣in bréede precious stones, that is to wit, Ligurium, Gagates, Pearles, and Corall. Also there are bread Boa, the ser∣pent, and Linx the wilde beast, and many other singular kindes of Birdes. Also this Countrye is called Hespe∣ria, and hath that name of a starre that is called Hesperus, as Spaine is cal∣led. For Gréekes sayling into Ita∣laye and into Spaine, take héede of that starre.
But Spaine is called the last Hespe∣ria, for Spayne is in the last place vn∣der the West. Huc vsque Isidorus, libro. 15. Among all the West countryes and landes of Europe, Italye beareth the price. Therein are noble Ilandes, and solempne hauens of the sea, and those Prouinces be full of riches, and Cities most full of people, & most strong wals and Ditches, with other araye of warre, with plentie of golde and of siluer. Lib. 2. Plinius sayth, that therein be twelue famous and most mightie perticular Countryes, besides the Ilands, of whom he treateth largely. And this lande is cloased all about in the East, North, & West, with full high mountaines cal∣led Alpes, out of which Mountaines, spring noble riuers, the Rine and Da∣nubius, which runne by Germany, and Rodanus and Secana, and many other, that runne by Fraunce, that moisten the Countreyes all about, and namelye, the parts of Fraunce, that be called, Gallia Lugduniensis, and Gallia Narbonensis, and Gallia Belgica. (Additiō.Italia, a noble Countrey, which is inuironed on the West, with the moun∣taines Alpes: on the North, with the Sea Adriaticum: on the East and the South, with the Sea Mediterraneum, and Fretum Siculum. It also contayn∣eth these Regions. Liguria, Ethruria, Vmbria, Flammia, Larlum, Apiutium, Campania, Apulia, Venetia, Picenum, Gallia cisalpina, called Lumbardie. The length thereof (after Plynie) is 1020. miles: the breadth in some pla∣ces betwéen the two seas foure hundred and ten miles. It was sometime named, Magna Grecia, because it was inhabi∣ted with Gréekes, as Mirsilius writeth. Solinus resembleth the figure thereof to an Oaken leafe, extending more in length, than in breadth, toward the end being diuided, as it were into two hornes, whereof the one lyeth towarde the Sea Ionicum: the other looketh to to the narrowe Sicilie, called Fretum Si∣culum. In the narrowest place, it passeth not in breadthe, twentye myles. Italica, a Citie in Italy, which by another name, is called Confinium. There is another in Spaine, where Si∣liue Italicus was borne.) ¶Of Hispania, chap. 79. THe countrey of Spaine, was first called Hiberia, and had that name of the riuer Hiberus, and was after∣warde called Hispania, and hadde that name of the Riuer Hispalus, (as it it sayd). And this lande was called His∣pera, and had that name in olde time of the West euening starre. And this land is betwéene Affrica and Europa, and is cloased in the North side with ye moun∣taines Pyreneis, and is closed with the Sea all about in the other sides, and the aire there is very healthy, ther is a∣bundance of all corne and fruite, & most rich of precious stones and of mettall. Most noble Riuers runne through this land, as Betis, Minius, Hiberus, Ta∣gus, and Pactolus, that draweth golde. Therein be sixe Prouinces, as Terra∣conis, Cartaginensis, Lusitania, Gal∣licia, and Betica: and in the other side of the arme of the sea in the countrey of Affrica Trangitania. And there be two Spaines, the hether and the farther. Huc. vs{que} Isido. li. 15. Orosius sayth, that Spayne is as it were a thrée corner to the roundnesse of landes: for it is beclypped nigh all a∣bout with the sea Occean and Tirreni, and is welnéere made an Iland: the next corner thereof is Eastward, and in the right side thereof is the Prouince of Guyan, and in the lefte side it is strai∣ned in with the Sea Balearicum: and nigheth the borders of Narbon. The se∣cond corner thereof, is toward ye North Northwest, where is Bernagicia, a Ci∣tie of Gallia, & reareth toward the sight of Britaine. The thirde corner thereof is toward ye Ilands Gades afore mount Athlant, that is in Affrica, in the other side of an arme of the Occean. Huc. vs∣que Orosius. Also Plinius prayseth Spaine in ma∣nye things, and namelye in mettall, and
sayeth, that nigh in all Spayne is plen∣tie of golde and siluer, of brasse, copper, and yron, of tinne and lead, both white and blacke. Therein be men and Nati∣ons great warriours, and strong. It is sayd, that some of them descended of the Greekes, and it is said also, that some of them were descended, & were successours of the Wysigothes, the same saith Isido. For therein be many speciall prouinces, that we know, and there is Galitia. Men of that countrey tell, that they came of the Greekes as Isidore saith lib. 9. Ther in is Asturis, and hath that name, for it is closed all about with mountains afore the riuer Asturius, and ther is Celtibe∣ria, and hath that name of Gallis Gelci∣cis, that bwelled vpon the Riuer Hibe∣rius. (*Hispania, a Countrey in the West part of Europe, called Spaine, somtime called Iberia, and Hesperia. It is muy∣roned on the South part, with the Sea Mare Meditaraneum, which diuideth Europe from Affrike: on ye North part, with the Sea, Mare Cantabricum: on the west, with the great Occean Sea: on the East with the Mounines Pyre∣nael, and the parte of the Realme of Fraunce, called Aquitania and Narbo∣nensis. This Countrey is diuided by Ptholome into three Regions: Bethica, wherin is Granado, Syuil, Cordubia, &c. Lucitania, wherein is Portugall, Galle∣tia, &c. Tarrhaconensis, wherein is Ca∣style, Lyons, and Arragon. At this time it containeth slue Realmes, Granado on the South part toward Affrike, Por∣tugall on the West, Gallecia and Bis∣kaye on the North, Arragon on the East, Castile and Lyons in the middle. Much of the West parte, by reason of Yorkes, Forrests, and for lacke of wa∣ter, is not fertill, nor well inhabited. The North part by reson of much cold, is not plenteous. The South parte is wonderfull fruitfull. It is in length, as Strabo writeth, 6000. furlongs, which is 850. miles: in bredth, 5000. furlongs, which is 625. miles. Plinius next vnto Italy, extolleth it in fertilite aboue all o∣ther Countreyes, in plentie of graine, wines, oyle, siluer, golde, and yron. Statius and Claudius doe no lesse com∣mend it. As touching for golde, and sil∣uer, Spaine is beholding to the Indies, from whence commeth yearely an infi∣nite masse of treasure: which if slouth and distrust, had not bene Pilates of England in finos past, those Indies had serued England and not Spaine, for the most part, as more plainly appeareth in the booke tituled, the Decade of ye West and East Indies, and Andrew The∣uer. ¶Of Hibernia. Cap. 80. IRelande is called Hibernia,Additiō. and is an Ilande of the Occean in Eu∣rope, and is nigh to the lande of Bri∣tayne, and is more narrow and straight than Britaine, but it is a more plente∣ous place. This Iland stretcheth out of the South into the North, as Isidore sayth libro. 15. The first partes thereof are toward the sea that is called Hybe∣rum Cantabricum Occeanum. And al∣so this Iland hath that name Hibernia, of the sea that is called Hyberum Oc∣ceanum. In this lande is much plentie of Corne fieldes, of wells and of riuers, of fairs meades and woods, of mettall, and of precious stones: for there is gen∣dred, a sixe cornered stone, that is to say, Iris, that maketh a Raine bowe in the aire, if it be set in the Sunne. And also there is sound a stone that is called Ga∣gates. And there is Iet sound and white Margarites. And concerning the whol∣some aire, Irelande is a good temperate countrye. There is litle or none passing heat or cold. Ther be wonderfull lakes, pondes and wells, for there is a lake, in which if a staffe, or a pole of trée be pight, and tarieth long time therein, the part that is in the earth turneth into yron, & the part that is in the water, tourneth into stone, and the part that is aboue the water, abideth still in his kinde of trée. There is another lake, in which if that thou throwest roddes of hasill, it turneth those roddes into Ashe, and againe ward, if ye cast ashe roddes therin, they tourne into hasill. Therein be places, in which
dead Carrions neuer rot: hut abide there alway vncorrupt. Also in Ireland is a little Iland, in which men dye not but when they be ouercome with age, they be borne out of that Ilande to dye without.Althogh the land, be free from ver∣mine, the men are not free from lice, vvhich cō¦meth of sluttish & filthy vse. In Ireland is no Serpent, no Fragges, nor vencuious Spider, but all the land is so contrary to venemous beasts: that if the earth of that lande be brought into another lande, & sprong on the ground, it slayeth Serpenies and Toades. Also venemous beasts flieth I∣rish wooll, skinnes and fells: and if ser∣pents or Toades be brought into Ire∣land by shipping: they dye anone. Ma∣nye other wonders are in that land. Solinus speaketh of Ireland and sai∣eth, that Irelande is nigh asmuch as Britaine, but the inhabitants thereof, be fierce, and lead an vnhumaine life. There is no Adder séene except it bée seldome. The people there vse to har∣bour no guests; they be warriours, andThey are more ci∣uill novv. drinke mens bloud that they slay, and wash first their faces therewith: right and vnright they take for one. There be no Bées, for if men throwe power or stones that is brought out of Irelande, into hiues, the swarmes forsake the ho∣ny combes. The Sea Hybernicum to∣ward Britaine, is full of waues, & vn∣quiet, and is in all the yeare vnneth a∣ble to sayle in, except it be fewe dayes, it is an hundred and thirtie thousande paces broad, &c. Huc vs{que} Solinus, De Mirab. mundi.The Irish men lyue long, and be helthy of body: but stran∣gers are molested vvith the flixe, a deadly dis¦ease if they a∣bide ther. Men of Ireland are sin∣gularly cloathed, and vnseemely arayed, and scarcely fed, they be cruell of heart, fierte of chéere, angry of speach & sharpe. Neuerthelesse they be frée hearted and faire of speach, and goodly to their owne Nation, & namely those men that dwell in woodes, marreyses, and mountaines. These men are plesed with flesh, apples, and fruite for meate, and with milk for drinke, and giue them more to playes & to hunting, than to worke and trauell. AdditionAs concerning Ireland, read Policro∣nicon lib. pri. cap. 32. ¶ Of Icana. chap. 81. ICaria is an Iland, one of Ciriades in the West side, and the sea Icari∣um hath the name of this land Icaria, & this lande is betwéene Samum and Cin∣thonum, and is not able to dwell in for high rocks and cragges, and also for it is hauenlesse in euery side, and hath this name Icaria, of one Icarus of Creta that was drowned therein, as Isidore sayeth libro. 15. (Additiō.Icaria, an Ile in the Sea Icarium, which is also called Icarus. Icarus the sonne of Dedalus, who hauing winges, (made by Arte) with his Father flewe out of the Ile of Crete, but when hée flew higher than his Father commaun∣ded, the ware, wherewith the fethers of his wings were glewed, melted with the heate of the Sunne: and ye feathers falling off, Icarus was constrayned to fall into the sea, afterward called, Mare Icarium, Icarus is also the name of the father of the chast Penelope, which was wife to Vlysses the Gréeke, and is also the name of a mountain in the Region of Athens: the Ile Icarus, is called Ich∣thicusa.) ¶Of an Iland. chap. 82. AN Iland is called Insula, and is a land compassed about with the sea, or with a riuer, or with a water, as it were set in the sea, as Isidore saith lib. 15. An Ilande is beaten all about with waues of waters, but it is not broke, nor destroyed with such beating, but by shouing and beating of water, and of waues on the sides of an Iland, the car∣thie parts be driuen and fastened toge∣ther, and so an Iland is made the more sadder and stedfast in the vtter oes. The vtter parts of Ilands be wasted, & vndermined with beating of waters: but about the inner parts they ioyne the faster together, because of wasting with∣out. Also Ilandes be some time heyted with waues and floudes of water, & bee made more by bringing thereto of earth and of sime. Ilands be gréene and plen∣teous, by sucking in at hoales of moy∣sture of waters and of humours. Of Caria. chap. 83. CAria a region in Asia,This chapter is added hauing on the North side the great riuer Meander: on the west the great riuer Icarium: on ye East Licia, & diuers other countries: toward the South, the mountaine Tau∣rus.
The people therof called Cares, were good men of war, & therfore euery where retained for soldiers, as Suizars, or Sut∣theners be now. (*Caunus a citie in Caria, by the riuer Calbis, this citie is verye queasie and daungerous to dwell in, both at other times of the yere, & specially in summer; and Autumn, as well for ye vntemperats heat of ye aire, as for the great abundance of fruites. Therefore it is reported, that the scituation is very vnwholesome, and the aire outragious. When Stratonicus a pleasant musttion, and merry conceited man, beheld the inhabitaunts thereof so wanne and ill coloured, he scoffed at them with this sentence of Homer, Tale qui∣deni genus est hominum, quale est foli∣orum: The men and the leaues of this Countrie looke verye lyke: that is, both man and pale without linelye coulour. For which scoffe, when the people were much gréeued, and bitterly railed at him, why (sayth hee) may I not iustlye call this a sicklye and queasie Citye, where dead men walk: with which aunswere, hée far more sharpelye nipped their dead∣ly coulours and wearish looks then he had done before. Of Carthage, chap. 84. CArthage is the name of a Citie and of a prouince of Affrica in Hispania: and there be two Carthages, the more and lesse: and Dido made both, shée went out of the Prouince of Fenir, and builded a citie on the cliffe of Af∣frica, and called the citie first Carca∣da in the language of Fenicia. And af∣terward the name was chaunged: and the citie was called Cartago. This citie when it was most famous, and not lesse renowmed then Rome, Sci∣pio with his Romane hoast destroyed and beate it to the grounde: as Isidore saith liber. 16. And nowe the Romanes haue builded it againe, as Isidore say∣eth. And another Cartage is in Affrica betwéene Bisantium & Numidia, & ioy∣neth in the North to the Sea that is cal∣led Mare Siculum, and stretcheth in the South to the Countrye of Getules. The next parte thereof beareth aboun∣dauntlye corne: and hath greate plen∣tye of Oyle and of fruite, and is full of mettall. In the farther parte towarde Nomidia is greate plentie of beastes, Serpents, and great wilde. Asses, that go aboute in desart; as Isidore sayth. lib. 15. Also there be many Elephants and other beasts, as plinius also affirmeth liber. 5. cap. 5. (*Carthago) a famous Citie in Af∣frike called Carthage, almost enuironed with the Sea: which City was in com∣passe about the walles .360. furlonges; which are .45. Italian miles: whereof seuen miles and an halfe ranne in length on the ridge of an hill which went from sea to sea, where were set the stables of Elephauntes, a very large place, almost in the middle of the Citye was a Castle or Towre called Byrs, on the top wher∣of stood Aelculapius Temple, (the sonne of Apollo and Cotonis, and was called the God of Phisicke; and honoured in the forme of a Serpent) vnderneth were ha∣uens or Keyes of the Castle, and a lyt∣tle round Ile called Cothon, standing as it were in a great ponde, about which were set the houses, yt serue for the nauy of Carthage. This Citie continued wars with the Romanes fortie yeares, and had many excellent men of warre, of whome Anibal was the most noble and famous. That Citye had in subiection, a greate parte of Affrike, Scicile, the more parte of Spaine, and the Iles of the middle Sea. It was at last destroyed by Sci∣pio, before the incarnation of Christ .144 yeares. The country where it stoode is now called Thunyse.) Of Carinthia. chap. 85. CArinthia is a little Prouince of Ger∣mania in Europa, and hath Pano∣nia in the East side, and Italye in the West: and the Riuer Denubius in the North: Dalmacia and Salmonia in the South. And is closed with moun∣taines in the one side, and endeth at the Sea Adriaticum in another side. And this is a plentious lande in ma∣nye places: and hath manye wilde
beasts and tame. The men do great war∣riours and strong, and mightely streng∣thened with Castles and townes. The land is cold for high mountaines be nigh therto, there is oft raine and Snowither about the mountaines for coldnesse of Snow water, manye haue Botches vn∣der the thinne, as it is sayde. There be many Beares, Bisoums, and other won∣derfull beasts and wilde. Also there bée glifes, & men eate them, for though they séeme to be a kinde of Mice, yet they bée eaten, to they flesh is both sauoury and far. (Additiō.Carinthia a Country by Oustrike, ioyning on the South to the mountains Alpes and Italy, on the East and North to Sna. The election of a new prince or gouernour there is verye straunge. Pius writeth in his Cosmographie, that in the towne called Sanctiviti, is a great val∣ley where in a meddowe is set a stone of Marble, of a good height, wherevpon as∣cendeth a husband man, vnto whom that office by inheritaunce belongeth: on his right hand standeth a blacke Cowe: on his left hand an ill fauoured Mare. A∣bout him standeth a great multitude of Carles, common people. On the other side of the medowe commeth the Duke accompanied with his noble men; in their roabes of estate. Before him goeth the Earle of Goritia, the great master of his house, betwéene .12. Banners, bearing the Princes standard: The other noble men followe with the Prince, cladde lyke an husband man, with a sheepe crooke in his hand, as he were a shepheard: As soone as the Carle on the Marble stone percei∣ueth him comming, he asketh alowde in the Slauoine tongue: Who is this that commeth with so proude a gate. They that stande about aunswere: It is the Prince of this Countrie. Then sayth hée oftentimes: is he a righteous Iudge, sée∣king for the weale of the Countrie, a frée man borne, and worthy to haue honour: is he a true christian man, and defendie of Christs faith: They all answere, yea, he is, and shall be: Then sayth ye Carle, by what right may be put me from this place: Then aunswereth the Earle of Goritia, thou shalt haue for thy place .60 groafes, these two beasts (the Cowe and the Mare) and the Princes apparol, which he did late put off. Also thy familye or kinne shall be frée, from all manner of tribute. Then the Carle giuing ye Prince a little blowe on his chéeke; bindeth him be a good Iudge, and comming downe from the stone giueth him place, & so de∣parteth taking with him the Cowe and the Mare. Then the Prince goeth vppon the stone, and holding a naked swoord in his hande, shaking it, tourneth to euerye part of the stone, promising equall iudge∣ment to all the people. Then is there brought to him colde water in a hus∣band mans cap, which he drinketh, signi∣fieng that he condempneth drinking of Wine. Then goeth he to a Church ther∣by, where after he hath heard diuine ser∣uice, he putteth of his rusticall raiment, and putteth on apparell of honour: And dining with his nobilitie sumptuouslye, he commeth often to the medowe, where he heareth matters, and ministreth iu∣stice: The Duke of this Country is as it were chiefe master of the Game to the imperiall maiestie.) Of Cathay. chap. 86. CAthay, a greate region in the East part of the worlde,This chapter is added extending to the East Occean sea: on the soath to yt ouer India: and is also called Siuarum Re∣gio; it is diuided into nine Realmes: all bée vnder ye great Cham. This Country is wonderfull rich in golde and silke, a∣bounding in grain, wines, & other things necessarie for mans sustenance. The peo∣ple for the more parte honour: Christ as God, but they are not baptised: They are curteous and reasonable, & very cunning Artificers. As concerning further discourse of Cathai, or Cataia, read the booke tituled, A discourse of a discouery for a new pas∣sage to Cataia, written by Sir Humfrey Gilbert, Knight Anno. 1576. wherein thou shalt finde many learned and com∣mendable notes. Of Corcica. chap. 69.
COrcica is an Ilande, and hath that name of a certaine Duke, and is .30 mile from Sardinia by the sea afore I∣taly: and is an Iland with most plenty of pasture. And that is knowen by a Bull that oft swamme thether out of Liguria because of Pasture, & came againe in no∣ble point. For a woman yt is called Cor∣sa kept that bull and other beasts by the sea cliffes, and saw that Bull euery daie go from his fellowes and swim into the sea: and came again in noble point & wel fed. Then she wold know what pasture the bull had found. And on a time when the bull went from the other beasts into the sea, shée followed him in a Boate vnto the Iland, and came againe, & tolde how plenteous the Ilande was. Then men sayled thether, and called the Iland Corcica by the name of the woman that found the Iland and was their guide & leader. The Iland hath many corners, and forlandes, and beareth best léese and pasture. And therein is gendered a noble stone, which the Gréekes call Bacem, as Isidore sayth, li. 15. (Additiō.Corsica an Ile in the middle Sea, betwéen Gean, and the Ile of Sardinia, called Cors: it is now vnder the Citie of Gean.) Of Lacedemonia. chap. 88. LAcedemonia is a prouince in Euro∣pa, in ye ends of Gréece, beside Thra∣cia, and hath another name and is called Spartania: The men of that countrye be called Lacedemonians, and haue that name Lacedemonians of one of the sons of Sem: These Lacedemons went out and warred against the Messenes: and feared that the war should long in∣dure, and they shuld be without ofspring, and commaunded that their maidens at home should take younlings that were left at home with them, & get and bring forth children. And the children that wer got in that manner were called Sparta∣ni, of the shamelesse doing of their mo∣thers, as Isid. saith li. 10. (Additiō.Lacedemon a noble Citie in Gréece, called also Sparta, in the region of A∣chaia. This Countrye is called Lacede∣monie. Of Lectonia. chap. 89. LEctonia is a Prouince of Scithia: The men thereof be called Lectini, & be men of comely stature, strong warri∣ours and fierce. The soile of the country of Lectonia beareth wel corne & fruit, & is full of moores and marreis in diuerse places, with many woods & riuers, wa∣ters, and beasts wilde and tame: and is strengthened with woodes, moores, and marreis, and hath little other strength but woods, moores, and marreis. There∣fore vnneth that land may be assailed in Summer, but in winter when waters & riuers be store. Of Liuonia. chap. 90. LIuonia is a speciall Prouince of the same countrie & language, and is de∣parted frō Germania with a long space of the Occean. The man thereof be cal∣led Liuones, & haue wonderful maners & vsages: and the Germaines turned them from the false beléefe of féends, to ye wor∣ship & faith of one God. For they wor∣shipped many Gods, and asked aun∣sweres of féends with mil beléeued & cur∣sed sacrifice. And vsed auguries, & diui∣nations, and they vsed not to burye the dead carcased, but the people made a great fire, & burnt them that were dead all to ashes. After the death of one of their friends, they clothed his kinsmen in new clothing, and gaue them shéepe & neate, and other beasts, as he was wor∣thy, his seruants, men, and women, with other things, and them all together they would burne with the dead man. And supposed that they that were so burnt, should graciouslye come to that lande of life with multitude of seruaunts, and of beasts that were so burnt, for his sake, & finde the lande of temporall lyfe and of wealth. With such errour of ends, this land was bewitched in olde time: now it is supposed, that by the grate of God, & by strēgth of Germans this land is de∣liuered of the foresaid errors, and many countries and lands that belong therto.
(*Liuonia, a part of Sarmatia, beyond Luten, Northward, hauing on the West the Sea called Germanicum.) Of Licia, chap. 91. LIcia is the name of a coast and of an hauen of the sea, the chiefe citie ther∣of is called Listra. Out of that city men saile my Siria and Pamphilia into Ita∣ly, as it is sayd Act. 28. This land by the true name thereof is called Licaonia, & the Cities thereof were Listra & Der∣ben. To these cities Paule and Barnabas fled out of Iconius, and healed and saued a man in Listra, and then the men of that country called Barnabas, Iupiter, and Paule, Mercurius, and would haue worshipped them, as it is written. Act. 14. (Additiō.Lycaonia, a Countrye in Asia, af∣ter some writers, it is a parte of Archadia.) Of Lidia, Chap. 92. LIdia is an olde place of Kingdomes, the riuer Pactolus adorneth this land with tokens and brookes of golde. Be∣fore this lande was called Aurea Me∣nea, and might not suffice two brtheren that were kings, Liddus and Cirenus: Then by lot Cirenus went out of that land with great strength of men, & occu∣pied countries in Gallia, and called the country Cirrenea. And Liddia hadde the name of Liddus the other brother, that abode and reigned there. This land ioy∣neth to the lesse Phrigia in the west side, and hath the citie Smirma in the East side: and the riuer Helles commeth a∣bout it. By the fieldes thereof runneth Pactolus and Herinus, two rich riuers, with golden grauell, as Isidore sayeth, libro. 15. (Additiō.Lydia a Country in Asia, on the East ioyning to Phrigia, on the North to Mysia, on the South vppon parte of Caria. In this region is the hill called Tmolus, out of the which commeth the riuer called Padolus. Tmolus is a mountaine in Lydia, whereon did grow great plentie of Suffron and bines: a∣mong the grauell of the riuer Pactolus is founde greate plentie of graines of golde.) Of Libia. chap. 93. LIbia is a greate lande in Affrica, and hath that name, for that Libe ye Sou∣therne winde bloweth from thence, as Isidore sayth lib. 15. Other men meane, that Epscisus Iupiters sonne that buil∣ded Nephim also in Aegypt, & get on his wife Casorta, a daugther yt is called Li∣bia, yt was after quéene of Affrica: & by her name that land was after called Li∣bia. And Libia is in the beginning of Affrica, & in the East side thereof is Ae∣gypt, and in the West bée Sireos, Ma∣iores & Trogodites, & in the North side is the sea Libicum, and in the South is Ethiopia and Barbaria: Therein bée diuerse nations and wildernesses: to whome men maye not come for wilde beasts and sierce, for Serpents and for Dragons that bréede Cocatrices. Huc vsque Isid. li. 15. ¶Libia is a full hot lande, and bur∣ning, and bréedeth in diuerse places ma∣ny venimous beasts, and beasts wonder∣fully shapen, and many precious things in diuers places, as precious stones, gold, and siluer, much wheate, wine and oile, and diuerse manner of spicerie. Men of Libia came first of Puthericus the sonne of Cham. Therfore a riuer that runneth by the sea coast of Libia is called Path: & all the land is called Puthensis: as the Glose saith super Gen. (Additiō.Lybia was among the Gréekes, the generall name of all Affrica: Not∣withstanding it is of the Romanes ta∣ken onely for that part of Affrica, which is from Aegypt, to the West Occean, containing Syrenaica, Affrica minor, Numibia, and Mauritania. The Spani∣ards do commonly call them all Moores, Libia interior is bounded on the North, with the two countries called aurita∣nia, with ffrike the lesse, and Cerenai∣ca, on the East with Ethiop, on ye South with Ethiop the further, on the West with the Occean sea. In this country are the people called Caramantes and Ga∣tule D. Cooper.
Of Lothoringia, chap. 94. LOthoringia is as it were the last pro∣uince and end of Germania, & hath that name of Lotharius the king. In the East side thereof is Recia: yt is Beaban: In the South side is the Rine, & Alsaci∣a, and in the West Gallia Senonensis, and in the North side is Gallia Belgica. By this land runneth the riuer Mosa, & in this land is ye citie Metis, & is a coun∣try bearing in many places fruit & wine, and is moisted with wells and riuers: therin be mountaines, woodes, & groues, and many beasts wilde and same. The people of this countrye be meddeled of French men & of Germains. Therein are wonderfull wells & medicinable to help men of diuerse euills if they drink therof. Lothoringia, a country called Loraine.Addition Of Lucitania. cap. 95. LVsitania is a prouince of Spaine, & there is the riuer Paeum, & the town Masia. The country is full of mettall of gold & siluer, yron, and Lead, white and blacke, as Plinius saith, li. 7. cap. 72. AdditionLucitania, the Realme called Portu∣gall. Of Mauritania. cap. 96. MAuritania hath that name of the coulour of men, as it were to vnderstand, the country of blacke men. For Mauron is Gréeke, and is to vnderstand black. For as French men be called Gal∣li, & have that name of whitenes of men. So men of this land be called Mauri, & haue ye name of blacke colour. The first prouince therof is Stiphensis: wherein is scituate the town Stiphis: and the coun∣trie hath the name of that towne: and the other part & prouince is Mauritania Cesariensis: yt is also called Colonia Ce∣saris, & the prouince hath ye name therof: both prouinces ioyne togethers, & haue ye country Numidia in ye East side, & Mare∣magna in ye North side, & the riuer Ma∣lum in the west, & the mount Astrixis in ye south. And ye mount departed the good land from grauell. 112, that lieth toward the sea occean. Ther is another Mauri∣tanta called Tingitana: & hath that name of the citie called Tingi. This is ye last part of Affrica, and riseth out of seauen mountaines, and hath the riuer Malua in the East side, and the sea Caditanum in the North and the Occean Athlanti∣cum in the West, and Glansasium in the South: The men be spread into the sea occean Hesperum. In ye country be wild beasts, Apes, Dragons, Strucions, E∣stridges, & Elephants. Huc vsque Isi. li. 15. Also lib. cap. 2. Plinius saith, that in Mauritania be many men that be called Ancoles: & they dwell beside the mount Athlant in a place full of woodes, with plentie of waters and of wells, where groweth all manner of fruite without trauaile of men, so the men that dwell there lacke neuer plentie of liking. The place is high above the clowdes, & nigh to the circle of the Moone. And hée tel∣leth that oft by night in that place is fire séene, and burning brands, and won∣derfull sightes. Also there is heard, song of liking, melodie of pipes, of timbers, Labours, and Cymballs, as solempne Authours tell:The harmony of the Zone also there growe won∣derfull high trées, and the gum of them smelleth full swéete, & bée like Cipres. And some be growen as it wer wr haire or with wooll, & thereof be clothes made by craft, as it were Bombex. Also there groweth an hearbe, called Euforbia, and hath that name of him that founde that hearbe, the white iuyce thereof is won∣derfully praised in cléerenesse of sight, & in helpe against stinging of adders, and other venim, as he faith there. (AdditiōMauritania, the country now called Morisco, of Moores, lieng on the West part of Astrike, betwéene the sea called Mare Mediteraneum, on the North, & Libia on the south, Martianus saith, yt in length it is 10.times 38.miles, which is 380. miles: It is divided into two coun∣tries, Tingitana, & Caesarencis, Tingita∣na hath on ye west side the occean sea, on the north yt straight of Marroche, called Fretū Herculeum, vnto ye riuer Masus, on the East Caesariensis, on the South Getulia & Libia. Caesariencis hath on ye west Tingitana, on ye north the sea Sar∣doum, vnto the riuer Amphagus, on the south the mountains of Libia, and the country of Getulia.)
Of Macedonia. chap. 97. MAcedonia had the name of Emaci∣us the king, and was called at the first time Emacia: But after that Mace∣de the nephew of Deucalcon, was ruler thereof, he changed the name, and called the land Macedonia by his owne name, as Isidore saith, libr. 5. This land stret∣cheth to the sea Egenin in the East side, and to Achnia in the South side, and to Dalmacia in the West, and to Messia in the North, as he sayth. And was the great Alexanders Country, and is best country in vemes of golde and siluer. It broedeth a stone that is called Uiren: In that country is mount Olimpus: and is so high that no clowdes nor winde for raine come on the top therof, as he saith. Libet, 4 cap 20. Phinus speaketh of Macedonia, and sayeth, that Macedonia was sometime called Emacia, and is set first of Empires of lands. This land conquered Asia, Armenia, Hibernia, Al∣bania, CAPPADOCIA, Siria, Aegypt, Tau∣rus, and Caucasus. This lande was Law among the Eactris, Pedes, and Persis, and had in pussession all the East landes. This land is nurse of Inde, that followed the steppes of Liber Pater, and of Hercules. This is that Macedonia, of whom in one daye the Emperour Pau∣lus Emilias tooke and solve 70. Cities, as he sayth. (AdditiōMacedonia a realme of Gréece, first called Aemathia, on the North it bound∣deth (as Ptholomeus writteth) vpon the sides of Dalmacia, Mysia superior and racia: on the West it Reticheth to ye sea Ionium. Puts deseribeth it to ioyné South and West to Thracia, and that the south side on the bankes of Thella∣ba and Magnetia, the North on Phoe∣nea and Paphlayonia. That it hath also on the south Epirus, on the north Illy∣ria, which varyeth not much from Soli∣mus, who sayeth that it is diuided from Thracia, with the riuer Strimon, it is now vnder the Turke.) Of Magnesia, chap. 98. MAgnesia is a prouince of Gréece, in the middle betwéene Thessalis and Macedonia: and conteineth many nati∣ons, cities, and townes, as Phanus sayth li. 4. cap. 10. Magnesia a part of Macedonia.Addition Of Messia, chap. 99. MEssia hath the name of Messis ripe corne, and is the first prouince that the riuer Danubius closeth vnto the sea of middle earth, as Isidore saith lib. 15. This land ioyneth to the mouth of Da∣nobius in the East side, and to Tracia in the North East, and to Macedonia in the south, and to Histria in the West, as he sayth. And this country conteineth ma∣ny nations, cities, and townes, and bea∣reth good corne and fruite. Therein is plentie of veines, of oare, of Rones, and mettall. (Additiō.Ptholomeus writeth of two Coun∣tries called Mysia, the more & the lesse, and both in Asia, beyond Eithinia, not farre from Ida.) Of Mesopotamia, cap. 100. MEsopotamia hath Etimelogia of Gréeke, for it is inuironed with two riuers, Tigris in the East, and Euphra∣tes in the West. And beginneth out of the North betwéene mount Laurus, and Caucasus: and in the south side ther∣of is Babylonia and Chaldea, as Isido, sayth, lib. 15. This is a country in Asia, and is a huge land in length & in bredth, plenteous of corne, of pasture, of beasts fame and wildeifull of mettall, and other RICHES. (Additiō.Mesopotamia, a countrye in the East, lieng betweene the two noble Ri∣uers. Tigris and Euphrates, and hath on the south Babylomon the North the greate mountains called Caucasus.) Of Media, chap. 101. MEdia hath that name of Medue the king that first assayled that Pro∣uince. And Modia hath the kingdomes
of Parthia in the Wiest side, and is in∣uitaned with Armenia in the North, and hath the mountaines Caspios in the East, and Bersida in the South side. On∣ly in this Country groweth a trée that is called Medira, and groweth in none other land noor Countrie; as Isidore say∣eth, libro. 15. This Country is full rich, it is moysted with many riuers, and is noble and strong with Cities & Towns. In olde time Kings of this lande ouer, came the great Babylonia, and the Em∣perours of Caldeis. Also the men of this land and the Perses sayled into Affri∣ca, are medled themselues with the U∣baes, men of Libia, and the Libees called them Mauros, in their corrupt & strange language of Barbarie, notwithstanding that Mauri in the Greeke language are called at blacke coulour, as Isidore sayth libro. 9. (Additiō.Media a country in Asia, hauing on the North, the sea called Hiremum, on the West Armenie the more, and Assy∣ria or the south Persia on the East Hir∣caia and Parthia.) Of Melos, chap. 102. MElos is an Ilande of the Ciclades,  to most rounde of all Ilandes, and is therefore called Melos, that is to saye, , as Isidore saith, libro, 15. And this lande is full of much good, as Plinius sayth. And what lacketh in this lande in quantitye of space, is rewar∣ded and recouered in the goodnesse of the ground. (Additiō.One of the Iles of Sicilla, where inhabited huge Gyaunts, hauing but one eue in their forehead.) Of Midia, chap. 103. MIdia is an Ilande in the Prouince of Irelande, and standeth in the middle place, as it is aide. And hath that name of a thing that departed the lande, euen in this partes among fiue daugh∣ters. And kept that parte of the Ilande, as his  vse, vs best and most noble place of the Countrye: And therefore as mouing Irish men that portion is s eal∣led Media, as it were in the middle of other landes about. In this Countrye is good grounde to beare corne and fruit. Therein is plentye of pasture and of beasts, of Fish and of Flesh, of But∣ter and Chéese, and of milke, and of other victualles. Therein bée good River, Wells and lakes, of manye effectes and vertues, as it is sayd, and ther is liking, aspect, good nyre and wholesome: And is right strange in the vtter partes with woodes, and marreys, and multitude of strong Castles and townes: for the com∣mon speach: this Countrie is called the chamber of Ireland. For peace is there continually. Mydia, an Ile named also Delos. AdditionOf Misena. chap. 104. MIsena a Prouince of Germania, and hath that name of a Citye that is called Missena: and ioyneth to Boe∣mis, and to Polonia in the East side, and to Baionia in the South: To Saro∣nia and to Turingia in the West: To Recia and to the bordes of Rhenam in the North. And is a right wide lande and a large: héere plaine and there full of mountaynes, and is good lande and full of pasture, and moysted with best Ma∣ter. For that principall Riuer. Albia runneth foorth in the more parte by the length, thereof. Also therein he strong Ci∣tyes, Castles, Tobones, and for. And generallye the people thereof be rich of Cattell, of corne, of heasen, and of mettall. And though the man hée long and very fayre strong and séemely of sta∣ture, yet neuerthelesse they  goe and peaceable by kinde, and  e sierce in all thing the enance her. (Additiō.There are two Riuers of this name Albis, the one in Bosmia, which commeth to all Gisle of Prae, the other in Germany. Of Moseouia. chap. 105. This chapter is added.MOscouia, a long continued sayle, rich of Fs, Tallows, Hiuers, and Hempe. There is also good Tarrs
and Mane. The comfort people b of a onerly stature, and of condour. Urwn; superstition, and verye lecherqus, the rest of their manners traitable, the Most thaiter affirme, that their nation in old time was called Russia, the speach is Slauoine tongue: Of the Princes that now reigne in Russia, the chiefe is the greate Duke of Mascouts yt who possess with the greatest parte thereof. The se∣cond is the Duke of Lithuania: and the third the king of Polome, who now obteineth the dominion of Polonie and Lithoania: In authoritie and dominion ouer: his sabiectes, the Prince of Mos∣ecuie, passeth all the Monarchies of the worlde, for hée depriueth all his noble men and Gentlemen of all their holdes and munitions at his pleasure. Hée also vseth lyke authoritie ouer his Priestes, and what hée commaundeth is done, without acception of persons: hée is ve∣rye tyrannous in punishing. Moseo∣ur is dained of the riuer Mosco. Read Sebastian Munster. Of Mithilene, chap. 105. MIthiline is an Iland in the sea A∣ by the which lande men  Cipred into Italye, and  is  to come to this Ilande Iy Bithala h it a cliffe stret∣ch dignitie the Sea, and the Sea is de∣parted and decade as it were double by esting in th or of grauell. And so∣shi  on the grauell be soone bo  in Act. A∣post  in the text and in the  though the  of that e be  be they shawn and cure∣tions to  that goe there to worke, as mention is made there  Paule when he sai∣led  ar ne, there e scaped the  called  leaped out of the fire, & hung on Paulas hand, and be swang the Adder into ye fire, and so the Aper was adt. And also Paule did there many miracles, as it is said Act. . (Additiō.This owe the called Mitheline of the  of thier books in his e doth declare hat baroinesse of the speath then vsed. The Ile is nowe called after the Gréekes phrase Meteline, and Mel∣ta, and last of all, Maltatnowe vnder the gouernement of the Turke. In this Ile was the Apostle Saint Paule bit∣ten of the Uiper, and escaped, death Act. 18.) Of Nabathea. chap. 106. NAbathea is a prouince of Arabia, & hath that name of Nabeleisma. els sonne: And is in the middle betwéene Arabia and Judea; and riseth from Eu∣pharates, and strecheth to the red Sea, as Isidore sayth, lib. 15. This land is ful fat, and beareth welt corne and fruit, and sée∣deth many beasts. Therein; he many pre∣cious stones and mettall. Lib. 6  Plinius speaketh of men of this prouince, and sayth, that Nabe∣theis dwells dirts. Towne that is called Betravita a ualley, & is almost two mile broad, and is inuironed with high moun∣taines that be hard to come to, & a riuer runneth betwéene them, an paces from the towne that is called Gaza, and 132: from the sea Petcisim. (Additiō.Nabäthaer,  people inhabiting the country called Arabia foeli , very contie∣nent, and in preparing and kéeping, theyr commodities, right prudent, he trobo wtes, in whome you may reade shore abundauntlye of their manners, not much expedient to bée declared in this place.) Of Norwegia, chap. 107. NOrwaye is the largest Prouince of Europa, and is compassed with the Sea wolting hall  out, and is vu∣net the North nd rethesh towarde the Countreye of Outhear.  South and in the East it is departed from Gothia by  table Albi and is a right change and colde Coun∣treye  Mountaines of Wdes, and of Croues. The men of this lande had more by Fishing
and hunting then by broad: for corne is scarce there because of great cold. There be many wild beasts, as white Beares: Also there bée Caslors; beastes, that liue both in water and in land, and they geld themselues whē they be hunted. Therin be many beasts and rough wonderfully shapen. There be wells, and all Lea∣ther and woode that is pat therein, turne anone into stone. In the North side of that land many dayes space in the sum∣mer, about the stinting of the Sunne, the Sunne is not séene goe to couert or glaade. And so many dayes in the win∣ter about the stinting of the Synne, the Sunne is not séene to shew there. And so that time men of that lande most worke by Candle. There is no Wheats, neither any Oyle, but, if they come out of other lands. The men be of great bo∣dies and of stature, of fayre shape, and of great might and strength: And hée strong skumours and sea théeues, and mightie and bolde of hearts. This land hath Gallacia in the East side, and Ile∣landia in the North side, wher the sea is frore alwaye, and Irish & British occe∣an is in ye west, & endeth in the South, toward the Countries of Denmarke & of Gothia. Additiō.(This land is beyounde Denmarke bearing towarde Russie, and Froze∣land.) (Additiō.Norwegia or Norway, this was somtime a flourishing kingdome, whose dominion comprehended Denmarke, Friesland, & the Ilāds far about, through discord it came to subiection, & is nowe vnder ye dominion of Danes: frō whence commeth the dried Haake called Stock∣fishrthe whales resort vnto those northen coasts that beare vpon Wardhus, an I∣land, where ther kéep such a strange noise, comming to ingender, that it is oftentimes daungerous to ships, and there are many taken, and of their flesh is made the common Oile. They are commonly thirtie yards in length. The Ilands about Norway, are of such fruit∣full pastures, that they bring, not theyr beasts into stables before the moneth of Nouember.) Of Normania, chap. 108. NOrmanop is called Normania, and Nuestria also, and hath that name of the proper Norwaies that came say∣ling out of Norwaye, and got the cliffe of the French occean, and dwelled in the prouince ther, about, & called the prouince Normania. That country hath the Bri∣tish occean in the East Northeast side, and the sea of Gyan in the West, and Fraunce in the South, and occean in the North. The soile thereof beareth well corne, and is fat, and is noblye indued with fieldes, woodes, and meades: And is ful strong of hauens of the sea, and with most noble cities & townes. The chiefe city thereof is called Rothomagus, Roan, a noble city vpon the riuer ye men of the country call Seyn: The men therof bée strong and greate warriours, gentle in clothing, sober in speaking, milde in heart, and will, and peaceable in compa∣ny. (Additiō.The people and inhabitants of this Prouince or countrie were the last that with William Duke of Normandy,Ann. 106& sub∣dued England.) Of Numidia, chap. 109. NVmidia is a country in Affrica, & stretching to Carthage, and begin∣neth at the riuer. Arnisiga, and endeth in the land of Cogitanes. And hath the place that is called Sires minores in the East side, and stretcheth to the sea in the North, and is afore Sardinia, and hath Mauritania Stiphensis in the west side, and Ethiopes in the South side. And is a faire country with fat fields in many places, and wilde beasts in weeds: there it is drie, it bréedeth horse and wild As∣ses. The further parte thereof is full of Serpentes and of beastes. In that lande is proper Marble that is called Numedium, as Isidore sayeth, libro 15. (Additiō.Numidia, a country betwéene Car∣thage and Mauritania in Affrike, and nowe is called Barbaria, where Masi∣nissa did sometime reigne. In that
Countrie is found most excellent Mar∣ble. The chiefe Citie there was na∣med Cirta, which was very strong, and so puissaunt of men, that in the time of Strabo, it might arme .10000. horsemen, and 20000. footemen. Of Narbonia. chap. 110. A Part of Fraunce that lyeth vppon the sea of middle earth, is called Narbon, as Isidore sayth, and hath that name of the riuer Narbo, that depar∣teth that lande and Italy in one side, and mountaines Alpes departe that lande and Italye in that side. And now some men call that lande Gallia Bra∣chata. No prouince is worthy to bée set before Narbon in araye of men, in worthynesse of manners and thewes, in plentie of riches: and shortlye to speake, it should more fréelye be called Italye thén a prouince. Therein be most noble riuers: among whom the French Rodan is most plenteous. And com∣meth out of ye mountaines and runneth by the Prouince of Narbon: therein bée many ponds and hauens and forlands: a∣mong whō Marcel is chiefe. The length of all the prouince of Narbon conteineth thrée hundred & tree score thousand pa∣ces, as Agrippa saith, Hue vsque Pli∣nius. (Additiō.Narbonensis prouincia, a parte of Gallia, hauing on the East the moun∣taines Alpes: on the South Mare Gal∣licum: on the West the mountaines Pi∣renei: on the North, the mountaines Iura. It conteyneth the countryes cal∣led Sauoy, Dolphyny, Prouince, and Languedocke. It was in the olde time called Gallia grachata.) Of Ophir. chap. 111. OPhir is the name of a Prouince in Inde, and hath that name of one Ophir, which was a man that came of the children of Heber: and this lande was in olde time called Terra au∣rea, The golden lande. For therein be golden mountaines: in the which bée Lyons, and most cruell beasts. And so there dare no man come but in this manner. A Shippe standeth nigh to the cliffe, and men goe on lande and gather the earth that Lyons and other beasts digge with their clawes, and they beare that earth to the Shippe. And if they sée that beastes come, they take the Sea with hast, as Rabanus sayth Super illum locum: Cum venis∣set naues Salomonsis in Ophir sump∣tum Inde aurum, &c. 3. Regum. 9. cap. and Plinius sayth nigh the same. Some∣time this Prouince sent out golde and precious stones, Crisoprassus, and A∣damants, and trées Thinum, and E∣benum: and Birdes, Popiniayes, and Perockes and Iuorie, and Apes, and o∣ther beasts wonderfully shapen, as I∣sidore saith, and Plinius also. Men come into this Countrie Ophyr from Iudea by long sailing about in the redde sea by the Ilande Osiongaber: the which the greate Alexander destroyed afterward. The men of the lande of Ophir came of the lignage of Heber, and dwelled and occupyed the Countrie and lands from the riuer Capue, vnto the Countrie of Inde, that nowe is called Rhetia, as Io∣sephus sayth. And all the Prouince hath that name Ophir, of one Ophir the ne∣phew of Heber, as Rabanus sayeth su∣per 2. Para. cap. 8. This Ophir was the sonne of Jectan, the sonne of Heber, as it is sayde Genes. 10. This Countrye is nigh the lande Eulath, about the which runneth the riuer Gyon, as it is sayde Genesis .2. And it is lyke thereto in golden mountaines and swéete spicery, and in rich pirreye, as Plinius say∣eth. (Additiō.Arniensis ege, the Countrye a∣bout Naruia (a Towne in Italye as some write) where the grounde with raine waxeth dustie, and in drie wether durtie.) (Additiō.Neapolis, a noble Citye of Campania, sette in the borders of the Sea called Mare Mediteraneum, and was first called Parthenope. Of this ci∣tis the countries of Campania, Apulia, and Calabria, bée nowe called Regnum
Nepolitanum, the Realme of Naples. There is also a Citie of this name in Affrike, and another in Cana.) Of Hollandia. cap. 112. HOlland is a small Prouince by the mouth of the Rine, wheras the Rine runneth into the sea, and stretcheth tō Braban, and is nigh to Phrigia in the South side, and to the Occean in the East side, and ioyneth to the British sea Westwarde, and is nigh to the neather Fraunce that is called Gallia Belgica in the North side: and to Flaunders in the West side. This land is full of marreys and of water, compassed nigh all about with armes of the Sea, and of the Rine, as it wore an Iland, Ther∣in bée lakes and many pondes, and is full of good léese and pasture. And is therefore full of diuers beasts in many places thereof. The saile thereof beareth wel cone, and in many places is full of woods wt many manner of good venson. Also in many places the ground is gle∣wie, and of it they make good fuell: and the lande is rich of merchaundise that passe by the sea and riuers. The chiefe citie thereof is called Inferius Traiec∣tum in Latine, and the neather Verich in the language of Germania: for it be∣longeth to Germania touching the sci∣tuation, manners, and lordships, and al∣so in language and tongue. The men be séemely of body, strong of might, har∣die and bolde of heart, faire of face, ho∣nest in manners, deuout to God, peace∣able and true to men: and take lesse héed to praies and to robbery, then other na∣tions of Germany. Of Orchada. chap. 113. ORchada is an Ilande of Occean by the British sea in Europa: Thereof many other Ilands that bée nigh therto haue the name, and bée called Orcades and be 33. in all .20. thereof be in desart, and men inhabit nigh .13. as Isidore say∣eth, libro. 15. cap de Insules. (Additiō.Orchades, 30. Ilands in the sea by Scotland.) Of Paradiso. chap. 114. PAradise is a place in the partes of the East, the name thereof is turned out of Gréeke into Latine, and is vnder∣stood an Orchard, and is called Eden in Hebrew: that is vnderstoode liking a∣mong vs, as Isidore sayth lib. 15. cap. 2. For Paradise is an Orchard of liking, as he sayth. For therin groweth al man∣ner trées, & all manner trées beare aples, therein is ye trée of life. There is no pas∣sing cold nor passing heate, but alwaye temperate weather & aire. In the middle thereof springeth a Well, that findeth water inough is that place: that well is parted in foure streames and riuers, the way thereto is stopped & vnknowne to mankinde, after the sinne of ye first man. For it is closed and compessed al about with a firy wal, so that the burning ther∣of reacheth nigh to heauen. And there is ward and defence of Angelics to kéepe Paradise, vpon the front wall, ordeined of God to hold of wicked spirits. And so fire is ordeined to hold out wicked men, and good Angells to holde out euill An∣gells: So that there is no way for euill spirits, nor for euill men to come to Pa∣radise. Huc vsque Isidorus li. 15. cap. 3. Vbi tractat de regionibus. Also ca. 2. super Gen. the master of sto∣ries, saith in this manner: God from the beginning of the world ordeined and a∣raide a place of liking with hearbes and trées, and in the beginning of the world, that is in the East, & that place is most merrie and far in space of land & of sea, out of the country that we dwel in: And is so high that it reacheth almost to the circle of the Moone: Where also by reson of the height, the water of the greate floud could not come, as he saith. Iohn Damascene speaketh of paradise & saith: because God would make man after his owne Image & likenesse of vnséene and séene creatures, he create & made him as a King and Prince of all the earth, and of all things in the earth, and so hée made a Country and a lande for him: in which man shoulde abide and leade a blissefull lyfe. And this lande and
Country is called Paradise: and is set in place of liking with Gods owne hande, and planted with pleasure in the East, and that lande is higher then all other lands, and shineth with most tem∣perate aire & cleere alway, full of plants, flourishing; and leaues of good smell, and full of light bright shining of fairenesse, ioye, and blisse, it is the oeser, passing the wit and vnderstanding of sensible creatures the kingdome of God, wor∣thy for him that is after his Image: in which nore vnreasonable beast dwel∣leth but onely man Gods owne hand∣worke. Also Serabus sayth and Beda also, that Paradise is a place set in the East, & is departed from countries and lands that men dwel in, with occean & moun∣taines that be betwéene. And is most farre, and stretchet in height as it were to the circle of the Moone, and was most conuenient place to an innocent man: for there is most faire wether & temperate. And there is neuer passing colde nor pas∣sing heate, but euerlasting faire weather and temporate, as Isidore saith. Also for plentie of all good. For as Austen de ci∣tate Dei. 14. ca. 10. saith: What might they dread, where might they be sorry in so great plentie of so much good, ther no∣thing greeued, there was all that good will desired: there was not that should offend or grieue the flesh nor the soule of man yt loued blisse. Also for most mirth, for ye place was eller of all sairnesse, as Damascene saith: And that witnesseth ye euerlasting fairenesse of trées, of flow∣ers, and of spraies: For the trees wither not, nor their leaues nor flowres fade. Also for most solace and mirth, and that witnesseth fairenesse of fruit: for ther is all manner trées faire to sight & swéet to eating. Genesis .2. Also that witnesseth beautifulnesse of light. For cléerenesse of light is proportioned to purenes of aire, as Beda saith. Also for noble grounde & plenteous, & that witnesseth the multi∣tude of springing wells. For it is sayde Genesis .2. That a wel sprong & moisted Paradise, the which well is diuided in foure riuers. Also for surenesse of place, & that witnesseth the highnesse thereof: for it toucheth the circle of the Moone,  Beda saith and, Isidore also. That is to vnderstand, that it stretcheth to the aire that is quiet aboue, after this troublous aire, where is the end and bond of moist erhalations and vapours. The passing forth and the rising of such exhalations & vapours is listened to the body of the Moone, as Alexander expoundeth: For Paradise reacheth not fully to the circle of the Moone, but it is sayde that it tou∣cheth the circle of the Moone by a manner figuratiue speaking, yt is called Hiperbo∣li loqoutio: yt it might be knowne that the most highnesse of Paradise passeth yt neather earth without comparison. Also for continuall being without corruptiō: & that witnesseth their long life therein. For ther is Elias & Enok yet aliue with∣out corruptiō, as the master saith in sto∣ries. For nothing aliue may there die: and that is no wouber of Paradise. For we know that in Ireland is an Iland, in which dead bodies rot not: and ano∣ther in which men many not die: but in the last end they must be borne out of ye Iland. Looke before in Ibernie, in lite∣ral. Of Paradise, & of the scituation there∣of was opinion among nations, as Plin. saith, where he speaketh of the Ilands of Fortune, of which Isi. speaketh also li. 15 Among the which Ilands in one yt bea∣reth all good: There the grounde bea∣reth al manner of fruit without tilling. On downs trées be alway clothed with faire gréene twigs & spraies with swéete fruit and good, where corne groweth as hearbs & grasse. Therfore errour of nasi∣ons & ditie of secular prophets, for good∣nes of ye ground meaned, yt these Ilands were Paradise: and yt is errour. For the foresaid Ilands be in ye west afore ye left side of Mauritania in the occean, as Isi. saith, li. 15. And Paradise is in the East. And in the top of the highest mountaine of thē falleth waters, & maketh there a right great lake or pond: and maketh so great noise in ye falling, that men of the country by ye lake be deafe borne: because of passing huge noise yt corrumpteth the wit of hearing in children, as Basilius saith in Exameron & Ambrose also and
from that other place, as stoin one well head, come these foure riuers, that is to wit, Phison, that is likewise called Ga∣ Gion, that is also called Nilus, Ti∣gris, and Euphrates. Of ye which riuers is speciall mention made in Gen. Looke before sir Fstach de fluminibus. ¶Of Parthia. chap. 115. PArthia, is the greatest Countrey in Asia, and stretcheth from the Borders of Inde, vnto the ende of Mesopotamia. And for the great strength of the Par∣thians, Assiria and other countryes tooke the name of Parthia. Therein are ma∣ny particular Prouinces, that is tolwit, Acathsia, Parthia, Assiria, Meosa & Per∣sia. The which Countries ioyne toge∣thers, & begin at the riuer Indus: and be closed with the riuer Tigris. There in many places be shārpe the huaines and many riuers, & the prouinces haue their owne boundings, and haue the names of their Authors, in the manner: for Ara∣usia hath that name of a towne of that lande. Men that came out of Scithia into Parthia, and dwelled therein, gaue to their owne name. In the South side thereof is the Red sea, and in the North Hircania, and in the west Media. Eigh∣téene regions thereof stretch from the sea espy to the Scithians. In Parthia are beasts wonderfully shape, as Plini, saith li. 5. for therein be fierre beasts, Perdes, Tigers, Linces, & Adders that be called Alpedes, and Serpents most cruell and sterce by kinde. Also the people be harde and cruell and scarse in vittailes, & holde them content with salt and Cardamoni∣um, for all manner posage and foode, as he saith there. And ther it is said in Glo. super Dan. de Persarum regione & Par∣thorum, es. 7. of a beast that is like to a Beare. TREVISA. He that will know Cardanomium, looke after in 17. booke ca. de Cardamonio. (Additiō.Parthia, a countrie in Asia, which hath on the South the Red sea: on the North, the sea called Hircanum: on the East, the people called Arijon ye west, the talme called Media. ¶Of Palestina. chap. 116. PAlestina is a prouince of Siria, and was sometime called Philistea, and now the chiefe Citie thereof is called, Aschalena, and was in olde time called Philistim, and of that citie all the coun∣trie had the name in old time, & was cal∣led Palestina or Palestia, as Isid. sayeth li. 15. and saith the same li. 9. in vocabul, grdium, Philistei (saith he) be they that were called Palesteni. Hebréwes haue not the letter P. but they take thereof, a letter of Gréeke that is to wit Ph. that is in latine. Fi. And so they say, Phili∣steis for Palestins, and so they be cal∣led Philistei of their owne Citte, that was sometime called Philistin. And they were sometime called Alophth, that is so vnderstande, alyens and straungers: for alwaye they were straunge to the children of Israel, for they were depar∣ted faire out of their company & kinred, as he saith ther. And as Isid. saith li. 15. this land hath the Red sea in the East side: and nighesh to Judea in ye South side: & is closed in the North side with the borders of Tiriis: and endeth in the west at ye bounds of Egipt, as it is sayd there. The Philistei came first of Cha∣naas sonne, that was called Chenlusim. The Philistines came first of him and Chaetratinie also, as it is said Gene. 10. As Flerodotus saith, men be alway false & guilefull & wily and grieuous E∣nemies to the Kingdome of Israel, and that for they had enuie at the prosperi∣tee of the Iewes, and also for they were proud of the welth of their owne land, & of great Ilands that they had won with might and with strength, as he saith. ¶Of Pamphilia, chap. 117. PAmphilia is called Isauria also, for yt it standeth in all blasts of winds, as Isi. saith li. 15. and is a prouince in the lesse Asia. The chiefe citie thereof is cal∣led Seleucia, as he saith. Seleucius Anti∣ochus builded that citie, & Antiochia al∣so, as Isi. sayth li. 15. And this country is nigh the sea betwéene Silicia, & Bithinia: out of this country men saile by the I∣lād Cipres into Italy, as we find. Act. 17
(Additiō.Pamphilia, a Region in the lesse Asia, lieng on the South side of ye moun∣taine Taurus, & Marcheth on ye Realmes of Phrigia and Caria.) ¶Of Pannonia that is also called Hungaria. cap. 118. PAnnonia, is a Prouince in Europe, wherein dwelled the Hunies some∣time: and hath the name of the same people, and is commonly called Hunga∣ria, and is double, that is to say, border∣ring neere another Prouince, as Oro∣sius sayth, the more and the lesse. The more is in the farther Siria, beyond the marreys Meotides. The Hunies came first out of that land because of hunting, and followed the trace of Harles and of other beasts farre wayes and space of marreys and of lands, & found the land of Pannonia at the last, & turned home againe, and gathered company, and came againe into Pannonia, and put out the men that dwelled first there, and gaue a name to the lande and to the men, and called the land Hungaria, as Herodotus saith. This Prouince is a part of Mes∣sia, and the Riuer Danubius lieth ther∣by, and ouerfloweth it, and maketh it plenteous, as Isidore saith. This lande hath Gallitia in the East side, and Gre∣cia in the South, Dalmatia and Italye on the West, & Germania in the North, as he sayth, and is most greatest lande, and plenteous, & most strengthened with woods & with mountaines, & moysted wt many riuers & waters, & most rich with veynes of golde and of other mettall. Therein be most great mountaines, in whom is found diuers kinde of marble. Also in some mountaines thereof is best salte digged. Pannonia is full of beastes wilde and tame, for plentie of léese and of pasture, and the soyle thereof beareth well corne and wine in many places. Therein be manye Nations that differ greatly, not onely in language & tongue, but also in manners and in liuing, as Herodotus saith. Also lib. 15. Isido. saith, that Pannonia hath that name of the mountaines yt be called Pennini, which mountaines depart Pannonia from Ita∣ly. The Countrey is strong, & glad and merry, and is compassed in with thrée Riuers, that is to wit, Danubius, Sa∣na and Tycia. And this land hath Messia in ye East side, Histeich in the Northeast, and the mountains Alpes Pennini in ye South: and that part of Fraunce that is called Gallia Belgica, in the West: and stret∣cheth to the Riuer Danubius in the North, which Riuer runneth by Ger∣mania. And this Riuer is called Hy∣ster also, and runneth about a lande be∣side Pannonia, that is named Hy∣stria. (Additiō.Pannonia, the Countrey now cal∣led Hungaria, which tooke the name of another Hungaria, now called Iulira. It lyeth in the North parte of the worlde, not farre from Tanai, and is tributary to the Moscouites. The bounds of Hun∣gary are now much larger, that they were of olde time, and hath on the west Ostrike and Beame: on the South, the part of Slauonie, that lyeth on the Sea Adriaticum: on the East, Seruia: on the North, Polonia and Mosconia. The Country is fertille of graine, and rich of golde and siluer: and as the Inhabi∣tants doe report, there is a Riuer, wher in if yron be oftentimes dipped, it will be tourned into Copper. This noble Realme is now destroyed, and vnder the captiuitie of the Turkes, which is much to be feared, all Christendome shall re∣pent: for it was sometime repeated, the puissaunt Bulwarke of all Christian Realmes, against the intollerable vyo∣lence of Saracens and Turkes.) (Additiō.Pannonia superior, the Countrey called Austria & Styria. In this Coun∣trey standeth Vienna. Pannonia infe∣rior, hath on the North Dunowe & Ger∣many: on the West, Pannonia superi∣or: on the South, Liburnia: on the East Iazyges. This Countrey is al∣most wholly vnder the Hungares.) ¶Of Paron. cap. 119. PAron is an Ilande, and hath that name of Paranto the sonne of Planto, that called the towne Paros by his owne name, and the Iland also, as Isidore
saith li. 15. Therein is most white mar∣ble, that is called Parium, & ther grow∣eth à stone called Sarda, that is better than Marble, and most profitable among precious stones, as he saith. ¶Of Pentapoli. chap. 120. PEntapoli is a countrie in the march of Arabia and Palestina, & hath that name of fiue cities of euill men, yt were desroyed with fire of heauen. That land was sometime more plenteous, than is now the country of Ierusalem, & is now desert and buried: for because of trespasse and sinne of men of that Countrey, fire come downe from heuen, and burned the country to ashes, that lasteth euermore: the shadow and some likenesse thereof, is yet seene on trees. For there growe gréene apples, and seeme so ripe, that men desire to eate of them, and if they take them in their handes, they chaunge and fall into ashes and smoke, as they were yet burning. Hue vs{que} Isido. li. 15. This prouince was so rich before the destruc∣tion thereof, that among stones thereof were Saphires founde and other pre∣cious stoanes. Among the earth there∣of gold was found, as Iob toucheth sai∣eng: The place of Saphire, the stone thereof, and the soyle thereof is golde. Iob. 28. But afterward all that countrie was turned into a dead sea, and is called the dead sea. For it gendreth nothing that is aliue, nor receiueth nothing aliue, for therin it suffereth neither fish nor foules, neither ships, nor boates: for all thing therein that hath no life, sinketh to the ground. A lanterne with light therein, fleeteth aboue the water: and sinketh to the ground, if the light be extinct, as Isi. saith, li. 14. Looke before, De marl mor∣tuo, in tractatu marium & aquarum. In the brinke of this sea, about the countries that be nigh to Sodoma, grow the foresaid apples, & be faire to sight, & stinking and bitter in the toast, as the Glose saith sup. 2. Epi. Pet. cap. 2. Also another Pentapolis is in Affri∣ca, in the prouince of Libia, & hath that name of the fiue Cities, that is to saye, Beruice, Centria, Apolonia, Polo, and Tholomais: of the which Tholomais, & Bernices haue the name of Gréekes. This Pentapole is ioyened to Libia Ce∣renensis, and belongeth to the Bordets thereof, as Isid. saith li. 15. (AdditiōPentapolis, a countrie betwéen Pa∣lestine and Arabia, wherein were ye Ci∣ties of Sodome and Gomor, burned by the vengeance of God, for sinne against nature.) ¶Of Persia. cap. 121. PErsia or Persida, is a countrey in A∣sia, counted among the kingdomes of Parthes, and stretcheth downward from the East to the Indes, and hath the Red sea in the West side: and toucheth Me∣dia in the North, and hath Germania in the South, that ioyneth and belong∣eth to Persida, and their noblest towne is Incussa. In Persida, Art Magike was first found. Thether Nemroth the Gy∣ant went, after the confusion of langua∣ges, and taught the Perses to worship the Sun, for men nigh those countries, worshipped the Sunne that they called Hel in their language, as Isi. saith li. 15. Persia hath the name of Perseus ye king, that came out of Gréece into Asia, and daunted ye strange nations with strong warre and long lasting, and was victor at the last, and gaue his name to ye men that were his subiects, as Isi. saith li. 9. & ca. de vocab. gentium. And he saith, that before Cirus time, the Perses were ac∣counted vnworthy, and as it were of no reputation among Nations, and the Medis were alway most mightie, as hee saith. Persida is full wide and wealthy yt of people: ther in is the noble citie, that is called Elam, and hath that name of Elam the sonne of Sem: of him ye Per∣ses came first, as Isidore saith. And the first Perses were called Elamites, and had first that name of Elam. In Persi∣da is a Citie most noble: that was cal∣led Elemaida, and now is caled, Persi∣polis, thereof is mention made. 1. Mac. 6. & 2. Macha. 9. In Persia, was the Citie Elemaida, most noble and most rich of golde and of siluer. And therin was a full rich temple, &
plates of golde, habourioynes & shields, that Alexander of Macedonia the King lefte, &c. (AdditiōPersia and Persida, a Countrey in the East part of the world, which hath on the North, Media: on the West, Su∣hana: on the East, Carmania: on the South, the Persian sea, called Sinus Persicus, where now the Sophy reig∣neth.) ¶Of Pirenea. chap. 122. PIrenea, is a prouince in Europa, an high lande and full of mountaines. The mountaines thereof, are called, Montes Pirenei, and they stretch from the South toward the West, and depart full great Countreyes a sunder: For those mountaines called Alpes Pirenei, depart betwéene Spaine & Fraunce, as wel France Narbonens as Lugdunēs, & hath Germania in the East side, & I∣taly in the South, and Spayne in the West, and Fraunce in the North. And the mountaines Pirenei haue ye name of ofte fire of lightning: For Pir is Gréeke, and is to say fire, & these moun∣taines Pirenei, be ofte smit with lygh∣tening, as Isidore saith lib. 15. cap. 3. De montibus. Pirenea is head and well of many great riuers, mother of most great woodes, nourse of manye beastes wilde and tame, and containeth veynes of mettall. Therein be strongly fortifi∣ed Cities, Castles and Townes: and therein be nourished many diuers Na∣tions and people, that be diuers both in manners and language, as Herodotus sayeth. AdditiōPyrenei montes, Mountaines which doe diuide Fraunce from Spaine, & are of a meruailous height.) ¶Of Pigmea. chap. 123. PIgmea is a Country in Inde toward the East, in the mountaines about the Occean. Therein dwell the Pig∣meis, men little of bodie, vnneth two Cubites long, as Isidore sayeth & Ply∣nius also. The Pigmeis gender in the fourth yeare, and age in the seauenth. These ga∣ther an hoast, and ride vpon Weathers, and fight with cranes, and destroy their neasts, and breake their egges, yt theyr enemies be not multiplied, as Plin. saith lib. 5. ca. De hominibus Indie monstru∣osis. Looke before. Additiō.Pigmei a dwarfish people in the vt∣termost mountaines of Indie (as Plynie sayth) inhabiting in a very wholesome, fertill, and pleasant countrey. In height they are not past one cubite: and their women the fifth yere of their age, beares children, and in the eight they were old. The report is, that riding on Wethers and Goates, armed with bowes and ar∣rows, they go in ye spring time in great companies toward the sea side, to de∣stroy the neasts, egges, and young bréed of Cranes: which otherwise would in∣crese to such multitudes, that they shuld not be able to resist them. Their houses in stéede of tile and thatch, are couered with claye and egge shels.) ¶Of Pictauia. chap. 124. PIctauia, Poydow is a Prouince of Fraunce Narbonens. Pictes, Eng∣lishmen and Scots sayled thether in old time, and dwelled there, and gaue at the last the name of their ofspring to ye men and to the land. as Herodotus writer of stories telleth. The which men came sayling out of the Countreyes of Bri∣taine, and they sailed along the sea coast of the Occean of Guyan, and obtained a place in the country at last, against men of the land, not without strong battaile, and builded & called the chiefe Towne, Pictauium by the name of Pictes, as Herodotus sayth: and now that towne is called Poycters, and they called a great Countrey about Pictauia, that is Peyto. Laire runneth by this land, and this land stretcheth along vpon the sea Occean, and hath Spayne in the East side, & the Brittish Occean in ye South, and the lesse Britaine in the North, and the coast of Gyan in the West. This lyttle Prouince is noble and solempne in diuers things. For it is sayde that the grounde beareth welnigh all manner
Corne, fruite and wine, and is rich of all good that the ground bréedeth. There be solempne hauens of the sea, and noble ci∣ties and townes, riuers and wells, most merry flews, meades and woodes, and is most strengthened with Rockes on the Sea side, as it fareth at Rochell, vn∣neth men may come to that towne, see straightnesse of place and of the sea, as be with. The men thereof be meddeled wtreth men in tongue and in ma∣nets therefore, though they haue of the first Pictes, that men of that Nation, should be kindly strong of body, & séem∣ly of shape: yet of French men, they take, that they be fierce; and more sharpe of wit, than other Nations nigh about them. And no wonder for as Isi. saith li. 9. by diuersitie of heuen, face of men and colours, quantities of body, wit of harts be diuers. Therefore we fair, that Ro∣manes be sad, the Gréekes light, the A∣trées guilefull, and French, men kindlye fierce and sharp of with that maketh kind of climes; as it is sayd there. Therefore men of Peyto be strong of body, faire of face, bolde of heart, guilefull and deceiua∣ble of wit, as Herodotus saith. ¶Of Picardia, chap. 125. PIcardia, is a prouince in France Bel∣gica, also hath that name of a towne or of a Castle that is called Ponticon, us Herodotus saith, De regionibus, for it is sayd, that the town that now is cal∣led Pichen, in the march of that lande, had Lordship vnto the Brittish Occean, in olde time. And it is supposed, that ad the men of that countrie had afterwarde the name of that towns. Their lande, & soile beareth well corne and fruite, and is moyst with welden and riuers, and full of people, and to strengthened with noble cities, and most  famous castles came townes as Belgue, yt is called Bel∣gie count, and Amblanis. Arrabatum Ma∣rium, and Lordum, as he faith. This prouince hath the Riuer of the Rine of Germany, in ye East side, couer France in the Southward the Occean of France at the West, and the more Britaine, that is England in the oeth Picardy is dou∣ble, the ouer, that is next to France: and the other that is the neather land, yt ioy∣neth néere to Flaunders & to Brabau, & is called Baipula. Of both countries the men be séemly of stature, faire of face, bold of heart, light & sharpe witted, cléere of vnderstanding, ulde of will and affec∣tion, and more great and boytous of language and tongue, than other Nati∣ons of Fraunce. ¶Of Ramathea. chap. 126. RAmathea, which also is called Cha∣nir, is a region besides Derabilum, & hath that name, of the citie Ramatha, in the, which Samuel ye Prophet was borne, and hath another name, and is called A∣rimathia. Of that citie was Ioseph the righteous man, that with Nichodemus annoynted our Lords bodye, and buried it, worshipfully, as the Glose saith super Lucica 24. And this citie is in the lina∣ges of Ephraim, in Iurie, in the most high mountaines: and is therefore called Ramathea, that is to say, high: for Ra∣ma is high, as Ierome saieth. Though this land be full of mountaines: yet it heareth well corne and fruite, vines and Olyues, and is moist with wells, & most healthfull with cleane and pure aire, and is full strong and stedfast in high places, as Ierome sayth, and is full couenable place to stand in, to waite and espy farre about. Ramathea, called Chanir in the olde Copie.Addition ¶Of Rencia. cap. 127. REncia, is a prouince by the Rine, & is that Countrey, about the which the Rine runneth & hath that name Rencia, for it is nigh the Rine, as, Isi. saith li. 15. And is a Countrey that hath manye full strong cities & townes. The ground ther of beareth well corne and, wine in many places. The men be strong and hardy, ac∣cording with Germaines in life & man∣ners: but then loue not theft & robbery. (Additiō.Rhenus, a notable, riuer in Germany, called the Rheyne. ¶Of Riualia. chap. 128.
RIualia is a little Prouince, and was sometime strange, and farre from g beleefe, and is now vnder the beleefe of Christ, and is subiect to the Kingdome of Denmarke. A part thereof is called Vi∣ronia; and hath that name of Virore, gréenesse, for therin grow many hearbs and grasse. There is good pasture & léefe, and woods in many places: the ground thereof beareth meanly corne. This land is moyst with waters and ponds: there is plentie of fish of the sea, and of lakes & ponds: there are many flocks & heards, & beasts. And this land is ioyned to Sci∣thia, and is departed from the Norpeges and Megardes, onely with a Riuer that is called Narua, as Herodotus saith. ¶Of Rinchouia. chap. 127. RInchouia is a little lande, and stret∣cheth from the citie Maguncia vpon the brinke of the riuer of Rine, betweene mountaines vnto the towne, which is called Pinguia: and is called Rinchouia, of the riuer Renum, that runneth tho∣rough the middle thereof. And though the land be little, yet it is in each clyffe of this Rine, meruailous merry and right plenteous: for it is so faire and goodly; & so incredible plentifull, that it is high delight, pleasure and comfort, not only to them that dwell there, but also to them that passe that waye, and pleaseth and féedeth them as an Ortharde of passing liking, and the ground thereof is so sweet and so fat, that it bringeth foorth right swiftly, fruite and corne, in right great plentie. There in the same field growe apple trees of diuers kindes, and nufs al∣so: & yet notwithstanding so great plen∣tie of fruite, in the same fielde, groweth well good corne. Also diuers trées let not the vines: but in the same little fielde, grow together corne, wine, nuts apples, Corbas, peares, and many other fruites. There be hot wells néedfull medicine to bodies, that spring out of the grounde. There is much good néedfull to mankind, that were to long to rehearse. ¶Of Romana prouintia, cap. 128. THe prouince of Romanes, as Varro sayth, is nigh containing of all the world wide, whersoeuer were any coun∣tries and lands that men dwell in. For might and power of the Romanes sub∣dued all the parts of the world wide, and there was no corner of the world wide, but it felt the sword fo ye hoast of Rome, as he saith. But sometime a part of Ita∣ly was called Romulea in olde time, and had that name of Romulus, that builded the Citie of Rome, and gaue the name to the men and to the Citie, as Isi. saith li. 15. And there it is sayde, that the Coun∣trie was first called Saturnia, & had that name of Saturnus ye king, ye first tought men of that countrie to till land: and for the passing plentie that they had, they called him Saturnus, and worshipped him at the last, as it were a God, among the starres. And afterwards they were called Latini, and had that name of La∣tinus the King, which after they were called Romani of Romulus that inlarg∣ed and fortified the Citie. And there af∣ter they were called Quirites, for ye Ro∣mulus was called Quirinus, for he vsed alwaye a speare that is called Quirie in the language of Sabins, as Isi: saith lib. 9. cap. 1. de gentium non-inatione. A pen may not write at full the praising of this kingdome, and of the Kings thereof, nei∣ther a booke may containe at full, ye great déedes of Romanes. Who that hath ly∣king to know their déeds, read he in the first booke Machabeorurt. & or here de wonders shortly rehearsed at their ver∣tues and of their might. (Additiō.Romulus, as the Romane stories af∣firme, the sonne of Mars by Isia yt daugh∣ter of Numitor, but more berely ye son of Amuhus his great bh with of pur∣poses ranished Illa in the darke, being a virgin actuall, to haue asquartall to put on to death: for king Numitor, h a brother named Amulius, of nature wic∣ked, fleirs and cruell, who not ving con∣tent to take the kingdome from his el∣der brother and cast him in prison, did also murdere his sonne Laulus; and vnder colour of honour, made his daughter Ila a virgin vestall, vnder the hands of per∣petuall
chastitie, that she might not haue any issue. But the being afterward found with childe by Mars, as the Romanes would haue men beléeue, was delyuered of two somies: which Amulius com∣maunded to be cast into Tyber, & theyr mother according to the lawe of the Ue:stalls to be baried quicke. Is it happe∣ned at that time the riuer of Tiber was swollen ouer the banckes, so that men could not come to the déepe of the chan∣nell: wherefore they that had the charge of drowning the children, cast them into the land floud, where the water sodain∣ly falling, lefte them aliue, and so were they founde by Faustulus ye Kings, shep∣hard, who brought them home to be kept and nourished, of his wife Laurensia, which because she was a strumpet, was named of the shepheards Lupa, whereof rose the Fable, that the founders of the Romane Citie, were nourished of a the Woolfe. When these children came af∣terwards to age, being instructed by Fau∣stulus of their stocke, and beginning, they gathered a bande of shepheardes, killed Amulius, restored Nursitor to his kingdome, and on the mount, Palatine, where they were brought vp, began to builde them a newe Citie. And because they were Twinnes both of one age, there fell controuersis betwéene them, which should giue name to theyr newe Citie: This contention so grewe, from words to tumult and strokes, that in the vickering Rhemus was slaine, although the more common opinion be, that hée was put to death, because that scornful∣ly he lept ouer the newe walles of the Citie. Romulus being then king alone, peo∣pled his Citie by erecting a Sanctuarie, for sauegarde of all transgressours, that would come thether: ordained an hun∣dred Senatours, called Fathers: procu∣red wiues for his people, by rape of all the maydens of the Countrey, resorting thether, to solempne gaines and playes: ouercame the people of Cenina, and slewe their King: vanguished the Sa∣bines & people of Atemna, and receiued them into his Citie. with other diuers valiant actes. Which when he had done, on a time calling an Assemblye, at the Marrice called Caprea, in a great Tem∣pest sodainly was gone, no man coulde tell how: as it was thought, for his stearne gouernment murdered priuelye of the Senatours, who to please the People, fained that he was a God, and named him Quirinus. Under which name, the Romanes euer after wor∣shipped him.) ¶Of Romania. chap. 131. ROmania, is called the newe Nation of Romanes: for Ne is Gréeke, and is to saye newe. For since that time that Constantine translated the seate of the Empyre of Rome, out of Rome to Con∣stantinople, a Citie of Thracia: all the Countrey and Regions of Gréekes were called Romania, that is as much to say, as newe Rome, as Rabanus sayeth. Therefore vnto this daye, the Gréekes call not themselues Gréeks in their com∣mon language, but rather Romanos. Looke before De Gree, in litera G. wher thou shalt finde manye other things of the Gréekes. ¶Of Rodo, chap. 132 ROdus is the first Ilande of the I∣landes Ciclabes in the East side, where the Capitoil of Robus was first found, while the Citie was there first buylded. In this Citie was one Cold∣sus of Brasse, seuentie Cubites high. In this same. He were an hundred lesse Co∣losus, as Isidore saith li. 15. cap. 1. de vo∣cab. Ciuitatum. Rodus is the same Iland that is called Ciprus, as Isidore sayth, in the same place. (AdditiōIn times past, manye Christians resorted thether to defend Christendome from the Saracens: but after through treason the Turke wan it.) ¶Of Ruthia, chap. 133. RVthia or Ruthenia is a Prouince of Messa, in the Marche of the lesse Asia. And hath the Countreyes of Ro∣manes in the East side, and Gothia in
the North: Pannonia in the West, & Grecia in the South. And this land ac∣cordeth most with Boemes and Scla∣uones in language and tongue: and this Countrey hath the name of some parte thereof, and is called Galatia, and the men thereof were sometime called Ga∣lathe. To whom it is sayd, that Paule the Apostle sent his Epistle. Looke be∣fore De Galatia. (Additiō.Ruthem, a people beyonde Liuo∣nia, of whom the Countrey is now cal∣led Russia.) ¶Of Sabea. chap. 134. SAbea, is Countrey in Arabia, and hath the name of Saba the sonne of Thus. This Countrey stretcheth in straight length Eastward, toward the sea Persicū: & is nigh to Chaldea in ye north: & endeth at ye sea of Arabia, in ye west: & is to Lethiopia in the South. And this land beareth Frankencense, and giueth good smells: for in woodes and landes there∣of growe Mirrhe, Cinamom, Thus, and other swéete spicerie, as Isidore sayth li∣bro. 15. This lande is rich of swéete Spi∣cerie, of precious stones, and of mettall. There is a Birde, that is called Phe∣nix, and other wonders that Authoures recken in ye region of Arabia, of whom it is shewed before of Arabia. The Quéen of Saba, was speciallye Ladye of this Prouince, and neuerthelesse in hir time, she had principate of all Affrica, as He∣rodutus sayth, for she was Quéene of Aethiopia & of Aegypt: as ye Close saith super li. Reg. 10. And so it is supposed, that she had other Kingdomes of the West in that time. (Additiō.Sabaea or Saba, a Countrey in the middle of Arabia toward the East, inui∣roned about with great Rockes, wherein is a great woode of precious trées, some of Cinamom and Cassia: some bringing foorth Frankencense and Mirrhe. The length of that Woode is twentie of their myles called Schaeni, which comprehen∣deth of Italian miles, one hundred and fiftie, Plinius. lib. 12. Theophrastus. lib. 9. De histo. Plat. Solinus writeth that the region brin∣geth foorth Frankencense, is from a Towne there named Atramicae eight mansions, which indéede containeth two hundred twentie foure miles. Mancio, or stathmos, being of eight and twentie Italian myles. The chiefe Citie of that Realme, is called sabeta, D. Cooper. ¶Of Samaria. chap. 135. SAmaria, as Isidore sayeth libro. 15. is a Region of Palestina, and hadde that name in olde time of the chiefe Towne and Citie thereof, for Samaria was sometime a royall Citie of Israell, and is now called Sebastia, & hath that name of Augustus the Emperour. This Region is in the middle betwéene Iudea and Galilea: and beginneth from the fréete that is called Eleis. The scitua∣tion thereof, is like to the kinde of Iu∣dea, and hath no difference thereto in vertue, as Isidore sayeth. And had the name first of a mount that is called, Somer, as mention is made 4. Regum chap. 3. Of this Countrey afterwarde came the men that are called Samaritani, that passed out of Assyries, and dwelled in Samaria, that is to be vnderstood, kéeping: For when the men of Israel were taken Prisoners, the Kings of As∣syries lefte them there to kéepe the Countrey, as Isidore sayeth libro. 9. chap. De vocabulis regionum. ¶Looke before De eodem, de Sama∣rio monte in littera S. (Additiō.Samaria, a Countrey and Citie in Syria, ioining to Iudea, which was the chiefe citie of the ten Tribes of Israell, who being taken Prisoners by the King to Syria, and ledde away Captiues: the∣ther were sent from Assyria, Panimes for them, to inhabite the Countrey: which were afterwarde called Sama∣ritani: and they mixte the Lawe of Moyses, with abhominable Pola∣trye.
the citie was afterward called Sebaste.) ¶Of sambia. chap. 136. SAmbia is a prouince of Messia in Eu∣ropa, and is set in the lower Scithia, as it were in the middle Countrey be∣twéene Pratenes, Estenes, Ofiliances, Liuenes, and Turones, that wer al sub∣iects to the puissance of the Goths in the olde time, as Varro telleth, and Herodo∣tus also. And they dwelled on the cliffes of Occean, and haue the forelonges and coasts of the Sea, afore the sides of the North, as he saith. Sambia is a plente∣ous land, and beareth well corne, & hath much marreys, and woodes, and is com∣passed about with many lakes & riuers. Among other strange Nations, the men be séemly of body, bold of heart, and passe other nations about them with crafte, & in curious working. (Additiō.Read Ortelius, and also this Ile is called Sanibria, and not Sambia, as ap∣peareth in the olde Copie.) ¶Of Sabaudia. chap. 137. SAuoye, is called Sabaudia, as it were a bold way & safe, as old men say, for that way of old time men by goodnes of Princes, were safe to trauell by moun∣taines and desart of countrie, to passe out of the country of Fraunce into Italy, for alway there was most righteousnes: and therfore as by common fame, alway ye wayfaring men wer safe in high waies, without dred of spoyling & robbery. And is a part of Pirene, the mountaines ther of, depart betwéene Fraunce and Italy. Looke before De montibus pireneis, in litera P. This land hath another name, and is called, Prouintia. ¶Of Sardinia. cap. 138. SArdinia is an Iland in the sea of mid∣dle earth, beside Sicilia, and hath that name of one Sardus, begotten of Hercu∣les, that came out of Lybia with a great multitude, and occupied Sardinia, & gaue thereto his owne name. This lande is seene in the sea of Affrica, to the likenes of the print of a mans foote towarde the East and toward the West, and more broad in euen sides toward the South & toward the North: and therefore of ship∣men of Gréece, it was first called I∣thos. The lande is séene in length of sea∣uen score mile, and in bredth of fortie. Therein bréedeth no Serpent neyther Woolfe, but onely a little beast that is called Solifuga,Solifuga. that is noyfull to wicked men. Therein bréedeth no venyme: but an hearbe named Apium risus,Apium risus. that draweth and shrinketh together ye iawes of men, and slayeth as it were laughing. There are hot welles that heale sicke men, and blindeth théeues, if they sweare vppon the Water, and touche their ey∣en there with, as Isidore sayeth Li∣bro. 15. (Additiō.Sardinia, an Ile in the Sea called Ligusticum by Gean, not passing seauen miles from Corsica.) ¶Of Sarmata. cap. 139. SArmata is a land of strange men, that be called Sarmate, & haue that name of studie and businesse of armour: for they went armed, and spoyled many Prouinces, before that Lentulus with∣stood them, and would not suffer them to passe ouer Danubius, as Isidore sayeth, li. 9. These men be descended as well of Gothes as Gipides: and they vse to fight, as well on horsebacke as on foote, and therefore they were so called, as Isi∣dore saith. (Additiō.Sarmatia, a Countreye of Europe, which bordereth on the North, vpon the sea called Sarmaticum: on the west, vp∣pon the riuer Vistula and Germanie: on the South, vpon Sibenburgh, Dacia, and Mysea inferior: on the East, vpon the Sarmatia, which is in Asia, the riuer Ta∣nais, and the Marish Meotis. Vnder this be many Countreyes contayned, Polo∣nia, Rhussia, Frussia, Lituania, Li∣nonia, Moscouia, &c. The greater parte of this Coun∣trie, is now vnder the King of Pole.)
¶Of Samo. chap. 140. SAmo is an Iland in the sea Aegeum, where Iuno was borne: thereof was Sybel of Samia, and Pythagoras Samius, that first founde the name of Philoso∣phers, as Isidore saith libro. 15. It is said that earthen vessells were first made in this Iland: and therefore they be called Vasa Samea, vessells of Samo, and so it is knowen, that claye of that Ilande is tough as glewe, and therefore the more able to make such vessells of, as Isidore saith. (Additiō. Samos, The name of two Iles in the sea called Aegeum, one by Thracia, and therefore it is called Samothracia, and the other lyeth against Ephesus.) ¶Of Saxonia. chap. 141. SAxonia is a Prouince in Germa∣nia, and it is sayde, nien of that Prouince came of the Gréekes: & dwell now in those parts that they arriued in by ship. And they expulsed and droue out the Thuringes, that then there dwelled, and occupied vnto the cleue of Occean. The Saxons gate and wannē them pla∣ces there with many battailes & strong, and dwell in the same Prouince to this daye. And the men were alwaye the gre∣test warriors, séemely of shape, of stature high, strong of bodye, hardie and bolde of heart. Saxonie is a land most plenteous in Corne, and beareth well Corne, and all manner fruite, and is full of woodes in mountaines, and is full of fruite and of léese and of fieldes, rich of beastes and of flockes, of siluer, and of Copper, and of other mettall. And there are solempne mountaines, in the which stones be dig∣ged, the which being stronglye resolued by fire, turne into the substance of brasse. Ther be most noble riuers and famous, as Wesera, Limia, Albia, Sala, & Ode∣ra, and many other that runne thereby, ouer and beyond Albina. There are salt wells in many places, in whom best salt and most white is sodde and made. Therein be many strong Cities, Castles and Townes, both in plaines and in mountaines. Beside the mountaine in the which Copper is digged, is a great hill, and the stones thereof smell as vyo∣lets. There, in some mountaines is fai∣rest marble digged, and namely beside the riuer Danubius, and that stone is called Saint Michaels stone. In those moun∣taines is most plentie of venison and of wilde beasts, of Beares, of Boares, and Hartes: and therefore in those moun∣taines full of woodes, is manye manner of hunting vsed. These and many other noble things be founde in the Countrey of Saxons. Looke before De Germania in littera G. & in litera A. de Alema∣nia. Saxonia hath Boemia, & Polonsa, in the East side: Westualia, in the west: and the side of Frisons toward Occean, and men of Thuringe in the North: and French-men in the South. The men are noble and strong, and not ouer∣come before this daye, as Herodutus sayeth. (Additiō.After the time of Arthur King of Britaine, ye Saxons greatly molested the Britons, and helds them in subiection, a long time.) ¶Of Sclauia. chap. 142. SClauia is a parte of Mesia, and con∣taineth many Regions: for Boemes, Paloni, Metani, Wandali, Ruttheni, Dalmate, and Charinthi be Sclaues, for all these vnderstand each other, and ac∣corde in many things touching language and manners, but yet they be diuers in rites and vsage: for some holde yet the faith of Panims, and some the vsage of Gréekes, and some the vsage of Latines. In all these regions is noble grounde, & beareth well corne, and also wine in ma∣ny places. All these Nations for yt more part haue their bush cut round, excepte the Ruthens, and those that be meddeled with Dutch-men, and with Latines. Sclauia is double: The more, which is called Selauonia, containeth Dalmatia, Saruia, Carinthia, and many other Re∣gions. And some men of this Sclauia, dwell vpon the sea, and some in high mountaines and in thicke woodes.
And some care and till fields and plaines. The men be fierce and sharp & vnseemly, without deuotion in Gods seruice, and lead their life in robbing on the sea, and vse to take praies by the sea and by the land, and namely those that dwell vpon the sea. The other lesse Sclauia, from ye borders of Saxony, stretcheth to Pruse, and to Wandales, and to the Boemes. And this Sclauia, is departed from Pruse, with diuers riuers and waters, & from the Gothes and Danes with an arme of the sea Occean: which sea, when it is departed, the lesse Sclauia endeth at the cliffe thereof. And this region beareth well corne and fruite: and is moyst with riuers and ponds. Therin is much wood and pasture, and milke & hony. The men be strong of body, earth tillers and fish∣ers, and more deuout to God, and more peaceable to neighbors, than those that dwell in the more Sclauia. And that for medling and company that they haue all daye with the Germaines, as Herodo∣tus saith. Sclauonia. ¶Of Sparta. chap. 143. SParta is a Region besides Grecia, and is called Lacedemonia by ano∣ther name, of one Lacedemon the sonne of Semele. Looke de Lacedemonia in li∣tera L. The men be called Lacedemones and Spartian also, as Isidore sayeth li∣bro. 9. ¶Of Seres. chap. 144. SEret is a prouince in the East, & hath that name of a town that is called Se∣res. There cotton is gathered of trées, & silke is made of that cotton. The Poet syenketh of men of that land and saith. Ignoti facie, sed not vellere Seres. (Additiō.Seres, a people in Asia, hauing great plentie of silke, first increased of the silke worme, called Bombax, and also much cotten wooll called Bombazi. In the olde copie, Ignoti facie, voce fere mille Seres. ¶Of Selandia. chap. 145. SEland is a land by the sea side, com∣passed about with riuers and armes of the sea, as it were an Iland. And hath Holland in the East side, and Flaunders in the South, and Occean in the West, & Britaine in the North. And are manye Ilands departed a sunder with armes of the sea, and those Ilands be compassed a∣bout with strong heapes of grauell, and quarries, and so warded and defended a∣gainst waues and strength of the sea. The soile of those lands beare wel corne and is bare of trées, for because of salt∣nesse of the sea, trées may not haue déepe mores and rootes, and therefore when they be set and planted, they faile & drye anone. Seland is full of men and people and of riches. The men be of great sta∣ture, strong of body, and bolde of heart, denout in Gods seruice, easie and softe among themselues, beneficiall to many, & greuous to no men, but when they must néedes withstand wrongfull risers of e∣nemies. (AdditiōZeland is next adioyning to Eng∣land, ouer against Ipswich. Brill, Dort, & Midelbrough, are their chiefest holds, strongly fenced with the sea.) ¶Of Semigallia. chap. 146. SEmigallia, is a lyttle prouince beyond the sea Balticum, beside Cilica and Li∣uonia, in the low Asta, & hath that name, for Gallache dwelled therein, meddeled with men of that lande, and so they are called Semegalli, as it were halfe Gal∣lis: For they come of the Gallis, and of men of the lande. The lande is good, and beareth well corne, and is rich of Pa∣sture and of méedes. But the men be straunge and vnséemelye, and sharpe and cruell. ¶Of Gallia Senonensis. Chap. 147. GAllis senonensis, is a Prouince of French-men, and hath Germania Treuerensis, in the East side: in the South, the oner Burgoyne, and the Mountaines Pennsnes: in the West,
the part of Fraunce, that is called, Gal∣lia Engdunēsis in ye North, Gallia Bel∣gica. The land beareth wel corne, fruit, and vines also. Therin be diuers wels, riuers and streames. These Galli Seno∣nes were sometime called Zenones: for they receiued freely into harborow. After∣ward that Z. was chaunged into the let∣ter S. and called Senonens, as Isid. saith, Libro. 9. And had that name of the Citie Senonensis, that is theyr chiefe Ci∣tie. The land is full of people, and hath manye Cities, and manye strong walled fownes, and a riuer runneth thereby that is called Serana. AdditionSenones, a people in Fraunce. ¶Of Siria, chap. 148. SIria hath the name of Sirus, Abra∣hams neuely, got on Cethura, as Isi∣dore saieth libro. 9. & 15. This lande endeth at the riuer Eusrates in the East side: and at the great sea and Egipt, in the West side: and stretcheth from, the North to Armenia and Cappadocia: and from the South to the sea Arabicum, as he, saith. The space thereof stretcheth in great length, and is more narrowe and straight in bredth, and containeth manye prouinces, as Comagines, Fenicia, & Iu∣dea is a part thereof, besides Saracens, Nabathes. And it is a region most full of people, and most plentifull of corne & fruite, neate, shéepe and great horses, As∣ses, and Camells, and is most rich of waze and swéete spicerie, and of metall, most strong with cities & castles, moyst with most noble riuers, lakes, & pondes, and hath noble hauens of the sea, name∣ly in Palestines, Maritimie and Feni∣cis. The men be sterne and great war∣riours, and occupie in diuers countreyes and lands with diuers chaffer and mer∣chaundises: therein be diuers Nations, the which as they differ in faces, so they varie in language, minde, and manners, of the which, some dwell, in Desart, as Nabathei and Saraceni: some dwell in mountaynes, and some in woodes, and greaues, of the which there are full ma∣ny, among the nations of those Regions and lands, as Herodotus telleth. (Additiō.Siria, a great Realme in Asia, which hath on the East, the riuer Euphrates on the West, the middle sea, & the Realme of Aegypt: on the North, Cilicia and Cappadocia: on the South, Arabia. Syria, called also Assyria, a great Coun∣trey in the East, hauing on the North part, Armenia: on the West, Mesopo∣tamia: on the South, Susiana: on the East, Media. It also containeth, Phoe∣nicia, Palestina, and Babilonia. ¶Of Sichima. cap. 149. SIchima, is a little lande in Samaria in the middes betwéene Iudea & Galilea: and hath the name of Sichem the sonne of Emor, that builded therein a citie that was called Sichem that now is named, Neopolis. (Neapolis. There are three ci∣ties of this name, one in Naples, one in Affrike, and the other in Caris.) And the Countrey thereabout is called Si∣chima, as Isidore saith libro. 15. Ierome saith super Genesis. 18. This was the portion of that land, that Iacob gaue to his sonne Ioseph ouer the lot. And so that land was in the linage of Ephraim, and there Ioseph was buried, and there his tombe is shewed vnto this daye, as Ier. saith. Iacob got that land, & bought it with money gotten with great trauel, and gaue therefore an hundred Lambes, as it is said Genesis 24. Ier. saieth, that for that trauell Iacob sayd, that he tooke that land out of the Amorteis hand, with bowe and with sword. There nigh was Terebintus a trée, vnder the which Ia∣cob bid the mawnets of his sonnes. And then he went vp out of Sichima into Lusa, that is called Bethel. Also as it is saide Genesis 25. In this place Iosephs bretheren fedde and kept flockes: but when Ioseph cought them, he found them not in Sichem, but in Dotaym: where they spoyled him, and solde him to Aegyptians. And afterwade Abimelech the sonne of Ieroboal, destroyed Sichi∣ma, and slew the men that dwelled ther, and sowed salte in the Countrey about, as it is sayd Iudie. 10. In this field was Iacobs well, by the which our Lorde re∣sted, when he was wearie of the waye, and badde the woman giue him drinke of the water of the Well, as it is sayde Iohn. 4. This place is most fertile,
and wonderfull merry and most stedfast. OF Scithia. chap. 150. SCithia is the greatest Region, and the ouer part thereof is in Asia, and the neather in Europa. And this neather part beginneth at the marreis Meotides, and stretcheth betwéene the riuer Danubius and the North Occean to Germania, as Isidore sayth, libro. 15. The first parte thereof is Alania, thē Meotides Paludes, then Gothia, Dacia, Rhetia, the Germa∣nia, where Sweues dwell, and occupye a greate deale thereof, as hée sayeth. In Scithia bée many regions and landes  some thereof bée rich, and some bée inha∣vitable, and no men dwell therein. For in many places is much golde and precious stones, but for great griphons men come there but seld. There is best Smaragdus and most pure christall, as he saith, Ther in many places in Scithia be many men, wonderfullye shapen, and greate wilde beasts, as Linces, Tygers, and most cru∣ell Beares and Lions, and namely in the desarts and regions of Hircana. Looke be∣fore de Hircanis. (Additiō.Scythia, a greate Countrie, nowe vnder the dominition of the great Cane of Cathaie, a sauage and wilde peo∣ple.) Of Sicionia, chap. 151. SIcionia had that name in olde time of Sicion the King, by his name it was called ye kingdome of Sicionia. Archas the sonne of Iupiter and of Calissa, af∣ter hée had subdued Pelasgis to his obi∣saunce, hée called that kingdome Archa∣thadia by his owne name. Archadia yt is called Sicionia,Abeston, astone that bee∣ing kind∣led, doth neuer quench. is ye bosome of Archaia, as it were set betwéene the seas Egeum, and Ionium, and hath a greate riuer kei∣mantum, & bréedeth Abiton a stone that, neuer quencheth, if it be once kindeled. There be gendered most whife Merules mau  as Isidore sayth, li. 15. (Additiō.Sugonia, a citie in Achaia, not farre from Corinth, called nowe Clarencia, where is great abundance of mettall.) Of Sicilia, chap. 152. Sicilia was sometime called Scicania, & had that name of Sicanus the king, and was afterward called Sicilia, & had that name of Siculus the brother of Italus: and this land was in old time called Trina∣cria, for thrée furlongs that be there, & be called Pelorum, Patheum, & Libeum, for Trinacria is Gréee, and is to saye, three square, for it is diuided thrée squares. This land is departed from Italy with a little sea, & is afore the sea Affricum. The land beareth well fruit & is rich of gold, and full of dens, chins, and caues, & is ful of wind and of brimstone. And ther bur∣neth the heat of the mount Ethna. In the sea therof is Scilia & Caribdis, in which shiue be swallowed, or sinke, or be bro∣ken. This was the country of Ciclopes, & afterward nourisher of Tyrants: And it beareth well, corne, and is eared & sowen with séed first of all lands: The chiefe ci∣tie thereof is Siracusa: there is a wel A∣racusa, and the riuer Albius, that nouri∣sheth horse: Therein was first found the Iland of Comedia. In the riuer of Agath in Sicilia was the stone Achates first found: And in ye sea of Sicilia is white co∣rall ingendered, and salt that is called A∣grigentine, a wonderfull manner salt: for it melteth in fire & sparkleth in water: al this lande about conteineth the space of three thousand furlongs. Also Salustius saith, that Sicilia ioyned to Italy somtime: but ye space that now is betwéene, was broken & consumed with strength of the sea. Huc vsque Isi. lib. 25. ca, de Insulis: ther al these forsayd things be rehearsed, & Plinius telleth the same. (AdditiōSicilia a noble Ile, first called Trina∣cria. afterward Sicania, & at ye last Sici∣lia, it is in forme 3. cornard, & therefore hath ye name of Trinacria: the one corner called Pachinus, extendeth toward ye part of Gréece, which was called Peleponensi∣us, now Morea: the second corner called Pelorus lieth toward Italy: the third cal∣led Lilyhens, it extedeth toward Affrica, of the which Pelarus, excéedeth in the temperance of ye earth, for with no wet there, may be any nure: nor by any drieth dust. This Ile containeth in circuite (as Solinus writeth, (3000. furlongs
which is of Italian miles .373. as Dio∣dorus Syculus writeth .4360. But Plini∣us sayth, that the thrée corners be distant from Pelorus, to Pachinus by land .165. miles: from thence to Lilybeum .200. miles: from thence to Pelorus 170. miles, and sayth also, that Agrippa affir∣med it, to bée in circuit .618. miles, which doe not agrée with Solinus nor Diodo∣rus, which may happen to be by the di∣uersitie of furlongs called sir Latine Sta∣dia. The fertilitye of this Ile in all graine, beautie of medowes, delicatenesse of waters colde and hot, mountaines and caues myraculous, and other things ther excéeding notable, many Authours haue written and wondered at, both Gréekes, and Latines. D. Cooper in The∣saurus. Of Sirtes. chap. 153. AS Isidore sayth, libro. 14. Sirtes bée places in the sea full of grauell, and hath that name of drawing. For Salusti∣us sayth, it draweth therto all thing. For Siren is Gréeke, and is to vnderstande, draught or drawing. And such drawing maketh the ground and the sea vneuen. In some place déepe, and in another place shallowe: and therefore it is perillous to passe that waye. Sirtes that induce such perill, are by the Sea of Aegypt, and are meddeled therwith in many places, as he sayth. (Additiō.Syrtes are those which we call quick sands, whose bottomes are ful of springs, but of a meruailous depth, that shippes lighting thereon, without a quicke floud, doe sinke out of sight, or vtterlye pe∣rish. Of Scotia. chap. 154. THe land Scotia hath ye name of Scotis, that dwell therein, and is a long stretching Countrye, as it were furlong in the Ilande of Britaine: and is depar∣ted from North Englande with riuers and armes of the Sea, and is closed a∣bout with the Occean in either side: and is also departed from Ireland with the sea Occean and the same nation that was sometime first in Ireland, and all accor∣ding thereto in tongue, in manners, and in kinde. The men are light of heart, fierce and couragious on their enimyes. They loue nigh as well death as thral∣dome, and they account it for slouth to die in bed, and a great worship and ver∣tue to die in a field fighting against eni∣mies: The men bée of scarce liuing, and many suffer hunger long time, and eate seld before the Sunne going downe, and vse flesh, milke meats, fish, & fruits, more then Britons: and vse to eate the lesse bread, and though the men bée séemelye though of figure and of shape, and faire of face generally by kinde, yet their owne Scottish clothing disfigure them full muth. And Scots be sayd in their owne tongue of bodies painted, as it were cut and slit: For in olde time they were marked with diuers figures and shapes in their flesh and skinne, made with y∣ron pricks, as Isidore sayth, lib. 9. cap. de Vocabilis gentium. And because of med∣deling with English men, many of them haue chaunged the old manners of Scots into better manners for the more parte, but the wilde Scots and Irish account greate worshippe to follow their forefa∣thers in clothing, in tongue, and in liuing, and in other manner dooing: And de∣spise some deale the vsages of other men, in:cōparison to their owne vsage. And so each laboureth to be aboue, they detract and blame all other, and enuye all other: they deriue all other, and blame all other mens manners, they be not ashamed to lye: and they repeite no man, of what na∣tion, bloud, or puissaunce so euer hée bée, to be hardie and valiant but themselues, they delight in their owne: they loue not peace. In that land is plenteous ground, merry woodes, moist riuers and welles, many flockes of beastes. There be earth tillers for quantity of the place inow:and is not unequall to the land of Britaine, as Herodotus saith. And is a sage insear∣cher of the worlde, as Plinius saith. Looke before in Hibernia in litiera H. There Isidore saith the same of Ireland, in many things. (Additiō.Scotia, Scotland, the part of Brita∣nia from the Riuer of Twéede to Ca∣tanes:
Scot, Scots, or Scottish men, of whome Saint Hierome writeth in this wise: Quid loqua de caeteris nationi∣bus, quum ipse adolescen tulus in Gallia viderim Scotos, gentem Britanuicam humanis vesci carnibus, & quum per syluas porcorium greges, & armentorū, pecudumque reperiant, pastorum nates, & foeminarum papillas solere abscinde∣re, & has solas ciborum delitias arbitra∣ri? What shall I speak of other nations, since that when I was a boye, I sawe in Fraunce, Scots, & people of Britaine, cut mans flesh, and when they found in the forrests heards of Swine, beasts, and cat∣tell, they would cut off the buttockes of the baies which kept them, and also the womens paps, and tooke that to be ye most daintie and delicate meate. Notwithstan∣ding the Scottes were in S. Hieromes time, which is néere 1195. yeares past, af∣ter the computation in Lanquet, so rude a people. It seemeth although they be not all come home to constancie, yet are they now abhorrours of such humans spoile, and tractable inough with good gouerne∣ment.) Of Suecia. chap. 155. SVecia is a regiō of the nether Scithia in Europa, thereof all Gathia hath now the name, that is the greatest region of the kingdome of Dance & of the Nor∣waies, & the sea Balticum is in the East side: and the British occean in the West: and the hils of Norway and people, in the North: and ioyneth to Denmark South∣ward, & endeth ther. Suecia is called Go∣thia also: and is good ground, and beareth well corne, & hath no vines, but in great plenty of pasture, & of mettall, it recom∣penseth the other defalts. For beside ma∣ny manner riches that it hath of the sea, it passeth manye other Regions and landes, in beasts wilde and tame, in sil∣uer Oare, and in many other riches. The men bée full strong, theyr might of chiualrye daunted long time the most deale nigh of Affrica and Europa. And in greate Alexanders time, the greate hardinesse of Gréekes dreaded to aduen∣ture vpon them. Also the greate might of Iulius Cae∣sar ouercame French men, Almaines, and Britones, but hée dreaded to fight with Danes, Gothes, Norwaies, and o∣ther men of the North, as the Writers of Storyes ell both of Gréekes and of Romanes, so whose wordes sayth maye and ought to bée giuen, in such thinges as are not against our religion, faith, nor reason as Hierome sayeth: It is wor∣thy (saith he) so beléeue Stories and wri∣tings of Poets and of Writers, if theyr relation be not against the faith, and good conditions & manners, neither contrarie to the truth that is known. Of these men came Amayones, women of womennes lande, as Orosius sayth, and Isidore li∣bro. 15. (Additiō.Swises, a people verye fierce, the chiefe Citie is Tigure, first built by the Sweues, the yeares before Christ. 1744.) Of Scondia. cap. 156. SCondia, Schondania, or Scondenmar∣chia,This chapter is added. is as much to say, as faire Dania, or faire Denmarke, Plinye nameth it Scandia. It was named Scondia, by reson of the fairenesse and fruitfulnesse thereof, replenished wt fresh riuers, hauens, mart townes, fish, beasts, golde, siluer, copper, & lead. It is supposed that the olde Gréek and Latines knew of this, for that they held opinion, in the North parts the cold Zone or clime was condempned to per∣petuall Snowe, intollerable to all liuing creatures, the Germanes, and these peo∣ple now vat the king of Denmark did vse strake togethers. Of suenia. chap. 157. SVenia is a Prouince of Germania, in Europa. The men thereof were wont to haue most Lordshippe in Ger∣mania, as Isidore sayeth, libro. 15. and sayeth the same .3. Cap. de Vocabi∣lis Gentium libro. 9. The Sweues, sayth he, be parted of Germanes in the ende of the North.
Of them Lucanus speaketh and sayeth, Fundit ab extremo slauos aquilone Sue∣uos. That is to saye, that the Sweues with yelow haire come of the vttermost North. And many men supposed, that in their lande were sometime an hundered townes, and much people, and the men bée called Sweui: and haue that name of a mount that is called Sueuie, which standeth in the entering of Germania. And those men dwelled first in the Countrye about that mount as hée say∣eth. Also as he saith, this Countrie hath Danubius and Bauaria in the East side, and the Rine and Alsacia in the West, and high mountaines called Alpes, and Italy in the South, and Franconia and the neather Germania in the North. And Sueuia is double: the neather stretcheth toward the Rine, and the ouer towarde high mountaines Alpes, and the Riuer Danubius. Either is good lande at best, and beareth good corne and Wine in ma∣ny places, and hath most strong Cities, Castles, and townes: and also plains and mountaines, riuers, and streames, & ma∣ny woods and hearbes: and much pasture and many shéepe, and other beasts: and about the mountaines, yron and siluer, and other mettalls bée found. The men be many and full strong, bolde and har∣dye, and good warriours, high of body, with yeolowe haire, seemely and fayre of face. (Additiō.Sueuia, the chiefe countrie of Ger∣manie, in fertilitye, wholesomenesse, and beautifull personages. It hath on ye East Bauiere: on the West Halsaite, and the riuer of Rhene: on the South the moun∣taines Alpes: on the North Frankland. It was somtime called Alemania, wher∣of all Germany was called Almaine: In Dutch it is now called Swaue.) Of Tanatos, chap. 157. TAnatos is a little Iland of Occean, & is departed from Britaine with a lit∣tle arme of the sea, and hath wheat fields and noble ground, and is called Tana∣tos, and hath that name of death of Ser∣pents. For the earth of that land carri∣ed into any countrye of the worlde slay∣eth Serpents foorthwith: as Isidore say∣th, lib. 14. (Additiō.This is supposed to be the Ile of Tenet in Kent, which is for the bignesse, very fertill and good land.) Of Trapobana. chap. 158. TRapobana is an Ilande of Inde to∣ward the South, out of that side, the Indish occean beginneth. The land stret∣cheth seauentie mile and fiftie paces in length, & foure store and fiftye thousande furlongs in breadth. And a riuer run∣neth there through, and is full of Marga∣rites and of precious stones. And some parte thereof is full of Elephants and of other beasts, and men dwell-in some part thereof. In this lande men saye be two Summers, & two winters in one yeare: and flowres spring there twice in a yere. And it is the profitablest Ilande of In∣de, and springeth alway. The leaues bée alway gréene and fade neuer, as Isidore saith, lib. 14. Addition. Taprobane,Addition an Ile in the Indian sea, and was of some dide Writers supposed to be in the contrarie part of the worlde against vs, and therefore they called it an other worlde: It lieth in the point be∣tweene East & West, the quantity there∣of is diuersly described by sūndry authore. For Strabo writeth that it is in length eight thousande furlongs, which is a thousand miles. Plinius, Martianus, and Solinus, do affirme it to be in lēgth seuen thousand furlongs, which is eight hun∣dred lxxv. miles, in breadth .5000. furlōgs, which is 625. miles: part of it extendeth beyond the Equinoctial line, more south, and hath on the Northeast the lesse In∣die. It is nowe called Samotra, and is vnder the dominion of the great Cam, and is gouerned by foure Kings, in an exquisite forme of iustice, notwithstan∣ding that the people be Idolaters: They hunt Tygres, Elephants, and Panthers, of the which there is great plentie. Also there be found Carbuncles, Saphires, Iacincts, Topaces, Rubies, & Granates, in great numbers. There groweth Si∣namome,
Canel, Beniamine, and other swéete trées, in great abundaunce. And they haue money of golde, siluer, & brasse, of the same waight and value, that the auncient coine of the Romanes was. There is also found great plentie of ori∣ent pearles. Of Thracia. chap. 159. THracia is a prouince in Grecia. Ti∣ras the son of Iaphet came thether, & called that land Thracia by his owne name, as Isidore sayth, li. 14. Other men meane, that Thracia hath that name of cruelnesse of men that dwelled therein. The Citie Constantinople is afore this land in the East side of the sea Propon∣tis: and is towarde Histre in the North side, and stretcheth to the sea Egeum in ye South, and hath Macedonia in ye West. Many diuers Nations dwelled therein sometime, as Massagete, Sarmate, and Scithe, & many other. The land is wide and large: and therefore many Nations might be conteined therin. The riuer He∣brum springeth & runneth in Thracia, and by many strange nations, as Isidore saith. li. 14. (Additiō.Thrace, a region in Europa, on the North it is bounded with the land My∣sia: on the East with the higher: on the South with ye sea Aegum: on the West with Bosphorus, Thracius, and Propon∣tis. Therein is the citie of Constantino∣ple, sometime called Bizantium.) Of Traconitida. cap. 160. TRaconitida is a region in Iudea, ouer the which raigned Herodes brother Philip. For all the Kingdome of the He∣brewes was departed in foure, and each of the foure was called Tetrarchia. And the Prince and the king of such a parte was called Tetrarcha. The first of those foure was Galilea: Herodes was Prince and king thereof. The second & the third was Ituria and the region Traconiti∣da: ouer that was Philip Tetrarcha of either region. The fourth Region was Abilina: Ouer this Countrie raigned Lisanias, the brother of Herode & of Phi∣lip. The land of Iewes was departed in so manye particular principates by the Romanes, to subdue the pride of the Iewes,Luke. 3. as the Glose sayth super Luc. super illum locum: Tetrarcha autem Philippo Iturie, & Traconitides regio∣nis, &c. (Additiō.Trachonites, a Countrie in Syria, ioyning vnto Arabia.) Of Thessalia. chap. 161. THessalia, as Isidore saith, libro. 15. is a Prouince of Grecia, and hath that name of Thessalus the king, and ioyneth on the south side to Macedonia. In Thes∣salia be many riuers, & therein be many towns, ye chiefe therof is called Thessalo∣nica. There is also the mount Pernassus, that was sometime hallowed to Apollo, & Thessalia was the country of Achilles, and thence came the Laphites. And it is said of them, that they brake first horses with Bridles, and sate on their backes, and séemed one body horse & man. There∣fore knights of Thessalia were scined to be Centauri, as Isidore saith, lib. 11. cap. de Portentis: In Thessalia were first found shillings of golde, and crafte and vse of breaking of horses: as Isidore sai∣eth, libro. 15. And farther bée sayth, lib. 4. that in Moses time tell a greate floud in Thessalia, that destroyed the more deale of the people of that lande: And a fewe were saved by succour of the mountaines, and namely in mount Parnassus: about the which mount Deucalion reigned that time: And such as fledde vnto him in shippes he receiued, and in the toppe of the hill Pernassus he nourished and cherished them. Wherefore the Greekes fables feigned, that Deucation should re∣store mankinde of stones, as he affirmeth there. (AdditiōThessalia a region in Gréece, called also Aemonia, sometime Pandora, som∣time Pyrthea, of some Pelasgia: of Ho∣mer, Argopelasgicon. It is inuironed with foure greate and famous Hilles, on the East with the mountaynes of Pelion and Ossa: on the North with Olympus: on the West with Pin∣dus: on the South Othris.
It marcheth on Macedonia on the East. The people were valiant men on horse∣backe, and inumerble in battaile, as Po∣lihius writeth, but verye vniust of theyr promise. The women there being won∣derfull witches, tranformed men into the shape or forme of beasts.) Of Tenedos. cha. 162. TEnedos is an Iland of Grecia, one of the Ciclades in the North side. Wher∣in is the citie of Thene builded. And the land hath that name of that city. For one Thenes a young man was defamed, that he should haue had to doe with his step∣mother, which fled vnto ye Iland, wherin he found none to fill it: and he gaue to the citie that hée there builded, & to the Iland his owne name. (Additiō.Tenedos, an Ile in the sea Aege∣num, betwéen Mytilene & Hellespont, not farre from Troia.) Of Thile iusula. chap. 163. THile is the last Iland of Occean be∣twéene the North countrey & South, sixe daies sailing beyond Britaine: and hath the name of the Sun, for there the Sunne stinteth in Summer, when the dayes begin to shorten. And no daye is there beyond. Therfore the sea thereof is slowly froze, as Isidore saith, lib. 14. And Plinius sayth, that ye place is vninhabita∣ble: for in Summer nothing may there grow for great burning heat, nor in win∣ter for freesing colde. For from the euen∣nesse of the day & night in March, when the Sunne is in Ariese, vnto euennesse of the day and night in Haruest, when the Sunne is in Libra, the Sunne for∣saketh not that Ilande: And from that time to the euennesse of the day & night, againe in March, the sunne commeth not there: and so there halfe the yeare is day, and halfe night, as he saith in cap. de in∣sulis. lib. 14. & de solstitijs, li. 2. Also Be∣da saith the same, li. de naturis rerum, and Solinus also. (Additiō.Thyle, the Ile called Island, the old Cosmographers supposed there the ende of all earthlye soile: of late yeres found otherwise.) Of Tripolitana. chap. 164. TRipolitana is a region, and Tripeli∣tana is the name of two Regions. That one is in Fenicia, and hath that name of Tripolis, that is a most famous citie, so strong and mightie, that he defen∣deth and succoureth all the Countrie a∣bout. And the other Tripolitana is in Affrica, betwéene Pentapolis and Bizan∣tium, and hath the name of thrée greate Cities, that is to wit, Osea, Sabine, and Leptis the greate. This lande hath the more Sirtes in the East side, and Trogo∣ditas in the North, and the sea Adriati∣cum in the West: Bizantium, Gelulas, and Garamantes in the south and stret∣cheth to the Occean of Ethiopia, as Isi∣dore sayth. (Additiō.Tiypolis a Countrie in Affrike, and another in Syria, the third in Phoe∣nicia.) Of Trogodia. chap. 165. TRogodia is a region in Ethiopia, the men thereof bée called Trogodites: and haue that name, for they bée so swift of foote, that they followe and take wilde beastes with running: In this Region is an Iland, wherin groweth the best kinde of Mirre, and most pure drops thereof is found there: and is called Mirre Trogo∣ditis, and hath the name of the Ilande that they growe in, as Isidore sayth, lib. 17. And though this prouince be in E∣thiopia, yet it stretcheth to the ends of A∣rabia: so that sometime it is sayd, it be∣longeth to Arabia, as in libro. 17. and sometime to Ethiopia, as it is saide in lib. nono. (Additiō.Troglodyte, people in the furthest parte of Affrike, beyond Aethiopia, which dwell in caues, and doe eate the flesh of serpents.) Of Troiana. chap. 166. TRoiana is a prouince in Phrigia, and was first called Dardania, and had that name of Dardanus: for Dardanus
came out of Gréece to Phrigia, & reigned there first: And afterwarde his sonne Erictonius and then his nephew Tros, and of him the Citie of Troye, and the country about had the name, as Isidore saith, libro. 9. And after that Troy was destroyed, many Troians sayled by di∣uerse countries of the world to get them places, & they expelled and put out many nations of their countries, and dwelled there in their stead afterwarde. Of them came most mightie nations of the world: as most true stories of diuers regions & lands tell. (Additiō.Troia, the citie of Troy: also the Countrey wherein Troy stoode.) Of Thuscia. ca. 167. THuscia is a Prouince of Italye be∣twéene Ligures and the Territorye of Rome: and is strengthened mightely and stronglye with diuerse mountaines and strong places, as Isidore sayth, li∣bro .15. Thuscia hath that name of ofte sacrifice, and of Thus and Incense. For in those partes at burialles and Obse∣quies men in olde time vsed for relygi∣gion and deuotion to burne and offer much; Frankenscence: and namely they wept and made greate dole and sorrowe for theyr dead men: And they burnt Thus on Alters of Goddis. For as it is sayde, in Thusria the craft of diuination was first found, as Isidore sayth. This land was first called Aemilia in olde time: therein bée many solempne Cities and noble. And hath the Citye Pise in the West towarde Liguria, Senos, Lu∣cani, and Florence towarde the North, the Citie of Arecium toward the East: and toward the South Thurthon, Per∣nes, and Assise, that ioyne and bée in the valley of Spolitane, and hath the Sea Adriaticum, & the march Anconitana in the East side: and the brinke Tyber, and Rome in the South: and Melan and Liguria in the West: Romanio∣la and the Prouince of Padua in the North. This lande stretcheth much in length out of the East into the West, and hath lesse breadth of the North side into the South. This land is full high of moun∣taines: and the place is most stronge touching scituation, and the grounde beareth well corne and fruite. The ayre is good and wholesome: The Sea ma∣keth this lande rich in two sides. Many Welles and lakes make this land moist and plenteous. The Riuer Aruis run∣neth thereby, and adorneth it. Plentye of sweete Saffron and Spicerye, that there groweth, maketh it singularlye no∣ble and rich. Manye hot Welles that there spring, make it kinde and so∣lemyne. (Additiō.Tuscia, a Countrie in Italy, wher∣in be cities of Florence, Sene, Luca, and Pise.) Of Thuringia. chap. 168. THuringia is a prouince of Germania, in the middle betwéene Saxons and Francos, and Westualls, and hath the Beemes and Saxones in the East side: Francenes and Bauaes in the South side: Sucues and Alsaces in the West: men of the Rine and Westualls in the North. And as the name of the Country meaneth. Thuringia, harde: so the men bée harde, and also most cruell agaynst their enymyes. The Countrye is po∣pulous, and the men bée faire and séeme∣ly of stature, strong of bodye, harde, and steadfast of heart. Their lande is streng∣thened and closed with mountaynes all about, and is full plaine within, and bea∣reth well-corne and fruit, & is not with∣out Uiniardes. There be manye strong castles and townes, not onely in moun∣taines, but also in plaines: there be riuers lakes, and ponds: there is good aire, and there is greate plentie of good pasture: there be many Oxen, Shéepe, and other beasts. There in mountaines be diuerse mettalles mined, as Herodutos sayeth, that sought and left vnsearched no priuy marches of Germania. Of Thuronia. chap. 169. THuronia is a Prouince of the ouer France, & was sometime accounted a part of Gyan, & hath ye name of ye noble
citie Turon, & in that Thuron the floure of Priests most holy Saint Martin re∣sted, and is vpon the riuer Ligeris, that runneth thereby, & moisteth it, and ma∣keth it rich in many manner wise. The land beareth well corne and fruit, wine, and pasture. Therein is most wholsome aire and many woods. Men be of bodys seemely of shape, hardy and bold of heart, goodly in déede, and in speath sober. (Additiō.Turones, people in Fraunce by the riuer Lei. Of Vasconia. chap. 170. VAsconia, Gascoine is a prouince be∣side the mountaines Perenei, and was sometime accounted vnder Gyan, & hath that name of the towne Wastea, as Isidore saith lib. 9. And hath the moun∣taines Pirenei in the one side, & the sea of occean in another. And is nigh to Pei∣to in the third side. In that land be ma∣ny woods and trées, lands, & mountaines. In many partes thereof be many vini∣ards, so many & so much, that it sendeth plentie of wine to countries and lands that be nigh, & also into Ilands of ye sea. The riuer Girunde departeth this land from Tholose, and runneth by Gascoine, and entereth into the sea of occean beside Burdewes, the chiefe citie of Gascoine, as Isid. saith, li. 9. cap. de Vocabilis gen∣tium. The Gascoines haue the name of the towne Wascia, and dwell by the long and large solitude of the mountains Pi∣renei, and be called Uascones, as it were Uaccones by changing C into S. Pom∣peius when he had subdued Spaine: and hasting him to come to his triumph, hée put these men out of the mountains Pi∣renei, & gathered thē into one towne: and therevpon the towne was called Vrba conuenarum, as Isidore saith, and Pli∣nius, and Herodotus telleth, yt these men Gascoines be light and pliant of bodye, hardie and bolde of heart, fierce of ha∣fly to battaile. Of Venecia. chap. 171. VEnecia is sayd of olde men the Pro∣uince of Uenir, the which Prouince stretcheth from the cliffe of ye sea Adria∣ticum, vnto the riuer Padus, which de∣parteth betwéene ye cities & countries of the nether & the ouer Liguns, that is to say, betwéene Pergamenses & Medola∣nensis, so it stretched somtime, as ye most true writer of stories of Lombards & of Ligures telleth. In the coasts of ye fore∣said sea afore and nigh to this prouince ye citie of Uenice is now builded: in this prouince are many other noble Cityes. For as Isi. saith li. 16. Montus was buil∣ded of Mantis, the daughter of Resia, which after the destruction of Thebes came into Italy & standeth in Uenecia, & in the French tongue is called Alpina. Also Uenecia is a prouince of Italia, yt had Lordship of many lands & cities in ye sea & land in olde time: and now at this day the might therof & Lordship stretch∣eth right far in the sea, & euen vnto Gre∣cia, & reacheth frō the countries of Ger∣mania, and subdueth the theft & tiranny of skimmours & sea théeues of Dalma∣cia and of Sclauia, and represseth them. And gouerneth & ruleth most rightfully Ilandes, hauens, and coast of the Sea, that be vnder the Lordshippe thereof. And defendeth mightely their subiects a∣gainst enimies, & hold the common pro∣fit and ciuill vnder rightfull lawes. And suffereth within their bounds no sed to abide, that is contrarye to Gods lawe. I thinke it wer superfluitie to reckend the godnesse & worthines of these men. For the vertue & might, aduisement, and readinesse, and great accorde and loue of all righteousnesse and mildnesse of men of Uenecia are now knowen nigh to all nations, as saith the roiall writer of the storie of Langobardes. (Additiō.Read Ortelius concerning Venice, and also Munsterus.) Of Westualia. chap. 172. WEstualia is a prouince of the nea∣ther Germania, & hath Saronia in the East side, Thuringia and Bassia in the South, the King and Colaine in the West, occean and Frisia in the North. And is closed in two ends with two most noble riuers, that bée Wesera and Rhe∣num. The Rine toucheth in the North
West: and Wespera towarde the East. This lande in some bookes is called the olde Saronia, and preserueth and kéepeth it selfe cleane from all spise of fornicati∣on, and most straightly punisheth adui∣terers: and hath in most reuerence ho∣nest wedlockes: although it was snared to the Pamins superstition til the seuen∣tie yeare of our Lord, as Bonifacius wri∣teth in an Epistle to the King of Eng∣land. This land is full of woodes and of pastures, and more apte to féeds beastes then to beare corne: and is moisted with many riuers and wells, with Lipia, and Kura, and many other wells and riuers, there are salt welles and mountaines, plentie of mettall and Dare, In that land is much fruit, and many Orchardes, ap∣ples, and nuts: also wilde beasts, swine, and other beasts small and greate. The men be commonly séemelye and high of stature, faire of shape, and strong of body, bolde and hardie of heart. There is much chiualrie, and wonderfull hardie & bolde, and hardie of heart, alwaye prest and readie to armes, there are strong Cityes and well walled, and most strong castles and towns, both in mountaines and in plaines. Of Vironia. chap. 173. VIronia is a little Prouince beyonde Denmarke toward the East. And hath that name of Uirore, gréene colour. For it is full of hearbes, grasse, and wood: there bée many wells of waters. The grounde thereof heareth well corne. The men were sometime strong, fierce, and cruell, and vnséemelye, and he now sub∣iectes to Kinges and lawes of Danes, and all the lande is occupied with Ger∣maines and Danes. Looke before in lit∣tera R. de Riualia. This lande is depar∣ted from the men Nogardes and Ca∣theis, with a full great riuer that is called Narua. Of Winlandia. chap. 174. WInlandia is a Countrye besides the Mountaines of Norwaye towarde the Cast, and stretcheth vppon the cliffe of Occean: And is not full plenteous, but in woode, hearbes, and grasse. The men of that Countrie bée straunge and somewhat wilde and fierce: and they oc∣cupie themselues with witchcrafte. And so to men that faile by their coastes, and also to men that abide with them, for de∣fault of winde, they profer winde to say∣ling,The Sa∣moyes bordring on ye Rus∣se, vse the like in∣chātment and so they sell winde. They vse to make a clewe of thrid, and they make diuers knots to be knit therin. And then they commaunde to drawe out of the clewe vnto thrée knottes or moe, or lesse, as they will haue the winde more softs or strong. And for theyr missebeléefe seendes moue the ayre, and arise stronge tempest or softe, as hée draweth of the Clewe more or lesse knottes. And some∣time they moue the winde so stronglye, that the wretches that beléeue in such do∣ing, are drowned by rightfull dome of God. Of Vitria. cap. 175. VItria is a little Ilande in the British sea, and is departed from the more Britaine with a little arme of the sea: the ground thereof is best lande for Wheat. Therein be many woodes and groaues, and many beasts wilde and same, & wels, and riuers that moist the lande. That I∣lande is most temperate and wholesome countrie, and most plenteous of fruite, as it is sayd, and English men dwell therein at this day. TREVISA. Héere lacketh: for no mention is made whether ward this land beareth from Britaine, nor in what side of Britaine this land should be, Some men would thinke that this Ilande is Wight, but Wight is commonly called Insula vecca, and this Ile is héere called Vitria. (AdditiōWhether this Ile bée a parte of that where the Uitrie canuas and linnen cloth was made in times past, or else béeing consumed with the Sea, there is nowe no such Ile: or whether the ma∣king of glasse, hadde there anye origi∣nall.)
Of Yselondia. chap. 176. YSeland is the last region in Europa, in the North deyond Norwaye. In the vttermost partes thereof it is alway Ise and srosen, and stretcheth vppon she cliffe of the Occean towarde the North, where the Sea is frore with greate and strong colde: And Iseland hash the ouet Scithin in the East side, and Norwaye in the South, and the Irish Occean in the West, and the Sea that is farre in the North, and is called Irelande, as it were the lande of Ise and of Glasse. For it is sayed, that there be mountaines of Snowe frore as harde as Ise or Glasse, there thristall is found. Also in that re∣gion be white Beares most greate and right fierce, that breake, Ise and Glasse with their clawes, and make manye holes therein, and diue there through in∣to the Sea, and take Fish vnder the Ise, and glasse, and drawe them out through the same hoales, and bring them to the cliffe, and liue thereby The land is bar∣raine, except few places in the valleys, in the which places vitheth grow Oats. In the place that men dwell in, onelye groweth hearbes, grasse and trées: And in those places bréede beastes same and wilde. And so for the more part men of the lande liue by Fish and by hunting of flesh Sheepe may not liue there for old. And therefore men of the lande weare for colde, felles and skinnes of Beares, and of wilde beasts, that they looke with hunting. Other clothing maye they not haue, but it come of other landes. The men be full grose of body and strong, and full white, and giue them to fishing and hunting. (Additiō.Those that goe the thether on fishing, are meruailously troubled with a kinde of Flie like a Gnat, and stinketh foule.) (Additiō.Island is interpreted the lande of Ise, and is called of olde writers Thyle, it is extended betwéene the South and the North, almost. 200. schones, in longi∣tude a schone is 60. furlongs, it is for the most parte full of mountaines, and vntilled, but in the plaines verye fruit∣full, the inhabitants are faine to driue their castell from their féeding, least they shoulde by ouermuch fatnesse strangle and die. There are thrée mountaines of meruailous height, the tops wherof are reuered continuallye with Snowe, but the lowēt partes are of lyke operation as is the mount Etna, flaming forth fire and Brimstone, Drie of these is called Helga, the other Mons Crosis. The third Hecla, whose flames consumeth not Flaxe nor Towe, nor yet is quenched with water, the fire breaketh forth with & hydeous casteling lyke Thunder, and casteth forth the pomisse stones of a mer∣uailous height, néere vnto these moun∣taines are there riuers or chinkes, lyke déepe raues, especially at the foote of the mount Hecla, so déepe that no eie canne perceiue any bottome, out of the which Abisme, appeareth as it were shapes of men, as though they were drownes, and yet breathing foorth a sound, saieng, that they must depart from thence is mount Hecla: as touching the fearefull noyse of the Ise, Read R. Eden, and R. Wells.) Of Zeugia. chap. 177. ZEogia is called Zeugis also, and is a prouince where as the thore Car∣thage is, ituate in the lesse Africa, be∣twéene Bisantium and Numidis, as Isi∣dore sayth, lib. 14. This prouince stret∣cheth from the north sea into Siculum, as he sayth. And stretcheth out of the South, to the country of Getules. The hither part thereof beareth well corne, and the further is full of Serpents & of beasts that be wilde. There be wild As∣ses, and other wilde beastes. There bée found wonders, and beasts wonderfully shapen, as he saith. (Additiō.Zeugma, is also the name of a citye in Dacia.) (Additiō.Zygantes, a people by Carthage, a∣mong whom is great store of honnye, both made by Bees, and also wrougnt with mannes hande. They coulour their bodies with red lead, and féede especially on Apes flesh, whereof they haue great plentie.) D. Cooper.
¶I haue set downe foorth of Or∣telius, the vniuersall descripti∣on of the whole earth (for the better vnderstanding wherof) Orbis terrarum, Nouus orbis, America, Asia, Africa, and Europa. All which is added. The introduction of Vesper be∣fore the discourse. THE world is a wonderfull gathe∣ring together of things created, the placing of Elementes, the mutiplyeng of Creatures, the dissoluing of Influen∣ces, the beginning place of time, and the ende by death. In which worlde there are in infinite number of varia∣bles, and an endlesse number of discords: Notwithstanding concord béeing placed by a secreate mysterye in the imperfect,1. Cor.13. Idem. 15. Iohn. 8. showeth the value of the minde to bée more noble, then the bodye, as the Cre∣ator is farre more excellent, then the thinges created: for all that is in the worlde is not of the Father, but of the worlde made and created, but not iusti∣fied and saued: wée liue together, but not loue together: the cause is discorde betwixt Errour and Ueritye. Herein appeareth the loue of God a∣mong those in whome hée abideth euer, and is called Mundus, which signifieth cleanenesse, as also the worlde. The worlde was made by him, and yet they knewe him not, hée came among his owne, and they receiued him not, hée sent his seruauntes, and they intreated them shamefully and slewe them. Héere∣in appeareth the nature of Discorde, the powre of Errour, by Tyrtannye, and the simple interteinement of Ueritye, as appearth among the seuerall kindes of Birdes, Beastes, Fishes, Wormes, Flyes, Flowers, Hearbes, Plantes, Trees, Fruites, Seedes, and manye o∣ther things of increase. And man whom God hath made cleane bodied, chéerefull countenaunced, swifte to heare, prompt to speake, apte to learne, poure to be∣léeue, hauing all these Angelicall ver∣tues, shoulde stirre by the minde, whi∣lest hée taking of materiall nourishment abideth, vnto the singular consideration of vertuous exercises, whereby the soule tasting with the bodye; might through Faith and good workes, féele that end∣lesse nourishment which is prepared for the children of God: but whilest they studie to subdue Kingdomes, to ouer∣come theyr neighbours, to robbe the fa∣therlesse and Widdowes, to rauish the virginnes, to gouerne, and not to bée gouerned, the spirits of all such terrestri∣all ferryes doe bréede the shape of sinne, and hatch forth so manye abhominable euills, that theyr whole race of yeares are spent in vaine glorious beasting, and filthye liuing, whose endes is dampna∣tion, whose vellye was theyr God, and glorye was theyr shame, because they were worldlye minded. The Earth is the Lordes and all that therein is, the round worlde, and they that dwell there∣in, Man was made, not to robbe, kill, and destroye, but to giue a continuall praising vnto God, and to learne of God, to bée bountifull, mercifull, and li∣berall, and to bée contented with that he hath. Which who so regardeth not the verye simplest creatures in theyr kindes, shall bée the onelye accusers of fleshlye violence before God, without remission. Consider that the ioyes of the worlde are disturbed by afflictions, and are frayle, and weare awaye, but the ioye of Fayth is not onely disquieted by ex∣tremityes, and by the crosse of perse∣cution, but is made perfect more and more, and when those stormes be most daungerous, then is Faith of most ef∣fect. All the godlye béeing fenced with the strength of Faith and patience, doe containe all the whole worlds, and the tirrannie thereof. Nolli intelligere vt credas, sed crede vt intelligas:S. August. Under∣stand not that thou maist beléeue, but beléeue that thou maist vnderstand. Orbis terrarum.
THE mappe or table of Ortelius, doth comprehende, and set out the portraiture of the whole compasse of the Earth, and of the Occean Sea; inuiro∣ning the same, all which compasse of the Earth, the auncientes, (to whome the newe worlde was not knowen) di∣uided into thrée partes, that is to saye, Affrica, Europa, and Asia: but which America was founde out, our age ad∣ded it vnto them, for the fourth parte, and looketh for the fifth, lyeng vnder the South pole: Gerardus Mercator, the chiefe Geographer of our time, in his vniuersall Table, neuer inough to bée praysed, doth diuide this compasse of the Earth, into thrée maynes; The first hée calleth that which we said, the auncients diuided into thrée, and from whence it is diuided by the holye Scripture, that mankinde tooke his beginning. The seconde, which at this days wée call A∣merica, or the West India: The thirde hée calleth the South lande, which ma∣ny fearme Magelonica, discouered he∣ther vnto, with fewe Sea coastes, And Antiquitis hath taught, that the com∣passe of this earth containeth aboute, where it is widest, fiue thousande and foure hundred Germaine miles,A Ger∣maine mile is supposed p. English miles. or 21000. 600. Italian miles, and the same the later age affirmeth. And these so manye portions of the Earth, (as Plinie sayeth in his seconde booke of Nature,) nare rather as many haue written, the point of the worlde, (neyther is the worlde anye thing else vniuersallye) this is the matter of our glorye, this is the seate, héere wée beare honour, héere wée exercise Empire, héere wée desire riches, héere mankinde fal∣leth together by the eares, or is in an vproare, héere we renewe warres, euen ciuill, and with killing one another, wée make the earth wider: And to passe o∣uer the publike furye of Nations, this wherein we driue awaye our borderers, and by stealth digge vp our neighbours stuffe, and put it to our grounde, or proper goods which belong vnto him, as for example in many Regions, they will yéelde the lande to the owner, in lewe of his purchaise and rent, but if in the bowelles of the Earth there bée founde anye mettalles of value, the pur∣chaiser shall not be Lorde thereof: with as much equitye maye bée taken, when in the stéede of Thifties, by painfull tra∣uaile, and lling of the sayde grounde, it after bring foorth good corne, that ther∣fore, because nowe good Corne, and no Thiftles, the Lorde maye take the Corne, yet replyeth the contrarye and sayeth, that mettalles were before, and are therefore in the right of the Lorde, because the Tenaunt d.d ne∣uer imploye charge, but for the thing readye prouided. Let this reason stand for lawe: yet sayeth the guide of the Lawe: The Kingdome of Heauen,Math. 13 is lyke vnto a treasure hidde in the field, the which a man findeth, and concea∣leth it: and for ioye thereof, goeth and selleth all that hee hath and buy∣eth the fielde. Who hideth the Trea∣sure, God, by his vniuersall creation, who findeth it? (Man,) by the gifte of knowledge:Where good sub∣iects hee, ther Prin∣ces shall neuer lose theyr right. To whome is it due? To him vnto whome it is giuen. Where∣fore hath hée that founde this Treasure boughte with all his substaunce this fielde? That therefore the inheritaunce should not be his: the inheritance is not denyed, but the Treasure, and whye? Because there is no difference, but ey∣ther mine or shine. I referre the equi∣tye of his question, vnto the more pru∣dent and wise in the worlde, that all thinges maye bée considered to the glo∣rye of God, as that which hath ly∣mited the Countryes farre abroade, and hath driuen the dwellers beyonde their boundes: of what small parts of the earth taketh it pleasure of, or when for measure of her couetousnesse, shee hath inlarged it, what portion at length ther∣fore maye a dead man haue. Thus farre hee. America. The new worlde, or the disco∣uerye of the Gloabe of the Earth.
ALL this Hemisphaer (which is cal∣led America, and for his huge wide∣nesse, at this daye the newe worlde,) remayne vnknowen and vnmentioned of the auncientes, euen vnto the time of the yeare from Christ byrth. 1492. in the which yeare it was first disco∣uered by an Italian named Christo∣pher Columbus of Genoa, and sée∣meth to excéede in each point the mea∣sure of mans meruayles. For when the dillygence, both of the auntientes in describing and setting foorth the whole compasse and Gloabe or the Earth, and the commonditye, and opportunitye of verye greate Em∣pires, to searche out for vnknowen Countryes, was considered, and also the cruell, gréedys, and infatiable de∣sire of mankinde, gaping for Golde and Siluer, leauing nothing vnaduentured and assayed, to the ende it might ob∣tayne, those thinges with the which those Countryes doe wonderfullye a∣bounds. I haue (not without greate cause) often meruayled, howe they coulde remaine so long vnknowne to this part of the world. There are some that thinke, howe that this maine lande is described long since of Plato, vnder the name of Li∣tle of Atlantica, and lykewise Marci∣anus a Cicilian in his Chronicle that hée wrote of Spaine, sayeth: That there was héere founde in the Golde mines certaine olde coyne, bearing the Pictures of Augustus Caesar, & for the declaring of the truth of this matter, there was sent vnto the chiefe Bi∣shoppe of Rome, by Doctour Iohn Ru∣sus Archbishoppe of Constantine, a cer∣taine quantitye thereof. Many thinke, that Seneca stirred by with a Poeticall spirite of Prophesse, did foretell the fin∣ding out hereof, in these Propheticall vearses. Venient annis Saecula seres, quibus oceanus Vincula, rerum laxes, & ingens. Patent tellas, Thyphisque nonos Detegat orbes, Nec sit terris vltima Thyle, The time will come in yeares long hence, when the Occean Seas shall loose theyr bandes of thinges, and a greate Earth shall lye open, and discouer new Countreyes to Shippe Maysters, neyther shall Thyle then be the farthest knowne land. ¶I haue left out, the counterfai∣ted Copie, reported of an∣tiquitye, as appeareth: and proceede in the true discourse. ALL this parte of the Gloabe of the Earth, is at this daye sayled aboute, sauing that quarter, which lyeth towarde the North: whose Sea coastes, haue not as yet bene viewed ouer. From the North to the South, it falleth downe vnder the fourme of two places, almost inuironed with Water, which are diuided with a narrowe straight. That place: almost inuironed with Water, which is more Northerlye, comprehendeth now Spaine, the Prouince of Mexico, Terra florida, and Terram nouam, the new founde lande. But that which lyeth Southerlye (which the Spa∣niardes call Terra firma) containeth Perreu and Brasill. The knowledge of all which Countries, the student of Geographie, maye reade Liuius Apolonius, Peter Martyr of Mil∣laine, Maxinilian of Transiluaniae, who in the Latine tongue haue writ∣ten, &c. Of Asia. ASia is diuided from Europa, by the Riuer Tanaic, and also by a lyne drawen out from his fauntaines vnto Granduie, the which is a Goulph of the North De∣tean. But it is diuided from Affric, by Istmus, which is betwéene Mare Medi∣terraneum,
tetraneum, and the gulph of Arabia, the residue, the Occean and the seas do com∣passe about. The Auncients haue manifoldly di∣uided this, but at this day, it séemeth vn∣to be, that it may stilye be diuided into fiue parts, according vnto hir Empires, by the which she is gouerned. The first part whereof, that which ioyneth is Eu∣rope, and obayeth the great Duke of Moscouia, shall be limitted with the fro∣sen sea (with the riuer of Obil) with the lake of Bitaia, and with a lyne drawen from thence to the Caspian sea, and with Istmus, which is betwéene this sea, and Pontus Eurinus. The second shall bée that which obayeth to the great Cham, Emperour of the Tartars, whose limits from the South, are Mare Caspium, the riuer Iaxartes, the mountaine Imaus: from the East and from the North, the Occean: from the West, the Kingdome of the Duke of Moscouia, alreadye spoken of. The third part, the ofspring of ye Ot∣tomans doe occuple, and containeth what land soeuer is betwéene Pontus Euri∣nus, Mare Aegeum, (now called Archi∣pelogus) and Mare Mediterianeum, Ma∣re Aegyptum, the Gulph of Arabia and Persia, the Riuer Tigris, Mare Caspi∣um, and Istnu: which is to be séene be∣twéene this and Pontus Eurinus. Un∣der the forth shall be comprehended the kingdome of Persia, which at this daye, is gouerned by the Sophy: It hath the Otomanus (with whom it maketh al∣most continuall warre) on the West: the Kingdome of the great Cham, on the North: and to the East, it stretcheth al∣most as farre as the riuer Indus: But on the South it is washed with the sea, which at this daye is called Mare Indi∣cum, and in times past, Mare Rubrum, the Red sea. The fifth parte shall haue the rest, which now they tearme the In∣dies, as it was also called in times past: which is not gouerned by one alone, as others are, but by many small Kings, for euerye Region thereof, hath almost his Prince: many of the which, also are fri∣butarie to the great Cham. Neither is this to be passed ouer, that certaine pla∣ces vpon the sea Coasts, which are from the gulph of Arabia, commonly called, Cabo de lampo (which thou séest to the 30. degrée of the latitude of the North,) are in manner all possessed by the Por∣tugall, or els are Tributarie vnto him. The Ilandes which are ascribed to this Asia, among all most innumerable, these be the chiefe, Creta and Rodus, in Mare Mediterraneum: Taprobana and Zeilan in the Indian Occean, where al∣so in the remembraunce of our forefa∣thers, the Portugals discouered both the Ianae, Borneo, Celebes, Paloban, Minda∣neo, Gillano, with the Moluccis, full of spicerie. Then Iapan was found, and of late now Guinea, but this is the last: and whether it be an Ilande or fastened to the lande Antarctike, it is not eui∣dent. Not onely among all prophane wri∣ters, as they tearme it, this parte of the earth, for the first Monarches in ye work, as of the Assyrians, Persians, Babyloni∣ans, and Medes, is greatly renowned: but also in the holy Scriptures that is more famous then the rest, for berrin not onely mankinde was created by the most blessed and almightie God: deluded and corrupted by his enimie Satan, and re∣stored by Christ our Sauiour, but also we reade that well néere all the historie of both Testaments was therein written and complete. This Asia Strabo doth handle in sixe bookes, beginning at the 11. Ptholome setteth foorth in thrée bookes, the 5. the 6. and the 7. Likewise in 12. tables, and at∣tributeth vnto it 40. Prouinces. Of the newe Writers, none hath vniuer∣sally described it, Marcus Paulus & e∣nelan, Ludouicus Vartomannus, and Iohn Mandeuile, (but manye Fables are set downe of him) haue written so much of it, as they knewe worthye of knowledge trauailing ouer those Coun∣treyes, &c. Of Affrica. THE auncients haue diuided this ma∣ny wayes, at this daye, as Iohn Leo writeth, diuided it into foure partes, to wit, Barbaria, Numidia, Libia, and the
, of the Negroes,  which they thinke the  they   with the sea Atlantic,snd the middle earth sea called Mediterra∣neo, with the  Atlas, and with  Countrey bordering upon Ae∣gyptwhich of the inhabitants is called Beledida, and Bringeth foorth Dates, (wherevpon, of the Arabi∣ans it hath none other name) but the Date bearing Countrey) is tted on the West, with the sea Atlantic; & on the North with the mount Atlas, to∣ward the East, it runneth out to Eloa∣eat, a Citie, n. hundred miles distaunt from Aegypt: ye desarts of Lybia, are on the South sides thereof. And as for Ly∣bia, it is the thirde parte  called in the Arabian toongue Sarra, which word sig∣nifieth as much as Desart▪ it beginneth: towards the East, at the riuer Nilus:  from thence it goeth Westward to the Sea Atlantic & Numidia lyeth in the North side thereof: Southward it ioyn∣eth it selfe to the Negroes, the name bee∣ing taken, either of ye inhabitants, which are of blacke colour, or els of the Riuer Nigris, which passeth through this coun∣trey. This hath on the North side, Li∣bia: on the South side, the Aethiopian sea: on the West, the Kingdome of Gua∣latae: and on the East, the Kingdome of Goagae. We are to consider, that in this manner they knit vp all Africa, with the middle lande sea, which is Mare Mediterraneo, with the Sea At∣lantic, also with the Aethiopian sea, and with the riuer of Nilus, of whence both Aegypt and Aethiopia be ascribed to A∣sia: which notwithstanding properly I thinke good to ioyne to Affric. For Ae∣thiope indéede at this day doth containe, the Empire of Presbiter Iohn, which of all new Writers is assigned to be ioi∣ned to Affrica: and I thinke with Pto∣lome, it is conuenient, that it ought ra∣ther to bée lymitted with the middle earth and Occean sea, than with a Ri∣uer, and it shall haue the forme of A pe∣na insula, ioyned to Asia, with an Ist∣mus or straight of lande, which is be∣twéene the middle earth sea, & the gulph of Arabia. The South parte héereof, was not héeretofore and we of the Auncientes, vntill the yeare of Christ. Anno 1497. when Vasco de Gama passed first with  & no  daunger by the Promentorie or good hope, otherwise ter∣med Bona spei,  aylyng Abbt Af∣frica  to Calu. This parte of the Persians and Arabians is called Zanzibar. he said Promentorie of good hope, the inhabitaunts are very blacke, which I thinke méete to speake off (because all then thinke that the heate, and néerenesse of the Sunne is the onely cause of theyr blacknesse. It is euident, that it is lesse hot héere, than it is at the sea of Mage∣lan) if in respect of the dissaunte of Hea∣uen we will measure the heat of ye place, where notwithstanding, they are sayd to be very white: and if we will attribute this blacknes to the burning of ye Sunne, we are to consider how the Spaniards, and the Italians, and other Nations in the South parte, haue theyr bodies so white, forasmuch as they are, as farre from the Equinoctiall lyne, as are the sayd inhabitaunts of the Promentory of good hope: the one being towarde the South, the other toward the North. They which liue vnder Preter Iohn, are brownish, but they which inhabit Zey∣lan, and Malabar are very blacke, vnder one selfe same distance from the Aequa∣tor, and vnder the seene Paralell of hea∣uen. But a man maye more meruayle at this, that in all America, there are found no blacke men, sauing a fewe in a place, which they call Quareca. What then is the efficient cause of this colour? It can be no otherwise, but either the drinesse of heauen, or of the earth, or perchaunce a certaine vnknowen pro∣pertie of the soyle, or a certayne reason hidden properlie in Nature vnknowen vnto man, or altogether vnperteiued. But these things I leaue to be conside∣red of the searchers out of the nature of things. This Countrey of the Gréekes is cal∣led Lybia, of the Latins Africa, because it is without the extremitie of tolde. Or (if we beléeue Iosephus, it is so cal∣led
of Afer, one of ye posteritie of Abra∣ham). Another reason of the name, thou shalt finde in Iohn Leo. The nobler parts of this Iland (for I thinke it not necessarie to set downe all héere by name) séeing they are to bée seene in the Mappe or table, are Mada∣gascar, and the Ilande which they call Canariae, likewise that which they call commonly, Capo Verdo (of Vividis) as also of Saint Thomas, scituated vnder the Equinoctiall, which is rich in Su∣gar. Among the Auncients, none hath per∣ticularly described this Countrey: But thereof read in the nauigation of Hanno, of Africa, and of Iacobus in Diodo∣rus Siculus. Of the fresher Writers, read Aloysius Cadamostus, Vascus de Gama, Frauncis Aluares, which trauailed ouer all Aethiope: but of all other Ioannes Leo, hath most diligently described it Io∣an Barrius doth also promise, & volume of Africa. Of Nilus the greatest Riuer in all the world, there are letters extant, of Ioan Baptist Ramuseus and Hiero∣nymi Fracastorius. Of Europe. EUrope, whereof it tooke this name, or who hath béene the Authour of the name, it is not yet knowen: vnlesse we say it took the name of Europa Tyria, as sayth Herodotus, in his fourth booke. Plynie nameth this the nurse of a peo∣ple conquerour of all Nations, and the goodlyest lande in the worlde: sometime compared to Asia and Africa, not in great¦nesse, but in manhood. It is certaine, that forasmuch as Europa is well inhabited, it is not much inferiour to any of them both, in abundance of people. The Nor∣therly and Westerly side héereof, is wa∣shed with the Occean: the South side, is seuered from Africa, with Mare Medi∣terraneum (the middle earth sea). After∣ward towards the East (as Glarean te∣stifieth) Europe is diuided from Asia, with the sea Egeam (now called Archi∣pelagus) with the sea Euxinum, (at this daye called Mare maggiore) with ye ma∣reys Meotide, (at this daye called, Mare delle Zabacobe) with the riuer Tanais, (commonly called Don) and with Ist∣mus, which from the fountaines wher∣of, lyeth strayght North and by this meanes, it hath the forme of Apeni in∣sulae, or a lande lyke an Ilande, an maye be séene in the Map. The head héereof is Rome, sometime the conquerour of all the world. The Countreys thereof, as we call them at this daye, are Spaine, Fraunce, Germany, Italy, Slauonia, Grecia, Hun∣garia, Polonia, with Lithuania, Mosco∣uia, or more significately Russia, and that Peni Insula, whereon standeth Norue∣gia, Suedia, and Gothia. Of the Ilands thereof, first presents it selfe Englande, Ireland, Grenland, Friseland, placed in the Occean sea. In the middle lande sea, she hath Citilia, Sardinia, Corsica, Can∣dia, Maideira, Minorica, Corphu, Negro∣pont, and other meaner Ilandes. The names and scituations of euery which, the Map doth vnfolde. This our Europe hath besides the Romane Empire ouer the whole earth,When Rome sur∣ceased to be the o∣uercōmer of the vvorld, by svvord & violence: then shee practised to subdue more do∣miniōs bi superstici∣ous Here∣sie ma∣king hie chiefe ca∣pitain the former Tiranie. 28. Kingdomes, besides if thou adde vn∣to them the 14. which Damianos Agoi∣es doth recken in Spaine alone, being Kingdomes in generall, that haue recei∣ued the Christian Religion: which is fertill beyond measure, hauing a natural temperature, and aire calme inough, not to be accounted inferiour to any other, in plants of all kinde of graine, wine, and trées, but to be compared to the best re∣gions. So pleasant, and beautified with goodly Cities, Townes, and Uillages, that albeit she be lesse in forme, than o∣ther parts of the Earth: yet she is coun∣ted the better, and alwayes hath bene so accepted, for mens manhoode of all aun∣cient writers most of all renowned, as wel for the Empire of the Macedonians, as especiallye for the might of the Ro∣manes, the commendation thereof maye be séene in Strabo, which hath very well set hir foorth in his third book, and in the seauenth booke following. Looke also in∣to other Geographers, of the later & most approued Writers: among other, which haue gone about to describe Europe, are Volateranus, Sebastian Munster, Do∣minic
Niger, George Rithaymerus, in their Geographies, but peculiarly Pius the 11. Christopherus, and Ancelmus Cellae. Cherubinus stella, Ioannes Herba∣ceus, & George Meyer, hath put in wri∣ting manye iourneyes, almost over all Europe, and haue noted the distaunces of places. The same hath William Gra∣arolus, done in the ende of his booke, which is intituled, De regimme iter a∣gentium, The Regiment of wayfaring men. Thus much foorth of Ottelius. Of India. WEll néere all writers, with one con∣sent doe teach, that India is the no∣blest part of the whole globe of ye earth: and that there is no greater Countrey comprehended vnder one name. It is so called of the riuer Indus. The space of India, according to Strabo and Pliny, is closed in the West with the Riuer In∣dus: on the North, with the hill Tau∣rus: and the East, with the East season the West, with his owne sea, to wit, with the Indian sea. It is diuided into two Countryes, the Riuer Ganges run∣ning betwéene: one of which, that is Westerly, is called within Ganges: the other, that lyeth more to the East, is sur∣named, without Ganges. In the holye Scripture we read, that the one is called Euila, and the other Seria, as Niger te∣stifieth, Marcus Paulus of Uenice séem∣eth to deuide it into thrée, into the more, the lesse, and the middlemost: which he saith, is called Abasia. All this India, is not onely happie, for the great store of people and townes almost innumerable, but also for the a∣bundaunce of all things, copper and lead onely excepted, if we giue credite to Pli∣nie. As the riuers there are very many, so are they very great, through whose watry ouerflowing it commeth to passe, that in the moyst grounde, the force of the Sunne approaching, ingendreth or bringeth foorth all things in great quan∣titie: and seemeth almost to fill the whole worlde, with Spice and Precious stoanes. Of which, it aboundeth more than all other Countreyes of the worlde. There are manye Ilandes ioyning vnto it, héere and there scattered in hir Occean; so that worthely a man may at hir, the worlde of Ilands. First of all, therein is Iapan, which is called of Marcus Paulus the Uenetian, Zipan∣gri: which for that fewe yeares past, it was not knowen of manye, I thinke good in this place to speake some-what of it. The Ilande stretcheth farre abroad, and hath almost the same eleuation, of heauen, that Italy heere in Europe hath. The Inhabitaunts are very denout, bée∣ing much giuen to Religion, learning, and wiseddine, and are very earnest ser∣chers out of the truth. They vse nothin more than prayer, which after our man∣ner; they exercise in their Churches. They acknowledge one Prince, vpon whose rule and becke they doe depende: but he also, hath one aboue him, called of them Voo, in whose power is the greatest authoritie of holy things, and Religion: perhaps, the one maye be ly∣kened to the Pope, the other to the Em∣perour, to him the common people doe commit with all rarence, the saluati∣on of their soules. They adore one God alone, portrayed with thrée heads, wher∣of notwithstanding, they are able to giue no reason. They studie to kéepe downe their bodies with fasting, for a testimonye of repentaunce. They fence themselues with the signe of the Crosse, against the inuasions of the Diuell, as we doe: so that both in Religion, and also in manner of life, they séeme to fol∣lowe Christians. There are also the worthy Ilands of Moluccus, renowned for the fruiteful∣nesse of spices, and famous for the Birde of them called Manucodiata, which wée call the Bird of Paradise, Sumatra, is al∣so an Iland knowen of the auncients, in times past tearmed Taprobana. There are manye other, as Iaua Maior, and Minor, Bornio, Timor, and others, all which are to bée séene in the Carde, or Mappe.
These Indius the Auncients haue sit with with great praises, Diodorus Sio∣lus, Herodotus, Pliny, Strabo, Oute , and Aianos in the life of Alexander the great. There is ant, also  letter of Alexander the great, written to Ari∣stotle, touching the scituation of India. Of the late Writers, udouicus Varto∣manus, Maxihan de Transiluanus, o∣anues Barteus, in his Decades of Asia, and Cosmas Indopleates, whome Petrus Gellius reciteth Ipan Macer a Lawyer hath also written thrée bookes of the Hi∣stores of India. The Empire of Turkie. WE haue gathered for the reader, out of the Historigraphers of our time, in these few worde, the originall and in∣crease of the Turkish Empire, and howe by litle and litle, it hath growen to this greatnesse, wherin at this day it séemeth to threaten vs. In the yere after Christs birth 1300. one Ottoman a Turke, the sonne of Ziclius, a man of bae estate, be∣gan among the Turkes, so haue air & dignitie, for his wit and skillfulnesse in martiall prowe. This man gaue name so the family of the Turkish Emperors and first appointed their king. And in 8. yeares in which he ruled, he an Bithi∣nta, and Cappadoeia, and possessed eye many strong places, ieng vpon Mre Ponticum His sonne Orolianes succeeded him, who sacked Prusia, a very diacio tie, and rade it the head of his kingdome. The . years of his reign: e fighting with ill successe; was slaine by the Mace∣tarians and left his sonne Amuramasim beare rule: who being sent for by the Gréekes being at variance, was the first that came out of  into Europe. Hée tooke Callipolis, and Cherronesus, and ouer came Abyous. When the Cities as Philipopolis and Hadrianapolis were brought vnder his subiection, & that er∣ua and Bulgaria were taken from vs, entering into the vppermost Mysia, hée dyed, being striken with a dagger, the 23. yeare of his Empire. Whose Sonne Bazotes, when his brother was stayne, did set vpon the greatest part of Thrace, subdued well néere all Gréece, and Pho∣cs, a   of Bulgaria but being ouer∣come by Teberlane, di without re∣nome. When the Father was taken, Clepinus his sonne tooke rule in hand, and when he had quite ouerthrowen, Si∣gismond in battaile,  had begun to spoyle the borders of the Emperour of Constantinople, dyed in the verye floure of his age when he had borne rule side yeares. Mahomeis after him tooke rule in hand, which made very sharpe warre, vpon the ldiathians, subdued the most part of Sclaudnia, first passed ouer the riuer Danubius, brought Maceonia in∣to thraldome, and came as farre as the Ionian sea, remouing his royall seate out of Bithinsa, he placed it in Hedrianapo∣lis, where he dyed the 14. yeare of his Empire. Afterward Amurathes the se∣cond, tooke vpon him the ote of rule, who wan Epirus, Aetolia, Achaia, Ber∣lia, Attica and Thesialonica, & citie b∣iect to the Uenetians, Him succeedeth Mahomtes the seconde, who destroyed Athens, and wa Constantinople, by assault the 29. day of May, Antio, Do. 145. he brought vnder his subiection, the Empire Trapesuntindeth, he took Co∣rinth, he subdued by warre the Ilandes of Lemnus, Euborae, and Mitylene, and ouercome Capha, a Citie of the Gen∣wayes: he ruled 32. yeares. Bagaztes the second made warre against the e∣netians, & tooke from them Paupactise, Methona, and Dirrahium, and spoiled all Dalmatia, and at the last died with poy∣son. His sonne Zelimus toke rule in hand, who after he had ouercome Alchair, a ve∣rie strong Citie in Aegypt, and slayne Sultan, he brought Alexandela and all Aegypt vnder his Empire, and tooke Da∣mascus, Soliman the onely some of Ze∣limus, succéeded his Father, wann Bel∣gradum, seeke Buda the Kings Citie, in Hungary, spoyled Sirigonium, and well néere all Hungary. He gofe the Ile of Rhodes by yéelding, and ouerthrewe Quinq & Ecclesias, the  Churches. When the Citie Iula was taken, he besieged Zigothum, and died in the assault: which Citie his son Zelimus the second, heire of the Empire spoiled in
the yeare 1566. And in this manner vn∣der 11. Emperours, they subdued vnto themselues by Turkish tiranny in 260. yeares, a great part of Affrica, a greater part of Europe, and the greatest parte of Asia. But he that desireth a fuller know∣ledge of these histories, let him read Pau∣lus Iouius, Christopher Richerius of Sene, Cuspinianus, Baptista Ignatius, Gilbertus Nozorenus, Andreas Lacuna, Pius the 2. in his 4. chapter of Europe, and other writers of Turkish matters. Laonicus Chalcendilas hath most dili∣ligently set out ye originall of ye Turke, and the offspring of the Ottomans. FINIS LIBRI XV. ¶NCIPIT LIBER XVI. DE LAPIDIBVS Preciosis. FOR the properties of the Earth and of the parties thereof, is described in ge∣nerall: by helpe of God, is now our purpose to plant héere somwhat, of ye beautie & ornament therof in special. Of things, yt beautifie ye earth, some be clene without soule & without feeling, as all thing that groweth vnder the grounde, & is gendered in veines of the earth, as stones, coulours, and mettall: and of these we shall first speake by order. And some with lyfe and soule, as rootes, hearbes, and trees, and some with soule and fée∣ling, as men, and other beasts, of whome we shall last speake. And we shall shewe first by order of A.B.C. the things that be gendered in the earth, & in the veines thereof. Of Arena. chap. 1. GRauell is called Arena, and hath that name of drinesse. And if it were thrust and brused together in a mans hande, it should rattle & make noise for drinesse & hardnes. And if grauell be throwne on a white cloth, it defileth it not, as Isi. saith li. 15. ca. 4. Also grauell of the sea is wash∣ed of all manner slime and wose, and of gleamie fenne, as Aristotle saith liber de proprietatibus elementorum. And there∣fore because of great drinesse it runneth not, nor turneth not perfectly into stone. Also li. 4. Mcth. he saith, that pure earth turneth not perfectly into stone: for it cō∣tinueth not, but breaketh. And therefore drines euercōming all moisture, suffreth not earth to turne into sadnesse of stone. Therefore it is ye grauell & sand is more harde in substaunce then common earth, & more soft then a stone, and may be de∣parted in many parts. And so grauel and sand is colde & dry & small, & most heauie in weight when it is thrust togethers, & though of it selfe it be small & baraine for defalt of heat & of moisture, & mastry of cold & drines, whē a showre falleth ther∣on, it breaketh not, but sennye things is washed away & wasted, & grauell & sand is more pressed togethers, & is more pure & sad: for the parts cleaue more together. Also the waues of the sea is letted with multitude of grauel and sand, & withstood with heaps thereof, & constrained that it passeth not the meares & boundes yt God hath ordeined thereto, as Hierome saith super le. cap. 5. He set grauel & sand mark & meare to the sea, &c. Also he hath vni∣uersally kind of during and of cleansing. And so water that runneth through gra∣uell is most clene and fresh, as Constan∣tine saith. Also it hath vertue to cleanse mettal, and to cleanse alwaye the rustinesse of mettall. Gold, Brasse, and Yron is made bright with froting of Grauell and Sand.
Also it hath vertue to coole and to smite inward, and to stop and to swage swel∣ling, as it fareth of Thimalia, that is, grauell and sande shauen or brused of a Smithes stone, which is good for all the foresayde things, as Constantine saieth plainly, and hath vertue like to oare of mettall. And so among grauell and sand both of riuers and of the sea, is founde golden grauell oft times, and also bright polished stones, and precious stones are found in the sea cliues among grauell. Also grauell of riuers and of the sea, bée gathered to heapes with contrary winds, that reaseth parts thereof hetherwarde and thetherward, and stoppeth and tary∣eth oft the waters of the riuers, of course and running into the sea, as Iero. saieth super Amos. 8. Ibi destuct sicut riuus Aegypti, &c. There it is openly sayde, that the water of Nilus is lot with heaps of grauell, that are gathered together in the month of the riuer, and suffereth not the water of Nilus to runne into ye Sea: but constraineth it openly, and maketh it turne againe and ouerflowe the plaines of Egipt: but the more the water is let∣ted, and compelled to turne againe with those heapes of grauell, with the more course and might it runneth and falleth into the sea: and it is said that it falleth the more déepe into the sea, when those heapes be departed and auoyded, as Ier. saith there. Also it is hard and most pe∣rill to fall and smile on heapes of gra∣uell, hid in the sea vnder water, as it is rehearsed before, where it is shewed of perills of the sea. ¶Of Claye. chap. 2. Argilla. Potters Clay.CLay is called Argilla, which is tough earth, glewie and gleymie, apte and meete to diuers workes of Potters, and hath that name Argilla of Arges, as Isi∣dore saith lib. 16. cap. primo. For among them were first earthen vessells made of such claye: and as it is said ther, by wor∣king of heate that consumeth and wast∣eth the moystie partes, and dryeth and hardeneth the earthie parts, such claye turneth into ile. Also ofte it happeneth, that colde fréeseth the water in such fen∣nie earth, and the earth turneth to stone: Also changing of vnctuous sen into stone, falleth ofte by heate running & hardning the matter, as it saide 4. lib. Metheorer. Unctuous fenne is able to such chaung∣ing and turning into stone, by burning & hardning of heate: for an vnctuous thing is meane betwéene a gleymie, and vapo∣ratiue thing that passeth out of things, in breathing or smoking. And the thing that is vnctuous hath moisture in it selfe, and so because of the partie that is vaporatiue, it may congeale and be made hard by heate: and because of the partie that is gleymie, it may not all passe out in vapours, but be more thrusted toge∣ther and made thicke and harde, and so tourned into stone, as the Commentour saith. Claye by his coldnesse stauncheth bloud at the nose,A remedy to stoppe bleeding. if clay be tempred with strong vineger, and laid to the temples. ¶Of Alabastro. chap. 3. AS Isidore saith li. 15. ca. 5. Alabaster is a white stone,Alabastri∣tes. with strakes of diuers coulours. Of such stone the oyntment boxe that the Gospell speaketh of,Luke. 7. was made: and of this stone, the oyntment vessell is made at best without corrupti∣on, and that stone that bréedeth about Thebes, in Aegypt and Damascus, is more white, than other: but the best commeth out of Inde. And Dioscucides calleth this stone Intomar, and it is said, that this stone helpeth to win victory, & mastrie. Also he saith, that this gendreth and kéepeth friendship. ¶Of Golde. chap. 4. GOlde is called Aurum, and hath that name of Aura, still wether, as Isidor. saith lib. 26. For it shineth most, in aire that is bright: for it is kindlye, that shi∣ning of mettall blase the more, if they be shined with other light. Therfore things that make shining the more blassing, be called Aurarij, and golde that is most blasing is called Obrisum, for it shineth with bright beames, and is of best cou∣lour. And the Hebrewes call it Ophar, and the Gréekes name it Chrusos.
And a thin plate, of the which golden threds are cut out, is called Brathea. Huc vs{que} Isi. cap. de mettallis. In li. Metheo∣rorum parum ante fine Aristotle saith, that golde, as other mettall, hath other matter of subtill brimstone and red and of quicke siluer subtill and white. In the composition thereof is more sadnesse of brimstone, then of aire and moysture of quicke siluer: and therefore gold is more sad and heauie than siluer. In composi∣tion of siluer, is more commonly quicke siluer than white brimstone as he saith. Then among mettall, nothing is more sad in substaunce, or more better compact than golde: and therefore though it bée put in fire it wasteth not by smoaking & vapours, neither lesseth the waight, and so it is not wasted in fire: but if it be melted with strong heate, then if any filth be therein, it is cleansed thereof, & that maketh the golde more pure & shi∣ning. No mettall stretcheth more with hammer worke than golde: for it stret∣cheth so, that betwéene the anfield and the hammer without breaking and renting in péeces, it stretcheth to lease golde. And among mettall, there is none fayrer in sight than golde, and therefore among Painters, golde is chiefe and fairest in sight, and so it darkeneth shape and cou∣lour of other mettall. Also among met∣tall is nothing so effectuall in vertue, as golde. Plato describeth the vertue there∣of and saith, that it is more temperate & pure than other mettall, for it hath ver∣tue to comfort, and for to cleause super∣fluities gathered in bodies: and there∣fore it helpeth against leprosie and me∣selrio. The filing of gold taken in meate or in drinke, or in medicine preserueth, & and letteth bréeding of leprosie, or name∣ly hideth it and maketh it vnknowen: for ofte vse of golde letteth & tarieth the bréeding of Lepra, or maketh it vnkno∣wen, as Auicen saith. Also the some fi∣ling and powder, with the iuyce of Bo∣rage, and with the bone of the heart of a Harte,A medi∣cu. helpeth against sownding, and a∣gainst cardiaele passion. Also thin plates of gold, fire hot, quenched in wine, ma∣keth the wine profitable against ye euill of the splene, & against many other euils and passions melancholike: and also bur∣ning made with instruments of gold, is better than with other maner of mettall, for it kéepeth ye place that is burnt with∣out stinking. Also powder of the offall of golde healeth spots of eyen, if it be ther∣in. Also golde comforteth sore lymmes, though it be not corporate therein, and though it norisheth them not, yet it doth away with the sharpnesse thereof, super∣fluities that growe in members, & clean∣seth them in that wise as Plat. saith. Al∣so hot gold doth away haire of members: and what that is burnt or froted there∣with, groweth no more, as Consta. saith. Also gold smitten, foundeth not as brasse doth and siluer, nor creketh nor cleaueth, but strecheth euen abroad, except other strong mettall be medled therewith in some wise. For as long as brasse or lat∣ton is medled with the substance of gold, it cleaueth alway vnder the hammer, & is inobedient to take out shape by bea∣ting of the hammer: no therfore it née∣deth that all superfluitie be put awaye, and the golde clensed by melting & made pure, that it may be able to be shapen wt a hammer, to make thereof some vessell with couenable shape as Gregory saith. And when a plate of golde shall be med∣led with a plate of siluer, or ioyned ther∣to, it néedeth to beware namely of thrée things,Three spe¦ciall pro∣perties to be obser∣ued in melting gold with siluer. of powder, of winde, and of moy∣sture: for if any héreof come betweene golde and siluer, they may not be ioyned together, the one with the other: and ther∣fore it néedeth to meddle these two met∣tals together, in a full cleane place & qui∣et, and when they be ioyned in due ma∣ner, the ioyning is inseperable, so yt they may not afterward be departed asunder. (*Golde maketh wise men glad: and spendthrifts mad: Gold vpholdeth king∣domes: Golde is preferred in manye common wealths before Justice: & there∣fore to those that put their delyght ther∣in, it is called Auri sacra fames, of ye mis∣vse thereof. It is reported by late Wri∣ters, of the golden mountaines of Ciba∣na, aud of the wonderfull riches of gold that the king of Spaine hath yéerly from the West and East Indies, gathered by a multitude of slaues, ordained for that
purpose: notwithstanding the vsurers yt inhabit Britaine, doe make moe slaues that are frée borne, by raising of rentes, ingrossing of landes, and hindring of til∣lage, for the quantitie of ground in one yeare, then is subiect among the Indies in thrée yeares, to the vtter ouerthrowe of landes, goods, wife and children.) ¶Of Laton. chap. 5. LAton is called, Auricalcum, and hath that name, for though it he brasse or copper, yet it shineth as gold without, as Isid. saith, for brasse is Calco in Gréeke. Also laton is hard as brasse or copper for by medling of copper, of tinne, and of Auripigment, and with other mettall, it is brought in the fire to colour of golde, as Isid. saith. Also it hath coulour & like∣nesse of gold, but not the value. Also of laton be composed diners manner of ves∣sells and faire, that séeme gold when they be new, but the first brightnesse dimmeth some and some, and becommeth as it were rustie, and so both in colour and in smell of copper, the first matter thereof, is knowen. Meate and wine kept in such a vessell, taketh an horrible sauour and smell of the vice of brasse: but Colliria and medicines for the eyen be profitably kept in such vessell, and be made sharp by the strength of brasse, as Plat. saith. ¶Of Auripigmento. cap. 6. AVripigmentum is a veine of ye earth, or a manner of frée stone that clea∣ueth and breaketh, and it is like to golde in colour. And this is called Lapis Ar∣cenicus by another name, and is double: redde and citrine. And as Dioscorides saith, it hath kinde of brimstone, or bur∣ning and drieng, & if it be laid to brasse, it maketh the brasse white, and burneth and wasteth all bodyes of mettall, except golde, as Diosc. saith. And Plat. saith, that Auripigmentum is hot and drye in the fourth degrée, and is a veine of the earth: and thereof is double kinde, red and ci∣trine: and the citrine helpeth to medi∣cine, and hath vertue of dissoluing and tempering, of drawing and of cleansing: and so it helpeth Tisike and Etike, and those that haue euill breth, that commeth of moysture, if they gaue thereon, & take the smoke thereof. Of Auripigment is made Pisilo cracium, an oyntment yt doth away haire and maketh them fall, when it is fodde in hot lime. Also it helpeth a∣gainst tetars and scabes, if the place be softly anoynted with sope and with Au∣ripigment: but the place must be washt anone, for if the oyntment lye long ther∣to, it will fret the good flesh as well as the euill, and stay away the shinne, and it hath kinde of slitting, taruing, and of fretting, and maketh soule and vnséemly nailes fall, that better nailes may grow, as Platea saith. (*Auripigmentum, a coulour called Orement, of some Orpine or Arsenike, & daungerous poyson. The red and ftret∣ting Mercury is of the like operation.) ¶Of Siluer. chap. 7. SIluer is called Argentum, and hath that name as Isi. saith of the speach of Gréeke, for siluer is called Argiron in Gréeke: and wonderfully it fareth. For though siluer be white, yet it maketh black lines and streakes in the body that is scored therwith or ruled therewith, as Isi. saith. In composition thereof is quick siluer and white brimstone, and therfore it is not so heauy as gold, as Richardus Rufus sayeth. There be two manner of siluers, simple and compounded & the sim∣ple is fléeting, and is called, quick siluer. The siluer compounded is massie & sad, and is compounded of quicke siluer pure & cleane, & of white brimstone not burn∣ing, as Aristotle saith. ¶Of Quicke siluer. chap. 8. QUicke siluer is a watrye substaunce medled strongly with subtill earthy things, and maye not be dissolued, & that is for great drines of earth, that melteth not on a plaine thing, & therfore it clea∣ueth not to the thing yt it toucheth, as doth ye thing yt is watry. The substance therof is white, & that is for cléenes of cléere water; & for whitnes of subtil earth yt is well digested. Also it hath whitenes of medling of aire with ye foresaid things.
Also quicke siluer hath the propertie, that it cruddeth not by it selfe kindly; with∣out brimstone: but with brimstone and with substaunce of lead, it is congealed, and fastened togethers. And therefore it is sayd there; that quicke siluer and brim∣stone is the element, that is to wit, mat∣ter, of which all melting mettall is made. All this sayd openly, lib. Me∣theororum. And also Richardus Rufus, expoundeth it openlye, in this manner: Quicke siluer is matter of all mettall, & therefore in respect of them it is a simple element. Of the vertue and kinde there∣of, diuers men speake diuerslye: But what the meaning of the Phisitions is thereof, it maye be knowen by these words. Quicke siluer (as Plato sayeth) is hot and moyst in the fourth Degrée, though some men déeme that it is colde in the same degrée. That it is hot, it is knowen by effect of working: for it dis∣solueth, pearceth and carueth, but for it séemeth full colde in touch, some men déeme it amisse, and meane that it is colde. But some men meane, that Quicke siluer is made by great heate of a veyne of the earth: but it is know∣en that that is false, for by heate of fire, it is soone wasted away in smoke: but of earth it is gendred, and is kept as it were fléeting water, & is full long kept in a cold vessell & sound, & cleaueth so toge∣ther, & so strong yt it may to nothing be meddeled, but it be first quenched, and it is quenched with spettle when it is fro∣ted therewith: and namely when pow∣der is medled with spettle, and specially when powder of bones of an Henne is meddeled therewith: and quicke siluer passeth out by euaporation is séething & in smoking. The smoke thereof is most grieuous to men that be thereby, for it bréedeth the Walste and quaking, sha∣king and softening of the sinewes. If it be taken in at the mouth or into ye care, it thirleth and slayeth the members. A∣gainst that perill, Goates milke is best, dronke in great quantitie, with continu∣all mouing oof the patient: for the same speciallye wine is good, in the which, wormwood and Isop is sod. Huc vsque Plat. And it is called quicke siluer, for it coniealeth matter in which it is done, as Isi. saith li. 15. And also ther he saith more to this. He saith it is fléeting, for it run∣nenth, & is specialy found in siluer forges, as it were drops of siluer molten, & it is oft found in olde dirte of sinkes, & slime of pits: and also it is made of Minis put in cauernes of yron, and a patent or a shell done there vnder, and the vessell that is noynted therewith, shall be com∣passed with burning coales, and then the quicke siluer shall drop. Without this, siluer nor golde, nor latton nor copper, may be ouergilte: and it is of so great vertue and strength, that though thou put a stone of an hundred pound weight, vpon quicke siluer of the waight of two pound, the quicke siluer anone withstan∣deth the weight, and if thou doest there∣on a scruple of gold, it consumeth into it selfe the lightnesse thereof: and so it ap∣peareth it is not wayght, but Nature to which it obeyeth. Taken in drinke, it slayeth because of weight, & is best kepte in glasse vessells: for it pearceth, boreth, and fretteth other matters. Huc vique Isidorus lib. 16. chap. de metallis. Then siluer is white and cléere, & soun∣ding and pure, and may well be wrought with hammer, but not so well as golde, and kéepeth and saueth well balme, and helpeth the vertue in the stone Iaspis, yt hath more vertue in siluer then in gold, as it is said in Lappidario, and it will melt: and when it is molt in the fire, it hath the colour of fire, neuertheles when it is colde, it is againe white and harde. And though it be of more great and boi∣stous matter then gold, yet among met∣tall it beareth the price after golde, in worthinesse and value: and is medicina∣ble, and helpeth against many euills. For the some thereof healeth wounds, & ful∣filleth the place, & fretteth away superflu∣itie of dead flesh, & letteth it not grow, & bringeth in the whole flesh, & cleanseth filth and hoare of bodies, a marking in∣strument of siluer, kepeth from stinking, and comforteth féeble members, and lay∣eth and maketh them stedfast, & rusteth, if it toucheth the earth, and taketh his co∣lour againe, if it be scoured with grauell, sande, and salt.
Of Adamant. chap. 9. ADamas is a little stone of Inde: and is coloured as it were yron, and shi∣neth as Christall, but it passeth neuer the quantitie of a walnut. Nothing ouer∣commeth it, neither yron nor fire, and also it heateth neuer: for of the Gréekes it is called, a vertue that may not be daunted. But though it maye not be ouercome, & though it despise fire and yron, yet it is broke with new hot bloud. Grauers vse the péeces thereof to signe and to rule, & to hollow precious stones. This stone is contrary to Magnes: for if an Adamas be set by yron, it suffereth not the yron to come to the Magnes, but it draweth it by a manner of vyolence from the Mag∣nes, so that though the Magnes draweth yron to it selfe, the Adamas draweth it away from the Magnes. It is sayd, that this stone warneth of venime, as Elec∣trum doth, and putteth off diuers dreads and feares, and withstandeth witchcraft. Huc vs{que} Isi. li. 15. ca. de Christallis. Di∣oscorides saith, that it is called a Preci∣ous stone of reconciliation and of loue. For if a woman be away from hir hus∣band, or trespasseth against him, by ver∣tue of this stone Adamas, she is the soo∣ner reconciled to haue grace of hir Hus∣band. And héereto he sayeth, that if a ve∣ry Adamas, be priuely layd vnder a wo∣mans head that slepeth, hir husband may know whether that she be chast, or no: For if she be chast by vertue of ye stone, she is compelled in hir sléepe to imbrace hir husband: and if she be vntrue, shée leapeth from him out of the bed, as one that is vnworthye to abide the presence of that stone. Also us Dioscorides saith, the vertue of such a stone borne in the left shoulder, or in the left arme pit, hel∣peth against enimars, against madnesse, chiding and strife, and against frends that anoy men that dreame in their sléepe, a∣gainst fantasie, against dreamings and venime. (Additiō.Adamas, A Diamond, whereof ther be diuers kindes, (as in Pliny) and in other it appeareth. His vertues are to resists poyson, and witchcrafte: to put a∣way feare, to giue victorie in contention, to helpe them that be lunatike or phran∣tike. I haue proued (saith D. Cooper) that a Diamonde laide by a Needle, causeth that the Load stone cannot drawe the néedle. No fire can burte it, no violence break it, vnles it be moysted in ye warme blood of a Goate.) (Additiō.The principall Diamonds are found in the first India, in a Kingdome of the Moores, named Decan, from whence they are brought to other regions. Ther are also found other Diamonds, which are not so good, but somewhat white, and are called Diamonds of the new myne, which is in the Kingdome of Narsinga. There are made other false Diamonds, of Rubies, Topaces, & white Saphires, which appeare to be fine. Of these, some are found, that haue halfe the coulour of Rubies, and other of Saphires, other al∣so of the colour of a Topase, other haue all these colours mingled togethers. Of the whitest of these, they make manye smal Diamonds, which cannot be know∣en from the true, sauing by touching of such are skilfull in that practise.) Of the Agat. (Additiō.In the borders of Scotland groweth and is found the stone that is called A∣gat, wherof some be with mixed colours of oaker red, blewish, and Icie coloured. Some like a reddish Amber, good to in∣graue anye feature, as for his vertue, if it be no more, than the estimation of the stone, it is little worth.) Of Christalines. (Additiō.Beyond Bristow, on ye hill called S. Vincents rocke, groweth manye: cléere stones, wherof some are very hard, & wil race on glasse. They cannot be counter∣set, because they grow natural: of little e∣stimation, as more worthier things are, that ought to be more set by: but farre fet, & déere bought, is good, for the foolish. ¶Of Ametisto. chap. 10. AMetistus is a stone of Inde, & is chiefe among precious stones of purple co∣lour, as Isi. saith. Amatistus is purple in colour, medled with colour of violet, as it were a blasing rose, and tightly rasting out as it were glisning beames of light. Isidore saith that the other kinde there∣of
is much like to blewe, and is not all firie, but it hath colour of wine. And fiue kindes be thereof, as Isidore say∣eth. But as Dioscondes sayeth: The Purple red is most noble and bet∣ter then the other. For the vertue there∣of helpeth against dronkennesse, and ma∣keth waking: and remoueth awaye idle thoughts, and maketh good vnderstan∣ding, and is soft, so that men may graue and write therein. (Additiō.Amethistus, a stone called an Ame∣thist, of colour purple: but the more Rose coulour the better.) Of Achate. chap. 11. AChates is a precious stone, and is blacke, with white veines, and hath that name Achates of a riuer, yt is called so: the which is in Cicilia. By the which riuer that stone was first found, as Isid. saith: and is now found in many regi∣ons and lands: and a manner kind of that stone is in Creta, as Dioscorides sayth, with bliew veines. And another kinde is in Inde speckled with red drops, as I∣sid. saith. Men beléeue that the first man∣ner thereof helpeth witchcraft. For ther∣with tempest is chaunged: and slinteth riuers and streames, as it is saide. Also Dioscorides saith, the same kind is good to the shape of Images of Kinges, and to shew likenes of sléepes. And the man∣ner kinde of Creta chaungeth perils, and maketh gracious and pleasing, and fayre shewing and speaking, and giueth might and strength. The thirde manner stone that is of Inde, comforteth the sight, and helpeth against thirst and venim, and smelleth swéete if it be nigh, as Diosco∣rides saith. (Additiō.Achates, a precious stone, wheron are represented diuers figures. Some haue the Image of the nine Muses, some of Venus. It was one of the 12. stones, yt God willed to be put in Aarons vesti∣ment. It is supposed that the Magiti∣ans, by the smoake of that stone, did put away tempests & stormes. This stone is interlined with white, & light bleiwish lines, &c.) Of Abeston. chap. 12. ABeston is a stone of Archadia with yron coulour: and hath that name of fire: if it be once kindled it neuer quen∣cheth. Of that stone is made that craftye ingin, of the which nations taken with sacriledge wondred. For in a Temple of Venus was made a cādle stick, on which was a lanterne so bright burning, that it might not be quenched with tempest, nei∣ther with raine, as Isidore sayth, lib. 15. cap. de Gemmis. Of Absciso. chap. 13. ABscisus is a precious stone, black and heauie, straked with redde vemes. If this stone be heat in the fire, it holdeth heate seauen daies: as Isidore saith. cap. de Gemmis. Of Alabandina. chap. 14. ALabandina is a precious stone, and hath that name of a region of Asia, the which is called Alabandina: The co∣lour thereof is like to the stone Calcido∣nius: but it is more tare, as Isi. saith, cap. de Cristallis. And Dioscorides sayth, that Alabandina is a precious stone cléere & some deale red, as Cardius. The vertue thereof exciteth and increaseth bloud. (Additiō.Alabandina, a red stone, mixt with bliew, prouoking bloud. D. Cooper.) Of Argirit. chap. 15. ARgirites is a precious stone lyke to siluer with golden speckes. Andro∣maia is like thereto in coulour: and is a stone with coulour of siluer, as Isidore saith. And is foure cornered in shape, as the corner of a Diamond. And Witches beléeue that it hath that name for that it refraineth sodeine passions, and wrath of hearts, as Isidore saith, cap. de Gem∣mis aureis. Of Astrione. chap. 16. AStrion is a precious stone of Inde, nigh like to Christall. In the middle thereof shineth a star with cléerenesse of the full Moone: and hath that name of A∣stris, starres: for if it be set in the starres light, it taketh light of them, as Isidore saith, cap. de Christal.
(Additiō.Astrios, a precious stone in Indie. Astroites, a stone lyke a Fishes eie.) Of Allectoria. chap. 17. ALlectoria is a stone that is found in the mawes of capons, and is like dim Christall: and the most quantitie there∣of is as much as a Beane. And as wit∣ches tell, it is supposed that in battayle fighting, this stone maketh men insupe∣rable, that they may not be ouercome, as it is said in Lapidario. Dioscorides spea∣keth of this stone, and saith, that Allec∣torius the stone exciteth ye seruice of Ve∣nus, and maketh a man gratious & sted∣fast, & vidor, wise and redie, and cunning in plea, and accordeth friends, and quen∣cheth thirst in the mouth. (Additiō.Alectoria, a stone found in the maw or Gissard of a Cocke, of the bignesse of a Beane, and couloured like Christall: This stone is not to be found in euery Cocke, vntill he be olde, &c.) Of Asterites. chap. 18. ASterites is a precious stone, and is white, and conteyneth light there∣in closed, as it were a Starre going within, and maketh the Sunne beames white. (Additiō.This Iewell is found in the mawe of a pure maid, that is fifty yeres of age, or els among the Troglodites.Such is & incontinē¦cie of the vvorld. Vesper.) Of Amatides. chap. 19. AMatides is a precious stone, if a cloth be touched therewith, the cloth with∣standeth fire and burneth not, though it put therein: But it receiueth brightnesse and séemeth the more cléere: and is lyks Alam, that may be brosed. And withstan∣deth all euil doing of witches, as Isidore sayth, li. 16. cap. 10. (Additiō.Amatices, it is supposed that in the mawe of the Cocke Turtle done this stone is to be found, and hath vertue to increase concord and loue.) Of Bitumine. chap. 20. GLew is slimie gleab of the earth, and gleaming and gendering, namelye in marreis ground. And (as Isidore sayeth, lib. 16. cap. 2. it is a manner of gleaming earth, and is founde beside the lake As∣phalti in Iudea. The kinde thereof is burning and of firie kind, and holdeth so fast, and is so clongie, that it is not broke with water nor with yron, but onelye with menstruall bloud, and it is good to ioyning of ships. Of this Glew is men∣tion made in Plat. in this manner. As∣phaltis glew of Iudea is hot and drie in the third degrée,Hot & drye. and is earth of blacke coulour, and is heauie and stinking. And some men meane, that it is earth gende∣red of the foame of the dead sea, and is made hard as earth, and hath vertue of drawing, and sodering, and fastening, and consuming, and is full good to heale and cloase, and to sowder woundes, and Botches, if it bée beate to powder and put in a dry wound, though the wounde be full long and full wide. Also it is good to helpe the passions of the mother, that pearceth and thirleth the spiritual mem∣bers, if it be put vppon coales, & the stin∣king smoake therof be drawen in at the nose and at the mouth. Also it helpeth flu∣matike men, and sléeping Litergicis, that haue the sléeping euill: For it purgeth well fleame out of the head, as Platea. sayth. (Additiō.Bytume, a kinde of naturall lime or claie, clammie like Pitch, in olde time vsed in stéed of Morteir, and in Lampes to burne in stéede of Oile, being of the nature of Brimstone, it is a good siment for earthen pots and cups.) Of Berillo. chap. 21. BEril is a stone of Inde, lyke in gréene coulour to Smaragde: but it is with palenesse, and is polished and shapen a∣mong the Indes in sixe corners shape: that dimnesse of coulour may be excited by the rebounding of the corners. And otherwise shapen it hath no bright sei∣ning. And of Berill be ten maner kinds, as Isidore sayeth, cap. de Viridibus Gemmis. Also there it is sayde, that
Crisoberillus is a manner kinde of Be∣rill. And the pale gréennes therof shineth towarde the coulour of golde. And this stone commeth to vs out of Inde. Dio∣scorides describeth the vertues of Berill and saith, that among Berill the stone that is most pals is best, the vertue ther∣of is good against perill of enimies, and against strift. And maketh one so that he may not be ouercome, and maketh him milde, and giueth good wit, and hel∣peth against diseases of the liuer, and against fighthings and sobbings, and a∣gainst bolkinges, and healeth moyst ei∣en, and burneth his hande that beareth it, if it be held before the Sun, & maketh a man great of state, & ioyneth wil loue of matrimonie. (Additiō.I suppose that the Berill is none other than a grose Christall, ingendred of the colde aire and dry water hardened: as the North wind fréeseth the common streames, but with a more violent opera∣tion being either a thin gréene or yelow, is more earthie then airie, which is per∣ceiued by his peise and heauinesse.) Of Calculo. chap. 22. CAlculus is a little stone medled with earth, and is round and most harde, and pure, and most smooth and plaine in euery side. And it hath that name Calcu∣lus, for it is trod with féet without gréefe of his smoothnesse and plainnesse. And contrarie héereto is a lyttle stone that is called Scrupulus chesell, and is most tough and sharpe, and full lightlye if it still betwéene a mans foote and the shooe, it griueth full sore. And so such stones that be sharpe and hard are called Scru∣pea, as Isidore saith, lib. decimo quinto. ca. 3. And oft in the bodie of a beast, this stone bréedeth of hot humours and glea∣my, now in the bladder, and sometime in the reines, as Constantine saith. Looke before lib. 7. de Passionibus renum, cap. de Calculo. (Additiō.Calculus is fallen. For the smooth Pibble stones, that net of many grose co∣lours, but to small effect.) Of a Whetstone. cap. 23. A Whetstone is called Cos, and hath that name, for it whetteth and shar∣peth yron to cut and to carue. For Cotis is Greeke, and is to say, caruing, as Isi∣dore saith. And there be diuerse manner of Whetstones. And some neede Water and some neede Oyle for to whet, but Oyle: maketh smooth, and water maketh the edge right sharpe, as Isidore sayeth, lib. codem. capitulo. 3. The Whetstone hath this propertie, that it serueth ano∣ther thing in wheting, and wasteth him∣selfe some and some, as Gregory sayeth. The powder of the Whetstone helpeth well in medicine, and hath vertue of dri∣eng, and of smiting againe repercussiue, and of staunching of bloud, as Constan∣tine saith. (Additiō.The ponder of a Whetstone is as good for a fresh wound to stape the blée∣ding, as is a Pigges turde to the nose of him that bléedeth: for the gréet of the one is a pricking in the wound, & the stench of the other, anoyance to the head.) Of Calce. chap. 24. LIme is called Calx, & is a stone burnt, by meddeling thereof with Sand and with water, Cement is made. And lime is called hot, as Isidore sayeth. For while it is colde in handeling, it contai∣neth priuely within fire and great heat. And when it is sprong with water, a∣non the fire that is within breaketh out. In the kinde thereof is some wonder: For after that it is burnt, it is kindeled in Water, that quencheth fire. And lime is néedfull to building. For one Stone may not cleane to another stronglye, but they be ioyned with lime. Lime that is made of white stone and harde, is best for walls: and Lime made of soft stone is best for roofes. Huc vsque Isidorus, lib. decimo quinto. ca. 3. And Plat. sayth, that Lime is hotte and drye in the fourth degrée: and Lime meddeled with Oile helpeth whelks and woundes that be rotted, and cloaseth and soudereth cutting, and fretteth su∣perfluitie
of flesh in woundes, and suffe∣reth it not to grow. Hot Lime sod with Auripigment and water, maketh haire to fall: For it openeth the poores with sharpnesse thereof, as Constantine sayth and Plat. also. Of Cemento. chap. 25. CEment is lime, sand and water tem∣pered togethers and meddeled: And such meddeling is most néedfull to ioyne stones together, and to pergit & to white lime, walles. In painting and colouring of walls the first ground & chiefe to take colour is sement, & cleaueth to wet wals, and namelye if it bée plaistre stone. For as Isidore sayeth, lib. 16. cap. 13. the best sement made of all stones is of the flint stone, or of plaistre, that is called Gyp∣sis: the which stone shineth as it were Glasse, also it will be broke into manye small peeces. Of Carbunculo. chap. 26. CArbunculus is a precious stone, and shineth as Fire, whose shining is not ouercome by night. It shineth in dark places, and it séemeth as it were a flame. And the kindes thereof be twelue, and the worthiest be those that shine and send out beames, as it were fire, as Isidore sayth, libro. 16. cap. 3. There it is sayde that Carbunculus is called Antrax in Greeke, and is gendered in Libia among the Troglodites. Among these twelue manner kindes of Carbuncles, those Antraciles be the best that haue the cou∣lour of fire, and bée compassed in a white veine, which haue this propertie: If it be throwen in fire, it is quenched as it were among dead coales, and burneth if water be throwen theron. Another kind of a Carbuncle is called Scandasirus: and hath that name of a place of Inde in the which it is found. In this maner of kind as it were within bright fires, bée séene as it were certeine droppes of gold. And this precious stone is of greate price without comparison in respect of other. Another manner of kind there is that is called Signes, & hath that name of bright burning of lampes. And this precious stone is called Remissus Carbunculus. And there is two manner of kindes: That one is with beames, as purple, & that other is of the coulour of red silke. And if this be heated in the Sunne with froting of fingers, it draweth to it selfe strawe and leaues of bookes. It is said, that it with standeth grauing. And if it be sometime graued and printed with waxe, it taketh with him a parte of the waxe, as it were with biting of a beast, as Isidore saith there. Among manner of kindes of Carbuncles, Balagius is counted, that is red and bright, as Dio∣scorides sayth: and also it is sayde, that this manner Carbuncle is founde in the veine of the Saphire: & therefore through néerenesse of the Saphire, Bala∣gius hath a manner mist, as it were spar∣keling about ye fire, that compasseth him without. And this is openly séene if men take héede thereto. (Additiō.The Carbuncle orient, is of the co∣lour of red Lead, and in the night spark∣ling like a coale.) Of Crisoprasso. chap. 27. CRrisoprassus is a stone of Ethiopia, & is hid in light, and seene in darknesse. For it is firie by night and goldish by daye, as Isidorus sayth. Therefore by day it is hid, as it were washed awaye, and léeseth his shining, and wareth pals as golde. And there is another manner, kinde that is called Crisoprassus, gende∣red in Inde: and this Crisoprassus is like in colour to a stone that is like to Pras∣sius, and is gréene as a Léeke and is be∣sprong with certaine, drops of gold, as it is said in Lapidario. Of Calcidonia. chap. 28. CAlcidonius is a pale stone, and shew∣eth dimme coulour, as it were means betwéene Beril and Iacinct, as it is said in Lapidario. And is gendered among ye Nasamos: and commeth and is gendered of the raine of our Lord, as it is sayd: & is found by shining in ye full of ye Moone, as Isidore saith, lib. 16. Ant found
but of thrée coulours, as the Lapidarye sayth. And all kindes thereof withstan∣deth grauing, and draweth strawe to it selfe, if it bée heated and chafed. Isidore saith, this stone pearced and borne about one, maketh him haue mastrie in cau∣ses, and helpeth against iapes & scornes of feends, and kéepeth & saueth vertues, as Dioscorides saith. (AdditiōMans coniecture is farre from the true operation of hidden properties.) Of Crisolito. chap. 29. CRisolitus is a little stone of Ethiopia, shining as golde, and sprinkling as fire. And is like to the sea in coulour, and somewhat gréene. If it be set in gold and borne on the lefte arme, it feareth féendes and chaseth them awaye, as it is sayd, and it helpeth night frayes and breades: And abateth an euill that is cal∣led Menlancholy, or doth it awaye. And comforteth the vnderstanding, as Dio∣scorides sayth. One manner of kinde of Crisolitus, is Crisolimphis, the coulour thereof is deemed golden by day, and firy by night. And another manner kinde of Crisolitus is called Crisolentus, & is co∣loured as gold, and is right faire in sight in the morrowe tide. And then as the day passeth, his coulour waxeth dimme. And this stone maketh most soonest heat: For if it be set by the fire, anone it wax∣eth on a flame, as Isidore saith, li. 15. ca. de Gemmis aureis. Of Celidonio. chap. 30. CElidonio is a little stone, but it is pre∣cious. Héereof is double kinde, blacke and redde: And be taken out of a Swal∣lowes mawe, and be little and vnséemly: But in vertue they be no lesse of value then more stones and greater. But they passe many other in vertue. For the red helpeth against the passion Lunatike and against woodnesse, & against old sorrow: and maketh a man kinde and pleasing. And the blacke helpeth against euill hu∣mours, and against Feauers and wrath. And if it be washed in water, it helpeth ore eien. And this is said in Lapidario. (Additiō.As touching these stones. I my selfe trieng an olde rule, did finde in ye maws of the young Swallowes, a blacke stone as bigge as a Thistle séede, and another red, and a third gray, spelled blacke, and after gaue them away.) Of Christallo. chap. 31. CHristall is a bright stone and cléere, with watry coulour. Men suppose yt it is of snow or Ise made hard in space of many yeres. Therfore ye Gréeks gaue a name thereto. It is gendered in Asia, & in Cipres, & namely in the North moū∣taines, where the Sun is most seruent in Sūmer: and they make this dure long, yt is called Christall. This stone set in ye Sun taketh fire, insomuch if dry tow be put therto, it setteth the tow on fire. His vse is ordeined to drink, & worketh none other thing, but what cold thing may do. Huc vsque Isi. li. 16. cap. 13. Dioscorides speaketh of Christall & saith, yt it is hard∣ned & turned into stone, not only by ver∣tue & strength of cold, but more by earth∣ly vertue, and the coulour thereof is like to Ise. The vertue therof helpeth against thirst & burning heat: and if it be beaten to pouder & dronken with hony, it filleth breasts & teates full of milke, if ye milke faileth before because of colde: Also if it be dronkē, it helpeth against Collica pas∣sio, & against the passion of euill guts, of ye wombe be not hard. The stone is cléere, & so letters and other things that be put therin, be séene cléerly inough. That chri∣stall materially is made of water. Gre∣gory saith super pri. Ezech. Water (sai∣eth he) is of it selfe fléeting, but by strēgth of cold it is turned & made stedfast chri∣stall: and so in Eccle. it is written. The Northen wind blew and made christall fréese, &c. And héerof Arist. telleth ye cause in li. Meth. Ther he saith, ye stony things of substance of oare, be water in matter, as Richardus Rufus saith. Stone oare is of water, but for it hath more of drines of earth then things that melt, therefore they be not frore onely with coldnesse of water, but also for drynesse of earth that is mingled therwith, when ye watry part of the earth & glassie hath mastry on the
water, and the foresayde rolde hath the victory & mastry. And so S. Gregory his reason is true, yt saith, that Christall may be gendered of water. Of Ceraunio. cap. 32. CEraunius is a stone like to Cristall, and is infected with bliewe coulour, and is in Germania. Another is of Spaine, and shineth as fire. These stones fall out of the place of Thunder. And it is sayde that they helpe against the strength of lightening, as Isidore sayth there. The same is said in the Lapidari. Where it is said that when it thundreth horribly, and the firie aire lightneth, and when clowds smite together, their stones falleth from heauen. Who so beareth this stone chastely, shall not be smitten with lightning, nor house nor Towne where this stone is therein. Either hath vertue of helping in battailes, and to haue mastrie in warre, and in causes of strife, and to make swéete sléepes, as it is sayd there. Of Corallo. chap. 33. COrall is gendered in the red Sea, & is a tree as long, as it is couered with water, but anon as it is dra∣wen out of water, & touched with aire, it turneth into stone, and vnder water the boughs therof be white and soft, & waxe redde and turne into stone when they be drawen out of the water with nets, as Isidore saith, cap. de gemmis rubeis. And if followeth there: as precious as ye Margarite of Inde is among vs, so pre∣cious and more is Coral among the In∣des. Witches tell, that this stone with∣standeth lightening, Isidore sayeth, the same is sayde in Lapidario. His might and vertue, as sayth Zorastes, is wonderfull, for it putteth off lightning, whirle winde, tempest and stormes from Shippes, and houses that it is in. And it is double, white and redde. And is neuer founde passing halfe a foote long. And the redde helpeth against bleeding, and agaynst the falling Euill, and against the feendes guile and scorne, and against diuers wonderous dooing, and multiplieth fruit, and spéedeth begin∣ning and ending of causes and of needs. Of Corneolo. chap. 34. COrneolus is a red stone and dim, but it is full good and precicus, if it be hanged about a mans necke, or borne on a finger. In strifes it alay∣eth wrath that rise, and it stauncheth bloud that runneth of a member and all maner running. And namely such a run∣ning as women haue, as it is sayde in Lapidario. Of Dioniso. chap. 35. DIonisius is a blacke stone or browne sprong with redde veines, and hath that name, for if it be ground and med∣led with water, it smelleth as wine: and yet it withstandeth dronkenesse. And that is great wonder in that stoue, as I∣sidore sayth, li. 16. Of Diadoco. chap. 36. DIadocus is a pale stone: bright as Be∣rill, and is apt to obteine answeres of féends, for it exciteth féendes and fan∣tasies. And if it happeneth that it touch∣eth a dead body, it is sayd that it léeseth anone his good vertues, for it is ye stone that hateth and is squeimous of the thing that is ouercome with death, as it is said in Lapidario. Of Ere. chap. 37 BRasse is called Es, & hath that name of shining of aire, as Isidore sayth. For in old time ere the vse of yron was knowen, men eared land with brasse, & fought therewith in warre and battaile. That time golde and siluer were forsa∣ken, and golde is now in the most wor∣ship, so age that passeth and vadeth, changeth times of things. Isidore sayth these wordes libro. 16. Brasse and Cop∣per is called Fa, for either is made of the same stone by working of fire, for a stone resolued with heat turneth into Brasse.
Iob. 28. Brasse & Copper be made in this maner, as other mettalls be of brimstone & quick siluer, & that hapneth when ther is more of brimstone then of quicke sil∣uer, & the brimstone is earthly & not pure, with red coulour & burning, and quicke siluer is meane and not subtill. Of such meddeling Brasse is gendered, as Arist. saith, and as Isidore saith, ca. de Ere. If Brasse be meddeled with other mettal, it chaungeth both coulour and vertue, as it fareth in Latton & in Brasse, that is cal∣led Conchium, that is ioyned to diuerse mettalls, and some is white as siluer, & draweth some deale to browne colour, & séemeth golde, the third in which is tem∣peratnesse of all. And another manner of Brasse ther is, yt which is called Corona∣rium, that is beaten abroade into shinne plates of brasse, wrought with hammer, & is died with Buls bloud, and is like to gold in crowns among posturing & pain∣ting Therfore it is called Coronarium, And Brasse yt is wrought with hammer is called Regular. And Brasse, ye onely is melted, is called Fusile, but Brasse that is fusile & molt, is brittle vnder the ham∣mer: And when Brasse is well purged & cleansed of all vices, then it is made able to be wrought with hammer & Regular. And all Brasse is best molt in great cold: Brasse rusteth soone but it be nointed wt oile. Also among al mettal Brasse is most mighty. Huc vsque Isi. li.16. And Brasse accordeth most to the vse of trumps and Belles, for sounding and during thereof. The stone of the which Brasse is blow∣en, is most sad and hard. And it breaketh not easily, but it be burnt first with strōg fire in the rocke, it is burnt: eight or nine times ere it be perfectly drawen out of the stone and pured, as they that cleanse Brasse in places where it is made, tell certainly. Brasen vessells be some redde and rustie, but they bée oft stoured with sand: and haue an evill seuond and smell, but they be tinned. Also Brasse if it bée without Tin, burneth soone, as Isidore saith, cap. de Stanno, and Platea, sayeth, that Brasse burnt to pouder hath vertue of dissoluing, of washing, of cleansing, & of purging of euill humours. And that powder healeth woundes, and cleanseth dimnesse of cien, and fretteth superfluity of flesh; and suffereth it to growe no more, as Platea sayth, and Dioscorides also. (Additiō.Of the rust of Brasse commeth a bliew substance called Verdigrese, which as it is a colour for Painters, so it is a fretting poison, vsed in ointments, on fe∣stured sores.) Of Electro. chap. 38. ELectrum is a mettall, and hath that name, for in the Sunne beame it shi∣neth more cléere then gold or siluer. For in the Sunne beame Electrum is effec∣tual. And this mettal is more noble then other mettalls. And héer of be thrée man∣ner of kindes: One is such, that when it runneth first out of the trée, it is flée∣ting and thin Gumme, but afterwarde with heate or with colde it is made hard as a cléere stone, as it wer christal. That other manner kind is called mettall, & is founde in the earth, and in and in price, The third manner is made of the thrée parts of golde, & of the fourth of siluer: and kinde Electrum is of that kinde, for in twinckling & in light it shineth more cléere then all other mettall: & warneth of venim: for if one déep it therein, it ma∣keth a great chirking noise, & chaungeth oft into diuers colours, as the rainbow, & that sodeinly. Huc vsque Isi. lib. 15. de Metallis vlti Et super Eze. is mention shade of Electrum artificiall. Greg. saith, that if hard gold be medled with siluer, then the filtier wiseth more cléere, & the gold tempered with clóerenesse of siluer, looseth not his vertue, but only it wareth somewhat pale, & lesse faire by medling of siluer. And some men cal very Glectrū Arpago. For if it be heted with fingers, it draweth to it selfe all leaues & straws, & hems of clothes, as Magnis draweth yron, as Isid saith; li. 16. ca. de rubiis Ge∣mis . And receiueth soone colour & hiew, in what manner a man will. And so it is soone died with the rote of Auense, with Couchinello, as he eth there. Of Echites chap. 39.
EChites is a stone of Inde & of Persi, & is found in ye cliffes of occean, both in ye coasts of the sea of Inde & of Persy, & is a stone with red colour, as it is sayd in Lapidario, & there is two sorts, as Hil. sayth, male and female, & so alwaye two be found in the Eagles neast, & the Eagle may not bréed without these stones. And therfore ye Eagles kéepeth these stones in her neast. The male thereof is hard, & is like to a gum that is called Galle, & this male is somewhat blasing. And the female is soft. And these stones bound to a wo∣man that trauaileth of child, maketh her soone to be deliuered: and maketh them sometime to beare dead children, if it bée too long there, & somewhat passeth of the priuy choice of the woman, except these stones be soone taken from her that tra∣uaileth of childe, as Isi. saith, li. 16. cap. 4. Also this stone Echites conteineth & brée∣deth another stone within him, like as it were a woman with child: as Dioscori∣des saith. And in Lapidano it is said: that this stone conteineth another stone, as a woman with childe. The vertue of this stone Echites maketh a man sober, and augmenteth & increaseth riches, and so it doth loue, & helpeth greatly to obteine & conquere victory, & fauour. And letteth and withstandeth the falling of them, which haue the falling euill. If there be any man suspect of fraude of poisoning, if he be guiltie, this stoud put vnder his meat will not suffer him to swalow his meate; and if the stone be withdrawen, he shall not tarry to swallow his meats. Of Emachite. chap. 40. EMachites is a red stone and reddie and rustie, & is sonne in Affrica and Iuda & in Arabia. And hath that name, for if it be broken with bloud, it tourveth anone into the colour of bloud, as Isido. saith. And is god against fluxe of the bladder, and for sore eien, and against venim and against the biting of an Adder, and stan∣cheth, the fluxe of the womb▪ & restraineth all bléeding, & namelye the bloud of wo∣men: & of the gums, as Dioscorid. saith. And in Plat. it is sayd, that it is of cold & drie complection, & hath vertue to stanch bloud. And hath that name Emachites, of Emach, that is bloud, and Chites, that is stint. And so it helpeth Emopto∣ces, men that spue and cast bloud, and is speciall remedie for the bloudie flixe. Of Eliotropia. chap. 41. ELiotropia is a precious stone, and is gréene and sprong with red droppes and veines of the coulour of bloud, and hath that name of effect and dooing. For if it be put in water before the Sunne beames, it maketh the water séeth in the vesell that it is in, and resolueth it as it were into mist, & soone after it is resolued into rainy drops. Also it séemeth that this same stone may doe wonders, for if it be put in a Basen with clére water, it chan∣geth the Sunne beames by rebounding of the aire, & seemeth to shaddowe them, and bréedeth in the aire red and sanguine coulour, and as though the Sunne were in Eclipse and darked, the Moone set be∣twéene vs and the Sun is darkned, and for it seemeth that it maye chaunge the cléernesse of the Sun, it is called Elitro∣pia, that is turning away of the Sun, as Isidore saith expresly & Dioscorides also. And in Lapidario the same meaning is said in this manner. Ex re nomen habens est in elitropia gemma, Quae solis radijs in aqua subiecta vacillo. Sanguineum reddit mutato lumine solem. Eclipsimque nouam terris effundere cogit. And Isidore saith, that this stone disco∣uereth the soily of inchauntenes of wit∣ches, that haue liking and pride in theyr owne wonders, for they begnile mens sight in those thinges that they worke, as the foresayde stone doth: and hée set∣teth an ensample thereof, and sayeth, that an hearbe of the same name, with certaine inchauntmentes, beguile the sight of men that looke thereon; and ma∣keth a man that heareth it not bée séene. In many other things thie stone is good and commendable, for it stauncheth bloud, and putteth awaye venimme, and hée that beareth this stone maye not his beguiled.
Of Enidros. chap. 42. ENidros is a little stone, and drop∣peth alway, and melteth not, nor it is neuer the lesse in any wise, and so it is sayde in Lapidario: Enidros that stone, weepeth alwaye as it were by springing of a full well with dropping teares and welleth alway. And there it is sayd, that it is hard to tell the cause of these doings. For if the drops were of the substance of ye stone, why is not the stone lesse, or mel∣teth awaye? And if a thing entereth into the stone, why is it that that thing that entereth, putteth not againe that thing yt goeth out, but as séemeth me, it maye be, that the vertue of the stone maketh the aire thicke that is nigh thereto, and turneth it into water. And so it seemeth that it commeth out of the substaunce of the stone. Neuerthelesse it commeth of the substance of the aire that is about the stone. AdditionPerpetui fletus lacrimis distillat Eni∣dros. Qui velut ex pleni fontis scaturigine manat. Dissoluing drops and teares full oft, that Enidros the stone doth drop, Which as out of a fountaine full, doth alwaies runne and neuer stop. Of Episte. chap. 43. EPistes is a litle stone bright and red∣die, and maketh a man safe that bea∣reth it in the hart side. And ceaseth guiles and decrites, and putteth of long Flyes and barren foules, and mist & haile from the fruit of the earth. And if it be set in the Sunne, firie beames some out there∣of. And if thou doest this stone in seething water, the seething thereof ceaseth, & the water cooleth soone, as Isidore sayth, and Dioscorides also. Of Excoliceros. chap. 44. EXcoliceros is a little stone, so named to: it is distinguished and diuersed with fortie colours, and is full little, and maketh mens euen that looke thereon to quake. And it is found in Libia among the Treglodites. Of Yron. chap. 45. YRon is called Ferrum, and hath that name, as Isidore saith, of Ferrendum smiting: for it beateth and smiteth, & by hardnesse thereof, ouer commeth all kinde of mettall. And though yron come of the earth, yet it is most hard and sadde, and therefore with beating and smiting, it suppresseth and dilateth all other mettal, and maketh it stretch on length and on breadth. And as Isidore saith, it hath the name of the lande that it is digged in. And therefore it is diuers, for by reason therof it is found more harde or soft. And after ye minde of Aristotle, Yron is gen∣dered of quicke siluer, thicke and not cleane, full of earthie hoales, and of brim∣stone great and boistous, and not pure. In composition of yron is more of the foresayd Brimstone, then of quick siluer, and so for mastrie of colde and dry and of earthy matter, yron is dry and cold, & ful well harde, and is compact togethers in his parts. And for yron hath lesse of airy and watry moisture then other mettall: therefore it is hard to resolue and make it againe to be soft in fire, as Ric. Rufus saith. It is the manner to temper yron ware with Oile, least by coldnesse of wa∣ter it be too much hardned, as Isid. saith. Yron taketh soone rust by touching of bloud, and if it entreth into the substance thereof, vnneth it is clensed, as Isi saith. The rust is a vice fretting yron, & com∣meth therto either of vncleannes of sub∣stance, or of touching of earth, & of nigh lieng therto, or else of touching of blood, or of some other qualitie that is infected. And he saith also, that with yron mans bloud is spilt, and mans bloud taketh wreake of yron: For yron taketh rust of nothing so soone as of mans bloud, if it be ointeb therewith. Yron hath agree∣ment with the stone Adamas, & so that stone Adamas draweth yron to it selfe: and so yron drawen, by meane of siluer vessel or of Brasse, followeth ye stone, & is subiect & obedient therto. Yron well fur∣nished, & annointed with Alam or with
vinegre, shall be most like to Brasse. And yron furbushed shall not rust, if it be a∣nointed with Sewet, or with marrowe of an heart, as Isidore saith. Firie hotte yron if it bée oft quenched in Wine or in milke, maketh that wine or milke me∣dicinable to them that haue the euill of the splene, and also to other sicke men, as Constantine sayth. Also as Isidore sayth, yron that is made firie hot is cor∣rupted, but it is hardned with strokes. Yron that is redde in the fire, is not profitable to carue nor to cutte, till it be∣ginne to waxe white. Use of yron is more néedfull to men in many things then vse of golde: though couetous men loue more gold then yron. Without yron the comminaltie be not sure against eni∣mies. Without dread of yron ye common right is not gouerned. With yron inno∣cent men be defended: & full hardinesse of wicked men is chastised with dread of y∣ron. And well nigh no handiworke is wrought without yron: no field is cared without yron, neither tilling crafte vsed, no building builded without yron. And therefore Isidore saith, ye yron hath this name Ferrum, for that therby Farra that is corne and seede is tilled and sowen. For without yron read is not wonne of the earth, nor bread is not departed, when it is readye, without yron couena∣bly to mans vse. Also yron is whet with yron, as Salomon sayth. For when the coge of yron is dulled and blunted, with great froting it is oft made thinne and sharpe and couenable to cut all thing the more easily. Sinder is called Scoria, and is the saith of yron that is cleansed ther∣from in fire: and hath that name Sco∣tia, see it is smitten and departed from the yron by violence of the fire, as Isidore sayth. Of Ferrugine. chap. 46. FErrugo is the pouder that falleth from the yron with filing, as squama is that thing that leapeth away from ye fire with heating, and hath vertue to make dry and thin, and therefore it is good a∣gainst stopping of the splene. Neuerthe∣lesse it exciteth casting and spuing, when it is dronken, insomuch that sometime it bringeth to death, but if the violence therof be ceased with pouder of the Ada∣mas stone, or with water, in which the stone lyeth all night. Also it is sayd, that the pouder therof is best remedy against Emoroides: and also it stancheth the flixe of the wombe, as it is said in Platea. Also filing or pouder of yrō is called Rubigo, also Corrosio, & hath that name of Cor∣rudendo, fretting and gnawing: but it is properly called Erugo, and hath ye name of Erodendo, filing, and not of Eramen∣to, as Isidore saith. And it infecteth and defileth the hand that toucheth it, and maketh it soule. The more pure and po∣lished that yron is, the more rather it is defiled with rust, and worst to be clen∣sed. And rust is not soone done awaye, but in thrée manners. By burning of fire, or by fretting of a Salue or a File, or by froting of an hard stone, or by scouring of grauell and sand, and pullishing. And rust hath this propertie, that infection thereof commeth againe by light occasi∣on to the place in which it was first mo∣red and rooted. Of Gleba. chap. 47. A Clot is gathering together of pou∣der in a clustre, as Isidore sayeth li∣bro. 15. capit. primo. For earth bounde and clonged togethers, is a clotte, and if it be broken and departed, it is powder: Earth hardned into a clot, receiueth no séed, neither suffereth the seed that is ther sowen to growe and to spring. A clotte broken, couereth and nourisheth séed, and if it be then tempered with raine, it gen∣dereth a manner of fatnesse. & therof séede taketh nourishment and féeding in roots. And groweth and springeth, as Gregory sayth. Also sometime a clot conteineth in it selfe a manner of kind of oare. Ther∣fore diuerse kindes of things be gendred and come of clots, as Gregory saith, su∣per illum locum. 24. Iob. Saphire stones is the place thereof, and clottes thereof is gold. Of Gemma. chap. 48.
A Precious stone is called Gemma, and hath that name, for it shineth as Gum, as Isidore saith. Precious stones adorne well gold, & make it well fayre in diuers coulours. Therefore Isidore saith, that they bée precious, for they be deare & scarce. For all that is scarce and seldome had, is called great and precious, as it is written. The word of God is precious, that is to saye, scarce. Isidore saith, that no man shall wene, that it is doubtfull or false, that God hath set vertue in precious stones. For it is sayd in Lapidario. In∣gens est herbis virtus sed maxima gem∣mis. That is to saye, Greate vertue is in hearbs, but most in precious stones. Of which precious stones some be found in veines of ye earth, & be digged with met∣talls. Some be cast out of the bottome of the sea, and the place of their generation is unknowen. And alway such precious stones be found in cliffes of the sea, & in sand and in grauell of riuers. And some bréed in bodies of soules and of créeping beasts. But frō whence so euer precious stones come, they be found endued by ye grace of God with passing great vertue, when they be noble & very. For Isidore ca. de Gemmis urens saith, in some kinde of precious stones if is harde and greate difficultie to know betwéene ye very pre∣cious stones and false. For oft those that be false & guilful, séeme most like to them that be true & very, so that vnneth men may know betwéene the true and guil∣full. For as he sayth, sometime men by craft aray the stone that is called Vitrū, and put it forth in stéede of Smaragdos, and beguile some mens eyen with false likenesse of true & very Smaragdus. For no life of men is without guile, as Isido. saith. And we vse to cal al manner of pre∣cious stones that bée not precious & shi∣ning, blinde. For they be dimmed with their owne thicknesse and boistousnesse. Isidore saith, that they that déeme so, bée oft beguiled: for oft more vertue is hid in a little Adamant with coulour of yron and darke, then in Sardio that is most bright, or in Berall. Of Gagite. chap. 49. IEat is called Gagates, and is boi∣stous stone, & neuerthelesse it is pre∣cious: And was first found in Cicilia by the riuer that is called Gagas: and was throwen vp to the brinke by the course of water. Therfore it hath ye name ther∣of, though most plenty & best be in Bri∣taine, as Isi. saith: and is double, that is to say, yeolow and blacke. The blacke is plaine and light, & burneth soone in fire, & driueth away adders with smell ther∣of, when it is kindled, right as Thus or insence. This gineth monition of them yt haue séendes within them. And is helde contrary to séens: and giueth knowledge of maydenhoode. For if a maide drinke of the water thereof, she pisseth not: and if she be no maide & drinketh therof, shée pisseth anon, and also against her will, as Dioscorides saith: And so by this stone a maiden is anone proued, as diuerse Au∣thors affirme. Moreouer the same stone both black & also yeolow, being made hot with rubbing in ye fingers, draweth light strawe and leaues to it selfe if it bée put thereto, & a drinke thereof helpeth them yt haue the dropsie: For it wasteth euil a∣pours. And it is sayd, that it comforteth the liuer, & that is perchance by drynesse therof, & also by priuy vertue & qualitie. Also the pouder thereof is good to féeble téeth & wagging, & strēgthneth & fastneth them. Also it is sayd, that this stone hel∣peth for fantasies, & against veration of féends by night. Also fumositie thereof exciteth Menstrua, if it be withdrawn by any day. Also it is said, that it swageth womb ach, when the stomack is mistur∣ned by any way. Also it helpeth against witchcraft, & fordoth hard inchantments, as it is said in Lapidario: and it spéedeth fast birth, & helpeth her that trauaileth of child, as it is said in Lapidario. And so, if so boistous a stone doth so great won∣ders, none should be despised for soule co∣lour without, while the vertue that is hid within is vnknowen. And Isidore spea∣keth of this stone & saith, that this stone is kindled in water, & quenched in Oile, and that is wonder. Of Galactile. chap. 50.
GAlactiles is a stone with coulour of Ashes, and hath swéete tast and sa∣uour. If it bee smit, a manner of white milke commeth out thereof, as Isidore saith. This stone closed in the mouth di∣stroubleth the wit. And if it be borne a∣bout the necke, it maketh breasts full of milke: and if it bée bound to the thighes, it maketh easie birth, and if it be medled with water and salt, and sprong aboute the field: then the shéepe be full of milke, and cleanseth them of scabs, as Diosco∣rides saith. Of Gelacia. chap. 51. GElacia is a white precious stone, sha∣pen as an haile stone: & it is so cold that it neuer heateth with fire, as Isidore saith, and Dioscorides also. Of Geraticen. cap. 52. GEraticen is a blacke stone, but it pas∣seth ye colour in vertue. For if a man wash cleane his owne mouth, & beareth the stone therein: heThey cā¦not tell what hee thinketh. may anone tel what other men thinke of him, as it is said in Lapid. And maketh a man that beareth it well beloued: his vertue is prooued in this manner. If a man be nointed with hony, and is set among many flies, if the stone be present, the flies grieue him not; & if the stone be away then ye flies grieue, bite, sucke, and hurt the body. Of Iaspis. chap. 53. IAspis is a precious stone, & is gréene like to Smaragdus: but it is more dim of coulour. And there be seuentéene kindes thereof, as Isidore saith. For Ias∣pis yt is greene, is called Gemma Pinna∣sin, and though the chiefe coulour thereof be gréene, yet it hath many other colours meddeled among. The vertue thereof de∣stroyeth feaners and dropsie in them that beare him chastlye: and helpeth in tra∣uailing of childe: and driueth awaye fantasies: and maketh a man sure in pe∣rill, and abateth heate within, and staun∣cheth bléeding and sweat, and withstan∣deth lecherye, and letteth conception, and stauncheth menstruall bloud and Emo∣roides, if it be in pouder, and tooke with milke, it helpeth and healeth olde Tor∣ches and viles, and cleanseth the eyen of foulenesse and filth: And sharpeth and comforteth the sight, and withstandeth witchcraft and inchauntments, and is more vertuous in siluer then in gold. In the head of an Adder that is called Aspis, is found a little stone that is called Ias∣pis: and men suppose that it is a stone of wonderfull vertue. And some men sup∣pose that it hath that name, as it were Aspis, and men suppose, that it hath as many vertues, as diuerse coulours and veines, as Dioscorides saith. And ye best Iaspis is found in the mountaines of Sci∣thia, & Griphons kéepe this stone, as they doe Smaragdus, as Isidore saith. Of Iacincto. chap. 54. IAcinctus is a bliew stone some deale, & nigh of the coulour of a Saphire, and hath that name of his owne coulour, as Isido. saith. The stone Iacinctus that is found in Ethiopia is best, and is not too cléere, neither too dim, but meane & tem∣perate betwéene twaine, shining. Isidore saith, this stone shineth not alwaye like, for in cléere wether it is cléere before the eien, and in darke weather it is dim and darke. Isidore saith, in the mouth it sée∣meth colde, if it be therein, and is most hard to graue in. Neuerthelesse it maye be grauen and written, and marked with the stone Adnae, as Isid. saith. Diosco∣rides sayeth, that the stone Iacinctus is now bliew, nowe reddish, nowe pur∣ple, & now bright bliew. And thereof bée thrée manner of kinds, some be citrine, & some bliewe, but among such manner stones, the bliew is best. The stone is wonderfull, for it consumeth it most to the aire. For in dimme weather it is dim, and in dright weather it is bright. And this stone hath a singular vertue, as Authours write: for it giueth gladnesse, and is contrarye to melancholy quality: and hath vertue of comfort, as Isidore saith in the kind thereof. Iacirctus hath vertue of comfort, & doth away eleignesse
and sorrowe: and also vaine suspition. And withstandeth diuers pestilences that come ofte of corrupt aire, and giueth strength and vertue to members, and life to the sinewes, and giueth good sauor and swéete and wholsome, and is most lyke to the Saphire. And Dioscorides saith, that all men that treate of preci∣ous stones, meane, that the more lyke the Iacinct is to the Saphire in colour & in substaunce, the more vertuous it is. And such Iacinctus withstandeth venim, and is contrary to poyson, as Dioscori∣des saith. Also an hearbe of ye same name is like therto in colour; and equall ther∣to in manie things, though it be not all alike thereto in valewe, as Isidore sath. (Additiō.Iacinthes grow in the Iland of Zey∣lam, they are tender stones and yeolow, they are best that are of déepest colour: a Iewell of small value in Calicut, where they are polished, ye cléerest are best, Bar∣tholome hath mistaken the color, in that he saith it to be a blew, when it is yeo∣low. Decades of the West In∣dies, fo. 426.) Of Iride. chap. 55. IRis is a sixe cornered stone, as Isidore saith, and was first found in Arabia, by the red sea, and is now found in ma∣ny a place, as in Germany, in Ireland, and many lands of the North, & is bright and cléere in colour, & like to Christall, as Isid. saith, and hath name Iris of the likenesse of the raine bow, for if it be in a house in the Sunne, it maketh the like∣nesse of ye colour of the raine bow, in the wals of the next house, as Isi. saith. Men suppose that this stone hath the same vertue that Berill hath, but that is not found in quantitie, as Dioscorides saith. Also it is sayde, that this stone helpeth women that trauell of childe, that they may the sooner be deliuered, & better suf∣fer their throwes, and dread perill the lesse. ¶Of Ienia. chap. 56. IEna is a precious stone that is founde in the eyen of a beast that is called Hi∣ena, & if this stone be put vnder a mans tongue, they say, that he shall tell many things that shall befall, as Isidore say∣eth. (Additiō.The beast Hiena is a kind of wild greyhound, very great and strong, & sel∣dome ouercome and taken: and it may be when one may take him, whereas vi. men dare not assault him, that the stone which is in his eye, may haue a working vertue, such as is reported: But it is doubtfull. Read Gesner.) ¶Of Kamau. cap. 57. KAmau is a stone, now white, now browne, now reddish, now diuided with diuers colours, and hath that name Kamau of Kamatis, that is to say, bur∣ning or kindling, for it is founde in pla∣ces of brimstone and of heate. And Di∣oscorides saith, the vertue therof healeth the Dropsie, and is grauen with diuers Images and shapes. ¶Of Kalbrate. cap. 58. KAlbrates is a passing shining stone, like to Christall: and men suppose, that it giueth faire speach and facunditie, worship and grace, and defendeth from griefes, and from noyous things and ve∣nemous, and cureth and healeth swelling of the liuer, and of the splene, as Diosco∣rides sayth. ¶Of Kalcophano. cap. 59. KAlcophanus is a black stone, & ma∣keth cléere voyce, and defendeth the griefe of hoarcenesse, if it be borne in the mouth, as it is sayd in Lapidario. ¶Of Ligorio. cap. 60. LIgorius is a stone lyke to Electurus in colour, and hath that name, as I∣sidore sayeth of a beast that is called, Linx. This stone Ligerius is gendered among the grauel of the brine of ye beast, and the vertue thereof, draweth strawe to it selfe, and helpeth against ach of the stomack, & stancheth flixe of the wombe,
that is grieued. And helpeth them that haue the iaundes, and that be discoloured: for it restoreth coulour, that is lost, as Dioscorides saith. Of Lipparea. cap. 61. LIpparea is a precious stone, and com∣meth out of the countries of Sirtes. The propertie thereof is, that all kinde of wilde beasts come to his presence, & behold thereon. And those beasts, yt hun∣ters maye not take with running of houndes, they take and allure to them, with the sight and shewing onelye of this stone Lipparea, as it is sayd in La∣pidario. ¶Of Margarita. chap. 62. The Ori∣ent perle.MArgarita, is chiefe of all white pre∣cious stones, as Isid. sayth, and hath that name Margarita, for it is founde in shells and in shell fish of the sea. It brée∣deth in flesh of shel fish, and is sometime found in the braine of the fish, and is gendred of the deaw of heuen, the which deaw shell fish receiue in certaine times of the yeare. Of the which Margarites, some be called Vniones, and haue a co∣uenable name, for onely one is found, & neuer two or moe together. And white Margarites are better thā yelow, & those that be conceiued of the morrow deawe, be made dimme with the aire of the euen side. Huc vs{que} Isido. li. 16. And some are found kindly pearced, and those be better than other: and some be pearced by craft, as Plat. saith. And they be best, that are white and cléere, bright and round. And they haue vertue comfortatiue, either of all the whole kinde, as some men saye, or els because they are besprong with cer∣taine specialtie, they comfort the lyins. for by constrayning and coarting, they cleanse them of superfluous humours, & they helpe against the Cardiacle passion, and against sounding or fayling of hart, against féeblenesse that commeth of the bloodie flire, & against flire of the wombe, as Plat. saith. And in Lapidario it is said, that Margarites be gendred of dew, and the more of deawe and aire that is drawen in, the more and the greater they be. The Margarite is gendered of the deaw, but it is supposed, that no Marga∣rite groweth passing of halfe a foote. Al∣so it is sayde there: if that lightning or thundering fall, when the Margarite should bréed of the deaw that is drawen in, the shell closeth by sodaine feare, and so the gendering falleth and is cast out. The best Margarites come out of Inde, and out of the olde Britaine, as it is said. ¶Of Magnete. cap. 63. MAgnes is a stone of Inde,The load stone. coloured somwhat as yron, and is founde in Inde among the Troglodites, & draweth to it selfe yron in such wise, that it ma∣keth as it were a chaine of yron rings, as Isidore saith. Therefore in the com∣mon speach, this stone is called, quicke yron. Also it is sayd, yt it draweth glasse molten as it doth yron. The might and vertue thereof is so great as Austen sayth, that if that stone be set vnder a vessell of golde, or of brasse, and yron set therevpon, by mouing of the stone that is beneath, the yron shall moue that is a∣boue. And also there it is said, that in certaine Temples is made an Image of yron, and it séemeth, that that Image hangeth in the aire. And in Aethiopia is another kinde of Magnes, that forsaketh yron, and driueth it away from him: al∣so the same Magnes, draweth yron to it in one corner, and putteth it away in a∣nother corner, and the more blewe the Magnes is, the better it is. Huc vs{que} Isid. And Dioscorides saith, and also it is said in Lapidario, that this stone reconcileth and accordeth men and their wiues, and increaseth grace and fairenesse, in speach and in words. Also with drinke made of honie and of wine, it healeth the dropsie, and the splene, and falling euill, & burn∣ning. If the powder thereof be sprong and done vpon coales, in foure corners of the house, it shall séeme to them that be in the house, that the house should fal anone: and that séeming is by mouing, that commeth by turning of the braine. Also Magnes is in likewise as Adamas, if it be set vnder the head of a chast wife,
it maketh hir sodainlye to imbrace hir husband: and if she be a spouse breaker, she shall moue hir out of the bed sodain∣ly by dread of fantasie. Platea saith, that witches vse this stone namelye. This stone Magnes is hot & drye in the third degrée, and hath vertue of drawing of y∣ron, and there be mountaines of such stones, and therefore they draw to them and breake ships, that be nayled with yron. Also namely the powder thereof layde to woundes, helpeth such as bée wounded: for if it be layd to ye wound, it draweth out yron. Also the powder of Magnes in the quantitie of two dragmes, with iuyce of fenill, is good against the drotsie, and against euill of the splene, & against fayling of the heart, as Auicen∣na sayeth. ¶Of Melonite. chap. 64. MElonites is a stone, and hath that name, for swéete iuyce commeth out thereof, as it were honie, as Isidore say∣eth: & hath two colours, for it is gréene in the one side, and lyke to honie in that other side. ¶Of Menophite. chap. 65. MEnophites is a stone, and hath that name of a place of Aegypt, and is of the kinde of precious stones as Isid. saith. If this stone be brused and ground, and laide vpon the place that should bée burnt or corued, or els with vineger sme∣red therevpon, it stonieth so the bodye, that it féeleth no sore neither griefe of the burning, nor of caruing. Of Mirite. cap. 66. MIrites is a precious stone, and hath that name, for it is like to Mirra, in colour. And if it be wrong and pressed, it smelleth swéete, as Nardus. ¶Of Medo. chap. 67. MEdus is a precious stone, & is found in the lande of Medes, and is some∣time greene and sometime blacke, as Dioscorides saieth. The vertue of this stone is against blyndnesse of eyen, and helpeth Podagre, if it be tempered with the milke of a woman that hath a male childe. Also it is good for ache of ye reines and for frensie, and if the blacke stone be resolued vpon a skinne, and in hot wa∣ter, and that water be giuen some man to drinke, it slaieth spewing and ouertur∣ning of the stomacke: and if the fore∣head be washed therewith, it strippeth wonderfully of the skinne, and grieueth the sight, and taketh it away euery deale, as it is said in Lapidario. Of Merochite. cap. 68. MErochites is a gréene stone lyke to Smaragdus: but it is more boyst∣ous gréene than Smaragdus, and so it hath the name of the colour of mallows, as Isid. saith: and is bred in Arabia, and is full soft in substance, and neuertheles it is full profitable, as Dioscorides saith. And it kéepeth and saueth children, from noyfull and euill happes. Of Marmore. chap. 69. MArble is called Marmor, and hath that name of the Gréeks, for gréen∣nesse, as Isi. saith. And he saith also that marble stones be noble stones, and are praised for speckles and diuers colours: for of marble be endlesse many manner of kindes, but they be not all hewen out of rockes. But many manner of marble, is found in diuers manner of places vn∣der the earth: as marble of Lacedemo∣nia that is gréene and precious. And mar∣ble is called Ophites,Called Serpētine for it is speckeled like an Adder, & hath therfore that name: & there is double kinde, soft & white, and blacke and hard.The Pur∣fire. And marble Purpurites commeth out of Egypt, & is reddie with white poynts among: & hath that name Purpurites, for it is redde as Purple. There is other manner kindes, as Ala∣bastrum and Parium: thereof we shall speake innermore. Also another manner kinde is called Coraliticum, and is found in Asia, and passeth not two cubites in measure, and is white nigh as yuorye,
and some blacke speckles, in diuers pro∣portiens. Also another kinde is called, Thebaicum, and is sprong with goldish speckes, and is found among Aegypti∣ans, and is kindly apt to grinde colours therevpon, and Colliria oyntments that helpe the eyen. Other kindes of marble breedeth in quarries and in rockes, as Marble that is called, Marmor Corin∣theum. Thereof is made great Pillars, pauements, and Towers. Also there is another maner kinde, as Caristium, and is greene and best: and hath that name, of aspect, for men that graue loue it wel, for greene colour comforteth the sight. Another kinde is called Numidicum, & breedeth in Numidia, and maketh a thing that is froted therewith lyke to saffron, and hath that name therefore. Lib. 16. Isidore setteth ensamples of manye o∣ther diuers Marbles: but these are suffi∣cient at this time. But Marble is more hard and sad, more strong and faire, and more profitable than other stones. In veynes thereof is diuers master found, and precious stones, and for hardnesse thereof, it is most hardly grauen & poly∣shed, and for coldnesse and solidiousnesse thereof, it is best to kéepe in spicerie, and oyntments. Ouer all things we maye wonder, that Marble stones be not hew∣ed neither clouen with yron neither with steele, with hammer nor with sawe, as they be with a plate of lead, set betwéen soft shingles or spones. For with lead & not with yron, Marble stones be hewen, and clouen, and plained, as shingles or small stones. ¶Of Nitro. chap. 70. NItrum (as Isidore saith) is a stone some deale white, and maye be he∣wen and clouen, and is full cléere. The vertue thereof dissolueth and tempereth, draweth and cleanseth, and wasteth su∣perfluities of humours. Lib. 16. cap. 2. Isidore saith, that Nitrum hath ye name of the countrey of Nitria that is in Ae∣gypt. Thereof is medicine made, & there with bodies and clothes be cleansed and washed. The kinde thereof is not farre from the kinde of salt, for it hath yt kind of salte, and is made right as salt in dri∣nesse in olde cliues. The foame thereof, is called Af∣fronitom, and is gendred dropping down in the countrey of Asia, and then dryed with heate of the Sun, and what is best dryed, is least heauie as Isidore sayeth. And Platea sayeth, ye Nitrum is a veyne of the earth, and is hot and drye, light, red, or white or citrine, & is bitter, sowre, and some deale salte in sauour. Nitrum abateth falnesse. If it be taken in the mouth, and consumeth and wasteth glei∣mie humours. Powder thereof consect in honie, clarifieth & maketh the face faire, & cleanseth scabs and matter of the sto∣macke and of the guts, if it commeth of a postume, and cleanseth lyce, and head scabs, and slayeth wormes of the eares, cleanseth most perfectlye the matter and scabs thereof. Fome thereof with vine∣ger, healeth gnawing and swelling, and helpeth against the dropsie, and cleanseth dimnesse of eyen, if it be meddeled with honie, and slayeth venime, and destroyeth it, and withstandeth mightely the palsie of the tongue, as Plat. saith and Diosco∣rides also. And Nitium is hot and drie in the ende of the third degree, and laxeth and cleanseth, as Isidore saith. ¶Of Noset. cap. 71. NOset that is Orapondine, is a pre∣cious stone, some deale white, or of diuerse coulours. It is sayde that this stone is taken out of a Toads head, and is cleansed in the same head, & in strong Wine and water, as Dioscorides saith: and sometime the shape of a Toade see∣meth therein with sharpe feet & broade. This stone helpeth against biting of Serpents and of creeping Wormes, and against venim. For in presence of ve∣nimme, the stone warmeth and burneth his finger that toucheth him, as Diosco∣rides sayth. ¶Of Onichino. chap. 72. ONichinus is a stone of Inde, and of Arabia, and hath in it selfe colour medled like the naile of mankinde.
The Onix of Inde hath coulour of fire, with white veynes & strakes, and the stone Onix of Arabia, is blacke of cou∣lour, and hath white veynes. And therof if fiue manner of kindes: one is Sardo∣nix, and hath that name of companye of two, of whitenesse of the Onix, and rednesse of the Sardonius, as it is she∣wed innermore of Sardonice. It is said, that this stone Onix hath many noyfull effects, for as Dioscorides saith, if it bée borne about the necke, or on the finger, it exciteth sorow, eleingnesse, and dread, and multiplieth plea and strife, and moo∣ueth the heart to contention and debate, and exciteth in children noyfull superflu∣itie of spettle, and may not grieue in pre∣sence of the stone Sardius. This stone Onix is cléere of the kinde of mirrors, & therefore images & figures be séene ther∣in, as it were in a mirrour, but that is darkly, as Dioscorides saith. ¶Of Optallio. cap. 73. OPtallio is called Oppalus also, and is a stone distinguished with colors of diuers precious stones, as Isid. saith. Therein is the firie colour of ye Carbun∣cle, the shining purple of the Ametistus, the bright gréene colour of Smaragdus, and all the colours shine therein, with a manner diuersitie, and hath the name of the Countrie. This stone bréedeth onely in Inde, and is déemed to haue as many vertues, as blewes and colours. Of this Optallius, it is said in Lapidario, that this stone Optallius kéepeth and saueth his eyen that beareth it, cléere and sharp and without griefe, and dimineth other mens eyen that be about, with a maner clowde, and smiteth them with a maner blindnesse, that is called Amentia, so that they may not sée neither take héede what is done before their eyen. There∣fore it is said, that it is the most sure pa∣tron of thieues as it is sayd in Lapidar. Of Orite. chap. 74. ORites is a precious stone blacke and rounde, and mother manner kinde therof is gréene with speckles. The third manner of kinde is white in the one side and plaine in the other, & is in substance as it were a plate of yron. This stone borne vpon a man, kéepeth him from bi∣ting of créeping wormes, and of wylde beasts and other. Also this stone letteth a woman to conceiue, if she beareth it about hir, and maketh hir to be deliue∣red anone without due manner, if she be with childe. ¶Of Petra. chap. 75. A Stone is called Petra, and Petra is a name of Gréeke, and is to vnderstand sad or stedfast, as Isi. sayth: for the sub∣staunce of a stone is gendred, of sad and hard parts of the earth. A stone hath this name Petra of Penetrando,Petra. pearcing: for he pearceth the foote, when it is harde thrast and trode on: and is also pear∣ced with drops of raine and of water, that falleth downe of spoutes and of gut∣ters. A stone hath another name, and is called Lapis, and hath that name of Le∣dens hurt and griefe: for it hurteth the foote with the hardnesse and sharpnesse thereof, as Isi. saith. But commonlye, a plaine; softe, or a round stone is called, Lapis.Lapis. And a stone that is hewen out of mountaines is called Saxum.Saxum. And a hard flint stone is called Silex,Silex. and hath that name of Exihre, for fire leapeth out ther of Isid. saith, though a stone be most cold of himselfe, yet fire commeth out thereof when it is smitten with yron: For by strong violence and smiting of the aire, betwéene the yron and the stone, ye ayre lepeth sparckling out of the flynt. Quar∣to Metheor. Aristotle saith, that a stone gendreth not of earth alone, for drinesse hath mastry therein, and suffereth it not to run. Stones are made either by con∣gellation, or els by conglutination. By medling togethers of water and of earth is clay made, yt is meane betwéene earth and stone, and tourneth into stone some and some, by constraining and fastening of partes, and so slimie claye is most méete for such transmutation: for if it it be not fattie, it will all to fall by ma∣sterie of drinesse, and not containe and holde together.
Then by strong medling and fastening of humour, earth tourneth into kinde of stone, and taketh diuers colours of the diuers qualitie of the earth. Also some∣time stone is gendred by fréesing of wa∣ter. In some place water shedde on the ground, turneth into stone of diuers cou∣lours, and that by some vertue of oare, that is in that place, and fréeseth the wa∣ter that is the matter of stones, as Ari∣stotle saith. Stone is bred of fat claye, by vertue of the sunne that maketh ye fenne priuely runne, and the parties cleaue and fasten together. Other stones be bred of water frosen, by some vertue of ore, that bringeth therein kinde & shape of stone, and be matter of stone, & some is soft and féeble of composition, and some strong: & some be gendred swiftly, and some slow∣ly, and some strongly, as the might of the qualities that worke more or lesse, and as the qualities that let and withstande, be lesse strong or more, as these qualities be medled in substance of stones. Stones be diuers in vertue and in kinde: For influence of heuenly vertue commeth in∣to their places, and putteth therein the effects therof, and after as it findeth mat∣ter more able and obedient to his work∣ing, the more noble impression it printeth therein. Therefore precious stones fol∣low vertues of kinde of Planets on ef∣fect and working, as it fareth of Topasi∣us, that followeth the Mne, as it is said, as Ambrose, Basilius, Isidore, Dioscori∣des and other tell, as it shall be knowen héereafter. The knowen properties of stones be these: for generally a stone is colde and drye, sad and fast hard and he∣uie, and moueth downward by his own heauinesse and waight, and lyeth heauie on the earth, and ioyneth and mineth to∣gether the parts of the earth, for it shuld not breake and depart a sunder. There∣fore Ambrose saieth, that stones be the bones of the earth: for stones doe in diuers partes of the earth, as boanes doe in the bodye, for stones make the earth sad and sound, and holde the parts togethers; and helpeth that it falleth not nor departeth asunder, by ouermuch dri∣nesse thereof. Stones be not made softe with lauing and washing with water: neuerthelesse they be bored & made hol∣low with dropping of gutters, as Gre∣gory saith. Also if fire hot stones be quē∣ched in wine, they corrupt the wine, and turne it into vinegere, as Isidore sayth. Also in stones generally néedeth purenes of matter, vertue, and precious colours, diuers figure and shape, and many ma∣ner moe profites: for stones be néedfull and profitable, to making and building of houses and of walls, of pauements & of bridges, & to put off enemies, wolues, and hounds, and other euill beasts, and to draw mettall out of the substaunce ther∣of, and to healpe and heale men of di∣uers sicknesses and euills, and so make and to increase Towers of Kings, to buyld and to strengthen Cities, Castles and Towers, and for defence agaynst wilde beasts. Also stones are first taken out of the quarrie, and then be bewed, playned, and squared, and layd and set in order in work of building, the more vn∣der the lesse, and set together with Ce∣ment, and couered without, and playned with cement. (Additiō.At a place called Sutton in Kent, and at Boughton, are found a kinde of stone, as if it were clusters of Periwrin∣kles growing togethers: which stone be∣ing wrought and polished, sheweth be∣yond Art, the shape of those shell fishes, after a curious and cunning manner. Which stones, if they wer not to be had, but farre off in some other Countrey, would héere be estéemed of great price, & hard and faire Marble gréet.) ¶Of Pario. chap. 76. PArius stone is a kinde of noble mar∣ble and precious, as Isidore sayeth. This stone is founde in the Iland Pa∣ron, and is therefore called Parius. The quantitie thereof, passeth not Lances and Crateras, and is good to kéepe mens spi∣cerie and oyntments. The Glose super Esay saith, that Parius is a kind of most white marble, and betokeneth therefore chastitie. ¶Of prassio. chap. 77.
PRassius is a stone as gréene as a léek, and comforteth the feeble sight, and is sometime found with red drops, and is sometime distinguished with white drops. Of this stone it is sayd in Lapid. that no profite is therewith, but that it is gréene, and maketh gold séemely. ¶Of Pirite. cap. 78. PIrites is a redde bright stone, like to the qualitie of the aire: much fire is therein, and oft sparkles come out there¦of, and this stone burneth his hand that holdeth it right fast, therfore it hath that name of Pir, that is fire. In Lapid. it is sayd, that he will easelye and softly bée handled and held, for it burneth if it bée hard wrong. Of Pionite. cap. 79. PIonites is a stone that is sayde to bée of female kinde, as it is said. At cer∣tain time it conceiueth and beareth such another stone, and helpeth women with childe as Dioscorides saith. ¶Of Panteron. cap. 80. PAnteron is a stone of diuers colours, sprong and distinguished, for it is séene blacke, red, gréene, pale, purple, yeolow, & also bright gréene in coulour. This stone maketh a man bold and hardy, so that he shall not be ouercome that daye that hée séeth this stone early at Sunne rising, as it is said in Lapidario. ¶Of Plumbo. cap. 81. LEad is called Plumbum, & hath that name, as Isid. saith de mettal, lib. 16. for first with balles of lead, men assaye déepnesse. He saith that of lead are two manner kindes, white and black, and the white is the better, and was first found in the Ilands of the sea Athlant in old time, and is now found in many places, for in Fraunce & in Lusitania is a man∣ner blacke earth full of grauell, and of small stones, and is washt and blowen, and so of that matter commeth the sub∣staunce of lead. Also in golde quarryes, with matter of golde, be small stoanes found, and be gathered with the golde, & afterward departed from the golde, and blowen by themselues, and tourneth all to lead, and therefore golde is as heauye as lead, as Isid. saith. But of black lead is double kinde, for black lead commeth alone of a veyne, or is gendred with sil∣uer in medled veynes, and is blowen, and in blowing, first commeth tinne, & then siluer, and then what remaineth, is blo∣wen and turned into blacke lead, as Isi. saith. But in Inde is neither brasse nor lead found: but Inde is rewarded again with Margarites and precious stones. Isido. saith blacke lead is best in trauel∣lous workes, as in pipes and plates, and that Spaniards and Britons haue proo∣ued. Huc vs{que} Isid. Quarto li. Metheo. Arist. saith, that of brimstone, that is boi∣stous and not swiftly pured, but troubly and thicke, and of quicke siluer the sub∣staunce of lead is gendred, and is gende∣red in minerall places, so of vncleannesse of vnpure brimstone lead hath a manner softnesse, & smoocheth his hand that tou∣cheth it. And with wiping and cleansing this vncleannesse of lead may be taken away for a time, but neuer for alway, a man may wipe off the vncleannesse, but alwaye it is lead though it séeme siluer. But strange qualities haue mastry ther∣in and beguile men, & maketh them erre therein. Some men take Sal Armonia∣cum, as Aristotle saith, and assigneth cause of this vncleannesse, and saith, that in voystous lead is euill quicke siluer, heanie and sennye. Also that brimstone thereof is euill vapour and stinking. Therefore it fréeseth not well at full. In li. 5. Alchimie Hermes saith, if thou hang lead ouer vineger, it hurteth it, for vine∣ger shall pearce the substaunce thereof, & turne it into pouder, and into white co∣lour of floure of lead: and if thou pow∣rest vineger thervpon, it commeth white, & destroieth the might of vineger. Burnt lead bréedeth red colour and dim, and if the fire be too strong, it turneth into Ci∣trine, and thereafter, with stirring, dry∣eng, and tempring with vineger, it tour∣neth into white colour of floure of lead.
And if then makest strong fire, it tourn∣eth all into the first matter of lead, & is made earth, as it is said there. Also lead medled with other mettall, gathereth to∣gethers the kinde parts of the mettall, & departeth and cleanseth away the other parts. Therefore lead is put with sil∣uer in the furnaice, that the siluer may be sooner cleansed: for the lead saueth the siluer parts from wasting, and the lead is wasted and burnt, and cleanseth the sil∣uer, Ier. saith the same in Glosa super. 6 ca, Fere ibi consumptum est plumbum, &c. Also Hermes saith, the lead in boy∣ling, vndoeth the hardnesse of all sadde and hard bodies, and also of the stone A∣damant. And in li. Meth. Arist. speaketh of lead and saith that lead without doubt when it is molten, is as quick siluer, but it melteth not without heate, and then all that is molten séemeth red. Wonder it is, that though lead be pale or brown, yet by burning or resudation of vineger, ofte it gendreth séemly colour and faire, as tawnie, red, and such other: therewith women paint themselues, for to séeme faire of coulour. And Lead is good for medicine: For Leade is colde and moyst in the second degrée, as Constant. saith, and helpeth wonderfully agaynst burning of fire and hot postumes, and stauncheth bleeding wounds, and staun∣cheth and abateth running of the eyen, & swageth smiting of Scorpions & Dra∣gons, and letteth the seruice of Venus, if a plate of lead be laid to the 2. reynes, and hath other medicinable reasons. Looke thereof innermore De coloribus, of the colour that is called Stibium and Cerusa, and is also called floure of lead. ¶Of Puluere. chap. 82. POuder is called Puluis, and hath that name for it is pufe with the winde, as Isi. saith, for lightnesse therof ye winde taketh it vp and bloweth it abroad. Contrary windes commeth into pouder, and beareth it about, & maketh ye whirle winde as Beda sayth. Powder beaten, sheweth the kinde of the thing that it commeth of: now by sauour, now by colour, now by odour and smell. There∣fore pouder is made of spicerie, that the inner vertue thereof may shew it selfe, that by medlyng and oning of partes, it maye receiue the larger vertue, that it may giue foorth the more fragrant smell, and cause the swéeter taste, and that it may the more effectually dry and clense putrified wounds, & eate and fret awaye the dead flesh, that it grow no more, as pouder of burnt lead dryeth and clean∣seth away superfluitie of wounds, & gen∣dreth and saueth quicke flesh, as Const. saith. And therefore of pouder plaisters, be made confections that be called Thi∣miamata, & other diuers medicines, and oyntments: Pouder is made of Thus, and of Mirrhe: with burning into pou∣der, beasts were offred to our Lord God. Also of pouder is made noble electuaries, that helpeth and healeth bodies that be aliue: also of pouder is oyntment made, that kéepeth and saueth dead bodies, that they rot not, nor fall into pouder: also sen is made by medling of pouder and of moisture, and turneth into a clot by working of drinesse, as Isid. saith. Also pouder defileth the face and grieueth the eyen, and many manner wormes bréede of pouder and be sed therewith, and pou∣der is bread to the serpent, as Esa. saith li. 12. Of pouder, bodies with soule haue beginning, and endeth and tourneth into that it commeth off, as it is saide to man. Pouder thou art, and into pouder thou shalt tourne. Also pouder infecteth the aire, and letteth ofte the eye, that it may not sée the cléernesse of the Sunne, for of pouder medled with moist aire, oft the myst is gendred betwéene vs and the Sunne, whose comming hideth ye sunne, that it is not cléerly séene. Also moies in the Sunne beame commeth of pouder, and the pouder is not séene in the sunne beame that commeth in at the window. ¶Of Quirin. cap. 83. QVirin is a stone that is founde in Lapwings neasts, as Dioscorides sayth. This stone bewrayeth and disco∣uereth in sléepe counsayle and priuitie: for this stone laid and set vnder a mans head that sléepeth, maketh him tell as
he thinketh sléeping, & multiplieth won∣derfully fantasies. Therefore Witches loue that stone, for they worke Witch∣craft therewith. Of Quandros. cap. 84. QVandros is a stone of vile coulour, but it is of great vertue, as Diose, saith, and is found in the head of a vul∣ture: and helpeth against all euill cau∣ses, and filleth teates full of milke. ¶Of Rabri. cap. 85. RAbri is a stone, & hath another com∣mon name, and is called Bolus Ar∣menicus, and is a stone or a veyne of earth, & is of colde and dry kinde, & hath a red colour, and is found in Armenia, & hath vertue to constraine & make harde the wombe, and to staunch bloud out of what place of the body it runneth. Of Rubies. This chapter is added.THE Rubies grow in India, and are found for the most part in a riuer named Pegu. These are of the best kind and finest, which they of the land of M∣labar call Nunpuclo, and are well sold, if they be faire and cleane without spots. In the Iland of Zeylath, being in the second India, are found many Rubies, which the Indians name Manecas: the most part of these, are pale, and fleshlye coloured, and very few in perfect beautie, which is as the red Rose and orient. If abiding their first triall in the fire, they grow to a sparklyng cléere coale shining, called of the Gréekes Anthrax, which signifieth a coale of the Latines called, Carbunculus. Their values in the In∣dies are 50. shillings, but being brought hether, are solde for much more. Of Reyben. cap. 86. REyben as Auicen saith, is a little stone and is found in a Crabs head, and is sometime whife, and is sometime some deale yeolow, and is softe in sub∣staunce, little harder than the blacke of a fishes eye, and is in shape round & plaine without, and some deale hollow within, and is in vertue kindly cold & moist, and helpeth against biting of Scorpions, and of the wesell, if it be beaten & laid ther∣to in plaister wise. Also it is sayd, it hel∣peth against the biting of a mad dogge, if the pouder thereof be taken in drink. If the pouder thereof be burnt, it clean∣seth téeth, and drieth wounds, and help∣eth scabs, and letteth teares. ¶Of Saphiro. cap. 87. SAphirus is a precious stone, and is blew in colour, most like to heauen in faire wether and cléere, and is best a∣mong precious stones, and most preci∣ous and most apte and able to fingers of Kings, and is found in many places, but that that is found in the East or in In∣de is accounted best, and namelye if it haue as it were pouder of golde medled therein, and this Saphire stone is thick and not passing bright, as Isi. saith. This stone is most praised in Lapid. And for it is so noble and so excellent, it is called Gemma gemmarum, as it were chiefe of precious stones, for it lighteneth the bo∣die, and kéepeth and saueth lims whole & sound, and hath a bright starre, and by brightnesse of that starre, his vertue is knowen. Another manner Saphire is called Sirtites, and is found fast by the place that is called Sirtes, among ye gra∣uel of the sea Libicum, as Diosc. saith, & is also found in the veines of mines, where Lasurium is also found, and in the same veynes of Saphire, in the middle, as it were in the wombe, is a certaine kinde of Carbuncle found. Therefore manye men déeme, that the Saphire is the Car∣buncles mother, for manye men meane, that the Carbuncle is gendred in ye Sa∣phires veynes, and many men meane, that the Carbuncle is some deale besha∣dowed with a certaine blewe sparcle of the kinde of the Saphire, as Diosc. saith: & Diosc. saith yt the Saphire hath ver∣tue to rule & accord them yt be in strife, & helpeth much to make peace & accord. Also it hath vertue to abate vnkind heat, therfore in Lapid. it is said of ye saphire,
that it cooleth heate of ye body within. For the Saphire cooleth much the heat of bur∣ning feuers, if it be hanged nigh the pulse & the veines of the heart. Therefore hee saith, y• it helpeth against much feauers, y• haue time of chāging in accesse time. Also it hath vertue to cōfort & to glad y• hart, therfore it is said, yt it helpeth against the Cardiacle, & against all melancholik pas∣sions. Therfore it stancheth running and sweat yt cōmeth of anguish, & other sweat also, as it is said in Lap. He stauncheth sweat that runneth swift, &c. Diosc. saith the same, & hath vertue to staunch bloud. And so a Saphire of the East stancheth bleeding at ye nose, if it be laid to ye tem∣ples. Also he hath singular vertue to swage blowing: For certeine it is, yt the Saphire abateth & swageth swelling of postumes, if it be soone laid therto in the beginning of noiful drawing. Also ye Sa∣phire helpeth against an euill postume, yt is called Antrax, for it putteth out the might of ventosity & mallice of that Po∣stume, for it ouercommeth & putteth out the woodnesse thereof, & suffereth not the smoak therof come to the heart, nor the malice therof to infect the spirits, as Di∣oscri. saith. His vertue is contrary to ve∣nim, & quencheth it euerye deale. And if thou put a Spider in a boxe, & hold a ve∣ry Saphire of Inde at ye mouth of ye bore any while, by vertue thereof the Spider is ouercome & dieth, as it were sodeinly, as Diosc. saith. And the same I haue séene proued oft in many & diuers places. His vertue keepeth & saueth the sight, & clean∣seth eien of filth without any greefe: ther∣fore it is written in Lapid. that it taketh away filth out of eien, and ach of the for∣head. Also this vertue healeth biles and botches: For as Dioscor. saith, this stone beaten into pouder, & medled with milk, healeth wounds, & this also hath ben pro∣ued in wounds by experience. Also this stone was of so great authoritie in olde time, that men held that it it was most worthy stone to their God, & so it was singularly hallowed to Apollo, for when natiōs asked coūsel of Appollo in time of sacrifice, they hoped to be certified, & to haue aunswere sooner, if a Saphire stone were present, as Dioscorides saith. And this is touched in Lapidario. And they that vse Nigromancie meane, yt they haue answere of God more ther∣by, then by other precious stones. Also Witches loue well this stone, for they wéen yt they may work certain wonders by vertue of this stone, and also this is touched in Lapid. where it is sayd. This stone bringeth men out of prison bonds, & vndoeth gates and bonds that it touch∣eth. Authours write those doings and many other of the singular vertue of the Saphire, & al Authors accord in this point & say, yt the Saphire is a precious stone, & loueth chastity, & therfore least ye effect thereof be let in any wise by his vnclean∣nesse yt him beareth, it néedeth him that beareth it to liue chast, as this story mea∣neth, but he that it beareth, is commaun∣ded to be most chast. Also in Lapidario it is said, that this stone doth alwaye en∣uy, & putteth off dread & feare, and ma∣keth a man bold and hardy, & master and victor, & maketh the heart stedfast in good¦nesse, and maketh méeke & mild, and good∣ly. I wéene that all this is saide more in disposition then in effect and doing. But this sufficeth at this time. (Additiō.In the Iland of Zeylam, are found the best & most true Saphires, being ve∣ry hard & fine, and of the coulour of A∣zure. Bliew: ther are diuers sorts of Sa∣phires found in Calicut.) Of Smaragdo. cap. 88. SMaragdus of al gréene precious stones is the chiefe, as Isidore sayth. Men in olde time gaue thereto the thirde digni∣tye after Margarites and vnions. Sma∣ragdus hath that name of gréene colour, as he said there. For it is sayde that all gréene things is bitter. In no hearbes nor in precious stone is more gréennesse then in the stone Smaragdus. It passeth hearbes & grasse, twigs & braunches: And infecteth the aire about it with passing gréene colour: And his gréene coulour a∣bateth not in the Sunne in any manner wise. Nothing comforteth more their ei∣en that be grauers, then this stane: If the bodie thereof be straight and clean∣sed or polished, then Images bée séene
therein as it were in a mirrour. Cesar Nero vsed to see fighting of sword play∣ers in this stone, as Isidore saith. Ther∣of be 12. manner of kindes, but the most noble are found in Scithia, and in Bac∣tria holdeth the second place: and Sma∣ragdis be found among & vnder stones, and in chinnes thereof, when the Nor∣therne winde bloweth, for then the earth is vncouered, and Smaragdis shineth a∣mong the stones, for in such winde gra∣uell and sand is most moued. The Ae∣gyptians haue the third. Other be found in metall or oare of brasse, but they be gleyming, for they haue speckles like to brasse, or to lead, or to salt. Though the Smaragdus be gréene by kinde, yet if it be medled with wine or with oyle, his gréene colour increaseth. There is a ma∣ner Smaragdus that goeth out of kinde though it be gréene, for it is somewhat vnseemly by beines of brasse, and is cal∣led Calcesmaragdus. Hue vs{que} Isid. li. ca. de viridibus gemmis. This stone is ta∣ken of and from Griphons, and plentie of Smaragdus may not be found: for great Griphons let the comming of men by the way that goeth thereto, as Isid. saith li. 13. cap. 3. And this stone multi∣plieth his gréene colour, of him commeth a beame that dieth the aire about him, and maketh it gréene. The body there∣of is cléere and of glassie kinde, & shew∣eth figures, images and shapes of things that be nigh thereto, and hath of gifte of kinde & goodnesse of vertue to heale di∣uers sicknesses and euills. Dioscorides saith; it increaseth riches, & maketh men haue good words and faire euidence, in caose and in plea. If this stone be hang∣ed about the necke, it helpeth the falling euill, and saueth and comforteth féeble sight, and represseth wanton motions of lechery, and maketh good minde, and hel∣peth also against al fantasies & iapes of fiends, and ceaseth tempest, and staunch∣eth bloud: and it is saide, that it hel∣peth them, that vse to diuine and gesse what shall befall, as it is sayd in Lapid. (Additiō.Smaragdes grow in ye countrey of Babylon, where the Indians call ye sea Diegnn. They grow also in other parts of India. They are stones of faire gréene coulour, and are light and tender. Of these stones many be counterfaite: but looking on them warily toward ye light, the counterfaits shew certaine burble, as doth glasse, but in the true there is no such seene.) ¶Of Sardio. cap. 89. SArdius is a precious stone of red colour as it were red earth, & hath that name, for it was first found in Sar∣dis, as Isid. saith, and the Glose sup. A∣poc. Though this stone be precious & faire, yet many account it least in value of precious stones: for as they meane, ex∣cept shining, there is no profit therwith, but onely that the stone Onix maye not grieue in his presence: for as it is sayd, Onichinus, that hath some euill proper∣ties, may not shewe them in déede, in presence of the stone Sardius. And Dio∣scorides saith, that ouer this vertue, Sar∣dius hath many other vertues. Of Sar∣dius be fiue manner of kindes, but the best commeth out of Sardis, and is good: for it increaseth ioyes, and putteth away dread, and maketh men bold and hardy, and sharpeth the wit, and in his presence Onix may not grieue. Also he saith, that Sardius, that is all red, saueth his bearer from inchantment, and from witchcraft. ¶Of Sardonice. chap. 90. SArdonix hath that name, of company of two stones, of Sardius and Onix. as Isi. saith, and is of thrée colours. For blacke is lowest, white the middle, redde as vermilion is highest. This stone only taketh nothing of the substaunce of the waxe, when it is printed therein, and is found in Arabia and in Inde. Héereof be fiue manner of kindes, but which of them hath most coulours and most diui∣ded, & the thickest, is best. It is said that it putteth of lecherie, and maketh men méeke and chast. ¶Of Solis gemma. cap. 91. THe Sunne stone is called solis gem∣ma, and is white shining, and hath
that name for it shineth with beames, as the Sunne doth shine in the world, as Isidore saith De candidis gemmis. ¶Of Silenite, cap. 92. SIlenites is a stone of Persia, & is gréen as grasse. His colour is like to ye stone Iaspis, as it is sayd in Lapidario, and shineth with a white specke, as though in brightnesse it contained the shape of the Moone: and the stone Silenites fol∣loweth the Moone, and wexeth and wa∣neth as the Moone doth, as Isi. sayth, and Diosco. also. His vertue reconcileth loue and accord. It is supposed that it helpeth Tisike and sicke men. ¶Of Stanno. chap. 93. TInne is called Stannum, and is a met∣tall, and hath that name of Etimolo∣gic of Gréeke as Isid. saith. Tin depar∣teth, for in fire it departeth mettalls of diuers kinde, and it departeth lead and brasse from gold and siluer, and defend∣eth other mettall in hot fire: and though brasse and yron be most hard in kinde, yet if they be in strong fire without tin, they burne and wast awaye: if brasen vessells be tinned, the tinne abateth the venim of rust, and amendeth the fauour. Also mirrours be tempred with tinne, and white colour that is Cerusa is made of tinne, as it is made of lead. Huc vs∣que Isidorus li. 16. cap. de Metallis. Lib. Metheororum Aristotle sayeth, that tinne is compouned of good quicke siluer and of euill brimstone. And these twaine be not well medled but in small parts compounded, therefore tinne hath colour of siluer, but not the sadnes there∣of. In li. Alchemie Hermes saith, that tin breaketh all mettalls, & bodies that it is medled with, & that for greate drinesse of tin. And destroieth in mettall the kinde that is obedient to hammer worke. And if thou medlest quicke siluer therwith, it withstandeth the crashing thereof, and maketh it white, but afterwarde it ma∣keth it blacke and defileth it. Also there it is said, that burnt tin gendereth redde coulour, as Lead doth: and if the fire bée strong, the first matter of tinne commeth soone againe. Also though tin be more soft then siluer, & more hard then Lead, yet lead may not be soone soudred to lead nor to brasse, nor to yron without tin: neither these may be soudered without greace or Talow, and Rosen. Of Sulphure. cap. 94. BRimstone is a veine of the earth, and hath much aire and fire in his compo∣sition, therefore it is called Sulphure, as it were Solum vrens burning of the grounde. Fire is called Vr. for the firye vertue of brimstone is known in feruent waters, for water that runneth and pas∣seth by veins of brimstone, taketh white∣nesse or heate thereof, fauorinesse, effect, and smell. And héereof it commeth that hot wels springing out of ye earth bring therewith ye qualities of veines of brim∣stone. And nothing is so soone set a fire as Brimstone, and bréedeth in the hotte I∣land Eloijs betweene Cicilia and Italy, and some men meane, that those Ilands burne, and Brimstone is found and dig∣ged in other places, as Isidorus sayth: of Brimstone there be foure kindes. One is called Viuum, the which when it is digged shineth and flourisheth, the which all onely among all the kindes thereof, Phisitions vse, as Isidore saith. Another is called Gleba, and serueth only for ful∣lers. The third is called Liquor, and is good and profitable to cast and sparple on Wooll: for therewith they make soft and white: the fourth serueth to light of lan∣ternes, as Isidor. saith. And sayth there∣to, ye the vertue of brimstone is so great, ye certaine sicknesses are perceiued with brightnes thereof. If the flame therof cō∣meth straight into a mās face, it bréedeth foule and euill palenesse to their sight that looke theron, to the likenesse of dead men, as Isid. saith, li. 16. cap. 1. Auicen & Pla. meane, that brimstone is hot & drye in the fourth degrée, & is turned into kind of brimstone in part of water, of earth, & of fire, and that brimstone is sometime great & boistous, & full of drosse, and som∣time pure, white, cléere and subtill, and sometime meane betwéene both.
And by this diuers disposition, diuerse mettall is gendered of Brimstone and of quicke siluer, as it is saide 4. Metheoro∣rum. There it is shewed that Brimstone and quicke siluer is the matter of met∣talls. Some Brimstone is called quicke brimstone, such as it is when it is taken out of the earth: and some is dead Brim∣stone or quenched, and is made by craft, and put in pottes or in other vessells for medicine. The best is the quick with heat bright & shining white, or gréene with∣out stone, and that maketh gréene colour, and if it bée put in the fire, it hath ver∣tue of tempering and departing, of con∣suming and wasting, and of making sub∣till and thin, and of restoring. Therefore it letteth the cough, and helpeth them yt haue the falling euil, and cleanseth scabs, and withstandeth venim, and awaketh men that haue the sléeping euill, and hel∣peth for the gowtes, Podagre, & the pal∣sie, if the remedie thereof be vsed in due manner and medicinable, as Auicen, Di∣oscorides, Platearius, and other Authors say. Of Sale. chap. 95. SAlt is called Sal, and hath that name of Saliendo, leaping: for it leapeth out of the fire, and flieth the fire, though it be firie kinde, as Isidore sayeth. Other men meane, that it hath that name Sal, of Sale, or of Sole, of the sea, or of ye Sun. For it is gendered of sea water by wor∣king of the Sunne: for some of the Sea abideth at cliffes, and is dried with the Sunne, and is sometime drawne out of salt pits, and sodde till water turne into hardnesse of salt, that was fléeting before, and so made hard and thicke with heat. And is somtime gathered among grauell and Sande in waring of the Moone by night. For oft in Cerenia salt is founde vnder Grauell and Sand. Also in some places be rockes of Salt, and out therof stones be hewen with yron, that turneth afterwarde into kinde of Salt. As it fa∣reth in Arabia, & in Pannonia. Also those stones be so harde, that they make hou∣ses of them, and the common salt craketh & sparketh in fire, leapeth out there∣of, but Sal agrigentinum of Cicilia suffe∣reth fire, and melteth in fire against kind, & starteth and leapeth out of water. And salt is diuers in colour: for Sal memphi∣ticum is red. In a coūtry of Cicllia, wher mout Etna is, is pure salt. In ye same Ci∣cilia in Pathmos is so bright & cléere salt, ye Images be séene therein. In Capado, is yeolow salt digged and mined, as I∣sidore saith. Also salt varieth, and is di∣uers in sauour as he sayth. For in some place it is swéete in sauour, and in some place most salte, and in some most bit∣ter. And the more bitter salt is, the more hot it is, or is the more hotter déemed, as Auicen saith. Salt is most néedfull, for without Salt nigh all meate is wearish and vnsauory. Salt maketh Potage and other meate sauorie, and exciteth good ap∣petite in all meate. With salt al meat is made sauory and liking. Men wéene it hath this name Salt of the Sun: for no∣thing is more profitable then the Sunne & salt. And so we sée diuerse beasts come to pasture most for liking of Salt. Also milke and théese be the more abundant, for goodnesse of salte. Also salte hardneth and drieth things, and kéepeth and saueth dead bodies from rotting: Huc vsque Isidorus. libr. 16. cap. 3. Also Plat. and A∣uicen tell, that Salt hath generally ver∣tue to vndoe, cleanse, and wast rotted hu∣mours. Also to depart and destroy vento∣sitie, and namely if powder of salt be sod and layd all hot in a bagge to the mouth of the stomacke. Also this vertue ioyneth and saueth kinde moisture in the body, & wasteth & destroyeth vnkinde moysture therein. And so water of Salt wells dis∣solueth and wasteth swelling and boy∣ling, and also the Dropsie, as he sayth. Also salt fretteth awaye dead flesh, and namely if the Salt be burnt. For then it withstandeth best rotting: and dryeth, cleanseth, & thirieth into the inner parts, as he saith. Also salt softneth the wombe, and bringeth out supersluitie, & namely salt that is called Gemma, and hath that name, for it is cléere as a precious stone, & worketh wonderfully in ordeining of the guts. And softneth what is harde, and putieth out superfluitie, and so doth Ar∣moniacum & common salt also. Also salt
medled with honie, bread, and wine, hea∣leth the Postume Carbunculus or An∣trax, as Auicen sayth. Also Salt doth away speckles of the face, if it be tempe∣red with water, and Camphora, and the face bée washed therewith. Also Salte cleanseth the bodie of scabbes and Tra∣ters, namely if it be medled with Sope. Also Salt healeth the venimous biling and stinging of Scorpions and créeping wormes, if it be meddeled with honnye and nuts, and with other certain things, as Aucien sayth. Salt hath these ver∣tues and many moe, that were too long to reckon all arowe: but these shall suf∣fice at this time. (Additiō.The last that is made at the Wi∣ches is most wholesomest.) Of Topazio. cap. 96. TOpazius is a precious stone, & hath another name Topazion indeclina∣ble, as Isidore sayth, lib. 16. And is of shi∣ning kind, and shineth with all colours, and was first found in an Ilande of A∣rabia in which Iland when the Troglo∣dites were diseased with hunger & tem∣pest, they digged vp rootes of hearbs, and they found this stone therewith, and cal∣led it Testam nebulis. After that shippe men sought and found the stone, and cal∣led it Topazim in the language of Tro∣glodites. Therefore this stone that was so sought & sound is called Topazius, and hath that name of the Iland. Topa∣zim in their language, is to saye Siche, & is greatest of precious stones. Plinius wrote, that a stone of this kinde was found so greate, that Philadech made thereof an Image of foure cubites long. In the Glose super fixem Apost. it is sayde in this manner. The more scarce Topazius is, the more precious it is. And hath two coulours, as it were of golde and of cléere aire, and shineth most when it is smit with the Sunne beame, & passeth in cléerenesse all other precious stones, and comsorteth men and beastes to beholde and looke thereon. And if thou wipe this stone, thou darkest it, and if thou leadest him to his owne kinde, hée is the more cléere. And in treasurye of kings, nothing is more cleere nor more precious then this precious stone. For cléerenesse thereof taketh to himselfe the cléerenesse of other precious stones that be about him, and it is sayd, that hée fol∣loweth ye course of ye Moone: and helpeth against the passion Lunatik. And so it is sayd, ye as ye Moone is more full or lesse, so his effect is more or lesse, as it is said in Lapid. and stauncheth bloud, and hel∣peth them that haue Emoroides, & swa∣geth seruent water, & suffereth it not so boile, as it is said in Lapidario. Diosco∣rides saith, that it swageth both wrath and sorrowe, and helpeth against euill thoughtes and phrensie, and against so∣deine death. And hath the shape of a mir∣rour, aud the Image that is therein, is séene in a hollow mirrour. (Additiō.The Topaseis grow in the Ilande of Zeilam, and are named of the Indi∣ans Purceragua: It is a harde and fine stone, and of equall estimation with the Rubie and the Saphire, because al these thrée are of one kinde: the perfect coulour of this is yeolowe, like vnto fine beaten golde, whereof some be more pale & some white, and therefore of lesse value. And of these are small Diamondes, coun∣terfeit.) Of the Turquesses. cap. 97. TVrquesses are founde in Exer,This chapter is added. in a place of Siech Ismael. Their mine is a drie earth, that is found vpon a blacke stone, which the Moores take of in small péeces, and carrye them to the Ilande of Ormus, from whence they are brought to diuers parts of the world by sea and by land. The Ilands call them Perose. They are soft stones, of small weight, & not much colde, and to knowe that they are good and true, in the day they shall ap∣peare like the cléere skie bliewe, and by candle gréene, and the best sortes are not without some blacke spotte of the Mine whereon they grewe. The Indians know none other vertue but this fayre∣nesse. Of Turgote. chap. 98.
TVrgotes that is called Torcois also, is a white yeolowe stone, and hath that name of the Countrie of Turkie, there it is bred. This stone kéepeth and saueth the sight, and bréedeth gladnesse and com∣fort. Of Terra Sigillata. Chap. 98. A Certaine veine of the earth is called Terra sigillata, and is singularly cold and dry. And Dioscorides calleth it Ter∣ra saracenica and argentea, and is some deale white, well smelling & cléere. The chiefe vertue thereof bindeth and staun∣cheth. And pouder thereof tempered with the white of an Egge, stancheth bléeding at the nose: and helpeth against swelling of the féete, and against the gowte, if it be laide in a plaistre thereto, as it is said in Lapidario. Of Tartaro. chap. 99. TArtarum is Wine drastes, and lyke to a soft stone, cleaning harde to the sides of the tunnes. Whose kinde is hot and drie in the third degrée, and is good a∣gainst scab and scall, and vncleannesse of the head: and it hath vertue to make thin, to wast, to cleanse, and to laxe, as it is said in Plat. Of Vitro. chap. 100. GLasse (as Auicen sayeth) is among stones, as a foole among men. For it taketh al manner of colour and painting, and is called Vitrum, as Isi. saith. For by his vertue he is bright and cleere, & light shining, there through all that is contei∣ned inwarde in other mettalles and in veines of earth is hid. In glasse all maner licour is séene outward such as it is wt∣in, & is shewed as it were to closed eien, that looke thereon, as Isidore saith. And glasse was first found beside Tholomei∣da, in the cliffe beside the riuer that is cal∣led Vellus, that springth out of the foote of mount Carmelus, at which shipmen a∣riued. For vpon the grauell of that riuer shipmen made fire of clots medled with bright grauell, & thereof ran streames of new licour, that was the beginning of glasse, as Isi. saith. Now glasse is made of ashes of trées and of hearbs, with strong blast of fire, with the which it is medled, now glasse, now brasse, & now both, & so turneth into glasse. When glasse is molt in the furnaice & perfectly cleansed, then it taketh purenesse, brightnesse, & cléernesse. Glasse is died with all manner of colour, so yt it followeth Iacinctus, Smaragdus, & other precious stones in colour & bright∣nesse. Also it is so pliant that it taketh a∣none diuers and contrary shapes by blast of the Glasier, & is sometime beaten, and sometime grauen, as siluer, as Isid. saith: and no matter is more apt to make mir∣rours then is glasse, nor to receiue pain∣ting. But most workmanship is in white glasse, yt is next to Christal in colour. For it is often chosen before siluer & golde to drinke in as Isi. saith. Also there he saith, yt the stone Obseanus is reckoned among kind of glasse. And this stone is somtime greene, & sometime blacke, & is cléere and bright. And is called Specularis, and is with fatly sight. Of this stone many men make precious stones, as Isidore sayth. And all maner glasse hath this property, that it is most pliant, while it is melting hot and softe, and most brittle when it is colde and hard. And if it be broken, it may not he amended without melting a∣gaine. But long time passed, there was one that made glasse pliant, which might be amended and wrought with an ham∣mer, as Isidore saith. And brought a Ui∣ole made of such Glasse before Tiberi∣us the Emperour, and threwe it downe on the ground, and was not broken, but bended and folded. And he made it right and amended it with an hammer. Then the Emperour commaunded to smite off his head anone, least that his craft were knowen. For then Golde shoulde be no better then fen, & all other mettall should be little worth, for certaine if glasen ves∣sels were not brittle, they shoulde be ac∣coūted of more value thē vessels of gold, as Isid. saith. Then glasse is cleane and pure, and specially bright & cléere. And I∣mages & shadowes be séene therein, and
is pliaunt when it is melting hotte, and brittle when it is colde and harde. And receiueth all colours, and followeth pre∣cious stones more in coulour then in va∣lue, and cleanseth away superfluitie and filth as Auicen sayth. Pouder thereof cleanseth the téeth, & doth away weue of the eyen, and helpeth greatly against the stone of the bledder and of the reines, if it bée dronken with Wine, as Auicen saith. Additio.(But the pouder of glasse must bée very fine, else will it frette a sunder the guts and sodeinly kill the patient, for the pouder made of glasse mixed in But∣ter, writ and Mice, it maye as soon kill men, take some other medicine) Of Ydaci. cap. 101. YDachites is a precious stone of redde coulour, and round in shape. And hath another stone within him, and soundeth by tinking thereof. Neuerthelesse wise men meane, that tinkling is not the in∣ner stone, but some spirit that is within, as Dioscorides saith: This stone swea∣teth water, so that it séemeth that it con∣teineth a manner well spring within it selfe. Therefore some men tell, that this is the stone that is called Enidros. Looke before in the same booke. Of Yrachite. cap. 102. YRachites is a stone, the man that bea∣reth it shall not be bit wish any flies, neither stung with Bées, as Dioseorides saith. And so men wéene, that it helpeth against venim. (Additiō.That is when he can get such a stone, that hath such a vertue.) Of Zimiech. chap. 103. ZImiech is a stone or veine of the earth, whereof Lapis Lazurij is made; as it is salde in Lapidarie. The more lyker this stone is to the coulour of heauen, the better it is, and hath small péeces, as it were of golde medled there∣on. Those that be whitest be most ear∣thie, and therefore they be not so preci∣ous. These may be long kepte without corruption: and help against many euils, and against sounding, that commeth of melancholike fumositie, if they be giuen in due manner to ye patient. It shal neuer be giuen without it be ground ful final, & oft washed ful cleane. And the signe of perfect washing thereof is, if the water that it is washed in, bee little or naught died. This stone cleanseth & looseth won∣derfully the quarteine, and shal not be gi∣uen with the decostion. For then it shuld fall to the bottome, but after or before, & that, with whey, as Dioseoriders saith, as it is said in Plat. And as Cerusa is made of plates of yron: so is Lazurum made of plates of siluer with vineger. Oft ye stone Lazurius is founde among siluer oare, & among gold oare. And oft in the veines of Lazarius be found Saphires, Iacincts, and other such bliew stones. Of Zingutte. cap. 194. ZInguttes is a stone with glassie colour, if it be borne about ye necke, it helpeth against Victipolā. And stancheth bloud, and putteth off rauing and phrensie. And if it be held to a trée that burneth, it quen∣cheth the flame therof as Dioscor. saith. (Additiō.There are many mo stones, whose hidden vertues are vnknowne for want of experiēce, which grow in fishes, beasts, birds, & men, as the stone in the Crabs head, the stone that groweth in ye Snaile, and the stone called Bulgoldo, sorth of a beast in Indes, and there are good a∣gainst all posons, the stone that growes in the maw of an Oxe; or in the gall, the stone that is dred in the kindness of a man, and all these serue to great and se∣cret vses.) FINIS LIBRI XV.
¶INCIPIT LIBER XVII. DE ARBORIBOS ET HERBIS. AFter that by Gods grace and his helpe, this booke & treatise is now ended, in which is openly shewed ye propertyes of those things that be endered in the earth within, as of precious stones and mettall, and other things that be gende∣red in veines of the earth: Now we shal shortly speake and treate of such things as grow vpon the earth by the helpe of God. As of ye properties of trées, hearbs, fruits, and seeds, & of mores & rootes. But first we shall speake onelye of trées and hearbs, of whō mention is made by name in holy writ, in Text or in Glose, after the forme of the A. B. C. Of a Tree. chap. 1. A Trée is called Arbor, and hath that name of Aruis, fieldes. For it clea∣ueth to the earth, and roots be fast there∣in, as an hearbe doth, as Isidor. sayth li. 16. ca. 5. A tree & an hearb commeth foorth in one manner, & after one way. For of one commeth the other. For if thou so∣west the séede of a tree, first it sheweth & wringeth forth as an hearbe, and is then confect, and riseth and tourneth into the kinde of a trée. And in space of short time, that ye seemed an hearb, turneth in∣to a tender and young Trée, and is then called Arbusta, as it were the shafte of a tree. For the place wherein trées grow is called Arbustum, and where Wil∣lowes growe is called Salictum, as Isi∣dore sayth.Of ye re∣freshing causes, by yt which trees and drie fruit In libro. de Vegitabilibus Arist. setteth these propertyes of trées and of plants, and sayth that in Trées, and in plants is lyfe and vertue, lyke as in beasts; but diuerslye. For in plantes life is hidden, and in beastes it is open∣ly knowne, perfect and complete. For trées mooue not from place to place. as beastes doe, nor chaunge appetite and liking, nor seeieth sorrowe, though some philosophers meane other trise, as Ana∣agoras & other, that Aristotle reprooueth. In plants is life vegitatiue, and thereby humour is drawne to saue and to ad the trée or plant, but therin is no soule of fée∣ling, and so it sorroweth not when it is bewen or cut, nor hath any seeling when it is nourished & fed, nor it waketh not, nor sleepeth, nor it breedeth not in nor out, nor hath other conditions, that be∣long to the soule of feeling. Nor a Tree gendereth not, nor is gendered by med∣ling of male and female. But a tree hath vertue of it selfe of seeding, and maye thereby bring forth another like it selfe in kinde. But this might and vertue worketh not in deede, but by some out∣ward help: as by help of times of ye yere. Winter needeth to gather together ye se∣minal humour: Springing time needeth to bring out the humour. For then is not great colde, freesing nor thrusting out∣ward, neither strong heat burning ye seed, nor corrupting it. Also the Sun needeth to resolue & temper the parts therof, that were before congealed by cold. And heat cōmeth in & departeth ye humour seminal from ye humour yt nourisheth & scedeth. Also earth is more needfull to trees and hearbs, then to other things ye gender: for yt well of feeding of a tree is of earth, as the Sun is well of generation therof, as of the cause that worketh Therfore in li. de Plantis Aristotle sayth that the earth is mother, and the Sun father of trees and of hearbes. For the earth fredeth, as the mother, and the Sunne worketh as the father. In Trees and Plantes, some men take beede of generation, of feeding and nourishing, of increasing, and of the rootes, yearelye renoua∣tion,
and séene no purgation by vrine nor by dirt, suppose therefore that trées bée more perfect then beasts. But Aristotle reprooueth this, and saith, That a trée is bound to the earth, and hath no moouing of it selfe, nor of the whole, nor of partes thereof: Neither hath any determinate shape in the partes thereof, so that the partes thereof be diuerse, and ordeined to diuerse offices and dooing by diuerse formes and shapes: as the eie of a beast for to see, & the care for to heare, nor hath a perfect soule, but a part of a parte of a soule, that is a soule vegitatiue. But a beast hath mo workings and more noble then a plant. A trée is diuers in substance, in vertue, and in working. For as Aristotle saith, lib. de Vegitabilibus. cap. 2. Some trées haue Gum, and Rosen, and the cause is, for passing much humour is not all defi∣ed of heate, neither touneth all into fée∣ding of the trée, but it is put outwarde, and is there cooled with cold aire that is thereabout. Also some trées haue knots, by meanes of which the partes gende∣red some after some, be bound togethers. Also they haue veines, that is chinkes: in the which kinde moisture is kepte, and passeth thereby from the earth into all the partes about. And haue also Pith in them, in the which the humour is sodde and defiaed before that it passe into the substaunce of leaues, of fruite, boughes, and twigges, as he saith. And hath rindes without to defend the trées within. For as the skinne doth in the body of a beast, so the rinde doth to the body of a trée, as Isidore saith. Also generally, as Aristotle saith, a trée taketh soone fire and light: and hath the name Lignum, as Isid. saith; for it taketh soone fire and light. And is called Lychius, a wéeke, for it giueth light to them that be present. Also the shafte of a trée that stretcheth from the roote vp to the toppe, is properly called Lignum, and hath somewhat within, as the pith, and thereof kinde hath succone when moy∣sture of féeding and nourishing fayleth without, as it fareth in feeding of a beast, when féeding and nourishing faileth in the members, then kinde hath succour of the bloud that is in the veines, as sayth expresly Auicen and Isidore also. Also a Trée hath, somewhat that belongeth thereto outwarde, as the rinde, boughes, leaues, twigges, blossomes, flowres, and fruite, and the toppe aboue, as Aristotle sayth there. A trée hath the rinde to saue and to kéepe all that is within, boughes, and twigs to spread vp and about, leaues to saue and to defend fruite, that is ten∣der, from harme and griefes, and hath fruite to saue and multiplye the kinde, and hath a round toppe in complement thereof. And hath figure and shape as a piller commonly all rounde, and that is, as Albumasar saith, for euen spreading of humour into all the partes about, and for euen working of heate, that ma∣keth digestion in all the partes about, and yet euery trée and plant hath a roote, and in the root many manner knots and strings, and the roote is in stéede of the mouth. By the roote humour is drawen so féed all the trée, and knots and strings be in stéede of sinewes, and binde toge∣ther the parts that be conteined. Also a trée hath super fluitie of parts, that be not kinde partes of office, nor néedfull to the being of the trée: but such partes be in a trée, as haire and nayles in the body. And therefore leaues & fruit tall of trées, by reason of withdrawing of humour, as haire falleth of beasts. For when the humour of féeding is scarce, then kinde withdraweth it from ye parts that be not néedfull, for it should not faile in the partes that bée néedfull. There∣fore generally leaues fall off Trées in winter time, yet neuerthelesse they abide in some trées, as in bore, & such other, ey∣ther for plenty of humour, or gleaminesse of humour, or for sadnesse and soundnes of the trée, for Trées with thinne sub∣staunce and not harde, but full of hoales and pores, loose their liues, namely, when the humour of féeding is thinne and scarce. Also trées be diuers in multitude of parts, and in greatnesse and in smalnesse, and in strength and in féeblenesse. And the cause is, for in some great trées, humour is milkie, as it fareth in figge trées. And such humour is able to spread himselfe in length & in breadth. In some trées the
humour is gleamie, and may not spread himselfe, for the partes cleene together, as it fareth in Pech Trées. And this is the cause of witnesse & scarcitie of parts of Trées, hearbes, and grasse. But such gleaming is not cause of féeblenesse in Trees, hearbes, & grasse, but of ye humour be too scarce, or the heate vnsufficient and vnperfect. Also in some Trées the hu∣mour, is sharpe and of hot and of drye complection, and yt is  of strength and of might: hot things is lyght & sub∣till, and chirleth, and therefore such hu∣mour spredeth, & the trée th in great quantity. Also in partes of Trées, men take hée of coutinesse in quantity, & lyke∣nesse, for a qualitie in  and lyke∣nesse in shape, commeth of pleiny of mat∣ter, with euennesse of heare ye worketh: and ye  of contrary cause. In the same wise, men take hee in trees of softnesse and adnesse, the softnes com∣meth of head yt is not sufficient to make the humour hard and sadde. Also Trées, hearbes, & grasse, bée aduerse in the man∣ner of fruit bering: for some trées, as Aristotle saith. Ware fruit aboue ye leaues, and yt is for strength of the fruite, and néedeth of heat of the Sunne to make di∣gestion in ye humour therof. Some beare fruit vnder the leaues, and that for fée∣blenesse of the fruite, least the fruite bée corrupt with greate heate or colde. And some fruite hangeth by a stalke, and the cause thereof is, by reason of vnmightye humour, and lmightie heate, yt maye no holde the fruit outwarde. And ge∣nerally euerye Trée hath a moyst roote, yt is meane betwéene the Trée and the earth, of which earth the Trée hath fée∣ding and nourishing. Therefore the Gréekes call the roote the life of the trée. For it bringeth lyfe thereto, and hath a stocke or a shafte yt stretcheth vpwarde, by helpe of the roote. And yt is needfull, as Albumasar sayth, to susteine the body thereof. Therefore it is lykened to the stature of the bodie of a beast that bea∣reth all the limmes and members. And so that stocke is a steadfast foundament of the Trée, and holdeth vp the boughes and fruites thereof. Also in a harde Tree is softe pith. And Aristotle sayeth, some men call the pith the mother of the Tree. For therein the seminall humour of the Tree is fed, as a childe in the mother. And some men cast it the guts of the tree, saw therein the pured féeding is depar∣ted from the vnpure as in the guts of a beast. And some men call it the heart of the Tree: For thereof commeth moo∣uing of life, as life of feeling commeth of the heart of euery beast. Also euery Trée hath a rind to make it steadfast and sad, and the rind beareth off small humour, drawen outwarde and dried with heate of the aire, as the Teée within breedeth of great humour and drie essencially, and moist accidentally, as Aristotle saith, and Albumasar also. And some Trees and hearbes growe in Croftes and in Gardeines, and bee ame. Trees and hearbs. And some grow elsewhere, and be called wilde Trées & hearbs. And Trées & hearbes of gardeins should be wild, if they were not kept and hared and shred, as Aristotle saith. And some such Trées beare doth fruite and Oyles because of vrictuous human and yrle that is sufficient, and some beare none for default of such humour. And in some trees ye leaues fall soone, by rea∣son of thin humour and not farlye ye bri∣eth soone: In some is the contrarye, for the cause is contrary. Also as Trees and hearbes be diuerse in quantitye, so they be in fairnesse and soulenesse. For they be both fayre for euennesse of matter, and for faire ordeining and setting of partes, and for sufficient heate yt worketh, and stretcheth in right and due disposition of kind. Foulenesse commeth of the contra∣ry, both in Trées and in hearbs. Also they be diuerse in fruit, good and euill: and yt is for more or lesse sweetnesse of kinde humour, or for the heate yt worketh hath lesse or more due proportion to the mat∣ter, and to the humour materiall. Also Aristotle sayth there, that wilde Trées and plants beare more fruit then Trees & hearbes of gardeins: and Albu∣masar saith, that that is for more plentye of humour that is little fattye and glea∣mie, and soone diuided and departed, and springeth out and tourneth into kinde of fruits. But fruit of gardeins is better
then fruit of wild trées, as Arist. sayeth. Albumasar saith, that the cause is plenty of more humour, fattie airie, and swéet, yt is perfect in the matter of fruit of gar∣deins. Also Trées and hearbes be diues by diuersitie of places that they growe in. For some growe in drye place, and they be losse in quantity for defeit of hu∣mour, & some in moist place amōg riuers and ponds, and by the sea side; and ofte such be great in quantitye. But Trées yt grow by strond of salt, water, growe not fast, for much sand and grauell and dry∣nesse of ye humour that is drawne. But beside the red sea this sayleth, as Ari∣stotle sayth, where be great Trées, and that is by reason of much humour and greate heate, as Albumasar sayeth. Also they be diuers in leaues and in variation of flowres: for some haue sharpe leaues & yt is by reason of mastry of earth & of dri∣nes, & some haue smooth leaues, for euen∣nesse of moisture of water, & due proporti∣on of heat, some haue clouen and ragged leaues & broad, as the vine, and yt is for mastry of earth, & priuation of gleamye matter, & vneuennes of heat, yt stretcheth not the matter euenlye all about. For in such plants the fatty humour & gleamye passeth into the matter of fruit, & watrye humour and earthie into the matter of leaues, as Albumasar saith. Also Trées & hearbs be diuerse in figure & shape of the vttermost partes. For in some the vt∣termost partes be shapen toppewise, or prickewise and sharpe. As it sareth in thornes, therein heate draweth the most thinne humour swiftly to the vttermost parts, & drieth it, and maketh it sharpe, & ioyneth it with the stock and the roote, as Albumasar sayth: a contrary shape com∣meth of contrary cause. And this same is séene in fruit of Trées, as Arist. sayth. For fruite is of diuerse shape, and is not all cornered, neither all straight on a straight line, but some fruit is round for euennesse of matter of humour, & for euen working of the vertue yt worketh, & of heate, by the which working the partes of matter is euen stretched and spread from ye middle to the roundnesse about, & cornered shape commeth of contrarye cause. Also they be diuers in coulour and how for both fruit and flowers boughs, and twigges be diuerse in trées s Ari∣stotle saith. Of cold humour, earthie, and melancholike, cōmeth blacknesse in fruit, and foule coulour, and of hot humour commeth red colour, & so of other, as Al∣bumasar sayth. In all the foresayde doo∣ing diuersitie of sauour is gendred in di∣uersitie of humour, that hath the ma∣stry, and of heat that worketh digestion and disposition in the substaunce. Also trées and hearbes be diuerse in riping of fruit. For in some trées & hearbes fruite ripeth soone, as Aristotle saith: as Mul∣beries and Cheries, and other such, and that is for the heate is strong and migh∣tie to woorke in the moysture, & in make the fruit ripe swiftly and soone. For ye hu∣mour is obedient, & letteth not the wor∣king of heat that maketh digestion, and some fruit ripeth late for groseness of hu∣mour, watrie, & vnobedienth and for un∣might of heate that worketh digestion. And that falleth most in wilde Trees. And for ye same cause some trée burgen soone, and some saie. And leaues spring soone by reason of much watrye humour vndigested, and not fattie, that breaketh out soone is the vtter parts of trées or of hearbes: And of contrary cause commeth the contrarie. Of Arbore aromatica. Chap. 2. A Trée of good sauour hath sometime the good smell in the rinde; and some∣time in the flowre, and sometime in the fruite, as it saueth in Sinamom, that is a rinde, and the Mare is the flowre, and the Nutmeg is the fruite. And Al∣bumasar sayeth, that the cause of good smell is dry and earthie, and subtill, med∣led with subtill watrye matter, and as yt mastrie hath more or lesse in one part of the Trée, that parte smelleth better then another, & some Trée smelleth well in euerye part thereof, as it foreth of the Trée Balsamus. All the partes thereof hath good sauour, as it shall be shewed héereafter among trées and hearbes with good sauour. Some growe and haue in themselues matter seminall, and come
forth by ouenable medling of elements. And some bée multiplied by planting, and of more and rootes, or stocke, and séedes. And some haue multiplication by grafting of stockes, as Albumasar sayth. Among all graffing of Trées, the best is, when the graffe and the stocke be lyke, as Aristotle saith, and this hath double vnderstanding, eyther plantes of one ile kinde, as if a figge graffe be graf∣ted on a Figge trée, and Wine on Wine stocke, or else of those trées that haue hu∣mious proportionall and according ey∣ther to other, so that the humour of that one be according to nourish, and to féde that other, as when a Peare is graf∣fed on an Apple trée, and againe warde. And it is to wit, that a graffe that is gras∣sed on a stocke, tourneth and chaungeth the vertue and qualitie of the stocke into his whe vertue and qualitie. And if an Oliue be graffed on a stocke of Bete, the vertue of the Oliue commeth downe in the stocke of Bete, & maketh it hard, and maketh it dure a certeine time. And at last it draweth the humour to himselfe, & tourneth and chaungeth the stocke into his owne likenesse and kinde, as Albu∣masar saith; super finem primi lib. And he saith there, yt lightlye good trées come not of euill séede, nor of good séede, or of a good root euill trées: though the contrary be oft séene among beastes. Albumasar sayth, that that is, for a trée is a fast in the earth, and taketh nourishing of the earth in one wise, and beasts doe not so, for di∣uerse complection and contrary appetite. Therefore it is otherwise to beasts then in hearbes and in trées. Also it is so of all kinde of trées that by tilling and crafte wilde trées may be turned and chaunged into the kinde of trées of gardeines. And Aristotle setteth ensample therof, & saith, that by crafte of tilling, bitter Almonde trees bée made swéete and sauoury, and so a Pomgranard is made mene sowre. Also be sayth, that a trée with thick rinde is made soone barren, and that is for de∣fault of fattie humour, that is the matter of fruite, or else for the hardnesse of the rinde, that letteth the euaporation of that humour, that is noyful in a trée, and he sayth, that if a roote of a tree be slitted and cloue, and a stone put in the cliffe, the tree shall beare fruite againe. And Albu∣masar telleth the cause, and saith, yt at this sleft, the said noifull humour passeth out, and then heat of the Sunne and of ye aire about, commeth and wasteth the corrupt humour. Also there it is said, ye Almondes and pomgranards leaue their malice by craft of tilling. For Pomgranards amende, if they be dunged with swines dirt, & wa∣tred with fresh water. And Albumasar telleth ye cause, and sayth, ye heat and dry∣nesse of such dung, abateth superfluity of water in Pomgranards, but teast passing heats and drinesse, turneth the fruite into bitternesse, it is good to put thereto fresh water, to temper the mastry of heat & of drinesse. Also if nailes be pight in an Almond tree, graines of gum come thereof, and that long time, and superfluity of water that letteth the breeding of vntuous hu∣mour that is the matter of fruit. And so thereby ye tree is altered from his malice as Albumasar saith: And there it is said, yt by tilling, wilde trees and hearbes ta∣keth kind of trees and of hearbs of gar∣deines, and beare well fruite. To make a wild tree change from his mallice into goodnesse, place and trauaile in tilling hel∣peth most, and namely time of the yeare, in the which it is set and planted, as A∣ristotle saith, and he setteth ensample of Baleno, that is Henbane seede,Bolemis in the old coppie. for that that groweth in Persia is venimous: & it is good to eat, if it be brought and set in Aegypt, or in Ierusalem. And ye com∣meth, as Albumasar saith, for ye tēperate place bringeth it out of vntemperatnes, & maketh it good to eate. Also time helpeth much such a chaunging. For Aristotle saith, trees yt neede to be set, be most set in springing time, and yt for temperate heate and moysture, ye comforteth heate and moisture in trees and in hearbes. In winter be few set, and yt for passing colde the moysture; and also in Haruest for colde and drynesse, and least in Sum∣mer at the rising of the Starre Cani∣cula, and that for passing heate and drynesse that consumeth and washeth kinde moysture in hearbes and in trees,
and namely in the roote. In Aegipt trées be set once in a yere, when the drinesse of the land is tempred with flowing of the riuer Nilus, as A∣ristotle saith, and Albumasar, also. Also there it is sayde, that in Trées growe di∣uerse twigges and braunches. For some spring of the roote, and some of the stock, and some by the grounde, and some in the boughes on high at the toppe, and some in the middle. And the cause of this diuerse springing, is diuers humour watrye and light, thinne, and not vrt∣ous, that is the matter of leaues, and is not like plenteous in all Trées, and heat worketh diuersly in Trées. And therfore of that humour springeth diuerse twigs and braunches. Also some beareth fruite once a yeare, and some ofter. But the last fruite ripeth not, but abideth rawe and greene, & not ripe, for heate may not ripe such fruit because that winter is nigh. The common vse is most to beare fruit perfectly once a yeere, for once a yere feed is gathered, and once heate maye spread humour to the vtter partes of the Trée, and tourne it into fruit, and maketh the fruit perfect and ripe. Also some Trées bée fertile long time, for much heate and fattye humour, as it fareth in the figge Trée, and some bea∣reth one yere, and rest another, as the O∣liue. The cause therof is, for in the second yeere ye tree is nourished, and the hu∣mour restored. For in the first yéere so much humour tourneth into kinde of fruit, yt the seconde yeare néedeth to re∣store the humour, though it beare many boughs in restoring time, yet it beareth but little fruit yt time. Also some Trées bée more fruitfull in youth then in age, for they haue more heate and humour in youth then in age. Some againewarde beare more fruit in age then in youth. And ye reason héereof is, as Albumasar saith, for in youth is more moisture ther∣in, then kinde heate may defie, and so it is inobedient vnto heate: but in age is lesse, and so it is obedient to the heate di∣gestiue, as it fareth in Almonds, in pires and in Peares, as Aristotle laieth an en∣sample there. Also Aristotle saith, that both wilde Trées and Trées of gardeins he diuers, for some bée male, and some bée female. For the male Trée is more thick, hard, sadde, and drye, and hath ones boughes then the female and the fruite therof is more shorte and ripeth better, and the leaues hée diuerse, and the grasses also and the cause of all this, as Albumasar saith; is, for in the male Trées is more heate and drynesse, then i the female, that bindeth the partes of the male trées fast and sadly together, and maketh the Trée more thicke and sadde. As strong heate multiplyeth humours and stretch∣eth and spreadeth into manye partes, and maketh the Trée more thicke of boughs, so greate drinesse wasteth moisture; and maketh the Trée more drye. Also in a male trée sad veines & straight letteth much humour to passe to one place of the Trée, that may tourne into sub∣staunce of fruite. Therefore the fruite of a male Trée is short. Also the leaues of male and female be diuerse, for the leaues of the male be short; & lesse in quantitye, & more narrowe for mastrie of drinesse, also ye male hath harder grasses then the female, & the reason of that is, for in the female is more moisture then in ye male. And Aristotle saith, that if leaues or the pouder of leaues, or the rinde of a male Palme be put to the leaues of the female, so yt they cleane togethers, the fruite of the female shall be the sooner ripe. For it letteth the falling of the leaues, and of fruit, vntil the digestion be complete and the reason héereof is, as Album. sayeth, because the male Palme increaseth heate in the female, & that by meane of the aire that cōmeth from ye male to the female, & thereby ye heate of the female is excited to worke digestion, the which Aristotle calleth Pepensim. lib. 4. Metheororum. And Aristotle saith, that ye male and fe∣male be knowen by burgening & spring∣ing. For the male burgeneth and spring∣eth sooner and swifter then the female, & that is by reason of most perfect heate, and they bée knowen by smell, for the male smelleth more then the female: for more small and subtill smoak is resolued of the male then of the female. Also A∣ristotle saith, that the wind beareth smel
of the male to the female, and so the fruit ripeth the sooner together, for the partes of the fruit of the female cleane together til it be ripe, when the leaues of the male be taken in the female. Albertus saith, yt if the leaues of the male Palme bée put to the leaues of the female, they cleane so together, that vnneth they maye be de∣parted a sunder, without cutting or car∣ning. Also Aristotle saith, that wild figtrées helpe figge trées of gardeines if they bee set right afore them. For the wilde bée more hot & dry then the other, and there∣fore they excite heate, and comfort those of gardeins. Also the humour of a wilde figge trée, resolued and laid to the root of a figge trée of gardeines, comforteth and helpeth the fig trée of the gardeine. And Arist. saith, that the Pomegranard help∣eth and comforteth Oliues, if it be plan∣ted therewith. These properties of trées we take of Aristotles words, lib. primo de Vegitabilibus, and of Albertus Glo. that translated and expounded the same. Libr. 18. de Animalibus Aristotle saith, that all trées that beare fruit euery yere, be made flowe. All trées (he sayth) that beare too much fruit, be soone dry, when ye féeding turneth into séed, that is, when ye humour that shuld nourish and féed tur∣neth into matter seminal. Other notable and noble properties of trées & of hearbs, we may take out of the wordes of Ari∣stotle & of Albertus, li. 2. Vegitabilium, where it is said, that a trée hath thrée ver∣tues. For it hath fastening of the earth, and ioyning and onng of the water, and steadfastnesse of partes together, and sad∣nesse of the fire, and stretching and sprea∣ding and bearing & riping of fruit, of ayre & of fire. For a watry thing is not fast∣ned, neither holden togethers without heate of fire, and it is shewed there in A∣ristotles ensample. For burnt tile is not ioyned nor fastned to holde together without fire, the wast∣eth the watrye partes, and ioyneth and hardneth the earthly parts. A trée hath softnesse and poores of Aire, of Water, and fire together, and might to grow and to waxe of the water. For a thing yt is vtterlye harde and sadde, may not waxe more and more, as Aristotle saith there. Therefore the greatest trée sinketh not in water, though it be heauie: where a little golde and small stones sinke anon. And that is for a trée with many hoales and pores hath much aire within the pores: And therefore it fléeteth aboue the water. But trées that be most sad and fast, as Ebenus, and such other like, sink∣eth in water sodeinly to the grounde, as Aristotle sayth there. It is also sayde, that the ayre is passed out of the blacke Ebenus, and therefore it sinketh in wa∣ter. The other that is pory and vnctuous séteth aboue the water, for it hath much aire. And the water beareth it vp by kinde, as it fareth of leaues & feathers & of all vnctuous things. For as Aristotle sayth, it is the propertie of the water to beare vp substaunce of ayre, and to lette heauy things sinke. Therfore things that be softe and full of holes, to take in aire, fléete on the water. And things that bée sound and sad, sink down to the ground. Also earthie vapours and watry, fastned and congealed with heate of the Sunne by matter of hearbes and of trées, which being medled with hot things and fixye, and by vertue of the starres, taketh per∣fect shape & forme of hearbs and of trées touching séed and fruit. Also heate closed in the humour, that is coagulate, draw∣eth fresh water to féeding and nourishing of the trée. And the vtter heat of the Sun helpeth thereto. For working of vtter heat of it selfe maketh digestion in the kinde humour in the same place, and turneth it into a trée, and so as Aristotle sayth, in mountains for the ground is so swéete, and concey∣ueth swéete humours, therefore therein trées springeth, and fruit ripeth soone. For mountaines draweth to them swéet humours. And the small and cléere ayre helpeth both in drawing and in digesti∣on, and the humour tourneth soone into substaunce of a trée, as Aristotle sayeth. And there it is sayd, that sometime colde aire driueth the heat into the earth, and then the partes thereof be gathered with moisture of water. And by the heat that is driuen into the earth by cold, the va∣pour that is so coagulat turneth into the
substaunce of a Trée, and by strength of heat the place cleaueth & chinneth, and so thereout springeth ye hearbs or trées. Al∣so sometime aire medled with water and wt earth in ye bottome of water, runneth together and is sad, and by doing of ter∣minate heate, & digesting ye mixed thing consused, the plant is gendered. As it fareth in ye hearbe yt is called Heniphar,In ye olde coppye this hearbe is named Mēphat. and in other small hearbes and grasse, yt are wont to growe in water. And the leaues therof couereth ye water, & though these hearbes and grasse grow and spred not full wide, yet they growe vpwarde, for small aire and fresh water yt beareth them vpward, and for sadnesse of ye earth and grounde yt susteineth the rootes. And of the grounde the hearbe hath gréene∣nesse in the roote, and susteining of ye stalke in the rearing thereof. And Aristotle sayth; yt in places essen∣tially cold, and accidentally hot, as those in which hot water runneth oft times, springeth a plant. For heate of ye wa∣ter draweth ye colde humour vpwarde aboue ye earth to the place of meddeling. And so of ye aire and of the earthlye va∣pour, with watrye humour, by ye heate of ye water and of the starres, the sub∣stannce of a plant is gendered. But yt falleth not, but in long time, as Aristo∣tle sayth, by reason of accidentall heate, yt is not according to the gendring of such a plant. And Aristotle sayth there, that hearbes that men eate, growe better in plaine places and in high, & in hot places, then in cōtrary places therto, for in plain places and euen is much moysture, and namely when the ayre is swéete and temperate. And so it is in right high pla∣ces, for there is cleane and pure aire, and much swéete humour, and yt is by rea∣son of spoungings and holes yt draweth and receiueth the swéete humour. And therefore oft in mountaines groweth more fee & better then in valleys. For in valleys is harde ming of the ayre. And so of concussion of the aire, thicke vapour rotteth fall soone, and so there is euill digestion. And thereof it commeth, yt there is found salt humours, as Alber∣tus saith. And salt water is more heauie then fresh, as it is shewed in Aristotle. Ensample, where he saith, yt an Egge sin∣keth anon in fresh water, and swimmeth in salt water. For salt water is earthie, & thicke, and beareth vp ye heauinesse and weight of ye Egge. Therefore fresh wa∣ter is more easilye drawen to high pla∣ces then salt water. For fresh water is pure, thinne, light, and cléere: and Ari∣stotle saith, that in fast claye and tough, and fattye, plantes growe soone. For such claye is soone chaunged and made fattye, as Albumasar sayth: and farther, if a plant shall be durable, it néedeth yt it haue humour well digested & fattie. For plants yt haue humour not well digested, wither soone in greate cold: and so a Canstock dureth not ouer thrée yere, but if men grasse theron a plant, and ye kinde of ye graffe goeth into ye stalke, and there∣of is made good digestion, & turneth into ye kinde of yt grasse, it dureth long time: also somtime an hearb groweth out of an hard stone, as Ari. saith, for aire closed in a stone, busieth to passe vpward, but whē it findeth no frée passage for hardnesse of ye stone, then it mooueth to ye partes of ye stone, and of his owne stirring it war∣meth, & when it is once hot, it draweth vpwarde the humour that remayneth in ye stone, and vapour with ye humour, with a litle resolution of partes of the stone goeth out: and of yt vapour and hu∣mour issued out of ye stone, sometime springeth an hearbe by helpe of heat of ye Sunne, and helpeth ye aire yt was before hot, and maketh digestion of ye humour yt issued out of ye stone, and turneth it in∣to ye kinde and substaunce of an hearbe or a Trée, but such an hearbe or a trée du∣reth not long, but it be closed wt earth, or watred with fresh water, and comfor∣ted with temperate aire, and that for scarcitie of humour. And Aristotle saith, yt a plant springeth the sooner if it be nigh the Sunne, that is to vnderstand, towarde the East, and that is because of sufficient heate, and springeth later toward the West, & that is, for it is farre from heate. And Albu∣masar saith there, that euery hearb or trée is kept by temperate weather. For ouer much moisture stoppeth the pores and wayes, by the which féeding and nou∣rishing
shoulde come vpwarde to make the trée stretch and spread. Also to much driues maketh the poores shrinke, so that nourishing may not passe to féede & no∣rish the trée. And Aristotle saith, that e∣uery hearb and trée néedeth foure things. Certaine seede, perfect and ripe in his owne kinde, and saued without rotting, and couenable ground to the generation of the plant, and moderate water, that is to vnderstand temperate humour, and meanly temperate aire. For as Albu∣masar saieth, if the aire be too hot, than kinde heate passeth away by the poores, which be opened: and if the aire be too colde, it shall stiffle the plant. The first twaine néede to generation of the plant, and the other twaine to féeding and pre∣seruation thereof. Also medicinall spice∣rie and plants that grow in mountains, be lesse liking to eating and their fruits is more harde to digesting, and that is for the vehement coagulation by ye heat that worketh in the moysture: & there∣fore such fruite nourisheth not much as Aristotle saith. For Albumasar sayeth, the more medicinable a plant is, ye lesse it nourisheth. Also in places that be farre from the Sunne, grow not many plants, nor ther is no great bréeding of beastes in such places as Aristotle saith: And the cause is as Album. saith, for they yt be straight vnder the euen North starre, haue conti∣nually halfe the year daye, and halfe the yeare night. Therefore plantes and beastes breede there but seldome: for if may not be in Summer for continuall heate, neither in Winter for continuall colde. Therefore as Aristotle saith: a plant that springeth there, hath no ver∣tue, nor leaues, nor fruite, and that is, for default of heate in one time of the yeare, and for too much colde, in another time of ye yere. And Aristotle saith, that a plant with many prickes, hath much fattie humour, and when it moueth it selfe by his owne heate, with helpe of heate of the starres, it is defied and tour∣ned into substaunce of the graffe that is graffed therein: and heate of life in the plant maketh that digestion with tem∣perate vtter heat, and the plant groweth small & stretcheth vpward, & so a plant with many prickes hath this propertie, that a graffe of other kind may be graf∣fed therein: and yt is as Albuma. saith, for it hath much vnctuous humour dra∣wen by outward heate, and so fastened togethers, and put out by inward heate, in many places, so that the ouer part of that humor is small, and thin, and pear∣cing, when it commeth vpward in the stock, wherby it may open many waies and pores in the grasse, and enter therin and incorporate and consolidate ye graffe to the neather stocke: and a graffe yt is graffed in ye nether stock, changeth & tur∣neth the stock into ye kinde of ye graffe, and not againward. And the cause is, as Albuma. saith, for the stocke comforteth the graffe with the humour, & heate that ascendeth thereto, & then the graffe defi∣eth the humour and tourneth it into his owne kinde, and after sendeth his owne vertue into the nether stocke, and altreth the stocke, yt it is graffed in, and conuer∣teth the stocke into his owne vertue and kinde. Also as Ari. saith, in fiue maner of wise, a plant is gēdred & commeth forth: of séede, of rooting, of humour of water, of planting, and of graffes of one into a∣nother. Also Aristotle sayth, some hearbes & trées beare fruite rather than leaues, as those trées that haue much fattie humor that is matter of fruite: and when the humour is defied with kinde heate and with heat of the Sunne, it turneth into fruite and ripeth anone: and the abun∣daunce of fattie humour letteth the wa∣trye humour, that is the matter of leaues, that it may not breake out into leaues in such a trée before ye fruite: & some trées bring forth leaues before fruit and that is for default & scarcitie of fat∣tie humour, and for plentie of watrie humour that is matter of leaues, & heate of the Sunne draweth the humour soo∣ner to ye place of springing of leaues, thā the fattie humour so the place of spring∣ing of fruite. Therefore riping & fattie humour, that is the matter of fruite, is taried, and the leaues first breaketh out and springeth. Also some leaues & fruite spring at once, as in those yt haue the
foresaid humour according, and the inner heate euen working with the heate of the Sunne, in the aire, neither humour, and putteth out the watry humour into leaues, and the fattie humour into fruit. Also Aristotle saieth, that men in olde time meaned, that fruite and leaues are all in one kind, and they said that leaues be not, but by cause of fruite, and they be not diuers in maner, but by more di∣gestion or lesse of watrye and rawe hu∣mour: for watry humour and thinne is soone drawen by heate of the Sunne, and turneth into leaues: and the humour that is more fattie and digest tourneth into matter of fruite. Also Aristotle saith, that though some trées be full of prickes, that commeth not of the intention of kinde, that ge∣dereth the substaunce of the trée: but it hapneth of thinnesse of the trée, whereby ther colde humour, that is but little sod, and issuing out by ye thinnesse of ye trée, is gathered into a pricke or a thorne by heate of the Sunne, and is great by the stalke or stocke, and sharpe at the es: for subtill humour, that is the humour materiall of thornes and prickes, passeth from the tree some and some, and stret∣cheth in length and in sharpnesse, and so doe all such trées, that be with parts sha∣pen in manner of a top. Also generally all trées be gréene without, and white within: for the matter of the inner parts draweth to white coulour, and the vtter parts draw to greene coulour. For the matter that is drawen inwarde, and is driuen outwarde into the barks, is somwhat digested & turned into gréene, for gréene is the middle colour betweene red, that commeth of the action and wor∣king of the perfect and complete heate: & betwéene white, that commeth of im∣perfect. Also Aristotle saith, that trées be di∣uers in figure & shape: for some stretch vpward, and some downward, and some aside, and some holde the meane: & those that haue small and thinne humour in their pith, the which humour is moued and drawen vpward by heate, be shaped or haue the forme of light of fire, that moueth in common vertue of fire. And such that haue in their pith thicke vertue of humour and watrye, growe downeward and be small: and so those parts moue downward by their owne heauinesse; and be great and lowe by the ground. In those that haue meane hu∣mour and are temperate betwéene thicke and thin, some moue vpward, & is cause of mouing vp of the trée, and some moue downward, & is cause of greatnesse ther∣of: and so as that humour is more or lesse digested in the roote and in the pith, the trée is more or lesse in figure & shape, for the first digestion is néedefull in the roote to the growing of the trée, and the second digestion is néedefull in the pith, for perfection, riping, dilatation, and con∣seruation. This double digestion, suffi∣ceth the perfection of trées and of herbs, and the third is found onely in beastes, as Aristotle saith, and as Albumasar expoundeth. Also trées be diuers in boughes, & in leaues, as the humour is more or lesse: and as strength of heat is more or lesse: for if the heate be strong with much hu∣mour, then spring manye boughes and leaues, and againward: and if the hu∣mour be small and thin, and able to bée wasted and foredryed, than the boughes doe wither and the leaues fall, & the trée abideth all bare without any leaues: & the contrarye falleth in the contrarye cause. Also Aristotle saith, that not alonely shornes and prickes in trées, be shapen in manner of topwise, but also the shape is found in fruit and in leaues: for if the wayes in a trée be first wide and large, and full thin in the beginning of the hu∣mour, and afterward be made narrowe by coldnesse and drinesse: then the fruit and leaues be great and large in the ne∣ther ende, and small and sharpe in the o∣ner ende, and that is for drawing of the more light part of the humour to the o∣uer ende by strength of heate, and put∣ting of the heauie humour towarde the nether ende. But full ofte it happeneth, that fruite and leaues be sharpe in the endes, and shapen in manner of a toppe, when by the vertue of heats and by the thin and small humour the ouer part is
made light, and the neather end is made sharpe, the humour in the middle stret∣ching and spreading and so the substance of the fruite and leaues be made small and sharpe at each of the endes by ma∣strie of firie vertue: and great  large in the middle, after the manner of a top with two sharpe endes. Also Aristotle saith there, that some trées and hearbes bloome, and the blossome, commeth out of small humour, and specially pure, that is in the pith: and is not all hardened nor digested and disposed into the ast perfection of fruite: But it is dispo∣sed to bring forth fruite. And for gleymie humor some trées haue no blos∣somes because of fatnesse, that humour may not be made smal and thin to spred out blossomes, as appeareth in the figge trée, that hath no blossome, for the cause aforesaid: and some haue no blossomes, for the humour is too thin, and may not be made thicke, as it néedeth to the sub∣staunce of blossomes, as it fareth in plants, and in other such, as Aristotle saith. And so as the matter in diuers in the which heate worketh, so colours are di∣uers as well in floures, as in hearbes & trées: but it belongeth not to this mat∣ter to pursue all this: and for noyance I holde it good to cease off at this time. Neuerthelesse, Aristotle putteth too di∣uers properties in the ende of the second booke, and I holde them not to be despi∣sed, there he saith, that a trée that hath great barke, is full high and broad, and that is by reason of stretching of humor and for putting of heate, for the thicke rinde, that receiueth and taketh the hu∣mour, suffereth it not to shed: and also the thicknesse of the rinde suffereth not the heate to open the poores to passe out, and so the trée must néedes stretch and spread, as it fareth in the Pine apple & in the Palme and in other such, as Ari∣stotle saith. Also there he saith, that trées with milke haue great fatnesse, & strong heate in the barke, and therefore the humours are resolued, and commeth to the vtter parts of the tree, and breedeth g som∣time thin fléeting, and sometime conica∣ted and fastned with colde aire without, and sometime hard as stones or shelles, and that commeth sometime of cold that fasteneth the parts together and some∣time of heate that commeth and com∣meth and wasteth the softe partes and bindeth togethers the great partes, as Albumasar saith. Also as Albumasar sayth, some trées chaunge as the time of the yeare chan∣geth, & for they be goldene in Summer, & pale in Winter, and yet their leaues fall not, for they haue strong heate incorpo∣rate within, and so the heate draweth into the inner parts of the trée, and of the leaues and wood, and flyeth the cold aire of the Winter, and therefore the vtter parts be pale and yeolow: but ye leaues fall not for cleauing humours, and for strong heate: And there it is sayde, yt trées beare first bitter fruite, when they bee new set and then bitternesse hath ma∣sterie in their fruite or bitter sowrenes: and the cause is, for the first digestion is sower, for the humour that is draw∣en in, is thicke and earthie for scarsitie & féeblenesse of the heate that worketh di∣gestion. Therefore such fruite is gende∣red without swéetnesse, for their humor abideth raw & vndigested, but afterward when the heate is cōforted, & the humor is augmented & mored more pure, then the heate worketh and maketh the hu∣mour swéet and sauoury. For so Aristo. saieth, that a thing waxeth swéete in the fire: and that is, as Albumasar sayeth, for the chaunging that it voydeth of the fire, that maketh the digestion. And there it is said, that in sowre places, colde, and drye, sometime groweth swéete fruit; for kind heat cōmeth into the sowre humour and is cold therein, and is holpen by the heat of the Sun, and defieth the sowre∣nesse, & tourneth it into swéetnesse. And fruit is swéet though ye leaues be sowre: and so it fareth in other partes, in the which is not so greate digestion, and working of heate, as it is in the fruite. But somtime it happineth, yt for super∣fluitie of great heat yt commeth thereto, and also for burning, that such fruite, as was before swéete, tourneth into bitter∣nesse, by reason of superfluitie and ouer
much heate and scarcitie of the other hu∣mour, and there it is sayde, that in cer∣taine temperate places, fruite ripeth swiftly before springing time, and that is for sufficient heate and temprate aire without. Also there it is sayd, that some trées beare first swéete fruite, & be afterward bitter and sower, as trées of Mirabola∣nes, and the cause is, as it is sayde there, for the fruite of such trées is full therin the houre of digestion, & when the waies are great and large, there is sufficient heate, that disposeth the humour materi∣all to fruite, and ripeth the fruite: and so in the beginning of digestion the fruit is swéet: but afterwarde the heate passeth out & wasteth the humour in the veynes and pores, and bréedeth drinesse, that ma∣keth the wayes and pores straight & na∣rowe, so that neither heate nor humour may come to the place of fruite: & colde and drinesse ouercommeth the heate; and the humour before the fruite chaungeth and is sower, for all passage of kind heat and the humor be let by straight waies, that be made straight by drinesse, and so colde hath mastrie in the fruite, for de∣fault of heate; and then is great sowre∣nesse, for mastrie of drinesse and of colde. But at the last, heate is holpen and area∣red to the place of fruite, and strengthe∣ned by heate of the Sunne, and so heate ouercommeth againe coldnesse, and gen∣dereth strong heate and drinesse, and so the fruite is bitter. Also trées be diuers in setting and in planting: for Trées that be set right in the full of the Moone, or in the newe, or in the changing, they thriue ful euill, if they thriue, their fruite is full little, & is full of wormes, & fruite of such trées, rotteth full soone: and trées that are fel in such time be soone fret with wormes, and durenot long, as Isidore saith. Looke the cause before lib. 8. de Effectibus Lu∣nae. Also betwéene the trée and his fruite, is a stalke, whereby the fruite cleaneth and hangeth on the trée, as the childe to the nauell cleueth to the mother, as Isi. saith, & the stalk is first féeble & lethie, & that is for default of hard humor. Ther∣fore in yt time fruite falleth with little shaking, as wt a strong blast or puffe of winde: But afterward heate hardeneth that humor by little & little, & the vertue setteth fast & falleth not so soone: but at the last when the fruite is ripe and full growen, that stalke for drieth or rotteth, and the fruite falleth soone, and the more déepe the roote is in the ground, the more humour it draweth, & if it beareth fruit, it beareth the more plentie of boughes, of leaues and of fruite. If water boughs and superfluitie be pared off, the trée bea∣reth the better and the more fruite, for then the humour passeth into fruite, that should els passe into superfluitie. And this of kinde and properties of trées in generall, shall suffice at this time. Of an Almond Tree. Chap. 3. AN Almond trée is called Amigdalus, and is a trée that blometh timely. And the Tree is called Hec Amigdalus, and the fruit is called Hic Amigdalus. And so one sayth in this manner. Sunt matu∣ra mora, pira, ficus, amigdala mora. That is to say, Beries, Peares, Figges, and Almonds be soone ripe: But in some place of holy writ, Hec Amigdala, le, is taken for the fruit. Num. 17. For (as S. Hierome sayth) The lawe and the Go∣spell may not be subiect to the rules of Grammer. And as Isid. sayth, li. 17. A∣migdala is Gréeke, and is to say, a long Nut And some call it Nucida, as it were the lesse not. Therefore Virgil speaketh in this maner, when many nuts in woods be closed with blossome. This Tree blo∣meth first of all trees, and beareth fruite before other Trees. Hue vsque Isido∣rus, in libr. de Plantis. Aristotle sayeth, that Almond Trees need much tilling, and namely when they be olde. And if they be beared with nailes, Cum com∣meth out of them, and humour is pured in the pith yt is ye matter of fruit. There∣fore if they be well tilled, Almonds trees beare more fruit, when they be old, then when they be young. And an Almonde Tree beareth double fruite, sweete, and bitter, as it is said in Plat.
Swéete Almonds be good to meate, and bitter Almonds to medicine, for they bee hot and dry.Hot and drye. And Dioscorides saith that the swéete Almond helpeth the stomack if it be eaten new with the skinne, but it grieueth ye head, & norisheth dimnes, & kindleth the seruice of Venus, and brée∣deth sléepe, and latteth dronkennesse. Also he saith there, that if a Foxe eateth Al∣monds, he shall dye.Almonds doth kill the Foxe. Ofte ye thing that is wholesome and good for men, is poy∣son to other beasts, and againward. Also he saith, that nigh all the trée that bea∣reth bitter Almonds is medicinable: for the roote thereof sod and brayed, clean∣seth the face and doth awaye speckles, & abateth head ach if it be layd to the for∣head, and cleanseth, and helpeth rotted wounds, if it be medled with honie. Also the barke and leaues cleanseth and hea∣leth: and oyle of Almonds slaieth long wormes in the wombe, and exciteth and purgeth menstruall bloud, and helpeth effectually against deafenesse, and clean∣seth and purgeth matter of ye eares, if it be luke hot dropped therein, as Diosco. saith. Also floures thereof sod in oyle, a∣waketh them that haue the Litargie, the sléeping euill, and the floures therof brai∣ed with honny, healeth biting of hounds and botches. Gumme of Almonde trées,The gum of the Al∣mond. mingled with a drinke, helpeth him that casteth bloud, and so little or nought is in the Almond trée, that accordeth not to medicine, as Diosc. saith. (Additiō.The eating of sixe or eight bitter Almonds fasting, is sayd to staye a man frō dronkennesse that day. Dodoneus.) ¶Of Firre. cap. 4. FIrre is a trée and is called Abies, and hath that name of Eundo, going or passing, for it passeth more farther, and stretcheth more high than other trées, as Isid. saith lib. 17. The kinde thereof hath no earthly humour, and therefore it is able and light timber, and other things that he made of this trée, be called Abiegna, and he that maketh any thing thereof, is called Abietarius, as Isi. saith. Arist. saith that Firre is a trée, yt stret∣cheth in length vpward, and hath much rarenesse in substaunce, and small and thin moysture, and therefore kind heate thereof with helpe of heate of the Sun, reareth and beareth vpwarde that moy∣sture, and turneth it into substaunce of trees, and so maketh the trée growe full high. This trée is wonderfull high, and little or nought crooked, and that is, for vertue of heate, and euennesse of humor that is obedient to the working of heat. Therefore it stretcheth vpright with∣out any crookednesse: and though the trée be gendered and commeth of lyght humour and subtill, yet kinde dry∣ueth the superfluitie of that humour outwarde, and bringeth it betwéene the Tree and the rinde, and there by heate of the Sunne it is made clammye, and turned into kinde of sweet smelling Rosen. Also for gleamie fatnesse yt is incorpo∣rate to this trée, this trée Abies kindleth full soone & burneth light. Also this Trée Abies helpeth to diuers manner buil∣dings, and namely for euennesse & length & shape that is stéeple wise, more smal vp∣ward then downward, therof is good ship timber made and shapen. (Additiō.Abies, is the Firre trée, whose fruit is smaller and longer then of the Pine trée, with the Timber is made Masts for ships, and the boordes and rest timber is reserued for many vses, the wood is tight and well smelling. The olde Firre trée yéeldeth a white Gumme, yt is solde for Frankensence: but that which runneth forth of the young trées is called Tere∣binthina Veneta, and is solde for the right Turpentine, which we call Tur∣pentine of Venice. Dodoneus.) Of Aloa. chap. 5. ALoes is a Trée with good sauour, and bréedeth in Inde, as Papias sayeth, And it is a Trée with most swéete smell. And sometime a parte thereof was set a fire on the Alter in the stéed of insence, and hath the name therefore, as it is sup∣posed. Of the Trée of Aloes it is sayde in Platearius, that it is an hot Tree and drye, and is founde in the greate riuer of Babylon, that ioyneth with a Riuer of
Paradise. Therfore many men suppose, that the foresaide Trée groweth among the trees of Paradise, and commeth out of Paradise by some hap or drifte into the riuer of Inde. Men that dwell by that riuer, take this trée out of the water with nets, and kéepe it to the vse of me∣dicine, for it is a good medicinall trée. There be three manner kinds of the trée Aloes, as Const. saith in lib. gradioni. The first is full heauie with knots and that is with good smell, and with some deale bitter sauour, and browne red cou∣lor & letteth not chewing: and he saith, when it is chewed, anone a good sauour goeth out of the braine & filleth it some-deale. The second is lesse heauie, & smel∣leth not so well, neither is it so bitter. The third kinde is some deale white & full light, and hath no sauour nor smell, but little, except it be arayed with other things. The trée of Aloes is fained, with a trée that is like thereto in waight and in knots, and some deale in smell, and some men account the Trée of Aloes Siluestris, as it were a wilde trée. This trée is froted with lead to chaunge ye co∣lour, & eare waxe is put thereto, to make it some deale bitter and red. Then it is put into licour that the best Aloes was sod in, with Muste to make it haue good smell: and is so made, that vnneth it is knowen from the best, but yet it is kno∣wen, for it is full hard and maye in no wise be chewed, and whiles men champ thereon, the bitter sauour within is not felt. The trée of Aloes comforteth the stomacke, and maketh good digestion, & helpeth against féeblenesse of the heart, & the braine, and against sownding, and namely against the Cardiacle passion. And when Aloes is sod in wine, it help∣eth against all euills and passions of the heart, and féeblenesse of the heart, yt com∣meth of colde: but it maketh the wine bitter, he should doe but little therin, & for delicate men temper the wine with rose water, and such wine may be kept long time, for it is much amended by ye trée. The smoake thereof taken in at the nose, heateth the braine if it be cold, and comforteth it, if it be féeble. And for to conclude the praising thereof in short words, it helpeth and introureth in all féeblenesse of the bodie, if one ran vse it in due manner. Huc vsque Platea. Of three sortes of the tree of A∣loes, forth of the 20. chapt. of L. Vertomannus nauigations. YOu shall vnderstand,Addition that there is no great plentie of true Aloes or Luser∣pitium brought vnto vs, because it is brought higher from the farthest partes of the world. Understand furthermore, there are thrée kindes or sorts of Aloes, greatly differing in goodnesse. The first they call Calampat, that growes not in the Ile Sumatra, but is brought from the Citie of Sarnau. There is another kind of Aloes named Iuba or Luba. The third kinde is named Bochor. Prouided, that none of the Aloe Calampat, is brought vnto vs, because it commeth from the kingdomes of Cathay, Chini, Macyni, Sarnau and Granay, Countreyes much richer than ours, haue much greater a∣bundance of golde, and kings of grea∣ter power and riches than are ours, and also that the said kings take great plea∣sure in such kinde of swéete sauours, & vse them much more than our Princes doe. So that by this meanes, the true kinde of Aloes, is worth in the Citie of Sarnau, ten crownes the pound waight. ¶Of Aloe, chap. 6. ALoe is the fruite of a certaine hearb, that is called Aloe.Addition Aloe is a lowe tree, of whose gum very seldome commeth anye into this part of the world. This hearbe is found in India and Persia, and in many other places. The iuyce thereof is wrong out and sod on the fire, and afterward dried in the Sun as Platea sayth. Also of Aloe be thrée kindes, Citrinum, Epaticum, and Cabal∣linum, as Plat. sayth. And these thrée ma∣ner kindes be diuers in goodnesse: For Caballinum, is good, Epaticum is better, and Citrinum is best.
And they be knowen by citrine colour, and some deale reddish, and namely if it be broken, the pouder thereof, séemeth as it were pouder of Saffron, and the sub∣staunce thereof is most cléere, when it is broken into little péeces, and that that is broken into little péeces, is lesse stink∣ing, & lesse bitter. The Aloe yt is called Epaticum, is like to the lyuer in colour, and is browne reddish, as the lyuer is, and hath holes as it were mouthes of veynes, and is dimme, and not cléere, & is more bitter than is Citrinum. The Aloe that is called Caballinū, is blacke, dimme and drastie, and most bitter in sauour, and most horrible in smell. This Aloe Caballinum, if it be distinguished with pouder of Saffron and vineger, & if it be ten times plunged therein, and dryed, then it taketh new disposition, and changeth color & smell, so that it séemeth Epaticum or Citrinum, but yet this is knowen: for if it be broken, and froted with fingers, anon it is found most stin∣king and most bitter, and so fareth not Epaticum nor Citrinum. All manner of Aloe, the lesse stinking it is, and the lesse bitter, the better it is. Though Aloe be bitter by kind, yet it is wonderful profi∣table and wholesome: for it purgeth fleu∣mie cholar and melancholy, and comfor∣teth sinewy members, and clenseth and purgeth the stomack of gleymie humors and noyfull, & reléeueth head ache, when fumositie of ye stomacke gréeueth ye head, and maketh it ake. Aloe cleanseth the sight, and vnstoppeth the splene and the lyuer, and prouoketh menstruall bloud, and maketh good colour in a bodye that is discouloured & kéepeth from the drop∣sie, and ureth the Dropsie at the begin∣ning. Powder thereof taken with hony, slayeth long wormes in the wombe, and maketh haue abide and not fall, and hel∣peth goutie men, and healeth botches of the priuie members, and easeth itch∣ing of eyen, and cleanseth rotting and matter of the gums, & of the mouth, and healeth, soudreth, clenseth & drieth gréene wounds, & is bitter to ye mouth, & sweete to ye stomack: for it cōforteth ye cold sto∣mack & feeble, & helpeth digestion. Al this is taken of Diosc. of Plat. and of Auice. (Additiō.Aloe the iuice of an hearbe con∣iealed like a gum, and is vsed commonly in purgatiue medicines, because it is cō∣fortable to the stomacke.) ¶Of a reede. chap. 7. A Réede is called Arundo, & is meane betwéene a trée and an hearbe, and more brittle and féeble than a trée, and more hard and boystous than an hearb, and is smooth without and hollow with in, and is norished in marreys, and wag∣geth with the winde, & hurteth ye hande soone with splinters. Isid. li. 16. speaketh of the réede and saith, it is called Arun∣do, and hath that name of Aresco, dri∣eng, for it drieth soone. In pondes of In∣de groweth a réede, and out of the roots thereof they wring full swéete sauour and licour, which they drinke. There∣fore Varro saith, yt a réed of Inde grow∣eth to a small trée, and humor is wrong out of the roote thereof, and no swéete ho∣ny may striue with that wose & lycour. (Additiō.There are diuers sorts or kinds of réede, the long poale réede or cane in the Ilands of Canare: of the which the peo∣ple vse as staues and speares, for theyr straigth and hardnesse. There is also the Sugar réede, verye long, within the which groweth the iuice, whereof com∣meth Sugar. The common great: reeds grow in marish grounds, as do ye small, with the which are made quilles for Weauers, fishing rods, &c.) ¶Of Amomo. cap. 8. AMomum hath that name for it smel∣leth as Cannell doeth, that is called Cinamom, as Isidore saith libr. 17. Amomum groweth in Siria, and in Ar∣menia. The trée thereof séedeth in clu∣sters cleauing togethers, & hath a white flower like to the violet, & leaues like to Brione, and maketh swéete sléepes with the good smell thereof. Amomum is an hearbe with good sauour, as Dioscorides sayeth, and is some deale redde with leaues ioyned, and with much séede, and with white flowers, as the Uy∣olet.
Of Amomum be thrée maner of kinds, for one is of Armenia, and is called Ar∣menicum, and that is best of all, and is reddish, & best of smell, and most of ver∣tue and of valew. Another kinde grow∣eth in moyst places and watrye, and is softe to handling, and hath good sauour. The third is called Ponticum, and is red and not long. The best is that that is new and white and full of séed spred vp∣pon red braunches most sauouring and heauie in waight, and biteth the tongue with a manner of sharpnesse when it is chewed, and hath colour not diuers, as Auicen sayth and Dioscorides also. These Authors meane, that all manner Amomum hath vertue to heate and to drye, and to heale smiting of Scorpions: and the water that it is sod in, comfort∣eth the eyen, and reléeueth them of sore ache. And Amomum hath vertue to as∣swage wombe ache, and to destroy ven∣tositie, and to excite menstruall bloud, & the lycour that it is sod in, helpeth and succoureth frentike men & Epatike, that be sicke in the liuer, and them that haue Podagre also. Also in all good receipts & medicines, Amomum is oft put, though some men vse ofte to take in stéede of that, another hearbe, that is called, Amo∣nides, and is like thereto in colour and hiew, and is all vnlike thereto in vertue and in smell, as Auicen saith. (Additiō.Amomum a little shrub growing in Armania, round together like a clu∣ster of Grapes, hauing a flower lyke a white Uiolet, and leaues lyke Wyth∣winde, or white Uine: some ignoraunt Apothecaries, vse Petroselium Macedo∣nicum, and call it Amomum, which is the verye true parseley of Macedonye, whereas it groweth most plentifullye. D. Rembert Dodoneus. fo. 608.) ¶Of Aneto. cap. 9. ANetum is an hearbe, and the séed of it may be kept thrée yeare in great ver∣tue, as Discorides saith: but it is bet∣ter that it be renewed euery yeare. The roote thereof is somwhat worth while it is gréene, and of no valewe, when it is drye, as he sayth. And hath vertue to heate and to tem∣per hard matter, and to make it softe and open, and to diuide and depart, and to destroy ventositie and swellyng, and to abate ache and gnawing of the guts, & of the wombe, and to breake the stone, to excite menstruall bloud, and to open the vrine veynes, and to abate the yere, that commeth of fulnesse, to make one sléepe well, and to temper hard gathring in the body if it be sod with oyle, and layd thereto in plaister wise: and the flower thereof sodde with Wine doeth away head ache, if the head be baulmed therewith: and ashes thereof layd to the dropping priuie chose of a woman, dri∣eth it, and stauncheth the dropping: and Anetum sod with oyle, releaseth shrink∣ing and stonieng of sinewes, and helpeth in many other passions, as he affirmeth and saith. (Additiō.Anetum is hot and dry in ye thirde degrée, it cureth the bloudie flixe, mixed with the cups of Akornes, and so dronk in ale or wine, the waight of halfe an ounce with halfe a pint. It is called, Dill.) ¶Of Aniso. cap. 10. ANise hath the same vertue that Ane∣tum hath, and is more swéet in sauor, & the séed therof is more small & round, & many men call it Dulcinium, as it is said in Plat. And hath vertue to temper & to make soft, to consume and to wast & destroy ventositie, & to comfort digesti∣on, and to open the stopping of the liuer, and of ye splene, & to break the stone, and to excite menstruall bloud, and to open and to amend all the inner wayes, and so though the séed be small in quantitie, yet it is full good and profitable in ver∣tue, and full healthfull and wholsome. (Additiō.Anisum, Anise séed is ye only vitall to Aqua vitae, it is good, ye pouder dronk in wine against poyson.) ¶Of Allio. chap. 11. GArlike is called Allium, and hath that name of Olendo smelling, for it smelleth strongly, as Isid. saith li. 16.
The smell thereof is so strong, yt it pas∣seth and ouercommeth all other strong smells: and therefore men yt must néeds passe by stinking places, or make cleane vncleanly rotten places, arme and defend themselues with strong sauce of Gar∣like, as Diosco. saith. Garlike hath ma∣ny vertues and properties both good and euill: for it is compouned of diuers ver∣tues, as he saith. Garlike disturbeth the wombe and the stomacke, and bréedeth thirst, and bréedeth whelkes & wounds in the body, if it be layd thereto: and if cholaricke men eate too much thereof, it maketh the body too hot, & bréedeth Le∣pra, and is cause of madnes and of fren∣sie and grieueth the sight and maketh it dimme. Therefore it noyeth cholaricke men by kinde, for it bréedeth red cholar, and increaseth burnt cholar, and helpeth well steumaticke men and colde. Of Garlike is double maner of kinde, wilde and tame. The wilde is called Scorde∣on, among Phisitions. The floure ther∣of shall be gathered & put in medicines, and it worketh not violentlye, as tame Garlike doth. Of tame Garlike we vse most the heads. In the kinde thereof be many manner vertues found, for therin is vertue to dissolue, and to temper, to consume and waste, to put out venyme, and all venimous things. Therefore it was not without cause called Triacle of churles, among Authours in old time, as Diosc. saith. It helpeth best against the biting and venime of a mad dogge, if it be eaten with salt and nuts, & with rew: stampe these foure togethers, and giue ofte thereof to the Patient, in the quan∣titie of a great nut, and that with wine, and laye the same confection to the sore without, for it helpeth the wound, and draweth out venime and wasteth it, and kéepeth and saueth and deliuereth of pe∣rill, as effectually as Triacle. And Gar∣like hath vertue to open, and to temper, and to diuide and to depart, to cut and wast great humours and thicke, & ther∣fore it helpeth them that haue the stone, and them that may not well pisse, and exciteth menstruall bloud, and cleanseth the wombe, and slayeth long wormes, & other wormes in the wombe, if it be ta∣ken as it were sauce with pepper & iuice of mint and vineger: and Garlike aba∣teth the ache of the guts & of the reynes also, if it be cleansed and stamped, & sod with oyle, and layd as a plaister to the sore place, and it helpeth also against the Morphea, that is the Leprosie of ye skin, if the place of the Morphea be garsed & froted with Garlyke, and stamped ther∣to as a plaister should. Also it helpeth a∣gainst the biting of an Adder, if it bée stamped and layd thereto with Oyle of Bay, as Dios. saith. Also it helpeth them that haue the dropsie, for it wasteth and dryeth the humour betwéene the skinne and the flesh, and swageth swellyng, & cleanseth and healeth great and fowle bloudie wounds, and soundeth them, if pouder of Garlike burned be laid therto: and Garlicke sodde with Well water, doth away all sore and ach of the place, and swelling also, but it néedeth to be∣ware, that it be not taken in meates, for it grieueth the eyen, and so meane these verses. Allia, Vina, Venus, Pulius, Ventus, Faba, Fumus:Garlike is almost hot & dry in ye forth degree. Ista nocent oculis, sed vigilare magis. The meaning is this, Garlike, Wine, and Venus, Pouder, Winde, & Beanes, and smoke, grieue the eyen, but waking doth more. In lib. de plant. Arist. sayth, that Garlike is like to the Lily, & accor∣deth therwith in disposition of the head, and in the cloues hath vertue seminall, in the cloues of ye roote, & is the greines of the top of the stalke: and of ye cloue of the nether head of the garlike, com∣meth a plant of garlyke, and so doth like wise of the séede that groweth in ye top of the stalke, and of a cloue of the ouer head commeth also both plant and séede. And therefore a cloue of Garlike, set in the earth, bringeth forth a plant, and so likewise doth the séede, and hath manye pilles and leaues stéeple wise, and a hol∣low poorie stalke. Also garlike as the Li∣ly, first hath séede on his stalke, the greines clustered together within a small thin leafe: but the Onyon doeth not cluster his greynes together, but no∣risheth and sendeth them out on small feete.
And Garlike hath hairie rootes, lyke as a Lily, and Saffron and other such: But in this the roots of Garlike & Lilies dif∣fer, for the roote of Garlike spreadeth not in boughes, as the Lily doth: and as the Garlike reneweth his leaues, so it re∣neweth his rootes, and seedeth but once in the second yeare after that it is sow∣en. Therefore garlike hath many cloues spreading, that those cloues may be féed∣ing and nourishing to the second rootes, and to the second leaues, and to the stalk thereof. For when the seconde leaues grow and the stalk, then the cloues ther∣of vanisheth away in the earth: and so it fareth in Onions. In this Garlike & Onions be diuers, for of euery cloue of Garlike set commeth a plant, and so it fareth of the Lily, that of a cloue plan∣ted in the earth, sendeth out a stalk, and that commeth, for in euerie cloue of the Lily and of Garlike is seminall vertue. And it fareth not so in the Onion, for there commeth not of euery cloue of the Onion, an Onion, though it be set, but of the whole head springeth a plant, if it be set: for the seminall vertue is not in euery cloue of the Onion, but in the whole head. And Garlike and the Lily be diuers, for the stalke in ye spire of gar∣like springeth out of the one ende of the cloue, & the spire of ye Lily springeth out of the side of the cloue, & not of the end. Huc vs{que} Anst. de plan. secund. nouam translationem. (Additiō.There be 3. sorts of Garlike, Alli∣um satiuum, Garden garlike, Crow gar∣like, and Beare garlyke, called Ram∣sons.) ¶Of Wormwood. chap. 12. ABseynthium, Wormwood, is a full sharpe hearbe, hot and drye, full sow∣rish and bitter, as Dioscorides saith, ther of is two manner kindes, that one is gréene in colour, and sower and bit∣ter in sauour, that other is some deale hoarishe, and lesse bitter, and lesse vertuous, and is gathered in the end of springing time, and dried in shadow, and kept all a yeare in great might & ver∣tue, and hath contrary vertues, as Plate. saith, for it laxeth and bindeth: it bind∣eth by thicke substaunce and sowrnes, & laxeth by heate and bitternes, & so when it is taken into the body, if it find thick matter and hard, by sowrenes and thick∣nesse of his substance, maketh it the more thicke and hard, & so it is cause of more binding: and if the matter be able and digested, it tempreth and softneth it with heate, and beareth it downe with sowre∣nesse, and putteth it out of the body: and sirop made of wormwood helpeth the ly∣uer, and comforteth the stomacke, & exci∣teth appetite, and withstandeth dronken∣nesse, and healeth the iaundes, & amend∣eth and chaungeth the colour. The iuice thereof with pouder sod, vnstoppeth the splene, and solueth and abateth ache of the stomacke, and wombe ache, that com∣meth of ventositie: and iuyce thereof dropped into ye eares, drieth vp moysture that runneth from the eares. Worme∣wood stamped with a Bulls lyuer, and put into the eares, distroyeth tincklyng, and ringing that is therein, and comfor∣teth and amendeth the hearing. Iuyce thereof swageth head ache that commeth of fumositie of ye stomacke. Wormwood with pouder of Commin and hony doth away moles and speckles, and ache that commeth of smiting, if it be layd thereto in a playster wise. Iuice thereof slayeth long wormes of the wombe, & wormes of the eares, if it be dropped therein. Iuice thereof dronke, cleereth the sight, & doth away rednesse and webs of eyen, if it be ofte put therein. And Wormwood keepeth and saueth bookes and cloathes from fretting of mice and of wormes, if it be layd therewith in chestes or Cof∣fers, as Macrobius saith, and helpeth a∣gainst biting of Wesells & of Dragons, and healeth it if it be dronke, and the li∣cour that it is sodde in, swageth ven∣tositie and swelling of the wombe, if it be dronke, as Diosc. saith. And hath ouer these vertues, some conditions & proper∣ties that bée not full good: for it infect∣eth the tast with sowrenesse and bit∣ternesse, & grieueth the smel with strong odour, & maketh milke and wine bitter, and al other swéet thing, that it is med∣led with.
Therefore Bées yt vse floure of worme¦woode, make the hony bitter, as Diosco. sayth. Plinius saith, that wormwood shal not be giuen to them that haue feauers. Wormwood letteth wambling in ye sea, if it be first dronke, and exciteth sleepe, if it be laid vnwittingly vnder the head, and withstandeth mothes and wormes, if it be layd among clothes, and maketh blacke haire, if ye haire be anoynted with oyntment made of the iuice thereof, and oyle of roses. Additiō.There are thrée sorts of Worme∣wood, the first Absynthium Latifolium, common wormwood: the second Seri∣phium sea wormwood: the third Pon∣ticum, wormwood gentle or Romane. It is said in Dodoneus, that there are sixe kindes. Inke being made with the iuice of wormwood, kéepeth writings long frō being eaten with mice or rats.) ¶Of Apio. chap. 13. MErch is called Apium, & is a com∣mon hearb, known nigh to all men: and hath that name, for somtime victors had garlands of it, as Isid. saith libro. 17 Hercules made him first garlandes of this hearbe. Rootes thereof withstandeth mightely venime, as Isi. saith, but of A∣pium is many maner of kinds as he sai∣eth. One is called Petrosum, & hath that name, for it is most lyke to Apium in leaues, and Apium of the Gréekes is called Silenum, and groweth in stonye places, and in mountaines, and rockes: and therefore Latines call Petrocilium Perseley, Petrapium, as Isid. saith. Of Merch and Apium, is another manner kinde, as Dioscorid. saith, as Apium of frogs, Apium of laughing, Apium of Emeroydes:Marsh parsele or Smallach Apium of frogs hath that name, for it is ofte founde in watry pla∣ces, where frogs be in, and if this Api∣um be sod with wine, & layd in a play∣ster wise to the wombe, and if it be laid to the reynes, it helpeth and abateth the ache thereof. Apium osus of laughing, hath the name of working and doing: for it purgeth melancholike humour, for of superfluitie of such humour commeth eegnesse and discomfort: and be tel∣leth, that if it be eaten or dronke in great quantitie, it slayeth a man with laugh∣ing, and helpeth also against the stone, & against difficultie of pissing, if men pisse often and little, and exciteth menstruall bloud, if it be sod in water or in wine, & the nether parts of the body washed and bathed therewith. Apium of Embroydes hath yt name, for pouder therof laid thereto fordrieth the bleeding. Commune Apium, cōmon Merch, vnstoppeth & openeth ye splene, & breaketh the stone, and destroyeth the Iaundes, and helpeth against the drop∣sie, & against frensie, if ye Patients head, be ofte anoynted with the iuyce thereof medled with oyle of roses, and with vi∣neger. The roote thereof succoureth a∣gainst venymous biting, and withstand∣eth venime, as Diosc. sayth. And all A∣pium grieueth & noyeth them that haue the falling euill, for it dissolueth and sof∣teneth the matter, and moueth vpward, and it grieueth children also, because of much moisture and feeblenesse of vertue, & straightnesse of members, & of waies, that age is disposed to that euill. Ther∣fore a nourice that féedeth a child, shall spare Apium, least the childe take that euill, as Diosc. sayth, and Plat. also. ¶Of Aristologia. cap. 14. ARistologia is a full medicinable hearb though it be bitter, & thereof is two manner of kindes, long and round, and either is hotte and drye, and the roote is more medicinable, than the leaues, and shall be gathered in Haruest, and is kept two yeare, & hath vertue to dis∣solue and put out, and to wast venyme, and maketh good breath, and softeneth the hard splene, and openeth the stopping thereof, & doth away ache of the wombe and of the side, & helpeth them that haue the Podagre and the falling euill, and men with lims and sinewes shronken. Powder therof with the iuyce of mints helpeth against venemous biting, and pouder thereof fretteth dead flesh, easely and softly in setter and the wound. The roote of this hearbe putteth a dead child out of ye wombe, if it be sod with wine Hactenus Dioscorides de Aristologia.
Plinius saith, and Isid. li. 17. That it is best for women with child: for if it be dronke with pepper and wine, it clean∣seth the filth of them yt trauayle of child, and purgeth the mother, and exciteth and purgeth menstruall bloud. (Additiō.Aristolochia longa, Rotunda Cle∣matitis, Pistolochia, Saracenica. These foure kindes are set foorth in Dodone∣us, called in English, Aristologia, and of some Birthwort, and Hartwort. The se∣cond is called rounde Aristologia. The third is called braunched. The fourth, long Aristologia: an hearbe good against poyson, and against the stinging and bi∣ting of venemous beasts. Aristolochia rotunda, doth beautifie, cleanse, and fast∣en the téeth, if they be often froted or rub∣bed with the pouder thereof. ¶Of Agno Casto. chap. 15. AGnus Castus is an hearbe hot & drie, and hath vertue to keéepe men & wo∣men chast, as Plin. saith. Therefore the women of Rome, vsed to beare with them the fruite of this hearbe in Dirige and seruice of dead men, when they must néedes lyue chast, for common honestie. This hearbe is alway gréene, as Dio∣scor. saith, and Plat. also: and the flower thereof is called Agnus castus, for with smell & vse thereof, it maketh men chast as a Lambe. And Diosc. sayth and Plat. also, that it maketh chast, opening the poores, and drawing out, and wasting the humour and moysture seminall: and hée saith, that the broath thereof helpeth a∣gainst colde and white dropsie, if it bée sod with fenel séede, and a lyttle Esu∣la. And there it is sayd, that the broth of that hearbe foredrieth superfluityes of the mother, and maketh the mouth ther∣of narrow & straight, and exciteth men∣struall bloud, and doth away Litargia, the sléeping euill, if it be sod in salt wa∣ter with Apium and Sage, and the hin∣der part of ye head strongly washed ther¦with, as Dioscor. saith. (Additiō.Agnus castus is a singular reme∣die, for such as would lyue chast: for it withstandeth all vncleannesse, or the fil∣thie desire to lecherie: it consumeth and drieth vp ye séede of generation, in what∣soeuer it be taken, whether in pouder, or in decoction, or the leaues alone leade on the bed to sleepe vppon, and therefore it was called Castus, that is to saye, chast, cleane and pure.) ¶Of Artemisia. chap. 16. ARtemisia,Artemisia Mugwort or Poute∣vveede, Damaso∣mum. is called mother of hearbe, and was sometime hallowed by men of nations to the Goddesse Diana, that was called Arthemis in Gréeke, as Isi. saith. li. 17. And is an hot hearb and dry, and the rootes & leaues thereof accord to medicine, & is good namely against bar∣rennesse, that commeth of moysture, and is nought worthie in hot cause and dry, as Diosco. saith. It exciteth menstraull bloud, and cleanseth and comforteth the Mother, and abateth head ache, if it bée sod in wine or in water: and bringeth out a dead childe, and the bagge that it is in, and breaketh the stone of ye reynes and of the bladder, and driueth awaye fiends, as Plin. sayeth, and withstandeth euill thoughts, and abateth féete ach that commeth of trauell of going, and thereof is many manner kinde, and it said, that the Goddesse Diana, founde out the ver∣tues thereof, and taught them to man∣kinde, as Plinius saith and Dioscorides also. And Auicen telleth other vertues thereof. (Additiō.This hearbe is called, Mater her∣barum, and Mugwort, whereof are foure kindes, especially in a idle huswife, and brawling wife, a proud dame, and a dis∣honest woman.) ¶Of Oates. chap. 17. AVena an Oate, is an hearbe, and the seede thereof accordeth to the profite of men and of horses, and hath that name Auena, for that it commeth and groweth soone after that it is sowen, as Isidore saith, and hath vertue to relaxe, and against swelling, and to relaxe noy∣full hardnesse, and to cleanse off vn∣cleannesse of the face, as it is sayde in Platearius.
(AdditiōIn the spire of the Oate is a rare se∣cret, which being put into water, turneth straungely, so that it be vnderstoode the manner of the setting: Oat bread is not agreeable for mankinde.) Of Balsamo. chap. 18. BAlsamum is a trée or a shrub, that ne∣uer groweth passing the height and quantitie of two cubites, as Isido. sayth, and to lyke to a vine, & lyke in leaues to Rue: But the leaues bee more white, & chaunge alway, & fall neuer. And the tree is called Balsamum, and the stocke Ori∣lo Balsamum, and the fruit or the seede Carpobalsamum, and the iuyce Opobal∣samum. For if the rinde of the stocke be smitten with yron combs, then droppeth thereof noble Opobalsamum. The iuyce thereof droppeth out of the hoales of the rinde, as it were out of dens. A denne in English, in Gréeke is called Opo, and it faineth droppes by meddeling of Cypres or of honie. But such as is feined by ho∣nie is knowen, for if a drop therof be put in milke, it renneth as cruddes, and if it be meddeled with water, it fléeteth aboue the water as it were Oile, yt is feined with Oile. And if it is feined and put in fresh water, anon it sinketh to ye ground, and defileth not a cleane cloth that it toucheth. Pure and very Balme or Bal∣samum may not bee suffered in ye hand, if the Sunne commeth thereto. Huc vs∣que Isidorus, Plinius libr. 12. cap. 17. sai∣eth in this manner: Balsamum is set before all other smells, and was some∣time graunted to one lande among all lands, that it is to wit, Iudea. And was not had nor found but in two gardeins of the Kings. The greater Gardein was of twentye dayes earth or earing: But afterwarde when the Romanes were Lordes, those fields of Balsamum spred into many mountaines and hilles. This tree is more lyke to a vine then to Mir∣cus, and filleth the mountains and sprea∣deth as a Uine, without railing and vn∣dersetting of boughes. For the boughes thereof beareth themselues, and the height thereof is within two cubites. It needeth beware that the Trée bée not cut within with yron, and so it needeth that caruing with yron passe not the rind in∣warde into the Tree. For if the Tree be hurt within, then all is lost. The Tree is all medicinable. The chiefe grace there∣of and first, is in the iuyce, the second in the seede, the third in the rinde, and the last in the stock. The best of these is swee∣test smell, in the greatest seede and most heauie, biting in tast, and feruent in the mouth, and redde in coulour. Huc vs∣que Plinius. lib. 12. cap. 27. Diolcorides sayeth, that there is a manner kinde of Balsamum that groweth about Baby∣lonia, where the seauen wells bée, and if that manner Balsamum be set in ano∣ther place, then it beareth neither flowre nor fruit. In Summer time the boughes bée softly cut with a knife of boane, or with shéeres that be not sharpe, least the Trée were hurt within, and so perish. Under the rinde that is thirled bée set violls of glasse to gather therein ye drops that fall. If one drop be done to the roufe of the mouth, it heateth the braine that it séemeth on fire. It hath vertue to dis∣solue & temper, and to consume & wast, and keepe & saue dead bodies without rotting, forasmuch as it dissolueth and wasteth, as it is saide in Plateario. And exciteth menstruall bloud, and bringeth a dead childe out of the wombe, and the Mola out of the Mother, and out of the wombe: and breaketh the stone in ye blad∣der and in the reines, and doth awaye the Illiaca passion, and all euills of the head, if it be taken in due manner: And helpeth in feauers quotidian & quartane, and withstandeth venimous biting, and hath these vertues, and many other noble vertues: yt were full long to recken them héere all arow: But these shall suffice for this time. (Additiō.Balsamita, an hearbe of length and bignesse of a Lilly, with a lease lyke rue, growing onelye in Iudea and Ae∣gypt, of whose iuyce commeth the preci∣ous Balme Oyntment.) Of Bidellio. chap. 19.
AS Plinius saith, lib. 12. capitulo. 10. Bidellium is a Trée, most named Couth, and is a blacke trée, most lyke to the Oliue in leaues and in might. The gumme thereof is most found in vse of medicine. For the gum thereof is bright and bitter in tast, and wel smelling. And smelleth the more if it be wet in Wine. Also in the Glose Super Genesis. 2. It is sayd, that there Bidellium is found, and the stone Omchenus. It groweth (as Pli∣nius saith) in ye countries of the East, as in Arabia, India and Chaldea. Libr. 17. Isidore sayth, that Bidellium is a Trée of Inde, and of Arabia, and the Gunune of the tree of Arabia is best, & smelleth well, and is bright, somewhat white and light, not heauie. And is fat and lyke to ware, and is soone made softe, and is bit∣ter with good sauour, and not meddeled with trée, nor with earth. And the Gum of the trée is foule and blacke, and coun∣terfeited with Gumme, which is not so bitter in tast, from whence so euer it com∣meth. The substaunce thereof is glea∣mie, and stoppeth and draweth. Therfore as Diocorides sayth, & Plat. also. It is contrary to the bloudie fluxe, which com∣meth of sharpe matter, & is good for them that haue the fluxe, which is ingendered and commeth because of strong drougs. And also is good against Postumes with∣in and without: if they be anointed due∣ly therwith: and breaketh the stone, and abateth the cough, and withstandeth ve∣nim of creeping wormes and beasts, and easeth ath of the guts, as Platea, sayth: And bealeth them at the best, that bée limme broiten, so that the guss falleth in the bagge of the Genitours, and soudreth well the inner partes. With Gumme of Bidellio, accordeth Vetnix, which is cal∣led Bernix also. And yt is called a maner Gum: and men saye, that it is Gum of a trée hauing vertue to souder, to clarifie and to saue. Therefore. Painters occupye it most, for it bindeth; as Bidellium doth: but it is of another kinde: For it is cold and dry in the seconde degrée: and Bi∣dellium is hot and moist, as it is said in Platearios. (*Edellium. Pli. A Trée growing in A∣rabia: also the Gum of the same trée, lyke to Waxe, swéet of sauour, and in tast bit∣ter. D. Copper.) Of Buxo. chap. 20. BOxe is called Buxus, and is a name of Gréeke, somwhat corrupt among La∣tines, as Isidore saith, lib. 17. For among the Greeks it is called Pixos. And this tree is alway greene: and for smoothnesse of matter it is able to receiue writing of letters and figures to be made on. For a Table of Bore which is wel planed re∣ceiueth white colour, & thervpon diuerse letters, and diuerse figures and shapes be written and made, & afterward maye be put away easily and soone, as Isidore sayth. All the vtter Trée is called Hec Buxus, and the inner stock, Hoc Buxum. Therefore one said on this manner. Hec buxus crescit, hoc buxum crescere nescit. It appeareth that he woulde meane, that this tree is called Buxus, while it groweth, and is called Buxum, when it groweth not. And is a Trée of sad matter of fast. And the nutrimen∣tall humour thereof is full gleamie, and cleauing togethers, as Albumasar sayeth in lib. Vegil. Therefore the stocke therof is hard, sad, and heauie, & sinketh in wa∣ter, as Hebenus doth, and that is because of sadnesse & fastnesse of the stock, which hath no pores where aire might enter, by the which entering it might fleete a∣boue the water, as Albumasar sayeth. And therefore the leaues therof be long, gréeue, & fall not soone, but some & some. And when one falleth, another commeth in his steed. And hath many smal leaues and thicke, and little fruit or none. The shauing of Boxe, for it is colde and drie, stauncheth the Fluxe, if it be sod in pit water, as Dioscorides saith. And dyeth haire, yt is oft washed in the broth ther∣of. The sauour therof is bitter, as Plinius saith. lib. 17. cap. 17. The smell is heauie, & though it grieue the tast with sauour, yet it comforteth the sight. For it is al∣way, greene, & namely in Summer. In Winter ye leaues therof waxe some deale pale, but they fall not, as Albumasar sai∣eth. And the cause is of gleamy humour,
that is therein, and much fleeting moy∣sture that is in the roote, and therefore the leaues fall not. When heat commeth the humour is drawen outward, & then by working of heat the leaues be gréene. And when colde commeth, the humour is suittest inward, and then is great dri∣nosses; & so the coulour is yeolow or pale. And Boxe groweth in hot places & sto∣ny, and is therefore hard and sadly war∣red; but the trée within is smooth, & coue∣nable to bée planed: And holdeth long time shapes and figures, which be made therein: So thereof bée made fayre I∣mage & and long during. Also of Bore be bores ordeined and made to kéepe in Muske, & other manner of spicery, and is good to many manner of other vses, and necessities, which were ouer noyous and greath letting of time to rehearse them héere-all arowe. But such as wée haue rehearsed bée now sufficient, as for this slute. (Additiō.The lennes of Boxe is hot and dry, and not vsed to medicine, and is verye hurtfull for the braine.) Of Balauftias chap. 21. BAlaustia is the flowre that falleth of the Pomegranard, for when the Trée shal beare fruit, the flowers cleaue toge∣thers in a cluster, & fall off the trée some∣time. Aud Phisitions take and occupye them so the vsage of medicines: and then may be kept and preserued in great ver∣tue all the winter long. And Dioscori∣des sayth, this flowre Balaustia is colde and drye, and hath vertue to binde & so fordrie humours  Therefore it helpeth & is medicinable against the bloudy fluxe, & helpeth also against menstruall bloud, and, hath also vertue to staunch spuing and, admiting if it bée sodden in Uine get, and layde with a sunng to the breast pit. Also pouder thereof healeth and clo∣seth and sendreth wounde, and Pouder thereof healeth the game, and cleanseth and date away the rottings therof: & fast∣neth and maketh stedfast the roots of the saith, & also healeth welks of ye lips. And Pisidra, the rind of the same trée, doth all the same things, and namely the fruit & apple of the same trée: and the apple shall be taken when it is ripe. (Additiō.Balaustium, the flowre of a Pome∣granard, very africtiue and binding.) Of Beta. chap. 22. BEta is a cōmon a hearb of gardeins, as Diosc, saith and therof is double kind, blacke & white, & of either the iuyce drop∣ped into ye nosethrils, purgeth the head, & abateth ach of the eares and amendeth & doth away nits, & other vncleannesse of ye head, & speckles & moles of the face, and restoreth & saueth haire: and the leaues therof shoare & laid to, quencheth ye euill, which is called Sacerignis, the holy fire, & swageth gréene wounds, & nourisheth euill humours, if it be oft vsed, as Diosc. saith. Aristotle speaketh of Beta & sayeth, & men may graffe on a Bete stocke, as men doth on a Caustocke, & then ye Bete stock taketh strength, & turneth into a trée, as it is saide before, de natura Plan∣tarum. (Additiō.Beta candida, Beta nigra, Beta nigra Romana. Beetes are hot & drie, & abster∣tiue especially the white Béete, yt which is of a more cleansing nature.) Of Ceder  chap. 23. CEdrus is a Trée, and the Gréekes call it Cedros, as it were Ceomones Dri∣sticon, that is to vnderstand, humour of a burning trée. The leaues therof an∣swereth to lykenesse of Cipressus, as I∣sidore sayth. li. 17. And he sayth ther, that Cedery is a Trée with merrye smell, and indureth and abideth long time, and is neuer destroyed with mought, ney∣ther with: Terredo, that is the Tree worme. And for the Ceder indureth al∣waye, thereof bée Rastees and other Timber made, belonging to places of kings, and to Temples also. The Gumme of this Trée is called Cedri∣na, and is most necessarye, and kéepeth and saueth Bookes. For Bookes which bée vermissed with that Gumme, bée not fret with Wormes; neither age in time. This trée groweth in Affrica, and in
Siria, & namely in mount Libany. Then the Ceder trée is a most high trée, Lady and quéene of all other Trées, as Raba∣nus sayth super Psalt. and is most fayre in sight, & alway gréene with good smell, & the smell of it driueth away Serpents and al manner of veniuous wormes, as he saith: and it is most swéete in fruite. And the Apples of Ceder be great & long, and bée of eitrine or else of yeolowe cou∣lour, with & wonderfull smell and most pleasaunt sauour, and hath thrée manner of sauores: for in the middle about the graines, the Apples be chrine and sowre, and without swéete by the rinde, and meane betwéene swéet and sowre in the pith of the fruit within. Then the Ce∣der is of many diuerse and great dooing and vertues, and also full medicinable & wholsome For the gum therof is shaped some what in manner lyke to a top, and is sharp and seruent. And it burneth and drieth, as Dioscorides saith: and it wi∣peth and cleanseth away dimnesse of the eien. And it slaieth & destroieth ye wormes of the eares, and it helpeth agaynst the ach of the féeth, and it helpeth against the biting of Serpents. And also it doth a∣waye tingling and ringing in the eares, with the iuyce of Hisop. And swageth & abateth the swelling in the iawes, & hea∣leth certaine wounds in the lungs. And kéepeth & laueth soft flesh from rotting. The Ceder trée anointed with his owne gumme, kéepeth and saueth dead bodyes from rosting that be saide therein. Also the seede of Ceder abateth the cough, and exciteth menstruall bloud and bringeth out Secundinas, bagges that children Bée wrapped in, in the mothers wombe: and cleanseth and purgeth the Mother, and softeneth and slaketh sinewes that bée shrunke with the Crampe, and maketh one to pisse, and cleanseth awaie the gra∣uell in the reines and in the bladder: And Dioscoride, setteth many other vertues of Ceder, and of the iuyce and fruit there∣of. And Plinius speaketh of a maner Ce∣der in this wise: A certaine trée is called Modica, & is first brought out of ye lande of Medes, and the Gréekes call that Trée Agedia or Cedronilla. And hath ye name for it séemeth, that the apples thereof fol∣low the vertue of Ceder, and the sauour also, as Isidore saith, lib. 17. And Apples of the same Trée be contrary to venim, as Plinius sayth, and he sayth, that this Tree is full of fruite nigh alwayes: And some fruit thereof is ripe, and some greene and sowre, and some in blossome. And that is seldome seene in other trees. And many men call this tree Assyria, as he sayth. (Additiō.There are two forts of Ceder, great and small. The small fruit is also of two fortes, the one with sharp prickly leaues like Ioniper, the other are not prickly at all The Ceder is hot and dry in the third degree. Read Dodoneus.) Of Cipresso. cap. 24. CIpressus is called Ciparistus in Greeke, as Isidorus saith, lib. 17. For the head thereof ariseth round and sharpe vpwarde as a toppe, or a Pineapple with the point vpward. And such a point is called Conon, as it were another roundnesse. And the fruite thereof is of such a manner disposition, and hath this name therefore, and is called Conus. And to Cipresses are names and called Consete. This foresaid Cipres trée hath vertue much lyke vnto the Ceder tree, And is formable and necessarye to edist∣eng and building of Towres and Tem∣ples, and for other greate and pompeous coifices. And for because it may not not, efayleth neuer, but abideth and duteth and lasteth alwayes in the first estate and condition: and hath a right good sa∣uour A most swéetest smelling. Therfore in olde time men vsed for to make fire and fume of the braunches and twigges thereof, for to destroye and put awaye the stench and loathsome sauoure of dead carrions, and other daungerous and conlagious ayres. Huc vsque Isi∣dorus. The Cipres Tree is hot in the first degree, and it is also drie in the seconde degree. The Apples of ye sayd Tree, and ye stocke and leaues, be according and right necessary to medicine, as Platearius say∣eth. For they be sowre and healing, and sendereth and fasteneth. Therefore they
for to helpe against ye flures of the wombe, which commeth for de∣falt of the vertue retenlers; if it be made in pouder, and then receiued in meat or in drink and is medicinable, and helpeth against the sicknesse, & the passion Illiaca: and helpeth against the disease and ach of the loynes, if it be prepared and fodde its pit water. And Wine watered with the foresaid water & leaues of Cipres, clean∣seth, purgeth, and putteth away the cor∣ruption and filth of new woundes, and cureth and healeth the: euill, which is called Sacer agnis, called in English, the holy fire: and purgeth and cleanseth snée∣ueling nosethrills. And doth alwaye the stench, and stauncheth bléeding. The séeds of the sayd Cipres trée with drie figges, tempereth the hardnesse of the Reume, of stauncheth the fluxe: and helpeth against the venimous and deadly Postume, that is called Antrax, and beareth downe the mallice thereof, & letteth the spreading thereof, and withstandeth venimous bi∣ting. Dioscorides rehearseth al these ver∣tues of Cypres and many moe. Plinius lib. 17. cap. 33. sayeth, that the Cypres is a trée with many boughs and hath voire knappes in stéede of fruit, and hath bit∣ter leaues, and a violent smell, and gra∣cious shadow. Of Cipres is double man∣ner kind, male and female. The female is barren and faire in sight, ye boughs ther∣of be thicke at the top, and wound toge∣thers. The boughs of the male dée more thin, and if they be cut, they burgen as gaine. (Additiō.The fruit of Cypres taken into the body, stoppeth the laske and blondy flixe: it is good against he spitting of blond, the decoction made with water hath the same vertue.) Of Cipio. cap. 25. OF Ciprus it is written Can. 4. Ci∣pricum nardo, &c. Li. 12. ca. 26. Pli∣nius saith, yt the Cipre is a trée in Ae∣gypt lyke to Oliue in leaues, but the leaues bee more gréene and more fatte, with blacke flowres and white séede, swéete smelling. And if the seede be sod or confect with Oile, out therof in wrong an ointment for kings, which smelleth wel, and is most delicious, and is called Ciprus. Also Isidore, lib. 17. & the Glose Super Can. and Plinius meaneth, that the best of the kinde of this Trée grow∣eth in Aegypt vpon the riuer Nilus, in the region of Canopia: and the second in Alcalone, and the third in Ciprus. And thereof the smell is wonderfully swéete. And as the sayeth, to this Trée another Trées is like, which is called Aspalatos, and is lyke to the Rose in flowre. And of the root & flowre thereof is made a no∣table ointment. Also he saith, that in eue∣ry schrub, where the Rainebowe shineth straight thereon, is the same swéetnesse of sauour and smell, all the while that the Bowe shineth there, and if the bowe shineth on the same Tree, it maketh the smell & fairenesse of it increase more then we man tell, & is like to a white thorne and hauing the colour of fire, or is redde, & smelleth some deale as Castorium: and some men call it Elizeus Scyepter, as hée saith there. Héereto Diosc. saith, that Ci∣prus is a medicinable Trée, of couenable and giuing vertue. The leaues thereof shewed abateth swelling of the mouth. The broth thereof flaieth wormes of the head, & infedeth the haire, if it bée washed there with. The flowre thereof sod with vineger, doth away head ach, as he saith. Ciprus is a trée yt is called Lentiscus by another name. Looke the vertue thereof in littera L. (Additiō.Cuparisos, sorth of the Lentiske tree commeth the excellent gum or Ro∣seu called Masticke, it is in smal grains, as big as wheat cornes, & it is brought from ye Ile cyo, it is fayre, cleere, white, brittle, and of a sweet sauour.) Of Cinamonio, chap. 26. CAnel is called cinamum, thereof it is written Ecc. 1. and Exod. 30. And as the Glose saith there, it is a shrubbe that groweth in Inde, & in Aethiopia, & pas∣seth not two cubits in quātity, & is called Cinamum, for it hath small stalkes ben∣ded with coulour of ashes or of blacke colour: and of them when they be broke, commeth breath that is seene. The more
subtill and small canell is, the more déere it is, and the more greate it is, the lesse worth it is held. And lib. 17. Isido mea∣neld, that Canell hath that name Cina∣moro, for the rinde thereof is small and round, as a Cane, & groweth on a shore stocke with small braunches, and when it is broke, thereof commeth a breath as it were a mist smelling most I wéetly. Su∣per Ecc. 5. cap. 24. the Glose sayth ye Ca∣uell is a short trée with good smell and swéete, with coulour of Ashes: and is twice so good in medicine as the Pipe. Also lib. 12. ca. 21. Plinius speaketh of Ca∣nell, and sayth. That of Canel of Cas∣sia men tolde Fables in olde time, that it is found in Birds neaste, and special∣ly in the Phoenix neast. And may not be founde, but what falleth by his owne weight, or is smitten downe with Lead Arrowes: But these men doe segine to make things déere and of greate price: but as the truth meaneth, Canell grow∣eth among the Troglodites in the lydela Aethiopia, and commeth by long space of the sea in Ships to the hauen of Gel∣lenites. And is a short Trée of two en∣bites long at the most, and a span long at the least, and hath a stocke of foure as sixe inches greate, and smelleth not but when it dryeth. For drynesse is lyking thereto, & is most fructuous in Winter, contrary to the kinde of other trées. And groweth among briers & most thick bu∣shes, therefore it is not gathered without great trauel and difficultie. And no man hath leaue to gather thereof before ye Sun∣rising, nor after the Sun going downe. And when it is gathered, the Priest by measure dealeth the braunches, & taketh thereof a parte, and so by space of time merchaunts buye that other deale. The chiefe goodnesse thereof is in the most thickest and smallest braunch, & that that is in the middle of the flocke, is of little dame or of nothing for there is but lyt∣tle of the rinde. In the rinde is the most vertue and grace of Canell. Therfore the tops and the ouer partes be best of good∣nesse. For in them is much rinde. The Trée within is little or naught worth in comparison to the rinde. Huc vsque Pli∣nlus. li. 12 Dioscorides and Pla. meane, that Canell is hee in the third degree, and dry in the second degree. And of Canell i double manner kind, yt is to wit, smal and great. The great is lesse worth then the small, and leaue in vornitiue me∣dicines. And the small is better and more néedfull in other vadirines. The best is shinne and small, with sharpe biting sa∣uour, medled with swéetnesse, with some deale red coulour and with much good smell. And the Canell that is some deale white, is lesse worth. By good smell Canel hath vertue to comfort the braine, and hath vermedy softnesse of parts to souder and to fasten. Canell hath manye manner vertues, as Dioscori, sayth. For it abateth the cough, that commeth of thicke moisture. Pouder thereof medled with vineger, doth away scabs, and dry∣eth moisture of the ein meddled with Colirium, an ointment of the eien. And swageth the swelling of the reines, and eureth this dropsie, and healeth biting of créeping Wormes, and comforteth the appetite, & exciteth menstruall bloud, and openeth stopping, and defieth meale and drinke, and dissolueth, vndeeth, and de∣stroyeth Postumes. And Canell dronke with Wine, bringeth out Secundinas, bagges that children bée in, in the mo∣thers wombe. And wipeth away dim∣nese of eyen, and succoureth and help∣eth in sounding, and in the Cardiacle passion. (Additiō.The Trée of Cinamon is not much vnlyke a Bay trée, especially the leaues, it beareth Barries as doth the Baye trée, but lesse, and white. It is doubtlesse therefore, home other then barke of a Tree, and is gathered in this manner, Euery third yeare they cut the branches of the tree, of this is great plentie in the Iland of Zaylon. When it is first gathe∣red, it is not yet so swéete, but a moneth after when it waxeth drie. The Barke is the onelye spice, and the wood is lyke Firre tree very light.) Of Casia. chap. 27. OF Casia is mention made in Exod. 80. And is a certeine kinde of spice∣ry, with good smell and molde, and grow∣eth
in Arabia, as Isidore saleth. And is a rod with a strong rinde and red Purple leaues, as the rind of Pepper, and is lyke to Canell in vertue, but not so mighty in effect and déed. Therof in medicines dou∣ble weight is taken in stéed of Canell, as Isidore sayth. The Glose super Exod. 30 meaneth: that Casia bréedeth in watrye places, and groweth strongly, and giueth good smell, Leb. 12. ca. 21. Plinius speaketh of Casia, and sayth, that the trée of Casia groweth fast by Cinamum in fields, and is three cubites long, and his braunch is greatet then the braunch of Canell, and hath thrée colours. For the first is white, and then redde, and then blacke, and that parte is best, and the white is lesse worth, for it is soone eaten with wormes and holed, and that for it is soft in sub∣taunce, and for lesse bitternesse and ver∣tue of the rinde. Casia is proued when it is new, by smelling, sauour, and cou∣lour. For the noble Casia is some deale swéete and biting, sharpe of sauour, and swéete and merrye of smell, and browns as Pepper of coulour, and heauye of weight. And that casia is best that brea∣keth not soone, but bendeth and foldeth. And another manner of kinde of Casses is lyke to Balsamus of Saba in smell, but it is bitter. And therefore the first, that is blacke, with some deale sweete and biting in sauour, and with good smell, is more praysed among Phisiti∣ons. Huc vseq Plinius. ibidem. Platea and Dioscorides meane and speake of two manner Casia. The one is called casia sestula, and the other Ca∣sia lienea, that is the rinde of a lyttle trée, that groweth nigh the marches of Babylonia. And threof is diuerse man∣ner of kinde. One is like to Canell, and is some deale redde and round and sadds in substaunce, and foldeth not when it is broken or beaten, but with standeth, and hath a sharpe sauour, and some deale sweete. And vnneth Phisitions vse this manner kinde. The other manner kinds is same deale bitter with some deale di∣uerse colours, & Phisitions vse this man∣ner kinde. And that is best that breaketh not seene, but bendeth and foldeth, and hath sharpe sauour meddeled with swéetnesse with good smell, and hath when it is bro∣ken somwhat white coulours distingui∣shed within, withred medled among, and is sometime teined with medling of the rinde of Capar, but is knowen for it is some deale bitter of sauour, & hath ver∣tue diuisitiue of his subtil substance. Also Casia hath a vertue to temper, to diuide & depart, and hath of his owne qualities vertue to consume and to wast. And hath by good smell vertue of comforte, and cureth the rumes and colde causes, and helpeth them that haue the falling euill, and comforteth the braine, and purgeth the reines and the bladder, and ripeth & healeth Postumes, and vnstoppeth the liuer and the splerie and the remes, and hideth and doth awaye the stinke of the mouth, if it be chewed, and exciteth men∣struall bloud, and comforteth and help∣eth against fowning and failing of the heart, if a stroppe bée made of the pouder thereof, and of roses, and of he boane of in Hart. Huc vsque Dioscorides & plat. (Additiō.Casia, a sweete shrob or hearbe, bea∣ring a spice like Cynamon.) Of Casia fistula. cap. 28. GAsia fistula is the fruit of a certeine Trée, that beareth long séede, that waxeth in passing of time greate of thicke without, by working of heate of the Sunne, and the iuyre within is black and moist and swéet, and is medled with certeine white graines within, & diuided with small holes, as it were in the holes of is hurry combe. The best is the greatest & most heauy, for therein is much moisture. And that that is light, and maketh noise when it is moued, shal be forsaken. For that betoke∣neth veronesse & emptinesse. Casia fistula hath vertue to make slipper and soft, and to cleanse and to abate wonderfully the sitteth of blow, and so cleanse and pure Chotera and bloud, and to dissolue and destroye Postumes of the throate, and is good for the guties, and profitable and helpeth against euills of the breast, and bringeth forth new menstrual bloud, that
commeth of fat humour, & doth away the swelling of the ropes and guts, if it hée dronke Huc vs{que} Dios. And though men vse to write, & to sound Casia with dou∣ble S. yet it should be written & sounded with one single s. & so it should be writ∣ten and sounded Casia, and not Cassia, as Authors tell. (Additiō.Casia fistularis, the common Bur∣gation.) And so meaneth Quidiusais Methamo; Quo simul ac Casias & Nardi leuis aristas, &c. And to saith Plinius vhio; & other also. Of Calamo. cap. 29. Kalamos Aromati∣kos.A Certaine cane is called Calamus A∣romaticus, thereof it is written Exo. 30. & hath yt for likenes of common cane∣as Isidore sayth,Calamus a loratu lib. 18. and groweth in Inde, with knots in many places, with swéete smell, and smelleth wonderfullye swéete. And if it be broke or cut in many parts, it is like to Casta in sauour, with a little sharpe biting sauour, as Isidore saith Bapias meaneth, that it hath a ser∣uent vertue. In Glosa super Exod. 30. it is sayde, that Calamus Aromaticus is a manner of kinde of spicerie ye grow∣eth beside mount Libani, but where so euer it groweth, it is a manner kinde of spicery, that is hot and dry in the second degree, as Dioscorides, Dlat, and Plinius meane, and is the root of a certaine small trée or wéede, verye lyke to a cane, and hath a great smell, and is hollowe with∣in, as a cane, and in the holownesse a stick is found that shoulde be taken out, for it is of no value, but sometime it is lefte therin for to haue the more weight. And the same Authors meane & speake of dou∣ble manner of kinde of such Canes. The one is of Persia, and is citrine in colour, and the other is of Inde, & is some deale while, and turneth not very soone to pou∣der when it is broke, & hath a wonder∣full vertue of comforting, and so it com∣forteth the stomack, & helpeth digestion, namely, if it be tempered with wormes wood, our helpeth against the Cardiacle passion, and against sowning and failing of the heart, with water of Roses. And Plina, saith, that the smelling Cane is of Inde, & is best when it is somewhat red, full of knots and thick, & when it is bro∣ken in many parts, that he full drie, and is medicinable almost as Basta, or Ca∣nell Looke the vertues of them before. It exciteth menstruall bloud. (Additiō.Calamus is altogether vnknowne in shops, for that which they vse to sell for Calamus Aromaticus, is no réede, nor no roote of a réede, but in the root of a certein hearb like vnto the yeolow stagge; or ba∣stard Acorus, called (Spanish ranes.) the which roofe is taken for the right Aco∣rus. The Cane réed is hot and day, the A∣romaticall and swéete Cane, is also hot and drie in the second degrée. Dodo∣neus.) Of Calamo vsuali. cap. 30. STrawe, is called Calamus vsualis, as Isidore sayth, and hath that name of Calco, es, for it heateth somedeale when men blow therein. And properly it is the middle stalk of corne betwéene the root & the care. And in the care the corne and seede is conteined, & hath another name, and is called Culmus, as Isidore saith, & is hollow within, and round and smooth without, with some knots, strengthened, and clothed with many leaues, and hi∣dells, thereby the care profiteth and ta∣keth feedíng and nourishing, and if this stalke or strawe faileth, the ears is de∣stroied and lost with a little, blast of winds. This stalke moueth hether & the∣ther, and breaketh full soone, if it be mo∣ued and wagged: and beareth downe∣ward, and is vnneth reared or regarelled againe. (Additiō.With the strawe of Wheat they thatch houses, and with i straw they commonly make strawen hate because it is a tough strawe and will bende pli∣ant.) Of Calamo scripturali. ca. 31 A Writing penne is called Calamus scripturalis, thereof it is sayde in psalme, Lingua mea calamus scribe, Ve∣locuer scibentis.Psal. 44. My tongue is the
pen of the writer. And it is called a réed, for in olde time men vsed to write with reede, ere vse of feathers were founde. For as Plimus saith, lib. 16. cap. 34. A reede is good to many manner vses. And among water shrubbes réede is chiefe, and is néedfull in peace and in warre. For in the North Countrie men thetch their houses well with réede, and hang the réede in their dens ost to make them faire and gay, and pleasant. In the East Countries men warre and make them dartes of Reede, and be so long in many Countries that men vse them in stéed of Speares. And Reede hath a quicke roote, and so if the Reed be cut,In Tarra∣tie. then groweth other new, more plentuons. And some Réed is full of pith within, and some are all hollow within, which are very méete to make pipes off, but pithie Réeds yt are thick & knotty, accord more to warriours and to fighting men. And there in small réed, that groweth in places that be lesse watrie, and hath thinne stalkes, and bée full hard, and they haue no pith in man∣ner within, & are smooth and cléere with∣out,With this common reed they couer houses, & dresse ships. and not full of knottes, & such Réede is good to write with. And the fore part thereof is cut and sharped, and made a∣ble to write, & is somewhat clouen for to giue Inke the better. And the right side of the cleft is somewhat longer then the left side. There is other réed full of swéet pith, and is shredded small, and sod with softe fire in a Cauoron, vntill it bee thicke, and first it séemeth all tourned to foame and to skumme, but after that it hath rested, the most best and thicke sal∣leth to the grounde, and the foame abi∣deth aboue, & some is feined & is know∣en, for the good sprankleth in the mouth, and is full sweete. And the euill doth not so, but vanisheth, as it is saide in Plate. Of Capari. cap. 32. OF Caparis is mention made Eccle∣siast vltimo, and is a weede that groweth in the East, & the rinde, leaues, and flowres thereof accordeth to medi∣cine, and namely the rinde that is in the roote, as Plinius sayth, libro. 13. cap. 23. and the same Isidore sayeth. And as Isidore sayth, libro. 17. the Greekes call it Capparis, for it hath small rounde heads in the toppe. And Dioscorides speaketh of Capparis and saith, that it is an hearbe or athornie shrubbe spread on the grounde, and is full of vnction, and helpeth against the hardnesse of the splene aboue all other medicines, and groweth in harde places and drye, and namely in olde walls, and softneth the wombe: if it be eaten, it exciteth vrine, and shéedeth menstruall bloud, and abateth tooth ach, and iuyce thereof dropped in the Eares, slayeth Wormes thereof, and hath ma∣ny rootes good for the sayde things. In Platearius it is sayde, that as some men meane, Capparis is an hearbe, that shall be gathered in the beginning of spring∣ing time, and dryed and kept seauen yeere in great vertue, and is good and noble, and falleth not to pouder, when it is bro∣ken, and is some deale bitter in sauour, & some deale red in colour. The flowres thereof be hot while they bée closed, and of no value when they be spread. They be salted, and so kepte to good vse: and haue vertue to excite appetite, and to de∣fie humour in the mouth of the stomack: and be both meate and medicine. This wéede helpeth against deafness, if it be sod in Oyle, and put in the sore care. And pouder thereof helpeth against woundes that be feslured. (Additiō.Capparis, the fruit Capers, which is vsed in Sallet with Mutton, a kinde of sengreene, colde and dry in the third de∣gree, and not farre different from purse∣lane: a help against grose fleame, but let, that sound and whole bodies féed therof, for it hindereth generation.) Of Cardamomo. cap. 33. OF Cardamomum is mention made super Eze. And is the séede of a cer∣taine trée, that seedeth in springing time, as Dioscorides sayeth, and beareth knoppes hanging togethers as it were clusters of vines, and therein the seede is contained. And Cardomomum is double, lesse and more, & the more is called tame,
and the lesse is called wilde. The first is called the better, for it fauoureth better, & the better is some deale réd with sharp sauour medled with swéetnesse, and hath vertue to comfort and to wast, & helpeth therefore against the Cardiacle passion, & against wamblings and indignation of the stomacke, and exciteth appetite, and abateth spuing, and comforteth féeble braine, as Dioscorides and Platearius say. (Additiō.Cardamomum a spice comming out of Inde, in stéede whereof Apothecaryes now vse graines. The right Cardamo∣mum is of the coulour of graines, but as bigge as Pepper.) Of Calamento. cap. 34. CAlament is an hearbe lyke mint, thereof holy men in Glosa make sometime mention, and is double, as Dioscorides sayth and Platearius al∣so. One groweth in mountaines, and is the better of the twaine, and the other is as it were tame, and not so drye as the first. And hath vertue to fasten and to wast, for it is harde and drye in the third degrée, as he sayeth, and helpeth a∣gainst the cough, and against euills of the breast that commeth of colde, as doth Diacalamentum, which is a confection made of flowres and Pouder of that hearbe, and of other things, and healeth the euill and ach of the stomacke and of the guttes, and it helpeth against the reume and other colde euills, and hea∣leth biting of créeping wormes & beasts, and draweth outward the venimme. The iuyce therof done in ye ears helpeth the sores, and slayeth the Wormes, and it chastiseth lecherie, and helpeth against Lepra, and letteth it, and tarrieth and wasteth, and destroyeth superflui∣tie and moisture of the mother, as he sai∣eth, and hath manye other vertues, as Arthemesia: but this is sufficient at this time. (Additiō.There hée thrée fortes of Cala∣myne, each of them hauing a seuerall name and difference, Cornemint, or wilde Peniriall, Catmynt, & mountaine Calamynte. Read Dodoneus. fol. 247. Of Carice. chap. 35. CArix, Sedge, is an hearbe most harde and sharpe, as it is said, and the stalke therof is three cornered, & cutteth and car∣ueth the hand that it holdeth, if it be hard drawen there through. And hath leaues that cutteth in either side, & be long sha∣pen as a swoord, and hutteth neuer man, but he toucheth it. And it groweth in a marreis place & soft, and yet it sheweth that the substance therof is hath & kéene, and is accounted among kind of rushes, as Plin. saith, & he calleth it a thrée edged rush, and speaketh therof & sayth, that the root of a thrée edged rush is of good smell, and of good vertue, as the root of Calamus Aromaticus, but I vnderstande this is not generall, but speciall, as he maketh mention, lib. 12. Of Carix commeth this name Caretum, the place that sedge gro∣weth in, & the place that Wilows grow in is called Salictum, a salice, as Isidore sayth. (Additiō.Carex, Segges or sheregrasse, wher∣of is made mats and Hassocks to sit and knéele vpon, with the said Segs is made Hambroughs for the necks of horses, in stéed of Lether harnesse, & for other car∣lage and plough.) Of Carduo. chap. 36. CArduus is Gréeke,Cardus slellatus. as Isidore sayeth, and is a manner hearbe or wéed with prickes. The kinde thereof is beting and cruell. Therefore the iuyce thereof cureth the falling of the haire. Dio∣scorides speaketh of this hearbs and say∣eth. That the roote therof fodde in wa∣ter, giueth appetite to drinkers, and is most profitable to the mother, and there∣fore it is no wonder though women de∣sire it. For it helpeth the conception of male children, as he sayth. And Carduus is a male hearbe full of prickes, and in the toppe hath heads with prickes in stalkes. In the which heads the séed is conteined, that is black without and white within. The pith and the séede is of vertue of departing, and dealing, and helpeth agaynst
the stone both in the bladder and in the reines, and groweth in a desolate place, and is eaten of Asses, and troden of beasts, as it is sayde. 3. Regum. 14. ca∣pitulo. AdditionCarduus Libani misit ad Cedrum qui est Libano, dicens, Da filiam tuam, filio meo vxorem. Transieruntque be∣stiae saltus, quae sunt in Libano, & con∣culcauerunt Carduum, &c. A Thistle that is in Libanō sēt to the Ceder tree, that is in Libanus, sayeng: Giue thy daughter to my sonne to wife, and the wilde beasts that was in Libanon, went the trode downe the Thistle, &c. And li. 20. ca. 16. Plinius speaketh of Carduus and sateth, that Carduus hath leaues with prickes and pricking heads thereon: and the seed and the root may bée eaten. And there is one manner Carduus blometh all the Summer continually, & when one falleth, another springeth, and when the leaues be drie, the pricks leaue to prick and sting. Ther is another man∣ner Carduus, that is enimy to corne, that groweth in earth, as he saieth, and hath much seede, and may vnneth therfore bée destroyed where it once groweth, but the weathers busily drawe vp the moore and rootes. And in drawing vp of Car∣duus, mennes fingers be oft gréeued with prickes, by these properties it séemeth, that Cardui bée Thistles greate and small. (Additiō.Of the kindes of Cardus, Thistles, are diuerse, Carduus Ramptarius, our Ladies Thistle, the leaues gréene, and the daines of the leaues white. Spina pere∣grins, the Gloabe Thistle, or the Oate Thistle. Acanthium, the common fielde Thistle or Cotton Thistle. Leucacan∣tha Carlina, white carroline Thistle. Spina Arabica, the Arabian Thistle. Carlina syluestra, wilde woode Thistle or Saffion bastard, or Carthamus, Car∣dus Benedictus, ye blessed Thistle, whose operation is hot and drye. Cardus syl∣uestris, whereof are thrée kindes also. Last of all are two sortes of Thistles, called Artechokes, which béeing eaten rawe and young doe choake the heart, by bréeding rawe iuyce and Cholera, but sodden, and with Uineger and Pepper seasoned, and a good quantitie of swéete Butter, the pith so eaten hurteth verye seldome those, who beeing pampered with daintye fare, haue eaten too much alreadie, of small nourishment, and yet as some write, they stirre by lecherye in women, and diminish the same in men. Whatsoeuer is else written of ye Arthi∣choke of late is fabulous, yet too good for those that regard no truth. Reade D. Turner. Aetius writeth, that the roote of the Arthichocke sodden in Wine and dronke, driueth foorth stinking vrine. Galen sayth they haue a naughtye iuyce, and maketh euill iuyce in the bodie. Pli∣nie. Hesyodus, &c. Reade Dodone∣us. fol. 523.) Of Carica. chap. 37. CArica is a drye Figge Trée, and hath that name of plentie. For euery yeere it beareth fruite three or foure times, as Isidore sayeth, whie one ripeth, ano∣ther springeth and commeth in the stead, and it is sayde, that if olde men eate oft such Figs, they doe away theyr ri∣uells, as he sayeth. Dioscorides sayeth, that among fruite drie Figges be swée∣test, and be good in meates and in medi∣cines, and nourish much, and fatteth and bréed much grose bloud, and comforteth feeble men, and cleanseth the breast, and abateth the cough, and cleereth the voice, and swageth the swelling of the iawes, and purgeth the reines, the bladder, and the mother, as Phisick mea∣neth. And such Figges sodde in Wine with Wormewood, cureth the dropsie, and purgeth the itching of the Eares, if they be stamped or grounde withThat is novv cal∣led Mutstard iced Sey∣neuey, but and they be too much vsed in meate, they breede swelling ventositye, and Lice also, as Dioscorides sayeth. Looke other vertues heereafter de Fi∣cu. (Additiō.Carice is a kinde of Figge which groweth onely in Syria, there is the gar∣dein Figge with the wild Figge, whose operation are after the soile whereon they grow.)
Of Cimino. chap. 38. COmin is called Ciminum, and is a séede with good smell, and with pale coulour, as Dioscorides and Macrobius say, therefore Persius saith in this man∣ner. Rugosum piper est, pallentis grana ci∣mini. His meaning is, that Pepper is ri∣ueled, and the graine of Comin is pale: and is hot and drye in the second degrée, and hath vertue to temper, and to de∣part, and to distribute, and to abate thick∣nesse of fumositie, and to comfort dige∣stion, and to abate ventositie and ach of the stomacke: and to do away smelling, and to staunch the flixe of the wombe, if it bée dipped in Uineger, and first per∣ched and blowen into the nosethrilles, that it may make a man sneese, and it stauncheth bleeding at the nose, and swa∣geth and healeth swelling and ach of the iawes, and with Bayes of the Laurell trée, it helpeth colde reume, and dissol∣ueth and doth awaye bloudye reume in the eie, if it be well meddeled with cléere Waxe, and layde oft thereto. Pouder thereof well meddeled with Waxe, doth alwaye wanne coulour, that commeth of smiting, or otherwise, if it bee layde ofte therto: but by oft vse thereof. the face shall be discouloured. Huc vsque Dioscorides, and Plat. And Plinius sayeth nigh the same, libro. 20 capitulo. 16. where hée sayeth, that some Comin is tame, and some is wilde, and hée sayth, it accordeth to ma∣ny medicines and remedyes, and namely of the stomacke: for it doth away swel∣ling and blowing thereof, and destroy∣eth ach, and gnawing of guttes and roayes. (Additiō.Cumminum, called Seseli, as Dio∣scorides writeth, is of thrée sorts, the first is called Seseli Masilience: the seconde, Seseli Aethiopium: the third Seseli Pe∣loponnense. The séede and roote are hot and drye in the second degrée. The séede dronke with wine comforteth the heart, helpeth digestion, driueth awaye gnaw∣ing and griping in the bellye, it prouo∣keth vrine, expulseth the dead childe, and setteleth the Matrixe, and is sayde to bée good in curing the falling Euill, so that the disease haue not continued long.) Of Coriandro. chap. 39. OF Coriander is mention made Ex∣odus, verse. 31. and is a smelling séed: and the Gréekes call it Corlon, as Isi∣dore sayth, libro. 17. The séede thereof taken in swéete milke, maketh men the more prest to serue Venus. But yet it néedeth to beware. For without doubt, if men take too much thereof, it bréedeth woodnesse and léesing of wit, and if a ve∣nimous hearbe to boundes, for it slayeth them, if they eate thereof, as Isidore say∣eth, and Papias. And he sayeth further∣more, that Coriander taken in meate, heateth and constraineth and hardneth, and bréedeth sleepe. And Authors meane, that it hath compounded vertue. Of the hearb Coriander Macer saith in his booke thus. Frigida vis herbe Coriandri dicitur es∣se, Austeraeque simul quiddam virtutis ha∣bere. That is to say: The hearbe Corian∣der is colde, and hath somewhat of cruell vertue. Galen sayth, that by this hearbe oft men destroy moughts, and putteth long Wormes out of the wombe, if it bee ground and dronke with wine, or med∣led with vineger. And this hearbe hath a good smell in it selfe while it is whole and sounde, and stinketh, if it be froted with handes, the seede thereof is white and small. (Additiō.This hearbe of some is called Ca∣liander, and is colde drye, and a daun∣gerous seede, if it be eaten rawe or vn∣prepared, it killeth the bodie.) Of coloquintida. chap. 40.
OF Coloquintida mention is made 4. Regum quarto, & is a maner hearb, that is most bitter, and is called Cucur∣bita agrestis, as it were a manner wilde wéede, for the spraye thereof bréedeth by the grounde, and is like to the common gourde, & hath round fruite. This hearb stretcheth and spreadeth in hedges, as a vine doeth, and hath much small fruite and rounde, as Isidorus sayeth, li∣bro. 17. Dioscor. sayeth, that Coloquintida, that is called Cucurbita Alexandrina, is sometime found alone, and then it is deadly and venemous, as is the hearbe that is called Squilla, id est, Cepamarina and griueth not all thing so much, when it is found with many other, and hath pith, rinde and séede. The pith is best in medicine, and the séede is secondarie, and the rinde is little or nothing woorthe in vertue: and so the pith that is white, is good, in which the séede is well pight: & of that that maketh much noyse when it is smitten, is little force, and also if it fal soone to pouder. It hath vertue to dis∣solue and to wast, and of his bitternesse, hath also vertue to depart and to deale, and to thirle, and by subtiltie of his sub∣staunce, it purgeth sleume and melancho∣ly, & it is said that it helpeth the quoti∣dian and quartane, and against scabs, if it be giuen in due manner to the Pati∣ent, and healeth tooth ache, and bringeth out wormes of the wombe. Pouder thereof staieth wormes of the eares, and openeth the hardnesse of the splene and of the liuer, if the iuyce ther∣of be dronke with Fenell. The broathe thereof, openeth the Emoroydes, and veynes of bloud, and bringeth out men∣struall bloud, and hath these vertues, and manye other moe, as Dioscorides sayeth, and Pltea, and Plinius al∣so. (Additiō.Coloquintida, is hot and dry in the thirds degrée. Without discréete vsage, it is excéeding hurtfull to the heart, the stomacke and lyuer.) Of Coccus the most fruitefull tree in Calicut, and of all the worlde. COccus groweth in the West India,Addition whose fruitefulnesse and sweetenesse, Passeth all the trees of the world. It bea∣reth certaine fruites, like vnto great Dates or Nuttes, and generally bring∣eth foorth ten commodities: for it bea∣reth wood most apte to kindle fire, and Nuttes very pleasaunt to be eaten, also cordes or ropes, which maye well serue for saylers. Likewise verye fine cloathe is made of a kinde of gosse lyke wooll, which when it is couloured, sheweth lyke Silke. The woode is the best that maye be fonnde to make coales. It yeel∣deth from the saype, wine, and oditerous water: forth of the which trée also, as a kinde of Turpentine or Gumme, pro∣ceedeth a moysture lyquide as Oyle, and a brittle iuyce, as Sugar hardeneth, and is verie pleasant. One tree heareth ma∣nye of these fruites, whereof the grea∣test are as bigge as a mans fist, suppo∣sed the Nux Indica. The cut braunches will droppe as the Uine, A pleasaunt drinke. Taking awaye the first rinde or barke, they put it in ye fire, where it bus∣neth quickly and with great flame. The seconde fruite vnder the same first rine or rime, is much lyke vnto Bom∣bace or Silke; and is not vnlike to bea∣ten or wrought Flaxe. Of the flowers, they make a certaine kinde of cloathe, not vnlyke Silke: of the course sowe, or refuse, they make cordes: and of the finer, tacklyng for shippes: so that what serueth not for cloath, serueth for cords: within the Nut is a lycour swéete, whi∣tish and fattie. This straunge Trée beareth fruite continuallye. They are so greatly estée∣med that in their greatest discordes or warre, it is not lawfull for anye man to hurte them, euen in the landes of their Enemyes. They lyue but the age of fiue and twentie yeares.
¶Of Croco. cap. 41. OF Saffron is mention made. Eccl. 4 & Tren. vlt. And Saffron is called Crocus, and is an hearbe, and hath that name Crocus of the Citie Coricius, for there is most aboundaunce thereof, as Isidore sayeth libro. 17. And the hearbe with the Flower, hath that name Crocus, but the flower in the which is the most vertue, is called Crocum. And the freshest and newest is best, yt is with good smell, long & little, som what white, whole, and not broken in gobbets & in péeces, and smelleth well, and couloureth the hands that toucheth it, and is lyght and sharp, and if it be not such, it is kno∣wen that it is olde or wet, and is some∣time counterfaited with a thing that is called Crocomagina, for to increase the waight with foyle of siluer ground, but it is espied, if it be slow to grinding, or if it chaungeth his owne smell, when it is sod. Crocomagina is called the super∣fluitie of spicerie, of the which Saffron Oyntment is made. Huc. vs{que} Isid. Dioscorides meaneth and speaketh of two manner Saffrons. One is called Hortensis, and hath that name of Gar∣dens, for it groweth therein. The other is called Orientalis, and hath also the name of the place that it groweth in, & is best, and shall not be put in vomitiue medicines, and it beareth a purple flow∣er with a head as a violet, & in the mid∣dle thereof thrée flowers or foure, & the best thereof be somwhat red, or all red, and the whitest shall be forsaken. Saf∣fron may be kept ten yeare, and is hot & drye in the first degrée, and temperate in his qualitie, and therefore it is comfor∣tatiue, and so it helpeth much against the féeblenesse of the stomack, and fayling of heart, and doth away rednesse of eyen, which commeth of bloud, or of defflyng, if it be ground with roses and the white of an Egge, and laid to the eye, as Dio. saith and Pla. also. And Saffron hath another property, that it is gréene all the Winter long in leaues, be the Winter neuer so colde: & in Summer the leaues of it falleth and fadeth, and withereth altogether, & grow∣eth againe after the middle of Haruest, & then the floures breaketh out of small stalkes, and as Arist. sayth in li. vegita. Saffron is much lyke to an Onion, and to Ascolonia in roote, neuerthelesse it is diuers and varieth from either: For the roote of Saffron is continued to the body, and séedeth not as Ascolonia doth, but all the seminall vertue is in ye roote, and all the cloues of Saffron be leane, & the cloues thereof springeth not out at one side, as it fareth in Ascolonia, and in an Onion of Gardeines: but the cloues of Saffron springeth out of the place of generation of veynes of cloues. And Saffron hath this propertie, as Arist. saith, it hath very rootes, and clea∣neth thereby to the earth, and sucketh nourishing and féeding, as Onions and Garlike and other such, & when the head of Saffron is great and ripe, it begin∣neth to be departed and to be dealed, and multiplyed in manye heades, with theyr fell and skins and rootes: and of euerye each groweth a plant, and thereby it is knowen, that in the head or roote is the vertue seminall, and the vertue of mul∣tiplication and preseruation of the kind therof. Plin. li. 20. sayth, that Saffron is not soone tempered with honye nor with swéete lycour: but it is tempred soonest with wine or with water, and it is best in medicine: for it destroyeth all swel∣lyng and boyling, and sore ache of the eyen, namely if it be medled with wine, and is best for the stomacke and lyuer. He that drinketh Saffron first shall not be dronken, & garlands thereof letteth dronkennes, & letteth a man yt he may not be dronken, it causeth sléepe, & moueth the head, and exciteth Venus. The flower thereof, done to the euill that is called the holy fire, helpeth and cureth it. Of Saffron is made an oynt∣ment, that is citrine or yeolow, which is called Clogomagon in Gréeke, and help∣eth against running of eyen. The best di∣eth the téeth and the spettle, and pour∣geth botches of the head, and abateth swelling: and cureth the biting of ser∣pents and of Spiders, and stinging of Scorpions. Huc vsque Plinius.
(AdditiōCrocus Hortensis, and Crocus Sa∣racenicus. The English Saffron is most best, both for colour and medicine.) ¶Of Cepa. chap. 42. AN Onion is called Cepa or Cepe, & is all hearbe, that hath all his vertue, in the roote and in the seede, and is ther∣fore called Cepe, as Isidore saith, for it hath naught but a head. In lib. de plan∣tes Aristotle speaketh of the alon and sayeth, that the Onion and Ascolo∣ina beareth leaues twice in one yeare, and the Onion hath a stalke and beareth séede thereon, and hath a roote be clypped, with many cloues, and hath ther vnder, other rootes, as though it were hayrie. And thereby the great roote taketh nou∣rishing and féeding, and radicall humor is sent into all thé hearbe. And in ye first yere this hearb profiteth not in the roote, but in the second yeare after that it is solved, nor séedeth commonly before the second yeare, nor beareth séed in one skin as Garlike doth and other such, but in the top of the stalke the seede springeth & spreadeth on small stalkes. Of Onions is double kinde, tame & wilde, that Aristotle calleth Canina, as it were an Hounds Onion. This Oni∣on Canina hath white flowers towarde heauen, and somwhat gréene toward the earth; and such an onion helpeth against postlimes. And the tame Onion hath an hollow stalke without knots, and rene∣weth both ioynts and leaues, as Aristo. saith in libr. predicto. And Dioscorides saith, that the tame Onion is good & pro∣fitable both in meate & in medicine, & is gleymie and colde of kinde, and namelye that that is ruen long, and the red more than the white, and more the drye than the new, and more rawe than sodde. And doth away griefes of the wombe, and a∣bateth stinch of the mouth, and softneth the wombe and maketh meate sauourie. And the iuyce thereof helpeth them that haue the Litargio that is the sléeping e∣uill, and abaseth ofte ache of the éares, if it be with womans milke dropped there∣in. If it be eaten couenably, it foreker∣neth and departeth gleymie humours, & openeth the mouthes of the veynes, and exciteth vrine and menstruall bloud, and bringeth out venime, and quencheth bi∣ting of a mad dog, and helpeth in other venimes by bitings, and clarifieth the skinne and openeth the poores, and exci∣teth therefore sweate, & maketh it break out and giueth to ye body no nourishing, when it is eaten rawe: and it grieueth cholericke men, and accordeth to fleama∣tike men, & bréedeth thirst and swelling: & noieth & grieueth the head with sharp∣nesse, and to eate too much of them, brée∣deth madnesse and woodnes, and maketh dreadfull dreames, & namely if men that be new recouered of sicknesse, eate too much thereof. Onions when yée eate them maketh the eien watrye, and grie∣ueth the light only with sauour. Huc vs∣que Dioscorides. (Additiō.There be diuers sorts of Onions, some white, some red, some rounde, some great, some small, but all of one fauour & propertie, sauing that the one is some∣what stronger in working, then an o∣ther, &c.) Of Sepe Canino. cap. 34. CEpe caninum, as it were an hounds Onion is called Squilla also, and is found by the sea side. Therefore Platear. calleth it Sepe marina, as it were a Sea Onion, and is sometime found alone, and is then venimous if it be eaten, except the venimme thereof be quenched. Men vse to depart it in manye partes, and plant them in closed Gardeins, and so quench the venimme thereof. And the mallice thereof quencheth, if it bée done a little space in Wine or in Oyle, and so it is put in medicine. This Onion shall bée cut: and the inner part and the vtter shal be throwen away. For the vtter part is venimous for too much heate, and the in∣ner for too much drinesse: but the middle part is full temporate and according to medicine. Libro. 20. cap. 17. Plinius speaketh of Onions & saith, that among the Gréekes is many manner kinde of Onions, & all their smell maketh eien watrie, and the most round are best, and the sharpe and
red are more bitter than the white, and more raw than sod, and is both set and sowen, and beareth no seede before the second yeare when it is sowen. It bea∣reth seede, and then the head is corrupt & destroyed. The head commeth of corrup∣tion of the seede that is sowen, and seed∣ing is corruption of the seede that is so∣wen, & seeding is corruption of the head. Onion seede will be sowen in land that is dolue and cleansed of rootes and other hearbes: the seede thereof is cut and ga∣thered when it beginneth to were black or it be all ripe. Onions be best kepte in straw, and to keep them without rotting, they must be washed with luke warme hot salt water, and so they dure the lon∣ger, and be the better to eate: but to set and to sowe, they be better kept in sacks. And many men hang Onions and Gar∣like in smoke ouer the re, & be so kept, for they should not spire and grow. Ofte Onions and Garlike spireth, though they be not in earth, but it be let by craft and cunning. Also li 20. ca 7. he saith, yt wild Onions be not full wholsome nor full good to eate, but they be ful medicinable, and healeth dimnesse with the smell, and exciteth most with vnction, and healeth boiches, and cureth hounds biting, with honie and with wine, and helpeth against biting of Serpents, and healeth tingling of eares and deafnesse, and helpeth ach of the reines, with Goose greace or with ho∣nie, and pourgeth and healeth woundes, meddeled with honnie. Huc vsque Pli∣nius. (Additiō.Squilla, the sea Onion, the white field Onion, and Bulbus, which some call Liltes of Alexander: temperate in heat and drinesse.) ¶Of Cucumere. chap. 44. CVcumer, cucumeris, is an hearbe of whom Isid. speaketh, lib. 17. & saith, that those hearbes Cucumers haue that name, for they be bitter sometime, & may not growe swéete, but if ye seed ther∣of be put in swéete milke medled with honie. And Dioscorides saith, yt the kind of this hearbe is colde, and slaketh the wombe, and helpeth the stomacke, and succoureth faint heartes with smell, for leaues therof stamped is medicinable for biting of hounds, & the séede thereof bru∣sed and dronke with swéete wine helpeth the sore bladder. Lib. 12. cap. 2. & 3. Pli∣nius saith, that some Cucumer is tame, & some wilde, and the roote therof is white and grose, & of the iuice thereof, is made an Electparie, that is néedfull in manye medicines. (Additiō.Cucumbers are colde and moyst, in the second degrée.) ¶Of Cucurbita. chap. 45. CVcurbita is a name of Gréeke, and the originall thereof is vncertaine to Latines, as Isi. sayth li. 1. and Plin. saith the same, that there be many kinds ther∣of. And some Cucurbita is tame, & some wilde. The tame spreadeth in boughes, and braunches, and leaues, as a Uine do∣eth, and bindeth it selfe with certaine fa∣stenings and bindings as a vine doth, & beareth somewhat white flowers, which spring out thereof: namely against night, it bloometh and beareth blossom without vndersetling, but the fruite thereof fay∣leth and rotteth, without that it be reared vp from the ground, & rayled with logs, and rods: as it were a vine. Platea saith: that Cucurbita is colde & moyst of com∣plection, and temperate in qualities, and is most found in hot countries & lands. Of the séede thereof sowen, commeth an hearbe, and thereof commeth white flo∣wers, and fruite at the last, full of séede & of pith, and the rinde therof is first soft, and then hard as a trée, when it is ripe. The fruite thereof when it is newe, ac∣cordeth to meate, and the séede to medi∣cine. The seede thereof hath vertue to depart, and to shed hard matter: for the substaunce thereof is subtill, and helpeth therefore against the stopping of the liuer and reynes and bladder, and is to such, as haue the Feauer ague, both meate & medicine, rosted or fried, for it purgeth the matter by vrine, and lareth and aba∣teth the heate, and comforteth the sicke. The seede thereof is gathered when it is ripe, and washed, & dried in the Sun, that it be not corrupt by superfluitie of
moysture, and is kept thrée yeare in a drie place. Huc vs{que} Plat. And Plinlus saith, that the iuyce of this hearbe, helpeth against the euill that is called the holy fire, & against ye swel∣ling of eyen, & abateth ache of the eares, if it be milke hot put therein, and pow∣der of the séede thereof, filleth vp hollowe wounds: and ashes of the rinde helpeth against burning. Li. 20. cap. 4. Plin. saith, there is a wilde Cucurbita, as great as a finger, and groweth in stonie places, & the iuyce thereof helpeth much the sto∣macke & guts, & the palsie of the loynes & reynes. The pith thereof with worme∣wood and salt, doth away tooth ache: iuyce thereof heat with vineger, fasteneth téeth that wag. The substaunce thereof with∣out séede, healeth postumes of the féete: wine heat therewith, doth away réeses of the eyen: leaues thereof sod and stam∣ped, helpeth wounds: seede therof dronk with wine, ouercommeth venime, & shall not be eaten, for it bréedeth swelling. Li. 17. Isid. saith, that wild Cucurbita is the same ye Coloquintida is, a maner With∣winde, a well bitter hearb, and springeth in braunches toward the ground, as Cu∣curbita doth, and hath great leaues with heauie smell, as Cucurbita hath, as Isid. saith there. Looke before De natura Col∣loquintide. It seemeth, that the first ma∣ner Cucurbita beareth gourds, & that the worst maner cucumer bereth Pinopins. (Additiō.The Gourd is colde and moyst in the seconde degrée, whereof two kindes are called Pompeons.) ¶Of Celidonia. cap. 46. CElidonia is an hearbe with yeolowe floures, the fruite staineth them that it toucheth, and is called Celidonia, for it springeth or bloometh in the comming of Swallowes, as Isid. saith lib. 17. For a Swallow is called Celidon in Gréeke. Or els as Isidore saith, it is called Celi∣donia, because it helpeth Swallowes birdes if their eyen be hurt or blind. And Plinius rehearseth the same, & saith, that by the iuyce of Celidonia, Swallowes eyes turneth againe to the first state, if they be hurt or put out, and hath ver∣tues that be noble and good, and dissol∣ueth, draweth and wasieth, as Dioscori∣des saith, and abateth ache, and purgeth the head, and menstruall bloude, and cleanseth the Mother, and cure the F∣ster and Canker of the mouth, as Plinius saieth, and Dioscorides, and Plateari∣us also. (Additiō.Selidoniae, Salendine, it is called, Fig-wort, and Marsh Marigolde. The two Selandines are hot and drie in the third degree. The Marsh Marigolde is not vsed in Phisicke.) ¶Of Centauria. cap. 47. CEntauria is a right bitter hearbe, hot and drye in the third degree, & is called therfore the gall of the earth, as Isidore sayeth: for one that was cal∣led. Acheronecentaurus found & knewe first the vertue thereof, as Isidore sayth, lib. 17. And thereof is two maner kinds, the more & the lesse: the first hath more greater blossomes and ftes, and is of more vertue than the lesse, as it is sayde in Platearius. And Constant. saith there, that it is said, that the roote of the more is hot and drie in the second degree, and hath some bitternesse with sweetenesse, & hath the∣fore vertue of fastening together, and of the bitternesse it hath vertue of tempring and of dealing, and the leaues & floures haue more vertue in medicine, than other things thereof. This hearbe abateth wombe ache, and cléereth sight, and vn∣stoppeth the splene and the reines, and cureth the pally, and slaieth wormes of the wombe medled with hony, the roote thereof closeth and helpeth wounds, as Plinius saith, and Dioscorides, and Pla∣tearius also. (Additiō.Centorie, the hearbe is bitter, and of two kinds, the greate, hot and drie in the third degrée, the lesse hot and drie in the second.) Of Daphni. cap. 48. THe Laurel trée is called Daphnis in Gréeke, and Laurus in Latine, as Isi∣dore saith, li. 17. and this hath the name
Laurus of Lau, praising: for in great worship and praising Conquerors were sometime crowned with Garlandes of boughes of the Laurell trée. In old time it was called Laudea, but afterward D. was changed into R. and the Tree was called Laurus, as sometime ye vndertide, was called Medidies, as Isi. saith. And ye Gréekes call this trée Daphnes, for it is alway gréene winter & sūmer. Therfore ctors were speciallye crowned there∣with, as Isidore sayth: and saieth there∣to, that the common fame is, that onelye this tree is not smit with Lightening, therefore it was hallowed to Apollo, by olde time. Of this trée speaketh the Maister in history, super illud verbum, Consiluit I∣saac Dominum, super Gen. 17. and saith: that Rebecca for trembling of Nations that she had séene in them that perished, she laid a manner Laurell trée that she called Tripodem, vnder hir head, & sate hir vpon boughes of an hearbe that was called Agnus castus, for to vse very Re∣uelations and sights, and not fantasies. Lib. 16. cap. 30. Pliny speaketh of the Laurell trée and saieth, that this Tree is properly hallowed to triumphal worship of Conquerours, and is had in houses of Emperours and of Bishops, for it wor∣shippeth the house, and maketh it faire. And there is two kindes, one is called Delphica, and the other Ciprica: With the Laurell Delphica, the Delphes were first crowned, when they were first Uic∣tors. And afterwarde with the Laurell Ciprica the Romanes crowned their vic∣tors. And now is manye manner kinde of Laurell trée, but they be diuers in gréene colour and in greatnesse of leaues, and in likenesse of Bayes: and is a trée of many manner kinde. And Plin. rec∣koneth thirteene manner kindes of the same tree, among whom he reckoneth one manner kinde, that was hallowed to the great Iupiter, and to Appollo Delphi∣cus. Therefore the lande that beareth Laurell trée, is safe from lightening both in field and in house, and Appollo vsed not to giue answeres, but in presence of Laurell trees. And some men supposed, that this trée was according to the seruice and wor∣ship of God, and for that cause it was had in worship in Triumphes and victorie. And it was not lawful to defile ye Lau∣rell trée in vnhonest and vnlawful vses, for it should be offered and set vpon Al∣tars to please the Gods therewith. The Emperour Tiberius Caesar, in thundering and lightening, vsed a Gar∣land of Laurell trée on his head, against dread of lightening, as it is sayde. Also ther Plinius telleth a wonderous thing, that the Emperour sate by Drucilla the Empresse in a certaine gardeine, and an Eagle threwe from a right high place, a wonderful white Hen into the Empresse lappe whole and sound, and the Hen held in hir bill a bough of Laurell trée full of Bayes, and Diuinors tooke heeds to the Hen, and sowed the Bayes, & kept them wisely, and of them came a Woode, that was called Silua Triumphans, as it wer the Wood of worship, for victorie & ma∣sterie: for afterward the Emperour bare Laurell trée in his hand, and a garlande thereof on his head. And afterward other Emperors in ye same wise shuld be crow∣ned with Laurell trée of the same wood, when they had victory. Huc vsque Plin. And Diosco. telleth more of the Laurel trée and sayth, that it is a trée of séemly shape and of great smell, and is good and of wonderfull vertue, for ye gréene leaues thereof, that smell full well, if they bée stamped, healeth stinging of Bées and of Waspes, and doth away all swellings, and keepeth bookes and cloathes that it is among, from mothes & other wormes, and saueth them from frétling and gna∣wing. The fruite of Laurell trée are cal∣led Bayes, and be browne or red with∣out, and white within and vnctuous. They be round in shape, hot in complec∣tion, and drye in the second degrée, with subtill substaunce and vertue of pourg∣ing and comforting, therfore they be pro∣fitable to be put in many medicines. Of Bayes is made precious oyle, that help∣eth against many euills & colde passions. (Additiō.The Bay trée is of some taken for the Lauriell: notwithstanding they are two seuerall trées, & yet the Lauriell is rather an hearb than a trée. Read Dod.)
¶Of Diptanno. chap. 49. DIptannus is a medicinable hearbe, & the roote thereof accordeth most to medicines. And the substaunce thereof shall be whole and not pearsed, and fal∣leth not to pouder when it is broke, and hath vertue to dissolue and temper, to drawe and wast venime, and venemous biting, if it be dronk & laid to the wound, as Dioscorides saith and Platea also. And it is sayd, that it hath the vertue of riacle in many things, with few things put thereto, & exciteth menstruall bloud, and bringeth out the Secundine, the bag that ye childe is in, in ye mothers womb, and bringeth out a dead childe of ye mo∣thers womb, and helpeth them that haue the falling euill & the palsie, with iuyce of rewe, as he saith. In Pli. li. 26. ca. 8 it is said, that a Hinde taught first the vertue of Diptannus, for she eateth this hearb, that she may calue easelyer and sooner: if she be hurte with an arrow, she seeketh this hearbe, and ca∣teth it, which putteth the yron out of the wound, as Basilius saith in Exameron, and Ambrosius and the Expositor super ca. where he speaketh of Hinde calues. Isidore saith, that this hearb groweth in manye places, but that that groweth in fat fields, is little worth, and that that groweth in drie places & stonie is best, and a little thereof tasted, heateth the mouth, as he saith. And libr. 17. Isidore saith in this manner, Diptannus is a mount in Creta now called Candie, and thereof this hearbe Diptannus hath the name. Virgil sayth, that a Hinde woun∣ded, goeth about in the landes and see∣keth this hearbe Diptannus. This hearb is of so great vertue, that it driueth and putteth yron out of the bedre: therefore beasts smitten with arrowes, eate there∣of, and driue the yron out of the body, for this hearbe hath a maner might of war, to driue out arrowes, and darts, and qua∣rells, as Isidore sayth. (AdditiōDictani of Candie, wherof are thrée sorts: the right Dictani is hot & drye like Heneroyall, but it is of subtiller partes, the other not so good.) ¶Of Draguntea. ca. 50. DRaguntea is an hearbe and hath that name, sea the stalke thereof is ∣keled as an Adder, and hath the lykenes of an Adder, or of a Dragon, as Isi saith, lib. 17. Many men call this hearbe Ser∣pentaria or Colubrina, for it hath a red floure departed and shaped as the mouth of a Serpent, & out of the middle thereof springeth as it were an Adders tongue, sharpe, blacke and round, and in the mid∣dle of the floure thereof riseth as it were an head with great seede and round first gréene, and then red when it beginneth to ripe. This hearbe hath great vertue & might, as Diosc. saith, for the roote there∣of dried and made to pouder with water of Roses ianseth the face, and maketh it cleere and of good colour, & healeth the Fester with French sope, and dryeth it vp, & maketh the mouth thereof so wide, that the bone that is within broken or rotten may be drawen and taken out at the full, and helpeth the Canker with vi∣neger and hot lime. Leaues thereof sod in wine, ripeth Postumes and botches. Iuyce thereof helpeth hearing, that is hurt and grieued by cold, and cleereth the sight, and exciteth menstruall bloud, and destroyeth the Emoroides, and drieth the nether veynes that run full of bloud. The iuice thereof dronke, maketh a wo∣man haue childe before hir time, & dri∣ueth and chaseth away serpents with the smell, and a beast that is baulmed with the iuyce thereof, shall not be hurte of a serpent. Huc vs{que} Diosc. and Platea. (Additiō.Dragons are of thrée sortes, Ma∣ior, Minor, & Palustris. Their rootes and fruite are hot and drye in the thirde de∣gree.) Of Draganto. cap. 51. DRagantum as Plat. & Auicen meane, is a manner gum of a certaine tree, of the which tree the kinde humour is har∣dened by norishing of heat, or by streng∣thening of cold, & thereof is treble kinde, for some is white, pure, and cleere, & that is best. And some is some deale red and
citrine, & that is not so good as ye white, that hath no earth medled therewith. The white accordeth to cold medicines, and the red and the citrine to hot, & may be saued and kept fortie yeare, and hath vertue of cooling, of moysting, & of clean∣sing, and that it hath of colde & of moy∣sture: and hath vertue of fastning things together, of the vertue of gum, and help∣eth against the euills of the breast, in E∣lectuaries and sirops, for it moysteth the drie breast, and restoreth humour that is lost, and abateth the rough, and bealeth chipped thins and whelkes of the lyppes and of the mouth, and cleanseth the face, and maketh it white, and helpeth them that haue gowles, and against the blou∣die fluxe, as it is said in Platearius. ¶Of Ebeno. chap. 52. EBenus is a trée growing in Aethio∣pia, with blacke colour, & is a plaine trée, and smooth in groping and handling, and is hard and heauie, and so for strait∣nesse of pores, it sinketh anone in water downe to the ground, as it is said in lib. Vegitabilium, & is somwhat sower and biting in sauour, and taketh fire anone, if it commeth nigh therto, & maketh a loft & swéet smoke and smel, and sheweth redde colour, if it be froted on the rde, & hath vertue to purge, and to comfort, and ther∣fore it is put in Collirijs, as Plin. sayth & Diosc. also. Coilirium is an oyntment, that helpeth eyen. Lib. 17. Isi. speaketh of this trée Ebenus and saith, that it grow∣eth in Inde and in Aethiopia, and tour∣neth into stone, if it be long beaten. And the trée thereof is blacke, and the rinde is smooth, as the rinde of a Laurell trée, with diuers speckes: but that that hath no speckes is best, if it be light & smooth as an horne. It is oft set by cradels, for blacke sights should not feare the chil∣dren, as Isid. and Virgil say. Plini. prai∣seth this trée Ebenus li. 12. ca. 5. and saith, that Hebenus is the most precious tree, and therefore the Aethiopes offered this trée Ebenus, with golde & yuorie to Em∣perors, in stéed of tribute: & so it is read, that ye Quéene of Saba, gaue such things to Salomon the King. 3. Reg. 10. (Additiō.Hebenus a trée whereof the woode is black as iente within, and beareth nei∣ther leaues nor fruite. First booke of kings, and tenth chapter, after Geneua translation.) ¶Of Edera. chap. 53. IUie is called Edera,Hedera. and hath that name, for it cleaueth to trées, as Isi. saith: or it hath the name of Edus, a Kid, for it multiplieth milke in Goates, that eate thereof, & with that milke Kids be fed and nourished. The roote thereof pearceth things that be full hard, and is colde of kinde, and betokeneth, that the ground is of colde kinde, that it groweth in, and is long gréene, and hath sower & biting sauour. And 16. li. ca. 33. Plin. meu∣neth, that of Iuie is double kinde, white and blacke, male and female. The male is harder in leaues, and more fat & greater. The white Iuie hath white fruite, & the blacke hath blacke. Ofte Poets are crowned with Iuie, in token of noble wit and sharpe, for the Iuie is alwaye gréene. And they went crowned with Iuie, that serued in the temple of Liber pater, that called Bac∣chus also, and so this trée was hallowed to Bacchus God of wine, and to Mars. Also therefore the great Alexander crow∣ned his Knights with Iuie, when they had the victory of Inde, as Plinius sayth, by ensample of Liber pater, that dressed the Basnets of his men, with stalkes of Iuie. And is a trée that stretcheth much vpward, while it findeth a trée or Wall, wheron it may créepe vpward, and hath boughs and braintches and berries, but they be bitter. The shadow thereof is noi∣full and grieuous, and strong enemie so cold, & most loued of serpents, & breaketh walls & graues: therfore wonder it is, yt it was in worship amōg men in old time. The leaues thereof be cloue wt corners, & heauy smell, plaine & bitter, & worntes larke vnder ye shadow therof. Also ca. 34. the kinde of Iuie is full wonderfull in knowledge and assaieng of wine: for it is certain, yt if wine medled with water, be in a vessel of Iuie, ye wine fléeteth ouer ye brink, & the water abideth. Huc vs{que} Pli.
Dioscorides saith, Iuie is medicinable, though it be bitter, and is strayning, and healeth the bloudie flix. Iuyce of it drop∣ped in the nose, purgeth the head and a∣bateth the ache of it. Iuyce thereof heat with oyle put in ye eares, helpeth against deasenesse. Also Iuie is compounded of contraries, and worketh in contrarie causes: And therefore, it hath ver∣tue of riping, of drawing and of clean∣sing and of easing: and therefore oft the leaues thereof be layed to sores. The Gumme therof dissolueth and tempreth, and helpeth against the stone. A Goate bucke fed with Iuie leaues, maketh the more sharpe bloud to breake the stone in the bladder and in the reines. And ther is a manner Iuie, and deaw falleth on the leaues thereof, and wereth gleymie, & turneth to glewe: the vertue thereof is great, and assayed by Phisicke, for smoke thereof exciteth menstruall bloud, and bringeth out the Secundines, the bag that the childe is in, in the Mother, and aba∣teth the reume, and comforteth the head and the wit, and helpeth agaynst the Cough & against the stixe of the wombe, and is profitable to be put in medicines. (Additiō.Iule is medicinable for manye cau∣ses: The gumme of Iuie killeth lice and nits, and béeing layd too, it taketh awaye haire. It is vnwholesome to sléepe vn∣der the Iuie, or in an Iuie bush. It ma∣keth the head light and dizzie.) Of Elitropio. cap. 54. Helitropi¦um.ELitropium is a drye hearbe, & hath that name, for it bloometh in the stin∣ting of the Sunne in Summer, when the daye is longest or els for it beareth and turneth the leafe about with the mo∣uling of the Sunne. This is the Rood∣wort, and is called. Solsequium in latin, as Isidore saith lib. . For the flower thereof vncloseth when the Sunne ari∣seth, and closeth againe when the Sunne goeth downe. And this hearbe is called Vruca, for it destroyeth and doth away waries, if it be dronke or laide  pluister wise, as Isi. saith. And Plat. saith, that this hear be Solsequium, is called the Suniles spouse, and is a colde heard and moyst in the second degrée, and the iuice thereof dronke, helpeth against venime that is eaten or dronken, & helpeth also against biting of houndes and other ve∣nimous biting, if it be brused and laied to the wound. Also it helpeth much a∣gainst chasing and stopping of the liuer. (Additiō.There are of two sorts, the great & the lesse, called Tornesol, hot & dry in the third degrée, both kindes of great opera∣tion. Dodoneus.) ¶Of Eleboro. cap. 55. ELeborus hath the name of the Riuer Eleborus,Hellebo∣rus. for there groweth much thereof, as Isi. sayeth. And the Romanes call this hearbe Veratrum, for it bring∣eth wit that is moued, into good dispositi∣on and health, if it be eaten or dronke: and thereof is two maner kindes, white and black, and is called white Eleborus, for it hath white rootes, & cleanseth and pourgeth white and fleumatick humors: & the blacke hath black rootes, and clean∣seth blacke and melancholike humours. Dioscorides and other Authours meane, that it is a full violent hearbe, and shall be taken readely and warely, for it grie∣ueth sore and slayeth soone, if it be vnrea∣dely taken of any person, and helpeth ne∣uerthelesse against manye euills, if it be taken in due manner, as Dioscori, saith. For it destroieth the feauer quartane, & Anieth wormes of the eares, & els where, and pouder thereof helpeth them yt haue the falling euil, & them that haue the Li∣turgie, the sléeping euill, if it be meddeled with bread, and flayeth mice if they eate thereof, as Diosc. saith and Plat. also. Of the two manner kinds of this hearb, the white Eleborus is the better, & is hot and drie of complection in the fourth degree, and groweth in mountaines & in moyst places, & hath leaues like to the leaues of plant ne, but they be more long & more sharpe in the ende, and the stalke is a cu∣bite long or more, and the roote thereof laxeth both vpward & downwards. And we shall neuer vse Eleborus, but ye mas∣ter be digested and made readye before hand, & yet then fall wiselye. Therefore Hippocrates saith, if thou wilt take Ele∣borus,
moue thy body, least that thou o∣uer sléepe: and hath vertue to resolue moyst matter, and to tourne it to vento∣sitie, and thereof commeth stopping of spirites, and death, as Dioscor. saith, and Platea also. And the blacke Eleborus, is much more perilloua. (Additiō.Read Fuchsius, Mattheolus, Tur∣dar, or Dodoneus. This is a daūgerous hearbe, to cause a deadly sléepe, whereof are two kindes, blacke and white.) ¶Of Esula. chap. 56. Ezula.ESula is a trée that is hot in the third degrée, as Phisitions meane, and drye also, as Diosc. saith, and the roote thereof is best in medicine, and of this hearbe is many manner kindes. And the vertue therof is now in milke, and now in hu∣mour, now in séede, and now in the roote. Therefore it is sayd, Lac Anabula parit, Cacaputis semine gaudet: that is to say, Anabula bringeth forth milke, and Ca∣taputia séede: and Esula helpeth by the rinde of the roote. And so the vertue of the first is in milke, and the scoud in the séede, and of the third in the rinds of the roote. This roote Esula hath plain leaues, and of this hearbe commeth humor that fretteth and gnaweth, & maketh whelks arise in the flesh and skinne, and pour∣geth flumatike humours, and helpeth a∣gainst the Dropsie, and other passions & euills that come of fleumatike humors. (Additiō.Pityusa Maior, great Ezula, Spurge Giant, and Pine spurge, of two kindes.) ¶Of Eruca, chap. 57. ERuca is a white hearb, somtime foone, and somtime wilde, hot & moyst, and softning and opening, and comforteth the reynes, and cureth and healeth the Pal∣sie, and exciteth vrine, & purgeth the blad∣der and reynes and is good in meate, and in medicine: and Bées loueth and haun∣teth the floures thereof, as Plin. saith. (Additiō.Of this hearbe, is found 2. kindes: the one same, which is ye common Roc∣kat most vsed, the other wilde.) ¶Of Enula. chap. 58. ENula is an hèarbe, and is oft called E∣nula Campana, and thereof is double kinde, the one groweth in gardens, & the other in fields, and hath more vertue in the roote, for the roote shall be gathered in the beginning of Summer, and dryed in the Sunne, that it be not corrupt with moysture, and hath vertue to plaine and smooth, and to cleanse and purge, and to comfort the sinewes, and to consuins and moyst gleymie humour, & helpeth won∣derfully against colde cough that is coo∣led, and against colde passions and euills of the spirituall members. Thereof it is written in Macers booke: Enula Campana reddit precordia sana. The meaning is, that this hearb ma∣keth ye breast & spiritual membes whole and sound. (Additiō.Inula, and Enula Campana, of some Elecampane, Scabwort, & Horse-héele,) ¶Of Epithimo. ca. 59. EPithimum is the floure of Thime, that is a hearbè, and all the vertue thereof is in the floure: For onely the the floure thereof is put in medicines, as Dioscorides sayth, and Platearius also. And hath vertue to purge flumatike hu∣mour and melancholike passions and hel∣peth against the Quartane and Quoti∣dian, & also against difficultie of passing, as Constantine sayth, and against Stran∣guria, that is a lyttle pissing and ofte, and agaynst stopping of the liuer, and of the splene. (Additiō.Thime is named of the auncient Gréekes and Arabians, Ephithymum, Time.) ¶Of Ebulo. cap. 60. EBolus is a Wéede, most lyke to E∣lerna Trée, both in leeues, and in stalkes & rootes and rindes, in flowers and braunches, and are good in medi∣cines, and haue vertue to temper and dissolue, to consume & wast great steame, thicke and gleymie humoures. And the iuyce of Ebulus helpeth against goutes, and shrinking of sinnewes of féete and handes, and agaynst the Dropsis that commeth of fleumaticke cause, & of cold.
And helpeth also against swellyngs and gatherings of euill humors betweene the skinue and the flesh in euerye place of the bodye, whereof and in what place it be gathered. And Ebulus helpeth best a∣gainst ache and sores, that commeth of stroakes, beating and fallyng: for if the patient be oft washed with broth therof, it abateth both ach and swelling, and gi∣ueth might and vertue to the sinewes, & ioynis of boanes. This hearbe Ebulus stinketh in smell, & is not kind in sauor, but in working and in vertue. In medi∣cine, it was accounted best among men of olde time, as Dioscorides, Plinius, and Platea meane. (Additiō.This hearbe is called Walwort, or Dane wort, and is verye lyke vnto the Elder trée toppes: of some called, Dane weede.) ¶Of Ficu. cap. 61. THE Figge trée is called Ficus, and hath that name of fruitefulnesse, for it is more fruitful, than other trees, for it beareth fruite thrée or foure times in one yeare, & while one ripeth, another spring∣eth anone or soone. And & Figge trée of Aegypt is more fructuous holden, and the stocke thereof done in water, sinketh anone to the ground, and riseth and com∣meth vp aboue the water, after that it hath lyen in the mudde, against the com∣mon course of kinde, for when it is wet, it should by waight of the moysture, a∣bide vnder the water. Before Pithago∣ras time, Hawkes were sed with figges, and after he brought them to the vse of flesh, that is the stronger meate. It is said, that figs doe away the shriueling of the skinne of the face, or wrinkles on the hands of olde men, if they eate ther∣of among theyr meate: and telleth that full cruell Bulls become milde anone, if they be tied to a fig trée. And he telleth that the figge trée may be made to beare well fruite, by remedy of a trée, that is called Capriticus. Huc vs{que} Isido. lib. 7. cap. 7. In libra vegitab. Arist. saith, that the humour of the rinde of a tree, that is as is were bloud in beastes, is white, & mil∣kie in some trée, as in a fig tree, and in a Mulbery trée, that is called Morus, but the milke of the figge tree hath vertue of running together, to make chéese, as the floure of Corde casealis. The humour thereof is full vnctuous, therefore the fig tree beareth much fruite, for what is vnc∣tuous tourneth into fruite, and what is thin and watrye, tourneth into leanes, which be broad, and clouen, and sharp in the endes. It is sayd if the genitals be baulined with the iuyce thereof, they be moued to lecherie. And such mouing is spoken of in the Glose sup. Gen. 3. Ibi. Fécerunt sibi de folijs sicus perisumata. Arist. saith, that it happeneth that the fig trée wereth barren sometime for default of humour, and sometime for superfluitie of humour: and in either case needeth medicine. In default of humour, ye Gar∣deiner doth thereto couenable dounge & fresh water. And if it be for superfluitie of humour, then he pearceth ye tree with nailes, & voydeth the superfluitie of hu∣mour, as it is sayd before, De arborum medicina lib. 14. ca. 8. Plinius speaketh al that is before rehearsed of Isid. and saith, that ye fig trée of Aegypt beareth most, and is like the trée Morus in quantitie, to leaues, and in sight: and beareth fruit foure times in the Summer, but the first springeth and is not ripe: and héerto the fig tree of Cipris is like, and burgeneth and bringeth fruite foure times, but the burgening thereof ripeth not, except they be first carued and cut, that the superflu∣itie of milke may passe out thereof. And knops thereof commeth foorth without leaues in the ende of boughs, and is like to Populer in the roote, and to Oliue in leaues, and lyke thereto in greatnesse of the trée. And the fig trée is a tender trée, & feeble, and is therefore soone grieued with strength of colde, & namely when it be∣ginneth to burgen or spring. Also libr. 12. ca. 6. Plin. saith the same: and he saith, that there is a figge tree of Inde, that beareth certaine small apples, and hath many boughs and thicke, that bend so to ye groūd by their own weight, that they sticke in the ground, & of them spring new branches about ye old stock, and maketh so great a shaddowe, that
heards come and abide there vnder for succour against heate, winde, and wea∣ther. And the ouermost boughes of this trée, stretch vpward full high, & the side voughes spread wide about the olde trée, as it were growen, and make a great shadow, and the leaues thereof are full broad, and shaped somewhat lyke to a shield, and beareth many apples, but they be small, & passe vnneth the bignesse of a Beane, & be so riped among the leaues with heate of the Sunne, that they are so swéete, that it is accounted a miracle. Héereto lib. 15. cap. 19. Plin. saith: That there is a trée, that is called a wilde fig trée, and hath another name, and is called Caprificus, & ripeth neuer, but it giueth to other, that that it hath not of it selfe: for often Gardeiners make cliftes in the rinde and roote of a fig trée, & graffe ther∣on graffes of the Caprificus, and by co∣uenable graffing thereof, the roote is dis∣posed, and receiueth new aire, and good humour, and also might and vertue and gréene colour. And so white humor, that is matter of figs, passeth into nourishing thereof, as it is rehearsed before, in ye tre∣tise De causa fructificationis arbonim &c herbarum. Also he saith, that some trées shall be set nigh Trées that beare well fruit, that blasts of winde may be borne therefrom to the figge trée: and thereto the Southerne winde is better than the Northerne winde, for the Northerne winde grieueth the fig trée more than thé Southerne winde. Therefore fig trées thriue the lesse in the North Countrey: for the white humor thereof is some wa∣sted and remoued, where such wind hath the masterie. Of the effect and doing of the fig trée, touching the rootes, leaues, & rinde, and fruite: looke before In tarcta∣tu de Carica, in litera C. There it is o∣penly contained. (Additiō.Ficus satiua, and Ficus Siluestris. Figges pound with Salt, Rue, and Nut∣megs, withstandeth all poyson, and cor∣ruption of the aire: and this was a se∣cret Preseruatiue, which Mithridates King of Pontus, vsed against all venime and poyson.) ¶Of Fraxino. ca. 62. THE Ash is called Fraxinus, and is a trée that groweth in rough places & in mountaines, as Isid. saith, and thereof be made shaftes, and speares. Therefore Ouidius saith, Et Fraxinus vtilis hastis, that is to say: Ash is good for shaftes & speares. Lib. 16. ca. 13. Pliny saith, that a∣mong trées, kinde hath gendered the Ash right profitable, and is a high trée, round and euen, and sharpe vpward in lease, & is made noble by praising of Homerus, and the speare of Achilles, and is in some place so lyke to the Cedar trée, that it be∣guileth the buyers, if the rinde be away. The leaues thereof helpeth against ve∣nime, and the iuyce thereof wrong and dronke, helpeth best against Serpentes. And Ash hath so great vertue, that Ser∣pents come not in shadow thereof in the morning nor at euen: and if a Serpent be set betwéene a fire and Ash leaues, he will flye into the fire sooner than into the leaues. In Greece ye leaues thereof is poi∣son to beasts, & grieueth not other beasts that chewe their cudde, and grieueth not beasts in Italy. It bloometh first or twigs spring therof, and leaueth not the leaues or it beare flowers. And thereof is dou∣ble kinde, as the Gréekes tell: the one is long and not knottie, the other is more in leaues, and more hards, and lyke to a Laurell trée. Other men put difference of the Ash, by diuers place that it grow∣eth in. That Ash that groweth in fields, hath more crispe leaues: and Ash that groweth in mountaines hath more thick leaues, and of the leaues some be better than some. Huc vsque Plinius. And Pla∣tea saith, that Ashe is a trée hot and drye in the second degrée. The rinde & leaues thereof, with Anise and Mushrumpes that groweth thereon, accordeth to me∣dicine, for it stauncheth the flire of the wombe and spewing also, if they be sod in raine water and vinegar, and layd to the stomacke. (Additiō.The lye that is made with ye ashes of the barke of the Ash trée, cureth the white scurffe: séeth in the saide lye, the Bramble leaues. ¶Of Fago. cap. 63.
Beech mast is good for Deere & hogges.A Béeth is called Fagus, and is a trée, & the matter therof is néedful in ma∣ny things. And lib. 17. Isidore sayth, that the Béeth is a Tree that beareth mast, and hath name Fagus, for sometime men liued by the fruit thereof, and tooke meate théreof. For Fage is Gréeke, and that is to say eate, as Isidore saith, libro 17. cap. 7. And he sayeth, that the mast of the Béech is cornered, closed in a smooth skin, and is lyke to a Nut kernell, but the rind is more soft. The marrow therof is derest to mise, and fatteth Glires, that séemeth Mise, and be somewhat more in quantitie. And this fruit accordeth with Culuours and Turtles, and feedeth and nourisheth them. The rind of this trée is full profitable, and namelye among the north Picts, for therof is made vessel, ser∣uing to diuerse vses and dooing, as hee saith, cap. 10. Also there it is sayde, that mast therof is ful swéet, and nourishing, and féeding. And flesh of beasts that bee fedde therewith is full profitable, and may bo sodde and is light. The Trée is not full sadde and fast in substaunce, but pory and full of hoales, and dureth there∣fore not ful long, as he saith, neuerthéles the substaunce therof accordeth to many things, as to make shingles, and other things that belongeth to building. And substance of Béech that is cleane & pure, & not eaten with wormes, is most néedful to Glasiers craft, for of ashes therof with other things, & with blast of fire, glasse is craftely arayed, and lyttle fuell is founde that accordeth so wel in euery manner to so wonderfull a work. The trée is smooth with many pores, & is soone eaten with wormes, and rotteth soone. And is soone cloue and set on fire, as Plinius mea∣neth. And Béech beareth some flowres, as the Trée Tilia doth, but not so well smelling. Neuerthelesse Bées haunt the flowres therof, & gather wilde honnie in hollownesse of trées. (AdditiōMen doe not gather these Nuts of the Béech for mans vse, yet Béech is sweete and good for to cat, and almost as good in medicine, as is the kernell of the Pine apple.) Of Faba. chap. 64. THe Beane is called Faba, & hath that name of Ethimology of Gréeke, as I∣sid. saith, lib. 17. And is a manner Cod∣warr, & serueth to Potage, & in olde time men vsed to eat therof. And héer of is dou∣ble kind. One is called a Beane of Ae∣gypt, & the other is the common Beane, which is sometime called Fresa, for men gren oft when they grind and breake it, as he saith. And Dios. saith, yt Beanes bée sowen both in gardens & in fieldes. The stalke therof ariseth with edges and cor∣ners, & is great and hollow with knots, with a leafe or leaues in euery knop: and the leaues be broad & plaine, & sound, and narrow in the endes: and Beanes beare white flowres, with red or black specks aboue in the ends, with good smell. And Bées haunt much the flowres of beanes. And in the stalke bée many coddes, that be think and long, and distinguished with in, as it were many dens and chambers, in which the beanes be set in theyr own place, departed each from other: And the coddes be first gréene without, and white within and softe, and hardneth lit∣tle and little by heate of the Sunne, and is blacke at the last, and that is token of ripenesse. Dioscorides and Platearius meane, that the Beane is colde and dry, except it be greene, and is then moyst in the first degrée, and nourisheth but lyttle, if it be eaten gréene, and bréedeth thick hu∣mours and swelling in the ouer parte of the wombe, & greeneth therefore the sto∣macke, & bréedeth thicke bloud & melan∣cholike, & also thick smoak, & greeueth the braine therwith. And beanes cause vaine dreaines and dreadfull. By séething and roasting thereof, swelling ventositye is abated, but not all destroied. He ye eateth Beanes continually, both ach and gnawing in the guttes and in the roapes. Beanes stop the splene, and make harde the wombe. Beanes eaten with the hulles be harde to defie, and bréed much swelling, but the cleane beane when the hull is away cleanseth, and so the cleansing therof purgeth the face, and
cleanseth the lungs if it dronke, and bea∣leth postumes of the teates and pappes, & doth away wormes and blearinesse of eien medled with roses, & stencheth hu∣mours that fall and come to the eien, if it be chewed & layd to the Temples, and stauncheth the bloud that runneth, if it be slit and laide to a beine that is cut, and stancheth milke that runneth out of breasts, and helpeth them that haue the Podagre and Goutes, if it be sod with shéeps Lallowe, and laid to the sore, and smiteth against swellinges and gathe∣rings and Postumes, if it bée sodde in Uineger, and layde thereto in the begin∣ning. Libro. 18. cap. 12. Plinius speaketh of the property and kind of the Beane, and sayth, that among poulse that groweth in roddes, Beanes is called the best. And many meddle Beanes with bread corne, to make ye bread yt more heauie. Beanes bée dampned by Pithagoras sentence: for it is sayd, that by oft vse therof, the wits be dulled, and cause many dreames. Or else as other men meane, for dead mens soules be therein. Therefore Vatro say∣eth, that the Bishoppe shoulde not eate. Beanes. Among corne onely the Beane springeth with leaues, and is full in wath∣ing of the Moone. And is not sod in sea water, nor in other salt water: & is sowen before the going downe of the seauen stars, that be called Pliades, and is ripe & gathered before winter. And loueth most water while it blometh, and drought when it is blossomed, and amendeth the land yt it groweth in, in stéed of doung. Therefore in Thessalia fields ye Beanes grow in, be eared when the Beanes bloome. In many places Beanes growe without trauaile of tilling, and namely, in Mauritonia, and in the landes of the North Occean: but they be so hard, that vnneth they may be sod. Beanes growe in Aegypt with sharpe prickes, therfore Crocodiles flye from them, and dreade least their eyen should bée hurt with the sharp prickes of them. Such a Beane is x. cubites long, with a head as a Popie, and therein Beanes be closed, and that head is red as a Rose: and those Beanes growe not on stalks nor in coddes. The Genicolatus and stalke therof ha en∣ches and lare leaues. And the  is somewhat bitter. The root thereof is ea∣ten rawe and sod. And is like in quantity to the rootes of the Réed. Rue vsque Pli∣nius, lib. 18. cap. 12. And he saith the same chap. 17. Virgillus inquit, intro et amurta fabam profundentibus, grandesiere cam promittit. And one sayth, that Beanes grow the sooner, and thriue the better if they be wa∣tred in pisse thrée daies, ere they be sow∣en. Hue vsque Plin. (Additiō.Gréene Beanes before they be ripe, are colde and moist: but when they bée drie they haue power to binde. The wild field Beane serueth to no vse for man, that is wholesome, nor scarce good pro∣uender for a horse, except with Wheate bran well baked and hard.) Of Frumento. chap. 65. WHeate is called Frumentum, & hath that name of Fruendo, vsing in ea∣ting: and thereof corne hath his name Fruges, as Isidore sayth. And so the ouer part of the roote is called Frumen, and the sauour of the meate is principallye knowen. It is a propertie of Wheate to haue eyles on high in the eare, & graines and corne in hollowe hoales. For in all manner Wheate the stalke springeth out of the roote, and the eare of the stalke in∣uironed with small holes, in the which the graines of corne bée closed. And a∣bout the eare groweth small cyles and sharpe, as it were dartes, and thereof the eare hath his name Spica, for dartes bée called Spicula. And these eyles defend the eare, as it were dartes, for small Birds shoulde not bite the eare, and take awaie the graines of Wheate, nor other small beasts. And the stalke is compassed with leaues, and bulles succoured therewith, for it should not bend to the grounde by weight & heauinesse of the corne in the eare. The stalke is called Stipula, as it were Vstipula, and hath that name of Vsto, burnt. For when it is gathered, some of the strawe is burnt to helpe & to amende the lande. And some is kepte to
fodder of beasts, and is called Palea: for it is the first meate yt is laid before beasts, namely in some countreies, as in Tus∣can. And the kinde thereof is colde, that it suffereth not Snowe that falleth to shodde, and is so hot that it compelleth Apples for to ripe. Huc vsque Isidorus, lib. 17. Many manner corne is called Fen∣mencum, as Isidore sayth, and Pli. also lib. 18. as Wheate, Barly, Rye, & Meale, and other such, of whome it shall be spo∣ken afterward, each in his owne place: But in all corne that is called Frumen∣tum, generally men shall take héed of the ground that it is sowen in, and of the qualitie of the grounde: for some Corne thriueth in one ground, and faileth in a∣nother, and fordryeth, as Plinius sayeth. And so it is to be vnderstoode, of other corne and lande. Also manner and time of sowing must be regarded. For some corne is soone sowen, and some late, for Winter séede is soone, sowen, and Sum∣mer séede is late sowen. And some is so∣wen vnder sorrow, and some aboue, And some Wheat is sowen in certaine man∣ner, and in time certaine: and Bar∣ly in other manner and time, and so is Meale and Commin, as Hieronimus sai∣eth expresly super Esay. And man take most héede of couenable time, both in sowing and in gathering of Corne. For Plinius sayth, libro. 18. That it is done better in one time then in another, for Corne gathered in the full of the Moone is saued from corruption. Also of fayre weather and time. Sowe, is Serere in Latine, and commeth of Sereno coelo, as Isidore sayeth. And Serenum coelum is cléere Skye in this manner speach. And then men shall sowe, and not in greate Raine and Stormes, as Virgil say∣eth. And Plinius sayeth there, cap. 13. If the winde bée too strong corne is apay∣red, and that in three times, and state of the corne. When Corne bloometh, and when the blossome falleth, and when it ripeth. By anye euill blast the eare fa∣deth and is destroyed, and looseth the fruit and corne. Also too much raine gréeueth: for then all is lost by colde humour, or else it turneth vnkindly into other hearbs and superfluitie of leaues. Also sodeine and immoderate heate gréeueth, that is closed in a Clowde, for while the humour is drawen into the in∣ner parts of the roote by strong heat, then of hot humour and gleamie, Wormes bréede about the roote. And by fretting & gnawing of such wormes, the substance of the corne is wasted. Also in Corne and graines wormes bréed about the Jeaues, and destroye the graines of the Corne, when the eares in rainye weather after passing heate bée corrupt and rotten. Al∣so in passing drinesse Corne lacketh hu∣mour, and is so lost for default of nou∣rishing and féeding, or else greene Flyes bréede therein, that he called Canthari∣des,Canthari¦des, are log flies, yt be varia¦ble colou¦red, & ve¦ry veni∣mous, in operatiō & do al∣so sting. and fret all the thrift of the Corne: And sometime many long Flies more & lesse bréed therein, & destroy euery deale. Also in the séede corne néedeth cleannesse and purenesse. For as Plinius saith ther, cap. 17. If the séeds be touched with Lallowe, or with grease, it is spilte and lost. Also in Corne that groweth, néedeth busily husbandrie, for it néedeth ye Corne be cleane wéeded & cleansed of superflui∣tie of euill weeds. For as he saith there, a∣mong the best Wheats sometime growe euill wéeds and venimous, as Carle and Rey, & other such there commeth for cor∣ruption and mallice of the humour that is drawen, or of might of the heate that worketh not sufficiently in all the mat∣ter. Also there it is said, of corrupt dewe, that cleaueth to the leaues, commeth cor∣ruption in corne, and maketh it as it wer¦red or rustie. And among all manner corne, wheat beareth the price, & to man∣kinde nothing is more friendly, nothing more nourishing. But héer of séeke in lit∣tera S. and séeke de Messe & Segete. (Additiō.The first and best kinde of wheate, after the opinion of Columella, is redde wheat the second is the Spie wheate, & the third is called ye pound wheat, or Sū∣mer wheat: Rawe wheat chewed in the mouth is good for to be laid to, against & biting of a mad dog. Wheat is most no∣rishing séede for man.) Of Farie. cap. 66. FAr is a manner corne, and hath that name, for sometime it was broken in
a morter, before men had the vse & craft of Mills. Of that commeth Farrago, as Isidore sayth, and is an hearbe that is of Barly kind, yet gréene, and the fruit ther∣of breaketh not to ripping. (Additiō.Zea, far, Spelt is of two sortes, the one hath commonly two cornes or séede ioyned togethers, whereof each graine is in his owne skinne, or chaffe couering. The other is single, and hath but one graine. Spelt is of nature lyke to wheat, but somewhat colder, drawing néere to the nature of Barly, and somewhat dry∣eng. The bread thereof is not much infe∣riour to that is made of Wheate, but it nourisheth lesse. Of this graine is none vsed in England, but in Almaine and Germanie, fol. 131, Turner.) Of Farina, chap. 67. MEale is called Farina, and is the matter of bread, and hath that name Farina, of Far. For of Far or corne bro∣ken betwéene Mill stones commeth meale. Or else that name commeth of Farciendo, filling for whē meale is made in bread it filleth ye womb. Or else meale is properly called Farina, when the corne is well ground betwéene Mill stones, & flowre and bran meddeled and not depar∣ted. And the stowre of the meale when it is boulted and departed from the bran is called Simila, & Similago. Also it hath another name, & is called Pollen, & Pol∣lis, and thereof commeth Haec Polenta, and Hoc Pulmentum commeth of Pul∣tes, as Isidore sayth, libr. 20. cap. 7. But some men meane that Polenta is a man∣ner Potage made of the most best and pured stowre,Thickned in milke, & called pap for young children. and hath that name Pol∣lenta of Polline, that is delicate meale, that flyeth from the mill stone in ye mill. And is called Amolum by another name, for it is throwne from ye mill stone for the lightnesse therof as the stowre is that is called Simila, smal without great∣nesse or weight: but Polenta hath other significations, as it is said in Glosa super Iosue. 5.Frumetie. They shall eate polenta of the same yeare. And Haec Polenta is corne sod, pilled, and hulled, and shalled with froting of handes, as though it were pil∣led, hulled, and shalled, with beating and stamping in a Morier. And it is called Polenta, as it were Pilenta, pilled & shal∣led in a Morter: but what name so euer it hath, meale is good both in meate and in medicines. Thereof bread is made by meddeling of water and baking of fire. Sometime thereof is meate made for seruaunts, and is called Cibarius, and is not full delicate meate, and sometime sowre bread medled with sowre dough, and some bake vnder ashes, and some is baked, and turned and wend at the fire, and is called Focacius, a Cake: and some is baked in an Duen, and is called Cli∣banarius. In this manner of wise & many other by baking crafte, bread is made of meale, as Isidore sayth, li. 20. And all this manner bread comforteth and nourish∣eth, and pleaseth mans heart, and resto∣reth that that is lost, and giueth vertue and strength to them that trauaile: but passing all other, fresh bread and cleane made of wheat, is most friend and accor∣ine to kinde: as Constantine sayeth in Dietis. Meale is ground at a Mill, and sisted with a Siue, and medled with hot water with sowre dough, & to haue ye bet∣ter sauour, and knead and mould to shape of loues, & baked afterwarde. And at last after many trauailes mans lyfe is fedde and susteined therewith. Also meale is good in medicines when it is medled in e manner with other things, that are according: for meale meddeled with ho∣ny, healeth and cleanseth the face of scabs and of whelltes, as Dioscorides sayeth. Also meale of Wheate or of Rie sodde with Wine & with grease laid to breasts and teats, healeth and softneth the hard∣nesse that commeth in of tunning of milke, as he saith, and ripeth Postumes and gathering of euill humours, and sla∣keth sinewes which be ouercome, & spilt as it were with the crampe, or shranke, as he sayth. (Additiō.Many wayes serueth the vse of flowre, for Wafers, Egg-pies, Flawnes or Custards, for the Summerset shiere Whitpot, and the Kentish Pudding, for Pancakes and Friters, and the dainfye Fartes of Portingale, Suger plate, Bis∣kets, Comfits, and Carawes, and last of
all, the most euilly bestowed in making starch to vlase ruffes for fondlings to flie withall, many wayes besides serueth the vse of flowre néedefull and profita∣ble.) Of Fermento. cap. 68. SOwre dough is called Fermentum, for it maketh paast feruent, & ma∣keth it also arise, as Isidore sayth, libro. 20. cap. 1. Sowre dough is compounded of diuerse vertues, and hath substaunce and vertue lyke, therefore it hath vertue to heaue paast and bread, and to change and amende the sauour thereof, and to turne into his lykenesse all matter that it is meddeled with, and hath vertue to drawe soone euill humours out of the bo∣die, as Dioscorides sayth, and to ripe and to open Postumes and Botches, if it be meddeled with Salt: and openeth the pores of the body by his subtilty, and dis∣solueth & tempereth humours, & is called Fermentum in Latine, & Zima in Gréek. And so paast made onely of meale and of water is called Asima, as it were Sima, without sowre dough, and Sima, sowre dough reareth paast and bread that is meddeled therewith, and chaungeth the sauour, and thirleth & distributeth partes thereof, as it is sayde super Epistolam. 1. Cor. 5. (Additiō.With Gran also called Curgings, and the dragges of Ale is made the fa∣mous potage in Deuen-shéere, called Drouson.) Of Fumo terre. cap. 69. FVmus tarre is an hearbe hot and dry in the first degree, & hath that name, for it springeth and groweth out of the earth in great quantitie, as smoak doth, or fumositie that commeth of the earth, as it is sayd in Placeari. And the more gréene the hearbe is, the better it is. And is of no vertue when it is dry: and is an hearb with horrible sauour & heauy smel, and is neuerthelesse most of vertue: for it cleanseth & purgeth Melancholia, sleme, and Cholera, and helpeth against ye scabs and dropsie that commeth of colde cause, and helpeth them that haue the Poda∣gre, and stopping of the liuer and at the splene: But this hearbe hath a vice, for it bréedeth swelling and ventositie, ther∣fore the ventositie thereof shall bée aba∣ted with Fenell, that it bréede not sret∣ting and gnawing, as Platearius say∣eth. (Additiō.Capnos fumoria, Fumeterre, is of two sortes, & of the common sort it is cal∣led Fenistorye, hot and dry almost in the second degrée.) Of Feniculo. cap. 70. FEnel is a common hearb, & is of great vertue and might, and is hot and drie in the seconde degrée, and hath vertue to temper and to shed, & to open, & to carue and to cut. And that by subtill cause and qualities thereof, as it is said in Pla. The séede, roote, and leaues thereof accorde to medicine. Therof Isidore speaketh, lib. 17 cap. vlt. and sayth, that Latines call Fe∣nell, Feniculum: for the iuyce of the stalk & of the roote thereof sharpeth the sight: and it is said, that Serpents tast thereof, and doth away the age of their yeares: and ye Gréeks cal this hearbe Maratrum. Isidore taketh this for certeine spéech of Plinius. li. 20. cap. 14. Serpents (he saith) maketh the Fenell noble, and they do a∣way age by tast thereof, and restore the sight, and maketh it sharpe with iuyce thereof, and sayth, that vnderstanding of inwit is arraied therwith, and dimnesse put off. And of the iuyce thereof full good Collirium is made agaynst dim∣nesse of eyen. Of Fenell is double man∣ner kinde, wilde and tame. The seede therof dronke with wine, helpeth against biting of serpents, and stinging of Scor∣pions. The iuyce thereof dropped into the eares, slayeth Wormes. And the iuyce thereof comforteth and strengthneth, and hardneth the stomack, & abateth wambe∣ling, and breketh the stone, and multipli∣eth milke in the brests. The roote thereof purgeth the reines, and helpeth the drop∣sie, if it be sodde in Wine, and healeth biting of hounds. Lame Fenell doth all this, but Ipomaratum, wilde Fenell
worketh more stronglye, and doth all those foresayde things, as Dioscorides sayth. (Additiō.Fenell is a most wholesome hearbe, the iuyce mixed with honaye clarified, vnstoppeth the lungs, and cleanseth the liuer, &c.) Of Ferula. chap. 71. FErula is an hearb, and the iuyce ther∣of is called Galbanum, as Isidore say∣eth, libro. 17. Thereof is mention made Eccle. 24. where is mention made of Sto∣rax and Galbanum. There the Glose sayth, that Plini. sayth, that Galbanum groweth in Syria, in a certein hill, where plentie is of Ferula. And out therof Gal∣banum runneth, as it were Rosen. And libro. 20. cap. 24. Plinius saith, that the seede of Ferula is lyke to Annet, and the leaues and the boughes thereof sodde in Oyle and eaten with honnie, accorteth to the stomacke: but it maketh the head ake if men eate thereof too much. And a pennie weight of the roote thereof dronk in two Cyates of Wine, helpeth against the biting of Serpents. Iuyce thereof dronke in ye quantitie of a Beane, sayeth the wombe. The gréene pith thereof doth away silth of the fare. The séede there∣of dronken in Wine stauncheth bloud, and helpeth them which haue the fal∣ling euill. And the iuyce thereof helpeth cleerenesse of the eyen. Huc vsque Pla∣teanus. (Additiō.Of this Ferula, read Dodoneus. 2. bo. cap. 110. fol. 301.) Of Feno. chap. 72. GEye is called Fenum, and hath that name, for it is fedde and nourished with flowres. A flowre is called Flamma in some manner language, as Isid. saith, lib. 17. All hearbes and grasse which bée ripe, or mowed and dried, may be called Fenum: and namely if it accorde to féede young beasts or olde beasts, for Heye is properly and right conuenient meate to beasts. The Glose super Esay. 40. speak∣eth of heye and sayeth, that in growing hey is gréene and faire, and then heareth flowres: and afterwarde is dryed with heate of the Dunne, and brought to pou∣der at last, and so lykewise man looseth fairnesse by passing and drawing toward age, and after draweth to his death, and tourneth at last into pouder. For heye while it is gréene and springeth, clotheth and maketh faire, downes and medowes, and maketh men and beasts haue liking to looke thereon: and comforteth the eien with gréene grasie and hearbes, and with flowers: and for tender substance therof, the moysture is soone wasted in the hot Sunne. And the hearbe, which sooned as it laughed while it bare flowres, is at ye last spoiled and depriued of fairenesse and liking: For it fayleth & drieth as it wer sodeinly, for hey that springeth & grow∣eth this daye, and is gréene, is the next morrowe dead and dry, and put into an Duen, as it is sayde in lykenesse of the wicked man in Psalmo. Bée he as heye that groweth vpon a house. Where the Glose saith. The more higher hey grow∣eth, the lesse déeper bée the moores and rootes, and groweth the lesse, and the soo∣ner dryeth and fayleth. And so Heye is mowed, when it is full growen, & is put in the Sunne to dry the better, and is oft raised, tourned, and wended with pikes, forks, & raltes, for it should not by super∣fluity of moisture appaire by the ground. And is then laden, gathered, and made of heapes into cockes, and at last lead home in cartes and in waines, and brought in∣to Barnes for diuerse vses and néedes: And hey that groweth in somwhat high places, and meanely drye, smelleth best, and is more better to beasts then other heye that groweth in low medowes, in marreis, and in watrye places, as Pli∣nius sayeth. For in such high places and drye, the humour that nourisheth is more digested then in lowe places and watrye. Of Flagello. chap. 73. THE highest parts of Trées bée called Flagella, & haue that name, for they suffer oft blasts and windes, as Isidore saith, li. 17. And some men call the leaues there of Trées haire, and some call them
Folia, as it were Fila thréeds for Foli∣o in Gréeks, is Filuru in Latine and threed in English. And that is because in leaues is some veines stretching out in their substance as it were the ends. There∣fore among Latines leaues he called Fo∣lia, as it were in likenesse of threed. And the knots out of the which spring leaues & braunches, he called Oculi, as it were euen. For aru humour and third, that hath but little vnquositie, is drawenē as reared by heabe from the roote vp to the houghs, & breaketh, out in diuerse places by sharpnesse therof. And commeth as it were out at so many euen. And is ther by working of the inner heat, & of the aire yt is without, tourned into substaunce of leaues, as it is said in Commento super librum, Vegitabilium Aristotelis. And after the quality of the humour, that hath yt in astry & the night for féeblenesse of heate which worketh in the humour, leaues, be diuers in diuers manner wise, as it is said before hayd in & same booke V aitu de diyes quoad figura arian, soliorum. Looke before in a same booke in littera. Leaues make faire the Trée and they defend the tender blossome flowres and fruit, that it taketh us wrong of strong blastes and stormes of winds & of wea∣ther and showres of raine. Leaues re∣ceiue the driefts of haile and blasts, and shouing of wind & showres, and strokes of raine as it were a shielde, and defen∣deth the blossomes and fruit. And leaues moue about with a little Winde, for then he light and thinne. But they fall not soone for plentye of gleamie humour till the fruit be ripe that is his vnder the leaues. Therefore leaues spring and hee greene in springing time & in Summer, and fade and wither in haruest time, and fall some and some against winter time and rot on the grounde at last. Also leaues accord to medicines, and be meate so many beastes, as Iuyce leanes, which windes and Goates eate most gladly, as Isidore sayth. Séek other propertyes of leaues before in the same booke, chap. 16. Flowres (as Isidore sayth, lib. 18.) he called Flores, as it were flowres flée∣ting and passing, for they fall soone, and bée soone wasted and consumed. Neuer∣thelesse in leaues be many manner ver∣tues and gra of smel of sauour, of co∣lour, of smoothenesse, of vertue and of might, for then lse and comfort the spirites with smell and the tast with sa∣uour, and the sight with colour, and the handling and tongue with softnesse and smoothnesse. And haue many manner vertues, for they cure manye manner euills, and bréed with western wind, and le in the Southerne winde, as Isidore saieth. Leaues beautifie trées, hearbes, fieldes, gardens, and woods, with fayre∣nesse and make them pleasing and lyke∣ing with swéetenesse that they conceiue of the dow of heauen. Therefore Bées that gather house visite and haunt flo∣wers because of gathering of hony when sowres spring, they betoken chaunge of time, and make men haue hoe of fruite that springeth thereafter. For flowres come, afore the fruite, & are wont to leaue behinde them a hope that fruite shall followe; flowres come and spring and breake out of pure cleane vnctuous humour of the stalke of the yard, and de∣fleth not the yard, but beautifieth it, and maketh it wonderfully faire. Also oft flo∣wers open themselues in the Sunne ri∣sing & close themselues in the Sun going downe. Many flowres for scarce and thin humour, fall & wither by strong heat that wasteth the moisture therein. Also flow∣ers somtime turne toward the Sun, and open themselues, & spread more & more as ye Sun riseth higher & higher, as it sa∣yeth in the hearbe Helicropia, yt is called Solsequium also, or Turmolt. And many call it Cicoria,Succorie. as it is said afore C. And shewes ye spring too late and in vntime, bode & token sailing of fruit that should come thereafter. For such flowres bee some corrupt by sodeine cold, or with cor∣rupt aire, or if they spring to nigh winter or haruest, then they ripe not for efalt of but beats as Plinius saith libro. 20. ca. 5. And among flowres bée setteth the Lilly, Rose, and Violet, before other, to beautifie crowns of noble  of whom it shal be shewed héereafter Flos campi,Rose cam¦pion is a speciall flowre, & hath that name, for
it groweth by it selfe in places that be not ed neither eased with a shade, nor for dunged with dirt. And is a little flowre with a small stalk, & the flowre is redish bloud. Commonly in ye flowre he contei∣ned & distinguished  leaues, & neither mo nor lesse; the vertue therof is lyke so the vertue of Centaures, but it is not so bitter of complection.Centurie. And though it be lesse in leaues & stalk then Centaure, yet was it déemed of wise men in old time, no lesse worth in medicine then Cen∣taurea. Centaure is a less bitter hearb, & is therefore called Serene. And thereof is double kinde, the more and the lesse, and hath sweetnesse in the roote, with a man∣ner bitternesse. The iuyce thereof med∣led with honnie, cléereth the sight, and a∣bateth swelling, and healeth venimous biting, and helpeth against the deadlye Postume, that is called Alitrax, and beateth downe the maice of the  thereof, and letteth the wildnesse of the matter, that it may not passe and spd into the inner partes of the most noble members. Huc vsque Plinius, vi∣pre. Of Frctu. chap. 74. FRuit is called Fructus, & hath yt name of Frumen, as Isidore saith. For Fru∣men is the ouer part of the throate, and there through meale passeth when it is chewed, as Isidore sayth, li. 17. And ther∣of commeth this name Fruges. Corne & fruit of trées and of fields that wée vse & eate, is properly called Fructus, though wée speake vnproperly sometime, and cal the broode of the beastes, fruit. Also it is generally knowen, that the most noble & vnctuous part of trées and hearbes, both in pith and in root, is often kindly drawn by heat, that blossomes and flowres may passe out and spring in their time, and dis∣pose the springing of fruit, that matter of fruit may be gendered of the foresay be noble part, that is so drawen out of the pith and roote, and that the master maye be nourished and fed with goodnesse of humour and of heate, and defended with couering of leaues, and be made perfect by heat of the Sun, and influence of the vertue of  that the fruite may bee taken to ye vse of meat, whē it is ripe at st. Greene fruit and raw, and not dige∣sted,  bodyes and make them swel and mely bodyes of children & of fée∣blesome, and bréede in the wombe long wormes; & other wormes also. And nou∣rish and feed euill humours and corrupt, and appaire kinde tast and sauour, as it fareth in women with colde, that wile most greene fruit that is for ripe, as Pli∣nius sayth. But good fruite and ripe af∣forde both to meate and to medicine, so that euery manner fruit be taken in due manner according, & drink be taken ther∣after in couenable and due time, as it is more plainly taught in li. Dietarum. Ge∣nerally fruit is first gréene & vndigest, & sowre or bitter, but ye vtter heat comfor∣teth the inner heate, & maketh digestion in ye sowre humour, & dissolueth it, & the earthy matter therof. And the néerer ripe the fruit is, ye more swéet sauour & plea∣sing it taketh. And fruite that groweth most high in the tops of boughs, and that is most straight afore the Sunne ripeth most hastely. Token of ripenes is chan∣ging of gréene colour or earthie and pale colour, red, or yeolow, and chaunging of bitter sauour or sowre into sweet & plea∣sing sauour, and liking to the tast. First, fruit springeth gréene, & when it ripeth, heat hath mastry therein, and then fruite chaungeth both colour and sauour. And ye more hardnesse of earthy mater ∣ked & softned by might & vertue of heat, and the more mastry moysture of water or of aire hath therin, ye neerer ripe is ye fruit. Therfore ripenesse of fruit is assai∣ed, not onely by sight and colour, nor by fast and sauour: but by groping & bru∣sing, if the finger bruteth in thereto, and findeth it soft, as Isaac sayth in Dieti. And fruit of trées that growe in moun∣taines be more pure, more sauourye, and more wholsome the fruit of trees yt grow in valleys & in low places. And that is for more swéete and more pure, & more temperate féeding & nourishing, that is in mountaines, then in valleys, as Ari. sayth. Looke before de diuersiete at bo∣rū quoad fructus circā sinem. And some fruit is first sweet and sauoury, and af∣terward
bitter and sowre, as Mirabola∣ni, as Aristotle saith. Though such fruit be not of himselfe good to eate, yet with other they be good and medicinable. And sweete fruit, as Isaac sayth, is most tem∣perate in foure qualityes, and bée more temperate, and more moist and hot and more softning then other. And colde fruit that is sowre and hard, stoppeth and con∣straineth. Neuertheles it comforteth the stomacke, and exciteth the appetite, speci∣ally if it be eaten fasting: but & it be ea∣ten after meat, it comforteth ye mouth of the stomacke, and thrusseth togethers & showeth downward the meat, and layeth and maketh soft the wombe. And if the fruit be sowre and compounded of watry matter and earthie, then it quencheth sharpnesse of Cholera, and comforteth ye stomack, and dissolueth & departeth thick humours and colde, and sharpeth swéet humours, and giueth to them vertue and might to thirle and to passe into all the body. Unsauery fruite, in which watrye moisture hath mastry, is lesse worth then other fruit, and helpeth not the stomack, but bréedeth abhomination & wambling. And if fruite bée perfect ripe, it hath good sauour and merrie smell, if it be not rot∣ten, neither worme eaten, nor infected with euill humours, nor with corrupt aire. And such fruit is best kepte, and du∣reth longest in a cleane place and dry, & namely in bey or straw. And rotteth soone in a moist place or lowe by the ground. Also ripe fruite falleth sooner then the graine, and sooner by night then by daie: for they be more heauie when they bee wet with the night dew, and fall the soo∣ner. Of speaking of fruit this sufficeth at this time, for much is shewed of fruit be∣fore in ye same booke, in tractatu de arbo∣ribus in generali. Looke there in A. Of Germine. chap. 75. BUdding is call Germen, and Germen is taken for a budding graffe, as I∣sidore sayth, and hath that name Ger∣men, of Gerundo, bearing, and thereof commeth Germinacio, for in budding breedeth the humour of nourishing, and the humour and the vertue seminall. And also kinde heate thriueth and wor∣keth therein, and is of most vertue and might in effect and working, though it be of little qualitye in substaunce. For the vertue of the roote is drawen, and passeth and turneth into the substaunce of budding. Therefore hearbes accorde best to medicine, while they budde and spring, and haue plenty of humour that commeth from the roote. And so bud∣ding is called that that first breaketh out of the roote of an hearbe, or of a Trée. For when kinde heate is comforted, that is closed in the pith of the roote, then the roote draweth to it selfe humour, that is néedfull therto, and that is reared and borne vpwarde by heate that is closed therin, and dried by aire that is without, and turned into the matter of budding. And for drawing ceaseth not in the roote, increasing and springing ceaseth not in budding, before there bée due perfection, and complement therin. Also heat of hea∣uen thirleth and commeth to the pith of the root, and draweth to it selfe the parts of the pith that bée most cléere and thin, and most vnctuous and pure, and faste∣neth them together, and bringeth them in by priuie pores of the earth, & ceaseth not to turne them into substance of budding, as the Commentour sayth super librum Vogit. And budding taketh and draweth gréene coulour, that is meane betwéene red and blacke by mastry of euen partes that be firie and earthie, for springing & budding of earthie humour and thicke & vncleane, but by medling of parts of aire and of fire, the colour thereof is greene, yt is accounted meane colour betwéene red & blacke. Of budding commeth the stalk, blossome, flowres, and fruit. First spring many flowres, twigs, & braunches, clip∣ped togethers, and kinde maketh them to kéepe and saue kinde heate and the sub∣staunce of budding, for the tender sub∣staunce thereof might soone bée hurt and gréeued, but it were defended and succou∣red from outward noyances by twigs & spraies. It is soone gréeued with cold aire, as hayle, raine, and with euill infectiue dewe. And so against such griefes it is defended & succoured with manye leaues and spraies knit together, as it wer with
many garments. And this beginning of buddings is fairenesse of earth, for all gréene things, ye spring of the earth come of budding, and is signe & token of chan∣ging of time, & of comming of noueltye of springing time, and warneth that win∣ter goeth, & Summer commeth with no∣ueltie of fairenesse. And sometime bud∣ding of buds be gnawen & fret with flies great and small, and with other worms, and then is no hope of fruit. Of Gramine. cap. 76. GRamen is a field hearbe, and hath that name, for it buddeth, as Isid. saith, all hearbs be gendered of humour of ye earth by goodnesse of heate, for the heat of hea∣uen commeth within the earth, & gathe∣reth the most subtill parts thereof, & tur∣neth them into kind of roots, which pight in the ground, closet  heate within them∣selues, and draweth by vertue therof hu∣mour of the ground about to increasing & nourishing of the same roote, and turneth what is like thereto into kind of it selfe, & sendeth the superfluitie to generation of leaues & of branches. And for roots be many fold, that come of the humour, that is drawne by reason of moisture of the matter, therefore many hearbs & diuers spring of the budding, & grow together, & heale all the ground about, and aray it with gréene colour, & with flowres. And the deeper the rootes of hearbes be in the ground, the wider about stalks & leaues of hearbes spring and spread. In the be∣ginning of springing of hearbes, they multiply themselues right fast, if they bée not pared and ropt, and helde lowe: and if they be suffered in the beginning to grow too fast, then they spire and séed too soone, and leese: too soone their fairenesse & gréene coulour, as Plinius sayeth. And hearbes take diuers qualitie and vertues of the grounde that they growe in, and of qualitie of the humour that they be fed and nourished with, as Plinius, Isaac, and other Authors meane. Therefore of humours with contrarye complections, sometime hearbes and grasse and all that springeth of the earth taketh varieng and diuerse working and vertue, as Plinius, Const. Isaac, and others Authors meane. Therefore as the same Authors meane, hearbes of mountaynes and of high pla∣ces, be thinner and shorter then hearbes of Ualleys and of Medes, but these bée good and according to shéepe, for they bée swéete and wholesome, and meanely drye. And those that growe in marreys, and in moores bée more fat and large. But hearbes that growe in mountaines and high plates bée best of all. For as I∣saac and Constantine saye, hearbes of moores and marreys feed and nourish not best, for they brade watry bloud, and dis∣solue themselues soone from the mem∣bers, and bréede swelling and gnawing and curling in the guts: But in contra∣ryes be contrary doings. It is a rule as Isaac saith, ye rule is this. Among hearbs if the roote nourisheth, the séede thereof nourisheth not. And if the séede of an hearbe nourisheth, the roote thereof nou∣risheth not. And grasse commeth of the graine, and is pleasing in sight, and liking to beasts in pasture and meate, & comfor∣teth the sicke in doing, for as in roots, so in hearbes and grasse be many manner vertues, as Palla, saith. Hearbes & grasse loue sterne wether, raine, & great showrs, for heate and colour of hearbs néed much moisture. Hearbs & grasse grow & spread in wilde places, & fade without in strong cold, & in North wind, and fordry & faile, as Beda saith. And Dioscorides sayeth, a certaine hearb, and specially that that is called Gramen, hath knots and braun∣ches spreading on the ground, and broad leaues, and some deale sharp, and the roote thereof is knottie and sweete Oxen and other beasts eate gladly of the hearb, and the vertue thereof bindeth, and also hea∣leth and closeth wounds, and bindeth and stoppeth the wombe, and healeth sores of the bladder and reines, and abateth ach of the splene. Hounds know this hearb, and eate it to purge themselues, but they doe it so priuely, that vnneth men spie it. (Additiō.Gramen Arundinaceum, the redde grasse. Gramen Marmum, our Ladyes quishion. Gramen Parnassi, grasse of Parnassus. Read Dodoneus. fol. 510.)
Of Galbano. cap. 77. GAlbanus is an hearbe, and the iuyce thereof is called Galbanum, and is like in branches to ye hearb Ferula: and as Varro sayth, Galbanus is the iuyce of ye hearb Ferula, as Isid. saith, li. 18. This hearb is cut in Summer, & iuyce cōmeth out thereof, yt is gathered & dried. Also ye best Galbanum is most cleane with ma∣ny drops, & is like to Thus in colour, wt smooth grains, & the graines therof is not too dry, as Pli. & Dios. meane, & is dried in Sūmer about ye stalk. The vertue therof is firy & hot in the third degrée, & moist in the first degrée. And is feined with pou∣der of Colophonie, that is called Pitis in Gréeke, & with Beanes shalled & broken, & the shalles throwen away, & then that pouder & the leaues medled with ye best Galbanum is softned and tempred. Uery Galbanum and pure may be kept long time, & hath vertue to dissolue & tempet, to swage, to drawe, to make smooth, and to laxe. Smoake thereof awaketh them that haue the sléeping euill, and helpeth ach & stopping of the splene with vine∣ger, & bringeth a dead child out of ye mo∣thers wombe, & cleanseth & purgeth the mother, with hony the pouder of Galba∣num slaieth long wormes in the womb, smoake thereof constraineth menstruall bloud, and driueth away Serpents & ve∣nimous beasts, & wormes, & abateth tooth ach, as Diosc. & Plini. meane, & Plat. also. And there it is sayde, that if Galbanum shall be put into medicine, it shall first be purged of superfluitie, & shal first be molt in a shell on the fire, and then put in water, then the pure Galbanum shall fléete aboue, and the filth, as rind & gra∣uell shall sinke to the bottome. But Di∣oscorides saith, that Galbanum shall bée put in scalding hot water, & what sink∣eth shall be gathered, & what fléeteth shal be throwne away. (Additiō.Galbanum is also a gum or liquor drawen forth of a kind of Ferula in Sy∣ria, called Metopium, griffly or crispe, not moist, nor too drie. Galbanum grow∣eth vpon the mountaine Amanus in Sy∣ria. Of Gutta. cap. 78. GVtta right as Galbanum, is the drop∣ping of a certaine trée or hearb, & hath another name, and is called Armonia∣cum. Twigges and braunches of this trée or hearbe, men of the country cut in Summer time, and the dropping thereof is called Gutta, and Armoniacum also a∣mong Phisitions, as Isidore sayth, and Plinius also, the best kinde of this Gutta is most cleane & pure, without medling of earthie matter, and shall be white and fat as Thus, and séemeth if it be broke, shining within and gummie, as Diosc. & Plin. meane, & smelleth like Castorium. Bitter & sowre Gutta is hot in the third degrée, and drye in the second degrée, and hath vertue to dissolue, temper, & to laxe, as it is said in Plat. A scruple of it dronk with Oximel, healeth euils of the splene, and abateth and purgeth smarting, vn∣cleannesse, and filth of the eien, & slayeth long wormes of the wombe medled with iuyce of wormwood, & helpeth againe the gouts medled with hard pitch, & exciteth pisse, and purgeth menstruall bloud, and abateth all swelling and bolning, as the Glose saith super illum locum, Mirra & gutta, &c. Of Gariophilo. cap. 79. CLoues bé called Gariophili, and bée perfect fruit with sharpe sauour, and somewhat blacke in coulour, hot and dry in working, and moyst inwardly in doo∣ing, & be lesse strong then other in their qualities, & be the fruit of a certeine trée in Inde. gathered in Summer time whē they be ripe, & be kept fiue yere in great vertue and might: and they shall be kept in a place that is neither too drie, neither too moist, for they rot in a place that is too moist, & for drie in a place that is too dry, and bée somewhat plaine without, with sharpe sauour and swéete smell, and wose some moysture, if ye nayle be thru∣sted therein. And sonie be ioyned with Pouder of good Cloues, meddled with Vineger and Wine with good smell, and thereof they take moysture, and bée
vnneth knowen, for they be more sharpe without then the other be, therefore that sharpnesse is more without then within. But these yt be feined may not bée kept passing 20. daies. Good cloues haue ver∣tue to comfort by the good sauour of thē, & to temper and to wast by the qualities of them, & they comfort the braine & the vertue of féeling, and helpeth against fai∣ling of the heart, and comfort well the spirituall vertue, and helpe also agaynst indignation and ach of the stomacke, that commeth of colde ventositie, for they helpe the naturall vertue, Huc vs{que} Di∣oscorides. (Additiō.Cloues hath vertue to comfort the sinewes, also to consume and dissolue su∣perfluous humours, they be hot and drie in the third degrée: sodden with milke, it comforteth the debilitie of nature. Sir T. Eliot. 2. boo. cha. 17. Gariopillus is the cloue Bilowflowre, and Garlophyllata is Hearbe Bennet, whose roote smelleth as the Cloue.) Of Genesta. chap. 80. GEnesta, Broome, hath that name of bitternesse, for it is full bitter to mans tast, & is a shrub that groweth in a place that is forsaken, stony, & vntilled. Presence therof is witnesse, yt the ground is barren and drie, that it groweth in. And hath many braunches knottye and hard, that be gréene in Winter, and yeo∣low flowres in Summer, thick wrapped with heauie smell and bitter sauour, and be neuerthelesse most of vertue, as Dio∣scorides sayth. For the broth of ye leaues thereof abateth swelling of the splene, and helpeth against the tooth ach, & strai∣neth menstruall bloud, and stauncheth the bloudie flire. And the iuyce thereof slayeth lice and nits, and the féede thereof is bitter and blacke, and is in long cods and blacke growen, as it were cods of Fetches of Pesen, and is good to the fore∣said things. (Additiō.Genista, Broome, whereof Besomes are made to swéepe houses: Broome flo∣wers mixed with Swines grease, swa∣geth the paine of the gout, béeing applied thereto.) Of Grano. chap. 81. A Graine is the least parte both of the seede and of the Trée, dealed and de∣parted and distinguished in substaunce. In euery graine is both pith and rinde, in the which pith abideth the cause and reason seminall, that a plant may spring thereof, to multiply things of that kinde, and to saue them in kinde béeing. And so a graine is full lyttle of substaunce, of pith, and rinde, and is neuerthelesse long and mightie in effect and vertue seminal. And as graines be diuerse in kinde, so they be diuerse in figure & shape, in place and disposition. Héereof Aristo. speaketh libro primo de Plantis, and sayeth, That some graine and séede is gendered in plants or cods, as it fareth in Annes séed, and in Feuell séede, or other such. And some is gendered in cods and hulls: as it fareth in Beanes, and in other cod ware. And some beare séede in hath shalls, and in cappes without aboue the shalles, as Nuts and Oliues. And some graines be ordeined in hard cores within the fruite, as it fareth in Apples and in Peares. Graines, yt be ordeined in cods & in hulls be diuerse in many manner wise in place, for some be multiplyed in coddes, as it fareth in Celidonye, which is a good hearbe for the eien, & some séede is inclo∣sed in the cod and hull, as the Erane and the Pease. And some in hull not closed, as Wheate and other such. And some graine is neither in cod neither in hull, as Early, but the graine is conteined to the Strawe. And some is double with∣out Interclose, as it fareth in Celidonie, and some is double with Interclose, as the graine of Nasturcium, Cresses, or towne Cars. And some is double or tre∣ble in diuers cells in the cod, as it fareth in Mirtus. In the fruit thereof bée thrée celles, and in euery cell thrée graynes or foure ioyned without Interclose, and thicke betwéene the graines, as in Casia fistula, and sometime thicke and softe Interclose, as in Cucumer, & Cucurbita. And sometime graines haue the Inter∣close of diuerse substaunce, and of diuers kinde, as in Pomegranardes. Therein
betwéene the greynes, there is some in∣terclose sad and thicke, and some small & thin. But as greynes be diuers in subs∣taunce, so they be diuers in figure and shape: for some be round, and some sha∣pen topwise, and some euenlong, and thrée cornered with many sides, as it fareth in Ciceris, Cherries. The euen-long greynes séemeth as though they were cloue in one side, as it fareth in wheate, and in other such like Greynes be war∣ded and succoured with rindes, skinnes, or hulls and cods, for to saue the inner pith, and kinde heate. Huc vs{que} Arist. ¶Of Gith. chap. 82. Melanthi¦um. Nigella, or blacke Poppie.GIth is a manner pulse much lyke to commin, and is put in bread to make it swéete, and is of blacke colour, as the Glose saith super Esa. 28. And Platea A∣ristotle, and Dioscorid, meane, that Gith is an hearbe hot and drye in the seconde degrée, and groweth among corne, with small séede, and blacke, as it were thrée cornered. And the séed is tempering and softening, and some deale bitter, and hath vertus to dissolue and consume, to waste and to open the stopping of the splene, & to swage ventoutie, and to abate the swelling of Emeroydes, and to staunche the bléeding thereof, and to slaye long wormes of the wombs with honie. And some meane, that this hearb is Ni∣gella, & the broth thereof slaieth wormes of ye eares, if it be luke warme hot drop∣ped therein, if it be sod in vineger, & bre∣keth postumes if it be sod in wine, bran, and line séede, and Culuer doung, and so layd therto in a plaister wise: and is ac∣coūted good against Lepra, if it be laid too with Radish sod in wine, and a litle salt, and exciteth menstruall bloud, and pro∣cureth hastie bearing of childe, if the wo∣man be smoaked therewith. If Nigella lye in wine all night, that wine dronke, helpeth against the euill Seranguria, that is small pissing, and ofte against the pas∣sion Illiaca, and shall not be sod, least it be too violent: for as Constantine sayth, Nigella slayeth, if it be taken in great quantitie. (Additiō.Some learned men, suppose this Nigella, to be wilde Commin, it is hot and drye, in the third degrée, take héed of this hearbe, if ye goe beyond measure, it breedeth death.) D. Turner. ¶Of Ilice. cap. 83. ILex, Ilicis, is a manner Oke, a trée that beareth maste, & hath that name of Eligo, gis, to choose. For as Isid. saith lib. 24. First men found & those the fruits of this trée to their meate and foode, be∣fore vse of corne, men liued by such mast in olde time. Among trées that beare mast, this maner Oke Ilex, is accounted most worthy and noble. The fruite therof fée∣deth many Nations, as Plin. saith li. 16. And Ilex is a trée with a great roote & déepe in the ground, and most surest and saddest stocke, and hath most hardest and thickest rinde, with some manner riuels, and with many boughes and braunches, and by reason of many faire leaues and broad, it causeth pleasaunt shadow, and beareth great plentie of fruite and of maste. The trée thereof is durable and strong, & nigh vnable to roote, for stockes thereof layd vnder water, turneth as it were to hardnes of stone, and the longer time they be in such moystie places, the more hard they be. Therefore such tim∣ber is able to buylding of Temples of Gods, and of Palaices of kings. And so for hard and durable matter and kinde of such trée misbeléeued men, made thereof Images and mawmets of false Gods, as Plinius saith. (Additiō.Ilex, a trée called of some Holme One kinde of it beareth the graine, of A∣pothecaries called Kirmes.) ¶Of Iunipero. chap. 84. IVniperus is a trée, as Isidore sayth, & hath that name among the Gréekes, for it groweth broad and wide beneath, and narrow aboue, as fire ariseth. For if it take fire, it kéepeth and holdeth it long time, so that if coales be raked in the a∣shes thereof, it quencheth not within a yeare, as it is sayd. Fire is called ir, in gréeke, therfore this trée is called Iuniper'
as it were bréeding fire. And some Iuni∣perus is great, and some is little & small, as Isidor. speaketh lib. 17. And either is a rough trée with prickes, and many small leaues and sharpe: and either beareth, but the lesse beareth more fruite than the more, and beareth many graynes small & round, and be first gréene, and after pur∣ple, or as it were some deale redde, when they be ripe at full. Unneth this trée léeseth gréene colour, either fruite or leaues, and is hot and drye in the thirde degrée, as Dioscorides saith. The fruit therof is gathered in sprin∣ging time, and is kept two yeare, & hath vertue to dissolue, to consume & to wast. The broath thereof if it be sod in rayne waler, helpeth against the sixe ye cōmeth of sharpnes and strength of medicine, if the patient he bathed therein. Of Iuni∣perus is made. Oleum Iuniperū, which is most effectiue against the Quartane, if the patient take euery daye thereof, the waight of a drain in meat or otherwise, and helpeth agaynst the passion Illiaca, if the place be anoynted therewith, and helpeth them that haue the fallyng euil, and, breaketh the slone, if it be put into the bladder, with an instrument, that is called Siringa. Siringa is a smal pipe, by the which the medicine is put into the bladder. Wine in the which fruite of Iuni∣perus is sod, with drie figges, pourgeth the breast, and doth away the cough. Huc vsque Plutearius & Dioscorides. Iuni∣perus groweth in stonie places, that is not illed, and in wildernes. Serpents fly the shadow thereof, as Plinius saith. Therefore men suppose that the fruit ther of helpeth against venime. Additiō.The gum that woseth foorth of the Iuniper trée, is called Vernix. The ope∣ration héere of the whole trée, is hot and drye.) ¶Of Isope. chap. 85. ISopus is a lyttle shorte hearbe, and groweth among stoanes, and clea∣neth by the roote to the harde stoanes, as Cassiodorus meaneth super Psal∣mum. Dioscorides saith that this hearbe is hot and drye in the third degrée. The ver∣tue thereof is in floures and in leaues, more than in the stalke or roote. And in summer when it bereth floures, ye must gather them, and drye them in a cleane place and darke that is not smoakie, and they haue vertue to dissolue, to temper, to consume, to waste, and to cleanse the lunges, and cleanseth and purgeth the breast of all manner euils that commeth of colde, if it be sodde in wine with drye figs, and the wine giuen to the Patient to drinke: and doth aware ache of the stomacke and of the guts: washing & ba∣thing with the broth and water that it is sod in, purgeth and cleanseth the mo∣ther of superfluitie of humours. This hearbe Isope heated in a shell, and laid on the head, abateth cold rume. Volam codentem reprimit, and doth a∣way ache that commeth of ventositie, & is called Haec Isopus, and Hoc Isopum, also. And Authours meane, that ye mid∣dle sillable thereof is shorte, and some saye, that it is long. It is sayde in Aurora. Est humilis petrae{que} suis, radicibus haerens, Et vitijs Isopus, pectoris herba me∣dens. These two verses meane, that Isope is a lowe hearbe, & cleaueth to the stone by rootes, and is medicinable for euils of the breast, and who that can scan a verse may know, that the middle sillable stan∣deth for a short sillable in the seconds verse. And in Anticlaudiano, Alanus maketh it long, and is made long in thrée verses that follow. Se celum terrae conformat Cedrus Isopo. And againe another saith. Pectoris herba cauas rupes incedit Isopus. Yet followeth another verse. Ad Pulmonis opus confert medica∣men Isopus. So it is long in all these thrée vear∣ses, that be heéere set for ensample therof. And Plinius saith, though that this hearb be little, yet it was of so great authori∣tie among men in olde time, that they
supposed, that they might not be clean∣sed in their Temples without sprinckling with this hearbe. Also among the He∣brewes, they that should be cleansed and purified, should be purified with a bundel of Isope, as mention is made. Exo. 12. & Leuit. 12.Levit. 14 & Num. 15.Num. 19. Also the powder thereof helpeth against the dropsie,3. Reg. 4. as Dioscorides saith,Psal. 51. and cleanseth the body of wan colour,Iohn. 19 and causeth full faire co∣lour in the face, and abateth tooth ache,Heb. 9. & tingling of cares, & slayeth long wormes in the wombe, as he sayth. (Additiō.Hissope, is of two kindes, & it is hot & dry in the third dergée. Read Dodoneus.) Of Iaceros. AdditionTHere is in Calicot a fruite, which they name Iaceros, the bodye of the trée, is of the bignesse of a peare trée: the fruite is of the length of two handfulls, and as bigge as the thigh of a man. The fruite groweth out of the bodie of ye trée, vnder the braunches, and some in the midst of the tree,and some lower. The colour is greene, the fruite not vnlike the Pineapple: but with a more finer order of scales: when it is ripe it turneth black. It is gathered in December, it hath the fast of a swéete Gourd, and of a peach, & beareth the relish of many fruites, as re∣porteth Lewes Vertomannus in fol. 393 cap. 14. lib. 2. ¶Of Iacincto. cap. 86. IAcinctus is an hearbe with a pur∣ple floure, and hath that name of a noble childe that was found dead among purple floures. And the hearbe hath that name of the hap of the dead childe, and is also lyke to a Uiolet in floure and roote, as Isid. saith li. 17. Also there is a preci∣ous stone both of the same name and of the same coulour, which is accounted a∣mong the twelue precious stones in the Apocalips. Iacinctus is also the name of a man, of a stone, and of a flower: The proper coulour thereof is the coulour of aire or of heauen. Purple hath coulour of bloud or of fire, and Byssas of snow. With these twelue coulours, bestments of Priests were arayed in the olde Te∣stament. ¶Of Iusquiamo. cap. 87. IVsquiamus in Gréeke, is in English called Henbane,Henbane. and Canicularis in La∣tine, and hath that name Canicularis, for in either side of the stalke thereof grow∣eth as it were Crabs heads, as it faeth in Pomegranards, as Isidore saith li. 17 The mouthes thereof be departed & clouen, and haue diuers séedes lyke to Poppie séede This hearbe is called Is∣na, mad; for the vse thereof is perillous: for if it be eate or dronke, it breedeth madnesse, or slow lykenesse of sléepe. Therefore this hearb is called common∣ly Mirilidium, for it taketh awaye wit and reason. Isidore sayth, that this is a venemous hearbe, and hath blacke séede, red or white, as linius saith and Dio∣scorides: the blacke is worst and vene∣mous, the red is lesse euill, and the white is least euill. Therefore the vse thereof accordeth most to medicine. & hath vertue to constraine and binde, and also to breed sléepe: and those that haue blacke seede, haue blacke leaues, and rough and hard, with Purple floures, with hard leaues, thicke and sad. Those that haue reddest seeds, haue white floures, and also butter floures, and leaues softer. And those that haue white seed, haue white floures & fat leaues & ful of iuyce: the hearb is cold in ye third degrée, & dry in the second degree. Therfore it abateth swelling, & bindeth the wombe, and stauncheth bloud, and healeth tooth ache that commeth of heat, and abateth hot reume. Huc vs{que} Diosc. and Plinius. And Aristotle in libro vegitabilium speaketh of Henbane seede and sayeth, that the seede of the Henbane is poyson, and slayeth among the Parthians, and is eaten at Ierusalem: and so by good ground or euill, where it groweth, the mallice thereof and venime abateth or increaseth. Magister in historia sup. Ex∣odum saith. That in the Crowne of the chiefe Bishop, sloode a floure lyke to an hearbe that the Greeks call Iusquiams. And vnder that floure in the vtter side
of the Crowne or Miter was a Circle of gold about the forhead, and the noll and the circle was distinguished in treble or∣der, and vpon the circle stoode golden flo∣wers like to Plantayne, from the Tem∣ple to the Temple. And so in that these hearbes were priuiledged, that the lyke∣nesse of them were worthy to be set in tokening and figure in the crowne and Myter of the chiefe Priest. (Additiō.Hiosciamus, blacke, yeolowe, and white: the blacke is most hurtfull.) ¶Of Castanea. cap. 88. CAstanea, the Casteyne trée, is a great trée and an high, and is called Castenea among the Gréekes as Isidore saith: for the fruite thereof is double in the lyke∣nesse of Ginetall closed in an huske, and be taken out of the shale, as it were by manner gelding. Therefore such Trées are called Castanie in Gréeke, and haue that name of Castrando, gelding. If this trée is felde,Forth of the olde root sprin¦geth yoūg sprigges, which grovve to trees and beare fruite. there springeth as it were a woode in the place all about, as Isidore saith. This trée is full profitable, for the stocke thereof is good to building and fuell, and the rinde and the leaues to me∣dicine. And though the fruite on ye trée, be hid in a vile rinde, rough and harde, yet when it is taken out thereof, it is found swéete, & namely if it be sod or ro∣sted. Isaac in Dietis saith, that this fruit is hot in the middle of the first degrée, & drye in the second, and is swéete because of heate, and sourish because of drinesse. But Casteynes bréede swelling, if men eate too many thereof, and breedeth also head ach because of fumositie, that is clo∣sed therein: but to purge & cleanse this fruite, it must be rosted or sod in water, that the earthy matter may be wasted by the fire, and the fruite made lesse harde, and lesse fast, or els that it maye be tem∣pered with softnesse & moystnesse of the fresh water, and then it nourisheth well, and bréedeth good humour, and tempreth drinesse of the body and the breast, and namely if it be eaten with Sugar Acata secundum alium librum. And of chola∣ricke and fleumaticke men it shal be ea∣ten with hony, and is good by medicine, for it restraineth wambling and spew∣ing, and comforteth the gut that is called Ieiuniū. Also a Casteyne tempered with a lyttle honnie, healeth at best biting of a mad dogge, or mans biting. Also this fruite made in a Plaister, with Barley meale and vineger, healeth effectuallye swellyng of breasts and of teares. Also the rindes and leaues burnt and made to powder, tempered with vinegar, and layed to a young mans head in a Play∣ster wise, maketh haire increase, and kéepeth haire from fallyng. Huc vsque Isa∣ac in dictis. (Additiō.Amongst all kinde of wilde fruites, the Chesnut is best, and méetest to be ea∣ten: for they nourish reasonable well, yet they be hard of digestion. Well rost, and dipped in butter, they nourish best.) ¶Of Lauro. chap. 89. THe Laurell trée is called Laurus, and is a trée of victory,and is worthy to be praised in many maner wise. For sin∣gular excellencie of grace and of vertue, sometime Conquerours were crowned, with garlands of Laurel trée, when they had the victorie. And the Gréekes call the trée Daphnis. Singular properties of this trée we haue set before in this same booke, in litera A. Séeke there, and thou shalt finde. Of Lentisco. chap. 90. LEntiscus is a lowe and a medicinall trée,Mastike. and is called Scinus among the Gréeks and Hebrewes by another name, as the Glose saieth super Dan. 13. The iuyce of the leaues thereof healeth lyps, and chinnes and whelkes, as it is sayde there. And is called Lentiscus, for the pricke thereof is blunt and softe and fol∣ding, for we vse to call a thing that is softe and plyant Lentus, as Isidore saith lib. 17. Of the fruit of this trée commeth Oyle, and of the rinde commeth Resina, that is called Masticke. And the best brée∣deth in the Iland Chio, as Isidore saith lib. 16. Dioscorides, Platea, and Plinius meane, that the leaues of this trée be full hot and drye, and so is all the trée, & haue
vertue to binde and to fasten, and to com∣fort, and helpeth therefore against spew∣ing, and all manner running of bloud, & of other humour. And the m thereof that is to say, Mistix, hath such lyke ver∣tues. And this gumme hath the name of Mistgand of the wing, for with chew∣ing it is made tough and cleansing, and harde as waxe among ye feeth: & to chew∣ed, it cleanseth and purgeth the gums of rotted humours, and fasteneth wagging and rocking téeth; & maketh them white and cleane, and strengtheneth and com∣forteth the rootes thereof, and cleanseth & amendeth euill breath. This Masticke is gathered in this wise. Ithe ende of springing time the rindes of this Trée Tenultus, be cut and flie, and the ground is made cleane, and cloathes be spred ther on, least the lycour that falleth shuld fall into the ground: and then the lycor that is faire and cléere, and cleane is best: that that is dim and medled with earth, is nought worth. Mastike cleanseth & purgeth the brain, and causeth to spit much, and comforted the vertue of digestion, & destroyeth ventositie and windes, & sow∣dreth and ioyneth together in a wonder∣full manner all broken things, as preci∣ous stones, and other things that be bro∣ken, if it be molten on an hot tile or flate. And Plinius and Dioscor. meane, that Lenticas is a trée wt many pricks, and with  déepe roote in the grounde, and clouen and diuided in many parts. The fruite thereof is lyke to Myrtus, but the greynes is lesse, and reared within when it is ripe, and within is a manner rough wooll, and the iuyce of that wooll, staun∣theth the running and dropping of wo∣men. (Additiō.Of the Masticke trée commeth, the gumme Masticke, which is in cleere and small greynes, of the quantitie of wheat cornes.) ¶Of Lilio. chap. 91. THe Lily is an hearbe with a white flower  and though the leaues of the floure be white: yet within shineth the likenesse of golde. Dioscorides and Plat. speake of the Lily and say, that it is hot and moyst. And some Lily is wilde, and some is same, and some beareth a purple floure or yeolowe, and some beareth a white pure, and that is most mightie in working. The vertue of the Lily ripeth dotch∣es and sores, and therefore it helpeth a∣gainst Pastumes and botches, if it bée stamped with Auxungia Grece. Also the vertue thereof tempereth and fasteneth matter. Therefore it helpeth against hard∣nesse of the splene, if the place of ye splene and the side about the splene be annoyn∣ted with iuyce of Lilyes well meddeled and incorporate with olde Oyle. And vertue thereof cleanseth and purgeth, if ponder thereof be medled with Roses, & the, face washed therewith: and vertue thereof easeth sores, therefore leaues sod and layd to a sore that is burnt, healeth the sore, & the roote therof doth the same, if it be brused with oyle, and layd therto, and vertue thereof tempreth and softe∣neth hard matter, therefore it bringeth out menstruall purgaon: and vertue thereof abateth swellyng, and helpeth a∣gainst postumes that come of swellyng ventositie, if the roote thereof be stamped with oyle, and ofte said thereto. Huc vs∣que Dioscorides. And Plin. saith, that the Lily roote maketh the floure therof wor∣thie and noble in many manner wise: for the roote thereof dronke with wine, hea∣teth biting of serpents, & helpeth against ye mallice and venime of frogs. And this roote sod in wine, and medled with oyle, helpeth Podagre, and knots of the féete, and maketh hayre growe in places that be sealded and burnt. Also this roote sod in wine and medled with honie, helpeth veynes that he cut. Leaues thereof sod in wine, healeth sore wounds: & séede there∣of brayed, is layd to the holy fire: and floures and leaues heale sore hotches. Huc vs{que} plin. li. 20. ca. 19. Item in cod. lib. cap. 5. The Lily is next to the Rose in worthines & noblenes, & in a certayne gathering of oyntment thereof, is made a noble oyntment and oyle, that is called Oleum Liliorum, as Oleum Rosaceum, is ofte made of Roses. Of the root therof springeth a stalke of thrée cubits long, & in the top of the stalke hangeth a floure
downward, that is narrow by the stalk, and wexeth in bredth wider and wider, shapen as a bell, & she floure hath with in as it here small threddes that con∣taine the séede. In the middle standeth chiues of saffro, and so nothing is more gracious than the Lily in fairnes of co∣sent in swéetnesse of smell, and in effect of working and vertue. The coulour thereof is treble, white, redde, and pur∣ple. Huc vsque Plinius libro. 0. capi∣tulo. 5. The roofe of the Lilye hath, manye cloues, as the roote of Garlike, as Arist. sayth in lib. vegitab. and in euery cloue, is vertue feminall, and of each springeth a plant when it is set alone. Séeke more héereof before, in the same, De Allio in litera A. And héereto Arist. saith that the stalke of the Lily hath many knots, and if the stalke be bended and layd downe, and couered with earth, while the roote is in the grounde, and ere the séed bread, out and vnclose, then within few dayes, thou shalt finde of euerye knot, a small cloue sprong, as it were out of the roote, and that is wonder. Also there it is said, that Lily floures be first gréene, and af∣terward white, and if the stalke be cut, all from the roote, for all the kinde humor of the stalke is closed in the pith, the kind heate that is in the pith, tourneth so the ouer part of the stalke, and maketh dige∣stion in the matter of the floure, and then the floure spreadeth and is white, when the humour is full digested. Therefore it is sayd that Uersifiers likened the Li∣ly to wans in wit, that is busie at last to things that euer shall last. And there it is sayd that the Lily hath not the vertue seminall in séed and in roote: and in that the Lily is diuers, & varieth from Léekes and Garlik, and other that haue seminal vertue in diuers places. Héereof loke be∣fore, in the chapter of Garlike and Oni∣ons in litera A. & C. Also the Lily stalks with floures new cut, put in a clodde of claye, keepeth the floures fresh long time. The Lilye flo∣wer smelleth full swéete, white it is whole and not broken, and stinketh full sowle, if it be broken and froted with handes. And the Lily hath onely the, flower with the seede in sleepe of fruite, and all the vertue that the Lily hath is stalk & in roote in shewed in the head in the flo∣wer and in the seede, and the more high∣er the floure is on the stalke, the more the head bendeth downward: and the flower thereof is plaine and smooth with out, and softe to touch and to handle, ound in shape, and liking in sight, with goldish greynes contained within ye hol∣lownesse of the floure: the which greines dye and colour more than saffron: and these dieng greynes be borne on with vi. stalkes. And the Lily floure is compou∣ned of vi. full white leaues that hée full nigh togethers. And is beautified, with seauen golden greynes: in the middle whereof is the seede in stéede of fruite, & is wonderfully white, & is closed about with benefice of leaues of the flower, that the seede maye be kepte and saued from grieuing of the colde aire that is without. (Additiō.Lilium candidum, there is also the Orenge coulour, and red purple Lilyes, the wilde Lily called Martagon and A∣matilis Hispanorum. Read Matthe∣olus, &c.) ¶Of Lactuca. ca. 92. LEctuce is called Lactuca, & hath that name of plentie of humour, as Isido. saith, or els for it maketh ofte milke in women, that nourish and féede children. And in men this heard ye withstandeth mo∣uing of Venus, & thereof is double kinde, wilde and tame. The wilde we call Sera∣lia, for the backe thereof hath sharpe prickes and séeth as it were a sawe, lyke as Isid. speaketh in his seuentéenth booke and the last chapter. Isaac in Dietis. speketh of this hearb and saith that this hearbe wild Lettuce, is lyke in shape to the tame, but it hath longer braunches smaller and sharper, & lesse gréene for scarsitie of moysture: and therefore it is much more bitter and dri∣er. Therefore many men meane, that it exciteth menstruall bloud, and putteth out rawe humoures, as Dioscorides saith.
And the tame Lettuce is cold and moyst, and temperate, that it passeth not mea∣sure in neither qualytie. Therefore vse thereof accordeth both to meate and to medicine, and is subtill of substance, and namely when it is fresh, and is therfore soone digested, and abateth gnawing and burning that commeth of Cholera ru∣bea, and cooleth heate & boyling of bloud, and exciteth sleepe, and healeth head ach, that commeth of cholaricke humour and sumositie, and multiplyeth milke in wo∣men, and Semen in men, and this is by reason of good bloud that it bréedeth in perfect quantitie and qualitie: but when it is olde it is hard, and moysture thereof wihtdraweth, and the hearbe is bitter, & then vse thereof bréedeth bloud at worst, and appaireth the sight, and maketh it fayle, and slayeth the feelyng, for it stif∣feleth naturall féeling with sowrenesse thereof. Such Lettuce is most grieuous to such as will get childrē, for it runneth and consealeth the seminall matter, and namely the séede thereof, if it be ofte ta∣ken in meate or in drinke. Huc vs{que} Isa. in Dietis. Lib. 20. cap. 8. Plinius speak∣eth of Lettuce and sayeth, that a manner kinde of lettuce groweth of it selfe with∣out tillyng, and that manner Lettuce is called Caprina, for if it be throwen into the sea, flayeth all the fish that is nigh thereabout. Milke thereof with vineger, water and wine healeth the Dropsie. The hearbe with the leaues stamped & sprong with salt, healeth sinewes that are forecut. Another manner Lettuce groweth in fields, and leaues therof stamped healeth botches, if it be laid to them with medle. And among ye Gréekes, this maner Let∣tuce is called Isopum, or Esoperum. The third manner Lettuce groweth in woodes, and is called Stancio. Leaues thereof grounde with meale and floure, healeth wounds, and stauncheth bloud, & healeth rotted wounds. The roote and the leaues abateth the euill, which is called, the holy life. Another manner Lettuce with round leaues & shorte, is called Heracia among many men. Hawkes scrape this hearbe, and take out the iuyce thereof, & touche and heale theyr eyen therewith, and doe away dimnesse and blindnesse when they be olde. The iuyce healeth all the euills of the eyen, and namelye if a womans milke be medled therewith. And it hea∣leth biting of Serpents, and stinging of Scorpions, if the iuyce thereof be dronk in Wine, and the leaues stamped, and layed to the wounde, in a plaister wise, swageth and healeth all manner swel∣lyng. Also the séede of all manner Lettuce, wilde & tame, chasteth in sléepe, dreames of lecherie, and suffereth not the body to be polluted neither desiled, if it be oft ta∣ken in meate: but ofte vse thereof, and too much thereof eaten, grieueth ye cléer∣nesse of the eyen. Plinius thereto giueth many other praisings in the same chap∣ter, but this shall suffice at this time. ¶Of Lappa. chap. 93. LAppa, the Clee, is an hearbe with broad leaues, and thicke about the ground, and hath in the tops of the stalke knots with crooked prickes, that oft clea∣ueth to mans clothes. Lib. 17. Isid. spea∣keth héereof and saith, that this hearb is called Lappa, because it hath great leaues disposed by the ground: & is called Phi∣lantropos among the Gréekes, for it is rough and cleaueth to mans clothes and groweth by olde walls, & is called Phi∣lantropos, as it were louing mankinde, for it cleaueth to mans clothes, by a ma∣ner affection and loue, as it séemeth. Thereof is double kinde, sharp & round, disposed to the lykenesse of an horse foote, therefore many men call it Vngula Ca∣balina, an horse hoofe: and either hath leaues with heauie and mightie sauour and smell, as Dioscorides saith. And li. 20. cap. 22. Plinius saieth, that this name Lappa, is the name of manye manner hearbes, for it is the name of all manner Dockes, and be all medicinable, for they healé smiting of scorpions, nor they smite not a man, that is baulnied with ye iuice thereof. The broath thereof helpeth and also comforteth the téeth, if it be luke warme hot helde in the mouth. The séede there,
of  of the stomack, and helpeth them much east blond, and them also that haue the blondie flixe for the roote thereof wih wiar bindeth the wombe, but the leaues medled with salte laxeth the wombe. The seede dronke, hea∣leth them which haue the stone. All the hearbe stamped with Auxungia grece, helpeth against the botch in the breast. Huc vs{que} vlinius. And Plato. meaneth, ye Lappa, which is called Lappatum also, is an hot hearb and a drye, and hath vertue to dissolue, and to temper and to laxe, and to open, & to kindle, and helpeth therefore against it∣ching, and also against scabs wet and dry, and against the shingles, and wasteth the humours betweene the flesh & the skin. And softneth and abateth hardnesse and swelling of Postumes, & helpeth against the cold dropsie, & against stopping of the splene: and the iuyce therof medled with the iuyce of Rewe, purgeth the braine of superfluitie of fleme, if it be dropped in∣to the nosethrilles in a bath, or in a hot aire. (Additiō.Lapathum, there are fiue kindes, Dockes and Sorrell, Patience, as Ru∣mex, Oxilapathum, stiuum, &c. Reade Dod. fol. 557. Of Lappate. cap. 64. LAppates is a manner meate made, compowned and confect of certaine hearbs of gardens, as ye glose saith super Iud. ca. 15. And Alexander Nequam spe∣keth thereof, & saith, that Lappates cibus est, et olus componet eundom. The me∣ning is, yt Lappates is a meate made of hearbs. And other meaneth yt it is a man∣ner kind of hearbs & of worts, wt broade leaues, as a Clete, but the leaues of Lap∣pates be soft, & fat, & plaine, & wonderful∣ly wralled & lapped, & cleauing togethers with a short caulstock, knotty without, & full of pith within. This hearb accordeth to meate & to medicine, & thereof is good meate made, that may be kept long time, if it be busily compounded and sod with vineger, smapie séed, and hony. And such meat is commonly called Compositum, and hath a singular vertue to withstand dronkennesse, as Plinius saith, lib. 10. 20. For if it be eaten before meat, it kapeth from dronkennesse: and if it be taken af∣ter meate in dronkennesse, it maketh it passe away. And the doctrine & teaching of Rasis meaneth, yt there is nothing better for broken bones, & is good to ye stomack & to the sinewes. Therefore he comman∣deth & biddeth, that this hearb be giuen to them that haue quaking, & the paste, and to them that spit bloud, and to children: and bréedeth plenty of milke. The iuyce therof helpeth against venim and smiting of Serpents; and namely the séed thereof helpeth against biting of hounds, as Isid. saith, lib. 17. Of Legumine. cap. 65. LEgumina, Codware yt serueth to po∣tage, hath this name Legumina of Legendo, choosing, as it were chose. For men in old time chose the best codware, & made them meat therof: and graines that be some deale more, & greater & thicker then graines of Wheale or Baily, be properly called Legumina, & be not gen∣dered in hulls, as wheat, but in code: and be closed therin, as it fareth in pesen, fet∣ches, & beans. And Legumina, codware, is diuers in quantitie, in colour, in figure, shape, and sauour. For among such Cod∣ware, Lupines & beanes be greatest, and pesen & fetches be meane, filles & vaches be smallest in quantity: and be diuerse in coulour. For some be white, and some blacke, and some red, and some meddeled with diuers coulours. In shape they bée diuers, for some be round, and some bée euenlong, & some thrée cornered, & some plaine. In sauour they differ, for some bée sowre and hard, and made soft, and good to eating and séething. And some bée bitter of themselues, as Lupines, and bée made swéet and sauoury, with good wa∣tring. And Codware shall be gathered when they begin to ripe. For they will fall soone out of the coddes, and be not well séene when they be shed: as it areth of Lupines, as Plinius sayth, libro. 18. And such codware is in substance, thicke, fast, colde, and drye, and harde to defie, and
is hard to séething, for fast and hard sub∣staunce, and may not well be sod in pitte water: but to seeth such Codware well, needeth running water of a well or of a streame Oft of Codware boystōus meat is made, which accordeth to strong men of complection and of kinde: for Cod∣ware of it selfe, is hard to digest, and nourisheth much, and comforteth when it is digested: but it bréedeth swelling and ventositie, but the ventositie is aba∣ted thereof by medling of things that de∣stroy ventositie, as Comin and Anete, & other such, as Dioscorides saith and affir∣meth. (Additiō.Codware bréedeth swelling, and is to be vsed of them that can kéepe good dyet, for beanes and pease of all sortes, doe breede winde, &c.) ¶Of Lente. cap. 96. LEns, lentis, is a manner of Codware, and is seruisable to Potage, as Isido. saith lib 17 and hath that name, for it is moyst and softe, and namely in grasse: & of Lens; lentis, commeth Lencicula, the diminutiue thereof, and is writ with c, for difference of Lens, lendis, that is a nit, a little head worme, & is writ with d, in the Genitiue case, and in all the o∣ther, except the Nomnatiue case. Therof one speaketh in this manner. Lens lendis capiti, Lens lentis con∣uenit oi. That is to say, that Lens lendis, is the nit in the head, and Lens lentis, is the titl, and accordeth to the mouth. The till is colde and drye, and compow∣ned of contraries, as Isaac saith: for one vertue thereof is in the rinde, and ano∣ther in the pith and the meale: For it hath in the rinde a manner sharpnesse, by the which it lareth the wombe: but the pith and the meale is sowrish, and comforteth the stomacke, and constrai∣neth and bindeth, and gendreth thicke & melancholike bloud, and filleth the brain, with thicke smoke, and is therfore cause of horrible and dreadfull dreames, and grieueth the stomacke with ventositie & swelling and stoppeth all the passages & veynes of the bodye, and dryeth the sub∣staunce of sinewes and of skinnes of the braine, and is most grieuous to the skins of the eyen, for it distempereth the moy∣sture thereof and fordrieth. And he say∣eth, that it greueth whole eyen, and then much more it grieueth sore eyen, because that it fordrieth. Oft vse of this, breedeth in the body most wicked euils and passi∣ons, and namely if that it be eaten with the skin and hulles, and if the bodye bée drye of complection. But somtime it hel∣peth them that be hot & moyst. And hel∣peth them that haue the dropsie, if it bée eaten without the skin, for it gendreth much swelling and stretching of guts, and of skins. Till that is most great & fresh and easie to seething, is best, & that both to meate and to medicine. The ma∣lice of Till is tempered if the skinne be put away, and the pith sod in fresh wa∣ter, and then oyle put thereto, & pepper, Comin, and other such things Huc vsq Isaac in Dietis. Plin. saith, lib. 17. cap. 12. that the till loneth leane land more then fat, and dry wether and aire, & all Cod∣ware loueth water before the blossome, and drinesse after the blooming. (Additiō.Lentills, not common, and is hard of digestion, & causeth dreadfull dreames, it bréedeth cankers, leprosie, and mad∣nesse, yet it is medicinable.) ¶Of Lino. chap. 97. BOth Flexe and séede is called Linum,Flexe or Lin. & hath that name, for it is both softe and smooth, and full liking, as Isid. saith li. 19. Li. 12. ca. 2. Plin saith, that flaxe is sowen in grauelly places and plaine, and that in springing time and is gathered in Summer. Flaxe groweth in euen stalks, and be yeolow floures or blew and after commeth hoppes, and therein is the seede, and when the hoppe beginneth to were, then the flaxe is drawen vp and gathe∣red all whole, and is then lyned, and af∣terward made to knots and lyttle bun∣dells, and so laid in water, and lyeth ther long time, and then it is taken out of the water, and layed abroad, till it be dryed, and turned and woond in the Sunne, and then bound in pretie nitches & bundles, and afterward knocked, beaten and brai∣ed,
and carfled, rudded and gnodded, rib∣bed and heckled, and at the last sponne. Then the thred is sod and bleaked, and bucked and ofte layed drieng, wetted, and washed, and sprinkled with water, vntill that it be white, after diuers wor∣king and crauayle. And there be manye manner Flexes, but the fairest of all, groweth in Aegypt, for thereof is Bislus made right faire, and white as snowe, as Plin. saith li. 19. ca. 12. This flaxe is not most strong, but thereof commeth most winning, for thereof be kinde vestments made for Priests. Flaxe is néedfull to di∣uers vses. For thereof is made clothing to weare, and sayles to sayle, and nets to fish and to hunt, and thred to sew, ropes to binde, and strings to shoote, bondes to binde, lines to meate and to measure, and shéetes to rest in, and sackes, bagges, and purses, to put and kéepe things in: and so not hearbe is so néedfull, to so manye di∣uers vses to mankinde, as is the flaxe. And the séede thereof is hot and moyst, or els temperate betwéene moyst & drie, and so thereof is oyle made, that is more needfull to other vse than to meate. For Isaac saith, Line seede nourisheth but lyt∣tle, and is harde to digest, and grieueth the stomacke, and bréedeth much swel∣lyng, but it tempereth and softeneth if it be parched, and is the better if it be ta∣ken with honie. It helpeth against the cough, and exciteth Venus, and moueth to loue, if it be eaten with honie and pep∣per, and is good for postumes, for it ripeth them, and swageth and easeth, and ma∣keth thicke humour cléere and thin, and so it dissolueth & destroyeth postumes of the mother, if the patient be ofte nouri∣shed with the broth therof, as Isaac saith in Dietis. (Additiō.Of Lin commeth the Linséed, wher of is made Painters oyle, besides sun∣dry other vses.) ¶Of Malo. chap. 98. MAlus, the apple trée, is a Trée, that beareth apples, and is a greate trée in it selfe, but it is lesse and more short then other trées of the woods, with knots & riueled rind, and maketh shadow with thicke boughs & branches, & is faire with diuers blossomes, & flowres, & is liking with good fruit and noble, & is gracious in sight and in tast, & vertuous in medi∣cine, and the apple is called Malum, mali, but the trée is called Hec malis, & Hec pomus also: and hath that name, for that the fruit thereof is round. And so apples that be most round be called Mala, as I∣sidore saith, li. 17. For Malum in Gréek, is Rotundum in Latine, and rounde in English. The apple trée is diuers and varieng from other trées of woods: for the apple trée, and namely the tame apple trée, is of double kinde, for the stocke thereof, springeth on the ground, and the graffe thereof springeth of another trée, and is graffed on the stocke, and is so oned by graffing, that of twaine is one compow∣ned, and the graffe so graffed, tourneth al the vertue of the stocke into his owne kinde and qualitie, as Affredus saith, su∣per finem primi li. vegitab. Looke before in the same booke in the treatise of graf∣fing of trées, about the beginning. The apple trée waxeth barren, excepte it be pared and shredde, and discharged of water boughs, & of superfluity, as he sai∣eth. For ye humour which is drawen frō the root, sufficeth not to bring forth fruit, if it passeth into nourishing and séeding, of barren boughs & branches. Looke be∣fore de fructificatione arborum, et causa ciusdem. Of Apples trees is diuerse kindes, for some beareth sowrish fruit & hard, & some right sowre, & some right swéete, with a good sauour and pleasaunt. And this diuersity cōmeth of diuers qualities, of the humours, & of more féeble or more strong working of heate that is in the root, as it is touched before in the begin∣ning. Of Malo granato. ca. 99. MAlus Granatus in the Trée that beareth Pomegranardes,Pomum granatum and the Trée is the Feminine gender, and the fruite the Neuter gender, and is called Malum Granatum: For it containeth many greynes within the rinde, and the
roundnesse, as Isi saith li. 18. and the rind thereof is called Psidia, and the flower, Balaustia, & some of the floures be white, and some purple; and some red as a rose. And these Pomegarnards be called Ma∣la punica, for they came first out of the Countrey of Punica, as Isidore saith. The trée is full hard with many knots, and boughes, and braunches, and grow∣eth more in bredth than in length, and may not well awaye with colde, and so the floures thereof be soone lost in hoare frost. And Arist. sayth, that this tree lea∣ueth his mallice, and chaungeth out ther of by craft of tilling. Looke before in this booke, De arborum culture. And Plinius saith, that of this tree is many manner of kindes, but wée shall speake now of two manner at this time. For as Dioscorides saieth, and Isaac in Dietis, Of Pomegranards is two man∣ner kindes: One Pomegranarde Trée beareth swéete apples, hot and moyst, & some beareth sower apples, colde & drye, and may be kept longer than other: but the swéete accordeth more to medicine, for all the trée is medicinall, & the fruite thereof accordeth but lyttle to meat, and so Isid. meaneth lib. 17. where he sayeth, That Phisitions denie, that bodies shuld be nourished with meate of Pomegra∣nards, but they suppose that it accordeth more to medicine than to feeding of the body. And all the trée, and namelye the fruite thereof, hath vertue to constraine & to binde, to comfort and to fasten, and to harden and dry thin humours & fléeting, and to staunche cholaricke spewing, and to staunch bloud, as Isaac teacheth open∣ly, and Dioscor. and Plat. also. If it be ta∣ken in couenable manner and due order, it helpeth against all passions of the bo∣dy, both within and without: but ye swéet breedeth more ventositie and swelling, & they doe lesse quench their thirst, that be diseased with feauers, and therefore they agrée worse with them that haue the A∣goe, than the sower doe. And of ye ioyce of the sower is a drinke made, yt is cal∣led Exizacra, that abateth the heate of fe∣uers, and defieth and chaungeth the matter of feuers, and exciteth appetite, & restoreth wonderfully, and repaireth and comforteth kinde that fayleth by reason of too great heat, and helpeth against cha∣sing of the lyner, and against the Cardi∣acle passion, and failing of the hart. Flo∣wers, fruite and rinde thereof slaieth old wormes in the wombe, if it be made in∣to powder and dronke, and most effectu∣ally comforteth and purgeth both téeth & gumbes, and helpeth against many other euills as Dioscorides and Isaac meane. Pomegranards helpe in all the aforesaid things most effectually, and though they be yeolow and discoloured and sowrish, wearish, and drye without in the rinde, yet neuerthelesse wtin they be red, moyst, softe and sauorie, and the greynes be or∣deined in their owne celles, by passing wonderfull craft, as Isaac saith. (Additiō.The rinde or séed of Pomegranets in powder giuen in ale, is good to stoppe the flixe.) ¶Of Moro. cap. 100. MOrus is a trée, which beareth beries,Mulberye tree. and the fruite of the same Trée, is called Morum, a berrie, as Isid. saith lib. 18. The Gréekes call this trée Moron, & the Latines call it Rubum, for the fruit thereof is red. Thereof is double kinde, tame and wilde, and heards in desart eat the fruite of the wild berry trée, & leaues thereof slayeth serpents, if they be thro∣wen or layd vpon them, and Ambrose super Mat. 17. sayth, that the fruite of this trée is first white in the floure, and then gréene, and then red, and blacke or browne at last, and the more ripe it is the more blacke it is, and dyeth & smor∣cheth his hands & téeth yt eateth thereof. Plinius and Dioscor. meane, that Morus is a trée, and the séed thereof laxeth the wombe, and the iuyce therof wrong and dryed at the fire, or in the Sun, constray∣neth and bindeth the wombe, and healeth whelkes and sores of the mouth, & swa∣geth and abateth swelling of the lyps. The rinde of the roote sod and dronke, laxeth the wombe, and slayeth broade wormes therein, the leaues thereof stamped and layed in Oyle healeth bur∣nings. The leaues sod in raine water, maketh blacke haire, & healeth the biting
of Phalngie,The field Spider. and of Attercops, and ea∣seth the tooth ach, and cleanseth rottings, and matter of the iawes. The berries thereof before they be ripe, be colde, and bindeth and comforteth the stomacke, and the more they were ripe, the more hot they were, and also the more sweete and moystie, and many thereof eaten af∣ter meate, turneth into corruption, and grieue soone both head and stomacke, and be well digested, if then be eaten fasting, and nourisheth but full little. Leaues of high Mulberie trées be great and broad, and are grieued with Palshrags & flyes, and gladly wormes eate thereof, and so silke wormes he best fed and nourished with such leaues. All the trée is medici∣nall, and namely the rinde, fruite, leaues, and rootes: for if the roote thereof be slit, thereout commeth gum, that helpeth in diuers passions and euilles, for is laxeth the wombe, and healeth tooth ache. Huc vs{que} Diosc. & Plin. Of Mulberies is no∣ble drinke made, that we call commonlye Moretum, Elephants drinke therof, and be the more bolde and hardie, as Raba∣nus saith, super li. 2. Mach. 5. ca. And ther∣of is a Lectuarie made, that is called Di∣ameron, that helpeth against the Squi∣nancie and euills of the iawes & throte, as Plat. saith. (Additiō.The Mulberie trée is knowen, as for the vertue of the berries, if they be ripe, they hurt not greatly the stomacke, &c.) ¶Of Mirto. cap. 101. MIrtus is a litle trée, & is so called, be∣cause oft it groweth in ye sea cliues, as Isid. sayth. Virgill speketh of ye broad cloues of Myrtus, and of the louers of the cloues of Myrtha, and the Gréekes call it Mirecie. And Phisitions write in their bookes, that this trée accordeth to many néedfull vses of women. Huc vs{que} Isid. And Plin. and Diosc. meane, That Mirtus is a litle trée as it wer a shrub, and groweth namely by the sea side. And fruite, flowers and braunches there∣of, accordeth to medicine, and the fruite thereof is better than the floures, & ma∣ny be kept longer time, & better in heate of the Sunne than in shadow place, and the more fresh the fruite is, the better it is. And all the substauncialls of this trée haue vertue of sowrnesse and of binding; and of his swéet smell hath vertue com∣fortatiue, & restoreth superfluitie of run∣ning and dropping, by proper kinde ther∣of. And helpeth the vertue retentiue, to hold in the body, and so helpeth agaynst the reume that falleth to the spirituall members, if they be sod in raine water, & the breast washed therwith, and stanch∣eth spewing, if ae braunch thereof be sod with vineger, and laied to the stomacke. Pouder of this trée healeth wounds ea∣sely and softe. And Plin. sayth, that some Mirtus is white, and some is blacke, and either is binding, but the blacke ye more, and is therefore profitably taken against bléeding, and it moueth vrine, and helpeth against venime, and against stinging of Scorpions, if it be dronke, broath thereof helpeth against the euill Allopicia, and fallyng of hayre, and helpeth agaynst swellyng of eyen, medled with wheate meale. Oleum Myrtum is made of the leaues and bayes thereof, the which oyle easeth, cleanseth, helpeth and healeth in all the foresayd things, and clenseth mat∣terie eares, if it be luke warme dropped therein. Huc vs{que} Plin, Super Esa. ca. 41. Iero. saith, that Mirtus hath good smell, & rotteth not, and Mirtus fastneth and re∣storeth and comforteth wearie members and lyms, & therfore it betokeneth com∣forters of holy Church, and hath vertue to swage, ease, temper and to coole, as he saith Super Esa. cap. 60. (Additiō.The Mirtle trée groweth in Spaine and Italy about Naples. The berryes of this trée is good to be giuen to them that spet bloud or pisse bloud.) ¶Of Myrra. cap. 102. MIrra is a trée in Arabia, fiue cubites high, and is lyke to a thorne called, Achantum, the dropping therof is gréene with great smell, and is bitter, and hath therefore the name Myrra, as Isidore sayeth libro. 16. The dropping that commeth thereof by it selfe is best, and
dropping that commeth out at chins and slits that bée made therein, is accounted lesse worth.Mirhre, a precious gumme The Arabians make fire of shredding thereof, & thereof is full grie∣uous smoake, but if it be withstood with other smell of Storaye. For els of such smoake, men should take vncurable sick∣nesse and euills. Best Mirra and most pure is gathered among Troglodites in Arabia, as Isi. saith, & Plinius. li. 12. cap. 17. where it is saide, that Mirra is a tree of fiue cubites high, and groweth in woodes of Arabia. The leaues thereof bée lyke to the leaues of Oliue, but they bee more cripse, and haue more prickes, & is like in boughes to Iuniperus. Boughes thereof be carued and cut and slit in two times, but it droppeth before it be slit; & that dropping is called Stacten, & is best of all manner Mirra, & is called: Mirra electa, Mirre chosen. And of Mirra is se∣uen manner kindes, as he saith, cap. 17. Oncées called Trogoditica, & that is wel chosen. The second is called Gelbanitica. The third is called Diantrides. The fourth Colaticia. The fift Pracena, and is called also Salbana, and is more thin then other Mirres. The sixt is called Dura∣tim & Odonferam, and is more white then the other. And is feined with Gum & clods of Lentiseus. The seuenth is cal∣led Indica, and this is the worst of them all. And there with other manner Mirres be feined. Huc vs{que} Plinius. And Dioscorid. saith, that Mirra is dropping of a trée hardened about the boughs by heat of the Sun, and the best is citrine and red within, and some deale bright, and héereof some is small, and some is great, and is called Trogoditica, and hath that name of an Ilande, which it groweth in. And this Trogoditica is hot and dry, and hath vertue to comfort, and that in gathering and increasing partes together by his vertue of good sa∣uour and smell, and dissolueth and depar∣teth and consumeth and wasteth euenly the qualityes thereof. And so dead bo∣dies be kept safe and sounde when they be balmed with confections of Mirre. And Mirra is kept in his vertue nigh an hundred yéeres, and helpeth against all causes fleumatike, and against all inor∣dinate running and dropping, and com∣forteth digestion, and purgeth gleamye humours, and namelye in the spirituall members, and it amendeth stinch, and smell of the mouth, and healeth & dryeth all euills of the gummes, and healeth and destroyeth & wasteth whelks of the lips, and comforteth the braine, and comfor∣teth strongly, and strengtheneth the mo∣ther, and fordrieth and wasteth all super∣fluitie thereof, and helpeth conception, & slayeth wormes in the eares, and fretteth dead flesh, and bréedeth & saueth quicke flesh at best. (Additiō.Mirrha is also the name of an hearbe, which we call Kixe, with a long and hollowe stalke. Reade Dodoneus. fol. 616.) Of Mirro. chap. 103. MIrrum is an oyntment made of Mirra, and of other spicery. By ver∣tue thereof sinewes and other members of féeling be comforted, and humours in the ioynts and toes be wasted. By the good smell thereof spirits of féeling be re∣stored & comforted, & slaieth with bitter∣nesse lice and wormes, & letteth breeding thereof, & abateth stinking sweats, & kée∣peth & saueth bodyes whole and sounde, that they rot not. Of Mandragora. cap. 104. MAndragora hath that name, for it beareth apples with great sauour of the greatnesse of the Apples of Macian, and is called Malum terre among La∣tines. And Poets call it Antropomoros, for the root therof is some deale shapen as a man:Nor so, but as it is coun¦terfeited. the rinde therof medled wt Wine is giuen to them to drinke yt shall be cut in the body, for they shuld sléepe and not feele ye sore cutting. Héereof is two man∣ner of kindes, the one is female, and is lyke in leaues to Letuse, and beareth ap∣ples. That other is male, & hath leaues lyke to the Béete, as Isidore sayeth, li∣bro. 17. And Diosco. saith, that Mandragora
is a sléeping hearbe, and the leaues there∣of spread on the grounde, and hath two rootes or thrée cleauing togethers, blacke without and white within, with a thick skinne. The male hath white leaues and thinne, and roote like to the other. And apples grow on ye leaues, as galls grow on Oken leaues, and be yeolow & swéet of smell, but with manner heauinesse, & be fresh in fauour, and accord not there∣fore to meat, but onely to medicine. For rindes thereof sod in Wine, cause sléepe, & abateth all maner sorenesse: and so that time a man feeleth vnneth, though he bée cut. But yet Mandragora must be wa∣rily vsed: for it flayeth if men take much therof, as he sayth. For in Plat. it is said, that it cooleth, and some deale slayeth, and maketh to sleepe stronglye, therefore the iuyce thereof with womans milke laide to the temples, maketh to sléepe, yea, though it were in the most hot ague: and for that the hearbe is colde in substance, it is sayd, that the fruit thereof quench∣eth the euill that is called holy fire, and abateth the réese of Cholera, and fluxe of the wombe. Huc vsque Plat. But there it is sayde, that by kinde no shape of man nor of woman is in the roote thereof, but it is rather so feined of Churles or of Witches. It is sayd, that it maketh wo∣men conceiue, but it seemeth Saint Au∣sten sayth nay super Gen. 2. cap. 19. He sayth there, that because of Rachel, that desired Madragora, he looked bookes of Philosophers that treate of vertues of hearbes, & found no such things in their bookes in that time. But sauing the au∣thoritie of Saint. Austen, many authors meane, that Mandragora hath this ver∣tue, and so Const. Dioscorides, Plinius, and Plat. meane, that Mandragora taken in due manner, disposeth the mothers to conceiuing, the which mothers and ma∣trices of conception were let by to much heat & drinesse. And so Mandragora dis∣poseth hot women & moist to concepti∣on and to conceiue. For Mandragora is colde and dry, as it is said in Platearius, and that in disposition, but it letteth wo∣men that be kindly colde and dry of such disposition. Mandragora hath many other ver∣tues, & smiteth off & destroieth swelling of the bodye, as Dioscorides saith, and withstandeth venimous biting, and stan∣cheth all droppigns and running aboue and beneath. All that is set before is sayd in Plini∣us booke. libro. 35. capit. 16. And there it is sayde, that of Mandragora bée two kindes, &c. And after it followeth in this manner. They that digge Mandragora, be bu∣sie to beware of contrary windes, while they digge, and make thrée circles about with a swoord, & abide with the digging vntill the Sunne going downe, and sup∣pose so to haue the hearbe with the chiefe vertues. The nyre thereof is gathered and dried in the Sunne, the apples ther∣of be dried in the shadow. The smel of the apples is heuy, & bréedeth sléep only with smell, as he saith. (Additiō.Mandrake of two sorts blacke, and whitish yeolow, they cause sléepe to bée inwardly receiued, verye daungerous. There is another kinde called Mala in∣sana, raging apples, or apples of loue. Read Dodo. fol. 439.) Of Milio. cap. 105. MIlium, Mile, is an hearbe with a long stalk and knottie, as the Reed, and the seede thereof is full small, colde, and dry, as Isaac saith in Dietis. And that witnesseth lightnesse and hollow∣nesse thereof, and absence of gleaminesse and of vnctdositie, and nourisheth but little, but it comforteth the stomacke by drynesse thereof, and bindeth the wombe. And as Dioscorides sayeth, is diuritike and assate, and swageth ach of the helly, and gendereth not good bloud, but it s∣leth and dryeth the stomacke, as it is said in Dietis. Of Menta. chap. 106. MEnta is an hearbe with good smell hot and drye, and comforteth the stomacke, & thereof is double kind, wilde and tame, one groweth in gardens, & the other in woodes and in mountaines: and this heateth more then the first: and this
hearbe is called Colocasia in Gréeke, and Nepta, or Calamentum in Latine, as I∣sidore sayth, libro. 17. cap. penul. This hearbe is full medicinable. Other man∣ner Mintes grow in moores & in medes, and be not so mightie in vertue or in heate, but they haue more heauie smell and sauour then Mint of gardens, that is an hearbe that multiplyeth it selfe, and springeth soone out of the ground. And if the stalke therof be bended downe to the ground, and heeled with earth, it turneth into a roote, & bringeth forth anon a new Mint. Mint of Gardeines is full vertuous, both gréene and drye. And dissolueth and tempereth and wasteth by proper qualy∣ties thereof. And comforteth and exciteth appetite by odour and good smell, and by sharpnesse therof. If it be sod in vinegar, it both away stinch of the mouth: and cleanseth and purgeth corrupt and rotted gums. And abateth with vineger perbra∣king and casting, that commeth of féeble∣nesse of the vertue retentiue. And help∣eth by sauour and smell against sown∣ding and féeblenesse of spirites, and com∣forteth & cleanseth superfluitie of the mo∣ther. And abateth if it be sodde in wine, ach of the guts and of the reines. If it be sod with Wine and with Oyle, and laid too, it cureth and healeth hardnesse of breasts, and teates that come of running and crudding of milke. The iuyce there∣of withstandeth venim, and slayeth if it dronken wormes of the wombe, and of the cares also. And Mint sodde in Wine and in Oyle, dissolueth and healeth colde Postumes, and healeth the cough. Huc vsque Dioscorides & Pla. And also Isaac sayth the same, libro. 2. in Dietes. That it taketh away abhomination of wamb∣ling, and abateth the yoring. And clean∣seth & smootheth the tongue, if it be froted therewith, and exciteth Venus. (Additiō.There are sixe kindes of Mintes, Curd mint, crispe mint, Baliac, Spere mint, Hart mint, horse mint, and water mint. Read Dodo. fol. 245.) Of Malua. cap. 107. MAlua the Hocke is a soft hearb, and hath that name Malua of Mollien∣do aluum, Softning the wombe, as Isi∣dore saith, libr. 17. And he saith, and Pli∣nius also, that he that is balmed with the iuyce thereof meddeled with Oyle, may not be greeued with stinging of Bées. Also members balmed with the iuyce of Hockes, bée not bitten of Spiders, nor stong of Scorpions, as Plinius sayeth. Of Hocke is double kinde, the lesse and the more, that is called Altea. And ey∣ther hearbe is moist and temperate be∣twéene hot and colde, as it is sayd in Di∣etis. And that is knowen by vertue and working thereof. For it tempereth and ripeth Postumes, & namely the roote and séed thereof. The broath thereof helpeth against flure of bloud, & hath somewhat of glea∣minesse: and tempereth thicke humour of the reines, if it be dronke with wine, and breaketh the stone, and softneth hardnesse of the splene. The broath therof maketh sléep, if the face be washed therewith, and the vtter parts of the body. The broth of the séede thereof helpeth Tisicke men: and helpeth against the cough. The seed therof sod in Oile, tempereth hardnesse, and softneth, & cleanseth, and ripeth, as it is sayde in Plateario. (Additiō.The holy hocke, or gardeine mal∣low, also the wild Mallow, and the small Mallowe. There is also Althea, ye marsh Mallow. Of their properties reade Ma∣theolus, D. Turnar, and Dodoneus.) Of Nuce. chap. 108. THe Nut trée is called Nux, and so is called the Nut also. It hath that name Nux, for dropping of the leaues thereof gréeueth and noieth other trees a∣bout, that be nigh théreto. And many La∣tines call this trée Iouelans by another name. For this trée was somtime hallo∣wed to Iupiter. The fruit thereof hath so greate vertue, that if it be put among frogge stooles and venumous meates, it spilleth & destroieth and quencheth al the venim that is therein, as Isidore sayeth libro. 17. The fruit thereof hath a harde
rinde without and bitter, and a swéete kernell within. And all manner Apples that be closed in an hard skinne, rind, or shale be called Nuts, as Pince, Castanie, and Auellane, and other such, as he saith, and the Nut trée is high and long, with large boughs and knots, and with broad leaues and sinewy, euen long, and sharp in the ends with euill smell and sauour. The shadow therof grieueth them that sléepe there vnder, & bréedeth diuerse sick∣nesses and euills, but the fruite thereof, leaues and rinde, accorde to medicines. For as Dioscorides saith, the iuyce of ye roote and of the rinde, of the more Nut trée, dronke to the quantitie of one Oxa∣gum, helpeth against the difficultye of pissing, and is contrarie to Feauers that come with shiuering and colde, if it bée dronke with vineger. And sayth also fur∣thermore, that it dieth & cleanseth haire, and letteth falling thereof, and hath ma∣ny vertues and might. The fruit thereof accordeth both to meate and medicine: And there be many manner of nuts, but we speake most touching meate and me∣dicine of the more nuts, that be French Nuts, and of the lesse that be Auelanes. The common Nut is called Gallica a∣mong many men, and is diuerse in sub∣staunce, vertue, and shape. For as Isaac sayth in Dietis. The Nut in substaunce is gréene, or new, or ripe. In the first dis∣position the skinne and the rinde is greene and sowre, and vitter, and smorch∣eth his hand that handleth it hard. And there within is a shell or a shale, ye wax∣eth harder and harder, and there within is the nut kernell, that is sauourye and full swéete, and the kernell that is with∣in the shale is closed in the skinne, to saue the tender kernell from colde and hardnesse of the shale. And therefore that skinne is more softe then the shale, and more hard then the kernell, and more bitter founde of them that haue assayed. And the néerer ripe the nut is, the sooner the skinne forsaketh the shale, & cleaueth the faster to the kernel, so that vnneth the kernell may be departed therefrom, but by hot water, or by some other craft, that tempereth that skinne, and maketh it softe. And the gréene Nut is kindly lesse hot and drie then the olde, aud gréeueth therefore the lesse. And is enimye to all venim, if it be with Rew eaten fasting. And Isaac saith, some Nuts bée fresh and new, and some be old, and some be meane betwéene both. In the fresh is most moi∣sture, and the meane be more drye, and in the olde moisture is wasted by work∣ing of heate that maketh digestion in the humours. And the olde be generally more vnc∣tuous. Therefore many thereof caten, turneth soone into chularike humours, & namelye men with hotte complection, if they eate thereof many and oft. For in them it bréedeth head ach, and maketh them turne giddy, but they bée couenable nourishing to them that eate them tem∣peratly, and be of temperate complecti∣on. For so they be defied well inough. The vertue thereof is knowne by effect of medicine, for generally they keepe and saue the body against venimous things. For by his ventositie it stoppeth ye veins, in the body, and suffereth not venim to passe to the spirituall members. Also Nuts euenly led with salt, rew, garlike, and honie medled helpeth in the viting of a wood hound, if some be swal∣lowed, and some layde to the fore with∣out, for it draweth out the venim migh∣tely, and wasteth it also. And nuts stam∣ped and medled with honnye, tempereth wonderfully, and dissolueth cholarik po∣stumes and flematike also. Also Nultes stamped and laid as a plaister to the na∣uell, destroieth postumes that bréed with∣in, as Isaac, saith in Dietis. (Additiō.Walenuts are of two sorts, the big∣ger and the lesse, and according to the soile whereon they grow, so is their good∣nesse. The thinnest rinded or shelled nuts, are commonly best and very whol∣some, to eate against poisen, eaten before greate drinking, staieth the head from lightnesse.) And Nuts be diuersly shapen. For some be round, and some euenlong, and some plaine and continued within, as it fareth in Auclane, and in Nutmegges. And some haue cleftes in the sides, and be distinguished in the toppe, as it were with the shape of a Triangle: as it fa∣reth
in great French nuts, in the which generally the shape of the crosse is prin∣ted within, as they know well that take bred thereto. (Additiō.Of late forth of the Indies hath bene brought diuers sorts of Nuts, whose na∣tural properties are not perfectly know∣en, as Nux Indica, Coecus, some in husks, lyke Beanes, some like kidncies of a browne coulour, some round, some square, and some shape: which nuties I haue, but as yet no proper name to giue them.) Of Auellana. chap. 109. AVellana is a field nut, and a wood nut in comparison to the French Nut. For without craft of Gardeners, it gro∣weth on Haselles, that be Trées that grow in groaues, as Isidore sayeth. And for they grow in common places, wheras men passe therby, & pull and gather ther∣of, they haue worthely the name Auella∣na. And Auellana, as Isaac saith, be lesse hot in substaunce then other Nuts, and store sowre, and more fast in substance & vnctuous. And be therefore hards to de∣fie, and the more slowe to passe out of the body: but when they be defied, they nou∣rish much the bodye, and they ingender much veutosity,Auellana Coryllus. Mollusca Pontica Nax. Pcuesli∣us. Heacleo¦tica. if they be eaten with the small skins. Therefore to take away the griefe, it is goo to blaunch them in hot water: and helpeth well then against ma∣ny passions and euills. The skinne ther∣of medled with hony, helpeth against fal∣ling of haire, and maketh haire growe in the body, as Isaac sayth, and Constan∣tine also. There is also many diuersities of Nuts, that accord to medicine, as Nux Muscata, Mude Indica, & Nux Vomica, and other such. Nux Muscata, the Nut∣meg; is the fruite of a Trée that groweth in Inde, in a shale that is hard, and coue∣red with a skinne, as Auellana. And the inde thereof is called Macis, and is right medicinable. And comforteth namely the heart, and purgeth the spirit of féeling in the Maine: and he heateth the colde sto∣macke, and comforteth appetite, and this inde is somewhat bitter. And the barke thereof is yeolow, & hath a sharp fauour, and somewhat bitter: & that that is black or earthy, and hath not a sharp sauour, is to be forsaken: and the Nutmegge ta∣ken out of thē rinde and of the shale, is inuironed with a thin skinne & plaine. And the more heauy the Nutmeg is in weight, and the more swéet in smell, and sharpe in sauour, the better it is. And so the best is heauie and sound within, and séemeth reddy in coulour, and falleth not to Pouder when it is broken, and hath a strong sauour and swéete, and it hath vertue to comfort & to heat the stomack: and to consume and wast venositie: and to heale head ach that commeth of cold. The Nutmeg held to the nose, comfort∣eth the braine and the spirituall mem∣bers, as Plinius, Dioscorides, and Plate∣arius meane. (Additiō.The Filbert is better then the ba∣sell nut, and inferiour to the Almonde nut, being new ripe they are best to bée eaten, especially with bread.) Of Nardo. chap. 110. NArdus is a little hearbe with pricks, and is hot, and smelleth well. And so among the Gréekes, Nardus spica is called Nardostartes, as Isidore sayth li∣bro .17. And thereof is treble manner kinde, Indica, Sinaca, and Celtica, but none groweth in Siria, but in a land ha∣uing many mountaines, that stretcheth to Siria in one side, and to Indie in the other side. The best is smooth and light, browne, and plaine, with small ciles, and dryeth the tongue when it is chewed. And Nardus Celtica hath that name of the Countrye of Gallia, for it groweth therein, & is lyke to Nardus, or to Spicis Nard, but it is more white, and com∣forteth by good smell, as Dioscorides & Platearius meane. And helpeth against swowning and sayling of the heart, and also agaynst féeblenesse of the sto∣macke. (*Nardus, after Doctour Turnar, is called Spickenarde, which as he say∣eth, groweth in the Indie, and smel∣leth lyke vnto Cyperus: of the which hearbe, it appeareth, the greatest Doc∣toures are in doubte, it is rare
and no common hearbe, some will haue it a roote, others the toppe like vnto our common Spike Lauender. Read more of this at large in the second booke of D. Turnar. fo. 62. b.) And it comforteth the braine, if it bée held to the nose. And abateth colde rume, and helpeth against deafnesse & postumes of the eares, and doth awaye oft euill smell of the mouth, & purgeth the gums, and openeth the stopping of the lyuer and of the splene. And exciteth menstru∣all bloud, and cleanseth the mother, and helpeth conception, & breaketh the stone both in the bladder and reines. This hearb tempereth and softneth, and depar∣teth hard matter, and thirleth and passeth into the inner partes. And helpeth a∣gainst Palsie of the tongue, and comfor∣teth the sinewes, and wasteth humours that let the tongue. Also it is sayde, that it helpeth against the falling euill, if it be ministred in due manner to the pati∣ent: and is ful good to many other things. And out thereof woseth the Oile that is called Oleum Nardinum, and is most ne∣cessarie to all the foresaid things, and to many other. (Additiō.In Dod. is set foorth thrée sortes of hearbes, called Nardus, which is called in English, Ualerian, & hath a sharpe leafe, the second, hearbe Benet, the third Asa∣rabecca, yet suppose I none of these thrée to be the true Nardus.) Of Olea. chap. 111. OLea is a trée, and the fruit thereof is called Oliua, and the iuyce Oleum, as Isidore sayth, lib. 17. But this trée is oft called Oliua, and is a worthy trée, and a tree of peace, as he sayth. For the story of the Remanes meane, yt without bran∣ches of Oliue no messengers were sent to Rome to get peace, nor to proser peace to other men. Remigius sayth, that the worthinesse of this trée is knowen, for in token of reconciliation & peace made be∣tweene God and man, the Doue came to the windowe of Noes shippe with a to∣ken in her mouth, that was a braunch of Oliue, and of none other trée. And libro. 15. Plinius sayth, that a∣mong the Athenienses, vidours were crowned with Oliue. And afterwarde the Gréekes ordeined, that theyr victours should be crowned with Olaster, as hée sayth. And the Oliue is a faire Trée in croppe, in gréene colour, and in multitude of boughs and braunches, with whitish braunches. And this trée is gréene all the Summer and Winter long, & hath smal leaues with good smell, and harde rinde, and bitter roote, and fat fruit, sauoury and swéete. For as Isidore sayth, the Oliue springeth of a bitter roote, that is nouri∣shing of light, medicine of wounds, & fée∣ding of the hungrye. For Oyle is put in Lampes to susteine and to nourish the fire, to sore members, them for to heale, and in meate, men for to féede. And also to make meat liking and sauourie, as hée sayth. And Oyle is nourishing of fire & of lyght, remedie of euills and fores, and maketh meate most sauourie and swéet, as Isidore sayeth. Then the Oliue bea∣reth fruite, and is medicinall. And leaues and rinde and fruite thereof accordeth to medicine. The Trée thereof is most sadde and fast, and pure and cleane with∣out rotting. And though it bée ryght harde without, yet neuerthelesse with∣in the pith, is much humour and fat∣nesse. Libro. 15. Plinius speaketh of Oleis, & of Oliues and sayth, that many manner Oliue trées that beare fruit, thrine not in Countries that be too colde or too hot, but in Countries that drawe more to heate then to colde. Therefore as Plinius say∣eth, Cato woulde haue Oliues set in hot ground, that is not too fat nor too leane. For heauen comforteth them well, and they loue much the dew of heuen, & faire weather. And if there be much Rayne when they be ripe, then the Oyle is ap∣paired & wasted, but if faire wether, come soone after to temper the thicknesse of the Oyle and liquor. And Plinius sayth, cap. 3. That the Oliue Trée needeth not to be pared nor shred with hooke nor with Bill, as vines be, but it is betaken to the Sun, and to the dew of heauen: and is glad in spring∣ing time, & beginneth thē to bloome. And fruite therof is first gathered about win∣ter,
and when the fruite is gathered, the tillers of Oliues vse to open the earth about the roote, and to pare away proper∣ly the bompes or knobs, and naughtye small sprayes of the rootes. And some I∣talians vse to call such superfluity about the roote, the goutes of the Oliue trée: and so when such superfluite is alwaye, the Oliue thriueth the better, and beareth fruit, and is wonderfully amended. And the Oliue will not bée harde beaten with stones & powles to gather the fruit therof, as some men do that be vntedy & vnwife. For such beating tourneth to harme of the tree, & to damage of the next yeare: For it beareth the worse if it bée beaten, as Plinius saith. Of this trée is many manner kinde. And each is known by diuersity of fruit. And Isidore sayeth, that this name O∣liua is the name of the fruite of the trée Ole: And thereof is many manner di∣uersity sound, as Isaac sayth. For some Olives be tame, & some grow in woods. The some beareth fruit, sometime ripe, and somtime not ripe, & somtime the ant betweene. And among these fruits of the Oliue, the first be earthy, fowre & gréene. And the second reddish, or Iacinctuous, as Dioscorides sayth, and the last séemeth black: and ye more black they be without, the more ripe they be within, & the more fat and able to yéeld Oyle. And Aristo∣tle saith, that it ripeth neuer perfectly on ye trée, though it hang on it many a yere: but to make the perfectly ripe, they must be layd on a heape together, & they must lye so long time, yt by pressing the heat & may be comforted, & come into the in∣ner partes thereof, and ripe the fruit at full. And Isaac in Die. sayth, that Oliue beryes, if they be red, and not full ripe, nor right la, they comfort well the sto∣macke, and bée binding, and excite appē∣tite, also namely if they be artied with vineger or with sauce. Neuerthelesse they be hard to defie: and nourish lesse then other. And the blacke that bée as it were pe, be froste and temperate, be∣tweene moyst and drye. And nourish much, and seemeth the wombe. For by fatnesse thereof they eee in the fro∣melle, and come not downewarde into the place of digestion. And they tourne soone into corruption of humours, and be the lesse worthy to meat. But they be good in medicine For if they be stamped and layde to a place that is burnt with fire, or sealded with water, they kéepe, that blaines shall not arise, and do beare them downe, if they be risen, and ope∣neth the pores, and maketh the fumosity to passe but that is closed in the skinne, of blaines and swelling. Huc vs{que} Isaac in Dietis. Libro. 15. cap. 3. Plinius sayth, that verses of Oliue appaire not while they be on ye trée. For they be the better: for they gather alwase vertues now & newe, and hang and fit the faster. The Be∣ry thereof is compounded as he saith, of the fieruell, flesh, Oile, & drast yt is called Amurca, and is bitter: and is neuerthe∣lesse profitable in medicine. And ye shales when ye Oile is wrong out, with leaues, be good to nourish fire, and make swine a, as it is said. (Additiō.The Garden Oliues are better then the wilde Oliues: being gréene, they strengthen the stomack, & prouoke appe∣tite to eate.) Of Oleo. chap. 112. OYle is the iuyce of hearbs of Oliue, as Isidore sayth. And the more fresh it is, the more noble it is, and the more stilye it commeth out of the hulls: the better it is, and the more noble, as Plinius sayth, libro. 17. cap. 2. There it is sayd, that Oyle appayreth by age. Also there it is sayd, that it cōmeth the better and the cleaner out of the drasse in the wringing and pressing, if the Be∣ryes be before hande well, stamped or grounde with a mill stone, and scalding hot water throwen theron. Buy such hot water the fatnesse, is departed the bet∣ter from the brasts: Hulles and drasse eere aboue the water, and bée craftelye departed from the water at last. As hee sayth, the switter the Oyle runneth out of the presse or of the wrin∣ging, the better it is accounted. For what that is lesse meddeled with, cat∣ye substaunce, the more fat and swéet
it is. Héereto Papias sayth, that if a man be vnder water with Oile in his mouth, and spouteth out that Oyle there in the water, all that is in the bottome and hid by the ground is the more cleere, and the more cléerly séene of him (put all ye oile as∣cend against his eyea,Additiō. by the force of the water, and so he shall see neuer a whit) Kinde, of Dise maketh good sauour in meate, and nourisheth light and easeth, refresheth, and comforteth weary bodies and lns, and softneth and slaketh harde sinewes, that be shronke or spilt with the crampe. And softeneth and ripeth Po∣stinnes that he harde, and namely Ly∣ny Oile, of Linne seede. Many diuerse Oiles he pressed out of manye diuerse things. And some oyle is simple, as oyle of Oliue, oyle of Nuts, oyle of Popy, oile of Almonds, of Raphens oile, of Linne séede Oile, of Hempe, and of other such. And some oile is medled and compouned, and thereof some is cold, and some is hot, some is binding, & some is constraining, and some laxing. For composition of hot things, is hotte Oyles and of colde, colde oile: and of buiding things, binding Otle: and of laratiue, laratine oyle: ther∣fore for diuerse causes of euills, diuerse Oyles shall be taken: as in cold causes and matter, Oyle de Bay, Oleum Lau∣rinum, Nardinom, and Puloguim, shalbe taken and in hot causes oyle of Roses, and oyle of Uiolets shall be taken, are other such. Oile may be so hot, that it shall breede the cauers, if the pulse veines, and  and the pawme of the hands and the sales of the feete be hamd therewith, as oyle in the which Lyons flesh is sod, as it is sayd in Com∣pendeo Saernitant. Also oyle may be so colde, that it shal ony, the member that is haied therewith and stay it, so that it shal haue no feeling, as it fereth of oile of Mandragota, that is made of oyle, in the which Apples of Mandragota bee soone, or kepte long in. But among Oyles that bee so compounded, the tem∣perate Oyles he best and most medici∣nable. And of simple Oyles, Oyle of O∣liue is best both in meat and medicine, and then of nuts and of Almonds, & then Oile of popie: But that Oyle is more colde then the other foresaide Oiles, and more dry also, and is most made of black Popie seede, and breedeth sleepe, and hel∣peth against hot Postumes in the begin∣ning, and against chasing of the liuer, as Platearius sayeth. And other Oyles be lesse according to meate, for heauy smell and strong sauour, and be good and pro∣fitable to medicine, as Isaac sayth in Di∣etis. And generally in all Oyle is much aire and lightnesse Therefore  fleeteth aboue al other liquors, and hath disdaine to be vnder other liquors. Oyle seaketh and spreadeth it selfe. And is therefore better kept in glasen vessell then in tréen vessell, or in vessell with many holes and pores. Oyle spotteth and inciteth clo∣thes that it toucheth, and maketh them smell thereof alway. Oyle shed in wa∣ter, fleeteth aboue in rounde drops, and then the water cannot be made all cleane of the fatnesse and sauour of the Oyle. Oyle with sharpe sauour and strong, weddeled with Amusca, or with the dragges, is not good so meats. For such greiteth vomiting and spewing, and cor∣rumpeth the mouth of the stomack. And Oyle slayeth Eres, and footlesse beasles with long and plyaunt bodyes, if it bee shed vpon them, as Aristotle sayth. And vineger turnesh them againe to life, if it be shed vpon them. And cleane Oyle hee∣peth bright won from rusting, if the yron be nonted therewith. If the Oyle be cor∣rupt or watrye  sddled with Oile drasts,  it destroieth & corrumpeth the yron that is nointed therewith as Plinius saith. Of Olcastio. cap. 113. OLeaster, is a wild Oliue tree & hath that name for it is like to the Oliue tree but the leause thereof be somwhat smaller then Oliue leaues. And this tree is barren and bitter, and not filled. And if a graffe of Oliue he graffed thereon it chaungeth the qualitie thereof, and turneth it into his owne analytie as I∣sidore sayth libro. 1. This Tree hath double dropping. The one is like to Gumme without anye biting qualitye:
and the other is bitter, and lyke to gum Ammonicum, as Isidore saith. Though this trée Oliaster be a wilde tree, yet the rinds, gums, and branches therof accord to medicine, for the leaues therof be bin∣dium, sowre, & bitter, & healeth botches of the head & of the mouth with hony. The iuyce of the rind & of the branches ther∣of, is sowre & binding, & stauncheth all flure & running of humours & of bloud, as he saith. And the gum thereof is good to many things, & namely yt that is most biting. For it cleanseth & healeth woūds, & helpeth the gums that be gnawen and corrupted & strengthneth and comforreth the teeth, and putteth of and healeth the euil that is called Erisipila, and the holy fire, that commeth of wood Cholera, and gnaweth & fretteth flesh & bone. And hel∣peth against falling of haire, and dyeth haire, and hideth or tarrieth hoarenesse of haire, as he saith. (Additiō.Oliues, condise in salt liquor, taken at the beginning of a meale, doth che∣rish the stomacke, stirreth appetite, and looseth the belly, béeing eaten with vine∣ger. They which be ripe are temperatly hot; they which be greene, are colder and drie. Sir Tho. Eliot.) Of Olere. chap. 114. Cole∣vvortes.COle is called Olus, and hath that name of Olendo, smelling, for as Isid. sayth. First men eate Colles ere they had corne & flesh to ease, be sore the floud men eate apples, coles, and hearbes, as beasts eate grasse & hearbs, as Isi. saith, libro. 13. And though all ye heart is yt grow in the earth be able to be sod, and according to mans meat be generally called Olus in the sin∣gular, & Olera in the plural, yet most cō∣monly cole is called Olus in ye singular, & Olera in the plurall. The stalke & leaues therof grow swifte & then stalks or leaues of other hearbs, as he sayth. And ye ouer∣most croppe thereof is called time, as it were Come: & the natural vertue of this hearb is namely in the crop therof. And therefore ye effect, & might of medicine as well of this hearbs as of other is most in the crop, as he saith. The hearb is cold & dry, & breede to thicke bloud & troubly, & horrible smell, as Isaac saith in Die. & some cole is Summer cole, and some is Winter cole. And this hearbe is com∣pounded of contraries, for the substance is great and hard to defie. The wose thereof & iuyce is running and sometime cleansing and drieng, and sometime moisting and laring in the wombe: But the substaunce without the iuyce, is stopping and binding. The mallice thereof is withdrawen, if it bee sod or boyled in water, and that water throwne awaye, and the cole then sod∣den in other water with good fatnesse & sauoury, as it is sayde in Dietis. This hearbe thriueth by setting and planting. For this hearbe is sowen and groweth first in one place, and if it be then taken by and set in better land, it groweth fast, & thriueth both in quantitie, quality, and in vertue. In Summer the tender leaues thereof be eaten with small shags, and with other wormes. And be constrained in Winter with grea frost and small, and be so made the more tender to sée∣thing, & the better to eating. For when the heate commeth into the inner parts of the leaues, the substance therof is the better defied, and be the more soft. And li. 20. cap. 10. Plin. praiseth strongly the Colewoort touching the vse of medi∣cine, and sayth, that there is thrée man∣ner kindes of coles: some with crispe leaues and good for the stomacke, and some softneth some deale the wombe. And another with broade leaues and thicke, and is lesse woorth in medi∣cine. The third with thin leaues and sim∣ple, and is more better then the other, and better in medicine. Leaues therof brused and laid too two daies, healeth wounds of hounds, both new and olde, and that wonderfully. Cole little sod, laxeth, and bindeth, if it be much & greatly sodden. Cole withstandeth wine & dronkennesse, and comforteth the sinewes: and is ther∣fore good for the Palūe, and for trem∣bling and quaking. And causeth aboun∣dance of milke for children in their nur∣ses breasts, and the iuyce therof helpeth against venim, and also against biting of a woode hound, as he saith there, and
Serpents flye the smell of cole sod. And he reckoneth vp many other vertues, the which & passe ouer at this time for noy∣full tarrieng. And he sayth, that Bractea, the wilde cole, groweth without tilling, and hath stronger vertues and work∣ing. (Additiō.Colewortes béeing giuen to kine, causeth them to yéelde aboundaunce of milke, and fattneth them in short time: but being in good plight they must be kil∣led, or els they grow to the rot.) Of Ordeo. cap. 115. BArly is called Ordeum, & hath that name,Hordeum Barly. for it is soone drie, as Isidore saith: or it hath that name of Ordo, for it hath sometime in the yéere sixe orders & rules of graines. This corne we call winter beare, and so both Barly & beare be called Ordeum. And this beare féedeth more better beasts then wheat, & is more wholsome to men then euill Wheate or Rie, as Isid. saith. There is another kind of Barly that hath two rowes of grains in the eare. The third manner Ordeum is called Trimense. For it ripeth in the space of thrée moneths after yt it is sow∣en, as he sayth. Plinius speaketh of Barly or beare, li. 18. ca. 7. Among corne beare is first fow∣en, and among many nations right good & noble bread is made of beare or of bar∣ly. And among the Gréeks is a manner meat made therof which is called Polen∣ca, and they do wet first this corne with water, & then dry it, & grind it in a mill, & depart the meale from the bran. And Italians grind Barly smal without bea∣ting before or watring. Of all fruit bar∣ly is most noble in meale, & will not be sowen but in sad land, & dryeth & ripeth soone and fast, for the substance therof is soft: and no séed séemeth in lesse daunger of corruption. For it groweth swiftlye, and is ripe before Wheate, and gathe∣red ere corruption or rotting fall vpon it, and hath foulest strawe among all corne, and vnworthiest stubble. But within is much meale when it is ar∣rayed in due manner, as Plinius say∣eth. And Isaac sayth in Dietis, that Or∣deum is colde and drie, and driueth and cleanseth, and hath lyttle ventositye in regarde of the Beane, but the Beane nourisheth teste then Ordeum, though the Beane bréedeth ventositie by kind, and such things as make the womb rise and stretch, nourish not alwaye best, as Plinius saith. And he sayth that manye men vse Barlye more in medicine then in meate, but thereof is made both meat and drinke, that nourisheth the body, and comforteth the spirituall members. And of Barly shealed and sodde in water is medicinable drinke made, that Phisiti∣ons call a Thisane. And this drinke quencheth thirst, and kéepeth and saueth health, and chaungeth feuerous heate. But of Thisane looke innermore in lit∣tera T. (Additiō.This Hordeum hath thrée sortes, Politicum, Dystichum, Nudum, of the which is brued good drinke & wholsome, whereof some so well like of the tast, that they drinke thrée all-outs: the drink out of the pot, the wit out of the head, and all their moneye forth of theyr purse.) Of Palma. chap. 116. PAlma is a Trée of victorye, and hath that name, as Isidore saith, libro. 17. for therwith the victore hand is ornated, or els for boughes thereof be shaped as the palme of the hand, and is a tree no∣ble and famous alwayes faire & gréene, & long time beautified with branches & leaues both in Winter and Summer. And for it indureth and is gréene many a day, & long time, therefore by likenesse of the Birde Phoenix that lineth long time, the Palme is called Phoenix a∣mong the Gréekes. And is a Trée that beareth fruite, that is farre and lyke∣ing, but the frute thereof ripeth not in euery place, where that it groweth: But in Syria and in Aegypt, often the fruite thereof is called Dactylus, and hath that name for lykenesse of fin∣gers, and the names thereof bée di∣uerse. For some is called Palmule, & be like to
Mirabolanes in shape and disposition, and all diuers in sauour. For these haue sa∣uour most swéete and pleasant, & Ms∣solim haue horrible and bitter sauour. And some bée called The bace & Nichola∣us, and some Mutales, that the Gréekes call Canathos. Hue vsque Isid. And the Glose super Psalmum toucheth, ye palme is a full high trée, but not to high as the Ceber. The roote thereof is rough and round, and full fast & déepe in ye ground; the stocke therof is sad and hard, and vn∣reth without rotting. The ind therof a∣bout the stocke is hard and rough, & som∣what pricking, and namely towarde the ground. Therefore it is harde to climbe therevpon, and to come to the fruit ther∣of. The leaues thereof so long, shapen as a swoord. And though the Palme be hard and sharpe about the stocke, yet in the crop it is pleasing and liking for mans fight in fairenesse and liking of boughs. And Palme beareth the fruit on high in the crop of the boughes, and not in the middle of the leaues, as Plinius sayeth libro. 13. And the neerer the fruit thereof is to the Sunne be arises, the more fruc∣tuous it is, and also the more swéet and sauourie. The Palme groweth in many Countryes and lands. And beareth fruit no where else so well, as it doth in hotte countries and landes, that are alway in heate of the Sunne, and in grounde that is milde and sandie, and not full of great stones. And therefore Iudea, Iurie, is rich of Palmes, as Plinius sayth, lib. 13. cap. . And hée setteth double kinde of Palmes, male and female: and the male bloometh first, and after the female buddeth and bloometh. And the female beareth not fruit, but if she be so nigh the male, that the smell of the male may come with the winde to the female. In libro Vegitabilium Aristo. saith, when the séede thereof is sowen or se it néedeth that the séede of the male and female be sowen or set together, the seede shall be set twaine and twaine together, and then of each springeth a plant, and thereof springeth foure planes, and clearie together as it were a net and be ioyned each to other by a wounderfull craft of kinde. And the female groweth not wel, nor beareth fruit with the male. And if the male be feld, then is the female barren after two dayes out. If leaues and flo∣wers of the male be put aboue the rootes of the female, then by comfort of the male, as it were by comfort of the worke of generation, ye female taketh oft vertue and strength. And such trées loueth not moistye places, nor fat and smoakie, but they loue Salt places and sandie. There∣fore it néedeth too sowe and spring. Salt there as no Salt place is, and not fast by the roote, but somewhat nigh thereto is wast the superfluitie of the humour of the grounde, as Plinius sayth. In the South Countrie is a manner Palme, that is alone in that kinde, & none other springeth nor commeth thereof: but when this Palme is so olde, that is sayieth all for age: then oft it quickneth and spring∣eth again of it selfe. Therefore men sup∣pose, that Phoenix, that is a bird of Ara∣bia, hath the name of this Palme in Ara∣bia. For he dieth and quickneth, and li∣ueth oft, as the foresayd Palme doth as Plinius sayth there. And he sayth there, that in Aethiopia be mane manner Palmes and diuerse, and be not more wonderfull, for they be not wide know∣en, then they bée for lyking and swéete∣nesse. Among the which the best be cal∣led Cariace, and be best of iuyce and of meat. For the fruit thereof is most plen∣tie of iuyce, and so out thereof is noble Wine wrong. Hue vsque Plinius, li. 18. cap. 5. Then the Palme is a singular trée, with a small stocke, & rough in comparison to the ground that it groweth in, and sayre and liking in boughes and toppe. The leaues thereof be long and plaine, thicke & according to diuers vses, as to make whéeles and cups, as Hierom saith. But yet the side corners be some deale sharpe. Boughs of palme be called Elate, & reare themselues vpward, & be alway greene, & neuer bend downward: And ye middle st∣iable of this worde Elate is long as in Cant. 5. Come we elate palmarū. Elate or Elates in Greek, is called Ablea in la∣tine; & after that maketh the middle stia∣ble short.
And it séemeth that another letter mea∣neth the same wise. Cant. 5. Crines eiurs sicut Abietis. And so the middle stiable is made short, and not long. The fruite of Palme is diuerse both in shape and ver∣tue, and that by diuersitie of the trée that it groweth on, and also of the grounde, in the which the trée groweth, and by di∣uerse receiuing of the heate of heauen, that smiteth diuerslye on the toppes of Palmes, as Plinius meaneth, lib. 13. The first is, for such Palmes beare fruit seld or neuer: and this is for euill dispositi∣on or vnsufficient heate, as it sareth in Palmes of Italy, that beareth fruit seld or neuer, and if they beare fruit, the fruit is neuer perfectly ripe, as Plinius sayth. And the second is proued by the foresaid things. For in ground that is cold or too moist, too fatte, or too famous, Palmes thriue not, but sayle of perfect thrifte without remedye, as he sayth. And the thirde is true, for in sha∣dowy places that bée not shined with the Sunne beames, Palme may not grow. And if it happeneth that it groweth some where in such a place, yet it maye not beare fruit, and come to worthinesse of Palmes. This is it that Isaac touch∣eth in Dietis, and sayth, that Dactila the fruit of Palme is hot and moyst in the second degrée, and hath diuerse workings by qualities of Countries and lands that it groweth in. For it groweth in colde Countries that is not soone hot, and some in hot countries soone, and some in mene countryes and temperate betwéene these twaine. And Dactilus the fruit of Palme that groweth in some hot country, where the Sunne is alway, is most swéet and sauourye, and somewhat vnctuous for a manner gleaminesse, and though it be full swéete and sauourie, and some deale vnctuous, yet it may somtime grieue bo∣dies that eate thereof too oft & too much, for it bréedeth boming and swelling, and sore ach of the mouth of the stomacke, and of the head, and stoppeth the wayes of the liuer and of the splene, and so it is not good to vse continuallye all swéete things, for they grieue oft both body and soule. And fruit of Palme that groweth in colde countries, that is not full hotte, is not perfectly ripe. And is therefore so∣wer and drye, and as it were rawe, and nourisheth not soone the bodys, but grie∣ueth it full sore, for such fruit is harde to defie, though it comforteth somewhat the stomacke, and bréedeth oft fretting and gnawing, as hée sayth. And though fruit that groweth in meane hot Coun∣tryes be ripe, yet in them is much super∣fluitye of watrye moysture, that it maye not bée kept ripe, and so it filleth bodyes with rawe humour. That is matter of long during seauers, as Isaac saith in Dietis. Fruit of Palme is compowned of soft substaunce, as it were fleshie, and of an hard kernell, as it were stony: In ye mid∣dest therof seed is conteined. But in Siria and in Aegypt is some Dactilus, fruite of Palme sound all without kernel: and such fruit of Palme is called Spado, for in the substaunce thereof is no reason se∣minall, as Plinius sayth. The more noble and olde the Palme is, ye better the fruit thereof is. And the Palme beareth no fruit before an hundred yeres, and then it hath the first perfect and compleate ver∣tue. And Dioscorid. affirmeth and sayth, that the fruit of the Palme Tree is good and necessarye in medicine, and maketh smooth the roughnesse of Arteries, and it clarifieth and maketh cléere the voyce, & most namely when they bée right ripe. For the fruit of palme is ful sowre while it is gréene. And Plinius sayth, some of Alexanders knightes were choked with gréene fruit of Palme. And so this fruite accordeth not to meate while it is all greene, but onely to medicine, & helpeth against the flixe also if it be ordeined in due manner. (Additiō.Palma, a Palme or date trée, of the braunches were garlonds made for con∣querours, or those that ouercame. The Date trée groweth in Affrica, Arabia, India, & Siria, Iudea, & all the countries of the East or orient, the fruit is hot & dry, almost in the second degrée, eaten rawe, they stop the belly, but sodden, they com∣fort & restrore ye liuer and melt, the fruit in shops is called Dactylus.) Of Palmes. chap. 117.
PAlmes, is properlye a bough, or a braunch of a vine. Thereof Isidore libro. 17. speaketh and saith, that Palmes is the softe matter of a vine, and spring∣eth out in new armes, and the braunches beare the fruite that groweth therein. The leafe thereof is called Pampinus, by the leafe the branch is defended and suc∣coured against colde & heate, and against all wrongs of frost and snow, and other hard weathers that fall. And in some place the leaues be plucked away, for the Sunne should come to the fruite, & ripe it spéedely, and to doe away the shadowe, yt letteth ye riping, as he saith. The vine draweth all vertue & norishing yt it hath from the roote, and draweth strongly, be∣cause that it hath strong heate, that is closed therein in pores thereof, & draw∣eth much humour that passeth into sub∣staunce of braunches, and the other deale tourneth into matter of knops, of bur∣gening of buds, of floures, and of fruite, as Plinus sayth lib. 13. Such as the hu∣mour of nourishing is in the roote, such it is shewed in braunches: and so Com∣pendium Salerni, teacheth to make grapes of diuers colours in ye same vine, while a vine is graffed on thrée braunch∣es, that springeth out of one stock of the same vine, & with one graffe slit, in time of graffing is done red colour, & with the other blew colour, & with ye third yelow colour. Then each of the graffes sprin∣ging of the braunches of such coulour, shall beare Grapes lyke to that yt was done therewith in the slit of graffing. But seldome in this Countrey is one vine graffed on another vine, though sometime vines be graffed on stockes or on trées. Therefore ofte fruite is chaun∣ged in this manner: In March, when the humour beginneth to passe vpwarde from the roote, the rinde of the Uine is warely opened, and when it is open, the colour is put in about the roote, betwéene the trée and the rinde, and is then busily kept, that the humour that commeth vp∣ward from the roote, passe not at the slit: and so the humour that the braunch dra∣weth by lyttle and lyttle from the roote, is chaunged, passing by the colour. And some thereof is vnctuous, and turneth in∣to the fruit, and the likenesse thereof, leaueth in the fruite. By the same trafte euery plant may be tourned and chaunged in colour and in sauour, and some trees, which lundlye binde, by crafte be made kindly to laxe: and so of the contrary as he saith. And Alfredus saith the same, super l. quinto plantarum. And that as diuers maner of kinde of trées be craftely graffed in the graffing time. Isidore speaketh & sayth, that of the sprayes and braunches of the vine, springeth small and little crookes, & by those smal crookes, the braunches and sprayes beclyppeth and compasseth the trée round about, and is kept and helde vp thereby, and withstandeth by ye helpe thereof, diuers & many maner of windes and stormes, and wethers, that the bran∣ches be not shaked and hurled with the winde, and to saue the fruite from perill of fallyng. The braunches springeth and spreadeth wide about, and for the branch is full tender and brittle in the begin∣ning, such holding is néedefull, till it bee strong by venefice of the Sunne. Euerye yeare the braunches néedeth cutting and paring, and discharging of superfluitie, to spring and beare fruite the better. The vine that is not cut, spreadeth full wide, and passeth out of kinde, and tourneth into kinde of a wilde vine. The noble vine is knowen by thicke or thinne sette knots: for as Plinius saith li. 20 ca. 15. for thinne setting of knots and sorre a∣sunder, is a token of barren vine: and thick setting of knots, is token of a good vine and bearing. Looke inner De na∣tura vitis. ¶Of Propagine. ca. 118. PRopago, propaginis, is a young braunch of a vine, that springeth of a slip of a vine that is new set in ye ground, as Isidore saith. The highest braunches of a vine are called Flagella, for they bee wagging with blastes of winde, and be set and pight in the ground to make the vine to spread, or to multiplye newe vines.
And thereof springeth new plantes and branches of Uines, and these braunches be called Propagines, for Propaginate, is to vnderstand, to ses and plant vines, and put new branches in the ground, that new vines may spring thereof, to make the Uineyard spred wide and large: for Propagate is to say, spred and spring, as Isidore saith. Also Uine branches bent downe in∣to a grippe of earth, and hid with earth, conceiueth vertue of generation, and bea∣reth new braunches, and so the vertue of generation leaf is aboue in the braun∣ches, breaketh out some and some, by ver∣tue of hence that turneth outwarde into the braunches. And some of that vertue, is bene downe to the ground, & is med∣led with earth, and tourneth into rootes, and therof springeth new braunches, and draweth nourishing and séeding of the same rootes, and turneth all into rootes at the lae,  feedeth continually the veynes that spring, & ye mother feedeth ye daugh∣ter r that that so tooke first feeding & nourishing is by crafte tourned & chaun∣ged into the kinde of a nourse: For the braunch that first tooke feeding of ye roote, is nowe, chaunged and become a roote, and nourisheth and féedeth all the bran∣ches that spring thereof, as the mother nourisheth the daughter, as Gregorye sayeth. ¶Of Platano. cap. 119. Sambu∣cus Palu∣stris, or Li∣costaphi∣los.PLatanus is a tree and hath that name so the leaues therof no plaine, broad, and large for plaine is Plantes in Gréek, as Isidore sayth libro. 17. Holye Writ speaketh of the vertues therof, and saith, As a Plane arcared Eccl. 14. The leaues thereof is softe and tender, and lyke to vine leaues, as Dioscorides saith. And he eth that the plane is a colde tree and dre the leaues thereof healeth in hot co for it destroyeth reume, and hotte olling of the oyen. And the decoction both of rindes and leaues, healeth ach of the teeth, and other bones, as it is said, & hath vertue to heale sharpe and sower euills. And so it is said, that it helpeth to ease scalding & burning if it be laid ther∣to, with other things that easeth. Broath thereof if it be sodde in wine helpeth a∣gainst venime. Plinius libro. 12. cap. 3. praiseth it. (Additiō.Plaine trée, is called the Marris El∣der, Oyle, or dwarffe plane trée, the flow∣ers white, the berries red shining. Also Platanus is of another sorte, whereof some grow in England. The fruite of this trée dronke with wine, helpeth them that are bitten of Serpents, the fruit is round, rough, and woolly, of the quanti∣tie of a Filbert.) ¶Of Populo. cap. 120. POpulus is a trée, and hath that name of multitude, for of the crop and roote thereof, springeth many boughes, twigs, and braunches, as Isidore sayth libr. 17. Thereof is double kinde, blacke & white. The white hath leaues on the one side, and gréene on the other, and so there be two coulours, as it were tokens of daye and of night, for it chaungeth cou∣lour in one manner in the Sunne rising, and another wise in the Sunne going downe, as he sayth. Also out of this trée, droppeth Rosen in Italy and in Syria, and Diosco. and other account this Ro∣sen medicinable to staunch bloud, & cea∣seth sweates and other runnings & drop∣pings Ote of the crop thereof is Oynt∣ment made, that is colde and stopping, & swaging heate, and exciteth sléepe, and a∣mong Phisitions, the Oyntment is cal∣led Populeon, and is accounted néedefull in many colde passions and euills. And also Isidore sayth, that Popular & Plane and Withie be softe of kinde, and able to graue and write in, and when suche trees be shred and pared, they spring and spred both in length and in bredth. (*The Popler trée is of thrée sorts, the one white, the other blacke, and the third is called Aspe. The Oyntment that is made of the buds, is good against all inflamations, and against all brusings, squattes, and falles, and against swel∣ling.) ¶Of Pino. chap. 121.
THe Pine apple trée is called both Pi∣nus and Picea, and hath that name Pinus, of sharpnesse of leaues, for in old time, men called Pinus sharpe. And this trée is called Picea, for out thereof swea∣teth and woseth pitch, as Isidore sayeth libro. 17. In the Ilandes of Germania, of ye Pine apple trée commeth dropping and wosing, which is made harde with coldnesse or with heate, and so tourneth into a precious stone, that is called Elec∣trum, as Isidore sayeth there. And this Electrum hath another name, and is cal∣led Succus, for it is the iuyce of a Tree, and is there named and called Pinus. Also this trée is good to all thing, that is kept and continued there-vnder: as the Figge tree gréeueth and noyeth all things that is there-vnder, as Isidore sayeth. The Pine trée is an high trée, euen and light, with many small hoales, & is right strong, for therein be many knots, & for the Pine apple trée is right strong, oftentimes thereof be mastes made for ships, and is right good timber for edifi∣eng and buylding: but this trée taketh right soone fire, and burneth if it com∣meth nigh the fire, & that is, for because of the plenteous fatnesse, which is ther∣in, for out thereof commeth pitche. The rinde of this trée, is hard and rough with out, but the humour within is fat and gleymie, but this humour is drawen out in Summer by the heate of the Sunne, and chaungeth and tourneth into Rosin, and this Rosin is first white, and is right blacke when it is sodde and pitch made thereof, and sauoureth full well, and so doth the smoake thereof: also by great séething the sauour thereof abateth. This trée beareth many leaues, but they be small and sharpe: and this trée is of gréene colour, both in winter and also in Summer. And though this trée be most fattest, yet it groweth in mountaines, & in right drye places, and also stony: & though this trée be of great springing, yet the more it is pared and shred towarde the grounde, the more it springeth and spreadeth vpward toward heauen: and groweth slowly, because of gleimie hu∣muor and thicke, that is soone deffed and digested. This trée is spoyled of ye rinds, for it should dry the better. Betwéene the rinde and the Trée, wormes bréede, when the trée beginneth to drie, & these wormes fret and gnaw the trée, & ther∣fore to saue the trée and kéepe it, it is ac∣counted a chiefe medicine to take-off the rinde, that wormes bréed not of corrupt humo that is in the rinde, & betwéene the tree and the rinde. Also lib. 16. Plinius saith, that ye Pine tree and Alloren trée, healed with earth orye vnder the ground, dure & last long time. Pipes and conduiles made of pine trée, and laid deepe vnder the earth dure many yeares, and rotteth and corrupt∣eth soone, if it lye aboue the earth in moyst places, which altogether hid vn∣der the grounde, by running of water that runneth thereon, it wexeth hard, & dureth in an house long time, & rotteth not soone, neither is worme eaten, but if it be corrupt with dropping of raine, but déepe vnder the earth, it cureth and abi∣deth full long time safe & sound without any corruption, and the contrarye is of the Ver, that rotteth anone vnder earth, and dureth best within the house & kept drye, as Plin. saith li. 21. ca. 10. (Additiō.Of Pine trées ther are fiue kinds, as appeareth in Dudoneus Herball, and beareth a kinde of wooden apples, with∣in the which is Rosen: these serue for diuers purposes. folio. 770.) Of Pines. cap. 122. PInea the Pine apple, is the fruite of the Pine trée, as Plini. sayth. And is great and round by the stalke, and sharp at the ende, and first gréene, and more full when it is ripe, with coulour, as it were the colour of a Castane. The pine apple is the most greatest nut, and con∣ceiueth in it selfe in stéede of fruite ma∣ny kernells, closed in full hard shales, & be ioyned together in a certaine order, & neuertheles, for none shuld touch other, they be distinguished and departed asun∣der with skins of the shales, as it were by certaine walls, as it were by won∣derful craft of kinde, & be so ordained, for ye more greater kernels shuld occupy the more larger place, & ye lesse yt lesser place.
And be so set in most best wise, for the lesse should be in the lesse place, vnder the waight of the more kernells: For the greater end of the Pine apple hang∣eth aboue, and is fast to the Tree by a stalke, and the sharpe ende hangeth som∣deale downward toward the earth And a Pine apple holdeth fast and closeth the kernells while it is fresh and new, and not dried of his fat humor by age. And the Pine apple fordryeth, when the gleymie humour and fatnesse is wa∣sted, and then the Pine apple all to fal∣leth: and so the one parte is departed from the other, and kernell from ker∣nell. Therefore Dioscorides and Platea∣rius meane, that when the Pine apple kernell shall be vsed, it needeth to heate easely all the Pine apple vpon coales, & so the double rinde thereof is taken a∣way, the inner and the vtter. And then the kernells be full medicinable, & plaine and smooth, and moisteth, and some deale openeth & cleanseth the spirituall mem∣bers, and easeth the cough, and helpeth them that haue the Tisike, and be con∣sumed, and increaseth bloud. The rindes thereof be medicinable, and by sowrenesse thereof stauncheth bloud, and namely menstruall, and bind∣eth and stauncheth bloudie flixe of the wombe, as it is sayd in Plat. and in Pli∣nius libro. 15. ¶Of Pice. chap. 123. PItch is called Pix, and is dropping of the Pine trée, and is made hard & blacke séething on the fire, as Isid. saith. Of Pitch is double manner of kinde, the one is called ship pitch, for ships bée pitched therewith, and chins and crasing of ships be stopped therewith, to keepe that water should not come into ye ship; & pitch molten, is called pitch Liquida, & either kinde of pitch is hot and dry, and the hard pitch is compouned in one ma∣ner, and the fléeting or softe in another maner. And many call this fléeting pitch Colophora, or Pix Greca, Pitch of Gréece: for in Gréece is much thereof found, and either manner pitch is medi∣cinable, and dissolueth and consumeth, & wasteth, and helpeth against stopping & euill of the splene, and is put in many o∣ther medicines and in playsters. And Dioscorides saith, that Pitche helpeth against venime and venemous biting, stamped with salte, and pitch ma∣keth fire burne lightly, and defileth and smorcheth hands by cleauing too, that it toucheth, and namely, if it be molten, & defileth white coulour, and white cloathes and cleane, and such defiling is vn∣neth taken away from cloathes, as tou∣ching the colour and sauour. ¶Of Pyro. chap. 124. PIrus is the Peare trée, that beareth fruite, and hath that name, for the fruite thereof is shaped as the flame of the fire: for the fruite thereof is great & hard and broad at that one ende, and na∣row & straight at that other, as ye flame of fire, as Isidore saith libro. 17. And the tree is called Pirus, and the fruite there∣of is called Pirum, a Peare, as he saith: and so few Peares weigh heauier than many apples, if they be on a beasts back, as he saith. And Isa. in diet saith. Of peares is dou∣ble maner of kind, wilde and tame: and of either kinde, the boughes and braun∣ches be sower, stopping, and biting. But the fruite is full diuers, for the wilde peares be more sower and earthy, more colde and drye than the tame, & more vnsauourie and hard in the tast, for they be generally more vndigest, and accord∣eth not therefore to meate, but onely to medicine: for it bindeth & stoppeth strōg∣ly the fluxe of the wombe, and staunch∣eth cholaricke spewing, if they be sad in running water, and laid to the stomack. And tame Peares gréne and not ripe, be sower, great and harde, and vnsauou∣rie, and euill to meate, but in seething in fresh water with honny, or with some other swéete thing, the earthinesse and the roughnesse thereof may be somwhat tempered: But yet they be not accord∣ing to meate, but to medicines. And tame Peares ripe be colde and drye, and the sower substaunce thereof,
is medled with watry swéetnesse, and therefore according both to meate & me∣dicine, but they be better according both to meate & medicine after meate then be∣fore: for after meate they laxe and beare downe the meate to the place of digesti∣on, and comforteth the sinewes of the mouth of ye stomacke. And many peares eaten fasting, bréedeth wormes in the wombe, and Colliea asio incurable, & swéete peares be more temperate of cō∣plection, and lesse cold than other, and ac∣cordeth therefore, the better to them that be colde and drye. And peares haue this propertie, that if they be sod with toad stooles, they take away from them all griefe and mallice, and namely wilde peares, for they be ful sower, as Isaac saith. Powder or ashes of wilde yeares dronke, helpeth against Fronges tead stooles, as he sayth. Alwaye after eating of peares. Wine shall bée dronke, for as one saith, without wine, peares be venime. (Additiō.The drint and mellower that the peares be, the wholsomer they be: ill to & colde stomacke, but baked with, daye, & hot spices, they are indifferent.) ¶Of Pruno. chap. 125. THe Plum trée is called Piunus, and Ln's and i Punom and of that trée is many edner of kinde;The Da∣macen plumme. but the Damacen is the best that commeth out of Damaske, as Isidore sayth: the fruite thereof, accordeth and healeth the sto∣macke. Onely of this trée droppeth and commeth glowe and fast gum, Phisiti∣ons say. ints profitable to medicine, & for to make inke for writers vse, as Isid saith The fruite of the plum trée, is cal∣led, Prynum, and some is white, & some is blacke, and some is red but ye blacke plum that is somwhat hard, dry & sow∣er is good for the stomacke as they of Damaske and the colde plum & moyst, when it is well ripe, moysteth and kee∣peth the mouth, and be giuen agaynst heate of fouers and against daye stop∣ping and binding of the wombe. And Papies sayth that Prunus and Lentis∣cus is all one trée. But the Glose sayeth super Dan. that Prunus and Lentiscus is the same. Trée and standeth for the same. But sith of ye trée Lentiscus com∣meth not Prunus, Puinus and Lenticus is not one trée. (Additiō.There are diuers sorts of plums, the Damzen, the Apricot, the pear plum, the wheaten plum, the Leuant plum, The whils shrag, the Bullis, the Sloes, the sages; besides other strange plums that grow in other Countreyes, to vs vnknown, as in Russie, the Yaga∣dens, whereof there are also manye kiudes.) ¶Of Papyro. cap. 126. PApyrus is a manner Rush, that is my to kindle fire and lanternes, and is called Pabulem gnis, the feeding of fe, for fire is called Pir in Gréeke. And this hearbe is put to burne in wickets, and in tapers and is a gréene hearbe and round, and full smooth without with soft pith white and dry sucking, full of holes within. The rinde is stripped off vnto the pith, and is so dryed, and a little is lefte of the rinde on the one side, to su∣staine the tender with, & the lesse is lefte of the rinde: the more cléere the pith bur∣neth in a lampe, and is the sooner kinde∣led. And the places wherein such rush∣es growe, is as marreys and moores, by eades and, water breaches: and is cal∣led Papyro papyrionis, as Isidore say∣eth. Of rushes be rushen vessels made, for all thing that is made of Rushes, is called Papyrion. And aboue Memphis, and in Inde  such great rushes, that they make boates thereof, as the Glose with Super Esa. ca. 18. And Plinius wit∣nesseth it. And Alexanders storie saith the same. And of rushes he charters made in the which were Epistles writ and sent by messengers. Also of rushes be made pauiers, bores, and cases,Iuncus. & bas∣kets to kéepe in letters and other things in as the Glose saith. And Plinius saith, that the pith of this rush, is good to draw water out of the earth, for it sucketh it kindly, and draweth it to it selfe.
Therefore with rushes, water is draw∣en out of wine. Lib. 13. Plinius speaketh of rushes and sayth, that in marreys of Aegypt grow rushes, and in other stan∣ding water of Nilus, where the waters passe not two cubites of height. Rooles of rushes that grow in those places and bounds, be as great as an arme, and bée thrée cornered in the side, and thereof spring Rushes, passing tenne cubites of height. And people of that countrey, vse those rushes to burne in steede of wood. Of these rushes be made diuers things, that be néedfull in households, and ther∣of they make and weaue boates & sailes, and ropes for ships, and also cloathing. And also they make thereof Paper to write with, Huc vs{que} Plinius. (Additiō.Fiue kindes of rushes are writ∣ten of: Mariscus the candle rush, Iun∣cus acutus, the hard rush and fenne rush, Hotosehaenus, the bull rush or Mat rush, Squinantum, in English Squinant, as reported Ddon. in Fol. 511. Papyrus, a great rush in Aegipt growing in fes or istacth grounds, whereof the first pa∣per was made: now it is vsed for paper to write or print on. The paper that is now common, is made of olde lynnen ran wrought in a ni, and brought to a perfection wheron is written the help of memorie, the bewrayer of on & the treasure of truth, which blusheth  no mans folly, bewrayeth euery one? Paper is also called Oliarta, of the ot∣ters therein contained. Séeing we bée come so néere the word Papirus, heate what shall be sayd of Papyrius ye name of a young Gentleman, who being a childe, (as the manner then was) came with his father into the Senate, at such time as it happened wghtie and very secret matters to be talked of. When he came home, his mother was verye car∣ness with him, to knowe what made who handled in the Senate that daye. He séeing no other shifte, and yet loth to vtter the truth said. To saith mother, they debated that it might be lawfull for one man to haue two wiues. She thinking it to be true, the next morning, when the Senate was againe set, gathered toge∣ther the noble women, and with admi∣ration of all men, commeth into the Se∣nate and there with a solemne tale re∣questeth, that by the same law, it might be lawfull, for women also to haue two husbands. The Senate at ye first mer∣uailed much at hir words: But when the matter was declared by the young Gentleman, they much praised his wise∣dome and towardnesse, and with rebuke dimissed the women that shewed them∣selues so foolish, and so curious to know that, which nothing appertayned to them. D. Cooper.) ¶Of Paliuro. cap. 127. PAliurus, furze is a thistle most rough and sharp with prickes, and groweth in rough land vntilled, as Isidore saith, with certaine heades full of certaine prickes, foule and vneasie to touch: for it grieueth his hand that is foueth, and in those heads the seede is contayned, & that is Dareticum, tempering in soe things, and is good as Dioscori saith, a∣gainst venemous biting, & also to breake the stone. Also this hearbe hath manye prickes, and woundeth feete is that passeth and treadeth thereon. The stalkes ther∣of be so rough and so full of prickes, that it suffereth not Asses to touch them, nei∣ther to eate thereof. (Additiō.This tearmed Thistle is Fure, called Genista Spinosa, or Goate Thi∣stle.) ¶Of Papauerd. cap. 128. POpie is called Popauet, and is a slée∣pie hearbe, and maketh sicke men to sléepe: and is double, common & wilde. Thereof commeth iuyce that Phisitions as Opium or Oplo. Of the common, some is white, and that is colde and moyst: and some is blacke and that is colde and drie: and some is redde. And this diuersitie of kinde, is knowen by flowres, white, Purple, red or whi∣tish. And they haue greate hands, as Pomegranards: and therein is the saide closed, and the seede is vnctuous, & there∣of is Oyle made, that is good so diuers vses. Of the iuyce of the leaues and of
the head thereof Opium is made, that maketh them sléepe that haue the Fea∣uers, and shall be giuen wisely and wa∣rely, for it is soone stopping, and cooling, and slaieng, and namely blacke popie is good & wholsome in medicines, as Plat. and Plin. saith, and Diosc. meaneth. (Additiō.There be 3. sortes of Poppie, the blacke, the white, and the common Po∣pie, which is smallest: all Popies bée cold & dry, almost to the 4. degree, a pro∣uoker to sléepe, &c.) ¶Of Plantagine. chap. 129. WEy bread is called Plantago, & is a colde hearb, and is called Arno∣glossa in Gréeke, that is to say, ye lambes tongue, as Isid. saith li. 17. For ye leaues therof be plain, & some deale sinewie, as the tongue, and be euenlong with round∣nesse. In the middle thereof riseth and springeth one stalke that is strong with corners, and in the top thereof the séede is gathered, & is in the shape of a mate: & the miter of ye chiefe priest was shapē to ye lykenes of this hearb, as ye Master saith in his story super Exo. And name∣ly this accordeth to medicine, for it hea∣leth sore wounds, and biting of woode hounds, and abateth the swelling there∣of, and helpeth against the dropsie, and is contrary to venim, and namely to the venim of a Spider. The iuyce thereof, slaieth long wormes in the wombe, and swageth and abateth strong womb ach, and cleanseth & dryeth mattry wounds, & abateth running of menstrual bloud, & sheddeth & smiteth off swellyng of Po∣stumes in ye beginnning: & Wey bread chewed, easeth & clenseth swelling gums and abateth the swelling thereof, as Diosc. saith, that praiseth the vertues of Arnoglossa, in many manner wise. (Additiō.Plantago maior and minor, Rib∣wort, and sea Plantaine: these 4. kinds are knowen. Buckhorne plantaine, and Cordnop plantaine, and Peregrina: these seuerall are rehearsed in Dodoneus, fo∣lio .94.) ¶Of Petrosilino. chap. 130. PEtrosily is called Petrosilium,Petroseli∣um. & is an hearbe that groweth in gardens,Apium Perselie. and hath good smell, & hath that name Petro∣silium, for oft it groweth among stones and stony places. And of Percely is ma∣ny manner kinde, but the best is Mace∣douicum, of Macedonia, swéete in tast, and with good odour and smell, as Isid. sayth, and the vse thereof accordeth both to meate and to medicine, and is an hot hearbe and drye, soone tempering, ope∣ning, and departing, and diuiding, and consuming, and wasting, and making thin & subtill great humors, comforting the stomacke, & exciting appetite, & bre∣keth therfore the stone, and bringeth out menstrual bloud, and helpeth against the dropsie, and openeth stoppings, of the li∣uer and of the splene, & helpeth against many other passions and euills, as Plin. Dioscorides, and Plat. meane. (Additiō.Garden Parsely is hot in the se∣cond degrée, and drye in the third, it is good against the cough. Marsh parsely is Smallach, Paludapium. Read Dodone∣us, like of mountaine parsely, & of stone Parsely, of great parsely or Alexander, of wilde parsely, water parsely, and red parsely.) ¶Of Pipere. cap. 131. PEpper is called Piper, and is the séed or the fruit of a trée, that groweth in the South side of ye hill Caucasus, in the strong heate of the Sun, as Diosc. sayth li. 17. The leaues thereof, be like to the leaues of Iuniperus, and serpents kéepe the woods that pepper groweth in, and when the woods of pepper be ripe, men of that country setteth them on fire, and chace away the serpents by vyolence of fire, and by such burning, the graine of pepper, that was white by kind, is made blacke and riely. And of pepper are 3. manner kindes, as he saith: for some pepper is long, and that is not ripe: some is white, and that is not corrupte by fire, nor blemished with fire, and some is black and riuelled without, with par∣ching and rosting of the heate of ye fire. And blacke pepper is most vertuous, and
may longest be kept in heate, & is stron∣ger than other Pepper, and the more heauie it is, the better it is, and the more new, as he saith, and is fayned new by scand and guile of merchandise: for they couer the most eldest pepper, and spring thereon oare of siluer or of lead, for it should so seeme fresh and newe, because of the while huske. Huc vsque Isid. And lib. 12. cap. 8. Plinius sayth, that Pepper is made black and riueled, by long burn∣ing of the sunne, and that not without wrong done to the pepper: for Pepper should be white by kinde, and wexeth, so blacke by distempering of heauen, and men of that lande suffereth that, that it may the better be kepte, and the longer time. But Diosco. saith, that Saracens putteth the pepper into an ouen, when it is new gathered, and parcheth & rost∣eth it so, and taketh so away from it the vertue of gendring and of springing, for it should not spring and beare fruite in other landes. And pepper is hot and dry in the fourth degrée, as it is said in Plat. And hath vertue to temper and dissolue, to consume and to wast, and to drawe. Powder thereof maketh sneesing, & pur∣geth and cleanseth the braine of fluma∣tike superfluitie, and fretteth dead flesh, and consumeth and wasteth the web in the eye, and cleanseth the spiritual mem∣bers of superfluities that be cold & gley∣mie, and namely if it be taken with dry figs, and also it hath vertue to heate, and comfort the stomacke, and to excite ap∣petite, but the vse of pepper is not profi∣table to sanguine men, neither to chola∣ricke: for pepper dissolueth and dryeth, and burneth the bloud, and bréedeth at last meselrye, and other full euill sicknes∣ses & euils, as it is said in Plat. Also the pepper graine is soule in sight, and black without, and white within, hot in sa∣uour, with good smell, little in quantity, most in vertue, colde in déede, and hot in might. The vertue thereof is not felte, while it whole and sound, but when it is chewed or ground. It were long to recken all the ver∣tues thereof at full: and though it bée right precious among vs, for the vertue thereof & might: yet for the great plen∣tie therof among the Indes, it is accoun∣ted lesse worthy than Palegium, as Ier. saith, and Isidore also. (Additiō.The elder Writers der set foorthe 3. kindes of peper, the long, the white, & the blacke pepper. Pepper is hot & drye in the third degrée.) Of Pulegio. chap. 132. PVlegium, Pennie royall, is an hearb with full swéete smell, aud hath that name of Pululando, springing, as Isido. saith, and is more precious than pepper among the Indes. And Plate sayth, that Pulegium is an hot hearbe, and drye in the third degrée: and the vertue thereof is in leaues and floures, and shal be ga∣thered when it floureth. And is double: the tame, that is called Sisinbrium, and the wilde. And either is profitable & me∣dicinable, and hath the vertue to temper and dissolue, consume and wast, & to com∣fort, and to cast out and destroy venim, & to destroy the cold cough, and to cleanse the mother, & to constraine the gate of the wombe: and to bring out menstruall bloud, to comfort the stomack, and to ex∣cite appetite, and to abate ventosity, and to swage wonderfully ach of ye wombe and the uts, which commeth of colde, & to breake the stone, and to help concepti∣on, as Plinius sayth. (AdditiōThis hearbe taken with honnye, cleanseth the lungs and the breast from al grosse humour: the pouder rubbed on the gums, fastneth the teeth.) Of Porro. chap. 133. A Leeke is called Porrum, and Porrum is a Nowne Ethroclitum. For it is declined hoc Porrum in ye singular num∣ber, and hi Porri in the pluall. And is so Newter gender in the singular, and Mas∣culin in the plurall, as this verse follow∣ing meaneth. Dat rastrum rastros, porrum{que} facie tibi porros. This verse meaneth, that these two nownes, Rastrum for a rake, and Por∣rum for a léeke, be Neuter gender in the
singular number, and Masculine in the plurall number. Also in li. Num. cap. 11. It is said in this manner. Porri, cepae, & allia, in memoria no∣bis veniunt, &c. (Additiō.In mentem nobis veniunt Cucu∣meres, & pepones, porrique, & cepae, & allia. There came into Israels remem∣braunce, the Cucumers, the pepous, the léekes, and the onions, and the Garlyke, that they had in Aegypt, &c.) This authoritie meaneth, & is héere set for an ensample, that this Nowne Porrum maketh Potri in the plurall, & is so the masculine gender. Of a léeke is double maner of kinde, one with whole head, and another is cal∣led Sectile, and Sectile is called a lyttle knot planted or set: and the léeke with a head is more,Vaset leeke. and is taken from place to place, as Isidore sayth libro. 17. The léeke that is called set léeke, accordeth more to meate than to medicine, and the léeke with whole head againward. And the head is white and full of meate, and compassed about with small skins, and hath in the neather ende many mores & rootes in stéede of haire, and cleueth ther∣by to the earth, & taketh féeding & nou∣rishing, and the plant springeth out of the middle of the head. In the ouermost ende of the stalke is a head, and in that head the seede is gathered, & each graine of the séede hath a stalke, whereby it cle∣ueth to the plant, & séedeth not the first yere, but the second, as it is said in Dio. and in Mac. Ipocras vsed léeke in many medicines, for he gaue onely the iuyce thereof to drinke against casting of bloud: and léeke is good against barrennesse, if young wo∣men eate thereof. The iuyce thereof dronke with wine helpeth against bi∣ting of serpents, and against euery ve∣nemous beast. Léeke stamped with ho∣nie, healeth wounds, if it be layd therto, in a plaister wise. The iuyce thereof medled with milke stancheth the olde cough, and healeth euills of ye lungs. The iuyce thereof medled with Goates gall, with the third part of honie, luke warme hot, dropped into the ears, healeth ye ach thereof, and helpeth against deafenesse. And the iuyce thereof dronk with wine, healeth the ache of the luynes. Léekes medled with salte closeth soone, and hea∣leth new wounds, and laxeth hardnesse, and soudreth soone breaches. And léekes eaten raw, helpeth against dronkennes, and exciteth Venus, and softeneth the hard wombe, and Plinius saieth all this libro. 20. capitulo. 7. There he say∣eth more héereto, and saieth also, that the smell of léeke driueth away Scorpi∣ons and Serpents, and healeth the bi∣ting of a mad dogge with hony, and hel∣peth agaynst tooth ach, & slaieth wormes thereof, and bréedeth sléepe, and healeth the kings euill and the dropsie. But the léeke hath some vice: for it gende∣reth swellyng and bolning, and grie∣ueth the stomacke, and bréedeth thirst, and kindeleth and heateth bloud, if it be ofte and too much eate thereof. Huc vsque Plinius. (Additiō.The Léeke is hot and drye in the third degrée, of nature like the Onion, but not so strong: they ingender grose & euill bloud, breede winde, and cause hea∣uie dreames, &c.) Of Polanda. OF the fruite Polanda or Apolanda,Addition growing in Calicut, the tree where∣on the fruite groweth, is vi. or vii. feete high, and beareth not past foure or fiue leaues hanging by certaine slips, euerie leafe so great, as will couer ouer or a∣bout a man from raine, or heate of the Sunne. Forth of the middle of the leafe, groweth a twigge, like the stalke of a beane, which bringeth forth flowers and also fruite, of a handfull long, and as big as a mans arme. These fruites are ga∣thered vnripe, because they ripe best bee∣ing gathered: they growe clustering, & many, and because of such increase, they are sold there, after the rate of 20. a pen∣nie, with many other rare fruites. ¶Of Quercu. ca. 134. THe Oke is called Quercus, and that nowne is declined, Quercus, cus, cui, and is a trée that beareth mast, and is a
fast trée and a sad, and dureth long time with hard rinde, and little pithe within or none, and there bréedeth on the leaues a manner thing sower and vsanery. And phisitions call it Galla, and beareth fruit which is called Akorne, and therewith Swine and Bores in countries be fat∣ted: and hath a strong roote and crooked, and is full deepe in the ground, and cle∣ueth full fast therto. The rinde & fruite and twigs therof be sowrish, and so cold and drye, and be good to medicine. And hath the name Quercus, seeking or ask∣ing: for therein Gods of Nations gaue aunsweres, as Isid. saith li. 17. Or els, for theron men in old time sought akornes to eate, as the Poet sayth. Mortales primi ructabanti guttura glandes. In old time, this trée was hallowed to Iupiter, as Ouidius sayth: Men desi∣red akornes of the broad tree of Iupiter. And Okes grow in mountaynes and in woodes, and namely in the land of Ba∣san, there groweth Okes that beareth a∣kornes, and passe other trées, in hardnes and in strength, as Ierome saith sup. A∣mos ca. 2. And Quercus and Ilex is all one. Looke before in the same book, in li∣tera I. The fruite of Quercus is called Akorne, and groweth among the leaues, and no blossome springeth before hande, And akornes be long and euenlong with out, full plaine and smooth, & some deale bright, as a mirrour, and cléere as the nayle, and so it is sayd in Diet. Akorns be colde and drye, and therefore hard to defie, and vnobedient to digestion, & har∣deneth the wombe, and commeth slowly downe from the stomacke, and bréedeth head ache, for thick fumositie passeth ther¦of out of the stomacke to the braine: & are gréene in the beginning, and as it were browne red when they be ripe: & they grow in shells shaped round, plain, and smooth, within the kernell it is full sad, and hath a little skin that departeth betweene the kernell and the shale, and the shale with the kernell & the huske, be full sower and dry, and not well sa∣uoured: but when they be well-ripe & rosted in the fire, or sod in fresh water, they be better in sauour, and taketh better sauour of the heate, and swéetnes of ye water And akornes helpeth against venime: for they stop waies and pores that venime may not passe soone to the heart, and dryeth rotted humours, and stauncheth and stinteth menstruall fluxe and running, as Isaac saith in Dietis. (Additiō.The ripe Akorne beaten to pouder and dronke in ale or wine, stayeth the pricking of the splene, called the stitche: the cup wherein the Akorne groweth, beaten to pouder, and dronke in redde wine stayeth the flixe or laske.) ¶Of Quisquilie. chap. 135. Gulls and outcast of corne is called, Quisquilie,Chaffe. as it is sayde Amos. 8. cap. And falleth off when corne is clean∣sed with a siue or with a riddle, and bée of no value to mans meate, but they bée meate to swine and to fowles, and ap∣paireth corne, if it be medled therewith: and corne hath thereof no profite, but waight onely, neuerthelesse the greines therof be light, hollow and voyd, & eaten with wormes, & the pith within is wa∣sted, & therfore the hole is voyd & léere, therfore it healeth not ye womb, so much as it grieueth it, & maketh it to swell. ¶Of Rosa. cap. 136. ROsa, the Rose trée, as Plin. saith, is a little trée with prickes, and the most vertue thereof is in the floure, and the se∣cond in the leaues, & in the séede, for the trée is medicinable in floure, leaues and seede. And the rose is double: one is tame, & groweth in gardens, another is wilde, and groweth in woods. The rose of gar∣dene is planted and set, and tilled as a vine, and if it be forgrowen and not she∣red and pared, and not cleansed of super∣fluitie: then it goeth out of kind, & chan∣geth into a wilde rose. And by oft chan∣ging and tilling, the wilde Rose tour∣neth and chaungeth into a verye rose, & the rose of the garden and the wild rose be diuers in multitude of floures, smell and coulour, and also in vertue. For the leaues of the wilde rose be few & broad and whitish, medled with little rednesse, & smelleth not so wel as the tame Rose, nor is so vertuous in medicine.
The tame rose hath manye leaues sette nigh together, and be all red, or all most white, with wonderfull good smell, sow∣rish in sauour, and somdeale biting, with great vertue in medicine: and the more they be brused and broken, the vertu∣ouser they be and the better smellyng: & springeth out of a thorne, that is harde & rough: neuerthelesse, the rose followeth not the kinde of the thorne, but she arai∣eth hir thorne with faire colour and good smell: when the rose beginneth to spring, it is closed in a knop with greynes, and that knop is greene, and when it swel∣leth, then springeth out harde leaues and sharpe. In the middle thereof sprin∣geth out other soft leaues, and compasse each other, and wexe red lyttle and lyt∣tle, and when they be full growen, they spread themselues against the Sunne ri∣sing, and for they be tender and féeble to holde togethers in the beginning, there∣fore about those small greene leaues, be∣neath bered tender leaues and softe, and beset all about: and in the middle ther¦of is seene the seede small and yeolowe, with full good smell, and that seede clea∣ueth vpon the fruite of the rose. First, the fruite of the rose is shapen, or the leaues spring out and spred at the full. And the fruite thereof is small rounde knops and hard, with a manner rough∣nesse, and full of certaine graynes that be first gréene, but they are redde, after that the seede and the leaues be fallen in Haruest, and be softe when they be full ripe, and were blacke about winter, and the sauour thereof is biting & somedeale soure, as the sauour of Medlars, but they be not ful good to eate, for roughnes that is hid within, and grieueth within his throate that eateth thereof. The Rose springeth sometime by sowing, & some∣time by planting, and somtime by graf∣fing, and the rose amendeth by changing of place, and by cutting and paring. Huc vs{que} Plin. li. 20. cap. 4. Among all flow∣ers of the world, the flower of the rose is chiefe, and beareth the price, and ther∣fore oft the chiefe part of man, the head, is crowned with flowers of Roses, as Plin saith, and that is because of vertues and sweete smell and sauour: For by fairnesse they féed the sight, and pleaseth the smell by odor, and the touch by nesh and softe handlyng, and withstandeth & succoreth by vertue against many sick∣nesses and euills, as he sayth, and accor∣deth to medicine both greene and drye. Many medicines be made of the greene leaues of roses, as it is sayd in Plat. For roses shred small and sod in clarified ho∣nie maketh that honie medicinable with good smel. And this comforteth and clen∣seth, and dissolueth & departeth in clean∣sing, and defieth gleymie and fleumatike humours and thicks, and bindeth and stoppeth with cold water, & laxeth with hot. Of roses well brused, and well in∣corporate with Sugar, is made Succura rosacea, Sugar roset, that hath vertue to comfort and to bind, and helpeth against the blondie flixe, and against sowning, & against cholarick spewing, and the Car∣diacle passion. Of the rose riped in oyle, is made O∣leum Rosaceū, that helpeth against cha∣sing of the lyuer, if the place of the liuer be anoynted therewith, and is néedful in many causes, and helpeth against head ache of the forehead and of the temples, if they be baulmed therewith, and help∣eth against distemperaunce of heat, and fierce agues, and maketh to sléepe. Of gréene roses, Aqua rosacea is distilled by seething of fire, or of the Sunne, and this water is good for all the aforesayde things, & is good in Colliries, medicines for eyen, and in oyntment for Ladies, for it cleanseth awaye webs and fowle speckes of the face, and maketh the skin thin and subtill. Also of dry roses be made many me∣dicines: for the smell of dry roses relee∣ueth and comforteth the braine: the de∣coction thereof in raine water, staunch∣eth all flixe that commeth of cold cause: pouder thereof stauncheth bleeding at the nose, & drieth and wasteth rotted hu∣mour, that corrumpeth and grieueth the gums and rootes, and comforteth wag∣ging téeth, that be in poynt to fall. Pou∣der thereof stamped with saffron, med∣led with the white of an egge, effectually healeth sore ache of the eyen, and staun∣cheth the humour and the bloud that flée∣teth
and runneth to the veynes of the eyen, and abateth swelling of the priuye chose of a woman, and reléeueth it if it abate downward, Plinius lib. 10. cap. 19. toucheth these vertues, and many other vertues of the Rose. (Additiō.Distilled water of Roses, is neces∣sarie to many vses: the red rose to pre∣serue and to medicine. Dodoneus wri∣teth of ten kinde of Roses, among the which, the Eglantine rose, and Muske rose, yeolow and white. There is one rose growing in England, is worth all these, Rosa sine spina: which royall Rose growing in hir proper soyle, is borne vp of a well settled stalke, and ar∣med with such thornes, as are apparant to so gentle a kinde, the leaues of Lilye hiew, called the Orient gréene, notwith∣standing, subiect to awes of dreadfull blaes, as all our common Roses be to tempesteous windes. Zeale constrai∣neth me somwhat to speake of so whol∣some a floure, chéerefull in sight, mild in kinde, and mercifull in iustice, by whose meanes, as the smell of the rose is com∣fortable to the sence, so much more is this Rose, for Englandes whole prospe∣ritie. Finding so great good by the grow∣ing of so wholsome a flower, it shall be good for the rest, hearbes of the whole garden, to take héed of the superfluous vanitie of their present being, & reioyce not with the olde wéedes in time past, which growing to all vnthankfulnesse, sayd: Our life shall passe away as the cloud, and come to nought as the myste that is driuen awaye with the beames of the Sunne, and put downe with the heate thereof: our name also shall bee forgotten by little and little, and no man shall haue our worke in remembrance, for our time is a very shadow that pas∣seth away, and after our ende, there is no returning: for it is fast sealed, so that no man commeth againe. Come on therefore, let vs inioy the pleasures that are present, and let vs chéerfully vse the creatures lyke as in youth: let vs fill ourselues with good wine & oyntment, and let there no flower of the time es∣cape vs; let vs crowne our selues with Rose buds afore they be withered. May not the buds be ye common profites, that are made by dayly pillage of the Clear∣gie, in abusing the gift of the Maiestie, who are neuer suffred to be at rest by one extreame assault or other, the faxe of re∣rages hath almost beggered, the humble and dutiful subiects. God graunt ye view of this note to the royall Rose, that the Cleargie be no more oppressed. Those thistles, nettles and thornes, say, let ther be no faire meddow, but our lust goe through it, let euery one of vs be perta∣kers of our voluptuousnes, &c. Let vs op∣presse the poore righteous, let vs not spare the widow nor old man, let the lawe of vnrighteousnesse be our strength, &c. Let vs defraud the righteous, and wy: he is not for our profit, &c. Wisdom. ca. 2.) ¶De Radice. cha. 137. A Roote is called Radex, and hath that name of Radius, a beame, for it stick∣eth fast to ye ground as it wer by certein beames, or else it hath yt name of Rado, dis, to shane, for if it be shauen, it gro∣weth no more: then the root is the begin∣ning both of an hearbe, and of a tree, & is soft in substance with poores, & is rough & crooked, & is soft & fat in substaunce for to take the better incorporation of moi∣sture, & hath many pores to take the soo∣ner, & the more humour to send to féeding & nourishing of leaues & branches, & it is rough for great drawing of nourishing & of feeding, & hath the same office in bo∣dies of hearbs & of trées, that the mouth hath in bodies of beasts, & cleaueth to the earth by roughnesse, & draweth to it selfe that yt is according of humour, and sen∣deth it by pores as it were by veines to nourish the plant: and is crooked, for to cleane the faster to the earth: and the root is diuers in shape & in disposition by di∣uers working of heat yt worketh in the substantiall matter of ye root. The which matter is somtime thin & somtime thick, & somtime mene, as Al. saith in Cōmen∣to super li. de Plantis. For if the matter be watry & thin, & strong heat: then the roote is euenlong, & sharpe in shape. And if ye moisture of nourishing bée thicke & earthie, then the root is hard & drye. For such humour is strongly fastned & runne by vertue of might and heate.
And if the matter bée meane, & the heate strong:then the heat draweth like swift from all the parts. And because of equall moouing of the partes, the roote is round in figure and shape. If the heat be feeble and the matter gleamie: then the heate may not send vp much matter, nor make it spread nor reare, but the most lyghtest partes thereof, and the most heauyest partes breaketh hether and thether by theyr owne heauynesse and weight. And so therein abideth an euen shape with knots and roughnesse. And the roote is gendered of humour of the earth by the working of heate, and the heate of hea∣uen entereth and commeth therein: and by vertue therof agréeable féeding & nou∣rishing is drawen and incorporate there∣to. Also of place and disposition of the ground, the root taketh disposition & com∣plection. For that that groweth in swéet ground, and meanly drye, and bée nouri∣shed with raine water, be better then other, and those that be nourished in soft land and in marreys, where standing & rotten water is, whereof they draw nou∣rishing: and by reason of the malignitye and corruption of water, they be worse then other, and least wholsome in meate and in medicine, as Isaac saith. The root is hid vnder the ground out of sight, and sheweth the vertue thereof and working in flowres, fruit, and boughs. The roote lyeth hid vnder the ground, liueth, & pro∣fiteth, and is better and better, & fayleth if it be drawen out of the grounde, and dryeth, and fordryeth. For of all the tree or hearbe the root is a part counted lesse of price, neuerthelesse as the root is mo∣ther and well of hearbe and trée: so it is of either the nourisher and most néedfull susteiner, and the more déepe the roote is put in the grounde, the more steadfast foundation it is of hearbs and trées: and though the root be soft in substance ther∣of, yet by vertue and subtiltie of kinde heat, it pearceth betwéene hard stones, & commeth into the innermost part therof. In winter time kinde heate slieth colde aire, & gathereth it selfe to the innermost of the root, and there it is multiplyed to temperatnesse and nourishing of it selfe. And then in winter time the root concei∣ueth and taketh water out of the hu∣mour, that is drawen, & sendeth it forth to nourish and to bréede the braunches and flowres in springing time, ye spring that time, and so trees and hearbs that be dry, & as it were dead in winter time, when the humoure commeth vp to the ouer partes, they quicken in springing time. Also the qualitie good and euill of the root commeth vp to boughs and twigs. And oft it is shewed in fruit and in flo∣wers, what vertue or vice is in ye roots. But oft sowrenesse and bitternesse of hu∣mour of the roote is defied by benefice of aire and heate of heauen, that purifi∣eth the matter. And so oft it falleth, that of a bitter roote commeth swéete fruite and flowers, as it fareth of the roote of the vine, of the Nut trée, and of the O∣liue. Huc vsque Isaac in Dietis vniuer∣salibus. Also Aristotle saith, that Trées when they be at a stay & beare no fruites are wont to be remedied in the roote. For the roote is slit, and a stone is put in the slit, & so the thicke humour and the corrupt, passeth out as it were séething, and so cleane humour & pure & new aire is drawen & commeth into the root. And so the trées be renued & healed. Also Isaac & Galen saye, that Muscus Atheniense sayd: that each hearb with a root of much nourishing, hath séed that is not nourish∣ing: as it fareth in Pasnepis, & in Rapis,Cole∣vvortes. Carreis. and in other such. And againward, if the séed of an hearb nourisheth, then ye roote nourisheth not. And there is a certaine hearbe that approprieth the name of a root, & is hot and dry, & is like Raphane in vertue, and hath vertue to temper, de∣part, and dissolue, to consume and wast, and to open poores, and so it helpeth a∣gainst scauers, which come of colde, and openeth stopping of the splene, and tem∣pereth hardnesse thereof, and succoureth against the dropsie, and hath harde sa∣uour and sowre, and accordeth more to medicine then to meate, as raye againe∣ward accordeth more to meate then to medicine, and is hot & moist, & nourish∣eth more then the other hearbs or roots,
as Isaac sayth in Dietis, and maketh soft flesh and sweete, for the ventositie and bolning thereof. Therfore it nourisheth the better if it be well sodde, and is hard to defie, if it bee rawe and euill sod, and stoppeth the pores and ye veine. And also it is good by way of medicine: for ye iuyce of it is good for Podagre feete, and the goutie places bée aswaged of sorenesse & ache. Of the séede of the rape, and also of ye séede of Raphane is Oile made, that is náedfull in manye vses, and namelye in Lamps, but yet it was not lawful to put such oyle in lamps of candlesticks in the house of God, as sayth the Glose super Exodo. 27. there it is sayd, with distincti∣on it is bidden to offer Oyle, not Ra∣phon nor Myrtum, or Mirtinum, but most pure oile of Oliue trees, for it was not lawfull to offer other oile, as it was not lawfull to light fire other then came downe from heauen, &c. Of Rampno. cap. 138. The smal Fuize, Anonis.THE Cambmoke is called Ramp∣nus, and is a right hard Trée with knots, boughs, braunches, and pricks, for it hath small leaues with full sharpe prickes in the sides, and doth harme to his feete and handes that toucheth it or treadeth thereon, and hath soft leaues in the beginning, when it springeth. And the more it groweth, the more sharp be the prickes. The master in Historie su∣per Iud. 9. taketh witnesse of Iosephus, and sayth, Chambmoke hath this singu∣lar vertue, that it gendereth fire of it selfe, for when the leaues therof fall and be dry, it is sayde that they be full drye with a soft fatnesse. And therefore when there is strong fire in hot Countryes or impression of heate of the Sunne, those leaues that be fallen so, and disposed to inflamation, by a lyttle blast of heate, winde, and brought, are set on fire. And because of that burning, sometime woods and groanes, that be nigh, be wonderful∣ly light and set on fire. And Plinius li. 24. cap. 14. speaketh of Cambmoke, and sayth, that among kindes of Trées, the Cambmoke is a pricking shrubbe, and hath boughes and leaues with sharpe pricks, euen and not crooked: and hath in the boughs a manner red hoales, and fruit, in the which is the séde. And hath vertue to drawe the Secundinas, that bée the bagges that children bée wrap∣ped in the wombe. And is a trée of great bitternesse, both in root and in leaues, and also in boughs and in braunches. And is neuerthelesse good and profitable in me∣dicine. For of the iuyce of the rootes and of the stalks by decoction, is made a me∣dicine, that Phisitions call Licium. Some men call it Lucidus, for it maketh cléere eien, and doth away webbes and wormes of the eien, and helpeth against blearednesse of the eyen: and against other euils of liddes of the eyen, and also against itching of the eyen. And healeth and cureth rotted gummes and spitting of bloud. And is good against the running of menstruall bloud of wo∣men, and when they haue much of super∣fluitie of humour in the mother, & clo∣seth the mother in the best wise, and also wasteth such humour, as Plinius sayeth. And healeth whelks and pimples of the lips, and healeth the chipperings of the tongue, as he sayth. (Additiō.The Cammocke, Rest, Harrow, or pety whyn, is ground Furze. The barke of the root taken with honny, prouoketh vrine, and breaketh the stone.) Of Resina. cap. 139. REsine, as Isid. saith, libr. 28. is a drop∣ping, which commeth and issueth out by sweting of the trées, as out of ye trées of Balsamus, Ferule, Pine, and Lentis∣cus, and of other trées & shrubs, which sweateth & woseth out liccur. For Rein is Gréeke, & is as much to say in Eng∣lish, to sweate or to wose, as well smel∣ling trées of the East landes and coun∣tries, as the dropping of Balsamus or of Ferula. The dropping whereof har∣deneth and chaungeth into precious stones, and into Electrum. The first and the chiefe Resina, is Therabinthina, and is chiefe and better then other, and com∣meth out of Arabia, Iudea, Siria, Ci∣presse, and Affrica, and out of ye Ilande of the Sea: The second is Lentiscina,
and that is called Mastix, and this com∣meth out of the Iland Hedechio: ye third is Resine pinealis, and this is now soft now hard. Huc vsque Isidorus. And one∣ly gumme hard or soft is called Resin. Some Resin is softe and fléeting as, Re∣sin of Balsamus, and Tirebinthina, and some is harde, as Mastix, Thus, and Mirra, and other such. And all Resin is first soft, and fleeting, and gleamie in the first wosing of the Trée, and abideth al∣way soft and fleeting, and waxeth harde with heat or with colde. And all Re∣sin is good and profitable in medicine, and therefore Resin is put in noble oint∣mentes and medicines. Looke kinde and vertues of all Resins in their owne pla∣ces. (Additiō.Resine pituinae, Pitch, Resina, Ro∣sen, Resina pini, Resina Colophonia, drie Pitch, Resina arida, dried Rosen, &c.) Of Rubo. cap. 140. The brā∣ble.A Bush is called Rubus, and is thick∣nesse of thornes and of Bryers, and of other shrubbes and prickes, when it groweth in a place together, as Isi. saith. And Rubetum, or Rubus is a name pro∣pried to shrub, that beareth wilde Be∣ryes, which heards eate for hunger. And the fruit thereof is first red, & spreadeth in long braunches, small, and round, & some deale thicke, growing with sharp pricks. And these branches be pliaunt & spring∣ing, and bending in it selfe. The leaues thereof be short and clouen in the side, & some deale sharp, with smal pricks with∣out, which be crooked, and lightly prick∣ing. And thus Rubus is full of pricks frō the roote vp to the toppe, and the prickes therof be some deale crooked downward towarde the earth, and is sharpe as téeth. The fruit thereof is first gréene, hard, and full sowre. And then red and some∣what sowre. And is blacke and swéet at the last, when it is ripe at the full. The ilyce thereof is red, and painteth and di∣eth as bloud. And the fruite without is compassed with a full thin and wearish skinne, and departed asunder. And diui∣ded as it were small dens and valleyes, & with a manner roundnesse some deale vpright, but it is ful of moist meat with∣in, and ful of graines, & is a medicinable trée with fruit thereof. And this trée Rubus is cold and dry, as Platearius sayth, and Constant. sayth the same. And saith that the crop there∣of is some deale sowrish, and helpeth a∣gainst hot Postumes and burning, and against rednesse of eien, if the croppes of it be powned with the white of an egge, and layde therto. Also iuyce of the stalks and of the crops therof, medled in water of barly, helpeth against the bloudy flixe. Huc vsque Platearius. Of the goodnesse of the fruit therof, looke before in littera M. de moris agrestibus. This trée groweth in barren land, and is best to close gardens and vineardes: for the thicknesse of multitude of pricks letteth and holdeth out men and beasts, that passseth forth by of entering, and re∣ceiueth hares & other such small beasts. And defendeth foules that make theyr neasts therein, for to ye intent their kind giueth pricks therto to defend it so ther∣with, as it were swoords. And therefore grieueth & hurteth & pricketh the hands that gather fruit thereof, and suffereth not aduersaries to come there within. And Rubus also is darke and shadowie, by reason of his thicknesse, and letteth the passing in of the Sun beame by the thicknesse thereof. And is therfore friend to Adders, & to other créeping wormes. Therfore of Rubus, a bush, Rubeta hath the name, and is a venimous Frog, that dwelleth in bushes. Therefore it is not safetie to sléepe and rest nigh such bu∣shes, for such venimous wormes, as the master sayth in Historie super libr. Ex∣odum. (Additiō.Of the bramble are thrée sorts. The great brier that is in euerye hedge bea∣reth black berries. The long ground bry∣er, wheron groweth a bigger bery black, called the dew berye, which is very good to coole a hot stomack. The smal scratch brier:these briers be all medinable both leafe and fruite. There is Rubus I∣daeis, called the Framboys, Raspis or hinder Berrie, both redde and
white, these grow in gardens, the iuyce is good to comfort a weake stomack, and the berryes haue a swéete smell: the La∣tines call it Crispina, Merum, Rubi, I∣daei. Dodoneus in fol. 662.) Of Ruta. chap. 141. RRow is called Ruta, and is a medi∣cinable hearbe, and hath that name, for it is full feruent, and therof is dou∣ble kinde, wilde and tame, and either is full feruent. But the wilde is more fer∣uent then that other, as Isidore sayth, li. 17. cap. vlcimo. Wéesells teach that this hearbe is contrary to venim, and to ve∣nimous beasts, for he eateth first Rew, and balmeth himselfe with the smell & the vertue therof, before he fighteth with the Serpent, as he sayth. And the Wee∣sell knoweth the vertue of Rew, and ea∣teth thereof, and fighteth afterward safe∣ly, and resith on the Cockatrice, and slai∣eth him, as Plinius, Dioscorides, & Con∣stantine saye. And Plinius praiseth this hearbe in a manner wise passing al other hearbes, libro. 20. cap. 27. and sayth, that the vertue thereof is hot and dry, and comforteth the stomack if it be oft dronk, and putteth a dead childe out of the wombe, and cleanseth the mother, and bringeth out filth and vncleannesse ther∣of, and purgeth and cleanseth the mother full cleane, and wasteth the humour of Venus, and abateth in males the appe∣tite of Venus, for it kindeleth in them complectional drinesse, and heat that hath mastrie in them, and by strength of these qualities the humour is wasted in men, that is oft the cause of the appetite of Venus seruice. And in women that bee colde and moyst, it worketh the contra∣rie by contrarie cause. The broath of Rew abateth hard torments, and gnaw∣ing of the wombe, if it be dronke. And the hearbe layed hot to the wombe in a plaister wise, cleanseth and healeth the lungs and the breast of all moystnesse and colde, that grieueth in the spirituall members. And if it be sod wt Oyle, it slai∣eth wormes of the womb. And Rew ea∣ten rawe sharpneth the sight of the ey∣en, and healeth and doth away the dim∣nesse of eyen, and stauncheth and dryeth bléeding at the nose, if the iuyce thereof be dropped therein. And Rewe eaten or dronke, withstandeth mightelye all ve∣nim and biting of venimous beasts, if it be stamped with Salt, Garlike, & Nuts. And healeth wonderfullye such biting. In the eare and nose the iuyce oft drop∣ped, purgeth the head of fleame, and hel∣peth them that haue the falling Euill. The broath thereof helpeth and releeueth tooth ache. And bringeth Paralitike oft to féeling, and openeth the poores that were before closed. And destroieth migh∣tely ventosity and wind in the guts, and abateth all sore ach within: and rew ea∣ten, medled with the water of roses, and with Comin, cleanseth and healeth blea∣rednesse & rednesse of eien. And the smell of Rew driueth and chaseth away al ve∣nimous beasts out of gardens: and is therefore planted about Sage, to driue away Serpents and Toads which loue Sage best. (Additiō.Ruta Hortensis, and Ruta Silue∣stris, hearbe grace, it is called Eriphion, and the small Rue, Viperalis, in shops, Hamel: Rue is hot and dry in the third degrée, the wilde Rue is stronger. These are good hearbes, and serue for diuerse cures, the iuyce of Rewe dronke with wine cléereth the stomacke from venim. To annoint the bodye with the iuyce of Rew, no venimous Serpents, nor noy∣some flyes will either sting or bite the body: and excellent receite for those that trauaile into the hotte Indies, and other places where those are, it killeth fleas and gnats.) Plinius libro. 19. cap. 9. speaketh of Rewe, and sayth: That Rue woulde bée sowen or set, when day and night be euen of one length, in haruest. And hale the Winter, doung, and humour, & thriueth well in drie weather. And will be nouri∣shed. with pouder and stones, and with a∣shes. Ashes should be medled with seede thereof, to destroy the wood canker, and other wormes. The Romanes in olde time did rew in their wine, that they dranke against venim and other euills. And vertue se∣minatine of rew is in the séed, in ye stalk,
in braunches, & in roote. For the braun∣ches & spraies therof bended downward toward the ground, taketh roote anone, & dryeth not soone, and taketh friendshippe with the figge tree. Insomuch that Rew is neuer in more liking, nor thriueth better then vnder the Figge tree, or nigh thereto. Also he sayth libro. 20. That Pythagoras erred, that supposed that Rewe grieued the eyen.A canear, of vvar∣ning. For Grauours, Lymnours, and Pain∣tours eate Rew because of the eyen, and to sharpe theyr sight, but beware women with childe, least they eate Rewe. For such meate slayeth the childe in the wombe. Rew is giuen against feminall fluxe, and against the seruice of Venus, and to them that dreameth of lecherye. They that be baulmed with the iuyce of Rewe, bée not bitten with Spiders nor stong with Scorpions, with Bées, nor with Waspes, nor infected with the iuyce Cicuta,Herba ve∣aenosa. that is venim of venims. Huc vsque Plin. li. 20. cap. 14. (Additiō.Cicuta, an hearbe much like our Hemlocke, but hauing smaller leaues: some vse this worde for Hemlocke. The iuyce of it through extreame cold is poi∣son, and therefore the Athenians vsed it kill men in common executions.) Of Saltu. chap. 142. SAltus is a wilde place, and wilde trées there growe and spring on high, as Isidore sayth; libro. 14.Woode, Grones, Forrests, & desarts And he sayth, li∣bro 17. that Saltus is high thicknesse of Tráes, and hath that name, for Trées spring and rise there in height. And Sal∣tus and Silua bée diuerse, for in a woode that is called Silua groweth many trees, and more short and more thicke, and neerer togethers, then in the wood that is called Saltus: And in the wood that is cal∣led Saltus, trées be more high and great. And so Silua is a thicke wood with short trées, and hath that name Silua, of Silen, that is a frée, for many Trees be there∣in hewen and felde and wasted. And Silua, Nemus, and Lucas bee all one: and be names of woods, but Sylua commeth of Silen, that is widenesse or wasting, or of Silence, for a woode that is called Silua, is where be wilde pla∣ces, wastes, and desartes, full of silence. And the Woode that is called Nemus, hath that name of Numen, that is God, for therein Ido made a mawmet, and foreshaped it in steede of God, and in woodes that be called Nemora Trees be great, and make shadowe with boughes and braunches. And the woode that is called Lucus is thicknesse of Trees, and letteth light to come to the grounde, and commeth per Antiphrasim, by con∣trary of Lucco, luces, to shine, and so Lu∣cus is to bee vnderstoode, as it were not shining, as Piscina is a poole or a water without Fish, as Isidore sayeth, libro 16. Then Saltus, Silua, and Nemus be wide places,Nemus. a groue or vvood, ser¦uing for pleasure. wast, and desolate, that ma∣ny Trees growe in without fruite, and also few hauing fruite. And those trees which be barren, and beare no manner fruit, be alway generally more and high∣er then that with fruit, few excepted, as Oke and Beech. In their woodes be ofte wilde beastes and foules, therein grow∣eth hearbes, grasse, lees, and pasture, and namely medicinable hearbes in woodes be founde. In Summer woods be beau∣tified with boughs and braunches, with hearbes and grasse. In woods is place of deceit and of hunting. For therein wilde beasts be hunted, and watches and de∣ceites be ordeined and set of hounds and of hunters. There is a place of hiding & of lurking: for oft in woods théeues be hid, and oft in their awayts and deceits, pas∣sing men commeth and be spoiled and robbed, and oft slains. And so for many and diuerse wayes & vncerteine, strange men oft erre and go out of the way, and take vncerteine way, and the waye that shal is vnknowen, before the way that is knowen: & come oft to the place there théeues lye in awaite, & not without pe∣rill. Therfore be oft knots made on trées and in bushes, in boughes and in braun∣ches of Trées, in token and marke of the high way, to shew the certeine and sure way, to waifaring men, but oft ye théeues in turning and méeting of waies, change such knottes and signes, and beguyle
many men, and bring them out of the right way, by false tokens and signes. Birds, foules, and Bées flye to the wood: Birdes to make neasts, and Bées to ga∣ther honnie, Birds to kéepe themselues from Fowlers, and Bées to hide them∣selues to make honnie combes priuely in hollow trées and stocks. Also woods for thicknesse of trées be cold with shadow. And in heat of the Sun wearye wayfa∣ring and trauailing men haue liking to haue rest, & to coole themselues in the sha∣dow. Many woodes bée marks & meares betwéene diuerse countries and lands, & departeth them asunder. And by weuing and casting together of trees, often men kéepe and defende themselues from eni∣myes. (Additiō.Saltus, as forrest, a lawne in a parke or forrest:a wood wherein Déere and other beasts do feed, & shadow themselues from Sunne). Of Salice. chap. 143. A Wilow trée is called Salix, and hath that name Salix for it groweth soone and spurteth vpwarde after yt it is pight and set in a place, as Isidore sayth, libro 17. And is a plyaunt trée and softe, and according to binding & rayling of vines, and vine braunches, as he sayeth. This Trée hath no fruite, but onely séede of flowres. And it is sayde, that the séede thereof is of this vertue,Hovv a man shal  ba∣ren dagh∣ters. that if a man drinke of it, he shall get no sonnes, but onely barren daughters Huc vsque Isi∣dore. lib. 17. Lib. 16. cap. 36. Plinius spea∣keth of the Wilow, and saith, that of wi∣lowes is diuerse kinde. For some bea∣reth long roddes and high,siers. and waxeth great, and thereof be pearches made and raises for vines. The rindes thereof be long and thicke, and strong, white with∣in, and gréene without. And thereof bée made bondes & hoopes. And though such Wilowes bée strong, yet they bee not so plyaunt as the lesse. And therefore they breake the sooner, when they be wouen and bended to make withye, and bonds, and so Wilows bee lesse and more smal and plyaunt then other, and passing ply∣aunt, and bée so pliaunt that they beare not, but they be made stronger with weauing and tourning, as thréed is with twining. And therewith men binde Wine pipes and Tunnes for Wine. And the thirde kinde of Wilowes is meane betwéene the two first, both in plyauntnesse and in quantitye. For it is more plyaunt then the more, and more stiffe then the lesse. And the boughes bée white when the rinde is away, and plaine & smooth to handling. And there∣of be made diuerse néedefull thinges to householde, as stooles, seates, paniers, and kippes. And is thicker in boughes and braunches, by plashing, shredding, and paring. And though euery Wilowe bée barren of fruite, yet neuerthelesse they beare well, and be not barren of boughs and braunches: and namelye if it bee shredde and pared in due time, as in March or in Aprill, as he sayth: and hée sayth the same, libro. 17. cap. 20. Among Trées that be set and planted, wilowes beare the price: and if they be cut two foote from the grounde, then they growe not n high, but spring and spread a∣broade, and so the maye eft soones bee shered and pared without a Ladder: and each Wilowe, the moe boughes and braunches it beareth, the neerer it is to the ground: and in passing of time when the wilow is right olde, then it falleth and rotteth some and some: and the cor∣ruption thereof beginneth within the pith, and there, oft the Wilowe abideth all voide and hollowe within, though it seeme greene and fayre without. Oft in the hollownesse thereof lyeth veni∣mous wormes, as Adders and Ser∣pents: and therefore if no safely to sleepe vnder the Wilow tree. Huc vsque Pli∣nius. And if the wilow trée be vnprofitable in fruit, yet it is full good and profitable in medicine, and is colde and drye, as it is sayde in Platearius, and hath vertue to stoppe and to binde, and to close and souder, and abate hot feauers, if the iuyce of the leaues thereof be dronke: and pou∣der of the rinde thereof burnt, helpeth a∣gainst ye bloudy flixe if it be takē in drink, and the same pouder healeth and closeth wounds with botches, and the same pou∣der
dronke, and layde in a plaister with∣out, doth away wartes, and the braun∣ches and leaues therof sprong with wa∣ter, cooleth the aire about fenorous men, and refresheth and comforteth them, and maketh them sléepe. Huc vs{que} Plat. Of Sambuca. cap. 144. THE Elder trée is called Sambucus, or Sambuca, and is a little softe trée, & thereof is a certeine symphonie made, that is called Tibia, and Sambuca also, as Isidore sayth libro. 12. or Tractatu de Musicis instrumentis, and is a trée with long boughes, and rounde and plaine, full sounde and sad without, and full hol∣lowe within, and full of certeine softe pith. And the leaues thereof be pleine, smooth, and fat, with heauy smell, and the flowers thereof be full white and small, with strong smell, and hath double rind. The vtter is browne redde, and the in∣ner is gréene. And that rinde is ful moist in déede. And the iuyce thereof accor∣deth to medicine, and beareth flowres and fruite twice in one yeare, and that fruit is black, with horrible smel and sa∣uour: and this is therefore vnprofitable to eate. And the elder tree is hotte and dry, and rindes, leaues, and flowres ther∣of accord to medicine, as it is sayde in Platearius, and hath vertue Diuretica, to temper and soften, to distribute and to drawe, and to purge fleams, and hel∣peth therefore against the Feance Cori∣diana, that commeth of fleme. The iuyce thereof by it selfe, or with honnie, slaieth long. Wormes in the wombe. The broth of the middle rinde within tempereth hardnesse of the liuer, and of the splene. And the same doth the leaues sodden in Oyle. And the barke and fruit therof sod∣den with Salt water, fordoeth swelling of feete, if the feete be baulmed therwith. The iuyce thereof helpeth against the dropsie, that commeth of colde, the broth of the leaues and of the fruits thereof sadde in strong Wine, helpeth agaynst Le, that commeth of fleame, if it bee used,  purgeth, wonderfullye flea∣matike humour and corrupt, call such mours fleamtike disposed to corruption. And wonderull it is to sée in Elder, for if the middle rinde of the stalke, or of the roote bee shauen vpwarde, then it purg∣eth vpwarde, and if it be shauen downe∣warde, it purgeth downewarde, as Pli∣nius, Dioscorides, and Platearius doe meane. (Additiō.The common elder is hot and dry in the third degrée, especially in the bark, the leaues and buddes, the tender crops or buddes sodden in broath: or Potage, doth open the belly, purgeth flegma and cholarike humours. There is also Marris Elder, called O∣ple or Dwarfe Plane trée, spoken of be∣fore. The gréene berryes of the common Elder tree, gathered néere the full of the Mone, and béeing dryed, beaten to Pou∣der, the quantity of halfe a quarter of an Ounce put into white or redish Wine, sixe sponefulls, dronke fasting, is a rare and speciall remedie to cure the stone Collicke, &c. He that taketh this medi∣cine, must walke halfe an houre after the receit, and kéepe good diet.) Of Saliunca, chap. 145. SAliunca is a lyttle hearbe with sharp prickes, as Vgucion sayeth, and hath that name of Saliendo, leaping. For it maketh them leap that treadeth ther∣on: and is called therefore Thauthe∣trape in French: For it taketh and hurteth the foote that treadeth thereon. And it séemeth that Virgil sayeth the same, and sayth, that Saliunca is among redde Roses. And héereby it seemeth an hearbe with a greate roote and a long, fat and softe, and full of meate: as the Parsneape, and is oft done in Elec∣tuaryes, and hath another name, and is called ringus, and thereof springeth cer∣teine harde stalkes with cornets, and in the toppes thereof growe certaine heads with sharpe prickes all about, as it were Speares. And groweth in dry barren lande and sandye, and some men call it Scorpio: for it stingeth him that toucheth the seed thereof, as it were a Scorpion. And libro. 20. capitu. 7. Plinius sayth,
that Saliunca is a lyttle short hearb with thicke boughes and leaues as they were thrusted together, and smell full well, nigh as Nardispica, and cleaueth to the ground by certaine small rootes, and gro∣weth in Pannonia in hard place and sto∣ny, and is a hot hearbe and dry, and sub∣till in substaunce, and right tempering and softening, the roote thereof sodde in Wine, stauncheth spuing, and comforteth well the stomacke, as Plinius sayth, libr. 21. cap. 10. Of Stacten. chap. 146. THE dropping of the Tree Mirra is called Stacten, and is the same that Mirra is, as the Glose sayth super Ge∣nesis, the dropping of the Trée Mirra 37. and is declined Haec stacte, haius stactes, and is founde Stacten indeclina∣ble. Isaac 3. where hée speaketh de odo∣ribus, speaketh thereof and sayth, Stac∣ten is Incensum that wooseth out of pressing, and is a Nowne of Greeke. Looke before De Mirra in littera M. Of Storace. chap. 147. STorax, as Isidore sayth, libro. 17. is a Trée of Arabia, and is like to a quince Tree. The braunches thereof wooseth out by dennes aboute the rising of the Starre Canicula. The dropping there∣of that falleth on the grounde, is not cleane, but if it bée kepte with the rinde of the same. And the dropping that clea∣ueth to the springs and sprayes is white and cleane: and is first made browne redde, by heate of the Sunne. And some manner kinde thereof is called Calami∣tes, and is fat and moyst, and full of Ro∣sen. And thereof commeth swéete ly∣cour, as it were honnye, with good smell and merrie, and is fastened together and hath the same name. For the Gréekes call a drop Stiman: and Stirax in Gréeke, is called Storax in Latine, as Isidore sayth. And the Glose super Eccle. ca. 23. sayth the same. Also Storax is the dropping of the Trée Stirax, and is right vertuous in medicine. For it is (as Dioscorides sai∣ Platearius) hotte and drye with glewie substaunce, and hath vertue to drawe. And heereof is thrée manner kindes: one is called Calamites, and is good, and the first that droppeth out of the Trée and wooseth: and the other is called Storax, and is redde, and commeth out and droppeth after the first, and is more pure. The third is Storax redde in colour, softe and fléeting, swéete in smell, sowrish in sauour, much and great in quantitye, and maye bée departed and made roughe with handeling and kne∣ding in the hande: and that that hath sweete sauour, is feyned: And what is feined, is knowen. For if it bée olde, it falleth to Pouder while it is iourned and wonde, and kneade in the hand, and falleth in péeces. And if it be freshe and newe, it waxeth soone moyst, and clea∣ueth not full fast to the hand, and hath more swéetnesse then it should, the softe and fleeting is not feined. Among these thrée manner kindes, Calamita is of much vertue, and com∣forteth wonderfully the braine. Fumo∣sitie thereof stauncheth all manner run∣ning of reme. And a plaister thereof made, cleanseth the gummes: and faste∣neth and strengthneth wagging of téeth, and commaundeth menstrual bloud, and helpeth well against coughing and hoars∣nesse: and good Storax is put in olls, and kepte against Nittes, whelkes, and pimples of the head, and agaynst manye other passions and euills. Huc vsque Dioscorides & Platearius. The fumo∣sitie of Storax purgeth the ayre that is corrupt, and driueth awaye all pesin∣tiall vapour and fumositie, as Isidore sayth. Additiō.(Storax, a swéete intense or Gum, whereof is made Stirax liquida, a strong smelling moysture.) Of Sicomoro. chap. 148. SIcomorus is a nice Figge Trée, lyke in leaues to the trée that is called Mo∣rus, and holdeth the lykenesse of a figge trée in other things, as the Maister say∣eth in Historie, libro. 27. Sicomorus and Morus be Nownes of Gréeke.
And Sicomorus hath that name, for it is lyke in leaues to the trée that is called Morus. And this trée is called Celsa a∣mong Latines: and is much higher and greater then the trée that is called Mo∣rus. Or else as other men meane, it hath ye names Sicomorus of Sile, that is a figge trée, and Morus, that is folly or nisenesse, as it were a foole, or a nice figge trée, as the Glose saith super Lu. 19. And Diosc. meaneth, that Sicomorus is a wild fig trée, and beareth certeine swéete fruite, that is neuer ripe at the full, as it fareth of the trée that is called Caprificus, as Plinius saith, lib. 15. cap. 19. The wilde figge trée ripeth neuer: but some men eate such fruit, and so Dioscorides sayth, that if the Sicomorus be beaten with a stone, it sweateth and woseth out dropping, as it were Gumme, and that is medici∣nable, for it sucketh venimous biting, if it be dronke, and abateth swelling of the splene, and doth away the ach of the sto∣macke. Additiō.(Sicomorus is a great trée, like to the Mulbery trée, the fruits lyke a wilde fig, the fruit groweth forth of the stocke; or braunch close by the maine woode. This tree groweth in Aegypt, and in Alkaire among the Turkes. Reade Matheolus, &c.) Of Spina. cap. 149. A Thorne is called Spina, and is a trée with sharpe prickes, and is as it were armed with prickes against wrongs of them that touch it, as Isid. saith. And by likenesse thereof the ridge bone is called Spina. For the ioynts of the bones in the ridge bone, be sharp as a thorne: and pro∣perly to speake, Spina, the thorne, is the pricke that groweth out of the thorne or of hearbs & trées with pricks, & the prick springeth out of the stocke or of the stalk, & is great next to the trée & stalk, & sharp outward at the point. Thou maist finde the cause therof before in the same booke, where it is treated of trées, and of dispo∣sition of trées in generall. There it is sayde, that it is not the intent of kind, that trees be sharpe with prickes and thornes: But it happeneth and commeth of vnfastnesse and vnsad∣nesse of the tree, by the which colde hu∣mour is drawen that is but lyttle odde. And is drawen and passeth by pores and hoales outwarde, and is hardned by heat of the Sunne, and made a thorne or a pricke, and is made small and sharpe at the ende for scarcitie of matter. And sometime is sharpe, and some deale ben∣ding, as it fareth in briers and rose trées, sometime the point is areared vpright, as it were in Dartes. Oft growing of thornes, is token of barren land vn∣tilled. And it is as it were a generall rule, that all shrubs and trees with ma∣ny thornes and prickes bee wounde and wreathed togethers, and compassed and succoured and defended each with other, and fight against them that they touch, and wounde theyr handes, and none of them hurteth other. And for thicknesse it letteth the comming of the Sun beames and of the dew of heauen, to things that be there vnder. And therefore that which is sowen nigh, or among thornes, thri∣ueth not commonlye. Often handes and feets be wounded with pricking of thornes, and the ach ceaseth not till the thorne be all taken out of the places that be hurt. And for sharpnesse and pricking vnneth thornes be feld or plucked out of the ground without hooke, Bill, Matock, or some other edged toole. And when they bee felde or rooted vp, they be bounde in Fagots and in heapes, and burnt in Ouens and in Furnases. Also among thornes often be flowers scene, and also much fruit, but thornes be not softned by softnesse of flowres, but when flowres and leaues fall, thornes a∣bide and be more harde. And for thornes be kindly dry, they be soone kindled in the fire, and giue a strong ley, and sparkleth and cracketh, & maketh much noise: and soone after they be brought all to naught, as the Glose saith super Eccle. 7. The Laughing of fooles, is as the cracking of thornes vnder a pot, and that is a vaine thing. Ecclesiastes. 2. But thornes be not vnprofitable, but they bee good and profitable to manye manner vses. For of thornes men make hedges and pauises, with which men de∣fend
and succour themselues and their owne. And thornes beareth manye good fruits, and defendeth the fruit. Looke be∣fore de Rubo in littera R. Of Lignis Sethim. chap. 150. CErtaine trées be called Ligna Si∣them, and such Trées haue many prickes, and bée light and rotteth not, and bée lyke to the white thorne, and bée called Acharitis in Gréeke, as it is sayde vpon Exodus. 25. There it is sayde, that Sethim is a name of an hill and of a Countrie, and of a trée, that is lyks to white thorne in leaues. And is a most lyghtest Trée, and rotteth not nor burneth: therefore it is sayd in Au∣rora. Ligna Sethim torpent nulla purtredi∣ne, iustos Signant in coelum qui sine fine ni∣tant. The trée of Sethim fayleth with no rotting, and betokeneth rightfull men in heauen, that shine without ende. And they bée called thornes of Sethim: for by might and vertue, and paines and tor∣ments men come to the Starres of God, as Dioscorides and Plinius meane. And the vertue therof stoppeth and bin∣deth, and stauncheth bloud. The leaues therof be rough and whitish, with thorns and prickes, and hath purple flowres and long braunches, of the greatnesse of a fin∣ger, and hath in the top of the bough smal beads with prickes and thornes, and full of rounde séede. And the séede dron∣ken, succoureth and helpeth rotted mem∣bers. (Additiō.Setim, a trée lyke a white thorne, which doth neuer rot, whereof was much of the timber in Salomons Tem∣ple.) Of Sentice. chap. 151. Heath.SEntix is a manner trée or an hearb with rough leaues, and fatte and cloue, as Eruca. And hath braunches of two cubites long, and hath that name Sentix of the place that it groweth in. For they growe among harde thinges, and be not tilled, as thornes doe, as Isi∣dore sayth. And hath heads as a rough Thistle, and the roote thereof is redde, long, and fat, and is medicinable, and hel∣peth sores of burning and of scalding, as Dioscorides sayth. And helpeth against inward stopping of veines. Of Sepe. chap. 152. AN Hedge is called Sepes, and Se∣pes is declined, Sepes, pis, and is a manner closing of briers, of thornes, and trées made. The soules and stalkes be pight in the grounde, and there about bée wreathed, wouen, and wounde thornes and roddes. And so houses and Corne be succoured and defended by strength of the hedge. And is declined haec Sepes, hu∣ius sepis. Thereof is mention made Ecc. 36. where no hedge is, possession is de∣stroyed. Also about hedges lurketh and dar∣keth venimous wormes, Frogges, Ser∣pents, and Adders: And so of this Noune Sepes, commeth this Noune Seps, and is a name of a venimous Adder, that is so venimous, that the venimme destroyeth not onely the bodye, but also it wasteth and destroyeth the boanes: and so sayth Lucanus. And meaneth, that this Adder destroyeth bodye and boanes, &c. And therefore it is perillous to sleepe vnder hedges, for dreade of venimous beasts, that lurke there. Hedges stand in great heate, and fayle soone except they be re∣newed, and while they kéepe and saue other things, they stande in the heate of the Sunne, and bée wasted themselues some and some: and at the last they bée rotted with drynesse, and burnt in the fire. Of Sepes, an hedge, or of this verbe Sepio, Sepis, that is to vnderstand close, commeth this Noune Septum, that is a place closed about. It is sayde, Intra septum templi, that is to vnderstande, within the closing or the clausure of the Temple. Of Sude. chap. 153.
SVdes, sudis, is an heisaule or a stake sharped at the end, and this Noune Sudes commeth of Suo, is, to sow. For an hedge séemeth as i were sowen with such soules and stakes, for such soules and stakes be cleaned or they be pight in the ground: and the faster they bee pight in the ground & more stronglye wouen and wound with rods, the more strong is the hedge. And Sudes is feminine gender, & declined haec Sudes, huius sudis, as Hu∣go sayth, and Ouidius Methamor. dicit. Que coniuncta est humeris ceruix su∣de figitur combusta, &c. Of Siliqua. chap. 154. A Codde and an huske is called Sili∣qua, and is a void thing of Codware, as it were Balthis, or a bladder blowen, and chargeth more then it feedeth and nourisheth, as the Glose saith super Lu. 15. and Hugo sayth, that Siliqua is the codde of all manner codware and purg∣ing, with the which Swine be sed. And Isidore saith, lib. 17. that Silique that is shortned among Latines, and is called Siliquam, had such a name among the Gréekes, for it is a trée, & the fruit therof is swéete, and a trée is called Xilon a∣mong them, and swéete is called Liquon among them. And to this sentence accor∣deth Plinius, lib. 9. cap. 24. There he sai∣eth, that fruit of Siliqua is swéete, and a finger long, and an inch broade, and the skinne thereof is eaten. And sayth there, libro. 13. cap. 9. that some men saide, that it is a figge of Aegypt, but that is open errour, for it groweth not in Aegipt, but in Syria. Of Sinape. chap. 155. Mustarde seede, or Mustart seede.SEnule is called Sinapis, and hath that name of Syn, and Napus a Nepe, for it is like to a Nepe in leaues, as Isi. sayth li. 17. And li. 20 cap. 24. Plinius speaketh of Senuey & saith, yt among hearbes that Pythagoras praiseth, it is sayde, that hee gaue to Senuey the first & chiefe praising, and sayth, that among hearbes Senuye beareth the price: And it is hot and drye in the fourth degrée, and wasteth and pur∣geth thicke humours and gleamie. And healeth smiting of serpents and of Scor∣pions, and ouercommeth venime of the Scorpions, and abateth tooth ach, and pas∣seth to the braine, and comforteth it won∣derfully, and breaketh the stone, & com∣maundeth menstruall bloud, and exciteth appetite, and helpeth them that haue the falling euill, and healeth the dropsie, and helpeth them that haue Litargie, the slee∣ping euill, and helpeth them full great∣ly: and cleanseth the haire, and letteth the falling thereof: and doth away tink∣ling and ringing of the eare, and wi∣peth away dimnesse of eyen, and smooth∣eth roughnesse of the lippes, and helpeth Paralitik men: for it openeth the pores, and tempereth and consumeth and wast∣eth the humour that laxeth and smiteth sinewes togethers, and taketh awaie the palsie. Plinius rehearseth the praising and many other, and saith, that the most ver∣tue thereof is in the seed and the seede is lesse in quantitie, and most in might and in vertue: For the séede heateth and ope∣neth, consumeth and wasteth and multi∣plieth it selfe. Of one little graine com∣meth a right great plant, and springeth and spreadeth greatly in branches, flow∣ers, and seed. The seed thereof groweth in certaine small cods, euenlong and round, and is kept by defense of those cods vn∣till they be ripe. The flowres thereof be full yeolow, with good smell. And though all the hearbe in substance be kene & fer∣uent, yet Bees loue best the flowers, and haunt them as Plinius sayth. Neuerthe∣lesse Bees touch neuer flowers of Oliue. And Plinius sayth, li. 20. ca. 12. that senuie multiplieth so it selfe, that where it is once sowen, vnneth the place may be de∣liuered thereof. And there it falleth once, it waxeth greene, and springeth anone, as be sayth. lib. 19. cap. 9. (Additiō.Senuie brused and ground with vi∣neger, is a wholesome sauce, meete to be eaten, with hard and grose meates, either flesh or fish, it helpeth digestion, & is good for the stomack, to warme the same, and to prouoke appetite.)
Of Semine. cap. 156. SEede is called Semen, and is sow∣en in fieldes to bring forth fruite, though the seminall humour of beastes is called Semen by a manner appropria∣tion, as Isidore sayeth: and Sementes is the séede of corne, when it is sowing time, and was called of manye men the Goddesse or the Lady of sowing: And Seminarium is the beginning of euerye thing, or a vessell that séede is put in for to sowe: But Sementum is profite and winning that commeth of the seede, as Hugo sayth. Héereof bée vearses dif∣ference in Grecismo, that meane that seminall humour of beasts is called Se∣men, and grains of corne that bée sowen in the fielde is called Sementis proper∣ly, and Sementinum. And Seminum is the well and beginning of things. And as Plinius libro. 8. and 24. cap. sayeth. Séede is good kepte one yeare, or two, or thrée: and is little woorth that is kepte longer time: and the grain that is lowest in the threshing floure is best is séed, & is best séed, for it is heauyest: & that is best, that is most heauie, and most white within. And by qualytie of the land, séede shall be sowen thicke or thinne, soone or late, for it must be sowen soone in moyst lande, least the séede rosteth with raine: and late in drye lande, that raine come soone thereafter, least the séede lye long drye, and vanish, and bée lost. And lesse séede shall bée sowen in fat land, and most in leane land. For in fat land it groweth full fast, and destroyed it selfe: and one séede ouersetteth another at the last by greate multiplication of it selfe. And séede that is sowen soone, shall waxe thic∣ker then the séede that is late sowen. For late séede shall be thinne, least it dry for thicknesse: and it is cunning to sow euen lyke thicke. For the hand shall ac∣corde with the stepping, and passe away foorth with the right foote: and séede shall not bée chaunged out of colde place into hot, neither againewarde. For no∣thing shall bée commanded into the con∣trary. Of séede sowen in leane land com∣meth thin strawe and small eares, som∣time voide: and in fat fields, of one roote of séed commeth a cluster of stalks: and in Haruest, when the day and the night bee lyke long, the time is contrarye to séede time, and also in springing time. And men shall not sow in full hoare frost: and that is sooth: for the winter séede is sowen before the hoare frost, and breaketh and springeth the seauenth day. But after the frost, vneth it springeth within 40. daies, Huc vsque Plinius. ca. 20. Then seede is small graine and rounde, and hath in it selfe vertue to multiply and to saue kinde therof: And when it is sowen, it swelleth by humour of the earth closed within, yt tempereth & maketh subtill the humour and the earth all about. And bringeth it & draweth it to temperatnesse of ye grains: and so the graine waxeth soft and great: and so the small skin of the séed cleaueth and the burgening springeth out lyttle and lyttle: the rootes be pight down∣ward in the ground by the which rootes the burgening séede draweth awaye to it selfe féeding and nourishing, and ope∣neth at the last priuelye the earth: and thereof springeth stalkes, twigges, flow∣ers, fruit, and séede. And though the séede yt is sowen, be right little: yet therof com∣meth a right great thing and an huge. Fooles account séede lost when it is sow∣en: neuerthelesse in better wise it is not kept then by sowing. Also in the séede is the vertue seminall, and kinde heat wor∣keth therein. And humour of nourish∣ing and of féeding is drawne thereto by vertue of heate. To féeding and growing of the séed commeth the stalks, and of the stalke commeth the eare that is called Spica, and hath that name of Spiculo, a dart or an eile, as Isidore sayeth, libro 17. For in the eares groweth many eiles that be sharpe as dartes. Kinde maketh eyles in the corne eares, to be succour and armour against sodeine réeses & bi∣ting of small birds and wormes, as Isi∣dore sayth. After diuerse kindes of séeds the eare is diuerse in figure and shape. For sometime the eare is broad, as it fa∣reth in Barlye, & sometime foure edged, as it fareth in Wheate, and is sometime round, as Plinius sayeth and Aristotle also.
Also the eare is in the toppe of the stalke compassed all about with small skinnes and bulls, and therein the séede is nouri∣shed as it were in the mother, and kept and saued vntil it be ripe: and such hulls springing out first with the graine bée closed, and cleaueth afterward some and some, and the graine swelleth and wat∣eth great, and namely in wheat, as it is sayd super libro. Aristotelis de plantis. And generally in the beginning by wor∣king and rearing of heate, the heads of corne eares be areared vpward, but whē it ripeth, then it bēdeth somwhat down∣warde by heauynesse and weight of the graines. And while eares bee greene, they bée sometime sprong and corrupte with corrupt aire and dewe, and taketh as it were rust thereof: and ripeth the better, if they be sprong with couenable dewe and raine, and haue dewe heat of heauen. And moysture of dew suffereth not the graines to fall out of the hulls, as Plinius sayth, libr. 17. And Constan∣tine, Isaac, and Albuma. meane the same. By goodnesse of the land the goodnesse of the eare is knowen: for in good and fat ground groweth good eare in great quan∣titie, and fruitfull of graines, and in dry lande and leane againeward, as Plinius sayth. Of Stipula. cap. 157. STubble is called Stipula, & hath that name of burning, as it is were a thing burnt, for when the corne is ripe and ga∣thered, the stubble is burnt, that the field may be eared, as Isid. saith, li. 17. Or else it hath that name, as Hugo saith, of Sti∣po, as to beset and compasse. And Stipu∣la is properly that strawe with leaues & hofen, that is left in the fielde after that repers haue reped the corne with hooks, and gathered it home. And many men gather this stubble, that is apt to many diuers vses: for some men thetch houses therewith, and some fée∣deth beasts therewith in stéed of strawe and sodder. And some maketh fire ther∣with and baketh bread therewith, and séeth meate, as Plinius sayth, libro. 18. cap. 30. Looke before in Palea, in littera P. Stubble is a little thing, hollowe and drye, and is full soone sette on fire, and with tlowing of winde, as hée say∣eth. Of Simila. chap. 158. THe flowre of wheat meale is called Simila, & is chiefe meale of wheate, most cleane, delicate, & liking. Thereof is bread made for noble men of renowne, & that bread is properly called Similago.Māchuet. & is the flowre of most smallest meale, most cleane, & most white & soft: and ac∣cordeth to many meates, & also to medi∣cines. Looke before de fauna in littera F. & de polenta in littera P. Of Scopa. chap. 159. SCopa is a trée,Bsomes & broomes. and hath that name of Scopando; spewing, that commeth of Scopis or Scopo, pas, and is to vnder∣stand, cleanse or purge for therwith hou∣ses he swept and cleansed, as Isid. sayth, lib. 17. And many call to tree Birch, & hath light leaues, as the pe.By this name Sco¦pa, of such a re the late Writers make no mention. For the leaues therof bée full thin and full light, and moueth and quaketh with a right soft blast of winde. And hath manye hard twigs and braunches with knots, and therewith often children be chasti∣sed and beaten on the bare buttocks & loines. And of the boughs and branches therof be besomes made to swéep and to clanse houses of dust, and of other vn∣cleannesse: and beareth séed that is void, as it were like huskes or voide coddes, and wilde men of woods and Forrestes vseth that séede in steade of bread. And this trée hath much sowre inye, & some∣what biting. And men vse therefore in springing time and haruest to stirte the rindes, and to gather the humoure that commeth out thereof, & drinke it in steed of Wine. And such drinke quencheth thirst, and bréedeth much swelling, as he telleth, but it nourisheth not, nor ma∣keth men dronke. Also ye same iuyce kept long in a vessell vnder-dung, and chafed with the heate of the Sun, corrupteth & rotteth, & turneth into fatnesse, & so it is made an ointment, & by séething of fire many mē draw out therof as it wer pitch
And though it be right blacke and stink∣ing, yet it is néedfull to many diuers v∣ses. Therefore wilde wood men, in desert vse the seede thereof, and the iuyce in steed of corne and of wine, and of Olyue, as Plinius saith libro 15. treating of iuyce of trées. (Additiō.In the booke tituled the Kalender of miles, there is in Macedonia, a nota∣ble Citie, in the which thrée sorts of peo∣ple inhabit, which at this day is called Scopia, three dayes iournie from Thes∣salonica, Turkes, Iewes, & Christians: the greatest companies, are Turkes. This Citie standeth not farre from the mount Olympus, &c. Muntles in lib. 4. folio. 931.) Of Stupa. cap. 160. HArdes is called Stupa, & is the clen∣sing of hempe or of flexe, and men in olde time called it Supa, as it were stopping or porring: for therewith chins and cliftes of ships be stopped and por∣red. Therefore they that aray it to that craft, and make it ready thereto, be cal∣led Stipulateres, as Isido. sayth libr. 20. Vbi agit de lanis.Strippers of hempe For with much bra∣king, heckling and rubbing, Hardes, be departed from the substance of hempe & of flexe, and is great when it is depart∣ed, and more knottie short and rough, & is therefore not full able to be spun for threed thereof to be made: neuerthelesse thereof is thréed spun, that is full great, vneuen and full of knovbes, and thereof be made bondes and bindings, and mat∣ches for candles, for it is full drie, and taketh soone fire and burneth, and so when it is kindled, it falleth sodainly in∣to ashes, and thereof commeth when it is quenched, bitter smoake, that grieueth both the eyen and the nose, and is good & profitable to medicine, when it is well wrought and purged of stalkes, and is good to dry and to heale woundes, and to ease burning and scalding, and to abate swelling of eyen, as Plinius sayeth, lib. 20. cap. 10. ¶Of Taxu. cap. 161. AN Ewe trée is called Taxus, and is a tree with venime and poyson, and is a strong tree and an high, with great boughes piyant and long; of the which the Parthes make bowes, as Isid. saith li. 17. The Doet speaketh thereof & say∣eth that such trees are burnt, and bowes made thereof. The shadowe thereof is grieuous, and slayeth such as sleepe ther∣vnder. The iuyce thereof is too laxa∣tiue, the substaunce thereof kéepeth the euill that is called Ignis Grecus, that it shall not quench, as Dioscorides affir∣meth and sayth. (Additiō.The Yew trée is a fast wood, wher of, because of the toughnesse, bowes are made for Archers, Ewe or Yew, is al∣together venemous, and against mans nature. The birdes that eate the redde berryes, eyther dye, or cast-theyr fe∣thers.) ¶ Of Tabula. ca. 162. A Boord is called Tabula, and hath the name of Teneo, to holde: and Ta∣bula is in one signification a meat boord, and namely of rich men, as it wer Te∣nebula, bolding morsells, for they holde morsells and vessell, that be set there vp∣on: and is areared and set vpon féete, and compassed with a lyst about. And in another manner. Tabula is a plaieng boord, that men play on at the Dice, and other games: & this maner of Table is double, and arayed with diuers colours. In the third manner it is a thin planke and plaine, and therein be letters writ with colours, and sometime small shin∣gles be plained, and made some deale holow in either side, and be craftely ioy∣ned togethers, and filled full of waxe, blacke, greene or red, to write therein. And such tables be called Tabulae, for they hold letters that are writen therin. And the more plaine ye trée is that they be made of, and the more hard & smooth, the better the Tables be. In another manner, this name Ta∣bula commeth of Tegendo, as it wer a heling or a couering, and is a long shin∣gle and broad, cloue with an axe or with
a sawe, and such a boorde is néedefull to couering of houses, for of such boords be tables made, and other buildings crafte∣ly arayed, and be disposed, sometime in fighting, with many manner crafte and wonderfull,Ingines. and that after many maner casting, hewing, denting, and plaining: that such tables and boords may be euen and well ioyned. Boords and tables gar∣nish houses, neuerthelesse when they bée set in soler flores,Planckes. they serue all men & beasts that be therein, and be troden of all men and beasts that come therein, & haue gyests or beames lyke farre asun∣der, and be fastened thereto, and defend∣ed therewith, that they bende not nor crooke too soone, when they be ouerset & pressed with stones and other heauye things laid on them. Then they be dres∣sed, hewed and plained, and made coue∣nable to vse of the ships, of bridges, of bulks, and coffers, and many other néed∣full things of buylding. Also in shippes mariners flye to a boord, and be ofte sa∣ued in perill. ¶Of Trabe. cap. 163. A Beame and also a gyest is called Trabes, and is a trée that stretcheth thwart ouer an house, and toucheth the walls in either ende, and holdeth them vp, that they fall not for great highnes, neither for leuieng, and is declined haec Trabs vel Trabes, and hath that name of Traho, that is to drawe or to reach, for they reach from one wal to another, and are ioyned and sticked therein, as Hugo saith. And it néedeth that a gyest & a beame be long, strong, and great, and namely in the middle, lest they bend & were croo∣ked, if that they be too small in the mid∣dle, and so for dread of bending and of crooking, ofte it néedeth to vnderset them with posts or pillers, for such a thwarte ouer trée, set in that wise, néedeth to bée vnderset for succour, that they maye bée the better held vp, & beare heauy things that be laid therevpon. ¶Of Terebinto. chap. 164. TErebinthus (as Isid. saith li. 17.) is a trée that sweateth Rosin, and is better than all the other, and the Rosin thereof is called Terebintina, & is right medicinable: for as Dios. saith ye leaues thereof, fruite, rindes and séede be sow∣rish, and they are gathered as busilye as the ashes thereof, and be contrary to ve∣nemous biting. The good Rosin thereof is cleane and bright, and cléere, with good sauor and red colour, and hath ver∣tue to temper and moyst, to laxe and is ripe, and in therefore good against hard postumes and other gatherings, that bée in the head, and in the members. And Plin. lib. 14. cap. 7. speaketh of this trée Terebintus, and saith, that in Siria is Terebintus, and thereof is double kind, as the male, and that is without fruite: and female, and that is double: That one hath red fruite of the greatnesse of a Fetche, and that other hath pale fruite of the greatnesse of a beane, & the fruite hath a merry smell, and is fat in hand∣ling and touching, and with much Ro∣sin, and is in Siria a great trée, and the matter thereof is right soft and durable. And when they wexe blacke and shine for age, then the leaues be thicke, & haue some manner cods, and therof commeth certaine beastes as it were Gnats, that gnawe and pearceth the rindes, and so when the rinde is pearced, thereof wo∣seth and springeth drops of Rosin. Also lib. 24. cap. 6. Plinius saith, that the roote of this trée Terebintus and leaues sod∣den in wine, comforteth the stomacke, & helpeth against head ache. Terebintina, the smelleth best, pleseth, both of Siria, and of Cipresse, that is pure, bright, and whitish, with a manner of rednesse and thicke: and that that groweth in Mountaynes, pourgeth and healeth woundes better then that that groweth in fieldes. (Additiō.The Turpentine trée groweth in Syria, especially about Damascus. The fruite is hotte and drye, prouo∣keth vryne, and stirreth vp fleshlye lust, &c.)
¶Of Thina. cap. 165. THina be certain trées most precious, as it were Hebenus, and thereof Sa∣lomon made steires and gréeces & posts in the house of our Lord, and so sayeth the Glose 4. Reg. ca. 10. vpon that place, a woman brought out of Ophir, vel E∣phir, timber of the trées Thina. And these trées Thina rot not, and also they haue prickes as a white thorne, and are round and white, and full cléere as a glasse, or as the nayle of the hand, & so therein be images séene, as it were in the naile, and these trées burne not in fire, nor soften in water, as the trée Si∣thim doth not. And many men suppose, that the trées Sithim and Thina, be one manner trée. ¶Of Tirso. cap. 166. THe middle stalke of an hearbe or of a trée is called Tirsus, and hath that name, for it riseth out of the earth, and springeth vpward, as Papias saith. And is the ouermost part of a plant, tender, most gréene, and most softe and fayre, & most farre from the earth, and nexte is heauen, most sprong with the deaw of heauen, and is most full of leaues, & ten∣der boughes and braunches: for in the stalkes is most vertue of hearbes. ¶Of Tignis. cap. 167. ROofe of trées is called Tigna, & are trees areared and stretched from the walls vp to the top of the house, & beare vp the couering thereof, and stand wide beneath, and come togethers vpwards, & so they nigh néerer and néerer, and are ioyned either to other in the top of the house, & haue that name Tigna of Te∣gendo, healing, or of Tegula, slate, or shingle,Rasiers. or laths, for it holdeth vp heling slate, shingles, & laths: the lath is long & somwhat broad, and plaine and thin, and is nayled thwart ouer to the rafters, and thereon hang slates, tile and shingles. The rafters be strong and square and hewen plaine, and be strong and great toward the walls, and smaller and lesse strong vpward toward the top, and bée charged without with slate and tile, or straw & thatch, and be made faire with∣in with faire gyests and boords, and are fast ioyned therein, and be called Laque∣aria, that be boords ioyned to the rafters to make faire houses & chambers with in, and be that arayeth the roofe with rafters, is called Tignarius, as Papias sayeth. ¶Of Tritico. cap. 168. Wheate is called Triticum, and hath that name of Tritura, threshing or treading: for it is threshed or trodde to haue the most pure in ye barnes or gar∣ners. Or it hath that name, for ye graine therof is ground or stamped and brused that it may be able to be eaten, as Isid. saith libr. 17. And of wheate is double kinde, one manner kind is red without, and sharpe at either ende, clouen in the side, and is most white within, and hea∣uie in waight, & that manner of wheats is best, as Plinius saith. The other manner wheate is yeo∣low without, and cléere and white with∣in, and is light and not easely broken. Of generall properties of wheate, looke before in litera F. de Frumento. Isaac teacheth and sheweth in Dietis, that wheate is diuers by diuersity of ground and soyle, that it is sowen and groweth in: for in such land that is fat and wel dounged, groweth fat ranke wheate and heauie of weight, and also more nutri∣tiue and nourishing, than is the wheate that groweth in leane land and also dry. And so the goodnesse of wheate is kno∣wen by goodnesse of the ground and land that it groweth in, and againward. Also wheate taketh diuersitie of diuersitie of tune, for wheate that groweth in mode∣rate time, is perfect in qualytie & quan∣titie, and is full of meale and of doure, with right little bran, and nourisheth at the best: and wheate that springeth in immoderate and vneasie weather and time, is vnperfect. Also wheat is diuers, for some is old and some is new, & some is in ye meane: for when it is olde and kept long time,
it is too drye and hard so defye, & nouri∣sheth but little, and then the substaunci∣all moysture thereof is soone fordried & abateth by heate of aire, and new wheat that is kept but a little time, for super∣fluitie of moysture and of gleimie earth, is moist and gleimy, fast and hard to de∣fie, and bréedeth swelling and ventositie, and hurling and kurling in the wombe, and wheate that is meane betwéene the new and the olde, betwéene too moyst & drye is temperate, and is therefore the better, and nourisheth the more, for when the accidentall moysture is wasted heat of the ayre tempereth somewhat ye sub∣staunciall moysture. And therefore such wheate is the better, and nourisheth the better, and is well digested, & leeseth glei∣minesse and thicknesse of earth, and as Isaac saith, wheate is hot and temperate betwéene moyst and dry, but bread ther∣of is the more hot, because of heat of the fire and of baking, for the kinde heate thereof is strengthened by accidentall heate of the fire. Also wheate hath this propertie, that it nourisheth better than all other greines, and that because of likenesse of mans complection, as he sai∣eth. Also wheate by drinesse cleanseth and wasteth, and therefore iuyce of the meale therof, cleanseth and pourgeth the breast and the lunges, and so doth Tisa∣num made of wheate, as Tisanum made or barly, for it clenseth more than Tisa∣num made of barly, and helpeth against the cough and the bloudye flixe. Also wheate sodde with Oyle, and laide vpon an hard postume dissolueth it. Also wheate soo with iuyce of rue, and dissol∣ueth and softneth running and kurding of milke, if the breast and teafes he bal∣med therewith. Also wheate tempered with the iuyce of Henbane, and layed to the sinewes, letteth euill humours, that they shal not fall downward. Also grems of wheate chewed, helpeth against the biting of a wood hound, for it draweth out the venime, as he saith. Also of wheat is made oyle that hel∣peth in manie things, and namely in it∣ching and in seads wet and drye, and shingles, if it be welt froted with a rough cloath: and that is done, for the vertue of Oyle shoulde the better enter. Also bran of wheate, dryeth and clean∣seth more than doth the meale thereof: but the bran norisheth little or els right nought. Also as he sayth, wheate fresh and new nourisheth but little, and brée∣deth sleame and swelling when it is ea∣ten rawe, and also ache in the sides, hur∣lying and curlyng, and is soone rotted, & therefore often long wormes and other wormes in the wombe be gendered of such meate: and wheate rosted nouri∣sheth more, and bréedeth lesse ventosity, and stoppeth soone, and bindeth, and is most grieuous, and bréedeth swellyng and gleimie humour, when it is sod in water. Huc vsque Isaac. in Dietis. ¶Of Tisana. cap. 169. TIsana, as the Glose saieth super 2. Reg. 1. is barley dried, stamped in a morter and shaled, and thereof is made that, that accordeth to them that bée toothlesse. Also of Tisanis such barley is drinke made that is good to them yt haue the feuers and other hot euills. Look be∣fore De Ordeo in litera O. It abateth and changeth heat, and quencheth thirst, and declyned Haec Tisana, huius Ti∣sanae, and the middle sillable is long: & thereof Alexander Nequam speaketh, and sayth in this manner. Cortice nudato, Tisanas Ordea dicas. His meaning is that Tisana is cal∣led Barley shaled, and thereof is made a drinke called Tisanum, as Isaac saieth in Dietis. ¶Of Tribulo. cap. 170. A Brier is called Tribulus, and is a shrub with pricks, is more softe than a tree, and more hard than a hearb: and thereof is double kinde, the more that groweth by hedges, as Plin. saith libro 21. cap. 16. The brier is an hard-thing, that gro∣weth about closing of townes, & spring∣eth vpward on high, but when it lacketh strength to stretche vpwarde, then it bendeth downewarde to the grounde,
and hath many téeth, and sharpe pricks, and euery braunch thereof from ye crop to the roote is full, and succoured with sharpe prickes. The other manner brier is lesse, & groweth in moores and in fieldes, and is lesse in length and in greatnesse, than is the more brier, and hath smal leaues and round stalkes tender and red, spredde by the ground all full of sharpe pricks, and beareth white blossomes, and the fruite thereof is first gréene, and afterward red and blacke at the last. Serpents, Adders and toades loue this fruite, and there∣fore it is not good for men to eate such fruite, and who that will eate thereof, shall chuse that fruit, that is most high from the ground, und is not too ripe, but whole and sound, and not touched ney∣ther bitten nor gnawen with flyes, nor with other wormes. The brier that groweth in fielde, as Plinius saith, is enimie to ploughes and to fruite, and is quicke and sharpe, and multiplieth it selfe swiftly, and may vn∣neth be destroyed in fields yt they growe in, and therefore it destroyeth and ouer∣setteth corne, and hurteth sore féete, legs, and hands of them that passe thereby, & touch it, and maketh oft foote men stum∣ble and fall, and renteth mens cloathes, and gathereth off wooll from shéepe that goe in leese thereby: and therefore this nowne Tribulus commeth of Tribu∣lando, grieuing and working woe: for it grieueth them that commeth ther nigh aud doth them much woe. ¶Of Thimo. cap. 171. THimus, is an hearbe with good sa∣vour, & Virgil speaketh so thereof, & sayth, that sweete donie sauoureth of it. The floure thereof is called Epithium, and is a medicinable floure, and clean∣seth and purgeth melancholy and fleme, and helpeth therefore against the sicke∣nesse called the uartane, and against diuers and manye other melancholicke euills, and grieuous passions. (Additiō.Thimum Creticum, Thimum du∣riue. Time of Candie, & common time. It is hot and drye in the third degrée, a medicinable hearbe. ¶Of Thimiamate. cap. 172. THimiama is a certaine confection most preciously ordained and made of Onice and of Seacten, of Galbanus, and of Thus, as it is sayd, Exod. cap. 30. And hath that name Thimiama of a good smelling hearbe that is called Thi∣mus, for it smelleth swéetly as Thimus doth, as Isidore saith libro. 4. where he treateth of odours and smells, and such confections should not be made to mans vse: for our Lord bad and commaun∣ded that such confection should be offe∣red in the Temple, vpon the Altar of Thimiama. (Additiō.Thimiama, a swéete perfume, or odi∣serous sauour made of hearbes.) ¶Of Thure. cap. 173. THus Frankencense, is the name of a trée, called Abies Firre, and of the gum that woseth and commeth out ther of. Isidore lib. 17. speaketh thereof and sayth, that this is a trée of Arabia, and is great with many boughes, and with the most lyghtest rinde, to the quantitis of the trée Acer, and thereof commeth iuyce with good smell, and is white as Almonds, and is fat when it is tempred and softened, and burneth soone when it is set on fire, & is among vs called Mas∣culus, for it is round shapen as the gen∣dering stones. And the other is plaine & full scabbed, and not so good as the smal, & fained by medling therewith of white Resine or of gum. But it is spyed and knowen, by his owne qualytie: For Thus burneth in the fire, and Resine smoaketh, and Gamme made not mel∣teth. The trée that sweateth and woseth Thus, is called Libanus, and the gumme thereof is called Olibanum among phi∣sitions, and hath name of a mount of Arabia. But the gum that droppeth of the trée that is called Libanus, is called Olibanum, and also Libanus (as Isido. saith) and the Glose super. Eccl. 24. vpon
that place Ego quasi Libanus non inci∣sus. And some men meane that Liba∣nus  Arabia, like to the Lau∣reit tree in leaues, and beareth fruite twice in one yeare in springing time, & in harvest▪ And the gum that droppeth thereof by itselfe in the beginning of Summer is the better: the which, in Summer when the rinde is slit is com∣pelled to come out some and some. What droppeth in haruest, is not so white nor so pure: but that that first cleaueth to boughes and twigs▪ That Thus is best that is white fast and sounde, and euen¦long as the gendring stones; and is cal∣led therefore Masculinum. And Thus that commeth out in haruest, or in the beginning of winter, when the rinds be slit, is not like to the other in vertue, nor in colour for that is white & cleere and bright, and full cléere, with full good smell: and the secondary I had is thin and scabbed, as Isido saith before. The Countrey where Thus groweth, is fast of mountaines and hard to come to for high rockes and crags, as the Glose sai∣eth super Eccle. And Plin. saith all this lib. 15. cap. 10. There he saith, that in A∣rabia is a countrey, and Thus groweth therein, Saba is a Prouiuce of the same countrey that beareth most plentye of Thus, and is a lande that vnneth men may come to, for it is closed in the one side with rockes of the sea and in the other side with mountaines and crags & and so the tree that beareth Thus gro∣weth with out tilling, and loueth claye lande. And the Arabians tell that. Thus shall not be gathered, nor the tree therof pared,The Ara∣biās vsed  ceremony beeing Macho∣milles & no papists. but of holy men & religious, that be not defiled by touching of women, in time of gathering: and so they suppose; that méede shall increase by obseruaunce of religion. Also he saieth there cap. 16. that the first kinde Haruest and gather∣ing thereof as about the rising of the starre Canis, in the most strong heate. For then the rinde thereof is right thin and slaketh and out thereof woseth fat fome, and is gathered togethers, and hardeneth where the kinde of the place asketh: and this is most pure and white. And the second gathering thereof is when it draweth to winter, when the rende be slit, and this commeth out red, and is not pure to the first. Men déeme that the gumme of the young trée is most white, but the gum of an olde trée is most vertuous: And some déeme, that the best gum groweth in Ilandes, and other donie and say, that no ginuine groweth in Ilands, Thus is gathered and brought on Camels backs, to the Citie that is called Sabocriam, & there is a gate opened therefore. And if is not lawful to lead it by another way, and there it is fyed to the God that they worship. There the Priests take there∣of by measure and not by weight; and it is not lawfull to begge neither to sell thereof before due portion be offered to God  and is assayed by witnesse if it burrieth anon to coales, and wexeth on light on high, if it how not togethers the téeth when it is bitten, but breaketh a∣ and falleth to pouder. Huc vsque Plenius. And Diosco and Platearius meane, that. thus is the gum of a certaine tree in Alexandria, and the best & most pure is called Olibanum Alexandrinum. And the other is found beside Damas∣cus, and is not so good nor so pure as the first, and is hot and dry with wel smel∣lyng ight fat and gleymie; and comfor∣teth by good smell thereof, and soudreth, b, and gleweth, and restrayneth & stinteth mightely by vertue of gummi∣nesse feares and ranning humours, that runne downward from the head, and namely when they runne by the vtter veynes of the face, and namely if pow∣der thereof be layd in a plaister to the temples with white wine and the white of an egge, and abateth also and staun∣cheth tooth ache of the gumers. And Thus chewed letteth the running of hu∣moures from the head to the spirituall members, that be the breast and lungs, and helpeth against feéble digestion, and sower bolking. And Wine in which Thus is sodden, helpeth, and com∣forteth, and cleanseth the Mother: and the smoake thereof helpeth greatlye to conception.
Powder thereof medled with vineger, lesseth and thinneth foule breastes of maydens, and helpeth brusing meddeled with pitch, and abaseth ache of the eares medled with wine. Huc vsque Diosco. and Plate. This nowne Thus commeth of Theos, yt is God, for it is offered in sacrifice of Gods. And in this manner it is written, as Isidore saith. Or els it commeth of Tundo, heating or brusing, for it is able to be stamped, and is ofte stamped: and the more it is stamped, the more and the better it sauoureth & burneth. And giueth lyght in the Sum∣mer, and is then writ without H. Tus. Of Thus set a fire, commeth a good smel∣ling smoake, shapen as a rod, and small beneath, and full mouable, and turning, and crooked with manye bendings and wrinklyngs, and moueth towarde con∣trary sides with most lyght mouing, & spreadeth abroad vpward, and shaddow∣eth the aire, and destroyeth stench of ca∣rayne by good sauour, thereof, and thyr∣leth and passeth straight to the braine, and comforteth and refresheth the spirit of féeling, and spreadeth into the cells of the braine. ¶Of Vimine. cap. 174. Osiers the smallPErsh is called Vimen, nis, and is a soft rod, and hath that name Vimen, for it hath much vertue of gréenesse, for the kinde thereof is such, that if it bée dryed and laide in water, it wereth ofte greene and pliant, as Isidore saith, lib. 17. Of Persh are néedful bendes & knit∣ting made to bind vp vines, and hoopes for Tunnes, as it is sayde before in the same booke in litera S. Looke there, De salice. ¶ Of Virga. cap. 175. A Rodde is called Virga, and Virga is properly that that groweth out of boughes, and hath that name of Vir∣tus, vertue: for it hath in it selfe great vertue. Or it hath that name of Viror, gréene, for the vertue that is hid in the roote, sheweth it selfe in the gréene cou∣lour of the rodde. And Virga is sayde, as it were gouern∣ing by vertue and might. Witches and Inchantors vsed rods to make serpents as it were bounden. Also Philosophers, Kings and Masters vsed a rod: and so doth he that meateth, kéepeth and depar∣teth fieldes, and threshing stoores, and meades, and so doth Ambassadors, mes∣sengers and heardes. Also a rod is com∣pouned of thrée manner of substaunce, of the rinde, Harke & pith: & is nourished & liueth by the pith: and springeth and is reared vp by the stalke, and is co∣uered and defended from wrong of the vtter aire by benefice of the rinde. For as the Commentor saith super. libr. de plantis, a trée hath rind in stéed of skin, and stocke or stalke in stéede of bones, & pith in stéede of veynes. For kind heate that is namely in the pith of the rodde, draweth thereto humour out of ye stock and roote, by the bough that is meane. And of the bough the rod springeth, and the kinde heate changeth the grosse mat∣ter and thicke and earthy, that is in the humour that is drawen, into the stalke and rinde, and turneth the watrye parts thereof into many twigs and braunch∣es, and bringeth the parte that is most vnctuous and pure to the vtter parte of the rod, to bring forth thereof, blossoms, floures and fruite: and at the last, both flower and fruit, springeth and commeth of the substaunce of the rodde, without corruption or defiling of the rodde: for the floure breaketh and springeth priue∣lye out of the rodde, and doeth neyther defile nor yet vnbeautifie the rodde: but maketh it more plenteous, perfect and faire. Also the rod taketh not strength of burgening, neither might of gendring by medling of seminal humour, as men and beastes doe: But a rod taketh such strengthe and might of the deawe of heauen, and of beate of the Sunne. And when a rodde groweth, it spring∣eth alway vpward, and holdeth and rea∣reth the toppe towarde heauen, for to come to perfect nourishing: and the rod is meane betwéene the boughe and the stocke or roote that conceyueth thereof,
and betwéene the fruite that it heareth, by tendernesse of the substaunce, the rod is full plyant and bendeth lyghtly, and some towarde euerie side. Also a rod is drye, rough, and knortie without, & softs within in the pith, and sail of humour vnder the rinde: and the m codde groweth, the higher it passeth from the earth: and the higher it passeth vp∣ward, the more small and sharpe it is us the ouermost roppe. Also a codde shall stretch vpright of it selfe: but when it is young & tender, and worthtes hap∣peneth that it crooketh & bendeth down∣ward toward the earth, and is hardened in that crookednesse, then it is harde to stretch it, and to make it againe euen  right. And somtime a crookedo and put in the fire, and by heate of the fire, the stiffenesse and hardnesse is tempered & made softe  and so the rod is the more easely straighted, & made euen and right. Also children & houndes hate the rod, for they be therewith chastised. ¶Of Virgulto. ca. 176. Young ha¦sil spring.VIrgultum hath that name of Virga, a rod, as Huguscion saith, and is a place where many rods gis. And Isi∣dore lib. 17. saieth, that Virgultum is a bough that groweth of the strength & stocke of the same tree: but a rod grow∣eth and springeth without meddeling of ede, and woreth vile in winter, & plea∣sing in spring time: for then they bur∣gon and bloome, and if they be cut, they grow againe and spring on high from the ground, and the more they grow, the more they spring vp toward heauen. And sometime an Herbor is called Vir∣gultum, Viridarium, or Viretum, and is a gréene place, and merrie with gréene trées and hearbs, as it is said before De Orto, Looke in litera O. ¶Of Vite. cap. 177. A Uine is called Vitis, and hath the name of Venciendo, binding, for it is bound. And Isidore saith, that Vitis hath that name, for it hath vertue to take some roote and p. Or els they be called Vites in the plurall number, for they haue vertue and might to binde themselues togethers, & be porrued and railed and bound to trees that be nigh to them. The kinde there∣of is plyant, and taketh and holdeth by strength, and imbraceth what it taketh,  it were in armes: and those bondes by the which it taketh and windeth a∣bout trees and stalkes, be called Capre∣oli; and haue that name, for it taketh & compasseth trees, and holdeth them each by order. These he crookes of the vines, by helpe and succour of which, knots & braunches of the vine, be helpe so su∣staine & to withstand winde & stormes, that they breake not with blasts of we∣thers. And be also called Corithi, for they be as it were rings and bends, and haddeth things that be nigh thereto, for boughes and braunches of the vine, should not be slaked farre for the succor∣med shaken, and disperpled, and hurled with blasts of winde: but they should so come, to beare and saue the fruite without perill. And these things accor∣deth most to vines, that the earth be o∣pened about the roots, and there made as it were a great hole, that the roote maye take more plentie of moysture and of humour, and also that the sunne beame may the better come thereto, and work therein. Also vines néede to be cut and pared, and purged of superfluitie & wa∣terie boughs and vaine. Also vines néed letting and planting, and thereof com∣meth young vines, and be called Propa∣gines, and be the first twigs that spring and spred of the young vine: and vines néed deluing and paring of the grounde, with shouell, spade, or mattocke, to do a∣way superfluitie of hearbes and of roots, that the vine may so be the better nou∣rished and comforted. Also vines néede to be rayled, to bée the better sustained, and the latine is for pitching of poles of rayling, Paxillare, as Papias saith, and commeth of Pango, gis, xi, and is to vnderstand, pitch or set stakes, as he saith. And Isidore sayeth, Pastinare is to vnderstande dounging with dounge, or with fat earth to féede & to nourish the vine to beare fruite, the
more and the better. Also them néedeth Pampination, that is to vnderstand, pul∣ling away of superfluitie of leaues, that the sunne and pure aire may the better come to the grapes. Also that the grapes be not ouershadowed by leaues, for then they shal ripe the better, and a vine leafe is called Pampines, as Isidore saith. By the leaues of the vine grapes be defen∣ded and succoured from heate and from colds, and against all wrongs: and the leaues be taken away, for the Sunne beame shuld the better come to ye fruite for to ripe it, and be called Pampini, for they hang by boughs and branches that are called Palmites, as Isidore saith li∣bro. 17. Also them néedeth Vindimacion; that is taking away of grapes, and that: is done, when Grapes be gathered to make of them wine. And Plin. lib. 8. ca. 22. speaketh of the vine and sayth, that when a vine is cut in good time and due manner, it taketh vertue and strengthe of the cutting, and conceiueth matter, of the which springeth and commeth after∣ward floures and fruite: and but it wer chastised with such cutting, and clensing and purging of such superfluitie, all the vine should were barren: For nothing groweth swifter than the vine, & there∣fore but the vertue of fruite bearing bée saued, the vine beareth no fruite: and in the vine is a kinde, that the vine would rather beare fruite than liue. Therefore all that is taken away of superfluitie of the matter of the vine, is aduauntage to the fruite in paring and cutting time. The sooner the vine is cut, the more wa∣ter it sheddeth, and the later it is cut, the more plentie it beareth of fruit: so that the cutting passe not due time. Small vynes néedeth to be soone cut, & great vines and strong néedeth to bée late cut; and the cutting shall be astone betwéen two knots, so that in the other side afore the knot the kerffe shall passe, and there∣fore it shall be a slont, & not euen ouer∣thwart, for the rayne drops should soone come and fall away: For by ofte com∣ming of such drops, & long abiding vpon a plaine kerffe, the top of the vine shuld be grieved and hurt. And the more small and leane the vine is, the more thereof shall be cut & when the leaues shall be cut off, the leafe that is with grapes, shall not be remoued, but it be a now vine and young, but the other leaues that be far, for these leaues should supplant the grapes. All those braunches that spring out of the vine, in other places than in the knottes, are accounted vnprofitable: and bastarde, and shoulde anone be plucked off and rased. Also cap. 24. he saith, that vines haue a speciall euill, when the braunch of the new vine is to soone taken away, either too hastely cut in vndue time, or when vines be sprong with euill dew or raine in blooming time: or when new twigs or burgening is appaired with frost, or with colde or when vncunning Garde∣ners hurte and wound wrongfully the rootes, and when they strip the roote, or spoyle the vine of all the roote. Among all, ye vine is most grieued, when strong raine smiteth the twigges while they bloome: for then falleth both flower and fruite of corrupt aire and corrupte heawe. And raine gendreth and bréedeth cer∣taine wormes, and Caterpillers and Snanies, that grow and fret burgening and leaues of the vine, & leaueth light∣ly the vine so spoyled, gnawen and ea∣ten: and this euill bréedeth in moyst, time, easie and softe. And there is ano∣ther euill that kéepers of vines call A∣raneum, for of euill blastes of winde, & corrupt raine commeth and bréedeth as it were copwebbes, and compasseth and wasteth the fruite, and burneth & grie∣ueth it. Also the vine bafeth Cabage, and all manner Coleworts, and hateth also Ha∣sels, for when such are nigh to the vines, then the vines be grieued and sicke; and Mitrum much lyke to salte, Alome, and sea water, and beanes, and etches, & namely in the last cutting, be venime to vines, and destroye them. Huc vsque Plinius libro. 17. cap. 2. And he saith, that among men in old time vines wer accounted among great trees. And in some parts and countryes
be so great vines, that they make Ima∣ges poasts, and stocks of vines: as it fa∣reth in the Image & mawmet of Iupiter in the citie of Popoloma. And men stye vp vpon a vine to the top of the Tem∣ple of Diana Ephesina. Also poasts and pillers made of such vines, dure and last without corruption long time. And in few trees kinde is more durable then in vines, they growe without end, & spring and spread full wide, and maye be laide with railing about houses and townes. And springeth vpward into many coun∣tryes vnto the toppes of Oliues, of Po∣pler, and other high Trées, and compas∣seth them and holdeth with their armes, as it were by affection of matrimonye. The vine is a good tree and medicinable, both in branches and in fruit. And ther∣of commeth licour, that is better, & pas∣seth the iuyce of all trées. When the vine is cut, thereof commeth dropping most clene and pure, and that dropping is good and profitable, and put in Colliriis, me∣dicines for eyen. By passing out of that dropping the substantiall humour of the vine is cleansed and purged in the roote. And therfore the vine beareth afterward the more pure fruite and swéete. The leaues of the vine be broade, plaine, greene, and softe within, and some deale rough without, and cloued and ragged in the vtter side and sharpe, and make a great shadowe. And the shadowe there∣of in Summers time is full pleasaunt to them that loue to rest there vnder. And the leaues be full medicinable, for they cleanse woundes, and heale full cleanly. And the leaues sodde in water, aba∣teth seuourous beate, and healeth won∣derfullye burning and swelling of the stomacke. If they be layde in a playster wise: and helpeth women with children, and exciteth sleepe, and refresheth and comforteth the braine. The drop there∣of oft dronken, breaketh the stone, as Di∣oscorides sayth: and sharpneth the fight, and doth away learednesse of eies. And succoureth against venimous biting, and venimous trauell: and stauncheth the wombe. Also ashes thereof is good to the foresaid things, & the ashes thereof medled with iuyce of rew and with Oile, abateth end softneth, and doth away swelling of the splene, as Plinius saith, li. 24. ca. 1. where be saith, that vine leaues doth away head¦ach, and swageth inflasions. And Uine leaues with Barly meale, healeth hetie goutes: and helpeth them greatly yt haue the bloudie flixe, if they drinke it. The iuyce thereof with Oile laid to an hairie place in a plaister wise, doth awaye the haire, and namely the dropping that cō∣meth of boughs of ye vine. The rind of ye vine doth awaye wartes: and dry vine leaues stauncheth bléeding wounds, and closeth and healeth woundes. Moreouer, the ashes of the vine purgeth and healeth soone a fester, & abateth ach and shrink∣ing of sinewes: and healeth with Oyle stinging of scorpions, & biting of hoūds: Ashes of the rinde by it selfe, restoreth & multiplieth haire that is fallen. (* Vitis vinifera, ripe grapes are hot and moist in the first degrée, and the rai∣son, or drie grape is hot and dry, as saith Galen.) Of a wilde vine called La∣brusca. chap. 108. A Wilde vine is called Labrusca, and hath that name, for it groweth in the vtter side of the lande. And this Noune Labrusca commeth of Labrum, that is a lippe or brimme, or the vtter∣most side of the land where it groweth, as Isidore saith, libro. 14. And Labrusca the wilde vine, is lyke a vine that bea∣reth wine in leaues, and not in fruit, for it beareth small fruite or none, and if it beare fruite, it is harde, sowre, and bit∣ter. And oft the vine that beareth wine, passeth out of the kinde, and fourneth into a wilde Uine, & that when it is not filled, neyther digged, neyther shred, nei∣ther pared. And againewarde, oft La∣brusca turneth into a vine that beareth wine, and that is by good filling and ut, and by shredding and knitting, as Pli∣nius sayeth. And though Labrusca bée not good to meate, yet it is good to medi∣cine. For the roote thereof sodde in raine water, and medled with wine, healeth
men of the dropsie, & doth away wens, and healeth the cough. And pauder of the roote thereof, helpeth wonderfully a∣gainst default of the stomacke, as Diosc. saith. Also lib. 13. cap. 2. Plinius sayth in this wise, Labrusca is called Ampeloe∣sargia in Gréeke, and Labrusca hath many leaues, and a rinde full of iuyce or wine, and beareth somdeale red grapes, like as they were sod: and with iuyce of those grapes, women purge the skin of the face, & those grapes stamped with the iuyce and leaues, be profitably laid to the euills and sores of ioynts, lendes, & loynes: and the same grapes stamped with vineger, healeth scabs of men, and also of soure footed beasts. (Additiō.The fruite of the right vine or se∣cond kinde called Labrusca, is also tear∣med Paslula de Corintho, in Englysh, Currants: a wholesome fruit, that pur∣geth fleame, and comforteth the heart.) ¶Of Vitulamine. cap. 179. VItulamen hath that name of Vitis, a vine, and is that bastarde plant or braunch barren without fruite, ye sprin∣geth out of the roote of the vine, or els where in the vine, and not out of the knots. And such braunches be vnkind, and beare therefore no fruite, but they charge and grieue the vine, and letteth & taryeth the fruite: for it draweth ye hu∣mor from the roote to the nourishing of themselues, that should be drawen to fee∣ding and nourishing of fruite. And ther∣fore they must be plucked & rooted vp, & done away, least they let the growing of fruite of the vine, if they growe there long time, and therefore such braunches be called bastarde. Vitulamina, that is passing out of kinde, and not kind bran∣ches as it is had lib. Sap. cap. 4. and this is the letter of Rabanus, and of olde men, though Austen in lib. de doctrina s sna, meane; that it were better sayd: Adulterine plantagines, bastarde plantings, and that is sayd to vnderstan∣ding of simple men: but the very letter and good to perfect vnderstanding men, in Spuia vitulamina. ¶Of Vinea. cap. 180. A Uineyard is called Vinea, and is a place where vines be set and growe, as Papias saith, and so we call Vinetu, the place where many vines be set. A vineyard is busely tilled and kept, & pur∣ged and cleansed of superfluities, & ofte visiled and ouerséene of the earth tillers and keepers of vines, that they be not appaired neither destroyed with beasts, and is closed about with walls & with hedges, and a wayle is there set in an high place, to kéepe the vineyard, that the fruite be not destroyed, and is lefte in Winter without kéeper or wayter, but in haruest time many come and haunt the vineyard. In winter the vineyarde is full pale, and wereth gréene and bloo∣meth in springing time and in summer, and smelleth full swéete, and is pleasant with fruite in haruest time. The smell of the vineyard that bloometh, is contra∣ry to all venemous things, and therefore when the vineyard bloometh, Adders & Serpents flye, and Loads also, and may not sustaine and suffer the noble sauor thereof. A vineyard with gréene coleur and merrie, pleaseth the sight, and is ly∣king to the smell with swéete smelling, and sadeth the taste with swéetnesse of sauour, and is pleasing to touching and to handelyng with softnesse and smooth∣nesse of leaues, and comforteth the tou∣ching therewith, and loueth cleane ayre and faire weather, as Plinius sayth. And loueth not cloudes, mystes, neither too much raine, but they loue hot lande and drye, and meanly fat and swéete, for in landes that is too fat & moyst, the vine outrageth, and beareth too manye, too great and long leaues, boughes & braun∣ches and little fruits: and in grauellye lande and leane, the vine ouer drieth & sayleth, for they finde not sufficient nou∣rishing. Also in bitter lande and salte, the roote thereof is corrupted with maliti∣ous humour that commeth and entreth into the substaunce of the roote: & ther∣fore the vine loueth sweete lande and temperate in his qualities.
And so high mountaines that standeth well in the Sun, be best places for vine∣yardes, for therein is sweet humour and strong heate: the more the vineyarde is in the Sunne, the more sweete grapes it beareth. And first the fruite the gréene, harde, and sowre, and is afterward made swéete by working of the Sunne. Fores lurke and hide themselues vnder Uine leaues, and gnawe couetouslye, and fret the grapes of the vineyard, and namely when the kéepers and wardens be negly∣gent and retchlesse, and it profiteth not that some vnwise men doth, that cloase within the vineyarde hounds, that bee aduersaries to Foxes, for fewe houndes so closed, wast and destroye moe grapes that many foxes should destroy, yt come & eate therof theeuishly, as Isidore saith. Therefore wise wardens of vineyardes be full busie to kéepe, that no swine nor same hounds, nor foxes come into the vi∣neyard. From fretting & gnawing of flies & of other wormes, a vineyard may not be kept nor saued, but by his succour and help that all thing hath, and puriueth in his power and might, & kéepeth and sa∣ueth all lordly and mightely, as Isidore sayth. Of Vua. chap. 181. A Grape is called Vua, and hath that name of Humeoes, to wet & to moist. And so Vua is as it were wet & moyst, for it is full of moisture within; as Isi. saith, libr. 17. The grape is compowned of thrée: Of the hul of Glarea, and of A∣rillis: the hulls be called Vineria, or Te∣ce, therein in Glares conteined, & Glarea is the iuyce and fat humour of ye grape. And Ailli be the small graines that bée in the grape, and haue another name, & be called Acin, and that Nowne com∣meth of Acco, es, and shall be sayde. Hic Acinus, Acina, as priscian saith in maio∣re volumin, where it is sayde, that this word Paulini. Exprimit humentes acinos succum∣que liquentum. The vnderstanding is, that Acinus is Masculine gender: and also that Paulini betokeneth the iuyce, and the grape that droppeth. But some men meane, it is hoc Acinum. Also Uua is a generall name, both of the cluster and of the grape. For properlye Uua is gathering of manye graines together. Racemus is taken for one grain, & Botrus is a cluster of grapes & Racemus is gathering of many grapes that be called MosAine in French. And Papias & Isidore meane, that Racemus is a part of the bough yt beareth grapes, and is a little braunch cut off wt grapes. And so this Nowne Racemus commeth of Ramus, a bough, as Isidore saith. And Grapes be called Suburbane, for they be solde to be eaten in cities, and fairenes & mery fauour thereof praiseth the grapes. And of grapes is many manner kind, for some be Precoque, & haue that name, for they ripe soone, & be before all other riped by heate of the Sun. And ye Gréekes call them Lageos, for they hast to riping as ye hare hasteth for feareland some be called Purple, for they haue such coulour. And some be called Uerticiarie, and haue that name of greatnesse; as Dactili haue their name of length. And some is called Ste∣phanice, for they be rounde. And some is called Cetance, for they be red as fire: And some is called Aminee, for they be white, & not medled with red. And some be called Apiane, & beare swéete wine, & if they be not gathered soone, they be lost with winde and raine: and bée namely destroied with Bées: and haue therefore that name Apiane, of Apes yt bée Bées. And some is called Biculpite, & haue that name of the country that they grow in, and may well susteine and suffer at the best, raine, stormes, and heate: and men say, that the grape Basilica is such, and of such kinde: and some is called Argite, and if they be not gathered first they fall to the ground, or rot with corrupt aire, & humour: and some is called Elbolie and haue that name, for they be diuerse, ney∣ther red nor blacke, & haue the name of ye colour that is called Elbus, that is ye mid∣dle colour betwéene white and blacke: and there bée manye other diuersityes of grapes. For grapes be diuers in sauour, in coulour, and greatnesse, and in vertue: but these be ye most diuersitie of grapes, as Isidore saith, lib. 14.
And Isaac in Dietis saith, that grapes vary in foure diuers coulours: for some Grapes be all white and cléere, and full of iuyce, with little hard matter within, and haue thin holls and small graines. Also some Grapes be all blacke, with thicke skinnes and pith: but the skinne is not full moyst, and in these Grapes be great graines. And some be citrine, ac∣cording more with white then with blacke. Also some be red, and accord more with blacke then with white. The white nourisheth easier, and be sooner defied: & thirleth the veines, and exciteth vrine. The blacke be of harde digestion, but they comfort more the stomacke, & nou∣rish also more when they be defied: and the citrine and red be meane in sowre∣nesse, as Isaac sayeth, the more ripe the Grapes be, the more they are to be prai∣sed, and the better they are to nourishing & to gather good bloud. And grapes that haue lesse pith then humour, gender bet∣ter humours then those that haue more pith then humour, but they nourish not so much. Of Vua immatura. cap. 182. A Gréene grape is called Vua imma∣tura, and is colde and drye, and full sowre, and greiueth the rootes & sinews of the teeth with colde, so that they make the teeth on edge: so that it séemeth yt they be somewhat frosen: and haue vertue to bind and to stanch cholarike parbraking and casting, & to quench the heate of the liuer, and also thirst, and to abate sharp∣nesse of heat, and to drie thicke humours in the eyen, and in the lids: and to abate itching and smarting of eien, as Isaac saith in Dietis. Of Vua passa. chap. 183. REison in the singular number is cal∣led Vua passa, and is made in many manner wise. For sometime the stalke thereof is woue and wounde, so that the humour may no more come to the grape from the vine. And so the grape in cer∣teine dayes is fordryed by heate of the Sunne. And this Grape and Reison is called Vua passa: for they suffer heate of the Sunne: and this is best to eat. And sometime the grapes be wounde in vine leaues, and bée bound with thréed, for the grapes should not séede, and be put into an Ouen so bound & wrapped after that bread is taken out and be dried, when the heate is temperate, and bée Reisons when they be so dryed. In such man∣ner they bée called Vue passe, for they suffer a manner of violence of heate of the Ouen. In such manner sometime Vua passa is made in chimneyes. A∣lexander Nequam speaketh thereof and sayth. Dant vuas passas clibanus fumaria Phoebus. The meaning is, that Raisons bée made in Ouens, Chimneies, and in heat of the Sunne. Isaac sayth in Dietis, that Vua passa, that is perfect in swéetnesse, is most hot, and namely if it be blacke, & not to binding nor to softning, but meane in both. And Vua passa then tempereth euill humours, and abateth fretting and gnawing, and namely when they be fat, with much pith and thin skin, with few pepines and graines and small, such rey∣sons helpe against sore breasts, and clen∣seth and purgeth the bladder and raines. But such reisons accord not to the splene, neither vnto the liuer, if the splene and the liuer be hard and thicke. And sowre reisons and biting be lesse hot then the swéete and moist, and namely if they be white, and therefore they nourish but lit∣tle, but they quench heat and harden and binde the wombe. Of Vino. cap. 184. WIne is called Vinum, as it wer gro∣wing in a vine. Or else it hath that name of Vena, a veine, for drink of wine filleth soone the veines full of bloud, as Isidore sayth, libro. 20. where he treateth of drinke. And strong Wine is called Temetum, for it holdeth the wit, & ma∣keth it oft to do amisse. And wine is cal∣led Merum, when it is pure & not med∣led with water, and is called Bacchus, and hath that name of Liber Pater, that was called Bacchus also.
It is sayde that this Bacchus found first wines. Or els wine hath this name Bac∣chus of working & doing, for by strength of it selfe  maketh them that drink therof madde and out of their wits, and éese madly an other men. The worthy∣nesse and praising of Wine might not Bacchus himselfe describe at the full, though he were aliue. For among all ly∣cours and iuyce of trees. Wine beareth the price, for passing all licours, wine mo∣deratly monkes; most comforteth the bo∣dy, and gladdeth the , & healeth and saueth, wounds and . Thereof spea∣keth Isaac in Dietis  and sayeth, that wine giueth good nourishing to the body, & restoreth the health that sweep  and comforteth & increaseth kinde heate pas∣sing all other meate & drinke, & that for likenesse and companye that wine hath with kinde and so Wine bréedeth most pure bloud, and pursueth & cleanseth trau∣bly and thicke bloud, & openeth & clean∣seth the smuth of the veines, & commeth inward by his subtiltie to cleanse and to purge the inner partes, and lyghtneth and driueth away darke umasie, that bréedeth and gendereth cleingnesse and discomfort, & strengtheneth all the mem∣bers of the body, & giueth to each might and strength, and déede and working of the soule sheweth and declareth to good∣nesse of Wine. And wine breedeth in the soule, forgetting of auguish, of sorrowe, and of oo, and suffereth not the soule to féele anguish and woe. Wine sharpneth the wit  and maketh it cunning to in∣quire thinges that be harde and subtill, and maketh the soule bolde and hardye, and so the passing nobilitie of wine is knowen. And vse of wine accordeth to all mens ages and times and Coun∣tryes, if it bée taken in due manner, and as his disposition asketh, that drinketh it. Also wine accordeth to olde men, for the heat of wine is contrary to their coldnesse. Also wine accordeth to young men, as it were meate. For kinde of wine is like to kinde and age of young men, and is meate & medicine to young∣lings and to children. For it nourisheth & helpeth their heate that is yet vnperfect, and consumeth and wasteth and dryeth superfluitye of moysture of children. And strong wine cleane and pure accor∣deth in colde co and in winter: And in Summer and in hot Countryes small wine, and well medled is good and profitable. For it moistneth and cooleth the body because of medling of the mat∣ter, that is sayde, and commeth full soone into the innermost members by subtilty of the wine. Therefore men in olde time called wine the greate. Triacle, for they found that wine helpeth in the ∣ries, For it heateth colde bodies and  hot bodies and moisteth dry bodies, and hteth and dryeth moyst bodye. Also the heate, and drynesse thereof is ly, and moisture and colde thereof is, accidentall, for by subtiltie thereof it bea∣reth water to members that needeth to be cooled and moysted, as he sayth. And in wine take heed of these things, of the licour, of coulour, of sauour, and smell. Bee the substaunce and lycour of wines subtiltie and cléernesse is knowen, and so is his earthynesse & thicknesse. And me∣ly wine that is subtilt cléere, and thinne, is white and cléere and accordeth to the stomack, for it is soone defied & aréeth and thirleth, & commeth to the veines, & purreth not norgrieuesh: the wit, neither grieueth the sinewes neither the braine. Great wine & earth it is contrary for sub∣tilt wine, for it grieueth ye stomacke, & it pearceth slowly. Of colours of wine bee foure manners, white, blacke, uane, and red: and both white and black bee lesse hot then other wine. And white wine is more moist then black, because of cleere∣nesse and watrynesse that hath mastrye therin: And blacke wine is more drye because of thickenesse & earthinesse that hath more substantialye mastrye there∣in, and wines of meane colour are hotter & then other, and so wine citrine or of gol∣den coulour, and red wine, be more hte then white wine or blacke, and that is as they be farther from white or blacke; and the more that they be farther from white wine or blacke and the neerer they be in coulour to white and black, the lesse hotter they be.
Of Vino rubeo. cap. 185. REd Wine that is full redde as bloud is most strong, and iceth much the héad, and noteth the wit, and maketh strong drunkennesse: and néedeth there∣fore be right well watred. And so if it be watred when it nedeth to be dronken, it néedeth to be watred as it accordeth & is séemely to age, time, countries & vsagè: and is full good, for it dissolueth and tem∣pereth thicke humours, and cleanseth the wayes of veines of matter & rottennesse and puristeth the bloud, and namely if is be  purenesse and cleannesse. And ac∣cordeth therefore to olde men, in that it comforteth their heartes, and dissolueth & tempereth many colde humours, that be gathered in the bodies of old men: and red Wine néedeth, so haue biting, sauour and sweete, and it néedeth that the licour be meane betweene thin and thicke, and the odour & smell meane betweene strong and softs and such wine is more tempe∣rate then other to nourishing and to see∣ding, and turneth soone to bloud, because of lykenesse that it hath with bloud with licour, sauour, and coulour. For swéete Wine that is full red, helpeth & is right necessary to cleanse and to purge diseases of the breast, & in likewise of the lungs, and tempereth full lightly, and cleanseth and wipeth and putteth away vnclean∣nesse and gleanious humours. Aud take déede dilligently of the good odour and smelling of Wine for it manifesteth and sheweth openly, and betokeneth, that the licour is cléere and temperate, and cleane from all filths. And maketh best digesti∣on: and gendereth therfore cleane bloud and cléere; and comforteth and gladdeth the heart, and putteth out thicke smoak, darke and troubly. And so Ipocra saith, that wine with good smell is more sub∣till and cléere then other, and is more light, and is sooner defied, and nourisheth better. For kinde sheweth and betoke∣neth, that working therein is compleate and profitable. And Wine without good smell sheweth that it is venteous and thicke: and is therefore the lesse worth to nourishing, and clarifieth not the bloud, nor comfortheth: but bréedeth and gen∣dereth great humoures and thicken, and troubly imbake and darke. Aud Wine with most strong odour and smell, and with sowre sauour i  for it grie∣neth most the body, and gendereth worst bloud, and giueth to the body noyful nou∣rishing, and namely if the Wine be full blacke. For to such perteineth and be∣longeth thicknesse of licour, heauynesse of smell, and sowrenesse of sauour. Also Wine that is temperate in ye fore∣said qualities, and is dronke temperatly, and in one manner, helpeth kinds, and gendereth good bloud, and maketh sauour in meate and in drinke, and exciteth de∣sire and appetite, and comforteth the ver∣tue of life and of kinde, and helpeth the stomacke too haue appetite, and to haue & to make good digestion: and exciseth the vertue of out putting, and to poure out the drasts, and quencheth thirst, & chaun∣geth the passions of the soule & thoughts out of euill into good. For it tourneth the soule out of cruelnesse into mildnes, out of couetousnesse into largenesse, out of pride into méekenesse, and out of dread into boldnesse. And shortly to speak, wine dronke measurably, is health of body and of soule. Huc vs{que} Isaac  Dietis, & Pli∣nius li. 13. ca. 9. where it is said, that kind of Wine and drinking, kindeleth and heateth the guts within, & keeeth with∣out members that be washed therwith, and to vertues of the bodye nothing is more profitable then Wine, if it be taken in due manner and measure, and nothing is worie taken passing out of measure. And so Adronides a cléere man of witte and of wisedome, wrote to the great A∣lexander, to restraine Wine kinde in drinking, and sayde in this manner: King haue mind, that thou drinkest bloud of the earth, for Wine drinking vntem∣peratly is to mankinde heauye and ve∣nime. ¶And if Alexander had done by his counsayle, truelye hée had not slaine his owne friends in dronkennesse, as Plinius sayeth. And toucheth there in the same booke, cap. vltimo, and rehearseth euilles and harme that wine doth immoderatly dronke, and saith that it turneth wit into
woodnesse, and into euil raises, & into for∣getfulnesse of good. And the dronken mans face is pale, his chéekes hang, his eyes be ful of welke and pimples, and of blearednesse. The dronken mans handes tremble & shake, & his tongue is bounde and knit, and his stomacke bolketh and giueth vp in the morrow tide some foule and abhominable stinking thing, as it ware a pit, wherin some dead carrenli∣eth, and feeleth and is grieued with sore pricking and aking in the head. And the palet or roofe of the mouth waxeth bit∣ten by Cholera, that is beate by hot fu∣mositye of kinde, the throate is tormen∣ted with drynesse, burning, and thirst, For this property followeth wine, that vse of drinking bréedeth appetite to drink oft. And wine dronken men fare as the Wormes that sucke bloud, for euer the more the vine dronken man drinketh, the more he is a thirst. And to these wordes of Plinius, Isaac sayth in this manner: if wine be oft taken, anone by dronken∣nesse it quencheth the sight of reason, and comforteth beastly madnesse, & so the bo∣dy abideth, as it were a ship in ye sea with out sterne, and without loades man, & as chiualry without Prince or Duke, there∣fore the dronken man fauoreth the thing that should not be fauoured, and graun∣teth that should not be graunted: & pray∣seth yt shoulde not bée praised worthy in it selfe, and maketh of wise men fooles, and of good men and well willed, dron∣kennesse maketh euill men and wicked: For dronkennesse is nourishing & cause of euill vice. And dronkennesse falleth oft in man slaughter, and spouse breaking, and in theft. And therfore men that will kéepe and rule men, it néedeth to kéepe them from Wine, that they drinke not more win then is spéedfull to their ver∣tue and kinde. Of Musto. chap. 186. NEw wine that is new taken out of the presse or wrong, is called Mu∣stum, & hath that name, as it wer holding Mus, that is earth or fenne. For Mus in Gréeke, is called Tetra in Latine, Earth in English, and so earth is called Hu∣mus humeficta, made moyst. In Must be earthy partes and drasty, medled with watry parts and airie, & vertue of odour and of heate worketh therein, and mak∣eth full strong boyling. For the fire and airye partes mooue, vpwarde, and ear∣thy parts mooueth downewarde, and of such disturbaunce and strife, and contra∣rynesse commeth strong boyling, and du∣reth vntill the heate hath mastrie: and departeth the cleane and pure from the vncleanenesse and vnpure: and maketh full digestion. And the strength of ser∣uent Must is so strong, that it breaketh full strong vessells that it is put in: but they bée vented, as Constantine sayeth, and Gregorie super Iob. For by venting foame and other vncleannesse is brought vp to the mouth of the vessel by strength of heate, and it casteth it out: and it pas∣seth out alway vntill the Wine be full cleane purged. And in the beginning when Must is so troden, wrong, & pres∣sed, it is troubly and thicke. And there∣fore Isaac sayth, that Must dronke, gen∣dereth thicke fumositie and dreadefull dreames, and euill humours: and ma∣keth kurling and swelling in the guts. And new Must is full windy and smoa∣kie, for departing and distributing of partes by vertue and might of heat. And so Galen sayth, that new wine hath vertue and might to leade and to bring meate in to all the body, and gendereth therefore ventositie and swelling, and abhomination or wambling. The lon∣ger the Wine dureth after wringing & pressing out of the presse, the more cleere it is and pure, & the heate thereof is the more strong and mightie. And while the wine is Must, it resteth not of boyling and séething, nor the earthye partes fall not at the full in theyr place, nor the fi∣ry parts come vp at the full to the place, and so the Must abideth yet vndigest. And therefore when the wine is stale, cléere, and well purged, it is bright, and good friende to kinde. For then the heate of the same Wine is alway com∣forted, and is alway better and better in smell and sauour, and also in vertue: but if it happē to be appaired by corrupt aire
or by a fustie vessell. For if the vessell in which the wine is kept; bée fustie, or cor∣rupt, then néedes the wine shall be fusty or corrupt. Also oft wine is corrupte by corrupt aire, or by greate distempering heat or cold. And therfore now wine for∣drieth, & now fasteth, & now rotteth all and some: and is then first and most c∣my to mans kinde: and shall therfore be forsaken as denim, and not dronke. Also sometime most oldest Wine is passing in temperate heate, and therfore chaungeth sauour and coulour. And such wine with sharpnesse thereof gréeueth the braine, & the wit, and burneth the substantial hu∣mour by defnesse thereof, and quencheth the kinde heat thereof. And  wine that is not soone to neither too old; but meane betwéene both is good. For therein is  good rate, neither too new nor too olde: for such wine is most temperate. Huc vs{que} Isaac in Dietis. Of Vino condito. chap. 187. WIne is made by craft of good spice∣rie and hearbes, as it fareth of the Wine that is called Saluiato, and of the wine that is called Rosatum, and Gan∣ohlatum. And that wine accordeth both in meat and in medicine, for vertue both of spicery, and also of hearbes chaungeth and amendeth this wine, and giueth ther to a singuser vertue, and therefore such Wines be wholesome and liking, when wholesome spicerie & hearbes be incorpo∣rate there, in due manner. For vertue of spicery kéepeth & silueth wines, that they be not soone corrupt; therfore such wines with their sauour please the tast, and ex∣cite appetite; and comforteth both the braine and the stomacke with their good odour and smell, and cleanseth also the bloud, and thirleth into the inner partes of the veines & of the members, as Isaac sayth. (Additiō.Compound Wine with spices, is called Ipochresse, whereof is redde and white.) Of Vino corrupto. Chap. 188. WIne is first swéet and temperate in sauour, and is corrupt by long ∣king of the Sunne, or of the aire also by long boiling, and turneth m when it hath no vertue, by the which it may bee kept & saued, as Isaac sayth in Dietis. ca. de Aceto. For by accidentall heat that passeth ouer & ouercommeth the vertue of kinde, the licour is made then. And by boyling and seething of acciden∣tall heate, kinde heate is cure quenched And to the winde that was first kindlye hot, is made colde by substaunce of  pte heate, and tourned into vineger, and is more drye then colde, for it cooleth mo∣derately in the first degree, and sorpeth strongly in the third degrée, as he sayth. And so by subtiltie of the substance ther∣of, and by féeblenesse of the coldnesse, it thirleth the body soone, & commeth to the well worse place: and so neither the iuyce of Pomgranard, nor other sowre licour hath virtue to thirle and to come into so déepe a place, as vineger. For the iuyce of a Pomegranard & other such worketh much more roughly in nigh places then in farre. And so who that will abate the heát of the stomacke or of the members and places that be nigh thereto, shall vse more profitablye the iuyce of Pomegra∣nards then vineger. But for to coole places that be far off, vineger is more profitable then the iuyce of Pomgranards or of gréene grapes, for it hath a liuelye vertue, by the which it commeth & passeth into farther places, therfore if dissolueth and tempereth, cut∣teth & departeth and maketh thin, & ther∣fore it dissolueth and departeth milke, which is crudded and runne and fastned in the stomacke if the vineger be dronk. Also (as he sayth there) vineger comfor∣teth the stomacke, and exciteth and aug∣menteth appetite, and beareth downe mightely all things that come downe to the stomack: and helpeth against venim, and also against venimous beasts which slayeth, as Opium helpeth, and Iusquia∣mus, and Euforbium also. Huc vsque I∣saac. And Plinius sayth, and Dioscor. also meaneth, that strong vineger done vpon
yron or vppon the colde grounde, boyleth and séetheth anone. Also vinger stancheth the fluxe of the body & of the wombe, or running of bloud, & dissolueth & laxeth if it find the wombe full, & bindeth if it finde the wombe lere: & helpeth them yt haue the Litergy, the sléeping euill, & frantike men also, & cleanseth new woundes, and suffereth them not to swell: and wipeth & washeth away the stench of the mouth, and of the gums, and putteth away the stinch of the téeth, & maketh them to bée soone on edge: and stauncheth perbraking and wambling, if the mouth & the other parte of the throate bée washed there∣with, & throwen out againe. And helpeth deafe eares, & openeth the hearing and the waies: and sharpneth the sight of ey∣en, and fretteth mettals, & therof are gen∣dered diuers colours, as Sorusa of leade, gréene brasse of copper, & Lasurium of sil∣uer. And an Egge laid in vineger maketh the shell soft as a small skinne. Drasts of vineger helpeth against the biting of a mad hound, and of the Cokadrill. Huc vsque Plinius. li. 23. cap. 10. Of Vinacio. chap. 189. THE after Wine that is wrong out of the grapes is called Vinatium, & Vinarium also, and is as it were drasts of all the wine. And the small skins and hulls of the grapes be called Vinacia, and the pepins of grapes be called Acini: and hulls & pipins abideth when the Wine is cleane wrong out, and gathered, and be then throwen out. Héereof Gressisme speaketh and sayth in this wise. Pelles vuarum vinacia dic fore tan∣tum. Et dicas acinum quod vua cernis a∣cutum. These vearses meane, that skinnes and hulls of grapes be called Vinacia, & a pepin is called Acinum. And Swine eat gladly the drasts therof, though they giue them but little nourishing, for they do swell more then nourish in ye manner of wise. Of Vinaria. cap. 190. SEc Vinaria, rie, is a celler or a place where Wine is kept in, & the more dry that the place is, the better it is to saue & kéepe that that therin commeth in vessells of wine. Therefore stony places be digged vnder the ground, & deepe cel∣lers be made to kéep and to saue wine in them from corruption of hot aire, yt the wine be not made sowre therby, neyther corrupt in any manner. Of Viola. chap. 191. VIolet is called Viola, and hath that name for strong smel, as Isidore sai∣teth, & therof is thrée manner kinds, pur∣ple, white, and meline, that is a manner white colour that commeth out of the I∣lande Melos. But all manner Uiolets haue leaues cold of kind, and watry, and therefore vnbinding: And so violet sod∣den in water with hony, laxeth and soft∣neth the wombe. And also if it be medled with Sugar, & set long time in the Sun in a glassen vessell, it laxeth the womb, & abateth swelling, and chaungeth feaue∣rous heate, and quencheth thirst. Sade therof casteth out conception of women, and slaieth long wormes in the womb, & helpeth against chafing of the liuer. Ui∣olet is a little hearbe in substance, and is better fresh and newe, then when it is olde, & the flowre thereof smelleth most, and so the smell thereof abateth heate of the braine, & refresheth and comforteth the spirites of féeling, and maketh sléepe, for it cooleth & tempereth & moystneth the braine: and the more vertuous the flowre therof is, the more it bendeth the head thereof downward. Also flowres of springing time spring first and sheweth Summer. The lyttle∣nesse thereof in substaunce is noblye re∣warded in greatenesse of sauour and of vertue, as Diose. and Plinius meane. (Additiō.There be two sorts of Uiolets, the garden, and the wilde violet, there is a third kinde bearing flowers, as white as Snowe. Of their properties, read Dod. in his. 2. li. cap. 1.2.) Of Vlmo. chap. 192.
Elme.VImus hath that name, for it grow∣eth better in moyst places then in other. And this trée is not at liking in rough places, nor in mountaines, as I∣sidore sayth, libro. 17. The rootes there∣of be put deepe into the ground, and dra∣weth and sucketh humour out of the déep guts of the earth, to feed the boughs, twigges, and braunches: And hath ma∣ny boughes with knots, & maketh with thicknesse of leaues shadowe to wayfa∣ring men, and is a barren Trée and ac∣counted of Plinius among Trées that beare most: and hath white flowers swéet smelling, as the Trée Tiha, and hath certaine graines, as Cucurbite, but that fruit is vnprofitable. And Bees haunt flowers thereof, and gathereth thereof swéetnesse of honnie: and though the Trée be barren, yet it is profitable to vines that beare fruit, for this Trée rea∣reth vp and susteyneth boughs, fruit, and braunches of vines. And hath a harde rinde and rough, but the Trée within is soft and full smooth, and full able to be grauen therein, as Tiha is, as Isidore sayth. (Additiō.Of Elme trées there are thrée sorts, the standard Elme, the hoppe Elme, and the Wych Elme. The first groweth high and is common, the second great & knot∣tye, and casteth of a thinne leafe lyke to the hoppe, with a séede, & beareth broun∣ches of a very great bignesse: the thirde groweth as the second, but more graye, and a tougher woode, wherewith in some shieres they make bowes. This woode made into piles and plankes for water worke, will not rot in a meruaylous time.) Of Vitica. chap. 193. THE Nettle is called Vitica, and hath that name, for it burneth the bo∣dye that it toucheth. And it is of firye kinde, as Macer sayeth. And the vertue thereof is full feruent holden and great, and so it taketh that name Vitica, not without cause, for it burneth things that it toucheth. And of Nettles is double kinde: One burneth and biteth and gen∣dereth bleines and itchinges, and hath sharpe leaues and rough, and some deale redde, and rough stalkes with edges, and burneth his hande that it handleth. And is heauye of smell and somewhat bitter & sowre. Another manner of Net∣tle is that which is called the dead Net∣tle, or the blinde Nettle. And hath leaues more white then the other hath, and more rounder. And biteth not them that it handleth, and hath flowres now red and now white, with full heauye smell and sauour, and each Nettle is medicinable. For the iuyce thereof dronke with Wine helpeth agaynst Collica passio. And hea∣leth with honnie an olde cough, and clen∣seth the lungs, and abateth and strageth swelling and bolning of the wombe. The leaues thereof stamped with Salt, helpeth and cleanseth hoarye and soule woundes, and also biting of houndes and of Cankers. The roote thereof stamped with Salt and with Wine, and sodde in Oyle, helpeth agaynst swelling of the splene. The iuyce thereof stauncheth the bléeding of the Nose, and stauncheth menstruall bloud meddeled with Mirca. The seede thereof dronke with Wine moueth Venus, and reciteth courage, and namely if it bee meddeled with hon∣nye and with Pepper. The fresh hearbe sodde, softneth the wombe, if it be eaten. And so Plinius commaundeth to séeth the fresh Nettle when it groweth first in March, and eate it, as it were Oyle a∣gainst many evills and sicknesses of the body. But the Nettle is better in medi∣cine then in meate. (Additiō.Nettles be of diuerse kinds, Viti∣ca, Siluesti, Maior, Minor, and Lami∣um, called Archangell, or dead Nettle, al∣though they be common weedes, yet are they very medicinable for many griefes.) Of Zizania. cap. 194. RAy is called Zizania, and is a certein hearbe, of the which Isid. speaketh, li. 14. and saith, that Peets call this hearbe Infelix lolū vngrations to kill or rad, for it is vnprofitable & vngracious, and is feminine gender in the singular, & neu∣ter gender in the plurall, as he saith. And
it groweth among Wheate in corrupt time and daie. And is lyke to Wheate when it is grasse, and maye vnneth bée taken therefrom when it groweth first. And it stuffeth and grieueth the wheat, but if bée wisely and warily looked ther∣to and departed therefrom with greate flight and warinesse. It shall not be pluc∣ked vp when it is greene, least men plucke up the wheat in stéed of ray, for likenesse that the ray hath to ye wheate: Therefore it is more wisely done when it is knowen betweene the raye and the wheat, to suffer & let either grow til they be ripe, & then when the raye is knowen by the seed frōm the wheat, to gather the ray & depart it from the Wheat, & make therof bundels and kitches, & burne it in the fire when the wheat is in the barne. And ray hath a sharpe strength & work∣ing, & some deale venimous, and gende∣reth swelling & venitoutie, and maketh therefore men dronke, & distroubleth the wit, and gréeueth the head, and changeth sauour of bread, and infecteth bread that it is medled with and put in. And gree∣ueth full soone, and slayeth sometime if it be eaten in great quantitie. And it is grie∣uous within the body, if it be eaten, but it is full good in medicine without. For if it be medled with Barly meale, and wt pouder of Thus and of Saffron, it hel∣peth conception and birth in women. And ray meddeled with Brimstone and with vineger, helpeth against scabs, wet and dry, and against Leters, and against itching: And if it bée medled with Lin∣seede sod with wine, it dissolueth and hel∣peth Postumes. And if it be sodde séede, rinde, and roote, it cleanseth rotten wounds, and helpeth also against the Fe∣ster & Canker, and exciteth wonderfully menstruall bloud: and cleanseth the mo∣ther, & disposeth and arayeth, & maketh ready conception, as Plinius and Dio∣scurides meane. (Additiō.Zzuia, olium, Darnel, and Ray, the meale mixed with birdrs grease, (is sayd) being bound to the head, eureth the ac.) Of Zinzibero. chap. 195. GInger is called Zinziber, and is the roote of an hearbe, and is hot & moist, as it is sayde in Platearius, and some Ginger is tame, and some is wilde, the wilde Ginger hath more sharper sauour then hath the tame, and is more sadder and faster, and not so white, but it brea∣keth more sooner, and helpeth and relée∣ueth agaynst colde euills of the brest and also of the lounges, and easeth and aba∣teth colde ach of the stomacke, and of the guttes, and putteth out easily winde and ventositie. And if Wine that Ginger is sodden in with Comin, be dronkes hot, it comforteth the stomacke, and maketh good and profitable digestion, and sharp∣neth the sight, and destroyeth and wast∣eth the web that groweth in the eie: and that doth much better tame Ginger then wilde Ginger, and the more whiter it is, and the more new, the more sharp it is, and the more better: and Ginger is kept three yeres in good might & vertue, but af∣terward it wareth dry, & wormes eate & gnawe & make holes therin, & rotteth al∣so for moisture thereof. Isaac sayth ther∣fore, that who that purposeth to kéepe Ginger by long continuance of time, shal put Ginger among Pepper, that the moi∣sture of the Ginger may be tempered and swaged by drynesse of the Pepper, as he sayth expresly. (Additiō.Ginger heateth the stomacke, & hel∣peth digestion, but it heateth not to soone as Pepper, but afterward the heat remai∣neth longer, and causeth the mouth to be moister: being gréene & well confectio∣ned in strop, it comforteth much the sto∣mack & head, & quickneth remembrance, if it be taken in the morow fasting: it is hot in the second degrée, and drye in the first.) Of Zedoario. cap. 196. ZEdoarium is hot and drye, and the tame is best; and that is most ci∣trine, thinne, and also long, and sharpe in sauour, and not thirled neyther hoa∣led. The wilde is whitish, and some∣what sharpe in sauour. And is good and necessary to the same things that Gin∣ger
is good for: and comforteth the sto∣mack and the body, and exciteth and mo∣ueth appetite, as pla. sayth. Of Zucaro. chap. 197. SUgar is called Zucarum & Sucara also. And is made and issueth out of certaine Canes and Réedes, which groweth in lakes and pondes fast by a Riuer that is in Aegypt called Nilus. And the iuyce that issueth out of those Canes or Réedes, is called Canna Mel∣lis, and of that iuyce is Sugar made by séething, as Salt is made of water. The Canes bée broken and put in a Caudron, or in another great vessell, and is sodde with easie and soft fire vntill it be come thicke. And first it séemeth that it tur∣neth all to foame: but after that it hath rested, it becommeth thicker and thicker. And the most purest and best therof sink∣eth down vnto the bottome of the vessel, that it is sodde in, and that which is fatty and foamie abideth and fléeteth aboue. And is lesse of swéetnesse & full of holes, and cracketh not among the téeth when it is chewed, but vanisheth sodeinly and melteth: And the best & most purest deth y• contrary: and that that is best is put in a vessell, & wareth all hard and white at the fire and at the Sun. And some is ri∣trine and more hot then the other, & shall not be giuen to sicke men that haue the feauer ague. And good Sugar is tempe∣rate in his qualities, and hath therefore (as Isaac saith in Dietis) vertue to dry & to cleanse, & to dissolue and temper, & to make thin and cleere, & to moist ye womb without any fretcing or gnawing, and to cleanse the stomack, and to plane & make smooth roughnesse of the brest and of the lungs: and profiteth in cléerring of the voice, & doth away hoarsnesse & cough, & restoreth the humour & moysture that is spent & wasted: and it tempereth sowre∣nesse & bitternesse of smelling spicery: and is most profitable & necessarye in medi∣cines & in Electuaries, in pouders & in si∣rops, as Isaac sayth. But it maketh the wombe somwhat to swell, & namely if it be taken after meate, for all swéet things by kind bréedeth swelling. Also Sugar changeth soone & turneth into red Chole∣ra, if it be giuen to cholarike men. For as Sugar abateth and quencheth ye cold∣nesse & sharpnes of Cholera: so the swéet∣nesse as it were contrary therto, exciteth and whetteth & nourisheth Cholera, as I∣saac sayth in eodem cap. (Additiō.Sugar is a thing very temperate & nourishing, and where there is Cholar in the stomacke, or that the stomack ab∣horreth honnie, it maye bee vsed for hon∣nie in all things wherin honie is requi∣red to be. With Sugar and vineger is made sirop Acetose.) FINIS LIBRI XVII. ¶INCIPIT LIBER XVIII. DE ANIMALIBVS IN GENERALI. FOrasmuch as the foresaid treatise is ended and fini∣shed, as touching those things that beautifieth & maketh faire ye earth, touch∣ing their vertues & pro∣perties, as of are, mettall, stones, and things that grow vnder the ground, & of trées, hearbes, & grasse, and wéeds, which groweth & springeth out of the earth, of whom mention is made in holy writ: now followeth to our purpose to shewe and intreate of the vertues & properties of those things that haue life & feeling. And first in generall, and after in speci∣all, of all beastes tame and wilde, and of all Wormes that créepe on the grounde, that he named in Text and Glose.
And all that is comprehended of flesh and of spirite of lyfe, and so of bodye and soule, is called Animallia beast whether hée be airse, as soules that flye: or watry, as fish that swim or earthy, as beasts: that goe on the grounde and in fieldes, as men and beastes, wilde and tame, or other that créepe and glide on the ground. And Moses assigneth thrée manner of beasts in kinde, tame beasts & wilde, and other that créepe on the grounde, as it is written Gen. 1. Héereof Basilius speaketh in Exameron,verse. 29. and calleth tame beastes Iumenta, and sayth, that they be beastes graunted and ordeyned to vse and to helpe of mankinde. And some be ordey∣ned to trauaile, as horses. Oxen, and Ca∣mells, and other such: and some to beare wooll for clothing of men, as shéepe and other such, & some to be eaten, as swine and pigges. Those bée créeping beastes and worms that passe from place to place by stretching of the bodye, and drawing againe togethers, and moue and passe vp∣ward by such drawing and stretching of the body, as the Wormes, Adders, and Serpents, And thrée manner kinde is of such, for some draweth by the mouth, as small Wormes that drawe themselues by the mouth, and some drawe so for∣warde by strength of the sides and ply∣auntnesse of the body, as Serpents, Ad∣ders, and Snakes: and some creepe on feete, as Eweuetes, and Botractes, that be venimous Frogs, and other such beasts, and be called Bestie, as it were Vastie, wasting. For they haue kindly kinde of cruel∣nesse, & réeseth and sheweth their strength now with clawes, nowe with strength of hornes, now with téeth, as Bores, Li∣ons, Tigres, and wolues. But common∣ly some be called Bestie, that be not tame but wilde, and bée kindly more stirring then tame beasts, and more milde then cruell beasts, as Harts, and other such. And in all beastes is vertue of moouing and of féeling, but in some more, and in some lesse, for as the bloud is more pure and cléere, some féels better and haue bet∣ter estimation and knowing, & bee more wittye and wilye. Therefore it is that the Oxe is slow and stable, and the Asse dull of wit, and horse seruent in desire, and covetous of females, the Woulfe wilde, and not ta∣med, the Lyon bolde and hardy, the Foxe wilye, the hound with minde of friend∣ship, & so of other beasts. And some good∣nesse of males of manners in beasts fol∣loweth goodnesse either mallice of com∣plection, as Basilius sayth. And Aristotle sayth the same in libro de Animalibus, and sayth, that beasts be diuers in man∣ners, for some bée right milde, as the Cow and the Shéepe, and some be right wilde and not tame, as the Tygres & the wilde Boare, and some be right hardye, bolde, and proud, as the Lyon. And some beasted be strong, wilde, and guilefull, as the woulfe & the Foxe, and other such. And this diuersity commeth of diuersitye of vertue, that worketh diuerslye in di∣uers beasts. For as he sayeth, libro. 1. Some beasts haue bloud, and some haue none, as Bées and other beasts with ri∣ueled bodyes.Infecti. Flies vvith parted bodyes. But such beastes haue other humour in steade of bloud. And beasts that haue bloud, be more then other in body and in vertue. Therefore it is, that some beasts loue fellowshippe, and goe in company, and are wilde, as Hartes, wilde Asses, and Camells: And some flye and voyde company, and maye not dwel together in company, as foules, and birds with crooked cleas, and beasts that liue by pray. Héereto Auicen sayth, that some beasts be tame, and some bée wilde, and some liue in towns, and some in fieldes. And among all beastes, man yt may not liue alone, as Cranes, Bérs, and Ampts, that accordeth with man in that. And also he saith, that beasts be diuers in nourishing and in feeding, for onely some eate flesh, as the Lion or the tiger, & the Woulfe, & other such: and some eat flesh, and other meat, as Hounds, and Cats, & other such: and some eate grasse, corne, & other fruit, as horses & hartes, and other such. And Arist. saith, libr. 1. some beastes haue their owne sauour and tast, that them liketh, as Bées haue liking in tast of hony, & few other swéet things, as the Spider hath liking & tast in flies, & liueth by hunting of flies; and some beasts hūt
other beasts, as the Lion & the Woulfe, & other such: & some gather store of meat & féeding, as the Irchin & the Ampt. And why euery beast néedeth meat & nourish∣ing it is, as Auicen saith, Moisture of substance, and heat that dissolueth & wa∣steth moisture, & hot aire that is about the heart. And so alwaye by working of heat, is wasting and losse of humour: & that that is lost, is néedfull to be restored, and that by goodnesse of meat and nouri∣shing. And some beasts séeke their meate by night, as soules that hate light, and some by day. And Aristotle and Auicen saye, that some beasts be alwaye wilde, and some alwaye tame, as Man, Mule, & the Goate: and some be soone made tame, as the Elephant. Of all kinde of tamè beasts, some be found wilde, as a wilde man, a wilde Fore, wilde Horses, wilde Hounds, & wild Swine. And some beasts be full cruell, readye to réese and to fight, and namely in time of loue, & in all ser∣uice of Venus. In all beasts is appetite of loue liking, and then the males woo∣eth and pleaseth the females, and fight for them. And some beasts do slily & wa∣rily, that their hornes and tuskes be hard and sharpe in that time, as wild Swine frote themselues against trées, and their tusks whet, as Arist. saith. And some re∣fraineth them much, and some be right wrathfull and angry & of great memory, as the hound, the Camell, & the Asse: and some haue but feeble memory, as the E∣stridge & Culuer. And onely man calleth to mind that that was forgotten, as Aui. saith. But many beastes holde in minde things yt they see & learne, as Arist. saith li. 1. And onely in man is mindfulnes, as the minde is obedient to reason. There∣fore li. 11. de Ciuitate Dei, Austen saith, yt in vnreasonable beastes is wonderfull redinesse & wit, but in them is no science properly to speake of science: but in them likenesse of science is found, for they haue readinesse of wit, in bréeding & rearing of their brood, and in building and making of bowers and dens, in seeking and get∣ting of meat and nourishing: In medi∣cine and healing of woundes, in flight and voiding of harme in boding or chan∣ging of time and weathers, of knowing of loue of their makes. For the Hart lo∣ueth the Hind, & the Lyon the Lionesse, and the male beare the female, and so of other. Also Aristotle sayeth, that in euerye beast is a radicall member, that is well & head of all the vertues natural and spiri∣tuall, and of feeling, and that member is the heart, or somewhat els in stéed of the heart, of the which roote or heart, as A∣uicen sayth, beginneth creation, making and shape of all beasts. When an unrea∣sonable beast is perfectly made & shapen, the face therof boweth toward the earth, that is the originall & materiall matter, whereof it commeth, and onely to man, kind ordeyneth & dseth vpright stature, wherein mankinde is wonderfully made noble, and passing all other beasts, as the Poet sayth. Os homini sublime dedit coelum{que} videre. Kind hath giuen to man an high mouth & vertue to looke on heaven. Therefore Basilius sayeth, that if a man be defiled with lust & liking of flesh in obeieng to lechery of the wombe, he is made pere to vnwise and vnreasonable beastes, and is made like to them. Also Basilius saith, that all beasts of the earth be comforted and hearted to gender & to get broods of their owne kind, to multiply after them, by gendring heat that tickleth and prick∣eth, & that falleth most in springing time, when the vertue of the heate of heauen beginneth to haue mastrye of bodyes of beasts. And in such forme meaneth Ari∣stotle. And also Auicen sayth, that euery beast that hath Semen, gendereth ano∣ther beast, which is lyke to it selfe. And therefore to euerye beast, which may not kéepe and saue alwaye kinde in it selfe, kind giueth it a member, by which it puteth out Semen, & another mēber, wherin it may be receiued, as the mother in the female taketh Semen: and this is general in all kinde of beastes, in the which is male and female. For the male is at it were a manner worker & shaper, and the female as it were matter to worke in. Therefore euery female beast hath such a member, called the mother, or els som∣what els in stéede of the mother, wherin
she may receiue semen and broode. And that falleth diuersly in diuers maner of beastes: for otherwise in such beastes, which lay egges, than in other maner of beasts, which containeth perfect beastes within themselues, as Auicen setteth ensample of many, following Aristotle. And he setteth all beasts with bloud, a∣fore beasts which haue no bloud. & saith, that they be alwayes more noble and more huge and great in quantitie and in vertue, except a fewe beasts of the wa∣ter and sea. And he saith, yt euery beast hauing noble bloud, moueth with foure instruments, as vnreasonable beastes, with foure féete: or els it moueth and stirreth with two handes and with two féete, as it fareth in mankinde: and some mooueth and stirreth with winges, and with two féete, as it fareth in birds and in fowles with feathers. But diuers and manye manner of beasts be found, hauing moe féete than foure, as it fareth in fishes that be cal∣led Crabs, and small shragges, and other such. And also some haue moe winges thē twayn, as it fareth in butterflyes, & in Bées, and in some long flyes, and in such is but little bloud, which is trea∣sure of kinde. And therfore the sore lims worke more effectually in the first ma∣ner, then many lims doe in the seconde manner, as in beasts the sore lyms are more able and worke more effectuallye than the hinder: for they haue more heat, and more part of heate of bloud of the heart, and be néere thereto. And Auicen toucheth ye generall properties of beasts and sayth. In some manner, some beastes communeth and accordeth in members, as man and horse in flesh & in sinewes, and are diuers in many things: First in qualitie and in manner of setting and mouing of members, both of the simple members and of the compouned, as it fa∣reth of the Snaile, that hath shelles, and of the Irchin, that hath pricks, and man hath none: and the horse hath a tayle, and man hath none. And beastes be also diuers in quan∣titie, as many in mouth, and in opening of eyen. The opening of the Owles eye is much: and the opening of Ea∣gles eyen is lyttle. Also the members be diuers in num∣ber and tale, for in some beasts are two feete, and in some foure feete: & in some be more fóete than foure, as it fareth in Spiders: for some Spider hath eyght fáete, and some other Spider hath tenne féete. Also in qualitie, colour, figure and shape, or in softnesse and hardnesse: as and Oxe foote is full harde, and a mans foote is full softe. And are also diuerslye set, as it fareth in the teates of a Mare, and an Elephant: for an Elephant hath teates vnder the breast, and the Mare in the flanke, betwéene the thighes be∣hinde. And are also diners in working, as it fareth in the nosethrills of ye Elephant, with the which he fighteth. And are also diuers in suffering, as it fareth in the eyen of the Reremouse, which be full féeble and in the eyen of the Swallow, which contrariwise are right strong, as Auicen saith. And be diuers in appetite, for some haue a great appetite and de∣sire to serue Venus, and some féeble, as the Elephant and the Turtle: and some haue appetite to serue Venus with all manner kinde of beasts, and some onely with beasts of their owne kinde: & some are continent & chast alwayes, as Bées. And some be great gluttons, and great deuourers of meate, and therefore they hunt by night, as Wolues which be cal∣led Hahala. Additiō.(Hahala, is no proper word; For Lupus in Hebrue, is called Zeeb in Chaldiacke, Deba in Arabicke. Deba and Alsebha, is the name if all foure footed beastes that haue clawes, that do scrape teare and rent, as with téeth and biting. In the Siriacke, Dabha, Al∣dabha and Dahab, of his furious raue∣ning. Gesner in folio. 717. in his booke of heasts.) And some of those rauenous beasts séeke foode by daye, as the Goshawke, and the Eagle: and some other both by daye and by night, as Cattes. Also in euery beast néedeth diuers mem∣bers to serue each other for diuers wor∣kings.
And so the bones be needfull to sustaine all the bodie: the gristles be needfull to defend the flesh from the hurting of the bones: and sinewes be needfull to binde and to ioyne members togethers, and to beare and to lead, and to bring fóeling into al the members, and be hard to cut∣ting, and plyant to stretch and to binde flesh, and be right néedefull to the Well of lyfe, and for gendering of spirites. The lungs be right needfull for breath∣ing, and for gathering and drawing of colde aire, that it may coole the seruent heate of the heart. The stomack is need∣full for the first digestion of meats. The lyuer is needfull to gendering of bloud: veynes be néedefull to beare bloud into all the members of the body. The guts be néedfull to heare the drastes and dirte to voyde it out of the body. The raynes be néedfull, and the gendring stones, to sauing of kinde: the gall is néedfull to comfort digestion: the splene is néedfull to gathering superfluitie of the humour melancholicke: the head is needfull to wits that be therein, to giue feeling and ruling to all the body: the neck is néed∣full for ioyning of the head and the bo∣dy together, and to bring meate & drink to the stomacke: the breast is néedfull to defend the heart and spirituall mem∣bers: the armes and handes be néedfull to workes and deedes: the sides & ribs to keepe and to saue the kinde members: féete and legs to vnderset and to moue swiftlye from place to place: the skin is néedfull to keepe and defende all that is within from outwarde griefes and hurts: vaires be néedefull to saue the skinne: nayles be needfull to keepe the vttermost parts, and also for defence in many maner beasts, & kinde hath wise∣ly ordeined in all beasts som what where∣with ther may defend them against noi∣aunces and griefes and hurtings. And therefore Harts haue hornes, and Bores haue tuskes, and Lyons vse clawes in stéede of swords, and so in beasts is no default nor superfluitie. And small beasts that lacke sharpe téeth, and clawes, and hornes, are defended with ablenesse of members, and swiftnesse of fligh, as it faceth in Hares, in Fawnes, and other such. Also euery beast ye gendreth another beast, hath eyen except the Mole, yt hath eyen closed within a web, and that web is giuen to the Moale, for féeblenesse of sight: and euery beast that hath eares, moueth the eares except man: and eue∣rye beast breatheth, but some by wayes which are knowen, as by the mouth, or els by the nose: and some by preuye wayes, as by preuy holes and poores, as Bées, and Flyes, and beasts which glide on the ground. And euerye foure footed beast which hath bloud hath marrow, & namely man hath much marrow in cō∣parison to his body, and that is needfull to man, for many and diuers workes, & dooings. And euery beast yt hath horns, is cloue footed with hornes without, ex∣cept one beast, that is, an Unicorne, that hath but one horne in the fore∣head, and one hoofe in the foote, as an horse. (Additiō.The Unicorne is cloue footed, as the Stagge, called in Gesner Monoce∣rote, Folio. 781.) And euery horned beast hath hollow hornes, except the Harte and the Uni∣corne: and euery horned beast is foure footed, with material and hard horne, ex∣cept a manner Serpent, which is in the region of Aegypt, which is found hor∣ned, and many call that serpent Serastes. And héere I speak of beasts which haue hornes of kinde of bone: for Snayles haue certaine hornes softe and gleymie, but they are not properly hornes, but things giuen to Snayles for helpe and succour. For Snailes be féeble of sight, and grope and séeke their wayes, with those horns. And if the Snayle méeteth with any hard thing, anone he draweth in his hornes: (Additiō.At the ende of which hornes, there appeareth a blacke like the sight of an eye, wherewithall it séemeth they haue some sight,) and then he closeth himselfe within his shelles: For hée vseth his shelles in stéede of houses and Castles. Also some beasts haue téeth in either iaw, and some haue onely in the nether iaw, & those which haue no téeth in the ouer iaw, be horned, for that matter pas∣seth and turneth into hornes.
And no Beast which hath crooked féeth or tuskes, as ye Bore, hath hornes, for that matter passeth and turneth in∣to turkes: for tuskes and hornes accord not in the same beast: Beasts of praye haue téeth departed and sharpe, that they may the better enter and come to the praye, and bite thereof gobbets and pée∣ces, as Wolues and Lyons. And tame beasts, as the Cowe, and beasts that be made tame, as the Elephant & Camell, haue téeth lyke high and nigh togethers, as if were one bone, that they may the better eate grasse and hearbes, and bite them the more euen nigh the ground, and no beast: hath more rowes of téethe in his mouth than twayne, except cer∣taine fish, that haue great teeth in their iawes set farre asunder, as the téeth of of a Sawe, and haue also teeth set with∣in, and with those inner, they gather and holde the meate, least the water shoulde wash it soone out of their mouthes, as it fareth in water Wolues, that are Lu∣ties, and in manye other, as Aristotle sayth: But it is sayd, that in Inde is a beast wonderfully shapen, and is lyke to the Beare in body & in the haire,The beast is called Hanthi. Looke in the letter H. follow¦ing, for this beast his di∣scription. and to a man in face, and hath a right red head, and a full great mouth and an horrible, and in either iawe thrée rowes of téeth di∣stinguished asunder. The vtter limmes thereof, be as it were the vtter syins of a Lyon, and his tayle is lyke to a with scorpion with a sting, and smiteth with hard bristle prickes as a wilde Swine, and hath an horrible voyce, as the voies of a trumpe, and he runneth full swift∣ly and eateth men; & among all beasts of the earth, is none found more cruell nor more wonderfully shapen, as Aui∣cen saith, and this beast is called Bari∣cus in Greeke, as he saith. Also libro. 8. cap. 22. Plinius saith, that  writeth and fareth, that among the Medes is a beast, that is most wicked & euill, which he tasteth , and hath three rowes of teeth set a rowe, and toge∣thers  and is lyke to a  in ares, and in face and hath ye  and  like to a Lion, with a Scorpions tayle, and stingeth with bristle prickes, and hath a voyce, lyke to the voyce of a man. And if a marrsingeth to a pipe and to a trumpe, it seemeth that this beasts voyce accor∣deth with the trumpe and tune melodie. And so this is the same beast, that Aui∣cen and Plinius speake of. Also euerye beast that gendreth and getteth a beast, hath two reynes & a bladder, but beasts that lay egges, haue neither bladders, neither reynes: for in birds and soules superfluitie of moysture passeth into fe∣thers and clawes, and in fish, into the shelles and scales; and therefore them néedeth no instrument to receiue super∣fluitie of moysture. Also euery beast that hath hornes & to téeth aboue, cheweth his cudde, and hath many wombes, and full great, and another lesse, one long & another wide, & many manner digestions be the cause, whereof such a Beast, hath so manye wombes: for his meate is drye, and is not right well chewed in the beginning when the beast féedeth, and that is for hast of eating, and for this cause this meate so swallowed, néedeth to be che∣wed againe, and then the meate is dra∣wen out of ye more wombe to ye mouth, and so the beast doth chewe it againe. And when the meate is chewed, it is sent to the second wombe, that it maye be there digested; & so to chew is called Ruminate, as Auicen saith, and Rumi∣nate is to chew the cud. Also libro. a. cap. 1. Auicen sayth in this manner, I saye that each Beast with tallowe hath fatte braine, and that the beast that hath no tallowe, hath no vnctuous marrough: and euerye beast that bretheth hath lungs, as fishes haue braunches, whereby they drawe in, and put out water and ayre: and euery beast that hath bloud, hath hart and liuer, and beasts that be without bloud, haue no heart, but haue somewhat els in seede of heart, that is feare and Well of life. Also all beastes that gender, haue gall, some preuely and hid, as the Hart, Horse, and Mule, and some openly kno∣wen and séene. Onelye the Dolphin wanteth gall, though he gendreth & bre∣theth.
And other beasts that lay egges, haue gall great or small, as fishes and Ser∣pents. Also he saith, that euerye Beast that hath bloud hath semen: and euerie beast without bloud that gendreth ano∣ther, hath fiue wits, except the mouse with eyen healed and couered, and hath the blacke of the eye vnder a skinne: and in some beasts the wayes of wit and of feelyng, bée preuye and bée hidde, as eares and nosethrills in fish, which heare as it is well knowen: for they flye and voyd flushing and noyse: & they smell well also, els would they not come to the net, for milke, nor for flesh rosted. For flesh rosted, crabs come into willowes and pitches. Therefore Ari∣stotle saith, as Auicen meaneth, that the Dolphin, and other manner of fish, fall to the bottome sodainly, as it were in E∣pilencia, when they heare sodaine thun∣dering, or great mouing and noyse, and be taken as they were dronke. And fish flyeth and voydeth the place of washing and slaughter of other fish, and the bloud of other fish, and flye and voyd also hoa∣rie and uncleane nets, and come glably into new. And beastes with crimping bodies haue sharpe wit & féeling, though it be priuie and hid, as Bées and Antes, that heare and smell a farre, and haue liking in certaine odor and smell, and dye in some odour of Brimstone, and of burnt leather, and of burnt Harfes hornes: and so Bées abide not in pla∣ces of euill smell, but they rest in pla∣ces with good smell and sweetnesse, as he sayth. Also hée sayth, that beasts are diuers in manner of voyce of crieng: for some haue strong voyce and sharpe, and some féeble and lowe and some with ly∣tle voyce or none, and onely beasts that haue the wosen of voyce, and lungs, and breath, haue voyce. But some breatheth not, and maketh somtime noyse & some∣time an hissing. And beastes that haue voyce make tunes and melodie, & some crye, chitter and sing, namely in time of gendering and of loue, and they knowe each other by their owne voyce, and call and pray each other to loue. Also he sai∣eth, that each beast, that hath bloud and goeth, waketh and sléepeth, and euerye beast that hath eye lyddes, closeth them when he sleepeth: and euery beast that layeth egges, maketh small sléepe. Also euery beast néedeth meate and no∣rishing according to his complection, and that is right needfull and necessary for sustenaunce and wexing of the beast, or for the restoring of that thing, which is lost by kindly heate. But in receiving and taking of meat and drinke there is great difference: for some going beastes with complete and euen lyppes, drinketh sucking, as man, horse, cowe and mule, and other such: and beastes with vneuen lyppes, in the which the neather lippe is shorter then that ouer, drinke lapping, as an hound, & cat, and other such: and so by the disposition of eyennesse and vneuennesse of lippes, some beasts in drinking sucke, & some lappe: and therefore kinde ordayneth wisely in hounds, and in other lapping beasts, tender tongue, long and plyaunt, & the tongue is the more able to licke & to holde the water, and bring it to the mouth. But many foure footed beastes, drinke not but seldome, as Lonyes, and Hares and other such: for meate of such beasts is right moyst, and that moisture sufficeth to them in stéede of drinke, & to bring their meate into the members, & to coole kinde heate. And other beasts that be full hot and drye, either of com∣plection, or by accidentall heate and dri∣nesse, and vse drye meate or hotte, néede therefore drinke to the foresaid things & doings: and this is the cause why Cul∣uers and other birds that be not rauen∣ners drink: for they eate corne & graines and other such and their meate is fatte, hot and drye. And fowles and birds of prane, vse moyst meate indeed, and drinke therefore but seldome, and when they drink, it is token of sicknesse and that vnkind heat hath passing, masterie in them, as Aui∣cen and Aristotle meane. And Auicen meaneth, that beasts with little bodyes, be more slye and hardie, and wittie, than other beastes with great bodyes: is it fareth in Spiders, Bees, & Antes, their workes be so slighe and subtill,
that mans wit may not comprise to doe such workes, for in them kinde reward∣eth in sleight and in wit, that that sée∣meth to be withdrawen from them in might and in strength, as he saith. Also in li. de mirabilibus mundi, cir∣ca finem, Solinus saith: that euery beasts with crooked téeth as a sawe, is a Glut∣ton, and fighteth: as it fareth of hounds, Panthers, Lyons, and Beares. And the females of such beasts bring forth yoūg, vnperfect and vncomplete, as the Bitche bringeth forth blinde whelpes, and the female Bears bringeth forth a lumpe of flesh not deuided by shape of members: and she kéepeth that lumpe hot, vnder hir armes pits, as the Den sitteth on hir egges: and the female Beare, licketh that lumpe of flesh, and shapeth it some and some, vntill it receiue perfect fi∣gure and shape of a Beare. Also the Pan∣ther & the Lions bringeth forth whelps, but not complete nor perfectly shapen, and euery beast that bringeth foorth ma∣ny young, loueth best the first, and ac∣counteth it most kindly hir owne, and therefore some beasts eate and deuoure their owne broode, except the first, as some Swine doe oftentimes. Also he sayth, that in all beasts that bring young foorth, vncomplete and vn∣perfect, the cause is gluttonie, for if kinde would abide vntill they were complete and perfect, the whelpes would slaye the damme with sucking, for immoderate & ouer passing appetite: and therefore in such beasts, kinde is swift to bring them foorth soone, or to make them soone dye, least they shoulde grieue the damme too sore, and such beastes, brought foorth in that manner, fight for meate and food, as Auicen saith, and hate each other. Ther∣fore kinde hath ordayned remedie to sane the kinde of those beasts, and ordai∣neth that such beastes may bring foorthe manye young at once, so that if it hap∣pen that many of them be dead and lost in sighting, the kinde of them maye bee saued in few & not too many. Therefore the female Wolfe, whelpeth manye whelpes, as the Bitche doeth. And the Idder that is called Vipera hath twen∣tie young at once, as he sayth: and so for the increase of this Vipera bet ma∣ny aliue at once in the wombe, for desire of nourishing they sucke much, & drawe of the humour so much, that the damme sufficeth not to sustaine so many in hir wombe: therefore she sayleth and dy∣eth ere she may bring foorth hir kinde at full. Also Aristotle and Auicen say, that beasts with téeth ioyned togethers and blunt, haue few increase, and beasts with téeth departed farre a sunder and sharpe, and set with many chinnes, haue many young, and much semen, & beasts with little bodies, gender more than beasts with great bodyes. And beastes that gender little and haue few of their kinde, haue few teates and diuersly, and set in diuers places. And therefore the Bitch hath many teates, and the Sowe also, & be beasts that haue many young. Also beasts that vse superfluitie and con∣tinuance of the seruice of Venus, haue much shorter life than those beasts that serue Venus temperately and seldem: and therefore gelded men lyue longer than other for in them the sinewes are cut, by the which semen shoulde come downward to effect and working of ge∣neration. Also in libro de spermate Galen and also Constantine tell the cause and rea∣son thereof. And Auicen libro de Ani∣malibus affirmeth the same and sayeth, that Sperma is gendered and commeth of good bloud and ful digested, the which bloud is readie to turne and to passe in∣to nourishing of membes, and therefore when a man sheddeth that humour se∣minall, the man is greatly discoloured, and the body more féebled than though he bled fortie times so much: for sper∣ma is a thing able and made readye to passe into nourishing of members: and therefore when Sperma passeth out of the bodie, kinde féeding and nouri∣shing of the members, is taken and withdrawen, and thereof is great losse of spirites and of vertue in the bo∣dye of the Beast. And so immoderate and ofte gendering is cause of spoyling and vndoing of the body, and so the lyfe is shortened. And therefore the Elephant lyueth
longest f:sor hée loueth chastitie, and vseth lecherie but seldome. Huc vsque Aristoteles. Auicen, and Solinus, and Isaac in dietis vniuersalibus, treateth of beastes, in that they be féeding and norishing for mans body: for some beastes accorde to mans complection, as Lambe, Kidde, Shéepe and Swine among tame beasts: Hart and Hindes, Backes and Roes a∣mong wilde beastes. And some be all contrary to mans complection, and that for great heate, as the Adder Tyrus, and other Serpents: or els for too great cold, as Spiders and Scorpions. And some are vnlyke to mans kinde, but they be not all contrary, neither poyson: as Ir∣thins, Hares, and Fores, & other beasts with flesh of heauie smell, for of suche beastes, commeth worst nourishing of mans body. And wilde beasts be more hot and drye, & leane, than tame beasts, and that for continuall mouing, and for heate of the ayre that they be in, and al∣so for drinesse of their meate and nouri∣shing, and therefore their flesh is more hard, and harder to digest, and that is knowen, for when they be slaine, theyr flesh rotteth not so soone as the flesh of tame beasts. Therefore all flesh of wilde beastes, is lesse sauoury and norisheth lesse, than flesh of tame beasts, except the flesh of wilde Roes, that is much more sauorie than other, and better, and more nouri∣shing. Their bodies be made softe by mouing, and humours be made small & thin, and the pores be opened, and hu∣mours that be cause of heauie smell, be dissolued and amended, and so because of mouing and of trauaile, they be acciden∣tally made more sauourie, for by suche running and mouing about, theyr kinde coldnesse is tempered: and therefore in wild beasts that run and trauaile much, the heauie smell and sauour is taken a∣waye, and their flesh is made the more sender, for their pores be opened, and the humours are tempered, that their flesh may be the better and sooner dissolued, & corporate into members, and because of kinde drinesse, their flesh is the later dis∣solued in the members. Also some beasts are fed and nouri∣shed in moist places and watry, and their flesh nourisheth soone, and is soone dige∣sted, but it is soone dissolued of the mem∣bers. And some are fed in mountaines and in drye places, and their flesh is bet∣ter in kéeping and gouerning of health, and more according in comforting, and more perfect in during in the mem∣bers. And other beasts that he made tame and fed in houses, haue more gleymie & great flesh, because of great eating, and of corrupt meate, and therefore theyr flesh is hard nourishing, and dissolueth slowly both in the stomacke, and in the liuer: for as Hippocrates saieth, To know goodnesse of kinde of beastes, as touching nourishing and féeding of the body, it helpeth to know place & pasture where they be fed, and aire moyst or drie where they dwell, and quantitie of mouing and of rest, and how they are disposed accidentally or kindlye in idle∣nesse or in trauaile. And beasts that are kindly tame, be lesse hot & more moist than wilde beasts, and therefore ye flesh is more softe, and the sooner digested, for by great rest and ease the pores be clo∣sed, and the thicke humours be tempe∣red by heat that is closed within, and so the flesh softeneth and tendereth. And for they eate and drinke much, their super∣fluitie of humours increaseth soone, and fatnesse is increased, and therefore the bodyes of such beastes, are much nou∣rishing and sauoury, and passeth soone into the members and into the veynes. And for multitude of gleaminesse and of moysture, such flesh rotteth soone, and gendereth superfluitie of humours. And though it féede kindly and much, yet for passing moysture it is soone dissolued, and passeth out of the members. And so acci∣dentally it nourisheth the body lesse then flesh of wilde beasts. For though ye flesh of wilde beasts nourisheth but little: yet for it is hard to dissolue and slow, it abi∣deth longer in the members, in which it is incorporate. Therefore men in olde time sayd that it norisheth the members accidentally. Also in all manner kinde of beastes,
the male is more hot and lesse moist than the female, and therefore flesh of male beasts is more subtill and better féeding than the flesh of females, except Goats flesh, that is better in the female than in the male, for in the female moisture tē∣pereth the drinesse of complection, and in the male, heate kindeleth or tempereth not ye kind drines of the male: & there∣fore in this manner kinde of beasts, the flesh of the female is better than the flesh of the male, for it is more tempe∣rate, and not passing drye, & that though it be fresh or olde, and namely when it passeth not from age of sucking, for then the goodnesse of milke of the female tempereth kinde drinesse therof. And gelded beastes be meane betwéene complection of male and of female: for flesh of gelded beasts heateth lesse, than doth flesh of males, and more than flesh of females: and is digested flower than male flesh, and sooner than female flesh: and are therefore lesse nourishing, and worse than be males, and better than fe∣males. And it is a generall rule, that a∣mong beasts that be kindly moyst, the male is better than the female, and bet∣ter in perfect age, than in vnperfect age: and among beasts that be kindly drye, the female is much better than the male, and more in vnperfect age, than in per∣fect age, as be saith. Also goodnesse of beastes, varieth by diuersitie of age, for beasts that be nigh the age of seeking, be of great moysture and gleyminesse, and also of sledernesse, and therefore their flesh gendreth super∣fluitie and fleame: but if it be beastes that are kindly drye, as Rotherne, and Goates. And flesh of such beastes, as Calues, is good in such an age, & name∣ly if they be nourished with good milk, and best if they be weaned, for it is lesse moyst and gleymie, and of more tempe∣rate sadnesse. And in young age, when beasts be full-waxen, then theyr flesh is more hard and drye, and namely if the beasts be of drye complection, and there∣fore their flesh is more hard to digest: and is better in comforte of the mem∣bers, and in during more than in ruling of health, as he saith. And in the fourth age when they be ful olde, their flesh is more vnprofitable to meate, and that for double cause: For than kinde heate is nigh quenched, and substaunciall moysture is full nigh wa∣sted, and therefore their flesh is full hard and not good to digest, and namely if the beasts be of drye complection. And it is generall among all beasts and fowles, that while they grow and wexe: theyr flesh is better to meate, and better fée∣ding, than it is when it passeth into fée∣blenesse for age, as hée sayth. Also in pasture and féeding is diuer∣sitie, for beasts that be fedde in moun∣taines, haue better bloud, and more sub∣till and sharpe, for scarcitie of meate. And those that be fed in marreys, haue more great bloud and more fatnesse, and lesse heate, and lesse stopping. And beasts that eate grasse and hearbes, as meate, are more boyde in Winter, than in Springing time or in Summer, for in Winter their meate faileth, and there∣fore they wexe fat, after the middle of Springing time or before, and wexeth much, and their flesh is more sauourye and better because of plentie of couena∣ble meate. And beasts that eate smal grasse and hearbes, are more fat from the begin∣ning of springing time to the middle of Summer, and their flesh is then best, for then they finde couenable meate and good and tender, for then they haue co∣uenable meate and foode. And other beasts that eate crops, boughs, twigs, & also braunches, are good from the begin∣ning of Summer vnto Winter: For then boughes and braunches, are both full moyst and tender. And so beastes, that eate full small grasse and drye, are better than those that eate moyst grasse and hearbes: and those that eate tender boughes and braunches are much better than those that be fedde at home with fruite. And those that eate and drincke lyttle, are better than those that eate & drinke much: for beasts that are fed in fieldes and in mountaines, haue great trauaile and moouing, and are there∣fore better than those that are fedde at home.
For those that be in mountaines and in fields, haue and draw more subtill ayre and drye, because of running about. And so superfluitie of humours is fore∣dried, & their complection is made tem∣perate. And againward, beasts that are fed at home, be found lesse good and pro∣fitable in cōplection, for scarcitie of pure aire, and for default of mouing, and for plentie of meate and of drinke. Also beasts are diuers, for some are fat, and some are leane, and some are meane: for the flesh of them that are fat, is worst to meate, for it grieueth & letteth digestion, for it fleeteth about the meate, and maketh the meate to swell, and softeneth the roughnesse of the sto∣macke, and causeth the stomacke to bée sudder and gleymie: and therefore too great fatnes dissolueth a moyst stomack by reason of failing of the vertue con∣tentiue, comfortatiue, and expulsiue: and it kindleth and heateth too soone an hot stomacke, as fire is ofte kindeled with∣out by fatnesse: and therefore men in olde time bad and commaunded, that of most fat beasts onely the red flesh shuld be eaten, and the fatnesse done awaye. And most leane beaste are sinewie and tough, and haue lyttle bloud and lyttle moysture, and giueth therefore lyttle no∣rishing to manns bodye. But beastes that are meane betweene sat and leane are most profitable, for they haue not so much fatnesse to kindle the heate of the stomacke, nor to make the roughnesse of the stomacke slider: nor so much leannesse to coole the stomacke, and to spoyle it of bloud. Also beasts are diuers in chaunging of time, for some beasts haue scarsitie of marrow and of bloud in one time, and are full thereof in the contrary time, as it is openly knowen in shell fish of the sea, and in mans braine, and percase in euery beasts braine, as Aristotle sayth, openly in libro de proprietatibus E∣lementorum. And therefore many wex sicke in one part of the month or of the yeare, ye another time be knowen whole and sound, and cleane of all sicknesse in contrary time, as it fareth in Lunaticke men and in mad men, and in Caduc men that haue the falling euill. Héereof seek more before cap. de Luna. And so Aui∣cen speaketh of the Ape and saieth, that the Ape is glad or sory by chaunging of times, and namely by the course of the Moone: & also in some season, beasts wex leane, though they haue neuer so much meate, and wexe fat in sléeping in the contrary time, as Auicen saith: and he sayth, that Glyres a manner kinde of mice, that moueth not in Winter, but lye as they were dead, and eateth not, wexe fat in sléeping, and wake in Sum∣mer time, and moue themselues against the heate of the Sunne: and he telleth wonderfully of the Swallowes and of other foules, that be found as it were dead in hollow trees in winter time, and quickeneth and waketh after, as it were sleeping they are made strong, and shew themselues strong and swifte in Sum∣mer time: and so the female Beare, af∣ter that she hath conceiued, hideth hir selfe long time in priuie places, and ta∣keth no meate that time, as Auicen say∣eth, and Aristotle and Solinus meaneth. Looke within cap. de Viso. Also fish in one month wexeth fat, and soone after∣ward wexe leane: and some wexeth fat in the Northerne winde, as fish with long bodies, & some in Southern winde, as fish with broad bodies: and some in raine time, as Aristotle sayeth. Rayne water accordeth to all manner shell fish, except the Fish that is called Roytera, that dyeth in the same daye, if he tasts rayne water: and too much rayne wa∣ter grieueth some fish: for it blyndeth them. And some beasts sometime change and renew themselues, and cast of and chaunge their superfluitie, as Crabbes change their shells, and Hartes theyr hornes, and Goshaukes their feathers. And Isaac meaneth and sayeth, flesh of beasts in which drinesse & heat hath ma∣stry, is not full good, as Camell flesh, and is not full good in Summer, but Ca∣mells flesh is according in winter: and flesh of beasts that be hot and moyst, as sheepes flesh, is good in springing time: and competent in haruest. Flesh that is colde and drye, is not full good, as Goats flesh colde and moyst.
And Swines flesh is best from ye mid∣dle of Summer to the ende, and worst in Winter, and meane in Springing time and in haruest. And so Hippocra∣tes saieth, that Swines flesh is good in Springing time, and lesse worth in har∣uest, and lesse worth in Winter. And Goates flesh is good in Summer, and Shéepes flesh in Springing time: and in the beginning of Summer, flesh of beasts, as it is ordained to mans meate, is diuersly dressed & ordained to mans meate. For as Isaac saith, flesh of beasts is sometime rosted, and sometime fryed, and sometime sod in water with salt. Flesh rosted and fryed is great and dry in féeding and nourishing, and harde to digest, for the moysture thereof is wa∣sted, and then the flesh taketh drinesse of the fire: and right fat flesh should not be eaten but rosted, so that the moysture thereof may be drawen out of the sub∣staunce thereof. Sodde flesh is more moyst and more easie to digest, for the water tempereth & maketh it moist: and somtime in the water in the which flesh is sodden, is spicerie put, & thereof is made diuers sauce, and kéepeth and sa∣ueth the flesh in his kinde goodnesse, and amendeth it both in smell and in sauor, and maketh it vertuous to destroye and put out diuers sicknesses and euills. And it is necessary to séeth flesh of dry beasts, and to rost flesh of moyst beasts & fat, and to dresse flesh of meane beastes be∣twéene these twaine, with diuers man∣ner of sauce, and this dressing is done in many manner of wise: for some flesh of beasts is wholsome, and accordeth to rosting, and is not ful good sod. And Ro∣then flesh and Goates flesh is better sod than rosted, & Swines flesh & Shéepes flesh is better rosted than sod: for by sée∣thing dry flesh is made moyst, & by ro∣sting moyst flesh is dried, and therefore for the moysture thereof, it is good to rost swines flesh, and for passing drines thereof, it is good to seeth Goates flesh & Oxe flesh. Also flesh of those beasts varieth and is diuers, by such accident and dressing, for swines flesh rosted, is amended and made better by rosting, and appaired by séething, and Goates flesh is better sodde, and worse rosted: and so it is to know of other. Huc vsque Isaac in Dietis. Also beasts are ordained, not onelye for meate of the bodye, but also for re∣medie of euills, and also for many man∣ner of medicines. All kinde of beastes, wilde and tame, going and créeping, is made and ordayned for the best vse of mankinde, as Plinius and Iohn Dama∣scenus meaneth. But some beastes are ordained for mans meate, as Shéepe, Harts, and other such: and some serue for the seruice of mankinde, as Horses, Asses, Oxen and Camells, & other such: and some for mans mirshe, as Apes, Marmusets, and Popiniayes: and some be made for exercitation of man, for man should know his owne infirmitie, and the might of God, and therefore are made flyes and lice: and Lyons & Ty∣gers, and Beares be made, that man may by the first know his owne infir∣mitie, and be afeard of the second & haue succour by callyng of Gods name. Also some beasts are made to reléeue & helpe the néede of many maner infirmityes of mankinde, as ye flesh of ye adder Vipera to make Triacle, and the gall of a Bull and of other beasts and fowles, to do a∣waye dimnesse of eyen: and an Adders skin sod in Oyle, abateth ache of the eares, and that in wonderfull manner, as Dioscorides sayth in libro Aescula∣pij, De occultis membrorum virtu∣tibus. It is sayd, that if he that hath the E∣moroides sitteth on Lyons skinnès, the Emoroydes shall passe away from him, and Wolues flye from him, that is an∣noynted with Lyons dirte: also there he saith, yt if the tayle of an old Woolfe be hanged at the Cowes stall, ye wolues will not come there nigh: also Diosco∣rides saith, that Beares eyen taken out of the head, and bounde together vnder the right arme of a man, abateth his fea∣uer quartains. Also the long téeth of a Woolfe healeth Lunaticke men, as hée saith, and so sayth Pythagoras and Pli∣nius also, and telleth, that tame foure foo∣ted beasts dread and flye, if they sée a
Wolues eye taken out of the head. In libro Viatico Constantine saieth, that the haire of a white hound without any blacke speck, helpeth them that haue the falling euill, and kéepeth them from fal∣ling if that haire be hanged about their necke: and such a thing saith Phytha∣goras in lib. Romanorum, and saith. If a ring be made of the hoofe of a white Asse, that hath no blacke speckes, and he that hath the falling euill beare & weare that ring, that ring kéepeth him from fal∣ling. And also he saith, that the gall of a Bull anoynted vnder the nauell, laxeth and softeneth the wombe. Also he saith, that the teeth of a Ser∣pent, which ought to be taken out of the head while the Serpent is a lyue, and hanged after about him that hath the fe∣uer quartane, that tooth destroyeth his quartane. And if thou besmoakest the house with the lungs of an Asse, thou cleansest the house of serpents and other créeping wormes. Plin. saith, that these vertues and properties, and many other wonderfull, be hidde in lims and mem∣bers of beasts, as it shall be saide more héereafter in the kinde and properties of perticular beasts: for nothing is in the body of a beast, without medicine, open, or hid: for the skin, haire, horne, naile, clawes, flesh and bloud, be not without remedie, nor the onely dirte. ¶De Animalibus in spci∣ali. cap. 2 FOR because the kindes and proper∣ties of beasts is shewed in generall, now by the helpe and grace that is sent from aboue, following to our purpose, we shall intreate of the vertues and pro∣pertyes of some Beastes and créeping wormes in singular and in speciall, and that by the order of A B C. ¶Of Ariete. chap. 3. THe Ramme is a Beast that beareth wooll, pleasing in heart, and mild by kinde, as Isidore saith lib. 12. cap. 1.Aries Dur est Ouīum. In He∣brue Ail, & tel. Caldeus. Dikerin, Arabie, Rabsa, & Rabsali. And is Duke, leader, and Prince of shéepe. Therefore kinde giueth him great strength passing other shéepe. It is séem∣ly that the Ram that is Duke and de∣fender of other shéepe, be more strong & mightie, than other shéepe: & therefore. Isi. saith, that the Ram is called Veruex, & hath that name of Vires, strength, and as it were a man, for he is male & mai∣ster of shéepe, and is more vertuous and stronger than other. Or, as Isidore saith, this Nowne Veruex commeth of Vermis, a worme: for the Ramme hath a Worme in his head, and for fretting of that Worme & itching, the Ramme is excited, & pusheth full strongly, and smiteth full harde, all that it méeteth: and therefore the Ram is called Aries also, and hath that name of Ares, that is Gréek, and is to our vn∣derstanding, vertue: for in flockes, the males are called Arietes, for they be ver∣tuous and mightie, to get and gender Lambes, for they passe other shéepe in greatnes of body & of might, & strength and vertue. Also this name Aries commeth of Aris, Altars, for as Isidore saith, This beast was first offred on Altars among Nations, and so the Ramme is called Aries, for he was slaine by Aaron at the Altar, and so by Moses law the Ramme was principally a cleane beast both to Sacrifice and to meate: For he was offered couenably for sinne of the Peo∣ple, and is cloue footed, and cheweth his cud, and was eaten indifferently of the people. And as Isidore sayth libro. 12. Sheepe were called sometime Bidentes: for among eight téethe that they com∣monly haue, two téeth be higher than any of the other, and therefore. Nati∣ous offered them principally in sacrifice to the Gods, as he sayth libro. 8. capi∣tulo. 47. Plinius speaketh singularlye of the Ramme, and sayth, that it is the kinde of the Ramme in the Iustines of his youth for to noye the Lambes, and to followe the Eawes that come against him. For he is farre more tractiue and more pro∣fitable in age: and neuerthelesse hee is more ceuell in heart then the Ewes, and
his cruelnesse abateth, if his hornes bée pearced igh to the eare. If his righte gendring staue be bound, he gendreth fe∣males: and if the lesse be bounde, hee gendreth males: and he gendreth males in the Northerne winde, and females in the Southerne winde. And such Rams as haue black veynes vnder their toūgs, such Lambes they gender in colour: for if his veynes be black vnder the toūge, his Lambe shall be blacke: and if they be white, the Lambes ere white: and if they be speckeled th Lambes are so. And Arist. & Auicen meaneth the same. Looke within De Oue. The Ram hath a full harde forhead nigh as a horne, and feeble temples, and somewhat gristly, and therefore for the defence and kéeping of the féeble parte, kinde giueth him great hornes and right hard about the féeble place of the temples, and be crooked and bended as a round shell, but they be somwhat sharp in the endes, insomuch, that they maye defend the head with sharpnesse & hard∣nesse of hornes, and withstand enimies, and fighteth with them, with sharpnesse of hornes, as he saith. For it is not seem∣ly that kinde should leaue the defendour of the flocke without weapon & defence. And therefore kinde giueth him two hornes bent, as it were circles, to defend and succour his owne head, which is fée∣ble of it selfe, and is the more bolde and hardie against aduersaries and enimyes by trust of weapon, by the which hée is strengthened and defended. And there∣fore he goeth the more boldly before the slocke, and beareth by the head, and pit∣cheth downe the foote, & treadeth strong∣ly on the ground, and is cloue footed. His lées be thicke with long haire in the locks, and defendeth himselfe against the miuries of hot aire or colde, with strong and thicke fell and skinne, and therefore one side of the Rams skinne, by reason of the strength thereof, suffe∣reth and sustaineth the violent craftes of Curriers of parchment makers, passing other fells and skinnes of other shéepe, and be more able to receiue and to hold printing and painting of diuers colours, as he sayth. And in time of loue, the Ram fight∣eth for his Eawes, and réeseth with his hornes on his aduersaries. And for to push his enemie the harder, he draweth backwarde, and réeseth and leapeth vp∣ward, and smiteth with his fiercenesse, and busheth with a kinde of violence. And li. 8. Auicen speaketh of Rammes and saith, that Rams, Goates & Bucks, goe much in rains, and hide not them∣selues in Winter for colde, but they goe sometime out of hot places into colde, & when it raineth, they flye not the raine vntill they be dead. And Rams by kind follow Goate bucks, and rest all, till the Heard take one of them, and make him goe, before, and then other follow soone. And they dread kindly the thunder, as shéepe do. And if a shéepe be with lambe, and heareth the thunder, she casteth hir Lamb for dread, and standeth for feare. And sléepe with the shéepe before mid∣night, and after part, and chaunge and turne, from side to side in sléeping. For from Springing time to Haruest they sléepe on the one side, & then vnto spring∣ing time they sléepe on the other side, & hold vp their heads while they sléepe, except they be sicke, and they chew their cud sléeping as they doe waking, and if it happen that they stray and go away, they come not againe, but if the Hearde bringeth them againe. And Isaac in dietis saith, that Rams in youth bée lesse moyst and gleymie then sucking Lambes, and that is be∣cause of the age that hath mastery ouer their complection, and therefore theyr flesh is better than flesh of Lambs and of Eawes, and gendereth better bloud, and namely if they be gelded, for theyr heate is tempered with accidentall moi∣sture, and so the flesh is of good sauour. But when they passe in age and be full olde, then for age they fayle in heate, but if they be gelded: & if they be gelded and passe in great age, then their heate faileth by double cause, for lacke of gendring stones, and also for age. And therefore their bodies be cold and dry as it were a sticke, and be more harde and vnsauo∣rie, in comparison to Goate, Oxen, and other such, that be worst in age.
And the bodies of rams, that be kindly hot and moyst, be more better then bo∣dyes of other beasts, that are kindly cold and drye in great age. Huc vsque Isaac in Dietis. Aristotle and Auicen lib. 6. meane, that Rams and Goate buckes, lyke as other Beastes, haue a certaine proper voyce, by the which they crie and call to them the females in time of gendering and loue. And Rams that drinke salte water, gender before other, and be sooner moued to loue: and when ye old Rams be sooner moued to gendring & to loue, than the young in due time, that is to∣ken of goodnesse of that time in ye yeare: and if in that time the young Rams be sooner moued than the olde Rams, it is token of a pestilence of shéepe in that yeare as he saith. ¶Of Agno. chap. 4. Agnus. Rebes.THe Lambe is called Agnus, & hath that name of a name of Gréeke, as it were milde as Isidore saith. For among all the beasts of the earth, the Lambe is most innocent, soft and milde, for he no∣thing grieueth nor hurteth, neither with téeth, nor with horne, nor with clawes: and all thing that is in the Lambe is good & profitable, for the flesh is good to meate, and skin to diuers vse, and woo to cloathing, and the dirte to lande, and clawes and hornes to medicine, as Isi∣dore saith lib. 7. Latines suppose, that this nown Ag∣nus commeth of Agnoscendo, knowing: for passing all other beastes, the Lambe knoweth his owne dam, insomuch, that if she bleate among manye shéepe in a flocke, anone by bleating he knoweth the voyce of his owne dam. Auicen and A∣ristotle meane, that some Lambes be ye∣ned in springing time, and some in har∣uest time, and some in winter: but those that be yened in springing time, be more huge and great of body, & more strong∣ger of bodye, then those which be yened in haruest and in winter. But in some countries and lands many men set win∣ter Lambes, afore Lambes of springing time, and meane, that onely these beasts be profitably yened in winter time, as Plin. saith li. 8. ca. 47. and ther it is said, that Lambes which be conceiued in the Northerne winde, be better than those that be conceiued in the southern wind, for then males be gendered and concei∣ued. And Lambes haue such coulour in flesh and in wooll, as the Ramme & the Eaw haue colour in veines of ye tonge, for if the veynes be white, the Lambes be white: and if the veynes be blacke, the Lambes be blacke; and if they bée speckeled, the Lambes be speckeled. In sucking time the Lambe bendeth his knées, and for the dam should giue the more milke, he thrnsteth and pusheth at the dder of his dam, and beséecheth the dam with bleating, and sawneth with his taile when he hath found his dam, and beareth vp the head, and sucketh neuer but first it areareth vp the head, & hath small wooll and crispe, and manye maner wise folded in it selfe. Cold grie∣ueth Lambes, and namely in raine we∣ther, and be glad and ioyfull of the com∣pany of folke, and he cleing and forie, & dreadeth full sore, when they be alone. The Lamb hoppeth & leapeth before the flock, & plaieth, & dreadeth ful sore when he séeth the Woolfe, and flyeth sodainlye away: but anone he is astonied for dread and stinteth sodaynly, and dare flye no farther, and prayeth to be spared, not with bleating, but with a simple chéere when he is taken of his enemie. Also when Butchers bind him fast, he defen∣deth him not with téeth, neyther with horne, and if he be spoyled either of his fell or of his skinne, he is still an inno∣cent and an harmlesse beast, and whether he be lead to Pasture or to death, hée grudgeth not, nor prauncheth not, but is obedient and méeke, as Plinius sayeth. It is perill to leaue Lambes alone, for they die soone if ther fal any strōg thun∣der. For the Lambe hath kindly a fée∣ble head, and therefore the remedy is to bring them together, and leite them goe together, that they may be the bol∣der because of companye, and the more hardy.
Of Agno anniculo. ca. 5. AGnus anniculus is a Lambe of full age of one yéere, & is within the space of one yere, the better it is ye farther it is frō sucking, for his moisture of complecti∣on increaseth by weaning and departing from milke, & superfluitie of moisture is tempered, namely if it be not yet gelded, as it is said openly in Dietis. And lambs of twelue moneths olde that be found in body, & cleane in flesh, be able to sacrifice and to meat, though they be speckled in flesh & in wooll. For speckles in flesh re∣proueth not the lambe, nor putteth him from sacrifice, but if there be stinch and corruption in flesh or in skin within, as the Glose saith super Exod. 7. and super Malac. Hierome saith super Leuiti. that specks and diuersitie of speckled flesh, let∣teth not sacrifice if the bodie be whole & sound, and without scabs in the skinne. Then as Plinius saith, libro. 8. cap. 48. a lamb of a yéere old was able & according to the Alters of Gods, and be in vse of the flesh, & in vse of the flesh the lamb, is néedfull to mankind, & therfore as bodies of neat be kept for profit of mankinde, so it néedeth to haue businesse of kéeping of lambes and of shéepe. And Diosco. saith, that the lambe hath blacke durt, which shall be dissolued and tempered with vi∣neger, and made in a plaister: and then he cleanseth away blacke speckes and red of the body, and helpeth the euill that men call the fire, and helpeth and saueth bur∣ning and scalding if it be meddeled with Waxe and Oyle. Of Agna. chap. 6. A Female lambe is called Agna, & is the Rammes daughter, and is lesse in bodye, and more moyst then the male lambe, because of the female complection, as it is sayde in Dietis. And the flesh thereof while it sucketh is more glemy, because of supersluitie of moystnre. And that commeth both of age and of com∣plection, and hath mastrye in the bodye. Therefore that that is gendered of the flesh thereof is fleamatike, and gleamie, and hard to defie, and vnneth passing out of the members when it is dested, & that is because of glewie and gleamie hu∣mour, which is gendered thereof, but it passeth soone downe of the stomacke, for slippernesse of the humour, as Isaac sayth. And the flesh thereof is better ro∣sted then sod, for the superfluitie thereof and moisture is consumed & wasted by the strength and vertue of greate fire. And the female lambes bée more simple and more fearefull then the male. For the female hath lesser kinde heate then the male, and bée for that cause without hornes. For hornes were superfluitie to the female lambs, for defalt of boldnesse & of the hardynesse they knowe not what to doe therewith, as Auicen sayth. Also libro. 3. Aristotle sayeth, that Lambes haue an euill, that is when they bée too fat about the reines, for if the Tallowe couereth the reines, then they dye, and the Tallowe increaseth in good pasture: and therefore Lambes be put out of the pasture, lest they waxe too fat. Look with∣in de Oue. (Additiō.Shéepe and Lambes haue also the disease of the ret, which happeneth if they change a drie laire, and be brought into fennie or marsh groundes: they are sub∣iect to the Tikes, which come for want of pasture, to the cough, and Maggets.) Of Alce. A Kinde of Deare, called (the Aethio∣pian Bull) some report that the Alce hath no ioynts in his legges,Addition & therefore doth neuer lye, but leane to a trée. I find no such report in Gesner for truth, he is in conlour like the fallow Deare, short & broad horned: This beast is the right Elcke, of whose hide the most best Buffe is made, for doublet and bréeches. Those which translated the Bible into Eng∣lish, as it appeareth in the .14. chapter of Deu. among cleane beasts: this Elcke is named there Chaimois, and Camois in Hebrue is called Zamer: the Muscouites call him Lozzos, & some haue vsed one name and some another, because they had no farther knowledge. Gesner in folio. 2 these breed in Hircania, a coūtry in Asia.
Of Apro. chap. 7. The bore Chasit in ye HebrueTHe Boare is called Aper, and is a Swine that liueth in woodes or in flelds, and is most cruell and not milde, as Isidore sayth, and is called Aper, as it were Affer, for by fiercenesse of his bo∣dy, he is fierce and cruell, and so among ye Gréeks the Boare is commonly called Fiagres, that is to vnderstand, fierce and cruell, and is called among Latines Vetres, for he hath greate might and strength, as it is sayd there. And Plini∣us and Auicen meane, that the Boare is a fierce beast and a cruell, for vnneth hée is tamed and made milde though hée be gelded, though other beasts be more mild what time they be gelded. Also the Bore is so fierce a beast and also so cruell, that for his fiercenesse and his cruelnesse, hée despiseth and setteth naught by death, & he réeseth full pitcously against the point of yt Speare of a hunter. And though it be so that he be smitten or sticked with a Speare through the bodye, yet for the great ire and cruelnesse in heart that hée hath, he réeseth on his enimy, and taketh comfort and heart and strength for to worke himselfe on his aduersarye with his tuskes, and putteth himselfe in perill of death, with a wonderous fiercenesse against the weapon of his enimy, & hath in his mouth two crooked tuskes right strong and sharp, and breaketh and rent∣eth cruellye with them those which hee withstandeth: and vseth tuskes in steed of a Swoord. And hath an hard sheld broad and thicke on the right side, and putteth that alway against his weapon that pur∣sueth him, and vseth that brawne in stéed of a sheeld to defend himselfe. And when he spieth perill that shoulde befall, hée whetteth his tusks, and froteth them a∣gainst Trées, and assaieth in that while froting against trées, if the points of his tuskes be all blont. And if he féele that they be blont, he séeketh an hearb which is called Origanum, and gnaweth it and cheweth it, and cleanseth and comforteth the rootes of his teeth therewith by ver∣tue therof, as Auicen saith. And li. 28. ca. 10. Plinius sayeth, that the vrine of the Boare is medicine for euills of ye eares, if it be meddeled with Oyle of Roses. Also his Gall helpeth against the stone, as it is sayde libro. 38. cap. 40. And his vrine is heauye to himselfe, so that hée may not arise, but if hée pisse, but is hol∣den downe as though hée were dead. For it is sayde, that his vrine burneth him. ¶Also he sayth, that the Gall of the Boare exciteth to gendring. Also he saith lib. 5. That the field Swine lencth well roots, and wroteth and diggeth the earth, and wroteth vp rootes and cutteth them with his tusks, and waxeth fat when he hath rested seuen daies, and namely if he drinke but little. And the Boare fighteth with the Woulfe, & hateth him by kinde. For ye woulfe lieth in waite for his pigs, and stealeth them full oft. Therefore as he saith, lib. decimo quarto, Kind giueth to the Boare tuskes to desende the fe∣males and the pigges. For the females be more féeble in themselues then the males, & worse of complection. For the males be more bolde and more mightye then the females, but the female is fierce whē she is wroth, and grieueth and hur∣teth, digging, froting, & biting, and ren∣ting with téeth & tuskes. And the Boare hurteth with his tusks striking vpward. And yt is the cause why that he may not hurt him that lieth on the ground. And the female grieueth but little them that stand. And when the Boare is wroth, he fretteth & soameth at the mouth: and so he doth when he gendereth with the fe∣male. Plinius rehearseth all these fore∣sayd things, & saith more thereto, lib. 8. cap. 2. and sayth there, that Egedius say∣eth, that Boares and other Swine bée farrowed toothed. Also Boares be sharpe and most fierce when they be in loue. For then they bite cruellye for their Sowes, & dig and cratch the earth with theyr clawes, and set vp the bristles, and whet the tuskes, and smite therewith, & shew them the woodnesse of their brests, with horrible groning and grunting: and eate but little then, but they goe and runne about females, & be therfore right leane. And Boares goe to valleys that be darke, and dwell in woodes, and kéepe
there theyr children; and liue there by rootes and fruit of wild trées. And when they espie the sautes of the hunters, and réeses, and Wolues, they go before their young. And when they maye not flye, they put them in perill for theyr young, and harden theyr shéeldes with froating against trées when they shal fight, & wrap them in durt, and drie themselues in the Sunne, and make the durt hard and fast among the haire, that they may the more surely beare and susteine the strokes of their enimies in their fighting. Libro. 6. Aristotle sayeth, that the females and Sowes of Boares, when they haue farrowed, bée full sharpe and cruell, to rent them that come nigh their young with cruell biting. Huc vsque Plinius. And as Isaac sayth, Boares flesh is more harde and drye, and more cold then tame Porke, and that is for his continu∣all moouing, and for drye meate and for drye ayre, and for hot ayre that is al∣waye within them. For his grease or fat is more harde, and his flesh more ly∣king in eating, and therfore tame Bores be strongly chased and tied, and also bea∣ten before they be slaine, that theyr flesh may be the more tender and sauoury be∣cause of strong moouing. And Dioscorides speaketh more of the Boare and sayth, that his durt dronk with Wine and water, is a singular re∣medye for them that cast bloud, and hel∣peth sore sides if it be medled with vine∣ger, and souoreth and strengthneth bro∣ken bones. Looke within de Porco. Of Asino. chap. 3. THE Asse is called Asinus, and hath that name of Sedendo, sitting, as it were a beast to sit vpon. For men sate & rode vppon Asses before that they vsed horse to ride vpon, as Isidore saith, libro 17. And is a simple beast and a slow, and therfore soone ouercome & subiect to mans seruice. Or else this name Asinus com∣meth of A, that is not hauing, & Synos, yt is wit, as it were a beast without wit. And of Asinus commeth Asellus, that is a lyttle young Asse, that is fayre of shape and of disposition while he is young and tender, before he passe into age. For the elder the Asse is, the fouler he waxeth from day to daye, and hairie and rough, and is a melancholyke beast that is cold and drye, and is therefore kindlye heauie and slow, and vnlustie, dull and witlesse, and forgetfull: Neuerthelesse he beareth burdens, and may away with trauaile & thraldome, & vseth vile meat and little, & gathereth his meate among Briers and thornes, and thistles. And therefore Aui∣cen saith, libro. 8. and Aristotle sayeth also, small birds that nestleth them in bushes, thornes, and briers, hate the asse. And therefore small Sparrowes fighteth with the Asse, for the Asse eateth the thornes, in the which ye Sparowes make theyr neasts. And also the Asse rubbeth and froieth his flesh against the thorns, and so the birds or the egges of the Spa∣rowes falleth out of ye neast down to the ground. And when that the Asse reareth & heaueth vp her head, then by a strong blast the thornes mooueth & shaketh, and of the great noyse the birdes he afearde full sore, and falleth out of the neast. And therfore the bréed birds suffereth them to leap on the face of the Asse, & bite & smite and réese to his eyen with their billes. And if the Asse haue a wouude or a scab in the ridge or in the side, of pricking of thornes, or in any other wise, the Spa∣rows leapeth on the Asse & pecketh with their bills in the wounds or in the sores, for the Asse should passe frō their neasts. And though such a Sparow be full lyt∣tle, yet vnneth may the Asse defend him∣selfe against his réese, pricking, and bi∣ting. Aristotle sayeth, and so doth Aui∣cen also, that she ranen hateth full much the asse, therefore the rauen flyeth aboue the asse, & laboureth with his bill to peck out his eyen: but the déepnes of eien hel∣peth thē asse, and thicknes and hardnes of the skin, for therewith the asse closeth her eyen, and healeth her sight, and de∣fendeth against the réesing and pricking of Foules: also his long eares and moo∣uing thereof helpeth, for therewith hée fearesh smal birds, that réese to peck out his eyen: also libro. 8. Aristotle sayeth, that the Beare fighteth with the asse and
with the Bull, because he eateth rawe flesh, & this is the cause why he fighteth with them, for he desireth to eate of their flesh. Libro. 18. cap. vit. Plinius speaketh of the Asse & sayth, that the smoak of the Asses hoofe helpeth the birth of a childe, insomuch that it bringeth out a dead childe, and shall not otherwise be layde to, for it slayeth a quicke childe if it bée oft layde to, and lyeth too long time. And new dirt of the same beast staunch∣eth bloud wonderfullye. And his lyuer holpeth against the falling euill of chil∣dren. Libro. 28. cap. 10. Plinius sayeth, that the Asses milke and Asses bloud helpeth against the biting of a Scorpion. And men saye, yt if a man looketh in an Asses eare when he is smit with a Scorpion, anone the mallice passeth. Also all veni∣mous thinges flieth smoake of the Asses liuer. Also in eodem cap. 9. it is said, that the Asses milk helpeth against venimous plaister, and against the mallice of Se∣ruse or of quicke siluer. Also li. 9. Assess bones brused & stam∣ped, and sad, helpeth agaynst venimme, if the broath therof be dronken: and vrine of the Male asse with Nardus kéepeth & saueth and maketh much haire. Libro 8. cap. 44. Plinius sayeth, that the Asse is a beast that maye worst awaye with colde, and bréedeth not therefore in colde Countryes and lands, and so he bréedeth not in Pontus: and therefore Ari. saith, though the asse be full colde and dry, yet he is ful lecherous, but he is not moued to gendring ere he be .30. moneths olde: and though be due then the worke of gende∣ring, yet he gendereth no broode ere hee be full thrée yéere olde: and so Plinius sayth there, that the birth of the asse is most in idlenesse after 30. moneths, and is lawfull & profitable after thrée yeare. Also Aristotle saith the same, li. 5. & Pli∣nius saith thereto, that the asse foaleth selde two coltes. When the female shall foale, she flyeth light, and séeketh a darke place that she be not seene, and loueth her foale so much, that she passeth through a fire to come to her foale: and ye asse brea∣deth full sore to passe ouer water, & scra∣peth therein: and when she is compelled, & must needes passe ouer a water or ri∣uer, and wadeth therein, then she pisseth therein: and the asse passeth not gladlye, where he may sée the water through the plankes, for he hath a féeble braine, and is soone grudged, and dreadeth therefore and falleth through the chinnes of the bridge into the water, that he séeth run∣ning there vnder: and the asse drinketh not gladly but of small wells that he is vsed to, and those that he may come drie footed to: and wonder it is to tell, yt though an asse be sore a thirst, if his water bée changed, vnneth he drinketh thereof, but if it be like the water that he is wont to drinke of. Plinius. li. 28. cap. 7. sayth, that if the female asse eateth Barlye wet in men∣struall bloud, as manye graines as shée eateth, so wet, so many yeres afterward shall she not conceiue. The Mule is gen∣dered betwéene an asse and a Mare: but to such gendering are Mares chosen, that passe in age foure yeare, and not ten yeare, and gender not alwaye either with other: Of this beast is two man∣ner of kind: the one is gendered betwéene an horse and an asse, and that other be∣twéene an asse and a Mare. But the one kinde withdraweth him from ye other, but if they be fed together in youth with one manner milke. Therefore it is said, that heardes that desire to haue Mules and burdones gendered of diuers kindes of beasts, vse this crafte, to bring forth young coltes of Mares, and set them in darkenesse to teates of asses, and to féede them with asses milke, and such horse colts when they be of age, bée mooued in time of gendering to gender with asses: also lykewise asses coltes be set to sucke teates of Mares, and be fed with Mares milke, and such colts gender with Mares when they be of age: and so of such gen∣dering betwéene an asse and a Mare com∣meth a beast that was called Ninnulus in olde time, but we tall a beast so gen∣dered Burdus, and call such beasts gende∣red betwéene an asse and a Mare, a Mule: and libro. 15. Aristotle sayeth, that if an asse gendereth with a Mare that is full fat, the conception of the Mare is corrup∣ted, for coldnesse of the semen of the asse.
For the Semen of the Asse is most cold by kinde, and the matter of them, and the matter of the Mare is hot, & therfore whē the hot is meddeled with the colde, then the meddeling is tempered, then therof may come conception, and the colt may be saued yt is gendered betwéene an horse and a female asse: and also likewise the colt yt is gendered betwéene an horse, and a Mare: but the hée of the Asse and of the Mare, that is the Mule, gendereth not, because of colde and naturall com∣plection of both horse and Asse, that hath mastrye in the Mule. And therefore the mule gendereth not another beast, as hée saith. Also there he saith, yt if an asse gen∣dereth with the same asse afterwarde, hee maketh her cast her colt, & the cause ther∣of is, as Auicen saith, for coldnesse of the semen of the asse cōmeth, & corrupteth & destroyeth temperatnesse of the first Se∣men, for the Semen of the asse is cold in complection, & brought to temperatnesse, by kind heat of ye male horse: & so when the semen of the female asse yt is colde by kind, or by complection, with coldnes of ye kinde with female by strength therof,the first temperatnesse commeth of ye hot se∣men of the horse, & of the colde semen of the asse, & this is the cause why euery fe∣male mule is barren, as Auicen saith: for the male asse yt is the father of the Mule, is passing cold of complection, and in the Mare that is mother, yt is hot, because of the heat of the horses kind. And therfore though the heat of the semen of the mo∣ther, that is the Mare, tempereth the cold semen of the asse, so that a beast may bée gendered, yet in the beast yt is gendered, the coldnesse of the father and mother a∣bideth and hath mastry therein, and dis∣poseth kindly to barrennesse. And there is a manner. Asse, that is called Indicus Asinus,Onager. This is ye vnicorne, as me writers assume. and hath an horne in the middle of ye forehead, and is whole footed on all foure. For euerye beast that hath two hornes is cloue footed: and therefore this asse Indicus hath but an horne, for he is not cloue footed, as Aristotle saith, lib. 2. But not euerye cloaue footed beast hath hornes, but againeward, if he be horned, he is cloue footed, as it fareth in the Bul, and in the sheepe. Hart, and other such, as Aristotle sayth there. Libro. 7. Aristotle sayth, that the Asse, Mule, and horse, ea∣teth fruit, hearbes, and grasse, and be fat∣ted with water, and loue more thick wa∣ter then cléere. And the cow again loueth better cléere water then thicke. Also lib. codem, Aristotle sayth, that for the more part Asses waxe sick in one manner of sicknesse that is called Mili∣de, and this sicknesse is first in the head, and then hot fleame runneth out at the nose:and if it falleth to the lungs, the asse dieth, & this beast flyeth more colde then all other beasts, and is not found in the Countries of the North. And ioynts of the ridge boane be more strong of the Asse, & stronger bound with sinewes be∣hind about the reines then before. And therfore the Asses beare more heauy bur∣thens behinde about the reines then be∣fore about the shoulders. After euennesse of the day and night in springing time, the Asse is mooued to lethery, and then he roreth & exciteth the female to loue with dreadfull roring & stron , and draweth in breath and winde, and bringeth odour and smell of the female to his nose, & by drawing thereof his desire of lerherye burneth, as Plinius saith. And the Asse hath another wretched condition know∣en nigh to all men. For he is put to tra∣uaile ouer night, & is beaten with staues, and sticked & pricked with prickes, & his mouth is wrong with a Bernacle, and is lead hether & thether, and withdrawne from léese and pasture, that is in his way oft by refraining of the Bernacle, & dy∣eth at last after vaine trauailes, & hath no reward after his death for the seruice and trauaile that he had liuing, not so much that his owne skinne is left with him, but it is taken awaye, and the car∣ren is throwen out without sepulture or burialls: But it be so much of the car∣ren that by eating and deuouring is som∣time buried in the wombes of houndes and wolues. Of Angue. chap. 9. ALL kinde of Serpentes and Adders that by kinde may wrappe and folde his owne body, is called Anguis, & hath
that name, for he hath many corners and angles in such folding, and goeth neuer straight. For as Isidore sayth, libro. 12. Anguis is called Serpens, for he créepeth with priuy paces, but he créepeth wt smal paces yt he hid with folding & sliding, and withdrawing of scales, & is accounted a∣mong créeping wormes, (Additiō. whereof came this prouerb. Anguis latit in herba. The Snake vnder leaues, & wrath in ye hart.) For he créepeth on the brest & womb, as Isi. saith, li. 12. & is called also Colluber, either for he dwelleth in shadowe, or for be glideth with slipper bendings, wrink∣lings, & draughts: for an Adder slideth while he is held. And of Adders is many manner kind: & how many kind, so many manner venim: & how many speces, so many manner malice, & so many manner sores & aches, as there are colours, as I∣sid. saith, li. 12. And as Adders be diuerse in quantitie, so they be diuers in mallice of venim. And some Adders be great and huge, as Plin. saith, li. 8. cap. 16. Magelle∣nes writeth, that in Inde be so great ad∣ders, yt they swallow vp both Harts and Bulls all whole.A dragon And so in Punico Bel∣lo, the battell that was besides the riuer Bragada,Bragada, a riuer neere to Vtica in Afirike. Regulus was cōsul and not Emperor. Regulus ye Emperour slew an Adder wt Arbalastes & Tormēts, yt which Adder was an hundred and twentie foote long, & the skin & the chéeke bones therof hang before the temple at Rome, & dured vntill the battaile Numantinum. Also in Claudeus Caesars time in Italy was a Serpent slaine, & in his wombe a whole child was found. And such an adder grie∣ueth most nowe with biting, now with blowing, now with smiting with ye taile, & now with stinging, now with looking and sight. And there are other Adders, small in bodye, but they be most greate in might of grieuing. For the Serpent Dipsas, as Isidore saith, is so little, that he vneth is séene when men tread there∣on, & the venim thereof slaieth before it be felt, and he that dieth by that venim, féeleth no sore: and so the Poet Lucan sayth. Signiferum iuuenem Tureni sangui∣nis album. Torta caput retro Dipsas calcata re∣mordit. Vix dolor aut sensus dentis fuit, &c. That is, Dispas, that Serpent wrast his owne white head backward, and bit the young Baneret of Turenis bloud, & vnneth he felt biting or sore. So sayth Isidore. Also Tirus is the least of adders, and yet as Aristotle saith, lib. 7. vnneth is remedie found against his biting. Al∣so Serpentes and adders be diuerse in disposition, figure, and shape, for some haue two heads, as the adder Amphisi∣bena. Of him Isidore speaketh in libro. 12. and sayth, that Amphisibena hath that name, for he hath two heads, one in the one ende, and another in the other ende, and runneth and glideth and wrigleth with wrinkles, corcels, & draughts of the body after either head: and among Ser∣pents, onelye this Serpent putteth out himselfe in cold, and putteth himselfe and goeth before all other. Also lib. 8. cap. 14. Plinius sayth the same, and sayth, that Amphisibena hath a double head, as though one mouth were too little to cast venimme. Also some Serpents haue many heads: for some be doubled, and some trebled, and some quatrebled, as Isidore sayth. And Idra is a Serpent with many heads, and such a one was séene in a marreys in the Prouince of Archadia. And it is sayde, that if one head be smit off, thrée growe againe:but this is a fable. For it is per∣fectly knowen, that Idra is a place that casted vp the water, that wasted and de∣stroyed a citie that was there nigh: and in this Idra if the head of ye streame were stopped, many head streames break out: and Hercules séeing that, burned ye place, and stopped the wayes of the water: and therefore it is said, that Hercules did kill Idra the Serpent with fiue heades, as Isidore sayth, libro. 12. Also Serpents varie and be diuerse in coulours, for some be blacke, and some be redde: as the ser∣pent Tyrus, and those bée worst, & some be speckled, as the Serpent Scytale shi∣neth with diuersitie of speckles, that all that looketh thereon for wonder of the speckles hath lyking to looke thereon: and for he is most slow in créeping by a
wonder of his diuersitie of his speckles, he catcheth them yt he maye not followe in going and in créeping, and the more diuers he is in coulours and speckles, the worse he is in venime, for his venime is accounted most sharpe and hot. For the same Serpent is so hot and feruent, that in winter time the skinnes that he hath chaunged, be feruent and hot, that bée of the body. Héereof Lucanus speaketh and sayth. Et Scytale sparsis etiam nunc sola pruinis. Exuujas positura suas. When frost is nigh, this Serpent changeth his skinne, as Isid. saith, &c. Also Ophites is a Serpent painted with di∣uers speckles, and hath as many manner of wise to noy and to gréene, as he hath diuerse colours and distinct. Heereof spea∣keth Lucanus, & saith, that that manner of Serpent Ophites, hath as many man∣ner of burnings and gréeuings, as he hath speckles and coulours, & is painted with burning speckles. Also Serpents be di∣uerse by diuersitie of stéede and of place, for some lurke in dens of the earth, & sic∣keth pouder or dust, & sucketh humour of the ground, as Plinius saith. And some be water Adders, and dwell in brimmes of waters, as the Serpent Enidris, that is a water adder, and who so is smitten at that Adder, hée swelleth into dropsie. And many men call it Boua, for the durt of an Ore is remedy therefore, as Isido. sayth, lib. 8. Also Natrix is an adder, and hath that name, for he infecteth with venim each well that he commeth nigh, as Lucanus sayth, and saith Natrix in∣secteth waters, as Isidore sayth libro. 7. Some serpents dwell in woods, in dens, and in shadowye plates, and hunt small Birdes and beastes, and sucke the moi∣sture thereof, as Aristotle sayth, libro. 14. And such Serpents and adders lye in awaite for them that sleepe: And if they find the mouth open of them, or of other beasts, then they créepe in, for they loue heate and humour that they finde there, but against such Adders, a little Beast fighteth that is called Saura, as it were a litle Euete. And some men meane, that it is a Lyzard, for when this beast Sau∣ra is ware that this Serpent is present, then he leapeth vpon his face ye sléepeth, and cratcheth with his féet to wake him, and to warne him of the Serpent, as A∣uicen saieth. And this little beast Saura, as Isidore saith, libr. 12. is as it were an Eute, and when he waxeth olde, his eien waxeth blind, and then hée goeth into an hole of a wall against the East, and ope∣neth his eyen afterwarde when the Sun is risen, & then his eien heateth & taketh light. And some manner serpents dwell in the fire, as it fareth of the Salamandra, yt Isidore and Plinius account among ve∣nimous beastes. The Salamandra hath that name, as Isidore saith, libro. 12. for he is strong & mightie against burning: & among all venimous beasts, his might is the most of venime. For other veni∣mous beasts nyeth one and one, & this noyeth and slayeth many at once. For if he créepe on a trée, he infecteth all ye ap∣ples, and slayeth them that eate therof, & if he falleth into a pit, he slayeth all that drinke of the water. By this venim this beast is contrary to burning, and among beasts, onely this beast quencheth fire, & lieth in the burning fire wtout consump∣tion & wasting, and also with smarting & ach, and burneth not in fire, but abateth and swageth the burning thereof, as Isi∣dore sayth there. And Plinius accordeth therewith at all points, libro. 10. cap. 47. and saith, that Salamandra is like to an Ewte in shape, & is neuer more séene but in much raine, for he falleth in faire wether. His touch is so colde that it quencheth fire, as Ise doth: and casteth out of his mouth white matter, with touching wherof mans bo∣dy leeseth haire, & what is touched there∣with, chaungeth and tourneth into most foulest coulour. Also they bée diuerse in manner of going & passing, for some créep and glide awaye wiggeling and crooked∣ly, and some alway stretch and goe forth right, as Isidore sayth, libro. 17. And bée sayth, that Cenchris is a Serpent, that bendeth not neither wiggeleth, but hold∣eth alway right foorth, as Lucanus say∣eth.
A Serpent eateth gladlye flesh, and sucketh gladly the moisture therof, as the Spinner sucketh flyes, and the Serpent swalloweth egges of birds, & their birds on liue. And when they haue swallowed them, they bring them to the hinder end, and putteth them out, and suffereth them not abide in the wombe. Also libro 2. A∣ristotle sayeth, that the guts of the Ser∣pents be lyke to the guts of foure foo∣ted beastes that laye egges, and haue no gendering stones, but they haue wayes as fish, and haue mothers, long and di∣uided, and theyr bowelles and guts bée long by the length of their bodies. And the tongues of Serpents be blacke, long, & thin, and clouen in twaine, and sharpe before, and moue out farre therefore, and moue easily. And the wombe of the ser∣pent is long and straight, and is lyke to a large gut. And that gut is lykened to an hoands gut, and hath after the womb a lyttle gut, and stretcheth vnto the out passing of superfluitie, and hath a lyttle heart nigh vnto the neck like to the kid∣ney in sight. And after the heart is that lung, and there after be subtill partes si∣newie and krindled, and hangeth down∣ward from the heart. After the long is the liuer, long and straight, and there∣vpon is the gall, as the flesh is lesse and more, the gall is vppon the guts in Ser∣pents, the splene is little and rounde, and their téeth be some deale sharpe and croo∣ked, and ioyned together, but they bée departed as the téeth of a Sawe. And a Serpent hath thirtie ribbes by the number of the dayes of the moneth. And it is sayd, yt Serpents fare as swallowes birdes, for if their eyen bée put out, yet their sight commeth againe: and the taile of a Serpent groweth againe if it bée cut off, as the taile of an ewt. Also Serpents haue egges first within, and layeth them afterwarde, not all at once, but one and one. And of those Egges beastes be gen∣dered, except the Serpents that be called Tyrus and Vipera. Also Arist. saith, li. 3. Tyrus the Ser∣pent gendereth beastes within, but shée hath first egges within, and of the egges beasts be bred within: therefore it is said, yt the mother of the other Serpents is long, after the making of the body. And their mother beginneth in ye nether part, and passeth vp in either side of the ridge boane, and is diuided in two partes, and hath as it were a wall or interclose be∣tweene the two partes, and therefore the two Egges be set arowe in the mother. And a Serpent layeth not all her egges at once, but some & some. Also lib. 5. Ari∣stotle saith, yt in tune of gendering Ser∣pents wrappeth and clippeth themselues together, that they séeme one body with two heads, as it is knowen to them that haue séene the doing. Also libr. 7 Aristo∣tle sayeth, that a Serpent, and namelye Tyrus, when he swalloweth a Birde or ought else, first he areareth himselfe, and afterward restrayneth himselfe vntil the thing that he swalloweth passe inward, and that is for his stomacke is little and smal. And Serpents may liue long with∣out meate, as it is knowen by Serpents that are kept to sell. Also Aristotle lib. 8. telleth, that the wéesell sighteth against Serpents, & ar∣meth himselfe with eating of Rewe, and fighteth namely against Serpents yt eate Mice.A snake. For the Wéesell hunteth and eat∣eth Mice. Also li. 7. he saith,No diffe∣rence is heere be∣tvveene Snakes &c Adders. ye Serpentes lone well Wine, and bée therefore hun∣ted with wine. And also a serpent loueth passing well milke, and followeth the sa∣uour thereof, and therfore if a serpent be crept into a mannes wombe, he may be drawen out with the odour and smell of milke, as he saith, and Dioscorides also, Libro. 14. Aristotle sayth, that Serpents haue that propertye, that they may moue the head backwarde, resting the bodye. And the cause therof is, for the ioynts of the ridge boane be of gristles, therefore they be full plyaunt. And it is needfull to Serpents, that they may bende their heads backward to sée their long bodies and small, or else they might not rule their bodies, but they were holpe by rea∣ring of the head to rule wisely all the bo∣dy. Also serpents swimme in water by wiggeling and folding of the bodye, as they creepe on the ground. For kinde gi∣ueth not to Serpentes for to goe vppon féete, nor on sinnes to swimme with, and the cause therof is the great length of the
body, for if they had many féet they shuld moue full euill: and so they should with few feet. Also if they had many finnes set nigh together, they shuld moue heuily, & if they wer set far a sunder, they wer not sufficient to susteine & to beare vp ye other deale of the body, yt is long & pliant: and therefore what fishes doe that haue fins with drawing and clitching of fins, and foules & birds with clitching & spreading of wings, that do serpents with bending & weigling & pliantnes of body. And some fishes be like to serpents in length, which for the same cause haue fewe or no fins, and swimmeth euenly with pliant∣nesse of ye body, as Lampraies, Congers, & Eles, and other such. For such mannee of fishes be like to Serpents in making, and haue onely two fins before, and vse onely pliantnesse of the body in stéede of fins and of wings. And creepe therefore vpon the grounde, and liueth long time without water, as Serpents doe with∣out meat. Also idem in eodem. Serpents haue wayes and guts, by the which som∣time superfluitie passeth out of the body, as other beasts haue ye gender, but they haue no way of vrine, for they be with∣out bladder. Item in eodem, Serpents be found wrapped together, when they come together & to loue. For they haue not a yarde nor gendering stones, for they bee without a yard, for if they had gendring stones, the Semen should coole for tarri∣eng of out passing: and so the séede were not according to generation. Item idem 18. In generation of Serpents falleth not errour nor wonderfull shape of ye kinde, but seld, & that is for the shape of the mo∣ther, that is long, strict, and strait. And so Egges of Serpents bée disposed & set a∣row, because of length of the mother. These properties of Adders & Serpents, & many other properties & kindes, Ari∣ristotle rehearseth, which were too long to rehearse & make processe of them all arow. But in generall these be sufficient as for this time. Of the common proper∣ties of them that be knowen nigh to all men, it shall be treated & spoken off héere following in this present chapter in lit∣tera A. Of Aspide. cap. 10. ASpis is an Adder worst and most wicked in venime & in biting, & hath that name Aspis, of Aspergendo, sprin∣ging: for he casteth out slaieng venime, and spitteth and springeth out venime by bitings. For the Gréekes call venim Yos, as Isidore sayth, libro. 12. capit. 4. And it followeth there: Of adders that be called Aspis bée diuers manner kind, and haue diuerse effects and dooings, to noy and to grieue, that is to wit, Dipsas that is called Scytula in Latine. For when he biteth, he slayeth with thirst. I∣palis is a manner adder, that slayeth with sléepe. These manner adders Cle∣opatra layde by her, and passed out of the lyfe by death, as it were a sléepe. Also Nemorrhois is a manner adder, and hath that name, for hée sucketh the bloud of him that he smiteth, and his veines that is smitten of the adder openeth and brea∣keth, and he bléedeth to death. For bloud is ralled Emath in Gréeke. Also Prester is an horrible adder, alwaye with open mouth, & casting and shedding venim, as hée goeth. Lucanus speaketh of him and saith. Oraque distendens auidus spumantia Prester. This adder is a glutton, & sheddeth smo∣king venim with open mouth. Hée yt is smitten of him, is rented & slaine with horrible infection of the body, as he sayth there. Also Ceps is an adder that slayeth and maketh a man madde, and when he hath bitten a man, anone he destroyeth and wasteth him: so that by the Serpents mouth, the man melteth altogether: and this Serpent destroieth and renteth not onely the bodye, but also he destroyeth with venim and wasteth both bones and sinewes of him, the Poet sheweth in this manner. Ossaque dissoluens cum corpore ta∣bificus Seps. Ceps slaieth, vndoeth, & destroyeth both body & bones: and ther be many other ad∣ders, & the venim of them is so strong, yt they slay with their venim him yt touch∣eth them with a speare, as Auicen sayth
de venenis. Also Isidor. li. 12. speaketh of this manner adder,Psa. 53. 740. yt is called Aspis in generall, & saith, that it is said, that ye ad∣der Aspis, when she is charmed by ye in∣chaunter, to come out of her denne by charmes & comurations, for she hath no will to come out, laieth her one eare to ye ground, & stoppeth ye other with her taile, & so she heareth not the voice of the char∣ming, nor commeth out to him ye char∣meth, nor is obedient to his saieng. Huc vsque Isidorus. Plinius libro. 8. capitulo 24. speaketh of the adder Aspis, & sayth, that the members that bée smit of this Adder do swell, and vnneth is any reme∣die found to heale such biting, without cutting of the partes that bee touched. This flyeng Adder and venimous hath wit to loue and affection and loueth his make as it were by loue of wedlocke, and liueth not well without companye. Therefore if the one is slaine, the other pursueth him that flewe that other with so busie wreake and vengeaunce, that passeth thinking: and knoweth the slaier, & reefeth on him, be he in neuer so great company of men and of people; & busieth to slay him, and passeth all difficulties & spaces of wayes, & with wreake of the sayd death of his make. And is not let nor put of, but it be by swift flight, or by waters or riuers: but against his mallice kind giueth remedye and medicine: For kinde giueth him right dimme sight, for his eyen are set in the sides of his head, and be not set in the forehead: and there∣fore be may not see his aduersarye foorth right, but aside. Therefore hee maye not follow his enimy by sight, but he follow∣eth more by hearing and smell: for in this two wits he is strong and mightie, as he sayth. Also Marcianus saith, that this Adder Aspis grieueth not men of Affrica and Moores: for they take their childrē yt they haue suspect, & put them to these Adders: And if the children be of their kind, this adder Aspis grieueth thē not: and if they be of other kinde, anone he dyeth by ve∣nim of the Adder. And this Plinius sayth expresly, lib. 6. cap. vltimo, and saith, that sometime this beast grieueth no men of the land, and slaieth straungers and men of other lands. And these Serpents spare wonderfully men yt be borne in the same land. So the Serpent Anguis about the riuer Euphrates, gréeueth not, nor hurteth men of the lande, nor noyeth them that sleepe, if they be of that lande, and paine & slay busily other men, that be of other nations, what nation so euery it be. Also there Plinius saith, that Aristotle sayth, that in a certaine mountaine Scorpions grieue no strangers: but they sting & slay men of the countrey. (Additiō.Aspis, is a little Serpent in Affrike, whose sting is not curable, but onelye with the water of a stone washed, which they take out of the sepulchre of an auncient king, &c. D. Cooper.) Of Aranea. chap. 11. THe venimous spinner is called Ara∣nea, and is a worme that hath that name of feeding & nourishing of the aire, as Isidore sayth, li. 12. and spinneth long thrids in short time, and is alway busie about weauing, and ceaseth neuer of tra∣uaile. For he hath oft harme in his worke for oft his web and his worke is broken with blasts of wind, or els with dropping of tame: and then he looseth all his tra∣uaile. And Auicen sayth, that the Spinner is a little créeping beast with many feet, and hath sixe feete or eight, and hath al∣waye feete euen, and not odde. And that is verye needfull, that his going and pos∣sing be alway euen, as the charge is and burthen. And this is generall in all that haue two féete or moe, and haue some féete longer, and some shorter, for diuerse workes that they make. For with some féete they make the thridde small, and drawe it a long, and with some they knit thrids together, and right and amende the thrids with some, and hooue on the web when they will. And among beasts of rounde bodyes, the Spinner hath best féeling of touch. For hoouing in the middle of the webbe, hee feeleth sodeyn∣ly a Flye that is in the farthest parte thereof. And réeseth sodeinly on the flie, as it were on an enimye: and if hée haue the mastrye of the Flye, hée win,
beth and wrappeth him flily, among the threds of the web, for he should not es∣cape, and falleth first on the head, and sucketh the moysture thereof, and ly∣ueth by such hunting of Flies: for such humour of Flyes is most lyking to his taste, as honnie is most lyking to the taste of Baes, as he sayth, and Aristotle also. Also in kinde of spinners is diuersity of male and female, as Aristotle saieth, lib. 5. And the female is more of bodye than the male, and hath longer feete, and more plyant, and more able so mouing and weauing. In time of gendring and of loue, the female draweth to hir the male by threds of the web, and thereaf∣ter the male draweth the female, and such drawing ceaseth not vntill they bee ioyned togethers, and then the male is set vpon the wombe of the female: & this manner is néedefull to them for round∣nesse of the wombe: and this ioyning togethers is most in the ende of spring∣ing time and in the beginning of sum∣mer, and sometime in haruest, and in the beginning of winter, and spinners are then most grieuous, and theyr biting most venemous. Also libro. 8. Aristotle saith, That of Spinners be many kindes, for some be small and of diuers colours, and be sharp and swifte of moaing: and some are more, and blacke in coulour, and theyr hinder legs be most long, and are slowe of mouing, but onely when they goe to worke of generation. And ofte blacke spinners inhabite by the ground among holes and dennes, and they abide in the web vntill some little beast fall therein, as a flye, that he taketh, and sucketh the moysture thereof if he be an hungred, & putteth then the flye in a certaine place and kéepeth it vntill he be an hungred againe: and when he hath sucked all the moysture, he throweth awaye the other deale, and surneth againe to hunting, and hunteth not ere he haue amended the breath of the webbe: and if one breake the webbe, he beginneth for to to amend it about the going downe of the Sunne, or in the rising of the Sun, and then he trauaileth most, for then ma∣ny lyttle wormes fall into the web. And the female bringeth forth hir brood, and the male hunteth and helpeth hir, and she hideth hir selfe vnder the web, that she be not séene of small wormes, and namely when she is great, for be∣cause of hir greatnesse she worketh not easely: and the female layeth first egs, and thereof afterward are shapen small spinners, & the mother setteth them to weane anone as they be hatcht, and they moue anon, and dispese themselues ther∣to weaue as they haue learned for to weaue, and hunt in their mothers wombe, and so the young spinner aray∣eth anon nets, that are according to his pray. And a manner kinde of spinners hunteth a little Ewte, and when they• finde him, they begin to weane vppon him, and all about for to binde strongly his mouth, and leap then vpon him, and sting him till he dyeth. Item in eodem he saith, that some Spinners are founde i. Bée hiues, and those spinners corrupt the honie, & sucke the lycour, and they make webbes a∣bout the honnie combes, and corrupte them. And Auicen sayth & Plinius also, De generatione Araneae. libro. 11. capit. 25.Arane. That the kinde of Spinners is wor∣thye of chiefe wondering, and of them there are manye manner of kindes, a∣mong whom a certaine manner of kind is called Spalangio.Phalan∣gium. The bodye thereof is little, speckeled, and of diuers colours, with a sting, and is swifte in leaping, and most grieuous in biting. Another Spinner there is, that is more of body,Atocius. blacke of coulour, with long legges, that weaueth in dennes by the ground. The thirde kinde there is, which by cunning working weaueth full subtyll webbes. A greate wonder it is howe the matter of thriddes that come of the wombe of the Spinner, may indure so greate a worke, and weauing of so greate a webbe. And that is drawen, as men thinke, some and some out of the Spinners wombe, and yet vnneth it is founde voyde. And it séemeth not to bée true, that Democritus sayd, that so much corruption is in the Wombe of the
Spinner, that of his dirte so much mat∣ter of thred might be had. Therefore Arist. reproueth Democritus lib. 8. and saith, that he said not true in this poynt, and his reason is as it séemeth, for spin∣ners and other such round beasts be lit∣tle of meates for default of bloud and of beate, and so he saith, that a spinner ta∣keth not so much meate: but more with∣out comparison cōmeth of him to weaue the web, and then should the superfluity and dirte, be more than the meate and foode that he taketh, and the superfluitie of dirte, is more than néedfull digestion, to due kéeping and sauing of the beast, as Aristotle saith. Also Plinius saith the same, & sayth, that they spin threds rounde and long, with moderate feete and clawes, & they stretch the warpe with wonderfull craft from the neather side to the ouer, and drawe and bring out againe the thred thwart ouer from point to poynt, and all the straight draughtes with small space betwéen ye threds, they couple & knit the threds in the middle lyke farre from the middle poynt, when the worke is draw∣en and layd, and then he beginneth from the middle poynt, and goeth round about with the Ofe, and maketh knottes and holes, as it were like farre asunder, and the holes and spaces that be betwéen, be by a wonderfull crafte between ye knots made now foure cornerd, now euenlong, and now round: and the néerer they bée to the middle, the more narrow they bée and straight, and the farther from the middle they be, the more large and wide they be. The sight séeth not, and vnneth the iudgement of reson perceiueth, wher∣by the spinner reyneth thred to thred, & knitteth so fast knot to knot, and reareth himselfe with a wonderfull lyghtnes by his owne threds that be so small, and vnneth séene with mans eyen, and yet he passeth in the web swiftlye, as though he flew hether and thether, and from place to place. Also he saith, that as long as the vt∣ter threds of the web dure, if it hap that the web be broken in any maner wise, the spinner beginneth at the middle to amend that which is broken, as though he would holde nothing whole & sound in the webbe, while the middle is not sure. Also he saith, in spinners be tokens of diuination, and of knowing what we∣ther shall fall, for ofte by weathers that shal fal, some spin & weue higher or low∣er. Also he saith, ye multitude of spinners is token of much raine. Also li. 14. cap. 3. de lesione ficuum, he saith that somtime spinners weaue and make webs aboute burgening and buds of vines, and also a∣bout flowers and blossomes of Trées, and by such compassing of such Cob∣webs, both trées and vines he lost, when they burgen and bloome. The biting of the spinner that is called Spalangio, is venemous and slaieth, except there be remedie and succour the sooner: but the vertue of Plantaine slayeth the venyme thereof, if it be laid thereto in due man∣ner, and therefore other wormes, as Eutes and Frogs, that dread the sting∣ing of Spinners, defende themselues with iuyce of Plantaine, as Plinius sai∣eth. Dioscorides and Auicen in capi∣tulo De venenis, &c. And Macer saith the same. Aristotle and Plinius meane, that webs of spinners come of their guts, by a manner cratte of kinde: and the web is wouen by most subtill working, and is wonderfully knit in a net wise, and made with most smallest threds, and that for it should not be séene of flyes and of other wormes, for the which it is lai∣ed, and it should be séene of them, if the threds were great: and cob-webs are made with trauayle and businesse: but it is wonderfully soone destroyed & vn∣done, for it may not sustaine fire: and spinners dread winde, for by a blaste of winde the cob-web is soone broken and vnknit. And though the spinner be venemous,Spiders doe care of their ovvne kinde, for I haue seene one Spider fight, and kill ano∣ther. yet the web that commeth out of ye guts thereof, is not venemous, but is accoun∣ted full good and profitable to the vse of medicine. And as Dioscorides saith, the cob-web that is white and cleane, and is not defiled with filth nor with pow∣der, hath vertue to constraine, ioyne, and to restrayne, and therefore it stauncheth
bloud that runneth out of a wound, and keepeth it from matter and rotting: and healeth a new wound, if it he layd ther∣to, and withstandeth swelling ye tarieth the heting of a wound: & a maner spin∣ner is called Spalana, as Pli. saith li. 29. cap. 4. and of this spinner is lyke to an Ant, but he is much more of bodye, and hath a red head, & the other deale of the body is black sprong with white specks: and his smiting is more bitter & more sore, than the biting of the serpent Vi∣pera, and this spinner liueth most nigh furnaces, ouens and milles: and the re∣medie against his biting or smiting, is to shewe to him that is bitten or smit∣ten another spinner of the same kinde, and are therefore kept, when they are found dead. The skinne thereof stamped and dronke, is medicine against biting of the Wesell. Also another spinner is rough with a great head, and the sorenesse and ache of his stinging, is as it were the ache & sorenesse of a Scorpion: and by his bi∣ting the knées shake and fayleth, and al∣so of the biting, commeth blyndnes and spewing. And another manner spinner is called Mirmicaleon, or Mirmiceon, which is called by another name, For∣micaleon, and is like to an Ante, with a white head, aud hath a blacke bodye, with white speckes. His biting paineth and aketh as stinging of Waspes, and is called Formicaleon, for he hunteth Ants, and sucketh the moysture of them, but sparrowes and other foules deuoure him, as they do ants. Against all biting of spinners, the remedie is the braine of a Capon dronke in swéete wine with a little pepper:Note. and the congealing of a Lambe with Wine, healeth biting of spinners: and the same doth ashes of a Rams cloe with honie: also flyes stam∣ped, and laid to the biting, draweth out the venimme, and abateth the ache and sore: and ther be other remedyes which he reckoneth, but these are sufficient for this time. And libro eodem. capitulo. 6. he say∣eth: That a long Spinner and white, with small féete, beeing stamped in olde ple, doeth awaye the white pearle of the eye, as it is there sayd. (Additiō.Besides this large discourse of spi∣ders, it hath bene reported, that in Ire∣land be many spiders, and some verye great, and that being eaten of the Irish∣men, haue not performed any shewe of venime: it may be that the greater poy∣son subduath the losse.) ¶Of Ape. chap. 12. THe Bée is called Apis, and is a lit∣tle short Incecti with many féete, & among all flyes with round bodyes, and so shapen, he beareth the price in manye things, as Plinius sayth libro. 11. cap. 6. Hugenesse of wit rewardeth him in lit∣tlenesse of body, and though he might be accounted among flyeng Flyes, yet for he vseth feete, and goeth vpon them, he may rightfully be accounted among beastes that goe on grounde: and ouer the properties that are sit before libro. 12. in litera A. other properties shall be set héere; the which properties Plinius rehearseth li. 10. cap. 6. and saith in this manner: Among all wonders, the wit and sleight of Bees is wonderfull, by the which wit they gather honnie, and make honnie combes of most swéetest iuyce and subtill, and most wholesome: and worke and make Waxe, that is full good and profitable to the vse of lyfe of mankinde, and lurke and be hid∣den in Winter: for they haue no might & strength to withstand the frost & snow, & blasts of Northen wind: and in spring∣ing time they go out to blooming beanes to worke & to trauaile, & none of them haue leaue to be idle in yt time: and first they ordeine hony combes, & make waxe houses & cells, & then bréed young & make hony therafter, & bring it together. And they perget the roofe of their hiues with woose & gum all about, & with iuyce of trees that haue vertue of Gumme, and strength their hiues as well as they may agaynst the greedines and réeses of other small Birdes, and if there be any durte, they breake it off and casteth it ef and farre awaye, and they washe the Hiues with the foresayd woose and iuyce.
And first for foundation of their work, they lay and set a certaine péece of bit∣ter sauour: and manye men call that Comosim: and make then another péece more swéete, and that is the beginning of ware, and many men call that Duli∣ces: & the third time they set more grea∣ter matter & thicke, that is the stablish∣ment and fastening of the hony combs, and many men call that matter Propo∣lim: and in these three manner wises, they strengthen, and succour, and defend their honie combes, against colde and o∣ther wrongs. And Bées sit not on fruite, but on flowers, not withered, but fresh & new, and gather matter, of the which they make both honie and wexe: and when the flowers that are nigh vnto them are wasted and spent, then they sende spyes, for to espie meate in farther pla∣ces, and if the night falleth vpon them in their iourney, then they lye vpright to defend their wings from rayne and from deaw, that they may in the mor∣row tide flye the more swifter to their worke with theyr drye wings and able to flye. And they ordayne watches after the manner of Castles, and rest all night vntill it be daye, till one Bée wake thē all with twice buzzing or thrice, or with some manner trumping: then they flye all, if the daye be faire on the morrowe: and they diuine and are ware before of rayne and of winde, and then they holde them in theyr house, and when they know and be ware before hand of faire weather, then they passe foorth to theyr worke with a swarme and companye: and then, some gather flowers with their feete, and some water with theyr mouthes, and beare drops together with all roughnes of their bodies. The youn∣ger goeth out to worke, and beginneth such thinges, and the elder worketh at home, with flowers that they bring. First, they charge the fore féete, and af∣terward the hinder féet, vntil they turne home againe, with the mouth full and fully charged. And they receiue them that be char∣ged in this manner: thrée or foure dis∣chargeth them, as they be ordayned at home, for theyr offices are diuers: For some make houses, and some cleanse and make fayre the Hiue, and some dresse meate of that that is brought home, and they eate not asunder, least vncleannesse of meate or of worke should be among them: and they make the combes ordi∣nately and by lyne, & hang them aboue, with certaine things, that them holdeth, and vndersetteth them that they shall not fall, and putteth a lyttle honnye in the first rowe, and ofte filleth the laste most full. And the Bées that bringeth and bea∣reth what is needfull, dread blastes of winde, and flyeth therefore lowe by the ground when they are charged, least they be letted with some manner of blasts, & chargeth themselues somtime with gra∣uell or with small stones, that they may be the more stedfast against blastes of winde, by heauinesse of the stones. A∣mong them is wonderfull obseruaunce of discipline and of lore, for one mark∣eth and taketh héed of them that worke not, and chastiseth them anone, and slai∣eth them that will not worke. Among them is wonderfull great cleannesse, for they suffer no filthe among theyr workes. And some Bées gather into one place the dirte of the Bées that worke, be∣cause they shoulde not goe farre from their works, and throw out their durt at euen, and goeth into their houses & bide still vntill the same Bée that hath wat∣ched, flye about and call them to rest, and then they holde all their peace and be stil sodeinlye. Item in eodem cap. 13. Bées doe most equitie and right, and smite all that distroubleth their peace, and all that desire to destroy their honnie. And Bées haue a King, that is not armed with a sting, but with Lordshippe and mage∣stie, as he sayth, cap. 18. Or if he haue a string, kinde denieth him the vse thereof. For kind wil not yt he should bée cruell, to the intent hée shoulde not be hastie to take wreake, and therefore taketh away from him his Speare, and leaueth him vnarmed. And so it is truth, that ye Em∣perour vseth not his sting. The obedi∣ence of Bées is wonderfull aboute the
King: for when he passeth foorth, all the swarm in one cluster passeth with him, & he is compassed about with ye swarm, as it were with an hoast of knights, & is then vnneth séene that time, for mul∣titude that followeth and serueth him: and when the swarm of Bees be in tra∣uell, he is within, and as it were gouer∣nour, and goeth about to comfort other for to worke, and onely he is not bound to trauayle, and all about him are cer∣tain Bées with stings, as it wer cham∣pions, and continuall wardens of the kings body: and he passeth seldome out, but when all the swarme shall go out. His out going is knowen certaine daies before by voyce of the hoast, as it were araieng it selfe to passe out with ye King; and so if it should chaunce that ye king of the Bees: wing were cat at that time, then the swarme shoulde not passe out of the hiue; and when he passeth out of the hiue, all the Bées profereth them to the Kings seruice, and labour to bée next him, and beareth the King on their shol∣ders, if he be weary and ouercome with trauayle, and if any Bée be wearie and faileth, or erreth, and goeth out of the hoast, then they follow by smell after the King, and where euer the King com∣maundeth, there the boast pitcheth their tents. And all the hoast is comforted, & hearted when they see the King: and if they loose the king, then all the swarme breaketh, and commeth vnto, another King: For they may not be without a King. To the Bée hiues commeth certaine false Bees that are called Fuci in ye plu∣rall number,Drones. and haue a great wombe, and eate and deuoure hony, & true Bées slayeth these false Bees when they take them therewith. When springing time is wet and moist, then the brood of Bées is multiplyed, and if meate fayleth in the Bée hiues, then they réese and assaile their neighbors, to take from them their honie, and to spoyle them: and the other lead an hoast against them if they haue a king, and if any Bee in the other side, fauoureth them ye rise & assaileth them, then the Bées that assaile them, spareth them that fauour them, and smite not at them, but take them in companye, and defendeth them. For many other causes hoasts that be contrarye, ordayne them two Emperours with great strife: and the fighting and battaile is all destroyed and disperpled, with throwing of pouder and of dirt. Item in eod. ca. 19. Some Bées, are fled Bées, and some be woode Bées and fowle to sight, and more wrathfull than other, but they trauayld better, and may better away therewith: & some be tame Bées, and some of them be short, diuers & round. And some be long as waspes, and those are worse than other, but they trauayle better, and may better awaye therewith and be rough: and some of these Bées are white, and gender honie, and make their neostes among corne: and in the woode, Bées gender honye a∣mong trées, and somtime in dens in the earth. And so these kinde giueth a sting, yt sticketh ther he smiteth at one stroke: and some for great wrath and desire of wreake stingeth so déepe, that the gutte followeth sodainly the speare and suche dye soone: and some loose the speare, and liue afterward, and maye not make ho∣nie, for their vertue is taken away from them, and lyue to doe profite, or to noye. Bees hate stinking & other euill smels, & namely smoke, and flye there from, & be glad & merry in things with good smell: and be comforted with smell of crabs, if they be sod nigh them. And when theyr King is dead, then they be woe for sor∣rowe, and doe for him, as it wer seruice for the dead, and all the swarme of them maketh great sorow & dole: if the King be dead in pestilence, then they beare meate togethers, and passe not out, but with sorrowfull mone they be gathered on a heap about his bodie, and abate not their sorrow and woe, but they dye for hunger and wo, except the body be taken away. Helth of Bées is knowen in their mirth and cléernesse. Also he sayth, that Bées fall into ma∣nie sicknesses: for as it is said cap. 20. they wer sicke when their brood faileth, and also sound that reboundeth of noyse is enemy to them, for it maketh them full sore afraid with sodaine noyse.
Also corrupt myst, that corrupteth flow∣ers that they eate is enemie to them. Also spinners be enimies to them, when they come in the hiue, and make webs, that grieue them. Also a flye that is like to a Butter flye, that Flieth into can∣dles,The long taper gnat is enemie to them: for that but∣ter flye eateth wexe, and leaueth there dirt, of the which dirt commeth Cater∣pillers, wormes that loue well war pas∣sing other things. Also the great desire of meate grieueth them, when they eate too much of flowers; and that hapneth namely in springing time, and they dye all with oyle, as such round beasts doe, and namely if the head be noynted: and such beasts set in the Sunne, quickneth againe if they be besprong with vineger. Also somtime they take sicknesse, and cause of sicknesse, when they euer gree∣delye eating, féele that theyr honnie is withdrawen and taken away. Huc vs∣que Plinius. Auicen lib. 8. cap. 3. rehearseth noble properties and worthy of Bées, & saith that Bees are fed with hony, and lyttle they eate thereof, but they eate honie when they be sicke, & go not out of their house. And when they find cleane hiues, they make therin houses and chambers of waxe, with sire manner castes: and whē ye mouth of ye hiue is too large, they make it lesse with some manner glewie matter, that is blacke with sharpe odor and smell: and first they build the kings house, and that house is lyke an hoale vauted, and afterward they buyld other houses, by diuersitie of the more mai∣sters or lesse. And onely the males builde theyr houses, and afterwarde is no working, but to eate and make hony: & first Bées dwell in their honie combes, and passe out when it is time, and flye vpwarde top wise, and come againe and eate hon∣nie. And the King passeth neuer out without an hoast: and the males haue no stings, except a few, and then they de∣sire to sting, but they may not: & Bées haue two maner Kings, the one is red, and that other as blacke as a coale, and is twice so much as a Bée that maketh honnie: and the male Bées, are more than the females: and the lesse Bees & round, with diuers colours be best: and Bées that are fed in mountaines, gar∣dens and meades, are small and good, and make honnie, like in parts light. Bées that be not good, maketh not hon∣nie euen, nor lyke in parts, but the Bee that cleaueth alway to the hole of the honie, maketh best honie, and els yt hon∣nie should be soone corrupt, and spinners should gender therein, and destroye the hony. And Bees that make the hony, vse a sting for double cause: for the defence, for there is firie vertue in the sting, and therefore it worketh greatly to wast su∣perfluitie of moisture, and to amend and kéepe, and to saue the honie. Also ofte into hiues come certaine euill flyes, and bréede there other small flyes, that are grieuous, and he called Gusanes, that pearceth the winges of other: but the very Bées pursue those flyes, and fight with them, and will not suffer them to fal vpon their house, and Bees that make hony slayeth the males that grieue them, and euill kings, that rule them not a right, but onely eate too much hony, and that they doe, namelye when honye is scarfe: and small Bees fight with long Bées, when they worke not nor trauel, and are busie to put them out of the hiues: and by such out put∣ting the hony is the better, & the more in quantitie. There is a manner kinde of Bées, that are called Labion, and these slaye Bées that make hony, and destroy their houses: and that is, for they are wake∣full. And when they come into theyr hiues, they pitche themselues into the honie because of eating, and stick so fast therein, that they may not escape, & then the very Bées slayeth them anone. And two dayes before that the King passeth out, the other Bées are skilfullye war∣ned, and haue knowledge what the king shall doe, that they may be obedient and readie to the king. And when ye kings be made, each hath one company, & that companie will haue none other, but him that they first choose: and if anye other king will be king of that companye, they slay him.
And if young Bées that come forth bée fow, they abide the companye of another swarme, and passeth so forth the more surely: and after that the young Bees begin to flye, if they be euen and lyke, then they hast their worke, and help the olde to worke. And no creature is more wreakful, nor more feruēt to take wreak than is the Bée when he is wrath ther∣fore a multitude of the hoast of Bées, throw downe great hedges, when they are compelled to withstande them that destroye theyr honny, passing all other things. Bees hate dirte and smoake, and la∣bour to delyuer them of their owne dirt when they flye, for their dirte stinketh full fowle, & clense therfore their houses of their owne dirt: & young virgin Bées work better, and make better hony than olde, and smite not so much, nor theyr smiting grieueth not so sore, as doth the smiting of the olde. And Bees drinke, & that is onely cléere water, whether it be farre or nigh, and drinketh not, but they purge them first of their owne dirte. And Bées maketh most honnie in Har∣uest, and in springing time is best, be∣cause of new floures of great purenes. And Bées be pleased with harmony and melodie of sound of song, and with flap∣ping of hands, and beating of basons: & therfore with beating of basons, tinging and tinckling of timbrells, they be com∣forted and called to the hiues. When much hony is lefte in theyr hiues, they wexe slow and worke the lesse, therefore it néedeth to leaue in the hiue, honnye meanly, not too much, nor too little. Huc vsque Auicen. li. 7. And he writeth ma∣ny other properties, in the which he ac∣cordeth with Aristotle libro. 8. and also with Plin. libro. 11: Looke before lib. 12. in litera A, there ye maye finde manye properties that Aristotle, Seneca, and o∣ther Authours write: but this sufficeth for this time. ¶Of Boue. cap. 13. THe Oxe is called Bos, and is called Boetes in Greeke, and sometime Te∣ro in Latine, for he treadeth the earth, and the dew lappe or fresh lap that han∣geth downe vnder his throte, and stret∣cheth to the legges, is called Palliaria, & hath that name of Pelle the skinne, as it were Pelliaria, a hanging skinne or a dagge, and is a token of gentlenesse & nobilytie in an Oxe, as Isidore sayth li. 14. And he sayth, that Oxen be full mild among their fellowes, for one of them séeketh another, with whom he is vsed to draw at neck at the plough. And ofte lowing proueth affection and loue, when he may not soone finde his fellow. Lib. 8. cap. 45. Plinius speaketh of Oxen, and sayth. That he findeth written of Oxen of Inde, that are as high as Camelles, with hornes of foure foote long. And ther it followeth: among beastes that goe backward onely Oxen be fed with foder and with other foode, and it is sayd, that they were fat by washing with hot wa∣ter. And Oxen maye better trauaile when they be yoaked by the horns, then when they be yoked by the necke. In Syria are Oxen that haue not dew laps nor tresh laps vnder the throte, but bun∣ches on the backes: and Oxen with straight hornes, be accompted excellent in worke: and blacke Oxen with lyttle hornes be accounted lesse profitable to working. Oxens hornes are more thicker than Bulles hornes: and after the gelding, the Oxe increseth in body and in horns, in might, vertue, and strength: but hee is not so bold and hardie as before hand, but he is more tame, softe, and milde, and may better away with trauaile and is more slowe and heauie of going. Also Plin. speaketh of the kinde of Ox∣en and saith: that after thrée years, an Oxe is lesse fierce than within 3. yeres: and a young Cow and an Oxe may be well coupled together. And we haue the Oxe fellow in trauel of tillyng of land: and this beast was so worthy accounted in olde time, that men would not harte the Oxe, and who that slewe an Oxe without cause, should be as sore punish∣ed, as though he had slaine his fellowe in earth tillyng, as he saith. The Oxe is a mild beast and cleane, not onely to the vse of man, but also to
offer in Altars of Gods: for of Oxen be best offerings and sacrifices made, and with offering of them and Sacrifice, the Gods be best pleased. The Oxe openeth the land, and carueth with culture and with share, and tilleth fields, and maketh them able and good to beare good corne & fruite. The Oxe féedeth with his flesh, and nourisheth: the skin and hide ac∣cordeth to many manner vse, and his dirte fatteth the lande: his hornes hea∣ted or sotten, were softe, and be stretch∣ed out and made right and euen, and of them be made diuers vessells, tooles, and instruments. Of Oxe hornes be made tapping and nockes to bowes, to arbala∣sters, and arrowes to shoote against E∣nemies, and breast plates, and other ar∣mour, by the which, vnstrong places of mans bodye, be warded and defended a∣gainst shot and smiting of enimies. And of Oxe hornes be lanternes made: to put off darknesse, and combes to right & to cleause heades of filth. Also Hunters vse Oxe hornes to feare wilde keasts, & to comfort hounes to pursue beasts that taketh the flight. Also writers and pain∣ters vse the hornes, and keepe in them diuers colours at best. Also warriours life hornes and blow therewith, and cō∣forteth their fellows, both such as fight, and then: that flye, and call them to the boast with blowing of hornes. Also kée∣pers and wardens of beasts and of Ca∣stels and waites, vseth hornes, and com∣forteth each other to wake with blow∣ing of hornes. And the Oxe hornes bée néedfull to all manner of vse. Also that that is in the Oxe is néedfull to diuers vse, and also his durt is good and profi∣table, as Plinius sayth, libro. 28. cap. 11. And sayth, that Oxe durt helpeth against ach of the ioyntes, and is a singular re∣medy against the dropsie, if the patient be therewith annointed in the Sun. For it consumeth and wasteth humours be∣twéene the skinne and the flesh: & swa∣geth and abateth holning and swelling of the dropsie. Also li. 30. ca. 3. Plinius saith, yt there is a little beast like to Ecarabeus, and is called Bupestris, and this Bupestris be∣guileth and betrayeth the Oxe in the grasse, and that is (as it is sayde) for the Oxe treadeth on him.Bupestris, a flie like a blacke betle, but hauing longer legs, it ly∣eth in the grasse, & killeth a beast if he eate him. For this Bupe∣stris lyeth among hearbs and grasse that the Oxe loueth, and hideth him therein: and the Oxe gathereth his meate, and swalloweth this beast Bupestris, & when this beast Bupestris is swallowed, hée chafeth sodeinely the lieur of the Oxe, and maketh him break with great paine and sorrow. Héerof Papias speaketh and saith, that the necke of the Oxe is wrong and grieued with charge of the yoake, & the Oxe is grieued with the ache of the pricke, with the which hée is so pric∣ked. And the Oxe dyeth with woe and sorrowe that commeth of the venimme of that beast Bupestris, when hée com∣meth into the Oxe wombe amongst his meate. Of Bubulco. cap. 14. AN Oex heard is called Bubulcus, & is ordeined by office to kéepe Oxen: Hée féedeth & nourisheth Oxen, and brin∣geth thē to léese and home againe, & bin∣deth their féet with a langhalds and spa∣nells, and neigheth and cloggeth them while they be in pasture and léese, and yoaketh and maketh them drawe at the plough, and pricketh the flowe with a gad, and maketh them drawe euen. And pleaseth them with whistling and with song, to make them beare the yoak with the better will for lyking of melo∣dye of the voice. Oxen and hartes loue melody by kinde, as Auicen saith. And this hearb driueth & ruleth them to draw euen, and leatheth them to make euen sorrowes, & compelleth them not only to eare, but also to tread and to thresh. And they lead them about vpon corn to break the straw, in threshing and treading the floure. And when the trauaile is done, then they vnyoke them and bring them to the statl; and tie them of the stall, and féedeth them thereat. Of Bubalo. cap. 15. THe Bugle is called Bubalus, and that nound Butus is diminitiue of Bos,
Bouis. And the Bugle is called Bubalus for he is lyke to an Oxe, & is a fierce beast, and is not gladly tamed, nor ta∣keth gladly the yoake on his necke. In Affrica be Bugles: and in Germa∣nia be wilde Oxen with so long horns, that ye Kings boord is serued with drink thereof: for he holdeth so much, as Isi. saith. And is a beast of great strength, and may not be tained but with an yron ring put through his nosethrill, by the which ring he is led about: and is black or red, and is thin haired, with hornes: and his forhead is beclypped with full strong hornes, and his flesh is good, not onely to meate, but also to medicine. For as Plin. saith lib. 28. cap. 10. Bugle flesh sod or rosted, healeth mans biting: his marrow taken out of the right leg∣doth away haire of the eye lyds, and is medicine for euills of eyen: his bloude taken with vineger, healeth wonderful∣ly them that cast bloud: his hoofe with Mirra fastneth wagging téeth: and Bu∣gle milke helpeth against fretting and gnawing of the guttes, for it softeneth them, and easeth with his fatnesse, and helpeth against the bloudye flure: and is full good against smiting of serpents & of Scorpions, and against venimme of the Creket, and of the Worme that is called Cicada,A vvorm lyke a grashoper and heleth new wounds: and Bugle dirt heated, healeth harde po∣stumes, and softneneth the mallice there of: his gall helpeth against dimnesse of eyen. Also some wilde Oxen be won∣full great, and neuerthelesse most quiuer and swifte, insomuch that the dirte that they shite in turning about falleth on theyr hornes, or euer it may come to the ground. (Additiō.There are no wilde Oxen, but ei∣ther Bulls, Buffells, or females of that kinde: this is a tame errour, the Au∣thor meant the furious Buffell of the greater kinde, called Vro or Tarando, who vyolently runneth vpon any man, to spoyle or destroye him. In the woode Hercynia these Beastes are bredde, not much lesse than the Elephant, pro∣portioned lyke a Bull, the flesh good to eate, with diuers other propertyes. Read Gesner lib. 1. folio. 157.) (Additiō.Hyreynia, is a great Woode in Germany, the which is in bredth nyne dayes iourney, and in length forty daies iourney, as Caesar writeth. Pompone∣us Mela affirmeth it to be fortie dayes iourney in length also.) These Bulls hate all thing that is redde: and therfore hunters cloath them in redde, to make these Bulles pursue them, and when the hunter séeth yt this beast is nigh him, then he starteth be∣hinde a strong trée, and the Bull in his wrath réeseth with the hornes strongly, and pitcheth his hornes into the trée, & is so helde in the trée by his horns, and destroyed and throwen downe by hun∣ters dartes. Also another beast is lyke a wylde Bull, and is not so great, but hée hath full great hornes and sharp, with whom he throweth downe bushes and trées, & throweth strong Dakes downe to the ground, and at the last, to gather meate, he putteth his head among shrubs, and long roddes, small and tough, that com∣passe and wind about the hornes of the beast, and so the beast is tyed and held: and then he striueth and praunceth long therewith, and striueth against the win∣ding and fastening of the roddes, and is faster and faster bound and holden, and when he hath long striuen, yet he maye not delyuer himselfe out of the bondes, but is alway faster & faster bound, then for indignation he loweth full loud, and the hunter heareth his great voyce, and knoweth that the beast is snarled, and fast helde: and then he commeth vpon the beast boldly, that is most sharp and mighty, & slaieth him with his toole, and weapon, and durst not aduenture vpon him in great woodes nor in fieldes, but now he dare stay him when he is held a∣mong small rods. Phisiologus calleth this beast Ap∣taleon: If his words may be beléeued,The later Writers report no suche name. it séemeth a wonder, why so strong & so fierce a beast draweth not his hornes out of shrubbes and roddes that are small: with the which hornes, hée so mightelye breaketh great trées & strong, and throweth them downe flatte to the ground.
Also there is a manner wylde Oxe, that Aristotle libro. 8. cirea finem cal∣leth Bonboricus, and saith, it is a great Beast, asia, great Bull, and is lyke a Bull, and hath haire shad on either side on the necke, as it fareth on the haire of an horse: and his haire is rōre softer than horse haire, and more shorter, and is haired continually vnto the eyen, and is some deale redde or citrine, and his voyce is lyke to the voyce of a Bull, & his hornes are some deale redde or ci∣trine, and be some deale crooked: and in to eyther of his hornes, maye halfe the measure that is called Bos, and hath no téeth aboue, but is toothlesse aboue, as a Bull: and his legges be not full hairy, but they be lyke to a speare, and is clo∣uen footed, with two clées in one foote: and his tayle is short in comparison to his bodye: and he diggeth the earth, and teareth him in digging, as a Bull doth, and hath an harde skinne, and suffereth well strokes, and his flesh is full swéet, and is therefore hunted and beaten, and flyeth, and resteth when he is hunted, & throweth dirte foure paces from him, & doth so for dread, and houndes that run after him, smell to the dirte: and while the hounds be occupied about such smel∣ling, the beast dyeth and runneth, and passeth farre away. Also libro. 10. Aristotle speaketh of the wilde cowe and sayth, That when hir time of Caluing commeth, manye of them come about hir, and make of dirte as it were a wall, and this maner beast hath much dirte, as Aristotle sayth, and Auicen also. ¶Of Basilisco. cap. 16. THe Cockatrice is called Basiliscus in Gréeke, and Regulus in Latine, and hath that name Regulus of a litle king, for he is King of serpents, and they are afeard and flye when they sée him, for he slayeth them with his smell and with his breathe: and slayeth also all thing that hath lyfe, with breathe and with sight. In his sight, no fowle, nor birde pas∣seth harmelesse, and though he be farre from the foule, yet it is burnt and deuou∣red by his mouth. But he is ouercome of the Wesel: and men bring the We∣sell to the Cockatrice denne, wherin hée lurketh and is hidde, for the Father and maker of all thing, lefte nothing with∣out remedy: and so the Cockatrice fli∣eth when he séeth the Wesell, and the Wesell pursueth and slayeth him: and the Cockatrice is halfe a foote long, and hath white speckes: and the Cockatrice slayeth that that he commeth nigh, as the Scorpion, and that water that hée toucheth, maketh the Dropsie, and it is venemous and deadly. And some men call the Coackatrice Sibilus, for with hissing he slayeth, ere he biteth or stin∣geth. Huc vsque Isidorus. lib. 12, capi∣tulo. 4. Plinius also sayth, libro. 8. capitulo. 22. Among the Hisperies and Aethy∣opes is a well, that many men suppose is the head of Nylus, and there beside is a wilde beast that is called Catoble∣tas, and hath a lyttle body, and nice in al members, and a great head hanging al∣way, toward the earth, and els it were great noyeng to mankinde: for all that sée his eyen, should dye anone, and the same kinde hath the Cockatrice, and the Serpent that is bred in the Prouince of Syrena, and hath a bodye in length and breadth as the Cockatrice, and a tayle of twelue inches long, and hath a specke in his head as a precious stone, and feareth away all Serpents with hissing, and he presseth not his bodye with much bow∣ing, but his course of way is forth right, and goeth in meane: he dryeth and bur∣neth leaues and hearbes, not onely with touche, but also by hissing and blast, he rotteth and corrupteth all thing aboute him. And he is of so great venime and perillous, that he slayeth and wasteth him yt commeth nigh him by the length of a speare, without tarrieng. And yet the Wesell taketh and ouercommeth him: for it pleaseth God, that no kind∣ly thing should be without peere, for the biting of the Wesell is death to ye Coc∣katrice: and neuerthelesse the biting of the Cockatrice is death to the wesell, & yt is sure, except ye wesel eat rew before.
And against such venime, as Aristotle sayth and Auicen, first the Wesell ea∣teth the hearb of Row, though it be bit∣ter, and by vertue of the iuyce of that hearb, be goeth boldly and obey commeth his enemie. And though the Cockatrice be venomous without remedy, while he is alway, yet he léeseth all the mallce, when he is burnt to ashes: his ashes are accounted good and profitable in worke∣ing of Alkamie, and namely in turning and changing of mettall. (Additiō.The Basiliske as Cockatrice, a∣mong créeping wormes is the most pe∣stilent. And among men, the most pesti∣lent minded, are the spoilers of the Cler∣gie with such vnconscionable are rages, that many Ministers haue bene forced to leaue their lyuings, and go a begging. If the tituled clemencie of the Gospell, he become oppression, God will bring shortly all to confusion. There were no such Basiliskes in Plinies time: My self haue bene so plagued, that I speak by experience, and haue to shewe by proofe, &c.) ¶Of Botrace. cap. 17. BOtrax is called Rubeta also, and is a manner venemous frogge, & dwel∣leth both in water and in lande, as Pli∣nius saith lib. 18. cap. 32. And it is sayde, that he chaungeth his skinne in age, & eateth alway certaine hearbes, and kée∣peth and holdeth alway venime, & sight∣eth against the common spinner, and a∣gainst the spinner that is called Spalan∣gio, and ouercommeth their venime and biting by benefise of Plantaine, and his venime is accounted most cold, and sto∣nieth, therefore each member that he toucheth; it maketh lesse feeling, as it were froze, and is a venemous beast, & comforteth therefore himselfe, at each touching: and the more he is touched, the more he swelleth, and as manye speekes as he hath vnder the wombe, so many manner wise, his venimme is accompted grieuous. And he hath eyen, as though they were site shining, and the worse he is, the more burning is his sight, & though he hath cléere eyen, yet he haleth ye light of the Sunne, and séeketh darke places, and flyeth to dennes, when the Sunne riseth, and his beames shineth vpon the earth. This Froggs loueth swéete hearbs, and eateth the rootes of them, but in ea∣ting, he infecteth and corrupteth both rootes and hearbes Therefore ofte in gardene in: Rew set, that is venime and enemye to Eoades, and to other vene∣mous wormes: for by vertue of Rew, then be chased away, and may not come to other hearbes and rootes that growe therein. The Toade loueth stinking places and dirie and hateth places with good smell and odour: and so it is sayd, that he flyeth out of the vineyard, when the vines begin to bloome, for he maye not suffer nor sustaine theyr good odour and smell. And libro. tricesimo capitu∣lo. 4. Plinius speaketh of the Toad, and sayth in this manner. There be right venemous Frogges, that are called Rubetae, and liue among biers and bushes, and the more great they be, the worse they be. And some be browne, and some are reddish, and some pale, and soone yeelow, or citrine. And they meane that these wormes Rube∣tae haue double lyuer, that one is most venemous, & that other is remedie, & is giuen in stéed of Triacle against poyson and venime: and for to assay & knowe which is good and which is euill, the li∣uer is throwen into an Ant hill, then the Antes flye and voyd the venemous parte, and desire and choose that other parte, and shall be taken and kept to the vse of medicine. And Authours tell wonders of these manner of Frogges as Plinius sayeth, and tell, that in the right side of such a Frogge, is a preuie boane, that cooleth same deale séething water, if it be thro∣wen therein: & the vessell may not heate afterwarde, but if the bone be first ta∣ken out: and Witches vse that boane to loue and hate: and they meane al∣so, that the feauer quarlane is healed thereby. And be that worme noiser so venemous, yet by burning he léeseth the mallyce of venymme, and taketh most
vertue of medicine: and ashes thereof helpe wonderfullye to recouer flesh and skinne that is happelye soft, and to make sadnesse and sinnewes, and to healyng and preseruation of wounds, if the ashes be vsed in ouer draner. Looke within De Rana, in litera. R. (Additiō.Bofo the Toade; whereof are di∣ners kindes: some Toads that bréed in Italy and about Naples; haue in theyr heas, a stone called a Crpo, of hignes like a big peach, but flat; of colour gray, with a browne spot in the midst, said to be of vertue. In times past; they were much Morlie, and vsed in ringes, as the forewarning against venime.) ¶Of Bombace. cap. 18. BOmbax is a worme that bréedeth in twigges and branches of Cipresse, of Ashe, of Malberrie trées, and of Tere∣bintus, as Plin. sayth lib. 11. cap. 24. And Isid. saith in this manner, Bombax is a Worme of two twigges and branches: of his weauing is cloathing made, and is called Bombacinium. And is called Bombax, for he is made voyde & cleane while the thred passeth out of him, and in him abideth ut aire onely as he say∣eth. And this Worme hath wonderfull chaunging: for first he commeth foorth as a worme lyke a Malshrāg, that gna∣weth caule leaues and vine leaues, this worme may not away with colde, and weaueth webs, as spinners doe: and first he maketh him a place or a house to dwell in, and to defond himselfe against the colde, winter, and maketh his webbe with his feete, and draweth his small threds, and kemeth them with his feet, and ordayneth them so, & maketh therof a webbe. (Additiō.Bumbix, a silke worme, the origi∣nall spinner, whereof all sorts of silkes, dressed and died into colours, serue mans vse.) ¶Of Camelo. cap. 19. CAmells are called Cameli, and haue that name of a nowne of Gréeke, as Isidore sayth libro. 12. for when they be charged they bowe and lye downe, and are méeke to them that charge them. For méeke and short is called Caine in Gréeke. Or els they haue that name of Ca∣mur in Gréeke, that is crooked, for when they take charge vpon them, they bnde and crooke the knées. Also Camelles bée beasts that beare charges and burthens, and are milde and softe, and ordayned to beare charge and cartage of men, and bée found in many countryes and landes, and namely in Arabia, and Camells of Arabia be diuers from Camels of other landes, for a Camell of Arabia hath two bounches in the backe, and a Camell of another Lande, hath but one bounche in the backe, as Isidore saith in eodem. And libro. 8. capitulo 19. Plinius sai∣eth in this manner: The Cast féedeth Camells among tame beastes, of which Camells is two manner kindes: For some are of Bactria, and some are of A∣rabia: the Camell of Arabia hath two bounches on the backe, and the Camell of Bactria hath but one in the backe, on the which he beareth his burthen: and another in the breast, and leaneth there∣on. Camells be soothlesse aboue as Ox∣en are, and chew their cudde, as Oxen and Shéepe, as Isidore sayth libro. 12. and is cloue footed, as it shall be sayde héereafter, and is full swifte, as Plinius sayth, and is therefore good in battayle and warre, and to beare charge and ca∣riage. And the Camell goeth no more a daye, than he is wont to doe, nor ta∣keth no more burthen than he is wont to beare. And the Camell hateth the Horse by kinde, and suffreth thirst, foure dayes, and stirreth the water with his feete when he drinketh, or els the drinks doth him no good. And the Camell liueth fiftie yeare, and some an hundred yeare, and wereth mad sometime. Camells be gelded that are ordained to battaile & to warre: for they be the stronger, if they be put from the worke of generation. Huc vsque Plinius. Auicen speketh of the Camel in this maner, the Camel he saith moueth first ye
right soote as the Lyon doth, and onelye the Camell hath a hunch on his backe, & is choi footed, and hath fells in the clifts as it fareth in a Goose foote, and those clefts be fleshly as ye rielies of a Beare foot: and therefore men maketh thē shooes, least their feet be hurt that bée tender be∣neath. And sometime in the Camelles heart is a bone found, as there is in the heart of an Hart. And the Camell hath foure teates in the two vaders, as ye row hath, and the female Camell boweth her selfe & goeth on her knées, when shée wilt be coupled with the male. And her ta∣lent and desire is strong and feruent in time of loue, & she eateth then but little, and desireth alway to bée assayled of the male, nigh to the place in which shée was first assailed. And as Arist. saith, li. 5. it is one propertie of Camells to be solitary & alone in mountains in time of loue, & no man may come nigh to them yt time, but the heard alone, and the Camells yard is sinewy & full hard. Therefore men make bow strings of such yardes. Item ibidem in eodem, Camells haue certaine times ordeined to the worke of generation: the female nourisheth the colt in the wombe 12. moneths, and they ingender not be∣fore they be thrée yéere olde, & rest a yéere after louing. Also he sayth, libro. 8. that certaine manner of Camells bée gelded, to be the more able to flie: and saith, that such Camells be more swifter then hor∣ses, and that is because of large pase and wide, but héereof look within de Drome∣datio. Aristotle sayth, lib. 9. cap. 17. that the Camell doth not the woorke of gene∣ration with his owne mother. For in a certaine citie a Camell was héeled with a mantell, & her owne sonne leape on her, and by falling of the cloth that she was couered with, hée knew it was his owne mother, and though hée did the déede, hée leaped downe & slew the man, that him had beguiled. Aristotle setteth this en∣sample, and other like of a horse of a cer∣taine king. Also libr. 11. cap. 37. Plinius speaketh of Camells, and saieth, that among foure footed beasts camells ware bald as men do, & as the Estridge & certeine beasts a∣mong foules. Also he saith, that among beasts without hornes, the Camelles bée toothlesse in the ouer iawe, & accord ther∣fore in téeth with beasts yt chew the cud, & in disposition of the wombe, but not in horns. And Ari. li. 14. sayth, yt a beast that eateth thorny matter, hath not yt wombe as the camell, & an hard horned beast hath us téeth in either iaw, & therefore the Ca∣mell hath no teeth in either iaw, but one∣ly beneath, though he be hornelesse. Then it néedeth that the Camels wombe be of such disposition, and is like to the womb of beastes that be toothlesse in the ouer iawe. And the making of his téeth is like to the making of the téeth of horned beastes. And it followeth there, and for the Camells meate is thorny and hard, it néedeth that his tongue be fleshie for the hardnesse of the palat. Therefore kinde vset the palat as the earthy part of téeth: and therfore the camell cheweth his cud as horned beasts do, for his wound is like to the wombe of horned beasts, & hée ta∣keth his meate in his first wombe, & all vndigest, and in the second wombe the meat beginneth to defie, and is better de∣fied in the third womb, and in the fourth wombe is full digestion and compleate, and this diuersitie of wombes is néedful for hardnesse of his meat, for he grindeth and cheweth his meate little with his teeth. And li. 13. Aristotle sayth, yt the camell hath no gall distinguished vpon yt liuer, no more then the Elephant hath, for the matter of this liuer is full whole & sound, and his bloud is kindlye sweete: and in such beastes is no gall found, but if it be found in full small veines, and therefore olde men sayde, that Anaxagoras sayth, that Camells be beasts of long lyfe, for they be gallesse, and beastes with lyttle galls liue longer then beasts with much Gall. And therefore Anaxagoras sayde, that gall is cause of all sharpe sicknesses, when gall is multiplyed vnto the lungs, and shedde to other partes of the bodye. But Aristotle sayth, that this is false, for many beasts in whom no gall is found, haue ryght sharpe sicknesse sometime and euills that slaye them, as it fareth in Camelles that haue the Podagre and phrensie, and by the Podagree their
feet be strained, and this euil slaieth them sometime, and bée neuerthelesse without gall, vt dicit ibidem. Huc vs{que} Aristoti. Also in Dietis vniuersalibus. Constant: speaketh of the Camell, & sayth, yt the ca∣mell is most hottest beast of kind, and is therefore leane by kinde, for the heat dra∣weth of all fatnesse of the bloud, & there∣fore the Camell is leane. And Camells milke is more thin then milke of other beasts, and lesse vnctuous, and lesse nou∣rishing, and more heating and opening & departing. And milke is nought else but bloud, oft sodde, and therefore Camelles milke is fall in sauour and sharpe, & tem∣pereth therefore those humours & maketh them thin. And cow milke is contrarye thereto, & is thicke & vnctuous, & nourish∣eth much. Looke other properties within de Dronedatio. Of Cameleoperdo. cap. 20. CAmeleoperdus is called Cameleoper∣dalis also, and is a beast of Aethiopia, as Isidore sayth, libro. 12. and Plinius li∣bro. 8. cap. 30. And hath the head of a ca∣mell, and the necke of a horse, and legges and feet of a Bull, and specks of the Per∣de, and is a beast befprong with white speckes distinguished with bright colour and cléere, and is called Cameleoperda∣lis, for he hath the head of a Camell, and speckes of the Perde. And Plinius sayth, that this beast is more worth in sight then in fiercenesse, and is so milde & soft, that he had almost the name of a sheepe. As he sayth, this beast was clene to meat by Moses lawe, but not to sacrifice, for he is cloue footed as a Bul, and cheweth his cudde as a Camell, and therefor it was lawfull to eate thereof, as it is written Deut. 14. &c. (Additiō.The Aethiopians call this Beast Nabis, his necke lyke a Horse, his féete lyke an Oxe, and his head lyke a Camel, spotted redde, very loftie before, and low behinde.) Of Camelion. cap. 21. CAmelion is a lyttle beast with di∣uerse coulours, and his bodye chaun∣geth full soone to diuerse coulours, as hée sayth. Also another beast there is founde, that taketh also chaunging of contrarye coulours, as Isidore sayth there. And A∣uicen meaneth, that Camelion and Stel∣lio the Lusard, is all one: for he shineth as a starre, and chaungeth coulours. For it is a fearefull beast, with lyttle bloud, and chaungeth therefore coulours. And is foure manner diuers: he hath the face of the ewte, and sharpe clawes and croo∣ked, and the bodye sharpe, and an harde skinne, as the Crocodile. And libro se∣cundo Aristotle sayth, that the Cameli∣on is a beast lyke to the Ewte in body, and his sides bée euenlong to the nea∣ther partes of his wombe, as it were a Fish: and his ridge boanes bounch vp∣warde, as it were a Fish: his face is as it were a beast compowned of a Swine & of an Ape: and his tayle is full long and small at the end: and his féete be crooked, as it were a little Ewte: and each of his féet is departed a twaine, and the compa∣rison of one foot to another, is as in com∣parison of the thombe of a man to the other deale of the hand: and each of those two partes is diuided in fingers: And his clawes be like to the claws of a bird: and all his bodye is rough and sharpe as the bodye of a Bardan: His eyen bée déepe, great, & round, and conteined with a skinne, lyke to the skinne of the body, and that skinne couereth the eyen. And he turneth and casteth oft his eien hether and thether. And chaungeth his coulour when his skinne is blowen, & his colour is somewhat blacke with black speckles therin: and this diuersitie is in al his bo∣die, & namely in the eyen, and also in the tayle, and is full heauie in moouing and foule of colour in his death, and what is in his body is but of little flesh, and hath but little bloud, but in the head and in the ende of the taile where he hath little bloud, & also in the heart, & in the veines that come therefrom: and also hath bloud about the eien, though it be right little. And the braine is nighe the eyen, and if the bodye bée departed in two, it abi∣deth in his working by spirite thereof: and a lyttle moouing abideth about the bodye, and is splenenesse, and dwelleth
in dennes, as an Ewte. Huc vsque A∣ristotle. And libro vicesimo octauo. Plinius sayth, that Camelion is a beast like to the Crocodile, and varyeth therefrom onely in crookednesse of the back; and in long∣nesse of the tayle. And no beast is accoun∣ted so fearefull, as the Camelion, & chan∣geth therfore his colour. His most might and strength is against the kinde of Gos∣haukes: for hée draweth them, and they flie to him, and he taketh them wilfully to other beasts to be deuoured. And De∣mocritus sayth, that if his head and his throate be set a fire with Oaken woode, it maketh both raine and thunder: but Pli∣nius scorneth this saieng. But what beast so euer it be, it is accounted among clene beasts, Super Leui. 11. Isichius saith, that in sicknesse he feyneth himselfe soft and milde though he be cruell. And it is said, that the Camelion liueth onely by aire, and the Mole by earth, and the Hearring by water, & the Cricket by fire, as these vearses meane. Quatuor ex puris vitam ducunt ele∣mentis. Camelion, Talpa, maris Halec, & Sala∣mandra. Terra cibat Talpam, flammae pascunt Salamandram, Vnda fit Halecis cibus, aer Camele∣onti. (Additiō.The Chamelion féedeth on Flies, and taketh them with the sodaine slip∣ping forth of his tongue, which is long and rounde, and may not be kept aboue fourtéene dayes without putting forth in the aire.) Of Caprea. cap. 22. THE wilde Goate is called Caprea, & hath that name of Carpendo, gathe∣ring. Thereof Isidore speaketh; libro. 12. and saith, that they be called Capri & Ca∣pree, for they gather braunches & twigs: And some men meane that they haue ye name, for they climbe vpon hard crags: and some meane, that they haue that name of noyse that they make with their legges: and so wilde Goates be called Caprie, for they sée most sharplye. The Gréekes call them Dorko and they dwell in high mountaines, and sée hun∣ters come a farre. And those same be cal∣led Ibices, for they cōe vpward into high places, as it were Birdes, so high that vnneth they be séene with mannes eien, as Isidore sayth, libro. 12. And he sayeth, that those beastes dwell in high Rockes and cragges. And if they perceiue some∣time, that they bée pursued of men or of wilde beastes, they fall downe headlong out of the high cragges, and saue them∣selues harmelesse on theyr owne hornes. And be called also Dame or Damule, as Papias sayth: Looke within in litrea D, de Damula. Also this beast Caprea, the wild Goate, is most swifte in running, most light in leaping, most sharpe in sight, most swéete in tast, most tender & wholsome to meat, & most busie to gather his own meat: for the Goat knoweth diuersity of hearbs, of trées, of twigs, of braunches, & of spraies, which they eate and féede themselues of by sight, tast, & smell. Also Plin. saith, that the Leopard drinketh milke of the wilde Goat, and voideth sorrow and woe. Of Capriolo. cap. 23. CApriolus, as Auicen sayth, is lyke to Hynnulus an Hinde calfe, and this beast chaungeth not his téeth, and when one may perceiue that he hath greate téeth, then it is token of long life, and also of long continuance. And this beast Ca∣priolus hath right fayre and pleasaunt eyen, and also sharpe. Also libro. 8. Ari∣stotle affirmeth & saith, that these beasts Caprioli haue wit when they be woun∣ded, and séeke the hearbe Pulegium Ceri∣num,Pennie royall. and ease thereof to drawe out ar∣rowes out of theyr bodye if they sticke therein. By businesse of running & swift∣nesse of mouing his flesh is discharged of superfluitie of moisture, and his flesh is so made the more tender, & the better to defie, & the better of sauour and smell. For the heuie sauour thereof is taken a∣way, as Constant. sayth. To get meate, this Capriolus climbeth vp from high places, to more high places, and knoweth by smel betwéene wholsome hearbs & vn∣wholesome. And be cheweth his cud, and is cloue footed, and defendeth himselfe in
woods and lands from hunters and their houndes, not with his clawes, hornes, and téeth, but onelye with swiftnesse of flight. And so when he is pursued in valleys & in fieldes, hée taketh his course and flyeth: into high places and moun∣taines. In the mountaynes of Iude bée some Caprioli, that cateth hearbes with good smell and sauour, and in theyr féete be certaine hollownesse, in the which cer∣tayne humours bée gathered, and brée∣deth postumes, the which postumes first be riped, and then broken with moouing and with froting, and throwe out of the body with small hairye leaues. And the substauite that is conteined within the skinne, is best of smelling, and most precious among spicerye, and most profitable and vertuous in medicine, as Dioscorides sayth, and Platearius also, & that we call commonly Moricum. Of Capra. cap. 24. THE Goat is called Capra, and hath that name of Carpendo, gathering, as Caprea, hath the name of the same, for he gathereth the ouermost ends of bran∣ches and of leaues, and eateth them, as Isidore sayth And Plinius li. 8. ca. 1. spea∣ket of the Goat, and saith: That a Goat eyneth many Kids at once, and but selde foure, and goeth with kid fiue moneths, as an Ewe doth. Also Goats ware bar∣ren by fatnesse before three yeare, & gen∣der lesse profitably, and in age after foure yeare: and conceiueth in Nouember, and eyneth in March or in Aprill, when trées and braunches spring, and haue not all hornes, but some haue, and in them the growing of knots is token of yéeres. Ar∣lclaus meaneth, that the Goats breath at the eares, and not at the nose, and bée seld without feauer, and therefore both in Goates & shéepe is the more feruent and hot working of generation, as he sayth. And we meane not, that Goates sée lesse by night then by day, and the Goat hath vnder the chin a beard that is called Ar∣mitum, and if a man drawe one out of the flocke by the beard, the other be asto∣nied and beholde. And also the same hap∣peneth when one of them biteth a cer∣taine hearbe. Their hiting is most de∣struction of Oliue, for with lyking they make the Oliue baren, and for this cause they were not offered to the Goddesse Minerua. When the Sunne draweth to glade, Goates eate not in pasture toge∣ther; but turne away their faces each frō other and lye downe: and in other times those yt turned each frō other eat toge∣ther in pasture, & tourne the face each to other. Huc vsque Plinius. And Aristotle lib. 3. sayth, that in ma∣nye landes Goates haue milke without conceiuing: but they take Nettles and froat the vdders therwith, and then com∣meth first out bloud, and then as it were matter, and good milke at the last, not worse then the milk of them that eineth. Also libro. 6. Goates liue ten yeere or a xi. and vse work of gendering vntil their last age. And sometime the Goate hath two kiddes at once, if they haue couena∣ble meat, and namely if the Goate bucke bée well fedde. And if shée conceiue afore the Northen winde, shée eyneth males, & if she conceiue afore the Southern wind, shee eyneth females. And he telleth, that they turne ye face Northward, when they shall gender. Also li. 7. there he sayth, that Goats & shéepe eate hearbs, but sheep bite hearbs vnto the root, and be stedfast in pa∣sture: And Goates passe soone from place to place, & take onely the ouermost ends of hearbes and grasse, & conceiue better after that they drinke salte water. And when goats be moued after ye vnder time they drinke the more water, and when they eate Salt before that they drinke, then shall much milke drop out of theyr teates. Also libro. 8. cap. 3. In Goates and shéepe is lyttle wit, insomuch that vn∣neth they can goe to a fielde to léese, or come againe, but they be lead & brought againe. And if a man take a Goate, and reare him vp sodeinelye, then the other reare them also, and beholde him sadlye. And the vse of Goate & of shéepe is need∣full to mankinde, for they féede the hun∣gry with milk and with flesh, and cloath the naked with fell and with Wooll, and amende the lande with vrine and with durt. And nothing is in the Goates body,
but it is good and profitable to vse of meate or cloathing, or else to néedfull vse of medicine. For as Plinius saith, libro. 33. cap. 10. Serpentes bée chosed and dri∣uen away with ashes of Goates hornes, and with their Wooll burnt. And by re∣medy of Goates hornes diuerse manner kinde of venim is ouercome, and super∣fluitie of dead flesh is fretted, and freshe flesh and new is gendered, and passing running humours be staunched, and by helpe of them rotted woundes fretting and gnawing haue remedy, though they be cankered or festered. With new Goats skinnes wounds be holpe and healed. Goats bloud medled with mery and sod excludeth poyson and venimme, biting of créeping wormes, and smiting of scorpi∣ons be saued and healed. The hot lung of a Goat laid to a venimous biting draw∣eth out the venimme, and abateth the ach and sorenesse. His gal putteth away dim∣nesse of eyen, and fresteth webbes and pearles, and sharpneth their sight, & clée∣reth the eyen. A Goats liuer roasted; hel∣peth against Lepra, if it be oft taken in meatrand his dirt helpeth many sicknes∣ses & euills: For as he sayth, Goates durt helpeth them that haue the Podagre, if tallow of the goat buck be medled with ye iuyce of Iute. And Goates vrine heated & dropped luke warme into the eares, hea∣leth eares that ake. He setteth these pro∣perties and many other medicinable pro∣perties: and so Plinius setteth a thousand remedyes. And héereby may bée shewed a meaning that one sayd in this manner. Each wonder, that it is not sayde, that it healeth the feauers. And héereto Aristo∣tle sayth, that a certaine beast sucketh Goates milke of the vdder and feats, and then the milke is destroyed and wasted, and the Goate wareth blinde thereby. Of the Goate looke more within in litte∣ Hiron. (Additiō.de is commended to be a non∣rishing meat, & héere is to be noted, that of all beastes, the younger from a quar∣ter of no yeare of age, vntill a yeere and a halfe, the flesh is most nourishing, onely Pige and Ueale, the one at three weekes other at a moneth or sixe wéeks olde before which time not wholsome.) Of Cane. cap. 25. A Hounde is called Canis, and tooke that name of Gréeke, as Isido. saith. For an hound is called Cenos in Greek, & some men meane that he hath yt name Canis, of loude barking, as he saith: No∣thing is more busier & wittier then an hound, for he hath more wit then other beasts. And houndes knowe theyr owne names, & loue their masters, & defend the houses of their masters, & put themselues wilfully in perill of death for their ma∣sters, & run to take prayes for their ma∣sters, and forsake not the dead bodies of their masters: and hounds pursue ye foote of pray by smell of bloud, & loue compa∣ny of men, and may not be without men, as Isi. saith. And there it is said, that oft hounds gender with wolues, and of that gendering commeth cruel hounds, which some men call Licisci. Also oft the In∣dians teach bitches, and lenne them in woodes by night, because Tygres should line them and gender with them, and of them come most sharpe hounds & swift, and be so strong, that they throw downe cruell beasts, as Lions, Huc vsque Isid. li. 12. cap. secundo. Libro. 8. cap. 40. Plinius speaketh of the hound, & sayth, that among beastes that dwell with vs, houndes and horses be most gratious. Wée haue knowen when yt hounds fought for their Lords agaynst théenes, & were sore wounded, & that they kept away beasts and foules from their masters bodyes dead. And ye an hound compelled the slaier of his ma∣ster, with barking and biting to know∣ledge his trespasse & fault. Also we reade that Garamantus the king came out of exiling, and brought with him two hun∣dered houndes, and fought agaynst his enimies with wonderfull hardynesse. Al∣so Iasons hounde of Cilicie would take no meate when his Lorde was slaine, and so hée dyed with greate hunger and sorrowe. Also we read ye Celius the Senator of Placencia, was defended by an hound yt was ouerset of men of armes, and was  wounded till the hound was slayne.
So Sabinus hound forsooke him not nei∣ther in prison nor in death, but abode with the dead bodye with dolefull and sorrowfull noyse, and howling, & a man gaue the hound meate, and the hounde tooke the meat, and he would haue put it in his mouth that was dead, and when the dead bodye was throwne into Ty∣ber, the hounde leaped and swam in the riuer to holde vp the dead body, and ther came much people to sée and behold the kindnesse of the true beast. Houndes haue mind of full long wayes, and if they léese their masters, they goe by far space of lands and Countries to their masters houses. The cruelnesse of an hound aba∣teth to a meeke man. In hounds is great wit & businesse in hunting, for by winde and by smelling, and also by water, they pursue and followe beasts that run and flye, and findeth theyr sorrows and dens, and warneth thereof by sute and by bar∣king: Of Tygres and hounds commeth so strong houndes, that they ouercome Lyons and Elephauntes: as greate A∣lexander made a proofe by the Hounde that the king of Alania did send to him, first in his presence he ouercame a Ly∣on, and then an Elephaunt was brought to him, and when the hounde sawe the cruell beast, his haire stoode vp in all the bodye, and barked fiercely first, and then reesed craftely, and fought so long with the Elephant, that he drewe him downe to the grounde. After the age of a yeare a hounde gendereth, and the Bitche go∣eth with whelpe in her wombe foure score dayes, and whelpeth blinde Whelpes. And the more plentye they haue of milke, the later they take theyr light. Also they neuer take theyr sight af∣ter the .xxi. day, nor before ye seuenth day: Some saye that when one is whelped a∣lone, the ninth daye he séeth, and when they be twaine, the tenth day, and when they be three, the thirtéenth day, and so as they be mo whelped in number, the moe dayes is theyr sight tarryed. And that whelpe is best that hath last his sight, or that that the mother beareth first to the couch. Huc vsque Plinius, libro 8. cap. 41. ther be reckoneth many other things. Aristotle libro secundo sayeth, that Houndes chaunge no téeth, but it bée by chaunce two, and the lesse they bee, the whiter téeth they haue & the more sharpe. And thereby men haue knowledge be∣twéene the young hound and the olde, for olde hounds haue black téeth and blunt, and young houndes the contrarye. Also there, libro. 5. he sayth, the male houndes be rather mooued to the worke of gene∣ration then females. And grey houndes gender rather then other hounds, as hée saith, li. 6. And this female goeth some∣time with whelps in the wombe the sixt part of the yere: that is .40. daies, and her whelps be blinde .12. daies, and then the male commeth not at her, but in the sixt moneth after her whelping. And some grey Bitches goe with whelpes in theyr wombe .73. daies, and that is nigh the sixt part of the yeare, & her whelpes be blind 17. daies: and so the sooner the whelps bée made perfect in the mothers wombe, the sooner they haue their sight, when they be whelped and come into the worlde. And the males are sooner mooued to the woorke of generation. For when they be∣gin to heaue vp the legge for to pisse, and that is after 6. or 7. moneths, when they ware strong. And greye houndes haue this propertie, yt they may gender more when they be in trauaile, then when they be in rest. And the female may liue ten yeare, and the male liueth shorter time then the female, and that is for the tra∣uaile of the male, and so it fareth not in other. For the male liueth longer then the female, as he saith ther. And other hoūds, as wardens of houses and of cities, liue longer, for they liue sometime .14. yeeres, and sometime 20. as Homerus saith. Also li. 8. When hounds be sicke, they eat the roote of a certaine hearbe, and casteth and taketh medicine in that wise. Also lib. 8. Plinius sayth, that an hounde that hath filled him of euil meat, eateth an hearbe, and by perbraking and casting he purg∣eth him. (Additiō.The wonderfull operation of na∣ture among brute beastes, declareth as rare effects in their kind, especially when they sort themselues by contraries. The Mastiue Bitch to the Dogge Woulfe.
the Bitch, to the Beare, and such lyke, not many yéeres past (at the place of all good roole) Parrisse Garden, was a Bitch, yt being lind with a male Beare, brought forth a mixed kinde, betwixt both, of so fierce a stomacke, and with all so strong, that vntill he was cut off from the game by péece meale, he coulde not be made to vnfasten his biting. Of olde time there was in the stable of Gereon, a notable dogge called Cerberus, that kept his cat∣tell: also in the Temple of Aescolapius was a dogge, that bowrayed the Théefe which robbed the sayd temple, called Ca∣parus, there are many dogs of ye like kind, and in a manner cōmon: the triall wher∣of is among tyed by dogs in ware-hou∣ses, backe sides, or gardens, that in yt day are very quiet, and in the night fierce: and among all the rest, the mungrell curres, which serue to kéepe the bottles & bags, with vittell, of ditchers and hedgers; wil bée sooner killed of a straunger then bea∣ten off from their masters apparell and victualls.) Of Canicula. chap. 26. THE Bitch is called Canicula, and is called mother of Houndes, and in her the mother is euenlong set in the length of the wombe, and hath manye beates set it in two rowes, eyther afore other, eudlong the wombe. Which teates waxe greate in time of conception. And the Bitch whelpeth manye whelpes at once, but always blinde: But she loueth them most tenderly, and defendeth them with barking and biting: and if the Whelpes goe out of the couch ofte, the Bitch fetcheth them agayne, and hea∣reth them in hir mouth betwéen hir téeth, without anye biting  grieuing  and heareth: first home the best and the fay∣rest, for him shée loueth best, and giueth him first sucke, and stretcheth to him the teate;  Aristotle sayth, libro. 5. In time of generation and conception seuen daies the Bitch delueeth her of vncleare matter, and then waxeth sicke, and the mother in her appayreth and hath no will to worke in generation, but flyeth and aydah, but after purgation shee kindeleth the better, and whelpeth the more liuelye. And after the whelping shee casteth out much fleamatik humour and thicke, and therefore then her bodye is cleane, an hée sayth. Also in Bitches, milke is founde many dayes before the whelping, and sooner in greye Bitches then in other: and first she milke is thicke, and thinne afterward, and is good and conuenient after whelping, and com∣monly Bitches liue lyttle time for great trauaile and running about. And when the Bitch desireth for to pisse, she rea∣reth not vp the legge as the male doeth, but bendeth her downewarde behinde, as it were sitting. And the Bitch is lesser in bodye then the male, & more smaller and more féeble in might and strength: and most best to nourish and bring vppe the whelps, and more soft and mild in heart, excepte it bée when shée nourisheth her whelpes, and is more able to bée taught then the male, and more nimble in bodye for plyauntnesse of members, and more swifte. But for féeblenesse of sinewes she dureth lesse in course and in running. Gentlenesse and nobilytie of hounds and of Bitches is knowen by length of face and of the snoute, and by breadth of the breast, and by smalnesse of the wombe and flarike. And a gentle hounde is small about the reines and flanke, and also in the wombe, and is broade before about the breast, and hath long eares and plyaunt, and long legges and small, and that is needfull, to bée the more swifte in course & in running & his tayle is more long and crooked then the tailes of other houndes, and hath lesse flesh then a dogge and shorter haire, and more thinne and smooth. For if hée were too roughe and hairie, he shoulde be too hot in course and in running: If hée were too fleshie, hée shoulde be ouerset with flesh and run the worse: And if the tails were long downe betwéen the legges, it should let greatly the course and running. And also by han∣ging downe of the taile hée is accounted fearefull and not hardye. Also gentle houndes be cruell and fierce in pursuing and in taking of wilde beastes,The gray hound. The blud hound. The bea∣cle. and bee full milde and softe to men and to tame beastes.
And if it happen sometime that he réeseth against straunge men, anone hée ceaseth, and withdraweth the réese. Also gentle houndes when they take an Hart or an Hare, they deuoure not anone the beast that they take, but kéepe the pray to their Lorde, and holde them content with the bowelles and other vile partes, as bloud & other such, for theyr portion and part, and though they haue no parte of the praye of one beast: yet for all that they spare not to pursue and take another. De alijs proprietatibus canum, Chap. 27. GOundes haue other propertyes that be not full good, for hounds haue con∣tinuall Bolisme, that is immederate ap∣petite, and be sometime punished with hunger, that they waxe rabbish and mad: for houndes haue sicknesse and euilles, baldnesse, squinatye, and madnesse, as A∣stotle sayth, libro. 7. And all beastes that be bitten of a mad hound, waxe madde, except men alone, that scape sometime by helpe of medicine. And Constan. sayth in Viatico. li. viti. that an hound is kind∣ly cold and dry, and blacke. Cholera hath mastrie in him. And if Cholera be much rotted and corrupt, it maketh the hound madde. And this falleth most in haruest and in springing time. And other hounds flye and voyde the madde hound; as pe∣stilence and venim: and he is alway exi∣led; as it were an outlawe, and goeth a∣lone wagging and rowling as a dronken beast, and runneth yaning, & his tongue hangeth out, and his mouth driueleth and foameth, and his eyen vs euertourned and reared, & his eares lie backward, and his faile is wrickled by the legges and thighes: and though his eyen bée open, yet hée stumbleth and spurneth against all thing, and barketh at his owne shadow. Other houndes dreade him and flie and barke against him. And no hounds come nigh the bread that is wet in the bloud of the wounde of his biting. And those that bée bitten of him, dreame in theyr sléepe dreadfull dreames, and bée afearde in sléeping, and that commeth of rotten∣nesse of corruption, and be wroth and a∣stonied without cause, and looke and be∣holde aboute, though nothing grieueth them: and if this eulil increase, then they begin to dreade and haue abhomination of all drinke, and then they dread water, and barke as houndes, and dread so wa∣ter, that they fall for dreade, and such die, but they be the sooner holpen with medi∣cine. Cures and remedyes looke before libro de Morbis, cap. de Veneno. Libro 29. Plinius sayth, that vnder the houndes tongue lyeth a Worme that maketh the hounde madde, and if this worme bée ta∣ken out of the tongue, then the euill cea∣seth. Also he sayth, that the violence and biting of a madde hound is so much, that his vrine grieueth a man if he treadeth thereon, and namely if hée haue a Botch or a wound. Also who that throweth his owne vrine vpon the vrine of a mad hound, he shall anone féele sore ach of the neather guts and of the lends. Also an hound is wrathfull and ma∣licious, so that for is awreak himselfe, he biteth oft the stone that is throwen to him: and biteth the stone with great mad∣nesse, that he breaketh his own teeth, and grieueth not the stone, but his owne téeth full sore. Also he is guidefull and decei∣cable, and so oft he sickleth and fawneth with his tayle on men that passeth by the waye; as though he were a friends; and biteth them sore, if they take no héede backewarde. And the Hounde hateth stones and rods, and is bolde and hardye among them that hée knoweth, & busieth to bite and to feare all other, and is not bold when he passeth among straungers. Also he is couetous and gluttonous, and eateth therefore dirde: so gréedely, yt he perbraketh and tasteth it vp, but after∣ward when he is n hungred, he taketh again that yt he cast vp in foule manner. Also the hounds tous, and therefore Auicen saith, yt he gathereth hearbs pri∣uely, by whom he purgeth himselfe with perbraking and casting, and hath anuye, and is right forrys if any man knoweth the vertue of those hearbes: and is also euill apaide, if any straunge houndes and vnknowne come into the place there hée dwelleth, and breadeth least he should face the worse for the other hounds presence,
and fighteth with him therefore. Also hée is couetous & scarse, and busie to lay vp & to hide the reliefe that he leaueth. And therefore he communeth not, nor giueth flesh and marrow boanes, that hée maye not deuoure to other houndes, but layeth them vp busily and hideth them vntil he hungreth againe. Also he is vncleane and lecherous. And so, li. 6. Aristot. saith, that hounds both male and female vse leche∣ry as long as they be aliue, & giue them to vncleannesse of lechery, yt they take no diuersitie betwéene mother and sister, and other bitches touching the déede of leche∣rie: and therefore offering of the price of an hounde or of a Bitch was accounted as vncleane by the law of Moses, as offe∣ring of ye price of a common woman: for such wretched persons serue in al lechery as hounds doe. Also an olde hound is oft slowe and heauy. And so libr. 7. Aristotle saith, that houndes in age haue ye podagre, & few of them scape that euill, and therefore they sleepe in daytime vpon dunghills among flyes and other wormes, and be then fore grieued with Flyes, that be about theyr bleared eyen, and about theyr scabbed ei∣en. And though they bite and pearce som∣time the houndes eares, yet for slouth he taketh no comfort and strength to chase and driue them away: but vnneth when they flye agaynst his face, hée snatcheth at them with his mouth, and busieth to bite them with his téeth. And at the last the scabbed hound is violentlye drawen out of the dunghill with a roape or with a whippe bounde about his necke, and is drowned in the riuer, or in some other Water, and so hée endeth his wretched lyfe. And his skinne is not taken of, nor his fleshe is not eaten nor buryed, but left finallye to Flies and to other diuerse wormes. Of Catulis. cap. 28. WHelpes be called Catuli, and bée the children of hounds. And Catulus is a nowne diminitiue, & so is Catellus also. And by a manner misse vse the young of other beasts are called Catuli, as Isi. say∣eth, li. 12. And generally these whelps bée whelped blinde touching perfect dooing of sight: for hounds whelps be whelped with sawing téeth though they be full small. And all beasts that haue téeth like a saw and departed, be gluttons, and fight, as the Hound, the Woulfe, the Lion, yt Pan∣ther, & such other. And all such beasts gen∣der vnperfect broodes, as it is said before hand, in codem li. de Animalibus in ge∣nerali. And in all beastes that bringeth forth vnperfect young, the cause is glut∣tony, for if she shuld abide vntil ye whelps were compleate and perfect, they shoulde slay the mother with strong sucking: and therefore it néedeth that kind be hastie & spéedfull in such beastes. Looke before in eod. lib. For as Solinus saith, whelpes of houndes were in most worship among men in old time. As Plin. saith, li. 29. ca. 9 sucking whelps were accounted so pure & so good to meat among men in old time, yt they offred such whelpes to please their Gods in stéede of other beastes. And no∣thing was accounted better & more pro∣fitable against poison & venim. And yet to this day Authors commaund to take such whelpes wholsomely against veni∣mous bitings: for such whelpes opened & layd hot to the biting of Serpents, draw out venim, & abate the age, and maketh ye sore members whole with remedies laid therto, as he telleth. And as he sayth, such whelpes the sooner they bée whelped, the later they haue their sight, and the nobler milke they be nourished with, the more slower they receiue perfect sight, and yet while they be blinde, they loue their mo∣ther, and know her with voice and with odour, and séeketh her and her teates: and if it happen that the mother withholdeth the milke, they bite her teates with the sharpest téeth, and compell the mother to giue more largelye milke. And when they be an hungred they cry and whine, and séeke their dammes teates. Also it is sayd, that they sucke in the same manner of order, as they lay in the Bitch. And the whelpe that is best and strongest the mother taketh first to sucking, and lo∣ueth him best, and comforteth him. And meate shall bée with-drawne warilye and wisely from hunting houndes, least they waxe too fat by too much meate, for
by too great fatnesse they take slouth, and be the slower to their praye and to run∣ning. And though they be melancholyke beasts of qualitie and of complection, yet they bée nimble and swifte by dispositi∣on of members, and bée gladde and me∣ry, and play much, and that is because of theyr age. And when they bée weaned from milke, they be able to be taught to hunting, and also to playeng, and to kée∣ping of beasts, and to defend them from Wolues. And houndes that be ordey∣ned to kéeping of houses shoulde bée clo∣sed and bound in a darke place by daye, and so they be the stronger by night, and the more cruell agaynst Théeues, for the office of such Houndes is to rest, and to sléepe by daye, and to wake by night, and to goe about courtes and closes a∣gaynst Théeues. For the hound is to be blamed, that waketh and barketh and goeth about by daye, and sléepeth and hi∣deth himselfe, and barketh not by night. Also that hounde is an euill hound, whe∣ther hée bée young or olde, that kéepeth and wardeth shéepe, and defendeth them from Wolues by daye in pasture, and strangleth and biteth them by night in the folde. Of Castore. cap. 29. A beauerCAstor is a wonderous beast, & liueth and goeth in land among foure footed beasts, and swimmeth vnder water, and dwelleth with Fish that swimme ther∣in, and hath that name Castor, of Ca∣strando, gelding, as Isidore sayeth, libro 12. for their gendering stones accorde to medicine, and because of the same stones they geld themselues when they be ware of the hunter, & bite off their gendering stones, as hée sayth. Cicero speaketh of him and sayth, that they raunsome them∣selues with that parte of the bodye, for the which they bée most pursued. And Iuuenal sayth, that they geld themselues and loose theyr stones, for they desire to scape. And the Castor is called Fiber also, and is called a sea hound of Pontus. Huc vsque Isidor. Of Castoris Plinius spea∣keth, libro. 11. capitulo. 3. In Pontus hée sayth, is a manner kinde of beastes, that dwelleth now in lande and now in wa∣ter, and maketh houses and dens arayed with wonderfull craft in the brinkes of riuers and of waters. For these beastes liue together in flockes, and loue beastes of the same kinde, and commeth together and cutteth rods and stickes with theyr téeth, and bringeth them hoame to theyr dens in a wonderfull wise, for they laye one of them on the grounde vpryght in stéed of a slead or of a dray, with his legs and féete reared vpward, and lay & loade the stickes and wood betwéene his legges and thighes, and draweth him home to their dens, and vnlade and discarge him then, and make them dwelling places ryght strong by great subtiltye of craft. In theyr houses bée two chambers or thrée distinguished, as it were thrée cel∣lers, & they dwell in the ouer place when the water ariseth, & in the neather when the water is away, and each of them hath a certeine hole properly made in the cel∣ler, by the which hole he putteth out his taile in the water, for the taile is of fishy kind, he may not without water be long kept without corruption. And the beast is wonderfull and wonderfully shaped, for his taile onely is fish, and all the other deale of his bodye hath the kinde of a foure footed beast, and is shaped as a lit∣tle hounde, and his hinder feete bée as it were the féete of an hound, & therwith he goeth principallye in the lande, and his two fore feete be as it were Goose féet, & therewith he swimmeth principallye in water. His skinne is full precious and hath téeth longer and shorter as a hound, and is not swift of moouing, for his legs be full short. And Castor hath two gen∣dering stones that be greate in compari∣son to his little bodye, and we call these stones Castorea. And of these stones Pli∣nius speaketh li. 32. ca. 3. and sayth, That the Castor biteth off his gendring stones that we call Castoria, and that least he be taken of hunters. And Sextinus, a most diligent sercher of medicine, denieth this: For he saith, that those gendring stones cleaue so nigh & so fast to the ridge bone, yt they may not take them from the beast, but his life is taken also. Also Plat. sayth the same, and Dioscorides also: that that
beast is not so wary nor so witty, that he could helpe himselfe in yt manner. And that is known all day in Castoris that be found in diuers places. And so this that Isidore and Phisiologus tell of their gel∣ding, shall not so be vnderstood of the cō∣mon Castoris: But of some other beast yt be like Castores in gendering stones. And very Castorium & not feined, helpeth against the greatest euill of the bodye, as Plinius saith there, & namely if ye stones be of a Castor that is not too young nor too olde. And Castoria these stones be cho∣sen in this manner: For they be double, & hang by one string, and coupled by one sinew, for such may not soone be feined. And many men take ye bladder of a beast, and fill it full of Castoris bloud, and put thereto a little of ye Castor to haue smel, & a little pepper for to haue sharp sauour: and bindeth the necke of the bladder, for it should séeme a sinew, but it is impossi∣ble yt two bladders shoulde hang by one neck: and therefore ye Castorium is best, yt is double, & hangeth by one sinew. And ye Castorium is best that is meanly sharp in sauour. For if it be too sharpe, & as it were earthie, then it is feined, & namely if it haue not sinewes medled, as Diosc. saith. And so good Castorium is meanely sharp of sauour & glewie, without strong or salt sauour: for with Sal aromaticum oft Castorium is feined, as Pli. saith ther: The more feesh & new Castorium is, the better it is, & the more vertuous in me∣dicine. And it is a token that it is not feined, when the stones haue certeine skins yt cleaue essentially thereto full of vnctuous fatnesse, and may be kept seuen yeares in greate vertue, & shall be put in medicine without the vtter skin, and shal he weighed in due manner: and hath ver∣tue to dissolue and temper, to consume & to wast, and to abate euill humours, and namely to comfort sinewy members: and so Castorium helpeth against many sick∣nesses & euills, for it accordeth to them yt haue the falling euill, and helpeth against colde euills of the head, and doth awaye sodeine palsie of the tongue, and restoreth ye speech, if it be onely tempered in moy∣sture vnder the tongue, & helpeth against vniuersall & generall palsie of the body, if it be sod in wine with Rew and with Sage. And oft in meat & in drinke, exci∣teth, moueth, & comforteth the brain, and maketh to sneese: and therfore the Litar∣gike man, yt hath the sléeping euill, is a∣waked therwith, & prouoketh and causeth sléepe, if the head be anointed therwith, & Oleum Rosaceum, and helpeth against strong venim, & against the venim of scor∣pions, & of the serpent Cerastes, & of the Serpent Prester, as Plinius saith, libr. 8. cap. 3. Also his vrine helpeth in all the foresaid things, as he saith, and exciteth menstruall bloud, and helpeth concepti∣on, and many other dooings, & his grease is most effectuall and vertuous in Oint∣ments. (Additiō.The Beuer is a greate deuourer of fish; as is the Otter.) Of Ceruo. cap. 30. THe Hart is called Ceruus, & hath ye name of Cereston in Gréeke, yt is an horne, as Isi. saith, li. 12. And he sayth there, that harts be enimies to serpents, which when they féele themselues grie∣ued with sicknesse, they draw them with breath of their nosethrills out of theyr dens & the mallice of ye venim ouercome, they are repaired with féeding of them. And they taught first the vertue of the hearb Diptannum, for they eat thereof, & cast out arrows & arrow heads,Diptanie or Diptā. whē they be wounded of hunters: and they wonder of noise of pipes, & haue liking in accord of melodye, & they heare well when they areare vp the eares, & beare downe the eares when they swim & passe riuers & great waters: and then in swimming the stronger swim before, and the féebles lay their heads vpon the loines of the stron∣ger, and swim each after other, and may the better indure with trauaile. Huc vs{que} Isid. And Plinius saith the same wordes lib. 8. cap. 34. And there he sayth moreo∣uer, that ye hart is a most pleasing beast, and tunneth wilfully and flieth to a man when he is ouer set with houndes: and when the hinde shall calue, she shunneth the lesse wayes and pathes, which bée troden with wilde beasts, whether they be common or priuy waies. After the ri∣sing
of the starre Arturus, the hinde con∣ceiueth, and goeth with calfe eight mo∣neths, and calueth somtime two at once. And from the time of conception the fe∣males depart and goe awaye from the males, but the males leaue not raging of lecherie, but waxe cruell, and digge vp clots and stones with their feet, and then theyr snouts be black vntill they be wa∣shed with raine. An before caluing the females are purged, & they vse certain hearbs, by the which ye calfe is the better held within the wombe and she is the ea∣silier deliuered when she calueth: and af∣ter the caluing ye female eateth two man∣ner hearbes; Camum & Sisolis,He mea∣neth Ca∣mamell & Spear∣wort, the names are barba¦rous. and com∣meth againe to her calfe: and so when she hath taken of ye iuyce of ye hearbe, she gi∣ueth her calfe sucke, and maketh her calfe vse to run and to make him ready to flie, and leadeth him into an high place, and teacheth him for to leape, and then the male is deliuered of the desire of lechery, and eateth busilye:also vvild commin. and when hée féeleth himselfe too fat, then hée séeketh dennes and lurking places, for he dreadeth do∣mage & harme by heauinesse of body: and when harts runne and flie, they continue not their course, but look anon backward: and when men come nigh to them, they séeke succour again of running & of flight. And they heare the cry of hounds, when their eares be reared vp, and then they flye fast, and perceiue no perill when the eares hang downeward, and be so simple that they wonder of all thing, and bée a∣stonied of new sightes. And so if an horse or a Bugle come to themward, they be∣holde him so earnestly, that they take no héede of a man that commeth to shoote at them: and when they swim ouer the sea in heards, they passe foorth in euen order and help each other, and come to the land, not by sight, but by smel. And because the Hart is an horned beast, among beastes the Hart hath this propertie, that hée chaungeth his hornes euerye yeare in springing time, and then hée is armour∣lesse. He séeketh him by day a priuy place, and hideth him vntill his newe hornes grow againe, & vntill he hath hornes and armour: And when he casteth his ryght horne, for enuie hée hideth it, and is sor∣rye if anye man haue medicine thereof. The age of Hartes is knowen by aunt∣lers and tines of his hornes, for euerye yeare it increaseth by a tine vntill sea∣uen yeare, and from that tines it grow∣eth all alike: And so the age may not be knowen thereby, but the age is knowen onely by the téeth. And the Hart hath few téeth or none; and hath no tines in the neathermost parte of the hornes, but before the forehead stande out the lesse tines.Called ye brovve Antlets. And if they be gelded afore they haue hornes, afterward groweth on them no hornes, and if they be gelded after that the hornes be growen, then they loose neuer theyr hornes. And while hée is hornelesse, hée goeth to meate by night and not by daye: and he putteth his hornes in the heate of the Sun to make them sadde and harde, and froateth them afterwarde agaynst Trées softly, to assay the strength of them: and doth awaye the itching that he féeleth therein, by hard∣nesse of the rinde, and when he féeleth his hornes strong, then he goeth openlye to meate and to léese, and sometime hée froateth them against a trée that is com∣passed with Iuie, or with Weathwinde, and their hornes be snarled and fastened in it, and be sometime so taken. The hart is contrary to Serpentes, insomuch that Serpents flye and voyde the odour and smell of burning of an Hartes horne. His ruenning is good agaynst all biting of Serpentes, and the Hart liueth ryght long time, passing an hundered yeares, as it was knowen by Hartes that liued in Alexanders time, and that were taken an hundered yeares after his death, on the which Alexander had in his time marked with cheines of golde: The hart féeleth not the euill of the feauers, for hée is succoured with medicine agaynst the euill. Huc vsque Plinius libro. 8. capi∣tulo. 38. Aristotle and Auicen meane, that the Hart is a beast without gall, but onelye in the guttes, and hath therefore bitter guts and stinking, and therefore hounds eate not his guttes, but if they bée pas∣sing sore an hungred. Also libro. 2. Ari∣stotle saith, that some men think that the Hartes gall is in the loungs, but that is
false, as Auicen saith, but he hath a ma∣ner moisture like to the moysture of the gall. Also he sayth, that the Harts bloud, and Hares bloud coniealeth neuer, but it is alway thin and fléeting against kind of all other beasts, and no beast chaung∣eth hornes, but Ceruus alone. And héere it séemeth, that he calleth Ceruus both Hart and Bucke. And Harts hornes be sound within, and be therefore heauye, but he changeth them not for heauines, and hath foure great téeth in the one side, and foure in the other, and he grindeth therewith his meate: and two other great téeth, as it were tuskes, and the male hath greater than the female, and bendeth downward, as Auicen saith. Also libro octauo Aristo. saith, that some men suppose of the Hart, that hée is among all foure footed beastes, vsing the wood, most ready and wise, and the Hinde calueth nigh a waye, that other beasts spareth for comming of men, and flyeth the light of the Sunne with hir Calfe, and seeketh thicke places & darke, as dens and caues of stones, that haue but one entering: for there they maye fight with other beasts, for as hée saith, Harts fight each with other with strong fighting, and he that is ouercome, is right obedient to the victor, & they dread most the voyce of a Foxe & of a Hound, and sometime the Hart hideth himselfe, least hunters finde him, and slay him for his fatnesse. And he sayth there, that the Hart is hunted in this manner: a hun∣ter whisteleth and singeth, & the Harte hath liking therein, and another hunter tolleth him inward, and shooteth at him, and slayeth him: and when the Hart is areared, he flyeth to a riuer or to a pond and if he maye swim ouer the water, then he taketh comfort and strength, of the coldnes of the water, and scapeth the hunters. And the Hart roareth, cryeth, & wéepeth when he is taken. Also when the hounds followe him, if he findeth double wayes, he runneth not foorth∣right, but now hether and now thether, and leapeth thwart ouer wayes, and a∣side halfe, and then he purposeth to take a mightie large pace, and starteth with contrary leapings and startings, that it be the harder for the houndes, to finde and to followe his chase by odour and smel. Also as he saith, ye hinde hath great trauayle and payne when she calueth, and that is knowen by bending & croo∣king of the body, and by ruthfull crieng, and therefore she eateth of the hearbe Dragantea to be delyuered of hir. Calfe the more easely:Tarragō. and when she hath cal∣ued, she eateth sodaynly. Secundina, the bagge that the Calfe is in, in ye mother, ere it fall to the ground, and the Secun∣dina is accounted venime, as he sayeth: Aristotle libro. 8: rehearseth other pro∣perties of the Harte, which Plinius re∣hearseth also. And li. 28. Pli. saith, That when the Hinde féeleth heauinesse, she swalloweth a stone, and is holp by ver∣tue of that stone: and the same stone is sometime found in hir entrayles when she is dead, and it is accounted, that this stone helpeth wonderfully women that goe with childe, and so doth the boane found in hir hart, as he saith: & that bone that is fonnde in the heart of an Hart, is passing profitable against many euils of the body, and is medled in all noble confections, as Dioscorides saieth, and Constantine also. (Additiō.The pisell of the Hart dryed into pouder and dronke, is good against the Collicke and stopping of water. Giue the boane of a Harts heart, ground, to a barren woman in drinke, and thou shalt sée the glory of God. Gesner foorth of Galen. There is a stone of great va∣lew against poyson, called the Beswar stone, which as Gesner writeth, when the Hart is sicke, and hath eaten manye Serpents for his recouerie, is brought into so great a heate, that he hasteth to water, and there couereth his body, vn∣to the very eares & eyes, at which time, distilleth many teares, from the which, the sayd stone is gendred, &c.) ¶Of Ceraste. cap. 31. CErastes is an horned Serpent, as Isi∣dore telleth li. 10. and hath hornes in either side of the head, crooked & wrin∣kled as the hornes of a Ramme: and he hydeth all his body in grauell and sand,
and onelye leaueth his hornes vncoue∣red: and foules sée them, and think that they be wormes, and lyght vpon them, & intend to feede themselues therewith, and then the false and guylefull serpent, taketh sodainly the fowles ere they bee ware. Also this Serpent lyeth in a waight, in wayes and in priuie places, and sueth both men and horses, that passe vnware∣ly by the wayes, and slayeth them with priuie biting. And the Glose super pen. cap. Gines. sayth, as it séemeth, that Ce∣rostes is a manner kinde of Serpent, so malitious and venemous, that if onely his venime toucheth an horses hoose, it slayeth both horse and man. And there∣fore wher we haue, Fiat Dan sicut Co∣lubet in via, Cerastes in semita: ye other lether hath, Fiat sicut Coluber in via, & sicut Regulus in locato. Other men meane, that Cerastes is a manner Serpent, most venemous, and most ma∣lytious. Looke before in litera A. De Aspide, for there is mention made of Cerastes. (Additiō.Cerastes, a Serpent with a verye lyttle bodie, and hornes crooked lyke a Ramine.) ¶Of Cornu. cap. 32. COrnu an horne, as Arist. saith. lib. 3. is of the kind of a bone, and is more softer than a boane, and is more harde than gristells, as hooues and clawes of beasts: and all such may be bathed and made softe with fire, as he sayeth there, that the colour of hornes, and of soles of beasts, is after the colour of the haire of the body of the beast. And so if that the skinne be blacke and the haire also, the hornes be blacke, and so of other colour. And hornes are giuen to beastes to de∣fend them with, in stéed of armour and weapon, and are therefore set in ye ouer∣most part of the head, that they may al∣way be ready to withstand wrongs and enemyes. And all hornes be voyde and hollow within, except Harts hornes, that be hard and sound within, & haue many tyndes and auntiers: and no beast chaungeth his hornes but the Hart alone, and so it seemeth that Ceruus is the name of the Hart, and of the Bucke, and of the Roe bucke: and the Hart changeth his horns each yeare once, and hideth that one, so that vimeth it may be found. Therefore it is sayd 3. Prouer. Go there as ye Hart casteth his horne. Libro. 8. it is sayde, that the hornes be faster ioyned to the skinne than to the boane, and therefore Arist. saith, that some beasts moue the hornes as well as the eares, in ye coun∣trey that is called Aufrage, and Auicen saith the same, and Aristotle sayth so of this lande that is so called, and the same matter is matter of hornes & of hooues: for smoake that passeth by vapours, and is resolued by heate of the heart, is mat∣ter of hooues and of hornes, as Const. saith. And therefore beasts hauing much a∣boundaunce of smoke, that is resolued & departed by the right strong and seruent heate of the hearte, and conuayed, and brought out vnto the vttermost partes of the bodye, by vertue of heate: suche beasts haue great hornes and strong, & namelye if this smoakie matter be not to subtill, and tourneth not to haire: or if it be not too thicke and earthy, and tourneth not into téeth and tuskes. And therefore Aristotle saith at best, libro tercio, capitulo de dentibus, that beasts with teeth and tuskes in either iawe, haue no horns, as it fareth of Elephants and Bores. Also all foure footed beasts with téeth in either iawe alone, and be cloue fooled haue hornes, and chewe their cudde, and haue two wombes, and some haue moe wombes, as it is sayde before hande, and so pluralitie of hornes follow the clefte of the foote. Therefore the Asse of Inde, that is called Asinus Indicus, hath an horne alone, and is foure footed, as Ari. saith and Auicen also. And there is so great affinitie betwéene houes, clées, & hornes, that Aristotle commaundeth to annoynt with Oyle and other medi∣cines betwéene the hornes, a Cow that hath sore ache in the clées of the féete. Of profit and goodnesse of hornes it is treated before in litera. B. de Boue.
(Additiō.In the olde time was made of hornes (beaten flat) armour for men, of diuers strange fashions, shields and tar∣gets, and the endes of manye weapons armed therewith. Horne is applyed to many good vses.) Of Cunneyes in generall, newly added. AS for those small beasts, bréeding in warrens, Parkes, or closures among vs, according to the soyle where they breed, so are they of goodnesse in flesh. The skinnes are a good furre, especially the blacke, mixed with white haires, called siluer haires. There is brought forth of Turkey, Cunnies called Por∣cello Indico, because their haire is short as a Pigges haire, and reddish: more lyke the Rats of Indie, than Connyes. Peter Martyr in his description of the new Ilandes, writeth of thrée sortes of Cunnyes, whereof I suppose ours are the best. ¶Of Crocodilo. ca. 33. CRocodilus hath that name of yelow colour,Crocodi∣lus. as Isido. sayth, and is a foure footed beast, as Isidore sayth, libro. 12. ca∣pit. de Piscibus, and dwelleth both in water and in lande, and is nigh twentye cubites long, & is armed with great teeth and clawes, and his skinne is so harde, ye he regardeth not though he be strong∣ly beaten on the backe with stones, and resteth in water by night, and by day in land, and layeth egges in the lande, that are greater that Goose egges, and the male and female kéepeth times & houres: and a certaine fish hauing a creast lyke to a sawe, renteth his tender womb, and slayeth him: and it is sayd, that among beasts onely the Crocodile moueth the ouer iawe, all this Isidore sayth. And Plinius libro. 8. ca. 16. sayth, in this ma∣ner, The Crocodile is a beast, & dwel∣leth in the riuer Nilus, & among beasts of the land he is tonguelesse, and onelye his ouer iawe moueth, and his biting is venimous: his teeth be horrible, & strong∣ly shapen as a combe or a saw, and as a Bores tuske, and no beast that commeth of so lyttle beginning, wexeth so great as the Crocodile, and is a beast nourish∣ed in great gluttenie, and cateth right much, and so when he is full, he lyeth by the brinke or by the cliffe, and bloweth for fulnesse, and then there commeth a little bird, which is called Cuschillus a∣mong them, and is called king of foules among the Italians, and this bird flyeth before his mouth, and sometime he put∣teth the bird off, and at the last, he ope∣neth his mouth to the birde, and suffe∣reth him to enter. And this bird claweth him first with clawes softly, and maketh him haue a manner lyking in clawing, and falleth anone asléepe, and when this bird Cuschillos knoweth and perceiueth that this Beast sléepeth, anone hée de∣scendeth into his wombe, and foorth∣with sticketh him as it wer with a dart, and biteth him full grieuouslye and full sore. The Crocodile is right softe and full tender in the wombe, and for that cause he is soone ouercōe of such fishes, which haue sharpe prickes and creastes grow∣ing on their backes on high. And for this cause Plinius sayth, that this grim and most horrible beast followeth & pur∣sueth them that flye, and is dreadfull to them, and be flieth Serpentes, and hath dimme eyen while he is in water, and séeth too sharply when he is out of wa∣ter: and be hideth him in winter, name∣ly foure months, and commeth out in Springing time, and groweth still, all the time that he is alyue, as it is sayde. Huc vsque Plin. lib. 8. cap. 26. Phisiolo∣gus saith, that if the Crocodile findeth a man by the brim of the water or by the cliffe, he slayeth him if he may, and then he wéepeth vpon him, and swalloweth him at the last. And Plinius sayth, that of his dirte is made an oyntment, and with that Oyntment, women annoynt their owne faces, and so olde women & riueled, séeme young wenches for a time: and the Crocodile eateth gladlye good hearbes and grasse,Enhydris a vvater Snake, or Adder. among whom lurk∣eth a litle serpent, that is called Enidros, and is enemy to the Crocodile, & hideth him priuely in the grasse, and wrappeth
himselfe therein, and so while the Cro∣codile eateth grasse, he swalloweth this serpent, and this serpent entreth into his wombe, and all to renteth his guts, and slayeth him, and commeth out harmles. Also Isidore saith the same libro. 12. and sayth, that the same worme lyeth in a∣wayte on the Crocodile when he slée∣peth, and then wrappeth himselfe in fen, and entreth in betwéene his teeth, and commeth into his body. And héereto So∣linus saith, that the Crocodile lyeth in awayte on certaine small birdes, yt bréed among the grasse of the riuer Nilus, the which birdes flye into the womb of the Crocodile, for heate of the Sunne, and eateth the wormes of his wombe: and so that fierce beast is cleansed and puri∣fied of wormes, and his skin is so harde, that vnneth it may be pearced with a sword, and so dwelleth in lande by day, and in water by night: for the water is hotter by night than by daye, for the water holdeth the Sunne beames, and be moued, and so the water is hotte, and this Beast hath no tongue, stret∣ching outwarde to make voice there∣with, but he hath a lyttle tongue with∣in as fish haue for tast of sauour, as So∣linus sayeth, and Aristotle, and Aui∣cen also. (Additiō.The Crocodill, an ill beast bred in Aegypt, lyuing partly in water, and on land, in fashion lyke a Dragon, but with very small eyes, long teeth and sharpe: he moueth onely the vpper iawe, and hath great & strong nayles or clawes, his skinne is vnpearceable, scalye and browne coloured: he deuoureth man & beast comming by Nilus. There hath bene séene of them twentie foote long, or after some 22. cubites. Of late yeares, there hath bene brought into England, the cases or skinnes of such Crocodiles to be séene, and much money giuen for the sight thereof, the policy of strangers, laugh at our folly, either that we are too wealthy, or else that we know not how to bestow our money.) ¶Of Colubro. cap. 34. AN Adder is called Coluber, as it wer Colens vmbras, dwelling in shad∣dowes. Or els he hath ye name Coluber, for he slydeth and wiggeleth in slipperye draughts and wrinckles, and in slimie passing: for all that slydeth while it is helde, is called Lubricum, as Papias sai∣eth. The Adder Coluber flyeth ye Hind, and slayeth the Lyon, as Isidore sayth, & he eateth Rew, and chaungeth his skin, and loueth hollownesse of woode and of trées, and drinketh milke busely: and he hurteth and grieueth with the téeeth, and with the tayle, and sheddeth ven;m, and lyeth in the Sun vnder hedges, and suc∣keth bitches, eateth flyes, and lycketh pouder. Looke before De Angue. And Plinius lib. 30. ca. 4. saith, that the greace of the water Adder Coluber, helpeth a∣gainst the biting of the Crocodile. And if a man haue with him the gall of this Adder, the Crocodil shal not grieue him nor noy him: and that most ieoperdous and fearfull beast dare not, nor maye doe against him in no manner of wise, dommage nor griefe, which beareth the gall of the sayd Adder. (Additiō.The Adder is not much vnlike the water Snake, onely the head flatter like a Newte, the skinne more browne, and at the tayle a hard tippe, lyke a spur of a young Cocke, and is verye vene∣mous.) ¶Of Damula. cap. 35. DAmula and Dama also is a wilde Goate, as Papias saith. And libro. 12. Isid. saith, that the wild Goate is called Damula, and is a fearfull beast, and dare not fight, & so cannot defend him but by flight, and in stéede of armour and we∣pon, this wilde Goate hath ablenesse & lightnesse to runne and to fly. And Mar∣cianus sayth. Dente tuetur Aper, defendunt cor∣nua Ceruum. Imbelles Damae, quid nisi praeda sumus? The Bore defendeth him with tuskes, and the Hart with hornes, and we wilde Goates fight not, what be we but pray?
The wilde Goate loueth mountaines & woodes, and eateth medicinall hearbes & grasse, with good smell, and gathereth and biteth crops and stalkes of twigs, and of and of branches, and when he is woun∣ded, he eateth Dragantea, and taketh so the arrow out of the bodie.Taragon. The bloude thereof is medicinall, as Plin. sayth libr. 28. for it softneth sinews that be shronk, and doth away ache of the ioynts, and smiteth and putteth out venime. Ser∣pents hate and flye the wilde Goate, & may not suffer the breath of him, as hée saith. This Goate is most sharpe of sight, and swifte of course and of run∣ning. Looke before in eodem, De Caprea agrosti. ¶Of Dromedario. cap. 36. DRomedarin: is an heard and kéeper of Dromedes; and Dromedus is a manner kind of a Camell, as Isid. sayth lib. 12. And he saith that Dromedus is a maner kinde of Camell, and lesse in sta∣ture than a Camell, and is much swif∣ter of course and running: and hath therefore the name Dromedus, of swift running, which is called Drombs in Gréeke, and the Dromedus goeth an hundred miles and twentie and more in ane daye, and the same beast cheweth his  an Oxe and a Camell, and so Dromedarri be masters of Dromedis, properly so speake, as Papias saith. But the Glose super f. 60. saith, that both Dromedarius and Dromis is accounted a beast lesse than a Camell, and much more swifte. And Mudian and Epha be countreys beyond Arabia, and therin be many Dromedaries, and be geth in youth & be the more  to runne as Auicen saith, lest they be letted of their running, by desire & liking of females: and are so swifle by reason of long pa  for they haue most large pce, as Aristotle saith, and Auicen and Pli∣nith  and also for great heate: for it is the most hottest beast of kinde complection, and so strong heat consu∣meth land wastreth in him all ventositie and fastnesse, and suffereth him not to  ouercharged with much flesh and fat¦nesse. Also for ablenesse of members, for his legges be long and small, and full of sinnewes, and is therefore lyght and a∣ble to mouing, and strong to continue course and running, and is a light beast for scarcitie of meate, for it is not a beast of much meate, but is sufficed with lyt∣tle meate, and scarcely eateth heye, and rindes, and loueth well the stoanes of dates, and is content with them at euen after right long iourneyes. As Plinius saith, his bloud is full hot, sharpe, and thin: therefore milke of Dromedaries is full thin, and fléeting, more than milk of other beasts, as Constantine sayth, & lesse nourishing, and more heating, and more departing thicke humoures. Looke before De Camelo, that hath nigh the verye same propertyes that this Beast hath. ¶Of Dipsade. cap. 37. DIpsas and Dipsades is the feminine gender, and is a Serpent that is cal∣led Situla in Latine, and hath that name Sytula for it that he biteth dyeth for thirst, as Isidore saith libro. 12. And such Adders are subtill and small, and vnneth they be séene when men tread on them. The venim of them slayeth or it be felt, so that vneth he féeleth sorenesse and shall dye, and is a manner kinde of Serpents, as it is sayde before De Aspide, Looke there. Of Dracone. cap. 38. THe Dragon is called Draco, and is most greatest of all Serpents, as Isi∣dore saith lib. 12. The Gréekes call him Draconia, and ofte he is drawen out of his den, and réeseth vp into the aire, and the aire is moued by him, & also the Sea swelleth against his venime, & he hath A creast with a lyttle mouth, and draw∣eth breath at small pipes and straight, & reareth his tongue, and hath téeth lyke a saw, & hath strength, & not only in téeth, but also in his tayle, and grieueth both with biting & with stinging, & hath not so  as other serpents: for to
the ende to slay any thing, to him ve∣nime: is; not néedfull: for whom he fin∣deth he slayeth, and the Elephant is not re from him, for all his greatnesse of body, for he lurketh in the waye, where the Elephant goeth, and bindeth & span∣neth his legs and strangleth and slateth him. The Dragon bréedeth in Ide and in Aethiopia, there as is great burning of continuall heat, as Isidore saith li. 12. Plin. li. 8. ca. 13. speaketh of the dra∣gon and saieth, that the Dragon is xx. cubites great, and bréedeth among the Aethiopes. Ofte foure or fiue of them, fasten theyr tayles togethers, and tea∣reth vp the heads, & sayle ouer sea, and ouer riuers, to get good meate. Also cap. 12. besayeth. Betwéene Elephants and Dragons is euerlasting fighting, for the Dragon with his tayle bindeth & span∣neth the Elaphaunt, and the Elephaunt with his foote, and with his nose throw∣eth downe the Dragon, and the Dragon with his tayle, bindeth and spanneth the Elephants legges and maketh him fall: but the Dragon buyeth it full sore, for while he slayeth the Elephant, the Ele∣phant falleth vppon him, & slayeth him? Irem ca. 14. The Elephant séeing the Dragon vpon a tree, busieth him to break the tree to suite the dragon, and the dra∣gon leapeth vpon the Elephant, and bu∣sieth to bite him betwéene the nosethrile, and assayleth the Elephants eyen, and maketh him blynde some time, and leapeth vppon him some time behinde, and byteth him, and sucketh his bloude, and at the last, after long fighting, the Elephant wexeth féeble for great blindnesse insomuch, that he fal∣leth vpon the Dragon, and slayeth in his dieng, the Dragon that him slayeth. The cause why the Dragon desireth his bloud, is coldnes of the Elephants bloud by the which the Dragon desireth to coole himselfe, as Isi. saith super illum locum Leuitic. 14. Attraxerunt ventum sicut Dracones, They drew winde as Dra∣gons. There Ierome sayth, that the Dra∣gon is a full thirstie beast, insomuch, that vnueth he may haue water inough to quench his great thirst: and openeth his mouth therefore against the winde, to quench the burning of his thirste in that wise. Therfore when he séeth ships sayle in the sea in great winde, he flieth against the saile, to take ther cold wind, and ouerthroweth the ship somtime for greatnesse of body and by strong réese a∣gainst the saile, and when the shipmen sée the Dragon come nigh, and knowe his comming by water that swelleth a∣gainst him, they strike the sayle anone, & scape in that wise. Also Solinus saith, that Aethiopians vse Dragons bloude, against burning heate, and eate the flesh against diuers euills, for they can depart the venimme from his flesh: and he hath venim on∣ly in his tongue and in his gall, & ther∣fore they cut off the tongue, and throw away the gall, in which the venime is receiued: and so when the venim is ta∣ken away, they vse the other deale of the bodie, both in meate and in medicine. And it séemeth, that Dauid toucheth this, where he sayth: Dedisti eum efcam populis Aethiopium, Thou gauest him for meate to the people of Aethi∣opia. Also Plin. saith, that for might of the venime, his tongue is alway areared, & somtime he setteth the ayre on fire, by heate of his venime, so that it séemeth that he bloweth and casteth fire out of his mouth: and sometime he bloweth out outragious blastes, and thereby the aire is corrupted and infected, and there∣of commeth pestilent euilles, and they dwell somtime in the sea, and sometime swine in riuers, and lurke sometime in caues and in dens, & sléepe but seldome, but wake nigh alway. And they deuour beasts and sowles, and haue right sharp sight, and sée therefore their pray a farre out of mountaines, and fight with biting strokes and stinging, & setteth him most on the eyen and nose of the beast that he fighteth with. Therefore Plin. saith li. 8. That hée grieueth most the Elephant in the eyen and in the mouth, and maketh him ofte blinde, so that sometime the Elaphaunt maye not eate and dyeth therefore in that wise.
Also of the Dragon Arist. speaketh lib. 7. and sayth, that the Dragons biting, that cateth venemous beastes is peril∣lous, as the Dragons biting that eateth Scorpions, for against his biting vnneth is any remedy or medicine founde. Also lib. 28. Plinius sayth, that all venemous beasts flye and voyd the greace and fat∣nesse of the dragon: and his greace med∣led with honnie, cureth and healeth dim∣nesse of eyen. Also libr. 7. Aristot. saith, those Fishes dye; that are bitten of the Dragon. (Additiō.Of the wonderfull greatnesse of Dragons and how manye sortes hath bene, and of the mischiefes they haue done, read the Chronicle of the Doome.) ¶Of Equo. chap. 39. HOrses are called Equi, & haue that name for they are ioyned and cou∣pled in cartes or in Chariots, euen, and and not odde, and they be also coupled in shape and in course. Also the horse is called Caballus, and hath that name of his hollow féete: for he maketh there∣with a caue or a pit in the ground there he goeth, and other beasts haue no suche féete, as Isidore saith lib. 12. And among many men the horse is called Sonipes, for he foundeth with his féete. And hor∣ses are ioyfull in fields, and smell Bat∣tayles, and be comforted with noyse of trumpets, to battaile and to fighting: & be excited to runne with noyse that they know, and are sorie when they be ouer∣come, and glad when they haue the ma∣sterie, and so feeleth and knoweth theyr enemies in battaile, so farre foorth, that they arise on their enimies with biting and smiting: and also some know theyr owne Lords, and forgetteth mildnesse, if their Lords be ouercome: & some horse suffereth no man to ride on his backe, but onely his owne Lord. and manye horses wéepe when their Lords be dead: and it is sayd that horses weepe for sor∣row, right as a man doth, and so ye kind of horse and of man, is medled in Cen∣taures, such beastes. Also ofte men that all sight, take euidence and diuine gesse that shall befall by sorrowe, or by the ioye that the Horse maketh. Horses of Persia, or of Cicilia, liue long time, fif∣tie yeare and more: and horses of Gal∣lia, of Inde, and of Spaine line lesse time. And héereto Isidore saith, that old men meane, that in gentle horses, noble men take héede of foure things: of shape & of fairenesse, of wilfulnesse and of colour. Of shape, that he be strong and sadde of body, and according to strength & might and height, and length, and breadth, that the side be long, and some deale small, that the loynes be great, and the thighs round and large, and broad breasted, and all the body full sad, and full of brawne, and the foote drye, and hoofe hollow and sad. Fairnesse is knowen by lytle head, and the skinne cleauing nigh to ye bone, if the eares be little and sharpe, if the eyen be great and the nosethrills large, if he beareth vp the head, if the maane be thicke, and the tayle long, and if the hoofe be well pight and round. The wil∣fulnesse is knowen, if he be bold of hart, and swifte of féete, if ye members quake: it is token of strength, and if he be soone areared, and riseth soone from great rest: or els, if he be soone stinted in swifte course and running. The colour is kno∣wen, for the coulour in them, is nowe red, now blacke, nowe white, and nowe graye, and now diuers, and now specke∣led. The diuers colour beautifieth much or disfigureth an horse, and is a token to know strength and will of a horse: but to pursue by order, and to make processe orderly, it were long. Huc vsque Isido∣rus. libro. 12. Libro. 7. capitulo. 43. Plinius speaketh of the Horse, and saith: That the Horses of Scythia fight for their Lordes, and eschewe to ingender with their owne damme, for in them is a manner knowledge of kinred. And Aristotle speaketh héereof libro. 8. and sayth, that a King of the North hadde a very fayre Mare, that foaled him a very faire horse: and the king would haue had some Colte gotten of the same horse of his owne damme, and couered hir face: when the Mares head was vncouered, anone the horse knew hir, and fled, and fell downe from an high place, and dyed for sorrowe.
Also in company of Mares, the horse goeth more gladly with the mare colts, than with his damme, and be glad with the noyse of Simphonie and of a trum∣pet, and starteth and réeseth on his ene∣mies, and bodeth warre and fighting, & wéepeth. for their friends and Lordes: and these horses are accounted best, in warre & in battaile, that thrust the head déepest into the water when they drink, for he meaneth, that such horses bée not let in running with heauinesse of vrine. Also libr. 28. cap. 9. he sayth, that the gall of an horse is accounted among venim, and therefore it was not lawfull for I∣dolatrous Priestes to touche the horse: his fresh bloud and raw is venemous, as the bloud of a Bull: the Horse foame dronke with Asses milke slayeth vene∣mous wormes. Also Aristotle and Aui∣cen meane, that ye horse casteth his téeth, and the elder he is, the whiter are his téeth. Also libro. 5. Aristotle saith, that the male horse lyueth xxv. yere, and gen∣dereth from thrée yeare to xxv. And the Mare liueth longer, and gendereth to xl. yeare: and when the horse beginneth to gender, then his voyce is greater, and so fareth the Mares also, and they loue the worke of generation more than other beasts, as he sayth libro 5. Also lib. 7. he saith, that sometime horses haue the po∣dagre, and loose the soales of theyr féete, and then groweth new: and the signe héereof is quaking of the right gendring stone, and horses that be fed in houses, haue an euill that is called Illiaca pas∣sio, and the token therof is, that the hin∣der members crimpleth togethers, and be constrayned, and this horse is tyed from his meate, and if he be let bloud he shall be holpe. And also an horse hath shrinking of sinewes, and the token ther¦of is, that all the veynes be straight vp∣pon the head and the necke, and it grie∣ueth him for to goe. Also horses gather venimme, and haue another euill in the mouth that is called Forem, and the to∣ken of this euil is, that that matter fal∣leth to the roofe of the mouthe, and his breath is hot, and this euill is without remedy, except it heale by himselfe. And somtime an horse is mad, and the token token thereof is, that his eares bend to∣ward the necke, and this euill hath no medicine. And the horse hath sickenesse in the bladder, and the token thereof is, that he may not pisse, and also he draw∣eth his loynes and soles. Also an horse is bitten grieuously with a flye that is cal∣led Mugelis. The biting of that Flye,Asilus, the horse flye. grieueth full sore both Horses & Mules: for he maketh to rise theron both blains, and whelkes,Hirudo, ye brent flye or leache. and oftentimes horses dye by venime thereof. And the horse know∣eth his neighing, that will fight with him, and hath lyking to stand in medes and to swim in water, and to drinke troublous and thicke water, and if the water be cléere, the horse stampeth and stirreth it with his foot, to make it thick. Huc vsque Arist. lib. 6. ¶Of Equa. cap. 40. THe Mare is called Equa, & that name commeth of the name Equus. And li. 7. Arist. saith, that if a Mare being with foale smelleth the snuffe of a candle, she casteth hir foale. Item, Idem Mares go in léese together, and if one of them dye, and leaue hir Colte aliue, another Mare feedeth and nourisheth him, for the kind of Mares loueth beasts of ye same kinde. Also libro. 8. cap. 42. Plin. saith, That a Mare foaleth standing, and loueth hir Coltes passing other beastes: and if a Colte léeseth his damme, another Mare feedeth and nourisheth him, and loueth him as it were hir owne. Also he sayth that in the forehead of the Colte bréed∣deth a blacke skinne, of the quantitie of a Sedge, and the Mare lycketh it with hir tongue, and taketh it away, and re∣ceiueth neuer the Colt to suck hir teats, except it be first taken away. And Plyn. calleth that skinne Veneficium amo∣ris, for women that be witches, vse that skinne in their charmings, when they will excite a man to loue. Also Aristo∣tle sayth, that the Mare is proude, and hath ioye of hir mane, and is sory when it is shorne: and when hir maane is short, hir lyking of lechery is quenched: as though the vertue of loue, wer in the maane.
Also lib. 8. Arist. saith, that a Birde that is called Ibis, fighteth with the horse, because the horse driueth hir out of hir pasture and léese, for Ibis is féeble of sight, and hath a voyce as an horse, & when he flyeth aboue an horse, he sto∣nieth him, and maketh him flye, & slay∣eth him somtime. (Additiō.That is a Fable, for the birde is but of the bignesse of a Snype, and a ve∣ry filthy and stinking bird.) ¶Of Poledro. ca. 41. A Colte is called Poledrus, and Pul∣lus equinus, also: and is a Mares sonne, and hath that name while he suc∣keth. And li. 7. Arist. saith, that in his forhead when he is foaled, is found Ico∣nemor, that is called also, Amoris vene∣ficium, and the Mare licketh it off with hir tongue, and taketh it away, and hy∣deth or eateth it: and women Witches haue prouerbes thereof as he saith. Also li. 13. he sayth, that the hinder part of the Colte is more than the former part, and when the Colte wexeth, the former part wexeth vpward, and therefore in manye horses, the former part is higher than the hinder: and therfore while he is a colte he maye touch his head with his hinder foote, and maye not so when he is of age: and all the while he is a Colte, he loueth his damme with wonderfull great affection, and followeth hir, where¦euer she goeth, and if it happeneth that he léeseth hir, he presently neigheth. The Colte is not lyttered with strawe, nor curried with an horse combe, nor arayed with trapping, and gaye har∣nesse, nor smitten with spurs, nor sadled with a saddell, nor tamed with bridle: but he followeth his dam fréely, and ea∣teth grasse, and his féete be not pearred with nayles, but he is suffered to runne hether and thether fréely, but at the last he is set to worke and to trauayle, and is helde and tyed, and lead with halters and with raynes, and taken from his damme, and may not sucke his dammes teates, but he is taught in manye man∣ner wise to goe easely and softe, and as Isi. saith li. 18. he is set to cartes, chary∣ots, and chaires, and to trauell and bea∣ring of horsemen in chiualry. The silly horse colte is foaled to diuers happes of fortune: for Isi. saith in eod. libro, that horses were sometime hallo∣wed in diuers vsage of the Gods: for chariot horse were ordayned and hallo∣wed to the Sunne, for foure chaunges of the Sunne in one yeare. In Springing time, in Summer, in Haruest, and in Winter, the which times chaungeth by vertue of the Sunne. And carte horses were hallowed to ye Moone, that is séene in double time by night and by daye. Therefore they that worship ye Moone, couple alway two horses, a white and a blacke: and thrée horses that drew in one carte, they hallowed to the Gods of hel, for fiends draw to them men in thrée a∣ges, in childhood, in youth, and in age. And these men coupled togethers horses of diuers colors, and durst not well cou∣ple togethers past seauen horses at once, and lykened that number to the seauen starres, by the mouing of the which sea∣uen starres they supposed generally that the world is ruled: or els to the num∣ber of seauen dayes, for by the passing about of the seauen Circles, they saye, that this lyfe passeth and endeth: and describeth therefore wonderfully the co∣lours of horses, as Isid. sayth there. For they hallowed red horses to the Fire,Red. White. Brovvne or baye. Pale or mouse dunne. or to the Sunne: and white to the Aire: and browne to the earth: and blew to the Water and to the Sea. And they rode red horses in Summer, for then all thing héateth: & white horses in win∣ter, for then all thing whiteth by colde & by frost: and graye in springing time, for then all thing wexeth gréene: and browne and blacke in Haruest, for then all thing dryeth, & fayleth as it were, of the first fairnesse. And also ther he saith, ye they halowed red horses to Mars, that is named God of battayle & of warre, or for the banners of the Romanes wer dressed with redde silke, or for Mars had ioye and lyking in bloud. And they hal∣lowed white horses to the West coun∣trey, or to the fayre weather: and gréene to the flowers of the earth: and blewe to the sea and to the water, for water is blewish of coulour: and they hallowed yeolow horses, and horses of diuers co∣lours
and purpured, to the Rain-bowe, that they call Arcum, for the Raine-bow hath many colours: and this cur∣sed doing men vsed somtime by procu∣ring and inticing of fiends, about the E∣lements of the world, as Isidore saith. Therefore this world is to be dispised, for manie hath fulfilled the lykenesse of Sathanas. Huc vsque Isidorus libro. 8. And now at the last, take héede of the horse colte: for the going and pace, hard or softe, easie or vneasie, that he vseth in youth, vnneth he may leaue it in age. (Additiō.The Irish Hobbie, and the Genet of Naples, the Coursers of Tartaria, & the Englysh stoned horses, are the foure principall & best kindes of horses in the world: the Flemish Mare for the brée∣ding.) ¶Of Elephante. cap. 42. THe Elephant is called Elephas, and Elephantus also, and hath that name of Elphio in Gréeke, that is to saye, an hill, and that for great quantitie of his body: but the Indies call him Barro, & therefore his voyce is called Barritus, and his téeth are called Ehur, and his snowte and wroote is called Promuscis, or Proboscis, for therewith he bringeth his meate to his mouth, as Isido. sayth, libro. 12. and sayeth, that this Beast is sharpe in wrath and in battayle. Uppon these beasts the Medes and Perses vsed to fight in towers of trée, and threwe & shot out darts, as it were out of towers and Castles. These beasts haue wit and minde passing other beastes, and goe in feare in their manner going, and voyd & flye the mouse, and doe the déede of ge∣neration backward: and the female fo∣leth in water or in wood, and leaueth hir foale where she foaleth, because of dra∣gons that be enemies to them, and span∣neth them and slaieth them: she goeth with foale two yeares, and gendereth not but once, & he lyueth thrée hundred yeare, as Isid. saith li. 12. And lib. 8. ca. 1. Pli. saith, that among beasts ye Elephant is most of vertue: so ye vneth among men is so great redines sound. For as he tel∣leth, in ye new Moone they come together in great companies, and bath and wash them in a riuer, & come so together in the new of ye Moone, & lot each to o∣ther, & turne so againe to their owne pla∣ces, & they make the young go before in the turning againe, & kéepeth them busi∣ly, & teach them to do in the same wise: and when they be sicke, they gather good hearbs, and ere they vse the heards, they heaue vp the head and looke vp towarde heauen, & pray for help of God in a cer∣taine Religion: and they be good of wit, & learne well, & are easie to teach, inso∣much yt they be taught to know ye king, & to worship him, and busieth to do him reuerence, & to bend ye knées in worship of him. Also ca. 5. it is said, that if Ele∣phants sée a man comming against them that is out of the way in wildernes, for that they wold not afray him, they will draw themselues somewhat out of the way, & then they stint, & passe little & lit∣tle before him, and teach him the way, & if a dragon come against him, they fight with ye dragon, & defend ye man, & put them forth to defend the man strongly & mightely, and doe so namely when they haue young foales: for they dred yt the man séeketh their foales, & therfore they purpose first to deliuer them of ye man, yt they may more safely féed their yoūg, & keep them ye more warely. Also li. 8. ca. 6. Alway they goe together, & the eldest leadeth ye company, & the next in age hel∣peth in the doing. When they shal passe ouer a riuer or a water, they send ye yoūg before, lest ye foord were let by cōming of ye more Elephants, & so they might not passe conueniently. Also among them is a strange shamefastnes: for if one of thē be ouercome, he ye is ouercome, flyeth the voice of ye victor, & they doe ye déedes of generation in priuy places, when ye male is fiue yeres old, & the females x. yere, & that but in two yeare, as he telleth: & in these two yeare, but onely fiue daies, & seldome the sixt day, as he saith: and be full perillous in time of generation, and namely the wilde Elephants, for they throw downe houses and stables of the Indians, and therefore the Indians hide that season their tame female Elephāts. And Elephants bée best in chiualrie
when they be tame: for they beare to∣wers of tree, and throw down scaffolds, and ouerturne men of armes, and that is wonderful, for they dread not men of armes ranged in battayle, and dread and flye the voyce of the least sounde of a Swine. Also cap. 40. with forhead and snowte he throweth down high palmes, and eateth the fruite thereof. Also be∣twéene Elephants and Dragons is per∣petuall wrath and strife: For that one hath enuie at that other, for great might and strength, and for quantitie of body, and the Dragon loueth to drinke the E∣lephauntes bloude, to coole his burning heate, for that bloud is most colde, as it is sayde before in the same Booke, wher he intreateth of the Dragon. Looke there. ¶De naso Elephantis. Chap. 43. ARistotle lib. 1. and Auicen meane, that the Elephants nose is long, and strong with bolning, and harde as an horne: and he vseth his nose in stéed of an hand, and thereby he taketh meate & drinke, and putteth it in his mouth, and so the Elephant hath two pappes in the breast, and strong tuskes in the mouth, and his tongue is full lyttle in compari∣son to his bodye, and is seene within: & is but seldome séene without, but when he lycketh his lyppes after meate and drinke, and in him is found but one gut folden and wrapped in manye manner wise: and that gut is in him in stéede of stomacke, and therafter is but one other by the which his dirte passeth out, and hath a great lyuer, foure times so greate as the lyuer of an Oxe, and hath a lytle mylte & splene in comparison to his bo∣dy, and that is as Auicen sayeth, for in him Melancholia that humor passeth in to nourishing. Also li. 7. Arist. saith, that when he is gendred, teeth be gendered in him. With his snowte and nose hée wrooteth vp trees, and breatheth there∣with when he swimmeth, and casteth out water: and that harde snowte Cal∣ceus is made of hard gristles. And when the Elephant sitteth, he bendeth his feet: and may not bend foure at once, for he∣uinesse and waight of the body: but hee leaneth to the right side or to the lefte side, and sléepeth standing, and he bend∣eth the hinder legs right as a man. Also libro. 5. the male gendereth at the fifthe yeare, and the female at the tenth, and vnto fortie yeares, and resteth after that she hath foaled thrée yeares, & after that she hath conceiued, she toucheth not the male, and gorth with fole in hir wombe, two yeares: and when the foale is foa∣led, it is lyke to a Calfe of two or thrée months olde. Also lib. 6. the Elephaunt hath sicknesse that commeth of ventosi∣tie and of winde, and by that sicknesse, he may not pisse nor shite. And if he ea∣teth earth he dyeth, but if he be vsed ther¦to, but somtime he swalloweth stones: and hath also ache in the ioyntes, and there-against helpeth drink of colde wa∣ter, and grasse and hearbs plunged in ho∣nie, for these two things letteth fluxe of the womb: and when the ache is so sore, that he may not sléep, his sholders must be balmed with oyle and hot water, and thereby he is holpe: and the same doth Swines flesh rosted, laied and bound to the shoulders that aketh. And if he hath yron in his bodye, Oyle is giuen him to drinke, and the yron is drawen oute by drinking of Oyle: and if he may not drinke Oyle, medicines are sodden in Oyle, and giuen him to eate. Also libro. 8. he saith, that the male is more of body and more bolde and hardie then the fe∣male, but the male is tamed by beating, & when he is beaten he is obedient while the hunter sitteth vpon him, and when the hunter lighteth downe, his fore feete bée bound vntill he be tame. And in the same booke in littera F. it followeth, that he is more able to be tamed, & more obe∣dient then all other wilde beastes, and hath more wit, and feeleth colde in win∣ter, and colde winde, and is a beast that vseth much waters and riuers, & dwel∣leth beside riuers, and wadeth in water vnto the chinne, and swimmeth: but he may not dure long in swimming for he∣uinesse of the bodye. And Elephauntes bée without Gall, as Aristotle sayeth libro. 14. but they be accidentallye cru∣ell
and fierce. When they bée too soone an∣gred, or if they be wine dronken, to make them sharpe to fight in battaile. Also li. 18. Aristo. saith, that no beast lyueth so long as the Elephant, and that his com∣plection is lyke to the ayre that he dwel∣leth in: and so it néedeth that she goe with foale two yeares, for greatnesse of the foale, that may not be perfectly, and complete shapen in lesse time. (Additiō.The Elephant, of all foure footed beasts, and next vnto man, is most of per∣seueraunce. When the Indians bring them to the warres, they put great pack-saddles on their backes, such as in Italy they vse for the great Mules. These they girde with two chaynes of yron in stéede of girts. Upon these saddles, they place little Turrets or Cages made of woode: euery Turret containeth thrée men, betwéene the Turrets sitteth an Indian on the backe of the beast, and speaketh to him in his language, which the Elephant vnderstandeth and obay∣eth. Seauen men are placed vpon one Elephant when they goe to warres, and all armed with coates of fence, and tar∣gets, bowes, launces, dartes, and slyngs: and to the snowte or trunke of the Ele∣phant is fastened a sharpe sword, of two cubites in length and of a handfull broad, wherewith he fighteth also. The Elephants are of great strength, the fe∣males more fierce than the males. The two great téeth, are growing foorthe of the vpper iawe, in height fourtéene and sixtéene handfulls high, two yards, and two yards quarter, and sometime sea∣uen foote and sixe inches of height. Lewes Vertomannus 3. lib. of Persia, chap. 6. &c.) ¶De Elephantibus. chap. 44. OF Elephants Solinus speaketh and sayth, that he kéepeth the course and order of the starres: and Elephants in wexing of the Moone goe to Riuers, and when they are besprong with lycour, they salute and welcome the rising of the Sunne with certaine mouings, as they may, and then they tourne againe into woodes and landes. Their youthe is knowen by whitenesse of téethe, of the which téeth, that one is alway wor∣king, and that other is spared, least hée shoulde wexe dull with continuall smi∣ting and rubbing: but when they are pursued with hunters, then they smite both togethers, and breake them, that they be no longer pursued, when ye téeth be appayred and defiled: for they know, that theyr téethe, are the cause of theyr perill. They gender seldome, and then they wash themselues ofte in running wa∣ter, and tourne not againe to the flock, before the washing and bathing. They fight neuer for females, nor knowe not spouse breache: and if they fight in any case, they be sull busie to helpe them that are hurte and wounded in the mid∣dle among them, and defend them more than themselues. And when they be ta∣ken, they are made tame and mild with Barley: and a caue or ditche is made vnder the earth, as it were a pitfall in the Elephaunts waye, and vnwares he falleth therein, and then one of the hun∣ters commeth to him, and beateth and smiteth him, and pricketh him full sore: and then another hunter commeth and smiteth the first hunter, and doth him a∣way, and defendeth the Elephaunt, and giueth him Barley to eate: and when he hath eaten thrice or foure times, then he loueth him that defended him, and is afterwarde milde and obedient to him. And if it happeneth, that he swal∣loweth a Worme that is called Came∣lion, he taketh and eateth of wilde O∣lyue Tree, and is so holpe agaynst the venimme. His wombe is softe, and his ridge is harde: and therefore when he fighteth with the Unicorne, he putteth foorth the backe against him, least he sticke him with his horne in the softe bellye. He hath lyttle hayre, and no bristelles, and large eares, long and thinne, and hanging downewarde. And hée réeseth and smiteth therewith full sore, when he is wrath against the Dragon that hée hateth full sore: and no wonder.
For the Dragon desireth to drinke his bloud when he may. And the dragon as∣saileth him neuer, but when the Ele∣phant is full of drinke, that he may take the more plenty of the weary Elephants bloud, when he is full of moisture with∣in, Huc vs{que} Soli. that setteth many other propertyes, the which Plinius rehearseth before. Of eodem. cap. 45. I Haue read yt in Phisiologus booke, that the Elephant is a beast that pas∣seth all other foure footed beasts, in quan∣titie, in wit, and in minde. For among other doings, Elephants lie neuer downe in sléeping: But when they be wearye, they leane to a trée, & so rest somewhat. And men lye in a waite to aspy their re∣sting places priuely, for to cut the trée in the other side: and the Elephaunt com∣meth, and is not ware of the fraud, & lea∣neth to the trée & breaketh it with weight of his body, and falleth downe with the breaking, and lyeth there: and when hée seeth he may not help himselfe in falling, he cryeth & roareth in a wonderful man∣ner, & by his noyse and crieng commeth sodeinly many young Elephants, & reare vp the olde, little and little, with all their strength and might: and while they a∣reare him with wonderfull affection and loue, they bend themselues with al their might and strength. Elephaunts hate the worke of lechery, but onely to gender of springing. And so it is sayde, that when vertue of loue pricketh the Elephants of Inde, the female goeth before Eastward, and the male followeth her vntill they come to a priuie place, and there the fe∣male in some wise gotteth Mandragora, and eateth first the fruit therof, and then her male eateth oft the same, and gende∣reth with her, and shée conceiueth, as it is sayd. But for greatnesse of the foale, the female beareth long time the foale in the wombe, but in time of foaling she fée∣deth and nourisheth her foale in waters, and in Ilands, for dread of the Dragon, least he should swallow the tender foale, or lead him awaye: and while the dam trauaileth in foaling, the male defendeth her with all his strength and might. Al∣so there it is said, that the Elephauntes bones burnt, chase and driue away Ser∣pents and all venimous beasts. Also ther is another thing sayde, that is full won∣derfull: for he sayth, that among the Ae∣thiopians in some countries Elephantes be hunted in this wise: There go in the desart two maydens all naked and bare, with open haire of the head, and one of them beareth a vessell, and the other a swoorde: and these maidens beginne to sing alone, & the beast hath liking when he heareth their song, and commeth to them, and licketh theyr breasts, and fal∣leth a sléepe anone for liking of the song, and then the one maide sticketh him in the throate or in the side with a swoord, & the other taketh his bloud in a vessel, and with that bloud people of the same coun∣trie dye cloth, and doe coulour it there∣with. (Additiō.Iuorie comforteth the heart, & hel∣peth conception. Syluius sayeth, we must take héede that it be not counterfeit, with the bones of other beasts. Iuorie is cold and dry in the first degrée. The shauings of Iuorye with pure honnie, taketh awaye the spottes in the face. The pouder of Iuory burnt, and dronke with Goats bloud, breaketh the stone in the kidneyes and bledder, with∣out all perill. Gesner in fol. 436.) ¶For the better vnderstanding of Ele∣phantes, in what coast they most a∣bound, I haue forth of Ortelius (set vnto a common view) the Empire of the Abissines, or of Presbiter Iohn, as followeth. THE Empire of the Abissines or of Presbiter Iohn,This is added. whome the inhabi∣tants of Europe doe call Presbiter Iohn, is surnamed of the Moores Aticlabassi, of his owne people, that is of the Abis∣sines, he is tearmed Acegue & Neguz, yt is Emperour & king for the proper name (as among vs is giuen by the parents.) They séeme also euen as the manner is, among ye Romane Bishops, to alter their proper name in comming to the Empire,
for he which in our age entered into the league of friendshippe with the king of Portugale, was called Antoni Tingil, which name when he came to the Em∣pire, he chaunged into Dauid: This Presbiter Iohn, is without doubte to bée reckoned among the greatest Monarchies of our age, as he, whose dominions stret∣cheth betwéene the Tropikes, from the red sea, almost to the Aethiopike Occe∣an, and to describe somewhat more dily∣gently, the limits of his Empire: on the North side he hath Aegypt to neighbor, which is vnder the Turkes: on ye East side it stretcheth out to the red sea, and in parts to the gulfe of Barbary: on the South it is fenced, by nature with the mountains of the Moone, but on ye West it is limited with the kingdome of Ma∣negogue, with the kingdome of Nubea, with the riuer of Nilus. By these writ∣ten limits it seemeth to comprehend, the Aethiop of the auncients, surnamed vn∣der Aegypt: The Countryes Troglo∣ditica, and Cinamoniphera, and a parte of the innermost Affrica: These regions at this day are distinguished with many diuerse names, as the Table doth shew, all the inhabitauntes call themselues A∣bissmi, they are of a browne colour, and Christians, as it appeareth by the letters of the foresayd Dauid, written to Cle∣ment the seauenth, of whose manners, kinde of lyfe, and religion, I haue gathe∣red these fewe lines out of the iourneye booke of Fraunces Aluaretius, imprinted in the Italian tongue. There is in this Countrye a greate number of Monestaryes of both kindes, and in the Monestaryes of men there en∣tereth no woman, nor liuing creature of the feminine kinde. The Monkes for the most parte, doe fast bread and water fiftye dayes, for among them is greate scarcitie of fish, namelye in the innermost partes of the lande, for al∣though the riuers be full of fish, yet they giue not themselues to fishing: Some of them at that time of theyr fast, doe scarcelye tast bread, but onelye liue by hearbes. There are among them, which during the time of theyr fast sleepe not, but sitting in the water vp to the chin. They say Masse, they goe in procession, with Crosses and Sencers (as the Ro∣mish Apostates doe) the Monkes weare long haire, the Priestes not so, none of them weare shooes, not anye of them with shooes, no not the laye men canne goe with shooes into the Church: They kéepe Saturne day, & Sol day, holy dayes: all bée circumcised, yea, the very women, they are lykewise baptised. In the name of the Father, of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghost, but not vntill they bée fortie dayes olde, they which liue not so long, dye without Baptisme: All that are bap∣tised, doe receiue at that present the ho∣ly Eucarist, hauing much colde water cast vpon their mouths, that the children may the easilyer swallow it downe, and the names which are giuen them are sig∣nificant: They saye that they were tur∣ned to the christian religion by Quéene Candace, of whome mention is made in the Acts of the Apostles, assembled toge∣ther at Hierusalem, all the contents whereof they doe most studeouslye ob∣serue: The commen people doe common∣ly kéepe two or thrée Wiues, without breach of lawe, according to the wealth they haue to kéepe them, but such the Church men driue out of their temples: it is also lawefull for them to make di∣uorce. The Gentlemen doe make greate daintie of rawe Cowes flesh, dipped in bloud, as it were in anye broath or Po∣tage. In all the kingdome of Presbiter Iohn, there is no vse of Copper coyne, but in stéed thereof they way pure & vn∣wrought golde. Moreouer Salt (but this is in vse, not onely in those Countryes, but also almost through out all Affrica,) serueth in the waye of bartering or ex∣chaunge: The same Presbiter Iohn in some places doth pullishe yron in forme of Pellettes. But Pepper is in so great price amonge them, whatsoeuer a man will buy, he may easilye redéeme for it: These Countryes haue well néere all kinde of Beastes and Birdes, as Ele∣phants, Lyons, Tygres, Lynxes, Bad∣gers, Apes, Parrets, and Harts, and this is contrary to the opinion of the auncy∣ents, who denieth that in Affrica bree∣deth
this beast namely the Elephaunt: but for the space of sixe yéeres, in yt which Aluaretius made abode in these quar∣ters; he writeth, that he sawe neither Beare, Connie, Godlefinche, nor Cuc∣koe. Locustes are a peculyar mischieuous plague in these quarters, whose number sometimes groweth so greate, that they seeme to darken the Skye, spoyling now this, nowe that prouince, in a manner of Enimyes, that they deuoute all theyr corne in haruest, they féede vpon leaues, and barkes of trées, and they so spoyle the fieldes, that oftentimes the inhabi∣tants are compelled to leaue their olde dwelling, and for want of foode, to goe to other places. There is in this Countrye a Citye called Gassumo, sometimes the seate (as it is specified in the Cronicles, of quéene Saba, which they saye was called Ma∣queda) and they saye moreouer, that shée had a sonne by king Salomon, named Meilech, they are perswaded, that this Citie was after inhabited by Queene Candaca, but it is best for the Reader, desirous of these things, to reade Fraun∣ces Alueretius, who hath diligentlye set forth those things which hée: obserued in his Embassage. Let him read also a little booke of Damian A-goes touching mat∣ters of Aethiopia. Of Hedo. cap. 46. A Kidde is called Hedus, and hath that name of Edendo, eating, and is lyttle and fatte, and his flesh is of good sauoure, as Isidore sayeth, libro. 12. his kindlye drynesse is tempered, by moy∣sture of the age, as Isaac sayeth in Die∣tis. And so the Kidde is better and more according to digestion, and namelye the male, for his flesh nourisheth well, and bréedeth good bloud, and hath strong heat by benefite of the age, and therefore Kid flesh for temperatnesse thereof is good and wholesome to them that recouereth out of sicknesse, and is according to mans kinde, and namelye to them that liue de∣licately in case and rest. And his Wooll is more long and rough then is Lambes Wooll, and his flesh is better and more obedient to digestion for temperatenesse thereof in moysture and in heate. And the Kidde hath full sharpe sight and simple looking, and looketh a∣side, and knoweth and séeketh his damme with bleating, as Plinius sayeth, libro. 8. capitulo primo. And it is sayde, that his lycour eaten helpeth and healeth dimnesse of eyen in them that he called Noctilupi. Also libro. 28. cap. 10. hée sayth, That skinnes of Kiddes healeth venimous bi∣lings, if they bée layde thereto all hotte, and Kidde Wooll burnt, driueth awaye Serpentes with the smell thereof: and the skinnes of Kiddes bée vsed to heale woundes, his bloud helpeth agaynst ve∣nunme, and his ruenning helpeth against venimous glew dronke or eaten, and al∣so against bloud of a Bull it helpeth, if it bee dronke. Huc vsque Plinius. And is a mild beast, and myeth not nor figh∣teth, he cheweth his cudde, and is cleane, & was ordeined to sacrifice in olde time, he skippeth and leapeth, and is ful swift, and fat within and fleshie, and tough and leane without, and eateth and gnaweth stalkes, twigges, and braunches, and lo∣ueth specially leaues of Iuie and of such shrubs. (Additiō.They are not to bée pastured in Orchards and gardens, nor to be fedde among coppises and frith, for they will spoyle the young springes, and kill the stockes: voyde and barren soyles are best.) (Additiō.To make Pomatum, mixe Goates fat with the soft of fiue apples, striped in rose or swéet water, and cloues sticked in the apples, put therto Camfiri, and make these in an Ointment, and annoint thy face, it maketh the face faire, smooth, and without spots. Also to cure the stopping of bloud, ye commeth out of the stomacke, drinke Goats bloud, Ges. in fol. 317. Of Eruca. cap. 47. ERuca, the Malshrag is a worme with many féet,Caterpil¦ler some∣time takē for the canker vvorme, which hath also many feete. & bréedeth in cole leaues and in vine leaues, and fretteth and gnaw∣eth twigges, branches, fruit, and flow∣ers, and hath that name Eruca of E∣rodendo, gnawing, for hée gnaweth
leaues of trées and of hearbes,Called also a Palmer. as Isidore sayth, libro. 12. Thereof Plautus maketh mention and sayeth, that this euill beast and wicked is enimye to the vine leafe, and wrappeth himselfe in the vine leafe and cleaueth thereto, and flieth not away hether and thether, and as a flie doth that is halfe fedde, and leaueth the leaues, but this Malshragge abideth vppon twigges and leaues, and wasteth them all with gnawing and biting, and is slow in crée∣ping. Huc vsque Isidorus li. 12. Libro. 8. Plinius sayeth, that the Malshragge is rough, as it were hairie. For in crops of trées, when hée hath gnawen the branch, and destroyed the greines therof, he wea∣ueth certeine webs of his owne guts, as the Spinner doth, & wrappeth himselfe in those webbes, and kéepeth his shrewd Semen all the winter long. And hée lay∣eth certeine egges, of the which commeth other broode of that kinde in springing time when trées bourgen, & by multitude of them, trees be grieued & lose their fruit, & so doth Iuie & tender hearbes. And the Malshrag is a soft worme & full of mat∣ter, distinguished with diuerse coulours, shining as a Starre by night. And hath many coulours and foule shaped by day. And is not without some pestilentiall venime, for when he creepeth vppon an hotte member of a man, hee scaldeth the skinne, and maketh whelkes arise, and chaungeth his shape,The silke vvorme. as Bombax doeth that maketh silke, and this Eruca loueth the shape of a flyeng Worme, for hée ta∣keth thin wings and broade, and flyeth vp hether and thether fréely in the aire, & as many coulours as he had first in the body, so many diuersities he sheweth in priuie winges, and such a flieng worme is called Papilio. And Isidore sayth, libro 12.Butter∣flyes. Papiliones bée called small Fowles, and bée most in fruit, as apples, and brée∣deth therein Wormes that come of their stinking filth, as Isidore sayeth. For of Malshrags commeth and bréedeth But∣terflyes, and of the durt of Butterflyes left vppon leaues bréedeth & commeth a∣gaine Malshrgges, & doth lesse harme in gnawing & fretting when he flyeth, then when he créepeth. And Papias sayth, that Butterflyes bée small flyeng Flyes, that come by night when lyght is kindeled in Candles,The Flie called a millers thombe, & gnats, whereof are di∣uers sorts and labour to quench the lyght of the Candles, and so they be burnt in the fire of the candles, & sometime when they labor to destroy light of other beasts, they are punished and hurt in their own bodyes. De Faunis & Satiris. ca. 48. CErteine beastes bée called Fauni and Satiri also, and be meruaylous beasts wonderouslye shapen, hauing the lyke∣nesse and also shape of mankinde, but they bée not full perfect of reason of man∣kinde, nor indued perfectly with natural wit. And so they be not taught to speake by craft nor by kinde, but they haue bea∣stiall wit, & be stubburne and cruell with beastiall appetite, & such beasts be full le∣cherous, insomuch that they slay women in the déede of lecherie, if they take them walking in woods, and be called Satiri, for they may not haue inough of leche∣ry, as Isid. saith, and though such beasts vse not reason of mankinde, yet they bée like to mankinde in voice and in manye déeds, as Isi. saith, li. 11. de Protentis. And there he sayth, that Satiri be somewhat like men, & haue crooked noses, & hornes in the forehead, and like to Goats in their feete. Saint Anthony saw such a one in the wildernesse, as it is said, & he of ked what he was, and he answered Antho∣nie, & said, I am deadly, and one of them that dwelleth in wildernesse: and misbe∣léeued nations deceiued by diuers errors worship such beasts that bée called Fau∣ni, Satiri, and Incubi. Satyri be called Fauni and Fatui also, & some thinke, that they be wilde men, as Isidore sayeth in eodem cap. and these wonderfull beasts be diuerse, for some of them be called Ce∣nophali, for they haue heads as hounds, and séeme by the working beasts rather then men, and some be called Ciclopes, and haue that name, for one of them hath but one eie, and that in the middle of the forehead, and some be all headlesse and noselesse, & their eien be in the shoulders, and some haue plaine faces without nose∣thrilles, and the neather lippes of them stretch so, that they heele therewith their
faces when they be in the heate of the Sun, & some of them haue closed mouths in their breasts onely one hole, & breath and sucke as it were with pipes and veines, & these be accounted tonguelesse, and vse signes and becks in steed of spea∣king. Also in Scithia bée some with so great and large eares, that they spreade theyr eares and couer all their bodyes with them. And these be called Panchi∣os, Pan is Gréeke, and is to vnderstande all. And an eare is called Ochi in gréeke, and some be in Aethiopia, and goe stou∣ping looking to the ground - warde as beasts, and may not reare themselues vp∣right, and these be called Arabice, & other be in Aethiopia, and each of them haue onely one foote so great and large, yt they shadow themselues with the foote when they lye gaping on ye grounde in strong heat of the Sun, and yet they be so swift yt they be likned to hounds in swiftnesse of running, & therfore among the Gréeks they be called Synodopes. Also some haue the soles of theyr féet turned back∣ward behinde the legges, and in each foot 8. toes, and such goe about and stare in the desarts of Libia. Also; in Scithia bée beasts with shape of men and féet of hor∣ses, and such wonderfull beasts be called Lamine among many men, as Paschasi∣us sayth super Trenos. Isidore reckoneth many other such beasts wonderfully sha∣pen, lib. 11. and hée gathereth and taketh all of Plinius libro. 6. &. 7. and also of Solinus. (Additiō.Fauni were named of the Poets, Rusticall Gods, and monstrous beasts, lyke vnto men, and Fanesij, people in the North part of the world, whose eares be so great, that with them they couer all theyr bodies.) Of Femina. cap. 49. THe female is called Femina, and hath that same name of Femur, that is to vnderstand, the thighs. For in these parts betwéene the thighes is distinction and great diuersitie betwéene the male and also the female. And also this name com∣meth of Fos, that is firie, for the female hath firye vertue, whereby she is vehe∣mently moued to loue: In all kinde of beasts, the female is more feruently desi∣rous of loue then the male, as Isidore sayth, libro. 6. And Aristotle telleth ge∣nerall propertyes of the same female, li∣bro. 8. and saith, that the females be more féeble then the males, except the Beare & the Leoparde, for their females be more hardy & strong then the males, & females be more light to learne, and to be taught then ye males be, & more busie about their brood & young, and more mild. Looke be∣fore more heereof libr. 6. cap. 1. de puella, for there thou shalt finde much of this matter. And generally the female is more wrathfull then the male, and fighteth therfore soone against the male. And li. 8. Aristotle setteth an ensample of Foca, for that beast dwelleth and bideth alway in one place, and the male striueth with the female, vntill the one of them slaieth that other, & the female is lesse steadfast with lesse true to her owne male, then o∣therwise. And Aristotle setteth ensample of Sepia, for when the female is smitten, the male helpeth and succoureth her. But when the male is smitten, the female chaseth him. Also libro. 5. Aristotle say∣eth, that in gendering of broode the fe∣male is as it were matter, and the male is forme & shape, and of both commeth Semen, and of medling thereof commeth the creature: & therefore I say, that male and female bée as it were principall of generation. And the male is a forme and a shape, and the female is matter. Ther∣fore it is giuen and graunted to ye male to get and gender another, & the female gendereth and conceiueth of another then her selfe. Also generally ye female is more vnstedfast in kinde, and more changeable then the male, and that commeth of fée∣ble heat and of strong cold humour that is more plenty in the female then in the male, & therefore in women, and also in some foure footed beasts is menstrual su∣perfluity, as hée saith, but in one kinde of beasts the female hath that euill, so much and so oft as the woman. Of these con∣ditions and other of females good & euil, looke before li. 6. (*Women be weak, yet iracundeus: cold, yet more lecherous: men are more strōg,
no lesse vicious, more hot, néere to phren∣sie, betwixt both, no greater amitye, and in both wanteth not superfluitie. Ves∣per in the defence of nature & generatiō.) Of Fetante. cap. 50. IN all kinde of beasts those that gen∣der or go with brood, is called Fetans or Parentes, & so Fetans, fetantis, & pecus, dis, haue one manner meaning, & so it is sayd in holy writ, De post fetantes acci∣pit cum. And so this Fetans hath a pro∣per member, in the which he conceiueth & nourisheth, & beareth the brood yt is cal∣led Fetus, and bringeth it forth into this world and to dispose & bring forth ye brood, reuolutions & going about of ye ouer cir∣cles of heauen, influence of stars worketh & helpeth, as Arist. sayth, lib. 18. in fine. Kindly, he sayth, the tearme and time of generation compleat shal be by reuoluti∣ons & passing about of stars. Of this pro∣ces & matter, looke before libro. 6. cap. de Muliere parente, &c. Of Fetu. cap. 51. FRuit, brood, and birth of the wombe of the woman, and of each other female beast is called Fetus, and declined Fetus, tus, tui, and is properlye called Fetus while he is in the wombe, in the which it is susteined and nourished, and brought to perfect shape of lims and to lyfe. And so Isidore sayth, libro. 12. that it is called Fetus, for it is yet nourished and succou∣red in the wombe and in the bagge, in the which the childe is in in the mother, and commeth out with the childe, when it is borne, and conteyneth him. And is called Secundina, and hath that name as it were the second mother, for that is in the mother, and the childe is therein, and followeth the child when it is borne, and the mother dyeth, if it it happen in anye wise, that this bagge Secundina abideth within, & cōmeth not out with the child. And of Fetus, females that conceiue and vse to boare children and broode, haue the name, and be called Fetose, as it were oft ful of Fetus, going with child, or with broode, as Isid. sayth. Of the same wombe Fetus be diuerse, and namelye in Sexus, that is by diuersitie of male & female, but in those in the which kind goeth out of kinde, as in Hermophroditus, for in such a one is found both Sexus,Both kindes in one male & female of anye sexe. male and female, but alwaye vnperfect, as Isidore saith, li. 12. Of Fetus and broode, looke be∣fore, lib. 16. There is treated de homni∣bus generatione. Of Ficario. cap. 52. IN one signification Ficarius is he that gathereth & selleth figges, and in ano∣ther signification, Ficarius is taken for a wild man yt liueth by figges. And so it is taken in Ier. where it is said in this ma∣ner, Dragons shal dwell with nice Fica∣rijs. There the Glose saith, yt it is to bée vnderstood with mad men. And yet in a∣nother signification Fatui ficarij be cal∣led Fauni & Satiri, that dwell betweene wilde figge trées and other trées, and bee hairy men, & such be called Onocentauri, and other beasts wonderfully shapen, of whom Isaac speaketh, li. 14. And Isidore speaketh of them, li. 9. cap. de Protentis. looke before in the same booke de faunis. And they be called so nice figge gatherers and beastly madde men, for though they be wonderfully shapen, yet they accord in some things in shape with mankind, & in other things with other beasts, & passe out of the shape of mankind. Such beasts be called Fatui Ficarij, as it fareth in Apis, Lamijs, & Sirenis, & Meremaidens, & other such be Ficarij, for they haue liuing by fruit, as the wild men hath, & neuerthe∣les they be fooles, for they lack vse of re∣son, & therefore the letter of the old booke is allowed, yt sayth in this manner, Cum satuis sicarijs, for Sicarij be certain guil∣full theeues, that slew men vnware with short Swoords, as Aioth that slew Eg∣lon the king, which that was most fatte, with a short Swoorde that hung in the right side, and such a Swoorde is called Sica, as it is sayde Iudicum. 3. Such théeues be not now in Babylon that is destroyed, and is no place for men to dwel in, but for beasts wonderfully sha∣pen, as Hierome sayth super Esay. But it might be said, that Ficarij be Si∣carij,
for a figge is called Sica in Gréeke, and Ficus in Latine, and héereby the first exposition should abide: but by the mea∣ning and vnderstanding of Latines such men wonderfully shapen be more vere∣ly called Ficarij, then Sicarij, as it is said before, where it is spoken and shewed de Faunis & Satiris. (Additiō.A Chapter of small substance.) De Formica. cap. 53. THE Ant is called Formica, and hath that name, as it were bearing crums and graines of corne. Héere Ouid speak∣eth and sayth. Grande opus exiguo formicas ore ge∣rentes. It is a great worke to sée the Antes beare great graines in little mouths. Or else it hath ye name Formica, as it were bearing crums or graines of corne that they gather, and biteth of the ende of the graines for they should not grow, sleight and businesse of them is much, for they make prouision and gather store agaynst time that commeth: for in Summer they gather store, by the which they may liue in Winter, as Isidore saith, libro. 12. and they gather wheat, & way not of Barly, and when the Wheate is wet, that they gather to a heape: then the Ants doe all the wheat out into the Sun, that it may be dried againe. And it is sayde, that in Aethiopia be Ants of the greatnesse of a bigge Dog, but not in shape as dogges: and diggeth vp golden grauell with their féete, & kéepe it that it be not taken away. And pursueth anone to the death them that take it away, as Isidor, sayth, li. 12. cap. 1. de Minimis animalibus. Also So∣linus speaketh of Ants and sayth: that Antes bée full lyttle, and bée neuertheles more slie & busie then many great beasts: For they make purueyaunce wisely for themselues, whereby they maye lyue in time to come afterward. And they lyue in company, and make heapes and hills, in whom they inhabit themselues in: and gather gréenes busily and properly, & put them in their inner closets full waxilye, that they be not taken away with foules, nor spilt and shed with winde nor with weather, and maketh them priuy wayes euen & straight to the houses that they dwell in, and the more wiser Ants stand in those waies, for the vnwiser should not goe out of the waye, and when they bée ouerset in theyr houses to be taken, then shed they venimous water vppon men:they haue stings as ye Bee, but very smal vvhere∣with they sting. And therefore it is commonly sayd, yt hée pisieth. And that water burneth his hand that it toucheth, and bréedeth therin itch∣ing and smarting: For they haue that water in stéed of weapon and armour. Huc vsque Solinus, libr. 11. capitulo. 31. Plinius sayeth, that Antes communeth their trauaile each to other, and séeke and gather theyr owne meate: But Bées bée better then Antes, for Bées make good meate and profitable, and gather and doe it together. The Ants gather great bur∣thens, which be more greater then theyr owne bodyes. And so they recouer re∣ward of littlenesse of bodye, in the great∣nesse of vertue, and beare theyr charge & burthen with biting. And if it be so great, that he may not beare it in his mouth, then he tourneth him and busieth him to drawe it forth with his hinder féete: They take greate charge of their com∣mon profite, and haue therefore season and winde. And they shale the graines, that they do togethers, because they shuld not growe agayne & waxe gréene corne: And gather busily graines that be shed, that they bée not lost: and in entering they breake the greater grains, that they maye the more easilye bring them into their place of purueyaunce. And they worke by night in the full of the Moone, and cease of worke in the chaunge of the Moone. And because they bring and fetch theyr meate out of diuerse places, they haue certaine time giuen to thē to know∣ledge each to other, and then is most gathering of them and meeting. And among them when they meete, is as it were a manner treating and talking and busie as king and spyeng. And they come agayne by wayes that they treade, and choose such wayes yt bée among stones. And Antes be small and straight about the wombe, as though they were girde in the middle: and growe and haue Winges at last as it were Flyes, and
chaunge so and tourne into small Vola∣tiles, dyng wonnes. Also capitulo. 32. It is sayde, that in Indie bée right great Antes with hornes, that kéepe golde and precious stones with wonderfull coue∣tousnesse and desire, but the Indians stele them in Summer time, when the Antes bée hidde in hilles for stronge burning heate, but the Antes flye after them bu∣silye, which take awaye the golde: and wounde them after, though they flye the Antes riding on swift Camells, in them is so wicked fiercenesse for loue in gold. Aristotle libro. 8. speaketh of Antes, and sayth, That in Antes is wit of smelling right as in Bées. And the Ant hateth all stinking things. And so if a man be∣smoketh the house of the Ant with brim∣stone, or with wilde Origanum, or with an Hartes horne burnt, the Antes will forsake & leaue their houses: and though the Antes liue in companye, and bée at∣tendaunt each to other, yet haue they no king, as Aristotle sayth, libro. 1. and Sa∣lomon sayth the same, Prouerb. 6. The Ant hath no Duke nor commaunder. There the Glose sayeth, of such a lyttle beast without Prince, and by reasonable leading of kinde, maketh purueyaunce for time that is comming: much more thou that art made to the Image of God, and called for to sée his blisse, and art hol∣pen with so great mystery, and hast our Lorde Duke and leader. Therefore thou shouldest héere gather fruit, by the which thou mightest liue afterwarde in blisse. Looke the Glose of the wit and businesse of Antes. That Authours praise heere be∣fore, Aristotle alloweth it, libro. 8. where hée sayth, that the working of Antes is knowen to them that take héede: For Antes goe alway by one waye, and laye downe theyr meate, and trauayle also by night in the full of the Moone: But Ants haue some properties yt be not full good, for they hurt and grieue rootes of trées, by whom they make their neastes: and de∣file theyr handes that touch them, and stye vp to the toppes of trées, and gnawe and defile burgenings, flowres, twigges, and braunches thereof. And bite and eate the fruit, and make hoales therein. And noy and grieue men, but they helpe Beares. For Plinius saith, libro. 8. That when Beares be sicke, they séeke Antes and denour them and heale themselues in that wise. But in some cause Ants egges bée medicinable. Looke in the last booke de Ouis. (Additiō.Formica, an Emmet, Ampt, & Pis∣mere, whereof some be red, & other black, and also in some soiles are bigger found, then in low places.) De Formicaleone. cap. 54. FOrmicaleon, that beast hath ye name of Formica, and of Leo, for as Isi∣dore sayth, libro. 12. It is a beast with the lykenesse of an Ant, and of a Lyon, and is a little beast, and enimy to Ants: for he cōmeth thée uishly into their place of purueiance, and eateth their corne, and so by wasting of theyr meate he is cause why the simple Antes dye néedes at last: and this Formicaleon is eaten of other beasts, as Antes bée, and may not defend himselfe by his owne strength, & is a ma∣ner kinde of Spider. Looke before de A∣ranea in littera A. De Fuco. cap. 55. FVcus, ci, is the name of a Drane,A Drane or Dore. that is more then a common Bée, and lesse then an Hornet, and hath that name Fu∣cus, for he eateth the trauaile of other, as it were Fagus that commeth of Fagin, that is, eate, for hée eateth that yt hée tra∣uaileth not for, for he maketh no honny, but he eateth the honnie of other Bées. Héereof speaketh Virgil and saith. Ignauum fucus pecus a presepibus arcet. That is, the Drane driueth towarde beasts, & chaseth them from cribs. So sai∣eth Isi. li. 12. ca. 12. Of these dranes or bées Plinius speaketh li. 11. ca. 12. & saith, that in Bée hiues is the more plenty of hony because of company of such Dranes: and such Dranes be without sting, as it were vnperfect Bees, and be seruauntes to the very Bees: and very Bées com∣maundeth them to worke, and stingeth, & punisheth without pity the Dranes that be slow in working, and also in breding.
For it is certaine yt the more multitude is of such Dranes, the more swarmes be bred, and when honnie beginneth to bée ripe, they driue thē away from the honie, and punisheth them and chaseth: and bée not séene but in springing time. And such Dranes make roial habitations & large, & disseuered to the masters and comman∣ders of Bées, and hleth them, & maketh them séemely passing other, & such dwel∣ling places and cells be all sire cornered. And though the Dranes susteine so ma∣ny trauailes, yet vnneth they be suffered to eate of the hony, but as much as they eate, they eat it by stelth, vt dicit Plini. De Grife. cap. 56. GRifes the Gripe, is a beast with wings, & is foure footed, and bréedeth in the mountaines Yperboreis, & is lyke to the Lyon in all the parts of the body, & to the Eagle onely in the head & wings, and is strong enimy to the horse: as Hu∣gution saith, he taketh vp the horse and the man armed, as the Glose saith super Deut. 14. And Gripes kéepe the moun∣taines, in the which he Gemmis & preci∣ous stones, as Smaragdus and Iaspis, and suffer them not to be taken from thence, as Isi. saith, li. 14. ca. 3. And in some coun∣tries in Scithia is plenty of gold and of precious stones: but for great gripes men dare not come thether openly, but seld for fiercenesse of Gripes: There is best Sma∣ragdus & Christall: & the Gripe hath so great clawes & so large, that of them bée made cups that bée set vppon boordes of kings. (Additiō.There are common Gripers in England, that deuoure more men by vsu∣ry, then al the Gripes in India, the fetch∣ers of golde.) De Glire. cap. 57. GLires bée lyttle beastes, as it were great Mice and haue that name Gli∣res, for sléepe make them fat. And Glis∣cefe is for  ware, as Isidore sayeth, and hée sléepeth all the Winter vnmoue∣able, and telleth as though he were dead, and quickneth again in Summer time, as he sayth, libro. 8. cap. 57. Plinius spea∣keth of these Glires, and sayth, that they dwell gladly in woods, and loue their fel∣lowes that they know, and striue & fight against other, & they loue their sires with great mildnesse & pitie, and féed and serue them in their age. (Additiō.It is reported by Andrew The∣ued, that in the Indies are Battes verye great: and by L. Vertomannus, that hée saw Bats bigger then Eagles, fierce and venimous.) De Grillu. cap. 58. GRillos is a little beast, as Cirogril∣lus is, feeble and mightlesse and thée∣uish, and venimous with prickes and pikes, and is lesser then an Irchin, as the Glose sayeth, super Leuiticum. 40. And hath that name of the sound of his voyce, as Isidore sayeth, libro. 12. This beast goeth backewarde, and saweth and dig∣geth the Earth, and worketh by nyght, and is hunted with an Ampt ryed with an haire, and throwen into his den: and the pouder is first blowen a waye, least the Ampt hide her selfe therein, and so he is drawne to loue of the Ampt, as Isi∣sidore sayth. De Hinnulo. ca. 59. THE Hart Calfe is called Hinnulus, and hath name Hinnulus, of Innu∣endo, becking, and nodding, for he is hid by beckes and signes of the Hinde, as I∣dore sayth, libro. 12. and is a féeble beast and loth to fight, as Dmula is, and hée is most sharpe of sight, and swifte of course and of running, and the Hinde hi∣deth him in caues and dens, and in pla∣ces that bée shadowye, and teacheth him to start and to leape ouer briers, thorns, and bushes, as Plinius sayeth, libro. 8. cap. de Ceruis. Looke before in littera C. His flesh is tender and good to defie, for hée is oft moouing and stirring aboute, as Constantine sayth, & Isaac in Dietis. And if he be gelded ere his hornes grow, his flesh is the better and the more tem∣perate in drinesse and in heat, as he saith, And if he be gelded while he hath horns,
then he chaungeth neuer his Hornes, as Aristotle sayth libro. 8. and Plinius. Al∣so the Hart Calfe is contrary to the ser∣pents in a wonderfull wise, for he yt is a∣nointed with his sewet or wt his bloud, shall not be touched of any Serpent that day, as Plinius sayth, lib. 38. And his ru∣ening is chiefe medicine in venims, as he sayth. De Hirco. cap. 60. THE Goat bucke is called Hircus, & is a lecherous beast, alwaye seruent to the déede of lechery, as Isid. saith libr. 12. And his eyen looke thwart ouer to le∣chery ward, & hath that name therefore: for Hirci be the corners of the eien, as he sayeth: his kinde is most hot, insomuch that his hot bloud softeneth and carueth the harde Adamant stone, that neyther fire nor yron may ouercome, as it is said there. This Goate bucke is called also Caper, and hath that name of Capio, to take, for bée laboureth to take croppes of trées: And the Goate bucke beginneth to bée mooued to gender after one yeare, as Aristotle sayth, li. 6. and the male that is first gendered, is more great and more fat then those that bée gendered after∣ward. Also libro. 7. he sayth, that some Goate Bucks haue notable hugenesse in eares, as some Rammes haue in theyr tailes. For some haue in bredth more thē the breadth of the hound. And the Goate bucke hath a long beard & a small taile, & long downe to the earth, & many & strong and great hornes, and rough Wooll and hard, with stinking smell, and hath much fatnesse, and namelye within about the reines, and then he dyeth lightly, excepte the fatnesse bée with-drawen. And the more fat he is, the lesse Semen hée hath, and gendereth the lesse, a hée sayth, lib. 8. And then hee doeth the déede of gene∣ration but seldome. And therefore wise heardes slayeth them, ere they doe the déede of generation, or else suffer them to bée leane, and maketh them bée leane, and though hée séeme leane without, yet sometime he is full fat within, and it oft happeneth that the Goat bucke is won∣derfullye shapen, as Aristotle sayeth, li∣bro. 8. for sometime it happened that a Goate Bucke was séene with hornes in the legges, and that was wonderfull to sée. And among all flesh of beasts, flesh of Goate Buckes is worst, hardest, and worst to defie, as Isaac sayeth in Dietis, and namely when the Goat buck is right olde. The skinne of the olde Goat bucke is better and more stronger then the young: but the odour and the smell is more, and the flesh is worst, and if hée bée gelded, his fleshe is the more moyst and tender, and lesse harde to defie, and lesse euill to be eaten. Also libro. 28. Plinius sayth, that Democritus sayeth, that the Goate Bucke is neuer without the Fea∣uers. And the bloud of a Goat buck, that is sedde with Iuie, breaketh wonderfully the stone both in the bledder and in the reines; as he saith: and his horne burnt, feareth & chaseth away Serpents, & hea∣leth feauers & cankers, & fretteth awaye & cleanseth Polipus, superfluitye of flesh in the nose. The liuer of the Goat bucke helpeth agaynst biting of the madde houndes. His gall cléereth the sight, and fretteth awaye the webbes of the cyen: His vrine meddeled with his gal helpeth leprous men, and doth awaye seales and scabs. (Additiō.Diuerse authors affirme, that the hot bloud of a Goat bucke, dissolueth a flint¦stone into softnesse.) De Hiena. cap. 61. HIena is a cruell beast lyke to the Woulfe in deuouring and gluttony, and réeseth on dead men, and taketh their sarcasse out of the earth and deuoureth thē. And therfore hath ye name Hiena, of Niando, for desire he réeseth to his praye with open mouth and voyce. It is his kinde to chaunge Sexus, for he is nowe found male and now female, and is ther∣fore an vncleane beast, as Isidore sayth, and commeth to houses by night, and sei∣neth mannes voyce as hée maye, for men should thinke that it is a man. Libro. 8. cap. 30. Plinius speaketh of this Beast, and sayth, that in Hiena is eyther kinde, for it is sayd, he is one yéere male ano∣ther yéere female. And she bringeth furth∣her
broode without male, as the common people suppose. And Aristotle denieth that. And hath the necke of the adder Vi∣pera, and the ridge of an Elephaunt, and may not bend but if he beare all the bo∣dy about. And heards tel that among sta∣bles be seyneth speach of mankinde, and calleth some man by his owne name, & renteth him when he hath him without, and he feineth oft the name of some man, for to make bounds run out, that he may take & eat them: And this beast hath end∣lesse many manners & diuerse colours in the eyen, & full moueable eyen & vnsted∣fast, and his shadowe maketh houndes leaue backing & be still, if he come neere them: and if this beast Hiena goeth thrice about anye beast, that beast shall stint within his steps. And this beast gende∣reth with a Lyonesse of Aethiopia, and gendereth on her a beast that is most cruell, & followeth the voice of men & of tame beasts, & hath many rowes of téeth in euery side of the mouth. In Affrica be many Hienas, & manye wilde Asses and Fibres, & many other beasts wonderfully shapen. As Plinius sayth, this beast Hie∣na bréedeth a stone that is called Hiena: and what man that beareth it vnder his tongue, he shal by vertue of that stone de∣uine and tell what shall befall, as Soly∣nus sayth.When he can get ye stone. Also libr. 28. Plinius sayth, that Hiena hateth the Pantera. And it is sayd, that if both theyr skinnes bee han∣ged togethers, the haire of the Panthe∣res skinne shall fall awaye. This beast Hyena flyeth the hunter, and draweth to∣warde the right side, to occupy the trace of the man that goeth before: and if hée commeth not after, he telleth that he go∣eth out of his wit, or els the man falleth down of his horse: and if he turne against the Hiena, ye beast is soone taken, as Ma∣gitians tell. Also as he sayth, this beasts gall is full medicinall, and helpeth most against dimnesse of eien: and also witches vse the heart of this beast and the licour in many witchcrafts, as it is sayd there. And Aristo. li. 7. sayth, that the quantity of Hiena is as the quantity of a Wolfe, & in his neck is haire, as in the necke of an horse, & hath haire vpon all the length of the ridge, and bequileth and deceiueth men, & rauisheth and stealeth them, and taketh houndes and deuoureth them, as gladly as men, and diggeth burialls and graues, & eateth the flesh of dead bodyes that be in them. (Additiō.Of this Hyena Plinie maketh men∣tion in his 8. booke. chap. 30. A beast lyke a Woulfe, with a mane like an Horse, which comming in the night vnto shep∣heards houses, will counterfeit mannes voyce, & by harkning learne ones name, and call him forth to the end to deuoure him. Gesner is doubtfull whether there be any such beast, yet hath he set downe, from other Authors.) Of Hiricio. cap. 62.Echino. THe Irchin is called Hiricus,Hedghoy and is a beast couered with pricks, hard and sharpe, and his skinne is cloased about with pikes and prickes, and hée cloaseth himselfe therwith, and defendeth himselfe therewith all about, for anone as he kno∣weth and féeleth that anye thing com∣meth after him, he areareth vp the pricks and wrappeth him therein as a clew, as it were within his armour: and is a beast of purueyaunce: For he climbeth vpon a vine or on an apple trée, & shaketh downe grapes and Apples. And when they bée feld, he walloweth on them, & sticketh his pricks in thē, aud so beareth meat to his young in that manner wise, as Isi. saith, li. 12. And for roughnesse & sharpnesse of the pricks & pikes, he is called Hirena∣cius or Hiricius, and hath as Aristotle saith, li. 1. pikes in stéed of haire: and pis héeleth him as the haire of other beasts, and be his weapon and armour: for with them he stingeth & pricketh and hurteth him that taketh or toucheth him. Also li. 3. Aristotle saith, yt some Irchins dwell in woods, & some in other places in land, & some in water, & lay many egs that be not eaten. And Irchins haue but lyttle flesh, and this is the propertye of him, hée hath beneath head and mouth, and outpassing of superfluitye aboue, for hée taketh his meate beaneth, and hath therefore an hoale in the other side, and the superfluity is in the ridge aboue, and the Irchin hath fiue téeth within
the mouth, and hath amonge the téeth fleshy parts in stéed of the tongue: & his wombe is departed in fiue parts, & therin is much superfluitie. And there is a man∣ner kind of Irchins with a white shell & white pikes, and layeth many egges. Also the Irchin hath feeble hearing, more fee∣ble then other beasts with hard shells, and that goe on foure féete. Also libro. 5. wilde Irchins gender standing, with back turned to backe: For in that part, in yt which superfluitie passeth out, there they touch themselues in generation. Al∣so there li. 8. it is said, yt often it séemeth, that in Irchins is wit and knowing of cōming of winds, North or South: for he maketh a den in the ground, when he is ware that such windes come. And so sometime was one in Constantinople, yt had an Irchin, and knew & warned ther∣by, that windes shoulde come, & of what side, and none of his neighbours wist whereby he had such knowledge & war∣ning. Also li. 12. he sayth, that the Irchin hath also as many wombes as téeth, and in these wombes bréedeth fiue egges bet∣ter then other, and the egges of some bee much and greate, and some be lesse: for some bée better to séething and defieng then other. Also li. 19. Irchins haue a lit∣tle body and many pikes, that, occupye more place then the bodye, and the cause of many great prickes, & the littlenesse of the body is, for féeding of the bodye pas∣seth into nourishing and growing of pikes, because of scarcity of heat, & for the meat is not well defied, & therfore in his bodye breedeth much superfluity, & that superfluity passeth into nourishing & fee∣ding of prickes. Huc vsque Arist. (Additiō.Histrix, is the Porcapine, like vnto the Hedghog, but more stronger armed with prickes, and bigger bodyed.) Of Herinacio. cap. 63. The common HedghogHErinacius is that same Cirogril∣lus, & is a little beast with prickes, and dwelleth in dens, and is lyke to the Irchin, but he is accounted more then he. Lib. 8. cap. 38. Plinius speaketh of him and sayth, that hée walloweth vppon ap∣ples, as the Irchin doeth, which sticke thereon his prickes, and he beareth them into hallownesse of trées. And beside the Apples that he beareth on his backe, al∣way he beareth one in his mouth: & when he is hunted, he cloaseth him rounde as a hall, for nothing should him touch for his pikes and prickes, and when he tru∣steth not to scape, then hée casteth from him pissing most venimous, & that pisse grieueth himselfe first, if it cōmeth in any wise on his back, or on his pricks, for by such moisture of that pisse, his back smar∣teth and grieueth, & also the prickes of his backe fall away. Therfore he know∣eth not, yt he is thereby the sooner taken, by the which hée casteth for to grieue other: Therefore there is a craft to hunt such a little beast, when his vrine is all spent and wasted, for then his backe is hurt or broken, and his pricks and pikes be loose and fall, and he may not flie, for be knoweth by the smell kindlye, in his vrine is strength of venim hid, & spareth therfore his vrine. For he doth not away nor sheddeth his venim, ere the last néede of taking cōpell him thereto. And though this beast be little, yet when he dreadeth he constraineth himselfe so fast, that vn∣neth he may be opened and streighted, sa∣uing the skinne. Therofore he is put in hot water, and so he openeth himselfe, as it were sodeinly, when hée seeleth the heate: And he is bounte and hanged vp by the hinder feete, and is so hanged and slayne with hunger, otherwise hée maye not be slaine in good manner, to haue good and profite of his féeble skinne, & though the little body of the beast be not full ne∣cessary to vse of mankinde, yet his skin yt is so picked is needfull to men, that if there were no pikes and pricks, softnesse of flesh in beasts were idle to mankinde. For with such a beasts skinnes, clothes be cleansed & picked. And it is said, that this beast Herinacius hath this property, that after yt he is charged with Grapes or with apples, if any apple or grape fall out of his pikes in any maner wise, then for indignation he throweth away of his backe all the other deale, and oft turneth agayne to the trée to charge him agayne with new charge.
¶Of Iuuenca. cap. 64. IVuenca or Iuuencus, is a young Stéere or Bullocke that is able to be yoaked to draw at plough, as Isido. saith: or els it hath that name Iuuen∣cus, for in old time such a young Stéere was offered to Iupiter, and not a Bull, as he sayth: and is a lecherous Beast, because of youth, & is therefore ouerset with a strong yoke to make him easie & tame, and is pricked with a pricke, and compelled to follow euen and foreright, the steps and fores of Dren. Iuuenca, such a young Stéere, is ofte able to the coupling and ioyning of Bulles, for in that age such a Stéere is ioyned to the Bull to drawe. The young Cowe is made fat in léese and in pasture, to bée slayne of a Batcher, for diuers vse of mankinde. Hir flesh is more drye and more sad, than ye flesh of sucking calues, for she is lōger without féeding of milk, and is more tender, and more hot and moyst than the flesh of an olde Oxe, or of an olde Cow: for yet she is néerer the age of sucking, than those that are of more age, as it sayd in Dietis. ¶Of Leone. cap. 65. LEon in Gréeke, is called Leo in La∣tine, a King in English, and is cal∣led Leo, king, for he is king & Prince of all beasts, as Isid. sayth li. 12. And some Lions are short with crispe haire and maane, and these Lions fight not: and some Lions haue simple haire of mane, & those Lions haue sharp & fierce harts, & by their forheads and tailes their ver∣tue is known in the best, and their sted∣fastnes in ye head. And when they be be∣set with hunters, then they beholde the earth, for to dread the lesse the hunters, and their gins, that do beset them about, & he dredeth noyse & rushing of whéeles, but he dreadeth fire much more: & when they sleepe, their eyen be open, and when they go forth or about, they heale & bide their fores and steps, for hunters should not finde them. And it is supposed, that the Lions whelpe, when he is whelped, sleepeth thrée dayes and thrée nights: & it is sayd that the place of ye couch trem∣bleth and shaketh by roring of the Fa∣ther, that waketh the whelpe that sléepeth. It is the kinde of Lions, not to be wroth with man, but if they be grieued or hurt. Also their mercie is known by many and oft ensamples: for they spare them that lye on the ground, and suffer them to passe homeward that be priso∣ners, and come out of thraldome, and eate not a man, nor slaye him, but in great hunger, Huc vs{que} Isid. li. 12. Li. 8. ca. 17. Plin. speaketh of the Lion & saith, that the Lion is in most gentlenesse and nobilite, when his necke and shoulders be healed with haire and maane, and he that is gendered of the Parde, lacketh that nobilitie. The Lion knoweth by smell, if the Parde gendreth with the Lionnesse, and réeseth against the Lion∣nesse that breaketh spousehood, & punish∣eth hir full sore, except she wash hir in a riuer, and then it is not knowen to the Lion. And when the Lionnesse whelp∣eth, hir wombe is rent with the clawes of hir whelpes, & whelpeth therfore not oft. And Arist. saith as Plin. saith, that the Lionesse whelpeth first fiue whelps, and afterward foure, and so each yeare lesse by one, & mereth barren when she whelpeth one at last: and she whelpeth whelpes euill shapen & small in quanti∣tie of a wesell in ye beginning. And he saith also, ye whelps of vi. monthes maye vneth be whelped, & whelps of 2 mōths, may vneth moue: & the Lion heaueth by his leg when he pisseth, as an hoūd doth, & the vrine that he pisseth, stinketh right foule, and when he eaeth once inough, afterward he is meatlesse, 2. dayes or 3. And if he néedeth to flye when he is ful, he casteth vp his meate into his mouth, and draweth it out with his clawes, to be in that wise the more light to runne and to flye. The Lion liueth most long, and that is knowen by working or wa∣sting of his téeth: and then in age he rée∣seth on a man, for his vertue and might faileth to pursue great beasts & wilde: and then he besiegeth Cities, to ransack and to take men: but when the Lyons be taken, then they be hanged, for other Lyons should dread such maner paine. The olde Lyon réeseth woodly on men,
and onely grunteth on women, and rée∣seth seldome on children but in great hū∣ger. By the tayle the boldnesse & heart of the Lyon is knowen, as the Horse is knowen by the eares: for when the Li∣on is wroth, first he beateth the Carthe with his tayle, and afterwarde, as the wrath increaseth, he smiteth and bea∣teth his owne backe: and out of eache wounde, that the Lyon maketh, with clawe or with téeth, runneth sharp and sower bloud, as Isido. saith. Also in per∣rill the Lyon is most gentle and noble, for when he is pursued with houndes and with hunters, the Lyon lurketh not nor hideth himselfe, but sitteth in fieldes where he may be séene, and arayeth him∣selfe to defence, and runneth out of wood & couert, with swifte running & course, as though he would account vile shame to lurke and to hide himselfe. And he hi∣deth himselfe not for dread that he hath, but he dreadeth himselfe somtime, onely for he would not be dread: and when he pursueth man or beast in lands, then he leapeth when he réeseth on him: and so when he pursueth man or beast, he v∣seth to leape, and so doeth he not when he voydeth & flyeth. When he is woun∣ded, he taketh wonderfull héed, & know∣eth them that smiteth him first, & réeseth on the smiter, though he be in neuer so great a multitude: and if a man shoote at him, the Lyon chaseth him, and thro∣weth him downe, and woundeth him not, nor burieth him. When the Lyon dyeth, he biteth the earth, and teares fall out of his eyen: and when he is sicke, he is healed and holpe with the bloude of an Ape, and he dreadeth greatlye the crowing and the combe of a Cocke: and he is a right kinde beast, and knoweth, and loueth him that doth him good, as it sayde in ensamples, that Plinius setteth there. Huc vsque Plin. li. 8. ca. 12. And li. 2. Arist. speaketh of the Lyon and saith, and Auicen, saith also, that ye Lion hath a necke as it were vnmoueable, and is full grimme, and hath entrailes & bow∣ells as an hound, and moueth alway first with the right foote, and afterward with the lefte foote, as the Camell doth: and hath lyttle marrow in his bones, & his bones be so hard, that by smiting of them togethers, sire springeth out thereof. Al∣so li. 16. the Lyon hath many cleftes in his féete, and gendereth therefore blinde whelpes, as the Hound doth, & the woolfe also: for he hath sawie teeth, and gende∣reth therefore vnperfect whelpes, as hée sayth, and Solinus also, that saith. That the Lyon dredeth, when he séeth or hea∣reth a whelpe beaten. His whelpes are borne blinde, as ye whelpes of all beasts, that haue the féete departed, be whelped vnperfect because of gluttonie. He hi∣deth himselfe in high mountaines, and espieth from thence his pray, and when he séeth his pray, he roareth full lowde, & at the voyce of him other beasts dred & stint sodainly, and  maketh a circle all about them with his taile, and all the beasts dread to passe out ouer the line of the Circle, and the beasts stand astony∣ed and afeard, as it were abiding ye hest and commaundement of theyr King. When the Lyon passeth rough places & hard, he clyncheth in his clawes, and draweth them toward the foote, for them he vseth in stéede of a sword, and hideth them therefore within softe places and fleshie, that they be not hurte, nor made blunt: and he is ashamed to eate alone the pray that he taketh: therefore of his grace of free hart, he leaueth some of his pray, to other beastes that follow him a farre, as he saith: and is so hot of his complection, that he hath alway the fea∣uer quartane, and hath kindly this euill to abate his fiercenesse, and his flesh pas∣seth in heate, and is therefore grieuous to eating, as he saieth, and Plin. libro. 28. And his flesh is good in medicines, in many manner wise, and his greace is contrarie to venimme, so that who so be anoynted therewith, shall not dread that time biting of Serpents, nor créeping wormes. Also his greace medled with Oleo rosaceo, kéepeth and saueth ye skin of the face from wennes and vices, and kéepeth whitenes, and healeth burnings, and swageth swellyng of eyen. His gall medled with water, sharpeneth and cléereth the sight, and helpeth against in∣fecting euills, and against falling euills: his heart taken in meate, destroyeth the
Feauer quartane, Huc vs{que} Plin. li. 28. cap. 8. And the Lion is hunted in this wise: one double caue is made one fast by that other, and in the seconde caue is set a Whitche, that cloaseth full soone, when it is touched: and in the first den and caue is a Lambe set, and the Lyon leapeth therein when he is an hungred. for to take the Lambe. And when he sée∣eth, that he may not breake out of ye den, he is ashamed, that he is beguiled, and would enter into the second den to lurk there, and falleth into it, and it cloaseth anone, as he is in, and letteth him not passe out thereof, but kéepeth him fast therin vntill he be taken out and bound with chaines till he be tame. This tou∣cheth Ier. super Ezech. cap. 19. super il∣lum locum, Miserunt cum in Caue∣am, &c. (Additiō.The Lion among the Hebrewes, as sayeth Dauid Kimht, hath diuers names, according to the degrées of his age. The first name is Gur, the second Kephir, the thirde Arieth, in the fourth Labi, in the last Laisch. Gur, signifieth the whelp of euery beast, yet most com∣monly for excellencies sake, he is put for the Lions whelpe, as Stymnos is amōg ye Gréeks. Kephir, a little elder. Arieth, in the second chapter of Naum the Pro∣phet a Lyon. Labi a Lionesse, Cepha∣rim young Lyons, and Gur a Lyons whelpe, are all contained in one Period. The Lion drinketh seldome and lyttle: the Lyon is sayd of some in watching to shut his eyes, which sléeping he ope∣neth: héere vpon the Auncients did paint vpon their Temple gates a Lion, for a badge or signe. If one sit vpon a Lions skinne, the Emeroydes will goe from him.) ¶De Leena. cap. 66. THe Lionesse is called Leena, and is a right lecherous beast, and loueth al∣waye the déede of lecherie, and is there∣fore more cruell than the Lyon & name∣ly when she hath whelpes: for she put∣teth hir selfe in perill of death for hir whelpes, and for defence of them, shée dredeth not nor spareth the shot of hun∣ters. And she whelpeth moe whelps in the first whelping, then she doeth after∣ward, for by sharpnesse of the clawes of hir whelpes, hir mother is grieued, & hurt, and so from yeare to yeare, shee wexeth barren, as Aristotle saith. And Plinius sayeth in this wise, as Isidore saith lib. 12. Beasts with sharp clawes, may not ofte whelpe, for in them ye mo∣ther is grieued and hurt within by moo∣uing of the whelpes, and therefore the Lionesse may not abide whelping, vntill the perfect complishment of hir young, but she delyuereth hir of hir whelpes, & whelpeth ere hir young be perfect and complete, and is compelled thereto by great ache and sorenesse, and feruent le∣cherie. The Lyonesse meddeleth in le∣cherie with the Parde, but after the déed of lechery with ye Parde, she dredeth the Lion, for ye Lyon knoweth such a fowle medlyng by odor & smell, but if the Ly∣onesse be washed of the spouse breaking in a riuer ere she come to the Lyon, as Plinius saith. When he knoweth that she is guiltie, he punisheth hir anone, & therefore she flyeth anone, and commeth not to hir make, but if she be first wash∣ed. There is a lyttle beast that the Lion and the Lionesse dreadeth wonderfully, and that beast is called Leonzeufones, for that beast beareth a certain venime which slaieth the Lion and the Lionesse. Therefore this sayd beast is taken, and afterward burnt, and the flesh is sprong with the ashes, and layd and set in mée∣ting of wayes, shall slay and destroy the Lions which eate thereof, as Isid, sayth lib. 12. cap. 1. Auicen saith, that the Ly∣on is a beast of great gluttonie, and co∣ueteth and desireth much meate, and is a deuourer of meate therefore without chewing, and casteth vp therefore the meate that he eateth, and eateth it afterwarde, and he eateth right much, so that he is heauie by meate, and fast∣eth afterward by the space of two daies and two nightes, and voydeth not his dirte but once in two daies or in thrée, and his dirte is drye without moysture, and stinketh right fowle, and so doeth his vrine. And also out of his wombe issueth &
commeth an euill smell, when it is cut and opened: and his breath stinketh, & is right infectious and contagious, & in∣fecteth other things, and his biting is deadly and venemous, and namely when he is woode: for the Lyon wexeth wood as the Hound doth, as Arist. sayth & A∣uicen also. And is cruell and wood when he is wroth, and biteth and grieueth him selfe for indignation, when he is wroth, and gnasheth with his téeth, and namely when he hungreth, and spieth and lyeth in awayle, to take beasts, which passe by the waye. He hideth himselfe in preuie caues, and reeseth on beasts vnware, and slayeth them with his téeth & clawes, & breaketh all their members, and eateth them péece meale: & if he see any come against him to take away his pray, then he beclippeth the pray, and grunteth and smiteth the earth with his tayle, and if he commeth nigh him, he lepeth on him, and ouercommeth him, and turneth to the pray. First he drinketh and licketh the bloud of the beast that he slaieth and renteth and haleth the other deale lim meale, and deuoureth and swaloweth it. ¶De Leopardo. ca. 67. LEopardus is a beast most cruell, and is gendered of a Perde and of a Ly∣onesse, as Isi. saith li. 12. For as Plin. sai∣eth, the Lion gendreth with the Perdus, or the Perde with the Lionnesse, and of such gendering commeth vnkinde Per∣des, as of an Horse and of a she Asse, or of a Mare and a male Asse is gendered & Mule. As Isi. saith, the Leopardis a full réesing beast and head strong, and thir∣steth bloud: and the female is more cruell than the male, as Arist. saith, and hath diuers colours, as the Parde hath, and pursueth his pray starting and lea∣ping, and not running: and if he taketh not his praye in the third leape or in the fourth, then he stinteth for indignatiō, & goeth backward, as though he wer ouer come, and is lyke to a Lyon in bodye, tayle and féete, but in shape of the head, he is lyke to the Parde. And he is lesse in body than the Lyon, and therefore he dreadeth the Lyon, and maketh a caue vnder the earth with double entering, one by which he goeth in, and another, by which he goeth out: and that caue is full wide and large in either entring, & more narrow and straight in the mid∣dle, and so when the Lyon commeth, he flyeth and falleth sodainlye into the caue, and the Lyon pursueth him with a great réese, & entereth also into the caue, and thinketh there to haue the masterie of the Leopard, but for greatnesse of his body, he may not passe fréely by the mid∣dle of the den, which is full straight: and when the Leopard knoweth that ye Ly∣on is so let and helde in ye straight place, he goeth out of the den forward, & com∣meth againe into the denne in the other side behinde the Lion, and réeseth on him behinde with biting and with clawes: and so the Leopard hath ofte in ye wise, the masterie of the Lyon by crafte, and not by strength, & so the lesse beast hath ofte the masterie of the strong beast, by deceipt and guyle in the denne, and dare not reese on him openly in the fielde, as Homer saith, in libro. De pugms & A∣stucijs bestiarum. Lib. 8. Arist. speaketh of a beast that is called Ferculio, and A∣uicen calleth that beast Leopardus. A beast sayth Ari. that is called Ferculio, eateth somtime venemous things, and lecketh then mans dirte, and eateth it: and therefore Hunters hangeth suche dirte in some Uessell, on a trée, and when the Leoparde commeth to that Tree, and leapeth vp to take the dirte, then the hunters slaye him in the meane time while he is thereabout: & the Panther doth the same, & the Perdus also, as it is sayd ther. Also Plinius spea∣keth of the Leopard and saith, that som∣time the Leopard is sicke, and drinketh wilde Goates bloud, and scapeth from the sicknesse in that wise. ¶De Lepore. ca. 68. THe Hare is called Lepus, as it were Leuipes, light foote, for hée runneth swiftly, and is called Lago in Gréeke, for swiftnesse in running. And li. 12. I∣sidore sayth, that euery swifte beast is fearefull and fighteth not, and hath no
manner kinde of armour nor of wepon, but onely lightnesse of members and of lims, & is feeble of sight as other beasts be, that close not the eye lids in sléeping, and is better of hearing than of sight, namely when he reareth vp the eares. His eares be full long and pliant, & that is néedefull for to defend the eyen, that be open, & not defended with couering, nor with heling to kéep them frō gnats and flyes great & small, for against noy∣full things, kinde giueth remedy to cre∣atures, as Auicen saieth. And therefore kinde giueth to the Hare lightnesse and pliantnesse of limmes, and swiftnesse of course and of running, to kéep him from houndes & other beasts that pursue him: and kind giueth him long eares, against gnats and flyes, that grieue oft and bu∣siy his féeble eyen, as he saith: & kinde giueth much haire vnder his feete, that the haire of the féete maye defende the flesh thereof from hurting in running, & for he should by lyghtnesse thereof in no wise let the féete in running: and ther∣fore Arist. saith li. 3. that the Hares feete be hairie beneath, & that is seldome séene in other beasts. His hinder legs be lōger than the former, and that is néedfull to reare the body when he flyeth: & when he rūneth against an hil, he is harder to take, than when he runneth downward toward the valley, & that is for shortnes of the fore legs, for because of lownesse of the fore part of the body, hée falleth soone when he runneth downe the hill, and may not continue euenly his course and running, & for he séeth, that he shall fall when he runneth and flyeth downe a hill, he runneth therefore aside and a∣slont by the hill side, and reareth the for∣mer legs as he may, towarde the high∣nesse of the hills side, and ofte beguileth the hounds that him pursueth, and sca∣peth in that wise. And li. 8. ca. 55. Plini. speaketh of Hares and sayth, that many kindes be of Hares, for some are more in quantitie, with more great haire and rough, and more swifte of course and of running, than those that be called Cu∣niculi, and so héere this name Lepus, is the name of Hares and of Conies: for Conies be called Parui Lepores, small Hares & féeble, & they dig the earth with their clawes, and make them bowers & dens vnder the earth, and dwell therein, and bring foorth many Rabets & multi∣ply right much. And in some Woodes of Spain, be so many Conics, that somtime they wast and destroy corne in the fielde, by the which they cause hunger in the Countrey and lande: and Rabets are so loued in the Iland Balearitis, yt those Rabets be taken and eaten of men of the countrie, though the guts be vnneth cleansed. And it followeth there, ye Ar∣chelaus the Author saith, that as manye dens as be in the increasing of the Co∣nies, so many yeres they haue of age. In the bodye are so many hoales, as the Conies haue yeres.Not so. Therefore it is said that they gender without males, & haue both sexes, male and female: therefore many men suppose, that the Conie gen∣dereth and is gendered without male, as he sayth: and such Conies be so plen∣teous, and bring forth so much breede, that when they bring forth one Rabet or moe, anone she hath another in hir wombe, and is a profitable beast both to meate and to clothing, and to many ma∣ner medicines, for his ruenning helpeth agaynst venime, and stancheth the flixe of the wombe, his bloud abateth ache & smarting of eyen, as Plinius sayth, and Dioscorides also: and in no beast with téeth in either iawe, is ruenning found, but in the Hare, as Arist. saith: and the elder the ruenning is, the better it is, as Plinius saith. (Additiō.Hare & Conie maketh grose bloud, it dryeth and stoppeth. Conie maketh better, and more pure nourishing, and is sooner digested than Hare. It is well proued, that ther is no meat more whol∣some, or that more cleane, firmelye, and temperatelye nourisheth, than Ra∣bets.) ¶De Lince. cap. 69. LInx, lincis, is a beast, and hath that name, for he is accounted among the kinde of Wolues, that is a beast like to the woolfe, and his backe is diuersly spe∣kled as the Parde, & his vrine changeth and tourneth into a precious stone, that
is called Ligurius, & that precious stone is also called Linx, lincis. And this beast Linx hath enuie, & is sorie that it should tourne to the vse of mankinde, and hi∣deth his vrine vnder ground when hee pisseth, but there it is the sooner hard, & turneth into stone, as Plin. saith li. 8. ca. 39. and Isid. 12. ¶De Limace. cap. 70. LImax is a worme of slyme, and hath that name Limax, for he bréedeth slime, or of slime, and is therefore alway foule and vncleane, as Isid. saith lib. 11. And it is a verye slowe worme in moo∣uing, and beareth an harde shell on his backe, and closeth him therein, and is an horned worme, & hath two small horns before the mouth, and when he féeleth a∣ny grieuous thing, he draweth the horns anone into his shell, and closeth himselfe in the shell, as it were within an house. And such wormes are gendered princi∣pally in corrupt aire and raine: and hée créepeth, though it be with slow pace, & commeth vp to the tops of trées, and bi∣teth and gnaweth the buds and fruite thereof, and where euer he créepeth or slydeth, he leueth after him a glemy froth and strake of vncleannesse. (Additiō.In Italy they vse to eate Snailes, which custome is vsed in England (be∣cause as the Phisitions haue made ma∣ny beléeue) being well cleansed in salt & vineger, they be in Sallets restoratiue: Snakes be as good, for from whence they had the one, is the custome of the other to be eaten.) ¶De Lupo. cap. 71. THe Woolfe is called Lupus, and hath that name as Isid. sayth, as it were Leopos, for he hath vertue in the féete, as the Lyon hath, and so what he trea∣deth with his feete, liueth not: and is a rauenous beast, and desireth and coue∣teth bloud, and slayeth him that he may finde in woodes of rauine. Husbandmen speake of him and say, that a man léeseth his voyce, if the Woolfe séeth him first: therefore to a man that is sodainly still and leaueth to speake, it is sayd, Lupus est in fabula, the Woolfe is in the tale: and certainly if he know, that he is seene first, he léeseth his boldnesse, hardinesse, & fiercenesse. In all the yeare, Wolues do not the déed of generation but xii. daies, and he may not dure with hunger long time, and deuoureth much after long fa∣sting. In Aethiopia are Wolues with haire and maanes in the necke, and are so speckeled, and haue so manye diuers colours, that they lacke no manner co∣lour, as he telleth. Huc vsque Isid. li. 13. cap. 23. Plin. saith the same, and saith al∣so that Wolues of Affrica be slender & lyttle: and those that are bred in colde countries and landes be lesse of bodies than other, and more sharpe and fierce. Libro secundo. Arist. saith, that in Indie is a Woolfe that hath thrée rowes of téeth aboue, and hath féete like a Lyon, and face as a man, and tayle as a Scor∣pion, and his voyce is as it wer a mans voyce, and dreadfull, as a trumpe: and the beast is swifte as an Harte, and is right fierce and cruell, and eateth men. Also libr. 6. Aristo. saith, that in time of generation, Wolues are full cruell and fierce, and be worse when they haue whelpes, as the females of hounds. Also lib. 7. Wolues haue sawie téeth, & eate flesh, and not grasse, but when they are sicke, for then they eate some grasse or hearb for medicine: for when the woolfe féeleth himselfe too full, he séeketh a cer∣taine hearbe and eateth it, that he maye cast vp that that he hath eaten. Also li. 8. when they flye, they beare with them their whelpes, and eate Origanum,the hearb Margerū. and chew it when they go out of their dens to whet and sharpe their téeth therwith. Also he saith, that the Woolfe is a full euill beast when he eateth, and resteth much when he hath no hunger: he is full hardie, and loueth well to playe with a childe, if he maye take him, and slayeth him afterward, and eateth him at ye last. And Homer saith, that the Wolfe is a full wakefull beast, and flyeth from the sight of the fire. And it is said, that if the Woolfe be stoned, he taketh héed of him that throweth the first stone, and if that stone grieueth him, he will pursue him
that hurt him: and if it grieueth him not, and if he may take him that throw∣eth that stone, he doeth him not much harme, but some harme he doth him, as it were in wrath, and leueth him at last: and the elder the Wolues be, the worse they be, and greue men, for they may not hunt beasts because they be olde, and by reason that their vange téeth be weked, and they liue long time, and the age of the Woolfe is perceiued in the téeth, for they are constrained in age. And ther he saith, that there is double manner kinde of wolues: for some be as it wer round, and some long, and those be more rough of haire and thicke and more bolde and hardie of hart, & the entrailes of wolues be right féeble, and take soone corruption when they be wounded, & the other deale of the bodie suffereth many strokes, and hath great strengthe in the necke and in the head. Also woundes of theyr bi∣ting are euill, for venimme commeth of them, and these wounds be heled, as the biting of a mad hound, as Aristo. saith, Also lib. 13. he saith, yt the woolfes mouth openeth most wide, & hath most strēgth in his mouth, and that Beast is a great glutton and deuoureth much. Also li. 7. Auicen speaketh of the woolfe, and saith: that the woolfe desireth kindlye to eate fish, & eateth the fish that fishers throw out of their nets: and when hée findeth nothing to eate that the Fishers leaue, then he goeth to their nets, and breaketh and renteth them. Phisiologus speaketh of wolues and saith, that their vertue & strength is in the breast, & in the clawes, and in the mouth, and lest in the hinder parts. And the woolfe may not bend his neck backward in no month of the yere but in Maye alone, when it thundereth: and hath a cruell warinesse, so that hée taketh no pray of meate nigh to ye place where he nourisheth his whelpes, but he hunteth in places that be far thence: and when he goeth by night to a Folde for to take his pray, he goeth against the winde, for hounds should not smel him. And if it hapneth in any wise, that his foote maketh noyse, treading vppon any thing, then he chasteth that foote with hard biting. His eyen shine by night, as lanternes, and as Solinus saith, he bea∣reth in his taile, a locke of haire that ex∣citeth loue, and doth it away with his téeth, when he dreadeth to be taken. The woolfe dreadeth greatly stones, so that if a man take two stones, and smite them togethers, the woolfe looseth boldnes and hardinesse, & flyeth away, if the noyse of the stones commeth to his hearing. The Woolfe whelpeth blinde whelps, and lo∣ueth and nourisheth them full tender∣ly, and eateth earth when he is sore an hungred and findeth none other praye, and hideth him in grasse, bushes, and shrubs, and in leaues, to rauish and take Goates, that gather leaues and crops of Trées, and deceiueth shéepe more with guile and wrenches, than with might & strength, but when he hath the mastery, if he be suffered, he biteth and slayeth all the flocke, and the part that he may not deuoure, he burieth and hideth vnder the earth, and diggeth and taketh vp a part when he is agayne an hungred. He in∣fecteth the wool of the shéepe that he slai∣eth, and maketh the cloth lowsie that is made of that wooll, as Isidore saith. Also Arist. saith, that all the kinde of wolues is contrarie and aduersarie to all the kinde of shéepe: and so I haue read in a booke, that a string made of Wolues gut,Proued, and is a rare and vvonder∣ful secret. put among harp strings made of the guts of sheepe, destroyeth and corrupteth them: as the Eagles fethers, put among Culuers, pilleth and gnaweth them, if they be there lefte together long in one place, as he saith. Looke before De A∣quila. De Mulo. cap. 72. A Mule is called Mulus, and hath that name of Molendo, grinding, for he is vnder the yoke of Bakers, and draweth about milstones, as Isid. saith libro. 15. And the Iewes tell, that Ana Esaus ne∣phew, made first Asses and Mares, for to haue first against kinde, the kinde of mules bred and gendred as he saith: and therefore the Mule followeth the kind of the Mare, and is more than an Asse, & fairer, and swifter: but he is more slow, fouler, and lesse than an Horse, and so
the mule is a barren beast, and neuer∣thelesse a noble beast to trauaile, as Pli∣nius saith lib. 8. ca. 44. And these beasts, the Mare and the Asse desire neuer to gender together, except they be together in youth, and sucke togethers while they be coltes: therefore Heards put and set their coltes to sucke Asses, and Asse colts to sucke Mares, when they will haue such beasts gendered betwéene beasts of diuers kinde as he saith. Also he saith: that wine drinking is forbidden ye Mule. Of wilde Asses and Mares, are swifte Mules gendred, with hard féete and able to runne, and haue great riuells in the body, and are wilde in heart, and neuer∣thelesse gentle: and those that be gen∣dered betwéene a wild Asse and a Mare, passe all other. Libro septimo Aristotle speaketh of the Mule and saieth, that the more water that the mule drinketh, the more good his meate doth him. Also li. 14. the Mule hath no gall openlye séene vpon his liuer. Also lib. 21. he saith, for the mule is gendered betwéene the Asse and the Mare, he gendereth not, for the kinde of either of them, of the Asse and of the Mare is colde, and so the coldnesse of the sire and of the dam hath masterie in the mule that is gendered, and there∣fore the mule is barren, and nothing is gendred of his séede, by reason of passing colde that hath mastrie on him. Also, there it is sayd, that it hapneth, that bo∣dies of Mules be great and huge, for menstruall superfluitie passeth into nou∣rishing and féeding of the body, and the bloud that néedeth not to kinde, passeth out with vrine, & therefore ye male mules smell not to the vrin of ye female mules, as other beasts do that haue houes: and the other deale of superfluitie passeth in∣to increasing and greatnesse of the body. Therefore the female mule conceiueth but by hap and full selde, and the male Mule for he is the more hot, because of the male kind, gendreth somtime in some countries and lands, and that but by hap, but what he gendereth is straunge and occasion, as he yt is gendred betwéene an horse and an Asse, and is worthye that such a one be barren, for he is gendered against kind. Huc vs{que} Arist. li. 16. Isaac in Dietis saith, that mules flesh is worse to nourishing and defieng than Asses flesh his dirt stamped and burnt: stauncheth bloud, if it be tempered with vineger, as Dioscorides saith, and the same dirte helpeth against stinging of of Scorpions, as he saith. (Additiō.Musmoue, a kinde of great shéepe very white, the which somtime bred in the North Iles of Scotland, as Hector Boetius affirmeth, of the bignesse of a Bucke, horned round and bending: of forme betwéene a Sheepe and a Goate, strong and swifte. Read Gesner in his additions, fol. 10.) De Mure. cap. 73. THe Mouse is called Mus, & is a little beast, as Isido. sayeth, and hath that name of Humus earth: for he breadeth and is gendered of humors of the earth, for earth is called Mus and Humus. Al∣so the the lyuer of this beast wexeth in the full of the Moone, lyke as a certaine fish of the sea increaseth then, and wa∣neth againe in the waning of the Moone: and Mice are called Sorices also, for they fret and gnaw things as it were a saw. Huc vsque Isid. lib. 12. And libro septi∣mo Arist. saith, that the mouse drinketh not, and if he drinketh he dyeth: and is a gluttonous beast, and is therefore be∣guiled with a little meate when he smel∣leth it, and will taste thereof. His vrine stinketh, and his biting is venemons: and his vrine is contagious, and also his taile is venemous accounted. Also lib. 8. cap. 38. Plinius speaketh of Mice & sai∣eth, that some Mice are wittie, and ga∣ther meate into their dennes, and hide themselues in dennes in winter time, & their palate is perfect in taste, and also their nose in smell. In haruest the male and female gather corne, and charge ey∣ther other vppon the wombe, and the male draweth the female so charged, by the taile to hir denne, and dischargeth hir, and layeth vp that stuffe in a place in the denne: and then they goe againe to trauaile, and gather eares of corne, & the male layeth himselfe on his owne
backe, and his female chargeth him, and taketh his taile in hir mouth, and dra∣weth him so home to the denne, and so they beare their burthens and charge, & chaunge course, & stes, and times. Also he saith, of Mice is diuers maner kinds, for some mice liueth in houses, & some in fields, & some in banks & brims of wa∣ters, and some depart the yeare atwaine in sléeping, for they sléepe halfe the yere, as Glires doe, which be a certaine ma∣ner of Mice, as Plin. saieth. And though Mice be full grieuous & noyfull beasts, yet they are in many things good & pro∣fitable in medicines: for as Plin. saith lib. 29. cap. 7. Ashes of Mice, with honye and with oyle dropped into the eares, doth away ache and griefe: and if any worme entreth and commeth into the are, the chiefe remedie is the gall of Mice tempered wt wine, dropped warme into the eares. Dioscorides sayth, that Mice durt brused with vineger, cleanseth that euill Allopicia, and kéepeth and sa∣ from falling of haire. Also that durt stamped with wine, and taken in drinke, softneth the wombe wonder∣fully  skinne laid all about the héele, heleth and saueth kybes & wounds therefrom. (Additiō.Many be the kindes of Mice, as in Gesnes is depressed, the field Mouse: the Farie with a long snoute: the sleeper, that is of a un coulour, and will runne on the edge of a sword, and sléepe vpon the payne. De Mustela. cap. 74. THe Wesell is called Mustela, and is so called, as it were a long mouse, as Isi. saith li. 12. for long is called Telon in Gréek, this beast hath a guileful wit, and nourisheth hir Kittons in houses, & beareth them from place to place, and chaungeth place and dwelling, for hir neast should not be found. The Wesell pursueth and chaseth Serpents, and ha∣teth and eateth mice. And of Wesels is double manner kinde, one dwelleth in woodes, and is more than other. And the Gréeks call it Lodas, and the other go∣eth about in houses. And their opinion is false, that means, that Wesells con∣ceine at the mouth, & kitneth at the eare. as Isid. saith li. 12. The wesell is enemie to Sparowes, and lyeth in awaite for them and other small birdes, and swal∣loweth vp their egges: and if the We∣sels kittens fall by any hap in chins or in pits, and be hurt or dead, the Wesell heleth them with a certain hearb, & rea∣reth them from death to life, as Pli. sai∣eth, and eateth Rewe, and bawmeth hir selfe with iuyce thereof, and réeseth then on the Cockatrice, and assaileth and slai∣eth him without any dred boldly, as Pli. saith li. 8. ca. 22. There it is said, that the vertue of wesells is death to the Cocka∣trice, for God and kinde will, that no∣thing be without a help: the wesell kno∣weth soone of the Cockatrice, and goeth into his den, and slaieth him there, and is a beast that sléepeth much, and wexeth fat with sléepe, as the mice doe, that are called Glires, as he saith. Also li. 29. ca. 1. he saith, that ye wesell is of double kind, fame & wilde, & either hath gall yt help∣eth much against Adders: for their pre∣uie chose stinketh right foule, & stinking things is contrary to adders & serpents, and we meane, that their flesh helpeth a∣gainst venim. A wesel burnt to ashes, is helthfully done in medicine, & helpeth a∣gainst Litargie, ye sléeping euill, & so if a man fall into Litargy the sléeping euill, by venimme of an Adder, the ashes of a wesel tempered with drops of water, dissolueth and destroyeth ye strength and might of ye sléepe, as he saith: & ther it is said, ye pouder helpeth against festers, for kind yt is mother of all, gendreth nothing without great cause, as it is sayd. Li. 8. Arist. saith, yt the wesell fighteth against serpents, for either eate mice, & is a swift beast of mouing, & pliant of body, & full slipper & vnstable, & wise in smell, & hath a red & a white wombe, & changeth cou∣lour: for in some countries somtime of ye yeare all his skinne is white, except the tayle. His biting is malitious and ve∣nemous, and his vrine stinketh as the v∣rine of the mouse. (Additiō.The Wesell Ictis and Mustela, a meruailous stinking beast if he be pur∣sued. Furunculus a little théefe, also a Wesell.)
De Migali. cap. 75. A Firet is called Migale, & is a little beast,Victerram in Hebrue Oach. as it were a wesell, and is a glutton & guilefull, and a rauener: for wt guile he rauisheth what he will eate af∣terward, as the Glose saith, sup. Leu. 11. For dred he saineth himselfe mild, when a man commeth nigh him, but he biteth anone. & sheddeth venimme, as it is sayd ther Arist. speketh of this beast Migale & faith, that he hateth horses & mules, & grieueth them, & lieth specially in await on a mare that is with foale, & fighteth against Serpents, and armeth him with rewe, as he saith. (Additiō.The Ferret is a common enemie to Conics, and is vsed of the euill dispo∣sed to rob warrens in the night, with pursnets and hayes.) De Murilego. ca. 76. THe Cat is called Murilegus, & Mu∣sio, and also Cattus, & hath that name Murilegus,A Cat. for he is enemie to mice & to rats, and is commonly called Cattus, & hath that name of rauening, for he raui∣sheth mice and rats. Or els he hath that name Cattus of Cata, that is to sée, for he séeth so sharply, that he ouercommeth darknesse of the night by shining of the lyght of his eyen, and the name Cattus commeth of Gréek, and is to vnderstand slye and wittie, as Isi. saith li. 12. And is a beast of vncertaine haire & colour: for some Cat is white, some red, some black, some skewed and speckled in the féete, and in the face, and in the eares, and is most like to the Leopard, & hath a great mouth, and sawie teeth & sharp, and long tongue & pliant, thin & subtill, & lappeth ther with whē he drinketh, as other beasts do that haue the nether lip shorter than the ouer, for because of vneuennesse of lips, such beasts sucke not in drinking, but lap and lick as Ari. saith & Plin. al∣so: & he is a ful lecherous beast in youth, swift, pliant & merie, & leapeth & réeseth on al thing yt is before him, & is led by a straw, & plaieth therwith: & is a right he∣uie beast in age & full sléepy, & lieth slily in waite for mice, & is ware where they be, more by smell than by sight, & hunt∣eth & réeseth on them in priuy places: & when he taketh a mouse, he plaieth ther∣with, & eateth him after the play, & is as it were wilde, & goeth about in time of generation, among eats. In time of kind is hard fighting for females, & one scrat∣cheth & renteth ye other grieuously with biting & with clawes, and they make a ruthfull noise & gastful,Called ca∣tervvau∣ling. when one prose∣reth to fight with another: & is a cruell beast when he is wilde, and dwelleth in woods, & hunteth then smal wild beasts, as Conies & Hares: and falleth on his owne féete when he falleth out of high places, & vneth is hurt, when he is thro∣wen downe off an high place. His durte doth stinkful foule, & therfore he hideth it vnder earth, & gathreth thervpon coue∣ring with féete & clawes: & when he hath a faire skin he is as it wer proud therof, & goeth fast about, & when his skin is burnt, then he bideth at home, & is ofte for his faire skin, taken of the skinner and slaine. (Additiō.The propertie of cats is to climbe trées for birds, as also to kill mice; and being néere warrens, for sake the house & become wild, praieng on rabits & birds. De Noctiluca. cap. 77. NOctiluca is a litle beast,The Glo∣vvorme. wt féete and with wings, & is therefore somtime accounted amōg Volatiles, & he shineth in darknes as a candle, & namely about ye hinder parts, & is foule & dark in full light, & infecteth & smiteth his hand that him toucheth: & though he be vnséene in light, yet he flieth light, & hateth it, & go∣eth by night, and is contrary to another little one that is called Lucipeta, that ri∣seth gladly oft light, as Isid. saith, lib. 12. cap. de minutis volatilibus &c. Of Odonta. IN the years of the world .3640. or néere therabout, Alexander ye great entring India with a great army, amōg diuers strange assalts amōg wild beasts & serpents, a beast of a strange kind ap∣peared greater then an Elephant, armed with thrée hornes, in his forehead, & ha∣uing a head of a blacke coulour, like a horse, the Indians tearme ye said beast O∣donta, & when he had dronke, he behold∣ing the tentes, sodeinelye settle vppon
the Souldiers, with great vyolence, nei∣ther was he driuen backe with the heat of the fire that was before him, At the ouerthrow of the sayd straunge & fierce beast, 36. souldiers were slaine, and 53. sauchenets or swords of that time were quite marred, and with much adoe, at length, the beast being deadly wounded dyed. Lucostenes de Prodigijs in fo. 99 in the Cro. of the Dome. fol. 66. Bat.) De Onagro. cap. 78. ONaget is a wilde Asse, as Isid. sayth, and such Asses be greate and wilde in Affrica, and vntamed, & goeth about in desart place: and each of them leadeth a company of females, & they haue enuy to the males when they be foaled, & bite off their gendering stones, & the females bée ware thereof, and hide theyr male foales in priuy places. And Plini. sayth, li. 8. Betwéene wilde Asses and tame as∣ses li 2 gendered most swift Asses. And is a free beast at large, and not tamed, & lecherous: and hunteth oft mountaines and woodes, & though hée be of himselfe a beast that fighteth not nor gréeueth, yet by benefice of running and of lyght∣nesse he ouercommeth in desart both the Lyon and the Wolfe: and is a beast that maye well awaye with thirst, and suffe∣reth it long, and abideth vntill he maye drink that is couenable for him. And of him Phisiologus speaketh and saith, that in the 25. daye of March, this beast roa∣reth twelue times in that day, and as oft in the night: and by his roaring the euen∣nesse of the day and night is knowen a∣mong the Affrikes, and he saith, that al∣waye he roareth as manye times in the daye, as there be houres in the day, and also in the night. And so woode men in mountaines of Affrica, in the which bée many wild Asses by the number of their roarings they account the diuersitye of the day and of the night. This Beast is wise and wittie, and enuious in smel∣ling, and so when he is feruent in loue, & wolteth not where his female is, hée goeth about and styeth vppon an high rocke, and openeth his nosethrillrs, and draweth in ayre and winde, and know∣eth and perceiueth by the wind and aire where his female is. And oft in moun∣taines hée fetcheth good hearbes and grasse, and hée loueth them well, and see∣keth them with businesse in high moun∣taines, with trauaile, and roareth for ioy when he findeth therin gréene grasse and hearbes, but when hée knoweth that hée is hunted by men or by beasts, he flieth: and hateth greatly the company of men, and loueth well desart places and wil∣dernesse. De Onocentauro. cap. 79. ONocentaurus, as the Glose sayth su∣per Esay. 9. is a beast of a straunge forme, and is gendered betwéene a Bull and an Asse. For an Asse is called O∣nos in Gréek: and so it is a beast le∣cherous as an Asse, and stronge necked and nowled as a Bull. But Phisiologus meth otherwise, and sayeth. That O∣necentaurus is compounded of the shape of a man and of an asse: for he hath shape of a beast from the nauell downwarde. It séemeth that Plinius accordeth héere∣to libro. 7. cap. 3. where he sayeth, that wise and wittie kinde maketh to vs gameful things and wonderfull, to shew his might. And in the same chapter hée setteth example of many wonderful sha∣pen beasts, which be in Indie, as of Fau∣nie and Satiris and Onocentauris, and of other such, which hee calleth beastes, and feineth somwhat the shape of mans kinde. And other meane, that Centauri were called Horse men of the Countrye of Thesalon, which pricked vp & downe on horses, and therfore some of them sée∣med that horse and man were one bo∣dye, and so they accounted, that Cen∣tauri were then feyned, as he sayth, lib. 11. where he speaketh of beastes wonder∣fullye shapen: and Centaurus in Gréek, is Homo in Latine, in English, a man, and this name Centaurus is compoun∣ded with Onos and Centaurus, and so Onocentaurus hath that name, for the halfe thereof hath the shape of a man, and halfe of an Asse, as Ipocentaurus is a beast wonderfullye shapen, in whome is accounted the kind of man and of an
horse, as Isidore saith. (Additiō.As auncient men spent their time in writing of follyes, to make the com∣mon people wonder at that they knewe not themselues: so in the last discouered Indies, the barbarous people séeing a far of the Spaniards on horsebacke, hauing neuer séene such a sight before, supposed they had bene monstrous deuourers, as in very déede they so proued, but in ano∣ther forme, then the simple and naked people, at the first tooke them.) ¶De Orice. cap. 80. ORix, as the Glose saith super Esay. is an vncleane beast, and not accor∣ding to sacrifice: and the seuentie trans∣lated and made this translation, Quasi Beta seminocta: & all ye other transla∣ted in this wise, Sicut Onix illaqueatus, as Orix is snarled: and Orix is called Tho in Hebrue,Theo. Orix. and is accounted in the lawe among vncleane beastes, and is a beast lyke to a water mouse, or to cer∣taine mice yt are called Glires, & haue ye name, for sléeping maketh them fat, and they sléepe all, the winter long, and laye egges vnmoueable as they were dead, & quicken againe in Summer, and so O∣rix is a beast like to such mice: and it séemeth that the letter of Isa. toucheth the same, and accordeth with Plini. that saith in this manner: In Aegypt they call a beast Orix, that standeth against the starre Canicula and the rising there∣of, the seuenth daye before, in the begin∣ning of Summer, and beholdeth on the starre as he would worship it, and that he doth when he is awaked after long sléeping. And this nowne Orix is deely∣ned Orix, cis, after that it is said Sorex, cis, and Orix, cis, and such other. But Iuuenall meneth, that Orix is a certain bird, that is most fat, and he blunteth & dulleth the knife with his fatnesse, as he saith lib. 3. there he saith, that olde Orix blunteth yron, and there by the meaning of this place the Expositors meane, that Orix is like to an hen of Affrica, or such an Hen, and so it is sayde after Briton, Orix, gis. And after the rule of Grecis∣mus, the nowne that endeth in ix, shall giue the Genetiue ease in cis, or in gis, as Fex, cis, Lex, gis, except Nox, Nix, Senex, and Suppellex, and therefore it is sayd, that Orix is that beast, that is accounted in lawe cleane to eating. Deu∣teronomeum. 14. there it is sayd in this manner: Thou shalt eate Orix & Ca∣meleopardalus, but it is accounted vn∣cleane to sacrifice. And libro. 8. capit. 3. de Animalibus somniferis, Plinius sai∣eth in this manner: Wilde Goates be shapen in many manner likenesses and shapes, for among them are some called Ilices, and be wonderful light, and leape downe of high rockes and cragges, and fall vpon their owne hornes. They are great and mightie, with the horne theyr heads be charged: and some be Origes, and their haire groweth and stretcheth toward the head, against the kinde of o∣ther beasts: and some be called Dame, and some Pigrasti, and many other such, and come of mountaines, and from be∣yond the sea, and so for to speake, Orix is a wilde Goate, and in this significa∣tion it is not taken in Esa. there he spea∣keth of beastes that men do dreame off in euill sléepe and dreames, for it accor∣deth not to the proportion and compari∣son: For Aristotle saieth, that euerye wilde Goate is wakefull by kinde, and sléepeth but little, and is soone awaked, for it is a fearefull beast: and so Orix is taken for a beast in Deuterono, and for another in likenesse in Esa. as many men meane. (Additiō.Orix a certaine wilde beast in A∣frike. The latter writers are in doubt, what this Beast should be, some sup∣pose a kinde of wilde Goate, some the Unicorne, some the Rinoceros, &c.) ¶De Oue. cap. 81. A Séepe is called Ouis, and is a softe Beast, and beareth Woll, and is vnarmed in body, and pleasing in heart: and hath that name Ouis, of Oblacio, offering: for men in olde time offered shéepe in sacrifice, and not Buls, as Isidore saith libro. 12. And some of these beasts are called
Bidentes, as it were with two teeth, for among eight teeth two passe the other. And Nations vsed them most in sacri∣fice, as Isidore sayeth. Or else they bée called Bidentes, as the age meneth Qua∣si biennes, as they were of two yeares old: For of that age they were, when they were chosen to sacrifice: but most verily they haue the name of two strou∣ting téeth, with the which they be yaned. And li. 5. Aristotle speaketh of shéepe, and saith, that they conceiue and yane vntil 8. yeare. And li. 7. if sheepe conceiue toward the Northen wind, they conceiue males. And if they conceiue toward ye Southern winde, then they conceiue females. And such as the veines bée vnder the shéepes tongue, of such colour is the lambe when he is yaned. Look before de Agnis & Ari∣ete. And whē old shéep be moued to gene∣ration in certeine time ordeined, the shep∣heards say, that it is a good signe in them: And if young shéep be moued so, they tell yt it betokeneth pestilence among shéep in that yéere. Also libro. 8. Aristotle sayth, that shéepe conceiue in drinking water, and there∣fore heardes giue them Salte to eate, to make them drinke the more, and to conceiue the more faster, and to kéepe them the more safe and whole without all kind of sicknesse. And also in Haruest they giue to them Cucurbitas,Gourdes. such hearbes, & salt them to make much milke in their teates. And shéepe conceiue with Tilles and salt: & if shéepe fast thrée daies and cate afterward, then they ware soone fat. And colde water of the North is good to them in Summer, & warme wa∣ter of ye South is good to thē in haruest: and meat helpeth them in the end of the daye & of the night: For by farre wayes and long trauaile they waxe leane, and heards know which of them maye dure in Winter, for vpon some is found Ise, & vppon some no Ise is founde, and some of them bée séeble and may not shake off the Ise. And shéepes flesh yt is nourished in watry places is euill, as flesh of other foure footed beasts is, that bée nourished in places that be right moyst and watry, and those that haue long tailes maye worse away with winter, then those that haue broade tailes, and those that haue litte Wooll and crispe, may worst away with Winter. And Wooll of shéepe that a Wolfe eateth, is infected, & the cloth that is made thereof is lousie. Also libro. 8. he saith, that in shéep is lesse wit and vnder∣standing thē in another foure footed beast. And Thunder gréeueth them, and if one abide alone, & if it be in the euentide, it may happen that she shall cast her lambe for dread. Also li. 8. ca. 67. Plinius sayth, that thundering maketh solitary shéep to cast their lambs. The remedy and helpe thereof is, to gather & bring them toge∣ther into one flocke. Looke before in this same booke, in littera A. where he trea∣teth de Ariete & Agno. (Additiō.Of sheepe, their Wooll is a singu∣lar benefit in a common wealth, especial∣ly the Cotsell wooll for finenesse. And in Bartholmes time, the Staple for Wooll, was not so well husbanded as it hath bene since. The increase of pasture for shéepe, hath so much decreased the tillage of corne, that vntill it be restored againe, there wil grow a poore common wealth: the more shéepe, the déerer the wooll, the flesh, and the fell: the moe shéepe the dée∣rer corne and graine, beside, Béefe, But∣ter, Egges, & Chéese: Pastures consumes tillage, the want of tillage bréedes beg∣gars, decayes villages, hamlets, & vpland townes. It is better to want Wooll then corne, shéepe then men, but excesse & pro∣digalitie, which cannot away with mea∣sure, hath brought this England to great penurie: it is espyed where it wanteth, but not wanting where it is espied, much lesse regarded.) De Panthera. cap. 82. PAnthera, as Isidore sayth, libro. 12. hath that name because hée is friende to all beastes saue the Dragon, for him hée hateth full sore: Or because he hath ioye and lyking of beastes of his owne kinde, and maketh all that hée ta∣keth of one lykenesse. And Panthera is Gréeke, and is to vnderstande, all. And is a Beast painted with small rounde speckles, so that all the skinne
without seemeth full of eyen by diuersi∣tie of speckles blacke and white, and red, as he sayeth. And as Isidore saith, this beast whelpeth but once, and the cause thereof is openly knowen: for when the whelpes waxe strong in the dammes wombe, and be strong to come into the world, they hate the damme and rent her wombe with claws, as it were ye womb letted their whelping and comming in∣to the worlde: and therefore the damme letteth passe and whelpeth them, con∣strayned and compelled by sore gréeuance of the wombe. Therefore Plinius sayth, that beastes with sharpe clawes maye not oft whelpe, for the whelpes mooue within and hurt the damme. Huc vs{que} Isidore, libro. 12. Phisiologus speaketh of the Panther, and sayeth, that he hateth the Dragon, and the Dragon flieth him: And when he hath eaten inough at full, he hideth him in his denne, and sléepeth continuallye nigh three daies, and riseth after three dayes and crieth, & out of his mouth commeth right good aire & sauour, and is passing measure sweete: and for the sweetnesse all beasts follow him. And only the Dragon is a feard when he hea∣reth his voyce, and flyeth into a den, and may not suffer the smell thereof, and fai∣leth in himselfe, and looseth his comfort. For he thinketh that his smell is verye venime. And libro. 8. cap. 18. Plinius spea∣keth of the Panthera, and sayth: that the Panthera and the Tigre bée most dres∣sed with diuers speckles and diuers cou∣lours: and some beastes ioye of theyr owne coulours, as Lyons in Siria, that be blacke with white specks, and be like to Panthers. And all foure footed beasts haue liking to beholde the diuerse cou∣lours of the Panthera and Tygres, but they be a fearde of the horriblenesse of theyr heads, and therfore they hide their heads, and toll the beastes to them with fayrenesse of the other deale of the body, and take them when they come so tolled and eate them: and though he be a right cruel beast, yet he is not vnkind to them that helpe & succour him in anye wise, as Plinius setteth an ensample of one, that delyuered and holpe vppe a Panthers whelps, that were fallen into a ditch, and the Panther lead him out of the wilder∣nesse with glad assemblance, and fawned on him, and thanked him right busily, as it séemed. De Perdo. cap. 83. THE Perde is called Perdus, as Isi∣dore sayth, & is the most swift beast, with many diuers coulours and rounde speckes, as the Panther, and réeseth to blend, and dyeth in leaping, and varyeth not from the Panther, but the Panther hath moe white speckes, so sayth Plinius libro. 8. Also libro. 5. Aristotle sayth, the Perde when he is sicke eateth mannes durt, because of medicine. Hunters hang that durt on a trée, and goeth vp to it: & the hunters slay him, and is lecherous, & gendereth with the Lyonesse: Of that ba∣stard generation commeth Leopardus. Looke before de Leena. The Perde is cruell when his whelps be stolen, as the Glose saith super Ose. 13. De Pilosis. cap. 84. PIlosi, as the Glose meaneth super E∣say. 13. be beasts wonderfully shapen to the lykenesse of men, & be called wilde men. And lib. 8. cap. 5. Isidore sayth: that Pilosi is called Pauide in Gréeke, and In∣cubi in latine or Inuij, of Ineundo, mans going in sometime with beasts: and haue that name Incubi, of Incumbendo, doo∣ing the déede of generation, and oft they couet women ouer measure, and do with them the déede of lecherye, and men call them Deniones Galliducij such manner fiends, for oft they doe such vncleannesse. And one of them is called Iucubouis, and the Romanes call such an one Faunum Ficarium. Also Papias sayth, that Pilosi be called Panites in Gréeke, and Incubi in latine. And their shape beginneth with mens likenesse, and endeth in the lyke∣nesse of beastes in the vtter parte. And the Glose sayth super Esay. 34. the same. But another Glose saith, that Pilosus is an Ape, and is a beast wonderfully sha∣pen, rough and hairie, shapen as a man, in many pointes. Looke heereafter de Si∣mia.
De Pigargo. cap. 85. Pygargus The Roe bucke.PIgargus is a cleane beast to meate, as it is said Deutro. 14. and is an hor∣ned beast, as a Goat bucke, & is lesse then an Hart, & greater then a goat bucke: and is like to the beast yt is called Hircocer∣uus, but is much lesse then he. Looke wtin de Tragelapho.Hircum siluestrē. And he cheweth his cud, as the Goat buck, & is cloue footed as an Hart, and is a wilde beast, and of great switnesse, and dwelleth in woods and in desart. And Hugution saith, that Pigar∣gus is a little lowe bird, and that name commeth of Pige, that is lownes. But in Deut. it is taken for a foure footed beast, yt is like to the beast that is called Hirco∣cemus, as the Glose meaneth there. And this name Pigargus hath no aspiratiō in the first silable, & so it shall not be writ∣ten with Hbut some men write Phigar∣gus, and doe amisse, as it is knowen by bookes that be dilligently corrected. De Pigmeis. cap. 86. PIgmei be little men of a cubite long, and the Gréekes call them Pigmeos, and they dwell in mountaines of Inde, and the sea of occean is nigh to them, as Papias sayth. And Austen sayth in this wise,The cu∣bits were in those daies at yt least tvvo foote. that Pigmei bée vnneth a cuibite long, and bée perfect of age in the thirde yeare, and waxe old in the seauenth yere, & it is said, that they fight with Cranes. Lib. 7. ca. 3. Plinius speaketh of Pigmeis, and sayth, that Pigmei be armed in yron, and ouercome Cranes, and passe not theyr bounds, and dwell in temperate land vnder a merrye parte of heauen, in mountains in the North side. And ye fame is, that Cranes pursue them, and Pigmei armed, ride on goat bucks with arowes in springing time, and gather an hoast, & come to the sea & destroye their egs and birds with all their might and strength, and doe such voyages in thrée moneths, and except they did so, Cranes should in∣crease, and be so many, that Pigmei shuld not withstand them, and they make them houses to dwell in of feathers, and with the pens of Cranes, and of shells of their egges, as he sayth, and saith also, that A∣ristotle meaneth, that Pigmei lyue in dennes. (Additiō.All the later writers affirme this to be true, they are in the vttermost moun∣taines of Indie.) De Porco. cap. 87. THE Swine is called Porcus, as it were Spurcus, vile & defiled, as Isid. saith, li. 12. for he sroteth and walloweth in durt and in fen, and diueth in slime, and fouleth himselfe therewith, and rest∣eth in a stinking place. Horatius sayth, that a Sowe is friend to fen & to myrye places: and therfore Swine be accounted foule and vncleanly, and we call the bri∣stice of Swine Setas in latine, and Shoo∣makers call them Bristles, & sow there∣with, as he saith: and some swine be tame, & some wild. And among the tame, the males be called Boares & Barowes: and be called Verres in latine: for they haue great might and strength, & the females be called Sowes, & Sues in Latine: for they digge and wrote & séeke meate vn∣der earth. And the wild male Swine bée called Bores, Apri in latine, as it were fierce, as Isidor. saith, lib. 8. cap. 51. Plini∣us speaketh of Swine and sayeth, that they be farrowed toothed, and the males gender not passing thrée yéere, a Swine dieth, if he léeseth an eie: and a swine may liue .15. yeares, or 20. yeres. And Swine haue many sicknesses, & hold their heads aside: and when they be sicke, they wal∣lowe in fenne and in puddles, and lye more on the right side then on the lefte side, and waxe fat in fortye dayes, and fat sooner if they suffer hunger thrée daies in the beginning of the féeding. Swine loue each other, and knowe each others voice: and therefore if any crie, they cry all, and labour to helpe each other with all their might. Tame Swine knowe their owne houses and home, and learne to come therto without guide and loads∣man, as hée sayth, and grunt in going and in lieng and in sléeping, and namely if they be right fat. And Swine sléepe faster in May then in othertimes of the yere, and that commeth of fumosity that
stoppeth their braine that time: And in Summer though there be great resoluti∣on of humours, there is greate wasting thereof and drieng by passing heat of the Summer: and there is no great genera∣tion of fumositie yt is cause of sléepe: and therefore they sleepe not in Summer, as they doe in springing time, as Auicen sayth. In Haruest and in Winter hu∣mours be sad and fastened togethers by coldnesse of the aire, & compasseeth them without. And therfore few fumosities be resolued in that time for passing cold that fastneth the humours in the body, as hée sayth libro secundo, Aristotle sayeth of Swine, that Swine chaunge not theyr téeth, & the male hath more téeth then the female. Also libro. 3. Aristotle sayth, that the Boare leapeth on a Sow after eight moneths, and the Sowe farroweth after one yeare, and what the Boare gende∣reth within the first yeare, it is full fée∣ble. Also the Boare hath no vsage, that if he gendereth first with one Sow, then his pigges of the second Sowe be fewer in number, & lesse of body: when a young Sow farroweth first, her pigs shall haue but small bodyes: & if the Sow bée right fat, her milke is the more scarce after the farrowing: and pigges that bée farrow∣ed in Winter be best, and they that bée farrowed in Summer be worst: and those that be gendered in youth, bée bet∣ter then those that be gendered in age. And the Boare when he is fat, may gen∣der in euerye time of the day, and of the night, and namelye earely in the morow tide. And libro. 6. When a Sow farrow∣eth, shée giueth her first pigge the first teate: and when she desireth the déede of lecherie, she suffereth not the male to leap vppon her, vntill her eares hang downe∣ward. And Barly is full good meate for Swine, when they shall gender, & name∣ly if it be sodden. Also lib. 6. Swine haue thrée manner euills,The dizei The me∣ill. one is called Bran∣cos, & is a postume in the eare and in the iawe, & oft in the féet,The lousie. The mad and the flesh about that place is corrupt, and the corruption passeth some and some into the flesh that is nigh thereto vntill it come to the lungs, and stuffeth then the spirit, & the Swine dieth, and this euill increaseth so∣deinly. And Swine heards, when they know first this euil, cutteth off his mem∣ber, in yt which this euill is in: and may not be healed without cutting. And swine haue another euill, that is ach and heaui∣nesse of head, and of this euill the most part of Swine die. Another disease that they haue, is fluxe of the wombe, & hath vnneth any remedy, for it slaieth in thrée daies. And when Swine be great, it doth them good to eate Beryes: and also bath∣ing in hot water delighteth them. And they be let bloud in the veine vnder the tongue. Also diuers meat fatteth Swine, and some meate maketh them to swell, & some gendereth flesh, and some greace & fatnesse. And hogs both male and female haue liking to eate akornes: for it tem∣pereth their flesh, but and Sowes eate much thereof, it maketh them cast theyr pigges, as it maketh sheepe cast theyr lambs. And many other things Aristotle telleth of them. Looke before de Apro, & looke after de Sue. (Additiō.The flesh of wilde Swine is much better & wholsomer, because of their stir∣ring too and fro, then is the flesh of the tame Swine.) De Pediculo. cap. 88. A Lowee is called Pediculus, and is a worme of the skinne, and hath that name of Pedibus, the féete, as Isido. sayth lib. 12. And grieueth more in the skinne with the féete and with créeping, then hée doth with biting, and is gendered of right corrupt aire & vaporous, that sweate out betweene the skinne and the fleshe by pores, as Constantine sayth in Viatico. Oft as he sayth, lice and nits gender in the head or in the skinne, and come of purgations, which kinde casteth out, and maketh them fast betwéene the flesh and skinne vpon that place. And expositours say, that some lice gender of sanguine hu∣mour, and be red and great, and some of fleumatike humours, and they be softe & white, and some of cholarike humours, & be citrine, long, swifte, and sharpe: some of melancholike humour, and they bée couloured as ashes, and bée leane and slow in moouing. And where great mul∣titude
of Lice is in a bodye that is right full and corrupt, it is oft token of general corruption, as of Morphea, or of Lepra, as hée sayeth. Against the grieuing of lice, oft washing, combing, and medici∣nall cleansing of the head helpeth, For as Constantine sayeth, quicke Siluer with ashes of willowes, slayeth them, & name∣ly if they be gendred of hot humour, & so doth Lead burnt with oyle and vineger, & if they be gendred of cold humour, then helpeth Staphisagra & Auripigmentum, with oyle and vineger, & so doth sea wa∣ter, and water of salt Welles. And as there be diuerse kinde of beastes, so in thē be diuerse manner of lice, as it fareth in hogs, his lonce is called Vsia, and hath that name because he burneth, for where hée biteth, the place burneth so, ye blaines arise there, as Isidore sayth, lib. 12. And the leaner that a louce is, the sharper the biteth and gréeueth. (Additiō.A louce is a loathsome vermin, yet was he king ouer Pharao and Herod, to the great terrour of the enimies of God: there be many that haue the lousie euill, and cannot be cured, which commeth of the fluxe of the reines and flegma.) De Pulice. cap. 89. THe flea is a little worme, and grée∣ueth men most, and is called Pulex, and hath that name of Puluis, pouder, for it is namely fed with pouder, as Isidore sayth, libro. 12. And is a little Worme of wonderfull lightnesse, and scapeth & voy∣deth perill with leaping, and not with running, and waxeth slowe, and fayleth in colde time, & in Summer time it wer∣eth nimble & swift. And though it bée not accounted among beasts that be gendred, and knowen among beastes by medling of male & female, yet he multiplyeth his owne kinde by bréeding of Néetes: For they bréede certeine neets in themselues, and of that commixion or comming of Néets, many Fleas do come of one Flea. And the Flea is bred white, and chaun∣geth as it were sodeinelye into blacke coulour, and desireth bloud, and biteth and pearceth therefore, and stingeth the flesh that hee sitteth on, and sucketh the thinnest parte of humours that bée be∣twéene the skinne and the flesh, and ma∣keth in that parte of the bodye, in the which he sucketh, a bloudie token, and doth let them that wold sléep with sharpe biting, and spareth not kings, but a little Flea gréeueth them, if he touch theyr flesh. And to Fleaes Warmewood is ve∣nim, and so be leaues of the wilde Figge trée, as Constantine sayeth. And Colo∣quintida, a wéede that is lyke to a wilde Nep, helpeth against Fleas, if it be stam∣ped and medled with water, and sprong in the place there as many Fleas be: and so doth Wormewoode leaues, for as it is said, they die by smell & sauour of worm∣wood: and by swiftnesse of leaping, they be the worse to take, & they bite full sore against raine. (Additiō.A sluttish kept house bréedeth fleas, and lodging next to stables of horses: al∣so the horse vrine bréedeth fleas, his dung falling vpon his taile, brédeth Snakes, his flesh, Waspes.) De Rinocerote. ca. 90. RInoceron in Gréeke, is to meaning, an horne in the nose, and Monoce∣ron is an Unicorne, and is a fierce or cruell beast, and hath that name, because he hath in the middle of the forehead an horne of foure foote long, and that horne is so sharpe and so strong, that he throw∣eth downe all or pearceth all that he rée∣seth on, as Isidore sayeth, libro. 12. And this beast fighteth ofte with the Ele∣phaunt, and woundeth and sticketh him in the wombe, and throweth him downe to the grounde. And the Unicorne is so strong, that he is not taken with might of Hunters. But men that write of the kinde of things, suppose that a maide is sette there as he shall come, and she ope∣neth her lappe, and the Unicorne layeth thereon his head, & leaueth all his fierce∣nesse, & sléepeth in that wise: and is taken as a beast without weapon, & slaine with darts of hunters. Huc vsque Isidorus, li∣bro. 12.The Rino¦cerot is one, and the Vni∣corne an other Gregory super Iob in Moralibus sai∣eth héereto, that Rinocero the Unicorne is a wilde beast by kinde, and maye not
be tamed in no wise: and if it happen that he be taken in any wise, he may not bée kept in any manner: for he is so vnpati∣ent and so angry, that he dieth anone. Li. 8. ca. 21. Plinius speaketh of the vnicorne and saith, that he hath an horne in ye mid∣dle of the forehead aboue the nose, and is enimye to the Elephaunts, and froateth and fileth his horne against stones, and sharpeth it, and maketh it ready to fight in that wise. And in the fighting hée as∣saileth the Elephant on the wombe, for he knoweth that that is the soft place of the Elephants body. His length is as it were the length of an horse: but his legs bée much more shorter, and his coulour is bay. And as he meaneth, libro. 8. cap. 22. There be many kinds of vnicornes, for some bée Rinoceron, and some Mo∣noceron and Egloceron. And as he saith, Monoceron is a wilde beast shapen like to the horse in body, and to the Hart in head, and in the féet to the Elephant, and in the taile to the Boare, and hath heauy lowing, and an borne strouting in the middle of the forehead of two cubites long. And they denie that this beast may be taken aliue. And Egloceron is a man∣ner of Unicorne, that is called Capricor∣nus in latine, and hath that name of Egla, that is a Goat, & Ceros that is an horne: And is little a beast like to a Kid, with an horne that is full sharpe in the middle of the forehead. Also Plinius saith there, that in Indie be one horned Oxen, with white speckes and bones, and with thick hoofes as horses haue. And in Indie bée some one horned Asses, as Aristotle, A∣uicen, and Plinius say. And bée called one horned Asses, because they haue one horne in the forehead, betwéene the eares, and bée called Asini Indici, Asses of Indie, and the other part of their bodyes be like to the bodyes of wilde Asses, and such an Asse is called Monoceros, and is lesse bolde and fierce then other vnicornes, and hath this name Monoceros, of Monos, that is one, and Ceros, that is an horne. And this nowne Rinoceron is declined, hic Rinoceron, ge. huus Rinocerontis. Also Monoceron is declined, Monoce∣ron, tis. Also we finde Rinoceros, & Mo∣noceros, and is then declined Rinoceros, Rinocerotis, in the Genitiue case, and so of other. (Additiō.The Rhinoceros in Aethiopia, a perpetuall enimie to the Elephant, hée is not so high as the Elephant, armed ouer with shells in steed of haire, so yt nothing can easily pearce the same: euen so is the little beast, called of the Affricans Tat∣ton, of Gesner Zibeti, in fo. 20. at the end of his booke of birdes, &c. Which armed case I haue to shew.) De Rana. cap. 91. THE Frogge is called Rana, and hath that name of noise and crieng of his voice, for he cryeth gréedely, and maketh much noyse in the marreys where he is bred, as Isidore sayth, libro. 12. cap. ter∣cio, de Piscibus. And some Frogs be wa∣ter Frogges, and some bée of moores and of marreys, and some bée called Ru∣bete, of whom it is spoken before in lit∣tera Byde Buphone: & some be called Ca∣lamite, for they dwell among reeds that be called Calami, & other among shrubs and in réedie places, and be but little and gréene, & dumbe without voice. And some be called Agredule, and be small Frogs, and dwell both in lande and in water, & haue therefore that name Agredule. And ther is a manner Frog that maketh an hound still and dombe, if he commeth in his mouth: But many men deny this, as Isidore sayeth, libro. 12. And libro quarto, Aristotle saith, that the Frogge hath his owne tongue, & the further part of the tongue ioyneth to his mouth, as though it were bound thereto, as the vt∣ter part of the tongue of a fish, though the hinder part and inner of the tongue bee loose and slacke toward the wosen: and therefore the Frog hath his owne voice, and that voyce is called Coax, and ma∣keth not that voice but onely in water: And properly the male in time of loue, when he crieth for the female. For euery beast that hath voyce crieth in time of loue, and the Frogge multiplyeth his voyce when he doth his neather iawe some deale in the water, and striketh the vpper iawe, for by the strength of stret∣ching of the two iawes, his eyen shineth
as a Candle, and namelye by night: for he gendereth more by night then by day, and all fish nourisheth and féedeth his brood, except the Frogge, as he saith li. 7. when he is first shapen in water, the frogge séemeth all head, with a manner string, hanging as it wer a taile, & after∣ward is spread abroad in the manner of a womb, & then the taile is away, & then groweth féete: and he is shapen & turned into a foure footed beast. Al frogs, except the Toad, and Rubeta, moue more, and passe by leaping more then by going, for the olde Rubeta leapeth but seld. Then the Frogge is watry and moorish, cri∣eng, and slimie, with a great womb, and speckled there vnder, and is venimous, and abhominable therefore to men, and most hated, and both in water & in land he liueth. De Salamandra. ca. 92. SAlamandra, as Isidore sayth, libr. 10. cap. 67. is like to the Ewt in shape, & in neuer séene but in great raine, & fay∣leth in faire wether, and his song is cri∣eng: and he quencheth the fire that hée toucheth, as Ise doth, & water frore: and out of his mouth commeth white mat∣ter, & if that matter touch a mans body, the haire shall fall, & what it toucheth, is corrupt and infected, and tourneth into foule coulour. Also Salamandra is a manner kind of an Ewt or of a Lisard, and is a pestilent beast, most venimous. For as Plinius sayeth, libro. 29. cap. 4. Salamandra infecteth fruit of Trées, and corrupteth water, so that he that eateth or drinketh thereof, is slayne anone. And if his spittle touch the foot, it infec∣teth and corrupteth all the mans body, and though he be so venimous, yet some beasts eate him in stéed of meate. Of all beasts, onely the Salamandra liueth in fire, as he saith, & quencheth the fire. And a certain kind of Salamandra hath rough skinne and hairy, as the skin of the sea Sele, of the which skinne bée sometime girdles made to the vse of kings: The which girdles when they be full olde be throwne into the fire harmelesse and without went purged, and as it were re∣nued: and of that skinne be tongues & bonds made in lampes & in Lanternes, that be neuer corrupt with burning of fire. Looke before in A. de Anguium di∣uersitate, & there thou shalt finde of this worme. (Additiō.Salamander, a beast in figure like a Lisard, full of spottes: being in fire it quencheth it, and is not burned.) De Sanguisuga. ca. 93. A Water léeche is called Sanguisuga, and is a water worme, & hath that name for he loueth and sucketh bloud, & lieth in a wait vpon them that drink, and when he falleth to the iaws, or clea∣ueth to any place, he sucketh & drinketh bloud, and when he hath dronke ouer∣much, he casteth it out againe, and suck∣eth newe bloud yet againe, as Isidore sayth, lib. 12. and is a worme with some part browne colour, distinguished with some deale red strakes, & is soft of body euenlong, and plyaunt, and his mouth is thrée cornered, and in his mouth is a pipe, with the which he sucketh bloud: and he sitteth vppon venimous things, and therefore when he shall bée set to a member because of medicine, first he shal be wrapped in nettles and in Salt, & is thereby compelled to cast out of his bo∣dy, if he haue tasted any venimous thing in warme water. And in hot time he ap∣plieth & setteth himselfe soone to a mem∣ber for to sucke. A horse léech. De Stellione. cap. 94. THE Lisard is called Stellio, & hath ye name of his owne colour, for it is a litle beast painted on the back with shining specks, as it were stars. Ouid speketh of him, & saith, yt he hath a name according to his colour, for hée hath di∣uerse shining specks in the body, & shine as stars, as Isidore sayth, lib. 12. And he saith, that the Lisard is so contrarye to Scorpions, that the Scorpions dread & léese comfort when they see the Lisarde. Li. 8. Plin. saith, that the Lisarde liueth most by dew: And though he be a fayre beast, and faire painted, yet he is right
venimous. For as Plinius sayth, lib. 29. cap. 2. the worst medicine is made of the Lisard: for when he is dead in Wine, he couereth their faces yt drinke therof, with vile scabs. Therefore they eschew to put him in medicine, and Ointment, yt haue enuie to fairenesse of strumpets.Note His remedy is, the yolk of an egge, hony & glasse: & the gall of a Lisarde stamped in water, assembleth together wéesels, as it is sayd. And the Lisarde is a manner kind of Ewts, & créepeth, & is foure foo∣ted, & cloue footed, with fingers departed as it wer in manner of an hound, & ther∣with he créepeth & climbeth vp to tops of houses, and in the chinnes of Welles there he maketh his dennes, and chaun∣geth their skins in age, as the Serpent doth, as he sayth, and lurketh in winter in dens and chinnes, and his sight dim∣meth, & in springing time hée commeth out of his den, and féeleth that his sight faileth, and chaungeth his place, and sée∣keth him a place toward the East, and openeth continually his eien toward the rising of the Sun, vntill the humour in the eye be full dryed, & the mist wasted, that is cause of dimnesse in the eie. And super Prou. cap. 30. the Glose meaneth, that the Lisard is the most swift beast, & is not feathered neither penned, but on∣ly by ablenesse and swiftnesse of feet hée créepeth & climbeth vpon the top of the house and the wall. (Additiō.Stellio, is not the Lisard, but like in bodye, and hath spottes in his backe, lyke starres, and is venimous. Lacertus is the Lisard or greene worme, and not hurtfull.) De Serpente. cap. 95. THe Serpent hath that name Serpens of Serpere, to créepe, for he créepeth with priuy pares and glidings, & goeth not nor steppeth openly, but créepeth wt priuy puttings forth of teates, as Isido. saith, lib. 12. Héere I make no processe of this kind, for before in littera A, cap. de Angue, all his properties be declared & shewed at full, but it noyeth not to set héere shortly some of his properties that be knowen. Io. de sancto Egedio speak∣eth of the Serpent, and sayeth, that hée dreadeth a naked man, and leapeth on a man that is clothed. Spettle is venim to ye serpent, for spettle of a fasting man is venim to him, the Serpent fighteth for his head, for therein is accounted the place of the heart. His flesh is accounted colde, for he is of colde kind, he glydeth on ye brest & on the wombe, & that is said for he goeth not forth right, but créep∣eth, & renueth himselfe euerye yere, & li∣keth moistie places, & loueth filthy pla∣ces and shadowye, and he looketh aside, & not forthright, and stingeth also aside, and the téeth be dented inwarde, & croo∣ked, & so be bendeth when he smiteth. The serpent hideth Lepra, & is eaten for to heale that euill yt it be not knowne: and vseth not to turne & wind te tongue, for he moueth it alway, & that by strēgth of venim. The serpent fasteth & suffreth hunger long time, & stoppeth his eares, because he wil not heare the inchanters coniurations. And is hunted with wine, & he hisseth before he bileth, & slaieth all that he biteth, & is enimy to birdes, for he slaieth them with his blowing: and taketh againe that thing that he casted vp, for he taketh againe the venim that hée casteth. De Simea. cap. 96. THe Ape is called Simea in Gréeke, & hath that name of a flat nose. And so we call Apes Simie, for they bée flat in the nose, and foule and riueled in the face. Or we call them Simeas, and giue them that name for lykenesse of reason. For that he in many things counterfei∣teth the déeds of men, but this is false, as Isi. saith, li. 12. And there he sayth, that Apes haue knowledge of elements, & be sory in the full of the Moone, & be merie and glad in the new of the Moone. And when ye Ape hath two whelps, she bea∣reth yt that she loueth best in hir armes, and that other on her shoulder, & when she is beset, then she must néeds flie, and may not beare both the whelps: then she is compelled to throw away yt that she bare in her armes, and is charged with that other that sitteth on her shoulder, &
is the more slow to run and to flye, and is therfore ye sooner taken with ye hunter. Of Apes be 5. manner kinds, as he saith, of whom some haue tailes: and ther is an Ape with a taile,A Munky A Babicu A Marme se. & that Ape is called Cluna amōg some men: and some be cal∣led Cenophe, and be like to an hound in the face, & in the body like to an Ape. Al∣so some be called Spinge, and be rough & hairie, with strouting paps and teats, and forgetteth soone wildnesse: and some be Sati, pleasing in face, and merrye mouings and playengs, and resteth but little. And some bée called Calatrices, & be vnlike to ye other, nigh in all manner points, for in the face is a long beard, & haue a broad taile, as Isidore saith. And Plin. saith the same, li. 8. cap. 54. There he saith, yt kinde of Apes is next to mans shape, & be diuerse, and distinguished by tailes, & labour wanderfully & busily to do all thing that they see: and so oft they sh themselues with shooes that hunters leaue in certeine places slily, & be so ta∣ken the sooner: for while they would fa∣sten the thong of the shooe, & wold put ye shooe on their féete, as they sée ye hunters doe, they bée oft taken with hunters ere they may vnloose the shooes, & be deliue∣red of them. Also Plinius saith ther, that the kind of Apes loue wel their whelps, for tame Apes that be in an house, she∣weth her whelpes that she whelpeth, to all men that he therein, & haue liking to be stroked, and knoweth them that com∣forteth and pleaseth him, and maketh them good chéere, Huc vs{que} Plinius. But eod. li. cap. 22. he saith, that in Indie bée Apes white in all ye body and those Apes be hunted & taken with Beares of Inde. Aud li. 2. Auicen saith, that the Ape ac∣cordeth in shape with a man, & in haire with a wolfes & some apes haue euil ma∣ners, & tatches, & their teeth be as it were hounds teeth, & haue malitious biting, and namely those that haue tailes, and some be rough and all hairie before, ex∣cept the face, & such haue teeth as a man, & haue other things as a man, and red∣dish eyen & sharpe, and paps and teats, in the breast, and handes, feete, and fing∣ers, and toes, and may goe and steppe on two feete, for they haue soles in theyr féet as a man hath, & so hath few beasts except a man, and namelye foure footed beasts, as Aristotle saith. And ye female Ape is like to a woman in the priuye chose, and the males yarde is like to an hounds yarde, & his entrailes be like to a mans entrailes Huc vsque Auicenne. And Aristotle saith, yt some foure foo∣ted beasts commeth to mans kinde, as the Ape. There he rehearseth all ye fore∣said likenesse. The Ape is a beast won∣derfully shapen, but he hath some likenes of mankind, and is learned and taught, and so he is taught to leape and play in diuers manner wise, and is an vntamed beast, and malitious by kinde, and is ta∣med and chastised by violence wt bea∣ting, and with cheines, and is refrained with a clogge, so that he may not runne about freely at his owne will, to abate his fiercenesse and outrage. And the Ape safeth all manner of meats & vncleane things, and therefore he séeketh and loo∣keth wormes in mens heads, and thro∣weth them into his mouth, and eateth thē. The Lion loueth Apes flesh, for by eating therof he recouereth, as it is said when he is sore sicke, as Isido. and Pli∣nius meaneth. Looke before de Leone in littera L. De Sirena. cap. 97. THe Mermaid is called Sirena, & hec Siren, Sirenis, is a sea beast wonder∣fully shapen, & draweth shipmen to peril by swéetnes of song, & so this noune Si∣rena commeth of iren, yt is to vnder∣stand, draught or drawing, as Hugueo saith. The Glose saith super Esa. 13. G. that Sirene be Serpentes with creasts.Sirene, in the svvift course of water, yt vvhatsoe∣uer com∣meth vvithin ye violence of it, is carryed avvay. And some men say, that they are fishes of the sea in likenesse of women. Papias sayth, that Sirene be great Dragons fli∣eng with creasts as some men suppose. And Isidore saith li. 20. where hée brea∣teth of wonders, in this wise, some men feine yt ther are three Sirenes soude  maidens, and some deale Fowles with claws and wings, and one of them ∣geth with voy, and another  Pipe,Those are Harpie, & both fey∣ned. and the third with an Harpe; and they please to shipmen with  of
song, that they drawe them to perill and to shipwracke, but the truth is, that they were strong whoores, ye drewe men that passed by them, to pouertie & mischiefe. And it is feined, that they brought them to shipwracke. And Isidore lib. 12. saith, that in Arabia be serpents with wings, that be called Sirene & run more swift∣ly then horses, and doe flye, and also it is sayd, that they flye with wings, and theyr venimme is so strong, that death is self sooner then ach or sore. And Phi∣siologus speaketh of Sirena, and sayth, it is a beast of the sea wonderfully shapen as as maid from the nauell vpward, and a fish from the nauell downeward, and this wonderfull beast is gladde and me∣rie in tempest, and sadde and heauie in fayre weather. With swéetnesse of song this beast maketh shipmen to sléepe, and when sée séeth that they be a sléepe, she goeth into the ship, and ratisheth which she may take with her, and bringeth him into a drye place, and maketh him first lye by her, and doe the déede of lechery, & if he will not or may not, then she slaieth him and eateth his flesh. Of such won∣derfull beasts it is written in the great Alexanders story. (Additiō.The nature of diuers fishes is to pray vpon man, as the Conger, the Mac∣krell, and the Crab or Lopster: my selfe in the yeare. 63. sawe the experience, and as for the Mermaide that is the sea fish, shapes appere after diuerse formes, that some groose-head imagine to be lyke a maide, as the Monke fish, the Frier, and Hippotamus wherein is a kinde of re∣semblaunce, but fae from proporti∣on.) De. Scorpione cap. 98. A Scorpion, as Isidore sayth, libro. .  lande Wo , with a crooked things in the tayle, and hath that name Scorpio in Gréeke, for it stingeth with  tayle, and sheddeth venimme in the  wound. And it is his propertie, that he  euer nor her oh neuer the palme of the hand, as he sayth: And this maner scorpion commeth of Scote the  is sweet, and of , that is to feine, for before he feineth pleasance. By likenesse of the worme Scorpion a bush of thornes, & of briers, & knotted braun∣ches of roddes be called stinging. Also a signe in heauen is called Scorpio. For when the Sunne is in that signe, wée féele first stinging of colde. Therefore Horace sayth. Maturina parum tunc cautos frigora ledunt. The morow cold grieueth but litle. Also an arow that is venimed is called Scor∣pio, for when it commeth out of the bow vnto a man, & hitteth him, if sheddeth venim, & for that cause it hath that name Scorpio. And of al these it is said in this vearse following. Scorpius est signum, vemūsque, sa∣gitta, flagellum. The effect of this vearse is saith before. And Plin. li. 11. ca. 26. speketh of Scorpi∣ons, & saith, that they bring forth small wormes, shapen as egges, & bréedeth fer∣uent & right pestelentiall venim, as ser∣pents do. And the venim of Scorpions noieth & gréeueth thrée dayes full sore, & afterward flaseth with soft death, but it be holpen & succoured the sooner. And ye Scorpion smiteth maidens with deaths stroke, when he smiteth & stingeth them, & women also: But he smiteth not men so soone, & grieueth most & noieth in the morow tide, those yt they finde in theyr wayes, when they cōeout of their dens, or if it happeneth yt they shed venim by any smiting. The Scorpions taile is al∣way redy to smite & sting, & ceaseth in no momēt of gréeuing or noieng, if he haue any occassion or cause: & hée stingeth and smiteth a slon, & sheddeth in the smiting white venim. Apoderus is author, & de∣scribeth many maner of gréeuous scor∣piōs by double colour, some haue stings, & among these scorpions the males bée most grieuous, & namely in time of loue, and these scorpions be smaller and lon∣ger then other. And of them all the ve∣nim is most gréeuous a little after the midst of the daye, in the great and fer∣uent heate of the Sun, and also when they thirst, and haue certeine knots or riuells in the taile, and the mo such they haue, the venim is the worse, and they
haue sometime such knots sixe or seuen. Apolodius meaneth, yt in Affrica some Scorpions haue feathers, and those bée full gréeuous: and because of winning, Inchanters gathereth venime of diuers lands, and labour for to beare these win∣ged Scorpions into Italy, but they may not liue vnder heuen within the country of Italy. But such Scorpions bée some∣time séene in Italy, but they be not grée∣uous. And in Scithia they smite blacke Swine, so that they die soone, but they bath thē in water afterward. To a man smitten of ye scorpion, ashes of scorpions burnt, dronke in wine, is remedy. Also scorpions drowned in oile, helpeth & suc∣coureth beasts that bée strong with scor∣pions. The Scorpion hurteth no Beast that hath any bloud, & some Scorpions bréed & bring forth a leauen young scor∣pions. And it is sayd, that the Scorpions eateth them sometime, but one of them that is most flie leapeth on the thigh of the Scorpionesse, and sitteth there safe & sure from the stinging of the taile, and from the biting of the mouth, and this slaieth the hée, and worketh the death of his young, and kinde ordeineth this prouision, for such a pestilentiall kinde should not multiply too much. Huc vs∣que Plinius. libro. 11. And Aristotle lib. 7. sayth, that some Scorpions doe eate some venimous thinges, and haue the worse venime, and so Dragons doe eate Scorpions, and those bée worst. A∣gainst stinging of Scorpions bée manye remedyes, as it is sayde before in libro de Venenis, where it is perfectly trea∣ted. (Additiō.In Italy are manye Scorpions, they are much lyke a Cricket, but more browner, venimous, & hanteth in clifts of posts, and beds, and be quicke in run∣ning.) De Sue. cap. 99. A Sow is called Sus, and hath ye name of Subigendo, vnder wroting & dig∣ging, for she routeth, & diggeth the earth to get her meate & foode, & ouerturneth & wrouteth, that shée may come with the teeth to moores & roots. And Plinius saith li. 8. cap. 51. that the young Sow concei∣ueth against the euennesse of the day and night in springing time, and sarroweth sometime 20. pigs at once, but she may not reare them nor bring them vp, and eateth all sometime, except the first. For she loueth him best that cōmeth out first of her wombe, for he is most kindlye to her. And shée giueth him alwaye the first seat, as Plinius sayth. Solinus and Aristotle li. 6. meane, that the sow is an vncleane beast, & a right greate glutton, and she eateth & deuoureth gluttonously all manner stinking things & vncleane, and couereth and desireth baths, fennes, and puddles, and reeth hir selfe therin, & waxeth fat. And Aristotle saith lib. 7. she waxeth fat, and namely in resting. And the seuenth part of her meat turneth into haire and bloud, and into other such. And the Sow waxeth leane after yt she hath farrowed, for the meat that she eateth turneth into milke, by the which her pigs bee nourished and fed, and the Sowe waxeth fierce and cruell, when she hath Pigges, and fighteth and put∣teth her selfe in peryll for her Pigges a∣gaynst the Woulfe. Looke the other properties of this sayde beast in littera P. before, de Porco, & in this same booke in littera A. de Apro, where they bée more largely treated and spoken of in di∣uerse things. De Tauro. cap. 100. THe Bull is called Taurus, & is nei∣ther roother nor gelded, as Isid. saith. And Taurus is a nowne of Gréeke, & so is Bos also. And as hée sayeth, libro. 12. Bulles of Indie be red, and swifte, and cruell, & their haire is turned in contra∣rywise, & such a Bull bendeth his necke at his owne will, and putteth off dartes and shot with hardnesse of the backe, and is fierce, and is not ouercome, and when he is tyed vnder a Figge trée, hée looseth and leaueth all his fiercenesse, and is sodeinelye sober and softe, as Isidore sayth libro. 17. Looke before de Ficu, in littera F. and is a proud beast and head∣strong, and his most strength is in the necke, in the hornes, and in the powle.
Plinius speaketh of the Bull, libro. 8. cap. 45. and saith, that the gentlenesse of the Bull is knowen by sight, & by sterne face, and ful eares, and in hornes, and in shape disposed to fighting: al his manace standeth in his fore-feet, with the which he diggeth the earth, and throweth it vp among beasts. He vseth specially such casting and throwing of earth, & com∣forteth him therewith, as he saith. And Aristotle lib. 2. saith, that the Bull hath a round liuer, lyke to a mans lyuer: and eateth alone before time of generati∣on & of loue, but then hée commeth into company of kine, as he saith, lib. 7. And fighteth then strongly against other. Also in codem, Bulls be fatted with grasse, hearbes, & corne, which bréedeth ventosi∣tie, & also they be fatted with Pesen & Beanes, and other such, & if thou doest cut & slit his skin,That is, vvhen hee is hide-bound, or cloung. so that it areare some∣what from his flesh with blowing with a pipe, & giuest him afterwarde to eate, then he fatteth, & is made fat with swéet meats, as with Figs and Grapes, and Reysons. Also lib. septimo, Bulles be in contrary manner & doing to horses: for they couet not to drinke water but it be colde and cléere. Also libr. 7. it is sayde, that Bulles doe fight for theyr Kine, and he that hath ye mastry, and is victor, leapeth on the female: and when he is faint and féeble by much dooing the déeds of generation, then he yt was ouercome, commeth & fighteth with him, & he that hath the mastry leapeth on the female, as it were making ioy of the mastrie. And Bulls vse the worke of generation after one yere, & perchance after 8. months, as kine do. Looke within following in this same booke, de Vacca, in littera V. Bulls before that they bée gelded, be fierce and proude, but when they haue lost theyr gendring stones, they be soft as females and mild, and fight not, and waxe in bo∣dye, and fatten,Then cal∣led Oxen and be made milde and soft with yokes of ploughs. Look within in littera V, de vitulo castrato. Also lib. 11. in fine it is saide. That Bulles haue stronger sinews & strings, or brawnes, then Oxen: for in the gelding all the mē∣bers of the body soften, & therfore in the hart of ye Bul oftentimes a bone is foūd: as in the heart of an Hart. Also Pli. li. 8. cap. 22. saith, that some Bulls be wilde, fierce, and sterne, and be more in quāti∣tie & greatnesse then other Bulls, & more swifter, and those Bulles be red in cou∣lour, and bléew in the eies, hauing theyr haire ouerturned, and groweth towards their eyes: & they haue mouable hornes & moueth them one after another in figh∣ting. And haue ridges & backes as hard as flint, so that they may not be woun∣ded. And he hunteth all wild beasts, and may not be taken but in déepe pits and caues, & be alway fierce when they bée taken, & destroy themselues, & die for in∣dignation. De Tragelapho. cap. 101. TRagelaphus is called Hircoceruus also, & hath that name Tragelaphus of Tragos, yt is a goat bucke, & Elephos, that is an hart, as Isid. saith, lib. 12. And be called Tragelaphi among ye Gréeks: and some be of the kind of an Hart, and haue rough eares as Goat buckes, and rough chins with beards. Aristotle li. 2. speaketh of them and sayth, that some wild beasts haue crooked hornes, as Hir∣coceruus, yt is called Tragelaphus also, & hath soles in the féet: & his body wax∣eth to the quantity of an hart: and this beast beareth downeward his face, and hath hornes lyke vnto an Hart Calfe. (Additiō.Tragelaphus, whose name is not common, is like a Goate, but he is not bearded, his hornes are bending more compasse then the Goat, headed as a Ram, both in forehead and ears, white as a shéepe, sauing his brest is blackish, bending necke, as the Déere. The lear∣ned haue named this beast Tragela∣phum, this beast is wholsome to eate, ye hide and hornes for sundrye purposes. Gesner, who supposeth it a kind of deere,in folio Appendix. Addition or rem∣nant of collections. 20.) De Talpa. cap. 102. A Mole is called Talpa, and is a little beast, somewhat like vnto a Mouse. Of this beast Isidore speaketh libr. 12.
and saith, that he is damned in euerlast∣ing blindnesse and darknesse, & is with∣out eyen, and hath a snowte as a swine, and diggeth therewith the earth, and ca∣steth vp that he diggeth and gnaweth, and eateth mores and rootes vnder the earth, and hateth the Sunne, and flyeth lyght, and may not liue aboue the earth, and hath a blacke skinne, hairie, softe & smooth, and most short legges, and broad footed, deuided or parted with toes, as it were an hound. And Arist. speaketh of the Mole in this wise: euery beast that gendereth a beast like to himselfe, hath eyen, except the Mole, that hath no eyen séene without, and who that slitteth the skinne subtilly and warely, shall finde within the fores of eyen hidden: & some men suppose, that that skinne breaketh for anguish & for sorow when he begin∣neth to dye, and beginneth then to open the eyen in dieng, that were cloased ly∣uing. Héereto Plin. saith lib. 10. cap. 49. that the Mole heareth better when he is healed with earth that is a thicke Ele∣ment and deafe of kinde, and if he heare a man speake, he voydeth and flyeth far awaye. (Additiō.The Mole or Want hath eyes, but they are very small, wherewith he séeth. In the end of Maye he leaueth open his earthing, and will somtime come so far thēce, that he is taken or he can recouer the same.) De Taxo. cap. 103. Badger or Graye.THe Brocke is called Taxus and Me∣lus also, and is a beast of the quanti∣tie of a Foxe, and his skin is full hairie and rough, and is called also Melota. And the Glose saith vppon that worde, Circuerunt in melotis, &c. Ebre. 12. Of this beast that is called Taxus and Me∣lota also, Plin. lib. 8. cap. 39. saith. In such beasts is wit and slight, and holdeth in the breath and blowing, stretcheth the skinne so holding their brethings, when they be hunted and chased with hunters dogges, and so they finde sleight and ma∣ner by such strouting out of the skin to eschew and put off the biting of those hounds that so do pursue and follow to noye them, and also for to slay them: and in like wise put they of the smiting of ye hunters: these beasts know when tēpest shall fal, & maketh thē therfore dens vn∣der earth, with diuers entrings, & when the Northerne winde bloweth, he stop∣peth the North entring with his rough taile, and letteth stande open the South entring, chaunging his hoales, as the winde altereth. In the same dens they make prouisions, and gather them store of meate against winter: and somtime if they lacke meate, they take sléepe in stéede of meate, as he saith: for they bée of those kinde of beasts, that hide them∣selues in winter, and liue most parte by sléepe, as it is sayd before of the Mouse. And as Phisiologus saith, there is a ma∣ner kinde of Brockes, that gather meat with the female against winter, & laieth it vp in his den, and when cold winter commeth, the male dreadeth least store of meate should faile, and refraineth ye fe∣male, and withdraweth hir meale, and suffereth hir not to eate hir fill, and shée faineth peace, as it were following the males will, and commeth in on that o∣ther side of the den, & openeth hir iawes, and eateth and deuoureth and wasteth the meate that is gathered, vnwitting to the male. Also he saith yt these beasts hate the Foxe, and fight oft times with him, but when the Foxe séeth, yt he may not for roughnes & hardnes of the skin grieue him, he faineth him as though he were sicke & ouercome, and flieth away, and while the Brocke goeth out to get his pray, the Fox commeth into his den, and defileth his chamber with vrin and other vncleannes: & the Brocke is sque∣mous of such foule things, & forsaketh his house that is so defiled, and getteth néedfully another dwelling place. De Tigride. cap. 104. TIgris is the most swiftest beast in flight, as it were an arrow, for ye Per∣sians call an arrow Tigris & is a beast spotted with diuers specks, & is wonder∣full strong and swifte: and the Riuer Tigris hath the name of this beast, for it is the most swiftest of all floudes.
And in the more Hircania bréedeth ma∣nie beasts of this kinde. Huc vs{que} Isid. And Haec Tigris, dis, is the name of the riuer. Looke before De fluminibus. And Plinius speaketh of the Tigers & sayth: that beastes of that kinde come out of Hircania, and are beastes of dreadfull swiftnesse, and is namely knowen when he is taken, for the whelpe is all glemie and sinewie: and the Hunter lieth in a∣waite and taketh away the whelpes, & flyeth soone awaye, on the most swifte horse that he may haue: and when the wilde beast commeth, and findeth the den bayd, & the whelps away, then he ri∣seth headlong, and taketh the sore of foo∣ting of him that beareth the whelpes a∣way, and followeth him by smell: and when the hunter heareth the grutching of that beast that runneth after him, hée throweth downe one of the whelpes, & the Tiger bitch taketh the whelpe in hir mouth, and beareth him into hir den, & layeth him therein, and runneth againe after the hunter: but in the meane time the hunter taketh a ship, and hath with him the other whelpes, and scapeth in that wise: and so she is beguiled, and hir fiercenesse standeth in no stéede. For as Plinius saieth lib. 6. cap. 19. the male careth not for the whelpes. And he that will bears away the whelps, leaueth in the way great mirrours,  the damme followeth and findeth the mirrours in the waye, and looketh on them, and séeth hir owne shaddowe and image therein, and thinketh that she séeth hir young therein, and is long occupied therefore to deliuer hir whelpes out of the glasse, and so the Hunter hath time and space for to scape: and so she is beguiled with hir owne shadow, and she followeth no farther after the Hunter to delyuer hir young. De Tinea. cap. 105. A Moth is called Tinea, & is a worme of clothes, as Isid. saith, & hath that name, for he holdeth the cloth that hée is in, vntill he be within, and eateth and gnaweth it, and is gendered of corrupti∣on of cloth, when the cloath is too long in presse and thicke aire, and is not blo∣wen with winde, neither vnfolded in pure aire. And this worme eateth ye vt∣ter part of the cloath, and wasteth it so slily, that it is not knowen ere it be har∣med, and though he be a sensible beast, yet he hideth himselfe within the cloth, that vnneth he is séene. Mothes hate & flye bitter things and bitter smells, and come not lightly in the cloth yt is sprong with such things, and therefore leaues of the Laurel trée, of Ceders and of Ci∣pres, and other such, put among cloathes in hutches, saueth clothes and also books from corruption and eating of mothes, as Constantine saieth. Also a manner scab of the head is called Tinea,That is ye seuere o scall. for it holdeth and cleaueth fast to the skinne. Thereof looke before libr. 5. De capitis infirmitate. De Teredine. cap. 106. MAny wormes are called Teredines in Gréeke, for they pearce and eate trées, as Isi. saith li. 12. and are gendered of corrupt humours, that abide in trées vnder the rinde and in the sap and pith, and be gendred namely in trées that are felled or planted in vndue time, as he sai∣eth: and that namely in the full of the Moone, when the moysture is much in bodies by vertue of the Moone, & is not defied for superfluitie thereof, nor ruled by kinde, and therefore such superfluitie must néeds turne into wormes and cor∣ruption. Looke before De effectu Lunae libr. 6. The worme Teredo is a little worme of a trée, and is most softe in substaunce, and fretleth, gnaweth, and wasteth most hard Trées, and maketh thereof smaller powder than anye fyle might make. Looke héereafter De vermiculo. De Testudine. cap. 107. A Snayle is called Testudo, and is a worme, and hath that name, for he is healed in is house, as in a chamber, as Isid. saith li. 12. And there are foure ma∣ner of snailes, land snailes, & sea stronde
snailes, & fennie snailes that lye in ma∣reyes, and riuer snailes, and some men suppose though it be not to be beléeued, that the ship goeth flower, if he beareth the right foote of the snaile, as Isi. sayeth lib. 12. De Testudine autem quaere su∣pra, in litera L. de Limace. (Additiō.The Snaile hath no féet at all, but he meaneth the sea Tortuce, because he carieth his shell vpon his backe.) De Tortuca. cap. 108. THe Tortuse is accounted among snailes, for he is closed betwéen most hard shells, in the which he closeth him when any thing grieueth him: and of Tortuca is double kinde, that one dwel∣leth in riuers, and that other in lande. And Tortuca of riuers slaieth and is venemous: and the lande Tortuse dwel∣leth in houses & in woodes, and is cleane and good to eating, but it is horrible and foule in sight, and layeth egges as an Hen, but they be more pale and lesse in quantitie, and is a foure footed Beast, with foure small féete, as a frogge, with a little head as a serpent, and hath hard shells, and many foule specke. And their flesh that dwelleth in woodes be medici∣nable, and hath vertue to restore, & hel∣peth therfore for Tisikes and Etikes, & for them that be consumpt. Arist. lib. 8. speaketh of the sea. Tortuse and sayth, that he eateth all thing, and his mouth, is stronger thā any other waste mouth, for if he take a stone in his mouth, hée breaketh it,It must be a soft stōe. The Author mi∣stoke this Tortuse, It is Lu∣pus mari∣nus, com∣monly cal¦led of the fishermē, a Cracke stone, for he hath in his mouth .3. rovves of teeth, and before tuskes, vvith the vvhich he breaketh a sunder that be biteth. and he commeth out of the water to the brinke, & eateth the grasse and hearbes, and when he tourneth a∣gaine to the water, he goeth vp & swim∣meth, so that his backe is drye with the Sunne, for it is not easie to him to bée déepe in water. Also lib. 13. a beast that hath stales, feathers, and shells, hath no bladder for scarcitie of drinke, for super∣fluitie of drinke passeth into the fethers and into other things, except ye Tortuse: for his loung is most fleshie and bloudy like to the lng of a Cowe: & the lung of the wilde Tortuse is more than hee should be, for his body is contained in a thicke shell, and is not onely dissolued therefore but in flesh, and therefore in the Tortuse is a bladder to receiue su∣perfluitie, but the bladder is full lyttle: & in all beasts that haue bloudie lungs, is a bladder, & therefore onely the Tor∣tuse among all beasts with hard shells, hath bladder and raines. De Vacca. cap. 109. THe Cowe is called Vacca, and hath that name, as it were Boacta, as Isi∣dore saith libro. 12. And is an incresing beast: for Aristotle saieth libro. 6. The Cowe is moued to the deede of kind af∣ter one yeare, and perchaunce after eight months, and the Cowe goeth with calfe nine months, and calueth in the tenthe month. If they range without a Heard, they wexe wilde, so that Heardes maye not tame them: and the desire of Kine is knowen, by swellyng of the twists, and by their continuall lowing: for Kine lowe when they be a Bulling, and leape on Buls and follow them, & stand with them. Also in codem he sayth in ye end: Men meane, that a Cow goeth ten mo∣neths, & if the calueth before that time, the Calfe liueth not, nor his clées be not full complete, and commonly she calueth one Calfe, and perchaunce twaine: and the female lyueth commonly xv. yeares, and the males also: and when they bee gelded they be the more strong, and may liue xx. yeare. And the Cowe hath good milke after the caluing, and no milk be∣fore, and if they haue any milke it is li∣tle worth, or nothing of value: and when a Cowes milke is first crudded, it is made as it were tough, and that falleth, when it is medled with waters and a yeareling Cow commeth seldome with a Bull: and when the Kine toe often calue and haue many Calues, it is a to∣ken as men meane, that in winter shall be much raine: and Kine lyue in com∣panye, and be ofte lost, if they goe out of companye, for then wilde beasts eate them. Also among all beasts, the males haue more stronger and greater voyce, except Kine, that haue more greater voyce than Bulls. Also he saith, that ye Cow hath more
stronger hornes, and more knottie than the male, but they are not so great: But and they be heated, they maye be bowed toward each side, and when they haue sore féete, it is medicine therefore to an∣noynt them betweene the hornes with oyle and pitch, and other medicines. Al∣so he saith, that Kine loue to drink cléere water, and drinke vneth or neuer, trou∣bly water & thicke: and haue the Po∣dagre, and die of that euill, and the to∣ken thereof is, when they beare downe their eares and eate not, as he saith. The fat Cowe shunneth the yoake, that she was vsed to beate last, or she was fat: she lyeth in hir owne dirte, & wex∣eth fat, and the more she is forborne and spared of trauaile, the more slow she is: and when she is stong with a great flie,The brēt or sloute flyes. then she reeseth vp hir taile in a won∣derfull wise, & stertleth, as she wer mad, about fields and plaines. (Additiō.The Cowe hide is not so good for shooe soale leather, as is the Oxe.) De Vacca agresti. cap. 110. SOmetime a Cowe is wilde. Of such a Cowe Auicen speaketh and Arist. also and say: that in the lande of Parthia is a Cow, that hath haire in hir necke as an Horse, & is of the quantitie of an Hart, therefore many men call that Cow, Equiceruus and such a cow is without horns, & dwelleth in moun∣taines and in woodes, and hath faire ey∣en and is sharpe of sight. And somtime such a Cow hath hornes, but they be li∣tle, as the hornes of an Hart calfe, and bend backward, as the horns of a Goat bucke: and in hir heart is a bone found as in the hart of an Hart, and that bone, when the bloud warmeth, tickeling mo∣ueth the sinewes and substaunce of the heart, and is the cause of mouing a beast to ioye and to lyking: and so by suche tickeling areareth sodainly the head, and leapeth swiftly, and startleth about. Also li. 8. Arist. saith, that beasts yt maye not haue helpe of hornes, haue other ma∣ner helpe and succour of kind, and kind giueth switnesse to Harts and to wilde Kine that haue crooked hornes, and may not for greatnesse defend all the bodye, and therefore kinde giueth another help to the wild Cow that helpeth hir great∣ly, casting of dirte, with the which shée noyeth hounds that come nigh hir. Also other hounds that finde such dirte, occu∣pie them about the smell thereof, vntill the beast that may not fight, is fled and scaped perill. Heereof looke before in lit∣tera B. de Boue and Bubalo, yt is a wild beast. De Vitulo. cap. 111. A Calfe is called Vitulus, and hath that name of Virore aetatis, spring∣ing of age, as Isi. saith lib. 12. For when he is calued, anone he riseth by his own vertue, and seeketh the Cowes vdder, & sucketh anone, and he is licked with the Cowes tongue, & cleansed of all manner filth that commeth with him out of hir wombe. And the Calfe when he is cal∣ued hath a certaine blacke specke in the forhead, and Witches meane, that that specke or whelke exciteth loue, but the Cowe biteth away this specke out of the Calues forhead, and receiueth him not to hir teates, ere the foresayd venime be taken off and done away. And Ari. sai∣eth the same of the Mare, & of hir colte, and Auicen also. Looke before in litera E. de Equa. The Calfe loueth his dam, and knoweth hir lowing, and followeth hir, and busheth with his forhead ye vd∣der that he sucketh, and getteth so the more milke of his dam. And when he is full, and hath wel sucked, then he is me∣rie and glad, and leapeth and startleth leaping about: and goeth not out of his dams foores. Also lib. 8. Arist. saith, that Calues be gelded after one yeare, and if they be not gelded, then they shall be lit∣tle of body: and a Calfe is gelded in this manner. He is throwen downe to the ground, and the skinne is cut and slit, & the gendring stones be cut out, and the strings thereof be areared vpwarde, and the sinewes also, & the caruing is bound vntill that the bloud passe out: and som∣time there gendereth a postume in that place, and then they burne that one gen∣dring stone that is cut off, and put the
pouder thereof vppon the postume, and so the place is saued. Also in the sea is a beast lyke to the Calfe, and is there∣fore called the Sea calfe:A Seale. and this beast calueth on the land, and gendreth as an Hound, and calueth neuer more than twaine, and he féedeth his whelpes with teates, and bringeth them not to the sea vntill the eleuenth day, and then he tea∣cheth them to swim, and they are euill to slaye, except they be hit in the heads, and they lowe as a Calfe,They snarle as a dogge, & do not lovve. and be there∣fore called Calues, and becke and make signes to men with voyce & with sem∣blaunce with most discipline. No beast sléepeth faster than these, and with the fins that they vse in the sea, they creepe on the lande, in stéede of feete, and haue rough skins and hairie as calues haue, and when the skinnes be falue off, they hold the kinde of the Sea, for the haire thereof ariseth when the sea floweth, his right fin hath a milde vertue, for it gen∣dereth sléepe, if it be laid vnder the head. Huc vs{que} Plin. li. 8. ca. 7. (Additiō.Uery simply did the olde Authors write of the nature of things, the cause was, they lacked varietie of wordes, to expresse their mindes.) De Vrso. cap. 112. THe Beare is called Vrsus, and hath that name, for with his mouth he shapeth his whelpe, and so he is called, Vrsus, as it were Orsus. She whelpeth before hir time, as Isido. saith li. 12. For Auicen saieth, that the Beare bringeth forth a péece of flesh vnperfect and euill shapen, and the dam licketh the lumpe, and shapeth the members with licking: and thereof is written. The yōg Bear hath al his feet only that hee lyeth round as an hedg hogge for certaine dayes.Hic format lingua soctum, quem pro∣tulit vrsa. The Beare shapeth with hir tongue, the broode that she bréedeth and bringeth forth. And this vnripe whelping ma∣keth, and then he gendereth the thirtie daye, and thereof commeth hastie whel∣ping and euill shaps. The Beares head is féeble, and his most strength is in his armes and in the loynes, and therfore he may stand thrée daies, as Isi. saith li. 12. cap. de bestijs. Or els this name Vrsus commeth of Vrgendo, to thrust & con∣straine that thing that he taketh. Lib. 8. cap. 37. Plin. speaketh of Beares, & saith, that their gendring is in the beginning of winter, and gender not as other foure footed beastes doe, but they gender both lieng, and then they depart a sunder each from other, and goe in dens and eyther by themselues, and whelpeth therein the xxx. daye, and the whelpes be not moe, than fiue, and be white and euill shapen, for the whelpe is a piece of flesh little more than a Mouse, hauing neither eyen nor haire,That is not so. and hauing claws some deale bourging, and so this lumpe she licketh, and shapeth a whelpe with licking: and so men shall sée no where beastes more seldome gender nor whelp than Beares, and therefore the males hide them and lurke fortie dayes, and the females aray their houses foure months with boughs fruite and braunches, and couereth it, for to kéepe out the raine with softe twigs and braunches. The first fortye dayes of these dayes, they sléepe so fast, that they may not be awaked wt woūde, and that time they fast mightely: and the greace of a Beare, helpeth against the falling of the haire. And after these dayes she sitteth vp, and lyueth by suc∣king of hir féete, and imbraceth the cold whelpes, and holdeth them close to hyr breast, and heateth and comforteth them, and lyeth groueling vpon them, as birds doe. And it is wonder to tell a thing, that Theophrastus saieth, and telleth, that Beares flesh sod that time, vanish∣eth if it be laide vp, and is no token of meate found in the Almerie, but a little quantitie of humour: and hath that time small droppes of bloud about the heart, and no manner of bloud in the other deale of the body. And in spring∣ing time the males goe forth and be fat, and the cause thereof is vnknowen, namely, for that time they be not fatted with meate neither with sléepe, but one∣ly seauen dayes. And when she goeth out of hir den, she séeketh an hearb, & eateth it to make soft hir womb, that is then hard & boūd, than hir eyen be dimmed, and therfore
namely they labour to get them honnie combes, for the mouth should not be wounded with stinging of Bées & bléed, and so reléeue the heauinesse & sore ache of their eyen: his head is full féeble, that is most strong in the Lyon, and there∣fore somtime he falleth downe headlong vpon the rockes, and falleth vppon gra∣uell, and dieth soone: and as men saye, the Beares braine is venemous, & ther∣fore when they be slayne, their heads be burnt in open places, for men shuld not taste of the braine, and fall into madnes of Beares. And they fight against Buls, and take them cruelly with the mouth, and hangeth on them by their féete and hornes, and draweth them with waight downe to the ground, and renteth & slai∣eth them with biting: and no beast hath so great sleight to doe euill déedes, as the Beare. Huc vsque Plin. libr. 8. cap. 37. And Arist. speaketh of the Beare lib. 7. & saith that the Beare eateth all things, for he eateth fruite of trées, when he cli∣meth vpon them, & breaketh Bée hiues, and eateth honie, and Bées grieueth his eyen, and stingeth his tongue, and dri∣ueth and chaseth him awaye sometime. And eateth Crabs and Antes for medi∣cine, and eateth flesh for great strength, and fighteth with Hartes & with wilde Swine, and with hounds, & with Buls, and throweth them downe to ye ground, and goeth vpright against the Bull, and ofte holdeth the hornes in his fore féete, and ouercommeth him, and is an vnpa∣cient beast and wrathfull, and will be aduenged on all those yt toucheth him. If another touch him, anone he leaueth the first, and réeseth on the seconde, and réeseth on the third: and when he is ta∣ken, he is made blinde with a bright ba∣sin, and bound with chaynes, and com∣pelled to playe, and tamed with beting, and is an vnstedfast beast and vnstable, and uneasie, and goeth therfore all daye about the stake, to the which he is strōg∣ly tied: he lycketh and sucketh his own féete, and hath liking in the iuyce there∣of: he can wonderfullye climbe vppon trées, vnto the highest tops of them. And ofte Bées gather honie in hollowe trées, and the Beare findeth honie by smell, & goeth vp to the place that the honnye is in, and maketh a waye into the Trée with his clawes, and draweth out the honie and eateth it, and commeth ofte by custome vnto such a place, when he is an hungred: and the Hunter taketh héed thereof, and pitcheth full sharpe hookes and stakes about the foote of the trée, and hangeth craftely a right heauie hammer or wedge, before ye open way to ye hony, then the Beare commeth, and is an hun∣gred, and the logge that hangeth ther on high letteth him, and he putteth awaye the wedge with violence, but after the remouing, the wedge falleth againe and hitteth him on the eare, and he hath in∣dignation thereof, and putteth away the wedge fiercely, and then the wedge fal∣leth and smiteth him harder than it did before: and be striueth so long with the wedge, vntill his féeble head doth fayle, by ofte smiting of the wedge, and then he falleth downe vpon the prickes and stakes, and slayeth himselfe in that wise. Theophrastus telleth of this manner Hunting of Beares, and learned it of the Hunters in the Country of Ger∣manie. De Vrsa. cap. 113. THe female Beare is called Vrsa, and is a Beast most cruell, when hir whelpes be stolne, for she is right busie to saue hir whelpes, and therefore she licketh them busilye, and giueth them sucke, and nourisheth them, and putteth hir selfe ofte foorth with all hir might, against them that would take away hir whelpes. And she departeth from the male when she hath conceiued, and com∣meth not in his company, till ye whelps be perfectly shapen, as he saith. And shée hideth hir selfe in time of lechery, and is ashamed to be séene in the time of loue: also then the male spareth the female, & commeth not to hir, till she hath whelp∣ed, as Ari. Plin. and Auicen meane. Also lib. 73. Beares licketh not drinke: as beasts doe with sawie téeth, and sucketh not, neither swalloweth, as beasts doe that haue continuall téeth, as shéepe and mē: but biteth ye water, & swaloweth it.
De Vulpe. cap. 114. A Foxe is called Vulpes, and hath that name, as it were wallowing féete a∣side, and goeth neuer forthright, but al∣way in by wayes, and with fraud, and is a false beast and deceiuable: for when he lacketh meate, he faineth himselfe dead, and then fowles come to him, as it were to a carren, and anone he catcheth one and deuoureth him, as Isi. saith lib. 12. The Foxe halteth alway, for ye right legges be shorter than the lefte legs: his skinne is very hairy, rough, and hot, his taile is great and rough, and when an hound weneth to take him by the taile, he taketh his mouth full of haire, & stop∣peth it. The Foxe doth fight with the Brocke for dens, & defileth the Brockes den with his vrine and with his dirte, and hath so the mastrie ouer him, with fraud and deceipt, and not by strength. The Foxe inhabiteth himselfe in holes and dens vnder the earth, and stealeth & deuoureth more tame beasts than wild. Arist. saith li. 8. The Hart is friend to a Foxe, and fighteth therefore with the Brock and helpeth the Foxe. Betwéene the Foxe and the Brocke, is kindelye wrath:and often the Foxe ouercommeth the Brock, more by guile, than by might and strength: and is a right gluttonous beast, and deuoureth much: and he gen∣dreth blinde whelpes, as doth the Lyon and the Woolfe, as Arist. saith libro. 16. For as Solinus saith, in all beasts that gender brood incomplete, ye cause is glut∣tonie: for if kinde suffered them to a∣bide vntill they were complete, they should slay the dam with sucking: and therefore kinde maketh them not to be full complete, least they should slay their owne kinde by gluttonie and great de∣sire of meate. The Foxe is a stinking beast and corrupt, and doth corrupt ofte the places that they dwell in continual∣ly, and maketh them to be barren: his wombe is white, and the necke vnder the throate, and his taile is redde & his backe: his breth stinketh, and his biting is some deale venemous, as Plin. sayeth. And when hounds do pursue him, hee draweth in his taile betwéene his legs, and when he seeth he may not scape, hee pisseth in his taile that is full hairie and rough, and swappeth his taile full of pisse in the hounds faces yt pursue him, and the stench of the pisse is full grie∣uous to the houndes, and therefore the hounds spare him somwhat. The Foxe faineth himselfe tame in time of neede: but by night he waiteth his time, and doth shrewd déedes. And though he bée right guefull and malitious, yet hée is good and profitable in vse of medicine, as Plin. sayth lib. 28. cap. 8. For his greae and marow helpeth much against shrin∣king of sinewes, as it is said: his blond is accounted tempering and dissoluing, and departing harde things, and is good therefore to breake the stone in the bla∣der and in the reynes, as it is supposed. Plinius setteth there other opinions of great men, of properties of Foxes, of whom I force not to make mention: but he saith, that if a man haue vpon him a Foxe tongue in a ring or in a bracelet, he shal not be blinde, as witches meane. (Additiō.The lyuer of the Foxe is sayde to be good to restore the lyuer in man or woman: his smell is a great helpe a∣gainst the Palsie, therefore he is tyed néere the lodgings of the diseased.) De Verme. cap. 115. A Worme is called Vermis, and is a beast that ofte gendereth of flesh and of hearbs: and gendereth oft of Caule, and somtime of corruption of humours, and somtime of medling of male and fe∣male, and somtime of egges, as it well appeareth of Scorpions and of Tortu∣ses and Ewies, as Isidore saith lib. 12. And the Worme is called Vermis, as it were Vertens, turning and winding: for the worme turneth and windeth to∣ward many sides, for the worme neither créepeth nor glideth as serpents do, but the worme draweth and haleth his bo∣dy in diuers places of the bodye, with many diuers draughts, as Isidore saith: and wormes come out of their dens in springing time, which is called Ver, as he sayth.
Of Wormes be many manner diuerse kindes, for some be water wormes, and some bée lande Wormes, and of those, some be in hearbes and in Wortes,Caterpil∣lers, Cankers. & Moaths as Malshragges: and other such, and some in Trées, as Teredines, trée Wormes, and some in clothes, as Moathes, and some in flesh, as Maggots, that bréede of corrupt and rotted moysture in flesh, and some in beasts within & without, as long wormes in childrens wombes, and those long wormes be called Lumbrici, and those other that be not long be cal∣led Ascarides,Mavvel vvormes. and Chirones, hounde wormes, and lice and néetes in heads,Gut vvormes & bots. & all such wormes bréed and gender of cor∣rupt humours in bodyes of beasts with∣in or wtout. And there be other wormes of the earth which be long and rounde, soft and smooth, as Anglitwitches, and males doe hunt them vnder earth,Ease vvormes vsed for baite to take fish. and with Anglitwitches fish is taken in wa∣ters, when fish hookes be baited with such wormes in stéede of baite. And Constantine saith, such wormes helpe agaynst the Crampe, and agaynst shrinking of sinewes, and also agaynst biting of Serpents, and against smiting of Scorpions: And among Wormes some be footlesse, as Adders & Serpents, and some haue sixe féete, and some bée full euill and malitious, and enimies to mankinde, as Serpentes, and other ve∣nimous wormes: and some wormes be round of body, and hath no sinewes nor bones great nor small, neyther gristles, neither bloud, and all such dieth if they be annointed with Oyle, and do quicken againe in vineger, as Aristotle sayeth. And some wormes gender and be gen∣dered, and some be gendered and gender not, as the Salamandra, and in such Wormes is Sexe of male and female. And in these diuerse manners and in many other Wormes be diuerse, both lesse and more. De Vermiculo. cap. 116. VErmiculus is a right little Worme, and this Nowne Vermiculus is a Nowne diminutiue and commeth of this Nowne Vermis, and oft such small wormes be found in trées and in fruite, as it is sayde, Secundo Regum. 24. Da∣uid was lykened to the tender Trée worme, which is called Teredo, or Te∣rebucca, and is softe in kinde, and yet it pearceth and gnaweth verye hard trées, and nothing is more harder then hée when he toucheth, and there is nothing more softer then he when he is groped, as the Glose sayth there. Then specially land-wormes doe bréede of Earth, of leaues, of fruit, and of trées, and do come out of the earth, when winter is passed away, in springing time. The Worme doth hate & also doth voide salt things, & toucheth not those things which be an∣nointed with some bitter things, & with strong smelling, & doe eat linnen clothes, and the Moath doth eate and gnaw, and is the occasion of destroyeng and wast∣ing of wollen clothes, and destroye that cloth, namely that is made of the Wooll of such shéepe which were bitten with Wolues, for the Wooll of that shéep that is bitten of a Woulfe, gendereth Lice and Moaths, as Aristotle sayth, libro. 8. (Additiō.Lice commeth also of that cloth that is trained in the wooll, with the fatte or greace of an horse or of a swine, & there∣fore ye Northen clothes worne of a swe∣ting bodye, doe bréede lice in .12. houres. And Plin. li. 10. saith, yt the little worme is foule & soft, & round, & his vtter partes be small, & the middle great, and biteth a trée priuely, and wasteth it, and passeth drawing himselfe more with the mouth then with the féet, & is vile, pliant, & soft. In al worms is a kind of touch & of tast, as Pli. saith li. 11. ca. 71. And therfore they hide thēselues when they perceiue noise, & haue knowledge betwéene sauours: and wormes forsake bitter & salt, and loueth and sucketh that thing that is swéet, and so some taketh what them néedeth, with téeth, and some with clawes and souts, and some pearceth with a sting, & some sucketh, licketh, and swalloweth, and casteth vp and eateth, & no lesse diuersity is in the seruice of the féet, to take, to di∣uide, and rent, to beare downwarde, and to wey, and he ceaseth not to digge the earth, as Plinius saith. lib. 10. cap. 71.
De Vipera. cap. 117. VIpera is a manner kinde of serpents that is full venemous. Of this ser∣pent Isid. speaketh lib. 12. and saith, that Vipera hath that name, for she bringeth forth broode by strength: for when hir wombe draweth to the time of whelp∣ing, the whelpes abideth not couenable time nor kinde passing, but gnaweth and fretteth the sides of their dam, and they come so into this world with strength, & with the death of the bréeder. It is said, that the male doeth his mouth into the mouth of the female, and spetreth the se∣men, and she wexeth woode in lyking of increase, biteth off the head of ye male, & so both male and female are slaine, for the male dieth in gendring, & the female dyeth in whelping. Of this serpent Vi∣pera be made pastees which are called, Trocisci Tiriaci, of the which is made Triacle, that is remedie against venim. Li. 8. ca. 40. Plin. speaketh of this Adder Vipera and saith, that he hideth himself only in chins and deus of the earth, and other Adders and Serpents hide them∣selues in hollow stones and trées: and this Adder Vipera sustaineth and may beare hunger long time in a strong win∣ter, and commeth to the den vnder earth, and casteth first away his venime, and doth sléepe there vntill Springing time come againe. And when the pores of the earth open, then by heate of the Sunne, this Serpent Vipera awaketh and com∣meth out of his den, and for his sight is apppaired by the long abiding vnder the earth, he séeketh the roote of fenell, or the hearbe of it, and washeth his dim eyen with the iuyce thereof, and taketh of the hearb to recouer his sight which he hath lost. And Tyrus is a maner serpent that is called Vipera also. Of him Aristotle speaketh lib. 8. and saith, That Tirus right as the Crocodile, hideth him in winter, and doth afterward off his skin that is betwéene his eyen, and they that know not the doing, wéene that hée is blinde, and then he doth off the skin of his head all in one day: and his flaieng and passing out of his skin, is as the passing out of a childe of the mothers wombe, and he is by that manner renu∣ed, and putteth away, and is so deliuered of his age. Moreouer, in the same booke, in the ende thereof it is found, that it is sayd in this wise: Great Serpents flye this serpent Tirus though he be little, and all his body is rough, and when he biteth anye thing, all that is about the thing, rotteth anone. And one little ser∣pent called Tirus is found in Inde, and his biting is so strong, that against it no medicine can be found. Ambrose in Ex∣ameron saith, that among all Serpents, the kinde of Vipera is worst, and when he would gender, he wooeth a Lampray that is called Murena, and commeth to the brinke of the water that he thinketh Murena is in, & calleth hir to him with hissing, and exciteth and wooeth hir to be clipping, and this Lampray commeth a∣none: and anone as the Adder Vipera séeth that she is ready, he casteth awaye all his venime, and goeth then and be∣clippeth the Lamprya: and when the déede is done, then he drinketh and ta∣keth again the venim which he had cast away, and so tourneth againe to his den with his venim. Also lib. 39 cap. 1. Plin. sayth, that this Adder Vipera swalow∣eth a certain stone, and some men know∣eth that, and openeth slyly the serpent, and taketh out that stone, and vseth it a∣gainst venim. Also if the Dragon or the Adder, which is called Aspis, biteth a man or a beast, the head of the Adder Vipera healeth him and saueth him if it be layd to the wounde. And againe∣ward, the flesh of the Adder Aspis ofte times heleth and saueth him, that ye Ad∣der Vipera stingeth, & draweth out the venim, which the Adder Vipera did shed in the wounds. Addition. THe Uiper is spoken of in the 28. of the Actes of the Apostles.Addition Of al kind of Serpents most daungerous, as appe∣red by the men in the Ile of Miletum, now called Malta. When they sawe the Uiper hang on Paules finger after the shipwracke, they sayde: Surelye this
man is a murderer, whom (although he haue escaped the daunger of the Sea,) vengeaunce will not suffer to liue. But when they saw him to haue no harme, the Uiper shaken off, they altered theyr mindes, and said, he was a God. Also in the thirde of the Euangelist Mathewe, Christ called the Pharisies & Sadduces the generation of Uipers. There are in England, as venemous serpents, called Timiopolae, Ingrossers and Regraters of Markets, that buye much corne & vic∣tuall together, to make a dearth to the great hurt and hindraunce of the poorer sort, I praye God to send a Paule to les∣sen some of these, not onelye to burne or hang them, but to banish them for euer, that they poyson no more so fertile a soyle. FINIS LIBRI XVIII. ¶INCIPIT LIBER DECIMVS NO∣NVS. DE COLORIBVS. FOrasmuch, as the properties be expressed of spiritual thīgs and bodelye, both of simple and compow∣ned, as is sayd before, now at ye last of some accidents that followe the substaunce of bodely things, by the help & grace of our Lord, héere we shal treate of, and first of Colour,Coulour. secondly of Odour,Odour. and thirdlye of Sauour,Sauour. and lastly of Licour.Licuor. Colour is called in Latine Color, & hath that name, as Isi. saith in li. 18. for it is made perfect by heate of the fire, or by cléernes of ye Sun: or els it hath that name Color of Colendo, drieng & clean∣sing, for colours be dried and cleansed to make them full subtil and cléere, and al∣so cleane: and colours commeth of kind, or are made by crafte, but héereof looke héereafter De coloribus. Aristotle in li. Meth. saith, that colour is the vttermost part of a cléere thing in a bodye that is determined, for the vtter part of a bode∣ly thing, that sight sheweth is the diuer∣sitie of colours, that it taketh by kinde of medling and mastrie of Elements in a bodye that is compouned: For when a cléere thing and bright, medled by ac∣tuall ioyning of light, shineth vpon the vtter part of a cléere bodye and bright, then colour sheweth and presenteth that vtter part to the sight. And therfore Se∣cundo de Anima, Arist. saith, that cou∣lour chaungeth in sight, and giueth ther∣to a likenesse by working of lyght: for light is the perfection of cléere things & bright, for it bringeth the kinde of cou∣lour that is medled in a body kindly by mastrie of some elements, to chaunging and déede of perfection of the sight: For though colour be essentially and kindly a medled body, yet hath colour no might to shew himselfe, but by light that shi∣neth actually therevpon, and so alway to shew himselfe colour néedeth light, but light to shew it selfe néedeth no colour, as colour néedeth light that shineth in déede, to print thereby the qualytie of the coulour, in the line of the sight. Therefore some men meane, that the reason of thinges séene, is rooted and shapen in lyght, that is, expresseth their beautie by the lyght: for if light lacketh and faulteth, the qualytie of coulour is not séene.
But in déede colour is in darknesse, as the Commentour saith De Anima. There he treateth and sheweth of chan∣ging and likenesse of colour and of the sight. And light maketh not the coulour, for the coulour is indéede by masterie of some element in a body that is medled:As lyght maketh not the colour: so the color beeing of himself, is nothing vvithout light. but light shineth without open colour, & in the same space and the place that the colour is in, and disposeth the place, and giueth his shape, by the which it maye receiue the likenesse of colour: and so light disposeth likenesse in the space, by the which diuersitie of colour commeth to the eye, where the iudgement is of co∣lour. Therefore in déede colours abide in darknesse,They a∣bide the same that they bee, but not discerned vvhat they be. as the Commentour sayeth openly. Therefore the Author Perspec∣tiue saith li. 1. ca. vltimo. That light née∣deth not to sight of coulours, but in one of two causes: for without lyght the shape and likenesse of coulour spreadeth not in the aire, or though it be in dark∣nesse spredde in the aire, yet it work∣eth not in the sight: and so light néed∣eth not to the being of colour, but onely to the shewing thereof. And though cou∣lour be not séene nor perceiued in dark∣nesses, yet neuerthelesse coulour is not idle in darknes, for continually the mat∣ter is perfect, which he is within: and though colour be not séene nor perceiued in darknesse, ye shall vnderstande, that that is not for the default of colour: but the default is in that thing, that should receiue and take it: for disposition lack∣eth, that néedeth in such receiuing and taking. Then if Authors tell, that in any place coulour is not in déede without light, it shal be vnderstood and knowen, of the deede of sight, and not of being: then light arayeth colours and maketh them first seene and knowen in theyr own kinde, and maketh them not first in being, & thou I vnderstand of light that shineth without vpon things: for ye ver∣tue of the lyght of heauen commeth vn∣seene into the inner parts of things, and gendreth colors by help of foure quali∣ties of elements. When they be gendred & be in kind, then commeth light that we for, & maketh them cleere & noble, & she∣weth them to the sight and to the eyes. De Materia coloris. cap. 2. A Cléere thing well termined, is the matter of colour, and that onelye or namely thing that is moyst: for drye & earthie is not cléere, insomuch as it is drye: and fierie drought commeth not downe from his sphere and place of the fire, nor is found héere beneath among vs: for onely forme of fire, is gendered of might of some element, of the which a medled body shall be made, as it it sayd in li. de generatione. Then such a cléere∣nesse hath thrée materiall diuersities, for the matter is thin, or thicke, or meane: If it be meane, then there is much more moisture of water than drines of earth, & passing ye moisture of aire failing from ye airie moysture. Or els it is airy much chaunged by the thing that is dry & ear∣thie, yet so that it passeth grosenes. And if it be thin and small, then it is moyst & changeth to the matter of aire, or els it is moyst & airie, & changeth to thicknesse and drines of earth, so that it passeth not & goeth not beyond meannesse of earth. De generatione coloris. chap. 3. THen in the matter of cléere coulour, drinesse hath the masterie, or moy∣sture hath the masterie, or the matter is meanly drye and moyst: and if drinesse hath masterie in the matter, then ye wor∣king of heate hath the mastrie, then is white colour gendered, for heate maketh the matter thin, and spredeth and depar∣teth the parts thereof, and maketh them subtill, and gendreth cléernesse & bright∣nesse. And in this wise Arist. speaketh in li. de Animalibus 19. and saith, That white coulour is gendred of scarsitie of humour in drie matter by mastrie of heat that worketh and maketh the mat∣ter subtill or small, as it fareth in mem∣bers & in bones burnt; and in other such. And if colde hath masterie, & worketh in dry matter, then is blacke colour gende∣red, for cold gathereth & constraineth the parts of dry matter and fasteneth them togethers, & maketh them sad & dimme. And dimnesse is not onely priuation of
light, but also of colour: for cléernesse is diuersitie both of light and of colour: for cléerenesse, is a certaine condition of things that are séene, and then the mat∣ter is determined drye, that néedeth to the generation of white colour, & right so blacke colour is gendred. Then if the matter be moyst, then the heate which hath mastrie gendreth blacke coulour: for heate burneth and also wasteth the moyst partes, and altereth and tourneth the moysture, which passeth out, into blacke smoke, as it fareth in wood, which is gréene and moyst: for out of the ends thereof, commeth blacke humour when it is burned. Héerof Aristo. speaketh in libro. Meth. and saith, that in poores of things that burneth, is féeble humour that may not withstand the heate of the fire, nor is sodainly stuffed, but it rather nourisheth and féedeth the fire: and so it is sooth, that fire worketh principally in moyst things, & that moyst things is cause of black coulour. By working of heate, it maketh subtil humour, and moi∣sture of water and of aire passe out of the matter, and then thus leaueth earthy matter and thicke, therefore it néedeth that blacke colour be gendered. Quarto li. Metheo. Arist. saith, that subtill kinde of earth and cléernesse of water, & kinde of aire maketh whitenesse in quicke sil∣uer, the contrary héereof gendreth black∣nesse in the drye matter that leaueth by working of heate in moist matter. And so lib. 19. Arist. saith, that blacknes gen∣dreth in the eye because of multitude of moysture, for heate worketh kindlye in moyst matter, and maketh therein dige∣stion, and fastneth and drieth it, and le∣ueth there blacke at last. De generatione coloris albi. ca. 4. ANd if cold hath the mastry in moist matter, then is white colour gende∣red, as it fareth in snowe, in hoare frost, and in hoarnes of the hairs, and of other things, and also in fleumaticke humors: for though colde gathereth moist matter togethers, yet it is not as drinesse gathe∣reth moyst matter togethers, for moyst matter when it is cléere, is ye more able to take noble colour. Therefore moyst matter pressed, is arayed and made to spreading and separation of parts: and drye matter fareth not so, therfore moist matter is more ready and prest to take cléerenesse than drye matter, although it be by wringing and pressing & openings therfore cold may better ingender white colour in moyst matter, than drie. And so Aristotle is to be vnderstood in libro 19. there he sayth, that white coulour is gendered of aire, in the which is some watrie moysture, & that because of wor∣king of colde. But the Commentour sayth, that whitenes is gendred of cléere fire, meddeled with a full cleere element, and sightie, that is to vnderstande, of cléerenes, that Aristotle calleth white∣nes, by a passing manner of speach, and in that manner speach it is sayde. That whitenes is gendered in the clowdes, by shining of beames in them, if the clowds be cléere & thin, and so the flame of the fire séemeth white somtime, when the aire is cléere & subtill, in the which the burning of the fire shineth: & such whitenes, is not properly whitenes, but it is so called in a passing manner of spéech. But we may amplifie of ye Com∣mentors worde yt saith, yt of fire, because of cléere matter, that is proper matter of whitenes, and not because of working thereof, and the word that he sayth, shal be vnderstood of fire, that is the matter of coulour and not of working. And in that wise it is to vnderstande, as the matter, and not the working, nor the making thereof, nor the ende wherefore it is made. De colore mediorum gene∣ratione. cap. 5. BEtwéene whitenes and blacknes are many meane degrées following the mastrie of qualyties that be actiue and passiue, working and suffering, as they be more strong or féeble, and that in ma∣ny degrées: for the more mastrie drines hath, with the more difficultie it is made subtill, thin and bright, and the harder it is to make it clere, and to take white co∣lour: for a dry thing is sadde and thicke.
The lesse mastrye drynesse hath, and the more mastry ye heat hath, ye better it ta∣keth white colour and the sooner. Also the more drinesse there is, and the stronger heat, ye more blacke colour is bred. And cōmeth of fatnesse of the parts, & of great dimnesse, and of priuation of cléernesse, & of superfluitie of fatnesse of ye cléere mat∣ter, & so it fareth of moist matter: for the more mastry of moist matter yt is pro∣portionall to burning, so that heate hath the mastry, the more smoake there is & dimnesse and blacknesse: and the more the mastry of moisture is, so yt the ma∣stry of colde increase proportionallye, so whitenesse increaseth: and if moysture hath great mastrye, and heate but lyttle mastry, then blacke coulour shall abate. Also if moisture hath great mastry, and drynesse and heate lyttle mastrye  then whitenesse shall abate. And if moysture hath some mastry, & heat hath more ma∣stry, then may great blacknesse be gende∣red. But sometime heat gendreth white∣nesse in moist matter, as it fareth in the white of an egge, yt is sod: and sometime heat worketh in gréene wood & moyst, & leaueth white ashes after all ye burning, but ye colour is not very whitenesse: For alway there is a token of euill termined matter, as it wer the ouermost of a cléere christall, & that is knowen, if the ashes be separate & departed, though this cléer∣nesse stretch not into all ye body in actual cléernesse & compleat, & so it is not verie whitenesse. And so ye whitenesse leaueth therfore féeblenesse of heat yt doth work, so that kinde colde hath mastry within. Also some white egge is sod, and is not touched with fire, but a shell or a vessell is betwéene, for if no vessel be betwéene, then shoulde blacknes be gendered in the matter. Also heat working in moist matter, gendereth first blacknesse, and smoake. Also mastry of moisture gende∣reth drinesse in matter yt it worketh in. And so drines that it gendreth therein, maketh a new chaunging, and gendreth a new coulour in making the dry matter subtill and thin. And heate gathereth to∣gether things of one name & one kinde, and maketh therfore thicke and sad, and dimme: yet drie matter hath some pro∣pertye, by the which hée may make some matter stretch and spread, though it ga∣ther & drawe togethers in the beginning because of mastry, yet after ye gathering it maketh the matter yt is gendered sub∣till and thin, if the matter be dry or sta∣ble pight, & that is séene: For sometime drynesse worketh in moist matter, & put∣teth or draweth out the moisture. But cold is not ordeined to make matter that is subtill and thinne, for colde standeth in déede of making thicke, as in princi∣pall working and déede, for colde gathe∣reth both thinges of one name and kinde, and also things of diuerse names and kinde. Of hot and colde. cap. 6. IF heate worketh meanelye with other qualyties in drye matter, then is néedely meane coulour gendered, for heate maketh subtill and thinne to gen∣der whitenesse: and colde doth the con∣trary, and gathereth the matter, and ma∣keth it fast and thicke to gender black∣nesse. Then when they worke both like in euerye place and pointe, is gendered both whitenes and blacknes. Then of them two, néedes must one coulour bee compouned, that is neither white nor blacke, and this coulour hath more of blacke then of white, for drye matter is lesse disposed to white coulour then to blacke, and that for priuation of cléere∣nes, and for kinde dimnes, and is more disposed to thicknes then to thinnes, and more to abide and to bée thicke then thinne. Also if they worke, namelye to∣gether in moyst matter, then they gen∣der coulour yt hath more of white then of black, for matter in yt which moisture hath mastrye, is more disposed to white colour then blacke, and yt because of cléer∣nes: & is more disposed to receiue ye wor∣king of cold then of heat: For his work∣ing in moyst matter putteth out & wa∣steth ye moysture, but cold working ther∣in keepeth onelye and saueth it in his owne kind, by way of fastning of partes together. And alwaye if ye matter bée meane, ye coulour is alway meane: and if ye working in heat in such matter hath
the mastry, then is gendered a coulour that hath more of blacke then of white: For moist matter chaungeth sooner into blacke, then dry matter into white: as it fareth by moist matter and drye, that is departed a sunder, then heate gendereth sooner blacke coulour in wet woode and gréene, then whitenesse in lime stones: and so of other such. And if colde work∣eth by mastry in meane matter, then the colour must be mene compounded more of white then of blacke: For moyst mat∣ter is more disposed to whitenesse then dry to blacknesse, or to anye other cou∣lour, for in moysture is the matter of cléerenesse, that is proper matter of cou∣lour, and not in drye matter, insomuch as it is drye. And in some working, namely in one wise moist matter is more obedient to the qualitie yt worketh. For it may wel be for priuation, if kind fast∣neth & hardneth that is in drye matter. And though drye matter be disposed of it selfe to be fast and hard, yet it is not so well disposed to be fastned & hardned, as matter yt is moist, as it fareth in stones, though the matter be fast and hard, yet they take not anone more fastnesse and hardnesse of cause that worketh in them. We see in many things yt cold bréedeth soone white coulour, as in Snowe, and that is not so well seene in ensample when colde worketh in dry matter, and if he worketh meanly together in meane matter, then must the coulour néedlesse∣ly be meane, and euen the middle colour betwéene the vttermost colours that bée white and blacke, and if the mastrie bée onely in one qualitie, that worketh one∣ly in the matter, then the colour is com∣pounded, and hath more of the one, and lesse of the other. And if the qualytyes that worketh, be euen, and the qualyties that suffereth also, then the coulour hath the aire like much, as it is knowen by the foresayd meaning. And so there bée two vttermost coulours, which be white and black, and fiue meane coulours: & it séemeth that the colours may not be di∣stinguished in more diuers kindes, as it is declared by this difinition, yt is made of contrary members without defaulte, and without superfluitie. And also Ari∣stotle beareth witnesse, that there be on∣ly fiue meane coulours, and the mem∣ber thereof and suffisaunce may be taken in the foresayd matter, and also by com∣bination of white and blacke in theyr generations of coulours. For if white and blacke bée euen lyke much in the composition of a meane colour, then the coulour is euen the middle coulour be∣twéene white and blacke, and euen lyke farre from the extremityes, as is redde coulour. And betwéene white and redde may not be but two coulours, one neere the redde, and the other néere to the white. Also betwéene redde and black be two coulours, one according with the redde, and the other with blacke. And so no meane coulours maye be betwéene white and blacke. For betweene white and red may be no firme coulour, but a chaungeable, as a Carnation coulour, a flesh coulour, and a shadow to either of these, for euen farnesse hath alwaye re∣spect to the vttermost parts: but if there were such a colour, it should haue thrée quarters of white, and one of black. For halfe the red coulour is of the one quar∣ter of white, & of one quarter of black. In the same wise betwéene blacke and red, may none be of euē quantitie, for it must haue thrée quarters of black, & one of white, and so were the equall onelye by somwhat and by séeming, and not ve∣ry euen farnesse. (Additiō.He meaneth, that euery simple co∣lour mixed, doth in the more, or the lesse, make light or darken, his proper ground.) Of coulours in generall, what they be. chap. 7. ARistotle rehearseth these fiue meane coulours by name,The sha∣dovves of coulours from the firie acti∣on, vvhich vvho so vnderstan¦deth not, shall be a simple painter, and a vvorie limner. & calleth the first Yeolow, and the second Citrine, and the third Redde, the fourth Purple, and the fift Gréene, so that betwéene white and red, the yeolow is towarde the white, and the citrine toward the red, betwéene blacke and redde, purple is toward the red, and the gréene towarde the blacke. These names bée otherwise called in Greeke, for Purple is called Kyanos in
Gréeke, and yeolowe is called Karapos, but of names of Gréeke is no charge, but we take héed to Latine names. And the cause of the foresayde coulours may be knowen, for yeolowe hath more of white then of blacke and redde. And such coulours is in leaues when they fall in Winter or in haruest. Citrine and Pur∣ple compasseth the redde coulour, for ey∣ther of them hath more of redde then of white or of blacke, but Citrine is far∣ther from blacke then is Purple, as A∣ristotle meneth, in secundo de Sompno & Vigilia, wher he speketh of corrupti∣on of these coulours, and turning into blacke. And he sayeth, that Citrine pas∣seth by Purple into blacke. And there∣fore Purple must be betwéene redde and blacke, and Citrine betwéene white and blacke, & of all this it followeth, ye gréene must be set toward the black, and so the cause is knowen of the ordinaunce of these fiue meane coulours, as Aristotle meaneth. Of the opinion of them which would haue light, to be of the substance of coulour. cap. 8. Coulours are made apparant by light, therfore is light cal∣led ye mo∣ther of colours.SOme men déeme or suppose, that light is of the substaunce of colour, and they saye, that coulour is in cleane and cléere matter, and cléerenesse hath these diuersityes, for cléere matter is cleane and pure, and not earthie, or vn∣pure and earthie. And lyght is diuided in foure manners: for light is cléere, or dimme, lyttle, or much: but I call not lyght great nor much, though it shine in a greate place and much, but vertuall light gathered in a lyttle place, or in a point, is called much lyght, and greate light, as when an hollow mirrour is set in the Sun beame, and the light falleth on all the mirrour, and reboundeth into the middle thereof, and gathering and rebounding of ye lyght in ye mirrour be∣twixt cleerenesse of Glasse, and bright∣nesse of the Sunne, a fire is kindeled, and burneth full soone, or spéedely. And so if Flaxe or drie matter be put therein, it burneth sodeinly, & is set on fire then, if there be much light and cleane in pure matter and cléere, as Albumasar sayeth. And if the light be little & dim in cléere matter, and not full cléere, but somedeale and dim, then blacknesse must néedes bée gendered, and this expoundeth the word of Aristotle, and of Auetrois, that mea∣neth, that blacknesse is priuation of cléer∣nesse, and for to speake in this wise, hée followeth, that there be seauen coulours that stretch from white, toward blacke.Of seauen colours. And this is knowne, and thrée thinges maketh whitenesse, brightnesse of light, and plentye thereof, & purenesse of cléere matter. And while meane coulour maye abate then in this wise is generation of thrée coulours, if one abideth alone, the other two abate: and so of white com∣meth 7. colours, & stretch from the white toward blacke: also from black to white stretcheth 7. And by this consideratiō co∣lours be 16. two principall,Of 16. co∣lours mixt & cōpoūd blacke and white, and 14. meane, for 7. stretch from white toward blacke, & 7. from black to∣ward white, & in the stretching, the first 7. abate in whitnes, & the other 7. abate in blacknes, & méeteth in the middle. In euery meane colour, be as it were endles meane degrées of déep colour & of lyght, as they be farre from white or blacke or nigh thereto. Then know thou héere∣of, that coulour is a propertye or a qua∣litye lefte in the vttermost parte of a cléere body, & commeth of kinde of med∣ling of qualities of elements medled to∣gether in a meddeled bodie, the which is by light presented to the eye and to the sight. For without meane light, cou∣lour chaungeth not the eye, nor maketh therin likensse nor shape, but yet colour may be séene by it selfe, as Aristot. saith 2. de Anima, for the default is not in the coulour, but the default and vnmight is in the eie, which coulour is not séene in déede without light. Therefore Pithago∣rici, that helde Pythagoras teaching, cal∣led coulour Ephiphania, that is ouersée∣ming, or imagined. For it is the vtter parte of a cleere bodye that is teemy∣ned. Or else coulour is in the vtter part therof, & is there most properly a sighty bodye, that taketh coulour and hiewe,
and letteth passage there through of lyght, and of sight is héere called a cléere body termined, Perspicuum termina∣tum, but some such letteth all passage of sight, so that nothing is séene there through: as boystrousnesse, stones, trées, and mettall, and thicke leather, and other such, and some letteth some deale passage of sight, and not fully all, as Wine and other lycour of diuerse coulour that is séene within and without. But the same kinde of colour in some things is with∣in, that is without, as it fareth in the white of an Egge, and in the broken Glasse that is couloured, as it is sayd in libro de Sensu & Sensato. cap. 7. But many things bée of one coulour with∣out, and of another coulour within, as it fareth in blacke Pepper, and in Apple graines. And many thinges dyeth and coloureth things without, and not with∣in, as it fareth in painting. Also redde cloath dyeth the vtter part of water, if it bée layed therevnder: And so it is knowen, that coulour is the vttermost parte of sight where cléere things bee, as it is sayde in libro de Sensu & Sensa∣to. Also as in a cléere body, not termined, as in ayre, the presence of lyght maketh white coulour, and his absence maketh blacke coulour and dimme, so that some∣what of lyght shineth therein, so that it bée not as lyghtlesse, as it is sayde, libro de Sensu & Sensato. capit. 8. And so in a cléere body that is termined is very co∣lour, and in a bodye that is not termi∣ned, is not verye colour, but as it were coulour, as it is sayde in the same booke. Also meane coulours bée gendered in theyr owne diuersitie, and by diuers pro∣portions. Also if one is in proportion that conteyneth all, and the third parte or all, and the halfe deale, or by other proportions: And if they bée by porpor∣tion, then they bee againe proportionall by steadfastnesse of abiding in the mat∣ter, and also by cléerenesse of the matter, as it fareth in Consonancijs, as it is sayde there, capitulo octauo. B. Also they bée gendered by proportion and conso∣nancie, and accorde of coulour, when the coulours be fayre and lyking. And the more proportionall they bée, the more li∣king they bée, as it is sayd there. And o∣ther men meane, that meane coulours be gendered by vnder setting and laieng of the vttermost coulours, that be white and blacke, when the more sightlye cou∣lour is laide aboue the lesse sightlye, or the lesse sightly aboue the more sightlye, as it fareth in painting: as the Sunne séemeth white whē it is séene by himself, and of another coulour when he is seene through a Clowde, as it is sayde there, cap. 8. Also coulours bee not seene by passing out of beames that come out of eyen, but by continuall multiplication of coulour, in the space and place be∣tweene the thing that is seene and the eye, and by spreading thereof to the ey∣en: For feeling is made by touch, as it is sayde there, capitulo octauo. Also cou∣lours that be lyke farre a sunder, maye seeme meane coulours to them that be farre therefrom, though they bee not meane coulours: For no parte of a thing may be seene vnder the vttermost cou∣lour, as it fareth in cloath of diuers cou∣lours, as it is sayde there, capitulo. 8. D. Also meane coulours be gendered by lykenesse of gendering of meddeled bo∣dyes, meddeled with simple bodyes: that for meddeling of couloues, followeth the meddeling of Elementes by chaun∣ging and tourning into the forme and shape of a meddeled bodye: as a meane bodye is gendered of the vttermost bo∣dyes, so is meane coulour gendred of the vttermost coulours, as it is sayde there capitulo octauo: Also euery meane co∣lour is gendered by white and blacke, that seemeth more priuation of white then coulour, as darknesse is priuation of lyght, as it sayde, libro. 10. Methe. cap. 3. B. Also it needeth not that vnity of kinde followeth vnity of likenesse of colour, as Albumasar sayth in Differentia. G. Also furthermore, the deede of cou∣lour is to print lykenesse in the sight by working in deede of light. For by light might of coulour is brought to worke in deede, and to print lykenesse in the eye, that the eye may take that lykenesse and deeme of that thing that is seene. Also meane colour well proportioned pleseth and comforteth the sight: but the vtter∣most
coulour féebleth and grieueth the sight, as Aristotle sayth. For greate whitenesse ofte sheddeth the spirite of sight, and dissolueth the eye, and maketh it water: And to great blacknesse ga∣thering the spirite, and making thicke, and rebounding the sight, maketh it dim, as it fareth in them that bée long closed in darke places, that sée little or right naught, when they be sodeinely brought into the light. Also the coulour of that thing that is coloured, sheweth the complection therof and kind: For whitenesse and white co∣lours in bodies that be frore, bée not but in cold substance, & black colours againe∣ward: For colde maketh moyst thinges white, and dry blacke, and heate maketh wet things blacke, and drye white,As Snovv & Coles. as Aristotle and Auicen meane. And ther∣fore whitenesse, that is the daughter of colde, is token of mastry of fleame and of colde, and of moisting and fléeting hu∣mour: and blacknesse is token of melan∣cholike disposition & of dry humour, that hath mastry in the body: and is somtime token of great burning of humours, and of chaunging & turning to kinde melan∣choly, as it shall be sayde héereafter. Also by the vtter coulour the inner qualities of things bée knowen. For as Auicen saith, colour is qualitie that is made per∣fect by lyght, for coulour is in might in a darke body, and passeth into working & déed by light that commeth therevpon from without, & that is knowne in this wise: for euery medled body hath some∣what of fire and might, and hath of fire somewhat of light, for the fire hath light by kinde, but that lyght is hid in darke parts, and is so onely in might, as heate of Brimstone & of Pepper: and the po∣tenciall heate of them passeth not into working & actuall heat in déed: But in vtter qualitie yt is like to the inner qua∣litie. Potentiall lyght that is in a medled bodye and darke, passeth not to woorke in deede by the comming of outwarde light. Also coulour séene within, declareth the might and feeblenesse of the fire that is hidde in might in a meddeled bodye, and thereby the vertue and working thereof is knowne proporcionally. Di∣uersity of coulour exciteth kindlye the sight of the lookers, to looke and wonder thereon, as Plinius sayth, libro octauo, and Auicen also. And so he sayeth, that euery beast, be he neuer so fierce, wonde∣reth of the duersitie & fairenesse of cou∣lour in the Panther. Also euery mans face is made most beautiful or vnbeauti∣full with coulour. For ordinate colour & fayre, is complection of fairenesse, when it miswexeth duely to the making & com∣position of members and limmes, as A∣uicen sayth. And Austen saith, that faire∣nesse is séemly shape of body, wt pleasing colour, and againward. For vile coulour and vnséemely is right foule in a bodye. Also colour is token of Accidents and of passions of ye soule, for sodeine palenesse and discoulour is a token of dread: for ye heat being drawen inward to the parts of the bodye, in the face is scarcitie of bloud, & so the face is discouloured. Also sodeine rednesse in the face, is token of shame or of wrath. And that is because heate commeth outwarde, and bloude maketh the skinne redde without: and busieth to put off shame and wronge. Also coulour termineth and arayeth the bodye that it is in, for excepte couloure bée in the bodye, the substance thereof is not knowne to the sight. Also couloure maketh fayre the matter without, and hideth defaultes that bée there within, and so compounded coulour, meane be∣twéene white and blacke, layed in or∣der by kinde, as Auicen sayeth, with∣out vppon a bodye, hideth and couereth infirmitie that is in the matter acciden∣tally, eyther by kinde, as Auicen sayth. Also coulour accordeth or agréeth to the lyght, as the Daughter to the Mo∣ther, and followeth lyghte in deede: For with greate lyght coulour increa∣seth, and with lyttle lyght coulour aba∣teth. Addition. Lightnesse or brightnesse is the cause of cleerenesse, which is a separation from darknes or blacknes, wherof procéedeth ye original action, established by Iehoua, in ye first diuiding of the day and night.
The cause of brightnesse is fire, (an in∣comprehensible substaunce) yet because it taketh part, with Earth, Water, and flowres, stones, shells, hornes, flyes, met∣talls, and whatsoeuer (so miraculouslye spread;) to expresse such a varietie of co∣lour, as mans reason had bene farre to seeke, had not the onelye benefite of the grace giuer bestowed the same: in the vitall bodyes, by bloud, in flowres, séeds, rootes, and beryes, by ioyce, as by this diuision of foure times thrée which ma∣keth twelue, appeareth, Fire, yeolowe: Aire, bliewe: Water, gréene: Earth, blacke. To the first Or, which is golde, Orcment, which is Earth: Masticot, which is ashes .2. Laake, Uarmilion, red Lead, 3. purple, Uiolet, Murry, 4. Smalt, Bise and Indian, all colours increasing, from blacknesse to brightnesse, is the spi∣rit of fire: the rest that decrease from brightnesse to blacknesse, in the spirit of the earth, wherein also consisteth a mira∣culous ordinance, teaching earthly Phi∣losophers to discerne the Animall, Uegi∣tall, and Minerall, the lyfe, the flesh, the death, of euery substaunce gendered: sim∣ply growing, and multiplied by vapour, as aire, dew, or waters: flesh to death: trées to withering: stones, to wearing, dissoluing, or consuming: To grow from the spirit of death, singular, and plurall, from the Adiectiue to the Substantiue: Few Philosophers haue studyed howe, beeing contented by the singular parte, to speake plurall things, but not by the plurall part to speake singular thinges, which is the cause that men be so pru∣dent in earthie matters, that there is lit∣tle left for spirituall vnderstandings, in studieng for coulours to please the eye, they forget those coulours that beautifie the soule, which are, for fire, loue: for aire, faith: for water, hope: for earth, cha∣ritie: for voyce, truth: for person, cha∣stitie. De Colorum mutatione. Cap. 10. COulours doe chaunge in bodyes for many manner causes, as it doth in fruite, grasse, hearbes, and other things that growe in earth: For first fruite is gréene when it groweth, as it fareth in beryes and grapes, then they waxe red, & pale, or blacke at last: & this changing of coulour commeth of diuersitie of kinde heate, or of heat of the Sunne, that doth seeth the substaunce of fruite in diuerse manner of wise. For first the working of heat is féeble & soft, & vnsufficient to dis∣solue & depart ye earthie matter to make it spread, & therefore in the fruite with∣out, is gréene colour, & vndigest, & earthy, but kinde heat waxeth stronger by heat of the Sun, and worketh therefore the more strongly, & so the heat for strength thereof leaueth red coulour in the fruite without, and at the last when the fruite is compleat & ripe, & the sowre humour & earthy defied, then of burning commeth blacke colour in the fruit without. For the heat hath mastry, and dissolueth and doth séeth, & defieth the earthynesse, & ta∣keth as much as néedeth, and turneth it into substance of fruit, and wasteth the other deale, or putteth & bringeth it to the vtter part of the fruite, and such fu∣mositie cast out, for it is earthy, infecteth and maketh the fruit blacke or yeolow without, as it is said super li. Vegitabi∣lium commento. For such coulour beto∣keneth of themselues working & kind of cold, & be oft gendered in things that bée full hot, & commeth of the same cause, that is heat, that hath mastry within, and doth put out earthy and watry fu∣mosities, as Alphredus sayth super A∣ristot. de Vegitabilis & Plantis. Also in beasts is chaunging of coulour, now in the skinne, now in the eyen, now in the eare, and now in the nailes. For coulour of ye skin is gendred in two manners, as it is sayde in Ioannico, for it is gendred and commeth sometime of humours in∣warde, and sometime of passions of the soule. Also chaunging of coulour in the skin commeth of inner things: sometime by hot humours, and sometime by cold, for it happeneth, that hot humours both compowned and simple, cooleth and bée colde, and also colde humours or cooled heateth, and according therevnto the co∣lour in the skinne is wont to varie, for when the colde humoures waxe hotte,
white colour turneth into citrine or into red. And when hot humours doth coole, then red coulour doth chaunge to white or pale, and so of other it is to be vnder∣stoode. Also chaunging in the skin com∣meth of passions of the soule. The red waxeth pale for anguish or for dreade, for in dreade the heart closeth, and heate that is in the vtter partes draweth in∣ward, & therefore the vtter partes waxe pale. Also the pale waxeth red for wrath, for in wrath the heart openeth and desi∣reth wreake, & the heat passeth sodeinly from the inner parts to the vtter parts, and so the bloud heateth, and is be∣twéene the skin and the flesh, and so red colour is sodeinly gendered. Also in men of the nation of Maures, the blacke cou∣lour commeth of the inner parts, & whi∣tish colour in Almains and Dutchmen. For ye countrye Mauritania is the most hottest country in Aethiopia, in ye which Country for greate heate the bloud is burnt betwéene the skinne and the flesh, and maketh all the members black. And so hée that first dwelled in Aethiopia, was made black. But afterward by con∣tinuall heat of the Sunne such blacknes sprang into all his ofspring. And of blacke father and blacke mother com∣meth blacke children. But in that place onely the father and mother be continu∣ally burnt with heate of the Sunne, and therefore in temperate countries & lands yt be somwhat cold, swart coloured men getteth children temperate in coulour, as Macrobius, Aristotle, & Auicen meane. And contrarywise the Almaynes and Scots, that dwell in colde countries, for in them colde stoppeth the hoales and poores without, and the heate is drawne inward, and therefore the skin is white without. The Cōmentour telleth al this super Ioh. & Aristot. toucheth the same. Also coulour of skinne chaungeth, and namely of the mans skin, by many occa∣sions, somtime for euill complection, as it fareth in melancholike men,Special to¦kens to knovv the complec∣tions. & for too great passing heat, as it fareth in chola∣rike men that be citrine of coulour, and for heat of the Sun & drinesse of aire, as it fareth in wayfaring men & in shipmē, & for spreading of corrupt humours be∣twéen ye skin & flesh, as it fareth in Mor∣phea & in Lepr, and for stopping of the liuer, or for distemperate qualitie of the gall, as it fareth in the Ianders, that is chaunged of kind colour into foule cou∣lour and vnséemly, as Constantine saith. And for continuaunce of solution of the skin, as if fareth of the Mesells, Pocks, wounds, botches, and burning. Also in haire is diuers colour, for by quality of fumositie, that is resolued of the bodye, colour of haire is diuers, for of fleame commeth white haire, of bloud red, & of kind melancholy yeolowe, & of Cholera adusta, black, & of the defalt of kind heat commeth hoare haire, as it fareth in old men. And when horenesse beginneth in the root of the haire, then it commeth of much fleme, & when it beginneth in the vtter end, then it is a token that it com∣meth of default of kind heat. Looke be∣fore in Tractatu de Capillis. Of coulour in the eies. ca. 10. HEereafter take héed of colour in the eyen, for as Iohannicius sayth, cou∣lours of eien be (foure) Black, Whitish, changeable & yeolow. The diuersitie of these cōmeth of cléernesse of the spirit of the sight, or of dimnes therof, or of scar∣site of ye christalline humour, or of deep∣nesse therof, or of superfluity of whitish humour, or disturbance therof, or of scar∣sity, or of superfluitye of humour of the Curtell yt is called Vua. For if the hu∣mour christaline be scarce in quātitie, or hid within, & the whitish humour that is called Albugines falleth, or is distur∣bed, or if there be much blacke humour in the skinne and Curtell that is called Vua. If all these or some of them come together, then is blacke colour gendered in the eie. And whitenes cōmeth of con∣trary cause, but yeolow colour & diuers colour commeth of thinges that maketh white & blacke, but in yeolowe is some∣what more blacke then white, and in diuerse is somewhat more white then black. But héereof séeke before in Trac∣tatu oculorum. In the nailes coulour is knowen, for the colour thereof shall bée white and cléere, as a mirror, when this
colour changeth into wan or pale colour, then it is a token of diuers passions, as it is said in Tractatu de Vnguibus. Of coulours perticular. chap. 14. NOw it followeth to speake of per∣ticular colours, and first of white, that is the chiefe fundament and ground of meane colours. Whitenes is a colour gendered of much cléere light, and pure matter & cléere, as Algasel saith. And so the more pure the cléere matter is, & the more cléere ye light is, the more white the colour is, & the lesse medled with black, then ye materiall cause of white colour is cléere & pure, without medling of earthy drafts, now dry & now moist. The cause of working & making white coulour is cold or heat, for if drinesse hath the ma∣stry in working therin, thē white colour is gendered, for thinning and subtilling of partes of the matter, and for cléering by vertue of might and heat, as it fareth in Lime and in burnt bones. And if the matter be moyst in substance, and colde hath mastrye in working therein, then white colour is gendered, as it fareth in snow & in dew. Therfore white is gen∣dred of aire that is some deale watry, as Aristotle sayth, lib. 19. de Animalibus, and that by working of colde, for colde maketh moyst matter white, and drye matter blacke. Also white matter is gen∣dered of chinning and spreading of ayre, as it fareth in skumme: and therfore hot water gendereth white haire, and a hot braine is cause of baldnesse, for white commeth not but of vapourable aire and watry that is in the members. And for white commeth of hot ayre and vapou∣rable, therfore beasts be white vnder the wombe, as Ari. saith, li. 19. de Animali∣bus. White hath vertue to shed the sight, & to shed ye visible spirit if it be too white, and maketh the eie watry and to drop, and is the ground of all coulours, & the meane colours bée grounded in no other coulour better then in white. And the more white the ground is, the faster the coulour cleaueth and abideth, that is lai∣ed therevppon, whether it bée white or black and to whitenesse belongeth & ap∣perteineth Candor, Albor, Palior, Li∣uor, or Flauor. In one meaning Flauum & Liuidum is all one, as Aristotle sayth in cap. de. Sapore. And he sayth, ye Liui∣dum is Flauum, for hée followeth the kinde of white. Phisitions doe assigne many other maner colours about white, as watrie colour, and milkie colour, and Karapos, that is whitish or palish, and be diuers as the matter is diuerse, in which they be rotted, thick or thinne, as it is sayd in libro de Isaac, Theophile, Constantine, Egid. de vrinis, Candor, is passing whitenesse, and hath in it selfe much light in forme, and much pure∣nesse & cléerenesse in matter, for blasing of brightnesse, ye dresseth matter that is without, that is cléere & pure & printeth likenesse in the sight, without gréening of the eye, & comforteth the sight to be∣hold theron with a manner liking: such whitenes is called Candor, yt is first séene of whitnesse, by doing of lyght, with∣out corruption of the sight, and is called Candor, for the vttermost whitenesse is not séene with eie, for it voideth ye dome of sight, for nothing may be séene vnder the vttermost coulour: For the vtter∣most colours be vnseene by themselues, for cleerenesse thereof, as it is said in li. de Sensu & Sensato. cap. octauo. Then that that is first séene of whitenesse is tearmed Candor. De colore glauco siue flauo. cap. 12. S̄Alowe is gendred of whitenes,Salovve, draw∣ing some deale toward red, & is gende∣red, as Aui. meneth, in matter yt is som∣deale temperate in comparison to gréene colour. For (as he saith) gréene colour in trées chaungeth into yeolow in haruest time, when in leaues is much matter more moisted then the matter yeolow, & the thicke parts wasted some and some by working of heat, & not all destroyed, though cold hath the mastry. And cold yt hath mastry in meane matter, gendreth néedely meane colour: And because colde may better chaunge moysture then dri∣nesse, it gendereth meane coulour, that hath much of white, as yeolow coulour,
as the Commentour saith super Arist. de Plantis in fine. Therefore he sayth, yt some trees be gréene in Summer, & pale in winter, as Boxe, for Boxe hath glea∣ming humour, and much thin moisture in the root, and the leaues therof fall not, but when heat commeth, the humour is drawen outward, and heat worketh and maketh gréene colour, & when colde com∣meth, the humour is smitten inwarde, & leaueth much drinesse of earth, and then the colour is yeolow, & so in comparison to gréen colour, in yt which is more moist matter, he saith, that yeolow hath more temperate matter. De Pallido colore. cap. 13. Pale.PAle coulour is gendered of the same causes, but the cold is lesse strong, and the whitenesse draweth more towarde blacknesse, and is gendred in more thick matter. Then polence is a mene colour: & beginneth from white, & passeth out of kind toward blacke. Also pale coulour is happely gendred, & commeth of dread of right great businesse, & of great trauaile, and of other causes, by the which bloud is drawen inwarde, and then the bodye is pale & discouloured without, for scar∣sitie and lacking of bloud, as it fareth in: them which doe sléepe too much, and in slumberous men, and in men which do trauell for loue, which burne in great loue, and the heart is therevpon, and the spirits passe and thereof and for to féede and restore them, kind bringeth in heate of the vtter partes, & so by withdrawing hot bloud, the skin is discoloured with∣out, as he saith. Palleat omnis amans, hic est color aptus amanti. This vearse meaneth, that euery lo∣uer is pale, and pale coulour is couena∣ble to the louer. For the same cause, they that be pained with hunger, or with great businesse and trauaile, bée pale, for spending and wasting of hotte bloud. (Additiō.And Also that in gilding of Plate, through the force of quick siluer, the va∣pour whereof cooleth the bloud, & dryeth the body.) De Rubeo colore. cap. 14. RED coulour is euen the middle cou¦lour betweene white and blacke euen lyke farre from other, and is in the part of a cleere body by incorporation of cleere firye light and pure to the generation of this colour. Colours do come togethers of cléernesse of matter, & firy light, & ac∣cording meanes betweene white & black, but firy light dui keth the cleane parts yt be medled, & maketh then thin & subtill. The coulour accordeth more in blasing with white then black & therfore déep red sheddeth the sight, as cleere light doth, & gathereth not the sight as blacke doth. Therefore Drapers yt sell cloth hang red cloth before the light,No policy but plaine subtilty. for ye rednesse shuld dazell the spirit of sight, and that men that see other clothes of other coulours, shuld know the worse the very colours. Red colour is a general token of mastry of heat in a medled body, though hee bee somtime found without in a bodye that is kindly cold, as it fareth in the red rose that is kindly colde and drie: but for the rose is full of subtill substance, the kind colour that he hath of composition slaieth the mastry of cold, & commeth outward, and findeth the vtter partes subtill and moist to receiue chaunging, & chaungeth them without into red colour, and that doing is namelye lykened to working of fire. De Colore croceo. cap. 15. BEtwéene Saffron colour and Punice and Citrine, is little diuersitie, as by abating of whitenesse, & some deale med∣ling of increasing of blacknesse, and by some what of strength of heat, & feeblenes of cold. And the more such a coulour in subtill matter and cléere is radicate, the more it shineth & appeareth, & the more grose and earthy the matter is, the lesse bright it is. And such a colour betokeneth might and temperate heat, and not pas∣sing, insomuch yt it belongeth to the beto∣kening of colour: but by diuers disposi∣tions of substance, it betokeneth diuerse dispositions of sicknesse or of health, and
diuers complections and states of the bo∣dy, as it is said in li. Isa. de Vrinis. For Citrine coulour in thin substance in the vrine of a child of cholarike complection, betokeneth yt he is whole & in good point. In a stematike body or melancholike, it may token diuers sicknesses & euills, as Egidius saith in his vearses, in Tracta∣tu de Vrinis. cap. 13. in this wise. Est multis tenuis citrina referta fi∣guris. Flumaticum iuuenem vel quem ni∣ger afficit humor. Condempnat tricham duplici, &c. And such coulour betokeneth diuerse things and contrary by diuersitie of the substance that it is in. De Colore croceo. ca. 16. SAffron colour dieth and coloureth hu∣mours and licours more then citrine, and betokeneth passing heate & distempe∣raunce of bloud in the licour by medling of cholera, as it fareth in them that haue the Iaunders, their vrine hath yeolowe spume, & they haue yeolow eyen, & their skinne is foule and citrine. Most hottest birds of complection and cholarike, as birds of pray haue their vtter parts yeo∣low of colour, as their feet and bills. And that commeth of right much cholarike & hot fumositie which kinde calleth into the vtter parts, and they haue therefore such colour. Looke before de morbis. cap. de Ictaricia, there it is treated more largely. De Colore minio. ca. 17. YEolow colour that is called Minios, is called also Coecinus & Vermiou∣lus, and draweth much toward red, & be∣longeth therto, & shinesh blasing as fire, and hath in himselfe much brightnesse of fire, and much cléernesse of matter, ther∣fore the coulour is right bright and bla∣sing. The matter of this coulour is ear∣thy, & he digged in the cliffes of ye red sea, yt dieth and couloureth, & maketh red all the sea, that it floweth into, so that the sea of yt ouer Aegipt taketh rednes ther∣of, & is called the red sea. In these veines of ye earth be red precious stones found. This earth is first dried & pured at the best, & then ground smal betwéen stones, & tempered with the white of an egge: & by this painters & writers do get & win much good, for therewith they limne, a∣dorne, araye, and make, beginning and ending of sentences, & of vearses and ca∣pitall letters. And is somtime sharped wt a certaine herab yt is called Coccus, and then ye coulour is bright and blaseth as fire, & hath the name of that iuyce, and is called Coccus. And diers of cloath vse this colour much more then writers do.Crista gal linacea, Yeolovve Rattel. Also in olde time men vsed to sharp this colour with ye bloud of a certein worme, as purple is sharped with bloud of a shel fish. And for such sharping with the bloud of a worme, ye coulour was called Vermiculus in olde time, as Isid. sayth, in Tractatu de coloribus. And is a cou∣lour that cleueth fast and abideth, when he is layde to the matter, so that if a man purpose to shaue or to wash it out of the Parchment, vnneth shall he shaue or wash so fast, but some what thereof a∣bideth after all the shauing and wash∣ing. De Colore Puniceo. cap. 18. CItrine colour is next to the redde in the one tree, as purple is next therto in the other side. And citrine hath more of the redde then of the white, or of the black, and is néerer to the white then to the blacke, and the purple againe warde, that is next to the red, and néerer to the blacke then to the white, as Aristotle saith, Secundo de sompuo et Vigiliars. There he sayth, that citrine passeth by Purpole into blacke, and Purple is née∣rer then red to the blacke, and in the sea is citrine shell fish founde, that is small and little, and is cut at the end, and then commeth thereof redde droppes, which be kept, and with these droppers is Pur∣ple dyed and redde coulours mastred, and so bloud is gathered in great quan∣titie, and kept in vessells of Dyers; and done with coulours, and therewith is purple e dyed, of the whihwath is, wouen, & therby is shewed wealth & ioy
of Kings, as Gregory saith super Cant. cap. 7. De Colore viridi. cap. 19. GRéene coulour is gendered and bred by working of heate in meane mat∣ter, in the which moisture hath somwhat the mastrie, as it fareth in leaues and in hearbes, and in fruit, & also in grasse, therefore the coulour is gendered, & hath much of blacke, and is not fully blacke of medling of light white, as yeolow is; and of much blacke in a moyst bodye without, gréene colour is gendered, when the heate which worketh in the matter, may not burne the moysture, neyther séeth it at the full, to turne all and fully into blacke. And so gréene coulours, in grasse, hearbes, and fruit, is a signe and token of rawe humour and vndigested, which is knowen, for the gréene colour in hearbs and trées turneth into yeolow in haruest time. For in leaues & hearbs is much moyst matter and thicke, which is wasted some and some by the work∣ing of heate: and is not all without heat in the matter borne vp, though that cold hath the mastry. Therefore some trées bée gréene in springing time & in Sum∣mer, and be pale in haruest, and in Win∣ter. For heate of springing time com∣meth, and beareth the humours out∣ward, and then the humour taketh heat and is made gréene, but when colde com∣meth, it smiteth the humour inwarde, and there is much drynesse, and the co∣lour is yeolow, as the commentor sayth super li. de Plantis, in fine. Also gréene is a meane coulour gendered betweene red & blacke, & that is knowen by passing of red Cholera into vnkinde melancholy, yt is black, by meane of vnkinde Cholera yt is rusty & gréenish, and is found gréene: Gréene colour is most liking to ye sight, for comming togethers of firy parts & of earth. For brightnes of fire yt is in gréene is temperate, & pleaseth ye sight, & dimnes of earth & blacknesse, for it is nigh most black, gathereth meanly the sight, & com∣forteth ye visible spirit. Therefore no co∣lour is so liking to ye sight as gréene co∣lour as it is knowne in the Smaragdus, a stone that most comforteth their eyen ye graue in mettall & in precious stones, as Isidore sayth in Lapidibus preciosis. Leaues, trées, grasse, & hearbs, and other that grow and spring of the grounde, bée gréene by mastry of earthy parts in the which they be grounded, as in matter, & by firy vertue, as by cause yt worketh & dissolueth earthy matter, and maketh it subtill and thin, and draweth outwarde the fumositie thereof, & dyeth the hearbs with such colour without, and not with blacke or with red, but with gréene. For blacke tempereth the shedding blasenesse of red, and cléerenesse incorporated in ye black maketh it meane & temperate. The gréene is gendered by mastry of earthye parts & firy. And though fruit, hearbes, & grasse be gréene, yet gréene blossomes or flowres, be seld or neuer found, and that is for subtiltie of ye matter of flowres, in the which if the mastrye partes bée watry & airie, the colour shall be white, & if the watrye and firie partes hath the mastry, ye colour is red, & if watry parts & earthy haue the mastry, the coulour is bliew or bliewish & if firie partes & ai∣rie haue euen much mastrye, then might the colour be gréene or black, but ye mat∣ter of flowres is so thin & subtill, that it taketh no such meddeling, and therefore flowrs be not gréen generally nor black. Then gréene coulour is meane betwéene red and blacke, and comforteth the cien to looke thereon, and restoreth and com∣forteth the sight. Therefore Hartes and other wilde beastes loue gréene places, not onelye for meate, but for liking of sight: therefore hunters cloth themselues in gréene, for the beast loneth kindlye gréene coulours, and dreadeth the lesse perills of hunters, when they looke vpon gréene, as Gregory saith. De Colore liuido. cap.20. WAnne colour is gendered in watrie and earthy parts, that haue mastry, for such coulour is gendered in thinges that haue colde humour and thicke, as it fareth in Lead and in certaine stones, but Lead is white by kind, though it be wan without, & of lead is white coulour
made that is called Cerusa, as the Com∣mentor saith. 4. Meth. Wan coulour is token of mastry of cold, & therefore wan colour in vrine is token of quenching of kind heat & of death of beasts, as Egidi∣us saith & sayth, that wan vrine betoke∣neth dead members & humour, & many other euills, & it followeth the euill Par∣uusenutitheus & Medns, & the falling euill also Ashites, Sinochus, breaking of veines, the pose, euill of ye ribs, of lungs, & Tisicke, that quencheth heate because of wan coulours. De Colore liuido malo. cap. 21. WAn coulour is euill in men and in beasts,Mixt. for it betokeneth mastrie of cold, which quencheth kindly heat, & be∣ginneth for to slay kindly beat: or els it betokeneth superfluitye of melancholye bloud, which defileth all the skin with∣out: or els it betokeneth anguish & passi∣on of the heart, which draweth inwarde the heate of bloud, as it fareth in those persons, that bée enuious or wrathfull: Or else it betokeneth sore falling or smi∣ting, which corrupteth and increaseth the bloud betwéene the skinne and the flesh,That is blacke & blievv. as it appeareth by thē yt be all to bobbed & beaten, in whom the humour betwéene the skin and the flesh is corrupt by ma∣lice, & corrupteth and infecteth the skin, as the Expositor saith before, super. 1. ca. li. de. Isa. Vulnus liuore, &c. It betoke∣neth failing of spirits & of kind heat, and scarsitie therof, as it fareth in those per∣sons, which haue the dropsie & Etike, & in those which doe consume and wast, as Egidius sayth. And betokeneth also Gowtes in the ioyntes: For the Gowte is full sore for tendernesse of sinewes, in the which it is in. For spirits & humore doe gather to that place, and be the lesse hot, and the place is the worse coloured. It is not expedient and néedfull in this worke to rehearse all the causes of wan colour, but only to make mētion of those things that our fore fathers haue treated at full, & most largely. And seld I remem∣ber, that wan coulour betokeneth good: but gréene or blacke tourneth into wan by working of kind, & then out of wan∣nesse into red or citrine, then it betoke∣neth that kinde hath the mastrye of the infirmitie and euil, as Egidius meaneth. If it be first wan, and afterward red, the kind of the braine riseth, & the strength is recouered. De Colore Indica. ca. 22. THE coulour Indicus & Venenus is bliew colour,Indiae, a deepe blievv and passeth wan cou∣lour in fairenesse and brightnesse, & hath more of water & of aire medled & ioyned with earthy parts, then hath wan cou∣lour, and such is the colour of heauen, for mastry of aire in a cléere body without, as it fareth in Sapphires of ye East lands & in Iacincts: also such coulour is in A∣zure, but héereof looks before in ye treatise of gemmes & precious stones, and of the stone Lasurus. (Additiō.The Indiae, if it bée not too much counterfeit, is the especiall grounde of greenes.) De nigro colore. ca. 23. BLacke is priuation of white in cléere matter,Blacke of 3. sons, Sable, Semy, mixt. as bitter is priuation of swéet in moyst matter, and so it séemeth that white is the first well of colours, as swéet is the first well of sauours, as Aristotle saith in li. de Sensu & Sensato. Blacke coulour is not but priuation of cléernes. Blacknesse is gendered of scarce light, & incorporate in cléere matter that is dim and darkish and vnpure: therefore black∣nesse gendereth ye spirit visible, & smiteth it againe, and gréeueth therfore the sight and maketh it dim, when the blacke is too blacke, as it fareth in them yt be long in prison, which sée litle or naught when they come out of prison. Black is some∣time grounded in moist substance & hot, for heat yt hath mastry bloweth a moist body, as it fareth in wet wood that bur∣neth somtime in dry substance and cold. For cold hath the mastry, and blacketh dry substaunce, and whiteth the moyst substaunce, as Aui. saith. Also sometime blacke commeth of colde, & that is a to∣ken of death, and sometime of heate, and that is a token of burning. And therfore blacke vrine may be taken of diuers dis∣positions
and contrary, as Egidius saith: and betokeneth somtime solution of the quartane, and betokeneth health, & beto∣keneth somtime burning and death, as it fareth in the Feuer Acot. And Egidi∣us saith, that blacke vrine betokeneth e∣uill and solution of the quartane, death and burning: and scarse humour black and fat, and stinking betokeneth death and some colours accordeth to ye worke of painters: and some thereof bréedeth in veynes of the earth as Sinopis Ru∣brica, Melium, Auripigmentum, and o∣ther such, and some be made by crafte. De Sinopi. cap. 24. Sinape, Laakes.SInopis is a red coulour, and was first founde in the Ilande Pontus, besides the Citie Sinopis, and hath therfore that name, as Isid. saith lib. 44. Héereof is thrée manner of kindes, red, lesse red, & meane betwéene them twaine, as hée saith, and is called Rubrica, for it is next to red sanguine, as he sayth, & brée∣deth in many places, but the best com∣meth ut of Pontus, and is therefore cal∣led Pontica. De Sirico Pigmento. cap. 25. A golden colour to paint vvith.SIricum is Pigmentum, and thereof is made the colour that is called Pheni∣ceus, therewith the chiefe and principall letters of bookes be written, & is founde in the cliffes of the red sea in ye countrie called Phenicus: and this colour is ac∣counted among fained colours, for it is somtime made of Cinopis and of San∣dix,The gold yeolovv. medled and wrought craftely toge∣thers, as Isidore saith. De Minio colore. cap. 26. Vermiliō.MInium is a redde coulour; and the Gréekes found the matter thereof in Ephesim: in Spaine is more suche Pigment than in other landes, as Isi∣dore saieth. De Cinobrio. cap. 27. CInobrium is called Cinabarin a∣mong the Gréekes,A colour made of Dragons bloud. and hath that name of Draco and Barro, the Dragon, and the Elephant. Auicen sayth, that it in a Dragons bloud, for Dragons win∣deth and wrappeth their tayles among and about the legs of Elephants, and the un densts falleth to the ground, & the Dragons dye and be slaine in that wise, and the bloud that the Dragon bléedeth, dyeth and coloureth the earth, and all that is dyed is Pigmentum, and red pou∣der, as Isidore saith. (Additiō.Canereus is also an ash colour; af∣ter a blacke.) De Prassino. cap. 28. PRassin in Gréeke is gréene, and ther∣of is a colour made gréene as a léeke,This greene grovveth of the rust of sil∣uer that vvhich cō¦meth of brasse is Verdigrek the best groweth in Libia Cerenence, as Isidore saith. Crisocania is the veyne of Prassm, of gréene colour, & hath that name Crisocania, for gold is found ther∣with, as it is sayde, gréene groweth in Armenia, but better groweth in Mace∣donia, and is digged and mined among mettall of brasse, and the defending ther¦of is token of siluer and golde, for the veyne thereof, hath companye of kinde with such mettall. De Sandaracha. cap. 29. SAndarach groweth in Topasion, an Ile of the red sea, and is of red cou∣lour, and smelleth as brimstone, and is found among mettall of gold and of sil∣uer, and the better it is, the more redde it is, and smelleth more of brimstone. Though Cerusa is toasted in an Ouen, to tourne into Sandarache, the coulour thereof is red, and if it be euen toasted and medled with Rubrica, it tourneth into Sandix. (Additiō.A bright redde coulour dsed of Painters, and found in Mynes of golde and siluer: some call it redde Arsenick, there is another kinde of it, made of Ceruse burned.)
De Arcenico. cap. 30. AResticum, is called Auripigmen∣  for the colour of golde, and is gathe Portus among golden mas∣ter and is most pure, and passeth into golden colour, and those that haue small veyne the most pale, & accounted worst. Heereof  before to tractatu de ve∣ns, & Auripigmento. De Occa. cap. 31. O deth in the Ilands Topai , there De Melino. cap. 34. MElinus is a white coulour, and the matter thereof is sounde in the I∣land Melos, that is one of the Ciclades, and therefore the colour is called Meli∣nus, as Isid. saith and for great fatnesse ofte the Painter doth not vse this cou∣lour, as Isidore saith. De Stibio, cap. 35. STibiuiu is a fained colour made of Cerus, and of other things medde∣led therewith. Women paint then fa∣ces there∣with. (Additiō f all these ∣teth
libro. 25. cap. 14. vsque ad 33. ¶The order of colours to limne with, after the accustomed skill of this latter time, not vnprofitable for Painters and stainers. Being newly added. Whereas of late yeares, two bookes concerning the reuiuing of ye Arte of Lymning, hath ben set forth: and as I iudge, more of good wish from the Au∣thour then of approued experience. I  therefore take vpon me, so farre Secondly, you must haue a perseue∣rance of the fire grounds, which are cal∣led the coulours of ye twelue Signes, as thus. The first and the seauenth, is of co∣lour white: the eleauenth and twelfth, gréene: the third and second, yeolow: the fourth and tenth, redde: the fifty and ninth, towney declyning: the first and eyght, blacks declined. Next followeth varieties, forthe of effectes, called the routours of the seu∣uen Plannets, and these shewe how to knowe the Compoundes from the Simples.
without bodies. Which are all sorts of sape, yelow, greene, blew and red, of Saffron, of Be∣rien, of flowers, and of Tornesaine, Lu∣mouse, and Flurey, which three coloures very few hawe skill to keepe theyr first heautie, as also the beautie of Rosset. These three are priuate coulours, which to make holde vpon metall, is the olde arte of lymning, prouided that the Ros∣set which is of late vsed in England, is not to be vsed in uing. Also in ftat∣ting of costure, and sweetening of shed∣dowes these must be a persenarance be∣tweene the colours of elements, of met∣talls of earth, of flowers airie, earthy, fierle and watrie. Also, that no prepareth coulours sande long vnoccupied, for too much moysture beads the colours. A shure ground to lay on gold,  on paper or parishment. Kinde white bowe with egge  first in water, and being setteled, one day  the same with euen water, not too , to the proportion for the place: then with pour pencill dipped in olde  sorten ouer your ground, and  on the golde, which beeing rle, you may burnish. Another . Mettalls Golde leaues or leafe Golde, siluer  the same preparing. ell gold & , or lyquid gold to be lay be with the pen∣cill. A in for a  is his shadow, or loose with pre∣pared. Christall ground with Bo ar∣moniake is the strongest grounde for a∣ny golde vpon parchment: vse no glew nor iuyce of arlyke, nor spre in  wise. Mixtures. Blacke and white maketh a russet, white and blew an ashe colour, red and white a Carnation, Leake and ple a purple. Tornesalue and Leake maketh a deepe scarlet, blew and gréene maketh a violet, Uermaion and white,  a flesh coulour. Mixed blacke and white, red and white, blew and white, where∣of are three principall variables  of these three, proceed nine mixtures, pro∣per to the Art of Limning. The manner to keepe your colours faire. THey must be refined from their waste if they be scule, by letting them of∣ten settle in fayre water, after they bee grownd, pouring away the sayle, and re∣freshing the colour, which being done put there to uns water of one monethe restning. All sorts of Byse, if they bee not countersait with sand or glasse, may not be growd, but blaunched in water vntill the Byse settle lyke a pasts  and smooth together, then  gaue water, ane other than of  Ara∣becks. Also euery seuerall colour, especially Byle, must be first layde , and after  as  of the counter∣. For enter mising of colours, that the  of  after the lyfe.  the cou∣lours are  day .
Inkes to write with. VErmillion onely grownds with mat∣ter, & after setteled with  vnder  so, of  cot, yeld  of & louers de lute, grns: of  is we, of ∣all, rudde.  Brasill and oucha∣new, you must adde Allome water, well prepared, but not to any of ye rest of the coulours, because   sayd and . I  to make particular colours that serue to common painting.  the difference is great bet wirte the well. bearing of them Anderein is neither Oyle nor . Duely this is  is  the shell, if it be well considered, which telleth what must be , and  it most be de. reie must teach the ignorant the variety of of colours, and thy pore the price, then had  diligence , which once attamed  fayre books, and good export, which is the best end of the cople in this present lyfe. The end of the Addition. THey that dye woll and cloth be cal∣led Dyars, as Isid. sayeth: & he that pictureth Images and likenes of things is called a Paynter. A picture is called Pictura, as it were Pictura, seyning. The Image is sayued, and is not sooth∣ness, and to called Focata, and hath that meane of a certaine  colour that is layde thereon. And some pictures passe in colour, an quantitie and in shape, very doores: and sometime  to  hey bring forth lea∣sings as he doth that painteth Cmera with three , such a The  found first Paynting ans dow was purtrayad and ∣ed, and draon with braughes & with lines & often painted with simple colours, and after  with diuers cou∣lours, so that ra increased and found ght, and  colours: and labour the manner of paynting of shadowes of men And now Payof as a draw  lyke∣nesse and lynes of the Image that shall colours, and holdeth the order of , as Isi sayth lib. . cap. st many be painted, as  on tted  is set is gaye cou∣lours: so lyke  vpon  gorgeous cloathing. But if mann eye first saw un be seeth others, he would be ashamed of that so  which he reproneth in others.) ¶De Odoribus. cap. . AFter Colours, it followeth in treats of odours and of Smells. Odour is a  vapour resolued of the sub∣stance of a thing: and is drawen and passeth by the aire to the brame, & chang∣eth the sence of smelling: For  chaungeth the sence of , and printeth the lykenesse therin, as coulour chaungeth the fight, and sound the hea∣ring, and sauour the taste. For it is pro∣per to the wit and feeling to receiue prin∣ting of things that they feele, & to mo tyking therein, and comfort if they bee meane. and is be despised thereby are destroyed if they be the vttermost, as if is sayd in libro de senss & lensato Then Doour is the propertie of a thing that is perceiued and felt by sum To make odour perfect and knowen in the liu of smelling, foure things rea∣deth at the least. rate resoluing and departing subtill matter obedine to the heat that dissolueth and departeth: and the qualitie of the sumotis that is re∣solued. Printeth his lykenesse in avi that beareth it forth: and the ayre with the lyghtnesse and qualytie of fumo commeth sodainly is the knew of smel∣lyng and presenteth thereto the lykenesse of the vapour of the sumositie, that is printed in that ayre and if it be lyke to the complution, it pleaseth and com∣forteth the  wonderfully, and in∣forteth and displeaseth it, if it be not a∣oing.
Therefore smelling things that be pro∣portionate is kinde, helpeth it and com∣forteth, and for the contrary cause stin∣ing things anoyeth and grieued it. Also heate ther resteesh, maketh odour  that constraineth and bindeth and setteth odour and fordoeth t for cold moueth toward the middle, and ieth not   vapours to passe and spread in the ayre, and therefore the oungs hull stinketh not in Winter as in couin∣tuer. Also subtill matter and obedient to the made that resolueth is cause of o∣dour, and the contrary is of thicke mat∣ter. Nor thicke matter withstandeth and letteth shedding and spreading of o∣dour, as it foreth in a stone; for cold is cause of uner falsnesse and hardnesse thereof, for the stone smelleth ot  nor stinking, as An saith. . be there disposition of mee, urspeth most to ll and odour, for if aire be subtill and thin, it receiueth some the matter of , that passeth forth in vapour: but for it is subtill and thinne, that sumositie may not lan time abide therein. The contrary is of thicke aire, that receiueth not to some such fumosity and vapours, god and euill; but when they be recyued, they  not so sone passe  of thicke re, as they may out of  nice and thin, as he saith. (The cause of infection is, when the subtill aire peneceth and cannot e speedely acke againe, because of a grater airs which stoppeth) The fourth disposition of the lun of smelling worketh principally to daeine of odour, for if the sinewe of feeling in the which the smelling is, be ll desposed or of euill completion or harte in anye wise, or stopped with corrupt humours, then the sense of smelling is amisle, or all lost. The first is seene in Melancho∣like. like man, and in other euill complection that loueth slinking places, and voideth them that smell sweete and pleasaunt. The second is shewed in them that are marmed, that bout the sinewes hurt of smellyng, and smell nut therefore. The third is shewed in them that haue super∣fluite of flesh growing in the ole, and in leprous men, that haue the nose stop∣ped with euill humours and smell not well, nor know vneth betweene sweete & thinking. Then fumositie that commeth of the substaunce of a thing is the mat∣ter of odour, and so by diuersitie of lu∣mo odour is be diturs. One manner su∣mo is still in the , and  of a stone, that declareth not the comple on of positiue, and by poesence of odour: but primitiue nearby absence of odour if sheweth, that a stone hath thicke substaunce and Another fumostitie modest needeth sweetelye at the aire, & that commeth of heats that tempereth the substaunce and ooweth and if the substance be put and cleere, the odour is still good and , as it safeth a Myrre, in Muske, and in Am∣ber: and if the subst about is euill and horetle so kinde, and this odour is  and departed in twaine,  and stinking.  o∣dour commeth of head that is  in a thing, that beginneth to appear and in take corruption, as it fareth in fish that is long kept witou salt. The thirde furmositye is nature, any resolueth and trespareth him by mean, and that of the one substaunce and part, or of vncleene or vnpure: If it com∣meth of cleane substance and pure, then the odour is meanly good, as it fareth in Apples, Uraieis, and : and if it romaneth of vncleene substaunce and vn∣pure, then the odour is some deale stin∣ing, as it fareth of Als, Wormwood, and Brimstone. Also good odour commeth by working, and resolueth the more subtill parts and pure, & ayre beareth the  ther∣of to the braee, and stinking odour and raee commeth by working & heat that dissolueth therke parts and corruptions, and for this default that commeth of working of heate, all thing with small & odour is accounted but  Authors. For many things be soide in substaunce, as it fareth of vineger, Camhore and Rosa, and that is for purenesse of sub∣stance
And thereby the thing that is toasted, may be perfectly knowe, but is the line of smelling one braueth commeth alone, and thereby commeth but little spirite, that may so perfectly know the kinde of a thing. Also for the thing yt is smelled commeth not but a certaine subtill fu∣mositie medled with aire, that is draw∣en therewith to the lim of smelling, and so by that fumositie the spirite knoweth not so well the kinde of things, but all the thing that is tasted within and with out is layd to the lim of tasting: there∣fore a thing is more verelyer knowen, by sauour than by odour. Then consider heereby, that odour is the propertie or qualitie of a thing, the which qualitie is perceiued and known by smelling, as I∣saac saith: for of the thing that is smel∣led by working of heale commeth a cer∣taine fumositie, and is medled with the aire, as it were a certaine spiritual med∣ling, and chaungeth the aire, and printeth his likenesse therein betweene the nose∣thrills in small peeces of flesh, hanging as heads of breasts, as the spirite of fe∣lyng, and taketh the print and likenesse of the fumositie, and commeth to the braine, and presenteth the print and like∣nesse to the soule. Also odour maketh the body knowen, in the which it is in, and the aire with the which it is meddeled, and printeth his lykened in the spirit of feeling, and sheddeth it selfe abroade in the aire, and pearceth inward, and com∣meth to the braine by blast or by drow∣ing of aire, and wasteth humors by heat thereof, and stancheth noyfull running, & releeueth the spirites by purenes there∣of, and comforteth by vertue the fable∣nes of the heart, and chaungeth the ayre into his owne lykenesse, and putteth off stench and roised things, and maketh it vnknowen, and comforteth the wit of smellyng as well in beasts as in men: for fish loueth good odour, and hate those things that stinke, and so doe Bees. Aristotle saith, that Ants flye and voyd odour of brimstone, and only venemous wormes and beasts haseth good odour, & those things that smell well. And so the odour of rewe, is noyous to serpents. And Botraces suffereth not the odour of uines when they  nemous frogges. De Fetore cap. 4. STinking is vapour resolued, and commeth of corrupt things, and in∣fecteth the aire, and displeaseth and cor∣rupteth the spirites of smelling: for as good odour feedeth and comforteth the spirite of smellyng, is clenche displeaseth the spirite: for as Isaac saith, fumositie that commeth of a thing of man com∣plection, is not according to the spirit of feeling, for in a body with euill odour be corrupted humours, for the kinde quali∣tie thereof be out passed: Therefore, such odour is contrary to the complecti∣on of mans body. And so horrible odour tnesseth corruption of the substance, and commeth either of vnkinde heate, or of corrupt moysture, for when vnkinde heate maketh the humours boyle then it is cause of rotting and stench: and the nourishing of them, breedeth in the sto∣macke corruption, and full euill rotten∣nesse, of the which commeth most euill fumositie that grieueth the head. When onely corrupt moysture to the cause, then is not gendered stench but heauie odor, and for heauie odour, all such hot things is vnwholesome foode: but it grieueth lests then stinking things and rotted, as Galen saith. And this is seene in fresh fish, and smelleth heauely white kinde heate is therin, and stinketh when kind heate is away, and when fish is sodden, by wasting the superfluite of corrupt moysture, heauye odour is taken awaye by heat: & so by sorthing, flesh is commend∣ed, not onely in odour, but in sauour. And so then stench witnesseth corrupti∣on, and sheweth default of kinde heate, and infecteth the aire, & corrupteth the spirite of féeling, and exciteth spewing & wambling, and breedeth head ache, and distempereth all the complection, and is horrible and displeasing is the wit of feelyng. Therefore fish flyeth and voyd∣eth olde stinking wits and wells, & com∣meth into fresh and new, as Aristotle sayeth: also stinke is grieuous to Bees, as be sayth.
And the Foxes durt stinketh foule, for be commeth into the Brockes den, and defileth it with dirte, and driueth the Broke out of his denne in that wise, as Plinius sayth, and ouercommeth him so with stench, which he may not ouercome with might and strength. Also stenche infected the spirites and sinewes, and chaungeth them out of kinde disposition into vnkinde disposition, as it fareth in Liprous men: their stinking breath, both infecteth and corrupteth whole men. Also stench slayeth the broode of beastes in the dams wombe: therefore Aristo. saith, that a Mare shall cast hir colts, if she smell the snuffe of a Canols. Also, stench may be so strong, that it may be∣cause of sodaine death, for some serpents stinke so foule, that they stay sodainlye with stench, those that doe smell them, as the Cockatrice slayeth with the sight both men and beasts that he seeth, as A∣uicen saith. But sometime it happeneth, that stench helpeth: for some stinking things be put in medicine, as Aloe, Gallianum, Brimstone, All lods, and other such, which accord to medicines in many causes, for because of lykenes by heauie odour, they draw together rotted humours, that be disposed to stinke, and putteth them out of the bodye. By lyke∣nes stench is horrible to kinde, therefore in presence of stinking medicine, they gather themselues whollye there against, to ouercome their enemie. Also stink∣ing medicine is occasion of out putting of stinking things, for when one stink∣ing thing is taken, another stinking thing to put out therewith. Also stench of well burnt, or felte burnt, or of a Goates horne went, is wholsomly done to the nosethrills to awake him yt hath the Litargie, the sléeping euill, as Const. sayth, for the spirites hate stench, & fléeth therefrom into the inner partes of the braine, and by gathering and comming of them, kinde is help against the euill, & defieth therefore the sooner the matter of the postume, that is cause of ye false sléep, as be saieth. And in the same wise, in causes of the mother, when it is areared too high, and presseth the spirituall mem∣bers, then be stinking things wholsom∣ly done to the nosethrils, & well smelling to the neather partes: for kinde flyeth stench, and commeth to the Mother, and feeleth good odour beneath, and draweth thetherward, and bringeth so with him the Mother downward in due place. And though no good odour be contrary to the other, yet some stench is contrary to an∣other stench, for stench of garlike is con∣trary to the stench of a dounge hill. Also where they doe all stinke, the stenche of one is not felt, for one stench swallow∣eth another. Of things with good smell and odour looke before in Tract. 17. De herbarum speciebus & plantis. De Sapore. cap. 4. SAuour is perceiued and knowen by taste, for as coulour is knowen by sight, so sauour is knowen by taste: and is the propertie of a thing, and pro∣fereth it selfe to the name of the soule, by the way of taste, for it is a propertie that is perceiued onely by the tast. This I toll at the beginning, ye Philosophers deeme otherwise of the principles of sa∣uours, then Phisitions doe: but of that strife I force not at this time: for wee search onely Diuersitie, Cause & Wor∣king of sauour, as it belongeth to Holy Writ to seeke some dark meaning of pro∣perties of sauours, and therefore of the other, we force not at this time. De Saporibus cap. 42. THen sauour is properly perceiued by the tast, and by the presence thereof in the line of tast, the w of tast is pleased or displeased. And Isa. saith in Die. of sa∣uours be eight : sweet, vnous firste, bitter, sharpe, sower, lesse sower, & yet lesse sower, & foure recken  with, worish sauour, and to account in thee wise, sauours be ne: but werish is vn∣properly called sauour, for it is sauorles I we héereof pertaine to heate & do hot complection, sweete, tnous, utts, bit∣ter, & sharpe. The other belong to colde, and to colde complection: sower, & lesse sower, and meane sower and werishnes. Two things make sower complection, &
substaunce,and substaunce is treble, thick, thin and meane. Also hot complec∣tion: moyst to the second degree, with thicke substaunce, maketh sweete sauour, and hot complection, and moyst in the end of the second degree, with subtil sub∣staunce, maketh vnctuous sauour, and is accounted subtill in passing, for it passeth soone this fumositie, and hath thicknesse in deede, and stoppeth therefore, and hath potentiall subtiltie in substaunce, & pas∣seth swiftly therefore. And hot and drye complection in the ende of the second de∣gree, with meane substaunce, maketh salt Sauour: and hot and drye in the third degree, with thicke suance maketh bit∣ter: but complection hot and drye in the fourth degree, with thus substauner, ma∣keth sharpe Sauour, and so fiue Sauors be grounded in heate. But colde com∣plection and drye in the seconde degree, with meane substaunce, maketh biting Sauour, such as is in roses. And colde & drye in the second degree with subtill substaunce, maketh sweete Sauour: and complection colde and moyst in the first degrees, with meane substaunce, maketh werish Sauor, such as is in the white of an egge: and so three Sauours be whi∣tish of subtill substaunce, sharpe, vnctu∣ous and Sower: and three be of thicke substaunce, Sourish, Bitter & Sweete: & three he whitish of meane substance, bi∣ting Sauor, Salt and Wearish. De dulcedine & eius effectu. ca. 43. SWeete, Sauour is gendred and com∣meth of temparate heate, and of thick substance & sweetnesse laid to ye tongue,Svveete sauour. opened moderately, and beareth mode∣rately and moysteth moderately, and the thicke substaunce entreth moderately & openeth the poores, and abideth in long seene. The soule both liking in tempe∣ratenes, and so kinde vnto more liking in sweetnes than in other Sauors. Al∣so nothing is so temperate and so such according to the euen complection of mā¦kinde, as swéetnesse of Sauor, and ther∣fore the complection of mankind, that is nigh to the euen temperatenes, hath ly∣king in Sweetnes that is like thereto. De Sapore dulci. ca. 44. TO make swéete Sauour, soure Ele∣ments come together, but not all a∣lyke much, for the fire and ayre posseh the other, and so of fire commeth heat, & of aire commeth moysture. The which two, heat & moysture be needfull to all ge∣neration of things: for temperate heat working in moysture, heateth and tem∣pereth the moysture and humour, and clenseth the earthy humour, and maketh the substaunce softe: and so the firie and earthie parts increase, & the moyst wet∣eth thicke, and so thicke substaunce is gendered, in the which sweete Sauor to grounded, and so sweete Sauor without wem of biting and sharpnes, passeth all other Sauours as Isaac sayth. For the kinde thereof is nigh to blood, and glad∣deth therefore and cleanseth and moyst∣eth the lion of last temperately, without trauell of kinde. Sweetnes is sometims cleane and pure, and containeth meanly soure qualyties, as it fareth in Sugar: & is somtime medled with gleimie things and thicke, as it fareth in Daies: and is somtime medled with biting Sauour, as it fareth in Honie. The first Sweet∣nes is most according to kinde: but it happeneth somtime that it noyeth kind, when kinde taken more then it may de∣fie, for ofte in ye wise Sweetnes is cause of some stopping, for superfluitie of sweet things is gleimed in the poores, fille sweete things softeneth the members, & washeth, dryeth and cleanseth and nou∣risheth lyttle by kinde, but happelye it softeneth, for moysture maketh matter softe, and heate dissolueth and tempreth, for the matter that was thicke, is now made softe, and draweth out and clean∣seth sweete things, and nourisheth lyttle by kinde, for they be thicke in substance and may not for thicknes come into the poores: and also it stoppeth the mouthe of the veynes, and saileth appetite full se: but it happeneth that they nou∣rish much, for they be lyke to the com∣plection of mankinde, and endo there∣to, and be therfore taken in great quan∣tity: & for that they be thick in substance,
heate working therein, gendereth much bloud. And sweetnesse medled with gle∣mie matter, nourisheth much: but it happeneth that it breedeth manye gre∣uings in the body, as Isaac saieth. For sweetnesse breedeth and dra to rotting, and breedeth swellyng, and hur∣lyng and ling in the wombe, and  soone and moueth discontinual fe∣uer, or els increaseth cholaricke swel∣ling. Then cleane sweetnesse and pure, and not infected by medlyng of another thing, is among all sauoure, most plea∣sing to the taste, and freend to kinde, and most lyke therto, and restoreth in the bo∣dy the thinge that is lost, and most com∣forteth fble vertues and spirits, & nou∣risheth specially all the members: For Isaac sayeth, that sweetnesse is the pro∣per sauour of nourishing, if it be stedfast and abiding in the members, and passeth not soone out of the members: and no∣thing norisheth, that is not medled with sweetnesse, and so sauoures, that be con∣trarie to sweetnesse, be contrary to the complection of mankinde, and norisheth therefore little or right nought. Of med∣lyng of contrarye sauoures, commeth a meane sauour, in the which is some sweetnesse hid, and because thereof, that meane sauour is according to kind, and nouriseth the bodye, as it fareth in dy∣uers sauces, and also in Pigmentes, in  be contrarie things: and so sweet∣nesse is head and well of all lyking sa∣uours, as wite is head and well of all , as it is sayd in lib. de sensu & . And thereto is sayd, that black∣ is priuation of white & cleere  as bitternesse is priuation of sweet∣nesse  sweetnesse is friende to the  members, for it easeth them, &  all roughnesse thereof, & clee∣ the voice, and cleanseth the wosen  and openeth the pipes &  of the lunges and of the breast, &  all esse of ye wo∣ and of the throte, and destroyeth the  souperfluitie of humors about uall members and bringeth all  of the spirite and of life in due  and abateth all the  and wasteth stuffing moysture in the members. By occasion, some sweete things was ma∣ny euills in the body, for they be vnctu∣ous, and breede swellyng: for when the sweete resolution, by heat is more than to the  of the moysture re∣solued, or at the beast the wsing, of re∣ there must be much  & vapour gendereth, and so the place most  stretch by the vapour, and there∣of commeth swellyng, ache, and r∣iyng: and for the seeme cse, sworde things  appetite, for  of thicke substaunce they stil meane the eyde stomacke, and stop the was, and also they increase red Cholera: for be∣cause, they be hot, they  hu∣mors, & gree therefore them that euils that come of shall . Also, it breedeth
De Sapore vnctuoso. 45. VNctuous sauour is gendered & com∣meth of heate and of moysture in subtill substance, & therefore vnctuoie y do so the tongue, openeth & dissolueth, and subtill substaunce entereth full some, and for the  thereof is but little vn∣temperate, the soule maye take ye sweet∣nes thereof, and hath most lyking therto. In the gendering of vnctuous sauo, is more of fire then of other elements, and after rs is most of aire. Then the more working of heat of moyst matter dissol∣teth the more, and cleanseth & putteth: and so the watrie partes and earthes a∣bate, andstrie parts and m increase, & so the reall commeth betweene sauour. Uctuou gets  appetite, & brée∣deth , for when this taken in the stomacke it is ture and departed into fumositie, and commeth vpward, for it is all  substaunces, and filleth and stoppeth the mouth of the stomacke, and abateth appetite and bredeth wombling. Also vnctuous meete  aboue, for the lightnesse thereof warreth vpwarde, for it is full of fumositie, and letteth al∣so dipretion, and it stoppeth the roughnes of the stomacke, & teth with  and so the dde that is taken, passeth narrowe without digestion, for it maye and be felt: such meate with vnctuous as sweete, smooth, and slidder, and passeth out therefore without dige∣stion. Also such  nourisheth but li∣tle. for it stoppeth soone ye mouthe of the  and litle is taken therof, & what is taken thereof, is soone wasted, for his subtil  also of heat, for  nourisheth not, but by meanes of aire, & vnctuous things passe soone into sub∣stance of aire: & so vnctuous things that haue more water, pertain lesse to ye mat∣ter of aire, and if appeareth by Swies greace, that féedeth lesse & fire, than doth shéepe greace of allow, for the Swies greace hath lesse of aire, & more of wa∣ter, then shéepes greace. Also vnctuous meete norisheth er heat, and therefore flesh is forbidden in feuer Ac. for dred of fatnes yt is medled therwith, yt feedeth and exciteth ye seuerous heat. It stoppeth also ye splene & the liuer for actuall thick∣nes thereof, for such meat in soone drawen because of swéetnes therof, and thicknes therof stoppeth soone the pores. Also such meate is cause of head ach, for much fu∣mosutie siteth of head, and stretcheth the tender  of ye braine. Also vnc∣tuous meate easeth the spirituall mem∣bers, as it fareth of butter, but soone vnc∣tuous things grieue ye brest for drines & is therein, as it fareth of oyle of note, for such haue not pere . All such things lesseth & easeth sor without the body, & , and ripeth Po∣stumes and hetches, and gendreth mat∣ter by moysture thereof, for it dissolueth and tempreth more then it wasteth. De Sapore salso. cap. 46. SAlt sauour commeth of heat & drines in meane substance, for passing heat & drines openeth many pores & holes: for drines with heat laxeth  & vnsend∣eth & constraineth & bendeth wt colde, & therfore much substaunce therof entreth vnto ye pores, & for ye parts be greatly de∣parted, & much substance entreth & com∣meth therin: therfore ye soule hath not li∣king in ye presence of it, hath disly∣king therof. In Salt sauor  4. elemēts in certaine proportion, & not euen like much of all, for fire & earth haue ye ma∣ste but moderately, & of moderate fire commeth moderate heate, & of moderate driues & moderate heat, commeth mode∣rate boyling & seething of moysture and so ye watry places and  be dissolued, & turned into meane firie parts and by moderate  ye substance moderately drieth, & so therfore liueth hot substaunce by heate. Salt things cleanseth and tem∣pereth and departeth moysture, if they be taken into the body, and biteth ye sto∣macke: and the gate being so bitten, be moued to put out moysture yt is dissol∣ued. And salt things, cleanseth and softe∣neth hardnes of flesh: for by heat & dri∣nes thereof, they depart the fast super∣fluitie of moysture, and so they mofie. Also  things harden substaunce For with heate and drynesse thereof,
De Sapore amaro. ca. 47. BItter sauour commeth of heat in the third degree, and drynesse in the se∣cond and thicke substance, & so heat with drinesse maketh great departing, & so the instrument of tast is greeued, & the sauor is bitter, greeuous, and contrary to tast In the  of this Sauour, but foure elements in a certaine proportion  fire & earth haue ye mastry  earth  of great mastry of heat commeth , and so the mastry partes  be the more dissolued & made  earthy thicke, but for the dry∣nesse doth  mastry, the substaunce deth thicke & not made then. And by working of drynesse and of heat, bitter∣nesse is grounded therein, and all bitter thinges  to the tast more then any other things with simple sauour, for it maketh more the parting are dea∣ling, & though other things haue lesse heate then sharpe things of sauour yet it maketh more dissolution and depar∣ting in the tongue, and groweth more by pressing & throsing. Also bitter thinges purgeth Cholera, for they be like therto in complection: or for in Cholera be ma∣ny pores that take the bitter things that maketh the Cholera fléeting and things and wing, and bringeth it out in that wise. Also bitter things exciteth appetite, for it putteth out Cholera, that is also gathered, as a thing that is light aboue the mouth of the stomacke, & feedleth the appetite. And also thicknes of bitter things helpeth therto, for they hold down the meat in the gr of the stomack, & to the ouer partes bee hold, and of kh meat. Also better things vnstoppeth the  and the sauor, for with heat it ope∣neth the pres, and dissolueth and bea∣reth downe the  that be dissol∣ued with thicknes, & putteth them out Also bitter things be cōtrary to worms, and slaieth long wormes in the wombe and no wonder: for such wormes come of corrupt fleume, and liue also by fleame. And it greeueth ye spirituall members, & neuertheles both by sharp substance, & by great drynes they be made made ting & fting. Also bitter thinges saueth the vtter things, for if they bee tempered with some licour, they haue those three, that needeth to conseruations and sauing, they  as much as dessolue, and en∣ter deepe in the thing, and lieth in thicke substance, and hardeneth the thing, & ma∣keth
it the lesse passible. Also it helpeth colde ouls and the palsie, dissoluing & wasting the matter, and dryeth colde scabbes, and openeth also the wayes of the bledder and of the reines, and brea∣keth the stone, and comforteth the mo∣ther, and exciteth and bringeth out men∣struall superfluitie. And though it greene the tast, yet it is more needfull to many other things then is sw things. De Sapore acuto. ca. 48. SHarpe sauour commeth of heat and of drinesse, that is in the fourth degree in subtill substaunce, and thereof commeth right great opening of poores and depar∣ting of parts, & entreth for the substance thereof is subtil, & commeth and heateth the lim of tast with sharpnesse thereof: In this sauour bee foure Elements, but not all alike, for there is more of fire & of earth then of other Elementes, and is therefore sharp & hot because of mastry of fire, and full drye because of earth, of great mastrye of heate commeth greate boyling, and turneth these parts of earth and of water into firye partes: And the dry parts be sharped, and great drinesse maketh the substance dry, subtill, & thin, & so sharp sauour commeth of great ma∣stry of heat & of drinesse in subtill mat∣ter. And thinne things with sharpe sa∣uour biteth, and be full hot and dry, and maketh dissolution & departing, for sub∣till substaunce commeth into the partes and departeth them a sunder, and there∣fore there is biting and fretting. Al such things fret and dissolue, for by qualitye and by substance it dissolueth and depar∣teth parts from parts, and entreth deepe within, and it comforteth the vertue of appetite, for it wasteth superfluity in the members: And so when the poores bee voide and cleansed, because of the voy∣dance the appetite is the stronger. Also with sharpnesse it pricketh and biteth the sinewes of feeling, and exciteth appetite in that wise. Also such biting things no∣rish but little, for of great heat and dry∣nesse commeth sooner burning then dige∣stion, and therefore it nourisheth lyttle. And be also by their complection contra∣ry to kinde, & be therfore abhominnable. And so kinde desireth them not, but put∣teth them of. De Sapore so. cap. 49. be foure Elements in certaine proporti∣on, but not all alike : There is meane , and of meane mastrye: Of earth commeth meane : Cow beareth downe the heate, therefore the heate maketh but little boyling, and re∣solueth s, and wasteth the partes of fire and ayre, as the more  parts, and dissolueth the parts of earth and of water, and maye not wast and consume them at full, for the fire is lyttle. And so thicke parts bee made subtill and not wasted and consumed. And so colde and drynesse haue the mastry in subtill sub∣staunce, and thereof commeth sowre sa∣uour. Sowre things make good appetite, for because of colde and drynesse it mo∣ueth towarde the middle, and so it bea∣reth downe the meate to the grounde of the stomacke. And so the mouth of the stomacke is voide, and feeleth the voyd∣nesse, and desireth meate. For desire is working compowned of vertue of kinde appetite, and the vertue of feeling. Also sowre things laeth the full , But if the stomacke  voide, it findeth but lyttle moysture. And sowre things dryeth it with drynesse, and bin∣deth it with colde. All such things ope∣neth stoppings of the splene, and of the liuer, for it openeth and carueth and de∣parteth humours in the poores, not by qualitie, but by subtill substance. Also such things greeueth the spirituall mem∣bers, & maketh them stretch with cold∣nesse, and roughe with drinesse. And if
they be put in the body without, they smite againe hot humours, & so it doth in legges swollen, for with holding of men∣strual bloud or Emoroides, swageth and abateth soone, if they be washed in hot vineger. Looke of this matter before in Tractatu de Aceto. li. 17. in the treatise of vines and of wine. De Sapore Pontico. cap. 50. Sapor Ponticus is sowrish sauour, and is ingendered and commeth of colde & drynesse in the third degree in the sub∣staunce that is thicke, and such thinges layd vnto the tongue, constraineth & bin∣deth, and the substance entreth and fast∣neth the parts, and that sauour is called Ponticus. In this sauour that is called Ponticus be foure Elements in greate vneuennesse, for water and earth haue the mastry, and fire and aire be ther vn∣der of great mastry. Of water commeth strong cold, and of earth commeth great drynesse. Therefore there may not bee transmutation and chaunging, for there to default of heate and of humour: And so for colde and drynesse haue there the mastrye, the substaunce must needes hir boystous and thicke, of mastrye of colde and of drynesse: this sauour Ponticus hath this property, as Isa. saith: for souri∣nes wt liking sauour is the more liking, & with vnliking sauour the more vnly∣king: and the cause is, for if sowrenesse wath sweete things and vnctuous cōmeth into ye pores, it maketh the sweetnesse a∣bide there the longer time, & the lyking to the faster therein, & abideth there long time: and so it faceth of vnliking sauour, and therefore it is, yt euer the neerer the bone, ye sweeter is the flesh, for the bones be melancholike colde and dry, and flesh in his kinde is sanguine and sweete, and so there is sowrenes & sweetnes medled, and that for the more liking. Also there∣fore Harts flesh is liking, and Rothers also, for sowrenesse of complection of the beast medled with sweetnes of the flesh. And the contrary is of wormewoode & of Fumitori, for of bitternes be medled with them, as  & other then they bee, the more bitter they be, & greeueth the tast ye more, and sowrish things exciteth appe∣tite, and lareth after meat, and the cause is, for they beare downe the meat, as it were a presser or a wrencher, and stop∣peth & bindeth before, for they constraine & kinde the sinewes, and stop the wayes with thicke substance, & with colde and drynesse, & so meat that is taken is held & maye not passe with their thicknesse, and stoppeth the splene and the liuer, and bredeth passions, Colica passio, & Illiaca passio, and stoppeth the guts with their thicknesse, & letteth out passing of durt and of fumositie, & gréeueth also the spi∣rituall members, for they make them rough and dry, and stauncheth tasting & spng, if they be layd to duely without, and abateth hot swelling, and staunch∣eth bleeding, and smiteth the sinews, and maketh the teeth on edge. De Sapore Stiptico. cap. 51. SApor stipticus is also a sowrish sa∣uour, & commeth of cold and of drines in meane substaunce. In this sauour bee 4 elements in a certaine proportion, but not all like: for water & earth haue ma∣strye therin, but not so much as in other sowrish sauour that is called Ponticus. Of water commeth cold, & of earth com∣meth drinesse, & colde abateth the heate, & therfore the heat maketh but litle boi∣ling, and the substance is some deals re∣solued, but not wasted, but some deale fastned by drynesse, and for drynes may not all forbi it, nor wast all, ther leueth meane substaunce, and is diuers, and other sauour then Ponticus yt commeth of the same causes, though it be more strong in thicke matter. Therefore this sourishnes that is called Ponticus, as I∣si. saith, yt setteth onely seuen diuers sa∣uors, accounted Stipticus, vnder Ponti∣cus. And he meaneth, that Ponticus is more sowre then Stipticus, and so they be not diuers of diuers kind, but onely that one is more sowre, & the other lesse sowre, and therfore either acordeth with other in working, but the one worketh lesse, and the other more.
De Sapore insipido. ca. 52. THe ninth sauour is called wearish∣nesse or vnsauourinesse, and that may be sayde in two wayes. Priuatiue and Positiue: Priuatiue is called vnsa∣uourie, if the sauour therof may not bee knowen by the tast of the sauour, as the sauour of water is not knowen by the tast, for great vnlykenesse thereof to the lim of tast, for water is simple in com∣parison to the tongue, and taketh foure things in his composition: Positiue sa∣uour is called vnsauourie, that is not knowen by the wit of tast, passing the first-degree toward a stronger sauour, as the white of an Egge, of the which the substaunce is meane, and heat and cold∣nesse passeth not distemperately the first degree: Such wearish things be Courds, Citrone, Meldnes, and other such, that be more vsed in medicine thē in other meat, and nourisheth but little, for they haue no lyking sauour, but their substaunce is fleeting, and abateth thirst with moy∣sture & colde, & quencheth Cholera, and heat, and increaseth Fluma, and bréedeth Feauers Colidiane, & festureth or exci∣teth all other fleamatike cold and moyst passions. Wearish sauour commeth of colde and moysture in meane substance. Therin as in other be foure Elements, but not in euen proportion, for water & aire haue the principal mastry, and earth the secondary mastrye: Then for strong colde and meane drynesse, the dry parts and ayry be chaunged into watry parts and earthy, but for mastrye of moisture withstandeth, that the substaunce maye not come to the drynesse of earth, ye sub∣staunce leaueth meane with mastrye of colde and of moysture, that is because of this sauour, that is by a misse vse called vnsauourie. Of simple sauour and of di∣uersitie and kinde thereof, this shall suf∣fice for this time. All this is taken of Isaac, of Galen, and of Constantine, au∣thours of medicine. And some sauours be compounded, as colours be meddeled & odours also. And these sauours worke diuersitie by diuers composition, for it worketh one wise in standing thinges, & other wise in fleeting things: other wise in hearbes and trees, and other wise in men & in other beasts. Heereof it is trea∣ted before in bookes of kindes & proper∣ties of thinges, and of bodies with soule and without soule: but of licours, in the which sauours be grounded. I holde it good to fulfil that that lacketh in the other bookes. De Liquore. cap. 53. LIcour is fleeting and is gendered by digestion in hearbs, trees, and grasse, & also in bodies of beasts, and is wrong & thrusted out of medled bodyes by vio∣lence and also by strength, and not that euery humour is called licour, but onely ye humour, yt which commeth by craft or els by kinde out of hearbs, out of trees, and out of bodyes of men, and of other beasts. In lykewise as milke and vrine issueth and commeth out of beastes, and wine and Oyle commeth of trees, and honnie commeth of flowres, and Sider of fruit, Ale of Corne, and some woose commeth of woode, Crabs, and of Car∣rudes. And among these licours, some be simple, and some compowned: Com∣powned be those that be confect & made of diuerse things medled together. And those be simple that liue and abide with∣out anye meddeling, right as they come first out of the substance. But no lycour is so simple as water, for it abideth in purenesse of Element. All other licours and humours be made of the foure Ele∣ments, but those that be not meddeled with other be called simple, in the which simple qualities of Elementes haue the mastry by the first composition and ma∣king, and be first purged and cleansed of drafts of earth, by kinde or by crafte. And by diuerse meddeling of licours and of qualities of Elements, that haue the mastry, licours haue diuers complec∣tions, odours, and sauours. For licours, in the which heate & moysture haue the mastry, be most swéete: And these, in the which heat & drynesse haue the mastrie, be most sweete: in which is heate with drynesse, and most sharpe: in the which colde and drynesse, be most sowre and
sowrish: but in the which cold and moi∣sture haue the mastry, be werish and vn∣sauoury, as it fareth of Ptisane, & other such. And same licours by drawing of heat of the Sun, commeth when ye rinde be slit, as Balsamus and Terebintina, & Lacrimis, that is first cleansed by heat of the Sunne, and fastned and turned in∣to the substaunce of Mirre And some li∣cour is pressed and wrong out of fruit of trees, as wine, oile, and other such: and some by great craft and burning in cer∣tain moysture, yt cōmeth at endes of cer∣taine woode, while it burneth, as doeth Colophonia, and Nash, Pitch, and some Oyle of the tree Iuniperus, & other such. And some commeth of iuyce of hearbes, as Apium & Aloe, and other such that be dried with heat of the Sun or of fire. And some commeth of the dewe of hea∣uen, and falleth on floures, and bee fast∣ned there aboute, and made by crafte of Bees, as honnie. And some commeth of veines of the earth, as water of Salte wells, and water Nitrum and Allome, & other such. These differences, properties, and causes of licours be sufficiently trea∣ted and shewed before, lib. 17. de herbis & Arboribus, & earum Succis. And lib. 16. de Venis terre, & li. 8. de passioni∣bus aeris, where it is treated of the kind of Manna and of honnie, that be accoun∣ted and gendered of the ayre: neuerthe∣lesse of honnie somewhat shall be sayde, and also of Milke and of Whey and of Butter, that be bulked of voders and scales of beastes, of the which it is not much spoken of before. De Melle cap. 54. HOnnie is called Melle, and hath that name (as Isidore sayeth, lib. 20. of Mellisle in Greeke, as much to saye in English, as Bees. For the Greekes call Mellisle, Bees, for by wonderfull craft of kinde, Bees arayeth bunnye, that is first made of dew of the ayre, & is found in leaues of Reede. Therefore Virgil sayth. Prutinus aer mellis coelestia dona. The heauen giueth Honnie to the aire. And so yet in Inde and in Arabia honnie is founde in boughes and in leaues hanging as it were Salt, as hee sayeth. And generallye all honnye is sweete. But in Sardini, honny is bitter, for therein is full much Woormewoode, and Bees liueth thereby. Phisitions tel, that treate of kind of things, and name∣ly Galen, ye horne is vnprofitable meat, and greeuous to children and to young men, in the which to much heate, and ac∣cording to full olde men and cold, with wine and with hot meates. Huc vsque Isidorus, libro. 20. capitulo. 1. Also honnie is most sweete lycour, by medicinall craft gendred of most pure matter, but by heate of the Bees that gendereth the honie, by medling of some hot thing with honnie, therein is sharp∣nesse meddeled with sweetnesse. The sweetnesse of honnie is more hotte and lesse moyst then other sweetnesse, as I∣saac sayeth. Then honnie hath much heate and ayre, and lesse of earth, and of water, and much drynesse both of fire and sharpnes also, and lesse cold humor. Therefore honnie is deemed hot and drye in the end of the second degree: But for the substance therof is nigh meane & temperate, honny cleanseth much, & wa∣sheth, and maketh subtill and thin, and carueth with heat thereof, and departeth thick humours in the body. And for hon∣ny is hot, it is nigh sharpe, and pricketh therefore the guts, and moueth them to put out drafts and dirt. Also such sweet∣nesse is the sweetnes of hony, with much sharpnesse and heat, and stoppeth not the waye of the splene and of the lyuer so much, as doth sweetenesse that is cleane & pure, and without medling of other sa∣uour, as Isaac saith in cap. of foure di∣uersities of sweetnesse and sauour. Also for honny is euen and temperate, honny is much according and friend to kinde, and likeneth it selfe much to the members & stancheth with thicknesse grieuous run∣nings, and straineth pores & holes that be too wide, and kepeth and laueth well temperate kind, & letteth humours that be ready & disposed to ye flure. Neuerthe∣lesse, yet hony laxeth grieuous humore. For honny hath contrary dispositions of matter in the which it worketh, for it hardneth matter that is soft, & losineth and departeth matter that is harde.
As Isaac sayeth, Honnie keepeth and sa∣ueth and clenseth and tempereth bitter∣nesse, and is therefore put in conserua∣tiues, and clenseth medicines to temper bitternesse of Spicery, as it is sayde in Antido. N. But rawe honnie not well clarified, is right venteous, and breedeth curling and swelling in the wombe, and turneth soone into euill humours, and stoppeth by his gleaming the liuer and the splene, and kindleth Cholera, & bree∣deth the Feauer that is called Diuina, and stretcheth and haleth the body vnder the small ribbes. And greeueth them yt haue the euills Collica passio, and Illi∣aca passio. Then as Constantine sayth and Isaac in Dietis, honnie hath diuers working, for some honnie is wholesome and keepeth and saueth health, and lax∣eth in some disposition, and breedeth euil humours and venime. And the more red it is, the more hot it is and sharpe, and departeth the more, and thirleth & clean∣seth. And the more white it is, the lesse hot it is and sharpe, and the more sweet it is, and more pure, and with good smel, the better it is. (Additiō.Plinie, although in his 11. booke of his naturall historie. Chap. 8. hee writeth yt honnie is gathered of the flowres of all Trees, and Sets or Plants, except Sor∣rell, and the hearbe called Chenepode, (which some call Goosefoote) yet hee affir∣meth that it descendeth from the aire: for in ye 12. chap. of the same booke he wri∣teth thus: This commeth from ye ayre at ye rising of certeine starres, and especi∣ally at ye rising of Sirius, and not before the rising of Vergiliar, which are ye sea∣uen starres, called Pleades, in ye Spring of ye day, for then on ye leaues are found a fat dew yt tasteth sweete, and is clam∣mie, which after is become corrupt, &c. This is ye mill dewe, which Bees take least of, and is gone by ye heat of ye Sun, or euer the Bees flie abroad, Plinie heere∣in knew much but not all thinges, and they are not wise yt will leane so much vpon Plinie, as it there were no better knowledge found sithence his time. Of the Elementall ayre proceedeth the originall of honnie, and is gathered by ye Bees from flowres and hearbes, & from the Trunke of ye Bees is distilled ye moist and then licour (and not vomited) ye cla∣mie substance gathered vpon ye smallest legges, and so brought to ye hiue, & there wrought by such arte, as passeth euerye dreaming skill to surmise.) Of Hunnie. HUnny is of great quantitie in north regions,Ad as Plinie writeth in ye .11. booke of naturall Historyes, & 13. chap. as in some places of Germanie, honnye is found in such quantitye, yt there haue bene serue honnie combes of eight foote long, and blacke in the hollowe part, &c. Honnie as well in meate as in drunke, is of incomperable efficacie, for it not onely cleanseth, altereth, and , but also it long time preserueth ye vn∣corrupted, which is put into it, insomuch as Plinie sayth: Such is the nature of Honnie, yt if suffereth not the bodyes to puinsie. And he affirmeth, yt he old see an Hippocentaure (which is a beast, halfe man, and halfe horse) brought in honnye to Claudius ye Emperour, out of Aegipt to Rome: and he telleth also of one Pol∣lio Romulus, who was aboue a hundred yeares olde, of whom Augustus ye Em∣perour demaunded, by what meanes hee liued so long, and returned still ye vigour or liuelynesse of body and minde, Pollio annswered, yt hee did it inwarde with Mead, (which is drink made with honie & water) & outward wt Oyle. Democri∣tus was also of ye same opinion, a great Philosopher, and being 100. yeares olde, & .9. prolonged his lyfe certaine dayes wt the euapouration of honie. Arestox∣eneus writeth of this excellent matter, most wonderfully wrought, and gathe∣red by the little Bée, as well of ye pure dew of heauen, as of the most subtil hu∣mour of sweete and vertuous hearbes, and flowres, be made licours commodi∣ous to mankinde, as Mead, Matheglyn, and Oximell, Mead, is made of parte of honnie, and foure times so much of pure water, and boiled vntill no skimme doe remaine, is much commended of Galen, drinke in Summer for preseruing of health. It cleanseth the brest and lungs.
Matheglin, which is most vsed in Wales, by reason of hot hearbe boyled with ho∣ny, is better then Mead, and more com∣forteth a cold stomacke, if it be perfectly made, and neyther too new nor too stale. Oximell, 11 where the one parts of Us∣neges is puouble so much of honnye, foure times so much of water, and that beeing boyled to a third part, and cleane skimmed, is good to cleanse the stomacke of fleame, or matter vndigested, so that it be not red cholar, &c. Sir Tho. Eliot. chap. 22. to, 15. to his booke, The Castle of ith. De Fauo. cap. 55. THE honnie combe is called Fatius, and hath that name of Fauendo, nourishing and succouring, for honnye medled with waxe is called Fauus. For in Cells made of Waxe by a wonder∣full craft or skill Bees gather honnye, and keepe and succour the lycour there∣with. And so the honnie combe is called Fauus as it were Fouus or Fouens nou∣rishing, comforting, and succouring, for ye honnie combe comforteth and succou∣reth ye honie therwithin Or else it hath this name Fuus, of Fauus, for it is full sauourable and lyking to the tast, and to eate. Therefore Isidore sayeth, that Fauus commeth of this word of Greeke Fagui, for honnie is more eaten then dronke, Fagiu in Greeke, is to vnder∣stand. : But some men doe cast Fa∣uus, honny wrong out of ye waxe, & pur∣ged at best, in the which the tast ineth much sweetnesse. A certain beast is cal∣led Melota, and hath that name for it lo∣ueth and desireth honnye: and so this name Melus and Melota also, commeth of this name. Mel. honnie, as Huguti∣on sayth. Also the Beare loueth honnie most of anye thing. And he breaketh trees, and climbeth on trées for loue of honnie combes, and not without peryll, as Aristotle sayth, libro. 18. For some∣time among honnie déepe in the hiue. breedeth certeine small Wormes, as it were Spiders, and doe spin and weaue and make webbes, and haue the mastry of all the Hiue, and therefore the hon∣nye rotteth and is corrupte. Also theyr honnye is good when it is taken out of new waxe, for honnie that long abideth in olde waxe, waxeth redde, and the cor∣ruption of honnie is lyke to the corrup∣tion of wine in flakets, & shall therefore be taken in time. And honnye is good when it so lyke golde, as he sayth. Also hée sayth, that Bees doe sit on the hiue and sucke the superfluitie that is in the honnie combes. And if they did not so, the honnye should bée corrupt that is in the combes, and Spiders should be gen∣dered. They sit on the combes, and doe kéepe bustly that sos Spiders haue no mastry, and eate them if they find them, and should els all die. De Mulso. cap. 56. MVlsum is drinke made of Water or of Wine, and honnye meddeled together: And the Greekes call that drinke Mellicratum, as Idiomel, that is made of the iuyce of Maces, and of honnye meddeled: And Rodomell, that is made of the iuyce of Roses, and hony medled. De Medone. cap. 57. MEth is called Medo or Medus, as it were Melus, and is drinke made of honnie and of water well sowen af∣ter the best manner. And breedeth swel∣ling and curling in the wombe, and hard gnawing, if it be rawe, and the ho∣ny not well puted, and forasmuch as it commeth sée into fumositye, it com∣meth vp to the head, and grieueth it with diuerse euills. And if it be well sod and stale, it is liking to the tast, and cler∣reth the voyce, and cleanseth the woden and the throate, and the pipes of the lungs, and gladdeth and comforteth the heart, and nourisheth and fatneth the bo∣dye, but to them that haue sore lyuers and splenes, and the stone, it is lesse ac∣cording,Mirrus, knee nolent of uichers boo n for it stretcheth and stoppeth the wayes, and it is ordered with Mir∣tus or Ruscum, and with other hearbes of good smell & odour, to bée more whol∣some
some and the better smelling, and to in∣dure and last the longer. De Clareto. cap. 58. CLaret is made of wine and of honnie and swéete spicerie: For good spicerye is grounde to small pouder, and put in a linnen bag that is faire and cleane, with honie or with Sugar, and the best wine is put vppon the spicery, as who maketh lye. And the Wine shall be oft put ther∣oft, vntill the vertue of the Spicerye bee incorporate vnto the Wine, and be clari∣fied. And so Claret draweth of Wine might and sharpnesse, and holdeth of the Spicery good smell and odour, and bor∣roweth of the honnye's wirrinesse and sa∣uour. (Additiō.The olde kinde of Apoctasse.) De Pigmento. cap. 59. PIe, as  sayth, hath shal ame as it were Pili ment, quod  in pila est ll. that in beaten in a orter  of the which Spi∣cery by Pigmentane craft, is made ly∣king or lake and Elapes and so they that sell and grinde Spicerye. And make confectious thereof be called Pig∣menta. (Additiō.A blauncher of drugges, whereof are made speciall fulle  pouder, per∣fumes and Wines.) De Oximel. cap. 60. Looke in the chap∣ter of home for these like copoundsOXimell is called sowre honny, for the matter thereof is confect of honnye and of vineger: For first vineger is foode with necessarye hearbe and aing roote: and then the Uineger is strained and cleansed, & then is put thereto pure hony & clens clarified at best. And is sod again on easie fire & soft, vntill it be thicke: & is pured with the white of an egge tempe∣red with vineger, & put in the Oximell, when it a little sod,Garblers, o peye ulnes vvhich coūterfeit phisicke. for the egge draweth to it selfe al the alth of hony, & maketh it fléet aboue: then the Pigmentaries or the Lech skimmeth away the filth waryly with a feather, & then the Oximel is put in a cleane bore. And Oximel is giuen in hot water to deeng & softning of harde matter, & to open pores, & so temper stop∣ping. In medicine might hightly breede peril, but it were prepared to bring out the drater some, &if digestion be before taking of Oximell. To shed doinges by right shed crafte of water and of Sugar with diners spicery is made a strop. Now frtting and larative, now rosens & stop¦ping, now compouned, and now simple. De Cera. cap. 61. WAre is the draste or dregs of hour, & within the substance therof Bees gather the licours of hony spedled with the drast of wae. as Aristotle saith li. 8. Therefore who that will keep hony in dip purenesse, that depen if by time from the substaunce of War. And  hath this propertye, that among rustes of , it flasth aboue, and fleiketh not to the bossome when it is f, but com∣meth vpward & storeth aboue, and that maketh the parth of fire & of ayre. that hard the may therin. And to lee molten in spae brath down ye water & oteth aboue, for that in so much light∣nesse of ayre, and leth vpwarde be∣cause therof, and the more new waxe is ye better it smelleth, & to the more pure & ye better to work, & the more able to take impression & printing of diuerse gened ye shapes: and both figures printed and letters written therein doieth & lesseth the longer time, and such Waxe is called Uirgins waxe. Also Waxe is good and néedfull to many doinges, for it is good in medicinen and in diuers ointmentes and confections: For it heateth & resol∣deth, tempereth, openeth, ripeth, & draw∣eth and wasteth vapours: And is also good to féeding of light, and therefore waxe serueth on temples & on Altars of Gods, and on tables of Lorde or and cer∣teine doings and vsages be called Cere∣monie, & haue ye name of Cera, waxe,It vvas in times past before ma¦mels and Idolls. or of Cereis, waxe tapers, for in ye Ceremo∣nies of ye temples, waxe tapers were of∣fered, & yet be, as Hugutlon saith. And so they yt serue in churches of waxe can∣dles be called Ceroserarij, as they yt ser∣ueth
in halls of kings and of Bishoppes be called Primicerij, as be sayth. Also letters be sealed with waxe cloased & pa∣tent: And priuitie is hidde vnder Waxe, & priuiledges be confirmed with Waxe. Tables be filled and dressed with waxe, simple or coloured, and therein be letters & diuers figures or shapes written or planed by the office of pntlls. And for diuers vse linnen clothes be waxed: And waxe keepeth & saueth bookes frō raine & frō water, for waxe is some eale vnctu∣ous, & sucketh in moisture, & suffereth it not to perish, & fell by the oses of sa∣red chord. Waxe melteth and ayleth in heat, & daies ended in colde yt seemeth not to wet things and tough And therefore seales the wet, for ye waxe shuld not  to the waters and priuies thereof. De  cap. 62. A Waxe taper is called Cereus, & hath that name of Cera, for it is made of waxe, as  sayth li.∣of speaketh and th in this maner . As he saith, the meaning followeth, for use of Tapers serueth to see by that light of her things that be in darkness. For in the Taper be three things, the matter, & vse, & desposition and shape, and the mat∣ter is treble, as Isi. saith, the waxe, wike, & fire. The wike is made of hempe thrid, & the ground and fundament of the ∣per, & the waxe compasseth the wike, and findeth & nourisheth the fire yt is lyght, & is end and complement of either, for it worketh in the waxe & in the wike, and turneth them into his owne likenes: and things of diuers kinde haue with them∣selues wonderfull & most couenable vni∣tye: The shape & disposition thereof is round & long, & great at the end. The vse thereof is to stand on a Chandeler and to be holde and borne before Lords. (AdditiōA Chandeler was long spites of wood wheron ye taper stood, whereof some were made of brasse, hanging on cheins in the hals of magistrates, & some with sockets for lesse Tapers.) De Lacte. cap. 63. MIlke is where licour & swéete, gende∣red of bloud by working of heate in teats & paps of beasts. Or as Ari. saith li. 18. Milke is bloud sod & defied, and not corrupt: For when the childe maye not for greatnesse be fed by the nauell, then kinde ordaineth him milke of menstru∣all bloud, that commeth of the paps and teates and is there digested and sod: and  white colour of the whitenesse of the kenels of ye teats and paps, as Con∣st saith. lib.. For milke and menstrual bloud be all one kind: therfore  so sad the child with∣out ye  erson shall not milke be  nor  therafter, but it  against kind for in ye time  milk is compleat us beaste.  or  bring forth there  men o diuersity.  must  her good ofte a  milke to  when it so well diuissed, and that is needfull for  of beasts yt is sweet, for all beast  & well digested, as he saith. li   li  Ari saith, that no beast ye lateth egges hath milk, nor  and paps, & in euery milke is a th part & watry: and a thick part so called  & the more thick milke is, the wore ch is therin. And milke of beasts yt be tooth∣lesse aboue, reueth, and milke of beasts with teeth in either sawe, reneath not, nor tallow of such beastes: And milke of such beasts is sweete and thin as Ca∣mells milke, and Mares milke, and As∣ses milke. Also hee saith there, yt in some countries the people abode not concepti∣on of Goats, but frote their tears & do∣ders with nettles, & then first commeth out blood, & after as it were matter, and at last commeth good milke,The Sovv Thirtle. & ye Spurge, vvhereof are seuen sundry kinds, ha∣uing mil¦ky iuyce & biting. not much worse then the milke is when they haue yened. No milke is in the tears of men generally, though it seemeth yt it happe∣neth otherwise: some hearbe haue white humors, as Titimallus, & some trees al∣so. The fig tree hath humour white as milke, as Ari. saith ther. Milke of beasts renneth, & among all beasts, the Batch
hath thickest milke, except hares & sows, & is most thicke in farrowing time, and waxeth thin afterward, as Ari. saith, li. 6. in fine. The Cowe hath no milke be∣fore coluing, and hath good milke after. But when it is first tongeuled, it is as it were a stone, and that happeneth when it is medled with water, as he saith. Al∣so li. 9. he saith, that when a child is no∣rished with hot milke, his teeth springeth the sooner: and after cleansing, womans milke multiplieth and increaseth: Some women haue milke onely in the head of the teate, & some in other places of the teate. And when the milke hath not good digestion, then it congealeth, and the breasts hardneth, for all the breasts bee right soft. And if any haire cōmeth ther∣in there falleth a great sicknesse yt is cal∣led Pilosa,Grovving of haire in ye nipples of the brest. and the ach ceaseth not ere ye haire commeth with ye milke, or rotteth, & commeth out in that wise. And while the milke commeth & renneth, menstru∣all bloud is not generallye found. And some melch woman bleedeth menstrual bloud, when her bloud is right moist, & much when children sucketh, and be fed with much thicke bloud that haue the cramp. If the nurse haue much multitude of milke, oft it noyeth and gréeueth. And a black woman hath much better milke, and more nourishing then a white woman. And Isaac in Dietis rehearseth such properties of milk, and many other, and sayth in this wise. Milke is generally diuided in thrée man∣ners, for some milke is swéet & new mil∣ked, & other is sowre & olde milked, or meane betwéene both. The sweet is most sauoury, & friend to bloud, & nigh there∣to, and tourneth soone into bloud, and is therefore good nourishing of bloud. And is compowned of thrée substaunces, that be diuers in vertue & in working. One maketh thin and cleanseth, the second is thicke and stoppeth, the thirde maketh soft and thinne. Farthermore the sub∣staunce of whey is watrye, and maketh throne the Cheese, the Chéese is cold and thicke and stoppeth, therefore creame is vertuous and soft: And so milke with watry substance thereof is sharp, & tem∣pereth and softeneth thicke humours, & washeth and biteth the wombe and the guts, and laxeth and putteth out, and thirleth ye veines. And openeth the stop∣pings of the liuer and of the splene, and namely of the milke of Camells. And such milk helpeth them yt haue the drop∣se, as he saith. And there it followeth al∣so: Good milke and temperate in his three substances, cleanseth the members with his watrynes, and withstandeth venim, & moisteth ye mēbers as butter, & beareth meat wt his cheese from the mouth of the stomack to ye ground thereof. Also milke is commended, for it nourisheth well the body, & turneth into likenesse of bloud, if it be taken temperatly & in due time af∣ter cleansing of ye body: and if it be taken into a body yt is not cleansed, or in vn∣due time, is tourned into euill humours that it findeth, and increaseth them, and is resolued and turned into but fumost∣lye, and is so cause of head ach, and if it nd matter of leauer, he kindleth the se∣ners heat, if it finde the kinde heate fee∣ble, then it sowreth sene, & is sowre in that stomacke, for when there is much humour and little heate, then is bredde sowrenesse or rotting of fleme: therefore milke shal not be oft taken, but the body be temperate, and the stomacke void: for if the body be cleane of rotted humore & Cholera, & the milke is well digested, it nourisheth well the body, & maketh good bloud, & much flesh. And moystth the body without, & maketh the skin fayre and tender, as he saith. Also hée sayth, it accordeth to them ye drinke milke to bee fasting, and eate the milke hot and new milked, and they should not eate ere the milk be defied. Also it néedeth to beware of too great trauaile & moouing, vntil the milke come downe into the place of di∣gestion, & be defied. For of vnordinate mouing and trauell, commeth too much heate sodeinelye gendered. And by such heat the vnctuositye is resolued and tur∣ned into euill fumositie and gréeuous, & the thicke part leaueth vndigested, and breedeth many manner corruption, as be saith. And chosen milke (as he saith) shall haue foure qualities, colour, odour, smel, and sauour. The colour most be white & cléere, without any yeolow, red, or wan.
Good odour without heauy smel: The hu∣mour meane betwéene thicke and thin. And a drop thereof put on the naile, abi∣deth continual, and droppeth not away. And such a drop is shapen broad béneath & sharpe aboue. The sauour is good, if it be not medled with bitternesse nor with saltnesse. And among these diuersities of milke, womans milk is accounted kind∣ly most temperate, for all milk followeth kindly the complection and kinde of the beast yt is commeth of. And for the com∣plection of mankinde is most temperate and more nourishing: therefore it easeth most smarting in the corners of the eien. And all that is said before of goodnesse of milke is found in the same discourse. De Lacte Cameli. cap. 64. CAmells milke, by hot complection of the beast, is more hot then other milk, and more than & lesse fattie or creamy, & lesse nourishing and is tempering, and openeth stoppings, & helpeth them there∣fore that haue the droysse, that commeth of stopping. The Camell is most hot of kind, therefore heat by wsting of bloud, draweth out the vnctuositie: for milke is not ells but bloud oft sod: And Camells bloud is salt and sharpe, and therefore is departeth humours, and maketh thicke humours thin. Looke before de Camelo, in Tractiru de Ammalibus. De Lactu vaccino. cap. 65. COwes milke is contrary to Camells milke, for the Cow hath not so much heate to drawe the fatnesse out of the bloud, & therfore hir milk is ful vncteous & most nourishing. For cold milk nouri∣sheth more then shéepes milke, though sheeps milke be more hot then cow milk. And the cause is (as he sayth) for though the Cowe milke be not so hot as sheeps milke, a lyttle fatnesse suffreeth to Cowe milke, and that fatnesse abideth in the milke, and passeth in the substaunce of Chéese, and the milke nourisheth there∣fore the more, for fat substaunce nourish∣eth more then the substance of the Cheese, for it is more hot & more moist, & neere to the heat of bloud, & turneth soo∣ner vnto bloud. And as men of olde time tell, things ye turneth soonest into bloud, nourisheth soonest, as it is sayd ther. But yet fat milke nourisheth better then fat∣nesse yt is more hot, for milke hath thin watry moisture, that softneth & eatereth into the inner parts of the body, but fat∣nesse by it selfe eeteth aboue for ye ayre that to therin, & maketh running, & hard∣neth by thicknesse of his substantiall moisture, and therfore cowes milke per∣ceth & thireth by watrinesse thereof, and commeth into the inner parts, & maketh kind heat by softnesse thereof, & greeueth not much kind by scarsitie of chase, but helpeth and susteineth, as he saith. Milke be vsed in one manner of nourishing, for then it is vsed with his three substances together. And otherwise to cleansing & to abate heat, for the whey is separated frō the creme, & otherwise to moist, and then ye fatnesse of Butter is vsed. And the vse of milke is taken by thinnesse, thicknes, & meane betwéene, as he saith ther. Milk is knowen in substance & in working: in substance, for ye milke is best yt is next to the complection of mankind, as womans milk, and ye néerer it is milked, the better it is, & the more effectual against venim, & against the euille of the bledder and of the reines, and against greeuaunce of the lungs, if aire cōmeth not that to, or chan∣geth ye vertue thereof, after it is milked. Then milk in working is known, when the creme & the Butter is parted therfrō & the Cheese also. Then ye whey is more watrye & sharpe, as it fareth in Camells milke, that is lesse nourishing, and help∣eth them neuertheles yt haue the dropsie, and that by watry heat and thin licour, Cowe milke is most thickest milke, and lesse thinne and watrye then other, and lesse sharpe, and more Buttery, and nou∣risheth well therefore, and best agree∣ing to the stomacke, and comforteth and cooleth the heate of the lyuer and of the stomacke, and maketh the bodye fat and huge, and healeth frettings of the guts and of the mother, and is the better and most wholsome, if the most deale of wa∣trinesse be consumpt & wasted by stodes of the riuers that be heate ry hot, and
then quenched therin. (Additiō.The new milke vnscummed of his creame, is wholesomest.) De Lacte Caprino. ca. 66 AMong the foresayd differences, Goats milke holdeth mee: For after wo∣mans milke it is accounted most tempe∣rate in three substances, therfore it help∣eth much against wounds & euils of the lungs, & of the bladder & reines, if it bée taken with Sugar. And whey departed from the chéese & from ye Butter, is most drieng & cleansing and abating Cholera: and much Goats milke dronk by it selfe, runneth & curdeth soone in the stomacke: & therfore because it shuld not grieue the stomacke, it is tempered with a litle ho∣nie & salt, & then it curdeth neuer, but vn∣curdeth if it begin to curd in ye stomack. And for Goats liue by dry meat and by ends & crops of boughs & of braunches, their milk is the losse watry, & more bi∣ting, & according to the stomacke: For of diuers pasture commeth diuers milke, for beasts that liue by fresh grasse & ten∣der, haue watry milke & thin, that grie∣ueth the stomacke. And those yt eat laxa∣tiue hearbs, haue biting milke, and pric∣keth sinewes, and noyeth and laxeth. De Lacte Ouino. cap. 67. SHéepes milke is more hot and drye then Cowe milke, with lesse Butter, and more Chéese, and nourisheth there∣fore the lesse. And is not so according to the body as Cow milk, & that is known by heauie odour and smel. For as Gal. sayth, Shéepes milke hath more heauye smell then Cowe milke, and is therefore fleamatie, and nourisheth more then Goats milke, and lesse then Cow milke doth, and is also temperate then is Goats milke. De Lacte Asinino. cap. 68. ASses milke is temperate and nouri∣shing, and restoreth, but it laxeth the wombe, and softneth and moisteth mem∣bers that be hardned by drynesse & with heat, and helpeth the breast, and abateth the cough and straightnesse of the brest, and helpeth the wounds of the bladder and of the reis. De Lacte Caballino. ca. 69 MAres milke is much like to Ca∣mells milke in thinnesse, in sharp∣nesse, and in colour, and helpeth in Po∣stumes of the mother, and exciteth men∣strual fluxe, if the cause of the menstrual bloud be hot and dry. This milke hath that property, that none other milk hath, as Isaac affirmeth. De Lacte Porcino. cap. 70. SOwes milke (as Isaac sayeth) is thin and watry, for by coldnesse thereof it abideth vnsod and vndigested, and help∣eth therefore little or naught, if it be ta∣ken for medicine. And if it be taken for meat & sodde with lupes of Barly, it brée∣deth and gendereth good nourishing and moist, as he saith. (Additiō.In the former yéereo of olde age, for want of better knowledge, manye vsed to féede of the flesh of vncleane beasts, and vsed their milke, which bet∣ter practise since, haue omitted.) Qualiter se habet lac tempore partus. cap. 71. MIlke of beasts that be nigh ye birth, is thinne and watrye, for humours be gathered in beasts in time of birth, for the mouth of the mother is closed, & the milke is medled with watry humours, & is therfore gréeuous yt time, & cause of spuing & bolding, & softneth roughnesse, & slippereth ye roughnesse of ye stomacke, & laxeth the wombe, & is herd to defie & so wrish, & runneth & curdeth in the sto∣macke, & breedeth full euill sicknesses & diseases, & smiteth the braine with fumo∣sitie yt commeth therof, & is cause of head ach and of stench of the téeth and of the breadth, & so if milke be too much corrupt, or too much taken thereof, or if it be ta∣ken other wise, or in other seasons thē it should, it bréedeth many sore sicknesses &
euills: and nourisheth euill humours, and flydreth & corrupteth good humors, and helpeth and rotteth the stone in the bladder and reynes, and kindleth & ligh∣teneth vnkind heate & feuerous. Also it infecteth the téeth and the gums, & bée∣deth full euill pimples and whelkes and scabs in children, and exciteth stop∣ping of the liuer and of the splene, and of the reynes, and grieueth the stomack, and putteth ont meate, by slippernesse, ere it be dosted, and laxeth so the womb. Corrupt milke bréedeth these humours, and manye other euilles: but of good milke and euill, this sufficeth at this time. (Additiō.Milke, is compost of thrée substan∣ces, Creame, whereof is made Butter. Wheye, and Cruddes. The most excel∣lent milke, is of a woman. Cowes milk next, and Goats milke. Whosoeuer hath any appetite to eate or drinke milke, to the intent that it shall not arise in his stomake, let him put into a vessell, a sow leaues of Mints, Sugar, or pure ho∣nie, and thereto poure the new milke, & so drinke it warme from the Cowe. Sir Tho. Eliot. fol. 33. in his Booke cal∣led, The Castle of health. cap. 20.) De Sero. cap. 72. WHeye is the watry parte of milke, departed from the other parte by running and curding, for running ioyn∣ese togethers the partes of cheese and of butter, and departeth therefrom ye whey that is thin and watry. The effects and doings thereof is rehearsed before, and hath also vertue to cleanse and to wash away rottings and matter, for it wash∣eth the guts, and clenseth their wounds of matter, and purgeth the breast, and quencheth thirst, and abateth the sharp∣nesse of red Cholora, and doeth awaye wet scabbes and drye, and vnstoppeth the Liuer and the splene. Looke before In primo secundum Isaac, there it is spoken of. De Butiro. cap. 73. BUtter is called Butirum, & hath that name of Imbuendo, moysting & ham∣ming, as Hugution saith, for by the fat∣nesse thereof and moysture, butter moy∣steth those bodies which he toucheth, for butter is the flower of milke, and is full hot and moyst, with mastry of aire, and therefore it is right fat: for Butter is kindly hot and moyst, gleyming and fat, and nigh according to the complec∣tion of mankinde as Isaac saith, and so Butter ofte eaten maysteth the stomack, and laxeth the wombe, and namely if it be fresh and new. Therefore men in old time, lykned butter to oyle medled with fatnesse: and sayd, that who yt wold take it, it would helpe him to spet, & cleanse the breast and lungs, and namely if ther be a postume therin, for it ripeth & tem∣pereth and cleanseth the superfluities of the breast, and namely if it be eaten wt Sugar or with honie: but then it ripeth the lesse, and helpeth the more to recoue∣ring, as he sayth. And he saith ther, that Butter is contrarye to venimme, and maketh the members moyste: and washing thereof softneth the rough∣nesse of the eyen, and purgeth and clean∣seth the eyen, and ripeth and breaketh the postumes, and helpeth wonderfully the wounds of the lunges, and in lyke∣wise the throate and of the breast, and abateth fretting of the guts and of the reynes, and softeneth and slaketh sin∣newes that be astonied or shronke, or destroyed with the Crampe, as he saith. And Auicen sayth, that butter taken in∣to the body, is a singular helpe against venime, if he that is poysoned, melteth butter in hot milke, and drinketh there∣of a great quantitie: for the softnes ther stoppeth ye waies, so yt the venims there∣of may not sodainly come to the heart. Also Butter draweth all the venimme to it selfe, and maketh it cleane toge∣thers, and bringeth it out of the body, by perbraking and spewing, as hee sayeth. Butter is made in this wise, ye creame is gathered in a cleane vessel, & is long beaten with an instrument of tree,In a Charne. that is made therefore, the which instrument
is round and broad, with an hole there∣in:In some ses, they beat ye creame in a payle vvith the flat of the hand, and to bring it to butter. and the creame is beaten and stirred therewith, and by that stirring, kinde heate is excited and comforted in ye sub∣staunce of milke, and therby all the fat∣nesse is gathered togethers, and fléeteth aboue, and the whey that is thin & wa∣try, with chsie part staketh downe to the ground, as it were giuing the ouer place to the butter, as to the more noble part and worthye, and then the Butter that fleeteth aboue, and is gathered and kept in a cleane vessell, for diuers vses, and needfull: and the more fresh and new the butter is, the better it is: the more sauery it is, the more lyking it is to the tast. Fresh butter is fléeting and softe, but kinde heate hath more maste∣rie ouer the moyst partes, and wasteth them litle and litle, and maketh the but∣ter some deale harde, and butter féedeth well, and nourisheth well, and maketh potage fattie and sauourie, and is there∣fore ofte put therein in stéede of greace and of oyle, and is some deale salted, that it may the better be kept, and that his potentiall moysturs may be tempe∣red with the drinesse of the salte. For it is more lyking to the taste when it is meanly salt. And when butter is olde, the sauour thereof appaireth, and the O∣dour also, and turneth into heauie sauor and smell, and is grieuous to the taste, and is not then worthy to make fat and sauourye, but it is good to diuers medi∣cines and oyntments: for often it hap∣peneth, that thing which accordeth not to the throate, accordeth to some medi∣cines. (AdditiōButter is also nourishing, and pro∣fiteth to them, which haue humours su∣perfluous in the breast, or lungs, & lack∣eth riping and cleansing of them, speci∣ally if it be eaten with sugar and honie. If it be well salted, it heateth and clean∣seth the more.) De Caseo. cap. 74. CHéese is called Caseus, and hath that name, as Isidore sayth, of Carendo, lacking or being without, for Cheese is wroong and pressed in a chéese fat vntill the wheye be pressed out, and departed from the watrie substaunce of milke. And so chéese is called Caseus, as it wer Carens, lacking: for sometime cheese is drye and not hauing lycour & moysture as he sayeth. But Hogution saieth, that this nowne Caseus commeth of Caden∣do, falling: for it falleth and passeth a∣waye some, and flydeth out between the fingers of the Drye wife, and cheese is the drastes of milke, for as Isaac sayth, the chéese substaunce of milke is colde & thicke, and hard to defie, and right euill of digestion, and also passeth slowly out of the stomacke, and it accordeth and be∣longeth more to stopping than to laxing, and is heauie to ye stomacke and to the lyuer, to the riyts and also to ye splene, and namely if the thicke places be dis∣posed to be stopped. Furthermore chéese bréedeth and gendreth a stone in ye reine, and so for because of these thrée euill ac∣cidents, Constantine sayeth, that Chéese vniuersally and most commonly is euil, but softe is least grieuous, therefore Isa. maketh distinctiō of chéese, & saith yt some is fresh & new, & some is olde, & some is meane betweene the twaine. New cheese is fresh, and ingendereth not euill hu∣mours, & hath yet therefore some swéet∣nesse and moysture of the milke, and is therefore the more easie to vests, & nou∣risheth the better, and laxeth the more the wombe, and namely if it be not salt, for saltnesse taketh away both sourenes and swéetnesse: for too salt chéese dryeth too soone, and grieueth the stomacke. And saltlesse cheese is most nourishing, and moysteth the bodye, and breedeth much flesh, but it grieueth the stomacke, and turneth some into fumositie, if the sto∣macke be hot: and tourneth into soure∣nesse, if the stomacke be colde. Then if it be meanly salt, it is the better to defie, and grieueth lesse the stomacke, & sow∣reth soone without salt, and kindleth the bloud. De Caseo veteri. cap. 75. OLde chéese is sharp and drye, & thick to nourishing, and hard to passe out of the stomacke, for if the moysture of
the milke be away, sharpnesse and dry∣nesse of the reuning hath mastry there∣in, and so it is not but thicke and fast: and therefore the superfluitie of the bo∣dy is not made, subtill therewith, as it is with other things that are subtill in working, and so grieueth the bodye in two manner wise: for corruption ther∣of, and thicknesse of working, maketh the superfloure thicke, and corrupteth & grieueth the stomacke, for by the sharp∣nesse of the renuing it is contrary to all other things, that helpe in other maner, and tourneth them into worse nourish∣ing, for if it doth de thicke humore in the body, it gendereth and bréedeth the stone in the bladder & in the reynes: for it vniteth humours hot and thicke, and maketh them full hard. Therefore old cheese is to be eschewed and forsaken, for it helpeth not, nor féedeth, and is obe∣dient to digestion, neither gendereth nor breedeth good bloud, nor moysteth ye bo∣dy, nor exciteth ne: but it sorrys and bindeth moysture, that it doth . Also the olde cheese is harde and drye, with many holes and poores, because of drinesse, and breaketh soone, and hath nei∣ther fatnesse nor moysture, but grieueth the body: but cheese sad and rosted, is not so euill, as cheese with manye eyen and hoales, for soundnesse of substaunce is token of fatnesse and of moysture: & cheese with too many eyen and holes, is ill, both new & olde. But Dio. saith, mil∣kie cheese mosheth ye womb, & old bind∣eth & namely if it be sod, or if it be takē out of water and toasted, and namely if it be before meate taken, for it stoppeth with thicknesse the way of the stomack, and suffereth not the meate to passe in∣to the guts: and cheese eaten after meat thrusteth downwards the meate, as it were a persset, and shoueth it to ye place of out passage. Meane cheese eaten after meate, thrusteth downward the meals: as it were betweene new and old, nouri∣sheth much, for good sauour and thicke∣nesse thereof, for it hardeneth swiftelye by kinde heate, and the more masterye kinde heate in it hath, the more strong∣ly it hardneth, and cleaneth the faster to the members. Huc vs{que} Isaac in dietis. Diosc. and Arist. li. 3. Fmane, yt when much cheese is in milke, it is the more meate. And Diosc. sayth, that cheese is contrary to venime, for it stoppeth the woyes of the veynes with thicknesse, & moysture, and suffereth not the mallyce of the venime to come to the heart: and fresh cheese layd hot thereto, draweth out the venimous biting, and in token héer∣of, if cheese be layd to the biting of a mad dog, or of a serpent, all the whitenesse of the cheese tourneth into won colour: and cheese helpeth also against the venemous postume that is called Antrax,A lun of vcom & against other venemous postumes, if it be eatē, or layed too without: and accordeth to medicine in many causes, as he saith. (Additiō.Antrax is also a swelling, which riseth like a byle, & is called of some, an Alder, very king, hot, and corrupt.) De Coagulo. cap. 76. REnning milke is made thick in the mawes of certaine beasts,A fresh cheese. & by ver∣tue therof, milke of othe4r beasts reemeth and curueth, and the Butter and Cheese gathereth togethers,And al o∣ther cau∣ses that thickneth and the Wheye is departed therefrom. And li. 3. F. Aristo. sayth, that the more thicke milke is, the more cheese is therein, and runneth the sooner. But milke of a beast yt is looth∣lesse aboue, renneth: and milke of a beast with teeth in either lawe, renneth not, nor his greace. Also he sayth there, that milke renneth by renning & milke of figges:Of . when the milke of figges is gathered in wooll, and the wooll then is wiped with a little milke, and that milk is put in other milke, and so all ye milke renneth. Also ther, renning is not found but in wombes of beasts that sucketh & cheweth their cuddes: In them which haue teeth aboue and beneath is no ren∣ning found, but in the Hare and in the Con. The elder that the Rennings is, the better it is, and helpeth against the flure of the wombe, and namely the renning of the Coe and of the Hare, as Arist. sayth. Also lib. 16. he sayth, that milke runneth by renning, for renning is milke in the which is a speciall heat. and helpeth therfore and sustaineth the
milke, as the semen of the male sustei∣neth the menstruall bloud of the female in the mother, for the kinde of milke, & of all bloud is all one, as he sayth there, cap. de Caseo. Isaac speaketh of renning and sayth, that he which renneth by ver∣tue of his sharpnesse, and of heate & dri∣nesse, which hath mastrie therein, & wa∣steth the moysture thereof: and though that renning be in all cheese, yet ye sauor thereof is lesse felt in new chéese & greene, and that is for much last and moisture. And renning is found in the mawe of a sucking beast, which doth chew his cud, and is medled with salte, and afterward dryed and ardned in smoke hanging o∣uer the fire, and a little thereof is tem∣pered with a little milke, made luke warme, & medled with the other milke, and so doth renne, and curdeh together, all that may be renned: and to in the substaunce of renning, is such a vertue hidden, as is hidden in the Semen of the male, as Aristotle, Auicen, Isaac, and other doe meane. And in shewing, and treating of the properties of cors, this that is layde, shall suffice, of this time. (Additiō.Chéese by the whole sentence of al Writers, letteth digestion, and is enemy vnto the stomacke, also it ingendreth all humours, and breedeth the stone. The chesse which doth least harme to seeke cheese, reasonably filled, which some men doe suppose, nourisheth much. S. Tho∣mas o.) Of the vertues of diuers things, as humour and licour. Chap. 77. IN humoures, licoures, and other things be certaine vertues, of whom some we shall set heere shortly: for by diuers complections and vertues, yt haue mastry in diuers things, diuers manner of working is found, as the vertue of o∣pening, of ripping, of cleansing, and of o∣ther doing The vertue of opening wor∣keth by heate, and dryeth in subtill sub∣staunce, as it fareth of Outons, or of iuyce of Lickes, of Allomne, and other such confections thereof, openeth the mouthe of the veynes, and exciteth the Emoroides, as Co. sayth. The ver∣tue of spreading, worketh by heate and moysture, for heat thirleth and commeth into the substaunce of a thing, and dissol∣ueth moysture that is ut thereto, and maketh open and spred, as it fareth of Mockes, and of Elderne rindes, and o∣ther such that war stretch and spread, if they be sod in oyle, as he saith. The ver∣tue of stopping, worketh by colde and moysture, with softe substaunce and sad, as it fareth of Dragantes, of the white of an egge, and of Psillium, for these of the poores, with cleaning and fast substance, and straineth and hindeth with colde. The vertue that maketh thick, worketh by colde and moysture, as it fareth by Mondragora, that maketh ye skin thick, if it be layd thereon, as he sayth: for by color it  the more thin partes of the moystures, and so the moyster com∣meth to the middle, and maketh ye sub∣stance more last, and so the more thick, and worketh by heate and by moysture: for heat wasteth the thin parts, and then be the earthy parts the more thicke. The vertues that maketh harde work∣e by colde and drines, for euery quali∣tee draweth toward the middle, and ma∣keth all the substaunce the more harde, and worketh somtime by cole and moi∣sture, and burdeth the moyst partes by cold, as it fareth in frost and  & some∣time by heate and drinesse, and lueth the earthy, arts and maketh them hard in that manner wise, as it fareth in fr or satie earth, and  borne fyte. The vertue of opening worketh by heat and drinesse with thicke substaunce: for heat reth & moneth the more subtill parts outward, and the thicke parts and drye commeth to the middle, and so all ye sub∣staunce is made vneuen, and that same vneuennesse is cause of roughnesse. Also colde maketh roughnesse in moyst water, binding and drawing the vter partes to the middle, and letteth the thin parts to spread themselues outward, and therefore the other partes, in the tich colde hath the domination and mastre, he doth rough and sharpe without, and by diuersitie of matter, which receiueth
impression and working of heate and of colde, be diuers conditions and proper∣ties, and medling of things gendred kind∣ly, either happely, as it is knowen, and as Auicen and Constantine doth mean, and as it is openly such vertue in ye tre∣tise of the qualities of Elements, and the vertue of softnesse norisheth by heat and by moisture also and that by heat that spreadeth the moyst parts, and de∣parteh and deuideth parts from other as Dialtea doth, which Dialtea is moist, and somewhat hot, and openeth meanly by the heate thereof, and maketh the hu∣mours softe and fleeting by passing moi∣sture of it, and maketh softe in yt wise, other things that be softened by heate that hath mastry ouer the watry part & earthy, and turneth them into earthye parts, as it fareth of the earthy vapours and watry that be drawen by in ye aire, and turneth into softe drope of raine, and now of deaw, now of hayle, and now of snow, as the Commentor saith super 4. Metheor. Also it is knowen, that ver∣tue of heate softneth such things, so that the parts cleaueth scarcely together in great working of heate, as it fareth in waxe & in other things that melteth, for vertue of re hath mastrie ouer ye parts of water and ayre that be therein. The vertue of reping and the vertue of ste∣stion worketh by vertue of heate and by moysture, and the vertue of withhol∣ding by colde and by drinesse; and the vertue Expulsius, of our putting, by cold and moysture, the vertue of appetite worketh principallye by heate and by drynesse, and the vertue of drawing, worketh by heate and drinesse, as it sa∣reth in Dipcamo, Serapino, and Stereo∣ry columino, and other such. The ver∣tue laxatiue worketh by the same ver∣tues, but it worketh more strongly, and so some things that draw laxe also and be ordent, as camonia, . And work∣eth by colde, and thrirsteth downward, & maketh slipper by moysture, as it fareth my Prunes. Slone, and Thamari∣es, &c. The vertue of riping worketh by heate and drinesse, and so doth the ver∣tue of drawing, as it fareth in Cantha∣ridilius, and in Flammula, and in other such, that he full hotte, and gendereth full soone in the flesh, whelles and blayues. Of other such vertues it is shewed before, in libro quarto, De proprieta∣tibus Elementarium qualitatum, libro septimo In Trictatu, De Remedijs Mothorum. De Putredine. cap. 78. ROttennesse is corruption of substan∣tiall moysture, and commeth of scar∣sitie of kinde heat by abundance of other heate, for vnkinde heate in working of moist matter, that is not ruled by kind, maketh it rot, as it is sayde, super libro Metheororum. For all that is earthye & cold rotteth later then the thing that is hot, as Aristotle sayeth. Also the thing yt is hardned by colde, rotteth slowly, as it fareth in Ile & in ye Christall stone, & that is feruent and hot, rotteth flowlye, as Aristotle sayth, for the heat that ma∣keth it feruent is more strong, then the heate of the ayre, or heat that commeth in the other side, & suffreth not therefore it selfe to bée ouercome nor chaunging made against the thing that is feruent. And all that moueth rotteth more slowly then that thing that moueth not, as A∣rist. maeth: For of mouing commeth heate that sth & keepeth kinde heate. Also all that rnneth rotteth more slow∣ly then yt shall runneth not, as hee sayth For accidentall heate that commeth of ayre, that contayneth it, is more féebler then the kind heat, that is of mouing or of running, & suffereth not it selfe soone to rot. Also a mightye body rotteth lesse and more slowly then a lyttle bodye, as hee sayth, for if the bodye be hot, there∣in is more kinde heate to withstande the cause of rotting. Also if the body be colde, kinde coldnesse thereof withstan∣deth better the accidentall heate that is cause of rotting in a greate bodye then in a lyttle body, as it fareth is the sea, as Aristotle sayth. For Sea water when it is departed rotteth soone, and it rot∣teth uer, whes it is whole & not di∣uided.
And in lyke wise it fareth of other wa∣ters: for water departed from a great riuer rotteth anone, and therfore worms dried therein by rotting. The cause is, for kinde heate maketh departing there∣in, and departeth the thin from the thick, and the earthy parts from the partes of water and of aire, that is departed from the thicke, the same heate gendereth wormes and other beasts, & yt is it that Ariste. saith, for kinde heate departing, maketh them abide departed, and tour∣neth them into kde of beasts, and that by rotting, by might of strong heate that is therein, as the Commentour sai∣eth  things be grieuous to the tast, and abhominable to the stomacke, and maketh wambling, and be heauy of  and of euill sauour, and of fowle colour and defileth the hands that them onheth, and be contrary to ye complecti∣on of mankinde, and breedeth sodaynlye corruption in whole men: but they bée meate and nourishing to Serpents, and to wormes. And things that be dispo∣sed to rot, they rot ye sonner if they touch a thing that is rotted, and corrupt and rotted members corrupteth whole mem∣bers. And though they take no spirites, they depriue and take away the spirits of members that be nigh thereto: and a member that beginneth to rot, may not be healed, but he be cleansed at full of rotting and of matter, & so rotted mem∣bers be not profitable, but they cut off or burnt, or throwen awaye. There be other vertues, by the which kinde wor∣keth, as the vertue of nourishing in hearbs, and grasse, trées, and beasts, and the vertue of gendering in menne, and in other beasts, hoth two footed and foure footen, and the vertue of gendring of egges in some créeping beasts, and al∣so in birdes and foules. But of the ver∣tues of gendering and nourishing, and of other vertues, that serueth them, it is treated at full before in li. 4. De genera∣tione hominis, and in li. 18. De genera∣tione Animalium in generali, therfore of them we leaue to speake at this time. The vertue of gendring of egges, is to round beasts and in long and plyaunt, as Serpents, Spiders and Scorpions, and in other such: and in Fish,  in Crabbes, and Lobsters, and in other endlesse many: and in fowles & birds and in other two footed beasts. Libro. 5. Arist he sayeth.A good¦ness in ye alteration of nature. That  two ooted beastes, gendereth not beasts, but man alone. (Additiō.Béeing two footed, by a wonderful th ception, not Egges, but y^ same shape and forme of the male and female except those people, which are called Calineti∣de, which doe trauaile with egges, and hatch foorth children. Read Lucosthe∣nes, de prodigijs.) ¶Of Egges and their pro∣perties. cap. 79. THen first in the foresayd beasts, the Semen is shed in small parcelles or drops that be small, softe, & moyst, and whitth, and be softneth, and tourned and chaunged into little bodyes, and are cal∣led Oua, Egges in English, for because that they be moyst, and full of humour within, as Isido. saith libr. 1. G. Same moyst thing hath moyst humour with∣in, and some without, as he saith. Some men meane, that this Now Cuum, commeth of a nowne of Gréeke, for they call as Egge Oluan, and put therto this letter L. Some Egges be conceiued in anye winde, but they be barren, except they be conceiued of treading or by working of the male, and thirled with seminall spirit, as he saith. And some men meane, that egges haue such a vertue, that a trée that is anoynted with them, shall not bure, nor cloth that is anoynted with them, as he sayth, and if they bée medled with lyue, they glew the parts together of broken glasse Then Egges are fift gendered, and take them a shape, and lyue by heate of the Mother, as Isidore sayth lib. 3. And 5. Aristotle sai∣eth, That foules, and fish, and serpents laye egges, but the egges be full diuerse in goodnesse and malice, in quantity, sub∣staunce and qualitie in figure and in shape. Foules and birdes laye egges gene∣rally in the ende of springing time, and
in the beginning of Summer, as Ari∣stotle sayth. libro 5. except a Sea foule that is called Aleon, for that Fowle layeth egges in the beginning of Win∣ter, and sitteth on breed fourteene dayes ere the birds be complete, and vii. dayes before the beginning of winter, and vii. dayes therafter, as Simonides saith. And Isidore libro 12. speaketh of this fowle, and saith, that in the chest of a ponde of Occean, Alceon in Winter maketh hir neast, and layeth egges in seauen dayes, and fitteth on broode, and while she sit∣teth seauen dayes, the seate is easie and softe and the weather still. seauen dayes the sea is easie and milde: for kind hel∣peth in that wise to bring forth fowles of kinde. And Pliny, Basill, & Ambse in Exameron, meaneth the same. But other foules lay egges twice or offer in a yeare, as Swallowes, but the first egs be corrupt because of the winter, and the latter be complete: and as Aristo. saith there, tame foules laye egges all in sum∣mer, as Coluers and Hens, and namely if they be well sed, and in an hot place. Also Aristotle saith libro 6. that some fowles laye egges all the yeare, except two moneths, Iuly and December, as hens, some of them lay twice euery day, and that that layeth much dyeth soone: and sometime the Culuer layeth tenne times a yere, and layeth but few at one breeding. And some lay many egges, as the Hen: and some fowles with crooked clawes laye fewe egges, and some laye in the neasts, and some in hollow trees, & some in holes and dens of the earth, & some in fields, and some in roches and rockes, and some in grauell or in sande as the Estridge, that fitteth not on brood in neasts made of bouchs of trées, and some in stones, and some in crags, and some in marteys, and among reede, as water foules. Aristotle saith lib. 6. that egges of foules breedeth hard without: and some be of 2. colors, citrine within, and white without. And egges of riuer foules be diuers, and other then egs be of foules that be fed in drye land: For citrine therein is more than double to citrine of egs of foules that be fed nigh the brie and brims of waters. Also egges be diuers in colour for Cul∣ners egges be white as hen egges. And egges of marreys foules be yeolow, and some be as they were paynted, as a Sperhaukes egge: and egges be diuersly shapen, for some be sharpe, and some are broad, and the broad doth come out first, and then the sharpe. Of the long egges with sharpe endes doth come males, and so of egges with roundnesse in steede of sharpnesse, commeth females. And in hot countries and lands egges be layde in dounge in heate of the Sunne, and of them commeth Chickens and birds, as in Aegypt, and in certaine places in hot feathers, as in a certaine Citie, a good drinker laid egges vnder his pillow, and sayd, that he continued drinking, vntill the time that Chickens were taken out of the egges. Also somtime egges be put in hot vessells, and chickens are hatchte therein, no he sayth there, but the semen of the male is receiued in the Fother, & medled with the semen of the female. First, the egges seemeth white, and af∣terward red as bloud, and then yeolow, and then by working of kinde, the yeo∣low abideth in the middle, and the white is thereabout, and commeth out when it is complete, and turneth then out of the soft into hardnes: for in ye out going it is fastned & made perfectly hard, for egs be yeolow while they are in the womb, and wrapped in a little skinne that is white, and be hard when they be com∣plete and shapen, and that hardnes is the shell. In fastnesse of an egge, ye shel hath the same office, that the bag that ye child is conceiued in, hath in the body of the childe, but for great heate he hath ma∣stery in the body of the foule: the shell then hath such a bag and that is neede∣full for sauing of the softe matter and moyst that is therewithin. And manye foules lay winde egges, as Hens & Curse as Ari. saith ther li. 2. and that commeth of superfluitie of seminall humors, that are passing in the body of a female: and winds egs be little & vnsauerie, & more moyst than other, & without hard shell, & chaunge not though it be layed vnder a Hen, but the yolke & the white abideth and chaungeth not, & such egs be foonde
in Hens, and in Geese, in Pohens, and in Culuers. The chicken in the egge is sooner complete and shapen in Summer than in Winter. In summer, hens egs openeth in 18. dayes, and in Winter in 25. dayes: and if it thundereth as ye hen doth sit on brood, the egges be corrupt, & so they be, if they be ofte handeled with folkes hands. Also olde hens laye in the beginning of springing time, and young hens egges be smaller, and lesse then o∣ther olde hens egges: and the Hens egge is full sharpe the xi. daye after the trea∣ding: and some foules in treading, keepe not sexes of male and female, but the fe∣male treadeth the female, and the male treadeth the male, as Partridges & Cul∣uers, and of such treading commeth stin∣king odour, and the egges become bar∣ren, as winde egs, and no chickens shall come of them nor birdes, as Aristotle sayth. And in the hens egge after three dayes of sitting on brood, be tokens seene of the Chicken, and then commeth vp the yeolow, toward the small ende to the place in the which the egge beginneth to cleaue, & there is seene, as it wer a drop of bloud in the white of the egge, and is the beginning and matter of toe heart, as it is sayd before in the treatise de ge∣neratione publi, looke there. Also of an egge with two yolkes commeth 2. chic∣kens, & these yolkes be departed aswain by a lyttle web, as Aristotle saith ther. And foules that eate flesh laye but once a yeare, except the swallow, that layeth egges twice a yeare: and the Eagle lai∣eth three egges, and throweth away the third out of the neast. Huc. vsq. Aristo. li. 6. A. and sitteth on brood vpon ye egs, thirtie dayes, Lib. 17. he saith that foules lay egs with hard shels, but if there fall occasion of sicknesse. Also foules yt gender much, lay oft winde egges, & so doth not foules wt crooked claws, nor foules wt good flight: for in foules wt many egs, is much superfluitie, & the superfluitie of foules with crooked clawes, passeth, into claws, feathers, and wings, and therefore their owne bodies be some deale hard, sharp, and leane, and layeth therefore not ma∣ny egges, nor treadeth much: and for fatnesse and heate of the wombe, the fowles  ofte. Also birds lay manye egges, and tread much, as it fareth of some hens, the lesse they be, ye more egs they lay, for the meate of them passeth into the matter and generation of egges. Also winde egges be not in Fowles of good flight, for in them is but lyttle su∣perfluitie and scarce, and therefore they laye but fewe egges: and winde egges be more than egs according to generation of Birdes and chickens, and be lesse in quantitie, for they be vncomplete, either for they be so many, and be not full ly∣king to eate, for in all thing what is di∣gest, is more swéete and farre more ly∣king then what is vndigest. And some foules be made full of egges when they smell the males or beare theyr voy∣ces, for they eate much, and haue much superfluitie and heate, and haue therfore the more stronger appetite, and sheddeth sooner the semen of generation, and lay∣eth egges fal soone, for by vertue of heat, that superfluitie passeth soone into the kinde of egges. Also foules be gendered and come of egges, when the female sit∣teth long on breede, and heateth the egs, and for the chicken in the egge may not be complete and perfectly shapen with∣out meate and ourishing, therfore kind setteth meate in the egge within: & for their feeblenesse, egges need heating and comfort of heate, therfore egges be soone complete in hot time, for hot time help∣eth digestion & generation. The white is the matter of the chickin, & the yolke is his foode and meate, and therefore the white and the yolke be ioyned by a litle web for diuersitie of kind of the white, as it were contrarye to the kinde of the yolke, and therefore the yolke is fastned in colde wether, and is moist afterward when it is made hot, and the white free∣seth not in colde, but it is more moyst, and is hardened when it is roasted, and wereth in generation thicke of ye Chic∣ken, for it is the master thereof. And the Chicken taketh meate of the yolke, and that by the nauell: and then is much yolke, for it is moyst by heate, and shall bee moyst, and iourneth soone into nou∣rishing. Huc vsque Aristoteles libro. 16.
Isaac in Detis speaketh of egs, and saith, that egges of birds that be whole and temperate, be good meate and nodle: and egges of fat birds nourish more, & be more sauoory, and also egges of them that are troden of ye male, for they haue more heate than those that be gendered without treading of male, and also Egs of small hens, for in them is much heat. Generally the kinde of egges is tempe∣rate and meane, and right according to the complection of mankinde, but the white is more colde than the yolke, and worse to defie, and namely of the egges be of old foules, or not troden of males. The yolke is temperate and softe, accor∣ding with heate, and is therefore ye bet∣ter to defie, and comforteth for members and abideth long therein. The nourish∣ing of egges is diuers, for the Egges of some foules be temperate, as egges of the Partridge and of the henne, and are good to digest, but they passe soone out of the members, and be therefore better to ruling of good helth, than to comfort the members: and eggs of great birdes be hard to digest, and not full good norish∣ing, as egges of Ostriches, of Geese, and Pohennes, that be euill nourishing, and hard to defie, and heauie of smell, and namely if the beasts be olde, or not tro∣den with males: but when they be di∣gested, they abide long in ye members, & are therfore better to comfort the mem∣bers, then to rulyng of good health. Egs of small birdes be most light, and of old birds most heauie, and of meane most temperate, for therin is more temperate heate and lesse moysture, and be there∣fore good to rule good health, and also to comfort the members: and the more newer egges be, the better they be, and the more older they bee the lesse worth they bee, and vary and are di∣uers by crafte in foure manner wise: for they be rosted or sod, or burnt in im∣bers or in hot ashes, or they be fryed. The rosted be more thicke and worse to digest, then those that be sod: for ye fire wasteth their substanciall moysture and maketh them drye and ye rosted & burnt vnder hot ashes, be umise than the roa∣sted. vnh of coles, for heat of fire in ashes compasseth them, & suffe∣reth not ye superfluitie of fumositie passe out thereof: and those that are roasted aboue the coles, sweate out the fumositie, and be made pure, and cleane, and thick: but those that be sod in water are better than those that be rosted, for moi∣sture of the water is contrary to the hot fire that worketh to sordrye ye moysture thereof, and be therefore the lesse drieng and coolyng kinde heate. And those that be sod whole in the shells be worse, for the shells without be hard, & holde there in the superfluitie of fumositie, that it may not passe out in vapour, and there∣fore they breed ventositie and swelling, and heauinesse of the stomacke & of all he wombe: and heate of water com∣meth temperatly into egges yt be broken: and sod in water, & tempereth the thick∣nesse and the fatnes of them, and taketh from them euill smel and odor, and they be therefore better than other, but one∣lye the yolke is more drieng, and faste∣ning: and the hard yolke is drieng and hard to passe out of the stomacke, & thir∣leth slowly the veynes, and comforteth much when it is digested, and grieueth the stomacke and the guts, if it be vndi∣gested, and menge and rere yolkes some deale fastened, be lesse drieng, and better to defie, and commeth soone into the veines, and moysteth the brest, and com∣forteth the members but little, and are means betwéene softe and harde in their working and passions. And fryed egges be worse than other, for if they bide in the stomacke, they turne soone in∣to fumositie and corruption, and corrup∣teth all the meats that they finde there∣in, and breedeth heauiness in the stomack, & worse disliking than other egs, name∣ly if they be fryed in yolkes, and some be meane betweene rosted egs, and egs broken & sod in water. Huc vs{que} Iso. Al∣so egs be good, not only to meat, but they be needfull in many manner medicines: for they moisten & ease & smooth ye brest & the throte, & comfort ye members, & re∣store & help ye vertue of generatiō, & hel∣peth burning & scalding, for of yolkes of egs rosted, is made ye best oyle, for bur∣ning & scalding. Also yolks of egges help
the venemous Postume, that is called Antrax, for a raw yolk of an egge med∣led with salt, healeth that postume, as Const. saith. The white of an egge swa∣geth and abateth heate and swelling, & stauncheth running moysture, and help∣eth  the hot goute and podagre, and be most greuous, when they be rotted and corrupt, and corrupteth the humoures, and breedeth with them wamblyng and perbraking, and be lightlye cause of death. (Additiō.Egges of Phesants, Hens, & Par∣triches, be of all other meates most agre∣able vnto nature, specialy if they be new laid. If they be reere, they do cleanse the throte and breast: if they be hard, they be slow in digestion, but being once di∣gested, they doe nourish much: meane betweene reere and hard, they digest con∣ueniently, and nourish quickly. Egges well potched are better then roasted. Egges fried are ill to digest, and corrupt other meates in the stomack. Egges sup∣ped warme before any other meate, they doe heale the griefe of the bladder and reynes (made with grauell) also sorenes of the cheekes and throate, and spetting of bloud: and they be good against Ca∣ars, or stilling out of the head into the stomacke. De  Aspidum. cap. THe egges of Adders that are called Alpides, be lyttle and round, verye yeolow, slynne, and stinking within, and most venemous, and clustered togethers with certaine sinewes and strings. The venime thereof is most slayeng, & there∣against is no remedie found, as Plinius sayth. And as he saith, it happeneth som∣time, that a venemous Frogge that is called Rubeta, findeth the egge of such as Adder, and sitteth on brood thereon, and of such bréeding commeth a worme that slayeth with blast and with sight, as doth the Cockatrice. The worm that sitteth so on brood, and bringeth it forth, feeleth first all ye venum of his matter & venime: for when it is first batche, hee beholdeth and seeeth him that bringeth him forth, and slayeth him in that wise, as he sayeth. If seemeth that  toucheth this matter and propertie, wher he sayth, that who that eateth egges of such an Adder shall dye, and what is confect and nourished therewith, shall turne into such an Adder. Ther yt Glose saith, that of the egges of Alpidis com∣meth a Cockatrice, and of the venemous Iewes shall come Antichrist: And of the wicked Papist the Diuell. De ouis Aranea. cap. 81. SPiders egges are manye, and they be small and wan, with small speckes and departed asunder, and be venemous, softe and gleymie, and if it happeneth by any cause, yt they be lost, ye spider seeketh them again, & bereth them in her mouth to hir web. And of an egge, commeth endles & many spiders, and so lyttle and small, that vnneth they be seene, and yet anone as they come out of the egge that they were in, they begin to weaue sub∣tilly, that it is wonder that so lyttle a Beast hath so much wit and vertue of kinde. Looke before, de Aranea li. 18. De ouis Aquil. cap. 82. THe Eagles egges and the Goshauks egges be few, for they passe but sel∣dome their egges and ofte the Eagle throweth the third out of the neast, for she sitteth not gladly on broode, as A∣ristotle saith libro. 5. And putteth in the neast a precious stone with her egges and Witches dums or suppose, that that stone helpeth against the thunder, and meaneth that the Eagle putteth ye stone in hir neast with hir egges to saue them from the thunder, as Plinius sayth. De ouis Ancerinis. ca. 83. GEese egges be great and hard to de∣fie, and are harder to hatch, and later complete then be Hens egges. De ouis Anatinis. cap. 84. DUckes egges are more than Hennes egges: but they be not sauourie, nor nourish so well as Hens egges.
De ouis Alaude. cap. 85. LArkes egs be little and small & spec∣uled, and are laid vnder a riot, and be ofte there eaten with wormes and we∣sells. De ouis Bubonis. cap. 86. OWles egges be small and speckeled with brotill shells, and be wearish, with much white & lesse yolkes. Choughs hunteth by daye, & eateth Owles egges. and the Owle eateth ye Choughs egges by night, and fighteth therefore alwaye either with other, because of their egges, as Aristotle saith li. 8. De ouis Corui. cap. 87. RAuena egges be many as Ari. saith, and onely the female sitteth ther on brood: and the male bringeth meate all the  time, and throweth awaye some of the egges, for they be so many: and the Rauen layeth egges and sitteth on broode in the middle heate of ye sum∣mer against the kinde of other foules & bird. And so Petronius saith, the dia∣r  egges when the frt is ripe. De ouis Cini. cap. 88. SWans egges be many, great, and euen long, with hard shells, & not with right good sauour and be heauie of smell, and more hard to defie than Geese egges. De ouis Cocadrilli cap. 89. COckadrils egges be more then Geese egges, and the male & female sitteth them on woe by certaine times, now the male, and now the female, as Plin. saith li. 18. And these egs be venemous, and as it were matter within, and are grieuous both to small and to taste, and poyson and venim to eate. De ouis Columbae. cap. 90. CUluers egges be lesse then hens egs, white and round, and somdeals euen long, landry and hot, and wet norishing. The Culuer ateth two egges, & of the one commeth a male, & of the other a fe∣male, & the male sitteth on brood on them by night, and the female by day, as Ari. saith li. 6. and the Culuer layeth ofte in a yeare, for she layeth ten times in one yeare, and namely in hot countries and lands, as in Egipt. Looke before li. 12. De ouis Colubri. cap. 91. A Doers egges be round and full ma∣ny, pale and warme, softe and full of matter, venemous and slaieng. De ouis Draconis. cap. 92. DRagon egges be greatest, and more longer than Crocodills Egges or E∣stridges Egges, as Plinius sayth. The Dragon hath Egs within and not with∣out, for the egges be hatcht within the mother, therefore the Dragon hath not so manye Egges as other Serpentes haue, but Dragons egges be more blou∣dy and great, & full of matter venimous and slaieng. De Ouis Herodij. cap. 93. THe Oesanicons egges be smal with diuers colore, and euenlong, as the Doshaukre egges or sperhaukes egges, and they be few, for all fouled with croo∣ked clawes be of strong sight, and of scarse moisture and of superfluitie, and therefore they be of few egges, as Arist. sayth, li. 17. De Ouis Iornucarum. cap. 94. ANtes egges be full little and small, whitish and rounde, and tooketh i∣ciesing without the bodie in a hot place, and mouldes, vntil they be full and com¦pleate, and if in any wise they be remo∣ued or shed, the Antes gather them, and beareth them againe to their neasts: and they haue good smel, and be medicinable as Plinius sayth, therefore Beares eat∣eth Ants egges, and healeth and saueth themselues, as Plinius saith. De Ouis Gruit. cap. 95. CRanes egges be meanely greate, pale, hard, & vn heauie of smel, with vnkind sauour, & they be hard to defie. De Ouis Griphis. cap. 96. GRis egges be greater and harder then Egles egs, & more heuy of smel, and of sauour, & more hot & dry in qua∣litie, and  to number & als, for shee
layeth neuer passing twaine, & is of hard ng oft brood, as Ari. sayth. De ouis Gallinarum. cap. 97. HEns egges be more temperate then other egges, and more according to the nourishing of mankinde, as it is said before hand: but winde egs be vn∣sauorie and not full good meate to nou∣rishing. Heerof looke before in this same booke, and also. li. 12. De ouis Hirundinum. ca. 98. SWallowes egges be many, for as Ar. saith, small foules lay many egs, & no fowle that eateth flesh, layeth twice in one yere, except the Swalow, which lai∣eth twice and bréedeth twice some yere, and sometime the first egs be corrupt by winter, and the latter egs be complete, & bringeth forth birds, as Ari. saith li. 6. De ouis Cantrorum. ca. 99. CRabs be first gendred between ye shel and the wombe within, betweene the Tayle and the back, then they come out and be gathred vnder the taile, and ther they swell and were round, and wereth vntill they be complete, and be lost, but they be besprong with semen of ye male. (Additiō.The round spawne of the Crefish, and on the Prawne, groweth as doth the Crab and Lobster.) De ouis Locustarum. ca. 100. FLyes egges be gathered within, & be many, and right small, & when they be shed vpon hearbs, twigs & braunches in corrupt aire, hot and moyst, of them commeth endlesse many flyes. De ouis Lacertarum. ca. 101. EWes egs be like to serpents egges: but they be lesse in quantitie, & more gleymie. And be venemous, but they be lesse venemous then serpents egges, as Plinius sayeth. De ouis Milui. cap. 102. KItes egges be few and smal, & yelow and speckled, and more earthy & dry then egges of other wilde foules, ful vn∣sauorie, and worse of smell and of odor. De ouis Merul. cap. 103. COutes egges be small & many ho, & speckled, and somwhat white, & much lyke to wilde Duckes egges. De ouis Nsi. cap. 104. SPerhaukes egges be small, and also speckled, and hot and drie, & somtime the Sperhauke layeth winde egs, when she is too fat. De ouis Coturnicis. cap. 105. CUrlewes egs be like to rauens egs, and they be accounted right good a∣gainst the falling euill, as Plin. saith. De ouis Onocrocali. ca. 106. MOrethumbles egs be like to Geese egges,The gu,  or Allens egges. but they be lesse & more vn∣sauorie and worser of smelling, & white, and more harder to be defied. De ouis Pauonis. cap. 107. POhens egges be great, with harde shells, & the Pohen sitteth 30. dayes on brood vpon hir egges, & hatcheth then: and she laieth 12. egges or lesse, & hideth hir egs from the male, for he breaketh them, if he may finde them, as Aristot. saith. De ouis Percidis. cap. 108. PArtrich egs be lyke to Culuers egs, in temperatnesse, complection, and in greatnesse: and Partridges steale each others egs, but this fraud hath no froot: for when the birds be hatch, & hereth ye voice of hir owne hen, then they forsake hir, that sate on brood vpon ye egges, and commeth to the same hen, that layed the egges, as Isid. saith. De ouis Passeris. cap. 109. SParowes egs be full litle & small, and the Sparowes layeth & breed∣eth twice in one part, & namely if ye first egs be corrupted or lost by some chance. They be most hot & maketh the reynes arise, and exciteth the seruice of Venus, & so doth the braine of Sparowes, as Const. saith. De ouis Quisquile. cap. 110. QUailes egges be little & round, and lesse than Partrichen Egges, and
be more then Larkes Egges. And the Quaile is a litle bird, and is called Quis∣quila, and hath that name of the voyce, & is a fleshly bird with many feathers, and is lesse of flight then & Larke, & ly∣eth vnder a clot as the Larke doth, & oft the weesell destroieth her egges, & she lei∣eth in diuers places, the male sitteth on some of the egs, & the female vpon soone, & recketh but little of the birdes, when they be hatcht. De Ouis Riuatricis. ca. 111. RIuatrix is a certaine venimous Ser∣pent, that infecteth water, and her egges be lyke to the egges of an Adder, that is called Colubet, and they be lesse & more speckled, and bee worse and more venimous. The serpent Riuatrix sitteth on her egges nigh waters and welles, and infecteth them, and corrupteth with full wicked venim. Of this Serpent Iu∣can speaketh and saith, that Riuatrix de∣fileth waters. Looke more heereof, lib. 17. De Ouis Strutonis. ca. 112. EStridge egs bée greatest, round, and full white, with harde shelles and wearish sauour & heauy smell, when the time commeth that she shall lay egs, shée heaueth her  the cluster of the 7. starres: For  laieth not but in the ri∣sing of that constellation: And so when that stares is seene, about the moneth of Iuly, she maketh a pit in the sande, and layeth egges therein, and couereth them with Sand, and leaueth them there, and forgetteth ye anone in what place she layed there, & commeth no more there: But the heat of the Sun in ye sand heateth them, and bringeth forth birds of those egges, and when the shell is broken, the Birds commeth out: the mother knoweth him, & feedeth and nourisheth him, which she forsooke while that he was in the egg. Estridges egs be hanged in churches for the rarenesse. For that they be so greate and seldome seene. (Additiō.Of late vsed to be set in siluer, and curiously guilt and wrought, cops made to drke cut of.) De Ouis Turturis. ca. 113. TUrtles egges be lyke to Culuers Egges, but they be some deale lesse, & the Turtle lneth two egs in springing time, & layeth no more that yeare, but if the first egges be corrupt, as Arist. sayth li. 17. and leth and breedeth on stickes, as the Culuer doth, and may laye and broode vntil the fifteenth yeere, as Ari∣stotle saith expresly. De Ouis Vpupe. cap. 114. LApwings egs be like to Partridges egs, but they be lesse, and more harde and more foule to the sight, and more vn∣sauourie to the tast, with worse odour to the smell. And ye Lapwing layeth and sitteth on brood on durt theron, and vn∣cleane things, and he telleth, that these egges be good for Witches and euill doo∣ers, and helpeth to their euill dedes, as Plinius sayth, li. 30. De Ouis Vulturis. cap. 115. VUlturis egges be greate as Eagles egges and few, for it is harde for her to fit an brood on her owne egges. These egges be browns and speckled, with hard shells, and ill smell, and heauy sauour, and sometime she casteth out some of her egs, as the Eagle throweth away some of her egges, for she may not castly feede her birdes, as Isidore sayth. Of Egges, and of the manner of egges, and of their qualities and diuersitie, this shall suffice for this time. ¶Of the number of waights and measures, and first of equall paise and sound. cap. 116. TO the foresaid propertyes of things, it séemeth mée good at last to set somwhat few & light, of the proper∣ties & diuersities of num∣bers, of measures, of weights, & of sound. For as Isi. saith, li. 3. The reon of nūbers is not worthy to be despised, for in many places of holy writ it shineth how much mastry and secresie
in reason of numbers, for it is not de in idlenesse, thou hast made all in number, weight, & measure Sap. 11. For the nyner of fire that is perfect, and made of his owne partes, betokeneth the perfectnesse of the world. And so it is to vnderstand of other numbers. And no∣thing we may know and learne without perseueraunce or skill of numbers, for thereby we knowe houres and times, when we dispute of the course of mo∣neths. While we knowe the space of yeares that commeth about by number, be taught that we be not harmed in ac∣counts. Take away (as he sayth) num∣ber and tale, and all things be lost. Doe away compot and accountes, and all is suil of lewdnesse and vnrunning. And no diuersitie is betweene other beastes and men, that knoweth not the reason of cal∣culing and of accounts, as Isidore sayth there. Also in the beginning of Arethure∣tike it is said, that it is neuer knowen, what is a Triangle, without the num∣ber of thrée, nor a Quadrangle, without ye number of foure: And so it is knowen that nothing is knowen by the Science Mathematica, without number, as hee sayth there. Also (as be sayeth there) a number is a multitude gathered by oft taking of one, for one in the roote and mother of numbers, and  is not ma∣nye, one commeth not of another num∣ber, but one is the beginning and well of all members, and thereof all numbers come and spring. For one is the roote of multitude, and of multiplication, and is most simple and worthy, and most vec∣tuous of all, which bee conteined there∣vnder, as Aristotle sayth, and Auicen li. 1. cap. 2. For one is more and root and well of multitude. One conteineth all vnder it selfe, and al things be therin, as in the taker, as he sayth Cap. 34. For the property of one is to take multitude and to giue thereto hauing, and to bee in all partes thereof, and conteineth Sim∣plicities, as it is said, libro. 4. cap. . And for asmuch as one is, yt well of al things, the more a thing maketh to one and v∣nitie, the more it nigheth to verie and truth, as he be sayth cap. 2. For our  as it were the foe, and two the mat∣ter. And therefore the neerer the one to to the other, the more be passeth from doublenesse, and migheth to simplenesse. And the more be nigheth one, the sooner doth multiply the number, For beeing is not before one, as it is said, li. 2 cap. 9. And one is not diuers but by the mat∣ter, for be susteineth and withholdeth al things, as it is sayd li. 5. cap. 31. One and vnitie is so praised among wise men, yt many meane, that one and vnitie is the soule in number, that commeth of one & of vnitie, and meane, that one is the be∣ginning of all things, that is continuall and discreet, as Auicen sayth, lib. 3. ca. 1 Also one is praised, for bee commeth of none other, and all other numbers come thereof, & be brought thereto, as to their proper head and well of them, as hee sayth. Also for simplenesse one is not di∣uided nor departed, as he saith. capit. 3. Most truelye one is that that is not de∣parted in deede nor in vnderstanding, & such one is beginning and well of num∣ber, as he sayth. Also be sayth there, that in one is no multitude, and that is to vnderstande, of the first vnite and sam∣ple, to the which all things be reduct, bee they neuer so diuerse, for one is saide in manye manner of wise, as it shall bee knowen heereafter. Also for perfectnesse, for al particular things, which is perfect each in himselfe, be perfect, when they be reduct into one. For all wholenesse and perfectnesse belongeth to one vnity, as it is sayd 1. de Coelo & Mundo. cap. . Also for singular dignitie, for one by it selfe hath a singular being, as it to sayd in libro Methe. cap. 5. And therfore Alg. foorth super. 3. Meth. cap. 15. That the cause of one and of vnitie to one es∣sentially and first noble & passing wor∣. One or  is taken is manye bse, as Alg. sayth. Some one is sim∣ple, and some one is by some what that belongeth thereto. One  is one, that may not be departed in deede, though he may be departed at waine, as a tree and a member, in the which the parts be last togethers, and bee not de∣parted at waine. One by somewhat that belongeth thereto is sayd in many man∣ner wise, as in one gender, as man, and
Oxe, and Horse. One in speciall kinde, as Sortes and Plato: One in accident and qualitie, as Snowe and Cerusa, and other white things. One in likenesse of doing, as the Carter and the ship men: One is subiect as swte and where bee in one substance and body In principio Phi. cap. 5. Aristotle sayeth, that some∣one is one in accident or subiect, as when two accidents be in one substaunce and subiect, as coulour and sauour. And one by it selfe is sayd in many wise, as one in continuance, that ioyneth togethers, and endeth of the middle. And one in speciall kinde and shape, as Suites and Plato. In mankinde one in generall kinde, as man. And Ore in general kind of beasts, and one is difinition. And one that may not be departed, as a pointe: and one in number, as singular, and one in simplicitie, as being, & one in al whol∣nesse and perfection, as is a circle. And one in matter, as all bodyly things. Bar∣nard distinguisheth nine manner wise of one and of vnitie ad Eugen. For vni∣tie is naturall and gratious, & is consti∣tuted vppon eyther. Unitie naturall dif∣fereth foure maner wise One is a vnity by assembling of diuers & distinct things, as many stones maketh one heape. And some vnitye is bnyting and coupling of diuers parts, of the which is one made, as members be in one bodye. Some bee ioyned of male and female in gendering of children, and so wife and husband bee one, when man and woman bee twaine in one flesh. And some by ioyning of di∣uerse kindes in one person of gendering & birth, and in this vnitie the body and soule be one man: So the gratious vnity hath foure diuersities. The first is migh∣tie, by the which vertue man is stable in himselfe: and not departed in his owne soule. The second is assenting, when by charity many haue one soule & one bodie in our Lord The third is liking, when ye soule is all according to God almigh∣tie, and forsaketh not God, but pleaseth him with all his might and power, & is one spirite with him. The 4. doth make vs igne & worthy, for thereby Gods son aeth our earthly kinde, to the vnity of the second person in trinitie, by that vni∣tie God and man is one: The vnity that passeth other vnities, as the vnity of the trims in three persons and one God, & this vnitie most be sole & singular with out pere, so that therin may be stinting, state, quiet, and rest of all vnities. Heere∣by it is knowen, that holynesse & perfec∣tion belongeth to one & to vnitie, as Ar. sayth. 5. Phi. And what is not whole & perfect, is not vniuersally called one, as be saith. Those that haue one matter, be one in number: and those that bee one in matter, be one in number. And those that be in one forme in generall kinde, hath one generall name in kinde, as a man is Animall, an horse is Animall, and of other beasts. But one and vnitie that is the well of numbers, is not one in matter but in number, as Aristotle sayeth. and is most simple, and hath the first doing, and all other thereby. In all kinds one is head & wel, that is per∣ticular therein, as white in colours, and in Neumatibus soundes, as it is saide, Meth. 10. cap. 3. And therefore the one v∣nitie of number, of the which commeth, and to the which are resolued all num∣bers, is the figure and likenesse of ye vni∣tie of our Lord God. For as it is said. 4. Meth. ca. 3. the first in generall kinde of substance & vndiuisible is the first ma∣ner euerlasting, that is God, cleane of all matter, which is not onely the first be∣ginning as Mtor, but as the forme and end, and last act, and in him is no might medled that may be chaunged. And so of him yt is one God in substance com∣meth all creatures effectually, as by en∣sample, as all numbers commeth of one vnity, as of ye head & well, & to him all be referred, as to the chiefe ende, as all numbers be dealed by ye first vnity, ye be∣ginning and end of all things maye be one, that is God, that is blessed for euer∣more. Amen. De Dualitate. cap. 117. IF one be put to one, then commeth twaine, & that number is after one first principall, & well of numbers. And holdeth the secondarye place, as Isidore sayeth. And this number is called
Binarius, and is called Infamu among some men, for by the number of twaine we be departed from one. And so this number is taken of diuision and depar∣ting. But Aul. in. 6. Musice saith, that if this number be to blame, for he pas∣seth first from one, then he is praising, for he commeth of one, and migheth or is first before the number of three. De Temano. cap. 118. THE number of thrée is called Ter∣narius, and is gendered of one put to twaine, and is most holy among num∣bers, for therein is sound the lykenesse of the holy Trinitie. For as the first v∣nitie of the first principall representeth one, so Ternarius presenteth the Trini∣tie of persons in God. For by generati∣on the Sonne commeth of the Father, and by procession the holye Ghost com∣meth of the Father and of the sonne. Al∣so Aristotle taught to worship the glori∣ous and most high God in the number of thrée, as it is said in li. de Caelo & Mun∣do. cap. 2. For euery creature cryeth and preacheth the holy trinitie, that is three persons, and one God, that made all tre∣asures, in number, weight, & measure, as it is sayd Sap. 11. De numero Quaternario. ca. 119. ONe put to three maketh foure, and the number of foure is called Qua∣ternarius, and hath ye name of Quadrate, figure & square, as Isid. saith. Quadrate shape and square is most steadfast and stable, and betokeneth therefore most the stablenesse of all holy Church, and sted∣fastnesse of a christen soule in virtuous science and lore, that he knoweth with all Saints, what is length and breadth, hignesse and deepnesse, &c. De numero Quinario. cap. 120. OF one put to foure maketh the se∣cond odde number, that is the num∣ber of fiue, & is called Quinarius, which among odde numbers in Binario distant from Ternario in the second, and oft be∣tokeneth those that put somwhat to the science and sore at the saith of the Trini∣tie. And neuerthelesse though they bee taught by the sayth and by the  they be held with the uc mee maidens and the  pole of Oren going amisse, for they bee yet tangled with the vo∣luytuousnesse and liking of the fleshlye wils. De Senario. cap. 121. ONe put to fiue maketh the number of sixe, the which is called Senarius, & is the first perfect number, of the euen partes thereof taken all together, they make the same number & summe, that is not found in a number beneath ten, but in the number of sixe, nor in the number aboue ten beneath eight and twentie. Therefore cap. 18. Boetius sayth, that the number of sixe is a number that follow∣eth vertue, for hee passeth not in super∣fluitie, nor faileth in lack of default, but holdeth the meane betweene euen parts, and hath no superfluitie nor default: For in the number of sixe, halfe deale is three, and the thirde twaine, and the firt is one, and sixe times one maketh sixe, and twice three maketh sixe, and thrice twaine maketh the same number: And therefore in holye writ this number betokeneth perfection of grace and of vertue. De Septenario. cap. 122, ONe put to sixe maketh seauen, & this number is called Septenarius, and is the third among odle numbers. And betokeneth increasing of seauen manner graces that alway increaseth and profi∣teth in them, that holde the sayth of the most holy Trinitie. De Octonario. cap. 123. ONe put to seuen maketh the number of eight, that is called Octonarius. And commeth of two euen partes, or of two numbers of foure: Or of two vne∣uen parts, or of two euen partes and adde, of fiue and three, and betokeneth the passing ioy and blisse in heauen, that
they shall haue that haue heere the sea∣uen manner gifts of grace. Their euen∣nesse of minde shall aunswere to the good deedes, and vneuennesse of ioy and perticular comfort, to the euennesse of torments and woe. For ioye of Mar∣tires shall passe the ioye of consectoure, to that they be lyke other things. And the ioy of vnctinnes the ioye of wedded solke, as one arre passeth in cleernesse.  li. 15. And for euen and vneuen deeds that herre be done, and for vneuen ioyes it is said, that diuerse manstone & dwel∣lings be in the fathers house of heauen. Ioh. 13. De Noncario. cap. 124. ONE added or put to eight maketh the number of nine, & is called Non∣nanus, & is compowned of thrice three, & is next to ten, & but one betweene thē, & betokeneth the blesse of the three Ierat∣chies of Angells, of the which each hath accord and likenesse of the holy trinitie, and be neerer to God then be other cie∣tured. De Denatio. cap. 125. THE number of ten passeth hereby one, & is ende, bound, and meare of all simple members, and first of all the compowned. And is worthy of present our Lord Christ God, that is Alpha & Omega, beginning & ending, & not onely beginning and ending of al simple crea∣tures, but the ioy and blisse of Angells & of man. Also the number of ten is the first meate of numbers, & no number passeth ten, but ten be put therto. And ten times ten maketh a perfect number, that is an hundred, & passeth from the left side to ye right, as Bede saith, therof it followeth yt some number is Digitus, & some Arti∣lais, and same Cōpositus: each simple number beneath ten, is Digitus, & ten is the first Articulus, & the next is twenty, & then thertie, fortie, & so forth. Composi∣tus is compowned of Digitus, & of Ar∣ticulus, as eleuen, twelue, & thirteene, & so forth vnto twentie, that is the second , & so forth, thirtie, and fortye, vntill an hundred, and ten hundred ma∣keth a thousand, and therein is the dig∣nitie of the number of ten knowen and noted. For without oft taking of tenne cōmeth not a thousand. slumber taketh greatnesse & quantities, & many diuisi∣ons be of numbers, for some number is euen & some odder: the euen number may be departed euen in two, and two, foure, sixe, and eight: Some number is odde, that maye not be departed into euen parts, for the one is more & the other is lesse, as in three, fiue, & seauen, and other such. As Isidore saith, the euen number is diuided in this wise: Some is Par, & some is Impar: That number is Par, yt is departed in euen nubers, alway vnto one, that is vndiuisible. In this wise the halfe part of foure & sixtie, is two and thirty, & the halfe thereof is fifteene, and halfe thereof is eight: and halfe therof is foure: and halfe thereof is two, and the halfe of that is one, and is vndivisible, & singular. Impar to the member yt maye bee diuided euen in twaine. But either halfe doth rename odde, as fiue, tenne, foureteene, eighteene, two & twenty, ther∣tie, fiftie, vntill as such numbers bee di∣uided, euen in two commeth a number, yt may not be diuided euen in two, Im∣par is the number that maye be dealed or diuided euen a sunder, and eyther halfe thereof also may be dealed euen a sunder, but such euen dealing commeth not fully to one, as it fareth of foure & twentie: The halfe thereof is twelue, another halfe thereof is sixe, & the other halfe thereof is three, which may not be diuided euen a sunder, & so ye euen diui∣ding commeth not fully to one. Impar is an odde number, which cōmeth of mul∣tiplication of odde numbers, as fiue and twentie, and nine and fortie, which bee odde numbers, and compowned of euen numbers & odde, and commeth of multi∣plication of the numbers that be odde, or seuen times seuen amounteth to the num∣ber of nine & fortie, and fiue times fiue maketh 25. Also some euen number is superfluous, and some Diminurus. Su∣perfluous is the number, yt hath partes, that make a greater number then it selfe, as it fareth of ye number of twelue
that hath fiue partes, the tlish pa is one, sixe is twaine, the fourth is three, the third foure, and halfe parte is sixe. And one, two, three, foure, and sixe, ma∣keth sixteene, that passeth by foure, and so of such number. De Numero diminuto. cap. 126. THE partes of a number Diminutins being accounted, maketh a lesse num∣ber then it selfe, as it fareth of the num∣ber of ten, yt hath three partes, the tenth part is one, the fifth is twaine, and the halfe is fiue: And one, two, and fiue, ma∣keth eight, that is much lesse than tenne. And the number of eight is such a num∣ber, and so be many other that commeth not fully of their own parts, as the num∣ber of sixe hath three parts: the sixt part thereof is one, the third is two, the halfe is three, and fiue, one, and three, maketh euen sixe: These nūbers be perfect, sixe, eight, and twentie beneath an hundred, foure score and sixteene beneath a thou∣sand, and sixe score, and eight & twentye beneath ten thousand: and those perfect numbers end alway is sixe or in eight, and that alway the one endeth in sixe, & the other in eight, as Boetius sayeth. Thou shalt seld finde perfect numbers, and they are soone accounted, for they bee scarce & compounded in a full stedfast or∣der. And superfluous numbers & dimi∣nutiue be vnordinatly disposed and com∣powned of no certeine end of numbers. Uneuen nūbers be diuided in this wise. Some be simple, and some compowned, and some be meane. The simple haue no euen part, but onely one other vnitie, as ye number of three hath only the third part, and due onely the fifth, and seuen onely the seauenth. Such a number hath but only one part. But héere be speaketh of ye euen mesuring part, which is so of∣ten taken, yt it maketh euen the same nū∣ber Compowned numbers be not onely by one, but they be also compowned of other numbers, & commeth multipli∣cation of other numbers: Nine, fifteene, one and twenty, and fiue & twentie, for we say, thrice three, & seauen times three, and thrice fiue, and fiue times fiue. The meane numbers seemeth some deale both simple and compowned in some wise, as nine, & fiue, & twenty. For in comparison to some number of nine, is the first vncō∣powned, for thn is no comon number, but onely one, &  the second and com∣powned in comparison to fifteene. For in nine & in fifteene is another common nū∣ber then one, as the number of three, for thrice three maketh full nine, and thrice fiue maketh full fifteene. De secunda, diuisione totius Numeri. cap. 127. AND numbers be departed and dea∣led in another manner wise: for eue∣ry each number is taken by himselfe, & with comparisō, as one, fiue, three, foure, fiue, sixe, and such other. A number is taken with comparison in this manner wise: the number of foure is double to the number of two, and conteineth oft two, and sixe is double to three, and eight to foure, and ten to fiue: and three to tre∣ble to one, & sixe to two, & nine to three. And yt like great numbers be those that conteins like many, as two to two, and three to three, & ten to ten, an hundred to an hundred Uneuen numbers be ye more and the lesse, as three and two, and foure & three. And generally the more and the lesse in comparison be vneuen either to other, & the more member conteineth the lesse, and somewhat more: as foure con∣teineth three, and somewhat ouer. For in foure is one & three, and so of other. The lesse number is conteined in the more, & is taken in comparison therto, with some part of it, as three to foure, & is conteined in foure with two parts therof. A num∣ber yt is called Multiplex conteineth the lesse number twice or thrice, or foure times, as two conteineth twice one, and is double thereto, & three is treble to one, & foure is quatreble to one, & so of other. The number Submultiplex is oft con∣teined in ye more number, as one is twice conteined in two, and thrice in thrée, and foure times in foure, fiue times in fiue, and so of other. The Superticularis number conteineth in comparison all ye lesse number, & somewhat ouer, as three
containeth two, and one more that is the halfe part of two. Also foure containeth three, and one ouer, that is the third part of three, and fiue containeth foure & one ouer, that is the fourth part of foure, & so of other. The number that is called Sub∣superparciens, conteineth the lesse num∣ber, & two parts, three, foure, or mo parts of the lesse number, as fiue contayneth three, & two parts ouer, that be two: and seuen containeth foure, & three partes o∣uer thrice one, & nine containeth fiue, & his other partes, foure times one. The number Subsuperparcient is conteined in the more number with some partes thereof, fiue, or three, or moe, as three is conteined in fiue, and two parts therof, & fiue is conteined in nine with foure parts therof, and so of other Subsuper∣particularis number is conteined in the more number with the halfe part, or the third part, or the fourth, or the fifth, as two to thrée, thrée to foure, foure to fiue, & so of other. The number Multiplex Subsuperparticularis conteineth ye lesse number oft, & some part thereof, as fiue conteineth twice two, yt maketh foure, and one part therof, as nine conteineth twice foure and one ouer. The number Multiplex Superparticularis conteineth oft the lesse, and some parts therof. Also foureteene conteineth twice sixe, & some parts thereof, as eight conteineth twice three, & some parts therof, & sixteene con∣teineth twice seuen, & some part of it: & two & twentie conteineth twice nine & some three parts. The number Submul∣tiplex Superparciens is oft conteined in the more number, with some partes thereof, as thrée is twice conteined in eight, with two parts thereof, and foure in twice conteined in eleuen, and three parts therof, as Isidore sayth. De tertia diuisione totius Nu∣meri. cap. 128. NUmbers bée diuided in the thirde manner, in this wise. Some discréet and some conteined. A discreet number is conteined in discreete vnities, as three, foure, fiue, sixe, & so of other. A nūber cō∣teining is be, which ioyned with vnities is conteyned, as three is vnderstoode in greatnesse & in quantitie, and this num∣ber is diuided in Lineall, Superficiall, & in Solide The number Lineal begin∣neth at one, & is written lineally vnto endlesse. And to Alpha is written for de∣signation of lines. For among Greekes this letter betokeneth one. The number superficial is writtē not only in length, but also in breadth, and to conteyned in length and in breadth. A three cornered number, and foure cornered, & fiue corne∣red, and round, and other such, be alway written and conteined in length and in wedth: Therfore heere be figures set for ensample. For the cornered nūber is or∣deined in this wise,  and the Qua∣drant in this wise And fiue corne∣red in this wise, The circle number is made thus, The number Spheri∣cus and Circularis commeth of a num∣ber that is multiplyed by it selfe, and oft by the number that commeth therof, and turneth into it selfe in a circle wise, and maketh a spere all rounde, as fiue times fiue times. For this circle multiplied by it self all about, maketh a spere al round: for fiue times fiue and twentie maketh generally an hundred & fiue and twen∣tie. The number Solidus, ( Solidus, it was among ye Romanes diuersly taken, sometime for a coine of Brasse contey∣ning 12. smal pieces. A shilling, sometime it was taken for Dragma in siluer, as Pri. Esdrae. 8. & secundi erusdem. 7. So∣lidus aureus, in the time of Alexander, was two drams of gold. After in ye time of Iustinian. 6. of them made an ounce, they being of the weight of our old no∣ble:) is conteined in length & bredth and deepnesse to them that be simple, propo∣sed simple to kinde, and many manner diuisions & numbers to be vnderstood & knowen, as I finde in the worse of Isid. for his words I follow at full. Heereof it followeth, & is openly knowne heere∣by, yt vnder diuersitie of numbers be di∣uerslye his diuers vnderstandings and meanings of holy writ, the which is in∣spired by the holy Ghost. Therefore, as Boetius sayth, libro quinto, capitu. pri∣mo. Among the science Mathematike, wise
men shall most take héede of the science of numbers. For the lore of Arethmetik passeth all other to helpe to knowe all thinges of kinde, of the which Philoso∣phie must treate: For without number is not a letter ioyned to a letter, nor sila∣ble to silable in right order, neither Sub∣iectum knowne from the Predicatum, nor the conclusion in Silogisinus is di∣stinguished from the premises, nor the first meane and lesse, nor of the third and fourth. Therefore (as Boetius sayeth) the science of numbers passeth all other sci∣ences. For without thrée is no Trian∣gle, nor Quadrangle without foure, and so of other. And so it fareth in Musicke, for accords Musick hath names of num∣bers, as Boetius sayeth. As it fareth in Diatesseron, in Diapente, and in Dia∣pason, and in other Consonants and accords of Musicke, yt haue no name with¦out number yt commeth before. And the course of starres is not knowen, and ri∣sing nor passing, nor diuersitie of time ruled, but by helpe of number. Also all yt is made is shaped by reason of num∣bers, as he sayeth. Also the ensample in the wit and thought of the maker, was reason of number: And by certaine num∣ber thrice three orders of Angell be di∣stinguished. By three & seauen, vertues & might of all reasonable things & of spiri∣tuall wits be distinguished. And the E∣lementes be fastened by vertue and sci∣ence of numbers. And so for to speak, all thing vsed coniunction of numbers both spirituall and corporall, both of heauen & earth. And numbers haue composition among themselues, as Boetius sayeth. For in ye substance of numbers is found euen and odde, that maketh all number by certaine might of God, for they bee diuers & contrary, and commeth neuer∣thelesse of one gendering and well, that is one, and bee ioyned in one compositi∣on without meane, and in lykenesse of proportion. And so it appeareth well that euery number is odde or euen. The euen number may be dealed euen a twaine, and leaueth not one, but the odde num∣ber is it which may not be dealed euen a two, without one odde. Or else by Pi∣thagoras lore, the euen number may be dealed vnder the same dimension, and in least and in most. In least diuision & most greatest number, as if thou dealed n hundred in fiftie, & fiftie is ye most part, and fiftie is the least diuision, for it is di∣uided but once, and there maye bee no lesse diuision then in two parts. For the more an euen number is diuided in ma∣ny parts, so much the greatnesse is dimi∣nished. As it fareth of a tree yt is hewen in many parts: but the number of diuisi∣ons is alway more. And the cause is (as he saith) for a great quantitie may be di∣minished, diuided intly. But a num∣ber increaseth & waxeth endlesse. There∣fore ye diuision of an euē number is most in continuall quantity, & lesse in number & discréet quantitie. The odde number is kindly diuided in two partes, more and lesse. The euen number is sometime dea∣led in two euen parts, and sometimes in vneuen more & lesse. And when the num∣ber is dealed euen in two, of the one part bee odde, the other is odde also, and if the one part be euen, the other is euen, as when eight be dealed in foure and foure, & twelue in sixe & sixe, and so of other. And if one of euen diuision bee odde, the other is odde also, as when was dealed in three & three, and ten in fiue and fiue, & foureteene in seauen & seuen. And so in euen diuision is not euennesse meddeled with oddenesse, nor oddenesse with euen∣nesse, but onely in the number of two, that is prince of euennesse, and taketh not euen diuision For it is compowd of twice one, and of the first euennesse of two. And if ye euē number be dealed in two parts, more and lesse, if the one part be euen, the other is euen, and if ten bee dealed in eight and two or in sixe and foure. Also if sixe be diuided in foure and two, and eight in sixe and two, and so of other. But if the one part be odde, neede the other is odde. And if ten be dealed in seauen and three, and eight in three and fiue, & so of other And it maye neuer be that one part of such a diuision to odde, and the other euen, nor one euen and the other odde. And alway where the odde number is diuided in two parts, more & lesse. ye one parte is euen, and the other odde, as if
thou deniest seuen in three and foure, the one parte is euen, and the other is odde, & that is generally found in all odde nū∣bers. And one is mother of pluralitie, and cause of euen & odde, for if thou put one to an odde number, de then makest an euen number: And if thou takest one out of an euen number, euen thou makest an odde number. Also of all numbers set in kinde disposition about one, and ioyned togethers, and is the middle: As if thou sayest, one, two, thrée, one put to one ma∣keth two in the middle betwéene one and thrée. Also if thou sayest, two, thrée, foure, one put to twaine maketh thrée, the middle betwéene thrée and foure. Al∣so if thou saiest, three, foure, fiue, one put to thrée maketh foure, the middle between thrée and fiue. And of other passing vp∣ward of partes, and speciall kindes of euen number and odde, it is treated be∣fore. To make processe of all the gende∣ringes and proportions, accorde and di∣uersitie of these numbers, it were right long. Therfore of properties of numbers is  for this time. Onely we shall wit, yt in numbers it is hard to finde the middle, as Isid. saith. For it is most cer∣taine, yt numbers be endlesse , for tel thou neuer so long til thou think to make an end, yet one put to the number ma∣keth the number more, and odde or euen. The reason & property of ye  th  know in this wise: First put togethers the lesse number and the more, & depart euen in , and thou shalt finde the middle n this wise: Take sixe for the lesse, & twelue for the more, & put them together, and sixe & twelue ma∣keth eight . Deale them euen in two that is nine, and so it is generall in A∣rethmetike, that by as many as the mid∣dle passeth the least, by so many yt most passeth the middle.  passeth sixe by thrée, and twelue passeth nine by thrée, as Isidore sayth, libro. 2. Heereof excepti∣on is set before. Of measures and weights. Chap. 12 OFten measures & weights haue place in holy writ. The reason and proper∣ties therof springeth of the skill of Geo∣metry, for as Isi. saith, li. 2. Geometrie to a science of measuring & meating, & con∣teineth in it selfe lines & length, shape & figured, & space in length & bredth & fair∣nesse, & distance, greatnesse & hgnesse, & figures, dimsions, & numbers, as it fareth in circles, triangles, & quadrangles, & in fiue cornered figures, & in other mosse many, of whom it perteineth not to this treatise to make tions of all, but to ouh sō what because of ye sple, of whō Isi. maketh mention & saith in this wise. Of Geometry is foure minor diuisions, plaine, & greatnesse of , & greatnes of reason, and solidate figures, plaine fi∣gures he contrid in length & in bredth: and bée fiue in number, as Plato mea∣neth. Greatnesse of nūber may be dealed by numbers yt be knowen in Arithme∣tike, the measure of fraction e, greatnes & hugenesse is not knowen. And  figures be conteined in length, breadth, & déepnesse, & such a figure to ated Cu∣bus, & is all  long, brd, and déepe: of plaine figures is many special shapes, as he sayth. The first is the circle in plaine , & is also called Circumducta, and in the middle thereof is a point, in whō al the times yt come from the round∣nesse therof meet together: & in Geome∣try that point is called Centrum, and the circle is in plaine set thus symbol for circle . The Qua∣drangle is in plaine, & lieth within foure straight lines in this wise. symbol for quadrangle Diategra∣mon is a plaine figure in this wise. Ortogonium that is recti angulum, is a plaine figure in this wise. symbol for right triangle Hiso∣pleros is a plaine figure and straight, ordeined vnder the Solide in this wise. The sphere is a figure shapen al round, & is pere to Solitude in al parts in this wise. symbol for sphere The Cubus is properly the So∣lide  long, broade and deepe in this wise. symbol for cube Chilindros is a square figure, with halfe a circle about in this wise. symbol for cylinder Conon is a figure broad in the end, and sharpe at the other, in this wise. symbol for cone Pi∣ramis is a figure shapen in this wise, symbol for pyramid wide beneath and straight aboue. Thus science vseth first the point that hath no parte: For among all that be measu∣red, it is least in quantitye, and most in
might  is to beginning of all lines, and therefrom all lines beginneth & stretch∣eth and cudeth thereas. Secondly, this Science vseth the line that is straight length without bredth, & stretcheth from point to point. For hée beginneth at a point and endeth at a point. Superficies is breadth and length. Spiutudo hath thicknesse, bredth, length, & déepnesse. And each body hath these thrée dimensions, length, bredth, & thicknesse: And by those three al corpulent substance hath measure, number, and weight. And by art of tel∣ling and numbers thou maist finde the middle in Geometry. For the least & the most multiplied maketh as much as the mene maketh multiplied, as 6. & twelue multiplyed, maketh two and seuenty, as Isidore sayth, lib. sicundo. The circle is a line drawne all round about frō a cer∣taine point to the same point. And each part of that line is like far from the mid∣dle point. And the circle is a most sim∣ple figure, and most taketh, and is most cleane, without corners & hollow with∣in. And the roundnesse therof is most far from the middle point, and is most per∣fect among all figures, and conteyneth in it selfe, and is conteined of it selfe, and of none that is without it selfe, as it fa∣reth of the circle of eaen, yt compasseth all and is not , and conteineth all, and is conteined of none that is with∣out, as Isid. sayth as within ten is each number, so within the circle is closed all manner shape of figure, in this wise. And shortly to speake of the perfection & reasons circulae, circles wonderfullye, by a certeine maner kind ulation, fol∣lowing all things. For heauen is round in shape, &  Planets moue all round about, and so doe all the starres, & so we see that the course of yeares, of moneths, and of diuers times beginneth and en∣deth, and alway passeth rounds about. So the Elements suffereth each other, and worketh each in other. And those that seeme disturbed by corruption, com∣meth yet agayne by generation: So con∣tinuall ebbing and slowing of the Sea commeth and goeth, and falleth and cō∣meth yet againe; So hearbes & grasse, trees, and seede, and fruit, commeth each of other, and turneth into themselues a∣gaine. So the spirits of  commeth of God by creation and making, & mo∣ueth to God in and by loue and affection: They come of God by working, & turn to God by deedes of thinking. So Ari∣stotle lykeneth the reasonable soule is a circle because of perfection hereof, and of disposition to receiue. Of all the figure of the same length, the circle is the most, therfore all the whole world hath round shape and is made thereto, because the soule should take it by vnderstanding & in wit. God is creatour and maker of all, and is designed in a circle. For as Trimegistius sayth, one gendereth one, and bendeth his loue unto him. For the Father generated, and hath without be∣ginning ingendered the sonne, and inspi∣reth the holy Ghost by the sonne, and the holy Ghost is the knot and loue of ey∣ther, of the Father and Sonne. For the father vnderstandeth him perfectly  beginning, and loueth vnderstanding per∣fectlye himselfe, which loue stretcheth to none other passing himselfe, but to him∣selfe that vnderstandeth, and is vnder∣stood, to the Father & sonne, of the which proceedeth that loue, and bendeth in him∣selfe in a circle wise. And so the some in God and  the father vnderstan∣ding, and vnderstanding gendereth the sonne, and the sonne gendered of the Fa∣ther and vnderstood, and the loue by the sonne commeth of the father, & berdeth & reboundeth to either, and is the  Ghost. And so it may be knowne yt per∣fection is in the persons of God, & that the pluralitie of them passeth not ye  of the . Therfore the Philosopher yt was called Secūdus, answered,  it was apposed what is God, he : God is intellectuall circle, of yt which ye mid∣dle point is euery where, & the roundnes no where, and so the reason of the circle shineth in euery creature. De Triangulo. cap. 128. A Triangle is a figure with the cor∣ners that bee euen as much as two euen corners. That is an euē corner, it is determined in another place: the soule
of lyfe yt hath three vertues in it selfe, of gendering, of nourishing, and of waxing is likened to ye Triangle, yt is the first of figures of Geometrie. For ye soule of life is the first of all soules, & hath in it selfe three maner vertues. Among cornered fi∣gures, the triangle is the first for hee is Solidus, long, & broad. Therefore each fi∣gure with corners, as the Quadrangle, & ye fiue cornered figure, conteineth as ma∣ny Triangles, as there be lines drawen frō corner to corner, as it fareth in ye qua∣drangle, yt conteineth two Triangles, if one line be drawen from one corner to the contrary corner in this wise And conteineth 4 triangles: if another line be drawen from another corner to ye contra∣ry corner in this wise . And so in all other figures, for he conteineth as many triagles, as they haue corners, as the quadrangle conteyneth foure Triangles, if two lines bee drawne, & stretcheth from two corners to the contrary corners. And by lines drawen, ye fiue cornered figure conteineth the triangles, and the sixt cor∣nered figure are, & the seuen cornered fi∣gure seuen, & so of other as Boetius saith li. 1. Arsmetrice. cap. 6. But the triangle may not be so dealed in other figures thē Triangles in this wise, this figure is so printed of breadth, yt other figures be resolued & deled in triangles: and for this figure is bosid to no principles, nor taketh thereof figures beginning of breadth: therfore this figure to dealed in it selfe, as he sayth there. And none other figure may be thought, that hath not beginning and principall of the Triangle: For the Triangle is the beginning and Ele∣ment of other figures and shapes, & that is knowen in numbers. For the number of foure is compowned of three, yt is a tri∣angle in numbers, & of one, that maketh foure & out to three: For one hath this dig∣nitie. That he conteineth in it selfe all the vertue of numbers, yt  thereof not in deede but in might & vertue, as Boetius sayth, libro. . cap. 14. And so the num∣ber of fiue is compowned of foure and one in sted of a Triangle: And so it may be shewed of all other Numeral figures. For alway each number is meresed of a triangle figure, as Boetius determineth then in termes openly, & leiteth ensāples in figures of foure, of fiue, of sixe, & of se∣uen, & of many other. Also ye triangle fi∣gure hath another singular property: for of such other figure  may be the chiefe side of a triangle: and so vpon each other figure may be rered a triangle: for each other figure Piramidale, yt hath in it selfe ye shape of a triangle, btaineth in it selfe as many triangles, as ye chiefe side containeth corners. And if a quadrangle is set for the chiefe ground & flo, there may arise a figure Piramidales, yt contei∣neth in it selfe as many triangles, as the quadrangle hath corners in it selfe in this wise. Also if ye chiefe side of  be fiue cornered, the Triangle Piramis, yt  may present fiue triangles vpon that Ba∣sis, as it fareth in a Piramidale figure yt may be Basis of the figure Piramis, as he saith. And in the Piramidale tri∣angle, 3. manner triangles may be found, as ye corners therof be three, in this wise. And so the disposition of God seemeth wonderfull in all things, and namely in numbers & in figures: Of other figures, both of numbers & of Geometry, it is re∣quisite now to cease for difficultye & di∣uersitie of endlesse many figures, though ye consideration of al be full profitable to ye lore of diuinity, as in the quadrangle, that is much solide and stedfast among figures & numbers, and is square, and presenteth the lore of the Gospell, that hath stedfastnesse in ye foure parts of the worlde, as Beda sayeth super Genesis. A corner is called in Augulus, as touch∣ing of two lines yt toucheth either other, and is the common subiect of many fi∣gures. For all the foresaid figures be de∣termined vnder diuersitie of angles. And of diuers touching of lines cōmeth diuers angles. For some angle is called Rectus angulus & sōe Obl. quus or Re∣flexus, & some Acutus, and some Obu∣sus. And most vertue is in the Angle that is called Rectus, for therein all the vertue is strengthned, yt is in the lynes that come from the Bests to the angle and ye vertue is strengthned by concourse and meeting and touching of lines, as it fareth in the eie that conteyneth all thing vnder an angle: For the highnesse
that commeth from the thing, yt is seene straight to the eye maketh Pirame: of the which the point is in the blacke of the eye, and the broad ende in the thing that is séene: and those beames be angled in the middle of the black of the eie, and by the angle of that Pirame, the sight is shapen, as the Author of Perspectiue sayth. Looke before li. 3. de natura Visus. lib. 5. de materio oculorum. The partes contrarye set and diuided among them∣selues, come togethers in angles, and bee ioyned there. Of the kinde of angles and of figures little is héere said, because of ensample, that we may know that the reason ther∣of is needfull to know diuers priuities of holy writ, that bee diuerslye lapped in likenesse of numbers and of figures: For as the circle betokeneth the soule Ratio∣nall, so the triangle betokeneth the soule of féeling. For as the Quadrangle con∣teineth two triangles, if a line be drawn from ye one angle thereof to the contrary angle, so the soule of feeling conteyneth in itselfe two triangles of might and of vertue. For ye soule of feelling hath three vertues of the soule of life, and there o∣uer the vertue of conceiuing, and concu∣piscible and irassible. For the soule of fee∣ling is soule of life, and not again ward. And so of other figures be diuers priuye reasons, & spiritually taken, and spiritual things with corporal be accorded. Under these figures be comprehended reasons of measures and of weights. Of measures of bodies. ca. 131. MEasure, as Isid. sayth, li. 16. cap. pe. is some thing in his manner meet, or his during by time. And measure is of body, or of time, or of space & of place. The mesure of body is as of mē, of trees, and of other bodily things in length and in bredth: For each body hath his owne dimension & measure, & that properly is called measure, by whome fruit & corne & licuor, and other things moist and drie be meten, as Modius, Vrna, Amphora, and Sextarius. And the least measure is Coclearium, and is halfe a Dragme, and weigheth nine Huoles, & such: thrée ma∣keth a Concula. For Concul, conteineth a Dragme & an halfe. And the weight Ci∣atus conteineth 10. Dragmes, & fiue put thereto maketh Orifasus. Acetabulus is the fourth part of Emina, and conteineth 12. Dragmes. Cotula is Emina, & contei∣neth 6. Ciatus, & is called therfore Cotu∣la, & hath that name of the Greeke word Cote, that is to say, earuing or dealing, and Emina is a part of Sextarius dealed euen in twaine, & is called Cotula. And Emina weigheth a pound, and such two maketh Sextarius, & is the mesure of two pound, and is called Bilibris euer. And 4. times is Cenix in Gréeke, & fiue such maketh Quinarius, yt is called Gomor. Also put thereto the sixt, and it maketh Congius, for Congies conteineth 6. Sex∣tarius, and thereof Sextarius hath that name. Congius hath ye name of Congre∣gando, gathering, or of Crescendo, wax∣ing. And so it meaneth, it is ye is giuen for some benefit is called Congiarium. And euery Emperour to win fauour of the people, put somewhat to the measure for to be held the more large of giftes. And Congiarium is speciallye a measure of fleeting things, & the Romanes ordeined the name thereof. Metreta is a measure of fleeting things, & hath that name of this Greeke name, Metron, & is a common name of al mea∣sures, that conteine fleeting things. The measure Modius hath that name, for it is perfect of his manner, & is the mea∣sure of 44. li. that maketh 22. Sextaris, and is therfore figure and token of per∣fect woorkes of sixe dayes. God did make 22. workes within sixe dayes, for in the first day God made seuen manner things, matter & forme, light or fire, the ouer heauens, water, earth, and aire: And the second day he made onely the instru∣ment. And the third day he made foure things, ye seas, séeds, hearbs, & trées. The fourth daye he made three thinges, the Sunne, Moone, and Starres. And ye fifth day thrée, fish, creeping beasts of water, and soules. The sixt day he made foure, tame beastes, wilde beastes, and cree∣ping Wormes of the lande, and man. And so. 21. manner things were made in sixe dayes. And 22. Generations were
from Adam to Iacob, of whose seede came all the people of Israel. And there be 22. bookes of the olde Testament vn∣to Hester, and 22. letters of A.B.C. by whom all the lore of Gods law is wri∣ten. Then by these ensamples, the mea∣sure Modius containeth 22. Sextarius, by Moses lore: and Modius hath that name of Modus, for it is a moderate me∣sure, as Isid. saith. Satum is a manner measure vsed in the Prouince of Palesuna, and contain∣eth one Modius and an halfe, and the name thereof is taken of Hebrue: for a∣mōng them Satum is called taking or re∣ring: for he that meateth, shall take and reare by same measure. But some∣time Satum is taken for Modius, mea∣sure of 12. Sextarius, as Isid. saith. Additiō.(Satum, Genus mensurae Palestinae, an Hebreu measure, containing of wine 33. pound .4. ounces, of Oyle 30. pound, of  50. pound. It is of our measure standard, two gallons and a quart. Bee∣ing a measure of drye things, it is our pecke, and the fourth parte of a pecke.) Bacus is a measure that holdeth 5. Sextarius, & Batus is in fleeting things, as Chorus and Ephi in drye things. Additiō.(Batus, a measure containing 72. Sex∣tarios, which after the Romane Sextari∣us reseth to 13. gallons & a pottle of our measure. Some affirme it to be but 36. pintes of Paris, which is the same mea∣sure that Amphora is. Batus is also, a kinde of fish.) Amhpora hath that name of Ansis, an handle, by the which he is heaued he∣ther and thether: and holdeth of wheat or wine, three Modius of Italy. Cadus is an Amphora, that holdeth thrice Vrna, Vrna is a measure, yt some call Quartenum, and properly to speak, Vrna is ordeined to do therin ashes of dead bodies. Thereof the Poet Lucan saith. He is healed with the , yt hath not Vrna. Artabo is a measure among the Ae∣gyptians, and boldeth 2. Sextatis, & hath that name, of 72. languages of anons that occupied the world. Gomer is a measure of 4. Modius, as Isi. saith. Or it is a mesure of 4. Mo∣dius, as the Glose saith sup. Exe. ca. 16 Additiō.(Gomer, Alter, Budey & Glarian ye x. part of Ephi: & Ephi is the same measure that Amphora is 9. gallons: so yt Go∣mer, is a gallon and almost a pint. After Gregorius Agricula, it holdeth .7. Sexta∣rios and one fifth part.) Chorus is a measure of 30. Modius, and hath ye name of coaceruation, heaps: for 30. Modius or one heape, seemeth a little hell, and is the charge of a Camel. Huc vs{que} Isid. 1.16. Also there are ma∣ny other mner measures, of whom the names be set in holy writ, & not with∣out great cause of preuie and mysticall meaning : for euerye vessell in which things be kept that be measen, is contai∣ned vnder the name of measure, as it is shewed in diuers ensamples. Acetabulum was a vessell, in which wine that shuld be offered to God, was assayed and proued, whether it were so∣wer or corrupt, and was called Aceta∣bulum: and the vessell in the which was sower wine and corrupt was called A∣cetabulum, as Isid. saith lib. 10. Ampuila is a little measure of licor and hath that name, as it were Ampi∣bulla, a large bull, and is like in round∣nesse to a boll that commeth of ye some of water by entring of winde, & be :ted, and blowen, and be full subtill. Alabastrum is a vessell for oyntment & hath that name of the kind of ye stone that it is made of, & saueth without cor∣ruption by his propertie longest, all cent∣ment that is put therein, as it is sayd in Trac. de lapididus. Archa is a vessell and mesure, onely in the which things be put and kept out of sight, yt they be not seene of all men. Of this name commeth this word Ar∣chanum priuitie, that is warely kept vn∣knowen to multitude of men. Amphora is a certaine measure, & hath ye name of Ansis, a handle, as it is sure before. Batus is a measure of fleeting things, ordeined by ye law. Bachia is a me∣sure, ordained generaly to ye vse of wine. Calix is a certain porsion & measure of drink, & hath ye name of Calo, yt is a tree, for such vessells were first made of tree & of wickers, as pamer and baskets.
Cathinum is an earthen vessell or∣dayned for meate and for drinke, and is better sayd in the neuter gender, than in the Masculine, as Salinum, a saler, as I∣sidore saith. Cacabus a candron, is a vessell of the kitchen, ordained for diuers vses, and to seeth flesh in, and also the same vessell is called Valcotula. Cadus is a barrell, and contayneth thrée Modius, as it is sayd there. Calathus is a basket made of splintes to beare fish therein. Cribrum is a oe, round with ma∣ny holes, and hath that name, as it were Curriferum, bering things that runneth, for wheate and other corne runneth ther in, for in a siue corne is clensed of stones and of small chaffe. Cista is a little hutch, & of that name commeth the diminutiue Cistella, & hath the names of rindes or splints, of canes or of willowes, of whome it is wouen and wrought. Cophinus is a vessell wouen of rods to beare dirt therin, as it is sayd in Psa. Manus eius in Cophino seruierunt. Celata be vessells of golde or of sil∣uer marked with euident signes, within or without, and haue that name of Ce∣lum, that is an instrument of yron that is commonly called Cilicon, as Isidore sayeth. Cimlia be vessells for drinke, & are euenlong and narrow in the endes, and broad in the middle, as it were a boate. Coclear a spoone, is a little instru∣ment of the measure of the mouth, and proportionate thereto: and therewith the hande serueth the mouth of diuers meates, and namely of fleeting meates. Therefore Martialis saith. Sum cocleis habilis, & nec minus v∣tilis ouis. Nunquid scis potius, cur coclearo dicor. Discus is a Dish broad and rounde, and hath that name of Do and Eseo, & is the same that Scutello is. And Dis∣cus is sayd, as it were Dans Eseas, gi∣uing meate, and men sitting at meate, be called Discumbentes, and haue that name of Discus. Dolium a Tunne, is an hollow ves∣sell, and hath that name of Dolando, he∣wing or thwtring, for it is made of ma∣ny boordes and Tunne slaues, craftely bound togethers. Emicadium is another vessell, and containeth halfe a Cadus. Enoforum is a vessell, and holdeth wine, for Eno is wine, therfore it is said. Vertitur Enolon fundut sententia no∣bis, as Isidore saith. Emissis is a certayne drinke, or a vessell that is dronke of one drought, as Isidore saith. Fiola hath the name of Glasse, for glasse is called Filin in Greeke, and is a lyttle vessell with a brd bottome, and a small necke, and therein wine is know∣en, namely by colour. Philacterium is a lyttle vessell of glasse or of christall in which holy Re∣lykes be kept. Also the punishment, in which the Iewes wrote the Law for to be helde holy, is called Philacterium, as it is said: Dilatant enim Philacteria sua. Fiscus is a common sacke or a bag in which the Escheker and rent gathe∣rers put the common debts and Cu∣stome that is payed to Kings, as it is said, Quod non accepit Christus, capit Fiscus. Fiscella is a little euen long scribbe or a panter woue with small roddes of willow or of wickers, & glewed or pitch∣ed, as was the vessell, that Moses was in, when he was put in the riuer. Gauata is a great header boll, below and deepe, and is called Gauata, as it were Couata hollow: there G. is set for C. as Isidore sayth. Gazofilatium is an hutch, in the which is put what is offered in the temple, to helpe and succour of needie men, & hath that name, as it were Archa gazarum, the Cofee of riches, and kéeping thereof, for kéeping is Filax in Gréeke, as Isid. saith, and so Gazofilatium was a hutch or a house kéeping the common offring, as Musac kéepeth the common offering of Kings, and Corban of Priests. Idria is a water vessell, for water is called Idor in Greeke.
Canistrum is a basket, or a fraile made of white rushes or of reede, & ser∣ueth to put in frte: Cordilum is a like vessell, craftelye made and wouen of white rods. Lamp is a , thin, and , upon was rounds aboue, narrow and straigth beneath, and  long, and  to  and lyght, and hath the name of Lambo. to  for it h it th the oyle, & is euer  that giueth  oorth  may be called Lampas, as Ho sayth. Looke before lib. 15. de metal∣lis cap. de Vitro. Lrarsa hath that name, for light is reason therein, and to name of glasse, as of  of some ashe ce thing, & light is closed therin, for the wind shld not blowe out the light: and it giueth light all about, and is often borne about wth lyght therein, as Isid. sayth. Lacetus hath the name of Lucino, & to the first  Lu, is short: thereof Persius saith. Disposite pinguem nebulam cuo∣muere lacernae. If Lucerna had the name of Lux, the  false, as Isid. saith. And the candle of the lanterne is called Licnus, and Luscinus, as he saith. Also Lagena is a wide vessell, & hath that name of the Gréeke word Lagenis, as Isidor. saith. And commonly we call Lagena a  barrell or a cestrell, and the diminutiue thereof is Lagungula, and by the kind of Lagena or of a barell, the sauor of the wine changeth, and the best Lageres or barall be made of the tree that is called Thamstus, therof ye wine taketh  and vertue to stop∣ping of the spl, as Const. saith. or , is a vessel of  of brsse, that commeth water by a  & pipes, for washing of hands, and as called , not onely for it is made for washing, but hath this name Labrum of Labium the lip, for ofte the wine thereof is broad and bending as a  such vessells be called Luderes, 3. Reg. cap. . in the which priests wash the satce of the temple. Licula is a little oyle vessell of brasse or of siluer, and hath that name of Liniendo, ying, for in such a vessell, the oyle was kept, to anoynt Kings and Priests, as Isid. sayth. Lebis is a vessell of brasse, to séethe flesh in, and taketh blacknesse of oft bur∣ning and vncleannes, and needeth there∣fore oft scouring and wiping. Ci met∣tall of leads and candernes, infecteth oft meate that is long kept therein. Loculus is a purse in which mery is put, as it were in a pre place, and is called also Marsupium, as Isi. sayeth. Marsupium is a bag to put monie in, and that neede commeth of ye Gréeke word, Marsippa. Mulgariū is a lk vessel, as Isid. saith. Mola is a great bell déepe & round, & was so called, for all rounde things are called Mola among the Gréekes. Nola is a lyttle bell, and hath that name of a citie of Campania that is cal∣led Nola, where such a bell was first soū∣ded, and is little, and soundeth, & is cal∣led Tinunnabulum, & the bell that is often hanged about the necke of hounde. and feete of foules and birds, as Hugu∣on saith. A crack is called Olla, for water boy∣leth therin, when fire is ther vnder, and vapor passeth vpward, and the ball that riseth on ye water, & dureth by substance of the winde and aire is called Bulla. Parupsis is a square vessel with foure sides alike. Patena is made of Dispelis and Patentibus lancis oris, as Isi. saith. Patera is a manner vyoll, and hath that name, for by drinke out therof, for the  euen and a twaine, as Isid. saith. Poculam hath that name of Potan∣do, drinking: and euerye vessell yt men vsesh to drinke of, is called Poculum. Patella is a pan, as it were an open crocke, for a  mouth, is more open than a crecke, for the mouth is as broad as the bottome, and is a vessell of brasse or lead néedfull to diuers vses. A  is called Peluis, and hath that name of Pellis, the skinne, for in it is ofte washed the skinne of feete and hand. A boxe is called Pixus, and hath that
name of Buxes, Boxe trée, for of it ofts boxes be made: for the tree that we call Buxus. Gréeks call Pixis, and a boxe is made now of mettall and now of tree, & serueth to many diuers vses, and name∣ly to kéep and saue, and to beare lettere, electuaries, licours, powders, and oynt∣ments. Quisquiliarium is a vessell or anye thing, in which coddes, huskes, or small chaffe is put and saued. Sartago, the frieng pan, hath yt name of noyse that is therein, when oyle bur∣neth therein, and is a manner pan, in the which things be fryed with chéese, with butter, or with oyle. Sphan is vessell that hath yt name, for blowing he casteth out water: for when houses be a fire, men of the East lands runneth with vessells full of wa∣ter, and quencheth and clenseth the same, and throweth vpward the water, as Isi. saith. Rapatorium is a vessell, in ye which Rapes be kept or sodden, as he saith. Ciphus is a cup or a vessell of tree, of siluer, of golde, or of glasse, of the which we drinke or wash our handes. A basket is called Citula, for it ac∣cordeth to those that be a thirst to drink therof, or for it thrusteth water, for now it receiueth water, and now sheddeth, for while one bucket is emptied, matter is filled. Cithrasia is a bagge or purse, in the which wayfaring men carrie bread, and other things that they need in the way. A basket is called Sporta, so called, because therein is bread borne and other things, which néedeth to houshold. Or hath yt name, for it is ofte made of rods of a shrub, that is called Spartus. Scottella is an oyle vessell, and hath that name, for it is made of leather. Scutella is the diminutiue of Scutū, a shield; for it is lyke to a lyttle round shield, as Isidore sayth. Scrinium is a lyttle hutch couered with leather and with nayles, in which money is kept and other preuy things. Salinum is a saler, as Isidore saith. And euery vessell with three féete is called Trisilis, as Isid. sayth: for a ves∣sell with foure feete, is miscalled Tri∣silis. A censour is called Thurabulam, & is a vessell of brasse, of siluer, or of gold, and is double, close beneath and open a∣boue, with manye hoales, by the which the smoke of the incense passeth out, and vpward into the aire, and serueth for to cense therewith, the two parts of it are cheyned together. The farme is called Vencilabrum, & is an instrument is fan wish, and hath this propertie, that the light thing & vyle passeth out, and the heauie and cleane a∣bideth therein. A bottle is called Vter, & is by craft made of leather, and hath therefore this name Vter, of Vterus, the wonder, as Isidore sayth. Vrna is Amphora, of which it is said before in this same booke. Vrceolus is a dimunutiue of Vrna, & serueth now for wine & now for water, but properly it is a vessell that serueth to put water in, with the which water wine is alayed at the table and feasts of Lords, & thereof Onon hath that name, for he giueth water to ye  of Gods in spousatles of Phiolagia, as tables but faine, as it said in Mac. and in Marc. Of many other maner measures is men∣tion made in holy writ for er misti∣call meaning, but for ensample these be let heere. Thers be also other measures of spare and of place, of the which Isido. speaketh on this wth . ¶Of measures for diuiding of Countreyes and places. Cap. 13. MEasure he sayeth, is all thing which hath  in wight, capacitie in length, in bredth, in highnes, in  and also in minde, and to our fathers mesured all the world, and  Par∣ties into Prouinces, and Prouinces in∣to Regions, and Regions into Places, and Places into Territories, and Terr∣itories into Fieldes, and Fieldes into Centurias, and Centurias into Dayes earings, and Daies earings vnto Clima∣ta, and Climata into Ans, and Ans into Perches, and Perches, into Paces,
Cubites, and feete, spans, & hand breads, vnces, and inches, and so by their wit & sleight, they lesse nothing vnmeasured, from the most to the least. An inche is the least part of measures of cius, and Vncia containeth three inches in mea∣sure, and the hand breadth foure inches, and the foote sixteene. And the pace con∣taineth fiue foots, and the Perch eleauen pace and ten feete. The Perch is called Pertica, and hath that name of Portan∣do, bearing, for all the sayde small mea∣sures be in the body, as the span, feet, and pace, and onely the Perche is borne, & is ten foote long, as Ezechiels cane made & measures mystically the temple: heereof is mention made Ezec. 40. C.D. Actu is a measure of foure feete in breadth, and sixe score feete in length. The Clima is a square space, and is sixtie foote long in euerie side. Actus qua∣drate euery way, finisheth with 180. foot, and so two Actus make Iugerum, and hath that name because of ioyning, Iugerum is 140. feete in length, and sixe score feete in breadth. There be many o∣ther manner measures, of the which we doe not speake at this time. But it is to vnderstand, yt the Sta∣iall field containeth sixe score pace and fiue, that is 615 foote. And eight such ma∣keth a mile, yt containeth 20000. whole feete, as Isi. saith there. Centuria is a field of two hundered Iugerea, and had that name of an hunde∣res Iugerea, and was so called in olde time, and was afterward doubled, & hol∣deth alway the first name, as Isid. saith, lib. 15. cap. vit. de mensuris. Measure of wayes haue diuers names among men of diuers tongues: for the Latines call Miliria, the Greekes Sta∣dia, and the Frenchmen Leucas, the Ae∣gyptions Signes, and the Persians, Pera∣sangas. And no wonder, for euery space is contained with his owne bonds and measures, as he saith. (Stadium, a mesure of ground, wher of were three sorts: One of Italy, con∣taining 625. feete, that is 125. paces. The second Olympicum, of 600. feete, that is 120 paces. The third Pithicum containing . feete, that is two hun∣dred paces: whereof happely maye rise the difference betweene Plinie and Di∣odorus Siculus, in describing Sicily. Of these Stadia, eight doe make an Italian mile, containing a thousand paces, euery pace being fiue foote. We maye call it 8. furlongs.) For the mile containeth a thousand paces, that is fiue thousand foote: the Leuca containeth a thousand paces and fiue hundred. The Stadium is the eight part of a mile, and containeth sixe score paces and fiue. He telleth that Hercules ordained that name Stadtom for such a space, for he ran so farre of  breath, and stint∣ed then, and so gaue that name Staduim as Isid. saith. A way is a space, in the which carri∣age may goe, and hath that name Vra, of Vehiculum, a thing which beareth, for therein commeth and meeteth caria∣ges, and containeth the breadth of two Actus, for going and comming, and mee∣ting of carriage. And euery way is common or pri∣uate: The common way is in common ground, and is common to the people, & leadeth to the Sea, and to other diuers townes: and this way is called Strata, as it were troden with the feete of the Comminaltie. Lucanus speaketh there∣of and sayth. Strataque iam vulgi pedibus detri∣ta viarum. Strata is a way troden with feete of the people. This way without obstacle is clean and sad, paued and couched with harde stones euen and peaceable, common to all manner of people, and free without stopping, impediment or grieuing, as hee sayeth. The Priuate waye, belongeth to some nigh Towne, and is short & nigh, and ofte growen with grasse, for sel∣dome going, and is beset with trees, on either side. Agger is an heape of stones, or a to∣ken in the high waye. And historyes call such a way, Knights waye. Thereof it is sayd.
Qualis sepe vie deprensus in Agge∣re serpens. Iter, iteneris, is a way, by the which a man may goe whetherwarde that hee will: and Iter is another than Itiner, for Iter is easie to passe, and Itiner is long and hard to passe. Semita is the middle of the way, and hath that name of Semis, halfe: and Se∣mita is the path of men, and Callis is the path of beasts, wilde and tame: and Callis is the pathe of beastes betwéene mountaines, and is streight and harde, troden with beasts, & hath therefore that name of Callo. Tramites are by paths in fields, and hath that name, for they lead to ye euen way. Diuersum is a bending of wayes, and leadeth to diuers places: And Di∣uerticulum is a benching besides the waye. Bruium is a beginning of 2. wayes, of the which one lyeth on ye right hand, and the other on the lefte hand, & is ofte a perillous place and suspitious: for in such places ofte théeues lye in a wayte, & the Cominaltie be oft robbed in such places: and is a doubtfull place, for men doubt often, which of those wayes they shall take. Therfore in times past, cros∣ses were set in such wayes, that the men passing thereby, might know, which of those wayes they should take. Compita is a place where manye wayes meete, as three or foure, and is a perillous place and doubtfull, as Brui∣um is. Ambitus is a space betwéene place & house of neighbours, of two foote broad and an halfe, ordained for a waye about neighbours places, and hath that name of Ambiendo, 1. Circumeundo, going a∣bout. Orbita is the forrowe of a wheele, that maketh a déepe furrow in the win∣ding, and trendlyng about. Actus is a place wher beasts are oft driuen, and is slipper and sickle. Vestigium is the fore that is lefte in the ground, after going and trendling, and hath that name of Inuestigare. Beasts leaue in their owne sores, some token, by the which they be ofte taken of hounds and of other wilde beasts. The Lyon knoweth that, and both a∣way therefore his fores, that they be not knowen of them that is followeth him. Of properties and diuersitie of mea∣sure, this is sufficient for this time. And what is sayd before, is taken forth of Isid. li. 15. cap. vltimo. Of Weights. cap. 133. IT is needfull to know the manner of weights, as the manner of mea∣sures, as Isidore sayth, for the might of kinde giueth to all bodely things theyr owne weight, and weight ruleth all. Therefore waight hath the name Pon∣dus of Ponendo, setting, for weight set∣teth all things in theyr owne place, for weight is not els, but receiuing a thing toward his own place. Two things ma∣keth weight, lightnesse and heauinesse, & so lightnes in subtill matter maketh vp∣ward, and resteth not ere it come to his owne place: therefore fire moueth vp∣ward, and resteth not, ere it come to his owne place and sphere. The contrary is of heauinesse, for heauines that hath the mastrie in corpulent and earthy matter, moueth downward, and resteth not ere it finde the middle, to the which is moo∣ueth towarde the middle by his owne weight, and so all thin matter and sub∣till, hath double cause of lightnesse, for the parts of such matter is shire and sub∣till, and moueth toward the middle to∣ward the roundnesse, and resteth not ere it come therto. Also for shir of parts in such are many parts, in which be ma∣nye poores, and vertue of fire commeth therein, and dissolueth and wasteth the earthy parts, and maketh so all the body light, and beareth it vpward: & so heate is chiefe cause of lightnesse, as cold that moueth from the roundnesse toward the middle, is cause of ning and fastnesse of parts, and  of heauinesse: and so the more sad a body is, the more heauye it is, and the more shire and thin, the more light it is found. And though both light and heauy is called weight, because of the inclination of either toward his
owne place, that is ordained thereto by kind, yet by the common speking, weight and heauinesse is all one: for things that moue down ward be called weighty, for their heauinesse, and things that moue vpward, are called light things: and so light and weight be diuided as contra∣ries. Therefore li. 15. Isidor. sayth, that a weight is called Pensum, hanging: for it hangeth in the ballaunce, when it is commonly weyed, and in this wise for to speake commonly, the thing in ye which a thing as wayed, is called a weight: and somtime the thing that is weyed, & som∣time maie things & heuy, by the which the heuines is assaied, is called a weight. Also instruments in the which things be weighed, haue diuers names: For Trutina is of double weyght, and Lanx is the hanging for to wey gret weights, as humorous, and talents, & small balan∣ces, for to weye small things and lyttle money. The ballance is called Statera, & hath that name of Stando, standing, for hee standeth euen weyed by a thing yt bea∣reth it vp in the middle. Lances be the thin brasen bolles, of the which in the one is the weight, and the thing that is weighed is in the o∣ther, and the weight to rightfull, when both ye bols hang euē with their weights and alyke high. The tongue that followeth the more heauie boll, is called Momentum state∣re, and the hgles by the which ye bal∣lance hangeth, and the heuinesse of bols be ayed, is called Filum as he saith: & euery weight hath a certaine maner, and proper name, as Isi. saith. The least parte of weight is cal∣led Calculus, and the fourth parte of weight Obolus and weieth two greins of Tilles and is called Calculus, for it is so lettil that it maye not be troden and . is the twentieth part of Soli∣de, and hath this name of a fruits of a . Obolus weieth three Huoles, and was  of brasse, shapen as an ar∣row,  ye name thereof, for an arrow is called Obolus in Greeke, as he saith. Scrupulus weyeth sixe Huoles, & is called Dragma in Greek, and this name Scrupus is a diminitiue of , that is a little stone. Dragma is the eight part of Vncia and weyeth three pence of siluer. Scrupulus, that is the eighteenth Hu∣olus, is called Denarius, and is accoun∣ted for ten pence, as he sayth. (Drachma the 3. part of an ounce, a dramme: also a coyne signed with a Bullocke, counterpesing and old sterling groase, of eight to the ounce. Drachma au. 12 siluer drams that is, an ounce & halfe of siluer) Solide hath that name, for it seemeth that he lacketh nothing: and therefore men in old time called a thing that was whole and vnbroken, Solidum & Totū. Also a shilling containeth 12. pence. Numisma is a penie, and is called so, and is marked with the print fo ye name of a Prince: for first Numilida was a penie of siluer, as Isid. saith. Solidus is called Sextula, & hath that name for it weyeth 16. ounces: ye com∣mon people calleth the third deale ther∣of Trimisus, for such three maketh So∣lide, and two Sextules maketh Dulco, & three maketh Stater, as Isid. saith. Stater is halfe an ounce, and wayeth three golden Solide, yt is called Stater, for it standeth in the Solide, & is called also Semiuncia, for it hath ye half of an oūce, & is called Semisus also, for it weyeth Se∣misus, as it is Semisus, half Assis as he saith also Assis is ye left among weights as one is least among numbers, as the Glose saith there. Nonne duo, &c. obtaer a certaine coyne, in value foure drm, or foure groats, 8. to an ounce of these were & old siluer Romans coynes. Fiue Quadrans; weyeth the fourthe deale of an ounce, & is called Quadrans in Hebrew. (Quadrant the fourth part of As, that is three ounces, also the fourth part of a∣ny number, as measure. In coyne it is a brasen parte, called Frienx in value the tenth part of sestertius. The accord in recning where the receipt and allow∣ance be equall. Quadrans vino , 6. ounces of Wine, after udey . After
Phisitions, foure ounces and a halfe.) Ciclis in Latin, is called Sicca in He∣brue, and weyeth an ounce among them, and among the Greekes, right as among Latines. Ciclus is the fourth part of an ounce and halfe a Stater, and weyeth two Dragures. In holy Writ Ciclus is an ounce, and the first parte of an ounce a∣mong Nations. Vncia hath that name, for it oneth and bindeth all number of weights, and weyeth eight Drams, that is 24. Scru∣pled, that is taken for lawfull weight: for by the number of Scruples thereof, the number of the houres of the daye & night be accounted, for twelue ounces maketh Libra, and is therfore accounted a perfect weight, for therein be as many ounces, as months in the yeare. (Additiō.Siclus, Iosephus: called also Te∣tradrachmen, and Stater argenteus. It is as well a coyne as a wayght, being halfe an ounce in peyse, and in value a∣bout 4. greates, when eight went to an ounce: Some write that it is but two Drachiues.) (Additiō.Sicilicum, a weight of two drams the fourth part of an ounce  also a me∣sure of grounde 20. foote broad, and 30. foote long, that is a plat containing 620. foote.) Libra is said, as it were Liberé, for it containeth in it selfe, all the foresaide weights, as Isi. saith. A pound weight. Bilibras, weyeth two Libras, and is double Libra. ma weyeth an hundred drams, & is a name of Greeke. (Additiō.In Latine Coina signifieth a bush or haire, the voughs & leaues of trees.) Talentum is accounted the greatest weyght among the Greekes for nothing is lesse than Calculus or As: For as One is in numbers, so Calculus is in weights, and no weight is more than Talentum. But this weight is diuers among Nations: for among ye Romans Talentum wayeth threescore pound and twelue, as Plinius saith: and two To∣lents weyeth two houdred pound, foure¦score and fortie. The Talent is treble, lesse, meane, & most. The lesse is of fiftie pound: the meane of seauentie pound, and twentie: and the most of seauen score pounde and that was Talentum of Seyntwary. Centenarium is the name of a num∣ber, for it containeth an hundred pound: and for the number of an hundred is perfect: ye Romancs ordayned a weight of that name. Huc vsque Isidor. libro 15. cap. 3. De Ponderibus & Mensutis. (Additiō.Talentum are of two sortes: Ta∣lentum Acticum maius, contayning 80. Minas, euery Mina valewed one hun∣dred Drachmas or Denarios, and euery Drachma being a groat sterling, when eight groates went to an ounce, and by that rate doth rise to one hundred thir∣tie thrée pounds and odde money. Ta∣lentum Acticum minus, which is most spoken of in Authors, containeth sixtye Minas, euery as before is written, bee∣ing in valew an hundred Denarios, and in that rate amounteth to an hundred pounds. But he may seeme as Tonstall writeth 120. pounds, after x. groates to an ounce: for the enesse or vnesse of English money, maketh Talentum more or lesse, as Talētū Hebraicū Sāctu∣ary containing an 100. Minas Mebrai∣cas, wherof euery one was 60. Sicli, and euery Siclus 4. Donarij of sterling groats of 8. to an ounce, which rate amounteth to 400. pounds. Talentum Hebraecum minus, was halfe so much.) De Musica. cap. 134. AS Acte of numbers and measures, serueth to Diuinitie, so doth the Art of melodie: for Musicke by the which concord & melodie is knowen in sound and in song, it is needfull to know ye se∣cret meaning of holy writ, for it is said, that the world is compounded & made in a certaine proportion of har, as Isi. saith li. 3. And it is said, that hea goeth about, with cousonance and accord of melodie: for musicke moueth ti∣ons and teth the wits of diverse dis∣positions. Also in battaile the noyse of the trumpet comforteth warriours: and the more strong and gious that the ounding is, the more strong & wild men bee to fight: and comforteth shipmen to suffer all the diseased and trauayles.
And comfort of voyce, pleseth and com∣forteth the heart and inwits in all dis∣ease and trauaile of workes and weari∣nesse. And musicke abateth masterie of euill spirites in mankinde: as we read of Dauid, that deliuered Sle of an vn∣cleane spirite by crafte of melody. And musick exciteth and comforteth beasts & serpents, soules and Dolphins to take heede thereto: and so veynes and sinews of the body and pulse thereof, and all the lns of the body be sec together, by vertue of harmony, as Isi. saith. HarmonyOf Musicke be three parts, Armoni∣ca, Rithmica, and Metrica, Armonica, diuideth the great and small in sounds, & high and low, & proportional chaunging of voice & sound. And Armonia is sweet accord of song, and commeth of due pro∣portion in diuers voyces or blasts, tou∣ching and sting sounde: for as Isido. saith, Sound commeth of voyce, as of mouth and iawes: or of blast, as of trumpes and pipes: or of touching and smiting of cymbale and harpe, and other such, & soundeth with smiting & strokes. Uoyce commeth to one accord, as Hu∣gution saieth, for in all melodie needeth many voyces or sounds, and that accor∣ding: for whereas is but one voyce on∣ly, it pleaseth not the cares, as the voyce and sound of the Cucko: and if anie discord, the voyce pleaseth not, for of such discord commeth not song, but howling, tarring, or yelling: but in many voyces according in one, is proportion of har∣mony, and melody, or sweet Simphonia. And so Isid. saith, that Simphonia is a temperate modulation and according in sounds high and low,Simpho∣nia is a coe in tune, called har¦mony. and by this har∣mony, high voyce accordeth: so that if one discordeth the hearing. And such ac∣cording of voice is called Euphonie, that is sweetnesse of voyce, and is called al∣so Melodia, & hath that name of sweete∣nesse and of Mel, that is honie: and the contrary is Diophobia, soule voyce and discording. To make melody of harmony, need∣eth Diosclina, Diesis, Tonu, Iperludi∣us, P, Arsis, Thesis, and sweete  rate sound. Dacesmo is a couena∣ of two voyces, or of mo accor∣ding. Diesis is the space of doing me∣lody, and chaunging out of one sound in∣to another. Tonus is the sharpnesse of voyce, and is difference and quantitie of harmonie, and standeth in accent and Tenor of voyce: and Positions make thereof fifteene parts. Iperludius is the last thereof and most sharpest. And To∣dorius is most heauy of all, as Isi. saith Arsis is rearing of voyce, and is the be∣ginning of song. Thesis is setting, and is the ende, as Isid. saith: and so Song is the bending of the voyce, for some pas∣seth straight as he saith, & is before song. And euerye voyce is sounde, and not againward, for sound is the obiect of he∣ring: for all that is perceiued by hea∣ring, is called sound, as breking of trees, smiting together of stones, hurting and rushing of waues and of winde, chitter∣ring of birds, lowing of beasts, voyce & groning of men, and touching of organs. And a voyce is properly the sounde that commeth out of the mouth of a beast and sound commeth of aire smit against an hard body, and the smiting is sooner seene than the sound is heard, & the ligh∣tening is sooner seene, than thunder is heard. A voyce is most thin aire, smitte with the wrest of the tongue: and some voyce signifieth and betokeneth by kind, as chirping of birds, and grning of sick men: and some betokeneth at will, as the voyce of a man that is ordained and shaped by beast of reason to tell out cer∣taine words. The voyce beareth for the the worde, and the worce that is in the thought may not come out but by help of voyce yt bringeth it out: & so first ye in∣wit gendereth a word in the thought, and putteth it afterwarde out at the mooth by the voyce, & so ye word that is gendered & conseined by inwit, com∣meth out by the voice, as it were by an Instrument, and is knowen. The voice that is disposed to song and to melodie, hath these properties, as Isidore sayth. Uoices he sayth be small, subtill, thicke, cleere, sharpe, and thrill. In subtill voyce the spirite is not strong, as in children and in women, and in other that haue not great sinewes, strong and thicke. For of smal strings commeth smal voice
and subtill. The voyces be fat & thicke, when much spirite commeth out as the voyce of man. The voyce is cleere that soundeth well, and ringeth without any hollownesse: sharpe voyces be full high: shrill voices be loud, and draweth a long and filleth soone all the place, as ye noyse of trumpets. The harde voyce, hoarce, grim and grisly, is when the sound ther∣of is vyolent, as the sound of thunder, & of an anueloc beaten with sledges: the rough voyce is hoarce and sparpled by small and diuers breathing: the blind voyce stinteth soone, and is stuffed, & du∣reth not long, as the sound of an earth∣en vessell. The voyce Vinolenta is soft and plyant: that name Vinolenta, com∣meth of Vino, that is a lytle bell softly bent. The perfect voyce is high, sweete, and strong, and cleere: high to bee well heard, cleere to fill the eares, sweete to please and not to feare the hearing, and to comfort the heart to take heede ther∣to: if ought heerof saileth, the voyce is not perfect, as Isi. saith. The first harmo∣nie is of organs, that commeth of blast, when certain instruments be cunningly made and duely blowen, and giueth by quantitie of the blast, and diuers qualy∣ties, aptly diuers sounds, as it fareth of organs, trumpets and pipes, & other such that giueth diuers sounds, and noyse. Organum is a generall name of all in∣struments of musicke, and is neuerthe∣lesse specially appropriate to the instru∣ment that is made of many pipes, and blowen with bellowes, and vsed onelye in Churches, in Proses, Sequences, and Himnes. (Additiō.Or is for his loudnesse, néerest a∣gréeing to the voyce of man.) De Tuba. cap. 135. THe Turent sound first the trumpet: Virgil speaketh of them and saith. Turenus{que} tubae mugire per aethe∣ra clangor. The voyce of the trumpet of Ture∣ne loweth in the aire. Men in olde time vsed trumpets in battaile, to feare and to astray their enemies, and to comforte their owne knights and fighting men, & to comfort horses of warre to fight, and to reese and smite in the battaile: & be∣tokeneth worship with victory in ye figh∣ting, & to call them againe that flye: & vsed also trumpets in feasts, to call the people together: and for businesse in praising, and for crieng of wealth of ioy the Hebrewes wer commanded to blow trumpets in battaile in the beginning of the new Moone,Consider by this yeare of grace vvhich vvas vsed in ye time of super∣stitio, that those vver the popes friendes vvhich brought him most mony, be¦sides, the charge that vvas spent in going the¦ther. and to cry and warn the comming of the Iubile the yeare of grace, with noyse of trumpets, & to crye ioy & rest to all men, as Isi. saith. li. 18. A trumpet is property an instrument or∣deined for men that fight in battaile, to crye and to warne of the signes of bat∣taile: and where the cryers voyce may not be heard for noyse, the noyse of the trumpet should be heard & knowen. And Tuba hath that name as it were To∣n, that is holow within, and ful smooth for to take the more breath: & is round without and straight at the trumpettes mouth, and broad and large at the other end, and the trumpeter with his hande, putteth it to his mouth, and the trumpet is ruled vpward and downward,The on∣se the alau the  Some v∣sed the greate ilke shell in steed of a trumpet, some hos of beasts & some the thighe bones of a man, as do the In¦diana. & held foorth right, and is diuers of noyse, as Isi. sayth: for it is somtime blowen to prepare battayles, and somtime for that battaile should ioine together, & somtime for the chase, and to take men into the hoast. De Buccina. cap. 136. BVccina hath that name, as it were, Vocina paua, and is a trumpet of horne, of tree, or of brasse, & was blowen against enimies in old time: for as Isi. saith, li. 18. The wild Panims wer som∣time gathered to all manner doing with the blowing of such a manner trumpet: & so Buccina was properly a toké of wild men. Propertius speaketh heerof,In ciuill discords, the Flute the Fist, and the Cornet, made vvinding like the Rammes horne. Iosu. 6. Iud. 7. 1. Reg. 6. . Reg. 1. & seeth. Buccina cogebat priscos, ad Arma Quirites. Buccina made the old Quirites aray themselues, namelye in armour. The voyce of such a trumpet, is called Buc∣cinum, as he sayth. And the Hebrewes vsed Trumpes of horne, namely in Ka∣lendis, in remēbrance of the deliuerance of Isaac, what time an horned Wether was offred, and made oblation of in his stéede, as the Glose saith super Gen. De Tibia. cap. 137.
TIbia is a pipe, & hath that name, for it was first made of legs of Hartes, young & old as ma suppose, & the noise of pipes was called Tibicen. Or els as Hugution saith, this name Tibia com∣meth of Tibin, yt is a rush or a réede, for of certaine reedes, such an instrument was made in old time: & thereof is said hic Tibicē, on, he yt plaieth on such pipes And was somtime an instrument of so∣row & lamentation, which men did vse in office & sepultures of dead men, as the Glose saith super Mat. 9. Cum audislet tibicines,A shalme or flute. that is the fingers of dole and of lamentation. De Calamo. cap. 138. CAlamus hath yt name of this worde Calando, sounding, & is the generall name of pipes. A pipe is called Fistula, for voyce commeth thereof: for voice is called Fos in Gréeke, & send, is Stolia in Greeke, & so the pipe is called Fistula, as it wer sending out voyce or sound. Hun∣ters vse this instrument, for Harts loue the noyse thereof: But while the Hart taketh hard & liking in the piping of an hunter, another hunter which he hath no knowledge of, commeth & shooteth at the Hart, and eieth him. Piping bey∣leth birds & foules, therefore it is said. Fistula dulce canit, volucrem dum decipit Auceps. The pipe singeth swéetly, while the fowler beguyleth the birde. And shéepe loue piping, therefore shepheards vse pipes, when they walk with their sharp. Therefore one which was called Pan, was called God of Heards, for he ioyned diuers réedes, and arayed them to song slily and craftely. Virgil speaketh ther∣of, and saith. Pan primos calamos cera coniunge∣re plures Instituit, Pan curat oues, ouium{que} magistros. The com¦mon ble∣sing mu∣sicke, is ye Drone,obu, and Cur∣.Pan, ordained first to ioyne with war manye Pipes in one, Pan hath cure of sheepe and of shepheards. And the same instrument of pipes is called Pandori∣um, for Pan was  thereof, as Isid. saith. And with pipes, watching men pleaseth such men, as rest in beds, & ma∣keth them sleepe the sooner & more swéet∣ly by melodie of pipes. (Additiō.Pan called the God of shepheards: he is thought to be Demogorgons son, and is thus described: in his for head he hath hornes like the Sun beames, a long beard, his face red, like ye cleere aire, in his brest the starre Nebris, the nea∣ther part of his body rough, his feete like a Goate, & alway is imagined to laugh. He was worshipped especiallye in Ar∣cadia. When there grew betwixt Phoe∣bus & Pan  contro, whether of them two should be iudged the best Musition. Midas preferring the pipe, not respec∣ting better skill, was giuen for his re∣ward, a paire of Asse eares.) De Sambuca. ca 139. SAmbuca is an Elder tree brittle, & the voughs therof be hollow & voyd and soeth, and of those same voughs be pipes made, and also some manner Sun∣phonie, as Isido. saith. De Symphonia. ca. 140. THe Simphonye is an instrument of Musicke, and is made of an hollowe tree closed in leather on either side, and menstralls beateth it with stickes, and by accord of high and low, thereof com∣meth full sweete ots, as Isi. saith: ne∣uertheles ye accord of all soundes be cal∣led Simphonia in like wise, as ye accord of diuers voyces is called Chorus, as the Glose saith sup. Luc. 15. De Armonia. cap. 141. ARmonia Rithmica, is a sounding melody, and commeth of smiting of strings, & of ruking or ringing of met∣tall, & diuers instruments serue to this maner harmonie, as Taber & Timbrel, Harpe and Psalterie, and Nakyres, and also Sistr. De Timpano. cap. 142. TImpanum is layde straight to ye trée in the one side: and is halfe a Ta∣ber, or halfe a Simphonie, & shapen as a se, and braten with a sticke, right as a Taber, as Isido. saith, and maketh the btter melodie if there be a pipe there∣with. De Cithera. cap. 143. THe Harpe is called Cithera, and was first found of Apollo, as the Greek,
. And the harpe is like to a mans brest for likwise, as the voyce commeth of the brest, so the notes come of ye harp, & hath therefore that name Cithara, for the breast is called Cithara, in Dorica lingua, & afterward some & some came foorth many maner instrumēts therof, & had yt name Cithara, as ye harp & psalte∣rie, & other such & some be foure corne∣red, and some three cornered: the strings be many, and speciall manner thereof is diuers. Men in olde time called ye harpe Tidicula, and also Fidicen, for ye strings thereof accord, as well as some men ac∣cordeth in saith. And the harpe had sea∣uen strings, and so Virgil saith. Septem sunt soni septem discrimi∣na vocum. There be vii. soundes, and vii. diffe∣rences of voyces: and are therefore cal∣led Dsrimina, for one string next to a∣nother, maketh like sound: and strings be seauen, either for they fill all the note, or for because heauen soundeth in vii. mouings. A string is called Corda, and hath that name of Corde, the heart: for as the pulse of the heart, is in the brest, so the pulse of the strings is in the harpe. Mercurius founde out first suche strings: for he strained first strings, & made them to sound, as Isid. saith. The more dry the strings be, & the more strai∣ned, the more they sound: & the wrest is called Plectrum. De Psalterio. ca. 144. THe Psalterie is called Psalterium, & hath that name of Psailendo, singing: for the consonant answereth to the note therof in singing. The harp is like to the Psalterie in sound, but this is the diuer∣sitie & discord betwéene ye harpe and the psaltery, in yt psaltery is an holow trée, and of that same tree the sound commeth vpward: and the strings be smit down∣ward, and soundeth vpward: and in the harpe, the hollownesse of the trée is ve∣neath. The Hebrewes calleth the Psal∣terie Decacordes, an instrument hauing ten strings, by number of the ten Com∣maundements. Strings for the Psaltery be best made of latn, or els those are good that be made of siluer. De Lira. cap. 145. Lira hath that name for diuersitye of sounde:Additiō for Lira giueth diuers sous, as Isid. saith. And some people suppose, that Mercurius first found out this in∣strument Lira in this wise. The riuer Nilus was flowen & arisen, & afterward was auailed and withdrawen againe into his proper chanell, and lefte in the field many diuers beasts, & also a snayle, and when the snaile was rosted, the sin∣newes lt and were strained in the snailes house, and Mercurius smote the sinewes, and of them came a sound: and Mercurius made a Lira to ye likenesse of the Snailes house, & gaue ye same Lyra to one yt was named Orpheus, which was most buste about such things. And so it was sayd, yt by ye same craft not on∣ly wilde beasts drew to song & melody, but moreouer stones & also woodes. As fables do mean, this foresaid instrument Lyra is set among stars, for loue of stu∣dy, and praising of song, as Isi. saith. De Cymbalis. ca. 146. CImbales be instruments of musick, & be smit together, & soūdeth & ringeth. (Additiō.Compassed like a hoope, on the vp∣per composse vnder a certain holownes, hangeth halfe bells, fiue or seauen.) De Systro. cap. 147. SIstrum is an instrument of musicke & hath the name of a Ladye that first brought it vp. For it is proued that Isis Queene of Egypt, was the first finder of Systrum, and Iuuenal speaketh thereof, and saith. Isis & irato feriat mea lumina sistro And women vse this instrument, for a woman was the first finder thereof. Therefore among the Amazons, the beast of women is called to battaile with the instrument Systrum. (Additiō.An instrument like a horne, vsed in battaile in steed of a trumpet. Also a bra∣sen Timbrell.) De Tintinabulo. cap. 148. TIntinabulum is a ball or a Cmpar∣nole, and hath the name of Tiniendo tinckeling or ringing. Looke before De vasis, in lytera V. A bell hath this pro∣pertie, that while he profiteth to other in sounding, he is wasted ofte by smiting. These instruments and many other ser∣ueth
to musicke, which science treateth of voyce and of sounds: and knoweth neuertheles disposition of kindly things & proportion of numbers, as Boctius say∣eth, & setteth ensample of the number of 1. in comparison to .6. & to other num∣bers yt be betweene, & saith in this wise: Heere we finde all ye accorde of musicke, for  to .6. & .9. to  make the proporti∣on, & make together the consonancy Di∣atesseron. But .6. to .9 & .8. to 1. make ye proportion Sequaltera, and make toge∣ther the consonae Diapente. And 12. to 6. make double proportion. & singeth the accord Diapason. Then 8. to .9. in cō∣partion be meane, & make Epogdonus which is called Tonus in melody of Mu∣sick, and is a common measure of all the sounds, and so it is to vnderstand, musick  yt be∣tweene Diatesseron & Diapente, Tonus is diuersitie of accordes, as betweene the proportions, Sesquitertia & Sesquialtera, onely Epogdolis is diuersitie. Huc vs{que} Boctius, in secundo Arimetice ca. vlt. G. And in the Prologue of the first booke Boctius sayth, yt the rather is there ver∣tue of nūbers, thereby it may be proued, that those thinges which doe stande by themselves, be rather in kind, then those things which be in comparison to some other things. And the melody of Musick is taken & called by names of the num∣bers: Diatesseron, Diapente, and Dia∣pason, haue names of ye numbers, which precedeth and goeth before in the begin∣ning of those sayde names. And the pro∣portion of their sounds is found and had in those same numbers, and is not found nor had in any other numbers. For ye shall vnderstand that the sound and the accorde in Diapason, of proportion is of the same double number, and the melody of Diatesserō doth come of Epitrite col∣latione, that is, Sesquitertia proportio. And hee calleth the accorde Diapente. Henolia is ioyned in number Epogdo∣u,Hemichs  ther be numbers that bée aboue .8. & is called Tonus in Musicke, as he say∣eth. Sesquitertia proportio in Arime∣trike, is called Diatesseron in Musick, & Hemiolia, yt is, Sesquialtera proportio in Arimetrike, is Diapente in Musick, & Diapente & Diapason is consonante, the more voyce contemeth the lesse, and the halfe deale thereof. The number of ∣quitertius conteineth the lesse number & the third part thereof, and if he contey∣neth all the fourth parte, then he is Ses¦quiquartus. And Sesquiquintus contei∣neth the lesse, and the fifth part in thus wise. Foure conteineth three, and the third part, that in one and And right contei∣neth sixe and the third part, that is t. And twelue conteineth nine & the third parte, that is three, and so eighteene to twelue, and twentie to : a new  of other alway  shalt finde. merus  cap. 149. compared to the lesse, conteineth the whole number, the halfe,  the halfe part therof, as  conteineth. . and the  part of two, that is one: so 9. conteineth 6. and the halfe of 6. that is  and so . to 8. and .15. to . and so of other.  worde be in themselues day and secret, and verye darke to vnderstanding But to them that bee wise and cunning in Arethmetike and in Musicke, they bee more dare and lyght, and be darke and all vnknowen to them which be vncun∣ning, and haue no usage in Arethme∣tike, Geometrye, and Musicke. There∣fore he that will knowe the foresayde wortes and proportions of numbers, of voyce, and soundes, shall not despise to aske counsell, & to desire to haue know∣ledge by those which be wiser, and that haue more cunning in Arethmetike, in Geometrye, and in Musicke. And li∣bro secundo Isidore sayth, that there is so great vertue in figures and accordes of Musicke, that the selfe man standeth not perfect there without: For perfect Musicke comprehended all things. And so then reuolue and consider heereof in thy minde, that Musicke and harmonye ioyneth and accordeth diuerse thinges that se contrary, and maketh the high sound to accord with the low, & the low with the high, and accordeth contrarye wills and desires, and retrayneth and abateth intentions and thoughts, and a∣mendeth and comforteth feeble wits of feeling. And eth namely and werneth vs of the vnity of the exempler of Codie
contrary workings: and diuersly mani∣festeth & sheweth, ye earthly things may be ioyned in accord to heauenly things: & causeth & maketh glad & ioyfull harts more glad and ioyfull, and sorry harts & heauy, more sorrie and disquiet. For as Austen sayth, yt by a priuie & secret like∣nesse of propertie of the soule & of harmo∣ny, melody comforteth it selfe to ye affec∣tions & desires of the soule. And therfore Authors meane, yt Instruments of Mu∣sicke make the glad more glad, & the so∣ry more sory. Looke other properties of harmony before in the same booke, wher as other word of Isidore bee rehearsed and spoken of. Addition. sCOncerning the straunge opinions in the world of Musicke, and the thrée folde conceits of variable minds, I haue thought good (so farre as the eternall li∣cense shall permit or suffer) somewhat to speake thereof: The occasion is, yt wher∣as many cannot away at all with Mu∣sick, as if it were some odious skill ran∣ged from hell, rather stirred vp by Di∣uells, then reuealed by Angels: some are indifferent, and can abide it better in the chamber of Venus, then in the temple of Minerua, and some do so far dote in mu∣sicke, without the which they think ther is no religion, that betwéene these vnin∣different iudgmentes, I am in doubt to speak, or so to frame a speech that might qualifie so foule a discord, concluding yt if Musick be the ordinance of God, as at other gifts of nature are, then how com∣meth it to passe, that .7. artes, tearmed li∣berall, are allowed, wherof Musick hath ben account of ye number one, except the late 8. art of Adulation, béeing placed in Musicks roome, be allowed for ye seuenth, which if Curiositie, béeing made iudge, haue recorded ye same in self-wils booke. I leaue to these thrée their owne, & yet proceed with those opinions, that maye stande with discreation, concerning the same. In the first booke of Cronicles, called in Latine Verba Dierum, or after the Greekes Paralipomenon, which the He∣brues cal Dibre Haiamim, historical, ca. 15. when the Prophet Dauid had prepa∣red a house for the Arke of the Lord, he called all Israel together to Ierusalem, to fetch the Arke of ye Lord vnto his place, which hee had ordeined for it, &c. And Dauid spake to the thiefe heade of ye Le∣uites, yt they should appoint certeine of their brethren, to sing with instruments of Musicke, Psalteries, Harps, & Cym∣bales, yt they might make a sound, and to sing on high with ioyfulnes, &c. And Da∣uid & the elders of Israel, & the Captains ouer thousands, went to fetch the Arke of the appointment of the Lord, out of ye house of Obed Edom with gladnesse. The Arke is brought forth of the house of Abinadob, yt was in Gibeon, which was a high place of ye citie of Baale, vn∣to the citie of Dauid, called Zion, lieng on the North side of Ierusalem. Samuel, 2. booke. cap. 6. Cro. 1. boo. ca. 15. 2. Cro. cap. 5. ver. 13. These instruments & other ceremonies which they obserued, were instructions of their infancie, which con∣tinued to ye comming of Christ: (ye note of the later Church) of then there should haue been a finall end of Musicke, why is it not absolutely forbiddē, or if it be tol∣lerable why is not the abuse taken a∣way (& not Musicke it selfe) because of a∣buse, if Musicke be but a sound, no more is the voice, it is better to heare good & godly Musicke, then baude and filthye talke, or a christian Psalme then a wre∣ked sonet. Seeing ye Musicke hath so be∣haued her selfe, yt shee is not allowed by the old Testament, as many affirme, be∣cause as they saye, she had her continu∣ance but vntil ye comming of Christ: yet from the time of Samuel, vntill the time of Iesus Christ, it largely appeareth she was in estimation, & although the super∣stitious pagans & Idolatrous Gentiles, hauing the same instruments yt the god∣ly had (with the which they committed their abhominations) this notwithstan∣ding was no elng nor disabling of ye Musicke which ye Prophet Dauid vsed, the Prophet Esay, cap. 22. commended. Daniel. 3. 1. Mac. cap. 9. Apo. 18. haue ex∣pressed. Let vs sée farther cōcerning mu∣sicke, what the newe Testament either liketh or alloweth: Wherefore be ye not vnwise, but vnderstand what the wil of
the Lord is. And be not dronke with wine, wherin is excesse but he filled with the spirite, speaking vnto your selues in Psalmes & Hymnes, & spirituall songs, singing and making melodie to the Lord in your heartes, &c. Eph. 5. verse. 17. 18. 19. Giue thanks alwayes for all things vnto God, euen the Father, in the name of our Lord Iesus Christ. Submitting your selues one to another, in the feare of God. Collossians. 3. verse. 16. Let the woord of Christ dwell in you plenteously in all wisedome, teaching and admoni∣shing your selues in Psalmes and Hymnes and spirituall songs. Singing with grace in your heartes to the Lord. Iames. 5. verse. 13. Is anye among you afflicted (or greeued in minde) let him pray: is any merrie: let him sing. Heer∣by the godly are allowed to sing, whos instruments are their bodyes, and whose toppes or strings are good intents. Un∣to the bodyes belong ye foure Elements, the foure complections, and the fiue sen∣ses, if any of these abound or dimminishe, the concord of the boydes is altered. Al∣so the minde is tourned to discorde, no lesse by a crabbed imagination: But what canne we saye for Instrumentes, that our former discourse maye ap∣peare vniforme, that is to saye, as well the instrument as the voice, and both to∣gether. 1. Epistle. Corinth. cap. 14. verse. 7.8. Moreouer, thinges without lyfe which giue a sounde, whether it bee a Pipe or an Harpe, except they make a distinction in the soundes, howe shall it bee knowen what is piped or harped. And if the Trumpet giue an vncertaine sounde, who shall prepare himselfe to battayle. In the Reuclation, S. Iohn sayth. Chap. 14. verse. 2. And I hearde the voyce of Harpers, harping with theyr Harpes. And they sung as it were a newe song before the Throne, &c. See∣ing then that the holye Scriptures in the newe Testament condempns not Musicke, (but onelye the abusers there∣of,) what reason, or what authoritye is there left why Musicke shoulde not bee vsed with song in anye place conue∣nient, is so bee it bee not hurtfull, in the Kinges presence, Chappell, or Orso∣rye, in Cathedrall Churches some where, or what offence, else where. It maye bee that some will aunswere vn∣to me, and saye, that Musicke in those places is Poperye. But I demaunde agayne, where was the knowledge of Poperye when Dauid praysed the Lorde with it, when the Arstle Paule knowe of it, and when Saint Iohn from heauen hearde it. If it bee so (that Musick, as it hath ben in very deede too much abused in these our later times, shall it therefore for that abuse be vtter∣ly banished and put aside, which wyll stand with as good a reason, as when a man hath stolen a horse, the Lawe shall hang his soule: yet who is so ignorant, the fact beeing committed, but that both bodye and soule is present. Nowe fol∣loweth the opinion of Saint Augu∣stine, of Cornelius Agrippa, of Peter Martir, and of Lodowicke Lioide, Gen∣tleman. First Saint Augustine in his ninth Booke of Confessions, as Peter Martyr noteth in the fifth Chapter vppon the Booke of Iudges, folio. 103. testifi∣eth, that it happened in ye time of Am∣brose (Bishippe of Milloine, aboute the yeare of Christ .377.) For when that holye man together with the peo∣ple, watched euen in the Church, least hee should haue bene betrayed vnto the Arrians, hee brought in singing to a∣uoyd tediousnesse, and to driue awaye the time: It seemeth that by meanes of sharpe persecutions, the godlye were scattered abroade, so that they hadde no leasure, scarcelye to praye, much lesse to sing, the tyrannye of theyr persecu∣tors was so monstrous, from the time of Nero the sonne of Domitius, beeing about .66. yeare after Christ, vntyll the time of Constantine the greate, which was about ye yere of Christ .333. the sayde godlye Emperour Constan∣tine gaue greate and large giftes, and yeerelye reuenewes to the maintenance of ye Cleargy and Preachers of the Go∣spell. Wherevpon the Bishoppes of Rome fathereth theyr foundation and head of Constantine, (a good pollycye to claime antiquitie, if that verylye
which is eternitie, could not discerne the truth) thus, what with strange opinions, and what with persecutions, the space of 241. yeares, or neere there abouts, musick was laide a side, & although that S. Au∣gustine repented him, and that he was sorrie, because he had sometime fallen, by giuing more attentiue héed vnto ye mea∣sures & cords of musicke, then the words which were vnder them spoken, which thing heereby he proueth to be ste, be∣cause measure and singing wer brought in for the words sake, and not words for Musicke. All this condempneth no mu∣sicke, but the abuse, for in allowing the Church of Alexandria, wherein was a little singing, &c for this cause I say, hee consented ye Musicke should bee retained in the Church, but yet in such manner, yt he sayd, that he was ready to change his sentence, if a better reason could be assig∣ned, & he added, that those doe sin deadly, as they were wont to speak, which giue greater heede to musicke, then vnto the word of God. It seemeth to me, yt there is none so sencelesse, that wil be, or haue bene, in such sort rauished with ye onely melodie of the instrument, that they haue so excepted of the same, forgetting theyr principall vertue of ye true worshipping of God: those that haue bene such, are in the same dampnation, that the common Drunkards, Adulterers, Idolaters, false speakers, viurers, with all those and such wicked, that thinking to drinke, minde not on God, so according to the desire the soule is poisoned, and the gifts of God abused. But why Musicke seemeth so to ray men in a manner wholye, the reason is plaine, for there are certeine pleasures, which onely fill the outward sences, and there are others also which perteine on∣ly to the mind or reason. But musicke is a delectation so put in the middest, that both by the swéetnesse of the sounds, it moueth the sences, & by the artificialnesse of the number & proportions, it delight∣eth reason it selfe. And it happeneth then chiefly when such words are added vnto it, whose sence is both excellent and lear∣ned, &c. Peter Martir in that discourse, whether singing may be receiued in the Church, sayth. In the East parts the ho∣ly assemblies euen from the beginning vsed singing. Read in his Commentarie folio. 103. Cornelia Agrippa in his sixt booke of the vanitie of Sciences. cap. 63. setteth forth the abuse of Musicke & the discord (from ye which some supposed the rest condempned) verse curiouslye vnder tearmes or parts of Musicke, as Enhar∣monica, Chromatica, Diatonica, and o∣thers, with a nomination of names, as among the Lacedemonians, the itting to armes, and Cretensians, which repeti∣tion of words seeme a great collections, & little matter, as the fable of the Musiti∣on, that by the onely vertue of the Do∣rian tune, the chastitie of Clitemnestia, wife vnto king Agamemnon was pre∣serued, from the assault of Egisus, who to be reuenged slew the Musition. Ho∣race dislyked the common odeiers and stage pipers, calling them wonderers, & Cornelius tearmeth them the seruaunts of Baudery, but wheras he sayth (which no graue man, modest, honest, & valiant, euer professed. eerin he shewed his sole conceil: and forgot that which was done and vsed in holy writ, altogether flouri∣shing among the Poets, giuing an open contempt of that the Poets secretly scor∣ned, declaring onely the abuse, as when he sayth, that the Aegyptians did forbid their young men to learne Musicke, I suppose it was, when Musicke was so common, as it is now in England in e∣uery Alehouse and baudy corner, but not the principall Musicke. Anaxilas sayth, Musicke is euen lyke Affrike, it yéerely bringeth forth some straunge beast. A∣thanasius for the vanitie thereof, did for∣bid it in the Churches, thus be conclu∣deth with the abuse, and not the thing it selfe. Lo, Lioide, Pilgrimaga of Princes, folio. 133. setteth forth properly Musicke, and sayth, by a Methodical gathering to∣gether of authorities, that there is great controuersie for the antiquitie of Mu∣sicke, beginning with Orpheus, Amphi∣on, and Dionisius of Greece. Polibius sayth, that Musicke was found first in Archadia, Tubal among the Herbrues, and Apollo finding a confused Chas,
setteth downe learners of Musicke, to be Socrates, Aelianus, Agesilaus, Atchitas, & the mightie Hercules, &c. And though some contemne Musick with Diogenes, and say, that it were more profitable to mend manners, then to learne musicke: what is manners, but a concord of ho∣nest intentes, which onelye, is adorned with nothing but vertue. Alexander the great loued Musicke, so did the tyrannt Nero. Heereby may be perceiued concord and discord, Musicke is not the cause of disorder, but disordered mindes abuseth Musicke. Dircedus Captaine ouer the Spartanes, is sayd first to inuent the trū∣pet, and taught the Lacedemonians to sound against the Messena, in the etd, therwithall to terrifie the courage of his enimies: for as Musicke to dolefull and pleasant, full of harmonie and melodie: so is Musicke terrible and fearefull of life and courage, for we read in the old age, both autenticall and prophane, that they vsed Instrumentes of sound of sundrye sortes, as among the Mlesio, pipes a∣mong ye Cretensians instrumentes with strings, a kinde of Giornes: among the Parthians ringing of Bells: among the Aethiopians lowd songs: among the As∣sirians, a kinde of skipping: among the Cambrians little drums made of leather stretched about a whoope, broad, and nar∣row, hauing a kind of hollownesse, All the which they put dry Beanes and Pease, to make ye instrument cattle, with many other vnaccustomed manners. But the absurdest thing of all, which passeth the abuse of Musicke, is, that as the Gentiles and Pagans called vpon Priapus, Pan, Ceres, Iuno, Hercules, Ianus, Bellepho∣ton, Dagon, Rempham, Astaroth, & such like, to be their supporters at armes in the field: so at this day, those which wuld be loth to be called otherwise these chri∣stians, are not ashamed so call Saint George, to borrowe, for the English, Saint Denis for Fraunce, S. Andrew for Scotlande, Saint Iames for Spaine, and so forth in the Christian King∣domes, they tell as first vppon their Saintes, as the Pagan Gentiles called on their tearmed Gods, when in verye deede this foule abuse ought to be refor∣med, which is a discord worse in ye mind then is the dombe instrument, that can sound none otherwise then the Musition either can, or will. To conclude, let all be done to the edifieng one of another, and both in the Lorde, and as for those that cannot awaye with Musicke in the best parte. I leaue them to the a∣forement maker, which is blessed for euer. ¶A conclusion of this worke by the first translator heere∣of out of Latine into English, cap. 149. THis that we haue shortlye placed heere of accidents of kindly things, as of Coulours, Sauoure, & Odours, of Weights, Licours, & Measures, of Uoice & of Sound, it may be sufficient for this time. For as I suppose, to the bull and so the small or simple, that be like to mee in Christ Those things of properties of kindly things that be fully conceiued in minde, & treated in .19. parcells or books, shall suffies to finde some reason of the likenesse of things, for which holy writ vseth so ready likenesse & figures of kind, not in all things, & of the properties ther∣of. I make protestation in the end of this worke, as I did in beginning: That in all that is in diuers matters conteines in this worke, right little or naught haue I set of mine owne, but I haue followed veritie and truth, and also followed the wordes, meaning, and sences, and com∣ments of holy Saintes, and of Philoso∣phers, that the stple that may not for endlesse many bookes seeke and finde all the properties of thinges, of the which holy writ maketh mention and minde, may héere finde soone what that he desi∣reth, and that I haue taken is simple and rude but I thinke them good and profi∣table is to that  rude in olde Eng∣lish tearmes, and to other such as I am. Therefore I counsayle the simple, that they despise not nor scorne this simple and rude worke, when that they haue perfect vnderstanding and knowledge of this, and plainly at the ful, then to vnder∣stand
and to haue knowledge of greater, higher, and more subtill things. I coun∣sell, that they leaue not to seeke & search ye learning & doctrine of greater authors and Doctors: and that I doe, & leaue on their owne aduisement and wit, if they will correct and amend that that is vn∣sufficiently said, and then expediently to adde and put more therto, that they so in like manner as God giueth them grace and science. That which is by me rude and simple began, may be by their wits and great wisdomes made compleat and perfect, to his magnifieng, laud, honour, praising, worship, and blisse, that is Al∣pha and Omega, beginning and ending of all good. That is the high God, glori∣ously liuing & reigning euermore with∣out end. Amen. Barthelmew Glantuyle descended of the noble familye of the Earles of Suf∣folke, he was a Franciscan Frier, and wrote this worke in Edward the thirds time, about the yeare of our Lord .1366. In the yeare .1397. 37. yeares after, was this sayd worke translated into English, and so remained by written Coppie, vn∣till Anno Domini. 1471. at which time printing began first in England, the .37. yeare of the reigne of king Henrie the . sithence which time this learned and profitable worke was printed by Tho∣mas Berthelet, the .27. yeare of the reigne of king Henrie the .8. which was the yeare of our Lord God .1535. And last of all augmented & enlarged, as appeareth, for the commoditie of the learned & well disposed Christian, by me Stephen Bat∣man, professour in Diuinitie, and prin∣ted by Thomas East, Anno .1582. the .24 yeare of the reigne of our most happye and prosperous Souereigne, Queene E∣lizabeth, whom God fortifie in the num∣bers of his mercies for euer. FINIS. MIEVLX.VAVLT.MOVRIR.EN.VERTV.QVE.VIVRE.EN.HONCTE. ¶Imprinted at London by Thomas East.
