15353.3 99845038 9914
❧ A PLAYNE TREATISE TO LEARNE IN A SHORT SPACE THE FRENCHE TONGVE, DEVIDED IN TWOO BOOKES. ❧ IE VIS EN esperance. Imprinted at London by Henry Denham, for cer∣tayne of the Com∣panie. Anno. M.D.LXXVI. CVM PRIVILEGIO.
❧ A TRESILLV∣STRE ET PVISSANT SEIGNEVR, MONSEIG∣NEVR, EDOVARD SEY∣MOVR BARON DE BEAV∣CHAMP ET CONTE DE HERTFORD. ❧ MOnseigneur, le coeur qui est accōpaigné de quelque bon∣ne volunté, ou enuers Dieu, ou enuers les hommes, se sent tousiours esguillonné à faire chose qui puisse apporter instruction ou com∣modité aux autres. Or combien que ie con∣fesse franchement que ie ne suis pas tel, que ce qui procede de moy, soit digne de venir en la lumiere des hommes: Toutesfoys considerant, que nostre deuoir est de nous esuertuer (selon le peu qui est en nous) pour nous employer à vn bien commun, I'ay bien voulu enfaire vn essay en ce mien petit traité, touchant nostre langue Françoises Il est vray que ce n'a esté sans en estre requis de plusieurs, l'es∣quelz
mesme mont employé pour l'apprendre, & ont estimé que mō labeur leur auoit gran∣dement profitté, au iugement desquelz i' ay beaucoup deferé, & ne leur voudroy refuser, rien qui fust en mon pounoir. Mais encores que la chose, leur ait esté aggreable, si est ce qu' il me sembloit ne satisfaire, au bon vou∣loir que i'ay en leur endroit & de tous ceux de ce Royaume slorissant. Neantmoins e∣sant conseillé voire persuadé de mes amis (lesquels l'ont diligemment leu & trouuē qu'il seroit profitable) ie me suis d'auantage enhardi de le mettre en auant. Cependant d'autant qu'il sera exposé au iugement de plusieurs, & ne sera hors du danger de beau∣coup de detractions, tellement que s'il n'a la faueur de quelque grand & vertueux person∣nage, à grand peine pourra-ilpasser sans estre nauré. A ceste cause, Monseigneur, confi∣derant les vertuz excellentes (desquelles vo∣stre grandeur est ornée, qui larend, encores plus respectable, & la debonnaireté qui con∣uie vn chascun de se mettre en vostre prote∣ction, i'ay prins la hardiesse de le vous pre∣senter
humblement, tant à fin d'estre fauorisé & soustenu de vostre autorité, que pour le re∣ceu (tel qu'il est) selon vostre grande be∣nignité, & de tel vouloir, comme par moy vostre treshumble seruiteur vous est offert & presenté, non qu'il soit digne de vous, ou que vous en puissieZ reccuoir quelque profit, veu que vousparlez autant bien & elegamment Francois qu'onscauroit demander. Mais at∣tendu qu'il peut apporter vtilité à d'autres qui desirent d'apprendre nostre langue, & qu'estes vn de ceux qui procurez & aimeZ autant le bien & commodité d'un chascun, comme le vostre mesme, ie m'assure que pour ceste cause vous y prendrez à tout le moins quelque contentement, & principallement s'il aduient qu'il puisse profitter à messeig∣neurs voz enfans: Car c'est ce que ie desire de tout mon coeur, & prac. Dieu qu'ainsi soit. Quifera l'endroict monseigneur, où ie pren∣dray cone de vous pour le present, prest auec vne affectiō à vous faire, & à eux, treshum∣ble seruice, comme des à present ie m'y voüe, non pour vn temps, à la facon de ceux qui ne
parlent que de la bouche, mais de tout mon coeur & toute ma vie: Car le salaire de telle obligation est perdurable, à cause qu'il pro∣cede de vertu. Priant Dieu qu'il me face la grace de faire chose quisoit digne de vostre Excellence & debonnaireté, & qu'il vueille par sa grande bonté & grace infinie vous donner, Monseigneur, toute largesse de ces benedictions & à toute vostre Noble poste∣rité. Vostre treshumble & tresaffe∣ctionné seruiteur G. Ledoyen De la Pichonnaye.
❧ A playne Treatise to learne in a short space the Frenche tongue (.?.) THere be two and tvven∣tie letters in the French tongue, the which wee will expounde after the order of the crosse row, hauing first made to be vnderstanded how they ought to be pro∣nounced euery one by it selfe, then ioy∣ned with others in any woorde: and af∣tervvardes, vvhen they doe keepe theyr sounde, and vvhen they doe lose it, or chaunge it, for herein consisteth all the difficultie of the tongue, my respect in this vvorke is to straungers and specially to Englishe men, for vvhome I vvrite, vvhich marueyle (& not vvithout cause) for that often times vve doe not sounde our letters, according to their ovvne na∣ture, but doe chaunge them into an other
sounde, and sometime vve doe not onely so alter them, but leaue them vnsounded euen as if they vvere not vvritten. First therefore they must presuppose that it is the nature of the tongue as of many o∣ther, and also of their ovvne, and they maye not denie it, for experience doth shevv it, I vvill not say in some vvordes but almost in all, and yet they can yelde no other reason for it, than vse. But I do hope in this my Treatise to do more cō∣cerning our tongue, not for to prayse or extoll it, but to ondeuour to satisfie them, that are so desirous to learne it, and to stirre them vp the rather so to doe, for that hereby my minde is (vvith the grace of God) to teach them: and I vvill yelde them a reason, vvhy this letter here is sounded and that letter there is not, and vvhy a letter is pronounced in one place, and not in another, & also by vvhat rea∣son this letter here is rather sounded vvith that letter there, then vvith another, and to conclude I vvil omitte nothing (if I
can) that may be profitable & necessarie for Englishmen to knovv forthvvith, to reade vvell, to pronounce, and speake Frenche. For I vvill applie my selfe to them and to resolue the doubts that they may mooue, vvherof oftentimes I haue reasoned vvyth certayne, vvhome I dyd so ansvvere, that for the most part I contented them: in so much that already knovving some part of their mind of this matter, it vvill bee the easier for me to make them vnderstand it, cōferring here∣in their tongue vvith ours, and giuing them examples thereof, for thereby the matter shall be vnto them more & more manifested, vvhich being done, I shall thinke thereinto haue much eased many that vvere so loden vvith difficulties and doubts (that they did see in our Frenche Grammars, that they vvere constrayned to gyue ouer and leaue all▪ yea, seeing them selues deceyued by their Teachers, vvho promised vnto them mountaynes of golde, and made them beleeue th
tongue vvas so obscure as none coulde be more, but vvith the labour and industrie, that they shoulde take, they vvould make it easie for them: and all this came to no∣thing, and yet to a very great thing, con∣sidering the harme and tediousnesse that the learners receyued thereof. Likevvyse I trust I shal againe encourage those that vvere in the vvay to learne it, the vvhich I vvishe vvith all my hart: For I desire nothing else in this vvorlde, but the pro∣fite and furtherance of euery one, and the rather bycause it is a deede of charitie, of the vvhich the Heathen also haue had some naturall instinct, as may be seene by their bookes, that they haue left vnto vs in vvriting, vvhere they all crie vvith one accorde, that vve are not onely borne for our selues, but for our Parents, for our Countrey, and for all those that doe vs good, & that shevv themselues charitable vnto vs. Novv of devvtie I ought to pro¦cure the profit of them of this Countrey, for the great benefits that vve doe receyue
of them, & let no man thinke that I do set forth this for any other occasiō, that is to saye; for lucre or any other vayne thing, for he should be much deceaued, & also I vvoulde accuse him of the same vice. For euen as he that hath his mouth out of taste, thinketh that euery thing that he eateth is also euill sauouring and corrup∣ted, euen so it is of those that delight to reprehēde other, vvhich they neuer could doe except they vvere stuffed and defiled, yea rotten vvith vices, vvhich they vvolde cast (if they coulde) vpon others. There∣fore I pray thē to leaue of such fopperies, for so they may be called, and let them bestovve their tyme in goodnesse, if they vvill that men esteeme of them, as they vvoulde be esteemed of. As touching the rest, if their peruerse nature vvill needs be occupyed in such their biting actions, the truth wil byte thē so hard, that their good name shall first feele the same and vvill make them to be cut vvith their ovvne svvorde. For that vvhich mooued me to
take this matter in hande, vvas the great loue and affection that I beare to English men, and also the request of many Lords and Gentelmen, vvyth vvhome I haue spent much tyme, being conuersant and communicating vvith them, of the pro∣nounciatiō of our tongue, so that I durst not say them naye, although I haue not beene much trayned vp in theyr tongue. But they haue promysed me, that if I doubted of any vvorde, touching the con∣ferring of their tongue vvith ours, or in this translation, that they vvoulde ayde me. So that resting vpon this their aide, and fauour, I dyd not then doubt to en∣terprise this little Treatise. And as concer∣ning our tongue, if I doe not obserue all thinges as I shoulde, neyther yet content the students, as I vvould the blame must not be layde on me, seeing that not I a∣lone, but all those that haue vvritten of it, haue not comprehended the forth part of our tongue in rules or precepts: Not∣vvithstanding that vvhich I coulde not
doe, as I vvoulde, I haue recompenced by labour as you shall see hereafter in the or∣der that I keepe, as vvell in the expoun∣ding of euery letter, as in the knovvledge of vvoordes, to vveete, of vvhat part of speache they are. But afore vve come to the vnderstanding of the vvoordes, vvee must speake of the letters, of vvhich the vvoordes are formed: to the end that ha∣uing the nature of the simple, vve may more easily come to the compoundes, as frō letters, to syllables, & from syllables, to vvoordes, and from vvordes to spea∣ches. Therefore vvilling to expounde first the letters, vve must of nature and reason begin at, A, for it is the first in order, and for to see the same cleerely I vvill vvrite all our tvvo & tvventie letters in this maner A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H. I. L. M. N. O. P. Q. R. S. T. V. X. Y. Z.
¶ A playne treatise to learne in a short space the Frenche tongue, deuided in two bookes. Of A. A, Is pronounced playnly of the Frenche men, opening a little more the mouth than Englishmen doe. A, ought to be soun∣ded euerye where, and wyth euerye letter, except whē it is ioyned with, i, and, y, for then it loseth his sound, & it is pronounced as this, é, which we call masculine: as for example of, ai, faire, to doe fére, aimer to loue émer, plain∣dre, to complayne pléndre, of ay, feray, I will doe feré, diray, I will say diré, ayderay, I will helpe éderé, and likewyse in all other words where they shall be founde. A, with an accent in this sort, à, sheweth that the woorde following is a Noune of the Datiue case, and signifieth in Englishe this Article, To: as in déede it is the Article of the datiue case in our tongue, as in this example, donnez cela à mō maistre, giue that to my master. Ditez à vostre Pere, que ie fais bonne chere, Tell your Father, that I doe make good cheere. A, without an accent betoke∣neth the thirde person of Verbes of our se∣conde Preterperfect tense, as in these exam∣ples, a dit, hath sayde, a aimé, hath loued, a parlé,
hath spoken, and so of all such like. And last of all, A, also is a note of the thirde person, and singular number of this Verbe, ay, haue, as Il a mon liure, He hath my booke. Il a authorité, He hath authoritie. Of B. B, is pronoūced in this maner, bé, as if the é, were alwayes ioyned with it, although that it be not there, neither ought to be there: but it is the nature of it so to be pronoūced in our tongue. B, among the vowelles is alwayes pronounced, and at the beginning of wordes, except at the ende, and when it is before some consonant. An example of the woordes where it is at the ende: as Plomb, Leade, and such lyke, of those where it is in the middest: as debte, debte, debuoir, dewtie, bycause that, u, in this place after, b, is made a consonant. Of C. C, is pronounced as this woorde, Cé, & kée∣peth his pronounciation in all woordes. It is true, that when it is written wyth a halfe cir∣cle vnderneath, then it is pronounced as, S, and this is, when it is ioyned with, a, and, o: as sçauoir, knowledge, Françoys, Francis, fa∣çon, fashion. C, ioyned with, t, in the ende of a woorde is neuer expressed, but in the middest,
it is, if it be betwéene twoo vowelles: as vi∣ctorieux, victorious, acteur, a dooer, protecteur, a defender, diction, a woorde, faction, a deede: al∣so when it is ioyned with, h, and, a, it is pro∣nounced: as, sha, an example, champ, a fielde, Charretier, a Charter, as if they were written thus, shamp, sharrtier, and so of others. Of D. D, is pronoūced as this syllable, dé, the which is expressed in all woords, except certayne, as∣well in the beginning as at the ende. An ex∣ample of those, where it is founde in the be∣ginning and not pronounced: as aduocasser, to pleade, aduenir, to come, adiourner, to adiourne, aduiser, to aduise, aduertir, to aduert, adiouster, to adde. Of, D, at the end: as profond, deepe, roud, rounde, grand, great, quand, when, as if profond & the other were written with, t, in this sort profont, &c. Of E. E, is pronounced diuersly in our tongue by∣cause we make two sortes of E, the one mas∣culine, & the other feminine, in such sort, that according as it is, so is it pronounced, we will speake then first of the nature of é, masculine: which is pronounced playnly & more strong∣lye than the other, as the woorde wherein it is
more playnly declareth, the which may yet more easily be cōceyues of them chiefly, that vnderstande the Latine tongue. For our, é, masculine, is lyke their latine, e, which they sounde in the ende of their wordes: as me, me, te, the, se, himselfe, Domine, O Lord, amare, to love, and so of all the other. The which, é, besides this caryeth a marke euident ynough, which is a sharpe accent in this sort, é, so that a man shall neuer fayle to know it by this meanes, seeing it so noted ouer the heade. As touching the e, feminine, it is harde to pronounce it bi∣cause that it hath not any signe that shoulde make it to be knowne: And especiallye, the Englishmen cannot pronounce it at the ende of their wordes, bycause they be not accusto∣med so to doe, as may be séene in these words sorte, concorde, able. But I woulde requyre them to accustome themselues to pronounce it, and in place that they make but one sylla∣ble of sorte, that they make thereof twoo, and so of other the like. And would aduertise those that haue studyed the Latine tongue to pro∣nounce the sayd, e, femini. as they pronoūce, e, in the second syllable of verbes of the thirde Coniugatiō: as in facere, to doe, legere, to reade, dicere, to say. Nowe beside these twoo sortes of, é, e, there is yet founde an other different,
notwithstanding from the other twoo: and it is alwayes before S, be it at the beginning, in the midst, or at the ende of woordes: and is pronounced betwéene a, and, e, as the Lati∣nistes doe this diphtonge, ae, which may and ought to be thus written, ae, as in these words aestre, to be, senaestre, a windowe, aupraes, neare. Now since we haue tolde how they are pro∣nounced, it is necessarie (folowing our order) to sée whither they kéepe their pronounciatiō and whither they alter not: é, masculine ne∣uer chaungeth his sounde, nor this, e, neuter: but, e, feminine is chaunged, as when it is ioyned with, n, and, m, in one & the selfe same sillable, for then it is pronounced betwene, e, and, a, turning yet more vpon, a, than vpon, e: as, entendement, vnderstanding, as if it were written with, a: thus, antandemāt, Empereur, an Emperour, as Ampereur, except in these woordes bien, well, mien, mine, tien, thine, sien, his, rien, nothing, combien, although, where it ke∣peth his owne pronounciation. Of F. F, is pronoūeed as this worde here effe, which is expressed almost in al words except some, to wéete, those where it is put before, S, as for example, beufs, beefes, oeufs, egges, vifs, quicke,
fugitiss, fugitiues, for otherwyse if, S, dyd not followe, it shoulde be expressed. Of G. G, is pronoūced in our tongue as this sylla∣ble Ié, compounded of, I, a consonant, and, é, masculine, which letter ought to be obserued diligētly of Englishmen. For this is it where with they finde themselues much combred, and especially when it is ioyned with, i, and, e, for then we pronounce it otherwyse than they doe: they pronounce it as the Gréekes, and as we doe ke, ki, as for example: geue and gif, but a Frenchman woulde pronounce geue, as if it were written thus Ieue, by our I, conso∣nant. So that Englishmen ought to note vp∣pon this that alwayes and so often as they shall sée in our tongue, g, ioyned with, e, or, i, they must pronounce it, as an, I, cōsonant: as in this worde geste, gesture, gist, lyeth, and all o∣ther such lyke, as if they were written in this sorte Ieste, Iist: Those which are exercised in the Latine tongue maye easily learne it, for we pronounce, g, euen as the Latinistes doe the, g, when it is ioyned with, e, &, i: as, gero, I behaue, gigno, I beget. There remayneth to obserue of this letter, g, that whē it goeth be∣fore, n, of necessitie it must be spelled and ioy∣ned
togither with, n, following, and not with the letters going before, striking the roufe of the mouth with the roote & flat of the tongue, and so ioyne togither these twoo letters: as thus, compa-gnon, and not compag-non, these thrée, gua, gue, gui. ought also to be well no∣ted of the Englishmen, who in them woulde pronounce the, u, as in this woorde: guarentir, to warrant, guarir, to heale: But they must take great héede of it, and pronounce them, as if u, were not there at all, & as it were thus writ∣ten garentir, garir, euen as they doe pronounce this woorde Gabriel, or any other woorde in their tongue which is writtē by, ga, an exam∣ple of gue, as in this worde guerre, warre, wher∣of the first syllable must be pronounced, as they pronounce the first of this worde geue, ex∣cept in this worde, arguer, to argue, where, o, is pronounced, an example of, gui: as guider, to guyde, deguiser, disguyse. For there, gui, is pro∣noūced as Englishmen doe the first, gi, of Gil∣forde, it is true that there are some woordes excepted from this Rule of gui, where, u, is pronounced: as esguillon, a stinge, esguille, a needle, esguiser, to sharpen. G, in the ende of the worde, is not pronoūced as g, but in a maner as c: as in long, long, as if it were thus writ∣ten lonc, g, is not also pronounced in this
worde cognoistre, to knowe. Of H. H. is pronounced in Frenche, as Englishe men pronounce this word, ashe, which is cal∣led fresne, in our tongue: it loseth his pronoū∣ciation in the beginning of wordes, which be of two, thrée, and foure syllables: as homme, a man, honneur, honour, habillement, garment, heures, boures, except some, where it is pro∣nounced, as in hache, a speare, hachis, a gally∣mawfrye, haine, hatred, hazard, hazard, hardi, bardie, hatif, hastie, haste, haste, and in wordes of one syllable it is alwayes pronounced: as hors, out, hault, high, and so of others lyke. Also it kéepeth his pronounciation being ioyned togither with all the letters, except with, p, r, t, for with those it is not pronounced at all, an example of, p: as phantasie, fantasie, philoso∣phie, philosophie, phiole, viall or bottell, phisicien, a phisition, and then, p. and h, take the significa∣tion of, f, an example of r: as Rhetoricque; Rhetorike, of, t: as thalent, a talent, Theatre, a game place, threfor, treasure. Of I. Wée dooe not pronounce I so brode as Englishmen dooe, which in déede pronounce
it so, that it séemeth to them which are not accustomed to heare thē, that they pronoūce this diphthonge, oi, ei, and, ai, in such sort that they haue also such a pronounciation in their latine, as in this worde Domini, Lordes, which they pronounce, as if it were written in this sort domainai, and so of others. And therefore to pronounce it well as the Frenche men, Spaniards, Italians, & specially they, which speake yet somewhat naturally the Latine tongue and consequently haue better the pro∣nounciation than those which speake it but by arte. They must then strayne the tongue more than they dooe, and therewith strike a little, onely agaynst the roufe of the mouth and agaynst the fore téeth in opening them a little that they may eschue this brode & grosse sounde that they haue accustomed to giue vn∣to it. We haue, I, a vowell, and, I, a consonant as the Latines haue, I, a vowell is before the consonantes: as Ignorant, Ignorant, Imagina∣tion, Imagination. I, a consonant is knowne by this, that it goeth before a vowell in one and the self same syllable: as jamais, neuer, jeunesse, youth, jaloux, ielous, jadis. sometime, ja, already, jeter, to cast, jouir, to enioy, joieux, ioyous, juste, iust. Of L.
L, alone by himselfe is pronounced as this worde elle, which Englishmen must obserue, séeing by this woorde they may sée how they must pronounce it more openly: I meane a∣lone, for a double ll, is not pronounced so o∣penly, & specially if these diphthongs, ai, oi, ei, and, ui, go before it, and any other vowell followe it, & then it must be pronounced with the flat of the tongue touching the roufe of the mouth, as yoong Schollers dooe pronounce the first syllable of luceo, I shine, the seconde of saluto, I salute: as for example, bailler, to giue, veiller, to watche, grenoille, a frogge, bouil∣lir, to boyle, and when it is betwéene simple vowelles: as faucille, a sickle, bille, a bille, fille, a daughter, and so of other, except ville, a towne. syllabe, a sillable, also, l, simple is pronounced in all places, as a liquide, that is l, m, n, r, sauing when it is before a Consonant in one and the selfe same sillable, and then it loseth his pro∣nounciatiō, as in these wordes fils, a sonne, fols, fooles, fault, a fault, aultre, an other. Of M. M, is by it selfe pronounced in this sorte emme, as if it were a worde of these two syl∣lables, and it is alwayes pronounced except at the ende of wordes where it is chaunged
onely into, n: as nom, a name, Adam, Adam, Abraham, Abraham, for you must pronounce them as if they were written by, n, thus non, Adan. &c. M. also after, e, is pronounced as, n: as Empereur, Enpereur, an Emperor. Of N. N, ought to be pronounced as this worde of twoo syllables, enne, the which is pronounced in all woordes aswell at the beginning, as in the middest, and at the ende: bycause it is a liquide, except, notwithstanding in the thirde persons of Verbes of the Plurall number. For there, n, before, e, is neuer pronounced: example aiment, doe loue, aimoyent, dyd loue, aimerent, loued, aimeroyent, shoulde loue, aimas∣sent, had loued, as if they were written with∣out, n, in this sorte aimet, aimoiet, aimeret, ai∣meroyet, aimasset. Of O. O, is a vowell which is pronounced after our fashion in all tongues: And therefore I will not stay more thervpon, I will only say that it kepeth his pronounciatiō in all places except in a diphthong. For then it is chaun∣ged into é, masculine: as congnoistre, to know, congnestre, oeuure, a worke, euure.
Of P. P, is a consonant which is alone pronoun∣ced as this syllable, Pé, which being put be∣fore another consonant is not pronounced, except in, apte, apte, also, p, before, h, and a vo∣well loseth his sounde, for it is pronounced, as, f, an example philosophe, a philosopher, as if it were written by, f, thus, filosofe, and so of other the lyke. Of Q. Q, is pronounced as, cu, which is alwayes ioyned with, u, and, a, u, and e, u, and, i, u, and o, and notwithstanding you may not say, quā, quë, quï, quö, quü, as in Latine, Italian, or Englishe, but, qua, must be pronounced as if it were written with, k, and, a, in this sort, ka, as for example quattre, foure, as, kattre, ban∣queter, to banquet, as banketer, antiquité, anti∣quitie, antikité, quo, and, quu, are not pronoū∣ced as ko, and, ku, but as, co, &, cu, as it is easie to sée in these examples quoter, to cote, as if it were written, coter, and, quoy, what, as, coy, and, quu, alwayes as, cu. Of R. R, of his nature is a letter very sharpe and rude, which our tongue cannot easily abyde,
we temper and mollifie the sounde of it, for otherwyse in our tongue it hath no grace. Neuerthelesse I woulde not therefore you shoulde be so delicate, that you shoulde alto∣gither leaue it, and that you shoulde be lyke to the women of Paris, who are so nyce that they can not pronounce it wythout hurting theyr mouth (as they thinke) for in stéede of saying Pere, Father, they say peze, or, pese, and in stéede of Mere, Mother, meze, or mese, but you must kéepe a meane, betwéene both. Of S. S, is pronounced as this worde, esse, which for the first when it is betwéene two vowels loseth his sounde, and is turned into, z: as maison, a house, saison, a season, as if they were written thus maizon, saizon. Otherwyse it kéepeth his owne pronounciation but bicause it is not pronoūced alwayes, chiefely being before another consonant: but in few, by rea∣son of the cōcourse of twoo consonants, which we thinke to be rude in our tongue, it is very necessarie to know in what woordes it is pro∣nounced, and in what it is not expressed: For this is it where the greatest part of those that desire to learne our tongue, are hindere, not knowing when they must pronounce it, or
leaue it: which also is harde to know and al∣most impossible, if it be not by great expe∣rience and long obseruation of the wordes. For they dooe but mocke themselues, and de∣ceyue other, that thinke to contayne the same by certayne rules, and to forge them after their owne fasie as may dooe, to the ende to féede men with such vanities. Therefore sée∣ing of twoo burthens the lesse is to be taken, I will set foorth in the table following by the order of the crosse rowe all the wordes where the, S, ioyned with any consonant in one and the selfe same syllable is pronounced: séeing that there is not of them so many, as there be of them where, S, ioyned with a consonant is not pronounced, for he that knoweth one, knoweth the other: forasmuch as hée that knoweth the nature of one cōtrarie, he knoweth conse∣quently the nature of the other.
¶A table of all the Frenche wordes where, S, ioyned with an o∣ther consonant is pronounced after the order of the letters. A. Abstenir, to abstayne. Acoster, to meete. Acostable, familiare. aposturne, an impostume. Asperger, to sprinckle. Assister, to assist. Apostat, an apostatate. Aposter, to become an a∣postatate. Austere, seuere. Auguste, noble. B. Bastille, a bulwarke. Bastillō, a litle bulwarke. Bosquet, a groue. C. Celeste, heauenly. Chaste, Chast. Clistere, a glister. Confisquer, to cōfiscate. Consister, to consist. Conspirer, to cspire. Constant, constant. Constellation, a constel∣lation. Constituer, to appoint. Constrister, to make sad, and those that descende of them. D. Desespoir, despaire. Destiner, to appoynt. Destituer, to want. Detester, to detest. Digestion, digestion. Discretion, discretion. Discret, discrete. Discorder, to disagree. Discours, a discours. Discussion, a discussion. Dispenser, to dispence. Disposer, to dispose. Disputer, to dispute. Distance, a distance. Distiller, to drop downe.
distinguer, to distinguish Distrere, to withdrawe. Distribuer, to distribute. Domesticque, houshold. Disgrace, disgrace. Demonstration, a de∣monstracion. Descriptiō, a descriptiō. Desastre, mischaunce. E. Embuscade, a conspira∣cie, or laying in wait for. Escarpins, pumpes or pin∣sons. Escrimeur, a fenser. Espace, a space. Esperer, to hope. Esprit, Spirit. Estimer, to esteme. Estomac, the stomacke. Escadron, an araye. Esquif, a boate. F. Festin, a banquet. Fistule, a fistola. Frustrer, to frustrate. G. Geste, a gesture. H. Histoire, an Historie. Histrion, a stage player. I. Inspiration, inspiration. Instable, inconstant. Instamment, instantly. Instinct, instinct. Instinguer, to prouoke. Instruire, to instruct. Instrument, an instru∣ment. Intestins, the inwarde partes. Iuriste, a Lawyer. Iusques, vntill. Iuste, iust. Iurisconsulte, a lawyer. L. Lustre, a shewe. M. Manifester, to manifest. Masquer, to maske. Modeste, modest. Moleste, grieuous. Monastere, a monasterie. Monstre, a monser. Muscadet, muskadell.
Mystere, a mysterie. N. Nonobstant, notwith∣standing. O. Obscurcir, to darcken. Obstiner, to be or make obstinate. P. Pasteur, a pastor. Pastenades, carret roots. Persister, to persist. Peste, plague. Postuler, to require. Presque, almost. Proscrire, to write for. Prosperer, to prosper. Prosterner, to prost. Protester, to pro. Postposer, to set after. Posterieur, latter. Posterite, posterite. Posthume, one borne af∣ter his fathers death. Poste, a poste. Postidate, a daye defer∣red. Q. Quaestion, a question. R. Respirer, to breath. Restituer, to restore. Restaurer, to restore. S. Superstition, supersti∣tion. Suspect, suspect. Suspendre, to hang vp. Sultenter, to susteyne. Subministrer, to serue vnder. T. Testament, a testament. Testicule, a stone. Testifier, to testifie. Testonner, to rub with a combe. Transcrire, to write out. Transformer, to trans∣forme. Transgressor, to trans∣gresse. Transmettre, to trans∣mitte, or see uer. Transmuer, to remooue
from one place to ano∣ther. Transporter, to trans∣port. Transposer, to transpose. Triste, sad. As for these foure last letters following, that is to say u, x, y, z. There are not founde any woordes which beginne by them, where S, looked with an other consonant is pronoū∣ced, beholde therfore all that I coulde gather vppon this letter, S, that myght be profitable and necessarie for the studentes. Of T. T, is pronounced as this woorde, Té, which in all woordes kéepeth his pronounciation ex∣cept in the end of nounes, wherin it is not ex∣pressed, but in the end of verbes it is pronoū∣ced softly, to the ende, , masculine be not sounded after it, so that to dooe this we may not strike much with the tongue agaynst the roufe of the mouth, but as litle as a man can, not opening the mouth to much, for feare of falling into the fault of the Bourguignions Wallons, which pronounce it so strongly that of a worde of twoo syllables they make thrée: as of mengent, they eate, they will make mengenté, donnent, they giue, donnenté. Ther∣fore I aduertise you to pronounce this letter,
T, rather to softlye, than to muche for our tongue requyreth it. Of V. V, is pronoūced in shutting the mouth and closing the lippes rounde togither, which is both a consonant and a vowell: a consonant, when it is before an other vowell: as vous, you, vostre, yours, voir, to see, & a vowell, when it is before a Consonant: as lustre, a shewe, doucement, sweetly, rude, rude. Now we must note, that as it is a vowell, it is not pronoun∣ced after, q, nor after, g, as for example of, q, quantité, quantitie, quattre, foure, which wordes Englishe men must pronounce, as if they were written by, k, and, a, in this sort kantité, kattre: of, g, as langue, a tongue, bague, a ring, which they must pronounce also lea∣uing the, u, and pronouncing the, e, that aby∣deth with the, g, as they dooe theyr a, or else betwéene both if they were written thus, lan∣ga, baga, mittigating notwithstanding, as much as they may the pronounciatiō of the, a, in tourning it vpon, e. Of X. X, is pronounced as if, i, were ioyned togi∣ther with it, in this sort, Ix, which being at
the end of words hath the sound of, S, as che∣uaux, horses, cheueux, heares, beaux, fayre, deux, two, but in the midst, betwixt twoo vowels, it hath the signification of two letters that is to say, c, s: as in these words Alexandre, Alexan∣der, exemple, example, which must be pronoun∣ced as if they were written by, c, s, in this maner ecsemple, Alecsandre. Of Y. Y, is rightly called of vs by the name of Gréeke, for it is also a vowell of ye Gréekes, which kéepeth in all places his pronouncia∣tion, and is lyke to our vowell, i, being neuer chaunged, but when it is after, a, for then the pronounciation of it is turned into our, e, masculine. Of Z. Z, is pronounced as this worde, zedes, and bicause English men pronounce it as we do, I will not stay any more thereof. True if is that at the ende of woordes we pronounce it as, S. Of Diphthongs. WE haue fower principal diphthongs, which are chaunged: of which I will speake, for as for the other diphthongs there
néedeth no mention to be made of them, sée∣ing they are pronounced as they be written: the fower are these ai, ei, oi, ui, of which ye thrée first be chaunged into, é, masculine, and the fourth into, i: an example of ai, aimer, to loue, emer, of ei, pleindre, to complayne, plendre, of oi, congnoistre, to knowe, congnestre, of ui, bouil∣lir, to boyle. There is yet an other diphthong, which I will not leaue out bicause it is chan∣ged also into, é, and that is, oe: as coeur, a heart, ceur, oeuure, a worke, euure, soeur, sistet, seur. Of Synalepha. Synalepha, is a figure by the which, e, fe∣minine is not in a manner pronounced, for when two diuers wordes run togither wher∣of one endeth in, e, & the other beginneth with an other vowel, the, e, which is at the end, is, as it were not pronounced, and if it be pro∣nounced, it is very little: as in this example bonne annee vous doint Dieu, a good yeare vnto you giue God. Il aime à faire cecy, ou cela, He lo∣ueth to doe this, or that. Of Apostrophe. This figure Apostrophe, is alwayes and so often as these woordes of one syllable, to wéete Ie, te, me, se, de, ne, le, que, ce, do go before other woordes that begin with vowels: For
this vowell, e, which is in the saide wordes of one syllable is eaten vp & taken away bicause of the concurrence & méeting of the vowell in the woorde following, and in the place of that which is so eaten vp, we put this halfe circle, which sheweth the figure of Apostrophe, as for example of, Ie, j'enuoye, I doe sende, of, te, je t'ay escrit, I wrote to thee, of, me, Il m'a dit, He tolde me. Of, se, Il s' est humilié, He humbled himselfe. Of, ne, Il n'est point icy, He is not here. Of, que, O qu'il est excellent, Oh how excellent he is. Of, ce, c'est icy vn don de Dieu, this here is a gift of God. Of, le, l'esprit viuifie, the spirite quickeneth, we may also herevnto adde these of one syllable, si, ma, re, & this woorde of twoo syllables, grande, as for example of, si. S'il est vray je vous croy, If it be true I beleeue you. Of, ma, m'amie, My woman friende. Of, re, r'amen∣teuoir, to remember. Of, grande, grand' espe∣rance, great hope. Grand'e asseurance, great assu∣raunce. Of the running togither of conso∣nants in diuers woordes. When twoo Consonants followe one an∣other, and méete togither in diuers woordes, the one in the ende of a woorde and the other in the beginning of the next word following, the same which is at the ende, is neuer pro∣nounced,
as for example, Ie me recommande a vos bonnes graces, I doe commende my selfe vn∣to your good graces, which must be pronounced as if, S, were not there at all: in this wyse, Ie me recōmande a vo-bonne-graces, but you must therefore pause a little vpon the vowell which goeth before, S, it is true that this rule taketh no place, when after a Consonant which is in the ende of a woorde, there follo∣weth a Comma or poynt, bycause then it is pronounced: as in this example, Ie vous re∣mercie messieurs, pour les grands biens, les grands plaisirs, & honnestetez, que vous me faites, sans toutefois, l'auoir metite, I thanke you my maisters, for the great be∣nefites, the great pleasurés, and ho∣nesty that you dooe to me without, notwith∣standing, my desert.
The seconde Booke. HAuing sufficiently declared the nature of the letters, and howe they be pronoun∣ced by themselues, and ioyned togither, and in what places they kéepe their pronunciati∣on, and also where they lose it. There re∣mayneth nowe to speake of wordes, and how they may be knowne one from another. And to knowe this well, it is necessarie to sée how many parts of speach there be, or kindes of wordes. Of which there are nyne: the ar∣ticle, the Noune, Pronoune, the Verbe, the Participle, the Aduerbe, the Coniunction, the Preposition, and the Interiection: Of which we will treate orderly. ¶ Of the Article. The Article is a certaine waye to guyde and leade vs easilye to the knowledge of the Nownes: for it is as the signe that sheweth the thing signified. There be two sortes of Articles, the one is, vn, one, and vne, one: and the other, le, the, la, the. Which Articles haue both gender and number: As for the gender, they haue it, insomuch as euery article is ei∣ther of the masculine or feminine gender. Of the neuter gender there is no Article in our
tongue. If they be for the masculine gender, in the singular number they ende in, vn, and in, le, in the plurall, vns, and les, if they be of the feminine gender, they make in the singu∣lar number, vne, and la, and in the Plurall, vnes, and, les. Le, is for the Nominatiue case singular of nounes of the masculyne gender: as, le maistre, the maister, le pere, the father, le fils, the sonne, and so of other lyke. La, is for the feminine: as, la dame, the Ladie, la femme, the woman, la maistresse, the Maystresse. For the genitiue case singular, de, of, du, of the, d'un, of one, for the masculine: as, Iesus Christ fils de Dieu, Iesus Christ sonne of God, Cecy vient de la bonte du Roy, this commeth of the goodnesse of the King. Ie parle d'un homme, I speake of a man. For the feminine, de la, of the and, d'une, of one: as, le mari de la femme, the husbande of the wyfe, la beauté d'une dame, the beautie of a Ladie. A, to, au, to, for the Datiue, masculine, and feminine: as, Ie declaray cela à mon maistre, I declared the same to my maister, I'ay dit cecy à Marguerite, I tolde this same to Margaret. The Accusatiue is lyke the Nominatiue. O, serueth to the Vocatiue, as well masculine, as feminine. Par, by, de, of, du, of the, d'un, of one, pour, for, de la, of the, and d'une, of one, he Articles which shew the Ablatiue case of the
singular number, whereof de, du, d'un, be for the masculine only: as Il est nay de Iean, he is borne of Iohn, Il vient du chasteau, he commeth from the Castell, Il a apprins d'un bon maistre, he hath learned of a good maister. De la, & D'une, are also for the feminine onely. Il sort de la ville, be commeth out of the towne, Il est estime d'une femme, he is praysed of a woman. But, par, and pour, are as well for the Masculine, as for the Feminine. Nowe, le, and, la, for the no∣minatiue plurall, haue onely, les, which ser∣ueth them both. Vn, hath vns, and vne, maketh vnes. The genitiue plurall maketh des, of, for, the masculine and feminine, d'uns, of one, for the masculine, d'unes, for the feminine. For the Datiue, aux, to the, for the masculine & the feminine. The Accusatiue is like the Nomi∣natiue. The Vocatiue is like to the Vocatiue singular. And the Ablatiue plurall, to the Ab∣latiue singular, which Articles be alwayes set immediatly before the Nownes substan∣tiues: And beside them, there are also many Pronounes, that helpe vs very much for to knowe to discerne nounes substantiues from other parts of speach, of which we will speak hereafter.
Of a Noune. The noune is the name of a thing which may be séene, touched, heard, or vnderstoode: as the name of my hand, ye name of my body, of a table, of a booke, or other ye lyke. Euery noune is eyther Substantiue or Adiectiue: The noune substantiue is the same that may be of it selfe, and hath no néede to be ioyned with another worde to signifie the nature of a thing: for simply in it selfe and alone, it shew∣eth the same wholy: as, homme, a man, mai∣stre, a maister, pere, a father, maison, a house. The noune Adiectiue is that which can signify no∣thing of it selfe, but must be alwayes ioyned with a Substantiue in this sort, bon homme, a good man, heureux maistre, a happie mayster. mauuais charpentier, an yll Carpenter, malheu∣reux enfant, an vnhappie chylde. Also a noune substantiue is deuided into twoo, into a noune proper, and into a noune common. A noune proper, is that that agréeth to one only thing, and to one onely person, as this noune Iean, Iohn, is proper onely to all those that are cal∣led by this name, and not to others. A noune common is attributed to many thinges: as maison, a house, pere, a father, homme, a man, liure, a booke, table, a table, lict, a bedde, chap∣peau,
a hatte, bonnet, a cappe. nounes substan∣tiues haue sixe accidents, that is to say, Gen∣der, Number, Person, Deriuation, Compo∣sition and Declenson. Of the first Accident. There be two sortes of genders, mascu∣line and feminine, which, as we haue sayde here before, are knowne by the Articles that go before them, and also by their significati∣on, of which we will nowe speake. For the masculine gender, we haue to note, that all names of men, of dignitie, of office, of occu∣pation, of parentage, or affinity, of Moneths, of money, of trées, of little trées (except the Vyne trée) all names of beastes male, briefly all verball nounes, or other that belong one∣ly to men, are of the masculine gender. As also all those which belong to thinges femi∣nine, are of the feminine gender: as the na∣mes of women, of fruites, of Cities, and o∣thers, which we will treate of hereafter ac∣cording to their termination. All nounes en∣ding in, i, or, y, ain, aire, ant, ent, as, eau, eux, ien, ier, ir, in, oir, vr, eur, ont, or, ond, is, Ils, or in any other consonant whatsoeuer, are of the masculine gender, which is easie to be knowne: notwithstanding, although that a
man maye well comprehende this same in this sort, yet I will not omitte to set downe some examples to make the thing more cleare whereof the question is: as for exam∣ple of, i, or, y, amy, a friende, apuy, a staye, en∣richi, enriched. Of ain, vain, vaine, prochain, neare, grain, corne, humain, humaine. Of aire, viaire, a graue, affaire businesse. Of ant, aymant, louing, constant, constant, fayneant, an ydle bodie, nonchalant, retchlesse, vaillant, valiant. Of crit, diligent, diligent, ornement, an ornament, habil∣lement, an habillement, argent, siluer. Of, as, a∣mas, a heape, bras, an arme, fatras, baggage. Of eau, veau, a calfe, pourceau, a hog, manteau, a cloke, chappeau, a hat. Of, eux, vitieux, vitious, ambitieux, ambitious, couuoiteux, couetous, hon∣teux, shamefull, amoureux, amorous, courageux, couragious. Example of, ien, chien, a dogge, bien, good, maintien, countenance, ancien, an ancient. Of, ier, sentier, a footepath, entier, whole. Of in, voisin, a neyghbour, cousin, a cosin. Of, ir, de∣sir, desire, plaisir, pleasure. Of, oir, vouloir, will, pouuoir, power, and so of other terminations, which euery man may sée in reading. For it shoulde be more tedious than profitable, to giue example of them all, séeing that euen of themselues they are easie ynough to compre∣hende, and so this shall suffice for the mascu∣line
gender. Now of the feminine. All nounes endyng in this, é, masculine, (except costé, a side, and all Participles therein ending,) be of the feminine gender, and those also which ende in, ion, son, and e, feminine, sauing that we must except certaine which ende in, e, fe∣minine, & yet are of the masculine gender, the which may be knowne easily by the Arti∣cle going before: as le pere, the father, le frere, the brother, and a very fewe others. It is true that all Verbes infinitiue ending in, e, femi∣nine, insomuch as they be made nounes by vertue of the Article which goeth before them, be also of the masculine gender, as, le boire, the drinke, le dire, the saying, le faire, the doing. Of the seconde Accident. The number is eyther singular or plurall. The Singular is knowne by the terminati∣ons (which I haue hertofore declared) and by the Article: and the Plurall partlye also by the Article, but commonly by his Singular, which ending in any vowel, formeth the Plu∣rall by putting to, s, x, or, z, at the ende: as homme, a man, hōmes, men, merci, mercy, mercis, mercies, loy, a lawe, loix, lawes, vertu, vertue, ver∣tuz, vertues, bonté, bountie, bontez, bounties, The
nounes Substantiues ending their singular in, m, n, p, r, haue, s, for the forming of their plurall: as in these words, nom, a name, noms, names, bien, good, biens, goodes, champ, a fielde, champs, fieldes, honneur, honor, honneurs, ho∣nors. Those that ende in, eu, eul, al, eau, ail, haue their Plurall in, x, and those also which ende in ault, chaunging onely, t, into, x. Of the noune singular ending in, c, d, f, g, q, t, is made the Plurall by putting to, z. Nowe we must here note, that there are some nounes in our tongue that haue onely but the Plurall, and doe all ende in, s, which shall be one of the notes to make them to be knowne, togither with their Article: as, les Rayns, the reynes, les tenebres, the darknesse, les meurs, the maners. Of the thirde Accident. The person is the thirde Accident, which is easie, and therefore we wyll declare it briefly. It is then to be vnderstoode that eue∣ry noune is of the thirde person: as, homme, a man, table, a table, pierre, a stone, boys, woode, liure, a booke, maison, a house. Of the fourth Accident. Euery noune substantyue eyther is deriued of an other Substantiue, or of an Adiectiue, or of a Verbe. Nounes diminutiues that end
in, ette are deriued of nounes feminines that ende in e, feminine: as of Ieanne, Ione, Iean∣nette, little Ione. Of femelle, a female, femelette, a little female. Also those nounes Deriuatiues that ende in, ceau, come of nounes ending in on: as of, lion, a lyon, lionceau, a little lyon, lar∣ron, a theefe, larronceau, a little theefe, heron, a heron, heronceau, a little heron, except homon∣ceau, a little man; whych commeth of this word homme, endyng in, e, feminine. There be o∣ther names Deriuatiues that descend of na∣mes Primitiues ending in, on, whych not∣withstanding ende not in, ceau, as the other going before, but in et, as of garçon, a boye, garçonnet, a little boye, cochon, a pyge; cochon∣net, a little pigge, and in, ette, as of, chanson, a song, chansonnette, a little song, maison, a house, maisonnette, a little house. Those nounes that ende in a consonant, make their diminutiues in et, as, corps, a bodie, corpset, a little bodie. Other nounes ending in, e, feminine, and yet be of the masculine gender, doe forme their Diminutiues, by putting to, c, with the, e, as signe, a marke, signet, a little marke, liure, a booke, liuret, a little booke. Of those nounes that ende in, eau, doe come such as ende in, el, or in, et, as of aigneau, a lambe, aignel, or, aignelet, a lit∣tle lambe, oiseau, a byrde, oisel, or, oiselet, a little
byrde, tonneau, a tunne, tonnel, or, tonnelet, a little tunne, bandeau, a thing to blindfielde, bandel, or, bandelet, a little thing to blindfielde. Last of all, those nounes which signifie the seasons of the time, doe forme their Diminutiues by a double, ee, as, an, annee, a yeare, matin, ma∣tinee, a morning, iour, iournee, a daye, nuit, nui∣tee, a night. Nounes perteyning to men, or to the masculine gender endyng in, ard, forme their Diminutiues in, eau, as, bastard, a ba∣starde, bastardeau, a little bastarde, bragard, a ruffler, bragardeau, a little ruffler, paillard, a whoremonger, paillardeau, a little whoremonger. And of those we also deryue nounes of the fe∣minine gender, in adding, e, to, ard, as, pail∣lard, a whoremonger, paillarde, a whore, bragard, a man ruffler, bragarde, a woman ruffler, bauard, a pratler, bauarde, a woman pratler. We finde of them others endyng in, aige, whych are de∣ryued of nounes of diuers terminations, as, corde, cordaige, a corde, baggue, a bagge, bag∣gaige, baggage, fruit, fruite, fruitage, fruitage, bende, a bande, bendage, binding. Some doe ende in, aille, as, couardaille, a cowardly multi∣tude, which commeth of, couard, a cowarde. Some come of latine words, by adding only to them, n, as of this latine worde, pronuntia∣tio, pronunciation, we make a Frenche worde,
by addition of, n, in this sort, pronunciation, of, perditio, perdition, perdition, of, consola∣tio, comfort, consolation. Of Adiectyues as well masculyne as feminyne, ending in, e, fe∣minine, are deryued nounes ending in, ré, wyth, é, masculyne, as of, humble, humble, humilité, humilitie, facile, easie, facilité, easi∣nesse, lasche, cowardly, laschete, cowardlynesse, graue, graue, grauité, grauitie, except some that ende in, esse, as for example, of foible, feeble, foiblesse, feeblenesse, triste, sadde, tristesse, sad∣nesse, sage, wyse, sagesse, wysedome. Some en∣ding in, ent, or, ant, doe forme their Dimi∣nutyues by chaunging, t, into, c, and there∣vnto addyng, e, feminyne, as, prudent, pru∣dent, prudence, wysedome, constant, constant, con∣stance, constancie. There be many other Adiec∣tyues, of whych are formed manye nounes whych we will handle in their place when we shall speake of the Adiectyue. It resteth now to sée those nounes which be formed of Ver∣bes. Of all the Preterimperfect tenses, of the present tense of Verbes, are formed nounes, chaunging, oys, (in whych they ende) into eur, as of parloys, I did speake, parleur, a spea∣ker, faisoys, I did, faiseur, a doer, disoys, I sayde, diseur, a sayer. And some in, ement, as of par∣loys, I did speake, parlement, a speaking, sentoys,
I did feele, sentiment, a feeling. Some nounes are formed of the Infinityues, chaunging their termination into, ure, as, engendrer, to ingender, engendrure, generation, nourrir, to nou∣rishe, nourriture, nourishing, escrire, to wryte, es∣criture, wryting. Of the fifth Accident. Euery noune is eyther simple or compound, the simple is it that is by it selfe, wythout be∣yng ioyned with another worde or sillable, as homme, a man, femme, a woman, liure, a booke, table, a table. As touching nounes compound, there be of them thrée sortes, some are com∣pounded of two perfect words, as beau pere, a father in lawe, bellemere, a mother in lawe, gen∣tilhomme, a gentleman. Others are compoun∣ded of twoo wordes imperfect, as this worde, Dimanche, Sunday. And those of the last sort, are also compounded of two, wherof the first is imperfect, and the other is perfect, as for example, in thys worde licol, a halter. Of the sixth Accident. The declenson of nounes in our tongue, is very easie, séeyng that it hath but two termi∣nations in all cases, the one in the singular, the other in the Plurall. Therfore for all the
nounes, I wyll set here but one declenson, by the whych all may be declyned, so that he that knoweth to declyne thys noune, may de∣clyne all the other. The singular number. Nomina∣tiue and Accusa∣tiue. Chartier, a Carter, the mas∣culine. Le Chartier, the Carter. the mas∣culine. Chartiere, a woman Carter. the femi∣nine. La chartiere, the woman Carter. the femi∣nine. Vn Chartier, one Carter. masculi. feminine Vne Chartiere, one woman Carter. masculi. feminine the Gem. & Ablati. case. De Chartier, of a Carter. for the mascu∣line. Du Chartier, of the Carter. for the mascu∣line. d'un Chartier, of one Carter. for the mascu∣line. De la Chartiere, of the woman Carter. the fe∣minine. d'une Chartiere, of one woman Carter. the fe∣minine. The Da∣tiue case. A Chartier, to a Carter. the mas∣culine. Au Chartier, to the Carter. the mas∣culine. A la Chartiere, to the Carter. the femi∣nine. A vne chartiere, to one carter. the femi∣nine. The Vo∣cati. case. O Chartier, O Carter. the mas∣culine. O le Chartier, O the Carter. the mas∣culine. O Chartiere, O Cartresse. the fe∣minine. O la chartiere, O the Cartresse. the fe∣minine.
The Plurall number. the Nom. & Accusa. Chartiers, Carters. the mas∣culine. Les Chartiers, the Carters. the mas∣culine. Chartieres, women Carters. the fe∣minine. les chartieres, the womē carter. the fe∣minine. the Genit. & Ablati. De Chartiers, of Carters. the mas∣culine. Des Chartiers, of the Carters. the mas∣culine. De chartieres, of womē carters. the fe∣minine. Des chartieres, of the women. the fe∣minine. The Da∣tiue case. A Chartiers, to Carters. the mas∣culine. Aux Chartiers, to the Carters. the mas∣culine. A Chartieres, to womē carters. the femi∣nine. Aux Chartieres, to the women. the femi∣nine. The Vo∣catiue cas. O Chartiers, O Carters. masculi. femini. O Chartieres, O women car∣ters. masculi. femini. By this declenson a man may easily decline all other nounes aswell Substantiues, as Adiectiues and Comparatiues, aswell of the Feminine as of the Masculine Gender. Of the noune Adiectiue. Folowing the order of nature, we will han∣dle the Noune Adiectiue, after the Substan∣tiue, for in our tongue: it is also set cōmonly after, as depending of the Substantiue the which it doth in déede, as it appeareth by his
nature and definition, where it is sayde that it cannot be, nor signifie any thing of him∣selfe, if it be not ioyned with a Substantiue, we will then treate thereof in the best & ea∣siest maner possible. For it must be confessed that it is somwhat hard, specially to shew by a certayne rule how it may be knowne & dis∣cerned from the Substantiue, except it be in vnderstāding the sense of the sentence where they shall be founde togther. And then a man shall sée easilye, which of the twoo names, (which are ioyned togither without a parti∣cle copulatiue, or this worde, de,) is the Ad∣iectiue. Besides, we say that the Adiectiue in our tongue goeth most often after the Sub∣stantiue, for that, it is as a signe, or qualitie, agreeing to the substantiue: as, cheual blanc, white horse, pain brun, browne bread. Notwith∣standing it is not so in all adiectiues, for some of them go before the Substantiue: as, bon, vin good wyne, bel homme, a faire man, the o∣ther be ut and placed before and after the Substantiue, as it séemeth good, which the reader may better obserue in reading, than otherwyse. Adiectiues haue fyue accidents, that is to say: Gender, Number, Compa∣rison, eclenson, and Deriuation.
Of Gender. A noune Adiectiue hath the masculine and feminine Gender as the substantiue. As tou∣ching the mascul. Gender, it shall be knowne by the termination, for all the Adiectiues that ende in any Consonant whatsoeuer, and in whatsoeuer vowell, except in, e, feminine, be of the masculine Gender. Also there are ma∣nye of them, which ende in, e, feminine, that neuerthelesse are of the masculine Gender, but those being taken awaye, all the other that end in, e, feminine, be of the femin. Gen∣der: as, belle, faire, blanche, white. excellente, excellent, ronde, rounde, grande, great, longue, long, and other such lyke sauing some that be of the doubtfull Gender, that is to say, aswell of the masculine as of the feminine: as braue, braue, difficile, harde, facile, easie, and all the Ad∣iectiues ending in able: as, probable, probable, abominable, abhominable, equitable, rightfull, fa∣uorable, fauorable. Of Number. The Number, shalbe easie to know by that which I haue sayde of it vppon the nounes Substantiues: for who so knoweth the one, knoweth the other, séeing that herein they be
a like, & that of the adiectiue is partly knowne by the termination, as that of the Substan∣tiue, and also by the substantiue, wherof it de∣pendeth and which is next to him. For if the Article sheweth that the Substantiue, is of the singular number: it shall follow that the Adiectiue, that is ioyned with it, by the same meanes shall be of the singular nūber: as le bon homme, the good man, you may sée, bon, which is of the singular number, as also the Article, le, sheweth: les bons hōmes, the good men, bons, is of the plurall Nūber, as it is also manifest by the Article, les. Briefly, to speake in fewe woordes, the Adiectiue agréeth with his Substantiue in Gender, in Number, and in case, as in Latine. Of the Comparison. The Adiectiues that receyue Comparison, may be knowne easily by these particles, plus more, or fort, very, which go before them, the which is a generall rule, sauing in these two, bon, good, and, mauuais, euill, which we call ir∣regular, bicause they be not as the other: for bon, maketh his Cōparatiue, meilleur, better. and mauuais, maketh, pire, worse, but as tou∣ching theyr Superlatiues they be of the same that others be. The Adiectiues that signifie
diminishing haue for their Cōparatiues these wroodes, moins, lesse, & moindre, lesser, & those which signifie excesse, haue this particle, trop, to, as trop grand, to great, trop long, to long. The superlatiues are knowne by these words, tres moult, most, or issime, as some doe now say, as for example of, tres, & of, moult, tresbon, or moult bon, very good, tres excellent, or moult excellent, very excellent. Of those that ende in issime, as bonissime, excellent good, grandissime, passing great, excellentissime, most excellent. Of the Declenson. For bycause that the Declenson of nounes Adiectiues is like to that of the Substantiues, I will sende you to that which I haue sayde here before of it. For he that knoweth how to decline a noune substantiue, knoweth how to decline a noune adiectiue, séeing yt it varieth no more in his cases, than the Substantiue. Of the Deriuation. I will not stay much vpon this Accident, séeing it should be but to cōsume a long tyme for a small thing, and therfore you shall con∣tent your selues herwith to be aduertised, that some be deriued of nounes Substantiues: as of, barbe, a bearde, barbu, a bearded man. Other Adiectiues of other Participles: as of, ho∣norant,
honouring, honorable, honourable. But we néede not breake our braynes frō whence they come, so that we know they be Adiec∣tiues, and what they signifie, for with tyme and experience the other may he learned. Of the Pronoune. A Pronoune, is a part of speache or kinde of worde verie lyke to the Noune, which men vse, to shewe things that are vnderstoode by it. Nowe the better to knowe this kinde of worde called a pronoune, we must know how many of them there be, & for the playner de∣claring of them, we will set downe these sixe sortes: Primitiues, Deriuatiues, or Posses∣siues, Interrogatiues, Relatiues, and De∣mōstratiues, whervnto may be ioyned Par∣titiues. Distributiues, and Numeralles. Of the Primitiue. There be seauen Primitiues, Ie, I, tu, thou, or vous, you, Il, He, for the masculine, elle, shee, for the feminine, l'on, on, and, se, it, whereof these thrée last, serue aswell for the masculine as the feminine. And it must be noted (as we haue sayde) that they be alwayes ioyned with Verbes to declare what persons there be vn∣derstanded, whither the first, the seconde, or
else the thirde. But it is verie requisite to knowne whither they be put before or after the Verbes. For Englishmen might therby be incumbred, bycause that they doe set them alwayes after verbes, except in the Nomi∣natiue case, where they be foremost, but in Frenche they be alwayes before the Verbe in what case soeuer they be. Furthermore, they haue foure accidents Number, person, Gender, Declenson. Of the Number. As touching the Number, I will make no long discourse for that they haue the singular and plurall, as nounes and other partes of speache, which are declined. Of the Person. They haue thrée Persons, Ie, for the first, Tu, or vous, for the seconde, Il, elle, l'on, on, se, for the thirde. Of the Gender. The first and the seconde (which be, Ie, and, Tu, or vous,) be aswell for the masculine as for the feminine, elle, is onely for the femi∣nine, Il, for the masculine, and the thrée other last that is l'on, on, se, are indifferently for the masculine and feminine.
Of the Declenson of, Ie. For the singular. Nominatiue, Ie, or moy, I. Gen. & Abla. de moy, or à me, of me. Datiue, à moy, or me, to me. Accusatiue, moy, or me, me. It hath no Vocatiue. For the plurall. Nominatiue, Nous, We. Genitiue & Ablatiue de nous, of vs. Datiue, à nous, to vs. Accusatiue, nous, vs. Of the Declenson of, Tu. For the Singular Nomin. Tu, thou, toy, or vous, you. Genitiue & Abla. de toy, of thee, de vous, of you. Datiue, à toy, to thee, te, à vous, to you, or vous. Accusatiue, te, thee, vous, you. Vocatiue, O toy, O thou. For the Plurall. Nominatiue & Accusa. vous, you. Geni. & Ablatiue, de vous, of you. Datiue, à vous, to you, or vous. Vocatiue, O vous, O you, or vous. As touching, moy, me, and, toy, thee, wée must obserue that they serue speciallye for aunsweres, Interrogations, & Admiratiōs,
without expressing the Verbe, Ie, and, Tu, and Vous, are alwayes before the Verbe, except when they are Interrogatiues, for then they be after: as dis ie bien? say I well? escris tu? writest thou? escriuez vous? write you? Of the declenson of, Il. For the singular. Nominatiue, Il, he. Genitiue & Abl. de luy, of him, le, him Datiue, à luy, to him. Accusatiue, le, him. For the Plurall. Nominatiue, ils, they. Genitiue & Ablati. d'eux, of them. Datiue, à eux, to them. Accusatiue, les, them. Of the Pronoune, Elle, which is for the feminine of the thirde person. For the singular. Nominatiue, elle, she. Genitiue & Ablatyue, d'elle, of hir. Datiue, à elle, to hir. Accusatiue, la, hir. For the Plurall. Nominatiue, elles, they. Genitiue & Ablati. d'elles, of them. Datiue, à elles, to them. Accusatiue, les, them.
Of Se. For the singular. Nominatyue case lacketh. Genitiue & Abla. de soy, of himselfe. Datyue, a soy, or, se, to himselfe. Accuatyue, soy, or, se, himselfe. And so of his Plurall. Se, is put before the Verbe, and soy after, wherevnto is ioyned very often thys worde mesme. As to the two other last, which are, l'on, on, they be vndeciyned, and are signes of verbes Impersonals: as on dict, it is sayd, on fict, it is done, l'on parle, men say. Of Pronounes deriuatiues or possessiues. We haue of them fiue, mon, myne, ton, thyne, son, his, nostre, our, vostre, your, whereof from the thrée first be deryued these feminynes here, ma, myne, ta, thyne, sa, hir. For the two o∣ther be as well for the masculyne, as the fe∣minine. To the rest, they haue thrée acciden∣tes, Gender, Number, Declenson. For the first, they be of the masculyne and of the fe∣minyne gender. Of the masculyne, as, mon, myne, ton, thyne, son, his. Of the feminine, ma, ta, sa. They haue the singular and Plurall num∣ber, the singular, as, mon, myne, ton, thine, son,
his, ma, myne, ta, thyne, sa, hir, nostre, our, vostre, your. The Plurall, as, mes, myne, tes, thyne, ses, his, nostres, ours, vostres, yours, or, nos, ours, voz, yours. And they are also declyned, but it is without chaunging of the termination in their case. True it is that the Article chaun∣geth, but in such sort, as in other nounes that are declyned. Of Pronounes interrogatiues. The Pronounes interrogatyues, are, qui, who, que, what, quel, who, quelle, what woman, or thing, whych chaunge not the termination in declyning, and therefore we call them inde∣clinable, and specially qui, & que, which haue one onely termination for the singular and plurall number. But quel, and quelle, doe va∣rye in the plurall. For quel, maketh quels, which, and quelle, quelles, which. It is also to be noted, that they be Relatyues taking a∣way the interrogatiue poynt, and thys word lequel, the which, and laquelle, the which, whych make in their Plurall, lesquels, the which, and lesquelles, the which. Besides whych there is yet one which is, en, which must be well ob∣serued, for it is worthy noting, bicause that vnder the two letters whych it contayneth, it signifyeth sometymes, not onely twoo or
thrée wordes, but (that more is) a whole and perfect sentence: and is alwayes put before the Verbe, to signifie and shewe those things which are in question: and also to discerne it, from the Preposition, en, whych is before nounes Substantyues, and after the Verbe. An example then of, en, a Relatyue, is thys, l'en parleray, I will speake therof, that is to say, I will speake of that thing whereof mention hath bene made: for by this Relatyue, en, an other sentence is presupposed, pronounced of some one that asketh, or demaundeth, as in this other example: Il en fera plus que vous, that is to saye: he will doe more in this or that, than you. Of Pronounes demonstratiues. There is but one Pronoune demonstra∣tiue, which hath the masculine and feminine gender. The masculine is declyned in all ca∣ses of his singular, ce, or, c'est, this, as ce perso∣nage, this person, c'est homme, this man: And it must be marked by the waye, that, ce, is put wyth nounes which begyn with a consonant, as ce chien, this dogge, ce cheual, this horse. And c'est, wyth those that begin wyth a vowell, as ce'st homme, this man, c'est oeuure, this worke. In the Plurall it only hath ces, these. The demon∣stratiue
feminine hath ceste, this, for the singu∣lar number, and for the plurall, ces, or, cestes, these. Nowe they haue manye compoundes, which kéepe the same fashion of declyning. It is true that they ende diuersly, as, cestuy-cy, this here, ceux cy, these here, cestuy-la, this there, ceux-la, those there, celuy-cy, this here, ceux-cy, these here, celuy-la, this there, ceux-la, those there. And for the compoundes of the feminine, ce∣ste-cy, this here, cestes-cy, these here, or, ces-cy, these here, ceste-la, this there, cestes-la, these there, celle-cy, she hir, celles-cy, these here, celle-la, she there, celles-la, these there. As to these two here, cela, this there, and cecy, this here, they serue to shew thyngs without lyfe: as if you woulde buye clothe, lynnen, or other things wyth∣out lyfe, you aske (wythout expressing the thing) in thys sort, cōbien cecy? cōbien cela? how much this? how much that? cestuycy, celuy-cy, cestuy-la, celuy-la, & their feminines, cest-cy, ceste-la, celle-cy, celle-la, serue to referre, or to declare a thing, which is not named: as if a man aske, Qui a fait cela? who hath done that same? cestuy-cy, this here. &c. cestuy-la, ceste-cy, ceste-la. But if the thyng be expressed, then it shall be set betwéene this demonstratyue, ce, or, cest, and this lyttle worde, cy, as, qui a dit cela? who hath sayde the same? ce bon per∣sonnage-cy,
this good person here, ce bon per∣sonnage-la, cest homme-cy, this man here, cest homme-la. And for the feminine, ceste femme-cy, this woman here, ceste femine-la. Of Partitiues and Distributiues. I finde that of them there be ten principal∣lye, that is to say, aucun, any, quelqu'un. some one, chacun, euerye one, tout, all, nul, none, tel, such, autre, another, autruy, another, maint, many, quelque, some, quelconque, whosoeuer. The which forme their feminines in adding, e, as aucun, aucune, quelqu'un, quelqu'une, & their Plural in, s, as, chacun, chacuns, tout, tous, nul, nuls. Behold all the chaunging they haue, for in respect of ye declenson they be vndeclined. Of Pronounes of number. There be infinite Pronounes numerals (that is to say of number) which cannot well be knowne but by vse, and by the number that they doe note. And they be also vndecly∣ned, and haue diuers terminations, as, vn, one, deux, two, troys, three, quattre, foure, cinq, fiue, six, sixe, sept, seauen, huict, eyght, neuf, nyne, dix, ten, onze, eleuen, douze, twelue, treze, thirtene, quatorze, fourtene, quinze, fiftene, seize, sixtene, dixsept, seauentene, dixhuict, eyghtene, dixneuf,
nynetene, vingt, twentie, and so of other, as well simple as compounde, I saye compounde as well in multiplication of Number, as o∣therwyse. But it must be knowne, howe men shall knowe them that are not compounded by multiplication, from the simple, and thys shal be partly by their termination, which is, me, as, vn, one, vnieme, the first, deux, two, deux∣ieme, the seconde, and so of the other. But some men may aske me, to what end men vse it? to whom I wil answere, that it is for the order, the place, or degrée of things, that we num∣ber: as, le deuxieme, the seconde, le troisieme, the thirde, le quatrieme, the fourth, this is vn∣derstoode in order, as ye sée. Of the Verbe. The Verbe, is a kinde of woorde which is coniugated by moodes and by tenses, & she∣weth the things that haue action and Passiō, as when I say, l'aime, I loue, I shewe that I dooe some thing in louing, & when I indure and suffer or receaue the friendshippe of any one towardes me, I say Ie suis aimé, I am lo∣ued. The Verbe is Personall, & Impersonall. The Personall is so called bycause that it is ioyned with persons, or for that it represen∣teth them, to the ende to shewe to whome be∣longeth
the action and passion that is signi∣fied by it, as in this example, Ie prie Dieu, I pray to God, Ie sers à luy seul, I serue him alone, beholde the Pronoune, Ie, I, which sheweth euidently the person. Now the Impersonall is so called, bycause it is without expressing, or naming any Person: & it may be also cal∣led indefinite, forasmuch as it defineth not nor bringeth in any thing doing or suffering, as in these examples here, on dit, It is sayde, on faict, it is done. And forasmuch as it is easie to know it, we will speake but twoo woordes before we come to the Personall. Although we ought to handle it at the end, kéeping our order, we must then onely obserue one thing for to know it, to were that so often as these particles, l'on, and, on, be founde before any Verbe, whatsoeuer, that Verbe may be cal∣led Impersonall, as for example, l'on dit ce∣la, men say the same, on faict telle chose, men doe such a thing. But besides these, there be some other Verbes Impersonals where this par∣ticle, Il, is put before them, as these fower, Il faut, it must be, Il conuient, it is meete, Il appartient, It appartayneth, Il reste, It recteth, there are also others, which haue, Il, before them, but they be formed of the thirde person of the Verbe Substantiue, which is, Est, is,
and an adiectiue, which followeth after it, and Il, goeth before them both, in this sort, Il est necessaire, It is necessarie, Il est conuena∣ble, It is meete, Il est vtile, It is profitable, Il est doutteux, It is doubtfull. Il est bon de faire telle chose, It is good to doe such a thing. Nowe resteth to speake of Verbes Perso∣nalles with the greatest methode and facili∣tie that may be, bycause that it is a thing so Intricate (& as I may saye) so confused that men dare not meddle with it, but are discou∣raged by meanes whereof they attayne not the knowledge of our tongue. And truely I haue found by experience that there be many in this countrey, yea and in ours also, who for want of knowledge of the Verbes, doe euery foote misse, when they speake: which they sée∣ing, are so ashamed, that they stay in the mid∣dest of their course, and there leaue all, with the long tyme and great labour that therein they haue spent, the which I haue lamented many times, especially hauing regarde to the great desire and affection that Englishmen haue to learne the tongues, and other ver∣tuous things worthie to be remembred, for this cause I haue béene well willing to take a little payne, to the ende that their good will shoulde not be vayne or frustrate in such sort
that I haue reade and ouer reade, séene and ouer séene, searched agayne and agayne, all the meanes to make them vnderstande howe many sortes of Verbes we haue: and howe they may be knowne, and of what tense they be, and what tense they shew, and how they be formed. For as men saye in a Frenche prouerbe: c'est ou gist le lieure, here it is where the hare lyeth, & the greatest force of the mat∣ter consisteth, that we intreate of, séeing that the Verbes gouerne the Nounes in their ca∣ses and make them to haue there full sense: and without them they can signifie nothing, for without the Verbes, they be as confused, and without order; we must note then that there be in our tongue sixe sortes of Verbes the which are knowne by the diuers termi∣nation of their Infinitiues: for as many In∣finitiues as there be of diuers terminations, so many Coniugations we make, for I finde that as they end diuersly in their infinitiues, they haue also diuersitie in their Coniuga∣tions, some dooe end, in, er, as aimer, to loue, monstrer, to shew, others in, die, as tordre, to wreath, mordre, to byte, in, ir, as, venir, to come, in, or, as aperceuoir, to perceyue, in, orre, as, clorre, to shut, and in, re, as, lire, to reade, faire, to doe, ire, to say.
Of the forming of the Indicatiue moode of Verbes ending in, Er. &c. The Verbes ending in, er, forme the Pre∣sent tense of the Indicatiue Moode by taking away onely, r, from their infinitiue: as for example, of parler, to speake, parle, speake, so that putting before, Ie, it signifieth the first Per∣son, and so forth, & is coniugated in this sort, as all the lyke are. For the Singular. Ie parle, I speake. Tu parles, thou speakest, ou vous parlez, or you speake. Il parle, He speaketh. Plurall. Nous parlons, we speake. Vous parlez, you speake. Ilz parlent, they speake. Of, aimer, to loue, we haue also Singular. I'aime, I loue, Tu aimes, thou louest, vous aimez you loue. Il aime, He loueth. the Plu. Nous aimons, we loue. Vous aimez, you loue. Ilz aiment, they loue. Except some Verbes defectiue: as, aller, to go, which forme there Present tense in, yr
gréeke in this sort For the Singular. Ie vay, I go. Tu vas, thou goest, ou vous allez. or you go. Il va, he goeth. the Plur. Nous allons, we go, Vous allez, you go. Ils vont, they go. Those that ende their Infinitiue in, dre, forme their present tense, taking away, r, and e, and adding after the, d, (which remayneth) z, or, s, as of, tordre, to wreath, tords, wreath or twist. For the singular. Ie tords, I wreath. Tu tords, thou wreathest, ou vous tordez, or you wreath. Il tord, he wreathteth. Plurall. Nous tordons, we wreath. Vous tordez, you wreath. Ils tordent, they wreath. Except, attaindre, to attayne to, & attendre, to wait for, where, d, is also taken away with the r, and the, c, and in their place is put an, s: as of attaindre, to attayne to, attains, attayne, at∣tendre, to attende, attens, attende, as for exam∣ple.
For the singular. I'attains, I attayne to. Tu attains, thou attaynest, ou vous at∣taignez, or you attayne to. Il attaind, he attayneth. Plurall. Nous attaignons, we attayne to. Vous attaignez, you attayne to. Ilz attaignent, they attayne to. And so of, attens, I tarye they that ende in, ir, forme their Present tense in, iens, as of tenir, to holde, tiens, I holde. Of, maintenir, to maintayne, maintiens, I maintayne, in this sort, For the singular. Ie maintiens, I maintayne. Tu maintiens, thou maintaynest, ou vous maintenez, or you maintayne. Il maintient, he maintayneth. Plurall. Nous maintenons, we maintayne. Vous maintenez, you maintayne. Ils maintiennent, they maintayne. And so of others, but not of all, for there are of one sort that end in, ir, which forme their pre∣sent tense in, is, changing, r, into, s, as cōuertir, to conuert, conuertis, I conuert, assopir, to waxe drowsie, assopis, I waxe drowsie, banir, to banish, banis, banish, thus For the singular. Ie banis, I banish. Tu banis, thou banishest, ou vous ba∣nissez, or you banish. Il banit, he banisheth.
Plurall. Nous banissons, we banish. Vous banissez, you banish, Ils banissent, they banish. There must also be excepted out of these here, consentir, to consent, and such lyke, mou∣rir, to die, querir, to seeke, dormir, to sleepe, which haue their present tense ending diuersly: as consentir, to consent, hath, consens, I consent, mourir, to die, meurs, I die, querir, to seeke quiers, I seeke, dormir, to sleepe, dors, I sleepe. The Verbes Insinitiues in, oir, make their present tense in, oy, as of, aperceuoir, to per∣ceyue, aperçoy, I perceyue, deuoir, to owe, doy, I owe, conceuoir, to conceyue, conçoy, I conceyue, as it appeareth in coniugating them, but one for all shall suffice. For the singular. I'apercoy, I perceyue. Tu aperçoys, thou perceynest, ou vous aperceuez, or you perceyue. Il aperçoit, he perceyueth. Plurall. Nous aperceuons, we perceyue. Vous aperceuez, you perceyue. Ils aperceuent, they perceyue. From these here, are fiue excepted where∣of two make their present in, ay, as scauoir, to know, maketh, scay, I know, auoir, to haue, ay, I haue. And thus be they coniugated.
For the singular. Ie scay, I know. Tu scays, thou knowest, ou vous sca∣uez, or you know. Il scait, he knoweth. Plurall. Nous scauons, we know. Vous scauez, you know. Ils scauent, they know. And, auoir, to haue hath For the singular. I'ay, I haue. Tu as, thou hast, ou vous auez, or you haue. Il a, he hath. Plurall. Nous auons, we haue. Vous auez, you haue. Ils ont, they haue. Which is a Verbe that helpeth the other, as you shall sée. As touching the other thrée, that is to say, valloir, to be worth, vouloir, to will, and, pouuoir, to can, they ende otherwise than those that went before, for valloir, to be worth, maketh his Present tense in, aux: as, For the singular. Ie vaux, I am worth. Tu vaux, thou art worth, ou vous vallez, or you are worth. Il vaut, he is worth. Plurall. Nous vallons, we are worth. Vous vallez, ye are worth. Ils vallent, they are worth.
But, vouloir, to will, &, pouuoir, to can, ende in, eux, as vouloir, to will, veux, I will, pou∣uoir, to can, peux, I can For the singular. Ie peux, I can. Tu peux, thou canst, ou vous pou∣uez, or you can. Il peut, he can. Plurall. Nous pouuons, we can. Vous pouuez, you can. Ils peuuent, they can. The Verbes that make their Infinitiue in re, forme their Present tense taking away, re, and putting to, s, as of dire, to say, dis, I say. escrire, to write, escris, I write, faire, to doe, fais, I doe, lire, to reade, lis, I reade, in this maner For the singular. Ie dis, I say. Tu dis, thou sayest, ou vous dites, or yo sa ▪ Il d▪ he sayeth. Plurall. Nous disons, we say. Vous dites, you say. Ils disent, they say. For the singular. I'escris, I write. Tu escris, thou writest, ou vous escri∣uez, or you write. Il escrit, he writeth.
Plurall. Nous escriuons, we write. Vous escriuez, you write. Ils escriuent, they write. For the last they, which ende in, ore, forme their Present tense, chaunging, re, into, s, as of, clore, to close, clos, I close, and his Com∣pounds, and other lyke, and they be coniuga∣ted thus For the singular. Ie clos, I shut. Tu clos, thou closest, ou vous clouez, or you close. Il clost, he closeth. Plurall. Nous cloüons, we close. Vous cloüez, you close. Ils cloent, they close vp. Of the forming of the Preterimper∣fect tense The Preterimperfect tense is formed in all verbes of what termination and coniuga∣tion that they be, by the first person of the plurall number of the Indicatiue moode, and Present tense, chaunging, ons, into, oye, or, oys, as of, aimons, we loue, we haue I'aimoye, or, I'aimoys, I loued, but most commonly, oys, as of, faisons, we doe. faisois, I did, disons, we say. disoys, I sayde, monstrons, we shewe, monstroys,
I shewed, and so of all the sixe verbes wythout exception. Therefore I wyll not tarye long herein, for it shall sufyce to coniugate one for all, seeing that by the same shal be known the coniugating of the others. So then of nous aimons, we loue, we haue, I'aimoys, I lo∣ued, in thys sort: For the singular. I'aimoys, I loued. Tu aimoys, thou louedst, ou vous ai∣mies, or you loued. Il aymoit, e loued. Plurall. Nous aimions, we loued. Vous aimiez, ye loued. Ils aimoyent, they loued. Of the forming and termination of the first Preterperfect tense. The first Preterperfect tense of our tongue hath riuers terminations, according as hys Infinitiues ende diuersly. The verbes which ende in, er, make thys Preterperfect herein, ay, or, é, masculyne, as some saye, but most commonly in, ay: as, For the singular, I'aimay, I loued. Tu aimas, thou louedst, ou vous ai∣mastes, or you loued. Il aima, he loued.
Plurall. Nous aimasmes, we loued. Vous aimastes, ye loued. Ils aimerent, they loued. They which ende in, dre, haue this Preter∣perfect in, dis, as of, tordre, to wrest, tordis, I wrested, thus: For the singular. Ie tordis, I wrested. Tu tordis, thou wrestedst, ou vous tordistes, or you wrested. Il tordit, he wrested. Plurall. Nous tordismes, we wrested. Vous tordistes, ye wrested. Ils tordirent, they wrested. Except prendre, to take, which maketh prins, I tooke. As, For the singular. Ie prins, I tooke. Tu prins, thou tookest, ou vous prin∣stes, or you tooke. Il print, he tooke. Plurall. Nous prinsmes, we tooke. Vous prinstes, ye tooke. Ils prindrent, they tooke. Touching those that ende in, ir, some forme this Preterperfect in, ins, as for example, re∣tenir, to keepe.
For the singular. Ie retins, I kept. Tu retins, thou kepst, ou vous retin∣stes, or you kept. Il retint, he kept. Plurall. Nous retinsmes, we kept. Vous retinstes, ye kept. Ils retinrent, they kept. As much must be sayde of these Verbes, maintenir, to maintaine, resiouir, to reioyce, preue∣nir, to preuent. The other be lyke to their Indi∣catyue moode as touching their termination, as, assopir, to waxe drowsie, assopis, I waxed drowsie, banir, to banishe, banis, I banished, con∣uertir, to conuert, conuertis, I conuerted. Ouir, to heare, is excepted, as we may sée in coniuga∣ting it, in thys fashion: For the singular. I'ouy, I hearde. Tu ouys, thou heardest, ou vous ouy∣stes, or you hearde. Il ouyt, he hearde. Plurall. Nous ouysmes, we hearde. Vous ouystes, ye hearde. Ils ouyrent, they hearde. They that ende in, oir, forme and ende their first preterperfect in, u, as of aperceuoir, to per∣ceyue, aperceu, I perceyued, conceuoir, to conceyue, conceu, I conceyued, deceuoir, to deceyue, deceu.
I deceyued, valloir, to be worth, vallu, I was worth, vouloir, to will, voulu, I willed, pouuoir, to be a∣ble, peu, I coulde. And they be coniugated thus: For the singular, I'aperceu, I perceyued. Tu aperceuz, thou perceyuedst, ou vous aperceustes, or you perceyued. Il aperceut, he perceyued. Plurall. Nous aperceusmes, we perceyued. Vous aperceustes, ye perceyued. Ils aperceurent, they perceyued. For the singular. Ie peu, I coulde. Tu peus, thou couldst, ou vous peu∣stes, or you coulde. Il peut, he coulde. Plurall. Nous peusmes, we coulde. Vous peustes, ye coulde. Ils peurent, they coulde. Auoir, to haue, and Scauoir, to knowe, be ex∣cepted, the which make their first Preter∣perfect in, ay, as the verbes in, er. The ver∣bes that ende in, re, make all their first Pre∣terperfect in, is, as of, dire, to say, Ie dis, I said, escrire, to wryte, escriuis, I wrote. And For the singular. I'escriuis, I wrote. Tu escriuis, thou wrotest, ou vous escriuistes, or you wrote. Il escriuit, he wrote.
Plurall. Nous escriuismes, we wrote. Vous escriuistes, ye wrote. Ils escriuerent, they wrote. And so of their lyke, except cognoistre, to knowe, boire to drinke, croire, to beleue, taire, to be silent, plaire, to please, repaistre, to seede. The which haue their first Preterperfect in, u, like to those that ende in, oir, of which wée haue spoken heretofore. Of the forming of the last Preter∣perfect tense. The last preterperfect tense may be known generally in all sorts of Verbes, by the thrée persons of thys verbe, ay, haue, which be as signes and tokens of it. And for the better knowledge of it, I will shewe it by the con∣iugating of one verbe, which shall serue for all. Let vs take, aimer, to loue, which hath For the singular. I'ay aymé, I haue loued. Tu as aimé, thou hast loued, ou vous auez aimé, you haue loued. Il a aimé, he hath loued. Plurall. Nous auous aimé, we haue loued. Vous auez aimé, ye haue loued Ils ont aimé, they haue loued. So that the persons of the verbe, ay, are as
you sée, for the Singular. Ay, haue. As, hast, ou auez, or haue. A, hath. Plurall. Auons, we haue. Auez, ye haue. Ont, they haue. Of the forming of the Preterplu∣perfect tense. The Preterpluperfect of all verbes is al∣wayes formed of the Preterimperfect of this verbe, ay, that goeth before it, which is for the singular for the first and seconde person, auoys ou auiez, auoit, for the thirde. For the Plurall, auyons, auyez, auoient. Let vs ioyne it then with some verbe whatsoeuer, and we shall make therewith a Preterpluperfect, in this sort: For the singular. I'auoys aimé, I had loued. Tu auois aimé, thou hadst loued ou vous auiez aimé, or not had loued. Il auoit aimé, he had loued. Plurall. Nous auions aimé, we had loued. Vous auiez aimé, ye had loued. Ils auoient aimé, they had loued.
For the singular. I'auoys dit, I had sayde. Tu auois dit, thou hadst sayde, ou vous auiez dit, or you had sayde. Il auoit dit, he had sayde. Plurall. Nous auions dit, we had sayde. Vous auiez dit, ye had sayde. Ils auoient dit, they had sayde. And so of all the other. Of the forming and termination of the fu∣ture tense Indicatiue. All verbes haue their termination alike in this Future tense, to wete, for the singular, ray, ras, or, res, and, ra, for the Plurall, rons, rez, ront, as we may easily sée by the coniu∣gating of all verbes, if we had leysure to re∣cyte them. But bycause it shoulde be a thing long and tedious, we will content our selues with one example, séeing that by it all other shall be knowne. Let vs kéepe then our ordi∣narie verbe which is aimer, to loue, for somuch as it is lyke to others in this tense. It hath For the singular. I'aimeray, I will loue. Tu aimeras, thou wilt loue, ou vous aimerez, or you will loue. Il aimera, he will loue. Plurall. Nous aimerons, we will loue. Vous aimerez, ye will loue. Ils aimeront, they will loue.
For the singular. Ieferay, I will doe. Tu feras, thou wilt doe, ou vous fe∣rez, or you will doe. Il fera, he will doe. Plurall. Nous ferons, we will doe. Vous ferez, ye will doe. Ils feront, they will doe. Of the Imperatiue moode. The Imperatiue hath but the second and third person as well in the singular, as in the Plurall. And as for the seconde person herof, it is easily knowne in all sorts of verbes, sée∣ing that it is alwayes like to the seconde per∣son of ye present tense of th' Indicatiue moode, sauing that it hath not ye pronoune primitiue, to wéet, tu, thou, ou vous, or you, as for example, aimes, loue thou, ou aimez, or loue you, dis, say thou, ou dites, or say ye, proposes, propoūd thou, ou pro∣posez, or propound ye, and so others. The thirde person of this Imperatiue is knowne also in all verbes by this Particle, que, which goeth before it, not altogither immediatly: for the Pronoune primitiue (that is to say, Il, for the singular, and, Ils, for the Plurall) is next vn∣to it, but this particle, que, and the Pronoune Il, and, Ils, be ioyned togither, as if it were but one worde, by the figure Apostrophe, by
the which (as we haue already sayde) the, e, of, que, is eaten vppe, bicause that the other vowell which is, i, is ioyned vnto it in thys sort, qu'il aime, let him loue. qu'il die, let him say, qu'il face, let him doe. And in the Plurall, qu'ils aiment, let them loue, qu'ils disent, let them saye, qu'ils facent, let them doe. And therefore behold howe we shall coniugate togither these twoo persons of the Imperatiue. For the Singular. Aimes, loue thou, ou aimez, or loue you. Qu'il aime, let him loue. For the Plurall. Aimez, loue ye. Qu'ils aiment, let them loue. The Imperatiue hath two Future tenses, the one is called affirmatiue, and the other negatiue, which haue but the seconde and thirde person as their Imperatiue, and haue alwayes before them as signes, these parti∣cles, fay, ou faites, garde, ou gardez, voy, ou voyez. An example of the Future affirma∣tiue, For the Singular. Fay que tu aimes, see that thou loue, ou faites que vous aimez, or see that you loue. Fay, ou faites, qu'il aime, see that he loue. For the Plurall. Faites que vous aimez, se that ye loue. Faites qu'ils aiment, see that they loue.
For the Singular. Garde que tu parles, take heede what thou speakest, ou gardez que vous parliez, or take hede what you speak. Garde, take heede, ou gardez, or take you heede, qu'il parle, that hee speake. For the Plurall. Gardez, take ye heede, que vous par∣liez, that ye speake. Gardez qu'ils parlent, take ye heede that they speake. For the singular. Voy que tu faces, see that thou doe' ou voyez que vous faciez, or see that you doe. Voy, see. ou voyez, or see you, qu'il face, that he doe. For the Plurall. Voyes que vous faciez, see that ye doe. Voyez qu'ils facent, see that they doe. As much thereof may a man say of the Fu∣ture negatiue, but that there must be added a negation, as, For the singular. Fay que tu ne parles, see that thou speake not, ou faites que vous ne parliez, or see that you speake not. Fay ou faites qu'il ne parle, see that he speake not. The Plu. Faites q̄ vous ne {per}liez, see that ye speak not. Faites qu'ils ne {per}lēt, se that they speak not.
And so of others. Of the Optatiue. The Optatiue is knowne in all Verbes by this particle of desiring, Ie prie Dieu, I pray God, ou Dieu vueille que, or God graunt that. In the rest it is lyke to the Present tense: as for example For the singular. Ie prie Dieu, I pray God, or dieu vueil∣le que j'aime, God graūt that I loue. Tu aimes, thou loue, ou vous aimez, or you loue. Il aime, he loue. For the Plurall. Dieu vueille que nous aimons, God graunt that we loue. Vous aimez, ye loue. Ils aiment, they loue. This Optatiue hath fower tenses, as the Indicatiue, to wete ye preterimperfect, Per∣fect, Preterpluperfect, and Future tense. Of the Preterimperfect of the Optatiue. This Preterimperfect is knowne by this Particle, pleust à Dieu que, I would it did please God that, and also by his termination, which is in the Singular in, usse, in insse, in, isse, in,
asse, and for the Plurall, in, ussions, inssions, issions, &, assions: An example of those, which ende in, usse, For the Singular. Pleust à Dieu que je cogneusse, I woulde it did please God that I knew. Tu cogneusses, thou knowst, ou vous cogneussiez, or you knew. Il cogneust, he know. Plurall. Nous cogneussions, we knew. Vous cogneussiez, ye knew. Ils cogneussent, they knew. An example of them which ende in, insse, For the Singular. Pleust à Dieu que je prinsse, I woulde it did please God that I tooke. Tu prinsses, thou tookest, ou vous prinssiez, or you tooke. Il print, he tooke. For the Plurall. Pleust à Dieu que nous prinssions, I woulde it pleased God, that we tooke. Vous prinssiez, yee tooke. Ils prinssent; they tooke. An example of, isse, For the singular. Pleust à Dieu que je fisse, I woulde it pleased God that I made. Tu fisses, thou madest, ou vous fis∣siez, or you made. Il fit, he made.
For the Plurall. Pleust à Dieu, que nous fissions, I woulde it pleased God, that we made. Vous fissiez, ye made. Ils fissent, they made, An example of these that ende in, asse, (which all verbes ending in, er, doe) For the singular. Pleust à Dieu, que j'aimasse, I would it pleased God, that I loued. Tu aimasses, thou louedst, ou vous aimassiez, or you loued. Il aimast, be loued. For the Plurall. Pleust à Dieu, que nous aimassions, I woulde it pleased God, that we loued. Vous aimassiez, ye loue. Ils aimassent, they loued. Of the Preterperfect. This Preterperfect hath also for one of his signes, Dieu vueille que, God graunt that, ou à ma volunte, or I would: And besides this signe it hath an other, which is the Present tense of the Optatiue moode of this verbe, ay, thus For the singular. I'aye, I haue. Tu ayes, thou hast, ou vous ayez, or you haue. Il ait, he hath.
Plurall. Nous ayons, we haue. Vous ayez, ye haue. Ils ayent, they haue. In such sort that adding any Verbe what we list to the Personnes of that tense of the Verbe, ay, this Preterperfect shall be for∣med, as for example, For the singular. Dieu vueille, que j'aye aimé, God graunt, that I haue loued. Tu ayes, thou hast, ou vous ayez aimé, or you haue loued. Il ait aimé, he hath loued. For the Plurall. Dieu vueille, que nous ayons aimé, God graunt, that we haue loued. Vous ayez aimé, ye haue loued. Ils ayent aimé, they haue loued. Of the Preterpluperfect. This Preterpluperfect is knowne gene∣rally in all sortes of Verbes by the Preter∣imperfect of the Optatiue of this Verbe, aye, which commeth of, j'ay, which is in this ma∣ner coniugated For the singular. Pleust à Dieu, que j'eusse, I woulde to God that I had. Tu eusses, thou haddest, ou vous eus∣siez, or you had. Il eut, he had.
For the Plurall. Pleust à Dieu, que nous eussions, woulde to God, that we had. Vous eussiez, that ye had. Ils eussent, they had. So that Coniugating it with what Verbe so euer this Preterpluperfect is so formed, as in this one example for all For the singular. Pleust à Dieu, que j'eusse aimé, I woulde to God, that I had loued. Tu eusses, thou hadst, ou vous eus∣siez aimé, or you had loued. Il eut aimé, he had loued. For the Plurall. Pleust à Dieu, que nous eussions ai∣mé, would to God, that we had loued. Vous eussiez aimé, ye had loued. Ils eussent aimé, they had loued. Of the Subiunctiue moode. The Subiunctiue h fower tenses, the Present, Preterimperfect, the Preterperfect and the preterpluperfect. The present, is like to the Present tense of the Optatiue: sauing, that we put in stéede of, Pleustà Dieu, woulde to God, veu que, seeing that, ou combien que, or although that, j'açoyt, albeit, si, if, quand, when. as
For the singular. Veu que j'aime, seeing that I loue. Tu aimes, thou louest, ou vo' aimez, or you loue. Il aime, he loueth. For the Plurall. Veu que nous aimons, seeing that we loue. Vouz aimez, ye loue. Ils aiment, they loue. For the singular. Combien que je dis, although that I say. Tu dis, thou sayest, ou vous dites, or you say. Il dit, he sayeth. For the Plurall. Combien que nous disons, although that we say. Vous dites, ye say. Ils disent, they say. And so of all others. Of the Preterimperfect. This Preterimperfect in all Verbes is like to the Preterimperfect of the Indicatiue Moode, as you may sée there, or else ending in, rois, and then this particle, quand, goeth before it, as For the singular. Quand j'aimerois, when I loued. Tu aimerois, thou louedst, ou vous aimeriez, or you loued. Il aimerois, he loued.
For the Plurall. Quand nous aimerions, when we loued. Vouz aimeriez, ye loued. Ils aimeroient, they loued. It hath also the termination of the Preter∣imperfect of the Optatiue, wherevnto I doe sende you, to sée that which I haue spoken of it there, only there is giue vnto it for a signe, this Particle, Combien que, although that, which alwayes goeth before it. Of the Preterperfect. This Preterperfect is as the seconde Pre∣terperfect of the Indicatiue moode: (but that there must be added for his signification this particle, veu que, seeing that, which is put be∣fore it) or as the Preterperfect of the Opta∣tiue, by adding in stéede of, Dieu vueille que, God graunt that, Combien que, although that. Of the Preterpluperfect. This Preterpluperfect is knowne by the Preterimperfect of the subiunctiue moode of this Verbe, ay, by ioyning with it, the first Person of the seconde Preterperfect tense of the Indicatiue moode of any Verbe whatso∣euer. Now the Preterimperfect of the Sub∣iunctiue of this Verbe, ay, is coniugated in this sort
For the singular. Quand j'aurois, when I had. Tu aurois, thou hadst, ou vous au∣riez or you had. Il auroit, he had. Plurall. Nous aurions, we had. Vous auriez, ye had. Ils auroient, they had. Now let vs ioyne with it, for example the first Person of the seconde Preterperfect of, j'aime, ou dit, ou fait, which is, aimé, dit, fait, we shall then finde for the first person of the singular that it is, quand j'auroys aimé, when I had loued, quand j'aurois dit, when I had sayd. quand j'aurois fait, when I had done, and so of others, for the seconde Person, tu aurois, thou hadst, ou vous auriez aimé, dit, fait, or you had loued, sayde, done, for the thirde, Il auroit ai∣mé, dit, fait, he had loued, sayde, done. For the Plurall, quand nous aurions aimé, dit, fait, when we had loued, sayde, done, vous auriez aimé, dit, fait, ye haue loued, sayde, done, Ils auroient aimé, dit, fait, they had loued, sayde, done. And that which I say of these thrée Verbes must be sayde of others. This Preterpluperfect may also be knowne by the Preterimperfect of the Indicatiue moode of this same Verbe, ay, which is auoys, as
For the singular. Veu que j'auoys aimé, seeing that I had loued. Tu auoys aimé, thou hadst loued, ou vous auiez aimé, or you had loued. Il auoit aimé, he hath loued. For the Plurall. Veu que nous auions aimé, seeing that we had loued. Vous auiez aimé, ye had loued. Ils auoyent aimé, they had loued. Or else lyke to the Preterpluperfect of the Optatiue of the sayde Verbe, ay, exam∣ple. For the singular. Combien que j'eusse aimé, although that I had loued, Tu eusses aimé, thou hadst loued, ou vous eussiez aimé, or you had loued. Il eut aimé, he had loued. For the Plurall. Combien que nous eussions aimé, although that we had loued. Vous eussiez aimé, ye had loued. Ils eussent aimé, they had loued. And so of all others. For you may not thinke that bycause I put so oftē this Verbe aimer, for example that I woulde not haue this to be vnderstanded, as well of other Verbes as of it, but séeing that all other Verbes may be cōprehended by one exam∣ple
I take this ynough then as the first that commeth. Notwithstanding when they dif∣fer I dooe shew it, and haue shewed it, brin∣ging then an example of all the kyndes of Verbes that differ: as you may sée in that which I haue sayde heretofore. Of the Infinitiue. The Infinitiue, first hath neither number, nor Person, and touching the terminations of it, I will not now speake bycause I haue treated amplie ynough therof in the begin∣ning of the Verbes, where we shewed howe many sortes there were of them & how they ended. Therefore when you shall doubt of a Verbe, you must haue recourse to that which I haue alreadie sayde. Of the Preterpluperfect of the Infinitiue. This Preterpluperfect hath alwayes be∣fore it for a marke and signe, this Infinitiue auoir, to haue, as auoir aimé, to haue loued, auoir dit, to haue sayde, auoir parlé, to haue spoken, a∣uoir mange, to haue eaten. Of the Future. The Future hath before it this particle,
que, and as concerning the rest, it is lyke to the Future of the Indicatiue: as For the singular.. Que j'aimeray, that I shall loue. Que tu aimeras, that thou shalt loue, ou vous aimerez, or you shall loue. Qu'il aimera, that be shall loue. For the plurall. Que nous aimerons, that we shall loue. Que vous aimerez, that ye shall loue. Qu'ils aimeront, that they shall loue. Of the Gerundine. The Gerundine is formed of Infinitiues by adding this particle, de, which goeth be∣fore the Infinitiue in this sort, le moyen d'ai∣mer, the way to loue, la faculte de parler, the fa∣cultie to speake, d'escrire, to write, de paindre, to painte, and so of others. We haue another kinde of Gerundines which is formed by the participle of the present tense ending in, ant, adding this particle, en, before the partici∣ple, as en aimant, in louing, en disant, in saying, en faisant, in dooing, en parlant, in speaking, and there is a thirde kinde of Gerundines, which is formed of the Infinitiue and of this parti∣cle, pour, or Il faut, which go before: as pour aimer, for to loue, pour dire, for to say, pour faire, for to doe, Il faut aimer, he must loue. Il faut e∣scrire,
he must write, the Supine may be for∣med after the same sort. Of the Participle. There be two participles of the Infinitiue, the one that commeth of the Verbe actiue, which endeth in, ant, as aimant, louing, faisant, doing, parlant, speaking, and the other which commeth of the Verbe passiue: as aimé, loued, dit, spoken, fait, done, whereof we will treate more largely hereafter. Of the Verbe Passiue. To know well the verbe Passiue, we must coniugate one, by the which all the other maye be coniugated, putting before it the verbe Substantiue for a signe thereof, which in coniugating varieth the tense, as it were alone by it selfe. We will therefore set forth one example for all, in this sort. The Indicatiue moode and the pre∣sent tense. For the singular. Ie suis aimé, I am loued. Tu es, ou vous estes aimé, thou art, or you are loued. Il est aimé, he is loued.
Plurall. Nous sommes aimez, we are loued. Vous estes aimez, ye are loued. Ils sont aimez, they are loued. The Preterimperfect tense. For the singular. I'estois aimé, I was loued. Tu estois ou vous estiez aimé, thou wart, or you were loued. Il estoit aimé, he was loued. Plurall. Nous estions aimez, we were loued. Vous esties aimez, ye were loued. Ils estoient aimez, they were loued. The first Preterperfect. For the Singular Iefus aimé, I was loued. Tufus, ou vous fustes aimé, thou wast or you were loued. Il fut aimé, he was loued. Plurall. Nous fumus aimez, we were loued. Vous fustes aimez, ye were loued. Ils furent aimez, they were loued. The seconde Preterperfect. For the singular. I'ay esté aimé, I haue bene loued. Tu as, ou vous auez esté aimé, thou hast or you haue bene loued. Il a esté aimé, he hath bene loued.
Plurall. Nous auons esté aimez, wee haue bene loued. Vous auez esté aimez, ye haue bene lo∣ued. Ils ont esté aimez, they haue bene loued. The Preterpluperfect. For the singular. I'auoys esté aimé, I had bene loued. Tu auoys, ou vous auiez esté aimé thou hadst, or you had bene loued. Il auoit esté aimé, he had bene loued. For the Plurall. Nous auions esté aimez, we had bene loued. Vous auiez esté aimez, ye had bene lo∣ued. Ils auoient esté aimez, they had bene loued. The Future. For the singular. Ie seray aimé, I shall be loued. Tu seras, ou vous serez aimé, thou shalt, or you shall be loued. Il sera aimé, he shall be loued. Plurall. Nous ferons aimez, we shall be loued. Vous serez aimez, ye shall be loued. Ils seront aimez, they shall be loued.
Of the Imperatiue moode, the Pre∣sent tense. For the singular. Fay que tu soys aimé, see that thou be loued, ou que vous soyez aimé, or that you be loued. Face qu'il soit aimé, se that he be loued. For the Plurall. Faites que vous soyés aimez, see that ye be loued. Facent qu'ils soient aimez, see that they be loued. Of the Optatiue in the present tense. For the singular. Dieu vueille que je soy aimé, God graunt that I be loued. Tu soys, ou vous soyez aimé, that thou, or you be loued. Il soit aimé, he be loued. Plurall. Nous soyons aimez, we be loued. Vous soiez aimez, ye be loued. Ils soient aimez, they be loued. The Preterimperfect. For the singular. Dieu vuelle que je fusse aimé, God graunt that I were loued. Tufusses aimé, ou vous fussiez ai∣mé, thou wert, or you were loued. Il fut aimé, he were loued.
Plurall. Nous fussions aimez, we were loued. Vous fussiez aimez, ye were loued. Ils fussent aimez, they were loued. Or else as the Preterimperfect of the Indi∣catiue, by putting before it for a signe, o si, O if: as, O si j'estois aimé. &c. O if I were lo∣ued. &c. Of the Preterperfect. For the singular. Dieu vueille que I'aye esté aimé, woulde God that I haue bene loued. Tu ayes esté aimé, ou vous ayez esté aimé, thou hast bene loued, or you haue bene loued. Il ait este aime, he hath bene loued. For the Plurall. Nous ayons este aimez, we haue bene loued. Vous ayez esté aimez, yee haue bene loued. Ils aient esté aimez, they haue bene lo∣ued. Of the Preterpluperfect. For the singular. Pleust à Dieu que I'eusse esté aimé, woulde it pleased God that I had bene loued. Tu eusses, ou vous eussiez esté aimé, that thou hadst, or you had bene loued. Il eust esté aimé, he had bene loued.
For the Plurall. Nous eussions esté aimez, we had ben loued. Vous eussiez esté aimez, ye had bene loued. Ils eussent esté aimez, they had bene loued. The Future tense is lyke to the Present tense of the Optatiue moode. Of the Subiunctiue moode, and of his Present tense. The Present tense of the Subiunctiue moode is coniugated as the present tense of the Indicatiue, sauing that it hath before it for a signe, veu que, seeing that. Of the Preterimperfect. For the singular. Quand Ie serois aimé, when I shoulde be loued. Tu serois, ou vous seriez aimé, thou shouldest, or you shoulde be loued. Il seroit aimé, he shoulde be loued. Plurall. Nous serions aimez, we shoulde be lo∣ued. Vous seriez aimez, ye should be loued. Il seroient aimez, they shoulde be lo∣ued.
Or else as the preterimperfect of the In∣dicatiue moode, in giuing him this signe, veu que, seing that, or as the preterimperfect of the Optatiue. Of the Preterperfect. This preterperfect tense is coniugated as the preterperfect of the Optatiue. Of the Preterpluperfect. For the singular. Quand I'aurois esté aimé, when I had bene loued. Tu auroys, ou vo{us} auriez esté aimé, thou hadst, or you had bene loued. Il auroit esté aimé, he had bene loued. For the Plurall. Nous aurions esté aimez, we had bene loued. Vous auriez esté aimez, ye had bene loued. Ils auroient esté aimez, they had bene loued. Or as the Preterpluperfect of the Indica∣tiue moode. Of the Future. For the singular. Quand Iauray esté aimé, when I shall haue bene loued. Tu auras, ou vous aurez esté aimé, thou shalt, or you shall haue bene loued. Il aura esté aimé, he shal haue ben loued.
Plurall. Nous aurons esté aimés, we shall haue bene loued. Vous aures esté aimez, ye shall haue bene loued. Ils auront esté aimez, they shall haue bene loued. Of the Infinitiue moode. Estre aimé, To be loued. For the Preterperfect and Pre∣terpluperfect. Auoir esté, aimé, To haue or had bene loued. Of the Future. Que Ie seray aimé, that I shall be loued, ou I'es∣pere que Ie seray aimé, or I hope that I shall bee loued. The Participle is formed, taking awaye from the passiue the verbe Substantiue, as aimé, loued, and so of all the rest. Of the Participle. The participle is a part of speach, which is so called, bicause it procéedeth of the nature of the Verbe, and of the Noune. Nowe we haue in our tongue two only sortes of parti∣ciples:
whereof the one cōmeth of the verbe Actiue, and is called a participle of the pre∣sent tense: and the other of the verbe passiue. That which procéedeth of the verbe Actiue, endeth in, ant, and is formed of the preterim∣perfect of the Indicatiue moode of the verbe actiue, of whatsoeuer coniugatiō it be, chaun∣ging, oys, into, ant, as aimois, loued, aimāt, louing, disois, sayde, disant, saying, faisois, did, faisant, do∣ing, parlois, spake, parlāt, speaking, & so of others. Of which participle, is formed the participle feminine, by adding, e, feminine at the ende, as, aimant, aimante, disant, disante, faisant, faisante, for all the other which ende in, ant, be of the masculine gender. The Participle that descendeth from the Verbe passiue is formed of the first person of the Indicatiue moode, by taking away the Verbe substantiue, which is ioyned vnto it: as we haue sayde in Coniugating the Verbe passiue, je suis aimé, I am loued, dit, sayde, fait, made, declaré, declared, estimé, estemed. There must then be taken away these particles, je suis, and beholde the participle formed in this sort, aimé, loued, dit, sayde, fait, made, estimé, e∣stime, dest tué, destitute, and so of others, wher∣of commeth the participle feminine by ad∣ding, e, feminine, as aimé aimée, dit dite, fait
faite, estimé estimée. For the rest, bycause, that these participles be declined as the nounes of which we haue spoken amplie ynough, I sende you thither. For it is all one in this respect of adding the Article, le, and, vn, for the masculine, la, and, vne, for the feminine, as for example of the participle actiue, l'aimant, the louing, et vn ai∣mant, and a louing, for the masculine, and for the feminine, l'aimante, et vne aimante, ex∣ample of the participle passiue: for the mas∣culine l'aimé, the beloued, le dit, the sayde, et vn aimé, and a beloued, vn dit. one sayde, for the fe∣minine, l'aimée, la dite, et vne aimée, vne dite. As for the plurall number there néedeth but to adde, s, at the ende of the singular, and it shall be formed, as l'aimé les aimés, l'aimée les aimées, l'aimant les aimants, l'aimante, les aimantes, &c. Of the Aduerbe. The Aduerbes be woordes, which be not declined (as these thrée last sortes of woordes that is to saye, Coniunction, Preposition, and Interiection, of which wée will speake consequently hereafter) and ioyne them∣selues to Verbes to make that to be more cléerely vnderstanded, which those Verbes
signifie and to fulfill & accomplishe their sig∣nification, as the Adiectiues are ioyned to Substantiues, as for example, let vs take j'aime, I loue, a man knoweth not whither it be of much or little loue; or otherwise, if there be not ioyned vnto it an Aduerbe, as, gran∣dement, greatly, ou legerement, or lightly, and so others, but then it is knowne with what loue one loueth: as je l'aime grandement, I loue him greatly, Il aime legeremēt, ou bien peu, he loueth lightly or very little. There are of diuers sortes of Aduerbes: some wherwith men vse to signifie or tell the tyme of a thing: as auiourd'huy, To day, de∣main, to morrow, hier, yesterday, l'autre iour, the other day, apres demain, after to morrowe, tous les iours, euery day, quand ou comme, when, or as, cependant que, whyles, maintenant, now, de∣sia, already, à ceste heure, at this houre, tantost, anon, incontinent; incontinent, si pris si mis, by and by, longuement, a long whyle, tousiours, al∣wayes, tousiourmais, for euer, quelquefois, some∣tymes, aucunefois, any tyme, jadis, in time past. souuent, souuentesfois, often, oftentymes, peu souuēt, seldome, jamais, neuer, cy apres, hereafter, par cy apres, hereafter, doresanauāt, from hence∣forth, ores, but, deuant, before, auant, afore, tant que, so long, jusques à tant que, vntill so long as.
Some be to signifie the place, as when one asketh, où est il? where is he? or else, où est il allé, whither is he gone? men aunswere in this? sort, Icy, here, là, there, illec, there, en ce lieu-la, in that place, en ce lieu cy, in this place, aupres neare, pres, nygh, dedans, within, hors, without, dehors, abroade. And for the answering of this question, of d'ou vient il? from whence commeth he? It is sayde, d'icy, of this place, de là, from hence, d'il∣lec, from thence. For this: Par où est il passé? which way went be? One aunswereth, Par cy, this way, par là, that way, par illec, by that place. For this questiō, de quel costé va il? on what side goeth he? One aunswereth in this maner, vers ce lieu cy, towardes this place, par icy, hither∣to par ce costé icy, on this side, par ce costé là, on that side, vers ce costé là, towardes that side, droict en auant, ryght afore, à trauers, ouerthwart, de∣uant, before, arriere, behinde, en arriere, backwarde. Some serue to recken, or number: as vne foys, once, deux foys, twyce, troysfois, thrice, quatre soys, foure tymes, and so of the other. Some signifie and shew order: puis apres, afterwardes, apres, after, en apres, after that, cy apres, hereafter, consequemment, consequently, Some be to aske: quoy? what? pourquoy?
wherefore? de quoy? why? où, where? d'où, from whence? par ou, wherby? cōment, how? quand, when? For to call, hau, howe, vien ça, come hither, st. whist, hist. For to aunswere, hau, howe. Nowe it is true that this last is somewhat rude, so that in the place of hau, we vse these phrases, plaist il, pleaseth it you, que vous plaist il? what shall it please you? and English men this woorde, tan∣tost, anon. For to aunswere assuredly: Ouy, yea, il est ainsi, it is so, pourquoy non? why not? For to affirme or confirme, sans point de faute, without any fayle, certes, certes, vrayemēt, truely, veritablement, veryly, certainement, cer∣taynly, pour certain, for certayne. For to denie, non, no, ne, not, nenny, no, nul∣lement, not at all. For to exhort & giue courage, or sus, go to, or auant, now, courage, courage, bien bien, well, well, or ça, go to. For to wishe: à la minne volunté, I would, pleust à Dieu, might it please God, Dieu vucille, God graunt, si, if, ou, or, o si, o if. For to signifie some thinges that are to be done togither: ensemble, togither, quand & quand, by and by, tout d'une venue, all at once, tout d'un coup, all at one chop, ensemblement, likewyse, tout d'un train, all in a rowe, ausi bien,
as well. For to elect and chose, mieux, better, et mais bien, and but well, in this sort, non pas cecy, not this, mais bien cela, but well that. For to separate, à part, a part, à l'escart, by it selfe, mais singulieremēt, but specially. As in this example, je vous en remercie tous mais sin∣gulierement, I thanke you all of it, but speciallye, mais nommement, but namely, principallemēt, chieflye, particulierement, particularly, special∣lement, specially, vous mon bon amy, you my good friend. For to signifie in what maner, seauammēt, skilfully, prudemment, wysely, vaillamment, va∣liauntly, diligemment, diligently, and so of o∣thers, which shew the qualitie of the thing. For to signifie quantitie, great or little, or for to augment, fore, very, beaucoup, much, moult, much, trop, to much, grandement, great∣lye, bien, well, As in this sentence, tu sois le bien venu, as for thee be thou welcome, peu, little, gueres, little, vn peu, a little, trop peu, to little, vn bien peu, a very little, le moins du monde, the least of the worlde, tant soit peu, be it neuer so little, presque, almost, is one of them also, so that, the negation goeth before it, in this sort, je ne voy presque goutte, I see not almost a whit. For to diminishe or make lesse, à grand
peine, skarce, peu à peu, little and little, tout bellement, faire, posement, softly, petit à pe∣tit, by little and little, presque, almost, enuiron, about, peu pres, well nigh, Il ne s'en faut gueres, there lacketh but little of it, nullement du mōde, by no meanes in the worlde, peu s'en faut, little lacketh. For to make comparison betwéene twoo, or many, aussi, also, tant, so much, autant, as∣much, si, so, plus, more, and moins, lesse, which be woordes that serue to shew comparison of things, and haue after them, que, comme, ou, de, as, or, of, which are alwayes one of the members of the Comparison: as in these ex∣amples, Il est aussi scauant que vous, He is as learned as you, Il n'est pas tant prudēt que cault, He is not so wyse as subtil. Ie suis autant son amy, que ou comme celuy qui l'est par dessus tous, I am as much his friend, as he that is aboue all other. Le plus excellent de tous, the most excellent of all, le moins sage de tous, the least wyse of all. For to shew, Voy-le-cy, Here it is, voy-le-la, there it is, voy-cy, beholde here, voy-la, beholde there. For to doubt, Paraduanture, peraduenture, Il peut bien estre, It may well be, il se peut bien faire, it may well be done, il est possible, it is possi∣ble, Il est bien possible, It is very possible, d'auen∣ture,
by chaunce, par cas fortuit, perchaunce, cō∣me fortune voulut, as fortune woulde, it is very true, that as to me I allow not these kindes of speaking, séeing that they smell more of Paynimes than the Christian speaches. And so I would gladly aduertise you by ye way to leaue this worde Fortune, which these olde dreamers Paynimes and Idolatours haue forged in their fonde braynes. For we must vse this woorde, Dieu, God, & haue it alwayes in our mouth in all our doo∣ings, and affaires, séeing that all things are and do come by his diuine prouidence, with∣out the which nothing can be. Then in place that men say, de cas fortuit, perchaunce, comme fortune voulut, as fortune woulde, we must say: comme Dien voulut, as God woulde, cecy ou cela se peut faire, this or that may be done, voire s'il plaist a Dieu, to weete, if it please God, the which must be added. For to shew likenesse or resemblaunce, or Comparison, or example: Comme, as ainsi, so, ainsi que, so as, ainsi comme, euen so, comme si, euen as, tout ainsi que, lyke as. Of Coniunctions. Coniunctions are woordes, which serue for to ioyne and knit togither other woordes or
sentences, of which there be diuers sortes. Some be to ioyne onely: as these, et, and, aussi, also, example of, et, and, Il est bon et hon∣neste, he is good and honest. Of, aussi, also, S'il vous offence, il in'offence aussi, If he offende you, he offendeth me also, d'auantage, moreouer, pareillement, likewyse, non seulement, not one∣lye, mais aussi, but also, en outre & qui plus est further and that more is, au reste, to the rest, au par sur, moreouer, en apres, afterwardes, outre ce, be∣side this, mesme, mesmement, also, namely. The other for to ioyne togither that which we woulde vnderstande a part: as, mais, but, example, Il est riche, mais meschant homme, He is riche, but a wicked man, voire mais, yea but, Il est bien vray que, It is very true that, vray est que, true it is that, or then, autrement, otherwise, sans cela, without that, mais aussi, but also: Ou, or, is a Coniunction to conioyne twoo things, of which we woulde affirme the one: as in this example, Il est bon, ou mauuais, he is good, or euill. Some serue for to yéelde reason, car, for, pour ce que, for that, pourquoy, wherfore, quād à ce que, as to this that, & puis que, and since that, donc, then, attendu que, considering that, veu que, seeing that, pourtant, by so much, pour au∣tant que, for asmuch as.
For to make exception, excepté, except, si∣non, but, ors, sauing, si, if. To shew a thing that foloweth of another, pour autant que, for asmuch as, as pour autant que vous auez la fieure, vous auez chauld, for∣asmuch as you haue the Ague, you are whot, puis∣que, sythens that. For to conclude, donques, then, parquoy, therfore, par ainsi, by this, & pourtant, and ther∣fore, pour ce, for that. To shew that, that which we say, causeth no let, or hinderaunce, Iaçoit, albeit, Cōbien∣que, although that, encores, yet, veu que, seeing that, toutesfois, neuerthelesse, neantmoins, ne∣uerthelesse, si est ce que, yet is it so that, nonob∣stant, notwithstanding, pourueu que, so that, au moins, at least, a tout le moins, at the vttermost, these two last serue for to demaunde that the least yet may be graunted vs: as in this ex∣ample: Si vous ne voulez m'ayder, au moins n'empeschez les autres de ce faire, If you will not helpe me, at the least let not other to doe it. Of Prepositions. The Prepositiōs are words that be put be∣fore other wordes, and therefore they are so called. As when a man speaketh of a place, of an order, or telleth the cause why, we saye,
Il est en la chambre, he is in the chamber, Il est le second apres cestuy la, he is the seconde after that same, Ie l'ay fait a cause de luy, I haue done it for his cause. Then we must knowe how many of them there are, & how they be placed, which may rather be séene by examples, than by rules or precepts. And therefore I will endeuour to discharge my selfe herein, the best that I can. It is true that if there doe remayne some be∣hynde that I shewe not, you may not for that be offended, for it is a small thing, and which may easily be learned in the French dictiona∣rie: and beside that, mannes memorie is so weake, that it is almost impossible to holde all things at the fingers ende. Then for the better vnderstanding them, we will gyue ex∣amples of them. And first, these sixe Prepo∣sitions, à, au, to, aux, to the, de, of, du, of, from. des, of the, de gouerne Nounes and Vrbes: as for example of, à, and, de, aller à la ville, au presche, aux prieres, to go to the towne, to the ser∣mon, to prayers. Of, de: Venir de la ville, du presche, des prieres, to come from the towne, from the sermon, from prayers. We saye also, estre à Londres, to be at London, au marché, in the mar∣ket place aux estuues, in the hote houses. A, and de, with a Substantiue, serue for an Adiectiue:
as, homme à cheual, à pied, de cheual, de pied, a man on horsebacke, a horseman, a foreman, on foote. So we saye: quelque chose de bon, some good thing, homme de bien, a good man. A. some∣times with the Infinitiue moode Present tense, signifieth the Future tense, or quali∣tie of some dutie. As: chose à aduenir, a thing to come to passe, besongne à faire, a worke to do, cho∣se à dire, a thing to saye, chose à taire, a thing to keepe secret. De, without an article, is ioyned with a noune of matter, quantitie, and in∣strument, as, couronne d'or, a crowne of gold, couppe d'argent, a cuppe of siluer, espee de fer, a sworde of yron, vn peu de feu, a little fire. This Preposition, des, is put in thys maner, des le commencement, from the beginning, des nostre enfance, from our chyldehoode. Depuis, and Ius∣ques, followe one another in one sentence, af∣ter this sorte: Depuis le haut iusques au bas, from aboue vntill beneath, Depuis soleil couchant iusques au point du iour, from the Sunne going downe vntill the breake of the day. Depuis, is set alone when it signifieth some space of tyme, as, Ie ne l'ay point veu depuis ce temps là, I haue not seene him sithence that time. Example of par, as, par courroux, by anger, par sa faute, by his fault. Of, pour, pour peur de honte, for feare of shame, cecy est pour moy, this is for me, faices
cela pour vostre profit, doe this for your profite. Pour, with the Infinitiue present tense, sig∣nifieth somwhat to come: as, Il est pour estre grand personnage, he is to be a great personage, pour enrichir sa maison, for to enrich his house, pour arriuer auiourd'huy, for to arryue to daye. Of parmy: parmy la fenestre, through the win∣dowe, parmy les champs, through the fieldes, par∣my la ville, through the towne. Of Apres: le se∣cond apres le roy, the seconde next the king, apres vous, after you. Of pres, and, aupres: seez vous prez de moy, sit you nigh me, venes aupres de moy, come neare me. Of sans: sans cecy je fusse allé aux champs, without this I had gone in∣to the fieldes, sans le sceu, without knowing, I'ay fait cela sans qu'ils s'en soyent apperceuz, I did the same, and they perceyued it not. Of, deuant: de∣uant tous, before all, deuant le roy, before the king. Of, auecques, or, auec: auec peine & tra∣uail, with payne and traueyle, venes auec moy, come with me, allez auecques elle, go with hir. Of en, and, és: en, is for the singular. As, Il est en Egypte, be is in Egipt: Es, for the Plurall, as, Il est és deserts, he is in the desertes, és montaig∣nes, in the mountaynes. There be of them yet some, as, enuers, towards, vers, towards, sur, vpon, soubs, vnder, sus, aboue, dessus, aboue, dessous, be∣neath, selon, after, ches, vnto, or, at, and verye
fewe other, the practise of which you maye easily sée in reading Authors. For there they may be best learned. And therefore it suffy∣ceth vs to haue shewed you with the finger, where the founteyne is, that you may drinke thereof when you are drye. Of the Interiection. Interiections be woordes that men cast, and set betwéene or in the middest of a mat∣ter, the affection of him that speaketh, there be diuers sortes of them. Some serue to call: as, hay, hau, howe. For to aske, haa? hagh? For to perceyue, ha, ha, ah, ah. For to crie, haro. For to make men holde there peace, ho∣uysche, hush, mom, paix, momme, peace. For to bid men beware, gare, take heede. For to laugh, ho, ha. For to lament, helas, las, lasse, hee, hemy, alas. For to marueyle, a, oya, dieux, dea. For to be sadde, O. For to abhorre, fy, fy. FINIS.
❧ ADVERTISSE∣MENT AVX LECTEVRS. POVR cae que c'est peu de chose, d'auoir la cognoissance des regles sans la practique. I'ay bien voulu à la fin de ce mien traité vous aduertir, de les practiquer en les estudiant. Et pour ce faire, il vous faut auoir quelques pe∣tis liures Françoys pour le cōmencement, tou∣chant les matieres que vous appeterez, com∣me ceux qui veulēt lire les Escritures sainctes, ils en peuuent auoir d'aussi exquis & eloquens qu'on sçauroit excogiter, comme le nouueau Testament, l'Institution Chrestienne de Mai∣stre Iean Caluin, ses sermons lesquels se peuuent trouuer separez, & plusieurs autres bons liu∣res, tant grands, que petis escrits, des plus ex∣cellents & renommez personnages de nostre temps. Et quant à ceux qui se delectent aussi de lire des liures sur quelque autre subiect, je les veux admonnester d'achater vn petit liu∣ret Intitulé le Theatre du Monde, lequel est à bō droict ainsi appellé, veu qu'il contient, non seulement le Theatre du monde, quant à la ma∣tiere, mais aussi pour la quantité du liure. Le Theatre & le Thresor de l'elegance & pure∣té de nostre langue. Il y en a d'autres qui sont
aussi fort bons & delectables pour la diuersité des maticres qu'ils contienent, comme le li∣ure des propos memorables, le liure des Face∣cieuses nuits, le liure des nouuelles de la Rayne de Nauarre, ou c'est qu'on peut descouurir les astuces de ce mōde, & le moyen de s'en donner garde, & maints autres semblables discours les∣quels vous pouuez sçauoir des Libraires, tou∣tesfois & quantes que vous voudrez, il ne faut seulement que leur demander en general quel∣que bon liure Françoys de telle grandeur, & sur telle & telle matiere, & ils le vous enseig∣neront incontinent. Au reste d'autant que je me doute, que vous n'entendrez pas tous les mots que vous lirez, je vous conseille d'auoir par mesme moyē, vn petit Dictionnaire Fran∣çois & Anglois, ou François & Latin (à ceux qui l'entendent) car vous y trouuerrez facile∣ment, selon l'ordre des lettres, la signification de tous les mots & puis apres vous voirez ai∣sement au premier liure de ce present traité, comme il les faut prononcer, & puis au second de quelle partie d'oraison ils sont, & s'ils sont Noms quels noms, de quel nombre, & de quel cas, & s'il sont Verbes, en quel meuf, & en quel temps vous les colloquerez, & ainsi des autres parties. Voila où je clorray le petit ruisselet de la petite source, qu'il a pleu a Dieu me don∣ner
l'eau du quel (s'il luy plaist) vous seruira pour arrouser, & faire croistre des Herbes de nostre langue Françoise, au jardin de vostre memoire, qui vous seront par apres, nō moins odoriferantes, que profitables, tellement que si je voy, que vous luy faciez des cōduits, pour le receuoir, & que voz Herbes en verdoyent, je suppliray nostre bon Dieu, qu'il vucille en telle sorte croistre les vaines de la source de mon esprit, que je puisse de mieux en mieux faire chose qui soit à vostre bien, & con∣tentement, comme je le prie qu'il vous maintienne en bonne prosperité. Ainsi soit-il. ❧
❧ AN ADƲER∣TISEMENT TO THE REA∣ders. BYcause that it is a small matter to haue the knowledge of rules without practise, I thought good at the end of this my treatise to aduertise you to practise the same, as you learne them. And for the dooing hereof, you must get some litle French bookes to beginne withall, which touche the matters that you are desirous of. As they which will reade the holy Scriptures, they may thereof haue so exquisite, and eloquent as a man can deuise, as the newe Testa∣ment, the Christian Institation of M. Iohn Cal∣uin, his Sermons, which may be found seuerally, and many other good bookes, aswell great, as small, writ∣ten by the most excellent and renowmed men of our tyme. And as for them, which are delighted to reade bookes vpon some other matter, I woulde admonishe them to buy a little booke Intituled: le Theatre du Monde, which is worthily so called, seeing that it contayneth not onely the glasse of the Worlde, as concerning the matter, but also for the quantitie, of the booke, the glasse and Treasure of the eloquence and purenesse of our tongue. There bee other also,
verye good and pleasaunt, by reason of the diuersi∣tie of matters, which they contayne: as the booke of Propos memorables, the booke of Facecieuses nuicts, the booke of Nouuelles de la Rayne de Nauarre, where a man maye discouer the subtill practises of the worlde, and the meane to take heede of them, and manye other such lyke discourses, the which you may knowe of the bookesellers, as often and when you wyll, you neede onely but aske them generallye, some good Frenche booke, of such a byg∣nesse, and vppon such, and such a matter, and they will shew it you by and by. As touching the rest, for∣asmuch as I doubt, that you will not vnderstande, all the woordes that you shall reade, I counsell you to haue likewyse a little Dictionarie, Frenche and Englishe, or Frenche and Latine (for them that vnderstande it.) For there you shall finde easilye, after the order of the crosse rowe, the signification of all woordes. And afterwardes you shall see easily in the first Booke of the present Treatise, howe they are to bee pronounced and after in the seconde, of what part of speache they be, and if they be Nounes, what Nounes, of what number, & of what case: and if they be Verbes, in what moode, and in what tense you shall place them, and so of the other partes. And thus dooe I shut vp the little Riuer of the little spring, which it hath pleased God to gyue
me, the water whereof, (if it be his will) shall serue you, to sprinckle, & make to grow, herbes of our French tongue, in the Garden of your memorie, which shall be to you hereafter no lesse pleasaunt in smell, than profitable, so that, if I see that you make pas∣sages to receyue the same, and that your Herbes thereby may spring. I shall beseeche our good God, that he woulde in such sort encrease the vaynes of the Spring of my vnderstanding, that I may the bet∣ter doe the thing, that may be to your profit and contentation, as I praye hym, to maintayne you in good prosperi∣tie. So be it.
