15557.5 S4049 34382867 29108
THE RIGHT VSE OF PROMISES. OR A Treatise of SANCTI∣FICATION. Whereunto is added GODS FREE∣SCHOOLE. By Mr IEREMIAH LEWIS, Sometime Preacher of the Word in Northampton. ISAY 35.8. The vncleane shal not passe ouer it. It shall be called the way of holinesse. LONDON: Printed by I.B. for H. Ouerton, and are to be sold at his shop at the entring in of Popehead-Alley, out of Lombardstreet. 1631.
TO The VVorship∣full RICHARD KNIGHTLEY, Esquire. Worthy Sir, WEre the bles∣sed soules in blisse ca∣pable of griefe, it would bee for no∣thing more than
that being possest of such an eternal weight of glory,Cor. 4.17 their care and diligence was no more when they dwelt in houses of clay,Iob 4.19. to glorifie God, by the improuement of their time & Talēts. Considering also that in the graue, whe∣ther wee are all go∣ing,Eccl. 9.10. there is no worke, nor deuice, nor know∣ledge, it behoues e∣uery
one to take that wise counsell,Pro 17.16. What∣soeuer his hand can doe, to doe quickly; lest ha∣uing a price in his hand, and wanting a heart, hee bee iustly taxed with folly. I haue therefore aduentured (this ser∣uant of God, the Au∣thour of this little worke,Gen. 35.20 being dead) to erect this Pillar on his Graue by publi∣shing
these few ob∣seruations, as they were deliuered by himselfe, especially being incouraged by some that are godly & iudicious; being confident that (by the blessing of God) they will doe a great deale more good this way, than was possible by kee∣ping them priuate; for by this means, he
being dead, yet speaketh.Heb. 11.4. It is but reasona∣nable that I present them to your Wor¦ship, for whose sake they first had a be∣ing in the world, hauing also had ex∣perience of your fa∣uourable acceptance of a small treatise of lesse worth already; I am imboldened to begge of your Wor∣ship to countenance
this likewise, far bet∣ter deseruing both for matter & Author. Psa. 35.27.The Lord, who de∣lights in the prosperity of his seruants, blesse you both in your person and familie, and by deliuering you from euery euill worke,2 Tim. 4.18 preserue you to his hea∣uenly kingdome. To whom be glory for euer and euer, Amen. Your worships in all duty THO. SHELTON.
To the Reader. Christian Reader: IT being ap∣pointed to all men once to dye;Heb. 9.27. GOD hath so prouided, that as the wicked shall be no more remembred; so,Iob 24.20. Psa. 112.6. the righteous shall be had in euerlasting remembrance,
and his memoriall shal be blessed.Pro. 10.7. Ruth. 2, 20Blessed be the Lord that hath not left off his kindnes to the liuing nor to the dead: that though the worthies of God, while they liued, were like Nepthaly,Gen. 49.21 as a hinde let loose, giuing goodly words, that when the eare heard them,Iob 29.11. it blessed them. I say, though they by death become like A∣braham, that knowes vs not,Isa. 63.1. and Israel that hath forgotten vs; yet the Lord in this age, as out of Zebulun, hath raised
those that handle the penn of the writer,Iudg. 5.1. whereby he accomplisheth that for them,Iob 19.23. that Iob wish∣ed for himselfe, Oh that my words were written, and that they were printed in a booke! There are many pro∣fitable and comfortable truths collected by ther Authors, with the ex∣pence of much pains & strength, that had now beene drowned in for∣getfulnesse, had not God by this means,Exod. 2.10 like Moses, drawne them out of the water, to preserue
the memory of the dead; as the smell of Lebanon,Hos. 14.6. and to edifie and com∣fort the liuing. Among the rest, these three Sermons being marked with pen and inke,Ezek. 9. are left as mourners for the holy man, the Au∣thor of them, who is now with the Lord, and rests from his labours:Reu. 14.13 It grieued me that they should perish with the breath that vttered them, especially being for matter so necessary, for manner so full and pithie, that by the bles∣sing
of God vpon them, they may raise vp spi∣rituall seed to the deceased. I commend them to thy diligent perusall, and thy indeuours here∣in, to the assistance of Gods Spirit, purposing as God shall inable me, and as I shall haue cal∣ling, and opportunitie together, with the ap∣probation of the holy and learned, to present the world with the la∣bours of some worthy men, whom God hath sent already to the house of all liuing; and,Iob 30.23, who
knoweth whether God hath brought this Art into this Kingdome for such a purpose as this. Thine in any Christian office, T. S.
The Contents. Doct. 1. THe faithfull are beloued ones. page 3 Ministers should helpe people apply truths. p. 5 Doct. 2. The faithfull haue more in hope than in possessi∣on. p. 9 Doct. 3. Gods promises should make vs more holy. p. 10 Reas. 1. It is one end why God hath made promises. p. 13 Reas, 2. Gods children made this vse of promises formerly. p. 16.
Reas. 3. From the relation betweene God and vs. p. 17 Vse 1. Terror to those that abuse Gods promises. p. 20 Vse 2. Instruction about the promises. p. 24 Doct. 4. Sin is a filthy thing in diuers respects, p. 39 Doct. 5. A Christians care should bee to clense himselfe from all sinne. p. 45 Reas. 1. Sinne disgraceth a Christians profession. p. 50 Reas. 2. Else wee can haue no communion with God. p. 53 Reas. 3. Ese wee habitually breake all Gods commands. p. 57 Reas. 4. We must hate all sin. p. 60 Reas. 5. One sinne vnmortifi∣ed
ruineth the soule. p. 62 Vse 1. Condemning two sorts people. p. 65 Vse 2. For information and exhortation to diuers duties. p. 70 Sinnes committed, how they must be vndone. p. 72 Sinnes to come, how to be pre∣uented. p. 74 Filthinesse in the spirit. p. 77 In the minde in two things. p. 78 In the vnderstanding. p. 80 In the imaginations. p. 82 In the will. p. 84 In the affections. p. 85 Foure motiues to purge the in∣ward man. p. 87 Foure wayes a Christian clen∣seth himselfe from all filthi∣nesse. p. 93
Vse 3. Trials if we purge out sinne. p. 103 Difference betweene restray∣ning and sauing grace. p. 104. 159 Sinne may be weakened foure wayes. 106 Foure infallible signes of pur∣ging out sinne. p. 109 These words, perfecting holi∣nesse opened. p. 124 Holinesse wherein it consists, p. 128 Three things premised concer∣ning holinesse. p. 131 Doct. 6. Positiue holines ne∣cessary. p. 131 Reas. 1. From the infinite ho∣linesse of God. p 13 Reas. 2. Wee cannot see G without it. p. 12 Reas. 3. All Gods works ca
vs to holinesse. p. 141 Vse 1, Terror, 1. to open profane. p. 144 2. Scorners of holinesse. p. 145 3. Hypocrites. p. 148 Three differences between true holinesse and hypocrisie. ibid. 4. To meerely ciuill men. p. 156 Difference between ciuility & holines. ib. 5. Those that haue onely restraining grace. p. 158 Vse 2. Exhortation to holinesse. p. 164 Vse 3. For triall of true holinesse. p. 170 Three markes of it. p. 171 Foure preparatiues to holinesse. p. 172 The manner of working holinesse. p. 175 Three effects of holinesse. p. 183 Doct. 7. God requires vs to grow to∣ward perfection in holinesse. p. 193 5 things touching this perfection. p. 196 Reas. 1. Frō the nature of grace. p. 199 Reas. 2. From the necessity of growing, in three respects. p. 202
Reas. 3. From the danger of not growing in three respects. p. 206 Reas. 4. From the kindnesse of God in affording meanes of growth. p. 209 Vse 1. A Christians taske ends not till his life ends. p. 213 That we are trees of God, it should teach vs foure things. p. 216 How to bring forth good fruit. p. 220 Vse 2. Terror to those that are barre in the Church. ibid▪ Vse 3. Of exhortation to fruitfulnesse p. 22 First, to take heed of three things tha hinder fruitfulnesse. p. 22 Secondly, Vse the meanes of perfectin holinesse, those are foure. p. 23 Fiue motiues to grow in holinesse, p. 24 Vse 4. Comfort to growers in holinesse p. 24 Foure signes of growing in holinesse. p 25
Doct. 8. It is the Lord to whom wee must haue recourse in all our wants. p. 278 Reas. 1. We are to pray to none but God, for three reasons. p. 279 Reas. 2. All supply is to be had in him a∣lone. p. 280 Vse 1. Against the doctrine of Rome. p. 281 Vse 2. Papists Idolatours. p. 282 Vse 3. To goe to God in our necessities. p. 283 Doct. 9. The best proficient in grace is still but Gods Scholler. p. 284 Reas. 1. By nature we are borne blinde. p. 286 Reas. Grace is wrought in vs but in a measure. p. 287 Vse 1. Instruction in two things. p. 288 Foure Vshers God teacheth by. p. 289 Vse 2. Reproofe of two sorts. p. 299 Vse 3. An exhortation to be Gods Schol∣lers.
p. 301 Motiues to it. ibid. Hindrances of it. p. 304 Three things to incourage vs to this Schoole. p. 309 Vse 4. Fiue trials whether wee be Gods Schollers or no. p. 313 Doct. 10. A life ordered according to Gods will, is Gods way. p. 323 Reas. 1. It is of Gods owne prescribing. p. 324 Reas. 2. God approues it. p. 326 Reas. 3. It leads to the enioying of God. p. 327 Vse 1. A double instruction. p. 328 Vse 2. To inquire the wayes of God. p. 329 Foure tracts of Gods way. p. 330 1. The way of mercie. ibid. 2. The way of truth. p. 332 3. The way of iustice. p. 334 Three things carry men out of the way
of iustice. p. 336 4. The way of peace. p. 339 The two maine heads of these wayes. p. 340 To vindicate the wayes of God. p. 344 Vse 3. Triall whether wee bee in Gods wayes. p. 348 How to know we are in Gods wayes by foure things. p. 351 Doct. 11. True instruction breaks forth into practise. p. 358 Reas. Knowledge brings conuiction. p. 359 Vse. Christians must walke as well as talke. p. 360 How to keepe our selues from miscarry∣ing in our way. p. 363 Foure things in our walking. p. 364 Doct. 12. A Christian should alway keepe his heart close to God. p. 366 Reas. 1. Because by nature our hearts sit loose from God. p. 367
Reas. 2. God gaue vs our hearts. p. 369 Vse 1. For terror to those that set the hearts on their lusts. p. 370 Vse 2. To labour to haue our hearts v∣nited to God. p. 372 Foure markes whether our hearts s close to God or no. p. 374
The right vse of PROMISES. 2 COR. 7.1. Hauing therefore these pro∣mises, dearely beloued, let vs clense our selues from all filthinesse of flesh and spirit, per∣fecting holinesse in the feare of God. OVR chiefest care in this world should bee how wee
may so liue, that wee may liue for euer in glo∣ry in another world. Which that wee may doe, because heauen is holy, and the company there is holy, and wee are impure, wee must therefore purge our selues before wee can come thither. And be∣cause wee loue sinne so well, which is that that wee must bee clensed from, God therefore draweth vs vnto this by many excellent promi∣ses, And seeing wee haue these promises, let vs clense
our selues, &c. I will giue but a touch vpon those things that are circumstantiall, that I may come to that which is more substan∣tiall. For the manner of the exhortation, it is pro∣pounded with an amia∣ble compellation, Dear∣ly beloued. The faithfull are belo∣loued ones. Dearly beloued, both of God, of Angels, and among thēselues. When there are expressions of loue in the exhorter,
then the exhortations will take impression in those to whom it is di∣rected. Secondly, you shall obserue that these words are inferred by way of vse of the former doctrine, as wee see by the relatiue particle, Therefore; hauing There∣fore these promises. It shewes vs how ne∣cessary it is for Mini∣sters to helpe their peo∣ple to apply truths. Because they faile ei∣ther
In their knowledge, or will. Either they know not how to doe it, or else they are not willing to doe it: the vse of Do∣ctrines proueth oft∣times more profitable than the vsing of Do∣ctrines.Diuision. But I come to the words themselues, wherein wee may take notice of these foure things, which sets down to vs the substance of the verse: First, wee haue the ground of an exhortati∣on,
Hauing therefore these promises. Secondly, wee haue the edifice that is built vpon this ground, and that is Sanctification: and this Sanctification is set forth vnto vs vn∣der two heads: First, in clensing our selues from filthinesse. And secondly, in growing vp to perfect holinesse. Thirdly, we haue the extent or measure of both these particulars. The first of them, first generally propounded,
Wee must clense our selues from all filthi∣nesse. And then it is expoun∣ded, and inlarged, Fil¦thinesse both of the flesh, and of the spirit; of the out∣ward, and of the inward man. And then for the se∣cond branch, Perfecti∣on is that that we must set as our marke, where∣at we must aime, and be euery day growing to∣wards perfecting holi∣nesse. Fourthly, wee haue the meanes how wee
may doe this, The feare of God; Perfecting holi∣nesse in the feare of God. So you see the particu∣lar parts of the Text, the points shall rise as natu∣rally as I can from the same. And first for the ground of the exhorta∣tion, Seeing we haue these promises. Wee might obserue or note to you here these two things; I will but name the first, and insist briefly vpon the second, being the Apo∣stles scope.
The first is this, that The faithfull haue more in hope than in posses∣sion. They are richer than the world knoweth of, the promises are theirs: the world thinkes them pooremen, and women, and indeed perhaps they enioy little in the view of others; yet they en∣ioy inwardly more than they know of, especial∣ly in respect of spiritual things; & yet in that re∣spect also wherein their riches consisteth, they haue more yet in faith
and hope, than in pos∣session; the promises are theirs: I doe but touch it. The next thing is more in the Apostles scope that he driues at, which is the ground of the exhortation, Seeing we haue these promises, let vs clense our selues, &c. The Doctrine plainely ariseth from it, namely, that The consideration of what God hath pro∣mised vs, should make vs walke more holily ward him.
Though God should neuer doe any thing for vs as long as we liue, yet being interessed in the promises, though the accomplishment be not yet on vs, it should make vs walke more holily towards him. Therefore when the Lord renued the pro∣mise of the Land of Canaan to the children of Israel, Deut 10.11, 12.Deut. 10.11, 12. he doth inferre this vse vpon the same. In the former verses hee had renued the pro∣mise, and then he comes
to this, And now oh Isra∣el (saith hee) what doth the Lord require at thy hands, but that thou loue him, and feare and obey him, &c. as if he should say, Since God hath made thee so large pro∣mises, there is now somewhat required at thy hands to doe. And so likewise wee see it set downe to vs in Rom. 12.2.Rom. 12.2. I beseech you, saith the Apostle, by the mercies of God, since God hath beene so mercifull towards you both in promises and perfor∣mances,
(for so farre hat may be extended) hat therefore you giue vp our selues to him a liuing, holy, acceptable sacrifice, &c. You must note that the ground of all pro∣mises is the goodnesse and mercy of God; therefore the Apostle takes vp this ground to enforce this exhortati∣on vpon people, I beseech you by the mercies of God, &c. The reasons for the confirmation of this point, are these: First, because this is
one end that God hat in propounding, or ma¦king promises to me and therfore if we mak not this vse of them, we frustrate Gods intenti¦on and end: for though wee must not doe good only or principally ou of hope of reward; yet notwithstanding, wee may, we ought to haue the recompence of re∣ward in our eye, to car∣ry vs thorow the diffi∣culties we meet with in the world, along the race of godlinesse to glory: To this end, I
say, God hath propoun∣ed promises, that by hem he might carry vs horow the oppositions ee meet here, there∣ore wee see the Lord irres vp Abraham to incerity and obedience, ith sweet and excel∣ent promises in Gen. 17..Gen. 17.1. Walke before me and be pright, I am thy buck∣er, &c. As if he should ay, Since I haue pro∣mised to defend thee, doe somewhat for me; e not afraid, walke be∣ore me, and be constant nd vpright, I haue pro∣mised
to bee thy buc¦ler and defence. The second reason  the point is drawn from the example  Gods faithful children who haue alwayes loo¦ked to make this vse o the promises, to work vpon their owne heart to preserue and keep them from sinning, an to draw them along in the course of holiness and godlines, as it is sai of our Fathers, in Heb 11.13.Heb. 11.13 They saw the pro¦mises, they beleeued them they imbraced them; and
is concluded of them  vers. 9.Vers. 9. if we compare em together, that ey liued; and after∣ards it is said, that ey died in faith, they ere carried along by ith in the promise to erseuere to the end, hat they were not only ble to liue, but to dye  faith. The third reason is rawne from the relati∣n that is betweene God nd vs, and from that which that relation binds vs to doe: The relation is this, God is
our Father, and we a his children; the rel¦tion it selfe is able ¦nough to enforce thi He is our Father, ther¦fore wee should obe him; nature teachet this: but God goe further, hee is a louin Father, he hath prom¦sed this and this, if we doe obey him, therfor I am much more vnna¦turall if I doe not stoup to him. If there wer nothing else, hee is ou Father, he made vs, an not we our selues: But fur∣ther, he is our Father a
he hath redeemed vs in hrist, and hee hath omised to doe thus d thus for vs. Now e promises, and the ounty of parents, tyes ildren to obedience;  the precious promi∣s that God hath made, hich in Christ are ea, and Amen, are orcible arguments to irre vs vpto purge our elues from all filthines f flesh and spirit, and o grow vp in holinesse. So you see the point o∣pened briefly, I come to the application, that
I may proceed to  next, the matter or ed¦fice (that is built on th foundation or groun which is Sanctificat¦on. This may serue, fir for the terror of tho that abuse the prom¦ses of God to loosene There is a contrary v that the world make of the mercy, goodne bounty and promises o God, expressed in th Word; they abuse the promises to loosenesse take it but in these tw generall maine promi¦ses,
He that beleeueth shall  saued; and, At what ne soeuer a sinner repents m of his sinnes, I will ue mercy on him, saith e Lord. Here are two sweet omises, the one an∣exed to faith, the o∣er to repentance. ow what poison doth e wicked hearts of en sucke out of these weet promises? Say hey, Wee need not be o strict and precise in ase of obedience, faith wil bring vs to heauen, nd we beleeue with all
our hearts: it is an  matter to beleeue, s the worldling, tho indeed it be as hard to keepe the Law,  God must inable  both; and he can ina to doe either as he pl¦seth: but they are bo beyond our abilities. And so for Repe¦tance, At what time s¦uer a sinner repents, I  haue mercy on him, sai the Lord. Now wh conclusions doe sinf wretches draw fro this sweet Promise Let vs (say they) follo
or lusts a little longer, d repent afterwards. he Apostle bids defi∣ce to such presumers  these, Rom. 6.1.Rom 6.1. Shall e sinne (saith hee) be∣use Grace abounds? God bid. What vnnaturall d vngracious chil∣en should we hereby oue our selues to be? his is an argument at wee are not belee∣ers; but presumers: ere is a great deale of ifference between be∣euing the Promises, nd presuming vpon hem; they cannot stand
together: wee shoul hereby shew our selue to bee the seruants o sinne, and not seruant of God; to bee heire not of the Promises, bu to all the curses that a written in this sacre volume of God. Therefore in the s¦cond place let this teac and instruct vs in the two or three things. First, to acquaint o selues with the Prom¦mises, it is a great fu¦therance to euery goo heart in obedience, an to carry it along chee¦fully
to know what Pro∣mises God hath made: therefore, let vs in rea∣ding of the Scriptures, obserue diligently the Promises, these, and such like; for so this Text seemes to haue re∣ference to some parti∣cular promise:  Since we haue these Promises, &c. Now we shall see what Promises these were, if we looke to the latter part of the former chap∣ter, where God saith, I will be your God, and you shall be my people: He pro∣miseth to be our father,
and being so, he promi∣seth to prouide for vs, and to pardon our sins, to heare our pray∣ers, and to saue our soules, &c. therefore, I say, let vs first ac∣quaint our selues with the Promises. And secondly, let vs acquaint ourselues with our selues, labour to know our selues, whe∣ther wee be such as the Promises doe belong to, whether the Promi∣ses are made to vs, whe∣ther wee lay hold on them, and imbrace, and
apply them to our selues or not. Then in the third place, labour to worke vpon our selues to bee holy, vpon considerati∣on of these Promises, thus, Is God our Fa∣ther, and is hee holy? And are wee his sonnes and daughters, and pro∣fesse our selues to be so, and shal we be vnclean? Hath God promised to pardon our sinnes, and shall we therefore pro∣uoke and grieue him e∣uery day more and more by our sinnes?
Shall we thus euilly re∣quite the bounty, mer∣cy, loue, and goodnesse of God? Hath he pro∣mised vs a Crowne, and Kingdome, an immor∣tall, and eternall inhe∣ritance that can neuer bee shaken, nor taken from vs, and shall not we labour to walk wor∣thy of the same. Beloued, heauen gates are opened to euery man of vs here by the Promises, and if they bring vs not in, they plunge vs deeper into hell; therefore since
wee haue these promises, let vs purge our selues, &c. So much for the ground of the exhortation. I come now to the e∣difice or building that is laid on this foundati∣on, which is Sanctifica∣tion, set downe vnder two heads: First, clensing our selues. And then, Persecting holinesse. I begin with the first, and take the matter and substance of the exhor∣tation with the extent, (to ioyn both together)
Clense your selues from fil∣thinesse, and from all fil∣thinesse. Now out of this exhortation that is so generall, wee may draw these three parti∣culars, I shal insist prin∣cipally vpon one of them. First, it is said here, that sinne is loathsome, nay, filthinesse, (in the abstract) in the sight of God. Secondly, that there is much of this filthinesse in the best of Gods chil∣dren; for the exhorta∣tion, it inwraps Paul
himselfe; he speakes to the faithfull, and in∣cludes himselfe, Let vs clense our selues, &c. they were purified before, but they must clense themselues more. Thirdly, that it ought to be the daily and con∣tinuall taske of a Chri∣stian, to purge out the remainders and the re∣sidue of corruption, e∣uen all sinnes inward, and outward, out of their soules and bodies. Let vs clense our selues. For the meaning of the words, it may be de∣manded
whether any man can clense himselfe from sinne, or not; can wee make our selues cleane and pure from our sinnes? To this I answer, If the question be deman∣ded in respect of any thing that is in our selues, that comes from our free-will, or natu∣rall power, looking no higher, we cannot; and rhere are two reasons for it: The first is drawne from the power that is in vs by nature.
And the secnd from our will, we neither can nor will. We cannot, we haue no power; the reason is giuen in that saying of Christ, The strong man keepes possession, till the stronger cast him out. Now by euery lust, the diuell keepes possession in the heart; therefore man of himselfe, vnlesse hee were stronger than the diuell, cannot cast out a lust. Secondly, their will is to sinne, and therfore men will not, though
they could, till the will bee sanctified by the Lord. If there bee any good in our selues (saith a Father) God is the Author of it, hee doth apply the will to the worke, and hee fits the worke to the will, for the effecting of the same. But then some man will say, To what end doth the Apostle wish vs to clense our selues? I answer, He doth it both in respect of the wicked, and in respect of Gods owne children,
to whom, especially, this exhortation is dire∣cted. It is not in vain to neither of these, no not in regard of the wic∣ked. First, because God may iustly require that at their hands that they cannot do, because they haue brought this ina∣bility of the perfor∣mance of it vpon them∣selues. It is necessary that the wicked should haue commands, otherwise they should not sinne in their disobedience; for
sinne is nothing but the transgression of the Law, and where there is no Law, there is no trans∣gression. It is necessary therefore that euen the wicked should be both bound to do that which is good, and to abstaine from that that is euill; for this is that that ma∣keth them culpable. Againe, it is necessa∣ry also in outward re∣spects, for restraint; for there are some precepts that binde the diuell himselfe: absolute com∣mands, when hee plea∣seth
to shew his power; ose commands, by ay of restraint, binde atan, and wicked, and ngodly men. The com∣andements of God are ot the measure of our rength,Note. but the rule of ur duty: there is no ommand that shewes  man what he is able to oe, but what he ought o doe: thus they re∣pect the wicked. But in respect of the hildren of God them∣elues, they both can, nd will, and therefore he exhortation is not
in vaine to them; th can doe it by the pow that God hath giuen them, which is t power of God, rath than their owne pow the power of God  them: For, greater is  that is in you (that is, t Spirit of God) than  that is in the world: t Spirit of God in a Chr¦stian can doe it. And likewise the chi of God hath freedo of will, so farre as h will is regenerated, ¦newed and sanctified hee hath a will both
doe that which is good, nd to cast out his sins: Wee must purge our selues therefore from filthinesse, that is, wee must vse the meanes, wee must improue and imploy the Talent of Grace that God hath giuen vs, that we may be euery day more and more cleane from the filthinesse of our lusts. Let vs clense our selues from all filthinesse. Sinne you see is resem∣bled to filthinesse; it is an odious and lothsome thing.
And so it is, In respect of God. In respect of o¦selues. In respect of God: First, because it is a¦gainst his nature whic is most pure. Secondly, it is again the Law of God, whic is iust, and holy, and good. Thirdly, it is agains his honour, &c. It is filthinesse likewise in respect of our selues. If wee looke on o persons, it defileth them; Psal. 5.4.Psa. 5.4. God ab∣horres
the workers of ini∣ity. In respect of our acti∣s: God hates the best tions that a man that taineth sin, performs:  hate your Sabbaths, I∣. 1.Isay 1. for your hands are efiled with bloud. So in hat respect, sinne is lthinesse, and we must ense our selues from all lthinesse of flesh and spi∣it. Some are called sinnes of the flesh, because hey are of a more flesh∣y nature, furthered by the disposition of the
body, and the temp thereof, as Glutton Drunkennesse, Whor¦dome, &c. Others, sinnes of th spirit, because they a of a more spirituall na¦ture, as Idolatry, Supe¦stition, &c. but these, take it, hee speakes n of here. But by sinne of the flesh, I rather v¦derstand sinnes of th outward man: and b sinnes of the spirit, th sinnes of the inwar man; for so the flesh  often taken in the Scrip¦tures for the outwa
man; and the spirit, for e soule, and the facul∣es of the same. There  sometimes filthinesse  the spirit, in wicked, nd vaine thoughts and esires, that neuer come o be acted, where there  not filthinesse in the esh. Sometimes againe, ere is filthinesse in the esh, that is, sinnes are cted, where the will onsents not to the ame: but vsually and rdinarily in the wic∣ed, where sinne reigns, he sinnes of the flesh,
the sins of the outwa man, and the sinnes  the spirit and inwa man goe together, (v¦lesse God restrai them, or they are ke from it by sinister ¦spects.) For when iu hath conceiued, it brin forth sinne, it brings for fruit, and that being fi¦shed, brings forth deat So you see the meani of the words is thi Since God hath mad such excellent prom¦ses, it should be the da¦ly care of a Christian ¦purge and to purif
himselfe, more and ore from sinne, that therwise wil defile his ule and body, and all is actions; which is herefore called filthi∣esse. And from all sinne of he outward and inward an, from the sinnes f the flesh, and sinnes f the spirit. So we see ow the Doctrin plain∣y rising, which is the maine scope of the words, namely, that It is a lesson and duty, that euery Christian should learne alwayes
to be purging of hi¦selfe from all sin both outward of  flesh, and inward the spirit. The Doctrine sh include both the thing selfe & the extent; the must alwayes bee p¦ging themselues,  that from all filthines That one reason in t Text might bee suffi¦ent, it is filthinesse; in t sight and esteeme  God and good men. But the Scripture i plaine in this, Isa. 1.16Isa. 1.16. Wash you, make you clea
that is the duty of eue∣ one at all times, espe∣ally when wee draw ere into the presence f God in the vse of his dinances. So likewise zek. 18.30.Ezek. 18.30. it is set owne there vnder ano∣er manner of phrase f speech, Cast away your ansgressions: When a an casts away that at defiles him, hee akes himselfe cleane; oth these are one and he same thing. So in am. 4.8. there is a plain lace that reacheth the xtent also of that wee
haue here in hand, W your hands you sinners,  clense your hearts you ¦ble minded. Washi and clensing is the du of euery man, and  washing both of  hand and of the hea there are the sinnes  the flesh, and the sins the spirit comprize the one vnder the sins the hand, those are f that are outwardly ¦ctuate; and the oth the sinnes of the spiri the heart must bee cl¦sed as well as the han And then for the e¦tent
of the duty, in E∣zek. 18.10, 11.Ezek. 18.10, 11. It is not enough for a man to seeme to wash his hands from one sinne, and yet notwithstanding liue, and take pleasure in an∣other: If a man beget a sonne, saith he, though he bee not a murtherer, &c. he goes on, and nameth diuers sinnes; yet if he doe any one of these, hee shall die the death: there∣fore we must clense our selues from all filthinesse, &c. Now the reasons and grounds I shall enforce
to proue the point, both in respect of the duty, and also the extent, may be these: First, in respect of the duty, take these two reasons: First, beceuse all sin disgraceth the calling and profession of a Christian, take this for a ground as the maine thing in the Text; ther∣fore this purging is a duty that Gods owne children should be ex∣ercised in, because euen the remainders of their sinnes, disgrace the cal∣ling
and profession of a Christian. What is his profession? Hee professeth Christ, and Christianity, and holinesse, and hereunto he is called, in 1 Thes. 4.7.1 Thes. 4.7. 7. We are called (saith he) not to vncleannesse, but vnto holinesse. If wee be called to holinesse, then we must purge out fil∣thinesse, and make pro∣fession of Christ and Christianity outward∣ly. Now to make a pro∣fession of Religion, and not to purge the heart from sinne, and the life
from corruption; It is not to professe, but to disgrace Religion: it casts an imputation of disgrace and dishonour from the mouthes of wicked men, not onely vpon the man himselfe, but vpon that that hee makes profession of, and all that make pro∣fession of the same. In Zach. 5.8.Zach. 5.8. Sinne is re∣sembled by, and com∣pared to a woman sit∣ting in an Epha: by the Epha, is vnderstood Iu∣dah; by the woman, wickednesse: Now it is
said, that God seeing a woman that sate in the Epha, that is, when hee saw so much wickednes sate in Iudah, God stirs vp two other women, and they represent the Magistrate and the Priest, that take both the Epha and the wo∣man, and carry it out of Iudah to Babylon. Wic∣kednesse beseemes not Iudah and Israel, it is fit∣ter for Rome and Baby∣lon. A second reason of the point, is this; Vn∣lesse wee doe exercise
our selues thus in this duty, wee can haue no communion and fel∣lowship with God, we can haue no comfort at all, in drawing neere vnto him, and com∣ming into his presence, in the Word and Sa∣craments, and in Pray∣er. In the Word God speakes to vs, in Praye wee speake to him. In the Sacraments God of∣fers himselfe, his Sonne, his merits, death and passion to vs; there is a more liuely representa∣tion of our vnion, nay,
beloued, a knitting of vs faster together in our fellowship with God, and one another: wee can haue no comfort in Gods presence in these ordinances, nor assu∣rance that we shall liue with him in glory after∣wards, vnlesse our care bee thus to purifie, and to purge our selues. In 1 Ioh. 1.6.1 Ioh. 1.6. If wee say wee haue fellowship with God, and walke in darkenesse, we lye. If wee walke in darkenesse still, there is no fellowship with God
in the vse of his ordi∣nances. As it is with ill hu∣mours,Simile. nay if there be but one ill humour that exceeds, and is predo∣minant in the body of man, it takes away the appetite and taste, that a man cannot relish the most wholesome and pleasant food: so, if there be but one ill hu∣mour that is predomi∣nant in the soule, if there be but one lust vnmor∣tified and vnkilled, it causeth vs to disrelish all the ordinances of
God that we shall finde no sweetnesse in them, we can haue no fellow∣ship with God here; and hee that lookes to enioy the presence of God in glory hereafter, hee purifieth himselfe now as God is pure, 1 Ioh. 3.3.1 Ioh. 3.3. those are the two reasons that more neerely and especially concerne the ground of this duty, why Christi∣ans are to be exercised in it. Now for the extent of it, that wee must Clense our selues from all
filthinesse, because if we liue in the actual breach of any of Gods Com∣mandements, (I do not say if we actually break any of Gods Comman∣dements, but if we liue in an actuall breach of any of Gods Comman∣dements) we liue in the habituall breach of all his Commandements, we breake all, and the curse, due to all, hangs ouer our heads: he that is guilty of one, is guilty of all, Iam. 2.10.Iam. 2.10. There is one Law-giuer; and the penalty hangs ouer his
head that liues in the breach of any one Com∣mandement of God: therefore in Exod. 16.28.Ezod. 16.28. the man that brake the Sabbath, there is said to transgresse the Lawes of God, in the plurall number, because hee brought that curse vpon his head, that was due to the breach of the whole Law of God: it be∣ing with the Lawes and cōmandements of God, as it was with Ionathan and Dauid; they were so fast, and so neerely v∣nited and linked toge∣ther,
in league, and loue, and amity, that Sau cannot speak any thing against Dauid, but Iona∣than riseth in displea∣sure from the Table, and sheweth his anger: So, I say, we cannot of∣fend God in one, but wee breake and offend him in all. The fourth reason of the point that toucheth also the extent of it, is this, Wee must purge out all, because we must hate all; vnlesse we hate all sinne, wee loue not God: for the loue of
God, and any one cor∣uption, without mix∣ure of hatred, cannot stand together: he that hates not all sins, hates none truly; because ha∣tred, where it is true, it is carried against all of the same kinde. And the cause is this, Because the ground of our ha∣tred, (of one, and ano∣ther) is one and the same; that is, because God hates sinne. Now the force of this reason is this, If we must hate all sinne, then surely we must purge out all sin.
Now wee must hate al sinne, or else we doe no loue God, nay, hee tha doth not make consci¦ence of euery sinne, h makes conscience truly of no sinne, when occa∣sion, and oportunity, and aduantage is offe∣red. Fifthly, the last rea∣son is drawne from the danger of sinne vnmor∣tified, and vnpurged: one sinne, one lust left behinde in the power of it, can ruine the soule as well as tenne thousand. If Herod had
had nothing but his lust (but that carried him further to cut off Iohn Baptists head:) Pharaoh had had nothing but his cruelty to the children of Israel: If Iudas had had nothing but his co∣uetousnesse and earthly mindednesse, this had been enough to ruinate the soule. Indeed euery sinne, being infinite in respect of God, who is an infinite Maiesty, and infinitely offended (and our infinite desire like∣wise to persist and goe on in the same, vnlesse
God reclaime vs, and bee pleased to sanctif vs,) there is as much sinfulnesse in a little sin as in a great one, a there is as much round∣nesse in a little bullet, as there is in the globe of the whole world; a the pricke with a pinne or a knife at a ma heart kils him, as well as a thrust with a sword. And indeed, beloued, the reason why a ma esteemes some of his lusts small, because hee looks on them through false spectacles, and no
the true glasse of the word of God; but as the deuill presents them, he beholds as they bring profit and pleasure, and not as God is dishonou∣red by them, and his owne soule preiudiced: So wee see the point confirmed from Scrip∣tutes and reasons. I come now briefly to make vse and appli∣cation of it. In the first place this condemneth two sorts of men. I will giue but a touch for those that are without, because I
would come to those t whom the exhortatio is more principally di¦rected. Since it is the duty o euery Christian daily t purge and clense him¦selfe from all sinne. First, it condemnet those that cry shame o others that make  conscience of sinne, an yet themselues fea not all sinnes: you se ordinary ciuil men tha liue in many sinnes an secret lusts, that are fre from disgrace; if the see one that is notori∣ously
prophane, they cry shame on him, hee makes conscience of no sinne. But why doest not thou make consci∣ence of all sinnes? Some abstaine from sinnes against the first Table, as swearing, Sabbath-breaking, Ido∣latrous worship of God: they performe the du∣ties of the first Table publikely, and some∣times priuate exercises: but then for the duties of the second Table, they are vniust, cruell, vnmercifull, without
cōpassion, without bro¦therly loue, withou tender affections, decei¦uers, couzeners, oppres¦sors, &c. these wee ca religious hypocrites. And some in the se¦cond place, seeme to make conscience o some sins, and of som duties of the secon Table; they will be a good as their word they will deale iustly (and these are com∣mendable parts) but a for the seruice of God, they care not after what manner they worship
him, nor how they car∣y themselues in his ser∣ice publikely; and for riuate duties, they are wholly shut out of their oores: these are ciuill ypocrites: and these re condemned heere oo: The first sort ab∣taine, for their credit, rom open, notorious, candalous sinnes; but or sinnes of the spirit, hey looke not to them, hey are neuer troubled for them, they neuer take notice of them, vn∣lesse it be to solace and delight in them. How∣soeuer
such men an women thinke of them selues, yet they are  loathsome obiect in th eyes of the holy God but to passe by these. In the second plac let this informe vs i our duty, and let it al bee an exhortation t prouoke and stirre  vp to the same. Let it informe vs, W must clense our selue still, and purge ou selues from filthinesse and from all filthinesse This exhortation, an information I wil press
in respect of these two eads: First, in respect of the nnes of the flesh more articularly. And then secondly,  respect of the sinnes f the spirit. First, for the sinnes of e flesh, either ch as re Past, commit∣ted already: Present To come, that are not yet a∣ctated. For the first, we must lense our selues from he sinnes of the flesh,
that is, of the outwa man, such as are past ¦ther in word or i worke. But some will s Can that bee vndo that hath beene don and that is all the c that many take w they looke back to th former sinnes, to s we cannot helpe it,  cannot now be vnd Yes, beloued, it m be vndone, and it m be vndone, or else t soule is vndone; O taketh away sinnes t are past, as if they
neuer beene commit∣ted: therefore the first thing that we must doe, is this: Looke, looke backe to our hearts, and to our liues, and breake our hearts with godly sor∣row and griefe, especi∣ally for those sinnes whereby we haue most dishonoured God, and grieued his holy Spirit: this is the way soundly to purge the soule, to to set it in health again; and a man can neuer thriue and prosper in grace till hee haue done
it, but this is not all. In the second place, wee must humble our selues vpon the knees of our soules by feruent prayer, that God would pardon our sinnes; haue mercy on me, Wash mee thorowly, saith Dauid, remember not the sinnes of my youth, Psal. 25.7.Psal. 25.7. No man can euer doe this, till such time as sin be∣comes a burthen, and till a man apprehends it as it is indeed, and the danger of it; the first rule helpes vs to this: For when once
the heart is possest, not onely with a sudden passion vpon the sudden falling out with sinne, but a man is displeased with himselfe, because he hath displeased God, then he fals to pray; and a man neuer falls to praying for pardon till his heart be possest with true griefe and godly sorrow for sin. Then thirdly, when wee haue beene thus humbled, and haue prayed for pardon; the next meanes to purge our selues from sinnes
already committed, is to set faith on worke, that wee may, by faith, which is the hand of the soule, sprinckle our soules and consciences with the bloud of Christ Iesus, resoluing and stedfastly beleeuing that Christ dyed, euen for the washing away of those our particular sinnes. Then secondly, for sins present or to come, sinnes that are not yet actuated (this is rather a preuention of filthi∣nesse, then a clensing
and purifying, which the text especially ai∣meth at; therefore I will giue but a touch of it) that wee may pre∣uent filthinesse also. First, let our hatred of sinne eueryday grow more and more, and we shall more easily re∣sist the diuell, hee will not be so rife, and so busie with a man, if he know his heart is set a∣right to hate all sinne and corruption, a man cares not for the com∣pany of him that hee knowes hates him: let
our hatred of sin grow more, and Sathan will not so easily preuaile a∣gainst vs. Secondly, let vs la∣bour to watch against occasions that might intrap vs in the sinnes of the flesh; outwardly, as idlenesse, ill company, slauish feare, wordly affections, excessiue vse of the creatures, &c. Thirdly, resist the motions of euill, when they arise first, and Sa∣thans temptations, when they are first sug∣gested, before they haue
gotten too strong a head, before they once incroach in any touch vpon our affections. But the principall thing in this exhortati∣on, is this, That wee clense our selues from all filthinesse of the spirit, and inward man. And this a Christian shall find that he hath a great deale of need of, be∣cause there is much fil∣thinesse that remaines behind within him, and that in diuers respects, if we shal suruey the in∣ward man a little: I will
instance but in three or foure particulars. First, there is much filthinesse that is in the minde of a man, that must be clensed and pur∣ged out; there is filthi∣nesse in the mind in di∣uers respects; I will in∣stance but in these two: First, in the false per∣swasion of the excellen∣cy of outward things; as if blessednesse and happinesse were to bee reposed in riches, and honour, and friends, and the like, which carries a man more than rea∣sonably
to affect them, and vnlawfully to seeke after them, in his ende∣uours. Vnbeleefe in the se∣cond place; that is ano∣ther thing in the minde that must bee purged out; vnbeleefe of the promises, of the proui∣dence and care, that the Lord, hath promised alway to take of his: vnbeleefe giues God the lye, it giues our souls vncurable woūds. How many haue wee in the world, of whom that may bee a∣uerred
which Paul saith, Who mind earthly things,Phil. 3.18. whose end is destruction? It is filthinesse of the mind, because it value earthly things abou the worth and price o them. How many liu in distrust of the car and prouidence of God, especially in their out∣ward estate, and in ex∣tremity: Let vs looke to this, and purge thi filthinesse out of ou mindes; for he that be∣leeues not, is damned; Mark. 16.16.Mar. 16.16 Secondly, there is
much sinne and filthi∣nesse in the vnderstan∣ding also, which must be purged out; as blind∣nesse, ignorance, errors, heresies in Religion, &c. Ignorance is a sinne of it selfe, and is enough to damne a man, if he had neuer committed any other sinne through his ignorance: 2 Thes. 1.7.2 Thes. 1.7 Christ shall come in fla∣ming fire to render ven∣geance to the disobedient, and those that haue not knowne him. The whole man is guided by the light of the vnderstan∣ding;
and if our light bee darkenesse, how great is that darkenesse: wee should therefore consider what meanes of knowledge and light God affords vs, that thereby wee may stirre vp our selues to this worke. The third thing, that wee must purge filthi∣nesse out of, is our ima∣ginations; they are like∣wise filthy, they are vaine thoughts, and there is the vanity of our thoughts and de∣sires; the vanity of our
imaginations: euil con∣ceits, euill thoughts, ei∣ther of God, to conceiue of him either after a car∣nall manner, or to con∣ceiue that he is not iust, or mercifull, or proui∣dent and carefull: or thoughts against our brethren, of malice, of wrong, of ambition, of ust, &c. these must be urged out: Oh Ierusa∣em, how long shall thy aine thoughts remaine in hee? Ier. 4.14.Ier. 4.14. And, Let he vnrighteous forsake his maginations, Isa. 55.7.Isa. 55.7. Fourthly, wee must
clense filthinesse out o the will: we are read to choose that which i euill, and to set ou selues in open rebellio and resistance again that which is good there is vanity in our ¦maginations, and we are ready to bring o wills to consent to th vanity and sinne, eith in our selues, or in o¦thers: as we see in Pa hee put not Stephen t death, but he stood b and consented. If a m looke on a woman  lust after her, he commi
adultery: this vanity there is in the will, to consent and ioyne with the vaine lusts and ima∣ginations that often rise in vs, and this must bee purged out. Fifthly and lastly, we must purge the filthi∣nesse out of our affecti∣ons also: there is much sinne, and rottennesse, and filthinesse in the af∣fections, either they are not moued at all, accor∣ding to the occasions that should moue them, we are fearelesse when wee should feare, and
comfortlesse when wee haue cause to reioyce, or else they moue too much, wee feare more than we should, or wee set false obiects to our feare, that wee should not; we loue that wee should not, and reioyce in that wee should not reioyce in, till our affe∣ctions bee purged and clensed, till the spirit be cleane, there is no clean∣nesse and purity in the outward man, what shewes soeuer men make of the same. So we see this Text is as a
fanne to winnow the haffe out of the soule nd spirit, and heart, nd inward man of a Christian. Let mee vrge the urging of the inward an, the clensing of the ind, vnderstanding, maginations, will and ffections a little by hese two or three mo∣iues and arguments. First,Motiues to purge the inward man. the sinnes of the pirit argue a man to iue in the flesh, and to iue in sinne, as well as he sinnes of the flesh, n the sight of God:
outward actuall sinne argue an vnregenera man in the sight of m because they cannot  the heart; but the s of the spirit argue  man to liue in the fle in the sight and esteem of God as well as exte¦nall and outward sinn of the flesh, and if we liue in the flesh wee sh dye, Rom. 8.13.Rom. 8.13. Secondly, these s of the spirit and in wa man; of the thought vnderstanding, mind &c. these are breach of the Law of God,
well as the other, and so they bring the curse of the Law vpon a man: they are breaches of the Law; For Gods law is spirituall and searcheth the heart, therefore hee calleth for and requi∣reth the obedience of the heart; so that, be∣loued, they are as dan∣gerous to the soule of a Christian, as these out∣ward actuall sinnes of the flesh; the same God forbids them, the same law is broken by them, the same curse is pulled vpon our heads by li∣uing
in them: let v therefore purge ou selues from inward fil¦thinesse, that whic hath beene, by godl sorrow, and that whic is, by the meanes o grace and mortificati¦on. Thirdly, if wee hau a care of our inwar man, purenesse an cleannesse of the out∣ward man will necessa∣rily follow; therefor the principall care of  Christian should be to approue his heart to God, the purity of th
outward man followes at; purge the Foun∣ine, and the streames ill runne cleare: con∣ary to those that oft lesse themselues with his false delusion, I hanke God I haue a good eart, when notwith∣tanding their liues are ull of wickednesse and anity. Nay fourthly, God delights in the clean∣es of the inward man, in the purity of the mind; Blessed are the ure in heart, Mat. 5.Matth. 5. but God neuer dwels in
that heart where sinn and wickednes reside and dwels. What shal I say more? beloued,  we would be Christi¦ans indeed, if we woul be blessed obseruers o the whole Law of God if wee would haue th Lord take pleasure an delight in vs, let vs l¦bour to purge ourselu from all filthinesse both  flesh and spirit. But you will say, it  impossible for a man  doe thus. Indeede, i man could cleanse hi heart, then the life mu
needs be cleane: but en if the heart and life  cleane, then a man ay be pure while hee es here: euen so pure  to be free from sinne; he can clense himselfe om all filthinesse both  hand and tongue, and ewise of the heart d inward man. To this I answer, yet irmatiuely, that a hristian may, and th cleanse him selfe om all filthines, both  the flesh or outward an, and of the spirit  inward man, in
these respects. First, hee doth it i the truth and sincerit of his desires whic doth not deceiue him indeed many are dece¦ued in the profession  their desires, that say,  desire to be as good as an the vanity of which, w shall proue after: her¦by appeares the tru of a mans desires; h desires to be free fro all sinne, nothing is su a burthen to him as h sinnes are; there is  one corruption in hi but it is a burthen, h
desires to kill them all though many of them sometimes escape his hand, that hee cannot kill them in that mea∣sure that he desireth. Secondly, he clenseth himselfe from all, in the truth of his resolutions also, which floweth from his desires; his heart is set in a mighty resolution which hee maketh to God against his dearest and most profitable sinne: neuer did souldier goe into the field so resolued to leaue neither man, wo∣man
nor childe aliue, as the Christian souldi∣er is resolued to leaue no sinne aliue in his soule, in his resolution. Thirdly, he doth this also in his endeuour; for it is a vaine thing, and many delude them∣selues with that, to say, I desire to bee as good as the best, and I would I could bee free from sinne, and yet they ne∣uer vse the meanes, to pray, and fast, and mourne for their sinnes; which means God hath appointed and ordained
to free vs from our sins: this endeuour proueth the truth of our desires. Then fourthly, they are clensed from all, in the truth of their affe∣ctions, because they hate all, they take plea∣sure and delight in none. Some man will say, it is true, a man may go thus farre, and Gods children doe, in their desires, and resolution, and affection, and en∣deuour; and hence it comes to passe, that they liue not in the pra∣ctice
of any knowne sinne that is discouered to them, but they break it off; neither ate they in loue and liking with any lust: but if a man doe thus, surely the world will thinke that this is too much strict∣nesse and precisenesse, and he shall haue scorne and reproach for his paines. It is no matter what the impure ones of the world say, and what censure they passe, or how they think of men: and indeed in passing a
censure vpon the chil∣dren of God for the truth of their endeuors, they passe a censure vp∣on Paul himselfe, that bindes the children of God to vse their ende∣uour, and how wilt thou endure hard vsage, that canst not endure a hard speech from the mouthes of wicked men. But you will say fur∣ther, it is a hard and dif∣ficult thing to doe thus, and in doing so, I shall cut my selfe off from much profit, and many
pleasures of the world, that I might reape by following my lusts and my owne wayes. It is not a hard, but an easie thing to him that delights in God: the yoke of Christ is easie to him that hath a willing minde: It see∣meth hard, because thy affections stick close to thy lusts, thy will runs that way, therefore it is hard to bring thee into another way; but thou shalt find it easie, if thou take thy will off from thy lusts, which is so
greedily set on them. Besides, the comforts that thou art depriued of, are a few carnall, temporary, deceiuing, mornentany pleasures of sinne, which will be recompenced with e∣uerlasting horror, and disquiet torment; and for parting with them, thou shalt enioy spiri∣tuall, eternall, vnspeak∣able, vnconceiuable pleasures, in the sweet∣nesse of Gods loue and fauour, these eternall pleasures that thou shalt enioy instead of parting
with thy sins and lusts. All the difficulty is in making triall of the wayes of godlinesse: Put away sinne a little, and see if thou shalt not liue at as much ease without thy lusts, as with them; all the dif∣ficulty, I say, is at the first; as a strait shooe that pincheth for a day or two, but it soone growes easie. So much for the second vse of in∣struction and exhortati∣on to stirre vs vp to this duty, in the largenesse of the extent of it.
Lastly, let this bee a triall whether this bee our care or no, to purge our selues from all fil∣thinesse both of flesh and spirit, both of the outward and inward man; many deceiue themselues in this, and thinke themselues clen∣sed from their sinnes, when the grounds whereupon they rest, deceiue them: I will giue you two or three discoueries of them. Some thinke that they are clensed and purified from their sinnes, be∣cause
they are kept and restrained from them; those sinnes that they are restrained from, they thinke they are clensed & washed from; but this deceit easily appears; for restraining grace keeps a man back from some particular lust, and lets him loose againe to other lusts; couetousnesse is an ene∣my to voluptousnesse; one lust may bee left, when a man serues an∣other: but sauing grace purifies and clenseth a man from all lusts.
Restraining grace (in the second place) hath secondary and sinister respects and ends, as a mans credite, &c. But true grace carrieth a man out of conscience to Gods Commande∣ments, to obey God; and out of loue to Christ, to auoid sinne; yea, to kill sinne. Secondly, some thinke they are purged from their sinnes, because their sinnes and lusts are growne weaker in them than before. This is good, my beloued,
wee may get fome ad∣uantage by this, and we may get the mastery the sooner by it: but this is not an infallible signe that a man is clensed, because his lusts are grown weaker, for they may be weakned diuers wayes. To giue a touch, not to insist vpon them. You know the fire decreaseth because the fuell is taken away, not that it loseth the nature of fire; it hath an incli∣nation to burne still: so the remouing of opor∣tunities and occasions
may sometimes weaken a lust. Secondly, some are angry, and resolue a∣gainst sinne; perhaps a mans sin hath brought discredit and losse to him, and therefore hee resolues neuer to do so, hus to be discredited, nd to haue his good ame taken away: so he not doing it may weaken sinne, for exer∣ise strengtheneth sin, nd abstinence weake∣eth it. Thirdly, from com∣on illumination, it is
not so good for thei body or for other end of their owne; in a these respects sinne an corruption admits som weakening. Sometimes also fro custome and educatio as we see in that King as long as Ichoiada liue with him, he was good custome and educatio weakeneth some sinne when a man is in a go family, perhaps hee not carried so violent now with some lusts  before. But if thou woulde
not deceiue thy selfe with any of these, let thy conscience answer me these two or three quaeres, and so I will end: First, Canst thou re∣sist temptations to those sins that promise pro∣fit, pleasure & secresie, as well as those sins that threaten losse, and dis∣aduantage, and dis∣grace; put these two in opposition to one another, and aske thy conscience how thou carriest thy selfe when thou art prouoked and
tempted to such a sinne, wherein thou mayest get thus much, if thou wilt say this, or doe this against conscience, and against the wil of God, if thou thinke, but I shall bring dishonour vpon my selfe if I doe it, perhaps it will bring losse, perhaps it will bring shame, in the end it is likely it will bee knowne and come to light, therefore I will not doe it; a wicked man may doe thus: But if thou wouldest know whether thou abstaine
from truth of heart, put case the contrary be of∣fered; Thus and thus I shall get, if I doe this, such honour, and such pleasure, but God will be dishonoured by it, therefore I will not doe thus and thus, as Ioseph said. If thy owne con∣science can giue thee this answer, thou may∣est receiue some com∣fort, that thou art not onely restrained, or that sinne is onely weakned, as I said before, but that there is such a remouall of lusts out of thy soule,
that thou art lesse sinf daily. Secondly, canst tho mourne in secret be¦tweene God and th selfe, for the sinnes o thy spirit, as well as fo sinnes of thy flesh; can thou mourne for th hardnesse of thy hear for the blindnesse of th minde, for thy earthly mindednesse, for t pride, for thy passio thy impatience, for t discontent, and distru and the like: Canst th mourne fot these in s¦cret, and cry to God,
begge pardon of these sinnes, with a sensible feeling of them, as the burthen of thy soule, as wel as for outward sins, then thou mayst receiue comfort to thine owne soule. Thirdly, doest thou desire that Gods Mini∣sters may lay open thy dearest sinnes, and come home to thy particular sinnes, and doest thou loue them best when they come neerest and closest to thee, and dost thou set thy selfe with speed to reforme euery
new corruption that i discouered to thee b the daily Ministery an preaching of the Word Many men, when th Minister comes to grat vpon their personall vpon their owne parti∣cular sinne, they fret and their hearts rise and they will not bee setled againe to loue them, and affect them: they cannot but say, i this the Minister me with my sinne, yet sti they goe on, and gul and delude their owne soules with this silly
and groundlesse deceit, We haue all faults, and ere is an end. Thus, I y, men go on and coo∣en themselues. Fourthly and lastly, is y heart set vpon spiri∣all things, as well as gainst sinfull and car∣all; doest thou looke e contrary way, that ere is not only a pur∣ing out of euill, but a tting the heart vpon at which is spiritual∣ good, as we shall see  the next branch con∣rning holinesse; so at though there bee
many sinnes in thee, ye thou doest not obe them, but thou hate them, and esteeme lusts to thy soule, as  disease is to thy body thou wouldest faine b rid of them, and vse all meanes euery day  purge thy vndersta¦ding, will, and affec¦ons, &c. and to set the not onely against sin but for God and goo¦nesse, and art not ca¦ed away to obey s aske thy selfe if th things be in thee or  Now apply these thi
briefly thus, since we aue these promises, let ur care bee to set our elues vpon these duties. Wee know the hand of God, the last yeere,These Ser∣mons were preached the yeere after the great Plague, 1625. was one out grieuously in he plague, what pro∣ises God hath made in l extremity, you ow, Call vpon me in the me of trouble, and I will are thee, &c. Seeing erefore we haue these romises, when wee are ought to the like aights and dangerous mes, and troublesome yes, let vs goe to God
with earnestnesse of spi¦rit, and lift vp pur hands, and clense ou selues from all filthine of flesh and spirit. We know God hath heard vs in remouing his hand in that iudge∣ment, therefore I ma say further, not onel since wee haue the promises, but since w haue these performan∣ces, let vs clense our selues else we disgrace our cal∣ling, wee cut off ou selues from the fellow∣ship of God and Chri in his ordinances, an
from the hope of en¦ioying his presence in glory, wee liue in the breach of all Gods Commandements, we loue not God if wee loue sinne, and one sin will ruinate the soule. God hath made pro∣mises, that whatsoeuer thy sinnes haue beene, that what sinner soeuer thou hast beene, though thou hast beene a drun∣kard, a prophaner and abuser of Gods name by swearing, a propha∣ner of the Sabbath, an adulterer, or the like,
God hath promised if thou repent, and come in, and lay downe thy weapons of rebellion, whatsoeuer thy sinnes haue beene, he will re∣ceiue thee mercifully and graciously. Seeing therefore thou hast this promise, let not this promise be charged on thee at the last day, that thou mightest haue beene saued if thou wouldest haue embra∣ced the promises offe∣red. Seeing wee haue these promises, I beseech you, let vs clense our selues
from all filthinesse of flesh and spirit. But this is not enough, but wee must grow vp in holinesse, which is the next point, but I must reserue the handling of that, till the afternoone.
2 COR. 7.1. Perfecting holinesse in the feare of God. I Come now to the se∣cond branch of Sanctifi∣catiō, name∣ly, positiue holinesse. I will first briefly giue you the meaning of the words, and then come to the points of Do∣ctrine.
The holinesse that we speake of, is created ho∣linesse, and that is two∣fold. Either that which is perfect in degrees and in measure, as Adam was holy in innocency, and as we shall be holy when wee come to glo∣ry: this is aspired, but it is neuer attained to by any man while hee liues here; we desire it and set it as our marke, but wee cannot reach it here, though we ayme at it. Or imperfect holi∣nesse,
not as it is a work of God (for all the workes of God are per∣fect) but in respect of the measure of it in our selues, because there is a daily addition to it, and this is the worke of Sanctification begunne to be wrought in vs, the Image of God in part repaired againe in the soule within vs: and this holinesse also is double, It is Habituall, Actuall. Habituall holinesse is that that is infused by
the Spirit of God into vs. Actuall holinesse is that that is exercised a∣gaine by vs towards God. The first consists in the renewing of our na∣ture, making vs new creatures. And the second in the exercise and expression of the same both in our words and actions. Of this holinesse principal∣ly, the Apostle speakes here both of the reno∣uation of our natures, and the expression of it
by a godly life and con∣uersation. And this is that worke whereby the Lord ena∣bleth vs both to know, to will, and to worke that which is good and godly, which is the ex∣pression of this holines that consists in the re∣nouation of the inward man. The first worke of the Spirit in this, is vpon the vnderstanding, il∣luminating vs to know our selues, to know God, and to know our sinnes.
And then vpon our will and affections, ben∣ding our will (when we are able to put a diffe∣rence betweene good and euill) to embrace that which is good, and to refuse that which is euill. And in ordering the affections, setting them vpon right and proper obiects. In a word, as I said before, this worke con∣sists in two things: First, in renewing our nature, which also stands in two things:
First, in abolishing sinne and corruption in the power of it, daily more and more euacua∣ting our lusts and the strength of sinne. And secondly, in re∣storing and repayring the Image of God, in the soule, in holinesse and righteousnesse, in the vnderstanding, and will, and affections, and desires, which are made anew, and cast and fra∣med in a new mold. Then secondly, in that that flowes from the same in our disposi∣tions
and actions wher∣by we are, First, inabled to or∣der our actions general∣ly and constantly accor∣ding to the rule of Gods word. Secondly, to performe religious actions in vp∣rightnesse and sincerity of heart. Thirdly, to bee con∣stant without intermis∣sion or going backe a∣gaine, and back-sliding in the wayes of godli∣nesse, and in the exerci∣ses of holinesse. This is the holinesse that wee
are to speake of in this place. Before I come to the point, I will promise to you, concerning this part of Sanctification in positiue holinesse, these two or three par∣ticulars: First, that the least measure of true holines shall neuer be extingui∣hed; the Lord will not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoa∣king flax, till hee haue perfected the work be∣gunne: it shall goe on herefore; we are said
here to perfect holines, though it be small, if i be true, it shall neuer be extinguished. Secondly, the greates measure of holinesse must not bee rested in, for we must perfect ho∣linesse, as wee see in th words. Thirdly, that the vse of Sanctification is not to plead any thing at the hand of God by vertue of merit in our selues, but it is the way that we must walke in, it is a euidence of the trut of our faith, and effe∣ctuall
calling and rege∣neration. I come now to the point of Doctrine, which is very plaine in the words. Let vs clense our selues from all filthinesse, and grow vp in holinesse. From the connexion of these two together, obserue this point, that In true Sanctification, positiue holinesse is as necessary as purging from filthinesse. There is a further matter required than the meere absence of
sinne, there must be ho∣linesse. It is commanded, Le∣uit. 19.2.Leu. 19.2. Be ye holy (saith the Lord there) for I am holy. The Scripture is very plentiful in exhor∣tations to holinesse, which containes this branch of holinesse that I speake of. You will say, what is it to be holy? You shall see in Isa. 1.16.Isa. 1.16. Cease to doe euill; is that all? no, Learne to doe well, saith hee; and in 2 Pet. 2.9.2 Pet. 2.9. it is laid downe there to be thus
with all those that come o heauen, They are a yall Priesthood, a holy Nation, &c. All that are ued, before they come o heauen they are ade holy: Now I ar∣ue the point, beloued, specially from these hree reasons, though we may take it many o∣her wayes. First, from the infinite erfection of holinesse n God himselfe, whom euery one of his chil∣ren labour to be like y vertue of the com∣mand of God.
As I said before, Be ye holy as I am holy, fro an holy imitation o mee; not onely in re∣spect of abstinence from that which is ill, fo there is no ill cleaues to God; but in respect o that perfect goodness that is in him, hee i goodnesse and holinesse it selfe: therefore in I∣sa. 6.3.Isa. 6.3. hee is thus pro∣claymed by the Cheru∣bins one to another, Holy, Holy, Holy, &c. Holy is God the Fa∣ther, & Holy is God the Sonne, and Holy is God
the holy Ghost. But yet notwithstanding, fur∣her, if you will, it is hree times repeated, to hew that wee cannot sufficiently expresse the holinesse that is in God. Now the force of the reason lyeth thus; Shall the King be holy, & the subiects prophane; shall the father be holy, and shall the sonnes and daughters be filthy and impure, and vncleane; shall the Lord and Ma∣ster bee holy, and shall hee keepe in his house and family wicked and
godlesse, and vnholy seruants? It cannot be, there is no agreemen betweene euill and good, betweene light and darknesse, betweene God and a sinner: tha is the first reason. Secondly, this holi∣nesse makes vs like God, without which we shall neuer see his face with comfort in heauen. For what was that Image in which wee were at the first created, according to the Image of God? in is not spoken of in re∣spect of the outward
man, we must not con∣eiue such a similitude f God; but in the re∣pect of the qualities of he mind, of holines and ighteousnesse. I say, it akes vs like God, without which we shall euer see his face, Heb. 11.14. Seeke peace with all men, and holinesse, with∣ut which, no man shall see God. Now here is the force of the reason. All the faithfull look to see the face of God with comfort in heauen, and they haue a promise that they shall, but
none shall see the face of God with comfort, but those that are holy▪ therefore all the faith∣full must be holy in thi respect. Besides, I might giu this addition to thi reason, the former we is not complete with¦out this.Simile, If a man pu off ragges, and doe no clothe himselfe with better apparell, hee h as good haue kept the on still: Wee must no onely put off the ragge of sinne, but wee mu bee cloathed with th
righteousnesse of Christ n iustification, and with the glorious I∣mage of God that beau∣ifully adorneth euery Christian: this Image must be repaired in ho∣inesse and righteous∣nesse, and expressed in he acts and exercises of Sanctification in the life and conuersation. Thirdly and lastly, all he workes of God cals vs to this, I might bee arge in instancing in many of them, God ath made vs & created vs to be holy, wee are
redeemed, which is th speciall worke of all, w are made againe whe wee had marred o¦selues in respect of tha estate that we were fir created in, wee are re¦deemed and regenera∣ted, and new borne to this end and purpose that wee might hau this, as well as the for¦mer part of Sanctifica∣tion; Tit. 1.14. Chris hath redeemed vs, o purchased vs to himself that we might be a peculi∣ar people, zealous of g workes: therefore posi∣tiue
as well as negatiue holinesse is absolutely necessary. Our natures must bee renewed, and our actions sanctified: So wee see the point o∣pened, I come to some vse of it. And in the first place, since to true Sanctifica∣tion is required posi∣tiue holinesse, which consists in the renewing of our nature, and in framing our actions to the will of God, both for matter, and manner, and durance, &c. Ther∣fore this is a terror to
diuers sorts of men that fall short of Sanctifica∣tion, and shall fall short of glory, vnlesse they doe further works than yet is begunne in them. I will begin with those that are most of all op∣posite to this holinesse. I will but giue a touch. First, it is a terror to those that are openly and notoriously pro∣phane, whose sinnes are written in their skirts, and in their fore-heads, that euery man that runs may reade their sinnes; such a man is
such a notorious sinner; a branded sinner, a child of Satan in his present estate and condition. These men are so farre from positiue holinesse, as that they forbeare not positiue filthinesse and notorious wicked∣nesse: therefore I leaue these; they cannot but be conuinced that they are farre from this ho∣linesse that I speake of. Secondly, a man would thinke that these people were the worst of all sorts, yet there is a generation worse than
these; that is, some that are prophane in them∣selues, that are trained vp by the diuell to higher wickednes, that they are so maliciously bent, that they vent their venome, and spit their Adders poyson in the faces of all those that make but a shew, and that beare but the name of holinesse in their liues and conuer∣sations; they persecute that in others, for the want of which, them∣selues shall doubtlesse be damned, when they
come before the Iudge∣ment seat of God and Christ: these are feare∣full and grosse hypo∣crites, that when they come into the Congre∣gation vpon their knees, in their ordinary con∣fessions they pray that the rest of their liues may be pure and holy, and yet are no sooner out of the Church, but they scorn the very name of puri∣ty and holinesse: they are growne to a great height of iniquity that are come thus farre, but I leaue them to get out
of the estate, or to bee conuinced of the dan∣ger they are in. Thirdly, it is for ter∣ror to the hypocrite, that makes a shew of holinesse when he hath it not; this positiue ho∣linesse that I speake of, hee hath not his nature renewed. But how shall wee discerne whether a man haue this holinesse or no? That must bee done, briefly, by putting dif∣ference betweene true holines and hypocrisie.
First, therefore, true Sanctification exerci∣seth it selfe in the acts of holinesse vniuersal∣ly, both in abstinence from all sinne, which is the point I spake of be∣fore, and in imploying a mans selfe in all neces∣sary knowne duties that God cals for, and re∣quires for at his hands. This is recorded in the 2 King. 23.25. of Iosiah, It is said of him, that he turned to the Lord his God with all his soule, and with all his heart, ac∣cording to all the Com∣mandements
of Moses: not according to one, but according to all the Cōmandements which God gaue by the mouth and hand of Moses. This argued true holinesse, because his Sanctifica∣tion was exercised in the acts of holinesse, v∣niuersally, in one as well as another: Whereas an hypocrite, hee al∣wayes sets vpon the breach of some one of Gods Commādements, both in entertaining some knowne lust, and in a willing liuing in
the neglect of some ho∣ly duty. In the second place, Sanctification and true holinesse seekes God as its end, but hypocrisie seekes a mans selfe; cre∣dite carries a man farre to outward exercises, and to expresse inward Sanctification in shew: Sincerity seekes God, but hypocrisie seekes it selfe, and hath its owne ends, when there is not true holinesse: and what will it auaile a man to shine as a Glow-worme for a time in this world,
and after to be tormen∣ted for an hypocrite as the diuell in hell. Thirdly, as Sanctifi∣cation exerciseth it selfe in the acts of holinesse vniuersally, so it exer∣ciseth it selfe in them constantly, without a willing intermission: it will borrow no time from God, nor lend none to the deuill; as many that will serue God in shew that day they come to the Ta∣ble of the Lord, and af∣terward be as prophane and as vile as they were
before; they will serue the Lord one time in the Sabbath, and the diuell all the weeke af∣ter: But wee must bee constant without inter∣mission and going back againe, that is the pro∣perty of the Spirit of God, which is the Spi∣rit of holinesse, it is a constant Spirit, the seed of God abides, and the Spirit rests vpon those that haue it. He that is borne, cannot bee vn∣borne, that were a con∣tradiction; so hee that is borne of God, con∣tinues
and goes on in Sanctification and Ho∣linesse, whereas an hy∣pocrite serues God by fits, according to the time, and season, and occasion, and his owne particular aduantage; so you shal see, beloued, the hypocrite wil trem∣ble with Felix when he heareth Paul preach of Iudgement, hee will humble himselfe with Achab outwardly and counterfeitly; he will confesse his sinnes with Saul, hee will be sorry for his sinnes with Iu∣das,
he will haue a kinde of a wish with Balaam, but this will not serue his turne. It is a con∣stant progresse in the acts of holinesse, & the exercising of sanctifi∣cation in the way of grace and godlinesse, that must afford vs com∣fort; and this is the way that leads & tends to euerlasting life and saluation: As perseue∣rance in an euill course damnes a man, so con∣tinuance in goodnesse, hat saues him; he that endures to the end shall
bee saued. Then fourthly, this is a terror to those that are meerely ciuill ho∣nest (for these I distin∣guish from the former. It is true, ciuill parts are very good parts in these vnciuill times comparatiuely: but not∣withstanding they will neuer stand a man in any stead, they argu not the truth of faith and holinesse, without which a man shall ne∣uer see God. Now ci∣uility is distinguished from holinesse, briefly
in this: It is exercised only vpon the outward man, and it carries a man to some duties, with the neglect of o∣thers; especially, be∣ing set on the duties of the second Table, pre∣ferring them before the duties of the first Ta∣ble: but grace and true holinesse, when the na∣ture of a man is renew∣ed, there is a holy seaso∣ning of the heart in new desires, in new thoughts, new affections, a new will, &c. And it carries a man to euery duty,
coupling together the duties of both Tables. But, especially, a holy man lookes to God, and is iealous of his honor, yet though he preferre the first Table, and the duties of Gods wor∣ship before duties to men, yet hee neglects not the second Table, but couples them both together. Then in the fifth and last place, this condem∣neth also, and is a terror to those that content themselues onely with restraining grace; (I
touched this in the mor∣ning.) But know thus much, that this also is farre from holinesse in these respects: First, restraining grace makes onely a ne∣gatiue religion, it keeps a man from sinne, but it makes him not fruit∣full in holinesse, in the duties of the affirma∣tiue part of Gods Com∣mandements, in the du∣ties of Gods worship and seruice. In the second place, restraining grace car∣ries not a man to hate
his sinne, it onely bride∣leth and restraineth a man from it: As we see many children and ser∣uants that are brought vp in religious families, they are restrained from many notorious faults and vices; which, if they examine their hearts, they cannot say that it is out of ha∣tred and detestation of the same. And if a man that hath restraining grace, bee at any time carried to doe a good action, he doth it with∣out life and spirit, with∣out
any true sauour, and sweetnesse, and rellish of it, hee hath no heart or delight in it; there∣fore vnlesse you go fur∣ther than euery one of these, your estate is fearefull, and wretched, and miserable: If you liue in prophanenesse, if you scorne holinesse, and the care, and con∣scionable endeuour of Gods children to auoyd sinne, and to performe euery holy duty, if you doe not exercise holi∣nesse, and sanctification in the acts of holinesse
vniuersally; if you bee not constant in good duties without inter∣mission or going backe, if you seeke your selues in the good things you doe, and not the honour and glory of God, if you doe not humble your selues for your selfe-ends and by-glan∣ces, if your holinesse rest in the outward man, and goe not to the renewing of your thoughts and desires, of your affecti∣ons and imaginations, &c. If you make more conscience of the second
Table than of the first, or if you haue some care of the second, and none at all of the first, f you be onely restrai∣ned, and are not fruit∣full in holinesse of life, in the duties of Gods worship and seruice, if you bee not carried to hate sinne, as well as to abstaine from sinne, and to doe good duties with pleasure and delight; if it be not thus with you, you are in your sinnes, in the power of Satan, in a miserable and wo∣full condition.
Secondly, let this b an exhortation to stirr vp, and prouoke euery one of vs to labour to finde this worke in ou¦selues: Why should we take delight in any thing in the world til we haue found it, con∣sidering how dangerou our estate is, if the Lor should cut vs off be∣fore? I say, let vs la∣bour to finde our na∣tures renewed, our acti∣ons changed, and ou course and conuersati∣on of life reformed an turned from euill, and
the exercise and pra∣tice of it to the daily nd constant exercise, nd practice of that which is good: Be∣oued, this will stand by s, and keepe vs close o God, in the time of affliction, and in the day of persecution and emptation, when hy∣pocrites and tempori∣zing time-seruers shall ye off, and fall backe from the Lord; then the true worke of grace will stand by a man, and vphold him in the time of trouble. These
are dangerous daye that wee liue in, and holinesse was neuer so much disgraced, it wa neuer so little in re∣quest as it is now: but yet if troubles come vp∣on vs for the Gospell, there is nothing that will fill our soules with comfort, vnlesse we find this worke be wrought in vs by the Spirit of God; and if wee haue this worke of grace in vs, wee shall finde the Lord alway present with vs in all trou∣bles and afflictions, ac∣cording
to the promise that the Lord hath made vs. There are none of vs here present that are sure (for a day, no not for the time that wee are to abide in this place) of our estates, of our liberties, or of our liues; but this one thing, euery Christian is sure of, that if this worke of grace be be∣gunne and wrought in him, hee shall see the face of God with com∣fort in the kingdome of glory, hee shall be sure
to inherit that king∣dome. Therefore you that are setting your feet into the wayes of godlinesse, I beseech you looke not backe a∣gaine, be not discoura∣ged you that haue be∣gun in a course of San∣ctification, for any sad dismall occurrents you meet with in the world. By holinesse you are made like God him∣selfe; what shall I say more? It is your honor, your glory, your reioy∣cing, without which you haue no reioycing
at all. You are made hereby, in some mea∣sure, conformable to the glorious Maiesty of the Almighty. Therefore this holinesse is called the new man, the Image of God, the diuine na∣ture, I know not how I should vrge this vpon you, but thus God is holy, God hath made, and created you to bee holy, Christ hath re∣deemed you to bee ho∣ly, God hath giuen you this long time to re∣pent in, that you might be holy; God hath sent
you the Gospell, the meanes of holinesse, therefore let vs not bee ashamed to embrace it, and professe it. Lastly, for this point, let it bee a vse of triall, whether wee haue not onely restraining grace which doth keepe from sin, but also this positiue holinesse; whether the Image of God bee re∣newed in our soules or not, because there is a necessity of this Sancti∣fication, and God glo∣rifieth none but those that he first sanctifieth;
as we see in that chaine, Rom. 8.Rom. 8. Whom hee prede∣stinates, he cals, and san∣ctifieth, and glorifieth: Therefore it concernes vs to try and examine our selues, whether the worke of holinesse bee in vs or no, whether we beate the Image of God, or the image of the di∣uell; for one of them e∣uery man carries in his soule. Now you may discerne this worke of grace and holinesse by these three markes: First, from the prepa∣ratiues to it.
Secondly, from the order of working it. Thirdly, from the e∣fects of it. I will bee briefe in them, because I haue another point or two to obserue to you. First, from the pre∣paratiues, where true holinesse and the Image of God is repayred, where a man is become a new man, hee findes these things preceding to prepare him to the worke of holinesse. First, a worke of il∣lumination to see his
vnholinesse: Did the Word of God euer worke vpon thy vnder∣standing, to let thee see what a wretched, mise∣rable and damned crea∣ture thou art by nature? The second prepara∣tiue, is a broken heart at this sight of our vn∣holinesse; Men and brethren, what shall wee doe? There was a begin∣ning, a preparation to the worke; the worke was not throughly wrought in them, Act. 2. but they saw that they were in a state of dam∣nation,
and their hearts begunne to rend in pie∣ces at the sense of the same; and then they could take no rest in their soules til they were in∣formed what they shold doe to be brought out of this wofull state. The third prepara∣tiue is selfe-deniall, a renouncing of our selues, a giuing vp our selues as desperate and wretched, and in a state of damnation, in respect of any helpe within our selues. The fourth is a desire
to apply our selues to the menes that God hath appointed to bring vs out of this misera∣ble condition to apply our selues to Christ, that there we may finde mercy and pardon at his his hands, to seeke grace here, as well as glory hereafter: looke into thy soule, and see if thou find this prepara∣tion. The second marke whereby this is disco∣uered is from the man∣ner of working of it by the Spirit of God. If
true holines be wrought in thee, it begunne first at thy heart; so that there is a sensible change: there was not a greater change in Ne∣buchadnezzar when hee eat grasse among the Oxen, and when hee sate on the Throne of his kingdome, than there is in the heart and affections, in the desire, and will, and whole soule of a Christian man that is changed from his naturall state and condition to a spi∣rituall estate, by the
worke of Sanctificati∣on and Holinesse. There was not a more sensible change in those mira∣cles that Christ wroght when he made men see that could not see be∣fore, than is wrought in the worke of Sanctifi∣cation: for now we see, that formerly were blinde; wee come to heare the word of God, that formerly were deafe, and could not heare: wee come to walke nimbly with pleasure in the wayes of godlines, and of grace,
whereas before wee were lame: these out∣ward expressions come from the change with∣in, from a new heart: Can a man haue a new heart and not bee sensi∣ble? Shall he not finde new affections, new de∣sires, new resolutions, and a new will; that whereas his will was formerly stubborne, now it is flexible to the will of God; that wher∣as his desires were fil∣thy, and vniust, and vn∣lawfull, the Spirit of God casts them out, and
he enters with holy de∣sires, holy thoughts, &c. Thus if holinesse bee true; it beginnes in this order, at the heart, be∣cause there the Image of God was first lost and defaced, there it is first repaired. But it staies not there, but in the second place, where there is this worke of holinesse, a man seeth that hee is bought with a price, ther∣fore hee laboureth to glorifie God in body and spirit: the worke goeth to the whole man:
where there is a sancti∣fied heart, it expresseth it selfe outwardly in the workes and actions, as wee shall see in the ef∣fects of this holinesse by and by in the life and conuersation: when there is sap in the tree wee know the tree is a∣liue, though wee see it not; so when nature is renewed, we are liuing, wee haue a spirituall life in vs, before we ex∣ercise the same; but the other presently fol∣low; as the tree in the season sheweth it selfe
to be aliue. How? First, by budding, then by blooming, and then by bearing: so it is in a true Christian man, when hee hath true ho∣linesse, when hee hath the seeds of grace in his heart, then hee comes to resolue well, those are as buds; he comes to speake well, the lan∣guage of Canaan, words that tend to holinesse and edification, those are the bloomes; hee comes to doe wel, those are the fruits; those that doe not proceed to
all these, the worke of grace is not truely wrought in them. Some seeme to resolue well, to bud well, but they neuer bloome in whol∣some speeches, it comes not to their mouth; some haue both good resolutions and faire promises, but they beare no fruit: What is the reason? They haue no root in them∣selues, as Christ spea∣keth, the sap that is in them, is as that that is in a branch that is cut off from the body of
the tree. Thus you may discerne it from the order of the working of it. Thirdly, you may know this holines from the effects of it. I will lay downe but two or three, and so proceed to the next point. The first effect is this, True loue to God the Author of the Word, the meanes whereby we are begotten, this marke is agreeable to holinesse: for the work being so heauenly, so excellent, and glorious
a worke as Sanctifica∣tion and Regeneration is, it is impossible, and against reason, but that he that is sensible of the same, should loue the worker of it. It is so in nature, benefits attract loue to a man; and not onely so, but we cannot but loue the instru∣ment that conueyes such a speciall good: So if euer God, by the ministery of his Word and Spirit, haue subdu∣ed our corruptions, mortified our old man, and renewed his Image
on our soules: we can∣not possibly but loue him that begat vs, and we cannot but loue the instrument, and the meanes, euen delight in the Word of God, and the Preachers of the same: for faith comes by hearing, and how shall they heare with∣out a Preacher: there∣fore examine thy selfe what loue thou bearest to God, and examine thy loue to God, by the loue thou bearest to the meanes whereby God hath done good to thy
soule, by the loue thou bearest to the Word: Canst thou keepe thy selfe from frequenting of it vpon euery idle worldly occasiō? Those that had rather follow their profits, and plea∣sures, &c. than delight in Gods Sabbaths, and in partaking of the or∣dinances of God, it is an argument they haue little loue to God, and by consequence little holinesse. A second marke, is loue to the Saints of God, those that par∣take
of the same holi∣nesse with our selues; this necessarily follow∣eth, Where this worke of holinesse is wrought, we loue those that are begotten of God: And herby we know that we are translated from death to life, because wee loue the brethren. It is impossi∣ble that a man should beare the Image of God in his owne breast, and not loue the Image of of God where hee seeth it in another mans life and conuersation: yea, I say, loue of holinesse
in others, where holi∣nesse is in the highest straine, is a speciall mark of discouery. For there may be some affe∣ction to that which is correspondent to a mans owne disposition; as a ciuill man loues ci∣uility wheresoeuer hee seeth it: but when it is a straine higher than that that is in him∣selfe, he imitates it not, but emulates it, and beares an enuious mind to that man, and to the worke of grace in him. When a man is vnlimi∣ted
in his desire of grace, because hee pro∣pounds perfection to attaine to the higher straine of grace he seeth in any, the more loue it begets from him. It is impossible for a man to carry the Image of God in his soule, and not to loue the same Image in others, wheresoeuer he seeth it. The third and last effect is this, where there is holinesse in the heart, it seasoneth a mans speech, it chan∣geth his discourse and
language; his speeches tend to edification, to profit, and to holinesse; to the building vp of the soules of others in the feare of God vpon euery occasion and sea∣sonable opportunity: Therefore the Scrip∣ture layeth downe the state of those that are guilty, that liue in sins of the tongue, they are no Citizens of the king∣dome of heauen, he tha slandereth his neighbour. So I may say of swea∣rers, of lyers, of reui∣lers, and euery man
whose speech is not ho∣ly, he hath no holinesse in his heart: my ground is good without denial, in Iam. 1.26.Iam. 1.26. If any man seeme religious, and doe not bridle his tongue, his religion is in vaine. So I say, examine thy selfe by these trials; if thou find not these things in thee, thy state is wret∣ched and fearfull; haste thee out of it, there must bee a change wrought in thee, or else thou canst neuer come to the kingdome of heauen. So much shall
serue to haue spoken of the first point; I come now to the next point to bee obserued from this part of the Text, before I come to the last words, In the feare of God. The Apostle doth not say, Let vs clense our selues from all fil∣thinesse and get holi∣nesse, but Let vs grow vp and perfect holinesse: Growing vp and per∣fecting holinesse must be the marke that wee must alwayes ayme at. So the point is plaine, that
It is not a scanty small measure of holinesse that God requires at the hands of his children, but a growing towards perfection euerie day. This the Apostle Paul prayeth for, in the be∣halfe of the Colossians, Col. 1.9.Col. 1.9. For this cause (saith he) since the day that wee heard of it, wee cease not to pray for you, and desire that you may be filled with the knowledge of his will in all wisedome and vnderstanding, that
you may walke worthy of the Lord in all pleasing, being fruitfull in euery good worke; euery straine almost leading a foot higher towards holines. And as the Apostle prayes thus on the be∣halfe of the Colossians, so all Christians are ex∣horted to this, in 2 Pet. 3.18.2 Pet. 3.18 Grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Iesus Christ. For the clearing of this point a little. Some man may say, Can we perfect holines, i the Image of God
perfectly renewed, can we be perfect in the ex∣ercises and expressions of it in the outward man? I answer, we may be, and wee must be perfe∣cting holinesse, though wee cannot perfect ho∣linesse as long as wee liue; therefore we must take notice of this di∣stinction. There is a perfection of degrees, this we must aspire to, and labour for, though we can ne∣uer attaine it here. But there is another
kinde of perfection, which is that the Apo∣stle speakes of here, and that contains these par∣ticulars. First, it is opposed to halfe holinesse, bee sure that your holinesse be full, that it bee not onely negatiue but af∣firmatiue also, as I said in the former point. Seconl, it hath re∣spect to the vniuersali∣ty of the grace of God that is in a Christian; God would haue them labour for euery grace, for patience, as well as
for knowledge; for meekenesse, as well as patience; and for loue, as well as meekenesse; for temperance, as well as loue; it hath respect to the vniuersality of grace, that the graces of Gods Spirit may be lin∣ked one to another, that a man may not make shew of one grace, and be altogether destitute of another. Thirdly, it hath re∣spect to the growth of those graces that are v∣niuersally in a man, in the measure of them,
growing stronger and stronger euery day, this perfecting holines hath speciall reference to this, growing in holi∣nesse extensiuely in the number of graces, get∣ting euery grace, and then intensiuely grow∣ing more in the measure and strength of those graces attained. Then fourthly, it hath respect to the ex∣pression of this holines in the vniuersality of our obedience. Fifthly and lastly, it hath respect to the
sincere and constant ex∣ercise of holinesse, this is the full perfection that euery one must striue, while they liue here, to come to. Now hauing thus farre ope∣ned the point, I come to the reasons of it. The first ground or reason, why it is not a small measure, but a growing to perfection that God requires; it is from the nature of grace that is wrought in the heart by the Spi∣rit of God; it is like∣ned and resembled in
the Scriptures to a sparke of fire which when it is throwne into dry wood, kindleth, and comes to be a great fire; that is the property of true grace, it is like a sparke of fire in dry wood, it groweth and increaseth hotter and hotter, it groweth to a greater and greater measure, till it come to a flame. So the graces of God and the meanes where∣by they are wrought, are compared to seed, to a graine of mustard∣seed
that is sowne in good ground, which hauing seasonable times fall vpon it, it growes vp till it come to bee a great tree. It is like flowers that grow in a Garden, or as a tree planted by the waters side, that springs and growes till it come to ful stature & grouth, so that in respect of the nature of grace, which is set out by these re∣semblances: whereso∣euer there is a dram of true holines, there can∣not but be a growing
and going forward dai∣ly to a greater and ful∣ler measure of strength and perfection of the same. The second reason is drawne from the neces∣sity of growing, or of perfecting holines, and that shewes it selfe in these two or three seue∣rall respects. First, euery man is to know that the time will come, when the grea∣test measure of grace that a man can get, he will thinke it little e∣nough; Store is no sore,
as we vse to say. So it is in the store and trea∣sures of grace. In the violence of Sathans temptations, in the bit∣ternesse of crosses and afflictions that may be∣tide and befall a man here, and at the houre of death. What is the eason that many then elapse and fall off from God? In the houre of ēptation, saith Christ, peaking of hypocrites, hey fall away: The eason is, because they ad not gotten store of race in their hearts.
In the second place there is a necessity in respect of prayer; the more strength of grace there is, the more easi∣ly God is intreated, and the more ready to heare vs: Would wee haue God to heare vs when wee call vpon him; would we haue him be as ready to heare, as we are to lay open our wants? Beloued, the stronger our faith and graces are, the soone God heareth; for fait and feruency are th two wings that carry
prayer: now the stron∣ger faith is, the sooner prayer comes to hea∣uen, and the sooner it obtaines the mercy it sues for, at the hands of God. In the third place there is a necessity of it, in respect of our owne corruptions, there must be strong grace to subdue strong corrupti∣ons, there is a great measure of sin, a great measure and degree of filthinesse yet in vs, and corruption in vs is ex∣ceeding strong; now
corruption doth not e∣uacuate corruption; therefore there is a ne∣cessity of growing in grace, that we may sub∣due the power and strength of our lusts daily more and more, by the power and strength of grace, and the Spirit of God in vs. That is the second rea∣son drawne from the necessity of growing. The third reason of the point, is drawne from the danger of not growing, from the dan∣ger in not perfecting
holinesse; the danger consists especially in these two or three things. First, grace being compared to a sparke of fire; you know if a spark lye long, and doe not get heat, it will be sure to goe out: So it is in grace, if wee goe not forward, we stand still but a little while, but wee goe backeward: Therefore in Reu. 3.Reu. 3. We are exhorted to stirre vp and quicken the graces of the Spirit, that are ready to dye in vs, for want of
exercise and vse, so that we goe backward, if we perfect not holinesse in going forward. Then a second dan∣ger is this, the curse of God hangs ouer euery barren soule: and that is a fearefull curse, Heb. 10.38.Heb. 10.38 If any man with∣draw himselfe, my soule shall haue no pleasure in him, saith God; he hath no pleasure in a man that withdraweth. Then thirdly, as this dishonoureth God, so it pleaseth the diuell, that a man should not
perfect holinesse; it re∣ioyceth Satan nothing more, than to see a man a trewant in Christs Schoole, to see a man make no proficiency in grace, for that feedes his hopes that hee shall be depriued of glory. The fourth and last reason is, because it is the good will of God, the kindnesse of God to afford the meanes of growth; therefore if we doe not perfect ho∣linesse, it will euince vs of these three things. First, that wee are
ill husbands. Secondly, that wee haue euill hearts. Thirdly, that we doe not pray first, if wee grow not euery day more and more, and perfect holinesse, it will conuince vs. First, that wee are ill husbands of the Ta∣lents that God hath gi∣uen vs, when hee hath sent his Prophets to rise early and speake to vs to direct vs in the way, to helpe vs forward, to build vs in the wayes of godlinesse; if wee doe
not grow, what ill hus∣bands are wee of these Talents. Againe, it not onely argues that we are il husbands, but that wee haue euill hearts: when the husbandman sow∣eth his Corne on the ground, and God wa∣tereth it from heauen, and yet it doth not grow, we say that is e∣uill ground: So when the good seed of the Word falls on vs, and yet wee grow not, and perfect not holinesse, it argues that wee haue
barren rotten hearts, that choakes the seed of the Word that it cannot come to ripenesse and perfection. Then againe, it ar∣gues that we are altoge∣ther negligent and care∣lesse of prayer, where∣by wee might obtaine the blessing of God vp∣on the meanes afforded vs: What is the reason that men grow no per∣fecter in faith, in holi∣nesse, in the wayes of godlines? Because they content thēselues with the bare vse of the or∣dinances
of God, and are not earnest and con∣scionable in seeking to God for a blessing on the same. You see then that it is not a small measure of grace, but perfecting holinesse, growing to perfection, that God cals for, and requires at our hands. Now I come to the ap∣plication briefly. First, it informes vs thus much, for a vse of instruction, that a Chri∣stian mans taske is ne∣uer at an end, till his life bee at an end; for
seeing wee cannot bee perfectly holy here, we must be perfecting ho∣linesse as long as wee liue. When once a man comes to this, saith a Father, to say hee hath enough, he is neere ru∣ine and destruction. When a man comes to say, I haue knowledge enough, I haue patience enough, I haue grace e∣nough, I haue assuranc of saluation enough this man is neere his ru¦ine and destruction.  would grieue a fathe to see his childe not
grow, and thriue: It grieueth God the Fa∣ther, that you should liue vnder the meanes of grace and saluation, one weeke after ano∣ther, one moneth after another, one yeare af∣ter another, and yet notwithstanding to bee no better proficients in the Schoole of his Son Iesus Christ. You are plants and trees in the Orchard of God, Ioh. 15.1.Ioh. 15.1. I am the Vine, and you are the Branches, and my Father is the Hus∣band-man. Are we trees
in the Orchard of God, then certainely God lookes for these things at our hands: First, for fruit. Secondly, for good fruit. Thirdly, for much fruit. Fourthly, for conti∣nuall fruitfulnesse. First, I say, God lookes for fruit: Will a man plant a tree in his Orchard only to looke vpon? Doth hee not come at the appointed time to looke for fruit? Doth hee not digge it
downe, and cast it into the fire, if it beare not fruit according to the cost and paines that he hath bestowed? There∣fore, saith Iohn to a ge∣neration of Vipers that came to his Baptisme, Bring forth fruit worthy amendment, Matth. 3.8.Mat. 3.8. Wee are Trees, God lookes for fruit. Nay, wee are Gods Trees, therefore hee lookes for good fruit, Mat. 3.10.Mat. 3.10. we see there, Euery Tree that bringeth not forth good fruit, is hewen downe and cast into
the fire. There is no man that liues vpon the face of the earth, but hee brings forth some fruit or other; hee brings forth fruit either to God, or else to the de∣uill, the hedge-fruit of his owne lusts, fruit to destruction; for he that sowes to the flesh, shall reape corruption. Wee must bring forth good fruit. Thirdly, God lookes for plentifull fruit; we must bring forth abun∣dance: Why? Because God hath planted vs,
and watred vs; Ioh. 15.8.Ioh. 15.8. My Father is the Hus∣band-man, and you are the branches, and here∣in is my Father glorified, that you bring forth much fruit. Lastly, God lookes for constancy in our fruitfulnesse: because hee is constant in his paines towards vs, that wee might be fruitfull, and bring forth good fruit, and much fruit, and constant fruit in the exercises of piety and charity; and that wee may doe so, let vs looke
to these two things: First, that the Tree be good, be sure that thy person bee iustified in Christ. And then see that the root be good, that by faith thou abide in him, Ioh. 15.2.Ioh. 15.2. Abide in mee that you may bring forth much fruit. So much for that vse of instruction. In the second place this is a terror for those that are within the compasse of Gods pales, I meane that are bapti∣zed, and so are in the bosome of the Church,
and heare the Word of God, and partake of the ordinances of God, (as the Fig-tree was in the Vineyard;) vpon whom the Lord hath bestowed much paines, and yet are so far from perfecting holinesse, as that they perfect wic∣kednes more and more; euill men and deceiuers grow worse and worse. But especially, which is strange, those that haue made some shew of re∣ligion and holinesse. Oh! beloued, that the profession of any
man should bee, as it were, in a consumpti∣on, languishing, decli∣ning, and going backe∣wards, this is that that the Lord grieues for, and abhorres: when men are not like to the Palme tree, that alway keepes it greenenesse, nor like the Cedar, that groweth stronger and stronger, but are like a Reed shaken with the wind, or like Bul-rushes that are planted in the mire; these neuer had any true holinesse, they neuer had the seed of
God indeed in them, vnlesse they recouer in some short time, being conuinced, vnlesse they bee burthened for this backe-sliding, and re∣couer out of this state and condition. Againe, as this re∣proues such, so it stops the mouthes of carnall men, for the imputati∣on that they lay vpon the children of God for their precisenesse and strictnes, and too much holinesse, that they are not content to keepe an equall pace with their
neighbours to goe to heauen as slowly as they, but they will la∣bour to out-strip them: I say, why should the children of God be bla∣med for their too much forwardnesse, when as God would haue no man to rest in the pre∣sent measure of grace, but euery man to con∣tend, and fight, and la∣bor, and striue to grow, and increase, and a∣bound, euen to perfect holinesse. Therfore in the third place, let this bee a vse
of exhortation, to stirr vp euery one, not to be like dead trees, that stand at a stay, and are good for nothing but the fire, but to stirre vp our selues to grow in holinesse, to be fruitfull in the workes of piety and charity, to abound in goodnesse, in good desires, in good ende∣uours, and good pra∣ctices and performan∣ces, and this exhortati∣on I shall vrge vnder these three heads. First, take heed of what may hinder you
from perfecting holi∣nesse. Secondly, vse the meanes that may fur∣ther you in perfecting holinesse. Thirdly, take two or three motiues to presse this on you, and then I will conclude. First, take heed of what may hinder you from perfecting holi∣nesse: And what is it that daily hinders men that they grow no fa∣ster, to no better ripe∣nesse? First, coldnesse in
profession, which is the politike wisedome of these times, take heed of that; men content themselues to keepe an indifferency and a meane in the profession of religion: Beloued, you know it is agreea∣ble to reason, that a cold tomacke digests no meat, a cold soile brings no fruit, a cold Spring kils the buddes, a cold heart choakes grace; if you see a man that is cold in Religion, that s luke-warm, no good∣esse can bee expected
from him till he amend his pace. Take heed of coldnesse, bee not dis∣couraged for any thing, let Religion bee full of life and heat. Secondly, take heed of couetousnesse, of earthly mindednesse, & surfetting too much vpon any thing here, either pleasures or riches; cares and riches are as thorns that choke, when wee suffer our af∣fections to be stollen a∣way with them. The glorious shew of the world, saith Paul, steales
mens hearts from the liuing God, and when men come to this, there is no growing in grace. And then the cares of the world how to grow rich, and how to ac∣complish wickednesse, and how to satiate and enioy their hearts de∣sires and lusts, in 1 Ioh. 2.16.1 Ioh. 2.16. Loue not the world nor the things of the world, hee that loues the world, the loue of the Father is not in him: And if the loue of God be not in a man, neuer looke for growing perfect in ho∣linesse:
When streames are diuided, they runne weakly, but when they runne one way, they run strongly: So if we draw our hearts altogether from the loue of the world, if wee vse it as if we vsed it not, if we vse it as a meanes to helpe vs to heauen, and to further vs in the wayes of grace, and not o∣therwise, then our loue will bee setled vpon God, and vpon Religi∣on thorowly, but earth∣ly mindednesse hinders our progresse in Religi∣on,
therefore take heed of that. Thirdly and lastly, take heed of too high a cōceit of our selus, in re∣spect of any presēt mea∣sure of grace, for that spoiles and deads it pre∣sently; grace is deaded when it stands at a stay. When a man takes the honour of working it that is due to God, to himselfe, when hee growes proud of that that is in him, Hos. 10.1.Hos. 10.1. Israel brought forth fruit to himselfe: So there are many that bring
forth fruit to them∣selues, when they grow prod and conceited of that tey haue. The low valley is fruitfull, when the high mountains are barren; take heed of a proud heart, for grace wil not grow in a proud heart; God resists the proud. So much for the first thing, I exhort you to take heed of the hin∣drances. The second thing is to vse the meanes; you know the meanes, ther∣fore I will giue but a touch, and vrge a little
the exhortation by mo∣tiues: The meanes are these: The publike meanes alway carry the prehe∣minence, though they be not disioyned from the priuate. Now the publike meanes to perfect holi∣nesse, are, The Word, The Sacrament, and Prayer. You haue been many of you at the Table of the Lord, this is the meanes that God hath appointed to strenthen your vnion and fellow∣ship
with his Sonne Ie∣sus Christ, and your as∣surance of the loue of God, and to vnite you in loue, and brotherly affection one towards another; see therefore that you perfect these gifts and graces. When the Oares strike not, the Boat stands stil, or goes backward: So when we doe not constantly and conscionably vse the Word and Sacraments, and ioyne these toge∣ther, then we stand still, and we cannot stand stil long, but the blasts of
Satans temptations wil driue vs backe. A second meanes is this, to labour to make a sanctified vse of our afflictions, of the hand of God vpon vs in any kinde whatsoeuer, and that is a meanes to weane vs from the world, and to draw vs neerer to God in all our wayes. A fearfull thing it is, beloued, that when iudgements are at the doore, when the sword is threatned, when dan∣gers are threatned a∣gainst vs in these feare∣full
back-sliding times we liue in, that now men should grow worse, that now they should not strain them∣selues to a higher pitch of holinesse, and ende∣uour to worship God, and doe more and grea∣ter seruice for God than before: When as God expects this at our hands, what are all af∣flictions and threat∣nings, they are the Phy∣sicke of God to expell peccant humors, and to helpe the obstructed parts, that grace may
haue a more liuely mo∣tion in vs; therefore take heed, when the hand of God is vpon vs, that wee make this vse of it, to surther our growth in grace, and to perfect holinesse. Thirdly, let vs labour to exercise those gifts holily, that God hath giuen any of vs for the benefite of others, that is a speciall meanes to grow in holinesse, some ther things waste and onsume in the frequent se and wearing of hem; but the more we
vse grace for the bene∣fit of others, the more wee encrease it; Com children, and I will teac you, &c. and taste and s how good God hath bee to me: the more tho teachest others, th more thou shalt hau thy selfe; as a candl that conueyes light  others, and yet keepe its own light: the mo thou conueyest light  others, the more th shalt find it in thy sel therefore hide not  thy talents in a napki in the ground, like
vnprofitable seruant, for there is a glorious reward that God hath laid vp for his chil∣dren. Fourthly, be sure to get an humble heart: as pride is an enemy to growth in Grace; so an humble heart furthe∣reth it, an humble heart is that where Gods spi∣rit delights to dwell, and that wherein grace growes: I say, the more humble wee are, the more our faith, & loue, and patience, and assu∣rance of Gods loue, and
euery manner of grace growes and increaseth in vs, let vs bee stirred vp to vse these meanes, and vse them constant∣ly. That is the third thing. Now I come to some motiues to stirre vs vp to grow and increase in holinesse. First, consider Gods paines and patience to∣wards vs; euery one of vs, if wee consider and looke on it, wee may say, God hath bought vs deare, he hath bought
vs with the bloud of his owne Sonne, hee hath planted vs in a good soyle, hee hath watred vs daily, he hath waited for fruit a long time at many of our hands, when the miracles were done in Corazin and Bethsaida, and fruit fol∣lowed not vpon it, then woe and misery to Co∣razin and Bethsaida comes; Woe to thee Cho∣razin, woe to thee Bethsai∣da. Thus it is with eue∣ry one of vs; when God hath bestowed paines, and cost, and care on vs,
if then wee answer not the expectation of the Husbandman, hee comes then with the felling axe of iudge∣ment, and strikes vs downe by the root, and casts vs into the fire. If this bee not the day of thy growing, to mor∣row may be the day of thy cutting downe and casting into the fire; therfore as the Prophet saith, When will it once be, Ier. 9.Ier. 9. Secondly, let vs con∣sider that euery one hath a care to grow
more and more perfect in other things, why should wee not labour also to grow in grace? Let any man shew a reason. Euery man hath a care to grow more in wit, in wealth, in strength, in fauour, in honour: I maruell how high a man would bee, but he would still desire to grow more: and how rich a man would bee, but he would desire to grow richer: Why then should we not de∣sire to grow more per∣fect in grace, seeing one
dram of sauing grace is worth tenne thousand worlds, if they were all of the purest gold that euer was in Ophir? Thirdly, consider how short wee come, both in respect of o∣thers, and likewise of what God hath done for vs; and this will worke somewhat on vs: Thou that hast beene a professor twenty, thir∣ty, forty, it may be, fif∣ty yeeres, looke vpon that man or woman that hath been a Schol∣ler in Christs Schoole,
it may be, but three, or foure, or tenne yeares, hath hee not more faith than thou? more consci∣ence, more comfort, and assurance? hath hee not out stripped thee alrea∣dy, is it not a shame for thee? And though thou see few that goe beyond thee, yet looke how far short thou art of that thou mightest haue come to; consider if thou haue not mispent many dayes and houres idly, wherin thou migh∣test haue done good to
thy owne soule, and haue profited others. The consideration of this will stirre thee vp to perfect holinesse. Fourthly, consider with thy selfe that Po∣pery growes, and pro∣phanenesse grows, why should not grace grow accordingly? Let it be the taske of euery Chri∣stian, euery one to a∣mend one, and at length there will bee a good a∣mendment in the gene∣rall. Consider that Po∣pery growes, the weeds are cherished and nou∣rished:
let vs also la¦bour to grow in grace, that the cry of grace may counteruaile the cry of our sinnes; that the strength of grace may keepe downe the strength of sinne, and preuent those plagues and judgements, that hang ouer our heads. Lastly, to moue vs, let vs worke vpon our selues with this consi∣deration, that our ac∣count is most certaine, we shall be called to an account how wee haue spent our times, and
dayes, and yeeres, and houres; the time of our account is vncertaine, wee know not how sud∣den it will be, whether some of vs shall be cal∣led to our particular ac∣count before wee stirre out of our seats, Our breath is in our nostrils, and our liues are in the hand of God. Hee takes vs away when he plea∣seth, and when we come before him, wee must giue an account for our time, and meanes, and wits, for our places and talents, for all that
God hath giuen vs, how they haue furthe∣red and perfected vs in the worke of grace and holinesse; and then cur∣sed be the barren soule, woe to that soule, that is not going forward and perfecting holinesse. So much for that vse. Lastly, this is a vse of sweete consolation and comfort, to euery one whose conscience tels him, I am going forward, I am perfecting holinesse daily, though it be smal, yet is it true: the promise of life and
saluation it selfe, and of perseuerance belongs to such. But some man may say, alas, It is true, if I thought I did grow, but I cannot discerne that I grow; I had as much faith, and loue, and strength of grace, for ought I know or finde, the last yeere, as I haue now. Now because growth in grace in weake Chri∣stians, and in strong ones too, sometimes it vnsensible, therefore I will briefly discouer to
you how you shall dis∣cerne whether your growth be in truth or no. I will but giue you two or three notes, and so conclude. First, the more sen∣sible we are of our not growing, the more in∣sensibly grace groweth, the more sensible wee grow in the want of it; for if there bee growth in one sauing grace, it is certaine (though it bee not discerned in o∣ther particulars) there is a growth and going forward in all, so that
the more sensible wee come to bee of our not going forward, the more humbled and sor∣ry we finde our selues for our not growing and going forward, the more we may be assu∣red of our growth. This I speak for the comfort of those that are weake. Then secondly, if we finde more earnest, and greater desires to grow, and to perfect holinesse then to any worke in the world besides, and conscionably attend vp∣on the meanes, for that
pur∣pose, the promise is ours, Blessed are those that hunger and thirst af∣ter righteousnesse: those that thirst, and thirsting vse the meanes to grow in grace more then any thing else, it argues they set a due price and rate vpon holines; and grace, it argues a good heart, that is making a progresse, and going forward, though a man be not sensible of it himselfe. Thirdly, if thou find thy heart affected with tankfulnesse for that
measure of grace thou findest in thee, as well as thou art humbled for that that thou wantest; for it is impossible that a childe of God (if he examine his owne con∣science, though he cry out of barrennesse ne∣uer so much, it is im∣possible) but that hee should bee sensible of the truth of grace in him, he dares not deny it: therefore when the heart is wrought to thanke God for that we haue, as well as to com∣plaine of that we want,
it argues the presence of grace; and where there is the presence of grace, there is the pre∣sence of the Spirit, which is operatiue, and working, and will stirre vp, and quicken grace, and cause it to grow. Fourthly, the last comfortable marke to euery one that hath it, is this, If our practice doe vniformely grow with our knowledge, that though our know∣ledge bee but in a small measure, yet if we make conscience to walke ac∣cording
to that me∣sure we haue. This may comfort our hearts if we finde these things in vs. But some will say, for all this, it is hard for a man to grow, and go forwards; a man can∣not bee constant alway in the course of Chri∣stianity, he cannot bee alway in the duties of hearing, of reading, and meditating, hee cannot alway be thus imploy∣ed in the exercises o Religion. It is true indeed,
doe not say that a man must alway bee doing nothing else, but hee must alwayes doe them with all diligence and constancy. It is true, a man cannot be rich vn∣lesse he take paines, but if he know he shall be rich with taking pains, he will doe it; so a man shall bee rich in grace, if hee take paines and vse the meanes: wee haue promises made, therefore wee should not bee discouraged with seeming difficul∣ties.
But some will say, I cannot grow so much as I would. Comfort and inco∣rage thy selfe in this consideration that thou wouldest grow more than thou doest, com∣fort thy selfe in th measure of grace tha thou desirest; God ac∣cepteth that, as if thou wert possessed with the same: let vs stirre vp our selues with consci∣ence and constancy i the vse of the meane that wee may not b shrubs in the Orcha
of God standing still, that wee may not be fruitlesse trees for the ire; much lesse of Plants in the pales of Gods Orchard by bap∣timse: let vs not goe backe, and bring forth it to the Diuell and our owne lusts, but let vs labour to be such as n the feare of God, purge our selues more d more from all fil∣hinesse of flesh and pirit, and perfect ho∣inesse, that so the pro∣mises made to vs for he comfort of our con∣sciences
here, and the saluation of our soules hereafter, may in due season be accomplished to vs. So much shal suffice to haue spoken of that branch of ou Sanctification, the affir∣matiue part, or positiu holinesse. So much fo this time. FINIS.
GODS FREE-SCHOOLE. OR DAVIDS PRAYER to be taught, and purpose to walke in the wayes of GOD. By Mr. Ieremiah Lewis. IOH. 6.45. And they shall bee all taught of God. LONDON, Printed by I.B. and are to be sold by Henry Ouerton, at the entring in of Popehead-Alley out of Lombard-street. 1631.
GODS. Free-schoole. PSAL. 86.11. Teach mee thy way, Oh Lord, and I will walke in thy truth: vnite, or knit my heart to feare thy name. GOD made men righteous, but they found out many inuentions, Eccl.
7.29. wherein they walke, swayed by Sa∣than, according to the law of their owne lusts, to the dishonor of their Sauiour, and the de∣struction of their owne soules. And now our mise∣ry being an obiect of Gods mercy, hee hath found out for vs, and pointed out to vs a way which begins in peace, and ends in blisse, euen the same which Dauid desired to know, and knowing, to walke in; Teach me thy way, O Lord,
and I will walke in thy truth. A path, which who∣soeuer treads, is fitted for all actions, of most noble worth, and noto∣rious consequence; and therefore a prayer, as seasonable, as profitable for all you that haue in∣terest in this solemne session, to know the way of the Lord. We are, while we liue here in this earthly ta∣bernacle, souldiers, and we wrastle with princi∣palities and powers, Ephes. 6.12.Eph. 6.12- we are Pil∣grims,
and are trauai∣ling homeward; wee are strangers as our fa∣thers were, Psal. 39.12.Psal. 39.12 we are Schollers, Learne of me, saith our Sauiour Christ, Mat. 11.29.Mat. 11.29. As we are Souldiers, wee haue God for our Cap∣taine; as we are Stran∣gers, we haue God for our guide; and as wee are Schollers, wee haue God for our Tutor: we fight for our Captaine, we trauaile toward our Countrey: and we can doe neither without the direction of our Teach∣er,
and that caused Da∣uid to implore his sa∣cred aduice and helpe; Teach mee thy wayes, O Lord, and I will walke in thy truth. The Psalme is intitu∣led a prayer of Dauid when hee was persecu∣ted by Saul, or oppres∣sed with some other ca∣lamity: neither doth the Scripture shew, or the Context conclude, saith Caluin,Caluin. of what dan∣ger he speakes. But sure we are, that Dauid, as a Scholler in Christs Schoole, craues
the direction of his Word & Spirit, that he might not behaue him∣selfe vnseemely vnder the crosse, nor take any vnlawfull course to rid himselfe of the same. A part of this Prayer I am fallen vpon, wher∣of wee may say, as that Father doth of the whole Psalme, it is short in the number of the words, but yet weigh∣ty & large in the weight of sentences. And in the Prayer it self, take notice of these two generall parts:
The first Theoreti∣call. The second, Practi∣call. Wherein is contained the whole body of Di∣uinity, and the duty of man to Know, and To Doe. First, a Petition. Secondly, a Resolu∣tion. The Ptition, Teach me thy way, O Lord, vnite my heart to feare thy name. The Resolution, I will walke in thy truth.
In the petition also take notice of these two generall parts. First, he prayes for direction, or instructi∣on and knowledge in the wayes of God, Teach mee thy wayes, oh Lord. Secondly, he prayes for conseruation in the same way, Vnite or knit my heart to feare thy name. In the first of these you may take notice of these particulars out of the words: First, here is the
Schoolmaster to whom hee goeth, Iehouah the Lord. Secondly, the Schol∣ler that betakes him∣selfe to his direction; and that is Dauid, Gods chosen, Teach me. Thirdly, wee haue the pliablenesse or wil∣lingnesse of the Schol∣ler to bee taught, it is his owne voluntary de∣sire and act, Teach mee oh Lord. Fourthly and lastly, the Lesson that hee as∣pires to, no lesse than Gods owne wayes,
Teach mee thy wayes, oh Lord. In the resolution take notice of these three particular parts also. First, wee haue the path, the Truth of God, I will walke in thy Truth; or if you read it accor∣ding to thy truth, then it is the rule. Secondly, here is his progresse, walking is a continued act. Thirdly, his purpose and resolution to goe on, I will, walke in thy Truth. But can Dauid pro∣mise
this for himselfe? Yes, what can hinder him, hauing first implo∣red God to be his Tea∣cher. When the Iudge∣ment is informed, the sanctified Will comes off, and acts its part, I will walke; to will is present with me, saith the Apostle, and hee knew hee could doe it also; I can doe all through Christ, saith Paul. I will walk in thy Truth, saith Dauid; but then God must not leaue thee, Dauid: No, I haue prayed to him that hee
would vnite and knit my heart to feare him; and the heart being set aright, the life cannot goe amisse. Take then the summe of all, from the begin∣ning of the verse to the latter end, Dauid de∣sires instruction that he may know, and know∣ledge that hee may pra∣ctise, and practice that hee might perseuere; Teach mee thy wayes, o Lord, and I will walke in thy Truth, vnite my he to feare thy name. And thus haue we heard the
scope of the Psalme, and the Text tooke a∣sunder into the seuerall parts, we fall now vpon the particulars as wee pointed them out in order. And first of the first, the Schoolemaster to whom he hath recourse, Iehouah the Lord. The Prophet wanted instruction, as you may see by his prayer, and hee goes not to any Saint or Angel to seeke it, but to God. The first point that thence wee may note, and will
but briefly touch, is this, that It is the Lord alone to whom we are to haue recourse by prayer, for the supply of all our wants, especially if they be spirituall. If any man want wis∣dome, Iam. 1.5.Iam. 1.5. let him aske of God; and there are these two reasons or grounds of the point. First, because we are to go to none by prayer but to God. Secondly, because there is supply of our wants in none but in God.
For the first of these: First, Prayer is a part of Diuine worship, and to be giuen to none but to him whose peculiar it is, and that is the Di∣uine nature. Secondly, wee haue neither precept to bind vs, nor patterne to back vs, nor promise to em∣bolden vs to offer our prayers to any, but to Iehouah the Lord. Thirdly, I finde a threefold prerogatiue proper to God, that no man must rob him of:
First, of opening the minde. Secondly, of conuerting the heart. Thirdly, to heare prayers. Secondly, all supply is to be had in him, hee alone must remoue the vayle that hath spread it selfe ouer all Nations, Isa. 25.7.Isa. 15.7. Hee hath sup∣ply for a Christian mans wants in euery kinde, eye-salue for the blinde, clothing for the naked, gold for those that are impoue∣rished; Come buy of me, saith Christ,Reu. 3.18. Reu. 3.
18. Briefly to apply this point: First therefore, let the vain-glorious chea∣ting Mountebanke of Rome goe with his ped∣ling and counterfeit wares. Indeed hee is confident that hee is a guide to the blinde, a light to those that are in darkenesse, and in∣structer of the igno∣rant; whereas indeed himselfe is blinde, and in darkenesse, and a foole, that foole Catex∣oki, Psal. 14.1.Psal. 14.1. that saith in his heart, there is no
God; he is besides him∣selfe, giuen vp to strong delusions to beleeue lies,2 Thes. 11. 2 Thes. 2.11. Secondly, if it be I∣dolatry to offer that to the creature which is a part of Diuine worship, proper to the Creator, if they be not Idolaters of Rome for inuocating Saints, let vs question the light of the Sunne, and the truth of the Scriptures. But in the last place, let vs haue recourse to God, and seeke to him for helpe in all our
needs, and apply those eceits that he hath gi∣en vs out of his Word, to our seueral maladies; we need not scorne this course, Dauid is a pat∣erne of humility in it, he professeth himselfe a Scholler to this Master, hich is The second poynt that I propounded. The Scholler that hath this recourse to Iehouah, Teach mee thy way oh Lord. I will handle especi∣lly this, in some refe∣rence to the first point.
Dauid, a man strong in grace, vpright in heart, assimulate to the Al¦mighty, yet notwith∣standing hee puts him∣selfe out to Schoole to learne. Let his submis∣sion be our instruction that The best proficient i grace, is still  Gods Scholler. The Angels them¦selues, those seco lights, as Nazianzen  them, are Schollers i this Schoole, for t misteries of this Schoo the Angels desire
looke into, 1 Pet. 1.12.1 Pet. 1.12 Much more man, that carries about him earthly members to be mortified, Col. 3.5.Col. 3.5. hee knowes not this way till God teach him; therefore hence it is that the Prophet so fre∣quently and so oft hath this prayer; Teach mee thy Statutes, Psal. 119.12.Psal. 119.12. open mine eyes that I may hold wonders in thy , Psal. 119.18.Psal. 119.18. Teach me the way of thy Sta∣tes, Psal. 119.33.Psal. 119.33. and lēteously in the Psalms  also in this place.
And the reasons of the point are these: First, because by nature we are all borne blind, we cannot perceiue the things of God. The Gentiles walke in the vanities of their minde, hauing their vnderstan∣dings darkened, Eph. 4.18.Eph. 4.18. It is the state and condition of euery na∣turall man. Indeed the diuell bargained (with vs if wee would obey him, and hearken to him) for more know∣ledge, but in fine hee spoyled vs of all, eu
of that we had. Secondly, the worke of grace and regenera∣tion in the heart of a Christian, as it is in e∣uery power and faculty of the soule of man, so it is but in a measure, we attaine not the per∣fection of degrees, as the Apostle speakes, we know but in part, and knowing but in part, there is no man, while he is here, is so perfect, as that hee is past lear∣ning. The consideration of which point, in the
first place, affords vs in∣struction, and teacheth vs these two things. First, that God vn∣dertakes the teaching of all that desire to learne; God vndertakes the Schooling of his children, else what did Dauid here in praying to him: hee teacheth the vnderstanding to know, and the minde to yeeld assent: for as the minde wants light, as a Father saith, so the wil wants liberty. Now God hath many Vshers whereby he teacheth vs here.
Some within vs: and, Some without vs. We will take them briefly in order. In the first place, the holy and glorious I∣mage of God, where∣with we were indowed in the Creation, was lost in the fall, but some sparkes stucke behinde in nature, whereby we roue at a God, and whereby God points vs so farre as to leaue vs vnexcusable; Nature will haue a God, or it will deifie it selfe; but this comes short, it tea∣cheth
not fully and tru∣ly the way to saluati∣on. In the second place therefore, God tea∣cheth vs by the booke of the creatures, the workes of Creation, prouidence, and preser∣uation. First, the workes of Creation doe shew vs the wisedome, power, and glory of the Al∣mighty; The heauens de∣clare the glory of God, and the Firmament sets forth to vs his handy worke. Againe, the workes
of his prouidence, first, by his mercies that hee renewes on vs inward and outward; by his mercies he teacheth vs that he is good in him∣selfe, and that hee is good and bountifull to vs; and that therfore in relation, and reference backe againe to him, we should be thankefull. And by his Iudge∣ments, in the second place, hee confounds his foes, and teacheth vs that he is a iust God, and that we should bee humbled vnder his
hand, as the thresher v∣seth to beate out the corne, and to bruise the straw with one and the same instrument. And if euer God did teach a People, and a Nation, and a Land, by his rod, surely he doth it now; the sword de∣uoures abroad, and threatneth calamity at home: now our hearts faile, our hands fall, our hopes are quelled, the heauens haue mourned, the earth hath trem∣bled, our trades decay, young men wish them∣selues
old, and old men wish themselues dead from the miseries to come. These, these things teach drunkards, sobriety; adulterers, chastity; couetous men charity, Christian men, zeale; and all of vs re∣pentance: that is the second thing whereby the Lord teacheth vs. Hee teacheth vs by his mercies that he is good, and by his Iudgements that he is iust; he tea∣cheth vs by the one that wee should bee thankfull, and by the
other that we should be humbled. Thirdly, he teacheth vs by the booke of his Law, this is his audible voyce, the flying book, a perfect copie, Psa. 19.Psal. 19. when the Psalmist had there spoken of the booke of the creatures, The heauens declare the glory of God, &c. then hee leaues them as im∣perfect to bring vs to heauen, and then hee comes to this, The Law of the Lord is perfect; and in this respect, the Mi∣nisters of God also are
said to teach vs, because the Lord vseth them as instruments to make knowne to vs his holy will and pleasure, and whosoeuer stoppes his eare against their mes∣sage, refuseth the Al∣mighty himselfe. Lastly, the Lord tea∣cheth vs by the good motions of his holy Spirit, by them hee knockes at the doores of our hearts, by them hee conuinceth vs of sinne, and of righteous∣nesse. Of sinne in our selues,
and what need we haue of a righteousnesse out of our selues; by them he shewes vs that we are out of the way, by them hee points vs againe to the way, and indeed neither the Word of God, nor the workes of Gods mercy, or the Iudgements of God, none of these former meanes are sufficient, except it please the Lord to illuminate vs by his holy Spirit. This should be our resoluti∣on, If God teach mee by his Word, by his
Mercies, and by his Iudgments, I will learn. If we will not, we shall perish vnexcusably, and others bee warned by our fall. That is the first instruction that God vndertakes to teach all his children, else why did Dauid pray this, to be taught, and hee tea∣cheth especially by the booke of the creatures, by the booke of the Law, and by the moti∣ons of his Spirit, to let goe the natural inclina∣tion that wil neuer car∣ry vs one step to God.
In the second place, learne, that man cannot teach himselfe; the knowledge of the Di∣uine Will, is the first step to piety, whereun∣to all the naturall in∣dowments in the world, concurring in one man, cannot possibly bring vs: the sauing know∣ledge of God, must bee taught of God. Against that of the Pelagians, that the be∣ginnings of faith, and the desire of a mans conuersion, is from a mans selfe, but the pro∣gresse
is from grace. Likewise against Ar∣minius, that saith, A man in the state of na∣ture hath remainders of life in him, hee hath affections to good; these know not themselues, therefore I leaue them to be taught, if they had s good hearts as Dauid had to be instructed. The second vse is for reproofe, and that is double, according to he former vse of in∣truction. Since it is o, that the best profici∣nts in grace, are still
but Gods schollers. First, it condemnet those that thinke them¦selues too good, or too great to learne of God and his Ordinances This esteeme many me by selfe-confidence and naturall pride, haue o themselues; they thin themselues too good to learne of God or his Ordinances: I know, saith one, as much as the Minister can teach me; and so they cut of themselues from God instruction. Againe, such as thin
themselues too great, especially, when Gods Ministers, by Gods ap∣pointment, come and tell Ieroboam of his ido∣latry, and tell Herod that hee must goe a step fur∣ther (though hee heard Iohn gladly) and part with one sinne more, though hee had parted with many before, then it is time for him to be∣stirre himselfe, lest hee lose a limbe of the bo∣dy of corruption; ther∣fore the great ones con∣spire, Psal. 2.5.Psal. 2.5. Come let vs breake their bands in
sunder, &c. Secondly, as this re∣proueth those that in respect of their great∣nesse, depriue them∣selues of the instruction of God; so wee are all guilty, wee may fasten the reproofe vpon the best of vs, that hauing such a Master as God himselfe is, wee are no better Schollers. When God speakes to things without life, they heare him; the rocke yeelds water, the dead rise and walke; and yet, alas, God speaks to vs euery
day, not onely by his works, but by his Word in the Ministery, and yet we stop our eares; let this bee a cause of humiliation to vs. And let this bee a meanes in the third place, to incite and stir vp eueryone of vs (since it is so, that the best proficients are but Schollers) to put our selues to this Schoole: and that is the third point that I take vp here by the way; the willingnesse of the Scholler, and wrap it
in this Vse of Exhorta∣tion: Beloued, we can dispatch no matter, no action, to the honour of God, and the com∣fort of our owne soules, without the direction of the Almighty: what is the cause of those I∣dolatries, blasphemies, murthers, and all man∣ner of sinnes and villa∣nies that too oft goe vnpunished, nay, some∣times are countenan∣ced, but because men doe not seeke direction where they should haue it? Therefore we haue
this charge giuen to them that are in autho∣rity, Ios. 8.1.Ios. 8.1. Let not the Booke of the Law depart out of thy mouth. God is an alsufficient teacher, Beloued. And not onely so, but hee is a milde Ma∣ster. And being milde, in the third place, hee stoopes to our capacity, and beares with our weakenesses and infir∣mities; and therefore what lets vs that wee learne not, and are not better Proficients in the Schoole of God, in
the knowledge of God and in the power and practice of Religion  surely, that which vsu∣ally hinders Schollers from learning, & wha is that? Either Pride, or Idlenesse. Pride, that wee haue knowledge enough. Or, Idlenesse, that we care for no more, or we loue our owne wayes, we are loath to change our course of liuing; but especially these two are great hindran∣ces to learning in the
Schoole of Christ. First, vnresoluednes, If a Boy be not resolu'd to be a scholler, he cares not for learning. There is many a man that is not yet resolued whe∣ther to learne of God, or of Sathan, of Christ or of Antichrist, they halt betweene two opi∣nions, and so they ne∣uer proue good Schol∣lers in this Schoole. The second hindrance is credulity; men too easily imbrace the euill reports that false spies cast vpon this Schoole-Master,
and his wayes: as they were too credu∣lous in embracing the ill report of those false Spies, concerning the good Land: Oh, say they, the Master is rigid and seuere; the lesson is harsh and vn∣pleasant, the company that learn in the schoole of God, they are few, and therefore what should men doe lear∣ning of this Master, in this Schoole. Suppose things were thus, that God were so sharpe a Master, & that
the lesson were so vn∣easant, and that there ere so few, as indeede ut is true, there are t few in the wayes of odlinesse, yet mee inkes these three ings should carry e∣ry man through all scouragements, and irre them vp to put emselues to that hoole, the Schoole∣ster whereof God mself professeth him∣elfe to be. The first is, that Gods hollers are the wisest en in the world; nay,
I may say they onely are wise men; for so wise men terme all fooles, but those that are en∣dued with the spirit of wisedome; I am wiser then my teachers, saith Dauid: then his earth∣ly teachers he meaneth; and the cause was, be∣cause hee was taught from God, that is, a teacher in heauē, which is the Schoole-mast we now speake of; in∣deed beloued, the mea∣nest Christian is able to teach in this lesson, th wisest naturalist in th world.
Secondly, if we con∣sider Gods readinesse and willingnes to teach vs; and this makes our sin heauier, if we learne not. Ioh. 15.22. If I had not come among them, they had had no sin: that is, in comparison of that they haue now, and the pati∣ence and mercy of God being laid in the bal∣lance with our sinnes, the one against the o∣ther, our sins will grow too heauy, and God will fall vpon the punishing side, for our abuse of his patience.
Thirdly, let vs know, that the lesson it selfe is easie, if wee be willing to learne, our crooked∣nesse, and vnwillingnes makes the waies of God harsh and grieuous, which else would be easie; and the more we take vpon our selues, the better we shall goe through with the work, one duty helpes on an∣other, and the longer we inure our selues, the more pleasure we shall finde in these waies: but I must hasten. The last Vse of the
point shall be for try∣all, since while we liue in this world, wee are Schollers, either in the Schoole of Christ, or of Sathan; therefore, beloued, it is worth our labour to enquire and make tryall of our e∣state & condition, whe∣ther we be Gods schol∣lers, or no: I will giue you two or three marks and characters to know it. First, doe you loue the Schoole of Christ, the Scoohle of Gods publique assemblies,
where there is Prayer, and Preaching: these are Gods Free-schooles; and there is God conti∣nually, and especially vpon the Sabbath, that is Gods market day, his Schoole day where∣in hee offreth to teach his children, and ser∣uants: therfore Popish recusants, factious Se∣peratists, and tempori∣zing neutrals, that ab∣sent themselues from Gods Schoole, they de∣priue themselues of the benefit of his teaching, the people of God. Isay
1. & 2. they say, come Let vs goe vp to the house of the Lord, and hee will teach vs in his Law: but alas, Sathan hath many schooles in euery town, that too oft are full, when Gods schoole-doores stand open, and are empty. Secondly, let vs exa∣mine, as our loue to this Schoole, so our en∣trance into it: haue we seene our owne naturall condition, what wee are by nature, what we are without Gods teaching; Sathans schol∣lers
led in the waies that lead to damnation, and destruction of our own soules? haue we beene humbled for this, and so haue gone out of our selues, that we might be nothing in our selues, and all in Christ. Then, when wee haue denied our selues, God admits the humble for his schollers, but he resists the proud, and giues them no admission at all. Thirdly, let vs exa∣mine our entertaine∣ment, when wee first
came into this Schoole, and thereby wee shall discerne it: what was that good welcome, and loue, and liking, and hearty approbation and affection we found of them, but hatred and ill vsage from the world, and hard lan∣guage euen from our owne companions, that formerly seemed to loue vs best? Fourthly, wee may know it by examining by what rule we walke: now, doe we walke, and liue according to the
Canon of Gods schoole? What is that? The reuealed will and word of God: alas no, the Word neuer taught thee to lye, to sweare, and for sweare; it neuer taught thee to bribe, and oppresse, thou art none of Gods Schollers, that walkest and liuest not accor∣ding to the Canon of Gods Word, thou art yet the Scholler of Sa∣tan. Lastly, examine thy progresse in this school, for Gods Scholler ne∣uer
thinkes that hee hath enough, hee is vn∣limited in his desires; the reason is, because he aymes at perfection; the more we profit in the waies of piety, saith one, the more easily we see how short we come of that that wee ayme at; yet we should not be discouraged, for whosoeuer gets into this way, are certaine to attaine one day to the end, in the meane time the way it selfe is not without pleasure and delight; for they are
Gods owne wayes, which is The fourth and last particular, in the first generall in the Text, Teach me thy waies: they are the wayes of God; by wayes hee meanes a course of life. And by the wayes of God, I vnderstand not so much Gods manner of dealing with his chil∣dren, whereof Moses speakes, Deut. 32.1.Deut. 32.1 all the wayes of God are iudgement and Psa. 18.13.Psal. 18.13 the way of the Lord is perfect: though I ex∣clude
not this, for Da¦uid being vnder the crosse, might, and it is good then for a man to search out the wyes of God; that is, after what manner God deales with his children, that he may the better hold vnder the crosse. Neither doe I vnder∣stand this of those se∣cret footsteps of the Lord, that are not knowne, Psa. 77.19.Psal. 77.19 but by the way of the Lord, though I include the former, I vnderstand first the doctrine of the
Law, and of the Gos∣pell, the preceps and commands of God; Whereof Dauid saith, Psal. 18.21.Psal 18.12. I will keepe the way of the Lord; that is, the precepts and commands of God: this is the way that Paul persecuted; Act. 9.2.Act. 9.2. And not onely so, but especially, in the se∣cond place, to extend it to the largest, I vn∣derstand by wayes of God, the whole con∣uersation euery way conformed, in respect
of a mans desires and endeuours, to bee led according to Gods wil; as by the way of the vngodly, I vnderstand a wicked conuersation in the diuels wayes: so then, the way of a iust and godly and holy conuersation, that is Gods wayes: So wee will bring the words to an issue and conclu∣sion, that A life ordered according to Gods will, is Gods way. I will walke in thy wayes, saith the Psal∣mist,
Ps. 119. I haue cho∣sen thy wayes: there is a life framed according to the rule and canon of Gods word. I know, saith God to Abraham, Gen. 18.19.Gen. 18.19 that Abra∣ham will teach and in∣struct his children in the wayes of the Lord; that is, how they might liue and conforme all their conuersation ac∣cording to the reuealed will and pleasure of the Lord. The grounds and reasons of this point are these. First, because this is
a way of Gods own pre∣scribing and pointing out; when a man frames his life according to the word of God, he doth that that God would haue him doe; we vse to say, it is such a mans works or waies, whē he is the Author & inuen∣ter of that way; so it is betweene God, and the wayes of godlinesse: Micah. 6.8.Mich. 6.8. He hath shew∣ed thee, O man, what is good: it is of Gods de∣lineating, and drawing out the way wherein e∣uery Christian soule
walkes to euerlasting life and glory. Secondly, they are Gods wayes, because God approues of these waies to be good waies. Wee vse to say, this is your way, because you approue of this way: so this is Gods way, a life agreeable to the word: God approues the way of the iust, it is knowne to the Lord. Psal. 1.6.Psal. 1.6. God knowes the way of the righteous▪ so he doth the way of the wicked too; but the way of the righ∣teous is knowne of God
with approbation, hee knowes it with a know∣ledge of approbation. Thirdly, because this way leads to the enioy∣ing of Gods fauor here, and euerlasting glory in his presence for euer hereafter; it comes from God, it leads to God, is approued by God, and therefore it is the Lords way: and this is the way that Precilla and Aquila instructed Apollo in more perfectly, Acts 18.26.Act. 18.26. The consideration of which point, for the Vse & application of it;
In the first place it affords vs a double in∣struction. First, this teacheth vs that a life not ordered according to the word of God, is none of Gods wayes, it is the way of man, the way of Sathan, the way of the flesh; God hates this way, and those that walke in it. Secondly, this in∣forms vs, that the know∣ledge of this way is the best knowledge that a man can attaine in this world; the practicall
sauing knowledge of this way it is the best, and most noble know∣ledge that a man can attaine to in this world, because it is the know∣ledge of Gods waies. Therefore let vs en∣quire for it, and loue it, and liue in it: there are two meanes to obtaine it. First, Inquisition. Secondly, Supplica∣tion. The first, that we may know: and the second, that wee may walke in this way.
Now if wee enquire, we shall finde foure di∣stinct tracts in this way of the Lord, for our in∣struction. First, the way of Mercy. Secondly, the way of Truth. Thirdly, the way of Iustice. Fourthly, the way of Peace. First, the way of Mer∣cy, that is the seate of the Almighty,Amo. 5.19 Hosea chap. 5. vers. 14. there∣fore when God is said to execute iudge∣ment,
hee is said to come from his place, and when hee ceaseth to punish men, hee is said to retire, and goe backe to his place; this is a way that euery man must know and walke in: Blessed are the merci∣full, for they shall obtaine mercie; and iudgement without mercie shall be gi∣en to them that shew no mercie, saith Iames; espe∣cially those that haue the sword of iustice committed to them, nd that iudge for te Lord, neither partiali∣ty,
nor spleene, nor pas∣sionate sentence, before the cause be duly way∣ed, nor austere nature, delighting in puni∣shing, and wreaking it selfe on others, when there is no iust cause and reason; none of these should carry a man out of the way of mercy, mercy must be mixed with iustice, and iustice must bee mixed with pitty: This is the first way that euery one ought to walke in. The second tract of this way, is the way of
truth; The wayes of God are mercy and truth, Psal. 25.10.Psal. 25.10 There we see in one verse both these tracts; and this is a way that wee must both know and walke in e∣uery man must speake truth to his neighbour, saith the Apostle, Eph. 4.Eph. 4. If wee must speake the truth, then surely we must sweare truth. It should be more deare to you that are iurors, than your Land-lords, or your selues, or your personall gaine: Bre∣thren in iniquity, one
wicked companion wil say, and sweare for ano∣ther: but let none of these things carry you out of the way of truth, for that is the way of God, it comes from God, and it leads to God, to holinesse and blessednesse. The third, is the way of Iustice: this is the way of God, & it should be manifested by you whom it concernes, in respect of God, with impartiality, Nahum. 3.1.Nah. 3.1. the Lords way is in the whirlewinde: and
Iob saith, hee cloatheth himselfe with Iustice, as with a garment, Iob 29.14.Iob 29.14. and so should you be that sit in the seate of iudgement and Iu∣stice; there were cry∣ing sinnes that brought ruine & desolation vp∣on the Church and state of Ierusalem, Ier. 5.1.Ier. 5.1. saith God, enquire and see if there be one man that exe∣cutes iudgement and Iu∣stice: no, there was not one, and therefore hee addes in the fourth ver. they haue not knowne the way of God. Beloued,
when iniustice takes place, and the lawes of the land fall sicke, then our peace & Kingdome too, lye a bleeding; therefore I beseech you euery one in your pla∣ces execute iudgement, against Idolatry, Per∣iury, Sabbath-breaking, and the like sinnes a∣gainst God; let nothing carry you out of the way of Iustice. Indeede men are vsu∣ally carried out of this way, and it is by these three things: First, through coue∣tousnesse:
the loue of money is the root of all mischiefe, wicked∣nesse and impiety; there is a strange change, where it hath gotten possession of a mans heart; it turnes a Magi∣strate into a Merchant, and it turnes all that he touches into gold, adul∣teries, and blasphemies, and what not? mens liues, and mens soules: therefore beware of the loue of money; this drawes a man out of this way. Secondly, sensuall
profuse prodigality: when men are endlesse in their expences of ap∣parell, and dyet, &c. Thirdly, base affecta∣tion of superiors, which attends vsually an effe∣minate cowardly dispo∣sition; for feare of a man, a man will not be knowne to be the same man that he was, hee will not be knowne to be an enemy to Po∣pery, and prophane∣nesse; nay, many times he sets himselfe to be an actor, and defender of the same: let none of
these draw vs out of Gods wayes: they are Gods wayes. The fourth and last, is the way of Peace, that wicked men neuer know. When I speake of Peace, they are for warre, Psa. 125.Psal. 125. and the Apo∣stle speaking of the vn∣godly, Rom. 3.17.Rom 3.17. saith, The way of peace they haue not knowne▪ Why? be∣cause they delight to liue & walke in malice. Hauing seene the seue∣rall tracts in these waies of God, I proceed fur∣ther in this point.
The two maine heads of these wayes, are Faith: and, Obedience. First, Faith: Christ himselfe is the way, the truth and the life: he is the holy, and true, and pure way, that leads to the supreame City; as a Father saith: and saith in him carries vs along in this way. And then Obedience that sollowes vpon Faith, vpon the reno∣uation of our hearts, vnderstanding, will and affections; when the
inward man is renewed we come to walke in the wayes of obedience. In this way was Paul when hee was so zealous a∣gainst Idolatry at A∣thens: in this way was Dauid, when he said, I will runne the wayes of thy Commandements. Indeed oft times he missed this way, once hee turned out of this way, but it cost him deere, it cost him one of the chiefest Iewels he had, the com∣fort of his conscience; in both these generall heads of Faith and O∣bedience,
this way is opposed by two sorts of men in the world. First, the way of Faith is opposed by Papists: for they faine a way to heauen that God neuer taught, nor I am sure neuer brought man to heauen by; namely, me∣rits of our owne, inter∣cession of Saints, Popes pardons, and the like; a broad and easie way for rich men, howsoe∣uer the poore doe shift, Lord haue mercy on them, as the vsuall saying is; Mercy must be their re∣fuge,
and indeed they are safe if they get and attaine that. Secondly, the way of obedience Atheists and prophane wretches op∣pose, directly setting themselues to affront it in the world; In so much that a man that hath a care to walke according to this rule, and goes on in this way that is cal∣led Gods way, it is de∣rided as precisenesse, and precipitate mad∣nesse. When the fashions grow vulgar, superiors
change them and cast them off; neuer was the truth of the Gospell more persecuted by Pa∣pists vnder the name of heresie, than the power of godlinesse is of late, in euery Tap-house and Tauerne, by euery Boy and Girle, vnder the name of purity. I would haue men of fashion, change this fashion, and leaue this vncleane language. And let those that are in the place of God vin∣dicate the wayes of God from false wayes.
First, keepe the Do∣ctrine of the Scriptures sound; Contend for the faith, Iude 2.Iude 2. For if our rule be wrong, how shall wee goe strait to heauen. If wee make the Word to speake that it neuer meant, that a man hath power of himselfe to saue him∣selfe if hee will: the meanes are offered, that God chuseth men for fore seen faith; that a mā may come to liue, and finally fall away from sauing grace; if you suf∣fer the Word to speake
that it meant not what will become of our Church, and Doctrine, and Peace, and Coun∣try? And not onely for the Doctrine of the Scrip∣tures to vindicate that from errors, and keepe the rule strait and sound, but in the second place countenance also the life of Religion, and the power of goodnesse where you see it; your Soueraign cals for this, that is the defender of the faith, your places call for this: for the
power is put into your hands, the law of the land also pleads for this; and not onely so, but good men expect it, your owne consciences will stand on your side, and God himselfe I am sure, will be for you. No man euer lost by stan∣ding for God, though some doe it not, yet let their backwardnes pro∣uoke you to be more forward. I need not vrge this point at this time in this place, your owne
care in your persons and families to giue the Sabbath rest, stops my mouth in this instructi∣on. The second Vse shall be for triall: It is worth our inquirie, to know whether wee are in this way or no. There is an old way of iustification by Faith alone; Abraham belee∣ued, and it was imputed to him for righteousnesse: and there is a new way of meriting heauen by workes of compensati∣on, which turnes to the
dishonour of God, it robs him of his honour, and Christ of his me∣rits, and themselues of their soules: for Christ is become of none ef∣fect to such, Gal. 4.2, 3.Gal. 4.2, 3. they are fallen from grace. There is an old way of innocency, sobriety, chastity, holinesse and righteousnes, that God hath alway prescribed his children to walke in; there is another way now of poysoning, stabbing, deposing Prin∣ces, and blowing vp of
Parliament houses and all by the Popes autho∣rity, and this is the di∣uels way; Gods way is a way of wisdome, a way of wonders, a way of narrownesse. A way of wonders; for the blinde see, and the dead rise and walke, and yet God hath ap∣pointed this to be done by weake meanes; as by Dauid, he slew Goli∣ah, so God by the breath and mouth of the Mini∣stery hee kils sinne and quickens the soule. It is a straight way
also, it is not ouer-much beaten: surely, those that make vniuersality, or generality a note of the Church, they would haue pitched on Sodome, and not on Lot in those times of generall pro∣phanenesse. But how shall wee know whether we be in this way, or no? I will giue you two or three characters to know it. First, he that is in the way of God, he hates all false wayes (as Dauid saith) whatsoeuer they
be; whether of errour, ignorance, idolatry or prophanenesse, he doth not onely decline them, but hate them: for ma∣ny a man declines, and keepes himselfe out of the superstitious and i∣dolatrous wayes of Po∣pery, and out of the too dissolute prophane courses of the Sonnes of Belial; yet hee loues these wayes too well, onely he waites a while to see where the winde will set: but hee that is in Gods wayes, he hates euery false way.
Secondly, if we be in this way, we will be so farre from discouraging others from the wayes godlinesse, by scandals and imputations, &c. that our care will be, that our children and seruants, and all may be brought into this way; My hearts desire is, that Israel may be saued, Rom. 9.Rom, 9. and Psal. 39.11.Psal. 39.11 Come children, and I will teach you the feare of the Lord. Thirdly, those that are in this way, are way-layed by Sathan and the
world; and those men that neuer found a rub in the way of prophane∣nesse, and in the way of ciuility, now they finde many oppositions. Lastly, wee may dis∣cerne it by our euen walking in this way: wee doe not now and then fall into this path, like those that are some∣time for one, and some∣time for another; some∣times they will heare Sermons, but by and by they will neglect them, but we keepe our selues constantly for God in
our generall course and way. Some thinke them selues in this way be∣cause they are more ci∣uill then others; and in∣deed ciuill parts are good parts in these vn∣ciuill times, but it is impossible that these should carry a man to heauen; Without holi∣nesse no man shall see God. Some thinke, if they pitch themselues in the way that runnes with the current of the times, that they are in the way:
but as Peter when hee was deliuered out of prison, at the first hee thought he had seene a vision; so these men de∣ceiue themselues, when thou commest to thy selfe, thou shalt finde and feele to thy cost, that neither riches, nor honor, nor preferment, neither greatnesse, nor ciuility, nor externall formality, and professi∣on will saue thee out of hell, vnlesse thou be in such a way as that thou hatest euery false way, vnlesse thou desirest to
bring others to the truth of God; vnlesse thou be in such a way as is opposed by Sathan. and in fuch a way as thou walkest in con∣stantly in thy course, though with much op∣position, & sometimes many failings: nothing in the world will keepe a man out of hell, vn∣lesse he finde these cha∣racters in him; there∣fore let euery man ex∣amine whether he be in this way, or in the way of sinne and ignorance, the way of death and
damnation: but I am loath to loose you in the way, before I come to the iournies end. Since wee are here met by the prouidence of God, and all of vs be∣leeue and hope for one resting place; therefore let vs on forward and imitate Dauid in his re∣solution, I will walke in thy truth: whence the point is this, that True instruction rests not inspeculation, but breakes forth int practise. Enquire for the old
and good way, Ier. 6.16.Ier. 6.16. this is the good way that brings vs to God, other wayes are naught; inquire for this way: what to doe? to doe it, Col. 1.9, 10.Col. 1.9, 10 the Apostle prayeth that they may be filled with the knowledge of the Lord; to what end? that they might walke worthy of the Lord: In a word, the ground and reason is this; know∣ledge brings conuicti∣on, therefore if we pra∣ctise not answerably, it wil leaue vs without ex∣cuse.
Therefore Christians must be walkers as well as talkers, both must goe together, hand and tongue, conuersation and action, wee must walke in Gods truth, or according to Gods truth for both come to one scope, they are not in the wayes of God that walke not according to the truth of God, they are not the Church of Christ, that walke not according to the rule and canon of Christs truth: some set their backes vpon this way,
and walke and runne a cleane contrary course, Idolaters, drunkards, murtherers, adulterers, &c. I need not instance, euery man may see a man when he runnes a contrary way to hea∣uen, with all manner of prophanenes & loosnes. Some seeme to set their feet in this way and to goe forward, but as disliking their for∣mer choise they stand still and retire, because they were neuer truly in the way: some de∣sire to know that they
might know, they de∣sire to know as much as the Minister can teach them, and then there is an end of their desires: some desire to know that they might bee knowne to know, they thinke their knowledge is nothing, vnlesse other men know it; but Da∣uid desired to know that he might practise; teach me thy way, O Lord, and I will walke in thy truth. So we should be exhor∣ted to that of a father, first to choose the waies of God, and then to
walke in those wayes; and that wee may not miscarry in our trauaile as we are going to hea∣uen: First, be sure alway that our eye be fixed vpon the rule, that is, the word of God, let vs keepe close to that. Secondly, let vs la∣bour to see what hin∣ders vs in the way, and to passe by it, or get thorow it. Thirdly, get a good heart to the iourney, and then let vs walke a∣long as Dauid saith here,
I will walke in thy truth. And let our walking first be chearefull, for indeed wee walke and trauaile to heauen, this way tends to a king∣dome, to glory, there∣fore why doe wee not walke cheerefully, why doe we suffer our heads to hang downe, and are all amort, as if we were going to a place of pain or execution. Secondly, let vs walk a pace, therefore Heb. 12.1. let vs run the race of godlinesse, lest the night come vpon vs.
Thirdly, let vs put on courage and resolution, lest persecutions, plea∣surs, profits, perswasiōs or promises, friends or enemies driue vs out of the way; wee walke in the valley of Rephaim, where there are Giants, the diuel & the world set against vs, therefore we haue need of resolution. Lastly, when we haue resolued, let vs neuer sit downe, till we come to the end of our iourney; many walke, but not to the end: the reason is, because they were ne∣uer
in the way. And that we may thus walke with cheerefulnesse, and runne the waies of god∣linesse, and put on reso∣lution and courage, and hold out to the end; let vs bee sure that our hearts be set and knit close to God, which is the last particular cir∣cumstance in the Text: Vnite my heart to feare thy name. Let my heat reioyce, saith the Septuagint; and indeed, Beloued, there is neuer true mirth in that heart that is not
knit close to God. Or make my heart be vnited to thee, as Ierom reads it; according to the Hebrew, vnite my heart to feare thy name; or, vnite my heart to thee: for the name of God in the Scriptures is taken for God himselfe. I will picke out the maine point of all, and that is this, that A Christian should al∣wayes haue a care that his heart sit close to God. This is called,Act. 11.3. Act. 11.23. a cleauing to God,
and here it is an vniting or a knitting, as one thing is fastened or tyed to another. The Reasons of the point briefly are: First, because by na∣ture the heart is ready, and subiect to sit loose from God, and to sit close to the world, and the loue of the flesh; therefore wee should haue a care of it; we are auerse to God, subiect to loue our owne lusts that will be our ruine. The second reason or ground is this, because
God gaue vs our hearts therefore we should re∣turne them againe to him: our hearts are Gods, hee must haue them therefore; they are his by creation, hee made them; they are his by redemption, hee redeemed them, You are bought with a price, there∣fore glorifie God with your bodies and spirits, for they are the Lords, 1 Cor. 6.20.1 Cor. 6.20 therefore seeing our hearts are his, we must returne them backe a∣gaine to him: we must see that they sit close to him.
The Vse of this point is; first, for terrour to couetous, voluptuous, ambitious men, whose hearts are set and cleaue fast to their profits, ho∣nours and pleasures, these are Idolaters; for couetousnesse is Idola∣try; and whatsoeuer a man sets his heart on, that is his God: these are as fishes that wallow without fins in the mud, therefore God abhors them; these sowe to the flesh, and shall reape corruption; these loue the world and not God:
as Iohn saith, the loue of the Father is not in them: these set their hearts vp∣on vanity, and that va∣nity is the price of their owne soules. Therefore let vs eue∣ry one labour that our hearts may bee vnited and close knit to God; without vnity in the heart there can be no peace either in the Church or Common∣wealth, it is that that preserueth both: you know the ordinary say∣ing, Diuide and raigne; diuide the heart from
God, and the diuel pre∣sently reigneth. What neede we haue in these dayes to keepe close to God, I need not vrge, especially if we be im∣ployed in matters of consequence; the Iudge iudgeth for God, the Lawyer pleads for God, the Minister preacheth for God, euery Chri∣stian doth, or should do all he doth, for God; all the cause of our miscar∣riage is, because we suf∣fer somewhat to put in betweene God and our owne hearts; let vs la∣bour
that our hearts may sit close to God in a holy fearing of him: I will onely at this time giue two or three marks of triall, whether our hearts sit close to God or no. First, are our hearts set close to the ordinan∣ces of God, to the Word and Sacraments, and Prayer; examine thine owne soule, and let thy conscience answer for or against thy selfe how thy loue is to the ordi∣nances of God. Secondly, doe our
hearts sit close to the feare of God; that is, to make conscience, in priuate, of secret sins, of vnbeliefe, of hard∣nesse of heart, of hypo∣crisie, and the like; those secret acted sins that are likely neuer to be discouered, or the world neuer to take no∣tice of them. Thirdly, doe our hearts sit close to the Saints of God, doe wee loue them, doest thou affect those that ende∣uour to put themselues out to this Schoole-ma∣ster;
he that loues God that begets, loues him that is begotten of him, 1 Iohn 5.1 Ioh. 5. Lastly, art thou so sensible of the loosenes and falling of thy heart from God, as that thou graspest and stirrest vp thy selfe, to catch better hold, and desirest daily closer and neerer com∣munion and fellowship with God; is it so with vs? it was so with Da∣uid, hee desired instru∣ction that hee might know, and to know that hee might walke in a
hearty, constant feare: Teach mee thy way, O Lord, and I will walke in thy truth; vnite my heart to feare thy name. FINIS.
The Table. A Account. VVE must giue an account to God. 247 Affections. Filthinesse in the affecti∣ons. 85 A Christian clenseth him∣selfe from all sinne in his affections. 97 Afflictions. Afflictions, wee should
labour for a sanctified vse of them. 235 All. How a Christian is clensed from all sinne, see sinne. 93 Apply. Ministers should helpe peo∣ple apply truths. 5 B Barrennesse. Barrennesse pleaseth the diuell. 208 Terror to the barren in grace. 220 Beloued. The faithfull are belo∣ued. 3
Blind. By nature wee are blinde. 286 C Change. True holinesse workes a change. 177 Cheerefull. We must walke cheerful∣ly in Gods way. 364 Ciuill. Terror to men meerely ci∣uill. 156 Difference betweene ciui∣lity and holinesse. 157 See hypocrite. Clense. Why Paul exhorts men to clense themselues. 34
See power, see sinne. Coldnesse. Coldnes hinders growth in grace. 226 Commands. Commands of God make wicked men culpable. 35 Liuing in any sinne breaks all the Commande∣ments. 57 Communion. Communion with God, what hinders it. 53 Constant True holinesse constant. 152 Constancy in holinesse saues vs. 155 Corruption.
Corruptions in vs strong. 205 Courage. Courage in Gods wayes. 365 Created, see holinesse. Couetousnesse. Couetousnesse hinders the growth of grace. 228 Couetousnesse carries men from iustice. 336 Curse. If wee grow not in grace, wee are vnder a curse. 208 Custome. Custome weakeneth sin. 108 D
Decay. Grace wil decay if it grow not. 207 Delight. Delight in God. 100 Desires. A Christian cleansed from all sinne in his desires. 94 Desire to grow in grace a signe of growth. 252 Desires accepted of God. 258 Disgrace, see profession. E End. The end of God in making promises. 13 Restraining grace makes a
man doe things for by ends. 105 A Christians worke ends not till his life end. 213 F Faith. Faith helpes against sinne committed. 73 Faith one maine head of Gods wayes. 340 Fire. Grace like fire. 199 Filthy. Sinne silthy in diuers re∣spects. 39 Flesh. Why some sinnes are called sinnes of the Flesh. 41 Helpes against sinnes of
the flesh. 71 What argueth a man to liue in the flesh. 87 Fruit. What Fruit God requires of vs. 216 G God. Who shall see God. 138 Holinesse seekes God as its end. 151 We must goe to God one∣ly by prayer. 278 Grow, Growing. Growing in holinesse, the necessity of it in three things. 202 Danger of not growing. 206
Exhortation to growing. 224 Hinderances of growing. 226 Growth of sinne. 246 Comfort to growers in holinesse. 249 Signes of this growing. 251 H Hate. Wee must hate all sinne. 60. 75 Restraining grace doth not make vs hate sin. 159. 352 Hating false wayes. 351 Heart. A broken heart prepare to
holinesse. 173 True holinesse begins at the heart. 176 The heart is euill that groweth not. 210 Humble heart to be labor∣ed for. 239 Heart must be vnited to God, for he gaue it. 369 Hypocrite, hypocrisie. Hypocrites religious. 68 Hypocrites ciuill. 69 Hypocrites. 148 Difference betweene holi∣nesse & hypocrisie. 149 Holy, holinesse. Holinesse created, two-fold. 124 Holinesse habituall 128
Holinesse, how wrought by the Spirit. 127. 175 Holinesse, wherein it con∣sists. 128 Holinesse, the least mea∣sure of it cannot be lost. 131 Holinesse positiue, requi∣site. 133 To be holy, what. 134 Holinesse of God infinite. 135 All Gods workes call vs to holinesse. 141 Scorners of Holines. 145 Holinesse, an exhortation to it. 164 Holinesse markes of it. 171
Preparatiues to holinesse. 172 Effects of true holinesse. 183 Motiues to grow in ho∣linesse. 240 See promises. Hope. Christians haue more in hope than in possession. 9 Humble, see Heart. I Idlenesse. Idlenesse hinders from learning in Gods Schoole. 304 Idolaters. Papists, Idolaters. 282 Illumination.
Common illumination weakeneth sin. 107 Imaginations. Filthinesse in the imagi∣nations. 82 Imperfect. Holinesse imperfect. 125 Inward man. Filthinesse in the inward man. 77 Motiues to purge the in∣ward man. 87 Indeuour. A Christian clensed from all sin in his indeuour. 96 Intermission. Hypocrisie with inter∣mission. 152
Iustice. Iustice Gods way. 334 Iustice, what carries men from it. 336 K Knit. Heart must be knit to God. 366 Foure trials of a heart knit to God. 368 L Law. Sinnes of the inward man breake Gods Law. 88 Learning. Foure hinderances from learning of God. 304 Limitted. Hypocrisie limitted. 150
Loue. Loue to good duties not bred by restraining grace. 160 Loue to God, a signe of holinesse. 183 Lusts. Lusts, we liue better with∣out them, than when we enioy them. 102 M Measure. Grace in vs but in Mea∣sure. 287 Meanes. Wee must apply our selues to Gods meanes. 174 Meanes to grow in grace. 232
Mercy. Mercy one of Gods wayes. 330 Merit. Merit must not bee plea∣ded by sanctification. 132 Mind. Mind, much filthinesse in it. 78 Mourne see Spirit. Motion. First motions to sinne must be resisted. 76 N Negatiue. Restraining grace makes negatiue professors. 159 O Occasions.
Occasions of sinne to be watched against. 76 Occasions remoued, wea∣ken sinne. 106 Others. Those that are in Gods wayes labour to bring in others. 353 Outward-man▪ The clensing of the out∣ward-man followes the inward. 90 P Patience. Patience of God should moue vs to holinesse. 240 Peace. Peace is Gods way. 339 Perfect.
Holinesse perfect. 124 To grow perfect in holi∣nesse. 193 Perfection two-fold. 195 Particular. Restraining grace keepes but from particular sins. 104 Perswasion. False perswasion in the minde. 78 Power. Man cannot clense him∣selfe from sinne by his owne power. 32 Gods children haue pow∣er giuen them to purge themselues. 37 Prayer.
Prayer for pardon of sins committed. 72 A signe we neglect prayer if we grow not in grace. 212 We must pray to God one∣ly. 279 Practice. Practice forborne weak∣neth sinne. 107 Practice vniform a signe of growing in grace. 255 True instruction breakes forth into practice. 358 Pride. Pride hinders from lear∣ning of God. 304 Prodigality. Prodigality carries men
out of the way of iustice. 337 Prophane. Terror to the prophane. 144 Promises. Promises of God should make vs holy. 10. 27 Promises of God the ground of them. 13 Promises, terror to those that abuse them. 20 Promises, wee should ac∣quaint our selues with them. 24 Profession. Profession of a Christian disgraced by sinne. 50 See Hope.
Purge. How it is easie to purge sinne. 100 Trials whether we purge our selues from sin. 103 Purging of sinne imper∣fect without holines. 140 See holinesse. Purity. Inward purity God de∣lights in. 91 R Relation. Relation betweene God and vs inforceth holines. 17 Resolution. A Christian clensed frō all sin in his resolution. 95
Rest. Wee must not rest in any measure of holines. 132 Restraine. Commands of God re∣straine the wicked. 36 Difference betweene re∣straining and sauing grace. 104. 159 Reward. We may haue an eye to the reward in our obedience. 14 S Saints. Loue to Saints a signe of holinesse. 186 Scorners, see Holinesse. Scholler.
The best proficient in grace Gods Scholler. 284 Exhortation to bee Gods Schollers. 301 Incouragements to bee Gods Schollers. 309 Trials whether wee bee Gods Schollers. 313 Secret. Secret temptations to be resisted. 109 Selfe, Selues. To labour for knowledge of our selues. 26 Of those that blame others and are worse them∣selues. 66 Hypocrisie seekes it selfe. 151
Denying our selues pre∣pares to holinesse. 174 Man cannot teach him∣selfe. 298 Sinne. We must purge out all sin. 45 Sinnes committed how to be vndone. 72 Sinnes to come, how pre∣uented. 74 Sight of sinne prepares to holinesse. 172 Sorrow. Sinne committed, vndone by godly sorrow. 71 Soule. Soule ruined by one sinne vnmortified. 62
Speech. Holy speech. 189 Spirit. Why some sinnes are called sins of the spirit. 42 Helps against sinnes of the spirit. 77 Mourning for sins of the spirit. 112 Heart set on spirituall things. 115 Spirit makes other means effectuall. 296 T Teacher. What kinde of Teacher God is. 305 Gods readinesse to teach. 311
Thankfulnesse. Thankefulnesse for that grace we haue, a signe of growth. 253 Trees. What fruit God requireth of his trees. 216 Truth. Truth Gods way. 332 V. Vnbeliefe. Vnbeliefe in the mind. 79 Vnderstanding. Filthinesse in the vnder∣standing. 80 Vniuersall. Holinesse exercised vni∣uersally. 149 Vshers.
Foure Vshers whereby God teacheth. 289 W Walkers. Christians must be wal∣kers. 360 Way. Way of God, what. 320 Holy life Gods way, why. 324 We should labour to be in Gods way. 329 Foure tractes in Gods way. 330 Two maine heads of Gods wayes. 340 How to keepe Gods wayes pure. 344 Tryall if wee be in Gods
way. 348 Signes that we are in Gods way. 351 Helpes to keepe vs in Gods way. 363 Weakened. How sinne may be weake∣ned. 106 Will. Gods children haue a will giuen them to cleanse themselues. 38 Filthinesse in the will. 84 Word. Word searching out our sinnes. 113 Loue to the Word, an ef∣fect of holinesse. 185 Workes, see Holinesse
World. World, not to regard the censures of it. 98 World opposeth them that are in Gods wayes. 353. FINIS.
Errata. Page 63. line 4. read if Pharaoh. p. 64. l. 17. r. is because. p. 71. l. 5. blot out looke. p. 82. l 15. for they, r. there. p. 131. l 4. for promise, r. premise. p. 135. l. 7. for argue, r. argue. p. 139. l. 3. blot out the. l. 10. r. Heb. 12.14. p. 146. l. 6. blot out they. p. 158. l. 6. for yet, r. and. p 194. l. vlt. for in, r. 1. p. 210. l. 5. blot out first. p. 259. l. 6. for bap∣timse. r. baptisme. p. 348, l. 6. for second, r. third.
