16949 99855125 20598
❧ A MORAL AND PITIEFVL CO∣medie, Intituled, All for Money. Plainly representing the ma∣ners of men, and fashion of the world noweadayes. Compiled by T. Lupton. The names of them that play this Comoedie. Theologie. Science. Arte. Money. Adulation. Mischieuous helpe. Pleasure. Prest for pleasure. Sinne. Swift to sinne. Damnation. Satan. Pryde. Gluttonie. Learning with money. Learning without mony Money without learning. All for money. Neyther money nor learning. Moneyles and friendles. Gregorie graceles. Moneyles. William with the two wiues. Nychol. S. Laurence. Mother Crooke. Iudas. Diues. Godly admonition. Uertue. Humilitie. Charitie. ❧ AT LONDON. Printed by Roger Warde and Richard Mdee, dwel∣ling at Temple Barre. Anno. 1578.
The Prologue. WHat good gift of God but may be misused? Nay what good thing newe but to euill is applye Howe is the Scripture with many abused With mouth it is talked, but with liuing denyed What iewel it is the iust haue well tryed For if that be a Iewell that comfortes in care Than this is a iewell of other most rare. It is the consolacion of the repentant sinner It is the chiefe comfort of Christes persecuted The faithfull and wronged person haue therein pleasure The penitent which are with pouertie oppressed Thereby are made richer then the couetous and wicked For it is our Euidence of all our ioye and saluation Whereby we are certified that Christe hath payd our raunsome. Thereby many godly sciences needefull be studied Whereof the bodie hath onely the fruition As the Physicall arte whereby the sicke are cured. Musicke through whose harmonie the minde hath consolation. Cosmographi which describes the countrie, citie and Nacion. Geometri, through whose subtill arte and measuring At this day there is much costly and sumptuouse building. The pleasant science of Astrologie whereby Gods wonderfull workes Are rather to be marked then mused on, or meruayled: Which arte is not hidde from the Sarisons, Paganes and Turkes Whereby such starres and heauens they may knowe were not created But by a mightie God, whose name for euer be honoured. And the moouing of the Planetes to be learned very strange With the swifte course of the Moone who monethly keepes her change. Yet all other sciences with these before delated Shall vanishe as the smoke, and be nothing at length Yet heauenlie Theologie, Gods worde before declared Hath bene, is nowe, and euer of such force and strength That though heauen and earth perishe, as Christes woordes meaneth Yet his worde shall abyde and remayne for euer: The following whereof God graunt we endeuer. Notwithstanding Epicures and belly goddes so swarme Farced, and flowing with all kinde of euill That they feare not to doe any kinds of harme So much they fauour their father the deuill The Scripture is taken with them as no Iewell Their mindes are so much on their riches and goods That the learned they esteeme lesse then fooles that weare hoods. But if the learned be riche, then be they esteemed: Not for their learning but for their goodes sake. Such power haue riches and money obteyned That the riche are helde vppe, the poore fooles in the lakes God giue them grace not so much on goodes to make: Diues me thinkes might be to them a warning, For pleasure therein, lyeth nowe in hell burning.
What mettayle is this money that makes men so mad? What mischiefe is it thereby is not wrought? What earthly thing is not therefore to be had? What hath bene so loued but money hath bought? What vertue or goodnes of vs so much sought, Who doth not wishe for money, and that euery day: I would I had thus much money eache one doth say. Howe many for money haue bene robbed and murthered? Howe many false witnes and for money periured? Howe many wyues from their husbands haue bene enticed? Howe many maydens to folly for money allured? Howe many for money haue spirites and deuilles coniured? Howe many friends for money haue bene mortall foes? Mo mischieues for money then I can disclose. Howe many Kings and Princes for money haue bene poysoned, Howe many betrayers of their countrey for money euery day, Howe many with money from true iudgement are led: Did not the prophete Balam curse gods people for money? Did not Iudas for money his master Christ betraye? Whereof he had no ioye, when he the same had done, But like a damned wretch honge him selfe full soone. One asked Diogenes why golde did looke so wan: No marueill said he it is though he so pale doe looke, For euery one layes wayte to catche him if they can. Fewe will take the paynes to catche holde on gods booke: Money ill vsed is the diuels snare and hooke. Whereby many are brought to endles damnation: But the godly doe bestowe it to their saluation. Fyer is the good gift and creature of God▪ Whereby we may do good and also wickedly: We may warme the poore therewith as charitie hath vs bode, And also seeth the meate wherewith to feede the hungrie: We may keepe houses therewith, as many haue done truely: And we may cut our necessaries and meate with our knyfe Wherewith many haue cut their owne throtes & bereued thē of their life. Thus the creature of God is not euill of him selfe, But through our misuse from good to euill conuerted: Euen so money ill vsed is a most wicked pelfe. And also as good where well it is, bestowed. Let all people take heede lest it of them be hoarded: For at the last day against them it will witnes, And then that they had not done it, to late for to wishe. And because that euery man of money is so greedie Our Authour a pleasant Tragedie with paynes hath now made, Whereby you may peceyue, All thing is for money: For Omnia pecunia effici possunt, as in Tullies sentence is said▪ In hearing vs attentiuely we craue but your ayde, Beseeching God, the hearers that thereby shalbe touched, May rather amend their faultes, then therewith be grieued. The ende of the Prologue.
Theologie commeth in a long ancient garment like a Prophet, and speaketh as doth folowe. Theologie. WHat felicitie can man haue more then in me? Wherein ought he to haue more ioye and consolation? What thing will make his conscience more quiet to be Then to studie that thing which is his saluation? I passe all the Sciences, it needeth small probation: And if you be desirous my name for to knowe, Theogie I am called the knowledge of Gods lawe. But who doeth not studie me chiefely for lucre and gayne, And also thereby to haue riche and easie liuing: But who to preache poorely in studying me is fayne, And thereby to saluation the sinfull wretch to bring. Nay they had rather to be payed here then to abyde gods rewarding: But such do not remember or beleeue Daniel Saying, The conuerting of a soule shall shine aboue the Angels, So manie would not studie me but for money And thereby to liue Lordly and in wealth: The Bishop, the Priest, and the Doctour of diuinitie Would giue ouer their studie, not regarding their soules health, And vse some other things, for as it appeareth, The artificer doeth leaue his arte and occupying And becomes a minister for money and easie liuing. Such as do studie, hauing liuing by me, Ought to be a lanterne and a spectacle to other, Whereby they may be allured all sinfulnes to flye: But many of them doe vse an vnchristianly order. For money they will handle full cruelly their neighbour: Is not this an hinderance to the knowledge of Gods worde, Without they amend, God will strike them with his sworde. Here commeth in Science clothed like a Philosopher. Science. Manie doe embrace and studie me dayly: But will you knowe why, and also to what ende, Forfooth for great liuing, and also for money: Not to helpe the needie therewith they do entend, But vainely on their carkasses to consume and spende, And the rest to reuenge malice wickedly they do spare: Thus to liue at pleasure is their delight and care. But the most parte care not for me▪ neither me regarde So much they are led with the blinde loue of money: Uile money before science and knowledge is preferd. All good science and knowledge I represent truely. Which doeth heale the minde, as medicines do the body,
Quemadmodum corpus medicina, sic animum curat Philosophia Et vita sine literis, mors est, & hominis sepultura. What worthie Theologie I am glad to see you heare, A must needes confesse you are my head and peare, For as man through me hath necessarie liuing Euen so both body and soule to heauenly ioyes you bring. Theologi. ¶ Your argument from mine doeth not much disagree, For nothing is almost done vnlesse it be for money, For the wicked riche man and the louer of money Regarde but for gayne, neither you nor me. Terence the vnlearned briefly describeth Homine imperito nunquam iniustius Qui nisi quod ipse fecit, nihil rectum putat: So they haue money they care not for vs a gnate. Arte commeth in with certeyne tooles about him of diuers occupations. Arte. Artes bonae vbique sunt in praecio, nec possunt à fortuna erip▪ Good artes are euery where esteemed, and had in pryce And can not be taken away by Fortune truely. My name is called Arte, wherein is vsed much vyce: All occupacions and artes which daily nowe are wrought By me are represented throughout the whole earth, Euerie one for money me daily haue sought: And all for priuate gaine as plainly appeareth, Who doeth embrace me, thereby to suppresse death, For a common wealth fewe vse me in deede And to bring vp their housholde godly, and the poore to feede. What husband man is he that abates the price of corne? Nay he rather buyes and keepes his owne in store. Many marchant man that is right simple borne, With vnsaciable gaines encreaseth more and more: He will not abate his price for helping of the poore. Who will not preuent his neighbour with buying things ouer his head▪ All this is for money, so that loue and charitie are dead. But doo I not see here the most woorthie Theologie, And also Science, and knowledge next him in degree? Science. ¶ To vs you are welcome Arte most necessarie No good order in the lande can be without vs three. Theologie. ¶ Euen as I at the first lamented the inordinate loue Of money which nowe of euerie one is esteemed, The same to be to true, you both I haue heard proue. O Iudas, Iudas, thereby thy selfe thast damned: Thou haddest bene better money neuer haue handled, And also such as haue had in money their consolacion Without the mercie of God shall haue euerlasting damnacion. Science. ¶ Diues vix bonus, a preatie saying and true, The riche man is scante good, this is the meaning: And money makes pleasures, this sentence doth shewe
Pecunia effectrix multarum & magnarum voluptatum. Arte. ¶ And againe it is written the seconde de finibus, Pecunia voluptatis perimitur maximae, The meaning whereof I may thus discusse Most great pleasures be brought forth for money: Then if money bring pleasure, pleasure brings forth sinne And sinne bringes damnation vnlesse Gods grace we winne. Theologie. ¶ Well, seeing euerie one is so farre out of frame, And giues them selues so much to the loue of money, Let vs walke as we ought in praysing Gods name, Beseeching God to sende them his fauour and mercie: O Lorde blesse thy people from euerlasting miserie. Christ had but twelue Apostles and one betrayed his master, Euen Iudas, the bagge carrier, for money he playde the traytour. Science. ¶ According to your godly will I am content likewise, Let vs not with money commit (O Lord) any vice. Arte. ¶ And as you both haue sayde, I am pleased therewith: O Lorde keepe thy people in thy faith, loue and trueth. ¶ These three going out, Money commeth in, hauing the one halfe of his govvne yellovve, and the other white, hauing the coyne of siluer and golde pain∣ted vpon it, & there must be a chayre for him to sit in, and vnder it or neere the same there must be some hollowe place for one to come vp in. Money speaketh. Hoyghe, hoyghe for money, more sweeter then honye: Who will not for me take payne: Each Lord and Knight for me will fight And hazard to be slaine. I waxe of such force that no earthly corse But embraceth me out of measure: The Doctor, the draper, the plowman, the carter In me haue their ioye and pleasure. Money is my name, all ouer is my fame: I dwell with euery degree: Though great be their liuing, yet can they do nothing, Without the presence of me. Manie for my sake worke while their heartes ake, Yet neuer thinke them selues wearie: The Smith and the Shomaker, the minstrell, the daunser With me will drinke and be mearie: But the churle and the couetous of me are so gelous That I can not get out of their sight. But the Seruing man, the spender, the vsurer and the lender Doe sende me abroade day and night. I am worshipped and honoured, and as a god am esteemed: Yea manie loues me better then God, No sooner come I to towne, but manie bowe downe
And comes if I holde vp the rodd. What neede I further shewe that euery one doth knowe. I doe but wast my winde, For seruants and prentises will priuily robbe their maisters, To me they haue such a minde. Here Money sitteth downe in a chayre, and Adulat commeth in and speaketh. Adulation. ¶ O worthie Money, thine absence hath bene long, My sorrowe in thine absence can not be spoken with tonge: For you money is onely the payne I doe take, Would I flatter or dissemble, vnles it were for your sake? ¶ What Adulation or flatterie more welcome to me Money. Than any man this moneth that I did heare or see. A true saying no doubt, Blandiloquio nihil nocentim, Then fayre speaking or flatterie nothing is more pernicious. Nemo suam turpitudinem perspicit, sed sibi quisque adulator es No man, to see his filthines is prest, But euery one to him selfe is a very flatterer, And thou wilt flatter also to haue money for thy labour. Adulation. ¶ Doe you thinke I will flatter or fayne any man, Unlesse for your sake? nay, beshrewe me than, Such as loue them selues, and loue their owne wayes best, Must needes be flattered therein, and then they be at rest. They must be holden vp, and flattered in their euill, And for you I care not howe many I sende to the deuill. Here money faineth him selfe to be sicke. Money. ¶ Ohe, what payne is this that I feele at my heart, My payne is as great, as though I were smitten with a darte. What ayles me, what ayles me thus sodenly to be sicke? I thinke I shall die without remedie of phisicke. Adulation. ¶ Be of good cheere Syr, of this I am sure, You cannot die so long as the worlde doeth endure. Come hether Mischieuous helpe, Money is almost dead, Come quickly in the mischief, and helpe to holde his head. Mischieuous helpe commeth in. Mischie∣uous helpe. ¶ What neede you call thus hastily, vnlesse you had more neede? Money may be sicke, but he will neuer be dead: But to helpe at a mischiefe I am as quicke as the best, O my lorde and master to helpe you I am prest. ¶ Welcome Mischieuous helpe▪ I was neuer so sicke before, Money. Helpe to holde my stomacke, I swell nowe more and more: I must eyther vomit, or else I shall burst in two, What wicked disease is this, that troubleth me so? Mischi. help ¶ None can make me beleeue it is any thing els, But Pleasure, the occasion that thus your belly swelles: You are so fraught with pleasures that I doe perfectly know, You will neuer be in quiet tyll he be rid from your mawe:
Therefore prouoke your selfe to vomit him quickly, And then you wil be at quiet, euen by and by. Money. ¶ Nowe I beleeue truely, that pleasure is the occasion Of all my great sicknesse, maladie and passion: Therefore as thou hast said certaine and true it is For money bringes all pleasures that any can wishe. Nowe I will assaye to vomitte if I can, Therefore either of you playe nowe the pretie man. Adulation. ¶ Let him holde your head, and I will holde your stomacke, And I hope with speede you shal haue very good lucke. Here money shal make as though he would vomit and with some fine conueyance pleasure shal appeare from beneath and lie there apparelled. I hope he is comming▪ for I feele him at my throte, Money speaketh. Great sorowe payne and griefe it is to me god woote: I would not for all the worlde be in such paynes agayne, As many as loues me of him wilbe glad and fayne. Pleasure. ¶ I must needes take money for the father of me pleasure, The most parte I am sure wil loue me out of measure. Money. ¶ Well my sonne, well forget not to do thy feate, I must needes get me hence▪ my paynes do make me sweate. Adulation. ¶ Money is to me such a sure friende, That seeing he is gone, I will not tarie behinde. Pleasure. ¶ In what case were the worlde were it not for money Without ioye and pleasure better be dead then aliue: To liue like dome goddes who would not be wearie? To satisfie mans nature with pleasures I can contriue, But I conteyne them at this time and hower, Hawking and hunting, shouting and fishing, Eating and drinking, dysing and carding, Riding and running, swimming and singing, Daunsing and leaping with all kinde of playing, Banketing with fine meates, and wine of all sortes, Dallying with faier women, with other kinde of sportes: All fine apparell that makes the heart ioye, With musicall instruments, both with man and boye. Thus no sporte or ioye wherein man hath solace But I doe conteyne them, though money bring them to passe. Mischie∣uous helpe. ¶ You say true Pleasure, no tong can expresse, What comfort and ioye in you conteyned is. Pleasure faines him selfe sicke, and speaketh sitting in a chaire. Pleasure. What thing is this that makes me thus to swell? I promise you euen nowe I was perfectly well: I am in a strange case what euer the matter be, There is no other way but shortly I must dye. Adulation. ¶ There wil none beleeue I dare ioberd my hande, That pleasure shall die so long as the worlde doth stande
Therefore take no care, nor yet lament or mone, For sodenly it came, and sodenly it wilbe gone. pleasure. ¶ I am neuer able to abide it if it last long, I frie in my fittes the paynes be so strong. Adulation. ¶ Euen as you were the occasion of the sicknes of your father, So is your sonne Sinne to you I am suer: So that you would I thinke be soone easied of your paynes If you could auoyde sinne from you by anie meanes. Pleasure. ¶ None in the worlde I thinke could gesse better. For as Money is to me, euen so am I Sinnes father: Therefore to be at ease and to be ridde of that lobber, Helpe nowe all my friends for loue of money and pleasure. Here commeth in Prest for pleasure. Prest for pleasure. ¶ I cannot chuse but helpe, you haue so coniured vs nowe, For Money and Pleasure none but will take paynes I trowe: He is not worthie to liue I make god a vowe, That will not worke his hearte out for both you. Pleasure. ¶ Ohe, helpe, helpe quickly, I neuer stoode in more neede, I am so full of sinne I shall burst without quicke speede. Here he shal make as though he would vomit, and Sinne being the vyce shalbe conueyed finely from beneath as pleasure was before. Sinne. I was afraied of nothing but onely of my dagger, Least in the time of my birth it would haue sticked my father, And then for my grandfather fewe would haue cared: If you my father Pleasure had bene slaine or killed. Yea mary Syr nowe my thinkes I am more at libertie, I could not once turne me in my fathers bellie, My father neede not care in what companie he doeth eate, I haue made his throte so wide he can not be choked with meate. Pleasure. ¶ Although my paynes were great yet nowe I may be glad, That I haue to my sonne such a pretie fine ladde. Sinne. ¶ If I be nowe a ladde, what be you than? A boye of my age will neuer make man: And although I be yong yet am I well growne, No childe of sixe yere olde is so bigge in all this towne. Pleasure. ¶ Well my sonne Sinne according to thy nature and name, All that loues money and me see that you do frame To all sinfull liuing and al other wickednes I neede not bid thee for I knowe well thy goodnes. Adulation. ¶ I haue euer to you Pleasure borne such loue, That to departe with you my heart doeth me moue. Pleasure and Adulation goeth forth. Sinne. ¶ He hath as much neede to bid me do this, As to make a dogge hold vp his legge when he doth pisse: And as Sinne is the childe of pleasure in euery nacion, Prest for pleasure. Euen so my sonne and heyre is endles damnacion. ¶ By the masse I care not what sinne I commit
So that thereby I may purchase pleasure and profit. It is a hard thing that I would not do for money, I would cut my fathers throte if I might get money thereby. Sinne. ¶ That is my boye that I neede not teache thee more, Or euer he haue money he committeth sinne before. Out alas masters, what thing is in my bellie? Such paynes as these will quickly make me wearie: Who, who is able to abyde this griefe or paynes, Euen nowe in my bellie, but nowe in my raynes, Nowe in my buttockes, and nowe at my heart, The paynes are so great that I suffer grieuous smart. I holde twentie pounde it will turne to the gowte, Euen nowe at my heart and nowe at the sole of my foote: Out alas my necke, my sides, and my backe, Out alas, my head asunder beginnes to cracke. Prest for pleasure. ¶ I pray you Sinne be quiet and be content a whyle, For I doe thinke verely your selfe you do beguyle: Your paynes are none other I dare be bolde to saye But onely Damnation whereof you are so full: Therefore to auoyde him you must take paynes to assaye And to helpe you therein with all my power I will: Do not make such mone Sinne, for your childe Damnation Is the onely occasion of all your griefe and passion. Sinne. ¶ The horesonnes head is so great, and he so ill fauoured made, That I must needes be ript I am greatly afrayed. Pre for ple. ¶ Be content Sinne I will call for more ayde: Ho Swift to sinne come away in haste, Sinne is so sicke I am afrayed he will burst▪ svvift to sin ¶ Euen as your grandfather did, and your father by you also, We will haue with speede your sonne Damnation I trowe. Sinne. ¶ That ill fauoured knaue is like none of vs, No more then a sowe to a cowe, or a sheepe to a gouse. Nowe for a midwyfe I would giue twentie pounde, Holde me vp Sirs, for nowe I begin to sounde. Here shal damnation be finely conueyed as the other was before, who shal haue a terrible vysard on his face, & his garmēt shalbe painted with flames of fire. Sinne. It is the heauiest lobber that euer man did beare, They say Sinne is heauie, but he is heauier I sweare: Howe say you masters is not this a well fauoured baby That I Sinne haue brought foorth so painfully? He is the worst fauouredst knaue that euer was borne, It must needes be good ground that brings forth such good corne: When I looke on him me thinks him to be to euill fauoured, Yet the crowe thinkes her blacke birdes of all other the fairest: But I can not loue him if I should be hanged: Thou art neuer like (sonne) of me to be kist.
Damnation ¶ I am fearfull Damnation through sinne procreated, To such as in sinne haue all their felicitie And dyes without repentance I shalbe anexed: But the repentant sinner that obtaines Gods mercie, Shall enioye the heauens farre separate from me: Therefore father Sinne to thee be due honour, That in bringing foorth of me thou tookest such paynes and labour. Sinne. ¶ In faith much good do it you, and them to whom you shalbe married, I wis they were better marrie a sowe that her pigges hath newe farried. svvift to sin ¶ Nowe farewell Sinne, of me you stande no more in neede, Do but becke when you lacke me, and I will come with all speede. Prest for pleasure. ¶ In your necessitie I am glad that we were here, I cannot be long out of your companie I sweare. Damnation ¶ Fare well most sweete father▪ I am lothe to departe, So soone to be trudging, it grieues me at the heart. Here they three go foorth. Sinne. ¶ Nowe faier euill most sower soone to be sorie I cannot chose, Your going grieues me so much that the snotte droppes out of my nose Had I not seene and felte the bearing of him my selfe, I would haue thought surely he had bene some changeling or else. Happie are they that are matcht with my sonne Damnation, They were better lye all their life in a dungeon or prison: He is so sure a companion as I knowe but fewe, Who happeneth once in his companie shall it neuer eschewe: My grandfather Money hath hatcht a goodly litter, An honester kindred can no where be founde, Pleasure, Sinne, and Damnacion of all other most bitter: Who doeth not loue vs, that with the loue of money is drounde. None but is my seruant that liues, and treades on grounde. The greatest power that is, the lowest state of all To be my seruants can not chuse, and also still shall. And is it any marueill why I so many seruants haue? None with fine qualities with me can compare, Therefore in my sight euerie one is but a slaue. What of with your cappes sirs, it becomes you to stande bare, None can forsweare them selues in trading for ware. No picking of purses can be at market or fayer, No thefte or robberie, no murther or killing Can be without me, ne yet whordome or swearing, No pride, no slothe, no gluttonie can be vsed, No periurie without me, neither enuie nor hatred, As my qualities be good, so my personage is proper. I am neither to high nor to lowe, to great nor so small, No thicker no thinner, no shorter no longer They decently appertayne, as you may see all. If I were higher I were the worst to fall: If I were lower they would take me for a boye, Therefore to beholde my persone, you can not chuse but ioye.
Here commeth in Satan the great deuill as de∣formedly dressed as may be. Satan ¶ Ohe, ohe, ohe, ohe, my friende Sinne I was neuer so merie In hearing thy qualities I can not be wearie: In thy genealogie (Sinne) I do more reioyce Then can be thought with hearte or spoke with tong or voyce: But my chiefest comfort is thy sonne, mannes Damnation Whereby they are excluded from eternall saluation. Sinne. ¶ Why you euill faste knaue, howe came your friendship in? They be well fauoured babes that be of your kinne. satan. ¶ Ohe Sinne, ohe to see thee it doeth me good, Thy wordes Sinne, ohe thy wordes do comfort my heart blood. Through money and pleasure my kingdome doeth encrease, Therefore to be merie why should I ceasse? Sinne. ¶ Then I and my sonne damnation be no bodie with you, Sinne and Damnation belike bring a man to heauen: Is thy kingdome diminished through vs thinkest thou? You bottell nosed knaue, I will see your nose eauen. I wis you had bene as good to haue set me in the nomber, I did not so much pleasure you but I will work you as much comber: For I did neuer encrease thy kingdome so much before But nowe I will diminishe it twentie times more. Howe can Money and Pleasure bring men vnto hell Without Sinne and Damnacion, Sir good face me tell? Nay I wilbe gone, I will tarie no longer here, I will turne all your myrth into sorowfull cheare. Here Satan shall crie and roare. Sinne. ¶ I knewe I would make him soone change his note, I will make him sing the blacke sanctus, I holde him a grote. Satan. ¶ Ohe my friend Sinne doe not leaue me thus, For without thee and thine owne sonne Damnacion: My kingdome will decay through my ancient enemie Iesus, For without mannes companie I can haue no consolacion All had bene mine owne but for Christes death and passion. Therefore without thy helpe and thy sonne Damnacion, Without companie in hell I shall for euer make my mone. Here he roareth and crieth: Sinne. ¶ You may laugh well ynough that Sinne & the Deuil be fallē out, But we will fall in againe or euer it be long: Stande backe in the mischief, or I will hit you on the snout, It is high time that you had ended your song. Satan. ¶ Come hether my sonnes Gluttonie and Pryde, Perswade my friend Sinne with me to sticke and abyde. Here commeth in Gluttonie and Pride dressed in deuils apparel, & stayes Sin that is going forth. Pride. Our Lord and master I pray you turne backe againe, Our father can not be merie, if you his companie refraine.
Thou canst thy lery pope to call me Lord and master, For I am thy chiefe head and thou art of me a member. Gluttonie. ¶ I pray thee for our sakes once backe againe to turne, For thy departing will cause him still to mourne. Sinne. ¶ Thou thy dogges and cattes thou euill fauoured knaue, Use me so agayne, and your nose from your face I will haue. Pride. ¶ We pray you most hartily to forgiue that is past, And we neuer hereafter will misuse you againe: If you forsake our father for sorrowe he will brast, Therefore from your furie we hope ye will abstaine. Sinne. ¶ Of all the three deuilles thou hast the most maner, For thy sake once againe I will comfort thy father Snottienose Sathanas, disable me no more Least you hath more adoe then you had before: Well Sathans kingdome by me shalbe encreased, And through my sonne Damnation that it shall nere be emptie. Pride. ¶ I would not haue you to take all the paynes alone, I my selfe will entyce manie to pride, That in hell (our habitation) they continually may grone: To helpe you at all times I wilbe at your side. Gluttonie. ¶ And I will allure them to fine fare and gluttonie, That their delight may be filling the bellie: Earely vp at drinking and late vp at banketing, So that all their ioye shalbe in drunkenes and surfeting: They shall spende on their owne bellies more then shall suffice, But the poore from their doores hungrie shall arise. Satan. ¶ Ohe, ohe, ohe my babes, my chickens, and my friend Sinne, Manie one through thee the kingdome of hell shall winne: Ohe, for ioye and gladnes I can not stande or sitte, Upon these cheareful words I must needes daunce a fitte. Sinne. ¶ Yea, but one thing snottie nose wilbe verie hard, Where shall we get a pype to ylaye the deuill a galliard? Satan ¶ Before you turned backe I did both crie and weepe, But nowe through thy comfort I can daunce without a pype: I do nowe perceyue Money is so beloued, That of manie aboue god he is esteemed and honoured, And the worlde is giuen so much to delicacie and pleasure, That Sinne and Damnacion encrease out of measure. Gluttonie. ¶ We giue you most hartie thankes, O Sinne our master, Whose returne againe hath comforted our father. Pride. ¶ If you had not returned for ought we could haue done Our father without doubt would haue fallen in a sowne. Sinne. ¶ If the deuill had died, who should haue bene his heyre? Satan. ¶ No my friend, no, none can possesse my chayre, For as God is without ende and his ioyes endles, Euen so am I king of euerlasting darknes. Sinne. ¶ Nowe if they be wise they will care for no such a friend, To procure them to paynes that neuer shall haue end. Satan. ¶ Euen as the ioyes of heauen do passe all other pleasure,
Euen so the paynes of hell exceedes al other be sure: The greatest torments and paynes that be on the earth Is ioye and pleasure in respect of paynes of hell, The Scripture maketh mention thereof as plainly appeareth, There is gnawing and gnashing of teeth, as the damned shall tell. Sinne. ¶ Much good doe it you snottie nose, I long not for your cheare: I beshrewe you and your babes if thereof you spare: It is better be poore and after in heauen to dwell Then to be riche on the earth and after liue in hell. Pride. ¶ Wel let vs talke no more of the paynes and sorrowe, But seeing we are prepared in that place to dwell, Let vs take paynes both euen and morowe: To enlarge our dominion the kingdome of hell. I am so esteemed throughout the worlde wyde, That they had rather dwell in hell then lay me aside. Gluttonie. ¶ And I beginne with manie to be in such fauour That the preacher can not allure them what so he doth saye, In their throte and bellie is all their ioye and pleasure, No whyt regarding the last fearfull day. Sinne. ¶ As either of you contayne one sinne particularly, Euen so I conteyne al sinnes generally: Therefore goodman snottie nose if you rewarde me well I and my sonne Damnation shal sende ynough to hell. Satan. ¶ Whatsoeuer thou wilt haue, I will not thee denie. Sinne. ¶ Then giue me a piece of thy tayle to make a flappe for a flie: For if I had a piece thereof I doe verely beleeue, The humble bees stinging should neuer me grieue. Satan. ¶ No my friende no, my tayle I can not spare, But aske what thou wilt besides and I will it prepare. Sinne. ¶ Then your nose I would haue to stoppe my tayle behinde, For I am combred with collike and letting out of winde: And if it be to little to make thereof a case, Then I would be so bolde to borrowe your face. Satan. ¶ Nowe I perceyue well you are disposed to be merie, But aske me any thing that is meete for to giue, And in satisfying you thereof I will not tarie To make you my chiefe officer, it would not me grieue, Sure you are thereof you may me beleeue, Besides if any friend of yours of me do stande in steede, The best thing in hell shalbe his in his neede. Sinne. ¶ Wo be to my friends if they stande neede of you, Or any thing you haue in that most pleasant place, I would not wishe that friendship to either horse or cowe, For there they should be sure of small fauour or grace: Is not here masters (thinke you) an amiable face? Happie may they be which with him shall dwell alwayes, But thrice happier then which godly ende their dayes. Satan. ¶ Nowe my friende Sinne seeing I haue seene you, Take here my blessing, and so I bidde thee adue. Here all the deuilles departe.
Sinne. ¶ Are not they thinke you of all other most happie, Which shal for euer and euer be in the deuilles companie? It were better be a post horse that restes night nor day, Or else to be a gallie slaue then with the deuils to play. Wel I am sure I haue yet much to doe, For if my father Pleasure haue much worke in hande I must needes trauaile through euerie lande: I can not well tell what thing to do first, My head is so ful of toyes wherewith I thinke it will burst. If I go to my grandfather first, then my father wilbe angrie, And if I see my father before I see my sonne Then he will take the matter I tell you sorowfully: Therefore giue me counsell what is best to be done. If I should go to my grandfather where should I finde him In the poore mans purse he doeth seldome abyde, But in the beggers cloke I might chaunce to haue him. I shall not finde where he is vnles I haue a guyde: I am a wise yong man that feares to finde money In the couetous churles coffer I shall haue him by and by, I am sure to finde him at the goldsmithes stall: If there I misse him I shall neuer finde him at all. Here Sinne goeth out And Learning with money commeth in richely apparelled. Learning vvith mon. ¶ Who may be compared to me in degree? Who is more happie then Learning with money? Learning at the first to riches me preferd: And monie is the cause that I am nowe honoured, Learning with money I am of all men called Who is not desirous my fauour to winne, For my money and riches my learning is esteemed: Uerie fewe or none but at my table haue bin. The learned Seneca these wordes hath exprest Iners malorum remedium ignorantia est. Then if you counterpease me Learning with money, Of all euils and mischiefe I am the best remedie. Here commeth Learning without money apparelled like a scholler. Learning vvithout money. Learning may aswel counsell where money doeth want, But riches causeth the common sorte to esteeme counsell best: For if a riche man well apparelled haue a fine tong to descant, He shalbe taken for learned though he knowe neuer a letter. My learning as good as yours I dare be bolde to compare, Yet there is great difference betweene our estimations, But if your attire, as mine is, were course and as bare, Then he should be best esteemed that had best conditions. My name is Learning without money in poore degree, god wote, I haue not to helpe my neede, eyther penie or grote.
And though I haue no money at this time present Yet I thanke God, through my knowledge and learning I euer haue ynough wherewith I am content, So that contentation makes me as rich as a king. The difference betweene our two liuings is this onely, You liue idely in pleasure, and I in studie take payne Which you can not away with but thinke it a miserie: But if with labour I haue sufficient I am right glad and fayne, Who will not be content with pouertie to haue sufficient gayne? Surely to liue godly with pouertie I had rather Then be damned in sinne with continual pleasure. ¶ I will not say but that riches be a great occasion Learning vvith mony That we do liue wantonly and out of Gods feare, But learning doeth cause vs to bridle our affection: Therefore learning rules my riches euerie where. Learning vvithout money. ¶ Who so is riche doeth fall into manie anoysome lust, But the godly poore alway in God doeth put his trust: If you do rule your goods and bestowe them as you ought, Fewe fellowes you haue as I by proofe haue tryde▪ Of manie learned riche I craud but could get nought, But the poore sorte vnlearned haue giuen me to feede: Many that be learned and riches haue withall Are more out of frame then some who nothing haue at all. Their learning makes them think with their riches to be so strong, That they will oppresse their neighbour be it neuer so wrong. Learning vvith mon. ¶ Wel, if you lacke liuing be bolde to come to me For I can be content to bestowe where is neede: And especially vpon such as godly learned be, I thanke God I haue wherewith the poore to feede. Here commeth in Money without learning, apparelled like a riche churle, with bagges of money by his sides and speaketh: What Learning with money I am glad to see you here, I stande neede of your counsell in diuers cases: Wherefore if you will helpe me I wil recompence you I swere I haue manie frowarde matters in hande in sundrie places I haue money ynough to defende me in maugre their faces Manie beggerly knaues haue good matters against me, But here is one will doe wel ynough, mine olde friend money. Lear. vvith∣out money. ¶ Quisque sua ducitur natura as here it may appeare, For the euil is wrought by the instrument according to nature: This man is giuen naturally to oppresse the poore And money is the instrument that maketh him so bolde: Manie are giuen naturally to consume in keeping a whore: Some naturally in drinking to spende their golde. Nihil est tam munitum quod auro non expugnetur. Thou thinkes thou lackes nothing seeing thou art full of treasure: Who in marying their children haue any respect
To learning and honestie but onely to riches: Nay the one they do embrace the other they neglecte. Well hereof a pretie answer was made by Themistocles▪ One asked him whether it was better his daughter to marie To a riche man not honest, or to an honest poore man, And he answered againe both quickly and wisely Ego inquit malim virum qui pecunia, quàm quae egeat viro pecuni I had rather saith he to haue if I can A man that lacks money, then money that lackes a man. Mon. vvith∣out learn. ¶ What pratling felowe is this that is so talketiue, It seemes he is learned but yet he can not thriue. Learning vvith mony ¶ Yea surely he is learned of whom it is great pitie, He hath no certaine liuing nor yet anie money. Mon. vvith∣out learn. ¶ In faith then he may daunce amongst beggers well ynough, Thou wert best giue vp thy learning and helpe to holde the plong Lear. vvith∣out mon. ¶ Doe you set so litle by my knowledge and learning? ¶ Who will esteeme thee vnlesse thou haue liuing? Mon. vvith∣out learn. ¶ The example of the philosopher may well be applied That kissed his gowne for cōming into the Emperours chamber: Lear. vvith∣out money. This gentleman of thee should not be esteemed Unlesse he had riches if thy wordes may be beleeued: For euen nowe thou saydest, I am not deafe of hearing Who would esteeme me vnlesse I had a liuing: There is none other difference betweene this gentleman and me, But that he doeth abounde in riches and I in pouertie: Mon. vvith∣out lear. ¶ Beleeue him not Syr for you were euer a good gentleman, If you stoode neede of me you should finde me your friende There is nothing but I will do it for you if I can: Nay trie me when ye list ye shall me faithfull finde. Lear. vvith∣out mon. ¶ As long as he needeth not thou wilt helpe him at an ynche, But if in pouertie he fall, then friendship will quenche: For it is the nature of the churlish riche man To be friend to such as of him standes no neede: But if his riches fayle farewell friendship than, He will not then bid him with him once to feede: If I had your estate Sir, by proofe you should see All the crowtching you haue had should then be done to me. Learning vvith mon. ¶ Your wise wordes haue brought this sentence to minde Written in terrio Tusculanorum where you may it finde, Omnes, cum secundae, tum maximè secum meditari oporter, quo pa∣cto aduersam aerumnam ferant. It is meete for all men when they be in prosperitie To meditate howe to suffer trouble in aduersitie. Lear. vvith∣out mon. ¶ If you marke it as well as here you haue it plaest, They wilbe the lesse grieuous to you come they neuer so faste: I promise you I would not chāge my estate with this mans liuing Mon. vvith¦out learn. To haue his riches and money for my knowledge and learning. ¶ Mary I am agreed I intende not to change it, Lear. vvith∣out money. To make such a bargaine I were out of my wit. ¶ I haue in my learning more perfect consolation
Then thou hast or canst haue in all thy golde and riches, For I may carie it with me in anie countrie or nation: And the more I spende thereof the more it will encrease, But the more thou spendest the more it doeth diminish: Thus no man that heareth vs but may perceyue well That my learning thy riches and treasure doeth excell. Money vvithout learning. ¶ I may carie money ynough with me where euer I go, Which will me helpe and succour both in well and wo. ¶ You can not carie your money but it must needes consume, Learning vvithout money. And perhaps be stolen or lost before it be halfe done: Manie one of their money as they haue trauailed Haue bene spoyled, some hurt therefore, and some also murthered. Mon. vvith∣out learn. ¶ I can haue meate and drinke in euerie place for money, But if I had none at all I should go to bed hungrie. Learning vvith mon. ¶ For that I am partaker with either of you both, To disalowe any of you I would be very loth: But learning before riches ought to be preferd, Although the most part money more regard. Mon. vvith∣out learn. ¶ I am the better esteemed as euerie one doeth knowe, I am taken for an honest man where euer I goe: And he shalbe for an abiect raskoll and slaue, To whom eche one will say, packe hence thou beggerly knaue Lear. vvith∣out money. ¶ Some that doeth not knowe me perhaps will say so, But where I am knowen (I trust) my vsage is such That they are verie sorie when thus I do go: And when I come againe of me they make much: But thou amongst thy neighbours art so beloued And though they flatter thee for feare to thy face, They will curse thee assoone as thy backe from them is turned And call thee cankeard churle in euerie place. Mon. vvith∣out learn. ¶ I would I knewe them which speake such wordes of me, They are but beggerly knaues I durst laye a wager, I would hoyse them at the next terme & thei should not know why Then should you see the villaines beginne to croutch and flatter: But yet for all that my money and my riches Get me all the pleasures I can desire or wishe. Lear. vvith∣out money ¶ These wordes of pleasures are written by Cato, Malorum esca voluptas qua homines capiuntur vt pisces hamo: Pleasure is the meate of euill men thus meanes the text and booke Wherewith men be catched as fishes with the hooke. And againe he hath written, reade the same who list Nulla capitalior pestis, quā corporis voluptas, hominibus à natur dat est There is no greater plague giuen to man by nature Then is of the bodie the desire or pleasure. Learning vvith mon. ¶ And Salust in fewe wordes thereof writeth thus, In regno voluptatis, virtuti non est locus: In the kingdome of pleasure there is no place for vertue, For pleasure bringeth lothsomnes as Plinie doeth shewe, Nulla est adeo quae non assiduitate sui fastidium pariat voluptas.
Money vvithout learning. No pleasure but with much vse bringes lothsomnes. ¶ Nay that is not true, for the more money I haue The more I desire so god me helpe and saue. Lear. vvith∣out money ¶ Iuuenalis wordes herein doeth thee rightly hit, Crescit amor nummi quantum ipsa pecunia crescit: The loue of money increaseth as much as money it selfe To what mischiefe bringeth vs this vile and wicked pelfe. Money makes no man riche vnles there be contentation, But the poore man contented is richer I saye As in vltimo paradoxo I finde a good probation, Contentum suis rebus esse, maximae sunt certissimae{que} diuitiae: The most great and certaine riches that is Hath he that is content with that which is his: Therefore thou art most poore as I may well define, For thou art not content with that which is thine. Egens est qui non satis habet, & is cui nihil satis potest esse: He is poore that hath not ynough or whom nothing will satisfie: And in primo paradoxo thou art trimly painted, And such as thou art as be neuer satisfied. Nunquam expletur nec satiatur cupiditatis sitis, Ne{que} solum ea quae habent libidine augendi cruciantur, sed etiam amittendi metu: The thirst of desire is neuer satisfied nor filled, And these goods they haue to increase their desire Whereby they are not onely grieuously tormented, But also to loose them they haue as great a feare. Learning vvith mon. ¶ Horace doeth verifie your saying I am sure Saying, Crescentem pecuniam cura sequitur. And eloquent Cicero sayeth in this phrase Virtuti qui pra diti sunt soli sunt diuites: They are onely riche that with vertue are adorned▪ So that without vertue a man can not be enriched: Were it not for my learning I should be more couetous, Therefore learning is to be preferred before any thing, Literae pulcherrimae sunt diuitiae hominis▪ The most fayer riches of man is knowledge and learning. Lear. vvith∣out mon. ¶ Opes eiusmodi parandae quae naui fracta simul cum Dn̄o quaeant enatare: These riches of men are chiefly to be gotten Which may swimme to land with his master whē the ship is brokē. Mon. vvith¦out learnin. ¶ Well I haue no learning to defende my cause withall, But here is a friend will pleade my matter in Westminster hall. Here he shall clap his hands on his bagges. Here commeth in Neither money nor learning, clothed like a begger and speaketh: By the olde prouerbe euerie man may not weare a fourde hood, But if my coat were furred it would do me more good: When I was able I laboured but nowe I waxe olde,
If I had sufficient meate to feede my body, And also necessarie clothe to keepe away the colde There is none of you would be so metie as I: I haue neither learning nor money my selfe to maintaine, Therefore to begge for my liuing I am both glad and faine. Lear. vvith∣out mon. ¶ Godlines is great riches if a man be therewith content, God for the godly will prepare that he shall haue sufficient. Mon. vvith¦out learn. ¶ Thou art vnhappie and borne in an euill houre, That hast no money, nor for anie canst labour. ¶ Doe you see howe he esteemes this poore and simple wight, Lear. vvith∣out mon. Perhaps he is more accepted then thou in Gods sight: He thinkes none is happie but such as haue money I will prooue this man richer then thou by and by, For he would be content with sufficient clothe and food, And thou art not satisfied with twentie mens good. In opiae nauca desunt, auaritiae omnia▪ saith Horacius: Fewe things to the needie but all wanting to the couetous, Thou represents Diues who had all his pleasure here, But he represents Lazarus who now hath heauenly chere: Beware least through thy riches thou haue not endles payne, The faithful and contented wight in thend shall heauen attaine. Neither lear¦ning nor money. ¶ For Christes sake I suffer this pouertie meekely, The crosse of Christ I embrace most willingly: The riche for the most part be so hard hearted That nothing I can get wherewith to be releeued, Yet God doeth open the heartes of the poore sort That I haue alwayes sufficient my selfe to comfort: It is a world to see howe greedie they be of money, For hauing an hundreth pound they will not part with a peny But they wil not sticke vainly to consume and spende A noble at a shot vpon a fayned friende: Gods grace I feare me from such hard heartes is past That will not giue the foure score part of that they spend in wast. Neither learning nor money I am called where euer I goe, Whereby I do suffer much payne, hunger and woe: Therefore good gentleman I beseech you of your goodnes Giue me your charitie my bodie to refreshe: And though I be not able God will paye it certaine At the last day with treble foulde againe. Learning vvith mon. ¶ God forbid I should from the poore withdrawe my hande, For then I should not be able before the Lord to stande: What we giue to the poore that we giue to Christ, To giue to the needie poore God graunt vs alway prest. Here he shall giue him something. Lear. vvith∣out mon. ¶ You take your selfe I perceiue in this case to be afterward, Therefore you shalbe to higher office preferd. Here he shal aske his almes of Money vvithout learning. Neit. learn. nor mon. ¶ Good honest man, relieue me I aske it for Christes sake,
If you knewe my neede you would then some pitie take: Giue me of your aboundance but one grote or penie And you shall receyue it with gaine at the last truely. Mon. vvith¦out learn. ¶ God help thee, god helpe thee, mine own neighbors be verie poore Neuer a day but one or other is euer at my doore: I had neuer so much to do with money in my lyfe, God helpe thee good man, I haue a housholde and a wyfe. Lear. vvith∣out mon. ¶ Duae res sunt quae maxime homines ad maleficiū impellunt, luxu∣ries & auaritia: Two things chiefly doeth man to mischiefe bring, Lecherie and couetousnes, O vyle and sinfull sting: Thou haddest euen nowe ynough thy neighbours to oppresse, But thou hast not one penie on this poore man to spare: If thou shouldest giue him twelue pence what hadst thou the lesse, God hath hardened thy heart and cast thy vp I feare. Mon. vvith¦out learnin. ¶ If I should diminishe my money but one grote, I should not be quiet these two dayes I wote: Well come to my house to night or to morne, And I will see if I can spare thee a dishe full of corne. Here Money vvithout learning goeth out. Lear. vvith¦out mon. ¶ Of money, pleasure and sinne he is nowe entised, I pray god with Damnation he be not infected: Well, walke thou in thy vocation what euer thou hast, Prayse thy God so long as life doeth last. Neither lear¦ning nor money. ¶ What paynes and troubles so euer we byde here, I pray God we be patient, and the liuing God feare: No paynes we do suffer of heauen can be worthie, The ioyes be so great no tongue can expresse: Therefore I care not for liuing neuer so painfully, For repenting in Christ I shall haue ioyes endles: God rewarde you good gentleman for your good almose deeds, I haue sufficient three dayes my hungrie corps to feede. Here he goeth out. Lear. vvith∣out mon. ¶ For that I knowe God hath sent you riches, Great knowledge, wisedome and learning withall: Beware of pleasures the mother of Sinne doubtles, For if she once catche you to sinne you shalbe thrall, It is written in the seconde de finibus, Nemo est dignus nomine hominis, qui vnum totū diem velit esse i voluptate. He is not worthie the name of a man be sure, Which spendes the whole day in voluptuousnes and pleasure. Learning vvith mon. ¶ I thanke God of such riches as I haue, But so long as I liue it shalbe my seruile slaue: To lende to the needie, to giue to the pore, To suffer none go emptie that comes to my doore. To bring vp my housholde in gods feare and faith And to be an example to such as like hath: And if you wilbe content hoie with me to come, You shall not want liuing as long as I haue some▪
Lear. vvith∣out mon. ¶ I thanke you most hartily of your large promise, I will wayte vpon you as my bounden duetie is. Here he goeth foorth and money commeth in pssing. Money. I was neuer so wearie since the houre I was borne, There is none at all but do craue me euen and morne: I neuer rest night nor day, I am euer busie when euerie one doeth play: Fewe blinde matters but I must be at their daying, If I speake the word it is done without praying. Since I was here last, I swere by this light, I haue made manie a crooked matter straight: The theefe that all night was robbing and stealing, If I beare him witnes was all night in his bed sleeping. A mans wife that was taken in bed with an other, Could haue no harme when I did excuse her: When I spake she was taken to be of good behauiour, And they that found her were set by the heeles for their labour. There was a man killed and twentie witnesses by, But I sayd he killed him selfe with his owne dagger truely: And when I had spoken euerie one helde his peace, And then the officers the murtherer did releace. So that I haue bene to manie so friendly, That well is he can get me on his side to be: I haue so manie suites and matters in hande, That I would fayne haue an helper by me fast to stande. Here commeth in Sinne the vice. Sinne. ¶ I haue bene since I was here in manie a nation, So that I could not come to any towne nor citie But I and my kindred are in great estimation: If I holde vp my finger you may trust me, It is a great matter that makes me to lye. And as I came homewarde I tolde these newes to the deuill, Who was verie glad to see vs beare such rule. Money. ¶ May I be so bolde to knowe of what kindred, Or else from what stocke you are proceeded. Sinne. ¶ The last stockes I was in was euen at Bamburie, They be worme eaten which shewes them ancient to be: If they were mine because they be so olde, I would burne them in winter to keepe me from the colde. Money. ¶ I meant of what degree you were descended. Sinne. ¶ I promise you I am come of an high and mightie kindred: I knowe not my grandfather, for I neuer yet sawe him, But Pleasure is my father, Sir, do not you knowe him? Money. ¶ What my sonne Sinne I neuer sawe thee before, I am thy grandfather Money which settes by thee great store. Sinne. ¶ Mary Sir it is time on my mary bones to kneele, Blessing, blessing grandfather of you I do aske: But take heede that none of it hit my left heele, For I promise you I haue a great and feruent laske.
Money. ¶ I am glad to see thee so merie my childe Sinne, It doeth reioyce me to see such one of my kinne. Sinne. ¶ Nay, then the fayrest birde of all the generation Is mine owne sonne and heyre, my faire sonne Damnation: Such a one as he is you haue seene but a fewe, Neuer trust me againe if I tell you not true: His face doeth shine as bright as the buttocke of a beare, He hath a beautiful face in the night whē the moone shines not clere Money. ¶ I pray thee whē diddest thou see my sonne Pleasure thy father? Sinne. ¶ I did not see him of late but I heard from him by the carrier▪ In faith father Money to put you out of doubt, There is no place in the world but he beares a great rout: But my thinks I hearde you complaine verie latelie, That through great paynes and trauaile you were very wearie. Money. ¶ I would I had a speciall friend that for me would take payne▪ He should for his paynes be sure of to much gayne. Sinne. ¶ Mary Sir I haue a speciall friend in store That will not for any man than for you do more, For he hath such a minde and great loue to money, That he will doe anie thing for you by and by. Money. ¶ What is his name, and then I shall know Whether he be able to do for me or no. ¶ A man he is to whom nothing can come a misse, Sinne. In euery kinde of thing he hath experience doubtles: All for money is his name, you knowe him full well, For this your busines all other he doeth excell. Money. ¶ Mary tha is he that I wishe for onely, There is nothing at all but he will doe it for me: I pray you call him for he will not long tarie, If he wist I were here▪ so to me is he friendlie. Sinne. ¶ What all for money come hether with all speede, My grandfather money taryes for you to helpe him at neede. Here commeth in Al for money in hast, apparelled like a ruler or magistrate. Mary that is well, should Money tarie for me, Nay it is meete I wayte on him both with cappe and knee. What would you with me my lord and master Money? Commaunde what you will and I will do it speedely. Money. ¶ I haue taken such payne as sure hath made me wearie, Wherefore I haue sent for you my roume to supplie: What suters so euer come to craue your ayde, If they come from me let them not be delayde: What euer their matter be haue thereto no regarde, For if they come from me they will you well rewarde. Al for mon. ¶ What euer I doe for you I take it for no payne, At midnight I would ride for you in haile, snowe or rayne. Sinne. ¶ Let there come a thousande if they do bring game, There can not come so manie, but hele them entertaine.
Money. ¶Farewell all for Money, in thee is all my trust, You may both make and marre, you may do what you lust. Here Money goeth out & Al for money sitting in a chaire, speaketh▪ Al for mon. ¶ Nowe my friend Sinne a proclamation make, None but shalbe heard that comes for moneyes sake. Sinne. ¶ What be the wordes that I shall nowe proclaime? Al for mon. ¶ I haue them written here I will resite them by name: Say after me and then you can not misse, You must speake a loude that they may knowe what it is. Sinne. ¶ Shall I in my mannes voyce or in my boyes voyce it declare? Al for mon. ¶ So that it be heard I do not greatly care. Here the vyce shal turne the proclamation to some con∣trarie sence at euerie time all for money hath read it, and here foloweth the proclamation: All maner of men that haue either matter or suite, Let thē come hether betvvene nine & ten, & none against them shal dispute▪ So they come from money then they shalbe heard quickly, Be their matter neuer so vvrong, they shalbe sped and not tarie▪ And that they make speede, he hartily them prayes, For he can not tarie past tvvo or three dayes. Al for mon. ¶ Do you thinke I shall haue any suiters at all, I thinke my market wilbe verie small. Sinne. ¶ If you haue no suters on you for to call, I am suer shortly the heauens will fall: They will not stande I thinke all in this hall, Which will come right shortly and still hereafter shall. Al for mon. ¶ Mary Syr the more the better for me, If they be ten thousande they shall speede for money. Here shall one knocke at the doore. Sinne. ¶ What good fellowe is that which knockes so boldly? Gregorie graceles. ¶ Mary I am a sewter that comes from money, My name if you list to knowe, is Gregorie graceles That can cut a mans purse and looke in his face. Sinne. ¶ If your personage be as handsome as your qualities be good. The hempe for your hanging beginnes for to budde. Al for mon. ¶ Let him in I pray thee, let me see what he is, If he come from money he shall not speede amisse. Here cōmeth in Gregorie graceles like a ruffian & speaketh. God saue you my lord, I am come from money, Who willes you to helpe me out of my troubles quickly. Al for mon. ¶ What is the matter rehearse it in breefe: Greg grac. ¶ Mine neighbours saye they will hang me because I am a theefe. The last night I chaunced to take a budget with two hundreth pound▪ And maymed also the partie that they thinke he will die, The budget with money I did hyde in the ground: So that they mist it although they tooke me, Therefore for your ayde to you nowe I flie: And the one halfe shall you haue for sauing my life,
And the other must keepe my house, my children and my wife. Al for mon. ¶ Deliuer the money to this my friend Sin, And take this token to shewe that with me thou hast bin. Here he shal deliuer him a paper, and Sin and he goeth forth. Al for mon. ¶ This is good lucke at the first beginning, To haue so much money it is an honest liuing: Me thinkes sewters in comming are verie slacke, Such as this first was I thinke I shall lacke: I could sit in the colde a good whyle I swere, Or I would be wearie such suters to heare. Sinne commeth in and saith: My Lorde, All for money, here is another cheat, It is better then the first, yea or els as great. Al for mon. ¶ Let them come in who euer they be, If your grandfather sent them, mine olde friend money. Sinne. ¶ Nay, the partie doeth lye nowe sore sicke in her bed, But my father doeth will you that she may be sped: And she hath giuen me for you an hundred pounde and more, Shall her neighbours be able to hurt her therefore? Al for mon. ¶ Nay, let them do to her the worst that they can, Tell me her matter and I will release her than. Sinne. ¶ She is a faier yong woman and verie full of fauur, She began to be coletishe, so that one must ryde her: And the thing she played for did after so prosper, That her bellie was full as lately did appeare: And shee fearing least thereby she should be claundred Killed her childe after she was deliuered. But as she conueyed it by some it was spied, And so it was founde whereby the trueth was tried. Al for mon. ¶ What, this matter is not so great, wel, for moneyes sake, That she haue no harme, my selfe will vndertake: They that should giue euidence shalbe all tongue tyde, And the twelue men shall finde her gyltles, let her not be afrayde. Sinne. ¶ For a whoore to haue a childe it is but a small matter, And after it is borne the same to kill and murther. Is not my grandfather money of great power and might, That such a crooked matter so quickly can make straight? Novve Moneyles and friendles knocketh at the doore. Sinne. ¶ Who is that, that knockes in such great post hast? Moneyles. ¶ One that without my Lordes helpe away is like to be cast. Al for mon. ¶ Let him come in, let me heare his matter, If he come from money he shall not lose his labour. Moneyles. ¶ O my Lord, as I came by an hedge the last night, Of a fewe ragges and clothes I chanst to haue a sight: Which when I had vewed with me I them tooke, Which were not worth a crowne I dare swere on a booke: And I haue a riche neighbour that threates me verie sore▪ That I shalbe hanged right shortly therefore. Al for mon. ¶ Be merie good fellowe and be not afrayed,
It were pitie thou were hanged for such a tryfell: Who will do thee hurt if I be on thy syde? They were as good nay as once thy goods to ryfell. Sinne. ¶ His goods be soone ryfeled I thinke he hath none at all, It appeares he is simple the robberie was so small: To come hether for helpe who put it in thy minde? Moneyles. ¶ By my troth my selfe, for I haue none other friende. Sinne. ¶ Did not my grandfather money in hast sende thee hether? Moneyles. ¶ I am not acquainted with him, I will not be found a lyer. Sinne. ¶ What art thou called whereabouts thou doest dwell? Moneyles. ¶ I am Moneyles and friendles as many one can tell. Sinne. ¶ Alas poore soule what diddest thou comming hether, I thinke for all thy comfort thou art neuer the better. Al for mon. ¶ I can do thee no good I did mistake thy matter, Thou art come hether in vayne, thou hast lost thy labor. Moneyles. ¶ You promised me that I should not be troubled, Al for mon. ¶ By my troth for all that thou art like to be hanged. If the lawe should not be executed of theeues and robbers, Men should not liue in quiet for loytering lubbers. Sinne. ¶ Shall I tell thee one thing in thine care Syrra, Thou art sure shortly to playe sursome corda. Moneyles. ¶ I trust Sir you will not go against your worde. Al for mon. ¶ Get thee hence prating knaue, I can do thee no good. Moneyles. ¶ God haue mercie on vs without a man haue money He shalbe cast away for a tryfell we see: But the theeues and robbers that with money be stored Escape well ynough, but the poore theeues be hanged. Here he goeth forth. Al for mon. ¶ Ahe Serra, here was a suter that was not for my profit, None such were appointed to come by the proclamation: We should make a wise market if for such we should sit, They shall sterue and hang before of such I haue compassion▪ Sinne. ¶ Through him you shall see none after will come, Unles they haue money either more or some. Is not my grandfather Money thinke ye of great power That could saue from hanging such abominable whoore, That against all nature her owne childe did kill? Thus you may do for money what mischiefe you will. And yonder poore knaue that did steale for his neede A fewe sorte of ragges, and not all worth a crowne, Because he lackes money shalbe hanged for that deede, You may see my Grandsyre is a man of renowne: It were meete when I named him that you all kneeled downe. Nay, make it not so strange, for the best of you all, Do loue him so well, you will come at his call. One other shal knocke novve at the doore. Al for mon. ¶ Me thinkes I do heare one knocke at the doore, He shall finde me his good master if he be not to poore. Sinne. ¶ Knocke softly in the mischiefe, who made you so bolde?
VVilliam vvith the li. vviues. ¶ I am William with the two wiues, I haue brought my lord golde. ¶ Let him in, let him in, I will his matter heare, I will dispatche him quicklie he neede not to feare. Al for mon. Here commeth in William with the two wiues, dressed like a countrie man, & speaketh: My Lord from Money I haue brought you such a token That I trust from my trouble I shall soone be holpen: Fourtie olde angels I trust will you please, Beseeching you therefore my matter to ease. Here he shall reache him a purse. Al for mon. ¶ I haue felt thee alreadie, nowe let me heare thee What euer thy matter be I will soone speede thee. Sinne. ¶ Mary he hath two wyues, and I thinke he would haue another▪ Al for mon▪ ¶ He shall haue two mo if it be his pleasure. VVilliā▪ &c. ¶ I haue two wiues I must needes confesse, I haue to manie by one I had rather haue lesse: To say trueth to my first wife I haue most right, But I can not loue her I swere by this light: I maried her onely for her goods and riches. She is an olde croust none would marie her for loue, Her mouth would slauer euer when I did her kisse, Therefore to take an other my minde did me moue Who is both yong and honest as her deedes do well proue: But the Bishop doeth trouble me whereby I knowe well, He will haue me againe with that olde iade to dwell. Sinne. ¶ A tyred Iade by thee I thinke she hath not ben, For she is properly a Iade that hath bene ouer ryden: And because thou hast spared her nowe she is freshe and lustie. Therefore hyer her out for an hacknie, and she wil bring thee money. VVilliā, &c. ¶ The deuill shall ride her if I set her out to hyre, I would she were with him in the middest of hell fyre. Sinne. ¶ Hadest thou any riches by her, anie lands or woods? VVilliā▪ &c. ¶ I had three hundreth pounds by her besides her other goods. Sinne. ¶ She may be verie glad that on thee her goods did spare That would let her foorth to be the deuils hacknie mare. VVilliā, &c. ¶ So I were rid on her I cared not where she were. Al for mon. ¶ Thou shalt be sped herein euen as thou doest require: I will finde meanes with witnes to be proued That she before her mariage to an other was betrothed. Whereby with thy yong wife thou shalt liue at ease: Thou maist thanke Money my olde friende I wisse, Or els thou maist trust me I would not haue done this. VVilliā, &c. ¶ I thanke you Sir hartily for the paynes you haue taken, I will remember you euery yere with a chrismas capon. Here he goeth forth. Sinne. ¶ These be goodly olde angelles take heede you do not lose them, Haue not they pretie winges that could flie into your bosome? Al for mon. ¶ I will keepe them safe ynough, I must needes loue them,
It is a crooked matter that I will not make straight for them. Nichol neuer out of lavve knockes at the doore. Sinne. ¶ There is some iollie suiter, do not you heare him knocke? Softer Sir, softer, least you breake the locke. Al for mon. ¶ Let him in quickly whatsoeuer he be. If Money haue sent him he is welcome to me. Here commeth in Nichol neuer out of the lawe, like a riche frankeline, with a long bagge of bookes by his side. Sinne. ¶ Come neare to my Lorde and tell him your matter, Did my grandfather Money will you come hether? Nicholl. ¶ I thinke I had come in vaine vnles he had sent me, Sir here is a dossen Portagewes if you will helpe me. Here he reacheth him something in a bagge. Al for mon. ¶ Nowe I am readie to heare thee tell it out a long, I will helpe thee without doubt, be it right or wrong. Sinne. ¶ Either right or wrong thy matter must needes bee, Therefore thou mayst speake, thou speedst Ile warrant thee I. Nichol. ¶ There is a poore knaue by me hath a piece of grounde, Not worth by yeere past three or foure pounde, And I haue at the villaine such hate and spite That I would haue it from him although it be his right: The lande lyeth so handsomely at the backe side of my house, That I am as greedie thereof as cat of a mouse. Al for mon. ¶ By what right and tytle do you the same claime? Nicholl. ¶ His name is Nicholas, we are both of one name: But no kinne at all I am sure he is to me. Yet though my tytle be nought I will wearie him with money: The lawe is open I am sure for euerie man: Mary let him make his plee as well as he can: Doe not manie giue ouer their tytles in a yeare, Some for want of money, and some for verie feare. Sinne. ¶ Is here all the tytle you haue good man Nicholl? Thou carest not so thou hast it what becomes of thy fall. Nicholl ¶ So that I haue it I care not for hereafter, When I am dead and rotten, it wilbe good for my children. Sinne. ¶ It is a good winde that blowes no man to euill, But happie are those children whose father goes to the deuill: No good plee herein I thinke thou canst inuent. Nicholl. ¶ Doe you not thinke that I haue fayned a dissent, And thereby claime a right that neuer was before, The riche may soone ouercome the moneyles and the poore: And yet that I shall loose it, I surely am afrayed, Unles you cause iudgement the next terme to be stayed. ¶ I will get it stayed, I haue thee nowe promised: Al for mon. But in the meane space see that you haue writings forged, And also false witnesses two or three at the lest, Who may swere if neede be thou hast bought his interest.
And this way thou art sure to haue thy desire, Go about thy busines▪ drie wood soone catcheth fire. Nicholl. ¶ Mary Sir this is the way that must needes preuaile, I thanke you Sir hartily for telling me this tale. Here he goeth out. Al for mon. ¶ I wis Sinne my purse beginnes to fill, Sinne. ¶ Nay, it wilbe fuller if you may haue your will. Here another knocketh. An other sewter there is I heare him knocke amayne, Shall he come in Sir to tell his griefe and payne? Al for mon. ¶ To come to me quickly see that he do not spare, If he comes from Money, well falls out his share. Here commeth in Sir Laurence liuingles, like a foolish Priest, and speaketh. Sir Laurēce. ¶ Sir I haue a petition to your Lordship to make, Trusting you wilbe good to me for master moneyes sake. Al for mon ¶Thou canst not come for any thing to me But I will do it gladly for the loue of money. Sir Laurēce. ¶ I haue a present here not worthie for you to receyue, But I giue you with all my heart euen such as I haue: An hundreth Dirige grotes▪ they be good siluer and olde, I haue kept them so long they begin for to moulde. Here he reacheth him something. ¶ It is very neere day when such byrdes flie, Sinne. You were wont to say masse for a grote, but nowe they are dearer to by. I pray thee what is thy name, art thou either vicar or parson? sir Laurence ¶ Sir Laurence liuingles▪ without either liuing or mansion. Sinne. ¶ By the masse I thought thou wast euen such an other, I knewe by thy countenance thou wast neuer Doctor, But thou hast bene a doctor at the ducking of women, He hath euer had a good zeale to kertchefes and linnen: I promise you he is very well learned if you list to appose him, But it must not be in Greke, Ebrewe, nor Latin: A cure he is able sufficiently to discharge, He can reade very well vpon a paire of cardes. sir Laurence ¶ I am none of the best learned it is but a follie to flatter, Sinne. ¶ In faith Sir Laurence I thinke you must playe the carter, Or else you must be a hedge priest, beggers to marie, Which is an easie liuing but you must fare hardly. Howe diddest thou with the Bishop when he did apose thee? sir Laurence ¶ Mary I dyd so answere him that he did depose me From all my benefices and liuings with his power and might, He would not once suffer me to serue a cure by this light: Therefore good my Lord I hartily you require To helpe me to some liuing according to my desire. Al for mon. ¶ Do not feare my priest for wanting of any liuing, I haue deuised alreadie which way it shall come in: My Chaplen thou shalt be, for here I do thee make A benefice thou shalt haue none shal from thee it take.
sir Laurence ¶ Now God rewarde your Lordship in heauen may you it finde, But one thing I had forgotten which nowe comes to my minde: At euerie visitacion when I shalbe aposed, For want of sufficient learning I shalbe then discharged. Al for mon. ¶ Before euerie visitacion be sure to come for my letter, Which when the Chancelor sees, straight wayes thou shalt haue fauour. sir Laurence ¶ The proudest of them all shall not make me nowe to shrinke, The pottes shall walke anon, I will full merely drinke. Sinne. ¶ Howe many Planetes Sir Laurence is there in the third heauen? sir Laurence ¶ Nay I knowe howe many cardes I haue when I haue plaied al seuen. Sinne. ¶ Howe say you by Sir Laurence, is not he well skilled In the Science of Arthematike when the cup is newe filled: Howe manie chapters in the Gospel did Saint Matthewe write? sir Laurence ¶ Mary one and all his fellowes, that I can quickly resite. Sinne. ¶ I pray thee tell me truely, howe many did he write in all? sir Laurence ¶ Would you fayne knowe the trueth, you were best aske that wall, Sinne. ¶ Thou hast not verie much studied that Gospell Because the number of the chapters thou canst not tell. sir Laurence ¶ No nor the other Gospelles but a litle I haue studied, In other things much more I haue bene occupied. Sinne. ¶ Howe manie Epistles did Paul write after he was conuerted? sir Laurence ¶By the masse he writ to manie, I would they were all burned, For had not they bene and the newe Testament in English, I had not lacked liuing at this time I wisse: Before the people knewe so much of the Scripture Then they did obeye vs and loued vs out of measure: And nowe we can not go in the streetes without a mocke, The litle boyes will saye, Yonder goes Sir Iohn smell smocke. A boye called me so once amongst twentie people and more, And in deede I smelled his mothers not two houres before. An other boye called a priest so, and the priest spake againe quickly, I neuer smelled thy mothers smocke but when I begatte thee. Sinne. ¶ Of trueth Sir Laurence in thy time thou hast bene good For lacke of winter liueries, thou hast giuen many a chrismas hood. Al for mon. ¶ Well my friend Sinne, carrie Sir Laurence home, He shalbe also my steward which is an honest mans roume. Sinne. ¶ In deede the honestie of the man may make the roume better, But the roume cannot make syr Laurence the honester. Here the Priest and the vyce goeth out. Al for mon. ¶ I haue filled my purse metely well this day, I do not intende much longer for suiters to stay: One other good cheate would make me packe vp and be gone. It is marueill without suiters I am so long alone, Me thinke it is no trouble for all my long sitting As long as money thereby I may be fingring. Sinne commeth in and speakth. It is maruell that no suiters haue bene here all this while, There is comming to seeke you that dwelles many a myle. Here one other doeth knocke.
Al for mon. ¶ There is one other doeth knocke what euer he be, If he come from Money he shalbe welcome to me. To me they do come, therefore let him in, Open the doore quickely I praye thee good Sinne. Here commeth in mother Croote dressed euill fauoured like an olde woman: Shee shalbe musled and haue a staffe in her hande and goe stouping, and shee speaketh. God saue all, God saue all, and our blessed Lady, Who is this gentleman that will do all things for Money? Sinne. ¶ Come hether mother mable your termes you do misuse, To see you come so farre my thinkes it is strange newes: But what is your name mother my Lord would haue you tell: Mother croote. ¶ Mary chill my life sonne but iche do not heare you well. Euery one that knowes me do call me mother Croote, Cham an hundreth yeres olde cha can skantlie go on foote. Al for mon. ¶ What is your matter mother tell me and do not spare, If Money sent you hether the better shall you fare. Mo. croote. ¶ He did sende me to you, and I may say to you, Chaue brought you hether the price of a good vat cowe: Haue here is foure olde Ryalles, iche would they were a score, Before yesterday cha did not see them this twentie yere and more. Here shee giueth him the money. Al for mon. ¶ Yea mary mother Croote they be foure good Ryalles of golde, If you knewe them not this twentie yere it is marueil they did not mould. Mo. croote. ¶ When ych put my hande in my coffer, ych might then feele them, But chaue bene blinde this thirtie yere, so that ych could not see them: Therefore chill conclare the cause of my comming hether. Sinne. ¶ Declare you should say mother, for that is the right speaking. Mo. croote. ¶ You can conclout the matter much better then I. Sinne. ¶ You should saye conclude mother, but it is not much awry, Mo. croote. ¶ Chaue you may see be brought vp amongst swine and kye. Chill nowe declare the cause of my comming, Al for mon. ¶ Go too then mother Croote, and I will giue you the hearing. Mo. croote. ¶ Because cham riche and haue something to take too, There came of late a yong sprignall mee to woo: Nay he is a holsome yong man, of twentie yere olde and three, It does me good to thinke on him by our blest lady. He made full much on me, and loued me god woote, And cha loue him againe euen at the heart roote: So that we plight our trothes eche to other. And so at peruenient time to marie together. Sinne. ¶ It is conuenient mother Croote, but it makes no great matter. Mo. croote. ¶ You may see Sir, olde women haue much clitter clatter. But I pray you good Sir beare with my budenes, Sinne. ¶ I knowe mother Croote your meaning is rudenes. Mo. croote. ¶ What soeuerich say my meaning is no lesse, But my husband, my husband was so well fauoured,
That a yong drabbe of him was enamoured, Who sayde vnto him that it was a great shame For him to marie such an olde beldame: And thus this yong drabbe my husband entised, To whom she doeth hope right shortly to be maried. But chad rather the yong whore were quicke at the deuill Than she should haue my husband, my sweet heart and iewell. My loue in my youth was neuer so feruent As it is on my sweeteheart, nowe at this present: Shall I neuer busse my sweete heart agayne, Nothing in the worlde would make me so fayne. Sinne. ¶ Goope with a gaulde backe come vp to supper, Gylle my olde mare must haue a newe crupper: A meeter mariage then this did I neuer see, For she is not past foure score yeres elder then he. Mo. croote. ¶ I wishe but one night with him for to lye, Ohe, he would make me looke yong by and by. Sinne. ¶ When I was a boye it was an olde saying, That an olde sacke would lacke much clouting and patching. Oh, it doeth mother Croote much good to haue her bones ratteled, And especially by her louer, and then her minde were setteled: When you be with your husbande you wilbe as good as a charme, If my wife were of your age, he would do her litle harme. Mo. croote. ¶ Yea, but he is good in my bedde to keepe my backe warme, And nowe and then chill kisse him and clippe him in my arme: Therefore my Lord for your friend Moneys sake, That I may haue my husbande I pray you vndertake. Sinne. ¶ He is more meete your sonne then your husbande to be, Mo. croote. ¶ Yea, but the yonger he is, the better he is for me, Sinne. ¶ Yea, but you are the worse for him the elder you are, Therefore he will labour other and you for holydayes spare. I pray you my Lorde mother Croote helpe to speede, For of this yong man she standeth very great neede. Al for mon. ¶ A couple of false witnesses must therefore be hyred Which must saye they heard when you were betrothed, And then will he, nyll he, he must be compelled To forsake the other and to you to be maried. Mo. croote. ¶ There will no such be gotte my deare heart roote, Al for mon. ¶ Ynough for money I warrant you mother Croote. Mo. croote. ¶ Nowe Gods deare blessing light on that soote face of yours, Chaue taried to long by two or three howres. Nowe chill desire from hence to depart. Here mother Croote goeth foorth. Al for mon. ¶ Nowe farewell mother Croote, euen with all my heart. Sinne. ¶ Do you not see yonder, olde mother Croote Would as fayne be trode as a yonger pullet:
Howe will her husband do when he should kisse her, Her nose and her chinne meetes almost together. Oh, she wilbe a trimme bryde that day she is wedde, One would thinke she smyled if her teeth were in her head. Al for mon. ¶ I haue had this day a trimme sorte of sewters: Howe many sent I away with money in their purses? My purse is nowe full euen vnto the brinke: Nowe it is highe time for me to eate and drinke. Haue not I bene friendly to your grandfather money? All such as he sent, they were dispatched quickly. Sinne. ¶ Manie such dayes you may haue when you will, Whereby all your bagges and coffers may be full still. Al for mon. ¶ I entende againe shortly to sit in commission, I pray God I speede no worse then, then nowe I haue done. Here All for money goeth out. Sinne. ¶ Doo you not see howe all is for money, masters? He helpes to make good all wrong and crooked matters: He cares not though at length he go to the deuill, So that with money he may his bagges fill. His money brings him to pleasure, and pleasures sendes him to me, And I sende him to Damnation, and he sendes him to hell quickly. And when he is there he hath got a proper place, Let him crie while his heart akes, he shall haue no grace. Oh, it is a goodly house it is bigger then a grange, It passeth see simple for the tytle doeth neuer change: Therefore if any wilbe maried to my faire sonne Damnation They shalbe sure streight wayes thereof to haue possession. Therefore if any chaunce to marie my sonne hereafter, Let them not blame me for I haue tolde his behauiour: Before you proceede therefore in this mariage Wey well with your selfe the daunger and charge. It is nowe high time me thinkes to departe, Will none of you speake to comfort my hearte? I would haue sworne that you had bene more manerly, To matche my sonne with such I past not of a flye. My throate for want of drinke beginnes to be drie, Who is it that calles me to drinke some good ale, Forsoothe I wilbe with you by and by. It is Sir Laurence liuingles, twentie pounde to a nasle He will typle at it solemlie as long as it is stale. And the rather I thinke it is he because of his talke, For he saide before his going, that all the pottes should walke▪ Here the vyce goeth out.
Iudas commeth in like a damned soule, in blacke painted with flames of fire, and with a fear∣full vizard, & speaketh as foloweth. O wo, wo, that euer on the earth I liued, Wo be to that howre when I first was deliuered. My guiltie conscience prickes me day by day, Iudas I was called that dyd my master betray▪ I did see Christes miracles and heard his predication: Oh that I had had grace to be with the rest in saluation. I wanted Gods grace and his especiall fauour, Whereby I hanged my selfe and dyed in despaire. And nowe the time is past anie mercie to craue, One halfe houre to liue I would desire but to haue. Well it will not be, nothing will helpe me nowe, Where euer I do go Damnation doeth me followe. Wo worth that money, that euer it was made By which occasion my master was betrayed. But had I had grace to haue asked mercie therefore And repented my faulte as Peter did before, I should haue bene pardoned as other sumers be, And accounted no sinner, God will haue mercy, So that they aske mercie so long as they do liue, All which time he is readie their sinnes to forgiue. Wo therefore to me, and to all that haue so dyed, For without remedie nowe I am for euer damned. Here commeth in Diues with such like appa∣rell and vizard as Iudas hath, who spea∣keth as followeth. O what hath bellie pleasure brought mee vnto, To hell torments to a place of euerlasting wo. Wo, wo, and wo againe to me for euermore, That consumed so much on my selfe and nothing on the poore: Poore Lazarus was at my doore, whose hunger was so great That he therewith soone died not hauing for to eate. When I with all fine fare lyke a glutton was serued And like a greedie cormorant with belly full farced: Not suffring one morsel to Lazarus to be giuen, And yet was there more spoyled then an hundreth would eate certein. To feede the dogges therewith I was much better content, Or els some reliefe to him I would haue sent. The silie and dumme dogges did him more good then I, For they licked his sores, O wo therefore to me. And then he died full soone, whose death pleased God so well
That in Abrahams bosome he aye shall reste and dwell: And I then dyed also without any repentance, Whereby I haue got Gods wrath and heauie vengeance. For I am a damned soule for euer in torment and paine, My pleasures on the earth hath brought me to this gaine. And though the torments be so vehement and the firie flames so great, Yet I cannot haue a droppe of water to qenche and coole my heate. I denied poore Lazarus to giue him meate and foode, And nowe denyes me to helpe, or do me good. A woef change to me, to him it is not so, For he from paine to pleasure past, and I from weale to woe: For if I were on the earth as I was once before I would spare from my selfe and giue it to the poore. What am I the better nowe for all my ioye and pleasure? And what is he worse▪ nowe for all his payne and hunger? If hauing all my pleasure at the last I had bene saued, My former pleasures had bene vayne, none doth them there regard. And if in cruell tormentes all my life I had layne, Yet in respect they all are ioyes to this eternall payne. Damnation, Damnation is comming, wo to vs therefore, Alas, alas, that we had this foreseene before. Here commeth in Damnation. Damnation ¶ Come, come you wofull wights, t'is follie nowe to prate, To speake, complaine, or else of matters to debate: Away vnto that dolefull place whereas the deuill lyeth, The best cheere that you shall haue there, is grone and gnash of teeth. Here he speaketh to Iudas. Of money thou so greedie wast thy maister to betray, And after in dispayre thou madest thy selfe away. Here he speaketh to Diues. And thou diddest pamper vp thy gorge, and poore didst not regard, Wherefore thy last assured hope is hell for thy rewarde. Here he speaketh to Iudas. Where is nowe thy money, wherefore soldst thou thy master? Here he speaketh to Diues. Where is nowe thy fare wherein thou hadest thy pleasure You would not take heede whyle that you were ing, Therefore you must pay for it in hell without ending.
I thinke if on the earth you were aliue againe You would not from your pleasures for all this refraine: For the most part on the earth do liue so wickedly▪ That they thinke there is no hell to punishe sinne truely: In money they haue great loue, in pryde they do exceede, In gluttonie and lecherie their liues they do still leade. Iuda ¶ O if I were on the earth and were aliue againe I would be a spectacle to all that there remaine: O vaine loue of money, O most stinking pryde, The remembrance of such sinne I can not nowe abyde. Diues. ¶ If I had but one howre in fleshe and bloud to liue I would a thousand turne from sinne I certeinly beleeue. Wo worth the pleasures past that workes me nowe such care Whereby I am a damned soule, good folke of me beware. Damnation ¶ Away, away you wretched soules to hell you must needes go, And such as die as you haue , shall dwell with you also. Here Damnacion driues them out before him, and they shall make a pitiefull noyse. ¶ Here commeth in Godly admonition. Godly ad∣monition. What heart but must lament To heare the ruful dolour of those two damned wights? What harde and stonie heart but will hereat repent, And pray continually, yea both dayes and nights. Who dies without repētance thus damnatiō them dites. Therefore happie are they what trouble soeuer they haue Which trust and die in Iesus Christ through whom God will them saue. Here haue you had inordate loue Which man hath to money although it worke his wo: But such as haue any grace, this will them stirre and moue To cast their loue from money and other pleasures also For feare they dwell with the deuill, their cruell and mortall foe▪ To late then to repent as Iudas and Diues did There is no helpe in hell for then Gods mercie is hid. Therefore I am come, called Godly Admonition, Warning you to repent before your breathe be gone, For feare you bring your selfe to endles damnation: But then there is no hope although you crie and grone, Therefore howe happie are they that haue time to make their moue. Nowe cast away your pryde and also the loue of money, For feare you shalt not when you would, as lately you did see. Vertue. ¶ I am to the godly a precious iewell and vertue, Who can without me vertue be in good fauour? Humilitie. ¶ Humilitie, or Clemencie is my name truely, Blessed (sayth Christ) are the meeke, for they shall obteyne mercy: We may learne Humilitie of Christ our master and head, Who bare his crosse meekely, whereon he was killed.
Charitie. ¶ Who can liue without Charitie to Gods honour and glorie▪ Who without me can die in Gods fauour? Charitie is enemie to all hatred and furie: I cause the riche to helpe the needie and the poore. Godly ad∣monition. ¶ For that you are all  the especiall giftes of God, Without whom none can be a perfect and godly wight: Let vs praye therefore the sinnes that God forbode We may cast away with speede, most wicked in his sight. The inordinate loue of money and pryde in which manie delite, And all other sinnes which leade vs to damnation And that we repent and die in Christ whereby we haue saluation▪ Vertue. ¶ Let vs praye for the Queenes Maiestie our soueraigne gouernour▪ That she may raigne quietly according to Gods will: Whereby she may suppresse vyce and set foorth Gods glorie and honour▪ And as she hath begon godly, so to continue still. Humilitie. ¶ Let vs not forget to praye for the honourable Counsell, That they mainteyne Iustice and all wrong to expell. Charitie. ¶And all the high Estates and Commons of this region. With all that be here present, to haue euerlasting saluation. FINIS, {per} T. Lupton. ❧ IMPRINTED AT London, by Roger Warde and Richard Mundee, dwelling at Temple Barre.
