17235 99855271 20757
The poore man payes for all. This is but a dreame which here shall insue: But the Author wishes his words were not true. To the tune of In slumbring sleepe I lay. AS I lay musing all alone, vpon my resting bed, Full many a cogitation did come into my head: And waking from my sléepe, I my dreame to mind did call, Me thought I saw before mine eyes, how poore men payes for all. A many obiects did behold, in this my frightfull Dreame, A part of them I will vnfold: and though my present Theame Is but a fancy you may say, yet many things not fall Too true alas: for at this day the poore man payes for all. Me thought I saw (which caus'd my care) what I wish were a fable, That poore men still inforced are to pay more then they are able: Me thought I heard them wéeping say, their substance was but small, For rich men will beare all the sway, and poore men pay for all. Me thought I saw how wealthy men did grind the poore mens faces, And greedily did prey on them, not pittying their cases: They make them toyle and labour sore for wages too too small: The rich men in the Tauernes rore: but poore men pay for all. Me thought I saw an Vsurer old, walke in his For-sur'd gowne, Whose wealth and eminence controld the most men in the Towns: His wealth he by extortion got, and rose by others fall, He had what his hands earned not, but poore men pay for all. Me thought I saw a Courtier proud goe swaggering along, That vnto any scarce allow'd the office of his tongue: Me thought, wert not for bribery, his Peacocks plumes would fail, He russles out in brauery, but poore men pay for all. Me thought I met (sore discontent) some poore men on the way, I asked one whither he went so fast and could not stay? Quoth he, I must goe take my Lease, or else another shall: My Landlords riches doe increase, but poore men pay for all.
The second part. To the same tune▪ ME thought I saw most stately wiues, goe ietting on the way, That liue delightfull idle liues, and go in garments gay, That with the moon their shapes doe change or else thei'l chide and brawle, Thus women goe like monsters strange, and poore men pay for all, Me thought I was i'th Countrey, where poore men take great paines, And labour hard continually, onely for-rich mens gaines, Like th'Israelites in Egypt, the poore are kept in thrall: The task-masters are playing kept. but poore men pay for all. Me thought I saw poore Tradesmen ith'City and else-where, Whom rich men kéepe as heads-men, in bondage care and feare: Thei'l haue them worke for what they list, thus weakest goe to the wall, The rich men eate and drinke the best, but poore men pay for all. Me thought I saw two Lawyers base one to another say. We haue had in hand this poore mans Case, a twelue-month and a day. And yet wéel not contented be to let the matter fall, Beare thou with me & Ile-beare with thée, while poore men pay for all, Me thought I saw a red-nose Oast, as fat as he could wallow, Whose carkasse, if it should be roast, would drop seuen stone of tallow, He growes rich out of measure, with filling measure small, He liues in mirth and pleasure, but poore men pay for all. And so likewise the Brewer stout, the Chaudler and the Baker, The Mault-man also without doubt, and the Tobacco-taker, Though they be proud and stately growne, and beare themselues so tall, Yet to the world it is well knowne, that poore men pay for all. Euen as the mighty Fishes still, doe féed vpon the lesse; So rich men, might they haue their will, would on the poore men ceaze: It is a prouerbe old and true, that weakest goe toth' wall, Rich men can drinke till th' sky looke blue, but poore men pay for all. But now, as I before did say, this is but a Dreame indéed, Though all dreames proue not true, some m hap right as I doe reade. And if that any come to passe, I doubt this my Dreame shall: For still tis found too true a case, that poore men pay for all. FINIS. Printed at London for H. G.
