17554 99847630 12680
A DECLARATION OF THE QVEENE, Mother of the most CHRISTIAN KING. Containing the reasons of her depar∣ture out of the Low-Countreys; And disadvowing a Manifest, set out in her Name upon the same Argument. LONDON, Printed by John Raworth for  and Thomas Warren, and are to be sold at the  of the White-horse In Saint . 1639.
A Declaration of the Queene, Mother of the most Christian KING, Containing the reasons of her departure out of the Low-Countreys, and disadvowing a Manifest, set out in her name, upon the same Argument. PErsons of my quality, being placed on the Theatre of the World, and their lives expo∣sed to publike view; by how much their Estate is the grea∣ter, by so much their liberty is the lesse. For although they are not tyed in Conscience, to give an ac∣count of their Actions to any but to God, who is the sole Judge of their duty; yet, their Honor inforceth them many times to lay open, even their secret thoughts to men, who are the Judges of their reputation. If then my arrivall in Flanders heretofore, hath given so much occasion of discourse to all Chri∣stendome, my departure lately from thence hath caused little lesse throughout all Europe. But as ill Fortune hath as little, wherewithall to re∣compence
just prayses, as good hath too much to reward flatteries; The misery of mine in either time hath beene cause, that more interessed tongues and pennes have beene found to blame me, then charitable to defend me. So I understand now from all parts, that they endeavour by divers meanes to condemne the designe and manner of my departure out of the Low-Countreys, as well by letters, written in severall places, as also by memorialls, relations and Gazetts, published and dispersed, and by manifests, set forth even under my owne name; a∣mongst which one is come to my hand in Print, a piece indeed, which seemes to be to my Justifi∣cation; But in effect, tends not but to trouble and imbroyle me on all fides. Briefly, I per∣ceive no Imaginary thing omitted, to give sini∣ster Interpretations to my retreat. Now, as I have cause to feare, that so many devises may prevaile against the sincerity of my intentions, and inclinations: and to the end, that this pretended Manifest, which passeth for my owne, may not hereafter be of any force in this nature, especially having been publikely seene in my hands, which might serve as a tacit Ap∣probation of it, if I should dissemble it: e thought it but due to my reputation, and true In∣terests, to set forth this publike Declaration, containing the disadvowing of that piece, and
such like, if there be any to be found, together with the principall motives, which made me re∣tire from the Low-Countreys, the occasions which made me passe into England, and the reso∣lutions wherein hitherto I remaine, that there may be no cause left of such various discourse to my disadvantage. I desire then that every one may know, That when I took Flanders for my refuge, I look't up∣on that place, but as a neighbour Port, whereto I repaired to avoid the tempest, that then disor∣dered me; and not as a Countrey I would have chosen to have remained or setled in, my obli∣gation to France, being too strict to admit of such a thought. I would likewise have it knowne, that in all the time I sojourned in Flanders, as well during the Peace, as since the rupture betwixt the two Crownes, my principall cares, have tended to my reconciliation with the King my Sonne, and I never concealed this desire, which even my Sonne in Law the King of Spaine did ever pro∣fesse to esteeme both just and commendable. It is true, that having for the space of seaven yeeres in vaine laboured an accommodation, and now discovering by advise of the wiser, neither passionate, nor interessed, and even by reason and experience, that after all possible care im∣ployed,
it hath rather beene reconded then ad∣vanced; And that the place, wherein I remained seemed a perpetuall obstacle to all encounters, which might lead toward it, as well by reason of the breach continued, as also for other power∣full Considerations: At last, I found it would be most agreeable with my affaires, to live (at least for a time) in some place free from Suspition; And the Season being then proper for drinking the Spaw Waters, when I first entred into this deliberation, I resolved to make some stay in the Country of Liege, a place Newtrall, hoping thereby, to finde as well remedy for my indis∣positions, as expedients for the advancement of my reconciliation. This was my cleere Intention without any re∣solution concerning my returne into Flanders; And to speake the truth, this incertainity where∣in I found my selfe, hindred me from communi∣cating the particulars of my designe to my Ne∣phew the Cardinall Infante; besides, his im∣ployments in the warres, held him at such a di∣stance from me at the time of my departure, that I could not have opportunity so much as to take my leave of him. Parting then from Brussells, I went directly to∣wards Liege, where the expectation of those people was as observable as the applause, where∣with I was received in all the Cities of that Do∣minion.
And I have reason, to acknowledge an oblation to these Magistrates for the orders, they had given for my reception, wheresoever I was to stay. Neverthelesse, having before dispatch'd into Holland and other parts, to make provision for my security, during the time I stay∣ed in the Country of Liege; besides, foreseeing many difficulties in the safety of my abode there, I discovered that there would have beene yet more in my departure thence, if I should have beene necessitated to have left that place, so that finding all these accidents, as well by ad∣vice from such as I had employed abroad, as by the observations I made upon the place, where I was, and having yet free passage for Holland, I thought no time was to be lost in seeking some safe and quiet habitation which to me was then of most importance, considering my inconstant condition. So that for avoyding further hazard, I resolved presently to passe into England, as to the place of most security. But before I proceed further in this discourse, I must not omit the successe, wherewith it plea∣sed God to favour my voyage, which indeed was beyond all that I could desire. My Cousin, the prince of Orange, who met me at my very first entrance into the Country, received me in the Equipage, I was (which indeed might have made me unknowne) as if my adversity had served me for ornaments, and as if I had been in as great splendor as in my highest prosperity. And as for
the States, they did not entertaine me, as a Prin∣cesse of my condition, desiring passage, but ra∣ther as a triumphant King, comming to visite them, and impart his victories to them. And for my Cousin the Princesse of Orange, who accom∣panied me through all Holland, she lived with me so respectfully and obliegeingly, and made the Country and her houses wherein I lodged, so a∣greeable to me, as that I could have almost thought them my owne, had not my ill fortune already too much accustomed me to know, that they are no more mine. And as to the entertain∣ment given me by the King of Great Brittaine, my Sonne in Law, all that I can say of it, would but derogate from what was publikely seen, and my selfe must acknowledge: By His extraordi∣dinary magnificence at my entrance into London, he hath published the esteem he had of my Per∣son, by the cheerefulnesse appearing in his own Countenance, and in that of all his Subjects; he shewed how deare my presence was to him. But above all, I acknowledge the true friendship, which I read in his heart, the freenes of his pro∣ceeding, and the tender affections of the Queen my Daughter, towards me, which have few ex∣amples, and haue given so much ease to my pres∣sing afflictions, that it could not have been more, if God had sent an angel from heaven to comfort me. Insomuch, that I could not have had in all my voyage other occasion then of joy, if those things, which were prepared for my delight had
not likewise beene Subjects of my Sorrow: In that they made me thinke, that the late King, my lord, appeared yet living in my person in strange Countrys, but in effect his very memory seemed dead for my sake in his owne Kingdome. Now to returne to my discourse; I must say, that having runne over all that hath past in this my retreat from Flanders, I cannot thinke, that a∣ny can charge me with neglect of my reputation for my diligence in the good of my affaires, nor that it will be hard to perswade such, as will in∣differently judge thereof, that in this Retreat I have done any thing, either in Circumstances or Consequences, more, then all the time I sojour∣ned in the Low-Countries, which may be repug∣nant to gratitude: And I adde, that I had done nothing unseemly, if, when I had left the terri∣tories of Spain, I had remained in Holland, though it be an Enemies Country; because in this Occa∣sion I had not sought Holland, as an Enemy to Spaine, but as an Allie and Confederate with France. And this quality of Holland, which was then advantagious to me, was not hurtfull to Spaine, in profiting me, So that remaining in Holland, I should not have prejudiced Spaine, in doing my selfe good. And as for the bruites spread abroad, that I went into Holland to doe ill offices to Spaine, and that some of my people by order from me, had
given up to my Cousin the Prince of Orange the Mappe of sundry places of the Low-Countries; It is a rumour so ridiculous, that it deserves no answer but of scorne. Surely it had been much to my credit, by this example to have demonstra∣ted to my Cousin the Prince of Orange, who re∣ceived me so courteously, how well I used my hosts when I was gone from them, and besides, in giving him a good impression of my integrity, I had also made him know that I had a better of his providence, judging it such, as that he had not care enough to provide himselfe of a Platt∣forme of all the places of the Low-Countries. Truly this would have passed for a faire Com∣pliment at my arrivall. And this rumor is not more contemptible then another quite contrary is false, savoring of a ma∣licious Invention, That I should go into Holland to treat of the Truce, or to practise against that State, and against my Cousin the Prince of O∣range, under the pretence of hospitality. But time having made appear even to the most simple, that these rumours were altogether false, and reason having made the wisest apprehend, that they had no resemblance of truth: I will re∣ly upon that which is of more weight, and for Justification of all my designes, declare ingeni∣ously, what were the motives of my resolution, in regard both of France and Spaine, whilst I remai∣ned
in the Low-Countreys, and, why I retired from thence. All the time I passed in Flanders, I kept this Temper, that my affections, as well as my beha∣viour, were al waies Neutrall in respect of Pub∣lique affaires betweene France and Spaine. The assistance which I received from Spaine on one side, and the Obligations, which I had to France on the other side, obliged me to carry my selfe in that Manner. And to speake cleerely, I should have held it as unjust, whilest I remained in the Dominions of Spaine, and lived at their expence, to take part with France, to the prejudice of Spain, as contrary to my owne inclination to have ta∣ken part with Spaine to the prejudice of France. And howsoever that pretended Manifest ag∣gravating the complaints, which it makes under my name of Spaine, doth artificially insinuate, that I have borne much affection to the good of their affaires, which is but a hidden venome, to perplex me on the part of France, The truth is, that Spain in that point hath no more obligation to me then that I have ever passionately longed for that Union and Concord between those two Crowns, whereof in former times I had laid the foundations by a double Alliance. And that be∣sides I have alwayes endeavoured since the rup∣ture, to contribute all I was able to the reesta∣blishment of Peace.
God forbid, I should desire to pay the new obligations, I have to Spaine, to the prejudice of those ancient bonds, which I have contracted with France, it is to that I have vowed my first affections, And it is that, which shall for ever keepe them with the ashes of my deceased Lord. But God forbid likewise, that for any advan∣tage I might have from France, it should ever en∣ter into my thoughts, to disadvow the Obliga∣tions I have to Spaine. I know too well, that it is the utmost degree of ingratitude to denie be∣nefits received; I am so farre from that, that I will alwayes proclaime them with advantage. And I confesse it troubles me that I have no o∣ther meanes to acquit my selfe then on all occa∣sions (as on this) to acknowledge the subsistence, which the King of Spaine my Sonne in Law gave me seven yeers together, and the proofs of Cor∣diall love, which I received from the Queen my Daughter, the care which my late sister the In∣fanta had of my person: who besides did no lesse instruct me with her vertues, then comfort me with her good offices: And lastly the great cour∣tesie and good will of my Nephew the Cardinal Infante: All which, are effects which I referre principally to the King of Spaine my Sonne in Law, to whose intentions my Nephew and my deceased Sister, the Infanta, have but joyned their naturall inclinations.
Moreover I am farre from weakening these publike testimonies (which I desire to confirme in all places) by making complaint against any of his Officers, and herein I am injured by the Authors of that pretended Manifest, in their ex∣posing false ones to the view of the world, un∣der my name; On the contrary it imports me, that it be knowne (as it is true) that in case there had been any disrespect of me through the fault of any Officers in Flanders (which yet would have been contrary to the orders of the King of Spaine my Sonne in Law) the good entertainment I received from the Master would in my opinion have covered the errour of the Servants, And al∣though peradventure it would not have taken a∣way my ressentiment of it, yet discretion would have taught me to have concealed it. Neither shall it ever be sayd, that any such thing falls from me, But rather expressions of the entire satisfaction I received from the King of Spain my Sonne in Law, And at my departure from the Hague, I dispatched an expresse to my Nephew the Cardinall Infante, to testifie to him my Acknowledgements and to let him under∣stand my intention of comming out of the Low-Countries: which is the same wherein this day I persist, and which I will cleerely expresse to conclude this Declaration. My end neither was nor is in all these procee∣dings
any other then my reconciliation with the King my Son: To the effecting of which, those meanes, which would seeme hard and trouble∣some to persons of my quality; shall be pleasant and easie to me. Nor doe I accompt it of the number of those painefull means, to affect those whom he honors with his principall trust: I will do that willingly though they give me no cause: and am resolved to omit nothing (no not that which I shall know to be in vaine) to gaine the friendship of the King my Sonne. It would be a happines precious to me, yet due by so many just Titles that I hold my selfe as blameles for the pretending to it, as innocent of the least ambition thereby to partake of the Go∣vernment. Nor should I pardon my selfe if I had any temptation of that nature, and withall, if I held not that authority as unusefull for my par∣ticular happines, as I esteem the love of the King my Sonne, necessary to my present contentment. And it will be easie to beleeve, that I am of this opinion, if the present may be judged by what is past, and to that end it may be conside∣red how I behaved my selfe during my regency, wherein I made use of it, and with what Spirit I governed, when through my misfortune and that of France, in loosing the late King my Lord, I was ingaged to imploy my care and diligence, to uphold the publique affaires, which were
then in eminent danger: And when the Com∣mon Vote and consent of the states of the King∣dome had committed to my care, the fortune of the State, I think I so forgot my own, that even Slander and my enemies together, never drea∣med to lay to my charge, that I had any thought of making Advantage of that Authority: Nor that Ambition or Interest had upon any occasi∣on a Vote in my private Councells. As for the former, it cannot be doubted, since it is cleere, that I never sought in all my Regency other glo∣ry, then to leave the Kingdome as quiet and flo∣rishing under the government of a woman (not∣withstanding all the troubles, that then come upon it) as one of the greatest Kings of the world saw it at his death, after twelve yeeres of setled peace. And as for Interest, I dare boldly say, without offence to modesty (and France cannot without ingratitude deny it) that I so ordered the Treasure of my Son, that in preserving it, I had care of it, as of my owne; but in expending it, I considered it as the goods of another. So that at the end of my labours, there is nothing left me, but the quality of a Mother, which God himselfe cannot take from me. These actions, whereof the publique monu∣ments themselves will be for ever witnesses, are the only Trophees, which I have erected to my Memory. These Actions, I say, are the only Ci∣tadells, which I have rais'd to my defence and
have built in the heart of the King my Sonne, in that of the French, and in my owne Conscience. But certainly not to deceive my selfe, it is upon this last foundation, whereon I settle my princi∣pall hopes, and in all accidents, my most solide satisfaction. And lastly, although it should hap∣pen by the secret reasons of Gods Providence, that the rest of my days should passe in disgrace, and though I should never have before my death the comfort of seeing the King my Sonne, yet I will not leave to give him, absent, as now I doe, my continuall blessings. And I will finish my life, as I now end this Declaration; Besee∣ching God that these my blessings may be as ef∣fectuall to him, as if I had been ever favourably treated. Signed Marie. and underneath is written, This Declaration hath beene read publikely before the whole Court of the Queen, in presence of her Majestie. And after it was Signed with her own hand and by her commandement, the Originall remaines in the hand of the Vicount. FABRONI.
