17878 99847926 12994
THE HIGHE & MIGHTIE PR. CHARLES PR. OF WALES D. OF CORN: YOR: ALB: & ROTHS: MARQ. OF ORM:&c
CIVITATIS AMOR. The Cities Loue. An entertainement by water, at Chelsey, and White-hall. At the ioyfull receiuing of that Illustrious Hope of Great Britaine, the High and Mighty CHARLES, To bee created Prince of Wales, Duke of Corne∣wall, Earle of Chester, &c. Together with the Ample Order and Solemnity of his Highnesse creation, as it was celebra∣ted in his Maiesties Palace of White-hall on Monday, the fourth of Nouember. 1616. As also the Ceremonies of that Ancient and Honourable Order of the Knights of the Bath; And all the Triumphs showne in honour of his Royall Creation. LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Okes for Thomas Archer, and are to be sold at his shop in Popes-head-Pallace. 1616.
The Ample Order and Solemnity of Prince CHARLES his Creation HIS Maiestie, as well to shew the bountie of his affection towards his Royall Sonne, as to settle in the hearts of his louing subiects, a liuely im∣pression of his Kingly care, for continuance of the hap∣py and peaceable gouerne∣ment of his Land in his issue and posteritie, ha∣uing determined to inuest his Princely High∣nesse, with those Titles and Solemnities which the former Princes of his Realme haue vsually beene adorned; it seemed fittest, both in regard of his Highnesse yeares, shewing the rare proofes of promising heroicall vertues, and also that it would bee a gladnesse most gratefull and acceptable to the Common-wealth, to haue the
Solemnities thereof royally performed: To the effecting of which the L. Maior and Aldermen of the Citie of London, with the seuerall Com∣panies, Honourably furnished and appointed, and Marsh'alld in faire and comely order, (both by the care and industry of Mr. Nicholas Leate, Citizen and Marchant of London, and one of the chiefe Captaines for the Citie; as also by the well obserued and deseruing paines of Maister Tho∣mas Sparro, Water-Bayly, made for that day Marshall for the water Triumphs) were ready at∣tending, with a great Traine, and costly enter∣tainement, to receiue his Highnesse at Chelsie, their Barges richly deckt with Banners, Strea∣mers, and Ensignes, and sundry sorts of lowd sounding instruments aptly placed amongst them; And for his Graces first entertainment, which was neere Chelsie, A Personage figuring London sitting vpon a Sea-Vnicorne, with sixe Tritons sounding before her, accompanied both with Neptune and the two Ri∣uers Thamesis and Dee, at his first appearing, speakes as followeth.
The Citties Loue The Entertainment by Water at Chelsey and White-hall. At Chelsey. A Personage figuring London, sitting vpon a Sea-Vnicorne, with sixe Tritons sounding before her, accompanyed thither with Neptune, and the two Riuers Thamesis and Dee. At the first appearing of the Prince, speakes as followeth: London NEptune! since thou hast beene at all this paines, Not onely with thy Tritons to supply mee, But art thy selfe come from thy vtmost Maines, To feast vpon that Ioy that's now so nigh mee, To make our Loues the better vnderstood, Silence thy Watry Subiect, this small Floud.
Neptune giues action toward Thamesis, and speakes, BY the timely Ebbes and Flowes, That make thee famous to all those That must obserue thy pretious Tides That issue from our wealthy sides: Not a murmure, not a sound, That may this Ladies Voyce confound, And Tritons, who by our commanding power Attend vpon the Glory of this Hower, To do it seruice, and the Citie Grace, Be silent, till wee waue our siluer Mace. London. ANd you our honour'd Sonnes, whose Loyalty, Seruice, and zeale, shall bee exprest of mee, Let not your louing ouer-greedy Noyse, Beguile you of the Sweetnesse of your Ioyes. My wish ha's tooke effect, for ne'r was knowne A greater Ioy, and a more silent one. Then turning to the Prince, thus speakes. TReasure of hope, and Iewell of mankind, Richer, no Kingdomes peace did euer see; Adorn'd in Titles, but much more in minde, The loues of many thousands speake in mee:
Who, from that blessing of our peacefull store Thy Royall Father, hast receiu'd most free, Honours that wooed thy Vertues long before, And e're thy Time were capable of thee: Thou, whose most earely goodnesse fixt in youth Do's promise comfort to the length of Time, As wee on earth measure heauens workes by truth, And things which Naturall reason cannot clime: So, when wee looke into the Vertuous Aime Of thy Diuine Addiction, wee may deeme By Rules of Grace, and Principles of Fame, What worth will bee, now in so high esteeme, And so betimes pursued; which thought vpon, Neuer more cause this Land had to reioyce, But chiefly I, the Citie, that has knowen More of this good then any, and more choise: What a Faire Glorious Peace for many yeares, Has sung her sweete calmes to the hearts of men? Enricht our homes, extinguish't forraine feares, And at this houre beginnes her Hymnes agen: Liue long, and happy, Glory of our daies, And thy sweete Time markt with all faire presages, Since heauen is pleasde in thy blest life to raise, The Hope of these, and Ioy of after Ages. Sound Tritons, lift our loues vp with his Fame, Proclaim'd as far as Honour ha's a Name. Neptune—Sound—On—
The Entertainement at White-hall. This Personage, figuring London (with the sixe Tritons sounding before, Neptume, and the two Riuers) being arriu'd at White-hall, where attend the Princes Landing, the Figures of two sacred Deities, Hope and Peace thus speaks. London. HOpe! now behold the Fulnesse of thy Good, Which thy sicke comforts haue expected long, And thou sweete Peace the Harmony of this floud, Looke vp, and see the Glory of thy Song. Hope leaning her Breast vpon a siluer Anchor, at∣tended with foure Virgins all in white, hauing siluer Oares in their hands, thus Answeres. Hope. FAire and most Famous Citie, thou hast wak't me, From the sad slumber of disconsolate Feare, Which at the Musick of thy Voyce forsak't me, And now begin to see my Comforts cleare, Now ha's my Anchor her firme hold agen, And in my blest and calme Securitie,
The expectations of all faithfull men, Haue their full fruites being satisfyed in mee. This is the place that I'le cast Anchor in, This, Honours Hauen, the Kings Royall Court, Heere will I fasten all my ioyes agen, Where all deseruers and deserts resort: And may I neuer change this happy shoare, Till all be chang'd neuer to alter more. Then Peace sitting on a Dolphin, with her sacred Quire, sings this song following. The Song of Peace. VVElcome, oh welcome Spring of Ioy & Peace, Borne to be honour'd, and to giue encrease To those that waite vpon thy Graces, Behold the many thousand faces, That make this amorous Floud, Looke like a mouing Wood, Vsurping all her Cristall spaces. 'Mongst which The Cities Loue is first, Whose expectations sacred thirst, Nothing truely could allay, But such a Prince, and such a day. Welcome, oh welcome, all Faire Ioyes attend thee, Glorie of life, to safety we commend thee. Tho. Middleton.
Prince Charles his Creation. THe dayes Triumph ended, to the great Honour of the Ci∣ty, and content of his High∣nesse, who out of the good∣nesse of his loue, gaue the Lord Maior and Aldermen many thankes. On Monday following, the Lords and Peeres of the Realme being all as∣sembled at White-hall, his Highnesse then pro∣ceeded in this maner to his Creation. First went the Trumpets, then the Heralds and Officers of Armes in their rich Coates; next followed the Knights of the Bath, beeing sixe and twentie in number, apparelled in long robes of purple Sattin, lined with white Taffata; then sir William Segar Knight, aliâs Garter, princi∣pall King of Armes, bearing the Letters Patents, the Earle of Sussex the Purple Robes, the Traine borne by the Earle of Huntington, the Sword by the Earle of Rutland, the Ring by the Earle of Derby, the Rodde by the Earle of Shrewes∣bury, the Cappe and Coronet by the Duke of
Lenox, Lord Steward, his Princely Highnesse supported by the Earles of Suffolke and Not∣tingham, came bare-headed, and so entred the great Hall, where the King was set in his royall Throane, and the whole State of the Realme in their Order; the Prince made lowe obeisance to his Maiestie three times, and after the third time, when hee was come neere to the King, hee kneeled downe on a rich Pillow or Cushion, whilest sir Ralph Winwood principall Secretarie, read his Letters Patents: then his Maiestie, at the reading of the words of Inuestment, put the Robes vpon him, and girded on the Sword, inuested him with the Rodde and Ring, and set the Cappe and Coronet on his head. With which Ceremonie the Creation being accom∣plished, the King arose, and went vp to Din∣ner; but the Prince, with his Lords, dined in the Hall, and was serued with great State and Mag∣nificence, accompanied at his Table with diuers great Lords, as the Earle of Suffolke Lord Trea∣surer, the Earle of Arundell Lord Marshall, the Earle of Nottingham Lord Admirall, the Duke of Lenox Lord Steward, the Earle of Pen∣brooke Lord Chamberlaine, the Erles of Shrews∣bury, Darby, Rutland, and Sussex, the Prince sit∣ting in a Chaire at the vpper end, and the rest in distance about foure yards from him, one ouer∣against another, in their degrees, all which were those that were employed in seuerall Offices of Honour about his Royall Creation.
At another Table in the same Rowme on the left hand of the Prince, sate the Knights of the Bath, all on one side, and had likewise great seruice and attendance. About the middest of Dinner, sir William Segar Knight, aliâs Garter, principall King of Armes, with the rest of the Kings Heralds and Pursuvants of Armes, ap∣proached the Princes Table, and with a lowde and audible voyce, proclaimed the Kings Stile, in Latine, French and English thriee; and the Princes in like manner, twice: then the Trum∣pets sounding, the second Course came in; and Dinner done, that dayes Solemnitie ceased. At night, to crowne it with more heroicall honour, fortie worthie Gentlemen of the No∣ble Societies of Innes of Court, being tenne of each house, euery one appoynted in way of ho∣norable Combate, to breake three Staues, three Swords, and exchange ten blowes apeece, whose names (for their worthinesse) I commend to Fame, beganne thus each to encounter other. And not to wrong the sacred Antiquitie of anie of the Houses, their names are heere set downe in the same order as they were presented to his Maiestie; viz. Of the Middle Temple, Maister Strowd. Maister Izord. Grayes Inne, Maister Courthop. Maister Calton. Lincolnes Inne, Master Skinner. Master Windham Inner Temple, Master Crow. Master Vernon. Middle Temple, Master Argent. Mast. Glascocke.
Grayes Inne, Maister Wadding. Maister St-Iohn. Lincolnes Inne, Master Griffin. Master Fletcher. Inner Temple, Maister Parsons. Maister Brocke. Middle Temple, M. Bentley senior. Maister Peere. Grayes Inne, Maister Selwyn. Maister Paston. Lincolnes Inne, Maester Selwyn. Master Clinch. Inner Temple, Master Chetwood. M. Smalman. Middle Temple, Ma. Bentley iunior. Ma. Bridges. Grayes Inne, Maister Couert. Maister Fulkes. Lincolnes Inne, Maister Iones. Maister Googe. Inner Temple, Maister Wilde. Maister Chaue. Middle Temple, Master Wansted. Ma. Goodyeere. Grayes Inne, Maister Burton. Maister Bennet. Lincolnes Inne, Master Hitchcocke. Ma. Neuill. Inner Temple, Master Littleton. Master Treuer. On Wednesday the sixt day of Nouember, to giue greater lustre and honour to this Triumph and Solemnitie, in the presence of the King, Queene, Prince, and Lords, foureteene right Honorable and Noble personages, whose names heereafter follow, graced this dayes Magnifi∣cence, with Running at the Ring; viz. The Duke of Lenox Lord Steward. Earle of Penbroke L. Chamberlaine. Earle of Rutland. Earle of Dorset. Earle of Montgomery. Vicount Villiers. Lord Clifford.
Lord Walden. Lord Mordant. Sir Thomas Howard. Sir Robert Rich. Sir Gilbert Gerrard. Sir William Cauendish. Sir Henry Rich. Hauing thus briefly described the manner of his Highnesse Creation, with the honourable Seruice shewne to the Solemnitie, both by the Lords and Gentlemen of the Innes of Court, I should haue set a Period, but that the Knights of the Bath, being a principall part and orna∣ment of this sacred Triumph, I can not passe them ouer without some remembrance: there∣fore thus much out of the Note of Directions, from some of the principall Officers of Armos, and some obseruation of credite, concerning the Order and Ceremonies of the Knighthood. The Lords and other that were to receiue the Honourable Order of the Bath, repayred on Satterday the second of Nouember to the Par∣liament house at Westminster, and there in the afternoone heard Euening Prayer, obseruing no other Ceremonie at that time, but onely the He∣ralds going before them in their ordinarie ha∣bites from thence to King Henrie the seauenths Chappell at Westminster, there to beginne their warrefare, as if they would employ their seruice for God especially; from whence, after
Seruice ended, they returned into the Cham∣ber they were to suppe in: their supper was pre∣pared all at one Table, and all sate vpon one side of the same, euery mā hauing an Escutcheon of his Armes placed ouer his head, and certaine of the Kings Officers being appoynted to attend them. In this manner hauing taken their repast, seuerall beds were made ready for their lodging in another rowme hard by, after the same man∣ner, all on one side; their beddes were Pallats, with Couerings, Testers, or Canopies of Red Say, but they vsed no Curtaines. The Knights in the meane while were with∣drawne into the Bathing Chamber, which was the next rowme to that which they supped in; where, for each of them was prouided a seuerall bathing Tubbe, which was lined both within and without, with white Linnen, and couered with Red Say: wherein, after they haue said their prayers, and commended themselues to God, they bathe themselues, that thereby they might be put in minde, to be pure in bodie and soule from thenceforth; and after the Bath, they be∣tooke themselues to their rest. Earely the next morning they were awakened with Musicke, and at their vprising, inuested in their Hermites habites, which was a Gowne of Gray Cloth girded close, and a Hoode of the same, and a linnen Coife vnderneath, and an Hankercher hanging at his girdle, cloth Stoc∣kings soaled with Leather, but no Shooes; and
thus apparelled, their Esquiers Gouernors, with the Heralds wearing the Coates of Armes, and sundry sorts of winde-Instruments before them, they proceede from their lodging, the meanest in order formost, as the nighr before, vntill they came to the Chappell, where after Seruice en∣ded, their Oath was ministred vnto them by the Earle of Arundell Lord Marshall, and the Earle of Penbroke Lord Chamberlaine, in a solemne and ceremonious manner, all of them standing foorth before their stalles, and at their coming out making low reuerence towards the Altar, by which the Commissioners sate, then were they brought vp by the Heralds by two at once, the chiefest first, and so the rest, till all succes∣siuely had receiued their Oath, which in effect was this; That aboue all things they should seek the honour of God, and maintenance of true Religion, loue their Soueraigne, serue their Countrie, helpe Maydens, Widdowes, and Orphans, and (to the vtmost of their power) cause Equity and Iustice to be obserued. This day, whilest they were yet in the Chap∣pell, wine and sweet meates were brought them, and they departed to their Chamber to be dis∣robed of their Hermites weedes, and were reuested in Roabes of Crimson Taffata, im∣plying they should be Martiall men, the Robes lined with white Sarcenet, in token of Sincerity, hauing white Hattes on their heads, with white Feathers, white Bootes on their legges, and
white Gloues tied vnto the strings of their Man∣tles: all which performed, they mount on horse∣backe, the Saddle of blacke leather, the Arson white, Stirrop leathers blacke, gilt, the pecto∣rall of blacke leather, with a crosse Paty of Sil∣uer thereon, and without a Crupper, the Bridle likewise blacke, with a crosse Paty on the Fore∣head or Frontlet: each Knight betweene his two Esquiers well apparrelled, his Footeman at∣tending, and his Page riding before him, carry∣ing his Sword with the hiltes vpward, in a white leather Belt without Buckles or Studdes, and his Spurres hanging thereon. In this order ranked, euery man according to his degree, the best or chiefest first, they rode faire and softly towards the Court, the Trum∣pets sounding, and the Heralds all the way ri∣ding before them being come to the Kings hall, the Marshall meetes them, who is to haue their horses, or else 100. s. in money for his Fee: then conducted by the Heralds, and others ap∣poynted for that purpose, his Maiestie sitting vnder his Cloth of Estate, gaue to them their Knighthood in this manner: First, the principall Lord that is to receiue the Order, comes, led by his two Esquiers, and his Page before him, bearing his Sword and Spurs, and kneeleth downe before his Maiestie, the Lord Chamberlain takes the Sword of the page, and deliuers it to the King, who puts the Belt o∣uer the necke of the Knight, aslope his breast,
placing the Sword vnder his left Arme: the se∣cond Nobleman of the chiefe about the King, puts on his Spurres, the right Spurre first; and so is the ceremony performed. In this sort Lord Maltreuers sonne and heire to the Erle of Arun∣dell, Lord Marshall, which was the principall of this number, being first created, the rest were all consequently knighted alike: And when the solemnitie thereof was fully finished, they all re∣turned in order as they came, sauing some small difference, in that the yongest or meanest knight went now formost, & their Pages behinde them. Coming backe to the Parliament house, their dinner was ready prepared in the same rowme, and after the fashion as their supper was the night before; but being set, they were notto taste of any thing that stood before them, but with a modest carriage, and gracefull abstinence, to refraine: diuers kindes of sweet Musicke soun∣ding the while; and after a conuenient time of sitting, to arise, and withdraw themselues, lea∣uing the Table so furnished to their Esquiers and Pages. About fiue of the clocke in the afternoone, they rode againe to Court, to heare Seruice in the Kings Chappell, keeping the same order they did at their returne from thence in the mor∣ning, euery Knight riding betweene his two Es∣quiers, and his Page following him. At their entrance into the Chappell, the He∣ralds conducting them, they make a solemne re∣uerence,
the yongest Knight beginning, the rest orderly ensuing, and so one after another take their standing before their Stalls, where all be∣ing placed, the eldest Knight maketh a second Reuerence, which is followed to the yongest, and then all ascend into their Stalls, and take their accustomed places. Seruice then beginneth, and is very solemnly celebrated with singing of diuers Anthemes to the Organs, And when the Time of their Offer∣torie is come, the yongest Knights are summo∣ned forth of their Stalls by the Heralds, doing reuerence first within their Stalls, and againe af∣ter they are discended, which is likewise imita∣ted by all the rest; and being all thus come forth, standing before their Stalls as at first, the two el∣dest Knights with their swords in their hands, are brought vp by the Heralds to the Altar, where they offer their swords, and the Deane re∣ceiues them, of whom they presently redeeme them with an Angell in Gold, and then come downe to their former places, whilst two other are led vp in like manner: The ceremonie per∣formed, and seruice ended, they depart againe in such order as they came, with accustomed Reuerence; At the Chappell doore as they came forth, they were encountred by the Kings Maister Cooke, who stood there with his white Apron & Sleeues, and a chopping knife in his hand, and challenged their Spurres, which were likewise redeemed with a Noble in money, threatning
them neuerthelesse, that if they proued not true and loyall to the King his Lord and Maister, it must be his Office to hew them from their heeles. On Monday morning they all met together nigh at the Court, where in a priuate Roome appoin∣ted for them, they were cloathed in long Robes of Purple Sattin, with Hoods of the same, all li∣ned and edged about with white Taffata: And thus appareled, they gaue their attendance vpon the Prince at his creation, & dined that day in his presence at a side Boord, as is already declared. The Names of such Lords, and Gentlemen, as were made Knights of the Bath, in honour of his Highnesse Creation. Iames L. Maltreuer, son and heire to the E. of Arund. Algernon L. Percy, son and heire to the E. Northumb. Iames L. Wriothesley, son to the E. of Southhampton. Edward L. Clinton, sonne to the E. of Lincolne, Edw. L. Beawchampe, Grand-child to the E. of Hartf. L. Barkley. L. Mordant. Sir Alexander Erskin, son to the Vicount Fenton. Sir Henry Howard, 2 sonne to the E. of Arundell. Sir Robert Howard, 4 sonne to the E. of Suffolke. Sir Edward Sackuil, brother to the Earle of Dorset. Sir William Howard, 5. son to the Earle of Suffolke. Sir Edward Howard, 6. son to the Earle of Suffolke. Sir Montague Bartue, eldest sonne to the Lord Wil∣loughby of Ersby.
Sir William Stourton, sonne to the Lord Stourton. Sir Henry Parker, sonne to the Lord Mounteagle. Sir Dudly North, eldest sonne to the Lord North. Sir Spencer Compton, sonne and heire to L. Compton. Sir William Spencer, sonne to the Lord Spencer. Sir William Seymor, brother to the Lord Beauchampe. Sir Rowland St. Iohn, 3. son to the Lord Saint Iohn. Sir Iohn Cauendish, 2 sonne to the Lord Cauendish. Sir Tho. Neuill, Grand-child to the L. Aburgauenny. Sir Iohn Roper, Grand-child to the Lord Tenham. Sir Iohn North, brother to the Lord North. Sir Henry Carey, sonne to Sir Robert Carey. And for an Honourable conclusion of the Kings Royall Grace and bounty shewne to this Solemnitie, his Maiesty created Thomas Lord Elesmere, Lord Chancelour of England, Vicount Brackley; The L. Knolles, Vicount Wallingford, Sir Phillip Stanhope, L. Stanhope of Shelford in Notting∣ham-shire. These being created on Thursday the seuenth of Nouember, the Lord Chancellour Vi∣count Brackley, being led out of the Councell Chamber into the Priuie Gallery, by the Earle of Montgomery and Vicount Villiers, the Vicount Wallingford, by the Earle of Suffolke Lord Trea∣surer and the Vicount Lisle, the Lord Stanhope, by the Lord Danuers and the Lord Carew, &c. FINIS.
