1814 99837238 1553
THE ANATOMIE OF POPISH TY∣RANNIE: Wherein is conteyned a plaine declara∣tion and Christian censure, of all the princi∣pall parts, of the Libels, Letters, Edictes, Pamphlets, and Bookes, lately published by the Secular priests and English hispanized Iesuites, with their Iesuited Arch-priest; both pleasant and profitable, to all well affected readers. Esdr. vers. 42. Magna est veritas, & praeualet▪ LONDON, Printed by Iohn Harison, for Richard Bankworth, dwelling in Paules Churchyard at the signe of the Sunne. 1603.
To the Reuerend father the ornament of learning and religion, TOBIE, the wise, graue, zealous, and worthie Bishop of Durham. THat excellent sentence worthie to be written in golden letters (Right Reuerend father,) which the good Iew & man of God Zo∣robabel,Esd. 3. vers. 42. pronounced confidently before the mightie king Darius; viz. Magna est veritas, & prae∣ualet;) is this day verified (God be blessed for it,) euen in the publike writings of the Iesuites, against the secular priests, their owne deare Popish brethren. And reciprocally of the se∣cular priestes against the Iesuites, their religious fathers and holy fryers. The deepe and serious con∣sideration whereof, hath possessed mine heart with such vnspeakable solace, as I can not easily with penne and ynke expresse the same. Such is the force of truth, (my good Lord,) that it hath enforced the professed enemies of truth, (a thing verie rare and to be admired,) to testifie the truth against them∣selues, and to publish the same in printed books, to the view of the whole world. God (say the popish priests) hath most straungely,Quodl 8. art. 9. Page. 267. and in verie deed (as it may be termed,) miraculously, reuealed the truth,
which long hath beene hidden. Thus them selues write of themselues. Hence proceedeth that rare conceiued ioy,Phil. 3. vers. 15. which hath enuironed me on euerie side. And which (I am well assured,) cannot but bring great con∣tentment to your Lordship, and to all true hearted En∣glish subiects. For as the Apostle saith: Some preach Christ through enuie and strife; and some of good will. The one sort preacheth Christ of contention, and not purely: but the others preach him of loue. What then? yet Christ is preached all manner waies, whe∣ther it be vnder pretence, or syncerely; and I therein ioy, yea, and will ioy. Thus wrteth the chosen vessell, of our Lord Iesus. The Iesuites puffed vp with enuie and malice against the secular priests, doe vnwittingly and vnwillingly bolt out many important truthes; not onely against themselues, and to their owne great pre∣iudice; but also to the euerlasting scandall, and vtter ruine, of theit patched hotch-potch late Romish reli∣gion. The Secular priests turmoyled with the vniust vexations of the cruell Iesuites, seeke by all aswell in∣direct as direct meanes, to redeeeme their iniust mole∣stations, and to defend themselues from their villanous and diabolicall dealing. The while they are thus bu∣sied; they cannot inuent or deuise, how to find out any end of their miseries; but by laying open to the world, the badde and irreligious conuersation of the Iesuites; and by imputing to them those disloyall treacheries, and most bloodie complots, wherewith their owne hearts and hands had sometime beene imbrewed. And consequently, while they are encombred to disgrace and gall the malepeart and trayterous Iesuites; they doe vnawares grieuously wound themselues, euen with their owne chosen weapons. They freely grant, and
can it not denie; that all papists were kindly dealt withall, vntill such time as themselues gaue iust cause, by their disloyall plots and bloudie practises against her Maiestie,See quodl. 7. art. 8. page. 199. of greater restraint and sharper procee∣ding against them. For first, they grant, that the Earles of Northūberland & Westmerlād with their adherēts, were rebels, & their insurrectiō flat treasō; that the pope ioyned with thē; that he excōmunicated her Maiestie; that he assoyled her subiects from their allegeance to her; that he sent two popish priests, Morton and VVebbe, (my selfe knew them both right well,) to bring the ex∣communication into England,The Duke of Nor∣folke. which they effected accordingly; that the Pope assigned the Duke of Nor∣folke, to be the head of the rebellion; that he gaue or∣der to Ridolphi the Florentine, to take 150000▪ crownes to set forwarde the saide rebellion. That the King of Spaine at the Popes instance,The duke of Alua. determined to send the Duke of Alua into England, that with all his forces he might assist the Duke of Norfolke. Secondly, they grant that the pope plotted with Stuckeley, Fitzmo. rize, and others both English, Irish, and Italian, (my selfe was euen then in Rome,) for enterprise by force in∣to Ireland,ann. 1578. vnder pretence of religion; to further which cruell attempt,ann. 1579. Sanders did afterward thrust himselfe personally into the like action. Thirdly, they confesse, that Parsons, Campian, Sherwin, and others, were sent disloyally into this land from pope Gregory the 13. (my selfe was then in Rome,) and that Parsons presently vp∣on their arriuall,ann. 1580. fell to his trayterous Iesuiticall cour∣ses, and bestirred himselfe with tooth and naile,1581. how he might set her maiesties crowne vpon an others heade. Fourthly, they confesse, that the Iesuite Heywood was sent into Englād from the Pope, & that he tooke vpon
him to call a synode, and to abrogate auncient cust∣omes, to the great scandall of many. Fiftly, they con∣fesse, that the Pope plotted with the King of Spaine, for the assistance of the Duke of Guise,1583. to enter vpon the sodaine, and to aduance the Queene of Scotland to the crowne of England. For the better effecting whereof, Mendoza a Iesuite (as they write,) then ledger in this land for the king of Spaine,The Iesuits sludie no∣thing but treason. set on worke Frances Thro∣cmorton, and many others. They adde there vnto, that about the same time Arden, and Somervile had conspi∣red, how they might lay violent hands vpon her Maie∣sties sacred person. Sixtly, they write, that about the same time Parrie was also plotting with the Iesuites be∣yond the sea, how he might haue effected the like villa∣nie. Seuenthly,1586. they confesse freely, that the earle of Northumberland was drawne into the plot of the Duke of Guise; and that Parsons the bloudie Iesuite, was him selfe an actor therein. Eightly, they write plainely, that Babington and his complices committed such no∣torious treason against her maiestie,1587. as it was shameles boldnesse to deny or qualifie the same. Ninthly, they confesse roundly, that Sir William Stanley committed notable treacherie, & falsified his faith to her maiesty. Tenthly,1588. they write plainly, that in the yeare 1588. the King of Spaine made a most cruell & bloudie attempt, not only against her Maiesty, (to vse the priests-words,) and their commō enemies; but also against themselues, all catholikes,1592. and their owne natiue countrey. The memorie of which attempt (as the priests write,) will be an euerlasting monument of Iesuiticall treason, and brutish crueltie. Eleuenthly, they grant, that Richard Hesket was set on by the Iesuites, in the yeere 1592. or their abouts, to haue stirred vp the Earle of Darbye, to
rebell against her maiestie. Where I may not omit, to deliuer mine owne knowledge in this behalfe. This Hesket I knew very well; in his life, conuersation, and professiō, I euer deemed him to be of all religions; that it to say, of none at all, and so the euent did declare. He could temporize egregiously and frame his religion in all places,Loe, all traytors are welcōe to our Ie∣suites. after the humours of the companie. In the end his creditors came so roundly vpon him, for his manifold and huge debts; that he was in forced secretly to depart, and to take England on his backe. Not long after, he became so deeply Iesuited, that he must needs be a glorious popish martyr; viz. an arrant and most bloudie traytour. he thought & sought by murdering his naturall soueraigne, to haue gotten gold, money,1592. & large possessions; and so perhaps to haue paid his credi∣tors, or at the least to haue cut them short at his plea∣sure. But in steade of a popish imaginarie charter, hee found an english reall halter; according to his cōdigne deserts. Twelftly, they grant,1592. that shortly after this stra∣tageme, the Iesuite Holt and others with him, perswa∣ded one Patricke Collen an Irish-man, to attempt the laying of his violent and villanous hands, vpon her ma∣iesties person. Thirteenthly, they freely confesse, that doctor Lopez the Queenes phisition, was stirred vp to haue poysoned her Maiestie. and the like they affirme, of Yorke, VVilliams, and Edward Squire, animated and drawne thereunto, by VValpole that pernitious Iesuite. All these notorious treasons (right reuerend father,) damnable in nature, intollerable in state, and almost incredible in relation, are plainly confessed of the Se∣cular-priests; and the same together with many other, bad, licentious, barbarous, sauage, and plaine brutish practises of Iesuited papists, are compendiously com∣prised
in this small volume. Which I haue therefore endeuoured to reduce to certaine heads, distinct bookes, and chapters, with some profitable annota∣tions annexed to the same; because I am verily per∣swaded, that whosoeuer shall seriously pervse them with indifferencie, cannot but loath and detest cursed Iesuitisme and all popish Iesuited faction. For, though it be necessarie to all true hearted English subiects, to know throughly the matters discouered by the Se∣cular Priests; yet because many for lacke of money, are not able to buy the bookes; and others because they are tedious and confusely written, will either abstaine wholy from the reading thereof; or lightly and slender∣ly runne them ouer, and so neuer attaine to the full knowledge thereof; I haue imployed my industrie & my wits, to couch in a small volume and portable manuall, the summe & effect of all their bookes, pam∣phelets, libells, edicts, and letters; so as euery one may easily compasse the price, and no one bee wearied in pervsing the discourse. My desire was to profit all; to confirme the strong; to strenghthen the weake; to stay the staggerer; to rowze vp the drowsie; to instruct the ignorant; to gratifie the thankefull; to perswade the doubtfull; and to confound the proud, malepeart and disloyall hearts,1. Cor. 3. . 6. Paule planted, Apollo watred, but God gaue the increase. If therefore any good be wrought by these my labours, let such as shall reape that good, be thankfull to God for the same. The disloyall papists & bloud thirstie Iesuites, haue alreadie kicked against my former labours, and whet their malicious tongues a∣gainst me. Their holy father the bishoppe of Rome, (whome they tearme the Pope,) hath thundred out his curse against me. But neither secular priests, nor
religious Iesuites, will or can make any sound answere to any of my bookes. They haue often beene buzzing about the matter; yet neuer durst they publish so much, as but one colourable answere, either to all, or to any one of my bookes. so as I must needs thinke, that male∣dictiō, cursing, & rayling, will be their morning and e∣uening song against me; by reason of this my friendly posie, which I present as a most redolent odour to their noses-grauitie; so often as they shall kisse the shoe of their Pope, and with him commit idolatrie. the vsuall manner (most reuerend and worthy prelate,) in all such kind of exercises, both is and alwaies hath beene, to make choise of some worthy and mightie personage, to protect, defend, and patronize the cause. and doubt∣les, neuer did any booke or pamphlet stande in more neede of a stout and resolute patron, then this pre∣sent volume. For the traytorous Iesuites and Iesuited papists, that cannot endure their owne brethren the secular priests, to publish in their honest defence, their knowne practises and imperfections; will no doubt become starke madde, & fetch al their Romish friscols against me poore soule; who haue as it were anatomi∣zed, and painted them out in their best beseeming co∣lours. After mature deliberation had herein, (most christian patron of learning and learned men,) I haue resolued to dedicate this worke to your most reuerend name; as to that vertuous Tobi, who is able with the perfumes of the heart and liuer of a fish; that is to say, with the redolent harmonie of christian diuinitie, (which continually floweth most pleasantly form his mouth,) to vanquish all the Asmodean-Iesuites vpon earth, & to strike such terrours into their harts; as they shall not once dare to grunt or barke, against my true
dealing and sincere proceeding in this behalfe. Sun∣dry other motiues do occurre, which might most iustly incite me to this dedication of these my late studies, if they were better then in deed they are; amongst which, many large bounties from time to time receiued at your Lordships hand, doe well deserue to haue a place. So praying the almightie to increase your godly zeale, against all traytorous Iesuites, & disloyall po∣pish vassales; and to blesse your good Lordshippe with many happie yeeres, to his glorie, your owne soules health, and the common good of his Church, I hum∣bly take my leaue. From my studie, this 23. of Ianuarie 1602. Your Lordships most bounden, Thomas Bell.
The Elogie of the author, in signe of his loyall affection, both toward his late Soueraigne, and now regnant. The cursed crew of Iesuites, A change did long desire; A change they haue, but to their griefe, Both Pope and Spaine admire. Our noble Queene Elizabeth From hence to heauen is gone; King Iames the first giuen vs of God, By right sits in her throne. Shee fourtie yeeres and foure complete, did Pope and Spaine withstand; And maugree all their bloudie plots, In peace did rule this land. Gods word and his true worshippe euer, VVith zeale shee did defend; For which cause God did her protect, Vntill her life did end. Her death perforce we must lament, VVho dearely lou'd vs all; Her bountie great, her mercie rare, The world to witnesse call. Yet English hearts be not dismaide, King Iames is our regent; Hence Poperie certes he will supplant, All falshood must relent. He will doe iustice euery where, And poore mens cause respect; The mightie must not them annoy, He will their right protect.
Poore men to him must haue accesse, Their owne cause there to tell; No bribes can haue place in his court, Thence vice he will expell. The richer sort with lingringe suites, Must not the poore oppresse; Our noble King the man of God, Their wronges will soone redresse. Christs Gospell still he will maintaine, Our true peace to prolonge; Both Spaniard, Pope, and Iesuite, May sing a doolefull songe. They sought by treason Scotlands crowne, On Spanish head to bind; Crichton was actor chiefe, who may in then'd an halter find. Most traytorous parts and bloudie plots, To Iesuites are deare; To all that will this booke peruse, This truth must needs appeare. Disloyall papists still presume, A tollerate to craue; But God preserue our gracious King, No such sport must they haue. Their combes are cut, their crests are falne, They stand amaz'd with feare; Their spirits rampant are made couchant, Their doome will soone appeare. For this rare blessing yeelde him thankes, That sits in heauen aboue; And let our faith and Godly life, Make knowne to him our loue.
The Preface to the gentle Reader. THis Anatomie of popish Tyrannie, (gentle Reader,) was compiled and made readie for the presse before the tenth of October, in the yeare of our lord God 1602. but by reason of casuall accidents, and other circumstances concurring, it was not printed vntill this present yeare 1603. before which time, it pleased the Almightie to call hence to his mercie, our most gratious Soueraigne the mightie Princesse Elizabeth, late Queene of England, France, and Ireland. Against whose sacred person, the Pope, the Spaniards, and Englist Spanioli∣zed Iesuites with all Iesuited popelings, deuised, contriued, and practised, many most cruell stratagems and bloodie complottes. All which were effected, for this sole and onely purpose, because forsooth her most excellent Maiesty of holy memorie, did euer with singular Christian zeale and rare magnanimitie, protect, patro∣nize, and stoutly maintaine, Christs holy gospell and his diuine wor∣ship, throughout her Realmes and Dominions. These treacheries and most villanous conspiracies against her royall person, with in∣numerable indignities against her Realmes & most louing subiects, contriued and put into actuall execution, by the cursed crew of En∣glish Iesuites, and Iesuited papists, are compendiously, distinctly, and pithily, comprised in this present volume. By reason whereof it commeth, that though this present worke be published, after that the imperiall Diademe of the Realmes afore named, came and des∣cended wholy and lawfully to the high and renowmed prince now our vndoubted Soueraigne lord, Iames the first, King of England, Scotland, Fraunce, and Ireland, yet must all the chiefest parts thereof, be referred principally to our late Soueraigne ladie Queene Elizabeth. I say (principally) for that the same doe in some sort con∣cerne his royall person & regall prerogatiues, who this day most hap∣pily raigneth ouer vs. For, the cursed and trayterous Iesuites, who for their manifold treasons against their Soueraigne lords, the late king of France & the king now regnant, are iustly banished out of the
whole kingdome of Fraunce, euen by publike decree of Parlia∣ment, (as the French papists tell vs,) and who also (as the Secular priests their owne brethren write of them,) haue endeuoured with tooth and nayle to stirre vp sedition in the kingdome of Scotland, so to set the imperiall Crowne thereof vpon a Spaniards head, will not now doubtlesse surcease, from their inueterate and wonted bloo∣die treacheries, (seeing their profession is linked inseperably with treason, as the priests affirme against them,) if our liege lord king Iames the first, shall graunt them any footing and resting place, within any of his kingdomes, territories, or dominions. God for his mercie sake, (which hath no end,) eyther conuert them soundly, or confound them vtterly, for the peace of his Church, the safetie of our gracious King, and the comfort of all his true hearted subiects, English, Scottish, and Irish. Amen.
The names of the Secular priests, that subscribed to the supplica∣tion sent to the Pope. Thomas Bluet. Christopher Bagshaw. Christopher Thules. Iames Tayler. Iohn Thules. Edward Caluerley. William Coxe. Iames Cope. Iohn Collington. George Potter. Iohn Mush. William Watson. William Clarke. Iohn Clinsh. Oswald Nedeme. Roger Strickland. Robert Drurie. Francis Munford. Anthonie Heburne. Anthonie Champney. Iohn Lingley. Iohn Boswell. Robert Thules. Edward Bennet. Robert Benson. Cuthbert Trolope. Iohn Bennet. William Mush. Richard Button. Francis Foster. Note heere gentle Reader, that though these thirtie onely, (who make a number sufficient,) did subscribe to the appeale, and to the petition sent to the Pope, yet were there, and are there many others, as the priestes write, which would willingly haue set to their hands, but that they were in feare to deale against the proud tyrannizing Iesuites. Yea, as the Iesuites write, there are this day in England 300. priests. God eyther conuert them speedily, or confound them vtterly. Amen.
A memorable caueat to the gentle Reader. I Haue imployed my whole industrie and best indeuour (gentle Reader) to doe thee good, and to confirme thee in the truth of Christs gospell, who, if I shall vnderstand, that my paineful labours for thy sake, shall be accepted in good part, and be an instru∣ment vnder God, to direct thee the readie way to eternall life; shall doubtlesse attaine my desire, and hold my selfe fully satisfied for my paines. Now, for the better ac∣complishment of mine expectation herein, I haue thought very expedient and necessarie, to instruct thee in some generall points, without the knowledge whereof, neither canst thou fruitfully read this discourse, nor fully and perfectly vnder∣stand the same. Primò prin∣cipaliter. Peruse the second booke, the fift chapter in the first section, & note it wel: see also the second se∣ction and forget it not.First therefore, the gentle Reader must obserue seriously, (though some, otherwise learned, be of an other opinion,) that the discontented secular Priests, are in truth and with∣out all doubt, at vtter defiance with the Arch-Priest and the Iesuites; that they condemne the proceeding and dealing of the Arch-Priest; that they vtterly abhorre and derest, the licentious liuing, the vnchristian coozening, and the trea∣cherous practises, with infinite other badde dealing of the Ie∣suites; as also that they write nothing of or against the Arch-Priest or the Iesuites, but that onely, which they thinke them∣selues bound in conscience to write, and to make the same knowne vnto the world. I my selfe am thus perswaded of them doubtlesse, and I prooue the same many waies. First, because the Secular Priests haue a long time suffered intollerable iniuries, at the hands of the Iesuites; because they haue often insinuated so much one to another; because they haue often complained, of the hard vsage of the Iesuits against them, because they haue often repined at their partiall dealing
with their fauorites, and rough dealing against such, as would not bow and bend to their designes at a becke: this my selfe know to be so, as also that it hath euer beene their vsuall prac∣tise euerie where. Secondly, because the Secular priests were most vnwilling to reueale the turpitude, and the villanous dealing of their reli∣gious fathers the Iesuits, (as who professe one and the same religion with the Iesuits, & saw rightwel, that it could not but tend to the great scandall, & vtter disparagement of their Ro∣mish religion) vntill necessitie it selfe enforced them therunto. Thirdly, because their Seculars write nothing of our English Iesuits in deed,See the se∣cond book, fourth chapter, & sixt Para∣graph. but the French papists haue in effect and sub∣stance made the same knowne vnto the world; affirming ge∣nerally, that for their seditious and treacherous dealing, they are wholy banished out of the kingdome of France; and that by a publike decree of Parliament. Hereof none be ignorant, that shall throughly and duely peruse the Iesuits Catechisme, and the Franke discourse, lately set foorth by the Catholike Frenchmen in the french tongue, and since translated into En∣glish, by some of the Secular priests. Fourthly, because neither the Iesuits nor the Seculars do spare one another, in catching and snatching the least aduantage, that they can finde or picke out of their reciprocall writings, so to reproach and giue the foyle one to another. Fiftly, because other English Secular priests, & lay-papists of best account beyond the seas, seeing such endlesse conten∣tion betweene the Iesuits and the other priests, and knowing the badde dealing of the Iesuits against them, haue thought themselues bound in conscience to take part with the Seculars in England, and thereupon haue written verie sharpely against the Iesuits, on their behalfe. Sixtly, the same is proued by many inuincible reasons, which the Reader shal find set down at large, in the last section of the fift chapter of the fourth booke, all which in regard of breuitie I heere omitt. Againe, the gentle reader must obserue seriously, that though I do charge the seculars with treasonable practises, and dissimu∣lation in state-affairs, & haue proued the same out of their own
bookes and writings in rigor of wordes; yet will I not denie, but they may haue a better meaning toward the state, then their bare words externally seeme to insinuate & purport. For albeit they professe themselues wholy deuoted to the Pope, & do submit their bookes, their writings, their opinions, and their own selues also to his censure; yet do they seeme vtterly to dis∣like of many of his proceedings; yet do they flatly condemne all English popish treasons; yet do they renounce the doctrine of Sanders, Allen, & Iesuits, in state-matters of wars, and king∣domes: yet do they write plainly and resolutely, that the Pope hath no power to depriue kings of their royal scepters & rega∣lities, nor to giue away their kingdomes to another. In which opinion likewise, the French papists do concurre & iump with them. For though Cardinall Allen affirmed roundly, that all pa∣pists were bound in conscience to ioyne with the Pope, and his power, in all maner of wars for religiō; & though also the secu∣lar priests do highly cōmend him for many respects; yet doth it not follow of necessity, but the seculars may take part with our soueraigne against the Pope, & fight on her side in defence of their natiue country, as they professe; to do in their bookes. The reason hereof is this; because the Seculars, though they ac∣knowledge the Popes power supereminent in spiritualibus, yet do they disclaime from it in temporalibus, when he taketh vpon him to dispose kings of their Empires, and to translate their kingdomes. Thirdly, the gentle reader must obserue seriously, that howso∣euer the seculars may be doubted and suspected, to dissemble or equiuocate in state-affaires, which are not articles of popish faith; yet may we safely beleeue them, and securely giue cre∣dit to their words and writings, whensoeuer, and how often soeuer, they speake, write, or deliuer their opinions, in mat∣ters of popish faith and doctrine. For to make equiuocation lawfull, euen in popish manner of proceeding; these three things must all concurre, or else it may not stand. First, the matter must not be an article of popish faith. Secondly, it must bee before an incompetent iudge. Thirdly, it must be in a matter of moment, as to redeeme ones vniust vexa∣tion, and the like.
Fourthly,Quodl. 1. art. 4. p. . 9. the gentle Reader must obserue seriously, that the secular priests acknowledge themselues bounde in consci∣ence, to detect the Iesuits to the vttermost. For these are their owne words; all priests and others, that are not of that se∣ditious Iesuiticall and Spanish faction, are bound in charitie, as now the case stands, to detect them to the vttermost. First, for a caueat to the ignorant multitude seduced by them, here∣after to beware of them. Secondly, per legemtalionis, retur∣ning their malice, detraction, defamation, calumniation, ob∣loquie, and what not inuented by them against the innocent, vpon their owne heads: thus it is written verbatim. Quodl. 1. art. 4. pag. 9. the Reader must likewise obserue,Quodl. 9. art. 4. p. 304 that the se∣culars confesse treason to be now by Iesuiticall proceeding, linked inseperably with Priesthood. For these are their owne words; The execution of Priesthood and treason are now so linked together by the Iesuites in England; as they cannot ex∣hort any to the Catholike faith, but Dogmatizando, in so doing they draw him in effect to rebellion; thus it is written, quodl. 9. art. 4. p. 304. The Reader must further obserue, that the Se∣cular priests know where the Iesuits vsually reside, where their walkes are, and with whom they doe conuerse. For these are their owne words; which of the Iesuits hath hitherto beene in danger of apprehension by our means, and yet we know all, or most of their residences in England, & their walkes? I am sure he will say, that if we were so lewdly disposed, we would be∣ginne with them first. Thus is it written verbatim, in the replie to Parsons libell. fol. 57. a. in fine. The reader must yet further obserue, that the English penall lawes are iustly made against the Iesuites. For these are their owne words; vntill at last they were intangled by penall lawes, which were iustly made against them equally, as against the Iesuites: thus it is written, verbatim, in the Preface to the Quodlibets, towards the end of the sixt page. And when the gentle reader hath well obserued all these foure points; first, that the Secular priests are bound in conscience, to detect the Iesuites to the vt∣termost; secondly, that treason is inseparable to Iesuitical pra∣ctises, & can no way be seuered from them; thirdly, that the Se∣culars, know the walkes of the Iesuits, the persons with whom
they conuerse, and the houses where they reside; Fourthly, that the seculars acknowledge and willingly confesse, the pe∣nall lawes of this Realme to be iustly made against the Iesuites; then may he rightly informe himselfe therewith, and constant∣ly hold this opinion, as built vpon a sure and sounde foundati∣on; viz. that if the secular priestes be indeede as they write, sincerely and loyally affected to her maiestie, and fully resol∣ued to spend their liues and best bloud in their bodies, in de∣fence of her sacred person, and of their natiue countrey, against the King of Spaine, the Pope, and the Iesuites; then doubtles they will make knowne those disloyall persons, who haue cō∣spired with the Iesuites in their bloudie treacheries; the persons who haue and still doe, harbour, aide, and releiue them; the per∣sons that haue deuoted and consecrated themselues, to the king of Spaine, the Pope, and the Iesuites, against their na∣turall soueraigne and deare countrie. Then doubtlesse they will disclose to her maiestie, the howses where the traytorous Iesuites reside, and the walkes which they frequent. That so her maiesties person may be secured, and their natiue coun∣trie preserued, form the treasonable practises of those tray∣terous villaines. For if they say, they may not this doe, least so they become the cause of their imprisonment, exile, or death; that cannot serue there turne, nor be a sufficient excuse for them in this behalfe. I proue it. First, for that they shal no otherwise become such a cause, thē they haue beene the same alreadie, by reuealing their tresona∣ble plots and bloudie treacheries. Secondly, because thereby they shall doe nothing els then that; which (as themselues write,) they are bound in conscience to performe. Thirdly, because in so doing they shall onely effect that, which the law of iustice requireth at their handes, as themselues doe graunt. Fourthly, because how often soeuer two euils doe so concurre, that both can not be auoyded, but that of necessitie the one must happen; then it is not onely charitie, but euerie man is also bound to preuent the greater euill, with the permission of the lesse, For the clearing hereof, I will here recount the priestes their owne expresse words; which though they be longe, yet doe I with the reader to marke them attentiuely,
because they are verie important, & plainly conuince so much as I intend. First, you know, (say the Priestes,) it is a generall receiued ground by all, that when the actions of any particular man or men, (be they of what degree they will be, secular or reli∣gious, ecclesiasticall or lay,) doe tende to anie generall or common huit of a communitie; (as for example, the acti∣ons of some particular seruant in a familie, to the ruine or ouerthrow of the familie; the actions of some particuler scho∣lers in a colledge, to the subuersion of the colledge; or the actions of some particuler men in a common weale, to the de∣struction of a common weale;) It is then not onely lawfull to disclose these particuler men, and their particuler actions, though otherwise priuate & diffamatorie to the said particuler parties, (as all such actions of their owne nature must needes be) but also euerie honest seruant, euerie faithfull seruant, e∣uerie true scholler, and loyall subiect, is bound in conscience vpon his dutie to his master, faith to his colledge, loyaltie to his Prince, and loue to his countrie; to disclose such per∣sons, and their facts or intentions, without regarde or respect vnto the hurt or damage, that may redound to the said par∣ticuler parties so offending. The reason hereof is this, because a generall good is alwaies to be preferred before a particuler, and a greater hurt to be eschewed before the lesse. As for exam∣ple, when two euils concurre so, that both cannot be auoyded, but that necessarily the one must happen; it is not onely cha∣ritie, but euerie man is also bound to preuent the greater e∣uill, with permission of the lesse rather then the contrarie. These words are set downe at large in this manner, in the re∣plie to Parsons libell. Fol. 28. a. This is a goodly foundation which the Priests haue laid, as which indeede is grounded vp∣pon the verie law of nature. And out of this grounde may so much fitly be deduced, as is sufficient to conclude my scope and purpose. If therefore the secular priestes doe▪ in deede meane truly to their Prince and countrie, as they pretend in outward shew of words; then no doubt they will doe as is alreadie said. But if they refuse thus to deale against the traytorous crew of Iesuites, for the common good of their
natiue countrie; then doe they but dissemble and equiuocate, when they tell vs they will take part with our Queene and countrie, against the Pope and king of Spaine. Thus much I thought good to set downe for a caueat to the reader. For these obseruations being well remembred, the reader shall be more able to iudge of the discourse following. This caueat must be well pervsed, throughly vnderstood, and faithfully remembred; or els the reader cannot possibly be able, to yeelde a sounde censure vpon the whole worke. First therfore reade it; then vnderstande it; that donne, giue thy iudgement, as indifferencie and right reason shall pres∣cribe. An admonition to the Reader. MAnie bookes are lately written, by the Iesuites and secular Priests; viz the Relation; the Sparing disco∣uerie; the Important cōsiderations; the Hope of peace the Copies of discourse; the Quodlibets; the Dia∣logue; the answer to the Iesuited gentlemā; the Letters of A. C; the Apologie; the reply to the libell of Parsons the Iesuite; the aunswer to the Apologie, compiled by Master D. Ely; M. Colle∣tons defence; the manifestation of folly; the Replie to the Apologie; the Franke discourse; the Iesuites catechisme. Which two last bookes, the learned Papistes of France haue lately published. All these bookes I haue pervsed verie seriously, and drawen the summarie and chiefe points of them all, vnto certaine heads, distincte bookes, and chapters. So as the indiffe∣rent reader may in a few houres, vnderstand the effect of the whole proceeding, betweene the Iesuites and the secular priestes. I haue like wise compiled an Alphabeticall table, in which the reader may easilie finde out at his pleasure, any principall matter handled in this discourse. To read all the said bookes, is a labour both tedious and painefull. To buy them, is too chargeable for manie. To vnderstand them, as they are cōfusely published, is a thing not easie for the greater part. The defect herein, my annotations and compendious obser∣uations will supplie. The argument of the booke is so necessary
for all true hearted English subiects, that I wish euerie one to be well acquainted therewith. The reader may at his pleasure, and that with all facilitie, turne to the originall in euerie booke by me named, and by the helpe of my quotations, finde out roundly the verie wordes which I put downe. For I alwaies name both the booke and the page, and doe euer alledge their owne words. That done, I haue inserted some speciall notes & obseruatiōs, as I deemed it expediēt for the good of the rea∣der. Paule planted, & Apollo watred, but the God of heauen gaue the increase. The same God I most humblie desire, so to water the hearts of the readers with the dewe of his hea∣uenly blessing, that they may thereby learne to detest all Iesuiticall treasons, and seditious Popish factions. Fare-well.
The first Booke, contayning certaine Preambles, for the better instruction of the Reader; as also that the bookes fol∣lowing may be read more seriously, and with greater perspicuitie. Preamble. I. Of the syncere and true dealing of the Author, through∣out this discourse. THe Iesuits are thought of the simply seduced Papists, to be holy men, to haue familiaritie with God, to haue receiued extraordinary graces from heauen, and to be saints vpon earth. So then, if my selfe should of my selfe speake any thing against them, I might perhaps get smal or no cre∣dite on that behalfe. But when I shal write nothing of them, but euen that which their owne brethren in Religion, their fellow-labourers, the Secular-priestes, haue published to the world in printed bookes, and sent the same to the Pope himselfe in his sacred pallace at Rome; they cannot but beleeue me, whosoeuer they bee y• shall reade my writings, howsoeuer they like or accept of my laboures. For I will euer set downe their owne words, as themselues haue in printed bookes published them, to the view of the whole world. That done, I will quote the booke & the place, where the reader shall roundly finde the same. Which being truely performed, I will insert mine owne glosses and annotations; so often as it shall seeme ex∣pedient for the common good, and for the helpe of the indif∣ferent reader.
Preamble. II. Of Iesuiticall dealing in state-affaires. THe old saying was, let the shomaker meddle with his slipper, the smith with his anuill, and the priests with their prayers; but the Iesuiteslike franke gamsters, are in at all. He is not worth a rush amongst them, that is not able to manage a kingdome. Matters of state,The Iesuits are cour∣tiers. titles of princes, genealogies of kinges, right of succession, disposing of scepters, and such affaires, are their chiefe studies. Some feare they are more cunning in Aretine, Lucian, and Machiuell; then in their breuiaries, diurnals, or Portiuse, assuredly they doe not behaue them selues, like any other religious men. He that should tell them of liuing in a cloyster, were as good goe a mileabout, as fall into their fingers. There are few kinges courts in Europe,The Iesuits loue no∣thing worse then a cloy∣ster. where some of their maisterships doe not reside, of purpose to giue intelligence to their generall at Rome, of all the occurrents in these parts of the world, which they dispatch to and fro by secret cyphers, hauing either a Ie∣suite, or some one Iesuited, in the most of those kings coun∣sels, who propter bonum societatis, must without scruple de∣liuer to them, the secrets of their soueraignes to their vt∣termost knowledge. These wordes are set downe in the sparing discouerie,The Iesuits haue an oare in e∣uery mans boat. page. 7. quodlibet. 3. art. 4. p. 65. Preamble. III. Of the inuentor of the Iesuiticall profession, now be∣come a most seditious faction. THe inuentor of the Iesuiticall order was a Spa∣niard and a souldier, and therefore, all his disci∣ples of what contrey soeuer they be by birth, are in their hearts and practises altogether Spanish,A notable epithet for the Ie∣suites. breathing little, but cruelties, garboyls, and troubles. They haue by their writings, their sermons, and by all their inde∣uours,
laboured to perswade all catholikes, that the kinge of Spaine and our faith are so linked together, as it is be∣come a point of necessitie in the catholike faith, to put all Europe into his handes; or otherwise, that the ca∣tholike religion will vtterly perish. These wordes are sette downe in the discouery, page. 7. see quodlibet 2. art. 7. p. 42. Note here gentle reader, these points with me. First, that the preists doe alwaies vnderstand the papistes, when they speake of catholikes; which I note heere once for all. Secondly, that the catholike faith, that is to say, poperie, will vtterly perish out of Rome, (notwithstanding their Popes prerogatiue) vn∣lesse the Spanish king doe patronize the same, and conse∣quently (a thing to be admired) that the catholike Popish faith testeth onely in the king of Spaine. Thirdly, that popish religion consisteth of troubles, cruelties, and gar∣boyles. Preamble. IIII. Of the excellencie of Iesuiticall religion, which is the Popish catholike religion in deede. THese erroneous, temerarious, and hereticall asserti∣ons, contrarie to the catholike faith,See the Se∣cond booke and the 4. chapter in the 6. parag haue beene defen∣ded with great egernes and vehemencie, amongst our Ie∣suited breathren in Wisbish. The stewes, are in Rome cum approbatione, the Stewes are in Rome as lawfull as anie citizen; as lawfull as any Maiestrate; as lawfull as anie order of religion. The Stewes are at Rome cum appro∣batione, as lawfull as the Pope himselfe. The Stewes are very good, and very necessary. That a priest is made by traditions of the chalice, patten, and hoste into his handes, they say, it is but a toy. They hould that the auncient fa∣thers, rem transubstantiationis ne attigerunt. These wordes are set downe in the discouerie, pag. 13. quodlibet. 2. art. 4. p. 31. Note heere gentle reader, these important points with me. First, that the Pope is not a lawfull Byshop at Rome, because
he is no more lawfull then the Stewes, which doubtlesse are most vnlawfull, as all the world knoweth. Secondly, that the manner of making Popish priestes is but a toy. This is a point to be marked, and neuer to be forgotten. Thirdly, that popish transubstantiation (which is the maine point in popish religi∣on,) is not once named of the auncient fathers; & consequent∣ly, popish religion, euen by confession of the Popes Iesuites, is a new oe religion, neuer heard of amongst the aunci∣ent fathers. see the 11. aduiso in the third booke, and note it well. Preamble. V. Of the distinction of Popish religious orders. AL religious men, are indifferently called monkes or friers, for these names are not proper to any in parti∣cular, but common to all Popish religious orders in gene∣rall. The Carthusians, the Dominicans, the Benedictines, the Franciscans, the Carmelites, the Capuchines y• Theati∣nes, the Iesuates & the Iesuites, with ye rest, are all general∣ly called monkes or Fryers, the Iesuites being the last vp∣start of them all. All these & the rest, generally are cowled, and distinguished by there verie habits; but the Iesuites being newly hatched and punies to all, must needes ouer∣rule all,The Iesuits are poore monkes by profession, but lordly fellowes in all their con¦uersation. and be like to none at all. I haue spoken more at large of them, both in my booke of motiues, and in my booke of suruey. Which mine assertions in those bookes, the secular Priests haue now iustified and made good, in their late printed bookes; so as my sincere dealing therein, is by indirect meanes made apparant to the world. The Iesuites haue vowed these three thinges, pouertie, chastity, and obedience, as all other religious papistes haue done. Of these Iesuites some bee Priestes, and some lay-brothers; which lay-brothers make also the said triple vow, & therevpon they are called religious fathers, though they be but porters or doore keepers; and they will take vpon them I warrant you, and so forth. Of these good fellowes you shall heere mirabilia, before the ende of this discourse. The other priests in Englād, thoughe brought by
in the seminaries, doe not make this triple bow afore na∣med, and therefore are they called seculars, or secular and not religious priestes. The persons that are called Iesui∣ted, are those men and women, aswell priestes as lay-per∣sons; which are foolishly so denoted to the Iesuites, that they will doe at a becke, whatsoeuer the Iesuites shall ap∣point to be done; euen as if they had made the selfesame vow. This preamble I haue put downe, because I haue vnderstood, that manie are ignorant of these thinges. See the second booke the fourth chapter, and seuenth Para∣graph. Preamble. VI. Of the intended conquest of this land. THe Iesuites hauing laid this ground, that England is not likely to be wonne to the catholike religion by the word, at least not so hastily as behoues for their aduanta∣ges, do dayly sollicite a conquest thereof from Spaine; and withall they labor to perswade vs, that it is both vtill and honorable. These words are put downe, in the answeare to the Iesuited gentleman; page. 93. Note here gentle reader, that nothing can please these bloud-thirstie traytors, the Iesuites; saue onely the conquest, of this their natiue countrie. Preamble. VII. Of going to the Church in time of common prayer. THe wise Iesuits preuented all daungers; they freely permitted Catholikes to goe to Church with prote∣stants, and made no sinne nor scruple thereof. Yea, the Ie∣suites, father Bosgraue, and father Langdale, went to the Church themselues. These words are in the Dialogue. Page 97. 98. Note heere gentle Reader, that by Iesuiticall both grant and practise, the Papists may freely goe to the Church with the Protestants, and thereby not sinne at all. This is a poynte worthie to be remembred.
Preamble. VIII. Of eating of flesh in time of Lent. A Famous Iesuite now in England made offer to a Gentleman, that if he would become Catholike, hée should haue licence to eate flesh in Lent, and on all fasting daies, among Lollards and Protestants; that by so doing he might liue without suspition, and escape daunger of the lawes. Thus it is written in their Dialogue. Page. 99. Note heere gentle Reader, these important points with me. First, that the Iesuites are right Machiuels, and make Religion a nose of waxe, which they vse as a seruile instrument, to bring to passe all their bloudie, tragicall, and traiterous attempts. Secondly, that those trayterous persons in high authoritie vn∣der her Maiestie (whereof I haue spoken in the third booke in the second reason of the 12. aduise) who haue entered closely into league with the Spaniard, do (as it may seeme) en∣ioy these kinds of popish dispensation. Thirdly, that Iesuits and Seminaries are both most dangerous to the state, and vnfit per∣sons to liue in this land: vnlesse they will ioyne in Sacraments and common prayer, with the rest of her Maiesties faithfull subiects. For to no other symbole or signe, can credit bee safely giuen. Preamble. IX. Of winning and redeeming of time. THe Iesuites haue an axiome of winning of redee∣ming of time; which is in effect to runne with the time, in altering their positions so, as they may best serue to win their desires. The practise of which ground, is in no one of their affaires so manifest, as in labouring to set vp, now this man, now that man, to attempt the Crowne; furnish∣ing euerie one with sufficient authoritie, that of right it be∣longeth vnto him. And true it is, that rather then they faile, they care not who he is, or of what rase, nor of what nation, that will step in for the kingdome, so he bee a Ca∣tholike. These words are set downe in the discouery
Page. 64. quodl. 2. art. 8. pag. 43. quodl. 9. art. 3. pag. 293. Note heere with me, that the Iesuites are most errant trai∣tours, as who desire so vehemently the conquest of this land, that they care not who haue it, so he bee a papist. Preamble. X. Of the fasting and penance, which the Iesuites vse. THe Iesuites haue a merrie life, in not being tyed to rising vp to the quire at midnight, but to lie in bed af∣ter the sunne, to faire well, to be well clad, and all this ex∣professo; not to fast so much as the Frydaies, to be a lyar when they will, and yet be beleeued, a detractor, a cheater. a courtier, a souldier, a kil-prince,See the re∣ply to Par∣sons libell. Fol. 8. b. and what not. And all without controll, nay with allowance and commendation. Briefe, it is a merrie life for a Iesuite, to trowle vp and downe the countrey from house to house, from good cheare to good cheare, in a gallant coach, accompanied with fayre gentlewomen, attended with neat seruing men, his cham∣ber to be deckt and perfumed against his comming: yea, a gentlewoman to plucke of his bootes, by his iniunction for∣sooth, for mortification sake. Oh monstrous irreligion, so to forget good manners, and so to make the lay religious, and themselues lay. These words are let downe, in the answere to the Iesuited gentleman. Page. 93. 94. See the second booke, and third Chapter. Now I beseech thee gentle reader, are not those men and women voide of all sense and reason, that doe so admire these Iesuites, and so depend vpon them, that rather then they doe not all their dissignements, they will be at defiance with their soueraigne, and natiue countrey? Let wise men iudge, and giue their indifferent censure herein. Not I, but their fellow-laborers the Secular priests, who with tooth and nayle labour to defend the Pope and popish religion, doe bitterly exclaime against them as you see. I put downe their owne wordes, I adde nothing, I substract nothing, alter nothing. Let the rea∣der therefore remember wel what I write, and ponder deepely the whole discourse.
Preamble. XI. Of the dependance of the Iesuites, and Iesuited persons, vpon the foule fiend the diuell. BY Parsons platformes, Secular priests must depend vpon Blackwell, and Blackwell vpon Garnet, and Gar∣net vpon Parsons, and Parsons the priests bastard vp∣on the Diuell: and therfore doe the Secular priests pray thus; when they say the Letanie; a machinationibus Parsoni, libera not domine. These words are set downe in the Disco∣uerie. Pag. 70. quodl. 5. art. 8. pag. 151. Sée the second booke and fourth Chapter. Note heere gentle reader, that to depend vpon the Iesuites, is to depend vpon the diuell; and consequently, that to follow the Iesuites and their bloodie, tragicall, and traiterous design∣ments, is nothing else indeed, but to forsake God; to abandon his true feare and worship; to be traitours to your prince; to be enemies to your natiue countrey; and to make shipwracke of your owne soules. I say not so. If I should haue said so, none would haue beleeued me. But the Seminarie priests, the Popes owne darlings say so, and therefore it must needes be so▪ the truth cannot but preuaile. Preamble. XII. Of the Cardinalship of the traitorous Iesuite Robert Parsons. THe Iesuite Hole, & Doctor Worthington, drewe afor∣mal letter supplicatiue, in the names of all the English souldiers, labourers, artizans, pensioners, aswell men as women, (yea very seruing maids and laundresses were not omited) the same to be presented to the king of Spaine, most humbly beseeching his Maiesty, in regard of his great affection and care of England, and the afflicted English; that he would deale earnestly with the Pope, to preferre the worthie Father and Prelate, Father Parsons, to the dignitie of a Cardinall; affirming it to be the onely way,
to bind and vnite the English to his Maiestie. These words are set downe in the discouerie. Page. 61. quodlib. 4. art. 6. pag. 121. Note heere gentle Reader, that this arrogant Iesuite hath quite forgotten his vow of pouertie and obedience, and must needs be a Cardinall. For we may be assured, that this motion was neuer made to the King without his knowledge. Behold heere the final end, scope, and intendment, of all his trauel, ly∣ing, cogging, slaundering; of all his treasons, cruell tragedies, and most bloodie designements. He must forsooth be a Car∣dinall; then the Popes Legate in England; and so rule the king and all. God saue my Lord Cardinall, bastard Cowbucke of Stockgersee, for so is his right name, as shall be seene hereaf∣ter. Yea, he is termed King Cardinall. quodl. 5. art. 8. hee is said to haue a vile, bloodie, and bastardly minde, quodl. 5. art. 8. and to be the bastardly vicar of hell. quodl. 5. art. 9. pag. 157. Preamble. XIII. Of the pompe and pride of our traiterous Iesuites. THe Iesuite Heywood kept many men, horses, and coaches, as the Iesuite Garnet doth at this present. By meanes whereof, the vsuall contributions to the Secu∣lar priests, were and are greatly diminished. These words are set downe in the Discouerie. Page. 48. Note heere gentle Reader, that by this and many other the like proceedings, it appeareth eudiently, that the Iesuites seeke for nothing else, but honour, preserment, case, delicate faire, sumptuous apparrell, horses, coaches, and their owne sensuall pleasures. To which may be added, that both they and the Seminaries, haue money and worldly wealth at their pleasures; vnlesse the foure score and ten Seculars, which of late are bent against the Iesuites, be lately by that meanes, bereaued of their former golden banks. But questionlesse their hauing as yet, is farre aboue their desets. See the tenth Preamble.
Preamble. XIIII. Of the dissention amongst the Iesuites. THe Iesuite Heywood, was against the Iesuite Par∣sons; neither would Parsons be vnder Heywood, nor Heywood vnder Parsons. Parsons alledged, that their ge∣nerall had appointed him to be the prouinciall all ouer all the Iesuite, in England, & consequently ouer Heywood. But Heywood replied, that his mission was immediately from the Pope, and that he thereby was exempted from all sub∣mission to him. This quarrel grw to be hote, and had ma∣ny partakers on eyther side. In the end the said Heywood loathing and abhorring many enormities amongst the Ie∣suites wrote sundrie letters to the Pope, instantly desiring his hlins, that the Iesuites might be reformed; affirming that otherwise he should see their ruine (he feared,) in his owne dates. These words are to be found in the discouery. Pag. 48. 46. Behold heere gentle Reader, the sweete vnitie betweene these Iesuites; marke the arrogancie of them both; call to minde their vowes of pourty and obedience; forget not,See the Apologie. Page. 22. how the priests were deuided, touching this Iesuiticall quarrell: and putting all together, thou shalt easely perceiue, and behold as in a glasse of Christall; that God who is the author of peace, and not of dissention, 1. Cor. 14. vers. 33. did neuer send them into this land; but is highly displeased, with their disloyall and trecherous dealing. God graunt, that all simply seduced pa∣pists, may in due time consider the same. Preamble. XV. Of the Duke of Medina. IT is knowen right well, both from the Duke of Medina his owne mouth, and by other certaine intelligence, that all the Catholicks in England, as well as others, and per∣haps rather were designed to ye slaughter. For the said duke beeing told, that there were  Catholikes in England,
made answere, that he cared not. I will make (quoth hée,) the best Protestants in England, as good Catholickes as they, if I haue them once vnder my sword. I respect neither the one nor the other, I meane to make roome there for my m∣ster. This he hath spoken diuerse times, and the Iesuites themselues haue so reported. yea, the Iesuite Southwell did confesse no lesse at , in the hearing of diuers priests their prisoners. These words are set downe, quodl. 6. art. 10. pag. 177. and the same is affirmed, in the important con∣siderations. Pag. 25 vers. 18. as also in the reply to Parsons libell. sol. 65. a. vers. 24. fol. 29. a. Note heere gentle Reader, this important point with me. Viz. That if the Spaniards should make a conquest of this land, as the Papistes doe disloyally expect, whose expecta∣tion God of his mercie hath hitherto confounded, and will I trust still confound the same; then doubtlesse, they would make a most tragicall and bloody massacre of all promiscuè, neither respecting one nor other: for their intendment is, to aduance and entich themselues; to haue a kingdom, not to re∣forme religion. No, no, neither they, nor yet the Iesuites, haue any such meaning. Preamble. XVI. Of the title of Isabella the Spanish Ladie. THe Iesuite Parsons caused the students in Spaine to subscribe to the Ladie Infantaes title to the Crowne of England, and to what else he would hauing gotten their names to three seuerall blanks. These words are set down in the hope of peace. Page. 22. See the next Preamble, and note it well. Note heere gentle Reader, that euerie allegation one after another, iumpeth vpon this setled and constant position; Viz. that the scope and whole intendment of the Iesuites, is flat auowed rebellion, and doth nothing at all concerne reli∣gion. See the fourth Chapter, in the sixt Paragraph.
Preamble. XVII. Of most notorious and intolerable treason, intended a∣gainst her Maiesties sacred person, and the royall Crowne of England. THe Iesuites are so desirous to set the Diademe of England,O traye∣s , & cur∣sed broode  the deuil. vpon the head of the princesse Isabella the In∣santa of Spaine, that they haue set forth a booke to this pur∣pose, and in that booke they giue her such an interest, as they make the kings of this land for many yeares to haue beene vsurpers: they haue also procured men by indirect means, to subscribe to this Ladies soueraigntie ouer vs. Yea, offers haue béene made to one of the secular priests, that if hee could haue eaten gold, and would but haue giuen his coun∣tenance and assistance that way, he should haue had it. In briefe, some of the Iesuites haue conspired among them∣selues, and with sundrie other most wicked persons at di∣uers times, to haue laid violent hands vpon the quéene, and to haue bereued her of her life. It cannot be denied, but that they haue done so; the circumstances haue shewed it; the parties themselues with whom they practised, haue confessed it; yea, sundrie Catholicks beyond the seas doe verie well know it, and haue charged in their writings some of them with it. These words are set downe in the Discouerie. Page. 9. see the 16. Preamble. Note here gentle reader, these important points with me. First, that the Iesuites labour with tooth and nayle, with gold and money, with threats and faire promises, to cause others both domesticall & forraine to ioyne with them, in setting the royall diadem of England, vpon the Spanish Infantaes head. Secondly, that they affirme in a most traytorous, and exe∣crable booke published for that end, that the kinges of Eng∣land haue beene vsurpers, and not lawfull princes, for manie yeares together. Where I must needes put them in minde of this one thinge, that their Cardinall Bellarmine telleth them with their Popes good liking; that if the Popes had somtimes beene vsurpers, yet prescription would iustifie the Popes title
in these dayes. So then by their owne doctrine, if their suppo∣sall were graunted, (Which they disloyally auouch, like arrant traytors as their fellow priests rightlie terme them,) yet were prescription sufficient in that behalfe. Thirdly, that they haue offered huge masses of gold and money, so to allure men do∣mestical or forraine, to the cruel murder and bloudie massacre of our gracious soueraigne, most noble Queene Elizabeth. If papists themselues had not thus written, my selfe could hardly haue beleeued it. Preamble. XVIII. Of Obedience which must be giuen to the Pope, a∣gainst all kinges, Princes, and monarches of the world. IN all warres which may happen for religion, euery Catholike man is bound in conscience, to imploy his person and forces by the Popes direction; viz. how farre, when, and where, eyther at home or abroad, he may and must breake with his temporall soueraigne. This doctrine was laid downe for a ground, in iustifying Sir William Stanleyes disloyall treacherie, against his naturall and an∣nointed Soueraigne, in the yeare, 1587. These words are set downe in the important considerations, Page. 23. 24. and they are granted of the Iesuites, Apol. 172. Sée the fourth booke and fift chapter, and note the words. Note heere gentle Reader, these important points with me. First, that all Kings, Queenes, and Monarches of the Chri∣stian world, are by this popish Maxime and Iesuiticall ground, brought into the bondage and slauery of the Bishop of Rome,See the complemēt of the third booke, and note it well. and must be his slaues and vnderlings to doe what pleaseth him. Secondly, that the Secular priests (who vnwittingly haue deliuered this doctrine against themselues,) are guiltie of the same treacherie with the Iesuites, though not perhaps in the same degree. For seeing the seculars doe professe their obe∣dience to the Pope in euerie thing, and do withall submit both themselues and all their writings to his holy censure, (as is to
be seene at large in this discourse;) they must needes ap∣prooue and like well of this most traiterous doctrine, be∣cause the Pope liketh and approoueth the same. Thirdly, that all the Papist, in England which ioyne with the Iesuites, who are verie many,) doe obstintely embrace this Iesuiti∣call doctrine, and so are guiltie of high treason. Preamble. XIX. Of the King of Spayne his purpose, and intent against England. THat the new king regnant in Spaine plotteth by Ie∣suiticall faction, and resolueth to proceed where his fa∣ther left against England, it is most apparant by the pre∣sent action in Ireland; as also by sundrie of father Parsons subiects, sent hither to be agents on the Spanish behalfe, for that purpose. All which doe conuince the Iesuiticall hispanized faction, of falshoode, hypocrisie, sedition, and treason; and that it is not religion, which the king present careth for, more then his father did before him; but maketh that onely a pretence, to seduce all Catholikes and to draw them to rebellion, hoping thereby to haue their spéedier aide and assistance, making them and you all (deare Catholiks,) to cut one anothers throate. These words are set downe, in the preface to the important considerations; in the fourth leafe therof. Note heere gentle Reader, that the Iesuites bend all their thoughts, words, and actions, to stirre vp rebellion and bloo∣die trecherie euerie where: as also that the king of Spayne now regnant, is as readie as was his father afore him, to ef∣fect both in Ireland and in England all bloodie practises, which the high counsell of Iesuiticall reformation, shall de∣signe and appoint to be done.
Preamble. XX. Of the Iesuiticall hotch-potch Religion. IT is a plaine testimonie of no religion in the Iesuites, but flat Atheisme, making religious pietie, but one∣ly amutter of meere pollicie, by sending forth trumpet∣ters to sound out their and Blackwels vertues. quodl. 6. art. 4. pag. 168. The Iesuites haue made religion, but an art of such as liue by their wits, and a verie hotch-potch of emm gherum quodlibet. 2. art. 8. pag. 42. The Ie∣suites are to be marked out for the most malitious, trai∣terous, and irreligious calumniators that euer liued on earth, vnworthie that euer the earth should heare them; and it is an intollerable indignitie to the whole Church of GOD, that euer such wicked members should liue vnpunished in her, as they doe. Quodlibet. 4. art 2. page. 99. Note heere gentle Reader, these important points with me. First, that these good fellowes, who pretend to bee sent of God from Heauen, to reforme the English Church and State, are men of no religion, but men that make re∣ligion a matter of meere policie. Secondly, that they are so wicked, so irreligious, and so trayterous, as the like were neuer heard of. Thirdly, that it is a great shame for the whole Church of God, that such badde fellowes doe liue vnpunished. These things well considered, hee that will thinke them or the Seculars to be Gods ambas∣sadours, may iustly be deemed as wise, as hee that hath no witt at all. For God is so highly offended, with their trayterous dealings and damnable practises; that hee hath enforced themselues, to discouer their owne bad proceedings against themselues; that so all the worlde may knowe their abhominations, and detest them with all their traiterous and cursed machinations.
The second Booke, contayning the trea∣cheries and tyrannie of the Pope and his Iesuiticall faction, breathed out against the sacred Maiestie of Gods annoynted. CHAP. I. Of the swarmes of Iesuites, and Seminaries, or Secular priests, in this Realme of England. THe number of Iesuites, and secu∣lar priests in England, is excéeding great, as by this discourse will be made apparant; and the said cursed brood,90. prieste do hold a∣gainst the Iesuites. Quod l. 2. art. 6. pa. 39. in fine. Ergo, their number is great in England. The Iesu∣ites affirme in their a∣pologie, Page. 118. That 300. seminare priests are on their side. Irgo the num∣ber of all is very great. is increased euery day. Thrée hundred seminarie priests besides the Iesuites, haue béene sent from the Pope into England. And be∣cause many doe not vnderstand ful∣ly, the difference betwéene Iesuites, Seminaries, and Se∣cular priests: it shall not be amisse, briefely to instruct them in that behalfe. Euerie Iesuite, euen he that is but a lay∣brother, maketh a solemne vow of three speciall and im∣portant points, whereof many of them, (I dare not say the greater part,) séeme not truly to kéepe any one. And I doe not barely say it, but the Seminarists shall contest the same with me. The three essentiall points of Iesuiticall professiō, are these in expresse termes; viz. pouertie, chastity, and obedience. Which triple vowe is common to the Iesu∣ites, with all their popish sects. And for this triple vow it is, that they are called religious. But how truly they enioy and deserue that name; let the indifferent reader iudge, when he shall haue perused this discourse. For albeit reli∣gious
profession, be a separating of men from the actions of the world, yet doe they deale altogether with the world. The Secular priests, are all manner of priests which make not the said triple vow; viz. All priests, which are not  or fryers. For our lordly Iesuites, are by pro∣fession and solemne vow, poore munkes and lowly fryers. They are called secular for distinction sake, & because they haue proprietie in secular prossessions of the world; which the others are by vow abandoned, but will by now and then be intermedling a little there∣withall. shall. . I say, for distinction sake, be∣ the word (secular) both fitly distinguish them, from the Dominicans, Carthusians, Benedictines, Carmelites, Ie∣suites, and the rest. All which are called religious, be∣cause they make a more strict profession of religion, then other Christians doe; howsoeuer they keepe the same. The seminarie priests are méere secular,ee the d Pre∣amble of the first booke. as well as they that neuer were out of this land. They are called semina∣ries, because they studie and are maintained in the Col∣ledges or seminaries; and some of them, neuer are made priests at all. I say (some,) because verie few are in that predicament. CHAP. II. Of the vnspeakable dissention, betweene the Iesuites and Secular priests. THe malice of the new vpstart Iesuites, is exceeding great, and the wth plainely; that they are badde fel∣ls, licents, proud, hautie, cruell, couetous, ambiti∣ous, deceitfull irreligious; nothing lesse then that, which they would seeme and professe to bee. All this to be tree, shall euidently appeare out of printed bookes, euen by the Iesuites themselues and the secular priests, to the iudgement of all the world: yea, the Pope himselfe in his sacred Palla, . For of Weston the Iesuite ths write the priests; a man as impatient, as some of his fellowes, and of as hautie a spirit as any man
can be. It was wonderfull to consider, what humblenes & simplicitie he would pretend (in the time of his prouincial∣ship.) His sighes and zeale seemed to be extraordinarie as though the perteetion of true mortification, had béene the onely thing he aymed at. Marrie, with all his hypocrisie he deceiued none, but such as did not looke narrowly into his proceedings. A righter Pharisee, cannot easily be found. In the most of his humility, nothing did trouble him more; then that Master Bagshaw being a Doctor of Diuinitie,Loe, the Iesuites are flat hipo∣crites. should haue place before him at the table. insomuch as the better to content him, we were driuen to place him at the tables end with him. Thus write the secular priests, in their relation. Page. 5. Paragraph. I. Of the outcries of the Iesuites, against the se∣cular priests. LIster the Iesuite hath written a booke,The Iesu∣ites are charged with theft. chap. 3. in which he chargeth all the priestes that appealed to the Pope, to be flat schismatikes. To which booke, Blackwell the Archpriest, and Garnet the prouinciall in England, did both sub∣scribe. In this booke, the Iesuites charge the priests to haue fallen from the Church, and the spouse of Christ; to haue troden vnder their féete, their obedience due to the Pope; to haue lost their faculties & authoritie; to be irregular; to haue incurred the sentence of excommunication; to be in all mens mouthes, as infamous persons. To be as publi∣cans and sinners. and to be nothing better, thou are sooth∣sayers and idolaters. These words are set downe in their relation. Page. 60. The Archpriest by Iesuiticall appointment affirmed audaciouslie, that he had receiued a resolution from the mother Citie (of Rome,) that the refusers of his au∣thoritie were schismatikes,Behold here  mē to guide mēs soules. and that he would not giue ab∣solution to any who should make no conscience thereof; and gaue direction that they should make account thereof, and make satisfaction, before they receiued absolution. Hee de∣nied
to giue any faculties to Master Benson, vnlesse he would renounce the schismaticall conuenticle (of the secu∣lar priests,) Hee declared also, that M. Moore had written in preiudice of the faith, when he wrote in the behalfe of the priests, concerning the matter of schisme; whereupon, neither his ordinarie ghostly father would administer the sacraments to him, nor his ghostly children receiue any of him, or be present when he said masse. These words are set downe in the hope of peace. Page. 31. Our Arch-priest chafeth, the prouinciall his good master clappes him on the backe, and egges him forward; the rest of the Iesuites what their tongues,Loe, the Iesuites are malitious slandere 15. and prepare their pens to speake and write, what they can falsely deuise to make vs odious; so as presently we are become a by-word in their mouthes, and are nothing with them, but rebels. Apostates, and what they list to report of vs. These word are set downe in the relation. Page. 60. The Iesuites caused a libell to be cast out against doctor. Lewis a secular priest, and for that they loued the man, in the course of their hote charitie, they made this deuout prayer for him; vel Turca, velmors, vel demon, euen eripiat à nobis. Eyther the Turke,A godly Iescall prayer. or death, or the diuell, take him away from vs. And indeed not long after he died; we leaue it to Gods iudgement, whether they were the causers of it or not. Thus write the priests in their discouerie. Page. 32. quodl. 4. art. 2. pag. 97. The Iesuites triumphed openly, vpon the death of an other English priest, Cardinall Allen by name,The Iesu∣ seeme to be most worked and hypocriti∣cal men. Yet, they a acted of that theft chap. 3. and a∣mongst other their calumniations against him, they said that God had taken him away in good time; for if he had led longer, he would haue disgraced himselfe, and lost the credit which he had got. These men haue the best fortune in the world; for no man, if once they begin to hate him, doth liue any long time after it. These words are set downe in the discouerie. Page. 34. In the same place the priests write, that the said Cardi∣nall was thought to be poysoned, by Iesuiticall meanes and procurement.
Paragraph. II. Of the outcries, which the Secular priests make against the Iesuites. THe priests exclaime against the Iesuites, for their Ma∣chiuilian practises & diabolicall plots, in their concur∣rence, incitements, and execrable perswasions, which they vsed and practised with the Spaniards, and with other for∣raine and domesticall powers; for the inuasion, conquest, and vtter subucrsion of most noble England, of her sacred Maiestie, and of all her loyall and faithfull subiects. This is true Catholike religion, in this case,Marke well this lesson. and true English nature and valure, true faith, and true charitie; and what the Iesuits perswade vs toward a conquest of our deare countrey, vpon pretence of neuer so much pietie, were abhominable disloyaltie in vs to our prince. These words are set downe, in the answere to the Iesuited gentle∣man. Page. 70. The Iesuites affect rule ouer the secular cleargie, so to bring armes and conquest into the Church,The Iesu∣ites are dis∣loyal wret∣ches. They are charged with theft. chap. 3. contrarie to all scriptures; and to that end, they doe manage matters of state more machiuilianly, then Machiuell himselfe; as ap∣peares by their erection of the Arch-priest, and all his carriages according to them and it. These words are set downe, in the aunswere to the Iesuited gentleman. Page. 79. Wee all of the Secular Cleargie vna voce, doe vtterly dis∣clayme and renounce from our hearts,Loe, the Iesuites are seditious and arrant traitors. both Arch-priest and Iesuites, as arrant traitors vnto their prince and countrey, whom to death we will neuer obey; no, if the Popes holines should charge vs to obey in this sense, to aduance an enemie to the English Crowne, we would neuer yeeld to it; as by no law of nature, of nations, or of man, to be compelled there∣vnto. These words with many moe to the like effect, are put downe in the Preface, to the important considerations. Fol. 9. page. 2.
Note heere gentle Reader, that this sweete harmonie, be∣tweene the Pope, the Iesuites, and the Secular priests, were able to make an horse to breake his halter. And doubtlesse, the Pope, yea, many Popes successiuely, haue thus com∣maunded them, as shall appeare in the due place of this discourse. The Iesuites holde this position for a constant doctrine, that the people may depose their princes, and choose others at their pleasures; haue they any or no right to the Crown, that is not materiall, so it be done ad Deum; that is (by our interpretation,) as the Iesuites shall appoint it. Héere we would haue you, to note an other rule of our english Ie∣suites, which must concurre with that of ordine ad Dem. and it is this,Oh bloo∣die,  Ie∣suite. that all things must be wrought and framed, as the times and occasions require. For example, if the king of Spayne or the Infanta, can by no other practise ob∣taine the Crowne of England, then in that case, the people are to haue a right to doe what they list, so they will choose one of them for their soueraigne. These expresse words are set downe by the priests, in their sparing Discouerie. Page. 14. & 15. quodl. 3. art. 4. pag. 68. Note heere gentle reader, that the Iesuites and their com∣plicies, are not imprisoned, or put to death for religion, as they would leaue the world to thinke; but for at treason and pur∣posely intended rebellion. For so much their owne pennes, (by Gods prouidence,) doe here testifie, as you see. And consequently, politicke, godly, and very necessarie, are the in that case prouided. While the inuasion was talked of, and in preparation in Spayne, Richard Hesket was set on by the Iesuites 1592. or there abouts, with father Parsons consent & knowledge, to haue stirred vp the Earle of Darbie to rebellion against her highnesse. Not long after, father Holt the Iesuite and others with him, perswaded an Irish man one Patricke Collen (as he himselfe confessed,) to attempt the laying of his violent and villanous hands vpon her Maiestie. Short∣ly after, 1593. that notable stratagme was plotted, for Doctor Lopez the Queenes phisition, to haue poysoned her.
This wicked designement being thus preuented,Holt, and other Ie∣suites are traytours, euen by the confes∣sion of se minarie priests. by Gods prouidence, the said traiterous Iesuite Holt and others, did allure and animate one Yorke and Williams, to haue accomplished that with their bloodie hands, that the other purposed to haue done with his poyson; we meane her Ma∣iesties destruction. Heereunto we may adde, the late vil∣lanous attempt, 1599. of Edward Squire, animated and drawen thereunto, as he confessed, by Walpole that per∣nitious Iesuite. These words are set downe, in the impor∣tant considerations; Page. 33 see chap. 4. paragraph. 6. of Wal∣poole the Iesuite. The Iesuites laboured in Fraunce, (euen the french Ie∣suites themselues,) to haue lifted the Spaniard into the throne of that kingdome,The Iesu∣ites are wholy bent, to traiterous practises euerie where. with the consequent ouerthrow of their owne natiue countrey. All Christendome to their perpetuall shame, ring loudly of it. They made great stirre in Spayne, to perswade the king to inuade England, yeelding to him many reasons, why he was bound to vndertake that enterprise, and assuring him of great assi∣stance, if once his forces were landed. Hereunto may be added, how many they haue intituled to the Crowne of England, as the Duke of Parma the Earle of Darbie, and others, exciting some of them by force of armes to as∣saile her Maiestie, and buzzing into their eares, how easily the scepter might be wrung out of her hands, and they obtaine it. But most pertinent to the purpose, is that their plotting and compassing, how to set the Diademe of this Realme, vpon the head of the princesse Isabella the Infanta of Spayne. To this purpose they haue written a booke, wherein they gaue her such an interest, as they make the kings of this land for many yeares to haue béene vsurpers. These words are to be read in their discouerie. Page. 8. quodl. 9. art. 2. pag. 288. The Iesuites take pleasure to scatter rumors,The Iesu∣ites are commonly iudged, to be great lyar. and to suggest certaine nouelties in the eares of Catholikes; yea, to forge and inuent things that are not. insomuch as they are commonly held now a daies great lyars, and it is come to passe, that though they sweare men wil not beléeue them.
These words are set downe in the Relation. Page. 73. quod∣libet. 2. art. 6. pag. 39. CHAP. III. Of the excessiue expences, and great gallantrie of the Iesuites. THe Iesuites endeuour by all meanes possible, that both those almes which are giuen for the relief of them that are in prison,Money ta∣ken for dis∣pensations. or any other poore afflicted whatsoeuer; as also whatsoeuer is paid in cases of dispensation, may come to their hands. Now what is done with this money, we know not. Prisons and Colledges are depriued of the great summes; the banished haue them not; the priests sée them not; but there are hired here with seditious persons; deuisers of fables,The priests are saints, in their owne iudg∣ment. slaunderers of their brethren, and scor∣ners of the saints are herewith enriched; these and such as these, receiue large stipends of their labours. And yet so great a masse of monies cannot be consumed, but that the fathers bestow much vpon themselues. For they goe in déed in great gallantrie; no Iesuite goeth to visit any one, or trauelleth from one place to another,Oh braue religious fryers? where is the pouer∣tie ye pro∣fesse? but he is richly ap∣parrelled, and is attended on with a great traine of ser∣uants, as if he were a Baron, or an Earle. They wrangle, and reprooue the priests garments, and spendings; where∣as the expences of one Iesuite▪ were able to maintaine twentie priests richly. Neither by this meanes also, could so great a quantitie of almes be wasted, but that (as the report goes,) much treasure is conueyed beyond the seas,The Iesu∣ites are ve∣rie honest men, and faithfull collectors. but to what purpose, we know not, vnlesse it be bestowed vpon their bodie, their corporation, or societie. These words are to be found in the Relation, Page. 70. See the tenth Preamble, and note it well. The Iesuites became our collectors, or rather not ours, but their owne; to whom for their accounts, the false Ste∣ward in the gospell may giue place. One Iesuite hath ta∣ken at times aboue 500 pound, that was giuen to the im∣prisoned priests then at W,500. li. and imployed the same
at his owne pleasure. Percie the Iesuite escaping from Wis∣bish, tooke fraudulently from benefactors abroad,Who will not hang their soules vpon such religious fathers? 2200. li. Page. 19. 20 57. pound, 17. shillings, and the yeare after stole 27. pound of the com∣mon money, by the consent of the other his fellow Iesuites. They haue so fleeced their fauorers, as ouer & aboue their owne expences, (which are excéeding great,) they haue beene able to send out long since, 2200. pound towards the Low countries. To scrape together so much money, they haue many sleights, besides their apparant consena∣ges, frauds, and thefts before mentioned. Thus they write in their discouerie. Page. 19. First,My selfe  able to te∣stifie this to be true. I will but referre you vnto all the priests and Ca∣tholikes that liued in England in father Haywoods time of libertie, and knew him & his manners, and fashions well, and if they doe not assure you, that his port and carriage was more Baronlike, then priestlike, all the world will condemne them for most partiall, and impudent deniers of the truth. Was he not wont to ride vp and downe the countrey in his coach? had he not both seruants and priests attendants in great numbers? was not his pompe such as the places where he came séemed petie-courts, by his pre∣sence, traine, and followers? againe, for present I referre you to father Garnets pompe and expences, of which I haue heard some honest priests (who haue béene much with him,) report, that he cannot spend lesse then 500. pound by the yeare. The mightie and extraordinarie excesse of master Iohn Gerard, hath béene such and so notorious, that I sup∣pose few priests (besides our cath.) to be ignorant thereof. His apparrell at one time hath béene valued at an higher rate, then I will for shame speake of. His horses were ma∣ny, and of no small price. My selfe haue knowne him to haue two geldings in a gentlemans stable, at 30. pound a gelding, besides others else-where, and horses of good vse. During his imprisonment in the Clinke, he kept a priuate table continually, with great store of dainties, and much resort daily. Besides, he paid his ordinarie commons at the common table, and chamber rent. Let them which haue liued in the Clinke, but iudge what this would come vnto
in the yeare. But that you may not thinke this to haue been the vttermost of his excesse, you shall vnderstand, that he ordinarily kept his geldings in the towne,O faithfull  Imprison∣ment of Iesuites, is  be∣come great libertie: This yeare would be looked in∣to. and his man, which I suppose to be some round charge vnto him. He also so wrought the matter, that he rode into the countrey at his pleasure, and returned. Which I thinke you will suppose cost his purse well, in bribes to such as were his keepers, if to no other. He also maintained two houses in the towne, with seruants in them, and not this without great expen∣ces I weene. Sure I am, that such as liued with him in the Clinke, were of opinion, that he could not maintayne all this I haue spoken of, vnder 400. or 500. pounds by the yeare. I may not omit master Oldcorm, though but a pettie Iesuite in this kinde. I know, that his apparrell is seldome lesse worth, then 30. or 40. pound. He is alwaies extraordinarily well prouided for horses, and those of the best. An honest gentleman, and one whom I thinke you will iudge to be no lyer, (besides that he is not euill affec∣ted towards the Iesuites,) told me, that he had eight good geldings at one time. Such as haue heretofore béene secu∣lar priests, and were wont to goe on foote sometimes, to vi∣sit poore people willingly, becomming afterwards Iesuites, haue béene so a cockhorse, that it must be thought no small fauour to be worthy of their presence, and that not without their attendants, and other ceremonies. Witnes this ma∣ster Bankes, master Blunt, and others now Iesuites. This long storie of the Iesuites, their expences, and gallantrie, is set downe in the replie to Parsons libell. Fol. 14. and fol. 15. Neither was it euer yet my hap to be made a rich mans executor, whereby to better my estate that way, and to braue it in girdle and hangers of thirtie pound price,Oh poore begging Fryer? as a Iesuite hath done, neither beare I so Iesuiticall a consci∣ence. These words are put downe, in the third letter of A. C. P. 65. 5. Nothing is more familiar to the Iesuites, by their buls & constitutions: & then beggery, yet neuer had any men better skil to scrape vp coyne, that they might liue at their ease. In
this occupation they played more trickes of legerdemaine, then master Peter Patelin, or Frances de Villon, or Panurge de Rabelais. For all that these thrée worshipfull Doctors did, was but in matters of trifles. But to doe as our re∣uerend fathers, the Iesuites do: is to fish for Whales, not for Goodgins: for which purpose they haue first the instruc∣ting of youth, which is their first hooke: Viz. The allure∣ments they vse to them, their auriculer confessions, which they know how to imploy to the benefit of their house: the visiting of the sicke, the waiting vpon them to the very last gaspe, that they may neuer be out of sight; the extraordi∣narie absolutions, which they say they can giue them, wher∣with they féede their humour, that they may draw some rich legacie from them: the deuises of their simple vow, and a thousand other hypocriticall shiftes, which they call charitie, but with this condition, that their charitie begin at themselues: because the predicament ad aliquid, is not an accident to them, but wholy the substance of their sect. So that one may iustly call them, not the order of the Ie∣suites, but the ordure of the Iesuites. For although they make shew, not to meddle with retayling, yet they sell by whole sale, the administration of the holy Sacrament, dea∣rer then Giezie Elizaeus man, would haue sold the spirituall gifts of Naaman. At once, so it is, that within these thrée∣score yeares, they haue raked togither more treasure by this their sophisticall beggerie, then all the Monasteries of Fraunce, haue done two or three hundred yeares. These words are set downe in the Iesuites Catchisme, in the second booke, and fourtéene chapter. But you perhaps will de∣maund, how such summes should come to their hands? I answere, that it is well knowne, that the Iesuites haue had disposition of the common purse for many yeares, and the receits of almost all legacies in pios vsus, yearely almes, extraordinarie gifts, besides restitutions de bonis meritis, much for dispensations in diuers cases, and for Alienations, Aduowsons, and such like. All which receits rise to no small summe. There hath falne by way of legacies with∣in these few yeares of my knowledge, (besides what other
men can say,) 2000. pound,The Iesu∣ites cannot be but rich, though they pro∣fesse pouer∣tie. some affirme 3000. pound, from one of worth, 500. pounds, from another priuate gen∣tleman: 800. pound from another, and some 100. pound, yearely in lands and rents. Master Iohn Gerard for his part, got by one gentleman 200. pound at one time, and 700. pound at another time, besides the disposition of 100. pound by the yeare. The said Iesuite had in another place by a priests procurement who told me of it, 160. pound, of another he receiued 500. pound in a matter of restitution, certa pro incertis, the partie hauing compounded before the aduise of another priest, for 300. pound, which he should haue giuen to the prisoners of Wisbish. But this young father Iesuite comming to the partie, hoysed the summe vnto 500. pound, and tooke it vnto himselfe. These words are set downe, in the reply to Parsons libell. Fol. 24. Note heere gentle Reader for Christs sake, what impostors, and coozners these Iesuites be, whom for all that, so many sil∣lie and simple soules, doe repute for saints and men of God. First, you see, that they will sell their holy so supposed sacra∣ments for money, and that at a dearer rate, then Giezie Elizaus man would haue solde the spirituall gifts to Naaman. Second∣ly, that by their sophisticall and deceitfull beggerie, they daily scrape golde and money into their hands. Thirdly, that too proudly, and too too sumptuously, (which is abhominable in Gods sight, and all good mens,) they bestow 30. pound vpon one gelding, (of which sort they haue many at once,) and 30. pound vpon one girdle and hangers. Fourthly, that so soone as they become Iesuites, (that is to say, poore begging fryers,) they are vpon their cockhorse, and thinke their betters to be enworthie of their presence. Fiftly, that they feede the hu∣mour of the sicke, with faire promises of extraordinarie abso∣lations, so to draw some rich legacies from them. Sixtly, that they apply their simple vow and auriculer confession, to en∣rich themselues, and to fill their cofers. Seuenthly, that they receiue great summes of mony for dispensations. Eightly, that they cause men to make restitution for goods vniustly gotten, and conuert the money to their owne proper vses. Wherfore I must needs conclude, that they are as blinde as beetles, that
doe not see there irrelegious dealing, but wil yeeld their soules to their vnchristian guiding. Among many other meanes, which the holy Iesuites haue to enrich themselues, this is not the least, to wit,The Iesuits are good hunters, in seeking gold and money. See book third, aduiso. 9. the drawing of men into their holy exercise. A yonge gentle∣man not long since, entering into this exercise vnder a yong Iesuite here in England, was found by his meditations to haue landes yet vnsold, worth one hundreth markes a yeare, which hindred his iourney to heauen. Whereupon he offering the same to the said yonge Iesuite, the good fa∣ther allowing the offer, said, that if he should receiue the land her maiestie would take it from him, but (quoth he) sell it, and then I am capable of the monie. By which Ghostly counsell, the Gentleman set his land to sale, and was of∣fered 900. pound for it; but the holy father insisting vpon a 1000. pound, the Gentleman died before a chap-man could be gotten, and so the good father lost all. I o∣mit, how many poore yong men, falling into these good Fa∣thers hands to be exercised, haue fallen into sundry incon∣ueniences, and growen to be broken-brayned euer after. these words are set downe in the discouery,See more therefore in the third booke, and 9. aduiso. pag. 27. quodli∣bet. 5. art. 10. pag. 99. See more to this purpose in the thirde booke, in the ninth aduiso. chap. 4. Of the quality, nature, and religion of the Iesuits. Paragraph. I. Of there equiuocations. A An other thing is to be generally misliked in the Iesuites, and it is their equiuocating,The Iesuits are giuen to lying & cogging. which you may tearme in plaine english, lying and cogging. For this a∣mongst others is one of their rules, that a man framing to him selfe a true proposition, when he is asked a question, he may conceale thereof, as much as he thinketh good. For example; one demaunding of you, whether if the Pope should come in warlike manner, to inuade this lande by force of armes, you would take his part, or y• Queenes; you framing this answere in your minde; wee will take the
Queenes t,That they vse equi∣uocations, it is gra∣ted in the Apolo∣gie, page. 205. if the Pope will command vs so to doe; may by their doctrine giue this answere lawfully; viz. we will take the Queenes part, and conceale the rest; whereby he that asked the question is plainely deluded. these words he shall find in the sparing discouerie, Pag. 11. quodlib. 2. art. 4. page. 66. Sée chapter second in fine. Standish, that honest man, must haue accesse to the Popes holinesse, accompanied with two runnagates both of them priests, doctor Haddocke, and M. Martin Array. These must take vpon them,This Stan∣deth is a Ie∣suited priest. that they were men deputed from the secu∣lar priests in England, &c. His holines hearing and mar∣king well their suite, demāded of them in expresse termes, if that which they had said vnto him, proceeded from the de∣sire and consent of his louing priests in England; affirming, that otherwise hee would in no sorte giue any eare vnto them. Whereunto Master Standish, very well instructed be∣fore by father Parsons,oe, the Pope  de∣ceiued by his holy priests. and sufficiently assisted by the said two lying priests, answered, that what he had presumed to deliuer to his holinesse, he had done it most assuredly by their consent. The said Standish after his returne into Eng∣land, being asked by certane priests, how he durst presume so impudently to abuse his holynesse, with so intollerable an vntruth, he excused himselfe in this sort. Viz. that when he said, he had the consent of the secular priests in England to make that motion, his answere therein was made by him cautè, that is, subtilly, or by equiuocation, meaning to himselfe, Viz. as he supposed or presumed; which words hée kept in his mind and vttred not. These words are set down in the relation, Page. 55. and 56. Note here gentle reader, two thinges out of this present Paragraph. First, that the Iesuites are indifferent men, and make no more conscience to deceiue their holy father the pope at Rome; then they doe to deceiue our soueraigne Ladie the Queene here in this land. Secondly, that the most essentiall pointe in all the Iesuiticall religion, consisteth in lying and cogginge.
Paragraph. II. Of the crueltie and tyrannie of the Iesuites. THe Iesuites giue it out, that the most vnlearned Ie∣suite,What great crueltie or tyran∣nie can be vsed? doth farre excell the most learned secular prieste, both in faculties and priuiledges. And it is noysed about, as it were by the common cryer, that they haue power from his holinesse, to grant to all, and euery one, all and singular their faculties; in so much as it shall not be law∣full and safe, for any to vse there priuiledges, though gran∣ted to them from his holines many yeares before, but with the leaue and consent of these Iesuites. And whē they giue out their faculties, they doe not bestow them, on learned, godly, or holy men; but on vnlearned, vngodly, and irre∣ligious; nay, seditious persons, such as follow their hu∣mor, stowpe at their becke, and stand bounde euer after to them. These words are set downe in the relation, page. 69. and 70. The Iesuites so rule in all gentlemens houses where they reside, that no lease must be let, but by their aduise; the tenants must either please them, or repent at leasure. Such fines must be taken,Loe, the Ie∣suites haue vowed to forsake the world, and yet are wholy oc∣cupied, in worldly af∣faires, as they thinke connenient, and some part of them must be imployed, as they shall prescribe ordine ad deum. in effect they doe so rule and ouer rule, as scarsely can the master or mistres of the house, giue a piece of bread at their doores, but it must be done with their ap∣probation. And for the seruants, they are much more at their commandement, thē at thers whome they serue. Wée would bee loath to tell you, how all this comes to passe. These words are to be red in the discouerie, pag. 15. and 16 quodlib. 3. art. 4. page. 68. Note heere, that disloyall subiects, goe and doe at euerie traytors becke; but are as dulle as snailes to goe or doe at the command, of their annointed Princesse. The Iesuites desire, that England should be conuerted of none, but Iesuits only. for they will admit no fellow-labo∣rers,
and they haue laboured by all meanes, vtterly to dis∣solue the colledge at Doway. They also challeng to them∣selues, a spirituall monarchie ouer all Englād. Thus I find written in the relation, pag. 71. A famous Father of the Iesuits, said in plaine words to a gentlewoman of good calling,Behold here tyran ny & ambition, in Iesuiti∣call procee∣dinge. which was charitablie af∣fected to the disgraced priests, in this manner; now is the time of tryall, they that are not with vs, are against vs. If you forsake them not now, you will ouerthrow your selfe and all your posteritie for euer. This he said to affright the charitable gentlewoman, as though the state of her poste∣ritie should be vtterly ouerthrowne, vnlesse shee adhered to the Iesuite. What more? was it not an other Iesuite with his assistant,O cruell tyrannie, o tyranous crueltie. which caused a gentle-man either to promise or to sweare, that he should stand fast vnto them, and in∣forme whatsoeuer he sawe or heard by priests and others, done against them and the arch-priest his procéedings? they made the lay gentle man their spie, (as they haue euery where many such,Loe the Ie∣suites proudly do promise a conquest. as well lay-men, as women, and priests,) vpon promise on their side againe to him yt he should be re∣stored to al his lands forfeited by his auncestors, in a conui∣ctiō by an attainder, whē the world should fall on their side. The silly Gentlemā mooued with this hope, vndertooke y• disgracefull office, and said to his friends, that he wrought a good daies worke,Iohn Ger∣ard the Ie∣suite said to the La∣die Markhā of Noting∣hame shire that the Ie∣suits would make the seculars leape at a crust, ere it be longe. quodlib. 3. art. 10. p. 83. when he entred this couenant. These words are set downe in the dialogue, betweene the secular priest and lay-gentleman, page. 66. page. 66. Note heare gentle reader, what traytorous and dangerous people our Romish Iesuites bee. They doe not only confident∣ly expect a conquest of this noble land, but they also proudly and malapertly promise the same to others, and besides this, they vse all cogging and lying, to allure and stirre vp her ma∣iesties subiects, to armes and open rebellion. Let the worlde iudge, vpon how iust and necessarie cause, capitall penall sta∣tutes are made, to abandon and bridle the proud and disloyall attempts, of these traytorous Iesuites, these most damnable villaines. If their power were correspondent to their willes, they would most cruelly murder her sacred and louing person
together with all their nobles and faithful subiects. God no doubt, who hitherto hath so miraculously protected her most excellēt maiestie, frō their villanous and bloodie hāds; hath also caused many of their owne coate (the secular priests I meane,) to contest and publish to the world in there printed bookes; their bad demeanor, their hypocriticall dealing; their conten∣tious garboyles; their seditious conspiracies; their disloyall con∣federacies; their tumultuous courses; their vnnaturall practises, and most bloodie complottes; yea, their vehement and conti∣nuall perswasions; their allurements and almost compulsions, to lay violent and bloodie hands, vpon their naturall, and vn∣doubted soueraigne, most noble Queene Elizabeth. So that hence forth, there can be no dniall made, either by themselues or by their fauourites, of their profane and mere brutish pro∣ceedings; of their cursed and diabolicall purposes; of their horrible and bloodie attempts; and their long desired con∣quest of this land. Paragraph. III. Of the malepeart saucinesse, and intollerable pride of the Iesuites. THe Iesuites that are in England desirous either to bring vnder bondage,What a malepeart aucinesse is this? what grea∣ter pride can be found? or vtterly to beare downe the cleargie of England, haue attempted the same by a won∣derfull stratageme. First, their will is, that in euery ca∣tholikes house. (which houses are insteede of the Church,) either themselues may be pastors, or others deputed by them in their roomes. And if happily their be any, that do denie the faculties granted by them; or will not take no∣tice, that such assemblies or cōpanies of catholikes depēd on them; or will not obediently (as it were at a becke,) ex∣ecute those thinges, y• they haue commanded; such shall be censured either as apostataes, or heretikes or tainted at least with some infection of heresie. so holy, so godly, so reli∣gious would they seeme to be; as nothing is holy, that they haue not sanctified; no doctrine catholike and sounde, that commeth not from them; no dispensation auaileable,
that is not granted by them; and which is worse, they haue beaē into the heads of the most, that the masse is not right∣ly and orderly celebrated of any, but of the Iesuite. These words are set downe, in the abstracte of the memorial, in the end of the declaration page. 69. The Iesuites scorne to come to any one, but where they may be vaintily intertained; they looke not after the cot∣tages of the poore, nor minister their helpe to them, be there neuer so much neede. Thus it is set downe in the memo∣riall. page. 72. No Iesuite goeth to visit any one, or trauelleth from one place to another, but he is richly apparrelled, and attended on with a great traine of seruants, as if he were a baron, or an Earle. They wrangle, and reproue the priestes garments,O braue gallan O humble le Iesuits  O poore . & spendings; and yet y• expences of one Iesuite, is able to maintaine twentie priests, plentifully and rich∣ly. These wordes are to bee found in the abstract, page. 70. Note here gentle reader, that it is more then time, to cut short these bad fellowes, these trayterous new vpstart Iesuits. For otherwise, as you may see, they will raigne as tyrants o∣uer this land. Paragraph. IIII. Of the couetousnesse, and deceitfull dealing of the Iesuites. THe Iesuite Holt and his companions gathered,O Iesuits where is your vow  pouerty? such an infinite masse of money from the catholikes in Eng∣land, for dispensations, or vnder colour of expending it to their vses, as many crediblie affirmed it, to exceede the summe of 50000. poundes English, which make two hun∣dreth millions of Italian scutes. These words are set downe in the abstract, page. 75. See thee thirde chap∣ter. The Iesuite Percie when he escaped from Wisbish,Loe, I pray you, the Iesuites cā steale. tooke fradulently from benefactors abroade, 57. poundes 17. shillings, and y• yeare after, he stole 27. pound of the cōmon
money, euen by the consent of the other his fellow Iesuites. These words are set downe in the discouerie, page. 19. quod∣libet. 3. art. 4. page. 7. Another Iesuite tooke at times aboue 500. pounds, that was giuen to the priests imprisoned then at Wisbish,The Iesu∣ites surpasse the false steward in the gospel. and imployed the same at his owne pleasure. They haue so fléeced there fauourers, that they haue beene able to sende not long since. 2200. poundes towards the low countries. These words are to bee found in the discouerie, page. 20. quodlibet. 3. art. 4. page. 70. The Iesuites take pleasure to forge and inuent thinges that are not, so y• now a dayes they are cōmonly holden for great lyars; & it is come to passe, that though they sweare,Loe, the Iesuits are men of good cre∣dit. men will not beleeue them. These words are set downe in the abstract, Page. 73. quodlibet. 2. art. 6. page. 39. The Iesuites of Rome, doe vse to intercept all manner of letters of all men whosoeuer,All is fish, that come to the Ie∣suites hāds, see the next paragraph. not forbearing the packets neither of the Cardinals, nor of Princes. These words are to be seene in the abstract of the memoriall, page. 77. See booke. 3. aduiso. 9. Note here gentle reader, the wealth, pride, and saucie de∣ceitfull dealing of the Iesuites, to be such and so great, that if they remaine a while vnpunished, they will not onely ouer∣rule the priests, but our noble Queene and all. Paragraph. V. Of the peremptorie and seditious dealing of Iesuites. THe Iesuits by cunning haue gotten into their hands, all authoritie, good estimation,The Iesu∣ites are se∣ditious. and all the treasure of money; and so doe what they list at home, and abroade. They thrust out, and let in, hire and buy, and maintaine factions,All religi∣ous men hate the Iesuites. at their pleasure. These words are to be found in the memoriall. page. 75. The Iesuits haue purchased them, an hard opinion of all religious orders; euen so farre forth as to bee written a∣gainst,
by some of them in most parts of christendome, ex professo; and in particular are banished for such, out of all the most christian kingdome of Frāce, as also for their Spanish faction there. where for all their great meanes, and flatte∣ring ballads of late made and exhibited to the king,The Iesu¦ites are ba∣nished out of ance, for their se∣ditious dealing. they are not like to get in againe this yeare, nor yet the next. onely they hold in heere and there with the good Capuchines, which they may easily doe; for that (as one of those good Friers on a time confessed,) they couet to haue all, and these couet nothing. Vpon this ground, the excellent good bi∣shop of Bamberge in Germany, when hee was laboured for their admittance into his reformed diocesse, answered thus; no, I brooke no such Quiddits. These words are to be found, in the aunswere to the Iesuited gentleman; page. 16. If any priest haue a conuenient place of residence,O what a cursed crew is this? the Ie∣suits will not cease, vntill they haue cast him out, and that by wicked meanes, by defaming him, and bringing him into suspition. These words are set downe, in the abstract of the memoriall, Page. 74. The Iesuites are the firebrands, of all seditions. The Iesuites by right or wrong, eke simplie and absolutely, the monarchie of all England. These words are set downe in the memoriall. page. 74. The ambition of Iesuites, hath taken footing not only in prouinces and cities, but also in priuat families; it sepera∣teth breathren one from an other, and the husband from the wife,O deepe gulfe of sedition? inflaming them with rancour and enuie one a∣gainst an other. These words are to be seene, in the abstract of the memoriall, page. 76. Note heere gentle reader, that whosoeuer loue charitie, christian peace and vnitie; they must abhorre, detest, & eschew, all Iesuiticall societie. For the end as you see, which that cursed broade aymeth at; is nothing els, but to dissolue peace and vnitie, and to maintaine sedition, and rebellion euerie where.
Paragraph. VI. Of the murders committed by Iesuites. IKnow there be diuerse, that will thinke this historie straunge, and incredible; but if it chaunce, that master Charles Paget doe but set downe the actions of father Holt, especially concerning master Godfrey Foulgeam, (the verie cause of whose death he was,) you shall see more straunge matters then this. These words are in the reply vnto Par∣sons libell, Fol. 70. pag. 1. in fine. Sée the fift chapter, the first and second sections, and note them well. Note heere gentle reader, that the Iesuite Holt is flatly char∣ged to haue beene the cause of the death of master Godfrey Foulgeam. Note also that the Rector of the Colledge of the Iesuites in Vallidolid, with some of his complices, dealt most cruelly with one Barkworth a priest then student in the En∣glish Colledge there, after that the minister of the Colledge had deceitfully enticed him being sick in his bed, to go abroad to shake off his feauer. They conueyed the said Barkworth in∣to the Colledge of the Iesuites, and there commaunded him to put of his scholers robes, and to put on a sute of ragges, which they offered him. And because he refused so to doe, the Rector called in certaine of his lay brethren strong fel∣lowes, to deale with him by violence. Wherof two comming to him, catched him by the legs, and pulling them from vnder him vpon a sodaine, threw him backward flat vpon the paue∣ment with such violence (being then sicke and weake with a feauer,) that he was much brused therewith. The rest of the lay brethren, apprehended some a legge, some an arme, haling and beating him most outragiously, and would as it seemed, haue murdered him in his bed, if a casuall good hap had not hindred them. The storie is long, and therefore I referre the reader to the place. They procured Henry the third to be excommunicated, and then by degrées they murdered him. These words are set downe, quodl. 8. art. 8. pag. 261. Perhaps they will pretend, that this fruitlesse encrease of
of their number, is an argument of Gods blessing vpon their societie, but this were both a daungerous, and an ab∣surd consequence. For it will be a long time, ere they come to equall the number of the Arsacides, (who were sent into France by their king a Pagan, to murther S. Lewes,) or Assasins (murtherers) men of their owne stampe. These words are to be found, in the franke discourse. Page. 88. Let not A Iesuite become a censor of other mens wri∣tings, or doing, as temerarius; till he haue amended and satisfied for his owne temeritie, both in his doctrine of prince-killing, and other disloyaltie to ones prince and countrey. A. C. in his second letter, Page. 8. in fine. If your maiestie please o reade, but the oration of the Polonian gentleman, made in their senate, there you shall sée an Iliade of tumults and ciuill warres. amongst the Christians which inhabite those large and wast countries, stirred and excited by the onely meanes of the Iesuites; who haue there caused of late more battels to be fought, then had béene in fiue hundred yeares before. These words are put downe, in the franke discourse. Page. 89. This is wonderfull, that in the whole troupe of the Ie∣suites, there was not one found (one is a small number,) and yet I say againe, there was not one, that from 89. to 94. was heard to let fall one word, that might be strained to the good of his prince, or countrey: but euermore vehe∣ment in behalfe of the Spaniard, and to qualifie the hard conceit of his gouernment. These words are in the franke discourse. Page. 95. vers. 17. A due religion of the Iesuites: for to speake truth, to deale in State-matters, and to practise the death of prin∣ces; are as essentiall parts of their function, as their confession it selfe. These words are set downe, in the Ie∣suites Catechisme. Liber. 3. cap. 13. fol. 168. Loe heere gentle Reader, it is an essentiall point of Iesuiti∣call function, to cause sedition, and to murder princes. From such religious men, good Lord deliuer vs. The first breaking out of our troubles, was in the yeare 1585. at which time all that resorted to the Iesuites to be
confessed, if they affirmed themselues to be good subiects, and loyal seruitors to the king, (for they were questioned vpon that article,) they were sent backe by the Iesuites, without receiuing absolution. Sequitur; Our kings represent the true image of God, against whom this yeare there hapned three straunge and vnusuall accidents; first, the rebellion against the late king, which they coloured with the pretext and title of tyranny; secondly, the parricidie committed vpon his person by a Monke: and lastly, the continuance of that rebellion against the king that now is, for his re∣ligion. Sequitur; their confessions were instructions, or ra∣ther destructions, to teach rebellion; refusing to absolue them, which eyther were not in their consciences fully con∣firmed, in their reuolt from the two kings, or had any in∣clination to acknowledge them for their soueraignes. And (which is full of horrour and detestation,) their ordinarie conrse was, before they would absolue them, to make them sweare by the holy gospell conteyned in their breuiaries, neuer to take these two kings for their lawful soueraignes. That which I speake, I haue by good information from many, that were faine to passe through that strait; and I know one amongst the rest, more néere me then the rest, who rather then he would giue credit to their doctrine, de∣parted from his confessour, without receiuing absolution. These words are set downe by a Catholike papist a French man, in the booke called the Iesuites Catechisme. Lib. 3. cap. 12. fol. 165. fol. 166. Note heere gentle Reader, these important points with me. First, that not onely our English papists, but euen the French also, do write the same argument in substance; against the Ie∣suites, and their damnable doctrine. Secondly, that they vse confession, as an instrument of patricidie, euen of Gods an∣noynted princes. Thirdly, that they would absolue none, which acknowledged true loyaltie to their soueraignes. Fourthly, that they caused all those whom they did absolue, to sweare by the holy gospell, neuer to take the king now regnant nor king Henry his predecessor, for their lawfull soueraignes. It therefore is high time for all kings, to abandon and expell all
this cursed crue out of their kingdomes, territories, and do∣minions. Jesuitisme agréeth with the Anabaptists opinion, in two propositions, in medling with state matters, and in cau∣sing princes and kings to be murdered, accordingly to the conueniencie of their affaires. I will adde, that in the car∣riage of this Iesuiticall warre within France, there was some conformitie of names betweene this, and that the A∣nabaptists vndertooke in Germanie the yeare 1535. for they had one Iohn Mathew their chiefe prophet, vnder Iohn Leydon their king: and one Bernard Rotman, and Bernard Cniperdolin, principall actors in their faction for the sedu∣cing of smple people; euen as our Iesuites had their fa∣ther Claudius Mathew, and Bernard Rouellet. I will not héere recite the other particulars of our troubles, being contented plainely to haue shewed vnto you, that our Ie∣suites were the first seminaries thereof. These words are set downe in the Iesuites Catechisme. Lib. 3. cap. 11. fol. 164. Note heere gentle Reader, that the French papists write as sharpely against the Iesuites, as doe our secular popish priests. And consequently, the priests assertions and reports of them, are of more credit in that behalfe. The Iesuites hauing set foote in Portugall, sollicited the king Sebastian by all manner of illusions, to make an vni∣uersall law, that none might be called to the Crowne, vn∣lesse he were of their societie; and moreouer, elected by the consent and suffrages of the same. Whereunto they could not attaine, albeit they met with the most deuout & supersti∣tious prince that could be. They were the men, that kindled the first coales of that accursed league, which hath béene the vtter ruine and subuersion of France. In fauour of the Spaniard, they set on worke (to kill the king,) one Peter Barriere, whom they caused to be confessed in their Colledge at Paris, afterwards to receiue the Sacrament, and ha∣uing confirmed him by an assured promise of Paradise, as a true martyr, if he died in that quarrell, they set forward this valiant champion, who was thrise at the verie point to execute his accursed enterprise; and God as often mira∣culously
stayed his hand, vntil at length being apprehended at Melun, he receuied y• iust hyre of his traiterous intention in the yeare 1593. I speake nothing, but what mine eies can witnesse, and what I had from his owne mouth, when he was prisoner. View and peruse all the iniquities, that you will, you shall finde none so barbarous as this. To perswade an impietie (to kill a king,) and then to couer it with such a seeming maske of pietie. In a word, to destroy a soule, a king, paradise, and our Church all at a blow; to make way for their Spanish, and halfe-pagan design∣ments. Thus is it written in the Iesuites Catechisme. Lib.3. cap. 18. fol. 185. Note heere gentle Reader, these materiall points with me. First, that the Iesuites labour with might and maine, (as our Secular priests truly write of them,) to ouerrule the whole world. For they would haue had a generall law made, that none should be made king of Portugall, vnlesse he were a Ie∣suite, and also elected by their consent and suffrages. Second∣ly, that they suborned Peter Barriere, to kill his and their liege∣lord the king of France. Thirdly, that they abused the Sacra∣ment, to that end and purpose. Fourthly, that they promised him Paradise and to be canonized for a martyr, if he should kill his soueraigne and die in that quartell. Fiftly, that all this was done, in the honour and behalfe of the Spanish king. Put all these together, and see if the same be not the Iesuiti∣call practise heere in England, as the Secular priestes haue told vs. It happened vpon Saint Iohn Enangelists day in the yeare 1594. after the reducing of Paris vnder obedience to their soueraigne, that the king going to his chamber, ac∣companied with many princes and lords, found himselfe vnlookt for sodainly strokē in the mouth with a knife, so that neither he, nor those that were with him, could perceiue it. For assoone as Iohn Chastell who was the traytor, and but nineteene yeares of age, had giuen the stroke, he dropped downe the knife, and set himselfe in the midst of the prease. Euerie one was in a maze, and busie to thinke who had done that trayterous déed, and it wanted not much, but that
this young yuth had made an escape. Notwithstanding God would not permit that this detestable act should re∣maine vnpunished. By chance it was,Iohn Cha∣ste'l as brought vp in the Ie∣suites schoole. that some ore ca∣sting his eyes vpon him, he became as one sore affrighted and appald with feare. But as he promised himselfe to haue the paradise of Iesuites, if he died one of their martyrs, so also he confessed this fact more readily and promptly, then was looked for at his hands. Whereby by decree of the Court of Parliament in Paris, he was condemned to die. I haue no greater argument then this, to shew that the trade of murthering was lodged within their Colledges. For where there was any exercise of good education and studie, no scholler would haue vndertaken such a damna∣ble determination, but such a one as was brought vp vn∣der them. In other Colledges, they know not what it meant to instruct schollers how to murther kings, and spe∣cially in ours. But in the Iesuits Colledges, it is contrarie and preached in their owne assemblies nothing so much as that alone. Of the which indéed, they were but too prodi∣gall in their sermons. These words are set downe, in the Iesuites Catechisme. Lib. 3. cap. 8. fol. 155. When our Iesuites saw themselues remoued from their princes fauour, they began to lay a snare to intrappe him. And as their societie is composed of all sorts of people, some for the penne, others for practise; so had they amongst them, one father Henry Sammier of Luxenburge, a man disposed for all affaires, and resolued to any hazard. This fellow was sent by them in the yeare 1581. towards diners Catholike princes to sound the fourd. And to say truly, they could not haue chosen one more fit. For he disguised himselfe, into as manie formes as obiects; one while attired like a souldier, an other while like a priest, by and by a countrey swaine. Dice, cards, and women, were as ordinarie with him, as his presired houres of prayer, saying, he did not thinke he sinned in this, because it was done to Gods glory. and that he mit not be discouered, changing his name together with his habite, according to the countries where he pur∣posed to negotiate. These words are to be read in the Ca∣techisme.
Lib. 3. cap. 11. Fol 162. William Crichton the Iesuite, went into Spaine by the licence of his generall. Whither he is no sooner come, but he practiseth to infinuate himselfe into the kings fauour. And to that effect, drawes a tree of the descent, and pede∣gree of the Infanta his daughter, shewing therein that the Crownes of England & Scotland, did by right appertaine to her; and so incite him the rather to take armes against the Scottish king, hee scattered abroad diffamatorie li∣bels against him. Whereunto the king of Spayne gi∣uing no eare, Crichton determined with himselfe, by letters to sollicite the Catholike Nobilitie of Scotland to the same purpose; and to that ende wrote letters in the yeare 1592. to Gourdon, and other Iesuites remai∣ning in Scotland; whereby hee gaue them to vnder∣stand, in what grace he was with the king, who by his incitement was resolued, aswell for the inuasion of Eng∣land, as for the restoring of the auncient Religion in Scotland. These words are in the Iesuites Catechisme. Lib. 3. cap. 16. fol. 173. Certaine young diuines infected with the poyson of the Iesuites, loosed the reines to subiects against their king, in the yeare 1589. and Commolet the Iesuite with his adherents, sounded the trumpet of warre in their pulpets, against the king deceased. Whereupon insued those outra∣gious disorders, which we haue seene in France since that time. These words are in y• Catechisme. Li. 3. c. 14. fol. 169. Walpole the Iesuite in the yeare 1597. deliuered a poysonous confection to Squire, therewith to make away the Queene of England his Soueraigne. The Iesu∣ites at Doway in the yeare 1598. sent the Cooper of I∣per to kill Graue Maurice of Nassaw. These wordes are set downe, in the Iesuites Catechisme. Lib. 3. cap. 13. fol. 168. It is well knowne (O Iesuites,) that your Colledge was the fountaine and seminarie, of all those calamities, which we endured during the last troubles. There was the re∣bellion plotted and contriued; there was it fully and wholy nourished and maintained. Your prouincials, your rectors,
your deuout superiours, were the first that troade that path, they that first and last dealt with this merchandise. Your Colledge was the retreat or Randeuous, of all such as had vowed and sold themselues, aswell to the destruc∣tion of the State, as to the murther of the king. In which your doings, you at that time gloried and triumpht, both in your sermons and lectures. Sequitur; this was the houre of Gods wrath, who hauing long temporized with your sinnes, thought it good to make Chastell a spurre in the hearts of the iudges, to incite them to do iustice aswell vp∣on you, as vpon him, that you might all serue for an exam∣ple, for posteritie to wonder at. To the accomplishment of this worke, he permitted that Chastell, (who had beene nurtured and brought vp in your schoole,) should assay to put in practise your deuout lectures, and exhortations a∣gainst the king; not in the countrey, but in the citie of Pa∣ris, and that his dwelling house should be, not in any ob∣scure corner of the towne, but in the verie heart of the citie, in a house right opposite to the gate of the pallace, the anci∣ent habitation of our kings, and of the supreame and so∣ueraigne iustice of France. This house belonged to the father, who was so infortunate, as not to reueale to the Magistrate, the damnable intention of his sonne, whereof hee had knowledge, as himselfe confessed. God made speciall choyse of that place, of purpose to make the punishment more notorious. For which cause this house was rnated, and raced by order, and in the place thereof a Pyamis or piller raysed, bearing the me∣moriall not onely of Chastels offence, but of the Iesu∣ites also, and this to stand in opposite view of this great royall Pallace. To the ende, that our posteritie may knowe heereafter, how highly Fraunce is beholden to this holy societie of Iesus. These wordes are set downe, in the Iesuites Catechisme. Lib. 3. cap. 19. fol. 191. Note here gentle reader with me, these important ob∣seruations. First, that Iohn Chastell but 19. yeares of age, went about trayterously with a knife prepared for that purpose, to murther his naturall Soueraigne. Secondly, that hee the
said youth was fully perswaded by Iesuiticall education and doctrine, that to murther his liege Lord the King was the readie way to heauen. Thirdly, that nothing was more freely taught in the schooles of the Iesuites, then the doctrine of the killing of lawefull kinges. Fourthly, that their sermons abounded, with this kind of maladie. Fiftly, that the Iesuites imployed in this kind of marchandise, one Henrie Sammier a most licentious & dissolute villaine, giuen to all vices vnder heauen. Sixtly, that he reputed all his vices for vertues, in respect of his god∣ly intents and purpose; viz. Of killing Kinges. Seuenthly, that the Iesuite Crichton sollicited the Spanish King, to inuade both England and Scotland; affirming that the crownes of both the kingdomes, did by right pertaine vnto him. Eight∣ly, that the Iesuite Commolet and his adherents, sounded the trumpet of warre against their king, euen out of the pul∣pets; s if it had beene an high point of diuinitie, and most fit for edification. Ninthly, that the Iesuite Walpoole endeuou∣red by poyson, to take away the life of his Soueraigne. Tenthly, that the Iesuites at Doway, sent the Cooper of Iper, to kill Graue Maurice of Nassaw. Eleuently, that the colledge of the Iesuites, was the fountaine and seminarie of the calamities in France. That in their colledge was all rebellion plotted, cō∣triued, nourished, & maintained. Twelftly, that the prouincials, rectors, and other superiours of the Iesuites, gloried and tri∣umphed in their rebellious dealing. Thirteenthly, that a Py∣ait is set vp in Paris, bearing the euerlasting memoriall, not onely of the traytor Chastell, but of the Iesuites also; that all posterities may know, what a kind of seditious and tray∣terous people they are. I might here adde manie other most cruell and trayterous murders, plotted and contriued by the Iesuites. But in regard of breuitie, I referre the reader, that shall desire more of this kind of their hellish diuinitie, to that worthie booke which the French papistes haue put forth, (intituled the Iesuites catechisme,) A golden booke in∣deede.
Paragraph. VII. Of the vowes of the Iesuites. Touching the vowes of the Iesuites. it is not amisse to put downe this corrolarie, as a fit preamble to the discourse following. To conclude, as long as we mingle the bringing vp of our youth, with this munkerie (of Iesuits,) we shall neuer be able to saue our selues from this vnhap∣pie confusion, whereof the citie of Paris (thankes be to God.) is at this day discharged. But I speake to them, who being coozened, protecte as yet, this new monster with their autho¦ritie. These words are put downe, in the Iesuites cate∣chisme. libr. 2. cap. 8. fol. 97. I will begin with the simple vow of Iesuiticall order, which I may say is new and monstrous, and which can not be tollerated in our Church, without the ouerthrow∣ing thereof, at the least in regard of religious orders and monasteries. The first vow of their order, is that which they call the simple vow, by which he that will vow him∣selfe to their societie, makes at the first the three ordinarie vowes of all other religious orders; namely, of chastitie, po∣uertie, and obedience. And although in respect of himselfe, he may not after this vow giue ouer his profession, yet it is in the power of the generall, to dismisse him when he will, though he haue beene a Iesuite .25. yeares. And which is more, as longe as he goes no farder then this simple vowe, he is capable of all inheritances direct and collaterall, not∣withstanding the vowe of pouertie which he hath made. These words are set downe, in the Iesuites catechisme. lib. 5. cap. 9. fol. 97. It is a new law, as also the simple vow of chastitie is, which this societie makes; which hinders mariage to bee contracted, and disannuls it after it is contracted. Ibid. fol. 98. What new monster then is that, which our Iesuites bring from the Church, that he which becomes one of their order, may breake of his marriage, without sinning
thereby against his wife? So that vpon a bare discon∣tentment of the husband, the poore desolate wife shall re∣maine vnmaried, according to the lawes of Iesuitisme; and yet may not marry an other husband, because the lawes of christianity forbids it. These words are put down in the Iesuites catechisme. lib. 2. cap. 15. fol. 113. Note here gentle reader, that the religion of Iesuites, is no∣thing els in deede, but an hotch-potch of omnium githerum, as the seculars rightly terme it. For first, they vow pouertie, and so they abandon all wordly possessions; and yet are they ca∣pable of all inheritances direct, and collaterall, after the ma∣king of their simple vow. Secondly, though gods Lawe forbid the seperation of husband and wife, sauing the case of forni∣cation; yet they roundly dissolue wedlocke, vpon the sole and only making of their simple vow. So as wee may truely say of these Iesuites, as doe the french papistes els where in these words; the Iesuites would say, that their simple vow is a vow of a pettie dissimulation, and that they thinke to deceiue God by the same sophistrie, which the old pagan vsed, whē he said, iuraui lingua, mentem iniuratam habeo; which protestatiō was condemned by thē of the time, though they were not chri∣stians. So saith the Iesuite, I vowed pouertie with my tongue, but in my mind I had a bird that sung an other songe. And thinking by this shift to make vs like to their new doctrine, he plaies three partes at once, the Iesuite, the heretique, and the Machiuelist. These words are put downe, in the Iesuites catechisme, libr. 2. cap. 10. fol. 100. This reseruing of the goods (say the Iesuites,) is not for them, who haue renounced this right, but to helpe them af∣terward, if happily they should be dismissed. Therefore if they be not dismist, these goods appertaine to their order. Was there euer more notorious coozenage, then this? A∣las, I wonder not indeede, that they very seldome dismisse their disorderly Iesuite; for in so doing, this fat morsell would fall out of their mouth. But why is yt Iesuite during this simple vow, kept away from his kined? Why is he sent out of one country into another? But to the end that if any new inheritance should fall vnto him, no man might
certainly know what his condition is, nor know howe to call in question, ye right he pretends. Well, in the end he is freed from his vow, that he may be out of daunger of all impeachments, and hinderances. Which done, hee shall proue himselfe to be the right heire, and yet by a watch∣word betwixt him and them, he shall returne afterward to the Iesuites, to bestow his goods in almes vpon them. Adde herevnto, that this is a point that toucheth the estate; that by this meanes, it is easie for the Iesuite to make him selfe in time, maister and head of many cities, townes, vil∣lages, and castles, according to the qualitie of them, whom he hath drawen vnto him. Let vs put the case, that their are a doozen gentlemen of good houses, (for such they la∣bour to bring into their societie,) that haue made thēselues Iesuites, and that some ciuill or forraine warres, hath ta∣ken away all their brethren; who now, but the Iesuites of the simple vow shall succeede in their inheritance, and so being admitted to thier first solemne vow, shall enrich their order there with all? And in time they will become monarches. These words are set downe in the catichisme libr. 5. cap. 15. fol. 9. The Iesuites after their simple vow make a solemne vow, by which they adde nothing to the former; but only that by making this second, they cannot any more inherit, nor be dismist by their generall. There remaines now the third, which is the vow of three steps, by which besides pouertie, chastitie, and obedience, vowed by them; they make a particular vow of mission to our holy father the Pope, which is to goe to ye Indies & Turkie, for y• winning of the soules, if they be commanded by his holisse. But a∣boue all, I make great account of that precise pouertie, which is inioyned them by their constitutions. runne through all the orders of religion, there is not one of them in which pouertie is so recommended, as among the Capu∣chnes which liue from hand to mouth, and put ouer the care for to morrow, to the onely goodnes of God The foundation of the profest, which are the Iesuites of the great vow, is to vow pouertie, aswell in generall, as in
particular, as it is in all the orders of begging Fryers. But because their pouertie had neede to be expounded, let vs see the commentaries they bring vs by their constituti∣ons. They haue three sorts of houses; one for their noui∣ces; an other for their religious bounde by their solemne vowes, which they call the house where there Church is; and an other, which they call a colledge, for the religious, that are bound only by the simple vow; whereof some are schollers probationers, others coadiutors, some spirituall, some temporall. In domibus vel ecclesiis, quae á societate &c. That is to say, in those houses and Churches, which the so∣cietie shall except of, for the saluation of soules, there shall be no reuenewes proper, either to be applied to the vestrie, or to the frame and buildinges, or for any other purpose whatsoeuer. That the societie may haue nothing to dis∣pose of, but onely to depend vpon God, whome by his grace they serue, trusting that without reuenewes he will prouide thinges necessarie for vs, to his praise and honor. They that are professed, (that is, men of the last, great, and solemne vowe,) shall liue by almes in their houses, when they are not sent forth to any countrie, nor to take the or∣dinarie charge of Rectors of Colledges, or Vniuersities, ex∣cept it be vpon necessitie, or vrgent vtilitiy require it, nei∣ther shall they vse the Colledges reuenewes in their hou∣ses. they shall be readie to begge from doore to doore, whē obedience or necessitie requires it. And to this purpose let there be one or two, or more appointed, to craue almes for the sustenance of the societie, which shall begge the almes simply, for the loue of our Sauiour Iesus. The houses and churches of the societie, shall not onely haue no rents, or reuenewes, but no possessions or inheritance, in generall or particular. Gather all these particulars together, was there euer pouertie more obstinately vowed, then this? And therfore it was, yt first Pius. 5. & after that Gregorie. the 13. ordained that this societie should be placed among the orders of the men∣dicants. If they would obserue that, which here is enioy∣ned them; I would excuse them with all my heart of the
herefie of their first vow. And that, because that after they had a long time enioyed goods, during the time of their sim∣ple vow, at the last to make satisfactiō to God for it, they are come to the periode of their great vow, by reason whereof, they haue the name of fathers aboue the other religious, yet not onely they vow from thence forwards, a beggerie, but also themselues to become treasurers thereof. I would ho∣nor them▪ as the true followers of Saint Peters repentance, after he had denied his master, and would esteeme them a∣boue all the other orders of mendicants. But when sawe you them goe with a wallet vp and downe the towne? For al this they liue richly and plentifully, not with the manna of God (for they are not children of Israell,) but by a nota∣ble point of Sophistrie, and see how. The houses where these holy fathers dwell,O whe Foxe? O religi∣ous Iesuits. are not permitted to haue any goodes, but onely their colledges are. Now so it is, that vnder their generals authoritie, they haue all there care and gouernment of their colledges. These are the old Cin∣cinnati of Rome, that boasted they had no gold, but com∣manded them that had. In like sort these masters, though they may haue noe proper reuenewes but their wallet (which they scorne,) yet doe they gouerne them, yt haue good store. This foundation presupposed, you may easily iudge what will follow. For it is reason, that being fathers, they should be sed and maintained by their children; and it is more honesty for thē, to aske almes of their colledges where they command, then to stragle vp and downe the townes to craue it. See how carefully they make sheaues off carne for God, as Caine did, and yet heerein they are the true and lawfull children of their good father Ignatius, who in all his actions, reserued for himselfe the principall care of his kitchen. Nothing is more familiar to them by their buls and constitutions, then beggerie; and yet neuer had any men better skill to scrape vp coyne, that they may liue at their ease. These words are put downe in the Iesuites catechisme. libr. 2. cap. 14. fol. 10. fol. 11. Note here gentle reader, the pouertie of the Iesuites, which
is wonderful. For first, they professe and vow beggerie, and yet they neuer begge. Secondly, they can haue no possessions, no inheritance, no lands, no goods; and yet they abound in welth, lands, and goods, and haue the worlde at will. Oh, who would not be a begging Iesuite Fier? Thirdly, they re∣nounce all possessions, (except their bare wallet, which they sreone and will not vse,) and yet they command both the po∣ssessions and the possessours, to come and goe at a becke. Fourthly, the professed Iesuites abandon and forsake all; but the other Iesuites, (who stand at their command,) shall re∣fuse nothing that may be had. The fathers can teach them to fish for whales, and not for Gudgins. This then is a goodly religious pouertie. Paragraph. VIII. Of the miracles of the Iesuites. Ignace the founder of the Iesuites, left a writing in a li∣tle coffer, in manner of a iornall, how thinges passed be∣tweene the holy Ghost and him, and the visions set down, wherewith he was inspired when he made his constituti∣ons. These remembrances were found after his death, & with great wonderment presented to the generall congre∣gation held at Rome, in the yeare 1558. Where all that he had ordred was considered of, and then passed through the hands of their printers and stationers. You blame Ig∣nace in your discourse for all his apparitions, and say they were impostures contriued by him, vpon which ground his societie hath coyned many fables. Pardon me I pray you, for you iudge of these matters like a punie, not like a states man. I tell you againe, I doubt not but that Ig∣nace hath told you all his visions, whereof he himselfe alone was witnesse. But when? not in the flower of his age, when he was in action, but when sicknesse and age had broken him, and he saw himselfe at the graues brinke; per∣swading himselfe there could be no better meane, to sta∣blish his order after his death and confirme his statutes, thē to feede them not with these holy, but rather fained illui.
nations. These words are set downe, in the Iesuites cate∣chisme. lib. 1. cap. 18. fol. 64. One Iustinian a Iesuite in Rome, calle father Iustinian, counterfeicted himselfe to be Leaprous, to make his cure miraculous. Againe he would haue men beleeue, that be∣ing shot with a pistoll through his garment, the bullet re∣bounded backe againe from his bodie without hurt, and so by the wonderfull grace of God, hee was not wounded. These matters were beleeued by the simple people at the first, but after they were founde to be false, this marred the whole roast of the Iesuites cookerie in Rome. For whē they did speake of a facer out of matters, & an imposter, they were wont to call him. a second Iustinian the Iesuite. It may be you will iudge it straunge I tell you, we neede not looke into Spaine, nor the Indies for their forgeries, sith of late yeeres they bruted it abroade in France, that Theodo∣re Beza was dead, and that at his death, he was conuer∣ted to our catholike apostolike romaine religion, by one of their companie: by whose example, many citizens of Ge∣neua had done the like, through the trauels of the Iesuits. Wee tooke it to be true a while, but after that Beza was knowen to be risen againe, he wrote certaine french and latine letters by which he conuinced their impuden∣ie. What a mint of fables will they haue in strange coun∣tries, which euen in the midst of vs, feare not to feede vs with such bables? Thus is it written in the Iesuites cate∣chisme. lib. 1. cap. 17. fol. 62. The kingdome (of Portugall) being fallen to Sebastian, the holy Apostles (the Iesuites) conceiued a hope, that by this meanes it might descend vnto their family, and dealt with him many times, that no man might from thence forward, be capable of the crowne of Portugall, except hée were a Iesuite, and chosen by their societie,What a  is here? as at Rome, the Pope is chosen by the colledge of Cardinals. and for as much as he (although as superstious, as superstition it selfe,) could not, or rather durst not condescend therevnto, they perswaded him, that God had appointed it should bee so, as himselfe should vnderstand by a voyce from heauen
néere the sea side. Insomuch as this poore prince thus car∣ried away, resorted to the place two or thrée seuerall times, but they could not play their parts so well, as to make him heare this voice. These words are set downe in the Iesuites Catechisme. Lib. 3. cap. 16. fol. 174. Zauier the Iesuite departing this life at Siuet,Zauier or Xauier. his body was rolde vp in quicke lime, that being spéedily consumed, it might not putrifie. Neuerthelesse, being sixe moneths af∣ter carried to the towne of Goa, where he lyeth, he was found to looke as fresh and sound, as when he liued. After he was brought to this towne, there was a wax candle of a cubit long, placed at the foote of his tombe, which burnt two and twentie daies, and as many nights, & was not wasted. A man that neuer saw further then the length of his owne nose, hauing got so much fauour of the priests, as to open him Zauiers tombe, tooke the dead mans hand and rubbed his eyes with it, and presently recouered his sight. Many other miracles were done by his dead corps, but I find none so famous as these two; one of his disciples hauing stollen away the whippe wherewith he beat himselfe, and a woman called Marie Sarra hauing cut of a péece of his girdle, which she wrought into siluer, and wore it about her necke, cured an infinite number of all sorts of diseases, by the bare touch of these two reliques. All these miracles were done in the Indies, and many other moe, if you be∣leeue Tursellin. But all these stories, are in verie déed such, as by common prouerbe we call old wiues fables, that is to say, fit to be told to simple women, when they sit spinning by the fire side. These words are to be found, in the Iesuits Catechisme. Lib. 1. cap. 17. fol. 62. Note here gentle reader, that the Iesuites would very gladly haue their first founder Ignatius the Spaniard, to be reputed and canonized for a Saint. And for this end and purpose, they haue deuised to publish many counterfeit and feined miracles, which they affirme in printed bookes, to haue beene done by men of their societie. But the bare rehearsall with the circum∣stances, may suffice for the confutation thereof. They are you see, but their owne meere inuentions, and old wiues fables.
Paragraph. IX. Of the perfidiousnes, lying, cooznage, mutabilitie, and temporizing, which the Iesuites vse in all their proceedings and constitutions. IN Rome the Iesuites acknowledge the Pope to be Lord spirituall and temporall ouer all Christian princes, else must they directly contradict all the extrauagant decretals, which impose the same vpon all Monarchies. It is a pro∣position, very familiar in the court of Rome. And in the Buls appointed for the publication of the Iubily, in the yeare 1600. Saint Peter and Sant Paul are called prin∣ces of the earth. In France the Iesuites are of another opinion. For in their pleading in the yeare 1594. they giue out, that the Pope hath no temporalities, but such as he hath by long succession of time gotten in Italy. The Ie∣suites are statesmen and temporisers, who hold all things honest and lawfull, which serue their turne. As in former times, when they spoke of a perfidious people, they named the Carthagenians, whereof the common prouerbe grew, Fides punica; the like we may now say of the Iesuites, Fides Iesuitica, They priuately among their friends, make a iest of perfidiousnes, and treacherie. For if you aske them, what is a Iesuite? their answere is, euerie man. Imply∣ing, that they are creatures which varie their colours like the Camelion, according to the obiect. A very fit comparison for them; for no more then the Camelion, can they borrow the colour of white, which in holy scripture figureth vertue and innocencie. A little before the king entred Paris, fa∣ther Alexander Hays a Scot, seeing the affaires of that league verie much decline, it was his chance to disgorge out of the abundance of his heart, these words in a great audience, in the Colledge Clairmont, where he read the principall lecture. Hitherto (saith he,) we haue beene Spayniards, but now we are constrayned to be french. It is all one, we must formalize vntill a fitter season. Cedendum erit tempori.
These were the words he vsed. And that you may not think that this maxime procéedeth from the pliantnes of their consciences, which they restraine or extend, as best fitteth their profit; their good father Ignace first taught them this dispensation, whereof they haue since made a particular constitution. The other holy fathers founders of reli∣gion, established diuers ordinances, which they fastened, if I may so speake, with nailes of diamond in tombes of brasse, which should perpetually be obserued by munks and other religions. In the sect of Iesuites, there is nothing so certaine as their vncertaintie, as I said of late. In the Bull of Pope Paul the third, it is written as followeth. That they may make (saith the Pope,) particular ordi∣nances, which they shall indge fit for the societie, to the glorie of our Lord Iesus Christ, and the profit of their neighbour. And that such as are alreadie made, or shall be made hereafter, they may chaunge, alter, or abolish, accor∣ding to the varietie of place, time, and occasions, and in stéede of them, make new; the which so changed, reuoked, or made new, we will that they be confirmed by the fore∣said authoritie of the Apostolike sea, and by the same au∣thoritie, of our specall grace and fauour we confirme them. Out of this generall constitution, they haue drawne one particular, which is worthy to be knowne, in the 16. part of their constitutions, chap. 5. The title beginning thus. That the constitutions may not binde any man in consci∣ence, sith the societie desires, that all their constitutions, declarations, and order of life, should be without euasion, conformable to our direction; and also neuerthelesse wisheth to be secured, or at least succoured, that they be not snared in any sinne, which may growe by their constitutions or ordinances; we haue thought good in the Lord, (excep∣tion taken to the expresse bow, wherewith the societie is bound to the Pope for the time being, and the thrée other essentiall vowes, of pouertie, chastitie, and obedience,) that no constitutions, declarations, or any order of life, shall impose any yoake of mortall or veniall sinne vpon
them; vnlesse their superiour command those things, in the name of our Lord Iesus Christ, or in the vertue of obe∣dience. And againe; in stead of feare of offending, let loue and desire of all perfection come in place, and let the glorie and praise of Christ our Lord & maker, be the more exalted. By the first article, it is lawfull for them to change and re∣change their constitutions at their owne pleasure, for their owne good. By the second, their constitutions are held (in regard of the soule,) indifferent; so that the Iesuite may breake them, without committing mortall or veniall sinne. A law which their great law-giuer gaue them, to the end, that to Gods honour and glory there might he fewer sinners in their societie. Oh holy soules? oh pure consciences? who restrayning their inferiours from sinne, take themselues the reines. committing all manner of sinne vncontrolled, Let vs ex∣amine these points without passion, and let let vs consider the scope of these two propositions. By the first, no prince shall be assured of his estate; and by the second, no prince shall be secure of his person in his owne kingdome. Con∣cerning the first point, call to minde how matters haue béene carried for these 25. or 30. yeares. There hath béene no nation, where they be fostered, but they would be tem∣pering with their affaires of state. I thinke they are such honest men, as what herein they haue done, they haue vn∣dertaken to doe it, by vertue of their silent constitutions; for if they did it by their owne priuate authoritie, the ge∣nerall were vnworthie of his place, should he suffer it. Fur∣ther, this was forbiden them in the yeare, 1593. when they saw all their plots were frustrate. Admitte new troubles should arise, these gallants will cassiere and disanull this last ordinance, suffering their companions to intermeddle as before. But what are their rules in such affaires? Mar∣rie, that is it lawfull to kill a tyrant; that a king breaking the common lawes of the land, may be depriued of his Crowne by the people. That there are other causes, for the which princes and great personages may be slaine. In what a miserable condition shall princes liue, if the assu∣rance
of their estate, shall depend vpon these fellowes? Let us sée their new constitutions of 1593. I will that they medle not at all in affaires of state in generall termes. And that particularly, they practise not vpon the person of prin∣ces. Are they bound to obey this? Nothing lesse. For their law-giuer chargeth not their consciences, but in ex∣presse termes; he would otherwise haue charged them, by vertue of their blind obedience. And this is the cause, that Commolet preaching since this new statute, that there wanted a new Ehud to kill our king. and Walpoole furnishing Squire with poyson and instructions, to kill the Quéene of England his mistresse, thought they sinned not therein. These words are set downe in the Iesuites Cate∣chisme. Lib. 3. cap. 26. fol. 234. fol. 236. It is not christian charitie (O Iesuites,) that leads you to that course, but Iesuitish charitie. Your whole profes∣sion is nothing else, but a particular coozning of our priuate families, and a generall villanie of all the countries, where you inhabite. These wordes are put downe in the Cate∣chisme. Lib. 2. cap. 12. fol. 106. The Iesuites make ostentation of a solemne decree con∣cluded among them, that they shall no more intermeddle in matters of estate. But let vs see, what date this decrée beares? They say of an. 1593. hath your Maiestie then alreadie forgotten, that since that time they haue practised twise against your life? Behold the performance of this glorious decree. Doe not we know the generall exception of all their statutes? vnlesse it be for the good of the Church; an exception that extends as farre, as they list to straine it. The Iesuites neuer harboured in their hearts any other proiect, but the subuersion of states, disauthorizing of ma∣gistrates, and seducing of subiectes from their alleage∣ance. These words are set downe, in the franke discourse. Page. 98. Ribadiner wrote his historie, onely vpon report of the countrey, as the further a Iesuite goes, the lowder he lies. These words are in the Iesuites Catechisme. Lib. 2. cap. 17. fol. 61.
Such iuglings and shiftings of late haue béene vsed by the Iesuites,The Iesu∣ites are iuglers. that not onely protestants, but also catholiks, yea priests can scarce tell, when they speake sincerely, when otherwise. These words are set downe, in the reply to Par∣sons libell. Page. 23. 1. vers. 2. These are ordinarie iugling tricks, which are too too fa∣miliar with our good fathers the Iesuites. In the reply to Parsons libell. Page. 19. 2. vers. 14. Concerning the imputation of lying, so famous and no∣torious are their equiuo cations, and so scandalous, that the verie protestants take notice thereof, to the great preiudice of our profession, alwaies heretofore famous, for our truth and sinceritie. In the replie to Parsons libell. Page. 23. 1. vers. 1. Note heere gentle Reader, these important points with me. first, that the Iesuites are notorious lyers, and that their owne fellowes can not tell when to trust them. Secondly, that they are notorious coozners, and full of iugling tricks. Thirdly, that the Iesuites acknowledge the Pope to be Lord spirituall and temporall, ouer all christian princes. Fourthly, that the Ie∣suits are notable temporizers, as who account all things lawful that will serue their turne. Fiftly, that the Iesuites are so perfidi∣ous a people, as their faith is become Fides panica, the Cartha∣genians faith, that is, a false and detestable faith. Sixtly, that the Iesuites will be Spaniards, or Frenchmen, or whatsoeuer else, if opportunitie be offered thereunto. Seuenthly, that no estate is free, from the villanie of the Iesuites. Eightly, that the Iesuites make hauocke of the Popes Buls and constitu∣tions. Ninthly, that the Iesuites change and rechange their rules and lawes, at their owne good will and pleasure. The Iesuites therefore are good fellowes, fit for all times, all places, and all companies.
Paragraph. X. Of the profession and Religion of the Iesuites, in generall. THe Iesuites neuer harboured in their hearts any other proiect, but the subuersion of states, disauthorizing of Magistrates, and seducing of subiectes from their allege∣ance. These wordes are set downe, in the franke discourse. Page. 98. 1. Vanitas vanitatum, that religious men who should spend their time in studie and contemplation, doe take their grea∣test pleasure, delight, and contentment, in writing and re∣ceiuing packets of newes from all coastes and countries, making that their whole studie and trauaile. These words are set downe, in D. Elies notes vpon the Apologie. Page. 264. vers. 20. The whole profession of the Iesuites is nothing else, but a particular coozning of our priuate families, and a gene∣rall villanie of all the countries, where they make their aboade. Thus it is written, in the Iesuites Catechisme. Lib. 2. cap. 12. fol. 106. This is not to stand long hammering about the matter; this is to make short worke, and to tell you in a word, that looke how many cleargie men your Maiestie hath, so many subiects hath the Pope in France; and so kings concerning the cleargie, are not soueraigne princes. This is (my liege) in good french, to erect another state within your state, and another kingdome within your kingdome. These words are in the franke discourse. Page. 24. vers. 1. If it please you to consider, what is now in practise among our Iesuites, you shall find they follow the same steps in christianisme, which Ismael first trode in Mahumetisme. Their Prophet Ismael is the great Ignatius, who with his fabulous visions, would beare the world in hand, that some∣times he spoke with God, somtimes with Christ, somtimes with our Ladie, or S. Peter. And as Ismael fetched out of
Hali, the pretended brother of Mahomet, a new branch of religion taken from the old stocke; so Ignatius christening himselfe with the new name of a Iesuit, in steed of the name of a Christian authorized from the Apostles, builded vp a religion neuer anciently obserued by our Church. Ismael vnder a new vow, changed the ancient Turban; Igna∣tius inducing a new monachisme amongst vs, yet retaineth not the anciēt habit of munks. Ismael first assembled a hand∣full of people after raised millions; Ignatius doth the like Is∣mael to make himselfe great, mingled pollicie and religion together; Ignatius followed him. Ismael and his successors, were adorned and magnified by their followers; Ignatius hath beene so idolatrized, and the rest of the successours in the generalship. Ismael made himselfe be called the Prophet of God; the generall of the Iesuits termeth himselfe Gods Vicar. In these proceedings and practises, Ismael troubled and turmoyled the Mahometicall state; and shall not we mistrust in Rome, this same new Iesuited Sophi? whosoeuer suspecteth them not, is no true and legitimate child of the holy sea. These words are set downe, in the Ie∣suites catechisme Lib. 3. cap. fol. 230. Note heee Gentle Reader, these points of great momēt with me. First, that the Iesuites harbour no other proiect in their hearts, but the subuersion of kingdomes, and the withdraw∣ing of subiects from their alleageance. Secondly, that they im∣ploy their whole time & study, in hunting after newes. Third∣ly, that their profession is nothing else indeed, but a particular coozning of your families, and a plaine villany of all countries. Fourthly, that Iesuiticall religion, is a semimonarchicall do∣minion, and a flat diminution of all royall regiment. Fiftly, that Iesu itisme is a new late vpstart Mahumetisme. And thus much of Iesuiticall religion in generall; let vs now see what it is in speciall,
Paragraph. XI. Of the religion and profession of Iesuites in speciall. FIrst, the Iesuites hold and defend this proposition; hominem non christian̄ posse esse Romanum pontificem. Thus in English; one that is not a christian, may be the Bishop of Rome. Thus it is written in the discouery. pag. 37. quodl 4. art. 2. page. 100. Let us admit this proposition gentle reader, with our Iesuites; perswading our selues, that the holy Ghost who made Balaams asse to speake, hath enforced them to speake the truth vnawares against themselues. For. as I haue proued at large, in my Suruey of poperie; Their owne renowmed popish writers freely graunt, that dame Iohan, a woman not a man, was once Pope of Rome. And certes, if a woman may be Pope, who by Saint Paules doctrine may not be permitted to speake in the Church: a Fortiori, an Ethnicke, Pagan, Turke, or Iew, who is no christian, may well bee the Bishoppe of Rome. Secondly, Archer the Iesuite defended this proposition; the Stewes are as lawfull at Rome, as the Pope himselfe, or any order of religious men. the Iesuite Weston also did defend the same, against D. Bagshaw. These words are set downe in the relation. pag. 47. Note here gentle reader, that the force of truth, and true christian religion is such, that the verie enemies thereof, doe often vnwittingly and vnwillingly acknowledge the same. for by this Iesuiticall doctrine, it followeth of necessitie, that the Popes authoritie and his being at Rome, is altogether vnalw∣full; as also that all the religious there, that is, munkes, Friers, Iesuites, and Nunnes, are vnlawfull, wicked, and most ex∣ecrable, which conclusion (by Gods assistance) shall be made more euident, when I come to speake of the Pope and his au∣thoritie in particular. Thirdly, the Iesuites hold, teach, and practise this doc∣trine
that a malefactor being condemned so die, after hée hath once made confession of his sinnes to his ghostly Fa∣ther, is not tied to reueale it to his iudge; nay, it is law¦full for him to stand in stiff deniall thereof, at the time of his execution, as being cleare before God, after hee hath discharged the depth of his conscience to his confessour. Thus is it writen in the Iesuites catechisme, libr. 3. cap. 12. fol. 166. Note here gentle reader, with what strange docrine our Ie∣suites vse to feed, the humours of their deuoted vassals. And for the better clearing of the falshood thereof, thou must duly obserue with me, that if it were true, (as the Iesuites suppose, & take pro confesso,) that the malefactor were washed & who∣ly purged frō his offence, by his confession and absolution re∣ceiued at the priests hands; yet would it not follow by good consequution, that he might lawfully denie, his former com∣mitted offences to the iudge; and that for these two insoluble reasons. First, because he doth formallietell a lie, which hee ought not to doe, as Saint Austine affirmeth, if he might ther∣by saue the whole world. For to lie is euer a sinne, as all lear∣ned diuines doe teach. But that he lyeth, in saying he did not commit such a fact, all the world knoweth. The reason hereof is euident, because a murder committed not to haue beene committed, is a thing so impossible, that God himselfe cannot performe it. Neither doth this argue anie imperfecti∣on in God, but contradiction in the thing that should be done. God is truly called omnipotent, because he can doe indeed, whatsouer is dowable or can be done. Yet, whatsoeuer im∣plieth imperfection or contradiction, that can he not doe; not for anie defect or impotencie in himselfe, God forbid; But for the contradiction or imperfection of that, which man re∣quireth to be done. For this cause, God cannot bring to passe, that Lazarus was not once dead; albeit he could and de fac∣to did,make well my dis∣course. raise him vp from death to life againe. For this cause, God cannot make another God equall to himselfe. For this cause, God cannot sinne. Yet, whatsoever neither implyeth contradiction, nor imperfection, that God can doe without all peraduenture, because hee is omnipotent. Now then, the ma∣lefactor
that hath killed a man, and is by a popish priest abso∣lued from the guilt of that fact; must perforce tell a leasing to the iudge, when he saith he killed not the man; though we suppose it true, that at that time hee be freed from the sinne. For it is one thing, to haue killed the man; an other thing, to be freede from the crime; euen as it was one thinge, for Lazarus to be restored to life; an other thing, to haue beene dead. And as it can neuer be true, to say Lazarus was not once dead; so can it neuer be true, to say the malefactor did not once kill the man. Againe, the papists teach generally and vniformely, that none without a speciall reuelation from heauen, can know that he is in the state of saluation, and fréede from his mor∣tall sinnes. The malefactor therefore cannot assure him∣selfe, that he is purged from the murder by vertue of his ab∣solution. And so we sée, or at lest may sée, the fondnes of Iesuiticall doctrine. Fie vpon it. See the end of y• fifth chapter, how they bind men & womē vnto thē. Fourth∣ly, the Iesuites in Rome, acknowledge the Pope to be Lord spirituall & temporall, ouer all christian princes. All the ex∣trauagant decretals, impose the same vpon all monarchies. it is a proposition verie familiar in the court of Rome, and in the buls appointed for the publication of the Iubily, in the yeare 1600. Saint Peter, and Saint Paule are called princes of the earth. These words are set downe, in the Iesuites catechisme. Libr. 3. cap. 26. fol. 233. The Iesuites teach, that the Pope hath authoritie to ex∣communicate Kinges, and to transferre their kingdomes to others; as also to free subiects, from their allegance to their soueraignes. this is proued as well in my Suruey, as in sundry places of this discourse. yet the absurditie here¦of, both the English priests and French Papists do acknow¦ledge, and most euidently confute the same. marke their proofes, which now follow in order. Againe, where Master A. C. saith, that power was not giuen to Saint Peter by Christ, to transferre gentem in gentem, it is both catholike, and true doctrine; and in vaine shall father Parsons, goe about to infring it. These wordes
are set downe, in the replie to Parsons. libell. Fol. 97. b. 17. Neither can any lawe, or necessitie in the world, contra∣dict or impeach the law of nature,See the  and , and note them well. borne with man, and al∣waies remaining in himselfe. Thus it is written in the re∣plie to Parsons libell. Fol. 42. b. 18. And in an other place of the said replie, viz. fol. 35. b. It is plainly and flatly auou∣ched, that the law of Premunire against the Pope and Romish mischiefes, was enacted, and published with the frée and full consent, of all the clergie and temporal∣tie. This we haue said, & doe say, y• religious men & priests, haue not to doe with kingdomes; and those of our owne nation, which haue delt in such affaires against their Prince and countrie, we doe therein condemne their actions, and dis∣claime from them, as vndutifull and vnpleasant to all true English natures, these words are in the reply to Parsons libell. fol. 38. b. Jesuite, learne this lesson of me; for I will not suffer, either our countrie-men to be infected with thy poysonous propositions, or strangers that shall reade this booke of thine, to conceiue, that the maiesty of our King is by thy comming anie whit empayred. First, we maintaine, and vphold it for an article inuiolable in France,Loe, the Pope can∣not depose kinges, nor translate their king∣domes. that the Pope hath no authoritie to bee liberall of our Realme, for any mans aduantage whatsoeuer, what fault soeuer our King shall be found capable of, none excepted, the Pope hath no power, but what is giuen him by commission from God. He is neither that Samuel, nor that Iehoiada, who were commanded by God to doe, what they did vnder the old law. For vnder the new, which we call the new tes∣tament, there is no mention of any such matter. The Pope cannot by the power of his spirituall sword, controll the temporall. We hold it for an article firme and indubitable in this Realme of France, that our kinges are not subiect to the Popes excommunication. A thinge which wee haue re∣ceiued from all antiquitie. Lothaire king of Austracia decea∣
lest Lewes his brother, who was Emperour & King of to be his successour. king Charles the Balde vncle to them both seazed on it by right of occupation, as lying fit for his hand. Lewes had recourse to Pope Adrian,The Pope is readie to curse, slow to blesse. whoe vndertooke the quarrell for him, and summoned Charles to do his nephew right. But Charles gaue no eare to him. So the Pope went on, to interpose his censures with bitter cur∣ses and comminations. He enioyned Hingmare arch bi∣shop of Rhemcs, not to admitte the King to communicate with him, vpon paine himselfe to be depriued of his holi∣nesse his communion. gmare aduised by diuers prelats & barons of France, wrot backe to the Pope, that all of them were ofended, and grieued with his decree, and would not obey him. These words are set downe in the Iesuites cate∣chisme libr. 3. cap. 17. fol. 179. Boniface the eight felling at variance with king Phil∣lippe The faire, would needes excommunicate him, but there was neuer excommunication cost pope so deare, as that did him. For his Nancios were committed prisoners, his Buls burnt, and Boniface himselfe being taken by Nan∣geret chancelor of France, presently after died for very sorrow and despight, that hee had receiued so foule a dis∣grace at the hands of his enemie. Wherein King Phillippe did nothing, but by the counsell and consent of the whole clergie of France. So farre was his excommunication, from alling to the preiudice of the king and his Realme; that contrariwise, it turned to his shame and confusion, by whome it was decreed. Bennet the 13. Otherwise called Peter De luna, interdi∣cted Charles the sixt and his Realme. The King sitting in the throne of iustice in the parliament,Loe, the bearers of the Pope bull, were set vpon the pillory. or high court of Pa∣ris, the 21. of May, 1408. gaue sentence that the bull should be rent in peeces, and that Gonsalue and Conseloux the bea∣rers thereof, should be set vpon a pillorie, and publiquely notified and traduced in the Pulpit. The meaning where¦of was, that the people should be taught and informed, that the king was not liable to any excommunication. Which decree was accordingly put in execution in the month of
August, with the greatest scorne that could be deuised, the two nuncios or legats hauing this inscription vpon their miters; these men are disloyall to the Church, and to the king. These words are put downe in the Iesuites catechis∣me, lib. 3. cap. 17. fol. 182. He hath forgot belike the notorious fact at Louain where the Iesuites by the power and authority of the Kinge of Spaine, forbad the publishing of the Popes order for the vniuersitie against the Iesuites. This facte belike this good father thought to haue beene so secret, as it was vn∣knowne to the world, or at the least forgottē. These words are in y• reply, to Parlons libell. fol. 20. b. 21. In an other place of the said reply, viz. fol. 42. b. 5. it is flatly set downe, that Pope Paule the fourth sent Caraffe with force of armes, to inuade Naples; to whom the King of Spaine would not yeeld, albeit as it is there affirmed, the Pope hath more right thereto, then the Spaniard. Note heere gentle reader, these points of great importance with me. first, that by Iesuiticall doctrine, a Pagan or Iew may be the Pope of Rome. Secondly, that neither Pope, Munke, Iesuite, or Nunne, are or can be lawfull at Rome; vnlesse the Stewes be also lawfull there. Thirdly, that one may denie the fact which he hath done, and that before a competent iudge; and yet neither sinne, nor lye at all. Fourthlie, that both the Iesuites and the Pope himselfe tell vs, that the Pope is both Lord spirituall and temporall ouer all christian princes; as al∣so, that he can depriue christian princes of their royall scepters and regalities. But withall forget not, that not onely the eng∣lish priests, but the French Papists also, tell vs the flat contra∣rie. viz. That the Pope hath no authoritie to depose Kinges, or to translate their kingdomes; that the Pope cannot excom∣municate kinges; that Charles the Bald contemned Pope A∣drian, and derided his curses and comminations; that Kinge Philip the faire resisted Boniface the eight, burnt his buls, and imprisoned his legates; and that all this was done, by the coun∣sell and consent of the whole clergie of France; that Charles the sixt despised pope Benedicts interdict; burnt his Buls; cau∣sed the bringers thereof to be set on the pillorie; and that to
be done in most reprochfull manner, that could be deuised by the wit of man. Fiftly, that the King of Spaine doth with∣stand the Pope, and his forces; and will not yeeld Naples, which (his righte, as the Priestes write,) vnto him. The secular priests giue this commendation, to the re∣ligion of the Iesuites. We desire you say they, by the mer∣cies of God, to take heede of nuelties and Iesuitisme. for it is nothing, but treachery, dissimulation, ambition, and a ve∣ry vizard of most déepe hypocrisie. When other kingdomes begin to loath them, why should you so farre debate your selues, as to admire them? giue vs not occasion to say with the blessed Apostle; yee foolish Galathians, who hath bewit∣ched you? These words are set downe, in the important considerations. pag. 39. see quodl. 8. art. 7. pag. 247. Loe gentle reader, the religion of our Iesuites is nothing els in deed, but treacherie, ambition, dissimulation, and flat hypocrisie. The Iesuites haue prouided that all who come out of Spaine, must sweare, vow, professe, or at least acknowledge an obedience to M. Blackwell in all thinges; yea, euen to become ranke traytours against their Prince and country; for that is principally intended. These words are to bée found in the sparing discouerie,Pervse the fit chapter in the first section,  note it well. in the end almost of the epi∣le, in the last page saue one. Now then, the actions of the Iesuites, tending so euiden∣ly as they doe and haue done, to the ruine, subuersion, and ouerthrow, of our Prince and country, both by secret pra∣ctises, and open incursions of Spanish inuasions, (as is ma∣nifest both by their owne bookes, letters, and other dea∣linges, aswell in Ireland as England,) what good sub∣iect or true hearted English man, can doe lesse thē disclame with his mouth, resist with his bloud, and open with his tongue, all such vnnaturall and treacherous attempts? Wée are too much acquainted therewith, and therefore bound to reueale what we know therein, when it shall be nece∣ssarie for the preseruation of our Prince and contry. These words are to be found, in the reply to Parsons libell. fol. 28. b.
All Catholikes must hereafter depend vpon Blackwell, and Blackewell vpon Garnet, and Garnet vpon Parsons, and Parsons vpon the Diuell. These words are set downe in the discouery, Page. 70. quodlibet. 6. arte. 7. page. 173. But for the Iesuites they are so headlong and vio∣lent in these courses, that they seeme no more to regard the good of our countrie or estate thereof, then the Spani∣ardes themselues. For notwithstanding the manifest in∣tentions of conquest, and subuersion by the Spaniards in∣tended: yet do they so concurre with them, as where as the Spaniard of himselfe seemeth slow, they pricke him on con∣tinually with plots and suggestions. Witnesse father Par∣sons actions, concerning two seuerall nauies which misca∣ried; in one of which, Maister Doctor Stillington tooke his death; of the other he speaketh since, in a letter writte from Rome to Maister Thomas Fitzherbert. Witnesse this the late attempt in Irelande, in which fa∣ther Archer an Irish Iesuite was a great actor. These wordes are set downe in the reply to Parsons libell. fol. 33. b. The Iesuites dispose of the last wils of the sicke; they loue to intermedle with the mariages of many, with their tem∣porall goods, and in deede with all thinges, they alwaies take that course with all men, that some thinge happen to their owne share, hauing mind indeede of nothing, but their own gaine. These words are set downe in the abstract, pag. 75. Note heere Gentle reader, these important obseruations. First, that all Iesuited persons must vow to become traytors. Secondly, that all Iesuites seeke nothing els indeede out their owne lucre and gaine. Thirdlie, that all Iesuited persons must depend vpon the deuill, who as you see heere, inspireth gui∣deth, directeth, and ruleth the Iesuites. From such religion, good Lord deliuer vs. Amen.
CHAP. V. Of the birth, parentage, qualitie, disposition, and de∣meanour, of Robert Parsons the Iesuite. The first Section, of his birth and bastardie. RObert Parsons the Iesuite, is by birth a bastard, be∣gotten vpon the bodie of a verie base woman, by the Parson of the parish where he was borne; (to wit, at Stockgersée:) and his right name is not Parsons, but Cowbucke. The said Parson of Stockgersée which begat him, did afterwards foster him, and hauing brought him vp at the schoole, sent him to Oxford, and placed him in Ba∣lioll Colledge. From whence being master of artes, he was expelled; not for religion as he hath vanted, but for his ba∣sterdie, factious conuersation, libelling, and other misde∣meanors. But thereof ye need no further information, then the said declaration; where you shall finde, that there was such lamentation at his departure from the Colledge, as for ioy he was rung thence with bels. Doctor Bagshaw be∣ing then fellow of the said Colledge, was his stifle aduer∣sarie in his matters obiected against him; which the good father of his Iesuiticall charity, doth not when occasion ser∣ueth, forget. These words are set down in ye discouerie. Pag. 42. & pag. 29. quodlibet. 7. art. 10. pag. 217. quodl. 4. art. 2. in fine. Concerning father Parsons illegitimation, I haue oft wished it had not beene vrged, being not much to the pur∣pose. But sith it haue béene vrged, & that he denieth it, I will but aske him, why he was expelled Balioll Colledge in Oxford, and whether the chiefest matter obiected was not periurie, in taking the oath of the house to the statutes, a∣mongst the which this was one; Volumus, vt omnes huius collegij alumni sint legitimo thoro nati; which was vrged a∣gainst him, and offered to be proued openly. For the auoy∣ding of which publike infamie, he made his owne resigna∣tion, writing it with his owne hand, as is yet to be séene. This is more, then I ment to haue said in this matter, being
a personall touch; had no father Parsons ouer much vr∣ged the obiection, not onely as an vntruth, but also inuented and framed by vs. Heereby you may see, that the matter was not coyned by any of vs, nor so void of verity, as he af∣firmeth. These words are let downe, in the reply to Parsons libell. Fol. 91. b. 6. Now then for our credits with father Parsons, for his ri∣sing by practises,Lo, the Ie∣suites vse to preferre fa∣ctious heads. or factious disposition, I will say no more, but what is iustiable à parte rei, viz. that the most stirring, medling, and practising heads amongst all of our English nation, (to goe no further,) haue alwaies come to credite and preheminence amongst them. Witnes this per inductio∣nem father Parsons, whose factious dispesition hath béene e∣uerie where sufficiently displayed, with proofes sufcient. Witnes father Heywood, and his busie inclination at his comming into England, of which father Parsons can beare witnes, being at variance with him; and many other priests yet liuing in England, some of them hauing beene present at his synodes, where he made himselfe president in the Popes name. Witnes father Holt, of whose disposi∣tion you may read in master Charles Pagets answere to the Apologie. Witnes father Creswell, as you may see in Doc∣tor Elies answere to the Apologie. Witnes father Garnet, the onely chiefe actor, in all our stirres héere in England. I might adde father Crichton the Scot, with therest; and fa∣ther Holt, (if he were aliue,) would take my part. These then are pretie inducements, to thinke father Parsons rose in his order, by his factious disposition. But for the other point concerning master Blackwell, let him be examined vpon his oath,The Arch∣priest must be a witnes, against his good ma∣ster. whether he came not to master Bluet then prisoner in the Marshalsies, vsing these or the like words; what meant Doctor Allen to send this man ouer, he will vndoe vs all. And being asked why; he answered, that his expulsiō ut of Oxford was so infamous, that it would be obiected by the protestants, to the disgrace of the cause. Let master Blackwell I say, be vrged with this. and I adiure him, as he will answere it before almightie God at the latter day, to say the truth; & then father Parsons
shall see we haue won our credits euen in both these points, besides an hundred more alreadie proued. These words are put downe in the reply to Parsons libell. Fol. 93. a. 30. Out of this spirit it is, that father Cowbucke (alias Par∣sons,) for all the disparage of his birth (which not his bap∣tisme could wash away,) and other his scandalous carria∣ges, aswell since his Iesuitisme, as formerly when he was an heretike in Oxford, ambitioneth the Cardinalate, forget∣ting how that to be a bare priest (though no such peere,) he being a known bastard, is against the canons of y• Church; although to be a Iesuite (being such,) well and good he may. These words are put downe, in master A. C. his se∣cond letter, page. 23. and more at large, pag. 38. What name of his, (he speaketh of the Iesuite Robert Parsons,) or but two letters of his name, find ye to this his manifestation of folly and bad spirit, whereby he not to de∣serue to be burned in the hand for a vagabond? not any. No nor any durst he shew, manifesting so badde spirit, and so much folly in that censure of his, as he hath done. He is discouered for such as he is, viz. a man who being the mis∣begotten of a ploughman, and he a cuckwold too, vpon the bodie of a plough-man, hath accordingly demeaned him∣selfe; first, in begetting two bastards male and female, vp∣on the bodie of his owne sister, betweene his age of seuen∣teene and three and twentie, which was the cause he ranne away (as fearing the sheet, &c.) And so became a Iesuite; secondly, or rather formerly and continually, by being a common alehouse-squire, and the drunkennest spunge in all the parish where he liued; thirdly, for being an heretike of the family of loue all his life, till he became a Iesuite. These words are set downe in master. A.C. his third letter, pag. 50. and more at large, pag. 78. O Parsons, monster of mankind, fitter for hell then middle earth. Thou giuest occasion to thinke, that thou art not a meere man, but some fairies brat, begotten of some Incubus, or aerish spirit, vpon the bodie of a base woman. These words are set downe expressely, by the author of the quodlibets. quodl. 8. art. 5. pag. 238. and quodl. 4. art. 5.
he is termed a sacrilegious bastard, borne of a base queane. Not, heere gentle Reader, two things of great moment. First, that when the Pope abandoned lawfull and honest wed∣locke to priests. (which was euer deemed lawfull, vntill Syri∣cius was aduanced to the Popedome in the yeare 385. as I haue prooued in my booke of Surucy,) then the priests had good store of bastards; one of which as the priests heere confesse, was expelled from Balioll Colledge for his bastardie, & seditious dealing, & is this day (euen by the free confession of the secular priests,) an arrant traitor to his prince and natiue countrey. Secondly, that this holy father, who must forsooth reforme the Church of England and manage euerie thing in that high and heauenly function, was to be sent from heauen with heauenly and extraordinarie gifts. viz. he must first be a priests, sacrilegious bastard. Then, hee must be a common drunkard. Thirdly, he must be polluted with the execrable sinne of incest, and beget male and female vpon the bodie of his owne sister. Fourthly, he must be giuen to se∣dition and libelling. Fiftly, he must be a ranke traytor to his naturall soueraigne. At the length, being thus qualified with supernaturall gifts, and extraordinarie graces proceeding from Beelzbub that notable Machiuell; he must depriue noble Queene Elizabeth of her royall and princely Diademe, and set the same vpon the Spaniards head; he must make a bloo∣die massacre, of all the nobles and other her louing subiects; he must abolish, abandon, and make hauocke, of all the ancient lawes of this Church and Realme; and so forsooth (si dijs placet) set vp his newly deuised Monarchie, his holy so falsely named reformation. Sect. II. Of his notortous treasons and bloodie trecheries. THe next point brought in by father Parsons, is the last Irish attempt; but before we say any thing to that, we must put his fatherhood in minde of his practises, con∣cerning two other preparations, wherein he cannot denie himselfe to haue beene not onely a dealer, but also the verie chiefe and principall actor. The first was that, whein Doc∣tor Stillington and some others got their death, which mis∣carried
by reason of the ignorance of their pilotes, or ra∣ther by the prouision of God, thirtie foure ships being shi∣uered vpon their owne bayes. If he denie this, wee haue master Thomas Leake a reuerend priest, and others witnes thereto, with whom he dealt to goe in that armie. And because master Leake refused, he intreated him accordingly. This preparation was intended, (as then was thought,) for Ireland. The second preparation was some thrée or foure yeares after (if I be not deceiued,) of which father Parsons maketh mention, in a letter written to master Tho∣mas fitzharbert from Rome into Spayne, desiring to heare of the successe thereof, saying withall, that they had little hope of that attempt at Rome. This preparation (as I remember,) was in the same yeare, that the Earle of Es∣sex went into the Ilands, and it miscaried also by tempests. These two preparations are so euident, to haue procéeded with his concurrēce, & cooperation, as he no way can denie it, without the note of impudencie; so many witnesse and his owne letters, being in testimonie against him. What wise man will not laugh at father Parsons, to heare him in such sober protestation affirme, that he neuer intended, that the king of Spaine should haue any temporall interest to the Crowne of England, and yet by all his might and po∣wer seeke to make him master thereof, by inuasion and force of armes? Was the booke of titles (wherein the kings daughter, the Ladie Infanta was intituled to all her Maie∣sties dominions,) writ to no purpose,Parsons the author of the tray∣terous booke of titles. but to exercise father Parsons wit,? was it a vaine speculation in the ayre, with∣out relation to effect or end? there is a most trayterous let∣ter of his extant, which in time may come to light. But should I labour to light a candle at noone tide? whose po∣sitions good father are these? the Catholikes in England, may fauour Tyrone in his warres, and that with great me∣rit, and hope of eternall reward, as though they warred a∣gainst the Turkes. All Catholikes do sinne mortally, that take part with the English against Tyrone, & can neyther be saued, nor absolued from their sinnes by any priest, vn∣lesse they repent and leaue the English. They are in the
same case, that shall helpe the English with any victuals, or any such like thing. The most worthie prince Hugh ô Neale and other Catholikes of Ireland, that fight against the Queene, are by no construction rebels. How say you fryer Robert, out of what forge came these warlike engins? they were hammered in Salamanca the seuenth day of March, 1602. and are as you see, read hote. But what Vulcan was the workeman of them? you shall heare euerie one of them, speake for themselues. So I Iohn de Sequenza, professour of Diuinitie in the Colledge of the societie of Iesus, in the famous Vniuersitie of Salamanca, do thinke. I Emanuel de Royas, professor of Diuinitie in the same Colledge of the societie of Iesus, am of the same opinion. I Iasper de Mena, professor of diuinitie, and of the sacred scripture in the same Colledge, doe assent to these fathers sentence, as to an assu∣red truth. I Peter Osorio, preacher in the Colledge of the societie of Iesus at Tire, ain altogether in iudgement with these fathers. Now father Parsons, speake out man, haue any of your company beene practicioners in the treasons of Ireland? the Catholike author of the Iesuites Catechisme telleth vs, that all the late rebellious treacheries and mur∣thers hée there mentioneth, were plotted and contriued in the colledges of the Iesuites in France: and doe not these Iesuiticall professors, tell vs as much, of their owne pro∣céedings in their colledges in Spaynt, for our treasons, re∣bellions, and murthers in Ireland? I can be but sorie, that the auncient Christian faith and rebellion of Christ, should thus be scandalized by Machiuilians, vnder pretence of the blessed name of Iesus. We can alledge his letter written to the Earle of Angus, the 24. of Ianuarie, 1600. wherein he confesseth, that he had laboured eight or tenne yeares for his Maiesty of Scotland, and the preferment of his title, with the summe of twentie hundred crownes a yeare for two yeares together from Spayne, which were as hee saith, disbursed in the yeare 1583. and 84. as also 4000. crowns procured to y• same effect, from Pope Gregory the 13. by bil of exchange; which he confesseth he brought to Paris, and there deliuered it. And he saith the same had continu∣ed,
it any correspondencie of gratitude, or hope had continued from Scotland; with no small assurance of farre greater matters, and aduauncement to the kings person, if the enemies since of both our Realmes (as hée saith,) had not ouer throwne, and altered that course. This he hath in that letter, and much more. Whereby you may perceiue, what his practises haue béene from time to time, against her Maiestie and State; séeking first as you see, by large pensions from Spayne, to worke with the Scots and others, for the vntimely aduancement of his title, which must haue beene with the ouerthrow of her Maiestie, or otherwise you know, it could not haue beene. And heere I request the reader, to note these labours of father Parsons for the affayres, of Scotland, to haue beene in the yeares, 1583. and 1584. in which selfe same yeare, happened the trayterous plots of Patry, Frances Throgmorton, and the Earle of Northumberland, and the practises with the Duke of Guise, Spayniard, and other English abroade, about the deliuerie of the Queene of Scots, and ouerthrow of her Maiestie; and shortly after, the treasons of Babington and his compli∣ces. Which I note, that you may see, how father Par∣sons courses concurred at the same instant with their attempts; and by this you may gesse, whether it be not more then probable, that he was inward with all those deuises; and perhaps some of that money was im∣ployed, to the setting forward of those attempts, though he would seeme cleare in all things. But it is Gods will, that his owne letters and writings, should discouer his dealings. There want not other letters of his and his complices, which shew his good will towards our so∣ueraigne and countrey, but these shall be sufficient at this time. These words are set downe, in the reply to Parsons libell. Fol. 65. fol. 66. fol. 67. fol. 68. The Iesuite Parsons caused the students in Spayne, to subscribe to the Ladie Infantaes title to the crowne of England, and to what else he would, hauing gotten their names to three seuerall blankes. These wordes are
set downe, in the hope of peace, page. 22. and they are de∣fended to be true, in the reply to Parsons libell, fol. 68. b. where it is affirmed, to be a matter verie notorious and euident, as also, that there are diuers priests yet liuing, as∣well of them that were enforced to subscribe against their willes, as others that openly refused the same, who will confirme this by oath. To come to Parsons booke of succession, what title is there, which he doth not inualidate one way or other, with bastar∣die, or the like, the Infanta her title onely excepted? doth he not bring the marriage of the Earle of Harford in question, to debarre that line? doth he not exclude the Scot, by the assotiation, and so in the rest? onely he leaueth the Infanta sole heire, without spot or staine. Againe, hath he not ra∣ked vp a title for the Infanta,See more of this fel∣lowes trea∣sons in the next chap∣ter. from John of Gaunt, and before? neuer dreamed of in the world till his time, to bring in her as a competitor. I am sure, he might bring in 300. at the least within our owne countrey aswell, and with as good right and interest to the Crowne. These words are set downe, in the replie to Parsons Libell. Fol. 77. a. Sect. III. Of Parsons impudencie, and other his bad quali∣ties manifold. I will say, he is impudent, and hath a face of brasse, and is as shamelesse as father Prsons; who will affirme, or denie any thing. For my selfe haue hard the foresaid irre∣uerent speeches, from some of their owne mouthes. these words are set downe, in the reply to Parsons libell. fol. 21. a. 22. Againe in an other place, viz. fol. 10. a. 16. Thus; they are so apparantly and inuincibly confuted, as that I admire much at the mans brasen forehead, that he durst, so palpablie laye open his follies, if not his ma∣lice. But this is but an ordinarie tricke with Parsons, and his complices; that euerie man, be he neuer so honest,
if he once speake against a Iesuite, must bee esteemed a bad man, and a suspected companion; marrie, if hee runne a longe with them in their courses, let him be neuer so lewde a varlet, he shall be reputed for most ho∣nest. Witnesse this, Tomson, Coulfon, Tunsteed, and ma∣ny others of that rable, which I could name. These words are set downe, in the reply to Parsons libell. fol. 11. a 19. Beleeue me, when I read this, I was amazed with wondering at this mans brasen visage, (he speaketh of Parsons that holy Iesuite.) Neuer did I in my life (I pro∣test,) reade or heare so notorious wickednesse and inius∣tice, so impudently recounted for iust. Iesu, whither will this man goe, or what will he not iustifie and commend? Doth not all our little world know, that the erecting of the Arch. priest, was the cause of all our dissentions? How then was he procured, at our owne petition? did not M. Standish most falsely by his meanes, suggest vnto the Pope in our names a desire of such a thing, we neuer dreaming thereof? did any one priest in England send his hand, or consent with Maister Standish to sollicite any such matter? Were not the Iesuites constrained,Loe, Par∣sons hath the trade of lying. cunningly to extort ratihabitions from the priestes themselues, by subscripti∣ons vnto a congratulatorie letter, after that they had by forgerie erected him, and saw him impugned? Diabolus est mendax, & pater eius. God send father Parsons more shame, more honestie, and more truth. I wonder not now, at any thing he saith. for I well see, he hath wholy giuen himselfe o∣uer, to the trade of fittening; with which it séemeth, he hath made sale of his conscience. These words are set downe, in the reply to Parsons libell, fol 57. a. And in an other place, viz. fol. 53. b. Thus; but father Parsons will neuer leaue, his old trickes of iugling. In an other place. viz. fol. 75. b. Thus; neither were their wits so weake, as not able to sée father Parsons cunning ayme therein, Though like a Gip∣sey, he play at fast and loose, yet men that are acquain∣ted with his olde trickes, can gesse at his newe fet∣ches.
The complement of this chapter. As for Don Bernardino Mendoza, it is knowne, that he was wholy affectionate to the Iesuites. and it is but an ordinarie course with the Iesuites, to bind both noble men & noble women, & others also, vnto them by vow; and yet leauing them in the world to be their instruments; of which kind in both sexes, I could name some in our owne country; and therefore it is no strange thing to charge the Iesuites, to haue men in the world abroad that are theirs, and bound to them in vow, and therefore may be termed Iesuites. for what doth incorporate into a religious bodie, but the vowes thereof, amongst which obedience is the chiefest. These words are set downe, in the reply to Parsons libell. fol. 47. a. 23. Note here gentle reader, what a cursed crewe of disloyall caterpillers these Iesuites be. they are not onely ranke tray∣tors, as you haue hard at large; but so full of cozonage, and hypocriticall dealing in their pestilent sect; that no man can tell, when he talketh, or conueseth with a Iesuite. for they are both Friars and Nunnes, both men, and women, and liue in the world to set forward Iesuiticall plots and treasonable pra∣ctises, as if they were lay-people. The like was neuer heard of in the world; it is a new no religion; it is a folly of all fol∣lies; Friers are become Nunnes, & Nunnes are Friers, & all are iumbled vp together. They may dilate and inlarge their hypo∣criticall sect, by a most execrable and sacrilegious propag∣tion. For Friers may begette Friers, and Iesuiticall Nunnes may be their mothers. Well, it is expedient to know these ho∣ly secular Friers, as also the religious contemplatiue Nunnes. For secret traytors are most daungerous,Remember the memo∣rable caue∣. and not to be tolera∣ted in a well managed common weale. Now, these gal∣lants, these Friers and these Nunnes, are knowne to the secular priests, as heere you see. againe, they are arrant traytors, as the said priests confesse. Thirdly, the said priests, as themselues haue voluntarily graunted, are bound in conscience to discouer them. Let wise magistrates remember these points, and thinke
vpon the execution. Let them not forget, that both secret fri∣ers, and secret Nunnes, are in this Realme; and that not base Friers and base Nunnes, but nobles of the best families, noble men, and noble women. if this geare, and this treacherous dealing, be permitted a while; welladay, and welladay, may be Englands song night and day. for the Priests themselues heere tell vs, that these noble Friers and these noble Nunnes, are permitted by the Iesuites, to liue as lay-persons in the worlde; that so they may the better bee a∣ble to effecte, their treacherous and bloudie practi∣ses euerie where. Chap. VI. Of the Pope and his English hispanized semi∣naries. Paragraph. I. Of Parsons the Popes instrument in state∣affaires. Parsons was the speciall instigator of the Duke of Guise, an. 1583. Or there abouts, for his sodaine surprizing the Citie of London, and her maiesties person, with 5000. men; assuring him, that the Catholikes would assist him, if néede required. It is not vnknowne, what a villanous at∣tempt the traytor Parrie vndertooke; against the life of hir Maiestie, ann. 1583. With which outragious plot, sundrie of the Iesuites were acquainted, and namely this arrant traytor Parsons; who also intituled Alexander the Duke of Parma to hir Maiesties crowne, and indeuoured with all his skill, to perswade the Duke in the right of his sonne Ranutius, to set vpon this Realme with all his force. But the attempt of anno. 1588. By the King of Spaine against hir Maiesty and this whole kingdome, is to be abhorred a∣boue all the rest, and to be had in perpetuall detestation. And yet in that cruell attempt, this our Iesuite was a chiefe
firebrand, and had his hand in that pernitious booke, that was then printed for the stirring vp of her Maiesties sub∣iects, to haue taken part with the Spaniard, if he could haue arriued. These words are to be found, in the sparing dis∣couery. pag. 49. page. 51. pag. 52. A large volumne is set forth by this Parsons and his ge∣nerall,The high counsell of reformatiō called the high counsell of reformation for England, to take place and to be of force, when the catholike con∣querour shall be established in great Brytaine. First, no religious order will that famous volumne permitte in great Brytain, but Iesuites and Capuchines. Neither Be∣nedictines, nor Carthusians, nor Dominicans must enter heere, sicut placuit Iesuitis; for the holy Ghost hath forsaken all other religious orders, and is onely in the Capuchenes and Iesuites. If you aske vs, why they make choise of the Capuchenes onely; we answere you, as a good Capuchene did to the like question. we sute best (quoth he,) with the humor of the Iesuits; for their drift is to haue all, and to rule all; and on the contrarie, our orders are such, as we must neitheir rule at all, neither haue any thing at all. Secondly, all bishoprickes great and small, all parsona∣ges, vicarages, and monasteries, must be no more in the hands of bishops, Abbots, parsōs, & the rest, as hereto∣fore it was accustomed. They all must bee put to their pensions, and the father prouinciall must ull out foure Ie∣suites, and two secular Priests, which must be demi Ie∣suits. These six vicars, these mightie great Lords, shall haue lands, mannors, Lordships, parsonages, monasteries, and whatsoeuer els, into their owne hands; allowing the Bishoppes, and the rest, pensions or stipends at their good pleasures. Thirdly, no parson, no vicar, no bishop, no fellow of a∣ny colledge, must be so hardy, as once to demaund an ac∣compte, what is become of their reuenewes, lands, and lordships. Fourthly, the nobilitie must be limited also, what reti∣newe they shall keepe; what they shall haue to spende
yeerely; and what diet they shall keepe at their ta∣bles. Lastly, the common lawes of our contrie must be abo∣lished, and the ciuill beare the sway. happie is hee, that can see and read this booke, called the counsell of reforma∣tion. These words are to be found, both in the sparing dis∣couerie, pag. 28. 29. and in the dialogue also, page. 95. as al∣so, quodlibet. 4. art. 2. page. 93. quodlibet. 9. art. 2. pag. 289. Note heere gentle reader, these important points with me. First, that the Iesuites doe perswade themselues confidently, and would perswade all others in like manner; that they can procure a conquest of England, at their pleasure. Secondly, that themselues are the onely wise men in all Europe, at least in their owne conceits; and consequently, that all people or all estates and condition whatsoeuer, must in reason yeelde to their counsell of reformation. Thirdly, that all bishops, par∣sons, and vicars, must depend vpon the Iesuiticall munks, those irreligious and trayterous fryers; a thing neuer heard of, since the world began. Fourthly, that not onely the ancient lawes of the Church, but also of the Realme, must be altered by Ie∣suiticall profested fryers. Fiftly, that munks (the hautie and arrogant Iesuites I meane,) must be the high treasurers of the land. Sixtly, that all the nobilitie of the land, must be censured and limited by the said Friers, what retinew they shall keepe, what summes of money they shall spend, and what diet they shall vse, Seuenthly, and lastly, that these Iesuits, these Lordly Friers, these noble treasurers of England, are lawles and in∣dependent; aboue all and vnder none; no man may call them to accoumpt; no man may once aske them, what is become of the common treasure. Two Priests (Maister Bishoppe & Maister Charnocke,) being messengers to Rome, sent in the name of all the rest, were imprisoned at Rome before their message was deliuered. The French Ambassadour came to the Pope and told him, that in imprisoning those two men, he had done that, whereof no example could begiuen in any age. And therefore beseeched the Pope, to giue them audience.
After the Ambassadours departure, forthwith commeth the Spanish Ambassadour suborned by, Parsons, and dis∣swadeth the Pope from that which he had promised. The French Ambassadour commeth againe the second time, and vrgeth as before; and againe audience was granted to the Priestes. This being knowne to the Iesuites, they procured the said Spanish Ambassadour to come againe to disswade the Pope, at whole motion audience againe was denied, and the Priests cast into prison. These words are set downe, in the preface to the important considerations. fol. 8. page. 2. See also Maister Elies notes vpon the Apolo∣gie. pag. 108. for there the same is auouched. Note here gentle reader, these points with me. First, that the Iesuites are men, which respect neither religion nor con∣science, nor honest morall dealing. Againe, that the Pope is an vnfit man, to gouerne any one nation; and much lesse fit, to gouerne all the christian world. But all is well, his traytorous Iesuites can doe it for him. Yea, they can rule the Pope himselfe, For so themselues affirme. These are their words, in the notes vpon the Apologie. page. 267. Parsons for his credit (you say,) in the Romaine court, doth greatly let & hinder their designements. And this their saying was not ma∣nie monethes since confirmed, by one of his owne coate pa∣ssing by this way; who said Father Parsons could doe what he would, with the Pope. Paragraph. II. Of the Popes dealing in matters of treason. Pis quintus practised hir maiesties subuersiō; he sent into England one Ridolphi a gentleman of Florence, vnder colour of marchandize,Loe, the Pope pur∣posely in∣tended re∣bellion. to sollicite a rebellion. He moued the King of Spaine to ioyne in this exploite, for the better securing of his owne dominions, in the lowe countries. He denounced his bull against hir maiestie, purposely to further the intended rebellion, and to depriue hir from hir kingdome. The Pope and king of Spaine assigned the
Duke of Norfolke, to be the head of this rebellion. The Pope gaue order to the said Ridolphi,The Duke of Norfolke a traytour. to take 150000. crownes to set forward his attempt. some of which mo∣ny was sent for Scotland, and some deliuered to the said Duke. King Philippe at the Popes instance, determined to send the Duke of Alua into England, with all his forces into the low countries, to assist the Duke of Norfolke. Are all these things true, & were they not then in hand,King Phi∣lip appoin∣ted the Duke of Alua, to aide the Duke of Norfolke. whilest her maiestie dealt so mercifully with you? how can you excuse these desgnements, so vnchristian, so vnpriestly, so treacherous? when we first heard these particulars, we did not beleeue them; but when we saw the booke, and found them there; God is our witnes, we were much amazed, and can say no more, but that his holines was misformed, & indirectly drawen to these courses. To proceed, the Ca∣tholikes continued as before,Ergo the Pope may erre. till the said rebellion brake forth in the North, 1569. a little before Christmasse; and that it was knowne, that the Pope had excommunicated the Queene, and thereby freed her subiects (as the bull im∣porteth) from their subiection. Thē followed a restraint, but the sword was only drawne against such Catholikes, as had risen vp actually into open rebellion. Well, the sen∣tence was procured by surreption,Rebellion in the North. 1569. and the Pope was decei∣ued, as hee is often in matters of fact. These wordes are set downe, in the important considerations, page, 10. 11. Maister Sanders also telleth vs, that Maister Morton and Maister Webbe two secular priests, were sent by the pope before the said rebellion, to the Lords and gentlemen in the North, to excite them with their followers,Loe, euery thing ten∣deth to re∣bellion. to take vp armes against their soueraigne. And the rather to perswade them thereunto, they signified to them by the Popes comman∣dement, that her maiestie was excommunicated, and her subiects released from their obedience. And the said Maister Saunders doth iustifie the commotion, and ascribeth the e∣uill successe it had, to the ouerlate publishing of the Bull, it being not generally knowne of, till the yeare after, when Felton had set it vp vpon the Bishoppe of Londons gate.
These words are set downe in the discouerie afore said, Pag. 12 in the said important considerations, page 12. The Priests confesse, that Maister Saunders doth to much extoll the said rebels; because say they, they were men arraigned and executed by the auncient lawes of our country, for high treason. In the place alleaged, the Priests confesse, that Parsons and others of his coate, haue since followed the former in∣tollerable and vncatholike course. They confesse also, that with in foure or fiue yeeres, it was commonly knowne to the Realme, what attempts were in hande by Maister Maister Saunders, for an interprise by force in ; in which action Maister Saunders being to much Iesuited did thrust himselfe in person, as a chiefe ring∣leader,The priest Saunders, was the Ringlea∣der ∣bellion. for the better assisting of the rebells. and whilst these practises were in hand in Ireland, Gregorie the 13. renew∣eth the said Bu of Pus quintns, and denounceth hir maie∣stie to be excommunicate, with intimation of all other par∣ticulars in the former Bull mentioned, which was procured no doubt by surption, the false Iesuites daring to attempt any thing,Loe, the deuill brought the Iesuits. into Eng∣land. Ano. 1580. by vntrue suggestion, and lewd surmises; which Iesuites as the diuell would haue it, came into Eng∣land, and intruded themselues into our haruest, being the chiefe instruments of all the mischiefes, that haue beene in∣tended against her maiestie, since the beginning of her raigne. Their first comming was in the yeare 1580. Cam∣pion the  and Pasons the prouinciall, Alias ba∣stard Cardinall Cowbucke, as you haue heard alrea∣die. In the said important considerations, pag. 22. it is set downe, how the Pope by the insgations of the Iesuits, plotted with the King of Spaine,Mendoza is a Iesuite. for the assistance of the Duke of Guise against the Queene of England. For the better effecting whereof, Mendoza the Iesuite and ledger for the King of Spaine in England,See im∣pors▪ cōsid p. 22. 24. P. 23. 18. set on worke Fraun∣ces Throckmorton and diuers others. two others also about the same time viz. ann. 1583. Arden and Sommervile, were purposed and had contriued how they might lay violent
hands vpon her Maiesties sacred person. And Doctor Par∣ty the same yeare,Important considerat. p. 22 24. & p. 23. 18. was plotting with Iesuites beyond the seas, how he might haue effected the like villanie. About the same time, the Earle of Northumberland, was brought into the plot of the Duke of Guise. Hereunto may be ad∣ded, the notable treasons of Anthonie Babington and his complices, in the yeare 1586. the treacherie also of Sir William Stanley the yeare following 1587. in the page. 40. it is confessed, that Cardinall Allen and Parsons, publi∣shed the renouation of the Bull by Sixtus Quintus; so as the Pope must needes be condemned, to haue dealt in matters of treason, and to haue beene the chiefest au∣thor thereof. For in his name, and vpon his pretensed au∣thoritie, the others did all that was done; and without him they durst not haue done any thing, as is euident by this discourse. Paragraph. III. Of the Popes Seminaries. THat the Pope did erect his seminaries, for to with∣draw English subiects, from their due obedience and allegeance to their naturall soueraigne; it may and doth appeare most euidently, by his first mission of his semina∣rists, into the Realme of England. For I pray you, when Sherwin, Rston, and Birket, were sent into this land from Rome, (who were the first that came from thence,) did not the Pope send with them at the same time,Gregory 13. the Iesuites Cmpion and Parsons that priestly bastard? I wote he did, my selfe was estis oculatus, being then one of that Colledge. And how did he send them? Mush, one of these secular priests which now stand against these Iesuites, can tell as well as my selfe, because he was then of the same colledge at Rome. I know, and he knoweth, that the excommunication was then renewed in fresh print, and common in euerie mans hands, my selfe had one of them at the same time. In which Bull, her Maiestie was denounced to be excommunicate,
to be an vsurper, and pretensed Queene of England, and all her subiects were thereby absolued, freed, and dischar∣ged of their allegiance to her. In this manner furnished, these good fellowes receiue the Popes blessing, and their viaticum, which was a good one I warrant you, and so they march towards England. Who forthwith after their arriuall, (as you may read in the important considera∣tions, Page. 14.) bestirred themselues, as the diuell would haue them, (for these are the verie wordes of the priests,) like a tempest, with great brags and challenges; and Par∣sons forthwith fell to his Iesuiticall courses, of which you haue heard copiously, in the chapter next afore going. Touching the erection of popish seminaries, who so listeth, may read at large in my booke of motiues, in the chapter of dissention. CHAP. VII. Of the English hispanized Seminaries, and the intent of their erection. IT is apparant, that the seminaries in Spaine were in∣tended by father Parsons, of purpose to cause a conquest, and to bring this land into the bondage and slauerie of the Spaniard. quodl. 8. art. 10. pag. 278. The Iesuites haue beene plotting about this Monarchie, these twentie yeares together. That is to say, how to bring both states ecclesiasticall and temporall vnder their subiection. For this cause it is, that father Parsons so spee∣dily obtained of the king of Spayne, there to institute three seminaries on his Maiesties costes and charges; that graines and indulgences must be published in England on the Spanish behalfe, for all that take his part; that all who come out of Spayne, must sweare, vow, professe, or at least acknowledge, an obediēce to master Blackwell in all things; Yea, euen to become ranke traytors against their prince and country, for that is principally intended. These words are set downe in the end of the preface, which is annexed to the sparing discouerie.
Parsons caused diuers by fayre meanes and threats to subscribe, that in all conferences they should when they came into England, aduance the Infantaes title, not inten∣ding therby to expect her Maiesties death, but by all means to remoue her, from the present possession of her royall e∣state. These words are set downe in the discouerie,See the 16. Preamble. Pag. 57. as also in the important considerations, Page. 34. By these testimonies gentle reader, two things are cleared; the one, that Parsons the Iesuite, aliâs bastard Cowbucke, ta∣keth vpon him as roundly as traiterously, to place and displace, to put on and take of royall Diademes, at his good will and pleasure. The other, that the three English hispanized semi∣minaries, erected in Saint Lucars, Siuill, and Valledolid, are and must be mainteyned, to further, ayde, and assist, the Spa∣nish bloodie intendments, against their vndoubted soueraigne and natiue countrey. CHAP. VIII. Of the Popes authoritie. I Haue discoursed at large of this theame, in my booke of motiues. I meane heere to speake thereof onely,See the fourth chapter, in the 11. Pa∣ragraph. as the printed bookes published by the secular priests, haue ministred t occasion to me. Where I wish the indifferent reader, to marke well what I shall by Gods helpe, deliuer in this behalfe. In which my dispute, I will for perspi∣cuitie sake, proceede by way of sections. Sect. I. Of the Popes fact in assoyling her Maiesties subiects, from their homage to her. TOuching the Bull of Pious Quintus, and the same since confirmed by Gregorie 13. against her Maiestie; as neither the Spaniard, nor any other forraine power, is eyther by expresse or implied termes thereof, incited to dominion ouer this land, as little are English hearts therby disallegeanced so from her Maiestie, as to concurre with any forraine inuadour. For though the said Buls vpon
her Maiesties excommunication therein promulged,See the 4. chapter. the 6. Pa∣ragraph. doe de facto assoyle the subiects of this Realme from their ho∣mage to her; it therfore followes not, that they must and ought to be parties against her Maiestie, and their country to a forraine power, howsoeuer pretending euen Religion, or the ciuill good thereunto. For that were to conster the Popes act so ouermuch in religion, and grace, as to the destruction of nature, which were against the marime a∣foresaid. These words are taken out of the answere, to the Iesuited gentleman, Page. 39. Sect. II. Of power granted to Saint Peter. A Man to goe against his owne countrey, is and euer was holden in the ciuill part of the world, an act con∣traius gentum; also vnnaturall, yea against all grace. Be∣sides, that Christ neuer did delegate any such power to S. Peter, as tradere gentem in gentem, that being a meere tem∣porall reuenge, and he but his vicar spirituall. Sect. III. Of the confirmation of the power, named in the former Section. SAint Peters commission against transgressing kings and kingdomes, is no more then onely to denounce by ex∣communication, and other the like ecclesiasticall censures, Gods displeasure against them for their transgression, and not to exercise the secular sword at all. These words con∣teyned in the third and second sections, are set downe in the answere to the Iesuiticall gentleman. Page. 40. Sect. IIII. Of the explication of the former confirmation. I Say againe, I doe not see, howe that chaire and those keyes to be imbrued in blood, and to atchieue con∣quests,
especially such a tradition as of England to Spaine by the sword, can any wayes stand, eyther with Christs, or his said vicars honour. These words are set downe in the answere to the Iesuited gentleman. Page. 42. Sect. V. Of the obeysance to the Popes comamundement. WE all of the secular cleargie, doe with one assent vtterly renounce both Archpriest and Iesuites, as arrant traytors to their prince and countrey, whom to death we will neuer obey; no, if the Popes holinesse should charge vs to obey in this sense, to aduance an enemie to the English crowne, we would neuer yeeld to it; as by no law of nature, of nations, or of man, to be compelled ther∣vnto. These words are set downe, in the preface to the im∣portant considerations. Fol. 9. pag. 2. Sect. VI. Of the Popes stat commaundement, in matters. of treason. THe secular priests haung told vs,The Pope is the cause of all re∣bellion. that the Pope de∣nounced his ul against her Maiesty, purposely to suf∣fer the intended rebellion, & that he gaue order to Ridolphi the Florentine to take 150000. crownes to set forward the said attempt, and much other matter to the like effect, wher∣of I haue spoken at large in the sixt chapter; doe adde ther∣vnto these expresse words; when we first heard these par∣ticulars, e did not beleeue them, but would haue laid our liues they had beene false; but when we saw the booke, and found them there; God is our witnesse, we were much a∣mazed and can say no more, but that his holines was mis∣informed, and directly drawn to these courses. These words are set downe in the important considerations, Page. 10. Now, out of these waightie and important points contey∣ned in these Sections, certaine conclusions are necessarily in∣ferred, for which I haue reserued the next chapter, wishing the reader seriously to obserue the same.
CHAP. IX. Of certaine memorable conclusions, worthie to be kept in perpetuall remembrance. The first conclusion. THe bishop of Rome hath no authoritie deriued from Christ,Read the 4. chapter, in the 10. & 11. Paragraph. or S. Peter, by which he may lawfully depriue and dispossesse her Maiestie, (that now most happily raig∣neth ouer vs,) from her royall Diademe and regalitie; and giue the same to the king of Spayne, to Isabella his sister, or to any other forraine potentate whosoeuer. This con∣clusion is effectually proued, by all the sections of the for∣mer chapter. For in the first section, this authoritie is said to tend to the destruction of nature, which power is denied to the Pope. In the second section, it is flatly affirmed, that Christ neuer gaue any such power to Saint Peter, whom all papists will grant to haue had as great power, as their Pope hath, I am sure. In the third section, it is said plain∣ly, that Saint Peters commission was onely to denounce by excommunication, Gods displeasure against trangressors of his lawes. In the fourth section, it is auouched, that this kinde of proceeding, doth neither stand with Christs ho∣nour, nor with his vicars. In the fift section, it is af∣firmed in plaine termes, that subiects can not be charged to obey such a commaundement; and the reason is yeelded to be this, because it is against the law of nature, of nations, and of man. In the sixt section, the priests grant the fact, and know not how to excuse the same. Yet, they seeme to haue a great desire to excuse the Pope, if possibly they could tell how. And therefore they say, he was misinformed, and in∣directly drawen to these courses. For which respect, I will put downe the next conclusion. The second conclusion. THe pope was neither misinformed, nor indirectly drawn to deale as he did, in the matters of treason. I proue it
many waies. First, because he knew,See the 4. and 5 chap¦ters, and note then wll. that our gracious Ladie Queene Elizabeth, was heire to the crowne of Eng∣land by succession in blood royall; that she was opposite to his disholy holines in religion; and that the crowne was set vpon her head, by Oglethorpe the bishop of Carlett, a papist to his owne liking. 2. Because he knew his owne plottings in that matter; viz. that he did excommunicate her Maiestie, that he did depriue her from her kingdome by his Bull, that he did pronounce her an vsurper; and that he discharged, absolued, and freed all her subiects, from their allegeāce to her. 3. Because he knew Ridolphi the Flo∣rentine, the king of Spayne, the Duke of Guise, and Stuke∣ley, to say nothing of the rest. 4. Because, he denounced his Bull as thēselues grant, purposely to further the intended rebellion. 5. Because he designed Ridolphi, as the priests also grant, to take 150000. crownes to set forward the said attempt. So then, it is verie ridiculous, to say the Pope was misinformed. For euerie thing was tru∣ly related to him, and he was ignorant of no important point. No, no, he will not say,This doth confound the secular priests. as the priests doe, that hee hath no such authoritie. For the Iesuite Bellarmine as∣cribeth the saide authoritie to the Pope, and defendeth it in that verie booke, which hee dedicated to the Pope himselfe; which booke is this day in pint, in all or most parts of Europe. If the priests doe not recant this point, and submit themselues to his holinesse; I am well assured, they must smart for the same. I would therefore aduise them, that as they haue wisely renounced the Iesuites and the Archpriest; so they will also (as I haue conceiued some hope therein,) renounce the vsurped and diabolicall autho∣ritie, which the bishop of Rome falsely chalengeth to him∣selfe. The third conclusion. THe Pope euen by the doctrine of the secular priests, hath erred iudicially in a matter of faith. For the proofe whereof, we must o serue first, that the Pope hath no au∣thoritie, neither from Chirst, nor from Saint Peter, to trans∣late.
kingdomes, tradere gentem in gentem or to giue the of one prince to an other. He hath no such powe granted him, vpon the face of the earth. Thus much freely granted in expresse termes, by the testimonie of th secular priests. Their words are set downe in the chapte next aforegoing. Sect. 2. Secondly, that the Popes power is wholy spirituall, and that hee can no way proceede against transgressing kings and kingdomes, but onely in denouncing Gods displeasure against them by ecclesiasticall censures. Thus much the priests grant, Cap. 8. sect. 3. Thirdly, that such a tradition as of England to Spaine by the sword, can no way stand, eyther with Christs honour, or his vicars. Thus much the priests graunt. Cap. 8. sect. 4. Fourthly, that to obey the pope, in that he seeketh to ad∣uance an enemy to the crown, is against the law of nature, of nations, and of man. And consequently, that such a uom∣maundement ought not to be obeyed, neyther will the priests obey the same. Thus much the priests confesse free∣ly. Cap. 8. sect. 5. Fiftly, that the pope hath de facto, thus commaunded. This I prooue by two strong reasons. First, because the Iesuite Parsons did charge the English priests vnder paine of excommunication, to ioyne themselues foorthwith with all their forces to the Spaniards, against our most graci∣ous Ladie Queene Elizabeth. Secondly, because Cardinall Alien did affirme openly, that the pope had made him cardi∣nall with intent to send him as his Legate,O grace∣lesse Car∣dinall. for the sweeter managing of the said great affayre. I will heere alleage their expresse words, as the secular priests haue published them in print. Thus they write; Father Prsons ascribeth it to error of conscience,O most cruell and bloodie vil∣laine. and want of courae, terming the same an effeminate dastardy, that we had then suffered her maiestie almost 30. years; o raigne ouer vs. He threatned vs with excommunication, and vtter ruine both of our selues and all our posteritie▪ if
we did then any longer obay or aide, defend or acknowledg,See the third booke in the third adui∣to. her highnesse to be our Queene or superiour; and did not forthwith ioyne our selues with all our forces to the Spani∣ards. The good Cardinall Allen by Parsons meanes is dra∣wne to say, that the Pope had made him Cardinall, inten∣ding to send him as his legate, for the sweeter managing of this (foroth) godly and great affaire; and to affirme vpon his honor,Fie, se shal the  depend vpon the courtisie of the Spa∣niard goodly new no re∣compence to all. and in the word of a Cardinall, that in the fury of the Spaniards intended conquest, there should beeas great care had of euery ctholike, and penitent person, as possiblie could be. And to allure the nobilite of his Realme, he promised them to become an humble suter on their be∣halfes, that (so as they shew themselues valiant in assisting the King of Spaine his forces,) they may continue their no¦ble name and families. These words are set downe in the important considerations, page, 25. 26. quodl. 8. art. 7. page. 247. See the fourth booke and the fift chapter in the first section, and note it well. Sixtly, that by popish doctrine, euery papist is bound in conscience, to employ his person and forces by the popes direction. For in iustifying the disloyalty of Sir William Standley, a worthy papist laid downe this ground, viz. that in all warres▪ which may happen for religion; euery Ca∣tholike man is bound in conscience, to imploy his person & forces by the Popes direction; viz Now farre, when, and wher, either at home or abroad, he may and must breake with his temporall soueraigne. These wordes are sette downe, in the important considerations, page. 24. See the fourth booke and fift chapter, and note it well in the first section. Out of these obseruations well marked and throughly pondered, the verity of my third conclusion, is inferred of necessitie. For first, seeing it is a matter of conscience, faith, and religion, to follow the Popes direction in all warres concerning religion, as is proued in the sixt obseruation; Secondly, seeing the Pope hath intended, willed, directed, and commanded, his english Priests & other his popish va∣ssals, to oyne themselues with the Spaniard, and to assist
them with all their forces, as is proued in the first obserua∣tion. Thirdly, seeing the Pope hath no such power and authoritie, as he may or can lawfully so will direct, or com∣mand, as appeareth by the first, Second third, and fourth, obseruations; it is so euident, as none hauing but common sence can denie the same, that the Pope hath erred de facto, euen iudicially, and in a matter of faith: when he affirmed it to be lawfull, and a matter of conscience, to obey his wic∣ked and most execrable sentence; when hee appointed the English preiests and others, to take part with the Spa∣nish powers against their soueraigne. And heere by the way,It is lawfull for euerie christiā to judge of the Popes do∣trine. See the sixt quodlibet art to infi∣ne and the apologie. page. 17. the gentle reader may note this excellent and gol∣den corollary; viz that though the priests and all Papists hold if for a cōstant maxime, that the pope is the onely iudg in controuersies; yet doe the priests now when the case toucheth themselues, take vpon them to censure the Pope, and to say bouldly, that they will not, because they are not bound, in such and such cases to obey him. Marke well for Christs sake, it is not my doctrine, but the doc∣trie of the secular Priests; and so of greatest force against them, and all other papists. The fourth conclusion. THe Pope hath no authoritie to assoyle or exempt the subieces of this Realme, from the homage to her ma∣iestie. This conclusion is cleare and plaine, by the free grāt and open confession of the secular Priests; where and when they write in expresse tearmes, as you haue heard in the chapters a foregoing more then once; that the Pope hath no power ouer y• law of nature, which is indeed the law of God; & therfore he is no more to be obeyed therein,For the proofe, see the fift ad∣uiso in the third real and note it well. thē if he should command to commit adulterie, incest or to murder our selues, or our parents, that I may vse the priests, their owne words. And the case is euident, to euery childe. for who knoweth not, that no inferiour hath power, to chaung or alter the law of his superiour. And yet is it cleare I weene, enen in the opinion of euery papist, that God is
the Popes superiour, and so the Pope hath not to chaunge or alter his law. How the difficultie is this, if there be a∣ny difficultie at all; whether the Popes fact, in assoylinge subiects from their loyaltie, be against the law of nature, or nor. To which I aunswere briefly, that it is so. And I proue it, because our allegeance to our soueraigne, is cō∣prised in the first precept of the decalogue, which is mo∣rall, and of the law of nature, under the name of parents. For in the name of parents, are contained and vnderstood al superiours, by what title or name soeuer they be termed. all both old and late writers without exception, doe so hold, write, and beleeue. If any papist can this denie, let him put downe his reasons, & I am readie to reply vpon him. But I suppose, none of thē will oppose himselfe, against this vn∣doubted truth. I therefore conclude, that the late bishops of Rome shew who and what they are, when they proudly take vpon them, to assoyle subiects from their allegeance, and naturall obedience to their Prince. CHAP. X. Of the secular Priests, and there late Printed Bookes. Paragraph. I. Of there religion in matters of state. THe secular priests professe themselues to hould con∣stantly, euery point and article of the Romish faith, For thus doe they write; name that article, or one point of the catholike Romish faith, wherein the secular priests doe either stagger in themselues, or seeke to seduce you. These words are set downe, in the preface to the important considerations, fol. 4. page. 2. Touching this demande, I haue thought it worth the labour to make a syncere answeare vnto the priests, out of their owne papers and writinges published to the iudge∣ment of the world. Partly▪ that they themselues may see (if they will not continue obstinate.) their owne folly in reli∣gion,
as also the great absurdities, which thereby they do vnwittingly and vnwillingly admit and defend. Partly also, that others may dislike their religion, and more zea∣lously embrace the truth. First therefore, the bishoppe of Rome holdeth, that he may and can assoyle subiects from their allegeance▪ and depriue her maiestie from her royall dademe. The Iesuites affirme it. Cardinall Allan ap∣proued it,See the fourth booke and fourth chapter, in the .5. secti∣on, and your selues haue granted the same, as I haue alreadie shewed. How, either you, (the secular priestes I meane,) hold the same opinion, or not. If ye doe not, then are yee not such perfect papists, as you write. If ye doe so hould, then are you traytors against your soueraigne, as∣well as the Iesuites, whome yet your selues tearme arrāt traytors, as they are indeede. Secondly, the Pope houldeth. That Queene Elizabeth is not the lawfull Queene of England, but an vsurper and pretensed Queene▪ you know it, you write so. How, if you hold not so, you are not perfect papists. If you hold so, you are arrant traytors. Beare with mee for my wordes, youre selues haue prouoked mee therevn∣vnto. Thirdly, the Pope holdes, that her maiesties subiects may and ought,See the fourth ad∣uiso, in the answere to the sixt reason. to take part with the king of Spain against her. If you hold not so, you are not perfect papists, If you hold so, you are ranke traytors. Fourthly, the Pope holds, that he may consecrat grains, and gnus deis, and grant pardon to all them, that will take parte with him against our soueraigne,See the preface to the discoue¦rie, in the end. and vse them as signes and seales of that couenant. If you hold not so, you are not perfect papists. If you hold so, you are traytors. Fiftly, the pope holds and his papists with him, as I haue the wed; that subictes must in conscience follow his direction, in all warres for religion. If you hold not so, you are not sound Romish catholikes or papiste. If you hold so, you are traytours. Master Saunders a secular priest, iustifieth the rebelli∣on in the North, and holdeth the Earles with their adhe∣rents,
to be glorious martyrs. Morton and Webbe doe hold the same opinion, who are likewise secular priests. the Iesuites at Rome are of the same stampe, and defend the same treason in the highest degrée. for Alphonsus the Iesu∣ite then rector of the English colledge in Rome, caused the Organs to be sounded in the English chappell, & all the stu∣dents to come to the chappell,Campion is canoni∣zed for a Saint. (of which number my selfe was one.) and then and there hee himselfe putting on his backe a white surplesse, (to signifie for sooth, the puritie of the matyrdome,) and the stole about his necke, sange a col∣lect of marrtyrs; so after his manner, canonizing Campion the rebell for a saint. This to be so, Iohn Mush, one of these secular priests, knoweth right well, and cannot denie the same, seing himselfe was then present in the colledge at Rome, which publique solemnitie, for a traytorous Iesuite, (Campion I meane,) Alphonsus durst not haue attempted doubtles, vnlesse he had first obtained the consent of his ge∣nerall; neither yet would y• generall (for he durst not so haue done,) haue approued the fact,The Secu¦l are ei¦ther tray¦tors, or not sound pa∣pistes. if he had not had the consent of the Pope, whose consent is the consent of all the popish Church. To which I must needes adde, that it is vsuall a∣monge the English papists, to keepe the relikes of Campi∣on, Sherewin, and the rest; and to pray vnto them, as vnto the saints of God. How, if you secular priestes hold not thus, you are not sound papists. If you hold so, you are arrant traytours. So then, the seculars are either not perfect papists, or els arrant traytours like the Ie∣suites. Paragraph. II. Of the staggering of the Secular Priests, in their asseueracions. THe priests write, that they cannot be iustly charged, to stagger in any point. Let therefore the indifferent reader, be an indifferent iudge in this behalfe. Marke the discourse. The secular priestes tell vs in their important considerations, page. 24. that a worthy man hath laid down
this for a ground,This wor∣thy man was. Cardinall . that euery catholike is bound in consci∣ence, to employ his person and forces by the popes directi∣on, and at his becke to breake with his soueraigne. This ground worke you sée is flat treason, and yet the priestes tearme him a worthy man, that laid the same. But how they can this doe, and not stagger in their affirmance, let others iudge. The priests likewise write in their important considera∣tions, page. 26. that Allan confessed openly, that the pope had made him Cardinall, for the sweeter managing of the Spanish forces; and yet with all, they tearme him the good Cardinall▪ on the one side, they condemne the Spa∣nish forces; on the other side, they commend the chiefest a∣gent, in that most bloodie and traytorous complot. Againe, in one place they say,Quadl. S. art. 5. page. 223. they professe their obedience to y• pope; in an other place, quodl. 8. art. 1. They graunt, they may not doe ought against parliament statuets. Loe, how they stagger. The priests say further, in their important considerati∣ons,See quodl. 8. art. 6. page. 243. page. 15. and put downe these expresse words; we had some of vs greatly approued the said rebellion; highly ex∣tolled the rebels, and pitifully bewayled their ruine and ouerthrow. Many of our affections were knit to the Spani∣ardes; and for our obedience to the Pope, we all doe pro∣fesse it. The attempt both of the Pope and Spaniards failing in England, hs holinesse as a temporall prince, dis∣plaied his banner in Ireland. The plot was to depriue hir highnesse first from the kingdome,ehould, how God inforceth the Papists to disclose the very truth truth will euer preuaile in time. if they could; and then by decres, so depose her from this. In all these plots, none were more forward, then many of vs that were priestes, These are their owne wordes. Out of which I note first, that both the Pope and Spaniards wherefully bent, to depose our gratious Queene Elizabeth, from Ireland and England by degrees. Secondly, that the priestes greatly approued this rebellios course. Thirdly, that the priests highly extolled the rebels. Fourthly. that their hearts were knit to the Spaniards Fiftly, that the priests did and still doe professe, their obedience to the Pope. Sixtly, that in
all these plots, none were more forward then the Priestes. This notwithstanding▪ they tearme the said attempts re∣bellion, and the agents and dealers therein traytors; they put the Pope himselfe, in the predicament with the Spa∣niards, and they reely confesse, that they themselues were as deepe in all these plots, and as forward,See quodl. 9. art. 8. pag 8. pag. 27. et. quod. 8. art. 9. pag. 277. as any others were. And yet forsooth, they would qualifie the matter so, as the state must needs beleeue them, and acknowledge thē for true hearted subiects. Hir maiesties honourable coun∣sellors, are so wise and carefull of their places, and charge committed to them, for the peaceable and godly managing of hir dominions; as I nothing doubt thereof, but they will looke narrowly into y• practises of these good fellowes, and tre them throughly before they trust them. They stag∣ger you see in there assertions: and what they say in one place, that they gainesay in an other. They contemne e∣quiuocations in the Iesuites, and I scare me, that in mat∣ters of state, they doe no leise equiuocate themselues they labour to haue a tolleration to liue as they list, and they are offended with the reuerend, we, graue, and learned fa∣ther, the good bishop of Durham; for that in a sermon at Paules crosse, he spoke against the said tolleration. But God of his mercie forbid, that euer any such tolleration be granted to them,The Secu∣lar priests in matters of treason and state, seeme to equiuocate. for if it be true whch Christ himselfe tel∣leth vs, Mat. 6. that no man can serue two maisters, viz. which are opposite▪ and not subordinate thone to the o∣ther, as it is most true indeede; then doubtles cannot these Preistes be true to her maiestie, who professe obedience to the Pope, her knowen professed enemie. But if they shall once ioyne with her good subiects, in prayer & sacraments openly in the Church, which God graunt then may they be thought indeed, to be true and faithfull to her sacred per∣son to her honour, crowne, and royall scepter. But in the in∣erim, let vs I pray you beleeue them at leasure.
Paragraph. III. Of the dissimulation, which the priests seeme to vse in their bookes. THe priests seeme to deliuer plainely, and without all equiuocation, their great enmitie and hatred against the Iesuites, as who say almost nothing of them, which my selfe haue not ineffecte published afore, both in my booke of motiues, and also in my booke of suruey. Where I wish the reader to note by the way, that my aduersaries haue therein iustified my writings,The authors booke  iustifid by, the priests. and are not able to charge me with any vntruth in that behalfe. The sub∣stance likewise of all and euerie thing and thinges, contai∣ned in their seuerall bookes and treatises, which I haue seene; viz. There hope of peace, their important conside∣rations, their sparing discouery, their dialogue, their rela∣tion, their quodlibets, and sundrie other of their bookes; my selfe vpon my owne knowledge, am able to contest with them to be a meere truth. But when they write, that they will stand to hir maiestie against her e∣nemies, be their pretences neuer so faire, for their country, for religion, or what els soeuer can bee deuised; they must pardon me, if I cannot yet giue credite to their pennes, & that for sundrie reasons. First,See more hereof in the third booke, in the fourth aduiso, in the latter end. because equiuocation is demed very lawfull, euen with the best papistes; three circumstances concurring, which I haue set downe in my booke of Suruey. Secondly, because the priests being as yet papists, and so not acknowledging her ma∣iestie, nor her maiestrates to bee their competent iudges, may iustly be suspected in the premises. Thirdly, because the priests doe still write resolutely, that they will performe their obedience to the Pope.
Paragraph. IIII. How the priests doe proudly vant and bragge, of their mightie strength and forces. HEr Maiestie,Page. 68. as write the priests in their answere to the Iesuited gentleman, Page. 68. hath a wise coun∣sell which cannot but see, that though for the present time, the estates ecclesiasticall and ciuill both of our countrey be∣ing so throughly setled as they are,It is good and neces∣sarie, to keepe the papists vn∣der. See quodl. 8. art. 9. Page. 270. it is méete (they thinke,) and easie (we know,) to keepe the Catholike vnder and supprest; yet what hereafter in a chaunge, and in a trou∣bled state, our partie may worke it selfe, they may rather perhaps gesse, then preuent. Sure I am, we are not so ignoble a partie in the land, for all the persecution of these fortie yeares, but that the vnity thereof with the rest at such a day, will perhaps be as requisite for our common∣weale, as any other. The consideration whereof, together with other no lesse important, may somewhat preuaile with so prudent a counsell as her Maiesties is, if not for a toleration of our rites, at least for a mitigation of our ag∣griefes in the meane time. Thus write the priestes out of these words. I note first,Loe, the papists ex∣pect a day, as Esau did when be meant to kil his bro∣ther. Gen. 27. 41. that the papists expect a day, viz. the death of her Maiestie, eyther naturall or violent; whose happie life and victoirous raigne, God blesse with Nestors yeares, and defend her sacred person, her honour, crowne, and royall scepter, from all trayterous attempts and bloody designements, of the Pope, Spaniard, Iesuite, and other disloyall papists, now and euer. I note secondly, that the priests expect trouble, rather then peace; in their long wished change, and conquest. I note thirdly, that the priests boldly anouch, that her Maiesties graue counsellers cannot preuent the mischiefe, that the disloyall papists are able to worke in this land. I note fourthly, that they proudly and malepeartly, like saucie malcontents, auaunt their partie to be so great after
fortie yeares persecution, that the Queenes power must stand in feare thereof. I note fiftly that they seeme to haue conceiued an hope, that they shall as it were with bigge words and threats, enforce a toleration to be granted them. Where me thke, they should rather feare, to procure sharper measure to them selues in time to come, then to liue in hope of any toleration. My reasons are these. First, because where they would haue rendred humble thanks for her Maiesties great cle∣mencie, they contrariwise bragge of their great partie, which her Maiestie might haue cut short before this day. Secondly, because if their partie be great and strong, as they auaunt it is, there is greater cause to keepe them vnder and suppresse, then to giue them more scope, by granting a toleration. Paragraph. V. Of the popish Catholike religion of Secular priests, and why it is called Catholike. THus write the Catholike secular priests, of their popish Catholike religion. Is there any sinne (deare Catho∣likes.) rising vpon infirmitie, and frailtie of man, commit∣ted by an apostate an infidell, an heretike an atheist cast out of the fauour of God, and accursed out of his Church: but a Catholike may, & often hath fallen into the saire, and yet remained constant in his religion to death? questionlesse, there is not. As innumerable examples of treasons, of murthers, of adulteries, of incests, of drunkennes, of cus∣nage, of what not vice, doth verifie it in all nations, in all times▪ sexes▪ and sorts of people. These words are set down, in their preface to their important considerations, a little from the beginning thereof. Note heere gentle reader, many most excellent epithites, which the secular Romish priests, ascribe to themselues, and to their Romish or popish Catholikes. Viz. That they may be traytors, murtherers, adulterers, incestuous persons, drunkerds,
coseners, and all manner malefactors; and yet be popish ca∣tholiks good enough, constant in the popish religion vnto death. If the papists thēselues had not written thus, who would haue beleeued me? none at all. But Gods spirit hath enforced their owne pennes, to testifie the truth against themselues. Out of this their plaine doctrine, and open confession; these golden corollaries, are deduced euidently. First, that the po∣pish religion may fitly be termed Catholike; that is to say, ge∣nerall or vniuerall; and the professors of the same religion, Catholikes, that is, generalls. For in good sooth, if they speake truly of themselues, all vices generally are in themselues, and they are generally vitious, as their letters patents tels vs. Se∣condly, that where they imagine, there is a purgatorie after this life; it may seeme, that such their opinatiue doctrine, pro∣ceeded of their most beastly liuing. For treasons, murthers, adulteries, incests, drunkennes, couenage, and al vices that can be, must needs haue a purgation doubtlesse. And consequent∣ly, these notorious vices remayning in popish Catholikes vnto death, no maruell, if they dreamed of a popish new no pur∣gatorie after this life. Thirdly, that the popish religion cannot be good. For as Saint Iames saith, cap. 1. pure and sound re∣ligion is this, to keepe our selues vnspotted of this world. And therefore, seeing popish religion may stand with such vices, it cannot be good. Paragraph. VI. Of the Romish late English Archpriest, and the excel∣lencie of his creation. IN good sooth, we thinke his mastership as farre to blame, as eyther of them, or more; in that being a secular priest, he doth so tyrannize ouer his owne brethren by cal∣ling, and hath not the wit to see, how he is abused and made a puppie to dance after their pipe, and to execute what they doe commaund him. These words are set downe, in the preface to their relation. In another place thus. Because none are iudged vertuous, that oppose them∣selues
selues against the Iesuites,Loc, their Popish Archpriest is an idol. or refuse to worship their Iesu∣iticall idoll our Arch-priest. But in good sooth master Black∣well, speake truly man; doth not that contention, in some sort touch your high authoritie? Was it not the ground of it? Did not our garboyles beget your greatnes? If master Weston had preuailed with vs, master Garnet would haue wiued your nose, for dealing like a young prince abroad as you doe. And therefore indeed in a right goodsense, wee are your good masters, and so you ought to esteeme vs. These words are set downe, in the same preface to their relation. Note heere gentle reader, these important points with me. First, that the popish priests in this Realme are so multiplied, and become so strong and mightie, and haue conceiued so firme and constant hope, of their abilitie shortly to accom∣plish their long wished conquest; that they haue desired their Pope, to appoint presently some bishoppe or bishoppes ouer them. What would these boysterous Nimrods doe, if a tole∣ration were granted them? if they be so sawcie, malepeart, and peremptorie, when they are in some sort by law kept vn∣der and supprest; what troubles, what garboyles, what se∣dition and treacherie would they stirre vp, thinke you; If the magistrates should fauour them, in such sort as they desire? I doubt not, but her Maiesties wise and graue coun∣sellers, doe sufficiently see, what marke these good fellowes ayme at. Secondly, that the Iesuites labour with tooth and nayle, that they may haue all, and ouerrule all. And when they could not preuaile therein, as they wished directly, their solemne vowe withstanding it; they brought to passe by indirect meanes, that an Arch-priest to their liking, is appointed ouer all. This Lordly Arch-priest is George Black∣well forsooth, I know the man right well. He is made a pup∣pie, to daunce as the Iesuites pipe vnto him. For he is the Ie∣suiticall idoll, as the priests write; and dareth to doe no∣thing, but as they commaund him; neyther may hee re∣fuse to execute, whatsoeuer they will haue done. Third∣ly, that it is true, which I probably foretolde long since in my booke of motiues. viz. That as the Romish English se∣minarie
beganne with an vngodly oath and dissention; so it would continue vnto the end. And I pray you, is it not this day apparant to the world? You see it, it can not bee denyed. The priestes confesse, (as you heare,) that their contention was the ground of the Archpriestes authoritie; that their garboyles did beget his greatnesse; and therefore, that they are his good masters. Fourthly, that the secular priests the Romish seminarists, repute it no shame to pub∣lish in printed bookes; that the superioritie among them, proceedeth of sedition and factious dealing. Happie are they forsooth, that are gui∣ded by such rulers.
The third Booke, containing sundry graue aduisoes, set downe for the good of all true-hearted Subiects, least they be hereafter seduced with Iesuiticall hypocrisie, and treache∣rous Poperie. Aduiso. I. Of Popish proceedings against, Kinges, Potentates, and Monarkes of this world. THE Iesuite Parsons in his booke Philopater, is verie peremptorie, slie, and saucie, verie boldly affir∣ming, that when kings deflect from the Catholike religion, and draw others with thē▪ then their subiects are frée, and both may and ought, (if they be able, to cast such a man out of his dominions. An other Iesuite giueth vs this lesson; the quarrel for Religion (saith he) and defence of innocen∣cie is so iust, that Heathen princes not at all subiect to the Churches lawes, may in that case by the Christian armes be resisted. An other Iesuite saith thus; that Christians in times past did not depose Nero and Dioclesian, and Iulian the Apostata, and Vlens the Arrian, and others: it was, because Christians did then want temporall forces, for o∣therwise they might lawfully haue dealt so with them. Thus it is written: quodl. 9. art 4. q. 296. Note here gentle Reader, that most vnnaturall rebellion, is as a naturall or proper passion, to all seditious Popish religi∣on. which doubtlesse is a graue aduiso, seriously to be thought vpon.
Aduiso. II. Of the charitable physicke of the Iesuites. IF hereafter any Pope shall crosse the Spaniards plots and purposes, the Iesuites will haue such a figge in store or his paines that shall doe so, as no Ruebarbe, Angelica, Mithridate, or other medicine, or antidote, shall expell the venime, poyson or infection from his heart; nor any Bezar, Pearle, gold, or Vnicornes horne, long preserue his life af∣ter it. And if there be, as there are, shrewde suspitions in Rome, concerning the death of two Popes, two Cardinals, and one Byshop alreadie; and that but for breaking, or ra∣ther intending to breke the Iesuites a little of their will, and vnbridled insolencie, and onely to reforme them in their order; then no maruell at their disignments for Eng∣land; and much lesse doubt to bee made,The king of France murdered by the Ie∣suits. what they would doe in such a case, if it came to canuasing for a kingdome. Thus is it written, quodl. 8. art. 6. p. 245. It is true, that in France there are publike monuments of Isuiticall ty∣rannie. For first, they procured Henrie the third to be ex∣communicated, and then by degrees they murderd him. quod. 8. art. 8. p. 261. see the 2. Booke chap. 2. and 2. Parag. Note here gentle Reader, three important points with me. first, that our holy fathers, the late vpstart Iesuites, are not re∣ligious fathers as they professe to be but disordered, dissolute, and blood-thirstie companions. Secondly, that they are char∣ged with wilfull murder,Loe, the Iesuites are most skilfull Phisitions. and that of no meane personages; but euen of Byshops; euen of Kings; euen of Cardinals; yea, euen of Popes themselues. Thirdly, that murder is a thing so common, or rather so connaturall to Iesuiticall faction; that if their purposes and plots bee but a little crossed, not onely by Barons, Earles, or Dukes, but euen by Kings, Emperours, and monarkes; nay, euen by the Pope himselfe, whom they would be thought to honour aboue the rest; then doubtlesse, that Barton, Earle, duke, King, Emperour, or Pope, shall haue such a fig giuē him by these skilful Phisitions, for his restoratiue Catholike antpast; as he shall neuer after it, be in neede of a∣ny Christian preseruatiue post-past: this is a graue Aduiso, it doth pourtray our Iesuites gallantly, in their deserued and well beseeming colours.
Aduiso. III. Of Cardinal Allens intendment, against his prince and natiue Countrey. IT can not be denied, but that in the yere 1588. Cardinall Allen compiled a booke, to be published when the Spa∣niards should haue arriued; to haue stirred vp all English papists to take armes against their Soueraigne, for the speedy conquest of their natiue Countrey. The first part of which booke, was intituled a declaration of the sentence: The second part. An admonition to the Nobilitie, and peo∣ple of England: but presently vpon the ouerthrow of the great invincible Armado, vnder their heroical Adlantado, for shame of the world they procured the whole Impression to be burnt; sauing some fewe that had beene sent abroad be∣forehand to frindes, & such as had otherwise béene conueyed away by the Printer, and others in secret wise. Thus it is written, quodl. 8. art. 6. p 240. Note here gentle Reader, that Cardinall Allen, the chiefe gouernour vnder the Pope, in all popish English affaires; did further the Spaniards intended conquest of England, with all his might, strength, power, and force; and that hee published a most trayterous booke in his own name, for the speedy com∣plement of that most cruell and bloody attempt: to which adde with mee, that the sayd Allen was sent by the Pope, to manage that great affaire: and was also made Cardinall for that onely ende and purpose, as I haue proued in the second Booke, ninth chapter, and third conclusion. now then, seeing the Pope, the Cardinall and the Iesuits, did all wholy intend the inuasion and conquest, & did at all times bend their Buls, bils, libels, and all their forces, to depose her Maiestie from her Crowne and royall Scepter; and seeing also, that the Secular priests confesse freely, as is already proued in the second book, tenth chapiter, and second Paragraph; that many of their affe∣ctions were knit to the Spaniards, and that none were more forward then they, in those bloodie treacheries; and seeing thirdly, that the said priests do still professe their obedience to
the Pope in euerie thing. and humblie submit themselues and all that they haue written, to be decided, iudged, and censu∣red, as shall seeme good to his holinesse; (for so they write, in their important considerations, pag. 43. quodlibet. 10. p. 342 et. p. 361.) let them (the secular priests I meane,) say and write what they list and like, of their true and loyall hearts towarde her maiestie; I for my owne parte will neuer giue credite to them, vnlesse they will ioyne with vs, in sacrament and com∣mō prayer. And I verely thinke, that whosoeuer shal marke this discourse seriously, will be of mine opinion. For, concerning equiuocating and temporizing instate affaires, they are nothing inferiours to the false cogging Iesuites. They vtter in deed many truthes, but they doe it of necessi∣tie; so to be auenged of the Iesuites, and to be deliuered from their tyrannie. The Iesuites they spare in no respect; But Car∣dinall Allan they highly commend, and the Pope they dare not in any case otend. Which two, the Pope and the Cardi∣nall, while they doe commend in manie thinges; they doe of∣ten vnwares, appeach themselues of high treason. I say, (vn∣les they ioyne themselues with vs in sacrament and common prayer;) because many disloyally affected subiects. will present themselues in the church with vs; as also eat flesh on frydays, and temporize with all companies,Preābles. 7▪ and 8. as is proued in the seuenth and eight preambles. But if they will receiue the holy Commu∣nion with vs, reade or singe▪ Psalmes publikelye in the Church with vs; that were a signe most probable, though not euer infallible. This is a grate aduiso, it may not bee forgotten. Aduiso. IIII. Concerning the appeale of the seculars to the Pope. THe instituton of the Arch-priest was procured from the Pope, sea, and court at Rome; and that by a bull, and in such meaner, as not only a Premunire was incurred thereby by auncient lawes of this land, but also and much more by recent statute lawes, there being treason vpon
treason committed in the action. quodlibet. 6. art. 3. 4. 5. This aduiso conteineth matter most important; in regard whereof, I purpose in God to examine it ad amussm, for the better satisfaction of the indifferent reader. The secular priests impute notorious treason to the Ie∣suites, (as appeareth by their owne words vttered in the defence of their appeale,) because the Iesuites procured the arch-priests authoritie from the Pope; but this notwith∣standing they affirme peremptorily, that they themselues are cleare and free from all offence. For these are their words; the seculars are so cleare and farre from all danger of any offence, committed by appealing from the arch-priest to the sea of Rome; as most daungerous, vniust, vn∣naturall, indiscret, irreligious, and preiudiciall to all, both Pope, Prince, Church, common-wealth, and all estates, if they had not appealed. These wordes are set downe, quodl. 6. art. 5. q. 171. Note here gentle reader, that these seculars are great wise∣men in their owne conceits, and so they may rightly be estee∣med, if they can make good indeed, that which they take vp∣on them in externall shewe of words; viz. that they may ac∣knowledge and performe, their professed obedience to her maiesties knowen enemie the bishop of Rome; that they may submit themselues to his resolution in all thinges, and concurre with his bloudie designments; against the honour, state, crowne, regalitie, and life, of their naturall soueraigne. and all this notwithstanding, still be cleare and free from all of∣fence. I will truely lay downe their owne reasons, in their owne words; and frame my sincere answeare to the same. Which, when the indifferent reader shall haue pervsed dulie, all partialitie set a part; I wish, that he giue his censure ac∣cordingly.
The first reason of the Seculars. TO whome the iniurie is done, to him the right of re∣uenge doth accurne; but the popes holinesse was iniu∣red, by the Iesuits their suggestion in obeying the bull. er∣go. Thus doe they reason. The Aunswere. I say first,Deut. 32. v. 35. Rom. 15. 19 that the right of reuenge belongeth to God a∣lone; for so saith holy writte. Vengance is mine, I will repay. And for this cause, when lawfull magistrates doe take re∣uengement vpon this or that malefactor, for his irregular and bad dealing; all such penall mulcte is hereby iustified, for that they are Gods vicegerents on earth, and what they doe is done in his name, and by authoritie gi∣uen them from aboue. So saith God himselfe; I say,Psal. 82. 6. Iohn. 13. 1. yee are Gods, and ye all are children of the most high. Againe; thou couldest haue no power at all against me,Rom. 13. 1. except it were giuen thee from aboue. Againe; there is noe power, but of God. Secondly, that iniurie was done to the secular Priests themselues, farre rather then to the Pope; and yet doth it not follow by any necessarie consequution,Mat. 26. v. 52. that they be∣ing priuate persons, either ought or could take reuenge, ei∣ther vpon the Iesuites, or vpon their Iesuited Blackwell, that Romih traytorus arch-priest for of priuat persons is this text verified; all that take the sword, shal perish with the sword. Thirdly, that the greatest iniury of all, was done to our gratious Soueraigne, most noble Queene Elizabeth. For first, the Iesuits that procured the authority, and the Arch-priest excepting it, were all her maiesties naturally borne subiects▪ and so thereby committed execrable villany, and intollerable iniurie, against her most sacred person. Se∣condly, the seculars being also her maiesties subiects, did in like manner offend most disloyally, against their most
gratious and mercifull soueraigne; in submitting them∣selues to the Romish tyrannizing Bishop, the professed enemy of her honour, her state, her crowne, her life, & her re∣galitie. Thirdly, the seculars promised their homage and obedience to the Pope, so that he would make his good plea¦sure knowne vnto them; and to signifie their alacrity here∣in, they designed two priests, Bishope and Charnocke by name, to take along, painfull, dangerous, and chargeable iourney,If a like, ergo trea∣sonablie. euen to the gates of Rome. but they were so farre from yeelding any obedience herein to her maiestie; that they would not once intimate the matter to her, or to her most honourable counsell. Nay, it is confessed plainly, that the Romish faith is defended outwardly, on both sides alike quodl. 4. art. 10. pag. 135. The Second Reason. The Iesuites in procuring the Popes Bull and au∣thoritie, made it a matter of state in preiudice of regall Maiestie. But the sculars in appealing, made it a matter of conscience, thereby to refell, infring, and abrogate, all such premunireall treacherie. The answere. I say first, that the seculars make it a matter of state, as well as did the Iesuites. For they professed solemne∣ly to the Pope, that they would dutifully obey the au∣thoritie of the arch-prieste, if his holinesse would so com∣mand them. Secondly, that albeit the seculars did indeuoure indéede, to stay and hinder the arch-prists authoritie; yet was not that done for any loyall part in them, or seruiceable dutie to her maiestie; but for their owne fréedome, and to defends themselues from Iesuiticall bondage. The disloyall act it selfe, was really and intrinsecally the selfe same in them both; and not but accidentally and meere respectiuely, different in the one and in the other. The popes autho∣ritie
and power, was acknowledged on both sides; the Ie∣suites vrged his authoritie the seculars yelded to his autho∣ritie; this only was the difference. The Iesuites affirmed, that the Pope had authorized the arch-priest; the seculars stood only vpō this point, that so much was not yet know∣en to them. So then, they differed not in the thing, but in the modification of the thing. Thirdly, that the seculars made in deede a matter of conscience; because it troubled their dissoyall conscience, to disobey the Pope. Conscience they had, I graunt; but in re∣pect of their bloud thirstie Pope, not in regard of our most clement and mercifull soueraigne, Gods faithfull seruant Queene Elizabeth. The Third reason. The pretence was made outwardly by the Iesuites, to be wholy for matters pertaining to the catholike Church, religion, and order in workes of charitie, pierie, deuotion, &c. Ergo the seculars approuing the contraire, (that they neuer had such a meaning, neither did the arch-priest prac∣tise any such matter,) meddle no way in any thinges by their appeale, whereby a Premunire can be incurred, no not so much as interpretatiuely. The Answere. I say first, that the seculars haue an huge multitude of popish fauourites, aswell counsellers skilfull in our muni∣cipall lawes; as others both of the nobilitie and gentry, as they confesse els where. This former I gather hence, for that they make a flourish of these words, (premunire, and premunireall,) wherein I confesse I haue no skill, as be∣ing noe parte of my profession. Secondly, that albeit I am ignorant, what the lawe word (premunire) meaneth; yet doe I constantly auouch, that if the Iesuites haue incurred the premunire, for their dealing in the arch-priests case and cause (as they affirme,
and I willingly admit, (then haue the seculars likewise in∣curred the same pemunire; by reason of their ap∣peale to the bishope of Rome. In which dispute, I am con∣tent to encounter with them, when they shall challenge me for the same. Thirdly, that the seculars aswell as the Iesuites, (not∣withstanding their contrarie pretence in outward shew of bare words,) did by their appeale to y• romish tyrant repute hermaiesties parliaments of no authority, her statutelawes of no validity, her royall prerogatiue of no soueraigne ex∣cellencie; but ascribed all wholy and soly without respect of English regalitie, to their professed papall vsurpate pri∣macie. All which shall (God willingly,) be made more plaine, cleare, and euident, before the end of this aduiso. The fourth reason. The Iesuites bolster out and build, aswell the intended vsurpate authority of the arch priest; as also their owne treasonable attempts, plos, and practises, vpon the saide bull and his holinesse authority. Ergo none other to appeale vnto for iustice against them. The Aunswere. I say first, that this reason doth ouerthrow, abandon, and turne it selfe vpside downe; for seeing the Iesuites doe builde all their treasonable plots and practises, vpon the Popes Bull and authoritie; it had beene expedient, and a∣greeable to all right and reason; that the seculars, (if they doe or will acknowledge, any true loyalty and faithfull al∣legeance to Queene Elizabeth,) should not haue appealed to the Pope, the mortal knowen enemie of the said allege∣ance; but from the Pope to her Maiestie, or to some in au∣thority vnder her. But the seculars haue no such meaning, because forsooth they will acknowledge no such allegi∣ance. Secondly, that seeing the seculars doe resolutely affirme,
that there is none other to appeale vnto, but the Pope alone; they desperately appeach them selues of high treason. The reason is euident,Quod. 8. art. 1. pag. 223. because they peremptorily auouch, a fore∣in potentate, yea a foraine knowen enemie, to be the com∣petent iudge ouer her maiesties subiects, euen within her Maiesties Realmes, and dominions. Which themselues els where, graunt to be vnlawfull. The fift reason. The seculars by their appeale, clearely exempt, redeeme, and keepe out themselues, from acknowledging any obe∣dience to that alreadie premunirized arch-priest; & by conse∣quent, from all daunger of incurring a premunire. The Aunswere. I say first, that though the seculars doe not now ac∣knowledge any obedience to the arch-priest; yet doe they acknowledge obedience to the Pope, which is an offence of like qualitie, and greater deformitie; and by consequent, they neither enioy immunitie from the premunire, neither from treason in the highest degree. Secondly, that the seculars did once acknowledge de facto the arch priests authoritie, and humbly yeelded their obe∣dience to him; viz. when they vnder stood by the Popes Breue, his holinesse, holy pleasure therin. And that, they now reuoke and denie the said obedience to the arch priest; such deniall procéedeth of méere malice against the Iesuites, and Iesuited crew, and not of loyall dutie to Queene Elizabeth, whome they outwardly pretend to loue for seruile feare. The sixt Reason. They labour by their appeale, for securitie to her maie∣sties person, for quiet to the state, for auoydance of all inua∣sions, for cutting of all conspiracies, state-tāperings, eraspe∣rating libels. &c. And for assurāce of relaxation and fréedom
from their heauie persecution, procured by the Iesuites a∣gainst them, aswell by false suggestions to his holinesse, as also by stirring vp other princes against our soueraigne and nation, & thereby bringing warres and feares vpon all, and heart breaking frownes to be cast vpon the innocent; ergo so cleare and farre from all danger of any offence▪ commit∣ted by appealing from the arch-preist to the sea of Rome; as most daungerous, vniust, vnnaturall, indisct, irreligious, and prediuciall to all, both Pope▪ prince, Church, common∣wealth, and allestates; if they had not appealed, but let the matter he dead in discontent, obloquie, and daunger of so∣rest trialles. The Answere. For the better vnderstanding of this reason, and full answere to the same; I obserue first, in the contents there∣of, the seculars are freede, and made cleare from all off∣ence, by their appeale to the Pope. Secondly, that if the secular priests had not appealed to the Pope, they should thereby haue béene made vniust, vnna∣tural, indiscrete, irreligious, & preiudiciall, to Pope, Prince, Church, and all estates. These two obseruations are con∣tained, in the words followinge the seculars their Ergo. Thirdly, that this appeale was taken in hand, for her Maiesties security; which I gather out of the first line of the reason. Fourthly, that the said appeale was for the quiet of the state. Fiftly, that it was also for auoidance of inuasions, and cutting of conspiracies. These obseruations well remem∣bred, the argument will be aunswered with all facilitie, but to the cold comfort of the seculars. For first, they appealed to the Pope, as is in the first obseruation; and so they are traytors to Queene Elizabeth by the lawes of Englande. For as the seculars write els where▪ euerie appeale is an acknowledging of highest authoritie,See the an¦swere to the  gentleman. page. 24. in the partie ap∣pealed vnto. And this answere is confirmed by their fourth reason, where they flatly denie her Maiesties royall prero∣gatiue
ouer them, while they affirme disloyally, perempto∣rily, saucily, and tootoo arrogantly, that there is no other to appeale vnto, but onely the bishoppe of Rome, whom they know (as is alreadie proued,) to be her Maiesties mor∣tall enemie, and the chiefe agent, in all conquests, in∣uasions, plots, conspiracies, treasons, & bloodie intendments whatsoeuer, against Queene Elizabeth, her sacred person, her Realmes, her royall honour, her princely Diademe and most noble peerelesse regalitie. Secondly, by not appealing, seculars should haue beene vniust and vnnaturall, as is in the second obseruation, but to the Pope, not to Queene E∣lizabeth. To her, they are thereby in deed vniust, for that they withhold thereby, their homage due vnto her. to her, they are indeed vnnnaturall, because they deny that loyalty, which by nature they owne vnto her, and they are in a sort naturalized to his disholie holines, by the said appeale: For they say flatly, in the next article of the same quodlibet, that they may not yeeld to the Iesuites, vntill his holines haue decided the cause in the court of Rome. And yet vn∣witingly, they condemne themselues in an other place,quodlib. 8. art. 1. page. 223. graunting that they may not by worde or writing, im∣pugne the parliamentall Lawes of this land. Thirdly, by not appealing, they should haue beene pre∣iudiciall to prince, Church, and all estates, as is in the se∣cond obseruation; but not to the prince, Church, or State of England: ergo, to the prince, Church, and State of Rome, for of force they must so meane, the force of trueth hath inforced their penne. Fourthly, they appealed for her Maiesties securitie, as is in the third obseruation; where I cannot enough admire,The secu∣lars are in∣solent fel∣lowes. the impudent insolencie of these disloyall Seculars, who make a treacherous flowrish, as if the securitie of their dread Soueraigne, did depend vpon their Popes good pleasure, and their treacherous appeale vnto him. Herein they make hauocke other Maiesties sta∣tute-lawes, which els where by popish statization and e∣quinocation, they say they may not offend. A note worthy to be remembred. Fifthly, they appealed for the quiet of the state, which is as disloyally spoken, as the former, for
God auert, that the peace of her Maiesties state, and her Realmes, do at any time stand in neede of the Popes fa∣uour, & the intreatie of the sedicious Seculars. Sixtly, they appealed for the auoydance of inuasions and conspiracies, as is in the fith obseruation; out of which confession, I inferre these two important corollaries. First, that conspi∣racies and inuasions are still intended,Corall. 1. against her sacred person,Corall. 2. her royall throne, her crowne, her state, and domi∣nions. Secondly, that the Pope is the principall actor, in all plots, conspiracies, treacheries, inuasions, and con∣quests; intended against the Queen, her realms, and faith∣full subiects. I therefore conclude, that the Seculars are this day as dangerous, in al treasonable plots, bloody prac∣tizes, and disloyall conspiracies, as they haue beene here∣tofore. For albeit they belabour themselues seriously, to hide and bolster out all their cursed intendements, a∣gainst their dread soueraigne and natiue Countrey; especi∣ally, when they are occasioned to speake of matters of state, as they doe or may concerne their owne persons; yet doe they but equiuocate and temporize in so doing,See the 10. chapter in the 3. Paragraph in the second booke. and that as scornefully and treacherously, as euer did the Iesuites. Of which point none can be ignorant, that shall seriously per∣use and ponder this discourse. Wherefore, as the Secu∣lars say of the Iesuites, so say I of them; that though they sweare, can yet we not safely beleeue them in state-affairs. the reason is euident,In the se∣cond booke, chap 3. . because they doe not acknowledge a∣ny magistrate vnder her Maiestie, to be their lawfull and competent iudge. If they say, write, or sweare the con∣trary, yet giue no credite to them therein: for euen then doe they seeke to delude the Magistate, by their hypocriti∣call and execrable equiuocations. No, no, it neither doth nor can stand with popish religion; to thinke and beleeue that Queen Elizabeth, (whom God long preserue ouer vs,) can ordeine any competent iudge ouer them. And conse∣quently, vntill the Seculars renounce the Pope and his damnable procéedings, against Christian kings, their royal diademes, and sacred regalities; they will doubtlesse delude the maiestrates, with their fondely inuented equiuo∣cationes.
This is a graue aduiso which may not befor∣gotten. Aduiso. V. Of the opinion, affection, and true meaning of the seculars, in all the treasonable practises, bloudie conspiracies, and other disloyall intendmentes, against their dread soueraigne and natiue countrie. THe seculars conspire, concurre, and iumpe with the Iesuites, in opinion, affection, and inward meaninge; touching the Popes authoritie, the bloudie conspiracies, inuasions, conquest, & other disloyall intendments, against most noble Queene Elizabeth, and our natiue country▪ this I proue by manie strong, weightie, and irrefragable rea∣sons. The first reason. The pretenses of such practises were generall,Quodl. 8. art. 9. pag. 277. and com∣mon to all Catholikes alike, all maintaining one & the same opinion, concerning what might be done by Apostolical po∣wer & authoritie, & neuer talking of what was necessarie. Thus is it written, quodl. 8. art. 9. pag. 277. but the secu∣lars are papists aswell as the Iesuites, Ergo, of the same opi∣nion with the Iesuites. Heere the reader may see plainely; that the seculars iumpe with the opinion of the Iesuits, touching the popes authoritie. For by apostolicall power, they vnderstand the power and authoritie of the Pope. To which must be added, (which is alreadie proued,) that the Pope hath excommunicated her Maiesty de facta, and hath beene the chiefest agent, in all treasonable practises, bloodie conspiracies, inuasions, conquests, and other execrable in∣tendments; against her Maiesties person, honour, state, and dominions. To this must likewise be added, which is also proued; that the Iesuites affirme malepeartly, dam∣nablie, and disloyally, that the Pope hath done nothing in the premisses, but that he lawfully might doe.
The second Reason. Among many examples, of the deare loue and compas∣sion of the Popes holines towards the inhabitants and princes of this land, in times of imminent commonwealths dangers; the chiefe since the Norman conquest, was shew∣ed in the daies and raignes of king Henrie the second surna∣med Fitzempresse, and of his sonne king Iohn the third Mo∣narke of England of a Plantagenets royall race. Against whom hauing vsed his fatherly correction, (as pastor vni∣vniuersall ouer the whole flocke of Christ,) for their great crueltie and tyrannie vsed towards their naturall subiects; yet vpon their repentance, mercifully receiuing them into grace and fauour of Gods Church againe; his holines on the behalfe of the second, did not onely accurse and excom∣municate prince Lewis of France with all his adherents, forcing him to yeeld vp all the interest, right, and title, that he or his posteritie had or euer should haue to the English crowne, but also surrendred vp the said crowne of England franke and free, to king Iohn and his heires and successours from of the head of Cardinall Pandulphus, hauing sit in∣thronized three daies therewith in the Popes right. And thousands there are in England, that desire as much. Thus is it written, quodl. 8. art 9. page. 327. Out of these words it is euidently deduced, that the Pope taketh vpon him, (though most iniuriously and ty∣rannically,) to translate kingdomes, to depose kings, Em∣perours, and Monarkes, and to bestow their princely Dia∣demes and royall regalities, as seemeth best to his good pleasure. Yea, which is more to be admired, the seculars, (who in outward shew of words by often and earnest pro∣testations, affirme themselues to be most loyall subiects,) approue the Pope in so doing. For first, where the Pope had excommunicated and deposed king Henry, they terme it his fatherly correction. Secondly, they say he did it, by his vniuersall authority ouer the whole Church. Thirdly, they terme the deposing of prince Lewis, and the restoring of
king Iohn to the crowne, the chiefest fatherly compassion since the Norman cōquest. Fourthly, they tell vs, that Car∣dinall Pandulphus was three daies enthronized, with the crowne of England vpon his head, in the right of the Pope: which forraine tyrannicall fact, they commend & approue. Fiftly, they tell vs, that the Pope enforced king Lewis, to yeeld vp his whole title and right, that eyther he or his po∣steritie had or euer should haue, to the English crowne. This they likewise approue and commend. Sixtly, they crie and exclayme with open mouthes, that thousands in England desire as much to be done. Which is all one, (as I interprete it,) as if they wished the Pope to send some Cardinall from Rome,Loe, thou∣sands are bent and wish dis∣loyaltie. to be enthronized three daies with the English crowne vpon his head, in the right of his holi∣nes, and then to surrender it vp to Arbella, or to some other popish fauorite. For so the Spaniard or other foreyner haue it not, they haue their desire. Me thinke, this my glosse swarueth not much from the text. The reason is cleare, the reader can easily make application thereof. The third Reason. I know, that Iure ecclesiastico, and by the authoritie and sentence of the Popes holines, much more may be done, then heere I will speake of. But yet I thinke it will proue in the end the best course, for men not to doe so much as they may. Many things be lawfull, which are not expedi∣ent. Thus is it written, quodl. 9. art. 3. pag. 293. This reason ab authoritate, (for better reasons then their owne grants and confessions, cannot be had,) is as strong as the former, if it be well noted with the circumstances thereof. For first, after Watson, (who speaketh in the name of the seculars,) had told vs by the doctrine of a learned man, that if we goe no further then to the law of nature, or to the law of God, no king is depriued from his soueraign∣tie ouer his subiects, though it be for the sinne of apostasie from faith; forthwith he addeth the words of this present
reason, affirming peremptorily, that the Pope can do more; then he will heere set downe. Secondly, he telleth vs here, that kings can neyther by Gods law, nor by the law of na∣ture, be deposed from their crownes and regalities; and consequently, when he saith, the Pope can doe more, hee must perforce affirme both impudently and senselesly, that the Popes power is aboue the power of God.The Pope hath grea∣ter pow∣er then God. The latter he dare not say; and yet hath Satan so bewitched and be∣sotted him, that it followeth necessarily of the former▪ that is of the doctrine, which he deliuereth from the penne of a learned writer, and putteth it downe for good. Now what is it, that the Pope can doe more, then may be done by the law of nature and of God? forsooth, he can excom∣municate kings, depose kings from their royall thrones, and put their Diademes vpon the heades of others. This is it, that Watson will not say heere, because it is not expedient. Yet vnwittingly (the truth enforcing him,) he telleth vs no lesse in another place. For, a reue∣rend priest (saith he,) and ancient gentleman, ould master Middleton, was content at Parsons his motion,Quod. 9. art. 5. pag. 306. to subscribe to the title of Infanta; vpon condition, that she should be ioy∣ned by marriage, to some noble or péere of our land, Thus they write,Quod. 8. art. 6. page. 24. peruse the place quoted in the margent. Againe, in another place it is thus written; say then for the present, (which yet is more then I would willingly put to main∣taine, the time of our afflicted state considered,) that his ho∣lines and the king of Spayne might lawfully haue taken armes, against her Maiestie and this her kingdome our natiue land; yet was it a shamefull part of father Parsons and his companions, to be the contriuers or instigators of . These are the expresse words, of the place quoted in the margent. Out of these two seuerall assertions, the confir∣mations of the third reason generall; I gather first that all the difference betweene the Iesuites and the Seculars, concerning the inuasion and conquest of this land, consi∣steth in this onely point, viz. that the Iesuites would haue the Ladie Infanta of Spayne to be the Queene of England, but the seculars will haue an English man, to be king of
the land. They differ not in the thing to be done,Marke this well, that ye may vn∣derstand it aright. but in the manner of contriuing the thing that should be done; not in the partie to be deposed from the crowne, but in the per∣son that should haue the Crowne; not about taking the crowne from Queene Elizabeth, but about giuing the crown to the Spanish Ladie. The reason hereof is euident, because our Quodlibetist telleth vs roundly, that old Mid∣dleton consented willingly; to giue his name to the charter of subscription; in the behalfe of the Ladie In∣fanta of Spayne; vpon condition, that she should be married to some English noble man. Which disloyall narration, the secular Quodlibetist approoueth and greatly commen∣deth, terming the said Midleton a reuerend priest and anci∣ent gentleman. I gather secondly,Loe, the secular priests are as trayto∣rou, as the Iesuites. See the fit reason. that our Quodlibetist Watson, singeth the selfe same song with old trayterous Midleton. For he putteth the case; that the pope & Spanish king should be said to haue taken armes lawfully, against her Maiestie and her Realme of England. That done, forsooth, he telleth vs, that he would not willingly maintain that doctrine, the time & circumstances considered. Where he vnwittingly auoucheth; that the Pope and king of Spayne might lawfully take armes, to depose her Maiestie from her royall Diademe. Yea, he granteth, that he would defend the same doctrine, but that the time is not correspon∣dent thereunto. Let the words be well pondered, and this will be the sense. The fourth Reason. The Quodlibetist and the seculars, doe often protest their obedience to the pope,Imp. con∣sid. p. 43. quodlib. 342 p 267. & p. 361. and submit themselues and all their writings, yea, euerie word sillable and title to the censure of the Romane Church. One place may suffice, where these words are to be read. With all humble obedience to the sea Apostolike be it spoken. Quodl. 8. art. 8 pag. 267. This reason doth plainely conuince, the contents of this fift aduiso to be true. For how is it possible to conceiue, that they shall in true meaning, say or write any thing against the pope on the behalfe of her Maiestie; who protest zealous∣ly before God and his Angels that they will yeeld all obe∣dienc
to the pope, & therefore do submit themselues and all their writings, sentences, words, and sillables, to his cen∣sure and iudgement? it cannot be, they do but temporize in these state matters, they vse Iesuiticall equiuocation. The fifth Reason. The seminaries were willing at the first,Loe▪ the penall lawes are iustly made a∣gainst the seminaries. to colour hide, and conceale all, making the Iesuites causes, attempts, in∣tents, practises, and proceedings, their owne in euery thing, vntill at last they were intangled, by penall lawes iustly made against them equally, as against the Iesuites. These words are set downe, in the preface to the Quodlibets, page▪ 6. Againe, in another place the priests write thus: we had some of vs greatly approued the said rebellion; highly extolled the rebels, and pitifully bewailed their ru∣ine and ouerthrow. Many of our affections were knit to the Spaniards, and for our obedience to the pope, we all do professe it. The attempts both of the pope and Spaniard failing in England,Loe, the seminarie priests are traitors. See the 3. reason. his holines as a temporall prince, dis∣plaied his banner in Ireland. The plot was to depriue her highnes first from that kingdome, if they could, then by de∣grées, to depose her from this. In all these plots, none were more forward, then many of vs that were priests. These are the expresse words of the priests, in their important consi∣derations, page. 15. Loe, this reason is so plaine, that it needeth no application. ll both Iesuites and Seminaries will obey the pope, and the pope will haue them to murther their soueraigne. These things the seculars concealed a long time, and would neuer haue discouered them, if neces∣sitie had not constrained them so to do. For, as the common prouerbe is,See the 4. booke and 7. chapter. when theeues beginne to reckon, true folks shall haue their owne. I therefore conclude, that the secu∣lars doe proue themselues arrant traytors, and that when they say ought to the contrary, they doe then but temporize, dissemble, and equiuocate. To which I adde, that when they say, (we say without all equiuocation,) then do they equiuocate in the highest degrée, for simulata sanctitas duplex
est iniquitas. The truth is this; if we will not be deluded, we must not in state matters giue credite to them. They vtter many truthes indéede, but with an intention much like the deuils; who speaketh the truth in the beginninge, that he may deceiue in the ending. Aduiso. VI. Of the Popes double person, and disholy holinesse. THus writeth our graue Quodlibetist; as the prudent Greeke appealed from Alexander furious to Alexander sober, and Bishop Crostrate frō Pope Adrian priuate to pope Adrian publique, and as Summus pontifex in Cathedra Petri; so may the seculars, notwithstanding any decree set downe by his holines to the contrarie, by wronge informa∣tion giuen; appeale euen from the pope as Clemens, vnto his holinesse as Peter. These words are set downe,This is a maxime in the Ro∣mā church. see D. Elyes notes vpon the Apolo∣gie p 93. 31. et p. 103 6. quodl. 6. art. 10. In the very ende thereof. By this doctrine so plainly deliuered, (which is a constant position in the Ro∣mish Church,) the seculars giue vs to vnderstand, that exe∣crable and neuer enough detested fallacie; wherewith the Pope and his popelinges haue a longe time seduced, the greater part of the christian world. viz. That the Pope may erre as a priuate man, but not as a publique person. Of which absurde doctrine I haue written at large, in my trea∣tise intituled the hunting of the Romish foxe. I will there∣fore at this present only speake thereof, as these words giue me fit occasion. First then; we see heere, that if we meane to wringe any truth out of the Popes nose, we must haue recourse to his holinesse, at such time as hee is sober; not when he is furious, least he become starke madde, and for∣get for euer the knowledge of the truth. Secondly, we must haue his aduise, when he is a publique person, not a pri∣uate man. Thirdly, we must goe vnto him, not as he is in∣deed, this or that pope; but as he is Saint Peter, that blessed Apostle of our Lord Iesus. Thus much is gathered out of this popish doctrine, by euident and necessarie consequutiō.
These points, if they be well marked, will vtterly confound all popish doctrine, and turne it vpside downe. For first, it is a constant axiome in all popish doctrine that the pope and none but the pope, must iudge in all controuersies of faith and doctrine. This notwithstanding, we see by this popish doctrine; that if the pope iudge of any matter, as he is furi∣ous, and not sober; as he is a priuate man, and not a publi∣que person; as he is Clemens, Sixtus, Adrianus, or some o∣ther like Pope, and not Saint Peter himselfe; then he may erre,The Pope may be iudged, e∣uen by Popish doctrine. See booke. 2. cap. 9. euel. 3. and so both be deceiued and deceiue others. whereup∣on it followeth of necessitie, that euery one must examine well the popes doctrine and iudgement, before he beleeue it; otherwise doubtlesse, he may receiue poyson for medicine, falsehood for truth, & erroneous for orthodoxe christian doc∣trine. Nay, otherwise he cannot possibly tell when he shall appeale from the Pope, as a falfe teacher and reducer of the people. Secondly, the time cannot be named, in which the bishope of Rome shalbe the bishope there, and not a publi∣que person at the selfe same time. for euen then, when he is a sleepe, he is a publique person, or els no bishoppe doubt∣lesse. for once a bishope euer a bishope, by popish indelible character. Yet I grant willingly, that a publique parson may doe some act, which may be censured the act of a priuat man; but that cannot serue their turne. Thirdly, if the pa∣pists will neuer appeale to the Pope, nor haue any inter∣course with him, vntill he be Saint Peter; they shall neuer doe it, till the worlds end. Fourthly, if they will appeale from the now Pope, as Clemens, they must perforce appeale from him in ech respect; or els he must be christened againe, and haue a new name. But pardon me, he was called Cle∣mens when he became their Pope. Be it so. Ergo when they appeale from him as Clemens, they appeale from him as Pope. For doubtles if he be not Clemens the Pope, he is not Pope at all. Fiftly▪ if he be Peter by office or calling, then is he alwaies Peter; vnlesse perhapes he be sometime Luci∣fer, which were a rare metamorphosis. Sixtly, this popish distinction may fitly be termed, a tricke of fast and looose. For, if the Pope define a truth, they may say, he defined as
a publike parson. But if he define an errour,How the Pope can∣not erre, but the di∣uell in his coate. then they say, he defined as a priuate man. So doubtles it may be said in∣deede, that he can nener erre; but some man in his coate, or some deuill under his pall. See the eleuenth aduiso, and note it well. Aduiso. VII. Of the penall statutes, against Iesuites and Seminaries. Vntill at last they were intāgled by penall lawes,Note this word (iu∣stly) for it is of great importāce. which were iustly made against them equally, as against the Iesuites. Thus doe the seculars write of themselues, in the preface to the quodlibets. page. 6. towards the end. Againe, in an other place, I find these words. All priests & others, that are not of that seditious Iesuiticall and spanish faction, are bound in charitie, as now the case stāds, to detect them to the vttermost. First, for a caueat to the ignorant mul∣titude seduced by them, hereafter to be ware of them. Se∣condly, perlegem talionis, returning their malice,The Priests are bound to detect the Iesuits. detrac∣tion, defamation, calumniation, obloquie, and what not in∣uented by them against the innocent, vpon their owne heads. These words are set downe, quodl. 1. art. 4. page. 9. This is a most excellent aduiso. For first, we learne heare by the seculars their owne frée and voluntary confession, that which I could hardly haue beléeued, If I had not found it writen in their owne bookes. viz. That the penall lawes of this land, are iustly made against the Iesuits and y• semi∣naries. Oh swéete Iesus? who could haue beléeued this. This is that mightie point, against which all the papistes doe so often and bitterly exclame; to witte,Loe here, the Priests confesse freely, that they are traytors. that the popish priests and Iesuites are put to death for their conscience, and not for treason. For séeing they graunt those penall lawes, by which they are conninced of treason, to be iustly made against them; they doe consequently grant, that they are executed for treason. Yet it may also be said, that they die for their conscience, because their conscience is to take part with the Pope, and to make warre against their so∣ueraigne.
We learne Secondly by this aduiso, that the Iesuites are so seditious and traytrous companions; that the secular priests are bound in conscience, to detect and re∣ueale there bad disloyall dealing. To which I must needes adde; as a plesant adiunct, that these good fellowes the se∣culars; are in the same predicament with the Iesuites, and guiltie of the selfe same treasons, as is alreadie proued. Aduiso. VIII. Of the great, strong, and mightie frends, of the Iesuites and seculars. THe Iesuits thinke it is vnknown, vnder whose wings the arch-priest liues shrowded, or to and from whome the letter was sent on father Gerards behalfe, to wish her (after some few complements and thankes for the token shee lent him,) to keepe her Iewell (the said Gerard) well, &c. Or who they be, that plie and plead for the Iesuites vnder-hand; or by whome they are backt, to be so bould as they are both in prison and abroad; to make their vaunt, that they haue moe & greater friends, both in ye English & Scottish court,Note this point well; it is to be admited, and to bee sought in∣to carefully then the seculars haue; more then halfe na∣ming some particular Nobles and others, in high estéeme and authority vnder her maiestie, that are secretly entered into league with them on the spanish behalfe. These words are set downe, quodl. 7. art. 2. page. 188. Againe in an other place, it it plainly written; that the Earle of Essex, was so∣licited to be the Kinge of Spaines close pensioner, for furde∣ring of the inuasions. quodl. 7. art. 2. pag. 189 A Iesuite priest was sent from Parsons to the said Earle of Essex, to moue him to take a pension of the King of Spaine priuatly for the aduancement of his designements. quodl. 5. art. 8. pag. 150. In an other place they write bouldly, that foure semina∣rie priests were altogether at supper, with a noble person, a Lord of high renoune; who would not sit downe, vntill they all were set and placed before him. quodl. 3. art. 1. page. 51. In an other place, it is thus written; these two noble per∣sons
are now most earnest persecutors of the Iesuites and Arch-priests sedition, falsehood, and faction. quodl. 4. art. 7. page. 126. In an other place thus; and other like speaches he vsed of him, to an honorable Earle who told me it. quod. 4. art. 9. page. 132. In an other place thus; Parsons,Note this point well. in his bookes affirmeth the infortunat Howard of Norfolke, to haue béene one and the chiefe cause of the ouerthrow both of the Church and common wealth, yet with whome hee and his haue had▪ (I will not say haue, videant ipsi,) more in∣ward and close dealing, for the aduancement to the crowne by marriage of the ladie Arbella. &c. and other means then with any other house and familie. quodl. 7. art. 9. page. 212. This is a worthy and a very golden aduiso. For by it, hee that hath but one eye may sée, what a daungerous kind of people the Iesuites and the seculars bee. For to say no∣thing of their practises with the late Earle of Essex, nor of that tender and deare familiaritie, which they haue with many of the nobilitie; this is a thing that ma∣keth me sigh and grone, when I remember it; viz. That some nobles and others in high esteeme and authoritie vn∣der her maiestie; are secretly entered into league with the Iesuites, on the behalfe of the King of Spaine, for the longe intended conquest of this land. This, this, is it, which can not but grieue and wound euen to the heart; all true hear∣ted English,Marke well for Christs sake. that shall heare the same. Not the seminaries doubtles of themselues, but the holy Ghost enforcing them thereunto, haue reuealed this notable stratageme. Yea, the seculars doe acknowledge thus much themselues,See the re∣plie to Par∣sons libell, fol. 68. where they write in this maner; God hath most straungly and in very indeed (as it may bee termed,) miraculously reuealed the truth which longe hath béene hidden. quodl. 8. art. 9. pag 267. Thus we sée, the Priests haue discouered long hidden traytors, and detected many notorious treasons: yet not in∣tending good thereby to Quéene Elizabeth, but to their owne persons in their combat with the Iesuites. I trust her maiesties wise and faithfull counsellers, will haue due cō∣sideration of this aduiso. pauca sufficiunt sapienti.
Aduiso. IX. Of the Iesuiticall exercise and their profitable ef∣fects thereof. First Iohn Gerard the Iesuite caused Henrie Drurie to en∣ter into this Iesuiticall exercise, and thereby got him to sell the mannor of Lozell in Suffolke, & other lands to ye value of 3500. pounds & got all the money himselfe; the said Drurie hauen chosen to be a lay-brother. Afterwards he sent him to Antwerpe,3500. pounds. to haue his Nouitiat by the prouinciall there, by name Oliuerius Manerius, (for at that time father Garnet had not authority to admit any;) where after twelue or fourthteene daies he died, not without suspition of some indirect dealing. Secoudly, the said Gerrard gaue the same exercise to Maister Anthonie Rowse,100. pounds. of whome he got aboue 1000. pounds. Thirdly, the saide Gerrard gaue the exercise to Edwarde Walpoole,1008. Markes. whome hee caused to sell the manner of Tuddenham, and had of him about 1000. Markes. Fourthly, he gaue the exercise to Maister Iames Li∣nacre his fellow prisoner in the Clinke, from whome hee drewe there 400. pounds; and afterwards got a promise of him of all his lands,400. pounds. but was preuented thereof by the said Linacres death. Fiftly,1000. pounds. vnder pretence of the said exercise, he confined syr Edmond Huddlestones sonne and heire by sundry sleights, of aboue .1000. pounds. Sixtly, he hath drawen Maister William Wiseman in∣to the said exercise so oft, as he hath left him now very bare to liue. So he dealt also with Maister Thomas Wiseman, whose land he gotte, and thē sent him to Antwerpe, where he died. Seuenthly, he wrought so with Maister Nicholas King lately of Grayes Inne, as he hath gotten most of his liuing, and sent him to Rome. Maister Roger Lee of Buckingham¦shire
hath beene in this exercise likewise, and is also by him sent to Rome. Eightly, in like manner he dealeth with such gentlewo∣men as he thinketh fit for his turne, and draweth them to his exercise; as the Ladie Louell, mistresse Haywood, and mistresse Wiseman now prisoner; of whom he get so much, as now shée féeleth the want of it. Ninthly, he drue Mistresse Fortescue the widowe of Maister Edmond Fortescue into his exercise, and so got a farme worth 50. poundes a yéere, and paide her no rent. Tenthly, by this his exercise of consinage, he perswadeth such gentlewomen as haue large portions to their mariage, to giue the same to him and his companie, and to become Nunnes. So he preuayled with two of Maister Williame Wisemans daughters of Broddocke; with Elizabeth Sherlie, borne in Leicestershire; with Dorothy Buckwood Maister Richard Buckwoods daughter of Suffolke, who had a great portion giuen her by the Ladie Elizabeth Drurie her grand∣mother; with mistresse Marie Tremaine, Maister. Tremains daughter of Cornewell she hauing a large portion; with Mistresse Mary Tremain of Dorcetshire, of whome he had aboue .200. pounds; with mistresse Anne Arundle, of whom he got a great portion; with Ladie Marie Percie, who is now a Nunne at Bruxells. All these words of this holy cou∣sinage, I would say, exercise, are set down in expresse terms, quodli. 3. art. 10. toward the end. By this aduiso wee may sée, in what sort and by what meanes, our Iesuites haue en∣riched their coffers; and consequently, we may haue a con∣iecturall prognostication thereby, that they expect a day, when to bestow the same to their aduantage. In the meane time, if they with their cōplices be permitted scot frée; they will set the whole land on fire, with their seditious & blou∣die treacheries.
Aduiso. X. Of Iesuiticall religious pollicie, neuer inough to be admired. IT is a plaine testimonie of no religion in the Iesuites, but flat I Atheism, making religious pietie, but only a mat¦ter of meere pollicie. These words are expressely set downe; quodl 6. art. 4. pag. 168. There is not a Iesuite, nor a Iesuites fautour any where to be found, but he hath a fowle tast of Atheisme, either di∣rectly pere, or indirectly, or virtute primi & principalis agen∣tis. The experience whereof, halfe witted men may see in England, and els where. These expresse words are set down quodl. 4. art. 4. p. 113. The Iesuites haue most traytorously cast the platforme, & doe goe about so much as wit of man can deuise, to bring all Kinges, princes, & states in christendome, vnder their subiection. quodl 9▪ art. 7. page. 313. They (the Iesuites) haue made religion, but an art of such as liue by their wits, and a very hotch potch of omnium githerum. These words are set downe; quodl. 2. art. 8. page. 44. The Iesuites, during the time of their rebellious practi∣ses and conspiracies, against the late King Henrie the 3. of France, & Henry now regnant the 4. did cast at the whole kingdome and crowne of Fraunce. quodlibet. 9. art. 6. page. 11. The seculars will be, when not one Iesuite shall be left aliue in the world, (vnlesse they amend their manners, and reforme their order,) but all damned for heretikes, or thruste out of Godes Church, as apostaas and A∣theistes, These words are to be read, quodlibet. 2. art. 7. page. 42. How the Iesuites haue abused that sacred seale (of con∣fession) of purpose to tyrannize ouer poore soules, as get∣ting thereby occasion to intrude themselues for disposing and managing of their wordly causes, I leaue it to sundry
reports and wofull experiences, whereof mistresse Wibur in Kent together with hee husband can and will be witnes∣ses another day, against father Cury the Iesuite, vnlesse his repentance were great for it, ere he died. These words are set downe, quodl. 2. art. 4. page. 69. Onely in hell and amongst heretikes ordo negligitur, Ergo, the Iesuites appointing vs a superiour (without order,) doe imitate one of these, (the diuels, or heretikes.) These words are set downe. Quodl. 6. art. 4. pag. 164. One is in time of solemne processions, at which it hath beene noted, that the Iesuites will seldome or neuer come. These words are to be read. Quodl. 3. art. 1. page. 51. The power of priesthood is called into question, by these new religious Scribes and Pharisees, (the Iesuites.) These words are set downe. Quodl. 2. art. 7. page 42. It followeth, that they must eyther renounce the Catho∣like Churches authoritie, in crediting these false hearted, seditious, and erroneus Iesuites, or else renounce the said Iesuiticall doctrine. These words are set downe, Quodl. 2. art. 7. page. 42. By this Aduiso we see plainely, that who∣soeuer followeth the doctrine of the Iesuites, must of neces∣sitie renounce Christs Church. Fie vpon them therfore, and their badde religion. Aduiso. XI. Of the testimonie, that the Iesuites giue to the Pope. THey (the Iesuites) haue preached openly in Spayne, against Pope Sixtus the last of all holy memorie; and rayling against him as against a most wicked man and monster on earth, they haue called him a Lutheran here∣tike; they haue termed him a Wolfe, they haue said, he had vndone all Christendome, if he had liued. And Cardinall Bellarmine, being asked what he thought of his death,See the sixt Aduiso and note it well. an∣swered thus: conceptis verbis, quatum capio, quantum sapio, quantum intelligo, descendit ad infernum. Thus in English; as farre I can perceiue, vnderstand, and apprehend, our pope is gone to hell. They gaue him doubtlesse, a merie
farewell. Thse words are set downe. quodl. 3. art. 2. page. 57. The Iesuites hold and defend this proposition, hominem non christianum posse esse Romanum Pontificem. A man that is not a Christian, may be the bishop or Pope of Rome, These words are set downe in the discouerie. page. 37. quodl. 4. art. 2. page. 100. This is a worthie Aduiso, which must be well marked and remembred, for it giueth poperie a deadly wound. First, we see here, that the Pope may be an eth∣nicke or atheist, and consequently, that the Church of Rome may be ethnicall or atheall, such as is their head. Secondly, that the pope, euen by confession of the greatest papists, may be an heretike, & that their late pope was one de facto. Thirdly, that euerie pope holdeth not in euerie point, the late Romish religion. For, (if they write truly,) this late pope Sixtus disliked of popish auricular confession. Fourth∣ly, that it is lawfull to iudge both of the popes religion, and of the pope himselfe. For we see here,King Hen∣ry now regnant. that the Iesuites did iudge the pope. Yea, our quodlibetist telleth vs in another place, that the Iesuites affirmed the pope, to haue erred in absoluing the French king. quod. 4. art. 2. gage. 101. See the fourth Preamble, and the sixt Aduiso sup. Concerning the pope, how he both hath erred and still doth erre, as also how both he hath béene iudged, and this day ought to be iudged, euen of his dearest popelings; I haue sufficiently proued elsewhere; neuerthelesse, for the full satisfaction of the reader. I will here adde a little, which in the former bookes is wanting and cannot but wel content, euerie indifferently affected person. Master Doctor Gerson a famous papist, and chancellor of the viuersitie of Paris, doth make the case so plaine in many places of his works, as none that with iudgement shall peruse the same, can stagger or stand in doubt thereof. Some few places onely I will heere allege, referring the Reader for the rest, vnto the author himselfe in his bookes. The first place is conteyned in these expresse words: cōcluditur ex hac radice duplex veritas. Prima, quod de terminati slius papa in his quae sunt fidei, non obligat vt pracisé est talis, ad
credendum: alquin staret in casu,Gerson. pri. part. de exa∣min. doctri∣nar. confi∣der. 2. quod qui▪ obligaretur ad contra∣dictoria, vel ad falsum contra fidem. Out of this roote is concluded a double truth. First, that the resolution or determination of the pope alone, in things belonging to faith, as it is precisely such, (not confirmed by a generall counsell,) doth not tie or bind a man to beleeue it. For other wise the case might so fall out, that one should be bound eyther to beleeue contradictories, or else falshoode against his faith. The said Gerson, after he hath in the same place by me quoted in the margent,Gerson, vbi supra. delated at large, that the Popes er∣roneous doctrine must be controlled by a generall councell, addeth these expresse words: Cui legi haud dubie subest papa licet hactenus multis haec veritas non placeret propter inordi∣natū, fauorem ad summum pontificem, vel scripta sua male sus∣cepta, plus quam ad Christī & Euangelia. Nunc autē opposita falsitas est haeresis expresse damnata per concilium Constan∣tiense, cum alijs multis in vtilitatem totius politiae Chri∣stianae. To which law the pope doubtlesse is subject, although hitherto this truth did not please a great many, by reason of their inordinate affection to the pope, more then to Christ and his gospell. But now the opposite falshood is an here∣ie, slatly condemned by the counsell of Constance, together with many other things for the good of all Christian pol∣licie. The second place is conteyned in these words: Concili∣um generale sic est supra papam,Gerson. pri∣part. in serm. pro. vi∣agio regis Roman. part. 3. di∣rect. 1. & alium quemlibet de ecele∣sia, quod ipsum papam potest deponere pro quocunque cri∣mine, de quo notorie & incorrigibiliter scandalizatur eccle∣sia. Hoe est practicatum dudum de papa Ioh. 12. & nunc de Ioh. 23. In cuius deiectione non inseritur, quod fuerit haere∣ticus, vel à fide deuius. A generall councell is so aboue the Pope, and euery one of the Church, that it hath power to depose the Pope, for what crime soeuer, whereof the Church is scandalized no∣toriously and incorrigibly. This was done vpon Iohn the 12. Long sythence, and now vpon Iohn the 23. of that
name, in whose deiection it is not inserted, that he was an heretike, or had swarued from the faith. The third place is conteyned in these words: Concilium generale potest eum quem reputat summum pontificem,Gerson in pri. part. in serm. pro agio regis Rom. di∣rect. 2. ne∣dum consultiue inducerè, sed authoritatiuè compellere ad offerendum viam cessionis, vel ad cedendum papatui, etiam sine culpa licet non sua sine causa. A generall councell may not onely by way of councell in∣duce him▪ whom it reputeth to be the lawfull Pope; but also by way of authoritie compell him to offer to giue place, or to depart from the Popedome in verie deed; yea, without his owne fault, though not without a cause. The fourth place is conteyned in these words: Status pa∣palis,Gerson pri. part. dsta∣tius ecclesi∣astic. con∣sider 3. non eximit papam à legibus purè diuinis, quae vel in euangelijs, vel generalibus concilijs positae sunt. Et ex hoc con∣sequēter patet, quod papa subijcitur legi de correctione frater∣terna. Si peccauerit in te frater tuus, &c. Sic quod potest fra∣ternaliter corripi, dum peccat. Et si tandem nolet audire ec∣clesiam, quam generale concilium representat, debet haberi sicut ethuus & publicanus. Et ita potest hoc modo per con∣cilium, vel iudicari, vel coerceri, vel pro excommunicato haberi. The Popes estate doth not exempt the Pope from the pure diuine lawes, which are set downe eyther in the gos∣pels, or in generall councels. And hereupon it is cleare consequently, that the Pope is subiect to that law of frater∣nall correction, if thy brother offend against the, &c. So that he may be reproued brotherly, when he sinneth. And if at length he will not heare the Church, which a generall councell doth represent, he must be reputed as an Ethnicke and Publican. And so he may this way by a councell either be iudged, or corrected, or reputed an excommunicate person. The fift place is conteyned in these words: Ecclesia vel generale concilium potuit & potest congregari,Gerson in serm. co. concil. Con∣stan. K. prim. part. sine expresso consensu vel mandato papae, etiam rite electi & viuentis, in multis casibus. The Church or generall councell both might and may
be called together, without the expresse consent or mandate of the pope, euen when the pope is lawfully elected and li∣uing, and that in many cases. Againe,Gerson ibi∣dem. the same Doctor hath these words: Ecclesia vel generale conciliū eam representans, est regula a spiritu sancto, directa tradita à Christo, vt quilibet cuiuscunque status etiam papalis existat, eam audire ac eidem obedire teneatur, lioquin habendus, est vt ethnicus, & publicanus. The Church or generall councell representing it, is a rule directed of the holy Ghost, and giuen vs of Christ, that euerie one of what state soeuer euen papall, must heare and obey the same, or else he must be reputed as an ethnick and publican. The sixt place is conteyned in these words: Concilium generale potestatem a Christo immediatè habet,Gerson in serm. pro viagio regis Romanorii, direct. 1. prim part. cui quilibet cuiuscunque status vel dignitatis etiamsi papalis existat, obe∣dire tenetur in his quae pertinent ad fidem, & extirpationem schismatis, ac generalem reformationem ecclesiae dei, in capi∣te & in membris. A generall councell hath power from Christ immediately, to which euerie one of what state or dignitie soeuer he be, yea the pope himselfe, is bound to yeeld obedience, in those things which pertayne to faith, and extirpation of schisme, and the generall reformation of the Church of God, in the head and in the members. The seuenth place is conteyned in these words: Iohan∣nes (papa) non est accusatus vel conuictus de haeretica praui∣tate,Gerson p. parte, in tractatu de appellatione à papa circa medium. & tamen concilium vocauit & indicauit ipsum, tanquam suum subditum. Vnde & in toto processu vsque post senten∣tiam definitiuam suae depositionis, reputans est ab eodem con∣cilio verus papa. Pope Iohn was neither accused nor conuicted of hereti∣call prauitie, and for all that the councell both called him and iudged him, as their subiect. Whereupon the councell reputed him the true Pope, in all the time of their procee∣ding against him▪ vntill after the definitiue sentence of his deposition. The eight place is conteyned in these words: In causis
fidei non habetur in  iudex infallibilis,Gerson vbi  in 2. propit. vel qui non sit de∣uiabilis à ide de lge communi, praeter ipsam ecclesiam vniuersalem vel concilium generale eam sufficienter reprae∣sentans. In causes of faith there is no infallible iudge vpon earth, or which cannot swarue from the faith by the cōmon course of Gods procéeding, sauing the vniuersall Church or a ge∣nerall councell. Thus you see at large, the constant doctrine of this great Doctor, and famous papist; who was present at the coun∣cell of Constance, and one of the best account in the same councell. Out of whose words I gather many verie excel∣lent documents, well worthie to be written in golden let∣ters. First, that no Christian is bound to beléeue the de∣crée, definition, determination, or resolution of the Pope, as he is barely and precisely Pope, or Bishoppe of Rome, without the assistance of a generall councell. Secondly, that the Pope may erre both priuately and publikely in resolutions of faith, aswell as other bishops and ministers of the Church. Thirdly, that the Pope is subiect to a gene∣rall councell, and may be controlled by the same. Fourthly, that the contrarie opinion is a flat heresie, condemned in the councell of Constance. Fiftly, that an inordinate affecti∣on to the bishoppe of Rome, withdraweth many men from the truth of Christs Gospell. Sixtly, that a generall coun∣cell is so aboue the Pope, that it hath power and lawful au∣thoritie to depose the Pope, for any notorious crime what∣soeuer. Which authoritie (saith this great papist,) was practised and de facto put in execution, both in Pope Iohn the 12. and in Pope Iohn the 23. of that name. Seuenthly, that a generall councell hath full power to compell a Pope law∣fully elected to the place, to renounce and forsake the pope∣dome, and to giue place to him whom the councell shall ap∣point. Eightly, that if the pope shall withstand the councell, and refuse to obey the decrées and constitutions thereof; he must be excommunicated, and reputed as an Ethnicke and publican. Ninthly, that a generall councell may be summo∣ned and kept, without consent of the pope, that is both law∣fully
elected and then liuing. Tenthly, that the Church or a generall councell is a rule set downe by the holy Ghost, and giuen vs by Christ, to which all people, aswell the pope as others, must yeeld obedience, or else be as the eth∣nicks and publicans. Eleuenthly, that neither the pope, nor any one man vpon earth is or can be an infallible iudge in matters of faith. Twelftly, that the iudgement which we must rest vpon, in all controuersies of faith and religion; is eyther the vniuersall Church, or a lawful generall councell. This is sound and most Catholike doctrine, though procée∣ding from the penne of a great papist. Which doctrine as the councell of Constance did approue, so do I embrace the same with all my heart; humbly thanking God, that by the mightie power of his truth, our aduersaries are enforced to deliuer vs the truth against themselues. This doctrine is proued more at large in my my booke of Motiues, and in my Suruey; in many places also of this present volume, e∣uen by the confession of the priests vnawares; and shall be confirmed God willing, in my Golden ballance of triall, now readie to the presse. Aduiso. XII. Of the tolleration expected by the Seculars. TOuching the toleration which the secular priests ayme at, I will only put downe the reasons which perswade me, that it cannot stand with the peaceable gouerment of this land, referring the decision thereof as appertayneth, to the graue consideration of higher powers. The same to∣leration is no lesse daungerous, in the kingdomes of Scot∣land and Ireland, a poynt that would not be forgotten. The first reason. In the booke which Cardinall Allen published in his owne name,See the Apologie, page. 172. and note it well. when the inuasion of England was chiefely intended, with the cruell massacre of her Maiesties sacred person, in the yeare 1588. (which booke the Iesuites partly framed to his hands,) they first make their entrance in∣to
their discourse, with a most odious and shamefull decla∣ration against her Maiestie, thereby to stirre vp her sub∣iects hearts to contempt of her highnes, and to make her be∣holden euerie where for odious both to God, to the world, and to all good men. Secondly, in that booke the Cardinall and the Iesuites threaten the nobilitie, genrie, and all the rest of the inhabitants of this kingdome, with losse of all their goods, their lands, their liues, and with dam∣nation besides,Loe, the like trea∣son was neuer hard of to this day. except that presently vpon the landing of the Spaniards, they ioyned themselues and all their forces, men, munition, victuals, and whatsoeuer else they could make, with that Catholike armie. The words of that booke be these; if you will auoid (say they) the popes, the kings, and other princes high indignation, let no man of what de∣gree soeuer, obey, abet, aide, defend, or acknowledge her, &c. adding, that otherwise they should incurre the Angels curse & malediction & be as déeply excōmunicated as any, be∣cause y• in taking her maiesties part, they should fight against God,These words are set downe. quodl. 8. art. 7. page. 247. against their lawful king, & against their country. Ergo the Iesuites are vnfit men to enioy any toleration, in a well managed commonweale. And whatsoeuer I say of Iesuites cōcerning this toleratiō, I vnderstand y• same indifferently of the secular priests. My reasons mouing me therunto, are manifold. First, because Cardinal Allen (with whose opiniō all the seculars did euer iumpe,) put his owne hand to this shamelesse & abhominable libell. Secondly, because many of the secular priests were in the campe, as is said in the same article,This my selfe know to be so. which is quoted in the margent. Thirdly, Because Ballard the secular priest, did at his comming ouer, about the yeare 1586. deliuer a like message to al reconciled persons, buzzing into their eares, to acknowledge the quéen of Scotland for their soueraigne. Fourthly, because all the seculars professe their obedience to the Pope, and are still deuoted to him, euen as they were before. Fiftly, because the seculars iumpe with the Iesuites, in all things concerning the Popes authoritie; as is alreadie proued. The second reason. Many nobles and others in high esteeme and authoritie
vnder her maiesties, are secretly entered into league on the behalfe of the Spaniard, and that by procurement of the Iesuites, as I haue proued in the eight aduiso; Ergo the Ie∣suits, and seculars are vnfit men, to enioy and toleration in a well managed common weale. The third Reason. All papists must imploy their persons and forces by the Popes direction, how farre, when, and where, either at home, or abroade; as men bound in conscience to further all warres for religion, and to breake with their temporall soueraigne at the Popes appointmēt. This is proued pre∣amble. 18. Ergo Iesuites and Seculars. &c. The fourth Reason. The King of Spaine plotteth and by Iesuiticall faction resolueth, to proceede where his father left against England, And for this ende sundry persons are sent into England, to be agents in that behalfe. This is proued preamb. 19. Ergo. The fift Reason. The seculars confesse in plaine termes, that the penall statutes are iustly made against them. this is proued in the seuenth aduiso. Ergo vnfit men to haue a toleration. The sixt Reason. The seculars commend the pope, for taking the English diademe from the king, and highly approue the dissoyal fact of Cardinall Pandulphus, in kéeping the said English crowne three dayes vpon his heade in the Popes right; Ergo. &c. This is proued in the first aduiso, in the se∣cond reason. The seuenth Reason. All that come out of Spaine, must sweare to be rancke
traytors against Quéene Elizabeth. This is proued in the second booke, chapt. 4. page. 6. Ergo. &c. The eight Reason. The seminaries in Spaine were intended and erected, of purpose to cause a conquest, and to bring England into the slauery of the Spaniard. This is proued, quodlibet. 8. art. 10. page. 278. Ergo. &c. The ninth Reason. The seculars in their answere to the Iesuited gentlemā, doe prowdly vaunt of their great power and forces, in the 68 page. Ergo. The 10 Reason. In all the blondie attempts and treasonable practises of the Pope and Spaniards, none were more forward then the secular priests. This is proued in the important consi∣derations, page. 15. Ergo. The 11. Reason. The seminaries were willing to colour, hide, and con∣ceale, all the attempts, intents, practises, and proceedinges of the Iesuites, vntill they were intangled by penall lawes. these words are set downe, in the preface to the quodlibets. Ergo. The 12. Reason. All papists (seculars and Iesuites,) maintained one and the same opinion, in all the practises and bloudie complots concerning England. This is proued, quodli. 8. art. 9. page. 277. But some seculars were as forward against Quéene Elizabeth, as the bloudie Spaniards, as is proued in the 10. Reason. Ergo vnfit men to haue a tolleration,
The 13. Reason. The seculers granut fréely, as is allready proued at large; that they haue many friends both of the nobility, and of the gentrie, who loue them dearely, & are deuoted to the Pope. Ergo. many other reasons may be gathered to this ef∣fect, out of this precedent discourse; but I will not stande vpon the matter. Her Maiesties graue and wise counsel∣lours, know best what is to be done herein. onely this I wish to be remembred, (which is already made manifest in the second booke, chapter. 4. paragraph. 1.) that the Iesuites are banished out of the kingdome of France, for their sedi∣tious dealing there. For doubtlesse, if they be vnfit persons to dwell in that Realme; where popery is openly professed, and therefore are banished from thence; it séemeth not to stand with christian pollicy, to grant them a tolleration to liue as they list in England. And séeing the seculars were as deepe & as forward in all bloudie practises, as y• Iesuites or spaniards, (as is alreadie proued;) & seeing with all, they doe still professe their obedience to the Pope, her Maiesties pro∣fessed mortall enemie; they seeme as dangerous, and as vnfit to enioy a tolleration, as doe the Iesuites. What say I of a tolleratiō? seeing the seculars cōfesse (as I haue pro∣ued,) that the penall lawes are iustly made against them; it were not a misse thinke I, if this their generall maxime were put in execution; viz. fiat iustitia, & ruant coeli. For as our quodlibetist telleth vs,Quodl. 7. art. 7 p 196. the execution of priest-hood and treason are now so linked together by the Iesuites in Eng∣land; as they cannot exhort any to the catholike faith, but dogmazando, in so doing they draw him in effect to rebel∣lion. quodl. 9. art. 4. page. 304. note the next reason. The 14. Reason. The Pope will not suffer nor permit the Iewes to dwell in Rome,I speake this of my owne knowledge▪ vnles they will orderly and dutifully heare the popish sermons in their popish Churches; and yet are the
popish sermons as much against the conscience of the Iew, as are the English sermons against the conscience of the pa∣pist. Againe, the Iewes are not the Popes subiects, and so doe they owe lesse dutie to the Pope, thē our english papists owe to Quéene Elizabeth. And consequently, if the Popes practise with the Iewes be made a rule, to square and mea∣sure the actions of his popish English vassals; they must haue no toleration to abide in England, vnles they will come to the Church to heare godly sermons. To which I must néedes adde, that the Iewes liue peaceably in Rome, and doe not any way meddle in seditious and treasonable practises; which for all that, is a thing very common and v∣suall with our English papists, as is alreadie proued. If therefore the execution of popish priesthood, be lincked inse∣perably with treason, as is alreadie proued; I hope popery will bee so farre from a tolleration, as no disloyall papist shall be permitted, to haue any footinge within this land. The complement of the three former bookes Paragraph. I. Containing a golden redolent posie, for the Iesuites and their Iesuited familie; presented by the secular Priests, to signifie their amitie. THe Iesuites and their arch-priesbyteran or Spanish faction, inueighing against the secular priests, for ap∣pealing to the Sea apostolike for iustice in spiritualibus, and to the regall throne of sacred maiestie, in defence apologi∣ticall of their innocencie in temporalibus; do peruert all laws, customes, and orders, and arrogate to thēselues a dignitie, preheminence, & authoritie, aboue the Pope and Prince, & are therebie guiltie of high treason. These words are set downe, in the preface to their dialogue. Note heere gentle reader, these important points; first that
by the flat testimonie of the seculars, the Iesuites are censured to be guiltie of high treason; and consequently, that they are worthily condemned by the lawes of this land for the same. secondly, that these good fellowes the secular priests, do make themselues guiltie of the same treason, though not in the same degree. For their appeale to the Pope in spiritualibus, imply∣eth high treason against their naturall soueraigne. Which to be so themselues confesse els where, as shall appeare in the next paragraph. Paragraph. II. Shewing that the secular priests vnawares condemne themselues, in their owne publike writings. THe seminaries were willing at the first, to colour, hide, and conceale all; making the Iesuites causes, at∣tempts, intents, practises, and procéedings, their owne in euery thing, and yéelding to them the preheminence, fame, honor and renowne in euery action acted by them; vntill at last they were intangled by penall lawes, iustly made a∣gainst them equally, as against the Iesuits. These words are set downe, in the preface to the quodlibets. Note heere gentle reader, these important points with me; first, that by the free confession of the seminarie priests, the pe∣nall statutes are iustly made against them; and consequently, that the seminaries are iustly condemned for treason. Second∣ly, that the penal lawes were made as iustly against the semina∣ries, as they were made against the Iesuites; and consequently, seeing the notorious treasons of the Iesuites, were the cause of the said penall lawes; it followeth by necessarie consequution, that the seminaries are guiltie either of the same, or at the least of other like treasons. Thirdly, that the seminaries for a longe time, made all the bloudie intents and treasonable practises of the Iesuites, their owne in euerie respect. Fourthly, that they honoured the Iesuites, euen in their bloudie attempts and cu∣sed treasons. Fiftly, that the seminaries did hide and conceale the treasons of the Iesuits, for the space of twenty yeares toge∣ther.
For the Iesuites began their treasons, in the yeare. 1580. as is alreadie proued; and the seculars did not reueale them, vn∣till the yeare. 1601. Neither then, but to be auenged of the Ie∣suites, and to saue their owne neckes from the halter. Paragraph. III. Of the cause of the discouerie of the Iesuiticall treasons. Now of late God hath most strangely, & in very déede, (as it may be termed,) miraculously, reuealed the truth which long hath béene hidden. These words are set downe, quodl. 8. art. 9. p. 267. Note heere gentle reader, that God for his owne glorie, for the preseruatiō of his faithfull seruant our gratious soueraigne, and for the common good of our natiue countrie; hath mira∣culously contrarie to the expectation of man, caused the secu∣lar priests to discouer the longe hidden treasons, contriued and disloyally practised both by the Iesuites and themselues.
The fourth Booke, containing a spa∣ring postpast, prouided by the Seculars for the Iesuites; in regard of the delicate and sumptuous Antepast, bestow∣ed on their messengers at Rome. AFter I had accomplished the three bookes aforegoing, I had a sight of a Iesuiticall booke, itituled a briefe apologie; which in pervse, I found not only to confirme the treasonable complots and bloudy practises, here∣tofore intended against her maiesty and this our natiue contry; but with all to sound out alarum, to most cru∣ell and vnnaturall rebellion in time to come; and consequēt∣ly, I haue thought it my parte and bounden dutie, to vse my penne for the confutation and confusion, of such vn∣christian villany. CHAP. I. Of the Author of this seditious apologie. ALthough by the inscription of this libell, some Ie∣suited priestes should bee the authors thereof: yet doe I verely thinke,See the  chapter & the secon section. that the traytorous Iesuite Par∣sons did compile the same. For first, if the stile and me∣thode bee conferred with his other bookes, they will séeme to bee of one and the same moulde. Secondly, the
author thereof speaketh of himselfe in the singular num∣ber,Apologie page. 2. so as the words can no way be applyed vnto many. Thirdly, the author of this disloyall pamphlet, speaketh scornfully and dishonourablie of her Maiestie, and o others in authoritie vnder her; which is the proper badge of that foule-mouthed wretch. For to say no∣thinge of manie other places,See Col∣lingons defence. page. 123. p. 124. p. 126. when hee hath told vs some parte of Maister Bluets letter to his fellow mai∣ster Mush, in these wordes; (I haue by opening the cause vnto there honours, and to Cesar, obtained &c. Hee putteth downe in the margent, these wordes; (the Queene after a sorte.) As if hee had said, shee is de∣priued by the Popes Bull,Apologie, page. 211. and is not Queene in∣déede, but by bare name only. And the very reuerend prelate Maister Doctor Bancroft, hee termeth the false bishoppe of London. And yet this good fellowe is grieuously offended,Apologie page. 162. page. 10. that the seculars doe not tearme the Arch-priest (Blackewell) by the name of Reueren∣dissimus, the most reuerent Father. Fourthly, they that would seeme to bee the authors of this libell, confesse fréely and plainly,Apologie. page. 194. that Parsons himselfe did diligently enforme them, how and in what sorte they should write. And consequently he was the architect indeede,It is not Parsons manner, to put his name to his bookes. See the a∣pologie. page. 172. howso∣euer others haue the name. But euery wiseman will thinke, that (seeing Parsons is the partie accused.) if his owne conscience had not condemned him in the aun∣swere, hee would haue put his owne name to the A∣pologie. Well, the answeare is so badde, the author may not be knowen. See more heereof, in the fourth chapter.
CHAP. II. Of the cruell proceeding, against the messengers sent to Rome. MAster Charnocke, and master Bishop two of the se∣cular priests, who had traueiled many yeares in the Popes affayres here in England, being vniustly molested by the tyrannizing Iesuites; did with the consent and coun∣sell of many other priests, vered by the Iesuites as them∣selues, take a long and painefull iourney to Rome, to desire some mitigation of his holinesse in that behalfe. But God thanke you, Parsons by the helpe of their Iesuites, made such an heynous complaint to the pope against the said mes∣sengers,O tyrannie of all ty∣rannies in world. See D. Elies notes vpon the Apolo∣gie. p. 108. p. 111. p. 112 vers. 20. that the prison was made readie for them, before they came to Rome. Yea, at their comming they were im∣prisoned indeed, neither to this day could they be permit∣ted to come to the Pope. And which is more, they were in∣ioyned at their going out of prison, to remaine in exile; the one, in Paris; the other, in Lozaine; and not to returne in∣to England, without speciall licence of his holines, or of the protector his deputie. Which cruell decree, they were compelled to confirme with a corporall oath. Heereupon the other priests exclayme and crie out; O miserable times? O wicked maners of men? that their two messengers should so be handled, as to be put in prison, before they could be heard, page. 192. Master Collington saith,Apologie, Page, 139. Page. 154. that they were kept in prison till Parsons had made all sure, by getting forth a Breue for confirmation of his plotted autho∣ritie. page. 208. Now what doth Parsons answere, in de∣fence of his intolerable tyrannie? you shall heare the ex∣presse words of the Apologie, in the next chapter.
CHAP. III. Of Parsons his answere, for the punishment of the messengers. THey say, that Cardinall Bellarmine his letter to fa∣ther Parsons from Ferrara, a lttle before their arriuall, doth proue, that the imprisonment of their messengers was procured by Parsons, for that the said Cardinall wrote that the two English priests were not yet come, but should be imprisoned when they came,How would these Iesu∣ites intreat others, that deale so cruelly with the popes friends? nor that it should be needfull for Parsons to flie, or make haste to Ferrara for that cause. And then the priests crie out, O tempora, O mores, that their two messengers should so be handled, as to be put in prison before they were head. But God be thanked, that worthy Cardinall is yet aliue, and can testifie all this to be their fiction, and that his holines being aduertised in Ferrara, from his Nuncioes in Fraunce and Flaunders, of these mens comming, was offended at their new stirring, and willed the said father to write to Rome to father Parsons, so be enormed of them and their pretenses, before euer father Parsons had written or spoken word thereof,Aske my brother, if I bea a these. as the said Cardinall will beare witnesse. And as for the least clause of his letter, whereby he should write, that Parsons needeth not to slie or make haste to Ferrara; it is added and forged by themselues, and no one such word in the letter. These are the expresse words of the Apo∣logie,Apologie. page. 193. in which all is saide for the Iesuite Parsons, that himselfe possibly could deuise for his owne defence. For eyther he was the man that penned the Apologie, or at least the man that diligently instructed him, who penned it, as is alreadie proued. Marke then the due examination thereof. Out of these words of the Apologie, we must obserue first, that the Iesuite Bellarmine now Cardinal, wrote from Ferrara to Parsons at Rome, telling him that the priestes were not yet come thither. Secondly, that the Cardinals letter was written, be∣fore
the priests came eyther to Rome or to Ferrara; whi∣ther it was thought they would come, because the Pope was there. Thirdly, that it was decréed, that they should be impri∣soned, so soone as they came. These three obseruations are expresly conteyned, in the former part of the Cardinals letter; to speake nothing yet of the last clause thereof, be∣cause that part is denied. But the former part is freely granted, which may not be forgotten. Fourthly, that the Pope was aduertised in Ferrara, by his Nuntioes in Fraunce and Flaunders, that the priestes would come to him. Fiftly, that the Pope willed the Cardinall to write to Parsons, to be enformed of them and their pretences. Sixtly, that the Cardinall Bellarmine can testifie all this, to be their fiction; for so saith the Apologie. These obseruations duely pondered, it will appeare to the indifferent reader, as cleare as the Sunne when it shi∣neth at the noone tide; that the Iesuite Parsons is cndem∣ned in his owne conscience, and knoweth now no other meanes how to defend his badde dealing, but by hypocri∣ie, falshood, and impudent lying. First therefore, he chargeth the Cardinall Bellarmine, with false testimonie. This is euident by the first obseruation, where after hee told vs the words of the Cardinals letter, he addeth im∣mediatly to the same words, the exclamation of the priests. That done, he forthwith with an impudent mouth auou∣ceth, that the Cardinall can testifie all this to be their fiction. Peruse the words in the beginning of this third chapter, and marke them well. The diuell is termed a lyer,Iohn. 8. vers. 44. and pater eius; but henceforth let him giue place to Parsons, in that behalf. For hauing told vs of the Cardinals letter written to him, and of the contents thereof; he forthwith affrmeth to vs, that all is false, and the méere fiction of the priests. And yet is the greater part, or rather the totall summe of their narration, conteyned in the said Cardinals letter. But let vs in the way of dispute, and in fauour of our good Ie∣suite Parsons, and in regard of his trauels for the king of
Spayne against our natiue countrey; suppose with him, that the priests had vttered many vntruthes, (the contra∣rie whereof God willing, shall shortly be made manifest;) yet must the lye perforce be retorted vpon Parsons, as vpon him that best hath deserued it; for his impudent, shame∣lesse, and most notorious lying. The reason is euident, be∣cause he granting a great part to be true, affirmeth in the same periode, the whole to be false. But it shall be proued before the ende of this replie, that there is no falshoode therein at all; saue that onely, which procéedeth from his owne lips. Secondly, Parsons to purge himselfe of bad dealing, if possibly it would bee, telleth vs in the fift obseruation, that the Pope willed the Cardinall to write to him, to be enfor∣med of the priests and their pretences. Heere Parsons either condemneth himselfe, or else giueth the Pope a mortall wound. If the Pope gaue no such charge to his Cardinall, then hath Parsons committed a damnable sinne, in ly∣ing so egregiously vpon the Pope and his Cardinall. And it séemeth verie probable, that the Pope was not then acquainted with the matter, but that the Generall of the Iesuites by Parsons his information, had required the Car∣dinall to moue the Pope for their imprisonment, if perhaps they should come to Ferrara, while the Pope made his a∣bode there. And for this cause did the Cardinall answere, that the priests were not yet come,O blessed Iesuitical, Cardinall. seruant of the diuell. Page. 199. but should be impriso∣ned when they came, as we haue in the third obseruation. As if he had said, haue yee no care, I will be minde∣full to gratifie you in your desire. The priests are not yet come, but I shall not faile to procure their imprisonment at their comming. For it can not be imagined, that intel∣ligence of this matter could come to the pope, but by the consent of Parsons, and as Parsons did designe to be done. The reason is euident, because Parsons boasteth, that he is appointed the Rector of the English Colledge, the Prefect of the English mission, and the like. All which is true indéed, and by reason hereof, all English papists depend vpon Par∣sons, and will doe nothing without his aduise; the seculars
euer excepted,Note this dilemna. that now oppose themselues against him, who doubtlesse would not bewray their owne cause. If the Pope gaue such a charge indéed, then did he shew himselfe to be the diuels vassall. and not Christes vicar, as he pre∣tends to be. For who, but the diuell of hel, would first decrée that the priests should be imprisoned and afterward labour to know, what offence they had committed? For if Parsons say truly, the Pope knew not what offence was done. Wel, be this as it be may, it is confessed on all sides, that the priests with the Popes knowledge, were first imprisoned, then inioyned to liue in exile, and neuer to returne into their natiue countrey without licence, and could not to this day, be permitted to speake to the Pope. Iustly therefore may the priests exclayme, O miserable times? O wicked manners of men? O cursed Parsons? O cruell bishoppe of Rome? Doest thou send thy priests with the daunger of their liues, to execute thine imployments, and when they haue taken a long, painefull, and chargeable iourney, to know thy further pleasure, in their doubts and distres∣ses in that behalfe, doest thou cause them to be imprisoned? Doest thou punish them,The Pope is a most cruell ty∣rant. before thou know any cause? Doest thou condemne them, nay banish them, before thou doest heare them speake? they truly haue deserued no lesse, because they haue taken part with thee against their natu∣rall soueraigne. Yet is it a shame of all shames for thee, to haue dealt so cruelly with them. They may see if they haue but one eye left, that thou art neither Saint Peter nor Christs lawfull vicar. Thirdly, they were more strictly imprisoned at Rome, then the Iesuites are this day in England, though knowen professed enemies to the crowne. For first, Parsons was the chiefe Iaylour. Secondly, the priests were put in eucrall places of the prison so as the one could not speake with the other. Thirdly, they could not be permitted to talke with schollers,Apologie. Page. 193. nor the schollers to talke with them.Page. 191. This is a good president. ew to deale with tayorous Iesuites, when they shall hereafter be apprehended in this land.
Fourthly, the notarie that penned the examination, was a Iesuite, so as Parsons had his desire, in euerie respect. These things put together with the former, the last clause of the Cardinals letter, of Parsons his hasting to Ferrara, will be euident. Fourthly, Parsons fearing, that the Pope would make some subordination in England, laboured by all meanes possible,Apologie. Page. 99. that Blackwell might be the Arch-priest. I proue this euidently. For first, the Pope willed that informa∣tion should be procured out of England, who were the fittest men for gouernment. And yet Parsons confesseth, that the opposite seculars were not acquainted therewith; Albeit they were the fittest men, as I shall proue demon∣stratiuely, if any Iesuite will prouoke me thereunto. Se∣condly, the Protector demaunded the opinions, of the prin∣cipall English in Rome. And I pray you, who were these? Parsons himselfe forsooth, and his brother Iesuite Baldwin, lately come (for that intent) out of England, Haddocke al∣so, Martin Array, and Allen, all Iesuited vassals, and at his commaund. Thirdly, diuers other principall men wrote out of Spayne, to signifie the sufficiencie of Blackwel for his Arch-presbiteran office, and that he should be the gouer∣nour. This doth Parsons or his flattering vassals at his de∣signement,Apologie. page. 99. set downe in expresse termes in their Apolo∣gie. Now I beseech the gentle reader, who is so blind, as cannot see this malitious treacherie? Parsons seeketh by hooke and by crooke to hide his false dealing, and yet doth he vnwittingly bewray his owne villanie. Men for∣sooth in Spayne,See Col∣lington. Page. 126. Page, 127. and note them well. must please Parsons for their owne gaine; and they must write to the Protector at Rome, that Black∣well (whose sufficiencie they know not,) is a most suffi∣cient man. Hee and none but he, must gouerne all the priests in England. Will ye know the reason? this Black∣well is Iesuited, (if not a close and secret Iesuite;) and consequently, he being the gouernour, Parsons may rule at his pleasure, and banish all that will not subscribe to his treasons. For not onely the prests, but the Cardi∣nall
also; yea, the Pope himselfe must conclude and agrée, to the Iesuites their designements. Who so will read the instructions, which the Arch-priest is inioyned to follow, can not possibly; but be of my opinion. CHAP. IIII, Of the fashoods, leasings, and vntruthes, conteyned in the Iesuiticall Apologie published to the world. Paragraph. I. Concerning Boromoeo the late Cardinall of Millan. ANd as for that, which our discontented brethren do cite in diuers places of their bookes, of Cardinall Boromaeo of holy memorie, that he tooke the gouerne∣ment of one of his seminaries in Millan from the fathers; we haue informed our selues of the trueth, that the fa∣thers of their owne will, and vpon their owne ear∣nest suite; left the said gouernment of the great labour and trouble thereof; as also some little difference in opi∣nion, about the schollers education; which the good Car∣dinall would haue had somewhat more bare in their diet and apparrel, then the fathers order in their seminaries did permit. For which the holy Cardinall alledged no euill reason: saying, that seeing they were to be sent after∣wards, abroad to poore benefices among countrey people, where they must faire hardly; they would refuse to goe, beeing brought vppe after the diet of other seminaries. But the fathers thought it easier for them to leaue this gouerment, then to admit this difference, and so they left it. And the good Cardinall did vse all the meanes possibly he could, both there & in Rome, to stay it in their hands. These are the expresse words of Parsons his Ie∣suited vassals,Apologie. page. 4. or rather of Parsons himselfe in the said Aplogie. By these words, two things are cleare. The one, that the Iesuites had once the gouernment, of one of the semi∣naries
in Millan, vnder the iurisdiction of the Cardinall Boromaeo; the other, that the said Cardinall was a good man, and of holy memorie. Now the controuersie is this, whether the good Cardinall disliked of their gouernment, and therefore displaced them, or that the Iesuites were wearie of the place, and therefore did voluntarily leaue it. The seculars say, that the Cardinall  them, the Iesuites denie it. But why would the Iesuites giue ouer that gouernment, which they had once taken vpon them? because forsooth, the good Cardinall would haue had the schollers, to bee brought vp more barely in their diet and apparrell. Thus they say, but the contrarie is the truth. For first, eyther the Cardinals allowance was suffici∣ent, or not sufficient. If it were not sufficient, then was he not so good a man,Note this . nor of so holy memorie, as the priests do affirme. If it were sufficient, then was that excessiue, and consequently vitious, which the Iesuites did require, then was their gouernment iustly disliked, then did they shew themselues to be a prude and arrogant kinde of people, that would not condescend to the Cardinall, in his most lawfull demaund. Secondly, Doctor Lewis the late bishop of Cassana, a man of great credit and renowne,See the r∣pe to . and who had great fami∣liaritie with the said Cardinall, did often affirme to his friends, that the Cardinall could not endure them, nor like of their gouernment. Master Hugh Griffeth, master Mor∣gn, and master Meredith, all priests this day liuing, can and will testifie this to be so. Thirdly, my selfe admiring, that the Iesuites kept not that place which sometime they had in Millar, enquired di∣ligently what should be the cause, for that I thought well of the Iesuites, at that time indeed. And one of their owne order, being then a Prefect in the English Colledge, (to say nothing of the common report of others,) confessed fréely, that the Cardinall could not brooke well their fathers, but he would not in any case, shew the cause thereof. This to be true, I protest before God, and his holy Angels.
Fourthly, they alledge a reason which they would haue to be the Cardinals but both it is from themselues, and doth consute themselues. The reason is this; viz. because they were to be sent afterward abroad to poore benefices, where they must fare hardly. But this reason is their owne, and neuer framed by the Cardinall; and it is confuted ma∣ny waies. For first, they grant, (marke their words alrea∣die cited) that the cardinals reason was good; and conse∣quently, that the Iesuites were bad, and without all reason, when they refused to yeeld vnto reason. Secondly, where shall those benefices be found,See Colle∣ton, page. 224. and in what country; which are not sufficient to fill the priests belly? No where doubtles; for the mainteynance of Popish priests, is too great euery where. Yea, by the setled law of poperie, (would God it were so in our english ministery,) euery priest at the houre of his consecration, hath some title for his sufficient maintenance; to say nothing of the huge commodities, that doe dayly insue vpon his priestly functi∣on. And for this cause, the papists that now come into England, where they haue no titles; are created ad titulum sanctissimi, and so may iustly chalenge necessary mainte∣nance of the Pope; howsoeuer he hath imprisoned the mes∣sengers, but bestowed no viaticum on them at all, neither great nor small. Fiftly, it followeth of the Iesuites their owne procée∣dinge, that they are vnfit men for gouernance. For it is a∣gainst all reason, to allow larger commons and more libe∣rall diet, to those that must be sent where no certaine main∣tenance is so be had; and more bare and sparing diet, to such as must haue well setled liuings. And yet doth the case thus stand, by Iesuiticall precéedings in the seminaries. For they grant as you see, that the Cardinals reason was good, (but it is their owne indeed,) in regard of the poore benefices, which are farre larger and better, a wiseman would thinke; then the vncertaine and accidentiall mainte∣nance, of the Seminaries in this lande. But this happely may bee gainesaide, in respect of the euerie daye expected conquest; for other reason none can
be yeelded, and yet this perforce must be reiected. Paragraph. II. Of the Iesuite Bellarmine, now Cardinall of the sea of Rome. To proue the Iesuite Parsons an impudent and a most notorious lyer; it is sufficient to pervse to remember, what is already said thereof in the third chapter of this booke.See the Second booke in the fift chapter. for after that Parsons hath set downe the narration of the seculars, and freely granted the greater part there∣of to be true; yea, the whole in effect; as there it is proued, and so needeth not here to be recounted; he forthwith like a desperate ruffian, and as one vnmindfull what he had immediately written; affirmeth with shamelesse lippes and rayling tongue, that the whole narration is false. Which doubtles, is such a notorious vntruth; as nothing is wor∣thy to be of credite, that shall heare after procéede from his penne. Paragraph. III. Of the students in the English Colledge, Parsons that arrogant Iesuite, for his owne credite if it would be; telleth vs in the apologie, in the 184. page, that vpon a certaine falling out betweene Maister Doctor Lewes then arch-deacon of Cambray, and after bi∣shop of Cassane, and the English youthes then students in the English Colledge; the said youthes aboue 30. in num∣ber, were all dismissed thence, and yet brought againe and placed in the colledge by his good meanes. Thus doth this good fellow boast of his rare fauours towards the en∣glish students, and his deserts in this behalfe are excéeding great, if we will beleeue him. But I assure thee gentle rea∣der, (whosouer thou art,) and I speake vpon mine owne knowledge as who was at the same time one of the same number; that this is to be enrolled, among his other no∣torious vntruthes. For first, there was no disagreement
at all, betwéene the late Bishop of Cassana and the students. Againe, the contention was indeed, betweene the Cardinal Morone then the protector of the English, and the students, or rather the Iesuites; who like wilie foxes did all in all co∣uertly, and yet would séeme openly, to be most vnwilling to haue the gouerment of the colledge. Thirdly, Parsons was at that time, a man of no reckening among the Iesuits; neither did he,Apologie. p. 184. 1579. 1574. or could hee doe anie thing in that behalfe. The reason hereof is euident, because he confesseth in the said apologie, that the colledge was erected in the yeare 1579. And that himselfe entered into the societie, in the yeere 1574. so that he had then béene Iesuite scantly foure yeeres, whereof one must be allotted for his probation. now if any wise man wil beléeue him,Parsons would ve∣ry gladly haue cre∣dite, but it will not be. that he could be of such cre∣dite with them vpon so short a tryall, he may; but my selfe know the contrarie, and so doe many moe yet liuing; viz. Maister Meredith, Maister Griffeth, Maister Morgan, M. Elize, and sundrie others; but none better then Maister Mush, if he list to speake the truth therein. Fourthly, there were at that time Iesuited English men, of long continu∣ance in that societie; who should rather haue done that ex∣ploit then this good father, if it had béene but for comely order sake; but as I said afore, the Iesuites would not be knowen to deale in the matter. Fiftly, this good fellowe (this good father I would say,) will needes bee the only man, that procured the schollers to stay; and (a thing to bee laughed at,) the graue and learned father Toledo, (after∣ward Cardinall,) was but an instrument to helpe the said Parsons in his imployment. A shame it is for this fellow, to tell of himselfe such a shamelesse lye. The truth is this; the generall of the Iesuites was desirous indeed, to haue the gouernment of the colledge, committed to his societie; as who knew right well, that it would tend both to his credit, and to his commoditie. But for feare of the displeasure of Cardinall Morone, who tooke part with Maister Morice the welch-man, whome he had designed to be the Rector of the colledge; he neither would deale openly for the schol∣lers, neither suffer any of the societie, to concurre with thē
in that behalfe. yet he did that secretly, which was the vp∣shot, and end of all; viz. he commanded by a secret mes∣sage, the reuerend father Toledo, a great learned man and one of great reckening with the Pope at that time; that he would instantly beseeth the Pope prostrate on his knees before his holinesse, and to make a most pitifull lamentati∣on for the ouethrow of England. that is forsooth, that now were reiected the finest wits; the most toward youthes; the seede of poperie; and the only hope of the English nation, who now exiled for zeale in religion, and come to be his po∣pish vassals; must either be trained vp in papistry after the Iesuiticall manner, or els should England neuer be recla∣med, world without end. this swéet narration noe sooner sounded in the Popes eares, but the commanded the schol∣lers to be receiued into the colledge againe. Where note by the way what politicians the Iesuites bee. This Toledo was a Iesuite, then remaining in the Popes house with the Pope, and was the Popes chiefest aduiser, in all ecclesi∣asticall causes. He then being a Iesuite, must needs doe the designement of his generall, the maister Iesuite of all the rest. For his profession was, to obey at a beck. And for that he was present with the Pope, in his pallace Bel-vdére, he was free to deale without suspition, in this great and weightie matter. Lastly, being in high esteeme with the Pope, and speaking in a cause so plausible and profitable for his holinesse, he was most likely to preuaile in his suite. which (I protest to the reader,) the Iesuits did more then once promise to the schollers, before it came to passe. Thus it is most apparant to euerie indifferent reader, that the goodly story which Parsons telleth for his owne vaine glo∣ry, is a lye with a witnesse. For the first credite that euer he got, was wrought by his treacheries & treasons against his natiue country, most noble England. By reason where∣of he crept into such credite with the King of Spaine, that now he is able to doe all in all, both with that Kinge and the Pope himselfe. Wherefore my opinion is this, that the se∣culars are ouer matched, and that howsouer they bragge, that they will haue audience, or els dye for it one after an¦other;
yet are they more like many of them, if they goe to Rome to be cast into their holy most holy inquisition. for Parsons hath now by the reason of their writings, matter enough to worke vpon; and therefore their best course is, to submitte themselues to Queene Elizabeth, and to bid the Pope faire well with all his traytorous Ie∣suites. Paragraph. IIII. Of the dealing of the Iesuite Parsons, during his aboad in England. THe seculars write, that Parsons being in England, did so exasperate the minds both of the Prince and ma∣gistrates by his doings, as then first of all by that occasion, capitall lawes were appointed against priests,Apologie. page. 183. and their receiuers. Parsons answeareth, that this is a calumniati∣on, which hath diuerse euident falshoods, reproueable by the witnesse, of all that liued at that time in England, both catholikes and heretikes. But I reply, y• this aunsweare of Parsons containeth a lye so palpable and so notorious, as I wonder how he could vtter it, without blushing. For first, diuers of the seculars in England at that time, refuse to witnes this false narration. Secondly, many good chri∣stians, whome it pleased this good fellowe to terme here∣tikes, will witnes against him. Thirdly, if all must wit∣nes with him; then doubtles none will witnes against him, which is most absurd to say or hold. Fourthly, his owne disputation will confute it selfe. For after hee hath told vs of his great paines in preaching, teaching, and wri∣ting; and namely in setting forth the reasons of refusall, of going to the protestants Churches; hee forthwith addeth these words; vpon which preaching and writing, when many chiefe men refused to goe to hereticall seruice: there was called a parliament in the end of the same yeere, and the law of twentie pound a moneth for recusancie was or∣dained; but no capitall law made against priests or their receiuers, vntill diuers yeeres after father Parsons was
gone forth of England. This is that goodly narratiō, which father Wiseman maketh for his honest purgation; if it may stand good either in law, or with right reason. let vs examin it, to know the truth therof. First, he granteth fréely, that by reason of his godly preaching and writing, the penall sta∣tutes of 20. pound the month,Apologie page. 183. was imposed for recusancie. Secondly he granteth fréely, y• by his traytorous preaching and writing many chiefe men refused to goe to hereticall seruice. Thirdly, he granteth fréely, that he wrote against going to the protestant Churches. Fourthly, he granteth likewise, that he termed the godly prayers vsed in the chur∣ches of England, hereticall seruice; and consequenly, hee termed her maiestie an heretike, like an arrant traytour as he is. And yet forsooth, we must beléeue him; y• he did not exasperate he Maiestie and her magistrates, to make capi∣tal lawes against Iesuites and seminaries. who can thinke, that this fellow hath any witte? Who is so blind, as hee seeth not his contradictions? Who seeth not, how the deuill hath bewitched him? For what was the cause of capitall lawes, against Iesuites and seminaries? Doubtles, the de∣niall in English subjects,Parsons hath lost his wi. of their due allegeance to their naturall soueraigne & the profession of yt same to the Pope her mortall enemie. And yet is this consequent necessarilie inferred of the premisses, which this fellow fréely hath ad∣mitted. I cannot but admire the folly of the man, that doth not see it. for euery recusant is reconciled to the Pope; and must perforce take parte with the Pope against the Queene, as is already proued. And to this recusancie must be ascribed, as to the principall cause; the enacting of all ca∣pitall lawes, and other penall mulcts whatsoeuer. I say, to this recusancie, that is, to that recusancie to which treason is annexed as an inseperable accident therof. For vntill re∣cusancie was so linked with popish treason,Note this point well. that disloyal∣tie was thereby set a broach in euery corner, recusants did iioy all curtesie, libertie, & freedome, Wherof this is a suf∣ficient argument, because all the capitall and other sharpe penall statutes, did nothing at all touch the old popish recu∣sants. Albeit we sée this day, (which is to be imputed to
the traytorous Iesuites,) that other priests together with the lay-people, are as deepely drowned in treasonable pra∣ctises, as the seminarie-priests. But what? Can Parsons say nothing for him selfe? Yes forsooth; he telleth vs first, that he was gon forth of England, before capitall lawes were made against priests, or their receiuers. Alas, alas,Apologie. page. 183. what a poore shift is this? Nay, what a foolish man is this? Parsons committed treason vpon treason, and then ran a∣way for feare of the halter. Ergo the capitall lawes ensu∣ing, were not made to preuent his and the like future trea∣sons. Euery child I weene, will sée the absurdity of this con∣sequution. He telleth vs secondly, that in Cāpions arraign∣ment, (which was after Parsons his departure,) there was no one action of Parsons objected in particular against the state, though he were known to haue béene the superiour in that mission. To this I reply, that the silence of Parsons in Campions arraignment, cannot discharge Parsons of the same or like treasons. Besides, it may be, that the state was aduertised, how dastardly Parsons ran away; and that they thought that their conniuence and silence in the matter, would be an occasion of his returne, and then they would talke with the good fellow. He telleth vs thirdly, that Parsons was the chiefe in the Iesuiticall mission. which as∣sertion doubtlesse, doth vtterly confound the man. For sée∣ing all the capitall lawes, were enacted onely and solely a∣gainst the Iesuites and their fauorites; it must needes bée granted, it cannot be denied; that they were principally in∣tended against the principall Iesuite that is to say, against Parsons who will needes be the chiefe. I therefore con∣clude, that the Iesuite, Parsons is a notorious lyar, and that the lye which he would bestowe vpon others, is iustly and fitly retorted against himselfe. See the fift chapter, in the second section.
Paragraph. V. Of Haddockes life and conuersacion. Richard Haddocke now doctor, (as Parsons termeth him,) is charged by the secular priests to haue béene of no edification in England, in his life and conuersation. But Parsons (because he resisted the messengers sent to Rome,Apologie, page. 167. and was readie at a becke to doe his designements,) desperatly affrmeth with a brasen face, the contrary in these words; as for his libertie of life (as they call it,) while he was in England; it is false, that it was of any euill e∣dification, and some of vs knew him better then these libel∣lers, these are the words of our graue Apologians. To which I aunswere breifely, that these wordes of the Pro∣phet are truely verified of Parsons, who was the author of this Apologie indeede. There is no faithfulnes in his mouth,Psal. 5. v. 9. there inward parts are verie wickednesse, their throats an o∣pen sepulchre, they flatter with their tongues. For my selfe knew the man,See Colle∣ton, page. 126. See also the 5 & 6. chap∣ter follow. and his life right well; and I will onely say that in few words of him, which I thinke himselfe will not deny. If he doe, it shall God willing be proued heare∣after, by a multitude of honest witnesses, and by such par∣ticular knowne circumstances, of times places, and parsons, as no possible deniall can be made thereof. for it shall neuer be proued God willing, that I write any vn∣truth of any man liuing. God is my witnesse,See the se∣cond booke and third chapter, in the  paragraph. See the e∣ply to Par∣sons libell, fol. 96. a. that is farre from my meanining. But I wonder, that the earth doth not open her mouth, to swallow vp quicke the Author of this Apologie, for his manifolde notorious slanders, impudent leasings, and most excerable caluminations. And Parsons is the man, as I haue proued in the first chapter. The phrase, stile, and methode, with many other circumstances concurring, doe euidently conuince it to be see. For to say, that it hath not his name,See Colle∣ton. page. 1. is too too vaine and friuolous. for by that rea∣son, no man should be the author thereof, because it hath no mans name. To which I adde, that it is not the won∣ted
manner of Parsons, to put his name to his bookes. The secular priests haue truly vnfolded that secresie, in their publike writings. And Parsons himselfe vnawares, repor∣teth no lesse in effect in this Apologie. Well,Apologie. page. 172. what doth Par∣sons call euill edification? Richard Hadocke I am well as∣sured▪ spent his whole time or the greater part thereof, (sub∣tracting time for sleeping, eating, and drinking,) in haw∣king, hunting, carding, dicing, and licentious liuing, to say nothing of other more homely, but lesse comely qualities. Of which manner of liuing, he was sufficiently admo∣nished, I know when, where, and by whom, and can so decipher all the particulars thereof, as himselfe shall neuer be able to denie the same. I therefore conclude, that when Parsons saith, it is false,See Colle∣ton, page. 126. &c. The falshood pro∣ceedeth from his owne stinking mouth. He indeed is the libeller,See also the fift and sixt chapters following. See Colle∣ton. page. 294. though it please him to bestow that name on the seculars. But such good fellowes as Haddocke, must be maintained, to bolster out master Parsons, and his detesta∣ble treacheries. For by his plotting to set the English Crowne on the Spanish Infantaes head, he is become so familiar with the Spanish king, and the Arch-dutchesse Isabella his sister, that he is able with his word to set vp or pull downe, all disloyall kil-princes in the world. Who then dare write against him? the seculars haue entered the combat, and if they faile in the conflict, a halter will be the end. He séeketh by flatterie to make them yeeld, and to bring them to submssion,Apologie Page. 221. & 222. but if that be once done, actum est de illis, they must enter into glorie, that is to say, into the holy inquisition, where there they must eyther remaine per∣petuo, or be bondslaues to Parsons and his Iesuited familie. I might enlarge my selfe, in discoursing vpon many other vntruhs, leasings, falshoods, and caluminiations, publi∣shed for truths in this scandalous and most disloyall A∣pologie. But by these falshoods alreadie discoured, it is apparant to all the world, that no credite can be giuen to the words or writings, of the notorious traytor Robert Parsons that bloodie Iesuite.
CHAP. V. Of Parsons his contradictions, peremptorily vtte∣red in his lewde Apologie. Sect. I. Concerning traytors like himselfe, and his con∣federates. PArsons in one place of the Apologie,Apologie. Page. 22. hath these words; for, (as the common saying is,) howsoeuer the trea∣son be embraced, yet the traytor is hated and contemned. But in another place,Apologie. page 172. he hath these words▪ what say you of my Lord Cardinall Allen his answere, to the English iustice; his defence of the twelue martyrs, in one yeare; his epistle for allowance, of sir William Stanleyes rendring vp of Dauentry; his declaration against her Maiestie, and the present state, in the yeare 1588. when the Armado was on the seas, were these exasperating treatises, or no? and how then is father Parsons onely named by this man, as though his writings onely were the cause of all exaspera∣tion? Nay, was there any man euer knowen to be parti∣cularly troubled hitherto,See the se∣cond booke and ninth chapter, in the sixt ob∣seruation. for any booke written by father Pasons by name? we are sure, that neyther master Mush, nor any of his, can euer proue it. These are the verie ex∣presse words, set downe in the Iesuiticall Apologie, in the places quoted in the margent. Out of which words, the indifferent reader may obserue these important poyntes with me. First, a notable contradiction in wordes of the Ie∣suite Parsons, who seemeth to repute himselfe the one∣ly wiseman in the world. For in the former place he tel∣leth vs, that howsoeuer the treason be embraced, yet the traytor is hated and contemned. But in the second place, he singeth another song, for he commendeth the notorious treason of sir William Stanley, and defendeth him therein. Secondly, that all traytors which take part with the Pope and king of Spayne, are well thought of, and dee∣med
right honest men. It is euident in Sir William Stanley, a man in great esteeme with them. Thirdly, that Cardinall Allen was a notorious traytor, euen by the testimonie of the Iesuits; though they will not grant so much in plaine termes. For of the said Cardinall, this Apologie affirmeth foure things, as you haue heard. First, that he wrote against English iustice, (done vpon the seminaries.) Secondly, that hee wrote in defence of the seminaries that were executed, and affirmed them to be martyrs. Thirdly, that he iustified sir William Stanleys treasons,Note here, that the se∣cular priests dostil com∣mend Car∣dinal Allen in al things. See Colle∣ton. p. 282. and highly extolled him for the same. Fourthly, that he published a most traytorous booke, against her Ma∣iestie and the State, in the yeare 1588. when the kings Armado was on the seas. Adde hereunto for the com∣plement, that the seminaries, who euer to this houre speake most reuerently of that Cardinall, and did obey him du∣ring life at a becke; could not but be vp to the eares in deepe treasons, seeing the Cardinal himselfe was so forward, in all the bloodie treacheries. Sect. II. Of Parsons his letters written to Master Bishop. THe Iesuite Parsons wrote a letter the ninth of Octo∣ber, 1599. to master Bishop in Paris,Apologie, page. 177. for answere (as Persons pretendeth, to certaine grieuous calumniations, which master Bishop and master Charnocke had spread a∣broad the world, of the hard and iniurious dealing vsed to them in Rome; which were contrarie to all truth, if the good Iesuites words were of any credit. In one place of the said letter, he hath these words: Master Bishop, it bee∣ing now diuers moneths since you departed from hence, and no one letter appearing yet from you, nor from your friend master Charnocke; it made vs maruell, considering your promise at your departure. In another place of the same letter, he hath these words; by a state letter which I receiued this weeke from you, I perceiue &c. These are the words of the Apologie. In which words, any man may easily behold a flat contradiction. For, in the former place,
he denieth the receit of any one letter; but in the latter he granteth, that he had receiued one stale letter. The secu∣lars haue charged him with this contradiction, and he an∣swereth that from May to Nouember is more then halfe a yeare, in which time no letter was come from them, con∣trarie to their promises, vntill this present weeke. This is the answere. To which answere, I reply in this manner. I say first, that when Parsons saith, it is more then halfe a yeare from May to Nouember, he is a lyar. For, from May to Nouember, are onely fiue moneths; and yet do 12. mo∣neths concurre, to the complement of one yeare. Againe, if he begin his supputation the first day of May, (which is to reckon from Aprill rather then from May,) yet is it but iust halfe a yeare; and consequently, Parsons affirming it to be more, is still a lyar. Secondly,Apologie. page. 176. that his reckoning must end vpon the ninth day of October, at which time Parsons wrote his letter; and so perforce he is farre short of his halfe yeare, and conse∣quently a lyar. Thirdly, that when Parsons saith, from May to Nouem∣ber is more then halfe a yeare, in which time no letter was come from them, he both contradicteth himselfe, and is an impudent lyar. I proue it, because euerie child knoweth, that betweene may and Nouember, intercéedeth the mo∣neth of October; and yet as Parsons confesseth liberally, he wrote his letter to master Bishop the ninth of that moneth, and the same weeke receiued a stale letter firm the same Bishop. So then, it is true, that Parsons receiued a letter from master Bishop, in the moneth of October; and conse∣quently, it is false, that he receiued no letter from May to nouember. Fourthly, that the word (now) in Parsons his letter, doth connotate the time present: that is, the time of the date of his letter, to wit, the ninth of October; at which time as he saith in one place, he had receiued no letter, but as he saith in another place, he had that weeke receiued a stale letter: Ergo, Parsons is a stale lyar. This lye is con∣firmed, in perpetuam res memoriam, by the word (yet,)
for when he saith, no one letter appearing from you yet; he doth flatly contradict himselfe, when he saith, by a stale let∣ter, which I receiued this weeke from you. Fiftly, that when Parsons saith,See the third chap∣ter. the reports of the hard and iniurious dealing vsed to the messengers in Rome, is con∣trarie to all truth; the falshood proceedeth from his lying lips, as I haue alreadie proued. Sixtly, that master Bishop (I know the man right well,) is of better credit, then twentie Iesuited Standishes; 70. Ie∣suited Haddockes; 100. Iesuited Personians. Sect. III. Of the Secular priests, and their writings. PArsons in the preface of his Apologie telleth vs, that these bookes must needes be presumed to haue beene published eyther by some one or few discomposed passionate people, or by some heretike, or other enemie to disho∣nour them all, and to discredit their cause and nation; and so as to such he will answere,Parsons lo∣ueth the priestes dearly, as appeareth by the in∣tati of then mes∣sengers sent to Rome. and not against his bre∣thren whom he loueth most intirely; but in many other places, he singeth an other song. For page. 63. he affir∣meth it to be probable by many euident arguments, that a long and slanderous narration, was written by the pro∣per pen of the chiefe authors of all these broyles. Againe, page. 8. he confesseth, that two priests (whom he termeth the ambassadours of the secular priests,) came to Rome a∣bout the controuersie. Againe, page, 9. he confesseth, that in Nouember last, 1600. diuers of the discontented made a generall appeale from the Archpriests iurisdictien. A∣gaine, page, 24. he saith, that his brethren doe vse so fonde a calumniation against the Iesuites, as no man can but wonder thereat. Againe, page. 105. he termeth the au∣thors of the bookes, his discontented brethren. To be briefe, in maine other places he confesseth, that master Bishoppe, master Charnocke, master Mush, master Bagshaw, master Champney,See Apo∣log. pag. . master Collington, master Warson, and others, haue written against the Iesuites; so as contradictions may
be deemed a thing verie common, with our graue and holy Iesuite Robert Parsons; who knew right well, that the de∣claration sent to his holinesse, was subscribed with the hands of thirtie priests, whose names I would here put downe, but that I studie to tbe briefe. Sect. IIII. Of the elegant Epithetons ascribed to the Iesuite Parsons, by Iohn Collington the Secular priest, in his booke of Defence. IOhn Collington hath lately published a large volume in defence of the seculars, for their appeale to the Pope a∣gainst tyrannizing Blackwel, which book came lately to my hand, but doth so euidently conuince the Arch-priest and the Iesuites, specially that notorious traytor Robert Par∣sons, as I cannot omit to make briefe recitall of some parts therof, for the common peace of this our natiue countrey. In the page, 30. He hath these words, whose busie head (he speaketh of Parsons.) & actions, haue béene the cause and increase of much trouble and persecution, in our Church and Realme. And who being a member of an other bodie, and professing also a mortified state, and to haue relinqui∣shed the world, seeketh neuerthelesse to be our great ma∣ster, and to rule all, or to tyrannize rather. Againe, pag. 31. He saith, they haue most pregnant grounds to proue, that Parsons was the inditer of the Cardinals letter constitutiue, for the archpriests iurisdiction. Againe, page. 296. He affir∣meth, that Parsons writeth no booke, discourse, nor scarse any letter of these stirres, wherein he doth not recount some good act of his owne. Againe,Parsons spendeth 5 or 6. crowns a weeke in . page. 297. he tel∣leth vs, that Parsons by managing of the Colledge, hath gotten such store of money, as he spendeth fiue or sixe crownes a weeke, in postage for letters onely. Againe, page. 253. hee affirmeth boldly, that Parsons appointed the Arch-priest. Againe, page. 255. he termeth Parsons
the Arch-deuiser, in getting the Cardinals hand, sub∣scription, and seale. Againe, page. 206. hee chargeth Parsons with many vntruthes, and to haue as little syn∣ceritie in his actions, as truth in his writings. Againe, page. 256. he hath these words,Loe Par∣sons studi∣deth deepe diuinitie. it would make to the prase of father Parsons, if religion were lesse worldlisted▪ in him; and state matter, and the designing of kingdomes had not so great a part in his studies. Againe, page. 170. he hath these words, we assure our seles father Parsons, that your restlesse spirit and pen, your enterprising and busie actions, haue turned heretofore our Catholike professants to infinit preiudice, for to no knowne cause,Parsons the cause of sharp lawes can we impute so much the making of the seuere lawes of our countrey, as to your edging attempts, and vocations. Againe page. 240. hee telleth vs plainely, that Parsons hath proferred and repro∣fered the Crowne of England to seuerall princes, now to one, now to another, as opportunities best serued, to en∣tertaine the personage with the hope thereof. And to omit many testimonies, because I would not be tedious, I will heere recount one for all, which master Colleton setteth downe in these words. Neyther is father Parsons holden onely of our magistrate for a statist, or marchandizer of the Crowne & Diademe,See & note page. 297. though this were enough to estrange vs from hauing any partaking in ought with him, but his trauels and negotiations this way are become so noto∣riously knowne,Loe, the Crowne of England is set on sale. that euen Pasquine in Rome (as intel∣ligence is sent vs,) speaketh in this manner of him, if there be any man, that will buy the Kingdome of Eng∣land; let him repayre to a marchant in a blacke square cappe in the Citie, and hee shall haue a verie good pen∣ny worth thereof. Thus writeth Colleton of Parsons, who both are deuoted to the Pope alike.
Sect. V. Of Parsons his birth, and expulsion out of Balioll Colledge in Oxford. THat Robert Parsons the Iesuite, and marchandizer of the Crowne of England, (as in the former Section,) is a bastard, and a man of bad demeanour, the fift chapter of the second booke sheweth copiously. But because Parsons in his Apologie,Quodl. 4. art. 2. page. 109. laboureth to purge himselfe thereof; I haue thought it good, to speake a little to that effect in this place. Watson the secular priest hath these words; we may not imagine, that father Parsons was ignorant of his owne base estate, as being a sacrilegious bastard in the worst sense, sil. à spurius, begotten by the parson of the parish where he was borne, vpon the bodie of a verie base queane. This then being so, and he not so senselesse as to thinke, but that he will find the Canon law more strict in dispensation with him for his irregularitie, then the ciuill or common law, will be for dispensation to inherit; there is no question to be made of it, but that some close statute and prouiso was closely made, and couertly foysted into the high councel of reformation, for enabling some bastards in the spitefullest sense, to be capable of any honour or dignitie, eyther in the Church or commonwealth. And true it is, that this good father Parsons (alias Cowbucke,) filius populi & filius peccati, or the very fiend himselfe, might be chosen to a king∣dome by his doctrine, if any people would be so madde, as to chuse him for their king. Thus doth our Quodlibetst write. The same Watson in an other place, writeth of the same Parsons in this manner: O monster of mankind, fit∣ter for hell,Quodl. 8. art. 5. page. 238. then middle earth. If thy profession will not draw thee, to consideration of the premisses; yet shew some signes of charitie in sparkes of grace, if it were but onely in pollicie, to moue thee to forbeare thy barbarous crueltie; because therby thou giuest occasion for diuers, to think thou art not a méere man, but some fairies brat, or begotten by an Incubus or airish spirit, vpon the bodie of a base woman,
thus doth priest Watson write, you haue his owne words. Againe in an other place, he hath these words, diuers of father Parsons bookes, letters, and treatises, we haue and doe from our verie hearts vtterly condemne them, as con∣taining many seditious and traytorous points,Quodli. 7. art. 10. page 184. and being very full of slaunderous speaches and impudent caluminia∣tions. Andreas Philopater being the fruites of father Par∣sons, and father Creswell, we hold to be fraught till it al∣most burst againe, (as some of my brethren els where haue noted,) with all Iesuiticall pride and poyson. and as tou∣ching the exthortation printed 1588. It is so detestable a trea¦tise, as all posteritie cannot choose, but condemne father Parsons for a most scurrilous traytor, if he had been brought vp amongst all the ruffians and curtizans in christendome, he could not haue learned to haue writ more vilely, pro∣phainely, and heathenishly. Moreouer, the said father Par∣sons and his fellow father Creswell, doe glorie in the said booke, that they haue caused not onely it, but also Maister Saunders treatise de schismate, to be translated into the spa∣nish tongue, and doe reioyce, that thereby the Spaniards are brought already into a greater detestation of her Maiestie,Quol. 7. art. 10. page, 217. her gouernment, and proceedings, then they had before. Thus writeth Maister Watson; and in an o∣ther place he telleth vs plainely, that he was a lewde boy in his youth, that during his aboade at Oxford, his conuersation was seditious, wanton, and factious, and that for his libelling and other misdemeanour, he was thrust out of Balyoll colledge. Againe in an other place, he hath these words, I meane the great Emperour illegitimate, irregular, abstract quintessence of all coynes, coggeries and forgeries, Parsons the bastarde of Stockgersey beyond Co∣sinage in Somersethire. This is that famous conqueror,Quodl. 8. art. 5. page. 236. who hath bathed all England by his seditious libels in priests bloud. This is that worthy excellent, that lies, dissembles, and equiuo¦cates, at euerie word. This is that learned counseller, that must rule, ruffe, and range, through euery state. This is that same Parsons, whome Pope, Prince, and peere, with
all true English hearts,Loe, Par∣sons is pur∣trayed in his best be seeming colours haue cause to hate. This is he, of whome Maister Blackewell (now his darling) said; that his turbulent head and lewd life, would be a discredite to the catholicke cause. and in few, the generall conceite of all, that haue throughly conuersed with him, is this; that he is of a furious, passionate, hote, cholericke, exorbitant working humour, busie headed, and full of ambition, enuy, pride, rancour, malice, and reueng. Cursed bee the houre, wherein he had the name of a Priest, nay of an irreligious parson, nay of a temporall lay-man Iesuite, nay of a catho∣like, nay of a christian, nay of a humane creature; but of a beast, or a deuill; a violater of all lawes; a contemner of all authoritie; a staine of humanitie; and impostume of all cor∣ruption; a corrupter of all honestie and a monopole of all mischiefe. These are the words of William Watson, the po∣pish secular priest. quodl. 8. art. 5. page. 236. See the fift chapter of the second booke, in the first, second, and third sections. By these sections, especiallie the fourth and fift, euery man may easily see,Of the vt∣tered by Parsons, see Colletō page. 126. that the Iesuite Parsons is not onely a∣common impudent lyar, but also a most bloodie and scur∣rilous traytor, the monopole of all mischiefe, and the wic∣kedst man vpon the face of the earth. The reports recoun∣ted of this Iesuite, cannot but seeme strange, if not incredi∣ble, to all that shall pervse the same. I know it is sinne to lie on the deuill; and therefore I will not affirme any lye of this Iesuite, nor of any other man. That which I haue written of him, is most true and sincere, in such sort as I haue put in downe. I name my authors, and their words, the tale, and the tale-teller; the assertions, and the places where they are to bee reade. I graunt willingly, and will it not denie, that I haue set downe in this discourse, many sharpe obseruations, annotations, correlaries, & illa∣tions, but all are deduced by necessary and euident conse∣quutiōs, out of those premises and antecedent propositions; which the secular priests and Iesuites haue published in printed bookes, to y• view of the whole worlde. In regard whereof; neither my selfe, nor any others guided by the pre∣script
of right reason, can but giue credit to the same. For first, the authors thereof are many, and the same of iudge∣ment and learning. and yet doe they charg the Iesuits with murdering of Kings. Secondly, they professe euen to death, the selfe same religion with the Iesuites. Thirdly, they all yeeld themselues in all thinges, to the censure of the pope; at whole tribunall the Iesuite must needes preuaile, if his case and cause bée good. Fourthly, they are subiect to such satisfaction, if their accusations should be false; as publi∣que pennance must néedes be inioyned them, and that wor∣thily; so as they shall neuer be permitted to exequute priest∣ly function, while there liues shall endure. Fiftly, they know, that if such haynous accusations, powred out against their fellow-priests, especially against their religious fa∣thers, were false and vttred of malice; they should thereby heape Gods heauy wrath, and vengeance vpon themselues. Sixtly, they cannot be ignorant, that all the world would hate and detest them to their liues end, if such their reports of killing of princes and the like, should be proued false and slaunderous. So then, the reports made of the Iesuite Par∣sons supposed to be true, and constantly admitted for such; it followeth of necessitie, y• his owne bare deniall in his owne cause, of his bastardie, expulsion, and whatsoeuer els; nei∣ther is, nor can be demed a sufficient purgation, to any in∣differently conceited man. Read the next chapter through∣out, and note it well, with the obseruations thereof. CHAP. VI. of the Iesuites heere in England, and of their demeanour. Paragraph. I. Of the Iesuite Garnet. THe Iesuite Garnet the prouinciall for England, hath vsed the libertie of his tongue against the secular priests▪ of this Garnet, thus writeth Iohn Collington. Fa∣ther Garnet the superiour of the Iesuites, affirmed that we
ministred and receiued sacraments in deadly sinne; that we gaue poyson in liew of medicine; that we were such by the opinion of all the learned, as his brother Lister had censured vs to be; that our criminous, sinfull, irregular, and excommunicate state, was so plaine and notrious, as none vnder sinne could forward, or assist vs in the exercise of our funcions. Thus writeth Maister Colleton, out of the Ie∣suite Garnets letter the tenth of Nouember. Againe in an other place,Colleton, page. 179. the same Iesuite hath these words; ye haue in the iudgement of all the learned, incurred the most shame∣full note of scisme. You haue so intangled them whom you-haue brought to Christ,Collingtō. page. 194. page. 281. or whose pastor and father you haue béene; as if they shall receiue sacraments of you; if they shall induce you to say Masse, or shall assist you in celebra∣ting; they seeme to partake with you in the crime of ex∣ercising your function vnworthily, and in liew of medicine, carry a way poyson. Thus writeth Colleton out of Garnets letter, dated in March, 1599. Paragraph. II. Of the Iesuite Lister LIster the sawcie and malepeart Iesuite, in a foolish and very malicious treatist hath these words▪ ye are rebels, ye are schismatikes,Colleton. pag. 163. ye are fallē from the Church and spouse of Christ. Yea hane troden vnder foote, the obedience you owe to the Pope. Ye haue offended against all humane faith and authoritie, by reiecting a morall certaintie in a morall matter. Ye haue runne headlong into excommu∣cation, and irregularity, ye haue lost the faculties, by which you shold haue gained soules to christ, ye haue raised vp; such great scandall in the minds of all the godly; that as infamous parsons, you are tenesed in euery mans mouth. Ye are no better then sooth sayers, and Idolaters; and in regarde ye haue not obeyed the Church, spea∣king to you by the highest Bishoppe, you are as E∣thinkes and Publicans. Thus writeth Colleton of Li∣ster the Iesuite.
Paragraph. III. Of the Iesuite Iones. Father Iones the Iesuite gaue forth, and our superiour said the position was true, that whosoeuer main∣tayned vs not to bee the abandoned creatures,Collingtō, page. 180. which father Lister iudged vs to be; in curred ipso facto for there defending of vs, the censures of the holy Church. thus writeth Maister Collington, of our reuerent father Iesu∣ite Iones. Againe, in an other place the same Colleton telleth vs; that the same Iesuite Iones affirmed peremp∣torily,Collingtō. pag. 272. that whosoeuer should stifly mainteyne, that their refusall to the subordination appointed before the arri∣uall of his holinesse breeue, did not make them schismatikes. incurred by such his patronage of the secular priests, the censure of holy Church. Thus much of this Iesuite. I will here surcease to speake of the Iesuite Holtbie, and the rest of that crew, and vse a conuenient, (if not necessarie,) con∣uersion, to our archpriest of the new religion: because by very pregnant presumptions, he seemeth to be a couert and close Iesuite, or at the least so Iesuited, as he dareth to doe nothing but after their command. Paragraph. IIII: Of Blackewell the Iesuited Arch-priest. THat all men may know, what a man this new-hat∣ched Arch-priest is, the golden epithyte which the se∣culars haue bestowed on him, shall heere be set downe for a preamble to the rest. Now all catholikes, say the priests, must depend vpon the arch-priest,Marke wel, all Iesuites & Iesuited persons, do depend p∣on the di∣uell. and the arch-priest vp∣on Garnet, and Garnet vpon Parsons, and Parsons vpon the diuell, the author of all rebellions, conspiracies, treasons, murthers, disobedience, heresies, and all such other diabo∣licall and bloudie desigments, as this wicked Iesuite hath hitherto deuised. This is the doctrine deliuered by the se∣cular priests. discouery, page. 70. quodl. 5. art. 8. page. 151. The next thing to be considered, is this; that this arch-priest was appointed, by the procurement of Robert Parsons the
Iesuite, of whose honest demeanour you haue heard suffici∣ent y. This to be so is proued already, if all thinges bewell marked; but Maister Collington maketh better proofes thereof. father Parsons saith he, in the eight chapter of the Apologie,Parsons is a great ly∣ar, well worthey of the wet-stone. cunningly fassioneth a narration lasting for foure of the first leaues, but with addition of moe vntruths, then he vsed full points in the tale. Hence suddenly arose an vrgent, or as it were, a fatall necessitie in father Par∣sons conceit; of making a superiour in England, ouer the secular priests, if witnes be demanded at our hands, we will (saith Collington,) name no other,Behold de∣ceitfull dealing. but father Garnet and father Parsons themselues, hauing their owne words for testimonie. for when father Garnet asked Maister Iohn Bennet, for his name (to olim dice bamnr) that is, to a preten¦sed letter of thankesgiuing to his holinesse, for institution of the authoritie, and found him vnwilling to giue his name; he told him, that the subordination was the fact and prosecution of father Parsons his old friend, and therefore stood assured, he wold not denie the graunt of putting to his hand. Likewise father Parsons in his speeches with M Charnocke at Rome, among other thinges fréely ac∣knowledged; that hearing how we went about in Eng∣land to make a superiour among our selues,Colleion, page. 126. page. 127. he thought it wisedome to preuent the effecting of such our indeuours, by choosing and promoting one to the roome, whom they knew to be their frind, and would comply with them. Thus writeth Colleton, with many moe wordes to the same effect. The third thinge to bee pondered, is the notorious bad dealing of the arch-priest our Iesuited Blackewell. First then, he said he had receiued a resolution from the mother city, that the refusers of his authoritie were schismatikes, and therevpon denied absolution to such as made no cons∣cienced thereof. And yet by his owne affirmance, hee re∣ceiue that resolution either from father Warford, or father Tichburne two English Iesuites at Rome. And yet Black∣well did so propose & grace the said resolution; as many then did, and as yet some doe beleeue, that it came as a de∣finitiue sentence from the Pope. Colleton, page. 199.
Secondly, Blackewell in his letter to M. I. M. bearing date the 22. of Feburarie, 1600. writeth thus; I determi∣ned, that hereafter whosoeuer had faculties of me, he should first be content to recall his peeuish opinion; terming the opinion péeuish, that doth not hold vs for schismatikes. Furthermore, your reuerence affirmed the assertion of fa∣ther Iones a priest of the societie to bee true, auowing all those to incurre presently the censure of holy Church, who should stiffely defēd, that we were no schismatikes. Which position you againe ratified, in your letters the 14. of March 1600. thus writeth Colleton▪ pag. 195. Thirdly, Blackewell sent forth a most arrogant, absurd, and diabolicall decrée, against both the clergie and the laity, in these words; I George Blackewell arch-piest in England, in vertue of holy obedience, and vnder paine of suspension from your office, and losse of all faculties in the deede it selfe to be incurred, doe prohibite al priests to divulge any booke, set out within these two yéeres, or heareafter to be set out, by which the lawfull state may be disturbed, or the same of any clergie catholike person of our english nation may be hurt by name; and the same commādement is giuen to the laity, vnder paine of being interdicted, the 17. of Ianuary, 1599 thus reporteth Iohn Colleton, pag. 197. Fourthly, when the famous vniuersty of Paris, after full & mature consideration had of the matter, did deliuer their censure on the behalfe of the seculars, affirming thē neither to be scismatikes, nor to haue committed any sinne at all, in that fact of not obeying the new arch-priest in it selfe cōside∣red; then our M. arch priest of the new religion, thundred out an execrable curse, (as it were frō the M. diuell of hell,) commanding strictly in vertue of obedience, & vnder paine of suspencion from diuine offices, and losse of faculties in the fact if selfe to be incurred, all ecclesiasticall persons, and al∣so al ay catholikes vnder paine of being interdicted, sembla∣blie in the fact it selfe be incurred, that neither directly nor indirectly, they maintaine or defende in word or in wri∣ting, the censure of the vniuersitie of Paris; whether it be truely giuen or forged, whether vpon true information or otherwise, as being preiudicial to the dignitie of the sea apo∣stolike,
and his holinesse breue. Thus writeth Maister Colleton,Collington, page. 147. of the arch-priests decrée published the 29. of May. 1600. Out of these sections and Paragraphes of the fift and sixt chapters, I note first, that the Iesuites are most impudent lyars. Secondly, that they are most arrant traytors. Third∣ly, that they are most cruell tyrants. Fourthly, that they are most seditious libellers. Fiftly, that they are most insolent, arrogant & sawcy companions. Sixtly, that they endeuour by flatterie, falshhood, bribes, and tyranny; to raigne and rule as Lords independent, ouer this Realme of England. Seuenthly, that they respect neither right nor wronge; nei∣ther truth nor falsitie; neither iustice nor iniustice; neither the iudgement of many nor of few, neither of vniuersities nor of countries, neither false nor true informatiōs; in their manner of procéeding. Eightly, that their owne wills, ter∣rene respects, & sensuall appetites, are y• sole & only rule by which they measure all their actions. that they haue made religion by their new dealing, but an art of such as liue by their wits, and a very hotch potch of omnium githerum, as the secular priests are hold to write of them. And consequēt∣ly, that foolish and senselesse may they be thought,Quodli. 2. art. 8. page. 43. who re∣ferre thēselues, their soules, their bodies, and all they haue, to be managed by such bad fellowes, & lewd companions. CHAP. VII. Of the disloyall dealing of the seculars, in state-affaires. I haue deliuered my opiniō cōcerning the seculars, in this behalfe, where I shewed by their owne frée cōfessions, y• they were sometime, (howsoeuer they be now,) as déepely drowned in bloody treasonable practises & defignments as are their brethren by hopish profession, the lordly & insolent disloyall Iesuites. I therefore meane here to set downe no other thing,Apologie. page. 212. but that only which the Iesuite Parsons in his apology, sendeth vnto thē in way of salutation. if he meane (saith Parsons speaking of M. Bluet,) any other causes of of∣fence as practising against the state or the like, then is it calumnious to them both.
First, to all the Iesuites in England, who are no lesse in∣nocent vpon our consciences in this point, thē other priests, and secondly, to the order of secular priests themselues, es∣pecially the better sort adhering to their superiour (Blacke∣well the Arch-priest,) who are as innocent also in this be∣halfe, as this mans (most part.) For whiles all other both priests & Iesuits, haue beene quiet & silent in statematters, these men haue béene busie, as farre as their power or credit wil reach, or as any prince would hearken to them, or deale with them. And this appeareth, for that they haue sent of their owne men euen to Scotland, to deale with that prince in matters of succession,They sent Watson with o∣thers. and haue tempered also with the king of France, by others of their consorts to like effect, as the Lords themselues of her maiesties councell cannot but know, and at their going ouer into France, we doubt not, (and so we heare it alreadie by some of their counsell,) but they meane to offer themselues wholy to that kings disposi∣tion, for the next succession of our Crowne,ge, the seculars are traitors like the Ie∣suites. thereby to gaine his grace & fauour. And yet they vant euery where, that they and theirs are innocent in these affaires, & onely Iesuites and their friends doe deale therein, and so master Bluet told the Queene, and counsell. Out of these words I note first, that the secular priestes are heere charged with disloyall dealing, against their na∣turall soueraigne, by plotting not onely with the king of Scotland, but also with the king of France. I note secondly, that the seculars are as guiltie of trayto∣rous practises and treasonable complots, as the hautie no∣cent Iesuites. I note thirdly, that the Iesuite Parsons doth héere vna∣wares, confesse himselfe and his brethren to be traitors. For he doth not simplie and absolutely affirme them to be in∣nocent,When theues be∣gin to rec∣kon, then true men shall come to their owne. (marke well my words,) but respectiuely and rela∣tiuely, to be nolesse innocēt then other priests, that is to say, to be nocent & guilty in very déed. For towards the end of his narration, he chargeth them with double treason, aswell by plotting in Scotland, as in the Realme of France. And in the marginall note, he saith Watson was sent with some others.
I therefore conclude this discourse, that seeing on the one side, the Iesuites are impudent lyars, notorious cousi∣ners, and arrant traytors, euen by the testimonie of the se∣culars, and seeing on the other side, that the secular priests are bad fellowes, no better then southsayers and idolaters, and that by the verdict of the Iesuites, and séeing withall, that both the secular priests and the Iesuites, professe one and the same religion, and are all deuoted to the pope alike, all men and women, noble and ignoble, learned and vnlear∣ned, rich and poore, young and olde, after mature delibera∣tion had of these matters and this whole discourse, must perforce and of meere necessitie, loath, detest, and abhorre, both them, their Pope, & their popish faction. From which and all treasonable practises, good Lord deliuer vs, Amen. A profitable and compendious appendice, for the better confirmation of the Reader. VVHosoeuer can and will seriously peruse, the prin∣ted volumes of many famous writers, of great account, and high estéeme euen in the Church of Rome, cannot but behold as in a glasse of Christall, that the late Romish religion, commonly called of the people, the olde religion, is but a newly coyned religion, and by piece-meale crept into the Church. I say (the late Romish religion,) be∣cause the ancient Roman religion was in déed sincere, and agréeable to the holy scripture, but the late Romish religion, is quite contrary to the same. This I proue by two means: first, by late practicall experience, for that the institution or papall Bull, by which an Arch-priest is designed the gouer∣nour ouer the Cleargie and laitie ouer all England,See the 4. chapter to∣wards the end. is a thing neuer hard of before in ye Church of God, as the priests themselues do willingly & truly grant▪ this is confirmed by the late order of the Capuchenes, who affirme thēselues to be nothing else, but only reformed Franciscans, as the secu∣lar priests doe know, and can it not denie. For as the Fran∣cans did by little and little, neglect and abolish the ancient rules of their order,Let this be well mar∣ked. and brought into their societie, nouel∣ties and new deuises in stead therof, and therefore were re∣formed by the Capuchenes, and called home again to their
old setled rules, euen so the late bishops of Rome, haue neg∣lected, and swarued from the ancient doctrine of the primi∣tiue Church,2. Reg. 18. and brought into the Church nouelties & new deuises of their owne inuention in stead thereof,2. Par. 19. and ther∣fore godly and zealous princes endeuour to reforme the Church,2. Reg. 23. 2. 34. and to abolish such superstitious nouelties▪ after the examples of Iosaphat, Ezechias, and other godly kings of Iuda. Wherof I haue discoursed more at large, in my booke intituled the golden ballance. Secondly, by the flat testimo∣nies of best approued popish writers. The great learned popish scholeman & Spanish fryer Victoria,Victor de potest. Papae. & concil. re∣lect. 4. pag. 139. writetth in this maner, paulatim ad hanc &c. By little & little we are brought to these inordinate dispensations, & to this so miserable state where we are neither able to endure our owne griefs, nor remedie assigned for the same. And therefore must we perforce inuent some other way, for conseruation of the lawes. Giue me Clements, Lines, Siluesters, and I will commit all things to their charge. But to speake nothing grieuously against these latter Popes, they are doubtles inferiour to Popes of old time, by many degrées. Loe heere gentle reader, the Popes owne renowned doctor and professed frier, telleth vs plainly, that the bishops of Rome in his time, were not like the bishops of oer ages, but did degenerate, from the ancient doctrine and discipline of the Church. He telleth vs in like manner, that this deflection from the truth, was not done all at once, but was brought by little and little into the Church. Thus you see or may see, that the doctrine I teach, is the selfesame, which I receiued from the best learned papists. The Popes famous Canonist Covaruvias, writeth to the same effect in these words. ne me latet, &c. nei∣ther am I ignorant, that S. Thomas affirmeth after great delibe∣ration, that the bishop of Rome cannot with his dispensation, take away from monks their solemne vow of chastitie. This notwithstanding,Couarr. 10. 1. cap. 20. par. 11. in med. we must defend the first opinion, least those things which are practised euery where, be turned vp side downe. Thus writeth Coueruvias, out of whose doctrine, many godly & profitable lessons may be learned. First, that the pa∣pists cannot agree about the Popes authority. Secondly, that great learned papists, among whom Thomas Aquinas is one,
(whose doctrine sundry Popes haue confirmed to be sound,) do denie the Popes authoritie in the premisses. Thirdly, that the contrarie opiniō must be defended, for the honesty & safegard of the Popes pretensed soueraigntie. Fourthly, that most mise∣rable is the Popes religion, which stand in need of such poore and beggerly shifts, for the vpholding & maintenance therof. Fiftly, that the papists haue no cause to exclaime against the mariage of priests, seeing the Pope dispenseth with his owne munks to marry at their pleasure. Sixtly, that the doctrine of Aquinas which the Pope himselfe hath approued, doth vtterly ruinate and batter to the ground, the lately inuested religion of the Church of Rome. Now, for the better satisfaction of the ignorant, I will heere briefely recount the originall, of the chiefest points and articles in the late Romish religion. First, the Church-seruice was made in the vulgar tongue eue∣ry where, in the old, ancient, and primitiue Church. Secondly, popish primacie began, in the yeare, 607. and that by the ty∣rannie of the Emperour Phocas, at the earnest suit of Boniface then bishop of Rome, & third of that name. Thirdly, the Popes pardons were neuer heard of, vntill the yeare, 1300. Fourthly, the mariage of priests was not prohibited, till the yeare, 385. at which time Siritius then bishop of Rome, made a wicked law in that behalfe. Fiftly, popish urgatory tooke not root in the Romish Church, till the yeare, 250. Sixtly, popish pilgrimage began in the yeare, 420. Seuēthly, the merit of works de condigno, was disputable about the yeare, 1081. Eightly, the popish in∣uocation of Saints & adoration, was not known or heard of, til the yeare, 350. Ninthly, the communion vnder both kinds was neuer thought vnlawful, till the yere, 1414. Tenthly, the Popes Buls were not authenticall, till the yeare, 772. Eleuenthly, auri∣cular confessiō was not established, till the yeare 1215. Twelft∣ly, generall concels were euer summoned by the Emperours. Thirteenthly, the popish English Archpriest began his new no religion, in the yeare 1006. and that by the tyranny & treasons of the Iesuites. All these important points, are soundly proued in my booke of Suruey, whither I referre the gentle reader, for better satisfaction in that behalfe. God grant, that these my painfull studies may tend to his glory, and the common good of his Church. .
A Table Alphabeticall, conteyning the principall matters handled in this worke. The letter (P.) signifieth the Page, and the letter (V.) noteth the verse. A ALlen the Cardinall was a traytour. Page. 93. Vers. 7. p. 92 vers. 28. Allen set forth a trayterous booke. pag. 108. vers. 5. Allen iustified Sir William Stanleyes treason. pag. 13. vers. 19. pag. 166. p. 167. Arch-priest setteth vp a new religion. pag. 89. v. 8. p. 179. v. 30. Arch-priest a traytor. pag. 89. vers. 8. Arch-priest is an Idoll. pag. 104. vers. 2. Arden and Someruile. See treason. Authors true dealing in this discourse. pag. 1. vers. 7. B BLackwell raigneth as a prince. Page. 104. vers. 7. Bookes written by Parsons, are traytorous. pag. 173. ve. 7. pag. 80. vers. 7. pag. 106. vers. 9. Bishop of Cassana prayed for by the Iesuites. pag. 20. ver. 21. Bellarmine against the messengers. pag. 152. vers. 26. Borromeo reiected the Iesuites. pag. 156. vers. 12. Bull renewed by Allen. pag. 85. vers. 9. Babington. See treason. Birket the priest. pag. 85. vers. 24. C CArdinals letter indited by Parsons. Page. 170. vers. 27. Cardinall Allen. See Allen.
Cardinall Bellarmine. See Bellarmine. Cardinall Boromeo. See Boromeo. Cardinals poysoned by Iesuites. pag. 107. vers. 19. pag. 37. vers. 34. Cardinall Toledo was Parsons boy. pag. 159. 27. Cardinall Pandulphus crowned in the Popes right. Pag. 120. pag. 20. Capuchenes why they agree with the Iesuites. page. 80. vers. 20. Conquest of England threatned by the Iesuites. page. 32. vers. 22. Coaches vsuall to Iesuites. pag. 9. vers. 20. pag. 7. vers. 17. pag. 25. vers. 18. Coozenage practised by Iesuites. pag. 59. vers. 16. Confession dissliked by Pope Sixtus. pag. 134. vers. 16. Church of Rome hereticall pag. 134. vers. 9. Confession vsed tyrannically by Iesuites. pag. 39. vers. 12 Constitutions of the Iesuites are mutable. pag. 56 Campion his martyrdome. pag. 97. vers. 11. Chaunge expected by the papists. pag. 101. vers. 9. Cogging of the Iesuites. pag. 29. Crichton the Iesuite a traytor. pag. 45. vers. 11. pag. 75. vers. 28. pag. 181. vers. 12. D DEuill brought Iesuites into England. pag. 84. vers. 22. pag. 86. vers. 8. Doctrine of Iesuites is contrarie to the truth. pag. 133. vers. 21. Duke de Medina threatned to kill all. pag. 11. vers. 3. Duke of Parma intituled to England. pag. 23. p. 79. Duke of Guise should haue inuaded England. pag. 75. pag. 84. vers. 32. Duke of Alua purposed to inuade this land. pag. 83. Deuill brought the Iesuits into England. pag. 84. pag. 83. v. 22. Deuill ruleth and raigneth in the Iesuites. pag. 68. vers. 3. Dissention betweene the priests and Iesuites. pag. 19. Day of channge expected. pag. 101. vers. 9.
E EQuiuocation of the Iesuites. pag. 29. pag. 35. vers. 13. Expences of the Iesuites. pag. 34. vers. 15. pag. 26. vers. 31. Exercise vsed by the Iesuites. pag. 29. vers. 6. pag. 130. Examination of the Popes dealing. pag. 94. vers. 16. F FRench Ambassadour. pag. 82. vers. 5. French king murdered by Iesuites. pag. 37. vers. 34. pag. 107. vers. 34. French king banished the Iesuites. pag. 36. vers. 3. Firebrands of sedition. pag. 36.. vers. 21. pag. 80. vers. 1. Ferdinando Earle of Darbie. pag. 22. vers. 33. Felton set vp the Popes Bull. pag. 83. vers. 38. Figges giuen by Iesuites. pag. 107. vers. 3. G GErrarde the Iesuite a good hunter for money. pag. 29. Grains hallowed for treason. pag. 86. vers. 28. Gybseys-Iesuites. pag. 77. vers. 35. H HEsket a messenger for treason. pag. 22. vers. 33. Haddocke a badde fellow. pag. 30. vers. 9. pag. 165. vers. 8. High councell of reformation. pag. 80. vers. 8. pag. 81. v. 5. Hallowed grains. See grains. I IEsuites by secret vowes. pag. 78. vers. 9. Iesuites are arrant traytors. pag. 75. vers. 35. pag. 12. pag. 11. pag. 44. vers. 5. pag. 22. vers. 17.
Iesuites are great lyers. pag. 53. pag. 35. vers. 13. pag. 77. vers. 27. pag. 58. Insuites are cruell tyrants. pag. 80. pag. 73. vers. 6. pag. 132. vers. 34. Iesuites make a triple vow. pag. 17. vers. 35. pag. 46. pag. 47. Iesuites are States-men. pag. 2. Iesuites ride like Earles. Pag. 24. vers. 22. pag. 34. vers. 12. Iesuites must haue their chambers perfumed. pag. 7. vers. 17. Iesuites are murtherers. pag. 107. pag. 7. vers. 12. pag. 42. pag. 37. vers. 34. pag. 23. pag. 107. vers. 18. Iesuites are diuels. pag 133. vers. 8. pag. 8. Iesuites are right Machiuels. pag. 21. vers. 20. pag. 15. Iesuites will not come at processions. Pag. 133. vers. 10. Iesuites are theeues. pag. 25. vers. 3. Iesuites are proud men. pag. 24. vers. 21. pag. 25. pag. 26. vers. 23. vers. 32. pag. 33. vers. 24 Iesuites ride in coaches. pag. 25. vers. 18. pag. 7. vers. 16 Iesuites are Scribes and Pharisees. page. 133. vers. 14. Iesuites commaund gentlewomen to pull of their bootes. pag. 7. vers. 19 Iesuites trowle vp and downe from good cheare to good cheare. pag. 7. vers. 15 Iesuites promise to restore men to their liuings, pag. 32. vers, 21. Iesuites doe threaten a conquest. pag. 32. vers. 22 Iesuites are franke gamsters. pag. 2. vers. 6 Iesuites cannot abide cloysters. P. 2. vers. 14 Iesuites vse great penance. pag. 7 Iesuites are firebrands of sedition. pag. 21. vers. 7. See fire∣brands, Iesuites how they pray. pag. 20. vers. 21 Iesuites the wickedst men vpon earth. pag. 15 Isabella of Spayne must haue the Crowne. pag. 11. pag. 12. pag. 22. pag. 23.
K Kinge of France murdered by the Iesuites. p. 107. v. 19. p. 37. v. 34. Kinge of France banished the Iesuites. p. 36. v. 3. Kinge of Spaine intendeth to conquer England. p. 14▪ King of Spaine is the life of poperie. p. 3. v. 4. Kinge of Spaine did resist the Pope. p. 66. v. 15. v. 7. Kinges cannot be deposed by the Pope. p. 90. v. 13. p. 88. Kinges haue beene deposed by Popes. p. 106. v. 19. p. 119. v. 35. p. 120. L LOpez would haue poysoned the Queene. pag. 22. vers. 38. League made by the nobilitie to Spaine. pag. 128. vers. 24. Lawes are iustly made against papists. pag. 119. page. 124. vers. 10. Lands promised to be restored in the conquest. page. 32. vers. 21. Leases may not be let to any, but by Iesuites. page. 31. verse. 19. M Murders done by Iesuites. page. 107. vers. 19. Page. 37. Vers. 34. Page. 38. Vers. 30. Medina will kill all afore him. pag. 11. vers. 4. Mendoza is a Iesuite. pag. 84. vers. 34. Martyrdome of Iesuites. page. 97. vers. 9. Miracles done by Iesuites. pag. 51. vers. 14. Mutabilitie in Ies. religion. pag. 55. N NOble men in league with the Spaniards. Pag 128. Vers. 24. 129. Noble men take part with the Iesuites. pag. 128. vers. 24:
Noble men assist the priests. pag. 128. vers. 33. v. 30. New religion of the Iesuites. page. 89. vers. 8. p. 179. v. 29. O OLim dicebamur preferred by the Ies. to the Pope. Pag. 178. Vers. 14. Order of the Iesuites. page. 56. Outcries of the secular priests. pag. 21. Outcries of the Iesuites. pag. 19. P POpe may be iudged of any man. Pag. 94. vers. 13. Pope Sixtus damned, saith our Iesuite. pag. 133. vers. 38. Pope Sixtus a monster on earth. pag. 133. vers. 29. Pope may be an ethnicke. pag. 134. vers. 5. Pope may be an heretike. pag. 133. verse. 29. Pope obeyed against Kings. page. 13. vers. 17. Pope cannot depose Kinges. page. 88. Pope can play trickes of fast and loose. p. 125. v. 23. pag. 126. Pope cannot erre, and how. page. 125. Pope erreth not, but Sathan vnder his pall. pag. 127. uers. 4. Pope will depose kinges. pag. 120. Pope not the lawfull bishoppe of Rome. pag. 3. vers. 22. Pope deluded by the Iesuites. pag. 30. vers. 12. Pope is the cause of all rebellion. pag. 82. v. 30. pag. 85. vers. 12. Pope is a cruell tyrant. pag. 153. pag. 157. page. 82. Poperie is annexed with treason. pag. 143. vers. 29. Priestes die not for religion, but for treason. pag. 167. pag. 127. vers. 12. vers. 32. page. 145. page. 86. Priests expect a change. pag. 110. vers. 9. Priests are bound in conscience to detect the Iesuites. pag. 127 vers. 15. Priests confesse that treasons are reuealed miraculously. p. 129. vers. 29. Priests must adore the deuill. pag. 8. vers. 4. pag. 86.. vers. 32. Priests sware to become traytors. page. 86. vers. 33. Papists must depend vpon the deuill. pag. 8. vers. 4. pag. 68. v. 3.
Parsons is an arrant traytor. pag. 92. vers. 33. pag. 76. vers. 8. pag. 73. pag. 162. vers. 13. Parsons is a bastard. pag. 69. pag. 71. vers. 24. Parsons would be a Cardinall. pag. 71. vers. 8. Parsons a monster of mankind. pag. 71. vers. 34. Parsons is impudent, and will affirme or denie any thing. p. 76. vers. 23. Parsons is a gypsey. p. 77. v. 34. Parsons setteth the english crowne on sale. 171. Parsons is the wickedst man vpon earth. pag. 174. p. 173. Parsons spendeth fiue or six crownes weekely in Postage. pag. 170. vers. 32. Parsons is a notorious lyar. pag. 77. pag. 76. vers. 23. pag. 178. vers. 6. pag. 161. vers. 15. pag. 168. vers. 36. Parsons can rule the Pope. page. 82. vers. 24. Pasquin in Rome talketh of Parsons treasons. pag. 171. vers. 30. Parsons is an incestuous person. pag. 71. vers. 24. Parsons an heretike of the familie of loue. pag. 71. vers. 30. Parsons drunken spunge. pag. 71. ver. 28. Parsons was begotten of some incubus. pag. 71. ver. 36. Parsons hath written traytorous bookes. p. 173. ver. 7. p. 106. P. 80. See bookes. Q QVerimonie of Priests against Iesuites. pag. 21. Querimone of Iesuites against the Priests. pag. 19. Queene of Scots, pag. 75. v. 20, pag. 45, v. 11. R REbellion in the North. pag. 83, vers. 17. Religion of the Iesuites is of the deuill. pag, 68. v. 3. pag. 59. pag. 57, v. 17. p. 63. p. 133. pag. 15. v. 8. Religion of Iesuites is new. p. 179. v. 29. p. 89. v. 8. Religion of the Iesuites brought from the deuill. pag. 84. v. 22. p. 67. v. 21. Religious parsons how they are distinguished. p. 4. Recusancie is linked with treason inseperably. p: 143. v. 28. Religion of the Iesuites is mutable. pag. 56.
Religion of Iesuits is flat cooznage. Pag. 59. Vers. 16. Religion of Iesuites is an hotch potch of Omnigitherum. Page. 67. pag. 15. vers. 8. Richard Hesket sent to the Earle of Darbie. pag. 22. vers. 30. Riston the Priest. pag. 85. vers. 24. S SAnders the priest the architect of rebellion. p. 84. v. 12. Secular priests sworne to be traytors. pag. 75. v. 36. page. 86. vers. 32. Seculars doe equiuocate. page. 118. vers. 19. Seculars must enter into glorie. pag. 165. vers. 28. Seculars are traytors. pag. 98. vers. 10. page. 119. Seminaries erected for treason. pag. 86. vers. 19. Spies made of gentlemen. pag. 32. vers. 24. Standish a lying fellow. page. 30. vers. 7. T Treason in the north. pag. 84. vers. 5 Treason of Throckmorton. pag. 84. vers. 35. Treasons of Parrie, Arden, and Summeruile. pag. 84. pag. 85. Treasons of Northumberland and Babington▪ pag. 85. Treason of Sir William Stanley. pag. 85. Treason of Norfolke. pag. 83. Treasons of Saunders, Webbe and Morton. pag. 83. Treasons of Hesket, Walpoole, &c, pag. 22. pag. 23. Treasons reuealed miraculously. pag. 75. vers. 28. p. 146. v. 9. Theft of the Iesuites. pag. 25. vers. 3. Traytors may eate gold, if they will. page. 12. vers. 13. V Vowes of the Iesuites. Pag. 46. p. 47. p. 48. p. 49. Verlets with Iesuites are honest men. Pag. 77. Vers. 4. W VVealth of Iesuites. P. 26. V. 32. P. 34. V. 13. Vebbe. see treason. Walpoole a traytor. page. 23. vers. 8.
