18453 99845580 10487
A PROCLAMATION made by the States of the vnited Netherlands, touching the defence of the safe∣gard of the enemy, the breaking of the quarters with the enemies souldiours, which vndertake to come ouer the wa∣ters and bogs in the parts of Freesland, Omlanden, Drente, and Westerwoldingerland, or Lordship of Wedde. Faithfully translated out of Dutch. Also a Copie of a Letter, to the honourable Lords, the States, bearing date the 21 of March, 1599. Touching the victorie atchieued by the Prince Maurits before Emmericke. I W printer's or publisher's device Imprinted at London by Iohn Wolfe, and are to be sold at his shop in Popes head Alley, neere to the Exchange. 1599.
The Copie of a Letter. To the honorable Lords, the States, dated the 21 of March, 1599. touching victorie atchieued by the Prince Maurits before Emmericke. MOst honourable Lords, his princely excelencie writeth from Arnham the 19 of this present month, to haue visi∣ted all the bordring citties, and haue fortified the same: To haue had intelligence, that the Cardinall being come towards Gelder, the Admirant vvas trauailed to meet him. That his princely excellency had found good to surprise the castle of Zeuenter, vvith two housen. That the princes souldiors in Zeuenter not vvith∣out great difficulty, after three vollies of demy-cannons had yeelded vp the fort. That the Counte Lodowicke vvas mean vvhile sent
vvith the horsemen neere Emmerick, as sup∣posing that the garisons vvould come out to assist the aforesaid places, as indeed it happe∣ned: for they perceiuing some of our horse∣men hold a great pace, as if they had shun∣ned the citty. The Earle of Busquoy, Gouer∣nour of Emmericke (vvhose vvife amongst others vvent to Spaine vvith the Archduke Albertus to fetch the Infanta) vvith a great troupe of the garison, came out of the citty to pursue our horsmen, vvhich they did a great vvay beyond the ambush, insomuch, that be∣ing inclosed, the said Earle and two captains vvith many officers vvere taken, and very neer a hundreth drowned. Also thirty souldiours vvere set at liberty, for the vvhich the Earle hath promised ransome, his person is vvoun∣ded, but (according to his excellencies vvri∣ting) not mortally: declareth, that the enemy maketh daily great preparation to come into the field. God be praised for this good beginning.
❧ A Proclamation made by the States of the vnited Nether-lands, touching the defence of the safegard of the enemie, the brea∣king of the quarters with the enemies souldiours, who vndertake to come ouer the waters and bogs in the parts of Freese∣land, Omlanden, Drenthe, and Westerwoldin∣gerland, or Lordship of Wedde. THe generall States of the vnited Nether-lands, to all those vvhich shall see or heare these present gree∣ting. Whereas vvee are in∣formed, that the enemie vvith a neuer-heard barbarous presumption, deceit and vvickednesse (as if all vvhat he list to doe vvere lawfull) against all diuine, natu∣rall, and humane lawes, against all faith, ho∣nor, oath, and beleefe, hauing most lamenta∣bly and cruelly oppressed, pilled, and infused the feeble, vnarmed, and guiltlesse, neutrall
cities and townes, yea of his best and vvell-vvillingest friends, and finally are ranged to the borders of these vnited Prouinces, vvhere although he vvas by the means of our might, and armes, through the wise and valiant con∣duct of his excellencie, next God, repulsed, and disapointed of his enterprise, yet ceaseth not by letters, messages, threats, and other∣vvaies, to procure diuers of our countries and inhabitants of these vnited Prouinces, as Freeseland, Omlanden, Drente, Oldampt, Westervvoldingerland, or Lordship of Wedde, to come vnder his contribution, vn∣der colour of his safegard, as if hee (vvho in such faithlesse, vvicked, and cruel sort had be∣haued himselfe towards these poore good neutrals, yea his owne friends) vvould behaue himselfe faithfully and meekely towards our inhabitants his enemies. And being that vve are vvell assured, that hee intendeth nothing els, then that hauing by these his adulations allured and enticed by little and little our good inhabitants to his deuotion, in the end vvith all crueltie and tirannie to handle them, and therefore thinke it most expedient, by all possible meanes to preuent it. So it is, that
by deliberation of the counsell of estate of the aforesaid vnited lands, vve haue interdi∣cted and defended expressely by these pre∣sents, on paine of our highest disgrace and displeasure to be held as enemies, and vvith∣out anie fauour to be immediately punished. All townes, villages, places, and quarters of Freeseland, Omlanden, Drente, Oldampt, and Westervvoldingerland, together vvith the Officers, Magistrates, and inhabitants of the same, high and low, noble and ignoble, as vvell in generall as perticular, in any man∣ner vvhatsoeuer not to take or receiue of the enemie anie safegard, or vnder pretext of the same to yeeld, accord, or pay the enemie any contribution, great or small, or to harbour or hide anie of the enemies souldiours, or to re∣ceiue any message by mouth or letters of the enemie, and much lesse to hold any corres∣pondence by mouth or vvritings vvith him. But to the contrarie, ordaine, vvill, and com∣mand expressely all the aforesaid townes, vil∣lages, places, quarters, and inhabitants, vvith∣out delay to furnish and prepare themselues vpon the needful places to keep good watch, and by all needfull and due order, either by
sound of bels, hornes, or beacons, to assem∣ble themselues; and iointly to vvithstand, pursue, and kill, or at least, take prisoners all such foe-like souldiours, as shall presume, or dare to come ouer the vvaters and bogs in∣to these territories. To vvhich end vvee like∣vvise declare, ordaine, and command, that henceforward no quarter shall be held with such enemies or foe-like souldiours: Which keeping of quarter vve haue for that cause al∣together and vvholly deposed and renoun∣ced, as by these presents vve yet depose and renounce the same. Vpon paine, that vvhoso∣euer henceforward shall bee found to haue kept quarter vvith the said foe-like souldiors, or to haue in any sort shewed them any fa∣uour or kindnesse, that those shall at the in∣stant be staied, and immediately vvithout any fauour punished as the foe-like souldiors themselues. And to the end, that euerie one may acquit himselfe vvith more courage and zeale towards his enemie, vve haue agreed, and agree by the presents, for an honour and recompence to euerie one, bee hee souldi∣our or no souldiour, the summe of fist y100 shil∣lings of En∣glish mony. gul∣dens for euerie foe-like souldior, vvhich by
anie henceforward shal be killed (vpon good proofes) or at leastwise taken prisoner. As al∣so in like manner vve agree and promise the summe of fiue and twentieFifty shil∣lings En∣glish mony. guldens, to each and euerie one vvhosoeuer, that shall surelie, trulie, and vvithout fraud accuse anie one to the contrarie of our expresse commaunde∣ments, vvhich shall haue receiued anie safe∣gard, paied anie contribution, to haue harbo∣red or hid anie of the aforesaid souldiours, to haue by mouth or by vvriting held anie cor∣respondence vvith the enemie, or that hauing taken anie enemie, shall haue vvithout, or vpon ransome, let him go. And to the end, that none may pretend ignorance of these our expresse ordinances, We desire our belo∣ued States of Freeslād, the city of Groningen, and Omlanden, or their deputies, and all others to vvhom it doth belong and apper∣taine, immediatly to cause proclamation and publication hereof to be made in euery and each citty, place, and quarter, vvhere it shall be needfull. As also earnestly requesting the noble Lord, the Earle William Lodowicke of Nassau, gouernour of Freeseland, the citty of Groningen & Omlanden, &c. vvill & com∣mand
expressely all cheefetaines, knights, captaines, commanders, and common soul∣diours, horse and foot, by vvater and land, al∣so all officers, iustices, and inhabitants, vnto vvhom this in any sort may touch or belong, to gouerne themselues according to the te∣nour hereof, and inuiolably to accomplish and keep the contents of the same, vpon pain of the paines aboue named, for that vve haue found the same to bee most expedient and necessarie for the good of the Land. Giuen in S Grauen Haeghe, the twentith of March. 1599. Fr. Duyck. V. By the commandement of the Lords, the generall States of the vnited Netherlands. And by the counsell of estate of the same. Christopher Huygens.
From the Haghe, the 21 of March, 1599. Those of Arnhem haue since reported, that aboue 150, which in the skirmish thinking to saue themselues through the water, were drow∣ned, and that amongst them were some with gold chaines. Those of Emmericke repent themselues alreadie to haue with∣out any need taken the Spani∣ards in, which was against their promise. FINIS.
