19217 99845605 10514
A TRVE PATTERNE OF Pietie, meete for all Christian house∣holders to looke vpon, for the better education of their families, in the feare and ser∣uice of Almightie God. Collected out of the fountaine of holy Scriptures, for the especiall vse of the faithfull in the congregation of Mal∣passe in Cheshire. By IOHN PARKER. GEN. 18.17.19. And the Lord said, shall I hide from Abraham the thinges which I doe. For I know him, that he will commaund his sonnes and his housholde after him, that they keepe the way of the Lorde, to doe righteousnes and iudgement, that the Lord may bring vpon Abraham that he hath spoken vnto him. PSAL. 101.2.6.7. I will walke in the vprightnes of my heart, in the middest of my house. Mine eyes shalbe vnto the faithful of the land, that they may dwel with me. he that walketh in a perfect way, hee shal serue me. There shall no deceiptfull person dwell in mine house, hee that telleth lyes shall not remaine in my sight. ACT. 10.1.2. Furthermore, there was a certaine man in Caesarea, called Cornelius: a Captaine of the band called the Italian band A deuout man, and one that feared God with all his house∣hold, which gaue much almes to the people, and praysed God continually. Imprinted at London by Iohn Wolfe, and are to be sold at his shop with in the Popes head Alley in Lombardstreete, 1592
TO THE CHRISTIAN and well affected Gentle∣men, together with the rest of the faith∣full in the Congregation of Malpasse, who haue giuen their names vnto Christ I. P. wisheth al holy and perfit increase of Gods gra∣ces, with the happie finishing of that good worke begun in them, euen through our Lord and Sauiour Christ Iesus. GOod Christian brethren, my prayers to God on your behalfe are, that you may grow in all spiritual graces, and bee establi∣shed in the pre∣sent faith. And if I (though vnworthie I
confesse) might in some measure bee v∣sed as Gods instrument and meane, for the furthering and building of you vp in that worthy worke, I should surely ac∣count my selfe greatly fauoured of the Lord. So that if I may know wherein to doe you good, (beyonde that which is done already) assure your selfe of this, that according to my poore power, I wil not faile you. And hereunto I will wil∣lingly bee led, not onely in regarde of worldly kindnesses, and curtesies recei∣ued lately and liberally from you, (for al the which I rest greatly indebted) but especially for the holy bond of our chri∣stian profession: whereinto, as we haue through Gods goodnesse made some entrie, and in some sort well begun: So I hope we shall holde on therein, and ne∣uer bee wearie, vntill wee come to the ende of our faith and hope, euen the sal∣uation of our soules. And because I haue no better way yet to testifie my loue vn∣faigned, then either by writing, or spea∣king: therefore: (though not as I would)
yet as I coulde, by reason of my mani∣folde infirmities and sicknesses, I haue diligently laboured to offer vnto your Christian and curteous acceptations, a few holy rules and briefe obseruations, for the godly and well gouering of your seuerall families, by Catechising them, and ioyning in faithfull prayers to Almightie God with them. The matter it selfe is collected out of the sacred wel∣spring of Gods holy word, and reduced into as short an epitome as possiblie I could, for memories sake. I haue not taken this paines, as one that would per∣swade you to accept of this direction and none other, (knowing right well, that there are farre better set foorth by more learned and godly Ministers) or for that I would tye you to one speciall forme of Prayer in your Families: wher∣as the spirite which is in you, wil in due time teach you aboundantly to craue al things at Gods hands, according to your seuerall necessities. But my simple and vnfained purpose herein is this; that for
as much as, that I am better acquainted with your estate and wants, then any o∣ther can be who knoweth you not, and that the continuall care which I haue o∣uer you for your good, can no better way be signified or manifested, than by prouoking you to well doing. I haue therefore endeauored to frame this spe∣ctacle for you to looke vpon, that you hereby finding out, and conceiuing the order and manner how to glorifie God, by offering vp holy and continnall sa∣crifice of praiers and praises vnto his maiestie, as also howe to occupie your selues in other exercises of pure religion before him, might hereby in some con∣uenient time hauing learned both the matter and maner of the seruice of God: wholy bend your selues to the carefull and constant practise of all holy duties, vnto so mercifull a Father, most to his glory and your edification and comfort. And if I vnderstande that you take that in good part, & esteeme this little work. though as a simple (I confesse) yet as a
sound significatiō of my vnfeigned loue towards you, and care to doe you good: then shall I not onely thinke this labour (though it be not worthy of that name) well bestowed for your sakes, but also to accomplish some far better thing, if my poore talent will extende thereunto for your better proceeding in that good race, whereinto you are entered. You know the poore widowes mite was ac∣cepted of God, not in regard of the gift, but the mind of the giuer, & I hope this shall be no lesse. Farwell my good bre∣thren, and the Lord Iesus be with you to confirme and inable you to euery good worke, that you may be kept blamelesse vntil his glorious comming, & so walke in this world in his feare, that we may in the conclusion of your pilgrimage, ende your daies in his blessed fauour, & at the last, liue with him for euer. Amen, Your assured brother in Christ, yea your seruant for Christ his sake to further your saluation. I. Parker.
THE PREPA∣ratiue to prayer. 1. Obseruation. To stir vs vp to praier these thinges to be considered.PRaier is a lifting vp of the hart to God, with an assu∣red faith to be heard, as ap∣peareth: Psal. 25, 1.2. Psal. 86.2. & Psal. 143.8.1. What prayer is, viz. Prayer is two folde. 1. either pub∣lique 2. or priuate.1. How mani∣folde proser is viz. 1. Conc. Publique it shall suffice to reade 1. King. 8. how Salomon built a house of praier at Ierusalem:1. Publique. which was vsed of all the faithful many yéers after. And our Sauour in his time re∣proueth them which abused the place of publique prayer. Math. and in this respecte a promise is made to two or thrée, being gathered together in Christs name, in the house of praier Math. 18.
2. Conc. Priuate prayer, which wée here intreate of.2. Priuate This is commaunded by God Psal. 50.15. & by Christ Math. 11.18. by the Prophets Ierm. 10.23. Ioel. 2, 32. Zecha. 12.12.13. &c. and al∣so by the Apostles, as appeareth: 1. Thess. 5.17. Ephes. 6.18: Luk. 21.36. This priuate prayer was practised not only of our fathers before the law: as appeareth in Abraham Gen. 18.18. and Gen. 24. where we read, that his very seruaunt could frame a praier to God, which no doubt hee had learned of his Master. Also by Isaac. Gen. 25.21. and Iacob: Gen. 32.9. but also by the godly vnder the lawe: as we reade of Moses: Exod. 33.18. Deut. 9.20. No. 12.10, Ioshua. 7.6.7.8. Iudg. 3.9.7. 2. After the law in time of the Pro∣phetes: as appeareth, Dan. 6.10. & Chap. 9. totum. Isay. 37.15.16.17. Ier. 9.1.2, Chron. 20.18. &c. and Dauid, in his Psalmes in infinite places, con∣firmeth the exercise of priuate prayer: professing that he wil preuent the mor¦ning
watch to praye, and that he will pray at morning, euening, and noone∣tide: yea, seauen times a day, that is many times. 3. This was vsed of the Apostles of our Sauiour: as appeareth, Actes. 2.42. & 1.14. & 10.2. & 16, 13. and for this cause, both Iohn Baptist and our sauiour, gaue to their disciples a forme of prayer: as appeareth, Luk. 11.1.2. For this cause, vz. In that there was no greater comfort to the faithful then to talke to God by praier. We reade the Saints haue praied in all places: as Isaac in the fieldes, Daniel in the Lyons denne, the Apo∣stles in prison, and our Sauior Christ himselfe in the mountaines and wil∣dernesse, and others in other places as occasion serued. 1.3. We are to obserue the necessitie of this dutie of praiers Viz. Rom. 12.1. Regard of Gods commaund, who as he commaunded the Children of Israel to offer morning and euening sacrifice: so hath commaunded vs by the blessed Apostle, to offer vp our
soules and bodies, as holy and accep∣table Sacrifices vnto God,. 12.1. not onely in praier, but also in all other partes, of his holy seruice. 2. In respect of Gods promises made to them that call vpon him: as Psal. 50.15. Matth. 11.28. Deut. 4.7. 3. Because of the threatnings de∣nounced against those that doe not praye. Ier. 10.23▪ Psal. 79.6. 4. In respect of our owne dayly ne∣cessities and wants, he being the foun∣taine from whence we must fetch eue∣ry good and perfect gift: Iam. 1.5, 17. Iohn 3.27. and for this cause, that we might see our wantes, hee gaue vs a forme of prayer. 4. We must be full to con∣sider  what  must pray. viz.1. That it be in the spirit, that is not with carnall, but with spirituall hartes, our affections being lifted to heauen in so heauenly an action: as also, that it be trueth & sinceritie, not in the lips onely, or in hypocrisie to be seene of men. Math. 7.5.6, 7. & 15.8, 9. 2. That we pray not for Gods be∣nefites
to consume them on our lusts and concupiscences, but to imploy the same to Gods glorye, least our pray∣ers be vnprofitable. Iam. 4.2. 3. That we approach before God, with a purpose to withstand and resist the sinnes which we confesse and pray against, or else we praye in vaine. Psal. 66.8.72. Tim. 2.19. 4. In prayer, that wee be void of malice & enuy, and commend the estate of others as well as of our selues vnto God, yea, to pray for our enemies, and especially to be mindefull to deale ear∣nestly with the Lorde for the prospe∣rous,Math. 5.23. & 4.44. Psal. 122.6, 7. 1. Tim. 2.1. religious, and happie estate of our Prince and gouernour, both in Church, and commonwealth: yea, and although any Magistrate should be a wicked man,Prou. 27.27. yet to pray for him. Lastly, not to appoint God a time of hearing our prayers,Iam. 5.8. but to tary his leasure, who séeth what is best for vs. 5. Wee are to obserue the end  prayer was or∣dayned. viz.1. To acknowledge our obedience vnto God, & the greatnes of his pow∣er,
from whom we receiue al things, and to talk familiarly with him as one friend with an other, alwaies prouided that we praye to none but him, & that onelie in the name of Iesus Christ, Ioh. 16.23. & 16.23. Math. 6.9. 2. To acknowledge our thankful∣nesse to his Maiestie for all graces and mercies both spirituall and bodily: as our election, redemption, sanctificati∣on, his worde and Sacraments, our creation preseruatiō, health, life, liber∣tie and peace, and all good blessinges whatsoeuer. Eph. 5.2.1. Pet. 1.3. &c. 3. Because by praier we entertaine God in our houses, and acknowledge our selues to haue renounced Sathan, and to haue opened the doores of our hearts, that God may come and dwell with vs, and wee with him, as one friend with an other Reuel. 3.20. 6. & last thing, To prepare vs vnto praier, is to marke, the effect of praier, viz.That God neuer let the praiers of his seuantes goe emptie and returne without a blessing, as was expedient for his glory and their good: as appea∣reth
by these scriptures. Exod. 17. Ge. 35, 5. 2. King. 19.15.2. Chr. 20, 36. Iosh 10, 12, 13. 1. Sam. 1, 10. to 16.2. Chron. 6, 18. 1. To conclude, let vs remember, that if we will haue God to heare our prayers, wee must be ready to heare him calling vnto vs by his worde and the ministrie thereof, as wee would haue him to heare vs when we call, and not to turne backe our prayers. 2. That if wee will haue God to heare vs,Conclu. thus. Look. Prou. 1.27, 28. ad fi∣nem. that we be readie and wil∣ling to heare the crie of our poore and needie brethren.Pro. 21.13. cap. 11.17.24.25. Next to the preparatiue, before wee come to laye downe the formes of prayer it selfe: this is to be conside∣red of. vz. THat euerye Christian who will rightlie knowe and learne how to be thus prepared & to serue God truly, prouide by all meanes lawfull, to pro∣cure
and purchase the sacred holy Bi∣ble, as the best and principal riches he can labour for, according as God hath cōmaunded in Deu. where he teacheth that not onely Princes,Deut. 17.9.10.11. but Subiectes must be acquainted with his lawes, to know their dutie, and both Dauid and Christ himselfe haue shewed the bles∣sednes of them that meditate in Gods lawe night and day,Psal. 1.1. & 119 12. Iohn. 5.39. & search the holy scriptures, wherein euerlasting life is contained, and to moue vs hereunto, we haue worthie examples in the pri∣mitiue Church: of them that not only did labour in the scriptures to finde out the truth of the doctrines of the A∣postles, and to trie the spirits as Iohn cōmaundeth:Acts 17 11. Iohn 1.4. but also traind vp their children from their Cradles, in the knowledge of the same. And fuxther, because this is the pearle, for the buy∣ing whereof, a man must sell all hee hath, if his abilitie will extend so farre: and that it is the only fortresse for the afflicted consciences.Math. 13.45. Prou. 23.23. Let euery man
(though neuer so poore) constraine him∣selfe to bee honored with this Iewell, without the which hee cannot knowe God, & not knowing him,Rom. 10.14. ad 17. can neither rightly nor truely call vppon him, but perish in his ignorance,Iam. 10.23. and bee num∣bred amongst the enemes of God. Therefore as thou louest the Lord, thy owne soule, and the soules of thy fami∣ly: delay not, deferre not, but procure & prouide a Bible, aboue all thinges else whatsoeuer. God giue thée this grace. 3 The Scriptures of God contained in the holy Byble being thus prouided: It is next to bee obserued, that the word and prayer bee alwaies ioyned together. viz. At al times before we humble our selues to praier, to read one chap∣ter, for the better stirring vs vp to that holy dutie: that is to say, Before mor∣ning prayer, one Chapter out of the olde Testament, beginning at Genesis,
and at night, also before euening pra∣yer, a Chapter out of the newe Testa∣ment. And if any place as wee reade séemeth hard vnto vs, it is good rather with reuerence to let it passe, then with rashnesse to enterpret the same: way∣ting with patience till that either by some learned expositor, godly preacher, or some other place of scripture we can attain to find out the sence of the place, alwaies hauing a care to obserue those places that séeme hard vnto vs till wee haue learned the true vnderstanding of them. ¶ Before the reading of the worde, and Cathechising, vse this short Prayer. O Lord open our eyes, that we may sée the wonderfull things and ex∣cellent doctrines which are written in thy word, and may receiue comfort by thy gracious promises contained in the same. Let vs learne hereby more per∣fitly to hate sinne, and loue righteous∣nesse,
and graunt that wee may so vn∣derstand the things which wee heare and so beléeue the things which we vn∣derstand, and praysing that which wee beléeue, that we may bee more & more able to glorifie thy name in this world, and be fully confirmed in assured hope of that glorie prepared for the faithfull in the world to come, Amen. 4 The word being thus read with reue∣rence and care, then let the Gouer∣nours,Here oberue that  that wil perswade vs, that all  sport  Gods is too much, and so will breed te∣diousnes in vs. together with their whole fa∣mily, humbly fall downe on their knees, and the Master himselfe, or one in his absence, whome hee shall appoint to be the mouth for all, and with a true heart, inuocate vpon God as followeth. Morning Prayer. O Most glorious and blessed Lorde God, who art the Father of mer∣cie and fountaine of all grace and good∣nes.
Thou Lord who hast commaun∣ded vs that in all our distresses, wee should come vnto thée, and offring our prayers vnto thée with a right hart, and true faith in the name of Christ, hast promised to heare vs, behold Lord euen before thée, who hast thus com∣maunded and promised, we sinfull and vnrighteous creatures doe humble our selues at this time, both in our soules and bodies: beséeching thy excellent Maiestie to looke from heauen with thy mercifull fauour vppon vs, accepting our praiers, which we shall powre out before thée, and directing vs so to pre∣fer the same vnto thy holinesse, that thou mayest accept them in Christ Ie∣sus. We confesse O Lord God of heauen that we are most vnworthie to appeare before thee, and more vnworthie to obtaine any fauour at thy gratious hands, in regarde of the infinite & hai∣nous offences which we haue commit∣ted against the puritie and excellent
vertue of thy lawes which condemne vs in our sinnes, and reuealed vnto vs our rebellion and vnthankfulnes. For O Lord wee haue a lawe in our mem∣bers, resisting and fighting against the law of our mindes, whereby through the infirmitie and vanitie of the fleshe: we finde in our selues no pronenes to that which is good, nor any courage to resist the thinges which are euill: and this our vntowardnesse is so much the greater, by howe much the more wee violate thy will and transgresse thy ho∣ly precepts, not onely in ignorance, but also in knowledge, and many times a∣gainst knowledge, both gréeuously and fearefully: so that thy authoritie on the one side, nor thy mercies on the other, haue neither moued, nor allured vs to obey or serue thée, as we ought to haue doone, and these our sinnes which are sufficient to condemne vs, go not alone but haue too many companions: for O Lord our infidelitie, impaciencie, hard∣nes of heart, abuse of thy patience, con∣tempt
of thy worde, and little profiting by it, are erdinarie sins into the which we fal daily, wee being such by nature, as estéeme more of our owne pleasures and profites then of thy glorious & bles∣sed seruice: our harts as corrupt foun∣taines yéelding foorth nothing but di∣strust of thy prouidence, hypocrisie, co∣uetousnes, carnall and worldly concu∣piscences, and neglect of all good duties towwards thée and all men: the flesh con∣tinually rebelling against the spirite, so that O Lorde if thou shouldest haue dealt with vs according to iustice, wée had all perished in these our sinnes and ignorances before this present, there∣fore obteining this fauour to come be∣fore thée, we vnfeignedly confesse that against thée O Lord, euen against thée alone we haue committed these sinnes and wickednesses, beséeching thy Ma∣iestie to pardon our ignorance & blind∣nes, that we cannot see them more ful∣ly, and confesse them more penitentlye then now we doe, wherein wee must
néedes acknowledge our sinnes to bee the greater, by how much the lesse our repentaunce appeareth to bee at this houre. Yet forasmuch as that O Lorde God thou hast reuealed thy selfe in thy word, to be God of infinite mercy and goodnes, to them that truely repent & come vnto thée, in the name of Christ Iesus. Wee are hereby imbouldned to humble our selues before thy Maiestie, beseeching thee for Christ his sake to touch our harts with vnfained sorrow and true contricion, for all these, & all o∣ther our sinnes, & graunt we may both so sée and abhorre our guiltines and fil∣thines, that wee may obtaine mercie & forgiuenes through his precious death and passion: which we beséeche thee to accept, as a ful satisfaction for the same wiping them all out of thy booke of re∣membraunce, that they may neuer be laid to our charge, nor rise vp in iudge∣ment against vs. Giue vs a lyuelie and true faith, to lay holde on these thy mercies promises vnto vs in him, that
wée may be able to resist all the fierie darts of the deuill. And as wee craue this grace for that which is past, so let it please thée of thy Fatherly mercie, to assist & strengthen vs in the residue of our life, to performe and accomplish all that obedience which thy Maiestie requireth of vs, and as thou art our Father, so regarde vs as thy children, and send down the power of thy Spirit into our hearts, that wée considering how thou sittest in the heauens, and searchest the secrets of all mens hearts, may haue continuall care to set our af∣fections on thinges which are aboue, and not on thinges which are beneath: but if that thy wisdome, power, good∣nes, mercie and trueth, or whatsoeuer else thy Maiestie is knowen by, may be truely reuerenced and honored of vs, so that all prophanesse of hart, all worldlynesse, and fleshly securitie may be farre remoued from vs. To this end O Lorde vouchsafe vn∣to vs that ordinarie & happie meanes
of the faithfull and sincere preaching of thy blessed worde, that thy spirit wor∣king therewith, it may effect in vs all good graces both of faith & repentance: Yea, we beséech thée sende foorth faith∣full labourers amongst vs, and blesse those whome thou doest send, with all graces necessarie, both puritie of doc∣trine and sinceritie of life, and so sancti∣fie them, in al their studies and labors, that by their ministerie and example wee may increase in all true zeale and loue to thée and thy worde, and may haue iust cause to embrace them déerly in our hearts, and accompt reuerently of them, as of thy mercifull instrumēts sent vnto vs for our great good. Graunt O Lorde that we maye not be hearers but dooers of thy will, and that the like mind may be in vs, that was in Christ Iesus, and in all our godly forefathers, euen with al willingnes and readines, yea, to make it our meate and drinke to do thy will. And for asmuch as Sathan is a continuall aduersarie, séeking to
choake the séede of thy worde, and all other good graces in vs: therefore O Lorde let it please thée, to take vs vnto thy selfe: so that no temptation of the worlde, flesh, or diuell, ouertake vs: but deliuer vs from sinne, and all the occa∣sions of sinne. O Lorde giue vs grace to stoppe sin at the beginning, before it come either into action or consent, so that wée ay∣ming at thy glorye in all our labour and affaires, and walking as in thy presence. Endeuouring alwayes to kéep a good conscience, both in thought, worde, and déede, towards thy Maie∣stie and all men, all thy good blessings maye followe and fall vpon vs, to the great ioye of our heartes, and glory of thy name, through Christ Iesus. And for these our bodies, wée onely craue bread for the day, & true contentation with that thou sendst, crauing thy bles∣sing vpon vs in our labours, that wée may bee able to minister to our owne necessities, and rather be helpfull then
chargeable to others, and alwayes to rest as well contented with aduersitie, as prosperitie, hauing assurance that al shall fall out for the best, to them that loue and feare thée: aboue all thinges kéepe vs from vsing vnlawfull meanes to liue by, and let vs be ready to supplie the wants of our brethrē, as we would haue them to fulfill our necessities. O Lorde forgiue our enemies, and turne their harts if it be thy will, and graunt wee may alwayes bee more readie to take then giue offence to any: wee are this day to walke before, O Lorde goe before vs, and so preserue vs from sinne and the daunger thereof, that at night we come before thée againe to giue thée thankes for these and all thy mercies in Christ Iesus. Thou Lorde as dutie bindeth, and as thou hast commaunded, wee pray thée remember thy Church vniuersall, and more perticularly this Church of England. Send thy worde frée passage throughout the worlde, and graunt a
good gouernment to be continued ther∣withall, Lord sanctifie the hartes of all thy people that enioye it, & graunt wée may walke worthie of it in our liues and conuersation: bring to nought all their councels that are enemies vnto it and enuie the prosperous passage ther∣of; of; preserue our gracious Prince, the honorable Counsell, the godly & faith∣full bishops and pastors of thy Church and all that feare thy name, & further or fauour thy trueth: defend vs from our enemies, and goe forth with our armies against them: comfort the af∣flicted with all true comforts, & turne their sorowe into ioye. Haue mercie vpon vs and al thy people euery wher, espectallye in this land. Blesse this whole familie with all graces necessa∣rie for our callings euen for Christ Ie∣sus sake, in whose name for these and all other the testimonies of thy fouour, we praye as he hath taught vs in his holy Gospell, saying: Our Father which art in heauen, &c.
A shorte forme of Morning prayer, to be vsed when want of opportunitie and vrgent affaires doe hinder vs to vse the other. O Lord our God before whose pure and holy eyes, no vncleanes or sin can be hid or couered, we wretched & sinfull creatures, and yet by thy mer∣cie thy vnworthie and poore seruants, do humble our selues before thée, in the name of Iesus Christ, acknowledging our selues to haue grieuously sinned a∣gainst thée, in thought, word, and déed, from our first enteraunee into this world, vnto this present time, and our repentaunce for the same we confesse, hath béene very little or nothing at all, so that wée may iustly feare and blush to approch into thy presence, with so small contricion of hearte, and wound of conscience, as we now doe, but that wée knowe thy mercie excéedeth thy wrath, in which mercie we beséech thée to looke downe from heauen vpon vs,
for Christ Iesus sake, and so to worke repentaunce in vs, for our vnthankful∣nes, abuse of thy patience, ignorance, infidelitie, neglecte of thy worde, and all other our sinnes, as our worldlines, carnall securitie, and the rest, that it may please thée to accept vs in the obe∣dience of thy Sonne, and to accompt of the same as a perfit raunsome for vs, assuring our Spirits by the testimonie of thy Spirite, that our sinnes are par∣doned, and wee reconciled to thy Ma∣iestie through thy promised mercie in him. And to that ende that the time to come may be better employed then the time past: therefore let it please thée to giue strength vnto vs, that we may re∣sist all sinne, and the temptations ther∣of, and consume our dayes in continu∣all care to performe all good duties vn∣to thy maiestie, both in body and soule. And as this day wee are to walke in this worlde among sundrie and great enemies of the soule, so derect vs by thy grace, that we may be circumspect in al
our thoughts, wordes and workes, re∣deeming the season, because the dayes are euill. O Lord giue vs grace in all our labours, and enterprises, princi∣pally to ayme at thy glorie, preferring the same before our owne pleasure and profite, and suffer vs not to start aside from the obedience of thy wil in any of our affaires, but giue vs grace sincere∣ly and in vprightnes of heart, to walke before thée, as becommeth the Saintes and children of God, so that all propha∣nes, vanitie, euill speaking, anger, ma∣lice, impaciencie, couetousnes, and all other corruptions of our nature maye vanish and die, and wee by thy grace, and the power of thy holy spirite, may be made more then Conquerours ouer them in Christ Iesus. O Lord graunt that al our labours taken in hand, according to thy will, may haue such issue and effect as may be for thy glorie, the good of thy Church and our owne comfort, and because all good graces are wrought in vs by the
ministrie of thy worde, O Lord vouch∣safe this thy blessed ordinaunce vnto vs, let vs hunger after it, as after our appointed foode, and in the light there∣of, let vs walke as Children of light, and glorifie thy name more and more, in the pure and true obedience thereof, in all vnfained loue to thy Maiestie, and all our brethren for thy sake. Blesse this whole familie, and graunt that the gouernours may rule with wisdome and godly discretion, and those that are gouerned may obey as those that are called by thy word, and sanctified by thy spirite, so that we may all glorifie thée, and in the end be glorified of thée. Saue thy whole Church we beséech thée, this Church of England especial∣ly, beséeching thy good Maiestie not on∣ly to scatter the testimonies of thy fa∣uour and grace vpon thy people euery where, but especially vpon these our dominions, and euery parte thereof. Regarde aboue the rest, the good and prosperous estate of our Soueraigne
Lady Quéene Elizabeth, honoring her Royall person, with all graces necessa∣rie for her worthie and high calling, & possesse her hart with a principall zeale for thy glory, so that by her holy go∣uernement, sinne and superstition may be beaten downe, and all vertue and godlines erected and maintained to the further increase of thy kingdome, and ouerthrow of Sathans dominions. Blesse the honorable counsellers with wisedome and holy Iudgement, that from their heades and heartes, as from a happie fountaine may flowe all good direction and orders for the sound and right gouernment both of Church and commonwealth. Blesse all thy mi∣nisters and Church guides, with all in∣crease of graces fit for their places, and increase the number of those that bee faithfull, whome thou wilt vse to adde soules to thy kingdome, and roote out those that are vnfit and not able to dis∣charge the charge which thy word lay∣eth vpon them.
O Lorde, thou that art Lorde of the Haruest, send faithfull laborers into the Haruest, in all places wée beséeche thée. Blesse all inferiour Magistrates with all graces fitte for their places. Blesse this whole land, and all sortes of people in the same, with the gift and grace of true repentance, both for the preuenting of thy iudgements threat∣ned, & for the remouing of those which are vpon vs. Fight for vs against our aduersaries, and through thy mercie let vs obtaine at all times victorie o∣uer them, that thou maiest still bee our God and we thy people, and thy name may be great in Israell. Confound An∣tichrist and all thine enemies, comforte and in thy good time deliuer all thy poore prisoners that are in affliction and bands for thy trueths sake, and arme vs against the like trials: be mer∣rifull to all thy people and giue peace and consolation of conscience to them that want it. These and all good graces for our selues and al thy people where∣soeuer,
we pray as our Sauiour Christ hath taught vs, saying. Our Father which art in Heauen, &c. 5 At dinner time, this must bee obser∣ued, that if there be any childe or ser∣uant which can reade in the house: that the Master cause him to reade a Chap. in time of dinner,The like is al∣wayes to bee done at supper time. or els if hee be able when he hath dyned, to reade one himselfe before he rise from ta∣ble, which will helpe well to season the meate, if the thinges that be read be rightly meditated of, alwayes pro∣uided, that we giue thankes both be∣fore and after meate. SIXTLY. Heere note that Euening pray∣er be done ey∣ther before sup¦per or shortly after, because otherwise, the flesh will be ve∣ry vnae to praye, but of the two, the ra∣ther before sup∣per.O Lorde God most mightie, our lo∣uing & mercifull Father in Christ Iesus we humble our selues before the throne of thy Maiestie, humbly craue∣uing pardon for all the sinnes which this day or any time of our life hereto∣fore we haue committed against thée, beséeching thée to forgiue our coldnes
in thy seruice, our vnthankefulnes for thy mercies, and so to mollifie our hard and barren heartes, with the force of thy worde, and operation of thy blessed Spirite, that we may more truely and effectually both sée and repent vs of all our sinnes heretofore committed. Yea, graunt déere Father, that we may de∣test and hate sinne in all men, especial∣lie in our selues, and be affraide to bee stained and defiled with the corruption thereof, though it be but in appearance. And because wée finde in our selues a willingnes to do good (which commeth of thy grace) and yet haue no power to performe the same: therefore wée pray thée O Lorde reforme this our nature, and make it more apt to the obedience of thy will, so that all sinne wherewith we haue stained thy holy Image in vs, may be remoued out of our hartes, and decreased, and the graces of thy spirit increased in vs as thou knowest them néedfull for vs. O Lord we are pilgrims here, hide
not thy commaundements from vs, set the feare of thy Maiestie before our eyes, let vs séeke with all our hartes to set foorth thy prayses by a holy & righte∣ous conuersation, as thou hast com∣maunded, being alwayes afraid to vio∣late or breake the least of thy comman∣dements, kéepe vs safe frō the contagi∣ons and manners of the worldly, and make vs a light of veritie and holynes vnto this peruerse and crooked genera∣tion amongst whome we liue, giue vs grace good Lorde to walke worthie of our high calling in Christ Iesus, in all true zeale for thy glory, and vnfaigned loue to thy Church, and graunt that in all our studies and labours, our care may be such to please thée, as that wée may haue the ioy of thy Spirit, and the happie peace of conscience to dwel con∣tinually in our hartes. To this end let thy worde be the lanterne to guide all our steps by, and to direct vs to all our doings, and graūt we may shew foorth the fruites thereof, in all vertue and
godlynes. With fauor regarde our labors and enterprises, which this day wée haue trauelled in or hereafter shall prosecute according to thy wil: & graunt we may so vse this world, as though we vsed it not, and in all thinges and aboue all thinges, let thy glory and the setting forth of thy prayses, be most deare vnto vs at all times. Blesse thy Church euery where, es∣peciallie here amongst vs in this land: giue all true zeale vnto our Prince, to gither, with a princely and wise heart: giue vnto her Counsellers the spirit of wisedome and counsell: vnto our Iud∣ges the spirit of iudgement: and to all our Magistrates the spirit of courage and godlines, to punish vice and main∣taine vertue: giue wisedome and faith∣fulnes to our pastors and teachers and all holy obedience to all thy people: minister all néedefull comfortes to the afflicted: giue thy worde a frée passage, and graunt all thinges néedefull for the
finishing of the number of thy elect peo∣ple, euen for Christ Iesus sake. Therefore Lorde we thanke thée for all thy mercies, and for this mercifull libertie wée inioye to come before thée. Wee render from the bottome of our heartes all vnfained prayses vnto thy Maiestie for our creation and continu∣all preseruation: for our health, life, li∣bertie and peace, for our foode, rayment and all other thy benefites, for the good of our bodies. But especiallie wee con∣fesse our selues infinitelie bounden for those blessings which are greater, as our election before all worldes, our redemption by Christ Iesus, our voca∣tion and calling by the gospel, our sanc∣tification by the Spirit, for calling vs out of darkenes, into thy meruellous light, and for seperating vs in suche poore measure, from the loue of this worlde, and worldly commoditie. We praise thée for thy worde, for thy Sa∣craments, and all thy vndeserued mer∣cies, not only vppon our selues, but al∣so
vpon our Prince and countrey: wée thanke thée for her gratious Maiestie, and the peace we enioy vnder her: wée thanke thée for the wise, and honorable Counsellors, the godly Maiestrates, faithfull Ministers, & for all thy faith∣full people. Lorde continue still merci∣full vnto vs, in Christ Iesus. Confirme vs in the Faith and obedience of thy Sonne, as many as thou hast alreadie called: and call all those that goe astray, and hauing finished thy worke: come spéedely in the cloudes for our full deli∣uerance we pray thée, yea come Lorde Iesus, come quickly. Now Lord we commend our selues, our soules and bodies into thy good handes, beséeching thée to kéep and pre∣serue vs this night, to giue quiet rest and sléepe to our bodies, and peace of conscience to our soules, that we being preserued from daungers and restored to the vse of thy fauor: the next day we may be careful to performe all good du∣ties to thy Maiestie, most to thy glorye
and our comfortes in Christ Iesus. In whose name for the continuance of thy fauor, in graunting all these and all o∣ther good graces: we praye as he hath taught vs, saying. Our father wich art in heauen halow∣ed be thy name, &c. 7 Certaine petitions to be vsed in mor∣ning or euening prayer, as occasion shall serue. In time of any generall visitation, as warre, sickenes, famine, &c. Say this petition. O Lorde our God, thou doost iustly correcte vs for our sinnes by this thy hand: make it profitable vnto vs wée beséech thée, and afflict not our land aboue measure, least the enemie say, where is their God become? Wee are thy people & the workemanship of thy handes: remember therfore thy aunci∣ent mercies to our forefathers, Abra∣ham, Isaac, Iaacob, and for Christs sake
suffer not our enemies to preuaile ouer vs, but put an ende to our miseries, that we may liue and dwell in peace, and inioy our former libertie, to serue thée, and the fruites of the earth in due time. Let vs therfore sée the sinnes that most displease thée, and repent truely of them, that so thou mayest turne thy fa∣uourable countenance towardes vs, in our Lorde and Sauiour Christ Jesus. In any particular visitation of thy selfe or anie of thy familie, say this peti∣tion. O Lorde our God, thou art righte∣ous in all thy dooings, but wee are moste vnrighteous, open our eyes to sée our sinnes which thus displease thée, and touch our hartes with vnfaig∣ned sorrow for the same, that we may no longer prouoke thy displeasure. And good Lorde graunt that we may sée thy purpose in thus afflicting vs, that wée may finde out the cause, and repent vs
of it, lay no more vpon this thy seruant then he is able to beare, let not the ene∣mie haue power ouer him, but assist him with thy spirit, against all assaults whatsoeuer, graunt him patience, and deliuerance out of this miserie in thy good time, which way shal séeme best to thy Maiestie. These and all good gra∣ces, wee craue for Christ Iesus sake, our onely Lorde and Sauiour, Amen. 8 Note, That the night season must not bee spent in idle and filthie talking, which becommeth not Christians, but shall be giuen accompt of. See E∣phes. 5, 4. Math. 12.36. Therfore foure nightes in the weeke, let them bee spent in honest and vertuous confe∣rence, that tendeth to edification, in reading Gods worde, in singing of Psalmes, as these scriptures com∣maunde: vz. Ephes. 4.29. Colloss. 4.6. Ephes. 5.19. Collossians. 3.16. The other 2. nights let them bee passed away as oportunitie and health shall
permit, in conferring with our family and examining them in foure or fiue questions of these principles of Faith, which followe: as the scriptures com∣maund and exhort vs: vz. Deu. 6.6.7.8.9. Eccle. 12.1. Dan. 12.3. 2. Tim. 3.14.15. He. 5.12. 1. Pet. 3.15. which Scrip∣tures I pray you look ouer with aduise. ¶ The Lords day must thus bee spent, vz. IN hearing the worde, and ioyning with the Congregation in praier and thankesgiuing. In receauing the Sa∣craments when occasion shal serue. In visiting the sicke, reléeuing the poore, meditating on Gods worde and his workes, auoyding all lewd companie, as also carding, dycing, &c. & at night to follow the example of the Church of Be∣rea, in calling to minde the things wee haue learned as these scriptures teach vs, 1. Iohn 4.1.1. Th. 5.21. Act. 17.11. And in thus dooing the peace of God shall be vpon you.
¶ A breefe Cathechisme Conteining the principles of the Christian faith, meete to bee learned of all true Christian Families. Question. IS there any creature in heauen or in earth, which must not be subiect vn∣to God? Aunswere. No,Gen. 2.1. & 1.27. & 2.7. Exod. 20.2. Ioshua. 24.14.15.24. Rom 11.36. 1. Tim. 6.15. Apoc. 19.16. for he hath created both Angels and men, and all other creatures both in Heauen and earth, and all places, to that ende, that they shoulde serue and obey him. Q. How is this seruice and obedi∣ence performed? A. When we reuerence his word and kéepe his commaundements,Luk. 12.47.48. & 17.9.10. be∣cause thereby wee manyfest both our subiection and his authoritie ouer vs, as our Lorde, and the God of power to require the same of vs.
Quest. What call you the worde of God, or which are his commaunde∣ments? Ans. I call that the worde of God which is contained in sacred and holye Scriptures,Iohn. 5.39. Heb. 2.2, 3.4. Luke 16.29.31. Deut. 4.13. Exo. 19.18.20. of the olde and new Testa∣ment, commonly called the Byble, and those are his commaundements which he gaue in Mount Sinay, which are as it were an abridgement and summe of the whole scriptures. Q. How many commaundements be there? A. Ten. Q. Rehearse them? Ans. Then God spake all these wordes &c.Exod. 20.1. ad. Q. How can these silly and dumbe creatures bserue Gods woorde and Commaundements? for you say that al creatures must obey him. A. In continuing in that first order and estate wherein the Lord first pla∣ced them,Psal. 148.5.6. Psal. 104.9. and whereto by his word hee first enioyned them.
Q. Howe is man inferiour to the vnreasonable creatures in this obedi∣ence? A. In that our first Parentes ha∣uing broken Gods Commandements,Gen. 3.6.16.1 Rom. 5.14, 15, ad 20. in eating of the forbidden trée, they themselues became not onelye sinfull and accursed,Gal. 3, 22. Psal. 14.1, 3. but haue left vnto vs who doe succéede them, the inheritance of their sinne which wee call originall sinne. Q. What then shall wee thinke of our selues that are thus corrupted? A. Surely that by nature we are the children of disobedience & wrath,Ephes. 2.1, , 3. Ro. 7.19.20, 23 prone to that which is euill, and vntoward to that which is good, for this originall sinne hath so infected both soule and bo∣die, that we can doe nothing but trans∣gresse Gods lawes. Que. What call you transgressi∣on? Ans. Transgression is the breathe of the Lawe,Rom. 7.7. Deut. 5.21. which the Apostle calleth sinne.
Q. Doth God allow of this sinne, or may we think our selues not to be a∣ny whit the worse, or lesse blessed be∣cause we are sinfull? A. God forbid we should so thinke, for as we sinne and breake Gods laws dayly in thought,Psal. 19.12. Gen. 6.5. Eccles. 7.22. 1. Iohn. 1.8. Math. 5.19.22. Rom. 6.23. Gal. 3.10. Iam. 2.10. word, and déede: so by the iustice of God, we deserue eternall death bothe of soule and bodye for the least of our sinnes, though it bee but in thought and in all our life, as the due and deserued stipend thereof. Q. This being so that wee by na∣ture can doe nothing, and sinne deser∣uing death: what are wee to doe for re∣medie in this case? A. We are herein principally to ob∣serue foure things, without the which our estate is but miserable. Q. I pray you rehearse them vnto me, that I maye discerne whether you know them or no. A. FirstRom. 7.7.9.10.11. I am to praye to God to open my eyes that I may beholde my selfe, and sée how I am conuicted of my
sinne by his lawe, and haue incurred his wrath against me for the same. (2) I am to repent and to forsake this my sinne,2. Act. 3.19. Ioell. 2.12.13. Ier. 3.14.15.22. which hath brought vp∣pon me this condemnation and misery. (3) I must vppon this repentance, séeke onely for remedy in Christ Iesus,3. Iohn. 3.16. Math. 11.28. 1. Iohn 2.1. Ephes. 2.9. Act. 4.12. Gall. 2.21. and not trust to any good workes or de∣seruings of my owne: (4) And lastly, I must haue assu∣rance of faith, & be stedfastly perswa∣ded that Iesus Christe by his holy suf∣sufferinges,4. Heb. 11.6. Iam. 1.6. Gall. 3.13. Iohn 14.18.26.27. Rom. 8.15. Heb. 4.16. hath appeased the wrath of his father, hath eased me of the burthen of my sinnes, and will not onely quic∣ken me by his comforting spirit: but restore me hereby from death vnto life. Q. How hath Iesus Christ thus effected our peace and deliuerance frō so great punishment? A. Because as hee was man,Ephes. 5.30. 1. Tim. 1.15. Esay. 53.5. 1. Pet. 2.24. Rom. 4.25. Colloss. 1.19.20. & 2.15. hee suffred for sinne in that nature in the which it was committed, vz. in mens nature: and so satisfied Gods iustice by that one oblation of his owne body and
blood for our attonement: secondly be∣ing God, he was able to ouercome and breake the bonds of death, and so who∣ly and fully to effect my saluation. Q. Hauing thus escaped the ter∣ror and cursse of death, tell me more plainely howe thou attainest euerla∣sting life? A. Christe Iesus hauing accom∣plished perfect righteousnes,Psal. 32.2. Iohn 14.16, 17. Iohn 17.13, 21, 22, 23, 24. it is mine by imputation: and being sanctified by the fulnes of his spirite which hee hath receiued, hee doth offer and present vs to the father, crauing that wee may be partakers of euerlasting life and glorie with him. Q. Shall all be pertakers of this life and glorie? A.Iohn 1.12. & 3.18. Iohn 20.8. Gal. 3.11. Habak. 2.4. Rom. 1.17. Heb. 10.10.38. Noe, not anye but the true and faithfull belieuers, who can applye Christs death to themselues, by a liuely faith, the summe of which faith is con∣tained in the Apostles Créede, Q. Rehearse the Creede? A. I belieue in God &c.
Q. What call you Faith? A. It is the gifte of God,Iohn 6.29. 1. Iohn 3.23. 1. Iohn 5.12, 13 and as the hand of the soule, to laye holde on Christ and his merites, and all good things which are offered and promised in him. Q. How may we attaine to this Faith? A. First,1. Iohn 2.20. & 3.24. & 4.13. by the inwarde meanes which God hath appoynted to worke the same in vs: & secondly, by the out∣ward, ordained for that purpose. Q. Which is the outward meanes ordained? A. The preaching of the word and ministration of the gospell,Rom. 10.14 Gal 4.19. Ephes. 4.11. & 1. Thes. 5.19.20. which if we neglect to receiue and practise, we shall be void of all saith, and so consequently of all saluation. Q. Hath GOD appointed anie meanes to confirme this faith? A. Yes, the blessed Sacramentes,1. Cor. 11.17. of our Lord and Sauiour Christ Iesus. Q. How many Sacramentes be there.
A. Two, Baptisme, and the Lordes Supper, as appeareth, Rom. 4.11. 1. Cor. 10.2, 3. Act. 2.26. Math. 21.25. & 28.19, & 26.26. Q. What is a Sacrament? A. An outward and holy signe, or∣deined by God himselfe, and by the confirmatiō of the word applyed there∣vnto, representeth spirituall and inui∣sible graces vnto vs, to manifest Gods fauour towards vs, and to confirme our Faith. Q. What call you Baptisme, and what benefite haue you by it? A. Baptisme is the seale of my re∣generation & vniting to Christ,Rom. 4.6. Acts 22.16. 1. Pet. 3.21. Colloss. 2, 11. Tit. 3.5. where∣as before I was a bond-slaue to fathan And it assureth me, that as my bodie is wached with water, so by the death of Christ my soule is washed frō sinne in his bloud, and from the guilte and punishment of sinne. And to conclude, it teacheth me that by Christes death I should learne to dye vnto sinne, and by his resurrection, arise to holynes
oflife, which is the newe birth. Q. What are you to obserue in the Lordes Supper, and what dooth it re∣present vnto vs? A. It assureth me by the operation of the spirit,Luke 22.19.22. Iohn 6.53.54.55.56. & 58. that nowe being receaued by Baptisme into Gods family, I shall be nourished with the liuing bread and water of the bodye and bloud of Christe, as my bodye is refreshed with the outwarde vse of bread and wine, and that as surely as the bread is bro∣ken and the wine is powred out, so as∣suredly the body of Christ was broken, and his bloud shed for my sinne. Q. How may a man knowe whe∣ther he haue this faith, which is begot∣ten by the worde, and confirmed by the Sacraments? A. The principall and chiefest signe thereof, is the spirit of Christ,Rom. 8.9.10.11.14.15.16. which is the seale and pledge of our adoption, and the earnest penny of our Saluati∣on: and this spirit is in none effectual∣ly but in Gods elect.
Q. How shall wee decerne, whe∣ther this spirit be in vs, or no? A. By the fruits thereof,Matth. 3.11. which will burst forth as a flame of fire. Q. Which be those fruites? A. They be these. First, loueMath. 22.37. Mark. 12.29. Exod. 20.2. Deut. 6.2. to the Lord and his worde, worshipping him in soule and bodye, andIob 13.15. Iohn 14.15. depen∣ding vpon his prouidence both in pros∣peritie and aduersitie: Secondly, a fullRom. 8.10. Luke 1.75. & 10.4.2. alteration in my self: that I am dead to sinne, and the maners of the world, and that I am now giuen to delight in Gods word and the hearing of it,Heb. 3.12. 1. Thes. 5.14. Coloss. 3.16. Iam. 5.20. to exhorte others vnto well doing, especi∣allyIosh. 20.15. Psalm. 101. Ephes. 6 4. those that are vnder my charge, beingPsal. 8.8. & 116.12. Rom. 12.1. Psal. 50.14.15. 1. Thes. 5.16. thankefull to God for all his mercies in Christ Iesus, vsing all exer∣cises of Christianitie, which tend to a godly and new life,Math 6.2. 1. Cor 13.3. hauing charitie towardes all men, and expressing the same by some signes of my loue, and to conclude holding fast the holyHeb. 25. Ephes. 2.20.11.22. com∣munion, with the rest of the members whereof Christ is the head.
Q. How are these graces of the spi∣rit obtained. A. Euen by the same meanes that the spirit it selfe is obtained, which is, by faithfull prayer vnto God only, that he will not harden our heartes, & cause vs to erre, but giue the pledge of his spirit vnto vs, & the graces therof. vide. Psal. 51.10, 11. Isai. 63.17. Psal. 50.25. Q. Must wee praye for nothing but for our faith and the spirit? A. Yes,Act. a. 24.29. Ephes. 6.18.19. 1. Tim. 2.12. we must praye not onely for our selues, but also for the whole Church: especiallye hauing a care to aske those thinges at Gods handes, which may most set foorth his glory, as we are taught in the Lords prayer. Q. Rehearse the Lordes prayer. A. Our father which art in, &c. Q. How way we be assured, that God will giue an aunswere to our prayer?Iohn 16.23. 1. Iohn. 2.1. 1. Pet. 25. Mark. 11.24. Luke. 11.9. A. First, if we aske the thinges we néede, in and for Christs sake. Se∣condly, if we aske in faith.
Q. What say you then to the pray∣er of the wicked. A. They are vndoubtedly abhomi∣nable to the Lorde,Prou. 1.28.29.30. & 28.9. not onely in respect that they want faith, but also because they perfourme not obedience to the Lordes voyce when hee calleth, but turne their eares from it. Q. Rehearse now the summe of all that thou hast learned? A. The summe of all is this. 1 That I finde my selfe to be most miserable, in respect of Gods lawe, which condemneth me in my sinne: In that it requireth I should loue God a∣boue all, and my neighbour as my selfe, and yet I violate the same, both in thought, worde, and déede. 2. That through Gods vnspeake∣able fauour, I finde remedy for my sin, that although ye Lorde hath giuen such a lawe as I cannot performe and kéep, because no other lawe then such a per∣fect rule of righteousnesse would agrée with his nature, therefore not by my
owne deseruing, but by the mercie of our Lord God in the death of his Son, and our Sauiour, the guiltines of my sinnes taken away, and I am dischar∣ged. 3 And lastly, that I rest thankefull all my life long, for this exceeding be∣nefite, and shewe foorth the fruites of my redemption, by a righteous and holy conuersation, springing from a liuely and true faith, which is begot∣ten by his worde, and sealed by his Spirite. This is the summe. FINIS.
A Carde for Communi∣cants to looke vpon, before they presume to come to the Lordes Table, fit to be learned of all that will not receiue vnworthelye. Question. HOw many thinges are to be re∣garded and learned of them that approche to the Lordes Table, to re∣ceiue the holye misterie of his holye Supper. Answere. Principally one thing, which is to examine themselues before they eate, least not discerning the Lordes bodye, they eate and drinke vnworthely, and so the bread and wine be vnto them of no greater force then the supper was to Judas, euen a seale of their condem∣nation. Q. What meane you by discerning the Lordes Supper?
A. I meane that we must not come to the Lordes Table as to a common feast or banquet, regarding onely the outward elements, as though bread and wine were become our spirituall nourishment, but that by the outward signes wee be ledde as it were by the hand to that which they signifie, name∣ly: that Christ Jesus hath suffered the death of the crosse, to take away my sinnes which are the cause of my con∣demnation, and to bring me vnto euer∣lasting life through that fulnes of grace which resteth in him. Q. You say the principall thing to be regarded, is to examine our selues: wherein dooth this examination con∣siste? A. In these foure pointes especially which are not lightly to be considered off. Q. Which be they, tell me briefely? A. 1. That I haue some knowledge to discerne the Lords body as is afore∣saide, and be able by a liuely and true
saith, to apply Christ and all his me∣rites to my soule for my consolation & comfort, least otherwise by hauing no féeling of Gods mercie & loue towards me, the Sacrament doe appeare to be but a dead letter vnto me. 2. That I finde my selfe inwardly and truely grieued for all my sinnes both lesser and greater, yea for all my idle wordes and vnprofitable workes, and for all sinnes whatsoeuer, whether actuall, or originall: and that I purpose not to sinne againe for any pleasure or prosite whatsoeuer; but to behaue my selfe before him all the dayes of my life▪ in performance of all holy duties accor∣ding to his worde. 2. That as I sée by the breaking or cutting of the bread, and powring out the wine, that Christs bodie and bloud was deuided, broken, and powred out for my sinne: so to finde my heart lyf∣ted vp vnto God, and prepared to giue humble and heauenly thankes vnto him, as for all his mercies, so especially
for those present benefites which we sée before our eyes, and pertake at his ho∣ly Table. And to conclude, to bee as ready to be broken & slaine for Christs sake, as he was for mine, by taking vp his crosse and following him. 4. And lastly, as I finde by the vewe of all these mercies, that God loueth me vndeseruedly, so that I finde and féele my selfe readie to loue all men in like sorte, though they deserue it not, yea my very enemies, Q. Are these sufficient rules to ex∣amine our selues by? A. These being conceaued in our heads, imprinted in our heartes, and expressed in our lyues, will further our worthie receiuing, to our euerlasting comforte. Certaine formes of Thankesgiuing. Grace before meate. O Gracious and blessed Lorde God who giuest al things abound ant∣ly
to thy seruants, and féedest them in due season: we humbly beséeche thée to sanctifie these thy good creatures proui∣ded for vs, forgiuing our sinnes, which haue deserued the contrary. Vouchsa∣fing for Christs sake, to giue vs a sober and moderate vse of thy creatures, so that whatsoeuer strength wée receiue from them, we may bestowe the same in thy seruice, to the setting foorth of thy glory in thy onely Sonne our Lord and blessed Sauiour Christ Iesus. Grace after meate. WE thanke thy Maiestie most mercifull and heauenly Father for these, and all thy mercies vpon our selues and all thy people, beseeching thée of thy Fatherlye goodnesse, to con∣tinue thy fauour vppon vs, and vpon thy whole Church. To send thy word into all places, and to graunt a conti∣nuall increase of the faithfull disposers thereof. To blesse our Prince and coun∣trey, to be mercifull to all our sinnes.
Comforte all the afflicted members of Christ: arme vs against the day of try∣all. Shorten these dayes of sinne, and increase our faith euermore. Graunt these and all good graces, euen for Christ Iesus sake, to whome with thée and the holy spirite, be al honour, praise and glory for euer, Amen. A thankesgiuing, to be vsed after Cathechising. WE magnifie thy name O Lorde our God, for thy patience and vse of thy word, at this and al other times, beséeching thy Maiestie to pardon our vnreuerent handling of the same, and to write in our heartes the thinges which wee haue learned, and giue vs the practise thereof in our liues. Lorde continue thy fauour still towardes vs, by giuing a long & prosperous reigne to our gratious Soueraigne, that vn∣der her godly and peaceable gouerne∣ment we may still enioye this libertie to thy glory, and our comfortes, both now and for euer. Amen. FINIS.
