19490 99838665 3052
A Briefe description of Ire∣land: Made in this yeare, 1589. by Robert Payne, vnto xxv. of his partners for whome he is vn∣dertaker there. Truely published verbatim, ac∣cording to his letters, by Nich. Gorsan one of the sayd partners, for that he would his countreymen should be partakers of the many good Notes therin contayned. AT LONDON, Printed by Thomas Dawson. 1589.
To his very good friend M. Nicholas Gorsan of Trowell in the Countie of Nottingham, and the rest of his xxv. partners for Ireland, giue these. LET not the reportes of those that haue spent all their owne and what they could y any meanes get from others in England, discourage you from Ireland, although they and such others by bad dealinges haue wrought a generall discredite to all English men, in that countrie which are to the Irishe vnknowne. These men will say there is great danger in tra∣uelling the countrie, and much more to dwell or in∣habite there: yet are they freed from three of the greatest dangers: first, they cannot meete in al that land any worsse then themselues: secondly, they need not feare robbing for that they haue not any thing to loose: lastly, they are not like to run in debt, for that there is none wil trust them. The greatest matter which troubleth them is, they cannot get any thing there but by honest trauell, which they are altoge∣ther ignorant of. These men cannot tel what good
fruites England hath, the which Ireland wanteth, neyther can they iustly say, but that it lyeth better for the vent of all commodities then England doth. What these men haue reported or what the simple haue credited, that woulde rather beleeue a runnea∣gate then trauell to see: I care not. But what I haue discouered or learned in that countrey, I will herein recite vnto you. First, the people are of three sortes, the better sort are very ciuill and honestly giuen: the most of them greatly inclined to husbandrie, although as yet vn∣skilfull, notwithstanding, through their great trauel many of them are rich in cattel, some one man there milketh one hundred kine, and two or three hundred yeawes and goates, and reareth yearely most of their breed. Their entertainement for your dyet shalbe more welcome and plentifull, then cleanly and handsome, for although they did neuer see you before, they will make you the best cheare their countrey yeeldeth for two or three daies, & take not any thing therefore. Moste of them speake good English and bring vp their children to learning. I sawe in a Grammer schoole in Limberick, one hundred, and threescore schollers, most of them speaking good and perfite English, for y• they haue vsed to conster the Latine into English. They keepe their promise faythfully, and are more desirous of peace then our English men, for that in time of warres they are more char∣ged:
And also they are fatter praies for the enemie who respecteth no person. They are quicke witted and of good constitution of bodie, they reforme them selues dayly more and more after the English man∣ners: nothing is more pleasing vnto them then to heare of good Iustices placed amongst thē. They haue a common saying which I am perswaded they speake vnfaynedly, which is, Defend me, & spend me: meaning from the oppression of the worser sort of our countreymen: They are obedient to ye lawes, so that you may trauell through all the land without any danger or iniurie offered of ye very worst Irish, and be greatly releeued of the best. The second sort being least in number are called Kernes, they are warlike men: most of that sorte were slayne in the late warres. The third sort, are a very idle people, not vnlike our English beggers, yet for the moste part, of pure complexion and good constitution of body: one of ye greatest ouersights in the better sort is, for y• they make not that idle sort giue accompt of their life. They haue the Englishe lawes and gouernours as is in England: First, there is a Lord deputy ouer the whole land, that representeth her Maiestie, al∣so a Lord Chancellor, a Lord Treasurer, a Lord chiefe Iustice, and all other Magistrates, Officers and Courtes, in like maner as belongeth to West∣minster. The land is deuided into fiue great parts: that is
to saye. Munster, Lanster, Conath, Meath, and Vlster. In Munster, are these vit. great countries: Owrm∣wood, Deasmond, Corke, Waterford Typerare, Lym∣bericke, and Carrey: a great part of Munster, was forfited to her Maiestie by meanes of ye Deasmondes late rebellion. There is two very riche countries called Kennory and Conelogh, both within the countie of Lemereck: they are called the gardens of the land for ye varietie and great plentie of all graine and fruites, and also there is more plentie of venison, fish and fowle then els where in Ireland, although in euery place there is great store. This land belonged sometime to the knight of ye valley, who for high treason was execu∣ted at Lemerecke. Ouer euery part is an English∣man liefetenant which hath authoritie as fully as the Marshall, to erecute Marshall lawes vpon the Irishe offēders at al times. Also there are Iudges of assize for euery circuit, who keepe their assises as our Iudges doe: if any matter be to be tryed there betweene an English man and an Irish, the Iury is half English and halfe Irish. There is a sheriffe of euery countie, with vndersheriffes, Arrant Bay∣liffes, & al other officers appertaining. Also there is a conuenient number of Iustices of peace in euery countie with Constables and pettie Constables, who keepe their quarter sessions orderly. The countrey is scituated some what neerer the Equinoctiall lyne then England, but yet for that it
lyeth more vpon the Ocean seas & is full of Riuers & smal brookes, it is not so hote in summer as Eng¦land, neyther is it so cold in winter, for that the seas fretteth away the Ice & Snowe there, much more then in England. The general Map of Ireland, which is ioyned wt the olde Map of England, is moste false: The au∣thour (as it seemeth) drew them both by report, and the common computation of myles: and made his Scale after the English measure, that is one thou∣sand paces, or fiue thousand footes to the myle: but therein he greatly deceiued himselfe, for the shortest myles in England are much longer then that mea∣sure, and an Irish myle is longer then two of those myles, by which meanes he hath made the Map of England lesse by ye halfe then it should be. Notwith∣stāding, he hath ouer reached in his nūber of parish Churches, and the Map of Ireland littell more then one fourth of that it would be, if it were truely drawen. This seemeth strange, and hath deceiued many ignorant in Geometrie: but alwayes take this for a principle, that the square of two myles con¦tayneth iust foure tymes so much as the square of one myle, and so of al proportions from the greatest to the least: wherefore as much may be sayd of the long myle which containeth two short myles. Some mistrust that the Spaniardes will enter the land, & that the Irish wil releeue them: no doubt there are some Traytors in Ireland, I would I
could truely say there were none in England: but this I dare assure you the greater number, and al the better sort doe deadly hate ye Spaniardes, & yet I thinke they beare them fayre weather, for that they are the popes champions, & a great part of the Irish (for want of good preaching & discipline) are greatly inclined to papistrie. But their intertainemēt this last yeare amongst ye Irish (notwithstāding they brought the popes holy candles & pardons) sheweth how they affect Spāish gouernemēt. Most of ye better sort of ye Irish haue read of their mōsterous cruelties in ye west Indiās, where they most tiranously haue murthered many millions moe of those simple creatures thē now liu∣eth in Ireland, euē such as sought their fauours by offering vnto thē al yt they had, neuer resisting nor of fering thē any harme. Wherfore I doubt not that ye Irish are so foolish to entertain such proud guestes knowing their tyrannie, & hauing not so well deser∣ued at their hands as those simple soules whō they so cruelly murdered. Neyther are ye Spaniardes so vn wise to trust those irish, who so lately imbrued their hands in their bloud, slaying them as doggs in such plentifull maner, that their garments went about ye countrey to be sold, as good cheape as beastes skins. If you haue not the sayd booke of the Spanishe cruelties, I pray you buy it, it is wel worth the rea∣ding, I haue for got the title, but it is of a small vo∣lume in quarto: it is written by a learned Bishop of
their owne countrey about forty yeares sithens in ye Castalian toonge, and dedicated to their king for re∣formation of those cruelties: afterwardes transla∣ted into English & diuers other languages, to make their monsterous tyrannie knowne to the worlde. When you haue read the same, conunend it to our Catholickes that wil be saued by their workes, and yet will not giue God thankes at their meate, for that they will not once haue in their mouth ye praier for our Queene, annexed to our vsual thanks giuing at meate. I pray God open ye eies of their vpholders, and let them see what these men gape for, which is no doubt the ruine and ouerthrow of her highnesse, whome I pray God preserue. But none are so blind as they that will not se. The Catholikes are borne with for their conscience sake, yet from such consci∣ences spring all the Traiterous practises agaynst her Maiestie. Although some of smal iudgements (which thinke euery soile good that beareth long grasse) haue fayled of their erpected woad crops, by meanes of their vn skilfull choyse of ground, yet assuredly the commo∣dities of the countrie are many moe then eyther the people can well vse or I recite. Their soyle for the most part is very fertile, and apt for Wheate, Rye, Barly, Peason, Beanes, Oates, Woade, Mather, Rape, Hoppes, Hempe, Flaxe and al other graines and fruites y England any wise doth yeeld. There is much good timber in many places & of ye straight∣nesse
and so good to reaue, that a simple workeman with a Brak axe wil cleaue a great Oke, to boards of lesse then one ynche thicke, xiiii. ynches broad and xv. footes in length, such a board there is vsuallysold for ii. d. ob. There is very riche and great plentie of Iron stone, and one sort more then we haue in Eng¦land, which they call Bogge myne, of the which a Smith there wil make at his forge Iron presently. Also there is great store of Lead Ore, & Wood suf∣ficient to mayntayne diuers Iron and lead workes (with good husbandrie) for euer. A barrel of Wheat or a barrell of bay Salt contayning three bushels & a halfe of Winchester measure, is sold there for iiii. s. Malt, Peason, Beanes, for ii. s. viii. d. Barly for ii. s. iiii. d. Oates for xx. d. a freth Sāmō worth in Lon∣don x. s. for vi. d. xxiiii. Herrings or vi. Makerels, vi. sea breames, a fat hen .xxx. Egges, a fat Pigge, one pound of Butter, or ii. gallōs of new Milke for apē∣ny. A redde Deare without the skinne, for ii. s. vi. d. A fat Beefe for xiii. s. iiii d. A fat Mattō for xviii. d. There be great store of wild Swannes, Cranes, Phesantes, Partriges, Heathcocks, Plouers green & gray, Curlewes Woodcockes, Rayles, Quailes, & al other fowles much more plentiful then in Eng∣and. You may buy a dosen of Quayles for iii. d. a do∣sen of Woodcocks for iiii. d. & all other fowls rata∣blie. Oysters, muskels, cockles and Samphiere a∣bout ye sea coastes are to be had for gathering great plentie: the Phisitions there hold, yt Samphier is a
present remedie agaynst the stone: you may buy the best Heafers there with Calues at their feet. for xx. s. a peece, the which are nothing inferiour to the bet∣ter sorte of Lyncolnshire breed. Their chiefe horsses are of as great price as in England, but carthorsses mares, and little hackneyes are of very small price, the meāest Irish man disdayneth to ryde on a mare. You may keepe a better house in Ireland for L. li. a yeare, then in England for CC. li a yeare. Al your commodities you may transport from ye sea side in ye countie of Corke (where I haue prouided for eache of vs foure hundred Acres of land) to England for viii. d. ye hundred waight, so that you make the same ready about S. Andrewes tide, when the herring fishers goe home from Irelād. The charg of which carriage for so much as you barrell, you may saue a great part through Cheapenes of the caske, & then wil ye most of your cōmodities, viz. Butter, Cheese. Bacon, Beefe, Honny, Ware, Tallowe, Corne, and Herring with diuers other Marchandize bee readie for the market. The worsser sorte of vndertakers which haue seig∣nories of her Maiestie, haue done much hurt in the countrie, and discouraged many from ye voyage: for they haue entyced many honest men ouer. promising them much and performing nothing, no not so much as to paie their seruantes, & workmen wages. They wil not let any terme, aboue xxi. yeres or three liues, and ye demaund for rent xii. d. ye Acre: this is so farre
from the meaning of her Maiestie, as appeareth by her highnes graūt, y• as I think they haue, or shortly will make all their estates voyde. They finde such profite from the Irishe tenantes, who giue thē the fourth sheafe of al their corne, and xvi. d. earel for a beastes grasse, besides diuers other Irish accusto∣med duties. So that they care not although they ne∣uer place any English man there. But ye better sort of vnder takers being many good knights & gentle∣men of great worship, do seek by al meanes possible to plant their landes with Englishmen according to ye meaning of her Maiesties graunt: they offer to any man either three hundreth acres of land in fee∣farme or foure hundred acres by lease for one hun∣dred yeares, for vi. d. the acre without any fine. Sir Richard Greenefield taketh a verie good or∣der for artificers & labourers: he wil let any poore man of honest behauiour a house, xl. acres of land & vi. milche Kyne for xl. s. the yeare, for the terme of three liues, and if any of these men after they haue bread on the same stocke a sufficient number of cat∣tell to store their ground, doe deliuer their stocke a∣gayne, then shal they pay but xx. s. rent for the rest of their termes. And if any of the said Kine be stolne, and the owner doe track which way they were dri∣uen from has ground, the sayd sir Richard will de∣liuer him so many Kyne for them, for that the law is there, if you tracke any stolne goodes into any mans land, hee must tracke them from him, or aunswere
them within xl. daies, so where the track ceaseth, the goodes must be answered. A man may be aswell and cleanely tabled at an English house in Ireland for the profit of fiue Kyne and fiftie sheepe, all which will be bought for vii. li. x. s. & for ye rent of so much land as wil keep them, which is xx. s. the yeare, as at the best ordinarie in England for vi. d. a meale: all which amounteth but to xxxv. s. vi. d. a yeare, accounting ii. s. in the pound for interest of the stocke. Wōen may be borded for the preste of foure Kyne, xl. sheepe, and xvi. s. rent. Seruants for iii. Kyne. xxx. sheepe, and xii. s. rent. Children, for ii. kine, xx. sheepe and viii. s. rent. Thus may a man that is xii. in houshold, viz. Himselfe, his wife, ii. seruauntes, and viii. children be very wel tab∣led a yeare for the profite of xxxi. Kyne, iii. C. and x. sheep, & vi. li. x. s. rent: al which stocke wil be bought for lesse then lx. li. The vse wherof being vi. li. the whole charge of a yeare for xii. persons is xii. li. x. s. which is xx. s. x. d. a peece. This hath not bene long vsed there, but nowe ye Englishman thinketh him∣selfe happie that can make such a bargayne with an honest man: for although yt which is not euery way to the gesse aboue xii. li. x. s. may make the host with good husbandrie more then a hundred markes. One hundred pounds wil buy lx. milch kine, CCC. yeawes, xx. swyne, and a good teame: the ground to keep these cattell, & vse this teāe on, wil be CCCC. acres at x. pound rent so your yearely charg will be
with interest of your mony, xx. li. for the which you may haue yeerely vpon good security with warrant of your stocke, xl. sirkins of butter, and fortie great ways of cheese, of the milke gathered betwirt May, and Michaelmas, which at x. s. the firkin, and xxv. s. the waie, is threescore & ten pounds, and the wooll and lamb of your sheepe. cannot be so litle worth as xxx. li. a yeare, all which amounteth to one hundred poundes: so may you declare besides your interest and rent, eightie pounds a yeere. To husband this farme, your tenant must keepe viii. persons, which may be well done with the pro∣fite of the swyne, wynter milke, calues and the crop which he should get vpon your land wt your teame. Most of the coyne in Ireland, and that which the people generally desire there, is base mony made of copper or brasse, they will not change you an angell into that money without iiii. d. gaines: I would to God her Maiestie would coyne foure hundred thou∣sand markes of the same, and lend it to the English marchantes gratis for two yeares, to be imployed there in mather, woade, rape, hoppes, hempe, flare and such other cōmodities, as might set some great number of our English men to work by which mea¦nes (in my iudgement) ye land might be very wel peo¦pled her Maiestie disburthened of a great part of her charge there, the marchantes made great gayners, and yet at the two yeares end paie her Maiestie her full summe in currant English money for that base
mettell, whereby her Maiestie might gayne at least CC. thousand poundes without hurt to any, & good to many thousandes. I haue sent you heerein closed an instructiō how you shal make a warraine for con¦nies of two acres of ground,  shalbe sufficient for a gentlemans house in which warraine, you may also make an Orchard, and the connies shall not barke your trees nor make their berries vnder the rootes, neither shal the sayd connies go foorth of two acres. Thus with my heartie commendations, I bid you heartily farewell. From my house at Paynes end, this xxv. of Iune. 1589. Your louing friend Robert Payne. The copie of an instruction for a Warraine. FIrst, you must choose two acres of very drie ground, and compasse it with a ditch as round as a circle, fiue footes deepe and seuen footes wide, let the slope side of your ditch be towardes your warraine, and that wayes throw vp all your earth, let the outsid be plum vpright, which you must presently payle otherwise the earth wil sal in: then plant your trees not aboue viii. ynches deep, and at the least xxiiii foote asunder, lay at euery roote close about the tree, asmuch pease strawe as a man will carry vnder his arme, the which will keepe the roote moyst in sommer, & warme from frostes in winter. The best time to set your teees is shortly after Michaelmas: which verefieth an old prouerbe in Kent if thou wilt a
good tree haue, let him carry a greene lease to his graue. In the very middest of your groūd you must make a little lodge, in the which you must haue eight seueral hutches, so placed that they may be alwayes open into the war∣raine, in euery hutche you must tye with a little chayne a tame bucke conny of the best kynde: then store your warraine with 64. of the better sort of tame female con∣nies, which is for euery bucke viii. does, euery weeke the first quarter: & then monthly you must wash your trees with water, so high as a conny can reache wherein you must burst the garbadg of a conny. Also euery weeke you must draw a peece of carraine at the foote of your payle in the bottome of your ditche round about your war∣raine, by which meanes your conies will neuer offer to touche your trees, nor come neere the payle to scrap thē∣selues out. You must feede your connies with the shortest and sweetest haye you can get: you may giue thē grasse, mallowes, cole wortes sow thistles, the, tops of carrats, scar¦rates, and any yeaths or weeds, they wil eate foure dayes in a weeke in sommer, and two dayes in winter, but not aboue for feare of the rotte: yet let thē haue haie enough at al times, you may fatte them with graines mixed with oates, bran, or French wheate: you must giue your cōnies euery day one oate sheafe, which will alwayes keep them hearty, sound, & fayre skinned. I doe accompt your char∣ges in keeping your cōnies to be xx. markes a yeare, that is your warrainers board and wages, viii. li. and the conies meate v. li. vi. s. viii. d. the increase at an indifferent recko∣ning, wil be seuen litters a yeare: euery conie of the best
kynde will bring vi. Rabbits at a litter, where one of that sort bringeth fewer, two will bring moe, some will bring ix. litters in ayeare: & that doe is not worth the keeping, that bringeth not vii. litters a yeare. The value of this in∣crease after the foresayd rates, and at viii. d. the couple, (which  very skinnes with good husbandrie of most of them wil be worth,) amounteth vnto the sum of xliiii. li. xvi. s. a yeare. But for feare you should fayle in your rec∣koning, as the womā did that supposed al the egges in her basket were capons: I would haue you allow for ca∣sualties, xi. li. ix. s. iiii. d. so resteth aboue all charges of the warrainer, and their meate, xx. li. by yeare declaro, which I thinke being welvsed can yeeld no lesse: although this kinde being bred in houses do not eate sweet, yet being bred after this manner, they are both the biggest, fattest, and sweetest conies that are.
