20281 99850390 15587
THREE SERMONS VPON THE SA∣CRAMENT OF THE LORDS SVPPER. By the late Faithfull and Worthy Minister of Jesus Christ, IOHN PRESTON, Dr. in Divinity, Chaplaine in Ordinary to his Majestie, Master of Emanuel Colledge in Cam∣bridge, and sometimes Preacher of Lincolnes Inne. LONDON, Printed by Thomas Cotes, for Michael Sparke, and are to be sold at the blue Bible in Greene Arbor. 1631.
I Iohn 5. 14. And this is the assurance which wee have in him, that if we aske any thing according to his will, he heareth us. THe scope of the holy Apo∣stle in this chapter, is to set forth some of those princi∣pall priviledges we have by Iesus Christ. One maine and principall (which is the greatest of all the rest) is that through him we have eternall life; And therefore (saith he) know this, that when you have the Sonne once, you have life: in the 12. ver. He that hath the Sonne hath life, and he that hath not the Sonne hath not life. Therefore (saith he) have I written this Epistle to you for this purpose, that you might consider well what gaine you have by Christ Iesus: These things have I written, (saith hee) in the verses before this that I have now read unto you, to you that beleeve in the Name of the Sonne of God, that you may know that you have eternall life. After this he names another great priviledge,
that wee have by Christ; mentioned in this verse, that I have now read unto you. This (saith he) is the assurance we have in him, that whatsoever wee aske according to his will, hee heareth us. This is the second great priviledge we have by Christ, we shall be heard in all our requests: it is no more but aske and have, put up what petition you will, if you be in Christ once, you have this assurance, that hee heareth you: but he delivers it with this condition, you must first be in him: We have this assurance in him (saith he) that if we aske any thing, according to his will, he heareth vs. So that you see, here are two plaine poynts lying evidently before us. 1 That except a man be in Christ,Doct. 1. he must not, hee ought not to apply to himselfe any of these spirituall priviledges, that wee have by him: if we be in Christ, this and all other are ours; if you be in Christ (saith he) then you have this assurance, for wee have that assurance in him. The second point that the verse affords us, is, 2 That whosoever is in Christ,Doct. 2. whatsoever he askes he shall have it. Now my full intenti∣on was, onely to have handled that which is mainely aimed at in the verse (for the other you see is but touched by the way) which is this great priviledge that belongs to all Christians, that whatsoever they aske in prayer according to the will of God, they shall bee heard in it:
But because I understand you had a Sacrament appointed for this day, I have altered a little that course; the hearing of that hath somewhat diverted mee, and caused mee at this time to pitch upon the other point which I named to you; That except a man be in Christ, be ought not to apply any priviledge to himselfe; if hee be, I say, all belongs to him. When you come to receive the Sacrament, it is a very great priviledge to meddle with those holy mysteries, to have those simboles given to you of the love and favour of God in Christ; but yet you must remember this, that except you be in Christ, you have nothing to doe with him, and therefore it is a fitte and necessary point for this season. For when the Apostle would give directions to the Corinth. what they should doe, to prepare themselves to the Sa∣crament, that they may be worthy receivers; hee gives it in this short precept:1 Cor. 11. 28. Let every man (saith he) examine himselfe, and so let him eate this bread and drinke this cup. Now what is a man to examine himselfe of? Surely every one that comes to the Lords Table, is to examine himselfe concerning these two things. 1 Whether he bee in Christ, and so whether he hath any right at all to come neere to him in that holy ordinance. 2 Though he be in Christ, yet he must exa∣mine himselfe, whether hee bee particularly prepared, quickned, and fitted; whether his
heart bee put into such a trance of grace, or fashioned so as it ought to bee, when hee comes to the immediate performance of such a duty as that is. Now because I handle this point, but onely for this particular occasion, I will not en∣ter into such a manner of handling of it, as I was wont to doe at other times, but onely take up so much of it as may serve for the present oc∣casion; Therefore because I say this to you: That except a man bee in Christ, hee ought not to take any priviledge to himselfe: wee will, First exhort every man to consider whether hee be in Christ: for this is the present question which any mans heart would aske, when hee heares this propounded; Why, if all the privi∣ledges bee suspended upon my being in Christ, my maine businesse is to examine whether I be in Christ or no. Now because a man may bee in Christ and yet be suspended by some interveni∣all sinne, by some indisposition of minde and heart, that may grow on him, from the actuall injoying of the present fruit and benefit of that priviledge which belongs to him Therefore we will first give you rules to examine your selves whether you be in Christ or no. It is ve∣ry usefull to all that now are to receive, or at any other time; its usefull you know too, not onely upon such an occasion as this, but upon all occasions; and therefore a point, (though pe∣culiarly belonging to this time being taken up for preparation for the Sacrament) which
we may the more boldly venture upon, and you ought to attend it more diligently. I will give you but these two maine notes or rules by which you shall try it. Whosoever is in Christ, there must passe a double act: one on our part, another on Christs part,Cant. 2. 16. My beloved is mine, and I am his; wee take Christ and Christ takes us; wheresoever you find these two acts, such a man is in Christ: There must be an act of our part, something the heart and mind of a man must doe to take Christ. Secondly the Lord sends and puts forth something of his, he doth put forth an act of the Holy Spirit, whereby he comprehends and takes us. Now if thou finde in thy selfe these two things; First, that thy heart hath exercised that act of taking the Lord Iesus; Secondly, that he hath sent forth a vertue and put forth an act of his to take and to comprehend thee; then cer∣tainely thou art in Christ; and if it be so, all the priviledges belong to thee; if not, thou hast no∣thing to doe with this holy Sacrament. Now for the cleare discerning of that act which is on our part, you must consider these things. 1 Whether you make Christ your chiefest Excellencie. 2 Whether you make him your chiefest Treasure. 3 Whether you make him you chiefest Ioy and Delight. 4 Whether hee bee your chiefest Refuge to
whom your hearts retire on all occasions. 5 Whether you set him up in your hearts for the chiefest Commander. My Beloved, if you finde all this done by you, then out of doubt, Christ belongs to you; They are all severall, but they meet in one cen∣ter, and serve together to make up one rule of triall, to know whether you have tooke Christ to you or no; and I will handle them all distinct∣ly as I have named them to you. 1 Therefore consider whether Christ be thy chiefest Excellency; for it is naturall to every man to seeke some excellency or other. Indeed beasts, so they may have that which is necessa∣ry for the life and service of nature, it is enough for them; and it may be it is enough for all bru∣tish men, whose soules are buried in their bo∣dyes that are but sepulchers of men, in whom that spectacle of excellency which is rationall, belonging to a man, is quenched in sensuality. These men, it may be, seeke no excellency at all, but so they may live in pleasures, so they may have that which belongs to their bodies, and to this present life, it is enough for them. But a man who hath any thing of a man in him, as hee is a man, considered in these higher parts of his soule, his mind and his will; hee seekes another excellency sutable to these parts: hee serves a higher, a more spirituall immateriall substance, such as the soule is; and according as mens mindes are of divers fashions, so they are in a
way of seeking severall excellencies for them∣selves, yet according to their different ages. Children delight in childish things, and so doe men likewise, from whom this childishnesse is worne; yet according to their severall fashion and understanding, so they seeke a severall ex∣cellency. Some seeke learning, knowledge and excellency in their profession; this is the excel∣lency they would have▪ Some seeke great places of authority and command, and if they had their wish, that is, the excellency they would have; Some seeke the favour of the Prince: Some to have a great estate, that men may say, hee is worth so much, he hath such Lordships, such faire houses, & lands belonging to him; if he had the excellencie he desires, these he would have. Every man in his owne kinde, according as mens understandings are stronger or weaker; according to their different education, as it hath beene more noble, and ingenious; according to the severall companyes they keepe, where they finde such and such things magnified; according to the severall ages they live in; (As wee say something is in request is one age, in one com∣pany, something in another) I say according to these severall occasions, so every man seekes a severall excellency to himselfe. Now consi∣der what is the excellency thy heart desires, a∣bove all thing else, whether it bee Iesus Christ; to be in him; to excell in grace; to have a new draught of Gods Image in thy soule; or whether
some such thing as I have named: Consider what is the proper vertue thou wouldest have thy soule to excell in, for there are severall ver∣tues; every thing hath some vertue or other which is proper to it; as the vertue of a knife is to cut well; the vertue of a horse to goe well; the vertue of a souldier to fight well; and the vertue of a Christian to be a holy man; to bee holy, gracious, and unblameable in his conver∣sation. Now what is the proper excellency thy heart aymes at: what is that thou esteem∣est thy vertue, that if thou wert put to thy choyse that thou mightest have a wish granted thee, thou wouldest most desire? whether wouldest thou desire this; to excell in grace and holinesse, to have thy sinfull lusts mortifyed, to have thy heart put into a holy frame of grace? or whether, (if thou wouldest deale impartially with thy selfe) is it not some other excellency that thy heart runnes upon? that thy thoughts and affections are most set upon? Consider when thou lookest upon others, what seemes most gracious in thy sight, by what thou doest most value the excellency of another man; for it is likely thou so esteemest thy selfe also: Con∣sider therefore I say what thou measurest thy selfe and others by; A man that is in Christ, sets so much by himselfe, and by every man as he is in Gods booke: as you see, men are rated, and their wealth esteemed according as they are in the Kings bookes. See what thy heart saith to
this, whether thou settest so much by thy selfe and by every man else, as he is in Gods favour; as he hath the eminency of grace and holinesse above others; or whether it bee something else by which thou ratest thy selfe and others: Con∣sider what is that outward Badge, that Livery, that Cognizance thou desirest to weare, which thou wouldest boast of among men: you shall see it in Paul, (saith he) When I come amongst you, I doe1 Cor. 2. 1. 2. not regard the excellencie of naturall wisedome; I care not to come with that; The time was when I prized it, as you prize it now; but now (saith hee) it is another excellency which I seeke, which I desire to weare (as it were) When I come amongst you, to preach the Gospell, (saith hee) I care for nothing else, I care not to bee thought to know any else, than Christ crucifyed: Consider with thy selfe now what thou wouldst have most eminent in thee, in the eyes and eares of men, that which thou wouldest weare in the view of all the world; whether it be the Livery of Christ; to professe the feare of God, to excell in grace and holy∣nes, though the world disgrace, despise and hate thee for it; Is this that thy heart desires? If so, its a signe thou seekest Christ for thy excellen∣cy. Consider likewise what it is that thou esteemest thy chiefest wisedome; for it is the dis∣position of men before they bee in Christ, be∣fore they have experience of the wayes of God, before they be regenerate, when they look upon
those wayes in others, they reckon them folly, they are1 Cor. 2, 14. foolishnesse to every naturall man: but when they are once in Christ, then they are wis∣dome unto them, that is, they reckon him the wisest man that excels most in these foolish courses, as before they deemed them. It is the Lords expression, Deu. 4. 6.Deut. 4, 6. This shall bee your wisdome before all people, to keepe my Lawes and Commandements. Consider now what is that thou reckonest thy chiefest wisedome, before all people; whether that which before thou thinkedst folly and weaknesse, and hadd'st a dis∣position in thy heart to contemne and scorne? whether now settest thou it at a higher price, and dost in truth thinke it thy wisedome, and art willing that all the world should know that thou thinkest so? By this you shall finde whe∣ther you make Christ your excellency by consi∣dering whether your hearts goe this way or no, to seeke a vertue in the excellencies of Iesus Christ, and so shew them forth to others; by examining whether this be thy cheifest wish, that thou mayest bee a Christian; that thou mayest bee found in Christ; that thou mayest be able to say as Paul said,Phil. 3. 7. 8. I reckon all other things as drosse, as base and vile things; onely to bee found in Christ, to be cloathed in his righteousnesse, to excell in the graces of his Spirit; this onely I prize as most excellent, and most worthy: And this is the first. 2 Secondly, consider what is thy chiefest
Treasure, for you seeMath. 13. 44. Hee that had gotten the field, hee gave all that heehad for it, and went away rejoycing, for hee reckoned it his greatest trea∣sure, and worth all the rest. It is certaine, whosoever hath taken Christ, doth so esteeme of him, hee reckons him to bee his chiefe trea∣sure. You will say, How shall I know it?Quest. Why, consider what men do with their trea∣sure,Answer. for it is certaine (as I said before, of excel∣lencie, so) every man hath some treasure or o∣ther; The poorest man that is, hath a treasure, something that hee esteemes of, which hee makes account of. I aske not what thou art pos∣sest of, but what thou most esteemest? for trea∣sures are as they are most esteemed of. As wee say of jewels, the worth of them is according to mens fancies, according as they are esteemed, so it is with every mans treasure; One makes this thing his treasure, another that. Now (I say) consider what thou makest thy treasure, and you shall know what your treasure is, by these markes. 1 A man layes up his treasure in the safest place. Then if Christ be thy treasure, thou wilt lay him up in the innermost parts of thy heart, he shall not dwell in thy tongue, he shall bee laid up in the closer of thy heart; hee shall not dwell in thy outward man, in thy understanding on∣ly, but hee shall bee laid up in thy inward part; (that is) he shall bee pitched upon the very bot∣tome
of thy heart, and there hee shall rest, there thou wilt entertaine him. 2 Againe, what a mans treasure is that hee keepes with his greatest care, with the greatest warinesse and solicitude. So wilt thou the Lord Iesus, when once thou layst him up in thy heart; thou wilt not be carefull for any thing, so much as to keepe him safe; that is, to keepe the assu∣rance of his favour safe, to keepe him neere thee, and thy selfe neere unto him; thy minde will be more carefull of this, more than of all things else: Thou wilt then take heede of all things that may cause a distance betweene thee and him; thou wilt then take heede of whatso∣ever may loose him, of whatsoever may make a separation betweene the Lord and thee; thou wilt be more carefull for this, than any man is to keepe his wealth, or to keepe whatsoever it is that he makes his Treasure. 3 Againe, whatsoever is thy treasure that thou wilt most esteeme, thou wilt set it at the highest rate above all things else. Before a man is in Christ there are many other things, which in truth, (howsoever hee pretend something else) hee prizeth at a higher rate than Christ; Worldly vanities before hee is in Christ, seeme great things to him; but when he is in him once, he lookes upon them with another eye. My be∣loved, you know there was a time whenGen. 1. 31. God looked upon the creatures, and they were exceeding good, even all that are in the world; those things
that men magnifie so much, I say, there was a time when they were exceeding good: but sinne hath blowed upon them, it hath blasted the beauty and vigour of them, so that now when the Lord lookes upon them, this is the sentence that is pronounced of them, you know, in Eccl. 2. They are all vanity and vexation of spirit. Con∣sider if thou be able to looke on all these things (even the best things the world hath) as things being but meere vanity; things wherein the Lord sowed not mens happinesse, and therefore thou canst not thinke to reape it there. If you marke but the expression the wise man useth in 1. Eccles. saith he; All things under the Sun are but vanity: now there is a reason conteined in these words why they are but vanitie, for waters you know they ascend not higher than the foun∣taine, and they carry not any thing higher than their owne ascent; so all the creatures that bee in the world, they be but under the Sunne, there∣fore they cannot ascend to that happinesse which is above the Sunne, nor carry you to that condition which is above; for happinesse is a∣bove the Sunne, laid up in Heaven. Therefore saith he, all things under the Sunne if they bee considered to make a man happy, they are but vanity: Now consider whether thy judgement be so of them or no, whether it bee conforma∣ble to the holy Ghost, whether thou hast this conceit of all other things, but the quite contra∣ry conceit of Iesus Christ; whether thou canst
thinke of him, as of one that is most excellent and thy chiefest treasure, as one that is farre be∣yond all these, as one upon whom thy heart is pitched, as one in whom thy happinesse is con∣teined. 4 Againe, a mans treasure is that which he will bee at any cost to get, hee will bee at any paines to attaine it. It is that, on which his heart is bestowed, and his affections are occu∣pied about. Is it so with thee when thou com∣mest to Christ Iesus? art thou willing to bee at more cost and paines to get him, than any thing besides? Is thy heart and affections more be∣stowed upon him?Math. 6. 21. For where a mans treasureis, there his heart is. I doe not aske whether thou bestowest more time upon the matters of grace, than the duties of thy calling; but, whether thou dost them with more intention, whether thou bestowest thy time and paynes upon them, as upon that which thou reckonest thy treasure, farre exceeding all other? 5 Fiftly, consider whether thou art willing to part with any thing rather than with Christ Iesus: for whatsoever is a mans treasure, you know a man will part with any thing rather than it. Is it so with thee? hadst thou rather part with any thing than with Christ? than to part with a good conscience; with the graces of the Spirit, or with any thing that tends to holinesse to build thee up further in the worke of Gods grace? I say, consider whether thy heart bee
willing to part with any thing rather than with Christ; for you shall find this, that Sathan and the world will cheapen Christ, and when they come to bidding, they will bid well. Consider whether thy heart can give a peremptory an∣swer to the world, and say thus; I will not sell Christ, I will not sell a good conscience for any thing; yea when Satan and the world bid high∣est, and tell thee as he did Christ,Math. 4. 8. 9. that hee will give thee all the riches, and all the glory in the world, if you will part with Christ; consider whe∣ther thy heart be ready to deny whatsoever hee offers to thee, (as he will bee sure to offer that which will be most sutable to thy disposition) whether thy heart hath taken this resolution to it selfe; Christ is my chiefest treasure, I will part with all therefore, I will part with liberty, with life, with goods, with credit, with plea∣sures, with profits, with whatsoever is neere and deare unto me, rather than I will part with the Lord Iesus. If this be thy hearts resoluti∣on and minde, then Christ is thy chiefe trea∣sure, that's the second thing. 3 Thirdly, consider what is thy cheife joy and delight, what is thy life; (I put them together, for that which is a mans chiefe joy indeed, is his life.) For wee know life is nothing else but that joy that the heart hath, whereby it is nou∣rished and fed as it were; for life is not to have body and soule joyned together, to bee a living man, in that sence we usually take life; for if that
were life, then those in hell should not bee said to dye the death, for you know in hell there is a conjunction of soule and body, and yet men are not said to live there; for it is death which is the punishment of sinne; and indeed you shall finde that there is something a mans heart cleaves un∣to, wherein hee rejoyceth, which is the same with his life. Therefore looke as the Soule enlivens the body, so the conjunction of the present things which he reckons his joy, that is, his life, enliven his soule, he cannot live without them. Now if Christ bee thy chiefe joy, thou wilt finde this, that thou canst not live without him, as men are wont to say of their delights; Such a man cannot live without such a thing; so it is true of every man that hath taken Christ, he is not able to live without him. This life is no life, and therefore if there be but a separation betweene thee and Christ, if a mans conscience bee as it were clouded for a time, hee findes no rest, hee doth as the Spouse in the Canticles;Cant. 5. 6. She seekes from one place to another, and gives her selfe no rest, till she finde him; and why? because it was he whom her soule loved. So you shall finde, Be∣loved, whatsoever it is that your soules love, whatsoever you make your chiefe joy, you will take no rest, but as farre as you love and enjoy it. Therefore for the finding of this, whether Christ be thy life and thy chiefe joy, consider what it is that thy thoughts feed upon; every wicked man, every man that is out of Christ,
there is something that his thoughts feed upon, some things there are in contemplation of which the soule so laceth it selfe; some pleasures that are past, present, or to come; the very thin∣king of these are the greatest ioy of his heart, he roules them under his tongue; even as a Ser∣vant that hath got some dainty bit out of his Ma∣sters presence, and eates it in a corner, so the soule of a man hath out of Christ some secret, some stolen, some unlawfull delights, that it feeds upon and delights in: Consider therefore well with thy selfe, what breakfast thy morning thoughs have (that I may so say) what breake∣fast they have every morning, what is that Pabu∣lum, that food of thy soule, wherewith thy thoughts and affections are nourished and re∣freshed from day to day; whether it be some carnall pleasure, some reflecting on thy state, up∣on thy wealth, upon thy friends, or whether it be on Christ. See (as David exercised it) whe∣ther be they thyPsal. 42. 8. songs in the night time? All car∣nall men have something past whereby they comfort themselves, something present where∣by they cheare up their hearts, something to come, something in hope. So every man that is in Christ, hee hath the comforts of the spirit, the meditation of the priviledges that he hath in Christ, the hope of Gods favour; These are his appointed food, these are the things that his soule feedes on in secret; yea the very workes that he doth, that seemes to be the hardest part
of a Christians life, the very workes that hee doth in serving the Lord from day to day, even that is his meate and his drinke; that is, it is as sweet and acceptable to his soule, as meate and drinke is to the hunger and thirst of his body: Now consider with thy selfe whether it be so with thee; whether that which is thy continuall feast, without which thou canst not live, bee Christ; or the assurance thou hast, that he is thine and thou art his; whether it bee the priviledges thou hast in him; and the things that belong to the kingdome of God; See whether these be thy life, the things without which thou couldst not live; or whether it bee some thing else, some stollen delights, some unlawfull plea∣sures, some thing else that thy soule and affecti∣ons are set upon. This is the next thing by which thou maiest try thy selfe whether thou belong to Christ or no, to consider whether he bee thy chiefe joy, whether thy soule bee most filled and satisfyed with him. And this is the third thing. 4 The fourth is; to know whether he be thy chiefe Refuge; If thou bee one that hath tooke him and received him, I say, he is thy chiefe re∣fuge. For every man hath some refuge, some castle or other to which his soule retires in all difficult and doubtfull cases, by reason of that indigency; that insufficiency to which the nature of man is subject. There is something that hee must have to leane vnto, (marke it) for mankinde
is like that generation which the Wiseman speakes of: You know it is sayd of the Connyes,Prov. 30. 26. they are a generation not strong, and what then, and therefore they have their burrowes to hide themselves in. I say such is the generati∣on of mankinde, he is a weake creature, a gene∣ration not strong, therefore there is something that he must leane to, something out of him∣selfe, some sufficiencie besides himselfe, some strong hold, some refuge every man hath; I say every man hath some refuge or other, whither he thinkes his soule may goe, and there hee may have succour in cases daungerous and in trou∣bles. Now consider what is thy refuge, whi∣ther thy heart runnes in all such cases, to what wing, to what strong hold: In dangerous ca∣ses, you see every creature hath some refuge or other, The Child runnes to his Mother. The Chickens runne to the henne, The Fox to his earth, the Connyes to their burrowes; so every creature to their severall corners and recepta∣cles proper to them: I say so it is with every man, so hath every one of you to whom I speake, there is somewhat that is a secret refuge to which your hearts fly. Now consider whe∣ther that be Christ or somewhat else. A cove∣tous man (or rather a man of this word) he hath wealth for his strong hold, in which his heart comforts it selfe; well, saith he, what change of time soever come, yet I have an estate to hold me up; and when he is ill spoken of abroad, yet
hee applaudes himselfe with that hee hath at home; The Courtiers, they have the Princes fa∣vour, that is their refuge wherein they comfort themselues; Those that are given to Company they haue good fellowes, such as they, that are their companions, and so long as they speake well of them, they care not who speake ill of them; Some haue a refuge of this kind, some of another, every man hath his refuge. If you will looke into the Scriptures, you shall see Davids refuge, in any distresse, vpon any occasion; At 1 Sam. 30. 6. Ziglag he comforteth himselfe in the Lord, his hart did fly to him, as the chickens fly to the henne, there he comforted himselfe, there he shrowded himselfe, there he encouraged himselfe in the Lord. When he fled from his sonne Absolon, was not the Lord his refuge? Yet (saith hee) Hee is my buckler and my strong hold, Psalm 3, which was made vpon that occasion. What was Iacobs re∣fuge when he fled from his brother Esau? Did not hee goe to the Lord, and seeke to him by Prayer?Gen. 32. 12. Lord thou hast said thou wilt doe me good, now I fly vnto thee, I beseech thee performe thy promise, thou art my refuge. Consider others now, what was their refuge: Iudas, when hee had betrayed his Maister Christ, and his conscience was vpon him for it, hee goes to the high priests and brings the silver to them, why, saith he, you set me a worke, you are the authors of it, and I hope to find some comfort from you; you see he found little comfort in his mind, yet that was his
refuge. The Kings of Israel and Iudah when they were distressed, they fled to Egypt and to Ashur, to this or that helpe, which (the Lord said) were broken reeds to them, but yet that was their re∣fuge: This is the manner of every man being out of Christ, of every unregenerate man, that is in his naturall estate, some refuge he hath; friends, or wealth, or credit, or the favour of the Prince, something or other it is: and if he bee destitute and have no refuge (as sometimes it so falls out) then his heart is shaken as the leaves of the for∣rest; TheirIsaiah 7. 2. hearts were shaken even for feare of the king of Aram, as the leaves are shaken in the forrest; and why? because they knew not how to de∣fend themselves: they had no refuge to fly to: So you see it was with Belshazars heart; so Achi∣tophel, and so Saul, when he sees that he must dye the next day, and that there was no refuge for him: then I say their hearts sanke and dyed with∣in them: And now consider how it is with thee, what is the refuge to which thy heart flyeth, and which thy heart makes most account of, (for every man thinkes with himselfe, change of time may come, and what shall bee my comfort, what shall be my strong hold at that time.) Dost thou flye to Iesus Christ? is hee thy succour when thy heart is dejected at any time and faints with∣in thee? from which fountaine dost thou fetch thy comfort? Dost thou fly to Christ, to com∣fort thy selfe in him, when thou art in a doubt∣full case, that concernes thee as much as thy
life? whither dost thou goe for counsell and direction? is it to Christ, to beseech him to guide thee, and direct thee, when thou art pres∣sed hard? whither doth thy heart goe for suc∣cour and for helpe to keepe thy selfe safe? Is it to Christ, or to somewhat else? My beloved, I assure you this, that a carnall man that is not in Christ, in these times of distresse knowes not whither to goe, hee dares not goe to Christ, for he feares that it shall be asked him, vpon what acquaintance? for he hath been a stranger to the Lord, he was never acquainted with him: but a carnall man that is out of Christ, hee goes to his muses, he goes to his farmes, he goes to his bushes, as the hunted hare was wont to doe, to goe to the places that she used when she lived quiet, thither shee flyes when she knowes not how to escape: so in that fashion it is with men, looke what things they were wont, to which their hearts had recourse in time of prosperitie, and what their haunts haue beene; to those bu∣shes they fly: But alas! they are but bushes, such as will not defend them. But now the Christian on the other side, the muse, the farme as it were (it is but to expresse it to you) that his soule is acquainted with, the strong hold that hee was wont to fly vnto, upon every severall evill, upon every ordinary doubt, vpon every deiection, discouragement and fainting of heart; he was wont to fly to Christ, and there he was wont to find comfort, and thither hee goes in time of
greatest difficulty in the day of death, and there hee finds comfort. Consider if hee bee thy chiefe refuge, for if thy heart hath taken him as he is thy chiefe excellency, thy chiefe joy, thy chiefe treasure; so he will be thy chiefest refuge, yea when all things else are taken away, yet that cover remaines safe: suppose thou be in prison, suppose thy credit be taken away, (I meane) thy worldly credit, (for the other credit cannot be taken away from any man that hath Christ,) suppose thy life be taken away, suppose thou bee stript of all that thou hast; yet thou hast Christ for thy chiefe refuge, and thou thin∣kest so, and thy heart is satisfyed with it. As Paul saith, when hee was a prisoner, when he was naked, when he was destitute, when he was stript of all, yet (saith he2 Tim. 2. 12. I know whom I haue trusted; As if he should say, yet I haue him safe, yet my cover is over my head, yet I am safe in my castle, I haue chosen him, I haue him in death, yea then Christ he is advantage, he is a cover, a castle, and a refuge. 5 Last of all: consider whom thou settest up for thy chiefest Commaunder, who it is to whom thou givest the chiefe command in thine heart. You will say how shall I know that? Why (my beloved) he whom a man feareth most,Quest. and lo∣veth most,Answ. that is, he whose friendship above all others he would least loose, and whose dislike and separation he doth most feare, certainly he will bee most obedient to him, he will be most
observant of him. Art thou so to Christ? take all the things in the world, if thou set vp him, as him whom thou most fearest and lovest, thou wilt most obey him: So againe, he whom thou thinkest can doe thee the greatest good, and the greatest hurt, him thou wilt most obey; if thou thinkest in good earnest that Christ is able to doe it, certainly then thou wilt most obey him. As for example, if thou looke to any man in the world, a man that is out of Christ, he thinkes that the favour or the wealth of the King, can doe him more good and more hurt, than the favour, or the losse of the favour of Christ; He thinkes that wealth, or credit, or something else, (many things there are that hee thinkes) can doe him more good and more hurt; there∣fore hee more respects their command, than the command of Christ; but a man that sets vp him for his chiefe Commander, hee regards no∣thing else when it comes to crosse it, when it comes to thwart any command of Christ, be∣cause hee saith thus to himselfe in his heart in secret: It is the Lord that can do the greatest good, and the greatest hurt, therefore I care for no more. So Naboth he cared not for Ahabs wrath. SoHest. 3. 2. Mordecay cared not for Hamans dis∣pleasure: so did the Apostles, they cared not for the High Priests, nor what they could doe, Acts 4. So did the 3 children (as you call them) they Dan. 3. 16, 17, 18. cared not for the fiery furnace of Nabucadnezar, nor for all that hee was able to doe; and why?
because they thought that Christ, that God was able to doe them more hurt, and more good. Now take any Commander in the world, when you regard not the punishment, nor the reward that he is able to inflict or to give you, his au∣thority is gone; now when you set vp Christ, and thinke so of Christ, you are ready to obey him, & obey him rather than any other. There∣fore consider with thy selfe this, and consider seriously; aske thy heart the question, what is that thou settest vp to be thy chiefest Comman∣der? For there are three great Commanders in the world, that divide all mankinde betweene them almost. And that is wealth, and estate; worldly credit and honour, to liue in esteeme; pleasures, and delight; Now thinke with thy selfe when any of these three great Comman∣ders come with any command, contrary to that which Christ commands, thinke with thy selfe what thou wilt doe in such a case, what wast thou wont to doe, looke to past experi∣ence: looke backe to thy former wayes, see what thou wast wont to doe: thinke with thy selfe when such a Command comes, what thy heart reasons vpon; if concupiscence, if a strong lust, if a strong impetuous desire come, and bid thee to doe something, which is contrary to that which Christ would haue thee to do, what art thou ready to doe in such a case? If thy pro∣fit, the maintenance of thy estate, thy liberty, thy wealth, thy convenience in this world come
and command thee to doe one thing, and thy conscience (which is Christs vicegerent) come in his stead, and command thee another thing, what art thou ready to doe in that case? for when thy credit, thy honour, and reputation, thy vaine glory shall come and bid thee doe one thing, and Christ shall bid thee doe another, what is thy resolution, what art thou wont to doe? By this thou shalt know whether thou set∣test vp Christ, as the chiefe Commander in thy heart or no, whether thou givest him thy chiefe throne, whether thou exaltest him for God in thy heart; you know when you exalt him for God, every thing then yeelds, if in truth hee be set vp for God in thy heart: Therefore con∣sider what it is that thy heart sets highest, whe∣ther thou exaltest him most, whether (when any of these threatning, crying commands come) thou canst give them an absolute deayall, and say with thy selfe, I will not obey you; and if they threaten imprisonment, or disgrace, and losse of life, and if I doe not obey such a lust, I shall be wrung and pincht for it, I shall lose such delights: well, I am resolved to beare all this: on the other side, when they shall come with faire proffers, you shall haue this honour, and this advancement, and this convenience. If thy heart can say now, I will haue none of you, for I see it is a command contrary to his that is aboue, whom I haue set vp for my chiefe Commander, whom I resolue to obey whom I
take to be greater than all the friendship in the world, than all the profits, pleasures, and credits in the world; I say thus examine the selfe what thy heart is toward Christ, what it is to his command; and (let mee touch that by the way) thou must also shew thy obedience to Christ, in thy obedience to others; My beloved there are indifferent things, that are in themselves not of moment one way or other whether wee doe them or not do them, and though the omis∣sion of them in themselues be nothing, yet when it shall be of contempt and neglect of those that are set in superiour place over you, in such a case you ought not to doe it: this is a rule, and a true rule in divinity, that indifferent things may be omitted except in two cases, in case of scandall, and in case of neglect, and con∣tempt of authority: therefore when there is neglect, when men shew contempt, for that case it is to be done, though for the other it is not to be done. This I touch but by the way, that you may consider it in your particular occa∣sion. Now my beloved, you see these five things, by which you may know if you have tooke Christ, or no: yee know when a man comes to examine himselfe whether he be a fit man, a man that hath any right to come to the Lords table, hee must consider whether hee bee in Christ, otherwise he hath nothing to doe either with this priviledge, or with any other. Now to bee
in Christ, there must (as I said) goe a double act, there must be one on thy owne side, there must be one act on thy part to take him; and there must be an act on his part, there goes out a strength and a vertue from him by which hee takes thee and comprehends thee: The time is past, and I cannot proced further, onely remem∣ber this that hath beene said to you, and exa∣mine your selves by it whether you be in the truth, whether you make Christ your chiefe Excellencie, your chiefe Treasure, your chiefe Ioy, your chiefe Refuge, your chiefe Commander; if thou finde that thou hast done this, if thou finde thy heart wrought to such an act as this, to take Christ in such a manner, then thou hast Christ, thou art in him, then thou hast a right in him, and maist come with comfort: but if thou have it not, then I must charge every one of you in the name of Christ Iesus (in whose authority we come) that you meddle not with such holy mysteries▪ My Beloued you know what I haue often told you, there is a necessity layd on men to come to the Sacrament: you know he that neglected theLevit. 23. 29. Passover was to be cut off from the people. It was a very great sinne: so it was to omit the Sacrament: you haue diverse Sacra∣ments every Tearme, and if your businesse hin∣der you from one, you may come to another; yea there is a necessity lyes vpon you to come, but yet we must giue you a double charge, one that you omit it not, and another that you come
not hither unlesse you be in Christ; what hast thou to doe that art a profane person, thou hast nothing to doe with Christ thou that art yet a stranger to him, that thou shouldest thrust in to the Lords table; thou ought'st not to doe it, if thou dost,1 Cor. 11. 29. thou eatest and drinkest thy owne dam∣nation, instead of thy salvation. The Second Sermon. AND so now wee come to the Vse,Vse. and that is, that there is an Act of Christ to make an union betwixt vs, that we may be his, and he ours: there is an act of his, that is, there is a certaine power or vertue comes from him, even as there doth from the Load-stone to the iron, that drawes thee to him; there goes out a vertue and power from him as to the woman that touched the hemme of his garment, that healed her bloody issue, such a power goes out from Christ to every man, that is in him. And as you must examine it by your owne act, so in the second place you are to examine it by this; consider whether there hath gone out any such power from Christ to take & comprehend thee: For you must know this, that when once we are in Christ, then there goes forth an effectuall almighty power from him, which doth not make a little light alteration on the superficies
of the heart, but it alters the very frame of it, it turnes the very rudder of the heart, so that a mans course is to a quite contrary point of the compasse; it is such an alteration as doth breed in vs, not some good conception onely of pur∣poses and desires which many have, which when they come to the birth, there is no strength to bring them forth: but he gives to vs a power and strength to performe them: That is, hee doth not put vpon us a washy colour of pro∣fession, but hee dyeth us in graine with grace and holinesse. And therefore consider whether thou hast found any experience of such a power going out from Christ to thy heart; This my beloved, differs from common graces, from the common forme of godlinesse which is in the world, as much as the life differs from the picture, or the substance from the shadow; as a through performance differs from a proffer, or an offer: or as that which hath sinewes and vigour, differs from that which is weake and powerles. Therfore this power of Christ which hee puts forth and diffuseth into the heart of euery man that is in him, is called the Kingdome. And the1 Cor. 4. 20. Kingdome of Christ is not in word, but in power: That is, when once he rules but as a King, hee exerciseth a kingdome there, and he saith not onely to us; I will haue such a thing done, they are not weake and powerlesse commands that he giues to the heart of a man that he dwels in; but saith he, The Kingdome of God is not in word
but in power; that is, there goes an efficacie with those commands, there goes a great strength with them, that brings every thought, and every rebellious affection into subiection to it; and therefore consider I say, if thou wouldest have these vertues, whether thou be in Christ, whe∣ther any such power hath gone out from Christ to thy heart. But you will say, what is this power and ver∣tue,Quest. and in what manner is it infused into the heart of man, for this seemes to be a narration of a thing a farre off? My beloved, we will explaine it as well as weAnswer. can to you; even as you see an Artificer working with his instrument, there goes a certaine vertue out from that art which is in his minde, and guides the instrument to make this or that, the which without it could not be done, when hee makes any artificiall thing, as a knife, or a sword; or when the Potter fashions the port, his hand is set on worke, and there is a certaine invisible passage, a certaine secret influence of the art that goes along with his hand, that brings forth such an artificiall thing; or even as you see the mem∣bers move; a man moving his arme, or his hand, or any part of his body, there goes a certaine vertue from his will, a certaine secret power, efficacy, and command that stirres them this way or that way; the thing we see not, yet we see it in effect, or as you see it in the creature, you see the creatures that God hath made, they
have all the severall instincts, by which they are instigated to doe this or that; you see the birds are instigated to make their nests of such a fashi∣on, at such a season; so every creature accor∣ding to his severall kinde. There goes out from God who is the authour of nature to these workes of nature, a certaine vertue that puts them on, and instigates them to this or that: and as you see an arrow that is shot by the Ar∣cher, there goes a vertue together with it, that directs it just to such a marke, so farre, and no further. So after this manner there comes a power from Christ to his members; as soone as a man is in him, there comes such a secret divine, unexpressable efficacy that workes vpon the heart of him in whom he dwells. And there∣fore the conjunction between him and vs, is compared to that which is betweene the soule and the body, that acts and stirres vs to and fro, according to its will and pleasure: such an effi∣cacy shalt thou find, if thou belong vnto him, and therefore consider if there bee such a thing in thee or no. But you will say, to what purpose is this effi∣cacy,Quest. and what doth it in my heart when it comes there? Why, I will tell thee what it doth; it is ex∣pressedAnswer. in plaine termes 2. Cor. 5. 17. Whosoever is in Christ is made a new creature; That is the worke it effects; it is such a power and efficacy as makes thee a new creature; That is, It breakes
in peeces the old building, it quite takes away the first print; As when a man comes to make a new stampe, the first must bee removed. So that this efficacy that goes out from Christ, it hath a double vertue in thy soule, to weare out the old stampe, to breed a death of the old na∣ture, of the old man, to ruine and breake downe the old building, and to set vp a new one; and that the scripture calls a new creature: and there∣fore consider with thy selfe, whether thou find such a vertue as hath put thy heart into such a new frame, as hath moulded it all together, and hath put it into another fashion than it was, con∣sider whether all in thee be new. You will say, this is strange, must all be new?Quest. My beloved,Answ. you know the words they are cleare;2 Cor. 5. 17. old things are passed away, all things are becom new. (In the same place which I quoted before) that as the command was in the offering of the Passover, not a jot of old leaven, but we must part with it; Now this is the nature of leaven, It is alwayes purging out, and it will be purging out while we are here, only the efficacy and strength thereof remaines not; Then thinke with thy selfe, is all new in me? looke what na∣turall disposition I haue had: looke what naturall lusts and desires I haue had, see what acts I was wont to doe, what old haunts and customes I haue had, looke what old company I kept, what old courses I tooke, what my tract hath beene; is all this altered and every thing become new?
(for, saith he, it must be2 Cor. 5. 17. a new creature, a new nature:) That is, it is not enough for a man to haue a new course for a fit, to haue new purposes and a new change that comes like flashes, I say, that is not enough; you may haue many new thinges in you, that may be in old hearts,Math. 9. 16, 17. like peeces of new cloath in old garments, that will doe thee no good at all; the Lord regards not that: like new wine in old vessells, so it is where there are some new things, that are good things in themselves; in a carnall and old heart, they are not fit for the heart, and therefore they never stay long there: So saith the text, Put a new peece into an old garment, and it makes the rent greater. Therefore all must be new; I say there must be a new nature, that these new things may be there: even as the severall creatures are in their severall elements, as the elements are in their owne place, as the plants are in their proper soyle, as the branches are vpon their own roote. For then they florish, then they hold out, then they continue; Therefore see whether this vi∣gor, this efficacy, this vertue hath gone out from Christ into thy heart; whether it hath not only renewed all in thee, but also hath given thee a new nature; That is, whether it hath wrought such a change in thee, that all the wayes of god∣lines and new obedience, become in a measure naturall to thee, so that thou canst doe them cheerefully, even as we heare, and see, and doe naturall actions, and that thou dost them with∣out
wearinesse: for you know, things that are naturall wee are not weary of them; And so thou wilt doe them constantly, for what is na∣turall, stayes and abides by us, that it out∣growes and out-wearies what ever is in us beside; Now hath there a vertue gone out from Christ, that hath wrought all this in you, that hath made all new, hath not only done so, but hath made it naturall to thee? But you will say,Quest. must it needs be so, cannot Christ take and comprehend mee, but there must bee this wonderfull change wrought, who can bee saved then? I haue then but little hope, when I am vpon my death bed, and then shall looke vpon my old nature, and find no such worke as this wrought vpon me. Beloved, I beseech you consider this,Answ. that there is a necessity of it: It is so, and it must bee so, and except you have it, you cannot be saved; you see the words in the Scriptures are most cleare, 2 Cor. 5. Whosoever is in Christ is a new creature: Doe but consider whether it be so or no, there must be withall2 Pet. 3. 13. a new heaven and a new earth; You see that was the great promise that was to bee fulfilled in our times of the Gospell: was it not a new preisthood, was it not a new covenant, hath not the Lord said, there must bee a new heauen and a new earth, That is, new graces from heaven, and a new company of men wrought on, and changed by those graces? Shall old Adam, those that are borne of him, shall they receiue a power from him, to make them like to him, to carry
his Image, to bee corrupt, and carnall, and sinfull as hee is: And doe you not thinke that the New Adam, the Second Adam, shall haue as much efficacy in him to make those new creatures, that are in him, that come to him? Certainly there is as much power, life, and vigor in the new Adam, to change every man that is in him, that comes to him, and to make thē new creatures, as in the old Adam, to make them like him: Besides, hath not Christ said plainely, I came not into the world to saue soules only, that is not my busines alone (though that was a great part of the busi∣nesse and errand for which he came into the world) but (saith he)Tit. 2. 14. I came to purifie a people to my selfe, zealous of good workes: in the 2 Tit. Now if that were the end of Christs comming, dost thou thinke that hee will loose his end? And therefore its impossible, that any man should be saved, or haue part in Christ, and that he should be in Christ and Christ in him, except his heart be purified so, as to be zealous of good workes. If Christ dwell in thy heart, thou mayst easily know it; for dost thou thinke, that Christ will dwell in a foule and uncleane place? hath he notHab. 1. 13. pure eyes? And therefore it is certaine wheresoever he dwells, that place must be a fit Temple for him to dwell in; Wherefore of necessity he must cleanse thy heart, he must fashion it, and keepe it pure, and cleane, and sweet, so as it may be a fit Temple for him and his Spirit to dwell and delight in. Besides, doth he not looke
to his glory in all those that belong to him? hee hath many eyes to looke upon them as it were, there are1 Cor. 4. 9. many spectators men and Angells, to see what they are, and how they behaue themselues: If hee should haue a company of men to belong unto him that are carnall, per∣verse, and worldly minded, that haue crooked wayes like other men, would this bee for his honour? would it not bee said, Like men, like Master? would it not reflect upon him? Cer∣tainly it would; and therefore the Lord so or∣ders it, that those whom he hath redeemed, 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16. should bee holy in all maner of conversation: Saith hee, you must be as I am, else it will bee for my dishonour, As I am holy, so every one of you must be holy, in all manner of conversation; Therefore let no man deceiue himselfe, to thinke he can goe away and yet be in Christ, and be saved through Christ and the mercies of God in Christ, when there goes out no such vertue and power from Christ to change him, to worke on him, to alter him, to make him ano∣ther creature; And therefore I beseech you in the examining of this, (for its a matter of great moment) to consider with your selues, if this be wrought in you or no; whether you finde any experiment & effect of this mighty power, effi∣cacy, and vertue: and let mee bring you a little to particulars. Hath there gone out a vertue from him to enable thee to beleeue? There is a faith required in the Deity, there is a faith required
in the Deity, there is a faith required in the pro∣mises of God, there is a faith required in the providence of God, to thinke that every particu∣lar thing is ordered by it; There is also a faith in all the threatnings of God: Now for the man∣ner of propounding; when the Scripture comes to propound any thing, it propounds it thus, and no more: as you see in Moses, he writes nothing, butGen. 1. 1. In the beginning God made heaven and earth, &c. And so the Apostles write; Such a thing was done,Math. 1. Luke 1. 2. Iesus Christ was borne of the Virgin Mary; Thus and thus he did: Now when the na∣ked object is propounded, other writers what they deliver or write is rationall; They use Rea∣sons and arguments to convince men of those things which they deliver; But when the Scrip∣ture sets downe any propositions of faith, it doth but barely propound them, for there is the Majesty of God and authority of God in them, to confirme them. But now here you will demand,Quest. (the proposi∣tion being but nakedly laid downe in the Scrip∣tures) what will enable a man to beleeve it? I answer:Answ. that certainly there is a mighty power that goes out from God & from Christ, that enables thee to beleeve with this efficacy, that where the obiect is set before thee, there goes out a power from him to worke faith in thy heart, whereby thou truly beleevest it, and so it appeares in thy life: we thinke we beleeve those things, but our lives doe manifest the con∣trary;
namely, That there is not a powerfull faith wrought in us; for all the errours of our lives (though we observe them not) arise from hence, that these Principles are not throughly beleeved: if they were, it could not bee, that there should bee such inconveniences in the lives of men; Therefore consider if this faith be wrought in thee, whether such a power hath gone out, to worke such a faith, that hath chan∣ged thy whole course, as it will doe, if it bee once wrought in thee, by the power of Christ: So also consider, whether there hath a vertue gone out from him to worke love in thy heart to the Lord; for otherwise it is certaine that there is no man in the world that is able to love God, or to come neere him, for all love riseth from Similitude, there must bee an agreement and similitude betweene those two that love: Now every man by nature is as contrary to Gods pure nature, as fire is to water, and with∣out an almighty power to change his nature, and to worke a particular affection of love in him, he can never be able to love God: therefore its the baptisme of the holy Ghost;Math. 3. 11. I will baptize you with the holy Ghost and with fire, that is, with the holy Ghost which is fire.Gen. 3. 16. I will multiply thy sorrowes and thy conceptions, That is, the sor∣rowes of thy conceptions. Now love is as fire in the heart, and one fire must beget another; And therefore you have it in the common pro∣verbe, Love is a thing that cannot be bought with
mountaines of gold and silver; yet if thou bee in Christ, there goes out a vertue from him, that stampes upon thy heart this holy affection, that breedes in thee this holy fire of love, so that thy heart cleaves to him, thou lovest him with as true, with as genuine, as naturall, and as sensible love, as thou lovest any friend; as thou lovest any creature in the world. Consider if this bee wrought in thee or no. And so for thy know∣ledge; there is also a power in it, consider whe∣ther any such vertue hath gone out from Christ, to make the knowledge which thou hast, power∣full. You will say,Quest. what is that? That is,Answ. to bring on these truths which thy heart assents unto, to bring them with that evi∣dence, and fulnesse of demonstration, that thou shalt yeeld unto them, and practise them accor∣ding to thy knowledge. Beloved, there is much knowledge among us, but who practiseth accor∣ding to his knowledge?Rom. 1. 21. We know God, but wee glorifie him not as God; and the reason is, because there hath not gone a power with that know∣ledge, to make it lively and effectuall, to passe through all the faculties of the soule, and to overrule them; for if there were such know∣ledge, it would alwayes draw affection and pra∣ctise with it. So likewise consider, whether there hath gone a power from him to mortifie thy lusts?Gal. 5. 24 Whosoever is in Christ hath crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts, not to lay them a∣sleepe
onely, but to mortifie and subdue them. See likewise whether there hath a power gone out from Christ, to helpe thee to overcome the world,1 Iohn 2. 16. The lusts of thine eyes, the lusts of the flesh, and the pride of life; for whosoever is in Christ overcomes the world, and all that is in the world. The world hath many things to worke upon us, and to resist and oppose us: It hath persecutions, it hath disgraces, it hath slanders and reproches, which it casts upon holy men, and upon the holy wayes of God. And the men that are actours in this, are the divels factours, though they thinke not so, as the Apostle Iames expresseth it;Iames 3. 6. Their tongues are set on fire of hell, to devise slanders and false reports, and to fasten them upon holy men, especially upon the Ministers of the Gos∣pell, and so upon all the wayes of God: I say they are the divels factours, though they thinke not so: and those that beleeve them are the devils receivers; the one hath the devill in his tongue, the other in his eare. But the Lord hath appointed this. This is one thing whereby the world fights against the wayes of God, to dis∣courage men and to hinder them, that they might be stumbling blockes to them. So it was with Christ, heLuke 2. 34. was the falling of many in Israel by reason of this; so was Paul, as a deceiver, and yet true, &c. Consider if thou hast this efficacy put into thy heart, that thou art able to over∣come this, that thou art able to overcome all the offences, and persecutions, all the slaunders
and reproaches that are cast upon the wayes of God; and notwithstanding that, to think well of them, and to walke in them, and practise them. Likewise, as it hath these things on the one hand, so it hath pleasures, preferments, glory, riches, credit, and all things of that nature on the other; art thou able to overcome all these? So to shut up this point & prosecute it no further, thus you shall know whether you be in Christ: for that is the point; We have assurance in him, that if wee aske any thing, wee shall be heard, but first we must be in him; now to know whether we be in him (as you haue heard) there must be an act of ours, and secondly an act of his, which is this power that goes out from him, to change, to take and comprehend us. So much for the first thing. Now for the second; if a man will apply or take to himselfe the priviledges we haue by Christ, as this particular priviledge of being heard in our prayers, of coming to the Sacra∣ment, or any other; know this, that it is not e∣nough to be in Christ only, but there must be a certaine qualification, a certaine immediate fa∣shioning, and preparation of the heart, or else though thou haue a right to the priviledges, though they belong to thee▪ yet thou art suspen∣ded from the use, benefit, and comfort of them. And this is considered in these Five things. (I will but name them very briefely.) First, when a man comes to receiue the Sacrament, it's not e∣nough for him to be in Christ, no nor when hee
is come to do some other duties, but moreover there must be this also; those graces thou hast, this change, this new creature that is wrought in thee, which is but a heape of particular graces, these must be acted and stirred up upon such an occasion: It is true, no man ought to come except hee haue the graces of Gods Spirit wrought in his heart, that they may lye there in the habits, that they may be in the heart as fire raked in the ashes. But if a man will come to receiue the Sa∣crament, and suffer these habits, these graces he hath to lie still there, he comes not as a worthy receiuer; (there are indeed degrees of unworthi∣nesse) he comes not as a worthy receiuet except hee stirre them up, except they be acted at that very time: As for example; when we come to receiue the Sacrament, wee ought then to haue an especiall humiliation and sorrow for our sinnes; wee ought then to haue an especiall love to Iesus Christ; we ought then to haue a spciall reioycing in him, and in all the Priviledges we haue by him; wee ought then to haue a speciall loue to our brethern, the men with whom wee converse, and among whom wee live: now if a man come and receiue, and do not stirre up and act these graces, he receiues unworthily, and my ground for it, is this; you see in the feast of Reconciliation, the Tenth day of the Seventh moneth, the Lord tels them there, you shall come, and you shall keepe it, and you shall not doe worke, &c. But is this enough? no, he that doth not actually
afflict his soule (saith he) that day, he shal be cut off from his people, Levit. 23. 27. That is, though theyLevit. 23. 27, 28, 29, 30. had a habituall disposition, and their hearts were prepared to sorrow for their sinnes, and to take them to heart and bewaile them, this is not e∣nough, (saith hee) at this time you must afflict your soules, that is, there must be a stirring up of that sorrow: So likewise you finde this in the feasts, in more places than one, that when they come to keepe the feasts, at that time they shall eate and drinke, and refresh themselues, but in any case rejoyce, Deut. 12. and Deut. 16. I will not stand to repeate the places: That is, it's not enough for you to haue thankfull hearts, to have hearts prepared for these thinges in the habit, but you must then rejoyce, for it is the season of it, (for everyEccles. 3. 11. thing is good in it's season) and the Lord reqvires it at such a time. Therefore thus thinke with thy selfe, whensoever thou comest to receiue the Sacrament, this is the time that the graces I have, the habituall graces, must be new pointed as it were, they must be new whetted, new scowred, that they may be bright and shining upon such an occasion, when the Lord calls for it, you must then qvicken them, and stirre them up, that they may be all acted in your hearts. And this is one thing, that it's not enough for a man to be in Christ, to take the priviledges that belong to him, but there is a certaine qva∣lification reqvired that must be done at that
time, when the Covenant is renewed And this is one, to have the graces thus acted. Secondly, there must be a new Reconciliation. For the Saints, those that are within the cove∣nant, those that are regenerate men, (you must marke it well, for it's a point of much use) when they commit sinnes aganst God, the guilt of their sinnes is retained: though they are within the covenant, and are not cut off from Christ, but are in him; yet (I say) when they have sin∣ned, the guilt of their sinne continues, and is continued till they be reconciled and renewed by faith and repentance; as you see it was with David: Nathan would not have said when he came to him,2 Sam. 12. 13. Thy sinnes are forgiven thee, if there had not beene a new thing, if there had not beene a thing done at that time; and therefore it intimates so much, that before his sinne was not forgiven: that is, the Lord was angry with him. You must know therefore this, that when a re∣generate man sinnes, there is onely a particular guilt; the universall guilt of sinnes returnes not, (for that would cut him quite off, that would put him absolutely into the state of damnation,) but it's a particular guilt, for every particular sinne; that is, even as a father is pleased well with his son, and knowes him to be his sonne, he is affe∣cted to him as to his sonne, yet hee hath done such a particular action that hath offended him, and for that particular offence, he withdrawes himselfe from him, hee carries not himselfe to
him as he was wont to doe, being offended with him for such a fault; now till the sonne hath re∣conciled and humbled himselfe for that par∣ticular action, though the father have an hun∣dred gifts to bestow on him, yet hee shall have none of them, till hee hath reconciled himselfe; So thinke with thy selfe (if any sinne lye in the way) when thou commest to partake of this pri∣viledge to receive the Sacrament, or when thou commest to call on God for any particular mer∣cy, or to have any request granted; thinke then with thy selfe, such a sinne I committed, I must humble my selfe for it, I must labour to make reconciliation, labour to have this taken away, that my Father may bee reconcilied to mee; then come and take the priviledge, for now it belongs unto me; therefore there is a necessity of renewing our repentance and reconciliation most exactly, and to take a very particular exa∣mination of our wayes when wee come to re∣ceive the Sacrament, or when we draw neere to God upon such speciall occasions, least our Fa∣ther, (though he be a Father to us) have some particular quarrell against us; for even he whom we call Father, 1 Pet. 1. 17, iudgeth every man (even his owne sonnes) without respect of persons; that is, he will not beare any ill in them: thus you see did he with Moses, with David, and others, and the like he doth with all the Saints. This is the second qualification that is required before you can have any part in any of the priviledges,
before you can attaine unto this assurance, to aske and have; therefore it is not without use, and that not in the Sacrament onely, but also in that which we have to deliver. Thirdly, suppose there be no particular sinne, suppose the grace you have, be acted, when you come to receive the Sacrament; yet there is a third thing required, a third qualification that must be found in the heart of him that will be a worthy receiver, and that is, to observe well what distance is growne betweene the Lord and him ever since the time, that he hath in a more particular manner beene reconciled to him. This is another thing than what wee named be∣fore, to consider what rust hath growne upon his soule, what soyle his heart hath contracted, by conversing in the world, and by medling with worldly and earthly things; for the soule ga∣thers soyle with medling with them, even as the hands doe; now thou must thinke with thy selfe, when thou commest to the Lord, and drawest neere to him in this, or any other duty, thou must recover that distance againe, and bring thy heart neerer to the Lord, thou must draw neerer to him, thou must get thy heart to a more close, and neere, and inward conjunction with him; thou must labour to have that hardnesse that thou hast contracted (as it will be in a little con∣tinuance of time) thou must labour I say, to have that tooke away and remooved; to have thy heart softened, to have the rust rubbed off;
thou must labour to have all these things done; For thou must know this, That though there be not a particular sinne committed, yet as we see, the outward man is subject to a wasting, though there be no wounds, though there bee no sick∣nesse; though a man be in perfect health, and all is well with him, and hee observe all the rules of dyet, yet (I say) you see the outward man is sub∣ject to wasting, to fainting, to weakenesse, and decay; and therefore there must be a renewing of dyet, and of strength, or else it cannot bee able to hold out: So it is with the inward man; though there bee no particular sinne, though a man did keepe some good course in the wayes of godlynesse, without running out emenently or evidently, yet he is subject to a secret decay, so that sometimes hee must have some speciall meate, some speciall feast, which the Lord hath appointed for that purpose, (for he doth nothing in vaine:) And if this Sacrament could bee spa∣red, that a man might keepe the strength of the inward man without it, the Lord would not have put you to this trouble; but he seeth it ne∣cessary and therefore he hath appointed it to be received, and that often, that you might feed upon the body and blood of Christ, that you might eate his flesh and drinke his blood, and gather new strength from it, that when there is a decay of grace in your hearts, you may goe to this Fountaine, and fill the Cisternes againe to recover strength; For when a man comes to the
Sacrament as hee ought, hee gathers a new strength, as a man doth from a feast; his heart is cheered up as it is with Flagons of wine, hee is refreshed, his hunger and thirst is satisfied; That is, the desires of his soule that long after Christ, after righteousnesse, and assurance, are quickned and refreshed. And this is the third thing. Fourthly, besides all this; First the stirring up of the graces, and the acting of the habits; Se∣condly, making thy peace and reconciliation with God, and remooving of any particular of∣fence, that is betwixt God and thee; Thirdly, this scouring off the rust, this remooving the distance betweene God and thee, the softning of that hardnesse which thy heart hath contracted; this recovering the strength that thou hast wa∣sted; There is besides all these a fourth thing required, which is, that there be an Intention, a particular increase of thy will, in taking Christ, of thy desire to Christ, and of every grace that knits thee and Christ together; For there are certaine sementing graces, certaine glewing gra∣ces, that joyne Christ and thy soule together, as Faith and Love; these are the two maine graces; there are a great traine of graces that follow them, but these are the chiefe, and these I say must bee intended: For what is the end of the Sacrament? Is it not to knit the knot stronger betweene Christ and us, to make the union more full and perfect? is it not to increase our willingnesse to take and receive Christ? for you
know all the acts of the soule may be intended. Put the case there be a resolved act in the heart and soule of any man, whereby he saith thus with himselfe: I am resolved to take Christ, and to serve and love him for the time of my life, yet this resolution of his, though it bee perfect and sincere, may receive intention; when a man is willing to doe to a thing truly, there may be degrees added to that will; when there is light in a roome (when thou bringest in more candles) that light may be increased. so it may in this, so may your faith & love; (by faith I mean nothing, but the resolution of the heart to take Christ; I meane not the beleeving part, but the taking part, the act of the will taking Christ, or recei∣ving him, which is nothing else but the choise of the will that resolves to take him.) I doe but touch this by the way, because it is a point I have handled already at large; the thing I ayme at is this; I say the glewing graces are these two; Faith and love, whereby you thus take Christ for your Lord and Saviour; Faith is like the part of the compasse that goeth about and doth the worke; and love is that cementing grace whereby we are more knit unto the Lord; They have both their office and their place; You know love is an uniting affection, therefore this is the definition of it, It is a desire of union with that it loves; Now when thou comest to receive the Sacrament, or to pray, or put up any speciall request, when thou comest to have to do with God, to make use of
any priviledge thou hast in Christ, thy chiefe bu∣sines is to intend this faith & love, at such a time to draw thee neerer, to make the union perfect. You will say, how is this increased and how is it intended?Quest. I answer;Answ. Two wayes in the Sacrament, one way is the very repetition, the very renewing the covenant, the very doing it over againe, the resolution of taking him, (for there is a mutuall covenant, you know betweene Christ and us,) it is confirmed to us in the Sacrament, hee con∣firmes his, and wee confirme ours, as the freind∣ship betweene Ionathan and David was increased by the renewing of the covenant, or else why was it repeated? They very repetition of the act intends the habit, the habit is increased by the repetition of the act, though it were no more; so the renewing of the covenant exerciseth thy faith, it sets a worke thy faith and thy loue, when thou comest to receiue the Sacrament, the very intention is increased: but this is not all, There is another thing in the Sacrament that much in∣creaseth it, and that is a thing I would have you chiefely to take notice of; That is the very Sa∣crament it selfe, the elements of bread and wine delivered to thee, with the very words of the minister,1 Cor. 11. 24, 25. Take and eate, this is my body, that was broken for thee; Take and drinke, this is my blood, that was shed, &c. For when these words are spoken to us, if wee did consider well of them, and thinke thus with our selves; These words
that the Lord him himselfe hath appointed the Minister to speake (for therein is the force of them that they are of the Lords own institution) therefore the strength of every Sacrament lies in the institution; That is a rule in Dininity; the Papists themselues, who haue added fiue other Sacraments, cannot deny, but that every Sacra∣ment must haue an immediate institution from Christ himselfe, even from his owne mouth, or else there is no strength in it; so that even as it is with all things that are symbolls of other things, (as take markes in feilds that stand for the divi∣sion of severall mens rights; take counters that stand for Thousands and Hundreds, the very essence of these things stands in the very institu∣tion of them;) So in the Sacrament, except these words were from the Lords owne mouth that delivered it, this very delivering of the bread and wine, being a signe to you of the forgiuenes of your sinnes, except the Lord had thus instituted it, there had beene no force in it. I say consider, they are words that the Minister speakes not in an ordinary course, but he is appointed by the Lord himselfe to speake them; and now when these words make a new impression upon thy heart, it addes an intention to thy faith and loue. For example, (to make it a little more cleare to you, that you may understand it distinctly.) The Lord hath said this, he will forgive the sinnes of all those that come unto him, hee will forgive them that forsake their sinnes, and take Christ
Iesus, and love and feare him for the time to come; The Lord might have suffered it to goe thus in generall, that he hath delivered it unto you and no more; But hee thought good to goe further and say thus to mankind: Its true, I have said it, but I will not content my selfe with that, but will adde certaine seales and symbolls, cer∣taine externall signes, that thou shalt see and looke on; and I say to thee, this covenant haue I made with thee, and when thou seest the bread and wine delivered by the Minister, know this, that the thing that thou seest is a witnesse be∣tweene thee and me: That as it was said by La∣ban and Iacob when they made a covenant,Gen. 31. 48. This stone be witnesse betweene us: And God said to Gen. 9. 13, 14, 15. Noah, when I looke upon the rainebowe, it shall bee a signe that I will destroy the earth no more after this manner; when the Lord hath said it and hath appointed this outward Symboll that thine eyes looke upon, I remember the covenant, and this is a signe betweene us, this shall bind mee to it and him likewise; Now when this is done anew, (it may be every month) this is a wondrous great mercy, this is a marvellous great helpe (if it be rightly understood) to strengthen our faith. Doth it not helpe us, when we see the Raine∣bowe which the Lord hath appointed to put him in mind of his covenant?Gen. 9. 14, 15. I will remember my covenant, when I looke on the Bowe in the Cloud it shall confirme me, and I will not breake my cove∣nant to destroy the world with a flood; So this ad∣ministration
of the Sacrament, when the Lord lookes upon it, hee cannot but remember his promise and his covenant, of pardoning our sinnes; And when thou lookest on it, thou art assured of it, for hee hath said it; it shall bee a signe and a witnesse betweene us; Now I say that new impression that these words, (thus contrived and understood, and delivered by the minister) make upon the heart, intends our faith and love; as indeed it is a great matter to haue it spoken to us by a Minister of the Gospell, sent from Christ, from his owne mouth;1 Cor. 11 24, 25. Take and eat, this is my body that was broken for you: and this is my blood that was shed for you and for many, for the re∣mission of sinnes. This is the fourth qvalification that is reqvired, that our faith and love bee in∣tended, and our union increased; that the will, resolution, and purpose of taking Christ for our Lord, receive more degrees; that so we may be more fast and firmely united and knit to him; which I say is done partly by the repetition on both sides (for the very repetition doth it;) and partly by a new impression that these words (take, eat &c) make on the soule. Now I adde the last thing which is required, (still remember the maine thing wee are upon, that it is not e∣nough for thee to be in Christ, but if thou wilt bee a worthy receiver, thou must haue these foure qualifications in thee, that I have named already; Thou must reconcile thy selfe anew, thou must rub off the rust from thy soule which
it hath gathered, Thou must recover the distance that is growne betweene God and thee; Thou must adde an intending and an increase, Thou must adde more degrees to thy faith and love, and after all these.) Fiftly and lastly, this is also required (which is much for our benefit and comfort) namely, to put up thy request, when thou comest neere to the Lord in the Sacrament: Now thou must not only do this, but thou must also make some use of the covenant, which the Lord hath made with thee for his part, so that thou mayst thinke this with thy selfe; When I come to receive the Sacrament, I have but two workes to doe, one is to recovenant with the Lord, and to renew my repentance, and to set all eaven; and the other is to remember the Lords covenant. You will say, what is the Covenant? It's a Covenant that consists of these three things or points; Iustification,Ier. 31. 34. I will forgive thy sins; Sanctification,Ezech. 36. 26. 1 Cor. 3. I will make you new hearts, and new spirits; and the third, all things are ours; that is, I have made you heires of the world, heires of all things, you have all the promises belong∣ing to you, that belong to this life, and that which is to come; this is the Covenant which the Lord hath made. Now thou art bound when thou comest to receive the Sacrament, not onely to remember this Covenant, Doe this (saith hee) in remembrance of Mee, and not barely of mee, and of my being crucified for thee, and of all the love
that I have shewed unto thee, but also in remem∣brance of the Covenant, and of those gracious promises, which are the particulars of which that Covenant is the summe: and therefore, thus a man is to do. What? hath the Lord vouch∣safed mee this favour, that I may come to his Table, I may come and renew the nuptials and my covenant with him? Surely, then I will looke about and consider what I want, what request I shall put up unto him; for there is nothing that is wanting, but it is within this Covenant; and thou art to put up thy request in a speciall manner, whatsoever it be, be it concerning things be∣longing to thy soule, to have a strong lust mor∣tified, to have thy hard heart softned, to have some sin that lyes upon thy conscience forgiven, and to have that forgivenesse assured to thee: be it any thing that concernes thy particular estate, if it be to be delivered from a potent enemy, or whatsoever it be, put up thy request, and that largely, open thy mouth wide, that is, make thy request full, feare it not. Put the case (againe) it be somewhat that doth not concerne thee, but that it concerneth the Church abroad, or the Church at home, it is a case that much concernes any of these in the Church, put it up to him, and put it up with confidence. For this is a marriage day (as it were) it is the time when he reacheth out his scepter (as you know the things I allude to) and thou maist come to his presence: you know, whenEster. 5. 3. Hester was admitted to the pre∣sence
of the King, then said hee, What request hast thou? when you are admitted to the famili∣arity and presence of the Lord, hee lookes for it, he askes what request you have to put up to him? and the promises are large enough: I will give it, whatsoever it be, if you aske according to my will; and therefore, do in this case as Moses used to doe: you shall find when Moses drew neere unto the Lord, when he was admitted into his pre∣sence, and saw him face to face (for that was the great priviledge Moses had) when there was any speciall apparition of the Lord to him, Moses makes this argument: (saith hee) It is a great mercy that thou wouldest shew mee this, that such a poore man as I am, should have this pri∣viledge, and give mee leave to make use of it: Exod, 33. 13. Lord, if I have found favour in thy sight, that is, since thou hast vouchsafed mee such a favour in thy sight, do thus and thus for mee: you see he made this request for the whole Church of God and saved them, or else they had beene destroyed. If thou hast not any particular argu∣ment in this case, say, If I have found favour in thy sight, do this: so I say, when thou hast this promise confirmed, that Christ hath given him∣selfe to thee, & the symbol of that promise is the bread and wine, which he hath given to thee, put up thy request: O Lord, if thou hast vouchsafed to give mee Christ,Rom. 8. 32. wilt thou not with him give mee all things else? Lord, if I have found favour in thy sight, to do so great a thing for mee, deny
mee not this particular request. Thus we ought to doe, especially when we come to things that are beyond nature: when we come, let us con∣sider with our selves; Indeed I have a naturall disposition that carries me strongly to evill, I shall never be able to overcome it, there are such duties to doe, I shall never be able to performe them: In such a case thou must doe it the more earnestly, thou must sigh & groane to the Lord. 2 King. 4. 34. Elishah when hee comes to doe a thing so much above the course of nature, as to raise a dead child to life, hee sighed unto the Lord, that is, he prayed earnestly.Iam. 5. 15. Eliah, when hee would have Raine, hee cryed, he tooke much paines, he pray∣ed: So must thou doe in this case: and know this for thy comfort, that though thou thinke thou shalt never be able to doe these things, to over∣come such lusts, such hereditary diseases, yet the Lord is able to helpe thee: though these are past naturall helpe, yet they are not past the helpe of grace; though the spirit in us lust after envy; yet as the Apostle Iames saith,Iam. 4. 6. The Scriptures offer more grace, that is, the Scriptures offer grace and ability, to doe more than nature can doe; nature cannot heale a spirit, that lusteth after envy, or any other thing; a spirit that lusts after credit, af∣ter mony, after the sinne of uncleanenesse, or whatsoever is presented: now the Scriptures of∣fer that grace, that will overcome any of these sinnes, bt they never so strong, or so old; Christ healed hereditary diseases, he healed those that
were borne lame and blinde: so though thou be borne with such lusts, Christ is able to heale thee; you see a Prophet could heale Naaman of his Leprosie, when there was no other that could doe it; so saith Christ;Math. 11. 28. Come unto me all yee, and I will heale you. So that you see wee must put up our requests to God. The third Sermon. WE have already made some entrance upon the words: I told you what the Apostles scope is in them, which is to make knowne to all Christians to whom he wrote, a∣nother great priviledge, besides that which hee named before: that is, That hee that hath the Sonne, hath life; this (saith hee) is another priviledge, that whatsoever you aske, you shall have; onely remem∣ber that you have this assurance in him, that is, in Christ Iesus: That point, (what it is to be in him, that it may be the ground of all the benefits and priviledges wee injoy) wee handled the last day. Now we come to the priviledge it selfe, If wee aske any thing according to his will be heareth us. The words are so plaine, I shall not need to spend any time in opening of them, but deliver you the point that lyes so evidently before us: which is this,Doct. [That all the prayers of the Saints made upon earth, are assuredly heard in heaven] whatsoever
we aske, (saith he) according to his will hee heareth us, onely the conditions must be obser∣ved. When you heare such a generall as this, it must be limited, there are certaine bounds set to it,1. Cond. which wee will name unto you: which are these foure conditions. First, all the prayers that are made upon earth shall be heard in hea∣ven; if they be the prayers of a righteous man, and are faithfull and fervent. The person must be righteous, that must first be remembred: be∣cause, although the prayer be never so good, yet except the person be accepted from whom it comes, the Lord regards it not: you know in the old Law,Esay 66. 3. the blood of Swine was reckoned an a∣bominable Sacrifice, yet if you take the blood of sheepe, and compare them together, you shall finde no difference; It may be the Swines blood is the better: then whats the reason the Swines blood is not accepted? even because of the sub∣ject of it, it was the blood of Swine, and there∣fore you see it was put downe, that it was an a∣bominable Sacrifice. So it is with prayer; Take the prayer of a Saint, and the prayer of a wicked man; it may be, if you looke upon the petitions, or whatsoever is in the prayer it selfe, you shall finde some times the prayer of a godly man more cold, and lesse fervent: the petitions are not so well framed as the wicked mans: yet be∣cause this comes from such a person, the Lord regards it not, you know the condition is men∣tioned Iames fift: The prayer of the righteous
man availeth much, if it be fervent. Now as this is required in the person, so there is somewhat required in the prayer also, that is, that it be fer∣vent and faithfull; that it be fervent, you have it in the same place, The prayer of a righteous man a∣vaileth much if it be fervent; that is, it must be a prayer made from the sence of the misery that is in us, and from the mercie of God, when a man takes a thing to heart, that he prayes for, and comes with confidence to be heard, for that makes him fervent. This the Lord will have, and also he will have it faithfull: Iames the first, when the Apostle exhorts them to prayer,Iames 1. 5. 6 if any man want wisdome (saith he) let him aske it of God: but then marke, he carefully puts in this conditi∣on, see that He pray in faith, that is, beleeue that it shall be done unto him: now this faith includes repentance, for no man can beleeve that he shall be heard, except hee make his heart perfect with God: If he allow any sinne in himselfe, he cannot beleeve vpon any good ground: therefore when I say it must be faithfull, that also is included, we mustPsal. 66. 18. regard no wickednes in our hearts, for in such a case, the Lord heares not,Iohn 9. 31. hee heares not sinners. So that this you must remember; First, the per∣son must be righteous, and the prayer must be fervent and faithfull. Secondly,2. Cond. the other Condition you shall heare in the Text, it must be according to his will; you must not thinke, whatsoever you aske, if you aske it loosely at Gods hands, that it shall pre∣sently
be graunted you: No (saith hee) it must be according to his will, if you askeLuke 9. 54, 55. fire from hea∣ven, that is not according to his will, and there∣fore you see, they that aske it, were denyed it, with this reason, you know not what you aske.Mat. 20. 21 22. Likewise to sit at his right hand, and at his left in heaven, which was another request of the Disciples, he puts them by with this; You understand not what you aske of the Father, and therefore it must be according to his will. And that is the second. Thirdly, we must aske it in time, in due season:3. Cond. so the promise is true, Knock and it shall be opened to you; but you know the foolish Virgins knockt & it was not opened to them; what was the reason of it? because they askt when the time was past: for there is a certaine2 Cor. 6. 2. acceptable time when the Lord will be found: and when that oportunitie is past, he is found no more. It is true, that this life is the time of grace, but God in his secret coun∣sell hath appointed a certaine time to every man, which is the acceptable time, the day of grace, therefore he saith unto them, This day if you will heare: this day if you will come and seeke unto mee, if you will pray unto mee, I will heare you: when it's past, the Lord suffers not the doores to stand open alwayes, his eares are not alwayes open: therefore that condition must be carefully remembered, you must aske in time; It is a condition that should be carefully thought on by us. For, for the most part, we fly to prayer as Ioab did to the Altar, hee went not
to it for devotion (for then hee would have done it before) but when hee was in distresse, when hee was in extremity, then he fled to it, and therefore you know what successe hee had by it, it saved not his life: So we goe not to prayer for devotion, that is, out of love to God, to do him that service; but (for the most part) wee doe it out of selfe love, when wee are in extre∣mitie or distresse, we passe the acceptable times he requires, and we goe to him in a time of our owne: For there is Gods time, and there is our owne time; Gods time is to come to him when we may doe him service, in our youth, in our strength, in the flower of our graces: Our time is to goe to him when we need him: Will not a friend say (when we never come to him, but when wee have extreame need of him) why doe you come now? you were not wont to visit me before, this is not out of love to mee: Even the very same answer the Lord giveth;Iudg. 10. 14. Goe to your Idolls (saith hee) those that you served in the time of peace, and see if they can helpe you. The fourth and last condition is,4. Cond. That wee referre the time, the manner, the measure of grant∣ing our petitions to the Lord. That is, wee must not thinke to be our owne carvers, to thinke if it be not granted in such a manner, such a mea∣sure, or such a time, presently the Lord hath rejected our petitions; No,Esay 28. 16. he that beleeves makes no hast: That is, he waites upon God, he stayes himselfe upon God, he is content to have it in
that time, in that manner and measure, as best pleaseth the Lord: For the truth is, we know not our selves what is meete for us; we are unto the Lord just as the Patient is to the physitian. The patient is importunate with him, for such things to refresh and ease him; But the physitian knowes what best belongs to him, and when to give him such things, in what manner, and in what measure: So the Lord knowes best what to doe: Many times he doth the same things that we desire, though he doe it not in the same manner: Even as the physitian he quencheth of∣ten the thirst with Barberries, or with such kind of conserves; what though it be not with drinke, is it not all one so the thirst bee quenched? Is it not all one whether a man be hindred from striking me, or if I have a helmet to defend the blow? Somtimes the Lord keepes not off the e∣nemy; but then hee gives us a helmet to keepe off those blowes, to beare those injuries and e∣vills that are done to us: hee is a wise physitian, hee knowes what manner, what measure, and what time is best, therefore that must be refer∣red to him: Now these conditions being obser∣ved, you must know that this great priviledge belongs to every Christian, That whatsoever prayers hee makes on earth, he is sure to be heard in heaven; It is a wondrous priviledge, that which wee have all cause to stand amazed at, that the Lord should so farre regard the sonnes of men, to grant them such a Charter as this; no
more but aske and have, and whatsoever you pray for, it shall be done to you. But a man is ready to say secretly in his heart when he heares it, This is too good to be true, That whatsoever I aske, I shall have. My Beloved, I confesse, it is a hard thing to beleeue it as we ought to doe: and therefore before we come to apply this, we will spend a little time in endevouring to con∣vince you of the truth of it, that you may not doubt of it that what prayers you make to the Lord, he is ready to heare them. First, consider that whatsoever prayer you make, he takes notice of it, he observes every pe∣tition, there is not one petition that you make to him at any time, but he lookes upon it, hee sees what the prayer is. And this thing although you thinke it common, (and who is there that know not this) yet (my beloved) to beleeve this, to thinke that God is present where I make my prayer to him, to thinke he stands and heares it, even as I speake to a man that stands and heares me, and understands what I say to him; This is a great helpe to us. That this is true, see in 4. Eph. 6. Hee is in all, and through all, and over all, That is, the Lord is in every man, he passeth through every thing,2. Chron. 16, 9. his eyes runne through the earth, and he is over all, looking whatPsal 44, 21. secrets are in mans heart, what thoughts; yeaPsal. 139, 23. before he thinkes them he knowes them, because hee seeth them in their causes: Hee that is in a man, that lookes in all the secret corners of the heart, hee
must needes see what thoughts he hath, what pe∣titions he putteth up secretly, even then when his mouth speakes not. And lest that should not be enough, saith hee, Hee is over all; you know one that stands on high, and lookes over all that is below, hee easily can see whatsoever is done; So the Lord, hee is in all, he is through all, he is over all. But this is enough for that, only I would have you remember, that hee takes notice of all, hee knowes thy prayers. But you will say;Quest. I doubt not of that, I make no qvestion but he heares me, and understands me well enough: But how shall I know that he is willing to grant the thing I pray for? You shall see these 2 Reasons,Answ. in the 7. Math. where our Saviour urgeth this very point, that we have now in hand, from the 7. verse downe∣ward; Aske (saith he) and you shall have; seeke, and you shall finde; knock, and it shall be opened unto you; here is the promise, For (he backs it with these 2. Reasons) Every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh, findeth; and to him that knocketh, it shall be opened unto him: As if he should say; yee have this reason for it, why you should beleeve it, that it is no more but aske and have; for (saith he) all that ever asked have obtained; all that ever have sought, have found; all that ever have knocked, it hath been opened unto them. That is, looke through the whole booke of God, and see what prayers ever have beene made to him, and you shall finde, that there is not a prayer menti∣oned
in all the Scriptures, but it hath beene heard. Now when wee have such a cloud of wit∣nesses, it is a strong reason, when it is said to us that there were never any prayed but were heard. Why, you will say,Quest. There were many prayed that were not heard; Did not David pray for his Childe, and was not heard? Did not Paul pray to be delivered from such a temptation, and was not heard? My Beloved, Its true, they were not heard for the particular, but yet I dare be bold to say, that Dauid was heard at that time, though (I say) not in the particular; for though his Childe was taken away, yet you may see the Lord gaue him a Childe of the same woman, with much more advantage; he gaue him a Childe that was legitimate, which this was not: hee gaue him a Childe that exceeded for wisedome, Solomon was the Child that he had: So that the Lord did heare him, and gave him this answer, as if he had said to him, David I have heard thee, I know that thou art exceeding importunate; thou shalt not have this, but thou shalt have another Childe which shall be better. And so hee saith unto Paule 2. Cor 12. Christ reveales this to him; Paule (saith he) though I graunt thee not this particular re∣quest, in the manner that thou wouldest have me, (To take away the pricke of the flesh which thou art troubled with) thou shalt bee a grater gainer by it, thou hadst better have it than want it; when
Paule understood that it was a medicine, and not a poyson as he tooke it to be, he was content and resolved in it; And a man resolveth not ex∣cept he be a gainer. Hee saw that Gods power was manifest in his weakenesse, and he saw himselfe humbled by it; and when he saw that God gain∣ed glory, and himselfe humiliation by it, he was content to be denyed in it; So I say whosoever asketh findeth, you shall never finde any exam∣ple but that whosoever sought to the Lord as he ought, he was certainely heard, or else he had somewhat that was better graunted to him in∣stead of it. And this is the first reason that is used heare. The second reason is this;Math 7. 9, 10, 11. what man a∣mong you, if his Son aske bread, will give him a stone; or if be aske a fish, will give him a serpent? if you then that are evill, know how to give good things to your children, how much more shall your heavenly Father give good things to them which aske him? (saith he) you be not able to perswade your selves of this truth, because you know not the Father, for the dwells in light inaccessable, you are not acquainted with him, saith our Saviour, I will helpe you out with an argument that you better understand; even upon earth (saith he) take but a father here, a father that is ill (but the Lord is full of goodnes, fathers have but a drop, but a sparke of mercy in them, whereas the Lord is full of mercy, as the Lord is full of light, he is the God of all comfort;) Yet, (saith he) this fa∣ther (when his sonne comes to aske him bread)
he is ready to give it him, he is full of compassion and tendernes toward him; doe you not thinke that our heavenly Father is as true a father as he, that hee loves you as well as he whose compas∣sion and pitty is much greater? doe you not thinke hee is ready to heare his Children when they call upon him? O this is a strong and unan∣swerable Reason, & this you see is backed in 16 Iohn, 27. you see there the love of the Father how it is expressed to us; I say not unto you that I will aske the father (saith he) the father himselfe loves you; Marke, as if he should have said, let this be one ground to you to thinke your petitions shall be graunted, and that they are not only graunted for my sake, for (saith he) the Father himselfe loveth you, and hath a great affection to you, that is in naturall parents, there is a naturall af∣fection to their Children; So if I were not im∣mediatly to present your petitions (though that bee not excluded) yet (saith he) the father hath such an affection to you, that he cannot choose but heare you; I say not (saith he) that I will aske the father, for the father himselfe loves you. So that this is the second reason which this promise is there backed with, the love of the father, That hee cannot find in his heart to deny us, even for that affection that he beareth to us. We will adde a third Reason that wee meet here in the same Chap. 16. Iohn, 23. In that day you shall aske in my name: verily, verily, I say unto you, yee shall aske the father in my name, and he will give it you;
It is brought in upon this occasion: when our Saviour Christ was to goe from his Disciples, they were ready to complaine, as we see in the verses before, they were ready to say with them∣selves, alas, what shall we doe when our Mai∣ster shall be tooke from our head? Our Saviour answers them, you shall do well enough, doubt you not, for though I be not with you; yet (saith he) goe to the father in my name, and whatsoever you aske of him, you shall have it: So that hee answers that objection, when a man is ready to say: Its true,Quest. I know that a father is exceeding lo∣ving to his Children: But it may be, my carriage hath not beene such, I am full of infirmities, I haue much in me that may turne the love and af∣fection of my Father from me. Put the case you have,Answ. yet Christ adds this for your comfort; If (saith he) the Father will not doe it for your sake, yet doubt you not, if you aske in my name, he will doe it; doe we not see it usuall among men, That one that is a meere stranger to another, if hee get a letter from a friend, he thinkes to prevaile; and hee doth so, because though it be not done for his sake (it may be he is a stranger, one that deserved no∣thing at his hands) yet such a friend may deserve much: And when we goe to God in the name of Christ, this answers all the objections whatso∣ever you can say against your selves, it is all satis∣fied in this: I goe in his name, I am sure he hath
supply, I am sure he is no stranger, I knowe he hath deserved it, &c. Last of all, as he loves us, and because we aske in the name of Christ, is ready to heare us: we will adde this, that he is ready to heare us for his owne sake, he isPsal. 65, 2. a God hearing prayer, saith the Psalmist, that all flesh might come to him, even for this cause he heares, that men might be encoraged to come and seeke to him; for if the Lord should not heare, then no flesh would come unto him; that is, men would have no encouragement, no helpe; there∣fore he saith, he is a God hearing prayer, doubt ye not, he will doe it for this purpose, that hee might have men to worship him, that men might come and seeke unto him. Besides that, he shall be glorified,Psal. 50. 15 Thou shalt call upon mee in the day of trouble, I will heare the, and thou shalt glorifie mee; now the Lord is desirous of glory; it was the end for which he made the world: But in not heare∣ing our prayer, hee loseth this glory, by heare∣ing our requests, the more we are heard, the more glory and praise we render unto him. Like¦wise he doth it for the Spectators sake; Moses of∣ten presenteth that Reason,Exod. 32, 12, 13. Lord doe it, What will the Heathen say? and left thy name be polluted among them, they will say thou hast brought out a people, and wast not able to deliver them. So David often, there are many instances in that; I say, for the lookers on sake he is ready to doe it. All this is enough to perswaide our hearts, that hee is ready to heare us, that when prayers are made to
him on earth, (So the conditions be observed) they are surely heard in heaven. Now to apply this.Vse 1. First, if the Lord be so ready to heare, then this should teach us to be more servent in this duty of prayer than com∣monly we are; for to what end are such promi∣ses as this, but to encourage us to do our duties? when wee heare that prayer is of so much effi∣cacie, that it prevailes with the Lord for any thing, shall we suffer it to lay by (as it were) and not make use of it? If a drug, or a pretious balme were commended to us, and it were told us, that if we made use of it, it would heale any wound, it will heale any sickenes, and this and this vertue it hath: Will a wise man suffer it to lay by him, will he not use it, and see what vertue it hath? And when it is said unto us, that prayer is thus prevalent with the Lord, that it is thus po∣tent, that it is thus able to prevaile with him for any thing, shall we not make use of it, when we are in any distresse, when wee need any thing: when we have any disease, either of souleor bo∣dy to heale? Let us flye to this refuge that him∣selfe hath appointed. If a King of the earth should say to a man, I will be ready to doe thee a good turne, make use of me when thou hast occasion; he would be ready enough to do it. Now when the Lord of heaven saith, aske what you will at my hands, and I will doe it; shall wee not seeke to him, and make use of such a promise as this? Beloved we are too backward in this; we
should be more aboundant in this duty than we are, we should make more account of it. For whatsoever the case be if, you doe but seeke to the Lord, if thou doest but set downe thy resolu∣tion with thy selfe: Well I see it is a thing (if I looke upon the creature and the meanes) I have little hope of, but the Lord is able to doe it; and therefore I will goe to him, I will weary him, and I will not give him over, I will not give him, nor my selfe any rest, till I have obtained it: I say it is impossible thou shouldest faile in such a case. Onely remember to be importunate, for an importunate suiter he cannot deny. You know theLuke 18. 2, 3, 4. parable of the unjust Iudge. You know also theLuke 11. 7. parable of the man that is in bed with his children; when the widdow was importunate, when shee knockt and would give him no rest, he gives her redresse; the other riseth and giveth his friend as many loves as he will, saith the Text; yea though she were not his friend; (for this is the mea∣ning of it:) If, saith he, the Lord had not much love to you, if he had not such an affection, if you did not come to him in the name of Christ whom he loves, in whom he is ready to grant whatsoever you aske, if hee were not a friend to you; yet for your very importunity, he is ready to doe it. As the unjust Iudge (for that is the scope of the parable) he had no minde to grant the widdowes request, he had no Iustice in him to move him, he had no mercy nor com∣passion, yet for very importunity he graunted it.
Remember and observe the condition, for this is commonly a fault among us; when we goe to prayer, we thinke that the very putting up of the prayer will doe it. No, there is more requi∣red than so. As it is the error of the Country people, when they heare say, that such an herbe is good for such a disease, they are ready to thinke, that (howsoever it be tooke or applyed) it will heale the disease; no, it must be applyed in such a manner, it must be used in such a fa∣shion. So it is with prayer, you must not only doe the duty (and therefore when we exhort you to it, not onely to call upon God, for men are ready enough to do that, especially in the time of distresse,) but with these conditions I have named. You knowe2 King. 4. 29. 31. Gehazi when he had got the staffe of Elisha, he went to the Child, but it was not the staffe that could raise the child from death to life, there was something more required. So in prayer, it is not meere prayer that will do it, there is something else, there must be other conditions that must be observed. For we are wont to do with it, as those Con∣jurers were wont to do with the name of Iesus; they thought if they used the name of Iesus, it was enough: but yee know what answer the Spirit gives them,Act. 19. 15. Iesus we know, and Paule wee know, but who are yee? so I say, wee are wont to do in this case, wee thinke it is enough to make our request, and that is all. No, there is some∣what more required, you must make your re∣quest
in such a manner as ye ought. Then I adde this further, that when thou makest them in such a manner, yet thou must not thinke to be heard for thy prayers sake: that is another thing we are apt to faile in. When wee have made fervent prayers, and have beene importunate with the Lord, wee thinke now surely we shall not faile. No, you must know this, the promise is not made to the prayer, but to the person praying. You shall not finde throughout the whole scrip∣ture, that any promise is made thus, because wee pray fervently we shall be heard: but it is made to the person praying, the prayer is but the instrument: but the meanes by which the blessing is conveyed to us, is a meanes without which the Lord will not doe it, for the promise is made to the party. A cold prayer (so there be no neglect in it, so a man seeke the Lord, and pray as well as he can,) it will prevaile some∣times as well, as a fervent prayer: Who indites the petition, who makes the prayer fervent? surely not thy selfe, but theRom. 8. 26, 17. Holy Ghost: he makes request in us, sometimes he makes thee more fervent, hee enlargeth the heart more: some∣times againe the heart is more straitned in the performance of this duty: but both may come from the same Spirit. Not but that we have cause of much comfort, when wee are able to pray fervently, for this is a ground of our com∣fort, that when we pray fervently, it is an argu∣ment that the Holy Ghost dwels in our hearts, and
that our prayers are dictated by him; it is an ar∣gument, that our prayers come from a holy fire within. And therefore fervent prayer may give us hope of being heard, but yet it is not meerely the prayer, but because it is an evidence that it comes from a right principle, that it comes from the regenerate part, and is made by the assistance of the Holy Ghost: it is not the very fervencie that prevailes. And therefore when you heare this, that the Lord is ready to heare, I say make that use of it, be fervent in this duty, remem∣ber the conditions: and yet withall know, that you are not heard for the very prayers sake, but for Iesus Christ his sake. He makes every prayer acceptable, he mingles them with his sweete odours. And if you object,Object. O but I am a man full of infirmities. You know how it is answered in the Fift ofAnsw. Iames, (saith he)Iam. 5. 17. Eliah when hee was heard, he was a man, and a man subject to passions, and to the like passions that wee are: As if he should say, do not thinke that Eliah was therefore heard, be∣cause he was an extraordinary Prophet, for it was because the Lord had made a promise to him, and hee comes and urges that promise to the Lord, and therefore the Lord heard him. So (saith he) should every one of you, if you have the promise, you may goe and urge it, as well as Eliah did: though you be subject to many infirmities, Eliah was even so. You know there
are infirmities and passions expressed in the Scriptures that hee was subject to. And this is the first use we are to make of it, to be freqvent and fervent in this duty, since wee have such a promise. Secondly,Vse 2. if wee have such a promise, then wee should learne hence (when we have put up our prayers at any time) to make more account of them than wee doe: for the truth is, that we pray for the most part for fashion sake, many a man saith thus with himselfe: I will seeke the Lord, if it doe mee no good, it will doe no hurt; but if wee made that account of our prayers as we should, we would performe this duty in ano∣ther manner; but wee doe not make that ac∣count of them as we ought. We thinke not with our selves that the prayers that wee make are surely heard: there be many evidences of it; what is the reason, that when wee seeke the Lord, we doe it so remisly that we have scarce leasure to make an end of our prayers: we are so ready to hasten and goe about other businesse, wee are ready to turne every stone, to use all meanes to seeke the creatures with all diligence: but who prayes to the Lord as hee ought, to worke his heart to such afervent performance of that duty as he should? men have scarcely leasure, for it is usuall with them when they have businesse to doe, and enterprises to bring to passe, they are exceeding diligent to use all meanes; and yet are remisse in the chiefe: what is the reason else, that
wee see the doores of Princes and great men so full of suiters, though there be porters set on purpose to drive them away; but the gates of heaven are so empty? It is indeed because we do not beleeve our prayers are heard, wee do but make our prayers for fashion. What is the reason likewise, that we use prayer in the time of distresse (if it will be an effectuall meanes to helpe us, when all other meanes faile,) why use we it not before? But that is an argument that wee trust not to it, seing we use it, onely in the time of extremity: for if it be not effectuall, why do we use it then? If it be effectuall, why do not wee use it till that accident? Therefore this use we must further make, when wee heate that the Lord heares our prayers, to make more account of them than we doe, to thinke that our prayers when they are put up to the Lord shall be heard. Say thus with thy selfe, Well, now I have pray∣ed, and I expect that the thing should be graunt∣ed that I have prayed for, when I seeke to the Lord: It's true, I deny not but wee must use the meanes too, we must lay the hands upon the plough, and yet pray; both ought to be done, as sometimes we use two friends, but we trust one; wee use two Phisitians, but we put confidence in one of them: In like manner we must both pray and use the meanes, but so as wee put our chiefe trust in prayer, it is not meanes that will doe it. But the truth is, we doe the quite con∣trary: It may be, we pray and use the meanes,
but wee trust the meanes, and not the prayer: that is a common and a great fault among us, it is a peece of Atheisme, for men to thinke the Lord regards their prayers, no more than he regards the bleating of sheepe or the low∣ing of oxen, to thinke he heeds them not. And its a great part of faith to thinke that the Lord harkens to them and regards them, as certainely he doth. But you will say, I have prayed,Obiect. and am not heard, and have sought to the Lord and have found no answere. Well,Answ. it may be thou hast not for the present, but hast thou stayed the Lords leasure? (for that is to be considered in this case,) sometimes the Lord comes quickly, he gives a quick answer to our requests; sometimes he staies longer: But this is our comfort, that when the returne is longer, the gaine is the greater. As we se in trades, some trades have their returne very quicke, it may be the tradesmens money is returned every weeke, but then their gaine is so much the lighter; but when their returne is slower, as is your great merchants, when it stayes three or foure yeares, wee see the ships come home laden, bringing so much the more: So (for the most part) when our prayers doe stay long, they returne with the greater blessings, they returne loaden with rich commodities. Let this be an encoragement to us; Though I stay, the Lord will grant it; and thinke not with thy selfe, I made such a prayer long
agoe, I found no fruit of it; for be sure, the Lord remembreth thy prayer, though thou hast for∣gotten it, the prayers that thou madest a good many yeares agoe, may doe thee good many yeares hence. May not a man pray to have his Child sanctified, to have him brought to better order? It may be hee lives many yeares, and sees no such thing, yet in the end, the prayer may be effectuall: So likewise it may be in ma∣ny cases, you see there are many examples for it: Abraham prayed, he stayed long; but you see it was a great blessing that he had, when he prayed for a Sonne, you know what a Sonne he was, he was a Sonne of the promise, in whom all the nations of the earth were blessed. So David when the Lord promised him a kingdome, hee stayed long for it: Many such examples there are. Therefore comfort thy selfe with this: though I stay long, this is my hope, this is my encourage∣ment, that sustaines me, If I seeke the Lord, and waite upon him, Hee will come with a great blessing, the gaine shall bee heavier and greater, though the returne be not so quicke and sudden. Last of all, when you heare such a promise as this,Vse 3. That whatsoever you aske you shall be heard in it; you should hence learne, to spend some time in the meditation of this great privi∣ledge that the Saints have, and none but they; This I propound to every mans consideration; that those that are not Christians, that is, those that are not regenerate, may know what they
lose by it; and those that are, may understand the happines of their condition, that they may learne to magnify it, and to blesse themselves in that condition, that they have such a great pri∣viledge as this: It is no more but aske and have, therefore that which in the third place I exhort you to, is this, namely to spend time in the me∣ditation of it, to consider what a great advantage it is: David cannot satisfie himselfe enough in it: In 18. and 116. Psalmes: Lord I love thee deare∣ly: he cannot prayse enough, and why? I sought to thee in distresse, and thou heardest me; I called upon thee, & thou inclinedst thine eare to my prayer. I say consider this mercy as you ought to doe, it is part of the thankes we owe to the Lord for so an exceeding priviledge, That whatsoever our case be, it is no more, but put up our requests, and wee shall bee heard: When there was a speech among some holy men (as you know that man that was named in the story:) what was the best trade, he answered beggerie; It is the hardest, and it is the richest trade. Now he understands it not, of common beggery (for that is the poorest and easiest trade, that conditi∣on he puts in) but (saith he) I understand it of a prayer to God, that kind of beggerie I meane; which as it is the hardest, nothing more hard than to pray to God as we ought, so withall there is this comfort in it, it is the richest trade of all others; there is no way to inrich our selves so much, with all the promises that belong ei∣ther
to this life, or to that which is to come. Even as you se among men, a Courtier, a Favorite in the Court, gets more by one suite, (it may be,) than a Tradesman, or Merchant, or husbandman gets with twenty yeares labour, though he takes much paines; for one request may bring more profit, may make a Courtier, richer than so ma∣ny yeares labour and paines: So in like case a faithfull prayer, put up to God, may more pre∣vailé with him, we may obtaine more at his hands by it, than by many yeares labour, or using many meanes; and therefore it is a rich trade, and great priviledge, a priviledge that we can∣not thinke enough of, that wee cannot esteeme enough. You have heard of a noble man in this Kingdome, that had a Ring given him by the Queene, with this promise: that if he sent that Ring to her, at any time when he was in distresse, she would remember him and deliver him; This was a great priviledge from a Prince, and yet you see, what that was subject unto; he might be in such a distresse, when neither King nor Queene could be able to helpe him; or though they were able, (as she was in that case) yet it might be sent, and not delivered: Now then con∣sider what the Lord doth to vs, Hee hath given us this priviledge, he hath given us prayer, as it were this Ring, he hath given us that to use, and tells us whatsoever our case is, whatsoever wee are, whatsoever we stand in need of, whatsoever distresse wee are in, doe but send this up to me,
(saith he) do but deliver that message up to me of prayer, and I will bee sure to relieve you: Now certainely what case soever we are in, when we send up this, it is sure to be conveyed, wheresoever wee are: Againe, whatsoever our case is, we send it to one that is able to helpe us, wth a Prince many times is not able to do. This benefit we have by prayer: That whatsoever we aske at the Lords hands, wee shall have it: Now consider this great advantage which you have▪ It is expressed 4 Phil. in these words, Be in no∣thing carefull (saith the Apostle:) And that you may see wee have ground for this generality, In nothing bee carefull, but in all things make your re∣quests knowne unto God. That is, whatsoever your case bee, I make no exception at all, but what∣soever you stand in neede of, whether it con∣cernes your soules or your bodies, your name or your estate; yet be in nothing carefull. This is a great matter: There is none amongst you that heares me now, but sometime or other he is carefull for something or other, for which he is solicitous: Now when a man heares such avoyce from heaven, that the Lord himselfe saith to us, Bee carefull for nothing, doe no more but make your request knowne, it is well enough, I will surely heare in heaven and grant it; It is a great comfort. Beloved, comfort your selves with these words, and thinke this with your selves, that this is that Charter, and great Grant that the Lord hath given you, and to none but you, that
what prayers you make to him, hee heareth you. But it will bee objected,Quest. why is this said so ge∣nerally? That we must in nothing be carefull, but in all thinges make our request knowne? For then if a man were but a poore man, it is but go∣ing to the Lord, and asking riches, and hee shall have them; If a man were sick of an incurable disease, it were no more but going to the Lord, and hee should be sure to be recovered; If a man hath an enterprise to bring to passe, it is no more but goe to him, and it shall be done: what is the reason then, that godly and holy men have not these things graunted to them? To this I answer,Answ. you must understand it with this condition, even as it is with a Father (I will prove it to you by that,) suppose he should say to his sonne, I will deny thee nothing, whatsoe∣ver I have, I wil deny thee nothing but thou shalt have part in it; Though he say no more, yet we understand it with these conditions. First, that if his Childe shall aske him for that, that is not good for him, or if the child should refuse to have that done, or pray his Father and say, I beseech you do it not, when the Father knowes it is good: here the Father is not bound hee thinkes: as for example, if a Father sees his childe needes Physick, it may be, the child finds it bitter, and therefore is exceeding loath to take it, it makes him sicke, and is irkesome unto him, so that hee earnestly desires his Father that hee
may be excused, that hee might be freed from it; In this Case, the father will not heare him, for hee knowes the Child is but mistaken: On the other side; if the Child aske something that is very hurtfull, if he aske for wine in a feaver, the Father denyes it him; No, (saith he) you are mistaken, I know your desire is that you might have health and recover, and this I know will hurt you, though you know it not; This the Fa∣ther understands, and therefore he puts in that condition: So when the Lord saith, In nothing be carefull, but in all things make your requests knowne: If you mistake the matter at any time, and your prayer shall not bee the dictate of the Spirit, (so that yee alway make request accord∣ing to his will) but the dictate of your owne hearts, and shall be the expression of your na∣turall Spirit, and not the Lords Spirit: In this case there is no promise of being heard, and yet the Lord makes his word good; Bee in no∣thing carefull, but in all things make your re∣quest knowne. Secondly, a Father when hee saith to his Child, I will deny you nothing, but you shall have part in all that I have, yet the Childe may carry himselfe so, that the Father, upon such an occasion may deny him, and be ready to say unto him; Well, if you had followed your Booke, if you had not runne into such disorders, if you had not bin negligent to doe what I gave you in charge, I would have done it: In this case, the
Father withholds the blessing that hee will be∣stow upon his Child; not because he is unwilling to bestow it, but because he would thus nurture his Child, hee useth it as a meanes to bring him to order: So the Lord saith toNumb 20 12. Moses, That be∣cause he had spoken unadvisedly, because he had not honoured him before the people,Psal. 106. 32, 33. at those waters, the waters of strife, therefore the Lord tells him by the Prophet, he should not goe into the good land: And so he tells2 Sam. 12. 14. David, that because he had sinned against him, he would not give him the life of the Child: So the Lord saith to us some∣times; I will not graunt you this request; for though I be willing to graunt it, yet this is one part of the discipline and nurture that I use to my Children, That such a particular request, I will deny you for such an offence; as worshipping of Idolls &c. Beloved this is not a generall denyall, and this is not for our disadvantage, but it is a helpe to us, it makes us better, that sometime we should be denyed; knowing hereby that it is denyed to us for our sinne, that we may learne to come to the Lord, and renew our repentance, and to take that away, that we may come to pre∣vaile in our prayers with him. Thirdly, when a Father is willing to graunt it, yet he will thus say to his Child, Though I bee willing to doe what you aske at my hands, yet I will not have you aske it rudely, I will have you aske it in a good manner, and a good Fa∣shion, (For when wee come to call upon God,
and come in an unreverent manner, in such a case the Lord heares not.) Or againe, hee will say to his child; I am ready to heare you, but you must not aske in a negligent manner, as if you cared not whether you had it or no: So the Lord saith to us; I will have you to pray fervently, you shall aske it, as that which you prize. Againe he will say to his child: I am willing to bestow this upon you, but I do not give you this mony, to spend it amisse, to play it away, to spend it in trifles, and geugawes, that will do you no good: So saith the Lord, I am willing to give you riches,Iam. 4. 3. but not to bestow upon your lusts. Thus speakes the father to his child, when he comes to aske, hee tels him hee must come in such a manner as becomes a child, he must speake to him as to a Father, he must speake with confi∣dence to receive it: So also the Lord tels us,Iam 1. 6. we must come in faith; So that (in a word) this is to be remembred; That though the Lord promise, that he will give whatsoever we aske, and bids us, in nothing be carefull, but make our re∣quests knowne; yet notwithstanding this, he would have us to understand that our requests be made in such a manner as they ought to be. Last of all, it may be the Father is willing to do it; but hee makes a little pause, he will not give it presently, and suddenly to his child, though he purpose to bestow it upon him, that he may come by it with difficultie: So the Lord useth to with-hold his blessings many times, that his
childe might be exercised in prayer, and seeke him the more, and likewise that he might come the hardlier by the blessing, that so hee might learne to prize it more; or else he will be ready to do as young heirs: As it is with some when they never know the getting of it, they spend it easily; but he that hath known what it is, he takes more care to his estate, he looks more diligent∣ly to it: so it would be with us in any blessing, if we had it with such facility as we would, we would not make much account of it; but when it comes with some hardnesse, with some diffi∣cultie, it teacheth us to set a higher price on it, and so it makes us more thankefull, it teacheth us to give more praise and glory to the Lord. There are many that have had a sicknesse long, and have obtained health with much prayer, and much contention, and therefore they learne to prize it more, than another that obtaines it easily. And thus it is in every like case. So when you heare this great priviledge: that it is no more, but, aske and have: and, be in nothing care∣full, but in every thing make your requests knowne: yet (I say) these conditions must needs be inser∣ted, these are such as must be included. But these considered, remember this privi∣ledge, rejoyce in it, let the Lord have the praise of it, that Whatsoeuer we aske ac∣cording to his will, he heareth vs. FINIS.
