20577 99850778 16005
THE SPY Discovering the Danger of ARMINIAN HERESIE and SPANISH TRECHERIE: Written by I. R. Possibile est Satyras non scribere? . Printed at Strasburgh 1628.
TO ll zealous Professor and true hearted Patriots in Great Britaine. MY blusing disabilities haue at length adven∣tured to passe the pikes of censure, vnprovi∣ded of any other armes, or ornaments, then sincere loyaltie, devoted to my King and Countreys ser∣vice; rather then my King and Countrey should be (for want of a timely discovery of those dangers, wherein they haue beene cunningly and intricately en∣tangled) thrust blindfold upon the pikes of forreyne enemies, or the poyniards of domestick traytors. Sooner had these naked raptures visited the world, had this age afforded but an Exo. ▪ 17. Egyptian midwife to forward them. Faine would they haue fluttred abroad the last Parliament, but the supercilious lookes of over-awing greatnesse had so danted these degenerous times, that none durst adventure, to giue wings to their desire. Howsoever, I hope, their flight home, from a forreyne Countrey will not now be unseasonable. The raine was ceas'd, and the windowes of heauen were shutt, when Noah sent forth his returning raven; but the inunda∣tion remayned. All the fabrick falls not, assoone as ever the foundation sinckes: but the mystery of iniqui∣ty runnes on so many wheeles, that it is to be feared,
the removall of one (though it may slacken) can ∣erly hinder the motion. Yet unlesse all be dr∣ed, the danger may be (indeede) partly abated, can not be wholly avoyded. If any censure me for present∣ing so graue a subject, treading in measure; they may consider that the whole book is but an explanation of the Frontis-piece: & such expressions square best with a▪ metricall proportion. As for statelynes of style, my scantling of time permitted me not (had I affected that, more then plainnes, in so serious a matter) to be so refyn'd. Whatsoever the acceptance be, it proceeds from a well meaning hart. And J beseech God, that with the oracles of our Lawes, and ornaments of our state, (especially with him that is the chiefe of both) they may worke the same effects, for the preventing of imminent danger, and providing for the publique safe∣tie, that I desire. Whose consultations that they may haue free proceeding for the establishing such whole∣some Lawes, as may tende to the advancement of Gods glory, his Majesties honour, the Gospells encrease, and the Kingdomet welfare, I will dayly offer up my most earnest supplications before the throne of grace. Strasborgh Aug. 23. sty. vet. Your affectionate though afflicted Servant and Countreyman, J. R.
THE SPY. MVST I turne mad, like Solo mentia  mulan▪ inso∣litis tibi v sibus (capi∣tis ) persuasit A∣theniensib  Megas  bllu infer∣re Iust l Solon and write rimes, VVhen Certain bitter inve∣ctiue oration of de  nes against Phil. of Ma∣cedon and  Cicero ( mitation of him) a∣gainst M▪ Antonius Philippicks would bet∣ter fit the times? Yes, Yes, I must. For what soe're they be In presse, or pulpit, dare of speech be free In truth's behalfe; and vent their grieved mind▪ In phrase more serious, or some graver kinde, (Though, at the common good, they onely ayme, And be as strictly Carefull to shun blame As wisdome can devise): they cannot scape The malice of the age. Some mouths must gape (VVhose guilty Conscience tells them, this was pend To lash at vs) their sland'rous breath to spend In their disgrace; and bring them into hate As movers of sedition in the state. As if truth's friend, must needs be Englands foe. These rimes, I hope, shall not be censur'd so Councels, of old, encourag'd such men still (Till those made Councellours did curbe their will) VVho boldly would, for publi{que} safety, vtter VVhat, novv, the best, in private, dare not mutter Vnder the Fleetes damnation. Nay 'tis fear'd, That their advise in Councell is not heard VVho passe their kewes enioyn'd, or else come short. Nor is this strange, for we have Presidents for't.
Our fathers dead, their sonnes their courage lost: Many of bloud, of spirit few can boast. Where now is Essex▪ Norris, Rawleigh, Drake? (At whose remembrance yet proud Spaine doth quake) Where's Burleigh, Cecill, all those axletrees Of state, that brought our foes vpon their knees? Where are such fearelesse, peerelesse Peeres become? All silenc'd? what, is all the world turnd' dumbe? Oh how hath trech'rous coward feare enchanted This plying temporizing age; and danted Our noblest spirits? what dull heavy fate Hath lull'd asleepe, and stupfi'd our state? That few will see, at least none dare disclose Those plots our forreine and domestick foes Haue layd to ruine vs. Shall th' Austrian brood Abroad be gorg'd, and glutted with the blood Of our allies and friends? nay shall they here At home a Babel of Confusion reare; And none speake to prevent it? is there not Vn slaughter'd, or vn poyson'd left one Scot Dares tell the blindfold state it headlong reeles To Spanish thraldome vpon spanish wheeles? And that those Pillars may be iustly fear'd VVill fall on vs, that we our selues haue rear'd? Then giue him leaue (for Stons sake) to speake, whose heart, with griefe, had it no vēt, would breake. Thou therefore, sacred Mother, Christs deare Wife, ▪From whose pure breasts, I suck'd the food of life) And thou, deare Countrey, (in whose peacefull lap First to receiue my breath, 'twas my blest hap
Vouchsafe t'accept, and graciously peruse Th'abortiue ofspring of an vnripe Muse: And suffer not weake insufficiency To counterpoyse his harts true loyalty In your affections, who to doe you good, VVould thinke th' exhausion of his deerest blood Great happines; and want of liberty Large freedome: nay, could ev'n contented be Or for your safety to be sacrific'd Or your saluation Anathematiz'd. Nor feare I censure, though strict Cato read VVhil'st in the well knowne path of truth I tread, And travaile in her cause. The subiects vveight Repells the breath of eu'ry vaine Conceit. And for Spaines agents, and times flatt'ring Minions I neither passe their persons nor opinions. For God, that doth the hearts of all men see, Knovves my intentions just and honest be. ''Tis no vainglorious humour makes me doe it: Nor doth malicious envy force me to it: But hate of Spanish treason, and true zeale Vnto the good of Church and Commonvveale. VVhy therefore, armed vvith so iust a cause, Should I the censure feare of right-full lavves? Or once suspect a Check or prohibition From any but a Popish pack'd Commisssion? Nor can the Councell take such subjects ill, As to true Patriots haue beene vvellcome still. VVhat, ever yet, did merit condemnation, Tending alone to publi{que} preservation?
Mistake me not (you Props of state) I pray: Such bold presumption never yet bare sway In my acknowled'gd weakenes, as to goe About 'informe your well tri'd judgments: no I b persuade and not prescribe, incite, And not instruct your wisdomes, to what's right▪ Those then of malice shall traduce my name, By being guilty, bring themselves to shame, Should such squint Lamian envions eyes reflect O their owne brests, they would themselues correct Beforeth would censure others but such spight Shall never mount my Muses lowest flight. So high this world I prize not, as to close VVith falshoods fautours, and Gods favour lose. If friends by flatt'ry be procur'd alone, Befriend me heav'n, on earth I'le looke for none. Grant therefore (God of truth) into his hands I Never fall that holy truth withstands.
The Explanation of the Table Prefixed. AN endles bloudy war, that never yet Cessation, truce, or peace did once admit From the worlds Cradle, so it's hoary age Hath still beene wag'd, with vnappeased rage, By cursed Sathan, and his damned bands Of reprobates, against Christs church▪ like sands Her foes in number are: no station's free From fierce assaults, and furious battery, When time began this malice first began, Nor will it end but with the latest man ''Time shall produce. Thus iustice hath decreed ''Those shall be crown'd in heav'n, on earth must bleed. To exercise the Churches patience, hope And faith, God hath ordaind a Turke or Pope To persecute her saints: her sins to scourge, And from her purer gold the drosse to purge Of vaine corruption, oft he tryes in flames Her glorions Martyrs: and sometimes he tames Herself▪ admiring, and applauding pride (That on presumption of his loue doth ride In to that high conceit, the Iewes haue told her Since God hath chose her, he is bound t'uphold her By Neither to∣tally no ful∣ly, but in the sencibility of operation. drawing from her his supporting grace. That see'ing in what a weake and vvretched case
She is vvithout his helpe: hovv soone she'd fall (If grace be not her leader Generall) To Heresy, or any other snare, The tempter, to entrap her, shall prepare: She may rely, vpon his povver alone VVho is the Rock of her salvation. To be exposed thus to Sathans spleene, Of Christs true Church, a true marke still hath beene. The church malignant, vvhose prodigious head The Divel is himselfe, vvee, see, hath led The Captiue vvorld in triumph: liu'd at rest: And most of nations vvith subiection prest. No streames of Martyrs blood her temples di'de: Nor did she persecution e're abide. His Cruelty, not to his friends, but foes, The Prince of darknes, here in this vvorld, shovves. VVhom, but th' Apostles, did he sift, like wheate? And whom, like Paul, did he desire to beat, VVithout, with Ievvish scourges, and vvithin, VVith buffets of his flesh-assaulting sin? Such barb'rous tortures, vvho did e're endure (VVithout all pity) as the saints most pure? This bold adventurous foe, his fiery darts Directs, vvith matchlesse cunning, at the harts Of them that are, the best of saints. And vvhere He sees the richest graces shine most cleere, There he his strongest engines doth erect: (If possible) ev'n to subvert th'elect. Thus haue vve seene in heate of vvarres alarmes, (VVhere bloudy fields are pav'd vvith broken armes)
The foes redouble all their force and might, To breake the battailes, vvhere the gen'ralls fight. Such vvas the Syrian monarchs, 1. Kin: 22. 31. charge to bring Captiue, o kill none else but Israels King. So Caesar thought those soldiours vvorthiest grace, VVhose poynts still levell'd at their foemens † face.Miles sacin▪ feri. Thus strong temptations, forcibly appli'd, Haue made the best of Gods owne children slide. Lot, Noah, David, Peter, fouly fell; Because their gifts, did all mens else, excell. Adam, in Paradise, no safety found: Nay he, that of all safety is the ground, Escap'd not vnassaulted: of vvhose fare, Good reason, all his servants should haue share. Stand forth then, Roman strumpet, vvipe thine eyes Pull of thy scales of blindnes: yet be vvise. Ere't be too late. Then shalt thon cleerely see VVho the erroneous, vvho the true Church, be. I vvill not (nor is't fitting) here discusse Those points of doctrine, vvhere in you from vs Are in Diameter oppos'd, as farre As bright truth from darke fals hood: such a vvarre Requires a larger and more spatious field, Then this restrained straine can aptly yeeld. VVherefore in freer methode, more solute, I leaue your tenents for the schools dispute. And yet hovv easy vvere't to make you knovv, Humane traditions are (alas) too lovv To mate Gods sacred vvord: nor may the vaine Inventions of an erring mortall braine
Braue th' oracle of truth. if th' Arke to check Dagon presume, Dagon shall breake his neck▪ Hovv easy vvere 't to proue, that saving grace, Of our corrupted nature, must take place? Errour hath Champions: 'tis not my intent That Antichristian Councell, which from Trent Takes it's denomination to refell, Since those blasphemons Cannons now doe smell O're all the vvorld: and you your selues are faine Many (for shame) back to revoke againe. No (were there no marke else, the Church to knovv) Our truth, your falshood, this vvould cleerely shovv To proue vs Christs, and aggravate your sin VVe haue the patients, you the agents bin In all massacres, treasons, persecutions, Close murthers, cruell bloudshed, and dirutions Of Cityes, kingdomes vvofull devastations. Rebellions, povvderplots, and vvrong invasions, Perform'd to force mens consciences, and make Inconstant soules, vvith errour part to take. These are the bloody glosses of your text VVhich, you vvell hop'd, vve should interpret next. And if your projects be not timely crost Our freedome and religion both are lost. For, that our safety might be vndermind, You haue not onely, all your povvers combin'd Abroad, but ev'n at home, prepar'd such vvay, That vve, our selues, should, our ovvne selues, betray. To vvhat end else, did you (in time of danger) You, introduce, vve entertaine a stranger
T'our reform'd doctrine? was't for Conscience sake To bring vs to the truth? or was't to make Entrance, for Spanish waspes, to th' English hiue VVhile vve, for conscience, with our selues should striue? Thus simple truth, hath by your cunning bill Assaild without, falsely betrayd within. And when religions bond's once broke asunder, No mervaile forreigne Atheisme bring vs vnder. Which, that the Church may better take to hart, And yet prevent that, for which else she'le smart, Her dangers here appeare: that when you view them You better may advise which way t'eschew them.A Truths Fortresse, whose fundation's layd vpon Th' Apostles, Prophets, aud that Corner-stoneCasteo  a verita. VVhereon they build; morter'd and cemented VVith blood of Martyrs (for the gospell shed) Then, by degrees, rays'd to the present frame, By such of ancient, and of later fame, VVhose workes, and wordes, liues, lines, harts hands haue made Truth flourish, errour vanish, falshood fade, And shak'd proud Babel: stands beleaguer'd, here, On all sides by her foes. Two Ports appeare, "Gainst which th' assailants (ar'md with fury rage, And hellish spleene, that nothing can asswage But blood and ruine) all their engines plant, And forces bend: here is, of plots, no want,B Or Cunning projects: for their braines are filld VVith all the stratagems that hell can yeeld.Port: orthe dosso. Religions Port's beleaguer'd by the whoreC Of erring Babel's cursed Paramour:The Pope.
VVhose right hand's armed vvith the fulmination Of Kingdomes-blasting excommunication: To send to hell, or some such place, all those His jurisdiction, or his lavves oppose. His bull's his buckler: vvherevvith he defends (As he makes credulous soules beleeue) his friends; Pardons their sinnes, pulls such from Sathans pavves As damne themselues, for his vnhallovved cause. Next him, the Cardinalls march in pompous sort: VVh' vvould rather the defendants of the port Corrupt, then force by conquest. This implyes, They shall not vvant for earthly dignityes, And temp'rall honours, that vvith Rome vvill side Gainst heaun: in vvordly triumph, those shall ride: And he, for Babels vvhore, vvill spend a soule, Shall quaffe in fornications golden boule. Be it so, Lord, such their revvard haue here, And plagues hereafter: but thy children deere Novv suffer, that they may be after Crovvn'd, VVhen they shall, in thy cup of vvrath be drovvnd. A squadron of fat Bishops marcheth next▪ VVhose armes are Pickaxes in stead of text. Truth, by the spirit can sustaine no harme: Therefore they'd batter't, vvith the fleshes arme, The last (though not the least in force) consists Of a vvhole Legion of * Ignatius Priests. VVho (hauing learnd the vndermining art From him, that taught it first to † Berthold Schwart) Doubt not to make Truth's strongest hold to fly, VVith * pouderbarrells, vp into the sky.
VVhen lying, forging, and equivocation, Too vveake, they found, to batter truth's foundation, And that the seeming'st, reasons they could rack From their sublimest braines, reflected back Vpon themselues, with shame, and vvith disgrace: (For falshood must, at last, to truth giue place Though ne're so nearly varnish'd) they betooke Themselues to treasons, and their bookes forsooke, (As  Iulius did his keyes) vvith fire and svvord, In stead of zeale, and the spirituall vvord, They take the field: not only to enthrall Mens consciences, but liberty and all. Thus arguments for armes they haue refused, And treasons base for their best reasons sed: Thus haue they chose for Pallas povverfull charmes▪ Mars his more harsh and forcible alarmes. And not prevailing by far-strain'd conclusions, Would put dovvne Truth by lavvlesse vvrong confusiōs. This Germany too sensibly hath felt And smarted for (vvhose soule can chuse but melt To thinke on't? vvhere the title to the Crovvne Of that vnhappy Kingdome, tumbled dovvne Truth's best professours. For the plot vvas layd, Before th' election of the Paltz grave made, Hovv to defeate him. This vvas onely done To make him on his owne confusion runne. And that they might the eyes of iustice blind VVith some pretence of equity: and bind Our hands, that vvere engaged to support So iust a cause. How grossely did they sport
VVith thy mild nature? thou, whose sacred name The title of the Prince of Peace may Claime. How was thy soule abus'd with false relations; And, hopes of ne're-meant reconciliations? How did that damned Don, and 's agents here, That were, of all thy subjects, plac'd most neere Thy nought-suspecting heart, infatuate The wisest Prince on earth? and captivate That iudgment, whereat all the world did gaze? Sure he that skrew'd thee into such a maze Of errour, was no Spanyard, but a devill Sent vp from hell, to worke the Church such evill. Hovv couldst thou else vvith patience sit, and see Truth's fall, and thine ovvne childrens misery? VVhile (as 'tis thought) there vvas more treasure spēt In fruitles embassades, and complement; Then vvould not onely haue the Paltz secur'd But in it's bounds the Austrian pride immur'd. VVer't nor for this (blest King) and th'old ones play∣ster, Thou migh'st (perchance) haue, yet, beene Britaines master. Novv Germany lyes drovv'nd in her ovvne blood, And all that for Religions quarrell stood Haue suffer'd Martyrdome: and Frances King Is set a vvorke the Huguenots to bring Into subjection. Yet one sore doth ly In th' eye o'th' Pope, and 's Catholi{que} Majesty, VVhich needs must be remov'd before the rest And thats our land, of Nido d'he∣tici▪  Heretiques the nest.
(As they please terme it) hovv they this may doe, Spaines councell, and the Romane Conclaue too, VVith Beelzebub, that sits as President At Councell table, haue a long time spent. VVith forreigne forces to invade a land So rich, so vvell appointed, so vvel mann'd VVith high resolved spirits, that ever bore Themselues, in vvarres, victorious heretofore, And made good proofe of perfect valour (till Base treachery against the valiant's vvill Did Generally Mislead them novv of late, And the vvhole vvorld may Admire all thereat) T'invade so stout a people, needs must be A dang'rous action, full of jeopardy. Besides the very thought of eighty eight Dants them, and quells such resolutions straight. VVherefore 'tis safest, in such case to fly From open vvarre, to secret trechery. "He that intends to bring a countrey vnder, "Either he must, before he lighten, thunder: "Or else rayse vp, and nourish in't a faction, "May make him entrance, through their ovvne de∣straction. In eyghty eight, the former they assay'd: Then treating peace, vvhen th' had their anchores vvaigh'd, To saile to our destruction. But (be blest You heav'ns) their svvord vvas turn'd on their ovvne brest. Novv of the second project they make tryall: (And Spanish gold, alas, finds rare denyall)
From Spaines exchequer some, some from the Of Par∣dons &c. Popes Ae fed with gold, but more with golden hopes. This th' haue attempted long: and how too true Tis th' haue prevaild (I feare) too late, we rue. ist, seeing A Religā∣o. Religion is the strongest Chaine To ty mens hars together: and 'tis vaine To hope for conquest, whiles that Concords band Environs (like a wall of brasse) our Land: His Holynes hath learn'd of Machiavell, (In whom all Popes haue ever beene read well) T'advise his The Diuel. standard bearer, to devide Truths chiefest followers: that while they doe side In factions mongst themselues, he may with ease Destroy them all, ev'n as himselfe shall please By taking part with th'one. Which to effect Sathan his writts doth readily direct To all the peeres of darknes. VVho being met, And (capering to the Councell-table) set: In comes the Divells Duke, great Lucifer: VVhen all, to make obeysance, quickly stir Scraping their cloven feet, and lovvely bending: Because their honours are from him depending. Straight Beelzebub, the chosen President After a hem (that all in pieces rent The walls of Lmbo) an oration roar'd To all the Luciferians, amply stor'd With threatnings: what he sayd, I did not heare: If needes you'le know the cause, I was not there. But, by the sequell, I perchance may guesse That solemnly his hate he did professe
To Truth, and all her follo'wers: and 's desire T'enlarge his empire, and to bring it igher To vniversall greatnes. But there lay (To curbe his great designes) a rubbe i'th vvay, Truths fortresse: vvhence he often had sustaind Losse irrecov'rable: and seldome gaind Ought else, but shamefull falls, disgracefull foyles, Or strong repulses. Therefore all their vviles Of hellish policy, they novv must proue, This let, of their ambition, to remoue. All spend their censure, that, since force prevailes not, Treason must do't: that too too often failes not. VVherefore vvith generall voyces they conclude That fiends in shevv of friends, must truth delude, And so betray her. To this cursed end, In humane shape Arminius they send; Got by Pelagius, and in Rome nurst up: VVhence, drunke vvith superstitious errours cup, He 's sent to Leyden by the Popes direction To blast the vvorld vvith 's heresyes infection, Nor rests th' ambiguons crafty monster there; But spewes the poyson of's false doctrine here: Comes, like a protestant, in shew, before; And vowes he hates the Antichristian whore; Disclaimes her tenents: Nay none seemes to be More zealous, in the gospells cause, then he. (Oh that false tongues were ever made so smooth, Or lying lips should haue the power to sooth,) Tell him the doctrine of the Pope is' true Concerning merits, he will censure you
For errour straight. Say that vve may attaine By nature, povver saluation to gaine, By vvorking it our selues: he vvill reply These doctrines are condemnd for heresy: And yet (vvhat positiuely he thus denyes) By necessary consequence implyes. So that obserue him vvell: vvithin you'le find A friers hart, as here his coule behind. Behold, novv, sathans masterpiece, t'or'e spread The Church vvith Popery, so long banished. Had he, in publique, these his tenents held, And justify'd, he should haue beene expelld From all reformed Churches; and confuted Had he such, Theses in the schooles disputed. Therefore, vvith truth, dissembling to take part He (Ioab like) doth closely, vvound her heart. And silly soules, entangled by him, ly In nets of errors, that they cannot spy. Yet though Arminius, Hollad had infected, Since vve, his poysonous doctrine had detected, And that blest King, most learnedly refelld Those false positions seduc'd Vorstius held: VVhat madnes vvas't, for vs, to foster here Those errours, that our Church condemned there? Had sathans instruments beene all vvithout, The danger vvere not great: vve need not doubt So much our safety. But Da chi mi fido mi guar do Dio. Da chi mi nō fido mi guar ro . vvithin, they lurke, That, vnder name of truth's stout'st chāpions vvorke Her ruine: and to back her, making shovv, Betray her, and conspire her overthrovv.
No sooner comes Arminius to vntwine The bond of concord, and to vndermine Religion, vvith condemn'd Pelagianisme (To make way for the Pope) but factious Schisme, VVith sencelesse Atheisme, cold neutrality,H . Loose Epicurisme, and damned Policy Are ready t'entertaine him: and declare Themselues (perfidious vvretches as they are) For him, g'ainst truth receiud. VVherefore, in hast, As he is formost, by the divell plac't VVith schismes vvild fire, Riligions Port to set In a combustion, he is straightvvay met By messengers sent to salute him. VVho They are, I scarce can yet precisely knovv. But Bishops Chapleines they should be, I deeme For, by their stately port, no lesse they seeme. And such is he, vvhose purblind Couzning eye It's objects (as't appeares) doth multiply, And make tvvo Sacraments seeme sea'vn. Like him. (But that his Carriage something is more grim) Is he, that takes vpon him to suppresse All bookes against his Leyden friend: vnlesse His sence of feeling be a little feed. (VVere I his indge) it should be so indeed. But him that welcomes first this Heretick, His very Intus quod latet externa pingitur in facie Cae a signatis. lookes proclaime a Schismatick. He hath Commission, with a false forg'd key To let this monster in, and so make way For all the rest of that accursed crevv In truthes chiefe Martyrs bloud, their hands t'mbrue.
These, these, not those at Clerkenvvell we tooke, The strong foundation of our Church haue shooke, And made Religion reele. Our foes we shun: But these false faigned friends haue truth vndone. Oh vipers most vnnaturall; thus to teare The bowells of that mother, held you deare. Alas, alas, too true it is I see, All men are for themselues; few Christ, for thee. Errour prevailes: and while thy sheapheards sleepe Wolves in sheepes clothing, Worry all thy sheepe. VVho, almost, cares which way Religion bends, So they may compasse their ambitious ends? Hovv sone doe those that should firme Montaines be, For truth to build on, leane to popery: Laude Romish lawes, and to disgrace endeavour, In truth's profession, such as would persever. So they may rise, they make their betters fall. Thus doe they ship wrack faith, loue, soule and all. Yet (blest be God) Truth ne're was so distrest, But she had still some Champions (those the best) T'abet her quarrell. See the faiths defender, VVth's brandish'd sword, is ready ayd to lend her; And thouhands more of soldiours stout there be, VVhich never yet, to ertour, . 19. 18 bow'd their knee, For truths sake, would, in midst of faggots dance: Yea Bishops some. But see a luckles chance Befalls one Prelate: hastning to repellM Arminius and's adherents back to hell For feare of faction. He himselfe is tane By proud Ambition: that is still the baneN
Of all religious acts, the roote of evill, The Character and darling of the devill: Aud violently (I know not why) 's throwne downe Vnable to resist, ev'n bv a frowne. Me thinkes 'tis pitty, for a cause vniust That godly gravity should ly i'th' dust. But, though he fall, himselfe (he sayes) shall rise Tu null plangente. And he shall fall, when none shall vvet their eyes. Hovv speed the rest: their vvell meant labour 's lost: A bald appa'ritour hath their iourney crost: VVho muzz'ling them, by virtue of his box Extorts the spirits svvord from th' orthodox. Nor doe these flattr'ing Prelates cease to bring Such men in hatred, dayly, vvith their King: And falsly, that th'are Calvinists, report Onely to make them odious in the court. Nor is't vnlike, some hope, by pleasing so The Kingdomes secret bane, and Churches foe, They may, in this golden corrupted state, Bishopricks purchase, at an easier rate Then the chiese-iustice-ship. Thus Errour beares Her selfe aloft: while Truth (bedevv'd vvith teares To thinke vpon the wofull sad events Schismes ever bring vpon the Church) laments. For, if the monuments of formerages VVe search: and studiously turne ore the pages Of all historians: they vvill shevv vs plaine, No state, or Kingdome ever did sustaine Such fatall dovvnfalls, gene'rall devastations, Finall subversions, and depopulations,
By open foes: (though ne're so fiercely bent) As by intestine civill broyles. Hovv went The Graecian Monarchy to nothing? why Lost Rome her greatnes? vvherefore doth she ly Buryed in her owne ruines (who vvas once The glory of the East) an heape of stones? But aske antiquity, how these did fall, 'T will answere, In quo dis∣cordia cives, Perduxi mi∣eros Virgi. discord hath or'ethrowne thē all. Enquire of Carthage, and her rubbish towers Will cry, would Hannos' house had ne're beene ours. Aske how the Thracian empire's stately seate Became a slaue to Mahomet the great, How we lost all those Countreyes in the East, And how that land our Saviours presence blest? Truth must reply, dissension was their fall. And Christian princes discord lost them all. This was spide wisely by a graue  Bashaw, And as a strong persuasion vs'd to draw Great Soliman to Rhodes. For while (quoth he) The Christian princes thus divided be, They hasten their Christia∣us occas testinis dis∣cordijs lab∣ destruction. 'twas too true. This Counsaile Rhodes and Hungary did rue. "Civill dissensions are most mortall ever: "But when religion breeds them, then they sever "The very soules of men. This nature makes "Become vnnaturall: it no notice takes "Of father, brother, friend: but all doth vse "With like Contempt, with equall hate pursues. VVhich Sathan, (th' enemy of humane peace. The gospells glory, and the truths encrease)
Perceiving; and by long experience knowing, That nothing keepes religion more from grovving, Then Church contentions. As the surest way To rayse vp errour, and make Truth decay; He hath suborned, in all ages, those That, vnder Qui sub nomine Chri stiano doctri uae resisterent Christianae. Tertul: Christs ovvne name, should Christ op∣pose. None's hurt, but by himselfe: to Christ none is A foe so mortall, as he, that seemes his. Schismes in the church, are like, i'th' soule, a vvound: To cure't no Aesculapius can be found. Th'are like * Elias cloud: though small, at first,* Yet still encreasing; and being dayly nurst VVith male contented humours: at the length, They (by degrees) attaine to so much strength; Truth's suune is by them overshadowed quite, And, like a tempest, on the church, they light, Or'ewhelming, vvith a bloody, inundation Cityes and kingdomes, ev'n to desolation. Such sad proceedings had the Arrian errour; VVhich, first contemn'd, prou'd aftervvards a terrour To all the vvorld. That sparke, whence once it brake To flames, made Europe, Asia, Afrike quake. And so obscur'd the Churches glory over, She never could her lustre yet recover. So vvas th' Mahomet. Arabian, in Heraclius dayes (Whom Sathan did another agent rayse Truth to disturbe) vvhen he began to broach His damned Dogma's, fitter of reproach And scorne reputed, then represt to b'e By force, or Councells censure. And thus he
(Though an vnread Barbarian) after came, By this connivence, to attaine such fame For false supposed truth (since no man could Gainsay, as it vvas thought▪ because none vvould, This nevv-spring doctrine) that it quickly grevv Through force and juggling of this Pagan Ievv To such an height of greatnes, and of povver, That from that age, vnto this present hovver, His barb'rous proud successours still haue beene The executioners of Sathans spleene, And heaviest scourges, for the Gospells side, That ever Christendome did yet abide. "So fatall 'tis: (oh then vvhat state vvould doe'?) "To let an errour, in the church, take root. If later times examples better take, And in mens minds deeper impression make: What frequent streames of bloud of Christians drevv The mad, phantastick, giddy-headed crevv Of Germane Anabaptists? to maintaine VVhose grosse erroneous tenents, there vvere slaine Thrice fifty thousand soules: vvho lost their breath In that false quarrell by a timeles death If then th' obtrustion of nevv dogmatiques Vpon th' abused Church, so deepely pricks Her grieved hart: if it her quiet marre And turne her happy peace to bloody vvarre: VVhat Belials brats, or Bichris sonnes could find In hart, to be s'vnnaturall and vnkind As to that mother, ill for good, to render VVho hath beene ever, of their vvellfate, tender?
Oh that such dang'rous serpents ere should rest, I'th' choysest mansions, of a Kingdomes brest, VVould suck her hart bloud out: it vvere too much In monster-moulding Africk to find such. VVho then would ere suspect a monstrous seed And more prodigious Africk ere did breed Should spawne in England? in so cold an ayre VVhere matter of corruption should be rare. That then, that doth this mi'shap'd births create Is not the sunne of zeale, but fire of hate, And slime of pride and treason: these they be That turne a man into a prodigie. And such, there are too many: who doe hope And strongly labour to reduce the Pope, Vs her'd b' Arminius: that themselues, in time, To th' honour of a Cardinalls cap, may clime: First let them breake their necks. And let that hand Be ever mark'd with th' ignominions brand Of infamous sedition, whose appeale, For Spanish-English favour, not for zeale To God or truth, did hither first transferre The Belgian Heretick, to make vs erre. Did we not see, of late, what sad effect This doctrine wrought, in that pernicious sect? Had not the States, like, to their cost, t'haue felt (By th' trecherous designes of Barnevelt, His sonnes, and others) what religious fruites We might expect from such seditious bruites? If, the same danger, we had meant to shun, VVhy, the same hazard, did we rashly run?
Nor vvere these tenents in the schooles discust (Fit places vvhere such paradoxes must Be controverted) but in publi{que} print▪ (To make vnlearned vulgar eyes to squint From truth on falshood) all the land about These dang'rous bookes are cast, to make men doubt The truth receiv'd: and not resoluing vvhere Safely to stand, or to vvhat side t'adhere, To fall as fast to Rome or atheisme As Sozom: Scholis ac parietibus clausit. Aug. de C. D. those in Arrius time to Gentilisme. Better discretion from the heathens lavves Might be observ'd. For no religious cause VVith them, vvas handled' mongst the vulgar sort▪ And vvith the Turckes, his life he forfaites for't Dares question any. Learned Varro shut Such bookes in schooles and private closets. But Boue all th' Apostles and the fathers vvere Herein most chary. For vvhen ever there Sprung any diff'rence 'tvvixt them: they ne're made Saucy appeales to temprall Kings, to shade Or bolster up their fancyes. None did write Bitter invectiues gainst his opposite: Nor clamorous bills in any princes court Put up. but Act. 15. lovingly they did resort I'th' feare of God together: there propose Their doubtes, alleadge their reasons, confirme those: And then determine from Gods sacred word VVhat must be follovv'd, vvhat must be ahorr'd. Good sheapherds lead their flocks to feeding, nigh Those pleasing rivers, that streame  Sep. Ps. 23. 2 quietly
And not in whirle pooles. Those of highest place Shall haue fruition in th' almighty's grace, That draw most soules vnto him. VVhere shall they Become, that fright vnstable soules away? Consider this, all you, whose hot desire Of worldy honour, far surmounts the fire Of your cold zeale. And fix in heav'n your mind▪ Where, onely, lasting honour, you shall find. So shall, our Church, be happy in her seed: So shall she be, from present dangers, freed: So shall the Gospell, 'mongst vs, ever flourish: So shall our state, the true professours nourish: So shall the God of Truth your labours blesse And your endeavours Crovvne vvith vvish'd successe.
Port della Fidelita. NOw rise vp Rawleigh, helpe me to vnfold A mystery, shall make the bloud grow cold In all true English harts. VVhich to de∣feate, Those boundlesse braines ofthine did ever beate, (Till Wisedome swallovved Spanish figges.) and thou Great Lesters treach'rous ghost assist me novv To vnrip Treasons bowells. That (may be To true▪) Hath harbour'd in as great a Peere as thee, As highly honour'd, and as highly plac'd In Offices of vveight: more highly grac'd. And novv you Catilines, that agents are For Spaines designes; to hang your selues prepare. For we already haue (though late) detected Your Treasons (blest be God) ere th'are effected. Nay novv our eyes, peace blinded long, haue found The plots, the meanes to worke by, and the ground Of your attempts: VVhereby y' haue slily sought Our English freedome (Traytor like) t'haue brought To forreigne slavish thraldome. And our land T'haue made a Province vnder Spaines Command▪ Novv haue we your conceal'd devices spide To weaken ours, strengthen the adverse side. Now haue we found, hovv the Cin{que} Ports of state.P The Gate of Loy'lty. Hath enclind, of late,Port della Fidelita. (As far as yet it could procure Commission) By th' vndescry'd darke by path of Prodition
Into our British Ile to let that foe. VVhose greatest ioy would be our overthrow. This how they haue attempted: and how far Prevail'd: we must enquire of Gondomar,▪ That Magazine of craft, the Divels factour Th' authour of all pernicious plots, and th' actour; He, he, in time of peace, that lull'd asleepe Our Salomon: Kind of  an an Rat creepes elly a sleeping s out utts. Ichneumn-like to creepe no his bosome. VVhere too long he sate To spy our secrets, and anticipate Our foreknowne Counsailes and attempts: that fox VVho, by his cunning wiles, pick'd all the locks Of state: he that, like Phocions sonne, him sway'd (VVhich way he pleas'd) whom all the land obay'd▪ That VVitch, whose charmes enchanted vs so farre As to bestow our * instruments of warresse i▪ To be imploy'd against our selues (a crime Ne're stupid state committed till that time) He, he, that by procuring tusse n lng oiers to n agt. ke nd agt. ▪ Arch agt▪ the  &c.  one hers . volontiers For Spaines allyes, 'gainst ours, in halfe seav'n yeares More English blood, by English armes, did spill In time of peace; more English vet'ranes kill By English vet'ranes▪ Then in ten were slaine In time of vvarre, in Belgia, France, or Spaine. He that brought Ravvleigh to vntimely rest For knovving hovv, his master, to infest Best of all Captaines living: he that made Our iustice, to his will, a very Iade. He that vvith hopes of a pretended match, Great Britane, in a purse-net thought to catch.
He, he that, all times: in all shapes was clad: The creaft'st agent ere the Divell had; The Spanish Philips graue Achitophel, That Matchiavilian Oracle of Hell. He, on this side, appeares truths formost foe: For all his actions have approu'd him so. Iustly may he, Spaines colours, then advance 'Foreh' Austrians, Flandrians, or the men of France. For his succesfull plots haue wrought those harmes They haue but executed vvith their armes. T'vndoe, by English meanes, this div'l proiected. Truth and the Palsgraue: vvhich he soone effected. And therefore rightly his devise proclaimes VVhereto he allvvayes bent his fox like aimes. VVhen foxes, muzzled lyons, lead so ame They dare not stir for feare of check or blame, 'Tis vvondrous easy for a Spanish dog Vpon that Lyons vvhelpes t'impose a Clog. This riddle needs no Oedipus t'expound it: For, too true, Englands onely Daughter found it, Vnto her ovvne and royall ofsprings Cost. For his helpe vvanting, vvhom she trusted most (That vvas by nature, and Religion both, The tye of common danger, and by oth Bound to defend her countrey, and Gods cause) Forsaking her: she fell into the pavves Of danger: and hath shelter'd, ever since Vnder the vvings of the Lovv-Countreys Prince▪ To our eternall shame: vvhom no regard Of honour, nature, common faith, revvard
Reseru'd in heav'n, for those their liues shall spend To beate dovvne errour, and the truth defend Could ever dravv Truth, falling, to sustaine, Or replant them in Heidelburgh againe. Oh that vvee're vvere forc'd to be disloyall, To such a gratious Princesse and so royall; Hovv (vvithout indignation) can the eyes Of heav'n, such irreligious Covvardise, And sluggish dull stupidity behold? VVhat made the English thus, but Indian gold.R Had not Spaines Philips h of Ma∣ced. thought no gate so strong but an asse laden with gold might passe t. He was not far from uth I feare. Macedonian Asse Permitted bee'ne our Loyall gate to passe (Driv'n by th' incarnate diu'l) they had not bin So deepely drench'd in woe: nor we, in sin▪ But things being thus: and our supplies kept back: Our friends, the Gospell, Paltz, went all to wrack. VVhat could (but Cursed thirst of tempting coyne) Our safety, in their ruine, vndermine: To bring vs downe, what readier meanes could be Then vs to cause to breake Confed'racy With our allyes? that, so, our strength divided, Might broken be vvith ease: and we derided For vvillfull blindnes: that would not prevent Those dangers could not be but imminent Better had treasure vndiscover'd layne In hell for ever: then t'haue beene the bane▪ Pind. Of honourable actions: and to cause The shamefull breach of God and natures lavves. Why, why (abused statesmen) haue you thus Your selues blindfolded, to endanger vs?
Could you be ignorant that th' Austrian might Dem. Olynt. 1. At length, vvould on our shoulders heavy light? Seing Religion, but that sugar'd baite VVherevvith, to catch mēs freedomes, they lay vvaite, And fish for a fift Monarchy no other But a cloake of Pretence, to hide and smother Their proud ambitious ends: vvhereto t'impose. Limits of right and title, vvere t'enclose The swelling sea, confin'd vvithin a grate. Since then Religion, and invete'rate hate 'Gainst vs, (as they that haue opposed most Their great'st designes, and vveighti'st proiects crost) Enfor'cd, in vs, a double interest In that long plotted quarrell: vvhy addrest Not vve, in time, our succours? vvhat did then The forc'd detention of the Englishmen But ev'n our friends betray, our selues pull dovvne, And helpe t'advance, and spread, th' Imperiall Crowne? VVe  &. the same ca∣se Dem. Oly. 1. Germany at Austria's foote haue layd' Because Prince Fred'rick vve refus'd to ayd. Spaines valour made th' Imperiall greatnes rise Not halfe so much, as English Covvardise▪ A humane body (in this case) is like Vnto a states great body Politique In th' one, to keepe disturbing humours low Preserues from sickues: so to curbe a foePrincip obsta. In th' other, frees from danger. Keepe out fin In it's first motions, scarce 't can e're come in. But giue it entrance, suddainly t' vvill raigne, And hardly ever be expell'd againe.
See then (abused Britanies) see at length And mend your errours: reassume that strength Hath beene abated by your vaine excesse Your soft effeminacy and vvantonnes. These idle pleasures did your Courage tame, So Cyrus, once, the  2▪ Lydians overcame. Draw out those swords in peace have lōg time rusted, And since hovv far a Spanyard may be trusted You novv perceiue (vvho promises and vowes Not onely, for his ovvne advantage, bovves VVhich vvay he pleaseth: but vvith perjur'd handFides non est enonda cum hreticis. Slightly (Lysander-like) doth breake the band Of sacred oathes, expresly 'gainst the vvord) VVhich even Turkes and Pagans haue abhorr'd Trust him no more, be sure, no more regard him: But, as he hath deserved, so revvard him. Nor haue thy projects, vvith thy life, an end, Old Spanish fox, vvhile there's a Spanish friend In th' English Court, to execute thy vvill: But stratagems of such like nature still VVe must, against our state, expect. For vvho But vnto Spaine a friend; a faithlesse foe To Englands good, would giue advise to breake Our peace with France, to make our party weake, And force th' affronted French in league to close Offensiue and desensiue with our foes? VVhereas the way to safeguard vs, and keepe Proud Spaine at such a bay, she durst not peepe Beyond her confines, vvas with France to hold Good correspondence, So we might be bold
(Thus countenane'd) courage and life t'infuse Vnto the Belgians: and to make them bruise The head of his ambition, till it Crack, Borne, and assisted by so strong a back▪ This then was but a Spanish plot, t'intangle Our armes in civill broyles: for while we wrangle With France, designing to the Dane no ayd; His townes, the Austrian, at his foote hath layd. Beates him frō Holsteyn, makes him still giue ground, And theatneth to be master of the Sound: Which if he be, then must we make great store O'th' ships we haue, for we shall ne're haue more. 'Tvvixt brothers then, this vnexpected breach, VVas not so much for malice, as to teach Our foes the time t' invade vs: having thus Pull'd (like curs'd Ismaël) all the vvorld on vs: Provoking some, and other friends abusing: VVitnes the lavvlesse staying and perusing The letters of that state, vve ever found To vs in league of friendship, firmely bound. Hovv many bones, likevvise, to rayse vp iarres Betvvixt our neerest friends the Hollanders And vs, haue oft beene cast? that vve, bereft Of all assistance, might, alone, be left Vnto the rage of all the vvorld expos'd. Thus haue our actions aym'd (if rightly nos'd) At losse of honour: and to bring our state Amongst all nations to contempt and hate. Nor, that remonstrance, vvill I feare to blame, Although I savv prefix'd the authours name;
VVherein the quarrell, Rochell to support Religion was (poore soules) they 'le suffer for't. This was the onely way, indeed, to draw All that are Champions for the Romish law 'Gainst the Reformists: and to bend their spleene VVholly at vs: because we still haue beene Truths ablest Patrons. Till the Gospells light Should be (which God forbi'd) extinguesh'd quite. This, blest King Iames, thy wisdome did foresee, And, being fear'd, prevent as carefully: Lest, Civill discord from the deepe vnbound' All Christendome should in her bloud be drown'd. Nor did there want a plotted grosse abuse Might giue iust cause, to vs, to breake the truce. Our Admirall the French, some ships hath lent, VVhich were, he knew, 'gainst Rochell to be sent: This could not chuse, but in our stomacks breed A secret grudge, and so it did indeed. These ships be'ing then detain'd, to open flame The sparke breakes out: and quite burnes downe the frame Of that Confed'racy we late had rear'd Gainst Spaines designes, by both states iustly fear'd'▪ And now, a huge Armado, giues assault To th' Ile of Re, as if we meant with salt To powder France. Our fleete environs th' Ile And yet it is not taken, all this while, To shew our courage, though, is free from dread; And vvhat trimme stratagems of warre, w'haue read, We scorne to man th' abandon'd little Fort, Or with our navy to secure a Port;
Although we rue the issue, what care they That seeke our good, the cleane contrary way? Torax (that, to the Spanyards next, doth lead A squadron of proud Monsieurs, vvho doe tread Their match in galliards, and in's banner beares A Cock insulting 'cause avvay he fearesGallus galli∣cus. A lyon) kindly doth a vvhite mare send For present, to his long expected friend. Which vvas from others of that hue desery'de By a blevv scarfe before her shoulders ty'de. These favours vve requite, since they begin them, With Pyes: pray God there vvere no papers in them. VVhat these Commanders meant, or vvhereunto These missiues tended, vve vvill leaue to you (Sage British Senate) but, I feare, you'le find, Our English leader had a French mans mind: Hovv, ever, else, vvhen th' Ile vvas compas'd round, Had they such vndisturbed entrance found? Vnlesse vvith legends you vvould blind our eyes And make vs thinke they drop'd downe frō the skyes. Or that from th' earth, like Cadmus leeth they sprung▪ Or else engend'red in the ayre they hung: (And that Conceit might vvell for currant passe. One squadron of them, seene at Wantage vvas) Or make's beleue because they came so soone, They leap'd downe frō the mountaines in the Moone, Or that sir Hugh of Burdeaux thither sent Iuvisibly, a fayery Regiment. Or that th' vvere shot in Archimedes gin. From France, and so the Iland lighted in.
Hovv ere (no English ships, or povver vvith standing) Ev'nas they pleas'd, they had a quiet landing. Then like a storme orevvheln'd our men, that had 'Gainst such impressions, no entrenchments made, Of any moment, but securely lay. As France had England beene. Yet might the day On th' English side beene won, had th' horse gone on VVith thy couragious resolution Heroick Cunningham: or vvith thy hart VVhom neither losse of bloud, nor stinging smart Of raging vvounds could ere enforce to yeeld (Brave Rich) oh that this pen of mine could build An everlasting Pyramis of prayse Your fame and vvorth, aboue the starres, to rayse. But you not back'd, the rest, to saue their throates, Did drovvne thēselues, because they vvanted boates, (For they had ships enough) you, that haue eyes, May reade these riddles, spy these mysteries. Let then those partiall tongues, these things impute T' inevitable fate, be ever mute. And tell me (if you dare of speech be free, That of your gen'ralls valour Praeco's be) If, as you say, he ventur'd so i'th' vvarres, VVhen few scap'd life, how could he scape from scar∣res? Hovv many French did his great provvesse kill? VVhat vvounds receiu'd he? vvhat bloud did he spill? Th are not Lambs philters, nor a Beldames charmes, Can flesh and bloud, secure from gen'rall harmes. But say he did: vvas't not as like as not, That Torax present made him free from shot?
VVho durst not presse into the midst of's foes, VVhen he is sure he shall receiue no blowes? But had he beene so: Ne{que} enim bénefacta ma ligne, detre∣ctare meum est. Mat. 13 (for I' de not detract Deserved vvorth from any) was't an act Of vvholesome policy, one that vvas vntrayn'd In feates of vvarre, nor ere experience gain'd In former service, and yet scorn'd to be Advis'd by men of try'd sufficiency, So many vvorthyes should vntimely lead To ruine, vvarn'd before, vnquestioned? Once in a month, to take a leafe to taske In Machiavell: or, vvearied vvith a maske, To reade ones selfe asleepe in Aelian's tacticks, Makes not a gen'rall, but tri'd Morgans practicks. Thy Holsteyn (iniur'd Dane) had ne're beene lost: Had vve, in thy defence, imploy'd that host, Commanded by some one, vvell knovvne to be Faithfull, and of well try'd sufficiency. I envy honour to no loyall hart: But from my life I could haue wish'd to part, So (noble Essex) thou, or thou, whose name Addes a Rich ornament to VVarwicks fame, Or thou (vvhom Newport sounds) victorious Vere, Had (as you best deserv'd) led th' English there. Then France had found, our ancient British might (Though long time layd aside) not rusted quite. Then had not your triumphant soules, for shame, Blush'd (matchlesse English Hero's) that your name We doe but beare, having your courage lost: And, of your victories, can onely boast:
VVanting your harts, your acts to imitate. Nor had the French, then, at so easy rate, In temples hung our ensignes, 'fore their eyes. As monuments of English Covvardise. Then had there beene no reason to suspect Ourselues of treason, or as bad neglect. VVhereas 'tis settled novv in every thought Not French, but English our Confusion vvrought, Disloyalty, not fortune, lost the day. So did vve looke on Cales, and run avvay. VVhereat aym'd that? but that vve might giue Spaine Our land (in earnest) cause t'invade againe. Nor onely vvere three subsidies spent there, To makes vs laugh'dat: but our soldiours vvere VVith stinking vitailes poyson'd: by this plot VVe vveak'ned vvere, and yet perceiv'd it not. VVas not anothers voyage likevvise barr'd VVith a degree i'th' south? VVho might haue marr'd The plate fleete, had he beene in earnest sent, Or they that set him on plaine dealuig meant. But now of late our vvaightiest expeditions Are allvvayes frustrate by ill-meant commissions. All plots pretended for our Kingdomes good Ly drovvn'd and buried in our Kingdomes blood And, as not here projected, but in Spaine On our part loose, but on our foes side gaine. Affaires, of such great consequence, of old (VVhen great ones did not scorne to be controll'd) VVere vvont to be concluded by consent Of the states body in a Parliament,
And not by factious spirits, made alone Of plying mettle, to be vvrought vpon: Such greene-vvax councell, that vvill onely take Th' impression, he that made thē such, vvould make. And so, his vvill, not daring to gainsay That hates the state, they doe the state betray. Thus is our land made vveake, our treasure vvasted, Our court corrupted, and our honour blasted, Our lavves are broke, our iustice sold: and they That should reforme these mischiefes, giue thē vvay. All symptomes of a Kingdome, that hath beene Declining long, may be in England seene: Our strength's decayd, the flovv're of all the land Haue perish'd vnder Buckinghams command. Those that their liues, haue ventur'd for their King, Home, nought but labour for their paines can bring. Hence 'tis, our saylours are constrain'd to fly. (For vvant of pay) vnto the enemy. VVhereby it comes to passe: a Dunkirke fisher tovvne, The very name of England once could drovvne, Doth, vvith the terrour of some thirty saile At most, the povver of that Kingdome quaile VVhich in the life of her renovvned Queene Kept all the vvorld in avv. VVho e're hath seene So strange an alteration? they that then Did feare . Xerx. de Ar∣tem. in Her. a vvoman, novv contemne our men. Admire it not: our marchants taken are Vnder the nose o' th' royall men of vvar? Oh that some angell would, from heav'n relate Vnto our King, vvhat vvrongs are done the state
He might beleeue't. And not giue eare alone To them that nothing haue to liue vpon But glorious titles, and their Countreys spoyle, The Kings exchequer, and the Fav'rites smile. No mervaile then such Caterpillers vse Their witts, the authour of these ills t'excuse. And Papists: whom he rais'd in policy Religion and the gospells bane to be. For if he once (on whom they hang) but crack: Their credit, state and Conscience, must to wrack, Yet can not those gold flourishes they cast Vpon his canker'd actions, blind in hast The vveakest iudgments. Nor is that conceit (So often in their mouth) of any vveight Pretending it a Paradox that those. VVhom highest honours, on all sides, enclose, Should not enioy content: but still aspire From high'st preferments to ascend vp higher▪ As if the large desires of humane pride Could be (alas) vvith bonds of reason ti' de. Ambition brookes no equalls: and much lesse Superiours. 'tis imperfect happines (She thinkes) in greatest povver to be plac'd, And not vvith so v'raigne titles to be grac'd. Thus great things gain'd, vve ayme at greater things Earles vvould be Dukes: and Dukes vvould faine beVn is Pellaeo iuveni, non sufficit orbis. Kings. Should Spaine (great King) but promise, to him, this For vvhose sake all your Kingdome fares amisse, (As vvho knovves but it hath) you soone should proue
VVhether your person or your Crowne he loue. Then should you see, how of your power he made Vse, to abuse your selfe: and be a shade For such his actions, As being rightly scan'd (You'le find) all tended to vndoe your land. Your subjects riches are your strength: these he Consum'd in riot and in luxury. Their loue's the maine supporter of your state: VVhich treach'rously he did alienate. That destitute of all your peoples ayd, Your selfe, the state, the truth might be betrayd. Which that he might effect, his doings all Aym'd at our foes advancement, and our fall. ''Great states affayers should allways manag'd be ''(If we would haue them speed) with secrecy, ''Till they are ripe for practise: with all speed ''And expedition then they must proceed. This (Macedonian) did thy honour rayse: This, Caesar, crownd thee, with immortall prayse. But all our plots, our foes did vnderstand So well, they seem'd proiected in their land. Spaine ever (ere our selues) knew our intention: And therefore, still, were readyer for prevention Then we for action. Thus at Cales and Ree VVe lost our liues, and purchas'd infamy. Nor can I, without horrour, call to mind Thy vvrongs, poore Rochell, novv vvith famine pin'd Through our default. whose fleete your safety broke, And forc'd your necks vnto the tyrants yoke. Then promising protection, and pretending
Supplies, from time to time, we would be sending, VVhich were detain'd of purpose, till too late. T was we that made your case thus desperate. For if w'had sent assistance with good will, VVhy lay graue valiant Denbighs navy still, VVithout empeachment of those French, that made He looking on) the forts and Pallisade? VVhy lack'd, after they should haue launch'd, so long Our fleetes, provision? but that all went wrong. Search out this fault (wise King) in time: and mend it And wheresoever treason harbours, end it. For feare those vipers that your favours wing Giues warmth vnto, at last your hart shall sting. Next to th' insulting French, the German comes Beating with fry his victorious drummes: And flesh'd in bloud of slaughter'd Protestants, No liberty of consultation grants; But summons ('cause he's master of the field) VVithout resistance made, Truths Fort to yield. But stay proud Austrian, though thy conquring blade, In seas of Christian bloud, hath passage made Through which thou sailst to the desired port Of monarchy: thy hopes may fall too short. Tis true: the world's well mended with thee now, Since venice made thy humbled knees to bow. Presume not on't: for thou shalt doubtlesse find The greatest labour to remaine behind. A Lyon yet may stop the Eagles flight. And take revenge on that iniurious spight
The gospell hath endur'd. If God be just, Knovv tyrant, that his svvord shall never rust. Shall he not hearken to the wofull plaints And lamentations of his martyr'd saints; And for that bloud, shed for his owne deare sake, Sharpe vengeance on the cruell murth'rers take? Yes, yes, he will: and bloudy Tyrants shall Themselues, orewhelm'd Ad gene Cereris sin∣c aede & sa guine pan &c. Iuve.  sat. vvith bloud, like Tyrants Nor is thy greatnes built on such a ground. But Spaine vvill vndermine 't. VVho, ever, found fall. Corrivalls in a throne, endure each other? VVhat ere he be, friend, kinsman, father, brother, (VVhen empires ly at stake) the one must dovvne▪ Such jealousies ever attend a Crowne. And think'st thou thē, cause th'art imploy'd by Spaine The German princes freedome to restraine: Th' empire shall by succession be deriu'd To the right line? no that must be depriu'd To make thy founders large extents entire. Thus thou art but the faggot, set to fire Thy friends, and burne thy selfe: the bee, vvhose sting In others fix'd her selfe to death shall bring. The same (ignoble Saxon) is thy case.T Whom envy stir'd and emulation base, Against the checks of conscience, to forsake Truth 's cause; and part with errours friends to take. What hast thou gain'd hereby? first God, that knovves The harts of all men, heavy iudgments shovves, (To curbe such irreligious Atheists pride) That, vvillfully, vvith earth, 'gainst heav'n doe side.
He loues no sinners: but such reprobates, And grosse dissemblers, from his soule he hates. Hereby (blind Duke) what purchase hast thou made? But ev'n a yoke, vpon thine owne neck layd; And made thy children slaues. Could'st not foresee, VVhen Austria hath subiected Germany, Th' Empire shall by inheritance descend, (As Boheme long hath done?) then to what end Serue the Electours? but to serue, like slaues, Spaines Tyrants, and endure their basest braues? By ayding thus, in friendly sort, thy foes; And with an envyous spleene pursuing those That were thy friends. Th' hast cut with luckles hand Thy right hand of. So maymed shalt thou stand Vnpityed to posterity. As one VVho, by opposing that religion (Against his conscience) he himselfe profest: On earth gain'd slauery, and in hell vnrest. So speed Truths foes: that dry deaths seldome see. Such (turne coate Saxon) 's like thy end to be. Now march on Spaines right arme: whose hardnedV skill In feates of war, so many mouthes doth fill VVith high encomious: as if thou, of men, Deseru'dst, alone, to make the Worthyes ten. VVhy dost thou here, (whose well knowne name and force Frights further then it strikes) the Troian horse. Beare for device? vvhat, doth it intimate Thy Sinon craft got the Palatinate?
Yes, sure it iustly may. For all knovv vvell That since your divelish maxime rose from hell, Of breaking oathes and leagues, vvhen ere you please, Y' haue gained more, by such damn'd tricks as these, Then by your svvords. VVhen thou hadst past the Rhine Into the countrey of the Palatine, Thou knew'st thy iourney like to cost thee deare If Thurlach and Count Mansfield tarried there. The Tyger then his vvonted courage vvanted Being by a more couragious Lyon danted See what the fox can doe. Thou knevv'st so farre Our peacefull King did hate the name of vvarre, That rather then he vvould of battels heare He'd beg for peace, or purchase't ne're so deare. Therefore th' Arch-duchesse sends to him vvith speed An embassade, as Spinola decreed. King Iames did' by persuasion soone consent (Desiring blouds effusion to prevent) That on condition Spinola vvould avvay. To free the countrey, Mansfield should not stay. The time's prefix'd. By th' style th' Arch-duchesse gets Ten dayes. And first Count Mansfield forvvard sets, And marcheth fairely, vvith his army, thence As Thurlach did; vvhen novv vvithout defence The Paltz vvas left: th' Italian quit, indeed, The land in person, as it vvas decreed But left his army, vvith Gonzales there VVho seconded by Mounsieur Tilly vvere. These, none opposing, vvast vvith fire and svvord, And all the cruelty vvarre can afford
The miserable countrey. Naked left Vnto th' invaders fury. And bereft Of Mansfields helpe (for vvhom in vvait they lay But, through their sides, his valour made him vvay) Then might you see, flames, frequent murthers, rapes On all sides: none the soldiours fury scapes: But, torrent-like, the Wallon beares dovvne all: Not sparing yong or old, or great or small. And in contempt of God and men detaines Perfidiously these his ill-purchas'd gaines. Our King, being made, by this Italian vvile, The Instrument his children to beguile, Iustly, vvith such a base affront, incens'd. Had vvith his quiet nature novv dispens'd (Then zealous in Gods cause, and ours vvert thou Earle Pembroke, but the case is alter'd novv) And vovves to take revenge by open vvarre. VVhich to prevent, Spaines old Too fami∣liar with K. Iames. familiar Most cunningly corrupts the English court, Suborning some, and those of highest sort; In vaine, their King, to credulous, to persuade For all wrongs satisfaction should be made; (Which ne're was meant, they knew.) sometimes they'd fire him VVith high encomions. All the vvorld admire him As peaces Patron: all posterityes Him, as the Prince of peace shall memorize. But, if his svvord vvere dravvne: oh vvhat a floud VVould it dravv out vvith it, of Christian bloud? Then should that honour he, by peace, had gain'd
Be lost: and vvith a boutefeaus title stain'd. At other times his feare they'd vvorke vpon VVith faign'd surmises of invasion For breach o'th' league, if he should succour those That must be Spaines, because th' are Austrias foe▪Hac ratione potes iustus Rex forte vi∣deri, sed non crudelis, non potes esse pa∣ter. Thus vvhile too iustly he doth vveigh the cause They make him breake the bond of natures lavves. Yet nettled something vvith so grosse a vvrong From one that to th' Arch duchesse did belong. He sent to let her knovv he vvas abus'd. She, flightly, vvith a Punick trick, excus'd Her servants actions. Sending vvord vvithall Neither Gonzales vvas her generall Nor Tilly, therefore by no meanes it lay In her the army to command avvay. (VVhich yet she vndertooke; till those had quit The countrey, vvho had else safe guarded it) And Spinolas army lay there. Then amaine Another posts vnto the King of Spaine: He ansvvere makes, it vvas not in his povver Tilly commanded for the Emperour: To vvhom another's sent: and he replyes Lieutenant for Bavaria there he lyes. Bavaria this disclames: and doth professe, He tooke and kept it for his Holynesse. So vvas thy Paltz, Prince Frederick, quite forsaken Of all thy friends, by fraud, not valour taken. But rise thou God of Truth, avvake from sleepe: Hovv long shall thy distres'd and slaughter'd sheepe Be thus by VVolues devour'd? lift vp thine head And let thine enemies be scattered.
Though we haue been thus backward all this while, And let our foes (as't were) besiege our Ile; Yet now, oh now at last, your hearts combine, Great Caesar and graue Senate: yet now joyne Your force, witts, whatsoe're is yours t'abate French, Spanish, Austrian pride; and let our state Gaine, once againe, what rate so ere it cost, (If possible) the honour it hath lost. The fire, in frost, its heat doth recollect T'expell the cold, let this conceit reflect Vpon your breasts. Let publique danger bind In publick vnity, your soule, and minde So may our concord, giving life and heate To our allies abroad, remoue the seate Of war from home. which had bene done ere this, Had not our Councels guided bene amisse. So may I liue to see proud Austria sit (perchance) as low, as poore as ever yet. So may the Gospell flourish and regaine It's former splendour: and our land retaine Her ancient prosperous happines: and rest Neither abroad, nor yet at home opprest. Which that it may doe: and th'unconquer'd Fort Of Truth, for ever safely may support Thy poore distres'd ones. Let, oh Lord, the EyeX Of thy most watchful Providence descry All danger may annoy't. And let it standY Safe guarded with thy strong Protections Hand: And let the Scepter of thy Power defendZ The Scepter that defends it to the end. FINIS.
