23784 99853462 18845
THE PENNYLES PILGRIMAGE, OR The Money-lesse perambulation, of IOHN TAYLOR, Alias the Kings Majesties Water-Poet. HOW HE TRAVAILED ON FOOT from London to Edenborough in Scotland, not carrying any Money to or fro, neither Begging, Borrow∣ing, or Asking Meate, drinke or Lodging. With his Description of his Entertainment in all places of his Iourney, and a true Report of the vnmatchable Hunting in the Brea of Marre and Badenoch in Scotland. With other Obseruations, some serious and worthy of Memory, and some merry and not hurtfull to be Remembred. Lastly that (which is Rare in a Trauailer) all is true. LONDON Printed by Edw: All de, at the charges of the Author. 1618.
TO THE TRVLY NOBLE, AND RIGHT Honorable Lord, GEORGE Mar∣quesse of Buckingham, Viscount VILLEIRS, Baron of Whaddon, Iustice in Eyre of all his Maiesties For∣rests, Parkes, and Chases beyond Trout, Master of the Horse to his Maiesty, and one of the Gentlemen of his Highnesse Royall Bed-Chamber, Knight of the most Noble order of the Garter, and one of his Majesties most Honorable Priuie Councell of both the King∣domes of England and Scotland. RIght Honorable, and worthy honour'd Lord, as in my Trauailes, I was En∣tertain'd, welcom'd, and relieu'd by many Honou∣rable Lords, Worshipfull Knights, Esquires, Gentle∣men, and others, both in England, & Scotland. So now your Lordships Inclination hath inci∣ted, or inuited my poore Muse to shelter her∣selfe
vnder the shadow of your Honourable Patronage, not that there is any worth at all in my sterill inuention, but in all Humilitie I ac∣knowledge that it is onely your Lordships ac∣ceptance, that is able to make this no∣thing, something, and withall engage me euer. Your Honours, in all obseruance: IOHN TAYLOR.
To all my louing Aduenturers, by what name or title so euer, my ge∣nerall salutation. REader, these Trauailes of mine into Scot∣land, were not vndertaken, neither in imi∣tation, or emulation of any man, but onely deuised by my selfe, on purpose to make triall of my friends, both in this Kingdome of England, and that of Scotland, and because I would be an eye witnesse of diuers things which I had heard of that Country; and whereas many shallow-brain'd Critickes, doe lay an aspersion on me, that I was set on by others, or that I did vndergoe this project, either in malice, or mockage of Maister Beniamin Ionson, I vow by the faith of a Chri∣stian, that their imaginations are all wide, for he is a Gen∣tleman, to whom I am so much obliged for many vnde∣serued courtesies that I haue receiued from him, and from others by his fauour, that I durst neuer to be so impudent or ingratefull, as either to suffer any mans perswasions, or mine owne instigation, to incite me, to make so bad a requi∣tall, for so much goodnesse formerly receiued; so much for that, and now Reader, if you expect That I should write of Cities scituations, Or that of Countries I should make relations:
Of brooks, crooks, nooks; of riuers, boorns and rills, Of mountaines, fountaines, Castles, Towers & hills, Of Shieres, and Pieres, and memorable things, Of liues and deaths of great commanding Kings: I touch not those, they not belong to mee, But if such things as these you long to see, Lay downe my Booke, and but vouchsafe to reede The learned Camden, or laborious Speede. And so God speede you and me, whilst I rest yours in all thankfulnes: IOHN TAYLOR.
TAYLORS PENNI∣LESSE PILGRIMAGE. LIst Lordings, list (if you haue lust to list) I write not here a tale of had I wist: But you shall heare of trauels, and relations, Descriptions of strange (yet English) fashions. And he that not beleeues what here is writ, Let him (as I haue done) make proofe of it. The yeare of grace, accounted (as I weene) One thousand, twice three hundred and eighteene, And to relate all things in order duly, 'Twas Tuesday last; the fourteenth day of Iuly, Saint Reuels day, the Almanacke will tell ye The signe in Virgo was, or neere the belly: The Moone full three dayes old, the winde full South; At these times I began this trick of youth. I speake not of the Tide; for vnderstand, My legges I made my Oares, and rowed by land, Though in the morning I began to goe, Good fellowes trooping, flock'd me so, That make what hast I could, the Sunne was set, E're from the gates of London I could get. At last I tooke my latest leaue, thus late At the Bell Inne, that's extra Aldersgate. There stoode a horse that my prouant should carie, From that place to the end of my fegarie,
My Horse, no Horse, or Mare, but guelded Nagge, That with good vnderstanding bore my bagge: And of good cariage he himselfe did show, These things are ex'lent in a beast, you know. There, in my Knapsack, (to pay hungers fees) I had good Bacon, Bisket, Neates-tongue, Cheese, With Roses, Barbaries, of each Conserues, And Mithridate, that vigrous health preserues; And I entreate you take these words for no-lyes, I had good Aqua vita, Rosa so-lies: With sweet Ambrosia, (the Gods owne drinke) Most ex'lent geere for mortalls, as I thinke. Besides, I had both vineger and oyle, That could a daring sawcie stomack foyle. This foresaid Tuesday night 'twixt eight and nine, Well rigg'd and ballac'd, both with Beere and Wine, I stumbling forward, thus my iaunt begun, And went that night as farre as Islington. There did I finde, (I dare affirme it bold) A Maydenhead of twenty fiue yeeres old, But surely it was painted, like a whore, And for a signe, or wonder, hang'd at' dore, Which shewe, a Maidenhead, that's kept so long, May be hang'd vp, and yet sustaine no wrong. There did my louing friendly Host begin To entertaine me freely to his Inne: And there my friends, and good associates, Each one to mirth himselfe accommodates. At Well head both for welcome, and for cheere, Hauing a good New tonne, of good stale Beere: There did we Trundle downe health, after health (Which oftentimes impaires both health and wealth.) Till euery one had fill'd his mortall Trunke, And onely Nobody was three parts drunke. The morrow next, Wednesday Saint Swithins day, From ancient Islington I tooke my way.
At Hollywell I was inforc'd carrowse, Ale high, and mightie, at the Blinde-mans house. But ther's a helpe to make amends for all, That though the Ale be great, the Pots be small. At High-gate hill to a strange house I went, And saw the people were to eating bent, I neither Borrow'd, Crau'd, Ask'd, Begg'd or Bought, But most laborious with my teeth I wrought. I did not this cause meate or drinke was scant, But I did practise thus before my want; Like to a Tilter that would winne the prize, Before the day hee'le often excercise. So I began to put in vre, at first These principles 'gainst hunger, and 'gainst thirst, Close to the Gate, their dwelt a worthy man, That well could take his whiffe, and quaffe his Canne, Right Robin Good-fellow, but humors euill Doe call him Robin Pluto, or the Deuill. But finding him a Deuill, freely harted, With friendly farewels I tooke leaue and parted. And as alongst I did my Iourney take, I dranke at Broomes-well, for pure fashions sake. Two miles I trauelled then, without a bayte, The Sarazens head at Whetstone entring straight, I found an Host, might lead an Host of men, Exceeding Fat, yet named Lean, and Few, And though we make small reckoning of him heere, Hee's knowne to be a very Great man there. There I tooke leaue, of all my Company, Bade all farewell, yet spake to No-body. Good Reader thinke not strange, what I compile, For No-body was with me all this while. And No-body did drinke, and winke, and scinke, And on occasion freely spend his Chinke. If any one desire to know the man, Walke, stumble, Trundle, but in Barbican.
Ther's as good Beere and Ale as euer twang'd, And in that street kinde No-body is hang'd, But leauing him, vnto his matchlesse fame, I to St. Albanes in the Euening came, Where Mr. Taylor, at the Sarazens head, Vnask'd (vnpaid for) me both lodg'd and sed. The Tapsters, Hostlers, Chamberlaines, and all, Sau'd mee a labour, that I need not call, The Iugges were fild and fild, the cups went round, And in a word great kindnes there I found, For which both to my Cosen, and his men, Ile still be thankefull in word, deed, and pen. Till Thursday morning there I made my stay, And then I went plaine Dunstable high-way. My very hart with drought me thought did shrinke, I went twelue miles, and no one bad me drinke. Which made me call to minde, that instant time, That Drunkennes was a most sinful crime. When Puddle-hill I footed downe, and past A mile from thence I found a Hedge at last. There stroke we sayle, our Bacon, Cheese and Bread We drew like Fidlers, and like Farmers fed, And whilst 2. houres we there did take out ease, My Nagge made shift to mump greene Pulse and Pease. Thus we our hungry stomacks did supply, And dranke the water of a Brooke hard by. A way t'ward Hockley in the hole, we make, When straight a Horsman did me ouer-take, Who knew me, and would saine haue giuen me Coyne, I said my Bonds did me from Coyne inioyne. I thank'd and prayd him to put vp his Chinke, And willingly I wisht it drownd in drinke. Away Rode he, but like an honest man, I found at Hockley standing at the Swan, A formall Tapster, with a Iugge and glasse, Who did Arest mee, I most willing was
To try the Action, and straight put in bale, My fees were paide before, with sixe-pence Ale. To quitt this kindnesse, I most willing am The man that paide for all, his name is Dam At the greene Dragon, against Grayes-Iune gate, He liues in good Repute, and honest state. I forward went in this my Roauing race, To Stony Stratford I toward night did pace, My minde was fixed through the Towne to passe, To finde some Lodging in the Hay or Grasse, But at the Queenes Armes from the window there, A comfortable voyce I chaunc'd to heare, Call Taylor, Taylor and be hang'd come hither, I look'd for small intreaty and went thither, There were some friends, which I was glad to see, Who knew my Iourney; lodg'd, and boorded me. On Friday morne, as I would take my way, My friendly Host entreated me to stay, Because it Rain'd he tolde me I should haue, Meate, Drinke, and Horse-meate and not pay or craue. I thank'd him, and for's loue remaine his debter, But if I liue, I will requite him better. (From Stony Stratford, the way hard with stones) Did founder me, and vexe me to the bones, In blustring weather, both for winde and Raine, Through Tocetter I trotted, with much paine, Two miles from thence, we satt vs downe and dynde, Well Bulwark'd by a hedge, from raine and winde. We hauing fed, away incontinent, With weary pace toward Dauentry we went, Foure miles short of it, one o're-tooke me there, And tolde me he would leaue a Iugge of Beere, At Dauentry at the Horse-shoe, for my vse, I thought it no good manners to refuse, But thank'd him, for his kinde vnasked gift, Whilest I was lame as scarce a leg could lift,
Came ilmping after to that stony Towne, Whose hard streetes, made me almost halt tight downe. There had my friend performed the words he saide, And at the doore a Iugge of liquor staide The folkes were all informed, before I came, How, and wherefore my Iourney I did frame, Which caused mine Hostesse from her doore come out, (hauing a great Wart Rampant on her snowt.) The Tapsters, Hostlers, one another call, The Chamberlaines with admiration all, Were fild with wonder, more then wonderfull, As if some Monster sent from the Mogull, Some Elephant from Affricke, I had beene, Or some strange beast from th' Amazonian Queene. As Buzards, Widgions, Woodcocks, and such fowle, Doe gaze and wonder at the broad-fac'd Owle, So did these brainlesse Asses, all-amaz'd, With admirable Non sence talk'd and gaz'd. They knew my state, (although not tolde by me,) That I could scarcely goe, they all did see, They dranke of my Beere, that to me was giuen, But gaue me not a drop, to make all eeuen. And that which in my minde was most amisse, My Hostesse she stood by and saw all this, Had she but said, come neere the house my friend, For this day heere shall be your Iourneys end, Then had she done, the thing which she did not, And I in kinder wordes had paid the shot. I doe intreat my friends, (as I haue some) If they to Dauentry doe chance to come, That they will balke that Inne; or if by chaunce, Or accident into that house they glaunce, Kinde Gentlemen, as they by you reape profit, My hostesse Care of mee, pray tell her of it. Yet doe not neither, Lodge there when you will, You for your money shall be welcome still.
From thence that night, although my bones were sore, I made a shift to hobble seau'n miles more: The way to Dunchurch, foule with dirt and mire, Able, I thinke, both man and horse to tire. On Dunsmore Heath, a hedge doth there enclose Grounds, on the right hand, there I did repose. Wits whetstone, want, there made vs quickly learne, With kniues to cut downe Rushes, and greene Fearne, Of which we made a field-bed in the field, Which fleepe, and rest, and much content did yeeld. There with my mother Earth, I thought it fit To lodge, and yet no Incest did commit: My bed was Curtain'd with good wholesome ayres, And being weary, I went vp no stayres: The skie my Canopy, bright Pheabe shinde, Sweet bawling Zephirus breath'd gentle winde, In heau'ns Starre Chamber I did lodge that night, Tenne thousand Starres, me to my bed did light; There baracadoed with a banke lay wee Below the lofty branches of a tree, There my bed-fellowes and companions were, My Man, my Horse, a Bull, foure Cowes, two Steere: But yet for all this most confused rowt, We had no bed-staues, yet we fell not out, Thus Nature, like an ancient free Vpholster, Did furnish vs with bedstead, bed, and bolster; And the kinde skies, (for which high Heau'n be thanked, Allow'd vs a large Couering and a Blanket: Aurora's face gan light our lodging darke. We arose and mounted, with the mounting Larke, Through plashes, puddles, thicke, thinne, wet and dry, I trauail'd to the Citie Couentry. There Maister Doctor Holland caus'd me stay The day of Saturne, and the Sabaoth day. Most friendly welcome, he did me affoord, I was so entertain'd at bed and boord,
Which as I dare not bragge how much it was, I dare not be ingrate and let it passe, But with thankes many I remember it (In stead of his good deedes) in words and writ, He vs'd me like his sonne, more then a friend, And he on Monday his commends did send To Newhall, where a Gentleman did dwell, Who by his name is hight Sacheuerell. The Tuesday Iulyes one and twenteth day, I to the Citie Lichfield tooke my way, At Sutton Coffill with some friends I met, And much adoe I had from thence to get, There I was almost put vnto my trumps, My Horses shooes were worne as thinne as pumps; But noble Vulcan, a mad smuggy Smith, All reparations me did furnish with. The shooes were well remou'd, my Palfrey shod, And he referr'd the payment vnto God. I found a friend, when I to Lichfield came, A Ioyner, and Iohn Piddock is his name, He made me welcome, for he knew my iaunt, And he did furnish me with good prouant: He offred me some money, I refus'd it, And so I tooke my leaue, with thanks excus'd it. That Wednesday I a weary way did passe, Raine, winde, stones, dirt, and dabling dewie grasse, With here and there a pelting scatter'd village, Which yeelded me no charity, or pillage: For all the day, nor yet the night that followed, One drop of drinke I'm sure my gullet swallowed. At night I came t'a stonie Towne call'd Stone, Where I knew none, nor was I knowne of none: I therefore through the streetes held on my pace, Some two miles farther to some resting place: At last I spide a meddow newly mowde, The Hay was rotten, the ground halfe o're-flowde:
We made a breach, and entred horse and man, There our pauillion, we to pitch began, Which we erected with greene Broome and Hay T'expell the colde, and keepe the raine away; The skie all muffled in a cloud gan lowre, And presently there sell a mighty showre, Which without intermission downe did powre, From tenne at night, vntill the mornings foure. We all that time close in our Couch did lye, Which being well compacted, kept vs dry. The worst was, we did neither sup nor sleepe, And so a temperate dyet we did keepe. The morning all enroab'd in drisling fogges, We being as ready as we had beene dogges: We neede not stand vpon long ready making, But gaping, stretching, and our eares well shaking: And for I found my Host and Hostesse kinde, I like a true man left my sheetes behinde. That Thursday morne, my weary course I fram'd, Vnto a Towne that is Newcastle nam'd, (Not that Newcastle standing vpon Tine) But this Townes scituation doth confine Neere Cheshiere, in the famous County Stafford, And for their loue, I owe them not a straw for't; But now my versing Muse craues some repose, And whilst she sleepes Ile spowt a little prose. In this Towne of Newcastle, I ouertooke an Hostler, and I asked him what the next towne was called, that was in my way toward Lancaster, he holding the end of a riding rod in his mouth, as if it had beene a Fluit, piped me this answere, and said, Talke on the hill; I asked him againe what hee said, Talke on the hill: I demaunded the third time, and the third time he answered me as he did before, Talke on the hill. I be∣gan to grow chollericke, and asked him why hee could not
talke, or tell mee my way as well there, as on the hill; at last I was resolued, that the next Towne was foure miles off mee, and the name of it was, Talke on the hill. I had not tra∣uailed aboue two miles farther: but my last nights supper (which was asmuch as nothing) my mind being enformed of it by my stomacke. I made a vertue of necessity, and went to breakfast in the sunne: I haue sared better at three sunnes many a time before now, in Aldersgate streete, Creeplegate, and new Fishstreete; but here is the oddes, at those Sunnes they will come vpon a man with a Tauerne bill, as sharpe cutting as a Taylors bill of Items: A Watch-mans blil, or a Welch-hooke falles not halfe so heauy vpon a man; besides, most of the Vintners haue the law in their owne hands, and haue all their Actions, Cases, Bills of Debt, and such Rec∣konings tried at their owne Barres; from whence there is no appeale. But leauing these impertinencies, in the ma∣teriall Sunne-shiee, wee eate a substantiall Dinner, and like miserable Guestes wee did budget vp the Reuersi∣ons. And now with sleepe, my Muse hath eas'd her braine. I'le turne my stile from prose, to verse againe. That which we could not haue, we freely spar'd, And wanting drinke, most soberly we far'd. We had great store of fowle (but 'twas foule way) And kindly euery step entreates me stay, The clammy clay sometimes my heeles would trip, One foote went forward, th'other backe would slip. This weary day, when I had almost past, I came vnto Sir Vrian Legh's at last, At Adlington, neere Macksfield he doth dwell, Belou'd, respected, and reputed well. Through his great loue, my stay with him was fixt, From Thursday night, till noone on Monday next, At his owne table I did dayly eate, Whereat may be suppos'd, did want no meate,
He would haue giu'n me Gold or Siluer either, But I with many thankes, receiued neither. And thus much without flatterie I dare sweare, He is a Knight beloued farre and neere. First he's beloued of his God aboue, (which loue, he loues to keepe, beyond all loue) Next with a Wife and Children he is blest, Each hauing Gods feare planted in their brest. With faire Demaines, Reuennue of good Lands, Hee's fairely blest by the Almighties hands, And as hee's happy in these outward things, So from his inward minde, continuall springes Fruits of Deuotion, deeds of Piety, Good hospitable workes of Charity, Iust in his Actions, Constant in his word, And one that wonne his honour with his sword. Hee's no Carranto, Capr'ing, Carpet Knight, But he knowes when, and how to speake or fight. I cannot flatter him, say what I can, Hee's euery way a compleat Gentleman. I write not this, for what he did to me, But what mine eares, and eyes did heare and see, Nor doe I pen this to enlarge his fame, But to make others Imitate the same. For like a Trumpet were I pleasd to blow, I would his worthy worth more amply show, But I already feare haue beene too bolde, And craue his pardon, me excusd to holde. Thankes to his Sonnes and seruants euery one, Both males and females all, excepting none. To beare a letter he did me require, Neere Manchester, vnto a good Esquire: His kinsman Edmond Prestwitch, he ordain'd, That I at Manchester was Entertain'd Two nights, and one day, ere we thence could passe, For Men and Horse, Rost, boyl'd, and Oates, and Grasse:
This Gentleman, not onely gaue me harbor, But in the morning sent to me his Barber, Who lau'd, and shau'd me, still I spard my purse, Yet sure he left me many a haire the worse. But in conclusion, when his worke was ended, His Glasse informd, my face was much amended. And for the kindnesse he to me did show, God grant his Customers beards faster grow, That though the time of yeare be deere or cheape, From fruitfull faces hee may mowe and reape. Then came a Smith, with Shoes, and Tooth and Nayle, He searched my Horse hooues, mending what did faile, Yet this I note, my Nagge, through stones and dirt, Did shift shoes twice, ere I did shift one shirt: Can these kinde thinges be in obliuion hid? No, Mr. Prestwitch, this and much more did, His friendship did command, and freely gaue All before writ, and more then I durst craue. But leauing him a little, I must tell, How men of Manchester, did vse me well, Their loues they on the tenter-hookes did racke, Rost, Boyld, Bak'd, too too much, White, Claret, Sacke, Nothing they thought too heauy or too hot, Canne follow'd Canne, and Pot succeeded Pot, That what they could doe, all they thought too little, Striuing in loue the Traueller to whittle. We went vnto the house of one Iohn Pinners, (A man that liues amongst a crew of Sinners) And there Eight seuerall sorts of Ale we had, All able to make one starke drunke or mad. But I with courage brauely flinched not, And gaue the Towne leaue to discharge the shot. We had at one time set vpon the Table, Good Ale of Hisope, 'twas no Esope Fable: Then had we Ale of Sage, and Ale of Malt, And Ale of Worme-wood, that can make one halt,
With Ale of Rosemary, and Bettony, And two Ales more, or else I needes must lye. But to conclude this drinking A lye tale, We had a sort of Ale, called Scuruy Ale. Thus all these men, at their owne charge and cost, Did striue whose loue might be expressed most. And farther to declare their boundlesse loues, They saw I wanted, and they gaue me Gloues, In deed, and very deede, their loues were such, That in their praise I cannot write too much; They merit more then I haue here compil'd, I Lodged at the Eagle and the Childe, Whereas my Hostesse, (a good Auncient woman) Did entertaine me with respect, not common. She caus'd my Linnen, Shirts, and Bands be washt, And on my way she caus'd me be refresht, She gaue me twelue Silke poyntes, she gaue me Baken, Which by me much refused, at last was taken, In troath shee prou'd a mother vnto me, For which, I euermore will thankfull be. But when to minde these kindnesses I call, Kinde Mr. Prestwitch Author is of all, And yet Sr. Vrian Leigh's good Commendation Was the maine ground of this my Recreation. From both of them; there what I had, I had, Or else my entertainment had bin bad. O all you worthy men of Manchester, True bred blouds of the County Lancaster) When I forget what you to me haue done, Then let me head-long to confusion runne. To Noble Mr. Prestwach I must giue Thankes, vpon thankes, as long as I doe liue, His loue was such, I ne're can pay the score, He farre surpassed all that went before, A horse and man he sent, with boundlesse bounty, To bring me quite through Lancasters large County.
Which I well know is Fifty miles at large, And he defrayed all the Cost and charge. This vnlook'd pleasure, was to me such pleasure, That I can ne're expresse my thankes with measure. So Mistresse Saracoale, Hostesse kinde, And Manchester with thankes I left behinde. The Wednesday being Iulyes twenty nine, My Iourney I to Preston did Confine, All the day long it rayned but one showre, Which from the Morning to the Ene'n did powre, And I, before to Preston I could get, Was sowsd, and pickeld both with Raine and sweat. But there I was supply'd, with fire and food, And any thing I wanted, sweete and good. There, at the Hinde, kinde Mr. Hinde mine Host, Kept a good table, Bak'd and boyld, and Rost, There Wedensday, Thursday, Friday I did stay, And hardly got from thence on Saturday. Vnto my Lodging often did repaire, Kinde Mr. Thomas Banister, the Mayor, Who is of worship, and of good Respect, And in his Charge discreet and circumspect. For I protest to God I neuer saw, A Towne more wisely Gouern'd by the Law. They tolde me when my Soueraigne there was last, That one mans rashnes, seem'd to giue distast▪ It grieu'd them all, but when at last they found, His Majesty was pleasd, their ioyes were crown'd, He knew the fairest Garden hath some weedes, He did accept their kinde intents, for deedess One man there was, that with his zeale too hot. And furious hast, himselfe much ouer▪ shot. But what man is so foolish, that desires To get good Fruit, from thistles, thornes and bryers? Thus much I thought good to demonstrate heere, Because I saw how much they grieued were.
That any way, the least part of offence, Should make them seeme offensiue to their Prince. Thus three nights was I staide and lodg'd in Preston, And saw nothing ridiculous to iest on, Much cost and charge the Mayor vpon me spent, And on my way two miles, with me he went, There (by good chance) I did more friendship get, The vnder Shriefe of Lancashire, we met, A Gentleman that lou'd, and knew me well, And one whose bounteous minde doth beare the bell. There, as if I had beene a noted thiefe, The Mayor deliuered me vnto the Shriefe. The Shriefes authority did much preuaile, He sent me vnto one that kept the Iayle. Thus I perambulating, poore Iohn Taylor, Was giu'n from Mayor to Shriefe, from Shriefe to Iaylor, The Iaylor kept an Inne, good beds, good cheere, Where paying nothing, I found nothing deere. For the vnder Shriefe kinde Maister Couill nam'd, (A man for house-keeping renown'd and fam'd) Did cause the Towne of Lancaster afford Me welcome, as if I had beene a Lord. And 'tis reported, that for dayly bounty, His mate can scarce be found in all that County. Th'extreames of mizer, or of prodigall He shunnes, and liues discreete and liberall, His wiues minde, and his owne are one, so fixt, That Argos eyes could see no oddes betwixt, And sure the difference, (if there diff'rence be) Is who shall doe most good, or he, or she. Poore folks reports, that for releeuing them, He and his wife, are each of them a Iem; At th'Inne, and at his house two nights I staide, And what was to be paid, I know he paide; If nothing of their kindnesse I had wrote, Ingratefull me the world might iustly note:
Had I declar'd all I did heare and see, For a great flatt'rer then I deem'd should be, He and his wife, and modest daughter Besse, With Earth and Heau'ns felicity, God blesse. Two dayes a man of his at his command, Did guide me to the midst of Westmerland, And my Conductor, with a liberall fist To keepe me moyst, scarce any Alehouse mist. The fourth of August (weary, halt, and lame) We in the darke, t a Towne call'd Sebder came, There Maister Borrowd, my kinde honest Host, Vpon me did bestow vnasked cost. The next day I held on my iourney still, Sixe miles vnto a place call'd Carling hill, Where Maister Edmond Branthwaite doth recide, Who made me welcome, with my man and guide. Our entertainement, and our fare was such, It might haue satisfied our betters much; Yet all too little was, his kinde heart thought, And fiue miles on my way himselfe me brought, At Orton he, I, and my man did dine With Maister Corney, a good true Diuine, And surely Maister Branthwait's well belou'd, His firme integrity is much approu'd: His good effects, doth make him still affected Of God and good men, (with regard) respected. He sent his man with me, o're Dale and Downe, Who lodg'd, and borded me at Peereth Towne, And such good cheere, and bedding there I had, That nothing, (but my weary selfe) was bad; There a fresh man, (I know not for whose sake) With me a iourney would to Carlile make; But from that Citie, about two miles wide Good Sir Iohn Dalston lodg'd me and my guide. Of all the Gentlemen in England bounds, His house is neerest to the Scottish grounds,
And Fame proclaimes him, farre and neere, aloud, He's free from being couetous, or proud: His sonne Sir George, most affable, and kinde, His fathers image, both in forme and minde: On Saturday to Carlile both did ride, Where (by their loues and leaues) I did abide, Where of good entertainement I found store, From one that was the Mayor the yeare before, His name is Maister Adam Robinson, I the last English friendship with him won. He (gratis) found a guide to bring me thorough,My thankes to Sir Iohn & S. George Dal∣stone, with Sir Hen: Gurwin From Carlile to the Citie Edinborough: This was a helpe, that was a helpe alone, Of all my helps inferiour vnto none. Fight miles from Carlile runnes a little Riuer, Which Englands bounds,Ouer Eskl waded. from Scotlands grounds doth seuer. Without Horse, Bridge, or Boate I o're did get On foote, I went yet scarce my shooes did wet. I being come to this long look'd for land, Did marke, remarke, note, renote, viewd and scand: And I saw nothing that could change my will, But that I thought my selfe in England still. The Kingdomes are so neerely ioyn'd and fixt, There scarcely went a paire of Sheares betwixt; There I saw skie aboue, and earth below, And as in England, there the Sunne did shew: The hills with Sheepe repleate,The afore na∣med Knightes had giuen mo∣ney to my Guile of wc hee left some part at euery Ale-hoose. with Corne the dale, And many a cottage yeelded good Scotch Ale; This County (Avandale) in former times, Was the curst climate of rebellious crimes: For Cumberland and it, both Kingdomes borders, Were euer ordred, by their owne disorders, Such sha king, shifting, cutting throates, and thieuing, Each taking pleasure, in the others grieuing; And many times he that had wealth to night, Was by the morrow morning beggerd quite:
To many yeares this pell-mell furie lasted, That all these borders were quite spoyl'd and wasted, Confusion, hurly-burly raign'd and reueld, The Churches with the lowly ground were leueld; All memorable monuments defac'd, All places of defence o'rethrowne and rac'd. That who so then did in the borders dwell, Liu'd little happier then those in hell. But since the all-disposing God of heauen, Hath these two Kingdomes to one Monarch giuen, Blest peace, and plenty on them both hath showr'd Exile, and hanging hath the theeues deuowr'd, That now each subiect may securely sleepe, His Sheepe, and neate, the blacke the white doth keepe, For now those Crownes are both in one combinde Those former borders, that each one confinde, Appeares to me (as I doe vnderstand) To be almost the Center of the land, This was a blessed heauen expounded riddle, To thrust great Kingdomes skirts into the middle. Long may the instrumentall cause suruiue From him and his, succession still deriue True heires vnto his vertues, and his throane, That these two Kingdomes euer may be one. This County of all Scotland is most poore, By reason of the outrages before, Yet mighty store of Corne I saw there growe, And as good grasse as euer man did mowe: And as that day I twenty miles did passe, I saw eleuen hundred Neat at grasse, By which may be coniectur'd at the least, That there was sustenance for man and beast. And in the Kingdome I haue truly scand, There's many worser parts, are better mand, For in the time that theeuing was in vre, The Gentles fled to places more secure.
And left the poorer sort, t'abide the paine, Whilest they could ne're finde time to turne againe. That Shire of Gentlemen is scarce and dainty, Yet there's reliefe in great aboundance plenty, Twixt it and England, little oddes I see, They eate, and liue, and strong and able bee, So much in Verse, and now Ile change my stile, And seriously I'le write in Prose a while. To the purpose then; my first nights Lodging in Scotland was at a place called Mophot, which they say is thirty miles from Carlile, but I suppose them to be longer then forty of such miles as are betwixt London and S. Albanes, (but in∣deed the Scots doe allow almost as large measure of their miles, as they doe of their drinke, for an English Gallon ei∣ther of Ale or Wine, is but their quart, and one Scottish mile now and then may well stand for a mile and a halfe or two English) but howsoeuer short or long, I found that dayes iourney the weariest that euer I footed; and at night being come to the Towne, I found good ordinary Countrey entertainment; my fare, and my lodging was sweete and good, and might haue serued a far better man then my selfe, although my selfe haue had many times better: but this is to be noted, that though it Rained not all the day, yet it was my fortune to be well wet twise, for I waded ouer a great Riuer called Eske in the morning, somewhat more then 4. miles distance from Carlile in England, and at night within two miles of my lodging, I was faine to wade ouer the Ri∣uer of Annan in Scotland, from which Riuer the County of Annandale hath it's name. And whilst I waded on foote, my man was mounted on horse-backe, like the George with∣out the Dragon. But the next morning, I arose and left Mo∣phot behind me, and that day I trauailed twenty one miles to a sory Village called Blithe, but I was blithe my selfe to come to any place of harbour or succour, for since I was borne, I neuer was so weary, or so neere being dead with ex∣treame
trauell; I was founderd and refounderd of all foure, and for my better comfort, I came so late, that I must lodge without doore all night, or else in a poore house where the good wife lay in Child-bed, her husband being from home, her owne seruant Mayd being her nurse. A Creature natu∣rally compacted and artificially adorned with incomparable homelines; but as thinges were I must either take or leaue, and necessity made me enter, where we gat Egges and Ale by measure and by tale. At last to bed I went, my man ly∣ing on the floore by me, where in the night there were Pid∣geons did very bountifully mute in his face: the day being no sooner come, and I hauing but fifteene miles to Ederbo∣rough, mounted vpon my ten toes, and began first to hobble, and after to Amble, and so being warme, I fell to pace by degrees; all the way passing through a most plentifull, and firtill Countrey for Corne and Cattle: and about two of the clocke in the afternoone that Wednesday, being the thir∣teenth of August, and the day of Clare the Virgin (the Signe being in Virgo) the Moone foure dayes olde, the winde at, West, I came to take rest, at the wished, long expected, Auncient famous Citty of Edenborough, which I entred like pierce penilesse, altogether monyles, but I thanke God not friendlesse; for being there, for the time of my stay I might borrow, (if any man would lend) spend if I could get, begge if I had the impudence, and steale if I durst aduenture the price of a hanging, but my purpose was to house my horse, and to suffer him and my Apparell to Lye in durance, or Lauender in stead of Litter, till such time, as I could meete with some valiant friend that would desperately disburse. Walking thus downe the street, (my body being tyred with Trauell, and my minde attyred with moody, muddy, Moore-ditch melancholly) my Contemplation did deuout∣ly pray, that I might meete one or other to prey vpon, be∣ing willing to take any slender acquaintance of any man whatsoeuer, viewing, and circumuiewing euery mans face I met, as if I meant to draw his picture, but all my acquain∣tance
was Non est inuentus, (pardon me Reader, that Latine is none of mine owne, I sweare by Priscians Pericranion, an oath which I haue ignorantly broken many times.) At last I resolu'd, that the next Gentleman that I met withall, should be acquaintance whether he would or no, and presently fix∣ing mine eyes vpon a Gentleman-like obiect, I looked on him as if I would suruay something through him, and make him my perspectiue: and he much musing at my gazing, and I much gazing at his musing, at last hee crost the way and made toward me, and then I made downe the streete from him, leauing him to encounter with my man who came af∣ter me leading my Horse, whome hee thus Accosted. My friend (quoth hee) doth yonder Gentleman, (meaning mee) know mee that he lookes so wistly on me; truely Sr. said my man I thinke not, but my Mr. is a stranger come from London, and would gladly meete with some acquaintance to direct him where he may haue lodging and horse-meate: presently the Gentleman, (being of a generous disposition) ouer-tooke me with vnexpected and vndeserued courtesie, brought me to a lodging, and caused my Horse to bee put into his owne Stable, whilest we discoursing ouer a pinte of Spanish. I related asmuch English to him as made him lend me Ten shillings, (his name was Mr. Iohn Maxwell) which money I am sure was the first that I handled after I came from out the walles of London: but hauing rested two houres and refreshed my selfe, the Gentleman and I walked to see the Citty, and the Castle, which as my poore vnable and vnworthy pen can, I will truely discribe. The Castle on a loftie Rocke is so strongly grounded, bounded, and founded, that by force of man it can neuer bee confounded; the Foundation and Walles are vnpenetrable, the Rampiers Impregnable, the Bulwarkes Inuincible, no way but one to it is or can be possible to be made passable. In a word, I haue seene many Straights and Fortresses, in Germany, the Netherlands, Spaine, and England, but they must all giue place to this vnconquered Castle both for strength and Scituation.
Amongst the many memorable thinges which I was shewed there, I noted especially a Great peece of Ordi∣nance of Iron, it is not for batterie, but it will serue to de∣fend a breach, or to tosse balles of wilde-fire against any that should assaile or assault the Castle; it lyes now dis∣mounted. And it is so great within, that it was tolde mee that a Childe was once gotten there, but I to make tryall crept into it, lying on my backe, and I am sure there was Roome enough and spare for a greater then my selfe. So leauing the Castle, as it is both defenciue against any opposition, and magnificke for Lodging and Receite, I de∣scend lower to the Citty, wherein I obserued the fairest and goodliest Street that euer mine eyes beheld, for I did neuer see or heare of a streete of that length, (which is halfe an English mile from the Castle to a faire Port which they call the Neather-bow) and from that Port the streete which they call the Kenny-hate is one quarter of a mile more: downe to the Kings Pallace called Holy-rood-House, The buildings on each side of the way being all of squared stone, fiue, sixe, and seauen Storyes high, and many by Lanes and Closes on each side of the way, wherein are Gentlemens houses, much fairer then the buildings in the high streete, for in the High-street the Marchants and Tradesmen doe dwell, but the Gentlemens mansions and goodliest Houses are obscurely founded in the aforesaid Lanes: the Walles are eight or ten Foote thicke, exceeding strong, not built for a day, a weeke, or a month, or a yeare; but from Antiquitie to Posteritie, for many Ages; There I found entertainment beyond my expectation or merite, and there is Fish, Flesh, Bread and Fruite, in such variety, that I thinke I may of∣fencelesse call it superfluitie, or sacietie. The worst was, that Wine and Ale was so scarce, and the people there such Mizers of it, that euery night before I went to bed, if any man had asked mee a Ciuill question, all the wit in my head could not haue made him a Sober answer.
I was at his Maiesties Pallace, a Stately and princely seate, wherein I saw a sumptuous Chappell most richly adorned, with all apurtenances belonging to so sacred a place, or so Royall an owner. In the inner Court, I saw the Kings Armes cunningly carued in stone, and fixed ouer a doore aloft on the wall, the red Lyon being the Crest, ouer which was writ∣ten this inscription in Latine, Nobis haec inuicta miserunt, 105. proaui. I enquired what the English of it was? it was told me as fol∣loweth, which I thought worthy to be recorded. 106. Fore-fathers hath left this to vs vnconquered. This is a worthy and a memorable Motto, and I thinke few Kingdomes or none in the world can truly write the like, that notwithstanding so many inroades▪ incursions, attempts, assaults, ciuill warres, and forraigne hostilities, bloodie bat∣tels, and mightie foughten fields, that maugre the strength and pollicie of enemies, that Royall Crowne and Scepter hath from one hundred and seauen descents, keepe still vn∣conquered, and by the power of the King of Kings (through the grace of the Prince of peace) is now left peacefully to our peacefull King, whom long in blessed peace, the God of peace defend and gouerne. But once more, a word or two of Edinborough, although I haue scarcely giuen it that due which belongs vnto it, for their lofty and stately buildings, and for their faire and spa∣cious streete, yet my minde perswades me that they in for∣mer ages that first founded that Citie, did not so well in that they built it in so discommodious a place; for the Sea, and all nauigable Riuers, being the chiefe meanes for the en∣riching of Townes and Cities, by the reason of Traffique with forraigne Nations, with exportation, transportation, and receite of variety of Marchantdizing; so this Citie had it beene built but one mile lower on the Sea side, I doubt not but it had long before this beene comparable to many a one of our greatest Townes and Cities in Europe, both for spaciousnesse of bounds, Port, state, and riches. It is said
that King Iames the fifth (of famous memorie) did graci∣ously offer to purchase for them, and to bestow vpon them freely, certaine lowe and pleasant grounds a mile from them on the Sea shore, with these conditions, that they should pull downe their Citie, and build it in that more commodi∣ous place, but the Citizens refused it: and so now it is like (for me) to stand where it doth, for I doubt such another proffer of remoueall will not be presented to them, till two dayes after the Faire. Now haue with you for Leeth, whereto I no sooner came, but I was well entertained by Mr. Barnard Lindsay, one of the Groomes of his Maiesties Bed-chamber, hee knew my estate was not guilty, because I brought no guilt with mee (more then my sinnes, and they would not passe for current there) hee therefore did replenish the vaustity of my emptie purse, and discharged a peece at mee with two bullets of gold, each being in value worth eleuen shillings white mo∣ney: and I was credibly informed that within the compasse of one yeare, there was shipped away from that onely Port of Leeth, fourescore thousand Boles of Wheate, Oates, and Barley, into Spaine, France, and other forraigne parts, and euery Bole containes the measure of foure English bu∣shels, so that from Leeth onely hath beene transported three hundred and twenty thousand bushels of Corne; besides some hath beene shipped away from St. Andrewes, from Dundee, Aberdeene, Disert, Kirkady, Kinghorne, Burnt-Iland, Dunbar, and other portable Townes, which makes mee to wonder that a Kingdome so populous as it is, should neuer∣thelesse sell so much bread corne beyond the Seas, and yet to haue more then sufficient for themselues. So I hauing viewed the Hauen and Towne of Leeth, tooke a passage Boate to see the new wondrous Well, to which many a one that is not well, comes farre and neere in hope to be made well: indeede I did heare that it had done much good, and that it hath a rare operation to expell or kill di∣uers maladies; as to prouoke appetite, to helpe much for the
auoyding of the grauell in the bladder, to cure sore eyes, and olde vlcers, with many other vertues which it hath, but I (through the mercy of God hauing no neede of it, did make no great inquisition what it had done, but for nouelty I dranke of it, and I found the taste to be more pleasant then any other water, sweet almost as milke, yet as cleare as cri∣stall, and I did obserue that though a man did drinke a quart, a pottell, or as much as his belly could containe, yet it neuer offended or lay heauie vpon the stomacke, no more then if one had dranke but a pint or a small quantity. I went two miles from it to a towne called Burnt-Iland, where I found many of my especiall good friends, as M. Ro∣bert Hay, one of the Groomes of his Maiesties Bed-cham∣ber, Maister Dauid Drummond, one of his Gentlemen Pen∣tioners▪ Maister Iames Acmooty, one of the Groomes of the Priuie Chamber, Captaine Mrray, Sir Henry Witherington Knight, Captaine Tyrie, and diuers others▪ and there Master Hay, Maister Drummond, and the good olde Captaine Mur∣ray, did very bountifully furnish mee with gold for my ex∣pences, but I being at dinner with those aforesaid Gentle∣men, as we were discoursing, there befell a strange accident, which I thinke worth the relating. I know not vpon what occasion they began to talke of being at Sea in former times, and I (amongst the rest) said I was at the taking of Cales, whereto an English Gentleman replied, that he was the next good voyage after at the Ilands: I answered him that I was there also. He demanded in what Ship I was? I tolde him in the Rainebowe of the Queenes, why (quoth hee) doe you not know mee? I was in the same Ship, and my name is Witherington. Sir, said I, I doe remember the name well, but by reason that it is neere two and twenty yeeres since I saw you, I may well forget the knowledge of you: well, said hee, if you were in that Ship, I pray you tell me some remarkable token that happened in the voyage: whereupon I tolde him two or three tokens which hee did know to be true. Nay then
said I, I will tell you another which (perhaps) you haue not forgotten; as our Ship and the rest of the fleete did ride at Anchor at the Ile of Flores (one of the Isles of the Azores) there were some fourteene men and boyes of our Ship, that for nouelty would goe a shore, and see what fruit the I land did beare, and what entertainement it would yeeld vs: so being landed, wee went vp and downe and could finde no∣thing but stones, heath and mosse, and wee expected Oran∣ges, Limonds, Figges, Muske-millions, and Potatoes: in the meane space the winde did blow so stiffe, and the Sea was so extreame rough, that our Ship-boate could not come to the land to fetch vs, for feare she should be beaten in pieces against the rockes; this continued fiue dayes, so that wee were all almost famished for want of foode: but at last (I squandring vp and downe) by the prouidence of God I hap∣pened into a Caue or poore habitation, where I found fif∣teene loaues of bread, each of the quantity of a penny loafe in England, I hauing a valiant stomacke of the age of almost 120. houres breeding, fell too, and eate two loaues and ne∣uer said grace: and as I was about to make a Horse-loafe of the third loafe, I did put 12. of them into my breeches, and my sleeues, and so went mumbling out of the Caue, leaning my backe against a tree, when vpon the sodaine a Gentleman came to me and saide, friend what are you eating, bread quoth I, for Gods sake said hee giue me some, with that I put my hand into my breech, (beeing my best pantrey) and I gaue him a Loafe, which hee receiued with ma∣ny thankes, and saide that if euer hee could requite it hee would. I had no sooner tolde this tale but Sr. Henry Withering∣ton did acknowledge himselfe to bee the man that I had gi∣uen the Loafe vnto 22. yeares before, where I found the Prouerbe true that men haue more priuiledge then moun∣taines in meeting. In what great measure, hee did requite so small a cour∣tesie, I will relate in this following discourse in my Returne
through Northumberland: So leauing my man at the towne of Burnt Iland, I tolde him, I would but goe to Sterling, and see the Castle there, and withall to see my honourable friends the Earle of Marr, and Sir William Murray Knight, Lord of Abercarny, and that I would returne within two dayes at the most: But it fell out quite contrary; for it was fiue and thirtie dayes before I could get backe againe out of these Noble-mens company. The whole progresse of my trauell with them, and the cause of my stay, I cannot with gratefulnesse omit; and thus it was. A worthy Gentleman, named Master Iohn Fenton, did bring mee on my way sixe miles, to Dumfermling, where I was well entertained, and lodged at Master Iohn Gibb his house, one of the Groomes of his Maiesties Bed-chamber, and I thinke the oldest Seruant the King hath: withall I was well entertained there by Master Crighton at his owne house, who went with mee, and shewed mee the Queenes Palace; (a delicate and a princely Mansion) withall I saw the ruines of an auncient and stately built Abbey, with faire Gardens, Orchards, and Medowes belonging to the palace: all which with faire and goodly Reuenues, by the suppres∣sion of the Abbey, were annexed to the Crowne. There also I saw a very faire Church, which though it be now ve∣ry large and spacious, yet it hath in former times been much larger. But I taking my leaue of Dumfermling, would needs goe and see the truely noble Knight Sir George Bruce, at a Towne called the Cooras: there hee made mee right wel∣come, both with varietie of fare, and discourse; and after all, hee commaunded three of his men to direct mee to see his most admirable Cole-mines; which (if man can or could worke wonders) is a wonder: for my selfe neither in any trauels that I haue been in, nor any History that I haue read, or any Discourse that I haue heard, did neuer see, reade, or heare of any worke of man that might parallell or be equi∣ualent with this vnfellowed and vnmatchable worke: and though all I can say of it, cannot describe it according to the
worthinesse of his vigilant industry, that was both the oc∣casion, Inuentor, and Maintainer of it: yet rather then the memory of so rare an Enterprise, and so accomplisht a pro∣fit to the Common-wealth shall bee raked and smothered in the dust of obliuion, I will giue a little touch at the de∣scription of it, although I amongst Writers, am like he that worst may, holds the candle. The Mine hath two wayes into it, the one by sea and the other by land; but a man may go into it by land, and returne the same way if he please, and so he may enter into it by sea, and by Sea hee may come foorth of it: but I for varieties sake went in by Sea, and out by Land. Now men may ob∣iect, how can a man goe into a Mine, the entrance of it be∣ing in the Sea, but that the Sea wil follow him and so drown the Mine. To which obiection thus I answer, That at a low water, the Sea being ebd away, and a great part of the sand bare; vpon this same sand (beeing mixed with rockes and cragges) did the Master of this great worke build a round circular frame of stone, very thicke, strong, and ioyned to∣gether with glutinous or bitunous matter, so high withall▪ that the Sea at the highest flood, or the greatest rage of storme or tempest, can neither dissolue the stones so well compacted in the building, or yet ouerflowe the height of it. Within this round frame, (at all aduentures) hee did set workemen to digge vvith Mattockes, Pickaxes, and other instruments fit for such purposes. They did digge more then fourtie foot downeright, into and through a Rocke. At last they found that which they expected, which was Sea-cole, they following the veine of the Mine, did digge forward still: So that in the space of eight and twentie, or nine and twenty yeares they haue digged more then an English mile under the Sea, that when men are at worke belowe, an hun∣dred of the greatest Shippes in Britaine may saile ouer their ads. Besides, the Mine is most artificially cut like an Arch or a Vault all that great length, vvith many nookes and by∣wayes in it: and it is so made, that a man may walke vpright
in the most places, both in and out. Many poore people are there set on worke, which otherwise through the want of imployment would perish. But when I had seene the Mine, and was come foorth of it againe; after my thankes giuen to Sir George Bruce, I tolde him, that if the plotters of the Powder Treason in England had seene this Mine, that they (perhaps) would haue attempted to haue left the Parlia∣ment House, and haue vndermined the Thames, and so to haue blowne vp the Barges and Wherries, wherein the King, and all the Estates of our Kingdome were. Moreo∣uer, I said that I could affoord to turne Tapster at London: so that I had but one quarter of a mile of his Mine to make mee a Celler, to keepe Beere and Bottle-ale in. But leauing these Iestes in Prose, I will relate a few Verses that I made merrily of this Mine. I That haue wasted Months, Weekes, Dayes and Howers In viewing Kingdomes, Countreys, Townes and Towers, Without all measure, measuring many paces, And with my pen describing sundrie places, With few additions of my owne deuizing, (Because I haue a smacke of Coriatizing.) Our Mandeuill, Primaleon, Don Quixot, Great Amadis, or Huon traueld not As I haue done, or beene where I haue beene, Or heard and seene, what I haue heard and seene; Nor Britaines Odcomb (Zanye braue Vlissis) In all his ambling saw the like as this is. I was in (would I could describe it well) A darke, light, pleasant, profitable hell, And as by water I was wafted in, I thought that I in Charons Boate had bin: But being at the entrance landed thus, Three men there (in the stead of Cerberus) Conuaid me in, in each ones hand a light To guide vs in that vault of endlesse night.
There young and old with glim'ring candles burning, Digge, delue, and labour, turning and returning, Some in a hole with baskets and with baggs, Resembling furies, and infernall haggs: There one like Tantall feeding, and there one, Lake Sisiphus he rowles the restlesse stone. Yet all I saw was pleasure mixt with profit, Which prou'd it to be no tormenting Tophet; For in this honest, worthy, harmelesse hell, There ne're did any damned Diuell dwell: And th'owner of it gaines by't more true glory, Then Rome doth by fantastick Purgatory. A long mile thus I past, downe, downe, steepe steepe, In deepenesse farre more deepe, then Neptunes deepe, Whilst o're my head (in fourefould stories hye) Was Earth, and Sea, and Ayre, and Sun, and Skie: That had I dyed in that Cimerian roome. Foure Elements had couered ore my tombe: Thus farther then the bottome did I goe, (And many Englishmen haue not done so;) Where mounting Porposes, and mountaine Whales, And Regiments of fish with finnes and Scales, Twixt me and Heauen did freely glide and slide, And where great Ships may at an Anchor ride: Thus in by sea and out by land I past, And tooke my leaue of good Sir George at last. The Sea at certaine places doth leake, or soake into the Mine, which by the industry of Sir George Bruce, is all con∣ueyd to one well neere the land; where hee hath a deuise like a horsemill that with three horses and a great chaine of Iron, going downeward many fadomes, with thirty sixe buckets fastened to the chaine, of the which eighteene goes downe still to be filled, and eighteene ascends vp to be emptied, which doe empty themselues (without any mans labour) into a trough that conueyes the water into the Sea againe; by which meanes he saues his Myne which other∣wise
would be destroyed with the Sea, beside he doth make euery weeke ninety or an hundred Tuns of salt, which doth serue part of Scotland, some hee sends into England, and ve∣ry much into Germany: all which shewes the painefull in∣dustry with Gods blessings to such worthy endeauours: I must with many thankes remember his courtesie to mee, and lastly, how he sent his man to guide me ten miles on the way to Sterling, where by the way I saw the outside of a faire and stately house called Allaway, belonging to the Earle of Marr, which by reason that his Honor was not there, I past by and went to Sterling, where I was entertai∣ned and lodged at one Mr. Iohn Archibalds, where all my want was that I wanted roome to containe halfe the good cheere that I might haue had there; hee had me into the Castle, which in few words I doe compare to Windsor for scituation, much more then Windsor in strength, and some∣what lesse in greatnes; yet I dare affirme, that his Majesty hath not such another hall to any house that he hath nei∣ther in England nor Scotland, except Westminster Hall which is now no dwelling Hall for a Prince being long since metamorphosed into a house for the Law and the profits. This goodly Hall was built by King Iames the fourth, that married King Henry the eights sister and after was slaine at Flodden field; but it surpasses all the halls for dwelling hou∣ses that euer I saw, for length, breadth, height and strength of building, the Castle is built vpon a rocke very lofty, and much beyond Edenborough Castle in state and magnifi∣cence, and not much inferiour to it in strength, the roomes of it are lofty, with carued workes on the seelings, the doores of each roome beeing so high that a man may ride vpright on horsebacke into any chamber or lodging. There is also a goodly faire Chappell, with Cellers, Stables, and all other necessary Offices, all very stately and besitting the Maiestie of a King. From Sterling I rode to Saint Iohnston, a fine Towne it is,
but it is much decayed, by reason of the want of his Maie∣sties yearely comming to lodge there. There I lodged one night at an Inne, the Goodman of the house his name be∣ing Patrick Pettcarne, where my entertainement was with good cheere, good drinke, good lodging, all too good to a bad weary guest. Mine Host tolde mee that the Earle of Marr and Sir William Murray of Abercarny were gone to the great hunting to the Brea of Marre; but if I made hast I might perhaps finde them at a Towne called Breekin, or Breechin, two and thirty miles from Saint Iohns Stone, wherevpon I tooke a guide to Breekin the next day, but before I came, my Lord was gone from thence foure dayes. Then I tooke another guide, which brought mee such strange wayes ouer mountaines and rockes, that I thinke my horse neuer went the like; and I am sure I neuer saw any wayes that might fellow them. I did goe through a Coun∣try called Glaneske, where passing by the side of a hill, so steepe as is the ridge of a house, where the way was rocky, and not aboue a yard broad in some places, so fearefull and horrid it was to looke downe into the bottome, for if either horse or man had slipt, he had fallen (without recouery) a good mile downe-right; but I thanke God, at night I came to a lodging in the Lard of Eggells Land, where I lay at an Irish house, the folkes not being able to speake scarce any English, but I sup'd and went to bed, where I had not laine long but I was enforced to rise, I was so stung with Irish Musketaes, a Creature that hath sixe legs, & liues like a monster altogether vpon mans flesh, they doe inhabite and breed in most sluttish houses, and this house was none of the cleanliest, the beast is much like a louse in England, both in shape and nature; in a word they were to me the A. and the Z. the Prologue and the Epilogue, the first and the last that I had in all my trauells from Edenborough; and had not this highland Irish house helped mee at a pinch, I should haue sworne that all Scotland had not beene so kind
as to haue bestowed a Louse vpon me: but with a shift that I had, I shifted off my Caniballs, and was neuer more trou∣bled with them. The next day I trauelled ouer an exceeding high moun∣taine, called mount Skeene, where I found the valley very warme before I went vp it; but when I came to the top of it, my teeth beganne to daunce in my head with colde, like Virginall iackes; and withall, a most familiar mist embraced mee round, that I could not see thrice my length any way: withall, it yeelded so friendly a deaw, that it did moysten through all my clothes: Where the olde Prouerbe of a Scottish Miste was verified, in wetting mee to the skinne. Vp and downe, I thinke this hill is sixe miles, the way so vneuen, stonie, and full of bogges, quagmires, and long heath, that a dogge with three legs will outrunne a horse with foure: for doe what we could, wee were foure houres before we could passe it. Thus with extreame trauell, ascending and descending, mounting & alighting, I came at night to the place where I would bee, in the Brea of Marr, which is a large Coun∣tie, all composed of such mountaines, that Shooters Hill, Gads Hill, Highgate Hill, Hampsted hill, Birdlip hill, or Maluerne hilles, are but Mole▪ hilles in comparison, or like a Liuer, or a Gizard vnder a Capons wing, in respect of the altitude of their toppes, or perpendicularitie of their bot∣tomes. There I saw Mount Benawne, with a furr'd mist vp∣on his snowie head in stead of a nightcap: (for you must vn∣derstand, that the oldest man aliue neuer saw but the snow was on the top of diuers of those hilles, both in Summer, as well as in Winter.) There did I finde the truely Noble and Right Honourable Lords, Iohn Erskin Earle of Marr, Iames Stuart Earle of Murray, George Gordon Earle of En∣gye, sonne and heire to the Marquesse of Huntley, Iames Erskin, Earle of Bughan, and Iohn Lord Erskin, sonne and heire to the Earle of Marre, and their Countesses, with my much honoured, and my best assured and approoued friend,
Sir William Murray Knight, of Abercarnye, and hundred of others Knights, Esquires, and their followers; all and e∣uery man in generall in one habit, as if Licurgus had beene there and made Lawes of Equalitie: For once in the yeare, which is the whole moneth of August, and some∣times part of September; many of the Nobilitie and Gen∣try of the Kingdome (for their pleasure) doe come into these high-land Countreyes to hunt, where they doe all conforme themselues to the habite of the high-land men, who for the most part speake nothing but Irish; and in for∣mer time were those people which were called the Red∣shankes: Their habite is shooes with but one sole apiece; stockings (which they call short hose) made of a warme stuffe of diuers colours, which they call Tartane: as for breeches, many of them, nor their forefathers neuer wore any, but a ierkin of the same stuffe that their hose is of, their garters beeing bands or wreathes of hay or straw, with a plead about their shoulders, which is a mantle of diuers colours, much finer and lighter stuffe then their hose, with blew flat caps on their heads, a handkerchiefe knit with two knots about their neckes: and thus are they attyred. Now their weapons are long bowes, and forked arrowes, Swords and Targets, Harquebusses, Muskets, Durks and Lo∣quhabor Axes. With these Armes I found many of them armed for the hunting. As for their Attire, any man of what degree soeuer that comes amongst them, must not disdaine to weare it: for if they doe, then they will dis∣daine to hunt, or willingly to bring in their dogges: but if men bee kinde vnto them, and bee in their habit; then are they conquered with kindnesse, and the sport will be plen∣tifull. This was the reason that I found so many Noble∣men and Gentlemen in those shapes. But to proceed to the Hunting. My good Lord of Marr hauing put me into that shape, I rode with him from his house, where I saw the ruines of an olde Castle, called the Castle of Kindroghit. It was built by
King Malcolm Canmore (for a hunting horse) who raigned in Scotland when Edward the Confessor, Harold, and Nor∣man William raigned in England: I speake of it, because it was the last house that I saw in those parts; for I was the space of twelue dayes after, before I saw either house, corne fielde, or habitation for any creature, but Deere, wilde Horses, Wolues, and such like Creatures, which made mee doubt that I should neuer haue seene a house a∣gaine. Thus the first day wee traueld 8. miles, where there were small cottages built on purpose to lodge in, which they call Lonquhards, I thanke my good Lord Erskin, he comman∣ded that I should alwayes bee lodged in his lodging, the Kitchin being alwayes on the side of a banke, many Kettles and Pots boyling, and many spits turning and winding, with great variety of cheere: as Venison bak't, sodden, rost, and stu'de Beefe, Mutton, Goates, Kid, Hares, fresh Salmon, Pidgeons, Hens, Capons, Chickins, Partridge, Moorecoots, Heathcocks, Caperkellies and Termagants; good Ale, Sacke, White and Claret, Tent (or Allegant) with most potent Aqua vitae. All these and more then these wee had continually, in superfluous aboundance, caught by Faulconers, Fou∣lers, and Fishers, and brought by my Lords tenants and purueyers to victuall our Campe, which consisted of four∣teene or fifteene hundred men and horses; the manner of the hunting is this. Fiue or sixe hundred men doe rise early in the morning, and they doe disperse themselues diuers wayes, and 7.8. or 10. miles compasse they doe bring or chase in the Deere in many heards, (two, three, or foure hundred in a heard) to such or such a place as the Noble∣men shall appoint them; then when day is come, the Lords and Gentlemen of their Companies, doe ride or goe to the said places, sometimes wading vp to the middles through bournes and riuers: and then they being come to the place,
doe lye downe on the ground, till those foresaid Scouts which are called the Tinckhell do bring downe the Deere: But as the Prouerbe sayes of a bad Cooke, so these Tinkhell men doe lick their owne fingers; for besides their bowes and arrowes which they carry with them, wee can heare now and then a harguebuse or a musquet goe off, which they doe seldome discharge in vaine: Then after wee had stayed three houres or thereabouts, wee might perceiue the Deere appeare on the hills round about vs, (their heads ma∣king a shew like a wood) which being followed close by the Tinkhell, are chased downe into the valley where wee lay; then all the valley on each side being way-laid with a hundred couple of strong Irish Grey-hounds, they are let loose as occasion serues vpon the heard of Deere, that with Dogges, Gunnes, Arrowes, Durks and Daggers, in the space of two houres fourescore fat Deere were slaine, which after are disposed of some one way and some another, twenty or thirty miles, and more then enough left for vs to make mer∣ry withall at our Rendeuouze. I liked the sport so well, that I made these two Sonnets following. WHy should I wast Inuention to endite, Ouidian fictions, or Olympian games? My misty Muse enlightened with more light, To a more noble pitch her ayme She frames. I must relate to my great Maister IAMES, The Calydonian anuall peacefull warre; How noble mindes doe eternize their fames By martiall meeting in the Brea of Marr: How thousand gallant Spirits come neere and farre, With Swords and Targets, Arrowes, Bowes and Gunnes, That all the Troope to men of iudgement, are The God of Warres great neuer conquered Sonnes. The Sport is Manly, yet none bleed but Beasts, And last, the Victors on the Vanquisht feasts.
IF Sport like this can on the Mountaines bee, Where Phoebus flames can neuer melt the Snow: Then let who lift delight in Vales below, Skie-kissing Mountaine pleasures are for me: What brauer obiect can mans eyesight see, Then Noble, Worshipfull, and worthy wights, As if they were prepard for sundry fights, Yet all in sweet society agree: Through Heather, Mosse, 'mongst frogs, and bogs, and fogs, Mongst craggy cliffes, and thunder battered hills, Hares, Hindes, Buckes, Rees are chas'd by Man and Dogs, Where two howres Hunting fourescore fat Deere killes. Low lands, your Sports are low as is your Seate, The High-land Games and Minds, are high and great. Beeing come to our lodgings, there was such Baking, Boyling, Rosting, and Stewing, as if Cooke Ruffian had beene there to haue scalded the Deuill in his feathers: and after supper a fire of firre wood as high as an indifferent May-pole: for I assure you, that the Earle of Marre will giue any man that is his friend, for thankes, as many Firre trees (that are as good as any shippes mastes in England) as are worth (if they were in any place neere the Thames, or any other portable Riuer) the best Earledome in Eng∣land or Scotland either: For I dare affirme hee hath as ma∣ny growing there, as would serue for mastes (from this time to the end of the world) for all the Shippes, Carackes, Hoyes, Galleyes, Boates, Drumlers, Barkes, and Water-craftes, that are now, or can bee in the world these fourtie yeares. This sounds like a lie to an vnbeleeuer; but I and many thousands doe knowe that I speake within the compasse of truth: for indeede (the more is the pitie) they doe
growe so farre from any passage of water, and withall in such rockie Mountaines, that no way to conuey them is possible to bee passable either with Boate, Horse, or Cart. Thus hauing spent certaine dayes in Hunting in the Brea of Marr, wee went to the next Countie called Bage∣noch, belonging to the Earle of Engye, where hauing such sport and entertainement as wee formerly had; after foure or fiue dayes pastime, wee tooke leaue of hunting for that yeare; and tooke our iourney toward a strong house of the Earles, called Ruthen in Bagenoch, where my Lord of En∣gye and his noble Countesse (being daughter to the Earle of Argile) did giue vs most noble welcome three dayes. From thence wee went to a place called Ballo Castle, a faire and stately house; a worthy Gentleman beeing the owner of it, called the Lard of Graunt; his wife beeing a Gentlewoman honourably descended, being sister to the right Honourable Earle of Atholl, and to Sir Patricke Mur∣ray Knight; shee beeing both inwardly and outwardly plentifully adorned with the guifts of Grace and Nature: so that our cheere was more then sufficient; and yet much lesse then they could affoord vs. There staied there foure dayes, foure Earles, one Lord, diuers Knights and Gentle∣men, and their seruants, footemen and horses; and euery meale foure long Tables furnished with all varieties: Our first and second course beeing threescore Dishes at one boord; and after that alwayes a Banquet: and there if I had not forsworne wine till I came to Edinbrough, I thinke I had there dranke my last. The fifth day with much adoe wee gate from thence to Tarnaway, a goodly house of the Earle of Murrayes, here that right Honourable Lord and his Ladie did wel∣come vs foure dayes more. There was good cheere in all varietie, with somewhat more then plentie for aduantage: for indeed the Countie of Murray is the most pleasantess,
and plentifullest Countrey in all Scotland; being plaine land, that a Coach may bee driuen more then foure and thirtie myles one way in it, all alongst by the Sea-coast. From thence I went to Elgen in Murray, an auncient Citie, where there stood a faire and beautifull Church with three steeples, the walles of it and the steeples all yet stan∣ding; but the Roofe, Windowes, and many Marble Mo∣numents and Toombes of honourable and worthie perso∣nages all broken and defaced: this was done in the time when ruine bare rule, and Knox knock'd downe Churches. From Elgen we went to the B. of Murray his house which is called Spinye, or Spinaye. A reuerend Gentleman hee is, of the noble name of Dowglasse, where wee were very well welcomed, as befitted the honour of himselfe and his guests. From thence wee departed to the Lord Marquesse of Huntleyes, to a sumptuous house of his, named the Bogg of Geethe, where our entertainement was like himselfe, free, bountifull and honourable. There (after two dayes stay) with much entreatie and earnest suite, I gate leaue of the Lords to depart towards Edinbrough: the Noble Mar∣quesse, the Earles of Marr, Murray, Engie, Bughan, and the Lord Erskin; all these, I thanke them, gaue me gold to de∣fray my charges in my iourney. So after fiue and thirtie dayes hunting and trauell, I re∣turning, past by another stately mansion of the Lord Mar∣quesses, called Stroboggy, and so ouer Carny mount to Bree∣kin, where a wench that was borne deafe and dumbe came into my chamber at mid-night (I beeing asleepe) and shee opening the bed, would faine haue lodged with mee: But had I beene a Sardanapalus, or a Heliogobalus, I thinke that either the great trauell ouer the Mountaines had tamed me; or if not, her beautie could neuer haue mooued me. The best parts of her were, that her breath was as sweet as su∣gar-carrion,
being very well shouldered beneath the waste; and as my Hostesse tolde mee the next morning, that shee had changed her Maiden-head for the price of a Bastard not long before. But howsoeuer, shee made such a hideous noyse, that I started out of my sleepe, and thought that the Deuill had beene there: but I no sooner knewe who it was, but I arose, and thrust my dumbe beast out of my cham∣ber; and for want of a locke or a latch, I staked vp my doore with a great chaire. Thus hauing escaped one of the seuen deadly sinnes at Breekin, I departed from thence to a Towne called For∣fard; and from thence to Dundee, and so to Kinghorne, Burnt Iland, and so to Edinbrough, where I stayed eight dayes, to recouer my selfe of falles and bruises which I re∣ceiued in my trauell in the high-land mountainous Hun∣ting. Great welcome I had shewed mee all my stay at E∣dinbrough, by many worthy Gentlemen, namely, olde Ma∣ster George Todrigg, Master Henry Leuingston, Master Iames Henderson, Master Iohn Maxwell, and a number of others, who suffered me to want no wine or good cheere, as may be imagined. Now the day before I came from Edinbrough, I went to Leeth, where I found my long approoued and assured good friend Master Beniamin Iohnson, at one Master Iohn Stuarts house: I thanke him for his great kindnesse to∣wards mee: for at my taking leaue of him, hee gaue mee a piece of golde of two and twentie shillings to drinke his health in England. And withall, willed mee to remember his kinde commendations to all his friendes: So with a friendly farewell, I left him, as well, as I hope neuer to see him in a worse estate: for hee is amongst Noble-men and Gentlemen that knowes his true worth, and their owne honours, where with much respectiue loue hee is worthi∣ly entertained. So leauing Leeth, I return'd to Edinbrough, and with∣in
the port or gate, called the Netherbowe, I discharged my pockets of all the money I had: and as I came penni∣lesse within the walles of that Citie at my first comming thither; so now at my departing from thence, I came mo∣nesse out of it againe; hauing in my company to conuey mee out, certaine Gentlemen, amongst the which was Ma∣ster Iames Acherson, Laird of Gasford, a Gentleman that brought mee to his house, where with great entertaine∣ment hee and his good wife did welcome me. On the morrowe he sent one of his men to bring mee to a place, called Adam, to Master Iohn Acmootye his house, one of the Groomes of his Maiesties Bed-chamber; where with him, and his two brethren, Master Alexander, and Master Iames Acmootye, I found both Cheere and Wel∣come not inferiour to any that I had had in any former place. Amongst our viands that wee had there, I must not for∣get the Sole and Goose, a most delicate Fowle, which breedes in great aboundance in a little Rocke called the Basse, which stands two miles into the Sea. It is very good flesh, but it is eaten in the forme as wee eate Oysters, stan∣ding at a side-boord, a little before dinner, vnsanctified without grace; and after it is eaten, it must be well liquored with two or three good rowses of Sherrie or Canarie sacke. The Lord or Owner of the Basse doth profite at the least two hundred pound yearely by those Geese; the Basse it selfe being of a great height, and neere three quarters of a mile in campasse, all fully replenished with Wildfowle, ha∣uing but one small entrance into it, with a house, a garden, and a Chappell in it; and on the toppe of it a Well of pure fresh water. From Adam Mr. Iohn and Mr. Iames Acmootye went to the Towne of Dunbarr with mee, where tenne Scottish pintes of wine were consumed and brought to nothing for a farewell: there at Master Iames Baylies house I tooke
leaue, and Master Iames Acmootye comming for England, said, that if I would ride with him, that neither I nor my horse should want betwixt that place and London. Now I hauing no money or meanes for trauell, beganne at once to examine my manners, and my want: at last my want per∣swaded my manners to accept of this worthy Gentlemans vndeserued courtesie. So that night hee brought mee to a place called Cober spath, where wee lodged at an Inne, the like of which I dare say, is not in any of his Maiesties Do∣minions. And for to shewe my thankfulnesse to Master William Arnet and his wife, the owners thereof, I must a little explaine their bonntifull entertainement of guests, which is this: Suppose tenne, fifteene, or twentie men and horses come to lodge at their house, the men shall haue flesh, tame and wild-fowle, fish, with all varietie of good cheere, good lodging, and welcome; and the horses shall want nei∣ther hay or prouender: and in the morning at their depar∣ture the reckoning is iust nothing. This is this worthy Gentlemans vse, his chiefe delight beeing onely to giue strangers entertainement gratis: And I am sure, that in Scotland beyond Edinbrough▪ I haue beene at houses like Castles for building; the Master of the house his Beauer being his blew Bonnet, one that will weare no other shirts, but of the Flaxe that growes in his owne ground; and of his wiues, daughters, or seruants spinning; that hath his Stockings, Hose, and Ierkin of the Wooll of his owne sheepes backes; that neuer (by his pride of Apparell) cau∣sed Mercer, Draper, Silke-man, Embroyderer, or Haber∣dasher to breake and turne bankerupt: and yet this plaine home-spunne fellow keepes and maintaines thirtie, fourtie, fiftie seruants, or perhaps more, euery day releeuing three or fourescore poore people at his gate; and besides all this, can giue Noble entertainement for foure or fiue dayes to∣gether to fiue or sixe Earles and Lords, besides Knights,
Gentlemen & their followers, if they be three or foure hun∣dred men and horse of them, where they shall not onely feed but feast, and not feast but banquet, this is a man that desires to know nothing so much as his duty to God and his King whose greatest cares are to practise the works of Piety, Charity, and Hospitality: hee neuer studies the consuming Art of fashionlesse fashions, hee neuer tries his strength to beare foure or fiue hundred Acres on his backe at once, his legges are alwayes at liberty, not being fettered with gol∣den garters, and manacled with artificiall Roses, whose weight (sometime) is the last Relliques of some decayed Lordship: Many of these worthy house-keepers there are in Scotland, amongst some of them I was entertained; from whence I did truely gather these aforesaid obserua∣tions. So leauing Coberspath we rode to Barwicke, where the worthy old Soldier and ancient Knight, Sir William Bowyer, made me welcome; but contrary to his will, we lodged at an Inne, where Mr. Iames Acmooty paid all charges: but at Barwicke there was a grieuous chance hapned, which I think not fit the relation to be omitted. In the Riuer of Tweed, which runnes by Barwicke are ta∣ken by Fishermen that dwell there, infinite numbers of fresh Salmons, so that many housholds and families are relieued by the profit of that Fishing; but (how long since I know not) there was an order that no man or boy whatsoeuer should Fish vpon a Sunday: This order continued long a∣mongst them, till some eight or nine weekes before Micha∣elmas last, on a Sunday, the Salmons plaid in such great a∣boundance in the Riuer, that some of the Fishermen (con∣trary to Gods law and their owne order) tooke boates and nettes and Fished, and caught neere three hundred Sal∣mons; but from that time vntill Michaelmas day that I was there which was nine weekes, and heard the report of it, and saw the poore peoples miserable lamentations, they had
not seene one Salmon in the Riuer; and some of them were in despaire that they should neuer see any more there; affir∣ming it to be God, Iudgement vpon them for the propha∣nation of the Saboth. The thirtieth of September wee rode from Barwicke to Belford, from Belford to Anwick the next day from An∣wick to Newcastle, where I found the noble Knight, Sir Henry Witherington; who, because I would haue no gold nor siluer, gaue mee a bay Mare, in requitall of a loafe of bread that I had giuen him two and twenty yeares before, at the lland of Flores, of the which I haue spoken before. I ouertooke at Newcastle a great many of my worthy friends, which were all comming for London, namely, Maister Ro∣bert Hay, and Maister Dauid Drummond, where I was well welcom'd at Maister Nicholas Tempests house. From New∣castle I rode with those Gentlemen to Durham, to Daring∣ton, to Northallerton, and to Topeliffe in Yorkshire, where I tooke my leaue of them, and would needs try my pennilesse fortunes by my selfe, and see the Citty of Yorke, where I was lodged at my Right Worshipfull good friends, Maister Doctor Hudson one of his Maiesties Chaplaines, who went with me, and shewed me the goodly Minster Church there, and the most admirable, rare-wrought, vnfellowed Chapter house. From Yorke I rode to Doncaster, where my horses were well fed at the Beare, but my selfe found out the honoura∣ble Knight, Sir Robert Anstruther at his father in lawes, the truely noble Sir Robert Swifts house, hee being then high Sheriffe of Yorkeshire, where with their good La∣dies, and the right Honourable the Lord Sanquhar, I was stayed two nights and one day, Sir Robert Anstruther (I thanke him) not onely paying for my two horses meat, but at my departure, hee gaue mee a Letter to Newarke vpon Trent, twenty eight miles in my way, where Mr. George At∣kinson mine host made me as welcome as if I had beene a
French Lord, and what was to bee paid, as I cal'd for no∣thing, I paid as much; and left the reckoning with many thankes to Sir Robert Anstruther. So leauing Newarke, with another Gentleman that o∣uertooke mee, wee came at night to Stamford, to the signe of the Virginitie (or the Maydenhead) where I deliuered a Letter from the Lord Sanquhar; which caused Master Bates and his wife, being the Master and Mistresse of the house, to make mee and the Gentleman that was with mee great cheare for nothing. From Stamford the next day wee rode to Huntington, where wee lodged at the Post-masters house, at the signe of the Crowne; his name is Riggs. Hee was informed who I was, and wherefore I vndertooke this my pennilesse Pro∣gresse: wherefore hee came vp into our chamber, and sup'd with vs, and very bountifully called for three quarts of Wine and Sugar, and foure lugges of Beere. Hee did drinke and beginne Healths like a Horse-leech, and swal∣lowed downe his cuppes without feeling, as if he had had the dropsie, or nine pound of Spunge in his maw. In a word, as hee is a Poste, hee dranke poste, striuing and calling by all meanes to make the Reckoning great, or to make vs men of great reckoning. But in his payment hee was tyred like a Iade, leauing the Gentleman that was with mee to discharge the terrible Shott, or else one of my horses must haue laine in pawne for his superfluous calling, and vnman∣nerly intrusion. But leauing him, I left Huntington, and rode on the Sunday to Packeridge, where Master Holland at the Faul∣kon, (mine olde acquaintance) and my louing and aunci∣ent Hoste gaue mee, my friend, my man, and our horses excellent good cheere, and welcome, and I paid him with, Not a penie of money. The next day I came to London, and obscurely com∣ming within Moore-gate, I went to a house and borrow∣ed
money: And so I stole backe againe to Islington, to the signe of the Mayden-head, staying till Wednesday that my friendes came to meete mee, who knewe no other, but that Wednesday was my first comming: where with all loue I was entertained with much good cheere: and after Supper wee had a play of the life and death of Guy of Warwicke, plaied by the Right Honoura∣ble the Earle of Darbie his men. And so on the Thurs∣day morning beeing the fifteenth of October, I came home to my house in London. THE EPILOGVE TO all my Aduenturers and others. THus did I neither spend, or begge, or aske, By any course, direct, or indirectly: But in each tittle I perform'd my taske, According to my bill most circumspectly. I vow to God I haue done SCOTLAND wrong, (And (iustly) gainst me it may bring an Action) I haue not giuen't that right which doth belong, For which I am halfe guilty of detraction: Yet had I wrote all things that there I saw, Misiudging censures would suppose I flatter, And so my name I should in question draw, Where Asses bray, and pratling Pies doe chatter: Yet (arm'd with truth) I publish with my Pen, That there th' Almighty doth his blessings heape, In such aboundant food for Beasts and Men; That I ne're saw more plenty or more cheape:
Thus what mine eyes did see, I doe beleeue; And what I doe beleeue I know is true: And what is true vnto your hands I giue, That what I giue may be beleeu'd of you. But as for him that sayes I lye or dote, I doe returne, and turne the Lye in's throate. Thus Gentlemen, amongst you take my ware, You share my thankes, and I your moneyes share. Yours in all obseruance and grate∣fulnesse, euer to be commanded. IOHN TAYLOR. FINIS.
