24281 S105913 99841638 6236
A TOVCHSTONE, whereby may easilie be discerned, which is the true Catholike faith, of all them that pro∣fesse the name of Catholiques in the Church of Englande, that they bee not deceiued: Taken out of the Catholike Epistle of S. Iude. Ieremie 6. verse 16. Thus saith the Lord; Stand in the waies, and behold and aske for the olde way which is the good way, and walke therein, and ye shall find rest for your soules: but they said, we will not walke therein. August. lib. 1. Retract. cap. 13. For the thing it selfe which is now called Christian religion, was among the fathers, neither yet euer failed from the first beginning of mankind, till Christ came in the flesh: from whence that one religion which now was before, began to be called christian religion. Iere. cap. 50. verse 14. Put your selues in array against Babel round about: all ye that bende the bowe shoote at her, spare no arrowes: For shee hath sinned against the Lord. AT LONDON Printed by Peter Short, dwelling on Bredstreet hill at the signe of the Starre. 1599.
To the Right Honourable, his verie good Lord, Sir Thomas Cicil Knight, Baron of Burghley, her Maiesties Lieutenant in the county of Yorke, and President of her highnes councel established in the North parts: Grace, mercy and peace from God our father, and from the Lord Iesus Christ. THe great zeale your Lordship hath to the Gospel, and to the professors ther∣of, and the dutie my Parentes, and my selfe did owe to your Lordshippes honorable father, of most famous me∣mory, deceased (right honorable) em∣bolden mee to offer these my simple labors vnto your Lordship, as a token of my humble dutie. If the earth yeeldes increase as it were with vsury to her Tillers, much more man ought to doe the same. There is no sinne more against the nature of man then vnthankful∣nesse: and therefore one of the Philosophers sayde, hee that calleth one an vnthankful person, comprehendeth in that one word all vices. And another, being asked, what thing of al others in the world died soonest, answered, a benefit or good turne: which thing in our corrupt nature, wee finde often true by experience. And although I confesse, that the forme of this my simple worke is rude, & vnworthy your Lordships view, yet the matter therein contained is excellent. This short Epi∣stle of S. Iude, like that pretious stone called the Carbun∣cle, small in quantity, but great in force, disperseth all the thicke mistes of errour and darkenesse of Antichrist. It
lighteneth to al Christians,Mat. 2.10 like as that starre did to the wise men, the way to Bethlehem, that is, as the hebrew word im∣porteth, the house of breade, where Iesus Christ abideth. And then howe necessary is it for these our daies, wherein Sathan goeth about by all meanes to seduce all men, from this Bethlehem, this house of bread, to Bethauen, that is, to his house, the house of lies. Iesus Christs house is Beth∣lehem, in it is breade, euen the breade of life, that is, the worde of God: according to that which is written, Man liueth not by breade onely,Mat. 4.4. but by euery worde that procee∣deth out of the mouth of God. And againe, I am the breade of life,Io. 6.51. which came downe from heauen. Hee that ea∣teth this breade, and beleeueth my worde, shall liue for euer. In Gods house is this bread, and all his houshold doe feede thereof: but Sathans house is Bethauen, that is, a house of lyes:2. Thes. 2.11 Because they haue not receiued the loue of the truth, that they might be saued (saith the Apostle:) therefore God hath sent them strong delusions, that they shoulde beleeue lyes: As the vaine fables, varnished as it were with some shewe of deuotion and religion, drawne out of the popish Legends, which many simple Catholikes at this daie beleeue, plain∣lie proue. These two houses, this Catholike Epistle of S. Iude doth very liuely describe, as your Honour in the fur∣ther consideration thereof may perceiue. And heere no doubt,Act. 8.27 as God sent that Noble man of Candaces Queen of Ethiopia to Ierusalem, that hee learning the truth there might by his authoritie establish it, among the Ethiopi∣ans, whither after hee sente also some of his Apostles to preach,Psal. 77.20 (for in building of the Lordes house, Moses and Aaron, that is, the magistrate and the minister, must ioine handes together:) So no doubt, God hath placed your Lordshippe in the North partes, that the Catholike faith, which many in those partes do loue, and this Epistle doth most plainely teach, may also there by your Lordships au∣thoritie
be planted, and established amongst them. But when as they, which haue sore eyes will finde fault with the sunne, and seeing our daies hath too many such, which like bastarde Eagles cannot abide to beholde the true sonne of righteousnesse Iesus Christ: I most humbly craue your L. honorable patronage, against the cauilling censures and reprehensions of any such, concerning these my simple la∣bours. And thus beseeching the Lord Iesus to blesse your honour, with al temporal, and spiritu∣all graces, I most humbly take my leaue. Your Lordships most dutiful in the Lord, Francis Trig.
To all true Christians, and to all them that call themselues Catholikes, at this daie in the Church of England: Grace, mercie and truth, with continuall ioy in the Holie ghost. THat notable discourse of Clemens Alexandri∣nus (beloued in the Lorde,Clem. lib. 1 Stromat.,) is verie forcible to moue all those that be learned in Iesus Christ, to put forth their labours in print. If the godlie should not write bookes: wherefore were let∣ters inuented? It is lawfull for the Epicure to write dishonest things: therefore much more for a Christian, such things as bee profitable. And euery man hath a care, to leaue children behinde him of his bodie: but bookes are the fruites of the minde. And againe, We call them fathers, that doe in∣struct vs: And wisdome is no niggard, she makes her selfe common to all, she is a louer of mankinde: And our Sauiour wil call all his ser∣uants to account, which haue receiued any talent of him. None must hide his talent in the ground. And he puts downe also the endes, whie all bookes should bee written. Not rashlie, but with deliberation: not for malice of any man, nor for vaine glory, nor for hope of rewarde, but for the profit of our brethren: Thus farre Clemens. Here wee may note, that they are reprooued, that will not set forth their workes in print; to the benefit of others. Such put a light vnder a bushell. And some such lightes, haue we at this daie; which wil not suffer their excel∣lent labours to bee published, least others should bee partakers of them:Epistola. 6. Whereas euen Seneca a heathen hath this notable sentence. For this ende I do desire to learne, that I may teach others. Neither any thing delightes me; be it neuer so excellent, nor so profitable, that I my selfe shoulde knowe alone. Nay, if wisdome her selfe were giuen mee vppon this condition, that I shoulde keepe her fast shut vppe, and shoulde not publish her abroad, I woulde refuse her. And this is a principall cause why the Church of Rome at this daie smes so glorious in the eies of many, because that in her all those that haue the best gifts, as Granatensis, Stella, Ferus and such others, whatsoeuer they haue don
they haue published and communicated to others. But in the church of Christ there are verie manie which are endued with singular giftes and grs of the holie spirit: who wil not be perswaded to publish any thing,  make their most excellent labours common to the benefit of others. The which if they would do, as the church hath now very many not infe∣rior to any of those: so she should haue a far greater number that woulde exceed them. But to let passe Clemens Alexandrinus, Seneca, and the practise of the Romanistes: much more forcible is the reason that Saint Iude here vseth in this Epistle. Putting a difference (saith hee) deale mercifully with some: and others saue with feare. pulling them as it were out of the fire. Meaning no doubt, that wee should not onely by brotherly conference, winne simple seduced Christians: but also euen by the handes of our writings, or by any other meanes what soeuer, drawe such as bee obstinate from the flame and fire of heresie. Who seeing his brother in the fire, will not pull him out? And surely so nowe the case standes in our daies. The doctrine of Antichrist flameth like a fire, and therefore it beguiles, and euen consumeth many. They will not sticke to spend all their reuenewes, so that they may continue in poperie. The great fiery zeale of the Iesuites, the eloquence, and as it were a shining light of some papists stiles, defending their causes, deceiues them. But let all true Catholiques marke heere what S. Iude teacheth, That some are to be pulled out of the fire. Though the teachers be as hot in zeale, as forcible in perswasion, as glorious in eloquence, as fire: yet if they em∣brace not the catholike doctrine contained in this epistle, embrace them not, beleeue them not. And all good christians, if this fire haue caught hold of any such; are bound with all diligence, to helpe to pull them out. And here let vs note the excellencie of this epistle: In it not only the chiefe points of Antichristian heresie; but as in a briefe mappe also, the chiefe principles of christian and catholike religion are contained. Wilt thou then be free from all danger of heresie? Wilt thou be established in the true catholik faith? Read this epistle. The labor is not great. Wouldst thou doe good workes in deede? Doe then those, which S. Iude here com∣mandeth. Build yee one another in your most holy faith. Here is the first and principall worke of all true christians and catholikes, To build themselues in their most holy faith: And that is by hearing, reading, and meditating of the holy scriptures. For so S. Paul teacheth, that this building is by the word of God: And now brethren, I commend you to God,Act. 20.32. and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you farther, and to giue you an inheritance, amongst all them that are sanctified:
Here wee may plainely see, that S. Paul against those rauening wolues, which shall succeede him (of whome also he speakes in the verse going before) and shall teach peruerse doctrine:Verse 29 30. he committeth all true chri∣stians and catholikes to the word of God, as to a most sure looking glasse, whereby to espie their deceits; and as to a most faithfull square & rule, to build and frame their faith by: And shall we not then giue heede vnto it? And in another place he saith:Col. 3. v. 16. Let the word of Christ dwell plen∣teously amongst you in all wisedome, teaching and admonishing one another. As though he should say to all christians: haue not onely the word of God in your houses, but also in your hearts, that you may be able to teach and admonish one another. And this no doubt is the building S. Iude here meaneth, See what knowledge of the word of God he requi∣reth in euery christian: that they should be able euen to teach and to re∣prooue: which cannot be done without great knowledge. Secondly (saith S. Iude) pray in the holy ghost, that is, as the holy ghost shall direct and inflame your harts,Theod. in Rom. 8. as Theodoret expoundes this phrase: By the grace of the holy spirit we being stirred vp, we are pric∣ked in heart: being inflamed by it, we pray more cheerfully, and call vpon God with vnspeakeable sighing. Why then all christians must be perswaded that they have the holy ghost: then they must pray with vn∣derstanding and knowledge. They must know what they pray: The holy ghost is light, and in it is no darkenesse at all. And how agrees this with the popish latine praiers which they haue vsed? Thirdly saith S. Iude, Keepe your selues in the loue of God: Be ye assured that God is your father, that hee loueth you and careth for you. Let this bee as a staffe in your handes, to passe ouer the Iordane of this world with all, with Iacob: and the ioy of your harts though sathan buf∣fet you neuer so much, as he did Paul:Gen. 32. v. 10.2. Cor. 12. v. 9. whom the Lord taught this les∣son, and in him all christians: My grace, my loue, is sufficient for thee. What needes thou then feare the waues of this world, nay nor all the buf∣feting and afflictions of sathan? Lastly saith S. Iude, waite for the mercy of our Lord Iesus Christ, to eternall life: not trusting in your owne merits, but only in his mercie: euer remembring your manifold imperfections and sinnes, and confes∣sing your selues to be vnprofitable seruants. Here are the duties plainely set downe of all Gods faithfull seruants, & of al true catholikes towards God. That is, continuall study and meditation of the scripture, daily praier in the holy ghost, assurance of the loue of God towardes them; and a waiting for the mercy of Iesus Christ to saluation: These are the
workes of the true catholique Church, and of all true catholikes. Those which doe not these workes; what soeuer they doe else, God shall not ac∣knowledge them for his serua ts. These points of christian religion, euery christian is daily to meditate vpon▪ these workes he must loke that he doe with the strength of this small cake,1. King. 19 v. 8. and with the comfort of this little water, no doubt with Eli∣ah, he shall go euen to Horeb the mountaine of God. The Lorde Iesus plant these vertues in euery Christians heart, and grant euery one grace diligently to doe these workes, and make them hunger for this bread and thirst for this water: and at last bring them to his heauenly Horeb and mountaine. To conclude (gentle Reader) if in this discourse any thing doe iustly mislike thee (as perchance something may doe) for as Saint Iames saith.Ia. 4.2. Gal. 6.2. Ia. 2.8. In many things we offend all; remember that royall law of our Sauiour Christ, That we ought to be are one anothers burthen. And if any thing seeme to thee heerein to bee ouer sharpelie and bitterly spo∣ken;Luke 10.34. surely the grieuousnesse of the woundes required it: remember how the Samaritan poured in, not only oyle but wine also, into the wounds of his neighbour.Mat. 26.18. Act. 1.20. If in the quotations any thing haue escaped, call to mind how our Sauiour sends his Apostles , to a certaine man, and Peter alleadging Dauid saith, It is written in the booke of Psalmes, neither quoting Psalme nor verse, and Paul saith, One of themselues, euen one of their own Prophets, said, the Cretians are al∣waies lyars. And loath not the plaine handling of the points of doctrine herein contained,Psal. 78.30.31. requiring quailes for thy dainty appetite as did the Israelites, which died with the meat in their mouthes: Such delicates profits not the soule, but rather embrace the heauenly manna, which was a small round thing vpon the face of the wildernesse;Exod. 16.14. small as the hoare frost on the earth. And remember these two notable lessons which S. Paul knits vp in two words,Ephes 4.15. : Let vs seeke after truth in loue: And so farewell in the Lord Iesus,2. Tim 2.7. who giue thee a right vnderstanding & iudgement in al things. Yours in the Lord Iesus, FRANCIS TRIG.
A briefe table, shewing the contents of this treatise. OF the sufficiencie of the scriptures 1. 2 &c Of the duetie of the true seruants of God 5 Of vocation 7 Of Gods prouidence and preseruation 10 Of Gods mercie 14 Of peace 17 Of loue 22 Of the common saluation 24 Of the certaintie of saluation 26 Of the first catholique faith 39 Of praiers in a strange tongue 65 Of the scriptures read in the vulgar tongue 75 Of images 80 Of pardons 96 Of auricular confession 100 Of purgatorie 115 Of praier to Saintes 137 Of Transubstantiation 166 Of Communion vnder one kinde 199 Of the authoritie of the Church 202 Of praier for the dead 204 Of Monkes and Friers 220 Of Mariage and single life 225 Of fasting and abstinence 239 Of Ceremonies 247 Of the Popes supremacie 251 Of the Sinnes of Sodome 288 Of obedience to Magistrates 290 Of Satans sleightes 295 Of Christian patience 296. 297 Of treason and rebellion 299 Of Christian loue feastes 301 Of the spirituall feeding of pastors 303
Of the deceites of priestes and friers 304 Christians must do good workes themselues 305 Of the Churches treasure 305. 306 and of hypocrisie ibid. Of the persecution of the true church 308 Of the ignorance of the Popes cleargie 309 Of the day of Iudgment 310 Our daies are the daies of Noah 313 Against murmuring 326 Of spirituall pride. Of couetousnesse 327 Of the word of God 328 Of sectes and schismes in the church 329 A true description of the Church 330 Of Sectaries. Of direction of Gods spirit 332 A briefe sum of true catholike religion 331 Of the exceeding loue of Iesus Christ 348 Of the reward of good workes 351 Of blinde zeale. Of traditions 354 355 Of the garments of the flesh 358 Of preseruation from sinne 359 Faultes escaped. Page 30. line 34. for Augur read Agur. p. 32. l. 37. destruction r. foolishnesse. p. 47. l 1. Psal. 17. r. 87. p. 72. l. 10. altother. r. altogether. p. 85 l. 17. demanded, r. demand. p. 87. l. 16. r. Eusebius in an oration of the praises of Constantine. p. 122. l. 23. more, read word. p. 177. l. 2. visible r. inuisible. p. 197. l. 27. if r of p. 199. l 2. r. knowe what I meane. p. 256. lin. 39. reuiled r. reuealed. p. 258. l 23. compresbyter r. compresbyterum: & l 35. collega r. collegam. p. 299. l. 8. of r. by. p. 300. l. 3. pardons r. pardoners.
¶The sum of this Epistle, and chiefe pointes of Catholique Religion contained therein and handled. FIrst it is a Catholique Epistle, because the doctrine therein con∣tained is necessary for al Christians to know. The poison of the heretiques which it describeth shal not be in some one countrey, but shall spread it selfe thorow the whole world. It liuely painteth out vnto vs the church of Rome, and Antichrists kingdome. Secondly, all Christians must beleeue and confesse the common saluation. That as they haue al one Sauiour: so they haue al one com∣mon saluation. That the saluation of the Apostles and of other Christians is all one. So that if they were certaine of their saluation, other christians may be certain of their saluation also. And they which teach contrary, are no Catholiques, but Heretiques. Thirdly, they must maintaine the faith once giuen to the saintes. The first faith is the true faith: Sathan shall depraue and corrupt this faith. That faith which commeth in after, seeme it neuer so deuout, is the false faith: As Latine prayers, Images, purgatory, pardons, prayer to Saintes, and other such like, which I speake of in this treatise. Fourthly, there shal heresies craftily creepe into the church, which shall turne the grace of God into wantonnes. And hath not poperie done so? comming into the church not all at once, but by degrees,Popery tur∣neth the grace of God into wantonnes, and that vnder a pretence of deuotion and holinesse. Hath it not tur∣ned the grace of God into wantonnes? making religion and the wor∣ship of God, like a maske or stage play: pleasant to the flesh in all re∣spects. In ringing and singing to the eares, in Images carued and gil∣ded, in copes and vestments embrodered to the eies: In censing with sweet perfumes to the nose, and in their vsuall and often feasts to the bellie. Hath it not defended spirituall fornication? teaching men to trust in man, and not only in the liuing God, to commit Idolatry, and
to worship creatures. Nay doth it not maintaine euen fleshly forni∣cation, that is the stewes: and euen practise sorcery and coniuring? And is not this to turne the grace of God into wantonnes? Fiftly, these Heretiques shal denie the onely master of his house Ie∣sus Christ. They shall confesse him to be master, but not onely master. They shall ioine another with him: they shall say, hee must needes haue a vicegerent, a vicar generall vnder him: and thus they shall goe about to impaire his honor. Sixtly, they are like the Israelites, who after they were deliuered out of Egypt,Papists like vn∣to vnbeleeuing Israelites. beleeued not the promise of God, concerning ye land of Ca∣naan: but murmured and doubted of it in the wildernes. So these, being deliuered from that great spirituall Pharaoh the deuill, by our sauiour Iesus Christ, beleeue not his promise, concerning the king∣dome of heauen,Papists deny the Lord Iesus. our true Canaan; who hath promised, that whosoe∣uer beleeueth in him shall haue euerlasting life: but deny the Lorde that bought them; and adde merits of their owne, to his redemption, as not perfect,The church of Rome once like Lucifer was a principall mē∣ber of Christs Church: but now by pride is falne like him. Reue. 8.10. & of it selfe vnsufficient. They are like the Angels, who being placed of God in heauen in great glory, were not content with their estate, but would be like God. Euen so these, being once messen∣gers, and angels in Gods church, were not content with their first e∣state God placed them in, but exalted themselues aboue their bre∣thren. Nay euen aboue all magistrates and gouernors, whom God in his word calleth gods. Seuenthly, that they are like the Sodomites in sinfull life, in fleshlie lustes, in their pleasant dwellings and seates. They are opprobrious in mouth, blind and ignorant in heart, lacking the true light of Gods spi∣rit, by his worde. They are bloudy teachers, like Cain, in persecuting those who reproue their sinnes, who putting those to death which con∣fesse Iesus Christ, thinke they do God good seruice. They are coue∣tous teachers like Balaam: As raging flouds, running after gaine, sel∣ling all their religion, doing all for money. They are rebellious like Corah and Dathan, who refuse the lawful magistrates, who perswade subiectes from their allegeance due vnto them: who accompt those martyrs which poison and kill them: who, to bee short, abounde in all sinne. Lastly, all true Christians must hate their ignorance, and must know Gods word, and by it must be able to edifie & instruct one another, in their most holy faith; must pray, not as they doe ignorantly, but in the holy ghost, that is with vnderstanding and feruency: and must not
doubt of their saluation, and of the loue of God towards them, as they shal go about to teach: but must keepe themselues in the loue of God, by obeying his word, neuer doubting of it. And must look for the mer∣cy of Iesus Christ to their saluation: not trusting in their owne works, (as the Pharisie did) not hauing any workes of supererogation, more then wil serue themselues: but must confesse, when they haue done all they can, that they are vnprofitable seruauntes, that they haue done but that they ought to haue done. That all their workes whatsoeuer, and more, if they were able to doe them, are but duties, not desertes. That they are all sinners, and offenders: and must craue grace and fauour. That they are far from good seruants: & can challenge no wages. This is the sum of this Epistle herein we may briefely see which is the true catholique faith: they which defende not this, are not true catho∣liques, but Here∣tiques.
The Catholique Epistle of S. Iude. THe word of God by the prophet Dauid is called A lan∣terne to our feete, and a light vnto our pathes.Psal. 119.105 2. Pet. 19 And the Apostle S. Peter calleth the wordes of the Prophets a most sure word: to whom we shall do well if we shal giue heede, as vnto a torch shining in a darke place. This lanterne and light lighteneth the whole house of God in the darke night of this worlde, like that same golden candlesticke which with her seuen branches lighted the tabernacle of the lawe, which Aaron and his sonnes dressed from euening to morning before the Lorde, for a statute for euer vnto their generations. And it discouers all the sleights of Sathan, that prince of darkenesse, and it is the onelie glasse of stéele to bewray him, the onely sword to wound him, and nothing besides this, in truth he feareth or careth for.Ephes. 6.17 The edge and dt of this sworde cutteth him to the quicke, as S. Paule tea∣cheth. Therefore wouldest thou not stumble in this pilgrimage of y life: neither in faith, nor in religion, nor in maners? follow this light: wouldest thou see sathans sleightes and auoide them? lke into this glasse (as S. Iames counselleth thee) and remem∣ber it well. Wouldest thou like Dauid, kill Goliah and win there∣by pe, not with king Saul, but with the king of all kings, euen God selfe? then take this sword n thy hande. Let it dwell in thy house, let it abide and remaine in thy hart, and thou shalt sure∣lie ke off his heade. It is the word of life,Phil. 2.16 1 Pet. 2.2 1 Tim. 6.3 it is the milke with∣out deceipt, it is the doctrine of health, that maketh thy soule and with und, it cannot hurt thee, feare not to taste,Psal. 58.5 to reade and me∣ditate therein. Stop not thy eares at it, bee not like the deafe Ad∣r, whereof the prophet Dauid maketh mention, which stoppeth re es at the voice of the charmer, charme hee neuer so wiselie. This is the wisedom of God and not of man: therefore giue good h vnto it, mark it wel. In that psalme it is the chiefe marke of the wicked, to stop their eares to Gods word. The church of God is thus euidentlie described by the prophet Esay cap. 26. v. 2. Open the gates, and a holy nation shall enter in, keeping (Aemunim) as it is in the hebrew, that is truthes, onlie kéeping and trusting to the worde of God, which our Sauiour with Amen hath ratified, Mat. 5.18. and S. Paul. 2. Cor. 1.20. 1. Tim. 1.15. & 4.9. And as this word is sufficient to teach:2 Ti. 3.1. so also it is sufficient to improue, as Saint Paul teacheth plainelie. It maketh manifest all
sathans subtleties, and ouerthroweth all his deuises. And here the verie title of this Epistle, doth euidentlie proue the same. And whereas an Epistle may be called catholique for two considerati∣ons. Either because it is written generallie to the whole catho∣lique church of Christ, as was S. Peters second epistle, and this of S. Iude: or else written but to some certaine people, as S. Peters first epistle, and that of S Iames, to the dispersed brethren, and yet con∣taining doctrine necessarie for all christians to knowe. This epi∣stle may seeme to be called catholique for both respects. The holie ghost did foresee, how sathan would goe about by the name of the catholique faith, to seduce many, and vnder this glorious title to beguile them. And therefore least any should be beguiled by him, the holie ghost in this epistle, doth plainly teach what is the catho∣lique faith, which hee shall impugne. Let not the name beguile thée, but looke west into the thing. Copper is like gold, and the et∣tle like Balme, and an Ape like a man. Beware thou bee not de∣ceiued, vse the touchstone, and trie which of these is golde in déede, Smell well with thy nose, and taste, which is true balme: and c reason to counsell, endued with Gods spirit, and iudge which is the man indéed. That faith, without all doubt, is the catholique faith, that is taught in this epistle. If the faith which thou accomptest catholique, be not agréeing herewith: without all doubt it is cop∣per, it is a counterfeit faith, it is not the true catholike faith. And here least anie man should pleade ignorance, or lacke of iudge∣ment, or lacke of leasure: the holie ghost hath most plainelie, and briefely, put downe this great and waightie matter, euen to the capacitie of the simplest. Wherefore I say to euerie one that hath eares to heare, let him heare. Of the great fruit and commodi∣tie wee reape by hearing and reading the word of God,Ferus in cap. 20. Euan. secun. Iohan. see what Ferus a Papist writes, Christ shewes himselfe chiefely by his word, for otherwise although he be present he is not knowne, vnlesse he de∣clare himselfe by his word. If therefore thou wilt see and know Christ, heare his word. For his face now thou canst not see. And of the same matter Philippus de Dies a Frier writeth thus. Blessed are they which heare the word of God.Conc. 2. Fest B. Mar. ad Nines. As the apple comes of the seede; so blessednes comes of hearing the word of God: wherefore the Deuill takes such great care that men should not heare it, least hearing it they should obtaine this blessednes. Here marke whose ministers they are, that disswade thee from hearing the word of God. They are
the diuels ministers by Philippus de Dies iudgement. As Eue accursed thee by eating the forbidden fruit, so eate thou this fruite againe if thou meane to be blessed. In the seed thereof is effectual blessednesse conteined. And of the great danger in not hearing it, see againe how the same Frier writeth. Also I say vnto you, this godly affection towardes the diuine doctrine to bee a verie manifest signe of Gods predestination.Phil. de Dies conc. 1. assumpt. For as among other differences which are betwixt birdes and beastes, this is one, That if in the night a light or torch bee placed, before the eyes of birdes, they will all forthwith flie vnto it: but contrariwise, if a light be set before beastes, they flie from it, and hide their countenances, because they cannot abide the brightnes of the torch. So likewise betwixt the predestinate and those whome God hath onely foreknowne, this difference is found. For the word of God is a light shining in the middle of the night, of this world. As kingly Dauid saith, Thy worde is a lanterne vnto my feete, and a light vnto my pathes. And the birdes, that is the predestinate: seeing this light, which the preachers set before their eyes, runne after it: with their taste, affection and deuotion. But sinners like vnto beastes, not being able to endure this light, by and by turne their backes and flie from it. Let euerie christian heere beware, how he turne awaie his eares from hearing Gods worde: séeing by a papistes owne iudgement, it is a manifest signe, of a reprobate. And let euerie one iudge what she was, that kept this light from the eies of our forefathers. They could not bee suffered to see it, to looke vpon it: surelie she was not the spouse of Christ, but the sinagogue of Sa∣than, who is a prince of darkenes, and himselfe cannot abide this light. Let all true christians delight in this light: as in the light of the sunne. Let euerie christian marke, that same spirituall ar∣mour, which (as it were in a little bundle) the holie ghost prescribeth to euery christian soldiour. There was a battell in heauen,Reu. 12.7. and the Dragon was ouercome, and the Diuel and his angels are now thrown down from heauen, by the power of Iesus Christ, that great Michael, who before accused our brethren in heauē before the maiesty of God, euen night and day. As there we may plainely read verse 10. and as we may see Iob 1. and 1. King. 22. verse 21. And he is now come downe into the earth with great rage, knowing hee hath but a short time. Against this fierce enemie this is the onelie victorie: (And they ouercame him by the bloud of the lamb, & the word of their te∣stimonie.) By these two things and by nothing else. Where by the
first is meant, that of al their deadly wounds and sinnes, which is this battell they should receiue, they were to be cured by the me∣rits of the death and passion of Iesus Christ. And this place, see∣meth to haue a resemblance,Exod. 2.22. with that of Exodus. Where the Isra∣elites did with Isope strike the vpper posts of their houses with the bloud of the lambe; and so escaped the destroier. So must we with the Isope of repentance, taken in the hande of faith, sprinkle our soules with the precious blood of the lambe, that is Iesus Christ, and then shall we walke without feare, and escape the destroier. Secondlie, the weapon to wounde this their enimie, is the worde of their testimonie. That is the word of God, whereof they are witnesses, of the trueth, sufficiencie, and certaintie of euerie otte and tytle thereof, euen to the death. They which will ouer∣come sathan, must loue the worde of God, must knowe it, nay must bee witnesses or martyrs, euen venturing their liues for it if occasion serue. For that the word (witnesse) signifieth. The word of God, must bee their profession, their testimonie; that it is the rule of lyfe, the touchstone of trueth, the ground worke of fayth, and the onelie roote of true religion. A witnesse must not onelie saie the truth, but sweare it, yea if néede be, dye for it. Such great zeale must all good christians haue to Gods worde. And such har∣nesse, such weapons, all those, that mind to ouercome sathan, must haue. This is plaine, this cannot be denyed. Therefore to be wit∣nesses or martyrs principally for the church, or for the prerogatiue thereof, (for which manie heeretofore and now, do venter their liues) is not to be true witnesses or martyrs. They must ouercome sathan by the blood of the lambe, and by the worde of their testy∣monie, that will bee indeede true victors and conquerers of him. They must be witnesses and martyrs of the worde,Reue. 6. that will bee true witnesses and martyrs: and vnder the altar of God, amongst the other true witnesses and martirs.Deut. 28.14. Such a witnesse was Mo∣ses. Thou shalt not departe from the worde of God to the right hand nor to the left.Psal. 19.7. Such a witnesse was Dauid. The law of God is a per∣fect lawe conuerting the soule. Such a witnesse was Agur in the daies of Salomon.Pro. 30.6. Euery worde of God is pure. He is a shield to those that trust in him, put nothing to his worde. There is no vn∣truth, no danger in his wordes. And it is sufficiente, put nothing to it:2 Tim. 3.16. it néedeth no addition. Such a witnesse was S. Paul. The worde of God is able to teach, to exhorte, to improue, to rebuke: that
the man of God (both minister and hearer) may be perfect to euery good work. Such a witnesse was Iames,Ia. 1.25. who calleth it the perfect lawe of libertie. If a perfecte lawe, then the commaundements of it onelie are to bee kept in matters of saluation; and of none o∣ther, neither of Angel, Apostle, Pope, Prince or potentate who∣soeuer besides it, or against it. Iudas the seruaunt of Iesus Christ,Text. Verse. 1. and brother of Iames] This is a rare saluation, as a learned man noteth; and vnlike the other saluations of the Apostles: but full of doctrine, full of comforte. This Epistle is but a shorte Epistle: but by it, as by a little touch∣stone, gold from copper: as by a small fanne, wheate from chaffe: that is true Christians and Catholikes, from false, and counter∣faite, are easilie to be discerned. Here, as in a litle map, the whole sum of Christian religion, is set down: who will not then highlie esteeme it; wherein so excellent thinges, so plainely & briefely are cōteined? The principal duty of seruaunts in the holy scriptures, is taught vs in two wordes, that is, in obedience, and feare.Eph. 6.5. You seruaunts (saieth S. Paul) obey your masters. Wherein this worde (obey) in the gréeke, importeth an obedience of the eare, specially: that is, that all seruantes shoulde obey their masters worde and commaundement: be it neuer so harde, séeme it neuer so strange, although it be against reason, in their owne iudgements.Gen. 12.1. So A∣braham obeyed God, like a good seruante, going out of the lande of Vr of the Chaldees, being 70. yeares old.Gen. 22.10. So he would haue of∣fered his sonne Isacke. in whome, God had promised him, all the nations of the worlde should be blessed, and whom hee loued most dearelie. So Noah obeyed the commaundements of God,Gen. 6.22 in lay∣ing out his monie, in making an Arke: when as all the mightie, and wise men of that world, laughed him to scorne, and accounted him as a foole for his labour: Being alone, and none to take his parte or to assist him, but Gods worde onelie, which no doubt was a notable comforte vnto him. The verie carpenters, that ear∣ned his monie, and framed the arke, were drowned, they beléeued not this worde and commaundement of God. Wée haue examples againe in the scripture of euill ser∣uants. Saul a King, being commanded to slay Amalecke, thought,Sa. 15.9. by his authoritie, he might pardon the king, and saue the fatlings: and hee had some good intente in this his doing, to offer sacrifice
thereof to God. But for this his disobedience, to Gods word and commandement, though a king, hee was reiected. The Israelites are reproued by all the prophets, for their costlie sacrifices, and stately buildings, which they called their high places, which besides Gods commandement they ordained. And therefore by the pro∣phet Esay,Esay. 1.12 God condemneth all this their external, hypocriticall, and voluntary religion: saying, who required this at your handes, to trample in my courts? That is, to bee present with your bodies, but to haue your hearts far off. Offer you no more the lying or false offering or gift: your frankinsence or perfume are abhomination to me.Verse 26. And after, Sion shall be called the faithfull citie: she shall be a∣shamed of the great elmes, & pleasant gardens, she hath chosen to serue God in. So that the principall duty of Gods seruantes, is o∣bedience to his word, as appeareth by these examples. Secondlie, to feare to offende him. Both these are also by our sauiour in the gospell, linked together in two wordes: who is a faithfull and wise seruant.Luke. 12.42. Rom. 10.17 Pro. 1.7 Faithfulnes, is obedience to his word, to do all things he commandeth. Faith commeth by hearing, & hea∣ring by the word of God: And the first point of wisedome is to feare the Lord. So that seruants must bee faithfull in doing their mai∣sters will, and wise in fearing to offend him. So the Lorde by the prophet Malachie requireth this of his seruants. If I be a master, where is my feare?Mal. 1.6 In times past there was great feare in the worlde, whereof many will talke at this daie; howe loath men were to break their penāces laid on them: but this was the feare of man. All Gods seruants must feare to breake his commande∣ments. For the feare of God consisteth chiefelie in kéeping his commandements.Matth. 25 So the Iewes were afraide to eate with vn∣washen hands, to sweare by the golde of the temple, and such like precepts they obserued: but this was no feare of God. Herein though they feared, yet they were not Gods seruants. Brother of Iames.] This remembrance of his brother in writing this epistle, should also teach vs in all our dealinges and affaires to remember our brethren: That those whom we deale with, are our brethren. And surelie this onlie consideration woulde kindle charitie amongst vs: who woulde deale hardlie with his brother? The forgetfulnes hereof, is the cause of all the hard dealings, that now is in the world. We forget that we deale with our brethren. This consideration, woulde cease manie quarrels: which are so
common at this daie, and more common then euer heretofore. Abraham said to Lot, let there be no strife I pray thee,Gen. 13.8 between thee and me, neither between my hearde men and thine. For we are bre∣thren. Surelie, if our contentious countrimen, that for euerie light trifle, will go to lawe, would remember but this short lesson of their father Abraham (whose sonnes if they be not, they can ne∣uer be saued,) I am perswaded it would end manie of their vain suites. This only reason moued Abraham in a waightie matter to peace and concord; and shall it not moue vs in lighter causes? Secondlie, S. Iude names himselfe the brother of Iames, to make a differince betweene himselfe and Iudas the traitor. And herby he also teacheth al christians a notable lesson, that is, not to haue anie affinitie or likenesse, with the wicked. Let euerie good christian, as much as in him lieth, be opposite against the wicked, and haue no fellowship with them, neither in their words, works, nor garments. And of this outward resemblance S. Paul saieth, ,Rom. 12.2 2. Thes. 5.22. bee not like in your outward shape and forme to the wicked world. And in an other place, Abstaine from al ap∣pearance of euill. It is a wonder to see at this daie, how sathan be∣witcheth, euen some of them that feare God, that they are caried awaie with these outward shapes and fashions of the wicked. And called] God euen now calleth, as he did once our grandfa∣ther Adam, hauing offended, and broken the commandementes, and hiding himselfe in paradise, that he might be partaker of that blessed promise of life.Gen. 12.1 Gen. 19.12 As Abraham liuing securely in Vr the land of the Chaldeans, that he might goe out of it, and possesse the lande of Canaan: as Lot, that he might go out of Sodome, that hee were not destroied with it: as Dauid from the sheepefolde,Psal. 88.7 1. King. 19.19. Matth. 9.9 that he might bee a pastor and feeder of his people, as Elizeus from his twelue plowes, that he might be a prophet to his people: as Mathew in the gospell, from the receipt of custome, that he might be nowe a Receiuer, of that great treasure of the gospell, and deliuer it to other. And last∣lie, as those that stoode idlie in the market place, that they might go and labour in his vineyard. Without this calling of God,Mat. 20.3 Adam would neuer haue commen to God, nor Abraham haue possessed Canaan, nor Lot haue gone out of Sodome, nor Dauid haue bin king, nor Elizeus a prophet, nor Matthew an euangelist; nor anie one of the generation of mankinde, whether king or prophet, high or low; a laborer in the Lords vineyard: But all would haue béen
Pharaohs brickmakers, sonnes of Beliall, seruants of Mammon, sathans bondslaues. And the refore euerie one that commeth to God, is first called by Iesus Christ: both outwardly, by his word, and inwardlie, by his spirit; or else by both. No man commeth of himselfe.om. 1.7 So S. Paul telleth the Romaines, that hee had receiued grace and Apostleship, that obedience might be giuen to the faith in the name of Iesus Christ, among all the Gentiles. Among whom the Romaines were called of Iesus Christ. Where wee may note two thinges. That all the Romaines, that beléeued in Iesus Christ. were first called inwardlie, by his spirit, and outwardlie, by the preaching of the gospell. Secondlie, that among the other gen∣tiles and nations of the world, the Romaines were called. Heere is no prerogatiue giuen to them, aboue the rest: which no doubte the Apostle would not haue omitted, to haue made them more at∣tentiue to his doctrine, if there had béene anie such, as many doe now teach and suppose. And in his 8 chap. speaking of all christi∣ans.Rom. 8.15. Those (saith he) whom God hath predestinate, them hee hath called, and whom he called, them also he iustified, and whom hee iu∣stified them also he glorified. Here is that golden and most strong chaine of our saluation, linked with such sure linkes, as all the di∣uels in hell cannot break it. First, Gods eternall and most gra∣tious and certaine decree of it in heauen, and the most euident token thereof, the calling of his word outwardlie, and the effectu∣all calling of his holie spirit in our hearts inwardlie. Which ma∣keth vs crie Abba,Rom. 8 15 father, that is, accompt and surelie beleeue God to be our father, with great boldnesse and assurance: which is the earnest of our inheritance,Ephes. 1.14 and maketh vs as sure of that great co∣uenant, bargaine and promise made of God to vs warde of our saluation; as any earnest penny in the world, giuen and taken a∣mongst men, assureth them of their bargaines and couenantes. So that then,Ma 11.28 doest thou heare the voice of Iesus Christ? doest thou heare him in thy heart call thee to him, as to a sauiour, from sathan thine enemie; as to a mightie helper, in the great burthen of thy sinnes: be sure then thy saluation is decréed, is ratified, is registred in heauen. And therefore reioice, as our sauiour teacheth his Apostles.Luke 10. v. 20. Neuertheles in this reioyce not, that the spirits are sub∣dued vnto you: but rather reioyce, because your names are written in heauē. All the names of them, that are called by Iesus Christ, that in their heartes beleeue his Gospell, are registred in heauen, and
their saluation is of God most certainlie decréed. And this free calling of God the prophet Ieremy verie plainlie declareth vnto vs. They say, behold if a man put away his wife, and she go from him,Iere. 3.1. and become another mans: will hee returne to her any more? hath not this lande beene polluted againe and againe? and thou hast plai∣ed the harlot with many louers: yet turne to me, saith the Lord. And here is to be marked one other excellent point of doctrine, that the works of the Trinity are common together, & the works of one of them are attributed to the other. As we are said here to be sanctified of God the father:1. Cor. 1.2 so we are saide to be sanctified by Iesus Christ. And as Iesus Christ is commonlie called our saui∣our: so God is called our sauiour. Thereby also to teach vs,1 Tim. 1. v 1. that our workes ought to be common, wee should bee all as brethren, no man should labour alone. When as God had appointed Iudah after the death of Iosuah, to go vp before the children of Israell, to be their captain, & to fight against the Canaanites: Iudah though he were appointed alone, said to Simeon his brother,Iudg. 1.3 Come and go vp with me into my lot, that we may fight against the Cananites. And I likewise will go vp with thee into thy lot: and so Simeon went with him. So our Sauiour sent his disciples two and two togither before him into euery city and place whither he should come!. So S. Paul in most of his Epistles, ioineth some of the brethren with him, as Timotheus, and Siluanus: hee seldome writeth any Epistle alone.2 Thes. 1.1 Teaching all christians, and especiallie the ministers of God, this holie fellowship, this communicating of their labours one with another, this brotherlie helpe in the Lordes worke, this ioyning of handes togither. God himselfe hath done so: all the saintes of God haue done so: and why should not we do so? It would make our labours light, and our workes easie, as the prouerbe is: By many handes a great worke is made light and easie. And if the saints of God, being mightie in respect of vs, and strong in the inward man, and abounding in the giftes of the holie ghost, haue done this: how much more ought we, who are weake in compari∣son of them, vpon whom the end of the worlde is come, to vse this mutuall aid & societie, in our labors. This is that great & general & roial law of Christ. One should beare anothers burthē.Gal. 6.2 This is not only wisedom, but it is a cōmandement. And how is this heauēly wisdome forgotten? how is this roial law neglected? Our worldly wisedome hath drowned it, our selfe loue hath ouerflowed it, our
vaine glorie hath surprised it: we thinke skorne to impart our la∣bours to others, to aske helpe of anie, or to giue our helping hand to any. This roiall law of Christ is broken. Euerie man nowe is for himselfe. There is no communicating of helpe, of workes, of labours, of riches: neither in the Church, nor in the common wealth. In the Lordes haruest wee labour alone: and in the har∣uest of our fieldes, we labour for our selues. For our neighbour, may be behind with his corne, may lacke helpe: and no man al∣most will care for him. If he lacke seed, he shall pay déerelie for it. God here, by his owne example, teacheth vs another lesson. Tertul in Apol. cap. 39.The primitiue church also, vsed a contrarie practise. The hea∣then (saith Tertullian) were madde that we christians called our selues brethren. Amongst them they are brethren that maintaine a faction, (that take a part in the common wealth:) But howe much more wor∣thily, are they called and accompted brethren, which acknowledge one God, for their father; which haue drunken one spirit of sanctifi∣cation, which haue attained from the same wombe of ignorance, to the same light of truth. But therefore perchance wee are accompted lesse lawfull brethren, because no tragedie exclameth of our brother∣hoode, or because in our goods and riches we are brethren: which a∣mongst them breaketh their brotherhood. Therfore we, which being ioined together, in hart and wil; do nothing doubt of communicating or imparting our goods one to another. All things in vse amongst vs are common: besides our wiues. Arnobius lib. 8. contra Gentes.Arnobius also of the loue of christians in his daies writes thus. So we mutually loue one another, which you are sory for, because wee cannot tel how to hate. So we cal one another brethren, (which you repine at,) as men hauing one God for our father, as partakers of one faith, and heires of one hope. Text.Sanctified in God the father.] That is, of God the father. For so the second letter of the Hebrew alphabet (Beth) hath the force of  the gréeke preposition, which in English signifieth (of.) God is called often in the holie scriptures, the holy one of Israell. And in the prophet Esay one of the Cherubins cried to the other and said,Esay. 6 Holy, holy, holy, Lorde God of hosts, his glory filleth the whole earth. So in the Reuelation, S. Iohn sawe foure be astes, which had sire winges, and were full of eies, and they ceased not day and night saying: Holy, holy, holy, Lorde God almighty, which was, which is,Reue. 4.8 and which is to come. So that God is most holie, hee is
holinesse it selfe. What goodnesse, or holinesse any man hath, hee hath it, like an emptie vessell, euen from the bountifulnes of God. And therefore in the gospell we read. Of his fulnes, we al receiue:Iohn. 1.16 holinesse, righteousnesse, and what good thing soeuer we haue.Iames. 1.17. And S. Iames saith, Euerie good and perfect gift commeth from aboue, from the father of light, with whom is no variablenes, or mutabilitie by changing: who cannot change himselfe as men do many times, who are good sometimes, in the begining of their life, and euill af∣terwarde. As we reade of that wicked monster Nero:Nero. then whose ue first yeares of gouernement, none was more gracious or vertuous; but then those eight following, none were more wic∣ked, villanous or monstrous.Psal. 118 But our God is good and gracious for euer. And God who giueth this holinesse to all his children, gi∣ueth them a speciall commandement, and charge warely to kéepe the same. Sanctifie your selues therefore, and bee holy. For I am the Lord your God, keepe ye therefore my ordinances, and do them:Leu. 20.7 I am the Lord which doth sanctifie you. Here is the giuer of this pre∣cious iewell, of our holinesse set downe, God himselfe. And also a commandement from him, that we careleslie loose not, this his in∣estimable gift. And this holinesse is kept, by kéeping the Lordes commandements, by obeying his worde. As our most blessed sa∣uior, in that his most seruent praier to God his father for all his, doth plainly teach vs. Sanctifie them with thy truth.Iohn. 17 Thy worde is truth. Euen as muske maketh our bodies swéet, and frankinsence our houses: so doth Gods word make our soules holie and sweete before the maiesty of God. Then howe vnwise are they, though they would seeme neuer so holie to the world, that make small ac∣compt of this onely true muske, and frankinsence of their soules; I meane the worde of God. The same doctrine is taught by the prophet Ezechiel. My tabernacle shall bee with them,Cap 13. yea I will bee their God, and they shal be my people. That the heathen may know that I the Lord doe sanctifie Israel, when my sanctuary shall bee a∣mong them for euermore. The Lord here is the authour of our ho∣linesse, and that by the meanes of his sanctuarie, of his church, that teacheth his worde: yea, and that so famouslie, that the heathen shall knowe, and talke of, and wonder at the holinesse of his peo∣ple. So that then: wee are sanctified of God the father. A nota∣ble lesson for all men to learne. To know this, will make vs thankefull to God, humble in our selues. We are all of vs, of our
owne nature, sinfull, like sathan; wicked, like Adam; filthie, like the earth: whereof we were made: But we are sanctified, we are made holie, by the grace of God. No child so resembles his father in conditions, in nature, and workes, as we do sathan, of our own nature. Wee are borne againe, we are newe framed and fashio∣ned,Aug. Sol. cap. 15. by the grace of God. The sprouts, and often buds, nay perfect fruites of euerie sinne, in euerie man almost, may teach vs the same. As Augustine saith. O Lord, if thou haddest not ruled me by thy grace: I had committed all the sinnes in the worlde. And as the Lorde kept Abimeleche that hee should not violate Sarah Abrahams wife:Gen. 20.6 so no doubt he kéepeth all his, by his speciall grace, from all maner of sinne: or else they shoulde sinke downe euen to the pit of destruction. The Lord maketh vs holie, he giueth vs not o∣uer to our own wils:Rom. 8 14. Psal. 119. hee uleth all his, by his holy spirit, hee ma∣keth vs to walke in the way of his commandementes. Let vs therefore be thankefull vnto him for this his inestimable benefit, let vs not be proud of it, it is none of our own. Let vs not despise our brethren that wallow in sinne: but pray for them. For of our selues we should be as euill as they. Text.And by Iesus Christ, kept, and preserued] Iesus Christ is not on∣lie our blessed Sauiour, but our carefull kéeper, and preseruer: as we reade in the Prophet Esay, where speaking of the kingdome of Christ hee saieth. In that day the Lorde shall visit, with his rough, and great and mightie sword,Esay. 27.1.2. vpon that Leuiathan, that (Barak, as it is in the Hebrw) ye mighty apostata, or reuolting seruant, that Leuiathan, that crooked serpente, he shall slay that dragon, that is in the sea. In that day, as concerning the vineyearde of red wine: sing vnto it. I the Lorde keepe it: I will water it euery momente, yea I will visit it day and night, I will keepe it. Here is first the ouerthrowe of Sathans kingdome,Gen. 3.15. according to that great prophesie in Genesis: the wo∣mans seed shal breake the serpents head. Here is the force of Gods worde, liuelie expressed: out of which place, it may séeme, S. Paul calleth it, the sworde of the spirite. It is a sharpe, a rough, a great and mightie sworde,Ephe. 6.17. able to kill and pearse that great, mighty and crooked serpent. And here is Gods church, pictured out by a vine∣yearde of red wine: whose wine and ioy in this worlde, shall bee red, she shall be vnder the Crosse, she shall be vnder persecution, she shall be as a woman labouring of child, according to that pro∣phesie of the same Prophet.Esay. 9.3. Thou hast encreased the nation, but
not encreased their ioy: they reioyce before thy face, according to the ioy in haruest, as they reioyced in diuidinge the spoyles. The labou∣rers in reaping the haruest, reioyce; but sweating, faint and wea∣rie: the souldiers after the victorie, reioice in deuiding the spoiles; but bloudie and wounded: Euen such is the ioie of all christians, in this worlde: such is the ioie of the church. They reioice:Gal. 6.14. but with S. Paul, in the Crosse of Iesus Christ. The vineyearde of the Lorde hath her wine, but red. But yet sing vnto her, she is a vic∣torious conquerer, she is a famous vineyearde, her prayse sprea∣deth ouer the whole worlde. And why? because I, saieth the Lorde, do keepe her, euerie momente I water her, least anie shoulde come to visit her, day and nighte I keepe her: here is the safety, victory, and glorie of Gods church, that God keepeth it, that he watereth it euery momente, that hee daylie powreth his blessings vpon it, that hee keepeth it daie and nighte, least anie strangers shoulde spoyle it. And least anie man shoulde doubte, of this the Lordes kéeping, and garding, it is not onelie sayde, hee keepeth his vine∣yearde, his church: but daie and night he keepeth it. So that not on∣lie in the daie, but also in the night, that prince of darknesse Sa∣than, can haue no aduantage against it. O fruitfull vineyearde! which the Lorde waters: O safe vineyeard! which the Lord kéepes: O happie vineyearde! which the Lorde looketh too: Oh vineyeard twise happie, which hee kéepeth night and daie!1 Pet. 5.8. The diuell like a roa∣ring Lion, rageth euerie where, seeking whome he maie deuour: but the Lorde keepeth his. Iesus Christ, hath not onlie redéemed his: but daylie preserueth them from his rage; or else wee shoulde all vtterly perish: As Augustine noteth excellentlie, to those which say,In Psal. 96. they will worship the deuill: least hee bee angry with them. And this is that which Dauid saieth, when hee was deliuered out of all his troubles, and out of the handes of Saul:Psal. 18.1. I will loue thee dearelie O Lorde, my strength, the Lorde is my rocke, and my fortresse, and my deliuerer, my God, and my strength, in him will I trust, my shield, the horne also of my saluation, and my refuge. Here is a cause of loue: this deliuerance from so many troubles, from such a mighty enimie. Here is such a safetie and securitie, as Dauid is not able, as it shoulde séeme, with anie wordes to expresse. And therefore he vseth all these metaphors: his rocke, his castle, his fortresse, his buckler, his shielde. And the same God, is the same castle, and shielde, and fortresse, and bulwarke, and deliuerer from all their
enimies, euen from the deuill and all troubles, to all them that put their trust in him, for euer. And therefore in another Psalme he saieth.Psal. 123.1 I will lyft myne eyes to the hilles, from whence commeth my helpe; my helpe commeth euen from the Lord, which hath made heauen and earth; hee will not suffer thy foote to slippe: for hee that keepeth thee, shall neither slumber nor sleepe. And here, comming from himselfe (he sayth) that God is not onely his helper,Therefore his elect and cho∣sen cannot perish. but eue∣rie faythfull mans also; yea and such a helper, as will not suffer our féete to slippe: much lesse, that wee shall fall into the pitte of destruction: nay such a keeper, as sléepeth not. And least any man shoulde doubte thereof, with a beholde, or admiration: he repea∣teth it againe. Beholde, sayeth hee, hee that keepeth Israell will ney∣ther slumber nor sleepe. And againe, the Lorde is thy keeper, hee is thy defence on thy right hande. And in the 12. Psal. Dauid certain∣lie protesteth this protection of the Lord. Thou wilt keepe them O Lorde (speaking of the poore and needie) Thou wilt preserue them from this generation for euer. And in the 17. Psal. he praieth for this defence and garde. Keepe me, O Lorde, as the apple of an eye, hyde me vnder the shadowe of thy winges. Who will not warely kéepe the apple of his eye? It is the tenderest thing, and that parte of the bodie of all the other, that men are most carefull of: And euen so, as the apple of an eye, the Lord Iesus kéepeth his. Who dare doubt nowe, who will not beléeue this, being so often, and constantlie affirmed, & that not by the mouth of one, but of thrée most suffici∣ent witnesses? And if Iesus Christ be our kéeper, whom néed we feare, what néede we care for, what can make vs afraide? Oh that this one lesson were grauen in euerie christian mans hearte: that Iesus Christ were his kéeper. It woulde make him loue him, leane to him, bee of good courage in the waues of the sea of this world, and feare nothing. Text. v. 2Mercy, and peace, and loue, to you be multiplied]. He wisheth here to all true christians and catholikes, three excellent Iewels, Mercy, peace, and loue: mercy for their sinnes, peace to their con∣sciences, and loue to their hearts. There is no man but standes in néede of these Iewels.Rom. 11.32 Luke 17.10 Psal. 32.1 As for the first, God hath shut vp all vnder vnbeliefe, that hee might haue mercy on all. All are vnprofitable ser∣uantes, no man can say my heart is cleane. And blessed is the man, not that hath not sinned (for then none should be blessed) but whose vnrighteousnesse is forgiuen, and whose sinne is couered. All must
knocke their breasts, and pray with the publican,Luke 18.13 O Lord be mer∣cifull to mee a sinner. All must professe that article in the creede, I beléeue the remission of sinnes. He that hath not this faith in him, this sure trust and confidence, though hee hath sinned, yet that there is a forgiuenesse, though hee be neuer so great a trespasser, yet there is an aduocate, a lawyer, that answereth for him; though he be neuer so great a debtor, yet there is a suretie, a satisfier, and discharger of all his debts: shall neuer be saued. And this forgiue∣nesse, is of mercie. And therefore this is the first thing that the A∣postle here wisheth to his, mercie for their sinnes. Hosee among the small prophets, is the first in order, and his name in hebrew is in english, Health or saluation. And surelie,Hose 1.10 his prophesie agrée∣eth with his name. For thus hee prophesieth. And the number of the children of Israell shall be as the sand of the sea, which cannot be measured or numbred: and it shal bee in that place, where it was said to them, none of my people, it shal be said to thē, the sons of the liuing God. Here are contradictions, to declare to vs the great mercie of God: what can be more contrarie the one to the other, then not my people, and the sonnes of the liuing God? And yet such was our estate, we were not onelie a rebellious people, but none of Gods people, we had quite cast off Gods yoke from vs: wée were dead in our sinnes, void of the life of grace, and euen now, such are cal∣led not friendes, but sonnes of the liuing God. Hosee here agreeing with Peter: the first of ye smaller prophets, with theIn order, nor else. Hos. 2.14 first Apostle, that as he called Christ the head, the sonne of the liuing God: so he calleth all his members. And in this 2. cap. most plainlie vnder the type of the Idolatrie of Israell, hee sheweth the great mercie of God. I will visite vpon her the daies of Baall, when she offered in∣cense vnto them, and she adorned them with her earerings and Iew∣els, and walked after her louers, and forgat me, saith the Lord. There∣fore beholde, I will allure her and bring her into the wildernesse, and speak, euen vnto her hart, that is, comfortably. For her idolarie for following her louers, and forgetting of God: God wil allure her, and drawe her into the wildernesse from these sinnes, and speake comfortablie vnto her. These were the Israelites merites, and such were all ours: and this was Gods great mercie. And in the 54. of Esay the church of Christ,Esay. 54.1 and his great mercie towardes it is most liuelie described. Reioice thou barren, that diddest not beare, brast out into ioy, and euen neie as horses do, for the greatnesse
of thy ioy. For there are more children of the desolate, then of the ma∣ried woman. Enlarge the place of thy tentes, not only in Iewry: but ouer the whole worlde. Stretch out the curtaines of thy dwelling, spare not, that is, the graces of the holie spirit which doe beautifie thee, not ten, but ten times ten in number: stretch out thy cordes, that is, the cordes of loue. The benefits which God bestoweth vp∣on thee, to binde thée to him, are not limited, as were those cordes of the Iewish tabernacles, but are nowe without measure. And fasten thy nayles, that is, the most assured promises of thy saluati∣on, wherewith thy soule by faith, is as it were with nailes fastened to God, still beate vpon them, let them go ouer the heades, in thy heart. Thou shalt increase on thy right hand and on thy left, and thy feede shall inherit the nations, and shall dwell in waste cities. Feare not, for thou shalt not be ashamed, neither shalt thou be confounded, thou shalt not be put to shame. For thou shalt forget the shame of thy youth, and shalt not remember the shame of thy widowhoode anie more. For he that made thee is thy husband, whose name is the Lord of hosts, and thy redeemer the holy one of Israell, shall bee called the God of the whole earth. Here is Christs church, & Gods mercy to∣wards her, excellentlie pictured out. The church, barren of it selfe, like Sarah, like Rachel: nowe more fruitfull then Leah. A smal thing before in comparison of the whole world, like Israels tents in the wildernesse, like Iewrie: now stretching her selfe ouer the whole worlde. Not beautified or adorned with ten curtaines of blew silke, and purple, as was Moses tabernacle; but with the di∣uers vnspeakeable and innumerable giftes of the helie ghost, not linked with coardes of line, (as was the Israelites) but with the coardes of loue, with the cordes of benefits, which are without number, whose nailes are Gods worde, Gods most faithfull pro∣mises, whose first and chiefe iewell, is sure trust and confidence, by Gods mercie of forgiuenes of sinnes. Shame, blushing, and con∣fusion commeth of sinne: But God himselfe commands his Church not to feare any such thing, nay to forget the shame and sinnes of her youth, and the reproch of her widowhood. Oh the great mercie of God! He will haue vs to bee so assured of the forgiuenesse of our sinnes, euen of the sinnes of our youth, of our most grieuous sinnes, of the sinnes of our widowhood, which we committed, when wee were Atheists and without God, that we should now not so much as remember them, nor be grieued for them. So great and
so sure is his mercie. For the Lorde himselfe is the husbande of his church, and hee will answere all actions and inditementes laide a∣gainst it. No man euer sueth the wife, but the husband. The holie one of Israell, euen Iesus Christ, a lambe vnsported, without sin, is the redeemer of his faithfull Israel.Col. 2.14. And therefore hee hath can∣celled the obligation of the keeping of all Gods laws, which we were bounde in, and of the forfeiting wherof wee are guilty, and hath faste∣ned it to his crosse, and paide all our debtes whatsoeuer. This is Gods mercie, this is all our saluations, this is our most assured trust and confidence, and this mercy is for euer,Psal. 118.1.2 Esay. 54. v. 9 this mercie is cer∣taine and sure. This is, as the waters of Noah, which the Lorde hath sworne shall no more goe ouer the earth. So the Lorde hath sworne this, he will not be angry with, nor rebuke his faithfull ones, in his fiery wrath and heauy displeasure (keseph, as it is in the Hebrewe) anie more. Nay this mercy is so sure, that the mountaines shall fall,verse 10. re∣moue, and the hils shal fal down: but his mercy shal not depart from his, neither this newe couenant of peace in Iesus Christ shall fal away, saith the Lord, thy pittier that hath now compassion on thee. Peace.] That is to saie, peace of conscience, peace with God,Text. Esay. 59.2 Psal. 68.1 & peace with our brethren. As touching the first. Our sins are sayd to make a separation, to bee as a wall betwyxt God and vs. They are compared to waues or greate streames, which trouble our hearte, and disquiet it, and rage therein, euen as waues do in the sea. And therefore Dauid speaking of his sinnes, when he was on drie land, and in no peril of earthlie waters, praieth thus. Saue me O God, for the waters are come, euen vnto my soule. I stick fast in the deepe myre, where no staie is, I am come into deepe waters, and the streames runne ouer mee. These streames were sinnes, they were the ouerflowinges of wickednes, as hee termeth them in another Psalme. These trouble the hearte of man, and make it more dis∣quiet, then anie sea. These will make the shippe of our soule be in danger of drowning. These will make the Apostles and the best Christians cry, helpe Lorde, least wee perish.Mat. 8.25 These alone Iesus Christ, with his worde, causeth to cease, and there followeth a great calme. This is that peace, which Saint Iude wisheth to his,Rom. 5.1. that be∣ing iustified by the faith of Iesus Christ, they maie bee at peace with God. Their consciences maie bee quieted. This is that peace,Luke. 2.19 of which the Angelles first brought tydinges to men, from heauen, as soone as our Sauiour was borne. Glorie be to God on high, on
earth, peace, and the free and gracious will of God among men. This is that which S. Paul also in euery of his Epistles wisheth his, grace, mercie, and peace be with you, from God our father, and from our Lorde Iesus Christ. There is a second peace also towards our bre∣thren,Rom. 12.18. which wee ought to haue. And of this peace S. Paul saieth, As much as in you lyeth, if it bee possible, liue peaceably with all men.Psal. 34.12. And Dauid, hee that would saine see good dayes, let him seeke after peace, and pursue it. And S. Paul; let the peace of God rule in your heartes,Col 3 15. as the prize or best game: to which you are called in one bodie. Where first we maie note, that this peace is called the peace of God, because God greatly delighteth in it, and there∣fore he is called the God of peace, and the peace makers are called the sonnes of God.Mat. 5.9. Secondlie, that this peace shoulde , that is, obtaine the chiefe place, be as the goale or best game in our heartes. Wilt thou striue to get the best game? wilt thou runne the race of this life victoriously, and winne the prize? why then striue for peace and concord, see thou keepe that, preferre it before all earthlie trashe and things transitory;Gen. 13.7. let not Eues fruite, nor Lots nor Abrahams shéepe commons, nor Cain and Abels quarrell, about their sacrifices, throwne in thy waie, hinder thy race, and make thee loose this reward. These are Sathans baites. Without this peace and holinesse no man shall see God.Heb. 12.14. Col. 3.15. And to make vs, make great accounte of this, here is a reason added, To this we are called in one bodie. As though hee should saie, as God in the beginning, made all other creatures manie in their kinds, onelie hee made man one; and of this one, came so manie, so infinite in number, to teach this vnitie: So likewise in our regeneration, we are all made as one bodie, that we shoulde all be as members, at peace among our selues, not one despising another, not one quarrelling or falling out with another. What member in the body, falleth out or disagréeeth with another, or despiseth another? The like vnitie and peace, should be in the mysticall body of Iesus Christ. Surely they yt do not kéepe this peace, as much as in them lyeth, are none of the members of this bodie. They peruert, both the order of their creation, and regeneration. And howe little do all sortes, and degrees of men now regarde this. Such warres among Christian Princes: When as the Prophet Esay saieth, They shall in the church and kingdome of Christ,Esay. 2.4. breake their swords into mattocks, and their speares into syeths: nation shall not lift vppe
sworde against nation, neyther shall they learne to fight anie more. Such inuasion of kingdomes: Such holie, or rather deuillishe leagues, made to shed bloud, as of late yeares we haue hearde of, and do now in all Christendome feele the smarte of; do not taste of this peace of Gods church. What shall I speake of the priuie quarrels and hearte burnings among greate men and gouer∣nours: of open disagréements and dissentions among ministers, of hatred among artificers, of stomaching among plowmen, of disdaining among seruantes, of murmuring & repining among laborers; no member almost is at peace with another. Surelie this peace of God beareth not the sway amongst vs. This decla∣reth the bodie to be out of temper. This declares, we are like the men in Esaies daies:Esay 1.6 From the crowne of the heade to the sole of the foote; there is no sound part. Let vs, considering the danger, (for if we lacke this peace, we are none of Christs bodie, but wee are as dead members to be cut off) get by earnest praier of God, the ointments of peace, and euerie one of vs, annoint all these soares therewith: that they may be cured. Let vs studie and deuise howe to make our parts good? howe to maintaine our quarrels?Ephe. 4.3 nay that is sathans counsell, but according to S. Paules counsell, Let vs studie how to keepe the vnity of the spirit, in the bonde of peace.Iohn. 3.5 Rom. 8.14 Iohn. 16.7 1. Io. 2.27. The spirit of God is our life, is our comforter, is our guide, is our hel∣per, is our teacher, is the greatest iewell and gift that euer was giuen to man in this worlde, which that great conquerour Iesus Christ, after his most glorious victorie ouer sathan, sinne,Luke. 10.14. the worlde, death and hell: sent downe as a most bounteous larges vpon his Apostles and faithful seruantes, and doth euen nowe be∣stowe vpon all his. Let vs not despise this inestimable gifte, this heauenlie treasure, let vs studie to kéepe it: And it is onelie kept by the bond of peace, as S. Paul teacheth vs.Ephes. 4.5 And these two kinds of peace, peace of conscience towardes God, and peace of affayres towardes our brethren, the Apostle S. Iude, here wisheth to all Christians, following the example of his master Iesus Christ, who a litle before his departure thus speaketh to his Apostles:Iohn. 14.27. my peace I leaue you, my peace I giue vnto you, and comming to them,Iohn 20.27 euer thus saluted them, peace be with you: comprehending these two peaces.
Prudentius of this peace writes very excellently. In Psichomachi∣a, Oratio pacis post victoriam.AVribus intentis expectat concio, quidnam Victores post bella vocet concordia princeps, Quam velit atque fides virtutibus addere legem. Erumpit primam in vocem concordia, tali Alloquio: cumulata quidem iam gloria vobis O patris, ô domini fidissima pignora Christi Contigit: extincta est multo certamine saeua Barbaries, sancta quae circum sepserat vrbis Indigenas, ferroque viros, flammaque premebat: Publiqua sed requies priuatis rure, foroque Constat amicitijs: scissura domestica turbat Rem populi, titubatque foris, quod dissidet intus. Ergo cauete viri, ne sit sententia discors Sensibus in vestris, ne secta exotica tectis Nascatur conflata odijs, quia scissa voluntas Confundit varijs arcana biformia fibris. Quod sapimus, coniungat amor: quod viuimus, vno Conspiret studio, nil dissociabile firmum est. Vtque homini atque deo medius interuenit Iesus, Qui sociat mortale patri, ne carnea distent Spiritui aeterno, sit que vt Deus vnus vtrumque: Sic quic quid gerimus, mentisque & corporis actu, Spiritus vnimodis texat compagibus vnus. Pax plenum virtutis opus, pax summa laborum, Pax belli exacti pretium est, pretiumque pericli, Sydera pace vigent, consistunt terrea pace. Nihil placitum sine pace Dea, non munus ad Aram. The same in English. THe whole assembly doth desire to heare, in open sight What names Queene concord will impose to conquerors after fight.
And with as great desire they wish to heare what sage decree To virtues, faith will giue, at th'end of ioyfull victory. Queene Concord first begins her speech, and thus her talke doth frame: To you which do to Christ belong I speake, and you I name, Immortall praise you haue deseru'd, great glory you haue wonne; To you I speake, which do belong to God and Christ his sonne. Barbarisme it is extinct, which did the Saints much grieue, Destroying them with sword and fire not suffering them to liue. But publique peace doth florish now, and raigneth euerie where, In Court and countrey all are void of danger and of feare. Intestine discord and debate the common wealth doth rent; And things abroad to ruine come, if things at home dissent. Beware therefore, ô mortall men, see that at one ye be, In mind and iudgement differ not, conspire in vnitie. Beware least hatred gender sects and noisome errors breed: For if the will be once distract, no truth can be decreed. Let loue our minds together linke, Let concord rule our life: With loue and concord things are strong, and weakened are with strife. And as the Sauiour of the world, did God and man combine By taking to him mortall flesh,
(as saith the writ diuine;) Euen so the things we take in hand in bodie or in mind, Let them with concord linked be, And eke with loue combind. Peace is the full and perfect worke of vertue, th'end of toile, The price of conquest, the reward of danger and of broile. Through peace the heauens do consist, peace doth the earth vphold, Without peace nothing pleaseth God, no not a gift of gold. Text.And loue be multiplied.] The loue wherewith God loued vs, when we were his enemies, the loue wherewith we shoulde one loue ano∣ther, as brethren: the loue, which is that one great and newe com∣maundement of the Gospell,1 Thes. 4.9 which is the royall lawe of Christ. Of which loue the Apostle saieth to the Thessal. hee hath no neede to write to them: For they were all taught of God, euen of Gods spi∣rit, to loue one another. This is the first lesson, that Gods spirit teacheth all his schollers, to loue one another. Howe little then haue they profited in Gods schoole, that as yet haue not learned this lesson. This should be a lesson perfectlie learned, and common∣lie practised, of al christians. This should be as the ayre we breath, and the fire and water we vse, and the garments we put on. And therefore the Apostle saieth,1. Cor. 13 Col. 3.12. Without loue I am nothing. And put vpon you tender mercy, louing kindnesse: let these bee as thy gar∣ments, dailie in all thy actions, ouer all thy members. As thou goest no whither naked without thy garmentes: so doe nothing without these.verse 14.1 And aboue all other vertues put on loue, which is the verie bond of perfection. Without this thou art vnperfect. Woul∣dest thou bee as in bodie, so in soule perfect? wouldest thou not halt, or be maimed? wouldst thou haue no deformitie on thy face or in thy other members? why then put on loue, it is the bonde of perfection. Without this thou art maimed, thou art deformed in thy soule, thou art a deuill, thou art the most deformed and mis∣shapen creature in the world. All christians should be loued of vs, they should be in our hearts to liue and die withall, and that not
as in a sparing or pinching room or place, but as in a most large, and ample, as S. Paul saieth. Our mouth is open vnto you,2. Cor. 6.11. (O Co∣rinthians) we preach to you plentifullie the gospell of Iesus Christ, wee kéepe nothing backe: Nay our heart is enlarged towardes you, you are also in our heartes, and that as in a most large place. You are not in vs as in a narrowe roome: But you are kept in a straite place, in your owne bowels. Now for the same recompence I speake vnto you, as vnto children: Be yee also enlarged. So that christians should haue their hearts enlarged, euen to haue all their brethren dwelling in their hearts. But if this be true, what case are they in then, which haue them not in their heartes at all, neither as in a narrow, nor in a large roome? This largenes of the heart is cha∣ritie. And it is to be feared, where this largenesse is not, God is not. God is most mightie, most free, most large, he cannot abide to bee pinched. And therefore they which will haue God dwell in their hearts, must thus enlarge them. Our princes will not dwel in narrow cottages, but in large palaces: no more will God, the king of kinges. And O vnhappy is he, with whom God dwelleth not: For so it followeth in the same place, You are the tēple of the liuing God. As God hath said, I wil dwel in them,Leue. 26.11.12. and I will walke in them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. Those with whom God dwelleth not, God is none of their God, neither are they his people. For so we reade in the prophet Osee of that last adulterous childe of Gomer. Call his name (saieth God) not my people: For they are none of my people,Osee. 1.94 and I will not bee with them: So that God is with his people, he dwelleth in them. This shoulde make vs call euerie one beloued: neither so to call them, but in déed so to accompt them, least we loose the loue of God. In token of this loue, (as I haue read) we bare our heads to our bre∣thren that wee meet, as offering our heades, our liues into their handes. For of whom we loue we feare no harme. And therefore Augustine saieth, Loue me, and doe what thou wilt vnto me. This mutuall loue was in the first christians:Eus. li. 7. Eccle. hist. cap. 20. So that as Eusebius re∣ports, when in a generall plague, the infidels forsooke their own pa∣rents, the christians went to them and comforted them, and ventured their liues for them. And these vertues must bee multiplied, must increase in vs. We will euerie yeere increase our stocks of cat∣tell, our possessions if we be able, and looke for the increase of our fieldes: So must we our selues increase in these heauenlie ver∣tues,
we must pray for the increase of these, wee must labour for them, we must be as earnest as we are to purchase our transitory thinges. And as we vse the meanes verie diligentlie to obtaine other worldlie commodities, so let vs vse the meanes, to obtaine and increase these heauenlie vertues, which are, continuall pray∣ers, hearing, reading, and meditating of Gods word, receiuing the sacraments, dooing good to our brethren. He that seeketh shal find (saieth our Sauiour) euen these heauenlie pearles: And hee that giueth, to him shall be more giuen; And hee that hath, shall haue abundance. God giueth not all at once; but, because he will haue all his labour, and not be idle, by drops and degrées, through the whole course of their liues; that as for earthlie things: so likewise for increase of heauenlie thinges, they should labour continually. When I tooke great care to write vnto you of the commō saluati∣on,Text. Vers. 3. it was necessarie that I should write vnto you, exhorting you to striue for the faith once giuen to the saintes.] Here followeth the E∣pistle it selfe: and here first wee maie learne, that this was an E∣pistle of great loue & good will. For the Apostle, as it should sée me, desired earnestlie to write this Epistle: euen as our sauiour lon∣ged to eat his passeouer with his disciples before his death. And as it was a necessarie Epistle: so it is néedefull for euerie Christi∣an to knowe it. Other Epistles of the Apostles were written to priuate persons: As Iohn wrote to Gaius, and to the electe Ladie; as Paul to Timothy, or to Philemon; or to priuate congregati∣ons;1. Cor. . as to the Corinthians or Philippians; and in some parte con∣cerning priuate matters whereof they wrote vnto him: But this Epistle is of things generall, and necessarie to be knowne of the whole church. It teacheth what is the true saluation, and what is the counterfaite; what is treacle, and what is poyson; what is the Lordes wheate, and what be the tares of the enimie: to be shorte, what is the true faith, and what is the false. And these two points who will not gladlie knowe? Secondlie, we maie knowe, what this true saluation is, how it is a common saluation. There is but one waie of saluation to all Christians, and that is, faith in the bloud of Iesus Christ, for their sinnes, whether they be Apostles, or martyrs, Iohn. 2.1.2. or other inferiors. And therefore S. Iohn himselfe (whom Iesus loued) sayth: If anie man sinne, we haue an aduocate with the father Iesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation or couering for our sinnes: And not for our sinnes onelie, but for the sins
of the whole worlde. The Apostles were sinners, and were saued by the propitiation or couering of Iesus Christ. To the which pro∣pitiation or couering Dauid alludeth in the Psalme saying: Blessed is he whose iniquitie is forgiuen, and whose sinne is couered.Psal 32.1. And this couering or propitiation; those coates of leather signified, which God gaue Adam in Paradise, to couer his nakednesse withall.Gen. 3.21. And so S. Paul likewise speaketh of this common saluation: wee by nature Iewes, and not sinners of the gentiles,Gal. 2.16. knowe that of the deedes of the lawe, a man is not iustified, but by the faith of Iesus Christ: and we also haue beleeued on Iesus Christ, that wee maie bee iustified by the faith of Iesus Christ, and not by the workes of the law: Because that by the works of the law, no flesh shall be iustified. Here we sée, there is no waie of saluation, but by the fayth of Iesus Christ; and that the Apostles themselues haue beleeued, that they might be iustified. And here least some shoulde saie, that the A∣postles had more fayth then we, and therefore were more iustifi∣ed: S. Peter to take away this doubte, writeth thus to all Christi∣ans. Simon Peter a seruant and an Apostle of Iesus Christ, to you who haue obtained like precious fayth with vs,2 Pet. 1. v. 1. in the righteousnesse and iustification of God, and our sauiour Iesus Christ. So that then our faith is like precious to the Apostles faith, it saueth vs as well, and as certainlie, as theirs saued them; there is no difference. And therefore S. Iohn saieth, That which was from the beginning,1 Iohn. 1 11. which we haue heard, which we haue seene with our eies, and handled with our handes, of the worde of lyfe: (And the lyfe appeared (that is, Ie∣sus Christ) and we haue seene it, and do beare witnesse, and shewe vnto you the lyfe euerlasting, which was with the father, and appea∣red to vs: That which we haue seene, and hearde, we declare vnto you, that you might haue fellowship with vs, and our fellowship is with the father, and with his sonne Iesus Christ. This is a great thing which the Apostle here teacheth, but yet because it is Gods worde, we must beléeue it: That by faith in Iesus Christ, we haue fellow∣shippe with the Apostles: naie with God the father, and with his sonne Iesus Christ; their saluation and ours is all one. And it bringeth vs into a league, into a societie, and loue, euen with God himselfe. This is the nature and force of faith: It is common, it is certaine, it maketh vs friendes with God. That which wee haue seene, and hearde, and handled, the Apostle often repeateth, and in the same he sheweth vs: That although wee haue not séene, nor
heard, nor handled, we may be blessed: according to the saying of our Sauior to Thomas,Iohn. 20.29. Because thou hast seen me, thou beleeuest; Blessed are they that haue not seen, & haue beleeued. So that then if our saluation be common, if there be no way of saluation but by ye faith of Christ, & therfore the Apostles haue beléeued yt they might be iustified; if Iesus Christ be ye propitiatiō for our sins; if we haue obtained like precious faith with them; if we haue fellowship with them, nay with God himselfe: why then, they erre greatlie, which teach, that the Apostles might be sure of their saluation, but not other christians.Rom. 8.38 That the Apostle might saie, I know that nothing can separate vs from the loue of God, that is in Iesus Christ: but we may not saie so. That by the vertue of this faith, hee might assu∣redlie saie,Phil. 1.23. I desire to be loosed and to be with Christ Iesus: but we may not say so, that teach men to doubt whether they shall bee sa∣ued or not. This doctrine is enemie to faith, it is against the na∣ture of it:Mark. 11.22 Haue ye the faith of God (saith our Sauiour) whosoeuer shall say to this mountaine, bee thou remoued, and cast into the sea, (that is, shall take in hand some notable and impossible worke in mans iudgement) and shall not doubt in his heart, but beleeueth what things he speaketh shall come to passe, that same shall bee vnto him, whatsoeuer hee speaketh. Here wee may learne, what is the faith of God,. not to doubt, or dispute, or reason in our heart, (for so the gréeke worde signifieth) but to beléeue. This is the true faith, this pleaseth God: This is the faith we ought to haue in God: This is the faith that God giueth to his. And therefore (saith our sauiour) I say vnto you, whatsoeuer you shall aske praying, be∣leeue that you receiue them:Mark. 11.24 and it shall be vnto you. And no doubt to this doctrine of our sauiour alludeth S. Iames, where he speaketh of praier: and he hath also the same worde of doubting, and his wordes bee these: But let him aske in faith, doubting nothing at all. For hee that doubteth is like a waue of the sea,Iames 1.6 . tossed with the winde: Neither let such a one thinke, that he shall obtaine any thing at Gods hands. And here first, if we must thus belieue and not doubt, that the things we aske, shall be done vnto vs, or else we shall neuer obtaine them; then surelie wee must knowe, what wee praie for. This assurance, of obtaining the thinges we aske, this doubtful∣nesse of our flesh, which is to bee ouercomed by faith: argueth a knowledge of these thinges we aske. He that knoweth not what he asketh; he that praieth in a tongue vnknowne, cannot be assu∣red
that the thinges be asketh, are done vnto him; nor cannot but doubt, whether he shall haue them or not. And therefore both our sauiours and S. Iames doctrine condemneth latine and vnknowne praiers. Secondlie, it is to be feared, that the lacke of this faith, causeth that manie, that know what they praie, do not obtaine their pray∣ers. They pray doubtfullie, they prayeareleslie, they pray vaine∣lie: So that they say ouer their praiers, they make no accompt, how their hearts be affected. But such, though they praie neuer so often, nor so long, shall obtaine nothing at Gods handes. And lastlie, if we may not doubt in our praiers, for smaller matters, for temporall thinges, much lesse in the greatest matter of all, for our saluation; without doubt wee must be sure of yt, or else we shall neuer obtaine it: God loueth no wauerer or doubter. This doubting is against the nature of faith, it is against our common saluation, it is against the doctrine of the Apostles. Wherefore of all thinges that we are assured of, let vs bee of this one thing most assured in our hearts, without doubtfulnesse: that wee shall be saued, euen as the Apostles were. Let no landes we haue pur∣chased, no fine or recouerie passed, be so sure vnto vs: as the pur∣chase of Iesus Christ, bought with his precious bloud, as our heauenlie inheritance. Nowe euerie christian must saie with Simeon, embracing Iesus Christ with the armes of his faith,Luke. 2. v. 29. Lord nowe lettest thou thy seruaunt depart in peace, &c. They must not feare death, they must be sure of their saluation. Now is that fulfilled which Esay prophecied of Christes church.Esay. 42.2 For thus saith the Lord God that made thee, fashioned thee, and hel∣ped thee, euen from thy mothers wombe: Bee not affraide Iacob my seruant, thou righteous, whom I haue chosen. Here is feare first ta∣ken away: that feare whereof Zacharie prophecieth, that is feare of enemies. God, saith Zacharie,Luke 1.74. hath raised vp a mighty saluation for vs, that wee being deliuered out of the handes of our enemies, might serue him without feare, all the daies of our life. Now the enemies of man are; sathan, death, and hell: God hath by Iesus Christ, de∣liuered vs, out of the handes and powers of these enemies, that wee might serue him without feare, all the daies of our life. So that nowe saieth God, feare not, O my seruant Iacob: neither sa∣than, death, nor hell. Thou hast a mightie sauiour, who hath con∣quered all these enemies.
(For I wil powre water vpon the drie grounde, and riuers vpon the thirstie: I shall powre my spirit vpon thy seed, and my blessing vpon thy stocke.) Here is baptisme, and our regeneration plainelie prophecied: For the heart of man was euen a drie ground voide of the moisture of all goodnesse, till God watered it with the hea∣uenly dewe of his graces. (They shall growe together like as the grasse and the willowes by the waters side.) Here is the charitie, and humilitie, and continuall fructifying and florishing in good workes, that should be in christians. (They shall growe togither) here is charitie, (like the grasse) here is humilitie (like willowes by the riuers side:) here is continuall florishing and bringing forth of good workes. (One shal say I am the Lords, another shal cal himselfe after the name of Iacob; the thirde shall subscribe with his hande vnto the Lord, and giue himselfe vnder the name of Israell:) What mea∣neth this? but that euerie christian shall bee sure of his saluation. One shall say, I am the Lords, that is, the Lorde most assuredlie lo∣ueth me, and therefore I shall assuredly be saued. Another shal cal himselfe after the name of Iacob, that is, shall beléeue assuredly that he is euen Iacob; that God euen loueth him, as well as hee loue Iacob. And so the thirde shall call himselfe Israell, euen preuailing with God. Such shall bee the assurance, through faith, of Iesus Christes saintes, of the loue of God towardes them, that they shall not yéelde, either to Isaack, Iacob, or Israel, in the fauour and grace of God.Psal. 87.3 So that here also may bee verified, that saying of the Psalme, God loueth the gates of Sion, that is, (the meanest in Christs church;) more thē the dwellings of Iacob that is, then the ex∣lentest of the Iewish sinagogue.Mat. 11.12 This is the faith of God, this is our common saluation, this is the first point of catholique reli∣gion.Phil. 3.1.4.4 The scripture teacheth vs in many places to reioice, as S. Paul to the Philippians thrise; and twise together: the better to imprint it, as a speciall doctrine into our heartes: Reioice in the Lord (saieth he) and againe I say reioyce. But this ioie taketh a∣way all doubtfulnesse, he that doubteth, especiallie of any matter of waight, can neuer be merrie: and what can bee more weighty then our saluation? And this assurance of our saluation, is that strong and forcible consolation, which wee haue in the bitter trou∣bles and afflictions in this life, confirmed vnto vs by two things immutable:Heb. 6 17.18 19. Gods promise, and his oath. This is that staff and strong anchor, whereunto we fasten the ship of our soules amidst
the waues of the sea of this worlde, as S. Paul teacheth vs. This is that comforte which the Lord himselfe from heauen gaue Paul, be∣ing by Sathan wonderfully afflicted: My grace is sufficient for thee:2. Cor. 12.9. That is, if I loue thee, if thou shalt be saued, if thou haue my grace and fauour, what carest thou for anie more? Let Sathan do what he can against thee. But here against this certainlie of saluati∣on the enimie obiecteth,Phil. Die conc. 1. assumptionis. that certaintie of glorie is not wont to be gi∣uen in this lyfe; but rather it belongs to the reward of the lyfe to come: which the good Angelles haue not obtained, and yet some saynts in this lyfe extraordinarilie haue obteined it; as Paul, Marie Magdeline, Iohn the Baptist. But here first I answeare, that the Angelles haue now obteined it through Christ: And that if the angels haue it not now in heauen, neither the saintes haue it, (which thing yet this disputer seemes to grant:Mat. 12.25) for our Sauiour saith that the saintes  , equall to the angels. So that it may seeme, if the angels now haue it not, neither the saintes haue it. But that all the saints of God ought to haue this certainty of their saluation, marke I beseech yee, what S. Iohn writeth to all christians.1. Iohn. 5.13. These thinges I write to you, which beleeue on the name of the sonne of God, that ye may know ye haue eternall life, and that yee may be∣leeue on the name of the sonne of God. S. Iohn writes to all christi∣ans, that they may know they haue eternall life. And Scientia, or , is so called, of setling the mind, that it wauer not. And the Philosophers define knowledge thus, that it is a determinati∣on or fastening of the mind, to one part, with a certainty. Why then, if christians must knowe they haue eternall life, they must be setled, they must be resolute in this, they must fasten their hart and soule to this, with a certaintie. So S. Paul speakes resolutely of himselfe, and also of all other christians: We know,2, Cor. 5.1 that if our earthly tabernacle were dissolued, we haue a building of God, made without hands, which shall last for euer in heauen. And what is this else, but euerlasting life? So Iob saieth of himselfe: I know my re∣deemer liueth; and I shall see him with these eies.Iob. 19.25 What is this else but to saie, I know surelie I shall be saued? And this certaintie of our saluation Saint Iohn setteth out more at large in his fourth chapter:verse 16 We knowe and beleeue (saith he) the loue that God hath towardes vs. And what is the loue of God, but saluation? And whereas the enemies of Gods gospell obiect,Mat. 25.24 that God is a seuere God, (as did that wicked seruant in the gospell,) S. Iohn addeth
here: that, God is seuere? Nay, to all the faithfull, to all yt belee on the nam of Iesus Christ, that he is loue it selfe. They be l the goodnesse of God, which teach the contrarie. And our Sai∣our himselfe saith,Ioh. 17.23 he loueth those that beleeue on him, euen as hee loued him. O vnspeakeable loue! And whom nowe shall we be∣leeue, whether S. Iohn or our Sauiour, who affirme that God ∣ued vs, and that so vnspeakeablie; or the enemies of the gospell, which teach men to feare whether God loue them or not? Nay S. Iohn addes, that to this ende his loue is perfect towardes vs, that we might haue boldnes in the day of iudgment. At that terrible daie,Psal. 97.7 Reu. 6.16 when as all Image worshippers shall be confounded, when all proude infidels shall hide their heades, and call the rockes to couer them, God will haue all his to looke vp, to be bolde, to be of good courage.1 Iohn. 4.18 And whie? because he loueth vs so perfectlie. For perfect loue casteth our feare. Who will be afraid of him, whom he know∣eth loueth him perfectlie? And so God loueth vs, that wee might haue courage and boldnesse against the daie of iudgment. For as he is, so are we in this worlde. And here by the waie, the conside∣ration of this loue, expounds this hard and obscure place: There is nothing makes man doubt of Gods loue more, then because he seemes absent:Psal. 10.1 Psal 31.24 As Dauid so often complaines; Why art thou ab∣sent so long ô Lorde, why hidest thou thine eyes? And I sayd in my haste, I am cast out of the sight of thy countenance. And therfore the holie ghost here witnesseth to euery christian soules comfort: That as he is: so are we in this world. That is, as S. Paul speaketh in ano∣ther place,Gal. 4.9 We know him, nay rather we are knowne of him. Our knowledge is nothing to his knowledge; no more is our being in the world, to his being in the world, though we iudge him manie times absent. As we are héere liuing: so is hee héere, louing vs: as we in dangers, so he defending: as we wandering, so he gui∣ding: as we often stumbling, so he (of his great mercie) holding vs vp. And from hence was that first name giuen our Sauiour, Immanuel,Psal. 94.18 that is, God with vs. This is that wee read of in the Prouerbes: The words of Augur the sonne of Iache (Assumptionem dixit,) the knitting vp of al. The man spake of Ithiel, of Ithiel and Vcal:Pro. 30.1. Ithiel compounded of thrée Hebrew wordes, signifieth, the mightie God is with vs: and Vcal, he is of all power, he can doe all thinges. And what is this, but Iesus Christ is with vs? the mightie God, which hath all power in heauen and earth, who is
alone all in all. So that as he is; so are we in this worlde: Nay, he more then we, though we often times thinke not so: And he lo∣ueth vs perfectlie. Hereof is that saying of the psalme,Psal. 105.15 Touch not mine annointed, my christians (for so the worde signifieth) and doe my prophets no harme. O beloued greatlie! whome the wicked are commanded not to touch, not to do them any harme. This is also that lesson, which God himselfe teacheth by the prophet Ioel: And you shall know, that in the midst of Israell, I,Ioel. 2.27. euen I am (saieth the Lord) your God, and no more my pleople shall bee confounded, no more for euer. But this certaintie of saluation, is confirmed to all christians by another most excellent testimonie:2. Cor. 5.5 God (saieth S. Paule) hath giuen vs the earnest of his spirit: And therfore we are of good courage alway. Here is plainlie set downe, for our learning and instruc∣tion, S. Paules comforte: hee was in many troubles, as himselfe witnesseth, in shipwrackes, in imprisonments, in persecutions, being accused before Magistrates and princes: but in all these, hee was e∣uer of good cōfort. And why? what was his comfort do you think? Surelie hee himselfe declares to all Christians, that they them∣selues hauing the like, should bee alwaies of good comfort, what∣soeuer should befal them: God (saith he) hath giuen vs the earnest of his spirit, and therefore wee are of good courage alwaies. Euen as one making a bargaine, if hee haue the earnest, hee is sure of the bargaine: so God hauing promised vs heauen, giueth to all his the earnest thereof, in this life, that they might be assured of it. If the earnest giuen and taken, confirme the bargaine and couenant of a mortall man: much more the earnest of the immortall and immutable God, confirmeth his couenant of saluation made to all his. And this earnest S. Paul saith not onlie of himselfe, that he hath receiued it (as the papistes would perswade vs) but of all the faithfull: God hath giuen vs the earnest of his spirit (saieth hee) and therefore wee bee of good courage alwaies. But some will say to me, how shall I know whether I haue this earnest or no? whe∣ther I haue Gods spirit in me or no? I answere, examine thine owne heart: If thou haue good thoughts, good cogitations, faith in Iesus Christ, loue to his worde, desire to pray, and such like good workes: be sure thou hast the earnest in thee.2. Cor. 3.5 Gen. 6.5 Ezech. 36.26 For of our selues we are not able to think a good thought. The deuises of man are wic∣ked euen from his birth. Mans heart is a heart of stone, wherein it is
impossible, that of it selfe any true goodnes should grow. Therefore if thou feele in thy selfe these good fruites; be sure, thou hast the ho∣lie ghost: And therefore the earnest of thy saluation: and be sure thou shalt bee saued. God which hath giuen thee this his earnest, to be a comfort vnto thee, in this thy pilgrimage and iourney to∣wardes him; will not at thy iourneys ende, denie thee the thing it selfe. And therefore alwaies be of good comfort, in this thy iour∣ney, what stormes soeuer assault thée: remembring this earnest: And therefore that christians should alwaies bee merrie, this cer∣taintie of saluation,Ephes. 6.16 is called the helmet of saluation: As one ha∣uing an helmet on his heade, will not passe what his enemie can do against him: so this certainetie of saluation, alwaies makes a christian enduce and despise all the blowes and assaultes of sathan. 2. Co. 12.9And this God himselfe taught S. Paul, being nowe buffeted of Sathan, and destring to be eased: My grace is sufficient for thee. What doest thou passe, what the enemie can doe against thee, if thou haue my fauour. There are two great cities in this worlde, the one of God, and the other of the diuell; and all men whatsoeuer are enfranchised, in the one, or in the other. And their names declare their natures; the one is called Babilon, that is confusion, trouble, vncertaintie, doubtfulnesse: the other Ierusalem, that is the vision of peace, quietnes, securitie, safetie, happinesse. They which are citizens of Ierusalem, beeing iustified through a liuelie faith in Iesus Christ, are at peace with God, they tast that plea∣sant fruit,Ro. 5.1. the certainty of their saluation, they are most certaine of it, they euen see it with their eies. And therefore that citie is called a vision or beholding of peace, with the eies: But contra∣riwise Babilon is called confusion, all turned vpside down, trou∣ble, wauering of conscience. And therefore the citizens thereof are compared to waues of the sea,James. 2.6 Eccle. 27.11 Psalm. 1 4 Matth. 16.18 1 Pet. 2. v. 4. Pro. 28.1 Psal 92.12 Esay. 48.12 Psal. 85.8. to the moone, to leaues of trees, to chaffe: but the citizens of Ierusalem, to rocks, to Lyons, to moun∣taines, to palme trees. And therefore thus speakes the Lorde to all his faithfull: Giue eare to me, ô Iacob and Israel (called mine,) I am, I am the first and last. And therefore Dauid saith, I will harken what the Lorde God will speake concerning mee in particular. Hee shall speake peace vnto his people, and vnto his saints, that they turne not againe to destruction. Euerie particular man must applie Gods promises of saluation to himselfe. Esay. 12.1.The prophet Esay seemes as it were in a briefe map to set forth
the true church of Christ: and first hee putteth downe the particu∣lar workes of euerie Christian, and then the generall workes of the whole Church. And in that day of the kingdome of Christ, thou shalte say, euerie Christian must saie, I will confesse thee O Lorde, thou hast beene angry with mee: but thou hast comfor∣ted me. He must saie he is an vnprofitable seruant, when he hath done what he is able. To the Pharisies that said they did see, their sinne remained. The first marke of Christs church is to be poore in spirit, that euerie one confesseth himselfe to be shal lost sheepe, that Iesus Christ came downe from heauen, to seeke for: and to be as thankefull, as though he had died for him alone. And truely he must saie; behold the Lord is my saluation: I wil trust in him, and I wil not feare. He must accompt his saluation a wonderful work, such a one as neuer was heard of: the which, that word (behold) seemes to infer. That Dauid shoulde kill Goliah, Sampson so ma∣nie Philistines, that Alexander should conquer the whole worlde, that the thrée children should walke through the midst of the fierie furnace: All these wonders were nothing to the worke of our re∣demption, to the conquest of the diuell, the world and hell, by our sauiour, by deliuering vs from the lions mouthes, by enduring the fierie furnace of Gods wrath, and the paines of hell which we should haue suffered. So that wee may iustlie saie, beholde the Lord is my Sauiour, I will trust in him, and I wil not feare. He must accompt especiallie Iesus Christ to be his, amongst his other pos∣sessions whatsoeuer. He must liue by his owne faith, and not by the faith of the church. And he must accompt his saluation so cer∣taine: that he must not feare. And the reason followeth, because God is his strength daily: he doth not onlie saue in the beginning; but dailie strengthens: according to that saying of S. Paul,Phil. 1.6 Iohn. 13 1 Psal. 48.14 Rom. 8.15 Hee that hath begun a good worke in you, will perfit it euen to the ende: And S. Iohn, Iesus Christ loued his euen to the ende: And Dauid, Thou Lorde shalt bee my guide euen to death. S. Paul also yéeldeth his consent to this doctrine; For yee haue not receiued the spirit of bondage to feare againe: but ye haue receiued the spirit of adoption, whereby we crie Abba, father. And to make the matter more sure, he repeateth the same doctrine:2. Tim. 1.7 For God hath not giuen to vs the spirit of feare, but of power, and of loue, and of a sound mind. Where wee may note, that the first fruit of the spirit of God, is this cer∣taintie of our saluation, which is heere expressed by crying Abba,Gal. 5.22. father; and by not fearing: and in an other place by the name of
ioy. They which haue this root of Gods spirit in their hearts, with∣out all doubt haue this fruit also. Feare commeth of doubtfulnes as security of trust and confidence. Yea the Lord God is my song.) We do sing in great and assu∣red ioy: as that saying teacheth, how can we sing the Lordes song in a strange lande?Psal. 137. v. 4. when anie is in sorrow or griefe, hee will haue no lyst to sing: but our saluation is so sure, that we euen sing for ioy thereof. And that which followeth in the prophet euidentlie prooueth the same: The Lorde is my song, and hee is become my sal∣uation. This is as it were the burthen, or ground of the song, this is often repeated, againe, and againe; The Lorde is my saluation. So that here may séeme to be the particular works of euery chri∣stian, to confesse his sinnes, to acknowledge Iesus Christ his sa∣uiour, not to feare or doubt: but euen to sing for ioy and certainty of his saluation. The workes of the church in generall, likewise followe:Es. 12.3. And they shall drawe water out of the welles of saluation with ioie. The welles of saluation, of comfort; are the scriptures, as S. Paul sayth:Rom. 15.4. The scriptures are written for our learning, that through patience and comfort of the holie scriptures,Psal. 36.9. wee might haue hope: And Dauid sayth, With thee is the well of lyfe, and in thy light shall wee see light:Io. 6.68. And it is called the worde of lyfe, which is all one, with the welles of saluation. So that then, all men must knowe and meditate vpon the scriptures in that daie of Iesus Christ (as Dauid also witnesseth) if they will be blessed. This is the first com∣mon worke of all Christians.Gen. 26.18. Abraham and Isack historicallie dig∣ged wels, and the Philistines stopped them vp. The Philistines, Gods enimies,Es. 12. v. 4. the deuill and all his adherents, cannot abyde Gods worde. And they shall saie in that daie: praise the Lorde, call in his name, make his workes to be knowne among the people, cause it be had in remembrance, that his name is magnified. These also are the common workes of Christians, these workes all must do, to praise the Lorde, for all the good thinges daylie they receiue: to call in his name, for whatsoeuer they shall lacke, not in anie other name;Iohn. 15.16. according as our sauiour teacheth all men in the gospell, Whatsoeuer you shall aske the father in my name, he will giue it you: And to declare among people his workes,Psal. 111. v. 4. The gracious God (saith Dauid) hath so done his maruellous workes, that they ought to bee had in remembrance.Exod. 18.7. Moses tolde Iethro what thinges God had wrought for him in the red sea and in the wildernesse. And the
Iewes were comaunded to teach their children what the passeouer ment:Deut. 4.10.11.19.6.6.7. And so no doubte all Christians are bound to declare the wonderfull worke of their redemption, and to teach it their chil∣dren and families. And this is to shewe the Lordes death till he come. And lastlie to put all men in remembrance, of the mag∣nifience of this name Iesus Christ. It should séeme, the prophet did foresée that in spirit, which we sée verified indéede: howe the magnifience and greatnes of this name, should be forgotten; and how other names should be had in estimation. And therefore he giueth all true Christians a lesson: that they onelie call vpon God in his name, and that they cause the magnifience of his name to be had in remembrance. These workes the carnall man accom∣pteth nothing: to reade or meditate vppon the scriptures, to praise God daylie, for what good thing soeuer he receiueth, to be talking daylie of Gods wonderfull workes, hee doth continuallie and hath done: (for men loue to be talking of great & strang works:) and when they lacke anie thing (as they are daylie standing in néede of manie thinges euen the richest of them all) to begge of God, in the name of Iesus Christ: to magnifie and extoll this name onelie, to haue it euer in their mouthes, to do all thinges in the name of Iesus Christ. But these passe all their pilgrimages, gylding of Images, building of guyldes or chantries, which here∣tofore men so highlie estéemed. Ferus also writing vpon the Epistle of S. Iohn,Ferus in. 1. Epist. cap. 5. confesseth this certaintie of our saluation. As Christ had testimonies from heauen and earth, that hee was the onelie sauiour of the worlde: so hath euerie Christian the same testimonies, that hee is the sonne of God. And who then will doubt? And here see (sayth he) how great is the certaintie of our faith. There is no other fayth, hath so manie and so great testimonies. But as Christ had witnesse from heauen and on earth, that onelie he was the true and onelie sauiour of the worlde: so euery Christian hath the same testimonies, that he is the sonne of God. For this thing the father witnesseth when he sayth. They shall bee to me sonnes and daughters, And I will be a father to them.Ier. 31.1. 2. Cor. 7.32. Mat. 6.32. Iohn. 16 27. Rom. 8.16. The same thing also Christ witnesseth when hee sayth, your father in heauen knoweth that you stand in neede of all these thinges. And also the fa∣ther himselfe loueth you. Also the holie ghost witnesseth to our spirit, that we are the sonnes of God, and maketh vs cry, Abba, father. The
same thing also that we are the sonnes of God, our baptisme witnes∣seth, because we are washed in the name of the holy Trinitie, And also the sacrament of the bodie and bloud of Christ, wherewith wee are fedde, and the moouing of the holie ghost which we feele inwardly: what therefore can bee more happie then a Christian man, who hath so manie testimonies? And after, The sum of all that hee hath said is, that beleeuing in Christ, we haue lyfe assuredlie: and that not by a∣nie other then by Christ. And after, He would haue these two things beaten into our heads, that through fayth we haue lyfe: and that one∣lie by Christ.2. Cor. 1.30 Therefore let no man ascribe any thing to himselfe: for Christ is made to vs of God, our righteousnesse, sanctification and re∣demption.Gal. 6.14 God forbid therefore that wee should reioice in any thing but in the crosse of Iesus Christ. And to know this is the chiefest wis∣dome of christians: then the which no greater or more profitable can be thought, &c. I would to God all christian catholiques, would learne these two pointes of Christian wisedome, of Ferus: that through faith they haue life assuredlie: and that they woulde not doubt of their saluation: and that onelie by Christ. And that in the matter of their saluation, they woulde attribute nothing to themselues, nothing to their workes: but all to Iesus Christ  his perfect redemption. This certaintie of saluation, made so many martyrs in the pri∣mitiue church.Euseb. Eccles. hist. lib. 11. ca. 5 I reade in Eusebius, vnder the persecution of Va∣lentinius, an excellent history of a womā in Edessa, a citie of Me∣sopotamia. When as the Emperor had seene himselfe the christians (being banished all churches) to assemble themselues in the field: hee is saide to haue striken his Lieutenant, because they were not driuen away from thence also. But he, although he was a Pagane, and also had suffered iniury at the Emperors handes for their sakes: yet beeing mercifull, the next day when he should haue gone to haue killed and destroied all the christians he found there; he caused it secretly to bee made manifest to the citizens, that they might take heede to them∣selues, and not be found in that place. And in the morning, when he should go forward with his officers, he made more a doe then he was wont, and he did all things so, that if it were possible, very few or none might be in danger: yet notwithstanding, hee sawe the people moe in number then they were wont, to go to the place, and to run head∣long, and to make haste, as though they were afraide least any man should be lacking to death. In the meane time, he sawe a woman to
to run out of her house so hastily and speedily, that she did not so much as shut her doore, & also she her selfe was half ready & halfe vnready. And she drew her little child with her, and she made such haste, that she brake thorow the midst of the ranke of his officers. Then he be∣ing able to endure no longer, lay hands on the woman (saith he,) and bring her to me, and being brought, hee saieth: O vnhappy woman! whither doest thou make such haste? To the field (saith she) where the people of the Catholiques do meete. And hast thou not heard (saieth he) that the Lieutenant goeth thither, that he may kill all that he shall finde? I haue heard (saith shee:) and therefore I make haste, that I may bee found there. And whither, saith hee, drawest thou this little one? That it also, saith she, may deserue martyrdome. The which things when the pitifull man had heard, he commanded the officers to returne, and his chariot to be caried to the Emperors pallace. And entering in, he saith, ô Emperour, if thou commandest me to die; I am readie: but the worke which thou commandest me, I cannot ful∣fill. And when as he had shewed him all thinges of the woman, hee staied the furie of the Emperour. No doubt this was a common lesson in those daies, that all they that beléeued in Iesus Christ, shoulde surelie bee saued, which this simple woman had learned: No doubt she was surelie perswaded she should bee saued, or else shee would neuer haue made such haste to death. I reade also of Cyprian bishop of Carthage,Anton. hist. part. 1. Tit. 7. c. 8 whose famous works are at this day extant in the church of God, that for the christian religion beeing first banished of the Emperors Galienus and Valerianus; and af∣terwarde called backe againe, and condemned to death for the same, yt when he heard the sentence of his condemnation: he gaue God thankes, and shewed no token of sadnes. And after hee com∣maunded his friendes, to giue his executioner fiue and twenty ryals for his paines: because he should receiue a benefit, and not any harme or destruction at his handes.Euseb. lib. 3. c. 36 The saying also of Ignatius declareth the same: Fire, saith he, gibbet, wilde beasts, breaking of bones, tea∣ring of members, the dismembring of my whole body, and all the tormentes of the deuill: let them come vpon mee, that I may enioy Iesus Christ. This certainty of enioying Iesus Christ, this bene∣fit of saluation which they were sure to receiue, made them to de∣spise all torments in the world, and willingly to become martyrs. Neither was this faith and assurance of saluation in these bishops and learned men, but generally in all christians.
Euseb. lib. 4. c. 17In the raigne of Antoninus Pius, a certaine woman of Alexandria, being instructed in the faith of Christ by one called Ptolomeus, began to detest her husbands ryot & adulteries: when he would not amend, after many admonitions, she preferred a bill of diuorcement, and was diuorced from him. The wicked husband doth incense Vibitius the Centurion or gouernour of the city against Ptolomeus; he is cast into prison, and his cause being not heard, he is drawne to execution. This cruelty one Lucius a christian boldly reprehending, he also was com∣manded to be caried to execution. And he thanked the Gouernour: saying, by this meanes hee should goe from an euill master, to a good father. Hereby wee may plainelie see, that euen priuate men of the common sort, had this faith in those daies. And to prooue this more plainely:Euseb. lib. 8. c. 11 We reade of a whole city in Phrigia, who confessed themselues to bee christians, and woulde not sacrifice to Idols: the which thing being knowne, the Romanes commanded the whole ci∣tie to be compassed about with souldiours, and fire to be throwne vp∣on it, and the whole citie was burned with man, woman and childe; yea insomuch that none when they had leaue giuen them, woulde de∣part. This was no doubt the catholique faith, that when they died they shoulde most assuredlie go to God. And this made so manie martyrs at those daies. This hony made that bitter cuppe of martyrdome so sweete. Take this awaie, and take awaie all martyrs. Lib. 8. contra gentes.Arnobius of christian martyrs writes thus: Our children and our women by patience inspired to them from aboue, laugh at your crosses and tormentes, your wilde beastes, and al your terrors of pu∣nishments. Neither do you perceiue (O wretches) that no man will suffer punishment without some reason, or can endure torments with∣out God. And after speaking of the martyrs, hee saith, Whereas they obiected that the christians worshipped dead men: Surely, saith he, with the same quietnes of mind as we liue: neither do we crown them with withering crownes, but wee looke for from God a liuelie crowne, better then all earthly flowers. So wee are content with the bountifulnes of our God (concerning worldly affaires) and carelesse, through that hope of happines to come, in our martyrdomes: and through the faith of the presence of his maiestie, wee are encouraged in our tormentes; so we doe rise againe blessed, and wee liue nowe, through the hope of that which is for to come. Heere wee may see what made so many martyrs in those daies, the certaine hope of
the felicity to come: Through that hope they both liued & died. But some will saie vnto mee, doe not the scriptures in many places teach vs to feare God? Yes verely, but not to doubt: The good childe feareth to offend his father; he neuer doubteth of his good will and loue; he doubteth not of his disinheriting. He praieth euerie daie: Our father which art in heauen, hallowed be thy name, let thy kingdome come. &c. Exhorting you that you shoulde earnestlie contend for the faith once giuen to the saints.) Faith is taken here for christian religion,Text. Act. 6.7. & 14.27. for the doctrine of the gospell, as it is taken in the Actes of the A∣postles, where it is written: Manie were added to the faith, that is, to Christian religion.Gal. 1.23. 1 Tim. 1.19. & 3.9. And God opened the doore of faith to the gen∣tiles, that is, of religion. And Paul preached the faith which hee had persecuted, that is, the religion. Here then is the sum and dryft of this Epistle, here is the grounde and foundation of true catho∣lique religion; to striue for to maintaine with all our force and might, the faith, the religion, once giuen to the saintes: Not that faith which should be giuen hereafter, but that which was giuen alreadie: not that faith which shoulde be made by degrees, in processe of time, by the decrees of Popes and councelles; but that which was once gi∣uen to the saintes. God gaue his lawe to the Iewes in the olde Testament, by the hand of his seruant Moses: so in the gospell he established his new Testament and league, by his sonne Iesus Christ, and his Apostles. Moses but a seruant ouer Gods house had this preheminence, much more the sonne of God, the wisdom of God the father. And of the perfection of the gospell of Iesus Christ, S. Paul writes no lesse, then Moses wrote of the perfection of his lawe, (that nothing was to be added to it,) but farre more; If we our selues (saith he) or an Angell from heauen,Gal. 1. v. 8.6. preach vnto you besides that we haue preached vnto you, (adding to it, altering in it anie thing, or departing eyther to the right hand, or to the left hand from it) Let him be accursed. Neither doth he saie this once, but he saieth it againe: no doubt mooued by Gods spirite, because men would forget this lesson, and Sathan should go about to take this séede out of their heartes especially, as we haue seene by expe∣rience: And therefore the Apostle, as a wise husband-man, sowes this séede twise. So that then, the first faith which was giuen ab∣solutelie to the saintes, by Iesus Christ and his Apostles, is the true Catholique fayth. This is S. Iudes resolution, concerning this
great question which troubleth so many at this day. And they which are trulie wise, will agrée with him; and will make this an vn∣doubted ground, & most certaine rule, to measure true catholique religion by. And this is not onlie his priuate iudgement, but it is the definitiue sentence of al the Apostles, & of our blessed saui∣our himselfe: Who giuing his Apostles, and in them all mini∣sters and pastors,Mat. 28. v. 19.20. authoritie to preach: All power (saieth he) is giuen me in heauen and earth. Go ye therefore and teach all nations, bapti∣sing them in the name of the father, of the son and of the holie ghost: Teaching them to keepe whatsoeuer I haue commaunded you: And beholde, I am with you alwaies, euen to the worldes end. Here is that great and large commission and authority, of preaching, com∣mitted to the ministerie of him, who hath all power in heauen and earth. I would to God our mightie men of the world, woulde re∣member this, whose embassadors and seruants ministers are; and then, they would not vse them as they do. They would then think nothing too deare for them. Secondlie, here is, what they ought to preach and teach, whatsoeuer Iesus Christ hath commanded them. His doctrine, his commandements, are sufficient. They maie not go beyonde their commission.2. Epist. Iohan. v. 9. And S. Iohn saieth, Whosoeuer trans∣gresseth, or goeth beyond, and abydeth not in the doctrine of Christ, hath not God. We maie not go beyonde, or go further, then that which Iesus Christ hath taught; herein we must rest, continue and abyde: though he which teach it, be neuer so ancient, though he be a father, though he be neuer so holie, though he were an Angel, though the doctrine séeme neuer so deuoute, plausible and religi∣ous. He that continues and abydes, and settles his conscience in the doctrine of Christ: he hath both the father and the sonne. And what can be desired more? And lastlie, to them that kéepe them∣selues within the boundes of this their commission, Iesus Christ promiseth, that he will bee with them, euen vnto the ende of the world. They néed to feare, neither Pope, Prince or Potentate: they haue one mightier then all these, that taketh their partes. S. Paul also in his first Epistle to the Corinthians testifieth the same. I thanke my God (saieth he) alwaies in your behalfe,Cap. 1. v. 4. for the grace of God which is giuen you in Iesus Christ, that in all thinges you are rich in him, in all speech and in all knowledge, as the witnesse of Iesus Christ was surelie confirmed among you: so that you wanted no gift, looking for the reuelation of our Lorde Iesus Christ. By this
place it appeares, that the Corinthians had receiued this grace from God (for the which the Apostle giueth God thankes, as for a most excellent gift) that they were rich in all knowledge, and now wanted nothing, concerning their saluation, but euen now were readie and prepared for the glorious appearance of Iesus Christ to iudgment. So that their faith was perfect, there was nothing as necessary to be added vnto it: they were sufficientlie prepared and armed against the daie of iudgement. And who will desire any more? all péeces and patches then, concerning faith and sal∣uation, which came into the church after, were néedelesse and in vaine.Cap. 20.26 And in the Actes S. Paul taking his leaue of the Elders and pastors of the church of Ephesus: I take you to record this day, saith he, that I am innocent from the bloud of you all. For I haue not kept backe any thing, but declared vnto you all the counsell of God. Who will not confesse then, that the faith once giuen to the saints was perfect: who seeth not, that what pointes of faith or of doctrin concerning saluation came in after, were not the counsel of God, but deuises of man?Psal. 3.8. And therefore in this matter vtterlie to bee reiected. For saluation (as it is in the Psalme) belongeth only to the Lord, to his wisedome, mercie, counsell and direction: And his blessing is vpon his people; all the good thinges his church enioieth, procéed also from him. The same thing also saint Peter witnesseth: By Siluanus a faithfull brother, saith he, as I suppose,1 Pet. 5.12. haue I written brieflie, exhorting and testifying, howe that this is the true grace of God wherein you stande: calling with S. Paul the true faith, the true way of saluation; the grace of God. So that then S. Peter himselfe witnesseth to all christians in the worlde, that that was the true grace of God, that that was the true way of saluation, in which they stood then; the which they had receiued then, and he ex∣horteth them with S. Iude to continue and to maintaine the same. And if that any other glad tidings, or glad newes were brought them, or any other grace of God, that it was not the true grace of God, but a false and counterfeit. For there is but one faith,Ephes. 4.5 and those giftes which come from God are perfect. They are like himselfe: as S. Iames also witnesseth.Iam. 1.17. And least any man shoulde say, that this grace of God is vncertaine, and that hee knoweth not where to find this faith once giuen to the saintes: S. Iames tel∣leth vs where this faith is to be found, that is in the worde of God: Receiue the word with all meekenes which is grafted in you, which
is able to saue your soules.1. Tim. 3.15 And the same S. Paul teacheth Timothie: Continue in these thinges that thou hast learned and art perswaded thereof, knowing of whome thou hast learned them, and that thou hast knowne the holy scriptures of a childe, which are able to make thee wise vnto saluation, through the faith which is in Iesus Christ. Timothie knew the scriptures euen from his childhoode: There∣fore let all true christians and catholiques, not bee afraide to teach them their children, and to make them reade them also. Timothie a child knewe them: therefore it is a shame for men not to knowe them. The scriptures are able to make vs wise to saluation: and then are they not perfect? is not this plaine? who will desire anie more? And this saluation is in them, by teaching this faith of Ie∣sus Christ, this faith once giuen to the saintes. So that then, this faith once giuen to the saintes, is to be gathered out of the scrip∣tures, they teach it, fullie, plainly and absolutely. Neither is this the Apostles sentence, but also the iudgment of many learned men since. And of this place of S. Iude, Nicolaus de Lira writeth thus: In this epistle S. Iude instructs al christiās ingeneral & not certain particular persōs, as did S. Iohn in his 2. former Epistles, (I haue need to write to you.) For heretickes springing vp: as it shal be put down after, (beseeching you to fight valiantlie, for ye faith once giuen to the saints) as though he should say, this is the cōbat of faith, that is, for ye faith giuen to ye saints, yt is, to the Apostles of Christ: once, that is perfectly, when he opened their vnderstāding, that they should vnderstand the scriptures. It is also said once, for the vnity thereof, and of the Authour thereof: There is one God, one faith, one baptisme. And here is put down the cause of this combate or warre, (for there are craftily and slilie crept in) that is, (saith he) vnder a shew of godli∣nes they haue come in (certaine vngodly men) that is heretiques. For godlines is sometime taken for the worship of God: but heretiques vnder the pretence of religion and Gods worde haue brought in the contrary, & therfore they are called vngodly. So that then by Lirah his iudgement, this epistle concernes all men. The faith once gi∣uen to ye saintes, was giuen by Christ to his Apostles, when he o∣pened their vnderstādings, that they might vnderstand the scrip∣tures. And therefore as should seeme, this faith was to bee taken out of the scriptures. And that heretiques, vnder a shew of wor∣shipping of God, besides the scriptures, should corrupt the faith, and bring into the church a contrarie faith. And that this faith was giuen once, that is, perfectly. And the ordinary glosse, spea∣king
in the person of S. Iude, expoundes this place thus: I say, be∣seeching you not to superadde any other faith, to your faith; but for the holy faith once giuen vnto you, and to all the saintes by the Apo∣stles, to fight earnestly euen vnto death: that for it if neede bee, you should die. And therfore I haue written vnto you, that I might know the state of your faith, and that I might shewe you my carefulnesse of you, and so you might be confirmed in the faith. So that Lirah sai∣eth, that that is the true faith which Christ himselfe gaue to his A∣postles, when hee opened their vnderstandings, that they might vnderstand the scriptures: And the glosse saith, that that is the true faith which the Apostles gaue to the saintes, for the which we must striue, euen to death: and therefore by their iudgementes wee are not to make any accompt of that faith, which shall come in af∣ter. That is the Antichristian and false faith. Ferus also vpon S. Iohns Epistle writes thus, vpon these words,In primam epist. 10. cap. 2. (that you haue hearde from the beginning: let it abide in you.) Hee giues (saith he) faithfull counsell what wee must doe, when false pro∣phets and Antichrist shall breake into the church: For otherwise hee had made mention in vaine, that such should come into the church, vnlesse he had forewarned vs also, what wee should doe. His counsell is, that we should abide in that, wee haue hearde from the beginning. Excellent counsel; for as soone as we begin to doubt of that we haue beene taught from the beginning, wee giue entrance to errors. And therefore Christ inculcates these wordes to his disciples: Abide in me, and I in you: Take heede no man beguile you, saying here is Christ, or there is Christ, beleeue them not. And S. Paul, But continue thou, in those things thou hast learned, knowing of whome thou hast lear∣ned them. And againe: Be not caried away, with diuers and strange doctrines. And againe: Bee not mooued with euery winde of doc∣trine, &c. And a little after he writes thus: yee haue beene taught not only what things concerne faith, but also what concerne godlines and holinesse of life. Here, saith hee, thou maiest marke, howe much christian doctrine, and the worde of God, is to bee esteemed of vs. Hereby wee are brought to great honor, and wee reape great profit. Can there bee any honour greater, then to abide in the father and the sonne? and hee gets this honour that continues in the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles. And after, vpon the same chapter he writes thus: whatsoeuer is necessary to saluation, that already the spirit hath made manifest to the church by the word of the gospell, and by his se∣cret
inspiration. And a little after, The Anabaptists separate the holy ghost from the scriptures, and from the externall preaching of the worde; when as this is the true meane, by the which the holy ghost doth teach vs, that is to say, the scripture, and the outward preaching of the worde. Therefore no man ought to separate the holy Ghost from the scripture, &c. The holy ghost taught the olde prophets for most part by secret inspirations, or visions offered to their imaginati∣ons, without the outwarde preaching. It taught the Apostles, the wordes of Christ, by suggesting vnto them, and by bringing that into their remembrances, which they had hearde of Christ: It teacheth vs now, by the meanes of the holy scriptures and word of God. And he that despiseth these meanes, hee lookes for in vaine, anie newe or in∣warde instruction of the holie ghost: yea therefore the holie scripture is giuen to vs as a certain rule of Christian doctrine, least our owne spirit should seduce vs. And if there were no rule of doctrine put down, who seeth not what a confusion and chaos there would bee? For, if hauing the holie scripture as a most certain rule set before our eyes, they do teach such diuers doctrines: what would come to passe, if the scriptures were taken awaie? So that by Ferus his iudgement, the holie scriptures are the most certaine rule, to measure and square all doctrines by; they are the onely meanes, by which the holy spirit nowe teacheth the church, and that the spirite ought not to bee se∣parated from them: And that in them, is the faith co, once giuen to the saintes. And therefore, all they that ill haue the true faith, and be armed against Antichrist, must looke for it, in them. That faith, that is taught besides them, which was not from the beginning, is the false faith, is the Antichristain faith. And the same Ferus is forced also to yéelde thus much to the worde of God.In praef. euan. secund. Iohan. Because (saieth he) heresies shoulde spring vp, and the doctrine of Christ, shoulde be defiled of the wicked, with mans deuises; it pleased God and our sauiour Iesus Christ, that also the bookes of the Gospell, should be written, that wee learning the truth from them, shoulde not bee deceiued, by the lyes of heretikes: but that all things as well in our lyfe, as doctrine, shoulde be ordered according to this rule, as by a touchstone. And also Serranus a papist, vpon Eze∣chiell concerning the perfection of the scripture, writeth thus. And also (sayeth he) by those holie Euangelists he hath written all wisdom,In. 9. cap. Ezech. necessarie to mans saluation: and the same also, as a master giuen from God, he liuing amongst men, preached with his owne mouth:
which perfection, and absolution of the diuine knowledge, this man here foresheweth; whiles he is commaunded to wryte (Tau) in euerie mans forehead that shall be saued, the last letter of the hebrew Al∣phabet, which by a figure called synecdoche, as S. Ierome writeth, sig∣nifieth all knowledge. This letter Tau, this lesson, that the scrip∣tures of God conteine all doctrine necessarie to saluation: must euery one that will be saued, haue written in their foreheads. And hereof also, it is called the word of lyfe. Arnobius a verie ancient wryter,Arnobius. in. Psal. 47. compares the two testamentes to the two breastes of the church. And shall we not thinke the mothers breastes sufficient to feede the childe? Now (saieth he) O you soules deliuered and borne againe, go about your mother Sion and sucke her two pappes, of the two testaments full of milke, and shewe to her towers the mer∣cie you haue obtained. Augustine of the excellencie of the scriptures and of their suffi∣ciencie writes thus;Aug. epist. 3. What disputations or writings of any of the Phi∣losophers, what lawes of any city, are to be compared by any meanes to those two precepts; of which, Christ saieth, all the lawe and the pro∣phets do depende: Thou shalt loue the Lorde thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soule, and with all thy strength, and thy neighbour as thy selfe. Here are phisicks (as they terme them) because all natu∣rall causes are in God, the creator. Here are Ethickes, because a vertu∣ous mans lyfe, is by no other meanes framed, then when those things are loued which are to be loued, that is God and our neighbour: here is logicke, because the truth and light of the soule of man, is nothing else, but God himselfe. Here is the happie estate of the common wealth: For a happie citie is not builded or preserued, but by the foun∣dation and bonde of fayth, and concorde; when as the common good thing is loued, which both most excellent and truest is God himselfe; and in him, when men do sincerelie one loue another; when as for his sake they loue one another: when as they cannot keepe secrete, for what cause they loue one another. The manner of writing, whereby the scripture is framed, how easie is it for all men, although verie fewe can attaine to the perfection of it. Those plaine thinges which it con∣teineth, as a familiar friende, without all deceit, it speaketh to the ca∣pacitie or heart, of the learned or vnlearned: And those things which she hydeth in a mysterie, she extolles them not with a loftie style, that a slowe and vnlearned mynde, dare not approach vnto them, (as a poore man dare not come to a rich) but with a lowlie speech, shee
inuites all men vnto her; whome shee will not onelie feede, with her manifest; but also exercise with her secret truth: And yet, hauing the same in a readinesse and easie, which she hath shut vppe in secret. But least they being too manifest, should be lothed, they are againe hid∣den; that they maie be sought for, and being sought after, they are as it were renewed: and being renewed, they are most surely disgested. By them (meaning the scriptures) both all wicked soules are correc∣ted, and simple are increased, and great are delighted. That soule is enemy onely to this doctrine, who erring, either knoweth not that it is most wholesome, or else being sicke, hateth her phisicke. What could bee more euidentlie spoken of the sufficiencie of the scrip∣tures? Here is logicke, ethicke, and naturall philosophie; here is the happie estate of all common wealthes; here is the blessednes of all soules, rightnesse for the crooked, strength for the weake, delight of the perfect. This noble Ladie, with her most lowlie voice, inuiteth all men to her: no man néede bee afraide to come, as the poore are to the rich: her doctrine passeth not mans reach; she hath the same things manifest to feed withall, which she hath hid to exercise withall. Lib. 12. in Ioan. cap. 68.Cyril also of the sufficiencie of the scriptures thus writeth most manifestlie: Therefore not all thinges, which the Lorde hath done are written: but what thinges they which wrote, thought to suffice, both to manners and to doctrine; that wee shining with a right faith, with workes and vertue, might come to the kingdome of heauen. And here by the way,Lib. 2. orthodox. explicat. let vs marke how Andradius goeth about to obscure this most euident place of Cyrill: If S. Iohn (saith he) haue contained all thinges necessary to faith and righteousnes of life, then we must beleeue or do nothing but that which S. Iohn hath written. Then shall he not be wicked, that shall doubt whether Christ was borne in an oxe cratch or no. But Cyril speaketh not onely of S. Iohns gospell, but of all the other holie writers. Not all thinges which the Lord hath done are written (saieth hee) but such as those which writ thought to suffice, to maners and doctrine; he compre∣hendeth all holie writers within this compasse, not S. Iohns gos∣pell onlie. Secondlie, Andradius saith, that in the gospell are cer∣taine principall groundes set downe of doctrines, by which the whole building of faith may arise. The which, if hee meane, that all doc∣trines of the church must bee confirmed out of the scriptures, or else are to be reiected; this exposition is not amisse: as Dauid saith.
Her foundations are vpon the holy hils. Psal. 17.1. Because all doc∣trines in the true church of God are to be grounded & haue their foundation in the scriptures:Luke 20. v. 37 As Christ out of the scriptures con∣firmed the doctrine of the resurrection, to the Sadduces. But he meanes nothing lesse then this. For he saith before, When as God would helpe the frailtie of our memories, by the writing of the gospel,Eod. lib. 29. pag hee woulde haue so briefe compendium of his affaires and mysteries committed to writing, that the greatest part of them, as a treasure of great price, should bee reserued, to be inclosed in the minde of man. And that thereby it shoulde appeare, that the greatest part of a chri∣stians dutie should be to keepe the memory of Gods lawe and bene∣fits. This is Andradius iudgement, far differing from the Fa∣thers, and from the maiestie of the scriptures. But let him go with his smoke of Egypt.Cyril. lib. 5. in Leu. Cyril writes thus againe of the sufficiencie of ye scriptures; I (saith he) as far as my smal capacity can attaine do thinke, that in these two daies, the two Testamentes may bee vnder∣stood, wherein euery worde, that concernes God, may be discussed, (for that is a sacrifice) and out of them the knowledge of all thinges is to bee receiued. If any thing remaine, which the holy scripture doth not determine, no other thirde scripture ought to bee receiued, that might be in authority amongst vs to get knowledge, which he called here the third day: but let vs commit that which remaines to the fire: that is, let vs reserue it to God. For in this life God would, not haue vs know all thinges, especially when as the Apostle saith, Because wee nowe knowe in part, &c. This therefore is the fire to the which wee must reserue all those thinges that remaine, and not through rash presumption, take to vs knowledge of all thinges, that the Apostle may iustly say to vs: not knowing what they say, nor what they af∣firme. Therefore, least peraduenture our sacrifice should not bee ac∣ceptable, and that same knowledge, which wee couet to haue out of the scriptures, be turned into sinne: let vs keepe those measures which the spirituall law, by her law maker, shewes to vs. See how plainly Cyrill concludes, all knowledge necessary for vs in this life, in the scriptures. And in searching out of them, he would not haue vs also to go too far, but to kéepe those limits our law giuer hath ap∣pointed: and that in this life, it is no shame to confesse our igno∣rance of many things: and that no third scripture whatsoeuer is to be admitted, to supplie the wants of this scripture, to teach that which it teacheth not. What can be said more plainlie for the suffi∣ciencie
of the scriptures then this? Conc. 1. in fest. omniū sanctorū.Philippus de Dies also writes thus of the excellencie and suffici∣encie of the scriptures: It was, saith he, a singular benefit of God, that he would giue vs a law, by which we should be gouerned. For when man should consider his own basenes, and the infinite maiesty of God: he durst not verily serue God, if God should absolutely com∣mand him, saying, serue me; nor should declare to him, what seruice did please him. For man might thinke with himselfe, hee were neuer able to please such a master: but God establishing to vs his law, hath deliuered vs from this trouble. Therefore the Prophet considering this great benefit, saith: For thy law I haue endured or sustained thee al the day long: that is, vnlesse that thou ô Lord hadst limited and put downe the seruice which thou wouldest haue me to do thee, and vn∣lesse thou hadst giuen me thy lawe; I shoulde haue beene at my wits ende, and verily haue fainted. Considering how my basenesse might serue such a great maiesty, and establishing me this law, thou hast gi∣uen me a heart, by which I may vnderstande, that I may easily com∣prehend this thing, and know what thou wouldest haue of me to bee done. Let vs all therefore marke the scriptures: no man knowes what things God delights in. Those thinges which seemes excel∣lent in our eies,Luke. 16.15 1 Sam. 15.15 1 Sam. 16.6. are abhomination to the Lord: As Sauls sacrifice, and Samuels choise among the sonnes of Isay plainely declare. Let vs onelie do those thinges and workes, which Gods worde com∣mands vs: those we are sure please him. As for other bee they ne∣uer so religious in our owne eies, so costlie, so seuere and austere, vnlesse they be warranted by the word; surely they doe not please God. And this Philippus de Dies, being forced of truth, confesseth, as most true doctrine, which ouerthroweth all popish voluntaris seruing and worshipping of God, and confirmeth euerie true chri∣stian soule, in those christian exercises, which out of the worde it practiseth. Prudentius of the Canon and rule of the Scriptures sufficient to conuince all he∣resies, writes thus. Hymno in Infi∣deles.ARctam salutis vix viam discernere est, Inter reflexas semitas.
Tam multa surgunt perfidorum compita, Tortis polita erroribus: Obliqua sese conferunt diuortia Hinc inde textis orbitis. Quas si quis errans ac vagus sectabitur, Rectum relinquens tramitem: Scrobis latentis pronus in foueamruet, Quam fodit hostilis manus, &c. Fax sola fidei est praeferenda gressibus, Ʋt recta sint vistigia. The which verses are thus tran∣slated into English. THe narrow way of sauing health, a man can scarcely find, Yea hardly can he it discerne from by-waies, or vnwinde Himselfe from turning labyrinths of sects and errors strange, The thread is spun so fine, men haue of colours so great change. If any chance, to treade their waies, and turnings for to follow, He headlong runs into deepe pits, and ditches false and hollow. These pits and ditches, digged are with hands of deadly foes, That such may runne into the same, which do the right way loose, &c. And after, The onely lampe of shining faith our doings must direct: Our feete must guided be thereby, it must by-waies detect. The effect of which verses is this; that in the manifolde by-waies of Sathan, onelie the Torch of faith is to bee had in our
handes to direct our steps. And no doubt, this torch of faith is no∣thing else but the word of God, as Dauid calleth it: And as S. Paul saith, faith commeth by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. And of the sufficiencie both of Christes passion, and of the Scrip∣tures, Arnobius verie excellentlie writes thus: Hee pleased in the sacrifice of the crosse,In Psal. 68. as a young Heifer, putting forth the two hornes of the Testamentes, and the foure hoofes of the gospels, which the poore Apostles saw and reioyced. These two hornes are sufficient to dash and ouerthrow all the power of Sathan; and these foure hoofes, to trample vnder foote all the baites of the world and the flesh. And vpon these wordes: let them be couered with shame as with a gar∣ment: The Deuils are couered with fourefolde confusion, when we take into our handes the fourefolde saluation of the gospell. And in another place,In Psal 117 The Iewes because they woulde haue continued in one wall, refused the stone which was not fit for one, but for two; But God himselfe hath put this stone in the heade of the corner, that of two testaments and two peoples, the building might rise. And a∣gaine.In Psal. 116 The handmaid of God is his holy discipline, he that can say at the day of his death: I am thy seruant, I haue not despised thee: And I am the sonne of thy handmaide, I haue obeied thy holy discipline as a sonne; his bonds shall God breake insunder. And againe: The hils are about Ierusalem,In Psal. 124. and the Lord is about his people, that is, the testimonies of the scriptures, for the defence of the simple people: And as a light in the night,In Psal. 118. do shew a man the ditches or stumbling blocks hee must auoide: so haue I set thy worde to my feete, to my senses. Iustine the martyr thus briefely knits vp the sum of christian reli∣gion;Epist. ad Zenonē. Let vs be daily in praier, rich in the word, & mighty in works. Let vs be members one of another, and for this cause, suffer with the afflicted, and reioice with the exalted, taking heed of those which are not houshoulde. Rom. 16.17 Lib. 2. hom. 15. seruants of the Law of Christ. Agreeing with S. Paul, who bids vs also beware of those which make diuisions and offences, besides the doctrine which the Romaines had learned. Gregorie also vpon Ezechiell, doth excellentlie teach all Chri∣stians, that out of the scriptures are sufficient weapons to be ta∣ken, of all Christian soldiers, against all the assaltes of their ene∣mies, whatsoeuer: as there in particular at large, hee doth most manifestlie declare. Haue a care, my beloued in the Lord (saith hee) to meditate in the word of God, despise not the writinges of our ma∣ker, which are sent vnto vs: It is an excellent thing. For by them, the
minde is as it were brought, into a naturall heate; neither doth shee wax slothfull by the coldnes of her owne iniquitie: when as by them we knowe, the former righteous men to haue done valiantlie, we al∣so are stirred vp, to the valiantnesse of well doing. The minde of the reader is as it were kindled, with the flames of holie examples. Shee seeth, what notable things haue been don by them, & she doth great∣lie disdaine, because she doth not immitate the like. Wherefore it is excellentlie sayd to the spowse, by the bridgroome: Thy necke is like the tower of Dauid, which is builded with his castles; and a thousande shieldes hang about it, all the armor of the valiante: For the throte is in the necke, and in the throate is the voice: what therefore is mente by the throate of the church, but the holie worde of God? in which whyle a thousand bucklers are sayd to hang, by this perfect number, the whole number is shewed, because our whole armor is contained in the worde of God. There trulie are the commandements of God, there are the examples of righteous men. But to let passe the com∣mandements of God, which he there vrgeth, the examples which he settes before our eyes, are worth the marking: Being hurte of thy neighbour (saieth he) hast thou a desire through humilitie of minde, to continue in innocencie? Let Abell come before thine eies, who is read to haue been slaine of his brother: and yet he is not read to haue strug∣led against him. Wouldst thou serue God, with a cleane heart, in the state of mariage? Set Enoch before thine eyes, who being married, walked with God, and was no more found; for God had translated him. Doest thou greatlie desire to prefer Gods commandements, be∣fore thine own present profit and commoditie? Sette Noah before thine eyes, who at Gods commandement making no great account of the care of his familie, a hundred yeeres liued occupied about buil∣ding of the arke. Dost thou endeuor to take vpon thee the yoke of o∣bedience? Looke vpon Abraham, who leauing his house, kinsfolkes & countrie, obeied to go out to a strange place, which he should take to be his inheritance; and he went out, not knowing whither he should go: Who was willing for the euerlasting inheritance, to haue killed his dearely beloued sonne, whome hee had receiued of God for his heire. Wouldest thou be a simple and plaine dealing man? set Isaac before thine eies, whose plaine dealing greatly commended him in the sight of God. Doth paines taking and great labour delight thee? remember Iacob, who after hee had learned many yeares, with great labour and trauell, in frost and heate to serue man: hee came to that
strength, that he coulde not be ouercome of an Angell, wrastling with him. Hast thou a desire to ouercome the intisementes of the flesh? let Ioseph come into thy minde, who, his mistres tempting him, studi∣ed to keepe the chastitie of his bodie, with the daunger of his lyfe: whereof it came to passe, that he that knew well how to rule his mem∣bers, was afterwarde made ruler ouer all Egypt. Doth patience and gentlenesse please thee? Call Moses to remembrance, who besides women and children gouerning six hundreth thousand fighting men, is reported to haue been the gentlest, the mildest man that euer was on the earth. Wouldst thou bee zealous in reprouing of sin, and in cor∣recting vices? Let Phinees be set before thine eyes, who running tho∣rowe with his sworde the two adulterers, (though they were Princes and great personages in their families) he made the people chast: and being angrie, he appeased the anger of God. Wouldest thou in thy doubtfull affaires trust of the hope and helpe of Almightie God assu∣redlie? Cal to remembrance Iosuah; who when he vndertooke doubt∣full battelles, with an assured courage, he obtained the victorie with∣out all doubt. Dost thou desire to laie aside, all ill will and malice from thy heart, and now to enlarge thine heart through charity? think vppon Samuel, who being now put out of his office, by the people, and remoued from his princely authority, when as the same people re∣quested him, that he woulde praie to God for them: God forbid (saith he) that I shoulde cease to praie for you. The holie man thought, hee shoulde haue done a great fault, if to those, who were his enimies, e∣uen to put him out of his kingdome, hee had not requited this fauour of praying for them. Who againe, when as he was sent of God to an∣noint Dauid king, answered, how shall I go? For if Saul shall find me: he will kill me. And yet because he knew God was angrie with Saul, he wept so greatlie for him, that the Lorde saide to him being alone: How long wilt thou weepe for Saul, seeing I haue cast him from mee? Let vs consider, what a heat of charitie had inflamed his hearte, that wept for him, which would haue slaine him. We will beware of him, whom we are afraid of, and perchance (if occasion serue) we will re∣quite euill, for euill, to him we flie from. But let vs set Dauid before our eyes, who found the king that persecuted him, at such aduantage, that he might haue killed him; and yet in this aduantage he did to him the dutie he owed him, and not the euill he deserued: Saying; God forbid that I should laie my hand on the Lords annointed. And when the same Saul after was slaine of his enimies: him whom he had
his persecutor as long as he liued, he lamented when he was slaine. Are we resolued to speake boldly to the mightie men of this world, when they doe amisse? let the authority of Iohn Baptist be called to our remembrance, who reprehending the wickednesse of Herod, for the vprightnesse of truth feared not death: and because Christ is truth, therfore, for Christ (that is for truth) he ventured his life. Do we earnestly desire to die for the Lord? Let vs remember Peter, who reioyced when he was whipped, being beaten he resisted the Princes, & for life he despised his life, with a longing for of death. Do we desire to despise all aduersities? Let vs remember Paul, who not onely being readie to be bound, but to die for Christ, he accompted not his soule more pretious then him. Do we desire to haue our harts scorched with the heate of charity? Let vs way well the wordes of S. Iohn, of whom euery word that he spake, was (as it were) tanned with the fire of charity. Because in the word of God we seeke for the bulwarke of euery vertue: therfore there hanges in it, for young men, a thousand bucklers, all the armor of the valiant. For if wee will fight against the spirituall powers of wickednesse, let vs seeke for weapons of our defence, in the neck of the Church, which is built to vs as the tower of Dauid, that is, in the word of God, that by the direction of the commandement, the aide of helpe may bee ob∣tained against vices. Behold, we desire greatly euery one of vs, to be strong against the powers of the aire; in this tower, we finde the ar∣mour of our soule: that from thence, we may take the precepts of our maker, and the examples of our forefathers, by the which we may be most assuredly armed, against our enemies. For whilst thou mindest to vndertake any vertue, and seest there, the same fulfilled of thy fore∣fathers, there thou findest armor, by which thou maiest be defended against all spirituall warres. There hang shields on hie, that if any de∣sire to fight, let him take them; and out of it, let him arme his heart with courage, and shoote out dartes of wordes. Thus far Gregory, teaching all Christians that the armour and weapons, not onelie against vices, but against our spirituall enemies: (whose chiefe assaults now are by heresies, to impugne the Church of Christ) are to be taken out of the scriptures. The faith which they teach, was the first faith, it was the Catholique faith: But the faith, which nowe many accompt for Catholique in our daies, and doe earnestlie embrace; was not the first faith, once giuen to the Saintes.
And Gregory may seeme, to ground his opinion, not onelie of that mysticall sentence of Salomon in the Canticles: but also of the plaine testimonie of S. Paul, which thus writes to the Ephesians. We are not to wrastle against flesh and bloud:Ephes. 6.12. but against rule and power, against the rulers of the darkenes of this world, against the spirituall powers of wickednes, in heauenly places, which are alofte. Therefore take vnto you the whole Armor of God, that you may be able to resist them in that euill day, and stand, hauing quite vanqui∣shed all things. Let vs marke here first, howe the Apostle doeth teach all Christian soldiours, the whole armor of God. And hee calles it so twise, and he counsels them to take it to them, and to haue it in a readines. Secondly, howe he shewes the force of it, euen against all the darkenes and thicke mists, that the Prince of this world, shall cast vpon true Religion, and against all the sleightes and baites, wherewith he shall drawe vs to any firme: it shall be able to daunt all these assaultes, all these his dartes. And what would we haue more? These two onely are the Chri∣stian bulwarkes, that sathan layeth siege against: Christian Re∣ligion and Christian life. And this heauenly armor, which the holie scripture here teacheth vs, is not combrous or costly: it consistes but of seauen partes. The first is a girdle of trueth, though the profession thereof pinch vs, as it did Iohn Baptist, we ought to hate lying and dissimulation in our dealings. The se∣cond is a brest plate of righteousnes, to deale iustlie with all men, to giue euerie one that is due vnto him. The third is, shooes on our feet in the preparation of the gospell of peace, that is, through the comfort of the gospell, to be armed against all the sharp pricks and thornes of this life. Fourthlie, aboue all, to put on the shield of faith, wherby we may be able to extinguish all the fierie dartes of the wicked. That is, in one worde, that which Dauid saith,Psal. 38.15. Psal. 130.3. Thou shalt answere for me O Lord my God: Whereas we are all bankerupts, we runne to Iesus Christ, and say thou shalt answere for me, O Lord my God. If thou Lord wilt be extreame, to marke what is done amisse, who is able to abide it? And this shield is able to quench all the fierie dartes of the wicked. What force soeuer Sathan layeth to our charge, Christes death is of more force. In him he could finde nothing:Io. 14.30. he can charge vs with no debt, but he hath performed it. Fiftlie, a helmet of saluation: that is, an assured hope of our saluation. Who will not endure any thing,
if he hope that he shall be saued? Euen as a soldiour, hauing a helmet on his head will despise all blowes. Hereof saluation is called the wals and bulwarkes of the Church, Esay 60.18. which repels and puts to confusion all the inuasions and assaults of the enemy. And of these wals and bulwarkes consisteth the strength of the cittie. Sixtlie, the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God. We must not onelie be armed to saue our selues, but also to wound our enemies: and that we may doe, with the worde of God. The which sword, how we should vse against him, our Sa∣uiour Iesus in his combat with him, hath taught all his soldi∣ours. And these thrée, we must haue aboue all thinges. First, the shielde of faith. Secondlie, the helmet of saluation. And thirdlie, the word of God, which all the Church of Rome almost hath quite taken from vs: as let any indifferent man iudge, looking into the daies of our fathers. And lastly, we must be not onely with our handes fighting, but also with our voice shouting and crying to God, against this enemie, with all manner of prai∣er and supplication. This is the complete harnesse of euerie true Christian soldiour. He that is thus armed, needes not feare Sa∣than. He that lacketh this, (whatsoeuer hee hath besides) it will not serue his turne: not holy water nor agnus dei; not holy bread, nor holy bell, nor any such externall thing: We fight against spi∣rits, and therefore we must thinke, that corporall things will not hurt them; no more than wooll will pierce yron. This may be the meaning of that which God taught Iob.Iob 40. ver. 20.21.22. Canst thou drawe out Leuiathan with an hooke, and with a line, which thou shalt cast downe vnto his tongue? Canst thou cast a hooke into his nose? Canst thou pierce his iawes with an angle? Will he make ma∣ny praiers vnto thee, or speake thee faire? Will he make a couenant with thee, and wilt thou take him as a seruant for euer? &c. That is, that as that great Leuiathan in the sea, cannot be taken by mans strength or cunning: much lesse sathan whose image he is. The Lords hand, and armor, & power, must confound him, and tread him vnder our féet. This is that which S. Peter teacheth.1. Pet. 5.8. Be sober and watch, for your aduersary the diuell, as a roaring lyon, walketh about, seeking whom he may deuour, whom resist stedfast in the faith. No∣thing but faith can withstand the Diuell: and this faith springeth out of the word of God, as S. Paul teacheth. And here first generally, concerning this first faith and religi∣on,
let vs marke how the scriptures haue most euidentlie set it downe to vs and let vs consider howe all our forefathers, in all ages, wi home God was pleased, haue kept it: and how Sa∣than hath still gone about to depraue and corrupt it. God gaue A∣dam in paradise this first faith,Gen. 2.15. contained in his word: God put Adam in the garden, that he might dresse and keepe it: and the Lord commanded the man, saying: Thou shalt eat of euery tree in the gar∣den, but of the tree of the knowledge of good and euill, thou shalt not eate of it. For in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shalt die the death. Here was the first faith, here was Adams religion or wor∣shippe of God. If he had kept this word, he, and all his posterity, had béene in paradise, till this day. But the subtill serpent, craf∣tilie créeping in, by withdrawing him from this word, by persua∣ding Eue shee should not die, shée should be a God: corrupted this first faith, and laide the corner stone of all Idolatrie, (which is, to depart from the word of God for any cause whatsoeuer) and ba∣nished man out of paradise, and all his progenie. Here you may plainlie see the first faith, and the false faith, which craftily crept in, yea the selfe same day as some thinke. In the 32. v. 8. of Exodus, they made a calfe and worshipped it, euen by and by after the law was giuen. And they cried a holi∣day vnto the Lord, and they remembred their deliuerance out of Egypt. Here were faire shewes, and here was golde, and a ho∣liday to the Lord, and great zeale, euen the pulling off of their ear∣rings: but all this displeased God, they departed from his worde, he looked for no such seruice at their handes, hee condemned this their blinde zeale, because it was against his plaine and manifest commandement. When God had deliuered Israell out of Egypt, (which example the Apostle Iude hereafter toucheth) and had drow∣ned their enemies, and had fed them with Mannah, and had mar∣ueilously shewed his wonders amongst them, and brought them to the borders of the land of Canaan: yet they which beléeued not his worde, they which cleaued not wholly to it: were destroied, and neuer entred into it. He promised that lande first to Abraham, then to Isaac and Iacob: Ioseph dying, being now setled in Egypt, in great dignitie and securitie; yet he beléeued this promise, and hoped no doubt assuredlie of the possession of it, and therefore gaue commandement, that his bones should be carried out with them, when they went. But this word, this promise afterwarde, his
posterity beléeued not: euen then when they were come to the ve∣rie entrance and taking possession of it. Iosuah and Caleb onely,Num. 13.31. who of the twelue spies that they sent to search the land, beléeued the promise of God, and encouraged them to go vp, and to fight against it: entred into it. But they beléeued the other tenne, against the word of God, who though they came home laden with the fruit of the land, persuaded them, that there were giants there, and great walled citties, and that they were not able to conquere it, and so they neuer entred into it. And were not the couetous, and faithlesse pastors and priests in popery, like these spies? Who had their backs laden with tenthes and commodities, as they had with grapes and figges: but they discouraged the hearts of their brethren; as these did. They taught them not to ground their faithes vpon the worde and promise of God, for the saluation of their soules, and obtaining of the kingdome of heauen. They taught them, as these did the Israelites, that their enemies were so mightie, & that sathan was so strong, and that their sins were so great (which in many places of scripture are compared to wals or castles) that vnlesse they bought their masses, or gaue something to their Monasteries, they could not bee saued. Derogating and disabling that great promise of God concerning our saluation: that, whosoeuer beleeueth in Iesus Christ, hath eternall life,Io. 3.16. 1. Io. 5.12. and shall enter into the true Canaan: though the walles of his sins he hath built, be as great as Paules, or as Peters, or as Mary Magdelens.1. Ti. 1.15.16. Luk. 22.61. Luk. 7.37. Psal. 18.27. Esa 49.2. Ephes. 2.14. Of these walles of sinnes, Dauid speaketh, with the helpe of my God I shall leape ouer the wall. And the Prophet Esay, your sinnes haue separated, or made a partition betwixt you & me. And S. Paul, Iesus Christ is our peace, which hath made of both one, and hath broken the stoppe of the partition wall. And of these buildings and strong holdes S. Paul speaketh:Gal. 2.18. 2. Cor. 10.4. If I build againe the thinges I haue destroied, I shall make my selfe a trespasser. And againe, the wea∣pons of our warfare, are not carnall, but mighty through God, to pull downe strong holdes, that is sinne, be it neuer so mightie, or state∣lie. Here is sathans sleight, here is the false faith, here is the sub∣uerting of the faith once giuen to the saints. So that, to depart from gods word, not to cleaue to it alone; seem it neuer so strange, neuer so hard, neuer so much against our sence and reason; is the false faith. They had tenne against two, they had their eies to perswade them, they sawe giants and walled citties: but they
lacked faith, and so they died all in the wildernesse. 1. King. 13. v. 1.That same historie of the man of God, most strange and terri∣ble in the booke of kings: is no doubt set downe for our learning. He was sent to Bethel, to preach euen to the King himselfe, a∣gainst the Idolatrous Altar, and worshippe of God done there: and hee did this his message verie boldlie, hee refused the kinges dinner, and reward very constantlie: and yet being beguiled by an olde lying Prophet, that dwelt there, who went after him, and tolde him that an Angell had appeared vnto him, and comman∣ded him to bring him backe againe, and to eate bread in that place; because he beléeued this lying Prophet, and against gods word reueiled to him, went backe againe with that Prophet, and eate bread in that place: he was after torne in pieces of a Lyon. This is a terrible and fearefull example, to teach all men obe∣dience to Gods word. The same God, which saide to the man of God, thou shalt not eate bread or drinke water in this place, hath saide to vs:Exod. 20.4. Psal. 50.15. Thou shalt make no grauen Image, thou shalt not fall downe to it or worshippe it. And againe, call vpon me in the time of thy trouble, and I will heare thee, and thou shalt glorifie me. And againe,Psal. 1.2. Psal. 47.7. 1. Cor. 14.15. 1. Io. 2.1. Let my law neuer depart out of thy mouth, meditate therin day and night. And againe, sing praises with vnderstanding, and I will pray with my spirit, I will pray with my vnderstanding (as saieth S. Paul.) And againe, if any man sin we haue an aduocat Iesus Christ, he is the propitiation for our sinnes. And dare we breake these his commandements? dare we set vp an Image, and knéele downe to it? dare we call on saints? neglect the hearing of his worde? praie without vnderstanding? make other intercessors to him, then Iesus Christ?Renas. lib. 3. stromas. bib. as though he loued vs not, whose loue (as one of the papists is forced to confesse) is more to vs warde, then all the loues of the saintes in heauen ioyned together. Surely, if we doe, without all doubt, not a Lyon of the forrest, but that ra∣ging Lyon the Diuell, shall deuour vs, shall teare our soules in pieces. And here, neither the gray head of the prophet, nor his great paines and trauell in riding after him, nor the reuelation of an Angell, much lesse, neither father, nor pope, nor councell, will excuse vs. Gods word must be kept and obserued. This is true religion, thus much this historie teacheth as. Among many kings in Israell and Iudah, there were not past three or foure commended of God. As Dauid, Iosaphat, Eze∣chias
and Iosias: and what was the cause, that these were prefer∣red before the rest? but because they loued Gods word, they caused their people to worship God, according to the same: as we maie reade in their histories. Dauid thus much testifieth of himselfe, in the booke of Psalmes in many places:Psal. 119.29. Take from me the waie of lying, and grant me gratiously thy lawe:Verse 30. Psal. 31.7. I haue chosen the way of truth, and thy iudgments haue I laide before me: and I haue hated them that hold of superstitious vanities, and my trust is in the Lord. Here was Dauids religion the law of God, the way of truth. Io∣saphat also king of Iudah, in the third yeare of his raigne,2. Chron. 17.7. sent his no∣blemen, with Priests and Leuits, throughout all Iewry, which should teach the booke of the lawe:Cap. 19.4. yea he himselfe being now confirmed and established in his kingdome, exhorted the people to the true worshippe of God, from Béersheba to mount Ephraim: he ex∣horted the iudges, to deale in their offices vprightly, and he saide to the iudges, Take heede what ye doe,Verse 6. for ye execute not the iudg∣ment of man, but of God: and he will be with you, in the cause and in iudgment. Wherfore now let the feare of the Lord be vpon you, take heede, and doe it, for there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, neither respect of persons, nor receiuing of rewards. Moreouer in Ie∣rusalem he set of the Leuites and of the Priests, for the iudge∣ment and cause of the Lord, and he charged them saying: Thus shall yee doe in the feare of the Lorde faithfully, and with a perfect heart: and therefore he prospered and grew, and such a terrour fell vpon all his neighbours, that none durst make warre against him,Cap. 17. v. 10. and the Arabians paied him tribute. Ezechias also is thus commen∣ded, He trusted in the Lord God of Israell,2. Kin. 18.5. and there was none af∣ter him like vnto him, among all the kings of Iudah: neither were there any such before him. A great and wonderfull commenda∣tion; and the cause followeth: He claue vnto the Lord, and depar∣ted not from him: but kept his commandements, which the Lord had commanded Moses. This short sentence containeth the cause of this great praise, the effect whereof was this: That (as it is re∣ported before) in reforming the Church, in taking away the high places, and in breaking the images, and in breaking in pieces the brasen serpent; and also, in his owne life and conuersation in his faith and religion: he had kept the lawe of God, he had done af∣ter it: in the word of God alone he trusted. And this his trust or confidence in the lawe of God, was obiected to him, as a reproch
of the Syrians, as nowe a daies the papists obiect the word of God to vs in contempt, calling vs gospellers, that professe the gospell. For thus Rabsakeh saieth:2. King. 18.20. Tell ye Ezechias I pray you, thus saieth the great king, euen the king of Assur: What confidence is this, wher∣in thou trustest? Thou hast saide: Surely the word of his lips. Forth the wordes are in the Hebrewe: and can haue no other proper sence but this; That Ezechiah trusted in the worde of God, in the words of Gods mouth. This was his first and principall trust and confidence: but against this Rabsakeh replieth. But counsell and strength, are for the warre. As though hee should saie: It is not trust in God, nor in his words, but pollicie and strength, that shall preuaile: speaking like an heathenish Atheist. Thus we may sée, Ezechias rule to reforme the church by, his staffe of faith to lean vpon, for his owne soules health, his confidence in warre, against his enemies; onelie God and his word. And this confidence the heathen laugh to scorne, euen as at this daie, they opprobriously scoffe and iest at vs, that trust in God, and his worde, and despise our small powers and armies.Psal. 20.7. But we saie with Dauid: Some put their trust in chariots, and some in horses: but we will remember the name of the Lord our God; and by obeying his word, he shall fight for vs, he shall preserue vs. They are brought on their knees, and fall downe,2. Chron. 30.1. but we are risen, and stand vpright. Ezechiah also commanded all Israell to keepe the passeouer, vnto the Lord in Ieru∣salem: euen as our prince nowe, by her godly iniunctions, com∣mands euerie subiect to communicate foure times by the yeare. He also did prouide,Cap. 31.11. that the Leuites, and priests, should haue suf∣ficient liuing and maintenance: as our gratious prince hath by her statutes prouided the same; but that the couert and couetous dea∣ling of patrones, peruerteth these her gratious lawes: which now though they doe to their great gaine, wil be one day, to their great shame and confusion. 2. King. 21.1. 2. Chron. 33.1.After Ezechiah raigned Manasses; and he did euill in the sight of the Lord: he forsooke the lawe, and cared not for it, he raigned fiftie fiue yeares. In his daies the booke of the law of God, was made no accompt of.2. King. 22.3.8. For in the eightéenth yeare of Iosiah, when as ye temple was in repairing, which no doubt, all the fifty yeares of Manasses had small looking to, the booke of the law (as it should séeme) stopt in some part of the wall, in the temple, was founde, and brought to Iosiah:Verse 11. And the ignorance thereof was so great,
that the king knewe not the contents thereof, till he had heard it read. And therefore when he had heard the booke read; being a∣mased at the transgression of the whole land, howe wickedly they had broken the lawe of God, he rent his clothes,Verse. 13. and sent to en∣quire of the Lord for himselfe, and his people. For great (saith he) is the wrath of the Lord, that is kindled against vs: because our fa∣thers haue not obeied the words of this booke, to doe according to all that is written therein, for vs. And after this, good king Iosiah,2. Kin. 23.1.2. gathered to him all the elders of Iudah, and Ierusalem, and the king went vp into the house of the Lord: and all the men of Iudah, and all the inhabitants of Ierusalem with him, and the priestes and pro∣phets, and all the people, both small and great; and he read in their eares, all the wordes of the booke of the couenant, which was found in the house of the Lord: And the king made a couenant before the Lord, that they should walke after the Lorde, and keepe his com∣mandements, and his testimonies, and his statutes, with all their hart, and with all their soule, that they might establish, and make good the wordes of the couenant, written in this booke: and all the peo∣ple ratified, and established this couenant. Here is first the lawe∣full authority of princes, to cause Gods worde to be preached and taught, and to cause the priests to doe their dueties: euen to make the people sweare, and make a couenant with God, that they will neuer forsake his word, but will euen worshippe him, as his word commandeth. He did this according to the lawe Deut. 31.12. where God commanded that the lawe should be read to men, wo∣men and children. This authoritie our prince hath: she may com∣pell our recusants to come and heare the lawe of God read, and preached, as this good king Ezechiah did; if it please her maiestie. For no doubt, many in Iosias time, that had béene nourished in idolatrie and superstition, those seauentie yeares after the death of Ezechias, and delighted in those high places they had built, and in that golden groue or wood, as is likelie,Verse. 6. which was placed in the temple, which Iosiah burnt, and stamped to powder; came vp to heare the lawe read, against their wils. But here the kings au∣thoritie preuailed, and ouerruled them: and euen such authoritie, should al true catholiques acknowledge, euen now all kings, and also our gratious soueraigne to haue. And should, as these men of Iudah and Ierusalem did, obey her godly lawes and comman∣dements, and come to the Church, without any resistance, and
heare the lawe of God read and taught them. She doeth com¦mand them no more, then here, as euery one may sée, Iosiah com∣manded these his subiects: That is, to beare the law of God. His subiects obeyed him, and why should not they obey her? Secondly, here is the true religion, to worship God according to his word, vtterly to abolish all buildings, foundations, works, vessels, be they neuer so costlie, or stately, which haue béene ordai¦ned, yea of kings, against the lawe of God. And this reforma∣tion is the part of kings to doe, it is the chiefe thing, they are to looke to: yea & euen to require an oath of their subiects, to main∣taine this religion for euer. And that this was the true religion before the captiuity, these histories of truth doe plainlie teach vs. And for the departing from this faith, for corrupting of this reli∣gion, for breaking of this couenant and oth made: they were af∣terwards carried prisoners to Babylon, as appeareth by the booke of the Kinges and by the prophecie of Ieremie. Nehe 8.1.But after their returne, God restored againe the same religi∣on and worship, by Nehemiah and Esrah. All the people assembled thēselues together, & they spake vnto Esrah the scribe, that he would bring the booke of the lawe of Moses, which the Lord had com∣manded to Israell. Oh that the like willing mindes were in the people nowe a daies that they would cal for the word of God, & e desirous to heare it. And Esrah the priest brought the law of God before the congregation both of men & women, and all that would heare and vnderstand it. Here againe we maie sée, who must know the worde of God; men, women, and children. And he read therein from morning to midde daie, before men and women and they that vnderstood it, and the eares of all the people hearkened to the word of the lawe. Hereby also it is plaine,Verse 4. that the lawe was in a tongue the peo∣ple vnderstood. And Esrah the scribe stood vpon a pulpit of wood, which he had made for the preaching: and Esrah opened the booke, before all the people, for he was aboue all the people. And when he had opened it, all the people stood vp, and Esrah praised the Lord the great God, and all the people answered Amen, with lifting vp their hands: and they bowed themselues, and worshipped the Lord with their faces toward the ground.Verse 7. Also Ieshua and Bani and diuers o∣thers, with the Leuites: caused the people to vnderstand the law. And they read in the booke of God distinctly, and gaue the sence, and cau∣sed
them to vnderstand the reading. Here is the true religion, here is the true seruice of God. Here is that seruice and religion, which many Recusants at this daie, refuse to be present at, as plainlie set downe as maie be: That is, reading of the word to all, to men, women and children, a pulpit of wood ordained for the preaching and expounding of the same, and praiers and praises to God, with vnderstanding, in a knowne tongue; so that the people cryed, A∣men, Amen. What can be more plaine than this? Is not this the very forme of seruice and praier, which our Church vseth at this daie? and yet some are offended at it. And Nehemiah and Esrah the priest and scribe, and the Leuites, that instructed the people, said to all the people: This day is holy to the Lord: Mourne not,Verse 9. nei∣ther weepe. For all the people wept, when they had heard the words of the lawe. He said also to them: Go and eate of the fat, and drinke of the sweete, and send part to them, for whom none is prepared:Verse 10. for this day is holy vnto our Lord, be ye not sory therefore: for the ioy of the Lord is your strength. Here are also two notable lessons, con∣cerning the Lords Sabaoth, for all Christians to learne. First to reioyce in the Lord, and in his word, that they haue heard: to me∣ditate vpon it, and to receiue it with ioy. Let all Christians be∣ware of wordlie carefulnesse, of sorrowe: For the ioy of the Lord,Heb. 13.9. is their strength. It is not gellies or preseruatiues, or meates; that maketh man strong: but the ioye of the Lord. Secondlie, in the Sabaoth, they should haue care on the poore: euerie one should bid his poore neighbour to dinner with him, for whom nothing is pre∣pared, or else send him something; if he haue but one dish, to send somewhat thereof to the poore. So did Iob,Iob. 31.17. who neuer eat his mor∣sell (that is as we terme it, his small pittance) alone: but the poore, the widowe, not on the sabaoth onlie, but also on other daies, had part of it with him. The like religion and forme of seruice was vsed in our sauiour Christes time. For thus wee read: And hee came to Nazareth,Luk. 4.16. where he had been brought vp, and as his custome was, he went in∣to the synagogue on the Sabaoth day, and stood vp to read, and there was deliuered him, the booke of the Prophet Esay. Here we may learne first, that Christ himselfe went to the Church, and that the scriptures were read and expounded to the people, and that this was a chiefe part of their seruice; and that euerie Sabaoth day, it was his custome, to preach and teach the people. And here also,
this custome of our sauiour, to preach euerie sabaoth, should all faithfull and true pastors learne, amongst their other customes of tithes and dueties, which they narrowly looke after. The same forme of seruice was continued in the Church in the Apostles time: for thus we reade of the whole Church of Christ, which were conuerted by the Apostles to the faith.Act. 3.42. And they continued in the Apostles doctrine, fellowship or communion, and breaking of bread and praiers. Here are the chiefe parts of Gods religion, faith to the word preached; communication of things necessarie, or christi∣an charity, to their brethren, as well preachers as others; recei∣uing the sacraments, and praiers. And that their praiers were in a tongue knowne,Act. 4.24. we read thus: That when they were comen from the councell, they tolde their fellowes, all that the priestes and elders had said vnto them. And when they heard it, they lift vp their voices, with one accord: and said, &c. How could they haue prai∣ed with one accorde, if they had not knowne, what they praied? And that the reading of the scriptures in a knowne tongue, and preaching of them to the people after also continued, thus we read. And after the lecture of the lawe and prophets,Act. 13.15. the ruler of the syna∣gogue, sent vnto them saying: ye men and brethren, if ye haue any word of exhortation to the people, say on. Here is the lawe and prophets first read, and afterward preached and expounded. And S. Paul after in his exhortation vnto them, affirmeth the same: for (saith he) the inhabitants of Ierusalem and their rulers,Verse 27. because they knew him not; nor yet the wordes of the prophets which are read e∣uery sabaoth day, they haue fulfilled them, in condemning him. And the Apostle S. Iames confirmeth the same, that this hath beene an auncient custome to heare the scriptures reade and expounded to the people.Act. 15.21. For Moses (saith he) of olde, in euery citty hath them which preach him, being read euery sabaoth day in their synagogues. So that then this is the ancient and true Catholique religion, to haue the scriptures read and taught vnto the people: and yet they which pretend the name of Catholiques, accompt this the newe religion, wil not heare the scriptures, will not come to that church where they are read and preached. That last fare well of Iosua to the Rubenites, Gadits, and halfe tribe of manasses,Ios. 22.5. when hee sent them home, is worth the mar∣king. Now (saith he) returne and go to your tabernacles, to the land of your possession, which the seruant of the Lord Moses, gaue you be∣yond
Iordane. Onely marke diligently, that you doe the precepts and the law, which Moses the seruant of the Lord commanded: that you loue the Lorde your God, that you walke in all his waies, and that you keepe his commandements, and that you cleaue to him, and that you serue him with all your heart, and with all your soule: And Iosuah blessed them, and sent them away. Here is liuelie set down the office of the magistrate, to command that his subiectes obey the law of God: Here is the platforme of true religion; to obey the law of God onely; there néedes no more. And this law can∣not be kept, vnlesse it be taught and heard: and therefore the prea∣ching and hearing is here also necessarily inferred. And here to come to particulars. Their praier in an vnknown tongue 1. Images 2. pardons 3. purgatorie 4. inuocation of saintes 5. transubstantiation 6. communion vnder one kinde 7. was not that faith once giuen to the saintes by Christ and by his Apostles: nay in the fathers daies it was not receiued; but came in after, as hereafter God willing, shall be prooued; and as many of themselues haue confessed. Of prayers in a strange tongue. ANd here first concerning praier in a strange tongue the scriptures teache plainely, that in all ages, al the saints of God haue made their praiers in their vulgar tongue. We reade in Genesis thus of the first common praiers:Gen. 4.25 Also to the same Seth was borne a sonne called Enoch: And then began men to call vpon the name of the Lord. But then they were all of one lan∣guage, as appeareth in Genesis chap. 11. ver. 1. when as their tounges were deuided: Therefore their first common prayers were in their vulgar tongue. The like forme of priuat praier, vsed no doubt, Abraham, Isaac and Iacob, when they talked with God: as appeareth by all their praiers and communications they had vnto the maiestie of God;Gen. 18.23 Gen. 24.63 as Abrahās often praiers for the Sodo∣mites proue: And Isaac going out to pray in the euening no doubt, followed his fathers steps: And Iacobs vowed forme of praier te∣stifieth Moses also praied in a tongue vnderstoode. Exod. 32.31.Ios. 7. v 7 And Iosuah for the finding out of Achan. Dauids whole booke of
Psalmes were written in the tongue he vnderstood;Psal. 106.48. wherein are both priuate praiers for himself, and publique praiers of the whole church, as that Psalme teacheth: O come let vs sing vnto the Lord, and let all the people say Amen. And as S. Paul saith, How should the people say Amen, if they knewe not what was praied? In the new testament, the praiers and hymnes of Simeon, Zacharie, the blessed virgine, of the Apostles, of our Sauiour himselfe; were all made in a tongue knowne vnto them: as is more euident th néedes any proofe. And shall not we follow their examples? Au∣gustine saieth, Enchirid, ad Laur. cap. 19. faith is quite taken away without the assent of the heart. And Philippus de Dies expoundes these wordes thus. Thou wilt defende; that is, I knowe thou wilt defend: We must be surely grounded in our praiers. But to let ex∣amples passe,1 Cor. 14 15 S. Paul out of the Psalmes seemeth to confirme this doctrine: I will sing (saith hee) with my spirit, and I will sing with my vnderstanding, alleadging this, as shoulde seeme, out of the psalmes,Psal. 47.7 where Dauid saieth: God is king ouer all the earth, sing ye praises with vnderstanding. All the churches of the heathen, a∣mongst whom God now raignes, must sing praises to him, and that with their vnderstanding.Actes. 2.6 And therefore the holie ghost came downe in al tongues: signifying, that it should teach men to praise God in all languages. And therefore to pray in the holie ghost (which S. Iude in this Epistle commandeth; & S. Paul also repeateth) may seeme to be nothing else, but to pray with heart and vnder∣standing. And this is that which is written in an other place: At the name of Iesus all knees shall bowe, and all tongues shall confesse, that Iesus Christ is the Lorde,2. Phil. 10.11 to the praise and glory of God. This is not meant so much of the tongues of flesh & bloud; as of the maner of languages: al languages shal confesse Iesus Christ. And more plainly to see the grossenes of praying in a strange language: S. Paul saith,1. Cor. 14.11 He is a Barbarian to him that heareth, which speaketh in a strange language. Such Barbarians were all the priestes in pope∣rie to their flocks. Nay it taketh away ye very force of cōmon prai∣er: how shal the people say Amen, or giue their consent, (which is the verie strength of praier) if they vnderstand not what is praied? Our sauiour founde fault with the mother of Zebedes children, because she asked she knew not what.Matth. 20.22 He likes not such prayers. And were not almost all praiers in poperie such? They saide (de profundis) for them which were dead. In which praier the deade is
not so much as named. Neither doth ye place of S. Paul make any thing for prayers in a strange tongue, where he saith. If I pray in a strange tongue,1. Cor. 14.14 my spirit praieth, but my vnderstanding is without fruit: where as heere he speaketh of his vnderstanding to others. For of his owne vn∣derstanding, when he praieth in a strange tongue, he had said be∣fore: he that speaketh in a strange tongue edifieth himselfe.1 Cor. 14.4 That the praiers in the primitiue church were all in a knowne tongue, thus it may appeare; Arnobius writes thus,Arnob. in. Psal. 135. Let vs come to Alleluiah, which is twise repeated: wherein I marke, that neither the flesh without the soule, nor the soule without the flesh can praise the Lord. These two things therefore that are knit in one, must sing their Alleluiah. That while they are in the passage of this life; they keepe this order of praising God, that the flesh say her Alleluiah, and the soule her Alleluiah. Iustine the martyr also of the church seruice in his time writes thus:Apol. 2. They which haue this worldes goods re∣leeue all others that neede, and we are daily one with another: and in all the oblations which we offer, wee praise (in giuing of thankes) the maker of all thinges by his sonne Iesus Christ, and by the holie ghost. And on that day which is called Sunday, wee come together into one place, which dwell either in the Countrey or in townes; and the bookes of the Apostles and the writings of the Prophets (as the time wil serue) are read. Then after when the reader hath made an ende: he that beareth rule or the pastor makes a sermon, wherein he instructs the people, and exhortes them, to the following of such excellent vertues as they haue heard. After these things we do rise al∣together, and powre out our praiers; and as wee haue saide before, when praiers are done, breade and wine, and water is offered or brought forth, and the . president, as much as in him lyeth, powres out his praiers and thanksgiuing, and the people cry together with him, Amen. And distribution and communication is made of all those things, vpon which thanksgiuing was made, to euery one that was present; & to those which were absent, it was sent by ye Deacōs. And they which are richer and willing, as euery one thinkes good, doe contribute to the poore: and that which is so collected, remai∣neth with the President, and hee thereof helpeth the fatherlesse and widdowes: and (that I may speake simply) he is the. ouerseer of al them that stand in neede. Thus we may see plainlie, the whole ser∣uice of the church in Iustine martyrs daies. Reading the scrip∣tures
in a known tongue, and after the reading, a sermon to the people, common praiers and common participation of the sacra∣ments: yea that they euen sent them to them that were absent. To declare their vnitie (as should seeme) they woulde all eate of one bread: as the pastors also declared their vnitie to strangers, by communicating with them, and their misliking by not com∣municating: as we may read in ecclesiasticall histories. Tertul∣lian also of churth seruice in his time writes thus:Apol. cap. 39. Wee meete to∣gether in one assembly or congregation, that, as it were making an army against God by praiers, we may compasse him about: this force is acceptable to God. We pray for Emperors, for their officers and powers, for the state of the worlde, for quietnesse, for the stay of the ende; we meet together, to heare the rehearsall of the holy scriptures. If the state of the present time do constraine vs, either to forewarne a∣ny thing, or to call any thing to remembrance: Verely wee feede our faith with these holy wordes, we confirme our hope, wee assure our trust. Renanus vpon this place of Tertullian writes thus: O holie assemblie! I would to God this custome might returne againe to vs, of beating the commandements of Christ, into the mindes of men. Our church at this day followes the primitiue church, as appea∣reth by Gregory in his Epistle,Epist. 63. where he saieth: The Lorde haue mercy vpō vs, & Christ haue mercy vpon vs, was said first of the Priest, and after answered of the people: (as we now vse.) And that the A∣postles did consecrate the sacrament, onely with the Lordes prayer. And that after one Scholasticus added but an other prayer. Here i Gregories daies, 590. yeares after Christ was but a poore mae. Iustinian the Emperor commandes thus concerning the seruice of God.In Nouellis de eccl. diuersis capit. We command all Bishops and Priestes, that they celebrate the holy oblation, and the prayer vsed in baptisme, not with a lowe, but with a lowde and cleere voice, which may be heard of the people, that thereby with more deuotion the mindes of the hearers may bee lift vp, in shewing forth the praises of God. For so the holy Apostle teacheth: Truly if thou onely blesse in the spirit, how shall he that is a priuate man at thy giuing of thankes say that Amen to God, seeing he knoweth not what thou saiest? Thou giuest thankes wel: but the other is not edified. And againe, with the heart it is beleeued to righteousnesse; but with the mouth is confession made to saluation. For these causes it is meete that amongst other praiers, they which are sayd in the holy oblation, shoulde bee pronounced with a lowde
voice of the holie Bishops and priestes, to our Lord Iesus Christ, with the father and the holie Ghost. And let all the holie priestes know, that if they shal neglect any of these things, they shal giue an account, in ye horrible iudgement of that great God, and our sauiour Iesus Christ. Neither, we knowing this, will be quiet, or suffer it vnpunished. Here is the order of praiers in Iustinians time: praiers in a known , pronounced with a lowde voice, that the people might vn∣derstand and heare them, not any masse; but the holie oblation then named. And if this order were omitted; not onelie Gods pu∣nishment, but his also threatned. And how will the Pope which breakes this order, escape this? or why doth not the Emperour now, who succéedes Iustinian in authoritie,De incomp. Dei nat. Hom. 5. execute this lawe e∣uen against the Pope? Chrysostom also speaketh thus of the com∣mon praiers in his time: Thou doest not so soon obtaine thy desire, when thou praiest alone to the Lord, as when thou praiest with thy brethren. For herein there is somewhat more, the concord, the con∣sent, the ioining of loue and charitie, the cry of the priestes. For to that end, the priestes are made ouerseers, that they being the stronger feet, maie take vnto them, the weaker praiers of the people, and car∣ry them vp to heauen. And in another place:In. 2. ad Thes. Ho. 4. The thing that a man cannot obtaine praying by himselfe alone, praying together with the multitude, he shall obtaine. And why so? For although not his owne worthines, yet the concord and vnitie preuaileth much. S. Ba∣sil also writes thus: Let thy toung singe,In. Psal. 28. and let thy minde search out the meaning of that thou speakest;Ad clericos Neocesar. that thou maiest singe with thy spirit, and sing also with thy mind. And againe: as it were from one mouth, and from one heart, they offer vp vnto the Lorde the Psalme of confession. And the word of repentance, euery one of them appli∣eth particularly vnto himselfe. They made as shoulde séeme, in his daies, such a publique confession of their sinnes,Lira. in. 1. ad Cor. cap 14. as we vse in our church at the beginning of our seruice. And Lira himself confesseth ths much: If the people vnderstand the praier of the priest, they are better reduced vnto God,Cyp. de orat. Domin. and with more deuotion they answeare Amen. Cyprian also saith, we haue one publique & common praier: when we praie, we praie not for one; but for the whole people: be∣cause the whole people are one. Augustine,Epist. 50. speaking of the Dona∣tists, comming to the vnitie of the church, by force of the Empe∣rours lawes, writes thus. Of whom (saieth he) if thou sawest the ioy, in the peace of Christ, their meetings and assemblies, their great
mirth, their solemne and ioyfull assemblies, both to heare and sing hymnes, and to heare the word of God, and many of them with great sorrow of the remembrance of their former error, and with ioy of the consideration of the present truth, &c. Thou wouldest saie, it had been great cruelty, to haue left these in euerlasting fire. Here we may see, what they did in the church in Augustines daies. Praefat. in Com. Aug super Psal.And in the preface of the commentaries of Augustine on the Psalmes, it is thus written. That God therefore made man, that there should be some, that should vnderstand his workes, which should in his vnderstanding wonder at, with his voice shew forth and praise, the prouidence of his disposing all thinges, the reason of his doing, the force of his finishing, and bringing thinges to passe, the power of his preseruing, ye wisdom of his gouerning, & the great mer∣cie of his doing good to all: And this is, to worship God our maker. As the world was made for man to serue him: so was man made for God, to serue him. (And after) He hath deliuered vs out of the handes of our enimies, that we might serue him, without feare all the daies of our life. This seruice of God enioined mā, though it may ma∣nie waies be expounded, and yeelded to God the creator: yet it is no∣thing else, but the worship due vnto God. And this is nothing else, then his deuout praise. The chiefe custome of worshipping God, (Lactantius being witnesse) is praise, out of the mouth of a iust man, directed to God. The which it selfe (he saieth) that it maie be accep∣table to God, we haue need of great humilitie, feare, and deuotion, least any perchance hauing the trust of integritie and innocencie, in∣curre the fault of pride and arrogancie, and by that meanes lose the grace of his vertue. Therefore Moses after he had put downe the for∣mer commandement, he addeth, thou shalt cleaue to him; he is thy praise, that is, whom alone thou must praise. This is true religion, this is right godlinesse, this is the right seruice of God. This is that accep∣table and continuall sacrifice, with which God will be worshipped, pacified, honored, and glorified: as he witnesseth by his prophet, Of∣fer to God the sacrifice of praise,Prolog. Aug. in lib. Psal. &c. And in the prologue Augustine writes thus. All scripture inspired from aboue, is apt to teach: And for this cause is written of the holie Ghost, that as it were out of a com∣mon fountaine of health, we should all out of this, take remedies for our proper griefes. (And after) The prophets teach some things, and the lawe other things, and the histories other things, and the doctrine of the Prouerbs other things; but the booke of the Psalmes, out of them
all, conteines what soeuer things are profitable. (And after) The ver∣ses of the Psalmes are made fit for vs by tunes, that either in our child∣hood, or they which are young men in manners, as it were singing psalmes, might be delighted. For manie of them which come to the church, neither can easilie learne either the precepts of the prophets, or Apostles; or when they haue learned them, can keepe them in me∣morie: but the answeres of the Psalmes, they sing at home sometime, and commonlie abroad, among the people. And if any be taken with any furious or cruel rage, if he shal be (as I may so say) inchaunted with the verses of the Psalme, by and by, all the rage of his fury departeth. (And after): Who will any more call him his enemy, with whom he hath lift vp one voice to God in the psalme? Whereby appeareth that the psalme restoreth charitie, which is the best thing in the worlde, making an vnitie, by the consent of the voice, and consorting diuers people of one companie, by concorde, through their common sin∣ging. A psalme driueth away deuilles, calleth Angels to helpe vs. It is the first letter to beginners in Christ schoole; the profiting of them, that go forwardes; the sure foundation of the perfect; and the one voice of the whole church. Psalmes beautifie our holy daies, psalmes mitigate Godlie sorrowe, psalmes will moue yea euen a hearte of stone, to teares. A psalme is the worke of Angels, the exercise of hea∣uenly soldiers, and spirituall frankinsence. O wise ordenance of our wonderfull master, that we may both sing, and may bee taught also, what things are good for our soule. If any thing be put in our minde hardly and by force, they straight way slip out againe: but those things we receiue with loue and delight, I cannot tell, how they more settle in our minds and sticke better in our memories. And what is it, that is not learned in the psalmes? Doth not ye greatnes of al vertues, the square of iustice, the beautie of chastitie, the perfection of wisedome, the rule of patience: doth not euery thing, which may be called good, proceed of them? And againe in the preface thus wee reade: This booke of Psalmes is as it were the register of all the holy scripture, and the perfection of all diuinitie. And when as wee must sing to God with our vnderstanding, howe can hee sing to God duly, which know∣eth not what he singeth? For our holie Psalmist commaundes vs to sing to God, with our vnderstanding. And that we must sing Psalmes with our vnderstanding, and not deskant vpon them without knowledge, (as they haue done heretofore in the aboun∣dance of their popish musick) this place plainly proueth.
Here we may plainlie sée why man was made, to knowe the workes of God, and to praise him for them; and that the chiefe part of Gods seruice is, his praise; and that we ought to praise him alone, in psalmes and hymnes, and that this is true religi∣on: that singing of Psalmes, driues away deuils, not ringing of holie bels, as was vsed in time of poperie; and that they song psalmes together in the Church, and also at home in their houses. To conclude, that the psalmes, are as an Apothecaries shoppe, containing medicines for all diseases of afflicted soules. And in S. Augustines daies the people with the pastor song psalmes alto∣ther, as appeareth in his exposition vpon the psalmes in diuers places, which prooueth manifestlie that their common praiers were in a tongue knowne to the people. For thus he writeth: Hauing beseeched the Lord,In psal. 18. that he would clense vs from our secret sinnes, and that he would spare vs as concerning other mens sins, we must vnderstand what this meaneth, that we may sing with reason like men, and not chatter like birdes. For blackbirdes, and pr∣rats, and crowes, and pies, and such like birdes, are often taught of men, to pronounce that, which they know not: but to sing by know∣ledge, by Gods will, is granted to man, not to birdes. And we know and lament, howe many wicked and riotous men sing so, thinges meete for their own eares and hearts: and they are so much the more wicked, because they cannot be ignorant of those thinges they sing. For they know, they sing that which is nought, and yet they sing (the more filthy the song is) the more willingly: because they thinke they are so much the more merry, as they are dishonest and filthie. But we which haue learned to sing Gods word in the Church, wee must also be instant, that we may be that which is written: Blessed is that people that singeth with vnderstanding. Therefore (beloued) that which we haue song with agreeing voices, we ought to knowe and perceiue with a pure heart. Euery one of vs in this psalme hath beseeched God and hath said, O Lord clense me from my secret sins, and spare thy seruant from other mens offences: if mine shall not pre∣uaile ouer me, then I shall be cleane, and shall be clensed, from the great offence. The which, that we may vnderstand what and what kinde this is, let vs runne ouer briefely, as God shall giue vs leaue, the text of the psalme. Here S. Augustine teacheth plainlie, that man must not sing like parrats or birdes, they must knowe and vnder∣stand what they sing. The verie wicked knowe and vnderstand
their songs: and shall not Gods children? And this doctrine he con∣firmeth in other places: For in another place thus he speaketh to his hearers: This psalme, as we haue song with you with ioyfulnes: so I beseech you consider it with vs with attentiuenesse. And after, This is written, and we haue declared where it is written:In psal. 44. they which remember it, let them acknowledge it, they which doe not remem∣ber it, let them read it: they which haue not read it, let them beleeue it. And in another place,In Psal. 147. you remember (beloued) the psalme which we haue song, where we haue deserted the exposition thereof to this. And againe: Blessed are the people that knoweth how to reioice in thee: let vs all runne to this blessing,In Psal. 99. let vs vnderstand our praise and reioycing: let vs not power it out, without vnderstanding. And spea∣king of the excellencie of singing psalmes against the Donatists, and of the maner of praying & singing in the Church of Aphrica, he writes thus: When (saieth he) is not the time to sing,Epist. 119. ad Ianuar. when the brethren are assembled in the Church: but either when there is rea∣ding, or preaching, or the chiefe pastor praieth himselfe with a lowd voice, or else common praiers are proclaimed, or denounced, by the Deacons: at other times, what can be better done of Christians as∣sembled together, then singing of Psalmes? What thing more holy, I knowe not. So that here may seeme to be set downe the chiefe partes of diuine seruice, in S. Augustines daies, reading the scrip∣tures, preaching, praier of the pastor with a cleare voice, that all might heare and vnderstand, common praier of the people, and singing of psalmes. Here was vnderstanding in all these: and in all these the people was edified: and all these are the chiefe partes of diuine seruice in the Church at this daie. I would to God, our recusants would marke this. And S. Ierome of Bethlehem in Iurie, writes thus:Ieron. epist. ad Marcellam vt commigret Bethlehem. Whosoe∣uer is chiefe in France, makes haste hither. The inhabitant of Britan∣, deuided from the world, if he profit in religion, leauing his We∣sterne sunne, seekes a place, knowne to him onely by fame, and re∣port of the scriptures. What shall we speake of the Armenians? what of the Persians, of the people of India, and Ethiopia, and Pontus, and Cappadocia neare Egypt, being very fruitfull of Monkes; Siria-Ce∣len, Mesopotamia, and all the swarmes of the East? which according to the word of our Sauiour, saying: Wheresoeuer the body is, thither the Eagles will be gathered: They haue runne to these places, and haue shewed vs the spectacles of many vertues. The language is di∣uers,
but one religion: so many companies of singers, as diuersities of nations. Amongst these (which is the chiefe vertue amongst Chri∣stians) they take no pride of their continency: Humilitie is of most force amongst them all: whosoeuer is the last, hee is accompted the first: No difference of apparell, no account, howsoeuer you be appa∣relled, it is neither praise nor dispraise: fastings extoll no man, nor po∣uerty is slandered, no moderate fulnesse is condemned. Euery man stands or falles to his master. Such were the first Monkes, not dif∣fering in apparell, hauing not certaine daies of fasting appoin∣ted, they song psalmes with vnderstanding. And as it is certaine, that euerie nation as they song psalmes in their own languages there, so they song also at home in their owne countries. And after he writes thus of the verie plowmen: Wheresoeuer thou shalt turne thy selfe, he that holdes the plow singeth Alleluiah. And the sweating reaper delightes himselfe with Psalmes, and the vine dresser, pruning his vine with his crooked sickle, singeth something of Dauids Psalmes. These are the verses in this countrie, these are (as we commonlie call them) the loue songs. This is the shéepe∣heards whistle, these are the plowmans instruments. That citie of Colchis called Dioscorias, whereof Plinie makes mention lib. 6. cap. 5. into which out of Asia had comed together 300. nations vsing al diuers tongues: so that the Romans in dealing with them were forced to vse 130. interpretors, maie verie fitly resemble the Church of Christ: as did also no doubt that congregation, on whome the holie ghost fell Actes 2.1. with the gifts of all langua∣ges.Ambros. hexam. lib. 3 ca. 5. And S. Ambrose declaring the order of singing in the church in his time, saieth thus: with the answering of Psalmes, and with the singing together, of men, women, maides, and little children; the Church soundeth as if it were the dashing and beatinges of the Sea. The Latine praiers in the Church (as a learned man noteth) séemeth first to come hereof; that the Bishops of Rome herein, followed the steps of the olde Romane Emperours, which séemed by their Latine iurisdiction and gouernment, to bridle the prouin∣ces, which they had subdued; and by the vse of the Latine tongue, they barred all strangers, from bearing office. So the Pope (who is the image of the beast) in his kingdome, hath done the like. For thus we reade of the Bohemians: when as they had em∣braced the Christian saith vnder Boriuarius their Prince, they re∣quest
of Methodius their Bishop, that their sacraments and prai∣ers might be celebrated, not in the Latine tongue they vnderstood not: but in the Bohemian tongue which was familiar to them. He certifieth this matter to Cyrill his fellowe Bishop, then being at Rome, and he to Nicholas then Bishop of Rome. Both these for their labour, were laughed to scorne of the Bishop, and of a great councell of fathers; when as sodainlie this voice was heard, in such a great assemblie. Let euery soule praise the Lord, and let eue∣ry tongue or language confesse him. With the which thing, the Bi∣shop of Rome being amased, yéelded to Cyrill according to the re∣quest of the Bohemians.Dubraius li. 4. But that manner of celebrating their praiers continued but a fewe yeares after, the Bishop of Rome altering it, when as he had appointed them a Bishop, and gaue him in charge: that he should not dissent in any respect from the Romane rite and custome in the celebration of their diuine ser∣uice. Here we maie sée, whose statutes these Latine praiers are: not the Lords; but the Bishoppes of Rome, to maintaine his kingdome. Of the scriptures read in the vulgar tongue. IN Chrysostomes daies, in the Church of Antioch,Chrysost. ho. 1. ad populum Antioch the scriptures were read in a tongue knowne to the people, and therefore af¦ter the reading of the Epistle to Timothy, he beginneth thus: You haue heard the voice of the Apostle, the heauenly trumpet, the spirituall harpe: you haue heard him to daie, discoursing to Timothy, of many and necessarie thinges, of elections, of drinking wine for his stomacke, of the obedience of seruants, and of many other things he hath discoursed to vs this day, and seeing we cannot runne ouer them all, what will you of these things which haue beene rehearsed, I shall declare vnto you (beloued?) For as in a great meadowe, I see many excellent flowers: (Nay not a meadowe; but euen Paradise it selfe, the garden of God, is the reading of the scriptures. Neither the flow∣ers thereof haue pleasant and fragrant smels and sauours: but fruit to feede the soule.) What will you therefore, of the thinges before spo∣ken,
I should declare to you this day, will you that I speake of that, which seemeth of smallest accompt, and is most easie to be vnder∣stood of euery man? (That thing we will handle) for it pleaseth me, and I knowe it will likewise please you: and what is that? but this: Vse a little wine for thy stomacke, &c. Thus far Chrysostome. Which place proueth plainely, that the people vnderstood the scriptures when they were read, and also the excellencie of them. They are as a meadowe, full of most swéete flowers: nay they are the pa∣radise of God here on earth. And who is so simple, as will not de∣sire to go into Paradise? Who is so foolish, as may goe in, and will not;In Gen. Ho. 35. that will banish himselfe from thence? And in another place he writeth thus: The cunning in the scriptures, is an excel∣lent thing (my beloued.) This endueth the soule with good man∣ners, this transporteth our minde into heauen, this maketh a man thankefull to God, this maketh vs regard nothing in this world, but that we should haue our conuersation in heauen, and hauing an eie to God our reward, it maketh vs doe all things, and ioyfully to attempt, euen the hard labours of vertue. By these we learne, the helpe of God, euen present and at hand, the courage of the iust, the goodnes of the Lord, the greatnes of his rewardes. Hereby we may bee stirred vp, to follow the liues of the best saints of God; not to be slouthfull in the combates of vertue, to be sure of Gods promises, euen before they come. Therfore with great diligence, let vs giue our selues to the reading of the scriptures, for thereby we shall get great knowledge, if wee shall still haue recourse to those thinges which therein are set downe. Who will not now learne so many good lessons? And least anie man should blame the hardnesse and obscuritie of the scriptures, as many doe; thus it followeth: Neither is it possible, that he that giueth himselfe to the scriptures, with great studie, and earnest desire, shall alwaies be neglected: but although wee lacke a master to teach vs, the Lord himselfe from aboue, entring our hearts, doth lighten our mindes, doth power his beames into our vnderstan∣ding, doth reueale things hid, and doth teach vs those thinges wee know not, if we only will bring, as much as in vs lieth. For he saith, you shall call no man master vpon earth: that is, in comparison of me, who am able and euer willing to teach. Therefore when we take this heauenly booke into our hands, all worldly cares being set aside; let vs bend the force of our minde, and bridle it, that it be not distracted with vaine cogitations; and let vs giue our selues to reading, with
great deuotion and marking, that we may be lead by the holy spirit, to the true vnderstanding of the scriptures, and thereby reape much fruit. That same Barbarian and Eunuch of the Queene of Ethio∣pia, which was so honourable, and was caried in his chariot; at that time, did not omit the reading of the scriptures, but hauing the Pro∣phet in his hands, he studied earnestly, and that being ignorant, what was contained in the booke: and he brought as much as was in him, that is, studie, a good will, and diligent marking. Marke I beseech you, what a matter this was, not to giue ouer his reading, no not in his iourney, and that sitting in his chariot. Therefore, they are iustly to be found fault withall, which being at home, cannot be persuaded to doe this, but thinke, that they neede not read the scriptures; either because they are married men, or souldiers, or haue care of children, and seruants, or other businesse: Therfore they thinke, it behooueth not them to reade the scriptures. Behold this man was an Eunuch, and a Barbarian (which both, had been enough to haue made him carelesse) and besides this, the greatnesse of his honour, and aboun∣dance of his wealth, as also being in his iourney, and being caried in a chariot; and he that traueileth thus, it is not easie for him to reade, but verie troublesome: notwithstanding his great desire, and earnest studie, taking all lets away, made him reade still.This same do∣ctrine he han∣dles at large, ho. 2. in Mat. and ho. 9. ad Col. where he wil∣leth his hea∣rers, to buy them bibles, and if not bi∣bles, yet at least the new Testament. Wherfore he did not say as many say now adaies, I vnderstand not these thinges which are written, I cannot vnderstand the depth of the scriptures, wherfore in vaine I should take paines, I haue none to guide me: He thought no such thing, being in language a Barbarian, but in heart a louer of wisedome; but he thought he should not be despised, but helped of Gods grace, if he brought that which was in him, that is, studie and diligence. Whom also let vs followe; and what thinges haue beene read to vs to daie, let vs learne diligently. This place being long, I haue written it at large, because it is so excellent; it containeth the great fruite and profite we get by reading the scriptures, the meanes how to attaine the knowledge of them: and it taketh a∣waie, ye common obiection which now adaies manie make, That because they haue wife and children, they are not bounde to reade the scriptures: and ouerthroweth plainelie, the popish Catholique faith, which teacheth, that the vulgar people should not reade the scriptures, and teacheth the true catholique saith indéed. And this is no small or light matter, but the chiefe point of all religion; as euerie one maie perceiue, by the benefites which are reaped by
reading the scriptures. In psal. 146.The same catholique faith was also in Augustines daies: For thus he writes against those, that finde fault with the hardnesse of the scriptures, vpon that verse of the Psalme: The Lord taketh vp the meeke, for example sake (saith he) Thou vnderstandest not the scriptures, thou vnderstandest but a little of them, thou knowest not what it meaneth: yet honour the scriptures of God, honour the word of God, although it be not manifest vnto thee: defer, through deuo∣tion thy vnderstanding. Be not froward to accuse, either the obscu∣rity, or peruersitie of the scriptures. Here is nothing peruerse, or out of order, or crooked: but here is some thing obscure, not that thou shouldest not know it, but that it should exercise thee, before thou receiue it. Therefore when it is obscure, thy phisition hath done that, that thou mightest knocke; he would haue thee exercised in knock∣ing, his will is that when thou knockest or praiest, he will open vnto thee: By knocking, thou shalt be exercised, and by exercise thou shalt be made more strong, and more large: and being made wider, thou shalt be made capable of that which is giuen thee. Therefore be not angrie, that it is shut vp: be gentle, be courteous, do not kick against obscure places, and say it had better, haue beene said this, or thus. For how canst thou say or iudge, how it ought to be said? The patient may not finde fault with his phisicke, the Phisition knoweth how to temper it, trust him that cureth thee. Therfore what follow∣eth: The Lord taketh vp the meeke, therfore resist not thou against the secrets of God: be gentle that he may take thee vp. Thus far Augustine.Oratione de lau∣dibus Const. Eusebius also writes thus: What is so excellent to de∣clare his diuinitie most euidentlie, not onelie to promise that hee would make them fishers of men (the which thing as hee spake in worde, so he performed in déed) but also, to giue them such vertue and power, that they should commit things to writing, and make bookes, and those bookes should haue such authoritie and great esti∣mation amongst all men, that they should be turned into all tongues, as well of Barbarians as Grecians, which are in the whole world, and that they should put all their whole studie and labour in learning them, and should beleeue assuredlie, that Gods wordes were contained and deliuered in them.In Gen. ca. 26. Origen also verie excel∣lentlie, that euerie man must studie and knowe the scriptures, writes thus: Let vs trie to doe that (saith he) that wisedome admo∣nisheth vs: Drinke water out of thine owne fountaine, and out of
thine owne wels, and let thy spring or fountaine be thine owne. Try thou (O hearer) to haue a well of thine own, and a fountaine of thine owne, that thou when thou shalt take in hand the booke of the scrip∣tures, maiest begin of thine owne iudgement, to bring foorth some vnderstanding, some meaning. And according to those things thou hast learned in the Church, trie thou also, to drinke of thine own wel. There is within thee, the nature of the water of life, there are in thee vaines of water, which neuer faile, and watering streames of thy rea∣sonable vnderstanding, if they be not earthie, and stopped vp with grauell. Sée, Origen would haue euerie man reade the scrip∣tures at home, nay he plainly affirmeth, that euerie man hath in him some part of the water of life, some part of the holy ghost, whereby he is able to féede his owne soule, with this water out of the holie scriptures, and to flowe also to others. Euen the simplest husbandman, is able to yeelde a sence of the scriptures, and per∣chance to see that, which some great doctor could not espie, if hee would take the booke in his hand, and with earnest praier and stu∣die giue his minde to the same: If his heart and minde be not opt and choked with the grauell of this vile earth and worldly af∣faires. Dauid saieth, Psal. 87.7. God will in numbring his peo∣ple, rehearse as well the singers as trumpetors: That is, as well y which praise god by reading and vnderstanding his wonder∣full workes, as they which like trumpets preach him. And least anie should say, how should we praise God? we lacke knowledge: The Prophet addeth, All my fresh springes shall be in thee, no man here maie complaine of want. And of euerie one of the faithfull, our Sauiour saith, Io. 4.14. That that water which hee shall giue him, shall be in him a well of water, springing vppe into euerlasting life. And this well hath euerie faithfull man in him, either deeper or shallower. Here we may sée how they which crie in certaine light matters of ceremonies, Fathers, Fathers; in this great point of religion dissent from the Fathers, and that both from the Gréeke and Latine Fa∣thers. And how then can their faith be catholique?
Of images. AS concerning Images, either of God himselfe, or of the saintes, to be worshipped: there is no one thing, that the scripture more condemneth. It is the second commande∣ment in the lawe: Thou shalt not make to thee any grauen Ima∣ges, thou shalt not bow downe to them nor worship them. They, which vrge the bare words and letter so much in the Lords supper, here make small accompt of it (being so often repeated, and writ∣ten, with Gods owne finger) to maintaine their superstition and Idolatrie. And this commandement is repeated and expoun∣ded thus:Deut. 4.15. And the Lord spake vnto you out of the fire, and ye heard the voice of the words, but saw no similitude, but a voice ye heard: as though he should saie, ye sawe no similitude of God, when he gaue the lawe, but ye heard a voice onelie: Therefore you shall make no Image or likenesse of God. For a voice cannot be pic∣tured. And here the word (Temunah) which signifieth an Image or likenesse, is to be marked, which after is repeated so often. For so it followeth, that they should looke well to their soules, because they sawe no similitude when God spake vnto them in Horeb out of the middest of the fire, least perchance beeing deceiued, they should make to themselues, anie carued worke, or likenesse or si∣militude, or Image. Anie likenesse, the similitude of man, or woman. So that, this hearing a voice onelie, which cannot bee pictured; this séeing no Image or likenesse or similitude, when God spake to them; this carefull keeping of their soules, least they should be deceiued; this multiplying of these wordes, of carued worke, likenesse, similitude, Image; argueth plainlie, that nor likenesse of God is to be made: and that Images of him are for∣bidden by this commandement, and not of Idolatrous Gods, as the Papists imagine and expound. The same doctrine is confir∣med by the Prophet Esay,Cap. 40. v. 20. To whom will ye liken God (saieth the Prophet) or what similitude will ye set vp to him? The workeman melteth an Image, or the Goldsmith beateth it out in golde, or the goldsmith maketh siluer plates.  Doth not the poore chuse out a tree, that will not rot for an oblation? he seeketh also a cunning workman vnto him to prepare an Image, that will not be mooued. Know ye
nothing? haue ye not heard it?  hath it not beene tolde you from the beginning? haue ye not vnderstood it by the foundation of the earth? He sitteth vpon the circle of the earth,  and the Inhabitants therof are as grashoppers, he stretcheth out the heauens as a curteine, and sprea∣deth them out as tents to dwel in, he bringeth the Princes to nothing,  and maketh the Iudges of the earth as vanity: as though they were not planted, as though they were not sowen, as though their stocke tooke no roote in the earth. For he did euen blowe vpon them, and they withered, and the whirle-winde will take them away,  as stub∣be: To whom now, will ye liken me that I should be like him (saith the holy one?) This place plainlie proueth, that no Image is to be made of God: and that, not the goldsmithes and carpenters, which made Idols, but euen they that made Images of wood, or golde, of God; are condemned. And not onelie that it is vnlaw∣full to make Images of God the father, but of Iesus Christ, to worship him withall. For of him in this chapter twise the Pro∣phet prophesieth: And the glory of the Lord shall be reuealed, and all flesh shall see it together; for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it. And beholde the Lord will come with power, and his arme shal rule for him, behold his reward is with him, and his worke before him. And yet after this he addeth: Who will you liken me vnto? [And sée∣ing to make an Image of God, displeaseth him thus, it may séeme also that the same thing displeaseth his saints. For it is likelie that thing which pleaseth not the master; displeaseth also the ser∣uants:] God will not be worshipped as the heathen worship their Gods: but their worship was to make Images to them: this vt∣terlie displeaseth God. And no doubt this is that, for which God reproueth the people of Israell, by the Prophet Ezechiell.Ezech. 20.32. Wee will be (saie they) as the heathen, as the families of the countries were, and serue wood and stone as the heathen did: For no doubt the heathen made their Images to them, whom they beleeued to liue in honour and in remembrance of them. It is a strange thing (saith Augustine) how God dwelles in some, which know him not,Epist. 57. and in sme that knowe him, he dwelles not; for they doe not belong to Gods Church, because knowing God, they haue not glorified him, as God, nor giuen him thankes: and yet children sanctified by the sacrament of Christ, and regenerat by the holy ghost, belong to the Church, who truely so being regenerat, by reason of their age, can∣not know God. Therefore whom they (meaning those idolatrous
and vnthankefull men) can knowe and not haue: these, that is chil∣dren, could haue before they knew. Oh therfore let all men glorifie God, as God, as they ought to doe, or else, hee will not dwel in them. That historie which Iosephus makes mention of, declareth the Catholique faith of the Iewes, how they alwaies expounded that commandement.Ioseph. lib. 18. antiquit. Iud. cap. 11. Caius the Emperour would haue had his Image set in the temple of Ierusalem, by Petronius, Lieutenant of Syria. But the Iewes so obstinately withstood him, that they saide, they would rather die, then suffer such a reproch: yea insomuch, that be∣ing now fully resolued to die for the matter, they left their fieldes vn∣tilled. Petronius wondring at the constancy of the people, and dete∣sting the wickednesse of Caius, promised to send Embassadours to Caius. He had scant ended his speech, when as behold a shower so∣dainly fell, contrarie to all mens expectation, on a faire day, when as there was no signe of raigne, and in a most fit time, when as they had almost beene vndone, for lacke of raine. The which miracle, made the Lieutenant thinke, that God cared for the affaires of the Iewes, and the Iewes to hope, that his suite should not bee fru∣strate. Petronius wrote diligently hereof to the Emperour, but hee continuing in his purpose, commanded that Petronius himselfe should be put to death. But before the letter came; Caius himselfe died: and so deliuered the temple from the Image, and Petronius from death. By this it should séeme, that the Iewes had in their tem∣ple no Image at all, neither of God nor of man, neither of Saint nor of Cesar: and that by the space of so manie hundreth yeares, because they thought it, against this commandement. The prophesie of Abacucke, seemeth a generall or catholique prophesy, directed vnder the type of the Iewes, to the whole church of God.Hab. 1.13. He first complaineth of the crueltie, and great prosperity of the wicked, & of the iust punishment of God, by requiting their own dealings vpon their owne heads. He teacheth the doctrine of faith, that thorowe patience, and faith we must still waite for Ie∣sus Christ; euen as the Iewes for his first, so wee for his seconde comming.Cap. 2.4. This faith must be our strong castle and bulwarke: He that trusteth in himselfe, as a strong tower of defence, that retcheth vnto the skyes, his hearte is not right in him: But the iust shall liue by faith He inueieth against couetousnes,Verse. 5. he complaineth of the proud and couous man, that enlargeth his desire, as hell that can ne∣uer
haue enough, that loadeth himselfe with thick clay (for he ma∣keth golde no better:) and that spoiles manie,Vers. 9.10.11.12. and thereby maketh him a glorious and statelie house: that buildeth a towne with bloud, and erecteth a citie by iniquitie: that maketh the people la∣bour, as it were in the verie fire, without ioy or comforte, they are so hardlie dealt with all. He cryeth woe, against all such dealers, in Gods church: Wee shoulde be all mercifull, as our heauenly fa∣ther is mercyfull. But his last woe, is against idolaters,Luke 6.36. Vers. 18.19.20. which say to a peece of wood, arise: and to a dumbe stone, awake; when as it is it selfe compassed with golde, and there is no breath at all in it. But the Lord (saieth he) is in his holie temple, and let all the earth keepe silence before him. As though he should saie: woe to them that call vppon God vnder anie Image, as though God were presente there, that saie to God vnder anie Image (as the prophet Dauid praieth often,) Let God arise. For so no doubt these phrases of the people are to be vnderstood. The people were neuer so sencelesse, as to saie to a stone or trée, arise or walke: but to the thing signifi∣ed by them. But the Lord (saieth the prophet) is in his holie temple: not tyed to anie Image: and let all the earth keepe silence before him, that is, tremble to breake his commandements. And againe, he taketh awaie that common reason that is made for the defence of these Images, which saie that they are lay-mens bookes, that they teach the simple: But he saieth,Vers. 18. what profiteth the grauen I∣mage? for the caruer of it, is the maker of it;Ferus. in Io. 18. Fol. 494. a thing molten or mingled together, and a teacher of lyes. Ferus also vpon S. Iohn writeth thus: It was a custome among the Iewes, that one shoulde be let loose at Easter, in remembrance of their deliuerance out of E∣gypt: but God (saieth he) in remembrance of this, had ordained the passeouer. But they not content with this signe giuen them of God, haue ordained an other, and that against the lawe of God, that some guilty person might be let loose, when as the lawe commands that all offenders should be punished: So hypocrisie is not content with the word of God, but alwaies either addeth or preferreth her owne deui∣ses. Thus much Ferus himselfe writes, of ceremonies and super∣stitions, besides the worde of God,Rom. 1.20. Deut. 6.8. These are the laymens bookes euen of the Pagans. whereof the papistes religion was full. And the reason he alledgeth here is sufficiente to ouer∣throw their doctrine of Images: for God hath giuen vs the hea∣uens to put vs in mind of him (as S. Paul saieth) and his word, as Moses teacheth: what neede we anie other signes, anie other re∣membrancers
of Images, and that against his worde? Is not this to imitate the superstitious Iewes? Idolatry (as one noteth) is worse then infidelitie: As in a kingdome, hee that preferreth or erecteth a new king, is a more greeuous offender, then hee that disobeieth onelie his lawfull prince. Such not traytors; but rebels against God are Idolaters.Lira in cap. 13. Reuel. And therefore Lira giueth this note, That euen the Turks kingdom hath so long continued, because in his religion (although otherwise wicked,) yet he banisheth all Images, and Idolatry: and euen for this cause (sayeth hee) God suffereth it to continue so long. In the Primitiue church also it séemeth, the fathers verie strictlie obserued this commaundement: and suffered no Images in the church: as appeareth by Epiphanius, who comming into the church and seeing a vaile hang there,Epiphan. in Epist. ad Iohan. Episc. Ieroslo. hauing painted on it the Image, as it were, of Christ, or of some sainte, against the authority of the scrip∣tures, he did rent it in peeces; and gaue counsell to the church war∣dens, that they should bury some poore man with it. Sée first howe he rent it in peeces; declaring it to be a thing not tolerable in the church of God: Euen as Moses with like zeale, broke the golden calfe in peeces,Exod. 32.20. and beate it into powder; and strowed it vpon the wa∣ter, and made the children of Israell drinke of it. Secondly he alled∣geth the authoritie of the scriptures against it, meaning no doubt the breach of the second commandement. If this had béene the ca∣tholique faith, once giuen to the saints, to haue Images of Christ, or of his saintes: no doubt Epiphanius being a Bishoppe, and who wrote against all heresies, woulde haue knowne it. But as it shoud seeme, this point of catholique religion, was not knowne in his daies; but crept in after. And soe indéede Alphonsus de castro confesseth. Therefore it is no true pointe of the catholique faith, for which here S. Iude biddeth vs to striue. Nay to haue Images, and that of Iesus Christ, he accomptes to be an heresie: For thus hee writeth of ye heretikes called Gnostici,Epiphan. contra haeres. Lib. 1. To. 2. haeres. 27. that they haue images pain∣ted with colours, and some of them of gold and siluer, which they say to be the Images of Iesus. And these Images of Iesus to haue beene made, in the tyme of Pontius Pilate, when as he was liuing amongst men: But they haue these Images secretlie. If these had done well, if these had beene precious Iewelles (as nowe of counterfaite I∣mages manie make accompte, which they are not sure, whether they be the true Images of Christ or no:) hee woulde neuer haue
numbred them among their heresies. Lactantius also an auncient writer, condemneth the worshipping, or hauing of images.Lact. de origine erroris 2. li. c. 19. Who∣soeuer (saith he) endeuours to maintaine this mysterie of man, and the reason of our nature; let him lift vp himselfe from the ground, and with a right minde, looke vp with his eies into heauen: let him not looke for God vnder his feete, nor draw out of his steppinges, that thing, hee will worshippe; for whatsoeuer is vnder man, must needs be more vile and base, then man: but let him looke for it aloft. For there can be nothing greater then man, but that which is aboue man; but God is aboue man; therefore he is aloft, he is not beneath: nei∣ther is hee in this lowe region, but in the highest to bee sought for. Wherefore it is no doubt, there is no religion, where there is any image. And in another place.Lib. 2. cap. 2. I demanded (saith he) if one behold the image of one, that is gone a farre iourney, that he might thereby receiue some comfort of him being absent, whether he be well in his wits, if when he is present, or returned home againe, he will continue i beholding the image, and will not rather enioy the beholding of the man himselfe? No truely. For the mans image then seemes ne∣cessary, when he is farre from home, but to no purpose, when he is at hand. But the image of God therefore, whose spirit and power is spread euery where, is alwaies in vaine, and to no purpose. And a little after in the same place: That is not the image of God, which is made of stone, brasse, or any other matter, but man himselfe: be∣cause he feeleth, moueth and doth notable workes. Marke first Lactantius zeale. First, there is no religion (saith he) where there is any image. Secondly, God is present in euerie place, there∣fore there néedeth no image of him. Thirdly and lastly, if wee wil haue an image of god, man himselfe is his most liuely image. And he liued 300. yeares after Christ. Arnobius, who was Lactan∣tius master, of Images writes thus: As much as in vs lieth, let vs go to the Lord of all things, with our heart and our minde:Lib. 2. cont, gent. let vs bee lift vp from these places, and let vs translate the wauering thoughtes of our hearts vpon him; let vs remember him continually. And al∣though he cannot be pictured in any mans imagination: yet by be∣holding him, let vs imagine to our selues, as it were, a certaine soft or still ayre of him (as Elias did.) And againe,Lib. 3. and if you will heare a true opinion, either God hath no shape; or if he haue any, we know not what it is. For that which we neuer sawe, to be ignorant of, we ac∣compt it no dishonest thing. And againe: you worship the pictures
of men, as the power of God: neither are you ashamed to giue them the shape of a mortall creature. And againe: If you refuse not to heare the iudgement of our mindes, we are so farre off from giuing a∣ny corporall lineaments to God, that we are afraid to ascribe to such an excellent maiestie, the ornaments of soules, and those same ver∣tues, in which it is granted but to very fewe to excell. For who will call God strong, or constant, liberall, or wise, &c. These are the god vertues of men, and by the opposition of vices, haue deserued commendations. Who is so brutish as to thinke God great, in the good thing that belonges to man? All mens vertues and affaires are nothing to God.Lib. 6. And againe: In this matter ye are wont to lay a great fault to our Church, that we build no churches for our diuine seruice, nor that we make no images or likenesse of the Gods, that we build no altars, that we giue not to them the bloud of beasts, nor frankinsence, nor come sprinckled with salt, nor wee power no wine out before them; which all, we doe not leaue off to doe or builde, as though we carried impious and froward mindes against the Gods, or that through some rash desperation we had conceiued some con∣tempt against the Gods: but because, that we suppose and beleeue that the Gods, if they be Gods in deede, and endued with the excel∣lency of this name, do laugh at all these thinges, (if they can laugh) and are displeased with them, if they can be angry. If the gentiles should sée the Churches in the popish kingdome, they would neuer ae these faultes vnto Christian religion, they should sée altars, and Images end we. But as it should seeme, the ancient and true Christian religion, had no such. And after: Wee build them no Churches, neither doe we worship their Images, neither doe we kill them any sacrifices, nor doe we offer them any frankinsence or wine. And what more honour or worship can we doe to them,We may note here how he giues the chiefe place to Emperours and Kings. then that we set them in place, wherein we place the head of all things, the Lord and most high king, and doe honour the Gods, as the chiefe Lordes and kings of all things. Here we maie sée first, that in Arnobius daies ye christians builde no churches, which was 300. yeares after Christ: and that christian religion consisteth not in the outward pomp or curious magnifi∣cency of churches or buildings, as ye pope hath made men beléeue. Againe, we maie obserue, by reading histories, when churches be∣gan to be builded; & when they were builded, how they were called and accomted of in true catholique religion. Euseb. of this matter
writes thus: The hid force and might which remaines in our sauiour appeareth, of the things he hath effected or done: and all excellent things which are done, are not the workes of one that liueth, &c. And now a fit time offereth it selfe, of shewing what thinges our sauiour hath done in our times, and of knowing perfectly the actes of the li∣uing God, which as it were euen nowe liue for the fresh memorie of them, &c. Our Sauiour hauing ouercome mighty tyrants and infi∣dels, forthwith caused ensignes of his victorie to bee erected in all landes, and the whole world to be adorned with holy temples, and with stately or large buildinges of Churches; yea and euen in the wildernesses of the Barbarians, churches and temples to be dedica∣ted and consecrated to the onely God of all thinges, and Lord of all creatures, wherof also those temples, which were consecrated to him, tooke the name of the Lorde, which name was not giuen them of men but of God: and therefore they are called the Lordes. houses. Thus farre Eusebius. Their faith then agreed with the scripture. Christ saith, My house shall be called a house of praier to all nations, That is, al churches & houses of praier among all nations, are my houses. And according to this, Iacob called the place wherein God appeared vnto him, Bethel: that is, Gods house: So here in Constantines daies, they called their Churches : that is, the Lords houses: as they also called their Sabaoth, the Lords day. They followed S. Paules precept, they did all thinges in the name of Iesus Christ. In Constantines daies, large and statelie chur∣ches were builded, in all the countries of the world: and they were called the Lords houses. They were not dedicated to anie Saint:  nor long after. Austen in his daies, as shall hereafter be allea∣ged, saith, that we build no churches to Martyrs. And though the Diuell was then preparing stones to such churches, yet then there were none of them as yet erected. Theodoret makes mention of a church of S. Michaell, on the third chapter of the Coloss. but it was but in a corner of the world in Phrygia, and was condemned by the councell of Laodicea. But after, this worke went forward ce in the world. For it was the first worke of that prowd Bo∣nifacius, successour of humble Gregorie, (who refused the name of vniuersall Bishop) after he had obteined that prowde title of Pho∣cas, to conuert the Temple called Pantheon, that is,In templian om∣n martyrum & E. virginis. the Church of all the Gods, into all saintes church. So that the naming of the Churches generallie, after the names of Saintes, as should
séeme, began with poperie. This is reported in Summ. Conc. by a Frier of their owne. Secondlie, the Christians offered to the Gods no corporall thinges. But in time of poperie, they haue both vsed frankin∣sence after the manner of the heathen, and also offered euen eg, and such like base thinges. And againe Arnobius saith, That the true worshipping of God is in the heart, and an opinion worthie of the Gods: neither the offering of bloud profits any thing. And of the signe of the crosse he writes thus:Lib. . As for crosses, wee neither wor∣ship them, nor wish for them: But you which doe make Gods of wood, perchance worship crosses, as parts of your Gods. For your ensignes and standards of your tentes, what are they else but golde and braue crosses? For your ensignes of victorie, doe not onely re∣semble the figure of the crosse, but of a man crucified. We see the signe of the crosse liuely in the ship, when it is carried with lofty sailes, when it slides away, her sailes being spread abroad, when asThree speares set a crosse, vn∣der which the conquered were made to go vnarmed. a yoke is erected, it is the signe of the crosse, when man worships God stret∣ching out his hands with a pure minde, it is the signe of the crosse. So the signe of the crosse either leaneth to naturall reason, or agrees to religion. Here we maie plainlie sée, howe Arnobius giues reue∣rence and holie estimation to the signe of the crosse: But he takes awaie adoration from it. And S. Augustin of Iesus Christ writes thus:De fide & sim∣l. cap. 7. We beleeue he sits on the right hand of God. And yet for all this wee must not thinke, that God the Father is compassed abou with mans shape, that when we thinke of him, we should thinke that he hath either right side or left, or that because the father is said to fit, we should suppose that to be done, with bending his thighes; least we fall into that sacriledge, wherewith the Apostle correcteth those which haue turned the glorie of the incorruptible God into the like∣nesse of a corruptible man. &c. It is a horrible thing, for a christian to make such an image of god in the church, but it is much more wicked in the heart, where is the true temple of God, saith Austen. And yet such images haue béene made of God in time of poperie. Concerning Images, also Iustin the Martyr writes thus: Nei∣ther doe we worship with many sacrifices,Apol. 2. and with garlands of flow∣ers, those which men picturing doe place in temples, and call Gods. And after, we accompt this thing to be done against all reason, and with dishonor of the gods, who hauing. a glorie which no man can vtter, and shape; their names are giuen to corruptible thinges, and to
such thinges as needes the care of men. Ignatius also of Images writes thus: Loue one another in the Lord, asVi Dei sim∣lachra. Epist. 5. ad Phil. the Images of God. See, you men, that you loue your wiues, as your own members. These were the images of god that were made accompt of in his daies. The councell of Frankford was called together Ann. Dom. 794. by Carolus Magnus, wherein the decrees of Adrian the Bishop and of the Germanes, concerning the worshipping of images, were disallowed. It should séeme, Charles the Great misliked the wor∣shipping of images: and yet of him I read this great commen∣dation.Fasciculus tem∣por. de Caroto magno. And this mans excellencie in all thinges that may commend a prince, who is able to praise sufficiently? This is sufficient at this time to say, that from the beginning, to the ende of his raigne, in such a great and troublous time, he behaued himselfe so commendably, that there was no one found, which could finde fault with him in any thing. For in truth, what could fraile man finde fault with, in him, whom Gods power alwaies protected and directed? The verie heathen countries some of them haue detested Ima∣ges. The temples of the Egyptians,Alex. lib. 2. c. 22. although they were verie curiouslie wrought, with marble and gold, with great excesse and wonderfull cunning; yet there were no images of the Gods in them: but in stéed of them, as liuing Gods, Apes, Ibis, Croco∣diles,Eus. lib. 6. Praep. Euang. and such like plagues of the Magitians and wonders of E∣gypt, were worshipped for Gods. Among the people called Seres, it was forbidden by lawe that no images should be worshipped. In the temples also of the Romanes, Clemens saieth, by the decree of Numah, following the lawes of Moses, in the space of an hundreth and seauenty yeares, after the building of the citty, there was no I∣mage seene, neither painted nor fained. Plutarch also affirmeth the same in the life of Numah, and he yéeldes a reason; because it were a wicked act, to resemble a better thing, by that which were worse: and that God would no otherwise bee conceiued, but by our vnder∣standing. The Germans also, as Tacitus writes, thought it not law∣full to set Gods on walles; neither thought it agreeing with the maie∣stie of the Gods, to liken them to any shape of man. Lycurgus among the Lacedemonians,Alex. lib. 2. c. 22. although he were the inuentor of manie ce∣remonies among the Gentiles, yet there was no image of him deuised for the gods: but he for bad anie Image of beast or man, to be made to the gods. The heathen men themselues, despise images. As Stasicrates
a notable workeman regarding nothing that delighted the eies, calling painters idle artificers, he determined to make a worke not vnworthie of Alexander.Plus. 2. orat. de fortuna Alex. The great Athos (saith he) the hill of Thracia, whose toppe may be seene a farre off, hauing members and partes like vnto a man, being laboured and portraied out, shall be A∣lexanders image. Who with his feete shall touch the sea, and in his left hand, shall hold a most famous city, and in his right hand, a boull, out of which shall runne a great riuer into the sea. Alexander com∣mended the inuention of the man: but (saith he) let Athos remaine in his place still. For it is sufficient, that it hath beene a monument of one kinges folly. But Caucasus, and Tanais, and the hils Emodi, and the Caspian sea, shall portraite forth me. These are the Images of my actes. Wen as the countries of Gréece also, would haue erected images in their famous cities, to Agesilaus, he wrote to them thus: Let my image neither be painted nor grauen.Plut. in A∣pophth. Xenoph. orat. de Agesil. rege. And Xenophon writer▪ That he vtterly refused that his image should be painted or pictured: but he laboured earnestly to adorne his minde, affirming that the o∣ther, was the caruers worke; and that this, was his owne. We maie note here, how the verie heathen men themselues haue condem∣ned images: And doe we thinke the saints of God doe nowe de∣light in them? It cannot be denied but that the heathen by the dimme sight of nature, aimed in this point verie neere to truth: and shall we thinke, that the saintes, hauing the true lighte of gods spirit, to shoote further off the marke? The Turkes doe de∣test and abhorre all images, either painted or carued, and do call Christians because they delight in these,Cuspin. Idolaters and worship∣pers of deuils. Let vs marke also howe Arnobius refutes, all the obiections that maie be made, for the defence of images. But one saieth or obiecteth, you are deceiued and you iudge amisse. For wee doe not iudge, neither brasse nor matters of siluer and gold, or other matters, whereof they make images, to be Gods by themselues, or powers to be worshiped: but we worship and reuerence those in them, whom the holy dedication puts vs in minde of, and causeth to dwell in those images made with hands.Arnob. lib. 6. contra gent. An excellent reason (saith he) which some simple, or perchance some learned man may beleeue: as though the Gods would leaue their seates in heauen, nor refuse to dwell amongst men. Sée the verie ground of all popish obiections: For they say, they worshippe not the image, but that holie faint sheet the image
doth represent to our mindes: and so saide the heathen of their Images. And againe, that the gods power was present at their images: so the papists imagine, when they praie before the ima∣ges of their saintes. And both these reasons Arnobius reiectes. And after: The ancient Fathers were not ignorant,Lib eodem. that these signes had no power in them, nor no sense: but for the vnrulie and simple people, whereof cities and townes most consist, they haue deuised such wholsomly and to good purpose, that as it were, a certaine shew of the gods, being set before the eies of the common people, through feare, they might cast away that their rage and fiercenesse; and thin∣king themselues, as it were to liue in the presence of the Gods, they might lay apart all wicked actes, and should become men, by the anging of their manners. And for no other cause they gilded them: but that as it were a maiestie of them might appeare, and might not onely dazell their eies, but also terrifie their mindes with their bright beames. Sée also here howe the heathen made their images the ie mens bookes (as they call them) and erected them, to teach  instruct them, and to kéepe them in awe. But this reason also Arnobius refutes. And againe: They say that these holy things are ordained for the honouring of the Gods; and for the cause of their ho∣nours, they doe, that they doe:Lib. 7. and by these meanes to increase the power of the Gods. And after: Doe you thinke, as little children are made afraid with puppets or hearing strange noises: so the diuine powers, are delighted with the noise of the shawmes, or are appeased at the tune of organes or cimbals? We maie plainlie here sée, howe the Gentiles made the selfesame obiections for their images, as the Papistes doe nowe for theirs. And howe Arnobius refutes em. Augustine also writes thus: But there is some subtill disputer, I cannot tell who he is, which seemes learned to himselfe,In psal. 96. and he sai∣eth, I worship not that stone, that Image that is without sense, &c. but I reuerence that I see, but I serue that I see not. And what is that? an inuisible power which ruleth ouer the Image. By making this an∣swere for their images (saith Augustine) they seeme wise to them∣selues. And they which doe not worship Idols, worship deuils. And after he writes thus: Tell me what spirits thou worshippest. Tell me, doest thou worship deuils, or good spirits? such as are Angels. For there are euill spirits, and good angels. I tell thee (saith Augustin) that in thy Churches, there are none other worshipped, but euill spi∣rits,
which proudlie do require to themselues sacrifices, and will haue themselues worshipped as gods. They are euill, they are proud. Such are as diuels, men which seeke their own glorie, & despise the glory of God. But marke good men, which are like to the Angels, when thou shalt find a good man a seruaunt of God: if thou wilt worship him & adore him, for God; he forbids thee; he will not take to himself the honour of God, he will not be a God to thee: but with thee he will be vnder God. Thus did the Apostles, Paul and Barnabas, when men would haue sacrificed vnto them. And after: Marke therefore, how these men forbadde them that woulde worship them as Gods; and they will rather that one God only to be worshipped, one God be adored, to one God sacrifice be offered, & not to them. So al the saints and Angels seeke his glorie, whom they loue; they studie to inflame all men whom they loue, to his worship, to pray to him, to meditate vppon him. They declare him vnto them, not themselues, because they are his messengers. And because they are Gods souldiers, they cannot but seeke the glorie of their captaine. Augustine denyeth this worshipping of saintes, and he expoundes what this worship was, to offer them sacrifices, to pray vnto them? No, he alloweth not anie worship vnder an image, as the heathen did. And Tertul∣lian writes thus: We haue here need to expound the word : In the greeke it signifieth a shape or forme,Lib. de. Idolat. and thereof is  a diminutiue, deriued, which likewise signifieth in our language, a little forme. Therefore euery forme or shape, be it little or great, is an Idoll: And thereof Idolatry, is anie seruice about any outward sonne or shape. Thus Tertullian plainely defineth Idolatrie. Cap. 1. gen.Origen also of images thus writes his iudgement: What else is the image of God (saith he) to which man was made, but our sauiour? which is the first begotten of all creatures, of whom it is writ∣ten: Because he is the brightnes of the eternall light, and the expresse image of the substance of God; because he of himselfe thus speaketh: I in my father, and my father in me, he that seeth me, seeth my father: It may be asked (saith Origen) how the soule of Marie can magnifie the Lorde: If God can neither be increased nor diminished, how saith Marie, my soule doth magnifie the Lorde? If I consider saieth he my Lord and sauiour, to be the image of the inuisible God, and do see my soule to be made to the image of my maker, that it should be the image,Homil. 81. in. Luke. of the image; (for my soule is not speciallie or peculiarly the image of God, but it was made according to the likenesse of the for∣mer
image;) then shall I see, according to the example of them that paite images, and for example, hauing taken one countenance of the king, they applie all their skill, to expresse that principall simili∣tude or likenesse: So euerie one of vs, framing his soule according to the image of Christ, either makes to him a greater or a lesser image, or a base and obscure, or a cleare and flourishing image, according to the picture of the principall image. Therefore, when I shall make an image of the image, that is my soule, and shall make her greate in thought and word, then I make a great image of God; and then the Lord, whose image is in our soule, is magnified. And as God by this meanes encreaseth in our soule: so if wee be sinners, he is diminished and decreaseth. Here wee maie sée what images were in Origens daies, Iesus Christ is the image of God the father, and euerie Christians soule, as neare as maie bee, is to bee pictured like to him. About the painting of these Images, they bended all their force, and emploied themselues, and not about anie other. And againe. The Christians and the Iewes, when they heare,Lib. 7. contra. Celsum. thou shalt feare the Lord thy God, and thou shalt serue him alone, and thou shalt haue no other Gods besides me; Nor thou shalt make thee any Idoll, nor likenesse of any thing, that is in ye heauen aboue, or in the earth be∣neath, or in the water vnder the earth, thou shalt not worship them, nor serue them, and thou shalt worship the Lorde thy God, and him onely shalt thou serue: For these, and such not vnlike to these, they do not onely refuse these images, altars and temples of the Gods; but they will rather (if neede be) willingly dye, least by anie excesse or sin go∣ing beyond that which Gods lawe prescribes, they shoulde pollute that which they excellentlie thinke of God, the maker of all thinges. And after, speaking of all the creatures, he writes thus. Neither is it seemelie, or behooueth, that those things, which are in the bon∣dage of corruption, should be honoured in the steade of God, which needeth no thing; or should take the roome or stead of Iesus Christ, the first begotten of al creatures. Origen here ioines the Iewes and Christians together, that as the one would rather dye, then suf∣fer anie images whatsoeuer, come into their temple: so also the o∣ther. That Iewish lawe against images, by his iudgement is not abrogated, but stands in force still. And againe, all creatures are in bondage as long as this world endureth, and looke for their frée∣dome hereafter: And therefore now, to giue them anie honor, as the images of God, is to deliuer them from their seruitude and
vanitie, before the time; nay, is to intrude them in the place of Ie∣sus Christ, who is the onlie image of his father (as he hath proued before,) and by whom alone, God will bee honoured. And of the Iewes in another place he wrttes thus:Lib. 4. contra. Celsum. If one will marke diligent∣lie the olde manner of the Iewes lyfe, and marke the institutions of their lawes, he shall plainlie perceiue, these men to bee those, which carry a shadowe of the heauenly lyfe here vpon earth, that is to say, amongst whom, besides him which ruleth ouer all thinges, nothing was euer accounted for God: nor there was any image maker, or ma∣ker of Idols in their common wealth, as whom their law droue frre awaie, least there should be any occasion, of making images by them, which should plucke awaie simple men from God, or shoulde with∣drawe the eyes of the mind, to behould earthly thinges. Sée the zeale of the Iewes, because they would haue no images or Idols or carued workes in their churches, or common wealth, they bani∣shed all painters and caruers. And Origen ioines Christians in the like zeale with them: So that be like in his daies, were no images. Cyprian also of Idolatrie writes thus, If so be that (saith he) before the comming of Christ,De. Exhor. Martyr. these commandements were ob∣serued, of the worshipping of God, and contemning of Idolles: howe much more are they to be obserued, after the comming of Christ. So that then, that commandement of making no Idoll, by Cyprian iudgement,Lib. de van. Idolor. is as strictlie to be obserued nowe, nay rather more, then euer the Iewish church. And againe hee expoundes what hee meaneth by Idolles. Idolles are no Gods (saieth he) there is but one God. And to the faithfull it is giuen to knowe, that they are no Gods, which the people worship. They were in times past kinges, who for their kinglie memorie, afterwarde began to be worshipped of their friends at their deathes; and therefore they made them temples: And therefore they made them images, to keepe in remembrance the countenance of the dead by an image: And therefore they offered sa∣crifices vnto them, and appointed them holie daies. Here is plaine∣lie heathenish Idolatrie set downe, and shall we do the like to our martyrs, to our saints? All which the papists (building them chur∣ches) haue done to their saintes. Cyprian no doubt, would neuer haue condemned these images of famous men deceased among the Pagans, and this sacrificing to them, and making them holie daies; if Christians had done the like to their saintes: so that in his daies images had not crept into the church. S. Augustine also con∣cerning
images writeth thus: In the first commandement,Epist. ad Iam we vn∣derstand the father, where is forbidden any likenesse of God to bee worshipped, after the imagination of man: not that God hath no i∣mage; but that no image of him ought to bee worshipped, but hee, which is the same, that he is. And this not for him; but with him. And Lib. 1. Retract. Cap. 1. Wheras he had said before, nothing at all is to be worshipped: but all is quite to be cast awaie, that is seene with mortall eies, whatsoeuer any sense of man apprehendeth: he addeth and correcteth (with mortall eie of the body.) So that then, all ima∣ges are to be cast awaie by his opinion. And also he alloweth that notable sentence of Varro writing thus: Varro saith,De ciu. lib. 4. cap. 31. that the olde Romanes aboue one hundreth and twenty yeares, worshipped the gods, without images. The which thing (saith he) if it had continu∣ed yet, the gods had been more purely worshipped. And he allea∣geth for a witnesse of his opinion, the nation of the Iewes: wherfore (saith Augustine) when as he saith, they onely found out, what was God, which beleeue him to be a spirit, gouerning the world: and he thinkes religion to be more purely obserued without Images: who seeth not, how neare he came to the truth? Here wee maie sée by Augustines iudgment, what is pure religion, and what was truth accompted in his daies, what néede I adde more? These three witnesses, one renting them inEpiphanius. pieces, anotherVarro. reasoning so stronglie against them; the thirdAusten. (as a thréefold strong cable) gi∣uing his consent to the Romanes, to the Iewes, being himselfe a Christian: I suppose are sufficient, to anie indifferent reader, to teach, what was Catholique religion in those daies. And yet for all this, we reade:Reu. 9. v. 21. that some (although plagued of God) in the end of the world, shall not repent of the workes of their handes, that they should not worship deuils, and Idols of gold, siluer, or brasse. And who should these be but the Papists? For the Turke hath no image in his religion. But they will saie, they worship no deuils; let them take héede: I reade this historie of S. Bernard, who comming to Spira, read these wordes in an Image dedicated to our Ladie, O gentle! O sweete! O holy mother Marie! they saie there was a voice giuen out of the image, God morrow Bernard. But he suspecting that it was some illusion of the Deuill, answered: Paul forbiddeth that a woman should speake in the Church. They saie this image remaineth at this daie, behinde the Church doore at Spira. Ferus also of Images
writes thus much: 3. cap. Ios. The stones which the Israelites tooke out of Ior∣dane, were erected for a memoriall: but the Iewes after the building of the temple, offered sacrifice vpon these stones, thinking them more holy then the temple: when as they were not erected for oblations; but for a memoriall. So they abused the brasen serpent: wherfore it was broken in pieces of Ezechias. And we no lesse abuse the Images & pictures of the saints: when as they are only had in the church for this end, that they might admonish vs of Christ & of the saints. Marke the onelie ende Ferus maketh of Images, to bee remembrancers of Christ, not to be kneeled vnto, or worshipped or offered vnto. This he confesseth to be an abuse. I will conclude this point, with the conclusion of Poligranes a popish writer, who writing in the defence of them, concludeth thus: It is sufficient to haue added these things concerning images, when as it is not needfull to be trou∣bled much about them, which are none of Gods commandements. I would to God, all Papistes would thinke so of them, and with him confesse the trueth: and seeing they are none of Gods com¦mandements, vtterlie forsake them. Of pardons. AS for pardons which nowe are not the smallest part of Ca∣tholique religion: It should séeme in the beginning, they were no part thereof at all; nor of that faith once giuen to the saintes. Of them one of their owne patrons and defenders writeth thus: Amongst all thinges we handle in this booke, there is no one thing,Alphonsus de castro de Indul∣gentiis. which the scriptures haue lesse declared, and whereof the olde writers haue lesse spoken. Notwithstanding for this cause, are they to be despised, because the vse of them seemeth lately to be receiued into the Church, because many things are knowne to them that succeede, which those auncient writers were vtterly ignorant of. For of the transubstantiation of ye bread into the bodie of Christ, there is seldome mention in the olde writers, of the proceeding of the holy ghost from the sonne, more rare mention, and of purgatorie almost no mention at all, especially among the Greeke writers. For which cause euen to this daie, purgatorie is not beleeued of the Grecians. Thus farre Alphonsus. Where, as he confesseth the truth of their pardons, transubstantiation, and purgatorie, so he erreth in the
procéeding of the holie ghost, which both the scriptures,These places proue the pro∣ceeding of the holy ghost. Rom. 8.9. Gal. 4.6. Ioh. 20.22. These fathers also make mention of it. Greg. Naz. orat. de statu Episcopal. Pascasius de S spiritu. Aug. de Trinit. lib 6. fol. 323. & lib. 15. fol. 472. & 474. Rossens. contra articul. Luther. Concil. Tol. 4 cap. 6. and the ancient fathers doe plainelie teach. So that then by his iudge∣ment, pardons, transubstantiation, and purgatorie, came latelie into the Church, and were not that first faith, once giuen to the saintes: and therefore they are counterfeit, therfore they are not the Catholique faith; we maie be saued without them. The Bi∣shoppe of Rochester Fisher, of pardons confesseth the same. It is not certaine (saith he) when pardons began, or of whom. Erasmus also in his preface vpon the first Epistle to the Corinthians, writes, that in the beginning pardons were remissions of the canonicall pu∣nishments, which the Church imposed to them that did open pen∣nance. But nowe they are saide to take awaie Gods punish∣ments due after this life to sinners. But of the true vse of pardons, thus we maie read in the coun∣cell of Toletan. We ordaine that vpon the day of the Lordes passi∣on, the mysterie of the crosse, which the Lord would haue shewed to all men with a cleare voice, and that the people should receiue par∣don of all their sinnes, that they being clensed by the compunction of repentance, they may be worthy to receiue the reuerent feast of the Lordes resurrection, our sinnes being forgiuen, and may take the sa∣crament of his body and bloud being clensed from our sinnes. This is that which we learne out of the gospell, that all mini∣sters in the Apostles, haue receiued power of forgiuing sinnes:Io. 20.23. and to them all, hath our Sauiour saide and not to Peter onelie, Whose sinnes you forgiue they are forgiuen, and whose sinnes you retaine, they are retained. This is that which S. Paul teacheth:2. Cor. 5.17. Olde thinges are passed away, behold all thinges are made newe, and all these thinges are of God, who hath reconciled vs to himselfe, by Ie∣sus Christ, and hath giuen vnto vs the ministerie of this reconciliati∣on. That is to say, because God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himselfe, not imputing vnto them their sinnes, and hath put in vs the word of reconciliation: In Christes steede therefore, we are Em∣bassadours, and as though God did beseech you by vs, we pray you most earnestly, that you would bee reconciled to God. This place first, ouer throweth the doctrine of mans free will, which teacheth, that we are onelie helped by the grace of God, whereas the Apo∣stle saieth, we are created, all thinges are newe, and all things are of God: nothing then of our selues. Secondlie, that God hath in Iesus Christ reconciled the whole world to himselfe. And that
all ministers and pastors, are Gods embassadours in Christes stéede, and in them, he put this worde of reconciliation, this his most gratious, generall and free pardon, that whosoeuer beléeueth this glad tidings of the sonne of God, dying, and rising againe, for our sins; shall haue pardon and frée remission of all his sins, shall be reconciled to God, shall not haue his sinnes imputed vn∣to him. So that then, euerie minister hath his worde of reconci∣liation committed vnto him: hath this power of proclaiming this generall pardon, to all true penitent sinners: not the Pope onelie, as he séemeth to challenge. And euerie one, that heareth and beleeueth this our embassage, this our message, hath the force thereof, that is, the remission of his sinnes, firmelie assured to him and sealed, not with a bull of lead, as the Popes pardons are,Ephes. 1.5. but with the spirit of God: as we reade, God hath adopted vs to himselfe, through Christ, according to the good pleasure of his will,Verse 7. to the praise of the glorie of his grace. And againe, by whome we haue redemption through his bloud,Verse 12. euen the forgiuenesse of sins, according to his rich grace. And againe, In whom we are chosen, that first trusted in Christ, and that we should be to the praise of his glorie. In whome also ye haue trusted (speaking to the Ephesians) after ye haue heard the word of truth, euen the gospell of your salua∣tion: wherein also after that you beleeued, ye were sealed, with the holy spirit of promise. Here is our frée redemption, the frée for∣giuenesse of our sinnes, by Iesus Christ. Here is the gospell, the worde of reconciliation, the tydings it bringeth of this deliue∣rance: here is the seale of this pardon and reconciliation euen the spirit of God: here is the ende thereof often repeated; that wee all should be, to the praise of the glorie of God: That is, that we all should praise the great mercie, and pitie, and gratious goodnes of our God, who so freelie, and willinglie hath pardoned so manie, so notorious, so vndeserued sinners. Now if this power laie in the Pope, we should haue cause to praise him. And of this pardon, and of the meanes to obtaine the same, that is faith in Iesus Christ,Rom. 10.9. we read. Rom. 10.9. This is the word of faith which we preach, That is to saie, if thou shalt confesse with thy mouth, the Lord Iesus, and beleeue in thy hearte, that God raised him from the deade, thou shalt be saued. For with the heart wee be∣leeue to iustification, and with the mouth we confesse to saluation. Here is iustification, the acquittance and pardon of our sinnes,
and saluation of our soules. And this word, this pardon (saieth the Apostle) is neare vs, we néede not go to Ierusalem for it; as the Iewes were compelled to do, in their sinnes, and trespasses, and there to offer sacrifices, and so to obtaine pardon; much lesse to Rome, or anie other place: we are now fréede from this burthen: It is now at home with vs, nay in our mouthes, and in our harts. To buy the Popes pardons, is to distrust this pardon, to go so far for the word of our saluation, is to denye the Apostle, who saieth, it is men at home amongst vs, euen in our hearts. But to con∣clude this place; Antoninus a great learned man confesseth,Tit. 10. de In∣dulgentiis. That of pardons which the Popes giue, we haue nothing expressed in the ho∣lie scripture. Although this be alledged for them: To whome you forgiue any thing, I forgiue also: Neither in the auncient doctors. So that then also by his iudgement, they are not that faith nor anie parte thereof, which was once giuen to the saints. And therefore no part of true catholique religion by S. Iudes determination. Philippus de dies writes thus, vpon these wordes of our Saui∣our: So God loued the world, that he gaue his onely begotten son,Fer. 2. Pent. conc. 1. &c. Condemning all buying and selling of the Popes pardons. God (saith he) gaue his sonne. He solde him not, because he is inestima∣ble, he is without price, neither therfore did we possesse him, that we should buy him. This was the iniquitie of Iudas, which sold that, which could be bought for no money, he solde that, which the euer∣lasting father gaue freely. And doth not the Pope so nowe? in selling his merits, and in selling pardons and masses: imitating herein rather Iudas, then Pe∣ter, whose successour hee would be.
Of Auricular confession. AVricular confession also, and the reuealing of all sinnes in the priestes eare (as manie as can be remembred) without the which, the church of Rome teacheth nowe, men cannot be saued, was not the first faith giuen by the Apostles, but came in long after; as appeareth by the Fathers and their owne wri∣ters.Lib. 10. conf. cap. 30. Augustin saith: What haue I to do with men, that they should heare my confessions, as though they should heale all my diseases? A curious sort of men, to know another mans life, and sluggish to cor∣rect their owne. Why seeke they to heare of me what I am, who will not heare of thee,Meaning God. what themselues are? And how know they, when they heare me tell of my selfe, that I saie truely? sithence no man knoweth what is done in man, but the spirit of man that is in him. And Chrysostome of confession of sinnes thus speaketh to euerie one:Ho. 2. in psal. 50. Confesse thy sinnes, that thou maiest blot them out. But if thou be ashamed to tell any man, because thou hast sinned: say them daily in thy soule. I say not, that thou shouldest confesse them to thy fel∣low seruant, that he might vpbraide thee: shewe them to god which cureth them. If thou shewest them not, doth not God know them? will he haue knowledge of them of thee? When thou diddest them, he was present; when thou committedst them, he knewe? Wast thou not ashamed to sinne? and art thou ashamed to confesse? Confesse them in this life, that thou maiest haue rest in that other life: confesse them sighing and weeping. For thy sinnes are written in a booke. And in another place:Ad Heb. ho. 30. I bid thee, not that thou shouldst bewray thy selfe openly, nor that thou shouldst accuse thy selfe to others: but I would haue thee obey the Prophet, saying: Reueale thy waies vnto the Lord. Here we maie see plainlie by Augustine and Chryso∣stome, that our priuate sinnes, were to be confessed to God alone, and not to anie man: and that there was no such necessitie, vpon paine of damnation, of confessing them enioyned to Christians, as is nowe taught: which if there had, these two fathers woulde not haue béene ignorant of it. And therefore Beatus Rhenamus saith thus much of Tertullian also:In lib. Tert. de poenit. Let no man maruell, that of this secret and auricular confession, he spake nothing: which (saith he) as
farre as I coniecture, at that time was not knowne at all. Here are two other testimonies, one of Tertullian, and another of Rhenanus, that it was not that first faith, agréeing with Augustine and Chry∣sostome. And to these agrees the ordinarie Glosse: It is better said,De poenit. Dist. 5. that this auricular confession, was ordained of the vniuersall tradition of the Church, then of the authority of the olde and new Testament. It was none of the first faith, it came in after by the Church. And howe long after, Antoninus a great searcher of antiquities and hi∣stories, plainlie sheweth: That it was imposed as necessary,Part. 3. hist. Tit. 19. cap. 2. first by the councell of Lateran. The same Innocentius (saith he) in the same generall councell decreed thus: That euery faithfull man or woman, after they came to the yeares of discretion, should alone confesse all their sinnes to their owne parish priest, once at the least by the yeare; and should endeuour to doe the pennance, he enioyned them, with their own strength: he that did not, should be kept out of the church, and dying should not be buried in Christian buriall. Where (saieth he) was there euer made, in any other councell, such a wholesome constitution. Their priuate sinnes, before this councell, men con∣fessed to God, as appeareth by those places I haue cited: but now to their parish priest. And their notorious and manifest sins, one to another, or to the church: as S. Iames teacheth,Ia. 5.16. Confesse your sinnes one to another. If one had offended his brother, hee should not be ashamed to confesse his sinne to his brother, and now to be reconciled: If he had offended the whole Church, he should not be ashamed to doe open penance, before the whole church, that they might praie for him. This séemeth to be the first vse of confession in the primitiue Church:In lib. de pen. as maie be gathered also out of Tertul∣lian, Confession (saith he) so much lighteneth thy sinnes, as dissimu∣lation or cloking of them, maketh them grieuous: And confession, is the counsell of satisfaction, and dissimulation of contumacie. And that this confession is, and to whome it is to be made: hee after plainlie sheweth, that is, to God and to the Church. That acte (saith he) which is more expressed by the Greeke worde and com∣monly practised, is called , wherby we confesse our sins to the Lord, not as though he were ignorant, but as though by this our confession to him, we made as it were a satisfaction. And thus he describeth the common repentance in those daies: Often to eede as it were praiers with fastings and sighes, to weepe, euen to re day and night to their God, to cast thy selfe downe to the priest, to kneele to the Altar of God, to ee to all thy brethren to
sende their praiers, as embassadours to God for thee. And after: In∣somuch as thou shalt not spare thy selfe: beleeue that God shal spare thee. But many (saith he) eschue this making themselues manifest, or doe deferre it from day to day, being more mindefull of the shame, then of their health: like those, which hauing diseases in their priuie members, while they hide them from the knowledge of the Phisiti∣ons, perish in their shamefastnesse. And after, But concerning thy brethren, and fellow seruants; where there is common hope, feare, ioie, sorrowe, and suffering; because also wee haue receiued a com∣mon spirit, of a common Lord and father: what doest thou account them any other thing, then thy selfe? Why doest thou runne from the partakers of all thy mischances and sorrowes, as from mockers and iesters at them? The body cannot be merrie, at the griefe of anie one member; the whole bodie must needes be sorie for companie, and seeke for remedie. And of this confession and open repentance practised in his daies, S. Ierome writeth thus of Fabiola. Part. 3. ep. 6.Who would haue thought (saith he) that after the death of her se∣cond husband, she comming to her selfe, at which time carelesse wi∣dowes, hauing shaken off the yoke of bondage, are woont to liue more licentiously, as to go to the bathes and walke the streetes, and to beare the shewe of strumpets: that shee would haue put on sack∣cloth, that she would haue confessed her fault? and the whole citie of Rome beholding her, in the church of Lateran &c. That she would stand amongst them that did pennance, (the Bishops, Priestes and all the people weeping with her,) and that she would humble (her haire being about her eares) her wanne face, her vnwashed handes, her fil∣thy necke. This repentance and this confession, of her common and notorious sins, committed before shée knewe Christ perfectly, Fabiola this excellent matron whom S. Ierome wonder fullie there commendes, shewed. Of Theodosius also the Emperour Am∣brose writes thus:Ambros. orat. de obi. Theodos. The Emperour was not ashamed to doe that which meane men are ashamed to do: that is, to do open pennance. Bead also of this priuate and publique confession,V citat. a beate Renan in prae∣fatione Tert. writes thus: The Lord (saith he) is read to haue sent none, on whom he bestow∣ed these corporall benefites, to the priestes, but the leapers; because the priestes of the Iewes were a figure of the kingly priesthood that should be, which now is in the Church, in which all are consecrated, which appertaine to the body of Christ, the high and true prince of priestes. And whosoe either by the wickednesse of sinne and be∣refie,
or by the superstition of the gentiles, or by the incredulitie of the Iewes, or by anie schisme from his brethren, as it were by a diuers co∣lour, hath lacked the grace of Christ; it is necessarie, that he come vn∣to the church, and there shewe the true colour of faith which he hath receiued. But other faults, as diseases of the members of the soule and senses, the Lord heales and correctes, by the man himselfe inwardly in his conscience and vnderstanding. So that then Bead also agreeth with the rest, that God alone heales in vs, all our priuate and hidde sinnes. But the other notorious and manifest sinnes, as they are knowne to the church: so he will haue the church put to her helping hand, by praier to him, for curing of them. This pri∣uate confession to the priest, and declaring all our sinnes to our ghostlie father vpon paine of damnation, Bead makes no men∣tion of: but that we ought to confesse those secret sinnes vnto God. And here because this is a wayghtie matter, concerning the forgiuenesse of our sinnes, let vs marke diligently what the scrip∣ture teacheth vs concerning the same, and to whom we must con∣fesse them. Dauid teaching vs the blessednesse of euerie faithfull man, saieth, Blessed is the man, whose wickednesse is forgiuen,Psal. 32.1. and whose sinne is couered. Our blessednesse consisteth not in our inno∣cencie, but in the mercie of God, not in the puritie of our works, but in the pardon of our sinnes. No man can say: My hearte is cleane. Here is the first proposition, the first part of blessednesse: to acknowledge our sinnes. Secondlie followeth howe wee shall obtaine this pardon: By confessing of them. For while I helde my tongue, and confessed not my sinnes, my bones consumed awaie: though I roared out, for griefe and payne all the daie long. For thy hande was heauie vpon mee day and night: And I was turned in my miserie, as the heate of summer: Without anie droppe of the water of comforte. But to whom now, in this miserable case, did he confesse his sinnes? To God. For so it followeth, I will make my sinnes knowne vnto thee, and mine iniquitie haue I not hidde. I said, I will confesse against my selfe, my sins vnto the Lord, & so thou forgauest the wickednes of my sin. Dauid being in this great mise∣ry, by reason of his sins, when as the Lords hand was heauy vpon him, he confessed his sins vnto ye Lord, & so obtained pardon, & so was partaker of ye blessednes, he spake of, in the beginning. And he repeates this twise, to whom he made this cōfessiō, yt is to God; & how vntil he had made his confessiō, his grief increased. Neither
wrote he this onelie for himselfe, but for vs: For this cause (saith he) shall euerie one that is godlie make his praier to thee, in the time thou maiest be found. Surelie, in the flood of great waters, they shall not come nigh him. Euery saint must here followe Dauids steps, and without all doubt, he shall obtaine blessednes with him: The great water flouds of punishments for his sinnes, shall not come nigh him. And this Psalme is called a Psalme of instruction, or in¦structing, in the Hebrue, as Arias Montanus translates it. I would to God all catholiques would learne this lesson of Dauid. To this agréeth S. Iohn:1 Iohn. 1. vers. 8. If we say we haue no sinne with the proud pharisie, we deceiue our selues, and there is no truth in vs: But if we confesse our sinnes with the Publican, he is faithful and iust, or righteous ra∣ther, (as I thinke it may fitlie be translated,) to forgiue vs our sins, and to purge vs from all our vnrighteousnesse. And here some will aske againe, to whome must we confesse? Surely Dauid hath to thee before, to God. Or if thou beléeue not him, S. Iohn here tel∣leth thee, Euen to him, that must forgiue, that is, to Iesus Christ. He is faithfull, he will keepe his promise, hee is righteous though thou be neuer so sinfull, he is righteous, he is rich enough, to paie all thy debts: and to purge thee from all thy iniquitie. And here let vs marke diligentlie the most assured, manifest, and greate promise of our sauiour: which no doubte S. Iohn here aimeh at. Whatsoeuer you aske in my name (saieth our sauiour) you shall ob∣taine.Ioh. 16. Vers. 23. The remission of our sinnes, is a thing of request. And therefore Dauid saieth. For this cause, shall euery one that is godly, make his praier vnto thee. Let vs confesse our sins to Iesus Christ, and by praier aske pardon, and no doubt he is faithfull, he wil per∣forme his promise, we shall haue remission, he is righteous, he is able to couer them, be they neuer so manie. And to assure vs now hereof,Mat. 7.7. also our sauiour saieth, Aske and ye shall haue, seeke and ye shall find, knocke and it shall be opened vnto you. Here is the force of faithful praier. Here is the key of Gods treasury, or store-house. There is nothing we desire more, then giftes and good thinges, then thinges lost, then secret thinges, to haue them re∣ueiled. Aske (saieth our sauiour) and you shall haue giftes; seeke, and you shall finde thinges lost whatsoeuer, euen the fauoure of God, which is the greatest losse in the worlde, you shall finde mercie for your sinnes, which is the greatest thing that can bee founde; knocke, and all secrets and mysteries shall be opened vn¦to you.1 King 3.9. By praier, Salomon obtained wisdome, the greatest gift:
Iosuah staied the sunne, the forciblest creature:Ios. 10.12. Iam. 5.17. Psal. 32.50. Ioh. 4. v. 46. Elias opened hea∣uen: And what is more secret? By praier Dauid found mercy for his sinnes: And what iewell is more excellent? We reade in the Gospell that the ruler beléeued the worde that Iesus spake: and his sonne being nowe at the pointe of death, recouered. This saith we must imitate. If our dearling, our soule, were through e, at the pointe of death: yet if we aske pardon in the name of Iesus Christ, and beléeue according to his worde; it shall be done to vs, and our soule shall no doubt liue. This is the faith of the Gospell: he that beléeueth not this, shall assuredlie dye. Faith is the hand of Christians, wherewith they receiue all things of God: For lacke of this hand, we are poore, we lacke spirituall graces. We are like that Idoll of the Philistines Dagon,1 Sam. 5. whose palmes of his hands were broken off: wee are like that man in the Gospell, who had a withered hand. Let vs the refore praie with the Apostles,Mat. 12.10. Luke. 17.5. Iohn. 14.1 Lord increase our faith, that wee maie haue handes to receiue all thinges, by faithfull praier from God. Let not your hearts be trou∣bled, (saieth our sauiour) beleeue in God, and beleeue in mee. This sh is a sure bulwarke against all the assaultes of sathans flouds, of troubles and stormes of our sinnes. The cures of those bodilie diseases, by our sauiour, being here vpon earth, were but lessons for vs, to haue the same faith for the curing of our soules, he being now in heauen. If we come vnto him, with fayth and confession, as they did, we shall most assuredlie obtaine the same saluation according to his promise. This is that which Dauid saieth.Psal. 4. v. 4. Stand in awe and sinne not, that is as much as in you lyeth, eschew sin: but if you fall into sinne by infirmitie, saie them in your hearts vp∣on your beddes and be still: that is, confesse them to God, and bee still, that is quieting your conscience, rest vpon the mercifull pro∣misse of God. This is that which our sauiour teacheth,Mat. 6.5. when thou praiest enter into thy chamber, and pray in secret: no doubt for thy secret sinnes; And thy father that seeth in secret, shall rewarde thee openlie. This is taught vs, by the example of that Stewarde, that was indebted to his master ten thousand tallents: Let vs euerie one thinke our selues to bee that stewarde. And in that great debte what shall we doe? Let vs fall downe at our masters féete, and craue mercie, and he will graunt more then we desire. For ye Steward there desired but longer time;Mat. 18.2. but ye Lord forgaue him the whole debte: so will God no doubt deale with vs; but set
vs be mercifull to our fellowe seruantes, let vs not followe his vnmercifulnesse, let vs not stumble at strawes, let vs not sée meates in our brethrens eies, and not our owne great beames. So Ezechias turned his face to the wall and wept bitterly.Esay 38.3 This is the writing of the king of Iudah, when he was sicke. In the cutting off of my life:Verse 12. I say, I shall go by the gates of the graue, I am depriued of the residue of my yeares, &c. And why? I haue cut off, as a wea∣uer cuts his webbe, my life; that was no doubt by his sinnes which he here confessed.Possid. in vita eius. So Augustine when hee was sicke, caused these foure Psalmes of Dauid which concerne repentance, to be written on the wall: and those being in foure partes, he lying in his bed, they being set vpon the wall, in the daie of his sicknesse, he behelde, and read, and wept continually and aboundantly, neither would suffer anie one to trouble him. Augustine, as we maie here sée, followe Dauids counsell: he confessed not his sins to anie ghostlie father, that we reade of; but to God alone, as Dauid did. And shall not we follow their examples? Confesse thy sinnes to Iesus Christ, confesse to God: and no doubt thou shalt haue pardon, as Dauid and Augustine had. This auricular confession which is nowe vses, was not then knowne: It sprang vp in the church after his daies. So manie hundreth yeares, so manie thousand Christians were saued without it: It was not that first faith once giuen to the saintes. And that this auricular confession, was not vsed in the prii∣tiue Church, is euident by the historie of the actes of the Apostles, who in the space of fortie yeares, that euer we reade of, neuer ∣ther required, or heard of anie man such a particular recitall of their sinnes. And S. Paul comming to Corinth, where he feared were contentions, wrath, backbitings, vncleannesse, wanton∣nesse,2. Cor. 13.1. and such like sinnes, saith: That now the third time, hee will come to Corinth, and in the mouth of two or three witnesses, euerie word shall stand, and he will spare none of them. What néede anie witnesses,Cap. 4.1. if this confession had béen then necessarie or vsed? And in his first Epistle to the Corinthians he writes thus: Let a man so esteeme of vs, as the ministers of Christ, and disposers of the secrets of God. And as for the rest, it is required of the disposers, that euery man be found faithfull. As touching me, I passe verie little, that I am iudged of you, or of mans iudgement. S. Paul is so far  from taking vpon him, the authority of knowing ye secrets of the harts
of the Corinthians, that he willed them not to iudge him. He addeth his good lesson: Iudge nothing before the time, (speaking of se∣cret and doubtfull matters,) vntill the Lord come, who will lighten thinges that are hid in darkenesse, and make the counsels of the harts manifest, and then shall euerie man haue praise of God. S. Paul re∣serues this knowledge of secret matters, to the daie of Iesus Christ, he doth not challenge it to himselfe, nor to anie other. And his preheminence is giuen to the Lord in manie places of scrip∣ture; that he is the searcher of the hearts, and to none other. As in the Actes and they praied, saying:Act. 1.24. Thou Lord which knowest the hearts of all men, shew whether of these two, thou hast chosen. Why should the Pope then or his cleargie challenge it to them∣selues? This is to intrude themselues into the Lords place. S. Paul askes the question, What man knoweth the thinges that are in man? And he answereth, none but the spirit that is in man. It might haue béene answered, his ghostlie father, if this confession had then béene vsed. And he makes this an argument to prooue, that so likewise none knowes the secrets of God, but the spirit of God. And herein our gratious God is also so mercifull, that although he knowe all secret sinnes; yet the sinnes of his elect, he will hide and couer: he will not haue them known to others, to their shame and confusion. And therfore Dauid saith,Psal. 32.1. Blessed is the man whose iniquitie is forgiuen, and whose sin is couered. And this is the bles∣sednesse of all Gods saintes. They are all sinners: he is the best that sinneth the least (as S. Augustine saith:) but their sinnes are ered. And therefore Iesus Christ is called of S. Iohn,1. Ioh. 2. v. 2. the pro∣ptiation or couering of all our sinnes: alluding to the propitiatorie in the lawe, which was a golden couering, which couered all the ae. Nowe the arke signifieth the Church, and this golden coue∣ring is no doubt Iesus Christ, who protectes, couers, and adornes the whole arke of God, his whole Church. There is no part there∣of, but néedes this his couering: And therefore he saith in the gos∣pell, He that is ashamed of me and my wordes; of him the sonne of n shall be ashamed, when hee shall come in his glory,Luk. 9.26. and in the glory of the holy angels. And this couering of the sinnes of Gods saintes, is also figured by the father in the gospell: who, when as the prodigall sonne had confessed his sinnes, his father,Luk. 15.22. first of all er his confession, bad bring forth the best robe, and put it on him.
It is the first thing God doeth to his, after their comming to his seruice; to couer all their sinnes: he will not haue them confoun∣ded or ashamed.Mat. 26 25. Io. 13.28. Our sauiour would not manifest Iudas his sinne that betraied him, no not to his Apostles being priestes (as the Church of Rome teacheth) but couertlie warned him thereof: and then howe much more will he haue the secret sinnes of his elect couered? But it is commonlie obiected, that our Sauiour Iesus after his resurrection, gaue his Apostles power to forgiue sins: Whose sinnes soeuer (saith he) ye forgiue,Io. 20.23. they are forgiuen, and whose sinnes you reteine, they are retained. And how can they forgiue sinnes, vnlesse they knowe them? And this authoritie was giuen them the verie daie of his resurrection, as a most gratious testimonie of his victorie. But I answere. First, that to the forgiuenesse of sinnes is not necessarily required, the particular repetition of all our sinnes. Our sauiour forgaue manie their sinnes in the gos∣pell: and yet they did not particularlie make a repetition to him of all their sinnes: as they brought vnto him one sicke of the pal∣sey, and Iesus seeing their faith, said to the sicke of the palsey: Sonne be of good comfort,Mark. 2.5. Luk. 7 47. Mark. 10.52. thy sinnes be forgiuen thee. And to Mary Magdelin, many sinnes are forgiuen her, for she hath loued much. And when blinde Bartimeus tried after him, O thou sonne of Dauid haue mercie vpon me, he answered: Go thy waie, thy faith hath sa∣ued thee. Here is remission of sinnes pronounced to all these, by our sauiour: and yet, not anie particular reckoning vp of their sinnes; but a generall, sorrowfull, and faithfull confession. So that, to the forgiuenesse of sinnes, that particular recitall, which the catholiques at this daie doe practise, is not necessarie, vnlesse it bee of some notorious sinnes, as was Achans theft, or Dauids murther and adulterie:Luk. 18.13. but onely a generall confession and know∣ledge is sufficient. So the Publican confessed his sinne to God in generall: O Lord be mercifull vnto me a sinner, and stroke his brest: arguing thereby the sorrowfulnesse of his hart, and he went home more iustified then the proud Pharisie, who séemed to make this par∣ticular recitall of his good déedes which nowe they speake of.Luk. 15.18. So the prodigall sonne (a type and figure of sinners) made his confes∣sion, from his sorrowfull heart, but in generall to his father say∣ing: O father, I haue sinned against heauen and against thee: I am no more worthie to be called thy sonne. And through this his con∣fession,
he was receiued into fauour.Ro. 15.4. These no doubt are writ∣ten for our learning, that wee confessing our sinnes generally, but sorrowfullie, as they did, should no doubt haue hope, and not despaire of pardon: So Esay, so Daniell, so Dauid, so all the Pro∣phets, euer confessed their sinnes to God generallie, and not par∣ticularlie, and they obtained pardon.Psal. 119 176.19.12. Esay 64.6, 6.5. I haue gone astray like a sheep that is lost, saith Dauid: and O clense me from my secret faults. And Esay, O Lord, all our righteousnesses are like to a stained cloth.Ier. 14.20. And I, am one of polluted lippes. And Ieremie, we acknowledge O lord our wickednesse, and the iniquity of our fathers,Nehe. 1.6. for wee haue sinned against thee. And Nehemiah, we haue grieuously sinned against thee, and haue not kept thy commandements, statutes, and iudgments, which thou hast commanded by thy seruant Moses. So that this confession in generall was practised in the primitiue Church, in these daies: and to such penitent sinners, the pastors were to pro∣nounce pardon. And no doubt their worde is of force, whose au∣thoritie was giuen them the daie of Christes resurrection, by the conqueror of death, hell and the diuell. And here is the true vse of the keies: that to notorious and tru∣lie repenting sinners, be their sinnes neuer so great; that the sen∣tence of his ministers and Church here on earth, God will make god in heauen. And that the Apostles thus vsed the keies, appea∣reth by S. Paul to the Corinthians,1. Cor. 5.1. when as there was one among them that had married his mother in lawe, and they as it should seeme, laughed or reioyced at it: Why rather (saieth hee) haue you not beene sorie, that he might be taken from among you, that hath done this euill? For I being absent in body, but present in spirit, euen now haue iudged, (haue giuen sentence concerning him that did that deed) that you being gathered together with my spirit, with the power of our Lord Iesus Christ, that you should deliuer such a one to sathan, to the punishing or tormenting of his flesh, that his spirit might be saued at the daie of Christ. Here is the power giuen to the Apo∣stles 20 of Iohn, and to the church, Mat. 18. That whatsoeuer they binde on earth, should be bound in heauen: and whatsoeuer they loose on earth, should be loosed in heauen, put in execution. Here are both their authorities ioyned together: here are the sins of this notorious sinner bound and reteined, till his repentance. And here is that distinction of sinnes made manifest, which the Apo∣stle mentions 1. Tim. 5.1. Ti. 5.24. Some mens sinnes (saith hee) are manifest
and go before to iudgement, but to others they follow after, and are not manifest. And with these former sins, the Church hath to deale, and not with the latter. They are to be reserued to the lords know∣ledge,1 Cor. 5.1. sentence and iudgement. And therefore he saith in the be∣ginning of the Chapter, that it is generally reported, that there is for∣nication among them, and such as is not named among the heathen. With such notorious & famous sins the church is to deale, by for∣giuing and deteining them: and not enter into the knowledge of euery mans secret sinnes. To such, vpon their publike repentance and generall confession, the church pronounceth generall pardon. And this is the rodde that shoulde kéepe Gods church in awe, this is the sword, that shoulde make all christians feare, this is  wéede hooke, that should purge the Lordes corne-fielde. Here  doubt, Iesus Christ will make good his owne promise, and  sentence of his church. He yt is cut off by excommunication here on earth;Ioh. 15.6. is also excluded from heauen, as the gospell teachethe Hee that is not as a branch, in the vine Iesus Christ, is as a withered branch cast out:Mat. 12.30. And he that is not with him, is a against him: And he that is not a souldier vnder his banner in the church, is Sathans souldier, and vnder his power and iurisdiction. And with suche one no Christian should so much as eate meate,1 Cor. 5.11. or haue anie fel∣lowship. For so it followeth, If any that is called a brother bee  adulterer or a couetous person, or an Idolater, or a raler, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, (that by force or authority, will take other mns goods from them wrongfullie) with such a one eate not. If this plaine and manifest lawe of the Apostle were executed, sin would not be so common as it is. If all these adulterers, and couetous persons, and railers, and blasphemers, and likewise other sinners, as soon as they begin to appeare, were cut off from Christs body, were excommunicated; if no man would once talke wish them, deale with them, or so much as eat wish them: it would make men afraide to commit these sinnes. And this is the destruction of the flesh,Pro. 17.22. which S. Paul meanes: what more hurtes she fleshe of man, then sorrowe and griefe? as Salomon saieth in the Prouerbes: A sorrowfull hearte dryeth vp the bones. And what is more sorrow∣full, then to be hated, loathed, and forsaken of all men? And that this sorrowe is the destruction of the flesh, which he meaneth, ap∣peareth in his second Epistle,2 Cor. 2. v. 7. where he willeth him to be receiueth againe, and to be strengthned, least he be swallowed vp of ouer∣much
sorrowe. For (saieth hee) wee are not ignorant of Sathans sleightes. Where also is declared, what is mente by the power of forgiuenesse of sinnes, which our sauiour gaue to his Apostles: t is in receiuing such excommunicate and penitent persons a∣gaine into the church. For to whom (saith he) ye forgiue any thing, I forgiue also. And againe, if I forgiue any thing, for your sakes I forgiue it in the sight or person of Christ. So that then here is the authoritie executed, which Christ gaue both to the Apostles in the 20 of Iohn. and to the church, Mat. 18: Here is the verie word and phrase of forgiuenesse of sinnes twise repeated, which is no∣thing else, but to receiue penitente sinners into the church: And to assure them of the forgiuenes of their sinnes. And this power of forgiuing sinnes is common to the people, with the pastor; To whom you forgiue, I forgiue: saieth S. Paul. Therefore if it bee a good argument, that they which do forgiue sinnes, must of necessi∣tie knowe all secret sinnes (, as the papists would faine grounde vpon those wordes of our sauiour, Iohn the 20, spoken to his A∣postles, Whose sinnes you forgiue, they are forgiuen:) then it followes also, that the people must knowe secret sinnes and heare icular confession, with the pastor: for here plainelie in the  of forgiuenes by S. Paul, both their authorities are ioined together. Cyrill vpon the 20 of Iohn writeth thus: The Apostles forgiue sinnes two waies, either by baptisme, or repentance: for either they drawe good men to be baptised, and do diligentlie repell the vnwor∣thie from thence; or they rebuke the sonnes of the church sinning, and do pardon them repenting, As S. Paul did the fornicators among the Corinthians. Cyprian also, as he is cyted of Augustine in an Epistle to Antonianus, of the vse of the keyes writes thus:Epist. 48. Some Bishoppes here, our prodecessors (saieth he) in our prouince thought not, that repentance should be graunted to adulterers, and altogether shut vp the place of repentance against adultery: but yet these depar∣ted not from the society of their fellow Bishoppes, &c. But Au∣gustine addeth there a little after. But if that which is trueth, the church by good right holdeth, peace is to be graunted rightlie to a∣dulterers repenting: they which shut vp all place of repentance a∣gainst adulterers, did indeed wickedlie, which denyed health to the members of Christ, and withdrew the keyes of the church from them, which knocked to haue gone in; and withstood the most mercifull
patience of God, with ouermuch crueltie: who suffered those there∣fore to liue, that repenting, they might be healed, the sacrifice of a broken spirit and a contrite heart being offered. Hereby appeareth the vse of the keies, that notorious sinners were excommunicate, were cut off from Christ; till by their open repentance, they had made satisfaction. And of this repentance the same Augustine writes thus after: Neither thinke thou, that any can come from er∣rour to truth, or from any great or small sinne to correction, without repentance. But it is a very impudent errour, hereof to slander the church, which by so many diuine testimonies, is euident to bee the church of Christ, that she deales with them otherwise, that doe for∣sake her, if they correct their fault after by repentance: and otherwise with those, that were neuer in her, and then first of all embrace her peace, by humbling those former more: by receiuing these more gently; and louing both of them, in doing her diligence, to heale them both, with a motherly affection. And of extortioners, Epist. 54. he writes thus: We reproue them, we detest them, we depriue them, of the communion of the holie altar, &c. Here is excommu∣nication of such notorious extortioners and couetous persons, as being able to make restitution, would not. So that to all sinners notoriouslie knowne, the Church as it should séeme, according to the greatnesse of their sinnes, laide this rod of open repentance, that they might be cured. And with this rod like a mother, she kept all her children in awe. And this open repentance, that it might make sinners more afraide, was vsuallie but once granted to anie in the church.Epist. 54. If open sinners were thus sa∣uerely puni∣shed amongst vs, it would make no doubt fewer secret sinners. For of it, Augustine writes thus: Although therefore it be very discreetly and wholesomely prouided, that the place of that lowest repentance, should bee granted but once in the Church, least the medicine being too common, should be lesse pro∣fitable to the sicke, which is so much more wholesome, as it is lesse contemptible: Yet who dare say to God, why doest thou spare him, who after the lowest repentance bindes himselfe againe with ye snares of his iniquitie? &c. It maie séeme for want of this discipline, the great and painfull teaching which nowe is in the church, taketh so small effect. If neuer so good seede be sowen, if weedes be suffe∣red to growe: what fruit will be repeated? And therefore S. Paul saith,Eccl. 13.1.21.2. Psal. 26.4. Psal. 119.63. Doe you not know, that a little leauen corrupts a great deale of dough? And Ecclesiasticus saieth, he that toucheth pitch, shalbe defiled of it. And, flie from sinne as from a serpent. And Dauid, I will
not fit in the companie of the vngoly: and I am a companion of all them that keepe thy lawe. For certainlie no leauen so soone pear∣ceth through a lump of dough, no pitch so fast eleueth to any thing, no plague so soone infecteth, no serpent so deadlie and secretlie stingeth; as sinne doth. And therefore we knowing this, should beware of it especiallie, should not suffer it amongst vs.Exod. 13.7. And therefore to the Iewes it was saide, that they should make leauen to cease, when they eate their passeouer: so we should doe dailie, ea∣ting our passeouer Iesus Christ. And therfore S. Paul likewise saith to vs: Clense away the olde leauen, that ye may be new dough.1. Cor. 5.7. And he expounds what leauen meanes: Let vs not keepe our feasts (saith he) in the old leauen, nor the leauen of maliciousnes, or wickednesse: but in the vnleauened bread of sincerity and truth. And after: take away quite the euill from among you. But here some will saie, who should iudge this? who knoweth, who is a couetous man, or a drunkard or a railer? Surelie I may answere here as S. Paul saith to Timothy:1. Ti 5.25. Good workes are ma∣nifest, and they which are not such, cannot be hid. Sinne will shew it selfe. And in this place: what haue we to doe with those that bee without, doe not you your selues iudge them that are within?1. Cor. 5.12. So that then, euerie mans conscience should iudge, who are coue∣tous, who are drunkards, who are extortioners, especiallie, theirs, that haue the care committed to them of ecclesiasticall affaires, as amongst vs are our church-wardens: They, by othe are bound to present all such riotous offenders, that they might be punish∣ed: that their flesh here might be afflicted by sorrowe and griefe, that their souls might be saued: that such wicked persons, might not by their euill examples infect others. The winking of these church wardens in all places almost, at all manner of sinne, and their (omnia bene) it is to be feared, will damne a great manie soules, and endanger their owne soules also. Hee that beareth false witnesse in a temporll court, what punishment sustaineth he? Howe farre greater shall he sustaine, that beareth false wit∣nesse in the court of God? But they are loath perchance to deale hardlie with their friendes and neighbours, they are mercifull. But Gregory saith,Greg. in Ezech. What mercie is that to spare here the temporall rodde, and to reserue the eternall? Not to punish with a rod of wil∣lowe, and to procure the yron rodde. And surelie such is their pit∣tie, who suffers sinners to wallowe in sinne vnpunished, giuing
them the raine as much as in them lyeth, to runne euen to hell: reseruing their punishments to the dreadfull daie of Gods iudg∣ment, when the daies of mercie shall bee expired; endangering thorough periurie also their owne soules. And that this was  sworde that kept men in feare in the primitiue Church, and that then there were such church wardens, appeareth also by Chryso∣stome, who against swearing writes thus: How is it not a very ab∣surd thing, that in the Iewish Synagogues they haue such forcible lawes, so that if the master command, all thinges are straightwaies done, and that wee here are so contemned and despised, I care not for my glorie; for my glory, is your goodnesse; but for your saluati∣on, we crie alowd euerie daie, we teach you, ringing in your eares, and there is none that heareth. And we suffer nothing more then swe∣ring. I feare, least we shalbe compelled one daie to giue an account of this great,Ad Pop. Ant. ho. 26. but vnprofitable curtesie. And therfore manifestly and plainly I denounce and protest to all, which commit that sinne, euen speaking from the deuill, (for swearing is such a sinne) that they come not within the Church. And I appoint you a moneth, to correct your selues in. Neither saie to me: thy businesse makes thee sweare: For I beleeue thee not. And in the meane time, cut off all thy swearing companions, &c. And after, If anie man shall denie to fulfill this commandement, as with a trumpet, with my voice, I forbid him to come to the church, although it be the prince, although he weare the crowne. And after, Among the Iewes the name of God was so ter∣rible and reuerend, that it was written in plates of golde. And it was lawfull for none to beare those plates, but the high priestes: but nowe euerie one carrieth the name of God about in his mouth, as a most common thing: Behold I charge and protest to you, that you correct your common and superfluous oathes, and bring all to me. Behold,Ad aedium sa∣crarum custodiā deputatis, Impero, monce, iubeo, &c. I command, admonish, and bid you, that are here present, appointed to the looking to, and guarde of the church, that it is law∣full for no man to sweare idlely, no nor otherwise: but that you should bring it to mee, whatsoeuer it is, &c. Here is the authoritie of the ministers, in deteining sinne, and in punishing sins, in excom∣municating notorious and obstinate sinners. Here is the office of the church wardens, to present such sinners to the Bishop, that they maie be punished. Here is the grieuousnesse of the sinne of swearing manifestlie put downe, we estéeme the name of God lesse then the Iewes did.Hom. 70. And in another homily, speaking against
those that mourned excessiuelie for the dead, and euen hired mour∣ners to lament them, he writes thus: Whosoeuer (saith he) shall hire these mourners (I speake no otherwise then I thinke, let him be angry that will) I will banish them the church a great while. This sworde of excommunication they vsed against euerie sinne: this kept Gods house cleane: this made Christians to stand in awe. Of Purgatorie. AS concerning Purgatorie. First the doctrine thereof (that they which beléeue in Christ shall after this life, go in∣to a place of fire and torments, and there for a time be pur∣ge) ouerthroweth the faith of the gospell. It is heauy newes, not glad tydings: that they which beléeue in Iesus Christ, shall besides their manifolde crosses and punishmentes in this life, goe after∣ward into a place of farre greater griefe and sorrowe. The glad tydings of our sauiour, to all that beléeue in him is quite contra∣rie. For thus he saith: Neither the father iudgeth any man;Io. 5. v. 22. but hath committed all iudgement to the sonne, that all men may honor the sonne as they honour the father. He that honoureth not the son, honoureth not the father that sent him. Verely, verely, I saie vnto you, he that heareth my wordes, and beleeueth in him that sent me, hath euerlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation: but hath passed from death to life. This is the faith of the gospell, this is glad tydings to all true Christians, and catholiques, and belée∣uers in Iesus Christ, confirmed by a double oath: that they which heare his worde, and beléeue in God his father, haue euerlasting life: that is, are euen now so sure of it, as if they had it: and shall not come into condemnation; either of temporall punishment after this life, or of eternall, but haue passed from death to life, that is, to ioie and felicitie. This is that which the psalmist affir∣meth: If thou Lord, wilt be extreame to marke what is done amisse,Psal. 130. v. 3. who is able to abide it? God will not call his to a strict account. This is that which the gospell teacheth: Christ, though they be sin∣full, will not be ashamed of his, before God and his angels:Luke 9.26. but they haue already passed from death to life: not to purgatorie, as the pa∣pistes
imagine. These signes of time past, argueth a certaintie of that shall be. So that then if our sauiour saie, and that with a dou∣ble oth, that all which beleeue in him haue passed already from death to life; we maie surelie beleeue, and that boldly confesse, they shall passe from death to life.Heb. 4. v. 1. This is that which S. Paul writeth at large in the fourth to the Hebrewes, Let vs feare therefore, least at any time, forsaking the promise of entering into his rest, any of you should seeme to be depriued. For vnto vs was the gospell preached, as also vnto them; but the word that they heard profited not them, because it was not mixed with faith, in those that heard it. For wee which haue beleeued, doe enter into rest, as he said to the other. As I haue sworne in my wrath, if they shall enter into my rest: although ye works were finished from the foundation of the world. For he spake in a certaine place of the seauenth day on this wise. And God did rest the seauenth daie from all his workes. And in this place againe, If they shall enter into my rest. Seeing therfore, it remaineth that some enter thereinto, and they to whom it was first preached, entered not therin to for vnbeliefe sake: Againe he appointed in Dauid a certaine daie, by to daie, after so long a time, saying as it is said: This daie, if you heare my voice, harden not your hearts. For if Iesus had giuen them rest, then would hee not after this haue spoken of another daie. There remaineth therefore a rest to the people of God: for hee that is entred into his rest, hath also ceased from his owne workes, as God did from his. Here is the summe of the gos∣pell, that whosoeuer beléeueth the promise of God made nowe in the gospell, shall most assuredlie enter into an immortall rest, as did they which beléeued his promise in the lawe, into a temporall rest: as did Iosuah and Caleb. And as then they which beléeued not the promise, neuer entred into that rest, because they ming∣led not the worde with faith; but respecting their owne frailties and the might of their enemies, died in the wildernesse: euen so nowe amongst vs, they which beléeue not the power of God, but looke on their owne infirmities, they which respect not his promise, but their owne power, they which consider the power of their ad∣uersaries, and not what God can performe; shall neuer enter in∣to heauen. For all Gods seruants, must haue strong holdes to conquer,Num. 13.29. Psal. 18.29. Gal. 1.15. with the Israelites; must haue walles to leape ouer, with Dauid; must haue flesh and bloud to giue a farewell vnto, with S. Paul; must haue their owne frailenesse, and weakenesse, and bar∣rennesse
of all goodnesse, to wrastle withall,Rom. 4.19. with Abraham and Sarah, that shall be saued. And they must beléeue and hope assu∣redlie in God, against all hope in themselues. And they, whosoe∣uer they are, that thus mingle the worde with faith, with our fa∣ther Abraham, with Iosuah and Caleb, and the true Israelites: though they be weake and fraile, yet shall no doubt enter into st, yea and that into a perfect rest, into a heauenlie rest: euen as God rested from his labours the seauenth daie; so shall they rest, they shall not néede to feare anie purgatorie. This is the faith and glad tydings of the gospell. And of this rest S. Iohn writes thus also: Blessed are they that die in the Lord.Reuel. 14. v. 13. For they shall rest from their labours: and their workes follow them. Nowe to die in the Lord, what is it else, but to die in the profession of the faith of Ie∣sus Christ? Faith is the bonde that knits vs to him.Rom. 11.20. As by incre∣dulity, the Iewes were quite broken off from him: so by faith we are engrafted. Those that die in the faith of Iesus Christ, rest from their labours. This faith bringes them this rest: according to that saying of our Sauiour, let not your heart be troubled,Io. 14.1. beleeue in God, and beleeue in me. This faith takes awaie all trouble, and bringeth peace and rest: and this goeth before; and their workes followe them. Here is also a manifest distinction put downe, be∣twixt faith and good workes, faith goeth before, and bringes rest, and iustifieth before God: and workes followe after, and shall be crowned of the mercie of God, through the vertue of faith: which otherwise of themselues, were nothing. And the same doctrine of workes and faith, S. Paul often teacheth,Phil. 1.11. calling them the fruites of righteousnesse, they are not our righteousnesse, but the fruites of righteousnesse: For1. Cor. i. v. 28.29.30.31. Christ is our righteousnesse, and sanctificati∣on, and redemption (as the same Paul witnesseth) which must stand vs in steede, in Gods iudgement. And that is euerie Christians true ioie (as out of Ieremie S. Paul proueth:) And vile things of the world, and things which are despised, hath God chosen, and thinges which are not, to bring to nought things that are; that no flesh should reioice in his presence: but ye are of him in Christ Iesus, who of God is made vnto vs wisedome, and righteousnesse, and sanctification and redemption; that according as it is written, He that reioiceth let him reioice in the Lord. And this is the rest, our sauiour speakes of, when as seeing the Centurions faith, he maruailed and saide to them that followed
him:Mat. 8. v. 10.11.12. Verely, I saie vnto you, I haue not found so great faith, euen in Israell. But I saie vnto you, that many shall come from the East and West, and shall sit downe with Abraham and Isaac and Iacob, in the kingdome of heauen: and the children of the kingdome shalbe cast out into vtter darkenesse, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. And this rest commeth of faith in Iesus Christ: To be∣leeue that all thinges are in his power, euen death and life, health and sickenesse, yea deuilles and what thinges soeuer are in the worlde.This was the Centurions faith our saui∣our so highly commended. Through this faith no doubt Lazarus, being poore in eue∣rie respect, not able to giue a mite, but rich in faith, was carried into Abrahams bosome, that is, into a place of most pleasant rest. Rom. 8.31.This is that S. Paul saith, What shall we saie then to these things? If God be on our side, who can be against vs? which spared not his owne snne, but gaue him for vs all to death: How shall he not with him, giue vs all things? Here is the riches of all Christians: God so loued them, that he gaue them his sonne: howe then will he not giue them all thinges else? But they are sinners, they are vnpro∣fitable servants, they are prodigall children, this will turne a∣wai Gods fauour from them: But against this heavie newes, here is a comfort: Who will laie any thing, to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God that iustifieth, who shall condemne? It is Christ which is dead, yea or rather which is risen againe, who is also at the right hand of God, and maketh request also for vs. Though we of∣ten displease God, euen dailie: yet we knowe hee is the beloued sonne, in whome the father is well pleased, and for whose sake,  are accepted. And those whome he accountes his, sathan dare not rowte against, and they appeare before God, clad with his righte∣ousnesse. This is the gospell, this is glad tydinges, this is most certaine, this is confirmed with a double oathe: This is generall of all Christians, that heare the worde of Iesus Christ, and beléeue in his father. Let Papists, and counterfeit catholiques take héed, which will not heare his word, nor thinke they are bound to know and vnderstand it; least by this their obstinacie and stopping their eares, they go not into purgatorie, but into hell. For no doubt this was not added in vaine; it shall haue his force in some, let them marke it well:2. Thes. 1.8. For S. Paul saith, The Lord Iesus shall come himselfe from heauen, with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, ren∣dring vengeance vnto them, that doe not knowe God, and doe not
obey the gospell of our Lord Iesus Christ. And howe can they obey the gospell, that knowe it not, and refuse to heare it? Neither shall their ignorance, the blinde mother of their deuotion, excuse them. For Christ shall render vengeance, to those that know not God. Secondlie, the doctrine of purgatorie is against the authoritie of Christ: for he saith, Father I will, that they which thou hast giuen me, be with me euen where I am,Io. 17.24. that they may beholde my glorie which thou hast giuen me. For thou louedst me before the foundati∣ons of the world. This is Christes will: and what Pope, what de∣uill, can withstand it? And he excepts none. All his shall be with him, all Christians, as well great as small, all his members, as well weake as strong. He will not suffer the feast of them, to en∣dure a moment, the fire of purgatorie. And when this shall be, that they shall be with him, S. Paul plainlie expoundeth, at the houre of their deathes. And therfore no doubt vpon the gospell groun∣ding his faith, he saith, I desire to be loosed, and to be with Christ. This was the cause, he desired to be loosed out of the bonds of this sinfull flesh, that he might be with Christ: as our sauiour here hath promised, and not to him onelie; but to all that his father hath giuen him, to all his. And in another place, S. Paul speaking of all Christians saith,2. Cor. 5.1. We know that if our earthly house of this ta∣bernacle were dissolued, we haue a building of God, a house made without hands, euerlasting in heauen. So that then, christians haue but two houses or homes: This earthlie tabernacle of the fleshe, and when that is dissolued, an house of God, an house in heauen. There is no third house for them in purgatorie. And after in the same place: God hath giuen vs the earnest of his spirit, and therfore we are of good courage alwaies: being assured of this heauenly in∣heritance, whereof we haue alreadie receiued the earnest from God, which euen amongst men confirmeth anie bargaine. Know∣ing this, that being at home in the body, we are strangers, we are ab∣sent from the Lord. For we walke by faith, not by sight (nowe in this life) yet wee are of good courage, (though we haue not séene the Lord with Thomas) and wee desire rather, it likes or pleaseth vs better, to go out of the body and to be at home with the Lord. Here is but two estates of the faithfull, of those that are Iesus Christes, that haue receiued the earnest of his spirit: Either to bee at home here in the body, and to be strangers with the lord, to walke by faith, and not by sight; or else to go out of the body and to see his glorious
maiestie, as S. Steuen dying for this faith saw him miraculously; and as it is likely, neuer after lost his sight: so shall all Christians dying in his faith bee with him for euer euen at their deathes. There shall be no middle place to staie them, in the waie. And here this their assurance, this their good courage, and , is twise repea∣ted.V. 6. &. 8. They feare not the performance of his promise, they feare no purgatorie, no torment in the waie: let their enemie the deuill, doe what he can against them in this life, hereafter they are sure he can doe them no harme. Neither that place 1. Cor. 3. which for their purgatorie the papistes so often alledge, maketh any thing to ye purpose, to proe it. According to the grace of God giuen to me (saieth S. Paul) as a skilfull master builder, I haue laide the foundation, and another buil∣deth thereupon: but let euerie man take heede how he buildeth vpon it. For other foundation can no man lay, then that which is layde, which is Iesus Christ. And if anie man builde vpon this foundation, golde, siluer, or precious stones; timber, haye, or stubble: Euerie mans worke shall be made manifest, for the day shall declare it, bee∣cause it shall be reueiled by the fire, and the fire shall try euery mans worke of what sort it is. If any mans worke that he hath built vpon, abide, he shall receiue wages. If any mans worke shall burne, hee shall loose: but he shall bee safe himselfe, neuerthelesse as it were by the fire. It is manifest in this place, that the Apostle speaketh not of anie fire, after this life: but of the fire of affliction in this life. And hee speaketh of all mens workes, not of the workes of anie middle sorte of men, as the papists do imagine, but of the ministers workes especiallie, who build vpon Christ by their prea∣ching and doctrine, either the gold of faith, or siluer of loue, or  precious stones of good workes, that is rare and excellente ver∣tues: or else wood, that is couetous doctrine, and wood for their owne fires; or gréene grasse or haie, that is pleasant and pla∣ble doctrine to their hearers; or else stubble, that is barren and fruitlesse doctrine. And of this golde in the church of Christ, an of these precious stones, the prophet Esay prophesieth in his 60. Chap. vers. 17. And of such wood S. Iude here speaketh in the per∣son of Balaam: and of such haie the prophet Micah propheseth, Chap. 3 vers. 5. and such stubble our sauiour condemneth in the superstitious Pharisies, who taught not the fruitfull seede of Gods worde, but the barren traditions of men, Mat. 15.9. And here
marke I beseech thee (gentle reader) howe wood, which is in the first place, maie resemble couetousnesse: For euen as a trée is rooted in the earth,Mat. 6.21. so the couetous man hath his heart fixed in this worlde; where his treasure is, there his hearte is also. And as a tree hath manie branches: so hath couetousnes, Simony, vsury, extortion, pryde: and therefore it is called the roote of all euill.Deut. 16.21. God for this cause (as it should seeme) commaunded that no groues or trees should be planted nigh vnto his Altars:1. Tim. 6.10. banishing from his church mysticallie the root of all euill, couetousnes. This wood the Apostle speaketh of, which also hee calleth Idolatrie, because the couetous man maketh his monie, his God. The preachers of the gospell must not build vpon Iesus Christ, this wood; must not plant neare his Altar, this roote of all euill, and huge greate tree with her manie branches, couetousnes: neither by their wordes, nor by their examples. For if they do, their works shall burne, and they themselues shall be hardlie saued, euen as it were thorowe the fire. Greene grasse also maie resemble the ease and pleasures of this lyfe. In May the fieldes are gréene, pleasant and full of fragrant flowers, and men then do delight, to take their ease in them. They therefore builde gréene grasse vppon Iesus Christ, which doe giue themselues to pleasures and ease, which preach not, which labour not in the Lordes vineyearde, and so by their euill example, are offence to others: or else which preach ly∣bertie to their hearers, plausible and pleasant doctrine; which preach the promises, and not the precepts of the gospell. Stubble also may resemble barren, and fruitlesse doctrine: For stubble is a barren thing, all the fruite thereof is gone, and therefore it may signifie all the deuises, traditions, wisdome of mans braine,1 Cor. 2. which profiteth nothing to the kingdome of God: as S. Paul teacheth at large. And S. Augustine writeth thus of the liberall sciences:Epist. 121. If the sonne shall make you free, then are you free indeede: for hee ma∣keth that those which are called liberall artes of those, which are not called into liberty, may be known, what libertie and freedome they haue in them. For they haue not anie thing in them agreeing with li∣bertie, that agreeth not with truth. And in his Retractat,Lib. 1. cap. 1. he wry∣teth thus: The praise wherewith I haue extolled Plato so greatlie, and the Academikes, as becommed not wicked men; not without cause displeaseth me, especiallie seeing Christian religion is to bee de∣fended against their great errours. So that all mans doctrine is stub∣ble
in comparison of the word of God. The liberall artes with∣out Christ, by Augustines iudgement, are bondage it selfe. Christ commandes to preach those thinges he commaunded, his worde. The Friers,Theodoret ex∣pounds this place of the daie of iudg∣ment. that haue preached legends or fables; haue preached stubble: and therfore this place toucheth them, they are not able to auoide this fire. The doctrines and buildings and workes of these teachers prin∣cipallie the daie, that is time, shall make manifest. Their hea∣rers are not sounde in the faith, they doe not teach them to beare the crosse after Christ: that, that faith which must saue them, must worke through loue. Euery mans worke that day, that is time, shal make manifest, for through fire it is reuealed. Thus much the Gréeke word imports, that is no doubt through afflictions, in time it is tried whether Christians be réedes or rockes: whether they be pre∣tious stones, or pibbles: whether they be wood or stubble. And here as in the wordes golde, siluer, pretious stones,  néedes be confessed an allegorie or figuratiue speech, why not also in the word fire? Againe, if they would haue this word fire, to sig∣nifie the fire of purgatorie, then as well golde as wood, as well good workes as euill, must be proued in the fire. The which thing S. Augustine noteth. Lastly, the daie signifieth not the daie of iudg∣ment;1. Thes. 5.2. 2. Thes. 2.2. 2 Pet. 3.10. Psal. 19. 2. Cor. 6.2. 2. Pet. 3.18. because Saint Paul commonlie calleth that, the daie of the Lorde: but rather here, because he speaketh the more simplie by it selfe without anie such addition, it signifieth course of time: as it is taken in manie other places of the scripture. As one day cer∣tifieth another: And behold now the day of saluation: And to whom be glorie, both now and to the day of eternitie, saith Peter. Here the word daie as in manie other places,Gen. 5.1. is taken for time. To this purging also by the fire of afflictions the Apostle S. Peter plainlie agreeth:1. Pet. 1.5.6. We are kept (saith he) through faith, to that great saluati∣on, ready and prepared to be reuealed in the last time, against which time, either of our deathes, or of the great iudgement, we reioice: yet a little while (if need be) 1.Our afflictions are louing, 1. corrections and purgings, 2. trials, 3. crownes. sorrowing, in many temptations, that the 2. triall of our faith, much more pretious then gold, which perish∣eth, and yet is tried by the fire, may be found to our 3. praise, and glo∣rie and renowne, in the reuelation of our Lord Iesus Christ. So that, if néede be, if our sinnes deserue it, we are here in this life, by the fire of afflictions, as the Lords golde, purified and tried: and not in anie fire of purgatorie hereafter. And of the same triall he spea∣keth
in another place:1. Pet. 4.12. My beloued (saith he) account not your fiery trial, as though some strange thing chanced vnto you: But as you are partakers of Christs sufferings reioice, that in the reuelation of his glorie, you may triumphing, bee glad. As Christ suffered nothing after his death, but all in this life: so all his members in some measure, shall suffer, to be made like vnto him. And herein (saith Peter) let them reioice. Nowe to saie that his members shoulde suffer after death, were to make them vnlike vnto their head. So that, it is ye fierie triall, which S. Peter appoints to all christians, if néed be; which no doubt the Apostle Paul speaketh of in this place. And this is that, which he himselfe teacheth vs also plainlie, to the Corinthians: If we would iudge our selues,1. Cor. 11.31. we should not be iudged of the Lord; but now we are corrected of him, least we should bee damned with the world. So that then, those Christians which doe not iudge themselues, which doe not repent sufficientlie of their sinnes, by S. Paules iudgment, and plaine testimonie, are here in this life iudged of God, and scourged with manie afflictions, least they should be condemned with the world. And therefore for such, no fire of purgatorie then remaineth, after this life: as the papists imagine. S. Peter also teacheth vs the same: That God beginneth first to punish, to purge and sweepe (as it were) his owne house, in this life: and afterward, the wicked in hell for euer.1. Pet. 4. v. 17. Now is the time (saith he) that the iudgment should beginne with the house of God, and if first with vs, what shall bee the ende of them, which beleeue not the gospell of Iesus Christ? So that then, God iudgeth and punisheth the faultes and falles, both of his shéepe, and of the wicked goats: but of his, in this life; of the wicked in hell. Of this sauing also,Psal. 66. v. 11. as it were through the fire, Dauid speaketh: We went through fire and water, & thou broughtest vs into a wealthy place: that is through the affliction and troubles of this life; whereof some were as hoat as fire, and some as huge as water. And of this triall by fire in the hearers of his word, our Sauiour speaketh: Some seedes (saith he) fell among stones where they had not much earth, and they sprung vp quickly because they had not depth of earth: but when the sunne arose, they were scorched with heat, and because they had not depth of earth they withered away. And what this heate meaneth he af∣terwardes expoundes: That which fell among stones is hee, which heareth the word, and receiueth it gladly:Mat. 13. v. 2. but hee hath no roote in himselfe, but is a time seruer, and when afflictions or persecutions
arise for the word, he is offended, he shrinketh from it. So that then, persecution is the fire that trieth whether we be gold or lead, whether Gods word haue taken roote in the hearts of the hearers or not.2 Ti. 3.12. And of this fire the Apostle speaketh, saying: Euerie one that will liue godly in Iesus Christ shall suffer persecution, his faith shall be tried in the fire: God will trie by some meanes or other, whether his word haue taken déepe roote in him or no. And this triall the daie, that is time, will make manifest. In the course of a mans life, God will once thus trie him; all must suffer persec∣tion, all must be tried. Of this purging the Prophet Malachie speaketh:Mal. 3.1. Behold I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the waie before me, and the Lord whom ye seeke shall speedely come to his temple, euen the messenger of the couenant, whom yee desire. Behold he shall come (saith the Lord) of hoasts: but who may abide the daie of his comming? and who shall endure when he appeareth? For he is like a purging fire, and like fullers soape, and hee shall sit downe to trie and fine the siluer, he shall euen fine the sonnes of Le∣vie, and purifie them as gold and siluer, that they may bring offerings vnto the Lord in righteousnesse. Who is this Angell of the coue∣nant? who is this Lord so longed after? but Iesus Christ. hat is this fire, by which he should purge his gold? but afflictions and persecutions, which are the perpetuall companions of his gospell. And when is this purging? but in this life, that the children of Iudah maie offer the sacrifice of righteousnesse vnto the Lord. To this agreeth that which our sauiour saith in the gospell,Io. 15. v. 1. I am the vine, and my father is a husbandman: Euerie branch in me not bea∣ring fruit, he wil take it quite away: and euerie one that beareth fruit, hee will purge it, that it may beare more fruit. Here are but two sortes of Christians, either wicked, which bring foorth no fruit; and they are quite taken awaie, and cast into the fire of hell: or else good Christians, which bring foorth some fruite, and they are pur∣ged, that they maie bring foorth more fruit. And here this pur∣ging, argueth an imperfection: for all Christians euen the best, are vnperfect, as S. Iames saieth: In many thinges wee offend all. So here is the purgation of all christians, not after this life, but in this life, that they maie bring foorth more fruit: As Dauid saith, It is good for me,Psal. 119. v. 71. that I haue beene in trouble, that I may learne thy statutes. And it is to be noted that he saith, euerie branch that abi∣deth in him, is so purged, and therefore none after. This is the pur∣ging
that Iesus Christ speakes of concerning all those that abide in him. If thou abide in Christ, God will purge thee (if thou lacke purging) presentlie, that thou maiest beare him more fruit. He is a most carefull husbandman ouer his: he will not suffer his tries growe out of order, he will haue them fruitfull: This is that which S. Ioh. Bapt. saith, His fan is in his hand,Mat. 3.12. and he shal purge his floore, and he shall gather his wheate into his barne, but the chaffe he shall burne with vnquenchable fire. His fanne, that is his word, his gospell, is in his hand: and by it he trieth and purgeth his, he knoweth whether they be wheate or chaffe: The winde of afflicti∣ons maketh the separation; both good and euill bee receiued into the fanne; both heareth the word preached. But the wicked en∣dure not the winde, when afflictions come they are chaffe, they flie awaie: the godlie are wheate, they abide in the floore.Luke 22.31. Of this tri∣all our sauiour telleth Peter. Symon, Symon (saith he) sathan desi∣reth to sifte thee, by temptations and afflictions and persecutions; but I haue praied, that thy faith should not faile. Of this triall S. Paul writeth to the Thessalonians, he sent Timothie to know of their faith,1. Thes. 3.2. least the tempter had tempted them in any sort, and that his labour had beene in vaine. And for this cause no doubt Paul saide to Bar∣nabas, Let vs returne and visit our brethren in euery cittie,Act. 15.36. where we haue preached the word of the Lorde, and see how they doe: not in the body, but in faith, whether they continue stedfast or not. And of this purging the Prophet Esay speaketh: Yea thou hast not heard, thou hast not known, yea since that time,Esay 48. v. 8. thou hast not opened thine eare. For I know, that in trespassing, thou wilt trespasse against me, & yt thou art rightly called a sinner, euen from thy youth. For my name, I will withdraw my furie, and for my praise, I will put a bridle vpō thee, that I might not vtterly destroy thee. Behold I haue purged thee, & not in siluer: I haue chosen thee, in ye furnace of affliction: for mine own sake, I wil do it. For how should it be prophaned or pollu∣ted? And my glorie I will giue to no other. Here is plainly descri∣bed the sinfull and miserable estate of all mankinde, and the infi∣nite mercie of God towardes man: Howe he withdrawes his furie, in our dailie sinnes: howe he bridles vs: howe he purgeth our sinnes, not with siluer but with the bloud of Iesus Christ (as Peter supplies that part of the sentence?) howe hee chuseth vs to himselfe, as cleansed and nowe quite purified from all these our es, in the furnace of affliction. Here is the onelie purgation
of all the sinnes (be they neuer so manie) of Gods people, not with siluer; but with ye bloud of Iesus Christ, as Peter telleth vs, & in the furnace of aduersitie: and all this doth God for his owne sake. It is twise repeated, as a most worthie lesson. How should it be polluted or be a prophane thing, saith he? And what thing mea∣neth he here? but Gods inheritance, he will not suffer it to be pol∣luted, he will purge and cleanse his owne house first, as Peter tel∣leth vs. And here is that obiection taken awaie, that no prophane thing, shall enter into heauen. God hath purged all his, he hath sanctified them, and chosen them in the furnace of afflictions: and he will not giue his glorie of redéeming, of preseruing, of pur∣ging them to anie other. And Philippus de Dies writes thus: This is the cause, why the holie ghost this daie appeared, and gaue it selfe in the forme of fire, to the faithfull;Feria 3. in Pent. Conc. 2. That it should teach vs, that it did the same in soules, that fire doth in thinges that maie be burned: as those thinges which are wont to be tried in the fire, as mettals can be cleansed by no o∣ther thinge from their drosse, then by fire: so the soules cannot bee purified from the drosse of their imperfections, but by the vertue of this forcible and diuine fire (meaning the holie Ghost) whereof the Lord speakes by the Prophet Esay: I will take thee in my handes, and I will take thy drosse quite awaie. And I will take all thy time from thee. And after this thou shalt be called the cittie of the iust, the faithfull cittie. Here we maie plainlie sée, what fire purgeth soules, euen the fire of Gods spirit: and not anie of pugatorie, by his iudgement. And here, this purging requires no long continu∣ance of time (as the papistes imagine) but euen in a moment, if the soule repent and beléeue rightlie in Iesus Christ, it is straight purged from all sinnes whatsoeuer. This doeth the gospell teach vs: The thiefe on the crosse no doubt a grieuous sinner, & whose sinnes had beene inueterated and growen to perfection:Luke 23.43. heare what comfortable wordes our sauiour spake to him: This day shalt thou bee with me in paradise. And Zacheus the chiefe publican, when as he had made his confession and restitution,Luke 19. v. 9. heard of our sauiour, This daie is saluation comen to this house. And Mathewe sitting at the receipt of custome,Mat. 9.10. our sauiour immediatlie after his forsaking his former wicked trade, by and by entred his house and dined with him.Luke 15. v. 17. But to expresse this mercie of God  liuelie, the prodigall sonne is a notable example, who wallowing
now in all manner of sinnes, after his returne, is immediatlie receiued, embraced, clothed a newe, feasted. Surelie all these, are but types and shadowes of sinners: Euerie true penitent and beléeuing sinner, no doubt, following their steppes, shall im∣mediatlie be partaker of their grace. There néedes no continu∣ance of purging awaie their sinnes, be they neuer so manie, grie∣uous, or inueterate. Bodilie diseases are not so soone recouered: but herein appeareth the great mercie of God towardes soules: he is a louer of soules. This is glad tydings, this is the gospell. This is truth: that spirit that teacheth contrarie doctrine to this, is the spirit of error. This triall also in our memories, hath God made of the works of his builders and of his seruants, in Quéene Maries daies: where one might sée some of all sortes: some chaffe blowen awaie with the winde, forsaking the gospell, some good wheate remaining in the Lordes floore still, and enduring all sa∣thans siftings and vexations; euen the fierie trial of death it selfe. So that the scripture it selfe in manie places, the examples of an∣tiquitie, as in other histories, so in them also which haue been fresh in our memories, doe declare plainlie, what this fire and this pur∣ging meaneth. And that this purgatorie the papistes speake of, was not the first faith, but after crept into the church, the fathers plainly proue:Apol. 2. Iustin the Martyr defineth hell thus: Hell is a place where they shal be punished that haue liued vniustly, and haue not beleeued that those thinges should be done which God taught by Christ. And a∣gaine, we knowe them onelie to bee immortall, which liue holilie through vertue, after the imitation of God; and we beleeue that they shall be tormented in euerlasting fire, which leade their life vniustly, without repentance, and changing of their manners. Here are but two sortes of men by Iustines opinion: either they which repent in his life (for after this life there is no repentance as the papistes confesse) and they shall be saued; or they which die not repenting, and they shall be damned. And in another place he writes thus:Lib. Quest. & Resp. Quest. 71. The soules keepe not that state after they haue departed the bodie, which being ioined with the bodie they had. For in this life what things happen to the soule, vnited to the bodie, are all common, as well to the iust as the vniust. And as concerning this matter, there is no difference betweene them, as to be borne, and to die, to be hole, and to be sicke, to be rich and to be poore, and other such like: But af∣ter
the departure of the soules out of the bodie, by and by the iust are separated from the vniust. For they are led awaie by Angels to pla∣ces fit for them. And the iust mens soules are carried into paradise, where they enioy the familiarity and sight of Angels, and archangels,. after the fight of our sauiour Iesus Christ himselfe, according as it is said, When as we are strangers from the body, we are present with the Lord. But the soules of the vniust are carried to the places of hell, as it is said of Nabuchadnezar king of Babylon: Hell vnderneath is mooued for the meeting of thy comming, &c. And they are reserued in places fit for them, till the day of the resurrection and of reward. Here is likewise but two sortes of men, and two places appoin∣ted for them, and that the iust are with Iesus Christ, and that pa∣radise is a part of heauen. In psal. 38.And also Arnobius writes thus: Forgiue mee here before I goe hence: for if thou shalt forgiue me here, I doe finde refreshing there, and I shal be no more a stranger. For I shal be made a citizen wi the Saintes, and a houshold seruant of God by Iesus Christ. Here Arnobius teacheth two thinges, forgiuenesse in this life, and thou comfort in the life to come, then the enfranchising of the eternall kingdome: but if no forgiuenesse here bee obtained, then we not vtterlie vndone, then no hope of refreshing there. And in ano∣ther place he writes thus:In psal. 48. The heele signifieth the ende of ou life: the serpent markes that, there he lieth in waite. This onely is to bee feared of all men, least in their ende, they be taken in their iniquity: For in what worke any one shall be found in his ende; in that he shal be for euer. You which trust in your owne power, and glory in the multitude of your riches: know ye this, that no man may redeeme you from destruction, no not your father not your mother, but that man Iesus Christ, which gaue himselfe a redemption for all. Here we maie sée that those which in their ende shal be found in doing god, in faith and repentance, shall be saued no doubt: and that no man through his owne power, maie redeeme his soule: no, nor no friend, purchase a pardon for him after his death. And againe, Then they finde their enemies in the gate,In psal. 126. when they passe out of the body,Athenag. de resurt. in which they haue ouercome the deuill. All the faithfull ouer∣come their enemie in the gate. Athenagoras also writes thus: It is an hainous offence to suspect, of God or from God, that anie iudg∣ment should be done without iustice: But there is no iustice, when he shall not remaine whole and sound and capable of iudgement, who
hath done either iust thinges, or vniust thinges. For hee which hath done euerie thing in his lyfe, for which he is to bee iudged, was man himselfe, not the soule. And after: On the contrarie, if the sinnes shall be condemned afore the resurrection, God shall not deale iust∣ly with the soule: for she alone shall suffer the punishmente of those thinges, which she offended in the lyfe, at the perturbations of the body, drawing her to his appetites and motions. Athenagoras af∣firmeth, that it is vniustice to punish the soule alone by it selfe for anie sinne before the resurrection, which the bodie hath béene par∣taker of with her, hee will haue the bodie and soule, as they haue sinned both together, to be punished both together. And yet this vniustice, the papists séeme to lay vpon God, by their doctrine of purgatorie: whereas they teach, that the soule is punished alone, in those sinnes which it committed in the bodie. And S. Augustine of purgatorie writes thus also.Euchir. ad. Laur. cap. 69. Such a thing maybe: but whether it be or no, it may be doubted. If it had béene a point of faith, it ought not to haue béen doubted of, and he taketh awaie the chiefe foundation of purgatorie, that place of S. Paul 1. Cor. Chap. 4. which out of the scriptures the chiefe patrones thereof, do alledge for it. If any man build vpon this foundation, &c. expounding the fire there, which S. Paul speaketh of, to bee af∣flictions in this life, and griefe for the losse of these earthlie thinges: as I haue expounded it before. So that then by his iudgement, purgatorie is an vncertaine thing, not grounded vpon the scrip∣ture. And in his Epistle to Macedonius he writes thus,Epist. 54. Of correc∣ting our manners, there is no place, but in this lyfe. For after this life, euery one shall haue that which he hath purchased to himselfe in this life. Therefore wee are compelled, through the loue of man kind, to praye for the offenders, least they end this life so, through punishment, that when it is ended, they cannot end their punishment. What can be more plainer then this? And in his Epistle to Hesichius, hee sheweth his iudgemente plainelie, that there is no such thing.Epist. 80. But he which saieth thus (saith Augustine) my Lord will not come yet, that he may strike his fellow seruauntes, and that hee may feast with the drunken, is not of light; but of darkenesse: And therefore as a thiefe, that day shall take him. The which thing also, euery man ought to feare, of the last day of this lyfe. For in what state his last day shall find euery man, in the same, shall the last daie of the worlde comprehend and take him: because
what kind a one he dyeth in this daie, such a one shall hee be iudged in that daie. And a little after. That which I say to you, I saie to all: Watch. To which all doth he say this? but to his elect and beloued; and that doe belong to his bodie, that is, to his church. Hee did not therefore speake to them, which then presently hearde him: but also to them, which were after them, before vs, and to vs also, and to those that shall be after vs, euen to his last comming. Shall that day finde all men liuing? or shall any man say, that it belonges to the dead, that which he saieth watch, least when he commeth sodainly, he shal find you sleeping? why therefore doth he saie to all, which did belong to them which were then? but because it belongeth to all, after that manner as I haue said. For then to euery one that day commeth, when the daie shall come, that he may depart such a one from hence, what kind a one he is to be iudged at that daie. And therefore euerie Chri∣stian ought to watch, least the Lord comming, find him vnprepared. But that day shall find him vnprepared, whom the last day of this life shall find vnprepared. Here is S. Augustines plaine resolution, yt such a one as euerie Christian dyeth, such a one shall the last ie of iudgement find him: therefore there is no preparation or helpe after to be had. And he repeates this twise. And comforting a noble Lady, touching the death of her husband, he writes thus, f the generall and common receiued opinion of all Christians,Epist. 6. of the death of all the faithfull, to comforte her withall. Neither ought you so to be sad, as ye heathen which haue no hope, when as according to a most true promise, we hope, that from this lyfe, from which wee must depart, we haue not lost some of our friendes departing hence; but haue sent them before vs: and that they shall come to that lyfe, where they shall bee, as better knowne to vs; so much more deare to vs, beloued without any feare of falling out. Hee comfortes hee, that according to the true promise of Iesus Christ in the gospel, her husband was gone to lyfe euerlasting, whither wee all must followe. And that although he was as it should séeme a rich man, (who are by occasion of their wealth drawne into manie noysou lustes, as S. Paul teacheth) yet, he doth not sende him to purgato∣rie.Epist. 28. And writing of the soule, he saieth thus; that there is no soule in all man kinde, which hath not need, for her deliuerance, of the me∣diator betweene God and man, Iesus Christ. Therefore the blessed Virgins soule also, as she herselfe affirmeth. Then what soule soe∣uer, without the grace of our mediator, and his sacrament, in any age
of the bodie, shall departe out of the bodie: shall be tormented, and at the last iudgement shall receiue the bodie to be punished with it. But if after the carnall generation, which is made of Adam, if it bee regenerated in Christ, and belonging to his societie: both it shall haue rest after the death of the body, and it shall receiue the body to glory. These thinges (saieth he) are they, which concerning the soule I houlde most assuredly. Then by his most assured sentence, all soules that bee regenerate and belong to Christ, after the depar∣ture out of the bodie, shall haue rest: and therefore shall not go to anie purgatorie, & shall at the day of iudgement receiue againe also their bodies to be glorified. And in an other place hee confesseth the same doctrine more plainelie: Take heede (saith he) least of your departure hence,Lib. de. rect. cath. con. yee make the Angels sad, and your enemies glad: knowe this therefore, that the soule when it is pulled from the body, is straight waie, either cast headlong, for our good workes into paradise; or truly for our e∣uill workes into hell. Wherefore chuse you nowe, and nowe in your lyfe dispose this matter, either to reioyce for euer, with the saintes, or without ende to bee tormented, with the wicked. What can bee more plaine then this? Neither also, doth he ioyne handes with the papists in their o∣pinion of Limbus, wherein, they say, the fathers were before Christs comming, in the vppermost parte of hell,Epist. 99. & from whence Christ fetched them: Augustines opinion is, that they were in the bo∣some of Abraham, and not in hell. And that he findes not, what good our sauiour did to them, when he descended into hell: therefore he fetched them not out thence, as they nowe teach. Neither was that the faith, once giuen to the saintes, or beléeued in the Church which Augustine knewe not, as appeareth by his wordes: I can ne∣uer finde (saieth he) the name of hell taken in good parte, in the scrip∣tures: and if it be neuer read in the diuine authorities; then surely, the bosome of Abraham, which is a dwelling of a secret rest, is not to be beleeued any parte of hell. Although also in these wordes of our great master, where he saieth, that Abraham saieth, a great distance is fixed betweene you and vs, it appeareth, as I thinke, sufficientlie, The bosome of such a great felicitie, not to be any parte, or as it were member of hell. For this great Chaos, what is it? but a greate gulfe, separating them farre a sunder, betweene which it is not onelie: but it is established or fixed. And after: wherefore to those iust men, which
were in Abrahams bosome, when as he wente downe to hell, I haue not as yet founde what he profited: from whence I see he neuer de∣parted according to the blessed presence of his diuinitie. And in a∣nother place he writes thus:Epist. 49. Whosoeuer from the beginning of mankind, beleeued in Iesus Christ, and in any small measure vnder∣stoode him, and according to his precepts liued godlie and iustlie, whensoeuer and wheresoeuer they were, they were saued by him without all doubt. For euen as we beleeue in him, both abyding in the father, and nowe, who is come in the flesh: so the olde fathers be∣leeued in him, abyding with the father, and who should come in the flesh. Neither because of the varietie of the times, nowe that is prea∣ched to be done, which then was foretolde that it should bee done; therefore the faith is varied, or the saluation is diuers. Neither because one and the same thing is prophesied and preached with diuers holy thinges and sacraments; therefore must we vnderstand diuers things, or diuers saluations. But when that thing, which belongeth to the saluation and deliuerance of the godly and faithfull shall be done, let vs commit the secret to God, let vs keepe obedience to our seles. By this place it plainelie appeareth, that the fathers beleeuing in Christ to come, by this their faith, were saued as well as we. And therefore at their deathes, went to heauen, as we beleeue by our faith nowe, we shall doe. And Primatius, S. Augustines scholer, writes thus.In. 2. Cor. cap. 5. God is present in euery place, but then wee are as it were more present with him, when as wee shall bee separated from the frailenes of the flesh. And vpon that place of S. Paul to the Phil∣lippians, I desire to bee loosed and to bee with Christ: Hee teacheth them (saieth he) not to feare death, by his example (meaning that they shall be with Christ at their deathes,Contra. Demet. as well as hee.) Cyprian also writes thus to the Infidels persecuting the Christians. Wee enuye not your profits, neither do wee conceale the Lordes benefits. Oh, we require curtesie to your Gods, and for the torments and pu∣nishments which are done to vs, we shew the waie of saluation. Be∣leeue and liue: and you which persecute vs for a time, reioyce with vs for euer: when we shall depart hence, there is no place of repen∣tance, no force of satisfaction. Here lyfe is either lost or obtained: here we obtaine euerlasting lyfe, by the seruing of God, and the fruite of faith. Neither is any man hindred either by sinnes or yeares, that he may not come to obtaine saluation: As long as we remaine in this worlde, there is no repentance too late. The entrance to pardon
is easie. To them which know and seeke the truth, the accesse is not hard. If thou, although in the verie ende and sunne setting (as it were) of thy life, shalt beseech God, which is one and true, for thy sins; and shalt desire the confession and faith of his knowledge, pardon is giuen thee, so confessing him: and to thee beleeuing, healthfull remis∣sion is granted of the mercy of God: And thou shalt go to immor∣talitie, euen at thy very death. This grace Christ bestoweth, this gift of his mercie he giueth, who hath conquered death with the ensigne of his crosse. Thus farre Cyprian. Let vs beware then, howe we impaire this benefite of Christ. Here is that short word of salua∣tion vpon earth, that S. Paul speaketh of: beleeue and liue. This no doubt was the faith in Cyprians daies: that whosoeuer at ye houre of their deathes, beleeued in Iesus Christ, they went from death to life. This faith he taught the Infidels:Ad Popul. Ant. hom. 66. If there had beene anie other faith of purgatorie, he had not dealt faithfullie with them, to haue concealed it. Chrysostome he maketh the afflictions of this life, our purgatorie. For then truely (saith he) the minde is purged, when for Gods cause it is afflicted.In Ioh. cap. 18. Ferus also writeth of tribulati∣ons in this life. Tribulation (saith he) bringeth forth in vs most ex∣cellent fruites. To conclude, it burneth and consumeth whatsoeuer vice is in vs, euen as the furnace purgeth and cleanseth golde. Thus much Frus. Therefore where these afflictions are, as they are common to all Gods children, (as manie places of scripture doe proue) there néedeth no other fire of purgatorie to purge them, and cleanse them by his iudgment. S. Paul saith,Heb. 12.6. that God in this life scourgeth and whippeth euerie sonne whom he receiueth. And therefore saith he knowing this, Let vs lift vp our hands which hang downe, and our weake knees, and make streight steps to our feete: As though he should saie, let vs be of good courage, and though we be afflicted, yet walke lustelie in the waie of the Lorde, and doe his workes couragiously. And here first this lifting vp of handes, and this making streight steps to our féete, prooueth plainlie, that this scourging the Apostle speaketh of, is in this life. And then secondlie, if euerie one be here scourged, that God receiueth: then none hereafter. And Dauid also of the wicked whom God reiects writeth thus: They are not partakers of the calamities of mortall men, and they shall not bee scourged with man. Here they escape vnpunished, but hereafter their torments begin. But they will obiect, God will leaue no sin vnpunished: ther∣fore
there must néedes be a purgatorie. But I answere out of S. Augustine,Aug. in psal. 44. who saith thus: That God hath two roddes: one of dire∣ction or correction: another of yron, inflexible, and of destruction: & with either of these he wil leaue no sins vnpunished: and that (there) that is, in hell, is a rodde of yron: but (here) in this life, is a rodde of mercie. So that God hath but two roddes, either that yron rodde of iustice, or this gentle rodde of mercie. And therefore S. Iames comforteth the saintes enduring affliction, and saith thus: Be ye patient, strengthening your hearts: For by this transitory patience, the eternall paine is escaped. And therefore the Prophet Na saith, (when as before, Gods mightie power and great wrath a∣gainst sinners is described) affliction shall not rise vppe the second time. God will not punish twise. Secondlie it maie be obiected, manie soules of men departed haue appeared againe, and haue tolde their friendes howe they haue béene relieued out of purga∣torie by masses sung for them. To this I answere: that the soules of men departed cannot returne hither againe: as the saying of Abraham to Diues plainlie proueth, and that the liuing are not to receiue anie instruction from the dead. They haue Moses and the prophets (saith he) let them heare them. And to this saying of Abraham agreeth that which S. Bernard writes vpon the second of the Canticles: Let him kisse me (saith he) with the kisse of his mouth, whose liuely and forcible worde is a kisse vnto me; I will haue nowe no more figures or darke speeches: I loath the shapes of Angels. For my Christ excelleth them far, with his shape and beau∣tie. Therfore I desire no other either man or angell, but I desire him to kisse me with the kisse of his mouth. So that now the reuelation of dead men or of angels, is not requisite, but the worde of Iesus Christ is sufficient. The fathers also of the Church haue béene of the same iudge∣ment.Hom 19. in 8. cap. mat. & ser. 2 de Laza. Chrysostome of all the rest, most manifestlie affirmeth, That the soules which are once departed hence, do not come againe, but if any such like appeare they are diuels. If such a voice be heard (saith he) I am the soule of such a one: this speech commeth of the deuill, and that is not the soule of the dead; but the deuill, who that he maie deceiue the hearers, counterfaiteth such things. And by and by after, These are olde wiues tales and childish toies. For the soule separated from the body cannot walke in these parts. Tertullian also an ancient writer, in the end of his booke of the soule, saieth:
That the soules separated from their bodies, doe not remaine vpon earth; and after they haue descended into hell, that they cannot wan∣der vp and downe, neither at their owne pleasure, neither at anie o∣thers commandement. And that hell is open to no soule, that they may come out of it, the Lord hath plainlie enough confirmed, by that argument of the poore man, being in rest; and the rich man groning, and the person of Abraham: and that a messenger of the state of hell, cannot be sent backe againe. Athanasius also in his booke of questions,Quest. 13. answering why God  not suffer the soules of anie of them which haue departed he, to returne to vs againe, & to shewe vs in what state things are in hell, Many errors (saith he) would haue sprung thereof. For many deuils might haue taken vnto them the shapes of men, & might haue beene transformed into the likenesse of dead men, and might haue said that they rose from the dead. And thereof might spreade abroad manie forged matters, and false opinions of things which are done there: and that to deceiue vs and to destroie vs. Yea, the verie Glosse of the canon lawe, saith, that Manie beleeue, that some from the dead come to the liuing: as contrariwise, the scripture witnesseth, that Paul was taken from the liuing into paradise. Vpon this the glose faith. They beleeue amisse,Grat. 2. parte Caus. 13. quest. 2. fatendum. because they are but imaginations or illusi∣ons. And surelie here the Glose erreth not: for all those angelicall visions, which to confirme their superstitions withall, their golden legendes, and manie popish historiographers are full of, are no∣thing else but diabolicall illusions. S. Paul (who saith, that he was not ignorant of sathans sleightes) telleth vs, that he will transforme himselfe into an angell of light to deceiue vs. Athanasius also resol∣ueth these three doubtes. First he asketh this question, what mea∣neth that, that he saith, Agree with thine aduersarie,Quest. 62. whilst thou art in the way with him? His answere is, that the aduersary of the soul, is the body; for these are aduersaries th'one to th'other; as S. Paul saith, we doe chasten it, and doe bring the body into subiection, by fastings, watchings, and by other afflictions: and we doe that willingly and freely, that it rise vp no more against the soule, through concupiscen∣cie. He cals the waie, this vaine and deceiueable life. For after the soule is separated from the body, and gone out of this life and waie, it can doe no more good. That is also called a farthing, which is be∣hinde, and as it were omitted in the considerations of the minde. Our conscience also, is saide to be our aduersarie: for it doth secretly
reproue vs in our heart; it doth bridle vs from euill, although we bee disobedient; at the length it makes vs appeare before the tribunal seat of god, where we shall suffer punishment, both of our grieuous sinne, and also of our light offences. So that by his iudgment, to agrée with our aduersarie, is to punish our bodie. To paie the vtter∣most farthing, is to repent vs of our least sinnes. And the pri we are to go out of, is this present life; not purgatorie. He  no such prison as it should séeme. Secondlie, what meaneth the Prophet when he saith:Quest. 121. In the ende destroie not Dauid? The Pro∣phet meaneth the ende of his life, and he praieth that the ende of his life come not, nor fall not into any dammage. For if the whole life of man be euill spent, yet if his ende be good, it is a blessing and grace: but if the ende be euill, that is a miserable thing. Therfore the Pro∣phet praieth, that the ende of his life may be good: for therefore hee writ this Psalme. He therefore that makes a good ende, need feare no purgatory. Thirdly, What is that, (saith he) If anie man worke burnt, he shall suffer losse: but he himselfe shall be safe; but yet so,  through fire?Quest. 131. His answere is: If any mans worke shall be burneth shall suffer the losse of the kingdome of heauen: but he shall be saued as it were by the fire. But how shall he be saued? that is, he shall sae and whole remaine in fire: neither shall he see death. But his worke only shall be burne and confounded: but he shall remaine for euer suffering punishment; neither shall he vtterly die. He also expounds this place of the Apostle of hell, not of pur∣gatorie.
Of praier to Saintes. OF praying to Saintes, we haue no commandement from God that we should praie to them: but rather the contrary,Psal. 50. that we should call vpon him, in all our troubles; and he will heare vs, and we shall glorifie him. Iosuah a figure of Iesus Christ,  ouerthrowing Iericho, which was a figure of this worlde,Ios. 6.10. had commanded the people, that they should not shoute, nor that a worde should procéede out of their mouth, till the daie that he said vnto them: shoute. This shouting of the people (as the bearing about of the arke, maie represent the preaching of Iesus Christ) maie signifie, the praiers of the people. And as this their shouting, must be done according to the commandement of their captaine: euen o must our praiers. Nowe if they had shouted otherwise, it before he had commanded, they had sinned: so no doubt those praiers, are sinnes, which are not made according to the comman∣dement of Iesus Christ. I would to God our Catholiques would mark that argument to abolish the inuocation of saintes, which S. Augustine makes, to confirme the singing of Psalmes, in a knowne tongue in the church which thing, manie of them cannot like of. The same rea∣son is of force both waies: both to confirme, and to confute. Hee aons thus: Especially (saith he) that is to be done,Epist. 119. ad Ian. which may be defended out of the scriptures: as is the singing of Psalms & hymnes, when as we haue of this, both doctrines, examples and preceptes, of the Lord and his Apostles. Thus he proues singing of Psalmes lawfull in the church. And by the same reason, Inuocation of ines, because it hath none of these, is vnlawfull.In Euchiridio. Eckius con∣feth, that there is no expresse commandement in the newe te∣stament, of inuocation of saintes, for two causes especiallie: First because the people were giuen to Idolatrie; and then least the Apo∣stles should haue seemed vainglorious, in teaching men to call on them. If this be true, this doctrine then is not to bee preached to the people, séeing Christ saith to all his preachers:Mat. 28.20. Go teach al na∣tions, teaching them to obserue all things, I haue commanded you. Againe, this is not then the first Faith, Saint Iude here commends vnto vs.
The inuocation of the name of God, is a speciall seruice of god; commanded all the faithfull in his worde. God speaking of eue∣rie faithfull man in the psalme,Psal. 91.15. thus he concludeth: He shall call vpon me, and I will heare him, yea I am with him in trouble, I will deliuer him, and bring him to honor. Who dare omit or brea this commandement? As of a most grieuous sin; Esay complainet There is none that calleth vpon thy name,Esay 64.7. nor stirreth vp himselfe to take holde on thee, by a liuely faith. But now O Lord, thou art our father,Psal. 79.6. and louest vs most dearely. And Dauid giueth this c¦sance to the wicked. Poore out (saith he) thine indignation vpon the heathen, that haue not knowne thee, nor called vpon thy name:  S. Paul this marks and badge to all true Christians, for thus hee writteth:1. Cor. 1.2. To the church of God, which is at Corinth, and to all that call on the name of the Lord Iesus, in euery place. And in the Acts thus we reade:Act 9 21. Col. 3.17. Is not this he, that destroied all those, that called vp∣on this name, at Ierusalem? And in another place, Whatsoeuer you doe, doe all in the name of the Lord Iesus. If all thinges must be done in the name of the Lord Iesus, then our inuocations  praiers.2. Cap. v. 19. And in the second to Timothie, He that nameth Iesus, let him depart from iniquity, and follow righteousnesse, &c. with al that call on the name of the Lord. As though, to name Iesus, to him Iesus in their monthes, to call vpon the name of Iesus, we be a christian. This then was the first faith, to call vpon the  of the Lorde Iesus. This was the badge of Christians, by  they were knowne in all places. Againe not to call vpon God is the badge of an Infidell.Gen. 4.26. The chiefe part of true religion, is to call vpon ye name of god, f a liuely saith: & therfore in Genesis Moses. when as he would cōmend Enos for restoring of true religion the put downe incation onlie, And then men (saith he) began to cal on the name of the Lord.Psal. 80.18. And in the Psalme all the faithfull  Oh let vs liue, and we shal cal vpon thy name: as though this should seeme to bee the greatest worke of christians: this to be the  ende of their life:Esay 43.21.22. this worke to bee most acceptable to God: thi to be Latria and Gods chiefe honour. This people haue I formed for my selfe, they shall shewe foorth my praise (saieth God) and thou hast not called vpon me,Gen. 30. v. 33. O Iacob, but thou hast wearied me O Israell. Abraham planted a groue and called on the name of the Lord the euerlasting God, saith Moses. To call vpon God, to sweare by his name: are the chiefe par f
his honour. As he will not giue the one to anie other: so no doubt neither ye other. He reproueth this in the Israelites,Ier. 5.7. That they haue sworne by them, which are no Gods: so no doubt he will reproue them, which call vpon them that are no Gods. Neither is there a∣nie example in the scripture, of anie of the faithfull seruantes of God, that euer called vpon anie saint. Therefore this doctrine is not catholique, it is not the faith once giuen to the saintes. The Iewes being children, and like seruants, durst presume to come with their praiers, to the maiestie of God: and shall not we much more doe the same, nowe being sonnes? They had no bodie to speake for them, but onelie they remembred the couenant made with Abraham, and yet they came before the maiestie of God wish confidence, and obtained their petitions: and shall not wee much more, the couenant being performed, hauing Iesus Christ to pleade our cause; whome we knowe to bee the beloued of the fa∣ther, who is euen ascended into heauen, and standeth alwaies rea∣die (as the scripture teacheth) to plead our cause;Heb. 9.24. who hath often commanded vs, to aske and praie in his name: haue the same con∣ence? haue the same accesse? Not to doe this, is to dishonour Iesus Christ, is to doubt of his loue, is to neglect and despise his ace and priesthood.Ephes. 2. v. 18. Thorough Iesus Christ (saith S. Paul) we haue accesse in one spirit, to the father; and that with great confidence: so that we may crie Abba, father, euen as did Christ himselfe: shall we not beléeue this? This accesse,Gal 4. v. 6. Rom 8.15. this name of loue Abba (which is but thrise read in all the newe testament: once vsed by our saui∣our, and twise commended to vs:) excludes all intercessors, and doubting in our praiers. The loue and grace which is in Iesus Christ towardes his saintes, is their strength: as S. Paul teacheth Timothie: my sonne, be strong in the grace which is in Iesus Christ.2. Ti. 2.1. 2 Cor. 12 9. Ephes. 3.19. Heb. 4 15. It is their riches; as the Lord taught S. Paul, my grace is sufficient for thee; desire nothing else. And S. Paul praieth that the Ephesians maie knowe this loue of Christ which passeth all knowledge. Nay we haue not a high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all thinges tempted in like sort: Let vs therefore go boldlie to the throne of grace. Renatus a papist confesseth,Lib. 3 stromat. Biblic. ex li. Sap. the loue of all saintes compared with the loue of God towardes vs, to be little or nothing. And why should we then doubt of this loue, and trust to the loue of saintes? And againe the same Renatus confesseth, that the saintes doe not natu∣rally
knowe our praiers: but by reuelation from God. And  we sure that our praiers be reueiled to them or not? And ther∣fore our praiers made to them, must néedes be doubtfull: and ther∣fore cannot please God, as S. Iames teacheth. The sunne shall be turned into darkenesse, and the moone into bloud,Ioel. 2. v. 31. before that great and terrible day of the Lord (saieth the pro∣phet Ioel.) (And it shall bee) Marke here the decrée and ordinance of God: This is set downe as an vnmoueable pillar of saluation, a∣gainst that terrible daie of trouble, for all Christians to cleane ¦to, (He that shall call in the name of the Lord shall escape.) And here let vs marke also,Beshem in the Hebrewe. that he saieth not, that hee that calleth on the name of the Lord, but he that calleth in the name of the Lord, (as it is in the Hebrewe) shall escape: Agréeing also with that ∣ing of our sauiour in the gospell, Whatsoeuer you shall aske the father in my name,Ioh. 14.13. he shall giue it you. Therefore let vs not call vp∣on God in other names: but in this name. And he that shall so call on the name of God, in that terrible daie, when the sun and  shall be astonished; although he be a sinner, and guiltie of high treason towardes the maiestie of God, through his manifold  yet he shall escape; for this word of (Escapinge) argues peri  danger. They which were in no danger, neede no escaping. For mount Sion and in Ierusalem, shall be a deliuerance or escaping,  the Lord hath sayd: Let all true Christians which are wise in the Lord, vse this healthfull remedie. Who now (this beaten waie be∣ing forsaken) will séeke by-waies? This saluation, this deliuer, is grounded on Gods word and promise; who now forsaking this, will giue credit to the deuises and dreames of men, which  them to cal vpon God, in the names of saints, or by their mea O great follie! And marke what followes: This inuocation shall not giue deliuerance to the Gentiles onelie, which beléeue a Iesus: but to those remnant of the Iewes, that shall be sa, to those wicked ones, which hitherto haue blasphemed the name of God, whose sinnes no doubt, are as great as maie be; whome  the Lord shall call (as Ioel here affirmeth.) How forcible  is this inuocation? what greate confidence aryseth herebie vnto v? Let vs beléeue it onelie,Act. 2.21. Rom. 10.13. and practise it. And this is confirmed to vs by the witnesse of Peter and Paul, which both alledge this te¦monie, this meanes of deliuerance in that terrible daie,  Gods wrath. Naie the prophet Esay also, describing briefelie the
whole estate of Christs Church, (as I haue noted before) amongst other thinges: teacheth vs this vndoubted lesson, wish an addition.Esay 12. v. 4. Call in his name (saieth he) declare among the people the thinges he hath done. And cause it to be remembred that his name is mag∣nified. This is the dutie of all Christians, to tell what Christ hath done for them, and to put all men in remembrance of the magni∣ficencie of his name. It should séeme the Prophet did foresée that in spirit, which nowe we sée fulfilled in déede: howe the mag∣nificencie of this name should be forgotten, and how other names should begin to be had in estimation. And therfore he giueth all true christians two lessons: that they onelie cal in this name: and that they cause the magnificencie of it, to be had in remembrance. And here sée,Col 3.17. what magnificencie S. Paul giueth to the name of Ie∣sus: Whatsoeuer (saith he) you shall doe in word or deede, doe all, in the name of the Lord Iesus, giuing thankes to God euen the father, through him. If all thinges must be done in the name of the lord Iesus; then here is no place left, for the names of saintes. What can be more plaine then this? And again, if we must giue thanks to God the father through him; then no doubt by his good meanes alone, we enioie all the good thinges we haue. Who nowe dare doubt of this matter? Who will not call vpon God after this manner, that he maie escape in that terrible daie? Truelie, hee maie iustlie be condemned, who will not followe this waie of sal∣uation; so easie, and so plaine, and foreshewed, and taught by so manie witnesses. Arnobius a most ancient writer, against the Gentiles, who blasphemed christian religion, thus liuelie sets downe what was the true christian and catholique religion in his daies.Contra gentes lib. 1. You bring vp (saie they) in the world wicked religions, and worshippings, that were neuer heard of. O men endued with reason, what dare you say? what babble out? what set abroach, by your desperate and rash speech? To worshippe God, the prince of all thinges, and that is the Lord of all Lordes; to call vpon him, with dutifull seruice in our ad∣uersitie, when we are quite tired (as I may say,) to embrace him, with all our senses, to loue him, to looke vp to him: is this vnhappie and accursed religion? full of all sacrilege and wickednesse, defiling with the noueltie of her superstition the olde auncient ceremonies of our Ancestors? And after, That we call vpon the most high God, and do request of him, that which wee pray: you might knowe with your
eares, or vnderstanding by the sounde of our voice, we make in our praiers. And a little after: We christians are nothing else; but as Christ taught vs being our schoolemaster, worshippers of the great king and prince, that is God: you shal finde nothing else, if you marke well, to be done in this religion. This is the summe of all our doings, this is set downe as the bound of all our diuine seruice; this is the ende, to him (as our custome is) wee all prostrate our selues, wee worshippe him, ioyning our praiers together. Of him we aske iust thinges, and honest things; and such thinges are acceptable to him. Not that he needes, that we should pray vnto him, or loues to see so many thousands fall downe prostrate before him: the profit is ours, this concerneth our owne commodity. For because we are proe to sinne, and of our owne nature subiect to diuers lustes; he suffers him∣selfe euer to be comprehended in our mindes, that when we praie to him, and seeke to obtaine his giftes; wee may receiue a will to doe good: and by this pruning (as it were) may purge our selues from the blot of all our offences. And after: I would to God, all the world being gathered into one assemble; I might vse this speech vnto them, in the audience of them all. Are wee therefore accounted guilty of wicked religion among you, that we seeke to the head and piller of all thinges, with innumerable seruices, and that I may vse your flan∣derous speech, are we therefore called vnhappy Atheistes? And af∣ter: O most great, O most mighty bringer forth of all inuisible things O thou inuisible, and not to be comprehended of any natures! Thou art worthie, thou art worthie, truely (if so be that mans mouth maie saie that thou art worthie) to whom all creatures, that haue breath and vnderstanding, should neuer cease to yeeld & giue thanks: to whom it becommeth all their life long, to lie prostrate on their knees, and to praie to thee, with continuall praiers. Thou art the chiefe cause of all good things, ye place of al things, the space, the foundation: infinit, not begotten, immortall, euerlasting alone, whome no bodily shape can protraiture, no circumscription of qualities can comprehend, without quantitie, without situation, mouing, or habit, of whom whatsoeuer man can say, is nothing. And after: Christ helpeth good & euil indiffe∣rently, nor repelled he any from him, who being in extremity, asked his ayde, against the force and iniuries of fortune. For this is ye property of the true God, & of kingly power, to denie his curtesie to none, not to account, who deserueth, or who doth not. Here we maie plain∣lie sée, the true platforme of Christian and catholique religion,
Arnobius daies; to worship God alone, to call vpon him: yea and if we spent so all the daies of our life, it were too little: and that Iesus Christ repels none, no though they bee sinners. This is kinglie curtesie and humanitie. This catholique religion séemes contrarie to that, which nowe is counted catholique. And of that verse of the psalme, The Lord is nigh them that call on him in truth: that is (saith he) that cal on him, in the name of our Lord Iesus Christ, for he is truth. And of the diuine essence he writes thus:Lib. 6. contra gentes. And we thinke euerie God (if he be worthie of this name) generally to heare whatsoeuer any man hath spoken, out of what part of the world soeuer, euen as though he were present: yea to knowe before, what any man shal se∣cretly thinke or deuise. And euen as the sun, the moone, & the stars, although they runne their race aboue the world, yet they are by and by present generally to all men, that shal beholde them; So it behoo∣ueth the hearing of the Gods, to be shut to no man, but to be present to euerie mans tongue, although speeches be made to them out of di∣uers countries. This is a thing, that properlie belongeth to the gods, to fulfill all things, with their power; not to be present with some part onely, but wholy to be present in all places: not to be present and ab∣sent, not to go to supper in Ethiopia, and after twelue daies to returne againe to their owne homes. This faith they had of the Gods in the primitiue church; and to be present in all places, and to heare all mens praiers, they accounted a thing proper to the Gods: and shall we attribute this to anie creature? to anie saint? And of the sacrifices which God requireth of Christians, Arnobius writes thus: I will not (saith God) eate the flesh of bulles,In psal. 50. whatsoeuer go∣eth on feet or flieth is mine. Why doest thou giue me mine, for thine? This is thine, if with a pure heart, thou pourest me out praises, and performest to me the vow, which thou madest in thy baptisme, wherein thou diddest promise, that thou wouldest forsake the diuell, and keepe my commandements. And also when thou shalt doe this, call vpon me in the day of thy trouble, in the day wherein thou shalt depart out of this body; and I will deliuer thee out of the hands of the diuels: and thou shalt magnifie me in my giftes. Here we are plain∣lie taught, by an ancient father, what sacrifie chiefelie God de∣lightes in; the manner of our baptisme, which our Church nowe kéepes, and whome we must call vpon, in the hower of death, with a sure promise, that then God will deliuer vs from the power of
the diuell. O happie inuocation, that hath such a promise! And in another Psalme, Wee in euery worke desire God to bee our helper. But thou (speaking of the wicked) the worke which thou goest about to perswade,Arnobius in. Psal. 54. thou makest not God thy helper, but they which worke these thinges, are without God. If they be rich men, presuming and trusting in the riches of the worlde; if they bee poore, desiring helpe of the rich men of the world, and not of God. And the Lord is nigh to all that call on him in truth, that is, which cal on him in the name of our Lord Iesus Christ. For he is truth. And in another place.Arnobius. Lib 7. contra gentes. A good opinion makes religion, and a right minde or iudgement concerning the Gods, that thou thinke them to desire no∣thing, against the worship of their beleeued maiestie. For when a all thinges, which here are giuen to them, we see consumed before our eyes, what else is to be sayd from vs to come to them; but opinions worthie of the Gods, and agreeing to their name. These are most sure giftes, these are true sacrifices: for pottage, frankinsence, with flesh, are nourishmentes of the raging fire, and meete for funeralles. Lactantius of the worship of God,De. vero. cultu. cap. 1. writes thus, agreeing with his master Arnobius: Now (saieth he) I come to that point, which i the chiefest and greatest of this worke: that I may shewe after what manner, and with what sacrifice, God is to be worshipped. For this is the dutie of man, and in this the chiefe point of all his affaires, and the whole maner of a happie lyfe doth consist: because for this ende we were made, and inspired with lyfe of him; not that we should be∣hold the heauens, the sun and the moone (as Anaxagoras thought,) but that we should worship God, the maker of the heauen and the sun, with a pure minde. And after: That holy and singular maiestie, requires nothing else of man, but onely innocencie and a pure lyfe: which if one offer to God, he hath sacrificed aboundantly. And a∣gaine:Lib 4. de. vera. sapientia cap. 29. There is one onely free and most high God, without begin∣ning, because he is the beginning of all thinges: And in him, both the sun, and all things are contained. Wherefore when as the mind or wil of the one, is in the other; or rather one in them both; by good right, they are both called one God, because whatsoeuer is in the father, he hath translated to the sonne: and whatsoeuer is in the sonne, descen∣deth from the father. Therefore that great and onely God cannot be worshipped, but by the sonne; he that thinkes he worships the fa∣ther alone, as he worships not the sonne; so doth he not worship the father: but he that embraceth the sonne, and beares his name; he also
with the sonne, worships the father: because the embassador, and messenger, and high priest of the father, is the sonne. Hee is the gate of the great temple, he is the way of light, he is the guide of saluation, he is the doore of lyfe. Dionysius Areopagita (as it is supposed) a verie ancient writer, beginneth his booke of the heauenlie Hierarchie by calling on the name of Iesus Christ: Therefore (saieth he) calling on the name of Iesus Christ, which is the light of the father, which is indeede, and is true, which lightens euery man that comes into the world; by whose bountifulnesse, an entrance was made for vs, to the father, the foun∣taine of light: Let vs come to the exposition of the scriptures, as much as in vs lyeth, which the fathers haue deliuered vnto vs.S. Paul saith, do all in the name of Iesus Christ, what∣soeuer ye do. This Au∣thour séemes to followe S. Paules counsell, who in the beginning of his worke, calles vpon the name of Iesus Christ, as Stephen al∣so did, calling on the name of Iesus Christ. And Martiall an an∣cient writer writes thus: Prayer is necessarie for you: Therefore continue in prayer euery daie,Martial. Epist. 2. ad. Tolosanos. for your aduersarie round about you like a cruell beast is seeking which of Gods sheepe hee may teare in peeces: who especially by a strong fayth onely, and pure and day∣ly praier, flyeth from the sheepe-folde of God. Pray to the glorie of God, and whatsoeuer you giue to your brethren, giue it to the glo∣rie of God, not for vaine glorie, and keepe your selues in the glory of God. Seeke those petitions that concerne eternall lyfe, greatly de∣sire to aske the kingdome of God, and the righteousnes thereof: and all thinges necessarie shall be giuen you of God. Alwaies call vpon od the father, raigning in heauen, praying that his kingdome maie come, and that his will may be done in vs, as in the Angels of heauen. And after: Beholde I shew you by him that speaketh in me, my Lord and master Iesus Christ: Nowe his kingdome is at hande: nowe his name shineth aboue the sunne: nowe throughout all the worlde his workes and wonders are preached. Sée the Catholique religion in S. Martials daies, to do all to the glorie of God: euen to call vp∣on God raigning in heauen: to magnifie the name of Iesus Christ: to preach and declare his wondrous workes.Epist. 2. ad. Trallianos. Ignatius al∣so the martyr in his Epistles writes thus: Stop your eares, if anie man speake vnto you without Iesus Christ. And againe: if the prayer of one or two haue such force, that Christ will be among them: how much more the supplication of the Priest and holy people,Epist. 11. ad. Eph. ascending to God iointly, doth perswade to graunt them, all their petitions in
Christ. Here we maie plainelie sée, the forme of common praies in his daies. The people and Priest praied iointlie together▪ And they praied in the name of Iesus Christ. And againe, ¦ting to the Romaines: You shall do me a very good turne, if you doe offer mee to God, when as euen nowe the Altar is readie, that an assemblie being made through loue, you doe sing to God the Fa∣ther, by Iesus Christ. And in his Epistle to the Philadelphians: I haue heard some saie, if I shall not finde the gospell of Iesus Christ, to be of great antiquity: I will not beleeue it. To such I say, that to me Iesus Christ is antiquity it selfe; to whom not to beleeue, is mani∣fest destruction and vnpardonable. And after hee writes thus of Christ: It is hard to kick against the pricke: It is hard not to beleeue Christ: It is hard, to despise the preaching of the Apostles. For the priestes are good, and the teaching of the minister; but the Bishoppe better, to whom the holy of holies is committed, to whome alone is committed the secrets of God. The offices are good, of the power of God, the spirit is good also, which is most holy ouer all, and the mi∣nister of the word: but aboue all the saintes, the high priest and prince of bishops is most holy, who is the embassadour and minister of his father, and prince of the legions of the heauenly armie, by whom the father made all things, & which gouernes all things. He is the way, which leadeth to the father, he is the rocke, ye wal, ye naile, the sheep∣heard, the priesthood, the gate of science and knowledge, by whom entred Abraham, Isaac and Iacob, Moses also, and all the company of the Prophets; the pillers of the world also, the Apostles; and the spouse of the Lord, the church, for which he shedde his bloud, that he might redeeme her. All these, are in the vnitie of the one and one∣ly begotten sonne of God. Here we maie learne manie notable pointes, of catholique religion: First, for those that will beleeue nothing, but antiquitie; Ignatius telles them, that Iesus Christ is antiquitie it selfe. Watsoeuer nowe, can be plainlie proued out of the gospell, is antiquitie it selfe; though it were neuer knowen before. And 2. not to beléeue the gospell, is a sin not pardonable. Thirdly, that Iesus Christ is the prince of priests, and chiefe Bi∣shoppe; hee is the waie to God the father, he is the rocke vpon which he saith in the preface of euerie of his epistles, that ye church is builded. 4. (agréeing to S. Paules doctrine) that all the Apo∣stles were pillers of the church. 5. he cals the seruants of Christ, mi∣nisters of the word, & Christ himselfe also a minister of his father:
that name, as maie seeme, was not so odious in his daies, as it is nowe amongst manie. Sixtlie, that the church and the Apostles are one in the vnitie of the son of God: he is the head, that knit all the church together, and not the Pope of Rome. And in his Epistle to the Magnesians hee sheweth the manner of his praying: I pray (saith he) in God and in our Lord Iesus Christ,Eus lib 4. Eccles. hist. cap. 15. in whom I wish you much to reioice. Policarpus also his scholler praies as he taught him: O God (saith he) the father of the beloued sonne Iesus Christ, by whom we are come to thy knowledge. The God of angels, and powers, and all creatures, and of all the iust men which liue before thee: I praise thee, which hast brought me vnto this day, and to this hower, that I might be a partaker of thy martyres, and of the cup of thy sonne Iesus Christ, &c. Thou art the true God, without all lea∣sing, wherfore in all things I praise thee, & blesse thee, & glorifie thee, by the euerlasting God and Bishop Iesus Christ, thy beloued son. To whom with thee and the holy ghost, be glory for euer & euer, Amen. And his body shone in ye fire, like gold: and ye smel, as the sauor of a most pretious frankinsence. And when his tormentors saw that his bodie, could not be consumed with fire, they commanded the executioner to drawe neare, and to come to the body, to which the fire gaue place, and thrust it thorough with a sword. Such was the praier, and most glorious martyrdome of Policarpus. Such prai∣ers they vsed to make commonlie in the primitiue church. But of hereticks Ireneus writes thus: They vse Images, and charmes,Iren. li. 5. ca. 23. and inuocations and such like superfluities. And lying, they shew forth the names of certaine angels, whose steps the Romish exorcistes and coniurers doe follow. And after: writing of the Cainites and O∣phites, which worshipped Cain and Core, and the Sodomites,Cap. 35. Lib. 2. contra heres. Valentin. cap. 58. he shew∣eth how they called vpon Angels: O thou Angel, I pray of thee, &c. But of the church of Christ he writes thus: It is not possible to tell the number of graces, which, thorough the whole world, the church receiuing of God, in the name of Iesus Christ, crucified vnder Ponti∣us Pilate, doth daily worke and finish; neither seducing anie, nor ta∣king money from anie. For as she hath receiued freely from God: so she ministreth freely. Neither doth she any thing by the inuocation of Angels, nor by inchantments, nor by any wicked curiositie: but purely and manifestly, directing her praiers to god, who hath made al things, and to the name of our Lord Iesus Christ: she finisheth them in pow∣er, to the profit of men; and not to their seducing. For euen now the
name of Iesus Christ doth bestowe benefits, and cures all most f∣ly and truely, which beleeue in him, and not the name of Sy or Menander, &c. Here we maie plainlie sée, she description of the true church, in Ireneus daies. She receiued innumerable graces from God, in the name of Iesus Christ, she doth nothing by the in∣uocation of Angels, or by inchantments, nor by anie curious act, she giueth fréelie, because she hath receiued freelie, she takes mo¦ney of none, she directes her praiers to God, in the name of Ie∣sus Christ. How vnlike this church, is nowe the church of Rome who requesteth, and receiueth (as she supposeth) most of her gra¦ces, in other names; who vseth so often the inuocation of An∣gels; who doeth all for money; who vseth charmes, coning and inchantments. Apol. 2.Iustine the Martyr writes thus, concerning Gods sacrifices, We are not Atheists and wicked, which worshippe the maker of th world, affirming as we haue beene taught, that he needes not offe∣rings and incense, and wee praise him by the meanes of praier and thankesgiuing, as much as in vs lieth: and we are perswaded, that this honour onely becomes him, that we should not burne in the fire those things that were created of him, for meate: giuing them to our selues, and to the poore. Let vs offer (shewing our selues thankeful vnto him.) Let vs celebrate vnto him our hymnes, and stately song and for the creation wherewith he hath created vs, and for the gt plentie of all thinges which concerne our health, for the variety of all kinde of buddes, for the alteration of the times and seasons, for the life which hereafter without all corruption shal come vnto vs, for  and perseuerance; we poure out our praiers. If praiers and hymnes, be the chiefe part of Gods seruice, be latria, (as by Iustine the m¦tyr they maie séeme they are) then they are not to bee attri to anie saint whatsoeuer. And of the maner of baptisme he writes thus: He that determineth to be regenerate, and doth repent him of his former sinnes, the name of the Lord God, the father of all things is named, and calling vpon that alone, we bring him that shall be w∣shed to the fountaine. If in baptisme, in the remission of so  great sins, the name of God alone is to be called vpon; much  in our dailie and fraile sinnes. In Origens daies this inuocation of the names of saintes ∣gan to creepe in, as it maie séeme, as purgatorie in Augustines; In Ireneus daies, and Iustine the Martyr, the church vsed it not,
Origen writes thus: If all the saintes which haue departed this life,Hom. 3. in Cant. hauing as yet charitie towardes those which are in this world, if they be saide to haue a care of their saluation, and to helpe them with their praiers and intercessions with God, it is not inconuenient, it is no ab∣surd thing. And on the 13. chap. of Iosua he writes thus: I thinke, that all the fathers which haue slept before vs, doe fight with vs, and helpe vs with their praiers. For I haue heard one of our ancient ma∣sters saying so. Here we maie plainlie sée, that this was not the first faith, once giuen to the saintes. For then Origen would not haue said, I so suppose: but I so will beléeue. Neither would hee haue saide, it is not inconuenient: but it is an vndoubted truth. Neither doth he speake of this point of inuocation of them: but onelie of this, whether they doe praie for vs or no; which though they doe: yet it doth not followe, that we should therefore praie to them, séeing as it hath béene proued, this is a chiefe part of Latria, and of Gods honour. And againe, we are not sure whether they heare vs or not. See also how manie absurdities, doe follow this inuocation of saintes. First, all praier must be made in faith: as our sauiour teacheth; and therefore I saie vnto you:Mark. 11.24. whatsoeuer ye desire when you praie, beleeue ye shall haue it, and it shall be done to you.Iames 1. v. 5. And S. Iames: if any man lacke wisedome, or anie thing else: let him aske of God, who giueth to all men liberally, and respecteth no man; and it shall be giuen him: but let him aske in faith, nothing doubting. For he that doubteth is like a waue of the sea, & let such a one thinke, that he shall obtaine nothing at Gods handes: where we maie note in praier, these notable lessons. First, to whom to praie, euen to God. Secondlie, for what thinges, euen for wisedome, the grea∣test it well in the worlde: therefore no doubt, for other lesser mat∣ters. Thirdlie, what persons maie haue accesse to God, euerie man, no man is excluded. Fourthlie, the nature of God, hee gi∣ueth generally without respect of persons, to all that beleeue in his sonne Iesus. For his sake, and not for their sakes; (for so the worde  importes) euen as we are also commanded to giue our almes , in simplicitie or generallie,Rom. 12.8. which worde (in my opinion) excludes all carnall respects: as though he should saie, giue not respecting the person: but for Gods sake only. And so God giueth generallie to all christians their praiers, (not respe∣cting what they are:) but for Iesus Christs sake. Fiftlie, he castes
none in the téeth, of their vnthankefulnesse. Though they haue béene vnthankfull, and prodigall children; yet now, if they return, he is readie to receiue hem with that father in the gospell: he wil not cast in their téeth, their former sinnes or vnkindnesse. Here is the true Image of God: Oh what a mercifull God haue wee? let all true christians beléeue this Image, and flie to him in their extremities. Here let all popish Images (be they of beaten gold) blush: they are not able to set out the true image of God, as this doth. Sixtlie, or last of all, he knits vp all thus: But let him aske in faith, nothing doubting: praie thou neuer so often, neuer so long, euen daie and night; vnlesse thou aske in faith, thou shalt obtaine nothing, at this bountifull and mercifull Gods hands. He makes account in vs, of faith, aboue all other vertues: and faith (as we read here) must not doubt, it must not be like a waue of the sea, it must not be vncertaine, it must not be carried this waie, & that waie. It must haue  ioyned with it: that is, a most assured certaintie and persuasion. As we read of Abraham, as con∣cerning ye promise of god, he reasoned not or doubted not, through vnbeliefe: but he was strengthned thorough faith, giuing the glo∣ry to God,Rom. 4 v. 21. , and being certainly perswaded, that he which promised, was able to performe it. Faith must haue e∣uer this certaine perswasion ioyned with it, which is contrarie to wauering or doubtfulnesse: or else it cannot please God. And so the worde ,Luc 1. v. 1. is vsed the first of Luke: When as many haue taken in hand to declare in order those thinges, whereof we are most assuredly perswaded and certified, saith S. Luke. Such a perswasion and certaintie is necessarie to faith, as the Apostles had, of the gospell. And by a consequent, seeing faith is necessary to our praiers: such a certaine perswasion, and vndoubted certain∣tie, is necessarie to our praiers. But praiers made to Saintes, cannot haue this vndoubted certaintie. For euen as the scripture teacheth vs,. 1. Io. 5. v. 14. this is our assurance, that when we praie in the name of his sonne Christ, wee know God heareth vs: we haue not this assu∣rance of anie other. And Dauid saith, thou that hearest the praier, vnto thee shall all flesh come:Psal 65. v. 2. Psal. 86. v. 7. And in the time of my trouble I will call vpon thee, for thou hearest me. And S. Augustine saith, of God the maker of all thinges, which is incomprehensible and ineffable, we read,Aug. med. ca. 27. speake, and write many wonderfull things, all doubt set apart: but of angels and saintes, whatsoeuer we saie, we cannot proue so eui∣dently.
So that by S. Augustines iudgment, we can haue no cer∣taintie of our praiers made to saintes; and therefore they lacke that same , that certaine perswasion of faith, which they ought to haue, if they should please God. Secondlie, while we are in this bodie, we neede goades, as it were, to pricke vs forward to good workes: and therefore ye word of God, is called by the preacher a goade or naile.Eccles. 12.11. And of such goades, towardes the ende of the world, to pricke vs forward to good workes (because then we shall be verie slowe) the Apostle saieth to the Hebrewes, wee shall stand in neede;Heb. 10.24. as we in our daies, almost in all places perceiue and proue: but after this life, we shall néede no such goades or prickes. This bodie of sin,Heb. 11. v. 1. Gal. 5.17. which nowe so hindereth, shall be taken from vs; that sinne which han∣geth so fast on, shall be taken off; the flesh, which now resisteth the spirit, shall be mortified: so that then, there shall be no resistance, no warre anie more, betwixt the flesh and the spirit; we shall doe willinglie then of our selues in heauen, all the thinges wee ought to doe. And therefore there néedeth no request to the saintes to be made to praie for vs. They doe nowe praie for vs, and wish vnto vs euen as to themselues without our requestes; euen as the car∣nall members of our bodie, doe wishe well one to another, and one néede not to be desired to helpe an other: Euen so much more, no doubt, the spirituall members, more feruentlie, in that they can, without anie intreating, helpe their fellow members. Now is their charitie perfect. To thinke that they must be requested, as they were, when they liued in the worlde, is to denie this their perfection: and as a thing néedlesse, God neuer teacheth anie in∣tercession to be made to them. The Philosophers could saie, that their blinde nature coulde doe nothing in vaine: much lesse our God, who is wisedome it selfe, would command his anie néedlesse thing: If we shall giue an account of euerie idle worde, surelie much more we shall giue an account, of euery idle and vaine prai∣er. Athenagoras in his booke of the resurrection saith, That (Fru∣straneitas) vanitie, is quite excluded from all the workes of God, and from all his giftes. The carnall loue of Diues in hell caused him to praie for his fleshlie brethren: and shall not Christian chari∣tie in hauen, nowe perfected in gods saintes, much more enforce th  doe the same? The Martyrs praie for vengeance against their persecutors, Reu. 6.19. and therfore no doubt, they wish wel
to the church.2. Pet. 1.12. The Apostle Peter while he dwelt here in this taber∣nacle, thought it néedfull to put vs in remembrance, and to stirre vs vp: but after this life, when we shall go out of this tabernacle, we shall neede no such remembrancers. And here it perchance maie be obiected, that the fame reason doth take awaie the inuocation of the name of Christ: for hee no doubt praieth for vs, and yet we are commanded to pray to him. I answere, this is commanded in respect of vs, and not in respect of him, he standes in no neede of this our inuocation, or seruice; but we, to declare our duetie to him, and to honour him, are com∣manded to call on him:50.15. as the psalme teacheth, Call vpon me in the day of thy trouble, and I will beare thee, and thou shalt glorifie me. Inuocation here is commanded vs, as a part of Gods glo∣rie, which onelie we are commanded to yeelde him, which wee are not commanded to giue to anie creature besides. Thirdly, this in∣uocation of the saintes séemes to sauour of the conclusion of the Sadduces, which would haue man and wife in heauen: but our sa∣uiour telleth them plainlie,Mark. 12. v. 25. that the saintes of God neither doe mar∣rie nor are married: but are as the angels of God; that is, nowe in heauen, there are no carnall respectes among them, as were here on earth. They loue all alike, they all glorifie God. But this inuocation of saintes, seemes to inferre, that they haue speciall care of some one, more then of another. But our sauiour teach∣eth, that, that priuate & indissoluble knot of marriage, in heauen is broken: much more all other priuat knots whatsoeuer. Fourth∣lie, this inuocation of saints, interrupts the seruice of God, which the saintes doe yeelde continuallie to God. The saintes office in heauen (as should séeme) is nothing else, but to praise God: as appeareth by the Reuelation.Reu. 4. v. 8. The foure beastes about the throne, ceased not day & night saying: Holy, holy, holy Lord God almigh∣tie, which was, which is, and which is to come. And all the Saints of God,Reu. 7. v. 10.11.12. cried with a lowde voice, saying: Saluation commeth of our Lord God, that sitteth vpon the throne, and of the lambe. And al the angels stood round about the throne, and about the elders; and the foure beastes, and they fell before the throne on their faces, and wor∣shipped God, saying, Amen: praise, and glorie, and wisedome, and thanks, and honor, and power, and might, be vnto our God for euer∣more,119 Epist. ad Ianuar. cap. 16. Amen. And Augustine writes thus plainly: That it is obser∣ued at the altar euerie Lords day: and Alleluiah, O praise the Lord, is
sung: which signifieth, that our worke to come, shall bee nothing else, but to praise God: as it is written, blessed are they that dwell in thy house, O Lord, they shall praise thy name without ende. Sée howe Augustine saieth plainlie, that the worke of the saintes to come, shall be nothing else, but to praise God. And he confirmes this his saying out of the scripture. And S. Iohn in the Reuelati∣on, as an eie witnesse, sawe the same: and shall not we beleeue al these? Shall we interrupt this their worke, appointed them of God, by our inuocation? Our Catholiques nowe make it, as should séeme, their chiefe worke, to praie for vs: as their dailie inuocations of them, in all places doe proue: which no doubt is me, if S. Augustines iudgment be true. But they obiect first, that God heareth not sinners: and there∣fore seeing we are all full of manie sins, we maie stand in doubt, whether God heareth vs or not. But Augustine saieth,Lib. 1. retract. cap. 3. That that was but the saying of a blinde man, that knew not Christ. God (saith he) doth not onely heare the godly, but also those which are not such, that they may be such. And Ferus vpon Iosuah saith:Fer. in cap. 10. Iosu. That he hea∣ring the suite of the Gibeonites, was a figure of Christ; neither he res∣pected their basenesse, and vnworthinesse. And after he saith, Iesus being called vpon, is present straightway, to all that labour and are in danger: for he respectes not what we haue beene, or are: but with what faith, we call vpon him. The which thing manifestlie appea∣reth in the leaper, the Centurion, and the woman of Canaan. Secondlie they obiect, that we maie require the helpe of our bre∣thren, in this life, to praie for vs: and therfore also, after this life. But this followeth not, for first, it is one thing to praie or request e; and another to praie to one: we praie our brethren in this life, that we knowe can and doe heare vs, to praie for vs; we doe not praie vnto our brethren. But they doe not praie the saintes: but praie vnto them, vsing the same phrases and spéeches to them, which they vse to God: and therfore the reason is not all one. And first Augustine writes thus concerning praier, and defineth it, that it is a talking with God; when thou readest,August. in psal. 85. God talketh with thee: when thou prayest, thou talkest with God (saieth he.) But what? must we despaire of all mankinde, and say that euery man is damned, to whom in his prayers some euill thoughtes creepe in, and interrupts his prayers? If we should saie so, (my brethren) I doe not see, what pe remaines. And why is there any hope with God? because
great is his mercy. (For he had sayd before) If any were declaring his cause to a iudge, and would sodainly turne backe, and talke with another man, would he suffer it? And yet God suffereth the heartes of so many that pray vnto him, and yet thinke on diuers thinges in their prayers. So that, here is the great mercie of God; euen in our best workes, are imperfections: who then dare trust in his workes? Secondlie, we maie learne what praier is, it is a tal∣king with God; not with anie saint or Angell. And after, in the same Psalme he speaketh thus of Inuocation: The wicked (saith he) haue not called vpon God: They haue called vpon; but not vpon God. Thou callest vpon, whatsoeuer thou louest; thou callest vppon, whatsoeuer thou callest into thy selfe; thou callest vpon, whatsoeuer thou wouldest haue come vnto thee. Therefore, if wee will haue no saint come to vs, nor to come into vs; but God alone, he must dwell in vs: we must call vpon God alone, by S. Agustines definiti∣on. No Angel or sainte can mingle it selfe with our soules, but Gods spirit onely,Ser. 3 super Cantica. as Bernard saieth. And the same lesson, as he taught others: so he practised himselfe. O Lord, (saieth he) graunt me to knowe and vnderstand, whether it be better to call vpon thee, or to praise thee;Confess. Lib. 1. Cap. 1. and whether it bee better to know thee, or to call vppon thee. But who will call vpon thee, not knowing thee? He may call vpon one for another, that knoweth thee not. Or whether rather, art thou not called vpon, that thou mayest be knowne? And howe shall they call vpon, in whom they haue not beleeued? And how shal they beleeue, without a preacher, &c. And after. I will seeke thee, O Lord, calling vpon thee, and I will call vpon thee, beleeuing in thee; for thou hast been preached to vs: my faith O Lord calleth vpon thee, which thou hast giuen me, which thou hast inspired me by the humanitie of thy sonne, by the ministery of thy preacher, (meaning Iesus Christ) who hath taught vs in the gospell, to call vpon God the father in his name, and we shall most assuredly obtaine our petitions. Vpon this promise preached by our sauiour, Augustine grounded his faith. And a little after: And how shall I call vpon my God and my Lord? Because truly, I will call him into my selfe, when I call vp∣on him. And what place is in mee, that my God may come vnto me? &c. By these places it appeareth, that according to S. Augus∣tines iudgement, inuocation is a chiefe part of Gods honour, and linked and annexed to faith: and therefore not to bee giuen to anie creature. And in another place he writes thus: Not euery one
that trusteth in his owne strength:Epist 89. but he that calleth on the name of the Lord shall be saued. But how shall they call vpon him, in whom they haue not beleeued? To this end therefore they beleeue, that be∣leeue a right; that they may call vpon him, on whom they haue be∣leeued; and that they maie be able to do that, which they haue recei∣ued in commandement by the lawe. For that which the lawe com∣mandeth, faith obtaineth. Thus far Austen. Here is the right ende of faith, to call on the name of the Lord. Faith is attributed to God alone, and so ought our inuocation. Phillipus de dies ioines praier or inuocation,In. Fest. Sancti Iacobi. 1. Conc. 1 and adoration to∣gether. For he writes thus. Where one translation hath, they shal worship him alwaies: another hath, they shall pray to him alwaies; as S. Augustine also reads. In which words two thinges are to bee marked, one is, that praier is so acceptable to God, that he accepts it instead of adoration; which is a thing greatly to bee weighed. For one of the greatest seruices, that God requires in the world, is to wor∣ship him, with the worship of Latria. And it so delights him, to be∣stowe gyfts vpon men, and that men should pray vnto him, that hee calles prayer, adoration. The second thing that there is to be noted is, that adoration worship, ought to followe perfect prayer: And therefore that which one translation cals praier, another cals adorati∣on. Thus farre Phillippus de dies. We maie note here, that he is forced to confesse, that praier is the chiefest part of Gods honor, & that praier and adoration must go together. Therefore when they praie to saintes, let Catholiques take héede, least by his iudge∣ment, they giue Latria, euen diuine honour, vnto them. And Augustine in his booke of Meditations writes thus:Cap. 5 Meditat. I call vppon thee, O my God, I call vpon thee, because thou art nigh to all, that call vpon thee in truth. Thou art truth (O holy truth) teach mee I beseech thee, of thy great clemency, to call vpon thee, in thee; bee∣cause I cannot tell, how this ought to be done. But blessed truth, I desire to be taught of thee, for without thee to be wise, is to be a very foole: but to know thee, is to know perfectly. And after: I desire to cal vpon thee, the which I pray thee that it may be in truth. What is in truth, to call vpon the truth? but the father in the sonne. Therefore O holy father, thy word is truth, and the beginning of thy wordes, is th: For this truly is the beginning of thy wordes, That in the be∣ginning, was the Word, in the beginning it selfe: I worship thee, the chiefe beginning. In the very word it selfe of truth, I call vpon thee,
O perfect truth: wherein, O thou the same truth, direct and teach me in thy truth. For what is more pleasant, then to call vpon the be∣getter, in the name of his onely begotten; then to moue the father to mercy, by the remembrance of his sonne, to mitigate the kings anger, with the naming of his deare childe? So are guilty persons deliuered out of prisons: so they yt are bound, are set free: so they that haue recei∣ued the doleful sentence of death, are not woont only to be absolued; but moreouer to obtaine extraordinary fauour, while they shall vrge to their angrie princes, the loue of their beloued children. And after: And what other intercessor, I shall direct to thee, I know not, but him that is the propitiation for our sins, and fitteth at thy right hand, ma∣king request for vs. And to this exposition agrées Arnobius. To al I say (saith he) that call vpon thee in truth,In. Psal. 1.44. thou art neare: that is, which call vpon thee in the name of our Lorde Iesus Christ. For hee is the truth. They both agréeing with the gospell which saieth. I am the way,Ioh. 14.6. Ioh. 1.17. Ioh. 18.37. the truth, and the lyfe: And the law was giuen by Moses, but grace and truth, came by Iesus Christ. And againe: for this cause am I borne, and for this cause came I into the worlde, that I might beare witnesse to the truth:2. Thes. 2.11.12. And hereof his word is called 2. Thes. 2. truth. God sent them strong illusions: because they beleeued not the truth.2. Epist. ad. Tol∣sanos. And Martiall in his Epistle writes thus. Trust in the power of the Lord Iesus Christ, whose clemencie is without measure, whose power is vnspeakeable, whose glory is for euer to bee desired, who wil neuer forsake you: but in al things wil euer be presēt with you; as he hath promised to vs saying; Behold I am with you, euery daie till the end of the worlde. To him all hidde thinges are manifest, and without his will, nothing can chance vnto you. Settle your mindes daily, in the beholding of him, and loue nothing besides him, because he cares for you. This was the first Catholique religion, euery daie to thinke on Iesus Christ: to loue nothing besides him: not to doubt of his loue and clemencie; but to beléeue it to be without anie measure. But some will saie, I will call to the blessed virgine or to some one saint, that he maie haue a speciall care of mee. This carnall cogitation is quite contrarie to the state of Gods saintes in heauen:Mat. 22.30. Our Sauiour in the gospell plainelie teacheth vs, that they are like the Angels, that they neither marrie, nor are mar∣ried: that is, they are quite voide of these fleshly affections. Now they loue all men alike. Amongst them there is neither wife nor
husband; and therfore they loue not anie one here on earth more then another, but they loue Gods saintes all alike, as before hath béene shewed. Our Catholiques at this daie would account it a strange thing, to speake against the honour, due vnto the blessed virgine Marie, as though she might be honoured ouermuch: and yet Epi∣phanius doth so, and condemned these women that offered certain meates vnto her. If he thought them, offering meates vnto her,Contra Colliridi∣anos haer. 79. to haue offended: what would he thinke of them, offering praiers to her? Let Marie (saith he) be in honour, be in estimation amongst vs: but let the father, the sonne, the holy ghost bee worshipped; let no man worshippe Mary: I saie not a woman, no nor a man (as though man were rather to bee worshipped then a woman:) This maiestie (saith he) belongeth and is due to God. The Angels refuse such glorie. Teaching vs by this, what this worshippe meaneth, ch as the Angels refused: that is, to kneele vnto them,Reu. 19.16. Iudges 13.16. to fall at their féete, to accept anie burnt offerings. But these thinges haue our newe catholiques done, and more then these to our Lady: whereas they saie in their praiers; shewe thy selfe to be a mother.In annuntiation beatae virginis. As though, because she was Christs mother, she might vse her au∣thoritie towardes him. And Augustine writing to one Laetus, that he should not be lead by the carnall affection of his mother, hindring his course to the gospell, he writes thus of the blessed virgine:Epist. 38. ad Laetum. Had not thy captaine also an earthly mother, of whom, when as some tolde him, being a∣bout his heauenlie businesse, he answered, who is my mother, and my brethren? And stretching his handes to his disciples, he said, That they pertained not to his kinred, but which did the will of his father: In which number, he being mercifull, included also holy Marie her selfe. For she did the will of his father. And our heauenly and best schoolemaster, reiected the name of his mother, which they told him of, as a priuate and proper thing, because it was an earthlie thing, in comparison of the heauenly kinred. And rehearsing that heauenly kinred in his disciples, he doth shewe, with what kinred the holy virgine, with others nowe, belonged to him. And least by this ex∣cellent lesson, whereby hee taught that carnall affection in parentes, ought to be despised, errour should take hold, by which it is saide of some, that he had no mother: in another place, he warneth his disci∣ples, that they should not say, that they had any fathers on earth: that
as it is manifest, that they had fathers; so he would declare, that hee had a mother, whose earthly kindred notwithstanding being despi∣sed, he would giue an example to his disciples, of despising all such al∣liances or fleshlie affections. Christ cast awaie the name of his mo∣ther here on earth, as a priuate and an earthlie thing, as sauoring of flesh and bloud: and doe we thinke that nowe in heauen, he wil allowe this fleshlie conceipt or imagination, that he will accept the name of mother? He teacheth all his disciples, by his exam∣ple to despise all such carnall bandes, and familiarities: and will hee allowe of them himselfe?Heb 13.8. Ferus in Iohan∣nem cap. 19. No doubt Iesus Christ, is the same yesterdaie, and to daie, and for euer: as S. Paul teacheth. Ferus also writes, that in Gods affaires Christ spake hardly to his mother, be∣cause where Gods busines is in doing, all mans affections must cease: Condemning this carnall imagination of theirs. But some will obiect, maie we not honour the saints? they  Gods friendes; the refore some honour is due vnto them. First, the scripture giues them this honour,Psal. 111.7. Psal. 73.19. Luke 1.48. Mat. 26.13. Reu. 14.4. 2. Co. 5.1. that they shal be had in euer∣lasting remembrance, that their names shall not be forgotten, as are the names and memorials of the wicked, that all generations shall call them blessed, that their famous vertues shal be preached, where∣soeuer the gospell is vttered: that they are now with Iesus Christ. I not this great glorie? is not this glorie sufficient for them? Am∣bition threw Lucifer into hell:Esay. 14.14. and shall we cause the saintes, to runne into the like offence? to attribute more vnto them, then God in his word affoordeth them. These honors they are content withall: Nay they are so far from arrogating anie thing to them∣selues,Reu. 4 10. of the true worship of God, that they threwe their crownes to the ground before him, that is, they neglect the honour due vnto them, that he maie be honoured, they care not for it. The dealing of Paul and Barnabas in the Actes,Act. 14. v. 13.14. when as the people would haue giuen them diuine honour, argueth how the saintes now in hea∣uen, doe detest anie part of Gods honour to be done to them. If anie should call a gentleman, by the name of a Knight; or an Al∣derman by the name of a Maior; or a Counseller by the name of a King, euen in our common wealth (where the poison of honour creepeth in manie times verie subtillie:) who would take it in god part? Much more in the heauenlie kingdome; we cannot offend or dishonour the saintes more, then by attributing that to them, which God in his worde doth not; which doth not belong to them;
ay which belongeth to the maiestie of God himselfe. Concerning the worshippe of saintes Arnobius writes thus: If you be religious (saie the heathen) why doe you not worship other Gods, with vs? Or why doe you not communicate in religion,Lib. 3. contrae gentes. with your owne nations, andCommunia sacra miscetis▪ ioine common ceremonies with them? Ar∣nobius answereth thus: We maie say that the chiefe God is enough for vs to worshippe. I saie the chiefe God, the father and Lord of all thinges, the maker and ruler of all things: In him we worship what∣soeuer is to be worshipped, and we adore whatsoeuer it becommeth vs to adore, and what duetie of worship doth require, with our wor∣shippes we performe: for when as wee embrace the head of the god∣head, whereof the diuinity of all things that are called diuine, are de∣riued, wee thinke it in vaine, to go to any singular persons. And a∣gaine: what number is of them; it cannot be manifest, sure, or cer∣taine to vs. And as in earthly kingdomes, we are not forced to wor∣shippe those by name, that are in kinges families, with their princes: but in worshipping of the kinges themselues, whatsoeuer belongs to them, by a certaine hidden force, the honour seemes to be compre∣hended: by no other reason, those gods which you propound to vs, doe vnderstand themselues to be honoured in their king.Athenag. legati∣one pro christi∣anis. And Athe∣nagoras thus writes: Neither the worlde it selfe, but the cunning workeman of it, God himselfe, is to be worshipped: as neither your subiectes (writing to the Emperors) when as they stand in neede of any thing, when as that they may obtaine it, they shall come vnto you, passing by you, that are Lordes and princes giuing no honour to you, shall turne themselues to the statelinesse of your pallace: but they passing by, without any great regard, the statelinesse of your pal∣lace, onelie wondering at it; they honour you before and aboue all thinges. But herein is a difference, that you kinges adorne your pal∣laces, for your owne vses: but the world was made of God, which needed it not. For God is all thinges to himselfe, light that no man can attaine to, a perfect world, spirite, power, and word: as though the world therefore were a fine instrument, and were striken with his many tunes and numbers. I worship him that strikes, and directs the instrument, that makes that pleasant musicke: I worship not the in∣strument. So in the winning of victories, they which haue the au∣thority and giue rewardes to the victors, doe not (omitting the musi∣tians) crowne the instruments. Athenagoras makes all the worlde, but a most pleasant instrument, and the saintes, no doubt, but as
most swéete trebles of this instrument: and God alone, that plaies vpon it, that makes the pleasant musicke. And therfore he alone, is to be worshipped, and no string, nor part of the instrument. The primitiue church had the Martyrs in great honour and esti∣mation, and therefore they named them at the administration of the holy communion.Euseb. lib. 4. cap. 15. But the Epistle of the Church of Smyrna, cited by Eusebius, teacheth vs, what honour they gaue in those daies to the Martyres, when Policarpus was Martyred, the Iewes sent one to the iudge, to desire of him, that hee would not grant his bodie to be buried, least peraduenture the Christians, leauing him that was crucified, should begin to worship this man: the Iewes especial∣ly going about these thinges, marked the Christians very diligently, least they should snatch him out of the fire: like miserable wretche, not knowing, that we can neuer forsake Christ which suffered death for the whole world, nor to worship any other: because we knowe the onely God, who is alone to be worshipped. But as for the Mar∣tyres, we reuerence them, and loue them: as disciples of the Lord, as keeping their faith purely & soundly, to their Lord & master; of whom we wish to be partakers in faith and perseuerance of loue. The Cen∣turion seeing the earnest suite of the Iewes, burnt the body before them all: but we after gathered vp the burnt bones, dearer to vs then any pearles, and more pretious then any gold; and after the manner buried them. In which place now, by Gods grace, we make our so∣lemne assemblies, especially in the day wherein hee suffered: and we celebrate also the memories of them that suffered before, that the mindes of them that follow, might be stirred vp by these famous ex∣amples to the way of their predecessors. Thus farre Eusebius. Dio∣nysius Areopagita also in those bookes which go vnder his name,De eccl. Hie∣rarch. cap. 3. putteth downe these two endes, of naming the saintes departed, both in the holie communion, and at the funeralles of others. Marke this also (saieth he) that the heauenly signes, worthie of reue∣rence, being placed on the diuine altar, by which Christ is signified, and receiued; by and by after, is recited the catalogue of the Saints; which declareth the coniunction of ye heauenly & holy vnion, which cannot be broken with him.Cap. 7. And of the funerals of the dead thus he writes: The chiefe minister putteth foorth the catechumenos, or nouices in the faith, and he praiseth the saints, which now are asleepe; with whom, he iudgeth him worthy of the like praise, which is lately departed out of this life; and hee exhorteth all men, that they would
pray for a happie end in Christ. Here is the honor due to the saints i the primitiue church: here are the causes why they are named, most plainlie set downe. Augustine also concerning the honouring and naming of the intes in his time, writes thus:Cont. Fast. Manich. lib. 2. cap. 20. Wee reuerence the Martyres of God, with that worship of loue and fellowship, as we reuerence the other saintes of God in this life. And in another place hee sheweth vs how we should not worship them: Neither doe we (saith hee) ordaine or appoint churches or priestes, or holy thinges,De ciuit dei lib 8. cap. 27. or sacrifices vnto Martyres; because not they, but their God is our God: andOr Gods seruants. Lib. 22. de. ciu. dei cap. 10. Epist. 49. as men of god, which in their confession, haue ouercome the world, they are named in their order and place; yet they are not called vpon, of the priest that sacrificeth. And in another place, This thing in this shortnesse I cannot passe ouer, that a temple, a priest, and a sacrifice, and whatsoeuer belongeth thereunto: doe not belong or appertaine, but to the onely true God. If the diuels which are Angels, breaking Gods commandements had not knowen this, they would neuer haue desired these thinges of them, whome they haue deceiued. So that to builde churches, to offer sacrifices, to anie Martyr, is idolatrie by S. Augustines iudgment: these thinges onlie belong to the true God. This was the Catholique faith in his daies; this was the ith once giuen to the saintes: but our latter catholiques haue accounted this no sinne. They haue to euerie saint almost erec∣ted a Church; as their names, and their vigils, and feastes (which doe commonlie concurre with that saintes daie, to whome their church was dedicated) doe testifie. They haue likewise offered sa∣crifice vnto them. Is not praier sacrifice?Psal. 14. v. 2. Let my praier bee set forth in thy sight, as an euening sacrifice, saieth Dauid.Heb. 13. v. 15. And S. Paul maketh nowe, the chiefe and first sacrifice in the church of Christ, the fruit or calues of our lips; as Osea calleth them.Osea. 14. v. 13. Let vs therfore by him, that is by Iesus Christ, offer the sacrifice of praise alwaies to God (saith he) that is the fruit of the lippes, which confesse his name. This he putteth in the first place, in steede of all the Iewish first fruites and oblations, the fruit of our lippes, praising God & con∣fessing Iesus Christ. Then next followeth the second sacrifice:Verse. 16. to the good and to distribute forget not: for with such sacrifices God is pleased. So that then, praises, psalmes, hymnes, praiers: are nowe the chiefe sacrifices in Christes church. But these haue they offered to saintes: and haue they not herein, gone and departed
from the catholique faith?Leu. ca. 1.2. The Iewes did not in the lawe, offer sa∣crifice to anie but to God: and shall we in the gospell? They were in the shadowe; we in the sunne shine, in the truth. If they herein had erred, their errour had béene more tollerable then ours. But in the Fathers daies it maie be againe obiected, that the christians made their praiers at the toombes of the Martyrs: as we read in Augustine,Epist. 42. that the highest state, of the noblest Empire, doth laie downe his crowne nowe, and praie at the graue of Peter the Fisher. But Iulian (that great enemie of christian religion) shew∣eth to whome they praied: Here (saith he, meaning the graues of the Martyres) doe you call vpon God.Cyrill. cont. Iulian. lib. 10. He would not accuse them then, that they called vpon the Martyres, as our catholiques doe nowe, as Cyrill reporteth. To conclude this place of praier, Saint Paul giueth thrée generall lessons, to all Christians, concerning thrée especiall workes, which they were dailie to practise. Reioice in the Lorde (saith hee) alwaies,1. Thes. 5. v. 16.17.18. pray continuallie, and in all thinges giue God thankes: for this is the will of God in Iesus Christ towards you. These thrée thinges are the verie will of God, these thinges he most delightes in, these things he would haue done. But they must all be done, in Iesus Christ, as S. Paul teacheth in other pla∣ces, As reioice in the Lord alwaies; and againe I say reioice. And a∣gaine:Phil. 4.4. Col. 3.23. Ephes. 5. v. 20. whatsoeuer ye shall doe, either in word or deede, doe all in the name of our Lord Iesus, giuing thankes to God the father thorow him. And againe, giuing thankes alwaies for all thinges in the name of our Lorde Iesus Christ to God the father. God will haue his saintes, alwaies merry, and praying at conuenient times, and thankefull: But their ioie, their praiers and their thankes, must be done in the name of Iesus Christ; not in any other name. This is twise repeated; and dare we breake this commandement? dare we name anie other in our praiers? Is not his name sufficient? If we will haue our praiers acceptable to God, and our thankes, and our ioie; let all bee done in the name of Iesus Christ: This God will haue, this he looketh for at our handes, this is most ac∣ceptable vnto him, this hee will haue done. And heere let vs take heede, the transgressing of this his will, is to reuolts from him, is to go to his enemie. Not to beléeue, that for Ie∣sus Christ sake, our praiers are hearde: is the doctrine of An∣tichrist.
A papist (as Caiphas confessed the truth ignorantlie of Christs th) cōfesseth here also the truth of Christs mediation,Conc. Dominica prima. aduent. & intercessi∣on. Phillippus de dies a frier affirmeth: That this is the crowne of Iesus Christ, that for his merits, we beleeue, that all the good thinges we enioy, do come vnto vs. Then they depriue him of his crowne, yt think by the intercession & merits of saints, they obtain any thing: And yt al whosoeuer haue writtē of ye cōming of Iesus Christ in ye flesh, haue said, that this was the chiefe cause of it, to reconcile vs to his euer∣lasting father, and that he should establish peace amongst men. And therefore (Esay saieth) hee shall be called the prince of peace: And S. Paul, he is our peace. If this be the ende of his comming, to re∣concile vs to God, to make God and vs friendes; then they that thinke, that God and we are not friendes, as though there were haue mediators and intercessors necessarie to God, besides him; deny the chiefe effect of his comming, and deny that hee is come in the flesh: And so are Antichrists schollers, who shall deny (as S. Iohn saith) that he is come in the flesh. Nay more then this, another marke of Antichrist is, that he shal deny Iesus to be Christ, that is, to be the Messias. And do not the papists so? In euerie reconciliation, there are thrée persons, and they are distinct, the partie offended, the partie offending, and the media∣tor or peace-maker betwéene both. Nowe as God is the partie offended, and man the partie offending: so Iesus Christ is the me∣diator. Nowe we they make the blessed virgine a mediatrix to him▪ is though he were not our friende, as though hee were angrie  vs, as though he had put off the office of a mediator: And so were not that Christ, that annointed, that acceptable,An Epistle to the faithfull soule. or only be∣loued of God. For so they write in an Epistle which they fame from Iesus Christ to the faithfull soule, that Christ saieth thus: The blessed virgine, who hath the custodie of my graces, and is an aduocate to mee, as I am to the father. What an absurd thing is this? that a mediator, should haue a mediator;Rom. 5. v. 8 Ioh 13 v. 1. Heb. 13.8. Heb. 9. v. 24. Rom. 8. v. 34. especiallie such a mediator and aduocate, as loued vs so, being his enemies, that he dyed for vs: that loued his to the end; that is the same yesterday and to day, and for euer: who is now ascended into heauen to pleade our cause. Is not this to impaire his loue, to gaine say his gos∣pell, to derogate from his office? Naie in the same place they at∣tribute to the blessed virgine not onelie inuocation (which is a parte of Gods honour Psal. 50. vers. 15.) but also veneration and
confidence:Ier. 17.5. whereas Ieremie saith, Cursed is he that trusteth in man. And S. Iohn sawe an Angell fly in the middest of heauen, hauing an euerlasting gospell,Reue. 14. v. 6.7. to preach to them that dwell on the earth, and to euery nation and kinred, and tongue, and people: Saying with a lowde voice, Feare God, and giue glorie to him. For the houre of his iudgement is come: and worship him, that made heauen and earth, and the sea, and the fountaines of waters. As though hee shoulde say: giue all glorie, all worship to the creator, and not to the crea∣ture, as of late hath beene vsed. For Babylon that great city of An∣tichrist, is fallen, who hath made all nations to drinke of the wine of her fornications; by making them worshippe and giue glorie to creatures. For this is that spirituall fornication which the Angell meaneth,Psal. 73. v. 25.27. as Dauid saieth. Whom haue I in heauen, but thee? and I haue desired none in the earth, with thee, &c. For lo, they that withdraw themselues from thee, shall perish; thou destroiest all them that go a whoring from thee. So that, to haue anie in heauen on whom to trust, whom to worship besides God, is to commit spiri∣tuall fornication. For this is an inuincible argument: faith and in∣uocation must bee linked together, as appeareth by the Apostle Paul; how shall they call vpon him, in whom they haue not beleeued? But we must beléeue onelie in God,Rom. 10. v. 14. (as Ferus confesseth vpon the 14. Chapter of Iohn.) Therefore we must onelie call vpon God. And as to beléeue in another, is spirituall fornication: so is it to call vpon anie other. All true christians will thinke Iesus Christs mediation suffici∣ent, and that they neede no other, that hee cannot deny himselfe, that hee cannot put off the office of a reconciler or mediator, and become an enimie to his;Ioh. 13 v. . that he loueth his vnto the ende; that he hath made God and vs perfect friendes: So that we may boldly make our praiers to him. He hath not mitigated or asswaged the anger of God towardes his:2. Ephes. v. 16. but as S. Paul saieth, by his crosse, he hath slayne enmity and all anger of God towards vs: And that God himselfe now loueth vs,Ioh. 17. v. 13. as our sauiour Christ teacheth vs. That the world maie know, that thou hast sent me, and hast loued them, as thou hast loued mee. Let vs marke here the vnspeakeable loue of God towards vs; he hath loued vs, euen as hee hath loued Iesus Christ: so perfect is the reconciliation made: he that beléeueth this, will he seeke for anie other mediator? And S. Iohn saieth, we know and beleeue the loue that God hath towardes vs.1. Ioh. 4 v. 16. And after: For this
cause is the loue of God perfect towards vs, that we might haue bold∣nesse in the daie of iudgement. All the faithfull must beléeue, and knowe assuredly, that God loueth them perfectlie, and that their sinnes are couered, by the propitiation of Iesus Christ: and ther∣fore they feare not; but haue confidence against the daie of iudg∣ment. And our sauiour to expresse this loue of God more mani∣festlie vnto vs, if it were possible, saith, In that daie,Io. 16. v. 26. ye shall aske in my name. And I say not vnto you, that I will praie vnto the father for you: for the father himselfe loueth you, because you haue loued me. God euen of his owne accord now, will grant our requests: he loueth vs so dearelie: so that euen Christ himselfe séemeth to affirme, that euen his intercession is not necessarie for vs. And shall we doubt of this his worde? of this his promise? shall wee procure anie other mediators? And least anie man heere, by rea∣son of his infirmitie or weakenes, should doubt whether this loue of God, did extende to him or no: our sauiour taught his disci∣ples this lesson, being yet verie ignorant, and wauering in faith, (as Phillips ignorance,Io. 14. v. 8. and Iudes question in the chapter going be∣e, and the contention among themselues,Luke 22. v. 24. who should be ye grea∣te, whereof Luke maketh mention, plainlie proueth:) Nay, euen the Angels of little ones, which beleeue in Christ,Mat. 18.10.11. which our saui∣our compareth to lost shéepe, beholde alwaies the face of his hea∣uenly father in heauen, as he teacheth in his gospell. And if the an∣gels and seruants of such, be in such fauour with God, what shall we thinke of their masters, whom they serue? And if those little ones, which beléeue in Christ, be in this fauour with God, what shall we thinke of them, that are growen to more perfection? Let all true Christians, either great or small, beléeue this excéeding great loue of God towardes them: let them beléeue, that Iesus Christ hath made a perfect reconciliation betwixt God and them. Let them pray in the name of Iesus Christ boldly, and with great confidence: he hath cōmanded them: not to do this, is the breach of his commandement, is no doubt sinne. Let them beléeue ve∣relie, they neede no mediatours to him, let them reioice alwaies in him, giue thankes to God alwaies through him, let him be all in all to them. As for inuocation of saintes, because he taught it not, let them refuse it. The woman of Samariah coulde saie, When Messias commeth, hee shall teach vs all thinges.Io. 4. v. 25. Let not vs beleeue lesse of our sauiour, then she did: because it séemeth con∣trarie
to his office, to his reconciliation: let them forsake it, hate it, and detest it, as spirituall fornication. Of Transubstantiation. OF transubstantiation, by Alphonsus iudgment, the Fa∣thers knew not the name: and they were as ignorant also, as should séeme, of the doctrine of it. Theodoret writeth thus:Dialog. 20. Neither after the sanctification (or consecration) the mysticall signes doe go from their owne nature. For they remaine in their for∣mer substance, figure and shape, and they may be seene, and touch∣ed as before. This is plaine then, that not onelie accidents: but the substance of the bread remaineth. Origen affirmeth the same: That which entreth into the mouth (saieth hee) doth not sanctifie a man,In cap. 15. Mat. although of the simpler forte that bread which is called the bread of the Lord, be beleeued to sanctifie one. And after thus he writeth: If that were so, it should also sanctifie him, which eateth the Lord vnworthily: neither any for this eating, had beene weake, or sicke or had slept. Therefore also in the Lordes bread, then there is profit to the eater, when as with an vndefiled minde and a pure con∣science, he is partaker of that bread. And a little after: if so be that, whatsoeuer entreth into the mouth goeth into the belly, and is cast out into the draught: that bread also, which is sanctified by the word of God, and by praier, according to the matter of it, goeth into the belly and is cast out into the draught:Origen agree∣eth with Austē that it is san∣ctified by prai∣er, as hereafter shall be noted. but according to the praier, which came into it, according to the measure of faith, it is profitable, causing that the minde be watchfull, looking to that which is profi∣table. Neither is it the matter of the bread: but it is the word that is spokē ouer it, that profiteth him that eateth the Lord worthily. Here Origen plainlie speaketh of ye sacramental bread, & not of the bread hallowed, giuen to Catechumenis, or nouices in the faith; (as some of ye catholiques expound him.) He speaketh of thē yt eat the Lord worthilie or vnworthily: and therefore no doubt of the sacrament. He affirmeth here plainly (agréeing with Theodoret) that the mat∣ter of the bread remaineth, and profiteth not, though the simpl sorte thinke it doth; but the worde spoken ouer it, according to the measure of faith: Nay, that it goeth into the bellie, and is ca
out into the draught. This cannot bee expounded of their acci∣dents, without a subiect. Ireneus also of the Eucharist writes thus:Iren. lib. 4. cont, Val. ca. 32. But giuing his disci∣ples counsell to offer to God the first fruites of his creatures, not as though he stood in neede of them, but least they should be either vn∣fruitfull, or vnthankefull; He tooke the creature of bread, and gaue thankes, saying, This is my bodie; and the cup likewise: he confes∣sed that creature which we haue, to be his bloud: and he taught of the new testament a new oblation, which the church receiuing from the Apostles, offers to God in all the world, to him, that giues vs foode; euen the first fruites of his giftes, in the newe testament. Of which Malachie amongst the twelue Prophets thus foreshewed, saying: I haue no pleasure in you, saith the Lord, &c. manifestlie signifying by this, that the former people should cease to offer to God: but in all places, a sacrifice should bee offered to him, and that pure; and his name should be glorified among the Gentiles. Ireneus here plainly affirmeth, that we offer to God the first fruites of his creatures,Iren. lib. 4. c. 34. therefore the substance of bread and wine remaines. And after, of the force and substance of the Eucharist, and of the outwarde gne, he writes thus: Howe shall it bee certaine to them that that bread whereon thankes are giuen, to be the bodie of the Lorde, and the cuppe of his bloud, if they saie not, that he is the sonne of the ma∣ker of the world, that is, his word? by which trees doe fructifie and fountaines doe flowe, &c. How againe doe they saie, that the fleshe shall come into corruption, and shall not be partaker of life, which is nourished of the bodie and bloud of the Lord? Therefore let them change their opinion, or cease to offer those thinges which are saide before. But our opinion is agreeing to the Eucharistes, and the Eu∣charist confirmes our opinion: for we offer to him those things which are his; setting foorth conueniently theCōmunicationē & vnitatem praedicantes car∣nis & spiritus. communication and vnity of the flesh and spirit. For euen as the earthly bread, after it hath recei∣ued the calling of God, is no more now common bread, but the Eu∣charist, consisting of two thinges, an earthly and a heauenlie: so our bodies receiuing the Eucharist, are not now corruptible, hauing hope of the resurrection. Here Ireneus doth plainlie affirme, that the sacrament consistes of an earthlie thing, and a heauenly, and that the bread remaines, and that we preach the participation and com∣munication, of the flesh and spirit. The spirit no doubt, makes  partakers of the bodie and flesh of Christ, and of the resurrec∣tion.
Saint Augustine also of the Sacramentall bread writes thus: Saint Paul could by signes preach Christ,Drinit. lib. 3. cap. 4. otherwise by his tongue, otherwise by his epistle, otherwise by the sacrament of his bodie and bloud. Neither doe wee call his tongue, nor his parchmentes, nor his inke, nor the sounding wordes of his tongue, nor the signes of letters written in skinnes; the bodie and bloud of Christ: but onelie that,Here Austen agrees with Origen that consecration is by praier. that was taken out of the fruites of the earth, and consecrated by mysticall praier, we doe rightly receiue vnto spirituall saluation, in remembrance of the Lords passion for vs. Which when it is wrought by the handes of men, vnto that visible shape, it is not sanctified, that it should bee such a great sacrament, but by the holy ghost, working inuisibly; when as God doth worke all these thinges which are done, by corporall mouing in the worke: mouing first of all, the inuisible partes of his ministers, or the soules of men, or the serui∣ces of the hidden spirites, which are subiect to him, &c. Here wee maie note, that S. Augustine makes the bread, a signe of the body of Christ, and that he defines the bread, to be a fruit of the earth, and that it is made holie, or consecrated by praier; not changed from his nature (as praier doeth make thinges holie, it doeth not change the natures of thinges:) and that God here, in his great sacrament and high mysterie, worketh all things; mouing, euen the very members of his ministers, which by their praiers do con∣secrate and make holie this sacrament, with their hands do breake it, and deuide it; and also the heartes of the worthy receiuers; and also causing there the presence of Angels, which the fathers did ma∣nie of them teach, to be present at the administration of the sacra∣ment. Here Augustine seemes to reckon vp all the wonderfull operations of God in this sacrament: and yet he makes no men∣tion of Transubstantiation; but of sanctification onlie: and ther∣fore it maie séeme, it was not taught nor beléeued in his daies. Arnobius also writes thus:In psal. 22. Let vs see, what the Church hath in it. She hath a rodde, wherewith she threatens the offender; shee hath a staffe, wherwith she helpes the penitent; she hath a table, frō whence she giueth bread to the beleeuer; she hath oyle, wherwith she makes fat the head, to him, that presumes to haue a free conscience; shee hath a cup, wherewith she makes merry those, that preach the word. Thus Arnobius séemes to describe all the furniture of the Church of Christ, and calleth the sacrament bread, and makes faith the mouth that receiueth this heauenlie bread. And in another place:
The praise of God is to be set forth,In Psal. 47. according to the diuersity of his giftes and workes. He is praised in his saintes, he is praised in his giftes of carnall and spirituall foodes. Here we maie sée, that Arnobius af∣firmeth that the substance of the bread doth remaine, and calles it carnall foode. Ambrose also writeth thus:Lib 4. de sacram. cap. 4. Thou seest how forcible the word of God is. For if there be such great force in the word of our Lord Ie∣sus, that that thing should beginne to be, which was not: how much more forcible is it, that they may bee what thinges they were before (meaning of the bread and wine in the sacrament) and yet should be turned into another thing? Hee agreeth here plainlie with Theo∣doret, Origen and the rest, which are before alleadged; that the bread and wine in their owne natures are the same thing, that they were before: and yet sacramentallie, naie wonderfullie and vnspeakeablie, are changed into another. And hee saith further, That the change in these mysteries, is like the change of man, who being regenerate is changed: and yet is the same in substance he was before. Bertrame also an ancient writer, affirmeth the same. Ac∣cording (saith he) to the substance of the creatures, that which they were before the consecration: the same they continue after. They were bread and wine before, in which forme also now being conse∣crated, they seeme to remaine. Therefore it is changed within, by the mighty operation of the holy spirit which our faith beholds, which feedes our soules, and giueth eternall life. And now because our faith altogether beholdeth that wholy, and marketh nothing with fleshly eies: it perceiueth that not in shape, but in vertue those things are the body of Christ, which are seen. What can be more plaine then this? The bread & wine according to the substance of their creatures, or natures, remaine that they were before: The holie ghost here, by his mightie power, maketh an inward change. They are in ver∣tue and force the bodie of Christ, which we receiue. This Bertrame liued after Christ, Anno 840. To whome Trithemius that made a booke of all famous and ecclesiasticall writers, giueth this com∣mendation: Bertrame a Priest and Monke, in the scriptures very ex∣pert, and in secular learning very well learned, subtill in wit, and elo∣quent in speech, no lesse famous in life then doctrine: writ many ex∣cellent bookes, whereof fewe came to my handes. And amongst other his workes he names this; of the body and bloud of the lord: And he saith, he wrote to king Charles brother of the Emperour Lo∣tharius.
If he had béene an hereticke, or some base fellowe (as some of our late catholiques haue slantered him) hee would not haue presumed to haue written to the Emperours brother, and Trithemius would not haue thus commended him: Some in those daies would haue noted him. If by the testimonie of these, Theo∣doret, Origen and the rest; the substance of the bread remaine: where is transubstantiation? Then Alphonsus said true, that the ancient fathers neuer knewe it. But here it is obiected of some, that Cyprian thought otherwise: whome that I maie by Gods grace fullie satisfie, I will put downe Cyprians iudgment at large concerning this matter,Cyprian. de. caena Domini. who writes thus: That same being eaten, which the old tradition had set down, the master set before his disciples that meat, which could not be con∣sumed. Neither are the people inuited to curious & costly banquets: but the meat of immortality is giuen, differing from common me, keeping the forme of the bodily substance; but assuring the presence of the diuine vertue, by the inuisible working. Here we maie plain∣lie sée what is present: the diuine vertue. And after: The flesh of his person, if it should bee cut in pieces, it coulde not suffice al man∣kinde: the which being once consumed, religion should perish; nei∣ther should any more sacrifice remaine. Here we maie sée, what he thinketh of Christes naturall flesh, it is a sacrifice for vs, doth which nowe Christ appeareth for vs in heauen. And that it is not vpon earth. And after: Bread is meate, bloud is life, flesh is a sub∣stance, the church is a body. A body, for the ioyning together of all the members into one; bread, for the fitnesse of it, to nourish our bo∣dies; bloud, for the office of quickning; flesh, for the property of ta∣king our humanity. This sacrament Christ sometimes calles his bo∣dy, sometimes flesh and bloud, sometimes bread, a portion of eter∣nall life: of which according to these visible thinges, he hath impar∣ted to our corporall nature. Here we may note plainlie, hy Christ calles the sacrament, his bodie, and his flesh, and breed; for the ef∣fectes of all these. As the bread strengthens, the bloud quickens, the bodie makes manie members one: so doth the sacrament. It hath all these names: for these diuers effectes. This is Cyprians meaning. And here we maie note, that Cyprian as well vrgeth that phrase, wherein our fauiour calleth this sacrament bread; as that, wherein he calles it his bodie. And that he meaneth in hath the effect: It followes thus plainlie after, This common bread,
changed into flesh and bloud, procureth life and increase to our bo∣dies. Therfore the weakenesse of our faith, being helped by the com∣mon effectes of these thinges, by a sensible argument, is taught; that in these visible sacraments, is the effect of eternall life. And that, we are knit to Christ, not by a corporall, but by a spirituall transition or passage. If we receiued his bodie, we were knit corporallie vnto him: but Cyprian saith, we doe not corporallie, but spiritually, by receiuing the sacraments, passe into Christ. For he is now, both the bread, and flesh, and bloud, and meate, and substance, and life of his church (saieth hee) which hee calleth his body, giuing her par∣ticipation of him. He is not made bread nor meate substantially:  effectuallie. So then in effect, he is all these to his church. And i the sacrament, we doe receiue all these effectes from him: wee receiue bread, and flesh, and bloud, and meate, and life, and sub∣stance: that is, the effectes, of bread, and bloud, and flesh into our soules. And what will wee haue more? So that Cyprian here plainlie shewes, what he meanes by flesh after, when he saith, The ead yt our sauiour reached to his disciples, by the omnipotency of the word, was made flesh: that was, had the verie effectes and force of Christes flesh, by the wonderfull working of Gods spirite, anne∣ to it: For so the verie coherence of the text ainlie also proo∣ueth. For he addeth: And we truely, when we were flesh & bloud, by the corrupt and weake nature of our body and soule, could not be reformed, nor returne to the image of God; vnlesse a fit plaister had beene applied to the olde disease: and in the cure of a desperate infirmity, contraries had bin remoued by contraries, and like things should agree to like. The bread which our Lord reached to his dis∣ciples, being changed, not in forme; but in nature, by the omnipo∣tency of his word, was made flesh. And as in the person of Christ, his humanity was seene, and his diuinity was hid; so to the visible sa∣crament, the diuine essence powred in it selfe; that religion might haue deuotion, concerning her sacraments, and that more pure ac∣cesse might bee to the truth it selfe, whose body the sacraments are, men to the participation of the spirit, not to the consubstantiation of Christ: but to most nie and like fellowshippe, this vnity might come. Here we maie note first, that Cyprian calles vs flesh and bloud, ing the same phrase which Paul doth where he saith,1. Co. 15. v. 50. that flesh and bloud shall not inherit the kingdome of God, meaning the corrup∣tion of flesh and bloud, as he expoundes himselfe. Neither (saieth
he) could the corrupt nature of our soule, be reformed, not returne to the image of God, &c. Here we maie note, how he calles the cor∣ruptions of flesh and bloud, flesh and bloud. And he addeth, that a like plaister must be applied to this sore. Therfore séeing as the substance of our soule and bodie was not sicke; but the forces and powers thereof; it must needes followe, that he meaneth like∣wise that to heale this corruption, not the substance of Christes bodie; but the effectes, vertues, and forces thereof to be necessa∣rie. Also we maie note here, what he meaneth by flesh in the latter place, euen the same no doubt, which hee meaneth in the former: that is, the force and vertue of Christes flesh, which hee calleth the diuine essence. Which thing also, the worde powreth, seemeth to inferre: but most plainlie that proueth the same, which he addeth. That we participate the spirit, and that wee are not transubstantiate with Christ, or partaker of his substance, or of his naturall body. For the sonne is onely consubstantiall with his father (saith he) neither the substance of the trinitie is to be deuided, or parted. But our coniun∣ction and his together, neither mingles the persons, nor vnites sub∣stances: but it ioyneth together our affections, and confederates and makes a league with our willes. Cyprian plainlie affirmeth, that we receiue not the substance of Christ: but his spirit, which makes our wils and his,1. Cor. 12.13. all one. A gréeing herein with S. Paul: We are all baptized (saith he) in one spirite, into one bodie, whether we bee Iewes or Greekes, whether bonde or free: we haue all druncke into one spirit: that is, that we might be partakers of one spirit, as we were baptized into one bodie. This place teacheth vs manie ex∣cellent lessons.1. Cor. 12.13. First, the number of the sacraments, Saint Paul here mentions but two; as also before cap. 10.2. baptisme, and the Lordes supper: by a figure called Synecdoche, vnder the name of the cuppe. Secondly, the vse of the cuppe, it ought to be common to all: We all drinke of one cuppe (saith he.) And thirdlie agréeing here with Cyprian: why do we drinke? to be partakers of one spirit. So that in the sacrament we receiue the spirit of Christ. And after Cyprian addeth: So the church, being made the bodie of Christ, obeyeth her head. And the high light, beeing spread into these inferiour thinges, with the fulnesse of his brightnesse, reacheth from ende to ende; who alone abyding with himselfe, yet hee im∣partes himselfe wholly to all: and theIdentitas caloris. same heate is so present with the body, that it neuer departeth from the head. See howe he com∣pares
here Christ with the sunne, whose bodie beeing in the hea∣uens, sendes downe his beames, his power, his force, to quicken these earthlie inferiour thinges. Therefore (saith he) this vnlea∣ened bread, this sincere and true meate, by the shew and sacrament thereof, doeth sanctifie vs, by touching vs, doeth lighten vs by faith, doeth make vs like Christ. And Cyprian goeth on forward. As the common bread which we eat euery day, is the life of the body: so this supersubstantiall bread, is the life of the soule, and the health of the minde. We eate here on earth, vnder a sacrament, the bread of An∣gels, the same we shall eate without a sacrament more manifestly in heauen. What can be plainer then this? Doe the Angels nowe eate the naturall bodie of Christ? or shall we eate it our selues af∣ter this life? I suppose, that the papistes themselues will not a∣h, that we shall. And the same saith Cyprian, that we shal then eate manifestlie, without a sacrament: nowe we eate that in the sacrament mysticallie. It is the vertue, strength, grace, and power of Iesus Christ, Cyprian plainlie meaneth; whereof both nowe, and then, we shall be partakers. But to make this matter more plaine (for manie as concer∣ning this point are verie hard to be perswaded,  sée what he wry∣teth concerning the vnworthie receiuers of these holy mysteries: The sacraments (saieth he) as much as in them lyeth, cannot be with∣out their proper vertue: Neither by any meanes, ye diuine maiesty absē∣teth it selfe from the mysteries; but although the sacramentes suffer themselues to be touched or receiued, of those which are vnworthie of them: yet they cannot be partakers of the spirit, whose infidelitie or vnworthines gaine saieth such holines. Here he plainly saith that the spirit is receiued in the sacraments, which the wicked cannot be partakers of. And after: The master of this tradition had saide, that vnlesse we did eate his body and drinke his bloud, we should not haue lyfe in vs: instructing vs with a spirituall lesson and opening our vnderstanding, to such a hidden matter, that wee might knowe that our abyding in him, was an eating, and drinking were, as it were, a certaine incorporation, our seruices and duties being subiect to him, our willes ioyned, our affections vnited. Therefore the eating of his flesh, is a certaine greedinesse, & a certaine desire of abyding in him, by which we so impresse and drawe into our selues the sweetnesse of charitie, that this sauour of charity powred in, stickes in our mouth, & in our bowels; piercing and refreshing all the inwarde partes of our
soules and bodies. Eating & drinking hath the same reason, by which as our bodilie substance is nourished, liueth and remayneth safe and sound: so the lyfe of the spirit is nourished with this proper foode: and that which meate is to the flesh, that is faith to the soule: that which meat is to the body, that is the word to the spirit; doing with more excellent vertue that eternally, which our carnall foode and nourish∣ments, do temporally, and but for a time. We celebrating the sacra∣ments, are admonished as a beast, parting the hoofe, and chewing the cud; to call backe to our chawes, and to grind small the example of our Lords institution, that his passion should euer be in our memory. Neither the torments of death, should once terrifie or make afraid the heires of him yt was crucified: but the ioyfull solemnities of the speed▪ resurrection, should feed them, and refresh them. And after of the communion of this sacrament he writes thus: Neither the pre∣rogatiue of the Leuiticall dignity, admits onely the priest to the bread of Iesus: all the whole church is inuited to this banquet, an equal por∣tion is giuen to all, he is wholy distributed; being distributed, he is not dismembred, he is incorporated, and not iniuried: he is receiued and not included: dwelling with weakelings, he is not weakened: he dis∣daines not the ministery of poore men, a pure faith, a sincere minde, delightes this inhabiter. Neither the narrownesse of our poore house offendeth, or pincheth the greatnesse of the almighty God. This bread of Angels, hauing all pleasure in it, by a wonderfull vertue to all that receiue it worthily and deuoutly, tastes euen as he would haue it, &c. Here we maie plainlie see, that the sacrament was common to all in his daies, as well the cuppe as the bread, that God him∣selfe is present at that heauenlie banquet, but he is not included vp in the bread, as they would haue it. That he cals it the bread of Angels, as he did before. But some will obiect; that which followeth in Cyprian, where hee speaking of the wicked, (who iudge not themselues, nor dis∣cerne the sacraments: but vse the holie giftes vnreuerentlie, as common meates) addes; that Christ euen to this daie, creates that his most true and holy body, and sanctifieth it, and blesseth it, and di∣stributes it, to the worthy receiuers. This place maie séeme obscure: but Cyprian is all one with himselfe. The doctrine he hath taught before, in this place he retracteth not: as maie bee most plainlie gathered out of another place:De vnctione Chrismatis. Our Lord gaue in the table, in which he participated the last banquet with his Apostles, with his owne hands
bread and wine: but on the crosse, he gaue his body to be wounded, to the handes of the souldiers, that sincere truth, and true sincerity be∣ing imprinted in his Apostles, he might expound to the nations, how the wine and bread were flesh and bloud, and by what reason the causes agreed with the effectes, and diuers names or shapes might be reduced to one essence, and the things signifying and signified, should be called by the same names. Here is his former doctrine, that the sacraments are called by the names of the thinges they signi∣fie, by reason of the effectes. But more plainlie in another place he vnfoldeth this matter.De resurr. The newe thinges and the olde thinges in this agree; Israell comes out of the bondage of Egypt; the people of God, commeth out of the kingdome of the diuell; the Hebrewes were baptized in the cloud and in the sea; the people of God are now cleansed from their sinnes by the holy ghost and the bloud of Christ: of diuers families one house is made, and one tribe; there is one meat; the thinges signifying, and the thinges signified, the thinges and the signes, the inuisible vertue, and the visible sacraments; doe so make one bodie, as the flesh and the spirit. And that which is seene, both in name and vertue, is accounted the body of Christ. Here we may plainlie sée, what bodie Christ Iesus creates, his bodie in vertue, not his naturall bodie. That which is seene (saith Cyprian) is his bodie: but howe? in nature? no; but in name and vertue. This is Cyprians doctrine. The sacraments are called by the names of the thinges signified: The vertue, force and graces of Christes bo∣die, are called Christes bodie. I would to God the Papists, which so much vrge the fathers, would herein agrée with Cyprian, and communicate the Lordes cuppe, to the Lordes people; and let Christes naturall bodie be in heauen, and with Cyprian and our church, receiue the vertue and force thereof here on earth. Of the thing signified in the sacrament, thus haue other Fa∣thers written: Theodoret saith thus,Dial. 2. cont. Nest. The substance of the bread is not changed at all: but it is both called and beleeued to bee made the flesh of Christ, for the grace of the body of Christ,Lib. de ijs qui initiantur mysterijs. ca. 9. which is added to it. Ambrose also writes thus: Christ is in that sacrament, because it is the body of Christ. Therfore it is not bodily, but spiritual foode: therfore the Apostle of the type thereof said, because our fathers eat spirituall foode, and dranke spirituall drinke. For the body of God is a spirituall body: The body of Christ, is the body of the spirit of God. the carnall bodie is not there then: for Ambrose calleth it the bo∣die
of the spirit of God; because by the meanes of the sacrament, the spirit of God is receiued,1. Cor. 12.14. is euen eaten. S. Paul no doubt also, speaking of the thing and substance of the sacrament, saieth, Wee drinke all one spirit. The wine then is the outward signe; but the substance of the sacrament, the thing signified; that which our soule receiueth and drinketh, is the spirit of Christ. And therefore our sa∣uiour himselfe saith,Io. 6. v. 63. The flesh profits nothing: but the spirit quick∣neth: speaking of that flesh, which the Capernaites thought he would haue giuen; speaking of ye flesh, which he himselfe tolde them, that they should sée ascend. He will quicken our bodies at the last daie; for his spirit dwelleth in vs. And hereof S Paul also plainlie di∣stinguisheth,1. Cor. 15.45. There is a naturall body, and there is a spirituall body: and he defineth both these bodies thus: The first man Adam was made a liuing soule, and the last Adam was made a quickning spirit. So that this quickning spirit, may seeme to be the spirituall body of the last Adam; as the liuing soule, was the naturall bodie of the former Adam. And this is that spirituall bodie, which we re∣ceiue in the sacraments from our last Adam Iesus Christ: as wee haue receiued our naturall bodies, from our first Adam and our naturall parents: And this spirit shall raise vs vp againe, at the last daie. And therfore our bodies also are called temples of ye holy ghost. Hence also no doubt, because the chiefest properlie of the holie ghost,2. Co. 4.13. Psal 115.10. Act. 2.1. is to confesse Iesus Christ, and to speake to the praise of God, as Dauid witnesseth: I beleeued and therfore I spake; those fiery tongues, which in the Actes fell on the Apostles, were signes of the holie ghost. And as then vpon whome those fierie tongues did sit, the holie ghost did inwardlie, and most certainlie possesse their soules: so nowe they, which with a liuelie faith eat the holy myste∣ries, are partakers inwardlie and most assuredlie, of Gods spirit, and also of all the vertues of Christes bodie. Hence Chrysostome saith,Hom. 4. in Leuit. That christians come from ye table, breathing fire. Origen als writes thus: If the Lord and God, be a spirite, those things which the spirit speaketh, wee must spiritually heare. Yea I will say some∣what more, those thinges which the Lord speaketh, are not only spi∣rituall thinges: but they are to be beleeued that they are spirits. I will not proue these thinges, out of mine owne iudgment, but out of the gospell.August in Io∣hannem trac. 50. sup. cap. 12. Heare our Lorde and sauiours saying to his disciples: The wordes I speake to you are spirit and life. Augustine also of Christs naturall body, and of this presence of his holie spirit, writes thus:
Concerning his maiesty, concerning his prouidence, concerning the ieffable and visible grace, is that fulfilled that was spoken of him (I will be with you euen to the end of the world:) but concerning the flesh which the word tooke vpon it, concerning that, that was borne of a virgine, concerning that, that he was taken of the Iewes, accor∣ding to that, he was nailed to the tree, that hee was taken downe off the crosse, that he was lapped in linnen clothes, that he was buried in the graue, that he made manifest in his resurrection: Ye shall not al∣waies haue me with you. And in another place, hee writes thus: The high priestes and Pharisees gaue commaundement,Hom. in. Iohan. 50. that if any knewe where Christ was, hee should shewe them of him, that they might apprehend him. Let vs nowe shewe the Iewes where Christ is; I woulde to God, they would heare, and apprehend or take him, whosoeuer they bee of their seede, that gaue commaunde∣ment, that it should be tolde to them where Christ was: Let them come to the Church, let them heare where Christ is, and let them take him: let them heare of vs, and let them heare out of the gos∣pell. Hee was killed of their parents, hee was buried, he rose againe, knowne of his disciples, he ascended vp into heauen before their eies: where he sitteth at the right hand of his father, who was iudged, and is to come a iudge. Let them heare, and hold. But some peraduen∣ture will answeare: Whom shall I holde? one that is absent? how shal I reach my hand vnto heauen, that I may hold him that sits there? Send faith, and thou hast holden him: thy parents haue holden him in the flesh, but hold y• him in heart, because Christ being absent, he is al∣so present: vnlesse he were present, he could not bee holden of vs our selues. But because it is true that he saieth, Behold I am with you to the end of the world, he is both gone from vs, and is here also, & hath forsaken vs: for his body he hath taken into heauen; but he hath not taken his maiesty out of the world. And againe the same Augustine writes thus. Hee that eateth my flesh and drinketh my bloud,Tract. in Iohan. 26. in cap. 8. aby∣deth in me, and I in him: This is therefore to eate that foode, and to drinke that drinke, to abyde in Christ, and to haue him abyding in him. And by this, he that abydeth not in Christ, and in whom Christ abydeth not, without all doubt, he cannot spiritually eate his flesh, not drinke his bloud; although carnally and visibly, hee may presse with his teeth the sacrament of the bodie and bloud of Christ: But they rather eate and drinke the sacrament of so great a thing to their own iudgement, because the vncleane haue presumed to come to the
sacraments of Christ, which no man receiueth worthily, but he that is cleane; as it is said, Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shal see God. If any one haue eaten of him, he shall not dy: but he yt pertaineth to the vertue of the sacraments; not hee that pertaineth to the visible sacra∣ment; that eateth it inwardly, not outwardlie; that eateth in his hart, not he that presseth it with his teeth. This is therefore to eat the meat that perisheth not,Ibidem. in. Ioh. tract. 25. cap. 6. but that which remaineth vnto eternall lyfe. To what end, preparest thou thy teeth and thy belly? beleeue, and thou hast eaten. But Chrysostome teacheth vs, wat is it carnally to vnder∣stand?Hom. 46. in. cap. 6. Ioh. simply as the thinges are spoken, and to thinke no other thing else. For those thinges which are seene, are not so to be iudged: but all mysteries are to be considered with the inward eies, that is, spiritu∣ally.Hom. 11. ex. cap. 5. Ioh. And in another place also he writes thus. If to translate sancti∣fied vessels, to priuate vses, be sinne and a danger; as Balthaser teach∣eth vs, who drinking in the holy cuppes, was both put from his king∣dome, and depriued of his lyfe; If therefore to translate these sanctifi∣ed vesselles, to priuate vses, be so dangerous, in whom the true bodie of Christ is not, but the mysterie of his body: how much more the ves∣selles of our bodie, which God hath prepared to bee a dwelling place for himselfe, ought wee not to giue to the deuill to do what hee will with them? &c. Epist. 1. ad. Bur∣degalenses.And of the Eucharist Martialis writes thus: After baptisme keepe your selues cleane from malice, that you may be worthy of the Lords table. Do not thinke the heauenly food and mans food to be all one, which is visible & seene with your eies, but notwithstanding, through a perfect faith all heauenly. Through the one the body; through the o∣ther, the soule liueth. Here we may note, first he cals it the Lords table. Secondly that he makes on that table, two kind of foods: the one of the bodie, and the other of the soule; which the accidents can∣not performe, as the papists nowe do imagine. And in the same Epistle: Honour (saith he) now much more the priests of God, which giue you lyfe in the cup, and the liuing bread. He calles this sacra∣ment liuing bread, and he makes the cup common to the people. Arnobius also writes thus of the Lords table:In. Psal. 52. Thou my compani∣on, my guide, my familiar friend: that is my man, my outward man, which receiuest with me sweet meat, in the table of the mysterie. Thou dealest against me, &c. And in an other place he calleth it pane sanctum: holy bread. Here we may note that Arnobius agréeing with Martiall, calleth it the Lords table: and not that only, but the
table of mysteries, as though the chiefe thinges of that table were mysticall. Cyrill also of the participation of these mysteries,In. Iohan. lib. 10. Cap. 39. and that those mysteries are, very excellentlie writes thus: It was ne∣cessary, that we should be made partakers of his nature, and to bee transformed into a new and strange kind of lyfe, the which coulde no otherwayes bee done, then by the participation of the holy Ghost. And the most fit oportunity, of the comming of the spirit, was after Christs ascension into heauen. For it was necessary, that the spirit should come, that wee hauing it, might cry, Abba, father: and being brought to haue courage, we might be made strong, as well against the deuill, as the persecutions of men. And againe vpon the same place writing against the Arrians, he speaketh thus. I would glad∣ly aske of them, whether he would call Paul Theophorum, that is, one wherein Christ dwelleth. For if they denye, that hee is a bearer of Christ, they lye impudently: but if being conuinced by the authori∣ty of the whole worlde, they say hee is a bearer of God, it is manifest that Christ is God. And so Paul is called because Christ dwelleth in him by his spirit. And in anoher place, what meaneth this maner of his petition, That (hee saieth) they may bee one,Lib. 11. cap. 2. as the father in me, and I in the father, that they may bee one in vs? Hee asketh the bond of charity, peace and concord; the which may bring the belee∣uers to such a spirituall vnion, yt it may resemble the similitude of the naturall and consubstantiall vnion of the father, the sonne, and the spirit. Neither this vertue and knot of charity, can euer bring to passe, that we should be so knit together inchangeably in the same sub∣stance, that we may seeme to haue obtained the manner of the diuine vnion. Here Cyrill plainely sheweth what is the vnion of Christ and his church, which hee makes to be onelie spirituall.Cap. Eod. And hee saieth, it is vnpossible to be substantiall or naturall. And after of our coniunction he writes thus: That he might knit euery one of vs among our selues, and to God; although wee differ in body and soule yet he hath found out a meanes, agreeing to his fathers counsel, and his owne wisdome.Suo enim cor∣pore per bene∣dictionem mysti∣cā credentes be∣nedicens. The mysticall blessing makes vs partakers of his body. For he blessing the beleeuers with his body, by the meanes of the mysticall blessing: hee hath made vs one bodie, both with him, and with our selues. And after: the sonne is vnited to vs, as mā, by ye mystical blessing; spiritually, as God, by ye grace of his spirit, renewing our spirit to newe lyfe, and to the participation of the diuine nature. So that by Cyrils iudgement, it is the mystical bles∣sing, and spirit of God, which makes vs partakers of the diuine
nature, and of Christs very naturall body. And againe: Although we are manie, yet we are all one body in Christ. For wee all partici∣pate of one bread:Lib. 11. cap. 20. And we are all annointed with one spirit of Christ. And to conclude, most manifestly ioyning the spirituall and the corporall vnion together, wherewith we are ioyned to Christ, hee writes thus. And as the vertue of the most holie fleshe of Christ, makes all receiuers one body: I thinke after the same maner, in whom the inuisible spirit of God dwelleth, it bringeth them all to a spiritual vnion. So that the vertue of the most holy flesh of Christ, which he calleth also the mysticall benediction or blessing, ioineth vs cor∣porallie to Christ; and the spirit of God knittes vs spirituallie to Christ,Cyril. in. Iohan. Cap. 19. and not Christ his naturall bodie. And againe hee writes thus. The mysticall blessing, and baptisme flowed out of his side. And the vertue of the mystical blessing proceedes from his holie flesh. It is not his holy flesh. Of the eating of Christes naturall flesh, also thus the fathers haue written. And first Cyrill of these words of our sauiour, Vn∣lesse yee eate the flesh of the sonne of man, &c. writes thus: Let vs see (saieth hee) howe euery man is either cleane or vncleane,Lib. 7. in. Leu. euery man hath some meate in himselfe, which he may giue to his neighbor, that comes to him: For it cannot be, that when wee men meet toge∣ther, and shall intermingle our speeches, but that wee shall take or giue amongst our selues, some tast, either by our answere, or questi∣on, or some gesture. And if so be that he be a cleane man, and of a good mind, of whom we tast; we receiue cleane meat: but if he be an vncleane man, whom we touch; we receiue vncleane meate, accor∣ding to those things which are saide before. And therefore I thinke, the Apostle Paul, of such vncleane men as of beasts, saieth, Eate not with them. But that thou maiest more euidently vnderstand these things, we do say: we wil take an example of the greatest things, that so descending by little and little, wee may come to the inferior. Our Lord and sauiour saith: Vnlesse you eat my flesh, and drinke my bloud, you shall not haue lyfe euerlasting: for my flesh truly is meat, and my bloud truly is drinke. Iesus therefore speaketh, and is altogether cleane, all his flesh is meat, and all his bloud is drinke, because all his workes are holy, and all his speech is true. And therefore his flesh is truly meat, and his bloud truly drinke: For with the flesh and drinke of his word, as with cleane meat and drinke, he makes drinke, and re∣fresheth al mankind. In the second place, after his flesh, Peter and Paul
Paul are cleane meat, and all the Apostles. In the third place, all their disciples. And so euerie one of them according to the qualities of their merits, or purenesse of their iudgements, is made cleane meat to is neighbour. He that cannot abyde these things, will go aside, and rne away his eares, according to those which said: How will he giue vs his flesh to eat? who can heare him? And they departed from him. But you, if you be sonnes of the church, if endued with the mysteries of the gospell, if the word made flesh, dwell in you; acknowledge what things we say: for they are the Lordes: least peraduenture hee that is ignorant, hereafter be not known. Know you, that they are fi∣gures which are written in the diuine bookes; and therefore examine them as spirituall, and not as carnall men, and vnderstand what things are ment: For if you receiue these thinges as carnall men, they hurt you: and they feed you not. For not only in the olde testament, but in the gospel also, there is a letter found which killeth: a letter that killeth him, which shall not marke spiritually those thinges which are spoken. For if according to the letter, thou shalt followe this, which is spoken; Vnlesse ye eate my flesh, and drinke my bloud: this letter killeth. Wilt thou that I bring another letter out of the gospel, which killeth? He that hath not (saieth he) a sword, let him sel his coate and buy a sword. Behold, this is a letter of the gospell; but it killeth: but if thou vnderstand it spiritually, it killeth thee not. But there is in vs a quickning spirit: and therefore whether in the law, or in the gos∣pell, take spiritually those thinges which are said. Wee maie note here, howe Cyrill plainly expoundes this sentence of our sauiour, spirituallie: If the Papistes opinion were true, he néeded not so to expound it. He teacheth, that this is the catholique doctrine of the whole church: and therefore he commandes all the sons of the church, to beleeue this his exposition. The flesh and bloud of our sauiour, wherewith he feedes and refresheth all mankinde; hee af∣firmes plainly, to be his wordes and workes. Naie and hee re∣futes them, that will expound it of his naturall flesh: or else some might haue saide, with his word and workes he féedes, I grant: but doeth hee not also féede with his flesh? But Cyrill plainlie af∣firmes the one, and denieth the other. Nay he affirmeth that hee hat shall expounde it so, killeth his soule: and hee that will not knowe this his exposition, let him take heede yt he be not knowne hereafter. And he giues an example, least any man should doubt of his meaning, which otherwise, is as plaine as maie bee. This
sentence (saith he) is to be expounded, as that wherein our sauiour saith, Hee that hath no sworde, let him sell his coate, and buy one. No man nowe is so sencelesse, that will expound this sentence of our sauiour, according to the letter, who in all his doings exhorts to peace and concord, and of whose kingdome Micah prophesieth: That men shall turne their swordes to siethes:Micah. 3.4. but spiritually, that euerie man should nowe prepare him spirituall armour: that is, the sworde of the word of God. And by the two swords, the Apo∣stles shewed him after,In Luc. ca. 22. Bonauenture expoundes the two testaments are meant, in which (saieth he) is contained sufficient doctrine to de∣fende the whole church. And so also must this other sentence bee expounded. Origen also at large affirmeth the same worde for worde vpon the 16. chapter of Leuiticus, expounding these wordes of our Sa∣uiour: Vnlesse ye eate the flesh of the sonne of man: so that worde for worde he agrees with Cyrill. And he addeth: If according to this meaning, that is spiritually, we shall say that the omnipotent God hath giuen lawes to men; I thinke that the giuing of the lawe, shall seeme worthy the maiesty of God: But if we shall cleaue to the let∣ter, and shall take those thinges which are written, according to that which seemes to the Iewes, or that which seemes to the common people; I am ashamed to saye that God gaue such lawes. For the lawes of men shall seemeMagis elegātes. more fine and reasonable, that is to say, of the Romanes or Athenians or Lacedemonians. But if according to this meaning which the church teacheth, the lawe of God be recei∣ued,De doctrina chri∣stiana lib. 3. c 15 then it surpasseth all mans lawes; and it shall truely be beleeued to bee the lawe of God, &c. Augustine also expoundes the same place after the same manner: Let (saith he) in all figuratiue spee∣ches, this rule bee obserued, that that which is read, so long be dili∣gently considered, till the exposition thereof be brought to the king∣dome of charity: but if it signifie that properly, then let it be thought to be no figuratiue speech. If it be a commandement, forbidding a wickednesse or haynous Act; or commanding profit or humanity, it is no figuratiue speech: but if it seeme to command a wickednes, or haynous Act, or to forbid profit or humanity: then it is a figuratiue speech. Vnlesse ye shall eate (saith he) the flesh of the sonne of man, and drinke his bloud, you shal not haue life in you: it seemes to com∣mand a wickednesse or hainous Act. Therefore it is a figure, com∣manding vs to communicate, to be partakers of the passion of Christ,
and profitably and ioyfully to lay vp in our memories, that his flesh was crucified and wounded for vs. The scripture saith: If thine ene∣mie be hungrie, feede him; if he be thirsty, giue him drinke. Here no man doubts, but it commandes mercy: but that which followes, for doing this, thou shalt heape coales of fire vpon his head, thou must suppose to command an Act of ill will: and therefore it is figuratiue∣ly to be vnderstood. Augustine here saith, that this speech séemes to command an haynous Act, which commands to eat the flesh of the sonne of man, whome he beléeued to be the sonne of God, and om∣nipotent: yet he did not attribute this eating his flesh, to his om∣nipotencie, as nowe the Papistes doe. And he puts this his iudg∣ment downe, in that booke he makes of christian doctrine. If thou therefore wilt be Augustines scholler, thou must beléeue this, that he there teacheth. And he séemes to affirme it to be as haynous lence, to eate the verie true and naturall flesh of Christ, as of anie other man: he makes no difference as should seeme. And againe, Augustine of Christes naturall bodie, most manifestly writes thus:In psal. 98. The wordes which I haue spoken to you (saith Christ) are spirit and life; vnderstand you spiritually that which I haue spoken. For you shall not eate this body which you see, nor drinke that bloud which they shall shed which shall crucifie mee: I haue commended to you a sacrament, which being vnderstood spiritually, shall quicken you. And although it be needfull that it should be celebrated visibly: yet it must be vnderstood inuisibly. Athenagoras also affirmes the same:De resurrection It is impossible (saieth he) that mans body should be mingled with bodies of the same kinde, to which they are intruded against nature for meate: although they bee conueied into their bellies, through some very hard calamity and mi∣sery. For they rebound from the nutritiue faculty. It is against nature (saith he) that mans flesh should be fed with mans flesh: but if they shall bee forced together, yet the one will rebound from the other. And hereof Cyprian saith, that we come by reason of the sacrament, to the consubstantiation of Christ, not of his flesh, but of his spirit, as is before alleaged. What can be more manifestlie spoken then that? Hence is that phrase, strengthened in the spirit; And againe,Eph. 3.16. 2. Cor. 3.18. we are changed into the glory of God as it were by the same spirit: which no doubt is obtained by the often receiuing of those holie mysteries. Here no doubt the inward man of verie manie is ve∣rie weake, because in manie places, they receiue the holy myste∣ries
so seldome. Here we maie sée the consent of the Gréeke and Latine Church, concerning this matter: if anie one of these had saide this, it had beene sufficient. And all these expresse their mea∣ninges so plainlie, as no man, that is not wilfully obstinate, can doubt of their meaning. Hierom also vpon the Epistle to the Ephesians and first chapter, verie excellently writes thus, and agreeth with the rest of the Fa∣thers: The flesh and bloud of Christ is two waies to be vnderstood, either that spirituall and diuine flesh, whereof he hath said; My flesh truely is meat, and my bloud truely is drinke; and vnlesse ye eate my flesh and drinke my bloud, ye shall not haue life euerlasting: or else that flesh and bloud, which was crucified and shedde, with the soldi∣ers speare. Here is a plaine distinction of Christes spirituall flesh, and of his naturall flesh. Here Ierome plainlie affirmeth, that the flesh we receiue in the sacrament, is a spirituall flesh, and differs from that which was nailed on the crosse. The same distinction hath Clemens Alexandrinus.Lib. 2. paed. ca. 2. The bloud of Christ (saith he) is twofold: The one is carnall, with which we were redeemed from destruction: the other is spirituall, with which wee are annointed; and this is to drinke the bloud of Iesus: to be partaker of the incorruption of the Lorde: To be holy, to be sanctified. Agréeing herein with that of S. Paul,1. Cor. 12.13. we haue all drunken one spirit. S. Augustine also hath ye same distinction: The words I haue spoken to you, are spirit and life. Vn∣derstand spiritually that I haue spoken,In Psal. 98. You shall not eate that bodie which you see, nor drinke that bloud, which they shall shedde, which shall crucifie me: I haue commended vnto you a sacrament, which being spiritually vnderstood, shall quicken you. It is marueilous that our newe catholiques, against all these fathers, dare affirme, that the same bodie, which was borne of the virgine Marie, and was nayled on the crosse, is eaten in the sacrament. All the fa∣thers make a distinction. As concerning the wordes of our sauiour; This is my body: It is certaine that in all thinges he had a respect to the olde lawe; he came to fulfill it: and therefore as in his workes; so in his words, no doubt hee aimed at it. Circumcision is called the couenant, ofGen. 17.10. Act. 7 8. God himselfe, and of S. Stephen,Gal. 4.25. Agar is Sina, is a hill,Exod. 12.12. he lambe is called the passeouer. These phrases God vsed in the for∣mer sacraments, and why should the like phrases séeme strange in the newe testament, and in our sacraments? And yet all these
were, but outwarde signes. So in the gospell, our sauiour vseth the like manner of spéech; Hee breathed on his Apostles,Io. 20.22. and he saide vnto them: receiue the holy ghost: whereof that was, but the outward signe onely. Speaking to the woman of Samariah, he calleth his holy spirit water.Luc. 22.20. And in this verie sacrament (he saieth) this cuppe is the newe testament in my bloud: wherein the aduersaries themselues doe confesse, that there is a sacramentall trope or figure. And if in this, why not also in the former? The former place commonly is expounded by the latter.1. Cor. 10.1. S. Paul sée∣meth to expounde these wordes thus. The bread which we breake, is it not the communion of the body of Christ? and the cuppe which we blesse, is it not the communion of the bloud of Christ? Because we being many, are one bread, are one body: because we are partakers of one bread. As though he should saie: The sacrament we re∣ceiue, maketh vs partakers of the bodie of Christ, maketh vs liuely and true members of his bodie, maketh vs one bodie with him: a farre greater matter, then if he should haue said, the bread is made the bodie of Christ: It maketh vs the bodie of Christ. All things in this sacrament, are mysticall or hidde, are metaphy∣sicall, aboue the reach of nature, are spirituall, wrought by Gods spirit. Artes worke wonderfull thinges, (as our age witnesseth) and nature it selfe also: howe much more the wisedome of God? Our eies cannot beholde these sunne beames: howe much lesse the bright beames of the true sonne Iesus Christ, by which hee worketh?Psal. 135.7. Who knoweth the true cause of the ebbing and flow∣ing of the sea, the treasures of the Lorde, from whence the winde commeth? If we knowe not these natural things: will we séeke to knowe the waies of God, in his holie mysteries? God had in his tabernacle manie thinges hid, which it was lawfull for none, but the high priest to sée: and shall he not haue also such like in his church, which our high priest Iesus Christ shall knowe only? Na∣ture hath her  and , her secret friendshippes and disagréements, whereof no man knowes the causes; and shal not diuinity haue the like? There is a great mysterie of the vnion betwixt Christ and his Church,Eph. 5.32. euen this same mysterie I nowe speake of, which S. Paul doeth not open and vnfolde: and shall a∣nie man go about to doe it? These God will haue vs reuerence: he wil not haue vs search: he will haue vs try & examine our selues, not the groundes of his mysteries and sacraments. The bones of
the Paschall lambe, must not bee broken with the hammers of our wittes, or deuises; they must be burnt with the fire of Gods spirit. We must confesse (as the fathers did) whatsoeuer in this sacrament, was a bone, past our reach, was done spiritually, was wrought by the holie ghost: no not the flesh, the easie things ther∣of, must be sodden with water; must be prepared according to our fancies.1. Cor. 11.33. Of this S. Paul saith, That I haue receiued of the Lorde, I haue deliuered vnto you: we maie not go from the first instituti∣on in the principall and essentiall partes thereof (as the Papistes haue done.) When the law was giuen, the people might not come too neare the hill,Exod. 19.12. they had their boundes appointed them: So no doubt in the gospell, in the Lordes sacraments, there are certaine limits, which all the fathers kept; which the schoolemen with their quodlibets and questions haue leapt ouer. Till Thomas Aquinas daies (as I haue read) transubstantiation was not heard of: He like to Thomas Didymus, would néedes put his hand into Iesus side, and open this great mysterie. Hee saide not like faithfull Peter,Io. 6.68. Rom. 12.1. Psal. 118.27. To whom shall we go from thee? Thou hast the words of eter∣nall life: And like Paul, Let euery man giue vp his body a liuely sacri∣fice to God: and like Dauid, binde the sacrifice with coardes to the hornes of the Altar, That is, all our affections, inuentions, deui∣ses, to God and his worde. So did Abraham beléeuing he should haue a sonne: so offering his sonne, he bound himselfe to ye hornes of the Altar. He disputed not with himselfe; that worde (howe) was not once heard in his mouth. The Israelites wonder at Mannah, they call it (Man hu:) what is this: they eat it, they reason not about it. The Fathers almost haue all thus expounded these wordes of our sauiour,Contra Adamā¦tum Manich. Aug. in psal. 3. (this is my body:) that is a sacramentall and a figuratiue speech. Augustine twise, The Lorde doubted not to say, this is my body, when as he gaue a signe of his body. And a∣gaine, In the historie of the newe testament, such was the great and wonderfull patience of our Lord, that he suffered Iudas so long, as God; whose secret thoughts he was not ignorant of, whom hee ad∣mitted to his banquet, when he commanded and gaue to his dis∣ciples the figure of his body and bloud. Tertullian also writes thus: The bread being taken,Lib. 4. contra Mar. and deuided to his disciples, he made it his body: saying, this is my body, that is, a figure of my body. It had not beene a figure: vnlesse the body had beene a true body. Here Tertullian must néedes agree with himselfe, it was a figure of his
bodie, and yet his bodie also spiritually. Dionysius Ateopagita of the sacrament writes thus: Consider this also, the heauenly signes,Eccles. Hierar. cap. 3. worthy of reuerence, being placed on the diuine Altar, by which Christ is signified and receiued; by and by after, is a catalogue of all the saintes recited. Ierom also of the sacraments writes thus: Ie∣sus tooke bread, and blessing it, brake it, transfiguring his body into the bread, which is the present church, which is receiued in faith,Hier. sup. ca. 14. Marc. is blessed in number, is broken in his passions, is giuen in examples, is taken in doctrines, making his bloud in the cuppe mixt with wine and water, that by the one we might be purged from sinne,In ca. 26. Mat. Hom. 4. by the other redeemed from punishment. And againe: And supping with them, Iesus tooke bread, and blessed it and brake it, and gaue it to his disci∣ples, and he saide, take ye, and eate ye, this is my body. After that the typicall passeouer was fulfilled, and he had eaten the flesh of the lambe with his Apostles, hee tooke bread which strengthens mans heart, and goeth to the true sacrament of the passeouer, that as in the prefiguration of him, Melchisedech the high priest of God had done, offering bread and wine, he also himselfe, should represent the truth of his body & bloud.Aug. ca. 26. de Catechizandis rudibus. And Augustine of nouices in the faith writes thus: Of the sacrament which truely he receiued, when it shalbe wel taught to him, that the seales of heauenly thinges seeme to be visible: but the thinges themselues are inuisibly to be honoured in them: nei∣ther that, that forme was so to be counted, being sanctified with bles∣sing; as they haue it in euery vse. It is also to be told him what that speech doth signifie, which he hath heard, what is hidden vnder it,Cap. 9. and whose image that thing beares. And againe: Of the sacrament that they are about to take, it sufficeth to the wise and more learned, to heare what that thing may signifie: Notwithstanding we must deale with those, of slower and meaner wittes, somewhat with mo wordes and similitudes, least they should contemne that, which they see. And Origen of the sacrament writes thus vpon these wordes: This is my bodie, &c. This bread, which the Lord confesseth to be his body,Tract. in Mat. 35. is a worde nourishing the soule: a worde proceeding from God, the worde; and bread from the heauenly bread: which is set vppon the table, of which it is written; Thou hast prepared for me a table, against them that trouble me. And this drinke, which God the worde doth confesse to be his bloud, is a word, refreshing and making merry ex∣cellently, the heartes of the drinkers: which is in the cuppe, whereof it is written; Thy cuppe which makes merry, how excellent is it? And
this drinke is the generation of the true vine. And it is the bloud of that grape, which being throwen into the wine presse of his passion, brought foorth this drinke. Here wee maie see, howe Origen ex∣poundes these wordes spirituallie, and not literallie. And after: Why (saith he) doth he not say this is the bread of the new testament, as he said, this is the bloud of the newe testament? because the bread is the worde of righteousnes, wherewith the soules eating, are nouri∣shed: but the drinke, is the word of the knowledge of Christ, accor∣ding to the mysterie of his natiuity and passion; because thereof, the testament of God is placed to vs ward, in the bloud of Christes pas∣sion: that we beleeuing the sonne of God to bee borne, and to haue suffered according to the flesh, should be saued not in our righteous∣nesse, in which alone, without the faith of the passion of Christ, salua∣tion could not be. Therefore onely of the cuppe it is said; This is the cuppe of the testament. The cuppe, by Origens iudgment, con∣taineth  force of Christes death and passion, without which wee could not be saued: And this (as we shall shewe after) haue the Papists denied to the Laitie. And alwaies Iesus, to those that keepe a feast with him, taking bread from his father, giueth thanks & breaks it, and giueth it to his disciples, according as euery one can receiue: and he giues it to them, saying: Take, and eate it: and hee sheweth, when hee nourisheth them with this bread, that it is his owne body, when as he is the word, which nowe we haue neede of; and when it shall be fulfilled in the kingdome of God: but now truely it is not ful∣filled; but then it shalbe fulfilled, when as we also shall be prepared to receiue a full passeouer, which he came to fulfil: which came not to breake the lawe; but to fulfill the lawe. And now to fulfill it, as it were by a glasse, in a darkenesse of fulfilling: but there to fulfill it, face to face, when that which is perfect is comen. The body which Iesus giueth, is his word to our soules, it is a spirituall foode, which we now eate in a darke manner: but hereafter wee shall eate plainly, face to face. And after he writes thus: Maruell not, because he is bread, and he also eates bread with vs, he is drinke of the generation of the vine, and he drinkes with vs. For the word of God is omnipotent, he is called by diuers names, & he is innumerable according to the mul∣titude of vertues, when as hee alone, is all vertue. And in the same place he calles it the bread of blessing,Hom. 5. in Leu. or giuing of thankes. And a∣gaine he writes thus: For the Lord the bread which hee gaue to his disciples and said, take and eate: he deferred it not; neither comman∣ded
it to be kept to the morrow. This mystery also perchance is con∣tained in that, that he commaundes; that they should not carry bread in the way, that thou maiest alwaies bring forth newe breade of the word of God, which thou carriest within thee. And in another place of Christ and his Crosse, he writes thus:Hom. 8. in Iosuah What profits me if I know that the king of Hay was hanged on two trees? But if I shall vnderstand that the vertue of the Crosse, is two fould, whereon Christ was hanged in his flesh, and the deuill with his host was triumphed ouer, by the vnderstanding of this sacrament, my soule shall be edified. And that also we may peraduenture high∣lier amplifie the greatnesse of this mystery; in the tree is vnderstood the knowledge of good and euill, whereon both good Christ and wic∣ked sathan was hanged: but the deuill that hee might perish; but the good, that he might liue by his power. As the Apostle saieth of Christ, though he were crucified, through infirmity, yet he liues by the pow∣er of God: Yea not onely that he might liue; but that he might make aliue (for he is the last Adam,) with his quickning spirit. But these things are to be vnderstood to bee spoken figuratiuely. For Christ himselfe is called the tree of lyfe. But as in other things, he is shewed to bee the priest, and the sacrifice, and the Altar; and of one vnder∣standing, the other is not hindred, but euery one is meant of him figu∣ratiuely in their places: so now, in the signes of these sacraments, the diuersitie of persons, taken of one and the same, hindereth not. Wée maie see here, how Origen cals Christ the sacrifice, and the priest figuratiuelie. And in another place he writes thus. Thou which comes to Christ, the true Bishop, which hath made God mercifull vn∣to thee, with his owne bloud, and hath reconciled thee to his father; sticke not in the bloud of the flesh: but learne rather the bloud of the word, & heare him saying to thee, For this is my bloud, which is shed for you, for the remission of your sins.Hom. 15. in. Leu. He that is partaker of the holy mysteries, knoweth both the flesh and the bloud of the word of God: Let vs not therefore stay in these thinges, which are manifest to them that know them, and cannot bee manifest to the ignorant. Wee may see here how Origen still expoundes, the flesh of the worde, and the bloud of the word, euen in the receiuing of the holy sacra∣ments, and not in spirituall hearing of the word onely. Neither doth hee by this meanes diminishe the authoritie of the holie signes.Hom. 26. in. Exod. For let vs marke howe hee writes concerning them in another place: I will teach you (saieth he) by the examples of
your religion, you know (saieth he) which are wont to be present at the diuine mysteries, how when ye receiue the body of the Lord, you keepe it with all warinesse and reuerence, least a little of it should fall downe, least any part of the heauenly gift should slip from you. For you beleeue your selues guilty, and you beleeue aright, if any parte thereof should fall from you by negligence. And if you vse such dili∣gence, concerning the keeping of his body; and you do vse it, by good right; howe do you thinke it, to bee lesse sinne to haue neglected his word, then his body? Sée what reuerence, hee would haue giuen to the sacramentall signes, and how he couples the reuerence of his receiuing his word and bodie together. And againe of the twelue loaues,Hom. 13. in. cap. 2. Leu. he writes thus: According to those things, which are writ∣ten, in the twelue loaues there seemes to be a commemoration of the twelue tribes of Israel, before the Lord: and a commaundement to be giuen; that without ceasing, these twelue loaues shoulde bee set forth before the Lord, that the memory of the twelue tribes might be al∣waies had before him; that as it were a prayer and a supplication by these might seeme to be made, for euery one; but this intercession is small and slender. For what auaileth it, to get them mercy, where e∣uery tribe is to be considered, by bread of fruite, by workes of fruite? But if they be referred to the great mystery, thou shalt find this com∣memoration to haue great force and effect of repropitiation. If thou returnest to that bread that came downe from heauen, and giueth life to this world, that bread of the proposition which God hath set forth, to bee a propitiation through faith in his bloude; and if thou looke to that commemoration, whereof the Lord hath said, Do this in remem∣brance of mee: thou shalt finde, that this is onelie the remembrance which maketh God mercifull to men. If therefore thou shalt marke more attentiuely the Ecclesiasticall mysteries, in those thinges which the lawe writes; thou shalt finde the image prefigured of the truth to come. It is not the hearing of masse: but the remembrance of Christs death and passion, which Origen giueth such great force to. Epiphanius also vpon these words of our sauiour, This is my bo∣dy, writes thus: Therefore all men haue that, that is according to his image,In. Ancorato. but not according to nature. For men haue not according to the equality of God, that which is after his image. For God is in∣comprehensible, and cannot be comprehended in the minde, seeing that he is a spirit, and aboue all spirits, and a light aboue all lights. But those things which he hath ordained, these we want not: For hee is
true, who with grace, bestoweth on man that, that is after his image. And how many are they, which are like? For we see, that our sauiour tooke into his handes, as the gospell witnesseth, that he rose at supper and tooke these, and when he had giuen thanks, he said, This is mine, this and this. And we see, that it is not equal, neither like to the image in the flesh, nor to the inuisible deitie, nor to the line aments of the bo∣dy. For this is of a round forme, and insensible, as concerning the power. And he would say, by grace this is mine, this and this: And no man, but doth beleeue his words. For hee that beleeueth him not to be true (as he hath said) he falleth from grace and saluation. But that which we haue heard, we beleeue to be his; we know our Lord to be all sense, to be all ful of feeling, to be all good, to be all working, to be all light, to be all incomprehensible. But who hath giuen vs all this, with grace. Epiphanius goeth about to proue in this place, that man is made according to the image of God: but not accor∣ding to the proper nature of the diuinitie, but according to grace. And he taketh a similitude from the Eucharist, which hee denies to be the bodie of Christ, according to the true nature of a bodie, when as it hath not the forme of a true bodie, and it lackes sense and moouing: and yet by grace it is truely beléeued to bee his bodie. The same doctrine he puts downe most euidently in another place: Christ (saith he) descended into the waters,Contra haereses lib. 3. To. 2. Pa. 487. giuing more then receiuing, bestowing rather then lacking, lightening them and ma∣king them forcible, for a figure of those thinges which should bee wrought in them: that they which beleeue in him in truth, and haue the faith of the truth, might learne that he was made true man, that he was truely baptized, and so also they comming to baptisme, by his ascending vp, might receiue the force of his light: That here, the saying of the Prophet might be fulfilled, Into the change of power, into the giuing of saluation (that is to say) of the power of the bread, taken from Ierusalem, and the strength of the water. So that here in Christ, the power of the bread is made strong, and strength of the water: that the bread should not be our strength; but the vertue of the bread. And truely the bread is meat: but the vertue in it profits to quicken vs; and not that the water alone should cleanse vs, but that in the strength of the water, by faith and force and hope and the perfection of the mysteries, and the calling of the sanctification of ho∣linesse, it should be to vs perfect saluation. This place makes the o∣ther
more plaine: There he called the bread of the Eucharist the bodie of Christ by grace; here he giueth vertue to the bread, as in baptisme strength to the water: making equall together those two sacramentes, often repeating this worde, vertue or force, as the thing of the sacrament, which wee receiue with the bread and cuppe; saying, that this vertue and strength doeth sanctifie vs. The bread (saith he) is meate, but the vertue thereof, profits to quicken vs: alluding no doubt, to that which our sauiour saide, the flesh profits not, the spirit quickneth. And this force of the bread, and strength of the water to sanctifie vs; he declares to bee done by grace; and not that in one worde onelie, but in manie wordes, more fullie and plainly expressing it: saying, these thinges to bee done through faith, and hope, and the perfection of the mysteries, and the calling of sanctification; to the perfection of our saluation. The same doctrine worde for worde, the same Author repeates in his booke called Anacephaleosis.Pag. 560.. So that this doctrine did not séeme to slippe from him vnawares; but to be his resolute opini∣on: and in those daies, the Catholique and receiued opinion of the whole church. Of the omnipotencie of God, which the Papistes vrge so much, Augustine also writes thus in his sixt Epistle: where he proue that the substance of God, cannot bee seene with mortall eies of the saintes in heauen. God is a spirit (saieth he) and therefore they which worship God, must worship him in spirite and truth. If they must thus worship him, then much more, see him. For who dare af∣firme, that the substance of God is seene corporally? when as he wil not haue it worshipped corporally. But they doe seeme to say sub∣tilly, and by asking a question, to vrge the matter more forcibly: whe∣ther could Christ performe that to his flesh, that with his bodily eies, he might see his father or no? So that if we shall answere: here, hee could not; they will crie out against vs, and say, that wee derogate from the omnipotencie of God. And if we shall grant that he could doe it, they wil conclude their argument of our answere. How much more doe they erre, which doe affirme the flesh of Iesus Christ to be turned into the substance of God, and to be that which God is; that so by that meanes, they may make it fitte to see God, being not so greatly vnlike with any diuersity. I beleeue they will banish this, both from their faith, and perchance also from their eares. And yet notwithstanding, if by a question they were vrged, of these whether
God could do this, or he could not? whether did they detract from his power, if they said, he could not? Or will they confesse, yt this shal see none corporally, if they say he can. Therefore as they haue crept out of another mans grinne: so let them creepe out of their own. Sée here plainlie, howe Augustine, in some respectes, to take from the omnipotencie of God some thinges, thinks to be no sinne. And that the flesh of Christ hath not lost ye nature of flesh, but reteines that nature in heauen euen now still. And againe, of the bodie of our sauiour Iesus, after his resur∣rection, S. Augustine thus writes: Christ in as much as he is the word,Epist. 57. ad Dardanum. he is the creator: but as concerning man, he is a creature. And after: doubt not, &c. but he shall come in the same forme and substance. To whom truely, meaning his humane nature, he hath giuen immor∣tality, hee hath not taken the nature of it away. According to this shape, he is not thought to be euery where: let vs beware, least we so confirme his diuinity, that wee take not away the truth of his bodie. And it followeth not; that whatsoeuer is in God, should be in al pla∣ces as God is: For of vs the scripture saith truely, that in him we liue, moue and haue our being: yet we are not in euery place, as he is. But that man is otherwise in God; because also God is otherwise in man, after a proper and singular manner. For one person is both God and man, and both is one Iesus Christ, who is in all places in as much as he is God; but in heauen, in as much as he is man. By these words we maie plainlie sée, that S. Augustine beléeued Christs body euen nowe in heauen to be a true bodie. And againe, that Christs body in heauen is nowe also a true bodie, he writes thus: Take the space from the bodies, and they shall be no where: and because they be no where, they shall not be at all. And take away bodies from the qua∣lities of bodies: and there shall not be a place where they shall bee; and therefore they shall not be at all. S. Augustine will haue all true bodies to reteine their true quantities and qualities; or else they are not, by his iudgment. Durandus also a Canonist,Neand in Sy∣nops. histor. of this sacrament coulde saie thus much: We heare the word, we feele the mouing, the meane we know not, the presence we beleeue. So that this meane, this transub∣stantiation, following the fathers steppes, he liked not. Augu∣stine, who made a booke of Logicke, knewe not these accidentes without a subiect; he neuer wrote anie such thing, much lesse anie of the fathers: wherefore it is a newe deuise. This was not the
faith once giuen to the Saintes. Epist. 59.Of the sanctification of the bread and wine, Augustine also writes thus: We thinke that those are called praiers, which we make in the celebration of the sacraments, before that which is on ye Lords table, begin to be blessed. For with orations it is blessed and sancti∣fied, and is broken in pieces to be deuided: The which whole petiti∣on, almost euery church concludes, with the Lordes praier. Augu∣stine séemeth here plainlie to affirme, that the bread and wine is blessed and sanctified, and then is broken to be deuided. Hee ma∣keth no mention of transubstantiation. And that all this is done, by praier and request from God, and not by the power of ye priest, as nowe is taught.Part. 3. Epist. 9. ad Euag. Ierome also speaking of priestes saieth, At whose praiers the body and bloud of Christ is made. And a little after: all thinges are vowed which are offered to God, saith Austen, especially the oblation of the holy Altar, by which sacrament is prea∣ched another great vowe, of ours, by which we vowe our selues, that we will abide in Christ, that is in the frame of the body of Christ: Of which thing, this is a sacrament, that we are all one bread and one body. Therefore in the sanctification of this, and in the preparation of the distribution of it, I thinke the Apostle did commande properly , that is to say, orations to be made, or as some other haue vnskilfully interpreted it, adorations. For this is belonging to a vow, which vsually in the scriptures is called . Interpellations (or as your bookes haue) requests are made, when the people are blessed. For then the Bishops, as aduocates doe offer to the mercifull might of God, by the laying on of handes, those whom they receiue: which thing being finished, and such a great sacrament being participated, thankesgiuing concludes all thinges: which also in those wordes the Apostle last commendes. Here séemeth to be the whole discourse of the holie communion in S. Augustines daies. First the bread and wine sanctified by praier; then broken and distributed among the people. The people also by the offering of their bread and wi (which he calleth the oblation of the holie Altar) doe vowe them∣selues, to abide in Christ. The blessing of the people by requests made to God. And lastlie, thankes giuing for the participation of such a great sacrament. The oblation of the Altar, not the priests, but the people offered, and of it the priests liued and were main∣tained: as appeareth by Posdonius, who writing the life of Au∣gustine saith thus: He was alwaies mindfull of the poore, and of that
hee bestowed on them, that was bestowed on him, and on them that dwelt with him: that is, either of the reuenewes of the possessions of the church, or also of the oblations of the faithfull. So hee ioyneth together, the oblation of the Altar, and of what other almes what∣soeuer. So that it maie séeme euen the Bishoppes in those daies, liued of the oblations of ye faithfull, and of some temporall liuings bestowed on the Church. And out of this oblation of the Altar, which the people offered, was the bread and wine taken for the communion. The priestes sacrifice, was praise and thankes gi∣uing; which is onely in this place mentioned. Tertullian after the eceiuing of the Eucharist (which he saith was commanded to all) eth: We make oblations yearely for the dead,De coron. militis. and for our birth daies. These oblations were not the Eucharist, they were made by the people, and not by the priestes: and they were giuen to the re in honor or for remembrance: not to profit, as their birthes; so neither the dead. But as concerning the meaning of offering of Christ at the communion,Aug. in psal. 21. thus Augustine most manifestly writes his iudge∣ment. Christ nowe rising from the dead, dyeth no more, death hath to more power ouer him. These are the words of the Apostle: Yet let not vs forget, that which was done once, is remembred of vs eue∣ry yeare. As often as Easter is celebrated, doth Christ dy so often? no, but yet the yearely remembrance doth as it were represent that, which was once done, and doth cause vs so to bee moued, as though we see the Lord hanging on the Crosse, not mocking: but beleeuing. or hanging on the Crosse, he was laughed at: but sitting in heauen, he is worshipped. The yearely remembrance, the celebration of the sacrament in Augustines daies; put them in mind, of Christes passion, euen as though they sawe with their eies. Christ hanging in the Crosse: and not any materiall Crosse, or Sepulcher, as the papists vsed at their Easter. There was no such dumbe shewes of Christes death and passion in his daies, as should séeme. The e doctrine he confirmeth in his Epistle to Bonifacius at large mst excellentlie. We often (saieth he) speake thus,Epist. 23. ad. Bonif. that when Ea∣ster draweth nigh, we say, the lorde suffered to morrow, or next day; when as he suffered so many yeares ago, and he suffered but once. And vpon the lords day we say, to day the lorde rose, when as since hee se againe, so many yeares are passed. Why? there is no man so foo∣lish, that will rebuke vs, as lyars speaking thus: but because wee call
these dayes according to the likenesse of those thinges, which were done in them: That, that may be called that day, which is not in it; but in reuolution of tyme is like to it: And that may bee saide to bee done that day, by reason of the celebration of the sacrament, which was not done that day; but was done nowe a great while ago. Was not Christ once offered in himselfe, and yet hee is offered in a sacra∣ment (or holy signe,) (for so he expoundes the word sacrament in a∣nother place,Epist. 5.) not onely all the holy dayes of Easter, but euery day to the people? Neither verely doth he lye, that being asked, saieth, hee is sacrificed: For if the sacramentes had not a certaine simili∣tude of those thinges, whereof they are sacraments, they were no sa∣craments at all. And of this similitude, for the most parte also, they take the names of the thinges. Euen as therefore, after a certaine ma∣ner, the sacrament of the body of Christ, is the body of Christ, the sacrament of the bloud of Christ, is the bloude of Christ: so the sacra∣ment of faith, (meaning baptisme) is faith. For to beleeue is nothing else, then to haue faith. And by this when as it is answered, that the Infant beleeueth, when as yet it hath not the affection of faith: yet it is answered, he hath faith, because he hath the sacrament of faith, that is, baptisme: and it is said to turne to God, for the sacrament of con∣uersion, because also the answeare pertaineth to the celebration of the sacrament; as of baptisme it selfe (the Apostle saieth) wee are buryed together with Christ, by baptisme to death: he doth not say, we signifie buriall; but he plainly saith, we are buried. The sacra∣ment therefore, of so greate a matter, he did call by the name of the same thing. Here we maie plainelie sée, what S. Augustine mea∣neth in other places, when he saieth, Christ is offered at the com∣munion: that is, he is not offered in himselfe, as he is very flesh, body, and bloud; as now is taught in the Romaine church: but in a sacrament, that is, in a holie signe; for so he declareth the word sacrament what it meaneth, in his fift Epistle. It were ouerlong (saieth he) to dispute conuenientlie of the diuersitie of signes: when as they belong to diuine things, they are called sacraments. So that a Sacrament is a signe applied to some diuine matter: and by such a sacrament or holie signe, is Christ offered in the church, in the cele∣bration of the Lords supper. And againe, he teacheth, that sacra∣ments haue but a similitude of those things, whereof they are sacra∣ments: they are not the things themselues. And of this similitude, for the most part, they take the names of the things themselues. Here
all men maie sée plainlie, the reason why Augustine calleth the bread in the supper of the Lorde, the body of Christ: because it is like the bodie of Christ, being giuen and broken for our sakes. They take their names of the similitude (saieth he) and not of the essence of the thinges. So saith he, after a certaine manner the sa∣crament of the body of Christ, is the body of Christ: so the sacrament of faith (that is baptisme) is faith. And marke here, howe he com∣pareth the sacraments together; that as the bread is the bodie of Christ, after a certaine manner: so baptisme, is also faith: he ma∣keth no difference of the one, more then of the other: The bread is no more the bodie of Christ, then baptisme is faith. For he saieth plainlie, as the bread is the bodie of Christ: so baptisme is faith. Then by his iudgment, as there is no trāsubstantiation in the one: so no more is there in the other. An offence was taken, as should séeme, in Augustines daies, both in the ouer much reuerence done to the Martyres, and of the vehement spéeches of ye Fathers also, concerning the sacrament: as appeareth by ye Epistle of Maximus Meganrensis the Gramma∣rian to S. Augustine,Epist. 43. whome Erasmus in the preface of that Epistle noteth, that Maximus tooke offence, that dead men amongst vs were worshipped, as Gods: scoffing at certaine names of Carthaginians, touching (as I suppose, saith Erasmus) the christians, that they reue∣renced the sepulchers of the Martyrs: and also finding fault, that they did celebrate their sacraments priuily. The which thinges Augustine himselfe also séemeth to signifie, when he concludes on this man∣ner: To conclude, be not ignorant of this, neither let it draw thee vna∣wares into sacrilegious reproches: know thou that if the christian Ca∣tholiques (of whom in your towne the church consisteth) that no dead man is worshipped, and nothing that is made and created of God, to be worshipped as God: but one onely God which made all thinges. Here we maie marke that he taketh all worship from the saints, and he attributes all worshippe onelie to God; to the maker of all thinges. Agréeing with the euerlasting gospell, which the An∣gell preached, (which gospell Babylon had peruerted,) Feare God,Reu. 14 6. and worshippe him, that made heauen and earth: and with that te∣stimony of the foure and twentie elders; Thou art worthy, O Lord,Reu. 4. v. 11. to receiue glory, and honour, and power; for thou hast created all thinges: for thy wils sake they are, and haue beene created. And by this his conclusion, grounded vpon the scriptures, he ouerthrow∣eth
the chiefe ground worke of poperie, which is to worship crea∣tures, and images, the workes of mens hands. It should séeme also, that in those daies some offence was taken concerning the sacrament of the Lordes supper, when as this Ma∣ximus slandered the christians, that they celebrated their sacra∣ments secretly; and also of the vehement speeches of the fathers, concerning the same, when as the Donatists spread abroad, that we put on the Lordes table I cannot tell what (saieth Augustine) nescio quid aliud:Epist. 48. not naming any thing. It should seeme the very flesh of Christ, besides the bread. And afterward he bringeth them in, who by force of the Emperors wholesome lawes, were conuer∣ted to the truth, speaking thus: Others say, we were made afraid, by false rumours, to enter in; neither had we entred in, vnlesse wee had beene compelled. Thankes be to God, who hath taken awaie our fearefulnesse with his rod, and hath taught vs by experience, how vaine and false thinges lying fame had spread abroad of his church. These spéeches and slanders arose not of nothing. And whereas they said, that they placed on the Lords table, (quid aliud) besides the bread and wine; Augustine séemeth to denie that they did not, especially vpon the psalme 89. as he is cited before. As the manner of sacrificing Christ, in the fathers daies agré∣ed with ours: so also theAltars abro∣gated by christ: being sha∣dowes of him. Altar whereon he was sacrificed, agré∣ed with ours. As the Fathers retained the name of priestes and sacrifice, being borrowed from the olde lawe: so it should seeme, they retained the name of Altar also; but after a diuers manner, from the Altars of the olde lawe, and from the Altars that the ca∣tholiques now vse. For in those daies, their Altars were of , and not of stone:Epist. 50. as appeareth plainly out of Augustine, who spea¦king of the crueltie and force of the Donatistes, against the Bi∣shoppe of the Church of Vagiensis, he said, That they rusht in vpon him, standing at the Altar, with horrible force, and cruell rage, and with clubs,Effractis lignis ipsius altaris. and such like weapons, they beat him horribly, the wod of the same Altar being broken. So that, that Altar was not made of stone. And Antoninus reportes in the historie of Chrysostome, That he made an inuectiue Homely against Eutropius, lurking vnder the Altar.Ad Pop. Ant. Hom. 51. & ho. 25. ad Neoph. The Altar as should seeme was hollowe, and not m of stone, as ours were. But Chrysostom himselfe, calleth it mst plainlie, a table. He hath set before all men (saith he) one table, that is the earth, but hee hath giuen vs a farre greater table, then this, and
that also but one. They, which are partakers of the mysteries, know not what I meane: and we drinke all of one cup. He hath not giuen any thing more costly, or pretious to the rich, or lesser or viler to the poore. Here is both the table,1. Cor ca. 10.21. and the communion of the cuppe plainly set downe, which both now our Catholiques denie; agrée∣ing herein with S. Paul, who calles it also the Lordes table. So that in the primitiue church, although they borrowe the name of priest, and sacrifice and Altar, from the Iewes: yet no doubt, they had not them properly, as the Catholiques at this daie teach, but her as our Church now vseth. Of Communion vnder one kinde. THe Church of Rome also, hath altered in the sacrament the Lordes cuppe; which also (as I haue said) was common to the priest and people, and hath ordeined it to the minister a∣ue, where as S. Paul said: That which I haue receiued of the Lord, I haue deliuered vnto you.1. Cor. 10.23. S Paul durst not alter anie substantiall point, in the sacrament: and yet the popish Church dareth? And here, where as some dare not communicate with vs, this mee keth, should be a sufficient warrant to euerie christians con∣science; That to receiue as Christ our sauiour first instituted it, is the safest and surest waie, therein can be no danger; (That was S. Paules ground:) But so doe we in our church, in all thinges, as re as can be, comming to Christes institution; therefore they should not feare to communicate with vs. And the same order which we vse, was vsed in the Church in S. Paules daies:Verse 28. For (saith he) let a man prooue himselfe, and so eate of the bread, and drinke of the cuppe. He doth not saie, let the minister prooue himselfe, and drinke of the cuppe: but euerie christian, as he ought first to exa∣ and prooue himselfe; so he ought to eat the bread, and drinke of the cuppe. And here they pretend for an excuse, the spilling of  ine, or the cleauing or loosing thereof by the beardes & haires
of man.Although with great care, a Origen teach∣eth, the sacra∣ments should be receiued and not to be let fall on the ground. But to let this superstition passe, Christ suffered his own bloud to be shedde on the ground, for our sakes: How much lesse then, will he not suffer the sacrament of his bloud? Sée what great iniurie they doe to Christes church, by maintaining this their su∣perstition. This cuppe (saith our sauiour) is the newe testament in my bloud: so that then as the bread is a certaine sacrament of the bodie, and maketh vs liuely members of the same; so the cup is a sacrament of the new testament, or league betwixt God and his church. And so as much as in them lieth, they which barre the people from receiuing it, would put them out of the league; and themselues be only, as they call themselues, the Lords Cleargie or inheritance. For so the worde Cleargy signifieth. And here their (concornitantia) falleth to the grounde. For if that woulde haue serued the turne, what néeded Christ to haue ordeined the cup, either for minister or people? For he yt receiueth the bodie, be he priest or people: receiueth by a necessarie consequent, (as they saie,) the bloud too. But Christ did ordaine nothing in vaine: ther∣fore we must beleeue it was ordeined, as well for the people, as for the pastor. Secondly, he that is not in the league or couenant, is partaker of none of Gods benefites; neither of the bodie, nor of anie benefit else. For we haue all thinges from God, as beg∣gers, not as owners; by league, by couenant; not by duetie, by challenge, by inheritance. So that they, which take awaie the cuppe of the newe testament, take awaie all gods blessings from vs. This manner of communicating, continued in the church in Cyprians daies, 200. yeares after Christ; and long after. For thus he writeth:Lib. 1. Epist. 2. Epist. Howe doe we teach or prouoke them, for the pro∣fession of his name to shedde their bloud, if to them, going to the battaile (speaking of Martyres) we shall denie his bloud? or how shal we make them fit for the cuppe of martyrdome, if wee admit them not first,Grat. de cons. dist. 2. quia passus De Consec. dist. 2. comperimus. by right of the communion, to the cuppe of the Lord? In like manner (S. Augustine saith) we receiue together, we drinke to∣gether, because we liue together. And Gelasius a Pope confirmeth the same: Either let them receiue the whole sacramentes, or else let them be driuen from the whole. So that this faith is not that which was giuen from the beginning, this is not the Catholique faith. Iesus Christ is the vine, we are the branches; wouldest th be sure a branch of this vine;Io. 15.1. wouldest thou abide in him, and be a member of his church; wouldest thou worthely receiue the sacra∣ment?
Why then, marke well what he saith vnto thee:Verse 7. If you a∣bide in me, and my wordes abide in you, aske what you will, and it shalbe done vnto you. Here is then the meanes to abide in Christ, to be a member of his bodie, & one of his true church, and to be par∣takers of his sacraments; to haue his word abiding & dwelling in vs: not to beléeue as the church of Rome beléeueth, not to abide in the Popes obedience; but to obey Gods word, in all things; to be∣leeue as it teacheth, to receiue his sacraments, according to his institution. And then as a faithfull spouse to thy husband, What∣soeuer thou askest, thou shalt obtaine it: Euen as a wife, that doth her husbands commandement, can lacke nothing. According to which Salomon saith:Prou. 18.9. Hee that turneth away his eares from hearing the lawe, his praiers shall be abominable. By his word God spea∣keth to vs, and by our praiers we speake vnto God. Now they, which despise God, speaking to them; surely God will not heare them speaking to him. Our sauiour in the gospell, when he sendeth forth his Apostles to preach to all nations, he giueth them this charge:Mat. 28.19. Go to all na∣tions and baptise them, in the name of the father, the sonne and the holy ghost, teaching them to obserue all thinges, whatsoeuer I haue commanded you, and behold I am with you alway, euen to the ende of the world. Here is the Catholique church, sealed and marked with the outward seale, and cognisance of baptisme: and doing al thinges that Iesus hath commanded, fulfilling his worde. And they are the true catholique preachers and teachers, that preache onelie that, which he hath commanded in his word, and with such, he is present euen to the ende of the world. Séeing then, to haue the scriptures read in the vulgar tongue, to haue thē preached vnto ye people, not in the beginning of the church, or at the first planting of the faith onlie (as the Papists imagine) but vnto the worlds end; seeing to haue our sins pardoned by faith, kindled in our harts by the preaching of them; séeing to praie in a knowen tongue, to haue no Images in the churches, was the first faith; seeing al the saintes of God, knew the scriptures & praied in a knowen tongue; seeing Mary praised God with her magnificat, and Symeon wish his song, and Zacharie with his also, in a tongue they knewe: why should not wee also followe their steppes, and heare the scriptures willinglie, praie with our vnderstanding fer∣uentlie, breake all Images zealously? Seeing purgatorie, par∣dons, transubstantiation, communion vnder one kinde, inuoca∣tion
of saintes, euen by their owne confessions, came since into the church; séeing they were not the first faith, once giuen to the saintes; seeing they were saued without them: why doe wee be∣léeue them? why doe we striue to maintaine them? following the Iesuites, not S. Iudes counsell herein. Augustine saieth verie ex∣cellently:Antoninus 2. Part. Tit. 10. God hath (as it were) paued vs the high way to heauen, by the pathes of the Patriarches by the hemming in on both sides of the lawe, by the incarnation of Iesus Christ by the testimony of the Apostles, by the bloud of Martyres: Let vs followe the steppes of all these, walke the way that they went in, & refuse all by waies, that came in since. Of the authoritie of the Church. THis was the first faith, this was the first religion and ser∣uice of God: Neither hath anie Prince, Pope, Poten∣tate, Apostle or Church, power to alter this faith, this re∣ligion,Gal. 1.8. this seruice. For so the Apostle teacheth: If an angell from heauen, or we our selues, preach any other gospell, teach another way of saluation, bring in another religion: let him be accursed. The church is not aboue (as they would haue it) but vnder ye scrip∣tures.Psal. 138.2. 1. Pet. 1.14. And therefore Dauid saith, Thou hast magnified thy name, and thy word aboue all thinges. And therefore S. Peter saith: All flesh is grasse (euen the whole church) but the word of God endureth for euer.Mat. 5 18. And our sauiour, that heauen and earth shall perish: but not one tittle or iot of his word, shall perish. And God by his Pro∣phet Esay:Esay 42.21.22. That God would exalt his lawe, but the peoples sins hin∣dered it. And yet for all this, shall we beléeue that the church hath power to controule the word, to alter anie thing therein contai∣ned?1. Pet. 1.24.25. This is not the catholique faith. The Church, nay heauen it selfe, shall waxe olde, as doth a garment, and perish; but not one io or tittle of Gods worde shall perish: and shall wee beléeue that the church maie change anie thing in it? Hence the church is compa∣red
to a spouse, to a body, to a sheepe, to a ship:Ephes. 5.25. Io 10.2. Heb. 6.29. and shall the wife rule the husbande? and the bodie the head? the sheepe the sheepe∣heard? the shippe the shippe-master? or be aboue them, or disobey their voices? no more is the church aboue the scriptures, or maie alter anie thing in them. Neither doth that place of the gospell: The holy ghost, yt is the spirit of truth, when he shall come,Io. 16.13. shall lead you into all truth: make any thing for ye authoritie of the church: as though it being lead by the spirit, might make newe points of doctrine, which were not contained in the scriptures. For first that place must needes be restrained. For the holie ghost, by their owne confessions, shall not leade them into all truth. There is some truth, that the holy ghost shall not teach: as the certaine day of iudgment, and such like. But the scriptures are called truth:Psal. 119. 2. Thes. 2.10. Io. 14. v. 6. Thy lawe is truth: and because they haue not loued the truth; there∣fore God gaue them ouer into errors. And our sauiour saith: I am the way, the truth, and the life. The way to heauen, by my death; the truth, by my worde; and the life, by my grace. Into all trueth the holie ghost shall leade vs, into all truth contained in the scrip∣tures, not into all truth simplie. And to this exposition, agreeth that our sauiour there addeth, He shall not speake of himselfe. And againe, he shall glorifie me, he shall take off mine, and he shal shew vnto you. So that this is a chiefe part of the glorie of Iesus, that the holie ghost shall reueile the secrets of his gospell, shall teache him, and not anie newe way of saluation. Ignatius speaking of the holie ghost,Epist. 11. ad Ephes. and of the doctrine he shall teach the church, writeth thus: The holy ghost speaketh not those thinges which are his owne: but those thinges that are Christs. Ney∣ther doth Christ shew his owne: the word (saieth he) which you haue heard, is not mine; but his that sent me. He saith of the holy ghost: hee shall not speake of himselfe, but whatsoeuer, hee shall heare of mee. And of himselfe, hee saith to the father: I haue glorified thee vpon earth: I haue fulfilled the worke, which thou gauest me to do; I haue made thy name knowne vnto men. Of the holie ghost, hee saieth, He shall glorifie me vpon earth, for he shall receiue of mee, and shal shew to you. Therefore both of them glorifie him, of whome they both do receiue that they doe, and preach him, and also declare his wordes. But the spirit of error preacheth himselfe, in his owne pro∣phesie speaking: for it pleaseth himselfe, and glorifieth himselfe. For he is bitter, a seducer, full of deceite, inconstant, proud, arrogant, full
of wordes, out of tune, vnmeasurable,Nigriformis. ilfauored, hauty, from whose works Iesus Christ hath deliuered vs, founding vs vpon a rock as cho∣sen stones, (yt are fit for the building of God the father) lifted vp on high of Christ, who was crucified for vs, being made strong by the holie ghost, and brought in through faith; lifted vp in hope and loue, from earth to heauen; walking without spot. For blessed (saith he) are they yt are vndefiled in the way, and walke in the law of the Lord. For the way without error, is Iesus Christ, as he himselfe saith: I am the way, the truth, and the lyfe: and this way leadeth vnto the father. For no man (saith he) shall come to the father,Deiferi Christi∣feri. Spiritiferi. Templiferi. but by me. Therefore blessed are ye bearers-of-God, bearers-of-Christ, bearers-of the-holy-ghost, bearers-of-the-temple, adorned in all thinges with the commande∣ments of Iesus Christ. A roiall priest-hoode, a holy nation, a chosen people. By this place appeares, that the spirit of God shal teach no newe doctrine, but that which is agréeing to the doctrine of Christ. The spirit of error is proud, hautie, blacke, obscure, and ougly: and shall teach it selfe. And do not all these markes a∣grée with the spirit of the Romish church? Is not their spirit bit∣ter? troubling the consciences of men for trifles: teaching many false pointes of doctrine, against the truth of the scriptures. Is it not slipperie and inconstant? as their schoole-mens opinions irre∣conciliable plainelie proue. Is it not proud and arrogant? who bro∣therlie exhortes not, like the apostolique spirit: but commandes and threatens, like Antichrist. Is it not full of wordes? as their Friers sermons, and schoole-mens oppositions, and vaine legends and fables do testifie. Is it not out of tune? differing from the sweete harmonie of the gospell. Is it not blacke and ouglie? which cannot abide the true light of the scriptures. It is very strange that the knowledge of the scriptures, and the Popes religion, can∣not stande together.Ioh. 12. v. 49. Eph. 6.13. That when as Christ to called a prince of light, and sathan the prince of darknesse, the Pope will haue all in his kingdome, to liue in darknesse, to haue ignorance the mo∣ther of their deuotion, and yet to be the subiects of Christ. Text. vers. 4.For certaine are craftily crept in, which in times past euen long be∣fore, haue beene appointed to this condemnation: vngodly, turning the grace of our God into wantonnesse, and denying the onely ma∣ster of his house, God and our Lord Iesus Christ.] Here the Apostle Iude describeth another marke or token, of these false christians: they shall slylie and craftilie come into the church. They shal not
at first shewe, what they are. They shall not come in, and stablish their false doctrines, by force of armes, or all at once, but by de∣grées, by little and little, vnder a shewe of holines, and deuotion. For thus much the words  &  (which the Apostle Iude in this place, & the Apostle Peter,2. Pet. 2.1. who speaketh of the same heretiques vseth) doe import, and signifie. And here a doubt maie arise:2. Pet. 2.22. because S. Peter (who most euidently speaketh of the same heretiques with S. Iude) saith, that such shall come: and Saint Iude, that such are come alreadie. Surely they maie be easily re∣conciled, as also S. Paul and S. Iohn: whereof the one saieth, A de∣parting from the faith, by Antichrist must first be;2. Thes. 2.3. 1. Ep. 4 3. and then the day of the Lord shall come. The other, That Antichrist was come already. S. Paul speaketh of the head; S. Iohn of the members: S. Paul spea∣keth of the reueiled antichrist; S. Iohn of the hid: Euen so S. Iude here speaketh of the roote of these, which euen then sathan had plan∣ted; S. Peter of the blossomes. Antichrist and his members euen then, did beginne to set foote in the church of God, but they did not shewe their faces, till after∣ward. Some of them were euen then come, as S. Iude and S. Iohn testifie, who liued as it should séeme, after the other Apostles: But the whole route, the great force and shewe of these heretiques (as Peter and Paul write) shall come after.Ep. 3.9. There was in Saint Iohns daies Diotrephes, which cared not for the Apostles, which desired to haue the preheminence or chiefe place aboue others, which tooke vp∣on him to excommunicate all men: And was not he a plaine limme and member of Antichrist?Act. 15.5. There were some which vrged circum∣cission and obseruing of the lawe, to the grace of Iesus Christ sa∣uing vs: and were they not members of antichrist? There were some which saide, Let vs eate and drinke, to morrowe we shall die:1. Cor. 15.22. And were they not members of antichrist? So that then these he∣retiques, these subtill tares of sathan were in the church, the séedes of them were sowen, they had taken roote, as S. Iude writeth: but yet they were to spread, they were to flourish after, as Saint Peter witnesseth. Or else the saying of S. Iude maie be taken after the manner of the Prophets: who some times speake of a thing to cme, in the preter perfectense, to declare the certaintie of it; that it is euen as sure, as if it were comen alreadie: as in this Epistle Enoch prophesieth, the Lord doth come with thousandes of saintes, that is, most assuredly the Lorde will come.
Popery crept into the church by degrees.Some also doe demand to knowe the yeare, and daie and sette time, that poperie came first into the church: as though it came in all at once, or by open force, in subuerting, and violating and ouerthrowing christian religion. But they are greatly deceiued, that thinke so. The Apostle S. Iude here teacheth vs, that it did not so come in. But the authors thereof came in craftelie, with stealing steppes, vnder a shewe of holines, as though they would preach the faith of Christ: and so easilie, and generallie deceiued the true christians, who were as simple as doues. As also the or∣dinarie Glosse expoundes this place. Of these false Christians Christ himselfe prophesieth:Mat. 24. v. 5. Take heede (saith he) no man deceiue you; for many shall come in my name, saying: I am Christ, and shal deceiue many. This is the first lesson he giueth, against the end of the world: Sathan shall first beginne, by false Christes, to beguile christians; and after by open warres, to trouble them. As there it followeth. And the same caue at he giueth to all his, in his ser∣mon which hee made vpon the mount:Mat. 7.15. Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in sheepes cloathing: but inwardly are rauening wolues. The false Prophets, we are to take heede of, shall come in shéepes cloathing, that is, with all outward shewes of religion and deuotion: but in their hearts, where true religion should bee, there is darkenesse, there is crueltie, there is couetousnesse: they are wolues. And S. Paul most plainly, of the captaine and gene∣rall of all these,2. Thes. 2.3. Antichrist himselfe, thus teacheth vs; that he shall not onely come into the church: but he shall sit in it, in quiet posses∣sion: And that he shall get this interest, by fraude and guile, he shal come like a masker, vnder a veile; and at last, he shall be reuealed, and his visard shall be pulled from his face, and he shall be consu∣med with the spirit of the Lordes mouth. Act. 20.29.Of his members also, S. Paul foretelleth the church of Ephesus: I know that after my departure shal grieuous wolues enter in among you, not sparing the flocke. Euen after his departure, and that not long after, they shall enter in: they shall be wolues in heart and dealing; and yet put on the habite of sheepheardes; they shall verie hardlie be discerned, without great héede taking, and there∣fore hee biddeth them before, take heede to themselues, least they be deceiued by these wolues, and to their flockes, least they deuour them. And he commits them to God, and to the word of his grace; which is able to build them further, and to giue them inheritance, with
all them that are sanctified. I would to God, that all true catho∣liques would beléeue that such wolues should come into ye church, after S. Paules departure; and would not thinke, that all, that hath béene taught, euen this thousand yeares, is therefore good, and ca∣tholique doctrine. It is not the time, that maketh it good: But that they would haue an eie, to this touchstone of truth, which the Apostle here giueth them: I meane to the worde of God. If the worde of God had not beene a sufficient thing, to trie all heresies y, the Apostle had not done faithfully to his flocke: He had giuen them a broken staffe, to leane to: hee had giuen them a false bal∣lance, to weie truth in; a false light to discerne falsehood, & darke∣nesse by. And in his Epistle to the Corinthes, He feareth,2. Cor. 11.3. least as sathan by his subtilty, by his fine and sugred speeches, by his ser∣pents faire shape, and braue shewe, deceiued Eue: so they should be deceiued, and drawen from the simplicity of the gospell. The gos∣pell is a plaine, easie and familiar thing, by beleeuing which, wee are saued: But sathan shall go about to make it obscure, harde, and intricate, with his quirkes, quiddities, deuises, and distincti∣ons; as also all men, which haue eies to see, and will behold things with indifferencie, maie see, hee hath done. The gospell of Iesus Christ, is now made among them as obscure and intricate, as A∣ristotles Phisickes, or Organum. Such a misse hath sathan caste, with his schoole mens distinctions, to the truth. And so hath he per∣uerted it, from the simplicitie or straightnesse thereof, and made it like himselfe; crooked, full of turnes, and sleightes. The Apostle also telleth vs,Verse 14. that sathan shall transforme himselfe into an angell of light: and therefore they are verie simple, that will beléeue visi∣ons or reuelations, or ground their faith vpon them, where they teach doctrines against the worde of God. And therfore Esay saith, Should not a people aske counsell of their God, for the liuing?Esay 8.19. shal they aske counsell of the dead? To the lawe and testimony get you, sticke to them. If they shall not answere according to that worde: to such there is no morning, no light. They are deuils, they are of the prince of darkenesse. And to this S Paul agrees,Gal. 1.8. If an angell from heauen, preach another gospell, in bringing vs anie other newes, or anie gladde tydinges of our saluation, then that yee haue already receiued, let him bee accursed: yea or wee our selues, which are the Apostles of Christ, yea or the church. The gospel is to be beléeued, before angels, before all the Apostles; and therefore
before the church. Let vs beware therefore, least the appearance of angels, the name of the church, beguile vs. For vnder such craftie meanes, and bare names, and outward shewes, shall these false teachers créepe in. And therefore the Apostles haue told vs, of their craftie créeping in: and also of their meanes which they should vse; that we being thus warned, might not bee beguiled. And of these their craftie meanes, S. Paul in another place fore∣warneth all christians:1. Ti. 4.1. Now (saith he) the spirit speaketh euidently, that in the latter times, some shal reuolt frō the true faith, that which they haue receiued, (for so the Gréeke word signifieth) and shal giue heede to spirites of error, and to the doctrines of diuels. Here is a plaine prophesie of the spirit of God, that some shall reuolte from the faith: and how shall they be seduced? they shall not giue héede to the worde of God: but to spirits, and reuelations: which shall teach them errors no doubt, vnder the shape of angels: they shall teach them the doctrines of diuels, as the Apostle teacheth vs here, Forbidding to marry, and to abstaine from meats: not condemning marriage, but forbidding it to some; as also some kinde of meats. Beware therefore of reuelations of spirites or angels; least you learne the doctrines of deuils. The Apostle teacheth vs here, that by such meanes manie shall bee deceiued. Their prohibition of marriage to their priestes, and of meats, at certaine times to all men, for religion, and holinesse and deuotion, who knoweth not? And these two pointes declare, that they are they, whom the Apo∣stle speakes of. And the Apostle putteth downe these two as prin∣cipall or chiefe pointes; whereby they shall winne credit with the worlde: as they haue done, by their Carthusians or charter house Monkes, who neuer did eate flesh; and by their other Monkes and Friers, who neuer married: Not denying, but that they shall teach other doctrines also. For their doctrine of purgatory, and of praying for the dead, and of Masses, and of dirges, and of inuocations of saintes; by these visions & apparitions, no doubt of diuels, vnder the shape of saintes and men departed, haue bene confirmed. For in their legendes they haue a vision, to prooue e∣uerie one of these. Sathan dare not come in his owne likenesse: for then all men would flie from him. Hee dare not come when men are awake, for then they would some of them bewraie him; he dare not sow Henbaine or poison, for then no man would reape it▪ but he commeth like an angel, he comes when men are a sléepe,
and doe giue small héede to him, when they are otherwise occupi∣ed, either in wars or in other earnest affaires, and soweth tares: and thus he craftelie creepeth into the house of God, into the harts of Gods people. But Gods worde, is the onelie light to discerne him by. Howe Angels appeare,Ench. ca. 60. Quid enim opti est haec at{que} hu iusmodi affirmē∣tur vel negentur vel definiantur cum crimine: quando sine cri∣mine nesciuntur and with what bodies (saieth Augustine) these and such like curiosities are determined with perill: seeing there is no fault in not knowing them. But wee haue more neede to dis∣cerne and iudge, when Sathan transformes himselfe into an angell of light, least by beguiling vs, he seduce vs into some hurtfull things. For when he beguiles the sense of the bodie, but moues not the minde, from the true and right assurance, by which euery man leades a faith∣full life, there is no danger in religion: or when he faining himselfe to be good, doth or speakes those thinges, which belonges to good An∣gels, though he bee accounted good, it is no error hurtfull or dange∣rous to christian religion. But when as, by these properties of good angels, he beginnes to drawe vs to his owne things, then to discerne him and not to follow him, there is neede of great watchfulnesse. But howe is it possible that any man should escape his deadly deceits, vn∣lesse God guide him, and defend him? And this difficulty is profita∣ble for vs to this ende; least any man should be a hope to himselfe, or any man to another; but God to all his. For that this thing is most profitable for vs, no godly man doubts. Augustine here confesseth, that sathan maie take vpon him all the partes of good angels, and maie by them drawe vs, to his doctrine. And that all the fathers or men in the world, are not able to discerne these his deceiptes, but God alone: he is so cunning and so subtill. It is to be feared for lacke of the light of Gods worde, which was extinguished and put as it were vnder a bushell in the time of our forefathers, that he beguiled manie. Of this crafty créeping in of Antichrist,Io. 8.45. 2. Thes. 2.9. our sauiour also did giue warning to all christians. He is (saieth our sauiour) the father of lyes: and shall vse all manner of lyes and forgeries, to maine∣taine his kingdome. Lying apparitions, lying intrusions of books vnder the name of saintes, corruptions of writers and fathers: And therefore S. Paul himselfe signed euery of his Epistles, with his owne hand, least this forger should craftelie bring into the church any Epistles vnder his name, after his death, which were not his; as he did of the other Apostles.2. Thes. 3.17. What had needed this
signing of the Apostle, if he had not feared some forgerie follow∣ing, as it fell out indeede. For thus I read in Cyrill, I finde in a certaine booke (saieth he) sayd of the Apostles,Lib. 10. in. Leu. blessed is he that fa∣steth to this end, that he may feede the poore. This booke which Cy∣ril here makes mention of, is not canonicall, and therefore craf∣tily thrust into the church, of sathan: As also was Peters gospell, whereof Eusebius makes mention. That booke (saieth he) which is called the Acts of Peter,Eccl. hist. lib. 3. cap. 3. and that is called the gospell after his name, yea and that is called his preaching, or a reuelation: is not at all ac∣compted among the canonicall Scriptures. Here wee may sée sa∣thans craft, how he turnes himselfe into Angelles of light, what goodlie titles he giueth here to Peters gospell, A reuelation from heauen, his Actes, that which hee preached: and yet all this was but counterfeit, it was but sathans copper, it was none of the gold of Iesus Christ. This one thing were enough to make all men take heede of sathan, how they beléeue euery thing that they shall reade in the fathers, in euerie booke that goeth vnder their names. If he were so bolde, as to counterfeit the Apostles wry∣tings: do we thinke, that he will not be more bold, to forge and corrupt the writinges of the fathers and men? And this also is to too manifest. Augustine writes that some thought euen in his daies, vnder Cyprians name, bookes were counterfeited: Some thinke (saieth Augustine) that Cyprian neuer held this opinion of re∣baptization,Epist. 48. but it was counterfeited of bold and lying persons, vnder his name. For (saieth he) the sinceritie and integrity of the writings of any, although he were neuer so sound a Bishop, could be so kept, as the holie canonicall Scriptures are kept, in so many languages, in such an order and succession of the ecclesiastical celebrations. Against which notwithstanding, there haue not wanted some, who haue for∣ged manie thinges, vnder the names of the Apostles. Wee maie note here, howe Augustine in his time confessed, that Cyprians workes might be forged; as the scriptures had manie bookes thrust into the church, vnder the name of scriptures, which were not the scriptures: And do we thinke that sathan hath béene a∣sléepe since this time? no doubt he hath forged Augustines workes, and all the fathers in some part, to maintaine his kingdome. And he that would forge whole bookes to confirme his opinion withall; no doubt would not sticke to thrust in sentences: As euen in that 40. Meditation of Augustine, that same imperfect sentence may
séeme to argue a corruption. I desire of thee, ô Lord, (saieth hee) pardon of all my sinnes, from whome and by whome: Let mee haue mercy in the day of necessitie and extremitie. Here no doubt Christ is left out, from whom and by whom Augustine hoped for propiti∣ation in ye day of his extremity. And there followes, ô holy & bles∣sed virgine, be my intercessor, whose temple yt was worthy to be, &c. So likewise in Eusebius there may séeme to be some of this forge∣rie. In his oration in the praise of Constantine, he saieth, That in all places through the worlde churches were erected to the onelie God; Agréeing with Augustine, who long after his daies, wrote that euen then they builded no churches to martyrs. And yet for all this, Lib. 4. de vita Constantini, he makes mention of the dedica∣tion of the temple of martyrs. His words are these; These things were done in the 30. yeare about the monument of our saluation, and the house of peace. In the dedication of the temple of martyrs, the Emperour holding a post, and said thus, &c. This séemes strange, that churches should be dedicated to God alone; and yet he should here mention a house of peace, & the temple of the mar∣tyrs. This house no doubt, and this temple, and this post,Nicen. conc. Can. 6. were intruded craftilie by sathan. So in the councell of Nice (as shall hereafter more at large be shewed) where it is said, Let the olde custome continue in Egypt, Libia, and Pentapolis,Quoniā episco∣po Romano pari∣lis mos est: The Cardinall in an old copie findes thus: Quoniā Metro∣politano episcopo, parilis mos est. Coranza in An∣notat. epit. Concil. because the Bi∣shop of Rome hath the like custome: A Cardinall of the holie Crosse, findes in an auncient copie, because the Metropolitane hath the like custome. Surely here was sathans subtiltie: For Romane, to thrust in Metropolitane. What shall I rehearse more particulars? Erasmus, a great searcher and reader of the fathers, acknowledgeth this corruption and forgerie manifestlie. And behold here another subtiltie of sathan, if this his former practise will not take place, he will endeuour to take the worde of God quite from the faithfull, and to cast mists and darkenesse be∣fore their eyes. A hauke being hooded, maie be carried whither one will: euen so sathan studies to take awaie the eyes of Gods peo∣ple, that he may leade them into the pit of destruction.Iudges. 16. v. 25. The Phili∣stines after they had put out Sampsons eyes, make of him a laugh∣ing stock; euen so the deuill in the Popes kingdome, hauing thus put out the spirituall eyes of the faithfull, that they could not looke on the word of God, made of them laughing stockes. And there∣of no doubt were so manie apparitions & gobblines (as they called
them) and terrors by night, in those darke daies. This is that Nahash ye Ammonite,1▪ Sam. 11.1. who by interpretation is a popular or world∣lie serpent; that is in trueth the deuill, who would make a league with Iabes Gilead (which maie represent the Church of Christ, for her drought, and heape of her testimonie:) so that, hee might put out all their right eies, and so hee would be friends with them. This serpent cannot abide the right eie of Gods people, that is, that they should knowe the right seruice of God, according to his worde. And such a like league hath the Pope made with ye church of God in our daies. It was lawfull for them to doe what they would, so they knew not the scriptures. This is that, which Na∣buchadnezar king of Babylon,2. King. 25.7. did to Zedechia king of Iudah, He killed his sonnes before him, hee put out his eies, he bound him with chaines and brought him to Babylon. Surely in this respect, maie Rome truely be called Babylon: who hath killed the sons of chri∣stian kinges before them, taking from their subiectes the worde of life, and put out their eies, that they might not knowe Gods lawe, nor whose ministers they were; & bound them with chaines, making them their slaues, to doe their pleasures. The Prophet Zacharie agréeing with the gospell, thus paints out these false christians: Thus faith the Lord (saieth he) feede the sheepe of slaughter:Zach. 11.4.5. for they which possesse them, slaye them, and thinke they sin not, and they that sell them, say, blessed be the Lord, for I am rich: and their owne sheepheardes spare them not. And therefore saith the Lord, I will no more spare the inhabitantes of the land: and I fed the sheepe of slaughter; euen the poore of the earth. And I tooke to me two staues, the one I called Beauty, and the other I called Bondes: and I fedde the sheepe. Here the Prophet plainly paintes out the couetous, carelesse, and cruell scribes and phari∣ses: and the louing, painfull, & amiable sheepheard Iesus Christ. And I cut off three sheepheardes in one moneth, that is, in a shorte time, that is those wicked pastors, Scribes, Pharises, and Lawyers. And my soule was humbled among them. They gréeued Iesus Christ at the verie heart: for all this his loue, he was humbled tho∣rowe their sinnes and wickednesse. And their soule abhorred me. And I saide I will feede you no more. And that that dieth; let it die. And that that perisheth, let it perish; and let the remnant eate, eue∣rie one the flesh of his neighbour. And I tooke my staffe beauty, and brake it: that I might make voide my couenant, which I established
with all this people. Here is plainelie the reiection of the Iewes, for their incredulitie: Here is the death of Christ, by the breaking of this staffe, called beawtie: and the disanulling of the former testament, made with all mankinde, the fulfilling of the lawe. And it was disanulled euen that day. And they knewe surely, those poore sheepe that wayted on me, that it was the worde of the Lord. And I saide to them, if it seeme good in your eies, giue mee my wages; and if no, leaue of. And they waied for my wages, thirty peeces of siluer. And the Lord saide to me, cast it vnto the potter. A goodly price, that I was valewed at of them. And I tooke the thirty peeces of siluer, and cast them into the house of the Lord, to be be∣stowed on the potter. Then I brake my other staffe, euen bandes: that I might dissolue the bandes between Iudah and Israell, that they might nowe no more be accompted brethren: But that by the cal∣ling of the Gentiles, a new brotherhood might be begun, through the whole worlde. And to declare, that they should be no more ac∣compted as brethren: but be dispersed, as they are now, from the endes of the world. Here is Iesus Christes preaching, death, betraying, merites, passion, and kingdome, thorow the whole world, most plainlie de∣scribed. Nowe followeth Sathans kingdome, nowe followeth his Church, nowe succéedes his idle, and idoll sheepheardes. For he is Gods enemie. Where God giueth the lawe, he maketh a calfe: where God planteth religion, hee by and by grafteth his su∣perstition: Hee sléepes not: he omitteth no opportunitie. And therefore immediatlie it followeth in the Prophet,Verse. 15. And the Lorde saide to mee, yet againe, Take to thee the instrumentes of a foolish sheepheard. For lo, I will raise vp a sheepheard in the lande, which shall not visit or haue regard to the thing that is lost nor seeke the ten∣der lambes: nor shall not cure that which is broken, and that which standeth, he shall not perfect or beare; he shall eate the flesh of the fatte, and shall teare their clawes in pieces. Here is Antichrist, here is sathans sheepheard, here is Christes enemie: yet his vicar, his successor: not a wolfe or wild boare; but a sheepheard (as he was;) but a foolish or ignorant sheepheard; a sheepheard that woulde not feede the flocke, that would not heale the wounded, that would not seeke the tender lambes, that would not perfect the strong; by prea∣ching and teaching. For the word of God is bread to the strong,Mat. 4. v. 4. Rom. 15.4. it is comfort to the afflicted, it is the tender lambes guide, it is the
phisicke of the soule,Psal. 119.2. 1. Tim. 6.5. and therefore it is called the doctrine of health. And it should séeme, our sauiour alluded to this prophesie, when he bad Peter so earnestly feede his flocke: not to giue him a suprema∣cie ouer his flocke, but to giue him a watchword and a warning, that his successor should bee this foolish, this carelesse, and this idle sheepheard, of whome Zacharie prophesieth. As though he should saie vnto him: There shall bee a shéepheard, a great sheepheard, that thall not féede the shéepe, that shall not looke after the young lambes, that shall not comfort and heale the wounded (of whome Zacharie and the Prophets haue foretolde) see thou, not thy succes∣sors be not he. For it followeth, woe to thee, thou Idoll sheepeheard, which for∣sakest thy sheepe; for the sword shall be vpon his arme, and vpon his right eie: his arme in drying shall be dried vp, and his right eie shall be vtterly darkened.So were the popish priestes reuerenced in times past. A iust plague of this carelesse pastor, who is like to an image of stone, which standes in a place vnmoueable, and is reuerenced of all men: but doeth nothing. Such Idolles, are the Pope and his Cleargie. The sword shall be vpon his right arme, which we maie euidentlie sée fulfilled in the Turke, who hath spoiled the right arme of the Popes dominion, which hee woulde challenge as his flocke. And his right eie is quite darkened: that is, as one noteth, he shall doe nothing rightlie; but all with the left hand, crookedly and frowardlie. His sentences shall be cr∣ked, his expositions of the scriptures shall be crooked, his workes shall be crooked, and whatsoeuer he goeth about, shall be peruerse, crooked & left handed His knowledge of the true worship or ser∣uice of God, is quite extinguished. He hath some light of ye second takle of Gods law, he teacheth and knoweth how we ought to be∣haue our selues to our neighbours: But his right eie, the know∣ledge of the first table of the lawe, or of the seruice of God, accor∣ding to his word, the true knowledge of our saluation, is quite ex∣tinguished in his Church. This his succession almost immediat∣lie after Christ, this his fulfilling of this Prophesie of Zacharie, by himselfe neuer preaching nor by his dumb cleargy; these plagues which we maie here see verified most plainlie, for these his sinnes, (for the Popedome and Turkes kingdome beganne almost both in one yeare, and when Bonifacius had obtained of Phocas to bee primate, Mahomet not long after became a Prophet) and our sa∣uiours Item or caueat to Peter: all these I saie, maie most plain∣lie
prooue, that the Pope is that Idoll shéepeheard. And also, the instruments of a foolish shéepeheard maie declare, the craftie comming in and creeping of him into Gods Church, which S. Iude here prophesieth of. And here first, whereas there are but two thinges to be consi∣dered in anie great personage, his authoritie and iurisdiction; and his landes and possessions: it maie seeme, hee came craftelie by both these. For first as touching his iurisdiction, the sixt Canon of the Councell of Nice maketh him equall with ye other Patriarks, which is this in all the vsuall printed copies. The old custome con∣tinues in Egypt, or Libia, or Pentapolis, that the Bishoppe of Alexan∣dria should haue authoritie ouer all these, because the Bishoppe of Rome hath the like custome. Likewise also at Antioche, and the o∣ther prouinces: let euery Church haue her owne honour. This Ca∣non makes the Bishoppe of Rome equall to the other Patriarks. But to delude this, the Cardinall of the holie Crosse shewed Co∣ranza, the gatherer of the Epitome of the Councels,Epit. Con. a most anci∣ent Latine edition (as he saith) wherein it is written; Quia metro∣politano parilis mos est: that is, because the Metropolitane hath the like custome. And so for Romanus, they haue put in Metropoli∣tanus. But here is a plaine rehearsall, of the thrée Patriarkes of Alexandria, Rome, and Antioche. Therefore as Alexandria is in  first place, and Antioche in the last: so in plaine dealing, Rome should be in the middle. And to make this matter more plaine, and to take awaie all doubt; Eusebius cites this Canon thus,Lib. 10. Eccles. histor. ca. 6. That as at Alexandria: so in Rome also, the olde custome should be kept, that either he of Egypt, or this,Suburbicarum ecclesiarum: of the citties of his suburbes. should haue care of the chur∣ches of the citties adioyning. Here is Rome plainly named. So that then, in the former place, Romanus, and not Metropolitanus, must be read: and therfore that most olde Latine edition, which the Cardinall shewed, maie seeme to be forged. Secondly concerning the bishop of Romes possessions, it should séeme the Donation of Constantine, wherby he claymeth Rome and Italie, is forged: as appeareth by Nicephorus.Niceph. li. 7. c. 46 Constantine (saith he) in all prouinces, gaue some part of his reuenewes to the churches, and he established that gift to be good for euer. But hee maketh no mention of this great gifte of Rome and Italie to the Pope. He that put downe this small gift, and other things of lesse account there, as the making of a church of wood, to carry
about with him to Constantines commendation: would not haue omitted this his great donation and liberalitie, to the Bishoppe of Rome,Anton. part. 1. hist. Tit. 8. ca. 2. Dist. 96. Constantinus. if there had béene anie such. Antoninus also, a diligent searcher of antiquities, of this donation writeth thus: Of Constan∣tines donation, is mention made in the decretals: but (saieth he) that chapter is not found in the olde decretals. What therfore, and how much he gaue it is not certaine. If this Chapter, bee not in the olde decretals, it maie séeme it crept in after. If a meane man should enioie anie landes, without plaine and certaine euidence: what a horrible sinne were it? And is this no sinne in the Pope? who should giue light to others. All their errors also by little and little crept in, as we maie per∣ceiue by the writings of the fathers, and by their owne councels. First it was decreed that the Bishoppe of the first sea,Conc. Carth. 3. ca. 26. should not bee called the prince of priestes, or the highest priest, or any such like name: but onely the Bishoppe of the first sea. The first supremacie was in order, not in honour; no not of the Bishop of Rome. And therefore Cyprian calleth him Collega or fellowe Bishop.Lib. 1. Epist. 4. But af∣terward these names of highest priest, and prince of priestes, and greater then these, were giuen to the Pope: as nowe we maie see in his stile. In the beginning, they brought in their images, vn∣der a pretence of putting vs in remembrance, without anie wor∣shippe to be done to them:Lib. 9. Epist. 9. as appeareth by Gregories Epistle to Serenus. In that thou hast forbidden them to be worshipped, wee commend thee (saith he:) but in that thou hast broken them, we find fault with thee. But nowe, capping, and knéeling, and offering to them, are allowed; and nothing can be done too much to them. Eusebius also speaking of the first original of Images,Lib. 7. ca. 14. euen of our sauiour, and of Peter, and Paul writeth thus: But we haue seene very ancient images of them, kept of diuers: which seemeth to me to bee done, as a thing indifferent; and of the custome of the Gen∣tiles, because they were wont to honour them thus, whom they ac∣counted worthy of honour. For that the ensignes of auncient men should be kept to the memory of their posterity, as a signe of their ho∣nour, and of the loue of these. So that then, these images crept in∣to the church from Paganisme, and not from anie Apostolique tradition, by Eusebius iudgment, and they were kept of them as memories; not worshipped as Idolles, as now is vsed. How superstition began to grow in the church, that prohibiti∣on
also whereof Augustine maketh mention, plainlie proueth.Confess. lib. 6. cap 2. His mother Monica would haue brought into the church bread & wine and such like, to haue distributed at the memories of the martyrs: but S. Ambrose had forbidden, that any such should be brought into the church. And he addeth the reason: Because these things done to their parents, were like ye superstition of ye gentiles. In the beginning, those same loue feasts (which S. Paul and Iustine martyr, and Tertullian, and all the olde fathers make mention of) were taken awaie,Concil. An. ca. 9. be∣cause it was not lawfull to make feasts in the church; or Maidens to sing songs, as appeareth by the 9. Canon of the councell of Antisidiorensis, no doubt that their masse and sole communion, after might take place. In the same councell it was decréed, that it was not lawful for a woman to take ye Eucharist with her bare hand.Ca. 36. Here beginneth a counterfeit honour of the Eucharist, more no doubt, then before was vsed. Sixtus Primus ordained,Summa. Conc. that pro∣phane hands especially of women, might not touch the holy ves∣sels. The Apostles ministred the communion,Pol de. inuent. Lib. 6. cap. 12. in a cup of wood Zepherinus after ordained a cup of glasse: after came in siluer and golden chalices: No doubt the plainer the matter was;Pol. Virg. lib. 6 cap. 12. the purer was the mysterie. Stephanus primus ordained their Altar clothes, and priestlie ornaments like Aaron. Some priestes after they haue said the Lords praier do communicate,Concil. Toletan. 4. ca. 17. which hereafter we forbidde (saith the councell) but a blessing being giuen to ye people, then let the sacrament of the body and bloud of the Lord be taken, in that or∣der, that the Leuites and priests shall communicate before the Altar; the cleargie in the quier, and the people without the quier. Here beginneth the difference of the receiuing the communion; but all receiued alike before: But nowe the people is shutte out of the quier, and after from the cup also. But here yet is not the Canon of their masse: but the Lordes praier and a blessing to the people, and the receiuing of the sacraments. At this time began the honor of the saints to increase:Summa. Conc, Bonifacius hauing obtained of Phocas the supremacie, the first thing he did, he conuerted Pantheon, the temple of all the Romane Idoll Gods, to the church of our Lady and all saints. Honorius Bishop of Rome, he repaired the churches, and by the leaue of Heraclius the Emperour,Summa Concil. Anno. Domini. 606. Conc. Antis. Ca 34.35. he tooke the tiles of brasse from the house of Romulus, and couered S. Peters church with them. And in the councell afore said, it was decreed that no iudge shoulde do any iniury to any cleargy man without asking the aduise of the Bi∣shop:
And that it was not lawfull for a priest to sit in iudgement where as a man is condemned to death.Cap. 34. And againe, it is not law∣full for a priest or Deacon, or for any of the cleargie for any cause to draw his fellow clerke before any secular iudge.  And so by little & little they exempted their cleargie, from the soueraignty & gouer∣ment of the ciuill magistrate. Of praier for the dead. PRayers for the dead, in the beginning were testimonies of loue & thanksgiuing to God for their departures, of the faith∣full, not doubting of their saluation, or that they were not in heauen with God, but in purgatory: as appeareth by Chrysos∣tome and Ambrose, which for the saintes, who were with God, re∣porte such praiers to be made. Of Constantine Chrysostome writes thus.Hom. 20. ad po∣pulum Antioch. Blessed Constantine, his image being once violated, with stones throwne at it, when as many pricked him forward to go out, and take reuenge of those, who had so disgraced him, affirming that they had stricken all his face with stones; is reported smiling to haue answered: I see neuer a wound made in my face: but my head is all sounde and my face. And after: this man built many cities, ouercame many Bar∣barians: but we remember now none of all these. But this speech is in euery mans mouth, euen to this day: and our childrens children shal heare of it. And there is none that heareth it, that can hold his peace, but he will brust out and praise him, and will pray infinit good thinges to him, euen now being deade. No man I am sure doub∣ted, but that Constantine was in heauen: and yet we sée, how he affirmeth, that all the people praied for him. And for such they prai∣ed or wished well to in those daies. And of all the faithfull nowe departed,Hom. 70 ad. Pop Antioch. condemning the mourners, which then they vsed to hire, to mourne for them, thus he writes: Why callest thou the priestes and the singers? not for this cause, that they should comfort thee, and for the honour of him that is departed. Why doest thou then disho∣nour him? as though he were not with God, as though he were in a lamentable case. And in the same Homilie. Marke what thou s∣gest,
when thou commest to that place: Turne to thy rest, O my soule, for the Lord hath done well vnto thee. And againe, I will feare no euill, because thou art with me. And againe, thou art my refuge, from the trouble that compassed mee about. Marke what these Psalmes meane. But thou markest not, and art euen as it were drunken with sorrowe. And after: Thou saiest; Turne vnto thy rest, O my soule, for the Lord hath done good vnto thee, and doest thou mourne? Is it not a plaine mockery? is it not a iest? For if thou beleeuest that to be true which thou speakest, thou lamentest in vaine. If thou dissem∣ble and counterfeit, and count all this but fables, why doest thou sing these thinges thy selfe, and sufferest others to sing the same? Why doest thou not driue the singers away? I greatly feare least by this meanes, some great euill will chance to the church. Let vs therefore hereafter amend this fault of mourning. And after he threatneth to excommunicate them, as Idolators, which shall hire any mour∣ners. And speaking of the ceremonies they vsed then about the funeralles of the dead, thus hee writeth: What meane the tor∣ches? but that wee followe them as conquerers; what the hymnes? doe we not glorifie God, and doe giue him thankes? who now hath crowned him that is dead, and hath deliuered him from his labours, and being taken out of this vncertainty doeth keepe him with him∣selfe. They vsed torches, as should séeme, to declare they were now in the true light; as we vse ringing, at the funerals of our brethren, in token of our ioie of their faithfull departures, or to comfort the sorrowfull heartes of their friendes. For in bels is a kinde of musicke, and all musicke is comfortable. This no doubt was the first vse of ringing at funerals, to comfort the liuing, and not to profit the dead. But as this first ringing: so also our cur∣fewe hath béene abused and turned to a wrong ende. Ringing of curfewe at the first was ordeined, by William Conqueror, that all men after the ringing of a bell (to auoide priuie conspiracies and assemblies against him, in the night) should couer the fire, and go to bed. And therefore the bell was called, the curfewe bell. But since, this curfewe ringing hath béene vsed, on saintes eeuens: as though it had beene ordained by the church, for the honor of them. It is wonderfull, howe sathan could turne this to a quite contra∣rie ende: and that men would not perceiue it.Ambros. oratio∣ne de obit Theodos. And Ambrose prai∣eth thus for Theodosius: Giue rest O Lord to Theodosius, the rest which thou hast prepared for thy saintes: and yet there also he saith;
Theodosius abideth in light and triumpheth in the companies of the Saintes. Thus began praiers for the dead: but soone after, they are accounted as helpes out of purgatorie: they procéede of a doub∣ting, whether the partie which is praied for, be saued or not. Of Monkes and Friers. Epist ad Diogne∣tum.OF the first christians we may read thus in Iustine the mar∣tyr: Christians (saieth hee) are not distinct from other men, neither in countrie nor speech, nor in politique or ciuill orders of their liues. For they neither dwell in cities by themselues; neither do they vse a language, which differs from the language of other men; neither haue they a kind of lyfe, which is notable, or to be wondered at, by reason of some strange thing in it: neither do they endeuour them∣selues to learne any thing, that curious men deuise. Neither do they maintaine the opinion of any man, as some do. But dwelling part∣ly in the cities of the Grecians, and partly of the Barbarians as euery mans lot befals:Indigenaerū in∣stituta sequen∣tes, in vestitu, victuque et caete∣ris quae ad vitam pertinem. following the lawes of the inhabitants, in their appa∣rell and liuing, and such like thinges which concerne lyfe. But for all this, they sette before our eyes, a wonderfull state of their common wealth. They dwell in their owne countries; but as it were strangers: They haue al things common with other men, as it were Citizens; and yet they patiently suffer all thinges, as though they were strangers. E∣uery strange region is their countrie, and euery country is as it were a strange region to them. They marry wiues, as all other men do, and beget children, but they cast not forth their children: They haue a common table, but not defiled: They are in the flesh, but they liue not after the flesh: They liue on earth; but they haue their common wealth in heauen: They obey lawes which are enacted of princes; but in the manner of their lyfe, they far exceede all lawes: They loue all men, and all men persecute them: They are not known, and yet they are condemned: They are killed, and yet they are reuiued: They are poore, & yet they make many rich: They lacke al things, & yet they abound in all things. And after: that I may comprehend all things in a word, that which the soule is in the body, christians are in the world.
The soule is dispersed through al the members of the body; and chri∣stians through all the cities in the world. The soule dwels in the bo∣dy; but it is not of the body: so christians dwell in the world, but they are not of the world. The soule which is inuisible, is placed in the bode, as in a garrison; so christians are knowen while they liue in the world, but their diuine worshipping of God, is inuisible. The flesh ha∣teth the soule, and makes warre against it, because it cannot enioy her pleasures; and the worlde hates christians, because they resist their pleasures. The soule loues the flesh which hates her, and she loues all the members: so christians loue them that hates them. The soule is included in the body, but it preserueth the body; so the christians are kept in the world as in a prison, but they preserue the world. The im∣mortall soule dwelles in a mortall tabernacle: so the christians inha∣bite those thinges which are corruptible, as strangers, looking for hea∣uenly incorruptibility. The soule, when as it fareth worse, with meat & drink is better: so christians daily also, they are punished and their number encreaseth: for God hath put them in such a place, which they may not forsake &c. So yt it should séeme,1 Cor. 7.29. in Iustine the mar∣tyrs daies, all christians were monkes; and as S. Paul teacheth them, vsed this world as though they vsed it not;1 Pet. 2.11. and were here as pil∣grimes & strangers, as also S. Peter counselleth: and not any one sort of men, as after began to be practised in the church. Neither in his daies, was there any such kind of men; differing from others in apparell and manner of liuing, as nowe our monkes and fri∣ers are. And after, when the first monkes began, we maie reade thus in Eusebius, as he cites out of Philo.Euseb. lib 2. ca. 17. First of all they forsooke all their goods, which giue themselues to this Philosophie, and they go out of cities, and liue in small gardens and fieldes: forsaking the com∣pany of vnlike liuing, or trades, knowing that these are a hinderance to those, that wil walke the hard and stiepe way of vertue. They haue in euery place an house appointed for their praier, which they call  or monasterium, which in our language signifieth an assembly of grauity or comlinesse. Into the which they going aside, they cele∣brate the mysteries of a vertuous and chast life: bringing in thither, neither meate nor drinke, but the bookes of the law and the prophets, and psalmes and such like. They spend all the whole day in study of the holy scriptures, and vnfolding the allegories of the lawes, giuen to the fathers. For they thinke those things which are written in ye letter of the law, to be formes & images, and vnder them to lie hid some se∣cret
mysterie. Abstinence (as a foundation) first they lay in their mind, and on this they go forward to build, the rest of the vertues. None of them eates any meat till the sun be set; ioyning the time of light, with their studies of philosophie: and the time of darkenesse, with the care and prouision of their bodies. And with the men whome wee haue spoken of, are women; among whome, many are olde virgins, keeping the perfection of a chast body, not through any necessitie: but through deuotion, while they desire to consecrate themselues to the study of wisdome, not onely in minde, but in body; counting it an vnworthie thing, to make a vessell prepared to containe wisdome, a bond-slaue of iust. And of their holy exercises thus hee wry∣teth: As we do especially on the day wherein the Lord suffered, when as we are content to watch all night, in praier & fasting, and to heare the word of God: so do they. One among them in a plaine tune be∣ginneth a psalme, and as he singeth one verse; all the multitude  sweateth another, &c. Here we may see the originall of the rt monkes and Nuns: They forsooke the company of the world, that they might more earnestlie studie the scriptures: they kept ta∣tie, not for necessitie; but for deuotion. In those daies there was us vow. And lastlie, they vnderstood the psalmes they song.  vnlike these in all points to our Monkes and Nuns? Lib. 3. T. 2. haeres. 86.Epiphanius telleth of certaine heretiks called Massilian, and they were like our friers, which forsooke all that they had, and liued by begging, and did not labour, and he saith they tooke occasion of the their sect, of certaine of our brethren, which knewe not the meane of christian conuersation, which biddes vs forsake the world. But the scripture (saith he) saith; he that laboureth not, should not eat. And these abuse that place of scripture, Labour for that meate which peri∣sheth not: but endureth to euerlasting life. Here we maie sée; the root of begging frieris, & idle monkerie, springing in Epiphnius daies. But Epiphanius affirmeth, that in all the monasteries  Egypt, and in all other places, they all laboured for righteousnes, as the Bée doth, in their handes hauing the waxe of their wors, and in their mouthes, drops of honie; that is, the praises of God, and (as he expoundes it after) the declaration of all the scripture. And they labour (saith he) least they should stand in need, and so be glad to flattermen. And after he proueth that all the saintes  laboured: Moses, Iacob, Paul. And he addeth, That many priests of God, following the Apostle Paul, haue found out some are, agree∣ing
to their ecclesiasticall function, by the which, with the preaching of the worde, they might liue themselues, besides the oblation and first fruites: and also through christian charitie, might impart some∣what to others. Although they are not compelled to this, nor ap∣pointed to it: but that they haue to liue on the labours of their prea∣ching, and they are sustained according to the doctrine of righteous∣nesse: but yet they doe this themselues, of a most franke and free will. This place sheweth of what kinde all the monasteries were in his daies, what were the monkes: studentes of the scriptures, prai∣ers of God, and labourers with their own hands, least they should become flatterers of men, for their liuing. Secondly, that many thinges were done then voluntarily, and not of necessitie: as that manie pastors laboured for their liuings with their owne hands, And manie also were virgines voluntarily: For so it maie bee gathered, out of another place of the same Epiphanius.Lib. 3. To 2. compend. fidei. Whatsoe∣uer (saith he) naturally the heathen obserued & kept, the same things are obserued in the church: partly by precept and commandement, partly by the taking vp or embracing of a most ready will, euen now God himselfe reioycing, at the force of his doctrine. And first of all, the corner stone (as I may saie) the foundation in it, is virginity, which i practised and exercised of many, and highly commended. After this followeth the solitary life, of both sorts; both men and women, liuing solitary. So that virginitie in his daies was voluntarie: and also the solitarie life, which he before had spoken of.Exod. 25.2. There was is owe laide vpon the backe of anie. God will haue all the iewels and ornaments brought to beautifie & adorne his tabernacle, come voluntarily: as in the lawe, so in the gospell,As appeares, Psal. 110.3. Act. 5.4. 2. Cor. 8.12. whether it be the pur∣ple, or read scarlet of martyrdome, or the blewe silke of humility, or the fine linnen of virginitie, or the rough goates haire of absti∣nence or fasting. And these voluntarie offerings were vsed in the fathers daies. Afterward sathan the deprauer of all thinges, addeth vowes to these, addeth merits, addeth necessitie:2. Iohn 8. to make Christians as S. Iohn saith, to loose these excellent workes. Of such kinde of monkes, Chrysostome writeth:Hom. 59. ad Pop. Ant. Shal we walke beloued (saith he) to the citty of vertue, to the tentes of the saintes? meane the woods and mountaines? there we shall see the highnes of humility: for men, who before were excellent in honours, or aboun∣ding in riches, now punish themselues. These in all thinges nowe, as it were with letters, write humility in their garments, houses, ser∣uices.
To be cloathed finely, to build stately, to haue many to wait on them (which are as it were the very touchwood of pride, and doe drawe men to it against their willes) among these, are quite ba∣nished. These kindle the fire themselues, these cleaue wood, these plaie the cookes themselues, and waite vpon strangers. And a little after: what man elles thou, that these haue one coat, and diet or a∣ble; when as they haue all one heart, not in substance onely (for all men haue so) but in charity? Such humble, such painfull, such lear∣ned, such voluntarie monkes; were the first monkes: Our state∣lie, idle, ignorant, and forced and vowed monkes; crept craftilie in after.Bed. lib 2. eccles. hist. cap. 2. And se forme were the monkes, which Chrysostome praiseth. Of such monkes we reade here in England, in the Mo∣nasterie of Bangor, wherein there was said to be such a number of monkes (as Bede reporteth in Gregories time) before the Pope had obtained his supremacie of Phocas: that when the monastery was deuided by gouernors into seauen pages, no part had lesse then 300. men vnder it, which all laied of the bou of their hands. And that these monks in time,Aug in lib. de o∣per. Monac. c. 2. began to degenerat, we may plainlie learne out of S. Augustin: who writ a booke, of purpose against such monks as in his daies would not labour, as the former monkes did. And in the ende thereof he complaineth thus: O seruants of God, O sol∣diers of Christ! we ye ignorant of the sleightes of your crafty enemy? who going about by all meanes, with his filthy sauours to obserue your good name, that sweete sauour of Christ, that godly soules may not say: we will runne after the sweete sauour of thy garmentes, and so may escape his snares: he hath dispersed so many hypocrites  the habit of monks in euery place, wandring vp and down coun neuer sent, neuer standing, neuer abiding any where. Some make va shewes of the members ofSi tamen mar∣tyrum. Martyres, some make large the hemanes and philacteries of their garments, some say that they heare saye that their parentes, or kinssolke liued in such a country, and that they go to see them. They all begge, they all demaund either the mainte∣nance of their gainful pouerty, or the price of their counterfeit holines, &c. And haue not Friers of late done thus? What hath beene so gainfull, as their pouertie? What hath béene so common? as to aske money or wages, for their counterfeit holinesse? This co∣tous superstition sprouted in Augustines daies, as maie séeme, but at last had spread it selfe ouer the whole world.
Of Marriage and single life. THe single life also, in the beginning was not inioyned mi∣nisters. For S. Paul saith,Heb. 13 4. marriage is honourable amongst all men: as in the law, so in the gospell; euen amongst priests and ministers. And he makes it a marke or token of chusing a bishoppe: If he haue gouerned his owne house well.1. Ti. 3.4. 1. Cor. 7.25. And in ano∣ther place hee saieth: Of virgines I haue no commandement of the Lord; no nor of virginitie; no not to priestes, and ministers: but he leaueth that free, but he wisheth that all were as himselfe. And of ministers and priestes, and of the chastitie that manie of them vsed in the primitiue church, Eusebius writes thus:Euseb. de de∣monst. euang. lib. 1. ca. 89. There is one ide of life (saith he) exceeding the common course of the life of man, not caring for wife and children, or riches, and wholy addicted to the seruice of God, for the loue of heauenly thinges: and these exe∣cute the priestes office. And after speaking of the priestes, he saith: It becommeth them, which haue consecrated themselues to Gods seruice, to abstaine from the society of a wife. Here is chastitie, for the loue of heauen, according to our sauiours saying:Mat. 19.12. He that can take it, let him take it. Here is a decencie; not a necessitie: Here is a zeale, not a vowe. And these were the causes that made so manie liue in chastitie in those daies. And of this voluntarie cha∣stitie and liuing solitarie, thus wee reade of Augustine himselfe:Possidanius in vita Aug. being nowe baptized of Ambrose, and being turned to God, from the inward bowels of his heart, he forsooke all the hope he had in the world; seeking not nowe a wife, nor sonnes, after the flesh, nor riches not honours of this world; but he determined to serue God, with all his; studying to bee in that, and of that little flocke, whome the Lord speakes vnto saying, Feare not little flocke, it hath pleased your father to giue you a kingdome. Sell that you haue, and giue almes, and make you bagges, that shall neuer waxe olde, and treasure ne∣uer sayling in heauen, &c. And after: And then, being aboue thirty yeares olde, his mother being aliue onely, called Monica, and liuing with him; reioyced more of his purpose taken vpon him of seruing God, then of children after the flesh. Here we maie sée a holy pur∣pose, of not marrying, of seruing God, of forsaking the worlde:
not anie vowe. Following herein the steppes of saint Paul, who thus writes to Timothy:2. Tim. 3. v. 10. Thou hast fully knowen my doctrine, ma∣ner of liuing, purpose, faith, long suffering, loue, patience, &c. Here is the Anatomie of S. Paules whole life, put downe (as may séeme:) But here is no vowe at all mentioned, but a purpose of contein∣ning the riches, pleasures, & vanities of the world; which purpose S. Augustine here followed. And of this purpose of single life, S. Paul also writeth, concerning parents in marrying their dagh∣ters:1. Cor. 7.37. He that (saith he) hath determined in his heart, hang no ne∣cessity: but hath power ouer his owne will, and hath decreed this  his heart, that he will keepe his virgine: and not giue her to marriage, doth well. Here the father, knowing his daughters strength, may fully purpose in his mind, not to giue his daughter in marriage, but to keepe her a virgine: here is no vowe, but a purpose of the father. So may, no doubt, euerie man, weying his own strength, purpose in his heart to liue vnmarried, if he will, without anie vowe. And of this holie purpose we read after in Possidonius, of S. Augustines kinsfolkes, who were no priestes, thus: Neither dealt he with his kinsfolkes, either placed in this purpose, or without it, in his life time, after the manner of the common people. To whome whilest he was aliue, he bestowed that in almes (if neede were) which he bestowed on others, but not to make them rich, but that they should either not want, or lesse want. He did not enrich his kins∣folkes, neither in his life, nor at his death: but if they stood in need, he reléeued them, that they should lesse néede. And some of these also were in this holie purpose, as should séeme, voluntarilie fol∣lowing his counsell and steppes, and some were not. And S. Au∣gustine himselfe, counting it a degrée of perfection in Christiani∣tie, not to seeke after the riches of the worlde, thus writes of this his purpose:Epist. 89. I which writ these thinges, haue loued that perfection, of the which the Lord spake to the young man; Go and sell all that thou hast. And I haue not done this by my owne strength: but by his grace. And how farre I haue gone forward, in the way of this per∣fection, I know more my selfe, then any other: but God more then I. And to this purpose, with all my might, I exhort others; and in the name of the Lord, I haue companions, to whom this is persuaded by my ministery: so that especially▪ wholsome doctrine may bee kept; neither that we should iudge those with vaine contumacie, which do not these thinges. This was a voluntarie purpose of Augustine,
and no vow. Arnobius of this purpose also writes thus:In psal. 113. The hum∣ble stand also in the purpose of holinesse; who that they may please the Lorde in the lande of the liuing, they perseuere, standing in the land of the dying. In Psal. 113. and in Psalm. 118. The iust Lord much safeth not, forced sacrifices. Of single life, Epiphanius thus writes against Montanus, We lay the necessitie thereof on no man:Haeres. 46. lt with good counsell, we admonish, exhorting him which is able. Neither doe we lay a necessity vpon him, that is not able, neither doe we reiect such a one, from life. For the holy word hath taught all, that we should beare the infirmities of the weake. Of king Ethelbert, we reade thus in Beda:Beda eccl. Hist. lib. 1. ca. 5. There began many daily to flow together, to heare the word of God, and forsaking gen∣me, by beleeuing, to associate themselues to the church of Christ:  whose faith and conuersion, the king is said to haue reioyced. And although he compelled none to Christianity; yet for all that, they that beleeued, now he embraced with more entire delight, as fellow ci∣tizens of the kingdome of heauen. For he had learned, of the doctors and authors of his saluation, that the seruice of Christ ought to be vo∣luntary, and not by compulsion. Although marriage in the begin∣ning was thus left frée: yet by little and little, single life crept in∣to the church. Thus we reade in an Epistle,Euseb lib. 4. ca. 23. Dionysius Bishop of Christh wrote to Pintus a Bishoppe concerning this matter. He eth him, & beseecheth him, that he would not put grieuous bur∣thes on the disciples neckes, neither that he would enioine his bre∣thren the necessity of forced chastity, by which, the infirmity of a great many should be in great danger. Here is plainlie Dionysius inde, that this is a yoke, and that it is not to be put on the bre∣threns neckes, and that it is dangerous. So that then, this sin∣gle life, this vowe of chastitie, which now all priests must take vp∣on them, was not then in force. He being a Bishoppe knewe it not, Pintus answering him thus: That he would embrace the sen∣tence of better counsell, and that he would send him letters hereafter, of stronger meat, not necessary for all, but fit for some, who can com∣prehend it. Thus by degrées this single life crept in, Dionysius is of one minde (as concerning it) and Pintus of another. In the councell of Nice also, they would haue decreed, that the priestes and deacons should not companie with their wiues, which they had married before consecration. But Paphnutius,Hist. Trip. lib. 2. cap. 13. who was vn∣nted himselfe (through deuotion, not for anie vowe, no doubt,
as were those former Monks;) yet he defendeth mariage. Sathan by him repelled at yt time: yet no doubt after attempted the mat∣ter againe, and preuailed. He was busie to bring the mater to passe, as we may read in histories. Contra. Iou. lib. 1. cap. 13.Ierom saieth, as though at this day also, many priestes haue not wiues. In Ieromes daies, as maie séeme, who extolled virginitie wonderfullie: yet the matter had not gone so farre, as to banish priests in all places from their wiues. Ignatius of the mariage of ministers writes thus:Epist. 6. ad. Philadelph. I find not fault with other saints, which were coupled in mariage, whom I haue now made mention of. For wish my selfe worthy in the Lord, to bee founde at their feete in h kingdome; as Abraham, Isaake, and Iacob; as Esay, and the other prophets; as Peter and Paul, and the other Apostles, who were m∣ed, who had wiues, not for carnal pleasure: but for to raise vp ye posteri∣tie. Marke here the mariages of the saintes, and also the ende  their mariages, euen to raise vp children to serue the Lord. And Chrysostome writes the like:De verb. Esaiae, vidi Dominum. Tom. 1. Hom. 4. Yea (saieth he,) had the prophet a sonne? then he had a wife: That thou maiest vnderstand, that mari∣age is not euill; but fornication. But manie times when wee reason with the people, saying, why liue you not well? why do you no ex∣cellent good works? How can I, say they, vnlesse I should depart  my wife, vnlesse I should bid my children farewell, vnlesse I  not follow my busines. And why? doeth thy mariage binder th Thy wife was giuen thee as a helper, and not as a hinderer. Had not the prophet a wife? Mariage hindered not the spirit of grace: but hee liued together with his wife, and yet neuerthelesse was a prophet. Had not Moses a wife? and yet he brake the rocke, and changed the aire, and talked with God, and restrained Gods anger. And what? was Peter that foundation of the church, that earnest louer of Christ, that vnlearned man in speech, and yet a conquerer of Rhetoricians, that simple soule, that stopped the mouthes of philosophers, who disper∣sed the wisdome of the Greekes like copwebbes, who went ouer the whole world, whoHe alludeth to ye draught of their nettes: which Christ bad Peter make, and the rest. Ioh. 21. v. 6 cast his net into the sea, & caught ye whole world what saith the gospell? Iesus went in into Peters mother in lawe, who was sicke of a feuer: Where was a mother in lawe, there was a wife, there was a mariage. What also, had not Philip foure daughters (as we read in the Acts) where were foure daughters, there was a wife, there was mariage. What name I these Christ was borne of a virg but he came to a mariage, and brought a gift with him, &c. He
we may note, that Chrysostome affirmes, that mariage hindereth not the spirit of prophesie. One maie be maried, and be a prophet, maie talke with God, euen as Moses did; that mariage hinders not godlinesse or virtuous liuing: and that, in the Apostolique Church many were maried. And in another place he writes thus. I will therefore shew to you, that neither riches hinder, nor pouertie,Contra gentiles Iudaeoses haeres. nor warfare, nor traffique, nor mariage, nor children, nor seruaunts, nor workemen, nor anie such like. Christ was bidden to a mariage,Sermone de Euangelio isto, Nuptiae factae sunt. Tomo. 3. came he or came he not? It is certaine that he came. If hee came, therefore mariage is not euill. Thou canst not excuse. I saie also, that not onelie he came, but that he brought a gift with him: He turned water into wine. Do not excuse thy selfe by reason of mariage; the Lord was present at a mariage, and honored mariage: and doest thou find fault with it? & doest saie it is a hinderance to godlines? wilt thou know that it hindereth not, to haue wife and children? Had not Mo∣ses wife and children? This thy excusation, this pretence is a snare of the diuell. Chrysostom also writes thus vpon those wordes (If anie man be blamelesse:) He intendes plainely to stop the mouthes of heretiques,In Epist. ad Tit. Hom. 2. which condemne mariage, shewing that it is a thing not worthy to be blamed; yea that it is so pretious, that with it also,In Epist. ad Tim. Hom. 10. one maie be aduan∣ced to the throne of a Bishop. And againe to Timothie hee saieth not this, as establishing a lawe, that a Bishop could not be without a wife: but he appointes a meane thereof, because the Iewes might marrie againe the second time, and haue manie wiues at once. And Augustine writes thus: And that in this place,Quaest. 127. ve∣teriset noui tes∣tam. wee may saie some∣thing of the Apostles, which concernes the force of the matter, surelie S. Iohn was a keeper of chastitie; but his fellow disciple S. Peter, is knowne to haue had a wife, and the begetting of sons hindered not the merit in thePrimatū huius inter apostolos. first place of this Apostle. He sheweth that one that is married, if in other thinges he kéepe the commandementes, he ought and may be made a priest.Euseb. Eccl. hist. lib. 3. cap. 30. Epipha. haer. 30. reports that Peter had a wife and chil∣dren. Eusebius also out of Clemens cites, that Peter and Philip had wiues, and gaue their daughters al∣so in a mariage: yea and Paul thought not much in one of his Epistles, to make mention, or a saluation of his yoke fellow which he there∣fore affirmeth he carried not about with him, that he might be more readie to preach the gospell. And because (saith Eusebius) I haue here made mētion of Clemens: it shal not be amisse to bring forth another excellēt sentence of his, which in his seauenth book he hath set down.
They say (saith he) that Peter when as he sawe his wife lead to suffer martyrdome, did reioice, because of her election,Ac regressinis ad propriam do∣mum. and of her retur∣ning to her owne house, (meaning heauen as I suppose) and to haue cried vnto her as she was lead, and calling her by her name, to haue said vnto her: O wife remember the Lord. Such were the maria∣ges of the saintes, such was the perfect loue of the blessed. By this historie also we maie plainlie sée, that the Apostles did not cast a∣way the care of their wiues & children, though they were Apostles; but that they gaue their daughters to mariage: And that Paul also was maried; wherein Clemens agreeth with Ignatius; & that Euse∣bius calleth this a saying worthie of all memorie, that Peter spake to his wife. Here is also the cause put downe why they did not carrie them about with them: that they might bee more ready to preach the gospell. The same reason we may read in Martials E∣pistle,Epist. 2. ad To∣losanos. A noble man was conuerted to the faith by Martials prea∣ching, and for the sweetnesse of the reward to come, heDeuitauerat. refused the knot of carnall mariage, that he might serue God more freely. Nei∣ther do wee therefore forbid mariage (saieth Martiall) when as this mariage is honest, and lawfull, and graunted of God, from the be∣ginning of the world, for the multiplication of mankind. Insomuch also my master and Lord Iesus Christ allowed the lawfull and chast bed of wedlocke, to those that will marrie in the holinesse and honor of chastifie, that being bidden to certaine mariages, hee sanctified them, with the presence of his maiestie, and made them glad or me∣ry, with a most wondrous and strange miracle, &c. But after, spea∣king of widowhood and virginitie, hee addes this: But beyonde these degrees, lawfully granted to man, he both placed widowhood, in a greater reward, and he hath shewed the third excellent steppe of virginity, being perfect, and like to the worthinesse of Angels, to the which the Lord hath inuited vs, saying, All men are not able to com∣prehend this word; but he that can comprehend it, let him compre∣hend it. As in pretious stones, there are degrees of excellencies; yea and almost in all thinges, so in vertues; so in states of life: But our sauiour bindes none to anie. He sets virginitie in the highest place, as a price, and saith, that he that can get it, let him get it. And to get this price or best game manie of the ministers stroue for, in the primitiue Church, as Prudentius notes in his verses, verie finelis.
DIxerat haec: & laet a libidinis interfectae Morte pudicitia,Prudentius in psicho machia. gladium Iordanis in vndis Abluit infectum, sanies cuirore rubenti Haeserat, & nitidum maculârat vulnere ferrum. Expiat ergo aciem, fluuiali docta lauacro Ʋictricem victrix, abolens baptismate labem Hostilis iuguli, nec iam contenta piatum Condere vagina gladium; ne sorde latenti Occupet ablutum rubigo scabra nitorem; Catholico in templo, diuini fontis ad aram Consecrat, aeterna splendens vbi luce coruscet. The same in English. THus of her speech she made an ende, reioycing at the heart, That cruell death inflaming lust had wounded with her dart. Her sword bedewed with matter vile, and sprinckled all with bloud: With cristall water she doth wash, and cleanse in Iordanes floud. Thus she her conquering sword doth purge in water bright and cleare: Washing the spottes in baptisme, which on her sprinckled were. But yet her minde is not content, her sworde in sheath to hide: Though bloud not any other spot, vpon it can be spide. But least that it should afterwardes take rust, as swordes are woont: She consecrates it to the church, and hanges it by the foont. Where it may shine for euermore, like morning starre so bright: And where it may be kept as cleare, as Phoebus in his might.
Here we maie note out of these verses, that chastifie wsheth her sword, wherewith she hath killed lust, in the waters of Ior∣daine, that is, in the waters of baptisme: because all virgines stande in néede of the grace of God,Rom 3 v. 19. & 11. v. 32. and God hath stopped the mouthes of all, euen of virgines, that hee may haue mercie of all. Then, that she placeth this her sword, in the church of Christ, neare vnto the Altar; she puts it not vp into the sheathe, least it should rust: and there it shineth gloriouslie, because of all other sortes of men, the ministers of God especiallie, should vse it, in subduing lust & carnall concupiscence. This séemeth to be Prudentius ∣ning. And to Prudentius in some respect concerning virgins im∣perfections,Iust. Apol. 2. agreeth Iustine the Martyr, who writes thus: As in mans lawes (saith he) he that contractes a double marriage is guilty so by our masters doctrine, they, which looke after a woman to desire her, are sinners. And Augustine also affirmeth, that there is no man whom the lawe of concupiscence makes not guilty. Euseb. lib. 8. eccl. Hist. ca. 10.But to returne againe to the marriage of ministers: Eusebius writes thus of a Bishoppe and Martyr, called Phileas, that was married: This troupe of souldiers (saieth he) a famous captaine did leade: this flocke, a notable sheepheard adorned, by name Phileas: who was Bishop of a citie called Thmuis, &c. And when as he had many noble men his kinsfolke and cousines in that citie, he was often brought before the gouernour, and that he would yeelde to his ad∣monitions, hauing so many and great kinsfolkes intreating for him: he was persuaded that he would haue respect of his wife, and to take consideration of his children, and not to persist in his former obsti∣nacy: but hee, as though water should slide ouer an vnmoueable stone, did refuse their bablings, did lift vp his minde to heauen, had God in his eies, accounted the holy martyres and Apostles his kins∣folkes, &c. By this historie it is euident, that bishops were ma∣ried, and that their mariages were not then infamous; séeing they had honorable kinsfolkes. That age, as should seeme, giuing honour to ministers and to their children, as king Salomon did in the olde lawe to the priestes and vnto their children, of whome in some translations we reade thus: And Azariah the sonne of Na∣than, was ouer the officers, and Zabud the sonne of Nathan a priest, was the kings friend. No doubt he was of great account with king Salomon, that was worthie to be called his friend. Of Constantine also we read thus: He had ye ministers of God, being sent for, in great
honour euer. And he shewed all curtesie to them: men simple both in countenance and in apparell; yet for another consideration they were his companions; not as his seruants. Whither soeuer he went, he caused them to go with him, supposing that hee then was at his right hand, whome they serued: Euseb. de vita Const. lib. 1.Contra. Iov. Lib. 1. ca. 13. The priestes among the Grecians, haue euer had their wiues. The Pope himselfe confesseth in hisLi. 3 Decret. de clr. &c. coniu∣gatis. Tit. 3. c. 6. decretals, That the east church neuer admitted the vowe of chastitie: and that in inferiour orders, they may marry; and in the higher orders, that they may continue in the mariage, which was already made. And the Glosse saith, that in the west church also, some thinke that the priestes are not bound to sin∣gle life by their vow: but by the institution or ordinance of the church. So that this single life of the ministers, was not anie apostolical or generall decree, which the Gréeke church neuer heard of, in the beginning of the faith, as should séeme; nor euer receiued. Nei∣ther was it a diuine ordinance: but a humane constitution, or∣dained by the Church. In Ethiopia in the countrie of Preterianes who is a christian, the priests haue wiues at this daie also,Lib. 18. Hist. as Pau∣lus Iouius reporteth, although they maie not marrie the seconde time. But Matheus Dresserus, writing of the church of Ethiopia,Dresserus Epist. in orbis descrip∣tione à Neandr aedita. saieth thus: Marriage is no lesse lawfull to the cleargie and priestes, then to their other citizens: yet so, as the first wife being dead, it is not lawfull to marry another, without the Patriarkes dispensation. So that if he do dispense with them, they maie marrie the second time also. In England when the faith was here first planted, the priestes and cleargie men had wiues,Lib. 6. Angelicae, Histor. as appeareth by Polidor Vir∣gil, who writes thus of Edgar. He chose to be of his counsell lear∣ned, holy and godly men, and he made such Bishoppes ouer Christes people. Amongst whom he loued especially (next after Dunstan) Ethelwood & Oswald. The king gaue so much credit to the learning & holines of these three, wherof they made great shewes (as monks know how to do such a like thing very cunninglie sometime) that partly, he being moued with their request, and partly being moued, because he sawe that the chiefe priestes kept their wiues, contrary to that, the fathers had a little before decreed: that hee intreated with many requests, Iohn the fifteene Bishop of Rome, that for good cau∣ses, which the Monkes had found out would be for their commodity, that he would grant, that it might be lawfull for them, by his autho∣ritie: to expell out of the Colledges of Worcester and Winchester,
those priests, which they called secular Canons, and to bring to their places his Monkes, which he obtained. Here we maie plainlie sée, that the priestes here in England had wiues, and that they had Colledges at Worcester, and at Winchester. And that by a de∣crée of the church a little before, it was decreed, that they shoulde haue no wiues. But the ende of this historie, makes the matter more plaine: The priestes, being thus expelled by the Monkes, de∣termined to pleade their cause, why they should bee expelled. The matter is brought before the iudges, who when they heard the mat∣ter at Winchester, in a parlour of the Monkes, in a great assembly; and that the greater part had decreed, that the priestes were to be re∣stored to their former honours againe: Beholde sodainly this voice was heard: (They thinke not well which fauour the priests:) as though the lawe made more for the Monkes, which had violently taken away other mens goods, then for the priests, which demanded their owne. But because the Image of Christ, which stood before them, seemed to giue the voice, they all gaue credit to the Oracle: so that the priests were ouercome, and the tumult was ceased. And so the Monkes, by Gods helpe or by mans rather (for euen then there were some, that thought it was the Oracle of Sathan rather then of God; and that it was vttered by mans pollicy, and not by Gods power) kept as wel as might be, the thinges they had gotten. So by this forged Oracle, the priestes in England lost both their goods and their wiues. In Ireland also the Bishops and priests had wiues, in the beginning of the church. For thus we reade of Celsus Armachanus an Arch∣bishop of Ireland: And Celsus had wife and children, euen being a Bishop, as it was the custome among the Irish men, till that age. For they had beene Bishops by succession of inheritance fifteene genera∣tions, with spirituall supremacie of that countrey, and eight of them had beene very well learned. Neither suffered they any to be Bishops in their Diocesse, but of that family and kindred. This affirmeth, besides S. Barnard in the life of Malachias; Vincentius, Antonius, and Petrus de Venetiis. Although mariage in the beginning was thus lest frée in all countries: yet by little and little we may sée, howe this single life crept into the church. Of the priestes also in Germanie,Lib. 5. pag. 574. Auentinus writes thus: About the yeare of our Lorde 1071. the priestes of Germanie in that age had wiues, like other christians, and begat children: as in the deedes of the giftes of landes which they made to churches, religious men and Monkes; I finde
where they, with their husbandes are put as witnesses, and are called by a commendable name, presbyteresses. In the councell Gagren∣fis it was decreed thus:Ca. 4. He that shall make a difference of a priest that hath a wife, that he ought not when he ministreth, be partaker of the oblation: let him be accursed. Some thought (as it should séeme) that the sacraments ministred by them, who were maried, were not so holie, as they were, which were ministred by them who were vnmaried: whom this councell condemneth. By little and little, thus mariage was stll shotte at: and at length, quite bani∣shed from the ministers of the west church. Concerning which,In Instit. Catho∣lica de Anti∣christo. Lorichius a learned papist, writeth thus: We confesse that it was an error, that lawfull wiues were forbidden to the Cleargie, and that they haue made the degree of spiritual affinity, an impediment of ma∣riage. But these errors may be excused (saith he,) because they, who made these lawes, were deceiued by the shewe of vertue. He doeth confesse that it is an error: belike he had tried that,Eras. in resp. ad natalem Bedam. Pa. 58. which Erasmus writeth: The world (saith Eraimus) is full of priestes, which keepe Concubines. There is a Bishop in Germanie, who tolde at a feast, that in one yere there were presented to him eleuen thousand priests, which only kept Concubines. For such, euery yeare, pay some thing to the Bishop. Oh horrible report! This monster, their single life, by little & little springing in the church, hath brought forth. Were it not better that these might haue had wiues? But it shoulde séeme, the Popes and Bishoppes couetousnesse would not per∣mitte it. There is nothing at this day, causeth the mariages of ministers to be so found fault withall, as the excesse of manie of their wiues. And here I coulde wish that all the ministers of God woulde marke what our sauiour saieth concerning ministers.Mat. 5. v. 13. They are the salt of the earth: If the salt haue lost his sauour, wherewith shal it be seasoned? it is thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out, and trodden vnder foote of men. A fearefull sentence. And whereas they are salt, they must season their owne families first. And this no doubt respected S. Paul, whereas he puts downe this as a chiefe vertue in a minister. One that can rule his owne house wel,1. Ti. 3. v. 4. hauing his children vnder obedience, with all decencie or comelinesse. For if he cannot rule his owne house: how shall hee take care of the house of God? Where we may note, that it is the part of a minister, as well to gouerne in the church, as to teach. Wouldest thou (being
a minister) not be despised then, or troden vnder foote of men? be salt in thine owne house first, and then after in the church of God: flatter no man in his sinnes. The lacke of this seasoning, makes manie ministers so contemptible in the world, as they are. They are the light of the world,Vers. 16. let them take héede what they doo; their doings are soone espied and quicklie practised. They are as a cittie builded on a hill,Vers. 14. which cannot be hid. All men marke what they doo, and are readie to carpe at it: therefore they must haue special care, what examples they giue. Our sauiour saieth, hee that shall offend one of the little ones,Mat. 18. v. 6. that beleeue in mee, it were better for him that a milstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were cast into the sea.Vers 7. And againe, Wo to the world because of offen∣ces. Offences bring all calamities, all miseries vpon the world. It is not also without cause, that S. Paul so preciselie speakes of the manners of ministers wiues, by themselues, not comprehending them in the common doctrine of other women:2 Tim. 3.11. . whose first vertue, that he requires in them, is comelinesse, decencie, and sobernesse: which also he requireth in their children. And that the conuersati∣on of women is no light matter to further or hinder the gospell, let vs marke what S. Peter writeth: Let wiues bee subiect to their husbands,1 Pet. 3. v. 1. that euen they which obey not the word, may without the word, be won by the conuersation of the wiues. See how the Apostle séemes to giue more force to the good conuersation of women; then to the word of God. And if the conuersation of all wiues haue this force, to win to the faith: then especially, the conuersation of the ministers wiues. And as they may helpe to win to the faith, by their good conuersation: so if they hinder by their euill conuer∣sation, let vs marke what followeth. God saieth thus to Dauid, because thou hast caused the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme,1 Sam. 12. v. 14 the child shal surely dy. To giue cause to Gods enimies to blaspheme, and speake euill of his name and word, is a gréeuous sinne; it kil∣led Dauids child: and euen so no doubt, it shall not spare our wiues and children, if through them, we giue any occasion for Gods eni∣mies to blaspheme his name.1. Sam. 2. The example of Elie plainelie proues the same. His children were sinners, and wicked: like the sons of Belial.Vers. 23. And he rebuked them with wordes: but like a tender harted father, he suffered them. And by their meanes, the sacrifice of the Lord was abhorted.Vers. 17. And therefore the Lord threatened Elie, that he would cut off his arme,Vers. 31. and the arme of his fathers house, and
that he should see his enemies in the house of the Lord, that his sonnes Ophnie and Phinees should die both in one day:Vers. 36. And that hee that was left in his house should be glad to beg, euen for a piece of bread. And do we thinke, if we follow these steps, wee shall escape these plagues? Oh therefore let all Gods seruantes and ministers haue a speciall care of their wiues & families; that they may stop the monthes of the aduersaries: whose excesse is a great scandall, is an offence. Some of them are not humble,Luk. 1.48 like Mary the mo∣ther of Christ: but proude like Mary Magdeline, who no doubt delighted in her haire,Luk 7.38 beauty and costly ointments before her con∣uersion; who being conuerted, now prostrated all at the feete of Iesus. They wil not take paines to visit and serue their inferiors,Luk. 1.40 as Mary did, but neglect and despise them.Epist. ad Tit. cap. 3. vae. 5 Genes. 34.1. Exod. 4.26 1 Tim. 2.9. They are not house∣kéepers, as S. Paul commandes them: but like Dinah desire to sée & to be séene. They are not like Sarah obeying their husbands: but rather like Ziphorah, the wife of Moses, who contemned the doc∣trine of her husband: They are not arraied in comely apparell, with shamefastnesse, and modesty, (which they teach out of S. Paul) but with broidered haire, or gold, or pearles, or costly apparel, which at∣tire becommeth not women which professe the feare of God. They forget that good lesson their husbandes teach out of Saint Peter, Whose apparelling let it not be outwarde, with broidered haire and gold put about, or in putting on of apparel: But let the hid man of the heart bee vncorrupt, with a meeke and quiet spirit, which is before God a thing much set by. Their apparell must bee costlie:Hest. 2. v. 13.15 or else it wil not please them. They are not like Hester, that refused those odors and perfumes which the other maidens required: but rather like Iesabell, painting and starching their faces, and their ruffes, and trimming their heades. To conclude, they are not like the kinges daughter, who was all glorious within,Psal. 45.14. but like to those proude daughters of Ierusalem, of whom Esay speakes in his third chap∣ter, with their lawnes, round tyres, and such like vanities, which as in all women: so especially in ministers wiues,Esa. 3.18 threaten desola∣tion and destruction to our countrey, death to our Valiantes,Vers. 25.26 as E∣say there plainely witnesseth. And doe we not feare Gods worde? There shal not passe one lot, or tittle of it vnfulfilled. These womēs pride and vanitie brought ruine and desolation to Ierusalem: And shall England escape, vnlesse it repent? Gregorie Nazianzen vpon the funerals of his father, who was
a Bishoppe, writes thus: It is hard to say (saith he) who was more happie in mariage then hee. For I thinke, if any man of the whole world would desire to haue a good wife, he could not finde a better and more conuenient, then hee had. For the excellencies of all ver∣tues, of all men and women, in these two mette together: so that, that mariage was not so much a coupling together of bodies, as of ver∣tues. For although they excelled others; yet betweene themselues, in the equality of their vertues, they could not one go beyonde ano∣ther. Surely shee that was giuen to Adam, that shee might be a hel∣per to him, seeing that it was not good that man should be alone, for an helper became an enemy, and was not a bedfellowe, but an ad∣uersarie, stealing awaie her husband through pleasure, and through the signe of knowledge, banishing him from the tree of life: but to my father, she was not onely giuen an helper (for that was lesse to be wondred at) but shee was a guide to him, which by her selfe did drawe him to euerie excellent verue, both by her wordes and workes. Bishoppes and ministers were maried in those daies, as plaine∣lie appeareth by this narration. I would to God all Bishoppes and ministers wiues, were like this woman: it would cause their marriages not to bee so euill spoken of, and their children (for which nowe they are so carefull) without all doubt worke prosper a great deale the better: euen as Gregorie Nazianzenus did, who grewe to that excellen∣cie, that for his knowledge he was called the Diuine.
Of Fasting and abstinence. FAsting and abstinence from meats in ye beginning was vsed as a meanes to tame the flesh, (as ye Apostle saith.) Concer∣ning which Cyrill puts down his opinion, & the opinion of the catholique church in his daies, thus, most euidently:In Leu. lib. 10. How (saith he) after you haue knowne the truth, are you turned againe to the weake and beggerly elements of this world, which as from the beginning, ye will obserue againe? You obserue daies and monethes and times, and yeares. See how by his Prophet Esay, the Lord refused this kind of fasting: and saith, I haue not chosen this fast, saith the Lord, for a day that a man should humble his soule. Thou if thou wilt fast, and humble thy soule, according to Iesus Christ; the time of the whole yeare is open vnto thee: yea haue thou the daies of thy whole life, to humble thy soule in, if so be that, thou hast learned of our Lorde and sauiour, which is meeke and lowly of heart. Thou therefore if thou wilt fast, fast according to the commandement of the gospel, obserue in thy fasting, the lawes of the gospell. In which after this manner our Sauiour commandes, concerning fasting: But thou when thou fastest, annoint thy head, and wash thy face. If thou aske how thou shalt wash thy face: Paul the Apostle teacheth, how thou maiest be∣holde the glory of the Lord, his face being reueiled vnto thee, being fashioned againe according to the same Image, from glorie to glory, as though by the spirit of the Lord. Annoint thine head: but beware least with the oile of sinne. Let not the oile of sinne make thy head fat: but annoint thy head, with the oile of ioyfulnesse, with the oile of mirth, with the oile of mercie. So that according to the comman∣dement of the wise man, mercy and truth depart not from thee. So that, when we fast, to wash our face, by Cyrilles iudgment, is to meditate in the scriptures, by which we are reformed againe, to the glorious Image of God. O happie meditation and reading! which reneweth in thy soule, by little and little, the Image of God, which thou hadst lost by Adams fall: Euen as they which walke in the sunne, their bodilie faces are by little and little sunne burnt; so they, which vse reading of the scriptures, ye faces of their soules, by little and little, are sunne burned and tanned with the glorie of the Image of God. Againe, to annoint thy head with oile, is
to fast ioifullie,To giue almes is to annoint our head when we fast. and not against thy will; and to giue almes, is the oile of mercy, when thou fastest. And after: Wilt thou that I shal shewe thee how thou shalt fast? fast from all sinne, eate no meate of malice, eate none of the dainties of pleasure, bee not inflamed with the wine of ryot, fast from euill workes, absteine from euill speeches, bridle thy selfe from naughty thoughts, touch not the stolne bread of frowarde doctrine, long not for the deceiptfull meates of the Philoso∣phers, which may seduce thee from trueth. Such a fasting pleaseth God. But to abstaine from meates, which God hath created to bee receiued of the faithfull, with thanksgiuing, and to do this with them that crucified Christ, cannot bee acceptable to God. The Pharisies sometime disdained against the Lord because his disciples fasted not. To whom hee answered, because the children of the bridegroome cannot fast, as long as the bridegroome is with them. They therefore fast, that haue lost their bridegroom: we which haue the bridegroom with vs cannot fast. Neither notwithstanding doe wee say this, that we should loose the bridle of christian abstinence: For we haue the daies of Lent consecrated to fasting, we haue the fourth and sixt day of the weeke, in which we fast solemnly. There is a liberty granted to a christian, to fast at all times, not for the superstition of keeping the fast: but for the vertue of abstinence. For how else could chasti∣ty vncorrupt be kept among them? vnlesse she were vnderpropped with the pinching staies and props of continency. How shall they ap∣ply themselues to the scriptures? How shal they employ themselues to wisdom and knowledge, but by bridling the belly & abstinence? How shall one geld himselfe for the kingdome of heauen? vnlesse he cut off abundance of meates, vnlesse hee vse abstinency, as a seruant. This therefore is the maner of christian fasting. Heere wee may see plainelie, that those daies of fasting were obserued in Cyrils age, which our church vseth, and the same endes of fasting: that is, not for superstition, as though there were any holinesse in meates, but for continencie and chastitie, to tame the bodie, to bee more apt to study the scriptures: These were the endes for which christi∣ans fasted. But there is also (saith he) another kinde of religious fa∣sting, whose praise is set forth in the writings of some of the Apostles. For we find written in a certaine booke of the Apostles: Blessed is hee that fasteth, that he may sustaine the poore. This mans fast is verie ac∣ceptable to the Lord. And indeed worthely enough; for he imitates him that gaue his life for his brethren, &c. The which kinde of fast
also our gracious prince hath commanded of late, and our church hath practised. The same ende of fasting we may reade in those which they call the Apostles Canons, If any Bishop, priest,Can. 50 or Deacon shal abstain from mariage, flesh, or wine, not for this cause, that his mind should be made more fit to serue God, but because they are abhominable, &c. let him be thrust out of the church: as also any lay man. Heere is first the cause of abstinence, to tame the flesh: and of single life, to make the minde more apt to serue God. But both these since haue béene accompted steps to heauen, meanes of saluati∣on: And mariage in a minister; as also meates eaten at times, not by the pope prescribed, is abhominable. Ferus of this supersti∣tion of meates writes thus: So many amongst vs,In Ioh. ca. 18 pa. 487. 488. trusting to the ordinances of man, hereof do promise righteousnesse to themselues: in the meane time, nothing regarding the commandements of God. Against such the 23. chap of Matth. is of no lesse force, then it was in times past against the hypocrites, among the Iewes; who woulde not haue thought but that that people had beene holy, and to haue had a iust cause against Christ, which with such care & religion, kept the constitutions of the fathers? If they would not break the commā∣dement of a godly man: how much lesse are they to bee thought to breake the lawe of God? Here wee may see hypocrisie. But Christ taught vs another righteousnesse, when hee saide: O father, sanctifie them in thy truth. That is that true sanctification, when the father himselfe possesseth our heartes, and reneweth and lighteneth them, with the true knowledge of Christ, with faith and remission of sinnes. This holinesse flesh acknowledgeth not: but imagineth a certaine carnall holinesse, whereby it abstaineth from certaine meates, and meetings, and familiarity of certaine men. And surelie this was the superstition and counterfeit holinesse in poperie. Their Imber daies, foure times by the yeare,Pontacus Bur∣degal. in chrono an. Dom. 214. were first ordai∣ned by Calixtus, who at those times decréed yt orders shold be giuē to ministers, and that the people thorow the whole church (as it should seem) should pray & fast thē, that God would send good pastors into his church. But in those Imbers, now they neuer thinke on this. The Rogation wéeke was first ordained, because there was a great earthquake at Vienna, and Wolues and wilde beastes came in and slew men. And therefore they fasted and praied. Or as some o∣ther thinke, because all things then are springing, they pray God that
he would blesse the fruits of the earth, and crowne the earth with his goodnes. But their latter Rogations, were a matter of state ra∣ther then humilitie: euerie one kéeping his order, and follow∣ing the crosse. And here somtimes a surmised contempt of one go∣ing before another (as I haue heard) hath bred more malice that weeke,Exod. 17.10 Ios. 7.6 These beads be¦gan an. Dom. 1090. a new deuise. Polidor Virgil de inuent. rr. then a whole yeere after could salue againe. Their beades Peter the Ermit, a French man, inuented (as it shoulde séeme) to teach that we shoulde continue in praier. For so no doubt Moses continued in praier all the while Iosuah fought against Amalecke. And Iosuah himself, when as God was angry with Israell for Achans offence, rent his clothes, and fell vpon his face to the earth, euen till the eeuen-tide, before the Arke of the Lorde, continuing in prayer: and Elias praied seauen times,1. King. 18.44 Mat 26.38 before he obtained raine, and our Sa∣uiour saide the same praier thrice. As no doubt all these continued begging of God still the same thing chiefelie, as also the importu∣nate widow in the gospell, had but one suite to the Iudge, which she continued: so to continue in praier, or often to say the same prai∣er, is no sinne. But they haue taught of late that the saying or repeating ouer onely,Ex opere operato. of so manie aues, so manie pater nosters, and so many creedes, not vnderstoode (of the worke done as they saie) do obtaine remission of their sinnes. What shall I speake of all their abuses? Ferus also concerning their abuses, saieth thus: How many thinges haue the saintes ordained of a good intent,In Iud. ca. 18 Pal. 426. which we now see to bee turned partly into abuse, partly into superstition: let holidaies, ceremonies, Images, masse, monasteries, bee an exam∣ple. So that by Ferus iudgement, euen the principall partes of their religion are nothing else but abuses and superstition. There∣fore wee may saie of this Romish Babilon, of this daughter of Babilon (as Dauid saieth),Psal. 137.9, Blessed is hee that taketh thy young in∣fants, that is those things which the fathers in simplicitie suffered, (which in déed were the infants of poperie) and dasheth thē against the stones, that is, against the great rocke Iesus Christ. Oh would to God our catholiques at this day would do so: these yong imp and infants (as it were of poperie) in the church concerning cere∣monies, which the fathers then suffered, nowe beguiles manie: And thus craftelie poperie came in; and by little & little, al their su∣perstitions grew. They which haue eies to see, may see now, what vgly monsters they are grown vnto. They are so monstrous and so great, that many of them, euen their own fathers, and faous
do detest and abhorre: as you maie here sée. Wherfore let all other christians forsake them. Turning the grace of God into wantonnesse.Text.]  in the Gréeke, taketh his name of a citie called Salga (as some thinke) wherein all were vertuous and good, and therefore by a depriuati∣on, it signifieth all incontinencie, and the vnrulie affections of the minde, when as (like a wanton Heifer) it is not kept within the boundes of reason: and also, a merrie iest or fact. Such wan∣tonnesse, our flesh delighteth in; such fleshlie and carnall mirth, mans nature onelie loueth. But this wanton mirth, this carnall ioie, Gods worde condemnes.Ier. 9.23. Let not the wise man glory in his wisedome, nor the strong man glory in his strength, neither the rich man glory in his riches (saith the Prophet) much lesse in these vani∣ties: But let him that glorieth, glory in this, that hee vnderstandeth, and knoweth me (saith the Lord.) And S. Paul saith) Christ is made to vs of God, wisedome, righteousnes, sanctification, and redemp∣tion, that as it is written, he that reioiceth, let him reioice in the Lord.1. Cor. 1.30. So that here is the true ioie of christians, to remember that they haue such an excellent treasure, and gift giuen them of God; to remember these their spirituall riches of their soules; to remem∣ber these benefits of Iesus Christ. And therefore S. Paul saith of∣ten, reioyce in the Lord, that is in Iesus Christ,Phil. 4.4. who of God is gi∣uen to thee, with all his goods, with all his merites, with all that he hath. And againe, I say reioice. This is the true grace of God, this is euerie true christians ioy. But these counterfeite Catho∣liques, haue turned this grace of God into wantonnesse. For in Poperie, few knewe what Iesus Christ had done for them. Ma∣nie for lacke of knowledge of the scriptures, vnderstood not that Christ was made ours: and therfore could not reioice in the Lord. What was the sum almost of all their religion? but wantonnesse. For this reioicing and mirth in the Lord, they had other kinds of mirth and disports: but they were all wantonnesse. They had in those daies mirth enough, but fleshly, wanton, and carnall mirth. What shall wee accompte (to beginne first euen with their best things,) of their senselesse songs without all vnderstanding, of their curious deskants, of their sweete censing, of their costly or∣naments, of their statelie processions, where euerie man must keepe his place? What were all these? but plaine wantonnesse. All these were pleasant to the flesh; but nothing profitable to the
soule, nor delectable to the maiestie of God; Whose worshippe is not now, in such outward things (as our sauiour tolde the woman of Samariah,Io. 4.23.) but in spirit, that is, wish the hearte of man, and in truth, that is, not with any more Iewish ceremonies or shadows: then the which, the Popes religion was almost nothing else. The swéete perfume of frankinsence, the pleasant voice of man, the braue shewe of copes embrodered, delighteth man: but the ma∣iestie of God regardeth no such thing. Nay (our sauiour saieth) that which is highly esteemed amongst men,Luke 16.15. is an abomination be∣fore God. He respected more the plaine and simple mantle, with the faithfull and pure heart of Elias, then all the priestes of Baal, with their costlie vestementes and ornaments. But to let these passe, what were their pilgrimages, their guilde feastes, their feasts dedicated to euerie saint, who bare the name of any church, their feastes of euery arte and occupation once by the yeare, their bonefices, their maypoles, their bookes of fables, (in reading whereof they spent most of their time,) their dauncing, what were all these? but wantonnesse and fleshlie delights. And here note that the Apostle S. Iude saith, that these counterfeit christians shall not embrace wantonnesse onelie, or be giuen to it: but shall turne the grace of God into wantonnesse. They shall account these the chiefe pointes of religion: they shall make these their chiefe ser∣uice of God: as though they worshipped God by these thinges. This is to turne the grace of God into wantonnesse: and did not they so? It is too manifest. And here by the way, this is a speciall note, for euerie true ca∣tholique, that would not bee deceiued, to marke: not to looke on their religion,Reu. 6.8. as nowe they haue cloked it, and refined it: (They haue turned the black horse, in the reuelation, to a pale horse: they haue nowe for euerie grosse error, gotten a fine cloake, and for e∣uery abuse, some couering, & for euery superstition, some salue:) but to looke on it, as it hath béene vsed heretofore, in the daies of their forefathers. Let them not aske the Iesuites what is the popish saith, but let them aske those, which nowe yet liuing, can of their owne knowledge tell them: and then they shall plainly sée the na∣kednesse, the abominations, and superstition, and the blindnesse of it. And surely the lacke of this one thing, I am persuaded, se∣duceth verie manie at this daie. They embrace poperie, and euen marry themselues to her, in the attire and furniture, she now com¦meth
into the world: But they neuer remēber, nor consider, how deformed, how blind, how vaine, how wanton she hath béen. But is their wantonnes, these guildes, these drinkings, these their feasts, those vaine books, this masse or huge chaos of ceremonies, and against the word of God. S. Paul also prophesieth of this wāton religion. Preach thou the word (saith he) to Timothy.2. Ti. 4.2. For the time will come, when they will not abide that doctrine of health, that is, the word of God: but according to their owne lustes shall heape vp to themselues teachers: And shall turne their cares from the truth, and shall be giuen to fables. This heape of teachers, maie signifie the ackes and great multitude of their Friers, which they heaped to themselues, as their onelie teachers: to whome Christ in his gos∣pell, gaue neuer anie commission or authoritie to teach or preach to his flocke; but onely to pastors. And the truth is the word of God: as Dauid saith: Thy lawe is the trueth:Psal. 119.1. and these fables noe doubt, were their legendes, their Beuis of Hampton, their Valen∣tine and Vrson, and such like bookes, which they greatly delighted to reade in. And this is a marke of Antichristes religion, a plaine marke, and an onely marke. For thus we reade in S. Paul of An∣tichristes disciples:2. Thes. 2. v. 10.11. that sathan beguiled them in all manner of de∣ceiueablenesse of vnrighteousnes, because they receiued not the loue of the truth, that they might be saued. And therfore God sent them strong illusions, that they might beleeue lies; That all they might be damned, which beleeued not the truth, but had pleasure in vnrighte∣ousnesse. Let all men here beware, they which loue not the truth, that is, Gods word: but haue pleasure in fables, and lies; To those God shal send strong illusions, they shall be deceiued; naie they shal be dāned. Let all men beware how they loue not Gods word, how they delight in fables and tales, the danger is great. But marke what followeth, which is the onely cognisance or badge of all true christians: But we ought alwaies to giue thāks to God for you (saith the Apostle,) because that God from the beginning hath chosen you to saluation, through the sanctification of the spirit, and the faith of the truth. All Gods children beleeue the truth, and by it are saued, and therefore knowe it. Dauid saith,Psal. 1.2. The man is blessed that hath his delight in the lawe of God, and therein meditates day and night: Then he is accursed that delighteth in tales. And againe in an other psalme.Psal. 4.2. O ye sonnes of men (saith he) how long will ye haue such pleasure in vanity, and seeke after leasing? S. Peter also teacheth
all christians,1. Pet. 4. v. 2. that it is sufficient, that we haue spent the time past of our life, after the lustes of the Gentiles, walking in wantonesse, lusts, drunkennesse, glutony, drinkings, and such abominable idolatries: wherein it seemeth a strange thing to the heathen, that the christians will not keepe them company still; and therefore they speake euill of vs. But they shall giue account to him, that is ready to iudge both quicke and dead. Of these their often, vsuall, and excessiue f¦stings, and drinkings; which they account as nothing, which the heathen in their religion vsed, and nowe sathan hath brought a∣gaine into the church of Christ: this is Peters iudgment. Ban∣queting is accounted of S. Paul a worke of the flesh.Gal. 5.21. 1. Cor. 10.7. Exod. 32.6. The Idola∣ters after their worshippe of their calfe in Exodus, sate downe to eate and drinke, and rose vp to plaie. See if in poperie, they were not like these. So in Daniell, king Nabuchadnezars religion was all musicke,D. 3.5. & pleasant to the senses; marke if papists religion were not like this. And what is it then, but wantonnesse? which  S. Paul so often accounts among the workes of the flesh. Their vaine bookes also, which they delighted in, and which in séede of Gods booke (which sathan had hidde,2. King. 22.8. as in the daies of Io∣sias,) he had put in their handes, to finde them occupied withall, doe not these places of scriptures condemne? Our sauiour that tel∣leth the Iewes,Io. 8.44. yeare of your father the diuell, and the lustes and plea∣sure of your father ye will doe. He hath beene a murtherer from the beginning, and aboade not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaketh a lie, then speaketh he of his owne. For he is a liar, and the farther thereof. Here are two plaine markes, and badges of Sathans children: to delight in bloud, and in lies: hee was a murtherer, and a liar, from the beginning: and his chil∣dren followe his steppes. Why then lies, whatsoeuer, (either ly∣ing bookes or tales) are the impes and brode of sathan. And shall christians nourish them in their bosomes? And to likewise S. Paul teacheth all christians, howe they should walke and spende thou liues,Ephes. 5.2. Walke (saith he) in loue as Christ hath loued vs, and hath gi∣uen himselfe for vs to be an offering, and sacrifice of a sweete smel∣ling sauour to God. But fornication, and all vncleannesse or cour∣tousnesse, let it not bee once named among you, (as it becommeth saintes) neither filthinesse, nor foolish talking, neither iesting, which are things not comely: but rather giuing of thankes. If these things be not comelie for christians soules: that disorder, what vncom∣linesse,
that horrour was in their former times, in the soules of a great manie? when as nothing was vsed almost but these. And our sauiour saith, That of euery idle word,Mat. 12.30. we shall giue account at the day of iudgment: Howe then shall their idle and vaine bookes be iustified?In Praefat. Retract. Which of his faithfull seruants (saith S. Augustine) hath not Christ terrified, by this saying? It was one reason, that made him make his booke of Retractations. The Apostle S. Paul coun∣selleth all christians,Col. 3.16. that the word of God should dwell plenteous∣ly and richly in their houses: but they being affraide to entertaine that guest, which he commendeth vnto them, least they should take anie harme thereby, least it should make them heretiques (for so they haue saide) haue entertained the words of sathan, vaine and lying bookes; & so in stéede of Christ sathan hath dwelt with them: as their night walking spirits doe plainly prooue and testifie. Of Ceremonies. COncerning ceremonies,Acts 15.28. the Apostles would lay no more on the disciples necks, then necessary things. And S. Paul writes to the Galathians: Stand therefore in the liberty,Gal. 5.1. wherewith Christ hath made you free; and be not againe wrapped in the yoke of bondage. And what this bondage is, he declareth:4. Cap. 4.3. when we were children, we were brought in bondage, vnder the elementes of the world, that is, we serued God with manie ceremonies, and with earthlie thinges: which after he calles beggarly,Vers. 9. in respect of those pretious iewels of the heart, faith, loue, and knowledge, and such like: wherewith now we serue God. But the papistes haue taken wie this libertie, which Christ hath giuen vs: and haue multi∣plied in the church, the number of the Iewish ceremonies. They haue not laide vpon the disciples neckes, onely thinges necessary (as the Apostles did) but infinit thinges vnnecessarie; they haue turned from the right seruing of God, with knowledge, faith, and obedience to his worde. (which iewels they haue quite stolne away from Gods people & lost themselues also:) & haue returned againe to the beggarlie elements of the world, in seruing God, by offe∣ring
of egges, candles, and such like. The worshippe of Christians excelles the Iewes worship in two thinges: First because that, that is according to carnall ceremonies onelie in meates and drinkes,Heb. 9. and righteousnes according to the flesh: but the worship of christians, is according to the spirit. Secondlie, the worship of the Iewes was by shadowes: but the worship of Christians is in truth, & by it selfe pleaseth God. Thesauri noui sermones quadra∣gesimales, a popish booke so called, confesseth thus much. Prudentius also thus verie excellentlie pictures out christian faith, and idolatrie. In psychothae∣chia. Fidei & idololae∣iae Pugna.PRima petit campum dubia sub sorte duelli Pugnatura fides, agrestiturbida cultus, Nuda humeros, intonsa comas, exerta lacertos: Nam{que} repentinus laudis calor ad noua feruens Praelia, nec telis meminit, nec tegmine cingi; Pectore sed fidens valido, membris{que} retectis Prouocat insani frangenda pericula belli. Eccelacessentem collatis viribus audet, Prima ferire fidem veterum cultura Deorum. Illa hostile caput, phalerata{que} tempora vittis Altior insurgens labefactas, & oracruore De pecudum satiata, solo applicat, & pede calcat Elisos in mortom oculos, animan{que} malignam Fracta intercepti commercia gutturis arctat, Difficilem{que} obitum, suspiria longa fatigant. The same in English. VIctorious faith doth enter first. into the bloudie field; And like a valiant champion she will not flie nor yeeld. And though the'uent of cruell warre be subiect vnto doubt, Yet she doth come into the fielde
with courage bold and stout. She cloathed is, with vile attire, not pleasant to the eie, Her shoulders naked are, her haire doth out of orderlie. Her tender armes vnarmed are, They stand in steede of shield Her naked body to defend, not weapons for to weelde. For hope of praise doth so enflame and so enrage her heart, That she forgets to arme her selfe with buckler or with dart. But being of a courage bolde, not fearing perils any, With naked brest, she dare attempt to challenge dangers many. Behold the heathenish worshipping doth come with maine and might, Against her bending all her force, to put her to the flight: But faith amounting to the skies, doth wound her crested head, Her face she dashes on the ground and mouth with bloud beraide, Her eies she putteth out, her winde she stoppeth and her breath. Thus Gentilisme, wanting winde: doth see no way but death, In the reuelation, the name of that great whore of Babylon,Reu. 17. v. 5. the church of Antichrist; the mother of spirituall fornication of the ole earth: hath a mystery written in her forehead, because that all her religion should bee nothing; but mysteries, ceremonies, types, and shadowes. And was not the papistes so? All thinges that euer they vsed in their seruice were almost mysteries: Their apes, censors, ashes, paxes, albes, stoles, crosses, cruets, and chers, as their booke called [Rationale diuinorum] doth detiare.Rationale diui∣norum. And this name is written in her forehead, that all men maie read
and knowe it. And yet will they not knowe this whore? who rea∣deth not this name in her forehead? who séeth not, that popish re∣ligion was nothing else, but mysteries, ceremonies, types, and shadowes? Why then it must néeds follow, that the popish church is that great whore of Babylon, whereof S. Iohn speaketh. The name of a thing, alwaies declareth the thing it selfe. If it cannot be denied, but that this name is in her forehead, then no doubt this is she indéede. And this mysterie, these ceremonies, of that wickednesse (as it may be well expounded) began euen in S. Pauls time, and in the daies of the fathers. They began euen then to de∣part from the simplicitie of the gospell, & to put this yoake againe on the disciples neckes.Col. 2. v 8. Some went about to make christians shoote at a wrong marke, they brought in worshipping of Angels, they had euen then voluntary religion, in pinching their bodies too much, which thinges had a shewe of worldly wisedome. These speeches be∣gan to be in vse againe: Touch not, tast not, handle not, whereas by Iesus Christ, we were made free: we might touch and tast al things. And therefore (he saith) they holde not the head, that is Iesus Christ, and his doctrine, by whom all the body being knit together, by iois and bandes, groweth the growth of God. They growe and en∣crease: but not the growth or encrease of God: They growe not in the knowledge of our Lord Iesus (as Peter saieth:) they aske not counsell of their head,Euseb. lib. 3. eccl. Hist. cap. 37. in these thinges. Eusebius reporteth out of Egesippus, that as long as the Apostles liued, & the hearers of Christ himselfe, so long ye church continued a virgine: but after their deaths, this adulterer had wooed her and wonne her from Christ.Erasmus notes, that there hath been patching in the fathers workes also: Praefat. epist. 58. Aug. And doe we thinke she is a virgine still? The verie workes of Plinie and Seneca, being prophane writers, and the fathers workes; howe hath Sathan that olde deceiuer, the father of ignorance and blind∣nesse; obscured and darkened, and depraued? And do we thinke, that he hath not touched the work of God, his religion, his church? Yea no doubt especiallie he malignes that. In Apol.Bernard writing against the superfluous ornamentes of chur∣ches saies thus: I let passe the great staelinesse of churches, their immoderat lengths, their vaine breadths, their sumptuous polishings, their curious paintings, which while they do draw the sight of thē that pray, vnto them, they hinder their affection, and they seeme to me to resemble the olde custome of the Iewes. Marke howe Bernards saith, that those thinges, which nowe a daies the Popes defend
saie, were ordained to help deuotion; as guilded images & costlie ornaments, Bernard: saith, they hinder it: & that they tast rather of Iudaisme then Christianisme. He in those thick clouds of papisti∣ll ignorance, sawe thus much: and manie nowe in the cleare light of the gospell, will hardly acknowledge the same. And to his agrées Ierom in his Epistle to Nepotian: concerning the life and conuersation of the cleargie. Iewrie had a rich temple,Ierom. Part. 3. Epist. Tract. 3. Epist. 7. and all thinges then made of golde. Then those thinges were allowed of the de. Of the Popes supremacie. DEnying the onely maister of his house and our Lorde Iesus Christ.] And here first concerning the word ,Text. Saint Peter vseth it for the master of a familie:1. Pet. 2. v. 18. Seruants (saith he) be subiect , to your masters, with all feare. And S. Paul also speaking of seruants, saith thus: Let as many seruants as in vnder the yoke, account , their own masters worthy of all honour. And againe, they which haue , faithfull masters, let them not despise them.2. Tim. 2.21. And in another place, comparing the Church of God to a house, and some of the members thereof, to vessels sealed, hauing Gods marke vppon em; and some other therein, to vessels vnsealed, filthie and wic∣ked: If (saieth he) one shall cleanse himselfe from these wicked ones, he shall be a vessell of honor sanctified, , to the master or land of the house. All those places prooue plainly and sufficientlie, at in the scripture this word  is taken for the master of the house. Then the wordes lie thus in the Gréeke and common translation.Although this word God, in the common translation & in some greeke copies, is not read. [Denying the onely master of his house God and our Lord Iesus Christ.] And S. Peter in his Epistle ioineth this word  to Iesus Christ most plainly, and not to God: Denying (saith he) their master or ruler that bought them Iesus Christ. So that   signifieth a master of a house, or a ruler or gouer∣nour. And S. Peter saith, that this master is Iesus Christ. And S. Iude th, that it is he alone. Therefore then, to denie Iesus Christ to be the onelie master, the onelie ruler or gouernour: is a plaine  of false catholique religion.
2. Pet. 2.1And of the same heretickes S. Peter speaketh, to confirme the certaintie of them, that there shall be such in déed: that as  Sauiour saith,Mat. 18.16 in the mouth of two or three witnesses, euery worde might stand. And first he taketh away that great stumbling loc out of the waie, which causeth verie many to fall, that the vissible church cannot erre: yes (saieth Peter) there were false prophets in the law,2. Pet. 2.1 euen as also amongst you shall be false teachers. And these false prophets in the lawe, bare the shewe, they caried the counte∣nance of the church.1. King 22.24 Iere. 38.6 Amos. 7.13 Poore Ieremy, and Amos, and Micah were no body amongst them: Ieremy was cast into the dungeon, Amos was discharged the kinges chappell; Micah was stricken on the face. And euen such false doctors shall bee in the church of Christ. Therefore let euerie one take heede. The deuill shall haue these his mightie Goliahs, as well in Christs Church, as in the sina∣gogue:2. Pet. 2.1 Therefore let not the outwarde shewe, or name of the church beguile vs, as it did many in those daies. And they shal bring in craftly and subtilly heresies of perdition, that is, they shall be soldiours of that great Goliah and champion, the sonne of per∣tion: whom S. Paul speakes of, whose captaine and chiefe heade is antichrist himself.2. Thes. 2.11 Whom as Paul there describeth: so S. Peter  S. Iude here describeth his members. Now their heresies follow, they shall denie their master, (where is the same worde that S. Iude vseth) which bought them. They shall establish another master ouer the church, ouer Gods house, that is, the Pope. This shall be the roote, the ground worke of all their heresies; and after that, they shall denie Iesus Christ, that bought them. And hath it not beene see? For after the supremacie was once established, howe hath Idolatrous worshipping of images, selling of pardons, and masses, and merits of Monkes and Friers, and such like, com∣en into the church, who séeth not? This other principall branch hangeth of this; They shal deny their master that bought them, they shall deny Christes merits, his raunsome to be sufficient. They shall ad vnto it, mony of their own coining, that is, their own merits & works. And this is the very sum of poperie: to make men beleeue, that Christ hath not suffici∣ently paid their ransom: but yt they must buie their pardons, their masses, their merits, to deliuer their soules out of purgatorie.  not this to denie their master that bought them? If hee paide the whole ransome sufficientlie, what néede wee buie anie of these of
them? And they shal bring vpon themselues suddaine destruction.2. Pet. 2.] If men will not be perswaded that these are they, whome the Apo∣stle speaketh of, by tasting their fruites: let them marke their end, and that shall make the matter more manifest. They shall bring on themselues suddaine destruction: As one who but a little mar∣keth the histories of our time shall easelie perceiue. The Pope here in England, by dispensing against the word of God, that the brother might marry his brothers wife: In Germanie, by sending  Tetzelius with his pardons of remission of sinnes, to all that would buie them: Cardinall Wolsey with vs, by beginning first to pull down all smal religious houses, that were vnder the value of a hundreth marks, that he might build his two colleges: The monkes and friers, by one accusing another to the kinges com∣missioners, in that generall visitation, of most grieuous sinnes and crimes. All these haue pulled (as they say) the house on their ne head, and haue ouerthrowne the popes kingdome: and that odainlie, in a short time, against all mens expectation. All the rebellions and counsels which haue béene since, could neuer salue it againe. And many shall follow the way of their riot or wantonnesse.2. Pet. 2.2 This is the same which Iude prophecieth: their religion shall be carnal, worldly, wanton, and many shall imbrace it. Here let them brag of their multitude: that therefore their religion is good, because manie follow it. But this is no good argument. For wee reade here that many shall follow these false teachers; wherfore let not ye number or multitude deceiue any in matters of religion.2. Pet. 2.2 And by thē the way of truth shall be blasphemed, shal be reproched. They shame not to speake euill of the word of God, and to call vs gos∣pellers in despite, and our newe gospell preachers. Neuer here∣tickes haue written so scoffinglie, so despitefullie; as of late they haue done: As master Hardings speeches, (your deuilish spirit,Hardings rai∣ling. your solemne praier protestant-like, your minister-like talke, your minister∣ships) do declare: wherein he blasphemeth the spirit of God, where∣by wee confesse Iesus Christ faithfullie and effectuallie.1. Cor. 12.3 For (as S. Paul saith) No man can name Iesus Christ, but by the holy ghost: and whereby we make our praiers vnto God,Rom. 8.26 for no man can pray as hee oft to pray of himselfe; but the holy ghost helpeth our infirmities. And therefore he that scoffeth at our praiers, blasphemes the ho∣lie ghost, which is the authour of them. And lastlie, he blasphemes
that sacred name of minister,1. Co. 3.5 and 4. vers. 1 which the worde of God so often v∣seth; and S. Paul is not ashamed to giue to himselfe. And are not these blasphemies against the word of truth? Is not this plaine? This their owne writings testifie: and thus they doe apparantlie be wraie themselues. And through couetousnesse with faire wordes they shall make merchandize of you:2, Pet. 2.3 And haue not the Papistes done so? selling all thinges, euen their pardons, their praiers, their masses, their merits. And is not this couetousnesse? Doe not all these pointes of doctrine, these markes to know them by, hit iustly vpon them? Doth not S. Peter and S. Iude agrée in the disciphering and discouering of them? But to returne to S. Iude againe, doe not our false catholickes at this daie teach this? Doe they not saie that the pope is Christs vicar generall or vicegerent? and that he is also a necessarie head of the church? Do they not plainlie agree, with those whom Saint Jude speaketh of: Who shall deny Christ to bee their onely master, the ruler or gouernour of his house, which is the Church? So that then Iesus Christ is the onelie head of his church, the onelie ma∣ster of his familie himselfe: Hee giueth this honour to no other. And to denie this, is heresie: it is not christian religion, it is not the catholique faith. And this prerogatiue here spoken of, S. Paul giueth to Iesus Christ, in his Epistle to the Ephesians, who spea∣king of the great glorie, wherewith God hath endued him after his resurrection,Ephe. 1.22 saith: He hath put all things vnder his feet: and he hath giuē him to be ye head ouer al ye whole church, which is his body: the fulnesse of him which filleth all things, with al things. As no man may seeme to take to himself the former priuiledge, that al things are put vnder his féete; so no man may presume to take the lat∣ter, that he is the head of the whole church. Againe the metaphor, which the Apostle vseth, conuinceth the same; he calleth Christ the head, and the church his bodie: Nowe it is monstrous, that one bodie should haue two heads; wherefore in this verie point, the summe and meaning of this metaphor consisteth. Againe in his second chapter,Verse. 20 he calleth him the head corner stone, which is but one in euerie building.Verse 29 Io. 3, 29 And in his fourth chapter, the husband of his church, which also (as all men knowe) argueth, that hee is the onlie husband, and can abide no companion with him. And in his epistle to the Hebrues,Heb, 3.5. he compareth him with Moses: That as Moses was in the house of God as a seruant; so now Iesus Christ is o∣uer
the house of God as the sonne. And this taketh away,Christ is here opposed to Mo¦ses: And the greater alwaies includes the les¦ser, and som∣what more: so is Christ ouer the church at Moses was, and more. Heb. 3. v. 6 as may seeme, that vaine distinction of a ministring heade, which they make. For Moses was in Gods house but as a ministeriall heade: and euen so nowe is Iesus Christ ouer Gods house, as the onelie heade both chiefe and ministeriall. He succéedes Moses in farre greater dignitie and honour, hee is nowe all in all. And as the Apostle there putteth downe, the onlie maister and ruler of the house and church of God, euen the sonne Iesus Christ:  he setteth downe two plaine and infallible markes and conditi∣ons of Gods house, least any man should be deceiued, by setting himselfe in sathans Sodome, for Gods Bethel; as it is to be fea∣red, manie doe at this daie. Heere is that great doubt dissolued, which is the true church. If anie man would but a little heere marke, hee shoulde see two euident signes, and tokens of Gods true church and house, which are these. But Christ as the sonne is o∣uer his house: whose house wee are (saith the Apostle) if so be, wee keepe sure or firme our confidence, and the reioicing of our hope, vn∣to the ende. Here is first the heade and master of the house, Iesus Christ; 2. then the house it self (we) that is Gods people: then fol∣loweth the conditions, If wee keepe that confidence and assurance: and that reioicing of our hope, firme and sure vnto the ende. Marke well these conditions of Gods church. They which kéepe not these, are none of Gods church. The holie ghost hath put them downe for our instruction, least we should be deceiued. Because the time shall come, that manie shall saie, they are of the catholique church: If they be, here be the markes they must be knowne by. If they lacke these markes, they are no doubt, none of Gods house: but of sathans sinagogue. These are the vndoubted markes and bad∣ges which God himselfe hath giuen to his house. But you will saie, what is that confidence, and that reioicing? Surelie Saint Iohn in his first Epistle telleth vs. This (saith he) is our confidence,1. Iohn, 5.14 this is our assurance, (where the same word  here vsed, is repeated) that we haue to him, that is to Iesus Christ, that whatsoe∣uer we aske, according to his will, he heareth vs: and if we know he heareth vs, whatsoeuer wee aske, wee knowe we haue our petitions which we aske of him. Here are two points of our assurance, we knowe first, and are sure, that what praiers soeuer wee make in the name of Iesus Christ, according to his will; hee heareth vs:
and not that onelie, but 2. we are sure that he granteth our petiti∣ons.Psal. 65.2.8 6.7 This same assurance is confirmed vnto vs, by other two places of scripture. Thou that hearest the praiers, vnto thee shal al flesh come (saith Dauid.) And in an other place: In the time of my trouble I will call vpon thee, for thou hearest me. And S. Paul saith, The spirit also helpeth our infirmities.Rom. 8.16 For we know not what to pray as we ought to pray: but the spirit it selfe maketh intercession for vs, with gronings that are vnspeakeable. And hee that searcheth the hearts knoweth the meaning or wisdome of the spirit. For euen to God, according to the will of God, it maketh intercession for the saints. So that we are sure God heareth vs, and therefore al flesh commeth to him; and therefore in troubles we crie vnto him. And therefore he is called, , the searcher of the hearts, he knoweth the meaning,Acts. 1.24 the wisdome of the spirit; and none other neither angell nor saint, but hee. This assurance the popish church hath denied. They saie, Iesus Christ doth not heare vs, and there∣fore they counsel vs to make other intercessors to him. Secondlie they teach vs to doubt, whether wee haue our praiers wee aske of him or not; as when we pray for remission of our sinnes. Nay they teach to praie, but in latine: So that he that praieth, knoweth not himselfe, what he asketh; and therefore cannot be assured whether he haue his petitious or not. And is not this plainlie to denie this christian assurance, and great confidence, that euerie christian ought to haue; & so to blot out this first marke of Gods house? Se∣condlie, the reioicing of our hope is, in yt, that we shal surely be sa∣ued. This hope maketh vs reioice alwaies, euen in tribulations, euen in chaines, euen in death it selfe. This ioie our sauiour tea∣cheth vs by his Apostles. Reioice (saith he) not that diuels are sub∣iect to you;Luk. 10.21 but that your names are written in the booke of life. And S. Paul: Being iustified by faith, wee haue peace with God, by our Lorde Iesus Christ, by whom also we haue an entrance to this grace, wherein we stand,Rom. 5.1 and reioice for the hope of the glory of God. And S. Peter in his catholique epistle, to all true catholiques writeth thus: Blessed be God, and the father of our Lord Iesus Christ, who according to his abundant mercy hath begotten vs againe to a liuely hope,1. Pet. 1.3 by the resurrection of Iesus Christ from the deade, to an inheri∣tance, incorruptible, vndefiled, and that neuer fadeth away, kepte for you in heauen; which are kept by the power of God, through faith, to saluation, ready to be reuealed in the last time; wherin you reioice.
All true Catholiques will beléeue S. Peter, and will be sure, and will haue a liuelie hope of their saluation, and will blesse & praise God for it, and will reioice in it.Nehem. 8.10. And Nehemias taught all the Iewes this ioie. The ioie of the Lord (saieth he) is your strength. Oh reioice in the Lord then, if thou wilt be strong. I haue written these thinges (saith S. Iohn) to you,1. Io. 5.13. which beleeue on the name of the sonne of God, that you may knowe you haue euerlasting life, and that you may beleeue in the name of the sonne of God, He that know∣eth that he hath euerlasting life, doubteth not, as before is more at large noted on this place. And againe, here is the cause  make vs beléeue on Iesus Christ, that we maie knowe we haue euerlasting life. The knowledge, yt faith bringeth, which is of eter∣nall life, will make euery one pray for faith, labour for faith, heare the word of God diligentlie, yt he may haue faith. But the papists take this reioycing from vs, by teaching vs to doubt: for he that doubteth, whether he shall be saued or not; can neuer reioice, can neuer be merrie: and therfore they are none of Gods house. Thus euerie one maie see plainlie, how the popish Church hath lost both these markes of Gods house, and therfore their church is none of Gods church. This preheminence in the Church of God, to be the only head, ruler and gouernour thereof; all the scriptures, and all the saints of God, yeelde to Iesus Christ.1. Pet. 5.4. Peter himselfe yéeldeth it to him whome he calleth , the prince of pastors, and himselfe a fellowe elder, not a fellow Apostle. Making himselfe equall, not with the Apostles of Christ onely; but with the elders and pastors of ye congregation: and who will not beléeue a mans own words? If this be true, then the Pope, by Peters priuiledge, can haue no superioritie ouer other Bishops. And S. Paul reckoning vp the chiefe Apostles, names Iames, Cephas and Iohn,Gal. 22. whome he calleth pillers; not corner stones or heads: and he placeth Peter among the rest, not as one aboue the rest. Nay hee maketh himselfe e∣quall to him, or rather farre aboue him: For (hee saieth) that God gaue him like and equall authoritie, ouer the gentiles; as Peter had ouer the Iewes. Now the Gentiles were farre more in number, then the Iewes: And Iames, Peter and Iohn confessing this, and ac∣knowledging it, ioyned hands of fellowship with him. Here is no superioritie,Rom. 15.16. but an equalitie or fellowship acknowledged of them all. And of this his authoritie ouer the gentiles: Paul himselfe
after often maketh mention, euen to the Romans in Peters chiefe charge, as they would haue it: I haue written to you more boldly (saith he) after a sort, putting you in remembrance; for the grace gi∣uen to me of God, that I should be a minister of Iesus Christ towards the Gentiles. This his ministerie, this his office, committed to him of God, of preaching the gospell among the Gentiles, made him bolde to write to the Romaines. And to the Ephesians hee writes thus:Ephes. 3.3. For this cause, I Paul a prisoner of Iesus Christ, for you Gentiles: if ye haue heard of the dispensation or stewardship, of the grace of God giuen me to you ward.1. Ti. 2.7. And to Timothy, he calleth himselfe the Doctor or teacher of the Gentiles in faith and truth. Why then, Peter was not pastor of the vniuersall church, Paul was steward ouer the Gentiles and their chiefe pastor. And in that thréefolde commission of Christ,Io. 21.15. Feede my sheepe, feede my lambes, feede my sheepe, were not the shéepe of the whole worlde: but of the circumcision onelie committed to Peters charge, as that place before recited to the Galathians,Gal. 2. v. 7. plainlie prooueth. For when they sawe, that the gospell ouer the vncircumcision, was com∣mitted vnto me, saieth Paul: as the gospell ouer the circumcision was to Peter, they gaue to me and to Barnabas, the right handes of fellowshippe,1. Pet. 5.1. The Iewes con∣tended with Peter concer∣ning his going to the Gentils, and he yeeldes an account to them: which argues no su∣premacie. Acts. 11. v. 2. Ro. 15. v. 15. 16. Cypr. lib. 2. Epist. Epist. 10 & 11. that we should preach vnto the Gentiles, and they vn∣to the circumcision. And hereof no doubt, Peter calleth himselfe Compresbyter, making himselfe equall with the other pastors. And here, what can be more euident, for a mans owne estate and dignitie, then the testimonie of his owne mouth? and not onely that, but his re∣cord in writing to all posteritie: Euerie man will speake best of himselfe: Nay surely Peter had sinned, if he had not both fulfilled, and also challenged that authoritie, that Iesus Christ had com∣mitted to him. Gods commandements and charges maie not be omitted. Hereof also Paul writes to the Romanes more boldlie, because God gaue him that grace, that he should bee , a common pastor, among the Gentiles Paul challengeth this his authoritie, euen in the church of Rome. Hereof Cyprian calles Cornelius Bishoppe of Rome;He makes the Bishoppe of Rome fellow Bishop with other Bishops calling them a Collegas nostros. Collega, or fellowe Bishoppe. He would not so haue forgotten himselfe, to haue matched him∣selfe with the Bishop of Rome, if he had acknowledged anie such péerelesse authoritie in him, as nowe the Pope challengeth. Nay, as it were to quite crosse this succession of Peter, and to maintaine
this equalitie of the Bishoppes: manie of the fathers doe make two bishops of Rome, Peter and Paul,Epiph. haer 27. Prud. Peristo∣phanon. as Epiphanius and Pruden∣tius. So that Paul had as good authoritie as Peter there, as should séeme: Therefore Peter could not conferre the whole authoritie to his successors, which he had not himselfe. All Christes ministers here on earth, are his vicars. For hee saieth of them all, Hee that receiueth you, receiueth mee; and he that receiueth mee,Mat. 10. v. 4. recei∣ueth him that sent me. But he is the head only himselfe; as long before him prophesied Oseas:Oseas 1.11. I wil gather (saieth the Lord) the sons of Iudah and the sonnes of Israell together, and they shall appoint them one head, and they shall ascend from the earth. Here is Ie∣sus Christ, the onely head of his church: here is the vnitie of the church, and their conuersation nowe in heauen. This is Catho∣lique doctrine; they which denie this, are not true, but false catho∣liques. This all Gods saints haue confessed. This doctrine con∣tinued in the church manie yeares: as wee maie plainly sée by reading histories; whereof one notable historie,Lib. 5. eccl. Hist. cap. 24. Eusebius repor∣teth thus. When as a controuersie did arise in the primitiue church, about keeping Easter, Ʋictor Bishop of Rome (pertinaciùs agens) as Ruffinus translateth, that is dealing obstinately, and frowardly, as one that would not yeeld: did goe about to excommunicate all the Bi∣shops of the East church, because they dissented from the Romaine church. But this pleased not the Bishops, but rather writing to him againe, they commanded him, that he should go about such thinges, as concerned peace, and that he should care for peace and concord. To be short, their letters bee extant, in which they did chide Victor very sharpely, as taking small care for the profit of the church. And Irenzus with the Bishops of France, whome he was chiefe ouer, re∣prooueth Victor; that he hath done amisse, in excommunicating so many churches, which obserued the custome deliuered them, of their elders. And after he writes thus: All they, which before Soter were elders of the church, which thou now rulest, (I meane Anacletus, Pi∣us, Higinus and the rest) had peace with these churches. This histo∣rie prooueth, that Victor dealt frowardly, as one that would not yeelde to anie, that they commanded him, that they chidde him sharpelie and reprooued him: and that Irenaeus maketh the Church of Rome, a particular church, that he calleth it not the vniuersall. If this be true, where was then this péerelesse authoritie, that now is practised? that the Pope maie bee iudged of none, that none
maie saie to him,Hist. Tripartita. Lib. 5. ca. 17. why doe you so? That dialogue also, betwéen Constantine the Arian Emperour and Liberius, maie prooue the same thing: We (saith the Emperour) because thou art a christian, and the Bishoppe of our citie, haue thought it meete, that calling for thee, we should giue thee warning, to forsake the communion of wic∣ked Athanasius. For that the whole worlde hath decreed, and the Councell hath excommunicated him. And when as Liberius had replied, that the Ecclesiasticall iudgments should be executed with great iustice; and that an excommunication should be had, Atha∣nasius himselfe being called before him: The Emperour still vrgeth, the whole world hath condemned his wickednesse. And after hee saith to him: Quota pars es tu totius orbis? that is, who are you, in comparison of the whole world? or what chiefe man in the world are you? that you alone should maintaine a most wicked man, and shoul∣dest dissolue the peace of the church? Liberius answered, not be∣cause I am alone, therfore the goodnesse of his cause is the worse. For in time past, there were three only found, that resisted the kings com∣mandement. To whome Eusebius the Eunuch said: Thou hast ac∣counted our Emperour, like Nabuchadnezar. Here Liberius being charged of the Emperour, to declare his authoritie, and who hee was; to maintaine a good cause, could not alleadge for himselfe, that authoritie which nowe the Bishoppe of Rome doth challenge: he might haue said, I am the head of the church, if he had béene so ordeined of God; but hee said no such thing: and yet he was stoute enough, he feared not ye Emperor. For when as he sent him money, to beare his charges, going into exile; he said to those that brought it to him: Go and giue it to the Emperour, he needeth it to paie his souldiers. Concil. Aphri∣can. can. 102. 103.But that discourse, which is contained in the councel of Aphri∣ca, concerning the Bishoppe of Romes authoritie, makes this matter verie plaine. At that councell were present 217. Bishops, amongst whome was S. Augustine himselfe. In this councell, al∣though inSalua chari∣tate. charity, notwithstanding not without much adoe, and disputation, that point amongst other was handled; whether it was lawfull, to appeale to the sea of Rome or no; and Pope Zozimus, who was then departed this life, had sent to the councell the yeare be∣fore, a decree of the Nicen councell, to prooue that it was lawfull to appeale to the sea of Rome. The which decree or Canon, they sus∣pecting to be forged, and affirming that they could finde no such, in
all their latine copies, they write to Bonifacius his successour: First, that they trust by Gods grace, that his holinesse ruling the church of Rome, that they should not suffer this smoak of pride, and that those things should be obserued towardes them, which if they had not rea∣soned about the matter, ought to haue beene kept of brotherly cha∣ritie. And the which thinges also, according to the wisdome and iu∣stice which the highest had giuen him, hee himselfe perfectly knewe ought to be kept, if the Canons of the Nicen councel, peraduenture, were contrarie. And then, that he would ioine with them, and that they might send to the east churches, to Cyrill and the rest of the Bi∣shops there, for the true copies of the Nicen councell. The which thing they did. And when they had receiued the very originall and true copies of the Nicen councell: thus they writ to Celestinus, who succeeded Bonifacius, concerning the matter. Hauing saluted you as becommeth, we earnestly desire you,Epistol. concil. aphric. ad Celest. papā vrbis Rom. that you will not easily admit to talke with any, that shall come from vs to you; nor that you will not admit any whom wee haue excommuni∣cated: because your grauity shall finde, this also decreed in the Ni∣cen councel. For if it be there decreed, of inferiour clergie men, or laie men: how much more wil they haue it obserued of Bishops; that they which are suspended from the communion in their owne pro∣uinces, should be restored of your holinesse, either hastely or rashly, or vnlawfully. Let your holinesse also, as it becommeth you, repell the wicked appellations of priestes and cleargie men, which hereafter shall chance: because by no decree of the fathers, this is derogated from the church of Aphrica, and the canons of Nice haue committed most manifestlie, both the clergy men of the lower degrees, and also the bishops, to their Metropolitanes. They haue most wisely, and iustlie foreseene: that all matters should bee ended in those places, where they began. Neither that the grace of the holy spirit should be wanting to any prouince; by which, equity may be both wiselie per∣ceiued, and constantly maintained of all Christes priestes; especially seeing it is granted to euerie one, if hee bee grieued with the iudge∣ment of them, that shall knowe his cause, to appeale either to the councell of his owne prouince, or to a general councell: Vnlesse per∣chance there be any man that thinks, that our God may inspire to a∣ny one, the iustice of examining causes; and deny it to a great num∣ber of priestes assembled in a councell. Or howe can the iudgement beyond the sea bee good, whither the witnesses which are necessarie,
either for infirmitie of age, or kinde, or sexe, or for many other impediments which may chance, cannot bee brought? Neither doe wee finde it decreed in any councell of the fathers, that any legates should be sent from you. Because that, which you sent not long since, by our brother and fellowe Bishop Faustinus, as a part of the Nicen councell: in the truer councels, which were receiued from Nice, from holy Cyrill our fellow Bishop of the church of Alexandria, and from reuerend Attichus Bishoppe of Constantinople, being sent out of the originals, the which also before this, by Innocentius a priest, and Mar∣cellus a Subdeacon, by which they were directed from them to vs, were sent from vs to Bishop Bonifacius your predecessor of reuerende memorie, in which we could find no such thing. Therefore send not your clergie hither, as dealers in causes, toIt shuld seem to be rather, quibus{que} peten∣tibus: that is, at any mans request, as it is in a copie printed at Pa∣ris. 1565. any mighty mē, or at any mans request rather, nor grant that to them, least you seeme to bring in the smoaky pride of the worlde into the church of Christ, which sheweth to al, that would see God, the light of simplicitie and the day of humilitie. By this historie we may learne manie things. First, that the pope was not then acknowledged supream head, & that S. Augu∣stine & the whole church of Aphrica knew no such superioritie. Se∣condlie, that the holie spirit is not tied to any one man, and ther∣fore not to the Pope: but that it is present in all countries, to go∣uerne the church, to decide all controuersies, as Tertullian also witnesseth;De praescrip. hae∣ret. pag. 99. that Iesus Christ, being taken vp into heauen, doth sit at the right hand of his father, and that hee sent (vicariam vim spiritus sancti: qui credentes agat) the power of the holie ghost, as his Vicar, in his roome: which shoulde leade the faithfull. And thirdlie, that this course was then obserued in all causes: First the Metropoli∣tane dealt in the matter; if the partie grieued would not standt to his iudgement, he might secondlie appeale to a prouinciall; and lastlie to a generall councell. And that was the last refuge, there was an ende. 4. They tell the bishop of Rome, that if the Ca∣nons of the councell of Nice had béene otherwise: yet he shoulde obserue that which he knew to be true, according to that wisdome God had giuen him. 5. They séemed to appeale to his own con∣science, in the matter, that God had ordained no such authority in his worde. 6. They call the authoritie hee challenged, worldlie pompe. 7. They touch pope Zozimus, of forgerie and pride. 8. They say, Christs church sheweth to all men, the light of simplici∣tie
and humilitie, in all her doings: and so on the contrarie, that Zozimus dealt craftilie and proudlie. 9. They thought then, that the pope might erre in those daies. 10. They shewe, that neither the councel of Nice, nor anie other councell, had taken this pre∣rogatiue from the church of Aphrica, nor from anie other: but that she might end all her controuersies at home, without appealing to Rome. 11. They call the bishop of Rome brother. Here is the true copie of the councell of Nice, the testimonie of 217. bishops, the practise of the church; strong arguments and reasons, against the popes supremacie: and yet shall anie man be so wilfullie blin∣ded, that he will not sée and acknowledge all these? Here is that craft which S. Iude prophecieth of, which pope Zozimus went a∣bout to put in practise, which these godfathers espied: and shall we not beleeue them? this testimonie of so manie fathers, this not writing, but presence of Augustine; is enough to ouerthrow quite the popes supremacie. But yet to make the matter more plaine, least anie shoulde thinke perchance that all these were partiall in their owne cause: you shall heare the plaine testimonie, as concerning this matter, of Gregorie; who was bishop of Rome himselfe,Greg. lib. 4 Epist. 91. when as Iohn bi∣shop of Constantinople, because the imperiall seat was there, (as it seemed) puffed vp with pride, by that meanes tooke occasion to preferre himselfe before other bishops, and to be called vniuersall bishop: Gregory being then bishop of Rome, writeth to him after this maner: Mark I beseech thee, how in this thy rash presumption, the peace of the whole church is troubled, and thou resistest or spea∣kest against the grace, which is giuen to all equally or commonly. In which thou maiest so much grow, as thou shalt in thy selfe decrease: and thou shalt become so much great, in as much as thou shalt bridle thy selfe, from the vsing of the name of pride, and of a foolish worde: and so much thou shalt go forwarde, in as much as thou shalt not ar∣rogate to thy selfe, by derogating from thy brethren. Loue therfore (deere brother) humilitie with thy heart, by which the concorde of all bishops, the vnitie of the whole vniuersall church may bee kept. Truly the Apostle S. Paul, when he heard some say: I am of Paul, I of Apollo, I of Cephas; trembling wonderfully at this tearing in peeces of the Lordes body, by which, the members thereof do ioine themselues, as it were to other heades; cried out saying: was Paul crucified for you, or were you baptized in the name of Paul? If hee
therefore eschewed, that the members of the Lords bodie should be particularly subiect to any certaine or other heads, beside Christ; no not to the Apostles; what wilt thou answere to Christ, the head of the vniuersall church, in that strait accompt of the last iudgement, who goest about, by the name of vniuersall bishop, to put all his mem∣bers vnder thee? who is followed as an example, in this froward word? but hee, who despising the legions of angels, ioined fellow-like with him, endeuored to break vp to the top of singularitie; that he would be subiect to none, and alone woulde seeme to bee aboue all. What are all thy brethren, the bishops of the vniuersall church? but starres of heauen, whose both liues and tongues among the sinnes and errors of men, as it were in the darkenes of the night, do shine. To whom while thou doest couet, by a worde of pride to prefer thy selfe, and to tread vnder their names in comparison of them, what saiest thou else, but I will ascende vp to heauen, and I will set my throne aboue the starres? And after: Truely Peter is the first member of the holie and vniuersall church; Paul, Andrew, and Iohn; what are they, but heades of particular peoples? And yet they are all members of the church, vnder one head. Heere wee may plainlie see, by Gregories testimonies these pointes. First, that all bishops were brethren, were equals: and that by the name of vniuersall bishop, he thought, that the peace of the church was troubled; and that by this equalitie rather of bi∣shops, then by anie supremacie of anie one of them, the vnitie and peace of the church, was kept and maintained. Secondlie, that by this name, the grace of God, which was giuen to all Bi∣shops equally, was gaine saide: as though God had giuen to one Bishop, who should bee the vniuersall bishop, more grace, then to the rest. This (saith Gregorie,) is to denie the grace of God, to be giuen to all alike. This he then affirmed: and the papistes now denie. Thirdlie, that Christ is onelie the vniuersall heade of his church, and that all his members are to bee put vnder to none o∣ther, no not of the Apostles, and then not to Peter; but to him a∣lone: much lesse then to the Pope. And doth not the pope yet, now challenge this? Fourthlie, that hee is like Lucifer, that challen∣ged that superioritie, who being fellow with the angels, would be aboue them. So are all bishops as starres equall, and that no one ought to set his throne aboue the rest; who so doth, followeth Luci∣fers example. And doth not the Pope so nowe? Lastlie, that Peter
himselfe, was but the first member of the church; because he first confessed Iesus Christ openlie;As S. Paul cals him a pillar ioining him with the rest: so doth Gregory heere. and not an vniuersall head or Christes vicar, as the pope now challengeth. He was called first in order, of the Euangelistes: because when as one reckons vp manie, there must néedes be one first in order. One may do two thinges at once, as God when as he created heauen and earth, as ne noteth vpon Genesis: but one cannot speake two thinges at once; but one must be named before ye other. So was Peter named first in order, not in honor: herein they were all equall, as Cypriā also herein with Gregorie agréeth.De simplic. praelat. And to make the matter more plaine; Paul, Andrew and Iohn are heades: but particular heads; no vniuersall head, but one Iesus Christ; in respect of whome, all are members, and are vnder him. This is Gregories opinion most manifestlie. But to come nearer, our owne histories proue the same. Eleu∣therius bishop of Rome himselfe, wrote to Lucius our first christi∣an king here in Englād, that he was Gods vicar here, in this his kingdome. And that he néeded nothing but Gods word, and lawes made agréeing with the same, to gouerne his people by: whose e∣pistle to the king is yet to be séen in the records of the Guild-hall in London, as Stowe in his late chronicle reporteth.Lib. 1. eccle. hist. Gent. Ang. ca. 4. Bede also saieth, that the Brittaines receiued the faith in king Lucius daies, and kept the same inuiolable, whole & perfect, and in quiet peace, till the time of Dioclesian. Fidem inuiolatam, integramque quieta in pace seruabant: These be his wordes. But when Augustine the monke afterwarde came from Gregorie, to conuert the Saxons: the Brittaines after they had receiued the faith thus perfectlie and soundlie in king Lucius daies, almost 200. yeares,Bed. 2. lib. eccl hist. ca. 2 all this while knewe no superioritie of the Pope. But when this Augustine (I saie) came to them, to perswade them to ioine handes with him, and others that came with him, in vnitie of doctrine and ceremo∣nies, as the Bishop of Romes legates: the bishops of the Brit∣taines knew no such peremptorie authoritie (as is now taught) that vnlesse they agreed to the Romaines faith and Popes autho∣ritie, they were none of the church, they were damned. But they answered that they would aske counsell of their brethren. And after returning home, and being counselled by an holie Eremite, that gaue himselfe wholy from the worlde to prayers and meditations of the scriptures (as those good monkes and Eremites did in the beginning)
That Augustine if hee were humble and lowlie, then hee was one of Christes schollers; then they should yeelde to him: but if hee were not, then they shoulde not communicate with him. And that they should trie this his humilitie, if he being first in the place, where they should meet, when they came, if hee would rise vp to them and sa∣lute and imbrace them brotherlie. This counsell they followed, and because Augune woulde not humbly imbrace them as his bre∣thren: they vtterly refused his fellowship & cōmunion. By this histo∣rie we may learne plainlie these two things. First that the popes supremacie vnder paine of damnation, was not then acknowled∣ged in the whole church: that all the bishops and learned men of the Brittons neuer heard of it. Secondly, that popish pride then began to spring vp and bud. This Augustine woulde not rise vp to his brethren; and so by degrées, this false catholique doctrine tooke rot & sprang vp,Galfrid. Monu∣met. lib. 8 cap. 9. de gestis Britan∣norian. and not all at once. One of our own writers of this time writeth thus: In the coūtry of the Britains (saith he) al this time christianitie flourished, which from the Apostles time neuer a∣mong them decaied. But after Augustine came he founde in their countrey seuen bishoprickes and one Archbishopricke, guarded or furnished with many learned prelates and many Abbies, liuing with the labour of their owne hands; among whom the Lords flock kept good order.Euseb lib. 3. de demonst euāg. c. 6 So that it shoulde seeme by him, that Ioseph of Ara∣mathia first planted the faith in England, or some of the Apostles passing ouer the Ocean sea, as Eusebius witnesseth. By this we may plainlie see, that these Britaines had the catholique faith a∣mong them, and yet not so much as hearde of the Popes su∣premacie. The Pope a gre while after, obtained this superioritie of Phocas, that hee might be called the vniuersall bishop. And hee was chosen and elected by the Emperours: vntill Leo the ninth, who being chosen by Henry the Emperour as the former Bishoppes were,Pontacus Bur∣degal. in Chro. an. Dom. 1048 first of all refused his election; and affirmed, that the Emperor had no authoritie to chuse him: but he was chosen by his clergie, and by the people. And if this his saying were true, that the Emperor had no right to chose the bishop of Rome: then all the former bi∣shops were not lawfullie elected, and were no lawfull bishops but vsurpers. And here all men that haue any iudgement, may note a strange change or great alteration.1302. The Emperor one thousand thrée hundreth & two years, or there abouts, chose the Pope: and
now since, the Pope is chosen by his Cardinalles; and all those former Bishoppes, by the Popes sentence (who as they saie can∣not erre in iudgment) were not lawfully chosen: but were vsur∣pers, those thousand yeares. And is not this a strange thing, that so manie good bishops, before that time should be vsurpers? Se∣condly, in the beginning the Emperour chose the Pope: but now the Pope chuseth the Emperour: Is not this a great alteration? This their owne histories testifie, and yet they will grant no alte∣ration in the church: they demand of vs, when this alteration be∣gan. Thus all men maie sée, howe they haue plainelie denied the only master of his house, the onelie head of his Church, the only husband of his wife, Iesus Christ, according to Saint Iudes pro∣phesse. S. Augustine, to make the matter more plaine, and that wee maie sée, what was the first faith once giuen to the saintes:In psal. 44. thus describeth Christ and his Church, the bride, and the bridegroome. He is the king of kinges (saith he,) And they are also kinges, of whom it is said, you shal sit vpon the twelue seates, iudging the twelue tribes of Israell. They preached the word of truth, and they begat sonnes, not to themselues: but to him. To this belongeth the mysterie of the lawe: If the brother shall die, let the brother take his wife, and raise vp seede to his brother. Christ is dead, he is risen againe, he is ascen∣ded, he hath absented himselfe in his body, his brethren haue taken his wife, and by the preaching of the gospell, are about to get chil∣dren, not by themselues; but by the gospell, for the name of their bro∣ther. Therefore raising seed to their brother, those whom they begat, they named not Paulians or Petrians: but Christians. Here first Christes absence with his bodie taketh awaie their reall presence in the sacrament. Secondly, if christians maie not be called Pe∣trians or Paulians, then not Dominicans or Franciscans. The brother must beare the name: therefore all Christes séede must be called Christians. Here maie be noted, that christians tooke their name of Christ, as he was called the annointed, and not as hee was called Iesus; because all were partakers of his annointing of the holie ghost: but as he was called Iesus, in the office of his saluation, none were ioined with him: and therfore in those daies, none were called Iesuites. This name is a newe and vsurped name. And a little after: In thy honour, kinges daughters haue delighted: the daughters of kinges, the daughters of the Apostles:
but in thy honour, because they raised that seede to their brother. Yea those which he had raised to his brother, when Paul sawe them runne to his name, he cried out, was Paul crucified for you? What saith the lawe, let him that is borne, haue the name of the dead, let him be cal∣led by the name of him that is dead. This point of the law Paul kept, &c.Contrarie to that master Harding writs: The church of Rome is the vniuersall church: is the onely church of God. And after: behold Rome, behold Carthage, behold diuers other cities, they are kinges daughters: and they haue delighted their king in his honour, and of them all is made one Queene. Why then, the church of Rome (by Augustines iudgment) was not then accoun∣ted the catholique church. She was but a member of the church. She, with the rest of her sisters, made that one Quéene, that one catholique church, that one spouse of Iesus. And after he descri∣beth the garments of this Quéene; And what (saith he) be the gar∣ments of this Queene? It is pretious, it is diuers: The mysteries or sa∣craments of the doctrine,Saint Austen here makes the Aphrican tongue no barbarous tongue. in all, in diuers toongs. There is ye Aphrican toong, the Syrian toong, the Greeke toong, the Heb. toong, and diuers other toonges. These toongs make the diuersitie of the garments of this Queene. But as all the diuersitie of the garments, agreeth in one: so all these toongs are to one faith: In this garment there is diuersitie: there is no rent: there is no diuision. So that the scriptures were then, in all languages. And this was the garment of diuers co∣lours most glorious, which the church then ware: but since that time, the Pope hath changed her coate: she goeth nowe in a coate of one colour, all must be in latine, in his kingdome. This gar∣ment of diuers colours, he cannot abide. In Augustines daies the came clothed in a garment of diuers colours, but in vnitie of wis∣dome. It was the same golde, the same wisedome, in all these tongues, as he there saith. And as he describeth the husband, the person, the vesture of this Quéene: so he describeth her beautie also. The king (saith he) hath greatly desired this beautie. What beautie? but that, which he made. He hath desired thy beautie, what beautie? of a sinner, of one that is vniust among her owne people? No, but that whereof it is said, who is this that ascendes, being made white? Before therfore, she was not white: but afterward she was made white. And a little after: Thou art married to God the king; being endowed of him, being beautifi∣ed of him, being redeemed of him, being healed of him. What soeuer thou hast, by which thou pleasest him, thou hast it of him. Thus Au∣gustine also condemnes their frée will. We haue no goodnesse, not
a droppe of our selues; no beautie, not a sparke: but from him. And after he describes the state of the Church. The daughters of Tyre, shall be there with their giftes. The king commeth (saieth he) and he will haue giftes. But what giftes, almes, &c. And also he de∣scribes her gouernours. For fathers (saith he) thou shalt haue sonnes. The Apostles haue begotten thee: but can they be alwaies in body present? No, one of them said, I desire to be loosed, and to bee with Christ, Therfore by their departure, is the church forsaken? God forbid. For fathers, thou hast sonnes borne to thee. And what is that? The fathers are gone, that is, the Apostles: and for the fathers, sonnes are borne to thee, Bishops are constituted. So that in the Apostles place, Bishops succéeded, and they gouerne the church throughout all the world. And this is the catholique church, (saith Augustine) sons borne to the church, whome she shall make princes ouer all the world: that is, Bishoppes gouerning the church throughout all the world: This is the Catholique Church, saith he. Chrysostome also teacheth vs the same faith of the Greeke church, concerning this matter, in his daies.Hom. 20. ad Popul. Ant. Speaking of the Emperours loue towardes the citie of Antioche, hee saith thus: Haue I not euer preferred this citie before all others, and accounted it more deere then my countrey? If Rome had béene the catholique church, the Emperour had béene too blame, to haue preferred An∣tioche before it. And of the Emperour himselfe, after in the same Homilie, thus hee writes: Oh howe great is the power of Chri∣stianity: the man (meaning the Emperour) vppon earth, hauing none equall vppon earth vnto him, hath bridled and restrained his power, of destroying and ouerthrowing all thinges, and hath taught such Philosophie, as a priuate man woulde not haue shew∣ed. Truely great is the God of the christians, which maketh of men Angels, and setteth them aboue the necessity of mans nature. If the Pope had béene aboue the Emperour, Chrysostome had béene both a lyar, and a flatterer, in preferring the Emperour before him: which I trust, no true catholique will affirme. And after: In this also, the city hath not a little honoured their king, when as they sent no embassadour vnto thee. For they gaue a most excellent and honourable speech of thee,Qui omni principatui tuo subiectos Dei sacerdotes prae∣honoras. that thou honourest very greatly all the priestes of God, which are subiect to all thy dominion, and principali∣ty, though they be neuer so simple. If priestes were not subiect to the Emperors rule and gouernment, this had béene a false spéech,
which the whole cittie of Antioche had giuen of him. One maie perchance make a lie: but it is not likely, that a whole citie should make a lie. Here the Romish catholiques maie sée, howe manie liars they must néedes make, if they will maintaine the preroga∣tiue, either of their Pope, or of their Rome. First the Emperor, 2. then Chrysostome, 3. then the whole citie of Antioch. And in ano∣ther Homilie,Hom. 18. thus he writeth of the citie of Antioche. Thou art sorie that the worship of the citie is lost. Learne what is the worship of the cittie: and then thou shalt surely know, that if the inhabitants doe not betray it, no man else can take away the worship of the citie: Not that it is the mother citie, nor that it hath stately buildings, nor many pillars, and porches, and walkes, not that it is commended before other cities: but the vertue, and religion of the inhabitantes; these are the worship, and ornaments, and defence of the citie. And a little after: What is the worshippe of our citie? It chanced first at Antioche that the disciples were called christians: This priuiledge, of all the cities that be in the world, none hath. Neither that same citie of Romulus, for this cause may looke aloft, against all the world; be∣cause she hath the fire of the loue of Christ; for this trust, for this ver∣tue. See here howe he preferreth plainlie Antioche before Rome, and he calleth it Romulus citie, as it were in contempt, in respect of Antioch: which he would not haue done, if he had beleeued that Rome had béene his mother church, as our catholiques now teach. No doubt Chrysostome would haue spoken more reuerentlie of his mother. And after he concludeth, that although Antioche were in some displeasure, with the Emperour: yet hee hoped, that shee should resume her former countenance, and bee in her former pre∣heminence. Of the Emperors authoritie also, agreeing with Chrysostome, Tertullian writes thus: We worship the Emperour (saith he) so as we may, and as it is expedient for him, as a man next to God, & what∣soeuer he is, hauing obtained of God, lesser then God alone. This also he willeth:Apol. ca. 30. For so he is greater then all others, when as he is lesser, then the onely true God. And in another place: The Emperours knowe who gaue them their Empire: They knowe what are men, they perceiue who are soules or spirits, that he is God alone, in whose power they are alone, from whom they are second, next whom they are first, afore all and aboue all Gods. And after: Moderating the maiestie of Caesar vnder God, I commend him more to God: to
whom alone I make him subiect. I put him vnder, to whom I doe not make him equall. Thus we maie see plainlie, by thrée euident testimonies, that in Tertullians daies, the christians beleeued that the Emperour in this world, was the next man to God. For thus he writeth in their apologie or defence, in the person of them all. And after: least anie should thinke, hee flattered and had forgot∣ten the danger that followeth flatterers, thus he writeth.Cap. 34. If flat∣terie be not ashamed of lying: yet let it feare cursing. He speaketh of those flatterers which called the Emperour a God. Ferus also writeth thus vpon the 6. of Iosuah. By this also (saith he) is shew∣ed that there are three orders necessary in the church. In the first or∣der, are the secular princes: these must go before, and make a waie for the priestes with the Arke: And therefore armour is permitted vnto them. In the second order, are the priestes, and to these belong not weapons but the trumpet, and the arke. For none is to be com∣pelled to the faith with armour; but by preaching of the word: and they which are the Lordes souldiers, must not entangle themselues with secular affaires. In the thirde order, are the common peo∣ple, and they must obey the secular power and heare the priests. Augustine also in an Epistle he writes to Casulanus,Epist. 86. concerning the fast of the Iewish Sabaoth, or our satterdaie, that we ought not then to fast, declareth his opinion of the authoritie of ye church of Rome. It should séeme that the Church of Rome, fasted on the sabaoth, and that this Vrbicus, against whome he writes, vrged this authoritie of the church and Bishop of Rome, for his defence, to whome Augustine answereth thus: In this opinion (saith he) he blasphemeth the church dispersed ouer the whole world, except the Romaines and a fewe westerne churches. But (he saith) it is certaine, that the life of the sheepeEx arbitrio pendere pastorū. depend of the iudgment of their pastors. But wo to them that call good euill, and euill good. &c. What mean these wordes saith Augustine, I cannot tell: for if as you write, Vr∣bicus saith thus, the people depending of the iudgement of their pa∣stor, doth fast with their Bishop on the sabaoth day; If he haue writtē these things thus vnto you, because in your Epistle you haue put such a like matter: let him not perswade you, so to praise a Christian city fasting on the sabaoth, that you may be compelled to condemne the whole christian world, that day dining. For when as he saith wo to them that call good euill, and darkenesse light, &c. meaning the fast on the sabaoth to bee good, light and sweete; and the dining on the
sabaoth day, to be euill, darkenesse and bitter: who doubts but that he condemnes the whole world, in all christians, dining on the saba∣oth? Here wee maie see plainlie, that Augustine counted Rome, but a Christian citie, and not the whole church; nor that the bishop of Rome with his Church,Videant Romani quid faciant, saith he. could or ought to preiudice or controll the whole world, though he fasted on the sabaoth daie. But that, which followeth in Augustine, makes the matter more plaine. If (saith Augustine) it be answered, that Iames taught those at Ierusalem & Iohn at Ephesus, and other in other places, that Peter taught at Rome, that is, that they should fast on the sabaoth day; and that other countries haue erred from this doctrine, and that Rome continued in it: and on the contrary it is replied, that some places of the west, amongst which Rome is, haue not kept that, which the Apostles haue deliuered; and that the countries of the east, from whence the gospell began to be preached, haue continued, and re∣mained without any varying, in that which was deliuered of the Apo∣stles, and also of Peter himselfe, that they should not fast on the saba∣oth: This is a contention without end (saith Augustine) engendering quarrels, not ending questions. So that here by Augustines iudge∣ment, the church of Rome maie erre, euen in kéeping of traditi∣ons, whereas the Catholiques at this daie saie, she cannot erre. And that to appeale to her, as to an vndoubted piller of truth, or to anie one church, either of Ierusalem, or anie other, is as a contention without end. And after hee calleth Rome the seate of the most famous Empire.Ierom. Part. 3. Epist. 9. ad Euag. To this also agreeth Ierome in his Epi∣stles, who also plainlie makes a difference betwéene the church of Rome, and the vniuersall church of Christ. It should séeme that deacons were preferred before priestes, amongst certaine in those daies, being lead by the custome of the church of Rome; con∣cerning which matter Ierome writes thus: Neither must we thinke (saieth hee) the church of the citie of Rome, to bee one; and the Church of the whole worlde to bee another: as though Rome should controll the whole church.Grat. 1. Part. Dist. 93. Or (as the Glosse also expoun∣deth the same place) that the custome of the church of Rome is to bee taken necessarily for an example. The Churches of France, of Brittaine, and Affrica, and Persia, and the east countrey, and India, and all barbarous nations, worshippe one Christ, obserue one rule of truth: If we respect authority, the whole world is greater, then a city. Here we maie see plainlie, the church vniuersall distinguished frō the church of Rome, in boundes and lymites, and also in autho∣ritie.
And also of the Bishoppe of Rome, and of Constantinople, and of Alexandria (whome he makes all equall concerning their offices, and priesthood, or bishoprickes) he writes thus: Whersoe∣uer a Bishop shal be, either at Rome, either at Eugubium, or at Con∣stantinople, or at Regium, or at Alexandria, or at Thanis: he is of the same desert, he is of the same priesthood. That is, he is all one. And he addeth, what makes them seeme greater? For some might ob∣iect: Is the Bishop of Regium in Sicilia, or of Thanis Metro∣politane of Egypt, as good, and of as great power as the Bishop of Rome? Ierome answereth,Potentia diui∣tiarum & pau∣pertatis humili∣tas. The power of riches, and the humi∣lity of pouerty, makes a Bishop either higher or inferiour. But they are all, successors of the Apostles. So that then, all Bishoppes are equall concerning their offices. They succéede the Apostles all a∣like, euen the Bishop of Rome with the rest. But they are higher by reason of their riches and power: and that also aduanced the Romaine Bishoppe, not anie authoritie or preheminence from Christ or Peter. And after hee obiectes, But you say, Howe at Rome are priestes made at the testimony of Deacons? Hee an∣swereth, What bring you me the custome of one citie? What the fewnesse (that is) of Deacons, whereof this pride is sprung vppe? Thou encrochest against the lawes of the church. Here wee maie plainlie see, what account Ierome makes of the church of Rome, how he accountes it but the church of one citie: and how he oppo∣seth the vniuersall church against it; and howe he makes the Bi∣shop of Rome, equall with other Bishops. And in another Epi∣stle, he preferreth Bethlem before Rome:Part. 2. Ep. 59. And I thinke (saith he) speaking of Bethlem, that this place is holier, then the Rocke of Tar∣peia, (meaning Rome) which is often reported from heauen that it hath been striken with thunder boults, because it displeased the Lord. Reade the reuelation of S. Iohn, and marke what is said there, of the woman cloathed in purple, and of the blasphemie written in her fore∣head. Of the seauen hilles, many waters, and the departing out of Babylon: God out of her (saith the Lord) my people, and be not par∣takers of her sinnes, and doe not take part of her plagues. And loo∣king backe to Ieremie, marke also howe it is written, flie out of the middest of Babylon, and euery man saue his owne soule: for great Babylon is falne, it is falne, and is become the dwelling of deuils, and a cage of euill spirites. There is there truely, the holy church; there is there, the ensignes of the Apostles and Martyres; there is there, the true confession of Christ; there is there, the faith commended of the
Apostles; and Paganisme troden vnder foote, the name of christians euery day aduancing it selfe on high: but ambition it selfe, the power and greatnesse of the citie, to see and to be seene, to salute and to be saluted, &c. are far off, and not conuenient for the purpose of Monks. This is Ieroms plaine iudgment concerning Rome. Here hee plainlie confesseth, that the church of Rome maie erre: Nay that it shall be that Babylon, Saint Iohn speaketh of, and of the seate of Antichrist. He toucheth their monasteries and Celles, calling it out of Ieremie, a cage of vncleane spirits, and also the crueltie of the Pope and his cleargie, affirming, that it is become not a ha∣bitation of pastors: but a dwelling of deuilles. Now the Deuill was a murtherer from the beginning, as our sauiour teacheth vs. Now such deuilles haue a long time dwelt in Rome, as who séeth not? He acknowledgeth the priuiledges of Rome, their faith com∣mended of the Apostles, Peter and Paul (as it should séeme) dying there, and planting the faith there euen with their bloud. But yet for all this, he thinkes that Rome shall degenerate, shall become Babylon: naie euen then in his time, in her greatest glorie, hee accountes Bethlem holier then her. What can be more plainer then this? vnlesse anie one will wilfullie shutte his eies, against the truth. Who will venture his soule nowe, vpon the church of Rome, of which Ierome thus writes? I would to God euerie one would marke here, out of Ierome, as well her blacke legges, as her white necke: and so leaue her and forsake her. Epist. 3.Of the supremacie Ignatius writes thus: Some (saieth he) call their pastor by the name of Bishop, and doe all things without him. To such Christ himselfe saith, who is the true and chiefe Bishop, and onely by nature a Bishop, why doe ye call me Lord, Lord, &c. Sée howe he giueth these names of chiefe Bishoppe, onelie to Christ. And of the authoritie of euerie Bishop in his seuerall Diocesse, he writes thus to the Magnesians: It becommeth you to obey your Bishop, and to gainesay him in nothing. For it is terrible thing, to contrary him. For a man despiseth not him, whom he here seeth: but they despise him, that inuisible one, which may not be despised of a∣ny. For he is not promoted to this dignity of man; but of God. For so saith God to Samuell of his contemners: they haue not despised thee; but me. And after: Let vs all loue together in concord, and let no man consider him that hath the charge of him after the flesh: but according to Iesus Christ. Let there be no cause, that may moue you
to be separated: but be you knit to your Bishoppe, being subiect to him, through God in Christ. And euen as the Lorde did nothing without the Father; for saith he, I can do nothing of my selfe: so nei∣ther you, without your Bishop, whether you be presbyters, deacons, or lay-men. Therefore let nothing seeme reasonable vnto you, with∣out his sentence; for that is vnlawfull and odious. And of the vnitie of the Church, hee writes thus to the Philadelphians, Wherefore I write to you boldly in God, to your worthie charity, exhorting you, that you continue in one faith, in one preaching, vsing one gi∣uing of thankes: for there is one flesh of our Lorde Iesus Christ, and one bloud, which was shedde for vs, and one bread broken for all, and one cuppe of the whole church, and one Bishoppe together with presbyters and deacons my fellow seruants, because also there is one only not begotten God the Father, and one only begotten sonne God the word and man, & one comforter the spirit of truth, one preaching also, and one faith, and one baptisme, and one church, which the A∣postles haue founded from one ende of the world to the other, in the bloud of Christ, with their owne paines and labour. And it becom∣meth you, as a priestly people, and a holy nation, to be perfected all of you in the vnity of Christ. Here we maie note, that Ignatius would haue ye church vse one manner of giuing of thanks, nor to change that, which then was vsed; which, by the papists own con∣fession, since his time hath béene changed. And againe, he distin∣guisheth betweene the body and bloud of Christ shed on the crosse, and the bread and the Lordes cuppe deuided in the church. Where it is also to be noted, that he faith, there is one cuppe of the whole church: The cuppe was giuen to all in his daies. And that there is one Bishoppe in euerie Church, as there is one God, and one onely begotten son Iesus Christ, and one holie Ghost. For thus he writes not of the Bishoppe of Rome, but of the Bishop of Phi∣ladelphia, whome he calles his fellow seruant: and that there is one church through the whole world, planted by the Apostles, not at Rome onelie: and that all the saintes must bee consummated and vnited in Christ as in their head. Here séemes to be the whole summe of Christian religion, briefely knitte vp together: from faith and baptisme, the verie first entrance of Christian religion, to Iesus Christ the heade and finisher of the same. And againe: Let no man without the Bishop doe any thing, of those things which concerne the church, of ecclesiasticall matters. Let the Eucharist be
accounted sure, which the Bishop grants. Where the Bishop is pre∣sent; let the people be there assembled: like as where Christ is, all the heauenly souldiours are present, as to the captaine of the Lords war∣fare. And he is the steward of all the spirituall nature. Wherefore it is not lawfull without the Bishop, neither to offer, nor to sacrifice, nor to celebrate Masse. If it shall seeme good to him, according to the pleasure of God: then it shall be safe and sure. And after: No man is more excellent then God, nor like to him, nor more honourable then the Bishoppe in the church, exercising the priesthood to God, for the saluation of the world. Neither who is like to the king in the host? deuising peace, and loue to all his princes. And againe: O ye Prin∣ces, be subiect to Caesar; and ye souldiers, be subiect to your princes. Let deacons be subiect to the presbyters, as the ministers of holy sa∣craments. But the presbyters and deacons, and all the cleargie toge∣ther with all the people, souldiers, and princes, and also Caesar: let them obey their Bishop, and the Bishop Christ, as Christ his father. And so vnitie may be kept in all pointes. Here we maie plainly see, in Gods affaires, in ministration of the sacraments, in preaching the word; he makes the bishop in euerie congregation in Christs stéede: and he willes all men to obey his precepts, out of the word of God, euen as Christ obeyed his father. In the host and in the common wealth, he giueth the superioritie to the prince. In the host (saith he) who is like to him? He giueth not both the swordes to the Pope, as the Church of Rome nowe imagineth. So that not anie one Bishop ouer the whole world, but euerie Bishop in his Church, is Christes Vicar, by Ignatius iudgment. And here though he name the masse, yet hee ouerthroweth the nature of it: he makes the cuppe common to all the people.Epist 7. ad Smyrnenses. He calleth the bi∣shop the dispenser of the intelligible nature: not making any cor∣porall nature of Christ there present, as the papistes nowe doe. Also heere appeareth what the presbyters were in times past, not gouerning elders (as some would haue) but ministers of the sa∣craments. And as before, hee would haue all vnitie to be conse∣crated in Iesus Christ:Apol. 1. agreeing with Cyprian concerning the bi∣hops authoritie, and of the Emperours with Iustine; whereof Iu∣stine writes thus: And that I testifie the truth of our conference, if such spéeches of our disputations, haue not béene brought to you; I am readie (to confirme the matter) to conferre with him againe before you of these matters: And this truely is a worke worthy your
Empire. And after: You truely are called religious, Philosophers, keepers of Iustice, and louers of learning: that you are so called, yee heare in euery place; but whether you be so, the thing it selfe will de∣clare. And after: The tributes and contributions which are ordai∣ned of you, to your collectors wee bring first of all, as we are taught of Iesus Christ. For at that time some came asking him, whether tri∣butes were to be paied to Caesar or not? To whom he answered thus. Tell me (saith hee) whose image the money hath: who when they had said, Caesars. Giue therefore (saith he) to Caesar the things that are Caesars, and to God the things that are Gods. And therefore we onely worship God: but as concerning other thinges wee serue you willinglie, confessing that you are kinges and rulers of men, and pray∣ing that you may haue with your Emperiall authoritie a right iudge∣ment. Here is plainlie the Emperours authoritie put downe, to heare matters in religion, to bee religious, a maintainer of reli∣gion and iustice: to impose tributes. Heere is the duetie of all christians, to yéelde to God worship, and the thinges yt belong to God: And to their Emperor to yéeld all other things willinglie. And to conclude, of the church of Rome Ignatius puts down his iudgement plainelie thus; of the preheminence of the Romaine church, writing thus to the Romaines, Ignatius, who also is called Theophorus, to the church sanctified and lightened by the will of God, who hath made all thinges, which are according to the faith and loue of our Lorde Iesus Christ, hauing obtained mercie through the might of the most high God, the father of Iesus Christ, his only sonne: to the church,Que & praesi∣de in loco Regi∣onis Romanorū which beareth rule, in the place of the coun∣trie of the Romaines, worthie of God,Eminētiadignae worthie of authoritie or pre∣heminence, worthie of blessednesse, worthy of praise, worthy of faith: founded in the loue and faith of Christ, hauing the name of the father, bearing the spirit, whō I salute in the name of God almighty, and Iesus Christ his sonne. Here we may see excellent priuileges giuen to the Romaine church: but her principalitie which she had, was onelie in locoregionis Romanorum, in the Romaines country, not ouer the whole world. This was her principality, that Irenaeus Cyprian and other fathers speake of. And concerning the authoritie of bishops,Cyprians iudge∣ment concer∣ning the su∣premacie. Cyprian also writes thus: There is one body, & one spirit, and one hope of our calling, one Lorde, and one baptisme, and one God; which vnitie wee bishops, which beare rule in the church, ought to keepe surely, and to striue
for that, that we may approue also our Bishopricke to be one, and not deuided. Let no man by lying beguile his brother: let no man corrupt the truth of the faith by vnlawfull trespassing. There is but one Bi∣shopricke,De simp praelat. whereof euerie one of vs holdes a part wholy and equal∣lie as his owne. And there is but one church spreade ouer the whole world, &c. And againe: Therefore deerely beloued brother, the bodie of priestes is many, knit together by the glewe of mutuall con∣cord, & with the band of vnitie, that if any of your colleagues should goe about to make an heresie, and to teare and spoile the flocke of Christ; the other should helpe, and as good and mercifull shepheards should gather the Lordes sheepe into his fould. As in the sea, if any hauen (her bulwarkes being broken) shall be dangerous to the ships, will not the Mariners direct their ships to the next hauen, where they may haue safe and sure entrance, standing in securitie? &c. See how Ciprian makes here but one bishoprick ouer the whole world,Lib. 3. epist. 13 as there is but one church, and euerie bishop hath a part of this bi∣shopricke allotted to him. And after: hee calles this multitude of bishops a college of priestes, knit together through loue. And hence no doubt he calles Cornelius bishop of Rome Colleague or fellow bishop. And hee addeth that in schismes, if anie Bishoppe shall swarue from the truth, that not anie one is to deale in the matter, no not the bishop of Rome; but that they altogether, and especial∣lie they which are next to him: As mariners, if any hauen be dan∣gerous, will land at the next hauen. And after he writes thus, Al∣though we be many pastors, yet we feede but one flocke. And wee ought to gather together the sheepe, which Christ redeemed with his owne bloud,Lib. 1. epist. 3 &c. And againe, Seeing it is decreed amongst vs all, as also it is meet and right, that euery mans cause should there be heard, where the faulte is committed, to euery pastor a portion of the flocke is allotted, which euery one must gouerne, giuing account of his do∣ings to the Lord. And in an other Epistle: I haue answered your letters according to my habilitie,Lib. 4. epist. 7 and haue shewed what wee thinke as much as lieth in vs, prescribing to none, that he may not determine, what euery one thinkes good, as who shall giue account to the Lorde of his doing. By all these places it appeares, that there was one bishoprick ouer the whole world, by Cyprians iudgement: and that euerie bishop had a part thereof equallie allotted vnto him; for the which he was to giue account to God. And herein he agree∣eth with Ignatius; that euerie bishop here on earth, amongst his
stocke, was in Christs stead, was Christs vicar. Of Peters authoritie also Cyprian writes thus:De simp praelat. The deuill found out heresies and schismes, wherewith he might subuert faith, breake in sunder the truth, and cut in peeces vnitie. Those whom he coulde not detaine with the blindnesse of the olde way: hee hath beguiled and seduced, with the error of the new way. He snatcheth men frō the church her selfe, and whilest they seeme to themselues to come neare to the light, and that they haue escaped the night of the worlde: hee againe powreth other darkenesse to the ignorant; that notwith∣standing, with the Gospell of Christ, and with obseruation of it, and the lawe, they might cal themselues christians; yet walking in darke∣nesse, they shoulde thinke themselues to haue the light, (the enemie flattering & beguiling them): Who according to the saying of the A∣postle, hath changed himselfe into the likenesse of an angell of light, and doth set his seruants out, like seruants of righteousnesse, affirming night for day, destruction for saluation, desperation vnder a pretence of hope, falshood vnder the color of faith; Antichrist vnder the name of Christ, that whilest thinges seeming true, are counterfeited, they might make frustrate the truth with subtletie. This is done hereof (be∣loued brethrē) whilst that we return not vnto the beginning of truth, nor seeke the head, neither in that we keepe the doctrine of our hea∣uenly master, which if any would consider and examine, there need no long discourse or argumentes. The triall vnto the faith, with the compendiousnesse of the truth, is easie. The Lord speakes vnto Peter, I say vnto thee (saith he) that thou art Peter, and vpon this rocke will I build my church, and the gates of hell shall not ouercome it. I will giue to thee the keyes of the kingdome of heauen, and what thou shalt bind vpon earth shall be bound in heauen also, And whatsoeuer thou shalt loose vpon earth shall bee loosed in heauen. And to the same he saith after his resurrection: Feed my sheep. And although he gaue like power to all his Apostles, after his resurrection, and saide; as my father hath sent me, I also send you, receiue ye the holy Ghost; whose sinnes ye shall remit they shall bee remitted vnto him; whose sinnes ye retaine, they shall bee retained: Notwithstanding that hee might make manifest vnitie, by his owne authoritie, he hath disposed the originall of the same vnitie beginning of one. And the selfe same thing truely were the other Apostles that Peter was, indued with the like fellowshippe both of honour and power: but the beginning sprang from vnitie, that one church might bee shewed. Which one
church also the holie ghost in the Canticles, in the person of the Lord, doth meane and say: One is my Doue, my perfect one, shee is one, chosen to her mother. Doth he beleeue that he holds the faith, which holds not this vnitie of the church? He that striues against and resistes the church, doth he trust that he is of the church? Here we may see by Cyprians iudgement, why Christ spake to Peter alone, not to preferre him before the other Apostles; but to declare the vnity of the church: which should be one through the whole world: Which v∣nitie who holds not, is none of Christs. This vnitie was common among all bishops: For thus he writes to Cornelius, Those things especiallie we do, and ought to bee carefull of: that the vnitie giuen vs of the Lorde and his Apostles, as much as wee can, we maintaine. This vnitie was not giuen to Cornelius or his successors; but to the whole church; nor by Peter onelie, but by all the Apostles. 2 lib. Epist. 10. ad Cor. Tract. 1. in Mat.Origen also of yt priuiledge which séemes to be giuē to Peter, writes thus: If we shal say also that which Peter said, Thou art Christ ye son of the liuing God, as it were by reuelation (not receiued either of flesh or bloud, but of the light shining into our hart, from the father which is in heauen) wee are made Peter; and it shall bee saide vnto vs that followeth this speech: Thou art Peter, and so forth, as it followeth in that place: for he is a rocke whosoeuer is Christes disciple, of whom they dranke the spirituall rocke following them: And vppon such a rocke all ecclesiasticall doctrine is builded, and according to the or∣dinance of life. For in euery perfect man, hauing the congregation of those wordes, deedes, and fences, which fulfill blessednesse, is the church, which is builded of God. But if you doe thinke that the whole church is builded vpon that one Peter only, what will you say of Iohn the sonne of thunder, and of euery one of the rest of the Apo∣stles? But otherwise, shall we be bold to say, that the gates of hel shall not preuaile against one Peter: and that they shall preuaile against the other Apostles, and perfect men? And not rather in all and euery one of them, of whom it is spoken before, that is done which is saide: And the gates of hell shall not preuaile against it? And also that vpon this rocke will I builde my church. Or truely were the keyes of the kingdome of heauen giuen to Peter onely of Christ? Nor that anie of the other blessed Saintes receiued them also? But if this saying, I giue to thee the keyes of the kingdome of heauen, bee
common also to the rest: why then not also all thinges, both those which were spoken before, and also those which follow, (as it were spoken to Peter) are common to all? For heere, and that seemed to bee spoken as it were to Peter: Whatsoeuer thou shalt binde vppon earth, shall be bound in heauen; and the wordes that follow. But in S. Iohns gospell, our sauiour giuing the holie ghost to his disciples, by breathing vpon them (he saith) Receiue ye the holy ghost, &c. What∣soeuer we eate (saith Austen) we conuay into our bodies: This doth the church by the saints, all those whom she winnes vnto her, after a maner, shee eates; whose person Peter represented: Kill and eate ô church, that is ô Peter. Aug in Psal 30. In the celebration of the councell of Nice,Euseb. in vita Constant, was the plain prac∣tise of all these authorities, that is, of the Emperors authoritie, and of the equalitie of the bishop of Rome with the other bishops. First the Emperor called this councel. Neither was it onely a sim∣ple or plaine commandement,It may seeme, that the dona∣tion of Con∣stantine, was not thē made: Rome was thē the Emperours citie: no nor that it was ne∣uer made by Constantine. For his succes∣sor Constan∣tius the Arriā, cals it his cit also: euen to Liberius, bi∣shop of Rome, because (saith he) thou art a christian, and a bishop of our citie, &c. Hist. tripart lib. 5. ca. 17. 2. Lib. a. 5 (saith Eusebius) but the kinges plea∣sure and will was adioined. Here was an assembly of many bishops, as a garland compact of many flowers. But the bishop of the Empe∣rours citie (saith Eusebius) being hindered by age, could not be pre∣sent; but Presbyters fulfilled his roome. Here we may note what the Bishop of Rome was accounted of in those daies, but a Bishop like the rest. And Rome was not accounted the whole church; but the Emperors citie. In the councel when as they were al set in their places, they all in silence waited for, and ratied the entrance of the king. There came in before, one or two of the kinges noble men: Then after a signe being giuen, they all arising, he himselfe (as some messenger sent from God) went in the middle, &c. Hee sate in a low chaire of gold, prepared for the purpose; and such was his humilitie, that he would not sit down, till the bishops gaue a signe: Then hee that sate at the vpper ende, of the right side of the bishops, rose vp and made a short oration to the king: And afterward gaue singular praises to God almightie in a hymne. This was not the Bishop of Romes legate, but some other. Theodoret in the tripartite histo∣rie seemes to affirme that it was the Bishop of Antioch, in these wordes: The Emperor sitting downe, the holie assemblie there sate downe with him. First Eustathius that bishop of Antioch, &c. He a∣dorned the Emperor with praises, and thanked God for the care that he had concerning holy thinges. The Emperor after, with a cheere∣full
countenance, gathering his spirits together, as chiefe of the coun∣cel, began thus with a curteous and gentle voice: It was not the least part of my wish or desire (ô friends) that I might enioy your compa∣nie, &c. And after he heard both partes of them, that were at discord courteouslie: perswading these, entreating those, and mouing all to concorde. Trip. lib, 2. c. 17And after we read that Eusebius and Theogonius being banished by the same councel, sent books of their repentance to theSūmis episcop. chiefe Bi∣shops, and were called home againe by the Emperours commande∣ment. Nowe the chiefe bishops are thus reckoned vp in order: Ma∣charius of Ierusalem, Eustachius gouerning Antioch, Alexander of Alexandria,Lib. 2. cap. 1 and Iulius of Rome. All these were chiefe Bishoppes, no one was then chiefe bishop: and here the bishop of Ierusalem among them is reckoned first. And it was decréed in the same councell, that the ancient prerogatiue of honour giuen the bishop of Ierusalem,Euseb. li. 10 c. 6 should bee obserued,Manente nibi∣lominus metropo litani ipsius pro∣uinciae dignitate. besides the dignitie that hee was Metropolitane. It should seeme then that he was accompted the first Patriarch. For of Iames first bishop of Ierusalem, Epipha∣nius writes thus. Iames first tooke the chaire of bishoply authority: to whom the Lorde committed his throne vpon earth first: Hee also was called the brother of the Lorde, &c. Epiphanius here plainelie affirmes,Haeres. 78. Lib. 2. cap. 10 that the Lord committed his throane first to Iames Bi∣shop of Ierusalem, and not to Peter. And then if any were Christs vicar generall, Iames shoulde haue béene, and his successors, the Bishops of Ierusalem. And to the same effect writes Eusebius: This Iames (saith hee) who was called iust of our fore fathers, for the merit of his virtue, and for the priuiledge of his famous life, first of al, histories report, that he tooke vpon him the seat of the church, which is at Ierusalem. As Clemens also in the sixt booke of his Ordinances affirmes, saying, Peter (saieth hee) and Iames and Iohn, after the as∣sumption of our sauiour, although they were almost preferred before all other, yetNon sibi vindi cabant primatus gloriam. they took not to themselues the glory of this primacy, but they ordained Iames, which is called iust, the bishop of the Apo∣stles. Here we may plainelie see, by the mouthes of two witnes∣ses, Eusebius and Clemens, first that not onelie Peter; but accor∣ding to S. Paules saying, Peter, Iames and Iohn seeme to bee prefer∣red aboue the rest, among the Apostles: They seemed pillers, as Saint Paul saith.Galat. 2.9. Secondlie, that they tooke not this glory to them∣selues anie of them: but resigned it to Iames the Lordes brother,
which for the innocencie of his life was most famous amōg them. So that if Peter had anie supersoritie or right in this matter, by Clemens testimonie he yéelded it to Iames. And therefore, hee thus resigning it to another, the Pope cannot nowe iustlie cha∣lenge anie, as from him. Nay that which followes, quite ouer∣throwes the Popes supremacie. For Eusebius saieth, that in his seuenth booke, the same Clemens addeth of himselfe these thinges. To Iames which is called iust, and to Iohn, and to Peter, the Lorde after his resurrection, gaue all knowledge, and they to the rest of the Apostles, which Apostles gaue it to the seauenty disciples, whereof Barnabas was one. Why then, Peter alone receiued not all know∣ledge, as the Pope now braggeth that hee hath all knowledge in the closet of his breast, and that hee cannot erre. But Peter re∣ceiued knowledge, equall with the rest: wherefore in this point, the Pope challengeth more, then euer Peter had by Clemens own testimonie? who as they saie, was after bishop of Rome: and ther∣fore could not erre. Eusebius also of the vnitie and gouerning of the whole Church writes thus. Before the birth of Christ, some ruled ouer Asia,Oratione de lau∣dibus Constant. o∣thers ouer Macedonia, others ouer Aegypt, and others ouer Arabia. Syria was subiect to the Iewes. In euerie village, citie, and place, then raging were wont to kill one another, to bee mad one against a∣nother, to make warre continually one against another. But all these quarrels, two notable powers, running out of the same lystes (as it were) brought to concord and vnitie: whereof one was the Em∣pire of Rome, gouerned by the authority of one: The other was the doctrine of Christ, which two began both at one time to florish to∣gether. And as the power of our Sauiour tooke away the manie kingdomes of the Diuell, and his diuers worships of many gods, and preached one God to Greekes and Barbarians, and to all others, e∣uen vnto the ende of the worlde: So the Romaine Empire, hauing taken away the causes of many Empires, hath put vnder her iurisdicti∣on all kingdomes that man coulde attaine to: and hath taken great care, that all mankinde should bee knit together in bondes of peace and concorde, &c. For now as children begotten of one father, that is of our God; and of one mother, that is, of true religion, for there∣with they haue imbraced peace among themselues, and haue kept it from time to time, that from that time the whole worlde doth differ nothing from a familie, gouerned and knit together, with good lawes
and ordinances. So that now euery one may at his pleasure, trauell where he will, without perill and danger. Eusebius placeth the vni∣tie of the Church in the vnitie of religion, neither placeth hee one spirituall Monarke, ouer the church: as hee doth one temporall, ouer the common wealth. But some will obiect, that the Fathers attributed much to the Apostolique seaes. It is verie true: but yet they accounted no one of them, ladie or mistresse ouer all the rest, as appeareth by Augustine,Epist. 55. who writes thus: That most mighty Champion of our faith, hath fenced his church with famous assemblies, of all people, and nations (meaning generall councels) with the seaes Apostolique, as with towers of authority: and also with strong and inuincible reasons of the godly and learned. Where he preferreth councels, before the apostolique seaes. And after also concerning the apostolique seaes,Epist. 42. he writes thus: You see (saieth he) howe many are cutte off from the christian society, which by the apostolique seates and suc∣cessions of Bishops, by most certaine propagations, is spread ouer the whole world. No one apostolique sea, was the whole church, no not Rome her selfe, by Augustines iudgment: but by them, all the Church was begotten, and spread ouer the whole world; they were mothers or rather midwiues vnto it. Of a vine the prophet Dauid speaketh:Psal. 80.8. Thou hast brought a vine out of Egypt; thou hast cast out the heathen and planted it. And when it had taken roote, it filled the land. This vine is, no doubt, the Catholique Church of Christ, the Lord himselfe brought it out of the spirituall Egypt, of sinne and ignorance, by sending his holie spirit. The Apostles and all the apostolique seaes, were but planters of this vine: as S. Paul saith, Paul hath planted, and Apollo hath watered; but God hath gi∣uen the encrease:1. Cor. 3.6. so that neither he that plants is any thing, or he that waters, but God that giueth the encrease. He that planteth and wa∣tereth is all one, that is, in effect is nothing: But God is all in all. Nowe shall we saie, that anie of these planters of this vine, is anie thing, is the vine it selfe? That were to gaine saie the Apo∣stle.Io. 3.29. S. Iohn the baptist said of Christ, and of himselfe: Hee that hath the bride, is the bridegroome: but the friend of the bridegroome standes by, and heareth him; and reioiceth greatly at the voice of the bridegroome; and this my ioie is now filled: Euen so we maie saie of the apostolique seaes, and of the vniuersall Church. None of them was the bride, but they were all handmaides, waiting on
the bride; and they all reioice at her glorie, and their glorie is fully perfected, seeing her spread ouer the whole world. None of them dare presume to take her person vpon her, no not Rome her selfe: if she doe, she is Agar, she is a rebell against her ladie & mistresse. And of these apostolicall seaes, Rome was not the first in order (as appeareth) till Iustinians daies. And here we may marke, how his sea by little and little, crept vp to her supremacie:Part. 2 Tit. 16. Ca. 1. prima sedes dicebatur quae a nemine iudi∣caretur. First it was thought, that the first sea should bee iudged by none of the o∣ther seaes. This preheminence they thought to giue to it aboue the others: as appeareth by Antoninus in the decrées and actes of Pope Nicholaus. But yet this sea was not Oecumenicall or ge∣nerall gouernour, of the Church ouer the whole world: as appea∣reth by the Councell of Carthage, where it was decréed,Conc. Car. 3. ca. 26. that the Bishop of the first sea, should not be called prince of priestes, or high priest, or any such like; butThe Romane church, was in Pope Nicholas daies, called but prima sedes. only the Bishop of the first sea. Where∣as also is plainly gathered, by the conferring of these two places, what is meant by the Bishop of the first sea, that is the Bishoppe of Rome. Cyprian not much dissenting from these,Lib. 1. Epist. 3. and yet as a nearer neighbour, giueth more priuiledges to the Romaine church: hee calles it, principalem ecclesiam, the chiefe church: from whence priestly vnitie began, whose faith the Apostle Paul praised, and to whome infidelity cannot haue accesse. And here we maie note by the waie, what certaintie it is, to builde our faith on the fathers, when as Ierome saith plainlie, that Rome shall bee that Babylon, which S. Iohn in the Reuelation bids all christians flie out of, as hath beene prooued before. Now Cyprian saith, that infidelity shall not haue accesse vnto it. Whether of these should one beleeue? But Ie∣rome groundes his assertion; vpon the scripture: Cyprian speakes his owne opinion; and therefore is lesse credible. And Prudenti∣us an ancient writer agréeing with Ierome, preferreth Bethlem before Rome, or anie citie in the world.O sola magnarū vrbium maior Bethlehē: cui con∣tigit ducem salu∣tis coelitus incor∣poratum gignere. Prudentius hymno Epipha∣niae. O Bethlem (saieth he) greater then all the cities in the worlde, to whome it chanced to bring foorth the captaine of our saluation incarnate. And after, all nations reioice, GAudere quicquid gentium est, Iudea, Roma, & Graecia, Aegypte, Thrax, Persia, & Scytha,
Rex vuus omnes possidet. Laudate vestrum principem Omnes beati, ac perditi, Vini, imbecilli, ac mortui: Iam ne post hac mortuus. The same in English. REioice ye nations euery where, lift vp your voice and shoute; Beginne ô Iewrie, thou which art most holy and deuout: Come not behinde, thou famous Rome, and Greece, doe thou the same: Thou fertile Egypt doe the like, and herein beare no blame: Thou Thracian bold, renowned farre for feates of chiualrie: Thou Persian stout and Scythian rude, men liuing barbarously; Reioice, againe I say reioice, breake foorth aloud and sing. For why? our God omnipotent of all the world is king. Extoll your prince, ye men of place and men of lowe degree, Ye which are liuing on the earth, and which in graue doe lie: For none hereafter counted lost, nor counted dead shall be: For euery one shall liue for aie and endlesse life shall see. Beatus Rhenanus in his argument of Tertullians booke of prescrip∣tions against heretiques, writes thus of Tertullian: That Christ whilest he was here on earth, taught aboundantly whatsoeuer was necessary. And that he chose twelue disciples, whome after his resur∣rection, he commanded to goe, that they might teach the Gentiles.
And those Apostles, first ordaining churches in Iewry; after that, they went into all the world; and that they ordained churches in euery ci∣tie, which were called apostolique churches, from which all the rest, (as it were) borrowed their doctrine. Furthermore, that there wasVnam primm Apostolicā, à qua reliquae. one chiefe apostolique church, from which sprang all the rest. HeHanc nulli loco affigis. appointes this to no one place. Let vs marke, howe Tertullian here affirmes, that Christ taught all thinges aboundantly, while he was here on earth. And therefore, left nothing hereafter to be taught, as new and strange doctrine, by the holie ghost, which he himselfe had not taught before. Secondly, that there is one chiefe apostolique church. But this, Tertullian fasteneth or tieh to no one place. Why then not to Rome? And after: Beatus Rhenanus writes his owne iudgment. As by this booke it may plainly appeare to the reader, if he be not very simple, by what meanes the bishop of Rome hath come to this authority, which at this day hee hath. Although Tertullian doe highly commend the Romane church: yet notwith∣standing, he makes not so great account of her, as we see is made at this day. For he reckons her among the other apostolique churches. He doth not make her the onely apostolique church,Summatem facit non summā. he makes her one of the chiefest, not the chiefest of all. And he writes to the same effect, in his fourth booke against Marcion in these wordes: To be briefe, If this be certaine, that that is truest which is first; and that first, which was from the beginning; and that from the beginning, which was from the Apostles: then also it shall be manifest, that was deliue∣red of the Apostles, which was kept as holy of the apostolique chur∣ches. Let vs therefore see, what milke the Corinthians sucked from Paul, by what rule the Galathians were reformed againe, what the Philippians, Thessalonians, and Ephesians doe reade, what also the Romaines, our next neighbours doe found foorth, to whom Peter and Paul left the gospell, sealed also with their owne bloud. We haue also the churches, Iohns schollers, &c. If Tertullian were aliue nowe, he would hardly say thus, without punishment. Thus much Beatus Re∣nanus plainlie writeth, of the authoritie which the Fathers gaue to the Romaine church. And hee not onelie affirmeth; but prooueth his assertions substantiallie, out of Tertullian. And now who will not beléeue these two witnesses, and condemne rather the church of Rome, with Renatus, then Tertullian? who if he were aliue a∣gaine, and wrote thus, Renanus affirmes would nowe condemne him. Aeneas Siluius, who was after Pope, confesseth; that before
the councell of Nice,Epist. 301. there was little regarde made of the Church of Rome: Then by his opinion, the supremacie thereof was not that first faith giuen to the saints. Text. Verse. 5.I will therefore put you in remembrance, for as much as yee once knewe this how that the Lord, after that hee had deliuered the peo∣ple out of Egypt, destroied them afterward which beleeued not. The Angels also which kept not their first estate,  but left their owne habi∣tation:  he hath reserued in euerlasting chaines, vnder darknesse vnto the iudgment of the great day. As Sodome and Gomorrha, and the cities about thē, which in like maner, as they did, committed fornica∣tion and followed strange flesh, are set forth for an example and suffer the vengeance of eternall fire.] Here we maie see, how the Apostle still vrgeth vs to kéepe the first faith, howe hee not onely teacheth and commandeth it: but goeth about to prooue it, and as it were to enforce it, by manie examples, of the people of Israell, of An∣gelles, of cities: That all those that kept not their first estate or calling, which left their first house or dwelling, that afterward be∣léeued not, that committed fornication and went backe againe: God hath seuerely and for our examples apparantly punished. And here first, as it is apparant, that those abominable sins, which I must touch hereafter, of vncleannesse of the flesh, of fornication and worse, of couetousnesse, of pride, and blasphemous inuasions of the honour due to the immortall God, and his son Iesus Christ our most blessed sauiour; raigned in the time of the darkenesse of Poperie. So herein, as the false teachers and wicked seducers, (the Pope and his spiritualty) are iustly to be blamed. So I must néedes confesse, that ye Laitie who like simple shéepe, were through the craftinesse of their teachers misled, and kept from the booke of God, neither were so déepe in these sins, neither are to be thought, through the mercy of God, so déepe in their condemnation. Christ was not only in Iewry,Mat. 2.13. but also in Egypt: to declare, yt his salua∣tion is ouer all the worlde, euen in that same spirituall Egypt. And therefore,Apoc. ca. 11.8. to go forward with these examples S. Iude giueth vs here to marke, we maie see, (if wee bee not ouermuch blinded with partialitie) thrée chiefe sinnes of false catholiques, and of po∣perie touched and painted out. Their supremacie vnder the exam∣ple of Lucifer, their vnbeliefe to that great promise of our salua∣tion, by their pardons, dyrges, masses, and such like, added as ne∣cessarie thereunto, vnder the example of the Israelites: and last∣lie,
their wicked sinfull liues, vnder the example of the Sodo∣mites: whose sinnes were reported to be common among them. Lucifer in the beginning, was created an angell of light; but he was not contented with his estate, hee would be aboue other an∣gelles, he would be like to God himselfe; and therfore he was for his pride throwen downe to hell: So the Bishop of Rome was a chiefe pastor, was like Lucifer among the angelles of God, and ministers of his church: but he was not content with his estate, but he would be aboue them all, so that he would be like the sonne of God: he would be his vicar and vicegerent. Nay aboue him, in dispensing with the written word of God, which Iesus Christ neuer tooke vpon him, who came to fulfill his fathers will, and not to breake it. And is not he plainlie another Lucifer? Euery one that hath eies maie sée this: let him in the ende, looke for his great pride, for Lucifers fall. The Israelites were mightelie deliuered out of Egypt, frō the bondage of Pharaoh. They had a promise of the land of Canaan; but after this their deliuerance,Num. 13.31. in going to the land, they doubted of this promise, as we maie reade in the booke of Numbers; and so they all perished, and died in the wil∣dernesse: Euen so God hath deliuered vs from the bondage of that spirituall Pharaoh the diuell, by our baptisme, and hath pro∣mised vs that celestiall Canaan, through faith in his sonne Iesus Christ: If nowe we shall not beleeue his promise; if we shal adde our owne deuises to it, our own reason; as though God were not able to make his worde good, as the Israelites did:Gen. 13.10. shall we not likewise perish? Sodome was like the garden of Eden, euen an∣other paradise; but they followed strange flesh, and they were burnt, with fire and brimstone from heauen. And were not our Monasteries such like? In situation most pleasant, and in sinne (as was suspected) most abominable. So then let vs knowe and marke that proude Lucifer of Rome, let vs beléeue assuredlie the promises of God, what gyant soeuer of deuils or huge bulwarks, or walled townes, of sinne be against vs. Let vs marke wisely this Sodome. Let not the pleasantnesse thereof beguile vs, nor the statelie buildinges thereof, nowe on the grounde, pittie our hearts: but let vs acknowledge their sinnes, and detest those So∣domites, which were the cause of their desolation. Let all these examples warne vs, and as it were arme vs, least being taught so plainly by ye Apostle, and warned so plenteously, if we contemn
all these, we perish worse then they. This is the summe of these verses. So that then we are to remember, to meditate vpon, and as it were to raminate or chewe ouer againe these two pointes: That the first faith is the true catholique faith: and that there shal craftely créepe in a second faith: which is false and counterfeit, and which we must all fight and striue against. This is the whole sum of this Epistle. And these two pointes like nailes with manie strokes, the Apostle seemes to fasten in our hearts: and therfore let vs marke well that we be not deceiued. Text. Verse 8.Likewise notwithstanding, these dreamers also defile the flesh, and despise gouernment, and speake euill of them that are in authori∣tie.] Here the chiefe word dreamers or sleepers, is left out in their olde translation, and it doth verie narrowlie touch them. It may seeme their single life and their good cheere, and their aboundance of idlenesse (all which in the Popes church raigned,) made them like Sodome, made them by dreames in the night defile the flesh, made them in the daie burne in lust. For as the olde verse saith, Without corne and wine Venus starueth: But where Ceres and Bacchus is, there Venus raigneth. And take idlenesse away, Cu∣pids bowe must néedes decay. But in their Abbaies and Frieries, in their whole cleargie, at those daies all these thinges abounded. They had plentie of all thinges, they did swim in idlenesse: There∣fore it is like that Venus with her handmaides, that Sodome with her sinnes, dwelt among them: That in the night they were pol∣luted by dreames, in the daie by déedes: that, ye generall axiome was verified in those daies,Si non caste tamen caute. They despise gouernment. If not chastly; yet if charily, it ma∣keth no matter. Neither doe these followe the Sodomites onely in their fleshly pleasures, but in their obstinacie and frowardnes. Let comming to Sodome to dwell among them, reproued their wicked liues, vsed authoritie in correcting & admonishing them, as it should séeme by their spéeches vnto him: Hee alone came but to soiourne with vs (saie they) and nowe continually hee plaieth the iudge amongst vs:Gen. 19 9. We cannot followe our olde vse and trade for him. And they despised him. It should seeme God had sent him to execute his authoritie, and to punish sinne amongst the Sodo∣mites, as he did Moses amongst the Israelites in Egypt, if they would haue vnderstood. Or rather these followe Lucifer herein, whome S. Iude maketh mention of before, who despised the maiesty of God himselfe: So these despise magistrates vpon earth, whom
the scripture calleth Gods;Exod. 22.28. Thou shalt not despise (saieth God) or make light account of or curse the Gods (that is the princes) of thy people: neither shalt thou slander, or in worde or in deede hurt him, that is exalted in thy people. The iudges also and other inferiour ma∣gistrates, are called Gods.Psal. 82.6. Ye are Gods (saith the psalme) speaking of iudges: and ye are all children of the most highest. Let vs marke, what reuerence the verie Barbarians haue gi∣uen vnto magistrates. That historie of Fabritius the Romane Consull is worth the marking in our desperate and wicked daies, where almost nothing else is, but poisoning and murthering of princes: When as Pyrrhus phisition had sent him a letter, that hee would poison the king, his vtter enemy: Fabritius sent Pyrrhus the let∣ter. He would not haue his very enemy poisoned,Eras. Apophth. being voluntarily offered to him. And now a daies, some will hire wicked persons, to kill and poison princes their soueraignes. Oh more then hea∣thenish crueltie and disloyaltie! And the reason also is worth the marking, that Fabritius alleageth, why he sent Pyrrhus the letter, not for the loue he owed to Pyrrhus (for he had not learned to loue his enemies as the gospell teacheth:) but for the name of the Ro∣manes, that they should not be said, by such vnlawfull means, to con∣quere their enemies. If Fabritius, had such a care of the good name of the Romanes, how much more should wee haue a care of the name of Christians? That the Turkes, enemies of christian reli∣gion, hearing our poysoning and such like dealings, shoulde not speake euill of our religion. What religion can this be, that vseth such practises? Chrysostome vpon these wordes, Let euery soule bee subiect to the higher powers, concerning the authoritie of ye ciuill magistrat, and the obedience of euerie one to ye same whosoeuer he be, writes s: Shewing that these thinges are commanded to all men, both to Priestes and Monkes, not onely to secular men, the which also hee declares by and by in the beginning, when as hee saieth: Let euery soule be subiect to the higher powers, whether thou beest an Apo∣stle, or an Euangelist, or a Prophet, or whosoeuer thou shalt be: For this obedience, is not against religion. Let vs marke here, howe Chrysostome would haue all men subiect to the authoritie of the ciuill magistrate, yea the Apostles, and then Peter himselfe, and then the Pope also, which the papistes will not grant; for Chryso∣stome excepts none. And this obedience consistes in praying for
their liues,1. Tim. 2.1. Mat. 22.17. 2. King. 23 2. 1. Sam. 24.5. as S. Paul commandes: in paying them tributes, as Christ himselfe practised: in obeying their godly lawes and de∣crees, in the purging & reformation of Gods house, as the priests in the olde lawe performed; yea though they were our vtter ene∣mies (as Saul was Dauids:) yet if their liues laie in our hands, to saue them, protect them, and defend them. And here also marke how the force of the wordes which the holy ghost vseth, besides the euident practise of their works, doe declare who these are, whom S. Iude here meaneth. They shall not denie authoritie or gouernment, as doe the Anabaptiss () but they shall despise it, they shall put it out of his place, and they shall not onelie despise or put rulers out of their places: but to sig∣nifie the greatnesse of their pride, the holie ghost saieth, that they shall take awaie euen gouernment it selfe, challenging it, as it were, to themselues, and they shall disgrace and blaspheme those that be excellent, those whome God hath aduanced. And hath not the Pope done thus? Doe not the Canonistes write thus of the Pope?Decret. lib. 2. Tit. de iudiciis. It seemeth that the Pope is greater then the Emperour. For the right of the heauenly and earthly empire, were committed of God to Peter. He had both the swordes, as saith the Euangelist. Beholde here are two swordes: the which hee hath conueied to his successors. But the execution of the temporall sword, the church hath commit∣ted to Emperours and kings: and yet sometime he hath exercised the iurisdiction of ciuill causes by priestes. If this bee true, the Empe∣rour and all kinges, are but the Popes seruants, they carrie his sword.Rom. 13.4. But S. Paul saith, that the ciuill magistrate is the minister of God: and he repeateth it twise, & no doubt he carrieth his sword. And Ferus, one of their owne side, thus writeth concerning these swordes:Ferus in Io. cap. 18. fol. 472. 473 Peter (saieth he) tooke the sworde, because he vnderstood not that which Christ said: he that hath not a sworde, let him sell his coate and buy one. This Peter vnderstood of the externall sworde, when as Christ spoke of the sworde of the spirit, that is the worde of God. And after: Away with this sworde that killeth men, my sworde which I haue committed to thee, cutteth off vices, saues the men. Returne the externall sworde into his sheath: or as some others saie, into his place. The proper place of the sworde, is the power (meaning the magistrate) let the power vse it, not thou. So that then by Ferus iudgment, Peter had not the materiall sword committed to him, nor the secular iurisdiction: That (saieth hee) is proper to the magistrate. And of the authoritie of the church he
writeth thus: Christ preferreth the church before the minister.Ferus in Io. ca. 19. fol. 523 For he saith, He that is greatest amōg you, let him be as your seruant. And S. Paul: Thus let a man esteem vs, as the ministers of God and stew∣ardes, &c. Therefore if the pope bee a minister, hee is vnder the church: and yet he chalengeth to be aboue the councell. And Peter, who (they say) did giue this authority to his successors, writeth thus to all christians. Be ye subiect to all the ordinances of man,1. Pet. 2.13 for the Lords sake, whether it be to the king as to the. most excellēt, (where hee vseth the same word that S. Paul vsed before) or to other rulers, which are sent of him. And afterwards, honor the king: This au∣thoritie Peter himselfe giueth to the ciuill magistrate, hee calleth him chiefe aboue all: and yet the papistes imagine against this his plaine writing, that he should make all his successors aboue him. The Pope (saie they) hath Gods power, he can make some∣thing of nothing. In those things that please him:Lib. 1. decret. tit. 8. de vsu pallii. his onely will is a sufficient reason. No man may say to him, why do you so? Hee can dispence aboue all law, he can make of vniustice, iustice, by correc∣ting and changing lawes, he hath fulnesse of authoritie. He transla∣teth Empires and kingdomes at his pleasure. For thus we read: When the church of Rome was oppressed of Astulphus,Decret. lib. 10 tit. 6. ca. 34 king of the Lombards: she asked aide of Constantine and Leo his sonne, Empe∣rors of Constātinople; & when as they would not defend the church of Rome, Stephen the second, being a Romaine borne, translated the Empire to Charles the great, who was son of Pipin, whom also Za∣charie his predecessor had placed in the place of Lewes, whom hee had deposed. So that to depose kinges, to translate Empires, if they be not obedient at word and becke (as they saie) is nothing to the pope. Pope Zacharie deposed Lewes king of France, and placed Pipin in his place; and Stephen translated the Empire from Greece to France: and after Iohn the 12. translated the Empire from France to Germanie. Thus they haue tossed the Empe∣rours vp and downe, and haue put them out of their places, and haue taken their authoritie vpon them; whom before Chysostome, and Tertullian, calleth the chiefe man vpon earth, and nexte to God. Neither hath the pope onelie abrogated the Emperors authori∣tie, by translating and deposing him at his pleasure,Lib. 1. cor. sect. 3 ca. 2. but also hath dealt most reprochfullie with him, and with others that bee in au∣thoritie: He maketh him his man to hold his stirrup, to beare his
chaste on his shoulder, to hold vp his traine. Henry the fourth was contented to waite on Pope Hildebrand, at Canusium, and thrée daies together,Sabel. en. 9 li. 3 to stand bare headed and bare foot in the hard frost at his gate:Carion. chron. So was the Emperor Fridericus Aenobarbus content willinglie, to laie his necke vnder the popes féete. The pope tooke the crowne from off the heade of Henry the second king of Eng∣land, and compelled him to put aside all his princelie estate, and maiestie, and like a meane priuate man, to come to his Legate with great humilitie and submission.Iohānes paris. de potestate reg. & pap. ca. 1 Innocentius the third called king Iohn of England vassallum suum, that is, his feod man, or his tenant. And they gaue not this name to kings only: but to Empe∣rors also. For thus they write, If the Emperour haue his authority immediately from the Pope, then the Emperor is the Popes seruaunt. And pope Innocentius saith the same: The Emperor (saith he) hol∣deth his Empire of the pope: therefore he is bounde to sweare ho∣mage and fealtie to the pope, as the vassall is bounde to his Lord. Our latter papistes in their writings follow the same vaine: They call the ciuill magistrates, carnall Lordes, humane creatures: And is not this to take awaie , soueraigne and supreame ciuill authoritie, or Lordship from them that ought to haue it, and to attribute it to those which ought not to haue it? which Iesus Christ denieth to his ministers and seruants. For the kings of the Gentiles,Luk. 22.25. , beare rule ouer them (saith he) and they that beare rule ouer them are called gracious Lordes or benefactors:. but you shall not so. And doth not the pope apparantlie declare himselfe herein to bee antichrist, in challenging that to himselfe which Christ Iesus denieth to all his ministers and seruants? And my kingdom is not of this world (saith our Sauior) Christ himselfe would not be made a king heere on earth:Ioh. 18.36. Ioh. 6.15. and may his vicegerent or vicar? To call Emperours and kinges vassalles, his seruants, to make them hold his stirrup, is not this to blaspheme, to reproch them that bee in authoritie? What néede I vse manie wordes. The thing it selfe is too manifest. Christ Iesus himselfe acknow∣ledged this authoritie to the Emperour in saying,Mat. 22.21. giue to Caesar that which belongeth to Caesar: and to God that which belongeth to God. And not onlie in worde but in deede, He paied tribute for himselfe & for Peter: he washed his disciples feet:17.24. Ion. 13.4. But the pope ta∣keth and exacteth tribute of Emperours, of kinges, hee maketh them kisse his feete, and doth hee not manifestlie prooue himselfe
hereby to be Antichrist? fulfilleth he not S. Iudes prophesse in this place? Yet Michaell the Archangell when hee stroue against the Deuill,Text. vers. 9. and disputed about the bodie of Moses, durst not blame him with cur∣sed speaking: but saide, the Lorde rebuke thee.] Heere wee may learne first by the name archangell, that there are degrees of an∣gels in heauen. The scriptures would not haue named a chiefe an∣gell, vnlesse there had beene inferiour angels. The which thing is sufficient to condemne the Anabaptisticall anarchie or equalitie of some, who will haue no superiours nor magistrates. God in heauen hath an order, a difference among his angels: therefore in earth he wil haue the same amongst men. Secondly, the name of this great angell Michael, may teach all princes and mightie men their duties: that is, to magnifie the Lord, to humble them∣selues vnder his mightie hand: to feare to offend him, and though they be in authoritie, for any cause to breake his lawes. For thus much the hebrue name (Michael) signifieth: who is like to the Lord. Though Michael himself was great among the angels: yet he glo∣rieth not in his own strength. So Dauid saith,Psal. 18. vers. 31 Who is like vnto ye Lord? or who hath any strength except our God? Hee accompted, as it should seeme, his owne glorie, vanitie: his owne strength, though a mightie king; yet like a potshearde in comparison of God. Euen as a candle light before the sunne: such is the glorie, maiestie of all kinges and princes before the Lorde,Oros. lib. 6. ca. 22. Caesar Au∣gustus (as it is reported) by diuine inspiration the daie that Iesus Christ was borne, would not bee called Lorde neuer after. Con∣stantine also the great,Nicephor. lib. 6. c. 46. in consideration of this his humilitie and seruice to God, caused a portable Church of woode to bee made, that in all his warres, whither soeuer he went, hee might serue God. And our king Henry the second,Stow in his last Chronicle. on Christmas daie wearing his crowne at Worcester, set it vpon the altar, and neuer would weare it after: in token that he acknowledged Iesus Christ to be king of kinges. All these fellowed the name of this great angell Mi∣chael: and no doubt in their heartes saide, Who is like vnto the Lorde? When as he stroue disputing about the body of Moses.Text.] Heere is the nature of the deuill, and his common practise taught vs. So that as S. Paul saith we may saie, (if we will marke the scrip∣tures,) We know his fetches, his deuises.2. Cor. 2.11. He goeth about to per∣uert
and abuse all thinges, he mooueth (as they saie) euerie stone to set vp his idolatrie: yea, euen Moses bodie. And here concer∣ning Moses bodie,Deut. 34.6 wee may learne first, that it is saide, that the Lord buried him. And therefore to burie the dead is no contempti∣ble work, it is a worke fit for the minister. Therfore let no mini∣ster thinke much to burie the dead, or thinke that it belongeth not to his office. Secondlie, it should seeme, though no man knewe the graue of Moses: yet the deuill knew where it was, and there∣fore because Moses was one, whome the Iewes beeing aliue, did greatlie reuerence: he would haue made an idoll of his bodie, that they might haue worshipped it after his death; but God would not suffer him. So that then hereby wee may learne, if God woulde not haue Moses bodie worshipped: much lesse the i∣mage of Moses, or of any sainte. And againe, if Sathan would so gladly haue had Moses bodie, to haue beguiled the people, yt which he could not haue; then no doubt, that which he can haue, hee will not omit: that is, to take vpon him Moses shape, or the shape of the saintes, or of the virgine Mary, or of an angel, to beguile vs with∣all. Therefore let euerie good christian saie with S. Paul: Wee are not ignorant of Sathans wiles, of his deuises: hee canne take vp∣on him the shape of Samuel,1. Sam. 28.14 the shape of an angel: therefore I will beléeue no apparitions, no reuelations: I will onelie rest vpon and cleane to Gods word, that teacheth me sufficient knowledge to my saluation: I will desire no more. They which doe not so, may easilie be deceiued. We may also learne heere the office of angels, to serue, to defend, guard and assist the godlie. So Dauid saith,Psal. 34.7 Heb. 1.14. The angell of God tarieth rounde about them that feare him, and deliuereth them. And S. Paul saieth, they are all ministring spi∣rits,Reu. 19.10 sent to serue those which shall inherit saluation. And so the an∣gell taught S. Iohn, I am thy fellowe seruaunt, and of thy brethren which haue the witnesse of God: worship God. So that then we are not to worship angels, as the angell heere teacheth S. Iohn, and not onelie teacheth, but proueth, They are our fellow seruantes, and who will worship his fellow seruant? And lastlie, heere wee may learne our owne duties: not to raile or reuile one another, when as quarrels shall chance to arise amongst vs.Mat. 5.22. He that calleth his brother foole contemptuoustis or opprobriouslie (saith our sauiour) is in daunger of hell fire: And S. Paul saith,Eph. 4.31. Let al sowrenesse or bitternesse, or wrath and anger, and
outcries and blasphemies, be quite taken from among you, with all maliciousnesse: Be courteous one to another, and pittifull, forgiuing one another, euen as Christ forgaue you. And in an other place,Phil. 4.5. Let your patient minde be knowne vnto all men: The Lord is euen at hande: As though he should saie, will you bee malicious, spite∣full, reuiling your brethren? and the Lord is at hande. Will you be falling out one with another, against his comming? Surelie this shall not please him. Forgiue one another, that he may forgiue you; be courteous one to another, that hee may be courteous to you againe. For with what measure you measure,Luk. 6.38. it shall bee restored to you againe. Michael woulde not reuile the deuill, and wilt thou reuile thy brother? This may teach all christians curtesie in their spéeches, in their dealings with their brethren. Manie passe not what they saie, what spéeches they giue, if they bee offended. But heere they must learne, though they haue cause, though he be a ve∣rie wicked man that speaketh against them, nay though hee were a deuill: yet they ought to giue courteous speeches, not rendering euill for euill, or reproch for reproch, as S. Peter also teacheth. Our God will haue all his courteous,1. Pet. 3.9 as well in their tongues as in their déedes. Michael said to the deuill, the Lord rebuke thee. This was all he saide. Let vs learne this lesson also of S. Michael, in the reproches and bitter speeches of our brethren, to saie vnto them; the Lorde reprooue thee: This lesson, these proude and pre∣sumptuous heretiques, these pretended catholiques, whom Saint Iude here speaketh of, had not learned. If they had, their bookes would not be so full of tauntes and bitter spéeches as they are, be∣ing not prouoked: as I haue partlie noted before, and as it is plaine to euerie one that will read their writinges. They declare hereby, of whose spirit they are. Gods spirit is courteous and gentle. But these speake euill of those things which they knowe not,Text verse 10 and whatsoeuer thinges they know naturally, as beastes which are with∣out reason; in those thinges they corrupt themselues.] Here the Apo∣stle hath a relation to that saying of Salomon, The foole maketh answere, before he knowe the matter. If he had hold his peace,Pro. 17.28 & 18.13. hee had beene accounted wise. So these men are, to bee accounted, which in truth by these tauntes and reproches, go about to defend their errours, and to cast a mist before the truth. Quippes and tauntes are pleasant to the carnall man, these he delighteth in:
they are as wine and nectar vnto him. And therefore no doubt, to make their doctrine more plausible, and acceptable to the sim∣ple, they haue mingled as it were this sharpe sauce of their vine∣ger and spight, in their bookes: And that not onelie against vs; but against the gospell it selfe which we teach,M. Harding which they call vene∣mous and lothsome stuffe, detestable blasphemies, Turkish doc∣trine. We may saie to them as our sauiour saide to the woman of Samariah, If she had known the gift of God and who it was, that said to her: giue me drinke; She woulde haue asked of him, and hee would haue giuen her the water of life.Io. 4 10 So if these men had known the gospell of Iesus Christ, which is the vnspeakeable gift of God: (as S. Paul saith to the Corinthians) as well as they had knowne the master of the sentences,1 Cor. 9.15 who as should seeme, was their ma∣ster in times past, (and to professe and teach him, they had their graces granted in the vniuersities) they would not thus raile on the doctrine of it. They are cunning in excommunicating, in cur∣sing with bell, booke and candle, and giuing to the deuill: but in the Lordes booke, in ringing his belles, in lightning the candle of his worde to the people: they haue no skill at all. And this makes thē thus to raile against it. The knowledg of the tonguesIn the primi∣tiue church it was a gift to the christians giuen, whereby they were knowne. Mark. 16.17 they make no account of, that which S. Paul makes the chiefe gift of the holie ghost, and therefore a meanes to leade into truth: they saie, it maketh heretickes, and therefore they must néedes make it a gift of Sathan. They cannot abide that their workes of pil∣grimages, virges, masses, and pardons, should be condemned: and to heare that men should bee saued by a liuely faith in Iesus Christ, working through loue. If they knew what true faith were, they would not thus raile against it. Woe be vnto them, for they haue followed the way of Cain, and are cast awaie by the deceipte of Balaams wages:Text verse. 11 and perish in the gaine saying of Core.] The Apostle Saint Iude, still goeth about to paint out these heretickes, (they shall be subtill, and hurtfull,) that being set out in their colors they may be the easilier bewraied and auoided. And because there is no plainer waie of teaching, then by examples: Therefore hee goeth about by examples, to laie them open to the eies of all men. And here these heretickes shall as it were in one battell-araie, followe all the chiefe heretickes, that were from the beginning of the worlde? Sathan shall nowe gather al his armie together against Gods church: This man of
ne Antichrist, shall nowe muster all his giants, shall haue his members florish and well liking, with all manner of sinne. And the Apostle putteth down here thrée principall captaines of them: Cain, Corah, and Balaam: and thrée sinnes, as mothers of the rest (for it were a worlde to reckon vp all:) that is, persecution, couetousnesse, treason or rebellion. These heretickes haue follow∣ed the way of Cain, in persecuting their brethren; and in the error or deceiuing of rewardes, wherewith Balaam was deceiued, they haue ouerflowed; & they haue perished in the gain saying of Corah. And are not these sinnes manifest in the popish Church? The Turke vseth not such crueltie in persecuting christians, as they doe to those, that speake against their religion. Fire and fagot was seldome heard of among the Barbarians and heathen, for anie trespasse; which nowe is their common punishment: So that they surpasse the Barbarians in their heathenish crueltie. And this persecution is like Cains: for he persecuted his brother,Gen. 4.8 be∣cause his sacrifice was better accepted of God then his, because hee was more iust and more godlie then hee: so because wee saie their masse is naught, their praiers are naught, they persecute vs. Cain should haue mended his waies, and not haue killed his bro∣ther: so shoulde these reforme their abuses, take awaie their su∣perstition and idolatrie, and not hate vs. But like Cain they think sorne to learne, they will maintaine their olde wickednesse still. Secondlie, they followe Balaam,Num. 22.23 they are all giuen to couetous∣nesse. Hee for rewarde gaue craftie counsell against Israell, and caused them to commit fornication with the Moabites: yet out∣wardlie hee shewed them a faire face: So doe they against the true Israelites. They haue a shew of christianitie, teaching them the right waie of saluation: but they make them commit spiritu∣all fornication; they teach them to offer their sacrifices to others, to put their trust in others, then in God alone. Such couert, sub∣till, and craftie enemies they are: and all for couetousnesse, all for rewarde. For this, as the terte heere saieth, they goe not or ride of an Asse as Balaam did: But they are euen as water poured out.. Pierce Plowman in his daies could note, how they coulde flie and locke to a buriall where anie thing was to bee gotten: but they seldome came to a christening, where nothing was to bee hadde. That common prouerbe was made of their couetousnesse: no nie, no pater noster: Nothing amongst them without money.
And haue not these followed the way of Balaam? Their Friers preaching,Salust. their Monkes praying, their Priestes massing, their pardons selling, and all for money. So that Iugurthes saying of old Rome was neuer truer then nowe:Omnia vena∣lia Roma. All things for mony are on sale, and now are to be sold at Rome. Num. 16And they haue perished in the contradiction of Corah.] Their last sinne shall bee rebellion and treason: which shall bring some of them to their endes. They shall be like Corah; he rebelled against Moses and Aaron: and so doe these, in rebelling against Iesus Christ, in putting their pope in his place; in taking to them his office, his priesthood: and against the ciuill magistrate, conspi∣ring against their persons, stirring vp their subiectes to rebellion from their allegiance, plainelie denying their authoritie: As Doctour Story of late did amongst vs, denying hee was the Queenes Subiect:Psal. 115.16. and because God had giuen the earth to the children of men; therefore hee saide, that anie man might chuse to bee subiect, to what Prince soeuer hee woulde. But God hath made diuisions of kingdomes, and Countries, and hath placed ouer them diuers Kinges and Gouernours,Dan. 2.21 Pro. 8.15 Nehem. 9.22 Psal. 47.3 Rom. 13.1 Exod. 20.21. whome hee commaundeth in his lawe to bee honoured as Fathers: Ho∣nour thy Father and thy Mother (saieth the Lorde,) thy Prince and Countrie are contained vnder this commaundement. This honor & obedience, thou canst not shake off. So that, as the child cannot at anie time bee set frée, from the dutie of obedience hee oweth to his Parentes: no more canne anie Subiect from his Prince. The Turks in their wicked religion haue this: that if a child rebell against his father, that sinne can neuer bee doone awaie, All the water in the Sea (saie they, who attribute much in their reli∣gion to outward washings, as the Iewes did) cannot wash it a∣waie. Such a haynous faulte they accounte disobedience and rebellion to their Parentes. But amongst vs, manie of late haue rebelled against their Soueraigne, haue imagined euill to their Mother, and Countrie, which when they were at home, neuer did them anie harme. Surelie such disloiall Children and Subiectes, the wicked and impious Turke shall con∣demne at the daie of iudgement. The Romaines and the Gre∣cians; although beeing hardelie dealte withall at home: yet coulde neuer bee brought to conspire against their Countries. That speech of Phocion to the Athenians is worthie of me∣rie,
. That is, I had rather my selfe suffer any euill at your hands, then attempt any euill against you. Their friendes complaine of the deathes of those, which are executed amongst vs: but let them marke and consider their treasons, conspiracies, re∣bellions, poysonings, which are the cause thereof.Num. 16.3 12. Corahs contra∣diction, or gainsaying, against Moses and Aaron, condemned him to a most fearfull, terrible and strange death: The earth swallow∣ed him vp quicke. And no doubt, this strange punishment, was to declare the haynousnesse of this sinne, and to deterre all men from it: So Absalon was hanged by the haire of the head.2. Sam. 18.9. And shall the contradictions and wicked dealings by al secret meanes, against their prince and countrie, of a great many in our daies, escape vnpunished? Let Corah his sinne like to theirs, terrifie them, and his fearefull punishment make them affraid. So that then the Deuill nowe, as into a huge monster, hath heaped all these sinnes in one; murther, couetousnes, and treason: and that in the papists, who seeth not? These are spottes in your feastes of charity,Text. Verse 12. when they feast with you, without all feare feeding themselues: cloudes they are without water, caried about of windes, corrupt trees and without fruit, twise dead and plucked vp by the rootes.] This place also prooueth, that these heretikes shall bee in the church, that they shall be no open enemies: they shal be partakers of our loue feastes, which the fathers called , or , that is a generall assembly or charity it selfe, not masse: because al then assembled themselues together, none absented themselues, as we doe now adaies. All which were partakers of the Lordes death, by receiuing these holie mysteries, set foorth both by heart and tongue the same. This they accounted their homage, which they did owe to that great king Iesus,1. Cor. 11.26▪ Luke 22.19. who hath tolde them by his Apostle, that as often as they should doe this, they should set foorth his death till he came. That this they should doe in remembrance of him. The doing of this, should be a most certaine signe of their remembrance. If this be true, as it is most true, how little then doe many at this daie, effectuallie remember him? which care not how seldome they communicate, scarcely once by the yeare. It will make him likewise, not remember them.Ps. 111.4. Let them take héede, The Lord hath so done his gratious workes, that they ought to be had in remembrance, or as it is in the Hebrewe: The gratious
and mercifull Lorde hath made a memorie of his wondrous workes. And this memorie which hee hath made, which hee hath ordained, dare wee despise? Secondly, it is called , charitie, as in this place of S. Iude: because then indéede, charitie as it were ap∣peared, The charity or loue of God towardes vs, in giuing his sonne, to be a sacrifice for our sinnes. The roote or seede of charitie is sent downe from aboue,1. Io. 4.7. For charity is of God (saith S. Iohn) it commeth from aboue.1. Cor. 10.16. And S. Paul saith, we are all one body, one bread: be∣cause wee receiue of one bread. The receiuing the Lordes bread, soweth this vnitie, this séede of christian charitie in our heartes: For lacke of this often receiuing; for lacke that this séede of cha∣ritie is so seldome receiued from aboue, by these holy mysteries: it is to bee thought, that in manie great men this charitie is so rare, as it is. For of all other, men of authoritie and gentlemen, they receiue the seldomest; they thinke they néed not receiue. And the pastor and church wardens, dare not compell them, or almost complaine of them. And surely charitie or loue amongst these, is now adaies waxen most colde. The loue or charitie one of vs to∣wardes another, in eating and drinking all together, should ap∣peare, the rich with the poore, the lyon with the lambe. For at that time, euerie man brought according to his abilitie, something in∣to the church, with which, after they had receiued the communion, they feasted all together, as appeareth by S. Paul. Concilium Anti∣siodorense. ca. 90These feasts continued long in the church; till the Antisiodoren∣sian councell, till poperie began to flourish. Then they were ba∣nished (as I haue noted before) vnder holie pretences, as it should seeme: That maidens should not sing in the churches, nor feasts there be vsed. They would haue the church kept cleane: but vnder this holy pretence, greater abominations followed, and the church was polluted in déede. Then crept in, for singing of psalmes altoge∣ther, their single and sencelesse songes of their priestes, without vnderstanding, which could neuer haue beene allowed, if the for∣mer common singing of psalmes, had béene continued: then crept in their single communion, the people were shut out of the quite, and after debarred of the Lordes cuppe. At these feastes, were some of these heretikes the Apostle here speaketh of, present: These feastes were not taken away, till they had set foote in the church: And therefore hereby wee maie see, howe poperie came into the church, by stealing steppes, by degrées, and not all at once; after
these psalmes and feastes, and all, were gone.In Apolog. c. 39▪ In those feastes was great sobriety, as Tertullian writeth of them: & yet in these feasts, these vsed riot and excesse. They which should haue béene orna∣ments, were spottes and staines, they which shoulde haue beene lights, were slanderers to the church: They fed themselues with∣out regard of anie man, they made much of themselues. And by this is noted, that these heretikes, should not only be cruell in per∣secution, and couetous in conuersation, and rebellious in practi∣ses: but also riotous and belly gods in their liuing.Ezec. 34.2. They shall re∣semble those olde Iewish false prophets, which should feede them∣selues, and not féede their stockes. And were not the whole popish cleargie such like? were not these spottes in your feastes? did not they féede themselues? They should haue fedde the soules of their flockes, and feasted them spirituallie: but they tooke part of their feastes and good cheere, but they neuer feasted their soules:1. Cor. 9.11. They reaped their carnall things, but they neuer sowed them any spirituall thinges. And is not this to be spottes in their feastes? But they saie they kept good houses in those daies. It maie be so. But then they fedde the bodie onelie: and not the soule. But Christ com∣manded his pastors chiefely, to feede the soule. Feede my sheepe,Io. 21.17. feede my sheepe, feede my lambes, saith our sauiour to Peter. And those three féedinges (as some note) argue thrée kindes of foode: of word and doctrine, and of example of life and conuersation, and of foode and meate in hospitality and sustentation. The first & chiefe of these in those daies, they for the most part neglected: and of yt the Apostles said, It was not meet, to leaue the word of God,Acts 6.2. and serue tables; preferring preaching of the word of God, before the féeding of the poore. And of this our sauiour saith,Luke 12.43. Happy is that seruant whō his master when he commeth, shall finde giuing meate to his family in due season. Oh then twise vnhappie is he, that giueth none at all! And here by the waie (this in due season) toucheth them, that be non-residents, that seldome come at their flockes, they cannot giue them meate, in due season. But the Epistle of S. Peter, who with S. Iude (as I haue before noted) ioines hands in discouering these heretikes, more at large sets them out.2. Pet. 2.13. They account plea∣sure daily banqueting, saith he: they fare deliciously euery day, with that rich glutton; they follow the steppes of those riotous pastors and sonnes of Belial, whom Esay prophesieth of. These greedy dogges (saith he) can neuer haue enough,Esay. 56.10. & these sheepheards cānot vnder∣stand.
They all looke for their owne waies, euery one for his aduan∣tage,Verse. 12. for his owne purpose. Come (saith one) I will bring wine, and we will fill our selues with strong drinke, and to morrow shall bee as this daie: and much more aboundant. They forget that lesson of the preacher,Eccles. 3.1. there is a time for all things. And were not their Ab∣baies and Frieries, in time past like these? neuer satisfied, neuer hauing enough. This one thing maie bee a plaine proofe thereof: That when by the statute of mortmaine, they were abridged, without licence of the prince, to receiue the gift of anie moe tem∣porall landes, at the death of anie man (which they still gaped af∣ter, although they had enough alreadie) then they obtained license of the Pope, that they might haue benefices impropriate to them, placing some poore vicars in the cure, and they might receiue al the commoditie themselues: And so they robbed the true pastor of his liuing. And thus they, by their excessiue couetousnesse were the adulterous fathers, of impropriations. It was also, they said, the propertie of a Frier, still do be begging. It should séeme these earthly things they so gréedelie sought after: they tooke part ther∣of, they tooke some pleasure therein. 2. Pet. 2.13. .But that which followeth in the Apostle Peter, toucheth them is the quicke: They banquet and make good cheere, in their deceipts and fraudes: They themselues, call their oblations and offerings, as the bloud of Hailes, and such like (which they confessed to be but lies) holie deceiptes and fraudes. And by this, they beguiled the people, and got their mony from them; and with this mony, they made merrie and kept good cheere: And is not this to banquet with their deceiptes and guiles? euen by their owne confession. Naie besides all this, all their good chéere, in their Abbaies & Frie∣ries, which they maintained, came of deceipt. They perswaded the people that they would praie for them,Mat. 25.9. that they should haue part of their oyle to light their lampes, when the bridegroome should come, they sold them the merits of all their couent: and they sold them deare enough. And by these meanes, they obtained all their landes, they gat all their riches, they maintained their good cheere: Whereas in Epiphanius daies, and in Beades daies here in En∣gland, the first good Monkes, in all monasteries as they reporte, were glad to worke, with their handes to get their liuings. They knewe not this gainefull trade and merchandise of selling their praiers, as these did of late daies: and yet they prayed as much as
they did both daie and night as they report,Bede mentions there three daies fast, tri∣duanum ieumi∣um, with prai∣ers: at the bat∣tell with Ed l. frithe eccl. hist. 2. lib. ca. 2. Mat. 25.8. Mat. 23.14. and were as full of good workes, as euer they were. But they thought according to the gospell, they coulde not haue oyle enough for themselues and for others also: These latter knew not the gospel, and that made them so bolde and hardie. And is not this deceipt? surely the greatest deceipt in the worlde, to make merchandise, and that false mer∣chandise, of mens soules: to eate the sinnes of the people, to make no bones of them: vnder pretence of long praiers, with the Pharises, to deuoure widowes houses. Thus we maie sée how plainly S. Peter and S. Iude agrée together, in disciphering these heretiks; and thus we maie plainly sée, if we be not ouermuch blinded with partiali∣tie, who fulfill both their prophesies. S. Paul saieth,2. Cor. 5.10. Wee must all giue account for our owne workes what we haue done in our bodies: And Chrysostome saieth to his hearers,Hom 13 ad Pop. Antioch. I would to God I coulde worke for you, that my works would serue your turne: but you must doe your good workes your selues.Mat. 7.19. The tree it selfe that beareth not good fruit is hewen downe, and cast into the fire (saith our saui∣our) Is cutte downe alreadie, euen as sure, as that it were cutte downe. But they will saie, maie not one praie for another? And so ones good workes profite another. It is true, one maie praie for another, and so helpe another. But euen as proppes to a vine, or cares to a boate; are our praiers for others: They are helps, they are outwarde meanes: but if the vine be dead it selfe, what profi∣teth the vnderpropping of it? If the boate take water, if it be not made of good wood, if the boardes be not compact together, what profiteth the oares? Euen so, if as vines, we haue not the life of faith our selues; if we be not grafted in that vine Iesus Christ; if like good boates, we be not compact together, with the bondes and ioints of christian charitie: these props, these oares, these praiers,Heb. 10.38. or whatsoeuer of our brethren will not help vs. The iust man liueth by his own faith. But this sale of their workes, & that of bad workes, of praiers in Latine, of de profundis, for another man, which Dauid made for himselfe, which was a plain mockerie of God: yea & that they standing in néed of them, themselues (as who is it, yt dare say to God, he is not an vnprofitable seruant?) And lastly,Luke 17.10. our trust in these their workes, is the thing that Gods word condemnes. But the church (saie they) hath a treasure, and the Pope is the dispenser of it, and out of that, he maie bestow or sell merites to
whome hee will. Wee reade no such thing in the scriptures. In Christ Iesus wee reade,2 Col. 9. Io 1.16. 2. Col. 3. are all the treasures of wisedome and know∣ledge: and if of these, then of mercie, of merits also. For another text saith, All fulnesse dwelleth in him, then fulnesse of mercy. And of this his fulnes, we all like empty vessels, must receiue. And the ministers of the gospell with S. Paul, must preach , vnsearchable riches of Christ, among the Gentiles. If the riches of Christ be so aboundant,Ephes. 3.8. what néede we anie other? If it be the duetie of his ministers to preach these: then they are anti∣christes ministers, that preach anie other. And S. Paul saith, the church is the fulnesse of him that filleth all things in all thinges.Ephes. 1.23. Why then, she is filled of him: she hath no treasures of her owne to sel. Let all runne to the well head,Psal. 35.10. Ier. 2.13. and not to the streames, as ye scrip∣ture commandes. And here also that text of the gospell condem∣neth their merchandise or sale of their workes: you haue receiued freely,Mat. 10.6. giue freely, saith our sauiour. Their workes are fréely giuen them of God, why should they then sell them? Text.Cloudes they are without water, carried about of windes, corrupt trees, and without fruite, twise dead and plucked vp by the rootes.] Hitherto the Apostle hath shewed vs these deceiuers by manie and most liuely examples: now least wee should bee deceiued by them, and that we should discerne them in déede; he pointes them out by similitudes in their colours, as we saie. And he puts down heere two similitudes of them, to teach vs their vaine bragging and oftentation. They shall make great shewes, they shall pro∣mise much: but performe nothing. They shall be like good shéepe∣heardes in shewe: but in truth nothing neare them. Ministers are compared by S. Paul to the Hebrewes,Heb. 6.7. to cloudes which raine vpon the earth: after whose heauenly showers, if the ground and hearts of their hearers, bring forth no fruit, they are as barren ground, accursed,Eccles. 11.3. and adiudged worthy the fire. And the preacher saieth, if the cloudes be full, they will power out water: So Gods ministers will plenteously declare his will to his people.Am. 7.16. And Amasiah cō∣manded Amos, prophesie not against Israell, neither drop any more against the house of Isaak: So that all Gods pastors are cloudes, which raine, which droppe like dewe, which poure out aboundant∣lie, as occasion requireth, the heauenly raine, vpon the ground of Gods church. But these are cloudes: but voide of water, carried about with windes. They haue the habit of pastors, the authority:
they are placed aloft, they are called Prelates, they make great shewes, euen as thicke cloudes doe sometime of raine, but not a droppe followes. The soules of their people, euen as it were drie ground, thinke for lacke of heauenlie moysture. And were not the Popish cleargie like these cloudes? with all their ornaments and robes and gownes and habites like pastors: but no raine fel. They were caried about with winde,Ephes. 4.11. for lack of the firmament of Gods word. God hath giuen Apostles, and Euangelists, and pastors, and teachers in his church: least we should be caried about with eue∣rie blast of vaine doctrine. These clouds, lacking the soundnesse of the Apostles doctrine and euangelistes, like emptie vessels, were tossed vp and downe. They beléeued euerie thing. They were not built vpon the rocke, that is, vpon Iesus Christ, and his word.Psal. 1.3. They are also trees in Autumn withering] The Godly are called trees growing by the waters side, that bringe foorth their fruit in due sea∣son, whose leaues do not wither. And our sauiour saith, euery good tree bringes foorth good fruit. But these are like trees blasted, for so the greeke name importeth, , which bringeth foorth nothing but corrupt and wi∣thered fruit. Such workes were most of theirs, not workes com∣manded of God in his worde: but of their owne deuises. Not workes that tooke sappe by faith, but which tooke sappe of mans fancie; as oblations, pilgrimages, buying of ornamentes to the church making great windowes, guilding images: all these lack the sappe of Gods word, these were like blasted fruit. And such for the most part, were the workes of these pastors, the fruit these gaue to their hearers. [Twise dead] not onelie by nature borne the children of wrath, and in life liuing like the sonnes of Beliall: but by their doctrine, falling awaie from the life of grace.1. Ti 5.6. A wi∣dowe wallowing in pleasure, though liuing bodily, yet the Apostle countes dead to God: much more these couetous, riotous, fruite∣lesse, and barren pastors. [Twise dead] dead men by their sinnes, and dead pastors by their doctrine. For no doubt, although they, which in that time of ignorance died,2. Chro. 15.3.4. and called for mercie ob∣tained it; as wee reade of the like time of ignorance among the Iewes, and so we doe not damne all our fathers that died then: yet no doubt, there remaineth an eternall woe, as vpon the Pha∣rises, so also vpon those blind guides, which by their holie deceits, beguiled Gods people. Or twise dead:] neither teaching by tongue
nor by example of life. Plucked vp by the rootes.] That is they are like trees plucked vp by the rootes, which are past all hope of reco∣uerie: euen so these will hardlie be brought to the light of the gos∣pell, they will hardly be brought from their olde kinde of liuing. They can sing masse well: but they are vnfit to open their mouths to speake to the glorie of God, to preach his word, to edifie his con∣gregation. That they cannot awaie withall. Text. Verse. 13.They are raging waues of the sea, foming out their owne shame: they are wandring starres: to whome is reserued the blackenesse of darkenesse for euer.] Before, the Apostle seemeth to describe the persons of these heretikes; they are cloudes without raine, they are emptie vessels, they are blasted trees: Now he describes their workes, their dealings. Christes church is compared to a shippe Heb. 6.Heb. 6.20. and the shippe wherein hee was, may resemble very fitly his church: which was almost ouerwhelmed with waues: In so much that the Apostles cried out:Mat. 8.25. saue vs Lord, wee perish. And in the Reuelation we reade,Apoc. 12.16. that the serpent out of his mouth, threw after the woman, that is the church, water like a floud; in so much that she was caried away with the floud: and if the earth had not helped her, she had vtterly perished. Surely this sea is the world: and these waues are heretikes, and false catholiques, that trouble and vexe the church of God. No shippe in the maine sea was euer so tossed, as the shippe of Iesus Christ is tossed in this world, by sathan himselfe driuing her (if it were possible) to the rocke of despaire; and therefore it hath néede of hope, as it were a most sure anchor, fastened with the oath and promise of God, as it were with two most strong cables: by his ministers,Heb. 6.18. assaulting and persecuting it; and therfore it hath néed of Iesus Christes power and presence, with it, euen to the end of the world. If he should not put to his helping hande, it could not haue chosen, but this shippe had beene sunken, long since. Hee helpeth with his mightie hand this poore ship, he maketh the earth, that is death, deuoure her raging waues, her persecuting ene∣mies. Herod a length died, persecuting Christ: so shall all He∣rods, persecuting his christians. And surely these waues may re∣semble the Cardinalles, Bishoppes and Prelates of the church of Rome, who in all kingdomes, since Popedome beganne, haue beene readie to persecute the church, and to assault this shippe. No man durst once speake against the Pope, or his doings; but hee
was catched by and by: So that these men maie bee fitly compa∣red to waues for their doinges, waues for their worldlinesse and couetousnesse, waues for their pride and ambition.In Apologia ad Guilielmum Abba. em. Bernard spea∣king of the state and pride of the Abbots of his daies, writes thus: I lie (saith he) if I sawe not an Abbot haue in his traine, threescore horse and aboue: you would say, if you saw them ride by, they were not fathers of Monasteries, but Lordes of some Mannors: not rulers of soules, but gouernours of prouinces. Then they must haue caried with them, their table clothes, their goblets, their basons, their can∣dlestickes, their trunkes stuffed, not with litter for their horses: but with ornaments for their beddes. They scant trauell seauen furlongs from home, but with all their stuffe and furniture; as though they should go to some armie, or into some wildernesse, where no proui∣sion were to be had. The Bishop of Elie here in England,Stow in his Chro. in king Ri∣chard ye first his daies, being in his absence gouernour of the Realme, ridde with fiue hundreth horses. Pius the second came into Perusia,Campan. in eius vita. riding on a white Palfrey, twelue others of the same colour, going be∣fore emptie, couered with purple, being led with golden bridles. The magistrates of the citie carrying a cloth of state of purple, wrought with golde: vnder which was the pope carried in fine white linnen, with a stole of golde put about him, and a scarlet hatte. What pompe was this? What greater pride could be imagined? And what is more vaine, and more like the vaine and mightie waues of the sea? They are wandring starres,Text. for whom is reserued the blackenesse of darkenesse for euer.] The pastors of Christes church are called starres by Daniell, because they giue light to others,Dan. 12.3. in the darke night of this world: because they take their light of the sunne, be∣cause they séeme little, though in deede greater then the earth; be∣cause they are fixed in the firmament, they kéepe their place. But these would séeme to be starres: but they are wandering or erring starres. The sunne is called Sol, because it onelie shineth (as one noteth) and giueth light to all thinges. And therefore the wicked complaine of the lacke of this light:Wisdom. 5.6. Therefore haue we erred from the way of truth, and the light of righteousnesse hath not shined vnto vs; and the sonne of vnderstanding rose not vpon vs. These borrow not their light of the sunne:Leu 10.1. They bring into the Church strange fire with Nahab and Abihu: they seeme profound doctors: but their doctrines are not constant, are not sure: are not grounded on the
word of God. They ground, they build vpon the sand; that is vp∣on nature, vpon worldly thinges. So the papistes make heauen like a kings court, and Peter the porter; and saintes mediators to God. They drawe frée will from Aristotle. Their schoolemen, were almost as manie in opinions, as in number. The sande is in∣finite; and so are the deuises of mans reason. It is impossible, that euer they should come to an ende, that followe it, and are ru∣led by it. To whome is reserued the blacknesse of darkenesse for euer.] Be∣cause they like owles, loued darkenes more then light, because they haue delighted more in the darkenesse of mans braine, then in the light of Gods word: therefore shall they dwell in darkenesse for e∣uer. For God in the same measure againe, repaies the wicked; and heapes their owne euill waies vpon their owne heades. They which loued darkenesse, shall bee tormented in darkenesse: they which like wilde beastes, deuoured and destroied all thinges (for Bestiae taketh his name à vastando of wasting as some thinke) shall bee de∣stroied themselues of deuilles: they which haue loued the pleasant fire of sinne, shall suffer the sharpe fire of hell. Text. Verse 14. Some thinke that Enoch wrote bookes, as of this book Tertullian de habitu muliebri makes mentiō and defends.And Enoch also the seuenth from Adam prophesied of such, saying: Behold the Lord commeth with thousands of his saintes.] This say∣ing of Enoch maie séeme to be by tradition committed to his po∣steritie: as no doubt was that promise of God made to Adam, the womans seede shall bruise the serpents head. This place also proo∣ueth, that God will haue some alwaies to preach his truth: as E∣noch and Seth, and Noe to the old world, & Lot to the Sodomites; but neuer so manie in anie age, as in this of ours: And therefore not one wo as our sauiour pronounced ouer Capernaum and Beth∣saida, but euen as S. Paul saith, Anathema Maranatha, that is, woe and againe wo shall fall vpon those, which despise Gods word, nowe so plainely and plentifully taught.Luke 12.48. For as the gospell teacheth, to whom much is giuen, of them much shall be required againe. And a∣gaine, he that hath eares to heare let him heare. But take heed what ye heare:Mar. 4.24. as though hee should saie, you shall one daie giue ac∣count of it. The Lord commeth, that is, shall most assuredly come with thou∣sands of his saintes and angelles. For both these shall adorne the tri∣bunall seate of Iesus Christ.Mat. 17.3. And as Eliah and Enoch in the trans∣figuration: so now all saintes in his great glorie and maiesty shal
bee present with him. And thousandes here are named, that the number of the wicked should not terrifie the godlie. The wicked to vs séeme manie in number, seeme mightie in power: but they are but as waxe before the fire when God ariseth,Psal. 68.2. their enemies are but a handfull in comparison of his. The chariots of God, are twenty thousand euen thousands of Angels, and the Lord is amongst them, as in the holy place of Sinah.Verse 17. And there was a great company stoode before the throne of God, of all nations, kinreds and people, which no man could number. And euen in this world no doubt,Reuel. 7.9. the Lordes wheate is infinite: though hidden amongst the chaffe, though the chaffe of the wicked beare the greatest shewe. To giue iudgment against all men,Text. Verse 15. and to rebuke all the vngodly among them, and all their wicked deedes which they haue vngodly committed, and of all their cruell speakings, which wicked sinners haue spoken against him.] He speaketh of the second comming of Christ. For at the first, when he came into the world, he came not to iudge the worlde, but that the worlde by him might bee saued.Io. 3.17. With God mercie alwaies goeth before iudgment, pardon is of∣fered before punishment, saluation before destruction: So Iesus Christ came a sauiour first, before hee comes a iudge. And euen now his long tarrying from this his fierce iudgment, which here so long before Enoch prophesieth of;Phil. 4.5. Ia. 5 10. 2. Pet. 3.9. and the Apostles saide was hard at the doore, is nothing else, but his great aboundant tender mercie to vs ward, as S. Peter teacheth: he is loth to come, he de∣ferreth the time, no doubt, as long as may be, that all men might bee prepared against his comming. And the great vengeance which remaineth for the vngodlie, should kéepe Gods children in his feare and obedience. If the elements shall burne with fire, what kinde of men ought we to be (saith Peter) in holy conuersations and good workes,Verse 11. looking for and hastning to the comming of the day of God? We should by our workes declare our selues, as though we greatlie desired that daie, as though we would euen run to méet it. Euery daie hath his proper workes. The scripture teacheth vs what workes belong to the daie of iudgment:Mat. 25.35. To feede the hun∣gry, to giue drinke to the thirstie, to harbour the harbourles, to cloth the naked, to visit the sicke, to go to prisoners. These workes we should doe with all speed, and so we should as it were make haste to that daie. These are the workes which at that daie shall be loo∣ked for at our hands; shall be allowed of in our accountes; shall
be crowned of our mercifull and mightie king. These the iudge himselfe, who cannot lie, who would haue all his ready and prepa∣red, hath foretold vs. And what can be more louingly done to vs then this? that the iudge should tell one what he should doe or saie, before hee commeth to the barre. Our iudges maie not doe it, they maie giue no counsell: but this great iudge of his excéeding great loue towardes vs, hath done it: and oh foolish men, who wil not followe his counsell, who regard it not, who nowe this iudge∣ment drawing neare, will doe quite contrarie. These dearthes of corne which we haue had of late, this dearth of wooll and cloth, these rents raised of houses in all places: are but trialles of vs a∣gainst this great daie of God, what we will doe: whether we had rather fill our purses, or feede the poore; whether we had rather for lacke of rent, turne the poore out of doores, or else haue patience with our brethren; and if our tenants be not able to pay vs, looke for our rent at Iesus Christes handes: whether wee had rather clothe our selues with our wooll money, and hang the walles of our houses; or the liuelie walles of the temple of Iesus Christ? The most men hope and wish corne will be deare, and hourd it vp, they will sell none yet, that they maie fill their purses, they wil not sell to the poore, much lesse relieue the néedie. The landlordes inhaunce their rents, that the poore cannot reach to them, and so doe not harbour them; but as much as in them lieth, turne them out of dores: naie they inhaunce their rentes so, as the tenant is not able, both to paie his rent, and maintaine his familie. And this is the chiefe cause, why hospitalitie decaieth so in our daies, especiallie in great lordshippes, which should bee as it were wel∣heads to relieue the whole towne. Their rents are so great, that the tenantes of them are not able to giue anie almes, or reliefe. And is this to haste to the daie of the great God? Is this to follow our iudges counsell? Is this to haue faith? This is plainlie to saie in déede, there shall be no iudgment. For if they beléeued it, they would prepare themselues against it. S. Paul giueth all christians this notable lesson against the daie of iudgment: We must all be made manifest before the tribunal seat of Iesus Christ,2. Cor. 5.10. that euery one may receiue according to those things hee hath done in his body, either good or euill. Wherein euerie word hath his force: First in that he saith (we must) there can be no excuse, God will pardon none. All, euen euery one, euen kings
and others that be in authoritie and nowe iudge others. (Be made manifest:) not onely make appearance, as we doe in our courtes oftentimes, and then depart: but all the corners of our heartes, all our workes, all our secret thoughts, all our imaginations and priuat practises (which we keepe close in the bottome of our harts, as the prophet Dauid saieth, and which wee would haue no man knowe) shall then be made manifest, euen as cleare as the sunne, to the eies of all men: And that not before a friend, which would couer and cloake their faultes; but before the tribunall seate of a most terrible iudge, at whose presence heauen and earth quaketh: who is now come to render to euery man according as he hath done. Oh therefore, let vs nowe take héede what wee doe, let vs studie nowe to please him, that at that daie we maie be accepted. Wee knowing this feare of the Lord, saith the Apostle, this terrible day of iudgment: we doe perswade men that they do good,2. Cor. 5.11. that they now striue who can please him best. For no doubt there is a reward. It is not, as most men thinke, that there shall be no regard had of our workes. Although our workes shall not iustifie vs, yet this shall be required at our hands, God will not haue his seruants idle:2. Pet. 1.8. And therefore he saith to all his faithfull seruants, I come quickly and my reward is with me: As though he should saie,Reu. 22.12. be not weary of well doing, or do not thinke it long ere I come, for I will come quickly, in respect of eternitie. Labour you, sweate you, endure you but a mynute of an hower; and you shall rest for euer. And my rewarde, my wages is with mee; I come not emptie. And surelie hee that bringes wages with him, lookes for some worke∣men. Let vs all therefore be the Lordes workemen against this great and appointed daie, that we maie receiue our wages. For he will giue to euery one as his worke is. Our daies are like the daies of Noah and of Lot,Luke 17.26.27. whereof as our sauiour prophecied, the men of the worlde at this day, doe as they did then. Let vs marke euerie circumstance and euerie word well, and we shall find it so. As our earnest desire and great studie of building, planting, buying, selling, purchasing, banque∣ting, marying in tender yeares without consent of parents, neg∣lecting degrees of consanguinitie, more then euer heretofore, e∣uidentlie proue. May it not trulie be saide of our daies that wee eate and drink? when as fasting nowe almost in all places and a∣mongst all sortes of men is quite banished. Neither maister nor
seruant, nor artificer, nor laborer will fast: If they do fast at any time, it is by constraint and with murmuring. Luk 18.12The Pharisie fasted twise in the weeke, as appeareth in the gos∣pell; and shall not we christians fast as often? Especiallie seeing our sauiour saith to all christians,Mat. 5.20. that except your righteousnesse exceede the righteousnesse of the Scribes and Pharisies; yee shall not enter into the kingdome of heauen. This terrible sentence shoulde moue vs to fast.Barthol. George viz. de morib. Turcar. The Turkes haue their Lente which they call ORVTS: and they fast one moneth and a weeke, euery yeare: and when they fast, they tast nothing, neither bread nor water til the stars appeare in the firmament: And shal not we obserue our Lent? shall they go beyonde vs in fasting? That were a shame for christians, whome S. Paul commandes euen twise in one chapter,Tit. 3.8.14 Ignat. in epist. ad Phillip. Aug. epist. 119. ad. Ian. Ieron. in 3. cap. Ionae. Brent. in cap. 19 Exod. to excell in good workes. The primitiue church obserued Lent, as Ignatius, Augustine & Hierome do testifie, and our church & Prince now also commands it: and yet such is our intemperancie, that we wil not obserue it. Brentius a learned man of our age writes thus, concer∣ning the fasting of Friday and Saturday, vpon that place of Exo∣dus, Moreouer the Lorde saide vnto Moses, Goe to the people and sanctifie them to daie and to morrow, and let thē wash their clothes, and let them be readie on the thirde daie: for the third daie the Lord will come down in the sight of al the people on the Mount, &c. Then Moses went downe from the Mount vnto the people, and sanctified the people, and they washed their clothes: and he said vnto the peo∣ple, Be ready on the third day and come not at your wiues. I thinke (saith Brentius) that from this place our ancestors consecrated to so∣brietie and abstinencie the sixt day and the Sabaoth: that on the next Lords day ye people might come pure and prepared to heare the law of God. The superstition of daies is to be misliked; yet this preparatiō and instruction is necessarie, that men may be made more fit to heare the worde of God: we sowe no seeds in the earth vnlesse we plough before, &c. And surelie it is to be feared that for lacke of this pre∣paration, the seede of Gods word, which is so painfullie and plenti∣fullie sowen in all places, at this daie, taketh so small effect & brin∣geth forth so ltitle fruite. Men come to heare the word of God on the sabaoth daie with vnprepared heartes. It is a seede sowen on land that is not plowed; and can the seed then be it neuer so good, bring forth anie fruit?Trem. in cap. 29. Exod. And Tremelius vpon the same place writes thus: Nowe altogether applie your selues, that you may be instruc∣ted,
insomuch that nowe come not at your wiues. And vpon that place of Samuel, where Abimelecke asketh Dauid if the young men haue kept themselues, at least from women:1. Sam. 21.5 This question (saieth Tremelius) is drawn from the Analogy of the commandement Exod. 19.15. and of the Oracle of God, of which mention is made hereaf∣ter in the tenth verse, and in the chap. following verse 10. As though hee would say, they which will vse most holie thinges, such as these loaues of bread are: must be endued with that purenesse, which God requireth of them that come nigh to him, and now also he comman∣deth. They which heare the worde of God, or participate his holie sacramentes, by Tremelius iudgement grounded by that place of Exodus, should abstaine euen from their lawfull pleasures, euen of meates and drinkes, euen from their wiues, before they come to be guests of the Lordes table. But I feare me that before wee come to the Lordes table, either to eate the bread of his worde, or of his sacraments, this washing our garments, this fasting, this abstaining from our wiues is neglected. In Hebrew, fasting is called Tsom, deriued by transposition of letters, of Mots, that signifieth to sucke out:Dan. 10 2. and surelie so it may verie trulie. For thus we reade of Daniell. Daniell was in heauinesse three weekes: I did eate (saith he) no pleasant bread, nei∣ther came flesh in my mouth,  neither did I annoint my selfe at all till three weekes of daies were finished, and then Daniell lift vp his eyes, and he sawe a man clothed in linnen, whose loynes were girded vnto him with fine gold of Vphaz, his bodie was like the Chrysolite,  & his face to looke vpon like the lightening, and his eies as lampes of fire, and his armes and his feet were like to polished brasse, and the voice of his worde was like a multitude. And hee saide to Daniell: Feare not Daniell: for from the first daie,  that thou didst set thy heart to vn∣derstand, and to humble thy selfe before God, thy words were heard. And I am come for thy wordes: and I am come to shewe thee what shall come to thy people in the latter daies. Daniell fasting sawe this strange vision, and euen suckt from heauen that great myste∣rie, that shoulde befall his people in the latter daies, and thinges that concerne vs. Peter also fasting till the sixt houre of the day, that is, till noone:Acts. 10.10. had that great mysterie of ye calling of the Gentiles reuealed vnto him. And Cornelius fasting til the ninth houre, till three of the clock,verse 3. sawe an Angell appearing vnto him, and suckt euen by this means,
by sending for Peter, faith in Iesus Christ, & the saluation of his soule. In our daies Napier a learned man, that hath taken great paines in vnfoulding the mysteries of the Reuelation,Napier to the christiā reader confesseth to the glorie of God: that hee found more fruite in searching that high mysterie, in one howres sobrietie, praier, and humble meditation, then in a thousand daies of curious or presumptuous inquisition. And no doubt Philippus de dies, Granatensis, and Ferus amongst the papists: all the iewels they haue,Phil. de Dies. Fer. 2. in lit. maior. they haue obtained by this meanes of praier and fasting. It is fasting that makes the mind apt to con∣templation, as they themselues doe confesse. Granatensis confes∣seth that the three children in Babilon,Fer. in c. 9. Mat. Granat. de Ieiu∣nio lib. 2. cap. 19▪ who despised the kinges deli∣cates and pretious wines, which were brought them euen from the kings own table, being content with pulse and water, by this meanes attained to so great wisdom. And that by the same meanes Saint Ber∣nard gat all his learning, whereas hee was but a little while brought vp at schoole. And that by the benefit of fasting and abstinence, S. Gregorie, who did eate nothing but raw pulse, which his mother ho∣lie Siluia did send him, became so wise: So Hierom vsed the same ab∣stinence in his life, as he writeth of himselfe. And S. Basill that most famous preacher, and most eloquent and wise Oratour and Deuine, that euer was in the world: yet in clothing himselfe and sleeping hee was most abstinent. He couered his naked bodie but with one gar∣ment, and he slept alwaies on the ground; nay rather hee watched al night, and continued in holie exercises. All these doctours beeing so excellent in wisdome, were no lesse famous for their abstinencie, then for their wisdome. They knewe howe necessarie the one vertue was to obtaine the other. So Thomas Aquinas that subtill dispu∣ter (as he at his death reuealed to his companion & brother Reig∣nold,Anto. part. 3. tit. 18. ca. 10. which thing as long as he liued he kept close as a secret) had all his wisdome, by diuine reuelation; and therefore it was his custome, when as he would write or speake any thing, he woulde first go to praier. And comming from praier, hee had that as rea∣die which he should vtter as if he had learned it in some booke. And no doubt he ioined fasting to his praier and mercie. And therfore Augustine saieth:Aug. lib. quest vet. & noui te∣stam. quest. 120 Our Sauiour which had no neede to fast, fasted, that he might giue vs an example. For then a man declares that hee would obtaine that which hee desires, when hee punisheth himselfe with fasting. And hereof it is saide, that praier is good with fasting. Therfore that praier may be acceptable, it wil haue with it as a com∣panion,
fasting. And because neither of these is sure, without pittie: he addeth, And almes with righteousnesse. So great is the force of fasting. If wee would then knowe the secret mysteries of God, let vs fast. Basil also of fasting verie excellentlie writes thus. As much as thou shalt take from thy flesh:Basil. ser. 2. de ieiunio. so much shalt thou adde to the liuelie force of thy soule: and the Angels who are appointed keepers of our soules, doe more willinglie and carefullie keepe those which by fa∣sting are purified. Nay, there are angels in euery church and con∣gregation, marking and registring those that doe fast. Take heede therefore least thou be punished for thy short pleasure of thy meate, and least thou make thy selfe guiltie to the Angell the Lordes Recor∣der, as a runnaway from the Lordes armie. Surelie it were lesse dan∣ger for one to throw away his shield in the field, then to slacke to take in his hands the great weapons of fasting. Art thou a rich man? despise not fasting: vouchsafing to bid it to dinner with thee, and make it thy guest, least thou make thy house wherein pleasure and belly-cheere beareth the rule, vile and worth nothing; least thou thy selfe also smart for it, at that Lawgiuers hands, and pay deerely for thy ryot: greater troubles being iustlie laid vpon thy backe, either by some bo∣dilie sicknesse, or by some other grieuous mischance. Againe, if thou beest a poore man, do not thou despise fasting, when as now thou hast fasting, as thy bedfellow, and thy daily companion. Fasting is as pro∣per to women, euen as the ayre they breath, and that euen by na∣ture. Children as young plants, must be watered with the water of fasting. And the olde acquaintance of fasting maketh it seeme lesse laborious to old men. What can be said more forcibly to perswade all meen to fasting? Angels note in euerie parish who be good fa∣sters. But some will saie perchance, this is but Basils opinion. But I saie more, and that out of the gospell: that euen God him∣selfe notes and markes those that fast. Doth not our sauiour say?Matth. 6.17. But when thou fastest, annoint thy head, and wash thy face: that thou seeme not to men to fast, but vnto the father which is in secret: and thy father which seeth in secret, wil reward thee openly. Surelie I feare me nowe, that neither God nor Angels see anie fast. Let vs re∣member to fast: for Basil saith that Angels register those that fast. And our sauiour saieth, that euen God himselfe seeth them, and knoweth them euerie one, and will reward them. And againe, he writes thus:Basil ibidem. Doest thou not see how horsebrea∣kers
and masters do tame their horses first, and make them nimble by fasting? But thou euen of set purpose, doest so with fulnesse presse downe and spoile thy selfe, that in gluttony thou goest beyonde the bruite beastes. A full bellie is not fitte for a race, no not to sleepe quietly, because being ouercharged with heauinesse, it causeth vs not to be quiet, but to tosse ourselues hither and thither. Fasting preser∣ueth children, it maketh young men sober, it maketh olde men com∣lie, and reuerende, it is the fittest ornament for women, a bridle for them that be lustie and healthfull, the safe keeper of wedlocke, and the nurse of virginity. This is the care, that abstinencie hath in euery particular family. But common abstinence gouerneth our whole life, it bringeth euery citie & people to a good state, it stilleth all quar∣rels and braules, it rootes out suites, it controwleth all reproches and reuilings: Euen as the masters presence stilleth the noyse of children; so fasting bridles the sturres of cities. Who euer came wanton or de∣sperate from fasting? What company was euer out of order, that vsed fasting? nice scoffings, wanton songes, madde merriments, straight way depart the citie, beeing banished of fasting, as of a seuere iudge. And if all men would vse this in all their affaires, as a counseller; with∣out all doubt, nothing could hinder but that quiet peace shoulde bee thorow the whole world. Here are excellent commodities of fa∣sting, singular commendations and ornamentes to euerie age: nay peace to our common wealth. And no doubt all those troubles which are now so common amongst vs, arise for want of fasting. The well fed horse, can abide no spurre: so they which delicatelie féed themselues can endure nothing; they will bee reuenged for e∣uerie little iniurie. And surelie hereof no doubt it commeth to passe, that sithence fasting hath not béene vsed: so manie sortes and quarrels haue sprung vp amongst vs. Wine and good cheere engenders hot spirits, which will soone be inflamed to anger. He∣raclitus the Philosopher in an vproare of the people,Eras. li. 8. apoph. beeing desired that he would shewe his iudgement how the citie might be brought to concord going vp into the pulpit, he desired a cup of cold water to be giuen him, and he mingled with it a little meale, and a little wilde Pnniryal or some pulse, and drank of that water; and so speaking ne∣uer a word went downe: signifying that if the citie woulde leaue their riot, and be content with a little and simple fare, they would soone bee at vnitie. Thus much the blinde Philosopher could see by the light of nature, and shall not we see so much being indued
with gods spirit? Nay faithful fasting turnes away gods plagues from vs▪ Ahab when he had grieuouslie offēded God,1. King. 21.27 & had heard ye heauie sentence of Eliah, what did he? He rent his cloathes & put on sackcloth, & fasted, & lay in sackcloth, & walked softly. And the word of the Lord came to Eliah, saying; Seest thou not how Ahab is hum∣bled before me? because he humbleth himselfe before me: I wil not bring this euill in his daies. Let vs marke how Ahabs fasting cried to God for him: we do not reade that he praied; and yet God had respect to his fasting. Wee haue manie at this daie as sinfull as Ahab: I woulde to God they would followe Ahabs steppes. The same force had fasting in Niniue,Ion. 3.5. euen when Gods plagues were now readie to fall on their heades. Iehosaphat also when his ene∣mies assaulted him, proclamed a fast thorow his whole land.2. Chro. 20.3 We are in the same case, God threatens vs manie waies, and shakes his rod ouer vs our enemies dailie assault vs: Oh let vs fast and praie with Niniue and Iehosaphat, that wee may escape all these euils. The flesh is that Eue,Gen. 3.6 Gen. 39.7 Iudg. 16.19 Mat. 26.69 that with her pleasant fruit beguiled Adam; that wife of Putiphar, that intised Ioseph; that Dalila, that lulled Sampson a sleep in her lap, and bereaued him of his strength, and put out his eies: that same handmaide, that made Peter de∣nie his maister. Let all Gods faithfull seruants beware of it: let them refuse her pleasant fruit; let them flée from her entisements; let them not be allured with her pleasures; let them not heare her voice; let them tame her with Paul, least they become reprobates.2. Cor. 9 27 They are not wiser then Adam, stronger then Sampson, more cou∣ragious then Peter.Eus. hist. eccles. lib. 2. ca. 17 The first christian Monkes laide abstinence in their heartes, as the foundation of all vertues, and vpon that as vpon a rocke they built all other vertues.Chrys. ho. 18. ad pop. Ant. Surelie in our daies for lacke of this foundation, other vertues are so scarce. Chrysostome writes thus of his daies. I see many glad, and saying among themselues, we are happie now, wee are glad: halfe the daies of fasting are gone. But I exhort such that they should not bee glad, because halfe the fast is past: but rather to consider that if halfe their sinnes bee quite gone and vanquished, and then to be glad; for that is to be reioiced at, and that is the marke that is shot at, and for which all thinges are doone. And after: The corne appearing in the spring, and the trees florishing with leaues; teach the beholders, what profit winter hath brought. Let the same thing be don in vs We haue receiued much raine (of the heauenly grace) in the time of our fast: by continuall preaching, we
haue receiued seede, and wee haue quite cut awaie our thornes; let vs continue our fast, that we may keepe those thinges we haue receiued, that when fasting is done, the fruites of fasting may appeare. Our fieldes may teach our soules: These late yeeres sithence we haue lacked the accustomed frost and snow of winter; we haue also lac∣ked the accustomed increase of our winter corne. And so no doubt where this frost and snowe of fasting is not, the spring of vertues cannot be. God himselfe, as should seeme, punisheth this our riot: and yet we marke it not. The riuers and the sea (as I haue heard) yeeldes not that plentie of fish which heretofore they haue doone. We canne digest no fish nowe. All men at all times must haue flesh: And God seeing this, therefore diminisheth and takes from vs that plentie of fish which we haue had. What shall I saie of mariage? May it not also bee verified of our daies, that now we marrie and giue in mariage? Euery one now will be maried. There will almost none continue either vir∣gines or widowes: whereas I reade, that in the primitiue church there were manie both virgines and widowes. In the church of Antioch in Chrysostomes daies,Chrys. hom. 34 ad pop. Ant. as he himself reporteth, there were three thousand Virgines and widowes. And in the church of Rome I reade in Eusebius,Eus. lib. 6. eccle. Hist. ca. 34. that there were a thousande and fiue hundreth poore people, and widowes that were relieued of the common stocke of the church. But in our daies, both widowes and virgines are rare to bee found. No father now will kéepe his daughter a Vir∣gine. And whereas in other matters concerning our children we will do the best: in this waightie matter we regard not what is best for them.1. Cor 7.37.38 For S. Paul saieth, Hee that giueth his daughter in mariage doth well: but hee that giueth her not to mariage, doth bet∣ter. Who regardes this better now? who thinkes of it? who once moues it to his daughters? Philip no doubt the Euangelist had re∣spect to this:Acts 21.9 He had 4. daughters, and they were al Virgines. It had béene a great matter and worthie the marking, if two of them had béene virgines; but that all the foure should bee virgines, was wonderfull. And this saying of the Apostle, and this practise of Philip: made so manie virgines in the primitiue church, of whome Chrysostom and Eusebius do make mention. And likewise of widowes he saieth: The wife is bounde by the law, as long as her husband liueth: but if her husband be dead, shee is at libertie to marrie with whom she will,  only in the Lord. But shee is
more blessed, if she so abide in my iudgement. And I thinke that I haue also the spirit of God. Euerie widow nowe be shee neuer so old will be maried, despising this counsell of S. Paul.Luke 2.37.38 Annah which had liued seauen yeares from her virginitie with a husband being a young widowe) continued a widowe fourescore and eight yeares af∣ter. But now a daies young widowes must needes marrie: And the reason is because they will not follow the true widowes,1. Tim. 5 5 whom S. Paul makes mention of, and Annah her footesteps: Of whom it is reported, that she went not out of the Temple, but serued God with fasting and praiers day and night. Our young widowes will not be good church women like Annah,Gen. 34.1 but towne women rather like Dinah: They will walke the streetes to see and to bee seene. They will not serue God with fastinges and praiers as true widowes ought to do; but with feastings and pleasures serue the flesh:1. Tim. 5 6 & there∣fore they must needes marrie. But why was this example of An∣nah so preciselie set downe? For vs to reade onelie? nay no doubt, but for widowes to imitate. For whatsoeuer is written,Rom. 15.4 is written for our learning, as S. Paul saieth. Nay in mariage now if there bee anie hope of gaine, as though there were no more choise nowe, then in the daies of Adam: wee will come as neare the degrées prohibited as may be, no respect being had, either of consangui∣nitie, or publike honestie. Neither is there almost anie accounte in mariage made of age. Now euen verie children in yeares will be maried. When was euer so manie stolen mariages heard of as in our daies?Iudg. 14.2. Children now will marie without their parents consentes: Which Sampson would not doe. Sonnes daughters and brothers sonnes will marie together. Nay brother hath ma∣ried the brothers wife. Examples of these are to too manifest. We now forget those two manifest histories of the scriptures concer¦ning mariages. Isaac that sonne of promise,Gen 24 3 that great heire of the world: He committed to his father the choise of his wife, And his father committed this great matter to his trustie seruant:Verse 12. but in the feare of the Lorde. And the seruant praied in his iourney, that the Lord would prosper him. And the maid when shee was seene and liked of, and as it were picked out of God, was not conuaied a∣waie without the consent of her parentes. And her parentes said to the seruant, this thing is comen of God,verse 50. besides his will wee can say nothing to thee. Here is no speech of dowerie; no considerati∣on of beautie: but God is all in all, No doubt if our great heires
would be thus ruled by their parents in their mariages, and haue God, rather then riches, beautie or worldly respectes, before their eies: they would speede better. But verie manie now adaies fol∣lowe Sichem the sonne of Hamor the Heuite, his hart claue vnto the maide, he spake kindly to her, he tooke her and defiled her: and after spake to his father Hamor: get me this maide to my wife. And then he left nothing vndone, that might helpe to bring the matter to passe. This is the course that manie both mightie and simple, take in their mariages at this daie. And few virgines are married, few with ye parents consents: And therfore their mariages thrine so euill. And shall it not be saide of our daies, that nowe we mar∣rie and are giuen in marriage? What shall I speake of our sumptuous and stately buildings: which at this daie are so common amongst vs? If wee respect the plaine buildings of our Auncestors in comparison of ours; wee maie be truely said, now to build. And this stately and sumptu∣ous kinde of building hath taken such roote, that nowe euerie one will haue such a stately and sumptuous house. The buildings of our forefathers were but, as it were, simple cottages in compa∣rison of our stately pallaces. So that it maie truely be said of our daies, that we build now. But in the scripture we read, that Iecho∣nias the king of Iudah was reprooued of Ieremie the prophet,Ier. 22.15. be∣cause he built him a stately house with large windowes, and painted it with vermilion, and seeled it with Cedar. And will God allow ex∣cessiue building in meaner men?Es. 2.15.16. Esay prophesieth, that the day of the Lord shall be vpon euery high tower, and euery strong wall, and vpon all braue prospects, as Arias Montanus translates it. And the day of the Lord now drawing neare, shall we now build such? Ioel prophesieth, that the land shall be as the garden of Eden, like a pa∣radise, before him: but behinde him he shall make it a desolate wil∣dernesse.Cuspinianus writes this of the Turkes. And doe we not feare this threatning? The Turkes shew great plainnesse in their buildings, hauing no delight in building hou∣ses, though they be very rich in gold and siluer: accounting this a vaine thing. And they build their houses seldome of stone: but most com∣monly of wood, and they laugh vs christians wonderfully to scorne, when they see our great buildings, which they beleeue we build ther∣fore,Iohannes Stump∣sius reports this historie. as though we should liue for euer. And shall we giue them any occasion to laugh vs to scorne? I reade a historie, which I would all our great builders would imitate. Two brethren being Ro∣maines,
escaped out of the destruction of a citie called Vindonissa, whereof the one being preferred to be Bishop of Argentine: perswa∣ded his brother with money that he gaue him, to builde a castle neare vnto Vindonissa, which nowe they call Halspurge, so famous with the petigrees of so many kings and Emperours. The Bishop hea∣ring that the castle was built, comming to his brother when as he saw that the building thereof was very rude and weake; first he began to wonder at the folly of his brother, and after to demaund an account of him of his money. To whom his brother made answere. To mor∣row you shall see, both the bulwarks of my castle, and also my recko∣nings. In the meane while the same night, he commanded all the no∣ble men and country men his neighbours, whose landes and seruices hee had redeemed and set free, with his money: to bee ready in the morning armed, as though they would assault the castle. The Bishop not knowing what the matter meant, amased with the sight of such a multitude, as though they had beene his enemies; was tolde of his brother, that those were his walles of yron, which he had bought with his money. I would to God our great builders would make such walles to their houses. Such walles would please God, and pro∣tect their builders more surely, then anie walles of stone. But we build now adaies, or care for few such walles. But some will saie, is it not lawefull to builde then? Surely thereis a time for all thinges, A time to breake downe,Eccles. 3.3. and a time to build, as saith the preacher. But now to beginne to build so cu¦riouslie, so statelie, so costlie:1. Pet. 4.7. when as we are taught by the scrip∣ture, that the ende of all thinges is at hand, and that we liue in the daies of Noah; is out of season. This is plainely to gainsaie the gospell, and to saie with the wicked,2. Pet. 3 4. where is the promise of his cō∣ming? And to doe as the men did in the daies of Noah. As we doe inherit our fathers landes, why should wee not, euerie one in his degrée, be content also with his fathers buildings? Do we thinke their buildings too simple for vs? This our blinde pride doth teach vs.Gen. 18.1. 1. King. 22 39. Let vs remember that Abraham our father dwelt in a simple tent, and he entertained Angelles: which thing Ahab in his Iuorie house neuer could doe. And in the psalme we reade of all ye righ∣teous, that in the tentes or tabernacles of the righteous is the voice of ioie and gladnesse. Surely in our stately houses manie times,Psal. 118.15. is not this voice of ioie and gladnes, but rather of sorrow and pen∣sinenesse.Heb. 12.13. The saintes of God account themselues pilgrimes in this
world: and therefore as pilgrimes, they make no account of their houses; they doe account them, but as Innes, wherein they shall lodge but a night. Let vs marke the Paganes in their common wealthes:Pet. Gregor. Tholos. de Rep. lib. 2 ca. 10. howe they bridled this excesse in building. By the Ro∣maine lawes they were not suffered to build the walles of their hou∣ses, aboue halfe a foote thicke, and that because they should haue but one loaft or flooring aboue them; and their bricke walles but two or three brickes of thicknesse: But now adaies, we build thicker wals and make our houses more loftie. Augustus Caesar the Emperor, although he had a pallace:Suetonius. yet he dwelt sometime in Hortensius hou∣ses, which were lowe and simple, without any marble pillars. Such was this Pagane Emperours humilitie. But such houses now will not content Christians: Manie bestowe so much cost on the wals of their houses, that they are not able to bestowe any thing within the walles, as long as they liue after. Will God allowe this prodigalitie? Let vs rather bestowe our cost vpon the poore, and liuelie stones of Iesus Christ.1. Pet 2.5. Let vs relieue them sufficientlie, which are now sent home, by a good and christian law, to their pla∣ces where they were borne.Ezech. 16.49. Let vs strengthen the handes of the poore: as Sodome would not doe: Let them bee well relieued, not only to kéepe life and soule together (as they say) but that they maie be strong to labor, least we be like Sodome in punishment. Let vs repayre and maintaine Gods house that is the church:Mat. 21.13. which in most places now is ruinous & lieth desolate. That complaint of Agge is verified of our daies most manifestly,Agg. 1.4. we our selues dwel in seeled houses, and Gods house lieth wast. The churches in times past, were the best houses in the towne: but now of all other they are least regarded. This declares the coldenesse of our loue, to∣wardes the owner of them.Mat. 11.15. Christ when he came to Ierusalem, the first house he went into, was the temple: And doth he regard his houses of praier, that is our churches, lesse now? No, no doubt, at his comming as he whipped the buyers and sellers then out of the temple: so will he also whip out, all those now that buy and sell in his church, whosoeuer they are, and what fine pretence soeuer they shall make to cloake this their Symonie; and will punish the spoyle and desolation of his house. And to let this house lie wast and to build our owne, is not this to build? The like may be said of purchasing and buying land. Men were neuer so giuen to purchase and buy land, as at this daie. What
shall I speake of planting? Heretofore they hedged in their gar∣dens and orchardes: but now we will haue our corne fieldes hed∣ged about. So that without all doubt, the daies of Noah are come vpon vs: And this prophesie of our sauiour is most euidently ful∣filled in our eies. And it is to bee feared, least that as at the first comming of our sauiour, the Iewes hauing a plaine prophesie, that when the scepter should depart from Iudah, then Messias should come; yet they were so blinded with worldlie ambition, that al∣though this prophesie was cleerelie fulfilled, that they would not sée nor marke it, and so perished in their blindnes: so at the second comming of our sauiour, least we, hauing also this plaine prophe∣sie that our daies shall bee like the daies of Noah, and we sée the same manifestly fulfilled, shall bee like them carried awaie with the course of the world; and also perish in our ignorance and care∣lesnesse. The Lord Iesus open all mens eies that they may marke this. These are the workes of the world: these are not the workes which Iesus Christ commands against the daie of iudgment. Let them that bee godly wise, marke well; least while they followe their steppes, they perish in their destruction. Let the course of the world beguile no man: That because others doe so; therefore we maie doe the like. This reason could not saue the olde world, nei∣ther shall it saue vs. There were but eight persons then saued, who beleeued the Lorde, all the rest that followed the world, were drowned. Let euerie christian therefore learne that lesson of Saint Iames: There shall be iudgment without mercy to him,Ia. 2.13. Mat. 5.7. that sheweth no mercy: And that of our sauiour, Blessed are the mercifull, for they shall obtaine mercy. These lessons then will be accounted worth the marking, let vs practise them now that we may then obtaine mercie, though the practise be neuer so costly. In this iudgement Enoch prophesieth what our iudge shall re∣prooue: wicked workes, and wicked and hard wordes against God: Let all christians beware of these two thinges. And here ye works which shall be reprooued, are called in the gréeke. irreligious works; such as haue no taste of religion, or godlinesse, which taste of the dealinges of the worlde. Let vs beware of such workes: let vs not be like this wicked world in our dealings;Mat. 7.13. Let vs not followe the broad way which leadeth to destruction: let vs striue to enter in at the narrow gate: let vs followe the light of Gods word, which shi∣neth now most plenteously amongst vs. But if we shall do so, saith
one:Marke 8.36. we shall loose. This counsell is against our profit. O foole, what will it aduantage thee to winne all the world, and to indanger thine owne soule? It is but an apple that here thou now gainest, and thou loosest paradise with Eue:Gen. 3.6, It is but a messe of redde pot∣tage, which thou heere enioiest, and thou loosest thine inheritance with Esau.Gen. 25.33. What great follie is this? But some will saie: do any giue harde speeches against God? none is so wicked. Yes, ouer manie. It is a common saying, If anie rebuke a wicked person, and tell him of this iudgment of God: Hee will say, It maketh no matter, if he may escape to that day. Is not this to giue hard spee∣ches, euen against the Lord, to decide and set light his iudgment, which euery one ought to quake and tremble a? which maketh the earth to tremble as Dauid saith,Psal. 18.7. The earth trembled, the very foun∣dations of the hilles shooke, and were remoued, because he was wroth. And in another place,Psal. 119 120. my flesh trembleth for feare of thee, and I am affraid of thy iudgments. Text. Verse 16.These are murmurers, complainers, walking after their own lusts. Whose mouthes speake prowde thinges, hauing mens persons in ad∣miration because of aduantage.] Now he describeth these false Ca∣tholiques, by their delightes and desires: because they measure and account felicitie or happines, to consist in thinges of this life: Therefore i anie affliction or misfortune chance, they murmure, they are impatient. And it cannot chuse, but such were our for∣mer Friers and Monkes. For they were couetous and gréedie of these worldlie riches (as I haue prooued before:) they were euer begging and neuer satisfied.Psal. 23.4. They lacked Dauids staffe of Gods worde to comfort them:Rom. 15.4. when God said his rodde vpon them they lacked the knowledge of the scriptures, which were written for our learning, that wee thorowe patience, and comfort of the scriptures, might haue hope: and therefore it could not chuse, but they should mourne and repine, at the manifolde crosses, which at that time fell vpon them. Kinges haue often pinched them, fire hath consu∣med their houses, and manie other chances haue beflane them; as wee maie reade in the Chronicles, which to sustaine with pati∣ence, they no doubt needed the castle and bulwarke of the scrip∣tures. Text. Ps. 70.4.145.11. Ps. 33.1.134.21.Complainers, finders of faults] Dauid giueth this note of the faith∣full, that ye praises of God are euer in their mouthes: and of himselfe, my mouth shall euer speake the praise of the Lord: And the Apostle
commandeth all christians that in all thinges they should giue God thankes. So that then,1. Thes. 5.17. good christians must not finde fault with Gods workes: whatsoeuer he sendeth, they must be content with all, they must thanke him for it. They must in all chances, with Iob saie, The Lord be blessed. What artificer among vs,Iob. 1.22. will pa∣tientlie abide his worke to be found fault withall? Much lesse our most mightie God. And therefore Ecclesiasticus teacheth vs this lesson, Blesse the Lord in all his works, giue honor vnto his name,Eccl. 39.14. and shew forth his praise with the songes of your lips, & with harpes, and ye shal say after this manner. Al the works of the Lord are exceeding good, and all his commandementes are done in due season. And none may say: wherefore is this? what is that? For at a time conue∣nient, they shall be sought out. But at this daie, it is a common fault amngst many olde men, to finde fault with Gods workes: manie times, with the weather, with the increase of the earth. And therfore it should seeme, in the former times, they were not taught this good lesson: it maie séeme, their teachers knewe it not them∣selues. And therefore this marke hits iustly vpon them. Their mouth speaketh proud thinges.] They are Thrasoes,Text. they brag of themselues. So haue they seduced the people, by bragging of their masses, their reliques, by making thē come a pilgrimage farre and nigh to them. They haue bragged of their Popes autho∣ritie: that no man maie saie to him, why doest thou so? that hee is a God vpon earth. Hauing mens persons in admiration because of aduantage.Text.] They are worldly minded, and this is the second marke of Antichrist. First, he shall denie, that Iesus Christ is come in the flesh: Hee shall denie that he is that onely king, priest, and prophet;1. Io. 4.3. which all the scriptures prophesie of. Whose shadowes and types, were all the kinges, priestes, and prophets that euer were: Melchise∣decke, Aaron, Samuell, Dauid, Salomon, Esay, Ieremy and the rest: Iesus Christ alone, is more then all these. And yet euerie of these in their times had God, sufficiently furnished, to bee able to doe their offices. And yet Antichrist shall substitute other to Iesus Christ, as not sufficient or willing to doe his office: whome the scripture adorneth with this kinde of willingnesse,Heb. 7.25. Verse 5. that he euer li∣ueth, to make intercession for vs. Secondly, they shall bee of the world, and therefore shall speake of the world, and the world shall heare them. And were not the Abbots, Monkes and Popes king∣dome,
of the world? Their statelie buildings, their pleasant seats, their insatiable mindes; declare what they were. Those that en∣riched them, them they reuerenced, them they praied for. Was not this to haue men in reuerence because of aduantage? Such were the priestes among the Iewes.Hos. 4.11. They did eate the sinnes of Gods people; whoredome and wine, and newe wine, take awaie their heartes, they were as a snare on Mispah, and as a nette spread on Tabor (as saieth the Prophet:) All was fish that came to their nettes. Mat. 23.14.So did the Pharises vnder pretence of long praiers deuoure widowes houses: So did they in S. Pauls time that counted gaine religion.1. Tim. 6.6. But Saint Paul teacheth Timothie, and in him all Gods ministers, to forsake and separat themselues from such couetous tea∣chers: and that godlinesse is great gaine, with contentment; and to be content with meate drinke and cloathing; not with monkish and popish state, and superfluitie: And to followe righteousnesse, godlinesse, faith, loue, patience, and meekenesse. Of which riches Gregorie also speaketh, If you will be (saieth he) truely rich in deede, loue the true riches, that is vertues. And of charitie Saint Augustine saith, that by charity a poore man is rich. Charitie alone is like a pre∣tious iewell, the valew whereof is so incomparable, that it enricheth the soule of him, whosoeuer hath it. These celestiall and spirituall riches Christes ministers shoulde pursue after, with might and maine (as they saie.) Those other transitorie and earthlie riches, are baites fit for Antichristes hirelinges: who for them haue men in great admiration,Gal. 1.10. whome if hee should studie to please (S. Paul saith) that he were none of Gods seruant. Text. Verse. 17.18.But you beloued, remember the words which were spoken before of the Apostles of our Lord Iesus Christ. Howe that they tolde you, that there should be mockers in the last time, which should walke af∣ter their vngodly lustes.] Here first we may learne that S. Iude be∣ing himselfe an Apostle, was not ashamed to alledge the testimo∣nies of the Apostles; condemning the arrogancie of those, that despise the authoritie of their equalles: nay of those, that haue bin their fathers in Christ. Secondly, that he liued after the other A∣postles. Thirdly, that he referreth this Epistle, to the predictions, and prophesies of the other Apostles: That those whome hee heere speaketh of, they also prophesied, that such should come: So that then his Epistle must be a prophesie, a prediction to the church, as
well as others. Although perchance in some part, that wicked seed began in his daies, more to shewe it selfe, then in the daies of the Apostles, (as I haue noted before.) And as he cites ye prophesies of the Apostles: so especially of Peter, whose very words he alleageth.2. Pet. 3.3. That there shall bee mockers.] So that his Epistle of all the rest most agreeth with this Epistle: So that as it should séeme, they had euen ioyned handes, to the discouering of the same heretikes. He calleth them mockers, which being drowned in worldlie plea∣sures, and being set in the chaire of pestilence, doe make a sporte of sinne: Who dare saie, in the manifolde threatnings, and knoc∣kings at the dore of their heartes, by Gods spirit:Ier. 5.12. Let the worde of the Lorde come. Tush it maketh no matter, these are but wordes, no euill shall happen vnto vs, we haue béene tolde this long ago; but we throue neuer the worse since. Such Atheistes, and sonnes of Beliall, all ages haue had: and our age hath too ma∣nie of them, which fulfill the prophesie of Iude, to their owne de∣struction. Walking after their vngodly lustes.] This barren branch,Text. sprin∣geth of the former wicked roote. For those that make a mocke of the worde of God: to such pleasure is life, and their own wicked lustes and desires, are reason. The worde of God is the onelie hatchet, to prune the vines of Iesus Christ,Io. 15.2. Ios. 5.2. that they maie bring foorth more fruit. It is the onelie sharpe knife, that Iosuah made, to cutte awaie the foreskinne of all carnall pleasures, from the true Israelites: that they maie serue the Lord with all their hart.Psal. 31.89. It is the onelie bridle, that keepeth both young and olde, from stumbling like horse and mule, which haue no vnderstanding: and therefore where this lacketh, there all sinne flourisheth, all plea∣sures abounde, and men fall downe headlong into the pitte of destruction. And therefore Dauid praieth,Psal. 119.133.17.5. Order my steppes in thy word, and so shall no wickednesse haue dominion ouer me. And stay my steppes in thy pathes, that my feete do not slide. These are makers of sectes, hauing no spirit.]Text. Verse 19. Heere wee may marke how in the verse going before he saith, that such shall bee: and here he speaketh after the maner of the Prophets, in the pre∣sent tence: these are makers of sectes: as though they were come alreadie: which may seeme to expounde his like phrase of spéech, verse 4 These are makers of sectes:] there is no one vertue that the Apostles vrge more in all their Epistles, then peace, peace in doc∣trine,
peace in life and conuersation. And therefore the Apostle Saint Paul writing to the Romaines, doth beseech them earnestlie as a last farewell that shoulde sticke déepelie in their heartes,Rom. 16.17 to marke those which make diuisions or offences, besides that doctrine which they had learned. Hee doth not saie, which is against the doctrine which you haue learned, but besides it: As adding anie thing, as it should seeme, of their own braine vnto it. For (saith he) such serue not the Lord Iesus, but their own bellie. I would to God the church of Rome had remembred this farewell of the Apostle: Then no doubt, she would not haue brought in so manie orders of her Fri∣ers and Monkes; which should after a newe manner, besides the word of God, not by preaching the gospell; but by singing Masse, saue soules. They serue not Iesus Christ, (though they rise ne∣uer so earlie,) that obey not his word. S. Paul willeth Timothie to take heede to himselfe and to his doctrine:1. Tim 4 16 To continue in them, that is,Verse 13. those thinges hee had commended to him before; which are rea∣ding, exhortation, and doctrine. For if thou shalt doe so, thou shalt saue thy selfe and them that beare thee.Rom. 1.16 And to the Romaines hee saieth, The gospell is the power of God to saluation, to all that shall beleeue it. So that then, not to sing masse: but to preach the gos∣pell, is the ordinarie waie of saluation, prescribed by God in his word. These sectaries S. Paul speaketh of, with flatterie and faire spéeches seruing their bellies, not Iesus Christ: haue deuised a new waie of saluation, which the scriptures teach not, nor our sa∣uiour commandes: Go preach the gospell (saith he) to al nations, he that beleeueth and is baptised, shall bee saued. This worke all his seruants, all his ministers must doe earnestlie and earelie in the morning. Psal. 87. Her foundati∣ons are vpon the holy hils. Ephes 2.10.The prophet Dauid describes the church of Christ, and he giueth it eight priuileges. First, that it is not founded vpon earthlie hils, as was Ierusalem: but vppon holie hils, euen vppon the hils of the scriptures, vpon the Apostles and Prophets, as S. Paul saith. Se∣condlie, that the Lorde loueth the verie gates, the meanest congre∣gation of Christs church, more then al the dwellings of Iacob, euen aboue Salomons temple. Thirdlie, that all the Prophets and Pa∣triarkes haue spoken very excellent things of this citie: As Esay, In that day this song shall bee sung in the Lande of Iudah.Esa. 26.1 Wee haue a strong citie; he hath put saluation her walles and her bulwarke. As walles doe kéepe and defende, all euils and enemies from a citie:
euen so the certaintie of saluation, as a wall kéepes all euils and enemies from the church of God. They know they shall be saued; and therefore they feare not, what colde stormes of afflictions, what wilde Boare of the forrest, what sicknesse or sorrowe, nay what death doth assault them. This wall and bulwarke of saluation re∣pels all euill from the church. Fourthlie, this city receiueh in it all the nations of the world. Christ as soone as he was borne wente into Aegypt: and by a starre, hee drewe out of the East the wise men: to declare that superstitious Babylon, and sinnefull Aegypt should nowe embrace Iesus Christ. Fiftlie, that the founder of this citie, is the eternall God, who was borne in her. Sixtlie, that the gospell is preached (as it were) by Trumpetters in this citie. Sea∣uenthlie, that all that dwell in this citie, are merrie and ioyfull.Shorim ce∣chollim. Or rather (as it is in the Hebrew) the Lord will number in writing vp the people, that this man was borne in her, and the singers as the Trumpeters. Here are two sortes of people, which God wil write vp, and enroll in his heauenlie citie, when hee surueyeth his city, The singers as well as the trumpetters. All Gods people must either bee praisers of God, or preachers of him. And therefore generally of praising God in his church,Esa. 26, 1. (saieth Dauid) In that day this song shall be sung: As though all men should sing that song, and should praise the Lord. The people should sing and praise God, the mini∣sters should bee trumpetters and preachers of the glad tidinges of the gospell. And therefore of the ministers, is that saying verified, Extol thy voice like a trumpet. And lastlie,Isa. 28.1 that al Gods fresh springs should be in his church. Knowledge should abound in it euen as a streame. And hereof no doubt commeth the number of so manie famous men, and excellent preachers, as wee haue at this daie. The chiefe office of the minister, is to be a trumpetter, not to be a singer of masse, as it was in poperie. And this diuision also of the church of God, we reade in an other psalme. They sawe how thou my Lorde and king goest in the sanctuarie: that is, they would see,Psal. 68.24. might see, the going and pompe of the people, giuing thee thanks in the temple for the victorie ouer their enemies. The singers went before, that is, all the people lauding and praising God: The mu∣sitions followed after, that is, the priests and ministers. In the mid∣dest of them were the damsels playing on tymbrels. That may bee expounded of the virgines, who had made their bodies like tim∣brels dried and withered, as S. Paul said of his bodie:I tame my
flesh,1. Cor. 9.27. and make it wanne or drie, least when I haue preached to o∣thers, I my selfe should be a castaway. These singers, and these mu∣sitions, and these plaiers of timbrels, in the shadow of the lawe, resemble no doubt the truth of the gospell. All our people must be singers and praisers of God; all our pastors must bee musitions, must be trumpetters; our virgines must plaie on tymbrels. And of these musitions Christ meanes when he saieth, Wee haue piped to you,Mat. 11.27. and you haue not danced: meaning his own preaching and his Apostles. And of these singers Dauid here saith, that the Lord shall write them vp, and enfranchise them in his heauenly kingdome: As well the singers as the trumpeters. These trumpeters the pro∣phet Esay meaneth when he saith, Cry as lowde as thou canst, lift vp thy voice like a trūpet. These trumpeters the Angels in the reuela∣tion blowing with trumpets resemble.Reu. 8.6. They which do not this worke in the church of God, whatsoeuer they doe besides, are sectaries. And of these sectaries and heretickes S. Paul speaketh: If any man shall teach any other doctrine,1. Tim. 6.3 and shall not giue heede to the health∣full doctrine of our Lord Iesus Christ, and to that doctrine which a∣grees with religion, he is puft vp and knoweth nothing. Here is the badge of Heretiques, not to preach the doctrine of Christ, not to giue héede to the worde of God, to teach doctrines besides it, to be puft vp with pride, to knowe in truth nothing. Such ignorant, proud, and erroneous teachers were the Monkes and Friers, and therefore no doubt these makers of sectes, which S. Iude here spea∣keth of. Text. Rom. 8.9.14.15Fleshly hauing no spirit.] All Gods children haue Gods spirit, and are led by Gods spirit, and the spirit maketh them come to God with great boldnesse,1. Cor. 2.15 by this spirit they discerne all thinges: and haue a right iudgment in all thinges. 1. Pet 4.10.Of this spirit and of the manifold giftes thereof, Peter speaketh, Euery one, as he hath receiued the gift: let him minister the same one to another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God. If anie man speake, let him speake; as the wordes that God putteth in his mouth. If any man minister, or doe any good worke; let him doe it, as of the strength that God ministreth vnto him: that God in al things may be glorified by our Lorde Iesus Christ. All Gods children then, must be partakers of this spirit, and must acknowledge what good things soeuer they doe proceed from the power and might of Gods spirit, yea euen the wordes of their mouthes. This spirit especial∣lie,
all Gods ministers haue; as S. Paul witnesseth: God hath not giuen vs the spirit of feare: but of power, of loue and of sobrietie:2. Tim. 1.8. and of these two, he willeth Timothie not to bee ashamed: to testifie the Lord Iesus: and not to be ashamed of him his prisoner. The prophet Micah had this spirit.Micah. 3 8 And I trulie (saith he) am fil∣led with the power of the spirit of the Lord, and with iudgement, and with strength and courage, to shew Iacob his transgression, and Is∣raell his sinne. Heare this I beseech you,Verse 9. ô ye heads of the house of Ia∣cob, and leaders of the house of Israell, which commit abhominable thinges, and writhe and peruert al iudgement and equitie. Here is the strength the courage of the Prophet of God, euen Gods spirit. Here is his office, to tell Iudah their transgressions,verse 10. Acts. 7.15 and Israell their sinnes. Stephen was ful of this spirit, when he rebuked the obstinate and stifnecked Iewes. These sectaries, these pseudocatholikes shal lacke this spirit, they shall not be able to vnderstand the scrip∣tures: they shall lacke iudgement; the scriptures shall bee vnsa∣uorie vnto them. But you beloued,Text verse 20 building forward your selues in your most holie faith, and praying in the holie ghost; keepe your selues in the loue of God, looking for the mercy of our Lorde Iesus Christ to euerlasting life.] The Apostle hauing sufficientlie made manifest to all men the former deceiuers: now he concludeth with a generall exhor∣tation, to all true christians; and he sheweth in it, what true chri∣stians ought to doe. He putteth down certaine principall pointes of christian religion against their Antichristian superstition. One contrarie placed by another, is made more bright: So this com∣paring of false religion and true together, will adde light to the truth. And the first point of true christian religion is, to build for∣ward our selues in our most holie faith. By this place then is proued that it is a chiefe point of christian religion, that al christians should be builders: that is, should make themselues a fit temple for God, to dwell in.1. Chro. 17.1.4 Wee reade what care Dauid had to build Gods tem∣ple; but God would not suffer him: but nowe, euerie man must build a temple to God, euen his owne soule. We reade what cost Salomon bestowed vpon the temple;2. Chro 4. 1. Pet. 2.5. but now God careth not for such temples made of stone; he will haue a temple of liuely stones; we must be his temple. And to build this temple for him, it must be the first worke we should do. Seeing then this worke of buil∣ding the Lordes temple, is so necessarie and so generall, it behoo∣ueth
euerie man to learne how to build; and that is, by the know∣ledge of the scriptures. What Mason can builde a wall, without rule or square? The rule or square of christian building, is the word of God. By it our harts & soules are squared & framed fit for Gods walles. And therefore S. Paul, taking his leaue of the church of Ephesus:Act. 20.32 commendeth them to God, and to the word of his grace, which (saieth he) is able to build further, and to giue them inheritāce with all them that are sanctified.2. Pet. 3.18 And therefore S. Peter saith, grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lorde Iesus Christ: and Saint Paul thankes God for the Thessalonians,2. Thes. 1.2 that their faith grewe excee∣dinglie. Why then, euerie christian must know Gods word, or else how shall he be able to builde? would anie of vs allowe, or giue wages to a worke man, that shoulde builde our walles without line, rule or square? no more will God allowe anie in his spiritu∣all building.1. Pet. 2.4 Of this building S. Peter also speaketh: Ye are come to the Lorde Iesus as to a liuing stone, reiected of men; but precious and chosen of God: wherefore you your selues bee built as liuelie stones,1. Cor. 14.27. a spirituall house: and S. Paul. Let all things bee done to edifi∣cation: that is, let this bee the ende of all thy workes, the buil∣ding of Gods spirituall temple: Be more carefull to build it, then Salomon was for his temple.1. King. 5.14 If Salomons workmen were one mo∣neth in Libanus, about the worke of the temple; and two moneths at home, about their owne businesse: Let vs exceede them, let vs emploie two moneths about the Lordes building, and but one a∣bout our owne businesse.Matth. 6.33. Let vs first seeke the kingdom of God, and al things else shalbe added vnto vs. Let all our other workes giue place to the Lords worke. And here we must not onlie build our selues by reading, & hea∣ring,1 Cor. 14.35 and meditating of the word of God: but we must also build our wiues, as these places proue. If wiues wil learne anything, let them aske their husbandes at home: they ought to bee able to teach them.1. Pet. 3.7 And ye husbands dwell with your wiues according to know∣ledge, that is, knowing the law of God, and according to that, dealing and gouerning. And our brethren also, as S. Paul com∣mandeth.1. Thes. 5.11 Rom. 15.2 Edifie one another, euen as you doe, and let euerie man please his neighbour in that which is good, to edification. But es∣peciallie we must edifie our children. A sonne in Hebrew is called Ben, that is, a building, because the father should especiallie build his sonne in religion and vertue. Nature teacheth all men this:
The sauage beare fashioneth her whelpes beeing deformed with her tongue: So shoulde all christians with gentle admonitions, frame the deformed maners of their children. The Doe her fawn being young, will hide it in the thicket, will cherish it; but beeing waxen strong, she will thrust it out, and make it seeke for liuing it selfe: So should parents their children being yong, nourish them at home: but now waxen strong, send them out into the common wealth. The Tyger when she perceiueth that her whelps are stolen awaie, when shee, being verie swift of fool, cannot recouer them, (the théeues by taking ship, and passing ouer the sea hauing pre∣uented her) on the shoare for sorrowe shee will kill her selfe: and shall it not grieue christian parentes more? to see their children, by the deuill stolen from them, and hoyst vp vpon the vaine sea of this worlde to all sinne and wickednesse? That commandement of the lawe, whereby fathers were bounde to teach their children,Deut. 6.10 that the passeouer ment: teacheth them this building. And that children ought to know the scriptures: the 119. Psalme,Psal.  19. which like an alphabet is made for them, plainlie prooueth. All the ver∣ses of that Psalme, beginne with Hebrewe letters, in order as they are in the alphabet. By if they may not onelie learne the let∣ters, but the principles of religion: and also the second part of that Psalme teacheth the same most euidentlie. Where withall shall a young man cleanse his way (saieth Dauid?) euen by ruling himselfe after thy word. Why then young men must knowe the worde of God. And Saint Paul writeth, that Timothy knewe the scriptures,2. Tim. 3.15 euen from his childhood. No doubt his grandmother Lois, and his mother Eunice, (whose faith hee commendeth a little before,) had taught him them. And Saint Iohn to all young men thus writeth: you are strong, and you haue ouercommed the wicked:1. Ioh. 2.13 because the word of God dwelleth in you. So Isaac no doubt, knew what sacri∣ficement; being a childe, he coulde saie: father, here is the woode,Gen. 22.7. where is the sacrifice? So that then, if wee will haue our children leade a pure life, if we wil haue them strong, if we will haue them ouercome the deuill, if we will haue them true catholicks, sonnes of Abraham: we must see, that the worde of God dwell and abide in them. They must not knowe it onelie: but as in their carnall weapons, they must bee cunning in it. So that then, the papists heretofore in their manie workes they did, and whereof they brag; they left this principall work vndone, They did not build thēselues
by the word of God, in their most holy faith. That worke which God himselfe commanded from heauen, that is: This is my belo∣ued sonne,Mark. 9.7 heare him, these did not, they minded not, they heard not the gospell of Iesus Christ. Their guides, and master-worke men, tooke the rule and square out of mens handes, and who then could build? Therefore in this very pointe, they declare themselues to be those, whome S. Iude here condemnes: They are no builders in the most holy faith. All true christians and catholiques must bee builders, and that by the leuell or square of Gods word. Text. Phil. 2.15.And that in the most holie faith.] Christians must shine as lights in the world. Now what fellowship is betwixt light and darkenesse? saith Saint Paul. Their libertie must not bee an occasion to the flesh: They must not nowe sinne,2 Cor. 6.15 Gal 5.14. Rom. 6.1 2. Tim. 2.19 2. Pet. 1.5. that grace may abounde. Let him vtter∣lie detest iniquitie now, that nameth the Lord Iesus. Our faith must be holie, and therefore S. Peter saith: Ioyne to your faith vertue, to your vertue knowledge, &c. Our faith must haue al vertues linked to it: Such a faith had the first christians; they coulde be a touched with no open crime,Eus. eccle. Hist. lib. 3. ca 32. or notorious fault: but that they sung psalmes to Iesus before daie, as Plinius Secundus writeth of them to the Emperour.Matth. 5.20. Our Sauiour tolde his disciples, that their righteousnesse must exceede the righteousnesse of the Scribes and Pharisies: and so must we now tell all christians, that theirs must excéede Turkes and Paganes, or else they shall neuer enter into heauen. And yet (as it is reported) their faith in their dealinges, their religion in swearing, their zeale in seruing their deuilish gods; farre excee∣deth ours. God stirre vs vp, and pricke vs forward; that we may one build another in our most holie faith, and that we may exceed them. Text.Praying in the holy ghost.] Praier is one of the chiefest exercises of true religion. And therefore after the building and encrease of faith, the apostle addeth praier, which is a speciall meanes to ob∣taine the same.Luk 17.5 And therefore the apostle praied: O Lord increase our faith. But because our heart of it selfe is vnfit to praie, and we cannot of our selues,2 Cor. 3.5 Ezech. 36.26. Zach. 7.12. Gen 6, 5. so much as thinke a good thought; and the heart of man vnregenerate, is called a stony heart and an adamant by the prophet; and Moses saieth, that all the deuises of it are euill euen continuallie: Therefore the apostle teacheth vs here, if we will pray acceptablie, to pray in the holy ghost. And the holie ghost helpeth our infirmitie in praier,Rom. 8.25 as S. Paul teacheth vs: Likewise the spirit
(saith he) also helpeth our infirmitie; for we know not what to pray, as we ought: but the spirit it selfe maketh requests for vs, with sighes which cannot be expressed. Of this,Heb. 5.7 came those sighes and grones of our sauiour, whereof we read: Who in the daies of his flesh, did offer vp praiers and supplications with strong cryings and teares: And of Dauid, Heare the right ô Lord, consider my complaint,Psal. 6.6.17.1 37.10 and hear∣ken to my praier, that goeth not out of fained lippes: and I am wea∣rie of my groning: and Lorde thou knowest all my desires, and my groning is not hid from thee. So then the spirit maketh vs knowe what to aske, it maketh vs to praie feruentlie, euen with sighing and groning. In warre, the soldiors do not onlie fight with hand: but crie with voices against the enemie. This crie of the voice, in our spirituall warfare, praier is:Ephe. 6.18 and therefore S. Paul hauing ar∣med a christian soldiour perfectlie; hee addes, praying with all ma∣ner of prayer, and supplication in the spirit: and watching thereunto, with all perseuerance. Thus (Iosuah fighting with the hand,Exod. 17.11) Moses cried with the voice against Amalecke: and it is saide there, that Moses praying to God with his voice, did more preuaile then Io∣suah with his sworde. Such an excellent thing praier is, against our spirituall enemie the Deuill. And therefore they are not cap∣taines or leaders: but traitours to Gods people, that take from them the sword of the spirit, that is, the word of God, and this cry∣ing and courage of the heart, christian praier. To pray in the spirit, is to know what we praie for, to praie with sighing and groning, to praie with faith and assurance.Rom. 8.16 For the spirit of God doeth assu∣redlie witnesse to our spirit, that we are Gods children. But to praie in latine, taketh away all these. They which praie so, know not for what they praie; and therefore cannot sigh or grone in their praiers, which sighing procéedeth of wanting:Mat. 15.22. As we read of the woman of Canaan, who being touched no doubt at the hart, with the sicknesse of her daughter, cried after our sauiour: and the men of Niniue, knowing and fearing their destruction, fasted and prai∣ed to the Lorde strongly, and mightely.Io. 3.8. So that then the papistes heretofore haue not praied in ye spirit, they haue not had the right vse of praier, they haue taken from christian soldiours, this chiefe helpe against satan their spirituall enemie. Keepe your selues in the loue of God.Text v. 21] Here is another spiritu∣all point of true catholique religion: You beloued (saith S. Iude) building your selues in your most holy faith, and praying in the holie
ghost: keepe your selues in the loue of God.] This is the chiefe worke of all; In anie wise doe this: Be ye sure that God loueth you. And here let vs marke well the first assault of our enemie,Gen. 3.5. God doth knowe (saith he) how that in what day ye shall eate of that tree, your eies shall be opened, and yee shall be as Gods, knowing good and euill. He goeth about to perswade Eue, that God loueth her not, that he enuieth mans welfare. And not onely sathan: but our owne flesh, will go about, thus oftentimes to perswade vs, as Dauid telleth vs:Psal. 30.23. And I said in my haste, I am cast out of the sight of thine eies. Because God doth not heare vs by and by when we pray, we thinke that he loueth vs not, that hee hath cast vs out of his sight: Neuerthelesse (saith Dauid) thou heardest my praier when I called vpon thee. And the wicked also will cast this in our téeth: Tush,Psal. 71.9. Mat. 27.43. God careth not for him: persecute him and take him, there is none to deliuer him. And so the Priestes and Pharises vpbraided our sauiour Christ: hee trusted in God that he would saue him; let him deliuer him, if he will haue him. Against all these temptations, we must arme our selues, and most assuredly keepe vs in the loue of God, as in a most strong tower. This is that which Dauid saith so often:Psal. 18.1.61.3. The Lord is my stony rocke and my defence: and thou hast beene my hope, and a strong tower for me against the enemy. And the name of the Lorde is a strong tower,Pro. 18.10. the righteous runnes into it, and is exalted. And this loue of God towards vs, that we should not doubt of it, is confirmed to vs, as a most strong? su soldi∣er, by manie places of scripture. Our sauiour praieth to his fa∣ther,Io. 17.23. that al his may be one with him, as he is one with his father; that the world may knowe, that God sent him, and that he loued all his: euen as he loued him. What can be saide more then this? God lo∣ueth his, and that not coldely, after the maner of manie men: but euen as hee loued Iesus Christ, that is, with vnspeakeable and most assured loue.Rom. 5.5.8.38. And S. Paul saieth, the loue of God is poured out into our harts, by the holy ghost. And againe, I am perswaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creatures in the world, are able to separate vs from the loue of God, which is in Iesus Christ. All the creatures in the world, are not able to batter this castle.1. Pet. 5.7. And in another place, Cast your care on him, for hee careth for you: He that careth for one loueth him. This care and loue of God towardes vs, our sauiour teacheth all his,Luke 12.4. as a sure rocke against persecution. And I say vnto you, my
friendes, be not affraid of them that kill the body; and after that, are not able to doe any more: but feare him, which after hee hath killed, can cast into hell. And after:Luke 12. v. 6.7. are not fiue sparrowes bought for two farthings, and yet not one of them is forgotten before God? Yea all the haires of your head are numbred: feare not therefore, ye are more of valew then many sparrowes. And our sauiour himselfe saith, No mā can haue greater loue then this; to giue his life for his friends. And it is said of him: that he loued his vnto the end.Io. 15.13.13. v. 1. Rom. 8.15. The holy ghost also maketh all christians to crie, abba, father, which is a name of loue. And our sauiour teacheth all his to praie thus: Our father, &c.Mat. 6.9. He that bids vs call God, our father, teacheth that he loueth vs. And S. Iohn saith: We knowe and beleeue the loue of God towardes vs:1. Ioh. 4.16. then we doubt not of it. The loue of God, is the fountaine of all our good thinges we enioie at Gods handes.Ephes. 1.4.6. Hee hath chosen vs through loue and through grace, and not through any thing in vs, saith the Apostle. He that stoppeth this fountaine: stops the well of life. So that then all christians must kéepe them in the loue of God, as in a most sure castle. This loue of God must be their trust in all thinges, euen in the assaultes of sathan,2. Cor. 12.9. as it was taught S. Paul: my grace is sufficient for thee. Let not sathan by all his sleightes or deuises at anie time, driue vs awaie from this:Heb. 2.4. Let this alwaies be our castle. Behold saieth the Prophet Habacucke (gnuphlah) he that trusteth in himselfe as in a tower, that reacheth to the heauens, (be he neuer so politique, as Herod: neuer so high in authoritie, as Nabuchadnezar: neuer so mightie as Goliah) his soule is not right in him. The iust shall liue by faith in his God: that is his life, his castle, his refuge. Looking for the mercy of our Lord Iesus Christ vnto eternall life.Text.] This great mercie of God towardes vs, is declared by two nota∣ble allegories in the word of God, First by the prophet Esay:Esay 51. Har∣ken vnto me ye zealous followers of righteousnesse, you that pursue after it, euen as the hart doth after the water floud:Psal. 42.1. ye seekers of the Lord, looke vnto the rocke, whereout ye were hewen, and vnto the hole of the pit, whereout ye were digged. As though the Prophet should teach them, that are nowe zealous in religion, and forward in good workes; that they should remēber from whence they came, and what they were in the beginning: least they should be proude. They should not consider their white feathers: but their foule, and blacke legges, with the swanne. They were all, as rude stones,
hewed out of a rocke; polished, squared, and made fit for the tem∣ple of God, euen by God himselfe. They were all, as taken out of a most déepe and filthie pit, all defiled with myre and claie, wash∣ed with cleane water powred on them, euen of the louing mercy of God himselfe; and that the best of them were no better: God biddeth them looke to Abraham their father, and to Sarah that bare them. For God called him alone, and blessed him, and multipli∣ed him.Gen. 12.1.4. Abraham would haue dwelt in Vr of the Chaldees still, if God had not called him thence. And this first calling of God, is repeated twise, Gen. 12. v. 1. & 4. And he feared his life in Egypt: and Sarah laughed behinde the tent doore.Gen. 18.12.12.11. Here were apparant imperfections in Abraham, and Sarah: Here are manifest argu∣ments, of Gods great mercy. And by the prophet Ezechiell; Thus the Lorde commndeth the prophet to saie to Ierusalem:Ezech. 16.4. Thy ha∣bitation and thy kinred was from the lande of Canaan: Thy father was an Amorite, and thy mother an Hittite. As though hee should saie; before thy natiuitie thou hast nothing to bragge of; as ma∣nie men are wont to bragge of their pedegrees, and of their nobi∣litie and vertue. In this spirituall generation, all pedegrees must cease; but the pedegrees of shame and confusion. (And in thy nati∣uitie in this case thou wast: Thy nauel was not cut, thou wast not wa∣shed in water, to soften thee; thou wast not salted with salt, nor swad∣led in cloutes. No eie pitied thee, to doe any of these vnto thee, or to haue compassion vpon thee; and thou wast cast into the open field, in contempt of thy soule, in the day thou wast borne.) Man had no an∣cestour to glorie in, nor no friende to helpe or pittie him, in the daie of his birth. (And when I passed by thee, I sawe thee polluted with thine owne bloud, and I saide vnto thee, in thine owne bloud, liue: and I said to thee, in thine own bloud, liue:) Here is mans mi∣serable estate, destitute of all helpe, polluted in his owne bloud, euen at deathes doore: and here is Gods great mercie, euen then, to saie liue. And least this great benefit should be forgotten, both ye miserie, and the benefit, is twise repeated: I said vnto thee, in thine owne bloud, liue; I said vnto thee in thine own bloud, liue. And this same our frée saluation, of the meere grace and mercie of God without anie thing in vs, is likewise repeated of S. Paul twise, 2. Ephes. vers. 5.Eph. 2.5. Verse 8. When we were dead by our sinnes, hee hath quickned vs together in Christ: by grace ye are saued. And againe in 8. verse for by grace ye are saued, through faith, and that not of your selues, it
is the gift of God, not of workes, least any man should boast in him∣selfe. God would haue man challenge to himselfe nothing, nor bragge of anie part of his saluation: that glorie he reserueth on∣ly and wholie to himselfe. Neither hath God alone thus giuen man life: but adorned him, but sanctified him; as followeth in the prophet. I caused thee to multiplie, as the budde of the fielde, to in∣crease, to waxe great; I caused thee to haue ornaments of ornaments: that is most excellent ornaments. Thy brests are fashioned, and thy haire is growen: whereas thou wast naked and bare. Now when I passed by thee, and looked vpon thee, behold thy time was the time of loue. Where this worde, behold is in the scriptures, there fol∣loweth some strange and wonderfull thing. One in this case, was beloued: this was the time of loue. To loue one beautifull or braue∣lie attyred, were no maruell: but to loue one thus defiled, thus deformed, thus naked, in this miserable estate, O thing most won∣derfull. And such was the time, when God loued vs first: Euen then: It followeth in the prophet, I spread out my skirtes ouer thee, and couered thy filthinesse. Yea I sware vnto thee, and came into a league or couenant with thee (saith the Lord God Iehoua) and thou becamest mine. Then I washed thee with water, and I washed thy bloud from thee, and I annointed thee with oile, and adorned thee with all manner of costly ornaments. Here is Gods great mercy set out to vs ward, by a most liuelie example.Rom. 5.8.9. And if God shewed this great mercie vppon vs, being his enemies: what shall wee hope for, now being iustified, and being his friendes? If he shew∣ed this in our birth: what shall we hope for, at our latter ende, at our iudgment? And surely this is the only staffe we must lean to. And therefore Dauid saith,Psal. 130.3. 1. Io. 2.1. If thou Lord wilt marke what is done a∣misse, who may abide it? And S. Iohn saieth, If any man sinne wee haue an aduocate with the father Iesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sinnes: and not for ours only, but for the sins of the whole world. Iesus Christ was the propitiation of the Apo∣stles sinnes: And S. Paul saith, God hath shut all vnder vnbeliefe,Rom. 11.32. that he might haue mercy on all. So that all must come to God for their saluation, like beggers, like damned & guiltie prisoners, and must he saued by pardon: not by pleading innocencie. And in another place he concludeth: that all mouthes must be stopped, and the whole world must be subiect, that is, must yéeld themselues as guiltie, to the condemnation of God.Rom. 3.19. No man must bragge of
his workes, or challenge anie merit before the maiestie of God. The workes which the Pharisie did,Luke 18.11. were good workes, as to fast, to pray, to pay his tithes: but he bragged of them, he trusted in them, he confessed not, that he was an vnprofitable seruant, hee looked not for, he desired not the mercie of God, for his saluation: and ther∣fore hee was reprooued. For who amongst men, will bragge of that, which is not his owne? And such like are our good workes: They are none of ours; they are the free giftes of God. Hee hath wrought all our workes in vs,Es. 26, 12. Ephes. 2.10. saith the Prophet. And againe, S. Paul saith, we are his workmanship, being created in Christ Iesus to good workes, which God hath prepared before, that wee should walke in them. Here is a second creation in Iesus Christ, to good workes: so that they wholy belong to Gods grace. Mans nature of it selfe, can challenge no part of them. Therefore it hath nothing to brag of, as concerning them: Nay we being regenerate haue not so much of our selues, as of our selues, as to thinke a good thought, or to deuise a good worke. For it is said also, that God hath prepared them long before, that we should walke in them. And therfore S. Au∣gustine writeth thus verie excellently,In Enchirid. ad Laurent. de fide cap. 32. and manifestly concerning Gods frée mercie, and mans frée will. Againe (saieth he) least anie man should brag, although not of his workes, but of his free will, as though desert had his beginning of that, to which the reward of do∣ing well as due, should be requited; let liberty her selfe, euen the freest man in the world, heare the preacher of grace, saying: It is God that worketh in you, both to wil and to worke, according to his good plea∣sure. And in another place: Therefore it is not of him that willeth, or of him that runneth: but it is of God, that hath mercy. And after he expoundes this thus against our Semipelagianists, that ioine grace and nature together: If it be said, It is not of him that willeth, or of him that runneth, but of God shewing mercy; because it is of them both, that is both of the will of man, and mercy of God, that we should thus vnderstand it to bee meant: It is not of him that willeth, or of him that rūneth, but of God shewing mercy; as though it should be said, the wil of man alone sufficeth not, if the mercy of God be not there also; nor the only mercy of God, if the will of man be not there also. And in this sense, if it bee well said so, that (it is not of man wil∣ling, but of God shewing mercy,) because mans will alone is not a∣ble to bring it to passe; why may it not then on the contrary, be as wel said, It is not of God shewing mercy, but of man willing; because the
mercy of God alone also, doth not bring it to passe? Therefore if no christian dare say, It is not of God shewing mercy, but of mans wil∣ling, least hee should most manifestly speake against the Apostle: it remaines, that therefore it is truely saide, It is not of man willing or running, but of God shewing mercy; that all may be yeelded to God, who prepareth mans good will, that it may be helped, and helpeth it also being prepared. Mans good will goeth before many of the gifts of God; but not all: but those which it doth not go before, it is among them it selfe. Thus farre Augustine most plainly writing of the christian faith to Laurentius, not disputing earnestly against Pela∣gius; and so by heate of disputation, caried ouer much to speake in the commendation of Gods grace, to depresse the pride of mans nature, as some haue written: And his opinion is grounded vpon the scripture so firmely, as all the enemies of Gods grace, shall neuer be able to ouerthrow it. But most manifestly in his booke of Retractations he taketh away this obiection & friuolous cauil. For first he retracts nothing out of this booke ad Laurentiū de fide. And againe,Ret. lib. 1. cap. 9. Behold (saith he) how long before the Pelagian heresie sprang, we haue so disputed, euen as though we had disputed against them. So that Augustine neuer changed his opinion in this mat∣ter. He was of the same mind before Pelagius and his heresie was hatched: as he was also after. So that then Augustines opinion is cleare, that man of himselfe, can challenge no part of merit, for his good workes: and that God when he crownes our good works, crowneth his owne giftes. Man must therfore ascribe all his sal∣uation wholie to God, and no part thereof to himselfe. And in ano∣ther place he saith, O Lord my strength,Meditat. li. 1. c. 5. there shall no flesh be iustifi∣ed in thy sight. My trust is not in the sons of men, whom if thou shalt iudge, setting mercy aside, shalt thou finde righteous? & vnlesse thou preuentest by shewing mercy vpon the wicked, there is none that shal glorifie thee being mercifull. As concerning his regeneration then (as these two allegories of Esay & Ezechiel do prooue) as concerning his daily preseruation and finall coronation, as Dauid, S. Paul, and the fathers Augustine and Bernard do affirme; and as concerning his remuneration, as S. Iude here teacheth: Euerie one must looke for the mercy of Iesus Christ to his saluation. The summe of all this, our sauiour the wise∣dome of God the father, comprehends in two words, as the toppe of all happinesse & felicitie: Blessed (saith he) are the poore in spirit,Mat. 5.3.
for theirs is the kingdome of God. Here is the toppe of blessednesse, to be poore in spirit. And what meaneth this, Our sauiour in ano∣ther place expoundes it,Luke 17.10. when as you haue done al you can, (saith he) say you are vnprofitable seruants, and we haue done but that was our duety to doe: That is, not to trust in our works, as the Pharises did, not to iustifie our selues. This God cannot abide; they that do so, though they fast often, and pray long praiers; the kingdome of hell is theirs. They are poore in spirit, which with Marie, though they excell in good works,Such a one was the womā of Canaan, who acknow∣ledged her selfe euen a dogge. as she did: yet thinke themselues as no bodie in Gods sight, and account of themselues basely with her, as those her wordes declare. Thou hast respected not the humility (which is a rare & excellent vertue) but rather the. Psal. 8.4. base & vile estate of thy handmaid: for so the gréek word signifieth, who account my selfe as a vile woman before thee: And saie with Dauid, What am I, that thou visitest me, or that thou regardest me? Such a poore man in spirit was our father Abraham, who though he were rich in good works:Gen. 18.27. Gen. 32.10. Iob. 15.15. yet called himselfe, speaking to God, dust and ashes. Such a one was Iacob, who confessed himselfe lesse then all the mercies of God. Hereof Iob said, If the heauens be not cleane in thy sight, how much more man, being borne of a woman, a very wonne. Here∣of Dauid called himselfe, a worme and no man. Hereof Paul called himselfe,Psal. 22.6. the least of the Apostles, and not worthy to be called an A∣postle.1. Cor. 15.9. Hereof our sauiour himselfe the chiefe patterne of all vir∣tues, would not haue his most glorious workes to be preached or published abroad:Mat. 9.30. to giue vs an ensāple, that we should not brag of our workes. And when as his Apostles had returned againe, and dare great miracles, and reioiced therein, he taught them not to reioice in their owne works: but in the mercy of God towards them, and that their names were written in heauen. Here is the on∣ly cause of reioicing,Luke, 10.21. that he that wil reioice, must reioice in ye Lord. And againe, that we must not reioice, in things priuate or proper to our selues (as the most part of the world doth at this daie) but in thinges common to all their brethren, that they haue one God, one father, one sauiour, one faith, one baptisme, one common inhe∣ritance. These should cause vs to reioice, & not here on earth, our priuate worldly commodities. But to let these ancient Patriarks passe, euen many of the Paganes, who were otherwise very gréedy of vaine glorie,Plut. in Apol. haue béene but poore in spirit. Alexander the great; when as his friendes bragged that hee had done more, then euer
Hercules had don: Truly (saith he) I do not think yt al my acts with my whole Empire are to be cōpared to one word yt Hercules spoke.Gal. 7. li. Therap. And Galen that famous Phisition did so disdain the peoples com∣mendation, that hee neuer put his name to anie of his workes. And he earnestlie requested his friendes, that they would not doe it after his death, being desirous onelie of knowledge and truth; Accounting (saith he) no possession more pretious then vertue, I neuer put my name to any of my bookes. What shall I speake of these Paganes, the fathers themselues verie excellentlie haue taught vs this lesson.Manual. ca. 23 Augustine writes thus: That hee doth God great wrong which distrusts in his mercie. As much as in him lieth; he denieth God to haue loue, truth, and pow∣er, wherein all my hope consists: in the charity of his adoption, in the truth of his promise, and in the power of his redemption Let my foo∣lish conscience murmure as much as it will, saying, who art thou? and howe great is that glory? by what merits doest thou hope to ob∣taine it? And I will answere boldlie, I know whom I haue beleeued. For through exceeding great loue he hath adopted me to be his son: and hee is true in his promise, and mightie in his performance: hee is able to doe what pleaseth him. I cannot bee terrified with the multi∣tude of my sinnes: if I remember the death of my Lorde, my sinnes cannot ouercome him. Here we may plainlie see howe Augustine was poore in spirit, his whole trust was in the loue, mercie, and power of God. Here is no mention of his owne workes or me∣rits. Bernard also in a gréeuous sicknesse,Author vitae. seemed to be arraigned at Gods iudgement seate, and was there accused of sathan; and there despairing of the righteousnesse of his owne merits: I con∣fesse (saith he) that I am not worthie, nor by my owne merits that I can obtaine the kingdom of heauen. But my Lord, possessing it by a double right: by the inheritance of his father, and by the merits of his passion: being content with the one himself, he hath giuen me ye other. By whose gift. I lawfully challenge that vnto me, and shal not be con∣founded. Here we may also see plainly Bernards claime to ye king¦dom of heauen: ye free gift of Iesus Christ, his merits, his passion. Hee was also poore in spirit, hee had not anie merit or worke of his owne to plead. But to come to our daies; that same saying of Cosmus Medices, the grandfather of that familie,Ludo. Guici∣ard. in diludiis. who was ador∣ned with the name of the wise: When as hee had bestowed fortie thousand rials vpon hospitals, & monasteries, and churches, and
was therefore commended of one, who tolde him, that hee might looke for a recompence at Gods hande, who was a patrone of the poore. He answered, that he could neuer finde as yet in his billes of reckonings, any mention of these expēses. Surelie, as should seeme, hee followed the counsell of our sauiour in giuing of almes: Let not thy left hand knowe what thy right doth:Matt. 6.3 Hee neuer writ nor made anie reckoning of that he gaue to the poore; he was poore in spirit, he confessed it was but his duty to bestow that he bestowed, and ten thousand more if he had béene able. And that no mans righteousnes consisteth in himselfe, though he had done neuer so manie good workes,Epist. ad Diognes Iustine the martyr thus verie excellentlie teacheth: But when our naughtinesse was comen to a perfection, and that it was made manifest, that the reward of sin was punishment, and death was to bee looked for, and the time ap∣pointed of God was come, to declare from henceforth his liberalitie and power, and how for the vnmeasurable loue he loueth men, hee hath not hated vs, neither hath he forsaken vs, neither hath he shew∣ed himselfe mindfull of our sins; but hath patiently borne it, and hath taken vppon him our sinnes. Hee hath giuen his owne sonne to bee the price of redemption for vs; the holy, for them that transgressed the lawe; the good for the euill, the iust for the vniust, one that knewe no corruption, for them that were guiltie of corruption, the immor∣tall for the mortall. For what other thing could couer our sinnes, but his righteousnesse? In what other man can we wicked and vngodlie wretches be counted for iust, but onely in the sonne of God? O sweet permutation! Oh vnsearchable cunning! oh kindnesse aboue all ex∣pectation! that truly the iniquity of many should be hidden in one iust person; and the righteousnesse of one, should make that manie iust persons should be counted for iust. Here we may plainelie set that doctrine of imputation of Christes righteousnesse, which the church of Rome nowe cannot abide, accounted as catholique, in Iustine the martyrs daies: His righteousnesse onlie couers our sinnes; and we vnworthie sinners can be accounted iust in none other but in him. This is then our righteousnesse, to haue our sins couered and to be accounted righteous in Iesus Christ. S. Paul saieth, The wages of sinne is death: But eternall life (is no wages) it is the gift of God (as the word  importeth) in our Lord Iesus Christ.Rom. 6.23 Mat. 25.34 . And our sauiour calleth eternall life an inheri∣tance, which in ye gréek taketh his name of Lots, whereof Salomon
writes thus: The Lots are cast into the lappe,Pro. 13.6 but the whole dispo∣sition thereof is of the Lord. So that in those things, which are don by lots, man hath nothing to doe, there is no respect of him: but all is of the Lorde. Such an inheritance is our heauenlie inheri∣tance. Ferus writing of Iosuah his diuision of the land of Canaan, saith thus. It is to be obserued (saith he) that Iosuah deuided the land by no other meanes then by lots, committing freely the disposition of the matter to God, by whome the lots are gouerned: that hee might purchase himselfe lesse enuy, and euery man might so receiue his in∣heritance, as giuen him of God. And so he that receiued more, should giue more thankes, and he that receiued lesse, should not murmure a∣gainst men; but should hope in God that hee could giue him more: Euen so Christ deuided his land by lots. For our electiō is of the grace of God, &c. Whosoeuer the refore in the church, hath Christ Iesus for his possession or inheritance: let him know, that it is of grace, and not of merit: that all mouthes should be stopped, and he that will reioice, must reioice in the Lord alone. No man in that inhe∣ritance might attribute it to his valiantnesse in fighting, or to a∣nie great exploit that he had done, more then anie other. It was not Gods will that anie then should do so: No more may wee in our heauenlie inheritance when we haue done what we can. The mmot in gréeke, is called ,Pro. 6. ver. 6 and thereof commeth  a schoolehouse. And surelie verie fitlie. For she may bee a schoolemistresse to christians in manie vertues; as Salomon also himselfe sendeth the sluggard to her to learne. But as she hath ma∣nie excellent properties, as to prouide against the time to come, and that not the basest, but the best corne, that is wheate: yea and that she will carrie a corne, euen bigger then her selfe, that she is girle about the bellie, and that shee hath winges on her former partes, As she may teach all christians by these, to prouide also a∣gainst the time to come, and that not base, but excellent workes: and that no man should excuse his inhabilitie, seeing she wil beare a graine, as big as her selfe: and that she is girl about the bellie, that wee shoulde also vse abstinence, and fast, if we will haue the winges of angels: So her name in the Hebrew no doubt giuen her, of her chiefest propertie, teacheth all christians the most excel∣lentest lesson of all; she is called Nemalah a gnawer, because she gnawes off both ends of her corne; least they should sprout in win∣ter, and so become vnprofitable to her when she had gathered it.
Herein especiallie must all christians follow this Emmot, when they haue done all they can, if they will haue their workes doe them any good: they must gnaw off both endes of them; that is, bragging of them, which may be compared to the vpper ende; and trust in them, which may be compared to the lower ende. For lack of this, both the Pharisies and the Paganes (which were greate workers) lost all their workes: and it is to be feared the Papistes also. All christians must take heede by the example of Lot, who (as Origen allegoriseth on verie finelie) after hee had escaped the fire, both of couetousnesse and lust in Sodome, and the brimstone of their stinking conuersation; who is called in Hebrew Lot, that is, most precious frankensence: yet after he had attained to the hill of perfection, from Soar, that is, a small citie, as he calleth it: begot of his two daughters Benammi the son of the people, which may resemble vaine glorie, and Moab, which is in Hebrewe, the fa∣ther of them; which may resemble trust or confidence. Which two nations (the Moabits and the Amonites) were banished the con∣gregation of Israell to the fourth generation. Let all christians though they be Lot, that is, excellēt in good works, beware of these two children, Ammon and Moab; that is, of vaine glorie and con∣fidence: these two shall marre all their works: they are outlawes from Gods church. To conclude, Iesus Christ is the heade of his church and of all his members,Ephe. 1.22 as S. Paul calleth him: And as the heade beeing aboue the water, the bodie cannot drown; so we beléeue verilie, that our heade being in heauen, all the waues and troubles of afflictions, and of our sinnes whatsoeuer cannot drown anie one of his mem∣bers.Ephe. 5.23.24 He is the spouse of his church, as S. Paul testifieth. And there∣fore, euen as no man will sue the wife at the lawe for anie debte; so we beleeue that in the manifold debts of our sinnes, which euen thousand thousands in number the best of vs all doe owe to God, and in all sathans inditements, and in the accusations of our own consciences, Iesus Christ shall answere for vs: Hee is our hus∣band. As Dauid also beléeued when hee said, Thou shalt answere for me,Psal. 38.15 Rom. 8 33 ô Lord my God: And as S. Paul saith, Who shall lay anie thing to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God that iustifieth, who shall condemne? It is Christ which is dead, yea or rather which is ri∣sen againe, which is also at the right hande of God, and makes re∣quests
for vs. The accuser of our brethren nowe (saieth S. Iohn) is thrown down from heauen:Reu. 10.1 he dare not nowe there against Gods elect once shew his face, or open his mouth: Wee haue there such a mightie sauiour, such a louing husbande. What shall separate vs from the loue of Christ (saith S. Paul) shall tribulation or anguish, or persecution, or famine or nakednesse, or peril, or sword? as it is writ∣ten, for thy sake are we killed all the day long, and are accounted as sheepe for the slaughter. Here is the state of all christians in this world. But what is their comfort in all these externall euils, nay in death it selfe? Neuerthelesse (saith the Apostle) in all these things we are more then conquerers, we conquer exceedingly through him that loued vs. The loue of our husband Iesus Christ, which wee be∣leeue hee hath towardes vs, makes vs conquerours in all these. This is that which S. Paul saith to the Philippians,Phil. 1.21 That Christ to his, bo in life and in death is aduantage. Nay the Apostle is so certaine of this loue of Iesus Christ, that hee saieth it more vehe∣mentlie, and addeth: I am certainlie perswaded, that neither death nor life, nor angels nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height nor depth, nor any other creature can remoue it. If all these shoulde conspire together, or goe about to bring Gods elect out of his fauour by accusing them: yet all these were not able to separate vs from the loue of God, which is to vs ward by the meanes of Iesus Christ. Iesus Christ is the most lo∣uing and constant husbande to his spouse that euer was. Iesus Christ is our garment: and therefore the Apostle saieth,Gal. 3.27 As ma∣ny as are baptised, haue put on Iesus Christ. And therefore as a gar∣ment couers all the nakednesse, the botches and blemishes of the bodie: so wee beléeue, that Iesus Christ couers all the naked∣nesse, imperfections, vlcers, and blemishes of all his. And there∣fore Dauid saith, Blessed is the man,Psal. 32.1. 1. Epist. c. 2. v. 2 Psal. 32.7 whose vnrighteousnesse is forgi∣uen, and whose sinnes are couered: And S. Iohn, Iesus Christ is the propitiation or couering for our sinnes. Iesus Christ is that onelie place of securitie to hide vs in, from the wrath of God, whereof Dauid speakes. Hee is that mightie one,Psal. 89.19 Gen. 28.12 on whome God alone hath laid helpe. Hee is that ladder, which Iacob sawe standing on earth, which reached to heauen: Hee is the onely way to heauen. And as sure as by our ladders, wee may clime aloft:1. Cor. 4 8 so much more sure∣lie we shall ascende euen to heauen by Iesus Christ. Hee is that true Paschall lamb which is slaine for vs, whose bloud being sprin∣kled
vpon the postes of our houses, by faith: that is in our hearts and vnderstandings, by beléeuing, and in our mouthes by confes∣sing: the destroier shall passe ouer vs. To this agréeth that of S. Iohn:Io. 3.36. Hee that beleeueth in the sonne, hath euerlasting life; but hee that disobeieth him, shall neuer see life: but the wrath of God abi∣deth vpon him. If the bloud of the shadowe were of such force, to saue the sinnefull Israelites: what force shall wee thinke that the bloud of the true lambe it selfe Iesus Christ is?Pro. 30.1 Ithiel and Vcal, that is, God is with vs, and we can do all things: As S. Paul saith, If God be with vs,Rom. 8.31 Phil. 4.13 who can be against vs? And I can doe all thinges by Christ who strengthens me. Hee is that Isaac, that true ioie and laughter:Ioh. 8.56. Io. cap. 20. v. 6 which ioy made Abraham laugh, seeing him but a farre off. He is that high Priest, after whose death euen the murtherer may re∣turne home to his citie againe: and so may all Adams faithfull po∣steritie to Paradise. Hee is the true corke; for they write, that the corke it selfe cannot be drowned, nay if you binde any thing to it, it will not suffer it to be drowned; and it is a verie low tree: So humble and mightie is Iesus Christ, that neither by Sathan, hell or death, hee could be drowned himselfe; no nor as many as are ioyned to him, by a liuely faith, they also cannot be drowned. He is that horne of salua∣tion,Luke 1.69. that hath deliuered vs from the hands of our enemies, that we might now serue God without feare. The enemies of man are sa∣than, sinne, and death: Christ Iesus hath so mightilie deliuered vs, that we néed not now feare anie of these. But all these things, if we beleeue, shall be done vnto vs. For so Christ said alwaies to those hee saued.Mark. 9.23. Mat. 9.28 Doest thou beleeue I canne doe this? And as thou beleeuest, so be it vnto you. And euen so no doubt, hee speakes to vs now: If we beléeue these things; all these things shall be done to vs. No head so saueth the bodie from drowning: no husband so quits his wife from danger of lawe: no garment so perfectlie co∣uers all the imperfectiōs of the body: no place kéepeth any so close from danger: no mightie man so assists and preserues: no ladder so certainlie lifteth vp, and causeth to ascende; no corke so assured∣lie makes swim aloft; no high priest dying, did assure ye returne of the poore vanished murtherer; no Isaac or childe whatsoeuer, hath made anie father euer so merrie or ioifull: As Iesus Christ him∣selfe alone doth al these things for his. If they beléeue these things in their hearts firmelie and vnmooueablie; all the wisdome and power of heads, loue all husbandes, couering of garments, hiding
of places, helpes of men, Iewish passeouers, ladders, corkes, laughters of men whatsoeuer, are but shadowes in comparison of him. But if we beléeue not, none of these shall be done to vs. So that then these are the principall duties of the true church of God, and of all true christians, to build one another in their most holie faith, by the knowledge of the holie scriptures; to pray in the ho∣lie ghost with knowledge, with sighing and groning: to keepe them∣selues in the loue of God; to be sure that God loueth thē, and to looke for the mercy of Iesus Christ to eternall life. But these workes the church of Rome hath neglected, therfore she is not the true church of Christ. Her schollers and followers could not build one another in the faith; because they knew not the scriptures: they praied not in the holie ghost, with knowledge and vnderstanding, but in la∣tine: they kept not themselues in the loue of God, they doubted of their saluation, they were not sure whether God loued them or not: And lastlie, they looked not for the mercie of Iesus Christ to saue them; they trusted in their workes; and manie of them had more workes then they needed, to sel to others. And doth this faith agrée with that faith S. Iude here teacheth? let all men iudge. Concerning good workes, S. Paul teacheth all christians plaine∣lie, that God hath ordained vs to the adoption of sonnes,Ephes. 1.5. through Ie∣sus Christ, according to the good pleasure of his owne will, to the praise of the glorie of his grace. Hee hath not made vs his sons for our workes sake: but according to his own good pleasure, when we were beggers, and void of all goodnesse, that we should be to the praise of his glorie: All the workes we can do should be to glo∣rifie him; who hath bestowed such a great benefit vpon vs. And to the Galathians he  h,Gal. 4.30 that the sonne of the bondwoman shal not in∣herit with the sonne of the free woman: Ismaell, the bondwomans sonne is a figure of the law, Isaac the sonne of promise, is a figure of the gospell: In the inheritance of heauen, Ismaell and Isaac, the law and the gospell, faith and workes, shall not be ioined together. As Isaac; so his inheritance, must come of promise: it must come of faith, it must come of God. In this matter, Abraham must be deade, and Sarah barren. And Ferus of workes writes thus: A good worke is not to be esteemed by outward shew or cost:Ferin 1. epist. Io. ca. 5. but by faith. And S. Paul saith, yt faith cōmeth by the word of God. And this is the true maner of teaching, that first faith be taught, & then works: and yet, that they againe be directed to faith, and trust in the merits
of Christ. And after: Many of the simpler sort trust in their works, & so build on the sand. Thus far Ferus. And in that epistle of Christ to the faithfull soule wee may reade thus:A booke inti∣tuled the Epi∣stle of Christ to the faithful soule, which ye papists haue put forth. Aske alwaies at my handes mercy and grace, not relying on any worke or merit of thine own: but trusting altogether, in that onely worke of redemption which I haue finished for thee, and in that vnspeakeable mercy which I shewed towardes thee. And againe in the same Epistle they faine that Christ speakes thus to the faithfull soule: And yet notwithstanding I wil not haue thee serue me, or to suffer these things in hope of reward but onely of meere loue towards me: I know what reward I wil giue thee; I say I will, because I doe not owe it thee in any other sort, then for that it is my will to bestowe it vpon thee: for all my giftes are of free grace. Thinke not thou therefore of any rewarde, be not so base minded: but thinke of mee with a more noble, louing, and faithfull heart, and submit thy selfe vnto me, euen of meere loue for mine own sake, to endure whatsoeuer my will is to lay vpon thee. And againe, Referre all thinges to me alone, holde this with a resolute and assured minde, and for an infallible principle, that if I do grant thee any good gift, it is giuen meerely without desert, as to an vnfaithful and vnwor∣thie creature. And direct thine eies to thine own vnworthines, (which art of thy selfe meerely nothing) and to thine own dishability, which art able to do nothing. And if thou doest any man good, thou maiest reioice in the good which I did by thee as my instrument: and thou maiest neuer ioyne together thy selfe and my benefit, except when thou comparest my infinite goodnesse, with thy vnspeakeable base∣nesse. And yet for all this, whereas master Beza vpon the Phari∣sies bragging confession, on the 18 of Luke hath giuen this note; Although whatsoeuer we haue we confesse wee haue it of God, not∣withstanding we are reiected of God as arrogant, if wee put neuer so little trust in our workes before God: Index expurgatorius, a booke which the Papistes haue made of late, and by which they controll all mens workes at their pleasure, giueth in charge that that note shall be blotted out quite. It is likelie they which made that book thought wee might lawfullie put some trust in our workes, or else they would not that that note should haue been blotted out. De contempt mundi. li. 2. c. 29Of good workes also Stella a Frier writeth thus: Yea if thou shalt depart from sinne, for this ende onely or principally, that thou maiest obtaine eternal lie, and not for God, thou shalt neuer obtain it. And if thou doest forsake the worlde for this ende onely or princi∣pally,
that thou maiest not go to hell; & not for God: without doubt,A shame for true christians that wil not do so much for loue vnto God, as these papists did for loue vnto thēselues thou shalt go to hell. For this thy end which thou purposest, doth pro∣ceed from the loue of thy selfe. If this be true, then it is likely al∣most all the Monasteries and Abbies here in England, were buil∣ded to a wrong end. They erected them principally for the saluati∣on of their owne soules, because they would not go to hell; as ap∣peareth by their foundations at this day: and then those could not profit them. They procéeded of selfe loue, & not of the loue of God; and therefore by Stella his iudgment without Gods great mercy they should go to hell. We must do all our workes for the glorie and loue of God (as Stella by the force of the scriptures is forced to confesse.) But before the light of the scriptures came into ye world, their blinde guides, and wandring stars, taught men otherwise: That they might build Monasteries and Nunries, for the saluati∣on of their soules. For thus I find recorded in an old booke, which belonged to the Abbey, of Kirksted of the foundation of it. Bee it knowen to all the faithfull, that I Hugh, the sonne of Eudone, haue gi∣uen and granted to the Lord, and Saint Mary, and to the order of the Monkes of Chester, ground to build them an Abbey, in a place which is called Kirksted, &c.Prosalutemea. for my saluation, and the saluation of my wife, and all my heires, and for the soules of my father and mother, and all my parents. And this gift was made before Alexander Bishop of Lin∣colne, and others. Here this ende is onelie expressed, the health of their soules; and the glory of God is left out & forgotten: and thus their teachers taught them. For this was made before the Bishop of Lincolne. And so they haue made them shoot at a wrong mark, and derogate from that great glorie of Iesus Christ, as though he had not sufficiently saued them: and so while they would saue their soules, they endanger their soules. This one point, by a Papists owne iudgment ouerthroweth all Papistes workes. And haue compassion of some in putting difference:Text. Verse 22.23. and other saue with feare pulling them out of the fire, and hate euen the gar∣ments spotted by the flesh.Mat. 24.12.] In the end of the world iniquitie shall haue the vpper hand (as our sauiour prophesieth) and heresie shall preuaile, that if it were possible, the verie elect should be seduced. False Christs & false prophets shall arise; such Christs as the gos∣pell teacheth not; which teach another waie of saluation, then is therein contained: and false prophets,Rom. 1.1. 1. Cor. 15. v. 5.6. which shall preach false do∣ctrine (not according to the scriptures) as the Apostle often addeth,
as a sure testimony to his doctrine; shal come into the world, and shall shew great signes and wonders, not so much in doing anie externall miracles (which none take vpon them to doe at this day) as in their manner of liuing, verie straite and austere: like frogs (as S. Iohn in his Reuelation prophesieth of them) in venturing their liues for their errors,Reu. 16.13. in vsing all manner of meanes to con∣firme their opinions, in all counterfeit holinesse and deuotion: so that if it were possible, the very elect should bee seduced. After the drying of Ephrates, that great riuer and streame of selling par∣dons, which enriched Babylon: there came frogs out of the mouth of the beast, to do wonders before the kings of the earth. Frogs liue hardly in the water, leape here & there, and haue a kinde of voice: They may resemble their Seminaries of late founded by ye Pope, and their preaching and hypocrisie. Out of this generall fire, which shal burne in all places, and from this great heresie & superstition, which now shall cary a zeale with it, like fire; the Apostle here wil∣leth all true christians, that as they haue a care of their owne sal∣uations: so to haue a care of others, as much as in them lieth, and to saue them. And he maketh two sortes: the one to be dealt more gentlie withall, to be pitied; the other with feare, to be pulled out of the fire: of both which sortes, we haue plenty at this day. There are a great many simple soules seduced by the vaine perswasions of others, which themselues are not able to defend their opinions: but are led by others. Such surely are to be pitied, and with al cur∣tesie, to be perswaded, that seeing they are men & haue reason, that they would not stop their eares,Psal. 56.4. like the deafe adder, and that they would vouchsafe to heare, that which should doe their soules good: That they would not in their faith, hange on other mens sléeues, knowing,Heb. 10 38. Mat. 9.22.29. Mat. 10.52. Ier. 31.32. Heb. 8.11. Esay 11.9. Hab. 2.14. that the iust man must liue by his owne faith. They shal all know me (saith God) from the greatest to the smallest. And speaking of the kingdome of Christ, the prophets Esay and Habacucke do af∣firme, that the earth shalbe filled with the knowledge of the glory of the Lord, as the waters couer the sea. Why then, who will nowe bee without knowledge? which the Lord here giueth so plenteously. It shall couer the earth, who will not stoupe downe to put his hand to it?Reu. 21.8. The fearefull soule, God will exclude out of his kingdome. Let no man be affraid to read the scriptures, to pray as the saints of God heretofore haue praied, to hope to be saued as they were. Those thinges that came in since, as Latine praiers, pardons, agnus dei,
images and such like: what neede we care for? the former saints of God were saued without them. Others, which be as it were in the fire through their ouermuch zeale, we are with feare to pull out: telling them with S. Paul,Rom. 10.2. that zeale without knowledge, profiteth nothing. Such a zeale as hee witnesseth the Iewes had, but it was not agreeing with the word of God. They defended the traditions of the fathers,Mat. 15.1. and expounded the scriptures according to them, as manie doe now adaies: but they should rather haue brought their traditions to the scriptures, and haue seene how they had agréed with them. And therefore as our sauiour saide to them of their traditions,Verse 13. euery planting which my heauenly father hath not planted, shall be rooted out: so we may saie to those, that maintaine the traditions of the fathers, and of the church: if their traditions be not planted of God in his word, they shall be rooted out. Such a zeale S. Paul himselfe had,Gal. 1.14. as hee witnesseth; and I profited in the Iewes religion, aboue many of my companions, and of mine owne nation, and was more zealous of the traditions of ye fathers. But this his zeale made him a blasphemer; these his traditions had well nigh drawen him, into hell. And Saint Peter affirmeth, that we were not redeemed with gold or siluer,1. Pet. 1.18. Verse 21. from the vaine conuersation we had receiued of our fathers, but by the pre∣tious bloud as of a lambe immaculate Iesus Christ. But now (saith he) we are borne againe, not of mortall seede but of immortall, that is by the word of the liuing God, which endureth for euer. If then Christ hath redeemed vs from the vaine conuersation, we had receiued of our fathers; let vs beléeue no more such a false schoolemaster: if we be regenerat, by the word of God which endureth for euer, let vs beleeue that, let vs be zealous in that: This is S. Peters lesson. Againe, in the lawe by the prophet Amos, God teacheth the same: Thus saith the Lord, for three transgressions of Iudah, and for foure,Amos 2.4. I will not turne to it: because they haue cast away the law of the Lord, and haue not kept his commandements. And their lies caused them to erre, after the which their fathers haue walked. Their fathers steps, besides the lawe of God, coulde not excuse the Iewes: no more shall ours excuse vs. Let our zeale be therfore according to know∣ledge, grounded vpon Gods word, maintaining it: not the tradi∣tion of the fathers. Papias a diligent searcher, and enquirer of the A∣postles traditions, in ye primitiue church fell into heresies:Euseb. ecel. hist. lib. 3. cap. 39. much more traditions may deceiue vs. Let euerie one take héede what hee
buildeth:1. Cor. 3.17. If any man destroy the tēple of God, him shal God destroy, for the temple of God is holy, which yee are (saieth the Apostle.) The teacher of false doctrine destroieth the temple of God: Oh therfore let euerie man take héede, what he teacheth! The doctrine which is grounded on the scriptures, is sure, it cannot be false: Oh let vs teach that! That which is grounded vpon traditions, may be false: Oh let vs beware that,Psal. 19.8. Rom. 6. v. 17. least we destroy the temple of God! The law of God (saith Dauid) is a perfect lawe, conuerting the soule, and S. Paul calleth the scripture , the platforme or mould of doctrine;Col 2. v. 20. and therefore all doctrine which agreeth not with that, is to be reiected: and to ye Colossians ; why are you led by the conceites and opinions of men concerning the elements of the world and outward thinges; as though now the worship of God consisted in them, in ouermuch pinching and pining the body, as the Iesuites doe, or in humblenesse of minde and worshipping of angels, as now also the catholiques teach. These our head Iesus Christ commandeth not; these are the opinions of men; these haue a shew of holinesse in voluntary religion: but in Christes religion, because he neuer taught them, they ought as superfluous to bee quite cut off and repelled. Such worshipping of angels, through humility; and such excessiue fasting, through ouermuch deuotion or rather superstition, began to spring (as it should séeme) as a part of Gods worship and religion, euen in the Apostles daies: but since it hath ouerspread almost the whole church, and quite choked all the true worship; which, according to our sauiours doctrine, should be only of God, and in spirit and truth. This only place if it be well marked, ouerthroweth the verie principall groundes of poperie: which is, a voluntary religion and seruice of God besides his word, and a wor∣shipping of angels and saints, and a religious & excessiue abstinence. For there is a measure in al things, which the gospell doth not take away,2. Cor. 10.13. as in doctrine: we will not reioice in thiges aboue our mea∣sure, saith the Apostle: so in fasting, in reproouing sins, and in all other spirituall exercises  (saith S. Paul:Rom. 6. v. 19.) I speake according to mans hability. And in the epistle to the christian soule, thus they faine that Christ doth speake to his spouse: I do not hold my selfe satisfied, though thou doest serue me, seeke me, and binde thy selfe to heare me: but I will haue thee serue me in such sort, as my will is to be serued, that is I will haue thee cleane forsake thine owne will, yea though it be in a thing vertuous and commendable; and to
follow my will in another thing, which is not halfe so good, but see∣meth to be vile and of no valew. Here we maie plainlie sée by their owne confession, that Gods will in his worship is chiefelie to bée respected: and how shall we learne that, but in his word? And that all voluntarie worship is condemned against this his will, séeme it to vs neuer so commendable, and full of deuotion. If we will be led by traditions: the church of Ethiopia hath a certaine booke,Mat. Dresserus in oratione de eccl. Aethiopicae. which they suppose was made of all the Apostles, when they were together at Ierusalem, and they call this booke in their language Manda and Abetylis, and they beléeue that all things written in it are as true as the gospell: And in this booke is contained that priestes may haue wiues: so that, both ecclesiasticall and ciuill persons, after they haue companied with their wiues, must abstaine from the church 24. houres. Also it containeth other ceremonies of womens purifications; and that a Synod ought twise euery yeare to bee kept in the church, &c. Why should wee beléeue the Popes traditions vnwritten, more then these which are written? Why should wee beléeue the church of Rome more, then of Ethiopia? For of the whole church Christ spake, that hell gates should not preuaile against it: And S. Paul, that it is the piller of truth, as well the church of E∣thiopia, as of Asia; as well the church of Ephesus,Epiph. haer. 27. where Timothy was Bishop, as of Rome, where (as some thinke) Peter and Paul were Bishops, not Peter onlie. Irenaeus of the traditions of the Iewes writes thus:Lib. 4. ca. 35. The traditi∣ons of the elders, which they faine that they obserued according to the lawe, were contrary to the lawe which was giuen by Moses. And therefore Esay saith, thy hucksters do mingle wine with water, shew∣ing, that with the tart precept of God, the elders did mingle their waterish tradition, that is setting vp an adulterous law, and that con∣trary to the law: as our Lord made manifest, saying vnto them, why doe ye transgresse the commandement of God, for your owne tradi∣tion? And they haue not onely broken the law of God, by transgressi∣on mingling wine with water; but they haue also on the contrarie part, set vp their owne lawe, which till this time is called the Pharises law. In the which they take somethings away, and some things they adde, & expound as they list, which their doctors vse especially which traditions whilest they would maintaine, they would not bee subiect to the lawe of God, instructing them of the comming of Christ; but also they reprooued the Lorde for healing on the sabaoth day: The
which thing truely, as we haue said before, the lawe did not forbid. Here we maie see by Irenaeus opinion, what the Iewes did: And haue not the papists done the like? Do they not saie, that their tra∣ditions are grounded on the scripture? haue they not added things of their owne, more then Gods word commanded, as the Iewes did the keeping of the sabaoth: so they haue added their pilgrima∣ges, and infinite such like? haue they not expounded ye scriptures, as they list? And as the Iewes at the first comming of Christ, maintaining their traditions, would not beléeue the word of God, which plainly prooued, that he was comen: Do not they so likewise now, against his second comming, maintaining their traditions of Enoch and Elias, and of Antichrist, that he shall be borne of the tribe of Dan, withstand the scriptures, and saie that Christ shall not come as yet? Text.And putting a difference, haue compassion on some &c. And hate euen the garment spotted by the flesh.] That is hate not onely the wicked works of the flesh: but also, all things which are nigh vnto it: all prouocations or intisements therunto. And so S. Paul willeth that all christians should abstaine not only from all euill,2. Thes. 5.22. but from all shew of euill: as though he should say, take héede to your selues, hate the garment spotted of the flesh.Ephes 4. v. 22.23.24 Col. 3. v. 8. & 12 The outward workes and conuersation of the olde man, are compared to a garment, as also the new man and his workes: The flesh still lusteth against the spi∣rit: hate the old man with his deedes, put him off; put on the newe man Iesus Christ. Those things that proceede from the hart, are they which defile a man (saith our sauiour) as euill thoughts,Mat. 15.19. murthers, a∣dulteries, fornications, &c. hate the garment, that is, the outwarde conuersation, & defiled life of the flesh, in your selues, and in your brethren;Reu. 7.15. séeke to wash it, with all saints in the bloud of the lamb. This garment spotted of the flesh too many weare at this day: that is, follow the lusts of the flesh in all their dealings: the whole course of their life, their conuersation, as a garment, is stained with the lusts of the flesh: whatsoeuer the flesh desireth it hath. That which we will doe,Rom. 7.15. Col. 3 5. we doe; which ought not to bee done. The flesh should be made a seruant: The spirit should beare the rule. The flesh should be mortified by fasting, and praier, and holy exercises: The spirit should be strengthened with sacraments, and holy me∣ditations.Text. Verse 24. To him that is able to keepe you free from sinne.] Here is the con∣clusion
of the whole epistle, with a thanksgiuing:1. Cor. 1.4. Ephes. 1.3. 1. Pet. 1.3. the Apostle here∣in not following ye other Apostles, who alwaies vsed to giue thāks in the beginning: and they all following our sauiour Christ, who often made confession and gaue thankes to God his father,Mat. 26.30. Mat. 11.33. Luke 10.21. euen for his meate, for the faith and knowledge of his hearers: teaching thereby all christians to do the like. And here first he stirreth vp all christians to this thankefulnesse, by two notable reasons; because God alone can keepe vs free from sinne: and can make vs appeare before his glory with ioy. So Noe found grace in the eies of the Lord,Gen. 6.8. that he was not drowned with the old world:20.6. so God kept Abime∣lech that he should not sinne against him, and that he should not once touch Abrahams wife:21 19. so God opened the eies of Agar in the wilder∣nesse, and she saw a well of water, and she gaue her childe drinke: so when as Lot prolonged the time,19.16. and was loath to go out of Sodom (the Lord being mercifull to him) they brought him forth, and set him without the citie. If man trust in himselfe, he cannot chuse but be ashamed and confounded. Vnlesse God order our goings,Psal. 94.18. & hold them vp: we must needes fall downe flat, euen into the pit of de∣struction:Psal. 119.35. vnlesse he make vs walke in the waies of his comman∣dements, the best of vs shall go astray, shall walke by-waies:Psal. 80.18.119.25 v. 88. Psal. 143.11. vn∣lesse he quicken vs, as Dauid often praieth; how slacke and howe slow shall we be in doing his commandements? Therefore euery one must daily lift vp his heart to God, & call to him for grace: that he may auoide the snares of sathan, the waies of sinners, and that he may be able to do that which pleaseth the Lorde. We are not more iust then Noah, more zealous then Lot, more wise then Abi∣melech, more quicke sighted then Agar: God alone must keepe vs from sinning against him, wee must finde fauour in his sight, or else we shall be drowned with the vanities and pleasures of this wicked world. He must leade vs with his holy spirit, or else wee shall all be burned, with this fire of heresie, and impietie the Apo∣stle Iude here speaketh of. Vnlesse he open our eies, we shall not be able to sée any thing that is good for vs. But some will saie, If God be able to kéepe vs from sin, why then there be some that are pure, that neuer sinne. But that followeth not: For though God be able to doe it, yet he giueth that grace to none in this life, least he should be too proud: He will haue vs humble;Gen. 22.1. Iob. 1.20. Mat. 26.33. hee will haue all mouthes stopped; he will exercise our faith, whether we do beléeue his promise or no, of free remission of sinnes in his sonne Iesus
Christ: whether we being sinners, dare ioyfully vpon this his pro∣mise, euen venture our liues. For these and such other causes, God suffers many often times to fall, and to feele their owne infirmi∣ties, and frailties. Text. Verse 25.That is, to God onely wise, our sauiour, be glory and maiestie, and dominion and power, both now and for euer, Amen.] This place also prooueth that our sauiour is God, and he addeth two other cau∣ses, why we should giue him praise: because he is the wisedome of God, he hath declared God vnto vs, which was in the bosome of the father.Io. 1.18. Io. 15.15. Mat. 1.21. Ephes. 4.8. Psal. 34.19. 1. Cor. 15.57. 1. Io. 3.3. Hence forth he calleth vs, not seruants, but friendes: be∣cause all things, he hath heard of his father, hee hath made knowen vnto vs. He is our sauiour, which first saueth vs from our sins, which saueth vs from our spirituall enemies the deuill, and all his angelles, which saueth vs from all perils and dangers in this life, which saueth vs from death eternall, and from hell it selfe: which alone setteth vs in the sight of his glory, with ioy. And shal we not praise, and mag∣nifie this our gratious, and mercifull, and louing, and most migh∣tie God and sauiour? Let vs therefore yéeld to him, all maiestie, and magnificence: as doing things wonderfull, passing all mans reach and reason. Let vs giue him glorie and praise for these his wonderfull workes, let vs yeelde to him dominion, and empire, in this world ouer all Turkes, Tyrants and wicked christians: nay ouer all the deuils of hell,Psal. 135.6. who hath power to doe whatsoeuer plea∣seth him. To this our most wise, mighty, and louing sauiour Ie∣sus Christ, with God the father, and the holy Ghost; one God, immortall, inuisible, and onely wise: be all honour, and glorie, power, dominion, and maiestie: both now and for euer. Amen, Amen. FINIS.
