5427 99853571 18961
A pleasant new Dialogue: OR, The discourse between the Serving-man and the Husband-man. The lofty pride must bated bee, And praise must goe in right degree. To the tune of, I have for all good wives a Song. AS I went through the meddowes gréene, that are most lovely to be séene, I heard two men in great discourse o many things better or worse: The one a Serving-man, and he stood much upon his bravery: The other was a Husbandman, which no man speake against him can. The Serving-mans speech. I am a Serving-man that's fine, and feed on dainties, and drinke wine, I am for Ladies company, who can have pleasures more than I? I have the love of Maidens faire, that are their Parents onely heire, Although they goe in garments gay, with me they'l yéeld to sport and play. The Plough-man. Though you in garments goe most brade, yet you must yeeld to what I crave, No serving-man shall make me yeeld, Ile shew the cause whereon I build. A Servingman cannot come nie to that which I will verifie: A young Serving-man may compare to be an old beggar mans heire. The Serving-man. I wait on Ladies, Lords, and Knights, where pleasure flowes with much delights, My time I spend with Venus Nymphs, whose features rare desire attempts. We Serving-men have pleasure at will: and Plough-men they have labour still, Then how can they with us compare, séeing we have pleasure, and they have care? The Plough-man. Though you in pleasure do excéed, who is it that doth serve your need? You might goe pine and starve with want, then at a Plough man do not tant. We till the ground which brings increase: and all would lack if we should cease. Such bragging Ias might doe full ill, then to a Plough-man yéeld thee skill. The Serving-man. Our parell many times is silke, our shirts as white as any milke, Our fare is of the very best, and that which is most neatly drest, And often when we sup or dine, we taste a dainty cup of wine: Our Masters Cellars yéeld good béere, and in his Hall we finde good cheare. The Plough-man. 'Tis true: there many goes in silke, and have their linnen white as milke, And yet perhaps not worth a groat, but much like you, will lye and prate: The Proverbe of a Serving-man, as alwayes I doe understand. In prime of yéeres hee'l roare and swagger, and being growne old he turnes a begger. The Serving-man. Why should a Plough-man me deface, and urge me with such foule disgrace▪ I dare to challenge you sir foole, to méet me at the Fencing-schoole: I will not so out-braved be, nor ranke with such base pedigrée, I am a man of courage bold, by Plough-men Ile not be control'd,
The second part. To the same Tune. The Plough-man. INdeed you are of perfect mettle, your nose shines like a copper kettle, Tis true you are of courage bold, the pipe and pot you will uphold, You hold it rare to drinke and smoake, all this is true which I have spoke: But 'tis a Husbandmans delight, to worke all day and sleepe all night. The Serving-man. We have no labour toyle and care, we Serving-men no drudges are, Our care is for the chiefest pleasure, which seemes to us a daily treasure: My Ladies Waiting-maid most fine, with us doth often sup and dine, Sometimes a courtesie we crave, a kisse or so, and this wee have. The Plough-man. If you the Proverb truly mark, Ioan is as good as my Lady in'th dark, A Country Lasse in russet gray, with hr I love to sport and play: O she will dance and sweetly sing, much like the Nightingale in Spring. She's fresh and faire, and firme and sound. in her much pleasure may be found. The Serving-man. Well Countrie-man my mind is brave, I will not yeeld to what you crave: No Plough man ere shall make me yéeld, I will not so much be compeld: My youthfull dayes yeelds me much ioyes, my nights I passe with merry toyes: My time is pleasure and delight, which I doe spend with Ladies bright. The Plough-man. O hold thy peace, thy fond delight doth passe away like day or night. Thy aged head appearing gray, then doth thy pleasure soone decay, Then from thy service must thou packe, and all things quickly wilt thou lacke: Then warning take ere it be long, and learne to worke while thou art young The Serving man. Why should I labour, toyle, or care, since I am fed with dainty fare? My Gelding I have for to ride, my cloake my good sword by my side, My bootes and spurres shining like gold, like those whose names are high inrold: What pleasure more can any crave, then such content as I now haue? The Plough-man. Tis true indeed, thy pleasure's great, and I have what I get by sweat, My labour gives my heart content, and I doe live in merriment. He that true labour takes in hand, doth farre surpasse the Serving-man, He passeth some with house and lands, when that decayes, he cryes, Helpe hands. The Serving-man. Thy reasons I have understood. and what thou speak'st is very good. I would I were a Plough man now, and labour could at Cart and Plough, Then would I work and till the land, and never more be Serving man, For what they have is truly got, they are contented with their lot. Thus to conclude and make an end, let none with Husband-men contend: You see here yeelds a loftie mind, and to good counsell is inclin'd. Thus will we all like lovers gree, the painfull man shall pised be, For by the labour of the hand, we doe receive fruits from the land. R▪ C FINIS▪ Printed at London for F. Coules dwelling in the Old Baily.
