7754 99836453 728
AN HVMBLE MO∣TION VVITH SVB∣MISSION VNTO THE RIGHT HONORABLE LL. OF HIR MA∣IESTIES PRIVIE COVNSELL. VVHEREIN IS LAID OPEN TO be considered, how necessarie it were for the good of this Lande, and the Queenes Ma∣jesties safety, that Ecclesiasticall discipline were reformed after the worde of God: And how easily there might be pro∣vision for a learned Ministery. REVEL. 3.20. Behold I stand at the dore and knock: if any man heare my voice and open the dore, I will come in vnto him, and will suppe with him, and hee with me. CANT. 2.15. Take vs the foxes, the little foxes which destroy the vines; for our vines haue small grapes. Anno 1590.
The preface of the author. WEre it not (gentle reader) that the truth of the cause, & the want in the practise, had a long time called vnto me, in reading of Gods book, and by experience of former time, drawing out before me, in the dayly knowledge of my conscience, the manifold necessitye of Christs discipline: I would not haue aduentured, se∣ing mine own wants, to put pen to the paper in a mat∣ter of so great waight. But knowing that by this my motion, ther might be occasion to the learned & wise, to think vpon very good things for the benefite of this realme, & (if need be) to set forth more deepe & setled demonstration, with far more exceding excellency: & for that I see the wiles of Sathan, by works of disgrace to hinder the good of my country: I thought it my duty to our high God, to his holy church, the Queens most excellent Matie, & my natiue cuntrie, by such meanes as these troublesome times would giue me leaue, vnto my louing mother that bare me, & my tender nurse yt fedeth me, those good & honest fruites wherwith God hath vouchsaued me for hir vse: beseeching al my lo∣uing cuntrimen, charitably, soberly & wisely to think & with sanctified affections to deale in these matters: that the hand of our God may bee with vs, to giue vs this honor, that at the length his cause may haue fauor and preuaile to the profit & ioy of vs & our posteritie. And I desire no other good wil of thee (gentle reader) whosoeuer thou be, in the christian accepting of this worke, than my very soule, in doing hereof, did with great care & godly loue seeke the prosperous estate of this land, & the flourishing of Gods church: for whose peace let vs pray night and day. Amen.
TO THE READER. WHEN I had read ouer this treatise (which by the proui∣dence of God light into my handes) and considered not onely the declaration of Christes discipline in the begin∣ning thereof, though briefly, yet plainely set down, and plentifully proued by those testimonies of Scripture, that (after many assaults) doth confirme the cause vnanswe∣rably but also the aequity, easines, the benefit and neces∣sity thereof euen in reason and policy, for the safty of hir Maiesty, the peace of the Land, the rooting out of popery and al other vngodlines; and that by such reasons as answere the foolish obiections of ignorant politikes: and in such maner layde open and vrged, as may satisfy al that bee not be sotted with wilful ignorance, and sturre the turbulent affection of none: as I took just occasion to praise God for his labors, whosoeuer was the penner of it: so did it giue me matter to encrease my perswasiō in that which long before I had conceaued, to wit that the Lorde meaneth certainlye either to esta∣blish this same scepter of his sonne Christ Iesus in a glorious manner among vs, or to make England an example of his vengeance for the reiecting of it. For first it is euident that God hath cleared it so euidently, & that by so dy∣uer and sundry sorts of handling the same, as no man of what state soeuer (if he desire to know it,) can want wherwith to satisfy his expectation. For if thou desire to haue it disputed against a professed and bitter enemy ther∣vnto, thou hast the first and second reply of T. C. against D. VV. If thou wouldst heare it handled in a sweet and pleasant latine style, the Ecclesiasti∣cal discipline is able to content thee, if thou be vnlearned & desire the same course in thy mother tongue, beholde the Learned discourse (whiche D. Bridges assaying to confute hath confirmed) the sermon vpon Rom. 12. &c. If thou desire to see it layd open and concluded in scholastical manner, the demonstration doeth that way satisfy thee and lastly, if thou wouldst see it freed from the sclander that are against it, answere the obiections that may be, and are coyned to disgrace it, and vnderstand how it ouerturneth not, neither (in the substance) altereth any tollerable common-wealth; but is the onely stay and prop of euery good policy: besides the forenamed, and many other worthye writings, this present treatise professeth & notablye performeth the same: so that there is no man, learned or vnlearned, feruent or myld, imployed or at leasure, but God hath prepared some of these books (except he be as the deafe adder) euery way to iustify the truth of his disci∣pline vnto him: which causeth me to gather vnto my self a comfortable per∣swasion, that these seueral guiftes, bestowed vpon diuers men, and mani∣fested vnto the Church in so diuers a manner, and al to one end; are not in vaine: But for the great good and comfort of those that shal striue for this cause in this age, and for their certane direction that shall reap the benefite of it, in the ages to come. But (alas) if we diligently wey on the other side, how this glorious and heauenly offer of the Lord vnto vs hath beene and is reiectcd, and shamfully disgraced by al estates and conditions. How greate ones cast of the yoak & break the bands: yea, & how that many who should haue commended the same vnto the prince with Helkijah, haue imploied al their wit and learning to traduce it with Amasiah yea and spent al their time in converting, sclaundering, displacing & imprysoning those that haue bene but suspected to fauor this truth: & lastlye when the increase of Gods dishonour that ary seth from hence is dulie weyed, it giueth vs rather cause
to feare, that God hath cleared his own light thus manifestly vnto vs, rather to make vs the more without excuse, than to make vs pertakers of so heauē∣ly a condition. For we see how it commeth, that our great Cleargye may∣sters spend al their time, in vexing of Gods people, and set themselues to di∣sgrace all that fauor this way: the ministers of God that should be alwayes busied in studying Gods word, and teaching their people, ar constrained to spēd the most of their tyme, in seeking to be quite of those intollerable mo∣lestations wherwith they ar daily vexed: the nobles & gentlemē take occasi∣on hereby to doe what they list: and the people seing the ministers in such disgrace, care not a button for their doctrine, so that if any of them bee re∣proued for their sinnes, they can be thus reuenged, complain of him to the Bishop that he is a mislyker of the state of L. Bishops: and they are so jea∣lous of their honor, that they admit the information of knowne Papistes, or any other notorious wicked wretches, & wil (yea do vsually) giue more countenance to the veriest varlet in the Land that commeth with such a com¦plaint; than to the most learned minister in al their diocese, if he be thought to lyke of the discipline, and (which is the greater argument of Gods ven∣geance not far off) ignorance and contempt of Gods word, and al kinde of sinne aboundeth in euery place, and in al estates and conditions: so that as the consideration of Gods mercies towards vs in offering vs this blessing, giueth vs some cause to trust that he wil perfect his good worke begun in this Land: so the regard of the encrease of al kindes of monstrous transgres∣sions doth justly occasion vs to fear that the land hath prepared (whiche without speedy reformation we shal shortly feele) such a scourge as shal mak vs more wondered at for our punishment, then wee haue bene admired for our peace: yet may none of these things discourage the seekers of this holye Reformation, for if they look to be crowned, they must stryue to the end. And let the aduersaries of the same know, that it may be their wickednesse shal being thus much to passe, as to keep it from vs for a tyme: but if they think either to weary the defenders, or lessen their nomber, or ouerthrow the cause: the mistres of fooles, their owne experience doth shew them that they deceaue themselues. For is not the cause far more cleared, and the nū∣ber of them that fauor and seeke to aduance it, since they haue waged war against it vnder their last general, mightely multiplied aboue that which was to be sene before? Yes doutles, & so it must be stil: for it being a portion of the Gospel, must needs be of the nature of the Gospel, even to spring wher it is cut down, and to spread where it is troden vpon: and though the loue of Egipt cause this generation never to know what so heauenly a conditiō meaneth, yea and Moses his ill managing of the matter be the cause that he shal onely see it: yet certainly the dayes wil come, when our posterity shal no more be gainsaid for desiring & practising Christs discipline, (for which we ar so many wayes abused) then we ar for professing of the doctrine, for which our fathers shed their blood. Let this be the conclusion of al, thogh the Lord do not vouchsafe this generation an honor so excellent, yet take thou heed that thou be no meanes of keeping it back: for if thou be a mini∣ster, & giue thy hart, hand or countenance against it; if a magistrate, & do any way discountenance it, if a priuat person, & cease to pray for it or liue a life vnworthy of it: thou shalt answere at the day of judgement, & be cō∣uicted as an enemye to the kingdome of Christ Iesus, and an occasion that in thy time be raigned not over that generation: & therefore by this book & such others informe thy selfe in the trueth of it: & when thou knowest it, be in loue with it & so labour by al the meanes of thy calling to aduaunce it: so shalt thou be comforted whether with it, or without it.
AN HVMBLE MO∣TION VVITH SVBMISSION TO THE Ll. OF THE COVNSELL CONCERNING THE NECESSITY of Christs discipline in our Land. WHO so calleth to minde the wo∣full estate of this land, before the happye entrance of the gracious raygne of our deare Soueraigne, Queene Elizabeth, (whom God long continue & preserue,) in what sort the forrain and vsur∣ped power of the Romish Antichrist, was injurious to the common-wealth, and cruell to the true members of Christs church: and compare it with the joyfull li∣berty and godly tranquillity of all sortes and degrees of people, in the midst of so many most apparant dan∣gers, most mildlye and sweetly begunne, and through so strange, so secrete, so mighty, so continual, mische∣uous and monstrous platformes, constantly & firmely seated and established: he shall see great cause that we Englishmen haue, both to admire the wonderful pro∣uidence of our mercifull God, & to magnify the high glory of his vaspeakeable goodnes; not onelye for his rich blessings both heauenly and earthly, with aboun∣dance of peace: but also for his rare kindnes of great long suffering and miraculous deliuerance. Surely we
may be truly said to be the vineyard of the Lord,Esay. 5. and his pleasant plante set in the fruitfull hill, dressed and fensed by God himself. And this hath hee done this thirtie yeare, looking we should haue brought foorth fruit accordingly. Now I would to God that it were not true of vs, as of Israel, that God looked for judge∣ment & behold a leaper fore, for righteousnes but be∣hold a crying. Many good lawes for maintaining of a quiet and dutifull ciuill life, are very wisely & pro∣uidently prouided; I pray God it bee notlaide to our charge, that they are negligently and corruptly execu∣ted: yea, the aboundance of sutes, quarrels, cōplaints appeales, presentments, indightments and supplica∣tions do argue apparantly the cruelty, extortion, con∣tention, deceit, oppressiō, murders, thefts, whordoms, and manye other strange villanies wherewith the vn∣thankfull people of this land be guilty. And how swea∣ring, lying, idlenes, drunkennes, excesse of meat, wan∣tonnes, excesse by pryde, and an vnmerciful and cun∣ning gripping of the poore by many strange reatches, & Machiauelian plottes, ar left almost without check or controlement, it grieueth them who weep ouer Si∣on, and maketh good men to feare very much, seeing that for these things God hath punished many people and caste off them that were moste neerest and dearest vnto him, as it is written:Hierem. 7. Ezech. 16. for the transgression of the land there are many princes thereof. And againe, hee turneth the floodes into a wildernes,Hosea 4.1. Proverb. 28.2. Psal. 107.33. and the springes of water into drynes, and a fruitfull lande into barren∣nes, for the wickednes of them that dwel therin. This latter we haue felt in some sort of late, whiche mighte make vs to suspect our own wretchednes: and the for∣mer (which the Lord in mercy kepe far from vs,) hath
beene wonderfullye in the great pacience and tender compassion of God, and yet not without many feare∣full threatnings hitherto preuented, and (as it were) waiting our conuersion, put off and prolongued: god giue euery English man the grace to see it. But look we into the Churches among vs (oh that the nakednes thereof is so open,) shall wee not finde there,2. Tim. 4.10. Ioh. 3.9. Demas embracing this present world, Diotre∣phes louing preheminence, to cast out the brethrē that do better than himself,Mat. 15.6. the Scribes and the Pharisies, making the commandement of God of no authoritye by their traditions:Mat. 21.12. buyers and sellers & money chan∣gers in the temple? Shall wee not finde there blynde watch men that haue no knowledge,Esa. 56.10. dumb dogs that cannot bark, they ly and sleep, and delyte in sleeping, euen greedy dogs that can neuer haue enough.Amos 7.10. Ama∣siah the Priest complaineth against Amos the prophet and the prophets which deceaue the people, byte thē with their teeth and cry peace. Shal we not finde that by these,Micha. 3.5. & 6.16. some of the statuts of Omri, and of the maner of the house of Ahab, are kept and maintained, even the marks of the second beast,Reu. 13.11.16 which commeth out of the earth? How can these things become the holye Churches of Christ, and yet we doe thinke our selues riche, increased with goods, and to haue neede of no∣thing: not knowing our wretchednes, misery, pouer∣ty, blindnes and nakednes. I praye God it befall not vs, (as was threatned vnto the Angell of the Church of the Laodiceans) that because we ar neither hot nor colde,Reu. 3.14.15. the high-priest of our profession Iesus Christe, spew vs out of his mouth. Heere we see the exceding riches of the bountifulnes, pacience, and long fuffe∣ring of God, leading vs to repentance: and our vn∣thankfulnesse
& disobedience, giuing occasion of the altering of Gods mercye and our happines. What is then to be done? Salomon answereth very wisely:Prov. 22.3. A prudent man seeth the plague, & hydeth himself, but the foolish go on still & ar punished. And again,Cap. .32. Ease slayeth the foolish, & the prosperity of fooles destroi∣eth them, Very sober and wise were those priests, Le∣vites, chiefe fathers, and auncient men, who having seene the first temple of Salomon, wept in the daies of Ezra, when they sawe the foundation of the Temple,Ezra. 3.12. which was after the captiuity of Babilon, notwithstā∣ding that many others shouted aloud for joy. And in the time of Nehemiah, the people in the daye of their joyfull solemnitye, wept and mourned,Nehem. 8. & 9. & 10. and with one consent joyned vnto their feast, wherein they covenā∣ted with God to amend their liues, and make statuts for themselues to follow his Law. So I am verely per∣swaded, that many graue and prudent Christians haue their reioicing mixed with griefe, when the want of things yet not attained vnto, maketh them to feele the lesse comfort in that which they haue, and the feare of Gods anger for the abuse of that which we possesse, & for the refusing of other more graces offered, doeth daunt their courage; while other men think all is well, and follow the pleasures of their hartes: and this is of all other moste lamentable, that neither mercye nor threatnings, corrections nor comforts, feares nor de∣liuerances, though the warnings of God bee neuer so apparant, can yet moue our hartes to goe one degree forward in the reedifiing of the decaied places of gods churches, but we say with the people in the dayes of the Prophet Haggai. The tyme is not yet come,Haggea. 1.2. that the Lords house should be built: but wee marke not
what God saieth againe:The reason of this booke Is it time for your selues to dwell in your seeled hou2es, & this house lye waste: Consider your owne waies in your heartes, you haue sowen much, and bring in little, &c. you looked for much, and lo it came to little: and when you brought it home, I did blow vpon it, and why saith the Lorde of hostes? because of my house that is wast, &c. For this cause (Right H.) I haue taken in hande this treatise, that I might shew a way for the continu∣ance of our happy estate, which I take to be, by establi¦shing the church government according to Gods a∣pointment, by which al the former enormities, and al other being taken away, the glory of God may florish the more among vs, the honour of hir Maiestye more highly advanced, and by the favor of God our ioyes may be exalted. Which work as an humble motion, I do with all duetifull submission present vnto your ho∣norable wisdomes, desiring no further to be esteemed herein, than the deuine wisdom of Gods word which cannot erre, & good reason (not contrary to the same) do warrant that which I say, and perswade that which I speake. The proposition which I take in hande to proue is this:The Propositiō It is the best and surest policy for the maintenāce of peace, & the good estate of this land every way, to reforme the disorders of the church according to the holy Scriptures of God, and to haue no other church-government, than that which Christ hath ordained & the apostles practised. The reason why I frame my pro∣positiō after this order, to mak it a matter of very good policye to set vp discipline in England according to gods word ariseth vpon this: that I heare in many pla∣ces, and lately haue read publikelye set forth, as à de∣fense
of L. Bb. that it is esteemed (by the abuse of the true rules of policy) to bee dangerous to the state,no invectiue. full of many inconveniences, & not fit, yea vnpossible for a maine country or region as ours is. Which when I considered to be in reason and truth far otherwise, and that the vnseated wisedome of mens frailty and igno∣rance do greatly stumble at it, I thought it my duty to God, to hit Majesty, and my natiue country to vnfold the secrete meditations and observations of my hart: which as I submit to the consideration of the wiseand godly learned, so I referre it wholly to the maister of the house (which is a God of knowledge,1. Sam. 2.3. by whome enterprises do come to passe) to giue that succes which his good pleasure thinketh best. In the next place my humble desire is, that this my proposition and whole treatise, be vnderstood, not as any invectine against the present state, or that either I disanulled the churches of Englād to be the churches of God,Churches of England true visible churches or that the true doctrine of the gospell were not preached, or the true sacramentes administred, which ar the infallible tokens of ye true visible church: but that certaine things of very good moment for the due and right administration of the church & the ho∣ly thinges thereof (whereof God hath lefte as straight commandement as for the rest) haue not yet obtained their due authoritye, but for lacke of that good enter∣tainment which God looketh for of his churches, may argue a change and a smal continuance of our present welfare. After this I pray that my meaning may be knowne touching the disorders of the church: that I tak them to be of two sortes: namely, of Ceremonies which ar variable according to time, place, & occasions, which
come vnder this generall rule,Disorders 1. Cor. 14. Let all things be done honestly and orderly. Whereby the church is autho∣rized to consider and ordaine in smal matters, not par∣ticularly determined in the worde, touching the tyme & manner of doing such or such a thing, which thing is prescribed in the worde, that there be no confusion or vnseemlines in the time and manner of doing. The other sort of disorders whereof I especially speake & meane to stande in, is a thing of greater importance: namely, where the church presumeth to adde, dimi∣nish or take away any of those things which God hath ordained to be obserued, or to bring in other of their owne, whereof God hath giuen hir no authoritye by his word: as in the administrations, giftes, and works of the church: that where 1. Cor. 12. the administrati∣ons are vnder one Lord, the giftes of one spirit, & the workes of one God: if the church do take vpon hir to make new administrations, apointing vnto thē giftes and works, wherof the Lord, the spirit, and god haue made no assignment to hir, that this is a great disorder: and so I vnderstand the church governement or disci∣pline, not to be in small and trifling ceremonies, (such as are howres, places, garmentes, seates, tables, &c. which yet in their kindes are necessary, being ordered after the former rule of comelines and order:) but in the very swaye and frame of the churche, the pillars, foundations,1. Cor. 3.9.10. building and builders thereof: as the king which is Christ, his officers, their offices & com∣mission with their callings, abdications, continuance, giftes, workes, and prerogatiues: for the good squa∣ring and laying together of each stone,Heb. 3.4.5.6. Kom. 9.5. and rearing vp the whole forme and beauty of the temple of God, ac cording to the pattern given, not by the servant, but
by the sonne who is ouer the house,of two sortes. and whose house euery church is, and who is over all, God blessed for ever. Amen. In the last place that I say no other governement of the church ought to be suffered but that which Christ hath ordained, &c. although by many men the same hath beene learnedly and truly described, yet because it is the thing wherwith only in all this treatise I binde my selfe to medle, I will briefly set foorth a small and plaine patterne thereof (as it were in a card lightly.) Leauing the reader to other books already extant, for the larger discourse, and ample confirmation: as by e∣vident and cleare places of scripture, God shall make me able to shew. First this is called (Taxis) order,Col. 2.5. to which soundnes of faith, in Christ being joyned, the churches of god ar highly commēded, as those which having the foundation layd, are to walk in Christ after the manner of the same, rooted and built in him,Disciplin what. and confirmed in the faith. It is also for the manner ther∣of, compared vnto a body,Rom. 12.4. Ephe. 4.15.16. where the head is joined to the body, and al the members receauing nourishment from it, do grow by joints and bands into the head, & one into an other, where every member hath his seue∣rall action. The head heere is Christ, the body ar the churches, the members are the people of all sortes in the churches, hauing severall callings, gifts & works. as it is said: You are the body of Christ,1. Cor. 12.27. Ephes. 4.7. and members euery one for his part: and againe, Vnto euery one of vs is given grace according to the measure of the gifte of Christ. Now as a body haviug all his members vn∣der one head seated in their proper places, and accor∣ding to their severall faculties doth bring forth in eve∣ry mēber the proper action for the good of the whole;
is a goodly and well ordered bodie:Discipline described So the members of the church by the scriptures are set in the churche, 1. Cor. 12 28. vnder one head Iesus Christ. Colos. 1.18. and haue several gifts as faculties given according to the will of the spirit to aedifie withall. 1. Cor. 12.7.11. and euerye one hath his office accordinglye in his place, either to prophesie or otherwise, which he must wait vpon: Rom. 12.6. Act. 20.28. 1. Pet. 5.2. and the people are to obey and submit themselues: Heb. 13.17 Euerye thing being thus constituted, ordered and furnished, is a well and right gouerned Churche of Christ. Now in this government wee may obserue diuers sorts of persons, and their proper workes, in whiche two things the whole policie is contained. For when euerye one doeth his proper workes of his place, the churche is very well guided. Nowe these persons are the maister of the house, and the houshold. And heere first we ar very reverently and wisely, to acknowledge the maister and chief gouernour,Christ heade of his Church. Gal. 4.4. who is Lord & king, and this is the only sonne of God made man, who by his wise and powerful administration, ordereth and e∣stablisheth his church,Psal. 110.1. and defendeth it against al ene∣mies and till all bee destroied, and hee deliuer vp his kingdome to his father in the day of glory,1. Cor. 15.24. and so the scripture speaketh saying: Vnto vs a child is borne, & vnto vs a sonne is given,Esay. 9.6. and the government is vpon his shoulder, and hee shall call his name wonderfull, counseller, the mighty God, the euerlasting father, the prince of peace, the increase of his gouernment & peace shal haue no end: he shal sit vpon the throne of Dauid, and vpon his kingdome to order it, and to e∣stablish it with judgement and iustice from hence, evē
for euer, &c. Which the Apostle interpreting, saith,by Gods word. Ephes. 1.22. that God hath appointed Christ ouer all things to be head to the church, which is his body, &c. Moreouer because his kingdome is not of this world. Ioh. 18.36.Christs govern∣ment not civill. that is to say, after the māner of earthly princes, which in comparison of this governement is called the ordi∣nance of man, 1. Pet. 2.13. being in the earth, he tooke vpon him no earthly or ciuill government, but sub∣mitted himself, teaching that Caesar ought to haue his due, Mat. 22.21. paying tribute voluntarily, Mat. 17 27 and refusing so much as to deuide betwene brethren, making suche civill matters pertaine to other iudges, Luk. 12.13.14 and yeelded himself to die without re∣sistance, when by ciuill authority he was wrongfullie judged, Ioh. 19.11.13.14. &c. Hereof it commeth, that the things by which he governeth, are not of the right of any ciuill regiment, being holye and spirituall, and his servants or officers are not furnished with civill po∣wer or dignity, 2. Cor. 10.3.4. Luk. 22.25. & his throne is, where he sitteth at the right hand of the maiestye in the highest places. Heb. 1.3. The first thing he ruleth by in his visible church,Gods worde Christs scepter. is his word, which is a scepter of righteousnes. Psal. 45.7 even the word of truth which is the gospell. Col. 1.5. which because it is spirituall, is called the sword of the spirit. Ephes. 6.17. in sharpnes to exceed any two ed∣ged sworde, entring even to the deuiding a sunder of the soule and the spirit, and of the iointes and marrow, discerning the thoughtes and intents of the hearte, Heb. 4.12. This is the rod of his mouth, and of his po∣wer, wherewith he smyteth the earth, and slayeth the wicked. Esa. 11.4. Psal. 110.2. and in the electe who beleeue, Tit. 1.1. it casteth down the imaginations &
euery high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God,Discipline described and bringeth into captiuity euery thought to the obedience of Christ. 2. Cor. 10.5. beeing the po∣wer of God vnto saluation, Rom. 1.16. and this is vn∣to the church a perfite law, Psal, 19.7. teaching them judgement and equity and euery good path.Euery good path in Gods word. Pro. 2.9. The second thing be the cēsures of the church adjoi∣ned to the word, as vengeance ready prepared if anie disobeye,The censures joined to the word. 2. Cor. 10.6. with 2. Thes. 3.14. These hath Christ given to his churche, as a power to purge out the leven of malitiousnes, that they may celebrat the Lords feast, and serue him sincerely: Mat. 18.17. 1. cor. 5.4.7.8. These censures are of two sorts, according to the party which offendeth, either to heale and reform, or els to cut off for euer. Men are reformed by admo∣nition or sharper affliction. Admonition is taughte in 1, Thes. 5.14. Gal. 6.1. 1. Tim. 5.20, Where admoniti∣on will not serue, according to the qualitye of the of∣fense and disposition of the person, there are two de∣grees in seeking his reformation. First suspension, whē a man is cut off from some of the holy exercises in the fellowship of Saints. Mat. 5.23.24. as namely the lords table, 1. Cor. 11.28. For the greater offenses and grea∣ter contumacy followeth excommnnication, whiche is a casting of them out of the church, and deliuering them to Sathan, in which state they are to bee holden of vs as heathen and publicanes, that is such as ar not of the church. 1. Cor. 5.5. Mat. 18 18. and all these v∣pon their true repentance ar to be forgiuen and com∣forted of the churche, 2. Cor. 2.6. The other censure which cutteth off is spoken of in 1. Cor. 16.22. If anye man loue not the Lord Iesus Christ, let him bee ana∣thema. [Maranatha] viz. accursed till the Lord come.
Wherevpon saith Iohn epist. 1. cap. 5.16.by Gods word. There is a sinne vnto death, I say not that thou shouldst pray for it: and Christ saith, that he which speaketh against the holy ghost, it shal not be forgiuen him, neither in this world, nor in the worlde to come. Mat. 12.32.The things of Christs king∣dome, not lyke to the things of earthly rulers. These are then far distant from the thinges whiche earthlye princes vse to rule their subiectes with: the one med∣leth with the outwarde man, afflicteth the bodye, and thinges of this life: but this toucheth, reformeth, and afflicteth the soule, the thoughts, and intentes of the heart: and concerneth the thinges of the lyfe to come. In the next place are the other persons to be consi∣dered which are vnder Christ the king: and these are his houshold, the servants and subiects of Iesus Christ in his church: according to the dignity of the Lord, & amplitude of his kingdome; are partly superiors,The subiects & officers of christ and partly inferiours: the first ar such as either haue charge committed vnto them ouer others, as the disposers of the secrets of God, 1, Cor. 4.1. or ministers about the holy things of the church, 1. Tim. 3.13. and the other are all the members of the church, called Saints: who submitting themselues to the voice of the gospell, are sanctified in Christ Iesus. Rom. 1.5.6.7. 1. Cor. 1.2. The duty of these latter, is in two words, submission, and obedience. Heb. 13.17. The former are of diuers degrees and severall functions, and therfore require a larger discouery, in speaking whereof I bynd my selfe to that only which is ordinary and perpetuall. In ge∣neral termes they ar called Bishops & deacons. Philip. 1.1. The generall termes of their office, bee likewise two, prophesie, and a ministrie, Rom. 12.6. In descrip∣tion of which diuers offices and officers, the scripturs
appointeth their calling and workes.Discipline described The calling of Christs officers In their calling, there is this generall rule, that no man take vpon him this honorable function except he be called. Heb. 5.4. Secondly that there bee a place or charge whereunto there is neede that they should bee called: suche was Mathias, Act. 1.20. the Deacons, Act. 6.1.2. the Elders Act. 14.23. Bishops in Creta, Tit, 1, 5. In their callings, common to all be election and ordination. Election is a free choise with the consent of the people, and ordi∣nation is, by imposition of handes, and prayer: to cō∣mend them to the worke of their calling. Act. 6.2.5.6. 1. Tim. 14.13, Act. 4.23. Vnto this election as a fore∣runner this rule is adjoyned, let them first be proued, then let them minister if they bee founde blameles: 1. Tim. 3.10. that is euery one must bee examined be∣fore he be chosen. The workes of these offices are either proper ac∣cording to the distinct nature and gift in their seuerall office: or els mixt, wher they joine in some common action of the church.Christ hath or∣dained diuers officers & their workes. In prophesie, this is peculiar and common to all Bishops, that they attend vpon the ad∣ministration of the word and prayer, Act. 6.4. & these Bishops are of two sorts, Pastors and Teachers. Ephes. 4.11. their giftes diuers, to the one that is Pastors, is gi∣ven the word of wisdome, to the other the worde of knowledge. 1. Cor. 12.8, their works also distinct, for the former, is to tende on exhortation, and the latter on teaching. Rom. 12.7.8. In the ministrye, (that is suche offices as haue not to doe with the prophesie or preaching of the word,) there ar governing Elders, & those which properly are called Deacons. The firste haue their authoritye and title, 1. Cor. 12.28. Gover∣nours, their gift: 1. Tim. 5.17. to rule well their work,
Rom. 12.8. a diligent practise in ruling.by Gods words. The deacons are nominated & set down what manner of men they should be, 1. Tim. 3.8. their gifts to be full of the ho∣ly Ghost and wisedome. Act 6.3. their work to looke to the tables, ver. 2. that is, to distribute with simplici∣ty, Rom. 12. Vnto these are joined widdowes or ser∣vants of the church, whose title, gifts, and properties are set down Rom, 16.1. 1. Tim. 5.1.2.3.4.5.6. &c. and their worke, Rom. 12.8. to shewe mercie with cheer∣fulnesse. The mixt worke is of the Pastors, teachers and go∣verning Elders, who are joined in one worke or gifte of ruling well, 1. Tim. 5.17. haue the same title of El∣ders, Act. 14.23. & 20.17. and their worke is joined to looke to themselues, and the whole flock. ver. 28. and to watche ouer the peoples soules. Heb. 13.17. the meeting or assembling in this office of governing is called an Eldership. 1. Tim. 4.14. And because they beare heerein the power of Christ in the church, they are called by excellency of speach, the church. Mat. 18 17. their worke is to see all thinges done according to the commandement of God, and ordinance of christ. In the callings of the severall offices, and in the vse of the censures that euery man do his duty, as in electi∣on to directe the people, and to examine the partie to be chosen, and to lay their hande, and praye over the party in his ordeining, Act. 6.2.3.6. cap. 14.23. 1. Tim. 4.14. and in the censures they haue the ful authority, Mat. 18.17.18.19. except that in so great a matter as excommunication, the people haue their interest, in that a member is to bee cut off. Therefore that was done in a fuller assembly, namely of ye whole church 1. Cor. 5.4. and the whole church is directed by Paule
to receaue such a one againe.Discip. described by G. word. 2. Cor. 2.6.7. Lastly, in & about al the former things Christ ordained for his church, they haue authority giuen thē to appoint, and see that al things be done honestly & in order, 1. Cor. 14.40. But if a matter fal out too hard or waighty for one church, or ye any maner of waies some one church hath need of help: this is supplied by other churches. 2. Cor. 8.13.14. When a matter of controucrsie was at Antiochia, they sent chosen men to Ierusalem, and there by a greater meeting of the Apostles and Elders, the matter being decided: there were also chosen men returned with the decrees of that synod. Act. 15.1.23. &c. In these meetings of synods and Elderships, some one for the time did moderate the assembly, not by a∣ny standing office of superiority, but for order to see al thinges well and orderly done, and to gather the con∣clusion. Such was Peter Act. 1.15. and Iames, Act. 15 13.22. and this is the description of the church go∣vernment,1. Cor. 14.37. cap. 11.1.2. 1. Tim. 6.14. according to the scriptures of God, left & commanded by God to his holy churches for ever: & therefore I take that no other can stand with the safty of our estate. They which oppugne this doctrine do not simplye denye, that such a thing is taught and commanded in the word, (for it is so cleare that no man can but with a shameles face, and seared conscience open his mouth to the contrary) but they partly cavill at some places, but especially affirme, that it was not commaunded as vnchangeable, that it was of force when the civill ma∣gistrate was not freind, but now it is determinable ac∣cording to the diuers estats and governments of coū∣tries: as being not so needfull or convenient. Whome I defire in the feare of God to cōsider these few things
First,Christs discipl. perpetuall. that I haue heere shewed it by Gods word (and other haue done it, and can doe a great deale better) if they bring in such an exception, they muste shewe some reason out of the word for the same. For can a∣ny thing which God hath ordained in his worde,Prouer 30.5.6. be altered by man, without his authoritye whiche or∣dained it? If God haue set Elders to bee gouernors in his church as 1. Cor. 12.28.Man cannot change Gods precepts with∣out Gods licēce Who that is wise will dare to pul them out except he haue commission from him that set them there? If the question were touching the officer of an earthly prince, men would keepe silence waiting the pleasure of their soveraigne: then muste it needes bee arrogancy, to deny him whome God hath appointed. Remember them who saide, wee will not haue this man to raigne ouer vs. Secundlye,Luk. 19.24.27 consider this order of Christ is not limited to be only when the civill magistrate is no freind, and that the ci∣vill government supplyeth nothing in the roome of a∣ny thing here spoken off: for these are (as is shewed) for the spiritual and heauenly administration, & theirs is carnall and earthly. And howe can an earthly king thruste into the house of God, an officer, a gifte, or a worke, which he knoweth not whether it will be fitte, or wilbe accepted as agreing with the heuenly pattern These then being plantes which our heauenly father hath not planted shalbe rooted vp, & where the feare of God is taught by the precepts of men,Mat. 15.13. there the wis∣dome of the wise shall perish, Esay. 29.2.13.14. Third∣ly we haue heard that Christ is head vnto the churche in all things, and that princes and judges should learn to be wise, and kisse the sonne least he be angry: if thē the churche take vpon hir to alter his ordinance, or a king doe keepe out that which hee commandeth, and
maintaineth other thinges diuers or contrary,Christs discipline ar they wise and learned? do they kisse the sonne? may they not feare his anger? If it appeare by the gospell, that all these officers are members of the body of Christes church, & are admistrations vnder one Lorde; if they haue giftes by one spirit, and operations by one God for the aedifiing of the churche: who louing Christe, and knowing Christ,Christs mēbers ought not to be changed. wil readily disfigure Christs bo∣dye, by mangling the members, changing the giftes of the spirit, altering the works of God. Againe, if all this be appointed to endnre for the worke of the mi∣nistry, to the aedifiing of the body of Christ, till we all meete together in the vnity of the faith, and the know∣ledge of the sonne of God, vnto a perfect man, & vnto the measure of the age of the fulnes of Christ. Ephes. 4.11.12. And this commandement of church-gover∣nement is to be kept without spot, and vnrebukeable vntill the appearing of our Lord Iefus christ. 1. Tim 5.21. cap. 6.13.14. then, who is he? or where is he whose arme is fleshe, that will not tremble to speake against them? Last of al, it is against the duty of the church, (who as the pure and chast spouse of Christ should al∣wayes be obedient to hir head and lord) to limit the authority,Psal. 78.41. and check the wisedome of hir king: ought she not rather to hearken & consider, and incline hir eare (being swift to heare,Psal. 45.10. Iames 1.19. and slow to speake,) forget∣ting also hir owne people & hir fathers house: so shall the king haue pleasure in hir beauty, for he is hir Lord, and she ought to reverence him. Būt can this be reve∣rence to his maiesty,Christs church ought to obey him or taking him to be Lorde: when she submitteth hir selfe, to the lawes of gouernement which she hath receaued of his greatest enimy, evē An∣tichriste, or can she be saide to forsake hir fathers house
and to hearken:vnchangeable. who punisheth & afflicteth as a step∣mother those hir children, that meeklye putteth hir in minde of the husbande of hir youth, and the oathe of God: detecting and bewraying the filthinesse of hir skirtes, when she hath defiled hir self with strangers, & standeth stifly for the customes and manners of hir fa∣thers house, even of vile flesh and blood, brickle con∣stitutions of blinde men? And who I pray you can say (except hee will tell a lye for his mother, and that against God his father) that she doth not limit his po∣wer and controll his prudencye,Mat. 28.20. when hee giveth hir charge to obserue all things whatsoever he hath com∣manded hir, affirming most amiably and comfortably vnto hir,2. Pet. 1.3. that by his godly power he hath given hir al things that pertaine vnto life and godlines, throughe the knowledge of him that hath called vs vnto glory & vertue, and namely a perfite Law,Psal. 19.7. Prov. 2.9. teaching judgemēt and equity, and euery good path: & yet shee leaning to hir owne wisdome, and presuming of hir owne po∣wer, will alter, adde, diminish, and change as she thin∣keth best. Therfore the Lord most earnestly complai∣neth, and in the vehemency of his godly iealousy cri∣eth against hir, and saith. Ye heauens bee astonied at this, be afraied and vtterly confounded saith the lord:Ierem. 2.1. for my people haue committed two evils: they haue forsaken mee the fountaine of living waters, to digge them pittes, even broken pittes that can holde no wa∣ter. In this last place, for clearing of my proposition, & that my reasons for the policye of our countrey maye plainly be seene: I am further to shewe in parte, what these disorders be, smal or great, and howe neare wee come to the ordinance of Christ. First wee holde the
head Christ Iesus and renounce al other heads of the church, giuing vnto the royall person of the Queenes highnesse, the due and lawfull supremacy ouer al per∣sons within hir dominions, and in all causes to vse the sworde of justice, for the maintenance of well doing, and punishing of vice: renouncing all forraine power and potentate to haue any interest or title of any suche supremacy. Secondly, we receaue the scepter of christ the gospel of truth, holding and teaching the doctrine of faith & loue according to the same: the Sacraments also as seales of the doctrine in their true nature, are taught & administred with prayers, singing of psalmes and reading of holy scripture: We allow also pastors in every church, and some teachers: and by these mi∣nisteries the word is taught ordinarily in many chur∣ches, by meanes whereof the church of England, our mother hath brought forth many notable children to God the father, and notable members of Iesus Christ: Heere one steppeth in and saith: Is not this wel? you woulde haue bene glad in Queene Maries dayes with lesse liberty, can you not bee content? Truth, this is well indeed, and I pray God we may bee thankfull as we ought to bee thankfull. Yet as I take it, and they confesse, all is not well. And if a man haue the foun∣dation of his house laide, and many parts of the buil∣ding framed, he will not content himself till all be fa∣stened together, and the roofe couered. And shal we content our selues to see the house of God ful of brea∣ches, and vncouered, because some principall parte is well begonne? Let vs then see those breaches. Surely, surely, I would your good Hh. should vn∣derstand, that of all other, I am loathest to speake of those thinges: neither would I, if I thought the truth
of this question might appeare without it: therefore I humbly craue your favorable patience, submitting all that I speake (as before) to your Hh. wise considerati∣ons, not willingly doing anye thing that might giue juste occasion of offence. The imperfections of our churches are of two sortes, either in matter of ceremo∣nies, or in thinges substantiall presrcibed of God. Of the firste I will say onelye this, that it is well knowen, that some of our ceremonies, are part of the character of the beast, and therefore not comely for Christs vn∣defiled spouse: but if the other greater things were re∣formed, they would fall away of themselues, lyke vn∣tempered morter, after a hard frost. The other, ar ey∣ther in the holy things, or holy offices. The first holy thing is the word, here some part of the holy scripture is commaunded to be left vnread, the Apocripha are appointed to be read, and that vnder the name of ho∣ly scripture, for instruction of manners: and homelies in steed of preaching: this I take to be an abuse to the scepter of Christ, which is before shewed to be perfect The other holy things are the censures, and namelye excommunication, which is made a ciuill ordinaunce committed to a civill judge in matters of heritage, in a quarrell often groates, for not appearing the partye may be absolved by his proctour. A ministers name is vsed in the forme, but he hath nothing to do to judge or determine, or to receaue againe. And besides all this, the pennance maye bee changed into money or some other thing. Heere the Elder-ship is despised, the congregation looseth hir right, and earth and hea∣ven are mingled together: no small disfigure vnto Christs church, if you remember howe God woulde haue it ordered and adorned.
The disorders in the holy offices are either by min∣gling or mangling. Mingling is of two sorts, firste the superfluity of offices and officers, as Archbishops, L. Bishops, Chancelors, Commissaries, Archdeacons, Officials Deanes, Vicedeanes, Treasurers of Cathe∣drall churches, Prebendes, Cannons, Peticannons, Singing men, Quiristers, Vergers, Curates and Rea∣ders, euery one of these haue a certaine dignity aboue others: & besides that there are Deacons, who haue no charge of the poore at all, Church-wardens, Side∣men, and collectors for the poore.Proverb. 9.3. Are these the mai∣dens whome wisdome sendeth forth to cal the simple to hir banquet?Ver. 1. Are these the pillars that God hath set in his church?Eph. 4.8.11. Can it be said that Christ when hee ascended vp on highe, gaue these? There is also a se∣cond mingling in their workes, as hee that preacheth wil also sit in commission, he wilbe a Pastor ouer some 2. or 3. churches, & an Archdeacon ouer many chur∣ches. One man wilbe a Pastor to one church, a Cha∣plain to an other, and a prebend to an other. In their prayers they ar bound to such a forme as for the most part is translated out of the popish portues, hauing di∣uers vngodly mixtures of signes, with sacramentall signification, as the crosse in baptisme, imposition of handes in confirmation, and of other rites and obser∣vations which Gods booke never dreamed of. Con∣cerning all these and other such minglings, howe shal it be answered when the Lorde shall say, Who requy∣red these things at your hands?Esay. 1.12. The manglings ar ve∣ry little better. For first diuers members are cut off, as governing Elders and Deacons: Presbyteries of par∣ticular churches, and free Synods: In the calling of mi∣nisters many are made without a place, few haue their
election with the consent of the churche: the right of imposition of handes, is in a L. Bishop, and suche as hee choseth, manye are made ministers of the worde that haue no giftes, contrary to the rule in examinati∣on. In their workes, there wanteth residency in many able men: there is no practise of preching in many re∣sident: fowre sermons a yeare dischargeth a man be∣fore our church. But what should I repeat all? I feare and tremble, that the glorious spouse of Christ Iesus, should thus be defiled with the filthy clouts & rotten patches of the foule & beastly strumpet,Revel. 17.1.9. the whore of Babel, which fitteth on the feven hills of Rome. where is the fulnesse of Christ? Col. 1.9. Where are the trea∣sures of wisdome and knowledge that are hid in him? cap. 2.13. and howe are wee complete in him? ver. 10. if we suffer our selues to be led as a pray, through phi∣losophy, and vaine deceat after the traditions of men, and not after Christ. ver. 8. The question being thus cleared,Proofer of the proposition. the reasons that proue the same, will shew themselues more readilye, and be sene more apparantly. My reasons are either ge¦nerall or speciall- Generally I first consider the author of church-discipline, on the one side Christ furnished with authority from God: on the other side, mans wisdome and Antichriste, aduersarye against GOD, whose comming is by the effectuall power of Sathan:2. Thes. 2.4.9. The first proofe from the autor of discipline. seing that it is already shewed, that God is the author of that we want, the consideration of his person may teach vs that his is beste and surest for our estate: for he is wonderfull in counsell, and excellent in works, Esa. 28.29. the foolishnes of God is wiser then men. & the weakenes of God is stronger then men, 1. Cor. 2.25. If God thā in counsel be wisest, & in works most
perfect & stable:Geueral reasons shewing that Christs howe should not all state-men thinke that to reform our churches after his coūfell, & to pra∣ctise his workes were safest for the estate of our lande. Look we vpon mā, Antichrist, & Sathā, what are these to ye almighty? & their wisdom to his? Can they teach a church-governmēt more certain for our safety, than he? Is not the wisdome of this world foolishnes with God? 1. Cor. 3.19. Doth he not take ye wise in their craf tines, & make ye coūsel of the wicked foolish? Iob. 5.13. And concerning Antichrist: oght we not to hearkē to him, who calleth vnto vs from heaven, and saith: Go out of hir my people,Revel. 18 4. that ye bee not partakers in hir sinnes, and that ye receaue not of hir plagues: for hir sinnes are come vp vnto heauen, and God hath remē bered hir iniquities. As for Sathan, his wiles are but to deceaue, euen as he deceaued Euah, to the misery of all mankinde: and as hee seduced Ahab to his de∣struction. Therefore I think it best, and the surest poli∣cy, to be ruled by God. And this reason wilbe the more euident,Our profession is to serue God in al he tea∣cheth vs. if we con∣sider our selues: what we haue done, and nowe doe. We haue entred into couenant with God, by submit∣ting our selues to the scepter of his word, and taking vpon vs his sacramentes as badges of our profession. Heere peradventure a wise Politian doth not see, that it is not safe to serue two maisters: though the Lorde saith,Luk. 16.13. 2. Cor. 6.15. You cannot serue God & Mammon. And what concord hath Christ with Belial. The next generall reason is from the thing it selfe, I meane the church-government which is of Gods cō∣mandement: first,The second ge∣neral reason frō the thing if wee consider that the same being Christs, and we christians, what can be better for vs? the same is from heauen, heauenly, and spirituall: and
we professe the Lord from heauen,Discip. is for our safety. what then can bee safer for vs? What do we (fuppose you) if wee judge any thing vnfit for vs, when he saieth:Pro. 3.8. All the wordes of my mouth are righteous, there is no lewdnesse nor frowardnes in them, If the commandement of God by Moses the servāt was such, that no nation was com∣parable to Gods people, because no nation had lawes and ordinances so righteous, as all that law which hee set before them: and if those lawes shoulde bee their wisdome and vnderstanding before al people:Deut. 4.6.8. so that they which should heare, should be forced to confesse only this people is wise and of vnderstanding: Shall we think, that the Lawes of the sonne, Lord and mai∣ster of the house, would make vs lesse righteous, wise,Christs discipl. maketh a natiō honorable. 1. King. 10. and honorable before al people? If Salomon for the wisdom which he had of God, was admired & sought to of all people, & the glory, wealthe, and peace of his kingdome, was herein especially, in that hee builded the materiall temple after the patterne giuen him of God? Is there not a greater than Salomon with vs, and shall not the glory of our Queene and countrye, be as great, if we in the building of the spirituall tem∣ple, vse no other platforme, but that which God doth send vnto vs? Ioine herevnto the vse and end of Christs governe∣ment: namely, why god appointed Christs kingdom: the kings of the earth, and civill states, being ignorant of the mystery of Christs ruling, are many times trou∣bled, when they heare that a king is borne:Mat. 2.1.2. and when they perceaue, that the neuer fay ling worde of the Al∣mighty, doth set down that it must be so, where, and how, they lay priuie netts & engines to prevent him: but wise men are contrary minded & doe come from
their owne country,The end of Christs discipline to seeke him out: & are exceding glad when they see the tokens of his comming, reioi∣cing to do homage before his holy Majesty, for they know plainly that hee came not to dissolue the Lawe,Mat. 5.17. as to teach subiectes to disobey their naturall princes, but to fulfill it: and to make men of conscience, even without feare of temporall sword,Rom. 12.5. to bee subiect; and to paye tribute to whome it belongeth. What good state-man that is a christian,Discipline can∣not hurt the state. can wisely, and by war∣rant of good policy once dreame, that that manner of governement whiche not medling or vsurping one whit vpon the ciuill power, but by the spirituall po∣werfrom Christ,Mat. 18.18. binding and loosing the soule & con∣science, doth subdue the will of all euill doers, whiche are set against the wholsome lawes of God and man, and by the terrour of Sathan doeth make them learne to leaue such euill wayes,1. Cor. 5.4. 1. Tim. 1.20. that when this is done, as it ought to bee done, and by those persons and orders, which the ordainer thereof hath appointed: that it shoulde hurte the estate, and diminish the happines of a Christian nation? Therefore well said the Prophet Esay of this government.Esay. 42 4. Hee shall not make to smok nor bruise, till he haue set judgement in the earth, and the Yles shall wait for his Law. By which he meaneth that the government of Christ is such, that of it self in his proper nature, it disquieteth & troubleth no man, no not to the bruising of a reed, or quenching of smo¦king flaxe: but it peaceably bringeth men to good or∣der, yea, saith he, the nations shall attend vpon him to be ruled by his Law. See how God hath determined the good of the nations by his sonnes government: cā it be good policy to refuse it? And we haue great ex∣perience of this thing since wee submitted our selues
vnto Christ by receauing the gospell so far as we haue done.to help the civill Magist. What works of righteousnes God hath wroght among vs? Howe is our Queene become an helper of the oppressed, and a succour, & a nurse to the ban∣nished? Howe hath our peace vnder hir flourished? What age can shewe the lyke in this land? And what praise hath God brought vpon this lande, and glorye vnto hir Royall Majesty, by worshipping Christ, and constant defending of his truth? If wee forget all the mighty deliuerances, yet this laste yeares ouerthrowe of Gods enemies may testifie: being strange to all na∣tions, admired of all people, an astonishment to the e∣nemy; and triumph to the godly: not by power or po∣licy, but by the faithfull and mercifull hande of God. Doeth not this (I saye) testifie:Psal. 144.15. Blessed is that people that hath the Lord for their God. But if wee haue so great profite and pleeasure by a part of Christs gover∣nement: what would it be, if we receaued all? would he not say of vs, as he did sometimes of Sion.Psal. 132.14. This is my rest for euer, heere will I dwell, for I haue a delyte therein: I will surely blesse hir victuals, and satissie hir poore with bread: and I wil clothe hir priests with sal∣vation, and hir saints shall showt for joy. There will I make the horne of Dauid to budde, where I haue or∣dained a light for mine anointed: his enemies will I clothe with shame, but on him his crown shal florish. Looke vpon Iehu king of Israel, he was zealous a little,2. King. 10.30. destroing the house of wicked Ahab, and the abho∣mination of Baal, & god blessed his seede to sit on the thron of Israel, vnto the fourth generation: what wold he haue done if hee had bene zealous in all the will of god: but because hee left not the sinne of leroboam, god loathed Israell, and smote them in all their coasts
by the sworde of Hasael. Looke on Asa also king of Iuda,2. Chro. 14. & cap. 16. when hee sought the Lord our God, the lande had quietnes ten yeares, and after hee had a wonder∣full victory and much spoiles of an huge hoste, often hundreth thousand and three hundreth charets: but when he made flesh his arme, and cast the Seer for ad∣monishing him into prison, and oppressed certaine of the people, hee had an extreame disease in his feete in his old dayes, which tooke from him the glory of his youth. Look we farther on that good king Iehosaphat who caused the people to be taught in the law of god, he was wonderfull in peace,1. Chre. 17. cap 18.1. prospering in wealth, & maruelous in victory:Cap. 19.2. yet when hee joined with wic∣ked Ahabs house, helping the wicked, and loving thē that hate the Lord,Cap. 18.31. did he not hazard his owne life? was not he & his people put in feare with a great mul∣titude from beyond the sea:Cap. 20.2.3.37. and were not his shippes broken that they were not able to go to Tarshish. And generally from Ioshua, and thenceforth in all the sto∣ry of the Byble, you shall hardlye or not at all finde, that ever God blessed the people long with peace and prosperitye, when they declined from his Lawes, or that he spared good kings, when they followed their owne mindes, and left the will of the Lords word vn∣performed. So if we woulde consider what hath fol∣lowed the disorderly and rash vrging of subscription, (a thing vnder pretence of vnity, to cut the throate of Gods ordinance in discipline) when the mouthes of Gods faithfull servants were stopped, and very many of hir Majesties moste faithfull subiectes fearing God, grieued and molested, it may be it were good policie for vs to besturre our selues to set vp reformation: for we know that one feare or plague hath euer since fol∣lowed
an other: firste in that very yeare, howe manye wayes was hir Majesties sacred person indangered by the diuelishe and traiterous Papistes, then followed a deare yeare of corne, and after manye were punished with penury: besides this, we haue sent forth souldiers kept watch & ward, & lastly forced to forsak al to wait vpon the enimye, whome God brought even in our sight before our dores, and at this houre wee are still busie in labour and study, to keepe the sworde out of the land. If vnto Iuda and Israell such thinges as these were warnings, threatnings, and corrections: let vs take heed, that we go not to far in flattering our selues molesting Gods servants, refusing Christs ordinance, till it be too late, and there be no remedy. O Lord for christs sake, bow thou our harts, that we may not leane too much, vnto the vncertaine staffe of earthly policy, but looke vnto thee that smitest vs. An other generall reason is this,The thid reason from the euent. that now it is easie to establishe it, and harde to keepe it back: yea saith a milde and reverent man: I would gladly know,D. Some in his treatise of decy∣ding certaine quest. &c. pa. 36 whe∣ther it bee possible or safe, to plante discipline in this land, before that Gods holy truth bee soundlye both taught and receaued: and that there be fit church-men and people to execute the discipline. I am sory that by publik authority such a boke should be allowed, that hath no better reason against discipline, then that which standeth with the accusation of the whole state and dispraise of the whole land. For what can be grea∣ter shame to our state which professe the true & sound doctrine of the gospell, then that the same should not be soundly taught: and what greater dispraise, then af∣ter 30. yeares teaching, there should want fit Church∣men and people, Paule was but one,Rom. 15.18.19 and yet in verie
few yeares he caused the gospell to abound from Ieru∣salem,An easie matter to set vp and rounde about vnto Illiricum:The Apostles in a short time planted very many churches with the discipl. of Christ. So that hee durste not speake of any thing, which Christ had not wroughte by him, to make the gentiles obedient in word and deede: & we haue diuers L. Bishops throgh all the shieres in England, dispersed in several charges, and haue not all they done as much in one countrye, as hee did in many? Hee had the ciuill power against him, these haue it for them: he was many times trou∣bled, imprisoned, these haue nothing to feare that might amongest men discourage them: he was poore and laboured for his liuing diuers times, these haue great liuings: he had no humiane help, but the simple & sincere teaching of the truth; these haue very large authority: and haue they not yet prevailed so farre, as that Gods holy truth, is soundly taught and receiued, but that the lacke hereof must hinder the good course of discipline? In a very small time did Pauland Bar∣nabas preach, and teach, many in Derba, Listra, Ico∣nium, and Antiochia:Act. 13. &. 14.20 21.23. and ordained them Elders in e∣uery church. At Ephesus Paule continued three yeare in whch space he taught them al the counsell of god,Act. 20, 17.27.28.31. and left them Elders to looke to themselues and to all the flock. It may be some man will object, that Paules calling being extraordinary, and his blessing extraor∣dinary, to blame our Bb. may not be fit. I aunswere, if they will take vpon them an office and charge of ma∣ny congregations as Paule, & claime authority in or∣dering of churches and church men, as Paule: why should it not bee looked for, that they shoulde doe as much good in their place, as he did in his, having ma∣ny more helpes, then he. But this commeth to passe, by no other reason, but by the want of Gods church
governement.Discipline in England. For when they take a calling whereof they haue no warrant as Paule had, how can they bee blessed as Paule: when they meddle with civill causes which Paule did not: how can they, or do they attend vnto preching in themselues, & promote it in others, as Paule did: when they by articles and deuised plots make daylie trappes to entangle good preachers, and thrust many out because they teach all the counsell of God, as Paule did: and maintain, & beare with some which preach against the counsell of God: and more, which preach neuer a whit of gods counsell, whiche Paule did not: when they haue in their mouthes the waye of preferment, and in their labours the care of honour, and giue dispensations to Non-residensy, tol∣lerations to naked Readers, which all were farre from Paule: how can wee look for the fruit of their loyte∣rings, which came of his labours: or that such as striue against the gospel, should do good, as he which stroue for it. Let all men consider by this, what it is to bee L.B. (jure humano) by mans lawe, and to bee a poore minister and true servant of Christ, (jure diuino) by gods Law. But it should seeme by this question, that if the holy truth of God wer soundly taught, &c. then it were possible and safe to plāt discipline in this land, and surely I thinke so too. But herein I differ, that I am perswaded that gods truth is soūdly taught in this land (which he seemeth secretlye to denye,Gods truth is soundly taught in England. or else his question were no question) and so I thinke all men that speake aduisedly, and all the churches of god will witnes with me: so that I think in a matter so cleare, I neede not to vse many vnnecessary reasons: therefore it followeth by his own judgement, that it is possible and safe to plant discipline in England, where the holy
truth of god is soundly taught. As touching fit church men and people (god be thanked for it) there be more knowen then be accounted of, and more vnknowen than we are worthy of, and more woulde haue beene if the resisting of discipline, and maintening of popish disorders, had not discouraged some, and prevented very many. But I would faine be taught either by the scripture of God, or by sound reason; howe in manye places of this Land the holy truth of God, can bee (as it ought) soundly taught and receaued, and fit church men and people:Christs orders and discipline, maketh fit churchmen and people. till the rule and law of Christ be ob∣serued. For see you not, that the orders nowe keepe them out, which would like kynde shep-heards feede the flocke, and that it feedeth and fostereth the Idle & proud Prelacy, who lye lurking in their warme nests, having manye easie impedimentes, and sweete silver coardes to pull them back from their duty, they are so invested into offices ciuill, and so preferred to the ho∣nour of the high commission, that their leasure is smal, some dwelling in Cathedrall churches, are so pestred with consultations about leases, & changing of church lands, with feasting and flattering one an other, with rhewmes and stitches, and the farnes of the places, or vnholsomnes of the aire, where their charge is: that they commend that busines to their curate. Some ha∣ving bene put to learne their Catechisme, & to make exercises now thirtie years, are as fitt church-men for knowledge and vtterance, as a childe of eight yeres of age. No marvell then, thoughe the people in all pla∣ces be not so fit as they should be: when by the order of our disorderly church government, such wicked & blinde guides may bee suffered and defended. But if according to the law of Christs church-governement
there were diligent searche made in all places of the lande, for wise, learned and stayed men of all degrees to bee called to the office of Pastors and teachers: and that by the wise circumspection of these, discreet and sober men, with the consent of several churches were adjoined as helpers: think you that there woulde bee many places voide of able and godlye teachers. And if there should some be, could it long so continew, se∣ing that the power and spirituall authoritye of these, would soone breed such a light, and bring forth such a harvest, as the beauty and glory of such churches as were established and furnished, would soone draw on the other, and cause them like wise to bee prouided. Now men thrust in themselues, then they should be called by other. Nowe men seeke (like journey men) a curatship, and (like farmers afore hande) get an ad∣vowsen before the incumbents lease (I should say life) be out: then should such as be good men and of fitte giftes be sought for, not only in the vniversity, but in the countrie, court cittie, and gentlemen and noble∣mens houses, whersoeuer any might be found worthy of so high a calling. Now many are violently thruste out, because they do their duty: then shoulde manye be set in, who would tremble of themselues, to enter into that calling, for feare they should not discharge it Now many change their studies from diuinity, many after study go to other trades, many parentes are dis∣couraged from bestowing coste on their children, be∣cause they see how little they be esteemed, if they will not yeelde to the corruption of our disorders. Then many would change their studies from law, phisicke, musick, schooling, &c. and many woulde leaue their trades, and parents would think their cost well besto∣wed,
& be diuers wayes comforted, to prefer their children to the study of divinity. Againe, many who now are dumb, if they saw Christ comming but a fair of with the scourge of discipline, would soone finde their tongues, and the vniting of smal parishes would make vs need fewer than be: and the sending of bish, and non-residentes (suche I meane as are meete) to a charge, woulde supplye some that want: and some of their curates, (being as learned, as they) woulde serue to fill a gappe: and diuers other things would God of∣fer, if we would go about it. If the Apostles in a short time found fitt men to place for Pastors, Teachers, El∣ders, and Deacons in euery church: how much more would it appeare easy among vs, if so be now after 30. yeares of peace, and increase of all kinde of learning, there were liberty for Christ; orders, and authority to further the same. The worthy example of Iehosaphat, in this place, might both teach this thing, and incou∣rage our state men.2. Chr. 17.6.7.8.9. cap. 14.4. For he first sent teaching Levites throughout all his kingdome to teach the people: and after went through all townes, causing them to turne to the Lord. And so by little and little in a short time restored the church to a wonderfull beautye and per∣fection. But it may be the godly reader hearkeneth and lon∣geth to know, how I can proue it easy at this time to re¦forme the disorders in our church, and to plant christs discipline: hee thinketh peraduenture, that hee seeth many things of contrary perswasion. Hee that had li∣ued in the day of the death of Christ, seing howe des∣pitefully he was handled, would not easily haue bele∣ued that which Christ speaketh Iohn 12.32 I, if I were lift vp from the earth, wil draw al men after me. But if
he liuing in the dayes of Cōstantine the great,Christs discipl. easy to be planted the first Christian emperour of Rome, hee had reade ouer the horrible battels of all Potentates by fire and sworde, for the space of three hundreth yeare against Christe, he might easily stand astonied to thinke, that through so many yeares of vnmeasurable affliction, such horri∣ble tormentes, and infinite butcheries, that the king∣dome of Christ stood fast and increased, according as it is written: Be thou ruler amidst thine enemies.Psal. 132.14. How much more may wee thinke it easie to set vp Christes discipline in the church, now vnder so Christian and milde a Queene, so highlye honored of God,No good thing hard for our gracious Quene. so ten derly beloued of hir subiects, after so many yeares of peace and preaching the Gospell, vpon so good occa∣sion as these wonderfull warnings and merciful deli∣verances, when thousandes sighe for it, and ten thou∣sands haue sought it: and approved and worthy men of all sheires haue consented vnto it, and in some sorte craved it, and all men almost confesse that wee ought to haue it (onely they say they cannot tell how it may be accomplished,) and no man is able soundly to con∣fute it. In the dayes of King Henry the eight, a prince of noble memory, by the meanes of one man the true right of the King being revealed: how soone, & how easily was the Popes supremacy cast out of Englande, in a time of great danger, when the Realme had very little acquaintance with the gospell, and the Pope did rule in mens hearts as God. And without the realm (for the most part) the whole world on the contrarye: yet did that worthy King prevaile and keepe his right. King Edward the sixte, that rare young prince, being tender for yeares, how did he set vp the Gospell in the midst of darknesse? What fitt church-men and people
was there, if he had taried till they had come of them∣selues, howe long mighte hee haue stayed. Or if the Quenes Majesty had cast al perils that in reason might haue fallen out in restoring the churches at hir joifull entraunce into the seate of hir rightfull throne: shee might haue said it was impossible, and not safe to alter the state of religion. How much more woulde it bee easy now to ouercome and turne out the remnants, & taile of the Pope, when there was no hurt to this land nor great matter in the doing of the thing, to subdue & bannish his head. The easines of this, may farther appeare if we con∣sider,Maintainers of mens traditions despised. first how the maintainers of mens traditions a∣gainst Christs church-gouernment by the juste judge∣ment of God,Malach. 2.4. (as he telleth them in the Propher) are made to be despised & vile before al people: because they kept not his wayes, but haue beene partiall in the Lawe. So that a poore simple minister that handleth the worde of God aright, though all his liuing perad∣venture be not worth fourty markes the yeare, is hard with more reverence, & resorted vnto with more di∣ligence, than one of those that imagineth that the dig∣nity of ministers consisteth in outward things, though he haue the great bell rung, and men to helpe him to the pulpit.Men cty out for lack of teching. Againe, who is ignorant howe men crye out for able ministers in euery place: what sutes and supplications in time of Parliament, what meanes hath bene made to counsellours? In the next place consider, that the same which the L.Bb. and the Cathedrall churches doe possesse, if it be takē in time,There is liuing for able mini∣sters, if it were taken in time. before it be too much scambled, how well woulde it serue to redeeme impropriations, and augment the smaller liuings, and with the ouerplus
serue to other good vses, for hir Majest. warres, & in∣crease of learning: how easily might two or three, or more small congregations bee vnited into one, when there is law already to do the same. Againe, some of themselues will say in some places, that if it pleased hir Majesty they would bee willing, but we must not go before a law. But I cannot be per∣swaded, but they slander hir godly & christian minde: for if they would deale faithfully with hir, & by them∣selues, & by suffering others, make this holy trueth of Christs Ecclesiastical government,The Queenes Majesty abused by the Bb. plainly knowen to hir royall and princely vnderstanding: it is impossible that so zealous and godly a prince, hauing so manye yeares in so many perils of hir life, againste so manye mighty men abroad, and false harts at home, so wise∣ly & constantly maintained the gospell of Iesus christ, and comfortably receaued so many blessings, deliue∣rances, and aduancements of honor, so that hir name is great and terrible to al lands, would be so negligent of hir duty, so vnthankfull to God, so fearefull of any danger, or any way so backward: that in hir onely, so holy, so worthy, so hye and necessarye a thing, moste profitable to hir subjects, most certaine for hir safety, should be withstood & resisted. Do not they preach? do they not perswad? do not they sue for cōmissions? Do not they suspend, imprison, and keep back al they can from the courte and Paules crosse, whiche might detect their vnfaithfulnesse to God, and abusing of hir Maiesty. Furthermore, if we weigh how the Papistes coura∣ges are wel alayed, their nets broken, and many fallen into their own pits, and their long wouē spiders web, their filthy plots, by Gods merciful providence made
voide,No hard thing to cast out & that the zeale of many hath bene lately stur∣red vp, and made more desirous to serue God, & fol∣low his law: were it not easie now to plant discipline? and would not all men thinke, that the mercifulnes of God calleth vnto it? and would not his mercies bow thousāds to like of it? how redily did the people leaue their work without all constraint, and with very small and slight warning in many places, when they kne we that hir highnesse was desirous that God shoulde bee solemnly praised of hir people, howe did this pearce the peoples harts towards hit? how much more wold the Lord frame the peoples harts towardes hir, if this noble worke were enterprised, and the fruite thereof would be a thousand fold doubled. Lastly,The Pope in a consumption. consider that since the time of Luther, the Lord hath breathed vpon the Pope, and stroken him in a mervelous consumption: and that is a sure worde of prophesy,3. Thes 2.8. that by preaching he shal be consumed, and the people of God haue commission to rewarde him,Renel. 18.16. and giue him double, according to his workes: think you it wilbe a hard thing to cast out of England, some reliques and scattered remnantes of the raile of the beaste, when wee haue experience that these pro∣phosies are true, in the great and most substantial frō∣tiers of his power. Let vs not feare then, as an harde thing, when God and man, heaven and earth, tyme & place do fauor the worke, and warrant good successe. Out of this followeth the second part of my reason, for if the Pope must consume, and that by the breathe of Christs mouth,3. Thes. 2.3. then surely Christs meaning is, that his owne kingdome shall preuaile. This is the stone that was cut without handes, that breaketh the image in pieces,Dan. 2.34.44.45. & maketh the great monarckes of the world
lyke the chaffe of the sommer flowres,the reliks of Popery. caried by the winde,Christs king∣dome  pre∣uaile. where the place cannot be found, and it selfe groweth into a great mountaine to fil the whole earth. This is Michaell the great prince that standeth vp for his people, and casteth out the great dragon.Dan. 12.1. This is the King of Kings, and Lorde of Lords.Reuel. 12.9. cap. 19.16. Now seing we craue no other governement but his, and his can∣not bee withstood: let all state-men judge, whether it bee not harde, and contrary to safety, to stand against him. And if we knew what the Prophet meaneth,Esay. 49.23. whē he saieth: that Kings shalbe the nursing fathers of the church, and Queens hir nources, that they shal wor∣ship with their faces towardes the earth, and licke vp the dust of hir feet,Psal. 110.6. & that Christ shalbe judge among the heathen. Hee shall fill all with deade bodies, and smite the head ouer great countries. We might soone perceaue that it wil be hard kicking against the prick, and as the Apostle said to the Corinthians, for ming∣ling themselues with the table of the Lord, and table of Deuils. So it may be considered of vs for mingling the holy things of Christ, with the prophane thinges of Antichrist. Do we provoke the Lord to anger,1. Cor. 10.22. are we stronger than he? When D.W. was made Archb. and set forth his vn∣aduised deuice of subscription,Subscription did but trouble the church and commō-wealth it seemed as a strong pot of brasse that would soone haue broken in pieces all the power of poore ministers, and made discipline in vtter contempt. But marke what followed by distur bing Gods servants and many churches, the cause of discipline is better known and more favored, & their Hh. and Lordly presumptions, by a contemptible & very base and strange meanes, not once dreamed of by a thousande of gods saints, even when their creases
were set vp,To keepe out discipline and they began to say, all is ours, was so dashed, daunted and taken down, that the more they stirre for their owne glory, against the glory of God, the more shall they fall before the presence of his po∣wer and the glory of his truth. And in them is fulfilled that which the Lorde spake against Ely, who suffered his sonnes to prophane the holy things of God. Thē that honour mee I will honour,1. Sem. 2.30. and they that despise me, shalbe despised. Alas, what armour had Dauid a∣gainst Goliah the great, armed with speare, shield, and sworde,1. Sam. 17.40. and brigandine, that he made the whole host to feare: had he any more but his shepe-heardes sling with a stone, who fighting in a good cause, and in the name of the Lord, subdued the Philistim, and smote off his head with his own sword.Iudg. 8.5.6. How did the prin∣ces of Succoth, and the men of Penuel dispise Gideon with his small power, refusing to giue them breade, when he pursued Zcba and Zalumna kings of Midian, yet wee know, that hee had the victory, and they the smart of such contempt. Let them consider I praye you, that by that verye meanes which the children of Iacob thoughte to bee rid of Ioseph, did God bring to passe, that which they feared: and a time came wherin they remembred that they had no compassion on the teares of their brother It may be remembred,Booke of mart. pag. 1430. & 1431. what hard dealing was against the reverend and godly man, B. Hooper, and howe God made them to see their faultes, and to be recon∣ciled that did it. It may be considered that Anno do. 1538. there was an injunction by the noble king Hen∣ry the eight, that the byble should be set in churches to bee reade of all men: and anno 1540. the 6. articles followed. These two, lyke vnto the arke of God, and
Dagon in the verye temple of Dagon, had their con∣flict,no eafie matter. but where was the victory? we this day see. So can it not be possible to keepe out discipline, seeing we haue the scepter of Christ, not only read, but prea∣ched among vs? For in the dayes of King Henry, Da∣gon fell down vpon his face on the ground before the arke, and his head and hands were cut off in King Ed∣wards time: he was set vp in a patching manner in the dayes of Queene Mary: he hath receaued the second wound by Queene Elizabeth. And I pray God, that by the emrodes sent from God, those which maintain the stomp that remaineth, be not forced with homage and honour to Christ, to giue the Arke of God his free passage. I would wish rather, & I desire God most hartily, (that now they are in a rage, & furnished with commission for their priuat reuenge,) the Lord would stryk them as he did Paule, when he went with letters to Damascus, and make them to see their folly,Acts 9. that by their happy conversion there may bee rest to the chur∣ches of England: and that they may bee aedified and walke in the feare of the Lorde, and be multiplied by the comfort of the holy Ghost. O if it woulde please God to giue them grace like good Elders to fal down before him that sitteth on the throne, and worship him that liueth for euer, to cast away their popish crowne,Reuel. 4.10. and cursed jurisdiction before his throne, and suffer not themselues to bee called Rabbi,Mat. 23.8.  Pet. 5.3.4. Heb. 7.26. or lords of Gods heritage, but let Christ bee the onely Teacher, chiefe shepe-heard, and Archbishop, and liue with their bre∣thren, as examples to the flock. Let them consider the good example of the faithfull and humble servant of Christ, Iohn the Baptist, who gaue Christ the honor, (though his owne disciples repined) to bee the bride∣grome,
and he as a friend stood by,Ioh. 3.29. reioicing to heare his voice, and confessing this to bee his joy, and to fill him with joye, saying: Hee must increase, but I muste decrease. Seing then that God is the author of this Ecclesiasti∣call discipline which we seeke,The end of the general reasons and that hee is the wi∣sest, and his workes moste permanent, and that mans vaine wisedome, Antichrist which consumeth before him, and Sathan the deceauer, bee the inventers and maintainers of disorders and vsurped authority in the churche: and that we haue covenanted with God in Christ, professe his word, renounce Antichriste, and God accepteth not Iuke-warme gospellers, and to be worshipped by peece-meale, seing the thing itselfe is pure, perfect, and full of all goodnesse, for the peace, wealth and honour of Gods people, and that it is or∣dained for the joy and happines of all nations. Seing that it is easy to be done among vs, hauing the gospel soundly taught, and receaued now thirtie yeares, and the head of Antichrist broken in peeces, in more dan∣gerous times, and the sincerity of doctrine is and hath bene among vs set vp, maintained, and zealously and constantly defended by a moste christian Princesse, & that the enemies are in derision, the Papistes cooled, the people inflamed with zeale, and the occasion of Gods mercy calleth vs thereunto; and the very tyme of Antichristes consumption, and that there is living sufficient, and men, and meanes to accomplish it. And lastly, seeing it is harde, dangerous, and impossible to stand against it: I moste humblye beseech, and moue your Hh. to consider, whether it be not the beste and surest policy for this realm, that it may continue quiet and happy, to reforme al disorders in the church, after
the scriptures of God, and to suffer no other church∣gouernment, but that which Christ ordained, and the Apostles practised. The speciall reasons are nowe to follow,More speciall proofes of the proposition, frō the church or commō-wealth which are such as specially concerne, either the common-wealth or the church, for these are two twinnes which are v∣nited together, and remaine distinct in euerye nation fearing God, for the double benefite of the inhabitāts thereof, whereby God hath that which is his,Mat. 22.21. and Cae∣sar that which is his: and some are put a parte in the church, for the matters of God, and some in the com∣mon wealthe haue civill offices for the affaires of the King. When these two are rightly ordered,2. Chro. 19.11. and be∣ing joyned together, and remaining distincte, doe in their severall natures and proper places worke toge∣ther, they make a happy state and people. Which two things, if it may appeare that the establishing of disci∣pline after Gods worde, will bring to passe: I hope it wilbe graunted that the true rules of policy will challenge Christs church government for this Land, and bannish the vsurped and Antichristian hierarchy. In the common-wealthe, there are the persons and times to be considered: the persons, for the wise and vpright executing of Lawes, and the times of peace & warre, or any other calamity, which requyre a diuers kinde of trauaile and providence. Concerning the temporall and common Lawes and statutes of this re∣alme,The civil estate and common lawes of Eng∣land worthy great commen∣dation. so far as I can see, there can be few nations pre∣ferred before vs, and for the wise fore cast of thinges in the sway of the common-wealth, both for the main tenance of peace, and strength for warre, as my pur∣pose is not to meddle with it, so I cannot but admire, & giue god thanks for the rare and honorable vertues
of wisedome and magnanimity,The orders of Christ in hir most excellent Majesty, and the constant, faithfull, and diligent pro∣uidence and labour of hir most honorable and graue counsellors: praying God alwaies for the blessed con∣tinuance of the same. The thing which I endeuour, is onely to shew how this happy tract of time, vnder so wise, both lawes and gouernours may be best and su∣rest kept and enlarged, either by that church gouern∣ment which is borrowed and left as the smoaking taile of Antichrist, or by the ordering of the churches, after the word of God. If wee speake of the persons in common,1. special reason for the executi∣on & practise of good lawes, Christs discipl is best. howe the good and wholsome lawes should take good effecte both in them, and for them: & we consider the loose handling of holy things, whiche is in the very nature of the bastard discipline, & the great occasions which the church governours and church-men haue, to be drawen away from the juste and due practise of their offices, you shal easily perceaue, that the matter is clea∣red by the experience of times paste: for as touching the worde, when on the one side in the most places, there wanteth the quickening work of preaching: and on the other side, where that worke is, it is hindred with dispensations, Totquots, & ciuill dignities: how can the word of God enter into the conscience of all degrees, as it were necessary to breed a conscience, ei∣ther in the Magistrates to execute the lawes justly, or in the people to obey them faithfully, being so little, being slightly & so vntimely taught. Wheras Gods or∣der is,Act. 14.23. Tit. 1.5.6. that euery church be furnished with able mē; of good life and diligent teaching,2. Tim. 2.3.4. to be as souldiers free from all busines to serue their captaine Christ, which a thousand times more effecteth the due executing, &
practise of Lawes wholsome and good.Maintaine the common lawes. And as touching the censures; first when they may bee executed for trifles, and then in waighty matters changed for money: thirdly by persons which in the nature of the thing ought not to meddle with such ho ly matters; and in regarde of distance of place cannot deale so justly as a good man would and should, (for a man though he be letted with sicknes, or the Queens Majesties busines, is excomunicated before the cause of his not appearing bee examined.) Verely all these things which lye in the very nature of our disordered government, & not in the corruption of the persons, make the holy things of God contemned, the execu∣tion hated and derided. Very hardlye then can anye man be well and soundly brought to be a good Magi∣strate, or subiect by these, wheras Gods order is,Heb. 13.17. Act. 20.28.1 Pet. 5.2. Gods order ma∣keth good ma∣gistrates and good subiectes. that the Eldership shall watch ouer euery congregation or parish, and so euery mans cause may easily be known: and that shalbee by men of Ecclesiasticall function, set apart onely for the same, according to the qualitye of the offence, without change of any censure into a ciuil mulct, without respect of person be duly and truly ex∣ercised. If you compare these together, and judge in the lykelihood of the seuerall nature of thinges (for I meddle not with persons, in whome alwaies ther may be corruption) you shall perceaue that the one is like the leaden rule of Lesbos, which wil bend where the partie to be ruled will not bowe, and the other is the blade of a shaken sworde in the hande of the Cheru∣bins, to keep the way of the tree of life. Tell mee then I pray you, which most agreeth with policy (if we were desirous to haue al good lawes duly executed) a thing contemptible and vile, which is far from true justice,
or that which hath power and pearceth the soule.The discipl. of Christ altereth not And surely this may easilye bee obserued, that the most part of such as are against the orders of god, are a people that delight in licentiousnes,VVicked like not Christs di∣scipline. which cannot abyde to heare of their sinne, and hate to be admoni∣shed. By whiche it is manifest, that the other is of no powerfull nature to keepe men in good order, & that which of all other is a very waighty matter, the nature of these disorders is such, that they keep out & thrust out of the ministery, such worthye men as of all other, are knowne most diligent and wise, in framing the cō science to all good lawes, for executing of justice, and practise of obedience.By T.C. In the admonition to the people of Eng. pag. 77. &c. Heere it is objected, that the whole state of the lawes of this realme wilbee altered, which is a manifest vntruth, as al men may see, that the church-gouernment intermedleth not in the tempo∣rall lawes, but onely with such cannons and lawes, as concerne the ecclesiasticall jurisdiction and orders: & the proofes from the cannon lawe, and state of ciuili∣ans, of tithes and matrimonye, &c. whiche containe but some very small parte of the law, doe of themsel∣ues convince the contrary. But as for the cannon law, it is no way hurtful, but good for the state of the lawes of this realme, if it were abolished: being (as heerafter wil appeare) not necessary but dangerous to the state, and by former statutes alreadyAnno 25. H. 8. cap. 19. indighted, and to re∣moue a dangerous thing already founde guiltye by o∣ther wholsom lawes, was neuer inconuenient. As for the maintaining of ciuilians, as the law already maketh no great necessity of them,There is little need of cannon or ciuil law. hauing little other way to set them on worke, but by the cannon lawe: if such mens studies were converted an other waye to more profit, in the church and common wealth, little or no
losse or inconuenience would follow.the estate of lawes established. As touching tithes, testament, and matrimony, judgements of adul∣tery, slander, &c. if they bee temporall, why shoulde not the magistrate haue his right to deale with them: and the alteration will not be great, but onelye perad∣venture some smal addition vnto those lawes and sta∣tutes which are already prouided, with an increase of matter to those courts and offices already established, whose processe and proceding in judgement, will bee no harder to be apointed, then from time to time in e∣uery statute, that hath bene made, partly in those mat∣ters, & partly in others, since the first yeare of hir high∣nes raigne, hath vsually bene accustomed. Touching the Iudiciall lawes, that is nothing to the question, for whether these thinges be altered or no, it is all one in respecte of discipline, which intermedleth not there∣with, and they may be altered if the wisestates of this land see it necessary, though the disciplin craue it not: and if they should be altered, the inconvenience can be no greater, than in such cases is vsual: for Princes re peale and alter such lawes without hurt, as they finde necessary to be repealed and altered, or else what need so many parliaments, and so many new Lawes. As for that is alleadged, concerning the lawes whiche main∣taine the Queenes supremacy. &c. It is a manifest slā∣der, as is declared plainly in an answere to D.Sect . Bridges preface, intituled, A defence of the godlye ministers, and shall after be seene also in this treatise.A lamentable abuse in impro∣priations and patronages. As for im∣propriations and patronages, if they confesse a lamen table abuse, then they joine with vs, that there ought to bee amendement. As for the difficultye, it is ra her presumed, than any way proued, as shal appeare after∣ward: and to speake generally to all the rest, what hurt
can there now come to go forward in religion,The discipl. of Christ altereth not to aug∣ment and alter a little,No danger to go forward in religion. seeing that when indeede the whole state of lawes were altered, at the entrance of hir Maiesties moste happy regiment, in time of more danger as is aforesaid, the Lord gaue a contrary euent and happy blessing. And though it seeme a matter of great waight, to alter one of the three estats, by which the lawes haue stood, yet the Lord hath by the mini∣stry of your honorable wisdomes, effected more grea∣ter and difficult matters than this. Howbeit (as the Lawiars reporte) the L.Bb. are not one of three estats in making lawes,The L.Bb. not one o the three estates by which the lavves do stand. but are mingled with the Lords of the vpper house, whiche Lords are one of the three e∣states. For they describe the state and body of a Par∣liamen, & the members it consisteth of, in this order: Namely,See the L. Diars book or reports An. 36. H. 8. fol 59. b. and An. M. 1. fol. 93.a. that it doth consist first of the King as chief: secondly, of the Lords as chiefe members of that bo∣dy: thirdly, of the commons, that is knights, citizens & burgesses as the inferiour members, & al this make the body of the Parliament by whiche the lawes doe stand. Whereby I gather, that as before the pryde of Antichrist brought in the L.Bb. to be lords, joined to the lords temporal in the vpper house, the laws stood by the said three estates without them: so it maye bee very well at this time, seeing they are not an estate of themselues,Lavves made without L.Bb. Rastal. tit. pro∣uision & premu mire. cap.4. but joined to the estate of the lords, and that diuers statutes haue beene made without them. And if their lordly title and dignity were taken away, might there not bee present in the Parliament house, some wise and graue ministers of especial giftes & lear∣ning, sorted out of all the land, to yeald their counsel according to Gods heauenlye lawe, even as the ciuill judges are ready to giue their aduise, according to the
temporall lawe,the estate of lavves established and for matters of greater difficultye, there might bee a free Synode after the manner of the Convocation house, at all times to minister further helpe. Come we now to the several sortes of persons, they are either superiors or inferiors: and amongst these (as Peter saith) the King is the chiefe.1. Pet. 2.13. Dauid on a tyme was in a hazarde by a mighty Philistime,2. Sam. 23.26, and rescued by a valiaunt and faithfull captain Abishai. To whom his men sware, that he shoulde go out no more to bat∣tell, least hee quench the light of Israell. These men no doubt did knowe that the glory and safety of the whole common wealth did depend vpon a good ma gistrate: who being taken away, as a light quenched,A good prince is the light of ye weale-publick. the whole land was lyke to be in great distresse and ha∣zarde, and this verily is alwayes a principle that neuer faileth. When the righteous are in authority,Pro. 29.2. the peo∣ple reioice, but when the wicked beare rule the people sigh. Therefore wee of England are much bound to praise God, both for so happye a light which hee hath vouchsaued to giue and keepe vnto vs, our moste sa∣cred soveraigne lady Elizabeth, and for the great and wise trauaile of hir honorable counsellers, so far as in them lyeth, to prevent all daungers to hir person, and performe euery action that may make for hir preserua∣tion. Graunt mee then I beseech you, your gracious favour, though I bee the leaste and basest of the thou∣sands of England, to shew my good-will, my hartye desire and faithfull minde in this thing.2. special reason For I am per∣swaded that there is nothing that can by any pollicye be deuised, comparable for hir safety; vnto the establi∣shing of discipline after gods word.Princes keping Christs worde are his friends. For if it be true,1. Sam. 12.25. that they that do wickedly shall perish with their king
and to disobey Christs commandement be sinne and wickednes,Discipline after Gods word 1. Tim 1.9.10. and he saith you are my friends if you doe whatsocuer I cōmand you:Ioh. 15.14. then it is a point of great policy that you labour wisely, to set vp Gods orders in his churches, if you desire the continuall preservation of our Queene. Againe,Good policy to roote out the spriggs of pope∣ry, that he grow no more to hurt the state. in al historics it is found to be most agree∣ing to policy, when thou hast subdued thy capitall e∣nemy, or bannished him, to roote out al his friendes, and whatsoeuer may minister occasion of his returne: and in your bookes of policy, you shall finde diuers princes for their safety, haue both takē away the heads of the men that might haue beene dangerous to their estate, and as conveniently (as possible they could) al∣tered the forme of government. But seeing wee haue sufficient in Gods word,1. King. 2.26. I wil not lade you with other. Salomon was a wise king as euer liued, he vsed this po¦licye towardes Adonijah, Ioab, and Shimei: and the text saith, after he had slaine these three, the kingdom was established in the hande of Salomon. Nowe this king needed not to change the law, because comming to his crowne by lawfull succession, he might safelye continue the olde. And yet in the matters of God, he went farther then his father, in building the temple, and setting foorth the true seruice and worship of Al∣mighty God therein: which when he swarued from, and followed the lawes of the nations rounde about him, which were enemies by nature vnto him, his e∣state was troublesome, and his ende not so glorious. For this cause God gaue his people when they should enter into the lande of Chanaan this lawe, that they should vtterly destroy those nations,Deu. 7.2.3.4. Cap. 12.2.3. make no covenāt nor haue compassion of them; nor make any mari∣ages
with them: and secondly,is for the Queenes Maiest, safety that they shold destroy their Idoles, and all monuments of Idolatry, so that the very names of such should not be heard of among them. Which when they did not carefully followe, they were pricks in their sides, and snares to their feet,Iudg. 2.3 and greatly to their wo and misery. So I doe seare, and very much beleue, that one great cause of many scour∣ges and feares, and flights that wee haue bene put vn∣to, commeth by a contrary policy which fostereth the enemies of hir Maiesty, and giueth occasion of manie mischiefes. What made the I urke preuaile against the east churches,Anno 1245. and that he came even to the borders of Germany, even the supremacy of the Pope, which is the maine breach of this discipline. But when & how was hee stayed? even then when Luther had detected the disorder of the Antichristian Prelacy,Anno 1529. and at Vi∣enna where serued the value of resolute Prote stantes,The breach of Christs discipl. hath ouer throwen many kingdomes, and namely the Ro∣main empire, he had his first stoppe, and a very great ouerthrow: & why prevailed he so farr into Hungarye, but onely be∣cause they which shoulde haue given rescue, as vassals to the Pope, were so busy in healing the wound which the triple crowne had receaued in Saxonye: and that they neglected the true duty to their country.Anno 604. When Phocas to get fauour after the murthering of Mauri∣tius his Lorde and maister, had graunted to the B. of Rome, to be B. of Bb. and head of all Christian chur∣ches: did not the authoritye of the Empire decay and the power of the Empire waxe weake euer since? haue not the seruants benelords ouer their Lord? Consi∣der I pray you what difference there is betweene the B. of Rome vnder the Emperor, to be made chiefe B. of all Bb. in the Empyie: and that the B. of Canter. should be chief, or Archb. Primate and Metropolitan
ouer all the Bb. & churches in England.Discipline after Gods word If that were dangerous to the empyre & Emperour, how can this be fafe for England and the Queene thereof? If Tho∣mas Becket his predecessour, coulde wrestle with the King, who then was Henry the second: peradventure this man (if occasion were offred) by his place (I speak not of his person) might be made strong to doe some thing. If king Henry the eight had not beene wise & stout, it is to bee doubted that the wiles of Stephen Gardiner, & the pride of Cardinall Woolsey (as one of them in diuers things did crosse him, and the other many wayes ledd him) might haue very greatly endā∣gered him and his countrey. If you looke on our L. Bb. their Chancelors,The Bb. seas & cathedral dig∣nities with the cannon law, are entisements to the Queenes deadly enemies. Archdecons, Commissaries &c. and joine (that which they work by) the cannon law: What shal you finde but that the Pope hath his horse readye sadled and brydled, watching but the time to get vp againe. For if Allin that filthy traitor, and such lyke, had not bene set on fire with the loue of the Sea of Canterbury, and other lyke places, & that the can∣nons were not so fit for popish purposes, would there not bee a great deale lesse stomacke in those men, to venture their liues, and very vnhand some sitting for the deadly man of sinne. These seas and Cathedrall cloisters, are fit for their pompous dwellings, and the cannon lawe is the foundation of his throne. What policye can there bee to leaue anye thing in the lande which might either encourage, or entice, or any man∣ner of wayes, serue, helpe, or strengthen, the greatest and most deadly foe & hostile enemy, which hir Ma∣jesty hath, or can haue: and howe can wee long hope that our armies shall stand before our enemies in bat∣tell (though for a while God spare vs and call vs to re∣pentance)
as long as the greedye mindes of many A∣chams which lust after the Babilonitish garment,is for the Queenes Ma. safety and the wedge of gold, and the cursed and damned thing of the cannon Law, bee suffered and fostered among vs. But let vs goe a little neerer, may wee not see that these offices are fitt for Papistes, whome no reward (if we beleue D. Parry) can make true subiects:Read the booke of his tragedy. Popish church-offices, cloakes for the Queens dissembling friends. may they not be civilians, and doctors of the cannon law? may they not be Chancelors, and L. bishops chief coun∣sellours? may not they in their courtes, nay doe wee not see them daily to spare and wink at open recusants and trouble honeste poore men, and especially those which are readiest, to detecte and bewraye their diso∣bedience to hir Maiesty? So the very order and nature of these vnnatural disorders, is against the safety of hir Maiestye. For whatsoeuer fostereth the fittest instru∣mentes, to obey the bulles in the great day they look for, that must needes bee against the Queenes Maic∣sties safety. But besides that before said, there is an other thing in the being of this corrupt church-gouernment: first the lack of teaching of youth: secondly, by these cou∣loured offices a man may haue a popish schoole-mai∣ster, especially if he can semble a little: thirdly, when some are secretlye intised and wauereth; who shall re∣solue them? the vanity of some, and the ignorance of so many, (though a fewe no doubt, bee well able and meet) doth so driue them back, and make them stum∣ble,Christs discipl. preventeth re∣volters from his Maiesties obe∣dience. that hardly can you heare, that by these anye bee drawen to their due and true obedience. But on the other side, the whole frame of Gods order is cleane another way. First, al the officers and cannons, horse,
sadle,Discipline after Gods word and brydle is taken awaye. Secondly, a learned ministry, euery way to write obedience in their heart is heere seated. And as he that planteth a right & true catholick Papist, cannot plant any other, but a traitor in hart & conscience: so he that by preaching frameth a true christian, cannot but frame a true subject in hart and conscience, when the preaching is the right waye to make true Christians, many revolters may bee pre∣vented, which otherwise swarme and grow into great nombers. This saieth one, By T.C. In the admonition to the people of Eng. pag. 77. is [non causa pro causa,] a wrong cause, that for lacke of preaching the euill of reuolting hath hapned: seing it was not so, or so much in King Edwards dayes, or in the firste ten yeares of hir Maie∣sties raigne, when we had not half so much preaching and a thousande lesse preachers: but the true cause is the euill hart of men, who heare the word of God vn∣reuerētly, the schisme of the church, and the Diuel ta∣king occasion by scisme. Whome I meekely desire to consider, that the merciful providence of God, might, did, and doth wonderfully stay the hearts of the peo∣ple, when it pleaseth him, even without & contrary to meanes:VVant of a learned ministe¦ry a cause of re∣volting. Prou. 19.2. & 29.18. Rom. 10.14.15 yet by al reason, seing it is written, that with∣out knowledge the minde is not good, and that the people perish, where the vision faileth, and the ordi∣narie means of God to instruct and bring into the way of truth, is the preaching ministery, it must needs fol∣lowe that the lack heereof is some cause of their reuol∣ting and backsliding. For inquire we into all men, and they will answere, so we did, because so we wereledd and taught. And though the wicked hart of man and schisme, and the Diuell be great occasions, and some∣times causes of suche thinges, yet the power of prea∣ching
& the due administration thereof,is for the Queenes Maiest. safety is the means to preuent and bridle al these: as may appeare, in that the preaching is ordained to open the eyes of the peo∣ple,Act. 26.18. that they may turn from darknes to light, & from the power of Sathan to God. And how can any man in reason thinke, that teaching men obedience & truth should not more draw them to obedience and truth, than not teaching. And if God haue ordained it to do it, why should not the want of Gods ordinance bee a cause, that it is not done: as it is written, My people is destroied for lack of knowledge. And whence is the euill hart of men maintained, and schisme fostered,Hosh. 4.6. & the Diuell occasioned to worke his will, but hence: namely, that the one is not taught diligently by prea∣ching, and kept in order by discipline, and the other are let out at random for lack of them both. For if by Gods order things were squared, where were the scis∣me, and the dore for the Diuell: where doth the wolf prevaile, but where the shepe-heard sleepeth, and the dogg doth not bark, and why should we pray the lord of the haruest, to thrust in labourers into his haruest,Mat. 9.38. if the want of such laborers, could be no cause of harm. For tryall heereof, looke on the country and parishes where preaching is by a standing ministery, and com∣pare them with other, I could name some place of two thousand communicantes, where there is not a suspe∣cted papist, and hardly shall you see such a one tary in such a place, except it be in hope, through the popish disorders, to driue away him who is the meanes of the good subiects faithfull hartes. Secondly, if there had beene an Eldership joined with such a ministery, think you that there could haue beene so manye seduced as there are, and so many hanged, drawen and quartered
as there are? When the nature of our disorders doth so negligently prouide a remedy, no maruell thoughe the Iesuites preuaile as they do. Add hereunto, that by these disorders, those men are broughte into con∣tempt, which haue written most for hir Maiesties right and labored with most profit, for the increase of good harty subiects. Heere an other steppeth foorth and saieth, that in stead of those you finde fault withall, you would haue a Pope in euery parish, and the Queene should be sub∣iect to your Pastor, and that by the discipline, the just power of hir royall magnificence shalbe abridged, & in that sense slaunder vs with the abuse of the wordes of Esaye,Esay. 49.23. that Kings and Queenes shall worship with their faces to the earthe, and licke vp the duste of the churches feete. First consider, that to be a Pope ouer one Parish,Christs discipl. diminisheth not the Queenes su∣premacy. is farther from the crowne and power of a kingdom, than an Archb. or L.B. ouer many parishes and shieres, yea, Metropolitane of all England: And yet the Pastour hath no Papall authority to doe as hee listeth, but hath his voyce only as the rest,1 Tim. 4.14. Act. 20.28. 1. Cor. 5.4. and is sub∣iect to the Eldership. Neither can he excommunicat without the consent of the churche: but as Peter and Iohn were sent by the Apostles from Ierusalem,Act. 8.14. & cap. 15.2.22. and Paule and Barnabas from Antiochia, and Iudas & Si∣las to Antiochia were sent by the church: so euery pa∣stor is subject to the churche and censure, as well as o∣ther men, saue onely that he hath an office that euerye man cannot haue. Then it is a slaunder also to saye, that we make hir subiect to the Pastor, for whatsoeuer authority any prince can haue ouer their subiects, that we giue vnto hir, teaching euery soule to bee subiecte to the higher power, neither is it to bee feared whiche
some men dreame of, for we affirme not (as god know∣eth) that the homage that Esay speaketh of, is of anie such nature, that hir royall crown and dignity shoulde bee subiect to any man whatsoeuer, but onelye vnto Christ, which I am perswaded hir most excellent Ma∣jesty most freely, and of godlye zeale doeth imbrace: Namely, that Iesus Christ the Lord of life, is Lord of Lordes, and King of Kings, and that his lawes are to bee preferred, before all Princes lawes, and that they ought to bee obedient vnto them, and not contrary. Heere of it commeth to passe, that hir Maiestye coun∣teth it no subiection to kneele down in the presence of a minister in prayer to God, to heare him preach, and admonish hir of hir duty, to deliuer to hir as from god the sacramentes, and by hir royall authoritye to com∣mand and enforce all hir subiects to doe the like, and in all other things to submit them selues to the ordi∣nance of Christ: and in doing this, hir royall Maiestie doth greatly honour the church, after the meaning of Esay, who speaketh in a borrowed speech from earth∣ly potentates, to shewe the obedience and honour of Princes to Christ in the churche, and their care to ad∣uance his church. So then, heerin hir highnesse wor∣shipping God after his owne Lawe, and thereby ma∣king hir self as a member of the church and not head, and reputing Christ onely for heade, to whome in all things she giueth homage, and taking hir self only vn∣der him as chiefe governour ouer all hir people, to see euery man, aswel church-officers as others, to do their duty according to Gods law, hauing the lawful sword to punish them that do it not, & to defend their chur∣ches in their right, doeth leese no one little iote of hir princely supremacye,Rom. 13.1.2. for she hath the honour of the
building of the Temple with Salomon,2. Chron 2: 1. Chron. 28.11, 12.39. to see by hir royall authority euery thing done according to the pa¦terne of God, and the Priests and Leuites to take their courses as God hath appointed,2. King. 12.4 8, 9. 2. Chron. 24.4 9. and with Ioash to cō∣mand the Priestes to looke to the repairing of the tem∣ple, and to proclaime in hir dominions, that men shal do after the law of Moses, and by hir authoritye with Iehosaphat to set the Priestes and Leuites,2. Chron. 19.8. and of the chief of the families, for the judgement and cause of the Lord: & for the establishing of hir supreame mag∣nificence aboue all persons, the Lorde will giue vnto the harts of al sorts of people to do hir cōmandemēt, & of the rulers vnder hir, according to the word of the Lord, as he did for the aduancement of the throne of Ezechias:2. Chro. 30.6.12.16. so that by his direction and commission, the Priestes and Leuites did sanctifie themselues, to stand in their places after the manner according to the lawe of Moses the man of God. Out of all which I gather, that the discipline hindreth not, but that by hir su∣preame authoritye she may compell all the people to keepe the commandement of God, and the ministers to be, and do, after the law of Christ his sonne. And by hir commission she may haue, as she hath already, rulers and officers in euery shire and great towne, as commissioners in causes Ecclesiastical, to be as it were, hir eyes, eares, and hands, to hearken after the due and orderly proceedings of the ministers, Elderships, and Synods: to compell them to doe euerye thing after Gods word, by ciuil authority: and if need be, to punish them which handle Gods holy thinges out of order, and to force the people to bee obedient vnto the ordinance of Christ Iesus: so that she still shall re∣maine ouer all persons, in all things supreame gouer∣nesse,
(and hir self, vnder none, but God in his sonne Iesus Christ) in that full and royall authority, superi∣ority, preeminence, supremacy & prerogatiue, which the Lawes already established do nowe giue vnto hir, and hir Maiesties iniunctions, and the articles of the Convocation house, & other writings Apologeticall of hir royall authority and supreame dignitye, doe de∣clare and explane. Now I say, seeing hir highnes doth acknowledge Christ to be hir heade, and renounceth the Pope, is it not for hir safety, by hir authority to set vp that which remaineth of Christs moste holy lawes, and to bannish all the Popes cannons? May not hir princely minde perceaue it to bee so, if she remember that it is said of Christ: By me Kings raigne,Prou. 8.15.16. and prin∣ces decree justice: by me princes rule, and the nobles and all the judges of the earth. An other reason may be drawen from the common effectes of the church gouernment. For if it be true,Christs discipl. maketh learned and good men, therefore it is best for a mo∣narch or king. that a certaine Politick counsellour gaue to a heathen Emperour, Omnes imperiti & vitiosi, bono Principi suspecti esse debent: that a good Prince may suspecte & stand in feare of al ignorant and wicked men: then seing that both heauen and earth do witnesse, that our soveraigne is a good prince, that church-government which breedeth moste learned and good men is best, and surest for hir safety. What our disorders do breed all the world seeth, it maintaineth blinde guides, how can it make a learned people? and howe wicked men doe shrowde them selues vnder them, this one thing may stande in stead of many: that partly by colour of Law, they can so molest a good man that would teach them and make them good, and partly by commuta∣tion of pennance, licenses, dispensations and tollera∣tions,
any euill man especially if hee be rich, can tell howe to escape their slender cob-webs well enough, that men are discouraged from presenting or dealing any way against wicked men. And let a good minister once suffer a harlot to be presented, she is so reformed that she wil haue two or three bastards on in an others neck, doe the minister and the parish what they can to the contrary. But how such should or might be scour∣ged out, with the through preaching of the Gospel in euery church, & the good vse of the disciplin of Christ, and knowledge and wisedome planted in mans heart, it may appeare by this, that for ciuill, wise, and good behauiour, compare them which are vnder continual teaching of Pastors, with them that be further remo∣ued, you shall finde a great difference. And how can it choose but nourish learning, when the wisdome of the word shineth in euery church, by a standing Pa∣stor, and Teacher? Will it not inflame mens heartes, with the bewty thereof? There shall you see yong & olde called from blindenes to light, from wickednesse to vertue and piety: must it not needs turne a great ma¦nye more, where it wanteth? Consider what M. Fox saieth of M. Thomas Bilney of Hadley,Booke of mart. pag. 445. that the same churche seemed in his time, rather to bee lyke an Vni∣versity, than a poore towne of clothing. Tel me whe∣ther a Non-resident, or idle & dumb minister can or hath done the lyke? and verely when men know their duties to hir Maiesty, it is the waye to make them doe it: but if they be not taught, how shall they know. But of all others,Christs discipl. an enemy to flat terers, who spoile good rulers. I finde that flatterers are reported of some to be most dangerous to the safty of a prince, as in the life of Alexander the great, when hee delte hardly with them that tolde him the truth, & yeelded
to flattery, to beare the reputation of lupiters sonne, he was neuer without one treason, or tumult or ano∣ther, and in the ende, (as some esteeme) poysoned. Now the disorders of our church, what are they, but a very masse of flattery, and a pit that casteth out flat∣terers: for while men contrary to their own knowlege say all is well, and there is nothing contrary to Gods word, and that by subscription and other means, they would driue men to allow of euery thing, & that this by order is so, that a man were better to sweare or lie, (which are manifest breaches of Gods morall Lawe) then to breake one of these traditions, is not this to make vs, not onely secure, but to thinke that even the law of God is not comparable to ours. How may this indanger a vertuous Prince; if the Lorde by his grace did not vphold hir? Againe, if it bee suspected that a man doe meane to speake plainly, and truly before hir Maiesty, is there not order prouided by our disorders and for their maintenance, that if it bee possible suche shall not come in place? Lastly, those great dignities and spirituall promotions may easilye beget flatterers. Mee thinketh I see a further sore heere, than I can hād∣somely expresse. I praye God to deliuer hir Majestie from all flattering, lying, and deceatfull tongues. One thing more there is which maketh for the ho∣nour and safety of our noble Lady & mistresse: name∣ly, that by this meanes when al thinges shalbee refor∣med by Gods word,Christs disci∣plin furthereth the league with religious Prin∣ces. as it is certain that she cānot haue more hatred than she already hath of the wicked, so the Christian princes of al parts wilbe a great deale the su∣rer, and the league with them the more certaine, and that which is more, many wilbe drawne by hir exam∣ple, being a monarch, and a mighty people, to go for∣warde
in religion:Christs holy Discipline for all wise and good potentates, must needs think, that this christian Lady and Queen increaseth much in zeale, wisedome & courage, and her people growe in the feare of God, and constancie in religion: therefore is it our best to make much of her and her people, & it is a shame for vs if we should not be as forward in zeale, and as valiant in the cause of God, as a woman & mayden Queene. Howe much wil these and such like thoughts and speches turne to her immortal fame, & presēt safty? for if it were hono∣rable to king Iosias, from age to age, more & more to establish religion in the purity thereof: and that Solo∣mon was noe longer honorable and safe, then he kept the same rule: howe much more shal it be for her re∣nown and safety, to deale more wisely then Solomon the wisest, and to be as zealous as Iosias, who was for zeale as highly commended as euer any. And here fal down two vayne & fond reasons,Christes disci∣pline no hazard to her majestie, nor Argument of inconstancie if she set it vp. that if she shoulde reforme the Church, she should be re∣puted inconstant, and purchase greater hatred: for ha∣tred, can there be greater then to seeke her life, and to robbe her of her crowne and dignitie? this hath bin sought after (al the worlde knoweth) by hatred, and can there be greater by discipline? al wise men wil al∣soe thinke that inconstancie is in going backwarde, & not in going forwarde.Luk. 14.28.26. Psal. 84.7. Rom. 1.17. It is inconstancie to begin a∣building and not to make an end if one be able: and not to finish a good worke well begone is inconstan∣cye, but this is the very nature of a christian, to growe from faith to faith from strength to strength, and from vertue to vertue, that we may appeare before GOD in Sion. Concerning the nobillitie and comminaltye of this
land,is good for Nobil. & Com. The third spe∣cial reason. there is a greate cause both for the one and the other, to seek after discipline as God commandeth it: first the one leseth a right in ciuil offices, & functions,Christes disci∣plin giueth the right to the no∣bilitie & comi∣naltie. for when it appertaineth not to the ecclesiastical func∣tions to medle with workes meere ciuill, as is before declared, then doe they vsurpe vppon the temporall estate, to medle with these callings, which must needs be an injury, and therefore in times past (as lawyars say) there haue bin diuers lawes made to bridle this insolencie, and it is a matter punishable at the sessions, if they medle with any subject,Mast. Lambert justice of peace booke. 2 cap. 4 pag. 338. to cal him before them or to put him to an oth, otherwise then in causes ma∣trimonial, and of restament, but if they do not onely beare vppon their shoulder the commission of peace and other great commissions, but also in their spiritu∣al courts against lawe, call her majesties subjects be∣fore them in matters which pertain to the ciuil judges, then it doth appeare that such disorderly gouernment is not to be suffered, as a thing plainly injurious to the nobillitie, and comminaltie: besides, that howsoe∣uer peraduenture some godly Princes haue reposed greate trust in such persons, yet is it a greate dishonor to the nobilitie and gentillitie of this land, that there coulde not be wise and honest men ynoughe founde out amongest them to deale in ciuil causes, but that ministers must be taken from the studye of diuinitye wherwith they ought to beautifie the Church, to the studie of lawe and executing of commissions, for they which by the nature of their calling, and manner of bringing vp, they are most vnfit.Christs discip. affordeth to al sortes godly & lerned techers. And how can a chri∣stian man delight in that gouernment, which by the nature thereof, wil take out of his chappel a learned wise and zealous minister, whome he knoweth to be
honest and of good conuersation,Christs holy Discipline is good and mainteine in o∣ther places such as are cleane otherwise, may not al the cominaltie haue litle delight in that dissipline, which in one yeare coulde stop the mouthes of a hundreth godly and faithful preachers, and not in thirty yeares to roote out thirty blinde guides, otherwise then na∣ture it selfe and the meere blessing of God hath affor∣ded?Christes disci∣pline excomu∣nicateth none for trifles.Can they delight in that which contrary to lawe can cal them for euery trifle, & excommunicat them, which is to deliuer them to the Diuel, if they doe not appeare? I will not here vse such tearmes which my matter and proposition requireth, because I see the people in their wound, and it is not good to stirr and cherish an il sore, but rather to heale it, in as much as God hath appointed an other way. Therefore we lye here at her majesties feet, crauing, begging, & humbly suing, that shee woulde looke wel vnto her selfe, ten∣der the honor of her nobillitie, and haue compassion vpon her poore people, who for lack of Christes ho∣ly dissipline, haue greate cause to doubt of her safetie, and to feare their own miserie, and to suspect the pre∣sent happines. What a godly thing were it,Christes disci∣pline good for children, and most equal and just for al per∣sons. that the nobility & co∣minaltie had some helpe in every place by a learned ministerie, euen in the infancie of their children, to breede that feare of god, which might preuent worse matters, which we see come to passe when the raines are layed loose in their neckes, and there hath bin litle dissipline? What a comforte were it that a man might be sure, no licenses could steale away his daughter, & what ease were it for the people, and readines to find out the truth and perfection for justice? that in causes ecclesiastical a man might be censured in the Church
where he liueth:for Nobilitie and Commi. the wicked coulde not beare it out with chaunging or perjurye, neither woulde the inno∣cent be so soone oppressed (as touching the nature of the thing, I speake not of the person) but euery one shoulde haue occasion to be delt withal according to sight, rightly and honestly. Now we are to consider of the times of peace & war, here one speaketh soughtly & sayth,The 4. speciall reason. if your ma∣jestie shoulde set vp dissipline, you shoulde haue pre∣sent rebellion. What might this man haue sayd vnto Luther, a poore simple Fryar,1518. that set vppe the Gos∣pel almost vnder the Alpes of Itallie, which remaineth so steady, that al the power of princes cannot take it a∣way: and when diuers Popes who sought his life, and that with strong hand, died, he liued an olde man and ended his dayes peaceably.No reason to feare rebellion by setting vp of discipline. In the entrance of her highnes gratious raigne, there was more pollicy in reason, to haue soe objected against the setting vp of the Gospel, but nowe God be thanked, the case is altered, as I haue before shewed, I doe not doubt but that the liuely fayth, which her good & princely hart hath in Christ Iesus, and that royal magnanimitie which she hath alwayes shewed, if she might be let to see the certaine truth of the venerable doctrine of Christs discipline, would easily perswade her that she could not doubt, but haue as good successe with this, as with the first, & the long experience of Gods mer∣ciful and assured protection, nowe in a time lesse dan∣gerous, woulde make a matter of so great necessitie, to be cheerefully sought for, and spedilye put in practise. Moses first brought the people out of Egipt, after he declared the lawe, and lastly erected the tabernacle, so I doe not doubt, but as God hath mightely blessed
her in the two first,The Church gouernment of Christ hee will as greatly honour her in the last. But mee thinketh this man in this case misseth the true rules of pollicie,The Papistes looke for a∣chaunge soe longe as we want Christes holy discipline. for where the Papists are so full of plots, is it not because they are in hope that things will change? and why do they hope? but because they beholde the image of their father the Pope and hys markes: they thinke he is not so gone, but that if they did their duty, he might returne. Therefore they are busie, and many nets are spread for the feet of our in∣no cent Princesse (whom God blesse and maintaine) and engins of diuers forts are made to breake in sun∣der our peace. Will you bee without feare? With all speed, and yet with wisedome and vnderstanding, set vp Discipline & reformation that is amisse after Gods booke,Psal. 122.3. & 48.5. and you shal see their hope wil be turned into feare, they will see Ierusalem so to be built, as a Cittie at vnitie in it selfe, that when they behold it, they will marueill and be astonied, and suddenly driuen backe. Thus was it with the people of God after their capti∣uitie: they neuer had quietnes till Nehemias that worthie Prince arose, who though hee were neuer so much put in fear, that he was driuen to cause ye people to work with one hand, & hold the weapon with the other,Nehem. 6.16. yet he neuer ceased til he had finished the wal, & made all things in his order about Ierusalē. Wher∣of, when al the enemies did hear, euen all the heathen that were round about, they were afraid, and their co∣rage failed them, for they knewe that this worke was wrought by God, and shall wee, who by her gracious and godly gouernment, are brought out of the spiri∣tuall Babilon, into the fellowship of the Citizens and saints of God, doubt more of his blessing, if we should
striue to garnishe gods Citie with this goodlye wall of Ecclesiasticall Discipline?maintaineth peace. should not all Papistes be forced to say, that the Lord hath done this? especially now, when he hath so wonderfully driuen backe our enemies. Iehosophat after that hee had escaped in the battaile where Ahab was slaine, and had bene admo∣nished by Iehu the sonne of Hananie the Seer, for ta∣king part with the wicked, gaue himselfe to reforma∣tion, and not onely in Iuda, but euen from Beer sheba to mount Ephraim, hee brought the people againe to the Lord God of their fathers. What folowed? could there any preuaile against him? No no: It is written, that the feare of God was vpon all the kingdomes of the earth, when they had hard that ye Lord had fought against the enemies of Israell,2. Chro. 19. & cap. 6, 20.29.30. so the kingdome of Ie∣hoshaphat was quiet, and his God gaue him rest on e∣uerie side. Shall wee thinke that the Lordes hand is shortned, if we be as zealous as he?Exod. 10.26. Moses would not leaue a hoofe behind him in Egypt: did he speed any whit the worse in the end? and shall we thinke that if some Achitophel shoulde fortifie some wicked Absa∣lom, to resist his liege Ladye and peaceable mother; that God woulde not stir vp a thousand Hushais to ouerthrowe all his counsailes? Let vs remember wherein our peace consisteth, and the strength thereof: is it not in seruing of God, and walking in his commandements, and putting our trust in his mercy? Then must wee take heede of all those Baalamites, who vnder pretence of preuenting rebellion, giue craftie counsail for the diuell: to make vs carelesse, in our dutie towards God, that when wee refuse to goe forward, wee might fall backward: and then God proclaime warre against vs and say, if they
will not obey,The Church Gouernment of Christ Ierem. 12.17. Esay 57.21. 2. Kin. 12.27. then will I vtterly destroy and plucke vp that nation. And againe, there is no peace to the wicked saith my God. So was it with Ieroboam, who to establishe his kingdome ouer the ten tribes to him∣selfe and his posteritie: he altered the precepts of God and made two Calues, the one in Dan, and the other in Bethell, least the people going vp to worship at Ie∣rusalem after Gods lawe, should rebell and fall away from him: but this turned to bee such a sinne, that it rooted out his house, & many other houses after him, and in the end, the whole ten tribes, whereof hee was king, were spued out of that land, soe dangerous a∣thing it is to chuse that pollicie, which is against gods lawe and commaundement. Nowe in peace as one saith,Christs Disci∣pline is for the vvealth and ho∣nour of the realme. small things are made great, riches & honour are multiplied. Let vs see whe∣ther these disorders doe not maintaine the contrary, I cannot say but God hath blessed vs in our peace with both, and yet I must say, that the state of our churches and church gouernement is rather a hinderer. First there lacketh that orderly seeing to the poore which were expedient, and men for the most part are left to them selues, so that by idlenes and libertie, great pouettie are among vs, which fal into many noisome thinges, which might very well be amended by Christes discipline. Secondlye there are among vs, suffered & nourished by order in Cathedral churches a cloister of idle men, who liuing vpon the goods of the Church and Common wealth, do litle or no ser∣uice for the same. It is a heauy burthen in a common wealth to suffer men to liue in pleasure and ease like oxen in a stall, to doe almost no labour. For most of these (I wil not say all) doe litle or nothing, as by the
nature of this order they are occasioned: Is not this to be amended? they wil say they are rewardes of learn∣ing, but it is scarce good pollicy (as I take it) that when men haue learning, they shoulde be maintained to idlenes, and put their learning to no vse. But they do preach, that is to saye, some of them sometimes doe preach, and some do hier others to preach for them. But to looke neerely to the thing, one man may do as much as all the orders of the house (in the place of the house) do require. Then if one of necessitie should be there, all the rest of the liuings might well bee spared for the helping of churches which haue smal liuings, and to further the encrease of learning. But as touching honor, it may be that they would say, that wee should loose one estate, and so the Com∣mon-wealth decaied in wealth and honour. The ho∣nour of a Common-wealth standeth, not in an estate which is of an other nature, but in the honourable and wise cariage of true Common-wealth men, coun∣sellours, Iudges, Iustices and Captaines. Now when their liuing should bee imployed to better vses, it would bee a greater honour, and riches of more pro∣fitable encrease. This would (say they) turne to the domage of the common treasure, which by first fruits in the remooue of L.Bb. and Cathedrall Prelates, is somewhat augmented. Not a whit: for if it were so that the money should be caried out of the land, as in times past it hath bin to that powling Citie of Rome, then it were something that were said, but seeing it is to bee bestowed in the land, it can be no losse. For in the conuaiance, that benefite might be reserued: yet I pray you, how did out treasure hold out, when that a great deale more was wanting, which hath come in
within these 80. yeares. If our forefathers in blind∣nes, thought nothing to much for the Churches ad∣uauncement, neither almost had any ende in giuing their lands and goods that way, shall wee thinke that God cannot another way blesse vs as much, if we par∣ted from alitle, for the competent and decent erecting of his ministery? but God be thanked, the Common-wealth (as I hope) may the rather be encreased: for if things be wisely handled, the Ministery may bee well and decently maintained, and yet there wil arise such a portion of good lands, to be bestowed at her Maie∣sties pleasure, as may make a large recompence by a yearely certaintie, and this will be a great deale more honor to our Common-wealth, to haue Gods house well and rightly built, and his seruants comely enter∣tained, then for the making of one L.B. vnnecessarily, there should be a hundreth Bb. beside to the realme,1. Tim. 3.1. as poore almost as beggers. It would be more honor & wealth to the realm, then to maintain a sort of idle, red or blew coats, to haue in euery parish, an honest, & learned B. who in a competent liuing would feed the poore, and by giuing and lending, keepe many a good Subject in heart, that he might be able to serue his Prince in time of need. In time of peace,Christes disci∣pline cutteth of contention. a great waster of prosperity is con∣tention and strife, and many houses lie wast by such inordinate iarring and suites of lawe: here to let passe howe many suits are bred and fed by these disorders, as about aduowsons, priuiledges and presentments. This one thing wil shew the excellency of discipline, for the wealth of the Realme and quiet of subiectes, that the Church is to censure such a party, who is ap∣parantly troublesome and contentious, and without
reasonable cause, and vpon a meere will and stomack doth vex and molest his brother, & trouble the coun∣trie. And the daily showring dew of the preaching of peace, will bring foorth many counsellours of peace, and many, when they see that such a thing is vncom∣lie, and to bee answered before the Church, will bee well aduised what suits they take in hand. Thus when the authoritie of the Churche and good preaching, cutteth asunder the cords of discord, men must needs increase in wealth, and so at all times shall bee able to beare any burthen that the Common-wealth shal re∣quire, and this will bee a great deale better, then if the treasure lay vnprofitably and without vse in Coffers, and to the honor of the Realme farre more excellent, when men shall be in all places, found able to relieue themselues and other. Now as concerning warres,The 5. speciall reason. wee may learne of the children of this world, that it is the best pollicy to ad∣uaunce the Lords holy Discipline, and that as well in the preparation for warre, as in the time of war it selfe. This doth altogether further our estate. The Bb. of Rome haue Seminaries erected, for the training vp of yong men in their abhominable errors, out of which, as out of the dragons mouth, there go these vncleane frogs the Iesuits and Seminary Priests, who go about as it were, by night closely and secretly croking, at the consciences of her Maiesties subjectes, to bring them from their dutifull obedience and subjection. Now in vvarre it is an ordinarye pollicye to haue a counter∣mine, because the enemie most commonly vseth to vndermine vvhere he cannot vvel come nere in fight. So if vve had Discipline, and euery Parish his learned Pastor, these creeping crokers would be so narrowlie
looked vnto,Discipline after Gods word Christes disci∣plin forest aleth all sedition and rebellion. that they could not haue any hole to hide their heads: and the people, would be so wel in∣structed in the knowledge of God in Christ Iesus, and of their duty to their true Soueraigne, that al the frogs in those moorish Seminaries, should not be able once to moue them, and by this meanes, so prepared for war, if neede be, that whereas nowe there go a great many only with their bodies, and some only of a na∣turall loue to their Countrey, then would they goe with a resolute iudgement, and of conscience to God, they would willingly do any seruice, and that, which in this case is not small, they would not so easily bee drawen after any great man, or meane man, to sedition and rebellion. For how ignoraunt men, are like chil∣dren carried with euery winde, all state men do vnder∣stand. Therefore, seeing as is already prooued, and al men by too too lamentable experience may knowe, that the nature of our Church gouernement, as it is now vnperfect, doth very slowly bring forth, true re∣solute christian men of knowledge: we may easily per∣ceiue, that it is dangerous for the state to suffer it in the Common-wealth, and to let the church bee ouer run with such carelesse and blind guides. Besides this,Quietnes in charges for war commeth by Christes holy discipline, and wiling soldiers. when men haue knowledge and vn∣derstanding, what is fit for Gods glory, and their duty at such a time: they will not murmure and grudge at euery trifling charge, which commeth to passe, for the supplie of the warres, but willingly and cherefully, do any thing that may become good Subiectes, in cases of necessity: But what I see both in this, and in the o∣ther for lacke of good teachers, maketh my heart to bleede, and my pen cannot vtter. Wherof thinke you, was it that Abraham ha in his house, 318. men, so
ready at an howers warning,is good against warre. Gen. 14.14. & 18.19. to go with him to pursue them which had taken Lot, but by the good instructi∣on & Discipline of his house, which he is commended for to haue, according to Gods waies? What made the Reubenites, the Gaddites, and the halfe tribe of Manasses, so willingly to leaue their wiues and Chil∣dren, on the hither side of Iorden, and to go before their brethren against Canaan,Iosh. 1.12. & to bind themselues on paine of death, euery man to bee obedient to Io∣shua, and to go whither so euer hee would send them? Was it not because they knew the Lord, and that Io∣shua was appointed by him,The keeping of Gods orders good for war∣like prouision. 1. King. 10.26. to bee their gouernour? was there euer king prouided more royally of al store of good things, for peace and for war, then Solomon? Was there any at any time, that did more aduaunce Gods ordinances, then he did in the time, hee got all this aboundance? Who went forward more in al pro∣sperity, and in all plenty and prouision for warre, then Vziah, so long as he sought the Lord God, in the dais of Zechariah that vnderstood the vision of God? but when his heart was lifted vp, & he presumed to break the order that God had appointed in his Church, hee became a pittifull leaper, and so for his transgression, lost his great honour, which he had of the Lord.2. Chron. 26. See then, that it is good pollicy, for prouision of good and faithfull souldiers, and all manner of store of muniti∣on, for honorable seruice in war, to folow gods word, and his ordinances in the gouerning of our churches. In vvar it selfe, there is nothing more needfull,Christes disci∣pline best to make soldiers obedient. then faithfull obedience, vvhich vvhere can it be more tru∣ly found, either in Captain, or common souldier, then vvhere the conscience is catechised in the vvaies of the Lorde: vvhich if it bee vvrought by this, in the
things of preparation, it will be also as firme in the ve∣ry time of vvarre it selfe: I vvill not say, but some thing is, and may be done, as the state of the Church novve standeth, for God be thanked, there bee diuers good Preachers: but the question is, of the best and surest pollicie: If now then by a fewe, much good is done, what vvould it be, if euery congregation were rightly informed, and truly reformed? a thousand to one. In warre vnto obedience,Cotage & pa∣tience, by Christes disci∣pline. there is to be linked cou∣rage and patience, courage to beare the assault of the enemy, his force and terror of warlike weapons, and patience to endure all distresses, pennury and scarcity. Now if men be not wel resolued by good knowledge of their dutie, they will flie, for feare of the one, & fall to mutinies, for griefe in the other. Therefore if there be in euery congregation, a worthy teacher, hee will be able so to prepare theit hearts, that they shall stand immooueable, with liuelines of spirit, to goe through the one, and with modest quietnes to go vnder the o∣ther: which thing, is not possible to bee, where the or∣der of the Church, suffereth or fostereth so many vn∣fit and rawe schollers, which haue more neede to bee taught, then to teach others. Againe, the presence of an honest, wise, and graue Minister (the Captaines can tel) doth more then ma∣ny fresh water souldiers do think, especially in extre∣mity, for he shall sweetly comfort them in grief, migh∣tily imbolden them in feare, meekly stay them in rage, and prudently preuent many euils. Hereof was it, that Ioab, that valliant warriour, when hee was beset be∣fore and behinde, by the Aramites and Amonites, ha∣uing deuided his armie,.Sam. 10.9. and set his battaile in araye, could and did vse these words of encouragement: be
strong, and let vs be valiant for our people, and for the cities of our God: and let the Lord doe that which is good in his eies. Hereof was it, that when Saneherib, king of A shur, besiedged Ierusalem with a mightye hoast, and sent his seruantes to raile vpon God, and to make weake the hands of the people:2. Cron. 32. Esay. 36. There was great silence by the seruantes of Hezekiah that godly king, and no man stirred, for he had caused them to be in∣structed in the wayes of the Lord. Last of al,Ordering the Church aright bringeth strength and victory in war. that you might know how good a pollicy it is, for strength & victory in war, to haue the church ordered aright, with the proper offices, and proper works, namely what corage it may worke, and what good successe it may bring in the end, consider well the battel which Abijath the sonne of Rehoboam had with Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat. The first being king of Iuda bringeth into the field, 400000. able figh ting men, the other being king of Israel had 800000. valiant men of war. Abijath setting his men in aray,2. Cron. 13. calleth vnto Israel, and admonisheth them to remem∣ber that they had forsaken their God, and therefore should not prosper: amongest other thinges he com∣meth to this present point: and sayth: Haue you not driuen away the Priests of the Lord, the sonnes of Aa∣ron and the Leuites, and haue made you priestes like the people of other countries, &c. And againe, but we belong to the Lord our God, and haue not forsaken him, and the priests the sonnes of Aaron minister vn∣to the Lord, and the Leuits in their offices, &c. and a∣gaine. Behold, this God is with vs as a Captaine, and his priests with the sounding trumpets to cry alarum against you. O yee children of Israel, fight not against the lord God of your fathers, for you shal not pros∣per.
Loe here what courage, and confidence, the true order of Gods ministerie may breede and bring forth. in the day of a dangerous battel, let vs heare the suc∣cesse. Ieroboam caused an ambush to compasse Iuda behinde, so that the battel was behinde & before: but the men of Iuda cryed vnto the Lord, the priests blew the trumpets, and the people gaue a shoute: and the men of Israel fled before them, and were slaine with an exceeding greatslaughter, so that there fel downe wounded of Ifrael, 500000. of chosen men, and Israel was brought vnder, and Iuda preuailed, because they stayed vpon the lord God of their fathers. Oh happy successe: oh wonderful victory, blessed is that people who can followe this example, to reforme themselues after Gods lawe, and to order the churches with these holy administrations, & sanctified works which God hath appointed, & to leaue the proude, antichristian, prophane, vncleane, lame, blinde offices and officers, of countries estranged from God, and the vnholy & defiled rites and ceremonies of the vnrighteous Ba∣bilon, from whence we are returned vnto the city of the liuing God. Let vs nowe looke vnto the church,The fixt special reason of the Church. and see whe∣ther al be well and safe: namely whether it were not better & safer to haue reformation after Gods word: the Church is called Gods house,1. Tim. 3.15. 1. Cor. 12.28. Cap. 4.1. Heb 5 4. Mat. 25.14. 1. Cor 12.6. 1. Pet 4.10. 1. Cor. 11.23. Act. 20.27. the ministers are Gods stewards, set in by him, and noe man is to take this honor except he be called, and those he putteth in office haue talents, these worke the workes of God, both to speake the oracles of God, and to minister of the abilitie which God ministreth, deliuering that which they receue of the Lord, & teaching the whole counsell of God that the church may obserue whatso∣euer
Christ hath commaunded,Mat. 28.20. 1. Tim. 6.14. & that without spott and vnrebukeable vntil the appearing of our Lord Ie∣sus Christ. When therefore it is already declared, and al men may see that many offices, workes, & rites, are added to that of Christes out of the house of Anti-Christ, & that many of these, want that which Christ hath appointed, and that the house of God is daubed with vntempered morter of mans deuise, with hey & stubble not agreeing with the foundation, and that the church is his truespouse, and with vs is maimed,Christ many waies calleth vs to reforme out churches after his word. in many members, and her nakednes & woundes co∣uered, with the filthy and stinking clouts and patches borowed of that damnable whore of Rome, Christes mortall enemie. I cannot tell howe it can be safe for our churches if they be not reformed, for if we be the temple of God, and he dwelleth amonge vs,2. Cor. 6.26. we are to knowe, that he calleth vs to come out of Babilon, and to seperate our selues, & to touch noe vncleane thing that he may receiue vs: & if we suffer our lord Christ to stand and knocke at our doores,Cantie. 5.2. as it is sayd in the Canticles, til his head be ful of dewe, and his lockes with the droppes of the night: & we as halfe a sleepe and halfe a wake, are loath to goe out of our warme beddes, to put one our clothes, and to foule our feet: it may come to passe, that when we would open vnto him, he wil be gone, and when we shal seeke him, we shal not find him, and call for him, & he not answere: and that counterfeit watchmen, of the wicked Sina∣gogue, shall finde vs, and beat vs, as in times past, and take awaye the vaile of Christ from vs: then will wee thinke, that it had bene better to haue beene zealous, and opened vnto him, that he might haue come in,Reue. 3.20. & supped with vs, and we with him.
To leaue out all other thinges,Christs orders, taught in the gospel,Christs church gouernment, best for vnitie and honour of the ministery. especially, because they are partly contained in the former reasons: there are two things, that men marueilously stand vpon, for the vpholding of this Antichristian lordlines, and v∣surpation of Church gouernment: the dignitie of the Ministery, and the vnity of the Church: two thinges of very great waight, whereof the one is so great, that euery minister ought to looke very carefully to it, stu∣dying to shew himselfe approoued, a workeman that needeth not to bee ashamed,2. Tim. 2.15. Titus 2.15. deuiding the worde of truth aright: speaking, exhorting, and rebuking withal authority: the other is such, that if it be not looked vn∣to, the contrary thereof, is the ruine and downfall of the Church,Oala. 5.15. as it is written: if you bite and deuoure one another, take heed least you be consumed, one of another. Now say they, if there were not L.Bb. the pore ministers would be borne downe, and made no account of, but they are a countenaunce and defence vnto them, and whereas, euery one would be maister, and doe as they list, by them, men are kept in awe, and things are made quiet: therefore you know not what you do, when you go about to pull them down. Sure∣ly, a goodly shew at the first sight, but not such as will abide the breath of God. Is not Christ sufficient, that hath promised to be with his seruants vnto the worlds end, to countenance and defend his ministery, as wel as he did three hundreth yeares together, when al the power of earthly authoritie was against it, and shall he need now a deuise which hee long since forbad: say∣ing, it shall not beso with you, but he that will be gre∣test, let him be your seruant,Luke 22.25. especially, when hee hath reared vp the christian magistrate, to bee a nurse-mo∣ther to his church, and to defend all the ministers for
well doing,be best for the churches safty. as she doth all other subiectes in their cal∣lings: and is not Christ by his owne order, as wel able to keepe his church in vnity, as by that which hee ab∣horred: and may not also the ciuill sword (if need re∣quire) helpe to bridle the insolent and vnruly? But in very deed, these men are greatly deceiued, who thinke, that either vnity, or good ministers, are furthered by their lordships: for as their callinges are not of God, so they countenance such as are like them selues, corrupt offices and workes, Cathedrall chur∣ches, non-residence, pluralities, dumb Idoll ministers, &c. These, if they subscribe, and shewe them selues conformable, though they slay neuer fo many soules, shall be borne out and countenaunced to the vtmost. I would we had not too lamentable experience: what a countenance is this? that though a man liue neuerso honestly-preach Christ neuer so soundly, wisely, and profitably, yet if he answere not their expectation, in that bastardly gouernement, and canonicall obedi∣ence, he shall be as much regarded, as though he were the vilest man aliue: and I would it were not true, that very wicked men are maintained, while good men are put out, and can any thing bee more to the contempt of the Ministery & rent of the church, and making of seisme, then when men are quiet, and follow their cal∣ling, with great care of the peace of the church, they should be called forth to subscribe, to humain consti∣tutions, as vnto the boke of God: & without due time of examination, consideration, & resolution, to be su∣spended or depriued, and tossed from court to court, what can make the gospel more hated, then to see bad fellows, & dumb Idols to be set free, with credite and commendacion, & they that haue woon many to the
feare of God,English books, seene & allowed, & duty to her Maiesty, by diligent prea∣ching: euen against the law of God and man, to be in∣tangled with troubles, torne and turmoiled with di∣uers molestations. And is this the fruit of vnity, that is pretended? to beginne the quarrell with the quiet, and to pursue it with all violence, to make them, who in towne and country were very greatly at vnity, tooke sweet coun∣sell togither, for the profiting of the church, to be now sundred as strangers? O Lord deliuer my soule from such honour and vnitie, and deliuer thy pore seruants from such bondage and contempt, and thy Churches from such reptoches and disturbance. But if these disorders were remooued, and Christs Discipline planted, where were all these mischiefes? they would be throwen into the bottome of the Sea: then would be the glory and beauty of the ministery, in the true worke of euery calling, and the power of the spirit,Christs Discip. taketh away the causeof conten∣tion, &c. which accompanieth the same: then would be the vnity of the Church, when their causes of con∣tention should be taken away, and the house of God, ioyned and built with the right stuffe & gold of God, and Gods grace in the middest of it. Then should the Papist quaile, to see the glory of Christes kingdome: then should the Annabaptist waile, that he hath abu∣sed Gods people: Then should the Atheist be forced to stand amazed, at the woonderfull brightnes of the chast and holy spouse of God, looking forth, as the morning,Cantic. 6.9. faire as the moone, pure as the sunne, terri∣ble, as an army with banners: For this I hope, all de∣uines will grant me,All disorder & scisme, by brea∣king Christs orders. that there neuer was, or can be in the church, by the members thereof, any dishonour, scisme, disorder, or disquietnes, but by the breach of
the law, and order of Christ: whereof,teach Christs discip. for our sasty in all the com∣plaints of Gods spirite, you shall finde these, and such like phrases. Diuisions and discensions,Rom. 16.7. 1. Cor. 11.18.22. 2. Thes. 3.14. Gal. 16.16 cap. 1.7.5.8 Math. 15.6.9. contrary to the doctrine ye haue receiued. I haue receiued of the Lorde, that which I also deliuered vnto you. With∣draw your selues from euery brother, that walketh in ordinatly, and not after the instruction which hee re∣ceiued of vs. As many as walke acording to this rule, peace shalbe vppon them.2. Tim. 4.3. It is not the perswasion of him that calleth you,Reuel. 3.14.20 you haue made the commaun∣dement of God of no authority by your traditions: & such like: therefore I may boldely holde,Iude. 3.4. that Christs Church gouernement is best for the Church euerie way, and namely for the honour and vnitie thereof. And here I most humbly beseech the reuerend fa∣thers, by the mercies of God our father,An humble speech to the Bb. by the conso∣lation which is in Christ lesus our Sauiour, & by the fellowship of the spirit, by whom we be renewed, set∣ting apart, al affection to themselues, and faction with others, in a simple and single eie, to consider these few things. First, that seeing by themselues, in their pub∣like sermons, and writings, and other bookes, set forth with authority and priuilege: The seekers of reforma∣tion, may learne,Sermons of Thomas, B. of Lincoine pag. 5 that the gouernement and direction by Gods worde, preuaileth more, than any deuise of man: and that there are infinite examples, of vnarmed men, who obeying gods commandements, haue sca∣tered the most puissant armies of the infidels,Antimartinus page 26. and of most mightie Emperors, who for mingling somtime, and sometime chaunging the precepts of the Lorde, with their inuentions, haue com vnder most vile bon∣dage: And yt wher the people are not taught, they can not serue God, the Prince is not so dutifully obeied,
the rebellion in the North is proofe of that.D. Some in his treatise of deci∣ding certaine questions. pa. 8 D. Bilson in his defence of the Queenes supre∣macy part 2. pag. 233. And that this authority which you haue, was not ordained by the cōmandement of Christ, for his Apostles, but by sufferance of other Bb. and that onely with this prero∣gatiue, that in all doubtes of doctrine or discipline Archbb. and patriarks might assemble the rest of their brethren, or consult them with letters, & see that ob. serued which the most part of them determined.Luther on 1. Pet. 5. ver. 2. So that the Bishops are greater, then Ministers or Elders, rather by custome, then by any truth of the Lords ap∣pointment, and ought to gouerne the church in com∣mon,M. Nowelin his Catechisme fol. 40 B. and that there is described out of Gods worde, a certaine order of gouernance and forme of Ecclesia∣stical discipline, which ought to be obserued in euery Church, if it be well ordered: which by desire of im∣punitie, and libertie to sin, is long since decayed. And seeing we haue most plainely and perfectlie teaching, the whole disciplin out of the word of god, & ancient writers, and Cannons of the Church, translated into the English tongue. Peter Martirs Common-places, Caluins-Institutions, Bullingers Decads, Bezaes con∣fessions, the Apoligie of the Protestants of Fraunce, and diuers others: Whereof, some I haue seene lying openly to be read in some of your gret chambers, some are commanded to bee studied, by the vnlearned mi∣nistery,Keeping out of Christs Discr∣pline, litle com∣fort to the Bb. and all printed with publike allowance. Here I say, you are to consider, whether it be equal and iust, for you to do contrary to your doctrine: to punish o∣thers for seeking humbly, that reformation in Disci∣pline, which by your meanes, they haue learned to be according to Gods worde. or what comfort you can haue in your consciences, (if God should but a little call you to account) to stand so stiffe for that, you can∣not
but confesse to bee of mans custome, against that which was of Christs institution. And lastly, whether you can be sayd to haue a care of the safety of her Ma∣jestie, and the good florishing estate of this land, espe∣cially now, when God calleth vs vnto repentance and reformation by many troubles, when you do so aeger∣ly fight for that, which made the mightie Emperors, vile slaues, and that against such a thing, as made the naked men great conquerours. Secondly, seeing that nowe thirtie yeares, taking vpon you, the gouerning of all the Churches in Eng∣land, you haue put out more godly,Litle good in 30. yeares by all our Bb. gouer∣ning. learned, and zea∣lous Ministers, for your owne traditions: then you haue remooued, of other vnfit and vngodly, for brea∣king Gods commaundements: and that S. Paule ha∣uing but a while preached at Creta, an Island of an hundreth Cities, left Titus there after his departure, to set all things in order, and namely, a learned ministery in euery Citie,Titus 2.5. cap. 3.12. (and that without helpe of the ciuill Magistrate) appointing him to staye but till winter, and then to come to him to Nicapolis. Consider I be∣seech you, that in so many winters and summers, in this little Island, you haue done so little good, and cry out still, it is impossible to haue a learned Ministerie, when you haue the most renowned Prince in the world for religion, to backe you with ciuill power and countenance. As it is to her immortall fame, to giue you this libertie & authority, thinking it not to much to aduanceyou to great dignity and honour: so, wey with your selues, what may bee thought of you, that haue so meanely discharged the great trust commit∣ted vnto you. Thirdly, where you saye, that the godly seekers of
reformation,The Bb. disturbers The godly see∣kers of reforma∣tion, contend not for trifies. contend about trifles, (which is not so) and that they ought not for small matters, to disturbe the peace of the Church, and prouoke her Maiestie. Consider I pray you: whether that, when you doe so earnestly stand to maintaine them, and are not as ear∣nest against the greater offences, suffering thousands of soules to perish, by ignorant ministers and non-re∣sidents, you tithe not mint, and leaue out the waigh∣tie matters of the law, and whether you ought not for the peace and good of the Church, to yeeld to your brethren,Gen. 13.8.9. in that you count smal matters (as Abraham did to Lot) especially, seing youcannot deny, but that they seek that which God commandeth, & refuse that which is of mans ordinance, & that, not as new fang∣led heads, and singular, but with the agreement and consent of most approoued, both olde and new wri∣ters, and as most reformed Churches haue also deter∣mined and practised. Consider I beseech you here∣in, whether the word of God went from you,1. Cor. 14.36. or came onely vnto you, and that when in so many years, you haue found these thinges to be inconuenient,The Bb. make thēselues slaues to their owne orders. it vvere not your duty, to do as the Apostle saith, that in lawful things, which were not profitable, he would not bee brought in subiection vnto any thing,1. Cor. 6.12. which while you neglect: Consider I pray you, whether it bee not you, that disturbe the peace of the Church, and pro∣uoke the good and peaceable minde of our gracious Soueraigne, against your brethen, and that you haue not neede to take heede, least the maister of the house come suddenly vpon you, and find you beating your fellows,Math. 24.49. and seperate you, &c. Lastly, wheras you mistrust some Machiauilian plot, by deepe sleights, to maintaine this contention, for
the bringing forth of diuers mischiefs,Admonition to the people of Eug by T.C. page. 155. Antimartin. page 24.25. noysome to re∣ligion and godlines, and hurtfull to your selues. Con∣sider I beseeche you, whether it bee not in you to pre∣uent it: For if you would leaue discountenauncing of your brethren, for that which you call small matters, and ioyne with them in humble suite to her Maiestie,It is in the Bb. to remedy ma∣ny mischiefs. to take away all the stumbling blocks of offence, or at least wise, obtaine some godly toleration, if you wold not leaue your brethren, nay oppose your selues, ex¦professo, against them, and haue your eares so open to popish information, and malicious accusation, and force them by oth, to be their owne accusers.Luke. 6.26. Yf you could see what it is, to bee so highly commended, by open recusants, and desperate Atheists, and that the worser sort of people, vnder the shadowe of your pro∣ceedings, begin to make an head, and to bee strong a∣gainst the gospell, and the sincere professors thereof: you might easily cut in sunder, and breake to powder, all the pollitike reaches which you feare: For what is it, that the ioyned labours of faithfull brethren might not do? But when you make light of these things, wey with your selues I pray you, whether you haue not great cause to suspect, your own inconsiderat doings, and to feare, if God preuent it not, your dealing with your brethren (as Eliab with Dauid) be not volunta∣ry instruments of your own ouerthrow,1. Sam. 17.28. and of the go∣spell, while you weaken your selues, by cutting of frō you, your faithfull brethren, by vniust seperation, and that (which many men bewaile, when they beholde the increase of your giftes, and other your dealinges) whither it be not fulfilledin you, which is prophecied against them that teach the feare of God by mens pre∣ceptes, namely, a strange worke and a woonder: The
wisedome of the wise shal perish,Esay. 29.13.14 &c. I pray God giue vs all grace, that we be not wayward conceited, and o∣piniate by contention & vaine glory, prouoking one another, and enuying one another, but that our care may be vnited to tender the yong lambes, for whome Christ Iesus our Lord and Sauiour, did shed his most precious bloud. Seeing then,The end of the speciall reasons. that the Discipline of Christ, doth most properly teach euery soule to execute and prac∣tise good lawes, both for the constant doctrine, conti∣nually taught, & also for the Eldership being at hand, without charge of penaunce, reforming the disobe di∣ent, and that the other gouernment ministreth lesse a∣ble men, and practiseth the censures a far of, by a per∣son vnfit, with chaunge of penaunce, and that wicked men, loue this, and hate that, and that this kepeth out good men, and that helpeth them in: seing, by the or∣ders of Christ, the Queenes safty is best prouided for, being a thing of obedience vnto prosperity: and by it, al the helpes of Antichrist be remooued, and the other orders, haue alwais hurt the lawfull authority of prin∣ces, and to be chiefe B. in one countrey, is all one, as to be chief Bishop in one Empire, and these haue hurt kings, as well as our Popes the Emperour: and that by the common law and these offices, there is a hope left, for the deadliest enemy to her Maiesty to enter in, & that papists (who in conscience can neuer be true, nor by rewards bee made faithfull) are fit for such offices, to couer themselues and others, that for lacke of tea∣ching, and by licenses, the breed of Papists is not hin∣dred, neither can the doubtfull be euery where resol∣ued, and that Christs lawes do take away all these, and make faithfull and obedient subiects, keeping out the
recusants, and bewraying the Iesuits, and that the ill orders do hardly intreat the doers of such good works and that Christs Discipline, doth giue all kings their iust titles, prerogatiues, and dignities ouer all persons in their dominions, and that in all causes, keeping out al ignorant, wicked, and flattering men, making strong yt league with christian Princes, to her immortal fame, and feare to the enemy, seeing that by this holy disci∣pline of GOD, the Nobility and Comminalty haue their right: are freed from diuers wrongs and distur∣bances, receiuing comfort to themselues, & their chil∣dren, being terrible to the wicked, & easie to the god∣ly: seeing that by Discipline, there can be no feare of rebellion, but a sure confirmation of peace, when all hope shall be taken away from the knowne aduersary of recouering strength in this Lande, beholding the Lords hand to prosper this worke, and that the Lord shal not be prouoked against vs, for our disobedience: and that by this, the wealth and honour of the realme are increased, and contentions, and brawles, and vn∣necessary pleas preuented and alaied: & that idle men, of all sorts, might be set in order, and poore men great∣ly comforted. Seeing that this maketh best for war, as in the preparation to preuent all seducers of the du∣tiful subiect, and by instruction, to make men resolute, in the right, so that they wil not be drawen after great or small, nor murmure at any paines, or charges reaso∣nable, but be alwaies willing, ready, and cheerefull to serue her Maiesty: and that GOD hath giuen them great store of munition, and faithfull souldiers, who followed his ordinaunce, and punished the contrary, and that in the war it selfe, it maketh courage to fight, and patience to beare extremities, vnited to iust obe∣dience
of the Magistrate,Church-gouerne. after gods word making Princes in time of danger bold and confident, and in the end victorious. Lastly, seeing that Christ hath ordained all manner of offices and workes of his Church, for the right or∣dering and establishing thereof: and therefore it is vn∣necessary, and an vngodly thing, prouoking Gods an∣ger to defile it with the things of Antichrist, and that Christ doth call vs to repentaunce, and that hee hath promised sufficiently to defend his Church in honour and vnity, by his owne order and meanes by him ap∣pointed, and hath added for that purpose, the ciuill Magistrate, and that by these disorders, all dishonor to the good Ministerie, and disturbaunce to the Church hath bene broched, and neuer any dishonor, confusi∣on, or disquietnes, did or can come to the Church, by the members thereof, but by violating the sacred lawe of Christ. I beseech, and humbly mooue your honors to consider, whether it be not the best and surest polli∣cie, for our estate in England, to reforme all disorders after the worde of God, and to set vp that Church go∣uernment which Christ hath ordeined, and the Apo∣stles practised and no other. Nowe,The last proofe taken from the iudgement of Christ. if in ciuill pollicie, all that I sayd were no∣thing, (which I am verily perswaded is not so) yet vn∣to Christians, there is further matter, and more reason for vpholding of that discipline which God ordained For we by profession (if wee bee not counterfeit) by beliefe also of the heart,Rom. 10.9. 1. Tim. 4.8. looke not onely to haue pro∣mises of this life,2. Cor. 5.10. by Christ our Lord and sauiour, but also of the life to come, and do know that we shall all appeare before the seat of Christ,Act. 10.42. who shall come a∣gaine to take account of his seruants, & of euery man,Rom. 2.6. and render vnto euery one according to the workes
which he hath done in his body, either good or bad,is best against the great day. and that these are to bee iudged by the lawe of God,Iam. 4.12.& not of man: Therefore, when we know these things are the commaundements of God,1. Cor. 14.37. Rom. 16.26. 1. Tim. 1.9.10 11. Gal. 5.21. and that such as continue obstinate in the breach thereof, without re∣pentance, shall not inherite the kingdome of heauen: it were not good pollicy for vs to obtain a litle peace, wealth, honour, and ease in this world,Luke. 16.25. Rom. 2.9. 1 Cor. 9.25.27. to purchase al miserie, disquietnes, anguishe, shame and torment in the world to com, for loue of our bodies, to leese both body and soule: for an earthly crowne, to leese a hea∣uenlie,Heb. 11.25. for the pleasures of sin for a season,2. Cor. 4.17. to leese the pleasures of the righteous God for euer, and to auoyd a light and momentany affliction among men, to leese an eternall & exceeding waight of glory:Reuel. 6.15.16.17. when kings of the earth, great men, rich men, and the chiefe Cap∣taines, the mighty men, and euery bond man, and free man shall couet to hide them selues in the great and terrible day from the lambe: when hee that hath not on the wedding garment shall be speechlesse,Math. 22.12. cap. 25.26.28. cap. 24.48. Reuel. 19.20. and the euill seruant and slothfull, shall haue his tallent taken from him, and such as thinke he will deferre his com∣ming, and begin to smite his fellowes, and eat & drink with the drunken, shall bee cut off and cast into vtter darkenes: when the beast and the false Prophet shall be taken & cast aliue into the lake of fire, burning with brimstone, and all vncleane thinges whatsoeuer,cap. 21.10.27. wor∣keth abhomination or lies,cap. 22.18. shal be kept out of the ho∣ly and heauenly Ierusalem, and they that adde or take away from Gods booke:2. Thes. 1.7. shall haue the plagues there∣in written, and leese their part in the booke of life, when the lord Iesus shal shew himselfe from heauen, with his mighty angels, in flaming fire, rendering ven∣geance
vnto them that do not know God, and which obey not the gospell of our Lord Iesus Christ, which shall be punished with euerlasting perdition, from the presence of the Lord, & the glory of his power, when he shal come to be glorified in his saints, & to be made marueilous in thē that beleeue:Luke. 16.29. Math. 17.5. then shall it be found the best and surest pollicy, to haue heard Moses & the prophets,Ephes. 2.20. ye beloued son of god: then shal it be known that the temple of the Lord is built vpon the founda∣tion of the apostles & prophets,cap. 4.11.12.13. Iesus Christ being the chief corner stone: and that he hath giuen gifts for the gathering together of the saints, for the worke of the ministery, & for the edification of the body of Christ, til we all meet togither, in the vnity of faith, and know∣ledge of the soone of God vnto a perfect man, and vn∣to the measure of the age of the fulnes of Christ. Nowe,The second part of ye booke answering the obiection, of prouision for the learned mi∣nisterie. while wee of good and single meaning, o∣pen the necessitie of reformation, other which neuer peraduenture deserued any thing of the Common∣wealth, stand gaping to run away with the spoiles, of such goods as may bee well bestowed, vpon the great need of many churches. I haue thought good there∣fore, partly, because it may appeare, that in this stile, I shout not against any mans person, or enuy or desire his goods: and partly, because it seemeth amongest many, to be a great obiection: how sufficient liuings should arise,How liuing may be had for a leathed mini∣stery is a great obiection for the maintenaunce of a learned Mini∣sterie: and especially, that it is high time to consider of it, before that by leasing, chopping, and changing of such things as might supply the want, it be made in deed a hard matter, which as yet, may very well and easily be done. I haue thought good (I say) and apper∣taining to this treatise, to shew a way how, the Chur∣ches,
may haue sufficient liuing for an able ministery, wherin as in the rest: I only make an humble motion, & as it were, the light opening of a window, put your wisedomes in minde of this thing, which I take to bee one principall matter, worthy consideration, know∣ing that with farre more deepnes of iudgement, and soundnes of counsell, you are able to enlarge, either where it wanteth, or to cut of where it aboundeth. Two thinges in this, I hope I shall not neede to stand vppon, that is, first to shewe that there are many mean liuings for ministers, partly by impropriations, and partly by the littlenes or situation of the parishes,Many means liuings for mi∣nisters. for this is in the knowledge of al men very cleare, that there are diuers liuinges, that are not worth aboue 20. markes yearly, some twenty pounds, which come no∣thing neer that competency, that were fit for the man of God: who in this last age, not hauing gifts extraor∣dinary, is driuen to study much, and thereby his char∣ges be increased, by buying of books and order of di∣et & some thing for the decensy of that calling, would be considered in the comlines of aparrell and house∣holde, that it bee not contemptible, and lastly,1. Tim. 3.2. it is re∣quired, that he should keepe hospitallity, all which, by many degrees cannot come so low as twenty marks or twenty pound, as if we looke vpon the proportion of Gods prouision vnder the law, which the holy Ghost teacheth to be our paterne 1. Cor. 9.8.9.10.Ministesought to haue very good maintai∣nance. Num. 38. & 28 it may ap∣peare: there shall wee find, that for the maintenaunce of the Ministerie, they had not onely the tenthes and conuenient dwelling places, but euen all the first fruites, and of all offeringes of diuers sortes, and they vvere bound to three feastes euerye yeare, (be∣sides euery newe moone and Sabbaoth) wherein e∣uery
male was to appeare before the Lorde,How a learned ministery may haue Deut. 15. & 16 & 12 Leuit. 23. but hee might not come emptie: yetin al these, and many mo charges, they prospered, though it seemed neuer so chargeable, so long as they willingly serued God af∣ter his order, and for so much as our land, by the bles∣sing of God, may well be accounted among the fertile and rich soiles of the world: I hope we are not so vn∣gratefull, as to recompence God, with a vile and base entertainement of his seruaunts, vnderstanding very well,1. Cor. 4.11. that it is a small matter, that the Minister should reape carnall things of them, vpon whome they sowe spirituall things. The other thing, which I trust I shall not neede to stand vppon is this: that seeing there is neede, and that very great, that the ministery should be better pro uided for: It were the dutie of the Common wealth, to conuert those thinges (which by their foundation were first ment and ordained for the seruice of God,The Church li∣uings are to be bestowed one the ministers. and now haue bene, and are in the opinion of al men bestowed to that vse) in the time of reformation, shuld be kept for that very vse, that the reforming of things be not thought rather a bait to feede our bellies, then to proceed of any godly zeale, or loue of religion, for who would not thinke it a plain mockery of God, and a scorne of godlines, that men going about to beauti∣fie the Church, should rob and ransacke the same: and pretending to further the seruice of God, should giue occasion to prophaneit? This were the most diuelish pollicy in the world, and the onely ingen almost, to o∣uerthrow both Prince and people: For God saith, if men offer the blinde and the lame vnto a prince,Mal. 1.7. cap 3.9. hee would not be content, nor accept the person, and shal we thinke that God can put it vp at our handes, if the
things of his holines should be lightly regarded,Sufficient maintenance. & that his embassadours should bee so spitefully shauen,2. Cor. 5.10. 2. Sam. 10.4. and their coates cut off to the middle. No, no: hee will not take it in good part: for in the zeale of his wrathfull in∣dignation, hee pronounceth such men accursed,Hag. 1.9.10. with a curse, because they haue spoiled him, and maketh the heauen ouer them to stay it selfe from dew, & the earth to stay her fruit, because his house lieth wast. I hope ra∣ther we will hearken vnto Solomon, who saith: Honour the Lord with thy riches,Prouerb. 3.9. and with the first fruites of all thine increase: so shall thy barnes be filled with aboun∣dance, and thy presses shall burst with newe wine. Be it far from vs in so cleare light of the gospel, we should be flower in this duty, then our forefathers, who did they know not what. The matter then I will stand vpon, is the thing which may thus be imployed, what it is, and how it is to be or∣dered: The first point what it is, may partly bee vnder∣stood by that which is already spoken:VVhat may scrue to make sufficient li∣uing for a lear∣ned ministery in England. for I meane the Archbb. and L.Bb. liuings, and al the Cathedral chur∣ches, houses and lands, & whatsoeuer profits adioyned excepting the free schools, & alms houses, or such like, which vnto some of them belong. The nature of refor∣mation, as may appeare by that which is already decla∣red, and the good of our land requireth, that these dig∣nities or spirituall promotions, which are not of Gods planting, should be pulled vp by the rootes, & the men of those places (such as are fit for learning and reuerend behauior) applied and tied to some congregation, where they should labor to feed soules: then would there be many a faire pallace voyd of a maister, and goodly hou∣ses, churches, and lands voyd of owners. Here I take it to bee the duty of the common wealth to keepe these
liuings still for the maintenance of the Ministery, seeing there is a very great need of them, and to chaunge one∣lie the order and manner of the applying: that whereas before they serued to vpholde a lordly pompe, idlenes and brauerie in some fewe: they might nowe by a wise and godly distribution, be communicated vnto many: for the benefite of many Churches. The lands, houses, and pallaces may be sould, and the money bestowed to the redeeming of impropriations and increase of small liuings: and surely, this is of all other most equall, that where the people do pay their tenthes vnder the name and proprietie of the Churches vse, they should bee so applied indeede. And againe: seeing the corruption of our time, hath made impropriations, as fee simple landes, they which haue reasonable recompence for the value of them they possesse, should by no meanes thinke them selues iniured. It is no reason that seeing the people do already stand burdened with such a great charge, that they should bee oppressed with a second, especially when there is a meanes to releeue them. And it is against all conscience, that the Ministerie should be left without iustand comely prouision & maintenance. But of all other,Forslow not the time till the Bb. and Cathedrall Prelates haue wasted all. it were most vnvvise, and vngodly, to foreslowe the occasion, especially when the Common∣wealth was neuer so rich, by yearely fruits and commo∣dities. And it is yet more horrible wickednes, that pri∣uate men (although peraduenture some of them haue done seruice) should preuent the Church, and commit so great sacriledge. For if they deserue, there is sufficient besides to reward them. There is no good Christian, or man, either of valure for fortitude, and wisedome, or of estimation for religion and honestye, or of any good name for iustice and clemency, can bee of so base and
seruile a mind, as to grope after the spoile and hauocke of the Churche, or to suffer himselfe to bee rewarded with those goodes, which should by all reason and con∣science,A good man will not enrich himselfe, with that which should serue to the soule bene∣fit of many. be imployed to the seruice and immediate ho∣nour of almightie God. But I hope these speaches shall not neede, and that the example of Nehemiah that ho∣nourable and zealous Prince, will bee followed in this case, he hauing the feare of God before his eies, being twelue yeares gouernour ouer the people that returned from Babell:Nehe. 5.10.14. when his labour was to builde the wall of Ierusalem, and to set vppe the puritie of religion: that hee might giue good example to the Princes and Ru∣lers, and that the people might no way bee ouer char∣ged, that so the businesse of the Lord might go cheare∣fully and prosperouslie forward, as it did indeede. Hee not onely tooke nothing to him, which was due vnto him, as hee was chiefe Gouernour, but also spent of that which he had of his ovvne, for the common charges of the wall, and fedde many at his table, lent his money to the poore, redeemed them that vvere captiue, and cau∣sed his seruaunts to doe the like in their place, and that all of them came to helpe forvvard the vvorke. The ex∣ample of Iehoash King of Iuda, is very memorable for this purpose,2. Kings 12. when the priests had neglected the repay∣ring of the decaied places of the Temple (notwithstan∣ding the Kings commandement) till the three & twen∣tieth yeare of his raigne. The charge and money for that businesse vvas committed to others, who vvere so farre from gaining by it, that they shewed such faith∣fulnesse in doing of it, that it was not thought needfull that they should giue any accounts of their dooing. If euer it please GOD to giue reformation amongest vs, I pray God that this mercy in framing of the heartes of
al sortes and degrees, after the good of these examples, may bee also a blessing vpon vs, as I hope that through his tender compassion and bounty it will. Now as great a matter standeth in the second point, how this shalbe ordered: one saith that it would be ve∣ry good, that it should be all, and all the other church li∣uings likewise taken out of the ministers hands, and that they should haue their seuerall pensions or stipends of a reasonable sort,To put al the ministers to their pensions were not good. for this saith he, would be easiest and quietest, so that they should be troubled with nothing, but to follow their bookes, and looke to their charge: if it might be so indeed, as these words do roundly beare vs in hand in very good shew, it were the best, and eue∣rie minister would be glad of the quietest way, and most benefit to the church. Another peraduenture is of a di∣uers mind, & thinketh it very inconuenient, especially at this time, when there is a settled prouision for most pla∣ces, and that by such a meanes, as is no great trouble to the minister, that wil not wilfully be a loyterer. It is bet∣ter to keepe a good way which we haue, then to follow a new, and change for the worse: and truly this latter, a∣greeth most with pollicy for the state, and with benefite for the church: for the state, it is found a point of tryed policy to alter as few things as may be, (especially when they are good and well) wherein the people haue had a long custome or interest, for this is a way vnto murmu∣rings, discontentment, stirs and sedition, and the people will quickly suspect, that for the priuate gaine of some fewe, such thinges are inuented, when they see plainly that it is very well already. I doubt it will bee found a hard measure to some, an vnluckie peece of worke to begin, heauy in the carriage, and a day of blacknes vnto posteritie. Secondly, there must bee offices erected and
augmented, and a great many men must haue leases or some other authoritie and office to gather the fruits: and what will come of this (which requireth many deuices) a man cannot tell at the first fight, neither shall he see all the mischiefs till it be practised: but this must needs fall out, that many men for gathering the fruites, for recea∣uing and paying againe, must haue a fleece, and so the church shalbe shortned & shorne of her right, by a need∣les occupation: when the people shal pay peraduenture well the more, for he that hireth must liue by it: againe, when the right & property is out of the churches hold: it may offer occasion in time, that it shall bee taken away altogeather, and then there will be iniury to the church and oppression of the people. But the other is euery way better: First, it is easier to be done when there remaineth no more but the due ex∣aminations of the liuinges,The ready way to prouide for ministers. and to redeeme the impro∣priations, and to augment the smaller liuings: it is with∣out all suspicion, for we see the practise, we know it to be good, and neede not feare any ill to come of it: and it is more iust, for then the whole liuing goeth that waye it should, and the people wil the better away with it, part∣lye, because they see it is bestowed according to their mind, & partly, because they are likely to be better vsed and the minister for his part shall be better able to keepe hospitality, & to feed the pore by the vse of such things as arise by that meanes, and that which is no small com∣modity, hee may let out part or all, as hee shall find most for his ease, and best for his profite, and if there doe any benefit arise, this openeth the doore to him, wheras the other way penneth him in to one certaine place, bee it good or be it bad: and it may be, that his neighbours of good will for his ease, will gather his fruits for him, and
he shal saue al, that by the other way should be lost, both to him and the people: Briefly, the more one looketh in the comparison of these two wais, the more he shal per∣ceiue, that the order nowe established, is the best: if the impropriations were redeemed, and the small liuinges increased. Now for the furthering of this good worke, there are two things to be added, which will helpe this matter very well:Vniting of smal liuings one help to the ministery First, the vniting of diuers little pari∣shes in one, a thing of common practise, out of which commeth this commodity, the liuing is increased: and by the number of the people, there are the more wise men to bee chosen for Ecclesiasticall officers: and the church shal be the more cumly, and as easily taught in a maner.Benefices with∣out cure may be some helpe, vni∣ted to the smal∣ler liuinges. The next is, there are certaine thinges scattered heere and there without cure, these may bee ioyned to helpe the smaller liuings. Then as touching the impropriations: in some there is great ease,Resigning and redeeming of Impropriations by Bb. & Ca∣thedrall liuings wil be a good meanes to main taine a learned ministery. & in some there is no great hardnes. Those which be in L. Bb. hands, and pertaining to these great churches, may easily be redeemed, if they be sent from whence they came: there need be no charge: and I dout not, but the third part will bee thus redeemed: but if there bee any in the Queenes possession, or of any tem∣porall man, or in Colledges, the landes and houses and other temporalities of the L.Bb. and other great Chur∣ches may be imployed to redeeme them: If the conside∣ration and account of these things, bee committed to wise and godly men, inhabiting in euery shire,Iosh. 18.4. vvhere such liuings & churches are (as Ioshua appointed 3. of euery tribe to walke through ye land to describe it) it wil easily be found out, that ye liuing of the ministery will be brought to a good and cumly measure: and that euery Church would haue at the least two hundreth markes
yearly for the Pastour and teacher, and some aboue two hundred pound,Tith wood me dowe, &c. might helpe in some places. which might also bee holpen in some places by tithe wood and medowe, and a greater sise of pasture, where such things are either not paied, or not according to the value of the tenths by much. But here groweth a question:The overplus of Bb. and Ca∣thedral liuinges may pay first fruites, tenthes, subsidies &c. What if the L.Bb. and the Cathedrall churches come to more then will serue for the redeeming of the impropriations, or lesse: If more, (as I am verely perswaded it will) it may serue to recompence the wonted first fruites and tenthes, which were from these seas and churches, it may serue to erect in all shires, a Lecture of al sciences, that such as cannot put their sonnes to Cambridge and Oxford, may haue them in the free Schooles, and after by those Lectures brought through all arts: which would greatly increase learned and wise men in this land, and make a florishing time. But if it should fall short of our reckoning,If Bb. and Ca∣thedrall liuings be too little: a general beneuo lence will make it vp. there is yet an easie helpe, that is, a free beneuolence, and as it were an offring of all sortes of people, yong and old through this land: this way hath the church of God beene verie much holpen and aduanced, and who is it that will not be willing to further such a worthy, honorable and ho∣ly worke. In the time of Moses,Exod. 36.5.6. when hee built the Ta∣bernacle, & made the altars & priests garments,Our for fathers liberal in gi∣uinge to the Church. things of a wonderfull great charge, for gold, siluer, silke, preti∣ous stones, incense and all costly thinges: The people came so willingly, and offered so plentifully, that there was to much, so that Moses proclaimed that they shuld offer no more.2. Chron. 31.4. And when Hezekiah commaunded to bring a part to the priests and leuites, to incourage them in the lawe, they brought in such abundance, that they did eat and were filled, and yet there remained plentie
in heapes that they had made. And in Dauids time for the building of the Temple,1. Chron. 29.6. the Princes of the families, and the Princes of the tribes of Israell, and the captains of thousandes, and of hundrethes, with the rulers of the kings worke, offered willingly, and gaue for the house of God, fiue thousand talents of golde, and 10000. pee∣ces, & 10000. talents of siluer, 18000. talents of brasse, 100000. talents of Iron, and they with whom precious stones were found, gaue them to the treasure: and the people reioyced when they offered willingly, for they offered willingly vnto the Lord, with a perfect hart, and Dauid the king also reioyced with great ioy. And there is no reason to feare the contrary in our time, of which it is written: the people shall offer willingly in the time of the assembly.Psalm. 110.3. I doubt not therefore of Gods mercie and blessing, if wee were as forward to go about such a matter, with singlenes of heart, and simplicity of Godly wisedome, and would follow after it with earnestnes of zeale, and painfulnes of knowledge, forgetting our own ease, pleasure, wealth and will, to preferre the true wor∣ship of God, the benefite of our soules, the glory of the Gospell of Iesus Christ, vnto the praise of God the fa∣ther, and this would bee the glory of our land. For thus speaketh God vnto his owne people, whom he honou∣reth with his word. Bring ye all the tithes into the store∣house,Mal. 3.10. that there may be meat in my house, and prooue me nowe herewith, if I will not open the windowes of heauen vnto you, saith the Lord of hoastes, if I will not open the windows of heauen vnto you, and power you out a blessing without measure, & I will rebuke the de∣uourer for your sakes: and he shall not destroy the fruit of your ground, neither shall your vine be barren in the field, saith the Lord of hoasts.
If I should stay here, I might be accused either of vn∣justice or cruelty, of vniustice, bicaus I haue but sleight∣ly spoken of her Majesties due, in the first fruits, tenths, and subsidie of the Cleargy (as they call it) and of pre∣sentations neuer a word. The first of these is the greatest doubt: for if the common wealth stand in need (as it is likely in this troublesome time) then there is good rea∣son, that al men help without any priuiledge, in asmuch as euery one hath part of the benefit & comfort, other∣wise, I am perswaded that the royall and christian heart of her Majesty, would as willingly part from it, and e∣specially the first fruits and tenths, knowing howe they came in, as euer Dauid did,1. Chron. 29.3.4. who considering that it was the house of God and not man, and because hee had a delight in the house of his God, besides the great pre∣paration which he made, of gold, brasse, yron, siluer, & pretious stones of diuers sorts for ye sanctuary, he gaue of his own, three thousand talents of gold of Ophir, & seuen thousand talents of fined siluer. First it may bee seene,Howe first fruites, tenthes & subsidies of Bb. & Cathe∣dral churches may be payde notwithstan∣ding they be solde to redeme impropriations whether the ouerplus of the lands, after the impropriations bee redeemed, there be not sufficient to repay the valu of so much, as the abun∣dance of those first fruits tenths and subsidies of L.Bb. and Cathedrall churches do amount, which if it do (as I verely thinke it will, and spare if thinges bee handled wisely & with a perfect heart) thē there need no further dealing for recompence:1. by the over∣plus. & al other churches may be as in times past: but if not,2. by the fore∣said beneuo∣lence. then the foresaid beneuolence may stop the gap for the redeeming of the foresaid im∣propriations, that the landes may remaine to this vse of buying out of the said first fruits, which wold be a great ease to the church, and the burden would not be great, at once to giue, euery man a little of his superfluity, to
haue a continuall benefit for euer: Besides that, the mi∣nisterie would be better able, and willing at all times, if need be, to giue a beneuolence, to further all necessarie purposes to the ease of the common welth, as a recom∣pence of this kindnes. Besides this if need be,3. By the ren∣ting those chur∣ches which are increased. those liuings that be increa∣sed by the restored impropriations, or otherwise: may be set vp to hier and greater first fruits, tenths and subsi∣dies: and where three or fower, lesse or more bee made one, they may followe the rate of so many, so that there need bee no diminishing of the treasure of the land by this alteration, except it please her highnes, of her graci∣ous bounty, vppon the triall of gods rare blessinges to∣wardes her and her people, to mittigate some part, as a drink offering of a sweet smelling sacrifice vnto almigh∣ty God: knowing that he can a thousand maner of wais send it in againe by other means, with great interest and increase, as it is written.Prou. 11.25. The liberall person shall haue plenty, & he that watereth shall also haue raine. He that soweth sparingly,2. Cor. 9.6.8. shall reape sparingly, and he that sow∣eth liberally shal reape also liberally, and God is able to make all graces abound towards you, that ye alwais ha∣uing all sufficiency in all thinges, may abound in euerie good worke.Prou. 10.22. The blessing of the Lorde, it maketh rich, and he doth ad no sorrows with it.Deut. 28.1.3.5.6.7.12. Againe, if thou shalt diligently obey the voyce of the Lord thy God, blessed shalt thou be in the city, and in the field, in thy basket, and in thy dough, whē thou commest in, & when thou goest out, the Lorde shall cause thine enemies that rise against thee, to fall before thy face, they shall come out against thee one way, and flie before thee seuen waies, and the Lorde shall bring vpon thee his good treasure, euen the heauen to giue rain to thy land in due season,
and to blesse all the worke of thy hands, and thou shalt lend vnto many nations, and shalt not borrow thy self. As touching Presentations, it would be a very good and commendable thing,Of presentati∣ons. if they were contained in the free gift of Prince and people, to bee resigned to euerie church, which by the laws of Discipline, ought to haue their free choice of their ministers. It will be no losse to the patrons, except a man wil stand vpon a dignity. For euery man holdeth it Symony, for patrons to take anie rewards or gaine, and men are sworne against it. But if it shal not be thought good so to do, the order that now is of presenting of able and sufficient Clearkes may re∣main, so there be sufficient caution that the Cannon of Christ be not broken, the order of his Discipline viola∣ted, nor the church wherto he shalbe presented robbed of their right in election. Yet in all these things I prefer not mine owne iudgement or wisedome,An humble caution of the Author. neither doe I set it down as the iudgement of al or many of them that seeke the reformation: but as I haue often sayd, I submit this my priuate motion, to your honorable wisedomes, and to all godly learned men, that if a better and easier way may be found, this may bee reiected, onely I craue that the thinges and my reasons, first and last, may bee rightly waighed, and that if a better cannot bee found, this may be wisely considered and not neglected. Now in the second place it were cruelty (saith som) to put down these spirituall lords, and great men of the church, and to turne them into small liuings, but espe∣cially to turne out the vnfitte men: it were pittie to see them, their wiues and their children to be put to misery and begging. If a man should make comparison with their doinges, what pitty eought there to bee shewed vpon them, which iustly for breaking Gods comman∣dements
are turned out, when there is no pitty shewed to such as stande to Gods trueth,Mat. 25.6.7.12.13. and breake onely the traditions of men:1. Cor. 9.16. To the one, the scripture pro∣nounceth woe, and therefore why should they be pitti∣ed?Mat. 15.9. to the other, the scripture ioyneth in league as it were, pronouncing vnto thē mercy, & saith with them against the other. In vaine doe you worship God, tea∣ching for doctrine the traditions of men, why should not they be pittied? As touching the L.Bb. and great clergy men, which haue soe laden themselues with thicke claye, that they haue much adoe to get vp in the pulpit of God:Haback. 2.6. doe they not know that it is their duty, that they may please him who hath chosen them to bee his souldiars, not to intangle themselues with the affairs of this life,2. Tim. 2.4. and that they ought for the peace and wealth of the church, to followe the example of their Lord and Maister Christ Iesus and to haue his minde in them, who being God, made him selfe of no reputation and tooke vppon him the forme of a seruant,Philip. 2.5. and was made like vnto men, and was found in shape as a man, and humbled himselfe & became obedient vnto death, euen the death of the crosse,2. Cor. 8.9. & he being rich became poore that wee through his pouerty might be made riche: then is it a smal mat∣ter for them to leaue their thousands,The Bb. & Ca∣thedral prelats, if they be fit, may be applied to some parti∣culer churches of good liuing. and bee content with their hundrethes: and surely I hope so of the men that they wil: for God forbid that they shoulde be of that cursed crue of vnbeleeuers: who they knowe loue the praise of men more then of God: & seeking honour one of an other,Ioh. 5.44. seeke not the honour that commeth of God alone: or of those vnfaithful stewardes, which seck their owne,Philip. 2.21. cap. 3.19.20. and not that which is Christ Iesus, or of those damnable bellye gods: whose glory is to their
shame, and mind earthly things, when all the true Mi∣nisters haue their conuersation in heauen. As for the other, which by no meanes can be fitted to bee workemen, and to labour in Gods building and husbandry: although they are worthie of nothing for their presumption and rash entring where they should not,Mat. 5.13. but as vnsauery salt to be cast forth and trode vnder foot of men, especially such vnthrifts, as beeing broken from liuing by their trades, or are thrust out of their vn∣timely occupation of a seruiture, do choose as their re∣fuge, and for an easie life to be in the ministery:2. Cor. 13.10. yet be∣cause the Church is to correct her children to edificati∣on and not destruction: and the lawe of charity wi∣sheth to do good vnto al men, yea vnto them that haue done vs euill,Vnable mini∣sters being dis∣placed may haue some stocke: or a sti∣pende for their life time. and it may please God by this meanes to giue them repentaunce, it may bee a verie good thing, that these haue a stipend for their life time, or som stock to helpe them that are not able to get their liuing other∣wise by their trades: and especially such as beeing verie honest men at the beginning of her Maiesties raigne, were drawen in of simplicity, not knowing the great burden of the calling: onely heerein they haue greatlie offended, that through idlenes they haue not, in al this time, attained to any knowledge fit for that calling, and they haue bene diuers waies admonished, yet some may be one degree more charitably thoght of, because they haue so small liuing, that they are driuen to labour and care, to make it holde out, beeing burdened with verie many and too heauy paiments. And in this point, the honorable and noble care of King Henry the eight, hath purchased his due praise in giuing stipendes or pensions, for the life time of them that were turned out of the Abbies and Monasteries
which were no more worthy to bee suffered in a com∣mon welth, then these L.Bb. and vnpreching prelacie: & it wil be found a better thing & esier for the church, a little while to beare the burden of these mens pensi∣ons, or stockes, then to suffer the Church to be damni∣fied by them for euer: for wee see that it is a broode of such a nature that will hardly be weeded out, except this good way of turning them out togither be taken in hand: and while men will looke to doe it by little and little, a time wilfal out, that they wil wax too strong: & oppresse the good ministers as the Cananites did Isra∣el vnder Iabin twenty yeeres.Iudg. 4.1.2. Delay is dangerous, and cursed is hee that doth the worke of the Lord loosely or negligently. But what should I run through euery thing: I knowe your honorable wisedomes can doe a great deal more sufficiently in the consideration, searching, & applying, of euery thing to his proper place, that God hath raised vp at your hands, very notable men which are endued with giftes:Exod. 35.30.34. which like vnto Bezaleel and Aholiab are filled with an excellent spirit of wisedome and vnder∣standing, and knowledg in al the worke of God, and to teach other likewise. Therefore as this is euery way the fittest time for such a holy and honorable purpose, so I thought I was in conscience to make known, that which hath diuersly and many times bene aduised of in my minde, as it were by an humble motion to bring to your remembraunce, that which I hope you cannot be igno∣rant of: and in some sorte to enter you in that, which I trust you are willing and forward vnto, and to drawe that out with a coal, as it were rudly, which you by good aduise and mature judgment, may bring forth & make perfect with great profit, beuty and glory. And I referre
al that I haue done, vnto your honorable wise and god∣ly censure, that if I haue swarued any thing from the word of God, or good reason agreing to the same, it might be reiected, protesting that I meddle not with any mans person, but with the cause, and vnderstand & meane when I reprehende some mens doinges in the naming of the persons, onely by the title of their place, the thing which is the ground and occasion of such do∣ings: which being taken away, I suppose the euil of such persons wilbe purged. And thus in all humblenesse, de∣siring your Honours, and all wise menne, to consider in the feare of God of euery thing, without prejudice to the truth, or affection to men or times: from my very soule I commend you to the tuition and gouerment of almighty God, and whome from the bottome of my heart, in feare and trembling, I doe pray and beseech, to powre downe the ritches of his graces vppon vs all, in al wisedome and spiritual vnderstanding, that wee may walke worthy of the Lord, and please him in all things, and namely vpon his Annointed and gratious handmayde, Elizabeth our deare Soueraigne Lady & Queene, to blesse her with longe dayes, and good a∣mong vs, with daylie increase of honour before God & men, and joy of heart in the holy Ghost: and that we al which are vnder her, may worship our true and euer∣lasting God, according to his worde: in truth, sincerity and vprightnes, and liue in al faithful duty to her Ma∣jestie, and godly loue one with another, being blessed with peace wealth and godlines, from generation to generation, through Iesus Christ our Sauiour, to whome with the Father and the holy spirit, one God, be al honour & glory for euer AMEN.
