8017 99847543 12580
❧ By the Queene. A Proclamation against the maintenaunce of Pirates. THE Queenes Maiestie vnderstandeth, that although by her former com∣maundementes notified by proclamation to all her subiectes, and namely to her officers in her Portes, for the staying, ceassing, and suppressing of al occasions of piracies: yet some numbers of vessels ar∣med with certayne disordered persons mixt of sundry nations, do styll haunt the narowe seas, and resort secretely into small Creekes and ob∣scure places of this Realme for reliefe of vitayle, and such lyke: And for their better defence to escape apprehension, do colourably pretende that they be licenced to serue on the seas, and are not to be accompted culpa∣ble as pirates. For remedie whereof, and to the intent no maner of pretext shal serue eyther such per∣sons to commit piracies, or any other that shal relieue them for priuate gayne or fauour by fayned co∣lours or pretence of ignoraunce: Her Maiestie straightly chargeth and commaundeth all maner offi∣cers and ministers, hauing rule and charge within any Port towne, or hauing aucthoritie to make deputies vnder them in any Creeke or landing place whersoeuer the same be, that from hencefoorth no maner of person comming from the sea, be suffred to haue any vittayle, munition, or any other releefe for hym selfe, his company, or vessell, except it be such as are notoriously knowen to appertayne to mar∣chauntes shippes, passengers, or fisshermen, hauing neede therof. Neither that any person do bye or re∣ceaue any wares or goodes of any person directly or indirectly comming from the seas, vntyll the same wares or goodes be brought and landed openly according to the lawes of the Realme in places accusto∣med, with consent of the officers of the customes, and that al dueties be first payde for the same, according to the vsage of marchauntes, vpon payne that whosoeuer shal do the contrary, or be consenting therto, shalbe vpon due information committed to prison, there to remayne without bayle, vntyll inquisiti∣on be made (according to the lawes of the Realme) of them and their factes, as in cases of piracies, and to be adiudged and executed as pirates, as by lawe shalbe ordered. And whosoeuer shall geue infor∣mation hereof against any officer of the customes, or any their deputies, and shalbe able to proue the same, if any wyse the Infourmer be meete to exercise the same office, they shall inioy the same, or other∣wyse shalbe duely and liberally recompensed according to their demerites. Furthermore her Maiestie wylleth and commaundeth all maner her officers, and specially Wardens of Portes, Uice admiralles, Constables, or Capitaines of Castles vpon the seas, and all other hauyng any office in Port townes or places of landyng: that they shall foorthwith as they wyll aunswere at their vttermost peryll, to do their vttermost in their iurisdictions to enquire, lay wayte, and thereby apprehende all maner of persons that do haunt the seas with any kynde of vesselles armed, beyng not an apparaunt marchaunt, and vtterly to stay all others makyng preparation thereto, and their ves∣sels, other then such only as shalbe openly knowne to be ordinarie marchauntes, passengers, or vsuall fisshermen: And not from hencefoorth to alowe or admit any allegation of licence to sayle vpon the seas with any vessell armed, but such as are notoriously belongyng to her Maiestie, and may be sent to the seas for kepyng the same free from pirates. And yf any maner of person shall herein be founde cul∣pable, or manifestly negligent: her Maiestie letteth them certainly to vnderstande, that their punysh∣ment shalbe poursued against them with such seueritie, as the example therof shall hereafter remayne for others to beware howe in such cases to offende. Gyuen at Otelande the thirde day of August. 1569. in the eleuenth yere of her Maiesties raigne. God saue the Queene. ❧ Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyarde by Richarde Iugge and Iohn Cawood, Printers to the Queenes Maiestie.
