A3937 12729028 66406
Licensed March 7th 1691
THE ACCOUNT GIVEN BY Sir John Ashby Vice-Admiral, AND Reere-Admiral ROOKE TO THE Lords Commissioners, OF THE ENGAGEMENT AT SEA, Between the English, Dutch, and French Fleets. Iune the 30th. 1690. WITH A Journal of the Fleet since their departure from St. Hellens, to their return to the Buoy-in-the-Nore, and other Material Passages relating to the said Engagement. LONDON, Printed for Randal Taylor near Stationers-Hall, 1691.
AN ACCOUNT Of the Late Engagement at SEA. On Monday the 30th of Iune, 1690. The CONTENTS. 1. Vice-Admiral Ashby's and Rear-Admiral Rooke's Ac∣counts of the Sea Engagement of the 30th of June, 1690. 2. The Lords Commissioners Letter to the Queen's Majesty concerning the same. 3. The Examinations of the Captains. 4. A Iournal or Account of the Passages and Actions that have happen'd in our Fleet, since we set Sail from St. Hel∣lens, to our Return to the Buoy in the Nore. SUnday the 29th of Iune, 1690. This Evening our Fleet being at Anchor off Beachy, about Three Leagues off, the Wind N. E. by N. the Admiral call'd a Council of Flag Officers, and imparted un∣to us the Queen's Order for engaging the Enemy; who
then lay about S. S. W. from us, about six Leagues di∣stance. At Ten at Night our Fleet weigh'd, the Wind at N. we lay by with our Heads towards the Shoar all Night. Monday the 30th of Iune▪ at break of Day, our whole Fleet bore away, the Wind at N. N. E. the Admiral then putting out the Signal for drawing into a Line of Bat∣tle; then fill'd, and bore down upon the Enemies Fleet. At Eight a Clock the Admiral put out the Signal to en∣gage the Enemy; we then being about a League off them, who immediately lay their head Sails to the Masts, we still bearing down upon them; about Nine they fill'd, and stood towards the Shoar with Top-Sails; at which time the Dutch, which led the Van, began the Battle at a considerable distance. About Ten, I with my Division engaged the Enemy, which happened to be Tourvill's Squadron; we fighting in a Line, still keeping three points from the Wind, often backing our Main Top-Sail to keep the Line, and make it good. About Twelve, the Lion and Expedition were disabled; and about Four a Clock our Fore Top-Mast was shot by the Board, at which time it fell Calm: And Vice-Admiral Vandeputt having lost his Main Top-Mast, (which led our head Di∣vision,) put all his Division out of the Line, so that I fell heavy on them, by reason we had not Wind to work our Boats; at which time I saw Nine Sail of the Enemy, that had weathered the Van of the Dutch, and enga∣ged them on both sides. The Vice-Admiral Putten's Squadron being disabled, the Admiral Orders them to Anchor, which being done, the Admiral of the Blew drove to Lee-ward of them, and Anchored between them and the Enemy. About Nine at Night the Fleet
weigh'd, and drove up the Chanel with the Tide of Flood. Tuesday the 1st of Iuly, the Admiral call'd the Flag Officers together, where it was resolved we should retreat with the Fleet to the Eastward; and in Case the Enemy should press us to destroy the disabled Ships, rather than hazard another Engagement to protect them. This is the exactest Account I can give. Dated the 11th of Iuly, 1690. Signed I. Ashby. An Account of the late Battle at Sea, between the English and Dutch, and the French-Fleet, June the 30th, 1690. ON Sunday the 29th of Iune, in the Evening, our Fleet being at Anchor, S. E. about 3 Leagues off Beachy, with the Wind at N. N. E. and N. E. by N. The Admiral call'd a Council of Flag Officers, and imparted, to us the Queen's Order for engaging the Enemy, who then lay S. S. W. about six Leagues off us. At Ten at Night our Fleet weigh'd, and the Wind inclining to be Norther∣ly; we lay by with our Heads unto the Shoar all Night. On Monday the 30th. At break of Day, the Wind at N. N. E. and E. Beachy bearing N. E. and by E. Three or Four Leagues off, my Lord Torrington put out the Sig∣nal for drawing into a Line of Battle; fill'd, and in that Order bore down upon the Enemies Fleet, who were un∣der Sail, standing with their heads by a Wind. At Eight my Lord put out the Signal for a Battle, our Fleet being
within three Miles of the Enemy, who immediately braced their Head Sails to the Masts, and lay for us. At Nine the Dutch Squadron, leading the Van of our Fleet, began to engage the Enemies Van at a considerable distance; and about half an hour after, the Blew Squadron began with their Rear; but they having formed their Line in a kind of Half Moon, the Red Squadron did not begin to en∣gage their Body till near Ten a Clock. We fought in a reasonable good Line, backing and filling with Top-Sails, as the Enemy did; which I believe they chose, to give their Ships opportunity to stretch out a Head of our Van. We sail'd all day Two Points, and sometimes Four from the Wind; and as we bore down upon the Enemy, they lasked away from us; and at the latter part of the Day, when it fell little Wind, they tow'd round away with their Boats a Head, till we were out of shot, insomuch that I thought we had the better of the Battle; till I saw the Dutch Squadron so much disabled. I can give no account of their Misfortune, by reason of the distance between us, more than that when we left off. I saw them very hotly engag'd, with the Enemy on both sides of them; in which it was impossible to give them any relief, it being then stark Calm, and continued so most part of the Night after. My Lord Torrington ordered the Dutch disabled Ships to come to an Anchor. At Nine at Night we weigh'd, and drove up the Tide of Flood all Night. On Tuesday the 1st of Iuly. In the Afternoon my Lord Torrington call'd a Council of Flag Officers, where it was resolv'd to retreat to the East-wards, and in case the Enemy pressed us, to destroy the disabled Ships, rather than to hazard another Engagement to protect
them. I can accuse no Man of neglect of his Duty in this Action; but do impute our Misfortune to the Advantage the Enemy had of us, in the Number and Quality of our Ships. This is the most exact Account that I can give of the late Action. From on Board the Dutchess at the Buoy of the Nore, the 11th of Iuly, 1690. Signed G. Rooke. The Lords Commissioners Letter, to the Queen's Majesty. May it please your Majesty, IN pursuance of your Majesty's Commission under the Great Seal, bearing date the 14th of this Instant Iu∣ly. Commanding and impowering us, to examine and en∣quire into the Actions, Conduct, Courage, and Beha∣viour of the Admirals, Vice-Admirals, and Rear-Admirals, of your Majesty's Fleet; and the Captains, Commanders of any of your Majesty's Ships in the same; in the late Engagement, or Fight against the French Fleet, which happen'd on Monday the 30th day of Iune last past, near the Coast of Sussex. On the 15th Instant we repaired to your Majesty's Fleet at Anchor at the Buoy of the Nore▪ where having sum∣mon'd on Board the Sandwich the Flag Officers, and all the Captains of your Majesty's Fleet, your Majesty's Commission was open'd, and publickly read; after which, we immediately proceeded to the Examination of the re∣spective Flag Officers upon Oath, and then directed the Commanders in Chief to send to Shearness the Captains
that were present in the Fleet, whom we likewise exami∣ned one by one upon Oath. We have taken the several Examinations in Writing, which we humbly present to your Majesty, together with an Abstract drawn from the several Evidences, whereby the whole state of the late Engagement may the more ea∣sily appear to your Majesty. On Sunday the 29th of Iune last, in the Evening, the Earl of Torrington call'd a Council of Flag Officers, where the Resolution was taken to engage the Enemy the next Day; in Order to which the Fleet weigh'd the same Night about Ten, and about Three in the Morning they disco∣vered the Enemy at Anchor between Three and Four Leagues to the Leeward of them. About four in the morning, the Signal was given to draw into a Line of Battle, and in that Order they bore down towards the Enemy. About Eight, on the 30th, of Iune, the Admiral put out the Signal for Battle, being then about a Leagues distance from the Enemy, who lay by in Order of Battle to receive him. The Wind blew fresh in the morning, the Admiral bear∣ing down with his whole Line, he brought to between Eight and Nine, being at the distance of twice Cannon Shot from the Enemy; and about that time he bore away to the Southward, Sir Iohn Ashby's Division doing the like; but soon after Sir Iohn Ashby bore again to the Northward, to join the Dutch Squadron, who lay for him; and to make more haste, he set his Top-sails, his whole Division do∣ing the same. The Admiral and his Division stood after with two Top-sails only, whereby there happen'd a consi∣derable Interval between those two Divisions of the Red.
About Nine, The Dutch leading the Van, began the Fight at first at a Distance, and presently after the Blew Engag'd; Sir Iohn Ashby, with his Divisions kept his Line, and bore in equally with the Dutch; and the Dutch not stretching to the Head of the French Line at first, gave opportunity to about Nine of the French Ships to weather them; Sir Iohn Ashby being in Shot of Tourville, the French Admiral fired two Guns, the usual sign of Cha∣lenge, which he took no Notice of, lying with his Top∣sailes aback in order (as was supposed) to fight the Eng∣lish Admiral; Sir Iohn Ashby then fired a Broad-side upon him, and continued Fighting for an hour and a half, till he was disabled, by his Fore-top-mast-head being shot a∣way. It was Observed, that the French, being press'd by the Dutch and Vice-Admiral's Division, gave way, and clapt on more Sail to help them off. Sir Ralph Delavall, Vice-Admiral of the Blew, being, a∣bout Nine, in the Line with the Admiral, finding he brought to at the Distance of twice Gun Shot, he with his Divisi∣on edg'd nearer to the Enemy, till he came within Musquet Shot, and then began to Fire; and so continued, the Ene∣my still edging from him, and he pressing forward, till he came at last almost into their Line; those he engag'd with setting up their Top-gallant Sails, Sprit Sails, and Main Sails for their getting away; and when there was but little Wind, they tow'd from them with their Boats a head. During this Action, there was a great space be∣tween the Van of the Blew, and the Rear of the Red. The Divisions of the Admiral, and the Rear-Admiral of the Red, which were nearer to the middle of the Line, began at Ten to fire, when they were within Cannon Shot
of the Enemy; the Rear-Admiral being somewhat to the Leeward. About Eleven, the Admiral being acquainted some French Ships had weathered the Dutch, he ordered the Ships should Luff to the Eastward; after which there happen'd a Calm, and then he was tow'd down between the Enemy and the Dutch, who were then at Anchor. Upon the whole, it seems to be a general Opinion: That if the Admiral, and the Rear-Admiral of the Red, had bore down, and pressed the Enemy, equally with the rest of the Fleet, the French probably would not have had the Success as to be able to keep the Sea; and many of the Officers of these two Divisions wished they might have been nearer to the Enemy. As to what relates to that Part of the Commission which concerns the Embezlement of Stores; We finding that the Remains have been taken by the Officers of the Ordnance, who say, that little more than one third of the Powder has been spent in this Action, we have made no farther enquiry into that matter. Sheerness the 18th. of July, 1690. Sign'd Pembrooke Maclesfield R. Howard H. Goodricke Tho. Lee
The Examinations of the Captains. CAptain Carter. About Four in the Morning, they had sight of the French Fleet, about three Leagues off to the Leeward, the Signal being given for the Line of Bat∣tle; they stood before the Wind with their Top-sails on∣ly, bearing towards the French. At Eight, being about Four Miles from the Enemy, the Earl of Torrington laid his Ships head to the Southward, and Sir Iohn Ashby did the like; but a little after, Sir Iohn wore his Ship to the North∣ward, as did his Division, in Order to join them the sooner. Sir Iohn set his Fore-sail, but the Admiral and his Di∣vision stood after them with two Top-sails only. About Nine, he was himself to Leeward, of four or five of the Dutch Ships nearer to the Enemy; the Debt∣ford, Sandwich, and Elizabeth following him. At that Monsieur Tourville lay with his Fore-top-sail a∣back (as he thought) staying for my Lord Torrington: but Sir▪ Iohn Ashby being then in reach of him, fired two Guns, which I suppose was a Chalenge; but the other taking no Notice, Sir Iohn gave him a Broad-side, and engaged him for an hour and half, and in that time lost his Fore-top∣mast Head. The Admiral's Division was at a distance from them, they making no more Sail than with their two Top sails; till between one and two a Clock, he set his Fore-sail, and there being but little Wind, with his Boats a Head, he towed off from the Enemy; and he judges he was a Miles distance from them and rather more from the Enemy. The Earl of Torrington maketh a Breach to the South∣ward between Eight and Nine, which course he stood half
an hour, occasioning the Dutch Fleet, or the greatest part of them, to lay their main Top-sails to the Masts, to stay for them; and he judged that might be the Reason why they could not reach the Van of the French Fleet before they Engag'd, and gave the French an opportunity to get the Wind of them. Being asked, what became of the French Ships that were opposite to that left space between those Divisions of the Red. He answered, that they fell down (as he supposed) up∣on the Vice-Admiral and the Dutch, endeavouring to sup∣ply the places of those Ships, that were disabled by Us, and drew out of the Line. Captain Ker. That Captain Carter led Sir Iohn Ashby's Division, and joined close to the Dutch. That he followed in his Station, Captain Mitchell being next him. When they were so near, that a Shot of the Enemies pass'd through his Ship, he began to Fire. The sternmost Ship of the Dutch the Captain kept Fi∣ring, his Sails not hoisted, and they were in no good Order. He continued Firing about two Hours and a half, be∣ginning at Nine, and then having his Running Rigging Shot, he was forced to Luff out of his Station, to knot and splice his Rigging, which he had not above two Men ca∣pable to doe. Upon his Luffing out, Captain Mitchell fill'd up the Line. About Ten, having mended his Rigging, he wore his Ship to get into his Station, but the Vice-Admiral being then disabled, sent his Boat with his Lieutenant to com∣mand him to tow him out, which he did. All this while the Plymouth, and Elizabeth were fight∣ing near to the Dutch, and as he thought to the Leeward of some of them.
About two, it was a dead Calm, then the disabled Ships did their best to tow off, and at Tide of Ebb they Ancho∣red. He thought the French gave way, but could not tell whether it were not in Order to weather the Dutch; but he is sure they were close pressed. He could not judge what distance the Admiral's Divisi∣on was from them, all their Division was Engag'd, and did well for ought we know. Captain Mitchell. The Dutch did not sail in their Line as they should have done, they began to Fire at the Distance of Cannon Shot, but came afterwards within half a Gun Shot of the Enemy; the French edg'd from the Wind, but he cannot tell whether it were not to give their Ships an Opportunity to weather the Dutch, and as the French edg'd away, others supplied their places from the Line of Battle. Captain Carter. Captain Kerr, and himself were joined immediately to the Dutch, where the Vice-Admiral was disabled and came aboard him; he told him he had so ma∣ny Men wounded, and not having his Complement at first, that he must desire him to send for one hundred or two hundred Men. Sir Iohn Ashby. The Day they Fought it was a fresh Gale from Seven to Nine in the Morning, and was a sail∣ing Gale from Nine till towards One, but began to be dul∣ler, and before Two, there fell a Calm. The Signal for Battle was given about Eight in the Morning; both Fleets standing North and South of Beachy. The Dutch Squadron began to Engage about Nine, and when they bore down, they left about Nine of the French Ships a head of them, which by One he saw had got the Wind of them.
He follow'd Vice-Admiral Putten, who was in the Rear of the Dutch Squadron, and stood in a Line with them till they were Disabled; and about the same time, he lost his Fore-top mast, and his Fire-ship Disabled; thinking to suc∣cour the Dutch, he went into Captain Mitchells Ship the Elizabeth; but he telling him he would not do any thing unless he could furnish him with one hundred or two hun∣dred Seamen, he return'd to his own Ship; or otherwise, he had born down between the Enemy and the Dutch, and might in part have prevented their Misfortune. About One he espied about Nine Ships of the French to the Windward of the Dutch Squadron; whereupon he sprang his Luff, and soon after they fell back. After the Dutch were Disabled, they sell into a Confusion, sailing about three deep; so that they were in danger from one another, and they began to Fire at to great a distance. The Earl of Torrinton brought to the first time half an hour after Eight, at the distance of a Cannon and half Shot, and then edgd nearer; he brought to again about Nine, at the distance of a bare Cannon Shot, or about a Mile. That he was not himself Engaged till towards Ten in the Morning, the French Fleet firing at him near three quarters of an hour, and many Shot flying over him be∣fore he fired. During the Fight he did observe the French to edge away. The Smoak was so great, that he could not observe what was doing in the Admiral's Division. He could not complain that any of the Officers were failing in their Duty. Having Monsieur Tourvill's Ship opposite to him, he fired two Guns, to try if he would be a reasonable Enemy; but finding he took no Notice, he bore up to him, and battled him till his Ship was Disabled.
Captain Clements. He could see little out of his own Squadron, but judged the Headmost Ship of the Admiral's was at a Mile and a halfs distance from the Sternmost of theirs. Their Division and the Dutch were within half Cannon Shot of the Enemy, but did not come within Musquet Shot of them. The Earl of Torrington soon after them came within Cannon Shot. He thought the distance between the Divisions was oc∣casion'd by the Admiral's bearing to the Southward, and was also the Reason we were forwarder toward the Van. Some of the Dutch Ships fought with their Fore-top-sails to the Mast, which he thought was occasion'd by the stay they made, to let the Vice-Admiral Cullemburgh, who had a heavy Ship, to stretch forward, and their fighting thus drove them so far to the Leeward, and expos'd them tothat loss. Captain Fairborne. We began to Engage about Eight and Nine, and within half an hour after we were within half Cannon Shot▪ and he had some Musquet Shot lodg'd in his Hamocks. The Dutch Ships were in disorder. Between Twelve and One, the Admiral was towing to∣wards the Enemy, between them and the Dutch; Sir Iohn Ashby was Disabled between Twelve and One, he was En∣gag'd with Tourville, and Shot down his Flag-staff. Captain Gother. When We first began firing, we were well within Gun-shot, and continued Firing two hours, bearing down at last within large Musquet Shot; they lay so till between two and three, when it was a dead Calm, and they like a Wreck. When they had Fired two or three Broad-sides, he saw the Earl of Torrington's Flag within a quarter of a Mile's distance between Us.
Captain Torpley. The Admiral's Division was half a Miles distance from us. Capt. Beverley. He was in the Rear of the Admiral's Di∣vision, and could not see how the Dutch were pressed. The Admiral and Vice-Admirals Divisions were within a quarter of a Mile one of another, when he observed them. The reason why he was out of his Line was, that his ships staff was carried away. Capt. Pomroy, Sir Francis Wheeler. We bore down to the Enemy in very good Order, and the Dutch ingag'd be∣fore mine; half an hour after we engag'd with Mounsieur Amphrevil's Squadron. The first thing he observed was, that the Expedition and Sir Iohn Ashby's Ship were disabled. He supposes the Admiral's stretching to the South-ward was to prevent their being rack'd by the Enemy fore and aft. D. of Grafton. That he could not tax any one to be of Fault. That the Dutch and Blew Squadron began to Engage be∣fore the Admirals brought to, the Dutch firing first; and if they had not begun so soon, the Red had been nearer. The Blew began before them, and continued it longer; but he could not say they were much nearer to the Enemy. About Ten and Eleven Orders were sent to Sir Francis Wheeler to make Sail, and to him to follow, which he supposes was to fill up the space between Sir Iohn Ashby's Division and them; and their Ships began to be foul one of another, and before the distance was fill'd, the Wind fell and it was calm, but they afterwards closed; for when the Ebb came, the Earl of Torrington drove below the Dutch, and he did not come to an Anchor till they were to the Windward of him. About Twelve or One he saw about Twelve Ships of the
French bear up round, which made him lie out of shot. At one time the French look'd as if they were going, be∣ing pressed by the Dutch, and the Vice-Admiral of the Red Division. The Admiral brought to within Gun-shot, and if the Wind had stood, we should have had more fighting. When he left off, the Shot flew over him. Captain Nevill. As soon as the Express came with Orders to Fight; on Sunday about Four in the Afternoon, a Signal was given for a Council of Flag Officers, to whom they were imparted, some of the Dutch Flag Officers said it were to be wish'd they had been stronger; but the Queen's Order must be obeyed; and so went to their Ships to prepare. About Two on Monday Morning, we heard the French give the Signal for going to Anchor, which was the dis∣charge of Five Guns from each Flag. About Three in the Morning we saw the French Fleet at Anchor, between three and four Leagues off to the Leeward; whereupon the Admiral order'd him to bear away. About Four the Signal was given to our Fleet to draw into a Line of Battle; the French likewise weighing, and putting themselves into their Line. About Eight we came nearer to the Enemy, the Earl of Torrington then observing the French Admiral had Thirty Four Ships a Head of him, and Forty eight a Stern, and that himself had a head of him Thirty Four Ships, and Twenty Two a Stern; and that if he had taken Tourville to engage, his Rear must be over powered; he edg'd away to the Southward, to bring himself to the Center of the Fleet, that every one might have his Share. The Admiral going to bear down towards the Enemy, said he would not go sternling, for then they should be
rack'd for and aft; but he would being to, and go away looking upon them, imagining they would keep their Wind, which they did not, for they fought Three or Four Points from the Wind, having by that means opportunity to weather the Dutch. The Dutch had but a weak Squadron, and did not keep up as they might. About Nine, Admiral Van Putten began to fire at a great distance, and after that we could see no more of them. Vice-Admiral Ashby began presently after the Dutch, and the Blew soon after that; we did not begin the Fight till about Ten, and the reason we did it no sooner was because the Earl of Torrington order'd there should be no firing till we came near the Enemy. About Eleven he saw some French Ships had weather'd the Dutch, and asked the Admiral whether he would suffer them to weather him also; he answered not if he could help it, and order'd the Fore-tack aboard, and that they should luff to the Eastward, and so we got to Wind∣ward of the Grafton, and hardly got clear of the Albemarle, at which time the Calm fell, and we got our Boat a Head. We saw Sir Iohn Ashby's Ship coming out dislabled, and that the Dutch were shatter'd. The Earl of Torrington order'd his Boats to tow him be∣tween the Dutch and the Enemy, where he came to Anchor. He believes at one time in the Fight, their Squadron was as near the Enemy as any other; about 12 a Clock the Enemy then edg'd off upon a Dutch Fire-ship bearing towards them, but was accidentally set on Fire. He never saw greater Firing than the French made that day. He is of Opinion that we ought to bless God for that Calm, otherwise the whole Fleet had been in great danger.
Captain Bemboe, Master of the Soveraign. We were within half-shot of the Enemy for an Hour, then the Wind proving little, we saw the French had weather'd the Dutch, and thought they had been many of them, so we got our Foretacks on board. We did not Luff till the French raked in fore and aft. The French gave way upon a Dutch▪ Fire-ships coming towards them. Captain Churchill. The Dutch engaged at Nine, and we at Ten, being at good Cannon-shot, and at Eleven we were at half Cannon-shot; but the French drew further off; but he thinks the reason of it was to get away to avoid a Dutch Fire-ship, which being accidentally set on fire, was driven towards them. Captain Greenville. Half an Hour after the Signal for Battel was given, the Dutch began to Engage, and soon after the Earl of Torrington brought to at Cannon-shot, and between Ele∣ven and Twelve we were within half Cannon-shot—The French towed off to get clear of a Dutch Fire∣ship. Captain Hastings. Little account can be given in Fire and Smoak; their Squadron, which was the Admirals, was engaged be∣tween Nine and Ten. The Calm fell about Twelve, but we continued fighting until Two. We hald away Southerly before the Engagement.
Captain Hobson. We of the Rear-Admirals Squadron were rather to the Leeward of the Admiral, being good Gun-shot off the Enemy; and if the Wind had lasted, we had been nearer, which he is sorry they were not. The French lay in a half Moon; if we had got in with them, in probability, we had done and received more dammage. Captain Cornwall. When they began Fighting, they were long Gun-shot off, about a Mile; however he had then a Shot in his Mast, and his Ship shot through and through. He thinks they were at no time nearer than half Gun-shot. He cann't tell why the Admiral did not bear nearer, for there was Wind enough for two Hours: he had heard the reason given, was to avoid being racked fore and aft, but he believes if he had done it, it would have been for the better. He believes the Blue fought nearer than they did in the Rear Admirals Division. He never saw the Sea-men so chearful as they were in the Fight. He is of Opinion, if the French had persued their ad∣vantage, and all weighed the next Tide, as we did, and as some of them did, they might have endanger'd our whole Fleet, for he thought them twice as strong as we were, af∣ter the Dutch had suffer'd so much. Captain Layton. We began the Fight about Nine: Some Guns were fired out of distance, but the Rear Admiral did not fire, until he came within shot, and some Shot from the Enemy pass'd as far over their Ships as it was to them.
We had Wind enough to have gone on Board the Ene∣my, but he cannot dive into the reason why it was not done. The French kept in a row, by which means those in the Center were not so near them. He never in his life-time saw more Courage than was shewed by the Sea-men. Rear-Admiral Rook. That the Admiral, steering towards the Rear, left a space betwixt his and Sir Iohn Ashby's Division, who was there∣upon obliged to bear towards him: that he thought his Intention had been to go and Engage the French Admiral, but he did not do it; therefore perhaps it was, that he thought the French strongest in the Rear. The Admiral brought to about Ten: at about a Miles distance, he was something nearer with his Division, but durst not break his Line, and therefore he brought to more to the Leeward, and Engaged, having the Admiral on his Weather Bow. He bare down two or three times, till he had the Rear of the French in his Wake a stern; he did not see when the Admiral Luffed. Captain Binge. When they were first brought to, they were not within shot, then the Blue edged nearer, and the nearest they came, he thought, was about half Cannon shot. He don't know why the Admiral brought to no nearer, but he thinks lasking down had been the better way. He thought the Fleet had been pretty near a strait Line, yet the rest was distant from the Wings, because the French lay in a Bow. He did not observe to give way to the Blue, but they once seemed to be in a huddle, so they made use of our Boats to tow them into order again.
He saw a great Ship, whose Poop blew up, sail out of the French Fleet, but he thought she returned again at Night. Captain Botham, Captain Tyrrell, Captain Hubbard. Within two Miles of the Enemy, we brought to, then we edged nearer, and brought to again within a Mile, and we were so near, that the Enemies Shot went through and through. We saw the French edged away several times from our great Ships, and they had their Top-gallant Sails and Sprit Sails to make more way. He was second to the Anne, and the Rear of the Red were two Miles a head off their Points upon their Weather-Bow: And the French Fleet, being drawn into a Bow, made the Red at a greater distance from them. The Red had left Shooting an Hour and half before they did. He don't know that any small Shot touched his Ship. The latter end of the Engagement was the hottest with them in the Blue, they not being able to work their Ships. His Opinion is, that the French were more in number, yet if every one had sought as they should, they might have worsted them, for it was the Enemy at last was very free to leave: then towing off with their Boats, his Ship had six Foot Water in the Hold, and with great difficulty he tow'd her off and stopt her Leaks. Acquainting the Admiral next Morning with the Con∣dition of his Ship, he order'd him twenty good Sea∣men out of the Warwick, which was a good means to preserve him, he getting off, keeping still to Windward of the Fleet.
Captain Iennifer. After the Fight began he could make little Observation; The Dutch engag'd a quarter of an hour before the Blew: It appeared to him, that the French Fleet lay in a Bow: Within a quarter of an hour after they were engag'd within Musquet-shot, he had his Rigging cut, and his Tackle and Sheets shot away: Two hours after the Fight began, he saw a Gap between their Division and the Red. They were to Leeward of the Red, but not very much. He saw no great Advantage was had of the French in the Fight. Some of his Men say, they saw a French Ship sink, but he saw no such thing himself. Captain Mees. Between Nine and Ten, we began to engage: before Noon we were within Musquet-shot of the Enemy, but I had not Men aboard to ply small shot, and I received none from the Enemy. Capt. Tyrrel being disabled, he went be∣tween him and the Enemy. Sir Ralph Delaval sent to him about Two a Clock to make Sail to joyn the Red, who he thought to be at Two Miles distance from them, and as far (as he judged) from the Ene∣my: So they left off firing. He thought that Distance was made by Captain Tyrrel's laying back; and they sailing to fill that place, received Damage from the Enemies Ships that were opposite to it. He saw some French Ships edge away. Captain Tenant, Captain Dorrel. He thinks that every Ship might have fought, and in case they had fought, and all the Fleet had gone in, we had sent the Enemy home; for those that engag'd their Squa∣dron,
made Sail from them, not only with the Sails they fought with, but loosed their Top-gallant Sails, Sprit-Sails, and Main-Sails; and when there was little Wind, they tow'd from them with their Boats a-head. The latter part of the Fight he was within Pistol-shot of the Enemy, a quarter of a Mile at least, and the Vice-Ad∣miral, Sir Ralph Delaval, was within Cables length a∣stern. I judg'd, the Red Squadron, when they brought to, were out of Cannon-shot; but during the Fight, he could not tell what they did. Vice Admiral Delaval. The Wind was fresh all the morning, but began to be duller towards noon. The Signal for Battle was given at Eight in the morning, and about half an hour after, the Earl of Torrington brought to at the Distance of Two Gun-shot from the Enemy; whereupon, with his Division of the Blew, he bore down, and did not begin to fire till he was within Musquet-shot of the Enemy, and that he had enough of their Ships before him to deal with. He was engaged with De Estree's Squadron, which edg'd off, as he pressed them: Insomuch, that he and his Divisi∣on were advanc'd almost to range with the rest of the French Fleet, and in his, and the Opinion of others, the French bore right away, as if they were running, and ever from the first beginning of his engaging, he found the Ene∣my made a jogging Sail. He observed the Earl of Torrington brought to again a∣bout 9: So that part of the Red lying by, and the Blew bearing forward, he saw the Fleet formed, as it were, into an Elbow, between Two and Three a Clock, and the Inter∣val between him and the Red was so great, as that he thought
Thirteen or Fourteen of the Enemies Ships had nothing to fire at; and if all the Divisions had bore down equally, which they might have done, he won't say, they should have beaten the French, (they out-numbring them, and plyed theirs very well) but he believes the French would have had enough, and been glad to have gone home; for the Red Squadron being the strongest in the Fleet, if that had press'd, the matter could not have gone better. He can't but say, the Dutch did not bear down to the Enemy in that Order they might have done, and that he thought the Earl of Torrington, laying the Head of his Ship several ways, might puzzle Sir Iohn Ashby. He can't charge any of his Squadron of being back∣ward. He did indeed lend his Boat to some of them, particu∣larly Captain Iennifer, in the Edgar, whose Answer was, That his Braces and Rigging were shot, and that he did what he could to come up; which he believes was so, for he set his small Sails, and came in, and had his share. He sent likewise, and writ to Captain Dorrel, but it was rather by way of Advice, That he should set Sail, since the Enemy had stretched away; so that some of the Ships at Stern were not then in a possibility of engaging; upon which he did what was possible. And he believes the Gentlemen of the Red Squadron, who had the misfortune not to be near enough, would have every one done their parts, if they had had Opportunity to be nearer engag'd. He bore right down, to be nearer the Enemy, receiving their Shot fore and aft; and he did not bring to till he was within Musquet-shot; for he that will fight, must hazard.
Captain Aylmer. We began firing half an hour after the Dutch: When we first fired, we were within half Cannon-shot, and come somewhat nearer afterwards, but not much; for as we edg'd towards the Enemy, they edg'd from us. We were in so much Smoke, that for an hour we could not see the Red Squadron. Sir Ralph's Squadron took the most Southermost Ship of the Enemy, and so in order. Though he bore too much to keep the Line of Battle, he can't say the French were running away, but he is sure some of their Boats were towing them a head. If there were any fault committed in the Action, it must be the Officers; for the Seamen did their parts. Captain Foulks. The Dutch began to fire an hour before us, but at such a distance, that their Shot fell short; so they gave off for a while, and then began. He imagin'd they did it, because they were not near enough the first time. About Eleven or Twelve a Clock, their Line, which was the Blue, was within Musquet-shot of the Enemy, and the Vice-Admiral sent him Word, that the Battle being so fair, he would bear in still. He saw the French bear away, with their Boats a head. Some of the French Ships set their Top-Sails and Sprit-Sails. He mist a great Ship of the Enemies, his Shot ceasing, which he supposes to be a French Commander. His Men call'd from the Top-Mast, and said he was sinking; and more saw it, but he did not.
Captain Martin. The Dutch began to fire about Nine: Next Sir Iohn Ash∣by's Division fired, and the Blew Four or Five Minutes after them. Some Ship to his Rear fired a Broad side, but the rest of the Squadron kept still towards the Enemy, lasking un∣til they came within Musquet-shot. I observed Four of the French Ships bore away together, which were opposite to the Vice-Admiral, and one of their Ships in the Rear had the Poop blown up; and before the Battle was done, several of the French loosed all their small Sails: and some were on the Run, as he thought. He fought from a quarter after Nine till Three, and then he was dis∣abled. He observed, as any of the French Ships gave way, their places were supply'd from their Rear, and their Line fill'd up. The Red were so far to Windward, that he could see a∣long through the Two Lines, and the French appear'd to him to lie in a Bow. If the Squadrons had fought equally, he believes the French would have receiv'd more Damage, and we might have had better success. Captain Walthers. He being in a small Ship, was oblig'd half a Cables length to the Leeward, to make his Guns reach their Squadrons, beginning to fight between Nine and Ten, being very well within Gun-shot. The Fight lasted for Three hours; but the headmost Ships of the Squadron were longer engag'd. In his Judgment, the French gave way, some of their Ships being towed about, between Twelve and One a Clock.
Captain Graydon. The Red were so much to the Weather of them, that he could see through to the Dutch. Their Squadron was smart∣ly engag'd for Three hours, and by what he could perceive, they did not receive so much Damage, when near, as at a distance, though the Shot then flew over too. Our Men fired faster then the French, after a little time; but before the Conclusion they fell to quick firing again. He saw one French Ship disabled, his Main-Top-Mast be∣ing shot through, whilst he was attempting to set a Fire-Ship on her. He discover'd, by a Glare through the Smoke, about Eight French Ships standing almost in a Line with him, near as far to Windward as himself. He believes, if they had been all of one Mind, the French would have had enough of it, and not have followed us. The Vice-Admiral's Ship made a continual Fire. Captain Jones. After the first firing we came within Musquet-shot of the Enemy; and the nearer we came, we receiv'd the less da∣mage both in Hull and Rigging, their Shot flying high. He took up a Young Man that was blown up with the Poop of the Terrible. He believes, if all had bore down, and come within Pi∣stol-shot of the Enemy, they would have been glad to go home. Copia Vera.
A JOURNAL: OR, Account of the Passages and Actions that have happen'd in our Fleet, since we set Sail from St Helens, to our Return to the Buoy of the Nore. Sunday, June 22. 1690. AT Ten at Night our General fired his Gun, to weigh, and by Two in the Morning the Fleet was ready, the Wind at W. and by N. and W. N. W. Monday June 23. At Ten a Clock in the Morning we weigh'd, the Wind at E. N. E. easie Winds. At Three in the Afternoon the Wind veered about to the S. VV. and at Four we came to an Anchor, in Twenty Seven Fathom Wa∣ter, the Culver Cliff on the VVight bearing S. VV. by S. from us, Six or Seven Miles. Tuesday 24. At Five in the Morning the Fleet weigh'd the Wind at N. E. by N. a fresh Gale, we standing off S. E. by E. At Seven a Clock we saw several Ships standing in for the Island; so that we came to Anchor in Fifteen Fa∣thom Water, the Culver Cliff bearing from us VV. N. VV. ½ N.
Our Smacks were ordered in after them, and they proved to be small Vessels come from the VVestward. VVednesday 25. At Five a Clock this Morning we weigh'd, the Dutch Fleet standing to the Northwards, and our Gene∣ral to the Southwards, drawing the Fleet into a Line of Bat∣tel, the Vice-Admiral of the Red, with Star board Tacks on board, leading the Van, weather'd the Dutch; and so lay after they tack'd, and came on with the other, as though they had been engag'd, the Wind veering out to the S. S. E. and a thick Fog. The Fleet all came to an Anchor about Nine in the Morning, in Seventeen Fathom Water, the Cul∣ver Cliff bearing N. VV. and Dunesse VV. N. VV. distant, by Estimation, Five Leagues. At half an hour past Nine, one of our Frigats came in with her Top-gallant Sheets fly∣ing, and firing; so that our Fleet weigh'd, and stood to the Eastwards, the Wind at S. S. E. each Admiral having his Jack-Flag at his Mizen-Peak, for his Division to fall into their places, in order for Battel, we then seeing the French Fleet to the Westward of us. At Two in the Afternoon the Vice-Admiral of the Blew, Sir Ralph Delaval tacked, and stood to the Southwards, the French Fleet standing the same way, the Wind veering about to the Eastwards. At Three the Rear-Admiral of the Red tacked, as did all the Squadron. At Four in the Afternoon the Dutch tacked, they bringing up the Rear with Lar-board-tacks on board; but when Star-board-tacks on board to lead the Van. At Six in the Afternoon we had the Weather Gage of the French about Three Leagues. And when we had made the Fleet, we tacked, and stood to the Northwards, the Wind at E. and a fresh Gale. At Seven the Vice Admiral of the Blue fired several Guns; so that we tack'd, and stood to∣wards the French again, and at Eight at Night we came to Anchor in Thirty Five Fathom, Dunesse bearing N. VV. by N. distant Six Leagues, the French Fleet bearing S. S. E,
from us about Three Leagues, the Wind Easterly and a fresh Gale all Night. Thursday, 26. At six in the Morning we weigh'd and stood to the Northwards, the Wind at E. N. E. a fresh Gale. At eleven we came to Anchor in twenty eight Fa∣thom Water, Dunesse bearing W. ½ S. from us seven Leagues, the French Fleet stretching to the Southwards. At four in the Afternoon we weigh'd, and stood away to the Eastwards, the Wind at N. W. small Winds, the French bearing S. S. W. from us about four Leagues, ply∣ing after us. At eleven at Night we came to Anchor in thirty four Fathom. Friday, 27. At Eight this Morning our Fleet was all under sail, the Wind at E. we standing in N. N. E. At Twelve we came to Anchor in twenty one Fathom, Bea∣chy bearing N. E. ½ E. three or four Leagues distant, the Wind all one, but very thick. At Eight at Night we weigh'd, and at Twelve we came to Anchor in twenty eight Fathom, still plying to the Eastwards. Saturday, 28. At Seven in the Morning our Fleet was all under sail, and at Twelve we came to Anchor in twen∣ty eight Fathom, Beachy bearing N. N. W. from us four Leagues, the Wind between the N. N. E. and the N. E. This Morning came in one of our Frigats with her Top∣gallant Sheets flying and firing, so that each Admiral put on his Jack-Flag at Mizen Peak for their Divisions to fall in their places. At Seven at Night we weigh'd. Sunday, 29. At Two a Clock in the Morning we came to Anchor in twenty nine Fathom, Beachy bearing W. by N. and Fairlee N. N. W. the Wind at N. and N. N. E. At Ten this Forenoon we were under sail, the Wind all one, and a fresh Gale, we standing in N. W. And at Three in the Afternoon we came to Anchor in twenty nine Fa∣thom, Beachy bearing W. N. W. and Fairlee N by E. This
Afternoon came a Sloop from Rye, as we suppose, with a Packet. At Nine at Night we weigh'd, and stood to the Eastward all Night. Monday, 30. At Three a Clock this Morning our Ge∣neral hove out his Jack-Flag at Mizen Peake, as did the rest of the Admirals: and after their Divisions were in their places, they bore away to the Westwards upon the French, the Wind at N. E. and N. E. by N. a very fresh Gale. About Four in the Morning we see the French Fleet standing for our Shore, with their Star-board Tacks on board. At Eight in the Morning the Bloody Flag was spread at our General's Fore top-mast-head. The Dutch leading the Van, and like Men of undaunted Courage, bore down upon the Van of the French, who shew'd no less, for they lay with their head Sails to the Masts (we having the Weather gage) ready to receive us. At Nine in the Morning the Dutch were Engaged, and plied them so hotly, that they made the French edge away, and some of the head-most Ships stretched a head and tacked upon the Dutch, the Dutch never once starting; but there lay and continued the Fight till the very last Guns that were fired, which was about Five in the Afternoon before they parted, although several of their Ships quite dis∣abled, at least Seven or Eight; some having lost all to their Fore-mast; some nothing but smooth Hulls; be∣sides what lost Top-masts: They were not above Twenty or Twenty one, as ever I could tell them, but the gene∣rality of them is quite spoiled: And since the Engage∣ment several of them burned, whether by the French that pursued us, or by themselves, I know not: never were Ships more batter'd and torn, nor ever did Men behave themselves better than they did. 'Tis said they lost Seven Captains; and that one of their Ships Flag struck three times to the French; but
after they see no quarters was like to be had, they took Courage again and saved their Ship. Had the other Two Squadrons gone on with the Courage they did, the French would never have followed us up Channel. About Ten a Clock Sir Iohn Ashby, Vice-Admiral of the Red, Engaged, and he and some of his Division had a share not much less than the Dutch; but fought at a far greater distance, so that our Ships were spoiled before ever they came near them. The Blue had some Broad-sides now and then, but not comparable to either of the other, till about Two in the Afternoon it proved little Wind; and withal Veered about to the S. S. E. so that the Rear of the French was equal with the Blue, as to the Wind; and, as I suppose, bore upon the Blue Squadron, and continued very hot till about Four in the Afternoon: when the French lay their Heads to the Westwards, and ours to the Eastwards, coming to Anchor all hands on the Tide of Ebb, Beachy bearing N. ½ W. distant by judgment Four Leagues. The French. coming to Anchor close by us. At Nine at Night we weigh'd and stood to the East∣wards. Tuesday, Iuly 1. At Six in the Morning we came to An∣chor in twenty four Fathom, Beachy bearing W. N. W. three Leagues from us, the Wind at E. N. E. where we rid till Eleven a Clock, and then we weigh'd, and in standing off we see a great Smoak to the Westward of us, which we suppose to be a Ship set on fire by the French, who are now plying after us. At Five in the Afternoon we came to Anchor in Twenty two Fathom, Fairlee bearing N. ½ E. Beachy VV. by N. This Evening we see about Forty five Sail of the French Fleet about two Leagues to the Leeward of us. At eleven at Night we weigh'd; and at twelve a great Ship was on fire, and burnt a Dutch-man, as we suppose her to be, but whether they or the French set her on fire we know not.
VVednesday, Iuly 2. At two in the Morning she blew up. This Day we see the French Fleet. Thursday, Iuly 3. The Wind at E. N. E. a fresh Gale. At twelve at Noon a great Ship on fire. At three in the Afternoon more on fire; but whether Dutch or English we know not, nor by whom fired, but there was Six or Seven Sail of French by them. Friday, Iuly 4. At three in the Afternoon a Dutch Fire∣ship burnt at S. W. end of Rye-Bay near Fairlee; the Rye Men told us the Dutoh burnt her themselves: but we see two French lie by her till she blew up, almost within reach of our Guns. The whole Fleet at Anchor in Rye-Bay and off the Ness. Saturday, Iuly 5. This Morning we weigh'd out of Rye-Bay, and at Night the Fleet went without the Good∣win, and came to Anchor at the North-sands head. This Afternoon the Anne Frigat was set on fire, we not be∣ing able to keep her any longer after the French came up with her. She was ashore the Day before in Rye-Bay, and we have saved most of her Trade, except her Guns, which will be taken up again. Sunday, Iuly 6. Some of the Anne's People was on board here, and told us the French landed some Men by Dungeness in Rye-Bay. This Morning the Fleet will be at the Buoy of the Nore, where we now are. From the Buoy of the Nere, the 18th of July, 1690. FINIS.
