A666 12623759 64601
ADVICE To Young Gentlemen; OR, An Answer to the LADIES of LONDON. To the Tune of, The Ladies of London. This may be Printed, R. P. ALl Iolly Blades that Inhabit the Town, And with the fair Sex are contriving, From the Gay Fop, to the honest bred Clown, be advisd to resolve against Wiving; Let not a prospect of Pleasure delude, where so many Plagues are attending, For 'tis the Nature of Wives to Obtrude, and Miseries heap without ending First, have a care of the Lady precise, who exclaims against Drinking and Roaring, That privately turns up the Whites of her Eyes and in publick abominates Whoring But if you Coach her a mile out of Town and quote her but Solomon's Uices; With a slight trip you may tumble her down, though seeming she modestly nice is. Let no City-Girl your Freedom beguile, shee'l cheat you with modest behaviour, Who sits like a Rabbit trust up for to boil, and swears she's a Maid by her Saviour: But if you cunningly manage your Plot, you'l quickly be admitted under; Her coy behaviour will soon be forgot, shee'l breath out her Soul in a slumber. The Widdow avoid where Pollicy lurks pretending to act by her Conscience That's black as the Devil and large as a Turk's shee'l tease you to Death with her Nonsense: But if you love her and long for a Bout, you ne'r must stand mincing the matter, Brush her with Iollitry briskly about, and down with your Britches and at her. Let not the Country wench that is coy, insinuate into your favour For when she knows what it is to enjoy she quickly will change her behaviour: Turn an insatiate Miss of the Town, to purchase Gallants shee'l endeavour; Pawn from her Carcase her Paragon Gown to maintain the curteous Pleasure. But if your Uigor a Wife doth require and will not admit of forbearing; Any may serve for to quench your desire, ther's no Barrel the better Herring. When you have ty'd the true Lovers Knot 'tis one of the Curses depending To Father a brood you never half got, without any further contending. When the Wifes brought a Bed, least the Cucko grow in the Midwife she makes an Oration And cryes the poor Infant is so like the Dad 'tis worthy of your Observation; Whilst the good Woman is pleased in her heart to hear them so Err in their chatting, Knowing her Husband and she was a-part when Bully, the Boy was a getting. Now how to avoid so heavy a Curse, I do like a Brother advise ye, Never to take her for better for worse, if you do, by my troth you'r a Nisey, For you without may get her consent and ne'r make half that Puther Then when she's false, or her Portion is spent you may change and make choice of another. LONDON. Printed for I. Back, at the Black Boy near Draw-Bridge on London-Bridge.
