B1004 11672415 48057
SIX Centuries OF SELECT HYMNS AND SPIRITUAL SONGS Collected out of the Holy Bible. TOGETHER With a Catechism, the Canticles, and a Catalogue of Vertuous Women. By William Barton, A. M. late Mini∣ster of St. Martins in Leicester. The Fourth Edition Corrected, with above a third part of Additions. LONDON, Printed by J. Heptinstall, for William Cooper at the Pelican in Little Britain. 1688.
TO The Right Honourable Sir Matthew Hale, Kt. Lord Chief Justice of England. Right Honourable, WHEN this Labour lay obstructed by the injuri∣ousness of others, and partly by my own inability, a word of your Lordship, in favour of this Work, did instantly excite the Right Wor∣shipfull, the Mayor and Aldermen of Leicester, and soon after some Honourable Personages and Wor∣thy Gentlemen of our Town and County to promote the Printing of this Book of Hymns: and had not fraud and injury inevitably pre∣vented, I had e're this presented this little Volume into your Honou∣rable
Hands in humble Gratulation of your Lordship's Favours: ho∣ping also to leave it as a lasting monument of your attested Piety and the Liberality of the Benefac∣tors ad of your Honourable Pro∣tection of, My LORD, Your Honours Most obliged and humbly devoted Servant, William Barton.
THE Author's EPISTLE TO THE READER. Courteous Reader, BE pleased to understand that I was sent to and requested by Mr. Richard Baxter to tran∣slate that famous Hymn, compo∣sed by St. Ambrose and St. Au∣gustine, called Te Deum, if I thought good, and so good I thought it, (harping upon Scripture all a∣long) that I did it in double Metre, both to the Chapter-Hymns and to the Psalm-Hymns, and to the former I prefixt the
Proofs, as you may find in pag. 2, &c. and to render it as near as possibly I could to the Prose-translation by variety of Metres, and the same correspon∣dency I have generally aimed at in all the work, the main design whereof is to propagate and pro∣mote Godliness, without which the Notions and Contests of Know∣ledge are but meer shadows, and (as the Apostle saith of Genealo∣gies) vain janglings; Now how far Spiritual Songs and Psalmody tend to true Godliness, we may ga∣ther from the Holy Scriptures, Col. 3.16. where the Apostle saith, Let the word of Christ dwell rich∣ly in you, in all wisedom, teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms and Hymns and spiritual Songs, &c. For in the use of such as these Christians may truly say, that they do teach and admonish one another. For certainly the most
pressing passages of Holy Scrip∣tures being put into smooth and familiar Verse, (keeping also the order, and, as much as may be, the words of the Prose-translation) will fix good Lessons in our mind and memory, so as to edify the understanding, and kindle the af∣fection, and do excellently instruct a Christian unto prayer and Medi∣tation, Ministring abundant hints and helps thereto: And is no in∣novation or induction, but a reno∣vation and reduction (rather) to Primitive use and Order. (And) how frequent, famous and familiar was the use of Hymns in the ancient Churches is both attested by the Ancients themselves, and applauded by worthy Writers of the later times. For the former see Justin Martyr in his 107th. Answer to the Or∣thodox (here following) touching Songs used in the Church: Ter∣tullian in his Apology against the
Gentiles, Chap. 2. and 39. Euse∣bius de praeparatione Evangelicâ. lib. 12. cap. 14. where he saith That by good right and reason, Christians did train up their Chil∣dren in Godliness, by the use of Songs and Hymns. And in his Ecclesiastical History, Lib. 5. Cap. 25. of the English Translati∣on, pag. 94. lin. 1. we have these words: How many Psalms and Hymns and Canticles were written from the beginning by faithfull Christians, which do celebrate the praise of Christ, &c. And for the late Writers, the Reverend Bishop Davenant on Col. 3.16. saith, That it is apparent by ancient Writers, that the ancient Churches did use Hymns. Comenius, in a little Book de∣dicated to his Majesty, saith, that among the Bohemian Bre∣thren they had above 700 Hymns in use, besides the Psalms of Da∣vid. But if we do reckon the
Hymns, Aliters, several Parts, and double Metres, together with the Prefatory Hymns, now pub∣lished, these do in all amount to the number of 778. Learned Dr. Hammond gives this Paraphrase upon Eph. 5.19. And let all your Mirth and Jollity be exprest in several kinds of Hymns, &c. that are used among Christians in a pious manner. Aretius upon that excellent Scripture, 1 Tim. 1.15. This is a faithfull saying, &c. hath these words, Sententia — digna quae Scribatur aureis, literis, ac publicè decantetur. i. e. A Saying worthy of a GOLDEN PEN, And to be sung i'th' Church by Christian Men. Wherefore I shall plead no fur∣ther at present, but only to pre∣sent my honest aim and purpose in these few Disticks following. To fix choice Scriptures firmly in our mind, And shew us where we shall those Scriptures find:
To move the mind to meditate and pray, And train up Children in a Godly way. To plant the Doctrine of our Catechism, And root up Errors, Heresie and Schism. To purge prophaneness, and create an Ocean Of Love and Loyalty, and due Devotion. This Third or New Century of Chapter-Hymns is composed (for the most part) of Context Scriptures, seldom fetching in any other save for a Doxology, and therefore one quotation at the beginning doth commonly serve for all; yet I dislike not the conjunction of parallel places but may say with holy Herbert, This Verse, Notes That, And both do make a motion Vnto a third, that ten leafs off do lye: Then as dispersed Herbs do make a Potion, These there make up a Christian's Destiny. And of the usefulness of these Hymns I may say again with him, A Verse may find him who a Sermon flies, And turn Delight into a Sacrifice.
Hymns were accounted Sacred and Divine, even among the an∣cient Heathen Poets, who the Apostle, Titus, Chap. 1. Vers. 12. calls Prophets, witness that of Hesiod in the beginning of his Book. , . Come, famous Muses, which from Pierus spring, Call God your Father while your Hymns you sing. Of what account then should Hymns be among Christians? Hymns especially taken out of the Holy Scriptures? Scripture-Hymns then may challenge the preheminence, for St. Paul cal∣leth it the Sword of the Spirit, for it is the Word of God; where∣by we may gather that the Hymns used anciently were com∣posed out of the Sacred Scriptures,
and certainly such as are thence aptly composed and keep nearest to the original Text are the most spiritual and fittest to be sung in God's worship. But if any shall think it far in∣feriour, for these ends, to the ac∣customed Psalmody; I hope I have now, in the regulation of the Psalm-Hymns, given fur∣ther satisfaction; having retained none but such pressing parts and passages as are generally suitable to the condition of all good Christians, and shall be of easie apprehension for application: I shall say no more, but that if these twenty short Hymns follow∣ing, prefix'd for Preface, (being supernumerary to the Centuries, and consisting most-what of History and Crimination) be thought by some not so suitable for Song, yet, for Apology-sake,
I would have the Judicious consi∣der, that some Psalms consist of the same Subjects. The 104th. Psalm (as learned Dr. Roberts saith) is a Narrative of the first five days Creation, and of Man (for whom all things were made) as is shewed throughout the Psalm. The 105th. and 106th. Psalms are Narrative, and Crimi∣natory also, as some other Psalms are, as Psalm 50. and Psalm 78. and many others: Neither are such Psalms without great use for Edification; and Edification is a matter of such importance, that the Apostle saith, 1 Cor. 15.5.26. Let all things be done to edifying: and, Greater is he that prophesies than he that speaks with tongues, that the Church may receive edi∣fying. So that if these twenty follow∣ing Hymns touching the Creati∣on, &c. were but frequently read,
though not sung, it might (by imprinting in the memory) con∣duce much to Edification, which is the design of the whole, By Thy Servant, For Jesus sake, William Barton. The Author has finished all that ever he intended both Hymns and Psalm-Book.
AN ADVERTISEMENT Concerning this Posthumous Edition OF THE HYMN-BOOK. Courteous Reader, BE pleased to understand that the Author of these Hymns, having a natural Propensity to Divine Poesie, and being conversant in the Hebrew Tongue, took great delight in the study and fre∣quent Meditation of David's Psalms, which at last did incline him to set upon a new Translation thereof into English Metre, (finding withall that the anci∣ent usage of our Speech in Sternhold
and Hopkins Translation was become obsoletely contemptuous to many people of this Age) which pious and laborious un∣dertaking he having happily effected caused it to be published in the year of our Lord 1644. which Impression selling off quickly, he set forth a second Edition in the year 1645. and it was again re∣printed An. 1654. in 12o. (besides the Pi∣racies which some committed upon him) afterwards finding himself at leisure, in his Meditations upon several parts of Sacred Scripture, he collected 100 Hymns and published them under the Title of a Century of Select Hymns collected out of S. Scripture and Printed Anno 1659. in 12o. and finding in a little time that this single Century was very acceptable to the people, it did much encourage him to proceed, as he did in collecting another Century of Cha∣pter-Hymns (for so he called them to distinguish them from the Psalm-Hymns which he afterwards published) for af∣ter he had finished his second Century of Chapter-Hymns, he took occasion to over∣look the multiplicity of Aliters which he had made in his Translation of the Psalms, wherein he found that many of those which he had refused at first were not in∣feriour
to those which he had published in his Psalm-Book, but were far too many to insert in that Book, therefore not willing that any of his Labours should be lost, he composed out of them two Centuries more of Psalm-Hymns, which four Centuries unpollished and as yet not Methodized, to use the Author's own words in his Epistle to the Reader before the Psalm-Hymns Section 5. [Because these Centuries were formerly put forth Anno Dom. 1668 against my will by an imperfect Copy and in great disorder, I have put them into a handsome method, passing by no Psalm of common use, but have in whole or in part, inserted it, and have put the whole Psalms together in double Metres,] and having re∣viewed the four Centuries which were surreptitiously printed without the know∣ledge or consent of the Author, but af∣ter that he did then methodize and po∣lish them at his leisure to render them as near the Hebrew, and yet as smooth and acceptable as was possible to mean Capacities, and in the year 1670. he published the two Centuries of Chapter-Hymns; and in the year 1672. he set forth the two Centuries of Psalm-Hymns
at his own proper cost and charges, and all in order according to his own desire and design; but since that time it pleasing God to prolong his days he collected a third Century more out of the Chapters of the Old and New Testament, and ano∣ther out of the Psalms, which he com∣pleated, together with a Catechism, the Book of Canticles, and a Catalogue of the Vertuous Women mentioned in Holy Writ, all in Metre, with the last Ad∣ditions and Corrections of the Author's own hand writing, and his twenty Prefatory Hymns, besides his Replenish∣ings with various Metres, as also com∣pleating it with divers excellent Aliters, with his last supervising, and then de∣clared to his Children, Relations and Friends that he had finished all he de∣signed, returning thanks to Almighty God that had spared him to finish his Work, and hoped he should survive to see both his Psalm-book and Hymn-book (so at large compleated) to be printed, but within a short time after he sickened, and upon the 14th day of May, 1678. it pleased God to call him out of this life to his Heavenly Kingdom being aged about 74, or 75; and since his death, his last Revise of the Psalm-book was printed
Anno 1682. and Now this present year 1688. is published the rest of his Works carefully preserved ever since his death, viz. The Compleat Hymn-Book in Six Centuries, besides Aliters, double Metres and distinct Parts, which toge∣ther with the Prefatory Hymns amounts to the number of 778 Hymns, besides the Catechism, the Book of Canticles, and a Catalogue of Vertuous Women enlarged, all in Metre, and thoroughly corrected by his own hand a little before his Death. The Third Century of Cha∣pter-Hymns are wholly New, and the last Century that he made of Psalm-Hymns (which though mixed for Me∣thod sake are distinguishable by the Poe∣tical Arguments) were never before printed: And though the Psalm-Hymns in this Edition follow in order, yet you may not expect here a Psalm-Book; for here is never a Hymn composed upon any of these 29 following Psalms; viz. the 5.10.13.17.18.22.26.27.28.35.38.40.56.57.58.59.60.64.71.75.76.78.88.94.109.116.118.140.143. for these you may see his Psalm-Book printed 1682. in 12o. which with this Hymn-Book makes up the Author's Di∣vine Works compleat.
I need say no more concerning this Po∣sthumous Edition of the Hymn-Book, it will sufficiently manifest its excellency in the perusal; but this only I do assure the Reader that all the care imaginable has been taken that no Injustice might be done to the Memory of the Worthy Author (through any considerable Er∣rata's) not only by the Circumspection of the Printer and Corrector but by sending the Sheets of the whole Work to be Cor∣rected by his Son, And Your Servant in Christ Jesus, Edward Barton, Minister of Welford in Northamptonshire.
Justin Martyr of the use and Excellency of Spiritual Songs in the Church. In his 107. Answer to the Orthodox. IT moves the mind and makes affections strong To that which is so taking in the SONG. The fleshly motions are by it supprest, And vitious thoughts which foes unseen sug∣gest. The mind it moistens (as a fruitfull field) Abundance of divine good things to yield. It makes Religious men (such power it brings) Champions for patience in all adverse things. It cures the Godly man of worldly cares. It is the Spirits Sword, as Paul declares. Which acts and arms a Christian Souldier so That he may grapple with his ghostly foe; For 'tis the word of God, which while revolv'd And sung aloud, the Devils are dissolv'd And driven away: yea, it hath power so great The mind to perfect, and to make compleat With Christian vertues, whiles (in sacred throngs) The Saints set on with these spiritual Songs.
ERRATA. PAge 214. Line 10. for stock reade flock. p. 244. l. 20. for mensounder r. each foun∣der.) p. 246. l. 9. for breaketh r. baketh. p. 300. l. 1. for known r. know. p. 423. l. 4. for blessed r. blasted. p. 428. l. 13. after right add hand. p. 447. for Psalm 23. r. Psalm 50.14, 15, 23. (1. M.) p. 477. l. 11. for fruit r. bruit. p. 500. l. 10. for the r. thy. p. 583. l. 11. for he r. be. p. 627. l. 13. after and add that. p. 637. l. 26. after griev'd add because.
TWENTY Prefatory Hymns. HYMN 1. Creation. First Day. All People, &c. Gen. 1.1. IN the beginning is set forth How God created Heaven and Earth Earth did lie void, and darkness keep Upon the face of all the Deep. Then said the Lord of sovereign might Let there be light, and there was light: And God saw light, a glorious spark, And God divided light from dark. And for the light, he call'd it day, And darkness night, thus nam'd were they, Evening and Morning set and rose, And these the First Day did compose. Rev. 4.11. Lord thou art worthy of the Crown Of Glory, Honour, and Renown; For Thou, O Lord, did'st all things make, And made they were for thy Will sake.
2. PART. Second Day. v. 6, 7. A Firmament did God provide, Waters from Waters to divide: The Firmament which God had fram'd He called Heaven, and so 'twas nam'd. And let, said God, the Firmament Divide the Watry Element: Waters above from these below Let be distinct, and it was so. Evening and Morning set and rose And did the Second Day compose: Let Israel's God be prais'd therefore From first to last for evermore. 3. PART. Third Day. v. 9. And this Command from God was given Touching the Waters under Heaven, That all should gather to a place, And the dry Land should shew her face. v. 10. And God did call the dry Land Earth, The Waters Seas, which he set forth: And God beheld that heaped Floud, And saw that it was very good.
Then was the Earth of God enjoyn'd To bring forth Herbs of every kind, The Grass and Trees to yield their Fruit, And Seed which in it self had Root. And God commanded all to grow Upon the Earth, and it was so; Evening and Morning set and rose, And these the Third Day did compose. Let Israel's God be prais'd therefore From first to last for evermore; And let all faithfull people then Say cheerfully, Amen, Amen. 4. PART. Fourth Day. v. 14, 15. And, said the Lord, let there be lights Distinguishing the Days and Nights: And let them shine within the Spheres For signs, for seasons, days and years. And God made two for greater light The Son for Day, the Moon for Night: All sorts of Stars he made beside, The light from darkness to divide. And God beheld that all was good Which he had made, and so it stood▪ Evening and Morning set and rose And these the Fourth Day did compose.
Let Israel's God be prais'd therefore From first to last for evermore: And blessed be the King of Kings Who doth alone such wonderous things. 5. PART. Fifth Day. v. 20. And God did give the Waters charge To bring forth moving things at large; The living Creatures, Works most rare, And Fowl to fly 'ith open air. And God created mighty Whales, And living Creatures that had Scales, And winged Fowl of every kind, And all was good, and to his mind. And then God blessed them and said A great encrease by you be made, Let Fishes fill the Sea, so wide; And Fowl on Earth be multiply'd. Evening and Morning set and rose And these the Fifth day did compose: Let Israel's God be prais'd therefore From first to last for evermore. 6. PART. Sixth Day. v. 24. And God enjoyn'd the Earth to bring And to produce each kind of thing,
Cattell and creeping things, and Beasts Each in his kind to make encrease. Then said the Lord, now let us make Man in his kind for our own sake: And let us make and form him, thus, In our own Image like to us. And let them have Dominion or'e The Fish, the Fowl, the Sea, the Shore: And every Creature that is found To swim in Sea, or go on Ground. So God made Mans original Stem Both Male and Female made he them: And, blessing them, said God most high Be fruitfull now, and multiply: And fill the Earth, and it subdue, I give the Lordship all to you: And ye shall rule as Sovereign king O're Fish and Fowl and every thing. And lo! said God, I give you meat, The Herbs, and Fruits of Trees to eat; To Birds and Beasts the Herbs that grow, I give for food, and it was so. And God beheld how all things stood And all he made was very good. Evening and Morning set and rose And these the Sixth Day did compose. Lord thou art worthy of the Crown Of Glory, Honour and Renown, For thou, O Lord, didst all things make For thine own will and pleasure sake.
HYMN 2. The Sabbath. Our Father, &c. Gen. 2.1. THUS Heaven and Earth were set in place With all their Hosts in six days space; The Seventh Day the Lord did rest Which day he sanctifi'd and blest Because thereon the Lord had stay'd From all the Work which he had made. Heb. 11.3. And thus by faith we understand The Worlds were made by God's command, So that the things which now we see Were not compos'd of things that be; Something of nothing God did call, And of that something God made all. Thus also we are put in mind That there's a Rest remains behind, An Everlasting Heavenly Rest Whereof God's people are possest, And we that do believe in him, At th' hour of death shall enter in. Let Israel's God be prais'd therefore From first to last for evermore: And let the People all proclaim The praises of his holy Name, And all of us with one accord Say here Amen, praise ye the Lord.
HYMN 3. Marriage. Our Father, &c. Gen 2.7.18, 21. &c. AND God the Lord did man compound Of Dust he gathered off the Ground, Breath'd in his breast a lively flame, So man a living Soul-became: Yet 'tis not good, said th' Holy One, Not good that man should be alone. Now will I make a helper meet For him, as his companion sweet; Then God made Adam fall asleep: And so he slept a sleep full deep: Then took the Lord a Rib most fit, And clos'd up flesh instead of it. And of that Rib a Woman made And brought her to the man, who said Bone of my bone is this to me, And flesh of mine own flesh is she: Woman she shall be call'd, because Took out of Man, himself she was. Therefore a man shall leave behind Father and Mother ne're so kind, And cleave unto his Wife alone, And they shall be one flesh and bone: And both were naked fairly fram'd▪ Man and his Wife, and not asham'd.
Psal. 106. ult. Psal. 67.3. Let Israel's God be prais'd therefore From first to last for evermore, And let the people all proclaim, The praises of his holy Name; And let us all with one accord Say here Amen: praise ye the Lord. HYMN 4. Paradise. All People, &c. Gen. 3.8. AND God did plant his Garden trees East-ward in Eden full of these: All that was pleasant to the sight, And good for food or for delight. And into Eden thus adorn'd He brought the man whom he had form'd; And made all Paradise his seat To dress it and to keep it neat. The tree of Life, of greatest price, Was in the midst of Paradise. And there the Tree of Knowledge stood, Knowledge of evil and of good. And God did bring each Bird and Beast (Even from the greatest to the least) For Man to name, and by his Word Was named every Beast and Bird. Let Israel's God be prais'd therefore From first to last for evermore:
And let all sorts of people then, Say cheerfully Amen, Amen. HYMN 5. The Covenant of Works. All People, &c. Gen. 2.16. AND God the Lord did give command To Adam, saying, understand Of every tree this ground doth bear Thou may'st eat freely any where. But of the tree of Knowledge (still) Knowledge, I say, of Good and Ill, To eat thereof be not entic'd, For if thou eat thereof thou dy'st. This tree, I say, which I so call Thou shalt not eat of it at all: For in the Day that thou shalt try To eat thereof, thou sure shalt die. All Glory to the Holy One That sits upon the Soveraign Throne, And to the Son and Holy Ghost Be Glory to the uttermost. HYMN 6. Man's shamefull Fall. Our Father, &c. Gen. 3.1. BUT now the Serpent was more deep Than any Beast the field did keep,
Subtler than all that God had made, And to the Woman thus he said Yea, hath God said ye shall not eat Of all the Garden-trees for meat? Fear not, ye shall not surely die, For God doth know assuredly That when ye both thereof have eat, Your eyes it shall illuminate; And ye as glorious Gods shall be, Knowing both good and ill, as he. And when the Woman (having view'd) Saw that the tree was good for food, And very pleasant to the eyes, And to be wisht to make one wise, She took the fruit thereof and ate, And of it did communicate. She gave her Husband of the meat, And he did also take and eat: Then were the eyes of both awak'd, And saw that they were wholly nak'd; And then they sew'd fig-leaves together Aprons to hide their shame however. Then hear the voice of God did they There walking in the cool of day: And in the Garden (got aside) They sought where they might closely hide, Thinking from him, that all things sees, To hide themselves among the trees.
HYMN VII. Adam's Arraignment and Ex∣cuse. Our Father, &c. Gen. 3.9.11. THEN God call'd Adam, And, said he, Adam where art thou? answer me. I heard thy voice then Adam said▪ Ith' Garden and I was afraid, And hid my self because that I Was naked thus opprobriously. v. 11. Then said the Lord, how didst thou know That thou wast nak'd? Who told thee so? What! hast thou eaten of the tree Which flatly was forbidden thee? Whereof with penalty so great I charg'd thee that thou should'st not eat? The Woman, Lord, then said the man▪ Thou gav'st for my Companion, She gave me of it; it was she That offer'd that unhappy tree; She gave to me of that dear meat, And I unwittingly did eat. HYMN 8. Eve's Arraignment and Excuse. Gen. 3.13. 1 Tim. 2.14. Rom. 5.12. THEN to the Woman, who was first In the Transgression most accurst, Thus said the Lord, what thing is this That thou hast done so much amiss?
For thou hast done, as thou shalt find, To the Destruction of Mankind. Then said the Woman, that foul fiend, The Serpent, whom I thought my friend, The Subtile Serpent, it was he That cousned and beguiled me; And I, beguil'd by his deceit, Was so unhappy as to eat. HYMN 9. The Serpent's Censure, and the Co∣venant of Grace intimated to his Sorrow. Gen 3.14, 15. THEN to the Serpent, said the Lord, Since thou hast done this thing abhorr'd, Above all beasts to thee be woe; Upon thy belly shalt thou go, And Dust to thy extreme disgrace, Shall be thy food all thy life space. Between thee and the Woman-kind I will put enmity of mind: Also between thy seed and hers There shall be everlasting Wars: To bruise thy head, as thou shalt feel, And thou shalt also bruise his heel. HYMN 10. The Woman's Censure and the Mans. Gen. 3.16, 17, 18, 19. AND to the Woman God said thus, Thy sorrows shall be numerous, And also thy conceptions; In sorrow shalt thou bring forth Sons,
Thy mind shall to thy husband be, And he shall Lord it over thee. 17. And unto Adam thus he said, Because that thou hast disobey'd, Hearkning to what thy Wife did say, And her suggestion did obey, And so hast eaten of the tree Which flatly was forbidden thee: The ground is cursed for thy sake, With grief, thereof thou shalt partake; In sorrow thou shalt eat thy bread As long as thou on Earth dost tread: Thistles and thorns to thee 't shall yield, And thou shalt eat the herb of th' field. With sad and sweaty face shalt thou Eat carefull bread, got by the plow, Till thou return unto the Earth Whence also thou wast taken forth: For by Creation, Dust thou wast, And shalt return to Dust at last. HYMN 11. Adam's Expulsion from Paradise. Gen. 3.21, to ult. AND unto Adam and his Wife (Now in a mortal state of life) Did God the Lord make coats of skin To cloth their naked bodies in: Then said the Lord Almighty, thus, The Man's become as one of us. Behold, said God his deeper skill How well he knows both good and ill!
And now lest he put forth his hand To th' tree of life, and think to stand, And eat thereof and never die (As he may think presumptuously) Therefore the Lord depriv'd him quite Of that sweet garden of delight: And to confute his fond device, He put him out of Paradise; And sent him forth, with open shame, To till the ground from whence he came: So God drove out the man, disgrac'd, And at the East of Eden plac'd The Cherubins with flaming sword On every side that turn'd and stir'd, To keep the way from all access To th' tree of Life and Blessedness. Rom. 5.12. And thus by one man entred sin Into the World; so Death came in: And Death hath passed over all, Since all have sinned by the fall; And as from Adam, all along, Death reigned over old and young. Rom. 5.18. So by one man's obedience Are many cleared from offence; That as sin reign'd to Death and pain, So grace to righteousness might reign: Through Jesus Christ our onely Lord, Wherefore praise him with one accord.
HYMN 12. The World degenerate. To the tune of the Ten Commandments: Or, All People, &c. Gen. 6.1. IT came to pass when men began to multiply upon the Earth, And Daughters born to many a man were fair and beauteous from their birth; That then the Sons of godly seed did see the Daughters sprung from those That practic'd many a wicked Deed, and took them Wives of all they chose. Then said the Lord, my spirit no more shall strive with man that is but flesh; Yet shall his years be twice threescore to wait repentance and redress. And God did see Mans works were nought, and full of foul Iniquity: Each motion of his heart and thought was onely ill continually. And God repented, for his part, for making man upon the ground: And lo: it griev'd him at his heart that man so monstrous should be found. I will destroy (the Lord then said) both man and beast and creeping thing, And fowl, and all that I have made, for I repent their fashioning.
HYMN 13. The Ark Ordered. Gen. 6.8. BUT Noah with the Lord found grace, (a perfect man without offence) While all the Earth before his face, was fill'd with fraud and violence. And unto Noah God said thus make thee an Ark of Gopher Wood, For th' Earth is most flagitious and I will drown it with a floud. But thou into the Ark shalt come thou and thy Wife, thy Sons their Wives: Two of each sort of Creatures dumb thou shalt bring in to save their lives. Of clean ones thou shalt take thee seven, and likewise food for them and thee: Both beasts and fowl from under heaven, both male and female shall they be. Heb. 11.7. Thus faithfull Noah, mov'd with fear prepar'd an Ark (as Scripture saith) To save his House, and prov'd an heir of righteousness which is by faith. To God the Father and the Son and to the Holy Ghost therefore, Be Glory done as first begun, is now, and shall be evermore.
HYMN 14. The Floud rising. IN the six hundreth year it was of Noah's life; the seventeenth Day, And second Month, it came to pass that Noah's Floud swept all away. Then all the Fountains of the Deep were broken up beneath the Sky: And Windows in the Clouds that keep, were opened universally. The Rain unmeasurably fell full forty Days and forty Nights: The Waters did prevail and swell unto the most excessive heights. The Ark was born above the Earth no less than fifteen cubits high: And all the Hills which now stand forth, did underneath the Waters lie. And all that mov'd upon the Ground, all Fowl and Beasts (name what you can) And every living thing was drown'd, whatever breath'd; and every man. HYMN 15. Eight Souls saved in the Ark. 1 Pet. 3.20. ONELY was Noah sav'd alive, and those few souls that did imbark, With Noah (whiles the Floud let drive) and were preserved in the Ark.
All were destroy'd, save such as sail'd in Noah's Ark, which scap'd however; And still the Watry Flouds prevail'd, for almost half a year together. Let Israel's God be prais'd therefore, a God of Judgment, sure is he: And let the whole Earth evermore give praise to him: Amen say we. HYMN 16. The Floud falling. AND God remembred Noah then, and every living thing with him; The Cattel also, and the Men, that to the Ark were entred in. And God did make a drying Wind pass o're the Earth where flouds had rag'd, Which for that purpose was design'd, and so the Waters were asswag'd. The Fountains also of the Deep and Heavens Windows, whence it rain'd, Were stopt, and made all close to keep, and Rain from Heaven was restrain'd. And waters from the Earth always were going off: to leave it dry, And in an hundred fifty days they were abated wondrously.
And in the seventh Month that Year and on the seventeenth Day of that, The Ark did rest and plain appear upon the Hills of ARARAT. And still the waters did decay untill the tenth Month did ensue; And in that Month on its first Day, the tops of mountains were in view. HYMN 17. The Raven and Dove sent out. Then Noah sent a Raven out which went and passed to and fro, Untill the waters all about were dryed from the Earth below. Then also sent he forth a Dove to see if waters did abate, From off the Earth and all above, but they were still at too much height. And the poor Dove could find no place whereon her weary foot might stand, So she return'd to th' Ark apace, and he receiv'd her with his hand. Let Israel's God be prais'd therefore, and with his glory Earth be fill'd And let the People evermore, to him all praise and glory yield.
HYMN 18. The Dove with the Olive leaf. Gen 8. AND seven Days more did Noah stay, then sends the Dove from th' Ark again, Thereby to make a fresh assay how clear the Earth was of the rain. And in the Evening cometh she, brings in her mouth (good news to tell) An Olive-leaf plukt off the tree; so Noah knew the waters fell. Then staid he yet seven other Days, and freshly sends the Dove a-shore; And, finding place, the Dove there stays, and came not at him any more. Then Noah did remove strait way the covering of the Ark, to spy, And lo! that Year, first Month and Day, the face of all the Earth was dry. Let Israel's God, the King of Kings, be ever blest and praised then, Whose mercies are above all things; and let all people say Amen. HYMN 19. The Covenant signed by the Rain∣bow. Gen. 8.15, &c. Chap. 9.11, &c. God spake to Noah then, and said, Thy house and harbour now resign,
And let the Creatures be convey'd Out of the Ark with thee and thine. And let them breed abundantly In all the Earth, and fruitfull be, And ye shall greatly multiply, And I will covenant with thee. And I will make my Covenant sure, And there shall never more be floud, To drown the Earth while Days endure; For I will make my Covenant good. And when I bring a Cloud on Earth, Therein there shall be seen my Bow▪ And that shall set my Covenant forth, And I will look upon it so. That I may call to mind, afresh, The Everlasting Covenant made Between the Lord and mortal flesh In all the Earth, as I have said. O let the God of Israel Be prais'd and magnifi'd therefore, And people all on Earth that dwell Give thanks to him for evermore.
HYMN 20. Noah's Sacrifice. The Mighty God, &c. Gen. 8.20. AND Noah built an Altar to the Lord And of clean beasts and fowl he offered two: And with these Offrings was Gods Altar stor'd, And God well pleas'd that Noah so should do; And so the Lord resented a sweet savour, And Noah for this Act was in his favour. And thus said God, whose bowels yern'd within I will no more for mans sake curse the ground, For mans imaginations are but sin, And such by Nature from his youth are found: Neither will I for ever any more, Smite all things living, as I did before. And while the Earth and Mountains shall re∣main Seeds-time and Harvest ever shall abide: And cold and heat shall never fail again; Summer and winter shall retain their tide; And Day and Night (increasing or decreasing) Shall keep their seasons without fail or cea∣sing. Gen. 9.12. And this shall be the Covenant which I make, And this the Seal betwixt my self and you And every living Creature, for your sake, And all the Generations that ensue:
I'll set my Bow i'th' Cloud, to be a token Between me and the Earth, as I have spoken Doxology. Rev. 1.4, 5. Chap. 4.8. 1 John 5.7. To him that was and is, and is to come, To God Almighty the most Holy One, And unto Jesus Christ his onely Son, And to the seven Spirits before the Throne, To Father, Son and Holy Ghost together, Be Kingdom, Glory, Power and Praise for ever.
The Table of the Prefatory Hymns. Hymn 1. CReation. The First Day. i. The Second Day. ii. The Third Day. Ibid. The Fourth Day. iii. The Fifth Day. iv. The Sixth Day. Ibid. 2. The Sabbath. vi. 3. Marriage. vii. 4. Paradise. viii. 5. The Covenant of Works. ix. 6. Man's shamefull Fall. Ibid. 7. Adam's Arraignment and Excuse. xi. 8. Eve's Arraignment and Excuse Ibid. 9. The Serpents Censure, and the Covenant in Christ intimated. xii. 10. The Womans Censure and the Man's. Ibid. 11. Mans Expulsion from Paradise. xiii. 12. The World degenerate. xv. 13. The Ark ordered. xvi. 14. The Deluge, or Flood rising. xvii. 15. Eight Souls saved in the Ark. Ibid. 16. The Deluge ceasing. xviii. 17. The Raven sent forth and the Dove. xix. 18. The Dove with the Olive-leaf. xx. 19. Noah Coming out of the Ark, and the Co∣venant of the Rainbow. Ibid. 20. Noah's Sacrifice. xxii.
The First Century. Hymn I. Access to the Throne of Grace at our awaking. 1 Tim. 4.10. 2 Cor. 1.10. Psal. 119.133. Jude 21. Psal. 73.24. Rev. 22.8. Tune. Ye Children, &c. O God the Saviour of all men, And most especially of them That faithfully believe in thee. Who hast preserv'd us all times past, And wilt preserve us to the last As still our trust and hope shall be. Order our steps in thy good word, And let no sin reign in us, Lord, But keep us ever in thy love; And let thy Counsels be our guide Till thou receiv'st us to abide In glory with thy Saints above. Psal. 28.9.115. 1. Mat. 6.13. Psal. 123.3.33.22.31.1. Lord, save thy Church in every Age, Govern and bless thine Heritage, And lift them up for evermore.
We daily magnifie thy fame, And thy most high and holy Name World without end we still adore. Vouchsafe us, Lord, thy grace herein To keep us clear this day from sin, Shew mercy, Lord, shew mercy free: Shew mercy, Lord, as we confide On thee, O Lord, have I reli'd, Confounded let me never be. The second Metre. The Mighty God. O God the Saviour of all sorts of men, Especially of them that do believe; Author & finisher of the faith of them Whose sure salvation, Lod, thou wilt at∣chieve. Who hast preserv'd us always heretofore And wilt, we trust, preserve us evermore. Order our steps in thy good word, O God, And let no wickedness in us bear sway; But Sin and Satan let be under-trod, And all our steps upholden in thy way: And let thy Counsels guide and never leave us, Till to thy glory, Lord, thou shalt receive us. Hymn II. Acclamations of Praise, or Te Deum Laudamus. Exemplifi'd with proofs of Holy Scripture. Rom. 15.6. Rev. 11.17. All people, &c. WE praise thee, O God, with one accord, We acknowledge thee to be the Lord,
All the whole Earth adores thy Name, Father of everlasting fame. Rev. 7.11.5.11. Isa. 6.2. To Thee aloud all Angels cry, The Heav'ns and all the Powers on high, Both Cherubin and Seraphin bright Continual cries of praise recite. Isa. 6.3. Rev. 5.11.4.8. O Holy, Holy, Holy LORD, Great God of Sabbaoth (they record) With splendor of thy glory spread In Heav'n and Earth replenished. 2. Part. Rev. 4.10. Th' Apostles glorious Company Praise Thee, O God, perpetually, The Prophets goodly fellowship Praise Thee, and let no moment slip. Rev. 7.7, 9, 10. The noble and victorious Host Of Martyrs do thy praises boast, The Holy Church throughout the Earth Acknowledge and extoll thy Worth. Isa. 9.6. Joh. 14.36. The Father of boundless Majesty, Thy true and only Son most high, Also that sweet Remembrancer The Holy Ghost the Comforter. 3. Part. Psal. 34.10.2.7. Thou art, O Christ, King of renown Invested with a Glorious Crown.
Thou art (before all time begun) The Fathers everlasting Son. 1 Pet. 3.18. Gal. 4.4. Heb. 9.15. Thou undertaking in our room Didst not abhor the Virgins Womb. The pains of Death orecome by Thee Made Heav'n to all Believers free. Heb. 1.3. John 5.22. At God's right hand Thou hast thy Seat, And in the Fathers glory great. We do believe that Thou shalt come To judge us at the Day of Doom. 4. Part. Rev. 5.9. Mat. 8.11. Lord, help thy Servants whom (when lost) Thy bloud redeem'd at so great cost. Place them on Everlasting Thrones Of glory with thy Holy Ones. Psal. 28.9. Thy People, Lord, do Thou protect, And bless thine Heritage Elect, Govern thy Church, and, Lord, advance For ever thine Inheritance. Psal. 145.1, 2. From day to day, O Lord, do We Highly exalt and honour Thee: Thy Name we worship and adore World without end for evermore. 5. Part. Mat. 6.13. Psal. 123.3. Vouchsafe, O Lord, we humbly pray, To keep us safe from sin this day:
O Lord, have mercy on us all, Have mercy on us when we call. Psal 33.22 31.1. Thy mercy Lord to us dispence According to our confidence: Lord, I have put my trust in Thee, Confounded let me never be. The second Metre. Rom. 15.6. Rev. 11.17.7.11. Ye Children, &c. O God we praise thy Holy Name, Thy Sovereign Lordship we proclaim, Confessing Thee the Lord alone; All the whole Earth doth worship Thee The Father from ETERNITY, The true and Everlasting One. Angels loud voices joyn with ours, The Heavens and all the Heavenly Powers, do ever magnifie thy fame; To thee the winged Cherubim And the bright burnng Seraphim, Continual acclamations frame. 2. Part. Isa. 6.3. Rev. 5.11.4.10.7.7. Thrice Holy Lord, they joyntly say, Whose royal Power all Hosts obey, thy glory bright fills Heav'n and Earth: Th' Apostles glorious Company, And Prophets sweet SOCIETY, perpetual praises do pour forth. The Noble Host of Martyrs stout, The Holy Church the World throughout,
thy power profess, thy praise prefer, The Father of endless Majesty, Thine only Son most true, most high, with th' Holy Ghost the Comforter. 3. Part. Psal. 24.10.2.7. Gal. 4.4. Heb. 9.15. Thou art the King of glory, O Christ, The King of glory in the high'st, the Fathers everlasting Son. Thou freely didst our flesh assume, And not abhor the Virgins Womb, for Mans redemption to be done. When thou hadst overcome the pains Of sharpest death which sadly reigns o're all mankind because of sin; Thou didst set open (in thy Love) The Kingdom (there) of Heav'n above, that all Believers might come in. 4. Part. Heb. 1.3. Joh. 5.22. Mat. 8.11.19.28. O Saviour Christ, Thou art set down At God's right hand, in high renown, and in thy Fathers glory bright; We do believe it, Lord, of thee, That thou shalt come our judge to be, who hast the sole and Sovereign right. We humbly pray Thee, Lord, therefore, Assist thy servants evermore, those whom thy precious blood did buy: Make them be numbred on the Thrones Of glory, with the Holy Ones, in Everlasting dignity. 5. Part. Psal. 28.9.115.1. Mat. 6.13. Psal. 123.3.33.22.31.1. Thy people, Lord, thine heritage, Preserve and bless from age to age,
govern and lift them up for ever. We dayly magnifie thy Name, We worship and adore the same World without end, surceasing never. Thy grace and favour Lord give in, To keep us safe this day from sin: Shew mercy, Lord, shew mercy free, Shew mercy, Lord, as we confide, On thee, O Lord, have I rely'd, confounded let me never be. The third Metre. To the Common-Tune. WE praise thee, God, we acknowledge thee the only Lord to be: O Father, the Eternal One! the whole Earth worships Thee. To thee all Angels cry aloud, the Heavens and all therein: Continually to thee do cry Cherube and Seraphin. O Holy, Holy, Holy Lord, the Lord the God of Hosts: In Heaven and Earth thy praise is spread, throughout the Skie and Coasts. The Apostles glorious Company, and Prophets goodly train: And Noble Host of Martyrs blest thy praises do proclaim. The Holy Church confesseth Thee throughout the spacious Earth:
The Father of a Majesty that cannot be set forth. Also thine Honourable true, thy dear and only Son: And Holy Ghost the Comforter of every faithfull one. Of glory thou, O Christ, art King, (that Title is thy due:) Thou art the Everlasting Son Of God the Father true. When sinfull mans deliverance was that thou camest for: To be inclos'd in Virgins Womb, Thou diddest not abhor. The sharp and cruel pains of death when thou had'st conquer'd whole: Thou didst set open Heavens gate to every faithfull soul. Thou in thy Fathers glory great at God's right hand dost sit: We trust that thou shalt come to be our Judge, to set us quit. Help then thy servants whom Thou hast bought with thy precious blood: In endless glory reckon them among thy Saints so good. Do thou, O Lord, thy people save, bless thine inheritance: Govern them, Lord, by thy good grace, and ever them advance. We magnifie thee day by day, thy Name we do adore:
World without end continually, vouchsafe thy grace therefore. And keep us, Lord, this day from sin lest we offend and fall: Have mercy on us, O good Lord, have mercy on us all. Lord, let thy mercy light on us as we do trust in thee: In thee I trust, Lord, let me not confounded ever be. Fourth Metre. To the Tune of the 50th. Psalm. The mighty God, &c. WE give thee praise, O God, with one accord, We all acknow∣ledge thee to be the Lord: All the whole Earth adores thee, O most high, The blessed Fa∣ther from Eternity. Angels loud Voi∣ces joyn their praise with ours, The Heav'ns on high, and all the Heavenly Powers. Both Cherubin and Seraphin so bright. Continual cries of praise to thee recite: O Holy, Ho∣ly, Holy Lord, they say,
Lord God of Sab∣baoth, whom all Hosts obey, Both Heav'n and Earth are filled every where With thy Majes∣tick glory shining there. The blest Apo∣stles glorious Company Do praise thy Ho∣ly Name harmoniously: The Prophets good∣ly fellowship proclaim The constant prai∣ses of thy glorious Name: The Noble Hosts of Martyrs also bless thee, The Holy Church through all the Earth confess thee. The Father of a Majesty unknown, Thine Honoura∣ble true and only Son: Also the Ho∣ly Ghost they do confess The Comforter of thine in their distress. The King of Glo∣ry thou, O Christ, art Crowned, The Fathers e∣verlasting Son renowned. When thou took'st on thee (what none other can)
Namely to work deliverance for man: The Virgins Womb thou diddest not abhor To enter on the Work thou camest for. When thou hadst quell'd the pains of death so grievous, Thou openedst Hea∣ven gate to all Believers. At God's right hand thou hast thy seat on high, And in the Fa∣thers glorious dignity: We do believe that thou shalt have the Throne, And (one day) come to judge us every one. O therefore help thy servants so esteemed, That them (when lost) thy precious blood redeemed. O make them to be numbred with thy Saints In endless Glo∣ry, where no fulness wants: Lord, save thy peo∣ple, bless thine Heritage, Govern and lift them up from age to age. We magnifie Thee daily evermore, World without end Thy Name we do adore▪
Vouchsafe to keep us, Lord, this day from sin, Have mercy on us, and thy grace give in. O Let thy mer∣cy, Lord, upon us light, As we have e∣ver trusted in thy might: O Lord, in Thee my confidence is grounded: O therefore let me never be confounded. Hymn III. Adventus Christi; or Accomplish∣ment of the first Promise. Joh. 1.14. THe eternal word took humane flesh, and dwelt amongst us here; And men beheld his gloriousness most plainly to appear. As of th' alone begotten one of God the Father, true; So also full of grace He sho'n, and glorious in our view. And of his fulness from on high we have, in every place, Received Universally and (richly) grace for grace: For lo! the Law Man's bound unto, by Moses was made known, But grace and truth to know and do, by Jesus Christ alone.
To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, all glory be therefore; As was, and is to th' uttermost, and shall be evermore. Hymn IV. A faithfull saying. 1 Tim. 1.15. John 11.25.5.24. THIS is a saying verify'd, and worthy all esteem: That Jesus Christ came down and di'd, poor sinners to redeem. His Name whoever trusts upon, shall live, although he die; And free from Condemnation, shall live, Eternally. To him that thus hath loved us, and cancell'd all our score: With that pure flood of his own blood, be praise for evermore. Hymn V. A joyfull Death, or the Song of Holy Simeon. Luke 2.29. NOW lettest thou thy servant, Lord, depart in perfect peace, According to thy faithfull Word, concerning his decease. For now mine eyes have seen declar'd (ere death shall end my race) The saving health Thou hast prepar'd before all peoples face. 31. Rev. 1.4.— A light to lighten clear enough the Gentiles where they dwell,
And to be made the glory of thy People Israel. To God the Father and the Son and Holy Ghost therefore, Be glory done as first begun, and shall be evermore. Hymn VI. A Morning Exercise. All People, &c. Lam. 3.22. 'TIS of God's mercies infinite, That we are not consumed quite; Because indeed they still prevail, And his compassions never fail. 23, 24. Each morning brings a fresh supply, So great is God's fidelity: The Lord's my portion, saith my soul, Therefore my hopes on him shall roll. 26. The Lord is very nigh to those That wait on him at his dispose: Good to the Soul impowr'd with grace, Unfainedly to seek his face. 27. And it is good in every strait, Both quietly to hope and wait, For that salvation to attend, Which God in his good time shall send..
Hymn VII. A Promise of sending the Holy Ghost, and of the Miracles at Pentecost. Luke 24.49. THUS spake our Saviour Christ to his, behold! I send, said he, To you my Father's PROMISES, which ye have heard of me. Luke 24.49. But stay ye at Jerusalem untill the day draw nigh, And ye shall be indued then with power from on high. Acts 2.1. And when full fifty days were come (thus hinted by our Lord) They all were gather'd in a room and all with one accord. And suddenly a sound from Heaven, like mighty rustling wind, Fill'd all the house, where sate the Eleven with other Brethren joyn'd. And there appeared to the men, tongues cloven, as of fire, And sate upon each one of them, and did their hearts inspire. And then began they to advance their speech in Languages, The Spirit giving utterance as He himself did please.
And Jews were present there in throngs, from Nations all abroad, And heard them speak in several tongues the wondrous works of God. Rev. 1.4. To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, all Glory be therefore. As was, and is, to th uttermost, and shall be evermore. Hymn VIII. Arraignment of Ambition, Co∣vetousness, and Cruelty. Hab. 2.9, to 12. WOE be to him (must all confess) that with a greedy eye, Covets an evil covetousness, unto his Family. That he may set his nest on high, and there to keep him warm, And sit with great security from fear of future harm. Thou hast consulted shame enough, unto thy house this day, And cutting many people off, hast sinn'd thy soul away. For lo! the very stone shall cry out of the wall to Me, And thereto shall the Beam reply, out of the Timber tree. Wo be to him, to him be wo that builds a Town with blood,
And stablisheth a City so, by ways abhorr'd of God. Hymn IX. A Song to celebrate the restaura∣tion of the CHVRCH. Have mercy, &c. Isa. 54.11. O Thou afflicted Church, and tost with tempest great, Left comfortless in thy distress, while all those storms did beat. Behold! I lay thy stones with colours very fair, Thy corner stones most curious ones with Saphyres to compare. 13, 14. And great shall be the peace, thy Children are to see, And thou, no less, in righteousness established shalt be. Oppression shall be far, because thou shalt not fear, No Tyranny shall terrifie, nor unto thee come near. 7. Rev. 15.6. Though, for a little while, I hid from thee my face, My care shall be to gather thee with everlasting Grace. To God in Trinity all glory be therefore: As hath been done, since time begun, and shall be evermore.
2. PART. Isa. 60.15, 16. Arise, O Church, and shine, thy light comes in and springs: Thy Saviour now, hath said, that thou shalt suck the breast of Kings. And they shall be design'd for nursing Fathers kind, And unto thee their Queens shall be for nursing Mothers joyn'd. ch. 33.17.65.16. Thine eyes shall see the King in all his beauty bright, And God shall crown thee with Renown and everlasting Light. That such as bless themselves (and each man that so doth) May bless themselves in nothing else but in the God of truth. Because the former times of trouble are forgot; And what men did is past and hid, mine eyes behold it not. To God in Trinity all glory be therefore: As was and is and shall be his henceforth for evermore. Hymn X. Astonishing Judgments, or AE∣GYPTS ten PLAGVES, for Nov. 5. Psal. 135.9. THE Lord sent tokens most severe, and let great Judgments fall
On Egypt: Upon Pharaoh there, and on his Servants all. PLAGVE I. Exod. 7.20, 21. He turn'd their waters into blood, so that they could not drink: Their fishes dy'd within the flood, and made the River stink. PLAGVE II. Exod. 8.6. Psal. 105.30. Their Land brought forth from Brooks hard-by, from Rivers, Ponds and Springs, A brood of Frogs Abundantly, in Chambers of their Kings. PLAGVE III. Exod. 8.17, 19. He smote the dust of Aegypt-Land, and loathsom vermine crawl'd On man and beast: 'Twas God's own hand, and so confess'd and call'd. PLAGVE IV. Exod. 8.24. He sent them divers sort of flies in Pharaoh's house to swarm, Which sore annoy'd all Families, and did the Land much harm.
PLAGVE V. Exod. 9.3, 6. A grievous Murrain he design'd, their Cattel to betide, That sundry beasts of several kind of this strange Murrain dy'd. 2. PART. PLAGVE VI. Exod. 9.10. Handfuls of Ashes He ordains, whereby their Plagues increast, By breaking forth in Boils and Blains, both upon Man and Beast. PLAGVE VII. Psal. 78.47, 48. The Hail destroy'd their tender Vines, and wealth of their quick stocks, The Frost destroy'd their Sycamines hot Thunder-bolts their Flocks. PLAGVE VIII. Exod. 10.14, 15. Locusts went over all the Land, such as were never seen, And spoil'd the trees that yet did stand; and all things that were green.
PLAGVE IX. Exod. 10.21. A darkness such as might be felt, for three whole days, did cover The Land where Lordly Pharaoh dwelt, they saw not one another. PLAGVE X. Psal. 78.51. All the first-born which Aegypt bore He smote with dreadfull hand, The chief of all their strength and store, in Cham's accursed Land. Exod. 12.13. Then was there a most dolefull cry, in Aegypt heard with dread, For there was not a Family, where some One was not dead. Ps. 72.18. Rev. 19.16. Let Israel's God the King of Kings, be magnifi'd therefore, Who only doth such wondrous things, Praise him for evermore. Hymn XI. A Testimony Prophetical of the Birth and Kingdom of CHRIST. Isa. 9.3, 6. NOW, Lord, before thee we rejoyce, as in a Harvest-day: As Conquerors lift up their voice, when they divide the prey,
For unto us a Child is born, to us a Son is given, And on his shoulder shall be worn the badge of power from Heaven. His Name entit'led Wonderfull shall faithfull Saints so call, Our Counsellour, our Oracle, God mighty over all. The Everlasting Father, and the Sovereign Prince of Peace. Of whose sweet peace, and sole command shall endless be th' increase. Th Throne of David to possess, and order it full sure, With Judgment and with Righteousness for ever to endure. To God the Father and the Son, and Holy Ghost therefore, Be glory as at first was done and shall be evermore. 2. PART. On the Birth, Kingdom, and Conquests of CHRIST. Isa. 9.3, 4. NOW, Lord, before thee we rejoyce, as men in Harvest-while, As Conquerors lift up their voice when they divide the spoil. For thou hast broke the burd'nous yoke, the Staff that bare the sway, The Rod of our Oppressors Power, as once in Midian's day.
For every battel generally of Warriours prime and good Is with confused noise and cry, and Garments roll'd in bloud. But this of Christ's against his Foes, that spightfully conspire, Shall be with burning where it goes. and Fuel mixt with Fire. The day doth come, as God assures, that like an Oven shall burn, And all the proud and wicked doers that day shall overturn. But unto them that fear my Name there shall arise and spring The Sun of Peace and Righteousness with healing in his wing. To God the Father and the Son, and Holy Ghost therefore, Be glory done as first begun, and shall be evermore. Hymn XII. At FVNERALS to mitigate Mourning. Job 1.21. NAked we go unto the Grave, as from the womb we came, God gives and takes but what he gave, and blessed be his Name. For he shall wipe off tears one day, and make all faces free, And our rebuke quite take away, and no more death shall be.
No sorrow shall, nor crying last, nor any further pain, Because the former things are past, and never come again. Hymn XIII. At Funerals to press Patience. 1 Tim. 6.7. Job 1.21. NOthing we brought into this world, and it is out of doubt, That we (from hence when-ever call'd) can carry nothing out. The Lord of his good pleasure gave, the Lord doth take away, And let his Name the honour have, and bless him day by day. Hymn XIV. At Funerals touching the preci∣ousness of the Saints death. Psal. 116.15. Rom. 14.8. A Thing of price unparallell'd in God our Soviour's eyes The death of all his Saints is held, when any of them dies. For while we live, we live to God, to God we also die, And live or die, we are indeed the Lords peculiarly. Hymn XV. At Funerals touching the Resur∣rection. Job 19.25. I Know that my Redemeer lives, I know he lives alway,
And shall appear and stand up here on earth at Judgment day. And though my skin, and next to that my body turn to dust, Yet in my flesh restor'd afresh I shall see God, I trust. Whom I shall perfectly behold, when I from dust recover, Not otherwise but with these eyes, my self, and not another. Hymn 16. At Funerals touching the Saints safety in Death. John 11.25, 26. THE Resurrection and the Life, saith Christ our Lord, am I, And he that hath in me belief shall live, although he die. And whosoever here he be, that draws this mortal breath, And stedfastly believes in Me, shall never more see death Hymn 17. At Funerals touching the Saints sweet Rest. Rev. 14.13. I Heard a voice that spake, and said to me, from Heaven on high, Write, blessed henceforth are the dead that in the Lord do die. Yea, saith the Spirit, that such men, may leave their labours hard, Their works likewise do follow them to reap a full reward.
Hymn 18. A Thanksgiving at, or after the Sacrament. All People, &c. Luke 2.13. GLory to God in Highest Place, On Earth be peace, to Men free grace: We praise, we bless thee, we adore And glorifie thee evermore. Rom. 11.17. We thank thee for thy glory great, Lord God, that hast the Sovereign seat: O heavenly King, and God alone, The Father, the Almighty One. John 1.14, 29. Acts 2.36. O God the true begotten Word, Son of the Father, Christ and Lord, O Lamb of God, that tak'st away The worlds great sin, thy grace display. 2 Cor. 5.21. 1 Pet. 2.24. Thou that wast made sin for our sake, (Who knew'st no sin) some pity take. Thou that did'st in thy body bear The sins of all, receive our prayer. Eph. 1.20, 21. Job 10.30. Thou that dost sit at God's right hand, One with the Father in Command, Above all Angels having place. Have mercy on us, and shew grace. Acts 2.27, 33, 36. For Thou art Christ the Holy One, The onely LORD, and Thou alone Art with the Holy Ghost most high In God the Father's Dignity.
Hymn 19. Attonement sought upon Humi∣liation, or, a woefull bewailing of our Cor∣ruptions and Calamities. Dan. 9.4, 5. O God that great and dreadfull art, who keepest truth and grace, To them that love thee in their heart, and do thy Laws embrace. O we have sinned, we confess, we have done wickedly, We have rebell'd by wickedness, and great Apostasie. 6, 7, 9. Not hearkning to thy Messengers, who spake by thy command To Princes, Kings and Ancestors, and People of our Land. But, Lord, to thee belongeth grace, to us, contrary way, Belongs confusion of the face, as at this present day. 14.12. Therefore the Lord hath watch'd the stroke, and brought it on us all, And hath confirm'd the Word he spoke against us so to fall. Our Judges too, that judged us, on them the Lord hath brought The evil so prodigious for sins which we have wrought. 12, 13. For under the whole Heav'ns of God, among all sorts of men,
The like hath not been done abroad, as to Jerusalem. Yet sought we not to know the truth, nor for repentance pray'd, But God is just in all he doth, for we have not obey'd. 2. PART. Dan 9.8, 11. Confusion of the face pertains to us and to our Kings, Our Peers, and Parents for our pains in doing wicked things. For all have broke thy Law, O Lord, revolting worse, and worse: That we might not obey thy Word, which pours out all this curse. 9.16. But mercy and forgivenesses belong, O Lord, to thee, Though our rebellious Trespasses, grow to a high degree. O Lord, according unto all thy righteousness, we pray, Let not thy dreadfull fury fall, but turn thy wrath away. 18.19. For we present not our address, before thy Mercy-Seat, For any of our righteousness, but for thy mercies great. Lord, hear, forgive, and pity take, hearken, O Lord, and do, Defer not for thine own dear sake, now thou art pray'd unto.
18.17. Incline thine ear, O Lord, and hear, open thine eyes and see Our desolations, and the place relating unto thee. And let thy face behold with grace thy Sanctuaries seat, Whose present state is desolate, for Christ's sake, we intreat. Hymn 20. A wofull Lamentation (or David's Elegy) for Saul and Jonathan. 2 Sam 1.19. THY beauty is, O Israel, in thy high places slain, O how those mighty Champions fell, and we the loss sustain! O tell it not to any one, nor publish it in Gath, Nor in the streets of Askalon, that Israel bears such wrath 20.21. The Daughters of the Philistins, lest they therein rejoyce, And those uncircumcised ones, lest they lift up their voice. Ye mountains great of Gilboa, let neither Rain nor Dew, Nor fields of Offrings, from that day for ever fall on you. 21. For there the shield of Sovereignty was vilely cast away: The shield of Saul, as if that He had known no Unction-day.
2. PART. Verse 22, 23. From fat of many a mighty Man, and bloud of enemies slain, Went not the bow of Jonathan, nor Sword of Saul in vain. Lovely were Saul and Jonathan, and living pleas'd us well, Division in their death was none, for both together fell. 23, 25. Swifter upon the chase they were than Eagles in their flight: And stronger than the Lyons are, although they fell in fight: Daughters of Israel mourn for Saul, who deck'd you gorgeously, With Gems of Gold, and cloath'd you all in cloth of scarlet-die. 27. How are the mighty fallen then, as we may sigh and say, Weapons of War and warlike men how perish'd in a day! Hymn 21. A zealous applause of Christian Con∣quests. All People, &c. 1 Joh. 5.4, 5. WHatever soul is born of God, o'recomes the World effectually, And thus the World is under-trod by Faith, which gets the victory.
For who is he that can atchieve the conquest of the world abroad, But he alone that doth believe that Jesus is the Son of God? Col. 2.15. 1 John 4.4. Who spoiling Principalities and Powers of hell that durst oppose, Made shew of them in open wise, triumphing over all his foes. And ye have overcome them too; ye little Children that are his; For greater is the Lord in you, than he that in these worldlings is. Rev. 1.4. To God the Father, and the Son; and to the Holy Ghost therefore, Eternal honour let be done, from first to last for evermore. Hymn 22. A zealous Invective against Hypo¦crisie. Luke 12.1. WHen as a mighty multitude, were gathered on a day. Our Lord to his Disciples shew'd what things he had to say. Beware of first (said he) to these, and shun most heedfully The leaven of Scribes and Pharisees, which is Hypocrisie. Mat. 23.4.7.3. Most grievous burdens do they bind wherewith to load another: But cannot one small finger find to bear it with their Brother.
They spy a mote, when small or none, within their Brothers eye: Whenas a beam is in their own, but that they never spy. 23.13, 15. The Kingdom where God's glory dwels, is so shut up by them, They neither enter in themselves, nor suffer other men. They coast and compass Sea and Shore, to make one of their sect, A Child of Hell made two-fold more, than they, by this effect. 24. Luke 11.42. Joh. 21.8. They tythe their Mint and Anniseed, (what every Garden hath) But weightier things they never heed, as Mercy, Judgment, Faith. Demurely at a Gnat they strain, a Camel swallowing whole, But what's their hope, although they gain, when God requires their soul! 20.5. For the triumphing jollity of sinners soon goes o're: The joy of Hypocrites shall be a moment, and no more. 2. PART. Mat. 5.20, 23, 25. Unless your righteousness exceed the Scribes and Pharisees, Ye can in no case hope to speed of Heaven, more than these:
Which make the outside of the Cup and Platter clean enough, But leave the inside all fill'd up with vile and odious stuff. Luke 11 39. Mat. 23.14. The outside (Hypocritical) they finely scoure and dress, But leave the inside full of all extortion and excess. Poor Widows houses they devour, and for to seem sincere, Out of their lips long Prayers they pour, these greater wrath shall bear. Mat. 15.8. Jam. 3.11. Th' approach to God with mouth alone, and honour him with their lips: But what their mouth and lips do own, their heart quite over-slips. But, first, the wsedom from above is pure without deceit, Then peaceable, and full of love, and easie to intreat. Jam. 3.17.1.27. 'Tis full of liberality, and fruits of mercy kind: 'Tis void of partiality, and of a double mind. Religion pure and undefil'd with God and with the Father, Is to relieve the Orphan-child with what estate we gather. To visit Widows (with our wealth) from habitation hurl'd: And for a man to keep himself unspotted of the world.
3. PART. Prov. 30.11. Mat. 23.27. There is a generation vile, yet pure in their own eyes, But are not cleansed all the while from their impurities: They are like Tombs, those painted ones, that glister to the eye, When full within of dead mens bones, and all impurity. Luke 16.15.18.9. They justifie themselves to men, as if they had no sin: But God well knows the hearts of them, and what doth lodge within. They trust upon themselves likewise to be a righteous sort, But other people they despise as altogether short. Isa. 65.5. Luke 16.15. They say, stand by thy self apart, and come not near to me, For I am holier than thou art, but God knows what they be. These are a smoak, saith God most high, within my Nose too strong, And as a fire of Jealousie, that burneth all day long. Job 36.13, 14. For lo! the Hypocrite in heart, shall heap up wrath extream, They often in their youth depart, whose life's among th' unclean,
The company of Hypocrites shall come to desolation, And fire shall quite consume the gates of bribe—abomination. Rev. 1.4. To God the Father and the Son, and Holy Ghost therefore, Be glory as at first was done, and shall be evermore. Hymn 23. Blessed Angels Attendance. Psal. 34.7.91.11. BEhold the Angel of the Lord encampeth round about All that fear God, and is their guard to keep all dangers out For he hath given his Angels charge to keep thee day by day, That thou mayst walk abroad at large with safety in thy way. Psal. 91.12. Heb. 1.14. And they this charge must execute, And bear thee in their Arm, Lest ever thou shouldst dash thy foot against a stone for harm. For are not all these Ministers sent forth for ministration, In their behalf that shall be heirs of God's assur'd Salvation?
Hymn 24. Blessedness of Pardon. Rom. 4.6. MAN's blessedness most absolute, thus David doth express, Whose faith alone God doth impute to him for righteousness. 7. For blessed is the man, saith He, whose pardon is brought in, To clear him of Iniquity, and cover all his sin. 8.3. Blessed is He to whom the Lord imputeth none offence: And thus the scripture doth record man's blessedness from hence. 24.3. And unto us doth so remain. if we in Him do trust, Who dy'd for sin, and rose again, to justifie th' unjust. Rev. 1.4.5.11. To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, all glory be therefore, As was and is to th' uttermost, and shall be evermore.
Hymn 25. Boasting Corrected. Have mercy, &c. Jer. 9.23. THUS saith the Lord of Hosts, let not the man most wise Glory at all, or make his boasts what wisedom in him lies. The mighty in his might, the rich man in his wealth, Though he should have it to the height, let him not boast himself. 24. But all mans boast must be to boast in this alone, In knowing and discerning me the Lord and gracious one. I exercise kind love, judgment and doing right, Towards all men, saith the Lord above, for therein I delight. Hymn 26. Charity and Piety extended. Prov. 3.9, 10. 2 Cor. 9.7. HOnour the Lord with all thy store, give thy first-fruits to him: So shall thy Barns be fill'd with more, the Press with Wine shall swim. Let each man give as mov'd in mind, not grudgingly however: Nor of constraint, for this we find, God loves a cheerfull giver.
Mat. 1.14. But cursed the Deceiver is that hath in's flock a Male, And yet doth vow and sacrifice a thing corrupt and stale. For I'm a King most highly crown'd, saith God, the Lord of Hosts: And dreadfully my Name doth sound in all the Heathen coasts. Hymn 27. Circumcision of the Heart. Jer. 9.25. BEhold, saith God, the time draws nigh, that I will punish al Th' uncircumcised generally, and circumcis'd shall fall. 26. For just as all the Gentiles were uncircumcis'd in skin, So all the house of Israel are uncircumcis'd within. Deut. 10.16. The fore-skin of your hearts therefore be sure to Circumcise: And be not henceforth any more stiff-neck'd in any wise. Hymn 28. Confession of Sin. All People, &c. Joh. 7.20. Isa. 3.8. O Thou Preserver of mankind, what shall we say or do to thee?
Or what excuse, Lord, can we find? for we have sinn'd in great degree. Our ways and doings still have been Against the Lord by grievous sin, So to provoke the glorious eyes, Of God, by our Iniquities. Job 40.4.42.5. Isa. 55.9. O we are vile in every part, with self abhorring we relent: And from the bottom of our heart in dust and ashes we repent! But, Lord, thy ways and thoughts of grace, Are not as ours, of narrow space: Thy thoughts transcend our thoughts as far As Heaven and Earth in distance are. Hymn 29. Constant seeking of God, by the Meek. Have mercy, &c. Zeph. 2.3. SEEK, seek the Lord most high, O all ye meek on earth, Ye that have wrought most faithfully the Judgments he set forth: Seek Righteousness, I say, seek meekness, it may be Ye shall be hid i'th evil day, and from God's Wrath go free. Hymn 30. Correction of Anger. Jam. 1.19, 20. LET every man be swift to hear, but slow to speech and wrath:
Because man's wrath goes nothing near to God's most righteous path. 3.16. For wheresoever strife takes place, and lusts of envy lurk, There is confusion in such case, and every evil work. Prov. 21.24. Eccles. 7.9. Proud haughty scorner is his Name, in whom proud passion rules: And anger rests not in the flame, but in the breast of fools. 16.32. Whereas the slow to wrath excell a Champion in renown, And he that rules his spirit well, the man that takes a Town: 1 Pet. 3.4. Put on therefore the Ornament of meek and quiet minds, Which in God's sight is eminent, and great acceptance finds. Hymn 31. Danger of heinous Sins, and de∣hortation from them. 2. Pet. 2.9. THE Lord of our Salvation, knows well how to deliver The godly from Temptation, how perilous soever.
And to reserve ungodly men, unto the dreadfull day Of Judgment, to be punish'd then for their ungodly way. And those men more especially that wickedly transgress, By practice of impurity and fleshly filthiness. Acts. 3.19. Repent, and be ye all therefore, converted from your crimes, To get your sins wip'd off the score, against refreshing times. Rev. 21.7. He that o'recomes this world impure, shall gain the world to come, And God will be his God, be sure, and he shall be his Son. 8. Heb. 6.8. But faithless ones, and fool'd with fears, vile persons (thorns and briers) Whoremongers, Murd'rers, Sorcerers, Idolaters and Lyars, Shall have their portion in the Lake, that burns with sulph'rous breath Of fire and brimstone (for their sake) which is the second death.
2. PART. The Adulterers Peril and Penance. Prov. 6.32. Whoso commits Adultery with women, is not wise: For he that doth so wickedly, his own dear soul destroys. 33. A wound he gets, a brand of shame, that's sure to stick and stay: And the dishonour of his Name, is never done away. 23.27.22.14. He falls as in some narow pit, or in a ditch most deep: Design'd for him to fall in it, whom God abhors to keep. 6.26. It brings a man of good estate unto a bit of bread: And the Adultress lies in wait, the precious blood to shed. 2.18.5.18. Her house inclines to theirs that dye, her paths to death's dark shade: Yea, it goes down to hell hard by, and there her guests are laid. 2.19. They seldom turn that are so bold as to go in to her, Nor on the paths of life take hold who e're so lewdly err.
7.24, 25. Hearken therefore to my advice, attend to what I say: Let not her paths thy heart entice to wander in her way. 3. PART. The seven Abominations. Prov. 6.16. Six things there are, and here exprest, which God almighty hates: Yea, seven things are manifest, which he abominates. A lofty look, a lying tongue, are both abhord of God: And hands that act so great a wrong, as shedding guiltless blood. A heart that harbours Wickedness lewd projects to pursue: And feet that press with eagerness mischievous deeds to do. A slanderous witness speaking lies, and Him that discord sows, To make kind Brethren Enemies, and feiends to be as foes. 1 Pet. 3.10. Let him that loveth life therefore, and longs to see good days, Eschew all evil evermore, and follow all good ways.
Let him refrain his tongue from ill, his lips from speaking guile: Let him seek peace with great good will, and follow it all the while. For th' eyes of God are bent with care, the righteous to secure: His ears He openeth to their prayer, but frowns on th' evil doer. 4. PART. The flying Roll for Swearers and Cursers. James 5.12. But above all things, this I say, my Brethren, do not swear, But let your words be yea and nay, And every Oath forbear. Because a Curse prodigious shall pass on every side, And seise upon the Swearers house, and there it shall abide. And from that house shall not depart the Curse, the Flying-Roll, Till Stone and Timber it subvert, and so consume it whole. Yea, Swearing makes a Land to Mourn, and pleasant places dry, When Men to such ill courses turn, and so impetuously.
Be carefull that thou do not then God's Holy Name prophane: For God will not acquit such Men, as take his Name in vain. Rom. 3.16.14. Destruction (too) and misery do all their paths possess, Whose mouths are full of blasphemy, Cursing and bitterness. Col. 3.8. Cease anger, then, and wrath likewise, and put off altogether: Oaths, Cursing, and Scurrilities, out of your Mouths for ever. Hymn 32. Deceitfulness of the Heart. Jer. 17.9, 10. DEceitfull is the heart of man, above all things that are, And desperately carryed on to sin, who knows how far? I, saith the Lord, do search the heart, and try the reins within, And deal to each man his due part, just as his works have been. Hymn 33. Deliverance from shipwrack, or of the Prophet Jonah. All People, &c. Jonah 2. BY reason of our grief and fear We cry'd to God, and he gave ear: Out of the depths of hell we cry'd, And he unto our Pray'r reply'd.
For thou hadst plung'd us in the deep, In midst of Seas, where waters keep Surrounding floods with waters vast, And all thy Billows o're us pass'd. We are cast out, then did we say, Out of thy sight, quite cast away: Yet one look more we will afford Towards thy holy Temple, Lord. The waters compass'd us about, Even to the soul they lanched out: The depths had us encompassed, The weeds were wrapp'd about our head. To th' bottom of the Seas we went, 'Twixt endless Bars of mountains pent: Yet was our life when under trod, Brought up by thee, O Lord our God! When as our soul within did faint, We thought on thee in our complaint, And then to thee came in our prayers, As by thy holy Temple stayrs. They that observe deceitfull Lies, And trust to Idol-vanities: Forsake the tenders of thy Grace, Which as their own they might embrace▪ But we will sacrifice to thee, With thankfull songs of melody: And pay our Vows besides our Songs Salvation to the Lord belongs.
Hymn 34. Descending of the Spirit. Numb. 11.29. 2 Cor. 3.18. O That the people of the Lord were Prophets every one, Such as the Lord of's own accord, would pour his Sp'rit upon! That we might all with open face behold, as in a glass, The glorious image of his grace, upon our souls to pass. And by degrees of Glory thus be chang'd, as still we shall, Ev'n by the Sp'rit of God in us, that worketh all in all. To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, all glory be therefore, As was and is to th' uttermost, and shall be evermore. Hymn 35. Drunkard's Cup and Calamities. Prov. 23.31. LOOK not upon the Wine fill'd up, when sparkling red and bright, It gives his colour in the Cup, and moves it self aright. For in the end that pleasant thing, which did so much entice, Bites as a Serpent, and shall sting like to the Cockatrice.
Strange women shall thine eyes behold, strange words thou shalt rehearse, And lust shall make thy heart full bold to utter things perverse. As one that floats upon the Sea, and sleeps exceeding fast, Such shalt thou be: Or just as they that sleep upon the mast. Thou shalt discern the strokes set on, and blows, but all in vain, For when the fit is past and gone, thou seek'st it yet again. Hymn 36. Due fear of God and the King. Prov 24.21, 22. FEar God my Son, and fear the King, and shun their courses strange, That love a factious meddleing, and are so apt to change. For surely their calamity shall suddenly arise, And who can tell what misery shall both of them surprize? Hymn 37. Duty to Magistrates. Prov 8.15. BY me (saith God) Kings reign on Earth, and Justice they decree: Princes, and all of Noble Birth, and Judges rule by Me.
1 Pet. 2.13. Submit therefore with one consent, and for the Lord's dear sake, Yield to each form of Government, which God himself did make. 1 Tim. 2.1, 2. And pray for Kings especially, and all those men that be In places of Authority, or eminent degree. That we may spend our days in peace, without the storms of strife, In all good ways of Godliness and honesty of life. 8. Let men therefore (as God commands) pray every where in faith, Lifting up pure and holy hands without distrust or wrath. 2. PART. 1 Pet. 2.13. Submit your selves in every thing to th' Ordinance of Men, Whether it be unto the King as the Supream of them: Or to inferiour Governours, whom his commissions raise For punishment of evil doers, or for well doers praise. For so's the sacred will of God, that ye, by doing well,
May silence foolish tongues abroad, and all mens clamours quell. As free with freedom from offence, and not to cloak thereby Rebellious Disobedience, but serving the most high. Have all men in esteem so good, that no reproach may spring: Fear God, and love the Brotherhood, and honour much the King. 3. PART. Rom. 13.1. Let every Soul be subjugate unto the higher Powers, For all these Powers did God create, 'tis his Decree, not Ours. Whoever then resists the Power, against God's Law rebells. And the resisters shall procure damnation to themselves. 5.1. And ye must needs be subject then (to Laws which rulers make) Not only for the wrath of men, but most for conscience sake. 7. Render therefore to all their dues, Tribute where Tribute's due, Custome, and fear, and honour use, to those ye owe it to.
8. And leave behind no duty ow'd, but each one love another: For he fulfills the Law of God that truly loves his Brother. 4. PART. Tit. 3.1. Of duty to Superiour Powers put Christians still in mind, Subject to be to Governours, to all good works inclin'd. Rom. 13.3. For rulers are not terrible to good works but to bad: Wouldst thou not fear the power? do well, and praise shall thence be had. 4. But if thou dost an evil thing, then fear and fear again, Because the person governing bears not the sword in vain. Ibidem. For he is God's chief Minister to execute his will, With wrath upon the trespasser, whoever doeth ill. Ibidem. For he's God's minister to thee for thy great good and gain, But fear t' offend because that he bears not the sword in vain. Prov. 20.8, 26. A King that sitteth on the Throne of judgment, and is wise, Scatt'reth away (as clouds o'reblown) all evil with his eyes.
HYMN 38. Esaie's Commination. Isa. 5.8. WOE's them that draw Iniquity with cords of vanity, And, as it were with Cart-ropes, dare draw sin most eagerly. 21. Wo to the wise in their own eyes, prudent in their own sight, Whom draughts of wine and mixt strong drink commend for men of might. 11. That early in the morning rise, to follow drink so good: And there they stay to drink all day, till wine inflame their blood. 8. That (covetous) joyn house to house, and land they lay to land, Untill no place be left on earth, but in their griping hand. 20. Good evil, evil good that call, that darkness put for light, Bitter for sweet, and sweet for gall, the wrong way for the right. 23. That justify iniquity, for base reward and pay, And take the blessed righteousness of righteous men away. ch. 3.10, 11. Yet must we tell how safe and well with just men it shall go:
But wo agen to wicked men, for all reap as they sow. HYMN 39. Exaltation of Humility. 1 Pet. 5.5. BE cloathed with Humility, and lowliness embrace: For God resists the proud and high, but gives the humble grace. Prov. 15.33.16.18. Humility shall honour find, but Pride destroyeth all, For sure the proud and haughty mind goes still before a fall. Luke 14.11. For he that prides himself, must know that God will pluck him down, But the self humbled sitting low, shall thereby get renown. HYMN 40. Exalting a Nation. Prov. 14▪34. THE exercise of righteousness exalts a Nation high: And sin is a reproach no less to any Family. Psal. 107.34. A fruitfull Land doth God expose to barrenness for sin, And for the wickedness of those that live and dwell therein. Job 22. ult. But God doth save the smallest Land of th' innocent and pure,
And by the pureness of thy hand it is delivered sure. HYMN 41. Excellent Counsel of Wisedom. Prov. 8.1.33.1, 32, 33. WIsdom puts forth her voice and cries, and such like words doth use, Hear ye instruction, and be wise, and do not now refuse. For ease shall slay those simple souls, that let devotion dye, And the prosperity of fools destroys them utterly. But whoso hearkneth unto me shall dwell in safety still, And shall be quiet safe and free, from fear of any ill, 2. PART. 8.34, 35, 36. Blessed is he that heareth me, saith Wisedom to her friends, That at my Gate doth daily wait, and at my door attends. For surely he that findeth me, finds life, and shall obtain The favour of the Lord above, to his eternal gain. But he that sins against such things wrongs his own soul thereby,
And all that hate on me to wait love death, and so shall dye. HYMN 42. Fallow Ground to be dressed. Hos. 10.12. SOW to your selves in righteousness, and reap in mercy sweet, Your fallow ground break up and dress for seed to make it meet. For it is time to seek the Lord, till he (descending on you) Shall come, and of his own accord, rain righteousness upon you. HYMN 43. Gods Covenant for us with the Crea∣tures. Hos. 2.18, 19, 21. THUS saith the Lord above, I have betrothed thee, In mercy, truth, and tender love, for ever unto me. And in that day will I a faithfull Covenant make With all my Creatures generally, for thy sweet safeties sake. The heavens shall hear the earth, the earth shall hear the corn, The corn and wine that thence come forth, shall hear my Church new born.
HYMN 44. Gods Jealousie for Jerusalem. Zach 1.14. THUS saith the Lord of Hosts, a Jealous God am I, For Sion and for Salems Coasts, with eager Jealousie. 15. And I am unappeas'd towards Heathens yet unscourg'd; For I was but a while displeas'd, and they th' affliction urg'd. 16. Therefore (saith God) I am return'd (for all their sin) With mercies to Jerusalem, to build my house therein. HYMN 45. Humble Supplications and Con∣fessions. All People, &c. Deut. 32.4. Rom. 7.12, 14. O Thou most just and righteous God! Thy Law is holy, just, and good: But we are carnal of our selves, As sold to sin, and nothing else. Rom. 3.23 Psal. 15.5. For all have sinn'd of every sort, And of thy glory are come short: Our shape in sin we did assume, And are transgressors from the womb. Rom. 7.18, 19. We from polluted Parents spring, And in our flesh dwells no good thing:
The good we would do, that we bate, And do the evil that we hate. Hos. 14.2. Take off all our iniquity, And Lord receive us graciously: So shall we sacrifice to thee The Fatlings of our lips most free. HYMN 46. Humble Supplications in time of Drought. All People, &c. Jer. 14.20. LORD, we acknowledge and confess Our grievous sins and wickedness, Our Fathers faults we do deplore, For we have sinn'd against thee sore. 21. For thy Name sake loath not thine own, Do not disgrace thy glorious Throne: Remember and do not infringe Thy Covenant with us for our sins. 22. Can any of the Idol Powers Cause rain, or can the heavens give showers? O Lord our God, art not thou he? And therefore will we wait on thee. Chron. 6.27. Send rain, O Lord, upon this Land, Put here into thy peoples hand: Lest Britain be one dried Strand, And all our Earth be turn'd to Sand. And teach us that good way to know, Wherein we alwaies ought to go.
HYMN 47. Humble Supplications in time of Sickness. All People, &c. Jer. 10.24. COrrect us but in Judgment, Lord, Not in thy wrath with sharpened Sword, Lest thou should'st bring us down thereby To dust and ruin utterly. 9.21. Death climbs our windows, by disease, Enters into our PALACES, Cuts off the Children from without, And from the streets the young and stout. 14.7. Isa. 38.9. O Lord, though our Iniquities As witness-clouds against us rise, Our help and healing undertake, And do it for thine own Names sake. HYMN 48. Humble Supplications in times of Tempest. All People, &c. Psal. 103.19. Isa. 64.6. O Thou that dost in Heaven Reign! We all are as a thing unclean; And all our righteousnesses are As filthy rags, unfit to wear. And therefore are we justly made Like as a Leaf, to fall and fade:
And our transgressions, bearing sway, As wind have taken us away. Psal. 107.25.77.17, 18. At thy command big storms arise, Thunder and lightning fill the Skies; The Clouds pour down their watry load, Thy flaming Arrows fly abroad. Joel 2.17. Isa. 64.9. Hab. 3.2. O spare thy People, gracious God! Redeemed with thy precious Blood: Keep not our sins upon record, In wrath remember mercy, Lord. HYMN 49. Humble Supplication in times of Transgression and Revolt. All People, &c. Isa. 43.27. OUR Father, Our first Father, Lord, Hath sinn'd, and disobey'd thy Word: And all our Teachers, at the best, Against thee greatly have transgress'd. Isa. 64.9. Lord, be not angry very sore, Nor mind our faults for evermore: See, we beseech thee, and behold, How we are all thy Flock and Fold. 8. Thou art our Father at this day, Thou art the Potter, we the Clay: And we are all and every one▪ Thy handy-work, O Lord, alone.
HYMN 50. Humble Supplication in time of War. All People, &c. Isa. 64.1. O That thou would'st the Heavens rend, And in thy Glorious power descend; And that the mountains might flow down At presence of thy face and frown. 2. As when the melting fire doth flame, It makes the waters boil a main, To make thine enemies know thy might, And Nations tremble at thy sight. 3. When dreadfull things were done by thee, Such as we never look'd to see, Then at thy presence and thy frown The mighty Mountains flowed down. Lam. 3.42. Isa. 64.5. But we have sinn'd, and for our crimes Thou hast not spar'd, but scourg'd the times: But in thy mercies is ingrav'd CONTINVANCE, and we shall be sav'd. HYMN 51. Judgment waited for. Luke 21.19. Jam. 5 7. Hab. 2.3. Heb. 10.37. POssess your Souls with patience, and wait unweariedly Untill the coming of the Lord, for lo! the day draws gh.
For yet a little while endure, (Th' account shall not miscarry) And he that shall come will be sure to come, and will not tarry. Heb. 10.38, 39. Hab. 2.4. Now then the Just shall live by Faith, but if a man draw back, My soul shall have no joy in him that true belief doth lack. But we are not of those that do draw back to condemnation, But those that do believe unto the Souls assur'd Salvation. HYMN 52. Judgment upon the Proud and Scornfull. All People, &c. Prov. 8.13. THE fear of God is seen in this, To hate the Paths that lead amiss, Pride, Arrogance, and all the rest Of evil ways, doth God detest. 13.10. The froward mouth (saith he) I hate, Onely by pride comes all debate: And sure God scorns the scornfull race▪ But to the lowly gives his grace. Luke 14.11. He then that doth himself exalt, Shall be debas'd by's own default; But the self-humbling soul shall be Exalted in a high degree.
HYMN 53. Kind love of God, in Christ. 1 John 3.2. BEhold, dear Saints, what kind of love the Father grants to us! To be the Sons of God above, and he to stile us thus. Therefore the World discerns us not, because it knew not him: And we are Sons of God begot, though yet with eyes so dim. 3. Mat. 25.31. Not seeing what we once shall see, but this we know most clear, That like unto him we shall be, when he shall next appear. For we shall see him as he is in glorifi'd estate: And sitting on that Throne of his, where all the world must wait. Heb. 6.19. 1 John 3.3. This hope we have whereon to roll, as that which cannot fail, A stedfast Anchor of the soul, Entring within the Veil. And he that hath this hope on high establisht in him sure, Doth purifie himself thereby, as God himself is pure. Rev. 1.4. To God the Father and the Son, and Holy Ghost therefore; Eternal honour let be done, henceforth for evermore.
2. PART. Rom. 8.35, 36. WHO can take off Christ's love from us can trouble or distress, Or Persecution perillous, or need, or nakedness? Can Famine do it, or the Sword? (as David hath his Song) For thy sake are we slain, O Lord, and killed all day long. 37, 38. Counted as sheep for butchery, nay, we (though martyr'd thus) Triumph in all these gloriously, through him that loved us. I am persuaded on this wise, that neither Death nor Life, Nor Angels, Principalities, nor Powers, with us at strife. 39. Nor present things, nor things to come▪ nor height nor depth together, Nor any thing that can be done by Creatures whatsoever, Shall separate us from the love which (of his own accord) Is born to us by God above, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Rev. 1.4. To God the Father, and the Son, and Holy Ghost therefore, Be glory as at first was done, and shall be evermore.
HYMN 54. King David's EXALTATION, in type of Christ. Give land, &c. 1▪ Pet. 2.6. Mat. 21.42. Psal. 118.22, 23. LO here the stone Elect, and which (as ye have read) The Builders did reject, now made the Corner's head: This work most wise God wrought for us, and marvellous in all our eyes. 24.25. This is the day so sweet which God himself hath made, We will rejoyce in it, and be exceeding glad. I earnestly Beseech thee, Lord, now to afford Prosperity. 26, 27. Blest is he that doth come in God's good Name to us, And we have sent you home, blest from his Holy House: God is the Lord That hath so bright and clear a light this day restor'd, Heb 13.16. Come bind the Sacrifice with Cords yet never worn, Bind it before our eyes
unto the Altars horn: Shew charity, That Sacrifice the Lord doth prize exceedingly. Psal 69.30. Now will I praise God's Name with a delightfull Song: And magnifie his Fame with thankfull heart and tongue. And this likewise, Beyond the proof of horn or hoof, the Lord shall prize. Psal. 118.28.29. O God, thou art my God, thou art my God, I say: Thy Name I will applaud, thy praise I will display: Give thanks to God, Whose goodness flows, whose mercy knows no period. HYMN 55. Large Mercies Corporal. All People, &c. Psal. 68.21, 22. BLessed be God Our Saving health, Who daily loads us with his wealth; The Issues of assayling death Belong to God, who gives us breath. He sends us Rain and fruitfull Years, Our hearts with Food and gladness cheers; And gives us with a rich supply All things in plenty to enjoy.
Psal. 44.8. Joel 2. Psal. 46.9. 2 Cor. 9.10. He sav'd us from our enemies hand, And hath done great things for our Land: Wars o're the Earth he soon doth cease, Blessing the Fruits of our increase. Psal. 115.1. Not unto us, O Lord, therefore, Not unto us on any score, But to thy Name the glory take, For thy sweet truth and mercy sake. HYMN 56. Large Mercies Spiritual. Eph. 3—7. BLessed be God, that of his grace hath us so richly stor'd; With Spiritual gifts in heavenly place, through Jesus Christ our Lord. As he hath chosen us in him before the World began, To be without the blame of Sin, with Love to God and Man. Having predestinated Us, adopted Children dear, Of his good pleasure chosen thus, and now by Christ brought near. To praise the glory of his grace, wherein he hath so done: His Saints with Favour to embrace through Jesus Christ his Son. Rev 1.4. In whom we have Redemption free through his most precious blood,
Pardon of our Iniquity by that rich grace of God. To God the Father and the Son and Holy Ghost therefore Be glory done, as first begun, and shall be evermore. HYMN 57. Large Mercies Temporal implored, to make Jerusalem a praise in the Earth. Isa. 62.1. FOR Sions sake I undertake, and will not hold my peace; And for Jerusalems dear sake I will not rest or cease. Untill her righteousness appear as glorious as the light, And her Salvation shine as clear as doth a lamp by night. Till Gentiles see thy righteousness, thy glory Kings proclaim; And a new Name shall Sion bless, which God's own mouth shall Name. 4.6.3.1. Thou shalt no more (as heretofore) be in forlorn estate Nor shall thy Borders any more be termed desolate. Ye that make mention of the Lord, resolve within your breast, And keep not silence, nor afford the great Jehovah rest,
Till Sion be a Diadem by God's own hand held forth: And till he make Jerusalem a praise in all the Earth. HYMN 58. Large Mercies through Christ in things Eternal. Eph. 1.8. BLessed be God who doth display abundant grace to us, In depth of Wisedom every way, and Prudence marvellous. Having to us discovered the myst'ry of his will, As his good pleasure purposed towards us to fulfill. That in the full appointed time he might Collect in one All things in Heav'n and Earth, to joyn in Him, and him alone: In whom we also have obtain'd the inheritance above, Predestinated and Ordain'd unto it, of his Love. According to the purposes which he performeth still, That worketh all things as he please by Counsel of his will. To Father Son and Holy Ghost all glory be therefore. As was and is to th' uttermost, and shall be evermore.
HYMN 59. Life and Conversation Conscien∣tious. Isa. 33.15. THE man that walks, as God prescribes, in paths of Justice plain, That speaks the truth, and scorneth bribes, and all oppressive gain: That stops his ear from hearing Blood, from evil shuts his Eye; That man shall have a safe abode, and he shall dwell on high. 16. Psal. 84.11. Munitions of the Rocks shall be his resting place secure, Store of Provision He shall see, his waters shall be sure. For God that is both Sun and Shield, will grace and glory give, And all good blessings freely yield to them that purely live. Psal. 106.48. Let Israel's God, the Lord most high be ever blest therefore, From time to time eternally, Amen, for evermore. HYMN 60. Light and Darkness discovered. 1 John 2.9. HE that shall say he is in light, and doth his Brother hate, That man doth yet in darkness sit, in unregenerate state.
But he that loves abides in light, and not in darkness dim; And there is none occasion of stumbling found in him. But he that doth his Brother hate, in depths of darkness lies: And whither he goes he never knows, for darkness blinds his eyes. HYMN 61. Looking and longing for the ge∣neral dissolution. 2 Pet. 3.12. THe coming of the day of Christ we look for, and desire; Whenas the Heavens shall be dissolv'd, and th' Elements melt with fire, Yet, as his promise holds it forth, we Christians (ne'retheless) Expect new Heavens and new Earth, wherein dwells righteousness. Wherefore (Belov'd) give diligence to keep in such a frame, As to be found of him in peace, without offence or blame. Because we look for such a thing as this Worlds new Creation: Accounting God's long suffering, to aim at our Salvation.
HYMN 62. Love in deed and truth. All People, &c. 1 Joh. 3.18. MY little Children every one, Let us not love in word alone; Neither in tongue and onely so, But deed and truth our love must show. And this a confidence will breed, That we are of the truth indeed: And that by this we may assure Our hearts before him to be pure. For if our hearts do us condemn, God's greater far who searches them: But if our hearts be pure and clear, Boldly may we to God draw near. And whatsoever thing we crave Of him, we shall be sure to have: Because we keep his Laws aright, And do things pleasing in his sight. HYMN 63. Loves Link, or the Golden Chain of God's Mercy. Rom. 8.28. WE know that all shall work for good to those that love the Lord: That (as his Holy purpose stood) are called by his word.
For his foreknown he pre-ordain'd before all time begun, That they might be conformable to th' image of his Son. The blest first-born that he might be of many Brethren dear: Moreover, whom he pre-ordain'd he call'd, and brought them near. And whom he call'd he justifi'd from their iniquities: And whom he freely justifi'd he gloryfi'd likewise. Rev. 1.4. To God the Father and the Son and Holy Ghost therefore, Be Glory as at first was done, and shall be evermore. HYMN 64. Memorial of God's Mercies. Ye Children, &c. Isa. 63 7. NOW will I mention and record The Loving Kindness of the Lord: and praises of the Lord above: Answering to all He hath bestow'd, And his great goodness sweetly show'd to th' House of Israel in his love. According to the multitude Of his compassions still renew'd; for thus He said, they are my flock, They are my people certainly, Children that will not falsifie, So He became their saving rock.
9. Chap. 50.1. Neh. 5.8. Psal. 72.19. In all their grievance He was griev'd, And th' Angel of his eyes reliev'd, and sav'd them (when to Enemies sold) In's love and pity he redeem'd, And sav'd them as his high esteem'd, and bare them all the daies of old. Let Israel's God, the Lord most high, Be honour'd to ETERNITY, with everlasting praise therefore: And let his glittering glory then Replenish all the Earth, Amen, Amen, say we, for evermore. HYMN 65. Ministerial Gifts conferred. All People, &c. Eph. 4.11. 2 Cor. 9.15. CHrist hath ascended up on high, And Captive led Captivity: And streightway gave his gifts to men, Ordaining some Apostles then. Some Prophets, some Evangelists, Some Pastors, and some Teaching Priests▪ For making of the Saints compleat, And Ministerial work so great. And for upbuilding by the word The Sacred Body of our Lord: To him that gave these gifts therefore Be Praise and Honour evermore.
HYMN 66. Our Saviour's call to the Nations. Isa. 45.22. LOOK unto me, O all ye Lands, and be ye sav'd thereby; For I am God who so commands, and there is none but I. And by my self, and none beside, shall all the faithfull Seed Of Israel's house be justifi'd, and glory in my deed. HYMN 67. Our thorough Sanctification prayed for. 1 Thes. 5.23. AND now the very God of peace sanctifie you throughout, And grant that such a rich increase of grace may be powr'd out. That your whole spirit regenerate, body and soul (I pray) May be preserv'd immaculate till Christ our Saviour's day. Faithfull is he that calleth you, and he will do it sure; To whom be praise as i most due for ever to endure.
HYMN 68. Passover slain for us and prepa∣ration thereunto. 1. Cor. 5.7. LO! Christ our Blessed Passover is sacrific'd for us, Now let us keep the Feast therefore, Subduing all our lusts. So, not with leaven inveterate of th' unregenerate flesh: Nor with the leaven of debate of spight or wickedness. 8. Col. 3.17. But let us keep it carefully, (conforming to our head) With Sanctifi'd Sincerity, and Truth's unleavened bread. And in the name of Christ alwaies do every work and word; To God the Father giving praise through Jesus Christ our Lord. HYMN 69. Perpetuity and Power of Christ's Resurrection. Rom. 6.9. CHrist being risen from the dead, now never dies again: No longer over Christ our Head may death for ever reign. For dying he took sin away, at once and altogether: But living is without decay, and lives to God for ever.
So count your selves as dead to sin, But yet to life restor'd, To live to God through grace brought in By Jesus Christ our Lord. To God the Father and the Son and Holy Ghost therefore, Be Glory as at first was done, and shall be evermore. HYMN 70. Power and prevalency of Christ's Resurrection. 1 Cor. 15.20. NOW Christ is risen from the dead, the hope that Christians have: And is to be acknowledged the first fruits from the Grave. For as by mans defection Came sin and death to reign, So came the Resurrection by man to live again. Rev. 1.4. For as by Adam all men dye, So all by Christ revive: And in the twinkling of an eye must all be made alive. To God the Father and the Son and Holy Ghost therefore, Be Glory done as first begun, and shall be evermore.
HYMN 71. Praise to the Creator. Have mercy, &c. Rev. 4.11. WOrthy art thou, O Lord, to wear the glorious Crown: All honour we ascribe to thee, All power and all renown. For thou, O Lord, alone didst all the Creatures make, Even all that are, and made they were for thy good pleasure sake. Luke 2.14. Glory to God on high, on earth be plenteous peace: And great good will extended still among men to increase. HYMN 72. Praise to the giver of Grace. Eph. 3.20. TO him whose mighty Power exceeds our asking and our thought, According to his mighty deeds which he in us hath wrought. To him let all God's Heritage give Glory yet agen, By Jesus Christ, from age to age, world without end, Amen. HYMN 73. Praise to the Prince of Poten∣tates. O Lord Consider, &c. 1 Tim 6.15. THE blest and onely Potentate, The King of Kings and Lord of Lords,
Who onely hath immortal state, in Light that no access affords. Whom no man yet did ever see, nor can behold with mortal eye: To him all Praise and Honour be, for ever to Eternity. HYMN 74. Praise to the Redeemer. Ye Children, &c. Rev. 1.5, 6. Eph. 5.27. ALL praise to him whose grace so good washt off our sin with his own blood, So to present us pure and clean: The faithfull witness (Christ our head) The first begotten from the dead, and Prince of princes here that reign. Heb 10.14. Rev. 1.6. Who dying fully clear'd the score Of all his saints for evermore, By one oblation offered then: And made us Kings and Priests to God, And to the Father, O give laud, and praise to him for ever, Amen. HYMN 75. Praise to the Trinity. Give laud, &c. 1 John 5.7. Rev. 1.4. UNTO the Three in One that bear Record above, The Father and the Son, and holy Spirit of Love, Be Glory then, As first begun, and shall be done for Ever, Amen.
HYMN 76. Remission of Sin. 1 John 1.5. THIS message have we heard from God, and shew'd to great and small, That God is light, in whom no cloud of darkness is at all. If then we say we know the Lord, and walk without the light, We plainly falsifie our word, and do not what is right. But we that walk with him in light have fellowship together, And Christ his bloud shall wash us white from all sins whatsoever. To God the Father and the Son and holy Ghost therefore Be Glory as at first was done, and shall be evermore. HYMN 77. Renewings of Joy. Isa. 65.18. REjoyce, saith God, as Joyfull men, in that which I create; For I create Jerusalem a joyfull happy State. And they shall build their houses new, and dwell in what they build: And plant them Vineyards thereunto, and with the fruits be fill'd.
They shall not build and others take their Habitation seat: Nor plant (as for a strangers sake) for other men to eat. As Trees stand long before they die, my peoples time so stands: And mine Elect shall long enjoy the labours of their hands. HYMN 78. Restraining of fleshly lusts. All People, &c. 1 Pet. 2.11. NOW we beseech You, Brethren dear, As Strangers, and as Pilgrims here, Ye would all fleshly lusts controll, As foes that fight against the Soul. Phil. 2.15. That pure and blameless ye may be, The Sons of God, from blemish free, Amidst a Cross and Crooked race, Shining as lights in every place. Phil. 1.10. That ye may give a full assent To those things which are excellent: And also be sincere, and clear From all offence, till Christ appear. HYMN 79. Right reasoning of Temptation. Jam. 1.13. LET no man say, when drawn by Sin some evil deed to do, That it was God that tempted him, and led him thereunto. For God Almighty neither can be tempted unto ill, Nor ever tempts he any man to so corrupt a will.
But every man is tempted then, when his own lust bears sway, And lust conceiv'd brings guilt on men, And guilt of sin doth slay. Watch ye therefore, and evermore pray hard against Temptation: And with sincere and awfull fear wok out your own salvation. HYMN 80. Sobriety, Prayer and Charity en∣joyned. 1 Pet. 4.7, 8. THE end of all things is at hand, let us therefore have care To walk in all Sobriety, and watch to earnest prayer. And specially let charity on all sides be kept in; For Charity helps mightily, and hideth many a sin. HYMN 81. Solemn ascension of Christ, and leading Captivity captive. Psal. 68.18. Eph. 4.10. THOU didst, O Christ, ascend on high, and by almighty power, Lead captive our Captivity, in that triumphant hour. Thou gavest then thy gifts to men, to them that did rebell, That God the Lord, (th' eternal Word) might with the Gentiles dwell. To God the Father and the Son and Holy Ghost therefore, Be glory done as first begun, and shall be evermore.
HYMN 82. Spirit of God dwelling in us. 1 Thes. 3.23, 24. THIS is the Lord's Commandement, and chiefly to be done: That every one should trust upon the Name of Christ his Son. And that we should love mutually, as his Commandment ties, And doing thus, God dwells in us, and we in him likewise. And that the Lord abides in us hereby a Christian knows, Namely by his good Spirit it is which he on us bestows. HYMN 83. The Benediction from the God of Peace. Heb. 13.20, 21. AND now the very God of peace that brought back Christ (our head) Even Jesus our sweet Saviour, and rais'd him from the dead; That Shepherd of the Sheep so great, by whose most precious blood The Lord did grant a Covenant to our eternal good. He perfect you in all good works to do his will aright, Working in you to act and do things pleasing in his sight. Through Jesus Christ our Saviour, who dy'd and rose agen, To whom always be given praise World without end, Amen.
HYMN 84. The Children of light exhorted▪ 1 Thes. 5.4.—9. BRethren, ye are not of the dark, but children of the light, Children, I say, of lightsome day, and not of darksome night. Let us not sleep in sin therefore, as others (ill inclin'd) But Brethren, we must watchfull be, and of a sober mind. For they that sleep, do sleep by night, and drunkards light eschew: But Christians! they are of the day, and fear not open view. Be sober then, and putting on brest-plates of faith and love: And take with you that helmet too, the hope of life above. For God ordain'd not us to wrath, which is for sinners stor'd, But to obtain Salvation through Jesus Christ our Lord. To Father Son and Holy Ghost all Glory be therefore, As first begun and shall be done henceforth for evermore. HYMN 85. The Confidence accursed. Jerem 17.5, 6. Psal. 106. ult. CUrsed is man that trusts in man, to keep him safe from harm; And lets his heart from God depart, to make proud flesh his arm.
He shall be like the desart heath, not seeing future good: But shall possess the Wilderness, not having friend or food. Let Israel's God, the Lord most high, be magnifi'd therefore: From first to last, till time be past, Amen, for evermore. HYMN 86. The Confidence applauded and bles∣sed. Isa. 30.18. Jer. 17.7. BLest is the man that waits on God, and doth in him confide: For he shall be like fruitfull tree set by the water side. Whose leaf (still green) shall feel no heat, but keep a spreading root, And shall not fear the droughty year, nor cease from yielding fruit. Psal. 106.48. Let Israel's God, the Lord most high▪ be magnifi'd therefore, And people then, say all, Amen, Amen, for evermore. HYMN 87. The day of grace proclaimed. 2 Cor. 6.2. Rom. 10.10, 11. LO! I have heard thee, saith the Lord, in an accepted time: And in the day which doth display Salvation unto mine. Behold (saith he) I succour'd thee, when Gospel-time took place: This is that prime appointed time, this is that day of grace.
And every one that calls upon, the Name of God most high, And call's in faith (as Scripture saith) shall sure be sav'd thereby. To God the Father and the Son and Holy Ghost therefore: Be glory done, as first begun, and shall be evermore. HYMN 88. The great Condemnation. 1 John 3.19. Eph. 5.13. THIS is the Condemnation great, that light to men is brought, And men lov'd darkness more than light because their deeds were nought. For evil doers hate the light, nor come they thereunto, Lest that their deeds should be reprov'd, which light is sure to do. But he that doth the works of truth comes to the light abroad, Whereby his deeds are manifest that they are wrought in God. HYMN 89. The Lively Hope. Give laud, &c. 1 Pet. 1.3— BLessed be God above the Father of Christ our Lord, Who, in abundant love, begat us by his Word To' a lively hope, By Christ (our head) rais'd from the dead, to raise us up. To an inheritance new, pure, endless, uncorrupt,
Reserv'd in Heaven for you, who by his power are kept, Through faith t' ascend God's blest abode, sure to be show'd when time shall end. Wherein ye much rejoyce though now (if need so press) The season be for sighs, and groans of heaviness: Which sighs and groans On you take hold, through manifold temptations. The tryal of your faith which is of price far higher Than gold that perisheth, though it be try'd with fire: That then it may Great glory, praise, and honour raise at Christ his day. HYMN 90. The Sluggard rouzd. Prov. 6.6.10.4, 5. GO to the Ant, thou slothfull one, learn of her, and be wise, Who having Guide or Ruler none to order or advise, Provides her meat in Summers heat, in harvest stores her food; While thou art deep in sloth and sleep, and still in that dull mood. Whereby thy want and poverty comes fast and fiercely on, As travaylers come suddainly, or like an armed man.
For he is sure to grow full poor that lets his business slack; But (understand) the diligent hand makes rich, and feels no lack. A prudent son is he therefore, and that shall be his stile, That labours hard, and lays up store in heat and harvest while. But he that keeps his bed, and sleeps▪ in harvest, is to blame, And fitly shall be stil'd of all a son that causeth shame. HYMN 91. The true fast. Isa. 58.6. THIS is the fast, and none but this, chosen, saith God, by me, To loose the bands of wickedness, and let th' opprest go free. The heavy burdens to unbind, all injuries to redress, To deal thy bread to th' hunger-pind▪ and house the harbourless. To cloth the naked, when thou seest in what great need he ood, And not to hide thy self (i'th least) from thine own flesh and blood. Then shall thy light break forth as day, thy health shall soon appear, Thy righteousness shall lead the way, God's glory be thy rear. And thou unto the Lord shalt pray, and answer shall be made: And thou shalt cry, and he shall say, Lo! here am I thine aid.
If thou shalt take away from thee the yoke of Tyranny, The beckning fingers mockery, and speaking vanity. 2. PART. 10, 11, 12. If thou draw out thy tender soul, the hungry to relieve, And with th' afflicted dost condole to satiate souls that grieve. Then shall thy light arise to thee in thine obscurest night: And all thy darkness then shall be as noontide shining bright. The Lord shall guide thee evermore, suffice thy soul in drought, And make thee fat with plenteous store of blessings poured out. Thou shalt be like the watred soil within the garden pale, And as a spring, whose waters boil, break forth, and never fail. And they that be produc'd of thee shall build the old decays: And ground-works laid for many an age thy buildings shall up-raise. And thou shalt then be call'd of men repairer of the breach, Restorer of the dwelling-paths; so far thy fame shall reach. HYMN 92. The vile bodies change. Phil. 3.20. Mat. 24.31. OUR Conversation is in Heav'n, from whence we do expect
The Lord our Saviour Christ to come, and gather his elect. And he shall change our body vile, how vile soever it is, For to be fashion'd (in a while) a glorious one like his. His mighty working power to shew, whereby the Holy One Is able all things to subdue unto himself alone. HYMN 93. Warning of Judgment by be∣ginning at God's house. 1 Pet. 4.17. THE time is come that Judgment must at God's own house begin: And if it first attack the just, what case are sinners in? And if the righteous scarce go free from judgment so severe, What shall the end of sinners be? or where shall they appear? Let him therefore that bears distress according to God's will, Commit his soul in uprightness to God's protection still. As knowing that he doth commit his Soul to him alone, Who by his power created it, and is the faithfull One. HYMN 94. Warning of the general dis∣solution. 2 Pet. 3.9. THE Lord is not of promise slack, as some men slackness call,
But is indeed long-suffering, and patient towards all Not willing any should be lost, but all should turn and live, Because the day of Christ shall come, and shall no warning give. When Heaven shall pass away with noise, the Elements melt with heat, The Earth and all its works likewise burn up with fire so great. Since all things then must be dissolv'd what manner of men should we (With grace and godliness resolv'd) in all points aim to be? HYMN 95. Well approved hearers. Jam. 1.25 & vers. 22. THE perfect law of liberty whoever looks into, Continuing in it constantly the same to know and do; Not being a forgetfull one, but hearing with good heed, To do the work, that man alone is blessed in his deed. Be doers of the word therefore, and not as nothing else, But hearers meerly, and no more, deceiving your own selves. HYMN 96. Whirlwind of God's Wrath. Jer. 23.19. Rom. 1.18. BEhold a whirlwind of the Lord with fury over spread, A grievous whirlwind falling hard upon the sinners head.
Because the wrath of God most high from Heaven is reveal'd Against lewd mens Iniquity that truth have so conceal'd. Rom. 1.19, 25. For that which may be known of God is manifest in them, For God hath made it understood, ther doings to condemn. Who chang'd the truth of God to lies, and creatures did adore, And the Creatour did despise, who's blest for evermore. 26.28.32. The lusts therefore of vilest kind God gave them up unto, And to a Reprobated mind, unseemly things to do. Who knowing well God's Judgment just what death such men deserve, Both do such things, and please their lust in liking those that swerve. To Father Son and Holy Ghost all glory be therefore, As was and is to th' uttermost, and shall be evermore. HYMN 97. Winking at the times of ignorance. Act. 17.30.1.7. Mat. 24.36. GOD winked at the times that were in former blindness spent, But now are all men every where commanded to repent. Because the Lord (whose power's no less) hath set the day (unknown) To judg the world in righteousness, by his appointed one.
Act. 17.31. Rom. 6.9. Whereof he hath sufficiently inform'd us all before, By raising him miraculously from death to die no more. To Father Son and Holy One be all the glory then, As hath been done since time begun, World without end, Amen. HYMN 98. Works, Words and Thoughts for the Lord's-day. All People, &c. Mark 2.27. Rev. 1.10. THIS is the day God made for man To Spiritualize a Christian; This is the day, upon record, Whereof the Son of Man is Lord. Isa. 58.13.48.17. Lord, make thy day my dear delight To think, and speak, and act aright; For Thou alone art God most high, That teachest us to edifie. Ibidem. Psal. 139. ult. Thou art our guide, and thou dost show The way wherein we ought to go: Cause us to take the path most blest That leads to everlasting rest. Heb. 4.9.3. For such a rest there doth remain For God's own People to obtain, And all that are believers true Are sure to enter thereinto.
Rev. 4.13. All glory to the Holy One That sits upon the Sovereign Throne, And to the Lamb of God therefore Be Praise and Honour evermore. 2. PART. 2 Thes. 3.1. Psal. 51.13. LORD, give thy Gospel a free course, And crown it with effectual force, That converts may come in to Thee, And Saints, this day, built up may be. Col. 4.3. Rev. 3.8. John 5.25. A door of Utterance open, Lord, To him that speaks thy Holy Word: A door of Entrance also give, That thy dead men may hear and live. Rev. 3.7. O thou that hast at thy command The Keys of David in thy hand, Thou onely openest or canst shut Into whose hands those Keys are put. Luke 24.45. Psal. 51.15. Open our hearts to apprehend The Scriptures which thy Prophets penn'd: And open, Lord, our lips alwaies To make our mouth shew forth thy praise. Rev. 4.13. All glory to the Holy One That sits upon the Sovereign Throne, And to the Lamb of God most high Be given praise perpetually.
HYMN 99. Wrongs to be remitted, or a Les∣son of true Charity. Mat. 18.21. Heb. 12.25. THUS Peter to our Saviour spake; How oft, O Lord, said he, Must I forgive my Brothers faults? Till seven times must it be? Our Saviour made him this reply, I, that do speak from Heaven, Say not to thee till seven times, but times full seventy seven. For if ye pardon faults to men, this Charity assures, That God your heavenly Father then will also pardon yours. But if ye do not, from your heart, forgive, as ye should do, Your heavenly Father will impart no pardon unto you. Rev. 1.4— To God the Father and the Son and Holy Ghost therefore, Be glory done as first begun, and shall be evermore.
HYMN 100. Worldly CARES forbidden. Mat. 6.31, 25, 32. O Take no thought solicitous what you shall eat or drink: And wherewithall you should be cloth'd be never toyl'd to think. Is not the life much more than meat, the body than the cloaths? And that your need of these is great your heavenly Father knows. 26, 28, 29. The fowls that neither sow nor reap, nor into Barns do gather, Consider how they are supply'd by your celestial Father. Think how, in fields, the Lilies grow, that neither toyl nor spin: Yet made that glory no such shew that Solomon liv'd in. 30, 25. And, sure, if God so cloath the grass, (cut down when at the heighth) Shall he not then much more cloath you, O ye of little faith? Take ye therefore no thoughtfull care for present life, I say, What ye should eat, or drink, or wear, for bodily array. 32. 1 Pet. 5.7. Jude 25. For after all these things abroad, the Gentiles do pursue: But cast ye all your care on God, for he takes care for you.
God onely wise our Saviour have all the glory (then) Dominion, Majesty and Power, both now, and ever, Amen. 2. PART. Phil. 4.6. Be carefull for no worldly thing, but (still) in all distress Your Prayers and Supplications bring to God, with thankfulness. 7. And then the peace which God imparts, past all that can be known, Shall sweetly keep your minds and hearts through Christ, the Holy One. Jude 25. God onely wise our Saviour, have all the glory (then) Dominion, Majesty and Power, world without end, Amen. The end of the First Century.
The Second Century. Hymn CI. Acclamations of Praise for Babylon's Fall. Rev. 14.8.16.5. NOW Babylon is fall'n and sunk, drunk that City great in state: Because she made the Nations with wine adulterate. And Thou, O Lord, art righteous, who art, and alwaies wast, And art to come most glorious, for judging as thou hast. 6, 7. For thy Saints bloud hangs on the score, thy Prophets bloud they shed: And bloud to drink thou gav'st them store, as they have merited. Even so, Lord God omnipotent, we gladly do confess, Thy Judgments are most eminent for truth and righteousness.
19.3, 1, 7. Now Allelujah sing aloud, Salvation, Glory, Fame, Be given to the Lord our God, and Honour to his Name. Be glad in God (for this just doom) rejoyce and honour Him: The Marriage of the Lamb is come, his Wife hath made her trim. HYMN 102. ALLELVJAH for the same. Give laud, &c. Rev. 19.5, 6. PRaise to our God proclaim, O ye his Servants all, And ye that fear his Name, together, great and small. Allelu-jah, For God supream with power doth reign, and bears the sway. 9.1. O they be ever blest, that shall be call'd unto The Lambs great Marriage Feast, These are God's words most true: Allelu-jah, Strength, Glory, Power, and Fame to our Lord God alway. 2. For thou hast powred forth thy wrath on that great whore,
That did corrupt the earth with all her acts impure: And hast, this day, Aveng'd the flood of thy Saints blod, Allelu-jah. 11.15. The Kingdoms of this world are every one become The Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ (his Son) And he, alway, Shall reign on high, with Majesty, Allelu-jah. HYMN 103. ALMS-DEEDS. Isa. 32.8. Psal. 112.9. THE Just deviseth liberal things, and by such things shall stand: He hath disperst his Charity, and with a liberal hand. With honour and with dignity his horn shall sure be rais'd: And these his deeds of piety for ever shall be prais'd. 2 Cor. 9.6. Ecc. 11.1. For he that soweth liberally shall gather many a heap: And he that soweth sparingly, but sparingly shall reap: Then, on the waters cast thy bread, it shall not be in vain: For when long times accomplished, it shall be found again.
Prov. 19.17. For he that giveth to the poor doth lend unto the Lord, And, trusting him, he shall be sure to have it all restor'd. HYMN 104. Blessed Death. Rev. 14.13. BLessed, O blessed are the dead that in the Lord do die: Thus hath the Spirit witnessed, and most assuredly. For from their toils that were extream, they are in quiet re: Their works likewise do follow them, to make them truly blest. Isa 57.2. Thus shall they enter into peace, and quiet rest possess, In blessed beds, each one of these that walk in uprightness. HYMN 105. Blessings of Obedience. Prov. 3.1, 2, 3. MY Son, keep my Commandements, forget not my decree, For length of daies, long life and peace shall these things add to thee. Then let not truth and mercy kind forsake thee and depart, About thy neck my Precepts bind, and write them in thy heart.
4. Chap. 2.5, 6. So shalt thou find a good respect and understanding, then, Approved in the sight of God, and in the sight of men. Then shalt thou understand and know, his wisedom and his fear: For from his mouth doth wisedom flow, and he gives knowledge clear. 10, 11.9. When Wisedom enters in thy heart, and is thy souls delight, Discretion shall preserve thee then, and knowledge keep thee right. Then righteousness shall readily by thee be understood: Judgment likewise and equity and every path that's good. Mat. 25.29. Prov. 4.18. For unto every one that hath there shall be given more: And he shall have abundant grace still to encrease his store. For like unto the shining light is every good man's way, Which more and more shines clear and bright, unto the perfect day. 2. PART. Deut. 28.1, 2, 3, 4. If thou shalt hearken diligently To all that God commands, The Lord thy God shall set thee high above all other Lands.
And all these blessings shall come on, and overtake thee soon: The blessings of the Town and Field, and blessings of the Womb. 5, 6, 27. The Lord shall bless thee mightily with Fruits upon thy Ground: Thy Flocks of Sheep shall multiply, thy Cattel shall abound. The Lord shall take away from thee all sickness and disease, And lay upon thee no such Plague as did on Egypt seize. 7, 12. The Lord shall smite thine enemies that rise up in thy sight, One way against thee shall they rise, and seven ways take their flight. The Lord shall make the Heavens give rain in season on thy Land: And prosper thee in all thy works which thou shalt take in hand. 9. 1 Sam. 15.22. The Lord shall then establish thee A people of his praise: If thou shalt keep to his decree: and walk in all his waies. For better is Obedience than Bullocks, Goats and Lambs, And hearkning to the will of God, than all the fat of Rams.
HYMN 106. Blessings on the Mount, or Bles∣sed Qualifications. Mat. 5.3. to the 10. BLessed, O blessed are the poor, the poor, I say, in spirit: For they shall have the Kingdom, sure, of Heaven, to inherit. And blessed they that mourn and weep, for they shall meet with mirth: And blessed also are the meek, for theirs is all the earth. Blessed are they that hunger much, and thirst for righteousness, For God shall satisfie all such, with comforts that refresh. And blessed are the mercifull, for God will shew them Grace: And blessed are the pure in soul, for they shall see his face. Blessed are they that strive for peace▪ to make men to accord: For we must call all such as these the Children of the Lord. And blessed are the sufferers for love of righteousness: Because a Kingdom shall be theirs in Heaven to possess.
HYMN 107. Call out of Babylon. Have mercy, &c. Rev. 18.4,— 8. COme out of Babylon, my people, at my Call: Lest, for her sake, ye should partake her sins and plagues withall. Because her sins have reach'd unto the Heavens high: And God doth find, and call to mind all her iniquity. Reward her to the full, as she rewarded you: And fill her cup twice double up, as she was wont to do. Look how much she hath been a proud Luxurious Liver, So much inflict her torments strict, and so much sorrow give her. For thus, within her heart, I sit a Queen, saith she: No desolate poor widows state, nor sorrow shall I see. And therefore shall her plagues come on her in one day: Famine, and death, and mournfull breath to make her pine away. And she shall utterly be burnt with fire at length, For God the Lord, that doth reward and judge her, hath such strength.
HYMN 108. Charities Qualifications. 1 Cor. 13.4, 5. LOng-suffering is Charity: and most exceeding kind: It envies not, nor vaunts it self, nor is puff'd up in mind▪ Doth not unseemly bear it self, it seeketh not its own: Is not provoked easily, and evil it thinks none. 6, 7, 8. It Joys not in iniquity, but in the truth takes joy: Believes, and bears, indures and hopes in all things patiently. And Charity fails not at all, but Prophecies shall fail: And Tongues shall cease, and Knowledge fade, but Love shall still prevail. 13. And now do Faith and Hope abide, and Charity, these three: But that which is most magnifi'd, is Love and Charity. HYMN 109. Chastisement. Heb. 12.5, 6. THE castigation of thy God, my Son do not despise: And when rebuked by his Rod faint not in any wise.
For whom he loves he never leaves without chastisement fit: And every Son whom he receives must to his scourge submit. 7, 8. By his chastisement if he bleed, Son-lke you have your lot: For what Son is there whom indeed, the Father chast'neth not. But if ye no chastisement bear, which all partake of here: Then Bastards verily ye are, and not his Children dear. 11. And now, indeed, no chastening doth, for the present, seem A joyou, but a grievous thing, as usually we deem. But afterward, it, ne'rtheless, doth yield us evidently The peacefull fruits of righteousness, when exercis'd thereby. HYMN 110. Christ his Benefits. Eph 1.3. 1 Cor. 1.30. BLessed be God that of his grace hath us so richly stor'd With spiritual gifts in heavenly place, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Made to us wisedom, righteousness, and sanctifying grace; Redemption also, to possess the purchas'd heavenly place.
2 Cor. 5.21. Joh. 14.6. Eph. 2.18. Made also to be sin for us, who from all sin was free, That we the perfect righteousness of God, in Christ, might be. The way, the truth, and life he is, and thoow him alone We, by one Spirit, have access unto the Holy One. Col. 3.11. Where there is neither Greek nor Jew; nor Sex of great or small, Barbarian, Scythian, bond or free, but Christ is all in all. 2 PART. Rom. 8.1, 2. There is no condemnation now to them that are in Christ: Who by the Spirit walk with God, not as by flesh enti'd. Because the Law of Spirit and Life, which is in Christ our Lord, Hath made us free from force of sin, and us from death restor'd. 3. Gal. 4.4. 1▪ Pet. 1.8. For when the Law was weak through Flesh, and had no strength to save, God sent his Son of Virgin-seed, and him to us he gave: Whom having never seen we love, and through belef (no less) Rejoyce with joy unseakable, and full of gloriousness.
Jude 25. Rev. 4.13. God onely wise our Saviour, that on the Throne doth sit, Have honour, glory, praise and power, for ever, so be it. HYMN 111. Christ's Commission. Mat. 10.1, 8. WHenas our Lord had call'd his twelve he gave them power at large Against all Devils and Disease; and thus he gave them charge: Go heal the sick, the Leaprous cleanse, the dead men cause to live: Cast Devils out, your grant is free, and therefore freely give. 14, 15, 16. Whoso receives or hers you not, it shall be far more ease For Sodom, and Gomorrah's Land, at judgment than for these. Behold as Sheep in midst of Wolves, I send you forth, saith he: The Serpents wisedom therefore use, and Doves simplicity. 2. PART. Mat 28.18, 19. Behold all power is given me in Heaven, and Earth likewise: Go therefore into all the world, and Nations gospeize.
Baptize them in the Fathers Name, in every Land and Coast: And in the Name of God the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. 20. Rev. 19.16. Gal. 1.5. And teach them to observe and do whatever I command: And I, behold, am now with you, and while the world doth stand. To Christ the King of Kings therefore, and Lord of Lords most high, Be praise, and glory evermore to all eternity. HYMN 112. Communion of Saints. Heb. 12.22, 23. NOW are we come to Sion Mount, the City of abode, The Heavenly Jerusalem, where dwells the living God. To Hosts of Angels numberless, and to th' assembly there, The General Church of God's first born, whose names in Heaven appear. 24. Mat. 25.32. And unto God the Judge of all (on whom the world must wait) And to the Spirits of all just men, made perfect in that State. To Jesus Mediatour of the covenant now made new, Whoe sprinkled blood speaks better things than Abels blood could do.
Rev. 5.13. Blessing, and glory, and renown, then give we altogether, To him that on the Throne sits down, and to the Lamb for ever. HYMN 113. Confession of Christ. Mat. 10.32. Rom. 10.10. HIM that confesseth me to men, will I, saith Christ, record, And will acknowledge him agen, before my heavenly Lord. For man believes to righteousness, with humble heart alone: And with the tongue doth man confess unto Salvation. 1 Tim 3.16. This Mystery of Godliness is very great and high▪ God manifested in the flesh, the Spirit did justifie. The blessed Angels saw his face, his word the Gentiles heard: Believ'd on in the world he was, to God's right hand preferr'd. HYMN 114. Confession of Sin. All People, &c. Heb. 1.13. Dan. 9.6. O Lord that art of purer eye than to behold iniquity: We all have sinned, we confess, and have committed wickedness.
Isa. 59.12. Ezr. 9.6. Our trespasses against us show, our sins we cannot chuse but know: For they are swollen above our head, and are unto the Heavens spread. Luke 15.18. O Father we have grievously offended Thee, that dwell'st on high; Unworthy to be own'd therefore, as thy dear Children any more. Ezra 9.13. Ezek. 18.32. Yet hast thou never punish'd sin, so much as our deserts have been: Nor is the death of him that dies a matter pleasing in thine eyes. Neh. 9.27. Ezek. 13.32. For thou art unto anger slow, and dost with grace and mercy flow: Thou art most ready to forgive, therefore let us return and live. HYMN 115. Confidence in God. O Lord consider, &c. Hab. 3.17, 18. ALthough the fig-tree shall not spring, although the Vine no grape shall yield, The Olive fail her fruit to bring, nor any food be in the field. The flock be cut off from the fold, no beasts can in the stalls be had: Yet in the Lord my joyes shall hold, in God my Saviour Ile be glad.
HYMN 116. The Conquest. All People, &c. Deut. 33.26, to the end. THere is not one ('tis truly said) like Jeshurun's great God on high, Who rides on heaven for thy aid, with excellency on the sky. Th' eternal God thy refuge is, his everlasting Arms thy stay: He will thrust out thine enemies: before thee, saying, kill and slay. Then Isr'el shall dwell safe, unmixt, and on a Land of Corn and Wine; There Jacob's Fountain shall he fixt, the Heavens dropping on his Vine. O happy Isr'el! we record, whom like to thee doth God advance? O people saved by the Lord! the shield of thy deliverance. Thy excellency's Sword is he, and all thy foes of forreign Powers Shall be found lyers unto thee, and thou shalt tread on their high Towers. HYMN 117. Conscience. 2 Tim. 1.5. Prov. 4.23. Act. 21.16. THE end of all the Law is Love, out of an heart unstain'd:
A conscience that we can approve, and out of Faith unfeign'd. Keep, then, your heart with diligence with all the care you can: A Conscience void of all offence, both towards God and Man. Heb. 10.22. 2 Cor. 1.12. 1 Joh. 3.21. And so draw near with upright heart, with faith both full and sure, Our Conscience cleans'd, our Bodies wash'd with Baptism-water pure. And our rejoycing shall be this, our consciences attest: For if our hearts condemn us not, on God we boldly rest. HYMN 118. Contentation. Prov. 30.8, 9. LORD give me neither poverty, nor too abundant store: Give me to live conveniently, and I desire no more. Not riches, Lord, too largely deal, lest pride should be my bane: Nor poverty, lest I should steal, and take God's Name in vain. Phil. 4.11, 12. Heb. 13.5. And teach me, if my state be scant, or if I fulness find, To know how to abound, or want, with a contented mind.
And let my conversation still be void of covetousness: For God hath said, I never will forsake thee in distress. HYMN 119. Covenant-Grace. Give laud, &c. Isa. 55.1, 2, 3. HO, all that thirst and pine, come to the waters here: And, ye that have no coyn Come buy, and eat good chear: O Come, I say, Buy milk and wine, without your coyn, without your pay. Why do ye money spend for that which is not bread, And labour to no end, not bing fill'd or fed? Heark diligently, And eat ye food, both fat and good, to your souls joy. Incline your ear, and come hear, and your soul shall live, And I will make you room, and I to you will give My Covenant-grace: The mercies sure, which shall indure to David's race.
2. PART. Give laud, &c. Ezek. 36.25. Besprinkle you will I, wih water that shall cleanse: And I will purifie your conscience by this means from Idols then, And all excess of filthiness I'le make you clean. 26. I will in you create a heart with grace refin'd: I will regenerate the Spirit of your mind: your heart of stone I will remove, and make it prove a tender one. 27. My Spirit I will place within you, and will cause That you shall (by my grace) walk in my Statute-Laws; so that ye shall Observe with trust my judgments just, and do them all. 3. PART. Give laud, &c. Heb. 10, 11. And this shall be (in sum) the Cov'nant of my word▪
Made good, in daies to come, to Isr'el, saith the Lord: My Laws will I Put in their hearts, and inward parts, effectually. 12. And they shall all know me, together great and small: And gratious I will be to their offences all. Their sins therefore And doings ill, I never will remember more. Jer. 32.40. My people then shall they be stil'd, and I their God, Nor will I turn away from doing of them good: My fear shall be In them so put, that they shall not depart from me: 4. PART. Jer. 50.5. They shall enquire the way with faces Sion-ward, Come, joyn ye, shall they say, in Covenant with the Lord, such as shall bind Perpetually, and never be put out of mind. 32, 39. And I will give them all one heart, and way, saith God,
And fear me then they shall, for ever, for their good: Their good alwaies, And of their Sons and little ones in after daies. Ezek. 34.23. Zech. 14.9. One Shepherd I will place over my pasture stock (A King of David's race) and he shall feed my Flock: Then shall there be One Lord alone, and his name one, in midst of thee. HYMN 120. Counsel of Christ. Rev. 3.18. I Counsel thee to buy of me Gold tryed in the fire: And white array to make thee rich, and trim in thine attire. That in this dress, thy nakedness and shame may not appear: With eye salve then anoint thine eyes, to make thy eye-sight clear. 19, 20. All whom I love I do reprove with wholsome chastisement: Be zealous therefore in my way, and of thy sloth repent. Behold how I, most graciously, stand at the door and knock, If any man attend to me, and will the door unlock,
21, 22. I will come in and sup with him, and he with me▪ alone, And he that overcomes with me, shall sit upon my Throne. Who hath an ear, now let him hear, what things the Spirit saith Unto the Churches, every where, to keep them in their Faith. HYMN 121. CREED. All People, &c. Or, O Lord consider. Gal. 1.8. 1 Cor. 3.11. Eph. 2.20. SHould we another Gospel preach, or if a glorious Angel durst Contrary to our Doctrine teach, let him be holden as accurst. Other foundation none can lay, than what is laid, to build upon, Namely what Holy Scriptures say, Christ that is made chief corner-stone. Eph. 4.4, 5. 1 Co. 8.7. Eph. 1.7. Ro. 4. ult. 25. One Body, and one Spirit free, one hope, whereto we have our Call: One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God, and Father of us all. One Jesus Christ, in whom we have redemption, through his precious bloud, Who dy'd for us, from sin to save, and rose to make th' assurance good.
Ro. 8.34 Jo. 2.3. Luk. 24.47▪ Act. 26.18. Heb. 1.3. Who by the word of his command made and upholds whatever is: Who sits enthron'd at God's right hand, and intercedeth there for his. Repentance preached in his Name, and free remission of our sin: That we th inheritance might claim, among the Saints by faith in him. Heb. 6.1. Act. 3.19. Mat. 24.35. Luk▪ 1.45. The Resurrection of the Flesh, and the eternal Judgment Day: When Christ his Presence shall refresh, and Heaven and Earth shall pass away. Blessed are they that have believ'd, for every thing, and every word Shall be accomplish'd, and atchiev'd, that hath been spoken by the Lord. HYMN 122. Deborah's Song. Judg. 5.2, 3. SIng praise, O Israel, to the Lord, that hath avenged thee: When as the people went to fight, offering themselves so free. Ye Kings give ear, ye Princes hear, I, even I will sing, And sweetly raise my voice in praise, to Israel's mighty King. 8.6, 7, 10. My heart is towards the Governours that did their help afford: Offering themselves so willingly, wherefore bless ye the Lord.
Ye travellers, and passengers, and ye that ride in state, And ye that yet in judgment sit now speak it in the Gate. 11.6, 7. They that are freed from frightfull noise of Archers at the Well, Shall oft rehearse God's righteous Acts, his Acts to Israel. The Passengers were wanderers in by-paths up and down: And none could dwell in Israel, but in a walled Town. 2. PART. 12, 19. Awake, awake, O Deborah! rise, Barak, sing a Song: Abinoam's Son, thy captives lead; thy captives lead along. There fought the Kings, hard by the springs, of great Megiddoes plain: But brought away no prize nor prey, to glory of their gain. 30, 20. Curse Meroz (said God's Angel then) curse Meroz bitterly: That would not help the Lord against a potent Enemy. But there were those against our foes that fought from Heaven that day: The Stars in course, did fight with force against keen Sisera.
27, 31. At Jael's feet he bow'd, he fell; he bow'd and fell down dead: She smote and pierc'd his temples through, and then cut off his head. So perish those that are thy foes, but, Lord, let all thy Lovers Be like the Sun, when he (at noon) his brightest beams discovers. HYMN 123. Diligence in Duties. Phil. 2.12. 2 Pet. 1.8, 10. WORK out your own salvation with trembling and with fear, That barren ye may neither be, nor fruitless plants appear. But use all circumspection that ye may so find out Your Calling and Election, to make it out of doubt. 5, 6. Add to your Faith the Vertuous Path, to Vertue Knowledge knit: With this advance sweet Temperance, and Patience joyn to it. To Patience add true Piety, with Piety express The Kindness that is Brotherly, and Charitableness. 5, 10, 11. Besides all this ye may not miss of Diligence in all: For if ye do these things pursue, then can ye never fall.
Opening a door of large extent (by this devout behaviour) Into the Kingdom permanent of Christ our Lord and Saviour. HYMN 124. Dragon's Downfall. Ye Children, &c. Rev. 12.10, 11. NOW is salvation come abroad, The strength and Kingdom of our God: now hath his Christ extoll'd his might, For the Accusers made to fall, He that accus'd our Brethren all, before our God, both day and night: And him they quell'd and overcame By the pure blood of Christ the Lamb and by their testimony true: For by that double-edged Sword (The witness of their faithfull word) this enemy they overthrew. 12. Nor did they spare their utmost breath, Nor love their lives unto the death, but boldly laid down all at stake: Therefore, ye Heavens, lift up your voice, And ye that dwell in them rejoyce, in this Salvation to partake. But woe to you, to you, O Sirs, The Earth and Seas inhabiters, guilty of our Accuser's Crime: For Satan is come down to you, Having great wrath, because he knew he now must have but little time.
11.17.7.10, 12. We give thee thanks with one consent: O Lord, our God omnipotent, Which art, and wast, and art to come: For thou hast taken unto thee Thy great pow'r and Authority and reign'd with Jesus Christ thy Son. Salvation to our God therefore, Wisedom, and blessing evermore to him that on the Throne doth sit: And to the Lamb be glory bright, Thanksgiving, honour, power, and might: Amen, say we, and so be it. HYMN 125. Easy Yoke. Have mercy, &c. Mat. 11.28. COME to me, saith the Lord, All ye that are opprest, And griev'd within, by weight of sin, and I will give you rest. Take on you my sweet yoke, and learn of me this Art, How meek to be and like to me, that am of humble heart. So shall your souls find rest, not to be had elsewhere: My yoke alone's an easie one, my burthen light to bear.
HYMN 126. Errours and Heresies to be avoided. Gal. 5.1. Eph. 4.14. STand stedfastly in liberty, wherewith ye are made free: And in the yoke which Christ hath broke no more entangled be. Nor childishly transported by loose Doctrines various wind: Through their deceit that lye in wait, beguiled souls to blind. 15. 1 Thes. 5.21, 24. But speaking truth in love thereof, (and not by error led) Grow up and spring in every thing, in him which is the Head. Prove all (be sure) keep what is pure, shun all that seemeth ill: Faithfull is he that calleth thee, who also will fulfill. 2. PART. Col. 2.8. 2 Cor. 11.19. Beware lest by Philosophy, and vain deceit entic'd, Ye follow mens traditions, which are not after Christ. For Heresies must needs arise, and Sects with you be found, That such as be from error free may be approved sound.
2 Pet. 3.17, 18. Be carefull then lest wicked men should draw you to digress, And there withall you strangely fall from your own stedfastness. But grow apace in Heavenly Grace and knowledge of our Lord: To whom alwaies be given praise of all with one accord. HYMN 127. Esaies Song of Thanksgiving. O Lord Consider. Or, All People, &c. Isa. ch. 12. LORD, I will praise thee now this day, though thou wast angry with me sore, Thine anger now thou turn'st away, and all my comforts dost restore. Behold, God is my Saviour strong, I will confide, as not afraid: For great Jehovah is my Song, also my strength and saving aid. Therefore by means of this supply, possest with joy and great delight, Ye shall draw water plenteously out of the wells of saving might. Then shall ye say, O praise the Lord, call on his Name, declare his deeds Among the people, and record how far his noble Fame exceeds. Sing to the Lord the sweetest Hymns of solemn praise with joy and mirth,
For he hath done most excellent things, this is well known in all the Earth. Oh thou that dost in Sion dwell, cry out and shout, for thou dost see The Holy one of Israel is mighty in the midst of thee. HYMN 128. Esaie's Triumphant Song. Ye Children, &c. Isa. 26.1, 2, 4, 5. WE have a City very strong, God sets Salvation all along, for Walls and Bulwarks every where: Now open ye the Gates for them Of righteous Jerusalem, which keep the truth, to enter there. And since the Lord Jehovah is Th' eternal Rock of strength to his, in his great Name for ever trust: He gives the proud the overthrow, He lays the lofty City low, flat to the ground, and to the dust. 8, 10, 11. Yea, Lord, in thine own judgments way, We waited for thee every day, our Souls desire is to thy Name: But let thy favour be declar'd To wicked men, they'l not regard, nor learn Religion by the same: But most unjustly will transgress, Here in the Land of uprightness,
and will not see God's Majesty: But they shall see, and see with shame, And feel, as foes, thy fiery flame, for envying our felicity. 2. PART. Isa▪ 16.18, 19, Lord, we have been with child in vain, And we have been in grievous pain, and as it were, brought forth the wind: For by our power we have not wrought, The least deliverance can be thought, in all the Earth in any kind. Nor have the dwellers on the earth Fall'n by the powers that we put forth, but by thy strength are under trod. For, Lord, thou wilt ordain, at last, True peace for us, because thou hast wrought all our work in us, O God. 20, 21. O come, my people, enter thou, Into thy secret chambers now, and shut thy doors about thee fast: And hide thy self now as it were But for a little moment there, untill the wrath be over-past. For loe the Lord comes from his place, To punish this ungodly race for wickedness that they maintain: The Earth shall also now disclose The bloodshed of our barbarous foes, and shall no more conceal her slain.
HYMN 129. Example of Saints. Ephes. 5.1, 2. Heb. 6.12. BRethren, be followers of the Lord, as Children dear and true: And walk in love with one accord, as Christ hath loved you. And be not slack through negligence, but followers of their spirit That thorough Faith and Patience the Promises inherit. 13.7. Mat. 5.16. Whose Faith likewise do ye pursue, considering the end, And blessed issue whereunto Their conversations tend. And let your light so shine to men, by what good works they see, That God your heavenly Father then much glorified may be. HYMN 130. Ezekiel's Infant. Ye Children, &c. Ezek. 16.3, 5, 6. THUS saith the Lord to Israel, Thy birth and birth-place know I well, of Canaan's cursed Land to be: And in the day when thou wast born, Thou wast cast out to open scorn, there was no eye to pity thee.
And when I saw thee (passing by) Polluted in thy blood to lye: behold it was the time of love, When in thy blood thou didst remain, I said to thee, and said again, Live, Infant, Live, blest from above. 8.11, 14. Then over thee my skirt I spread, Thy nakedness I covered, I sware to thee, and made thee mine: With ornaments I did thee deck, I put a Chain upon thy neck, and Bracelets on those hands of thine: And thy renown for beauty, then, Went forth among the heathen men, that praised it with one accord: For, true, it was a perfect dress, Through my exceeding comliness, which I put on thee, saith the Lord▪ HYMN 131. Faith praised. Heb. 11.1, 2, 13. FAith is the substance of those things which once we hope to get: And the assured evidence of things not seen as yet. By it the Elders have obtain'd a good report and fame: And died boldly in this Faith, before the Promise came.
6. Rom. 4.3. But without Faith and Confidence, as Scriptures clearly say, It is a thing impossible to please God any way. For he that comes to God must trust that God is God most high: And the rewarder of them all that seek him diligently. Gal. 3.7, 9. Know then that they that are of Faith, are all of Abraham's seed, And blest with faithfull Abraham, that are of faith indeed. HYMN 132. Faith Proved. Jam. 1.14, 20. WHAT profits it, my Brethren dear, if any person saith That he hath faith, and hath not works, is that a saving Faith? But wilt thou know, O thou vain man, that Faith by Works unknown, Is not a living Faith, but dead, it being all alone. 26. Gal. 5.6. For as that body is but dead the which no breath supplies: So Faith that is not perfected by Works, is dead likewise.
And neither circumcision, avails with God above: Nor yet uncircumcision, but Faith that works by Love. HYMN 133. God's Glittering Sword. Deut. 32.39,—43. I Kill, saith God, and make alive, I wound, and heal, alone; And there is none with me can strive, to rescue any one. For I lift up my hand on high to heaven above, and say, Behold I live eternally, and am without decay. If once my hand with Judgment close, and whets my glittering Sword, With vengeance on my hatefull Foes, I'le execute my Word: I'le make mine Arrows drunk with blood, my Sword shall flesh devour, The slain and captives shall be food from the revenging hour. Rejoyce ye Nations with his Land to whom he will be good: And (while his foes shall feel his hand) avenge his Servants blood.
HYMN 134. Government. 2 Sam. 23.1. Deut. 16.20. 2 Cor. 4.4.1.17. 2 Chr. 19.6. Psal. 82.1. THE Prince that Ruleth over men must be exceeding just: And govern in the fear of God that putteth him in trust. Because the judgment is not mans but God's (the judge on high) Who sits among these earthly Gods, to judge most righteously. Rom. 13.1.5. 1 Tim. 2.2. And every soul must needs submit unto the powers supream: And, not for wrath, but conscience sake, be subject unto them. And pray for Kings and Rulers all, that we, through their defence, May live in Peace, and Godliness, with all good conscience. 2 Cor. 5.10. For we must every one appear, and personally come Before the Judgment seat of Christ, there to receive our doom. As hath been in the body done by each man (bond or free) And as the work is good or bad, so shall his sentence be.
2. PART. 1 Thes. 5.12, 13. 1 Pet. 4.10. Obey those Rulers over you that warn you in the Lord: And, for their work-sake prize them much that preach to you the Word. As each man hath receiv'd the gift let him discharge his place: As good and faithfull Ministers of God's abundant grace. 1 Th. 5.14. 2 Th. 3.6, 14. 1 Tim. 5.22. Warn the unruly, help the weak, support them lest they fall: Comfort the feeble-minded ones, be patient towards all. Withdraw from the inordinate, to shame them from their sin: And no way be partakers of the sins that such live in. Heb. 12.15, 16. 1 Cor. 14.26, 33. And let no root of bitterness, no person vain and vile, Spring up with you to trouble you, and many to defile. Let all be done to edifie, for God's the God of peace, In all the Churches of the Saints, to make disorders cease. 2 Cor. 13.11. Rom. 13.8. And live in peace and holiness, whereto ye have your call: And then the God of love and Peace shall still be with you all.
And owe to no man any thing, but one to love another, For 'tis the Laws accomplishing, to be a perfect Lover. 3. PART. Eph. 6.1, 2, 4. Obey your Parents in the Lord, ye Children, as 'tis fit: This is the first Commandement, with Promise made to it. Parents, provoke not unto wrath your Children, in their youth: But bring them up in fear of God, and nurture of his Truth. 5.6, 9. Servants, obey your Masters will with reverential fear: Not with eye-service, pleasing men, but as Christs servants dear. And, Masters, do your Servants right knowing ye have on high A Master who hath no respect of Persons partially. Rev. 1.7.22.12. Behold, he cometh in the Clouds, whom every eye shall see: And every man shall have reward so as his works shall be.
HYMN 135. Government of the Tongue. Jam. 1.26. Mat. 12.36. IF he that seems religious doth not his tongue refrain, That man's Religion, verily, is altogether vain. For, sure, of every idle word that any man shall say, He is to give account thereof at God's great Judgment day. 5.22. Jam. 3.2. Rash anger shall be judg'd a sin, contemptuous speech goes higher: And he that saith, thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire. But not to sin in Word or Tongue doth testifie and tell A perfect man, and one that can rule all the body well. HYMN 136. Harvest. Have mercy, &c. Mat. 9.37, 38. THE Harvest, truly Sirs, is very great to view: But loe, the faithfull Labourers are but a very few: Pray ye the Lord therefore, whose own the Harvest is,
To send out Labourers good store into this field of his. Joh. 4.35, 36. Phil. 4.17. That he that doth engage to sow and reap, or either, May have eternal life for wage, and both rejoyce together. And that our fruit amount (as we desire and pray) Abundantly to our account, in that great Harvest-day. HYMN 137. High and lofty One. O Lord Consider, &c. Isa. 57.15. THUS saith the high and lofty One, inhabiting Eternity, Whose Name is Holy; be it known, I dwell in Holy place on high. Also with him that is contrite, whose humble Spirit sighs and groans, To cheer the humbled in my sight, to cheer the heart of contrite ones. 16.66.2. For, still, contending with the frail, and keeping anger unallay'd, The Spirits would before me fail, and those poor souls which I have made. But unto him will I be sure to look with favour, saith the Lord, That is in Spirit meek, and poor, and trembles at my Holy Word.
HYMN 138. Humiliation. Hos. 6.1. COme now, and let us search and try the ways that we have trod: And turn again unfeignedly unto the Lord our God: For he hath torn and put to pain, and he hath made the wound; And he will bind it up again, and make us whole and sound. 3. Jam. 4.9. After two daies he will revive, and raise us up the third: And set us in his sight alive, that felt so sharp a Sword. Be then afflicted, weep and mourn, (repentance to express) Your laughter into mourning turn, your joy to heaviness. 10. Mic. 6.9. Joel 2.13. Hear him that smiteth and the Rod, humble your selves and stoop: Cast down your selves in sight of God, and he shall raise you up. For he is gratious, mercifull, and unto anger slack: Of kindness great, and one that will his judgments soon call back.
HYMN 139. Idolatry Forbidden. 1 Cor. 10.14.22. 2 Cor. 6.14. FLEE fast from all Idolatry, from Idols keep you free: Provoke we God to Jealousie? are we more strong than he? With Belial can Christ accord? or can these things unite The house of Idols and our Lord, the darkness and the light? 15, 16, 17, 18. Unrighteousness, can that combine with righteousness to dwell? Or can the true believer joyn with any Infidel? Be therefore separate and clear, and all uncleanness flee: And ye my Sons and Daughters dear, and I your God shall be. Rev. 3.4. For but a few do walk aright, and keep their Garments fair: And these shall walk with me in white, for worthy Saints they are. HYMN 140. Jew and Gentiles Call. Rom. 11.26.15. THERE cometh a Deliverer from Sion hill on high, To turn away ungodliness from Jacob's Family.
For if the World be reconcil'd by casting them away, Much more shall their return be stil'd life from the dead that day. 26, 27.16. And then all Israel shall be sav'd, (as Scripture doth declare) Because the Gifts and Calls of God without repentance are. For if the first-fruits Holy be, the lump is Holy too: And if the root yield sanctity, so shall the branches do. 2. PART. Rom. 11.32, 33. Yet now hath God adjudg'd the Jews by unbelief to fall, That he might this occasion chuse, to shew his grace to all. O depth of riches infinite! and wisedom of our God! His Judgments O how past our sight! his Tracks O how untrod! 34, 35, 36. For who hath known the mind of God, or lent his counsels aid? Or who hath given unto him, and it shall be repaid? For of, and thorough him are all, and pass to him agen: To whom be praise of great and small for evermore, Amen.
HYMN 141. Jew and Gentiles fulness held out in many Promises. Ye Children, &c. Isa. 66.8. OH who hath heard of such a thing, As now God's power to pass doth bring? or who hath seen such things as these? For shall a Land (can any say) Be made to bring forth in a day? are Nations born at once with ease? Before that Sion travelled, She presently was brought to bed, and brought forth Sons by heavenly aid, Before she travell'd she brought forth, Before her pain she brought the birth, and of a sweet Man-child was laid. 54.1.66.9. Break out, O barren Church, and sing Thou that didst (once) no Children bring, let joyfull Songs take up thy life: Thus saith the Lord of thine estate, The Children of the desolate are more than of the married Wife. For shall I bring it to the birth, And then not bring the Children forth, saith the Almighty Sovereign Lord? Or shall I cause to bring forth some, And then untimely shut the womb, thy God, O Sion, spake this word.
2. PART. Isa. 66.10, 11, 12. Rejoyce ye with Jerusalem, And let her lovers (all of them) in her spiritual joys partake: Rejoyce, I say, lift up your voice, Be glad with her, and much rejoyce, all ye that mourned for her sake. That ye may suck, and take your fill Of Consolations, which distill in plenty, from your Mothers breast: Then shall ye suck (danc'd on Her knee) Milk out, and much delighted be with her abundant gloriousness. 54.7, 8, 60.18. Though for a very little space, Angry I was▪ and hid my face, and thou wast termed desolate: Yet will I gather thee again With kindnesses that shall remain, and bear an everlasting date. Destruction shall no more be heard Within thy Land, nor wasting fear'd, nor violence be in thy ways: But thorowout thy borders all, Thy Walls Salvation they shall call, and give thy Gates the Name of praise. 3 PART. Isa. 51.1, 5.54.2.2. ch. 4. Hearken, O people, and give ear, My Righteousness is drawing near,
my saving health I will disclose; My Arm shall judg the heathen men, The Isles shall wait upon me then, and on my power shall they repose. Enlarge and spread thy Tents apace, (And Curtains of thy dwelling place) lengthen thy Cords, and stretch them far: And men shall break their Swords and Spears To pruning hooks and Plowing shares, nor shall they any more learn War. 11.6.49.23.60.20, 22, 23. The Wolf and Lamb shall joyntly feed, The Leopard with the Calf and Kid, the Lyon and the Youngling fat: Thy Nursing-Fathers Kings shall be, Queens Nursing-Mothers unto thee, they shall bow down before thee flat. Thy Sun shall never more decline, Nor yet thy Moon desist to shine, for God's thy everlasting light: A little one shall thousands bring, Strong Nations from a small one spring, and all thy people shall be right. 4. PART. Isa. 66.12.60.4.66.13. Behold (saith God) I will extend The peace of Israel far-an-end, that like a River it shall seem: Then shall the glorious Dignity Of the converted Gentiles be like to an over-flowing stream.
Thy Sons shall come from far and wide, And (to be nursed at thy side) thy Daughters from the earths far ends. Then will I sweetly comfort them, That dwell in my Jerusalem, as one whom his dear Mother tends. 14, 24. Psal. 149.5. Isa. 35.10. Which when ye see, your heart shall joy, Your bones shall flourish wonderously, like a sweet herb that freshly grows. Then shall the hand of God be known, Towards his Servants every one, and his displeasure towards his foes: For loe, their worm shall never dye, Their fire shall burn perpetually, and not be quenched night nor day: But Saints shall shout upon their beds, Eternal joy shall crown their heads, sorrow and sighs shall flee away. HYMN 142. Imperfection. Eccl. 7.20. Jam 3.2. 1 Cor. 10.12. THere is not any in the earth, (through all the coasts of it) A righteous man, that still doth good, and doth no sin commit. For, verily, in many things, we sin, and trespass, all: Let him therefore that thinks he stands be carefull lest he fall.
Gal. 6.1. Eph. 4.32. And if by imperfection, ye see a man transgress, Restore him, ye spiritual ones with love, and gentleness; And kind and tender-hearted be, forgiving mutually, As God for Christ his sake forgave all your iniquity. 2. PART. Gal. 5.17. Rom. 7.23. The Spirit wars against the Flesh, and this with that doth fight: So that ye cannot do such things as ye would do, aright: We, in our members find a Law averse to that within: And bringing in captivity unto the Law of sin. Jam. 5.16, 20. Confess your faults, then, mutually, And pray for one another: That so ye may be heal'd thereby, and grace afresh recover. Who turns a sinner from the path wherein he went aside, Shall thereby save a soul from wrath, and numerous sins shall hide.
HYMN 143. Joys of Heaven. Rev. 22.14.3. BLessed are they whose only strife is God's good Law to do: That they may taste the tree of Life, and have a right thereto. And that they may have entrance all into the City Gate, There, where no curse can ever fall to alter their Estate. 4, But there the Throne of God shall be, and Christ the Lamb's high Throne: And there his Servants shall be free to serve the holy One. And they shall see his blessed face, and bear his glorious Name, Which on their foreheads shall have place, his Image to proclaim. 5. And there, there shall ensue no night, (as if their day were done:) Nor have they need of candle-light, or shining of the Sun. For God the Lord (om whom it springs) shall give them light on high: And they shall reign, as crowned Kings to all Eternity.
HYMN 144. Judgment-Day Forewarn'd. Joh. 5 28, 29. THE day and hour is drawing nigh, when all the dead must hear The voice of him that is most high, and shall forthwith appear. All they to sure Salvation whose works are good and right: And they to condemnation in evil that delight. Prov. 12.28. Rom. 6.23. Gal. 6.8. For life is found in righteous ways, no death can be therein: But death the certain wages pays of all unpardon'd sin. All they that sow to sinfull flesh corruption shall inherit: But endless life shall them refresh that sow unto the Spirit. 1 Cor. 15.58. Be stedfast, Brethren, now therefore, and alwaies be unmov'd; Abounding now and evermore, in works of God approv'd. Because ye know his Holy Word doth make the Promise plain, So that your labour in the Lord, can never be in vain. 2. PART. Luke 21.34. Be carefull, lest at any time, you should, by your excess,
Surcharge your souls with surfeiting, or shamefull drunkenness. And lest your heart be overcome with weight of worldly cares: And so, that day, the day of Doom, o'retake you unawares. 1 Thes. 5.2, 3. Luke 12.47. Because the day of Christ will come like as a Thief by night: And when they say, Peace, Peace, will be, shall suddain vengeance light. He that did know his Masters will, and not himself prepare To do according to his skill, full many a stripe shall bear. 37, 38, 44. But blessed are those Servants all that watch with wakefull mind: Whom Christ shall at his coming call and in this posture find. He shall come forth assuredly, and set them at his board: And make them partners in the Joy of their advanced Lord. HYMN 145. Justification. Rom. 8.33, 34. IT is the Lord that justifies, who therefore shall condemn? It is our Saviour Christ that dy'd, or rather rose agen. Who also is at God's right hand ascended up on high:
And maketh intercession there for us continually. Heb. 4.16. Col 3.17. Now therefore let us boldly come (in certain hope to speed) Unto the Throne of grace, for grace to help in time of need. And let all things we speak or do be in the name of one, To God the Father giving thanks through Christ our Lord alone. HYMN 146. Laud and Praise for God's Judg∣ments, or the Lambs Song. Rev. 15.3, 4. THY works are great and marvellous, Lord God th' Almighty one: Thy ways are true and righteous, thou King of Saints alone. Who shall not fear thee, O most high, and glorifie thy Name; For thou alone for sanctity deservest laud and fame▪ For all the Nations of the earth shall come and worship thee: Because thy judgments are set forth so plain for us to see. HYMN 147. Longing after Christ. Ye Children, &c. Joh. 6.32, 35. Chap. 7.38. THE bread of God (so truly calld) That giveth life unto the world,
is he that down from Heaven came: And with this sweet celestial bread, Lord, let us be replenished, and give us ever of the same. For he that (as the Scripture saith) Laies hold on Christ by lively Faith shall never thirst or hunger more: For by that Faith, and feeding so, Out of his belly there shall flow of living waters plenteous store. Rev. 22.17, 20. Cant. 8.14. Jam. 5.8. Come say the Spirit and the Bride, And so of all let be reply'd that hear the Lamb and his dear Wife, Come all that thirst, and take your fill, Take freely whosoever will the water of eternal life. Make hast, my love, and be not slow, Be like the nimble Hart or Row tracing upon the Mountains spic'd: And I, behold, come speedily, The coming of the Lord draws nigh, Amen, so come, Lord Jesus Christ. HYMN 148. Love of God. Joh. 3.16. 1 Joh 4 9. Joh. 3.17. SO greatly God did love the world that freely he did give His onely and begotten Son, that we through him might live. God sent him not into the world the world for to condemn, But that he might be manifest a Saviour unto men.
Rev. 1.5. Joh. 3.16. Rev. 21.24. Who loved us, and gave himself for our eternal good, And washt away our scarlet sins in his own precious blood. And whosoever trusts in him shall never perish quite, But he shall have eternal life, and live in endless light. Luke 2.24. To God therefore that dwells on high be praise and glory still: On earth be true tranquillity, and unto men good will. 2. PART. 1 Joh. 2.3. c. 5.3. Hereby we know undoubtedly that we do love the Lord, By keeping with fidelity the Precepts of his Word, And this is sure God's love in us, that we his Laws fulfill; Nor do we count them burdenous, but do them with good will. 4.19. Eph. 1.4. 1 Joh. 4.10, 19. The perfect Love of God most high is manifested thus, And we love him so perfectly because He first lov'd us.
Herein is love, not ours it is, but his for our dear sake, In sending that sweet son of his our debts to undertake. Rev. 5.13. To him that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb therefore Be glory, strength, dominion, and honour evermore. HYMN 149. Love of the World forbidden. Mat. 16.26. Col. 3.2. WHAT shall it profit any man the world to purchase whole, And thereby miss the certain bliss of his immortal soul? Oh set your strong affections then on things that are above! And let no worth of things on earth be motives of your Love. 1 Joh. 2.16.15. All in the world is pride of Life, and lusts of flesh and eyes: Which do not from the Father come, but from the world they rise. Love not the world nor things thereof; if any love so low, The perfect Love of God above in him can never flow.
17. These worldly things all pass away and perih altogether, But to fulfill God's holy will makes to abide for ever. HYMN 150. Marriage. Heb. 13.4. THE due estate of Marriage (as Scripture doth assure) Is honourable every where (the bed preserved pure:) But Harlots and Adulterers that violate this thing, By practice of unchastity, will God to Judgment bring. 1 Thes. 4.4. Col. 3.19, 20. Then let us every one know how his vessel to possess In honourable dignity, and spotless holiness. And Husbands dearly love your Wives, giving no bitter word: And Wives, submit obediently to them, as to the Lord. 1 Pet. 3.3, 4. And your adorning let not be in any pompous way, Of plited hair, and wearing gold, or putting on aray. But of the heart and hidden man, where no corruption lies,
And of a meek and quiet soul, which God doth highly prize. 1 Cor. 7.39. 1 Pet. 3.7. And be not yoakt unequally, but joyned in the Lord; Honouring the Wife (the weaker Sex) according to the Word. And live together lovingly, as heirs of Grace, of Life: That disagreements hinder not the prayers of Man and Wife. Mat. 22.30. And in the Resurrection, where none are in Marriage given, Ye shall be like the Angels there, Triumphant Saints in Heaven. HYMN 151. Mediator. All People, &c. 1 Tim. 2.5. ONE God there is, and one alone, and Mediator none but one; The man whom we Christ Jesus call, who gave himself full price for all. 1 Joh. 2.1, 3. If any sin, we have on high an Advocate to qualifie, Jesus the Just, whose bloud was spilt to expiate our hainous guilt.
Rev. 5.13. Blessing and glory and renown to him that on the Throne sits down, And to the Lamb of God therefore be praise and honour evermore. HYMN 152. Mercies. All People, &c. Mic. 6.18, to the end. WHO is a God like unto thee that pardons all Iniquity; And from their sins doth disengage the remnant of his heritage? This wrath he doth not long excite, for mercy is his dear delight: He will return again, he will, and have compassion on us still. Isa. 43.25. He will subdue our trespasses, as drowned in the deepest Seas: And for his own Name sake on high, he blots them out of memory. Thou wilt perform thy Truth and Grace, to Abraham and Jacob's race. As thou hast to our Fathers told, and sworn it from the daies of old.
HYMN 153. Mercy and Terror mixt. All People, &c. Nah. 1.2, JEalous is God's avenging eye, the Lord avengeth furiously, He will take vengeance on his foes, and he reserveth wrath for those. 3, Yet is the Lord to anger slow, but of great power to overthrow: And he will not at all acquit the wicked that repent no whit. 6. Hab. 3.5. Before his fury who can stand? who can abide his angry hand? The Pestilence before him rolls, beneath his feet are burning coals. Nah. 1.5. The Mountains quake, the Hills do melt when as his presence is but felt, The earth is burnt at sight of him the world and all that dwell therein. Isa. 14.27. Neh. 9.17. His judgments none can disanul; but yet our God is mercifull; Thine anger, Lord, is slow of pace: thy kindness great, and rich thy grace▪
2 PART. All People, &c. Nah. 1.7, 8. The Lord is good▪ a Tower to his when as the day of trouble is: And them that trust in him he knows, but darkness shall pursue his foes. 8.6. He will with over-running floud: consume the Palaces that stood: Like fire his fury poureth down, the rocks by him are overthrown. 9. Against him what do ye intend? the Lord will make an utter end: Affliction (for so great a crime) shall not rise up the second time. 10. Folden as thorns, although they be, and drunken with prosperity, They shall be very suddenly devour'd as stubble fully dry. 15. O Judah! keep thy solemn feasts, thy Mountains bring good news of peace No more shall sinners pass through thee, but utterly cut off shall be.
HYMN 154. Merit disclaimed. Luk. 17.10. Phil. 2.13. WHen you have done the best ye can, say thus with humble thought, Unprofitable Servants all we do but what we ought. For it is God that works in you, he works both will and deed, And of his meer good pleasure too, doth all your power proceed. Eph. 2.8, 9. Chap. 3.21. And ye are sav'd by grace, through faith, wrought by the Holy Ghost: Not of your selves, nor of your works, lest any man should boast. To him let all the Church therefore ascribe, with one accord, All praise and honour evermore, through Jesus Christ our Lord. HYMN 155. Moral Precepts. Prest with Arguments. Mic. 6.8. Psal. 37.28. Col. 3.25. THe Lord hath shewed thee, O man, what God requires as good: Do justly, love compassion, walk humbly with thy God. Because the Lord loves equity, his Saints he will not leave: And he that deals injuriously, shall suitably receive.
Mat. 5.7. Jam. 2.13. Luk. 14.11. And mercy to the mercifull, the Lord will still express: But Judgment shall with rigour fall upon the merciless. And God doth still resist the proud, but gives the humble grace, Self-humbling, then, shall honour men, self-honouring shall abase. 2. PART. Jam. 5.12, Eph. 4.25. Rev. 21.8. Swear not by heaven, nor by earth, nor any oath at all: Lest into condemnation, by such offence, ye fall. Put Lyes away and speak the Truth, for every wilfull Lyer Must sure partake of that broad Lake which burns with brimstone-fire. Rom. 13.13. Heb. 12.14. Shun surfeiting and drunkenness, and do not lead your Life In chambering and wantonness, in envy, or in strife. And ever follow peace withall, and holiness together: Without which grace there's no man shall behold God's face for ever.
3. PART. Eph. 4.31, 29. Rom. 12.21. All malice, wrath, and bitterness, and clamour put away: And be not overcome with ill, but let the good bear sway. And let no talk come from your mouth corrupt in any case: But such as serves to edifie, and teach the hearers grace. Eph. 5.3, 4. But fornication, avarice, and what pollutes or taints, Amongst you, let not once be nam'd, as it becometh Saints. Nor filthiness, nor foolish talk, nor unbeseeming jests (Which things are not convenient) but rather thankfulness. 4. PART. Rom. 12.10, 15. Eph. 2.4. Gal. 6. By kind affection mutually the Love of Brethren keep: Rejoyce with them that do rejoyce, and weep with them that weep. And heed not your own things alone, but each for other care: And to fulfill the Law of Christ, each others burden bear.
Rom. 12.16. Mat. 7.1, 2. Mind not high things, but condescend to men of low estate: And be not wise in your own eyes puff'd up with self-conceit. And judge not, that you be not judg'd, for as you mete to men, Accordingly shall God reply, and deal to you agen. 5. PART. Mat. 7.12. Rom. 13.7. Chap. 12.17. T. 3.2. 1 Thes. 4.7. Do as you would be done unto, and give to all their right: Of no man ever speak amiss, not ill with ill requite. Let none defraud or go beyond his brother any way: For God avengeth all such things, and will the wrong repay. Jam. 5.9. Joh. 7.24. Phil. 4.5. Rom. 14.4. And, Brethren, let no one of you against another grudge: Nor judge ye by appearances, but righteous judgment judge. And let your moderation be manifest to all: The Lord our Master is at hand, to whom we stand or fall.
6. PART. Eccles. 5.4, 5. Heb. 13.16. When thou hast vow'd a vow to God defer not then, to pay: For God hath no delight in Fools, that mock him with delay. And to do good and distribute forget ye in no wise: For God is pleas'd exceedingly with such like sacrifice. Phil. 4.8. 1 Cor. 4.5. And all things honest, just and true, and such as sweetly please, For vertue, praise, and good report, think on such things as these. Until the secrets of all hearts be publish'd all abroad: And then shall every one of us have his due praise of God. HYMN 156. More spiritual Precepts. Prov. 3.5, 6. Mat. 22.37. 1 Thes. 5.15, 16. TRust in the Lord with all thy heart, love him with all thy might: In all thy ways acknowledge him, and make him thy delight. Pursue good things, rejoycing still, and pray continually: Quench not the Spirit any way, despise not prophecy.
Walk after God's Commandements, fear him, obey his Voice: Rejoyce in him continually, and still I say rejoyce. Rom. 12.11. Heb. 12.28. Joh. 6.27. With fervent spirit serve the Lord, and (having grace) draw near To worship God with reverence, and Godly filial fear. And for the food that perisheth be not at any Strife: But for the food that doth indure to everlasting life. Mat. 6.33. And seek God's Kingdom first of all, his righteousness pursue: And then shall all the other things be added unto you. HYMN 157. Mortality and Immortality. Isa. 40.6, 7. All flesh is grass, and soon must yield, for all the goodly show, Which is but as a flower in field that some short time doth grow. The grass doth wither and is gone, the flower doth fade and pass: Because God's Spirit blows thereon; the people sure is grass. 8. 1 Cor. 15.53. The grass doth change, the flower doth fade at one rebuking blast;
But loe! the word our Lord hath said for ever standeth fast. The corruptible must put on a state that cannot die; The mortal must be cloath'd upon with immortality. 54, 56, 57. The Scriptures sayings then shall be fulfil'd for Saints to sing, O Grave! where is thy Victory? O Death! where is thy Sting? The Sting of Death Sin needs must be, the Law the strength of Sin, But thanks to God for Victory through Christ our Lord herein. HYMN 158. Mortification. Col. 3.5. Rom. 6.12. c. 8.13. YOUR earthly members mortifie, and let no sin bear sway, Or in your mortal body reign while ye the lusts obey. For if ye serve the flesh ye dye, but if that by the Spirit, The bodies lusts ye mortifie, then shall ye life inherit. Chap. 6.16. Chap. 13.14. For his ye are, whom ye obey, whether of sin to death; Or else of righteousness to life, after this mortal breath.
Put on, then, Jesus Christ the Lord, and for the fleshes ease Make no provision, nor regard the lusts thereof to please. 2. PART. Rom. 8 7. Chap. 12.2. The carnal mind is enmity against the living Lord: Not subject, neither can it be to his revealed word. Be chang'd therefore by minds renew'd, that ye may understand What pleasing good and perfect things the Lord doth here command. Chap. 8.6. Chap. 6.11, 8. Because to be of carnal mind is death without release: But if Spiritually inclin'd, it savours Life and Peace. Then count your selves as dead to sin, to God (in Christ) alive: Because if we be dead with him we trust we shall revive. HYMN 159. Mose's Song. All People, &c. Exod. 15.1. NOw sing unto the Lord will I, for he hath triumph'd gloriously: The Horse and Rider (both of these) his hand hath cast into the Seas.
5, 6. The depths devour'd them every one, they sank to th' bottom as a stone Lord thy right hand with power shines bright, thy right hand crusht the enemy quite. 7, In thy great excellence, O God, thou hast those Rebels under-trod. Thou sentt forth thy wrath whereby they were consum'd as stubble dry. 9, The enemy thus proudly spake, I will pursue, and overtake, The spoil saith he) I will divide, my Lust shall so be satisfi'd. 10, Then didst thou blow with blustring force, the Sea returned to its course; And (covering them) became their graves, they sank as Lead in mighty Waves. 11. Among the Gods, who's like to thee? who like thee shines in sanctity? Fearfull in praises, as exceeds, and doing rare and wondrous deeds. HYMN 160. Oppression and Rapine disswaded. Prov. 4.14, 15, 16. GO not with wicked men, my Son, go not with them, I say; Their crooked paths avoid and shun, and come not near their way.
For if they do no wicked deed, they take no rest at all: Their sleep departs, unless they speed of making some to fall. Mic. 22. Prov. 4.17.2.13. They covet fields, and violently they take them for a prey, Oppressing Town and Family, because they bear the sway. They eat the bread of wickedness, and drink the wine of strife; They leave the paths of Righteousness to lead a brutish life. Isa. 59.7, 8. Destruction and unhappiness are ever in their waies; Nor do they know the way of peace; for still their Judgment straies. They make them crooked paths of sin, form which they cannot cease: And whosoever walks therein shall never know true peace. 2. PART. Prov. 1.10, 11, 13. My Son, let sinners ticing thee be constantly withstood; If they say, come, let us agree, let us lay wait for blood: All precious substance we shall find, to make us rich and great; And with the spoil of every kind shall fill our house compleat.
14, 15, 16, 18. Cast in thy Lot among us now, let us have all one purse. Refrain, my Son, and go not thou with them in this lewd course: For unto rapine they run fast, but loe their laying wait Shall be for their own lives at last, and their own bloud the bait. 19, 31. The projects which they prosecute shall pay them home one day: And they shall eat the bitter fruit, of their own cursed way. Such ways are his, whoever strives his hands with bloud to stain, To take away the owners lives for greediness of gain. HYMN 161. Passion and Compassion of Christ. 1 Pet. 3.18. Chap. 2.24. LO Christ hath suffered once for sin, the Just for wicked men; That he might bring us unto God now reconcil'd agen: Who bare our sins in his own flesh upon that cursed Tree, That we should live to righteousness and dead to sin should be. Isa. 53.6.3. All we like sheep have gone astray, each took his course to fall:
And God hath laid the Load on him, to answer for us all. A man of sorrows sure he was, and he hath born our grief: Mean while we hid our face from him, And gave him no relief. Joh. 10.11. Lo, this is that sweet Shepherd, then so infinitely good, That for his sheep laid down his Life, and spilt his pretious bloud. 2 PART. Joh. 15.13. Rom. 5.7. A greater Love than this hath none, to act or apprehend, Than that a man should stake his life, and lose it for his friend: For scarce will any dye for him that lives most righteously, Yet haply for a special friend some one might dare to dye. 18. Chap. 14.9. But God commends his tender Love to us ward in this wise: In that Christ Jesus dy'd for us when we were enemies. And therefore did our Saviour die, recover and revive, To be the Lord both of the dead, and those that are alive.
Heb. 13.15. By him therefore give we to God the sacrifice of praise, (The gratefull fruit of thankfull lips) blessing his name alwaies. HYMN 162. Patience. Jam. 1.4. Heb. 10.36. LET Patience have her perfect work, that ye may be intire, And nothing wanting in your grace which God doth here require. For ye have need of Patience, that having done his Will, Ye may receive the Promises which God shall then fulfill. Chap. 6.19. Rom. 5.4, 5. 2 Co. 4.17. For Patience works experience, experience hope doth gain: And hope shall never make asham'd whatever we sustain. And lo! our light affliction, which is but transitory, Works for us a more excellent eternal weight of glory. 2 Tim. 2.12. Jam. 5.72. For they that suffer with the Lord shall reign with him full sure: Therefore, behold, we count them blest whoever do endure.
HYMN 163. The Peace of God, and Prayer. All People, &c. Or, O Lord Consider, &c. Phil. 4.6, 7. IN nothing be perplext with care, but call on God for every thing: And with thanksgiving in your prayer to him your supplications bring. And lo! the peace which God imparts, past understanding to make known, Shall safely keep your minds and hearts, through Jesus Christ the Holy One. HYMN 164. Perseverance. Heb. 3.12, 13. TAKE heed, my brethren, lest there be in any of you all An heart of infidelity, whereby from God to fall. But still exhort with mutual heed, while it is call'd to day, Lest any one be hardened by sins deceitfull way. 14. Chap. 10.23 1 Thes. 5 24. For we partake of Christ (be sure) if we by faith hold fast, So that our confidence endure unshaken to the last.
Let's hold profession firm therefore, not wavering in our faith, For faithfull is the promiser, and will do what he saith. Rev. 2.10. Be faithfull to the death, (saith he) persisting in my way, And I will surely give to thee a Crown of Life that day. HYMN 165. Portion of the little Flock. Luke 12.32. 1 Cor. 2.9. FEAR not, O little Flock and few! for 'tis your Father's pleasure. To give the Kingdom unto you, that hath eternal treasure. Eye hath not seen, nor Ear hath heard what things God hath above, Beyond the thoughts of man, prepar'd for them that do him love. 1 Tim. 4.8. For godliness avails to all, having the Promise sure Of this Life which is temporal, and that which doth endure. To God the Father and the Son, and Holy Ghost therefore, Eternal honour let be done, henceforth for evermore.
HYMN 166. Power of Prayer. Jam. 1.5. Mat. 7.11. IF any of you wisedom wants, ask of the Lord alone, Who liberally to all men grants, and yet upbraideth none. For if that ye, which evil are, can give good things to yours, Much more your heavenly Father's care his suppliants assures. 7. Jam. 1.6. Joh. 16.24. Ask therefore and be sure to have, and seek and ye shall find: But ask in Faith what-ere ye crave, and not with wavering mind. But if ye ask and shall believe: God will thereto agree: Ask therefore that ye may receive, that full your joy may be. HYMN 167. Reasonable Service. Rom. 12.1. 1 Cor. 6.19. PResent your bodies to the Lord a living Sacrifice: A holy offering unto him, and pleasing in his eyes. This is a service which ye owe, and reasonably due: For ye are not your own, ye know, but Christ hath purchas'd you.
20. Chap. 10.31. Now therefore glorifie the Lord (dear brethren every one) Both in your bodies and your souls. for they are God's alone. And whether eat or drink ye do, or ought else, all your daies. Let all be done, by each of you to God's renown and praise. Vide Cent. I. Hymn 55. Psal. 68. HYMN 168. Recovery of the Church. Have mercy, &c. Mic. 17.8, 9. REjoyce not over me, O thou mine enemy! For, when I fall, the boast is small, so soon arise shall I. And when I sit me down in darkness desolate, The Lord will be a light to me, in that distrest estate. And I will therefore bear the Lords most just displeasure: Since I have been intic'd to sin against him in such measure. Untill the Lord be pleas'd my cause to undertake: And, at my suit, shall execute his judgment for my sake. For verily, the Lord will bring me forth to light, And will express his righteousness apparent in my sight.
HYMN 169. Redeeming of Time. Eccles. 12.1, 7. REmember thy Creator now, in these thy younger daies: Before the year and day draw near when pleasure quite decays. Then shall the dust return to earth, to earth from whence it came: The spirit then goes back agen to God that gave the same. 13, 14. Now let us hear the end of all, that Scripture doth declare, Oh fear the Lord, and keep his word, which should be all our care. For every work, both good and bad, with every secret thing, That here have past, from first to last, will God to judgment bring. Eph. 5.15, 16. See that ye walk exactly then, and not as fools, but wise; And still redeem your precious time because ill daies arise. HYMN 170. Redemption. Out of the Songs of the Blessed Virgin Mary, of Zacharias and Old Simeon. Luke 1.46.47, —50. MY soul doth highly magnifie the Lord of Sovereign power: My spirit joys exceedingly, in God my Saviour.
For holy is that Name of his, and lets great grace to fall On them that fear him, every where, through Generations all. 51, 52. The things that his right arm hath wrought have shew'd his strength full well: Scattering the proud in that high thought wherewith their hearts did swell. Yea, he dethrones the mighty ones, and plucks them from their seat: And them that be of low degree he hath made high and great. 53, 54, 55.48—2.11. He fills the hungry with good things, the rich sends empty away: And to his Servant Israel brings Soul-saving help this day, Calling to mind his mercies kind, to our Fore-Fathers told, With Abraham, and his seed to stand for ever, as of old. 2. PART. Out of the Song of Zacharie. Luke 1.1.68, 69. The Lord the God of Israel, we praise with one accord: For visiting and redeeming us the people of the Lord. For he hath thus rais'd up for us salvations surest horn: Which in his servant David's house, is of a Virgin born.
70, 71, 72. As holy Prophets all foretold should come to pass for man: And by their mouth he spake of old, since first the world began. From hands of those our hatefull foes that he would set us clear: And so perform the mercy sworn unto our Fathers dear. 73, 74, 75. His holy Covenant (still the same) He hath remembred thus: His oath to Father Abraham, that he would grant to us. That safely we (from foes set free) might walk in fearless waies Of holiness and righteousness, before him, all your daies. 3. PART. Out of the Songs of Simeon and Zacharie. Luke 2.30, 31, 32. And now, O Lord, our eyes have seen, thy saving health and grace, By power divine prepar'd to shine before all peoples face. And as a light to shine full bright where blind-fold Gentiles dwell: And to be made the glory of thy people Israel. Chap. 1.77, 78. The knowledge of salvation, that God might thus give in:
Unto his people making known the pardon of their sin. All through the love of God above, so tenderly let fall: Whereby the day-spring from on high hath visited us all. 79. Chap. 2.14. From darkness and the shade of death to grant us glad release: And give us light to guide our feet into the paths of peace. To God be glory now therefore, in heaven's highest place: Let peace on earth be poured forth, to men good will and grace. HYMN 171. Reformation. Give laud, &c. Hag. 2.6. THUS saith the Lord of Hosts, but yet a little while, And I will shake all Coasts, yea, every Land and Isle, Yet once again, I shake all these, heav'n, earth, and seas, and all the main. 7. All Nations I will shake the Long desired day, Which doth all Nations take, loe, that shall come, I say, And (for all Coasts) This house I will with glory fill, saith God of Hoasts.
9. The glory of this last far greater shall it grow, Than of the Temple past, the Lord of Hosts saith so, And in this place, Will I (the Lord of Hosts) afford sweet peace and grace. Zach 4.6, 7. H. 2.22. Yet not by might nor power, but by my Spirit alone: Saith God of Hosts our Tower, The strength of all in one: For who art thou O Mountain great (the Empires seat) to hinder now? Zach. 4.7. Before Zerubbabel thou shalt become a plain: The stone that doth excell (The head-stone of the same) His hand shall fit, And bring it out with general shout, grace, grace to it. 9. Hag. 2.22. The hand of that same Man that laid the ground-work low, Shall end what he began and I will overthrow The Heathen Kings; Who then are they that slight the day of smaller things.
HYMN 172. Regeneration. Joh. 3.5. Gal. 6.15. EXcept a man be born again of water and the spirit, He cannot any way attain salvation to inherit. For circumcision serveth none (the priviledge is small) Nor serves uncircumcision, but a new creature's all. 2 Cor. 5.17. Jam. 1.18. Behold a man in Christ, therefore, and a new creature view: Old things are past, and come no more, and all things are made new. By his own will and word hath he wrought our regeneration, A kind of first ripe fruit to be of all his whole Creation. HYMN 173. Repentance. Isa. 59.1, 2. GOD's arm is never shortened, but it can reach to save: His ear not dull, or wearied to hear us what we crave. But from you, do your sins divide your God that was so near, And cause the Lord his face to hide, so that he will not hear.
Ezek. 18.13. 2 Cor. 30.9. Lay therefore your transgressions by, repent and turn saith he, And so your great iniquity your ruin shall not be. Because the Lord is full of grace, ready to pardon sin: And will not hide away his face, if ye return to him. Luke 15.7, 10. One sinner that returns agen makes Angels joy exceed, More than do ninety nine just men that no repentance need. 2. PART. Jer. 3.13. 1 Joh. 1.9. Acknowledge how ye have transgrest against the Lord your God: And only let it be confest what by-paths ye have trod. For if we do our sins confess, faithfull and just is he, From sin and all unrighteousness to cleanse and set us free. Prov 28.13. Joel 2.13. Neh. 9.17. Ez. 18.32. For he that hides his sins shall fall, (they prosper but a space:) But to confess and leave them all shall with the Lord find grace. For he is unto anger slow, and ready to forgive: And doth abundant kindness show. wherefore return and live.
Exod. 34.7. For he reserves compassion for thousands that come in: Remitting all transgression, iniquity and sin. 3. PART. Isa. 55.6, 7. Seek ye the Lord unfeignedly, now while he may be found; Oh call on him while he is nigh, with mercies that abound! Oh let the wicked leave his Lusts (the way that sinners take) And let the man unrighteous his sinfull thoughts forsake. —Chap. 1.18. And turn again unto the Lord, while mercy now takes place, And to our God so richly stor'd with guifts ef pardoning Grace. For though your sins were crimson-like, as red as scarlet (full) I (saith the Lord) will make them white, as white as snow or wool. Rev. 1.5, 6. To him that thus hath loved us, and washt off all our score, With that pure floud of his own bloud▪ be praise for evermore.
HYMN 174. Reproach for Christ, and Imi∣tation of him. 1 Pet. 4.14, 16. IF that ye be reproacht for Christ, happy are ye, and blest: The Spirit of God and glory great upon your souls shall rest. On their parts he's ill spoken of, but glorifi'd on yours: Therefore let no man be asham'd that Christianly endures. Mat. 5.11, 12. Blessed are ye when men revile, and speak each evil word Against you falsly, for the sake of Christ your Sovereign Lord. Rejoyce and be exceeding glad, considering the reward, How great it is in heaven above, for suffering Saints prepar'd. 2. PART. Phil. 2.5, 7. Let that good mind be in you all that was in Christ our Lord: Who being in the form of God, the true eternal Word, Yet made himself of no repute, to death did condescend, And came not to be tended on, but to observe and tend.
Phil. 2.9, 10. Heb. 9.28. Therefore God gave to him a Name, above all Names, most high: That every knee should bow to him, and every tongue comply. Who came to take our sins away, once, by his own oblation: And shall appear the second time, without sin, to salvation. HYMN 175. Resurrection. All People, &c. or, O Lord consider, &c. 1 Cor. 15.20, 21, 22. NOW Christ is risen from the dead, as whom no bands of death could keep: And is to be acknowledged as the first fruits of those that sleep, For as by man came death to raign, so by a man to rise again: And as by Adam, all men die, by Christ came immortality. Col. 3.1, 2, 3, 4▪ If ye be risen then with Christ set all your heart on things above: And be not any way intic'd on earthly things to set your love. For ye are dead to things abroad, and your life hid with Christ in God: When Christ who is our Life appears ye must shine with him in the Spheres:
HYMN 176. Revenge forbidden. Rom. 12.19. Luke 6.27. Mat. 5.44. DEAR Saints avenge not your own selves, nor let fierce wrath incense: For vengeance, saith the Lord, is mine and I will recompense. Love ye your very enemies, and them that curse you, bless: Do good to them that use you ill, with hate and spightfulness. 45. And people persecuting you curse not, but bless them rather: That ye may be the children true, of your celestial Father. For he doth cause his rain to fall, and lets his Sun to rise On good and bad in general, just and unjust likewise. HYMN 177. Sabbath. Isa. 58.13. IF from my holy Sabbath-day thou turn away thy foot: And do not by thy pleasures stray, my Sabbath to pollute. But call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord: And thine own carnal pleasure slight in thought, in deed, and word.
14. Then shalt thou joy in God alone, with sweet and sacred mirth: And he shall make thee ride upon high places of the earth. With Father Jacob's heritage the Lord shall feed thee fat: For thus doth God's own mouth engage, and thou mayst trust to that. HYMN 178. Sacrament of the Supper. Cant. 1.1, 2. Chap. 2.5. LET those life-breathing lips of thine be joyn'd, O Christ, to me! Because thy love excelleth wine, and all thy Saints love thee. With flagons of refreshing joy, and comforts from above, Stay me, O stay me powerfully, for I am sick of Love! 2.4.3. Into the house of Banqueting he brought me to be fed: Love was his banner flourishing with honour o're my head. Beneath his shadow I was plac'd with very great content: His fruit was sweet unto my tast (his Word and Sacrament.) 5.1. O friends, said he, (preferr'd on high) eat well of my good chear: And drink, yea, drink abundantly, my guests to me, most dear.
2 PART. Cant. 5.16 2 Cor. 5.20. My Saviour, my beloved one is mine, and I am his: Chief of Ten Thousand he alone, pure red and white he is. Made sin for us that knew no sin, that so we might be made The righteousness of God in him, by whom the price was paid. Cant. 8.7. Chap. 1.4. Stronger than death his love is found, not to be bought with goods: Nor quench'd with waters, nor be drown'd with whatsoever floods. O draw me, my dear Saviour, with those strong cords of Love, And then will we go after thee as fast as we can move. 2, 3. We will record thy Love, O Lord, above the joy of Wine: The Virgins fair that spotless are do love thy Name Divine. 3 PART. 1 Cor. 5.7.11. Loe Christ is sacrific'd for us, (our Passeover from Heaven) Now therefore let us keep the feast, not with old lumps of Leaven: Not with the Leaven of wickedness, or Leaven of malice led:
But keep it with sincerity, and truths unleavened bread. Chap. 11.29, 28. Who eat and drink unworthily their own damnation earn: Because they want a spiritual eye his body to discern. Our hearts (with care) examined, let us be stirred up To eat of this coelestial bread, and drink this sacred cup. 26. To eat this bread and drink this cup holds forth a Saviour slain, So often as we celebrate, until he come again. 4 PART. 1 Cor. 10.16. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not understood The sweet communion to express of Christ our Saviour's blood: The bread we break (the Holy Loaf) do we not all accord To call it the Communion of the body of our Lord? 17. For we though many, are one bread, and in one body joyn: For all of us are joyntly fed with that one bread divine. The living bread is he on high that down from heaven came;
And he shall live and never dye that eateth of the same. Mat. 26.28. The bloud of the new Testament, we sweetly tast herein, Which was for us and many spent, for pardon of our sin. 5. PART. 1 Joh. 4.10. Chap. 5.6. Herein is love, not ours to God, but his to us most large: In sending down his onely Son our great debts to discharge. Lo! this is he that came to us by water, and by bloud, And not by one of them alone, but both waies to our good. Joh. 17.17. Acts 13.39. Therefore he sanctified himself, to lead us into truth: That he thereby might sanctifie us also, as he doth. By whom we may be justify'd from sins both great and small, From which set free we could not be by Moses Laws at all. 1 Thes. 1.10. He sav'd us from the wrath to come, at that most dreadfull day: And was so good to shed his bloud to wash our sins away.
6. PART. Mat. 21.9. Rev. 5.9. Hosanna to King David's Son, Hosanna to the Christ, That in th' Almighty's Name doth come, Hosanna in the High'st. For thou wast slain, and art alive, redeeming us to God, From every Nation, Kingdom, Tongue, by thy most precious bloud. 1 Pet. 1.18. 1 Thes. 1.10. Rev. 1.5. Corruptive things as silver is, and gold redeem'd us not: But the dear bloud of Christ, our Lord, a Lamb without a spot. Even Jesus Christ, who saved us from storms of future wrath: Whose love to wash our sins away made his own bloud the bath. 5.13. To him that on the Throne sits down and Christ the Lamb, therefore, Be blessing, glory and renown, and power for evermore. HYMN 179. Salvation Shining. Tit. 2.11, 12. GOD's grace that brings salvation hath shone to every eye: Teaching us worldly lusts to shun, and all impiety.
And that we should live soberly, and in a godly way: With righteousness, and equity, while in this world we stay. 13, 14. That blessed hope still looking for, and glorious drawing near, When that great God our Saviour Christ Jesus shall appear, Who freely gave himself for us, for our dear sakes to dye: That we might be redeemed thus from all iniquity. — 1 T. 6.17. Rev. 5.13. To purifie to his own Name (from whom this grace proceeds) A people of peculiar claim and zealous of good deeds. Unto the King of Kings therefore that on the Throne doth sit, Be honour, glory, praise and power, for ever, so be it. HYMN 180. Sanctification. Eph. 5.14. Chap 4.17, 18. AWaken thou that sleep'st in sin, and stand up from the dead: And Christ shall let his light break in whereby thou shalt be led. Then walk not as some Gentiles walk, in vanity of mind: Estranged from the life of God, because their hearts were blind.
19, 20, 21. Who being past the sense of sin, let loose to all excess Of wanton and unclean desires, and that with greediness. But ye have not so learned Christ, if ye by him were taught: And as the truth in Jesus is have learnt him as ye ought. 22. Chap. 5.11. The old man that ye do put off, which is corrupt and vile, In sinfull Lusts of former life, which did your souls beguile▪ And have no fellowship at all with works that shun the light: But rather such unfruitfull works reprove in open sight. 2 PART. Eph. 4.24, 23. Chap. 5.8.11. Cast off the old man with his deeds, and put ye on the new, Made after God in righteousness, and holiness most true. And be renew'd in heart and soul, and walk as sons of light: And prove what things the Lord allows as pleasing in his sight. 2 Tim. 2, 19, 22, 21. Rom. And as 'tis meet, let every one that names the Name of Christ Depart from all iniquity, and by no lust be tic'd.
The purging of our selves from these will evidently produce Vessels to honour sanctify'd, meet for the Masters use. Rom. 6.22. 1 Tim. 1.17. And being thus from sin made free, God's Service to attend, The fruit to holiness shall be eternal Life the end Now to the true eternal King not seen with humane eye: Th' immortal onely wise true God be praise perpetually. HYMN 181. Scriptures. Joh. 5.39. SEarch Scriptures, for ye hope thereby eternal Life to have: And those are they that testifie of him that came to save. Rom. 15.4. For what of old is registred, was for our learning penn'd, That we by Scriptures comforted, might hope unto the end. 2 Pet. 1.21. The prophesie came not of old by mans own private will; But holy men of God foretold, by Heaven-inspired skill. Isa. 8.20. Then to the Law and Testament, for they that speak not right,
And as this word doth represent, in them there is no light. 2 Tim. 3.16, 17. For Scriptures sacred verities came all by inspiration; Able to perfect, and make wise in all things to salvation. HYMN 182. Secret reveal'd. 1 Cor. 2.7, 8, 14. GOD's wisedom in a mystery we speak to perfect men, But not the wisedom of this world, nor what is known to them. For man while merely natural receives not what we press, The things of God spiritual he counteth foolishness. — Prov. 24.7. Mark 4.11. Too hard for him to know or learn (for natural men too high) And such as nothing can discern but a spiritual eye. But unto you (dear Saints) it is, touching the things of heaven, To know that Kingdom's Mysteries, to them it is not given. 2 PART. John 1.18. No man hath seen Almighty God since first the world began:
He that in heaven hath blest abode declar'd him unto man: The onely and begotten Son of God the Holy One, Did from the Fathers bosome come to make this Doctrine known. John 3.32. Jude 25. Attesting what he saw and heard, yet faith appear'd in few, But whosoever believes his Word hath seal'd that God is true. To God our Saviour onely wise be all the praise therefore. Dominions, Thrones, and Dignities, Amen, for evermore. HYMN 183. Secrets unreveal'd. Rom. 12.3. Deut. 29 29. BE wise unto sobriety, as God hath given faith, And dealt to each man diversly the measure that he hath. The secret things that are decreed belong to God alone: But to our selves and to our seed, the things that are made known. 1 Tim. 6.17. Now to the blessed Prince of might, the chief of Kings and Lords, Who onely dwells in endless light, which no access affords. Whom no man can behold and see, nor ever did see yet: To him all praise and glory be for ever; so be it.
HYMN 184. Souls under the Altar. Give laud, &c. Rev. 6.10. HOw long, O Lord, how long thou holy one, and true, Ere thou avenge our wrong, and judge, with judgment due Them that have spilt Our blood on earth, and pou'd it forth, with hainous guilt. Luke 18.7, 8. And shall not the most High avenge his own Elect, Which night and day do cy, and pray to that effect? Though he bear long, I tell you, he will speedily avenge their wrong. Rom. 8.36. Psal. 44.23, 24. But we are killed thus all day for thy dear sake, As sheep they count of us which they for slaughter take. O God arise, Why dost thou yet our griefs forge, and our sad cries? 2 Thes. 1.6, 7. But with the Lord, ye know, the thing is just and due, To render wrath and woe to them that trouble you.
But ye, that thus Afflicted are, shall surely share sweet peace with us. —8. When Christ shall come abroad, in flaming fire from Heaven: And they that know not God, shall have their portion given Of Vengeance meet: Because that they would not obey his Gospel sweet. HYMN 185. Spiritual Shepherds. Acts 20.28. 1 Pet. 5.4. TAKE heed you Shepherds to your charge, to feed with wholsome food The flock which God hath purchased with his own precious bloud. And the chief Shepherd, coming down from heaven at his great day, Shall crown you with a glorious Crown that never fades away. Zach. 11.17. But to the Idol Shepherd woe, a Sword will God assign To cleave his arm and his right eye that leaves the flock to pine. arm, to nothing withered, lean dryed up shall be: And his right eye so darkened as not at all to see.
HYMN 186. Strait Gate. Mat. 7.13, 14. O Enter at the narrow Gate, for wide is that of sin: And broad the way that leads astray, and many go therein. Because the Gate to life is strait, and all the way thereto: Is (as I say) a narrow way. and they that find it, few. Luke 13 24, 30. Strive then to hit the narrow Gate, the right way to attain: For not a few (I say to you) shall seek, and seek in vain. And there are first that prove the worst, and last that first prepare: For in this world are many call'd, but few elected are. HYMN 187. Suffering and Self-denial. Mat 10.34, 21. THink not (saith Christ) that I am come to send all peace on earth: But through malicious minds of some) a Sword must I send forth. The Father shall the Son betray, the Daughter her own Mother: Brethren shall Brethren seek to slay, set one against another.
26, 30, 28. Yet fear not men in these affairs, nor have them in such dread: For God hath numbred all the hairs that grow upon your head. Who kill the body, fear not them that then no more can do: But him that can to Hell condemn both soul and body too. 2. PART. Mat. 10.39, 38. Luke 14.27, 33. He that doth find his life, shall be at loss of it thereby: And he that loseth it for me, shall find it gainfully. And he that leaves not all to loss, to follow after me, Nor for my sake takes up his Cross, my follower cannot be. Mark 10.29, 30. But whoso laies down all at stake, forsaking Friends and Lands, For me, and for my Gospel sake, to follow my commands. An hundred fold shall he regain, although with persecution, And afterwards a life obtain that fears no dissolution.
HYMN 188. Temptations succoured. Heb. 4▪15. SUCH an High Priest we have not now, as is not touch'd at all With sense of such infirmities as on his Saints do fall. But suffered such temptations as we our selves fall in: And was in all points like to us, but yet excepting sin. Chap. 2.18. 1 Cor. 12.13. Isa. 40.31. In suffering such temptations, the tempted he can aid: And no temptation taketh you, But what on Saints is laid. But God is faithfull verily, who will not suffer you To be assail'd above the strength which ye shall still renew. But will in all temptations, provide and order so, That ye may have a way to scape, and strength to undergo. HYMN 189. The Tree good. Prov. 21.27. Mat. 7.16, 18. THE sacrifice of wicked men is hatefull to the Lord: And offred with a wicked mind is then much more abhor'd.
For figs of thistles cannot grow, nor grapes of thorns be had: A bad tree cannot bear good fruit, nor yet a good tree bad. Chap. 12.35, 33. From the good treasure of the heart good men bring forth good things: And from the evil treasury bad fruit the bad man brings. Now therefore let the tree be good the fruit will then be so: And make the tree an evil one the fruit the same will show. 3.10. And now's the Ax laid to the root, and therefore every tree That brings not forth good wholsome fruit cut down for fire shall be. HYMN 190. Trinity. 1 Joh. 1.7. Joh. 6.57. Luke 11.13. THree witnesses there are above, and all these three are one: The Father, Son, and sacred Dove, one Deity alone. The living Father sent the Son, who by the Father lives: And unto them that ask of him the Holy Ghost he gives. 1 Cor. 12.4, 5. Diversities of gifts indeed there are that he bestows: But from one spirit all proceed, who doth them so dispose.
And his Administrations great difference afford: And divers operations, but one Almighty Lord. 6. 2 Cor. 13, 14. All these in great variety from his good hand do fall: But one adored Deity that worketh all in all. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and love of God, therefore, And comforts of the Holy Ghost be with you evermore. HYMN 191. Vine-yard of Israel. Isa. 5.1, 2, 3. NOW will I sing to my belov'd (although with mournfull voice) A Song of my Beloved one touching his Vine-yard choice. A Vine-yard my beloved had, plac'd in a fruitfull hill: He fenc'd it, and plucktout the stones, and planted it with skill. Choice Vines he set, and built therein▪ a Wine-press and a Tower: Expecting it should bring sweet grapes and lo it brought forth sower. And now O ye inhabitants of Salem pray you see: And men of Judah, judge between my Vineyard here and me.
What could be to my Vine-yard done more than I did to it, Why therefore brought it forth sowre Grapes▪ when I expected sweet? And now, go to, know what I'le do to this my Vine-yard-soil: I will break down the hedge therefore, and leave it to the spoil. I'le lay it waste, unprun'd, undig'd, for Bryers and Thorns alone, I also will command the clouds to rain no rain thereon. 7. The Vine-yard of the Lord of Hoasts the house of Israel is: The men of Judah are the plant, that pleasant plant of his. And when he lookt for judgment done behold great cruelty: And when he lookt for righteousness, behold a dolefull cry. HYMN 192. Vnity and love of Brethren. Col. 3.12.13. PUT on, Belov'd, as Gods Elect, bowels of mercies kind: Long-suffering, meekness, sweet respect, and humbleness of mind. Forbearing one another long, forgiving one another: If any have received wrong done by his Christian brother.
14. Ph. 2.2. Eph. 4.3. As Christ forgave you so do ye your brethren that transgress: And chiefly put on charity, the bond of perfectness. Of one mind, and one judgment be, and let all discord cease: Keeping the Spirits unity in sacred bonds of peace. 2. PART. 1 Pet. 1.22. Heb. 12.1. 1 Joh. 1.16. See that ye love with fervency and with an heart most pure, And let this love so brotherly perpetually endure. For God (we know) is perfect love, and whoso dwells herein. He surely dwells in God above. and God most high in him. 3.14. Rom. 13.8. And hence our change is understood from death to life above, Because we love the brother-hood with true and perfect love. Owe nothing then to any man but love to one another: For he's a perfect Christian that is a perfect lover.
HYMN 193. Vocation. 1 Cor. 12.2. Tit. 3.3. YE know that we were Gentiles once; and carried away, To Idols and dumb vanities, as we were led astray: And sometimes disobediently, and foolishly we swerv'd, By divers lusts and vain delights, which we our selves have serv'd. 1 Pet. 2.9. But a peculiar people now, a chosen generation, A Royal Priest-hood are we made, and call'd an holy Nation. That we should shew the praises forth of him that called us From darkness great to greater light, that is most marvellous. 1.16. As he therefore that called us is holy; so must they That are to this profession call'd, be holy every way. 2. PART. Eph. 2.11, 12, 19. Remember ye were aliens from Israel's Common-wealth: And strangers from the Covenants which promise saving health.
But now are ye that were far off made nigh by Christ his blood: And fellow Citizens with Saints, and of the house of God. 20, 21, 22. Built on the sure foundation laid down in holy writ: And Christ himself head corner-stone▪ who makes the building knit, In whom together built ye grow into an holy place, An habitation of the Lord by his sweet spirit of grace. Rom. 8.16. Which spirit witnesseth with ours, and testimony bears, That we are made the Sons of God, and if his Sons, then Heirs. 3 PART. Jam. 2.5. 1 Cor. 1.26. Hearken, beloved brethren dear, your call ye plainly see, How God hath chose the poor on earth full rich in faith to be. Not many mighty men are call'd, not many wise and learn'd, Nor yet in many noble men this calling is descern'd. 27. Matt. 11.26: But God hath chose weak foolish things, and such as men despise, To bring to nought, and to confound the noble, great, and wise.
We thank thee, Father, Lord of all, that hast these things conceal'd From many wise and prudent men, and them to babes reveal'd. 1 Cor. 1.29, 31. Even so, O Father, since it was thy pleasure and decree▪ That, in thy sight, no flesh on earth might glory, but in thee. HYMN 194. Whole Armour. Eph. 6.10.13, 14. BE strong, my brethren, in the Lord, and in his powerfull might: Put on your soul his Armour whole, to make you stand in fight. Stand therefore, having girt your loyns with truth, which ye profess: And having done the breast-plate on of perfect righteousness. 15, 16. And with the preparation of the Gospel of our God, (The Gospel of his peace and love,) let both your feet be shod. And chiefly take the shield of faith, that so your valiant hearts May quench thereby, most powerfully, the wickeds fiery darts. 17, 18. The helmet of salvation take, and that two-edged Sword: (The Sword of his good Spirit it is, to wit God's holy Word.
And alwaies in the spirit pray, with all requests and prayer: And watch thereto (what e're ye do) with constancy and care? HYMN 195. Will for the Deed. 2 Cor. 8.12. Mat. 10.42. IF there be first a willing heart, the Lord the same accepts: And what one hath takes in good part, and pardons our defects. Cold water onely, one small cup to a Disciple spar'd For that names sake, is sure summ'd up, and shall not miss reward. 20. Rom. 8.26. Eph. 3.20. Nor will he quench the smoaking flax, nor break the bruised-reed: Till judgment have a sure dispatch with victory to speed. And though we know not how or what to pray for as we ought, His spirit helps our wants in that, beyond our speech or thought. 21. To him in all the Church therefore be glory yet agen, Through ages all for evermore, by Jesus Christ, Amen.
HYMN 196. Wisdoms exhortation. Have mercy, &c. Prov. 1.20, 21. LO, wisdom crieth out, she crieth in the streets, She uttereth her zealous breath where all the concourse meets. In opening of the gates of Cities populous, She calls, and cries, with words most wise, exhorting sinners thus. 22, 23. How long, ye simple ones, will ye delight in folly; And scorners in so vile a sin, and fools hate knowledge wholly▪ Turn you at my reproof behold I will pour forth My Spirit to take hold on you, I'le shew you words of worth. 2 PART. Have mercy, &c. Prov. 4.5.7, 8. Chap. 3.15.17. Get wisdom, O my Son, with all the care thou canst: She is of all things principal, and most to be advanc'd. Of greater price than pearls, and all desired treasure: Her paths and ways have all the praise of perfect peace, and pleasure.
18, 14, 16, 18. A tree of life to them upon her that lay hold: Her Merchandise of greater price, than silver or than gold. Her right hand, length of days, her left bears wealth and honour: And happy he (who e're he be) that lays fast hold upon her. HYMN 197. Word preached. All people, &c. 2 Cor. 10.4. Heb. 4.12. THe weapons of our warfare here have nothing carnal plac'd therein: But mighty thorow God they are, to pull down all strong holds of sin. God's Word is such a powerfull one, sharper than any two-edg'd sword: It parts the marrow from the bone, and is an heart-discerning Word. 1 Pet. 2.2. Jam. 1.20. Then shunning guile and malice lewd envy reproach hypocrisie. As babes new born desire the food of God's pure Word to grow thereby. And let us set all sins apart, with meekness to receive and have God's Word ingrafted in our heart, which is of power our souls to save.
2. PART. Work of mercy magnifi'd, or The second part of mercies (forgot to be inserted in its due place.) 2 Cor. 7.13. If I shut heaven saith the Lord or leave the Land to be devour'd By Locusts, or if I dispence some drought or dreadfull pestilence. If then my People whom I grace with my great name shall seek my face, Humble themselves and joyntly pray, And turn them from their evil way. Then will I hear in heaven high and pardon their Iniquity: Most graciously I will forgive and heal the land wherein they live. Jam. 2.13. Psal. 136.1. Thus mercy with triumphant voice against strict judgment doth rejoyce: O thank the Lord of Heav'n therefore whose mercies last for evermore. HYMN 198. Worker of Grace. 2 Cor. 3.5. Phil. 2.12. WE have not the sufficiency and power of our own, To think so much as one good thought as of our selves alone. But all our whole sufficiency doth of the Lord proceed. Who works in us most graciously both the desire and deed.
Jam. 1.17. Rom. 9.16. For every good and perfect gift proceeds from God above, With whom there is no varying, nor shadow of remove. It is not then of him that wills, nor him that runs the race, But all our good on us distils from God that sheweth Grace. Jude 24, 25. To God therefore the only wise, our Saviour, strength and stay, Be Thrones, Dominions, Dignities, for evermore, we pray. HYMN 199. World and the Church. 1 John 5.19. WE know we are of God most high, for we are born of him, And this whole world, most generally, lies soaking in their sin. And lo, the Son of God is come, and we the same have known: And he hath thus instructed us, to know the faithfull one. 20. Rev. 5.13. And we are in him that is true, in Jesus Christ his Son: This is the true God (known to you) and endless life begun. Blessing, and power, and praise, therefore to him be altogether, That sits upon the sacred Throne, and to the Lamb for ever.
HYMN 200. Zealous Ejaculations at Even∣ing or Bed-time. Give laud, &c. Psal. 31.6. Rev. 1.5. MY spirit, O God, do I into thy hands commit: Lord God of Verity, Thou hast redeemed it. Thy grace so good Washt off our sin, and bath'd us in our Saviour's blood. Psal. 141.2.51.12. Mic. 7.19. Now let my prayers be as incense in thine eyes, And hands up-lift to Thee as th' evening Sacrifice. O cleanse my heart, My sins subdue, and still renew my inward part. Rom. 14.8. That whiles I draw this breath, I may live up to Thee; And when I die the death, to Thee, Lord, it may be. That, live or die: Whatever time, I may be thine perpetually. Psal. 4.8. Rev. 1.4. — And now my lying down shall be both sweet and sure; For thou, O Lord, alone my dwelling dost secure. All glory then To Father Son and Holy one; forever, Amen. The End of the Second Century.
THE Third and Last Century OF CHAPT. HYMNS. Newly Translated. HYMN 201. The Covenant of Grace entred to Abraham. [All people, or, O Lord consider, &c.] Gen. 17.1.15.5. THus said the Lord to Abraham Lo! I the Lord Almighty am Walk thou before me for thy part Sincere and with a perfect heart. And covenant with thee will I And with thy seed successively: Number the Stars, and thou shalt tell The Summ whereto thy seed shall swell.
And he believed in the Lord Relying on his faithfull Word, And it was counted unto him, For Righteousness to trust therein. So all that are of faith indeed Are blest with Abraham as his seed; To Abraham's God be praise therefore, From first to last for evermore. HYMN 202. The Test to the Covenant. All people, &c. Deut. 26.16. THis day the Lord commandeth thee Obedient to his Laws to be, Keep them therefore in every part; With all thy soul and all thy heart. Thou hast avoucht the Lord this day To be thy God: To keep his way, His Statutes, Laws, and Judgments choice, And still to hearken to his voice. And God this day avoucheth thee His own peculiar stock to be, As his most gracious promise stands That thou shouldst keep all his commands. To Israel's God be praise therefore From first to last for evermore, And let all faithfull people then Say cheerfully, Amen, Amen.
HYMN 203. The Song of Moses the man of God, commanded to be learnt by heart of all Israel. Deut. 32. to 44. v. 46. Moses's Title, Psalm 90. To the Tune of the Ten Commandments. GIve ear O heavens from on high, and I will speak this present day: And hear O Earth, attentively the awfull words which I shall say. My doctrine shall drop down as showers, my speech as dew shall gently pass: And as small rain on herbs and flowers, and as the showers upon the grass. Because I will this day proclaim, and publish fully all abroad, The Lord our God's Almighty Name, ascribe ye greatness to our God. He is the Rock his work's compleat, and all his ways just judgment be, A God of truth without deceit exactly just and right is He. 2. PART. v. 5. They are corrupt, they bring a blot upon themselves, of foul disgrace, Their spot is not his Childrens spot, they are a cross and crooked race.
Requite ye thus the Lord most high ye foolish people? Is not He Thy Father dear that did thee buy? hath he not made and stablisht thee? Remember now the days of old, the years of ages long ago, Thy Father ask, thou shalt be told, and ask thine Elders they shall show. When the most high did first divide inheritances unto men, And separated far and wide all Adam's Sons, as he did then: He set the people bounds compleat, but chiefly one that did excell According to the Number great of all his people Israel. 3. PART. v. 9. For lo! the Portion of the Lord is Israel whom he doth advance, And Jacob's house is on record the Lot of his inheritance. He found him in a forraign Land in howling desarts waste and dry, Led him, and made him understand, kept him as th' apple of his eye. As th'Eagle stirreth up her nest, and flutters o're her young ones there,
Spreads out her wings whereon they rest, and on her wings she doth them bear. So God alone was then his guide, and there was with him no strange God, On Earths high place he made them ride, and on those Palaces he trod. That he might eat th' increase of fields▪ both of the fruits and of the flock, And suck the honey which it yields and oyl out of the flinty rock. Butter of Kine and Milk of Sheep with fat of Lambs of Bashan-breed, And Rams which Bashan hill did keep, and goats which there likewise did feed. With fat of kidneys of the wheat which yieldeth flower so passing good, For thee, O Israel, to eat, and thou didst drink the grapes pure blood. 4. PART. v. 15. But Jeshurun waxt fat and kickt, thou art grown fat, thou art grown thick, Cover'd with fatness finely slick; and this was it that made him kick. Then he forsook his God on high that made him and all other men, And he esteem'd but carelesly the God of his Salvation then.
With strange Gods they did all the while provoke Him unto jealousie: And with abominations vile mov'd Him to anger vehemently. They sacrific'd to Devils there, and not to God: To Gods unknown, New Gods, and new come up they were, such as their Fathers did not own. 5. PART. 18. Of that high God which thee begot thou art unmindfull, and wilt be: And (mindless) thou remembrest not the mighty God that formed thee. And when God saw it, He at once abhorr'd them in his holy eyes, For the provoking of his Sons and of his Daughters in such wise. I'le hide, said he, from them my face, and see the end of their lewd path, For 'tis a very froward race, children in whom there is no faith. They have provok'd my jealous eyes with that which is not God (they know) And with their idol vanities spurr'd on my anger which was slow. And I'le move them to jealousie with people that are next to none,
And I will vex them vehemently with a most foolish Nation. 6. PART. 22. For there is kindled in my wrath fire that shall burn to hell below, Consume the Earth and all it hath, and make the hills foundations glow. An heap of mischiefs I will bring upon their impious heads to fall: And charge mine arrows on the string and spend them freely on them all. Burnt up with hunger they shall be, and with a burning heat devour'd: A sad destruction they shall see with bitterness upon them pour'd. And I will send upon those men the teeth of beasts (in vengeance just) With poysons (as I threatned them) of dreadfull serpents of the dust. The sword without shall pierce them through, and fears within the young men slay; The Virgin and the suckling too, and th'ancient man whose hairs are gray. 7 PART. 26. I threat to scatter their increase, and drive them into corners then;
And I would also make to cease their memory from the Sons of men. Were it not that I fear'd the wrath of envious foes and nothing else, Letting their Adversaries laugh, and strangely to behave themselves. Lest they should say, our hand is high, and that the Lord did NOT all this: For 'tis a Land puts Counsel by, in whom no understanding is. But O that they were wise indeed, and did this matter apprehend. And would consider, and take heed, and think upon their latter end. 8. PART. 30. How should one man a thousand chase and two should make ten thousand flee? Had not God sold them to disgrace and their Rock shut them up, think ye! For their Rock nothing so excells as our Rock (Israel's mighty King) Our very Enemies themselves being made Judges in the thing! For Israel's Vine is worst of all as Sodoms and Gomorrahs field, Their grapes are very grapes of gall, and bitter clusters do they yield.
A Wine of Dragons theirs must be, and as the Asps in venom'd cup: Is not this safely stor'd with Me among my treasures sealed up? 9. PART. 35. Vengeance belongeth unto me and recompence to every crime, Their foot shall slide and broken be, but all in my appointed time. For lo! the day, the day that brings calamities which they must taste, Is near at hand: And all those things which come upon them shall make hast. For God shall judge his people known, and for his Servants sake repent, Whenas He sees their strength is gone, and none shut up, or left unspent. And He shall say, where are their Gods, their Rock in whom they trusted so? That eat the fat of all the goods that to their Sacrifices go? Which drank the Wine ye did allow, the Wine of your drink-offerings free; Let them arise and help you now, and let them your protection be.
10. PART. 39. See now that I, even I am He and there's no God with Me to stand, I kill, I make alive to be, I wound, I heal with powerfull hand. Nor is there any such power given out of my hand that can deliver, For I lift up my hand to heaven, and say behold! I live for ever. If once I whet my glittering sword and that my hand with judgment close, I'le render vengeance, saith the Lord, and will reward my hatefull foes. I'le make mine Arrows drunk with blood, my Sword shall cut, and flesh devour: The slain and captive shall be food even from the first revenging hour. Rejoice, ye Nations, with his land, for He'll avenge his servants bloud: And, while his foes shall feel his hand, he will to's Land and folk be good. HYMN 204. The Song of Hanna. The mighty God, &c. 1 Sam. 2.1. MY Soul rejoyceth in the Lord most high in Him my horn's exalted and my voice,
Is much enlarged o're mine enemy because in thy Salvation I rejoice. None's holy as the Lord, there's none beside Thee Nor is there any Rock like our Almighty. Talk so exceeding proudly now no more, no arrogance let from your mouth proceed, For God's a God of knowledge, rich in store, and He doth weigh exactly every deed: The bows of mighty men are broke asunder And they that stumbled are with strength girt under. They that were full, have hir'd themselves for bread; and they that were an hungry quickly ceast, So that the barren seven hath numbered; and with a goodly houshold is increast: And she that had of children once so many Is waxen feeble and not brought forth any. 2 PART. The Lord doth kill, the Lord doth also save, for He can make alive as well as kill, He bringeth down unto the very grave, and bringeth up again whene'er He will: The Lord makes poor, He also stores with treasure, He bringeth low and lifteth up at pleasure. He raiseth up the poor out of the dust; and lifts the beggar from the dungil base, Sets them with Princes in high place of trust, t' inherit thrones of glory in their place: For Earths strong Pillars God alone doth own them And He hath stablisht all the World upon them.
He will preserve the feet of all his Saints, as for the wicked silent they shall be In utter darkness, where are sad restraints from light and comfort in the least degree. For by the strength of man (mans sole indea∣vour) Shall no man in the World prevail for ever. The Adversaries of the Lord shall be broken in peices by his power put forth: Thunder upon them out of heaven shall He, the Lord shall judge the ends of all the Earth: He shall give strength unto his king appointed, And will exalt the Horn of his anointed. Let Israel's God that is the Lord most high be ever blest and magnifi'd therefore: And let the whole Earth universally be fill'd with his renown for evermore. And let the people rich and poor together Say all Amen, and praise the Lord for ever. HYMN 205. The Change. Job 14.1. MAN that is of a woman born hath but few daies on Earth, And with continual trouble worn even from his very birth. He comes up as a flower that dies, and is cut down freightway, And shadow-like he flits and flies, and keeps no constant stay.
Untill therefore the utmost date and full appointed summ Of all my daies, here will I wait, untill my change shall come. HYMN 206. Seeking God betimes. All People, &c. Job. 8.5.22, 23. IF thou wouldst seek to God betimes, and to th' Almighty prayers would'st make If thou wert pure, and free from crimes, then would the Lord for thee awake. Prosperity should still befall thy Habitation, blest with peace; Though thy beginning were but small, thy latter end should much increase. Return thou then to God most high, and He shall build thee up full sure; And put away INIQUITIE far from thy House, and be secure. HYMN 207. God's expostulation with Job. All People, &c. Job. 40.6. THEN unto Job, God answer made Out of the Whirl-Wind, and He said Gird up thy Loyns now like a man And answer my demands who can?
Wilt thou my judgment disanull, Wilt thou condemn me, as more full More full of righteousness than I, Hast thou a stem like God most high? Or canst thou thunder all allowd Like Him that rules the ratling Cloud: Deck now thy self with Eminence Of Majesty and Excellence. Array thy self in glory bright And beauty which is exquisite, Cast thou abroad in every path Cast thou the tokens of thy wrath. Look upon every man that's proud, And mask him with a dreadfull Cloud: Blast all the proud with foul disgrace, Tread down the wicked in their place. Hide them in dust at once to dye, And bind their faces secretly: And then will I confess to thee Thine own right hand thy help can be. HYMN 208. Job's Answer. To the Tune of the Ten Commandments. Job. 42.1. THen answered Job to God and said, I know thou canst do every thing: And there's no thought can be convey'd Or hid from thy DISCOVERING.
Who's this that doth his counsel hide, and void of knowledge, as do I? I utter'd words, exceeding wide, things that I knew not, and too high. Lord, I beseech thee, hear thou me, and I will speak with awfull care: Instruction I must ask of thee, and unto me do thou declare. I heard of thee by hear-say, Lord, but now I see thee, and relent, Yea, and I have my self abhorr'd, in dust and ashes I repent. HYMN 209. Man's mortality minded. To the Tune of the Ten Commandments. Isa. 2. ult. CEase ye from man, whose fading breath Is in his Nostrils, near to death: For wherein is he (since the fall) To be accounted of at all? Psal. 39.9.144.3. Man flourishing in all his wealth Is like to vanity it self: His days are as a slitting shade Which dayly doth decline and fade. Psal. 90.12. Eccl. 11.8.12.1. Lord, teach us how to count aright Our days that have so long a night, That we thereby may bring our heart To wisdom, and betimes convert.
HYMN 210. A Vine-yard of Red Wine. Isa. 27.2. A Vineyard of red sparkling wine Sing to her in that day, I, saith the Lord, do keep that Vine, I water it alway. Lest any hurt it I stand by to keep it day and night: And there is in me, verily, no fury to affright. But who would set the thorns and briers against Me in aray? I would go through with flames and fires, and burn them up streightway. Or let him on my strength take hold and make his peace with Me, And if he seek it, as he should, we surely shall agree. And God shall cause all Jacob's Race to take effectual root, Blossome and bud, and fill the face of all the world with fruit. Let Israel's God the Lord most high be ever blest therefore From first to last perpetually, Amen, for evermore. HYMN 211. Debate in measure. Isa. 27.7. DID ever God smite Israel as He hath smote his foes?
Or hath it been with slaughter keen as God hath smitten those? In measure when it shooteth forth, He shall therewith debate; He staies th' unkind rough Eastern Winde when storms are at the height. By this therefore shall Jacob's House be purg'd and cleans'd within; And all the fruit of this pursuit to take away his sin. Let Israel's God the Lord most high be ever blest therefore And people then say all Amen, Amen, for evermore. HYMN 212. Commands for comfort. Where righteousness, &c. Isa. 40.1. O Comfort, Comfort Ye my people, all of them, Speak comfortably, as may be, unto Jerusalem. Say to her (saith your God) now ends her Warfare here, Her sins are as a darksome cloud which God doth fully clear. For now receiv'd hath she, in Gods so kind account, A payment double in degree to what her sins amount.
And I will (saith the Lord) take off her heavy score, And never at all will I record her trespass any more. HYMN 213. Jacob's sadness cheer'd. All People, &c. Isa. 40.27. WHY do'st thou Jacob speak? and say Hid from the Lord is my sad way, My judgment also (undertrod) Is passed over from my God? Hast thou not heard, hast thou not known That God the everlasting one, Creator of the Earths far ends, No weariness nor fainting spends? His understanding none can search, He giveth power to his faint Church, And unto them that have no might He raiseth strength unto the height. The youths shall faint, as wearied all, The young men utterly shall fall, But they that on the Lord do wait Shall have their strength renewed streight. They shall mount up on Eagles wings, And run as do the nimblest things: Of weariness make no complaint, But they shall walk and shall not faint.
HYMN 214. Love engraven. Isa. 49.14. BUT Sion said (so sad was she) The Lord hath quite forsaken me: And now the Lord hath me forgot As one whom he remembreth not. What? can a mother meek and mild Ever forget her sucking child? Can her compassions find no room For the dear son of her own womb? Yea, (saith the Lord) they may forget And not remember Natures debt: Yet will not I forgetfull be, But always will remember thee. Behold thy Name engraven stands Upon the palms of both my hands: Thy walls are ever in my sight To keep them safely day and night. Let Israel's God be blest therefore From first to last for evermore, And let us all with one accord Say here Amen, Praise ye the Lord. HYMN 215. A Child of Light incouraged and instructed. Isa. 50.10. WHO is amongst you fearing God His Servants voice that hears, That in the darksome paths hath trod, and where no light appears?
Upon the Name of God most high O let him trust full sure; And on his God let him rely, and he shall be secure. Let Israel's mighty God therefore for ever honour'd be From first to last for evermore, Amen, Amen, say we. HYMN 216. Mourners comforted. To the Tune of Ye Children, &c. Isa. 51.7. HEarken to me in all distress Ye people that know righteousness, and in whose heart my Law is plac'd: Fear ye not the reproach of men Nor the reviling speech of them that dare reproach, where I have grac'd. For lo! the much devouring moth Shall eat them up like to a cloth, the worm shall eat them up like wooll: But still my righteousness shall reign And my salvation shall remain from age to age, unto the full. HYMN 217. Almighty Arm invoked. The First Metre. Isa. 51.9. AWake, Awake, O Arm of God, whose strength is uncontroul'd,
Awake as in those ancient daies, and in the time of old. Didst thou not lay all Egypt low, and that fell Dragon wound? Dry'dt Thou not up the Seas that flow with Waters most profound? Didst Thou not in those mighty deeps a plainer path discover? And for the ransom'd of the Lord make way for getting over? Therefore shall God's redeem'd return with Songs to Sion hill, And endless joy crown them that mourn while Songs their mouths do fill. They shall obtain abundant joy and gladness in that day, Sorrow and sadness utterly shall hast, and flee away. The God of Israel therefore renown'd and honour'd be, From first to last for evermore, Amen, Amen say we. 2. METRE. Ye Children, &c. Awake, Awake, O Arm of God And put on strength for th' undertrod, awake as in the daies of old: Art thou not it that rent and tore Proud Rahab, and Thou woundest sore the Dragon which those deeps did hold.
Art thou not it that dry'd the Sea The Waters of the deep were they, the Waters of the mighty deep: In those great deeps of Seas, I say, Thou mad'st a passage and a way, for thy redeem'd and ransom'd sheep. Therefore the Lord's redeemed Ones That were so fill'd with sighs and groans shall have a time for to return: And they shall come with songs of joy To Sion hill unanimously that formerly did sigh and mourn. And everlasting joy shall be Upon their heads in high degree whom former griefs did oversway: They shall undoubtedly obtain Gladness and joy that shall remain, sorrow and sighs shall flee away. HYMN 218. The Preachers Lips. Have mercy, &c. Isa. 57.19. I (Saith the Lord) create The fruit of lips that preach For peace to men disconsolate, and far and near to reach. And I will give them ease: But wicked en (unblest) Are like un the troubled Seas whose waters cannot rest.
But still it casts abroad Both mire and dirt at once: There is no peace, as saith my God, unto the wicked Ones. HYMN 219. Robes of Righteousness. Have mercy, &c. 1. METRE. Isa. 61.10. I greatly will rejoice In God that is so good; My soul shall sing with cheerfull voice unto the Lord my God. For he hath cloathed me With that delightfull dress Of saving health and sanctity and Robes of Righteousness. As Bride-grooms, that have wealth, With ornaments are deckt; And as a Bride adorns her self with jewels most select. Or as the bud that springs Out of the pregnant earth, And gardens sow'd with choicest things doth richly bring them forth: So God will make, likewise, His righteousness and praise Spring forth in all the Nations eyes now in the latter days.
Let Israel's God therefore be prais'd perpetually: And let us all for evermore give praise to God most high. 2. METRE. The mighty God, &c. Greatly will I rejoyce in thee, O Lord, and in my God I will triumph, and shout: For He hath cloath'd me of his own accord, with garments of salvation thoroughout. And with the robes of righteousness attested By His free grace: He hath my soul invested. Just as a Bride-groom doth himself array with Ornaments most priestly to be worn: And as a Bride upon her Wedding day with Orient Jewels doth her self adorn, So hath the Lord with his spiritual beauty Arraid my soul to serve my God in duty. And as the teeming Earth puts forth her bud and as a garden makes the things to grow, As when the seed, and where the soil is good, it makes the seed to prosper which we sow, So God the Lord will cause his sure salvations And praise to spring afresh before all Nations. Psal. 106. ult. Let Israels God that is the Lord most high be ever blest and magnifi'd therefore,
And let the whole Earth universally be fill'd with his renown for evermore, And let the people rich and poor together Say all Amen, and praise the Lord for ever. HYMN 220. Treading the Winepress alone. To the Third New Tune. Isa. 63.1. WHO'S He that comes from Edom side With scarlet cloaths of Bosrah dy'd in his apparel brave: Trav'lling in greatness of his might, I that speak righteousness most right, and mighty am to save. Why art thou read in thine array? Thy garments like to him this day that doth the Wine fat tread? I trod the Winepress, I alone, And of the people there was none that follow'd me, or led. Nahum 1.2. For I will tread them in my wrath, And trample on them in the path; letting my fury reign. Their bloud likewise that war with Me Shall on my garments sprinkled be and all my rayment stain.
2. PART. v. 4. For lo! the days of vengeance due O Sion, my revenge for you! the day is in my heart! The year of my redeem'd is come I lookt, but lookt in vain for some salvation to impart. I wondred then that there was none None to support, indeed not one brought any help or aid: Therefore mine Arm, in high degree Did bring Salvation unto Me, and thereby was I stay'd. And I will tread the people down In my great wrath and furious frown, and make them drunk thereby: And I will all their strength confound And bring it down unto the ground so low their power shall lie. HYMN 221. Mercies recorded and requested. Isa. 63.7. I Will make mention of the love and kindness of the Lord, The praises of the Lord above I surely will record. According to his gifts most free and loving kindness show'd With love and liberalitie on Jacob's house bestow'd.
According to his grace renew'd which at his hands we find, According to the multitude of his compassions kind. For sure, said he, they are my flock, children that will not lie; Therefore he was their saving Rock in their adversity. In all their grievances that were himself was grieved sore: And th' Angel of his presence, there, preserv'd them evermore. He in his love and pity then redeem'd his flock and fold: He bare them and he carried them even all the daies of old. 2. PART. v. 10. But they rebell'd and vexed so his holy Spirit of might That he was turn'd to be their foe and did against them fight. Then thought he on those ancient days, Moses and Israel's stock: Where's He that brought them from the Seas with Shepherds of his flock? O where is He, said God most high, that did within him place In ancient times so powerfully his holy Spirit of grace?
By Moses's hand that led them right, with glorious Arm and Name; Dividing Waters in their sight to get eternal fame? That led them through the deeper Seas, untill to Land they got, As Horses in the Wilderness, that stumble they might not? As Beasts go down into the dale God's Spirit made them rest, Thou led'st thy people not to fail, Thy Great Name to attest. 3. PART. v. 15. Look down from Heaven and behold from that thy dwelling seat Of Holiness prepar'd of old, and of thy glory great. Where is the zeal and strength in Thee? thy bowels mov'd and pain'd, And of thy mercies towards me, are they, O Lord, restrain'd? Doubtless thou art our Father dear, though Abraham hath forgot; Or ignorant of us appear, and Israel knows us not. Thou art our Father, still the same, thou didst us, Lord, redeem: From Everlasting is thy Name, a stranger do not seem.
O Lord why hast thou made us err from thy most holy path? Hardning our hearts from thy true fear, in thy provoked wrath? Return, and have rememberance, for thy dear servants sake, The Tribes of thine Inheritance which thou did'st chuse and take! HYMN 222. Idolatry exploded. Jer. 2.11.5.23.16.20. HATH ever any Nation chang'd their Gods which yet were none? Yet have my people been estrang'd from me, and wholly gone. And they have chang'd their glory great for Gods which they have got, Meer Idols that are all deceit and things that profit not. O Heavens be amaz'd hereat and horribly affraid; And be ye very desolate, as God the Lord hath said. For lo! my people Israel have these two evils done, Forsaking Me who am the Well whence Living Waters run: And hew'd out Cisterns to themselves too shamefull to be told:
Meer broken Cisterns, and none else, that can no water hold. HYMN 223. Backsliders called back. All people, &c. Jer. 3.22. REturn, backsliding Israel, And I will your backslidings heal: Behold we come with one accord To Thee that art our God the Lord. Truly in vain do men expect Salvation for the hills t' effect: And from the mountains multitude No safety sure can we conclude. But truly in the Lord our God Is sure Salvation to be had: The saving health of Israel Is all of Him, we know full well. Let Israel's God be blest therefore From first to last for evermore: And let all faithfull people then Give praise to God, and say Amen. HYMN 224. The old good way. Have mercy, &c. Jer. 6.16. THus saith the Holy One stand in the ways and see, Inquire, I say, for th' old good way, the paths that ancient be.
And walk ye all therein, and ye shall surely find A very blest Estate of rest contenting to your mind. To Israel's God most high be all the praise therefore; And people then say all Amen, Amen, for evermore. HYMN 225. False fears and false Deities de∣rided. Our Father, &c. Jer. 10.1. HEar ye the Word which God doth say to you O house of Israel, Learn not, saith He, the heathens way, nor fear what they count terrible: At signs of Heaven be not dismay'd, For so the Heathens are afraid. For peoples Customs are but vain, one from the Forrest cuts a tree (The work of workmen are they plain) which with the Ax cut down must be: Then deckt with silver and with gold, The nails and hammer make it hold. Like a Palm-tree they stand upright, but never can they speak a word; And needs they must be born by might that go no farther than they're stirr'd: Let no man fear these Logs of Wood, For they can do nor ill, nor good.
Since there is none like thee, O Lord, for very great indeed thou art, reat is thy Name upon record, who would not fear thee from their heart? The King of Nations thou dost reign, And fear to thee doth appertain. 2. PART. v. 8, 10, 11. But they that err and Idolize are altogether brutes and fools: The stock's a Book of vanities, but the true God for ever rules. He is the Lord the Living One The King with everlasting Throne. His Wrath shall cause the Earth to quake, the Nations cannot bear his blow: Tell them, that Gods which did not make the Heavens above, and Earth below, Even they shall perish from this Earth, And from these Heavens which God set forth. Each man is brutish in his skill, men founder is confounded quite, His graven Image fools him still, his molten Image gives no light: They have no breath, they are but vain, The work of errors are they plain. The workmen and these works of his shall perish at God's visiting, Unlike them Jacob's portion is for he hath formed every thing.
Israel's the lot which he doth claim, The Lord of Hosts is his great Name. 3. PART. Isa. 44.9. They that make graven Images are all of them meer vanity, They profit not howe're they please, as they themselves can testifie; They see not neither do they know, But may be sham'd it should be so. Who makes a God or who hath fram'd a molten Image good for nought? Lo all his fellows shall be sham'd, they are but men that have them wrought: Let all stand up and gather near They shall be strook with shame and fear. The Smith with Tongs doth work it warm, with Hammers doth he fashion it, He works it with his strength of arm, he labours and is hunger-bit: His strength must fail upon constraint, He drinks no Water, and is faint. The Carpenter extends his rule, with lines he makes it as he please; He fits it with his plaining tool, he marks it out with compasses: He forms it like a man compleat, To make a household God most neat.
4. PART. He hews him down the Cedar-trees, he takes the Cypress and the Oke, He glories in the choice of these which through the forrest bear the stroak: He plants an Ash as also fit, And leaves the rain to nourish it. With part thereof the fire is fed, he warms his body at the flames, He kindles it, He breaketh bread, yea, and a God thereof he frames: A graven Image makes he new, He worships and falls down thereto. A part he burneth in the fire, with part thereof he eateth flesh, He rosteth rost to his desire, and doth with warmth himself refresh: Aha, saith he, well warm'd am I, I saw the fire burn cheerfully. He maketh of the residue his God, his graven Image dear, He worships it, and prays thereto, he falleth down with awfull fear: He saith to it, Deliver me, I for my God acknowledge thee. 5. PART. v. 18.20. They have not known nor understood, for God hath closed up their eyes,
They can not see their Gods are wood, yea, he hath shut their heart likewise, So that they can not understand That there's a lye in their right hand. And none considers in his heart, nor hath he wit or skill to say, I in the fire have burned part, yea, I have baked bread this day: Upon its Coals I bak'd my loaf, I rosted flesh and ate thereof. And shall I make the residue abomination for to be, Shall I fall down and kneel, think you, unto the stock of any tree? He feeds on ashes all that while, An heart deceiv'd doth him beguile. Isa. 44.21, 22. O Jacob and O ISRAEL my servant whom I form'd of old, As a thick Cloud I did dispell thy sins and failings manifold; Remember, and return to me, For I alone redeemed thee. 6. PART. v. 24. Thus hath the Lord thy Saviour said, that from the womb hath formed thee, I am the Lord that all things made, Heaven is stretcht out alone by ME. I spread abroad the spacious Earth And by my self I laid it forth.
The lyars signs that nullifies, and makes Diviners mad to be, That turneth back the worldly wise, and makes their knowledge foolery. That seals the Word of's Ministers And counsels of his Messengers. That to Jeruslem doth declare thou shalt have dwellers in thee plac'd, And Judah's Cities I will rear, and raise up all her places waste: That saith unto the deeps, be dry, And dry thy Rivers up will I. That said of Cyrus (yet unborn) He is my Shepherd: it is He That all my pleasure shall perform, and saith, Jeruslem built shall be; And to the Templ' of old He said, Thy sure Foundation shall be lay'd. HYMN 226. Humble Supplications in hard times. To the Tune of the Ten Commandments. Jer. 14.7. O Lord though our INIQUITIES As Witnesses against US rise, Yet do it of thine own accord, Save us for thy Names sake, O Lord. For we confess our sins to thee, And our backslidings many be: And we have very oftentimes Provok'd thee by our hainous crimes.
O Thou the Hope of ISRAEL That canst assist and save so well, The onely Saviour we confess In time of trouble and distress: Why shouldest thou whom Nations dread, Be as a man ASTONISHED? And as a very MIGHTY MAN That cannot save, for who then can? And thou, although estranged thus, Art in the very midst OF US: And we are called by thy Name, O leave us not to utter shame. HYMN 227. The Glorious Throne. Jer. 17.12. A Glorious Throne exalted high (since first it did begin) Is that high place the Sanctuary, which our God dwelleth in. O God the Hope of ISRAEL and worthily so nam'd, All that forsake thee, and rebell, shall surely be asham'd! Yea, all that do depart from ME (in whom they ought to trust) Saith God the Lord, destroy'd shall be, and written in the dust. Because they have forsook the Lord the fountain and the spring
Of Living Waters richly stor'd with every good thing. Heal me, O Lord, as I have crav'd, and healed I shall be: O save me and I shall be sav'd, my praise is all of Thee. HYMN 228. Vanity of Idols. Jer. 16.19. O Lord that art my strength and fort, my refuge in distress; The Gentiles shall to Thee resort, and thus they shall confess: Surely Our Fathers (dull of sense) have all inherited lies, And Vanity, and things from whence no profit can arise. Shall men make Gods unto themselves and Lo! no Gods they be? Therefore, behold, my Soul resolves this once to make them see. And I will make them know my hand, my might shall they record: And they shall know and understand that my Name is the LORD. HYMN 229. The Partridge. Jer. 17.11. LIke as the Partridge gathers young which are not of her own, So he that gathers wealth by wrong, but right thereto hath none,
Shall leave them to another's Rule in midst of all his years, And at his end shall be a Fool as by his work appears. HYMN 230. Wo to Oppressors. Jer. 22.13. WO be to him that builds his house by wrong and injury. And by such deeds injurious his Chambers builds on high. That doth his neighbours service use without the wages pay'd: And doth the recompence refuse that should maintain his trade. 1 Thes. 4.6. Col. 3.25. For God avengeth all such things as we have told you true, And testifi'd with threatenings before-hand warning you. For the wrong-doer surely shall. receive his just reward: And there is no respect at all of persons with the Lord. HYMN 231. The LORD our Righteous∣ness. Jer. 23.6. BEhold the days shall shortly come, as saith the Lord our God, That I will raise to David's House a righteous Branch and ROD.
And there shall reign and prosper much a King of Royal birth, And judgment He shall execute, and justice in the Earth. In His daies Judah shall be sav'd, and Israel dwell in peace: And by this Name shall he be call'd, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS. HYMN 232. Effectual Prayer of Captives. All People, &c. Jer. 29.11. I Know the thoughts of my good Will which towards you I, saith God, intend The thoughts of peace and not of ill to give you an expected end. And then unfeignedly shall ye call on ME, and your Prayers pursue: And ye shall go and pray to ME, and I will hearken unto you. And ye shall seek and find me then when ye seek for me from your heart: And I will bring you back agen from whence I caus'd you to depart. And found I will be at your hands and have your Captive-state restor'd, And gather you from all the Lands to which I drove you, saith the Lord.
HYMN 223. Restoration of Israel: Jer. 30.7. ALAS! the Day is great and chief, and none is like thereto, It is the time of Jacob's grief, but he shall well go through. And it shall come to pass that day, saith God the Lord of hosts, That I will take the yoke away that binds his neck so close. And I will burst their bonds that hour, they shall not bind a limb: And strangers shall no more have power to serve themselves of him. But they shall serve the Lord their God, and David their good King, Whom I'le raise up with ruling rod for their good governing. O let the God of Israel then be prais'd with one accord, And people then say all Amen, Amen, praise ye the Lord. HYMN 234. The constancy of God's covenant. Jer. 33.20. THUS saith the Lord, if ye can break my Covenant of the day, My law of night if ye can check, and take those times away.
My Covenant may be broken then with David serving ME, That he shall have no Son to reign, or on his Throne to be. The Levites, Priests and Ministers, and Jacob's House may fail, And Covenants with your Ancestors no more at all avail. But as the Hosts above our head in Heaven, none can count; Nor can the Seas be numbered to what their sands amount. So I'le increase and still prefer my Servant David's seed, And Levites that administer to me, as I decreed. Let Israel's God be prais'd therefore of all, and all together; From first to last for evermore Amen, Amen for ever. HYMN 235. Murmuring restrained. To the Tune of the Ten Commandments. Lam. 3.39. WHY should a living man complain, A man that sins to suffer pain? For it is good in very truth That man should bear his yoke in youth. He sits alone with silent soul Because He bears a just controul: He puts his mouth into the dust If hope may be in whom to trust.
He gives his cheek to them that smite, He's filled with reproach and spite: For thus he thinks God will restore, And not cast off for evermore. For though a while He causeth grief Yet will He surely send relief: And in his mercies multitude Shall his compassions be renew'd. HYMN 236. God afflicts not willingly. Lam. 3.33. THE Lord afflicts not willingly, Nor grieves mankind with misery: To crush with foot or cruel hand All the poor prisoners of the Land. Of man's just right to turn the stream, Before the face of God Supream; And to subvert a mans just cause The Lord approves not by his Laws. Who's he that saith a thing shall be, And it is come to pass saith he, When possibly God may permit, But never He commanded it. Psal. 62. ult. Out of the mouth of God most high Comes evil and good with equity, For both He censures what is nought, And gives reward to works well wrought. Let Israel's God be prais'd therefore From first to last for evermore: And people all with one accord Say here Amen, praise ye the Lord.
HYMN 237. Exhortations to Repentance. All people, &c. or, O Lord consider, &c. putting two Verses into a Staff. Lament. 3.40. COme, let us search and try our way; And turn to God without delay: Let us lift up our hearts and hands To God in Heaven that commands. We have transgrest, we have rebell'd, And thou thy pardon hast withheld: Thy cloud hath hid us from thy view, So that our prayer should not pass through. Turn us, O God, turn us to Thee, And truly turned we shall be: Renew our days as 'twas of old Thy face and favour to behold. Psalm 79. ult. So we thy flock and pasture-store Shall give Thee thanks for evermore, And will shew forth to great and small Thy praise to generations all. HYMN 238. The Sins of Sodom recorded. Tune of the Ten Commandments. Ezek. 16.49. REmember this was Sodom's sin great pride and fullness of their bread: And IDLENESS was much therein, and in her Daughters whom she fed.
And also that she did not care to strengthen the distressed hand Of such as poor and needy were, but waxed haughty in the Land: Abominable deeds did they, which were committed in my view: Therefore I took them quite away as I my self saw good to do. Psal. 106. Let Israel's God the Lord most high be prais'd and magnify'd therefore, And let his glorious Majesty fill all the Earth for evermore. HYMN 239. Pacification by Repentance. Ezek. 16.62. I Will establish now with thee the Covenant of my Word: And thou shalt know this thing of Me, that I am God the Lord. That thou mayst call to mind the same, and be confounded sore, And never speak a word for shame of this thing any more. When I am pacifi'd in this towards thee gratiously For all that thou hast done amiss, saith God the Lord most high.
HYMN 240. The exact Doom. Ezek. 18.4, 5, 9, BEhold saith God all souls are mine and mine peculiarly: The Fathers, Sons, and every ones, the Soul that sins shall die. But if a man be just and good, and doth things just and right, The Lord will give that man to live for ever in his sight. 10, 11, 14. If he beget a wicked Son, that Son shall surely die: His bloud I'll shed on his own head for living wickedly. Now lo! if he beget a Son his Fathers sins that sees▪ And shuns them quite, and doth things right, even he shall live in these. 24. If he that seems a righteous man forsakes good ways and true, And takes a course to worse and worse, as wicked people do. The righteousness that he hath done no more shall mention'd be, But in the sin he trespass'd in most surely die shall he. 21, 27, 22. And when the wicked leaves his lusts, and for my grace doth strive:
And shall delight to walk aright, he saves his soul alive: All the transgressions he hath done no more shall mention'd be; In his approved righteousness most surely live shall he. 29. Psal. 106. ult. O House of Israel hearken then, for needs confess ye must My Ways to be pure Equity, and your own ways unjust. Let Israel's great and gratious God have all the praise therefore, And people then say all Amen, Amen for evermore. HYMN 241. Repentance urged. Ezek. 18.30. REpent and turn your selves from sin, and all transgressions flee: And so the sin ye lived in your ruin shall not be. Cast your transgressions quite away, trespass no more thereby; Make new your heart, and inward part, for wherefore will ye die? Why will ye die, O Israel's House, when I such warning give? Ill pleas'd am I that sinners die, wherefore return and live.
HYMN 242. God's Oath of Grace. Ezek. 33.10. WHEN Israel speaks, as thinking thus, the Lord will not forgive: And we in our transgressions pine, and how then shall we live? Say to them, as I live saith God, I swear it solemnly, I have no pleasure in the death of wicked men that die. But that the wicked man should turn from his ungodly way, That's my desire and my delight, thus therefore shalt thou say. O turn ye, turn ye speedily from evil, and do well; For wherefore will ye chuse to die, O House of Israel? HYMN 243. The Sabbath. Ezek. 20.12. MOreover said the Lord to me, I gave my Sabbaths signs to be betwixt my self and them, That they might know assuredly I am the Lord that sanctify and make them holy men. But Israel's House rebell'd no less Against me in the Wilderness than by their former sin:
And they despis'd my Judgments too Which if a man with care shall do he shall even live therein. My Sabbaths they did much pollute, Then threatned I to EXECUTE my Wrath in great degree: Yet for my Names sake wrought I then, That it among the HEATHEN men polluted might not be. 2. PART. v. 18, 20. Thus to your children I did say, Walk ye not in your Fathers way, but let my paths be trod: Hallow my Sabbaths which shall show My Covenant, that ye may know I am the Lord your God. Yet did their whole posterity Rebell against me wickedly, and did my Laws transgress: Wherefore I threatned to let fall And power my wrath upon them all within the Wilderness. Yet shall the House of Israel Serve me at home, and please me well, and there will I require Your First-Fruits and your Offerings, Your Odors and your holy things and all that I desire.
3 PART. v. 42.15. And ye shall know that I am God That brought you to your own abode, and gave into your hands The Land of Israel which I sware To you and to your Fathers there, the glory of all Lands. And there shall ye remember still Your ways and all your doings ill wherewith ye were defil'd: And loath your selves in your own sight For all your deeds that were not right when ye are reconcil'd. And ye shall know that I am God When I have wrought with you abroad My Name for to record: Not answering to your wicked ways, Nor deeds corrupt in former daies, O Israel, saith the Lord. HYMN 244. Ezekiel's evil Hearers. To the Tune of the Ten Commandments. Ezek. 33.30. O Son of man thy people (still) Are talking of thee very ill; They talk against thee by the wall And doors of houses where they call.
To one another thus they talk, Brother to Brother as they walk: Come pray you let us hear the word that now proceedeth from the Lord. And they come to thee, not a few, And as the People use to do: They sit intent before thy face As People whom my Name doth grace. They hear thy Words as faithfull men, But never will they practice them, For with their mouth much love they show, But after gain their heart doth go. 2. PART. Moreover know, O Son of Man, Thy people blame thee all they can, They take the oportunity To talk against thee secretly. And whatsoever they profess Their heart pursues their Covetousness: And thou art as a Song most choice Of one that hath a pleasant Voice. As one that giveth great content By playing on an Instrument; For this is their perpetual spot They hear thy Words but do them not. And when the matters propheci'd Are come to pass and verifi'd, And come they must: then shall they know They had a Prophet told them so.
HYMN 245. Vniting the Nation. Give laud, &c. Ezek. 37.21. BEhold now I will take the Sons of Israel, And them one Nation make in Israel where they dwell: And there they shall In midst of thee divided be no more at all. Nor shall themselves defile with Idols any more; And their transgressions vile I will take off the score: And David there Shall be my King for governing my People dear. Isa. 40.11. And he shall lead his flock as Shepherds that have care, Gathering his Lambs whole stock, them in his bosome bear: And with mild hand Lead those along that are with young in all the land. Ezek. 37.23. And I will save them sure out of their darksome dens, Where they have dwelt impure, and will their Conscience cleanse.
So their abode Shall be with ME, and I will be the Lord their God. 26. Moreover I will make a Covenant of peace For Israel's dear sake to stand and to increase. I'le heap their store, And fix my Name in midst of them for evermore. HYMN 246. Michael our Prince. The mighty God, &c. Dan. 12. from 1. to v. 5. and 10. AT that time shall stand up Michael your Prince for children of his people that shall stand: And troub'lous times shall be as were not since there was a Nation liv'd in any land. Then shall thy people all obtain salvation That in the book of life have nomination. And many of them that sleep in dust forlorn shall waken: some to everlasting light, And some to shame and everlasting scorn: the wise shall shine as firmament most bright: And they that turn to righteousness great store Shall shine as stars in heaven for evermore. And many people shall be purifi'd from filthiness of their iniquity,
And many shall be white (as purely try'd) but still the wicked shall do wickedly; And none shall understand that live profanely, But wise and good men shall perceive most plainly. Let Israel's God the Lord that is most high be prais'd therefore and wear the sovereign Crown; And let the whole Earth universally, be filled with his glory and renown: And let Gods chosen People, altogether, Give praise to Him and say Amen for ever. HYMN 247. Back-slidings censured, or Israels Revolt. Hos. 11.1. WHEN Israel was a tender child then did I bear him love, And call'd my Son from Lands defil'd; from Egypt to remove. But as they call'd they went from them, and did their fancies please; They sacrific'd to Baalim then and Graven Images. And Ephraim too I taught to go I took him by the Arm, But they their healer did not know, that cur'd them of their harm. With cords of men I did them draw, with cords of kindness great, I took the yoke from off their jaw, and lay'd before them meat.
HYMN 248. Aptness to back-sliding holpen by Grace. Hos. 11.7. MY Folk are to back-sliding bent, and 'tis their general fault, And though they call'd them to repent, none would his name exalt. How shall I give thee up, O how shall I to wrath deliver? My heart is turn'd within me now, my bowels yern together. I will not execute my Wrath with fury to annoy: I will not take the angry path to ruin and destroy. O Ephraim look for grace from Me, for I am God not man: And, dwelling in the midst of thee, the Holy One I am. HYMN 249. The Calves of our Lips. Have mercy, &c. Hos. 14.1. O Israel return unto the Lord thy God, For thou by thy Iniquity hast many by-paths trod. Take with you humble Words, and turn unto the Lord, And to him say, now Lord we pray to thee with one accord.
O take away from us all our INIQUITIE And now that we draw nigh to thee receive us gratiously. So shall we render soon the Fatlings of the Lip: The thanks that bind a gratefull mind no praise to overslip. Nor will we have recourse for ever any more To th' outward force of men or Horse, as was done heretofore. Nor to our handy Works will say in any case Our Gods are ye: for Lord in thee the Fatherless find Grace. 2. METRE. Where Righteousness doth, &c. O Israel return unto the Lord thy God; For thou mayst well discern what by-paths thou hast trod. Take with you gratious Words, and turn, unanimous, Unto the Lord of Lords, and say unto him thus. Lord, take thou quite away all our iniquity; And as we humbly pray receive us gratiously.
So we whom grace absolves and from our sins sets free, Shall sacrifice the Calves of these our lips to thee. It is not outward force which we shall trust unto, Nor strength of man or horse or any works we do. Nor any more shall we those Idol-Gods embrace, For Lord alone in thee the Fatherless find grace. HYMN 250. Backslidings healed. All People, &c. Hos. 14.4. I'LE heal backsliding Israel and love him freely, as I say, Because mine anger that did swell, is ceast from him, and turn'd away. My grace as dew I will bestow on Israel that he may come on: And he shall like a lilly grow, and cast forth roots as Lebanon. His branches shall grow forth full well, his beauty as the Olive-tree; As Lebanon shall be her smell, and such his spreading out shall be. And they that dwell beneath his shade, shall then return from captive state:
They shall revive, as Corn ith' blade, and grow as Vines most delicate. Ephraim shall say, what should I do with shamefull Idols any more? I heard him and observ'd him too, he will not do as heretofore. Now am I like a green firr tree that groweth on the fertile ground: And know, O Israel, that from Me and me alone thy fruit is found. Whoso is wise and well inclin'd even he shall understand these things, And he that hath a prudent mind shall know whence all this blessing springs. For all the Ways of God are right, and all the just shall walk therein; Yet shall transgressors deviate quite, still running into farther sin. HYMN 251. The Fast proclaimed. Joel 2.15. BLOW ye with Trumpets loudest blast in Sion, warning all; O sanctifie a solemn Fast, the great Assembly call. The Congregation sanctifie, the people gather near; Assemble th' Elders generally, gather the children dear.
O Let the Bride-groom (humbled low) pass from his chamber door, The Bride out of her closet go, to humble them the more. And let the Priests (the Courts that keep) the Ministers of the Lord, Between the Porch and Altar weep, and say with one accord. Lord, spare thy people, do not give thine Heritage to reproach; And under Heathen Lords to live that on thy right encroach. And then the Lord of Israel will be jealous for his Land; And they shall find most plentifull compassions at his hand. HYMN 252. Three and four Transgressions. Amos 1.3, 6, &c. THUS saith the Lord, for three sad crimes Damascus did, and four, I'le take revenge in after-times, and never quit their score. Because they threshed Gilead with iron flayls in wars But fire shall burn up Benhadad, and break Damascus bars. Thus saith the Lord, for three sad crimes of Gaza, and for four, I'le take revenge in after-times and never quit their score. Because they carried quite away the whole captivity,
Delivering them to be a prey unto the Enemy. 2. PART. Amos 1.9, 11. Thus saith the Lord for three sad crimes of Tyrus, and for four, I'le take revenge in after times, and never quit their score. Because the whole captivity of Edom they resign'd, The Covenant so brotherly came not into their mind. Thus saith the Lord, for three sad crimes of Edom, and for four, I'le take revenge in after times and never quit their score. For hunting Jacob with the sword (all pity cast aside) His anger was extremely stirr'd, and ever did abide. 3. PART. Amos 1.13. Thus saith the Lord, for three sad crimes of Ammon, and for four, I'le take revenge in after times and never quit their score. For ripping up with cruel hand the Women then with Child, T' enlarge the borders of their Land that was with bloud defil'd▪
Chap. 2.1, 3. Thus saith the Lord, for three sad crimes of MOAB, and for four, I'le take revenge in after times and never quit their score. Because the King of Edom's bones they burned into lime, The Judge, the Prince, and their high Thrones shall fall at some sad time. 4. PART. Chap. 2. v. 4 & 6. Thus saith the Lord, for three sad crimes of Judah, and for four, I'le take revenge in after times and not acquit their score. Because they did God's Word despise and did not as he bid, And they were made to err by lies as their Forefathers did. Thus saith the Lord, for three sad crimes of Israel, and for four, I'le be aveng'd in after times and not acquit their score. Because for silver they did sell the just and righteous Jews, And sold the poor of Israel just for a payr of shooes. 5. PART. Joel 2.12. Now therefore turn to me, saith God, and with an heart sincere,
With fasting and with mourning loud, and many a brinish tear. And rent your hearts with one accord, but keep your garments whole, And turn unto the Lord your God withall your heart and soul. For He is gratious, mercifull, and unto anger slow; Of kindness great, and sensible of our excessive Woe. Who knoweth if He will repent, and blessings leave behind; Meat and drink-offerings to present to your Lord God so kind? HYMN 253. Heavy Judgments. Our Father, &c. Amos 4.5, 6. O House of Israel, saith the Lord, I smote you at your dining board, I gave you emptiness of teeth In all your Cities to your grief: And want of bread in every place, Yet to repent ye had no grace. The rain from you I have held back When THREE Months did to Harvest lack; One City I did rain upon, And on another there was none: One piece was rain'd upon and sped, And that which was not withered.
I smote you with a blasting Dew When Gardens, Vineyards, Figtrees grew; And when increas'd your Olive-trees, The Palmer-Worm devour'd all these; Yet turn'd ye not with one accord To seek my favour, saith the Lord. I sent on you the Pestilence As Egypt felt when ye went thence; Your young men I with sword did slay, Your Horses I did take away; I made the savour of your Camp Come to your Nostrils like a damp. I have o're-throwen some of you As God Gomorrah overthrew, And Sodom: and by gratious hands Ye were pluckt forth as fire-brands: Yet turn'd ye not with one accord To seek my favour, saith the Lord. Therefore will I do this to thee, And am resolv'd it so shall be; And since new judgments shall begin, Greater than all that yet have been; Against that time, prepare thou well To meet thy God, O ISRAEL. For he that did the Mountains form; That did create the Wind and Storm; That shews to man what is his thought, That hath the Morning Darkness wrought, That treads on all the Earths high Coasts His Name is call'd the Lord of Hosts.
Let Israel's God be prais'd therefore From first to last for evermore, And let the whole Earth, up and down, Be filled with his bright renown: And let all sorts of people then Give praise to God, and say Amen. HYMN 254. Grass-hoppers and Fire. Amos 7.1. WHEN God had formed Grass-hoppers, (as once it came to pass) And made them his Commissioners to eat up all the Grass. The time was at the latter growth of shooting out the blade, And I, to see the judgment loath, on this wise spake and said. Forgive, Lord, our iniquities, I humbly cry and call: By whom shall Jacob's House arise, for he is very small? Then did the Lord repent for this, and thus He said to me, Though they have done so much amiss, yet this thing shall not be. Then cald He to contend by fire, devouring all the deep, And eat a part though not th' entire, then did I pray and weep; Lord cease these wofull miseries, and hear my cry and call: By whom shall Jacob's House arise, for he is very small?
Then did the Lord repent for this, and thus he said to me, Though they have done so much amiss, yet this thing shall not be. Then shew'd he me a plummer line, pointing at Israel's score: To shew that God would not incline to pardon any more. Lord spare thy flock, do not condemn, thine Heritage to shame; That Heathens should rule over them dishonouring thy Name▪ For wherefore should the Heathen say, (while we are undertrod) Now where is Israel's God (say they) where Now is Israel's God? Then will the Lord of 's own accord be jealous for his Land, And pity his own flock that is under the Heathens hand. Let us always give laud and praise, to Israel's God therefore, And people then say all Amen, Amen, for evermore. HYMN 255. Nonsufficient Sacrifices. Now Israel may say, &c. Micah 6.6. WHerewith shall I, or any man be bold to come before the Lord confidingly, and bow my self before the Lord most high? With Offerings shall I come of flock and fold, Burnt Offerings or with calves a just year old?
Will God be pleas'd, and with our sins dispense for thousands of fat Rams which we shall boyl, or for ten thousand Rivers full of oyl: Shall my first-born my trespass recompence, Fruit of my body for my souls offence? But he hath shew'd thee what is good, O man, and what doth God the Lord require of thee, but to do justly and exact to be; Mercy to love, and shew it all we can, Walk humbly with thy God, and so go on. Let Israel's God the Lord that is most high be ever blest and magnifi'd therefore, and let the spacious Earth, the Sea & shore Be filled with his glorious Majesty, And people say Amen unanimously. HYMN 256. The Treasures of deceit challenged. The mighty God, &c. Micah. 6.10. Deut. 25.14. AND are there yet the treasures of deceit in wicked Houses now so general? And the scant measure, or the small and great, which is abominable unto all: Or shall I count them pure with wicked bal∣lance, And of deceitfull Weight which I can chal∣lenge? For their rich men are full of violence, and their inhabitants are full of lies, Also their tongue is full of foul offence, and of deceitfull wicked treacheries: Therefore I'le make thee sick in visitation, And for thy sins to be a Desolation.
And thou shalt eat and not be satisfi'd, thy casting down shall be in midst of thee, And thou shalt take fast hold on every side, but not deliver when thy siege shall be: And that which thou deliverest Son or Daugh∣ter I will give up unto the sword and slaughter. And thou shalt sow but shalt not reap the crop, and thou shalt tread the Olive from the tree, But not anoint thee with the Oyl one drop, and Wine to drink but none at all for thee: Therefore, saith God, return to Me, returning Withall your heart, with fasting, tears and mourning. And rent your heart, but keep your garment whole, and turn unto your God so patient, So gratious, great in kindness, mercifull: and soon repents him of our punishment: Who knows if He will turn, and leave behind him A blessing, that for ever we may find Him? HYMN 257. The Priesthood. The Mighty God, &c. Zech. 3.1. AND lo! He shew'd me Joshua God's High Priest standing before the Angel of the Lord, And Satan at His right Hand to resist; then spake the Lord to Satan this sharp Word, The Lord that chose His Church check thy de∣sire, For is not this a BRAND pluckt from the fire? Now Joshua was clad in vile array, and stood before the Angel of the Lord,
And God commanded, take those rags away, and give him change of rayment at my Word, So then they gave him change of rayment brighter, And on his head they set a comely Mitre. Then did the Angel of the Lord protest if thou, O Joshua, wilt observe my charge, Then will I give thee Walks among the rest, to judge my House and keep my Courts at large: Hear now, O Joshua, my Priest desired, Thou, and thy fellows that are men admired. 2. PART. Zec. 3.8, 9. Heb. 10.14. Behold I will bring forth and will advance my choice elected, the foundation stone, My chosen servant who is call'd the Branch, my Well-beloved, and the Holy one, That is endow'd above all mortal merit With all the Graces of my Holy Spirit. I will engrave with graving of my hand concerning him the Lord of Hosts doth say, And those Iniquities of all the Land I will remove and quit in one short day: For by one Offering made by him that died Perfect for ever are the sanctified. And in that day, as saith the Lord of Hosts, such amity and unity shall be, That they shall call their friends in all the Coasts under the Vine and under the Fig-tree; Let Israel's God be magnifi'd therefore And people say Amen, for evermore.
HYMN 258. The Brother-hood. Give laud, &c. Zech. 7.9. THUS speaks the Lord of Hosts, let every man of you, In all the Lands and Coasts, just judgment now pursue, And mercy show, Even all ye can, to every man; both friend and foe. And do not ye oppress the Widow any more, Nor wrong the Fatherless the Stranger nor the Poor: Let none of you His Brother judge, nor bear him grudge whate're ye do. But they refus'd to hear, and pull'd their neck away, And stopt their willfull ear from all that I did say▪ Yea every one Did quite depart, and make their heart as th' Adamant Stone. Lest they should hear the Law, and Words which God had sent, Which former Prophets saw, and call'd them to repent: Therefore there came On Israel's Land by God's command great Wrath to flame.
And therefore as He cry'd, and yet they would not hear, So was their cry deny'd, and I would not give ear, Saith God of Hosts: And thus alas! It came to pass in Israel's Coasts. So I did scatter them as when fierce whirlwinds blow, Among all Nations then, and whom they did not know; And thus their Land And whole Estate lay desolate by God's Command. Thus was it with the Jew, their Land was left forlorn, That no man might pass through, nor any might return: For their own hand Lay'd desolate that delicate and pleasant Land. HYMN 259. God's Jewels. [Where righteousness doth say, &c.] Mal. 3.16. THEN they that fear'd the Lord spake oft to one another, And God gave ear and heard What each man told his brother A Book then of record was written of the same For them that fear'd the Lord, and thought upon his Name.
And they shall then be mine in that appointed day When I shall new refine my Jewels, as I say. And I will spare each one of them, as some kind man Spares his obedient Son that serves him all he can. And then shall ye return, and difference shall be had: That ye may well discern betwixt the good and bad. And t will be seen abroad how different is the Lot, 'Twixt him that serveth God, and him that serves him not. 2. METRE. Have mercy, &c. Then they that fear'd the Lord spake oft to one another, And God gave ear and (kindly) heard what each man told his brother. A Book then of record was written of the same, For them that (truly) fear'd the Lord, and thought upon his Name. And they shall then be mine in that appointed day, When I shall make up, and refine my Jewels, as I say.
And I will spare each one of them, as some kind man Spares his obedient (humble) son that serves him all he can. And then shall ye return and difference shall be had That ye may well (and soon) discern betwixt the good and bad. And 'twill be seen abroad how different is the lot 'Twixt him that (truly) serveth God and him that serves him not. HYMN 260. The Son of Righteousness arising. Mal. 4.1. BEhold the day shall come, saith God, that like an Oven shall burn, And all the Wicked and the Proud shall God to Stubble turn. And them into that Oven put (his justice to advance) The day that comes shall burn them up not leaving root nor branch. But unto you that fear my Name the blessed Son shall spring, Of righteousness, with shining flame and healing in his Wing. And ye, like fatlings of the stall, shall go forth with renown, And have the power wherewithall to tread the Wicked down:
And they beneath your feet shall be as ashes undertrod, When this thing shall be done by Me, saith your Almighty God. Let Israel's God, the Lord most High have all the praise therefore From first to last perpetually, Amen for evermore. Finis Hymnorum Veteris Testamenti.
HYMNS Out of the NEW TESTAMENT. HYMN 261. The Fan of Judgment. Mat. 3.12. THE Lord, whose fan is in his hand, shall one day purge his floor; And he will purge it thoroughly, that it shall need no more. Into his glorious granary gathering his wheat together: But then will He burn up the chaff, with fire that burns for ever. HYMN 262. The Agreement necessary. Mat. 5.25. AGree thou with thy ENEMY, while with him in the way Lest he should hale thee to the judge, that will compell to pay. The Judge unto the Officer commit thee by command; And thou be made a Prisoner, under the Serjeants hand. For verily I tell thee right, from thence thou shalt not get: Till thou hast pay'd the utmost mite, of all thy dreadfull debt.
2. METRE. All People, &c. Agree thou with thy Creditor, In dues that he contendeth for; Agree with him betimes I say, While thou art with him in the way. Lest thou be haled by the foe, Before th'impartial Judge to go; The Judge by his severe command, Commit thee to the Serjeants hand. And then the Serjeant that doth wait, Shall cast thee into Prison straight. I tell thee thou shalt not get thence Till thou hast pay'd both pounds and pence. HYMN 263. The Cabinet. Mat. 6.19. LAY not your treasures upon Earth where worldlings love to deal, And where the moth and rust corrupt and thieves break through and steal. But heap in heaven treasures pure, from all corruption free; For where your treasure is, be sure your hearts will also be. HYMN 264. The wise builder. Mat. 7.24. WHoever hears these Words of mine and doth them (saith the holy one) Is like a wise man in's design, that built his house on rocky stone.
And Rain and Floods and Winds, in course, Did beat upon that House with force, And it fell not for all the shock, For it was founded on a Rock. But he that hears without regard, of doing that which I command: To a foolish man shall be compar'd that built his House upon the Sand: Then Flouds of Rain and Tempests great Upon that House did fiercely beat; And down it fell unto the ground, And great the fall thereof was found. HYMN 265. Our Saviour's Rapture. Our Father, &c. Mat. 11.2, 25. Luk. 10.20. John. 5.23. WHen John the Baptist (free from doubt) Sent two of his Disciples out, To ask our Saviour, and to know If he were very Christ or no, Tell John said Christ, what things they be Which ye your selves do hear and see. The Blind receive their cheerfull sight, The Lame are heal'd, and walk upright, Deaf hear, and Lepers cleansed are; The Dead rais'd up: these things declare; And while by Worldly-Wise despis'd, The poor are taught and gospeliz'd. I thank thee, Father, from my heart The Lord of Heaven and Earth that art:
Because thy wisdom hath seen good These things should not be understood: But hid from wise and prudent men, And hast to babes revealed them. Even so, O Father, let it be, Since so it seemed good to Thee, For what so seemeth in thy sight, Must needs be holy, just and right. God onely wise have praise therefore, From first to last for evermore. HYMN 266. The Mustard-seed. All People, &c. Mat. 11.31. THE Kingdom of our Lord, indeed, Is like a grain of Mustard-seed: Which sown, of all seeds is the least, But when 'tis grown the most increast. So grant us, Lord, in every place That we may richly grow in grace: And in the Knowledge of our Lord Whose name we praise with one accord. HYMN 267. The Leaven. All People, &c. Mat. 13.33. THE Kingdom of God's Word from hea∣ven Is like unto a piece of Leaven, Which in a mass of meal was hid: Untill the whole was leavened.
So grant our Body, Lord, and Soul May be preserv'd entire and whole, In holiness, untill the day Of Christ our Lord, Amen we pray. HYMN 268. The wise Merchant. Mat. 13.45. Prov. 2.6. GOD'S Kingdom in a Christian Is like unto a Merchant-man that sought rich pearls of wealth: Who having found a pearl of price Sold all he had, and did rejoice to buy it for himself. So grant us, Lord, the truth to buy, And not to sell it foolishly. (for wisdom flows from thee) Instruction, understanding too Grant we may carefully pursue, and rich to God may be. 2. METRE. To the Tune of the 113. Psalm. God's Kingdom in a Christian Is like unto a Merchant-man, that sought rich pearls of worldly wealth: Who having found a pearl of price Sold all he had, and did rejoice to buy it wholly for himself. So grant us, Lord, the truth to buy, And not to sell it foolishly.
(for purer wisdom flows from Thee) Instruction; Understanding too Grant we may carefully pursue and wise to God thereby may be. HYMN 269. The Draw-net. Mat. 13.47. Pet. 12.3. THE Kingdom of the Gospel here, which is for grace design'd: Is like a net cast in the Sea, gathering of every kind. Which when 'twas full men drew to shore, sat down to make survey; In Vessels gather'd up the good, and cast the bad away. So shall it be at this World's end, the Angels shall come forth Severing the wicked from the just on all the Coasts on earth: And they shall cast the wicked ones into a furnace-flame. There shall be weeping, gnashing teeth, and everlasting shame. HYMN 270. The Fool in grain. Ye Children, &c. Luke 12.16. THere was a certain rich mans ground, That plentifully did abound: and made the wealthy owner say What shall I now devise to do, Because I want a barn or two, wherein I might my harvest lay?
But now it comes into my mind, There is a means that I shall find▪ to lay up all my wealthy Crop: I will pull down my barns, and build Much greater barns, and have them fill'd and heaped up unto the top. And I will say unto my Soul, Soul, live at ease, without control, eat thou, and drink, and merry be: For worldly goods enough thou hast Lay'd up for many years to last, and there can come no want to thee: Thou fool said God, this night shall they Require thy Soul, and take 't away, what then becomes of all thy store? Such is the man that heaps up wealth, And worldly treasures to himself and is not rich to God, but poor. HYMN 271. The best fear. Mat. 10.23. Luke 12.4. MY friends, said Christ, to you I say fear ye not them that threaten you; And can, perhaps, the body slay, but after that no more can do. But I will give you warning here, and be ye warned by my word: Whom ye should ever have in fear, namely, the mighty Sovereign Lord. Who after he hath smote and slain (having all power of life and limb:)
Can cast to hell, and endless pain, yea I say to you, fear ye him. HYMN 272. The best rejoycing. Now Israel, &c. Luke 10.17. AND lo▪ the Seventy Disciples came▪ As they return'd from preaching of the word And thus they spake & said unto our Lord, O Lord, we cannot but with joy proclaim How Devils are subject to us through thy Name. Our Saviour said I know it must be so, I saw proud Satan falling from on high Like to a flash of lightning from the Sky. For his power shall come down, but yours shall grow And conquer all the forces of the Foe. Nevertheless rejoice ye not in this that Devils are subject unto your command, But rather much rejoice to understand. Your Names are written in the book of bliss, And of Eternal life ye shall not miss. To Him that sits upon the Throne therefore, And unto Christ the Lamb, the Holy One, And to the seven Spirits before the Throne, Ascribe in heaven and earth, on sea and shore Dominion, power and praise for evermore. HYMN 273. Peace with all men Rom. 12.18. AS far as it is possible and in your power doth fall,
Retain ye still this Principle, to live at peace with all. Because the fruit of righteousness is sown of him in peace, Whose quiet mind is still inclin'd to make Contention cease. And therefore follow peace with all and holiness together: Without which grace, none see the face of God above for ever. HYMN 274. Subsistance of God's Kingdom. Rom. 14.17. GOD'S Kingdom is not meat and drink, (the things desir'd of most) But righteousness, and peace it is, and joy ith' Holy Ghost. And he that in these things serves Christ as all men ought to do, Is much set by, of God most high and men commend him too. Let us therefore pursue the things that make for mutual peace, And things whereby to edifie and make true Love increase. HYMN 275. Moderate affections. All People, &c. 1 Cor. 7.27. BRethren, I say, the time is short And this remains for every sort:
The Married so to lead their lives As free, and not as having Wives. The sad as sorrowing not too deep, But weeping as they did not weep: And they that joy in their fair lot Should joy as if they joyed not. The buyers free from carefulness, As if not buying to possess: Using the World as doth befit, And not at all abusing it. For lo! the World doth quite decay, The fashion of it fades away, But he that doth the Will of God Hath an Eternal blest abode. All Glory to the Holy One That sits upon the soveraign Throne, And to the Lamb of God therefore Be praise and Honour evermore. HYMN 276. Sowing to the Spirit. Gal 6.7. BE not deceiv'd, my brethren dear, God is not mock'd, we know, For all shall reap (for things done here) according as they sow. He, then, that soweth to the flesh corruption shall inherit: And they eternal happiness that sow unto the Spirit.
Unwearied, then, let us pursue good Works, without complaint: For we shall reap in season due if that we do not faint. And taking opportunity, do good to every man, But chiefly to the family of Faith the best we can. HYMN 277. Amity and Vnity. Phil. 2.1. IF any Consolation in Christ is to be had, If any Delectation in love to make us glad. If any fellowship be felt in God's sweet Spirit of grace, If any bowels that can melt, or mercies taking place. Fulfill our joy, like-minded be, in mutual love combin'd: Having the self-same amity, and unity of mind. Let nothing out of strife be done, or of vain-glory wrought, But others to themselves each one preferring in his thought. And look not every man of you on his own things alone. But on the things of others too, to comfort every one.
HYMN 278. Our Saviour's coming in the Clouds. 1 Thess. 4.16. THE Lord himself shall once descend from Heaven with a shout, And God's Arch-Angel shall attend, and his loud voice break out. And then the Trump of God likewise shall his alarum sound: And first the dead in Christ shall rise and stand upon the ground. Then shall the living that remain to Heaven in clouds repair: And be caught up with all the train to meet the Lord ith' air. And then shall we for ever joy in presence of the Lord: Comfort your selves then mutually with this so sweet a Word. HYMN 279. Charity charged upon the rich. Now Israel, &c. 1 Tim. 6.17. THE rich in this World charge thou solemnly Not to be puffed up with secret pride, Nor in uncertain riches to confide: But on the living Lord that they rely, Who gives us richly all things to enjoy. That they do good, and largely give to th'poor▪ Ready to distribute of their estate, And to be willing to communicate: A good foundation laying up in store Of gaining life that lasts for evermore.
HYMN 280. The Call of Grace. 2 Tim. 1.9. TIS God that lov'd and called us with an effectual call, Of his good pleasure marvellous, not for our Works at all. But of his purpose and his grace ordain'd to every man, And by Christ Jesus given us before the World began. And now is made most manifest in that which doth appear By coming of the ever-blest the Lord our Saviour dear. Who hath abolish'd death thereby, and hath, in every place, Brought life and immortality to light by Gospel grace. To God the Father and the Son and Holy Ghost therefore, Be glory done as first begun, and shall be evermore. HYMN 281. The Cross and Crown. All People, &c. 2 Tim. 2.11. THIS is a very faithfull Word, If we be dead with Christ our Lord, Then will he us to life restore To live with him for evermore.
For if we suffer and sustain, Then shall we with him also reign: If we deny Him, then, I say, He'll deny us another day. If we believe not (wanting faith) Yet is He true to what He saith: And howsoe'er we falsify Yet can He not Himself deny. All Glory to the Holy One That sits upon the sovereign throne, And to the Lamb of God therefore Be glory now and evermore. HYMN 282. Vessels to honour. 2 Tim. 2.19. Mat. 22.14. Eph. 5.3. THE Lord's foundation stedfast is having this seal thereto, The Lord well knoweth who are his, and they are but a few. Therefore let all unanimously that name Christ's Holy Name, Depart from all iniquity which is to Saints a shame. But in a great House are at once Vessels, as seemeth good, Not onely Gold and Silver ones. but likewise Earth and Wood. And unto Honour some are fram'd, and to dishonour some: If any shun the things here blam'd, and as refin'd do come.
A Vessel it shall him produce of honour and regard, A meet one for the masters use, to all good Works prepar'd. To him that sits upon the throne and to the Lamb therefore Be Glory and Dominion and Honour evermore. HYMN 283. Evill Times to be amended. The Mighty God, &c. 2 Tim. 3.1. THIS also known, as that which must be known, that in the last days perilous times shall come, Men shall be lovers of themselves alone, proud, covetous, boasters, and blasphemers some, Unthankfull, yielding Parents no subjection, Unholy, void of natural affection. Truce-breakers, false accusers, violent, Traitors, and disesteemers of the good, Heady, highminded, and incontinent, loving their pleasures, more than loving God; Having a form of Godliness, denying The power thereof: with these is no com∣plying. 2 Tim. 2.22. 1 Thes 5.15. But follow righteousness with one accord, faith, charity, and peace unanimously, With all the Saints that call upon the Lord, out of an heart that savours purity. And that which good is, follow altogether, Among your selves, and all men whatsoever.
HYMN 284. Exhortations to good Works. All people, &c. Tit. 3.1. PUT them in mind, all those of ours Subject to be to higher Powers: To Principalities and STATES, And duteous to the MAGISTRATES. To all good Works addicted still, To speak of no man any ill: To use no bitterness or gall, But shewing meekness unto all. For we our selves, in former times, Were much addicted to such crimes▪ Foolish we were, to envy bent, And very DISOBEDIENT. Deceiv'd, and serving divers lusts, And pleasures most pernicious: Living in malice, and debate, Hatefull and given much to hate. But when appear'd the kinder love Of God our Saviour from above, Not by the Works of Righteousness Which we have acted more or less: But saved by his grace from Wrath, And his regenerating BATH, And by the very innermost Renewing of the Holy Ghost. Which he shed on us plenteously By Jesus Christ to justify,
Through grace which He towards us bears, Of endless life to make us HEIRS. HYMN 285. Dehortation from evil. All People, &c. Tit. 1.8. THIS is a saying very true, And always to be press'd on you, That they that do in God believe Should carefully good Works atchieve. And let all ours learn to produce Good Works for charitable use: These things are good for us and them, And profitable unto MEN. But foolish Questions still avoid, And Genealogies of pride, And vain contentions of the Law, Which from the Ways of Truth withdraw. An Heretick of any SECT When twice admonisht soon reject, Knowing such are subverted quite, And sin against their inward light. And shun the Words that are prophane, And bablings which are all in vain, For they will grow to more excess Of error and ungodliness. Beware therefore lest, led aside By wicked errors, wandring wide, And leaving truth which ye profess Ye fall from your own stedfastness.
But have a care to grow a pace, To grow in knowledge and in grace, Knowledge of Jesus Christ our Lord, Whose Name we praise with one accord. HYMN 286. Pure and impure described. Tit. 1.15. Rev. 3.4. UNTO the pure are all things pure, but to the faithless and defil'd Is nothing so, ye may be sure, for mind and conscience both are soil'd. They still profess to know the Lord, but in their deeds deny him straight, Abominable, and untow'rd and t' every good Work reprobate. But some are holy and upright, and keep their garments clean and fair: And these shall walk with God in White, for worthy Saints esteem'd they are. HYMN 287. Fruitfulness blessed. Heb. 6.7. THE Earth which oft drinks in the showers, And bringeth forth sweet Herbs & Flowers, Meet for his use by whom 't was drest Is blest of God, and richly blest. But that which bringeth forth far worse Rejected is, and near a curse: Namely, that brings forth thorns and briers Whose end is burning, flames and fires.
HYMN 288. Charity rewarded. Heb. 6.10. Gal. 6.9. THE Lord is not unrighteous, your labours to forget: Which ye have shew'd towards his Name with love so strongly set. In that ye have administred unto his Saints so dear; And still ye do administer unto his servants here. And we desire each one of you with diligence to attend Unto the full assurances of Hope unto the end. And be not slack through negligence, but followers of all these That thorough Faith and Patience obtain'd the Promises. And let us all good Works pursue, not fainting any jot, For we shall reap in season due if fainting hinder not. To Father Son and Holy One be praise and glory then, As was and is and shall be his World without end Amen. HYMN 289. Benediction from the God of peace. Heb. 13.20. THE God of peace we now intreat that brought our Saviour from the dead,
That Shepherd of the Sheep so great whose pretious bloud for us was shed: And th' everlasting Covenant seal'd through that dear bloud which he did spill Make you compleat through grace reveal'd in all good Works to do his will: Working in you through Jesus Christ things pleasing for the Lord to see, To whom be glory in the high'st for evermore, Amen say we. HYMN 290. Evenness of Spirit in all condi∣tions. Jam. 1.9. LET Brethren of a low degree be joyfull to be rais'd, But rich mens joy made low to be, and say the Lord be prais'd. For as the flower of the grass so shall he fade away, When sun with burning heat shall pass unto the height of day. The grass doth fade, the flower decays, its grace and fashion goes: So shall the rich man in his ways fade as the withering Rose. HYMN 291. War with lusts. Jam. 4.1. FROM whence come Wars and Fightings keen Come they not from your lusts unseen?
The lusts that in your members are These are the causes of this War: Ye lust and have not, ye are slain, With strong desire, and can't obtain. Ye fight and war and cannot have Because ye do not wisely crave, Ye ask and have not that or this, Because ye ask so much amiss; For what ye ask ye aim it thus That ye may spend it on your lusts. O ye adulterers that while, And ye Adulteresses vile, Know ye not that the World abroad Hath friendship opposite to God? Who then doth with the World agree The enemy of God shall be. Think ye the Scripture saith not well, The Spririt that in us doth dwell Lusteth to envy and disdain, As apt to let such vices raign, But yet doth God more grace bestow These wicked lusts to overthrow. Job 40.11. Who saith, God doth the proud abase, But to the humble giveth grace: Submit your selves to God therefore, Resist the Devil evermore: And if ye do resist him so He will flee from you as his foe.
HYMN 292. Our Advocate in Heaven. 1 John 2.1. MY little ones, I write to you that ye sin not at all, But if by great infirmity some into sin do fall: We have a potent Advocate with God the Father true, Jesus the just to mediate, and intercede for you. A full PROPITIATION for all our sins is He, And not for our great sins alone that pardoned they might be, But also for them all he pleads that penitently grieve, And for the whole World intercedes whoever in him believe. HYMN 293. The Children of God and Satan described. 1 John 3.10. IN this are manifestly known the Sons of God most high, And children of the Wicked One are also known hereby. Whoever doth not righteousness is not of God begot: Nor he (whatever he profess) his Brother that loves not.
And this command from God above we have tow'rd one another, That he that bears to God true love, should also love his brother. HYMN 294. God's Children and Satan's di∣stinguished. 1 John 3.10. Mat. 19.17. BY this the Sons of God are known, And Children of the Wicked One, The man that doth not righteousness Is not of God we well may guess, Neither is he of God above That bears his brother no true love. Mat. 19.17. For this Commandement we have From God, who all the precepts gave, That he that loveth God most high Should love his brother accordingly▪ God onely good have praise therefore From first to last for evermore. HYMN 295. Want of Charity discovered and censured. 1 John 3.16. THE love of God well know we thus Because He lost his life for us, And for our brethrens sake should we Lay down our lives, if need should be. But whoso hath this Worlds great store And sees his brother very poor, Yet no compassion stirs within How dwells the love of God in him?
For thus, at judgment, Christ will say, Since ye did shew your love no way To one oth' least that here ye see Ye did it not, no, not to Me. And this uncharitable Train Shall pack away to endless pain, But then the righteous (ye must know) Into Eternal life shall go. All glory to the Holy One That sits upon the Soveraign Throne, And to the Lamb of God therefore Be praise and honour evermore. HYMN 296. St. Judes Admonition, Exhorta∣tion and Benediction. Ye Children, &c. Behold as Holy Henoch said, The Lord doth come with power array'd, and millions of his Holy Ones; To execute his judgment just On Wicked men led by their Lust to set them at his Judgment Thrones: And to convince ungodly men And all the multitudes of them of all their Wicked Actions done: Also of all their speeches hard Which Wicked men without regard have spoke against the Holy One. But ye beloved edifie Your selves in Faith and Piety: still praying in the Holy Ghost,
And keep your selves in God's true love, Looking for mercy from above to save you to the uttermost. Now unto him whose power on high Can keep you from Apostasie, and with great joy present you then, And set you faultless in his sight, To him be Majesty and might, and Honour evermore, Amen. HYMN 297. The Joys of Heaven. The mighty God, &c. Rev. 7.13. ONE of the Elders asked me, and said, Who are these persons in White Robes ar∣ray'd? And answer'd straight, to put me out of doubt, These from great tribulations did come out; And they have washt their Robes and white they made them In Christ the Lambs pure bloud, whose Robes array'd them. Wherefore they are before the Throne so bright, And serve God in the Temple day and night, And he that sitteth on the Throne on high Shall dwell among them everlastingly: And they shall never thirst nor hunger more, Nor Sun nor Heat sustain, as heretofore.
For Christ the Lamb that sitteth on the Throne With Heavenly Joys shall feed them every one, And he shall lead them to the living springs Where the pure Water flows with all good things; And he shall wipe away scorns and disgraces, And all sad tears from off his peoples faces. To him that is and was and is to come, To God Almighty and to Christ his Son, And to the seven Spirits before the Throne, The ever blest and everlasting One, To Father, Son and Holy Ghost together Be Kingdom, Glory, Power and Praise for ever. HYMN 298. The New Jerusalem. Rev. 10.5. BEhold I saw an Angel stand Upon the Sea and on the Land, to Heaven lifting up his hand, And by the Everliving swore, By him that made both Sea and Shore, that shortly time should be no more. Rev. 21.1. New Heavens and new Earths, that day, I saw, for th' old was past away, and no created Sea could stay, I saw the Holy City then The Heavenly Jerusalem a coming down from God to men.
And as a Bride she did appear Adorned for her Husband dear, and Heaven's loud voices I did hear, God's Tabernacle is with men And lo! the Lord shall dwell with them and they be his JERVSALEM. All tears shall God wipe from their eyes, And no more death nor grief nor cries shall evermore the Saints surprize. For former things are past away; And thus I heard him (that same day) that sat upon the Throne to say. HYMN 299. The Coronation of Spiritual Con∣querors, and reward of Carnal evil doers. Rev. 21.5, 6, 7, 8. BEhold I make even all things new, Write it said He, I 'monish you, for faithfull are these Words and true: And said He, it is done and past, I'm he that hastned it so fast, Alph' and Omega, First and Last. To him that is a-thirst will I, Give of the Fountain never dry, the Wat'r of Life gratuitously: He shall have all th' inheritance free That overcomes: and shall have Mee his God: and he my Son shall be.
But daunted ones devoyd of grace, And all the unbelieving Race, and all th' abominable base; The murderers and whoremongers, Inchanters, Witches, poysoners, all lyars, and Idolaters, Shall have their part in that broad lake Which coals of fire and brimstone make, this after death must they partake: Glory to God Almighty then, As was of old, is now agen, and shall be evermore, Amen. HYMN 300. The Celestial Paradise. Our Father, &c. Rev. 22.1. AND after this, he shewed me, A River pure as pure might be, A Crystal River very clear Of Waters of life which did appear, Proceeding from the throne of God, And from the Lambs most blest abode. Rev. 22.2. Amidst the Street of Salem new, And on each side the River, grew The tree of life most rich and rare, Twelve sorts of fruit, each month, it bare▪ And, lo! the leaves thereto design'd, Were for the healing of mankind.
Rev. 3.12. To him that overcomes, said he, I'll give to eat of that same tree Of life: and he shall have abode Within the Temple of my God: A pillar there shall he persever, And shall no more go forth for ever. Rev. 1.4. To God the Father and the Son, Which is, and was, and is to come: And to the seven Spirits of might, Which are before the Throne so bright, Be given all the praise therefore, From first to last for evermore. The End of the Hymns out of the New Testament.
A Brief Summary OF Christian Religion, Poetically drawn up. Shewing, 1. What things are to be Believed. 2. What things are to be Implored. 3. What things are to be Performed. A Christian must believe what Scripture saith Touching the Principles of Christian Faith. One true, Eternal God, unchangeable, Most holy, wise, just, mighty, mercifull, Invisible, immense, and infinite, And having all things always in his sight. Incomprehensible, in Persons three, The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, they be. The fountain of this Personality Begets the Son, who works by his supply, Both these produce the Spirit, which pro∣ceeds And works from both, and they, by him, their deeds. So none's afore, but, in this order rare, All coeternal, and coequal are. Predestination, and foreseen decree Now for God's glory every thing shall be.
Creation of the world in six days space, All Angels first, Man in the latter place; Perpetual providence, the helpless fall Of sinning Angels, Some ne're sinn'd at all. These were elect and praise their Maker still, And with great quickness execute his will: These wait on Saints and bear them in their arm, Those (by permission) tempt, accuse, and harm. Reserv'd in chains of darkness (which dismay) Untill the judgment of the general day. Man's innocence and happiness at first, That Covenant broke, and all therein accurst, Original corruption, actual sin, Transgression censur'd, and thus death came in: The Law so plainly written in man's heart, Obliterated for the greatest part; The Earthly Paradise quite lost and gone, And all mankind slain by the sin of one. A better Covenant wrought man's Restora∣tion; By Christ the second Person's Incarnation; Conceiv'd in Virgin's Womb by Heavenly Powers, His manhood (sin excepted) just like ours, To th' Second Person joyn'd immediately, And mediately to the rest thereby; Making both Natures but one Person still, Though having both divine and humane will, Divine and Humane, Properties distinct, Man-God, God-Man, both these together linkt.
Equal with God in his spiritual Nature; Inferiour to him as the Mediatour; Yet in both Natures (not in man's alone) Far above Angels in the highest Throne. His perfect life, and blessed Doctrines taught, Backt with a world of wonders which he wrought. His Judgment, Passion, Burial, Resurrection, Ascension, Session, (in his bright perfection) And Intercession there, at God's right hand, And having all things under his command. The universal Churches sure Election, Calling, Adoption, Tryal and Correction; Redounding to their good, Justification, Sanctification, and sure Preservation. The seal of Baptism, and the sacred Cup, With many an Ordinance to build them up, All to be guided by the Scriptures light, Which Saints did pen, and God's own Spirit indite. The common call, and gifts of many a one, Never built up unto perfection. Immortal souls of Saints celestial bliss, Imprisonment of theirs that liv'd amiss: The Resurrection and the Judgment-day Where Christ in chief, and all the Saints bear sway. The world that was accurs'd (for man misled) Purged by fire, and reestablished. Then Reprobates must pack to endless pai, And Saints in endless Glory shall remain.
2. What things are to be implored. The Preface of the Lord's Prayer. [Our Father which art in Heaven, &c.] First it sets forth God's glorious attributes Of might and mercy, and their blessed fruits: Assuring he can help that dwells above, And will do, as a Father, out of love. That we (through Christ who doth this grace display) With reverence and confidence may pray▪ The First Petition. [Hallowed be thy Name, &c.] That worthy instruments may still be found In Church and State, and God by them re∣nown'd, Our hearts even fill'd with Heaven, our tongues apply'd To edifie, and God be glorify'd; And that our lives before the World may shine With glittering beams of Graces most Divine.
The Second Petition. [Thy Kingdom come, &c.] That Saints be kept and Satan's Kingdom quell'd, False Doctrines, Errours, Anti-Christs expell'd, The Gospel spread and prosper'd every where, And Christians labouring (each man in his sphere) For Jew and Gentiles call, and confirmation, Our happy end, and final full Salvation. The Third Petition. [Thy will be done in Earth at it is in Hea∣ven, &c.] That we with wisedom may be all inspir'd To know God's will in what he hath requir'd; Our backward natures that are dark and dull, Inflam'd with zeal to do it to the full: And what he pleaseth of himself to do, We may contentedly submit unto. The Fourth Petition. [Giev us this day, &c.] That we, depending on God's providence, By lawfull means and daily diligence, Without ambition, avarice or strife, May have all needfull comforts of this life For us and ours: not envying great or small, But helping those that in affliction fall.
The Fifth Petition. [Forgive us our trespasses, &c.] That we confessing our vile sinfull Nature, Acts and neglects against our great Creatour, Not having ought to pay, or ought that's good, But of his gift, may flee to Christ his bloud For Grace, and Peace, and Pardon while we live, With peacefull minds, addicted to forgive. The sixth Petition. [And lead us not into temptation, &c.] That we be never try'd above our strength By weal or wo, but may prevail at length, That either the temptation time be miss'd, Or we with Graces armed to resist. That, ever watchfull, we may never fall, But grow in Grace, and be preserv'd in all. The Conclusion. [For thine is the Kingdom, &c.] That we may ever praise our heavenly King, From whom all blessings, friends and favours spring; That all that hear may joyn with free consent, And full assurance of accomplishment: Waiting for answers as not beg'd in vain, And so returning to our prayers again.
3. What things are to be performed. Which are contained in the Decalogue or Ten Commandments. The First Commandment. MAKE God the sovereign object of thy fear, Faith, love and joy; and service most sincere. The Second Commandment. Act always in Religion every thing By Scripture warrant from the heavenly King. The Third Commandment. Thou maist be short in duty never slight Nor use a word of God that's vain or light. The Fourth Commandment. On Sabbaths always put thy soul to nurse, Shun worldly thoughts, occasions and discourse. The Fifth Commandment. Be sure to carry well in thy relation, For none are good without that commenda∣tion. The sixth Commandment. Live peaceably with all, shun wrath and strife, By all good means preserve and succour life.
The Seventh Commandment. Keep chastity, all wantonness eschew In heart, in habit, touch, or talk, or view. The Eighth Commandment. Promote your neighbours and your own e∣state, Sloth, riot, couz'nage and injustice hate. The ninth Commandment. Maintain thy Neighbours and thy own good Name, Lies, flatteries, slanders, scoffs and brags dis∣claim. The Tenth Commandment. Grudge not thy neighbours good, quell fond desire, And let thy heart to true content aspire.
A TABLE to the Three First Centuries, containing the Chapter-Hymns. A. ABominations seven, Page 43 Acclamations of Praise, or Te Deum Lauda∣mus, exemplified with proofs of Holy Scri∣pture, 2 Acclamations for Babylon's Fall, 97 Access to the Throne of Grace at our awa∣king, 1 Admonition of St. Jude, 309 Adventus Christi, or the Accomplishment of the First Promise, 12 Advocate in Heaven, 307 Adulterers Peril and Penance, 42 Affections moderate 294 Aegypt's ten Plagues, for the fifth of Novem∣ber, 18 Agreement necessary 286 Allelujah for Babylon's Fall, 98 Almighty Arm invoked, 232 Almsdeeds, 99 Amity and Vnity, 296 Angels their blessed attendance, 35 Anger corrected, 39 Applause of Christian Conquests, 30 Aptness to backsliding holpen by Grace 267 Arraignment of Ambition, Covetousness and Cruelty, 16 Arising of the Sun of Righteousness, 284
Ascension of Christ, and leading Captivity Captive, 81 Astonishing Judgments, or Aegypt's ten Plagues, 18 Attonement sought upon humiliation, or a wofull bewailing of our Corruptions and Ca∣lamities, 27 Attendance of blessed Angels, 35 B. BAbylon's Fall, 97 Backsliders called back, 242 Back-slidings censured, or Israel's Revolt, 266 Backslidings holpen by Grace, 267 Backslidings healed, 269 Benediction from the God of Peace, 82 & 304 Best fear, 292 Best rejoycing, 293 Benediction of St. Jude, 309 Bewailing our corruptions and calamities, 27 Blessed Angels attendance, 35 Blessed death, 100 Blessings of obedience, Ibid. Blessings on the Mount, or blessed Qualifica∣tions, 103 Blessedness of pardon, 36 Boasting corrected, 37 Bodies changed, 88 Brotherhood, 281 C. CAbinet, 287 Call out of Babylon, 104 Call of Grace 298 Calves of our Lips 267 Captives Prayers effectual 252 Carnal and evil doers rewarded, 312 Change, 224
Charity and Piety extended, 37 Charity charged upon the rich, 297 Charity what it is truly, 94 Charities qualifications, 105 Charity rewarded, 304 Chastisement, 105 Celestial Paradise, 313 Child of light encouraged and instructed, 231 Children of light exhorted, 83 Children of God and Satan described, 307 Christ's Birth, Kingdom and Conquests 21, 22 Christ's commission, 108 Christ's Benefits, 106 Christs Passion and Compassion, 167 Christian Conquests applauded, 30 Circumcision of the Heart, 38 Comforting mourners, 232 Commands for comfort, 229 Commination of Esay 52 Communion of Saints, 109 Compassion and Passion of Christ 167 Confession of Christ, 110 Confession of sin, 38, 110 Confessions and Supplications, 56 Confidence in God, 111 Confidence applauded and blessed, 84 Confidence accursed, 83 Conquest, 112 Conscience, Ibid. Constant seeking of God by the meek, 39 Constancy of God's Covenant, 253 Contentation, 113 Conversation and life conscientious, 69 Correction of anger, 39 Correction of boasting, 37 Coronation of Spiritual Conquerours, 312
Corruptions and Calamities bewailed, 27 Covenant of God constant, 253 Covenant of Grace, 114 Covenant of God's Grace entred to Abra∣ham, 213 Covenant of God for us with the Creature, 55 Counsel of Christ, 117 Counsel of Wisedom excellent, 54 The Creed, 118 Cross and Crown, 298 Cup and Calamity of Drunkards, 47 D. DAngers of heinous sins, and dehortation from them, 40 David's Exaltation in type of Christ, 64 David's Elegy for Saul and Jonathan, 29 Day of Grace proclaimed, 84 Death blessed, 100 Debate in measure, 228 Deborah's Song, 119 Deceitfulness of the heart, 45 Descending of the Spirit, 47 Dehortation from heinous sin, 40 Dehortation from evil, 302 Deliverance from shipwrack, or the Prophet Jonah, 45 Diligence in duties, 121 Dissolution general longed for, 70 Dragons downfall, 122 Drawn Net, 291 Drunkards Cup and Calamities, 47 Due fear of God and the King, 48 Duty to Magistrates, Ibid. E. EAsy yoke, 123 Effectual Prayers of Captives, 252
Errours and Heresies to be avoided, 124 Esay's Commination, 52 Esay's Song of thanksgiving, 125 Esay's triumphant Song, 126 Evenness of spirit in all conditions, 305 Evil times to be amended, 300 Evil dehorted, 302 Evil doers rewarded, 312 Exalting a Nation, 53 Exaltation of Humility, Ibid▪ Example of Saints, 128 Exact doom, 258 Excellent Counsel of Wisedom, 54 Exhortation to Repentance, 256 —To good works, 301 — Of St. Jude, 309 Expostulation with Job, 225 Extension of Charity and Piety, 37 Ezechiel's infant, 128 Ezechiel's evil hearers, 262 F. FAith praised, 129 Faith proved, 130 Faithfull Saying, 13 Fruitfulness blessed, 303 Fallow Ground to be dressed, 55 False fears, and false Deities derided, 243 Fan of Judgment, 286 Fast proclaimed, 270 Fear of God and the King, 48 Fleshly lusts restrained, 80 Fire and Grasshoppers, 276 Flying Role for Swearers and Cursers▪, 44 Fool in grain, 291 Funerals to press Patience, 24 Funerals to mitigate mourning, 23
Funerals touching the pretiousness of the Saints death, 24 Funerals touching the Resurrection, Ibid. Funerals touching the Saints safety in death, 25 Funerals touching the Saints sweet rest, 25 G. GEneral dissolution longed for, 70 Giver of Grace, 77 Glorious Throne, 249 God's Children described, 307 God's Covenant for us with the Creature, 55 God's Children distinguished, 308 God's Covenant constant, 253 God's Oath of Grace, 260 God's glittering Sword, 131 God's jealousie for Jerusalem, 56 Gods jewels, 282 God's Expostulation with Job, 225 God's mercy, the golden chain thereof, or loves link 71 Good works exhorted, 301 Government, 132 Government of the Tongue, 135 Graces call, 298 Grasshoppers and fire, 276 Great condemnation, 85 Gifts ministerial conferred, 73 H. HAinous sins dangerous, 40 Healing of Backsliders, 209 Heart Circumcised, 38 Heart deceitfulness, 45 Heavy Judgments, 274 High and Lofty one, 136 Humility exalted, 53
Humiliation, 137 Humble Supplications and Confessions, 56 Humble Supplications in time of drought, 57 Humble Supplications in time of sickness, 58 Humble Supplications in time of tempest, Ibid. Humble Supplications in time of transgression and revolt, 59 Humble Supplications in time of war, 60 Humble Supplications in hard times, 248 I. JAcob's sadness cheered, 230 Idols, their vanity, 250 Idolatry forbidden, 138 Idolatry exploded, 241 Jerusalem, God's Jealousie for it, 56 Jew and Gentiles call, 138 Jew and Gentiles fulness held out in many Promises, 140 Immortality and Mortality, 162 Imperfection, 143 Impure and Pure described, 303 Invective against Hypocrisie, 31 Job Expostulated by God, 225 Job's Answer, 226 Jonah's Deliverance from Shipwrack, 45 Joys of Heaven, 145, 310 Joyfull Death, or the Song of holy Simeon, 13 Israel restored, 253 Israel's revolt, 266 St. Jude's Admonition, Exhortation, and Benediction, 309 Judgment waited for, 60 Judgment upon the proud and scornfull, 61 Judgment day forewarned, 146 Judgments heavy, 274 Justification, 147
K. KInd love of God in Christ, 62 King David's Exaltation and Type of Christ, 64 —His Elegie of Saul and Jonathan, 29 —His Lamentation for Saul and Jona∣than, Ibid. L. LArge Mercies Corporal, 65 Large Mercies Spiritual, 66 Large Mercies Temporal, 67 Large Mercies Eternal, 68 Laud and Praise for God's Judgments, or the Lambs Song, 148 Leaven, 289 Lamentation of David for Saul and Jona∣than, 29 Lesson of true Charity, 94 Life and Conversation Conscientious, 69 Light and Darkness discovered, Ibid. Lively Hope, 85 Longing after Christ, 148 Looking and longing for the general Dissolu∣tion, 70 Lord our Righteousness, 251 Love of God, 149 Love of God in Christ, 62 Loves Link, or the Golden Chain of God's Mercies, 71 Love in Deed and in Truth, Ibid. Love of the World forbidden, 151 Love Engraven, 231 M. MAN's mortality minded, 227 Marriage, 152 Mediator, 153
Meek constantly seeking of God, 39 Memorial of God's Mercies, 72 Mercies recorded and requested, 238 Mercy and Terrour mixt 155 Mercies,—154— The Second Part, 210 Mercies Corporal, 65 Mercies Spiritual, 66 Mercies Temporal, 67 Mercies Eternal, 68 Merit disclaimed, 157 Michael our Prince, 265 Ministerial Gifts conferred, 73 Miracles at Pentecost, 15 Mitigation of mourning at Funerals, 23 Mixture of Mercy and Terrour, 155 Moral Precepts prest with Arguments, 157 Moderate Affections, 294 More Spiritual Precepts, 161 Morning Exercise, 14 Mortality and Immortality, 162 Mortification, 163 Moses Song, 215 Mourners comforted, 232 Murmuring Restrained, 254 Mustard-Seed, 289 N. NOnsufficient Sacrifices, 277 New Jerusalem, 311 O. OATH of Grace, 260 Obedience blessed, 100 Old good way, 242 Oppressors, wo to them, 251 Oppression and Rapine dissuaded, 165 Our Advocate in Heaven, 307 Our Saviour's call to the Nations, 74
Our Saviour's Rapture, 288 Our Saviour's coming in the Clouds, 297 Our thorough Sanctification prayed for, 74 P. PAcification by Repentance, 257 Pardon, the blessedness thereof, 36 Partridge, 250 Passion and Compassion of Christ, 167 Passover slain for us, and preparation there∣unto, 75 Patience, 169 Patience to press at Funerals, 24 Peace of God and Prayer, 170 Peace with all men, 293 Peril and Pennance of Adulterers, 42 Perpetuity and Power of Christ's Resurrec∣tion, 75 Perseverance, 170 Portion of the little flock, 171 Power and prevalency of Christ's Resurrecti∣on, 75 Power of prayer, 172 Praise to the Creator, 77 Praise to the giver of grace, Ibid. Praise to the Prince of Potentates, Ibid. Praise to the redeemer, 78 Praise to the Trinity, Ibid. Prayers of Captives Effectual, 252 Preachers lips, 234 Pretiousness of the Saints death, 24 Priesthood, 279 Prince Michael, 265 Promise of sending the Holy Ghost, and of the Miracles of Pentecost, 15 Prophet Jonah's deliverance, 45 Pure and impure described, 303
Q. Qualifications of blessedness, 103 Qualifications of Charity, 105 R. RApine and oppression dissuaded, 165 Rapture of our Saviour, 288 Reasonable Service, 172 Recovery of the Church, 173 Redeeming of Time, 174 Redemption out of the Songs of the Blessed Virgin, of Zacharias and old Simeon, Ibid. Reformation, 177 Regeneration, 179 Remission of sin, 79 Renewing of Joy, Ibid. Repentance, 179 Repentance pacifies, 257 Repentance urged, 259 Reproach for Christ, and imitation of him, 182 Restoration of Israel, 253 Restraining of Fleshly lusts, 80 Resurrection, 24, 183 Revenge forbidden, 184 Reward of Charity, 304 Rich Charged with Charity, 297 Right reasoning of Temptation, 80 Robes of righteousness, 235 Role for swearers and cursers, 44 S. SAbbath, 184, 260 Sacrament of the Supper, 185 Sacrifices nonsufficient, 277 Saints Communion, 109 Saints, their safety in death, 25 Saints, the pretiousness of their deaths, 24
Saints, their sweet rest, 25 Salvation shining, 189 Sanctification, 190 Sanctification prayed for, 74 Satans Children described and distinguished, 307 Saviour's Rapture, 288 Saviour's Call, 74 Saviour's call to the Nations, 74 Saviour's coming in the Clouds, 297 Saul and Jonathan lamented by David, 29 Scriptures, 192 Seven Abominations, 43 Secrets revealed, 193 Secrets unrevealed, 194 Seeking God betimes, 225 Sin confessed, 38 Sins of Sodom recorded, 256 Sluggard rouzed, 86 Sobriety, Prayer and Charity enjoyned, 81 Solemn Ascension of Christ, and leading Cap∣tivity Captive, 81 Son of righteousness arising, 284 Song of Holy Simeon, 13 Song of Deborah, 119 Song to celebrate the Restoration of the Church, 17 Song of Zacharie, 175 Song of Simeon and Zacharie, 176 Song of Hannah, 222 Song of Moses the man of God, commanded to be learned by heart of all Israel, 215 Souls under the Altar, 195 Sowing to the Spirit, 295 Spirit of God dwelling in us, 82 Spiritual precepts, 161
Spiritual Shepherds, 196 Strait Gate 197 Subsistance of God's Kingdom, 294 Supplications and Confessions, 56 Supplications in time of Drought, 57 Supplications in hard times, 248 Suffering and self-denyal, 197 Swearers and Cursers their flying Role, 44 T. TE Deum Laudamus, 2, 4, 7, 9 Testimony prophetical, of the Birth and Kingdom of Christ, 21, 22 Temptations succoured, 199 Terror and mercy mixt, 155 Test to the Covenant, 214 Thanksgiving at or after the Sacrament, 26 Thorough sanctification, Prayed for, 74 Three and four Transgressions, 271 Time of Drought, Sickness, Tempest, Trans∣gression, Revolt and War, Vide Humble Supplications. Treading the Wine-press alone, 237 Treasures of deceit challenged, 278 Tree good, 199 Trinity, 200 True Fast, 87 V. Vanity of Idols, 250 Vessels of honour, 299 Vineyard of Israel, 201 Vineyard of Red-Wine, 228 Vile-bodies changed 88 Vnity and Amity, 296 Vnity and love of Brethren, 202 Vniting the Nation, 264 Vocation, 204
W. WANT of Charity discovered and cen∣sured, 308 Warning of Judgment by beginning at God's House, 89 Warning of the general Dissolution, Ibid. War with lusts, 305 Well approved hearers, 90 Whirlwind of God's wrath, Ibid. Whole Armour, 206 Will for the Deed, 207 Winking at the times of ignorance, 91 Wisedoms Exhortation, 208 Wise builder, 287 Wise Merchant, 290 Woe to the oppressors, 251 Wofull bewailing our Corruptions and Cala∣mities, 27 Wofull Lamentation for Saul and Jonathan, 29 Word preached, 209 World and the Church, 211 Worldly cares forbidden, 95 Work of Mercy magnified, 210 Work of grace, Ibid. Works, Words and Thoughts for the Lord's Day, 92 Wrongs to be remitted, or a Lesson of true Charity, 94 Z. ZAchary's Song, 175 Zealous Ejaculations at Evening or Bedtime, 212 Zealous applause of Christian Conquests, 30 Zealous invective against Hypocrisie, 31 FINIS.
The Three Last Centuries OF SELECT HYMNS Collected out of the Psalms of DAVID By William Barton, A. M. late Mini¦ster of St. Martins in Leicester. Col. 3.16. Teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms and Hymns and Spiritual Songs, &c. St. Chrysost. Vol. 3. Hom. 3. The Holy Ghost descends not to our throngs, At Sacraments alone, but at our Songs. LONDON, Printed by J. Heptinstall, for William Cooper, at the Pelican in Little Britain. 1688.
To the Right Worshipfull the Mayor, Aldermen and Sheriffs of the Ho∣nourable City of Coventry: And To the Right Worshipfull Sir Ri∣chard Hopkins, Knight, Steward of the said City: And To the Right Worshipfull the Mayor, Recorder and Aldermen of the Corporation of Leice∣ster: And To the Right Worshipfull the Mayor, Recorder and Aldermen of the Corporation of Nor∣thampton. Right Worshipfull, MY Birth, Breeding and A∣bode in your respective Corporations, together with your kind encouragements and costs bestowed upon these long La∣bours of Psalm and Hymn-Tran∣slations, (after my own excessive Charge and Detriments) have made me excusably ambitious to Dedicate unto your Worships
these Three ensuing Centuries, ac∣commodated with some variety of Tunes and Metres, hoping to leave these as a living and lasting Monument of my respect and gra∣titude, and of your Christian Love and Liberality. Having also finish∣ed the Psalm-Book it self with like variety of Metres to most of the shorter Psalms and to some of the longer sort. The aim and end of all is to revive, increase, and promote Godliness, which is profitable to all things; and hath the promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come, 1 Tim. 4.8. In hopes therefore of some good issue of these Labours, and in humble apprecation of the flou∣rishing Felicity of the Corporati∣ons to which I stand ingaged, I rest, and subscribe my self Your Worships much obliged, and devoted humble Servant, William Barton.
THE EPISTLE TO THE READER. Courteous Reader, I Find no clear distinction in Scripture between Psalms and Hymns and Spiritual Songs. Psalm 18 and 45. and Fifteen more beginning at the 120. are called Songs. Psalm 92. is called A Psalm or Song for the Sabbath day. Psalm 145. is intituled  David's Hymn or Psalm of Praise: And from this saith learned Schindler the Title of the whole Book seems to be taken; for it is intituled  The Book of Hymns or Praises; Quod major Psalmorum pars Dei Laudes contineat; Because the grea∣ter part of the Psalms consist of the Prai∣ses of God: And of such Psalms the ma∣jor
part of these Centuries is Composed. As for the parts and parcels of Psalms conducing to this Composure, I find an Example in the Holy Scriptur, 1 Chr. 16. where from the 7th ver. to the 36th are sundry parts and parcels of the 105.96.106. and 136 Psalms, collected into a Psalm or Hymn; upon which conside∣ration, I take more liberty to pick and chuse places, and put in parallel Scrip∣ture as it serves the purpose. Now, for the great variety and plen∣ty of them in these Centuries set out, I have great variety of reasons to plead. 1. Because I know nothing so much excepted against in my Edition of the Psalms 1654. as that the variety of Metres was very much omitted; neither did the Impression go off in five times the space that the former did. 2. Because many of these Psalms are done more elaborately than those of the former Edition, till they were corrected and compleated, and printed Anno 1682. with Aliters to my mind as they are now finished. 3. Because I may gratifie the Reader with examples to accommodate the choi∣cer old Tunes, whereof I have omitted none that I know; and have put in more
frequent examples for these two delicate and expeditious Tunes of the Old 50th, and the 124th. As in the 320th, and 322d, and in the 338th, and 341st, Hymns of the Fourth Century you may see Examples. 4. Because I might take liberty in some Hymns to Paraphrase for the Ex∣position of some hard passages; for in∣stance, it is said, Psalm 139.21. Do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate thee, &c? which I think to be clearly interpreted in Hymn 565. and more largely varied Psalm 139. of the last Edition thereof, printed Anno 1682. The latter end of the 51st Psalm I found very dark; for when he had said, Thou desirest not sacrifice, &c. Thou delightest not in burnt offering, &c. He saith presently, Then shalt thou be pleased—with burnt offering, and whole burnt offering—and Bullocks, which I think to be clearly interpreted in the 4.7. and 8. Metres of the 51st Psalm. A passage in the 72. Psalm, vers. 17. I counted choicely done, and keeping the Allusion which the Hebrew seems to hint, , Nomen ejus filiabitur, saith Montanus, His name shall be continued — among the posterities
saith the Old Translation: Yet I thought it needfull to put it plainer by an Aliter, as you may find it. The 8th. Psalm was hardest of all to me to be explained, carrying a construction of Christ our Saviour, as the Apostle saith, Heb. 2.6. Which Psalm shew∣ing the glory of man in his Creation, in∣timates mans re-investing in his Domi∣nion by Redemption: I have annexed the Intepretation in a different Character. 5. Because these Centuries were for∣merly put forth against my will, by an imperfect Copy, and in great disorder, An. 1668. I have put them into a handsome method, passing by no Psalm of common use, but have in whole or in part inserted it, and have put the whole Psalms together in double Metres, and in some more. 6. Finally, I have endeavoured to doe the Work so well, as that whosoever approves of the Psalm Book (as it is now compleated Anno 1682.) may not think these Hymns unnecessary or un∣worthy (for Printing) to precede or follow them. I might have annexed Scripture-Proofs to that famous Hymn Te De∣um, (harping upon Scripture all along) but having done that already in the
Chapter-Hymns, (wherein those that are well acquainted may readily find the most noted Sentences of Holy Scrip∣ture, as by a Concordance) I let these go for a demonstration, how much the old Version needs amendment, and how near the Verse-Translation may come unto the Prose. I aimed principally in all this pains to promote Godliness: I much affected that Noble Sentence put out by the fa∣mous Dr. Cudworth, . Be Godly, O my Son, for Godly men Do Christianize it with the best of them. And sure there is nothing more effec∣tual to breed Godliness than Holy Scrip∣ture, nothing will preach Scripture to us, or print Scripture in our minds more than Scripture-Hymns. Wherefore I conclude all with that precept of the Apostle, Col. 3.16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisedom, teaching and admo∣nishing one another in Psalms and Hymns and Spiritual Songs, singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord. Your Servant for Jesus sake, William Barton.
Of the TUNES. THE Tunes here set down are none of the common ones, except that of the 100 Psalm. Note, That the Tune of the 51 Psalm, O Lord consider, &c. or any Tune of eight Sil∣lables in each Line, when four Lines make up the Verse, may be sung in the Tune of the 100 Psalm. Note, that the Tune call'd, Where Righ∣teousness. &c. may be changed into the usual Tune of the 67 Psalm, if you put in two Sil∣lables more in the third Line of every four. Note, That the New Tune (set in Mr. San∣dy's Psalm-Book by Mr. Henry Lawes) for the 531 Hymn, pag. 646. may be changed into the Tune of the 113 Psalm, Ye Children, &c. if you put in two Sillables more into every third Line. Note, That the old 127 Psalm, mentioned in the 564. Hymn, pag. 678. hath no pro∣per Tune of its own, but in the old Psalm-Book is referred to the Tune of the 112 Psalm, which is the proper Tune of the Lord's Prayer, as it is in the old Psalm-Book. Note, That the 111 Psalm, as it is in the old Psalm-Book, may be sung in the Tune of the old 120 Psalm, which is a shorter Tune; And all these Tunes, (except the New Tunes) are taken out of the old Psalm-Book rectified by Mr. Ravenscroft.
The TUNES of several HYMNS in this Book. PSALM 50. The mighty God, &c. PSALM 51. O Lord consider, &c.
PSALM 100. All People, &c. PSALM 111. With heart I do accord, &c.
PSALM 112. The man is blest, &c. PSALM 113. Ye Children, &c.
Ps. 120. In trouble and in thrall, &c. Psalm 121. I lift mine Eyes, &c.
Psalm 122. I did in heart rejoyce, &c.
Psalm 124. Now Israel may say, &c. Psalm 125. Such as in God do put, &c.
Psalm 126. When that the Lord, &c. Psalm 130. Lord, to thee, &c.
Psalm 148. Give laud, &c. Complaint of a Sinner.
The New Tune for the 524. Hymn of the Sixth Century, Page 617. The New Tune of the 532. Hymn of the Sixth Century, Page 646.
Here follows an Example of turning the Tune, Where Righteousness doth say, into the plain Tune of the 67 Psalm. 6th Century, Hymn 526. p. 622. (2. M.) Have mercy, &c. TEach me, O Lord, the way whereto thy Statutes tend, So shall I never go astray, but keep it to the end. Give me to understand, and then shall I endeavour To act (O Lord) by thy command with my whole heart for ever. In paths of thy commands Lord make me go aright, For ver'ly my desire so stands, and therein I delight. Incline my heart, O Lord, that I may not digress: Incline it to thy holy word, and not to covetousness. Lord turn away mine eyes, turn them, O Lord, I pray, From viewing worldly vanities: and quicken me in thy way. Establish thou thy word unto thy servant dear: Who wholly is devoted, Lord, unto thy faithfull fear.
The obloquy I fear, Lord turn away from me: For I confess to thee how clear, How good thy Judgments be. Behold how my desires do for thy precepts press: O stir these heats, these holy fires to shew thy righteousness.
Here follows a perfect Praxis for the Tune of the old 111 Psalm, because those Examples of p. 508. (2. M.) and of the 120 Psalm want Hypermeters to each second Verse, and may well be sung in the proper Tune of the 120 Ps. but not in the Tune of the old 111 Psalm. Pardon of sin implored, the suit pursued, the mercy assured. Out of the 130 Psalm. OUT of the dreadfull deeps, Where fear and horror keeps, I cry'd to thee, O Lord; Lord, hear my voice said I, ATTEND unto my CRY, And to my suits accord. For shouldst thou mark, O God, What by-paths we have trod, By sinfull Conversation: Who then, O Lord, shall stand, Or scape thy heavy hand, Of righteous Condemnation. But, Lord, there is with thee, Forgiveness full and free, That thou may'st be ador'd: I wait upon the Lord, My soul waits on his Word,
And there my hopes are stor'd. My soul waits patiently Upon the Lord most high. And for his words performing: More eagerly than they That watch for break of day, And dawning of the morning. Yea, Lord, my soul and mind Attendeth still to find Free favour in thy sight: Whereafter I enquire With earnester desire Than Watch-man for the light. Let Israel hope therefore In God for evermore, For with the Lord is mercy: And plenteous grace with him To pardon all our sin, Which made the Controversie. A Perfect Praxis for the Tune of the old 126 Psalm. Out of the 117 Psalm. PRaise ye the Lord O all ye Nations far and near, His praise record, O all ye people every where. Because we find How very great and marvellous His mercies kind, And his compassion is to us.
His Faithfull Word Endures for evermore: Praise ye the Lord, Praise ye the Lord therefore.
The Fourth Century. Beginning the PSALM-HYMNS. HYMN 301. A blessed Man described. Psalm 1. THE man is blest whose piety forbids to turn aside, In Counsel, or Society, with men unsanctify'd: That from those evil paths doth keep, wherein the wicked are. And joyns not in their fellowship that sit in scorners chair. But in the Law of God the Lord, he placeth his delight, And meditateth on his Word devoutly, Day and Night▪ He shall be like a planted tree that near a River springs, Which always, as his seasons be, abundant fruit forth brings.
Whose leaf likewise shall never fade, but flourish still and stand: And prosperous shall his works be made, what'ere he takes in hand. But as for men of wicked minds, far otherwise are they: And like the chaff which boisterous winds drive easily away. Therefore th' ungodly never may in Judgment rise up clear; Nor sinners in the Judgment Day among the Saints appear. For God doth favourably know the Godly Persons Path: Whereas the way that sinners go shall perish in his Wrath. HYMN 302. (2. METRE.) Argument. Good men and bad this first Hymn compre∣hends, Discovering fully both their ways and ends. Have mercy, &c. Psalm 1. A Blessed man is he that is not led aside, By counsels of impiety to go where sinners guide. Nor sits in scorners seat, but in Gods Law delights, And in this Law doth meditate continual Days and Nights.
He shall be like a plant set by the Rivers side, Whose boughs no timely fruit do want, whose leaf shall fresh abide. And well shall he succeed in all good works design'd, Not so th' ungodly; they shall speed as chaff dispers'd with wind. Therefore ungodly men, shall not stand justify'd; Nor sinners with the righteous then, when Judgment must be try'd: For ways of men upright the Lord doth kindly know; But sinners paths shall perish quite, with everlasting woe. HYMN 303. A difference betwixt good and bad. 3. METRE. Psal. 1. THE Man is blest that shuns the snare of wicked mens advice: Whom sinners paths, and scorners chair, by no means can entice. But his Delight both Day and Night is in Gods Holy Law; Whereon he waits and meditates with constant care and awe.
Like planted tree by water-springs shall such a man be made▪ A tree that timely fruit forth brings, whose leaf shall never fade. And all he doth is blest of God, the wicked are not so: But are like chaff dispers'd abroad when stormy wind doth blow. Therefore th' ungodly shall not stand in judgment clear and quit: Nor with the just at Christ's right hand shall any sinner sit. For men upright are God's delight, their ways to him are known, But sinners ways shall soon decay, and quite be overthrown. HYMN 304. (4. METRE.) Argument. The good and bad are here compar'd, Both in their Works and their reward. The mighty God, &c. Psalm. 1. THE man is blest that walketh not astray by evil counsels of ungodly men, Nor doth comply with sinners in their way, nor cometh high the scorners seat with them:
But with delight on God's good word he wait∣eth, And Day and Night thereon he meditateth. He shall be like a tree by th' River side, whose fruit is ripe and in his season, sure; Whose leaf in youth and greeness shall abide, and all he doth shall prosperously endure: Ungodly men may look for no such matter, But are like chaff which stormy wind do's scatter. Therefore ungodly men shall never stand, at Judgment Day (as righteous men may trust) Nor any one of all the wicked band come in the Congregation of the just: For just mens ways the Lord doth know and cherish, But Days will come when sinners paths shall perish. HYMN 305. (Psal 2.) Argument. Christs Kingdom how oppos'd and hated And how the wrong is vindicated. All People, &c. WHY do the Heathen rage and fret and people plot a thing so vain? They rise and are in councill set Rulers and Kings, on Earth that reign.
Against the Lord they proudly speak, against his Christ, advising thus; Their bonds asunder let us break, and cast away their cords from us. But he that doth in Heaven dwell, their wicked doings shall deride: And laugh to scorn his foes that swell with such presumptuous haughty pride. Then in his wrath the most supream shall all his enemies controll: And in Displeasure most extreme, shall he torment their guilty soul. HYMN 306. (2. PART.) Argument. Christ's Kingdom how exalted high, By type of David's sovereignty. UPON my Sions sacred Hill yet have I set my sovereign King; Thou hast decreed and wilt fulfill, and I will now declare the thing. The Lord hath spoken thus to me thou art my true and onely son; This Day have I begotten thee, ask of me and it shall be done.
All Heathen Kingdoms I will make to be th' inheritance of thy birth: And thou shalt in possession take the utmost parts of all the Earth. Thine Iron Rod, of sovereign might, shall dash thy foes and make them break: Yea dash them into pieces quite, As Potters Vessels that are weak. HYMN 307. (3. PART.) Argument. Kings here are mov'd, the Psalmist saith, Christ's Kingdom to receive by Faith. NOW therefore O ye Kings take care that ye may truly understand; Be well instructed ye that are the Princely Judges of the Land. See that the Lord have service done with reverence and due respect: Rejoyce with trembling, kiss the Son; lest in his wrath ye should be checkt. So should ye perish from the way, for lo! if his least anger flame, Blessed, O blessed then are they that trust upon his Holy Name.
HYMN 308. (Psalm 3.) Argument. The Enemies of Saints encrease, But God do's still procure their peace. Ye Children, &c. LORD how the number multiplies of my incensed enemies, that daily do against me rise: Many, O Lord, many are they that of my soul presume to say God cannot help him any way. But Lord thou art a shield for me my head is still upheld by thee in Honour and in Dignity. For when with voice so loud and shrill I call'd on God, he pleased still to hear me, from his holy hill. 2. I lay'd me down and sweetly slept, I wak'd and was in safety kept, for God's good hand did me protect. And tho' ten thousand of my foes should me now round about enclose, I would not be afraid of those. Arise, O Lord, and plead my cause, for thou hast smote them on the Jaws, and broke the teeth of all my foes. Thus are th' ungodly overthrown, salvation is of God alone; and thou, O Lord, dost bless thine own.
HYMN 309. Felicity of God's protection. Psalm 4. PITY me, Lord, for well I know I am belov'd of thee, I find it so because my foe triumphs not over me. I am upholden by thy grace in my integrity, Thou giv'st me place before thy face, and that perpetually. The Lord the God of Israel's Name for ever day by day, And all his fame let us proclaim. Amen, Amen, I say. HYMN 310. Affiance and repose in God. Psal. 4.6. THE greater sort crave worldly wealth, and riches they embrace: But Lord grant us thy saving health, and shining of thy face. Thou hast put gladness in my heart by those thy beams Divine: Much more than they that had their part of plenteous corn and wine. In peace therefore will I lye down, and take my sleep secure: For thou, O Lord, and thou alone dost make my dwelling sure.
HYMN 311. (Psal. 6.) Argument. He supplicates the Lord to spare Those Chastisements he cannot bear. Have mercy, &c. IN thy incensed wrath, O Lord, rebuke me not: Nor on me lay thy chastning hand in thy displeasure hot. Have mercy on me, Lord, for I am wonderous weak: Heal me, O Lord, because thou knowst my bones with anguish break. My soul is sorely vex'd; how long stay wilt thou make? Return Lord, free my soul, and save, me, for thy mercies sake. For none can, after death, of thee remembrance have. Who can give thanks to thee, O Lord, when lying in the grave? I'm weary with my groans, all night I make my bed To swim in sorrows; and my couch with tears I watered.
By reason of my grief mine eye consumed is: It waxeth old, and that because, of all mine enemies. Depart therefore from me ye wicked workers all: For lo, the Lord has heard my voice when I did, weeping, call. My supplication the Lord hath kindly heard, The Lord will gratiously receive, my Pray'r, to him preferr'd. Let all mine enemies be sham'd and vexed sore; Let them return, and suddenly be shamed evermore: HYMN 312. Arraignment of Persecutors. Psal. 7.11. GOD is a righteous Judge (be sure,) and one that will repay; And with the lewd and wicked doer, God's angry every day. Unless he do his sins forgo, and speedily repent: He whets his sword, and strings his bow, and hath it ready bent.
His deadly Darts he doth ordain to smite hm unawares: And for the persecutors pain sharp arrows he prepares. Let Israel's God the Lord most high be ever prais'd therefore: From first to last eternally, Amen for evermore. HYMN 313. Arraignment of Persecutors and their ruin. Psal. 7.14. BEhold, how with iniquity the wicked is in pain: Conceiving mischief craftily, and labours all in vain. He made a pit, and digged it, no pains at all he spar'd: And now is fall'n into the pit▪ which he himself prepar'd. Upon his own unhappy crown his mischief shall be spread: His violent dealing shall come down, and light on his own head. But I his justice will proclaim that judgeth righteously, And with a Song, will praise the Name of him that is most high.
HYMN 314. Babes and Sucklings setting forth God's praise. 1. METRE. Psalm 8. O Lord our Lord, of how great worth▪ is thy Name every where? For thou hast set thy glory forth above the starry sphere. The mouth of babes thou didst ordain, thy mighty power to show: And tongues of sucklings to restrain the proud imperious foe. Now when I see the Heavens high, the work of thine own hand: The Moon and Stars that deck the Sky, and in their order stand. O what is man, Lord, think I then, that he should be in mind: Or any of the Sons of Men, to whom thou art so kind? For thou hast made him little less than Angels in degree, And crowned him with gloriousness, and great Nobility. Preferr'd him to be Lord thou hast, of all thy works of wonder; And at his feet all creatures cast, that he should keep them under.
All Oxen, Sheep, and Beasts obey, all that in fields do feed: Fowls of the Air, Fish of the Sea, and all that therein breed. O Lord, our Lord, of how great worth, of how exceeding fame, And excellence in all the Earth is thy most glorious Name! HYMN 315. Babes and Sucklings shaming Atheists. 2. METRE. Psalm 8. If you put in the Exposition in the lines of the Italian Character, you must sing it to the Tune of The Lords Prayer; but if you leave the Exposition out, you may sing it in the Tune of the 100 Psalm, or O Lord Consider, &c. O Lord, our Lord, how excellent in all the Earth, is thy great Name? Above the Heavens Eminent thou spread'st the splendor of thy fame. Thy Wisedom, Might, and Majesty Do far surpass both Earth and Sky. From mouth of Babes and Sucklings young thou hast ordained strength to flow:
To still the scornfull Enemies Tongue, and silence the avengefull Foe. Their Innocence and Infant grace May shame such Atheists to their face. When on the Heav'ns I fix mine eye, the Moon, and Stars, thy Creatures rare: Why should God visit man, think I, or, for the Son of man should care? An Heir of Heav'n that should have bin; But now is fall'n from God by sin. Next Angels once, Thou had'st him plac'd, with Glory and with Honour crown'd: And him with high Dominion grac'd, or'e all thy handy-works renown'd. His Dignity did then excell, But sin made all things to rebell. Thou gav'st him whatsoever went through paths of Seas, or thence came forth: O Lord, our Lord, how Excellent is thy great Name in all the Earth! Blessed be God, that, since the fall Hath thorough Christ restored all.
HYMN 316. (3. METRE.) Argument. Man's glory shining in his first Creation, And (thorough Christ) seen in his restoration. The Mighty God, &c. Psalm 8. O Lord, our Lord: O how thy Name ex∣cells! O're Heaven and Earth thy glittering glo∣ry dwels, Out of the mouths of Babes and Infants young, Thou hast ordained strength against the strong; For in these Weaklings, is thy strength or∣dained, That our avengefull foe might be restrained. When I consider in my serious thought The glorious Heavens which thy fingers wrought, The Moon and Stars, which were ordain'd by thee, What's Man think I, that he should minded be? Or what's the Son of Man? what favour is it That thou should'st honour him with so kind a Visit?
For thou hast made him but a little lower, Than glorious Angels that thy Name adore; Than Cherubim and Seraphim so bright That see thy face in unapproached light: That thou might'st cloath him in a glorious manner, With Robes of Royal Dignity and Honour. Thou mad'st him have Dominion and Com∣mand O're all the works of thine Almighty hand, And hast put all things (as thou saw'st it) meet In due subjection underneath his feet All Sheep and Oxen (take them all together) And Beasts belonging to the Field whatever. All Fowl that fly thou gavest unto him, And all the Fishes in the Seas that swim: With whatsoever sort among all these, That have their passage o're the deepest Seas; O Lord, our Lord, with what great glory crowned Is thy great Name o're all the Earth renown∣ed! HYMN 317. Calamity of the wicked, or Re∣markable Judgment. Psalm 9.15. SUNK down the wicked Heathen are into the Pit they made: Their foot is taken in the snare which they themselves have lay'd
By doing judgment God is known, when wicked people fall By handy-works, which are their own: Remarkable to all. Psalm 41.13. Let Israel's mighty God therefore be prais'd and prais'd agen, From age to age for evermore, Amen, Amen, Amen. HYMN 318. Chains of Darkness for the Wicked. Psalm 9.17. LEWD men shall into Hell be hurld', where Chains of Darkness bind: And all the people of the World that have not God in mind. For poor men shall not be forsook for ever in their pain: The patient people never look for help from God in vain. Arise, O Lord, lest men presume still to prevail by might: And let the Heathen have their doom, and judgment in thy sight. Smite them, O Lord, with fear, full sore▪ and let the Nations find, And know themselves to be no more but men of mortal kind.
HYMN 319. Comforts for the Righteous. 1. METRE. Psalm 11. I Make the Lord my trust and stay, why therefore urge ye still, My harmless soul to hast away, as birds unto the Hill? For lo! the wicked bend their bows, their arrows they prepare: That closely they may shoot at those that upright-hearted are. If the foundations of our faith by you be taken away, No comfort then the righteous hath, nor strength whereon to stay. But God doth in his Temple reign, his Throne's in Heaven on high: His eyes behold the Sons of men, and them his eyelids try. He trys the just mans patience, as unto him seems best, But lewd men loving violence his soul doth much detest. On sinners he shall rain down snares, brimstone and balls of fire: An horrid Tempest he prepares to pay them home their hire.
For God most just without defect, in justice doth delight: His countenance with kind aspect, beholdeth the upright. HYMN 320. Confusion of the wicked. 2. METRE. The Mighty God, &c. Psalm 11. I Trust in God, why do ye daunt my soul? hast as a bird, unto your Hill, ye say: The wicked bend their bows without con∣troll, and string their shafts the upright soul to slay: If Faith whereon we ground be not assured, What can the righteous do to be secured? The Lord is in his Holy Temple still, his Throne's in Heaven, (he can see us then:) His eyes behold all people good and ill, his eye-lids try the Childeren of men. God trys the just man who in patience wait∣eth: But wicked men, and cruel, his soul hateth. Upon the wicked, he shall rain down snares, Brimstone and Fire, from which they can∣not flee.
And a prodigious Tempest he prepares, and this the portion of their cup shall be. For God that's righteous, righteousness af∣fecteth: His grace so good all good men so respect∣eth. HYMN 321. Corruption of the Times. Psalm 12, 1, 2, 3. HELP Lord, for godly men decay, the faithfull are but few: Men lie, and flatter, and betray, with tongue, and talk untrue. But God will cut those lips away, whence fraud and flattery springs: And tongues that dare presume to say such proud blasphemous things. 4, 5. Our lips say they, shall lord it still, and hold the upper hand: Our Tongues are ours to speak our will. what Lord shall countermand? Now for the sighs of needy men, and poor mens wrongs and woes; I'll rise, saith God, and rescue them from proud oppressing Foes. 6, 7, 8. Pure words, that will the test abide; God's promises come forth Like silver seven times purifi'd in Furnaces of Earth.
Lord thou shalt keep thy Saints alway, from this ungodly Race, Though every where they hunt their prey, when vile men are in place. Psalm 106.48. O let the God of Israel then be prais'd perpetually, And let all people say Amen, the Lord to magnify. HYMN 322. Curbing of the Wicked▪ 2. METRE. The Mighty God, &c. Psalm 12. HELP, Lord, the Godly cease, there's few of them, The faithfull fail among the Sons of men: Each man to's neighbour vanity imparts, With flattering lips they speak, and double hearts. But Godwill cut off every lip that flatters, And tongues that speak such proud presump∣tuous matters. Who thus have said our tongues shall bear the sway, Our lips are ours, and who shall us gain∣say? Now for the poor men, under proud con∣troll, And for the sighing of the needy soul, I'll rise, saith God, and be his sanctuary: And set him safe from his proud adversary.
The Words of God are pure, as silver try'd In Earthen Furnace, seven times purifi'd: Thou shalt preserve, O Lord, and keep the poor From this lewd generation evermore. The wicked walk on all sides to devour, When Vilest men are set in place of power. HYMN 323. Degenerate World described. 1. METRE. Psalm 14.1. THere is no God the fool hath thought, they are corrupt and lewd: Abominations have they wrought, and none of them doth good. The Lord look'd down from Heaven high, man-kind for to discern, If any knew spiritually, or sought God's Will to learn. But all were wandred from the way, defiled by the fall: Not one did good, not one I say did any good at all. Are workers of iniquity, so brutishly mis-led: To eat my people greedily, devouring them like bread?
Upon the Lord they never call, yet greatly did they fear: For God will surely be with all the righteous every where. The poor man's Counsel ye disdain, whose trust on God is stay'd: But Oh, that Israel might obtain from Sion saving aid. When God turns our Captivity, and sets poor Sion free, Jacob shall joy triumphantly, and glad shall Israel be. HYMN 324. Degenerate World (through A∣theism) described. 2. METRE. All People, &c. Psalm 14. FOOLS say in heart, there is no God, and with such thoughts their fancy feeds: Corrupt they are, and none doth good, but act abominable deeds. The Lord from Heaven view'd all mankind, to see who knew, or sought for God: All were defil'd, and far declin'd, not one by Nature doing good.
Are wicked workers all so dead, and void of knowledge since the fall, To eat my People up like bread, without regard of God at all? Yet do their hearts with terror quake, and guilty makes them to mistrust: For God doth in protection take the Generation of the Just. Ye sham'd the Council of the poor, because his hope on God was stai'd: But O that Israel might procure from Sion Hill some saving aid. When God brings back from captive state the chosen flock of Sion Hill: Then Jacob shall rejoyce thereat, and gladness Israel's heart shall fill. HYMN 325. Description of true Christians. Psalm 15. THE Tabernacles of thy Grace, Lord, who shall rest in still? Or who shall have a dwelling-place in thy most Holy Hill? The man that walks in God's true fear, whose works are just and straight: Who speaks the truth from heart sincere, who utters no deceit.
That to his neighbour doth no hurt in body, goods, or name: Nor taketh up a false report to prejudice his fame. The man whose pure impartial eye vile persons doth contemn: But whoso fear the Lord most high, he highly honours them. His Oath and all his promises that keepeth faithfully, Though he sustain the damages that might accrue thereby. That putteth not to usury the money that he lent: Nor takes reward to testify against the innocent. He that shall do the will of God, whereof this is the sum: Shall never perish in this world, nor in the world to come. HYMN 326. Description of true Citizens of Sion. 2. METRE. All people, &c. Psalm 15. O Who shall have a blest abode Within thy sacred Tents, O God? Thy Holy Hill who shall possess? Sure he that walks in uprightness.
The works of righteousness that doth, And from his heart doth speak the truth: That slanders none with spightfull tongue, Nor doth his neighbour any wrong. That takes not up an evil fame Against his neighbours honest Name: That doth of vile men vilely deem, But hath the Saints in high esteem. That changeth not what once he swears, Though he the loss and damage bears: That puts not out his coyn, whereby To get his gain by usury. That takes no bribes to circumvent, Or prejudice the innocent: He that doth these things is approv'd, And never shall that man be mov'd. HYMN 327. Expectation of Resurrection. Psalm 16.8. I Set the Lord still in my sight, and trust him over all: Since he doth stand at my right-hand, I know I shall not fall. This therefore fills my heart with joys, my glory joys in this, My flesh shall rest in hope likewise, in hope of endless bliss.
Thou wilt not leave my soul in hell, nor wilt thou, Lord, permit Thy Holy One, (as lost and gone) to perish in the pit. The path of life thou wilt declare to me, with joys full store: And Lord at thy right hand there are sweet pleasures evermore. HYMN 328. Extolling of Scripture verity and virtue. Psalm 19.7. MOST perfect is the Law of God, of Soul-converting might; His Testimonies are most pure, and give the simple light. The Statutes of the Lord are right▪ and fill the heart with joys: The precepts of the Lord are pure, inlightening the eyes. The fear of God (his word) is clean, and doth endure for ever: The Judgments of the Lord are true, and righteous altogether. Yea more than Gold, than much fine Gold, to be embrac'd alway: The hony and the hony-comb are not so sweet as they.
They are thy Servants Monitors, how he his life should frame: And great reward's provided for's if we observe the same. HYMN 329. Faith seen in fear of Sin. Psalm 19.12. LORD who can all his Errors see? O cleanse my heart within From secret faults, and keep thou me from all presumptuous sin. O let it have no power to reign in me at any time: And so shall I be free from stain, and scape the greatest crime. O let the words which I recite, my thoughts and whole behaviour, Be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, my strength and Saviour. HYMN 330. Faith's Triumphant Banner. Have mercy, &c. Psalm 20. THE Lord attend thy cry in this distressfull hour; Great Jacob's God most gratiously defend thee by his power.
He send thee succour still out of the sanctuary: And strengthen thee from Sion Hill against the Adversary. Thy Offerings in like wise O let him have in mind: And let thy whole burnt Sacrifice a good acceptance find. The Lord now grant to thee thy very hearts desire: And let thy prudent councils be accomplish'd all entire. We will our Joy proclaim in thy assur'd defence: And spread our banners in the Name of God our Confidence. The Lord now grant in love what-ever thou would'st have: And now I know that God above doth his Anointed save. And he will hear his King from Heaven, his Holy Throne: With saving strength which he shall bring by his right hand alone: Some people make their boasts of Chariots, some of Horse: But in our God, the Lord of Hosts we reckon all our force. While these bow down and fall, we rise and stand upright: Save, Lord, and hear us when we call, O King of Soveraign might!
HYMN 331. Faith's Victorious Banner. 2. METRE. O Lord Consider, &c. Psalm 20. LORD hear our King this troublous day, the Name of Jacob's God defend: Help from his holy place convey, and succour out of Sion send: Remember well, and highly prize Thine Offerings and Burnt Sacrifice: Thy hearts desire he grant thee still, And all thy councils God fulfill. In thy Salvation we'l rejoyce, and in our God's great Name shall we Our Banners raise with prayerfull voice, all thy requests God grant to thee. Now God, I know, will save from harm, With saving strength of his right arm, And heareth his anointed one, From Heaven, his high and Holy Throne. Some hope in Chariots help to find, and some in Horses hope the same: But we will ever bear in mind the Lord our God's all helpfull Name: They are brought down, and fallen quite, But we are risen, and stand upright: Save, Lord, O let the King give ear Now when we pray, our prayer to hear.
HYMN 332. (Psalm 21.) Argument. The King's supply and sure defence, Obtain'd by Prayer and Confidence. THE King rejoyceth to record the comforts of thy might, And in thy saving health, O Lord, How much, shall he delight. Thou gav'st him what his heart desir'd and that important thing, Which he with humble lips requir'd was not deny'd the King. Blessings of goodness to be sure thou hast on him powr'd down, And made a Crown of Gold most pure his royal head to crown. He askt thee life, and thou didst please to give it in such store, That he might see the length of days, and live for evermore. Great is his glorious dignity in this thy saving aid, For honour and great majesty thou hast upon him laid, For as one ever blest of God thou didst thy King advance, And thou hast made him wonderous glad with thy sweet countenance.
For on the Lord he doth rely, to see thy promise prov'd. And through thy mercy, O most high, he never shall be mov'd. HYMN 333. (2. PART.) Argument. The sure destruction of rebellious men, The Lord is prais'd for Judgments upon them. THY hand shall find out all thy foes, whoever, Lord, they be, And thy right hand shall find out those that bear ill will to thee. And make them as the Ovens hot steam what time thy wrath shall light: The Lord in wrath shall swallow them, and fire devour them quite. Their fruit likewise shalt thou destroy from off the Earths increase, And cut off their posterity, and cause their seed to cease. For they intended ill to thee, and thought they should succeed In their mischievous Tragedy, but could not act the deed. And thou shalt make them for these things to turn their backs apace, Charging thine arrows on the strings against their very face.
Be thou exalted, O most high, in thine own strength therefore, And so our Songs shall magnify thy might for evermore. HYMN 334. (Psalm 23.) Argument. God's the good Shepherd of our lives and souls, No danger need we fear nor foes controlls. Have mercy, &c. THE Lord my shepherd is, and he that doth me feed, Since he is mine and I am his what comfort can I need. He makes me to lie down on tender pasture grass, Then to the streams he leads me on where waters gently pass. And when I go astray he doth my soul reclaim, Conducting me in the right way for his most holy name. Yea though the paths I trod in deaths dark vale should be, would not fear, for there's my God a staff of strength to me.
Thou mak'st me sit and dine, even in my enemies sight, My head with Oyl, my cup with Wine run over day and night. Thy goodness sure, and grace shall measure all my days, And thy house be my dwelling place, to give thee endless praise. HYMN 335. (2. METRE.) Argument. God the Good Shepherd doth supply, No dangers need to terrify. All People, &c. Psalm 23. MY Shepherd is the Lord most blest, I shall not want but be supply'd; In pastures green he makes me rest, by sweet and silent waters side. He doth restore my soul that strays the paths of truth he makes me take, To walk in his most righteous ways, and this he doth for his Name sake. Yea though I pass deaths dark abode, afraid of ill I will not be, For thou art with me, O my God, thy rod and staff they comfort me.
In spight of foes thou dost appoint my Table spread and in their sight, My head with Oyl thou dost anoint, my cup runs over day and night. Surely thy goodness and thy grace, shall follow me throughout my days: And thy house be my dwelling place, where I will ever give thee praise. HYMN 336. God our good Shepherd. 3. METRE. Psalm 23. MY Shepherd is the living Lord, and he that doth me feed: How can I but be richly stor'd while he supplies my need? In pastures green and flourishing he makes me to repose: Hard by the silent water spring, whose stream with pleasure flows. He guides my soul, so apt to stray, a safer course to take: Conducting me in his right way, for his alone Name sake. And though I walk in deaths dark shade, it shall me not dismay: For thou art with me, and hast made thy rod and staff my stay.
My Table spread thou didst appoint, in presence of my foe: My head with Oyl thou dost anoint, my cup doth over-flow. Thy grace and goodness certainly shall measure all my days: And in thy house, O God will I for ever give thee praise. HYMN 337. God our sure-Shepherd. 4. METRE. Give Laud, &c. Psal. 23. THE Lord is evermore my Shepherd to provide: I shall be sure therefore full well to be supply'd. For by this means, In pasture green I couch between the silent streams. Most gratiously doth he restore my soul that strays: And also leadeth me in those his righteous ways Which I should take: (The paths of truth) and this he doth for his Name sake.
Yea, though I walk on still through deaths most darksome Vale, Yet will I fear none ill, nor shall my courage fail: For there thou art With me, O God, thy staff thy rod uphold my heart. My Table thou hast spread in all my foes despite: And hast it furnished here, in mine enemies sight. Thou 'nointst my head, And fillest up my bounteous cup untill it shed. The goodness, Lord, in thee, and grace thou dost display Shall surely follow me unto my dying day. And I therefore Will make abode i'th' house of God for evermore. HYMN 338. Good Christians described. To the Tune of the 124. Psalm. Now Israel, &c. 1. METRE. Psalm 24.3. WHO shall ascend into thine Hill on high?
And who shall dwell, Lord, in thy palace pure? The clean of hand, and pure of heart is sure: That hath not lift his soul to vanity: Nor sworn unjustly, or deceitfully. He shall receive the blessing from the Lord, And righteousness (to him so pure in heart:) The God of his salvation shall impart. This is the Ge∣neration that regard, That seek, that seek thy face, O Jacob's Lord. HYMN 339. Devout and true Saints. 2. METRE. Psal. 24. THE Earth is God's and wholly his▪ the World is all his own, And whatsoever therein is, belongs to him alone: For he hath firmly fram'd it so above the Seas to stand, And laid the liquid flouds below to flow within the Land.
Who shall ascend into thy Hill, or who may make account To stand, and to continue still, within thy holy mount? The man of spotless purity in life and conscience too: Whose soul affects not vanity whose oaths are just and true. For such a one the Lord shall bless, and he shall have convey'd The rich reward of righteousness from God his saving aid: For these be they that are indeed true seekers of his grace, O Jacob this is sure thy seed, of them that seek thy face. HYMN 340. Entrance of the King of Glory▪ 3. METRE. Psalm 24. YE Everlasting Doors and Gates, lift up your heads on high, And then the Prince of Potentates, shall enter in thereby: Who is this King so glorious? the mighty Lord and strong, In battel still victorious; to him these Names belong.
Ye Everlasting Doors and Gates, lift up your heads on high, And then the Prince of Potentates shall enter in thereby: Who may this King of Glory be? his royal Name's set down, The Lord of Hosts and none but he is King of high renown. HYMN 341. Good welcomers of the King of Glory. 4. METRE. To the preceding Tune. Now Israel, &c. In Paraphrase. Psal. 24.7. 1 Cor. 6.19. Isa 30.18. LIFT up your heads ye Everlasting Gates, Ye living Temples of the Holy Ghost, Lift up your hearts to him whose might is most, To entertain the Prince of Potentates, And He shall enter who in mercy waits.
Col. 2.15. Rev. 14.14. Who is this Prince of Princes (here set down) that vanquish'd Prin∣cipalities and Powers? It is this Soveraign King, and Lord of ours, That conquers all our foes, and wears the Crown: He is the King of Glory and Renown. 1 Cor. 6.19. Isa. 30.18. Lift up your heads ye everlasting Gates, Ye living Temples of the Holy Ghost, Lift up your hearts to him whose might is most, To entertain the Prince of Potentates: And he shall enter who in mercy waits. Rev. 20.11.14.14. Who is this Prince of Princes (here set down?) It is the Soveraign Lord, the Lord of Hosts, That conquers Kingdoms, Countries, Lands and Coasts. That sits upon the Throne, and wears the Crown: He is the King of Glory and Renown.
Psalm 106.48. Blessed be God whom Israel doth adore, From everlasting let his Glorious Name, To everlasting have renown and fame. And let all people say Amen, therefore Praise ye the Lord, and praise him evermore. HYMN 342. (Psal. 25. Ver. 8.) Argument. God guides the meek and soon imparts His pardoning grace to penitent hearts. UPright and good is our Lord God, and therefore takes delight, To teach his way to them that stray and sinners to set right. In Judgment he a guide will be to meek men hating pride, The meek I say, shall know his way, for God will be their guide. For all the ways which God displays are truth and mercy still, To them that seek his Laws to keep and Covenants to fulfill.
Wherefore for thy Name-sake do I thy mercy, Lord, intreat, To pardon my iniquity, for it is very great. HYMN 343. (Psal. 25. v. 12.) Argument. The Mysteries of God's free Grace Reveal'd to such as seek his face. WHO is the man that fears the Lord? to him he plainly shews, What way to go, and how to know the way that he shall chuse. His soul shall dwell exceeding well in perfect peace and rest, And 'tis decreed that by his seed the Earth shall be posses'd. The secrets of the Lord above shall all that fear him know, And unto them that fear his Name His Covenant he will show. To Israel then do thou, O God, thy sweet redemption send, And bring all his adversities unto an happy end.
HYMN 344. 2. METRE.) Psalm 25. IN mercy, Lord, do thou regard, th' affliction I am in, O see the pain that I sustain, and pardon all my sin. Consider those that are my foes for many such there be: And thou hast seen how sharp and keen their malice is to me. O keep and save my soul, I crave, and put me not to shame: But keep me safe, because I have believed in thy Name. O Lord, let my integrity and uprightness in me, Preserve me still from every ill, because I wait on thee. To Israel now, O God, do thou thy sweet redemption send, And bring all his adversities unto a happy end. HYMN 345. Greatness of God seen in Tem∣pests. 1. METRE. Psal. 29. GIVE to the Lord ye mighty men, give glory, strength and fame:
Give glory great (I say agen) as due to his great Name. Worship the Lord with head down bow'd in beauties holy place, Whose Thundring Voice upon the Cloud makes rain pour down apace. The Glorious God makes Thunder fly from th' Elements Watry Towr: God's Voice is full of Majesty, God's Voice is full of Power. He lets his thundring voice fall on, and breaks the Cedar-trees: The Cedars of mount Lebanon, the Lord breaks such as these. He makes them dance as Bullocks do, or youngling Unicorn: Mount Lebanon and Syrion too with tottering Earth-quakes torn: His Voice divides the lightning flame, the Wilderness it shakes: And Parans Wilderness (by name) by such concussion quakes. God's voice doth through the Forrest pierce, and Hinds to calve compels: And all his house his praise rehearse, each tongue his glory tells. The Lord sits King upon the floud, his Kingdom shall not cease: His peoples power he will make good, and bless his Church with peace.
HYMN 346. Greatness of God seen in Thun∣der. 2. METRE. Psalm 29. YE mighty in your stock and tribe, All Glory to the Lord ascribe: In beauty of his holiness, His Glorious Name adore and bless. The Lord by his commanding power Brings down the Clouds in many a shower: The Glorious God the Thunder sends, And many Watry Clouds he rends. His Voice is powerfull in the sky, His Voice is full of Majesty: His Voice when he in Thunder speaks The high and lofty Cedars breaks. Like sporting Calves, the Mountains trip, Great Lebanon doth leap and skip: Syrion by his motion born, Leaps as a youngling Unicorn. God's Voice divides the flames of fire, When Lightnings with the Clouds conspire: At his rebuke the Desart shakes, The Wilderness of Kadesh quakes.
He makes to calve the frighted Hinds, He bares the Forrest with his Winds, And all that in the temple are His Soveraign Glory must declare. God sits above the Watery main, This Glorious God doth ever reign: His Peoples strength he will encrease, And bless them with long lasting peace. HYMN 347. (Psalm 30.) Argument. Escape from Death his thoughts employ, He tells the quick return of joy. I Will advance thee, O most high, that am advanc'd by thee, Who hast not left an enemy to triumph over me. I cry'd to thee, O God, to save and thou hast made me whole, And from the all-devouring Grave brought back my gasping soul. To me a new life thou didst lend, and wouldest not permit That I should hastily descend into the dreadfull pit.
Sing to the Lord ye Saints of his, and thankfully express, How sweet the due remembrance is of his pure holiness. For though his anger burns a space, it quickly slacks again, But in his favour and his grace doth constant life remain. Though sorrows lodge with s a night, and make us weep and mourn; Yet joy comes in at mornings light, making a quick return. HYMN 348. (2. PART.) Argument. Prosperity puffs up, then Grace withdraws, Prayer is excited, and gives God th' applause. Psalm 30. IN my prosperity I laid, I never shall be mov'd, So strongly was my mountain laid so free thy favour prov'd. Thou didst no sooner hide thy face, But trouble did invade, Then Lord ory'd to thee for grace and supplication made.
What proit is there in my bloud when I to Grave go down? Can Dust declare thy praise, O God, can Dust thy truth renown? Hear me, O Lord, O bow thine ear, and pity on me take: O Lord unto my help draw near for thy sweet mercy sake. My mourning then to melody thou didst for me convert: My sackcloth thou hast quite laid by and me with gladness girt. To th' end my Glory may sing Lad, to thee and not give o're: O Lord my God I will applaud thy Name for evermore. HYMN 349. Happiness conferr'd on the Saints. Psalm 31.19. O God, how great felicity hast thou laid up in store, For men affected faithfully to fear thee evermore. What goodness Lord, what recompence is wrought by thee for them That put their trust in thy defence, before the sons of men?
The secret of thy presence, Lord, shall those thy Servants hide, And be their safety, and their guard from man's insulting pride. And thou shalt keep them secretly, in a Pavilion sure; And save them by that secrecy, from strife of tongues, secure. Psalm 35.10. Psal. 76.10. And who, O Lord, is like to thee, that sav'st the poor from spight Of's over-potent enemy, that seeks to crush him quite. Surely the wrath in men that reigns shall turn unto thy praise: Remaining wrath thy power restrain, when passion oversways. Psalm 72.18, 19. O Let the Lord of Israel be prais'd of rich and poor: Whose works are such as do excell, and he the onely doer. And let the whole earth generally be fill'd and fill'd agen With his renown and Majesty, Amen, Amen, Amen.
HYMN 350. Exceeding happiness of pardon· All People, &c. Or, O Lord Consider, &c. Psalm 32. THE man is blest whose sin's remitted, Whose crimes are covered, and acquitted, To whom the Lord imputes no fault, Nor guile is harbour'd in his thought; For while I no confession made, My strength with daily grief decay'd, Thine anger burnt the day throughout, My moisture turn'd to summers drought. Then I confest and kept not in, But said, I will confess my sin: And thou when I, Lord, did confess Forgav'st my sinfull wickedness: For this cause, all the Godly Race Shall seek thee in a time of Grace, That when great flouds of waters roll No danger may come near their soul. Thou art my hiding place from wrongs, To close me round with safeties songs, I'll tell and teach the faithfull so, Mine eye shall guide them how to go: O be not like the Horse and Mule Whom understanding doth not rule; Whose stubborn mouths we must restrain From violence with bit and rean.
The wicked shall be curbed so, And are reserv'd to many a wo, But them that in the Lord confide Shall mercy close on every side: Be joyfull therefore in the Lord Ye righteous men, with one accord; And shout for joy with great delight All ye that are in heart upright. HYMN 351. (Psal. 33. v. 13. to 21.) Argument. Protection and Provision from above For those that fear the Lord, and trust in's love. THE Lord lookt down from Heaven high beholding all abroad, All mortal mans posterity from place of his abode. In all the Earth and all the parts the dwellers he survays; He fashioneth alike their hearts and all their works he weighs. No numerous Hosts can save a King, the strength of limb saves none: Nor can the Horse deliverance bring, his great strength saves not one. But lo! the eye of God above is ever fixt on those That fear his Name, and in his love their confidence repose.
To save their souls from sharpest sword of Famine that can be: Wherefore our soul waits for the Lord, our help and shield is he. For in him shall our hearts be glad because we can proclaim, The confidence that we have had in his most holy Name. HYMN 352. Honouring God at all times. Psal. 34.1. AT all times I will bless the Lord, my mouth shall spread his fame: Continually it shall record the praises of his Name. My soul shall make her boast in God, the humble men shall hear: And they shall gladly spread abroad his praises every where. O magnifie the Lord with me, and let us altogether Exalt his Name in high degree, and speak his praise for ever. I sought the Lord with fervent cries, and graciously he heard: And did deliver me likewise. from all the harms I fear'd. The meek lookt up and sought his Name, and they enlightned were: Their Faces did receive no shame, that fled to him by Prayer.
This poor man cry'd unto the Lord, the Lord did hear his call; And saving health to him afford, out of his troubles all. HYMN 353. Holy Angels protecting Saints. And Exhortations to fear God. Psal. 34.7. GOD'S Holy Angel doth encamp round about all those men That have Relgions real stamp, and he delivereth them. O tast and see that God is good, O blessed men are they That have that goodness understood, and make it all their stay! O, fear the Lord, ye Saints of his, and on his care rely: For they that fear him never miss a competent supply. Young Lyons shall have meat full scant, shall hunger, and lack food: But they that fear the Lord shall want for nothing that is good. HYMN 354. How to fear God aright. Psalm 34.11, 12 COme unto me, my Children dear, and hearken to my word: And I will teach you how to fear the true and living Lord.
Who is the man that would live long, and lead a blessed life? See thou refrain thy lips and tongue from all deceit and strife. 13, 14, 15. Refrain thee still from doing ill, and all good deeds embrace: Inquire for peace and quietness, and follow it apace. Because the Lord's most gracious eye upon the just is bent: His ears are open to the cry of all the innocent. 16, 17. But he looks down with angry frown upon the wicked train; To cut their memory from the Earth, that none of them remain▪ But when the just do call and cry the Lord doth hear them so, That out of pain and misery he lets them timely go. HYMN 355. Jewels of God's keeping. Psal. 3419. FUll many be the miseries which on the just do fall: But God doth soon deliver them, and help them out of all.
20. He keepeth every bone of theirs by his Almighty Arm, That not so much as one of them is broken to their harm. 21. Evil shall slay the wicked man, for sin which he hath wrought: And such as hate the righteous man shall quickly come to nought. 22. But them that fear the living Lord he keepeth safe and sound: And them that put their trust in him no malice shall confound. HYMN 356. (Psalm 36.) Argument. Ill deeds describe the wicked sort, Gods mercies are the Saints support. The mighty God, &c. TRangressions of the lewd to me sug∣gest, that there's no fear of God before his eyes, For still he sooths himself in his own breast till all abhor his foul iniquities. The words of his foul mouth are fraud and lewdness, He hath left off all wisedom, grace and good∣ness. He studies▪ mischief on his secret bed, he sets himself to go in no good way, No evil action doth he hate or dread▪ yet is thy mercy my sufficient stay. The Heavens O Lord, thy mercy compre∣hendeth, Thy faithfulness unto the clouds extendeth.
HYMN 357. (2. PART.) Argument. God's mercies keep both man and beast, His comforts make the Saints to feast. Psal. 36. THY righteousness is like the mountains great, thy Judgments are a most unfathom'd deep, Thou Lord, art he that holds the sovereign seat, thy preservation man and beast doth keep: How excellent, O God, is thine affection, Which makes mankind to trust to thy pro∣tection? they shall be satisfy'd abundantly, with fatness of thy house and holy place, And thou shalt make them drink pure streams of joy, And pleasures there imparted by thy grace. For Lord, with thee is life's pure fountain present, And in thy light shall we see light most plea∣sant. HYMN 358. (3. PART.) Argument. God's mercies to the Saints secure. Great woes attend the wicked doer. Psalm 36. O Lord continue thy compassions kind to them that know thee by experi∣ence, And let the upright hearted people find thy righteousness for their assur'd defence. Let not the foot of pride with power op∣press me, Nor let the hand of lewd men dispossess me.
See there those workers of iniquity how often times they fall before our eyes. Yea they shall be cast down eternally, and never more be able to arise. O let the God of Israel therefore Be prais'd from first to last for evermore. HYMN 359. Joys of Heaven. 2. METRE. Psalm 36.5. THE Heavens, O Lord, thy mercy fills, thy truth doth reach the sky: Thy justice over-tops the Hills, and deep thy judgments lie. Thou dost preserve both men and beasts, for Lord thy grace excells: And underneath thy wings in peace mankind securely dwells. With dainties of thy house most sweet replenish'd they shall be: And drink the streams of pure delight, imparted there by thee. For Lord, from thee the fountain flows that giveth light to thine: And in thy light shall we disclose our lasting light to shine. HYMN 360. Just mens vindication, Protecti∣on, and Provision. Psalm 37.3. TRust confidently in the Lord, to goodness give thy mind:
So shalt thou dwell in Israel, and sure provision find. Delight thy self in God likewise, and he shall set thee have, Yea grant entire thy hearts desire, whatever thou dost crave. Commit thy way unto the Lord, and rest in him secure: And he shall bring to pass the thing, and make the issue sure. He shall bring forth thy righteousness as manifest as light: Thy udgment he shall make to be as noon-tide, shining bright. 2. PART. God knows the days of upright men how far their tryal goes: And doth engage an heritage which they shall never lose. They shall not be asham'd at all when some are hard bestead: And in the day of famine they shall be suffic'd with bread. I have been young and now am old, yet ne're saw Saints so poor; Nor yet their seed in so much need to beg from door to door. Psal. 55.22. Then cast thy burden on the Lord, and he shall well provide: For not a whit will he permit the righteous man to slide.
HYMN 361 Just mens sure safeguard and happy end. Psal. 37.37. MARK and behold the perfect man, for that mans end is peace▪ But quickly shall transgressors fall, be quite cut off and cease. But the salvation of the ust is of the Lord most high; Their strength and stay mth evil day of their adversity. And he shall shield and save the just, and keep them life and limb; Delivering them from wicked men, because they trust in him. HYMN 362. Knowledge, and acknowledg∣ment of Mortality. All People, &c. Psalm 39.5. WHAT is our life but as a span? So meer a vanity is man: And reckon'd at his best estate Is reckon'd at no higher rate. Man walketh in a shadow vain, And toyls himself with needless pain: He gathers wealth with wretched care▪ And knows not who shall be his heir. When thou rebukest man for sin, A sad condition he is in:
Thou mak'st his beauty like a cloth, fretted and eaten by the moth. Surely every man how great soever, Is vanity, yea, altogether: And reckoned at no higher rate When reckon'd at his best estate. Lord hear my prayer, attend my cry, Slight not my tears: for what am I, A stranger and a Sojourner With thee, as all my Fathers were. O spare me, Lord, a little space, That I may gather strength of grace, Before I lose this mortal breath, And shall be taken off by death. HYMN 363. Lovers of Charity blessed. 1. METRE. Psalm 41.1. THE man is blest that minds the poor that suffers sore distress: The Lord will sure deliver him when perils most oppress. The Lord will keep him safe alive, and bless him in the Land: And he will not abandon him unto his enemies hand. Upon his bed of languishing, the Lord will strengthen him, And in his sickness make his bed to ease each weary limb.
Then in my sickness thus said I, be gracious, Lord, to me: And heal my sick and sinfull soul that hath offended thee. HYMN 364. Falseness of Persecutors. 2. METRE. Psal. 41.5. MINE enemies speak ill of me; when comes his dying-day? And when shall we survive to see his blessed Name say they? He visits me with complements, his heart he fills with fraud, And vile intents, all which he vents, whene're he goes abroad. My haters all lie whispering, against my soul combin'd, Some hurtfull thing on me to bring, devising in their mind: An ill disease doth him surprize, and cleaves to him so fast, That now he lies he shall not rise, but breaths (say they) his last. My trusted friend, fed at my board, against me lifts his heel; But help me, Lord, that when restor'd they may my justice feel.
HYMN 365. (Psalm 42.1. to 5.) Argument. The Saint, when from God's house confin'd, In Sighs and Prayer, sets forth his mind. All People, &c. LIKE as the chased hart doth pant after the cooling water brooks: So, Lord, my soul pursu'd and faint, pants after thee with longing looks. I thirst for God, the living God, O when shall I come and draw near The place of his most blest abode, and in his glorious courts appear? Both thoroughout the night and day, my mournfull tears have been my food: While constantly my foes do say, where now is thy most faithfull God? When I these things have thought upon, my grief of soul has much renew'd, Because I formerly had gone among the zealous multitude. I went with them to God's own house, with cheerfull voice of joy and praise, Where multitudes did follow us that kept the solemn Holy daies.
O Then my soul, why shouldst thou be so over-whelm'd in thy distress? O wherefore art thou mov'd in me, and tossed with unquietness? Hope still in God's deliverance, for I shall surely, yet again, Praise him for his sweet countenance, and help I, shall thereby obtain. HYMN 366. (Psal. 43.) Argument. When persecutions greatly grieve and grind, God's Ordinances cheer the Godly mind. Judge me, O God, and plead my cause, against th' ungodly train, From subtil tyrants greedy jaws, my righteous soul sustain. For of my strength thou art the God, why dost thou leave me so? And why walk I so heavily oppressed by my foe? Send out thy light, and truth so bright, and guide me with thy grace; And so conduct me to thy hill, and to thy dwelling place▪ Then shall I to the Altar go of God my hearts delight, And on the harp, O God, my God, thy praise I shall recite.
Why art thou then so sad my soul, and fret'st thus in my breast? O why art thou so troubled now and taken off thy rest? Hope still in God, and him applaud, whom I shall yet record; Who doth advance my countenance, and is my God, my Lord. HYMN 367. (2. METRE) Argument. He cheers his soul in God's free love, And Comforts flowing from above. Give Laud, &c. Psalm 43. MY judgment, Lord, maintain, and plead my needfull case, Against a Nation vain, and destitute of grace. O save thou me From men unjust, and such as trust in treachery. For thou art my support, my God, my strength and stay: Why seem'st thou n such sort to cast me clean away? Why do I go So mournfully, oppressed by my cruel foe?
O Lord send out thy light, send out thy word most true; And let them lead me right, and let them bring me to Thy holy Hill, That dwelling place where thy sweet grace abideth still. And then, O Lord, will I unto thine Altar go, To God my wondrous joy, from whom my comforts flow. There I'le give laud, And honour thee with Psaltery O God, my God. Why art thou then so low dejected O my soul? Why do such waves of woe within thy bosome roll? And why art thou With fear and dread disquieted within me now? O let thy hope be set on God that helpeth thee: For I shall praise him yet for his great aid to me When undertrod, Who doth advance my countenance and is my God.
HYMN 368. (METRE) Argument. Canaan the Type of Heaven fell, By Gods free grace to Israel. All People, &c. (Psalm 44 v. 3.) O God our Fathers have us told What works thou didst in days of old; And we have heard it with our ears, What works thou didst in times of theirs. How thou didst drive out Heathen men With thy strong hand, to plant in them; How thou those people didst afflict, And cast them out in judgment strict. For neither their own sword or hand Did get possession of the Lnd, Nor was it their own chivalry That sav'd them from the enemy. But thy right and powerfull arm, That kept them evermore from harm, And Lord it was the lightsome glance, Of thy sweet face and countenance. Thou wast the aid of Israel still, Because thou bear'st them great good will: To Israel's God be praise therefore, From first to last for evermore.
HYMN 369. Martyrdom, or slaughter of the sheep. (2. METRE.) Psalm 44.20. IF we have now forgot the Name of our Almighty One, And stretched out our hands (in vain) to Idol-Gods unknown: Should not our God the matter try, and understand the whole? For he doth know undoubtedly the secrets of our soul. Yea for thy sake, O God, are we slain all day long indeed, And counted as the sheep we be which men for slaughter feed. Awaken and arise therefore, why sleepest thou, O Lord? Cast us not off for evermore, as people quite abhorr'd. O wherefore dost thou hide thy face, and dost our grief forget, In this forlorn and wofull case that hath our souls beset? For down to dust our soul is thrust, our belly cleaves to th' Earth: Rise, and afford some succour, Lord, to set thy mercy forth.
HYMN 370. (3. METRE.) All People, &c. Psalm 44.20. IF our God's name we have forgot, or bow'd to gods whom we knew not: Should not our God the sin disclose, the secrets of our hearts that knows? Yea for thy sake thus ill we fare, that killed all day long we are: Counted as sheep, that have their life exposed to the slaughtering knife. Awake, why sleep'st thou, Lord, arise, O do not quite cast off our cries: Why dost thou hide thy face so long, forgetting all our grief and wrong? For to the ground our soul is thrust, our belly cleaveth to the dust: Arise our aid to undertake, and save us for thy mercy sake. So we thy flock and pasture-store shall give thee thanks for evermore: And as thy mercies do engage, shew forth thy praise from age to age.
HYMN 371. (Psalm 45.) Argument. The praise of Christ who spake as no man did. His powerfull word disclosing secrets hid. Have mercy, &c. MY heart indicts good words To praise the Lord of Lords: More swiftly than the Writers Pen, My tongue his praise records. O fairer than mankind Thy Lips with grace have shin'd; And God therefore for evermore To bless thee hath design'd. Thy sword gird on thy Thigh, O mighty Majesty: Ride on O King all conquering, And ride on prosperously. Because thou dost express Truth, meekness, righteousness; And mak'st that word thy conquering sword, Thou shalt have sure success.
HYMN 372. (2. PART.) Argument. The power of Christ converting Souls, But stubborn Enemies he controuls. Psalm 45. THE right hand of thy might Thine Enemies shall smite With dreadfull sense of Conscience, Till yielding to thy right. Full sharp shall be thy dart In the King's enemies heart: Nothing shall ease the Consciences, Till they to thee convert. As for the stubborn foe Well shall thy right hand know, To wound such hearts with dreadfull darts, And work their overthrow. HYMN 373. (3. PART.) Argument. The Throne of Christ with justice deckt The Graces of his Saints elect. Have mercy, &c. Psalm 45.6. THY throne, O God most high, Abides perpetually;
Thy Government is excellent For truth and equity. Thou lovest righteousness, And sin thou hat'st no less; Therefore hath God thy God bestow'd On thee such blest success. And hath anointed thee With gifts of grace so free, And oyl of joy transcendently Above all saints that be. Thy graces all divine Which do from Heaven shine, Like Cassia, Myrrhe and Aloes are, The joy of thee and thine. Chief Saints in every place Shall come before thy face, At thy right hand shall Israel stand All deckt in robes of grace. HYMN 374. (4. PART.) Argument. The Spouse of Christ he doth exhort, The Gentiles call'd to Sions Court. Have mercy, &c. Psalm 45. v. 10. HEarken O spouse most dear, consider and give ear,
Forget thy birth that sprung from earth, And as new born appear. So shall the King desire Thy beautious grace entire, For none but he thy Lord must be Pure worship to require. And converts most compleat Shall come with gifts full great, The Gentiles which are great and rich, Thy favour shall intreat. And I will cause thy Name To be of endless fame, And therefore all the people shall Thy praises still proclaim. HYMN 375. (5. PART.) Argument. The Churches inward beauty, her succession. The Jew and Gentiles glory with confession Of Christ our Saviour's praise past all expres∣sion. Have mercy, &c. Psal. 45. v. 13. THE Kings dear spouse behold Deckt in her cloth of gold. (The inward dress of Holiness And graces manifold.)
Be brought to Christ shall she In robes of sanctity, Her Virgin mates (confederates) Must all be brought to thee. With joy shall they resort, And in triumphant sort, (Gentile and Jew) be brought into The Kings celestial court. And in the Fathers stead Thou shalt have children bred, As Princes high for piety The Earth to overspread. And I will cause thy Name To be of endless fame, And therefore all the people shall Thy praises still proclaim. HYMN 376. (Psalm 46.) Argument. The Lord proclaim'd a present aid: The foes with fear are much dismay'd. All People, &c. GOD is our strength and present aid, Our refuge in our need, Therefore we will not be afraid, Nor tottering earthquakes heed:
Though midst of Seas huge hills be hurl'd, though troubled waters roar, And swelling of the billows curld make mountains tremble sore. A River there with Crystal stream shall glad that City of his, The sacred tent of God supream the Lord amidst her is. Right early God shall help her there, she shall not once be mov'd, The Heathen Kingdoms moved were, and most outragious prov'd. He uttering then that voice of his the earth did melt away, The Lord of Hosts with Israel is, and Jacob's God our stay. Come see the work of God's own hand, what desolation's made, How wars are husht in all the Land, and how he breaks the blade. He burns the Charriot, breaks the Bow, be still and know, saith he, That I am God on earth below, and there extol'd will be. Of Heathens I'll be magnifi'd in this my glorious power, The Lord of Hosts is on our side, and Jacob's God our tower.
HYMN 377. (2. METRE.) Argument. A present refuge God appears, Therefore the Saints should banish fears. All People, &c. Psalm 46. GOD is our refuge and relief, A very present help in grief, Therefore we will not fear at all Although the earth should flit or fall. And though the mountains should be hurl'd Amidst the Seas throughout the world. Although the troubled waters rore And swelling Seas should shake the shore. There is a River whose sweet stream Shall glad the City of God supream, The Glory of his holy place Are th' Ordinances of his Grace. The Lord is in the midst of her, She shall not once be made to stir, God gives her help and soon perform'd Tho' Heathens rag'd and Kingdoms storm'd.
His voice he utter'd soon 'twas felt, And made the stubborn Earth to melt, The Lord of hosts is with us still, The God of Jacob's our high hill. HYMN 378. (2. PART) Argument. God ceaseth wars, proclaims his power, Is Israel's refuge and high Tower. Psalm 46. THE works of God O come and see How mild he makes the Earth to be; He ceaseth wars to earths far ends, He breaks the bow, the spear he rends. He breaks asunder steel entire, He burns the Charriot in the fire, Be still and know that I am God To be exalted all abroad. Heathens (saith he) shall set me forth, I'll be exalted in the Earth, The Lord of hosts is with us still, The God of Jacob our high hill. Psalm 106.48. Let Israel's God be blest therefore From first to last for evermore; And let all people joyntly then Give him renown and say Amen.
HYMN 379. Mercies to the Church by our Saviour's ascension. 1. METRE. Have mercy, &c. Psalm 47. O People clap your hands, and shout unto the Lord With Voice of Joy triumphantly, and all with one accord. Because the Lord most high with terrour is set forth, A mighty King in governing, and ruling all the earth. He shall subdue the Lands for us, as he thinks meet, And make to fall the Nations all, subjected at our feet. He shall elect for us a lot which doth excell: A glorious choice for Jacob's house▪ which he hath loved well. God is gone up on high, ascending with a shout, With Trumpets shrill to Sion-hill, the Lord is thus gone out.
2. PART. Sing praises unto God, sing praises chearfully: Sweet praises sing unto our King, sing praise with melody. For God is Soveraign King of Earths remotest parts: Your Voices raise, to sing his praise with understanding hearts. God reigneth o're the Lands which Heathen men possess: God sits upon his sacred Throne of perfect Holiness. The Princes of the world, and people every one, That are by Grace of Abraham's Race, are gather'd to his Throne. For all the powers on Earth belong unto the Lord: So much must he exalted be of all with one accord.
HYMN 380. Mercies to the Gentiles by Christ's ascension. All People, &c. Or, O Lord Consider, &c. 2. METRE. Psalm 47. CLap hands ye people generally, and shout to God with joy and mirth: For dreadfull is the Lord most high, a mighty King in all the Earth. The Heathen he for us subdues, and Nations to our feet subjects: A glorious portion he shall chuse for Jacob, whom he so affects. God is ascended with a shout, the Lord now while the Trumpet plays: Sing praise to God, his praise sing out, sing praises to our King sing praise: The Lord is King, the Earth submits, sing praise with understanding then: Upon his Holy Throne he sits, he ruleth o're the Heathen men. Exod. 3.14. Hither the peoples Princes throng, to him whose Name is call'd I AM: The faithfull people that belong unto the God of Abraham. Because the shields of all the Earth belong unto the Lord alone: For they are of that heavenly birth, and he the high exalted One.
HYMN 381. (Psal. 48.) Argument. The Churches beauty highly prais'd, Her walls besieg'd, the Siege is rais'd. All people, &c. GReat is the Lord, prais'd all abroad, and greatly to be praised still, Here in the City of our God, and in his consecrated hill. Mount Sion is a beautious thing, the only joy of all the Earth, The City of the soveraign King, is situated on her North. God in her palaces is known to be a refuge near at hand, Th' assembled Kings were quickly gone, with all the whole beleaguering band. They saw it and they marvelled, and troubled, hastned back again, Surpriz'd as women tortured, with keenest pangs of Child-bed pain. Or like as when at thy command the Eastern wind with fury roars, And splits the Tharsian Ships by Land, upon the naked rocks and shores▪
Now have we seen in Israel's Coasts what we have heard declar'd of old, The City of our Lord of hosts the Lord for ever shall uphold. HYMN 382. (2. PART.) Argument. The Church records God's mercies past, Her strength and safety to the last. Psalm 48. A Midst thy holy house, O God, thy kindness to remembrance came, Thy praise on earth is spread abroad, according to thy Glorious Name. Thy right hands full of righteousness, therefore let Sion-mount rejoyce, And Judahs Towns their joys express, to hear thy iudgments awfull voice. Walk round about and Sion see, her stately Towers distinctly tell, Her palaces consider ye, and mark ye all her bulwarks well: That so to all posterity, it may be truly testify'd, This God (our God perpetually) even unto death will be our guide.
HYMN 383. (Psalm 49.) Argument. The Riddle of Worldlings peace summ'd up in this, Death adds to Saints, but ends the Worldlings bliss. HEAR this with care ye People all that in the world do dwell, Both rich and poor, both great and small together hearken well. My mouth the wisedom shall impart of God's most holy will, The meditation of my heart, shall be of heavenly skill. I will incline a ready ear a Parable to mark, And on my harp will make appear the sayings that are dark. Why should I fear what I may feel when th' evil day falls out, And th' iniquity of my heel shall compass me about? They that on wealth with pride depend in heaping up thick clay, None of them can redeem a friend, none can his ransom pay.
The soul of man no price can buy, such thoughts should cease to be, That man should live immortally and no corruption see. For all alike doth death surprize, as knoweth all mankind, The fool, the wise and brutish dies, and leave their wealth behind. HYMN 384. (2. PART.) Argument. The flattering World applauds and crowns her own, But death and judgment makes Saints happi∣ness known. Psalm 49. THese are the thoughts which inwardly those worldlings entertain, How that their house and family for ever shall remain. Their dwelling place to ages all they think shall still endure, Their Lands by their own Names they call to make the matter sure. Yet man in honour and renown Hath soon his honour ceast, And quickly to the grave goes down, to perish as the beast.
This way of worldlings verily is but a foolish way, Yet are they by posterity approv'd in all they say. Like sheep so are they laid in grave, and death shall them devour: And just men shall dominion have at their awaking hour. Mean while that outward pomp and grace, whereof they did presume, Shall perish from their dwelling place, and in the Grave consume. But God will sure my soul redeem, from power of the grave, For I shall be receiv'd to him an heavenly house to have. HYMN 385. (3. PART.) Argument. Envy not worldlings honour nor delight, Which ends in horrour and perpetual night. Psalm 49. O Be not thou solicitous, when any is made rich, And when the Glory of his house gets to an higher pitch. For when his time shall come to die, nought with him shall he have, His pomp shall not accompany his person to the Grave.
Though while he liv'd he blest his soul, and men will much commend, A man that lives without controll, and doth himself befriend. He shall go down to his own place, into perpetual night, Among his cursed Father's race, and never more see light. Thus man in honour and repute, yet understanding not, Is well compared to the fruit, which soon must die and rot. HYMN 386. True Thankfulness. Have mercy, &c. Psalm 23 OFFER to God each day thanksgiving cheerfully, And have a special care to pay thy vows to God most high. Then seek and sue to me, when dangerous daies do frame, And I will sure deliver thee, and thou shalt praise my Name. For whoso offers praise, he glorifieth me, And he that goes in godly ways, shall Gods salvation see.
HYMN 387. Mightiness of God in Judgment. (2. METRE.) Have mercy, &c. Psal. 50. THE God of Glorious might, the Lord hath summon'd all: And call'd the Earth from Suns first light, unto the furthest fall. From Sion's sacred mount (beauties perfection right) Will God appear to take account in Glory shining bright. Our God shall come with power, and then shall he speak out: Before him shall a fire devour, with tempests round about. Calling to Heaven on high, and to the Earth below: To judge his people openly, that all may see and know. Let each professed Saint, be brought before mine eyes: Those that have made a Covenant with me by Sacrifice. And Heaven shall express how just his judgments be: They shall declare his righteousness, for none is Judge but he.
HYMN 388. Mightiness of God in Mercy▪ Have mercy, &c. 2. METRE. Psalm 50.7. MY People hearken well, I'll speak and testifie, Against ev'n thee, O Israel, thy God, thy God am I. I do not need at all, thy Cattle young or old: I'll take no Bullock from thy stall nor Hee-goat from thy fold. For all the herd that fills the Forrest is mine own, And Cattle on a thousand hills belong to me alone. All fowls I can define, what e're the mountains breed: And all the Salvage beasts are mine that in the field do feed. If I were hunger-bit I would not tell it thee: For that the world and all in it belongs alone to me. Will I eat bullocks flesh, or drink the bloud of Goats? Offer to God true thankfulness, and pay the high'st thy votes.
Then call and cry to me when dangerous days do frame, And I will sure deliver thee, and thou shalt praise my Name. HYMN 389. Mightiness of God in punishing the wicked. 4. METRE. Have mercy, &c. Psalm 50.16, 17. AS for the wicked now that speaks, but acts not fair, To him saith God, what right hast thou my statutes to declare? Why should thy mouth relate the Covenant which I taught, When as thou dost instruction hate, and set my word at nought? When thou a thief hast seen, with him thou dost consent: And a Partaker thou hast been with men incontinent. Thou giv'st thy mouth to ill, thy tongue deceit doth frame: Thou sit'st and speak'st with words at will, to wound thy brothers Name. Thine own dear mothers son thou sland'rest with thy tongue, These things ungodly thou hast done, and I kept silence long.
Therefore thou thought'st of me that I was such as thou: Yea altogether like to thee, and would thy deeds allow. But I'll put home reproof, and set thy sins in place: To stand in order plain enough before thy guilty face. Mind this all ye that have the awfull God forgot: That I (when there is none to have) in pieces tear you not. But whoso offers praise, he glorifieth me: And he that goes in godly ways shall God's salvation see. HYMN 390. Mightiness of God in the day of Judgment. 5. METRE. To the old proper Tune. Psalm 50. THE God of might Unto the earth did call: From Suns first light And rising to his fall: From Sion fair The Lord himself hath shone. God shall repair In noise and terror known.
Usher'd with flame, Wrapt in a stormy shower, And shall proclaim All judgment, in his power. Gather to me My Saints in Covenant ty'd, And Heav'n shall see His justice magnify'd. My People, hear, O Israel, I come in And witness bear Against thee for thy sin. I will not blame Thy Sacrifices slender: Nor Bullocks claim, Nor Goats for thee to render. Mine is each beast Which widest Forrest feed: Even to the least, Which thousand hills do breed. The Fowls I know Which on the mountains fly: Wild beasts also Which in the desarts ly. If I would eat, To thee I would not show it: For th' Earth compleat Is mine, I'd have thee know it. That I require Bulls flesh, why should'st thou think? Or have desire The bloud of Goats to drink?
Thanksgiving bring, And pay to God thy Vows: This Offering He specially allows. Then on me call In time of thy temptation, Save thee I shall, And gain thy gratulation. HYMN 391. Mightiness of God in Vengeance upon the Wicked. 6. METRE. Psal. 50. v. 16. BUT to the lewd Saith God, why should ye dare Once to intrude My statutes to declare? Why do ye vaunt With mouth for to relate My Covenant, Whose hearts instruction hate? When thou hast seen A thief, thou hast consented, And with th' unclean To joyn thou wast contented. Thou giv'st thy mouth To utter what is naught, To speak untruth And guile thy tongue is taught. Thou dost backbite To work thy brother blame, And (full of spight) Thy mothers son to shame.
This hast thou done, And my long silence finding, Thou thought'st me one Like thee, and never minding. But I will haste To set before thine eyes (In order plac'd) All these impieties. Consider this Ye that forget God's fear, Lest piece by piece Your helpless souls I tear. But whoso gives Me praise shall glorify me, And he that lives A Saint, be saved by me. Psal. 106.48. Let Israel's God be ever blest therefore, And let's applaud his Name for evermore. And let the Earth in all parts up and down Sound out his worth, his Glory and renown: And let all Peo∣ple say Amen together, Amen, praise ye, Praise ye the Lord for ever.
HYMN 392. New building of Sion: And the Sacrifices most acceptable to God. 1. METRE. All People, &c. Or, O Lord Consider, &c. Psal. 51.18. LORD cast a favourable eye On Sion's sad calamity: Jerusalem's low walls repair, And build them up again more fair. 19, 16. Then shalt thou be when once appeas'd With our devout oblations pleas'd: But thou desir'st no Sacrifice, Burnt Offerings take not in thine eyes. 17. The Offerings of thy dear delight Are trembling souls, and hearts contrite: An humble heart that prostrate lies, O God, thou never wilt despise. 10, 15. Create in us, O God, therefore An heart refined more and more: And open thou our lips always To make our mouth shew forth thy praise.
HYMN 393. Pardon implored. (2. METRE.) Psalm 51. HAVE mercy on me, O my God, take pity, Lord, I pray; And in thy mercies multitude wipe all my sins away. Wash me, O wash me thorowly, from filthiness within: Blot out my fowl iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. For I acknowledge and confess transgressions done by me: In horrid shapes of guiltiness my sin I always see. Against thee, Lord, and onely thee, the high and Holy One, Have I transgrest in high degree, as unto thee is known. That when thou speak'st of my offence thou may'st be justify'd: And clear in all thou shalt pronounce when I am jud'gd and try'd. Behold how in iniquity I did my shape assume; My mother hath conceived me, a sinner from the womb.
But thou lov'st truth in th' inward part, and wisedom put'st within: Which makes me from my very heart to loath my self for sin. HYMN 394. Pardon, Justification and Sanc∣tification implored. 3. METRE. Psalm 51. PUrge me with Hyssop, O my God, for thou shalt cleanse me so: O wash me in my Saviour's bloud whiter than any snow. O Let me hear the voice that spoke of joy and gladness sweet: That so the bones which thou hast broke may with much comfort meet. Then from my sins, Lord, hide thine eyes, and frowning face refrain: And blot out mine iniquities that none of them remain. O God, create in me an heart unspotted in thy sight: Renewing in my inward part a spirit pure and right.
O do not cast me quite away from presence of thy face: Nor take from me (I humbly pray) thy holy spirit of grace. The joy of thy salvation sweet to me, O Lord, restore: And thy free spirit, O grant me it, to stay me evermore. Transgressors then shall learn of me, how to obtain thy grace: And converts shall come in to thee, and sinners seek thy face. HYMN 395. Pardon of bloudshed, and pray∣ers for Sion. 4. METRE. Psal. 51.14. ACquit me from bloud-guiltiness Lord God, my Saviour strong: Then shall I sing thy righteousness, with loud and joyfull tongue. And open thou, my lips, O Lord, my drooping soul to raise: Then shall my mouth aloud record, and shew forth all thy praise.
For thou desir'st no Sacrifice, else would I give it thee: Burnt Offerings, Lord, thou dost not prize, nor take delight to see. A Soul that doth with sorrow smart, is God's chief Sacrifice: A broken and a contrite heart thou wilt not, Lord, despise. Do good in love to Sion hill, build up Jerusalems wall: Then shall we bring our Offerings still, and please thee therewithall. Pure Sacrifice of righteousness, and bullocks then shall they, With whole burnt Offerings numberless upon thine Altar lay. HYMN 396. Pardon of Sin implored. 5. METRE. All People, &c. Or, O Lord Consider, &c Psal. 51. HAVE mercy on me, O good God, Thy loving kindness shed abroad: And in thy mercies multitude O let my pardon be renew'd. O wash me throughly from my sin, And cleanse my heart from filth within: For I confess my foul offence, With horrour of my conscience.
Thee, thee alone have I set light, And done this evil in thy sight; That if I were condemn'd, I must Confess thy judgment to be just. And well have I deserv'd that doom, That am a sinner from the Womb: And thou lov'st truth in th' inward part, And hast put wisedom in my heart. HYMN 397. Peace of Conscience implored: Also Justification, and Sanctification. 6. METRE. Psalm 51.7. PUrge me with that the Law doth mean By Hyssop, and I shall be clean: Wash me in Christ his bloud, and so I shall be whiter than the snow. Gladness and joy to me reveal, The bones which thou hast broke to heal: From all my sins, Lord, hide thine eyes, And blot out mine iniquities. Create a clean heart in thy view, And a right spirit in me renew: Cast me not off for my demerit, Nor take from me thy holy Spirit.
Thy saving joys to me restore, And spiritualize me more and more: Then shall transgressors learn of me, And sinners shall convert to thee. HYMN 398. Peace of Conscience and par∣don of bloudshed implored. 7. METRE. Psalm 51.14. FROM guilt of bloud-shed make me clear, O God of my salvation dear: Then shall my tongue loud Songs express, To magnify thy righteousness. Wherefore I pray thee, O most high, My lips to open powerfully; And make my mouth aloud to raise The acclamations of thy praise. For thou desir'st not Sacrifice, Else would I make such flames to rise: Burnt Off'ring thou delight'st not in, As an approved purge for sin. The Sacrifices of the Lord, Are hearts contrite, and self-abhorr'd: A broken breast, and heart contrite Surely, O God, thou wilt not slight.
HYMN 399. Prayers for Sions prosperity. (8. METRE) Psal. 51.18. DOE good, O God, in thy good will To Sion thy beloved hill: Let it receive no detriment By sinners falls that do repent. But O build up for thee and them The walls of thy Jerusalem: Then shall our Sacrifices be Pure righteousness well lik'd of thee. Then shall we offer from our soul Burnt Offrings, and burnt Offrings whole, And in a more spiritual way, We shall our Sacrifices pay. And Bullocks taken from the Yoke Shall make thy sacred Altar smoke: Or rather purer flames shall dart Sent from the Altar of our heart. HYMN 400. Properties of Tale-bearers accu∣sed. Psalm 52. WHY dost thou Tyrant take a pride in doing mischief still? Be sure God's goodness doth abide, and so it ever will.
Thy tongue contrives mischievousness, and cuts as rasour keen, It worketh all deceitfulness, in secret and unseen. Thy mind with mischief most accords, with falshood and with wrong; Thou lovest all devouring words, O thou deceitfull tongue! Therefore shall God destroy thy race, and cut thee clean away: And pluck thee from thy dwelling place, both root and branch, I say. The righteous then shall see and fear, and laugh at his disgrace: See here the man that took no care his strength in God to place. But trusted in his store of wealth to save him from distress: And thought to fortifie himself by works of wickedness. But like a green fresh Olive-tree▪ in God's own house am I, And trusting in God's mercies free shall dwell perpetually. And I will ever spread thy fame for doing things so meet: And wait upon thy Holy Name, to all thy Saints so sweet.
The Fifth Century OF PSALM-HYMNS. HYMN 401. Properties of Tale-bearers cursed; and the blessing conferred on Saints. Psalm 52. WHY dost thou boast of mischief most, O man of worldly might? God's goodness sure doth still endure to save me from thy spight. Thou dost incline that tongue of thine to practise mischief great: Yea, it hath been a razer keen in working of deceit.
A readier will thou hast to ill than good to entertain, And righteousness thou lovest less than for to lie and feign. Thou lovest words as sharp as swords, false tongue, that doth betray; Therefore the Lord shall bring a sword to cut thee clean away. He shall destroy thee utterly, pluck'd from thy dwelling place: And bring about to root thee out from all the living race. With terrour then, shall righteous men look on, and laugh, and say, See what befel an Infidel that made not God his stay: But trusted more in worldly store, and riches to possess: And thus he fed and strengthened himself in wickedness. But I shall be an Olive-tree in God's house growing still: And in his grace my trust I place, and so I ever will. On thee will I wait constantly for this thy deed Divine: And spread the fame of thy great Name, Which is so good to thine.
HYMN 402. Punishment of Atheists, and protection of Saints. 1. METRE. Psalm 53. THE fool that is Atheistical hath spoke it (for his part) There is not any God at all, for so he thinks in heart. Corrupt they are exceedingly, and so is all the brood: Have acted vile iniquity, and none of them doth good. The Lord lookt down from's heavenly throne on sons of men below, To see of whom the Lord was known or who did seek to know. But they were every one gone back, defil'd with filth of sin: Not one did tread in vertues track not one was skil'd therein. Are wicked doers so quite misled? such by-paths have they trod, To eat my people up like bread? they have not call'd on God. Sore terrours there shook every limb where was no cause of fright, For God hath burst the bones of him that did against thee fight.
And thou hast put them all to shame, (God blasting all their ways) And O that such salvation came to Israel now a days. When God brings back the captive state of Sion now so sad: Then Jacob shall rejoyce thereat, and Israel shall be glad. HYMN 403. Punishment of Atheists, and protection of Saints. 2. METRE. All People, &c Or, O Lord Consider, &c. Psal. 53. FOOLS say in heart, there is no God, no God that humane actions heeds, Corrupt they are, and none doth good, they do abominable deeds. The Lord from his celestial throne lookt down on mortal men below, To see if there were any one that knew God's will, or sought to know. But all were gone aside from grace, wholly defil'd and in their bloud: There was not one of all the race, not one by nature doing good.
Have they no knowledge in their head? these workers of iniquity, Eating my people up like bread, they never call on God most high. They fear'd a fear, where no fear was, for God hath scattered all their bones That durst encamp against thy cause, and thou hast sham'd those guilty ones. And therefore were they thus dismay'd, because despised of thy God: And O that Israel's saving aid were come from Sion all abroad. When God shall once from bondage bring the captive flock of Sion-hill: Then Jacob shall triumph and sing, and gladness Israel's heart shall fill. HYMN 404. Judgments against Persecu∣tors. Psalm 54. BY thy great Name, O God, defend and judge me by thy might: O hear my prayer, my words attend and do not set them light. For strangers do against me rise, oppressors seek my soul: They set not God before their eyes, their actions to controle.
But God my helper doth abide, the Lord doth still take part With those that gather on my side, and do uphold my heart. He shall unto my foes repay the ill that they have wrought: Lord, in thy justice cut away, and bring them all to nought. Most freely then shall I accord my offering to present, And I will praise thy Name O Lord, for it is excellent. For he hath me delivered from all my grief and wo: Mine eye hath seen accomplished his will upon my foe. Let Israel's God, and none but he, from everlasting (then) To everlasting praised be, Amen, Amen, Amen. HYMN 405. (Psalm 55.17.) Argument. Frequent prayer prevalent, Want of Gods fear destructive. AT Morning, Noon, and Evening-tide unto the Lord I pray:
When I so constantly have cry'd he will not say me nay. Yea God shall hear when I complain, and vex mine enemies sore: Even he that doth of old remain, and is for evermore. Because they see no sudden change, but find a fixt abode: Therefore their courses are so strange, therefore they fear not God. Yet shall they soon be undertrod, that wicked works commit: For thou wilt bring them down, O Cod, into destructions pit. The bloudy and deceitful one, shall not live half his daies: But I will trust in thee alone and give thy Name the praise. HYMN 406. Quieting of Cares, or repose in God. 1. METRE. Psal. 61. LORD hear my cry, my prayer attend, from Earths remotest part; Mine earnest cries to thee I send when over-whelm'd in heart,
Unto the rock of higher power, Lord, lead me graciously: For thou st been my fort and tower. against the enemy. Within thy tents I chuse to dwell, and dwelling to endure: Beneath thy wings I know right well I shall be safe and sure▪ The vows that did my soul engage, Lord, thou wast pleas'd to hear: Thou gavest me the heritage of them that do thee fear. The life of thine anointed one, thou wilt, O Lord, maintain: As many a Generation before thee to remain. He shall abide before thy face, for ever to endure: Prepare thy mercy, truth, and grace, which may preserve him sure. So shall I sing and utter still the praises of thy Name: That all my vows I may fulfill, and daily pay the same.
HYMN 407. Quieting of Cares, or the Rock of Refuge. 2. METRE. Ye Children, &c. Psal. 61. LORD hear my cry, my prayers attend, For from the very utmost end of all the Earth to thee I cry, When as my heart with sorrows weight Is over-whelm'd, O lead me straight unto the rock that's higher than I. For thou a shelter wast for me, And a strong tower I have of thee, against the adversaries face. I will abide within thy tent, And evermore be confident under thy Wings most secret place. For thou, O God, hast heard my vows, And thy free grace to me allows, among thy Saints an hritage: Thou wilt prolong upon the Throne The life of thine Anointed one, and make his years as many an age. He shall abide before thy face For ever, O prepare thy Grace and truth which may preserve him still:
And I will sing due praise therefore Unto thy Name for evermore, and daily all my vows fulfill. HYMN 408. Quieting Principles. Worldly Confidences condemned. Psal. 62.8, 9. O Have your hope in God alway ye Saints with one accord: Pour out your hearts to him, and say, our refuge is the Lord. For all mankind is vanity, th' ignoble, mean and base, And they no better than a ly that are of higher place. For lay them in the Balances with all their pomp and pelf: And lighter weighs the best of these than vanity it self. (2. PART.) Psalm 62.10, 11, 12. O Trust not in oppression, in robbery be not vain: If wealth increase rest not thereon, nor set your heart on gain.
The Lord hath spoken more than once, and often have I heard That God the Judgment must denounce, for every mans reward. The power belongs to him alone, to punish and to spare: And Lord thou giv'st to every one just as his actions are. Let Israels mighty God therefore be prais'd perpetually: From first to last for evermore, Amen, Amen say I. HYMN 409. King David's wicked Enemies destroyed. Psalm 63. WIth marrow fat and delicate, my soul suffic'd shall be, My mouth always shall render praise with joyfull lips to thee. When I record thy love, O Lord, upon my bed at night: And meditate upon thee late, before the morning light. Since thou alone art he from whom my help proceeds and springs, Therefore will I rest joyfully beneath thy shady wings: My soul doth press with eagerness to follow after thee: And still I stand by thy right hand for that upholdeth me.
But soon they must go down to dust, that seek my soul to slay, And falling by the sword shall die, and be the foxes prey: Yet shall the King God's praises sing, from whom these Judgments come; Who still prefers true worshippers and lying lips strikes dumb. Let Israels God be then set forth, and prais'd and prais'd agen, His glory filling all the Earth, Amen, Amen, Amen. HYMN 410. (Psalm 65.) Argument. Our silent praise awaits Gods holy place For his sweet pardoning satisfying grace, His wonders both by Sea and Land Make all in admiration stand. All people, &c. IN Sion, Lord, praise waits for thee, To thee the vow perform'd shall be: O thou that dost our prayers hear, To thee shall all mankind draw near. Transgressions much against us say, But thou shalt purge them clean away: O blessed men select that be, And whom thou mak'st t' approach to thee.
Within thy sacred Courts to dwell, Where we are satisfi'd full well: With goodness of thy holy house, Even of thy Temple glorious. By dreadfull things in righteousness, Lord, thou wilt answer our requests: O God our saving health at hand, Our only hope by Sea and Land. HYMN 411. (2 PART.) Argument. The blessings of a fruitfull year, Are sweetly celebrated here. Psalm 65. GOD by his strength sets fast the Hills, And (girt with power) the Seas he stills: The noise of waves, and tumults rude, Of all the people multitude. Them too, that dwell on utmost Coasts Thy signs affright, O Lord of Hosts: Thou mak'st the mornings early voice, Likewise the Evenings to rejoyce. Thou visitest the spacious Earth, And waterest it with rain pour'd forth: Greatly thou dost inrich each clod, With the full water'd River of God. Thou dost prepare them Corn to grow, When thou hast order'd for it so:
Thou waterest abundantly Its ridges which were parcht and dry. Thou lay'st her furrows by thy power, Thou mak'st it soft with many a shower: The springing of it thou dost bless, Thou crown'st the year with happiness. Thy paths drop fatness lo! they drop Upon the wildernesses top: The little hills and desarts wide, Greatly rejoyce on every side. The flocks do cloath the pasture-ground, The valleys do with Corn abound: And covered o're with what they bring, They shout for joy, they also sing. HYMN 412. (Psalm 65.) Another Metre. Argument. Devotion, Pardon, true Vocation, With answer of our supplication: Strange providences are renown'd. A fruitfull year with glory crown'd. The Mighty God, &c. PRaise waits for thee, O God, in Sion hill To thee the vow shall be performed still: O thou that art the God that hearest prayer Gladly to thee shall all mankind repair.
Iniquities have urg'd great things against us, But with far greater mercies thou prevent'st us. Blest is the man thou chusest of all sorts T' approach to thee, and dwell within thy Courts, With fatness of thy house we shall be fill'd, Such goodness shall thy holy Temple yield: By dreadfull things in righteous dispensati∣on, Thou answerest us, O God of our salvation. Thou art the confidence of Earths far ends, And theirs the farthest Ocean comprehends: Who (girt with power) by strength set fast the hills, The noise of Seas he pacifies and stills; The noise of all their billows he appeaseth, And tumults of the people when he pleaseth. They also that inhabit utmost parts, Are with thy tokens frighted at their hearts: Thou mak'st th' out-goings of the mornings voice, And of the evenings greatly to rejoyce: Thou visitest the Earth, watred completely And with God's River dost inrich it greatly. The River of God, with water doth abound Then thou prepar'st them Corn to sow the ground, Thou water'st its ridges from the Sky, Thou waterest it, O God abundantly: Thou lay'st her furrows, mak'st it soft with showers, Blessing her springing with her fruits & flow∣ers.
Thou with thy goodness Crown'st the faithfull year, Thy paths drop fatness, dropping far and near; They drop on pastures of the desarts wide, The little hills rejoyce on every side: Flocks cloath the pastures, Corn o're val∣leys springing, Shouting for joy, and joy'd with cheerfull singing. HYMN 413. (Psalm 66.) Argument. Great providences prais'd, great foes submit; The Red-Sea dry'd, and Israel passing it. SIng to the Lord, O all ye Lands And make a joyfull sound: Set forth his fame and honour'd name, And make his praise renown'd. Say, Lord, what works come from thine hands, How dreadfull lo! they be Through thy great strength thy foes at length Must all submit to thee. The Earth shall worship and obey, Their songs thy praise shall spread: Come and behold Gods works of old To mortals full of dread. To firm dry land he turn'd the Sea, And all the waters moist:
There went we through, and dry shod too, there we in him rejoyc'd. HYMN 414. (2. PART.) Argument. God's Soveraign Rule: He keeps our Soul alive, Though we with tryals and afflictions strive. Psal. 66. v. 7. GOD'S power still rules the world a∣broad his eyes all Lands descry, O let not then rebellious men exalt themselves on high. O all ye people bless our God, with earnest voices strive, To sound the fame of his great Name who keeps our souls alive; And suffers not on any side our feet to be remov'd, Yet thou, O God, hast us'd thy rod, and us thy servants prov'd. As silver in a furnace try'd, so througly try'd were we: Our feet were set within the net, and therein brought by thee.
HYMN 415. (3. PART.) Argument. Afflictions great imposed and allay'd, The vows of gratitude are sworn and pay'd. Psalm 66. v. 11. Afflictions sore and violent thou mad'st our loyns abide, Yea thou didst then cause furious men over our heads to ride. Through flames of fire, O Lord, we went, and through the watry flouds, But surely thou hast brought us now, to places stor'd with goods. Burnt offerings to thy house I'll bear, those very vows to pay, Which I did make, and which I spake, in my distressfull day. Burnt Sacrifice of Fatlings there my sould to thee devotes, With Incense too, of Rams enough, with Bullocks offering Goats.
HYMN 416. Release from Afflictions. (4. PART.) Psalm 66.11. LORD thou hast brought us oftentimes into a tangling strait: And laid afflictions on our loins, with an oppressing weight. Over our head fierce men did ride, by thee on purpose sent, And we distrest on every side, through fire and water went. But when we were thus under-trod, and hopeless seem'd our case: Even then thou brought'st us out, O God, into a wealthy place: Therefore will I come to thy house burnt offerings to bestow: And I will pay thee all the vows which my engagements owe. HYMN 417. (5. PART.) Argument. Experience told stirs up to prayer and praise, Sins kept, withhold true blessings in our ways. 2. METRE. Psalm 66.16. COme hearken all that fear the Lord, and I will let you know
What special Love the Lord above to my dear Soul did shew: My mouth did his renown record, my tongue his praise preferr'd, But if within I harbour'd sin my prayer should not be heard. But God hath heard me verily, and hath been well content, With willing ear my voice to hear, and what I did present, The Lord I bless and magnifie, who turned not away; Nor held from me his mercy free, when I to him did pray. HYMN 418. Revelation of the Gospel. 1. METRE. Have mercy, &c. Psalm 67. SHEW Grace to us, O God, and bless us every one: Thy face Divine on us let shine, thy way on Earth make known Let Nations see thy light, let people praise thy Name: O let them all in general thus see, thus spread thy fame.
Let Nations shout and sing, because thou art set forth A righteous King in governing and judging all the Earth. Let People praise thy Name, let all of them praise thee: Then shall the Earth her fruits bring forth, and great increase shall be. God our own God shall then abundant blessings send: And men shall fear him every where, to Earths remotest end. HYMN 419. Revelation, and Riches of the Gospel. 2. METRE. Give laud, &c. Psalm 67. BE good, O God, to thine, and pour thy blessings forth: Thy face on us let shine; and shew thy way on Earth, With such success, That Nations all may see their call To blessedness.
O let the people then give praise, O God, to thee, And let all sorts of men in thy sweet praise agree: Let them confess Thy Holy Name, and spread thy fame With thankfulness. O make the Nations glad, and let them sing for joy: For thou shalt judge, O God, the people righteously. Thy Rule shall bless The Nations all in general With happiness. O let the people then give praise to thee, O God, And let all sorts of men proclaim thy praise abroad: Let all confess Thy Holy Name, and spread thy fame With cheerfulness. Then shall the earth afford a plentifull encrease: And our own God the Lord to bless us shall not cease. God shall us bless, Earth far and near his Name shall fear, With awfulness.
HYMN 420. Rising of the Ark, or, Exurgat Deus. The mighty God, &c. Psalm 68.1, 2. LET God arise and dissipate his foes, Let those that hate him flee before his face: As smoke is driven away, just so let those Be driven away and God pursue the chase. As fire doth melt the wax, and makes it liquid, So perish in God's presence let the wicked. 3, 4. But let the just their joys in God proclaim, And let them glory in the Lord most high: Sing to the Lord, sing praises to his Name: Exalt ye him that rideth on the sky. By JAH his Name exalt him, and adore him, And most exceedingly rejoyce before him.
5, 6. A tender Father of the Fatherless, A Judge of Widows is Almighty God: And so indeed he doth himself express From's holy habitation and abode. He sets the desolate in habitations To dwell with their own housholds, and relations. 6. Psalm 106.48. He bringeth out those that are bound with chains, And frees the Pris'ners with a powerfull hand: But the rebellious people he restrains, And makes their dwelling in a barren Land. Let Israel's God be ever blest therefore, And People say, Amen, for evermore.
HYMN 421. Sanctuary Songs for the wonder∣full works of God. Psal. 68.32. SING unto God with one accord, ye Kingdoms of the earth: O sing ye praises to the Lord, and set his honour forth. To him that mounts the highest sphere of Heavens fram'd of old: And sendeth out his thunder there most mighty to behold. Ascribe to God Omnipotence, for that to him pertains: O're Israel is his excellence, and in the clouds he reigns. O God, thou art a dreadfull God, and so thou mak'st it known From Heaven, which is thy blest abode, and Sion's sacred throne. The God of Israel is our tower, and it is onely he That gives his people strength and power, and blest his Name shall be.
HYMN 422. Sion's Reparations. To the Tune of the old 130. Psalm. Psalm 69.34. LET the Heavens praise begin, let the Earth pursue it: Let the Sea and all therein joyn their suffrage to it. For the Lord will Sion save, Judah's Cities rear: Houses new that men may have, and possessions there. Psalm 106.48. There his Servants seed shall claim th' heritage excelling: There shall they that love his Name▪ have perpetual dwelling. Let the God of Israel then have the praise for ever: And the People say Amen, joyning all together. HYMN 423. Speedy deliverance pray'd for. 1. METRE. Have mercy, &c. Psalm 70. MAKE haste, O God, make haste, my Saviour now to be: And let the time no longer waste before thou succour me.
Let shame confound them all that seek my bloud to spill: Let flat confusion on them fall who-ever wish me ill. Let them be turned back, so to reward their shame, That no disgracefull language lack to taunt and to defame. Let them that seek thy face rejoyce in thee always: Let them that love thy saving grace, say still, to God be praise. But I, O Lord, am poor, and greatly stand in need: O thou my God, draw nigh therefore, and succour me with speed. Thou art my onely aid, thou art my Saviour strong: Let not thy help be still delay'd, Lord make no tarrying long. HYMN 424. Speedy deliverance urged. 2. METRE. All People, &c. Psalm 70. MAKE haste, O Lord, and help afford, Make haste to help me, O my Lord:
Their practices with shame confound That seek my harmless soul to wound. With great disgrace let them retire, Whoever do my hurt desire: Let them that make my grief their game, Be turned back with utter shame. Most glad and joyfull let them be Who-ever do seek after thee: And those that thy salvation love, Say, ever-blest be God above. But I am poor and under-trod, Make haste to help me, O my God: Thou art my hope, my help and stay, Come, Lord, and make no more delay. HYMN 425. Spiritual Government of Christ figured in Solomon, or, A prayer for the King. Psal. 72.1, 2. THE King, O God, the King's dear Son instruct in thy Decrees: That Justice may be duely done, to men of all degrees. Then shall the mountains bring us peace, and God shall also bless The little Hills to yield increase, by means of righteousness
And he shall judge those people then, that worldly comforts lack, And he shall save poor needy men, and break th' oppressors back. Then shall they fear thee to be sure, the people great and small, So long as Sun and Moon endure, to Generations all. He shall descend as rain pour'd forth▪ upon the mowen Grass, As show'rs that water all the earth, whatever way they pass. The Just shall flourish in his time, and great the peace shall be: Untill the Moon surcease to shine, Amen, Amen, say we. HYMN 426. Strength and establishment of Christ his Kingdom. Psal. 72.11, 8. ALL Kings shall worship Christ the Lord, before him falling down: All Nations shall with one accord do homage to his Crown. And his Dominion shall extend from Sea to Sea, throughout: And from the River to the end of all the Earth about.
9, 10. The dwellers in the desarts must before him bow full low, His enemies shall lick the dust, and great submission show. The farthest Kingdoms shall present their offerings to this King; The Islands and the Continent, their Gifts to him shall bring. 15, 17. And people then continually shall pray for, and proclaim His Kingdoms great felicity, and daily praise his Name. His Name shall shine from East to West, as Sunbeams never dim: And Nations all shall call him blest, as being blest in him. 18, 19. Now bless the Lord with one accord, the God of Israel, Who onely brings to pass the things, that every where excell. And spread the fame of his Great Name always and altogether; And fill the Earth with his known worth, Amen, Amen, for ever.
HYMN 427. (1. METRE.) Argument. Temptation much assaults the pure in heart, To see the wicked prosper, while they smart. Psal. 73. HOwe'er it be yet God is good and kind to Israel: To every one that's clean of heart and keeps his Conscience well. But as for me I almost slipt, my feet began to slide, And through temptation unawares, my steps were turn'd aside. For when I saw the foolish ones I was with envy griev'd: Beholding the prosperity wherein the wicked liv'd. For both they had an easy death, and firm perswasions then, And were not vext as others were, nor plagu'd as other men.
HYMN 428. (2. METRE.) Argument. The prosperous state the wicked men live in, Provokes them to commit far greater sin. Psalm 73. PRosperity and pride enclose the wicked as a chain: And as with Garments they are wrapt with Rapine and Disdain: With fatness do their eyes stand out They have beyond desire; they speak great words, and threaten high, to set oppression higher. They set their mouth against the Heavens, their tongue walks through the Earth: Therefore God's people much comply, and much grief it brings forth. And thus they say, how doth God know? sees he that sits so high? Lo! those prophane ones prosper here, their riches multiply.
HYMN 429. (3. METRE.) Argument. The pure in heart (sore scourg'd) are taught to know That Worldlings joy soon ends in Worlds of woe. Psal. 73. SURE I have cleans'd my heart in vain; in vain my heart I purg'd; For all day long I have been plagu'd, and every morning scourg'd. But if I say I will speak thus, I rashly should condemn, The Generation of thy Saints, and judge amiss of them. Yet when I thought to know this thing, 'twas hard to apprehend, Till, going to the house of God, I understood their end. And namely how thou settest them upon a slippery seat; And in a moment casts them down, and mak'st their ruine great.
HYMN 430. (4. METRE.) Argument. The Worldlings joy is but a Dream, The pure in heart have joys Supream. Psal. 73. HOW soon are wicked people brought to desolations path; They are consumed utterly with terrours of thy wrath: And as a Dream when one awakes, so thou, O Lord most high, When thou awak'st, thou shalt despise, their Image utterly. Thus for a while my heart was griev'd, my reins were prick'd with pain, So ignorant a fool was I, a beast before thee plain: Yet am I evermore with thee, thy right hand holds me fast, Thou with thy Counsels guidest me to glory at the last.
HYMN 431. (5. METRE.) Argument. God's the sure portion of the pure in heart, Their sure destruction that from him depart. Psalm 73. WHO is there, Lord, that I can wish but thee, in Heaven above: Nor is there any one on earth like thee that I can love. My flesh and heart doth fail in me, but God doth fail me never; The strengthner of my heart is he, and heritage for ever. For lo all such as go from thee, and unto Idols bow, Shall their deserved ruin meet, and utter overthrow, Therefore will I draw nigh to God, and in the Lord I'll trust; That I may shew forth all his works to be both good and just.
HYMN 432. Strength of sinners subdu'd. Or, Habitation of Cruelty supprest. 1. METRE. Psalm 74.11. WHY dost thou, Lord, thy judgments spare, and thy right hand with-draw? O pluck it from thy bosome bare to keep thy foes in awe. O give not to the multitude the turtle-doves dear soul: Forget not thy poor flock, O God, which bears too long controll. Unto thy Covenant have regard, the Earth's a darksome Den, And full of Habitations hard, possess'd by cruel men. Let not the simple go with shame, and blushing turn their back: Nor let the poor to praise thy Name a just occasion lack. Rise, Lord, and plead thine own true cause, think how the fools defame, And what contempt it daily draws upon thy sacred Name. The clamours of thine Enemies forget not, Lord, to cease: The tumults that against thee rise, continually encrease.
HYMN 433. (2. METRE.) Argument. Strength of Leviathan subdued. Pharaoh overthrown in the Wilderness. Psal. 74.12. O God thou art my King of old, and thou dost still set forth Thy saving mercies manifold in midst of all the Earth. Thou didst divide and part the Seas by thy great strength and force, Thou brok'st the Dragon's head in these returning to their course. Leviathan's heads with great disgrace were broken there by thee: Which to thy flock in desart place, was meat and drink to see. Thou mad'st a Spring with streams to rise from rocks both hard and high: Thy powerfull hand did make likewise deep Rivers to be dry. The day is thine, likewise the night by thy decree doth run: Thou also hast prepar'd the light, and form'd the brighter Sun. Thou didst appoint the ends and coasts of all the earth throughout: Both Summer heat, and Winter frosts thy hand did bring about.
Psal. 72.18. Let Israel's God, the King of Kings be prais'd for evermore, Who only doth such wondrous things, praise ye the Lord therefore. HYMN 434. Temptations encountred and overcome. All People, &c. Psal. 77.7, 8. WILL God cast off eternally, and is his favour clean remov'd? Is mercy quite and clean set by, his promise past, but never prov'd? 9, Hath God forgotten to be kind, and wholly left compassions path? His tender mercies all confin'd, and hath he shut them up in wrath? 10. But this, said I, full well appears to be mine own infirmity: But I will call to mind the years of his right hand that is most high. 11. I will remember, and unfold the mighty works of God the Lord: The wonders which he wrought of old, surely (said I) I will record.
HYMN 435. The Safe Conduct. Psalm 77.15. THOU hast, O God, with powerfull hand redeem'd thy people, Jacob's Race, And Joseph's from proud Pharaoh's Land, conducting them in desart place. 16. The Waters, Lord, had sight of thee, the Waters saw, and were afraid Thy presence and thy power to see: the depths of Seas were sore dismay'd. 17. The Clouds pour'd down their watry load, the Skies a thundring sound forth sent: Thine Arrows were dispers'd abroad, shot from the flaming Element. 18. In Heaven was thy thunder heard, thy lightnings did the world surround, Earth shook and trembled sore afeard, thy way was in the Seas profound. 19, 20. Thy paths were in the waters deep, thy foot-steps now none understand: Thou lead'st thy folk like flocks of sheep by Moses and by Aaron's hand.
HYMN 436. The time of Trouble complain∣ed of. Psalm 79.5. HOW long wilt thou be angry, Lord? for ever! till we die! And shall thy jealousie b stirr'd to burn perpetually? 9. Help us, O God, Our strength and stay, thy Glory to record: Save us, and purge our sins away, for thy Name sakes, O Lord. 8. Our former foul iniquity remember now no more: Let Grace prevent us speedily, for we are humbled sore. 2. PART. Ibidem. Psal. 79.8, 9.13. DO not record against us, Lord, our sins done long agoe: Draw nigh apace with tender Grace, for we are very low. O Lord, let some sweet comfort come, for sorrows sharp and keen, And for the years of sighs and tears that we have lately seen.
So we thy flock, and Pasture-stock shall praise thee evermore, And pre-ingage each following age, to keep like praise in store. HYMN 437. The Vine of Israel pray'd for. Psalm 80.8, 9. A Noble Vine of Israel, thou didst from Aegypt bring: The Heathenfolk thou didst expell, and plant it here to spring. Sufficient room for it to shoot, preparing by thy hand, And when it once had taken root, it filled all the Land. 10, 11, 12. Her goodly boughs like Cedars sprout, her shade the hills did hide: Her boughs and branches were set out from Sea to River side: Why hast thou then broke down of hers the quick-set hedges so, That all the transient passengers do pluck her as they go? 13, 14, 15. 'Tis wasted by the wood-land Boar, wild Beasts from neighbouring coasts Devour thy Vine, return therefore we pray thee, Lord of Hosts. Look down from Heaven and behold, and visit this thy Vine, And Vine-yard planted here of old by that right hand of thine.
79.13. So we thy flock and pasture-stock shall praise thee evermore: And shall engage each following age to keep like praise in store. HYMN 438. Throne of Israel re-established. Psal. 80.17. UPhold the man of thy right hand, the Son of man sustain: Made strong by thee, for thee to stand, Lord, make him strong again. 18. So shall not we go back from thee, O quicken us for this end: And faithfull suppliants we shall be upon thee to attend. 19. Lord God of Hosts our hearts incline, and turn them unto thee: Let Grace Divine upon us shine, and safe our souls shall be. HYMN 439. Tryal of Loyalty, or Israels in∣gratitude. Have mercy, &c. Psalm 81.7. NOW hearken and give ear to me, my people dear: O Israel, I will testifie to thy conviction clear.
In thee I say there shall be no strange God at all, Nor evermore shalt thou adore, or on strange Gods shalt call. The Lord thy God am I, who brought thee graciously With powerfull hand from Aegypt Land, and servile tyranny. Thy mouth now open wide in prayer, to be supply'd: And sure I will thy prayers fulfill, but Israel still deny'd. So I (in judgment just) even left them to their lust, To walk as their own counsels were, destructive to their trust. HYMN 440. Tryal of Israel, and attest of God's favour. Have mercy, &c. Psal. 81.13. MY people, O that ye had hearkened unto me: That Israel had walk'd so well, as after my Decree.
I should have soon subdu'd their adversaries rude: And turn'd my hand to clear the Land of all their enemies lewd. They that the Lord do hate have bow'd and been prostrate, But Israel's time had been in prime, and born eternal date. I should have made them eat the finest of the Wheat: And made the Rock a hony-stock distilling plenty great. 2. METRE. To the Tune of the old 111. or 120. Psalm. Psal. 81.13. O That my people dear Had bow'd a willing ear to that which I did say, And O that Israel Had sought to please me well by walking in my way! I should have soon subdu'd Their adversaries rude: and turn'd my powerfull hand Against their enemies, Whoever durst arise my people to withstand.
The haters of the Lord Should all with one accord have bow'd and been prostrate: But as for Israel's time It should have been in prime, and born eternal date. I would have made them eat The finest of the Wheat that standeth in the shock: And in my favour free Have satisfied thee with Honey from the rock. HYMN 441. Mighty men warned. All people, &c. Psal. 82. Among the Gods, God takes the room, to judge among the great and high: How long will ye unjustly doom, accepting persons partially? Defend the poor and fatherless, do justice to the weak and poor; Deliver all the succourless, and rid them from the evil doer. But neither do these Tyrants know, nor will they better understand, In wilfull blindness on they go, unto the ruin of the Land.
The Earths foundations are decay'd, all out of course and order runs: I stil'd you Gods, all ye, I said, are the most high Jehovah's Sons. But dye like men of mortal birth, like former Princes ye shall fall: Arise, O God, and judge the Earth, for thine alone are Nations all. HYMN 442. Tribulation and Woe to the wicked. Psal. 83.1. LORD be not still, hold not thy tongue, behold how furiously Thy hatefull foes in tumults throng, and lift their heads on high. Make them, my God, like to a wheel, or straw which winds disperse: As burning woods the fury feel of fire that burns so fierce. As kindling flames on Mountains vast with fury all deform: So persecute them with thy blast, and fright them with thy storm. That men may know that thou whose Name is call'd Jehovah great, Surpassest all the world in fame, and hast the Soveraign seat.
HYMN 443. True love to Ordinances. 1. METRE. Psalm 84.1, 2. HOW amiable are thy Tents, Lord God of Hosts, to me? My soul doth long, yea even faints thy Sacred Courts to see. My heart and flesh cry out for thee, the everliving God: O when shall I come near and see the place of thine abode! 4, 10. O happy they that hold their place within thy house to dwell: For in thy Courts a days short space a thousand doth excell. Much rather would I keep a door, and in thy house remain, Than dwell with all the pomp and store in tents of the prophane. 11. For God a Sun and Shield will be, with Grace▪ and Glory bright: And no good thing with-hold will he from them that walk upright. Lord God of Hosts (whose Glory reigns) how happy a man is he That though debarr'd the outward means, yet puts his trust in thee.
HYMN 444. Affection to Ordinances. 2. METRE. Psal. 84. LORD God of Hosts, how lovely fair, thy Tabernacles be! My longing Soul would fain repair, thy sacred Courts to see. My flesh and heart cry out amain for thee the living God, O when shall I come near and see the place of thine abode! Most happy therefore are those men that dwell so nigh thy Courts, And they whose zeal doth carry them to such Divine resorts. From strength to strength they walk full fast, through growth in Grace and Love: Untill they come to God at last, in Sion (there) above. 2. PART. One day, O Lord, of prayer and praise spent in thy Courts of Grace, Is better than a thousand days in any other place.
Much rather would I keep a door where God his Grace presents, Than have my dwelling evermore, in Sinners furnish'd Tents. For God the Lord Jehovah is, a constant Sun and Shield, He will vouchsafe his Grace to his, and Glory freely yield. And no good thing with-hold will he from them that walk upright, Lord God of Hosts, so blest they be that trust upon thy might. HYMN 445. (3. METRE.) Argument. Zeal to the Temple quells their labours hard, As they did take long journeys thither-ward. Psal. 84. HOW amiable are thy Tents, Lord God of Hosts, to me? My Soul doth long, yea even faints, thy Sacred Courts to see. My heart and flesh cry out for thee the ever-living God, Thinking the Sparrows bliss to be to find that blest abode.
The Swallow builds her nest full close, her young ones there to bring; Even to thine Altar, Lord of Hosts, my God and Glorious King. Happy thy houshold Servants be that still do give thee praise: Blest is the man whose strength's in thee, that minds thy Servants ways. That passing thorow Baca-plain do make thereof a Well; Or use the pools there fill'd with rain, and difficulties quell. From strength to strength they walk full fast with an unwearied will, Till all do come to God at last in Sions Sacred Hill. HYMN 446. (2. PART.) Argument. Church freedom Saints account their bliss, And choicest blessings do not miss. Psal. 84. LORD God of Hosts my prayer embrace, O God of Jacob hear: See, Lord, our Shield, behold the face of thine anointed dear.
For, Lord▪ one day of prayer and praise spent in thy Courts of Grace, Is better than a thousand days in any other place. Much rather would I keep a door, where God his Grace presents, Than have my dwelling evermore in sinners furnish'd Tents. For God the Lord, for certain, is a constant Sun and Shield, He will vouchsafe his Grace to his, and Glory freely yield. And no good thing with-hold will he from them that walk upright: Lord God of Hosts, so blest they be, that trust upon thy might. DOXOLOGY. Let Israels God the Lord most high be ever blest therefore, From first to last perpetually, Amen, for evermore.
HYMN 447. (Psalm 85.10.) Argument. Truth springing out of the Earth, Or our Blessed Saviour's Birth. . MErcy and truth (now we may say) are sweetly met together: And righteousness and peace (this day) have kindly kiss'd each other. And truth hath sprung out of the Earth (by Christ a Saviour given) And righteousness (by his sweet birth) hath looked down from Heaven. And God that made his Gospel known, shall give us each good thing: And make our Land a fruitfull one, and great encrease to bring. And Christ our righteousness most pure shall go before his face, To guide us by example sure in his good ways of Grace.
Psal. 41.13. Let Israel's God the Lord therefore be praised altogether: From first to last for evermore, Amen, Amen, for ever. HYMN 448. (2. METRE.) Argument. The Church redeem'd from Captive State is glad, He prays that full deliverance may be had. Psalm 85. LORD thou hast dealt most favourably with Jacob's Land of late, And turn'd our sad captivity into a free estate. Unto thy people thou didst please to seal a pardon free: Their grievous sins and trespasses are covered all by thee. Thou hast removed from the path where all thine anger lay, And from the fierceness of thy wrath, hast turn'd thy self away. Turn us, O God, our Saviour, thus with thee for to comply: And cause thine anger towards us to cease perpetually.
Wilt thou be angry evermore and not thy wrath recall? Wilt thou draw out thy wrath so sore to Generations all? Wilt thou not quicken us again, and so far set us free, That we thy people which remain, may much rejoyce in thee? HYMN 449. (2. PART.) Argument. The Church redeem'd and warn'd gives God the praise, He prophesies great good in Gospel Days. NOW will I hear attentively what God the Lord will say, In hope of true tranquillity to follow many a day. For to his Saints and people dear the Lord will utter peace, But let them take a warning here and former follies cease. And sure the Lord's salvation is, Nigh them that fear his Name, That Glory may dwell here with his, and fill our Land with fame. Mercy and truth together meet whilst Christ the Kingdom sways: And righteousness and peace do meet in Glorious Gospel-Days.
And truth shall spring from humane race by Christ our Saviour's Birth; And righteousness looks down with Grace, from Heaven to bless the Earth. Yea God shall give us each good thing, with righteousness and peace: And he shall make our Land to bring abundance of encrease. That sure example (for our sake) the righteousness of God Shall go before, and make us take the way that he hath trod. (Psalm 86. to v. 7.) HYMN 450. Argument. The Saints Calamity, and God's propensity, Strong Arguments of pity. All People, &c. LORD bow thine ear, attend my cry, for I am poor and in the dust: Preserve my righteous soul, for I in thee, my God, do put my trust. Thy mercy, Lord, to me extend, and hearken to my mournfull voice; Daily my cries to thee ascend, O make thy Servants soul rejoyce.
Thou, Lord, art good for rvermore, to pardon sins art still inclin'd; And all that do thy grace implore, shall thine abundant mercy find. To thee I humbly make address, Lord, hear my prayer, my voice attend; I'll call on thee in my distress, for thou wilt me an answer send. HYMN 451. Turning, or conversion of the Gentiles. 2. METRE. All People, &c. Psalm 86.8, 9. AMong the Gods there's none like thee, nor any works like thine, O Lord: All Nations whom thou mad'st to be, shall come to thee with one accord. 10. With Adoration they shall come to glorify the Holy One: For the great God, great things hath done; yea thou, O God, art God alone. Psalm 106.48. Let Israel's God the Lord therefore be blest and praised yet agen: And let all people evermore say cheerfully, Amen, Amen.
HYMN 452. Turning the Gentiles, or Sions Glory. 1. METRE. Psalm 87. IN Holy Hills the Ground-work lies of Sion's Edifice: Whose Gates beyond all Jacob's Land the Lord doth love and prize. O City of God renown'd and fam'd, thy Converts are proclaim'd: Egypt for one, and Babylon, I to my friends have nam'd. Philistia, Tyre, and Ethiop' there was born, and made an heir: And Sion, they shall point and say, did this and that man bear. And the most High shall stablish her, and such mens birth refer To Sion Mount: so make his count when he doth register. As well the voice of him that sings, as he that tunes the strings Of musick sweet, therein shall meet: in thee are all my Springs.
HYMN 453. Turning the Gentiles to the Church. 2. METRE. All People, &c. Psalm 87. THE Church well built upon the word is consecrated to the Lord: Who bears to Sion great respect, and chiefly to his own Elect. Most Glorious things of her fore-told in Gospel-days we shall behold; The Gentiles shall convert and dwell, as heirs of life with Israel. Tidings shall be of many a man born there a famous Christian: And God shall stablish them and theirs, and count them his adopted heirs. Then Lord our giving thanks to thee the musick of our souls shall be: For all the Springs of Grace and Skill, are made to flow from Sion-hill.
HYMN 454. Validity of promises, or faith∣fulness of God's Chastisements. All People, &c. Psalm 89.30, 31. IF David's seed my Law forsake, and do not execute my will: If they infringe the Laws I make, and do not my Commands fulfill. 32. Then will I visit and chastise their bold transgressions with the rod: Correcting their Iniquities with stripes and punishments (saith God) 33. But of my loving kindness yet I will not wholly him bereave; Nor will my faithfulness permit to fail, and take a final leave. 34. My Covenant with my faithfull King I'll not reverse, nor quite eclipse: Nor will I alter any thing that I have spoken with my lips. Psalm 106.48. Let Israel's God the Lord most high be ever blest and prais'd therefore: And let all people magnify his blessed Name for evermore.
HYMN 455. Vanishing of Life. Psalm 90.10.5. THE days of our determin'd years are threescore years and ten, And if at fourscore strength appears, that strength is weakness then. So speedily we pass away, and we are quickly gone: Just like a floud that makes no stay, but hastily runs on. 6, 12. Like Grass which in the morning grows, but is cut down at night: At morning fresh and fair it shews, at evening withers quite. LORD, let our frail mortality be so well understood, That we may wisely learn of thee for our eternal good. HYMN 456. Vanishing of Life, or the short age of man. All People, &c. Psalm 90.10. THE common age of mortal men is counted threescore years and ten: And if to fourscore some attain, Their life is but a lengthned pain.
So quickly comes it to decay, And suddenly we drop away: Lord teach the numbring of our days, To bring our hearts to wisedoms ways. HYMN 457. Wishing for good times. Psal. 90.13. REturn, O Lord, how long a space let it repent thee much, Touching thy Servants wofull case, whose sufferings have been such. 14. O satisfy us speedily with thy compassions kind, That all our days may yield us joy, and gladness chear our mind. 15. As thou hast sent us sorrows keen, so send us comforts glad, For days and years that we have seen so sorrowfull and sad. 16. O let thy work appear unto thy servants every one, Thy Glory to their Children show, when we are dead and gone.
The Lord our God shine on his Church, and grace our joynt endeavour, O prosper thou our handy-works, and stablish them for ever. HYMN 458. (Psal. 91.) Argument. Choice Saints preserv'd in pestilential times, While Sinners smart for unrepented crimes. All People, &c. WHO makes th'Almighty his retrea Rests in a safe and quiet seat; For God's or'e-spreading providence Shall shadow him for his defence. I therefore of the Lord will say, He is my refuge, hope and stay, My fortress where I safe abide; My God, in him I will confide. He'll save thee from the fowlers snare, And noisome pestilential air; His feather'd wings shall safely yield, His truth, thy buckler be, and shield. Thou shalt not need to take a fright For any terrour of the night: Nor for the arrow that makes way, And flies with deadly stroke by day.
For stinging plague that quickly kills, And round about with slaughter fills, Walking in darkness, or noon-tide, Thou shalt not fear, nor be annoy'd. Thousands on every hand shall fall, Yet thou shalt not be hurt at all; Onely thou shalt stand by and see, What wicked mens reward shall be. HYMN 459. (2. PART.) Argument. The true believers tread the Dragon down, Attain choice comforts, and at length the Crown. SInce thou hast made the most high God Thy refuge and thy safe abode, No evil shall impede thy joy, Nor plague thy dwelling shall annoy. For he shall give his Angels charge To keep thee in thy ways at large: These in their hands shall thee support Lest thy foot stumble to thy hurt. The Lyon thou mayst boldly meet, Tread th' Asp and Dragon under feet; Because he fixt his love on me I will from dangers set him free.
I'll set him high, protect and own, Because that he my Name hath known: When he calls on me, I'll reply; And in his trouble I'll stand by. I'll send him safe deliverance, And unto honour him advance: Give him long Life, and when that's done, Will shew him my Salvation. HYMN 460. (Psalm 92.) Argument. The Antient Sabbath celebrated here, For providences to the Saints most dear. All People, &c. IT is a good thing to record The Loving-kindness of the Lord, And to sing praises cheerfully Unto thy Name, O thou most high. And in the morning to shew forth Thy Loving-kindness of such worth; And every night for to express The record of thy faithfulness. Upon a Ten-string'd Instrument With Psaltery and Songs consent, And on the Harp with solemn sound To make thy Glorious Name renown'd.
For thou hast made me glad, O Lord, With thy great works which I record: And in thy handy-works will I Triumph, O Lord, exceedingly. HYMN 461. (2. PART.) Argument. God's Providences cannot be descry'd By brutish men: but God is magnify'd. O Lord, how great are thy great works! Thy thoughts are far too deep to search; A brutish man can never learn, Nor doth a fool this thing discern. When wicked men do spring as Grass, And all ill doers in pomp surpass, It is that they should altogether Be blasted, and destroy'd for ever. DOXOLOGY. But thou, O Lord, art still most high, For ever to ETERNITY: Let Israel's God be prais'd therefore, From first to last for evermore.
HYMN 462. Vertuousness or fruitfulness of the Saints in age. 2. METRE. All People, &c. Psalm 92.12. LIke to the Palm the Just shall be (That ever-flourishing fruitfull tree) And spread abroad as he comes on Like Cedars of Mount Lebanon. Those that the Lord by special Grace Hath planted in his Holy Place, Shall flourish there, and spread abroad Within the Courts of our Great God. And in their age much fruit shall bring, They shall be fat and flourishing: God's Power and Justice to express, In whom is no unrighteousness. HYMN 463. Vertuousness or Victoriousness of God's Power. 1. METRE. Psal. 93. THE Lord as King aloft doth reign, in Glory shining bright: His strength and power appeareth plain, for he is girt with might:
The Lord likewise the Earth hath made, and setled it so sure, No might can make it move and fade, it ever doth endure. E're that the world was made or wrought thy seat was set on high: Before all time that can be thought thou art eternally. The flouds, O Lord, the flouds arise, they swell against the shore: They raise their waves unto the sky, and make the waters roar. Yet though the storms appear in sight, though Seas do rage and swell, The Lord is strong and more of might, for he on high doth dwell. And sweetly reigns he over us, keeping his Cov'nant sure: And Holiness becomes thy house for ever to endure. HYMN 464. Vertuousness or Victoriousness of God's Power and Promises. 2. METRE. Psalm 93. THE Lord doth reign eternally array'd in beauty bright: He is most high in Majesty, and girts himself with might.
The world he stablish'd still to last, thou hast prepar'd thy Throne: Of old thou hast confirm'd it fast, thou art th' eternal one. The flouds, O Lord, the flouds arise, the flouds lift up their waves: Up to the skies their uprore flies, their voice with tumult raves. Yet is the Lord on high far more, far more of might than these, Though numerous store of waters roar, and mighty waves of seas. Thy Testimonies (questionless) are sure, and alter never: Pure holiness doth deck and dress thy house, O Lord, for ever. HYMN 465. Vocation to publick Worship, or lowly Adoration. Have mercy, &c. Psalm 95.1—7. COME sing with cheerfulness loud Songs of sweet delight, With one accord, before the Lord, our Rock of saving might. Into his presence press, hearts truly thankfull bring, And make a noise, exciting joys, and Psalms unto him sing.
Because the Lord is known a mighty God to be: The Soveraign King in governing above all Gods is he. Within his hands alone the earths foundation lies, The strength and might and tow'ring hight of hills is his likewise. The Sea is his deep Ford, for he did make the same, And by his hand the solid Land receiv'd its form and frame. O come bow to the Lord, before him let us fall: Let us adore and kneel before the Lord that made us all. HYMN 466. (Psal. 96.) Argument. The Psalmist celebrates sweet Gospel-Days, Idols are slighted: God claims all the praise. All People, &c. NOW sing a new Song to the Lord O all ye people of the Earth: Bless ye the Lord, his Name record in cheerfull Songs of joy and mirth.
From age to age, O do not spare his sweet and saving health to show: His wonders rare and fame declare, that Nations all on Earth may know. For he excels in Soveraignty, and infinitely hath the odds; And much must he exalted be, and greatly fear'd above all Gods. For Heathen Gods are vanity, meer Idols are they every one: But verily the Lord most high created the Celestial Throne. Before him honour stands in sight, with Majesty that is Divine: Adored might and beauty bright do in his Sanctuary shine. O give unto the Lord's great Name, ye numerous Kindreds of man-kind, Both strength and fame to him proclaim, for both in one must be conjoyn'd. HYMN 467. (2. PART.) Argument. God's Glory in his Temple shineth forth, All Creatures joyn with joyfulness and mirth, To serve the Soveraign Judge of all the Earth. GIVE to the Lord such Glory due as his Almighty Name imports, O bring with you an Offering new, and come into his sacred Courts.
Adore the Lord in beauty clear of his Divine and holy place: From far and near O stand in fear before his Glorious awfull face. Tell Heathen men Jehovah reigns, the spacious world hath he set fast; And so sustains that it remains unshaken ever to the last. With Justice he shall judge the Earth, O let the Heaven rejoyce therefore, And let the Earth be fill'd with mirth, let Seas and all the billows roar. Let fields and fruits shew high degrees of joy and mirth with one accord: And then (with these) the woods and trees, shall greatly joy before the Lord. For lo! He comes, He comes afresh with righteous judgment in his mouth, To judge all flesh with righteousness, and people with his sacred truth. HYMN 468. (Psalm 97. to v. 7.) Argument. Christ reigns and triumphs to his enemies dread; The Convert Nations may be comforted. To the Tune of the old 121. Psalm. THE Lord of Israel doth reign, Let all the Earth rejoyce With high exalted voice: The Lord his Kingdom doth maintain.
Let multitude of Nations Express their Gratulations. Thick Clouds and Darkness (as it were) At Sinai's sacred Hill Are round about him still: And righteousness and judgment are The blessed Habitation Of his high Throne and station. A flame of fire that blazeth bright Before his presence goes, And burns up all his foes▪ His Lightnings to the world gave light; The Earth that was assembled With terrour saw and trembled. The Hills did melt like heated Wax, At presence of the Lord, By all the Earth ador'd: The Heavens declare his righteous Acts, All people see his Glory, For 'tis not transitory. HYMN 469. Worship of Images accursed. 2. PART. Psalm 97. v. 7. COnfusion on them all shall come, Who can their fancy please With Graven Images: That boast themselves of Idols dumb; O all ye Gods adore him, And humbly bow before him.
8, 9. Mount Sion heard, and made great mirth, And Judah's Daughters joy'd To see thy Judgments try'd: For thou art high o're all the Earth: Exalted altogether Above all Gods whatever. 10. O ye whose love no malice taints, But grows to God-ward still Hate all things that are ill: He saves the souls of all his Saints, And strongly them secures From hands of evil doers. 11, 12. And light is sown for righteous men, And very great delight For men of heart upright: Rejoyce in God, ye righteous then, Give thanks to him in telling His holiness excelling. HYMN 470. Salvation of Saints. 2. METRE. Psalm 97. YE lovers of the Lord hate all that evil is, For he the souls doth guard of all dear Saints of his:
And saveth them From cruel spight, and crushing might Of wicked men. For just men light is sown, and gladness is up-stor'd, For each pure hearted one; ye just joy in the Lord: Him praise and bless At th' memory of his so high Pure holiness. HYMN 471. Worship of the Soveraign Lord. 1. METRE. Psalm 98. A New Song to the Lord now form, for rare things he hath done: His right hand and his holy arm the victory hath wone. The Lord doth make his people know his saving health and might: The Lord his righteousness doth show▪ in all the Heathens sight. His Grace and Truth to Israel he kindly doth record: And all the Earth hath seen full well the Glory of the Lord. O all the Earth, sing to the Lord, your joyfull voices raise: Make loudest noise with one accord, and gladly sing his praise.
With Harp and Psalms melodious voice and Trumpets to him sing: With sound of Cornet, O rejoyce before the Lord the King. Let Seas and Shores rejoyce their fills, and both roar out with noise: Let waving flouds, and tow'ring hills clap hands, and joyn in joys. Let Creatures all with one accord rejoyce with joy and mirth, Before this great and Glorious Lord, that comes to judge the Earth. With righteousness and equity then judge the world shall he, And all the people generally with truth and equity. HYMN 472. Worship of the Supream Judge. 2. METRE. Ye Children, &c. Psal. 98. SING to the Lord a new made Song, Whose holy arm, and right hand strong hath wrought rare things victoriously: The Lord made known his saving might, His righteousness in open sight of Heathen men most gloriously.
He call'd to mind his Truth and Grace To Israel's House, and every place hath seen the Lord's Salvation: Make joyfull noises to the Lord, O all the Earth, with one accord sing praise with acclamation. Sing to the Lord with Musick choice, With Harp, With Harp, and with the Voice, and some sweet Psalm-devotion: Your Trumpets and your Cornets bring To sound loud praise to Christ our King, who rules the Earth and Ocean. Let Seas and all their fulness roar, The world and dwellers on the shore, the hills and inundations Before the Lord! for lo, he comes With righteous decrees and dooms, to judge the Lands and Nations. HYMN 473. Worship performed by the An∣cients. 1. METRE. Psalm 99. THE mighty God his reign begins, let foes with terrour quake: He sits between the Cherubins, let Earths foundation shake. Not onely great in Sion's Towers is our most Glorious God; But high above all humane powers, in all the Earth abroad.
Let all men speak of his great fame, give him the honour wholly: Extol his great and dreadfull Name, for it is purely holy. His royal power doth righteously, and Judgments he loves well: Thou dost establish equity, and truth in Israel. Exalt the Lord our God, O ye that in his Courts have trod: Before his foot-stool bend the knee, for he's a holy God. Moses and Aaron in the throng of Priests, and men of fame: And faithfull Samuel was among the seekers of his Name. They pray'd, and he did answer make when they his favour sought: He in the cloudy pillar spake, and they his Judgments wrought. Thou answeredst them, O Lord, our God, forgiving them likewise; Though their inventions with thy rod thou sorely didst chastise. The Lord our God exalt therefore, give him the honour wholly: And at his holy hill adore, for our Lord God is holy.
HYMN 474. Worshippers of old, Moses, Aaron and Samuel. 2. METRE. Psal. 99. THE Lord the God of Israel reigns, let Heathens quake to hear: He sits between the Cherubins, let th' Earth be mov'd with fear. The Lord is great in Sion Seat above all people high: Let them proclaim his dreadfull Name so full of sanctity.. This mighty King loves Judgmen well, thou dost establish right: Thou execut'st in Israel just Judgment by thy might. O then applaud the Lord our God, extoll his Name alone: And falling at his foot-stool flat adore the holy one. Moses and Aaron with his Priests, and Samuel anciently Among his suppliants made requests, and he did make reply. To them aloud, he in the Cloud and fiery pillar spake: They kept with trust his Judgments just, and laws which he did make.
Thou didst them hear, O Lord our God, a pardoning God wast thou: Though thou didst scourge them with thy rod; and not their sins allow. O then applaud the Lord our God, and at his holy Throne, His Name adore for evermore, for he's a holy One. HYMN 475. Zeal in publick Worship. 1. METRE. Psal. 100. Deut. 32.18. SHout to the Lord in every place O all ye lands and tongues: Serve him, and come before his face with Gladness and with Songs. Know that the Lord is God, our Rock, he made us every one: Not we our selves, we are his flock, and pasture people known. Enter his Gates with Gratitude, praise in his Courts proclaim: Be thankfull to him, and speak good of his most holy Name. For good and gracious is the Lord, his mercy never fades, The truth of his eternal word endures from age to age.
Rev. 1.5. To God the Father and the Son and holy Ghost therefore, Be Glory as at first was done, and shall be evermore. HYMN 476. Zeal in the publick Worship: 2. METRE. Psal. 100. MAKE joyfull noises to the Lord, O all ye Nations of the Earth: Serve him with joy, his praise record, come in his sight with Songs of mirth. Know that the Lord is God alone, we are the flock which he doth keep: His workmanship, and not our own, his people and his Pasture-sheep. Enter his Gates with thankfulness, and come with joy into his Courts: Great gratitude to him express, and bless his Name in fullresorts. For lo, the Lord is good and kind, his mercy everlasting is: His truth all Generations find for evermore assur'd to his.
HYMN 477. A Pattern of Princely Govern∣ment. 1. METRE. Psal. 101. LORD, I will sing of mercy sweet, and judgment to thy praise: And wisely guide my wary feet in all thy perfect ways. When wilt thou Lord fulfill thy word, and I shall do my part; To order my whole Family with uprightness of heart. I will no wicked thing abide before mine eyes to be; I hate their work that turn aside, it shall not cleave to me. The froward heart from me shall part, and have no more access, And I will no such persons know as practice wickedness. The man that slandereth privily, I will cut off (be sure) The stout in heart whose looks are high I will not once endure. I'll look out then the faithfull men, that they may dwell with me: And they that press for perfectness my servants then shall be.
None guilefull will I entertain within my house to dwell: Nor shall he in my sight remain that loveth lies to tell. I'll soon cut short the wicked sort, and evil-doers condemn: And quite suppress ungodliness From God's Jerusalem. HYMN 478. A Pious Prince described. The mighty God, &c. 2. METRE. Psalm 101. OF Mercy and of Judgment I will sing, and, Lord, my Song I dedicate to thee, And Wisely will I walk in every thing: when wilt thou come, Lord, and establish me? I will not set before me a Temptation To any ill, but ever shun th' occasion. I hate the work of them that turn aside, there shall no such corruption cleave to me: The froward heart with me shall not abide, no wicked man my favourite shall be. The secret sland'rer I will quite cashier, Nor will permit proud men to domineer.
Mine eyes shall note the faithfull of the Land, my house and house-Communion to enjoy: And he that walketh after God's command shall be my servant whom I will employ: My house shall harbour none that craft con∣spire, Nor will I suffer in my fight a Lyar. I will destroy the wicked of the Land, and take a care to cut them off betimes: And I will cleanse my Kingdom out of hand of persons that commit notorious crimes. Chiefly Jerusalem God's City pure Shall soon be purg'd of every evil doer. HYMN 479. Appearing of Hope, or Sion' Reparation. Psalm 102.13. THOU wilt arise in mercy yet, and Grace to Sion send, Because the time for favour set is now come to an end. For even in the stones thereof thy servants take delight: Her very dust is cause enough of favour in their sight. And then the Heathen far and near shall fear thy holy Name; And all the kings on Earth shall fear thy Glory and thy fame.
Whenas the Lord shall once repair poor Sion's broken wall, His Glory then shall shine so fair it shall appear to all. He will regard the destitute, and not despise their prayer: He will regard their humble suit, with tender love and care. This shall be found in holy writ for ages that succeed, The people not created yet shall praise him for this deed. O let the God of Israel then be prais'd with one accord, Henceforth for evermore, Amen, Amen, praise ye the Lord. HYMN 480. Stability of the Church. All People, &c. Psalm 102.25. OF old, O Lord, thou hast laid forth The strong foundations of the earth: The Heavens o're our head that stand Are all the works of thine own hand.
26. And they shall perish (to be sure,) But thou, O Lord, shalt still endure: And all these Orbs which we behold, Like to a Garment shall wax old. And as a Vesture old and worn Thou shalt invest them with new form: And (from their former state estrang'd) Shalt change them, and they shall be chang'd. 27. But thou, O God, art still the same, Though Heaven and Earth do change their Frame: And lo! Thy years shall have no end, Though all things to corruption tend. 28. And Lord thy faithfull servants seed Shall still remain (as 'tis decreed:) And fixt before thee they shall stay, When Heaven and Earth shall pass away. Psal. 72.19. Let Israel's God be blest therefore From first to last for evermore: And let the whole Earth ring agen With his renown, Amen, Amen.
HYMN 481. Applause of God's Mercies. All People, &c. Or, O Lord Consider, &c. 1. METRE. Psal. 103. O Praise the Lord, O praise his Name my soul and all that in me is: My soul do thou set forth his fame, and mind those benefits of his. Who all thy trespasses forgave, who cur'd thy grief, and clos'd thy wound; Thy life that saved from the Grave, and thee with loving kindness crown'd. Thy mouth with good things he doth fill, and Eagle-like, he makes thee young: And executes just judgment still for every one that suffers wrong. His ways to Moses he declar'd, his deeds to Israel he did show: And good and gracious is our Lord, to mercy prone, to anger slow. He will not always us upbraid, nor evermore displeas'd is he: Nor hath he so our sins repay'd as justly they deserve to be.
For they that fear him find his Grace outreach the spreadings of the Sky: And he from us our sins doth place as far as East from West doth lye. HYMN 482. (2. PART.) All People, &c. Vers. 13. GOD pities them that fear his Name, as Fathers pity their own Sons: For well he knows our brittle Frame, and whence our composition comes. Our time is like the flowry Grass, so fair and pleasant to the view; Which at a blast doth fade and pass,, and leaves no token where it grew. But still the mercy of the Lord doth bear an everlasting date, To them that tremble at his word, and are the true regenerate. His righteousness doth still endure to Childrens Children, great and small: To them that keep his Covenant sure, and mind his Laws to do them all.
HYMN 483. (2. METRE.) Argument. God's pardoning Grace: he makes us to renew Our youth in age, as Eagles use to do▪ Psalm 103. MY soul now bless with readiness the Lord's most holy Name: And let my hearts most inward parts applaud and spread his fame. O bless the Lord, his praise record my soul be not unkind: As one that slights his benefits, and puts them out of mind. Who pardons thy iniquity and cancels all thy score: Who healeth thy infirmity, and doth thy strength restore. Who from the Grave thy life did save, and crown'd thee from above, With mercies free enlarg'd to thee, and with his tender love. Who satisfies thy mouth likewise with blessings that are good: Thy flower of youth (as th' Eagles doth) he makes afresh to bud.
HYMN 484. (2. PART) Argument. God vindicates th' opprest, as Israel found. His mercies far beyond our sins abound. GOD doth express his righteousness and judgment to the blest, To vindicate the desolate and all that are opprest. His ways to Moses he did shew, his acts to Israel's seed: The Lord is known a Gracious one, and mercifull indeed. To anger still inflexible, but plentifull in Grace; He'll not abide always to chide, nor keep his wrath long space. We never felt his judgments dealt according to our sin: Nor hath he thus rewarded us as our deserts have been.
HYMN 485. (3. PART.) Argument. God's mercies larger than from East to West, Parents have no such pity in their breast. FOR as the Sky is far more high, Than Earths inferiour Frame; So ample his compassion is to them that fear his Name. And as the East is from the West a distance marvellous: So far, I say, he puts away our Trespasses from us. And as the mind of Fathers kind is towards their Children dear; So doth the Lord much Grace afford to them that do him fear. For he can tell and knows full well how quickly we are crush'd: He calls to mind out brittle kind, and knows we are but dust.
HYMN 486. (4. PART.) Argument. Man's frailty tendered by Gods clemency, His goodness to the Saints posterity. THE days of man are like a span, and quickly he must yield: He spreadeth as the fading Grass, and flower of the field. For when a blast of wind hath past upon it, it is gone: And then must it for ever quit the Ground it grew upon. But God's free Grace doth still take place, for them that fear his Name; His righteousness so fathomless may Childrens Children claim. I mean the seed that take good heed his Covenant to fulfill: And think of his Divine Decrees, to do them with good will.
HYMN 487. (5. PART.) Argument. God's Soveraign Throne where Hosts of An∣gels wait: Each Faithfull one his praise doth celebrate. THOU hast, O Lord, in Heaven prepar'd a Throne without decay: And over all in general thy Kingdom bears the sway. His praise recite ye Angels bright, in strength that pass us all; Ye that fulfill his holy will still hearkning to his call. His Name applaud ye Hosts of God his Ministers on high, That do what his good pleasure is with all alacrity. O ye his Hosts in all the Coasts of his Dominion whole, Bless ye the Lord with one accord, O bless the Lord my soul.
HYMN 488. Applause of God's Greatness. 1. PART. Psalm 104. MY Soul, O bless, and magnifie the Lord thy God so Great, Who decks himself with Dignity, and Majesty compleat. Who covereth himself with light and with a Garment fair: Who stretcheth out the Heavens bright as Curtains in the Air. Upon the watry Element his Chamber beams he binds: The Clouds his Charet represent, he walks on winged Winds. He makes his Angels Spirits entire, not like our mortal seed: His Ministers a flame of fire to pass his work with speed. HYMN 489. Applause of the Creation. 2. PART. Psal. 104.5. THE Lord by his Almighty hand the Earths Foundation lay'd, So sure that it shall ever stand, although by nothing stay'd.
Which at the first Creation was cloathed with the deep: The waters had their station above the mountains steep. At thy rebuke they fled amain, and could no longer stay: Thy thundring voice did so constrain, that they made hast away. Up by the mountains then they ran, and down the dales apace: Imbodying in the Ocean which was their founded place. Their passage now thou dost restrain by setting them a Bound, That they may never turn again to cover all the Ground. HYMN 490. Blessings of Provision ap∣plauded. 3. PART. Psal. 104.10. FResh Springs into the Vales he sends, which run among the Hills: Each Beast the Forrest comprehends here take and drink their fills. Wild Asses here their thirst do slake, here feathered Fowl do houze, And nests for habitations make, and sing among the boughs.
He from his Chambers of the Sky the Earth with Rain hath stor'd: Thy works the whole Earth satisfie with fruits which they afford. He makes the Grass to grow for Beasts, and Herbs for man's own use: Convenient food, with full increase he makes the Earth produce. Psal. 41.13. And wine he gives to cheer the heart, and Oyl to slick the face, And bread which strengthneth every part, the heart in chiefest place. Let Israel's God the Lord most high be blest and prais'd therefore, From time to time eternally henceforth for evermore. HYMN 491. Blessings of the Creatures, viz. Plants, Planets. 4. PART. Psal. 104.16. THE trees of God no sap do want, those goodly Cedar-trees Which he in Lebanon did plant, The Birds make nests in these. The Stork in stately fir-trees dwells, high Rocks the Goats befit: The Conies in the hollow Cells of stony Rocks do sit.
The Moon a certain course doth run, and thou ordain'st it so: And when to set none tells the Sun, for he the time doth know. Let Israel's God the Lord most high be blest and prais'd therefore: From time to time eternally henceforth for evermore. HYMN 492. Blessings ordain'd for man. 5. PART. Psalm 104.20. THOU makest darkness o're the Earth, and darkness makes the night: And then the Forest-beasts creep forth whom day-time did affright. Young Lyons roaring for their prey of God do seek their meat: The Sun ariseth, then do they together make retreat. In secret Dens they closely lurk, and then doth man begin To set upon and ply his work, till evening calls him in. Let Israels God the Lord most high be magnifi'd therefore, From time to time eternally henceforth for evermore.
HYMN 493. Blessings rich and plentifull by Land and Sea. 6. PART. 1. METRE. Psal. 104.24. HOW manifold, O Lord, are those, the works of thine own hand? All which thy wisedom did compose, thy riches fill the Land. No less this wide and spacious Sea, wherein's a huge increase▪ Of creeping things that seek their prey, both small and greater beasts. Here go the ships that carry man over the waters thin: And here is that Leviathan thou mad'st to play therein. These on thy bounty all depend for seasonable food: Thy liberal hand thou dost extend and they are fill'd with good. 28, 29, 30. They gather what thou dost supply, thou hid'st thy face, they mourn: Thou tak'st away their breath, they die, and to their dust return.
Thy Spirit which a while withdrew, anon thou sendest forth: And by and by thou dost renew the face of all the Earth. Let Israel's God the Lord most high be magnifi'd therefore: At all times to eternity Amen, for evermore. HYMN 494. Blessings shewing forth the Glo∣ry of God. 7. PART. 1. METRE. Psal. 104.31. GOD's Glory, in its perfect state for evermore shall stand: The Lord shall joy to contemplate the works of his own hand. Upon the Earth he casts his eye, it trembleth at his look: And if he touch the hills on high, they smoke at his rebuke. I'll sing unto the Lord as long as I escape the Grave: I'll praise my God with cheerfull Song whil'st I my being have.
My thoughts of him much joy shall add, much joy, I say, to me: And in the Lord I will be glad, and great my joy shall be. But sinners shall be swept away, and perish from the Earth: Th' ungodly shall no more bear sway when judgment once comes forth. But thou, my soul, with heart sincere applaud and praise the Lord: And let the faithfull every where his Glorious praise record. HYMN 495. Creation applauded, or service of the Creator. 1. PART. 2. METRE. Give laud, &c. Psalm 104.1. NOW must I needs applaud Jehovah from my heart, And say, O Lord my God, how very great thou art? thou dost thee cloath Most Gloriously with Majesty and honour both.
Thou coverest thee with light as with a Garment fair: Spreading the Heavens bright as curtains in the air: who lays likewise His Chamber-beams in watry stream of Cloudy Skies. Who also hath assign'd the Clouds to be his Coach: And on the winged wind he walks, and makes approach: his Angel-Quire Spiritual Powers, his Ministers a flame of fire. HYMN 496. Creation applauded, or service of the Elements. 2. PART. 2. METRE. Give Laud, &c. Psalm 104.5. LORD thou hast laid of old the Earths foundation fast: The Deeps did it enfold, as with a Garment vast: the watry floud Did not remove, but far above the mountains stood.
At thy rebuke they fled, thy thundring voice began, They climb'd on mountains head, and down the valleys ran, hasting apace Unto the Ground which thou did'st found for their fit place. Thou settest them their bound, which they shall not pass o're, The shore and solid Ground, to compass any more: in all the vale, Springs run an end, which he did send into the dale. Abundant drink they yield (where through the Hills they burst) To every beast in field, wild Asses quench their thirst: and hard by these The Birds of Spring do sit and sing among the trees.
HYMN 497. Creation applauded, or service of the field. 3. PART. 2. METRE. Give laud, &c. Psal. 104.13. JEHOVAH from on high doth water all the Hills: From Chambers of the Sky, and all the Earth he fills, and satisfies With fruits which thy great works supply, in plenteous wise. He doth the Grass produce, for Cattel in the field: And herbs for mans own use he makes the Earth to yield: that he may bring Out of the Ground food to be found for every thing. The heart of man to glad, he giveth generous wine, And Oyl from hence is had, to make his face to shine:
and also bread, Whereby mans heart in every part is strengthened. HYMN 498. Creation-work applauded, or service of the Fruits. 4. PART. 2. METRE. Give Laud, &c. Vers. 16. GOD's trees are full of juice, those Cedars many a one, Which he did plant for use in hilly Lebanon: where birds make nests, The Stork to her takes trees of Fir wherein she rests. The hills that are on high wild Goats for refuge climb, In Rocks the Rabets lie: the lights distinguish time: he made the Moon Seasons to show, the Sun doth know his going down.
Thou dost the darkness make, and darkness makes the Night; Then all the beasts forsake their dens that shade the light: young Lyons rore After their prey, from God do they seek all their store. At rising of the Sun they get together then, And hastily they run to hide them in their den: man goes from home To work, and ply his husbandry till ev'ning come. HYMN 499. Creation work applauded, or service of the Seas. 2. METRE. 5. PART. Give laud, &c. Psalm 104.24. to 31. O Lord, how manifold thy works are, great and small? Thy wisedom we behold in making of them all:
the Earth, O Lord, Is fill'd with thy benignity, and richly stor'd. So is this spacious deep, wherein a huge increase Of countless Creatures keep, both small and greater beasts: the Ships here sail, And (made to swim, and play therein) that strong-set whale. All these do wait on thee, that thou maist give them meat When fitting seasons be: and what thou giv'st they eat: thy hand so good Thou openest wide, they are supply'd and fill'd with food. Thou hid'st thy face, they mourn. thou tak'st away their breath, They dye, and soon return unto their dust by death: thy Spirit goes forth, Comes a new race, and spreads the face of all the Earth.
HYMN 500. Creator's Glory celebrated. 6. PART. 2. METRE. Give Laud, &c. Psal. 104.31. THE Glory of the Lord for ever shall abide: And in his works well stor'd, Jehovah shall be joy'd: his looks provoke The Earth to quake, his touch doth make the mountains smoke. I'll sing unto the Lord whilst breath prolongs my days, And whilst I am, record my God in Songs of praise: each thought shall add Sweet joy to me, and, Lord, in thee I will be glad.
Let sinners be consum'd out of the Earth therefore, And wicked men be doom'd to have no being more: but O record God's praise alway, my soul, and say, praise ye the Lord. The End of the Fifth Century.
The Sixth Century. OF PSALM-HYMNS. HYMN 501. Deliverance celebrated. 1. METRE. For the Fifth of November. Psal. 105.1, 2, 3. GIVE thanks to God, call on his Name, his deeds to men make known: Sing Psalms to him, and O proclaim his wonders every one.
Glory in God with cheerfull voice, his holy Name record: And let the very heart rejoyce of them that seek the Lord. 4, 5, 6, 7. O seek the Lord, his strength intreat, for ever seek his face: Remember well his wonders great perform'd in every place. O ye his servants, Abraham's seed by your spiritual birth: The Lord our God he is indeed his Judgments fill the Earth. Psalm 44.7. Psalm 57.6. Psalm 106.48. He sav'd our Land from th' Enemies hand, and puts our foes to shame: They digg'd a pit and fell in it, themselves must bear the blame. But Israel's God we must applaud at all times evermore: Ye people then say all Amen, praise ye the Lord therefore.
HYMN 502. (2. METRE.) Argument. All Israel's Seed and Holy Race Are charg'd to seek God's Holy Face, For Works and Judgments shew'd in every place. All People, &c. Psalm 105. GIVE thanks to God, call on his Name, his mighty deeds to men make known: O sing his praise, his works proclaim and shew his wonders every one. Let hearts rejoyce that seek his face, boast in his holy Name always: Seek, seek the Lord, his strength and grace O seek him ever all your days. Remember with religious care the wondrous works that he hath done; His Miracles and Judgments rare which from his holy mouth have come. O ye his servants Abraham's seed, his chosen Jacob's Sons by birth; He is the Lord our God indeed, his Judgments are in all the Earth.
HYMN 503. (2. PART.) Argument. Canaan the type of Heaven promised, His people through strong Kingdoms safely led, A Princely people chiefly honoured. HIS Covenant he call'd to mind for evermore to stand full fast: The faithfull word which he design'd a thousand ages to outlast. Which Covenant he with Abraham drew, and next to faithfull Isaac swore, And for a Law confirm'd it new to Jacob as to them before. An everlasting Covenant firmly with Israels seed to stand: Saying, to you I freely grant All Canaans rich and fruitfull Land. An Heritage allotted you when but a few the people were; The number was but very few, and they were also strangers there. When from one Nation they were sent, and to another pass'd along: From one t' another Government he suffer'd none to do them wrong.
But Kings for their sakes he controll'd, and said, let no presumptuous Arm Touch mine Anointed, nor be bold to do my Prophets any harm. HYMN 504. (3. PART.) Argument. Joseph reserv'd for many Lands relief, In time of famine he's preferr'd in chief. Psal. 105. MOreover then th' Almighty spake, that Famine should the Land o're∣spread: A dreadfull Dearth thereby to make, and wholly break the staff of Bread. But Joseph he had sent before whom for a slave his Brethren sold, Whose feet with fetters they made sore, they lodg'd him in the irons cold. Untill his words accomplishment the man was try'd by God's decree: The King (the peoples Ruler) sent to loose him and to set him free. He made him Lord of's Family, and Ruler of his Royal wealth; To teach his Senate policy, and bind his Peers as pleas'd himself.
HYMN 505. (4. PART.) Argument. Israel in Aegypt harbour'd: then oppres'd: Moses sent in: and plagues their Land infest. THEN Israel into Egypt came, and Jacob's houshold there found place To sojourn in the Land of Ham, and there they multiply'd apace. He made them stronger than their foes, and of their foes to be abhorr'd, And subtilly they dealt with those the faithfull servants of the Lord. He sent his servant Moses then, and Aaron his own chosen man, They shew'd his signs among those men, and wonders in the Land of Ham. A darkness he among them sent, and it was dark, that none could see; These were not disobedient unto the word of his decree.
HYMN 506. (5. PART.) Argument. The plague of bloud, of flies, of lice, of hail And Caterpillars, Aegypt's Land assail. HE turn'd their waters into bloud, and slew their fish; in ponds and springs, Their Land brought Frogs, a monstrous brood; filling the Chambers of their Kings. Strange flies and lice by his command in all their Coasts there did remain: He gave them Hail in all their Land, and flames of fire for showers of rain. He smote their vines and their figtrees, their trees in field and wilderness: He spake, and Locusts swarm'd like Bees, and Caterpillars numberless. Upon the Lands Green Herbs they fed and did their dainty fruits devour: All Aegypts first-born he smote dead the chief of all their strength and power.
HYMN 507. (6. PART. Argument. Israel departs from Aegypt Land, And with an high and mighty hand. HE brought them forth without con∣troll, both hir'd with Gold and Silver bribes; And there was not a feeble soul among the Israelitish Tribes. Full glad was Egypt when they went, their terrour did so sore affright; He spread a Cloud, a sheltering Tent, and fire to light them all the night. The people asked to be fed, he brought them Quails to eat their fill: And satisfy'd them with the bread which he from Heaven did distill. He opened the rock of stone, and thence the waters gushed out: The desarts dry were over-flown, as if a River ran about. For he on's holy promise thought, and on his Servant Abraham: His chosen people thence he brought, with joy and gladness every man.
The Heathens labours and their Lands upon his people he bestow'd: To keep his Laws and his commands, O spread his praises all abroad. HYMN 508. Felicity of the Church pray'd for. 1. METRE. All People, &c. A Short Collect. Psalm 106. v. 4. REmember me with favour, Lord, such as thou bearest to thine own: Visit me of thine own accord with thy salvation here made known. That I may see thy chosens good, rejoycing with the present age: And Nations happy neighbourhood, and glory with thine heritage▪ 6. & Ver. 43. But we have sinn'd we must confess, we have committed hainous crimes: We have done grievous wickedness, yet thou hast sav'd us oftentimes. And save us now, O Lord our God, and gather us from th' Heathen Lands: Thy Name with praises to applaud, and raise to thee triumphant hands.
Let Israel's God be blessed then from first to last for evermore: And let all people say Amen, praise ye the Lord our God therefore. Psal. 106. (2. METRE.) Argument. God's praises are past all we can express, Mans greatest praise is constant righteousness. Have mercy, &c. PRaise ye the Lord most high, his goodness magnifie: Give thanks to God for he is good, and good perpetually. Who cant full declare the mighty acts and rare Of our great God; and shew abroad what all his praises are? O blessed men are they that walk in judgments way: And he that doth the works of truth, and never goes astray.
Psalm 106. (2. PART.) Argument. He prays to find such favour show'd As is upon the Church bestow'd. O Lord remember me with Grace and favour free, Such as thine own have found and known, vouchsaf'd to them by thee. O shew me thine own self, and thy sweet saving health; That I may he reserv'd to see thy chosen peoples wealth. And that I may rejoyce with glad and glorying voice, In seeing this great Nations bliss whereof thou hast made choice. Psalm 106.  (3. PART.) Argument. Great sins scor'd on: great Mercies are forgot, And yet through Mercy God destroy'd them not. BUT, Lord, we do confess we all of us, transgress; Have swerved by, iniquity, and have done wickedness.
The wonders which thy hand perform'd in Aegypt Land, Our Fathers old did them behold but did not understand. Thy mercies many a one they did not think upon, But at the Sea, provoke did they the Red-Sea scor'd it on. Yet letting them alone, he sav'd them every one; For his great Name to spread his fame and make his power known. Psalm 106. (4. PART.) Argument. The Red-Sea dry'd: the Enemies drown'd, Israel believ'd, but not with faith so sound. THE Red-Sea on each side at his rebuke was dry'd: Through deeps profound, as desart Ground, he did his people guide. Their Saviour he did stand against their haters hand, And did redeem and rescue them from th' Enemies command.
The waters covered those that were their mortal foes, And there was none, not any one remaining to oppose. Then they his word believ'd for works which he atchiev'd; And sung his praise for some few days, but soon their God they griev'd. Psal. 106. (5. PART.) Argument. Israel forgets the Works of God most high; They lust and surfeit, and by surfeit die. THE works which he had wrought they presently forgot: His councils wise, they did despise, and for them waited not. But lusted with excess within the wilderness: And tempted God while they abode in desarts harbourless. Yet unto them he gave what they desir'd to have: But after all he sent their soul with leanness to the Grave.
Psal. 106. (6. PART.) Argument. Moses and Aaron (Israel's Lamp) Are envy'd in the Camp, The Rebels that against them strive Are swallow'd up alive: Israel as brutish, more than half, Adores a Golden-Calf. GOOD Moses they envy'd as they in Camps abide; And envy drew on Aaron too, whom God had sanctifi'd. The Earth did open then, and swallow'd up the men Of Dathan and Abiram's band and shut her mouth on them. In Horeb they were bold to make a Calf of Gold, And worshiped an Image dead which their own hands did mould. Thus they their Glory pass into a molten Mass Of Oxes rude similitude, a Beast that eateth Grass.
Psalm 106. (7. PART.) Argument. Moses while standing in the Gap Saves Israel from God's Thunder-Clap. THEY were forgetfull quite of God their Saviour's might, Whose hand alone great things had done in Aegypt, in their ight. He wrought with wondrous hand in Cham's accursed Land: Dread things were they at that Red Sea, perform'd by his command. Therefore the Lord did say he would those sinners slay Had not alone his chosen one been happ'ly in the way. For when the breach was wide there Moses did abide; And turn'd away his wrath that day, else had they been destroy'd. Psalm 106. (8. PART.) Argument. Israel believes not, but with murmurs base, Provoke the Lord to th' ruin of their Race. YEA, they in careless-wise that pleasant Land despise; They entertain his words in vain, as deeming them but lies.
But murmur'd in their Tents, and gave not their consents With willing ear his voice to hear in his Commandements. Therefore he sware no less but that he would suppress, And overthrow them (as a foe) within the Wilderness. And also he decreed to overthrow their Seed By Tyrants hands in Forraign Lands where they were sure to bleed. Psalm 106. (9. PART.) Argument. Spiritual uncleanness follows Corporal, Phineas do's justice, and was blest in all. Have mercy, &c. TO Baal the God of Peor themselves adjoyned were: And ate likewise the Sacrifice of those dead Idols there. Thus they provoked him to anger by their sin Of new devis'd Idolatries and so the plague broke in.
Then Phineas rose with zeal just Judgment for to deal: Which judgment made the plague be stay'd, and Israels wounds to heal. 'Twas deemed righteousness which that act did express; And Ages all for ever shall esteem it for no less. Psalm 106. (10. PART.) Argument. Murmuring at Meribah moves the meekest-man, And Israel spares the worst of Canaan: They mix with Heathens, learn Idolatry; From their example are ensnar'd thereby. AT Meribah they spake, and did much anger make, That ill it went (through discontent) with Moses for their sake. His Spirit they did provoke that unadvis'd he spoke; Such error slips from hasty lips when passion hath the stroke. Neither did they destroy those Nations utterly, But spared some, concerning whom God charg'd that they should die.
And they were mingled then among the Heathen men, And works most vile which did defile, they also learn'd of them. And there they basely serv'd the Idols that were carv'd, Which also were to them a snare, as justly they deserv'd. Psalm 106. (11. PART.) Argument. Bloudy Idolatries and inhumane, The Land of Israel do most grosly stain; For all which sins, the Lord most high Commits them to their Enemy. Have mercy, &c. YEA they did sacrifice their little Girls and Boys, Offering the necks of either sex to Devil-Deities. And innocent bloud they shed which their own Children bled, Daughter nor Son blind zeal could shun, for them they offered.
To Idols made of wood they offered, and made good The barbarous rites of Canaanites, and stain'd the Land with bloud. Psalm 106. (12. PART.) Argument. The vile misdeeds of Israel he records, For which their Enemies must rule as Lords. THUS they themselves did stain with their own works profane And (basely bent) a whoring went with their inventions vain. The wrath of God therefore against them kindled sore, So that the Lord his own abhorr'd, such blame the heritage bore. He left them in the hands, and under the commands, Of Heathen men whose hatred then they felt in forrein Lands. Their Enemies also oppress'd and brought them low, His people were subjected there under a forreign foe.
Psalm 106. (13. PART.) Argument. The ries of Israel in their great distress Move God to pity and to great redress. HE spar'd them many times though mov'd by their designs, And were brought low (they vext him so) with their abhorred crimes. But never a whit the less he pityed their distress, And gave regard whenas he heard their cry in bitterness. Then Covenant-thoughts took place, for those of Abraham's Race: Made him repent their punishment of his abundant Grace. He made the Enemy to use them favourably, Even all those men that carried them into captivity.
Psalm 106. (14. & ult. PART.) Argument. A prayer for Captives, and redemption free, That God may have the praise, and none but he. SAVE us, O Lord our God, and gather us from abroad, From Tyrants hands in forreign Lands, where we have had abode. To give thy holy Name great thanks with laud and fame, And with great joy triumphantly thy praises to proclaim. Let Israel's God most high be prais'd perpetually, And people then say all Amen, his Name to magnify. HYMN 509. Free favours to Captives. 1. PART. All People, &c. Psal. 107.1, 2. EXtoll the goodness of our God whose mercies know no period: Let God's redeemed ones say so, whom he redeemed from the foe.
3. And gathered them out of the Lands From all their Cruel Enemies hands, From East and West, from North and South, O that his praise fill'd every mouth! 8. O that all people would record The gratious goodness of the Lord; Declaring both with tongue and pen His wonders done for sons of men. Psalm 106.48. Let Israel's God be prais'd therefore, From first to last for evermore: And let the Church with one accord Resound, Amen; praise ye the Lord. 2. PART. Free favours to Colonies or Planters. Psalm 107.4. THE praise of God let those express That wander'd in the wilderness, In solitary desart Ground, Where they no dwelling City found. 5, 6. Hungry and thirsty by constraint, Their very souls did in them faint; Then cry'd they in their bitter grief To God, who sent them sweet relief.
7, 8. He led them forth by ways direct, Fit Habitations to select: O that men prais'd God's goodness then, And wonders done for sons of men. 3. PART. Free favours to distressed ones. Psalm 107.9.10. THE longing foul God satiates still, His goodness hungry souls doth fill: Such as in darkness scarce draw breath, All covered with the shade of death. 11. Such as by his afflicting hand Are bound (as with an iron band) For they rebell'd against the Lord, And scorn'd the counsels of his word. 12. Therefore did he bring down their heart With labour, and they felt the smart: Yea they fell down with loading pain▪ And none could lift them up again. 13, 15. Then to the Lord they made address, And he releas'd them from distress: O that men prais'd God's goodness then, And wonders done for Sons of men.
Psal. 106.48. Let Israel's God be prais'd therefore From first to last, for evermore: And let the Church with one accord, Resound Amen, and praise the Lord. 4. PART. Free favours to Prisoners. Psalm 107.16. OFten hath God broke Gates of Brass To let the wofull prisoner pass: And often hath he cut in two The iron bars to let them through. 14, 15. He brought them out of Dungeons deep Whom shades of death did fold and keep: He brake their bands asunder quite, O that men praisd him to the height. O that all people would record The gratious goodness of the Lord: Expressing both with tongue and pen His wonders done for sons of men.
5. PART. Free favours to sick-men. Psalm 107.17. FULL oft are foolish men surpriz'd With sicknesses, and sore chastis'd: So high do their transgressions rise, So foul are their iniquities. 18, 19. Their souls abhor all kinds of food, The Gates of death do them include: Then cry they to the Lord in grief, And soon he sends them sweet relief. 20, 21. He sends his word to heal and save, And keep them from the gaping Grave: O that men prais'd God's goodness then▪ And wonders done for sons of men. And let them sacrifice always, The Sacrifices of his praise: And with rejoycing tell abroad The wonders of Almighty God.
6. PART. Free favours to such as go to Sea. Psalm▪ 107.23, 24. THEY that go down to Sea in Ships, And are employ'd upon the deeps: These see the work of God most plain, His wonders on the watry main. 25, 26. For storms arise at his command, And make the waves on tiptoes stand; They mount to Heaven, then down they go, Making mens souls to melt for wo. 25, 28. They reel and stagger Drunkard-like, And are as men whom terrour strike: Then in their grief to God they cry Who brings them out of misery. 29, 30. He makes the storm a calm of peace, So that the raging waters cease: Then are they glad (the storm blown o're) When Landed at the wished shore. 31. O now that men would praise the Lord, His goodness that they would record: Declaring both with tongue and pen His wonders to the sons of men.
Psalm 106.48. Let them exalt his Name likewise In Congregated Companies: And in th' assembled Elders seat His praises let them now repeat. 7. PART. Fruits of the Earth perish or prosper as men be∣have themselves to Godward. Psalm 107.33. SOmetimes doth God for sins excess Turn Rivers to a Wilderness: And where fresh waters did abound He turns it to a barren Ground. 34. A delectable fruitfull Land He turns to heath, and heaps of sand: And so he punisheth the sin Of wicked men that dwell therein. 35, 36. And then again he turns and brings The Wilderness to Water-springs: And there he makes the hungry dwell Cities and Towns to furnish well. 37, 38. To sow their fields, and Vine-yards plant To yield increase, and feel no want: He blesseth them, they greatly thrive, And keep their Cattel all alive. 15. O then that people would record The loving kindness of the Lord: And praise him both with tongue and pen For wonders done for sons of men.
8. PART. God's several dealings with good and bad men to be regarded. Psalm 107.39, 40. AGain they minish and grow less, Through grief, oppression, and distress: He pours on great ones great contempt, From Dens and Desarts not exempt. 41, 42. Yet sets the poor upon a rock, And makes his family like a flock: The just shall joy to see the sight, And it shall silence envy quite. 43. Whoso is wise and will observe The things that so much heed deserve: Shall understand and well record The loving kindness of the Lord. Psalm 106.48. Let Israel's God be blest therefore From first to last for evermore: And let all faithfull people then Say cheerfully, Amen, Amen.
HYMN 510. Gratulations to God and suppli∣cations for the Church. Have mercy, &c. Psalm 108.1, 2. MY heart, O God, most high, is fixed stedfastly: Now will I raise my voice in praise with songs of melody. My Glory now awake▪ thy Harp and Psaltery take; And I likewise will early rise, sweet melody to make. 3, 4. I'll praise thee with my Songs amidst the thickest throngs, That every Land may understand what praise to thee belongs. Because thy mercy great doth reach the Heaven's high seat: Thy truth, O Lord, which we record, is to the Clouds compleat. 5. Then, Lord, exalt thy fame above the Heavens frame And O set forth o're all the Earth thy Glory and thy fame.
2. PART. Have mercy, &c. Psalm 108.8, 11, 12. THAT thy belov'd may be delivered and set free: Lord save our Land by thy right hand, and kindly answer me. For wilt not thou again lead out our martial train? Thy help afford in trouble, Lord, for man's help is but vain. 13. Psalm 106.48. With God's assistance crown'd, we shall do acts renown'd: The power is his, and he it is that shall our foes confound. To Israel's God most high be praise perpetually: Ye people then, say all Amen the Lord to magnifie. HYMN 511. Greatness of Christ's Kingdom. 1. METRE. Psalm 110. THE Lord unto my Lord thus said, here at my right hand sit, Untill thine enemies be made a foot-stool for thy feet. The Lord shall out of Sion bring the Scepter of thy power: Rule thou amidst thy foes O King, in that successfull hour.
The people at first call shall come, (submitting to thy Grace) As drops of dew from mornings womb in beauties holy place. He sware that never Oath will break, thou art ordain'd, O Christ, By order of Melchizedeck, an everlasting Priest. in th' day of his fierce anger then the Lord at thy right hand Shall strike through Kings, and wound chief men, in many a Heathen-Land. Filling the places where he struck with bodies of the dead: And in the way drink of the Brook, and so lift up the head. HYMN 511. Greatness of Christ's Kingdom expressed and explained. 2. METRE. Psalm 110. THE Lord unto my Lord thus said, sit thou at my right hand, Till I thy foes a stool have made, whereon thy feet shall stand. The Lord shall out of Sion bring the Scepter of his might: Amidst thy foes be thou the King, and ruler in their sight.
The people shall come willingly, submitting to thy truth, Yielding a fruitfull progeny of Converts in thy youth: Thy beautious spouse shall bring to thee, (to fill the sacred room:) As fruitfull births, as dews can be, that drops from mornings womb. This word God sware, and will not break, thou art the sacred one; A Priest like to Melchisedech, whose lineage was not known: The Lord that is at thy right hand (for thy support and stay,) Shall strike through Kings that dare withstand in his most wrathfull day. Among the Heathen he shall judge, and all the places fill With limbs of men that bare thee grudge, whom thou shalt slay and kill. And as the war with fury spreads to multiply the slain, He shall proceed and wound the heads o're many Lands that reign. Then shall he drink (that bitter cup,) the torrent in the way: Therefore shall he the head lift up at's Resurrection day. The God of Israel therefore be praised altogether: From first to last for evermore, Amen, Amen, for ever.
HYMN 512. Priesthood and power of Christ. 3. METRE. THE Lord unto my Lord thus said here at my right hand sit, Until thine Enemies be made a foot-stool for thy feet. The Lord shall out of Sion bring the Scepter of thy power: Rule thou amidst thy foes, O King, in that successfull hour. The people at first call shall come, (submitting to thy Grace) As drops of dew from mornings womb in beauties holy place. He sware that never Oath will break, thou art ordain'd, O Christ, By order of Melchisedeck, an everlasting Priest. In th' day of his fierce anger then the Lord at thy right-hand, Shall strike through Kings, and wound chief men, in many a Heathen Land. Filling the places where he struck with bodies of the dead, And in the way drink of the brook. and so lift up the head.
HYMN 513. Great works of God celebrated. 1. METRE. Psalm 111. PRaise ye the Lord, whom I record, and praise with all my might: In meetings where the just appear, and in the Churches sight. The works of God must all applaud, so great they still have been: Sought out of all in general that take delight therein. His works renown'd with honour crown'd, a glorious work therefore: His righteousness (renown'd no less,) indures for evermore. His wonders he hath made to be retain'd in thankfull mind; The Lord is known a gracious one, compassionate and kind. He giveth meat for them to eat that fear his holy Name: He will record his faithfull word still to perform the same. He shew'd his might in Israel's sight, and did his power ingage: That he might so on them bestow the Heathens Heritage. The works he doth are full of truth, his Laws are just and sure: They all stand fast, and ever last accomplish'd true and pure.
Redemption is sent down to his by him who did proclaim His Covenant sure; so very pure, and reverend is his Name. Psalm 106.48. God's fear and dread is fountain-head of Wisedom, in our ways, They want no skill that do his will, perpetual is his praise. Let all proclaim the blessed Name of Israel's God therefore: From first to last till time be past, Amen for evermore. HYMN 514. Great works of God for his Church. 2. METRE. All People, &c. Psalm 111. PRaise ye the Lord, (I for my part) Will praise the Lord with all my heart In the Assembly of th' upright, And in the Congregations sight. God's works are great, and (as 'tis meet) Sought out of all that find them sweet: His work is glorious and renown'd, His righteousness for ever crown'd. His works of wonder he hath wrought To be for ever in our thought, The Lord's a very gracious one, And full of kind compassion.
He hath (in plenty) given meat To all that fear him (small and great:) And he will ever bear in mind The Covenant which he hath sign'd. Unto his people he hath shew'd The power of his works abroad: That he might freely give to them The Heritage of Heathen men. His works are truth and judgment pure, All his Commandements are sure: They all stand fast perpetually, All done in truth and equity. He sent redemption to his own, His Covenant he to his made known: He binds it still to be the same, Holy and reverend is his Name. The fear of God is wisedoms Spring, Good understanding doth it bring: To all that act as he commands, His praise for ever firmly stands. HYMN 515. Honour and happiness and ver∣tues of the Saints. 1. METRE. Psalm 112. PRaise ye the Lord, for blest are they that truly fear the Lord: Delighting greatly to obey the precepts of his word. His seed on Earth successively shall be in great request: The righteous mans posterity for ever shall be blest.
Riches and wealth his house shall fill, and fill it in great store: His righteousness continueth still, and lasts for evermore. Unto the man immaculate in darkness riseth light: Gracious he is, compassionate, in justice exquisite. A good man still is mercifull, and freely lends and spares: And with discretion sutable he guideth his affairs. He shall not (of a certainty) be mov'd though times prove bad: In everlasting memory the righteous shall be had. Ill tidings shall not trouble him, to make his heart affraid: His heart is fix'd, by faith within trusting in God's good aid. His heart is well established, and fear he shall forgo, Untill he see accomplished his will upon his foe. He hath dispers'd and fed the poor, his righteousness is prais'd For ever: and for evermore his horn with honour rais'd. Sinners shall grieve to see the sight, and fret and pine away: And his desire shall perish quite, the wicked mans, I say.
HYMN 516. Honour and Vertue of the Saints. 2. METRE. The mighty God, &c. Psalm 112. PRaise ye the Lord he's blest that fears the Lord Greatly delighting in his holy word: His seed on Earth shall be among the best, The just mans generation shall be blest. Riches and wealth he to his house procureth, His righteousness for evermore endureth. Unto the upright there doth light arise In darkest night of his adversities: He is a gracious one you may be sure; full of compassion, and a righteous doer. A good man freely lends, and sheweth favour, And all his actions of discretion savour. He never shall be mov'd undoubtedly, But had in everlasting memory: With evil tidings he shall not be stirr'd, His heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord. His heart is fix'd, he shall not be affrayed Untill he see his Enemies dismayed. He hath disperst, and given to the poor, His righteousness indures for evermore: His horn shall be exalted with renown, The wicked seeing that shall be cast down. His teeth shall grate, his heart no joy shall cherish. But pine away, and all his hopes shall perish.
HYMN 517. Lovers of Liberality. 3. METRE. All People, &c. Psalm 112.5.37. A Good man favour shews, and lends, And with discretion spares and spends; He freely lends to them that need, And leaves a Blessing to his seed. Surely he never shall be mov'd That hath his wealth so well improv'd: The righteous shall be had thereby In everlasting memory. He hath dispersed of his store, And given plenty to the poor: His righteousness is ever prais'd, His horn with honour shall be rais'd. His heart is fix'd, his fear is past Untill he see his enemies cast: The God of Israel therefore Be blessed now and evermore. HYMN 518. Honours and promotions of the poor▪ 1. METRE. Psalm 113. PRaise ye the Lord, praise him I say, ye servants of the Lord: Now from this day for ever may his greatness be ador'd.
Of all men universally must his great Name be prais'd: Whose dignity surmounts the sky, above all Nations rais'd. With God the Lord who may compare, whose dwells in Heaven high? Yet stoops to care for things that are both in the Earth and Sky. The poor and needy he doth grace, whom from the dust he brings: From dunghill base, to Princes place, to sit inthron'd with Kings. The barren to keep house makes he, that (having Children store) A Parent she full glad may be: praise ye the Lord therefore. HYMN 519. Honours and promotions of the poor. 2. METRE. Give Laud, &c. Psalm 113. YE Servants of the Lord, praise ye the Lord most high: His blessed Name record with praise perpetually; from Sun to Sun, And from the East unto the West must this be done. All Nations he excells, his glory mounts the skie:
And what God is there else, what other Lord so high? yet stoops to know The things that move in Heaven above, and Earth below. He lifts and raiseth high the needy, poor, and base, That in the dust did lie on dunghills of disgrace; and them he brings To sit in seat with Princes great, with Israel's Kings. The barren women he doth wonderfully bless: A Parent glad to be, and housholds to possess; and to be stor'd With many Sons, and little ones, praise ye the Lord. HYMN 520. Jacob's safe Conduct. 1. METRE. Psalm 114. WHEN Israel Aegypts bounds forsook, and safely march'd along: And Jacob's house their journey took from people strange of tongue. In Judah was his holy place, in Israel he reign'd: The Sea saw that, and fled apace, and Jordan was restrain'd.
The Mountains like to Rams did start, the Hillocks as young Sheep: O Sea, what drove thee to depart? why fled the liquid deep? What forc'd thee (Jordan) on a heap, to rear thy water dams? Ye mountains great as Rams do leap, ye little Hills as Lambs? Tremble O Earth, so justly aw'd at presence of the Lord: At presence of the mighty God, whom Jacob there ador'd. Who turns the Rock (that takes no dint) into a standing Pool: And flinty stones (the fiery flint) to Springs of water cool. HYMN 521. Jacob's safe Conduct from Aegypt. 2. METRE. Ye Children, &c. Psalm 114. WHEN Israel out of Aegypt went, And Jacob's house with great content, From them that us'd a tongue unknown: Judah was then (when thus restor'd) The Sanctuary of the Lord, And Israel his Dominion. The Sea saw that, and quickly fled, And Jordan to his fountain-head Was quickly turned back again: The frighted Mountains skip'd like Rams, The little Hills, like little Lambs, Such awfull terrour did constrain.
What ail'd thee, O thou Sea to fly? O Jordan, what so hastily Did force thy fleeting current back? Ye Mountains that ye skip'd like Rams? Ye little Hills, like little Lambs? Some cause cumpulsive could not lack. Tremble O Earth, and quake for fear When God in presence doth appear, The mighty God, Of Jacob's Race: Who made the Rock a standing pool, And fiery Flint a Fountain cool, For Israel in the Desart place. HYMN 522. Idols derided. Psalm 115.1, 2. LORD not to us, Lord not to us do thou the Glory take: Yea for thy truth we praise thee thus, and for thy mercies sake. Why then, O Lord, endurest thou the Heathen thus to say, Where is your God, O Israel now, where is he now say they? 3, 4. But our God, be it known to you, he is in Heaven on high: And what it pleaseth him to do, he doth continually. The Idol Gods of Heathen Lands are Silver, Brass and Gold; They are the work of work-mens hands, and such as men did mold.
5, 6. They have indeed both mouths and eyes, such (take them) as they be: But blind and speechless Deities, and neither speak nor see. Ears have they for the greater grace, yet hear not what we tell: And they have Noses on their Face, but want the sense to smell. 7, 8. On either side they have a hand, and yet they handle not: And they have feet whereon they stand, but never stir a jot. Their hollow throats no breath goes through, their makers like them are: The truster's like the trusted to, the work-man like the ware. HYMN 523. Liberty of the Gospel. 1. METRE. Have mercy &c. Psalm 117. PRaise God ye Nations all, let all the praise be his: For great to us, and marvellous his loving kindness is. The Gospel-truth of God endures for evermore: In time to call the Nations all, praise ye the Lord therefore.
HYMN 524. Liberty and latitude of the Gospel. 2. METRE. To the New Tune. PRaise God all Nations and all Lands, Great mercy have we at his hands: His praise record, His truth is sure still to endure, Praise ye the Lord. HYMN 525. Liberty and latitude of the Gospel. 3. METRE. The mighty God, &c. Psalm 117. YE Nations all, O praise the Lord above, O praise him all ye people here below: For great towards us is his tender love, and greatly ratifi'd let all men know. The Gospel truth of God endures for ever: Praise ye the Lord, and praise him altogether. HYMN 526. Life of Religion. Psalm▪ 119. (1. PART.) O Blessed are the innocent and perfect in the way: Who from the Lord's Commandement do Never go astray. 2. Blessed are they that care to keep his Testaments entire: And such as for the Lord do seek with all their hearts desire.
3, 4. They practice no iniquity, but in God's ways they go: And we must serve thee diligently for thou hast charg'd us so. 5, 6. O that my ways were made direct, and to thy Statutes fram'd: Which when I generally respect, I shall not be asham'd. With upright heart I'll give thee praise, and keep thy Laws aright: When I have learn'd thy righteous ways, O do not leave me quite. (2. METRE.) Psalm 119.1. All People, &c. BLessed, O blessed are the pure that never from God's Laws depart: That keep his Testimonies sure, and seek him with a perfect heart. They also do no wickedness, but keep his Laws and never swerve: So strict a precept thou dost press, that we with care thy Laws observe. O that my ways were made direct, and to thy Statutes rightly fram'd: Which when I wholly do respect, doubtless I shall not be asham'd: With upright heart I'll give thee praise when I have learn'd thy judgments right: And I will surely keep thy ways, O do not, Lord, forsake me quite.
The Corruption of youth bridled. 2. PART. Psalm 119. v. 9, to 16. HOW may a young man cleanse his way, and curb the lusts of youth? If that he mark what thou dost say, and keep the word of truth: Lord I have sought thee all my days, with heart unfeign'd and free: Let me not wander from thy ways, through ignorance in me. I hid thy word within my heart that I might not transgress: A blessed one, O Lord, thou art, thy laws to me express. The righteous Judgments of thy mouth My lips have spoke with pleasure: Rejoycing more to keep thy truth than get the greatest treasure. And I will study of thy Name, and thereof frame my talk, As at a mark so will I aim, thy ways how I may walk: And my delight upon thy Laws shall be so surely set, That I will not for any cause thy holy word forget.
The Devotion of pious Pilgrims. Psalm 119. from v. 17, to 24. (3. PART.) DEAL largely with thy Servant, Lord, That I may live and keep thy word: Open mine eyes that I may see What wonders in thy Laws there be. I am a stranger here below, Hide not the Laws which I should know; My soul doth break with longing sore, After thy Statutes evermore. Thou hast rebuk'd the proud that durst Err from thy Laws, and are accurst: Remove from me reproach and shame, For I have walkt as free from blame. Princes that sat, condemnd my cause, Yet did thy Servant mind thy Laws: Thy Testaments are my delight, And Counsellors to set me right. The dull and drooping Saints quickened. Psalm 119. from v. 25, to 32. (4. PART.) MY Spirit cleaveth to the dust, Lord quicken me as thou art just, I have declar'd my ways to thee, And thou hast hearkened unto me. Teach me thy Statutes I thee pray, And let me know thy Precepts way, So my discourse shall wholly tend, Thy works and wonders to commend.
My heart doth melt for very grief, Lord for thy Word-sake send relief, The way of lies from me withdraw, And grant me gratiously thy Law. Lord I have chosen prudently The way of truth and verity: I laid thy judgments in my sight That I might always do aright. Thy Testaments I stuck unto, Lord shame me not for what I do: I'll run the way thou giv'st in charge When as thou shalt my heart enlarge. 5. PART. 1. METRE. The faithfulness of Saints to the end. Psalm 119. v. 33, to 40. LORD teach me in thy Statutes way, and I shall keep it to the end: O give me knowledge that I may with all my heart thy Law attend. Yea I shall keep, and keep them sure, make me therefore to go aright; In paths of thy Commandments pure, for therein onely I delight. Incline my heart unto thy Law, and not to avarice I pray: From vain delights mine eyes withdraw, and quicken me in thy good way.
Thy promise to thy Servant prove, who is devoted to thy fear: My fear'd reproach from me remove, for, Lord, thy judgments are sincere, Lord, I have long'd with earnestness thy blessed Laws to know and do, Vouchsafe then in thy righteousness, to move and quicken me thereto. 5. PART. 2. METRE. Life of Religion in practice. Psalm 119. v. 33, 34. TEach me, O Lord, the way whereto thy Statutes tend: So shall I never stray but keep it to the end. Give me to understand, and then shall I endeavour To act by thy command with my whole heart for ever. 35, 36. In paths of thy Commands Lord make me go aright; For my desire so stands, and therein I delight. Incline my heart, O Lord, that I may not digress: Incline it to thy word, and not to covetousness. 37, 38. Lord, turn away mine eyes, turn them, O Lord, I pray:
From viewing vanities, and quick'n me in thy way. Establish thou thy word unto thy servant dear: Who is devoted, Lord, unto thy faithfull fear. 39, 40. The obloquy I fear, Lord, turn away from me: Eor I confess how clear, how good thy judgments be. Behold how my desires do for thy precepts press, O stir those holy fires to shew thy righteousness. Psalm 119. v. 41, to 48· (6. PART.) The great freedom of the Godly. LORD, let thy mercies come to me, The saving health that flows from thee, according to thy promise, Lord; So shall I have to answer those That are my most reproachfull foes, for I have trusted in thy word. And take not, Lord, the word of truth, Take it not quite out of my mouth, for in thy judgments do I hope: So shall I keep and not, and not give or'e To keep thy Statutes evermore, for that is all my aim and scope. And I will walk at liberty, Because I seek unfeignedly the precepts which thou hast proclaim'd:
Thy Testimonies are such things, That I will mention them to Kings, and never be thereof asham'd: And I will much delight my mind In thy Commandements enjoyn'd, which I have loved to relate: My hands likewise I will direct To thy commands, which I affect, and in thy Statutes meditate. Psal. 119. v. 49, to 56. (7. PART.) Hearty comfort had in Godliness. THY promise to thy servant mind whereon thou mad'st me rest: This comfort in thy word I find, it cheers me when distrest. Though proud men have me greatly scoft, thy laws I did not leave; Thy judgments old I thought on oft, and comfort did receive. Yet horrour takes me for this age, that leaves thy Statutes quite: But in my house of Pilgrimage thy laws were my delight. Thy name in mind I have retain'd, when night her curtain draws▪ I kept thy word and thus I gain'd because I kept thy laws.
Psalm 119. v. 57, to 64. (8. PART.) The Just man's portion and practice. THOU art my portion, O my Lord, I said that I would keep thy word, according to thy flat decree: I beg thy favour from my heart, Thy mercy, Lord, to me impart, as thou hast kindly promis'd me. I thought upon my sinfull way, And turn'd my feet without delay unto thy Testimonies true: I hastned and have not delay'd To keep the word which thou hast said commanding our obedience due. The wicked men by troops and bands Have rob'd me with injurious hands, yet have I not forgot thy Laws: But ev'n at mid-night I will rise, To reader thanks in Sacrifice, thy righteous Judgments give such cause▪ A dear cumpanion, Lord, am I To all that fear thee faithfully, and of them all that keep thy way The Earth, O Lord, is richly stor'd With mercies which thou dost afford, teach me thy Statutes to obey.
Psalm 119. v. 65, to 72. (9. PART.) The keenest affliction profitable. ACcording to thy promise free, Lord thou hast dealt full well with me, Who am thy Servant fearing thee: Teach me good judgment, Lord, I pray, And knowledge of thy word and way, for I believe what thou dost say. While unchastised with thy rod I went astray from thee, O God, but in thy paths I since have trod: Lord thou art good, thy nature's so, And thou dost good, thy works do show, teach me, O Lord, thy Laws to know. The proud against me forg'd a lie, But my whole heart I will apply to keep thy precepts faithfully: As fat as grease their heart is grown, But, Lord, the Law which thou dost own is my delight and that alone. 'Twas good for me to undergo Th' afflicting hand of God, I know, that I might keep thy Statutes so: The Law of thy dear mouth I hold Better to me a thousand fold, than heaps of Silver and of Gold.
Psalm 119. v. 73, to 80. (10. PART.) The love of Saints to Grace and Godliness. I Am created, Lord, and fashion'd by thy hand, O give me skill to know thy will, and practice thy command: All they that fear thy Name to see me will be glad, For I O Lord believ'd thy word, and therein help I had. Thy Judgments, Lord, are just, I know them so to be, And in thy fidelty thou hast afflicted me: Let thy kind love I pray, for my true comfort make; According to thy promise do, for thy dear servants sake. O let thy tender love come to me in thy sight, That sweetly I may live thereby who in thy Law delight: Let proud men be asham'd, for they without a cause Have used me with injury, but I will mind thy Laws. Let those that fear thy Name, turn in, O Lord, to me; And every one to whom is known thy precepts what they be.
O let my heart be sound, and in thy Statutes true, That no just blame may bring me shame for any thing I do. Psalm 119. v. 81, to 88. (11. PART.) The making God our hope. MY soul for thy salvation faints with vehement desire, Yet doth thy word uphold my heart with hope that cannot tire: Mine eyes do fail for thy sweet word, and thus they seem to say, When wilt thou comfort me O Lord, why dost thou thus delay? For I am like a bottle, Lord, that in the smoak is set, Yet do not I at any time thy holy word forget▪ But, Lord, how long must I compute the time, to bear controll? When wilt thou Judgment execute on them that hunt my soul? The proud have digged pits for me, far from thy Law they are: Thy precepts and their practices do differ very far. But thy commandments, O most high, are faithfull, just, and true, O help me, for most wrongfully do they my soul pursue.
They had almost consumed me, and sent me to the Grave, Yet did not I forsake thy Law, my very life to save: Therefore in loving kindness, Lord, now quicken me with speed: So shall I keep the righteous word which doth from thee proceed. Psalm 119. v. 89, to 96. (12. PART.) The never failing of God's word. FOR ever, Lord, thy word doth last, And is in Heaven fixed fast: Thy faithfulness all ages see, The Earth abides as fix'd by thee. They all continue to this day, As thou appointest all obey: Had not thy Law been my delight, Affliction had o're-whelm'd me quite. Never will I forgetfull be Of thy sweet Laws that quickened me: Save me, O Lord, for I am thine, And I have sought thy Laws divine. The wicked have my death design'd, But I thy Testimonies mind: I find the worlds perfections fail, But above all thy Laws avail.
Psalm 119. v. 97, to 104. (13. PART.) The power of Religion in practice. THY Law O how I prise, I mind it all the day: Thereby thou mak'st me wise, yea wiser, Lord, than they that are my foes: For still with me thy precepts be, whence wisedom flows. I have attain'd more skill than all my teachers have, By studying on thy will: and more than men more grave, I understand: Because I do keep close unto thy strict command. My feet I have refrain'd from every evil way: That I might keep unstain'd the word which thou dost say: I have not gone From thy decrees, for thou by these, hast led me on. Thy Words how sweet they are, how sweet unto my taste? Yea sweeter, Lord, by far than honey for repast: thy precepts praise It Is, that I get skill, and fly from all false ways.
Psalm 119. v. 105, to 112. (14. PART.) The pure Lamp of the word. THY word's a Lamp unto my feet, A light to guide my paths most meet, that I may never go astray: And I have made a solemn Oath, And to perform it, am not loath, that I will keep thy righteous way. I am afflicted very sore, Now quicken me, O Lord, therefore, according to thy promise free: The free-will Offerings which I mov'd, I pray thee, Lord, let e approv'd, and teach thy judgments unto me. My soul is ever in my hand, My life doth in such danger stand, yet do I not forget thy Law: The wicked laid a snare for me, And yet I erred not from thee, Nor from thy precepts did withdraw. Thy Testimonies I have stor'd, My heritage for ever, Lord, for all my hearts delight they be: I have inclin'd my heart therefore, To keep thy Statutes evermore, untill I die and come to thee.
Psalm 119. v. 113, to 120. (15. PART.) The renouncing of ill courses and companions. I Hate vain thoughts, but love thy Law, thou art my hiding place, O Lord: My shield, when dangers near me draw, and I have hoped in thy word. Ye evil doers from me depart, your company my course withstands; For I am purpos'd in my heart to serve my God, as he commands. Uphold me, Lord, that I may live, and, Lord, perform thy promise claim'd; That of the hope which thou dost give, I may at no time be asham'd. Uphold me, for if thou protect, I shall be very safe thereby; And I will have a due respect unto thy Laws continually. Thou hast in anger under-trod all those that from thy Statutes stray: For all their subtle shifts, O God; is but a foul deceiving way. For all the wicked of the Earth as basest dross, thou turnest by, Therefore as things of greatest worth, I love thy precepts wondrously.
Yet when I find what judgments fall, my flesh doth quake for fear of thee, Whose dreadfull hand so acts them all, as makes me sore afraid to see. Psalm 119. v. 121, to 128. (16. PART.) Supplication for deliverance and direction. I Do what equity commands, O leave me not to Tyrants hands, that would oppress me out of spight: Be surety for thy servants good, Let proud oppressors be withstood, and let them not o'rethrow my right: Mine eyes for thy salvation fail, I wait to see thy word prevail, that rghteous word of thy decree. Deal with thy Servant, I intreat, According to thy mercy great, and all thy Statutes teach to me. I am thy Servant, give me skill, That I may understand thy will. and may thy Testimonies know; And now it is a needfull time, For thee, O Lord, to work for thine, for all thy Laws they overthrow: Therefore do I thy Statutes love Above bright Gold, yea far above The Gold that goes at greatest rate: Therefore I count all thy decrees, In all things right and none but these, and all false ways I truly hate.
Psalm 119. v. 127, to 136. (17. PART.) The true Zeal and Charity of Christians. THY Testimonies are most rare, Therefore my souls delight they are: The entrance of thy word gives light, And makes the simple know aright. I gaspt and panted very much, My longing for thy Laws was such; Look on me, Lord, and let me claim Thy Grace, as one that loves thy Name. Order my steps in thy good way, And let no sin in me bear sway: From mans oppression set me free, So shall I keep to thy decree. Thy face let on thy servant shine, And teach to me thy Laws divine: Rivers of tears run down mine eyes, Because thy Statutes they despise. Psal. 119. v. 137, to 144. (18. PART.) The true zeal and purity of Christians. RIghteous art thou, O Lord, thy judgments are upright, The precepts of thy word to which thou dost excite so earnestly, Are most express for righteousness and equity.
My zeal, Lord, after those, made me consume and pine; Because my wicked foes forgot those words of thine: but O most pure Is thy sweet word, thy servant, Lord, loves it therefore. And though I am but small, and of as small regard, Yet mind I most of all thy words which I have heard: for ever doth Thy righteous word remain, O Lord, thy Law's the truth. And though adversity in very deep degree, And great perplexity have taken hold on me: yet (in this plight) My comfort stands, in thy commands, there's my delight. The righteousness, O Lord, Of thy Decrees Divine; Doth stand on sure record, and never can decline: to me O give Compleater skill to do thy will, and I shall live.
Psal. 119. v. 145, to 152. (19. PART▪) The unwearied seeking of God. WITH earnest voice I cry and call, Lord hear the words which I let fall, for I will keep thy Statutes all▪ O save me, Lord, I cry'd to thee, Thy Testimonies then shall be most faithfully observ'd by me: I did prevent the dawning day I'th morning I did cry and pray, I made thy word my hope and stay: Mine eyes prevent the watches late That I might freely contemplate and on thy word might meditate. According as thy judgments be, And after thy compassions free, Lord hear my voice and quicken me: Lo they draw nigh and near me press, That follow after wickedness, but from thy laws they far digress: But thou, O Lord, art very nigh, And thy commandments generally, are perfect truth and equity: Concerning thy decrees, behold, I knew, O Lord, I knew of old, that thou hast founded them to hold.
Psalm 119. v. 153, to 160. (20. PART.) The unworthiness of the wicked counterpoised. THINK how I am beset, and, Lord, deliver me: For I do not forget the word ordain'd by thee. plead for me, Lord, And set me free, and quicken me by thy good word. Thy saving health is far from all ungodly men, For what thy Statutes are is not sought out by them: thy mercies kind Are great, O Lord, O let thy word cheer up my mind. Many, O Lord, are those, (for they are not a few) That are my utter foes, and do my soul pursue with ill intents, Yet do not I decline from thy Commandements. Transgressors of thy laws I saw, and seeing wept, For I was griev'd, thy word they have not kept: consider, Lord, The love sincere which I do bear unto thy word.
Lord quicken me anew by thy kind love restor'd, Because thy word is true from the beginning, Lord; it faileth never: And every clause of thy just laws, abide for ever. Psalm 119. v. 161, to 168. (21. PART) The watchfulness of Saints. PRinces have persecuted me without a cause, O Lord, Yet stands my heart in awe of thee, and trembles at thy word. And in that word, Lord, all the while I did as much rejoyce, As he that finds the greatest spoil, and bears away the choice. But lying Doctrines of deceit I ever have abhorr'd: While my affection is full great unto thy Law, O Lord: And surely seven times a day I will give thanks to thee, Because thy judgments do display such righteousness to me. All they that love thy Law to find such great content and peace, That nothing shall offend their mind to make their comforts cease:
And for thy sweet salvation, Lord, I have waited still, And led my conversation according to thy will. My soul hath kept with constancy thy laws in every part, I love them so exceedingly, and from my very heart. Thy Testimonies I have kept, thy precepts I pursue, For thou beholdst me every step, and seest what 'ere I do. Psalm 119. v. 169, to 172. (22. PART.) The work of Grace permanent. UNto the Lord let my cry come, and near approach to thee: Of understanding give me some, as with thy words agree. My humble supplication before thee let appear; For thou art my salvation, my God, my Lord, most dear. Then shall my lips applaud thy name in holy Songs of praise: And to thy Statutes my heart frame when I am taught thy ways. My tongue shall thy true word declare, thy righteousness unfold: Thy Commandments that are so rare, shall to the Saints be told.
O help me, Lord, by thy right hand because I trust in thee, Thy chosen precepts shall command me, with humility. For thy salvation, Lord, I sought, and longed very much: Thy laws delight me wisedom taught, I never pains did grutch. Long live my soul the Lord to praise, his Name to glorifie, And by thy judgments guide my ways to all eternity. Lord, like a sheep thy servant stray'd, in pity Lord seek me, For of thy law I'm not affraid, forgot ne're let me be. HYMN 527. Living in quietness longed for. Psal. 120. (1. METRE.) I Cry'd to God in all my wrongs, who heard me when I pray'd: From lying lips and crafty tongues, Lord save my soul I said. What shalt thou have, O slandrous tongue, and what shall be thy hire? Sharp Arrows of a Champion strong, and burning coals of fire. Ah wo is me that am constrain'd in Meshech still to dwell: And that I have so long remain'd in Tents of Ishmael.
Too long a time my soul hath sate with them that peace oppose: I am for peace and speak for that, but they contention chose. 2. METRE. To the proper Tune. IN my distressfull day I to the Lord did pray: and he redrest my wrong. Lord save my soul, say I, From lips inur'd to lie: and from a double tongue. O false tongue! what shall be Awarded unto thee: or what shall be thy hire? Sharp Arrows such as go Out of a Giants bow, and burning coals of fire. O wo is me! that I Sojourn constrainedly with men contentious; And am enforc'd to dwell So far from Israel, among the barbarous. My soul hath dwelt too long With him that likes of wrong, and hates a quiet life: I am to peace inclind, But when I speak my mind they are for war and strife.
HYMN 528. Looking up to God. Psalm 121. (1. METRE.) UP to the hills I lift mine eye, whence comes my help at need: From him that made both earth and sky, doth all my help proceed. He will not let thy foot be mov'd, for still thy keeper wakes: Lo he that keepeth his belov'd no sleep nor slumber takes. The Lord at thy right hand shall be thy shadow of defence: The Sun and Moon shall shed on thee no harmfull influence. From evils all he keeps thee sure, and guards thy soul about: Henceforth for ever to secure thy goings in and out. 2. METRE. Give laud, &c. I Will lift up mine eyes unto the hills on high, From whence my sure supplies do come continually: my help comes forth From God the Lord, whose powerfull word made heaven and earth. And suffer he will not thy foot once mov'd to be:
Nor slumbers he a jot that watcheth over thee: lo! he that keeps His Saints each one, he slumbers none, nor ever sleeps. The Lord thy Keeper is, the Lord's the shady Bowe: At the right hand of his, by his right hand of power: that neither shall The Sun by light, nor Moon by night hurt thee at all. To keep thee safe from harm, the Lord shall still provide: The Lord thy soul shall arm, and all thy goings guide: thou hast therefore The guard of Heaven, henceforth and even for evermore. HYMN 529. Lovers of Sion. Have mercy, &c. Psalm 122. (1. METRE.) I Joy'd to hear them say, to Sion take your way: Behold our feet shall shortly meet in God's own house to pray. Jerusalems buildings are like to a City fair: For form exact, and close compact, whereto the Tribes repair.
To it God's people went, to Israel's Testament: That every Tribe might there ascribe his praise with joynt assent. The judgment throne's for them are there for David's stem: O pray that peace may never cease from fair Jerusalem. Thy lovers God shall bless, thy walls let peace possess: Thy palaces the Lord shall please to crown with happiness. For my companions sake, and brethren that partake: For Sion's good, and neighbour-hood these constant prayers I make. HYMN 530. Lovers of Sion blessed. The mighty God, &c. Psalm 122. (2. METRE.) FULL glad was I when as they said to me, Come let us ha∣sten to the house of God: Our feet shall stand where we desire to be, Within thy Gates O Salem's safe abode! Jerusalem is built up most compleatly, Like to a Ci∣ty joyn'd together neatly. Whither go up the tribes whereof we tell,
The tribes of God unto that stately frame; Unto the Te∣stament of Israel, To render thanks to God's most holy Name: For there are set the thrones with grace engraved; The thrones of Judg∣ment for the house of David. Pray for the peace of sweet Jerusalem, Pray that its peace may bear a lasting date: For they shall pros∣per ev'ry one of them That love the good of Sion's good estate. Peace be within thy walls with double blessing, Prosperity thy palaces possessing. Yea, for my Bre∣threns sake that shall have part, And my Compa∣nions every one of them: Now will I say, and say it from my heart, Peace be within thee, O Jerusalem: And for the Lord our God's most holy dwelling, Ill seek thy good, as of a place excelling.
HYMN 531. Meekness of Captives. Psalm 123. (1. METRE) O Thou that dwell'st above the skies, I lift mine eyes to thee: Behold as servants bend their eyes the Masters hands to see: As hand-maids on their Mistresses, so do our eyes attend, Untill the Lord our God shall please his succouring Grace to send. Thy mercy, Lord, to us apply, and pity our sad case: For we are fill'd exceedingly with hatred and disgrace. Exceeding great contempt and scorn our souls do now abide: Of such as have lift up the horn with pamper'd ease and pride. HYMN 532. Meekness and mourning of Cap∣tives. 2. METRE. To the new Tune. O Thou that dwell'st above the spheres, To thee thy humble servant rears A meek and mournfull eye: Behold as servants mark the hands Of Masters, under whose commands They serve submissively.
And as a Maidens eyes erect Upon her mistress with respect, Compassion crave and love: So on our God our eyes do wait Till he shall us commiserate With favour from above. Have mercy on us, O good Lord, Have mercy on us here abhorr'd, And under miseries bow'd: Our soul is fill'd (even while they please) With insolence of men at ease, And scorning of the proud. HYMN 533. Miracles of Mercy, or the snare broken. Have mercy, &c. Psalm 124. (1. METRE.) HAD not the Lord this day, now Israel may say: Had it not been that God came in to be our strength and stay; Had not our God so good on our side firmly stood When cruel foes against us rose, like some impetuous floud: They had let none survive, but swallowed up alive: When in such heat of fury great they did against us strive.
Then, then without controll the waters that did roll With boisterous waves, had been our graves, and gone quite o're our soul. Blessed be God alway that gave us not a prey Into their teeth, to be therewith devoured that same day. Our souls escaped fair, as from the fowlers snare: When (broke in two) the bird gets through, so we escaped are. Our help we now proclaim to be in that great Name Of God the Lord, whose powerfull word did Earth and Heaven frame. HYMN 534. Miracles of Mercy, or the snare broken. To the proper Tune. Psalm 124. (2. METRE.) NOW may we say of Israel's Heritage, Had not the Lord himself been on our side, Had not the Lord himself oppos'd their pride When wicked men against us did ingage, They had devour'd us quick in their fierce rage.
Like foaming flouds our foes incensed thus Had overwhelm'd our Souls without con∣troul, Then the proud waters had gone o're our soul: Blessed be God that hath not given us To be a prey for cruel teeth to crush. Our soul's escaped, just as doth a bird: Just as a bird out of the fowlers snare; The snare is broke, and we delivered are: Our help is in the Name of God the Lord, Who made both Earth and Heaven by his Word. HYMN 535. Mount Sion's sure standing. Psalm 125. (1. METRE) WHoever on the Lord rely, like Sion Mount are sure To stand with all stability, and ever to endure. Environ'd as Jerusalem is with mountains huge and high: So doth the Lord environ his henceforth perpetually. God will not leave the sinners rod on just mens lot to rest: Lest righteous men should fall from God when overmuch opprest. Do good, O Lord, to all good men, and graciously impart Thy love and favour unto them that are upright in heart.
But wicked men that turn aside perverseness to encrease, To share with sinners God shall guide, but Israel shall have peace. HYMN 536. Mount Sion's sure standing. Give Laud, &c. Psalm 125. (2. METRE.) ALL they that do confide, and trust in God above, So firmly shall abide that nothing can remove their station sure: But stedfast still, like Sion hill, they shall endure. And as high mountains do enclose Jerusalem, So have God's people too a safeguard sheltring them: they have therefore The God of Heaven henceforth and even for evermore. Because the righteous God will not permit too long The sinners scourge and rod to do the righteous wrong: lest it should force Most righteous men to follow then some wicked course.
Do good, Lord, to the good, and to the pure in heart, But those that to their lewd and sinfull ways depart, God casts to hell With evil doers, but peace assures to Israel. HYMN 537. Mourning turn'd to rejoycing for Israel's deliverance from Babylon. Psalm 126. (1. METRE.) WHEN from his sad captivity the Lord did Sion bring, Like to a dream it seem'd to be, but prov'd a real thing. Our mouth and tongue were sweetly fill'd with joy and laughter then: And such like speeches past along among the Heathen men. Great things the Lord hath done for them, great things we do confess: Great things to glad Jerusalem, and stir up thankfulness. Lord perfect our deliverance, and make a full return, As flowing streams do change the soil which parching heat did burn. They that i dearth and time of tears their seed do sadly sow: The crops of Corn with full grown ears shall gladly reap and mow.
Though carrying forth his costly seed, it made the seeds-man mourn: He shall no doubt bring whom his sheaves, and make a glad return. HYMN 538. Mourning turn'd to rejoycing, or the dream made real. Give laud, &c. Psalm 126. (2. METRE.) WHEN God had turn'd the stream of our Captivity, We were like them that dream, affected doubtfully: but when it prov'd, Our mouths and tongues with joyfull songs were sweetly mov'd. Thus also did they say among the Gentiles then, The Lord hath done this day great things for those poor men: yea God hath done Great things for us which ravish us to think upon. Turn our Captivity as Rivers in the South, Which help the Desarts dry against the parching drouth: who sows in tears (Through scarcity) shall reap in joy their full grown ears.
He that goes weeping out▪ and bears forth precious seed, Returns with joy (no doubt) and happily shall speed: for he receives A pledge to come well laden home and brings his sheaves. HYMN 539. Nativities blessed, or Blessings of the Womb. 1. METRE. Psalm 127. UNless the Lord the house do build vain pains the builder takes: Unless the Lord the City shield in vain the watchman wakes▪ 'Tis all in vain to watch and wait, and eat of sorrows bread: While God's belov'd in their estate sleep quietly in bed. A fruitfull womb and children sweet God onely can bestow: Which are in youth as Arrows fleet shot from a Giants Bow. The quiver herewithall repleat imports a happy state: Such shall not be affraid to treat with enemies in the Gate.
HYMN 540. Nativities blessed, or Blessings of the Womb. All People, &c. Psalm. 127. (2. METRE.) UNless the Lord the house sustain, The builders labour but in vain: In vain the watch abstain from sleep Unless the Lord the City keep. In vain ye rise before the light, And break the slumbers of the night: In vain ye eat the bread of care While God's belov'd the labour spare. Lo Children are an heritage That come from God, and grow to age, As formidable to the foe As Arrows from a Giants Bow. Happy is he, and most renown'd, Whose quivers with such shafts abound: It shall not shame him to debate With adversaries in the gate. HYMN 541. Olive Branches. Psalm 128. (1. METRE.) BLessed are all that fear the Lord, and walk in his good ways: For thou shalt of thy labours eat with comfort all thy daies.
Like fruitfull Vine on thy house side thy loving Wife shall be: Thy Children round about thy board as plants of Olive-tree. Lo thus the man that fears the Lord is blessed in his ways: The Lord shall send from Sion-hill to bless thee all thy days. The welfare of Jerusalem to thy mature decease: And Childrens Children thou shalt see, with Israel's stablish'd peace. HYMN 542. Olive Branches. Ye Children, &c. Psalm 128. (2. METRE.) BLessed, O blessed on record Is every one that fears the Lord, and walketh in his perfect way: For thou shalt have in store to eat Of goods well got by thine own sweat, O happy, happy thou I say. Like to a Vine with fruitfull boughs On thy house side, such is thy spouse, with goodly branches springing out: Thy daughters and thy sons shall be Like to the plants of Olive-tree, decking thy Table round about. Behold that thus above the rest Shall such a man be surely blest, who fears the Lord unfeignedly:
The Lord shall plenteously distill His blessings out of Sion-hill, that thou may'st be enrich'd thereby. Yea, all the days that thou dost live This blessing God to thee shall give, to see Jerusalem do well: And Childrens Children thou shalt see Of thine own loyns, that spring from thee, and likewise peace on Israel. HYMN 543. Onsets upon Israel, or the Plow∣ers defeated. Psalm 129. (1. METRE.) EVEN from my tender infancy, many a time have they Afflicted me from infancy, may Israel now say. Many a time have they set on with all their spight and power: Yet have they fail'd and not prevail'd against me, to this hour. The Plowers plow'd upon my back, long furrows did they make: The righteous Lord hath cut their cord, Yea, all their cords he brake. And let them be confounded all, turn'd back in their design; And put to flight that Sion spight, and bear ill will to thine.
Let them be made like to the Corn upon the houses top: Which gets no height but withers straight before it comes to crop. Which neve fills the Reapers hand, nor his that comes ehind, To pluck and pull a bosome full for sheaves and bands to bind. Concerning which, the passengers no benediction frame: Nor never say along the Way, we bless you in God's Name. HYMN 544. Onsets upon Israel, or the Plow∣ers defeated. Give laud, &c. Psalm 129. (2. METRE.) FULL often of a truth, and many a time have they Distrest me from my youth, may Israel now say; even from the first: Yet could they not effect their plot, and do their worst. They plow'd upon my back, as plow-shares tear the Ground: Long furrows did they make, and many a grievous Wound with wicked hands: Just is the Lord, who cut their cord, and brake their bands.
And, Lord, confound them all, and bring it so to pass, That Sion's foes may fall, and all may be as Grass on houses top, Which withers straight before the height of growing up. Which never hath the hap to fill the mowers hand: Nor lies in binders lap so much as makes a band: nor passengers Along the Way do never say God-speed you, sirs. HYMN 545. Pardoning mercies. Psal. 130. (1. METRE. . O Lord to thee I make my moan in these my depths of Grief▪ I call, I cry, I sigh and groan, trusting to find relief▪ Hear then, O Lord, hear my request, thy gracious ear incline: And let it fully be possest with these desires of mine. O Lord if thou shouldst strictly weigh the sins that we have done Who should escape, or who could say that he could answer one?
But thou, O Lord, art rather bent to tenderness and Grace: That we might have encouragement to fear before thy face. Therefore my soul with patience doth wait upon thy Will: And on thy Word with confidence my hope is fixed still. My soul with longing appetite doth wait on God alway: More eager than the Watch for light, the Watch for break of day. Let Israel boldly trust upon the Lords's free grace and love: And plentifull redemption that comes from God above. Who from the more abundant store of Grace which he supplies, shall blot out all the heavy score of our iniquities. HYMN 546. Pardoning mercies implored. Psalm 130. (2. METRE) OUT of the Depths I cry'd to thee, Lord, let my voice be heard: And let thine ears attentive be unto my suits preferr'd. Such are our sins, that none could stand If thou shouldst mark the same: But there's forgiveness at thy hand, that men may fear thy Name.
I wait on God, and on his Word my soul doth wait and stay: I wait more earnest for the Lord, than Watchmen for the day. I say, more earnestly than those that watch for morning light: Let Israel thus on God repose whose mercy's infinite. Redemption in most plentious wise with him is found to be: And from all his iniquities he shall set Israel free. O render thanks to our great God, the God of Heaven therefore: Whose mercies know no period, but last for evermore. HYMN 547. Pardoning mercies plentifull. All People, &c. Or, O Lord Consider, &c. Out of Psalm 130. (3. METRE.) OUT of the deeps I cry'd to thee, Lord hear the prayer that I have prest, And let thine ears attentive be unto the voice of my request. For if thou mark iniquities, Lord, who may stand before thine eyes: But there's forgiveness, Lord, with thee, That sweetly feared thou may'st be. I wait for God, my soul doth stay, his word I hope in day and night: My soul waits for the Lord, I say, more than the Watch-men for the light.
Let Israel hope in God therefore, For with the Lord is mercy store: Plentious Redemption he brings in, To save all Israel from his sin. HYMN 548. (4. METRE.) Argument. The depths of mercy give relief, Vnto the utmost depths of Grief. Psalm 130. FROM the depths of troubled mind, Lord, to thee I cryed, And to thee, O Lord, most kind were my prayers applyed: Lord vouchsafe to hear my cry in commiseration, Bow thine ear attentively to my supplication. If thou mark iniquity who, Lord, should be cleared? But forgiveness is with thee that thou may'st be feared. I am waiting for the Lord, yea my soul attendeth, And on his most holy Word all my hopes dependeth. My soul waits for God, I say, more than men for morning, More than Watch-men for the day, for the days returning.
Hope thou Israel in the Lord with an apprehension, How with him is richly stor'd mercy and redemption. And he shall his Church redeem from their vast offences, Though they do past pardon seem and cry loud against us. O give thanks to God therefore for the Lord is gracious; And his mercies evermore kindly do embrace us. HYMN 549. Pride mortified. Psalm 131. (1. METRE) NO haughty heart, O Lord, have I in great affairs to deal: Nor do mine eyes look loftily, to thee I dare appeal. I have not sought nor entertain'd the things for me too high: But as a child an infant wean'd, so meek and mild am I. The weaned childs behaviour my soul hath altogether. Thus Israel in his saviour must hope henceforth for ever.
HYMN 550. Pride to be mortified. A Praxis for the proper Tune of the old 50. Psalm. The mighty God, &c. Psalm 131. (2. METRE.) NOT self-high-pris'd, but meek and mild am I: Not exercis'd in things too great and high. But as a Child wean'd from his mothers breast; So am I mild, and set my heart at rest. And in this way must Israel endeavour To trust and stay on God, henceforth for ever. HYMN 551. Promotion of the Church and State. Psalm 132.8, 9. ARise, O God, into thy rest, and settle us now at length, As when thy Ark did once invest the Temple of thy strength. O let thy Priests perpetually with righteousness be clad: And make thy Saints to shout for joy, and be exceeding glad.
13, 14, 16. Because the Lord hath Sion chose, desiring there to dwell: This is for ever my repose, I love and like it well. My saving health shall cloath throughout his Priests perpetually: And I will make her Saints to shout, and shout aloud for joy. 15.17. And I will in abundance spread provisions for her store: And I will satisfie with bread the numbers of her poor. There will I make the horn to bud of David on his Throne: I have ordain'd a lamp so good for mine anointed one. 18. As for his enemies that combine, I'll cloath them all with shame: But on himself his Crown shall shine, and flourish with his fame. HYMN 552. Promotion of Vnity. Psalm 133. (1. METRE.) BEhold how sweet it is to see, how happy a thing to find, When Brethren live in amity, and unity of mind.
It's like the precious unction which was pour'd out and spread Upon the Priestly function on Aaron's honour'd head. It wet not onely head and hair, but on his beard ran down: And wet the garments which he ware, and border of his gown. As dew distill'd upon the tops of Hermon's fragrant hill, Or Sion with his silver drops the fields with fruits doth fill. So plentiously the blessing flows commanded from above. With everlasting life on those that live in peace and love. HYMN 553. (2. METRE.) Argument. Vnity and Christian Love Bring great blessings from above. Have mercy, &c. Psalm 133. BEhold how good a thing, and pleasant 'tis to find; That Brethren (where cohabiting) firm unity should bind.
'Tis like the Oyntment shed, and by command conferr'd On Holy Aaron's Priestly head, which wet both head and beard. And did from thence distill his Garment skirt to wet; 'Tis like the lovely Hermon hill with drops of dew beset. Like Sion's silver showers descending on the dales: For there the Lord the blessing powers of life that never fails. HYMN 554. Promotion of Vnity. The mighty God, &c. Psalm 133. (3. METRE.) BEhold how good! how sweet it is to see when Brethren by the laws of love are led! Dwelling together all in unity, 'tis like the Oyntment that perfum'd the head, The head and beard of Aarons Priestly Order, And wet his Garments to the skirt and border. It's like the fruitfull showers of morning dew, that did upon the Hill of Hermon fall: Or that which doth descend in drops not few on Sion Mountain fruitfullest of all. For there the Lord commands the happy bles∣sing Of life so sweet and endless in possessing.
HYMN 555. Protection out of Sion, or the Levites Blessing. Psalm 134. (1. METRE) BEhold, bless ye the Lord, O ye his servants all▪ That in his house by night keep guard according to your call. Lift up your humble hands within his holy place: And bless the Lord as he commands, and humbly beg his grace. The Lord (shall ye say sti) that made both Heaven and Earth, Accomplish thee from Sion-hill with blessings thence powr'd forth. HYMN 556. Protection out of Sion, or the Levites Blessing. A Praxis for the proper Tune of the 124 Psal. Now Israel, &c. Psalm 134. (2. METRE. LO! ye his servants praise the Lord most high, Ye that by night within his Temple stand: There bless the Lord and us with raised hand. The Lord, say ye, that made both Earth and Sky, Out of his Temple bless thee bounteously.
HYMN 557. Providences to Israel God's pecu∣liar treasure. Ye Children, &c. Psalm 135.1. to 5. PRaise ye the Lord, and spread his fame, O ye his servants still proclaim the praises of his holy Name: Ye that do stand within his gate, And at the Sacred Altar wait of our great God, his praise relate. Praise ye the Lord, for good he is; Sing praises to that Name of his, for a most pleasant work it is. For God hath chosen, and foreknown Jacob and Israel as his own for his peculiar wealth alone. 5, 6, 7, 8. For that the Lord is great, I know, And infinitely doth outgo all gods, and great ones high and low. For whatsoever doth him please, In heaven, in earth, in deeps, in seas, he acts in all, in each of these, Vapours he draws from earths far ends, Lightnings for Rain from Clouds he rends, and Winds out of his treasury sends. Who smote all Egypts first increast, The first of Man, the first of Beast; all, from the greatest to the least.
9, 10, 11, 12. Wonders and Sines send forth did he, O Egypt, in the midst of thee, on Pharaoh, and his Family. Who did the mighty Nations smite, And slew the Kings of potent might, as Sion, that strong Amorite. And Og, who sate on Bashan Throne He also slew; nor him alone, but Canaans Kingdoms every one. And to his People gave their Land, He gave it into Israels hand, an heritage at their command. HYMN 558. Pureness of God's Worship, and derision of Idols. Ye Children, &c. Psalm 135, 13. to 17. (2. PART.) THY Name, O Lord, shall never die, And thy memorial, O most high, endures to all posterity. For God to Judgment will awake, His peoples cause to undertake, repenting for his servants sake: The Heathens Idol-Gods, behold, They are of Silver and of Gold, such as the hands of men did mold: Mouth, Ears and Eyes, they have all three, But neither speak, nor hear, nor see. and void of breath their Nostrils be.
18, 19, 20, 21. Their makers (guilty of the sin) Are like to them, and much a kin, and so are all that trust therein. But God the Lord, deserves great fame, O house of Israel bless his name, O house of Aaron do the same. Bless ye the Lord, O Levy's house, And make his praises glorious, let all that fear him praise him thus. O bless the Lord from Sion-hill, That dwells at Salem with good will, O bless the Lord, and praise him still. HYMN 559. Pure services of the Church. Psalm 135.19. (3. PART.) BLess ye the Lord with one accord, O house of Israel: And each of us of Aaron's house, his glorious praise forth tell. 20. Let Levy's Tribe due praise ascribe to God's most holy Name: And all that fear him every where his noble praise proclaim. 21. O bless him still from Sion-hill, whose is that blest abode, Jerusalem, and dwells with them, praise ye the Lord our God.
HYMN 560. Remembrance of God's ancient works, and everlasting mercies. Psalm 136.1, 2, 3, 4. (1. METRE.) GIVE thanks to God, for he is good; for's mercy lasts for ever: To th' God of gods shew gratitude, for's mercy faileth never. The Lord of lords give thanks unto, for's mercy never fails: Who can alone great wonders do, for's mercy still prevails. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. To him whose wisedom made the Skie, for's mercy still shines bright: And stretch'd the Earth, than Seas more high, for's mercies infinite. Who made Sun, Moon and Stars for lights, for's mercy still outshines: That rules the day, and these the nights, for's mercy ne're declines. 10, 11, 12, 13. To him that Egypts first-born smote, for's mercies still abound: And Israel from among them brought, for's mercy's still renown'd. With arm outstretch'd, and mighty hand, for's mercy still extends: Caus'd the Red Sea in parts to stand, for's mercy still transcends.
14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Amidst it he gave Israel ground, for's mercies still endure; Where Pharaoh and his host were drown'd, for's mercies still are sure. That led his flock the desarts through, for's mercies still persist: And smote great Kings and famous too, for's mercies never mist. 19, 20, 21, 22. King Sion th' Amorite he did kill, for's mercies still remain: And Og, the King of Basan hill, for's mercies ever reign. And for an heritage gave their land, for's mercies still stand fast: Into his People Israels hand, for's mercies ever last. 23, 24, 25, 26. Who thought on's in our low estate, for's mercies never slack: And sav'd us from our enemies hate, for's mercies ne're go back. Who feeds with food all kinds of flesh, for's mercies still provides: To th' God of Heav'n give thanks afresh, for's mercy still abides.
HYMN 561. Remembrance of God's ancient Works and everlasting mercies. Give laud, &c. Psalm 136. (2. METRE.) GIVE laud unto the Lord, for very good is he, The God of gods record, the Lord of lords praise ye: For certainly His mercies do endure unto Eternity. The wonder-working God, whose wisedom made the skies: And spread the Earth abroad, above the Sea to rise: For certainly, &c. To him your praises pay that made those glorious lights, The Sun to rule by day, the moon and stars by nights: For certainly, &c. Who Aegypt's first-born smote, and Israel (scaping harm) He from among them brought with strong out-streched arm: For certainly, &c.
Who parted the Red-Sea, where Israel passage found: But Pharaoh and all they of his whole host was drown'd. For certainly His mercies do endure unto Eternity. Who all his people led the Wilderness quite through: Who mighty Kings smote dead, and famous Kings he slew. For certainly His mercies do endure unto Eternity. Sihon and Og he slew, and in their Land do dwell, He gave possession to his servant Israel. For certainly His mercies do endure unto Eternity. Who kindly on us thought, when in a low estate: And our Redemption wrought, from them that did us hate. For certainly, &c. Who gives all flesh their food, O then give thanks unto The God of Heaven so good, to whom all praise is due. For certainly, &c.
HYMN 562. Revenge upon Babylon. Have mercy, &c. Psalm 137. (2. METRE.) BY the Brooks of Babylon we sat down every one: And Sion's state now ruinate we wept to think upon. Our Harps untun'd, unstrung, on Willow-trees we hung: Where they did thus require of us, come sing a Sion-song. For then and there did they that carried us away In captive state, and desolate, urge us to sing and play. They mirth of us demand, though wasted by their hand: How can our tongues tune Sion's Songs within a foreign Land? O Salem! If that I forget thee carelesly; Let my right hand lose all command of musick faculty. If I forget thee ever, then prosper let me never: But let it cause my tongue and jaws to cleave and cling together.
If for Jerusalem I do not quite contemn All joys that be, and count not thee above the chief of them. Remember, Lord, the spight shew'd by the Edomite: Thus did they say in Salem's day, down with it, raze it quite. O Daughter Babylon, whose ruine now comes on: Happy is he that doth to thee as thou to us hast done. Yea happy, happy he that takes and dasheth thee (Thy little ones) against the stones when Babel's doom shall be. HYMN 563. Service and safety of the Humble, God's true favourites. Psalm 138. (1. METRE.) LORD I will render praise to thee, with all my heart and might: Before the gods who'ere they be, in Men and Angels sight. I will bow down with humble grace towards the stately frame Of thine own house and holy place, there will I bless thy Name.
For all thy loving-kindness, Lord, and for thy truth Divine: For thou hast made thy faithfull Word o're all thy Name to shine. The day whereon I cry'd to thee, thou answerest me again: And gav'st such inward strength to me, as did my soul sustain. All Kings on Earth shall praise thy Name when they shall hear of thee: What promises thou didst proclaim, and hast fulfill'd to me. Yea, they shall sing with one accord, in God's most holy ways: Because the Glory of our Lord deserves so great a praise. Although the Lord be very high, the lowly he respects: But them that carry't loftily he utterly neglects. And though I walk in midst of Woes, fresh comforts thou shalt send: Against the Wrath of all my foes thy hand thou shalt extend. And thy right-hand, O thou most high, my sure defence shall be; The Lord will perfect thoroughly that which concerneth me.
Thy mercy doth, O Lord, abide, for that can never fade. O do not lay the work aside which thine own hands have made. HYMN 564. Service and safety of the Humble, God's true favourites. Ye Children, &c. Or, To the proper  of the Old 127. Psalm. Except the Lord, &c. Psalm 138. (2. METRE.) LORD, from my heart I'll praise thy Name, Before the Gods I'll sing thy fame, prostrate at Sion's sacred frame: For thy sweet love and truth so try'd, For thou thy Word hast magnifi'd, yea, more than all thy Name beside. Thou heard'st me when I cry'd to thee, With inward strength thou strengthenedst me; and didst my soul from danger free: All those that Earthly Scepters bear Shall praise thee when thy Words they hear; and know how well fulfill'd they were. Yea, they shall sing, and give thee praise, Walking as Converts in thy waies; whose Wonders admiration raise: Though God be high above the Skies, He on the lowly casts his eyes; but doth the proud as much despise.
And though I walk in midst of woes, Thy hand shall save me from my foes, and raise me in their overthrows. My perfect peace shalt thou command, Thy mercies, Lord, for ever stand: leave not the works of thine own hand. HYMN 565. Seeking God, or supplications at our awaking. All People, &c. Or, O Lord Consider, &c. Psalm 80.1. & 121.4. & 139.17, 18. O Shepherd that dost Israel keep, Who never slumbrest nor dost sleep: How precious are thy thoughts to How great a sum, O God, they be! If I thereof would take account, The Sands in number they surmount: And whensoever I awake, These things into my thoughts I take. And I am ever with thee still, To contemplate of thy good will: As for the wicked and the lewd, All such companions I exclude. For thou wilt surely slay such men, And bring destruction upon them: They speak against thee wickedly, And talk of God whom they deny.
I hate their bold impieties, I hate them that against thee rise: I count no man so much my foe As him that doth thy fear forgo. Nor do I speak from feigned zeal, To thee, O Lord, I dare appeal: Search me, O Lord, and see my heart, Try me, and prove my inward part. See, Lord, If I do go astray In any evil wicked way: And guide me, that I may not miss The way to everlasting bliss. HYMN 566. Supplications for the Morning. Psalm 141.2, 3. LORD, let my prayer be now set forth as incense in thine eyes: And the uplifting of my hands as th' evening Sacrifice. Lord set a Watch before my mouth, that no ill Words take place: And keep the door of both my lips by thine effectual grace. 4, 5. Incline my heart to no ill thing, no wicked work to follow: With them that act iniquity, nor their sweet baits to swallow. But let the righteous smite me, Lord, and it shall be a favour: And his reproof a precious oyl of acceptable savour.
5. Such smiting shall not break my head, and I'll requite their care: When their calamities shall need the succours of my prayer. 2. METRE. All people, &c. LORD let my prayer be now set forth Before thee, as a thing o worth: As incense let it, Lord, arise, Or as the Evening Sacrifice. Lord, set a carefull watch before My mouth and lips to keep the door: To no ill thing incline my heart, With sinners let me take no part. Nor let me of their dainties eat, That swallow sin as men do meat: But let the righteous man reprove, And smite me with the checks of love. As precious Oyl, or Odours shed, Such smiting shall not break my head: And in my prayers I shall bless The Saints, when fal'n into distress. HYMN 567. Supplications in times of ex∣tream danger. Psalm 142. (1. METRE) WITh earnest voice I cry'd to God, I shew'd my wofull case:
With earnest voice I cry'd aloud, and humbly su'd for Grace. My lamentation I prepar'd, before him to express: I shew'd before him, and declar'd my trouble and distress. When over-whelm'd in spirit I was, thou didst my danger see, How in the way that I did pass they laid a snare for me. On my right hand I looked hard, but none did notice take: All refuge fail'd, none did regard my life that lay at stake. I cry'd to thee, O Lord, and said, to thee my hopes arrive: Thou art my portion and my aid while I remain alive. Attend my cry, O Lord, and see how very low I lie: From my pursuers rescue me, since stronger far than I. O bring my soul from this dark den, that I may praise thy Name: The Just shall flock about me then, thy bounty to proclaim.
HYMN 568 Supplication of King David. To the Tune of the Old 124. Psal. Now Israel, &c. Psalm 142. (2. METRE.) I Cry'd to God aloud with all my might, I cry'd aloud unto the Lord most high, I made my sup∣plications earnestly. I powr'd out my complaints before his sight: I shew'd before him my distressfull plight. When as my heart was overwhelm'd with care, Thou knewst my path, and how I was beset: The way I went was lined as a net. Mine enemies had laid a secret snare, That I might fall into it unaware. I looked on my right-hand and beheld, But none would know me, no man did condole, All refuge fail'd, none cared for my soul▪
I cry'd to thee, and said, thou hast excell'd: God is a Re∣fuge most unparallel'd. Thou art my por∣tion whilst I live an hour, Attend my cry, for I am brought full low: O save me from my persecuting foe. For they that seek my soul for to devour, Are stronger far than I, and more of power. O bring my soul from prison by command, That I may shew and celebrate thy fame: And render prai∣ses to thy holy Name. Then shall the righ∣teous round about me stand, When thou shalt bless me with a bounteous hand. HYMN 569. Supplications relating to Poste∣rity. Psalm 144. LORD make our Sons as thriving Plants which growing youth doth grace: Our Daughters as the battlements of some fair polish'd place.
Our Garners full of each good thing, our Sheep in numbers great: Their thousands, and ten thousands bring, within our fields to bleat. Our labouring Oxen strong and stout, that there be no restraint: No breaking in, nor going out, Nor in our streets complaint. Happy are men in such a case, yea rather we record That people blest in every place, whose God is God the Lord. 2. METRE. The mighty God, &c. LORD make our Sons as plants grown up in youth, our Daughters as the carved corner stones Of some fair Pallace, which an artist doth erect with Pillars, making curious ones: Our Garners full all sorts of store containing: Our Sheep by thousands, and ten thousands yeaning. Our Oxen strong to labour, fat of flesh, no breaking in where dread and danger meets: No going out to wars begun afresh, no sad complaining uttered in our streets.
Happy the people blest so for their bodies, Yea, happy people, whose protector God is. HYMN 570. (Out of Psalm 145.) Argument. Perpetual praises to the Lord are vow'd, And Saints enjoyn'd to set them out aloud. David's Psalm of praise. I Will extoll thee, Lord, my King, and bless thy Name for ever: Each day will I be honouring thy Name; neglecting never. Great is the Lord, and great in praise, his greatness none can search: One age shall praise thy works and ways to thy succeeding Church. Thy mighty acts they shall proclaim, and I will here discuss The glorious fame of thy great Name, and works miraculous. And men shall shew the mightiness of all thy dreadfull deeds; And I'll express with readiness thy greatness which exceeds. The mem'ry of thy goodness great they largely shall express; Thy righteousness they shall repeat in Songs of thankfulness.
HYMN 571. (2. PART.) Argument. God's slow to anger prone to grace: His mercy shines in every place. Psalm 145. THE Lord's a very gracious one, whom kind compassions fill: To anger slow, to mercy prone, and bears us great good will. The Lord is very good to all, as all his creatures find; And all his works in general taste of his mercies kind. Thee, Lord, shall all thy works renown, and thee thy Saints shall bless: They shall renown thy Kingly Crown, and thy great power express. To make the Sons of men to know God's mighty acts and great: His Kingdoms gloriousness to show. and his majestick Seat. Thy Kingdom's an eternal one, and stands forever fast: And thy alone Dominion from age to age shall last. Therefore my mouth shall speak his praise, and universal flesh▪
His holy Name's renown shall raise and ever sound afresh. HYMN 572. (3. PART.) Argument. The weak upheld, all Creatures are supply'd With timely food, and God is magnifi'd. Psalm 145. v. 20. THE Lord preserveth faithfully all those that do him love: But all the wicked he'll destroy with vengeance from above. The eyes of all do wait on thee, and thou dost give them meat, In fitting opportunity that all may have to eat. Thy opened hand, O Lord, of might, doth great abundance bring; To satisfie the appetite of every living thing. Psalm 145. (4. PART.)) Argument. God just and holy takes delight To hear the Prayers of men upright: He quite subverts lewd sinners ways, And claims our universal praise. THE Lord is just in all his ways, holy in all he doth:
And nigh to every one that prays, and calls on him in truth. He will fulfill the just desires of all the holy seed: He hears their cry, what that requires, and helps them at their need. Let Israel's God the Lord therefore be prais'd of all together: From first to last for evermore, Amen, Amen, for ever. HYMN 573. Trust in God blessed. Psalm 146.1, 2. (1. METRE.) GReat praise to God Almighty give, my soul praise thou the Lord: Yea, whilst I have a day to live his praises I'll record. I will give praises o my God, my soul and song agreeing: Whilst here on earth I have abode, whilst I have any being. 3, 4. Trust not in Princes mortal seed, nor in the Son of man: For help you in your greatest need be sure they never can. His breath goes forth and he is dead, he turneth to his clay: And all his thoughts are perished, in that same very day.
5, 6. But happy, happy man is he whom Jacob's God doth own: Whose help the Lord his God will be who hopes in him alone. Which did the Heaven and Earth begin, creating both together. The Sea, and all that is therein, which keepeth truth for ever. 7, 8. Which executeth judgment good, for men that are opprest: Which to the hungry giveth food, and prisoners sets at rest. The Lord doth open blind mens eyes, and raiseth from the dust: The bowed down, the Lord likewise doth greatly love the just. 9. He keeps the stranger safe and sure in their forlorn estate: The Lord relieves the Orphans poor, and Widows desolate. But as for men that disobey, the Lord on them doth frown: And their ungodly wicked way he turneth upside down. 10. The Lord throughout all ages still shall reign for evermore: Even thy God, O Sion hill, praise ye the Lord therefore.
HYMN 574. Trust in God immortal, power∣full, faithfull. Give laud, &c. Psal. 146. v. 1, to 9. (2. METRE.) MY soul praise thou the Lord, as long as thou hast breath, In Songs his praise record, and honour him till death. trust not in Kings, Nor humane seed, which are indeed vain helpless things. Breath fails, and dust they be, there all their thoughts are laid: But happy, happy he whom Jacobs God doth aid, that hopes in him Who made all these, Heav'n, Earth, and Seas, and all therein. That keepeth Covenant still, that helps the wrong'd to right; That doth the hungry fill, that gives the blind their sight; sets prisoners free; Loves upright men, and raiseth them bow'd down that be.
HYMN 575. Trust in the preserver; viz. of Srangers, Widows and Fatherless. Give laud, &c. Psalm 146.9. (3. METRE.) THE Lord's Almighty hand preserveth evermore The Strangers in the Land, the Widows and the poor: and doth relieve The Fatherless in their distress, that mourn and grieve. As for the sinners way he turns it upside down: But he shall reign for aye, and wear th' Eternal Crown. thy God, thy Lord, O Sion-hill, shall govern still: his praise record. HYMN 576. (4. METRE) Argument. Never in Kings or Princes trust, For they quickly fall to dust. All People, &c. Psalm 146.1 to 5. THE Lord's deserved praise proclaim, my soul do thou extoll his fame: I, while I live, will praises give unto the Lord's Almighty Name.
Unto my God will I sing praise, while breath prolongs my life and days: Trust in no King, nor mortal thing, they can no help nor succour raise. For lo! there passeth out his breath, and he returns to dust of death; That very day his thoughts decay, and every project perisheth. HYMN 577. (5. METRE.) Argument. Happy he that trusts alone In the high and holy one; That made Heaven, Seas and Shore, And keeps Covenant evermore. Psa. 146. O Happy, happy, happy one, whoever Jacob's God hath known To be his aid: whose hope is staid upon the Lord his God alone. That made the Heavens, Seas and Shore, the Earth and all the num'rous store In liquid Seas: he made all these, and keepeth truth for evermore. In judgment he for us proceeds for to avenge oppressors deeds; From bondage he sets prisoners free; the Lord likewise the hungry feeds.
HYMN 578. (6. METRE.) Argument. God loves the Just, helps the distrest, For ever reigns, his Name is blest. Psal. 146. THE Lord doth righteous men affect, The bowed down he doth erect: Opening likewise the blind mans eyes, and strangers doth the Lord protect. The Lord relieves the fatherless, and helps the Widow in distress: But in his Wrath, the sinners path the Lord doth utterly suppress. The Lord shall reign continually, thy God, O Sion, rules on high; And so he shall to ages all; his Name do ye still magnifie. HYMN 579. (7. METRE.) Argument. Creation-works demands our praise, And all the Churches, all our days. Three Children, &c. Psalm 136. GIVE thanks to God ye Saints of his, for good he is. For his mercies sure for ever do endure.
Unto the God of Gods give praise, his honour raise. For his mercies, &c. Give thanks to God the Sovereign Lord with one accord. For his mercies, &c. To him that doth such wondrous deeds, whose fame exceeds, For his mercies, &c. To him whose wisedom skilfully made Heaven on high. For his mercies, &c. To him that set the solid Ground the Seas to bound. For his mercies, &c. HYMN 580. (8. METRE.) Argument. Creation works and wonders wrought of old, Require thanksgiving great and manifold. Psalm 136. Praise him that made by power Divine great lights to shine. For his mercies, &c. The Sun that hath the brightest ray to rule the Day. For his mercies, &c.
The moon and stars of lesser light to rule the night. For his mercies, &c. That smote all Egypt's first increase of man and beast. For his mercies, &c. And brought out Israel from among the barbarous throng. For his mercies, &c. With his strong Arm and stretcht-out hand of high command. For his mercies, &c. HYMN 581. (9. METRE.) Argument. God's greatness and his goodness (past our search) Are celebrated by his faithfull Church. Psalm 136. O Render thanks to our great God, for he is good. For his mercies, &c. The God of gods give thanks unto as ye should do. For his mercies, &c. Unto the Lord of lords confess, with thankfulness. For his mercies, &c.
To him that parted the Red Sea for Israel's way. For his mercies, &c. And Israel through the midst of it he did transmit. For his mercies, &c. But overthrew Pharaoh and his host on that Sea Coast. For his mercies, &c. That led his people past the bounds of desart Grounds. For his mercies, &c. HYMN 582. (10. METRE.) Argument. God's wondrous works of judgments wrought of old, Require thanksgiving great and manifold. Psalm 136. PRaise him that wrought such won∣drous things; Who smote great Kings. For his mercies, &c. And famous Kings and not a few he overthrew. For his mercies, &c. King Sion that strong Amorite, his power did smite. For his mercies, &c.
And Og the King of Bashan too he overthrew. For his mercies, &c. And gave their Land an heritage to th' after age. For his mercies, &c. Who thought on us in low estate, and desolate. For his mercies, &c. And hath redeemed us from those that were our foes. For his mercies, &c. Who giveth food for to refresh all mortal flesh. For his mercies, &c. All thanks and praise be therefore given to th' God of Heaven. For his mercies, &c. HYMN 583. Variety of mercies magnified. Psalm 147. (1. METRE.) PRaise ye the Lord, sing to the Lord, for very good it is: Pleasant and comely to record, and praise that Name of his.
The Lord builds up Jerusalem, his repossessed throne: And Israel's outcasts all of them he gathereth into one. 3, 4, 5. The wounds of every broken heart he heals with gentle hand: He numbers all the Stars apart, and names them as they stand. Great is our Lord of Israel, and of great power and might: His understanding doth excell, for it is infinite. 6. The Lord lifts up the meek on high, But doth the proud confound: And casts the wicked scornfully down to the very ground. 1. METRE. 2. PART. Ver. 7, 8. SING to the Lord with thanksgiving, sing praise with one accord: Upon the solemn Harp, O sing, unto our God the Lord.
Who makes thick Clouds o'respread the Skie to feed the Earth with rain: And Grass to grow on Mountains high as on the fertile plain. 9, 10. He giveth to the beast his food with plentifull supply: And feeds the Ravens callow brood, when hunger makes them cry. God takes no joy in any horse, nor in a Champions limb: Nor can their courage, strength, or force delight or pleasure him. 11. But lo! the Lord doth take delight in them that fear his Name: And in his mercies infinite their confidence proclaim. HYMN 584. Variety of mercies magni∣fied. 1. METRE. 3. PART. Psalm 147.12, 13, 14. O Praise the Lord, Jerusalem, thy God, O Sion praise: For lo! thy gates and bars of them he very strongly staies.
Thy Children in thee he hath blest, thy peace he makes full great: And fills thee with the very best and finest of the Wheat. 15, 16. He sends out his commandement on all the Earth so vast: No sooner can his word be sent, but runs exceeding fast. He giveth snow like gentle wool, and scatters all abroad: His hoary frost most plentifull like ashes that are strow'd. 4. PART. 1. METRE. 17, 18. THE Lord casts out his Icy hail, like morsels to behold: And who can stand and shall not quail to feel his pinching cold? He sendeth out his word, and lo! it melteth them again: He causeth then his winds to blow, and waters flow amain. 19, 20. God shews his word to Jacob's house, that they may know it well:
His Laws and judgments righteous, he shews to Israel. He hath not dealt so large a lot to any Land beside: As for his Laws they know them not, the Lord be magnifi'd. HYMN 585. Variety of Providences prai∣sed. 2. METRE. Give laud, &c. Psalm 147.1. GIVE laud unto the Lord, it is a pleasant thing, His praises to record, and his sweet songs to sing: who on a rock, His Church erects, and recollects his scatter'd flock. He heals the heart contrite, and binds up all their wounds: He tells the Stars of light whose number so abounds. and he can call Each shining flame of them by name, he knows them all.
Great is this God of ours, yea most exceeding great: His power above all powers, and hath the sovereign seat. and as his might, So likewise his pure wisedom is most infinite. The Lord lifts up the meek, the wicked throws to ground: Praise him with songs most sweet, and harps harmonious sound. the Heav'ns he fills With Clouds for showers, makes Grass and flowers to grow on hills. The beasts and ravens young he feedeth when they call: In horse, or Champion strong he joyeth not at all. but God above Delights in them that fear his Name, and trust in's love.
HYMN 586. Variety of Providences prai∣sed. 2. PART. 2. METRE. Psal. 147.12. O Salem praise the Lord, praise him O Sion-hill, Who hath thy Gates well barr'd, and doth thy Cities fill: thy peace full great He makes to be, and filleth thee with flower of wheat. Through th' Earth his mandats go, his word most swiftly flies: Like wool he giveth snow, his frost as ashes lies: his Ice is roll'd As morsels, and, O who can stand before his cold? He speaks, and straight it thaws, he breaths and water flows: To Israel his Laws (and to none else) he shows: as for his word No heathen land doth understand: praise ye the Lord.
HYMN 587. (3. METRE.) Argument. Praise suits with Saints for God his Grace imparts To Israel's outcasts, and to broken hearts. He tells the Stars, his power and skill abounds; He cheers the meek, and lewd men he confounds. Psalm 147. PRaise ye the Lord, for it is good his praises to forth-tell: And to sing praises to our God, for it becomes us well. The Lord builds up Jerusalem's Walls to bring his people thither: And Israel's outcasts he recalls, and gathers them together. He heals the broken in their heart: where sense of sin abounds: And (taking pity of their smart) binds up their bleeding wounds. He tells the number of the Stars, and calls them all by Name: Superiour of Superiours must we our God proclaim. So very great is God indeed, So great in power and might: His understanding doth exceed, for it is infinite.
The Lord doth save poor humble souls whom sharp afflictions wound: But all the wicked he controlls, and casts them to the Ground. HYMN 588. (3. METRE.) Argument. He praiseth God, who gives to all their food: But he takes pleasure onely in the good. 2. PART. SING to the Lord with thankfulness, and spread his praise abroad: With solemn harp his praise express, and sing unto our God. Who covers Heaven with Clouds of Rain t' inrich the Earth below: And on the hills as on the plain he makes the Grass to grow. Both beasts and birds he kindly feeds, young Ravens cry to him: He takes no joy in strength of steeds, nor in a strong mans limb. But lo the Lord's delight and joy is ever in the just: In them that fear him faithfully, and in his mercy trust.
HYMN 589. (3. METRE.) Argument. He praiseth God that sendeth peace; And plenty in the fields increase. 3. PART. Psalm 147. O Praise and magnifie the Lord, O Salem praise him still: The praises of thy God record O Sion's sacred hill. For he hath strengthened the bars which to thy Gates pertain: And blesseth the inhabiters within thee that remain. He makes abundant peace to be within thy borders spread: And plenteously he filleth thee with finest of the bread. He sendeth out on Earth below his word which runneth swift: Like locks of wool he sends the snow, that also is his gift.
HYMN 590. (3. METRE.) Argument. God sends the Seasons from above, In token of his tender love: But the chief Glory's Israel's In freedom of God's Oracles. 4. PART. THE hoary frost he spreads about as ashes on each side: His Ice as morsels he casts out, his cold who can abide? He sendeth out his word in course and melts the Ice and snow: He makes his wind to blow with force, and then the waters flow. He shews his word to Jacob's Land, and shews it for this cause, That Israel may understand his judgments and his laws. The tokens of such tender love no heathens can record: His judgments they know nothing of, wherefore praise ye the Lord.
HYMN 591. Vniversal thanksgiving, or Benedicite, &c. 1. METRE. Psalm 148. PRaise ye the Lord, praise ye the Lord, from Heavens lofty frame: Him from on high, O magnifie, all Angels praise his Name. O all his hosts his praise record, O praise him moon and sun: Ye stars of light that shine so bright, the like of you be done. Ye Heav'ns of Heav'ns that are so high, praise him with one consent: And water: ye on high that be above the firmament. O let them praise and magnifie the Lord's Almighty Name; For lo! they were created there when his commandment came. He likewise did contrive it so, to stablish them for ever: So firm Decree ordained he, that pass it they shall never.
Praise ye the Lord from Earth below, ye Dragons and each deep: Fire, Vapour, Snow, Hall-storms that blow, his word that firmly keep. All Mountains high, and fruitfull trees, All hills and Cedars tall: Ye Fowl with wings, and creeping things, ye Beasts and Cattel all. Kings, Princes, People, all degrees, ye Judges praise his Name: Young men and Maids, Children and Babes, and old men do the same. The Lord's great Name still praised be, for that alone excells: And far more high than Earth or Sky his glittering Glory dwells. The praise of all his Saints is he, and he the horn doth raise: Of Israel's Sons his dearest ones, O give the Lord his praise. HYMN 592. Vniversal thanksgiving, or Benedicite, &c. 2. METRE. To the proper Tune. Psalm 148. GIVE Laud unto the Lord, from the Celestial Coasts,
All ye his praise record, his Angels and his hosts: him glorifie, Sun, Moon and Stars, ye higher Spheres, and cloudy Skie. O let them praise his Name, since made by his command: Who stablish'd all the frame perpetually to stand. He also made A firm decree, which needs must be by them obey'd. Praise God from Earth below, ye Dragons and ye deeps: Fire, hail, clouds, wind and snow, whom in command he keeps. hills low and high, Trees all that grow, Beasts swift or slow, fowl all that fly. Kings, and the vulgar throng, Princes and Judges all: Ye men and maidens young, old men and Children small: praise ye his Name, Whose Name alone (as th' onely one) excells in fame. Whose Glory bright doth blaze above the Earth and Sky: (Of all his Saints the praise) he sets their horn on high:
Even theirs that spring Of Israels race, (much in his grace) his praises sing. HYMN 593. Works of grace to the Church. Psalm 149.1. PRaise ye the Lord, sing to the Lord a new-composed Song: His memorable praise record where all his Saints do throng. Let joyfull Israel shout and sing in their Creatour's Name: Let Sion's Children in their King triumphant joys proclaim. In dances let them praise his Name, the Harp before him bring: And joyn the Timbrel to the same, with these his praises sing. For lo! the Lord exceedingly, in Israel doth delight: The humble he will beautifie with robes of saving might. In glory let the Saints be joy'd, sing loud upon their bed: And their Religious mouths imploy'd the Lord's high praise to spread. And with a double edged Sword, put here into their hands, Inflict the vengeance of the Lord upon the heathen lands.
Impose the peoples punishments, bind Kings, and kingly trains: The Noble Peers, and Presidents in iron bands and chains. To execute upon them all the judgment on record: Such honour to the Saints doth fall, praise ye, praise ye the Lord. HYMN 594, Works of Grace to the Church. 2. METRE. The mighty God, &c. Psalm 149. PRaise God with new made Songs, and cheerfull Voice, his praises in the Saints assemblies sing: Let Israel in his maker much rejoice, let Sion's Sons be joyfull in their King. O let them praise his Name with comely dancing: With harp and timbrel his sweet praise ad∣vancing. For in his people God takes much delight, the meek with saving health I'll beautify; Let Saints be joyfull in his Glory bright, and sing aloud as on their beds they lie: The Lord's high praises with their mouths un∣folding: And in their hands a sword two-edged hold∣ing,
To execute his wrath on heathen Lands, with punishments the people to condemn: To bind their Kings in chains, their Lords in bands, the written judgment to fulfill on them: For with such honour all the Saints are crowned: Praise ye the Lord, who is to be renowned. HYMN 595. Yielding Vniversal Praises. Psalm 150. (1. METRE) PRaise ye the Lord with one consent in Sion's sacred Tower, O praise him in the firmament of his Almighty power: The Acts of his Omnipotence in gratefull Songs recite, According to the excellence of his adored might. With Trumpets, Psalteries, Harpsicals, with Timbrel and with Dance, With Viols, Lutes and Virginals, his Noble praise advance. On Cymbals sounding loud and high his Glorious Praise record: Let all that breaths make melody, and praise, O praise the Lord.
HYMN 596. Yielding Vniversal Praises. All People, &c. Psalm 150. (2. METRE.) PRaise, praise the Lord in's holy Tower, Praise him i'th spreading of his power: Praise him for his great miracles, Praise him as his great power excells. Praise him with Trumpets melody, Praise him with Harp and Psaltery: Praise him with Timbrel, Pipe and Flute; Praise him with Organ and with Lute. Praise him, O praise him zealously, With Cymbals sounding loud and high, Let all that breath his praise record, O praise and magnifie the Lord. HYMN 597. (3. METRE.) Argument. Heaven must God's praise begin, Then must all the Earth come in, Art and Nature, Strength and Skill, Instruments both loud and shrill: Things above, and all beneath, All must praise him while they breath. Psalm 150. PRaise God in's Sanctuary bright, and powerfull Firmament:
O praise him for his Acts of might, and greatness excellent. With sound of Trumpet spread his fame, with Psalteries, Harps and Flutes, With Timbrels also praise his Name, with Organs and with Lutes. With Cymbals loud his praises sing, and Cymbals sounding high: O praise him ev'ry breathing thing, praise him perpetually. HYMN 598. (4. METRE.) All People, &c. Psalm 150. PRaise ye the Lord, his praise repeat Within his Sanctuaries seat: O praise him in the Firmament That shews his power Omnipotent. O praise him for his mighty deeds, And for his greatness which exceeds: Praise him with sound of Trumpet sharp, And with the Psaltery and Harp. Your Timbrels in his praise employ, And let your hearts ev'n leap for joy: Praise him with Instruments well strung, And quavering Organs sounding long.
Praise him, O praise him cheerfully With Cymbals sounding loud and high: Let every thing inspir'd with breath Applaud and praise the Lord till death. HYMN 599. (5. METRE.) Argument. Heaven must God's Praise begin, Then must all the Earth come in: Art and Nature, Strength and Skill, Instruments both loud and shrill: Things above, and all beneath, All must praise him while they breath. To the First New Tune. Psalm 150. PRaise ye the Lord with all your might, Within the Sanctuary bright; and that high Tower Of large extent, the Firmament of his great power. Praise him for those great Acts of his According as his greatness is: therein is he Most excellent, so eminent his praise must be.
With sound of Trumpets pierce the Skies, Praise him with Harps and Psalteries: his Name advance; Take in your hand the Timbrel, and strike up the Dance. Praise him with instruments well strung, With lovely Organs sounding long: sweet Cymbals sound Both loud and shrill, that his Name still may be renown'd. Let every thing inspir'd with breath Sing forth his solemn praise till death: let all accord To spread the Fame of his great Name, praise ye the Lord. HYMN 600. 6. METRE. The Mighty God, &c. PRaise ye the Lord, praise him in's holy Tower, Praise him i'th firmament of his great power: Praise him for his great Acts and eminent According to his greatness excellent; O praise him with the Trumpet sweetly sounding, With Harp and Psaltery and Joys abounding.
O praise him with the timbrel and the dance, With stringed Instruments his praise advance; Praise him with Organs reaching to the cloud, Praise him with Cymbals sounding high and loud: Let every thing that breaths his praise endea∣vour, Praise ye the Lord, O praise the Lord for ever. The End of the Psalm Hymns.
THE CANTICLES: OR THE SONG OF SOLOMON PARAPHRASED. By William Barton late Minister of St. Martins in Leicester.
The Song of Songs. [The Church.] JOYN thy life-breathing lips to mine, Thy love excells the joy of Wine: Thy Odors oh! how redolent Attract me with their pleasing scent: These sweetly flowing from thy Name Our Virgins with desire enflame; O draw me, my belov'd, and we With winged feet will follow thee. Thy loving Spouse at length, great King, Into thy royal chamber bring; Then shall our Souls entranc'd with joy In thy due praise their zeal employ; Thy celebrated loves recite With more than crowned cups delight: Who truth and sacred justice prize To thee their hearts shall sacrifice. You Daughters of Jerusalem, You branches of that holy stem; Though black in favour I excell, Black as the Tents of Ishmael; Yet gracefull as the burnish'd Throne, And Ornaments of Solomon. Despise not my discoloured look, This tawny from the Sun I took, My mothers Sons envy'd my worth, And swoln in malice, thrust me forth
To keep their vines in heat of day, While, ah! mine own neglected lay. More lov'd than all of humane seed O tell me where thy sheep do feed; Where rest they, in what gracefull shade, When scorching beams the fields invade? Why should I stray, and turn to those, Who, though companions, are thy foes? [Christ.] O thou the fairest of thy kind, I will inform thy troubled mind; Follow the way my flock has led, And in their steps securely tread. Thy kids feed on the fruitfull plains, Besides the sheep-coat of our swains. Thou, love, art like those generous steeds Which Pharaoh for his Chariot breeds, Tric'kt in their rich Caparisons, How shine thy cheeks like sparkling stones! That loosly dangle from thine ears, Thy neck the ocean treasure wears; Borders of Gold we'll make for thee, Whose studds of purest Silver be. [The Church.] While he the Prince of Bounty feasts, And entertains his happy Guests, My Spiknard shall perfume his hair, Whose Odors fill the ambient Air: All night his sacred head shall rest Betwixt the pillows of my breast; Not Myrrh, new bleeding from the tree, So acceptable is to me.
Nor Camphire clusters when they blow, Which in Engedy's Vineyard grow. [Christ.] Thy beauty, love, allures my sight, And sheds a firmament of light; In either eye there sits a Dove, So mild, so chast, and full of love. [The Church.] Thou, my belov'd, art fairer far, Thou as the Sun, I but a Star; Come, my delight, our pregnant bed, Is with green Buds and Violets spread; Our Cedar-roofs are richly guilt, Our Galleries of Cypress built. The Second Song. [Christ.] I Am the Lilly of the Vales, The Rose of Sharon's fragrant dales: Lo, as th' unsullyed Lilly shows, Which in a Brake of Bramble grows, My love so darkens all that are By erring men admir'd for fair. [The Church.] Lo, as the tree which Citrons bears, Amidst the barren Shrubs appears,
So my belov'd excells the race Of man in every winning Grace. In his desired shade I'll rest, And with his fruits my palate feast: He brought me to his magazine Replenisht with refreshing Wine; And over me (a tender maid) The Ensign of his love display'd. With flagons, oh! revive my powers, And strew my bed with fruits and flowers; Whose taste and smell may cordial prove, For oh! my soul is sick of love: Beneath my head thy left arm place, And gently with thy right embrace. Ye Daughters of Jerusalem, Ye branches of that holy stem; I by the mountains, Roes, and by The Hinds which through the forrest fly, Adjure you that ye silence keep, Nor till he wake, disturb his sleep. Is it a dream, or do I hear The voice that so delights my ear? Lo! he o're hills his steps extends, And bounding, from the clifts, descends; Now like a Roe outstrips the wind, And leaves the breathed Hart behind. Behold, without my dearest stays, And through the latice darts his rayes, Thus, as his words, his looks invite, O thou the Crown of my delight. [Christ.] Arise my love, my fair one rise, O come, delay our joy envyes:
Lo, the sharp winter now is gone, Those threatning Tempests overblown; Hark how the airs musicians sing, And caroll to the flowery spring: Chast Turtles hous'd in shady Groves Now murmure to their faithfull loves; Green figs on sprouting trees appear, And vines sweet smelling blossoms bear. Arise my love, my fairest rise, O come, delay our joy envyes; O thou my dove, whom terror locks Within the Cranyes of the Rocks; Come forth now, like thy self appear, And with thy voice delight mine ear: Thy voice is musick, and thy face All conquers with resistless Grace. My love, come vanquish, for my sake, These foxes, these young foxes take; Who these our tender Grapes destroy, And in their thriving rapine joy. [The Church.] I am my loves and he is mine, So mutually our loves combine; He, whose affection words exceeds His flock among the lilies feeds: Return to me my onely dear, Stay till the morning-star appear; Stay till nights dusky shadows fly Before the days illustrious eye; Run like a Roe or Hart upon The hills of lofty Bethoron.
The Third Song. [The Church.] STrecht on my restless bed all night, I vainly sought my souls delight; Then rose, the City searcht, the street, No angle my unwearied feet Untrodden left, yet could not find The onely solace of my mind. When, lo, the watch that walk the roun Me in my souls distemper found, Of whom with passion I enquir'd, Saw you the man so much desir'd? Nor many steps had further past, But found my love, and held him fast; Fast held, till I the so long sought, Had to my mothers mansion brought, In that adorned chamber lay'd Of her who gave me breath, I said; Ye Daughters of Jerusalem, Ye Branches of that holy Stem, I by the mountains, Roes, and by The Hinds, which through the Forest fly, Adjure you that ye silence keep, Nor till he call disturb his sleep. [Chorus.] What beauty from the Desart comes, Like spires of smoak rais'd from sweet gumms,
With Aromatick Powders fraught, By Merchants from Sabaea brought? [The Church.] Behold the bed he rests upon, The royal bed of Solomon, Twice thirty Souldiers that excells In valour Sons of Israel's, So dreadfull to his enemies Their bright swords mounted on their thighs. His person guarded from th'affright, And treason of concealing night; King Solomon a Chariot made With trees from Lebanon convey'd, The Pillars Silver, and the Throne With Gold of India, Ophire-stone, With Tyrrean Purple cield above For Sion's Daughters pav'd with love: Come, holy Virgin, O come forth, Behold a spectacle of worth; Behold the Royal Solomon High mounted on his Father's Throne, Crown'd with the Crown his Mother plac'd, On his smooth brows with gemms in hast, At the solemniz'd nuptial feast, When joy his ravish'd soul possest. The Fourth Song. [Christ.] HOW fair art thou? how wondrous fair Thy Dove-like eyes in shades of hair?
Whose dangling curls appear like flocks Of climing Goats from Gilead's Rocks. Thy teeth like sheep in their return From Chyson, washt and smoothly shorn; None markt for barren, none at all, But equal twins at once let fall; Thy lips like shreads of Scarlet show, Whence gratefull accents sweetly flow; Thy cheeks like Punick-apples are, Which blush beneath thy flowing hair: Thy neck like David's Armory, With polisht marble rais'd on high; Whose walls a thousand shields adorn By Worthies oft in battel born. Thy breasts are twins, twins of the Roe, There grazing where the lilies grow. I to the mountains will retire Where bleeding trees perfumes expire; Untill the morning fleck'd the Sky, And nights relapsed shadows fly. How beautifull dost thou appear, In every part from blemish clear; My spouse let us at length be gone, Leave we the fragrant Lebanon. Look down from Amana, look down From Shenars top and Hermons Crown; From hills where dreadfull Lyons rage And from the mount'nous Lepards cage. Thou who my spouse and sister art How hast thou ravished my heart? Struck with one glance of thy bright eyes, One hair of thine in fetters tyes. Thy beauty, sister, is divine, Thy love, my spouse, more strong than wine:
Thy Odors far more redolent Than Spices from Panchea sent. Thy lips drop honey; from below Thy palate milk and honey flow. Thy robes a sweeter odor cast Than Lebanon with Cedars grac't; Our love by mutual vows assur'd A Garden is, with strength immur'd. A crystal fountain, a clear spring Shut up and sealed with my ring: An orch-yard stor'd with pleasant fruits, Pome-granet trees there spread their roots; Where sweetly smelling Camphir blows, And never-dying Spiknard grows, Sweet Spiknard Crocus newly blown, Sweet Calamus and Cynamon: Those trees which sacred incense shed, The trees of myrrh and aloes bleed, From bitter wounds, with all the rare Productions which perfume the air. [The Church.] Those living springs from thee proceed, Which still our plants with moisture feed; Like those clear streams which issue from The fountain (fruitfull Lebanon.) Ye cooler winds blow from the North, Ye dropping Southern-gales break forth, On this our Garden gently blow, And through the Land rich Odors throw: Come, love, come with a lovers hast, Of our ripe fruits and spices tast.
The Fifth Song. [Christ.] I To my Garden have retir'd, Reapt Myrrh, with Spices much desir'd, Sweet Gums from trees profusely shed, On dropping combs of honey fed: Drunk morning milk and new press'd wine; O friends whom like desire combine, Eat, drink, drink freely, nor remove Till thou be all enflam'd with love. [The Church.] Although I sleep, my passions wake, For he who knockt, this sadly spake, My spouse, my sister, thou more mild▪ Than harmless Doves, my undefil'd, O let me enter, Night hath shed Her dew on my uncovered head, Which from my drenched loks distills, And with a frozen numbness chills. Can I assent to thy request, Disrob'd and newly laid to rest? Shall I now cloath my self again, And feet so lately washt distain? But when I had his hand discern'd, Drawn from the latch, my bowels yearn'd, I rose, nor longer could defer, T' unlock the door, when liquid myrrh Thence dropping on my fingers fell, And breath'd an odoriferous smell;
But oh! when opened, he was gone, His grief fetcht from my heart a groan; In vain I sought my souls belov'd, I call'd him, O, too far remov'd! The watch and those who walkt the round That me in this affliction found, Smote, wounded, and profanely tore The sable veil my sorrow wore. Ye Virgins of fair Solyma, I charge you if ye meet him, say, That I his spouse am sick of love, And with your tears soft pity move. [Chorus.] O thou of all our sex most fair, Can none with thy belov'd compare? Doth he our loves so much transcend, That we should him a Love intend? [The Church.] Amongst a Myriod he appears The chief, and beauties Ensign bears, His head adorn'd with burnisht Gold, Which curls of shining hair infold, Black as the newly plumed Crow, His eyes like Doves by fountains show; Late bathed in a Rivulet Of milk, alike exactly set; His cheeks sweet spice and flowers confer, His lips like Lillies dropping myrrh; His hands the wondring eye invites Like rings that blaze with Chrysolites: His belly bright as Ivory, That's overlaid with Saphirs dye:
His legs like marble pillars plac't On sockets of fine Gold, stand fast. His countenance like Lebanon Or like the Cedars grow thereon; His tongue the ear with musick feeds, And he in every part exceeds: Ye Daughters of Jerusalem Such is my friend, my love, my gemm. The Sixth Song. [Chorus.] FAIR Virgin, parallel'd by none, O whither's thy beloved gone? Direct our forward zeal, that we May joyn in his pursuit with thee. [The Church.] Behold, the more than life desir'd Down to his Garden is retir'd; There gathers flowers fast in the shade, On beds of bruised spices laid. Our mutual flame all flames exceeds, His flock among the lilies feeds. [Christ.] Not regal Tirzah, Isaaels Delight, thy beauty, love, excells: Not thou Divine Jerusalem, That art of all the world the gemm.
Not Armies with their Ensigns spread So threaten with amazing dread: O turn from me thy wounding eyes, In every glance an arrow flies; Thy dangling curls appear like flocks Of climing Goats from Gileads Rocks: Thy teeth, like sheep in their return From Chyson washt and smoothly shorn: None markt for barren, none at all, But equal twins at once let fall: Thy cheeks like Punick-apples are Which blush beneath thy flowing hair. They boast of many Queens, great store Of Concubines, and Virgins more Than can be told, my undefil'd Is all in one, the onely child Of her fair mother, and brought forth To shew the world an unknown worth: Queens, Virgins, Concubines beheld, Admir'd and blest th' unparallel'd. [Chorus.] Who's this? who like the morning shows, When she her paths with roses strows, More fair than the replenisht moon, More radiant than the Sun at noon: Not Armies with their Ensigns spread, So threaten with amazing dread. [Christ.] I to my pleasant Garden went Where Nutmegs breath a fragrant scent,
To see the vines disclose their gemms, And granets blooming on their stemms: Where unawares and half amaz'd, Me-thought my ravisht soul was rais'd: Up to a Chariot swift as winds Drawn by my peoples willing minds. [Chorus.] Return, fair Shulamite, return To us who for thy absence mourn: What see ye in the Shulamite? Two Armies prevalent in fight. The Seventh Song. [Christ.] O Princess, thou than life more dear, How beautifull thy feet appear When they with purple ribbands bound, In Golden Sandals print the Ground! Thy Joints like Jewels which impart To wondring eye the work-mans art. Thy Navel like a Mazer fill'd With juice from rarest fruits distill'd. Thy belly like an heap of wheat With never fading Lillies set; Thy breasts like two young Roes do show, Which fell at once from one fair Doe: Thy Neck's an Ivory Tower, thine Eyne Like those Fish-pools in Heshbon shine. Thy Nose presents that Tower upon The face of flowery Lebanon:
Which all the pleasant plains survays, Where Abana her streams displays. Thy head like Carmel cloath'd with shade, Whose Tresses Tyrrean fillets bray'd, Sweet fetters for the great Kings Eyes, Fast holden in those Galleries: How pleasant, Oh! how exquisite Thy beauty fram'd for sweet delight; Thy stature like an upright palm, Thy breasts like clusters dropping balm. I will ascend thy palms high crown, Whose boughs victorious hands renown: Thy Nose shall smell like apples fine, Thy breasts like clusters of the Vine: And from the spreading branches root Will gather her delicious fruit. Choice wine shall from thy palate spring, Most acceptable to the King; Which sweetly shall descend and make The dumb to speak, the dead to wake. [The Church.] I my belov'd am onely thine, And thou by just exchange art mine: Come, let us tread the pleasant fields, Tast we what fruits the Country yields▪ And in the Villages repose, When shades of night all forms enclose: Then with the early morn repair To our new Vine-yard, see if there The tender Vines disclose their gemms And Granets blossom on their stemms:
Amongst those fragrant trees my love There onely shalt thou freely prove, How sweet a smell our mandrakes yield, Our Gates with various fruits are fill'd; Fruits that are old, fruits from the tree, New gather'd, all preserv'd for thee. The Eighth Song. [The Church.] O Had we from one mother sprung, Both at her breast together hung, Then should I meet thee in the street With unreproved kisses greet: And to my mothers house conduct Where thou thy sister shouldst instruct; There would I spiced wine produce, And my pome-granets purple juice; Beneath my head thy left arm place, And gently with thy right embrace. Ye virgins born in Sion's Towers I charge you by the chief of powers, That ye a constant silence keep, Nor till he call disturb his sleep. [Chorus.] Who's this whose feet the hills ascend From desarts leaning on his friend?
[The Church.] I my belov'd first rais'd when he Lay under the Pome-citron tree; Thy carefull mother in that shade, With anguish her fair belly lay'd; Be I, oh thou my better part, A Seal imprest upon thy heart? Let me thy fingers Signet prove, For death is not more strong than love: The Grave not so insatiate As jealousies inflame debate; Should falling clouds with flouds conspire Their waters could not quench loves fire: Nor all in Natures treasury The freedom of affection buy; We have a sister immature, Who hath no breasts, as yet obscure; What ornaments shall we bestow, When mortals her endowments know? [Christ.] On her if strongly built to bear, We will a silver Pallace rear; Or if a door to deck the same, We'll leaves of carved silver frame. [The Church.] I am a firm foundation For my belov'd to build upon; My breasts are towers, I his delight, His object and sole favourite.
[Christ.] Late at Bal-hamon, Solomon Let forth his Vine-yards every one, For fruits and wine there yearly made A thousand silver pieces paid. [The Church.] This Vine-yard thus which I possess With diligence I daily dress; Thou Solomon shalt have thy due Two hundred more remain for you Out of the surplus of our gains, Who in our Vine-yard took such pains. [Christ.] O thou that in the Garden liv'st, And life-infusing counsel giv'st To those that in thy song rejoyce, To me address thy cheerfull voice. [The Church] Come, my belov'd, O come away, Love is impatient of delay; Run like a youthfull Hart or Roe, On hills where pretious spices grow.
A CATALOGUE OF VERTUOUS WOMEN Recorded in the Old and New Testament. 1 Cor. 7.16. What knowest thou O Wife, whether thou shalt save thy Husband? Or how knowest thou O Man, whether thou shalt save thy Wife? The Second Edition; with Additions. LONDON, Printed for William Cooper at the Pelican in Little Britain. 1688.
To the Right Honourable the Lady FRANCES, Countess of Rutland. Right Honourable and Renowned Lady, THE favourable acceptation which this small Present found with you, incouraged me to communicate it to other vertuous Ladies and Gentlewomen, who were very desirous of a Copy of it; which de∣sires growing ample and importunate, made me weary of writing, and willing (though not ambitious) to impart it to the Press: partly to commemorate the honourable accepta∣tion, and partly to congratulate and gratifie the respects it found. Moreover, by much perusal, I perceived that I had left out many memorable Persons of high account in Holy Scriptures, and that some that were put in had too scant a Cha∣racter, wherefore to make all compleat, and to leave a living Monument of those Resplen∣dent Vertues that are recorded of the Female Sex, which will undoubtedly excite good Wo∣men to Godly imitation, I have presumed to make this Paper publick for the honour of that Sex which God hath so highly honoured, as the most acute Aretius observes upon the pious Wo∣mens coming first to the Sepulchre of our Sa∣viour,
Luke 24.1. Totum hoc ad gloriam Muliebris Sexus pertinere, That it did all be∣long to the Glory of the Female Sex: and learned Polanus saith on the same occasion, Syntag. Theol. Christ. Page 419. at the letter C. Column 1. Resurrectio Christi primum ab Angelo annunciata est mulieribus quia voluit Deus sic ornare pietatem illarum quarum Ze∣lus pro Gloria Christi fervidior erat quàm Virorum. The Resurrection of Christ (saith he) was first told by the Angel to the Women because their zeal for the glory of Christ was hotter than the Mens. Considering therefore that it cannot be con∣demned for flattery; (for none can inherit such glory but they that imitate them) nor can it provoke envy or disdain, which is so clear a record of the Holy Scriptures, neither doth it derogate from the Man, but dignifie him. For as he is her head, so she is his glory, 1 Cor. 11.3.7. And a Vertuous Woman is a Crown to her Husband, Prov. 12.4. I humbly crave your Honours allowance and ac∣ceptation of the Publication in your Name. And so with supplications for your Honours long health and happiness, I rest, Your Honours duly devoted, and most humble Servant, William Barton.
To the Right Honourable the Lady FRANCES, Countess of Rutland. An EPIGRAM, Presented on the Feast Day of our Blessed Saviour's Nativity, Anno Dom. 1669. 'TIS a famous Character Which I oft have heard of Her Corresponding to the Fame Of her Noble Father's Name. Thus Religion understood, Often runneth in a Bloud: And, for multitude we find Most what of the Woman-kind. This is still the true Renown, Vertue! which puts envy down: So the Sacred Book defines All the Ancient Heroines.
A CATALOGUE OF VERTUOUS WOMEN, &c. Gen. 3.26. & Vers. 15. EVE the Mother of all Living, Who was sav'd by God's forgiving, When she first embrac'd the Creed Of the precious promis'd Seed; Gen. 3.15. Deeply doubtless she resented Her transgression, and repented, Had her share in Godly grief, If therein she was not chief. Ibidem. Neither did she so far grieve, But as truly did believe In the Saviour promised▪ Who should break the Serpents head. Gen. 4.2. Vers. 25, 26. She brought forth the Proto-Martyr, And good Seth that follow'd after:
In the daies of which good man Publick worship first began. Gen. 4.25. And of whom she prophecy'd, This, said she, did God provide In the room of Abel, slain By the cruel hand of Cain. Ibidem. Thus was Eve (in primest place) Mother of the Godly Race: And a Pattern doth appear Of them all that follow here. 1 Pet. 3.6. Gen. 17.15. Sarah that obey'd the word Of her Dear, and call'd him Lord, Though her own Name mounts so high, And a like doth signifie.  or a Lady or Princess. Gen. 22.20, &c. Milcah, mightily renown'd, Springing forth as fruitfull Ground, Mother of Bethuel, saith the text, Father of her that follows next. Gen. 27.26. & Vers. 12. Good Rebeccah griev'd to death With the Heathenish Dames of Heth: Wishing him the Pristaly place, That was principal in erce.
Mat. 2.18. Gen. 35.19. Jer. 31.15. Beauteous Rachel, whose sad cross, Lack of Children, seem'd as loss: For as loss it was resented, And as mournfully lamented. See Diod. on Mat. 2.16. &c. & Jer. 31.15. Thus by Faith she prophecy'd Of the Bethlehem babes that dy'd: Mothers tears, and Childrens bloud See Postsc. Made a lamentable Floud. Note 1st. Gen. 30.22. Ch. 41.28.36. Ch. 47.25. Yet at length her Prayers obtain'd Such a Seed as rul'd and reign'd: Joseph, Aegypt's Foster Father, Who did large provisions gather. 1 Sam. 10.21.24. Gen. 48.16. Ch. 49.22. Benjamin, from whom did spring Israel's first exalted King: And from Joseph soon ensu'd Ephraim's populous multitude. Exod. 6.20. ch. 2.2. &c. 1.21. Next is to be registred Resolute good Jochebed, For, three months she hid her Son Th' Inquisition so to shun. Exod. 12.2.4.  Heb. 11.23. Miriam next, tha  her hand (Fearing not the  command) To secure the Babe rom slaughter, Kindly sav'd by Pharaoh's Daughter.
Exod. 2.9, &c. Whom the beauteous Babe did please, Weeping in the Bull-Rushes: And her pity and her purse Hir'd for him an Hebrew Nurse. Ibidem. Witty Miriam calls her Mother To be Nurse unto her Brother: So the Serpent and the Dove Met alike in Miriam's Love. Micah 6.2. Numb. 36.59. So was she recorded One With her Brethren so well known: One in their Levitick Stock, One in Conduct of the Flock. Numb. 27.3. ch. 36.10. And the Daughters we must add Of the good Zelophehad: That were free from all Defection, And still follow'd God's direction. Ch. 27.4, 7— That could plead their own just right, Well approv'd in God's own sight: And a President became For the Females rightfull claim. Ver. 8. See the Postscr. Note 2. And did prove Estates to fix With the true inheretrix: Which by Reason should withdraw, Th' Error of the Salique Law.
Isa. 49.23. For we find by Scripture search Nursing Mothers to the Church: And that Queens as well as Kings Are ordain'd to such high things. Josh. 15.19. Psal. 87.7. Acsah too that ask'd a blessing, Granted at her first addressing: Th' upper and the nether Springs, Which import far higher things. Ruth 1, &c. Naomi for faith excelling, Whiles with hatefull Heathens dwelling: And when plung'd in deep distress Was upheld by humbleness. Josh. 6.17. Ruth 1.17. Mat. 1.8. Rahab too, and Vertuous Ruth, Converts that embrac'd the truth: Both enroll'd by Grace Divine In our blessed Saviour's Line. Josh. 2.4.6. O the noble faith of her That was but a Victualler! That durst boldly hide the Spies In her flax-spread Galleries. 15, 16. And did wisely let them down By the wall-side of the Town: And then shew'd them how to shun The pursuit that was begun.
Ver. 11. That believ'd God's truth and might, As a true born Israelite: And declar'd this faith of hers To her welcome messengers. Ver. 9. Well, said she, I understand God hath given you the Land: And the Land I'll tell you true Faints and melts because of you. Ver. 10. For they heard how God most high Made for you the Red-Sea dry: And, for your sake, how he smote Kings that were of famous note. Ver. 12. Swear now to me by the Lord, For my safety from the Sword, Give a token that secures Her, that stak'd her life for yours. Ver. 18. Tye, said they, this scarlet line To thy window for a sign: All that keep within thy door Shall be safe upon our Score. Ver. 19. All without shall bear their guilt their bloud be spilt: So she bargain'd and brought in All her houshold and her kin.
Ruth 1.15. As for Ruth, no surer dart Ever hit true lovers heart: Cleaving so resolvedly To her Mother Naomi. 16. Press me not, said that kind Daughter, From access or following after; Where thou goest, I'll go thither, And where lodge, we'll lodge together. 16, 17. For my people thine I'll own▪ For my God, thy God alone: Where thou diest and art buried, There I'll die and be interred. God do so to me and more If I give this journey o're: Or if ought but death shall be Cause to separate me and thee. 18. Thus good Ruth the Moabitess Prov'd a perfect Proselytess, Quitting Countrey, Customs, Kindred, All for Christ, nor would be hindred. Judg. 4.4. &c. Deb'rah Wife of Lapidoth, Prophetess and Princess both: That arose by God's command As a mother in the Land.
Ver. 14, — That did call a War, and carry it Spite of Sisera's Iron Charet: And did startle (to the best) Brave resolves in Barach's breast. Judg. 4.21. Ch. 5.14. Jael too for courage crown'd Nayling Sisera to the Ground: Whose blest honour did augment, Past all womens in the Tent. Judg. 13.23. Heb. 11.33. And the wife of Manoah, Her good Husbands prop and stay: Mother of the Nazarite, Magnifi'd for faith and fight. 1 Sam. 1.18, 27. Ch. 2.22. Hannah that reviv'd by prayer, And obtain'd a Son and Heir: Vow'd him freely to the Lord, With her Husbands joynt accord. Chap. 2.1, 22. Luke 1.46. And presents him most compleat With her Gratulation great: Whose inspired heart and tongue▪ Hint the Holy Virgin's Song. 1 Sam. 4.19. And the wife of Phinehas, For a Zealous Saint she was, More lamenting Israel's fall, Than her own loss, life and all.
1 Sam. 4.20. Troubled that the Ark was taken, Israel's Glory so forsaken: Calls her dear Child Ichabod, Grieving for the Ark of God. 1 Sam. 25.18, 31. Abigail that durst ingage To subdue a Souldiers rage, Courted David, sought and serv'd him, From a rash revenge preserv'd him. Ver. 23. Wins him with Civility, Wisedom and Humility: Of his greatness prophecy'd, And e're long became his bride. 2 Sam. 20.16. And that peaceable good Spirit Of immortal fame and merit: She that at the siege of Abel Carried all so amicable. Ibidem. Talking with the royal Captain, Of the fears the Town was wrapt in: How, said she, canst thou take joy God's inheritance to destroy? Ibidem. Far from me be such a fury, Said the Captain, I'll assure ye: Onely Sheba's body bring, That hath clasht against the King.
Ibidem. Then she treats with all the Town, Crys the trayterous Rebel down, Gets his head cast o're the wall, And forthwith appeaseth all. Pro. 31.1. Mat. 1.6. And the Queen we count upon, That instructed Solomon: Princess in the Royal Line, Prompting Oracles Divine. 1 Kings 10.1. Mat. 12.42. And the Queen of famous Note, That did come from parts remote, In her zeal to seek the Lord, As both Testaments record. Ibidem. That with Solomon did consult, Asking questions difficult: And the Heaven-inspired King Answered her to every thing. Ibidem. That admir'd the works she saw, And his Oeconomick Law: Most of all his rare Ascent, As he to the Temple went. Ibidem. 'Tis a true report, said she, Which at home I heard of thee: But by what I now behold, Lo! the one half was not told.
Ibidem. Ver. 9. Blessed be the Lord thy God, And thy people I applaud, That such Oracles may hear, From a Prince to them so near. 1 Kings 17.13. She that first Elijah fed With the last bit of her bread: But by faith which she embrac'd, Neither Meal nor Oyl did wast. 2 Kings 4.6. And that faithfull widdow too That had vessels not enough To contain the Liquor fill'd, Which by Miracle distill'd. 2 Kings 4.36. Heb. 11.35. And the Shunamites good wife, Who receiv'd her dead to life: Whom Elisha did require That did such a Guest invite. 2 Kings 5.1. And the little Captive Maid From her native Land convey'd, That did wait on Naaman's wife, And put fair to end the strife. Ver. 3.24. Would to God (said she) my Maste Were (in spight of all disaster) With the Prophet, that doth dwell In Samaria's CITTADEL.
Ver. 3.14.15. For he would undoubtedly Cure him of his Leprosy: So he went and was made whole Both in body and in soul. 2 Chr. 34.22, 26. Mat. 1.10. Hulldah dwelling in the College, Perfect in Prophetick knowledge: That did comfort King Josiah, (Grand-child to King Hezekiah.) Ver. 28.24. And assur'd his peacefull end, For even death must stand his friend: Though God's wrathfull indignation Scorcht the following Generation. Ver. 25. And the Prophetess was bold To denounce the wrath foretold: For their sin so far incens'd, That the wrath could not be quench'd. Esther 4.14. Royal Esther, most religious, Born as for a time prodigious: With her Maidens mourn'd and pray'd, Stak'd her life for Israel's aid. Chap. 7.6. Cop'd with Haman, got the day, Which advanced Mordecay: And if any women be Types of Christ, 'tis such as she.
Thus the Testament hath told Worthy Women of the Old: Now great Ladies take a view Of the Worthies of the New. Luke 1.6. Ver. 44. First Elizabeth admire, Whose obedience was entire: Whose sweet Babe within her womb, Leap'd for joy that Christ was come. Luke 2▪ 37. Chap. 7.38. Aged Anna that did pray Instantly both night and day. Mary that did weep as fast, Till her tears all price surpast. Luke 10.39. Th' other Mary we must mention, Who to Christ gave great attention: For the better part she chose, That which she could never lose. John 11.2. Mat. 26.13. This was also she that shed Precious Spiknard on his head: Which to such account did come, As must pass through Christendom. Luke 11.38. John 11.5. And good Martha must be number'd, Though with too much care encumber'd: One expresly said to be Lov'd of Christ among the three.
John 11.22. For she was a sound believer, Though her brothers death did grieve her: And (confiding) told our Lord He could raise him at a word. Mark 12.44. 2 Cor. 9.7. And the Widdow whose Gratuity Pass'd the rich mens superfluity: Though two mites was all her living▪ So much priz'd is cheerfull giving. Mark 7.26. Mat. 15.20. And the Greek Syro-Phoenician, Who so press'd her bold petition: Term of Dog she overcomes, Dogs (said she) may eat the crums. Ibidem. So she stoutly stood the tryal, And misdoubted no denial: For she knew she should prevail, And her faith did never fail. Mat. 9.20. Such a faith did Christ avouch Hers to be that stole a touch: For, said that believing soul, If I touch I shall be whole. John 4.26. She of Sychar made acquainted With Messias, (God's Annointed) She made all the Town to know, They believ'd and found it so.
John 19.25. Luke 2.35. And of them that so surpass Was the wife of Cleophas, Sympathizing in the smart, That did pierce the Virgins heart. Ibidem. See Postscript Note the third. And the Virgins Sister there That did like affection bear: And Salome, who likewise Did so strongly Sympathize. Luke 8.2. Mat. 27.46. And that Godly Convert then Called Mary Magdalen: Who last serv'd our Saviour slain, And first saw him rais'd again. Acts 9.39. ch. 17.34. Tabitha that did prepare Garments for the poor to wear: Damaris that clave to Paul When the learn'd neglected all. Acts 12.14. Rhoda that knew Peter's Voice, And thereat did so rejoyce: That she straight ran in, and said, Here's the man for whom we pray'd. Acts 16.14. &c. She whose heart the Lord did open To attend to what was spoken: And her heart set pe (to each her,) Sets her house so to the Preacher. Rom. 16.8. Phoebe that did service pay To the Church of Cenchrea: And Priscilla that did purchase Thanks of all the Gentile-Churches.
Ver. 6.12. Mary too, a Saint illustrious, And for Saints dear sakes industrious: So Tryphaena's works import, And Tryphosa's came not short. 2 Tim. 1.5. ch. 3.15. Lois, next (as Scripture saith) In whom dwell'd unfeigned faith: And Eunice prais'd as high, Which two train'd up Timothy. 2 John 1. &c. And the Lady call'd Elect, With the Robes of Vertue deckt: And her Children from their youth Walking stedfast in the truth. Rom. 16.15. Phil. 4.3. 2 John 13. Some but named are set down, And a Name is some renown: Here a Sister, there a Wife, Owned in the book of life▪ Phil. 4.3. Luke 8.3. Women then as well as Men Have their praise by Scripture pen: Women of their substance lent To our Lord with one assent. Luke 8.3. One of these was good Susanna, And the Noble Dame Joanna (Herod's Stewards wife) was one, And a many more unknown. Luke 23.27. Ver. 40.55. Women did with mournfull breath, Most of all lament his death: Women at his Grave did grieve, On the sacred Sabbath Eve.
Luke 23.50. chap. 24.1. And (that past) they did not fear To embalm his body there: And had there the best inspection, First, into his Resurrection. Acts 17.4.12. Lastly (to give all their due) Famous women, and not few, Were converted, and strait-way, At the Gospels spring of day. Wherefore to conclude the story Of this faithfull Female glory, One thing more I must annex In the honour of your Sex. Mat. 1.27. Luke 1.44, 48. One of yours excell'd all other, That was both a Maid and Mother: Whom all Generations shall Blessed Virgin-Mother call. Luke 1.32. Ver. 46. Mother of Almighty God, Celebrated all abroad: Yet was she of meek behaviour Magnifying Christ our Saviour. Heb. 1.6. Luke 2.10. Whom all Angels evermore Are commanded to adore; And with joy they all obey, Witness this triumphant day. FINIS.
The Post-script. NOTE 1. For the distick in Italian Character Page 748. Take this following if you think it fit. Infants (of both Sexes some) Suffered bloudy Martyrdom. Though some Interpreters say that the Male Children onely suffered; but that could hardly be: See the Text in Jer. 31.18. And Reverend Bishop Hall, in his Contemplations of Herod and the Infants, saith thus: All the Infants of Bethlehem shall suffer for this one. Note 2. The Salique Law is a Law of France, whereby the Crown of France cannot fall to a Woman; The Original and injustice of it, and how confuted and condemned from this President of Zelo∣phehad's Daughters, Num. 27. & 36. c. See in Dr. Heylin's description of the World, Edition 8. in Quarto, page 80. and in the Edition in Folio, pag. 177. Note 3. Some take the Virgin Mary's Sister, spoken of John 19.25. to be the same with the Wife of Cleophas; for
thus the Text expresseth it, . His Mother, and His Mothers Sister. Mary the Wife of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene. And Calvin construes it, that this Mary (call'd her Sister) was her Cousin, and might be the Daughter of Cleophas, for any thing said in the Text, and the Trans∣lators put it in a different Character; But Aretius distinguisheth them, Adest Mater Christi, adest Soror ejus, Ad∣sunt aliae duae Mariae, Uxor Cleophae & Magdalenae. There was present (saith he) the Mother of Christ, there was present her Sister, there were pre∣sent two other Maries, the Wife of Cle∣ophas, and Magdalene.
A TABLE to the Three Last Centuries, containing the Psalm-Hymns. A AAron and Moses Israel's Lamp, 586 Affection to Ordinances, 512 Affiance and repose in God. 369 Afflictions great imposed and allowed, 482 Ancient Sabbath, 528 Angels protecting Saints, 415 Answer of our supplications 478 Appearing of Hope, or Sion's Reparation, 547 Applause of God's Mercies, 550 Applause of God's greatness, 557 Applause of the Creation, Ibid. Arraignment of Persecutors, 371 Arraignment and Ruin of Persecutors, 372 Atheists shamed by babes and sucklings, 374 B. BAbes and sucklings setting forth Gods praise, 373 Babes and sucklings shaming Atheists, 374 Believers victory over the Dragon, 527 Believers Comfort and Crown, Ibid. Benedicite, &c. Or Vniversal thanksgiving▪ 709 Birth of our blessed Saviour, 516 Blessed man described, 361 Blessedness of Charity, 422 Blessings of the Womb, 653, 654
Blessings ordained for man, 560 Blessings conferred on Saints 465 Blessings rich and plentifull by Land and Sea, 561 Blessings of a fruitfull year, 477 Blessings of provision applauded, 558 Blessings of the Creatures, viz. Plants, Planets, &c. 559 Blessings shewing forth the glory of God, 562 C. CAlamity of the Wicked, 377 Canaan the Type of Heaven, 428, 576 Canaan fell to Israel, 48 Captives redemption prayed for, 593 Captives free favours, Ibid. Chains of darkness for the wicked, 378 Charity blessed, 422 Chastisements, God's faithfulness therein 523 Christ's Kingdom, how exalted, 366 Christ's Kingdom, how opposed and hated, 365 Christs praise, 431 Christ's praise past all expression, 434 Christ's power converting souls, 432 Christ's Throne deckt with Justice, Ibid. Christ's Reign and Triumph his enemies dread, 535 Churches inward beauty and succession, 434 Churches beauty highly prais'd, 442 Churches favours pray'd for, 583 Church besieged and delivered, 442 Church records God's mercies her safety, 443 Church-freedom to Saints, 514 Church redeemed from Captivity, 517 Church redeemed and warned, 518 Comfort in godliness, 624 Comforts flowing from above, 426
Comforts for the righteous, 379 Comparison between good and bad men, their Works, and their Rewards, 364 Confusion of the wicked. 380 Converted Nations comforted, 535 Corruption of youth bridled, 619 Corruption of the times, 381 Creation applauded, or service of the Creator, 563 Creation applauded, or service of the Elements, 564 Creation applauded, or service of the Field, 566 Creation applauded, or service of the Fruits, 567 Creation applauded, or service of the Seas, 568 Creation-works & wonders wrought of old, 695 Creation-works demand ours and the Chur∣ches praise, 694 Creators Glory celebrated, 570 Curbing of the wicked, 382 D. DAvid's wicked enemies destroyed, 475 Death, the Saints advantage, World∣lings sorrow, 444 Death and Judgment shews difference between Saints and Sinners, 445 Degenerate world described, 383, 384 Deliverance pray'd for, 490 Deliverance urged, 491 Deliverance celebrated, 573 Depths of mercy, 661 Derision of Idols, 669 Description of true Christians, 385 Description of true Citizens of Sion, 386 Destruction of Rebellious Men, 393 Difference betwixt Good and Bad, 363
Devout and true Saints, 399 Devotion of pious Pilgrims, 620 Devotion, Pardon and Vocation, 478 Dull and drooping Saints quickened, 620 E. ENVY not Worldlings honour or delight, Which ends in horrour and perpetual night. 446 Enemies of the Saints increase, 368 Enemies of King David destroyed, 475 Entrance of the King of Glory, 400 Escape from death and the Joy thereof, 408 Establishment of Christ's Kingdom, 493 Everlasting mercies, 671 Exaltation of Christ's Kingdom, 366 Exceeding happiness of pardon, 412 Exhortations to fear God, 415 Expectation of the Resurrection, 387 Experience stirs up to prayer and praise, 483 Extolling of Scripture, Verity and Vertue, 388 Exurgat Deus, 487 F. FAith seen in fear of sin, 389 Faiths Victorious Banner, 391 Faithfulness of Saints to the end, 621 Faithfulness of God's Chastisements, 523 Falseness of Persecutours, 423 Favours pray'd for, 583 Favours free to Captives, 593 Felicity of God's Protection, 369 Felicity of the Church prayd for, 581 Flattering world applauds her own, 445 Foes of the Lord dismay'd with fear, 435 Free-Grace of God revealed, 404 Free Favours to Colonies or Planters, 594 Free Favours to distressed ones, 595
Free favours to Prisoners, 596 Free favours to sick-men, 597 Free favours to such as go to Sea, 598 Freedom of the Godly, 623 Frequent Prayer prevalent, 470 Fruits of the Earth perish or prosper at God's pleasure, 599 Fruitfull year a Blessing, 447, 478 Fruitfulness of the Saints in Age, 530 G. GEntiles called to Sion's Court, 433 God's acceptable sacrifices, 455 God ceaseth wars, proclaims his power, 438 God's Clemeney tenders mans frailty, 555 God's comforts the Saints feast, 418 God's different dealings with good and bad men, 600 God's free Grace revealed to them that seek it, 404 God's Free-grace to Israel, 428 God's Free-love cheers the soul, 426 God our good and sure Shepherd, 396, 397 God the good Shepherd of our souls, 394 God the good Shepherd doth supply our wants, 395 God's greatness and goodness, 696 God's greatness seen in Tempests, 405 God's greatness applauded, 557 God's greatness seen in Thunder, 407 God's glory in his Temple, 534 God guides the meek and penitent, 403 God's Judgments and Destruction of Rebels 393 God just and holy, delights to hear prayers, 688 God loves the just, helps the distrest 694 God's mercies the Saints support, 417 God's mercies keeps both man and beast, 418
God's mercies to the Saints secure, 418 God's mercies larger than from East to West, 554 God's mightiness in Judgment, 448 God's mightiness in mercy, 449 God's mightiness in punishing the wicked, 450 God's mightiness in the day of Judgment, 451 God's mightiness in Vengeance upon the wick∣ed, 453 God's Ordinances cheer the godly mind, 425 Gods pardoning grace, 552 God's praise set forth by babes and sucklings, 373 God's praises past all expression, 582 God a present refuge, 437 God procures peace for the Saints, 368 God's providences prais'd, great foes submit, 480 God's Providence cannot be descried, 529 God's propensity to pity the Saints calamity, 519 God's protection the felicity thereof, 369 God's soveraign rule to keep our souls alive, 481 God's Soveraign Throne, 556 God slow to anger, prone to grace, 687 God subverts lewd sinners in their ways, 688 God the sure portion of the pure in heart, 499 God sends the seasons from above, 708 God's true favorites, 676 God vindicates the oppressed, 553 God's wondrous works of Judgment, 697 Good Christians described, 398 Good Men and bad their ways and ends disco∣vered, 362 Good wellcomers of the King of glory, 401 Gospel days celebrated, 533
Gratulations to God, and supplications for the Church, 601 Greatness of Christ's Kingdom, 602 Greatness of Christ's Kingdom expressed and explained, 603 Great freedom of the godly, 623 Great works of God celebrated, 606 Great works of God for his Church, 607 Great sins scord on, great mercies are forgot, 583 H. HAbitation of cruelty supprest, 500 Happiness conferred on the Saints, 410 Happiness of pardon, 412 Hearty comfort in godliness, 624 How to fear God aright, 415 Holy Angels protecting Saints, Ibid. Honour, Happiness and Vertue of the Saints, 608 Honours and promotions of the poor, 611, 612 Honouring God at all times, 414 I. JAcob's safe conduct, 613 Jacob's safe conduct from Aegypt, 614 Idols derided, 615 Idolatries bloudy and inhumane, 590 Jew and Gentiles glory with confession, 434 Jewels of God's keeping, 416 Ill deeds describe the wicked, 417 Image-worship accursed, 536 Joys of Heaven, 419 Joseph reserved for many Lands relief, 577 Israel's refuge and high tower, 438 Israel's deliverance from Babylon, 651 Israel's passing the Red Sea, 480 Israel's ingratitude, 506
Israel's seed charged to seek God, 575 Israel in Aegypt harboured, then opprest, 578 Israel departs from Aegypt, 580 Israel forgets the works of God, 585 Israel grown brutish, 586 Israel believes not, but murmurs basely, 587 Israel spares the worst people in Canaan, 589 Israel mixes with Heathen Idolatries, 590 Israel ensnared by Heathens examples, 589 Israel grosly stain'd by Idolatries, 590 Israel's misdeeds recorded and punished, 591 Israel's enemies rule over them; Ibid. Israel cries in their great distress, moves God to their redress, 592 Judgments against persecutors, 469 Just mans portion and practice, 625 Just mans Vindication, protection and provi∣sion, 419 Just mans sure safegard and happy end, 421 Justification implored, 457, 460 Just beloved of God, 694 K· KEenest afflictions profitable, 626 King David's wicked Enemies destroy∣ed, 475 Kings moved to receive Christ's Kingdom, 367 Kings supply and sure defence by prayer, 392 Kingdom of Christ how opposed and hated, 365 Kingdom of Christ how exalted, 366 Knowledge and Acknowledgment of Mortality, 421 L. LEvites blessing, 667 Liberty of the Gospel, 616 Liberty and latitude of the Gospel, 617 Life of Religion. Ibid.
Life of Religion in practice, 62 Living in quietness longed for, 640 Lord proclaim'd a present aid, 435 Looking up to God, 642 Lowly Adoration a publick worship, 532 Love of Saints to Grace and Godliness, 627 Lovers of Liberality, 611 Lovers of Sion, 643 Lovers of Sion blessed, 644 Lovers of Charity blessed, 422 M. MAking God our hope, 628 Man's frailty tendred by God's Cle∣mency, 555 Man's Glory shining in his Creation and Resto∣ration, 376 Martyrdom or slaughter of the Sheep, 429 Meekness of Captives, 646 Meekness and Mourning of Captives, Ibid. Mercies to the Church by our Saviou's Ascen∣tion, 439 Mercies to the Gentiles by Christ's Ascention, 441 Mercies the Saints support, 417 Mercies keeps both man and beast, 418 Mercies secured to the Saints, Ibid. Mercies larger than from East to West, 554 Mighty men warned, 509 Mightiness of God in Judgment, 448 Mightiness of God in the day of Judgment, 451 Mightiness of God in Mercy, 449 Mightiness of God in punishing the Wicked▪ 450 Mightiness of God in Vengeance upon the Wicked, 453
Miracles of Mercy, or the Snare broken, 647, —Idem, 648 Moses and Aaron Israel's Lamp, 586 Moses saves Israel in the Gap, 587 Mortality acknowledged, 421 Mount Sion's sure standing, 649, 650 Mourning turn'd to rejoycing for Israel's deli∣verance from Babylon, 651 Mourning turn'd to rejoycing, or the Dream made real, 652 Murmuring at Meribah moves the meekest Man, 589 N. NAtivities blessed or Blessings of the Womb, 653, 654 Never failing of God's word, 629 New Building of Sion, and the Sacrifices most acceptable to God, 455 O. ORdinances, true love to them, 511 Ordinances, Affection to them, 512 Olive Branches, 655 Onsets upon Israel, or the Powers defeated, 656, —Idem, 657 Opposition or hatred to Christ's Kingdom, 365 P. PArdon implored, 456, 457 Pardon of bloudshed, and Prayers for Sion, 458, 461 Pardon of sin implored, 459 Pardoning Grace, 476 Pardoning Mercies, 658 Pardoning Mercies implored, 659 Pardoning Mercies plentifull, 660 Pattern of Princely Government, 545 Peace of Conscience implored, 460, 461
Peace of Worldlings a Riddle, 444 Perpetual praises to the Lord, 686 Persecutors Judgments, 469 Persecutors Arraignment, 371 Persecutors arraigned and ruined, 372 Persecutors falseness, 423 Persecutions greatly grieve and grind, 425 Pharaoh overthrown in the Wilderness, 501 Phineas does justice and is blest, 588 Pious Prince described, 546 Plagues of Aegypt, 578, 579 Portion and practice of just men, 625 Power of Religion in Practice, 630 Power of Christ converting souls, 432 Praises to God, 706, 707 Praise of Christ, 431 Praise of Christ past all expression, 434 Praise suis with Saints, 705 Praises from Heaven and Earth, 717 Prayer frequent, prevalent, 470 Prayer for the King, 492 Prayers for Sion's prosperity, 462 Prayer for Captives redemption, 593 Priesthood and power of Christ, 605 Pride mortified, 662 Pride to be mortifyed, 663 Promotion of the Church and State, Ibid. Promotion of Vnity, 664, 666 Properties of Tale-bearers accused, 462 Prosperity puffs up, and Grace withdraws, 409 Prosperous state of the wicked makes them com∣mit greater sins, 496 Protection and provision from above, 413 Protection, provision and vindication of just men, 419 Protection of Saints, 467, 468
Protection out of Sion, or the Levites Blessing, 667 Providences to Israel God's peculiar Treasure, 668 Providences to the Saints, 528 Punishment of Atheists, 467, 468 Pure Lamp of the Word, 631 Pure in Heart are taught to know the World∣lings End and Woe, 497 Pure in heart have joys supream, 498 Pure in heart are God's sure portion, 499 Pure Services of the Church, 670 Pureness of God's Worship, and derision of I∣dols, 669 Q. QVieting of cares, 471, 473 Quieting principles, 474 R. RED Sea dried, and Israel passing it, 480 Red Sea dryed and enemies drown'd, 584 Release from Afflictions, 483 Remarkable judgments on the Wicked, 377 Remembrance of God's ancient works and ever∣lasting mercies, 671, 673 Renouncing of ill Courses and Companions, 632 Repose in God, 471 Revenge upon Babylon, 675 Revelation of the Gospel, 484 Revelation and Riches of the Gospel, 485 Riddle of Worldlings peace and bliss, 444 Righteous comforted, 379 Rising of the Ark, or Exurgat Deus, 487 Rock of Refuge, 473 S. SAcrifices, which are most acceptable to God, 455
Safe Conduct, 503 Saints sighs and prayers when confined from God's house, 424 Saints should banish fears, 437 Saints Calamity and God's propensity to pity, 519 Saints preservation in times of pestilence, 52 Saints Honour, Happiness and Vertues, 608, — Idem, 610 Salvation of Saints, 537 Sanctification implored, 457, 460 Sanctuary Songs for the wonderfull works of God, 489 Satisfying grace, 476 Seeking God, or supplications at our awaking, 679 Service and safety of the humble, God's true Favourites, 676, 678 Services of the Church, 670 Service of the Creator, 563 Service of the Elements, 564 Service of the Field, 566 Service of the Fruits, 567 Service of the Seas, 568 Short Age of man, 524 Sion's prosperity prayed for, 462 Sion's Reparations, 490 Sion's glory in turning the Gentiles, 521 Sion's reparation, or the appearing of Hope, 547 Silent praise to God, 476 Sins kept, with hold true Blessings, 483 Slaughter of the Sheep or Martyrdom, 429 Speedy deliverance prayed for, 490 Spiritual uncleanness follows Corporal, 588 Spiritual Government of Christ figured in So∣loman, or a prayer for the King, 492
Speedy deliverance urged, 491 Soul cheered in God's free love, 426 Spouse of Christ, 433 Stability of the Church, 548 Strength and establishment of Christ's King∣dom, 493 Strength of sinners subdued, 500 Strength of the Leviathan subdu'd, 501 Supplication to God to spare Chastisements, 370 Supplication for deliverance and direction, 633 Supplications for the Church, 601 Supplications at our awaking, 679 Supplications for the Morning, 680 Supplications in times of extream danger, 681 Supplications of King David, 683 Supplications for posterity, 684 Sweet pardoning Grace, 476 T. TAle-bearers properties, 462 Tale-bearers cursed, 46 Temptation much assaults the pure in heart, 495 Temptation encountred and overcome, 502 Throne of Christ, 432 Throne of Israel reestablished, 506 Time of trouble complained of, 504 Tribulation and woe to the wicked, 510 True love to Ordinances, 511 True believers victory over the Dragon, 527 True zeal and charity of Christians, 634 True zeal and purity of Christians, Ibid. True thankfulness, 447 Truth springing out of the earth, 516 Trust in God blessed, 689
Trust in God immortal▪ powerfull, Trust in the presver of strangers,  and fatherless, Trust not in Kings and Princes, Ibid. Trust alone in the high and holy one, 693 Tryal of Loyalty, or Israel's Ingratitude, 506 Tryal of Israel and attest of God's , 5 Turning the Gentiles, or Sion's Glory, 521 Turning the Gentiles to the Church, 522 V. VAlidity of God's promises, 523 Vanishing of Life, 524 Variety of Meroi magnified, 98, 70 Variety of providence praised, 02, 704 Victoriousness of God's power, 530 Victoriousness of God's power and promises, 531 Virtuousness of Saints in Age, 530 Vocation to publick Worship, 532 Vnity and Christian Love, 665 Vniversal thanksgiving, or Benedicite, 709 Vnwearied seeking of God, 636 Vnworthiness of the wicked counterpoisd, 637 W. WANT of God's Fear destructive, 470 Watchfulness of Saints, 638 Ways and Ends of Good-men and Bad-men dis∣covered, 362 Weak upheld, all Creatures are supplyed, 688 Wicked their calamity and remarkable Judg∣ment, 377 Wicked, their chains of darkness, 378 Wicked their Confusion, 380 Wicked their curbing, 382 Wicked described by their ill deeds, 417 Wicked, Great Woes attend them, 418
for good times, of God by sea and Land, 476 Confidences condemned, 474 Worldlings peace a Riddle, 444 Worldlings honour and delight ends in hor∣our and darkness, 446 Worldlings nd and wo, 497 Wordlings joy is but a dream, 498 Works of God celebrated, 606 Works of God for his Church, 607 Works of Grace permanent, 639 Works of Grace to the Church, 712, 713 Worship of Images accursed, 536 Worship of the soveraign Lord, 538 Worship of the supream Judge, 539 Worship performed by the Ancients, 540 Worshippers of old, Moses, Aaron and Samuel, 542 Y. YIelding Vniversal praises, 714, 715 Z. ZEAL to the Temple, 513 Zeal in publick Worship, 543, 544 FINIS.
