B1458 12015587 52521
A JOURNAL OF THE Late Actions OF THE French at Canada. WITH The Manner of their being Repuls'd, by His Excellency, Benjamin Fletcher, Their Majesties Governour of New-York. Impartially Related by Coll. Nicholas Reyard, and Lieu∣tenant Coll. Charles Lodowick, who attended His Excellency, during the whole Expedition. To which is added, I. An Account of the present State and Strength of Canada, given by Two Dutch Men, who have been a long Time Pri∣soners there, and now made their Escape. II. The Examination of a French Prisoner. III. His Excellency Benjamin Fletcher's Speech to the Indians. IV. An Address from the Corporation of Albany, to His Excellen∣cy, Returning Thanks for His Excellency's early Assistance for their Relief. Licensed, Sept. 11th 1693. Edward Cooke. London, Printed for Richard Baldwin, in Warwick-Lane, 1693.
THE PREFACE. As this following small Treatise is a short Narrative of some little Check given by the English Gallantry to the Arms and At∣tempts of France, so far off as the Indian Territories; so it gives us an occasion of consi∣dering, How the Great Lewis may justly plume himself with a Title peculiarly his own, viz. The great Disturber of the World. For, tho the Bloodiest and most Active Scene of that Mo∣narch's Ambition seems bounded within the Confines of Europe; yet is there hardly that most distant Region or Nation, the very ut∣most Corner of the Universe, but has some Footsteps of his Aspiring Arms. For, be∣sides the Tragick Theatre he has made within the Bowels of Christendom, not to instance his Leagues with Mahomet, the unnatural Sub∣jection of his most Christian Cross to the most
Anti-Christian Crescent, his Ambition has been a little busie too in the American Quarter of the Globe. 'Tis true, his Strength has neither been formidable, nor his Stars fa∣vourable in this Remoter Stage. Justice seems, at least, to the American Climate, to reign Lady of the Ascendant, in carrying Vi∣ctory to the Honester Side; witness the se∣veral Advantages obtain'd, not only in the fol∣lowing Expedition, the subject of our present Treatise; but in divers other Advances of Their Majesties Prosperous Arms in those Parts. But, as this Preface is only a Compliment to my Readers Introduction, I shall leave him to the Entertainment he finds, only assure him; we have this Credit to the Truth of our Narra∣tion, That 'tis no more than what has been alrea∣dy Printed at New-York by his Excellency's (the Commander in Chief in the Expedition) particular Authority there; and now made Publick Here, for the Satisfaction of all such Honest English Readers, as can take Plea∣sure in the Success of their Countrey's Arms and Interest.
A Journal of the Late Actions of the FRENCH of CANADA, &c. SUNDAY, the 12th of February, 1692. about ten a Clock at Night, an Express from Lieut. Colonel Beecknam of Ʋl∣ster County, gave his Excellency an account of Advice from Albany, of the French and Indians, consisting of 550, be∣ing within twenty Miles of Schenectady on the 8th. Instant an Hour before Day, ready to fall upon the two first Castles of the Mohaques. Whereupon His Excellency ordered the Col. of the Militia of the City of New-York to draw out his Regiment the next Morning. Monday the 13th, Orders were sent to Col. Courtland of Kings-County, to detach out of their Regiments a hundred and fifty Men, to be forth-with ready to Imbarque at the Ferry. About eight a Clock in the Morning the City Regiment being under Arms, his Excellency on Horse-back, at the head of the Re∣giment, demanded, Who were willing to follow him to the Frontiers against the Enemy? They unanimously threw up their Hats, and cryed, One and all. Upon which the Colonel was ordered to de∣tach 150 of the fittest Men, to be under the Command of three Captains, with their Subalterns, ready at the first Beat of Drum, and dismissed the Regiment, and ordered all Sloops for Transpor∣tation to be secured. About ten a Clock his Excellency did send the Express forward to Col. Beecknam, with Orders to get all the Hor∣ses in the County of Ʋlster together in readiness, to carry his Ex∣cellency and the Detachments from Kingstone to Albany by Land, in case the River was not open, and to forward any Confirmation of the News to his Excellency.
Tuesday the 14th, by break of Day came an Express from Major Ingoldsby, confirming the former News, and that the two first Castles were taken by the French and Indians. Whereupon eight Sloops were ordered with necessary Provisions and Ammunition to go round the Fort, and to be ready to Sail, and the Detachment of the City Regiment did immediately Imbarque. About four a Clock afternooon, the Tide offering, his Excellency, attended with the Officers of the Detachment and several Volunteers, did imbarque and set sail. Friday the 17th, about 9 a Clock his Excellency arrived at Alba∣ny (being 50 Leagues distant from New-York) with five of the Sloops, having met with much Ice in the River, which gave some Difficul∣ty; the rest arrived towards Evening. As soon as they came on Shore, his Excellency ordered Captain Schuyler to march 50 of the Men for Schenectady; about a 11 a Clock his Exellency followed, with 16 Horse, leaving Instructions with Col. Beyard to forward all the rest of the Detachments, as they did arrive towards Schenectady, without loss of time, together with the Ammunition and Provisions. About 3 a Clock afternoon his Excellency met Major Ingoldsby, about 8 Miles from Schenectady, on his Return from Albany, having gone from thence to visit Schenectady that Morning. His Excel∣lency arrived at Schenectady (being 20 Miles from Albany) about 5 a Clock. About 9 a Clock at Night Capt. Schuyler with his Men arrived, and found Provisions and Quarters in readiness for his Men. Saturday Morning the 18th, by break of Day, the Men were ready to be transported over the River, but a violent Storm did hinder their Transportation till Afternoon, and sundry Indian Wo∣men loaden with Provisions were sent along with them: This Day about Noon Major Merrit, with the rest of the City Detachment, did arrive at Schenectady, and were immediately furnished with Quar∣ters, Ammunition, and Provisions, ready to march next Morning. Sunday the 19th, by break of Day, the rest of the Forces that were fit to march, did attempt to get over, but great quantites of loose Ice did hinder till about 10 a Clock, the Ice setling, they got
over it on Foot, which in two Hours after was dispersed, and the River open again. This party carried a further supply of Provisions and Ammunition. Monday the 20th, by Break of Day, those of the City Detach∣ments who were not able to march the Day before (being refreshed) his Excellency detached from the Garrison of Schenectady, so many of them as made 42, who did immediately march with 13 Horses loaden with Provision and Ammunition. About 2 a Clock afternoon arrived at Schenectady Capt. Stillwell with the Detachment of Kings County, consisting of 50 Men, who were ordered to refresh themselves till next Morning, and 3 Horses with Provisions ordered to be in readiness to attend them. Tuesday the 21st. The Horses being carried over the River, and the Men ready to be transported, came an Express from Major Schuyler, giving Intelligence of his being near at hand on his Re∣turn, who arrived about 4 a Clock afternoon, upon which the Men and Horse were remanded, and sent back to their own Home. There marched by his Excellency's Order, to joyn Major Schuyler, since his Arrival 208 effective Men, besides Guides and Carriers of Supplies, with considerable quantities of Provisions and Ammuni∣tion, which are since returned. Wednesday the 22d. His Excellency returned for Albany, accom∣panied with Major Schuyler, and several of the Forces came from pur∣suit of the Enemy, and arrived about 3 a Clock afternoon, much dissatisfied at the Enemies escape. His Excellency did order Major Schuyler, with some other Offi∣cers to give the Journal of their Action in the Woods. At 4 a clock arrived Col. Willet at Albany, with 120 Men from Queens County, who were next Morning remanded home to their Habitations, together with the rest of the Detachments. At Night his Excellency sent to call those Indians that were returned from the Fight, to meet him next Morning at Albany. Thursday the 23d. A Proclamation issued, requiring all the out Farmers to draw themselves into Neighbourhoods, for their better security against the sculking Enemy, and to fortify with Stockadoes.
Fryday the 24th. His Excellency received an Address from the Corporation of Albany, congratulating his safe Return, and returning Thanks for his early Assistance with his personal Presence for their Relief, &c. Saturday the 25th. The Indians being arrived last Night, and gi∣ving their Attendance, this Morning his Excellency, being accom∣panied with the Magistrates of this City, and the Souldiers and Mi∣litia in Arms, came to the City Hall, and made his Speech to the Indians, which was Interpreted to them by the Interpretess Helle. In the Afternoon they gave their Answer to his Excellency by the same Interpretess. Sunday the 26th. About 8 a Clock in the Morning, four of the chief Sachims came to his Excellency, with some further Propositi∣ons, which he immediately answer'd to their Satisfaction. Monday the 27th. His Excellency caused a Proclamation to be published, prohibiting the selling of Rum to the Indians, and did imbarque for New-York, where he arrived Thursday Morning follow∣ing, and was received with such Expressions of Joy and Thankful∣ness as the place could afford. Nicholas Beyard, Col. Charles Lodwick Lieut. Col. A JOURNAL of the Actions in the Woods, between the FRENCH and INDIANS. IN Obedience to his Excellency's Command, Peter Schuyler May∣or, with the other Officers under his Command, gave this fol∣lowing Account of their Proceedings since the first Intelligence of the Enemy's descent into the Country of the Mohaques. February the 8th, being Wednesday, about 2 a Clock afternoon, we had the Alarm from Schenectady, that the French and Indians had taken the Mohaques Castles; soon after we had the News, that a Young-man, called Jan Baptist van Eps, (taken at Schenecta∣dy 3 Years ago) was run over from the French, as they were to
attack the first Castle of the Mohaques, and come to Schenectady, who related, that the French were 350 Christians and 200 Indians. Major Ingoldsby sent forth-with his Warrants, to command in the Farmers of Capt. Genits and Capt. Tunis's Companies of Militia. This Night Lieut. John Schuyler and Cornet Abeel with 55 Horse, marched to Schenectady. February 9. Cornet Abeel came express from Schenectady, and de∣sired that Major Schuyler or Major Wessels might be sent thither to pacifie the Indians, who were enraged that no Christians went out in pursuit of the Enemy. Upon which Major Schuyler at his own Request was permitted to go that Evening. As soon as Major Schuyler arrived there, he sent out Scouts to spy the Forts and the Enemies Motion, and withal to go and warn the Tionondoge Indians of the Enemies coming, but they having gone 12 Miles, returned about 12 a Clock at Night, saying, they could not get over the River. Feb. 10. Major Schuyler sent Lieut. John Schuyler and Lieut. John Sanders, and six more to view the Mohaques Fort that was possessed by the Enemy, who brought News, that the French were in both the Forts; of all which he gave advice to Major Ingoldsby at Albany. Feb. 11. Major Schuyler sent 10 Christians and 40 Indians to lie near the Enemy, and to watch their Motion, who made a small Fort to retreat into, and so spyed what the Enemy did. Feb. 12. News was brought to Schenectady by some of the said Scouts, that they had heard firing at the Mohaques Forts, which was supposed the Tionondoge Indians against the French; which News Major Schuyler sent forward to Albany. Whereupon Major Ingolds∣by detached about 200 Men out of the several Companies of the Militia Fuzileers and Troop, commanded by Capt. Peter Matthews, Capt. Arent Schuyler, Capt. Benj. Phips, Capt. Kihad van Renslaer, and Capt. Tho. Gartin, who arrived at Schenectady about 2 a Clock afternoon, and joyned Major Schuyler: The Waggons with Bread arrived that Night. This day our Scouts brought us the News, that the French were there still, and that they had also cut off the third Castle of the Mohaques, called, Tionondoge, and that none of
the upper Indians were come down; all which was advertised to Major Ingoldsby forthwith, and Major Schuyler sent to him for Or∣ders to march. Feb. 13. This Morning having received no answer of the said Express, Major Schuyler sent another to march, and being pressed with the Indians, who threatned else to desert us, was forced to march the Men over the River without Orders, which came about 4 a Clock in the Afternoon, when most of the Men were got over the River. This very time we had News by our out Scouts, that the French had burnt the Mohaques three Castles, and were marched away, which Major Schuyler ordered Lieut. Young to signifie to Ma∣jor Ingoldsby. We marched 12 Miles that Evening, being 273 Christians. In the Night about 10 a Clock one of our Scouts came in, and told us that 600 of our uppermost Indians were coming down; Major Schuyler forthwith sent the same Messenger, that brought us the News, to Major Ingoldsby, and desired that Provi∣sion and Ammunition should be sent after us, not knowing what the Indians might have occasion for. Feb. 14. About 1 or 2 a Clock in the Morning we decamped, and marched to the small Fort that was made by our 50 Scouts, about six a Clock in the Morning, where we had Advice, that the Enemy was not above eight Miles from us; upon which Lieut. Harme van Slyk and two Indians were sent to discover the Enemy, who brought us word they were marched; two Indians came to us with News, that there were 300 of our upper Indians within 20 Miles of us, whereupon we sent two Indians back to hasten them up, and to let them know we were there to joyn them. We sent three Mohaques to discover the Enemy; about 4 a Clock in the Afternoon we de∣camped, and marched to the Place where the Enemy had lain the Night before. Feb. 15. In the Morning two of our Indian Scouts returned, (the third being run over to the Enemy) who brought us News they had seen the Enemy within ten Miles. Our Indians came up with us about 12 a Clock, being 290 Men and Boys, some Armed, and some without Arms, a Consult being had, we marched about
four a Clock, and encamped all together, having marched about ten Miles that Afternoon. This Night a Consult was held, and Spyes sent to discover the Enemy. Feb. 16. We marched early in the Morning, and having gone ten Miles, found the place where the Enemy had lain two Nights before; we halted there, an Oneyde Indian came from the Enemy, being sent to our Indians to debauch them over to the French, which Messenger we did not think fit to send back, being one of the Prisoners taken at Tionondoge. We sent an Express to Major Ingoldsby to acquaint him that the Enemy had built a Fort, and were resolved to fight us, and sent for supplies of Provision, Ammunition, and Men. We marched on toward the Enemy, and met with one of our wound∣ed Indians, who informed, that the Enemy stayed for us in a Fort; upon which we marched about two Miles, where a Christian Boy (Arnant the Interpreters Son) came to us, who had been three years a Prisoner among the French, he gave an Account, that the Enemy were about 6 or 700 Men, and within three Miles; we marched forward to find some convenient place to Encamp, and to fortifie our selves from the Enemy that Night: We had Scouts out (Christians and Indians) all Night to watch the Enemies motion, who brought an account in the Morning, that we were within a Mile of their Fort. Feb. 17. We decamped, and marched towards the Enemy with Scouts before us, and did not take a direct line, but went round, for fear of an Ambuscade, and came in sight of their Fort about eight a Clock in the Morning, where our Scouts came and shewed us where the Enemy lay; upon which all the Officers were commanded to take their Posts, and make ready to engage, being 250 Christians, and 290 Indians; the Enemy seeing us, gave three Huzza's, which we answer'd with as many, and as loud as they, and made the Woods ring: our Indians went to work to fall Trees, and fortifie; but the Enemy sallyed out immediately; we engaged them, and beat them back into their Fort; our Indians fell to work again, and desired our Christians to help, which they did; the Enemy sallied out with all their Strength a second time, encouraging their Men, crying, They run, we will cut them all off, and get their Provisions; We received
them briskly, and beat them back into their Fort, with the loss of several of their Men: Our Men fell to work again about the Fort; the Enemy sallied out the third time, but were as well repulsed as be∣fore, and beat into their Fort with considerable loss, our Indians bringing several of their Heads and Scalps into our Fort; after this the Enemy was quiet, and we finish'd our Fort: as soon as this Skirmish was over, we sent an Express to Major Ingoldsby, to ac∣quaint him what had passed, praying him to hasten our Recruits with Provision and Ammunition, for that the greatest part of our Men had not had any Provision in two days time; we sent our Scouts of Christians and Indians all that Night, to discover our Enemies Motion, and lay all Night in our Fort; it was extream bad, cold, snowy Weather. Feb. 18. Being cold stormy Weather, and Snow, insomuch that we could scarce see any Tract; our Scouts came in this Morning, which gave Account that the Enemy were in their Fort, some being still popping at our People. About nine a Clock an Indian that left the French in their Fort, told us, He thought the Enemy would retreat, that they were packing up their Baggage. Upon which Major Schyler ordered the Captains to draw out their Men to march round the Ene∣my's Fort to stop them; but the same time had an Account they were fled; he commanded the Officers to pursue them, and to hin∣der their Retreat, till Men and Provisions came up; but the Men wanting Provision, refused to march; the Officers, with 60 Christi∣ans, and some Indians, pursued the Enemy till they had made a small Fortification; but the Officers not having Men to engage them, nor to make a Fort, returned back, leaving two Officers with 40 Men and 100 Indians to watch their motion, expecting our Provision to come up that Night. Feb. 19. About 7 a Clock in the Morning we had an Account that our Provisions were near at hand, which came up to us about nine or ten a Clock with 80 Men, commanded by Capt. Simms; the Provisions being immediately distributed among the Men, those that were first served, were commanded away after the Enemy, with five Baskets a Man: About four a Clock, the Van being com∣manded
by Capt. Peter Matthews and Capt. Arent Schuyler, came up near the Rear of the Enemy, the Scouts telling us the Enemy were within less than an English Mile; we desired the Indians to joyn with us to fall upon their Rear, till the rest of our Men came up, sending in the mean time to our People, to march up in all haste; but the Indians halted; and could not be perswaded to march, the Mohaques being most unwilling, because the Enemy had dropt several Priso∣ners, who told them, that if they pursued them, they would kill all their Wives and Children, whom they had Prisoners; after an hours Consultation of the Indians, most of our Men came up, we marched with all speed, thinking to overtake the Enemy before they got to the River-side; but there being a flake of Ice in one part of the Ri∣ver, and all open above and below, the Enemy got over before we got up: We encamped by the River-side that Night. Feb. 20. In the Morning Major Schuyler resolved to march over the River, to pursue the Enemy, ordering the Officers to get the Men ready for that purpose; but many of the Men being wearied with fatiegue, their Shoes being quite wore out, and Provisions scarce, were not able to make any further pursuit: But that which did most of all discourage us, was, that the Indians had great averseness to pursue or fall upon the Enemy, because of their Wives and Children; whereupon we marched back. In this Engagement we lost four private Souldiers, and four Indi∣ans, two Officers, and twelve Christians, and Indians wounded; and we had an Account by some of our Indian Prisoners that made their Escape, that we killed of the Enemy 33, whereof we found but 27, among which was their Commandant, one Captain, and two other Officers, with two of their commanding Indians, and 26 Wounded. We rescued between forty and fifty Prisoners. Since their Retreat we are informed by divers of the Prisoners who come home daily, that all our Men Prisoners except five, have made their escape, or are set at Liberty, and but few Women and Children left with them, not being able to carry the Prisoners off, by reason of their Wounded Men, whereof they carried thirteen.
As we did not hear, so we could not expect that your Excellency should in so short time (at that Season of the Year) be advanced so near us as to Schenectady, and that so considerable Supplies could be so speedily got together: And we observed it was no small Encou∣ragement to our Indians to see your Excellency at the head of 300 Men, besides Volunteers, for our Relief, and theirs; of which we are all sensible. Peter Schyler, Major. Peter Matthews, Capt. Arent Schuyler, Capt. K. V. Renselaer, Capt. Benj. Phipps, Capt. The Examination of Andres Casparus and Cornelius Claese van den Bergh, both Dutchmen, taken before his Excellency Benj. Fletcher, Governour, who have made their Escape from Canada, who were Prisoners there, and have been 32 Days by the Way. THE said Cornelius Claese van den Bergh was taken at Canacta∣giere in July, 1691, a little before the Mayor Peter Schuyler went to Canada, and Andres Caspares who was gone out with some of our River Indians last fall to hunt, and withal, to see how the far Nations, called, the Turchtuicks lived, was taken last March by a Par∣ty of Turchtuicks and Davaganhaes, and brought to a Castle where the said Indians lived, and was there to be burnt and eat by the said Indians, from whence he run away that very day he received his cruel Sentence, and was sixteen days in the Woods, and came to a place where Monsieur Tontys People were making a Fort, and the said Mons. Tonty, and Mons. La Free brought him to Canada. The said Prisoners say, that the French informed them, that there were ten Ships come from France with Provision and Amunition, but no Men, scarce so many as could sail their Ships, that they had brought 120000 pound of Flower, and 160000 pound of Pork, also some great Guns, and two Mortar Pieces.
That there is a Fort built below Quebeck, in a narrow Passage where Ships must pass; the French spoke of two Forts, (but an English-man told him only of one Fort,) and twelve Guns in each Fort. They had 1600 Souldiers three year ago, of which a 1000 are killed and taken; this is besides 200 Inhabitants who are killed. The said Cornelius has lived all this while at the Governour of Mont Royal's House, called, Monsieur d' Cellier, and judges there are about 400 Men in Mont Royal with Souldiers and all, although the said Monsieur d' Cellier often told them, they had 700 Men there. There is a Man come over with those Ships to be Mons. d' Cellier's Cook, who says, that the English had fallen upon the French Fleet unawares, and done them some damage, and pursued them to Brest, and if they had come but a quarter of an hour sooner, they had taken Brest, and all the Provinces of Brittanine. The French have lost this Summer 37 French, and 70 Indians at one time, going up the Falls to Ottawawa, and at a second time they lost 30 French the same way, and often-times smaller Parties killed by our Indians. The said Andres Casparus says further, that when he came to the French House, after he had escaped from the Indians, the French tyed him two days, but he being so lean and meager, having no Food all that time, but 11 Eggs he found in a Turkies Nest, and 6 Swan Eggs he found in another place, so that the French did unty him. About eight days after Monsieur Tonty came, (who is in the manner of a Governour among them) and he went down with the said Tonty to Ottawawa, which was 200 Leagues from that place; the said Tonty dispatched about 25 or 30 great Cannows full of Beaver to Canada; and after they had been two days from Ottawawa, they met one Monsieur de Lille, who had been out a skulking upon the great River, and had taken two Prisoners, who told that 300 of our Indians lay at a carrying place on the great River, waiting for the Ottawawa Company, and 200 were near Mont Royal Island, upon the same design. They stopt the said Company till Monsieur Tonty sent for them back, and resolved to go to Canada with 200 Men In∣dians and French, without Beavers, in which Company the said
Andres Casparus came, being reckoned 300 Leagues between Otta∣wawa and Canada. As soon as the said Andres came to Mont Royal, Monsieur Tonty delivered him to the Governour of Mont-Royal, who put him in Prison four days, and then released him to work in his House; but as soon as he got out, consulted with his Comrade Cornelius to run away, which they did accordingly. After they had been about a Month or five Weeks together in the said Mons. d' Cellier's House, the said Andres says, he saw a great prodigious Quantity of Beavers at Ottawawa; an Inhabitant of Canada, called Jaques de Tallie, told him he had 3000 Beavers of his own there, and that there was as many Beavers now in Ottawawa as would load 200 Canows to Canada, and each Canow generally holds nine or ten hundred Beavers, which the said Andres doth credibly believe to be true, there being none gone from thence to Canada in a great while. There is a Fort at Ottawawa burnt by accident this Spring where Mons. la Free had the Command, wherein was great store of Beavers and Peltry, and several Goods and Merchandize. This is the Account the said two Prisoners gave at Albany the 4th. of October, 1692. and is entered down from their Mouths, by his Excellency's Command, Robert. Livingstone. The Examination of Joachin Lebert, a Frenchman of Ca∣nada, and Native of Mont Royal, taken before his Excel∣lency Benj. Fletcher at Albana the 4th of Octob. 1692. THat he lived at Prerie de lay Magdelain. That it is 60 Leagues from Mont Royal to Quebeck. That Mr. de Cellier is Gover∣nour of Mont Royal. That there is 2000 Men carrying Arms in his Government, Souldiers and Inhabitants. That the Town of Mont Royal is inclosed with Stockadoes. That there is 53 pieces of Canon, Brafs and Iron, eight Companies of Souldiers, unequal in number, 50 Men being the most.
That the Fort of Magdelaine contains 23 Families, 400 men in Arms, 2 pieces of Canon, and 5 Patteraroes. There is 200 men in the Indian Fort, called, Ganawagne. That there is ten Men of War arrived at Quebeck, from France, laden with Ammunition, and that he saw the said Ships. That he hath been taken 43 days, and says, that the day before his being taken, he being at Mr. Cellier's House, he saw a Canow arrive there from Mr. Le Count, sent to Mr. Cellier to demand the Collers of Beeds, which are usually presented at the concluding a Peace, the which occasioned him to say, there was Ambassadours coming to treat a Peace. Upon the Objection made, that there could not be so many Peo∣ple in Canada, he says, that the two Frenchmen that were sent to York some time since, being now at Canada, did inform Mr. Le Count, that the English had assembled all their Nations, with a design upon Canada, which obliged Mr. Le Count to raise all the men he could possible, which was that Number he said: And says, he knows nothing more. His Excellency Benjamin Fletcher's Speech to the Indians at the State-House in Albany, February 25, 1692. BRETHREN, IT is not unknown to some of you, that I came last October into these parts upon no other occasion than to view the Fronteers, and put them into the best posture I could, to secure us and you, from the Attempts of the French, and their Indians, our Enemies and yours. And in order to this, I sent a supply of Ammunition, Artil∣lery, and Christian Souldiers, sufficient to prevent any Insult from our Enemies, and it had the effect I expected, for they durst not face the weakest of our Garrisons. I came now for your Relief, and have lost no time; the same day that I had an acccount from hence that our Enemies were in this Countrey, I put my self on board a Sloop,
and brought with me 150 Christian Souldiers, besides Volunteers, and arrived here before I could be expected; I then immediately march∣ed to Schenactady, from whence I sent you Supplies of 200 and odd Men, Ammunition, Provision, &c. with which those that joyned you before, under the Command of Major Schuyler, might have se∣cured an entire Victory, and prevented the French and their Indians from any possibility of getting back to their own Houses; but it has pleased God to order it otherwise. I had also 200 Christians more upon their March, who arrived here, and would have been a consi∣derable Reinforcement to us; but the Action being over, I com∣manded them back to their former Residence, till further Orders. It is obvious to me, and I believe to you all, that this Calamity is fallen on you by your own Faults. I could never suppose my Bre∣thren, the Mohaques, would be so supine and careless, as to suffer the French, and their Indians, to enter their Castles without the least Resistance. These Men that have an Enemy near, must sleep with Arms in their Hands, and one Eye open; that is, they must keep Scouts and Spyes, so as never to become a Prey to their Enemies, by their own Negligence. I must advise you, that for the future you keep strict Watch, so that I may have timely Notice of the Enemy's Mo∣tion, and you will then see how easily they will be defeated. I hope it is now apparent to you, that the great King of England is ready to apply his Arms for your defence, when you consider, that in a very days I am come personally to your Assistance, with near 400 Christian Souldiers. I have had the Honour to bear Com∣mand under the great King of England, my Master, where I have seen the French fly before his Victorious Arms; and last Summer it pleased God to add to his Victories, by the Defeat and Destruction of their Fleet, in which most of their Ships were burnt or sunk. I came now in great haste, and brought no Presents with me, but design (by the blessing of God) to be with you at the beginning of the Summer, to give you something to wipe off your Tears for the Brethren that are lately lost, to renew the ancient Covenant Chain, and to give you further Assurances of the Great King of England's Favour, and of my own Readiness upon all Occasions to
appear as his Servant, for your Protection against our Enemies and yours. My present Care now is, to provide for the Mohaques Nation, about which I have given my Directions to Major Schuyler, who will ap∣point them a place for their Residence; I have also ordered some Corn for their present Support, which they will receive from him. I must add, that it concerns your Honour and Reputation, to make some brisk Attempt upon our Enemies, and this with what Secrecy and Expedition you can, that those People may see you retain the ancient Courage of your Ancestors; and I do not question but God will give you Success by a severe Revenge on our Enemies and yours. I am informed, that your Young Men have killed the Horses of some Christian Souldiers, who were upon the same Service with you, (it is not Brotherly,) and I desire, for the future, you will take care to prevent such Outrage, that the ancient Covenant Chain may be preserved inviolable on your parts, as it will be on the part of my Master, the Great King. To conclude, I must tell you, that I doubt there is some false Bro∣thers among us, who keeps Intelligence with our Enemies, concealing their Designs, and exposing ours; if you have one Frenchman among you, he will be true to his Countrey, by betraying you. I have order'd you some Bread and Bear, and desire you will drink the Healths of my Great Master and Mistriss, the Victorious King, and most Illustrious Queen, of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, and all Their Majesties Territories in America, and so bid you farewell.
The Answer of the Five Nations, viz. The Mohaques, Oneydes, Onondages, Cayouges, and Sinnekes, To his Excellency Benjamin Fletcher, Captain General and Governour in chief of Their Majesties Province of New York, &c. in Albany this 25th. of February, 1692. Sadeganaktie, Sachim of the Onondages, Speaker. In∣terpreted by Hille, the Interpretess. Brother Cayenquirago, which signifies a Great Swift Arrow, a Name the Five Nations have given His Excellency, because of his spee∣dy Arrival here, with so many Men for their Relief, when the Enemy had fallen upon the Mohaques Country. WHen we arrived at Schenactady, after our march against the Enemy, you were pleased to desire us to come hither, where we heard you, Great Swift Arrow, speak, and participated of your Favours; we acknowledge that the Enemy, the French of Canada, have fallen upon our Brethren, the Mohaques, and destroyed their three Castles, which we can attribute to nothing else but their not hearkening to the Great Swift Arrow's good Advice, which was, to keep good Guards and out Scouts. We return you, Brother Great Swift Arrow, our hearty Thanks for your Care in providing for the Mohaques, that they may not starve, nor be in want in this Extremity. Brother Great Swift Arrow, You propose to us the attacking the Enemy in their Country, to shew them that we have not lost the Courage of our Ancestors; we return you our hearty Thanks for your good Encouragement, for we are in a manner drunk with the Blood lately shed by them. It is not usual for us, while we are in that Grief and Anxiety, as now we are, to proceed to revenge our selves of the Enemy; you have lost your Blood as well as we, therefore that Blood ought to be revenged unanimously by both sides.
Brother Great Swift Arrow, You recommend us to go and at∣tack the Enemy where they are at home in Canada; but you are acquainted with us of Old, that it is our Custom, first to bewail and condole the Death of them killed by the Enemy, for we are all of one Heart, one Blood, one Soul; nevertheless we design to go out and to fall upon the French; but we must first secure our Castles, since we know, that the Governour of Canada is intended to send out a considerable Party, but whither we know not. Brother Great Swift Arrow, While you press us to go and attack the Enemy of Canada by Land, we expect (according to the many Promises and Engagements made to us) to hear of a considerable Force to go with great Guns by Sea, that the Enemy might be as∣saulted both ways, and so overcome; we press this the harder, be∣cause a great part of our Strength is now broke, and therefore take it not amiss that we push this Point of taking Canada by Sea, since its impossible to be done by Land alone. Brother Great Swift Arrow, We return you our hearty Thanks, that you are so ready to assist us upon any Occasion, and for the good advice to be watchful, and keep out good Scouts and Spies; it is probable, that we would have done a great deal more da∣mage to the Enemy, had we been so well provided with all sorts of Ammunition, as the Indians of Canada are; but some of our Men have Guns, and no Powder nor Ball, and some but Bows and Arrows, as Major Schuyler saw, when we came up to him; but the Gover∣nour of Canada supplies his Indians with all sorts of Arms and Ammunition, which we found now we engaged them. We pray you, Great Swift Arrow, to have a careful Eye over us, since this Party of the French that has destroyed the Mohaques Castles is but part of his Strength, he is working with the Ottawawa and Dowaganhaes Indians, where he has a great Magazeen, and sup∣plies them with all sorts of Ammunition, and we fear that Force will come down upon us still. Brother Great Swift Arrow, We return you Thanks for remem∣bring our Dead, and that you will condole their Death, when you
come up in the beginning of Summer, but you can expect no Re∣turn from us, being in so mean a Capacity and Condition. Brother Great Swift Arrow, You inform us of the great Victory that our Lord of Lord (meaning the great King of England) has got upon the French, the common Enemy at Sea, which is admi∣rable, and all the Nations are heartily rejoyced at it, and we hope that the great God that has his Seat above the Heavens, will give the same success to our great Lord of Lords Arms in this part of the World, over his and our Enemies, the French of Canada. We pray that you would be pleased to acquaint our great Lord of Lords (who lives over the great Lake) of our mean Condition, and what Posture we are in, and how easy it is to destroy Canada, if all our great Lord of Lords Subjects in these Collonies would unite and joyn together, with some Ships that carry great Guns, which our great Lord of Lords can easily spare us, after this late Victory over the French at Sea. We desire that you would be pleas'd to order a Smith to be with us in our Country to repair our Arms, that we may defend us from the French. His Excellency replyed, That he hoped they were sufficiently sa∣tisfied of his Readiness to assist them, and that the Force the French had now sent, was the most they could make; and if they will but keep out Scouts, and advertise his Excellency timely of the Enemies coming, his Excellency does not doubt, with the Strength he has in his Province, to deal with the Governour of Canada, and all his Power. The Governour granted their Request of the Smith to be in their Country to repair their Arms.
Proposals made by four of the chief Sachims of the Five Nations, to his Excellency Benjamin Fletcher in Al∣bany the 26th of February, 1692. Brother great Swift Arrow, WE are come to acquaint you, that one of our Men has last Night in a drunken Fit, killed an Indian that came over from the French, at which we are much concerned, and therefore come to see how our Brother great Swift Arrow resents it. We desire that you will be pleased to prohibit the selling of Rum while the War is so hot, since our Souldiers cannot be kept within Bounds, if they be drunk. Brother great Swift Arrow, We answer'd your Excelleny's Pro∣posals yesterday, but had not time to consult with that deliberation as we ought, and if therefore there be any thing omitted, or if we failed of our Duty, we beg that you would be pleas'd to pardon that Omission; for we must declare in behalf of all the Nations, that we are singularly obliged to you, Brother great Swift Arrow, for your so extraordinary Dispatch and suddain Arrival here for our Relief, with so considerable a Force, the like never having been done before, whereby we see your readiness and alacrity to help and assist us. And we do also return you Thanks for leaving your Di∣rections with Major Schuyler to take care of the Mohaques Nation. We are thankful for your kind Expressions, to be so ready to come for our Relief, and that you warn us to come and acquaint you as soon as we see the Enemy a coming a far off, not doubting of your Power to protect us, since we have seen a sufficient Proof of that already by this late Expedition. Brother great Swift Arrow, We do engage to make a narrow en∣quiry as soon as we come into our own Country, about the French Prisoners, who we suspect may betray us: we have had two Bouts
with the Onedeys about the Priest Milet that is among them, and we intend to try the third time. We desire that you, Brother great Swift Arrow, may come up as soon as the Bark is loose upon the Trees, since we have a Design up∣on the Enemy. We forgot to answer you in that Business about the Young-men killing the Horses; we acknowledge, its not Brotherly, but very ill done, and as soon as we come into our Country we will take such Methods that it may be prevented, by finding out them that have done it, causing them to make Satisfaction. His Excellency replied, that he was much concerned that they should Exercise their Arms one against another, while there is an Enemy in the Field, and hopes they will for the future endeavour to prevent such Irregularities, That they may be now sufficiently convinced how ready the Arms of the great King of England is to succour them; and that his Excellency, for his own part, will never spare to expose his Person for their Security. That the Rum shall be prohibited upon their Request; and that the most he requires of them, is to be Vigilant and Careful, and not to suffer themselves to be Surprized, and then they need not fear the French. To his Excellency Benjamin Fletcher, Captain General and Governour in Chief of Their Majesties Province of New-York, Vice-Admiral of the same. The Humble Address of the Mayor, Aldermen, and Commonality of the City of Albany. May it please your Excellency, WE are extreamly sensible of your Excellency's special Care, not only for the Safety and Security of your Excellencies Government in general, but in particular for the extra∣ordinary Regard taken for this City, being the utmost Frontier
thereof, seated near One Hundred and Fifty Miles up in the Coun∣try, whilst the same was attacked by the Enemy of Canada, who had surprized and burnt the three Castles of the Mohaques, killed divers of their Fighting Men, and led in Captivity upwards of 130 Wo∣men and Children; and that your Excellency should, within two Days after Notice received from hence, make that Dispatch, as to be here so suddenly with 300 Men, and sufficient Provisions and Stores of War, for our immediate Relief, which was more than ever could be expected in this Winter Season. We therefore, out of a deep sence of your Excelleny's unparallell'd Affection to, and Care for us, cannot but esteem our selves highly obliged to your Excellency, and beg of you to accept our Unfeigned Thanks; assuring your Excellency, As we shall never forget your extraordinary Care of us; so we shall ever admire and beg the conti∣nuance of your Excellency's benign Government over us: And since the Mohaques Nation is wholly dispersed by the Enemy's burning all their three Castles, and our Farmers live stragling up and down the Country, in great Danger to be cut off by the skulking Indians, We pray, that your Excellency, in your Wisdom, will be pleased to or∣der some convenient Place, where the Remnant of the said Nation may be convened together, and fortified for any Attack of the Ene∣my; and that the Farmers may be ordered to fortifie themselves in Companies together, that the Enemy may not have an advantage of them. And we humly beg your Excellency to believe, We are always ready to venture our Lives and Fortunes for Their Majesties Service, the Defence of this Province; and with all chearfulness and allacrity shall endeavour, whenever it lies in our Power, to demonstrate our true Affection to your Excellency in particular, and to approve our selves, Your Excellency's most Dutiful, and most Obedient Servant's, Peter Schuyler, Mayor. Levinus V. Schaick, Alderman. Rymen Barentse, Assistant. Dirk Wessels, Recorder. Evert Banker, Alderman. Johannis Roseboom.
The House of Representatives for the Province of New-York, Wednesday A. M. March 22. 1693. Ordered, THat the Thanks of this House be given unto his Excellency, for his favourable Speech, and his Care of the Frontiers of this Province, by the great Dispatch he made in his Personal Ap∣pearance there, upon the late Invasion of the French. Ordered, That Mr. Wessells, Mr. Pell, Mr. Kipp, Capt. White∣head, Mr. Rutsand, Mr. Theunissen, Mr. Tuthill, and Mr. Barnes, do wait upon his Excellency and Council with this Message. By Order of the House of Representatives, James Graham, Speaker. FINIS.
