B5693 R25737 9097607 42434
. Christians earnest Expectation an Longing for the glorious Appearing o the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ. Set forth in a DISCOURSE Occasioned by the Decease of that Ex∣cellent Christian and Minister of Christ. Mr. NOAH WEBB, Lately of Sandhurst, in the County of Berks. By Daniel Burgess, Minister of the Gospel. The Prophets, do they live for ever? Zech. 1.5. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the Faith. Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judg shall give me, at that day; and not to me only, but unto them also that love his Appearing, 2 Tim. 4.7, 8. Printed for O.C. 1675.
To the Lady Martha Mer∣ryn, Wife of the right Worshipful Sr. Audley Merryn; Mrs. Hester Whitfield, Wife of [my Honoured Uncle] Hen∣ry Whitfield Esq; and Mrs. Elizabeth Briscoe, my justly Honoured Dear Mother-in-law. My Excellent, and very Dear Friends. OTher Readers [probably] will mistake: But, I pray do not you. Here's no Epistle Dedi∣catory: I prefix your Names here for nothing else, but to make me place to
shew you, that I Forget you not, nor my great Obligations to you. I and mine, do commemorate often in England, your goodness to us in Ireland. And being [you see on what Occasion] now pre∣vail'd with, to appear in publick, it li∣ked me thus to have our Gratitude ap∣pear too. You will look on the following Pages, for the Author's sake: And you will prize them for the Subjects sake; I beseech you set your selves to the Duty they commend, for God and your Souls sake: I believe I shall never see you more, till Jesus comes, Oh! may we then meet him, and each other with joy! And in the mean time, all our Days, keep pro∣viding for that great, and [if not pro∣vided for] Terrible one. Tis Death in your Thoughts, must put Life into your Actions, said Blessed Vines. And Mr. Baxter himself could say of Heaven, [in Vines his Elegy] Sin doth not only keep me thence, But makes me loth to go from hence. Look well to your selves, My Invalua∣ble
dear Friends! You have sundry excel∣ent Monitors by you; Singularly [my thrice dearest] Dr. T. H. whose life and labours the Lord continue to Dub∣in. I commend you, and all your dear∣est Ones, to divine Tuition and Grace; it's most incorruptly that I profess my self, Your most Affectionate Remembrancer to the Lord, Dan. Burgess. From my House in Bayden neer Malbrough, Wilts, Aug. 30. 1675.
Ʋpon the much Lamented Decease of Mr. Noah Webb, who Died Aug. 14. in the 42d. year of his Age, A. D. 1675. Blest God! OH Turn [the glorious lamp of Heaven] the Sun To darkest Darkness! Let his Course be done! Nor let [the Queen of Heav'n] the Moon take 's Light, And with it colour any future Night! Black thou the Milkie way! Blow out the Stars, No more to twinkle signs of Peace, of Wars! Our Waters turn to Blood! to Lice our Dust! The World to Ashes, if 't bee thy righteous Lust! For Pitie's sake thus Curse us, Righteous Lord, Rather than Take the Teachers of thy Word, From thy afflicted Church! Church, dare I say? 'Tis Hell, not Church, without such Lights as they! Much rather had we, Jesus strait should come, Then let the World, more Aggravate their Doom! Did there ten thousand Worlds to ruin fall, One God could Save, one Christ Redeem them all, (Well sang Orinda;) Grace [who doubts?] divine One Spirit could infufe, and all Refine. Thou could'st, Oh Blessed Trinity, without One of the Ministers thou sendest out, Convert, Build up, Confirm, and make t' Increase Thy Church, in Faith, in Purity, and Peace!
But oh! thy Will's thy Law! Teachers, we know, Must be Co-workers; 'cause thy Will is so! And seeing, Faith by Hearing them must come, The day of their Loss, must b' a day of Doom! Thrice direful Doom! The World may better spar The Elements, Mat. 5.13, 14. Rev. 2.1. Heb. 13.7. 2 Cor. 5.20. 1 Cor. 4.1. 1 Cor. 3.9. 1 Cor. 4.15. Joh. 21.15. 1 Cor. 3.10. Heb. 13.17. and Isai. 52.8. 2 Kings 13, 14. than the Church spare them, that a Her Lights, Salt, Angels, Rulers, Legates; and Stewards of thy both Heav'nly house and land! Husbandmen, Fathers, Shepheards, Builders, and The Watch, which for thy Flocks, Oh Jesu, stand! Horsemen and Chariots of thy Israel, In whom her Safeties and her Glories dwell. Oh then allow us, Lord, to Sigh and Groan, Under the Loss of this Excelling One! Smite, smite the Rocks too, that insensate be Of its portending great Calamity! The stop of Noah's preaching did of yore Portend a Judgment, th' in-dwelt World o're! Thy snatching our deer No'h into thine Ark, Affrights us all; and chiefly such as mark, How fast our Alleines, Janeways, and our Blakes, Our Barrets and our Webbs, thy Hand up takes: And do observe, what Sin and Strife be brewing, For England's, Europe's, yea the World's undoing. Next unto Sin, Oh God! [that's Strife with thee,] Our mutual Strifes speak imminent Misery; They both, in Gath and Ascalon are known! One hath the bitter last thus sweetly shewn. The Cross must now against the Cross be spread, Beaumont, in Psych. (Blush, oh ye Heavens at this!) and they who are Under the King of Peace all Marshalled Be Barbarized by a mutual War. Tearing the precious gentle Legacie, Their Lord bequeathed to their Custodie.
They who by Mystick Union are knit Under one Head, no other Foes do seek, But their Fraternal members; and forget, That whilst on them their savage spight they wreak, The tender Head feels every Wound, and will Score up each drop, which of his Blood they spill. Weep all good eyes, which see this dreadful Shame, Os Christians digging Christian's bowels up; Sure streams of Blood deserve your briny stream, Weep then, and let your Bottels never stop! Till you have wash'd away this purple stain, 'Gainst which all Powers, without your Tears are vain! Had but the thousandth part of this dear blood, Adventur'd to be broach'd in Palestine; Quite overwhelm'd by its exuberant flood, Had Mahomet's wide spred Contagion bin: And woful Greece had not enslaved lain, Under the bondage of a Pagan chain. Or had that Power of Policy, and Wrath, Of Arms, of Horse, of Men, of stronger Gold, Which in our self-destroying Brittain hath Of late bin lavish'd out, (when England sold Her peace to misery,) with provident And pious Zeal, in Syria been spent; Our guilty Swords had not now Blushed in Fraternal blood; nor had our Palms and Bays With any English curse deflowred bin; But Salem her sad Head, had 'gan to raise, Fleeing from her long pressed Neck, the yoke Of Ottamanick Barbarism broke. Oh Thou, who when thou didst ascend on High, God in Christ, hath committed to us the Word of Reconciliation. 2 Cor. 5.19. Didst give thine own Peace-teaching Ministry!
A Gift whereof thy Church doth humbly Boast, As greatest,, next the Gift of th' Holy Ghost! Thy Church fill with those Teachers! and them fill With that most Holy Ghost, if 't be thy will! Send [like of this our Brother took away,] More Shepheards in this Wolf-abounding Day! So shall On Earth be Peace! [through GOD-MAN] then Men shall b' at Peace with God, and God with Men! And as the whole Earth never shall again Be Drown'd; thy Church too ever shall remain, Safe from the Floods of Turk, of Pope, of Hell, And all that 'gainst the Peace of Sion swell! When the twelve hundred Sixty Days are gone, Rome's Scarlet and our Sackcloth will be done! Satan shall hang in Chaines! Gentile and Jew Shall both pray, Come Lord Jesus, Holy, True! On winged Hours, Oh hast that blessed Day! Unanimous Saints and Angels, Amen say, With the Chief of Sinners, And less than the least of Saints. D. B.
REV. 22.20. Amen! The whole Verse runs thus: He which testifieth these things, saith, Surely I come quickly. Amen! Even so, come, Lord Jesus. To the Lord Jesus, declaring that he will not let it be long e're he come to judg the world, the Saints eccho back, Amen! Men and Brethren, THE very Apostles who saw our Lord Jesus his Transfiguration on the Mount, (which was a Rudi∣ment and Specimen of that Glory wherein he shall appear at his se∣cond coming), those Apostles (all three of them, as Junius thinks; two
of them, as Grotius, and all (necessa∣rily confess) did in their time warn the world, that he would soon be with them. He is ready to judg the quick and dead, said Peter; adding, that he was not slack concerning the Promise of his coming: see 1 Pet. 4.5. & 2 Pet. 3.9, 10. The Coming of the Lord draweth nigh, the judg standeth before the door, said James, Jam. 5.8, 9. It is the last time (or hour) the last time of the World, (the last Monarchy, some construe it), so said John. There are more than six∣teen hundred years expired and gone since; and now certainly Christs Mi∣nisters may, and with advantage, re∣urge those warnings. He is, at least sixteen hundred years nigher to Com∣ing now. Blessed Souls they, that knowingly, and sincerely, and fer∣vently too, can say unto this, Amen! That (which is the Doctrine I of∣fer from this word) the Church of
God doth Christs members, say Amen, so be it unto, and cordially wish for, his Coming to judgment, according to his Promise. Christs Members do so, I say, and (knowingly) none but they. His Enemies wish no more for his Coming, than Malefactors, when surest of death, wish for the Assizes. Were it in their power to stop him, he should never come. But Christs Members all love his appearance (as 'tis 2 Tim. 4.8.) and desire his Coming; as Prisoners, whose Friend is Judg, and who have well-ground∣ed hopes of releasement and liberty, long to hear the Trumpets sounding. Yet do they not all, nay I'm confi∣fident, not any at all times thus de∣sire and long for Christs Coming. Children of light walk sometimes in darkness, nor are they always them∣selves, as we use to speak. But then they lament that so it is. And (most∣ly) while they cannot, its an heart∣ake to them that they cannot say
Amen, to their Lords Coming. Still they have the wit, though not al∣ways the Power, to say it. And 'tis not the least Care and Business of their lives, to seek and pray for Will and Power and Act too. So that, methinks, they do in a sort say Amen, when they do not and dare not. Because though to Do they find not, yet even then, to Will is present with them; to Will it, I mean, on the best terms. And (ordinarily) he who gives that said Will, is not long before he gives to Do also: and so is this the keeping of the Churches song, Amen! Come Lord Jesu, come quickly! † It's well known how passionately the Church of old longed for his first coming; weary of the Shades and Darkness She dwelt under; sick of desire to see him in the flesh: see Cant. 2.17. Godly Kings and Prophets would have given much t' have seen it. In like manner, the Church ever since, hath, and till he comes, ever
will pray, Come Lord Jesu! The Jews retain it as an old maxim; That prayer wherein's no mention of the Kingdom of God is no prayer. It's true, whether meant of the Kingdom of Grace or Glory. Christ teacheth to pray for the coming of the latter, as well as the former, Mat. 6.10. I understand that second Petition: Thy Kingdom come, principally, if not wholly, of the Kingdom of Glory. Were it intended of the Kingdom of Grace, I judg with them who think it would have been thus worded; Thy Kingdom be promoted! for come it is already, that of Grace. Many Learn∣ed and Godly Ancients and Moderns understand it purely of the Kingdom of Glory, and (with submission) I think, upon good grounds. But pass we on to the Consideration of those grounds and motives, which Saints have for the foresaid Amen. These will singularly well make both for the proof and Improvement of the
Doctrine offered. I shall tender but these few, of which some respect Saints themselves more neerly; and others, God himself, the whole Trinity. For the first, M. 1. Saints Sorrows and Troubles in this world are true and just motives to them todesire their Lord's Coming. They know that they shall never be without Sorrows of their own, and others too; never without Passions and Compassions, Feelings of their own, and Fellow-feelings of others miseries, in this World. They can't look up∣on inferiour Creatures without Trouble at their misery and Bondage for mans sin. The Earth struck with barren∣ness, and fruitfulness of things hurt∣ful; the Air (how often) with Pe∣stilential fumes; the Stars with ma∣lign influences that infect the Air; the Sun and Moon with eclipses; the tiresome drudgery of all poor Crea∣tures for mans Necessity, Pleasure, yea and sinful Lust too; these are Eye∣sores
and Heart-sores to Saints. And so are (much more) all the Oppressi∣ons done under the Sun to mankind, that is so full of them. Their Con∣tentions, Wars, Frauds, and all me∣thods of making one the other mise∣rable, disquiet, and go to the hearts of Saints. The Persecutions of Gods Church by professed Enemies, by false Friends, and (sometimes too) by mistaking erring Brethren, these are gall and Wormwood to Saints. Add hereto what they often suffer them∣selves, in Soul, Body, Name, Estate, and Friends: Sometimes, because they have sin'd; and sometimes, be∣cause they will not, dare not sin. All these spur them up to pray for his coming, who will deliver (then) the Creatures from their Bondage, Rom. 8.21. and will wipe away all their Tears, Rev. 7.16, 17, and drive away Sorrow and Crying, Rev. 21.4. yea will give fulness of joy and plea∣sures for evermore, Psal. 16.11.
M. 2. Saints manifold Temptations and incessant ones unto sin, in every place, time, and condition. This world is no pleasant place under the (first) Consideration of it, as 'tis a great Hos∣pital of sick and sad wretches; and Bedlam of wild folks let loose, and tearing each other. But it's worse as 'tis a Pest-house, without one Room or part of it but hugely full of Noisom fumes; and without any one Person in it but infected and infectious; and without possibility of being lived in, for the infection, any longer than you use strong Antidotes, and high Cor∣dials. Were you lock'd into such an house and could not get out, you and your dearest ones, till some good Freind came home; would you not say Amen! to his speedy coming? Sirs, Sin is the Plague of Plagues; The World's a Pest-house of it. Where's that spot of ground on it, but the Flesh, Devil and Devilish men will be infecting one with it? Nay, where's
the man in it, that is not infected him∣self with it, and apt (of Wickedness or weakness) to infect one with it, and tempt one into it? Can you live sinless a minute without Gods preser∣vatives? Without Gods Antidotes can you keep out Disobedience? or without his cordials keep off Distrust? Saints are Souls that know the defi∣ling damning nature of Sin; and know the deceitfulness of their own hearts, the bewitchingness of the Worlds favors and frowns and customs; as also the Devils devices, snares, wiles darts, depths; and find so much ado to keep a flood of Hell out, and a spark of Heaven in them, that they can't forbear longing for Christ to come and carry them into Heaven, and put them up, above the Gunshot of Hell, and hellish men, and lusts. They know Davids, and Peters, and Pauls, can no longer stand, than they Fight in this world, and they know Jehovah-Jesus, when he comes, will
find them a place, where the weary are at rest and the wicked (Devils, men, Objects, and Lusts) cease from troubling, as Job speaks, Job. 2.17. M. 3. Saints Sins are yet the sharp∣est goades in their sides, and quicken∣ing motives in their hearts to pray for Christ's coming. Patience will make Troubles; and divine Valour makes Temptations Tolerable, though not Pleasant. But for Sin, Oh what can a holy heart say, or do? Other mens sins, the World's, the Kingdom's, where∣in he lives, the Town's, Congregation's the Family's; Oh how do all, join in with his own, to cut his Soul in meditation, His own weakness of Grace, strength of Corruption, Frequency of offending and grieving God the Holy Ghost, to the gratifying of damn'd Devils! what daggers are these in a gracious heart? Saints consider further; be∣fore Conversion that they do nothing but sin; that after it, they do nothing without sin, that if they should also live a thousand years yet more, still
sin against God they should, more or less, as long as their pulses beat. And this makes heart-ake, and Soul-smart, this is a Scorpion. Look into your Bibles, Brethren, yea look into Houses where Saints are to be seen! You shall learn in the History of former ones, and so in the Observation of the living ones this day, that sin is no such Flea∣bite to them, as Formalists imagin. They know 'tis a Renouncing of the Blessed God; yea a striking at him as far as Sinners can reach, and (as the Schools say well) a murdering of God, his Essence, Soveraignty, Per∣fections, Laws, all together virtually. They know sin's as evil (Objectively) as God is Good, and therefore infi∣nitely evil. They know that it hath effected dismal things in Heaven, Earth, and Hell; that it turn'd Angels into Devils, that it (even one sin) damn'd the whole World, brought Gods wrath and curse on Mankind, and all the Creatures for our sakes; that it found∣ed
Hell, kindled and set flaming all the Fire there; that to expiate it, it cost the Eternal God's becoming man, the Blessed God's being made a Curse, the Lord of Life's enduring Death, the Prince of Glory's lying under Shame, with a load of his Fathers wrath upon it, hotter and heavier than ten thousand mountains of melted scalding Lead. And the sight of this cursed Quality, this evil of evils, sin, the sight of it daily in themselves, their hearts and their Lives, this over∣whelms; and but for a great God Me∣diator, a Jehovah's righteousness, would sink into distracting raving despair. Especially considering, (as I know not what kind of Saints they be that do not consider) that there still cleav∣eth a Body of Sin (a heavy Noisome stinking carcass of it) and there dwell∣eth still within, a busie stirring active Rebel-sin, never in this Life to be quite expel'd. But is it thus, may some say, with very Saints? I say read
Rom. 7th Ch. and judg. Ask the God∣liest Souls alive, and hear what they say! † Observe on, Saints do also know, that except but the sin against the Ho∣ly Ghost, there's no sin but they may (and being left by God to themselves, they are most ready) to fall into; even the foulest ones, that very graceless Mo∣ralists themselves would abhor. They know (and shake in their thoughts) Aaron himself fell into foul Idolatry, David into Adultery and Murder; Joseph's Brethren (the Patriarches) were in a sense Murderers of him. Sampson so sinful, that had not God numbred him among Saints, men might justly have doubted his being one. Peter Lied, Sware, Cursed; not Christ indeed I judg, but himself he cursed most dreadfully. The Original word's such, that makes it as if he said in the late dialect of Hell, God Damn him! or, God Curse his Soul! Saints I say know this, and stand justly affected with Sollicitousness and Care, lest
their feet slide even so far away; and lest their sins in dwelling, like Snakes lurking in the holes of a dunghil, when 'tis cold, should crawl out and come into Act, upon the gloom of Temptation. Shall I add? Satan and their own hearts rise up sometimes, and suggest, that they are from eter∣nity Reprobates; be now but Hypo∣crites, and one time or another be∣fore they dye, will prove Apostates: and poor gracious hearts, frighted first into a discomposure and disability to make a judgment reasonably of them∣selves, by and by faint under the doubt; nay sometimes fall to stark raving in the dread that 'tis indeed, and 'twill be so, with them. † These things, my Brethren, (and what won∣der?) stimulate and provoke Saints (many of your selves I hope) to a∣bound in hearty Amens to the speedy coming of the great God and our Sa∣viour: of him I say, who when he appears, will make his Saints like him∣self,
1 John 3.2. and set them far a∣bove and out of the reach of Sorrow, Temptation, and sin, and sinful Doubts, and Fears. Yea will also satisfie them with his likeness, Psal. 17.15. Ult. make them joint possessors of Grace and Glory with himself, Rom. 8.17. and for ever hold them in an undi∣sturbed Possession. M. 4. Saints (innocent, yea gra∣cious) earnest Covetousness of the best things, adds to all their foresaid incitements and incentives, to say Amen to their Lords coming. † As they are heart-weary of Troubles, Temptations, and sins, so are they heart-sick for better things. Could you look through their breasts and to the pit of their hearts, you would see there, 1. a Pit that all the Creation can't fill; and 2. an impossibility of being (fully) satisfied with but Grace it self. Grace, I say, which is but a short antepast to them, to stay their stomachs and appetites of Glory; the
Glory which (alone) is their satisfy∣ing feast, Psal. 17.15. You would see, Sirs, 3. you would see their Cravings and Pantings for Incorruption, and freedom from Poverty, Violence Sick∣ness, &c. for Honor, and such bright∣ness and splendor as that of Christ was in his Transfiguration, fairer than the Sun; for Power and Vigor, per∣fect freedom from all impediments; and for Spirituality, no need of Cloath∣ing or Food or any animal Provisions; all these do Saints crave, for their ve∣ry Bodies, 1. Cor. 15.42, 43, 44. And what then for their Souls? Hear a few hints! Saints for their Souls crave, 1. Full Sight of God as he is, and face to face; with such perfection as leaves no Desire unsatisfied, or Capacity un∣filled. 2. Full Possession of God, with all the Faculties of their Souls as full of him, as the Sun's of Light, or Sea of water. 3. Full Conformity unto Christ. 4. Full Complacence and De∣light in the sight, enjoyment and like∣ness
of God; and Communion with him, Angels, Patriarchs, Prophets, E∣vangelists, Apostles, Martyrs, all Gods, and our own Godly dear Relations, to everlasting Ages. Being men of such Desires, (Desires so unfillable till Jesus comes,) what wonder if Hope delay'd make the hearts of Saints sick and sick of Love, to pray, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly! who knows not the quickning force of enlarged De∣sires?) M. 5. Saints Loves of God, and hearty Desires of his Glory, do eminently and excellently urge them to join their Amen to Christs coming quickly. At∣tend you, Sirs, 1. God is the dearly beloved Father of Saints; the Trini∣ty is their one God. 2. This Holy and beloved Trinity is in the world for∣gotten, scorn'd, hated, rebell'd a∣gainst, wish'd out of Heaven yea out of Being. Most of the Nations of the earth by far, make Professedly other gods. The Jews Curse our Blessed
Jehovah-Jesus every day. The Turks prefer a filthy impostor (Mahomet) before him. The Papists (generally) go neer the Jews in their doctrines, and the Pagans in their manners: Especially the Italian, Spanish, and Irish Papists. Protestants, if they must be so call'd, how many Hypocrites? how many Profane? Socinians and Quakers, hereticks knownly odious (in Doctrine and Life) to God and Saints, how do they swarm? how ve∣ry little is the flock of true Israelites? And in this little flock it self, how ve∣ry great sins be there, and dishonours to God (as hath been foresaid.) Saints see their Father hath a small income of Honour here; but Dishonour, every minute of time, unexpressible. And 3. They so Love God, that they can't see it unconcernedly: No, Rivers of tears it stood David in, Psal. 119.136, 139. They know, in the day of Christ it must be, that their Father is (I was about to say, any thing worth a speak∣ing
of,) Glorified in his very saints themselves, 2 Thes. 1.10. They them∣selves can do but little at that work before; others, be sure will do con∣trarily. Wherefore, as dear Children, impatient of their Fathers dishonour, (by themselves and others,) desirous of his Glory, longing to have it shine forth; and to behold him Honour∣ing and Magnifying himself upon his Friends and Enemies too, they pour out Amen and Amen to the quick ap∣proach of the day thereof. In the former Considerations, eye was had to their own Good and divine Glory therein: In this, the respect of Saints is purely to the Glory of their Father. And I am perswaded many there be, so concerned for his Glory, that were the Day of Christs coming to be a day of their Annihilation, yet they would wish for it; and wish it straightways come, rather than Gods name and Glory should any longer be such suf∣ferers in the world. (I hope no man
will say, But is 't not fit we should wait Christs own time? If any ask so weakly, I answer, yes surely, it is so. And 'tis with holy submission that Saints, upon all these Motives, do pray Come Lord Jesu! Also, that 'tis with Prayer of his first accomplishing his Promises too, unto his elect.) This Doctrine is of excellent Ʋse (among others) unto these Pur∣poses. Ʋse 1. It turnes out all our carnal∣minded, earthly-spirited Professors, from the number of Christs-members; and declares them to be but whiter (incarnate) Devils, than Swinish Drunkards and filthy Whoremongers, &c. They, Christs members and Bride, and careless for, yea pleased with, his absence! A likely matter! I am cer∣tain that as many of you as Love (in∣ordinately) this world, you wish it would last for ever; and that you could for ever dwell in it; and (con∣sequently) that Christ were never to
come, and no Judgment-day to be; and so (by consequence again) that there were no God. And, let your Consciences say then, is it just we should esteem you Converts to God, and members of Jesus Christ, or can you think your selves such? I'm per∣swaded, your hearts tell you, that 'tis as proper to a Saint to Pray and Desire Christs coming, as 'tis to a loving Wife when her house is every day so pestered with the Clamors of Outrages of Violent men upon her self, and her whole family, that she scarce knows where to be, to Desire her Husbands return: Especially, if her Chastity be assaulted, her Life en∣dangered, and her only Hope of rescue be in his return. I Pray let the same hearts of yours then tell you, that if you can lye hugging the world, and brook it's troubles and temptations, and suffer your sins, and be listless of Glory in Heaven, and unconcern'd for the Dishonour done to God in the
world, and pour out no sincere Amens to Christs coming, you are then no members of his. You are strangers, enemies, Anti-Christs, for all your Orthodoxie, for all your shadows and shapes of Godliness, for all your pre∣sumptions and others Opinions of your being Well-inclin'd, Good, or whatever it be. I am sure St. Paul stretches the promise of the Crown of Righteousness, no further than to the Lovers of Christ's Appearance, 2. Tim. 4.8. And I know not any ground they can have to expect that Crown, who wish not cordially for that Ap∣pearance. Blessed Luther says plainly, (Tom. 5. fol. 507.) He's no Christian, nor can he (without lying) say the Lords prayer, that wisheth not for Christs coming (and that) with all his heart. Ʋse. 2. It sounds an alarum unto Heart-search, and enquiry how it is with you. Whether you can say, say truly, and with any fervency, Amen
to Jesus his speedy Coming. † We should not conclude overhastily; or by any means lye at uncertainties in this thing. You are Certified that Gods true Church doth say Amen! and that you, if of that number, must say so too. I Charge and beseech you by the tender mercies of God, and all the regards you bear to Sanctification and Salvation, go labour to certifie your selves, whether you can and do verily say it. Away to your Closets, and the places of your Retiracy, and ask your Souls in such manner as this, each of you! Oh my never-dying Soul! (Qu. 1.) Sayest not thou of this world, of this valley of sin and sorrow and Temp∣tation and absence from the Lord, as Peter of the mount, It's good to be here? Mat. 17.4. (Qu. 2.) Art thou not at ease in Sion, fat at heart, a Gal∣lio and careless for the sins and miseries abroad in the world? As of old, Noah's Soul, art thou vexed with them from day to day, 2 Pet. 2.8. (Qu. 3)
Art thou looking expecting and wait∣ing for that blessed hope and the glori∣ous appearance of the great God and thy Saviour Jesus Christ? Tit. 2.13. Dost look for and hasten to it, as 'tis 2 Pet. 3.12? Dost joyn with the Souls under the Altar, in their cry, for the cutting off all delays? Rev. 6.10. Doth the Holy Spirit in thee, and thou as Christs bride say, come! as 'tis Rev. 22.17. (Qu. 4.) Dost thou live like one that doth, and may say, safely say Amen! How is that? That is, doing thy Gods will with diligence, and suffering it with Patience; and so Cleaving to Jesus a Saviour, that thou mayst not need to fear him a Judg, as St. Austin speaks. Ʋse. 3. It writes in Sun-beams the blessed Estate of the truly Godly.  seems, have in this world  that's more worth than all  the wallings Enjoyments: and have  Coming, beyond measure,  imagination good. They are
Souls acquainted with, and interested in, the Heir of all things! They have an assured Hope of a good Day of his bringing, when Flames fed with ri∣vers of brimstone and the wrath of God, shall mercilesly devour all be∣sides. As well the formal Hypocrite and empty Professor, as the Prophanest rakehel Helhound that ever lived. Oh Blessed! thrice Blessed Souls without peradventure! If they can say Amen to Christs Coming, and long even for that day of Fire, tell me whereof they need be afraid? or what in this world need they be very sollicitous for, who are so well provided for the next? I have (with my own ears) heard Persons of Honour and huge estate and substance in the world profess, that they would give all, and Life it self too; for ability to say, with the Church of God, this Amen! Nor wonder I any more, than if they should say, they would give a pebble for a rock of Diamonds, or a nutshel for the spice-Islands.
Sith the prophane and Hypocri∣tical World, have not the grace to Love Saints, I will never wonder that they Envy them. It can't be strange that a Happiness so great is Envied, though 'tis sad that it's not rather learn'd and sought for. Seek it, oh my Brethren, Wrestle humbly with God, Fight flesh World and Devil; Rest not till your Longings for Jesus his Coming are restless, and Mr. Herbert's ejaculation stirs daily in, and springs forth from your Souls, to Jesus Christ. Oh come thou down to me, Or take me up to Thee! Need you Motives hereunto? Sirs! your hearts are deceitful; the World's Temptation-full; Devils (that in Na∣ture be spirits, in Number be many, in place be so neer you, in Power be Lions, in Policy be serpents, in in∣dustry be restless, in malice be impla∣cable, in Plots and all Projects be
soul-strikers:) Devils, I say, are Op∣position-full; your Lives be short, and most uncertain; your Deaths be at hand; Gods judgment is just and una∣voydable; Heaven's infinitely desira∣ble; Hell is as dreadful, and Eternity is boundless, to very astonishment. Unto all which, add you this; The day of Grace is far spent; The Night's at hand wherein no man can work; God is apace taking up to himself his Embassadors. An Observation-wor∣thy token, that he intends not much longer to await your Motion. The Prophets do not live for ever, Zech. 1.5. Yea neither doth God suffer them, [many of them] to live out so many years as the people ordinarily do. Hereof, the Servant and Minister of Christ whose Translation we lament, Mr. Noah Web. is an instance; I need not superadd Blessed Jo. Alleine, Janeway, Hen. Blake, Si. Bar∣ret, and others. Methinks the late Translation of the
first named, (whose Memory is so just∣ly Precious to you,) should be more than ordinary Impressive on you. I hope you forget not, but will ever re∣member, how much his 1. Providential succession to the Chrysostom of this age and most Powerful Preacher dri∣ven from you; his 2. Unwearied pains and heavenly Teachings among you; also his 3. Conversation and holy Life so passing Exemplary to you how much all these do add to your Accounts at Gods bar! 'Twere a foul and fear∣ful mistake, if any should dream that they had answer'd all these, by pro∣curing and attending his Funeral Ser∣mon. Alas, that must be done, by holding in Mind and Practice, his own more Powerful ones. Nevertheless-of (this in particular, and all) Funeral-Sermons, I am of Renowned Ro. Bolton's mind, which he hath left in these words (Discourse of true happiness, Pag. 63.) Nei∣ther do I mislike Funeral Sermons; I
could rather wish, that as the death of his Saints is precious in the sight of God; So that it might be glori∣ous in the eyes of men: I could rather desire, that the just Praises and true sincerity of the child of God were published by some seraphical tongue, that both the Glory of his Graces might pass along, and shine bright to all Posterity; and that such a Zeal for imitation might be in∣kindled in the hearts of all the hear∣ers (especially the present occasion making their minds more capable of perswasion,) that they, passing through the same course of Holiness, might at length be made partakers of the same happiness with the Saints of God. Indeed, if this stroke of Providence (taking away him, who, so often in Journeying, and in Perils, so much in Weariness, Painfulness, Watchings, &c. laboured to espouse you to Christ Jesus,) if this work not your minds into any more easie Per∣swadableness,
if due Consideracy of Blessed Mr. WEBS Sanctity, kin∣dle not in you any fire for Zeal of imitation, I shall reasonably esteem it portending, (and judg 't highly pro∣bable) that God will follow you with more such blows; take away more of your Ministers, who I can assure you, are (many of them) very willing to be gone; yea and by such Obduracy of yours, will be made more willing. The Obduracy of one Congregation [within twenty miles of this place] made a most excellent Minister of Je∣sus Christ profess to me, that his Ejection in the year 1662. Mr. S. S was unto him as the taking off of a heavy burden from tir'd shoul∣ders. So weary, so heavy-laden, so broken was his gracious Soul, for his peoples unbrokenness. An eminent one in the City of Dublin in Ireland hath oft told me his heart; and oft in these words: Dr. D. R. I am certain I am as willing to die, as
God will allow me to be. He himself, I think, feared, I'm sure I fear'd, that his peoples Obduracy made him more willing than God approved. Think not this unworthy to be thought on. But go ye, My Dearest Friends, go I beseech you to God, beseech him that neither the Doctrine, the Life, nor the Death of this blessed Star now in Glory, may rise up in Judgment against you! Cry mightily to God, to fill you with the fruits of righteousness, to give you such fore-tasts of Glory, as may enamour you of Heaven, and set you craving for that Day, which ye Prophane and ye Hypocrites too, [as close as they hide it from themselves and others] do wish would never be: Pray to be enabled to Pray, yea to be made unable to forbear Praying, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly! I need not tell you, (I think I need not,) that 1. come he will, and quickly too, whe∣ther you will or no: And that 2. when he comes, you will see the Wrath of
the Lamb to be intolerable, (Rev. 6.16, 17.) and his anger, though he be the Lamb of God, to be unavoidably destructive, (Psal. 2.12.) Gods chara∣cter of him being infinitely true, that which I pray you consult, Exod. 22.21. Jesuits and Socinians would have an Angel created on purpose to keep out the Blessed Jesus from being meant in that Text. But he is so very plainly un∣derstood there, that besides all our sound commentators, the Hebrew Rab∣bins say, 'tis meant of the Angel-Re∣deemer, the Messiah. So Ainsworth from Rabbi Menahem, and he from the ancient Rabbins. Hear it then, He will not let your sins go unpunish'd, for my Name is in him: that is, he will be as severe as I am, saith God the Fa∣ther; for, he hath just my Nature, Ju∣stice, &c. and is no other than what I am. Neither are you to learn now I hope, 3. that Christ's coming will bring with it enough and enough, to quit the cost, defray all the charge,
and make good amends for all losses and labours spent in waiting and cra∣ving for it, even a bottomless depth and dearest confluence of all Delights. Delights, [oh Amazement, where art thou?] Delights in 1. glorious sight of God, his Face, Essence, Will, Coun∣sels, Perfections! and 2. in Blessed filledness with the fulness of God; e∣ven through Jesus, by his Humane Na∣ture uniting us to God, and through his Divine Nature uniting God unto us; and so making us (in a manner un∣utterable) Partakers and Possessors of God himself. The devout Ancients have soared high. Our Modern Di∣vines speak the words I put my mind in One of great same, hath ventur'd to say, that in Heaven, We may conceive an unexpressible Associati∣on (which is too far off,) an Astimi∣lation (which is not near enough,) the Schools would venture to say an Identification with God: And thus he proceeds; As the Sun by shining
on the Moon, makes it a Planet and Star as well as it self, though it would otherwise be but the thickest and darkest part of the Sphere; so those beams of Glory which shall issue from my God, and fall upon me, shall make me that am other∣wise a clod of earth and worse, a dark soul, a spirit of darkness, to become an Angel of light, a Star of glory, a something that I cannot name now, nor imagin now, nor to morrow nor next year. —I shall be so like God that the Devil him∣self shall not know me from God, so as to find any more place to fasten a Temptation on me, than on God himself, nor to conceive any more hope of my falling from that King∣dom, than of Gods being driven out of it. (Dr. Jo. Donne in 2. Ser. on Gen. 1.26.) To conclude, I trust, ye need not that I stand to tell you, 4. that Christ Jesus doth heartily long for Saints coming to Heaven to him,
their speedy coming; and his longing is fervent and constant. (See Dr. Tho. Goodwin's little Treatise, called the Heart of Christ in Heaven, p. 49, &c.) And what eye is that which sees not, how hellish ungratitude 'twould be in them, either not to desire, or but coldly to desire Christs coming to them. Oh Brethren, who will be the gainers? Can a man be profitable to God? No, No, not God: man. Christ by the Psal∣mist hath told God, no. My goodness (saith he to the Father) extendeth not unto thee, but unto the Saints, Psal. 16.2, 3. 'Tis Jesus his goodness to Saints, not Saints that extendeth to him. Have done, have done then with this world, wherein, sometimes in Poverty you will be wanting other creatures; sometimes (it may be) in banishment, wanting other men; sometimes in sickness wanting your own Bodies; sometimes in Impatience wanting your Souls, & always (as long you are) in Sin wanting your God. Live by Faith, Watch & wait in hope. Keep an open ear to Jesus proclaiming his rea∣diness
to come. And thereto let your daily Antiphonie and return be, Amen, come Lord Jesu, come quickly. Upon Prov. 10.7. one of the Hebrew Doctors is reported to have thus glos∣sed; Whosoever makes mention ei∣ther of a just man and blesseth him not; or of an unjust man, and cur∣seth him not, violates an affirmative Law. If so it indeed be, I know what we have to do, as oft as we name a Rabbin. But the very truth is, we should break I think many of the Laws of God, (written in our own hearts, and in the blessed Bible) if we should either make no mention, or no honourable mention, or not bless the Memory of this holy Embassador of Christ, whose Decease is the providen∣tial occasion of this Discourse this day. Much need not be said of him, because more is known than can (in our limi∣ted Discourse) be said. And though it excuse not our duty, (as a Landlords having mony enough besides, excuseth
not a Tenant for not paying his rent) yet it pleaseth us to consider, that his Life and Labours have found him very sufficient Praise in the Church of Christ. And that which we utter in his Praise, is but jointly to pay duty to his justly blest memory, and learn duty from his excellent Example. Where∣fore all I shall offer concerning him, I shall put into these few particulars. First, His Parts and Endowments, (Natural and Acquired) were not or∣dinary, but excelling; as the Judici∣ous and Learned of his Acquaintance attest. He had wherewithal to capti∣vate and charm, and edifie the lowest understandings, and the while to satis∣fie and delight the highest. A faculty not bestown on every, even of learned and godly Divines, and of justly consi∣derable Repute in the Church of God. I say nothing of his Parentage. What Honour is any Birth but the New Birth? the Birth from that Heaven, whence he was Born, and whither he is (as to his
native place) return'd. 'Tis known some Western Counties over, that he had a Father of whom he might justly (in a sense) Glory; (Prov. 17.6.) and to whom he was equally a Delight and Honour, Prov. 23.24, 25. The Father of the Righteous shall greatly rejoyce, &c. Secondly, His Graces, in the eyes of the most spiritually discerning Chri∣stians, were both True and great. Ex∣cept but his humble self, I challenge all that read me, to name that compe∣tent judg of him, who ever thought him either no Saint, or no Excelling one? His dear Yokefellow tells me, that she was inform'd by himself, that's Conversion was wrought in Oxford. Blessed Soul! to whom the Holy Ghost (the Author and special In-worker of all Gifts, (1 Cor. 12.) gave Art and Grace, Divine and Humane Learning, in the same place! The Vigilant Masters of the Literate Societies there, do sad∣ly know, how very many come away
from them, without bringing either Sarah or Hagar, Grace (I mean) or Learning with them; and how many more that get the Handmaid of Philo∣sophy, obtain not more than the Sha∣dow or Shape of the Mistress, Divinity! Thrice-Blessed, our dear Brother! to whom Free Grace vouchsafed Capaci∣tating Nature, Polishing Art, and Ac∣complishing Grace, now it self Accom∣plished in Glory. Thirdly, His Ministerial Labors, and Painfulness in the Lord's work, were extraordinary. He did not only, more than others do Do, but more than he himself could Do, with his health consulted for. The Devil knows to his wo, how unweariedly he labour'd to get Souls out of his hands; (and how many he got too.) No doubt but the hundreds made partakers of his Pains, give the Lord thousands and ten-thousands of Praises with thanksgiving for them. Lions in the way of duty, seem'd no Lions
to him. Though wisely Zealous, he was daringly Good; I had almost said, Desperately. For even then would he Labour, when he had no hope of a∣voiding the weakning consequents of it to his feeble Consumptive body. Oh that they were not able to forbear Imitating his holy industry, who will not be able to forbear Praising it! Ay, and (it may be) coveting the Praise of it too. Now to you, my Brethren, to whom his painfulness was so well known, by you (of any Souls) let it not be un∣imitated! God, my God, perswade you to be such, as he perswaded you to be; and to Labour in the Word and Practice of it, as he laboured in the Word, and Doctrine, and joynt-practice of it. Let not his Counsels or Example dye with him! The Jews have a saying, that No day hath in it any so good a Man dying, but it hath as good a one born on it. I pray God, it may prove true of the day of our Blessed
Brother's death. Recall, recall, I charge you before God and the elect Angels, recall his heavenly Instructions! Beg, beg on bended knees, the Holy Ghost to bring to your Remembrance those Teachings that he sent you by him! Shall I give you some particular Hints, which the Lord's good Providence hath enabled me to do, by a sight of some Notes kindly communicated by his Widow: hear, I beseech you, and with Solemn attentiveness! 1. Excellently he taught you, the Vanity and Nothingness and less than nothing of all that can be taught, be∣sides the knowledg of Jesus. Not (to use his own words,) the Carnal, the Historical, or General knowledg of Christ: but the spiritual, particular, heart and Life-reforming, and trans∣forming knowledg. He shew'd you 'twas in Jesus that all the Attributes of God did Shine! that 'twas to Jesus all the Types, Ceremonies, Legal wash∣ings, &c. of old, and all the Prophe∣cies,
and Promises ever given of God, pointed! that Life-eternal in the End, the excellent End, whereof knowledg of Christ is the excellent and only means! that this knowledg of Christ is, 1. Revealed, 2. Certain, and 3. Sweet, Savory knowledg. He rows'd you to the Trial, by heart-search, whether you had this knowledg: And directed you to try, by a Consideracy of the Causes and Effects: All this from that text, 1. Cor. 2.2. 2dly, He shew'd you likewise, what you are till you come to the foresaid knowledg of Christ. Even, Children of wrath, and Alienated, and Enemies to God in your minds by wicked works; both from Ephes. 2.3. and Col. 1.2. He told you, and proved, that you and all the world (no man, save God-man excepted) are by Na∣tural Propagation sinful: Sinful (not by imitation only, though very much; but) 1. by nature; and 2. universally; all men, and in all of man. He shew'd
how 1. Fruitful of sin and misery this sin of Nature is! How 2. Powerful; it self a Law (Rom 7.23.) and mak∣ing your Souls Lawless. 3. How Fierce and Furious! 4. How Ʋnavoidable! 5. How (yet) Voluntary! Inherent in the Will, and making men Wilfully to sell themselves to sin and Satan. He made it plain to you, that unsanctified men are Gods Enemies, Haters of God; as 'tis Rom. 1.30. They Enemies to God, and God an Enemy to them. He shew'd you wherein mens Enmity to God appeareth: In their Opposi∣tion to his Will! 2. Their hatred and Opposition to his Saints and Servants, and Friends! 3 And their Friend∣ship with Gods Enemies; to wit, Devil, World and Sin. Also, 1. How unrea∣sonable this Enmity is; how, 2. Ʋn∣profitable; and 3. how Destructive. 3dly, He set forth the blessed Doctrine (the Soul of the Gospel,) of Christs being Peace-maker 'twixt God and Man. And that, 1. by Perchase,
bearing the Chastisement of our Peace: (as Isai. 53.) 2. by the Tendring of puchased Peace to poor Souls; and 3. by Conquering the Enmity of the heart, and making Souls willing to be Recon∣ciled to God. 4ly. Incitingly and Invitingly, to your Reconciliation unto God, he sew'd you, 1. That Reconciliation unto God, is a mercy highly to be valued, much to be desired, and endeavoured after: And 2. that taking hold of God in Christ is the only and certain means of Reconciliation with God. And 3. to such laying hold on God are re∣quired, 1. Conviction of the unable∣ness of all beside Jesus, to satisfie Gods Justice. 2. Sense of your inability to save your selves, and to lay hold on Christ offered. 3. Faith of Christ's All∣sufficiency. 5. Letting go of your hold of all other things, which may hinder resting on him. 6. Speedy laying hold on him, as offered in the Gospel: and 7. Union with him, Spiritual Union by
Faith. He told you, you had 1. Gods word, yea, 2. Gods Oath for your peace on these terms: This, on Isai. 27.5. 5ly. Hereupon God directed him to tell you, that (as he made it his work) it is the work of Ministers, to perswade sinners to accept of Christ as their Husband. And that, whereas unto Marriage there's requir'd, Consent of Parents and consent of Parties; God, the only Parents willing, Christ, the one Partie's willing; the query is, whether the Sinner be willing. He told you, you must consent, 1. Ʋnderstandingly, 2. Freely, 3. Presently, 4. Ʋniversally and Perpetually. And come unto a 1. Real, a 2. Spiritual, and 3. Total Union with Jesus; and 4. an Indissoluble one; one never to be broke off, by any threat∣ning or bribing Temptation. To Conclude; he further shewed you, Christ is the only way to Justifica∣tion, and Sanctification and Glory: and excellently displaid before you, how altogether Lovely (his beloved, now
fully enjoyed) Jesus is. Of the which (though I can Hint no more) I pray God bring much more to your Remem∣brance, Consideration, Practice, and Delight. I am most certain, if the good Spirit of Grace shall Powerfully set home these Instructions and Counsels, Dead hearts among you shall live; and they that have spiritual Life, shall have it more abundantly; and the Jewish maxim a∣foresaid, will be verisied, and more, even exceeded. Not one only, but many, shall be born to God, and made to en∣crease with the encreases of God, and fitted (as our Blessed Dear Brother) for an entrance into the Kingdom of God. Amen, and Amen FINIS.
