C190 12266092 58078
ADVERTISEMENT. THe Memoires of Monsieur Deageant: Containing the most secret Transactions and Affairs of France, from the Death of Henry IV. till the beginning of the Mini∣stry of the Cardinal de Richelieu. To which is added, a Particular Relation of the Arch-Bishop of Em∣brun's Voyage into England, and of his Negociation for the advance∣ment of the Roman Catholick Reli∣gion here; together with the Duke of Buckingham's Letters to the said Arch-Bishop about the Progress of that Affair: Which happen'd the last Years of King James I. his Reign. Faithfully Translated out of the French Original. Printed for Richard Baldwin in the Old-Baily. 1690.
THE Cabinet Open'd, OR THE Secret History OF THE AMOURS OF Madam de Maintenon, With the French KING. Translated from the French Copy. London, Printed for Richard Baldwin, in the Old-Baily, 1690.
THE Author's Preface TO THE READER. LOve and Fortune produce effects so fantastick and surprizing, that a man that accustoms himself to make reflections
on all Occurrences, cannot consider 'em without asto∣nishment. One sees not on∣ly the vilest and most ab∣ject creatures rais'd by this means to the highest ele∣vation of Glory and Gran∣deur; but one also sees the most agreeable and haugh∣ty of all the Sex, thrown down from their greatness, by the Caprices of these bru∣tal passions, and the Chi∣merique effects of the ima∣gination,
to which stupid men offer incense as to a Deity. Nature never wrought half the diversi∣ties in her productions, as Love and Fortune have done in their Vassals and Adorers. Madam de Maintenon, the per∣son whom we shall choose to be our Heroine, does abundantly confirm the truth of these evident assertions; one that the
following relation may make to be reputed for a happy person, if you place the happiness of this World in prosperity, in which 'tis confess'd she abounds. As for the rest, I am to advertise the Reader, that altho' several persons, having wrote upon the like subjects, have deliver'd no∣thing but pure Romance, nevertheless what I have Wrote is an unquestiona∣ble
truth; for the better part of the Memoires, from whence this Little History is drawn, came out of the Cabinet of Ma∣dam de Maintenon, and were partly written with her own Hand. These we recovered of a certain Gentlewoman, who lived a considerable time with her, and who had not served her this trick, but only to avoid a greater mischief
which was designed her, and she avoided by her flight. Therefore, what we received of her, we are now going to expose to the publick; and this it is, which has given occasion to the Title of this Book. I hope the World will re∣ceive some satisfaction by it, since I have given my self the trouble to put to∣gether these Memoires, and digest 'em into a method.
If you meet with any thing that is ridiculous, you are only to accuse the Original, and not the Copy. Farewel.
THE SECRET AMOURS OF Madam de Maintenon, With the French KING. AMongst all those Effects that Love has produced, one sees nothing that surprizes him more, than when it joyns the Scepter to the Crook, and by its influences
makes those Conditions of Life that stand at the greatest distance from one another, so united and reconciled, that the two Parties forget not only what they have been, but also what they owe to themselves: Several Examples have acquainted us with the truth of this Assertion, but we have not any Instance that has demon∣strated it with that clearness, or is more universally known in our Age, than This which we are going to relate. Madam de Maintenon owes her Nativity to America: Her Father who had been formerly one of those righteous Persons, that we use to transport for their Civil Behaviour, after he had made Satisfaction for the Slavery, to which he was Condemned, took a little piece of Ground, and planted it with Tobacco. With
the Revenue of this small Terri∣tory, he made an hard shift to keep Body and Soul together; when Providence, to let him see, that he had faln into a Terrestial Paradise, furnished him with a comfortable Importance, and suf∣fered a certain Vessel that was plentifully laden with all sorts of Females, to arrive at the Island de la Martinique. These virtuous Ladies considering the Corrupti∣on of the Age, and the Fruitfulness of the new World, after having sacrificed their Bodies for some time to the Goddess of Pleasure, and performed all Acts of Cha∣rity to those who begg'd it at their hands, departed from their respective Habitations in Low-Poictou, and out of a Spirit of Submission, to which they were obliged by the Orders of Justice, surrendred themselves at Rochel.
Here the report of their Actions gathered a vast Company of Peo∣ple together, who ran from all parts to behold them with Admi∣ration. The respect they met with, was so extremely great, that the Magistrates of the place, not thinking any ordinary House worthy to entertain Persons of their high Character, lodged them in the most Magnificent Building of the whole City, as well in regard of its Height, as of its Scituation, and Structure. Their Quarters were assigned them in the Tower de la Lanterne, where they passed some time without any manner of Diver∣sion for want of Needles. After a short stay, like true multiply∣ing Daughters of Eve, they em∣barqued for America, where they arrived, as we told you before: Presently after their Landing,
they were joyned to the Tune of for better for worse, according to the laudable Custom of the Coun∣try, which, as we are credibly in∣formed, was taking one anothers Words without any tedious Pre∣face or Ceremony; and amongst the rest, Madam de Maintenon's Father and Mother were coupled together, and so by this means our Illustrious Heroine came to be begotten. All those Persons who have been at America, are able to inform you, that whether it happens through the peculiar Nature of the Climate, or the Temperature of the Country, their Children don't stay so long a time before they are able to help themselves, as here in Europe; and Experience has made it evi∣dent, that their Infants do com∣monly make a shift to walk, when they are but one year Old,
which would pass for an extraor∣dinary Miracle, with us on this side the Globe. To reassume our Discourse, our little Heroine was employed at the Age of Three years, to look after some Turkies belonging to the Illustrious Ma∣dam de . . . her Godmother, who out of a Principle of Cha∣rity took her from her Pious Pa∣rents, and kept her with her at her own Mansion. In this honou∣rable important Occupation, she passed Three years more, after which time was expired, her above-mentioned Godmother, ha∣ving some occasions to make a Voyage into Europe, carried the pretty Damosel along with her, with a design to cultivate and re∣fine her Person as she advanced in Age. Their Voyage, as it happened, was somewhat of the longest,
which they, poor Souls, never ex∣pected, by reason of the ill Wea∣ther with which they were fre∣quently distressed. Nevertheless they arrived happily at Rochel, where after they had refreshed themselves for some time, they took their way towards Low-Poictou, and there they tarried a considerable space, without any reverse of Fortune. The first Calamity which befel our Hero∣ine was the unexpected Death of her Godmother. At that time, she was about Fifteen years Old; the decease of her careful Fellow-Traveller touched her very sensi∣bly; and, without question, she wished her self an hundred times in America again. We may ima∣gine, that in this Melancholy Condition, she had remain'd with∣out any Comfort; if a Brawny Rustick of the Village where she
sojourn'd, had not prevail'd upon her by Virtue of his Comple∣ments to believe, that whatsoever Loss she had sustained by the Translation of her Godmother, might be fully made up in him. This amorous Villager had Riches enough for a Man of his Quality, he had one Leg shorter than the other, and an Eye less than other Men, but to make him amends, Nature provided him with a tolerable good Addi∣tion upon his Back, for he always carried a Mountain about him. After all, I say, one could not find in all the Village, a Man that could surpass him; he had like∣wise a little share of Understand∣ing, which was but very necessa∣ry, considering the business he went through, and yet a Man may say without flattery to his Person, that it was not much for
his advantage. A long time be∣fore the Death of our Heroin's Godmother, he had a certain in∣clination towards her, that can∣not be well expressed; for he per∣ceived in himself a small Je ne scay quoy, a beginning of a Passi∣on, which he durst not discover. Without doubt, the Veneration he bore to Madam de . . . the Godmother of our Madam de Maintenon, hindred him from making a Formal Declaration of his affection; but as soon as she was dead, he searched all the means in the World to accost her, he never sung at high Mass when he was there, nor in any famous Assembly of the Village, when he made his appearance amongst them; If he went to any Fair of note, he laid out his Money very profusely, on Ribands of all Sorts and Colours, to present
them to his fair Mistress, hoping by that Liberality to insinuate himself into her good Graces. But all this while he made but small insensible advances in his Affair by his dumb Language, and we may honestly conclude, that all these Assiduities had been to no purpose, if he had not found occasion to accost her one day with his Rural Rhetorick, as she was drawing water out of a Well. Will you let me help you, says he, Alas, replys the Damosel, You'l mightily oblige me; so he put himself in a Posture to execute the Business, and through an ex∣cess of Civility, carried her Buckets for her even to her Cot∣tage, where being arrived, and finding himself alone with her, Is it not true, says he, That you suffer a great deal of Sorrow-for the loss of your Godmother;
She was a very good Woman, and had a mighty Concern for you, and if she had lived any time longer, had not failed to give you some lit∣tle Fortune, that might have made you an agreeable Match for some ho∣nest Labourer in the Village: But, crys he, pursuing his Discourse, although She has left you nothing at all, yet I have Love enough for you, to give you a Moiety of what I possess, if you'l be pleas'd to be my Wife; you shall always conti∣nue to command me upon all occa∣sions, and nothing shall be wanting for you. Do but allow me, answers she, a small time to consider of this matter, and Ple return you my An∣swer to morrow behind our Cottage. Our amorous Esop was exceeding satisfied with this Answer, and after having entertained her a while with his Gallantry upon this Subject, retired and with∣drew,
impatiently expecting the following day, to know her final Resolution, so he failed not to ap∣pear upon the place, at the hour of Assignation. When he saw her a pretty way off, Alas! says he, and will you be my Wife then? I don't know, says she, I find not any great reluctancy in my self, to enter into those Ecclesiastical Indentures with you, but to confess the Truth, I have no very great Affection for your person at present, however, I am in good hopes that a little time will bring all these Matters about. Ah! My dear Guiellemette, says he, how passionately do I love you, I'le make you such Presents, and give you such undeniable Testimonies of the Sincerity of my heart, that you shall be in a manner forced to have a Love for me.
In effect, he went to none of the Neighbouring Markets, but he courteously brought her either a Cake-offering, or Buns, or Needles, or Pins, or Penny-knives, and a great quantity of other things of that Nature. She that saw with what Zeal and Affection he bestirr'd himself in her Service, began at last to have some kind∣ness for him. She consider'd, she was without Father, and Mo∣ther, Relations, or Friends, to sup∣port her, destitute of all manner of Conveniencies, and as it were a Stranger in the Country: On the other hand, she saw a strong, lusty, two-handed Labourer, that courted and ador'd her. These prudent reflections had almost prevailed with her to make this ill Choice, but it may be alledg∣ed for her excuse, that it had not been the first Marriage by
ten thousand, that necessity has occasioned; for when one suffers himself to tumble down a Preci∣pice, 'tis twenty to one, unless the Devil's in him, but that he'l lay hold of the next thing he meets to save his Bacon. Therefore she testified a vast deal of kind∣ness, and more indeed than was usual, for her trusty Swain, and there's no question to be made, but the Marriage had succeeded, if a certain Lady that lived in a Neighbouring Castle, had not taken Compassion of her Youth, and the Embarras, she had una∣voidably thrown her self into, by matching with this Villager: and having observed in our He∣roine, a Spirit and Wit that was capable of attaining to any thing, she took her home along with her, where she lived at first un∣der the Character of a Servant,
and afterwards under That of a Chamber-maid. There she for∣got her poor Rustick to all Intents and Purposes, and began to shew by little and little the greatness of her Soul, á la mode de la Noblesse. Her disconsolate Lover was in Despair for loss of her; he was almost come up to the Castle to see her, but he wisely bethought himself, that he could not make his approaches any further, if he designed to carry back with him a bundle of Fagots, which he had got upon his Shoulders. This threw him into one of the seve∣rest Fits of Melancholy in the World, nevertheless to relieve him in this Affliction, he had hopes some time or other to speak with her, and knowing that she would be obliged shortly to pay her Devotions all alone at the Parish Church, he was resolved
to renew his correspondence with her there. In order to put this in∣trigue into execution, he came thither very early in the morning, being afraid, as you may imagine of coming too late, and when she was just entred the Church he advanced towards her, that he might have the opportunity to converse with her; but she that found her heart rais'd above the ordinary pitch, by the fine cloaths she wore, a vanity with which she had never been acquainted before, scornfully rejected him, and would not hear him speak one syllable. He had like to have lost, for good and all, the respect that was due to so sacred a place, and was upon the point of reproaching her, for her base ingratitude; but his Reason proving too powerful for his Passion, he waited pati∣ently
till the Service was over; and then, as he followed her, he pursu'd her all along with the bitterest reproaches imaginable, he refresh'd her memory a thousand times over, even with the least inconsiderable triffle he had given her; not forgetting the expences he had been at, upon her score, at the Farthing-Custard-House, and the never to be forgotten present of a Needle-Case. Sometimes he swore at her like any Dragon, at other times he made his supplica∣tions to her in the most submissive manner, humbly desiring her Lady-ship not to forget the ardent Love he had for her. In fine, he put himself into an hundred seve∣ral postures, but all this signified nothing; for all the while she marched on carelessly, without regarding his complaints, or shew∣ing the least concern for him. This
severe usage made so deep an im∣pression upon the afflicted Labou∣rer, that the very same day he fell into a violent Feavor, which in a short time carried him out of the World. She could not for∣bear the having un peu de chagrin, a little interval of sorrow, upon so doleful an occasion, and the Lord knows it was but very lit∣tle, for two hours put it out of her head, and made her forget the memory of him for ever. She continued a good time in this mid∣dle station of Life, and without do∣ing her any affront, we may safely conclude, she had passed her whole Life in this humble Figure, if the Marquis de Chevreuse had not found some charms in her. The first time he saw her was in this Ladies family, and having infor∣med himself of her extraction, he employ'd all his thoughts to make
a conquest of her. To bring this about, he attacqu'd her with all the ways and arguments, that he believed would be most agreeable to his design, and cou'd soonest help to vanquish her, but to no purpose: She lived with a reserv'd Virtuous Person that had an Eye continually over her; and besides, had sufficiently instructed her in the principles of Honour, if she wou'd be content to practise 'em. Monsieur de Chevreuse who had seen the Court, and consequently knew that some feeble denials at first were things of course, was not overmuch mortify'd or a∣stonish'd at her refusal; he daily continued in his pursuit, and did not at all despair to accomplish his ends, and carry off the Game. One day when her Lady was wholly taken up in receiving a Visit, and she her self, contrary
to her usual custom, was a∣lone in her Chamber, he accosted her with great civilities. Ah! Dear Madam, says he to her, and have you then sworn to be always cruel to me, and will you not reci∣procally correspond with the most violent and faithful passion in the World? I love you, Madam, and I have acquainted you with my flame several limes, and my Eyes have declar'd it to you, every mo∣ment when I had the happiness of seeing you; yet you, cruel fair one, will not suffer it to meet with the least encouragement, but seem fully resolved to make me endure a thou∣sand Martyrdomes, by the contempt with which you entertain my love, and the indifference with which you receive my protestations. Monsieur, answers she, very coldly to him, I have neither any rigour or soft∣ness in me, in regard to your self;
I know my own inclinations pretty well, and it suffices me to have a respect for you, which is due to per∣sons of your Rank and Quality, with∣out troubling my self with any other matters. Having ended her dis∣course, she went hastily out of her Chamber, and disposed of her self amongst her companions, the poor Marquis not being able to oblige her to tarry one moment longer with him, for all his im∣portunity and solicitation. Ne∣vertheless he did not suffer any favourable occasion to pass by, without discoursing to her about his love, and he imagined, that he observed some prosperous ad∣vance in his affairs; when he was obliged to go and take possession of an Estate a great way off, which a certain pious Aunt of his had left him at her decease. Being just about to depart out of this
Province, he desired to take his leave of her, but he was not able to find her alone, because she was always busied before her Lady, who found her self somewhat in∣disposed. Therefore he resolved to write to her, which he im∣mediately did, as soon as he arri∣ved to the place, where he was obliged to be; and that his Mi∣stress might receive it with secu∣rity, he dispatched one of his Ser∣vants to visit, as from him, the Lady with whom she lived; with order likewise to slip the Letter into her hands when he saw an opportunity, which he accor∣dingly did. When she had received it, she cou'd not tell, whether it was best to deliver it to her Mistress, or read it by her self. Her mind continued some time in this suspence, at last her curiosity prevailed, so she opened it, and read as follows.
Madam, AFter having oftentimes assur'd you in conversation, that I love you more than my self, I take the liberty to write to you; that I may give you fuller evidences of my sincerity, and at the same time to make this protestation before you, that notwithstanding all your indifference, I shall ever persevere to adore you. I am sensibly afflicted that I had not the honour to take my leave of you before my departure; I have sought every occasion with the utmost dili∣gence, but you, my cruel fair one, think, that I am not sufficiently pu∣nished for my transgressions either by your rigour, or my owndespair. You have hitherto industriously avoided my company, because you very well fore∣saw that one moment of your charm∣ing conversation wou'd sweeten and lenify all that chagrin which your
absence had created. Let me per∣suade you, Madam, to quit all those cruelties that are so disagreeable and contrary to the fairest Sex, con∣sider the violence of my passion, and by an act of generosity, which is so peculiar to your nature, return one heart for another. Mine is altoge∣ther yours, it will suffer no other image to be imprest upon it, but that of your charming person, nor will it be ever separated from you. Give me therefore some small room in yours; 'tis the only thing in the World which I beg of you, and for the attaining of it, I would willingly abandon my fortune, and my dignity. Let me then conjure you, Madam, to com∣ply with my passion, and make your self absolute Mistress, not only of my Heart, but also of every thing that I possess. The Bearer hereof will bring me your answer; I beseech you, that you'l no more deny me this fa∣vour,
than any thing else that I have requested of you; without which you'l reduce to the extremity of de∣spair the person, that preserves his life upon no other score than to love, nor his Fortunes, than to serve you. De Chevreuse. She continued for some space altogether astonished at reading this Letter, and cou'd not tell whether she had best return any answer or no; at last she resol∣ved with her self not to write to him, and to avoid-meeting with the Messenger she pass'd the time amongst her Female companions till he was gone. After this, she took a walk all alone by her self to a pretty Grove of Trees that was joyning to the House; where she had not been long, but she was possessed with an itching desire
to review the Letter; she endea∣vour'd with some little violence to her self to master this inclina∣tion, but the curiosity, which is so natural to her Sex, at last carried it. Immediately she imagined, that it would prove a very a∣greeable diversion, and that an hundred Letters of that nature cou'd not fail to get the ascendent over her heart. Having there∣fore pleased her self with the per∣usal of it, she began to discover some graces in the Style, which attracted her Eyes as it were by force. In fine, she read it again with abundance of , and after she had mad  few re∣flections, found it  ertain∣ing. How! (says she,) a Marquit fal'n in love with me, and not only so, but passionately in love, that of∣fers me his Heart, and his fortunes, and shall I refuse him? No, I
begin to see my fault, I will love him, he'l make me a great Lady, and instead of being a Servant to others, as I am at present, I shall then have others to wait upon me; I shall by this means raise and ad∣vance the obscurity of my Birth. But then, says she, reprehending her self, You know who you are, and if he love thee, 'tis only to ravish from thee the dearest thing thou hast n the World. When that is gone, e'l regard thee no more; then hou'lt be abandon'd, and without support: No, love him not, but reserve thy reputation and honour. Thus divided between two dif∣ferent passions, she let her Let∣ter drop without perceiving it. he pursu'd her walk and medi∣tions, when an old venerable ervant-Maid of the house, with hom she was intimately ac∣uainted, came thither: She
walked so softly, that Guillemette was not aware of her till she came up to the place, and had taken up the Letter, which she did very carefully, not at all questioning, but that it contain'd some impor∣tant piece of secrecy. She ac∣costed her then, and endeavour'd to drive her out of her pensive∣ness. I have never found you, says she to her, in such a sullen reserved humour before, it must certainly be some extraordinary matter that has occasion'd it; Come, don't conceal any of your affairs from me, and if I am able to bring you any consolation, you may rest satisfy'd, that I shall leave nothing unattempted. She spoke abundance of such things to her, without being able to ex∣tort any positive answer; but seeing that, she did not any more importune her upon this occasion,
not at all questioning but she should discover something or other in the Letter. In short, they were no sooner arrived to their respective apartments, but the old Woman shutting the door upon her self, began to read it; and there was fully satisfy'd with the true rea∣son of the change which she ob∣served in Guillemette. She was extremely concern'd to know, what advances the Marquis had made in her affections, and what effect this Letter had produced. She judged very well, that Guille∣mette wou'd not make her any discoveries of this Secret, so she resolved to attend, and wait till the return of the Marquis, hoping to get an account of the whole in∣trigue out of him; and as she knew by experience, that lovers are generally free and liberal, so she promis'd her self no inconsi∣derable
advantage, if she cou'd but be serviceable to him in this Amorous commerce. All this while, the pensive Guillemette had her mind seized with a thousand several thoughts, and agitations: She had a desire once more to read the Letter that gave her all these inquietudes, and for that purpose, she searched her Pockets. Nothing certainly is able to describe her astonish∣ment and confusion, when she cou'd not find it there: She im∣mediately ran to the place where she read it the Second time, but did not meet with it; then she did not at all question but that she was entirely ruin'd in the good opinion of her Lady; a thousand mortifying reflections disturbed her Soul, and she found a visible alteration in her self within a few days. Her Mistress
that loved her very well, desired to be made acquainted with the reason; but she pretended an or∣dinary indisposition of body, and confess'd not one Syllable of the true occasion. There was no body in the whole Family that knew the cause, but only our old Agnes, who, being willing to apply a re∣medy to this malady, came im∣mediately to her Chamber, and thus began. Ah, my dear Guille∣mette, lays she to her, you wou'd not tell me t'other day in the Grove, what it was that possess'd you with this melancholy, and I believe I had never known the reason, if my good Stars had not thrown me upon your Letter, which has discover'd the whole business. 'Tis nothing but the loss of That, continues she, which has caused all your pain; but it has been lodged in very good
hands, behold here I return it you, no body has read it but my self. I have always had a kindness for you, and shall ever preserve it; but then to correspond with my friendship, you must make me your confident, and for the future conceal none of your Intrigues from me. Guillemette took the Letter with a great deal of joy, which did not a little contribute towards her recovery, since her indisposition chiefly proceeded from an apprehension she had, that her Lady had read the Let∣ter. In fine, she gave Agnes abun∣dance of thanks, and reposed an entire confidence in her Fidelity. The Old Woman contradicted her in nothing, on the contrary she agreed with her exactly in all her Sentiments, in order to make some advantages hereafter by this complyance, which was the only
thing that she propos'd to her self by it. In the mean time, the Marquis de Chevreuse was in despair, for having received no answer to his better, he resolved to write to her the Second time, and if that fail'd to crown his expectation, to make no more efforts of that na∣ture, but go himself in Person, and endeavour a conquest: There∣fore he took Pen in Hand, and Composed a Sonnet, which he closed up in the following Billet. 'TIs I find decreed, Madam, and you have resolved my death; If that is your design, you'l have your satisfaction upon me in a few days, for since I have been absent from you, I have not been able to procure one moments release from my torments. However, if you'l be pleased to alleviate my pains
with one Word from your adorable hand, I shall have the consolation to be remembred by you. Do it then, I beseech you, and if you disdain to answer my prose, at least, answer the Verses, which are sent you by the most Passionate and sincere of Lovers, De Chevreuse. SONNET To my Adorable Guillemette. I. FAir Goddess, whose victorious Charms Have made a Conquest o're my heart, When will you fill my long-expecting arms, And bid my cruel fears depart. II. Since envious fate your absence has procur'd, No peaceful rest has crown'd the Night. The day has seen no kind delight, Ten thousand Martyrdoms I have endur'd.
III. Come, make a Victim of your pride, Gave my despair, and ease my pain, unbecoming Cruelty aside, And to mild pity sacrifice disdain. IV. Or of my fate you have decread, And poor unhappy. I must bleed, In a pathetic tone pronounce my death. And I with freedom will resign my breath. This he sent by another Valet, hoping that he'd acquit himself better in his commission than the last, who in a few days arrived at the Castle; and after he had visited the Lady in his Master's name, as he was ordered, be waited for an opportunity to find Guillemette alone. At last, e had the good fortune to meet with her in the Parterres, and
having saluted her with the ap∣pearance of a most profound re∣spect; he told her, that he had orders to deliver a Pacquet into her own hands, and attend her answer. She knew the Livery full well, so it cost her a moment or two's consideration to conclude whether she should receive the Letter or no. But the Bearer was so very adroit in his persuasions, and acquitted himself so hand∣somely, that he oblig'd her to re∣ceive it. However all the an∣swer he was able to get out of her, was only this, that he was not to expect any; he was weary of making a long stay, since it was not likely to turn to account, therefore he withdrew, and went back to his Master; who was no sooner informed of the success of his Second Letter, but he sent or∣ders with all the haste imaginable to dispatch his Affairs, and prepared
to be going very early next Mor∣ning, as indeed he did, and soon arrived at the Ladies house. Immediately he waited upon her, to pay his Devoirs, but staid not any long time in the Room, out of an impatience he had to talk with his dearly beloved Guillemette, who took as much Fains to avoid him, as he did to find her out. She came off well enough for that time, for she took care to be constantly in her Ladies Company. The Marquis began to despair of the Success of his undertaking, nevertheless to conceal his impatience as much, as was possible for him, he visited all the Ladies Maids, a∣mongst the rest as he was passing by the Chamber of the reverend Old Agnes, he made her some Com∣plements, and as they had known one another for a long time, she
deed him to come in, and ha∣ving made him to sit, thus began her Discourse, I know, Sir, some Melancholy Consideration or other, has of late oppressed your Spirits; I don't see you in that pleasant Mer∣ry Humour, you were always accu∣stomed to carry about you; on the contrary you do nothing in the World but think, and sigh, and cast your eyes everlastingly upon the Ground. For Heavens sake, whence proceeds this sudden Alteration? Come, Sir, deal fairly, and lay aside your Disguise, Guillemette has oc∣casioned all this Chagrin, don't con∣ceal any thing from me, and be per∣swaded, that I have Compassion enough for your Condition, and Friendship enough for you, to un∣dertake anything in the World that may prove Serviceable to your De∣signs, only tell me what Progress you have made in her Affections,
and how your circumstances stand. Since I must acquaint you with eve∣rything, my dear Agnes, answers he, You are to know, that hitherto she has scorned and disdained me, and shuns my Company with as much concern, as if I carried the Pestilence about me. Endeavour to set me right in her good Opinion, and besides a suitable recompence which I shall give thee hereafter, behold here are ten Lew is d'ors, which I desire thee to accept. She made some Ceremony at first of taking the damn'd Yellow pieces, but in fine she suffered him to overcome her Modesty, and promised to ma∣nage her self upon this occasion, that he should have no Reason to discommend her Conduct. Guillemette in the mean time, who knew nothing of this Conspi∣racy against her, had no sooner read the Letter, but out she goes
to find her vertuous Confident Agnes, according to her Promise, which, as you were informed before, obliged her to conceal no∣thing from the venerable Old Gentlewoman; she found her as she came from conducting the Marquis to his Lodgings, and im∣mediately shewed her the Letter, and demanded her Opinion of it. Upon my word, dear Child of mine, replyed the charitable Ma∣tron, I could almost find in my heart to quarrel with my Stars, and so forth, for not being young, and in a condition to oblige. A Lover so sincere as yours is, should never be able to disengage him∣self from my Chains, and heaven knows, how advantagiously I'de manage so favourable an oppor∣tunity. I give thee, my dear, the same Advice which I would follow my self, were I in thy Cir∣cumstances,
make your Profit of this Affair, and don't neglect it, 'twill turn to a fine Account, I warrant you. Not to over whelm you with an hundred and fifty Pro∣verbes, strike the Iron, I say, while it is hot; for that Person, that has had the Grace to take the first occasion by the Forelock, will be able to command the other for∣tunate Moments, as they happen. In a word, she alledged so many convincing Reasons for what she said, and so well employed her little Talent of Rhetorick, that Guillemette promised her for the time to come to comply with the Marquisses Inclinations. Our Old Matron was never better pleas'd in all her Life than now, she immedi∣ately sentthe Marquis word in how hopeful a way things were like to go with him, which he was no sooner informed of; but he
prepared himself to give a Visit to the Lady. After that piece of Formality was over, he walked out to breathe a little fresh Air in the Garden, where it was his Fortune to meet with the Good∣natur'd Agnes, who gave him an ample Account of what had pas∣sed, and told him withal, that he might, if he pleased, see his Mi∣stress Guillemette, because she was at that very time all alone in her Chamber. He ran thither with all the haste imaginable, and found her very busie about her Linen. At last, Madam, says he, I may count my self the happiest Man in the Ʋniverse, since I have one favourable moment to acquaint you with the true Sentiments of my Heart; they are pure, and sincere. Madam, I love you, I adore you, comply with my Passion. How! continued he, will you then return
me no Answer, will you reduce me to the extremity of Despair? To all this she made no Answer but by her sighs, which gave the Mar∣quis to understand, that the Pains of the venerable Agnes were not bestowed in vain, but had operated wonderfully. Never∣theless he could not content him∣self with this dumb Language, but conjur'd her by all manner of Reasons to quit this Silence, he beseeched her to make some E∣claircissement of her Love, and in fine prevailed so far, that he drew this Confession from her Mouth, that she had no Aversion to him. He would needs be as∣sured of the Truth of it by a Kiss, but she was not willing to grant him such a Favour so soon; in re∣fusing him, she did not however take away all hopes from him to obtain it for the time to come,
but he that was the most passio∣nate Lover breathing, seeing he could not have so small a refresh∣ment to his Flame, began to faint away, and had unquestionably done so, if he had not sustained himself by an Elbow-Chair that stood near him. As soon as he was recovered out of the Fit, look∣ing upon her with languishing Eyes, he thus Addressed him∣self to her in the following Sonnet. SONNET. I. WEll now, imperious Fair, I find, You have your Lovers Death design'd: Since you that could have eas'd my wretched state, Have added to my Cares, and urg'd my coming fate.
II. Go, take a Kiss, Love whispers in my Ear, But Love, alas! gives place to Fear; Awful respect disarms my hands. And to my growing Passion gives Commands. III. Ah! must your wounded Lover dye, And see his Balm, and see his cure so nigh. Or shall he boldly seize a Kiss, A prelude to a greater Bliss. IV. No, He'l a thousand Deaths endure, And all reverses of his fate attend, E're He'l by Sacrilege attempt his cure, And his dear Guillemette offend. This Agitation, and respectful Behaviour of the Marquis failed not to make a large breach in the heart of the poor Guillemette, yet she had the care enough to conceal it from her Conqueror, and after all his reiterated impor∣tunities
made no other Declarati∣on of her Affections, than what she had done before; Namely, that he was not displeasing or disa∣greeable to her. Our Marquis immediately gave the discreet Agnes, a full Ac∣count of the issue of his Nego∣tiation, and visited Guillemette with the greatest Assiduity as was possible, he prevailed so far upon her at last, that she confessed she loved him; he was not satis∣fied with this Confession, but conjur'd her by all the tenderest things in the World, to answer his Love. Agnes on the other hand perswaded her not to shew her self too Complaisant on the sudden to the Marquis, but to have a regard to the making of her Fortune: In a word, they were so well pleased one with the other that she promised him a rende∣vouz
the next Night at her Chamber, where they might dis∣course of these Affairs, with grea∣ter Liberty and Freedom. But their cruel Destinies so ordered the Matter, that a certain Lady of Quality in the Neighbour-hood, having lost two of her Maids by an unlucky Distemper, and being informed, that in the House where Guillemette lived, they had more than they had occasion for, she dispatched a Messenger to her Lady, to entreat her, that she would be pleased to send her one or two. This Lady, who had some Suspicion of the Intrigue that was a driving on betwixt the Marquis and Guillemette, was extremely glad, that she had an opportunity to break off the Cor∣respondence; and so much the more was she satisfied, because she knew the Marquis durst not
appear there, by reason of an in∣veterate hatred between him and that Family. Therefore she or∣dered our unfortunate Lover, and another of her Maids to prepare themselves to depart the next Morning, and commanded Guille∣mette to come that Night, and lye in her Chamber, because she had some important Advice to give her for the future manage∣ment of her Life. Never did any mortal blow occasion, a greater Astonishment; these words struck her like a Thunder-bolt, or like Medusa's head, for she imagined her self to be changed into stone. Her Lady, perceiving the disor∣der she was in, was very inquisi∣tive to know the Reason, but she, who had a very good faculty that way, found it it no difficult mat∣ter to invent a sham Excuse; the present Conjuncture afforded her
a plausible Pretence, and to give the better Colour to her Hypo∣crisie, she shed a few Tears, and thus began her Discourse. With∣out question, Madam, you are suffi∣ciently acquainted with the cause of my Grief, but since you are pleased to learn it from my own Mouth; I dare not assume the Confidence to contradict you. I believe, Madam, it will not appear strange in the least to you, that after having re∣ceived such abundance of Favours and Kindnesses from your liberal hands, I find a sensible regret to part with you, especially having de∣termined to pass the remaining part of my Life in your Service, and by my diligence to make you some to∣lerable amends for all your Bounty. This only Sorrow, to see my self so miserably disappointed in my Expectations, bas sofar possessed me, that I can think of nothing else;
and altho' your Injunctions have ever passed with me for so many Laws, yet I shall obey this particu∣lar Command, with the greatest reluctance in the World; if my Prayers and Supplications could prevail with you to revoke this cruel Order. I have parted with you for your own good, replys her Lady very bluntly, but it will not con∣tinue always; as I find you behave your self, so I shall Act accordingly; go in the mean time, and prepare to obey me. She departed, and run imme∣diately to inform Agnes of this fatal Command, and enjoyn'd her to tell the Marquis, she would ever preserve the same Affection and Tenderness for him; only she de∣sired him to attempt nothing up∣on the Road, for that, says she, will raise a great Clamour and Noise, and discover the whole
Affair, which I would have kept as secret, as is possible. Agnes was mightily concerned at this Contre-coup, this mortifying dis∣appointment, for she grounded no small Expectations upon the Sacrificing of this Virginity. Ne∣vertheless she promised to per∣form whatever she had requested of her, and presently posted a∣way to acquaint the Marquis with the News, who by this time had tasted a thousand Fan∣tastick Pleasures in his Imagina∣tion: He fell into the greatest Consternation in the World, but had no other Remedy to apply to his Sores, except Patience; and endeavoured to comfort himself, as well as he could. As the Night approached, he judged it not à Propos to depart, but stay till next Morning, that he might give no Umbrage or Suspicion in
the Case, and also, that he might find some opportunity or other, to speak with his Mistress before his Departure. Guillemette having put all her things in her Trunk, received Orders to appear forthwith at her Ladies Chamber. This vir∣tuous Person, who had passed above Threescore years in the World; had gathered a great deal of Experience, and consi∣dering that a good Tree is easily spoiled, if it is not cultivated when 'tis young, was desirous to furnish her with some useful So∣lid Instructions, before she went away, and to that end she thus be∣gan the Discourse. Since it has pleased Heaven to take away my dear Husband and Children from me, I have been effe∣ctually dead to all these imperti∣nent
gilded Vanities; of Life, and only paid my regard to those Duties, that cannot but render those Per∣sons eternally happy that follow them. Now because you are going to be separated from me for at me, I have some Reason to be fearful of your Conduct, when I consider what Age you are of. One runs a great deal of Hazard and Danger at your years, but withal one ac∣quires a vast Reputation and Glory in surmounting them: Therefore I think it not amiss, to give you part of that Experience which I have, and to lend you some Instru∣ctions for your future Deport∣ment: And I am able to assure you, that you cannot prove other∣wise than Happy, if you'l permit your self to be influenced and dire∣cted by them.
In the first Place be devout with∣out Affectation, and have a Care you don't fall into Hypocrisie, for by that one does immediately Af∣front and Assault the Divinity. 2. Don't set your Heart upon the Pleasures of the Flesh, for he that prefers the Pleasures of the Body, before the Health of his Soul is Guilty of the same sottish Stupidity, with him that let's his Friend drown, and runs to secure his Cloaths. 3. Don't propose to your self any great Pleasure in worldly Vanity, rather abhor it, and let your Garb be Modest and Civil; ever while you live take more care to adorn your Soul than your Body, without doing which you offer incense to an Idol, and aban∣don the Deity.
4. Don't begin any thing, without having consider'd seri∣ously of it before, and let your judgment be mature and well fix∣ed: for he that undertakes any business of moment, without this necessary provision, ought not to be surprized, if it never succeeds. 5. Never attempt any thing which is above your strength, for all efforts of this nature use to produce effects that are infi∣nitely below the expectation one conceived of 'em. 6. Don't look with Envy at the good of your Neighbour, for by that means you render your self unworthy to possess your own. 7. Carefully avoid that which they call Love here in the World. Above all, never give any atten∣tion to the discourses of Flatterers. This sort of People deify you in
their warm harangues, tho' at the same time they endeavour to make you the most miserable of all Creatures. Therefore in imita∣tion of the Adder, shut your Ears to the Cllarms of these Enchan∣ters, and be strongly persuaded, that there is nothing so prejudi∣cial to your reputation, as the vanity of hearing your self flat∣ter'd. Of all the passions, that are capable of misleading, and corrupting the judgment, Love is the strongest and most imper∣ceptible: for he kindles his Fire only with a design to make us blind and giddy; to make you entertain a horror of him, he's Painted blind, not only to repre∣sent his Effronterie and immo∣desty, but also to teach us, that commonly he reduces those Per∣sons to Nakedness and Poverty, that follow him.
8. If you submit your judg∣ment to your pleasures, you'l burn your self at last with the Torch, that was given you to light and conduct you. 9. Avoid Gaming as much as is possible, for he that loves play to excess, takes a great deal of pains to die poor. 10. Consider one moment at least, of what you are going to speak, and take two more to think of what you are going to promise; fearing lest you may come to feel a great deal of sorrow, for that which you promised with preci∣pitation. 11. Obey with all alacrity and reverence, the person whom you Serve, and employ your utmost endeavours to set your self in her good opinion. Never stay for a Command to do that, which you see is necessary to be done, and
consider that the principal cause of the liberality of Masters to∣wards their Servants, proceeds from their having acquitted them∣selves well in their respective du∣ties; for to apply an old but a Proverb upon this occasion. A good Valet makes a good Master. 12. Be content with your own condition, for he that is not con∣tent with an honest condition, gives himself the trouble often∣times to render that less, which he endeavour'd to encrease. 13. Don't be urgent or pressing to know the Secrets of another; be likewise very reserv'd, in com∣municating your own. You are no longer Mistress of 'em when you have parted with 'em to a Confident, and your own exam∣ple will justify the infidelity which one ought to observe in commu∣nicating his Secrets to another.
14. Once more, renounce and defy all cajolers and flatterers, both the one and t'other design by the sound of their empty discourses, to the Money out of your Pocket, and to ravish you of your Honour. In fine, the infection of the Plague is not half so contagious and fatal for the body, as the Poison of Vicious Profligate company; and they that make use of Elaborate harangues for no other purpose than to enveigle us into a crimi∣nal rencoutre with 'em, employ a perfum'd Poniard to pierce us in the heart. Behold Guillemette, this is it which I had to say to you, and which I always desire you to retain in your Memory, and fearing lest you might forget it one time or other, I have succinctly digested it into particu∣lars, and committed it to Writing. Be sure you keep it carefully, and read it often.
Guillemette made very solemn promises to observe all this, and then they composed them∣selves to rest till the Morning. The Lady never pared with her out of her company, till she saw her in the Coach, so that our Lo∣vers cou'd not take their farewel of each other, but only in general terms. Our Marquis having tar∣ried some short time after her, took his leave, and retired to one of his houses, scituated about two Leagues distance from the new Habitation of his Mistress, who along with her Companion was very kindly received at her first arrival. But the entertainment that followed did not answer ac∣cordingly, for she lived with a Lady whom we shall call Olimpia, a haughty, imperious, ill-natur'd Woman; that treated all her Ser∣vants after a rude barbarous man∣ner,
notwithstanding they used the greatest diligence imaginable in the discharge of their duties. This kind of usage seem'd extreme, ly unpalatable to the poor Guille∣mette; she was just parted from a person that had always regarded her as her own Child, whereas she saw her self now in a condi∣tion very little different from that of a Slave, which infinitely dis∣gusted her, and served to establish the Marquis more then ever in her good inclinations. He was now just upon the point of despair, never a day passed over his head, but he rode that way on Horse∣back; yet was never so fortunate as to see her. At last he bethought himself of a Stratagem, which accomplish'd his designs. By the vertue of Almighty Money, he gain'd over to his party a certain Peasant of the Village, that us'd
to furnish that Castle with Fish, and made him promise to deliver a Letter into the hands of his be∣loved Guillemette; To prevent all mistakes, he acquainted him with her Shape and Features, so the o∣ther promised to perform his part, which he effectually did, for he gave her the Letter. She was somewhat discompos'd at the manner of receiving it, till the fellow cured her of her fears and apprehensions, by assuring her that he was altogether at the Mar∣quises devotion. She promised to send an answer by him the day following, so the Peasant made what haste he could to bring this news to the Marquis, who had all this while impatiently attend∣ed his return. In the mean time, Guillemette open'd the Letter, and read as followeth.
Madam, I Am persuaded, that if I did not live entirely for you, I had not been able by this time so much as to lift up my Eyes to see you without dying. If I cou'd have had the honour to take my leave of you, and know your sentiments, I had recei∣ved sufficient consolation. Do me then the favour that I may enjoy one minute's conversation with you, in some place or other: Alas! who cou'd have believed that we should be so cruelly separated, when we were just upon the point of meeting? However it does not signify much, and I have that favourable opinion of your Charity, that it will repair the loss we have mutually sustain'd. Adieu, my Dear, let me know how matters go with you. You may con∣fide entirely in the bearer, for he's trusty and faithful.
She took no long time in con∣sidering of an answer. The Let∣ter found her when she was in a suffering condition, and desirous to be set at Liberty, so she writ the following answer, and dropt it slily into the Peasants Pocket. Sir, ALtho' I have not seen you since my departure from . . . yet I have not suffered that passion to be extinguished, which you have kindled in my Heart. For a proof of this let me find you to morrow a∣bout four a clock disguis'd in a Fe∣male Habit, on the side of the Wood that joyns the High Way; there I shall have the Honour to see you. Never was the Marquis in such a transport of joy, as when he received this Letter, he kissed it Twenty times over, and made all
the haste imaginable, to get his Love Equipage in readiness. He found her waiting for him on the spot, at the hour of Assignation, where he spoke a thousand tender passionate things to her. She that was now made free and sociable by the Marquises good manage∣ment, complain'd of the haughty carriage of Olympia, and of the unworthy usage wherewith she treated her. He offered her his assistance immediately to deliver her from this Tyranny; but she would not at first consent to such a motion; desiring nothing else, as she assured him, but only to re∣late to her former Mistress. But her lover managed his cause so effectually, by representing to her, that if she followed those measures, she would always con∣tinue in the same condition; whereas with him she should be
absolute Mistress of his fortunes, that she consented to resign her self into his hands the Sunday fol∣lowing. He return'd her his thanks with all the Eloquence he was Master of, he Embraced her, he Kissed her most ardently; all this while she shew'd nothing of her primitive rigour; so that we may conclude, without breach of Cha∣rity, that if they had been in a more convenient place, she had scarce carried that troublesome luggage, call'd a Maiden-head, home with her. However, let that pass, he kissed her Eyes, her Mouth, her Neck, her Bosom, and where he pleased. This com∣plaisant entertainment of his Mi∣stress, threw him into such an extasie, that he was not able to utter one Syllable, till she thus awaked him. I fancy, says she, that I behold you in the very same
condition, as you were in the other day, when you were transported with a sudden Spirit of Poetry, because I would not consent to relieve you with a Kiss. If that chagrin, that sullen fit of melancholly, which at that time possessed you, was able to inspire your Mase with so much vi∣gour; I am of opinion, that the joy which you testify upon this oc∣casion, ought to produce as lively effects. You are much in the right on't, replys he, and after he had a little considered upon the point, he repeated the following verses, as he walked by her side.
An Ode upon a KISS. I. NAy, now Ambitious thoughts farewell, I pity Kings in all their state, While thus in Sylvia's arms I dwell, And mighty love does on my triumphs wait. II. Thus let me languishing expire, Encircled in her Snowy Arms, Till she revives me by her Charms, And pours into my breast a new and nobler fire. III. Thus let me Kiss my Soul away, And revel in substantial bliss; Thus let me spend the fleeting day, And crown each beauteous moment with a Kiss. IV. Adonis ne're was half so blest, Was ne're so fortunate as I: Tho' Loves bright Goddess him carest, And in her Arms hugg'd the delicious Boy.
V. Nor Jove himself such transports knew, When Danae the amorous God did hold: Tho' he, the pleasure to pursue, Mortgag'd his poor Almighty-ship to Gold. VI. Ten thousand loves in pompous state On those two Rosy Lips. reside: While busy I with erger pride Sip all the sweets of love, and bless my happy fate. VII. Now on her glowing breast I range, Now kiss her Cheeks, and now her Eyes. The pleasure's heighten'd by the change, And fills my Senfes with immortal joys. VIII. But Ah! my beauteous Nymph, beware, Ho you encrease my store: For else your pamper'd Slave may dare, Drunk as he is with joy, to sue for something more. IX. For say fond Lovers, what you will, To deify a Kiss: 'Tis but a pledge or prologue still, An earnest to secure the great succeeding blis.
After he had thus concluded, he let a sigh drop from him, and said, Well, Madam, what think you of this Poetical transport now, have you enough of it? Yes in∣deed, says she, and I here protest to you, that I like these Verses extremely well. If it were possi∣ble for me to have a greater esteem for you than I have already, it would be, because you have so extraordinary a Genius at Poetry: Nothing cou'd contribute to ad∣vance you higher in my good opi∣nion than that. To confess the truth, I have a mighty passion and respect for Poets, and all per∣sons of understanding, as I con∣ceive, ought to preserve the same veneration for them. I am ra∣vish'd with joy, Madam, says the Marquis, that I am Master of any good Qualities, that are capable of giving you a diversion: I as∣sure
you, My dearest, that I shall take care to cultivate this poor alent of mine, since I find you have a kindness for it, and that nothing of Gallantry shall pass be∣tween us, which I shall not endea∣vour to give you an account of n Verse. Upon my word, an∣swers she, you will infinitely ob∣ige me by so doing. After they had said abundance of amorous hings one to another, and had reason'd sufficiently upon this Subject, they parted with a pro∣mise not to fail meeting at the our of Assignation. Immediately when she was return'd back to her Chamber, she began to make some reflections upon this affair; and s she was accidentally looking for some thing or other in her Trunk, she chanced at the same ime to lay her hands on the in∣structions, that were formerly
given her by the old Lady. She read 'em over not without some uneasiness, and qualms of consci∣ence, because she saw her actions so apparently blamed in 'em: But to what purpose? She had had already given her promise, and the intrigue was too far ad∣vanced to think of making a re∣treat. But on the other side, the Instructions carried reason and weight in 'em, she was going to embarque her self in an affair, which perhaps might cost her a great deal of repentance, when it would be too late, and what should a poor perplexed Damosel do in such an intricate, mortify∣ing case? She found out, at last, the true expedient, which was to sacrifice these troublesome instru∣ctions to the flames, that she might have nothing about her to refresh her Memory, or reproach
her proceedings. So now, Gentle Reader, you may imagine the pious Gullemette committing the help∣less criminal Papers to the Fire, and aftewards very devoutly ta∣king her repose. The fatal Sun∣day now approached; therefore she made all the haste she could to pack up the best of her move∣ables in a little bundle, and at the time appointed she took 'em under her Arm, and marched out of the Castle, without being per∣ceived by any body. Within two hundred paces of the place, she found her trusty Lover, who at∣tended her coming in a Coach and Six Horses; they took her up, and made such speed that in less then two hours, they arrived at his House; He had prepared a magnificent Apartment for her reception; In fine, he passed a∣way the Night with her, and ra∣vish'd
that flower from her, which the men search after with so much curiosity, and the Women ought so industriously to preserve and guard. In the mean time, they missed her at the Castle, and be∣lieved she was return'd back again to her old Quarters. They pre∣sently dispatched a Messenger thi∣ther to enquire after her, but she was not to be found; the old La∣dy was exceedingly afflicted at the news, and as for her part O∣lympia left nothing unattempted to discover whether she was As∣sassinated or no. All this while, they could not imagine what was become of her, and we have reason to suppose, that it had been a long time before they had received a∣ny intelligence, where she resided, if one of the old Ladies Servants, that was sent to the Marquis up∣on an Errand, had not by mere
accident spy'd her looking out of  Window. He did not seem to iscover any manner of astonish∣ment at the sight, but she no soon∣er perceived him, but she im∣mediately retired to the other end f her Chamber; as soon as he ame home, he declared the whole matter to the good Lady, who om the beginning testify'd a reat deal of sorrow upon this oc∣casion, but now comforted her elf to hear that Guillemette was live. Nevertheless, she banished e poor Marquis for ever from er House, and would not per∣it him to see her any more. For ll that, he did not in the least for∣ear to pass his time as agreeably  he could with his beloved Mi∣ress; and because he remembred mself, that she loved Poetry, he iled not to divert her even that ay, as often as their gallantry
furnish'd him with an occasion. She found all his compositions very agreeable and natural, and took a great deal of pleasure in reading 'em over. She pay'd the Marquis for his Poetry in the same Coyn, as she pay'd him in for all the other civilities she received at his hands. Thus according to appearances, they passed their time contentedly enough, their mutual affection continued very warm and violent for a consider∣able space, and all the while this happy couple never troubled their heads with any other matters. The Marquis made a journy to the Court, after which he returned home, fuller of Love and Vigour than before; much about this time the Judge of one of the prin∣cipal Villages belonging to the Marquis, became a Widdower, and he immediately thought of
supplying that place for him, with his Guillemette; he was a very honest plain man, very rich, and very young; but the difficulty was to know whether the Judge would sit down contented with another man's leavings, and sub∣mit the long Robe to the lubrici∣ty and levity of a Woman. How∣ever, he was in good hopes to gain him, so for this purpose he communicated the design to Guil∣lemette, and represented to her, that it would prove a very advan∣tageous match, that it would re∣pair her honour, and not in the least destroy or interrupt their correspondence. For in fine, my dearest, says he to her, 'tis only for thy Interest that I attempt this affair; and don't believe that I have a mind to abandon thee. No, I'le sooner abandon my whole Estate, and I should be happy e∣nough
in the sole possession o thee, to make the greatest Mo∣narchs envy my condition, tho I was divested of all my other for∣tunes. 'Tis therefore for thy good only that I undertake this enter∣prize, and that we may continue our intrigues with the greater pri∣vacy and security. If you are of opinion that it will be for your advantage, we'l joyntly employ our efforts to wheedle him into the oval of Matrimony. She was convinced with the force of his arguments, and return'd him a∣bundance of thanks for all his care, and civilities; promising to make use of all her Charms to draw this Pigeon to her Pigeon-house, but they were well match'd, he was the Devil of a Rat, and she was the Devil of a Cat.
The Marquis frequently invited the Judge to dine with him, he frequently complained before him of the loss of his Lady, he often regal'd him at his Table; and gave him all the marks of friend∣ship imaginable, and all this while the poor Judge knew not one Syl∣lable of the true occasion. Guille∣mette also frequently entertain'd him in particular, when the Mar∣quis was call'd away by other company. Never did Vestal Vir∣gin shew more Prudence and Pi∣ety than she made appear in all her conversation and behaviour; they that were not acquainted with her Character, would have infallibly taken her for a Second Lucretia. In the mean time, the Marquis sounded by little and lit∣tle the Judges Sentiments, about a Second Marriage, he discoursed en passant of this affair daily to
him; but to all this he return'd no clear positive answers, but talked all the while ambiguously. But one day, our Marquis was resolved to sound his inclinations for good and all; to this end, af∣ter dinner was over, he took him out to walk with him in one of the Parters of his Garden, and thus open'd himself: You know, Sir, the estimation I have always made of your Person, I have di∣stinguish'd you from all the Justi∣ciaries of my Precincts, to place you in these circumstances; the more I find I have for you a cer∣tain honest, well-meaning, com∣plaisant tenderness, that obliges me to have a great respect and concern for your wellfare. This is the reason why I passionately desire to see you advantageously placed in a Second Marriage, and upon this score I have a great de∣sire
to marry you from my own hands. The Judge thanked him very submissively for all the fa∣vours he had received of him; and particularly for the honour he did him daily at his House. But, Sir, says he, you have talked to me concerning a certain thing, of which I have not entertain'd the least thoughts since the death of my Wife; I don't question but that coming from your hands, she must be a person that has abun∣dance of merit, and honour: but may a man be so happy as to know who this Lady is? 'Tis that young Gentlewoman, replies the Mar∣quis, that you have so often seen at my house; she was given me for the Governant of my Family, and I must freely own to you, that I have a great esteem for her ver∣tues. She's a person of Wit and good understanding; and besides
her other qualifications, she'l have four thousand Livres by way of Portion, which I intend to bestow upon her; besides, the first va∣cant place that falls in the Court of Judicature, at Poictiers, which I offer you to accept of, as you find convenient. The Judge was not at all igno∣rant of the train that was laid for him; and as soon as he heard the name of Guillemette mention'd, he smelt the design, and imme∣diately formed a resolution in him∣self not to comply with his Pa∣tron's inclinations. But as it was his interest to manage Monsieur le Marquis as dexterously as he cou'd, he was not willing on the sudden to give him a total refusal, not at all questioning, but that the other, who carefully observed all his actions, would conclude from his rejecting the offer, that he had
some intelligence of their designs upon him. Therefore he took the midle way; and after he had complemented the Marquis upon the score of all his favours and civilities, he humbly represented to him, that an affair of that im∣portance, as Marriage, ought to be nicely consider'd, before one throws himself into it; that with∣in five days at farthest he should receive his answer in writing, where he would take the liberty to express his Sentiments sincere∣ly, in case he should not be able to accept the party. The Marquis pressed him to explain himself more clearly upon this point, but without any effect; He only re∣iterated his former promise, so that the Marquis was obliged to content himself with it, and went immediately to carry the  Guillemette, who no sooner
it, but she presaged ill success to her self in the matter. Neverthe∣less they expected the answer, and accordingly it came to their hands at the prefixed time, they had the curiosity to know what Mysteries the Paper contain'd within; so they broke it open, and read as follows. Sir, AFter having made abandance of reflections upon the incon∣ventences and misfortunes, that Marriage generally carries along with it, I have taken up a resolution not to venture my self the second time on that outragious Sea, but to pass the remainder of my Life in se∣curity in the Harbour. The most convincing arguments that served to determine my opinion in this case, were sent me in a Letter by a Poet, a Friend of mine: I have transcrib'd
a copy of 'em for you, that you may see the advice which he gives me, and with what an invincible aver∣sion be declaims against Matrimony. In the mean time, I shall never cease to make you all the acknowledgments in the World for your infinite fa∣vours, and I am heartily displeas'd with my self, that I cannot force my inclination so far, as to offer my Vows to that charming person you design'd for me. You may rea∣sonably believe, that Providence never design'd me for so great a bles∣sing, however I shall always reserve that honour of Writing my self, Your, &c.
Advice about MARRIAGE. THe Husband's the Pilot, the Wife is the Ocean, He's always in Danger, she always in Motion. And he that in Wedlock twice hazards his Carkass, Twice ventures a drowning; and faith that's an hard Case: Ev'n at our Weapons the Female defeat us, And death, only death can sign our Quietus. Not to tell you sad Stories of Liberty lost How our Joys are all pall'd, and our Plea∣sures all crost, This Pagan Confinement, this damnable Station, Suits no Order, nor Age, nor Degree in the Nation. The Levite it keeps from Parochial Duty, For who can at once mind Religion and Beauty? The rich it Alarms with Expences and trouble, And a poor Beast you know, will scarce carry double.
Twas invented, they say, to keep us from falling, Oh the Virtue and Grace of ashril Catter∣wauling! But it pales in your Game. Ay, but how do you know, Sir, How often your Neighbour breaks up the Enclosure. For this is the principal comfort of Mariage, You must eat, tho' a hundred has spit in your Porrige. True Woman nere minds a Sermon, or Lecture, Her Glass is her Guide, and her Ghostly director, Then she Primes her gay Looks, with an early Devotion, There she Paints, and she Patches, and studies each Motion. Not to please the dull sight of her Conjugal Satyr, But charm and confound ev'ry gaping Spectator. If at Night you're unactive, and fail of performing, Enter Thunder, and Lightning, and Blood∣shed next Morning. Crys the bone of your side, thanks dear Mr. Horner.
This comes of your sinning with Crape in a Corner. Then to make up the breach, all your might you must Rally, And Labour, and Sweat like a Slave at the Gally. Yet still you must Charge, Oh Blessed Condition! Tho you know to your cost, you've no more Ammunition. Till at last, my dear mortified Tool of a Man. You're not able to make a poor flash in the Pan. Fire, Female, and Flood begin with a Letter, And the Worlds for them all scarce a Far∣thing the better. The Flood soon is gone, and your Fire you may humble, If into the Flames store of water you tumble, But the Fire of a Female, on the word of a Friend, Is ne'r to be quench'd, but burns World without end.
You may call half the Engines, and pumps in the Nation, To extinguish the Flame, and allay Titula∣tion. But may Piss out as well the last Con∣flagration. Thus Sir, I have sent you my thoughts of the Matter, Judge you as you please, but I scorn to Flatter. The Marquis was very sorry, that his Project met with no bet∣ter Success; in the mean time the two Lovers did what they could, to comfort one another, by a Con∣tinuation of their Amours. But as resistance feeds the Flame, And fans the dying Fire. So dull Enjoyments spoils the Game, By palling the desire. In effect, our Marquis also, like he rest of his Sex, began to for∣get
get his Promises; for he apparent∣ly neglected her, and never looked upon her without a certain spice of Melancholy. Nevertheless she was happy enough, in having possessed him for about the space of ten years, after which time was ex∣spired, seeing that he had not that Esteem for her, as he formerly had, but on the contrary negle∣cted her, she resolved with her self to leave him, so she begged leave of him to depart, but he pretended at first, by way of Com∣plement, an extream unwilling∣ness to part with her, but at last, he gave her his Consent, and to say the Truth without any great importunity. She had got to∣gether, what by her own sav∣ings, and what by the Presents the Marquis made her, a pretty Sum of Money, with which she took her way towards Paris.
When she arrived there, she lived after a high profuse rate, not be∣ing able to dis-accustom her to those fine Dainties, she used to eat at the Marquis's Table. But as every thing is dear at Paris, she was obliged to retrench her Expences, and consider of some Livelihood or other, where∣by to support her self. For this purpose she entreated a virtuous Old Matron, who made it her busi∣ness to promote a civil Correspon∣dence between the two Sexes, and bring good People together, to put her in a way; but this pru∣dent Gentlewoman seeing her young, and beautiful enough, proposed a Match to her, as the most probable, and advantageous Course to make her Fortune. She was not very averse to the Mo∣tion, and presently inquired af∣ter the Person, and his Vocation;
to this she received Answer, that his Name was Monsieur Scaron, and that he was of the honoura∣ble Society of Poets. The Name of a Poet ravished her Soul with Joy, she longed to see him im∣mediately, but the Old Woman judging it convenient to prepare before her before hand, for see∣ing so extraordinary a Figure, and to give her some short Descrip∣tion of his Person, least she should be affrighted at the sight of him, thus began her Discourse. Like my dear Child with reverence and attention, I am very willing to oblige you with a short Portraiture of this Gentleman before you go to see him. In the first place, he's young, of an ordinary Stature, but very de∣formed; his Legs, his Head and his Body in the posture as they are Scituate, make the exact Represen∣tation of a Z. His Eyes are some∣what
of the largest, but sunk into his Head; his Nose is true Roman, his Teeth of the same Colour with Ebory, and very irregularly placed; his Members to outward appearance seem small and slender, I mean his vi∣sible Members, for I don't desire to be understood of the rest; however to make amends for this want of Sym∣metry and Proportion, he has an infinite deal of Wit above the rest of Mankind; to recommend him farther to you, he has something to live upon, he has a Pension from the Court, and is the Son of a Gen∣tleman of the Long robe; at present if you have a mind to see him, we'l go and make him a Visit. She a∣greed to the proposal, and so they went; Scaron who had some in∣formation of their coming, had dressed himself up like a Bartholo∣mew-Baby, and attended them in his Chair; at their entring into
the Room. Scaron received them with all the Civility imaginable, and for her part Guillemette endea∣voured to answer him in like manner, but not without laugh∣ing to see so Comical, and pleasant a Figure. Their Conversation having lasted almost the space of an hour, they took their leaves of him, and the Old Woman en∣gaged her self several times to bring Guillemette along with her again: They made him a Second Vi∣sit, when he entertained them with a small regale of a Collation, and and the venerable Matron being gone out to look after some∣thing which she had lost, Scaron began to display the Charms of his Wit, and discovered his Passion to the adorable Guillemette. He told her, that he very well con∣jectured, that a Lady so beauti∣ful and handsome as she, would
not willingly Embarras her self with such a demy Monster as he was. But Madam, notwithstand∣ing all this Discouragement, says he, if I durst lay any manner of va∣lue upon my self, I would tell you, that this ill favorable Tabernacle of mine, for all it Promises so little, perhaps lodges a Spirit in it, that de∣serves a better Case, and that is ex∣tremely concerned to find it self in Company with those Persons, who are so advantagiously provided with all the Gifts of Nature. As for my self, I can assure you, Madam, that I shall be always obliged to treat you with the profoundest respect, in case I shall have the Happiness to be ap∣proved by you: But give me leave to tell you, Madam, that delays are not convenient upon these occasions. As she was going to answer him, one of Scaron's Sisters entred the Room, which made her reserve
till another time, what she had to say, so that then she did not ex∣plain her self upon this subject, but at the next visit she made him, well had this old Matron acquitted her self of her com∣mission, that she plainly promised him to be his Wife. He was immediately inspired with the greatest joy in the World; and after this happy declaration he never failed to entertain her day∣ly with his Billets doux, which he composed so agreeably, that they served not a little to conti∣nue her in the same favourable sentiments. But Oh! the Fates, this com∣plaisant humour did not stay with her long, for there happen'd a small rupture between the Lovers. The Old Matron went into the Country to accommodate a cer∣tain affair of mighty consequence
to her, but all this while the ob∣durate Guillemette continued firm in her resolution, and swore she would never see, or think of him any more. When the door Scaron understood this ill news, he en∣dured all those vexations which despair uses to inspire us with, and his grief was yet the more and more violent, when he heard that she rejected all his Letters. He and his trusty confident were just upon the point of accomplish∣ing their designs, and now to be defeated, when they fancied they had surmounted all difficulties, was a mortification not to be ex∣prest: But Scaron, that was master of a great deal of Wit, happily remembred himself, that she loved verses exceedingly, and took an inspeakable pleasure to her him repeat some of his Poetry. There∣fore he resolved to attempt her
once more that way, and wrote abundance of Billets to her in this fashion. After she had read them over, she decently laid 'em aside, as she had done the rest, but wou'd not condescend to return him any answer. Nevertheless, our inde∣fatigable lover charged her daily with his amorous Epistles; his constancy, his respectful behavi∣our; to which were added the assiduities of his Confidence, fail'd not at long run to re-establish him in his Mistresses good graces. But he, that was very well acquainted with the inconstancy of the Age, did not think it á propos to spend much time in this affair; there∣fore he pressed her with all the ar∣guments he could Summon on this occasion; and, in fine, re∣new'd his importunities with that success, that in a short time the Marriage was consummated be∣tween
'em. But alass, poor Gen∣tleman! he found himself migh∣tily mistaken in his judgment; and what he imagined would be the consolation of his Life, pro∣ved just the contrary. He found a large Breach made ready to his hands, through which the Lord knows how many combatants had mounted to make the Assault. He complained of this same business to her; but she was so far from denying the matter, that she told him in an imperious tone, that it was not for such a feeble, meagre, two-legg'd figure, as he was, to have the entire possession of such a Woman as her self; and that he ought to reckon himself happy enough in all conscience, that she was able to suffer his nauseous embraces. This unwelcome dis∣course; which he expected no more than a Summons to the next
World, reduced him to the ex∣tremity of despair; and forasmuch as it lay exceeding heavy upon him, he was willing to discharge in into the hands of one of his Sisters, not at all believing that he cou'd dispose of the Secret to a better Person; or that she wou'd take pains to publish the infamy of her own Family: but he found himself exceedingly mistaken, to imagine, that one of the frailer Sex was capable of concealing so nice and critical a secret; howe∣ver, at last, he discovered his grievances to her, after he had mightily aggravated the conse∣quence of this affair, and told her how tenderly it concerned his Life and Reputation to have it kept private. She failed not on her side to swear and promise e∣very thing in the World, which he would have her do, out of an
itching desire she had to be made acquainted with this important matter. But she no sooner under∣stood what it was, but she found her self possess'd with a far grea∣ter inclination to disclose it. Thus she continued for some days in this Female irresolution, saying and unsaying the very same thing. One day for instance, she fell into the following transport. There's no body knows this secret, but I. Which I've heartily sworn to conceal par ma foy: And I've promis'd, without any damn'd reserva∣tion, Not to utter one Word to a Soul in the Nation. Then must I conceal it? Alass and alack! I may promise as well to bear Pauls on my back. But then if I tell is, I ruin my Brother. Why Isaith I can't help it, as well he as another. This telling of Secrets is part of our Charter, And for my part, I swear, I'le dye no body's martyr. Well, let me consider once more of the matter. Either burn or disclose it, why troth chuse the latter. But then if I speak it, forewell reputation, And besides I may raise his severe indignation, But what Woman alive can conceal fornication?
Not a female on Earth can Cuckoldom smother, Then don't take it ill from your Sister good Brother. You know what the Matron said unto her Daughter, Ne're long keep a Secret, nor long hold your Water. After so many different agita∣tions, sheoesolved at last to put her self out of this torment, and communicate the secred to a trusty She-friend of hers; this trusty Female handed it to another, and she likewise to her next Neigh∣bour, and so on to the end of the Chapter, till at last, the whole Town was acquainted with the Secret, and the greatest part of the conversation in the city went to this Tune. However as every thing in the World has its time, so some new accident or other, occa∣sion'd even this discourse to va∣nish; but this did not afford the least comfort to the Unfortunate Scaron, but the oft ner he reflected on the cruelty of his Stars, and
the unhappiness of his condition, he found his Melancholly humour to grow upon him. In fine, he was so sensibly affected with re∣morse of conscience for what he had done, that it made him pass the remainder of his Life in a sad languishing condition, and at last carried him out of the World. His pious Wife, according to the laudable custom of the World, for some time appeared very de∣solate and afflicted, as you know good manners and civility obliged her to do. She subsisted for a while upon the small for tune that her Husband had left her, for Poets are seldom guilty of leaving great Sums behind 'em; but being sa∣tisfied that her poor stock would not last for ever, she resolved to pursue her first design, and look after a Service. Never was a more favourable opportunity presented
to her then now; she had the luck to meet with one of her old companions of Poitou, who was so happy as to be placed in a very advantageous station with Madam de Montespan. This honest ac∣quaintance promised to employ her utmost interest with her Mi∣stress, to get her fixed in some good condition; and at last suc∣ceeded in her endeavours, for she procured her a Governants place in the house of a Person of Qua∣lity; but this was in Portugal, and thither she was obliged to transport her self, if she complied with the Motion. She agreed to to it with all her heart; and du∣ring the time that the Persons with whom she was to live, were making preparations for their Voy∣age, she went frequently to Ma∣dam de Montespan's, to thank her she companion for the kindness she
had done her; and likewise to endeavour if it were possible to have audience of this celebrated favourite before she departed. This favour she obtained by the means of her correspondent, and acquitted her self so agreeably in her conversation before the above-mention'd Madam de Montespan, that she desired to see her often. Not to be tedious, she pleas'd her so extremely with the gayety of her diseourse, that this Lady ima∣gining she might be useful to her upon several occasions, was wil∣ling to entertain her in her Ser∣vice; and having obliged her to break off her design'd Voyage to Portugal, kept her in her Family: Where she insinuated her self so dexterously into her good opinion, that in a-short time she became her only Confident. Nothing was now to be done with the King,
but by the favour of Montespan, and nothing with her, but through the intercession of Madam Scaron: She managed her good fortune with that address and policy, that she has never since suffer'd any alteration in it; on the contrary the favour she found with her Mistress, brought her daily a vast quantity of presents, and particu∣larly there happen'd an opportu∣nity of considerable importance to her, which served as well to make her carry the cause, as to inform the World what interest and power she had in the very be∣ginning of her Elevation, which has encreas'd to her advantage ever since. The King's Chief Physician be∣ing dead, his Majesty resolved to accept of no body for favour or affection, but to chuse one him∣self; and in order to supply that
considerable place, began to cast an Eye upon Monsieur Vallot. We may reasonably enough con∣clude that he had carried it, if death had not ravished him out of the World. Immediate upon his decease, there appeared a great number of Competitors upon the Stage; who durst never have made any pretensions to the place, if Vallot had been living. Every one employ'd the intercession and prayers of his Friends to succeed in his design; but all these entrea∣tres were to no purpose; a request of this nature, without a good handsom gift to recommend it, carries but little efficacy along with it. The truth of this asser∣tion was soon understood by those pretenders, who were not over and above furnish'd in the Pocket; and they saw clearly that it was but time and labour lost to make
any further bustle. Monsieur Da∣quin was the man that found the easiest access, for he thonght it a piece of imprudence to starve a good cause, and only to depend on a few feeble simple Petitions; so he went a surer way to work, and promised Madam Scaron to make her a purse of twenty thou∣sand Crowns, in case she helped him to the place. This was too tempting and advantageous an offer to be refused; therefore she used all the ways she could think of, to bring Montespan to her par∣ty; she employ'd her utmost ef∣forts to accomplish the design, and did not conceal from her, the advantage she was to make, if this affair succeeded. Montespan who loved her exceedingly, was not sorry to find an occasion to gain her such a considerable Sum as this; to this effect, she made
use of all her Interest with the King: In short, her Petition met with success, and she obtained this pretty round Sum of Money for our Heroine, who to testify her acknowledgments for so transcen∣dant a favour, redoubled her dili∣gence about her, in such a man∣ner, that it was almost impossible for Montespan to suffer any one else about her. It was she that kept all her Soctets, and into her hands she made no scruple or dif∣ficulty to commit those Letters which the King wrote to her; nay sometimes she made use of her assistance to answer 'em. One day she composed so charming, so accurate, and tender a Billet, that the King, who has a delicate apprehension and penetration in these matters, soon perceived that it was infinitely above the Cenius of his Mistress; he pre∣sently
presently resolved to enform him∣self from what hand it came, and began at the same time, to enter∣tain somesuspicious thoughts, some little motions of Jealousie, that something had happen'd which would prove fatal to his Amour. Being come to Madam de Montes∣pan's apartment, he told her, he was desirous to know what per∣sons had dictated that Letter; for as for you your self, Madam, says he, I have known you long enough to be sufficiently acquainted with your Style, and way of Writing. Therefore tell me without any reserve or disguife, who it is. Since you must needs oblige me to tell you, answers she, I will do it, tho' I am confident you'l find it a difficult matter to believe it. But not to keep your mind any longer in suspense, 'twas Madam Scaron that dictated the Letter, and I
transcrib'd it from hers; and that your Majesty may not in the least doubt of the verity of what I have said, I'le go fetch the Original un∣der her own hand. In short, she brought it, and prosented it to him. The King was very well satis∣fy'd with it, and demanded to see Mademoiselle Searon, who at that juncture of time was not to be found: But shortly after, as she happen'd to be with Madam de Montespan, the King entred the room; she was going to with∣draw out of respect to his Majesty, but he would not permit her to quit the place; and gave her a thousand commendations for the happy talent she had in wri∣ting of Letters. She answered e∣very thing he said to her with so much flame and Gallantry, that he admired her more and more, and began to distinguish her from
his other Domesticks. At parting he recommended her to Madam de Montespan's eare, to whom he wrote oftner then his custom usual∣ly was, that he might have the plea∣sure & diversion to see the answers which Scaron dictated: He found 'em all so agreable and charming, the language so beautiful, the thoughts so natural and tender, that he redoubled his Visits, and never failed when he was there, to enter into some pleasant facetious conversation with her. All this, you may imagine, was not very grate∣ful to her Mistress, who began now to be sensible, that after the example of Madam, she had made a person known to the King, who was in a capacity to supplant her. Scaron, who likewise perceived the alteration which these unex∣pected favours from his Majesty, had created in Montespan, endea∣voured
all she could to possesher with far different Sentiments, and attended her with greater dili∣gence every day than other, which in some sort served to cure her disgust. The King took such Pleasure in her Conversation, that he seemed to be somewhat in Love. In effect, he perceived himself to be touched with a cortain Passion in her favour: He gave himself no great trouble to resist and com∣bat these growing Inclinations, supposing that they would vanish of themselves as soon as they were born, but herein he was mightily mistaken: For his Affe∣ctions increased so violently, that he resolved to Discourse her a∣bout them the very next opportu∣nity. To be short, one day when Montespan was indisposed with a Fever, and had composed her self
to rest, the King entred Scaron's Apartment; as soon as ever he was entred, the rest of the Maids withdrew out of a respect to the King, so that finding himself all alone with her, he thus accostell her. It it some days ago Madam, says he, since I have felt a certain Je ne say quoi for you, which obli∣ges me to regard you with a greater Tenderness, than meer Good-will uses to inspire People with. I have often sought an occasion to make this Declarati∣on to you, and at the same time to request you to bring me some Remedy for my Pain: but having never as yet found so favourable an opportunity as this at present, I conjure you to comply with my Demands, and to recoive the offer I tender you, of being the abso∣lute Mistress of my Heart and Kingdom. Alas! Sir, answered
she, how ready is your Majesty to sally your popr undeserving Ser∣vants. How! was it enough to divert your self upon the Score of my Writing, but you must find out at new Subject for your laughter? How ever, I ought to esteem my self sufficiently happy, in that I am able to contribute a∣ny thing to the Pleasure of the greatest Monarch in the World, tho' it is all at my own Ex∣pened No, no, Madam, replys he, somewhat hastily, these are not proper Subjects for Raillery, what I have said to you, is no∣thing out the truth, I am sincere, believe me upon my word, and comply with my Passion. Is it possible then says she, persuing her Discourse, that a mighty Prince should cast his Eyes so low? Sir, I am not worthy of such an Ho∣nour,
and besides, the inumera∣ble Company of Beauties, the most exquisite in the World, of which your Court is so full, are sister by far to engage the Heart of so great a Man. The World would be apt to conclude that your Majesty is blind as to these. Matters, and as for my self, they would give me a Name, which does not at all belong to me. In fine Sir, besides that I am some what advanced in Age, & want Charms enough to pretend to so glorious a Conquest, your Majesty must not be ignorant that I am a Widow, and that you cannot possibly make choice of a Person that lyes un∣der so many disadvantages as my∣self, without making her draw down upon her Head the con∣tempt and indignation of all the beautiful Sex. Ah! Madam, re∣plyes the King, 'Tis to no purpose
to seek for such little Subter∣fuges-as these to colour your re∣fusal. Are you resolved to make me languish away a miserable Life? Ought you nor rather to rest satisfied, when Her you see, that altho' I am above the rest of mankind, yet never theless I have a Heart which is susceptable of all the pretty soft engaging things of Love? and such I esteem, that lively penetrating Wit, which one sees in you, that Grandeur of Soul which you make appear in the most inconsiderable Acti∣ons; in a word, all your charm∣ing Perfections. He said no more to her at that time, and at parting made her a profound reverence, and bid her consider of what had passed be∣tween them. She had no time to return any Answer, for the King immediate entred Madam
de Mantespan's Apartment, where his Chagrin would not suffer him to carry long. As soon as he was gone, Made∣moisell Scaron revolved all this Conversation in her mind; she represented to her self the Passion which the King expressed for her, and did not at all question but that she was beloved by him. Never thelese, she took up a reso∣lution to dissemble a little upon this Score, to the end that by a pretended resistance she might inflame the Kings Desires. This piece of Policy succeeded beyond Expectation, for having suffered two of his Visits, without ma∣king any Declaration in favour of him, she threw him into so vio∣lent a Passion, that being fully re∣solved to vanquish her, he wrote the following the Letter.
The Letter of LOVIS XIV. To Madam Scaron, I Am to tell you, Madam, that your resistance has extremely asto∣nished me; Mr, I say, that have been hitherto accustomed to Victory, and was never before refused. I aways believed that being a King, it was sufficient to give any sign of my desire, in order to accomplish it, but I perceive the contrary by your Rigeurs, and therefore to oblige you to soften them, was the occasion of this Letter. Let me conjure you, my dearest, to love me, or at least make as if you loved me. To∣wards Evening I shall come to see you, and if then I find you no more
favourable to me, than at your other Visits, you will reduce, to the extre∣mity of Despair the most passionate of Lovers. Lovis. She received this Letter with an unspeakable transport of joy, and finally determined to surren∣der her self, that very same Eve∣ning to His Royal Pleasure, for fear she should disgust or exaspe∣rate him by a farther Affectation of resistance. Madam de Mon∣tespan, who perceived the In∣trigue, was extremely afflicted, but being very well read in Court-Policies, she dissembled her Re∣sentment, and shewed no appea∣rances of discontent. In the mean time, the King being come to her Chamber, she endeavoured to retain him with her, by her Ca∣resses,
but he had another design in his Head; he was desirou to know, what mighty Effects his Letter had produced, so he quit∣ted her in haste, and ran to the Apartment of his new Mi∣stress. As soon as ever she per∣ceived him, she put her self into a posture of weeping. The King was urgent with her, to know the occasion. Alass! Sir, says she, I bewail my weakness, which notwithstanding is powerful e∣nough to triumph over my Duty, and my Honour: For in fine, it is impossible for me to resist you any longer, you are my King, I owe every thing to you ... But —No, Madam, replyes he to her, I am not willing you should do any thing by Force and Compul∣sion. I will lay aside the Qua∣lity of a Soveraign before you; do you lay aside your Cruelty
and Rigour, and with a recipro∣cal Passion, Love those that love you. He said to her upon this occa∣sion, abundance of tender, agree∣able things, by the force of which she suffered her self at last to be overcome, and thus the King in that favourable moment accom∣plished his Design, and after se∣veral reiterated Caresses, they took their leaves of one another for a few days. The King gave Orders to have a Magnificent A∣partment furnished for her, which he prayed her to accept; and be∣ing willing, that she should not appear under a meaner Chara∣cter than any of his former Mi∣stresses, he lookt out a Title for her, and at last conferred upon her, that of the Marchioness de Maintenon. But that Dignity be∣ing only Honorary, he purchased
the Estate of Marquis de Mainte∣non for her, who parted with it willingly, and received as well as she a large share of his Maje∣sties Royal Gratifications; for he had a Frigat in America defrayed at the Kings Expence for the space of four or five Years, to make what advantaget he could by her, and withal, a Permission to execute what Acts of Piracy he pleased upon the Spaniards. If he had been Master of any Courage, and had known how to manage his Fortune, when the Fributiers de∣sired him to joyn with them, he had been without dispute the ri∣chest Man that France had in all her Dominions. But he was far from attempting any thing that was Heroic, he had always baseness enough to steal out of the Fleet, when he saw there was any occa∣sion for Fighting, but at the time
of sharing the spoil, he never failed to pay his Attendance, and by his Good-will would have re∣ceived the greatest part of the Dividend. This scandalous Con∣duct sunk him very low in his Reputation, and at present he is so mortally hated by all these People, that a Party of them ha∣ving taken him Prisoner in the Year 85, when he came from En∣rope, to the Isle of St. Martin, designed to put him and his Lady to the Sword, after they had plun∣dered them: Nevertheless, Com∣passion prevailed upon them at last, so they gave him his Life, and having taken his Ship from him, they left him only a little Shal∣lop to get a shore, of which he was then in sight. But if they ever meet him the Second time, it is likely to be his last; and in all Probability they'l never give
him an opportunity of meeting them the Third time. To re∣assume our Discourse; the King having made this purchase, spa∣red no Charges to make the place agreeable to his Mistress: He laid a prodigious infinite Expence up∣on it, he brought store of Water thither, tho before he could bring his design to Execution, he was forced of necessity to raise Moun∣tains, and Traverse them. To this end he joyned Hills together, at the incredible Drudgery of his poor People; for it cost the Lives of above Threescore thousand Souls, and all this, to gratifie a brutal insatiable Passion, with which He was ever possessed. Madam de Scaron, whom we shall for the future call by the Name of Maintenon, was not wanting to pay the King the Ac∣knowledements for all his Favours.
She constantly passed two hours in a day in private with him, he sometimes Communicated to her Affairs of the greatest Importance, and sometimes he also followed her Advice. In the mean time, she did not behave her self disrepectfully to∣wards Madam de Montespan, she treated her always with a great deal of Esteem and Moderation, & this prudent Conduct served to preserve a good intelligence be∣tween them for a long time. The Reverend Fathers the Je∣suites, no sooner perceived the Elevation of Maintenon, but they immediately resolved to gain her to their Party; they rendred her all manner of Homage and Sub∣mission, of which fulsome Ser∣vices the Society is liberal enough, when they find their Account in doing it. They ordered the Re∣verend
Father la Chaise and Bour∣dalou to thank his Majesty, and to insinuate to him, that he could not have made a fitter Choice of any Person to entertain his va∣cant Intervals, than what he had already made; they established her so far in his good Opinion, that she was extremely glad to see them at her House. In fine, to testifie the Confidence which she had in that Order, she chose from thence a Spiritual Director of her Conscience; nay, she en∣tred her self into the Third Order of the Society, and would by all means carry the Name of a Daughter of that sanctified Com∣pany. However, even this Con∣descension did not fatisfie the Je∣suites, but being informed by her Confessor. (For these are a sort of Ecclesiastical Pimps you must understand, that never Scruple to
discover any Secret, when it makes for the interest of their Order) that she was exceedingly given to the Pleasures of the Flesh, and that she entertained an amorous Correspondence with one of her Domesticks, they una∣nimously desired him in a full Assembly, which they held in the College de Montaign, that he would contribute as far as in him lay, to let them make an abso∣lute Conquest of her, to the end that they might have her entirely at their Devotion. He promised to use his utmost Efforts for the Advancement of the holy Socie∣ty, and to give him his due Cha∣racter, he left nothing unattemp∣ted: To bring the business about more dextrously, he took care that his Confessor in ordinary should pretend a certain indisposition for a time, so she was forced to make
use of the Jesuit, and for his part he cou'd not have wished for a better opportunity; for by this means he discover'd the turnings and windings of her Conscience; and was so far from chastizing her for her Sins, that he assured her she was not at all accountable for 'em, but that she was obliged by all the ties of Christianity, to furnish herself with Amorous instructions, in order to render her self Ser∣viceable to the pleasures of the Eldest Son of the Church. Sinners usually love to be flat∣ter'd in their Crimes, and to find out a way to damn themselves with pleasure; and this is the me∣thod that the Modern Casuists, the Jesuites prescribe to their Pe∣nitents, that make no other use of this Sacred Tribunal, which if rightly managed ought to be an instrument of saving People, but
only to chalk out to 'em the most compendious Way to Hell. It is no wonder therefore, that Main∣tenon abandon'd her self to such blessed Counsellors, who had found out so rare an expedient; and she had no sooner tasted the softness and bounties of Father la Chaise in her Confession, but she rejected the rest of the Ecclesiasti∣cal herd; in effect, after that time she only made use of him. All this while, he had promised to make a conquest of her person by way of a Love Intrigue; To suc∣ceed in this attempt, by the help of a little Spiritual Opium, he lull'd asleep the Consciences of all her Domesticks, whom he found favourably inclined to the Society, and like a Politick director he employed some of his own crea∣tures in this pious affair; and a∣mongst others, two penitential
Sisters of the Society, who had an admirable faculty at wheedling and cajoling, and who had in a short time so strangely establish'd themselves in Maintenon's good opinion, that she reposed an en∣tire confidence in 'em, and by way of requital made use of 'em to serve her in her amorous affairs. By this means Father la Chaise was folly inform'd of every particular, and knew how to take his mea∣sures accordingly. One day, the Domestick, who was so very ser∣viceable to her in her nocturnal diversions, had leave of her to go into the the Country for two days, but whether it was, that he met with any of his acquaintance there, or was willing to recruit himself with fresh vigour against his re∣turn; he tarried somewhat lon∣ger than he had permission. After he had been absent for the space
of six tedious days, Madam de Maintenon, who was never ac∣custom'd to so long a fast, wrote a Billet to him, and gave it one of her trusty confidents to see it deliver'd. The Maid immediately carried it to the Reverend Father le Chaise; they shut themselves up in their Chamber, and having opened it, read as follows. UPon my Word, my dear, I must reproach you for the small tenderness you have for me; if you measur'd your own impatience by that of mine, you had return'd the very first day. As for my self I can assure you, that I am infinitely displeased with my easiness in gi∣ving you leave to go, and I am yet the more concerned that you come not at all: You must either not love me, or be dead to, make so unpar∣donable a stay. Return then, my
dear, and leave me not to suffer a∣ny more from the King's Embraces, whom I don't love the tenth part so well as thee; and if you wou'd not find me sick, or dead, come at the usual hour straight into my Cham∣ber; I shall give orders that my door be left open to let thee in. Adieu my Dear. Goodly, Goodly! says the Fa∣ther, and what think you now? What I, says she? I can't tell, un∣less it be that you'l give me the Letter to deliver it to him. No, by no means child, says he, but I want your assistance to do me a certain kindness: She made no great difficulty to promise it. 'Tis this, continues he, I'le go imme∣diately and write a sham-Letter to the Gallant, to spoil his coming and at the blessed hour of Assig∣nation I'le not fail to expect you
in the Anti-chamber, from whence you must lead me to her Bed, the place of Execution. I am much of the same pitch and stature with him, and will throw upon my self all the consequences of this affair. The business being thus resol∣ved upon, he made all the haste he could to write the Bantering Letter, and gave it her to see it deliver'd instead of the other. It was conceived in these terms. Sir, I Am sensibly afflicted that I must acquaint you with ill News. Your Father is at the point of death, I have confess'd him this Morning, and given him the Holy Viaticum. He desired me two or three times to write to you, because he has some∣thing of moment to communicate to you before he dies: Fail not there∣fore to take Horse immediately upon
the receipt of this, for as yet he is in his senses; and if you lose no time, according to what we are able to judge by all ontward appea∣rances, you may come soon enough to speak with him. Cochonet, Curate de Lasine. He had no sooner received this Letter, but he effectually be∣lieved, that the Matter was so. He had an extraordinary Ten∣derness for his Father, and there∣fore made all the dispatch he could, to see him; but to his great surprize he found him in very good Health, which did not a little rejoyce him. They were not able to understand the Mystery of this Letter, but our young Gallant had not the least Jealou∣sie
of the real occasion, which made him to continue for some time with his Parents. In the mean time, the Reverend Father la Chaise came exactly at the hour appointed to the Anti-Chamber, when he found the Maid expect∣ing him. He undressed himself, and put on a Night-gown and Cap, which was the Equipage the other Gentleman used in his amorous Expeditions; after this he was introduced to her Bed, where he entred softly, and with∣out any farther Ceremony pre∣pared for the Assault. Altho' she was fast asleep, she perceived him well enough, notwithstan∣ding the Pretensions of some cer∣tain Females who are of another Opinion, and supposing it to be her own Game-Bull in ordinary, she embraced him with such vio∣lent
and eager Caresses, that the poor Father thought he should expire in this charming Exercise. The Sport was too entertaining to leave any Room for dull insipid Conversation; thus they renew∣ed the Combat several times without uttering one Syllable, and in all Probability they had passed the Night after this man∣ner, if Father la Chaise had not broke the silence by reason of a dam'd unlucky Cold, which set him a Coughing and Wheezing like a decrepit Alderman, that e∣every Morning Vomits ropes of Phlegm by whole-Sale, as juglers do inkle at a Country Fair. Madam de Maintenon gave a shriek im∣mediately, and would have thrown her self out of Bed; but our Ecclesiastical Stallion held her fast, and all the while made her
the most plausible Excuses, that either his Fear or his Love could suggest to him: After he had somewhat appeased the Storm, and calmed her, he represented to her, that the thing was with∣out Remedy; that she ought to consider it was the violence of his Passion, which obliged him to do it, but still he was so prudent, as not to make the least discovery of the true Motive of this Intrigue. How they came to be reconciled, I am not able to say; but in fine, my Memoirs tell me, that recon∣ciled they were, and the business fairly accommodated between them. When the Tempest was happily blown over, they passed the remainder of the Night in these laudable Recreations, and if we may give any Credit to ex∣terior appearances, they have pur∣sued
the same Sport ever since; and I have the Charity to believe they'l continue the Game as long as either of them are able. For certain it is; that if She's the King's Mule; She's likewise the Mare of the pious la Chaise, and her Valet's Hackney into the Bar∣gain, who poor Fellow was no sooner returned to his Mistress, but he excused his long absence, upon the Account of the Sham-Letter he had received. But she who was advertised of the whole Affair, by Father la Chaise, was not desirous to search any farther in∣to these Matters, and received him into her Favour; since which time she employs him in her Pri∣mitive Drudgery to her vast Sa∣tisfaction, if we may take a cer∣tain Talkative, busie Gentlewo∣mans word for it, whom the vul∣gar
People call Fame. All these liberal Contributions by the bye, did not hinder her from recei∣ving the Kings ordinary Benevo∣lence, when he was in Health, and in a Capacity of performing; but when his Distemper came upon him, which proceeded from no other cause than his over-exhau∣sting his Royal Loyns, Madam de Maintenon was infinitely affli∣cted, and in publick gave all the Demonstrations of Grief imagina∣ble. In fine, the Malady grow∣ing daily worse and worse, the Physicians resolved to apply Plai∣sters to the part affected: This holy Daughter of the Society, be∣ing very well satisfied in her Con∣science, that she was partly the occasion of his Majesties indispo∣sition, generously offered to lay the first Plaister on this distressed
Son of Priapus. She laid it on accordingly, and continued to do it several times, even until the entire recovery of the King: When she saw him restored to his Health, she was willing to divert him, and having nothing at all of that nice delicate Love in her which won't admit of a Compe∣titor, she found out for him one of the most celebrated Beauties in France. 'Twas Madam Fon∣tange, which she presented to him; the King redoubled his Esteem for her, seeing she made as it were a Sacrifice of her self, and likewise cherished Fontange with a very particular Affection; But their Amours having been already written, we think it not worth the while, to make any impertinent Repetitions of them in this place; only this I will
add, that the King did not en∣joy her long, for she was Poison'd. Madam de Maintenon has entire∣ly possessed the King's inclinati∣ons ever since; and whatever Charms he might find to attract him elsewhere; yet they were never so powerful as hers since the Death of Fontange. He like∣wise received another Present from her hands, and that was la' Martenon; but she died in Child-Bed, so that when she came to offer him another Lady for his Royal diversion, he would not accept the Gift, but applied him∣self altogether to her; who for her part is not overmuch affli∣cted, altho' the King has not been for a considerable time, capable to oblige any of the fair Sex; but has so much Discretion, as to re∣lieve her Necessities elsewhere,
His Majesties favour is more acceptable and grateful to her then his Love, since she has so many servile Vassals, to gratifie her infamous Passions, and above the rest, the Reverend Father la Chaise. FINIS.
