C2814 R29204 10856404 46126
The Kings Maiesties SPEECH To the LORDS for the raising of For∣ces, to preserve the peace and safety of His Subjects. Iune. 29. Likewise a Report of Mr. Hambden, and Mr. Fines, concerning a Conspiracy intended against the Parliament. Whereunto is annexed Joyfull Newes from the Queene in Holland. Sent from Mr. Cayne Her Majesties Servant, to Mr. Sanders neere Charing-Crosse. Concerning fourteene Messengers which are gone from the States in Holland to His Majesty at Yorke, whose Names are expres∣sed in this ensuing Relation. Together with the Message the States sent to His Majestie. With their Determination concerning the Lord Strange. Ordered that this be printed and published. Jo. Browne, Cler. Parl. Iuly, 5. London, Printed for I. H. and T. R. 1642.
The Kings Majesties Speech to the LORDS for the raising of For∣ces to maintaine the peace and safety of His Sub∣jects. My Lords, THe last time I was in this place I minded you to make what speed you could to raise Forces to reduce the ty∣ranising people, which will not obey my command to a Loyall subjection, the same I shall now include, for I a∣bove all things in the world prize the peace and safety of my good Subjects, and of all Rebellion J hate that of the Popish Faction, I heare daily of the wo∣full estate of my People, and doe under∣stand how my House of Commons
have passed a Bill for the raising of For∣ces, and that the Bill stickes with you my Lords, for whach I give you no thanks, as to the Declaration, J have no pleasure in that, but that Actions may be transacted, in matter of such conse∣quence, this is the full effect of the Speech. The Roport made by Master Pym. Still doe the Protestants eccho forth lameetable complaints, and as it were dispaire of safety, for it was reported to the committee for Irish affaires, that that more Counties have collected their Forces, and joyne with the Rebels, They are marched within 4. Miles of Dublin, pillaging of Houses, and dri∣ving away Cattell, and stop the passa∣ges
from whence they received provisi∣on, to the great griefe and feare of his Majesties good Subjects, the Protestants of Ireland, the Rebels made publique proclemation, and maintained it, with a generall Oath for to be all true to the Church of Rome. also they proclaime and confesse that King Charles is their lawfull King and governour, making a Vow and Protestation. They tooke up Armes in defence of their Religion, not in contempt or malice against his Maiesty, to which intent they spake to the Lord Dillon, to send Letters to the Kings Majesty, but this can be no better dissem∣blation, for they which love the King will not persecute his Loyall people by fire and Sword, as they have and daily doe, and yet will make us be∣lieve they love the King, from their pow∣er Lord keepe him for ever, and never let him be so unfortunate as to fall into their
hands, for then upon my life J am per∣swaded they would exile from their hearts both duty, love, and mercy, two Sunnes must not shine in one climate, Tyrone must have nothing to doe where King Charles hath Authority. Although now he exalt himselfe as his Father did before him, let him quick∣ly returne to his Spanish preferment, from England, Scotland, or Jreland. Other Letters came that the Rebels expected Ammunition from forraigne parts, that the old Proverbe may∣be made true, the Devill helpes his ser∣vants. Wherefore the Lord chiefe Iustices of Jreland, desired the Parliament to send their poore Subjects and friends some reliefe of Men and Money, about which there did arise some debate con∣cerning sending of men out of this Kingdome, I meane also concerning a presse unlesse it was done by Act of Parliament, but now it is resolved up∣on
the Question that ayd shall be spee∣dily sent unto the poore afflicted Pro∣testants in JRELAND, the Com∣manders in London looke every day when their Commission should be sea∣led up, and then they enter into pay. A Conspiracy discovered against the High Court of Parliament. VPon the 17. of June, Mr. Fines made a Report to the Honou∣rable Court, that there was a great Treason discovered against them, the Plotters whereof were, first. That Captaine Goring should be a great Commander in the Army, and the Lord of Newcastle to meet them in Notting∣hamshire with 1000 Horse. In which Conspiracy Sergeant Major Wallis saith, That the French would assist them, and the Clergie would at their own charge send 1000 horse, this Army was to be
brought from the North against the Ho∣nourable Houses of Parliament. As it was Reported to both Houses by Mr. Hambden. A Letter sent from the Queenes Court in Holland, sent from Mr. Cayn her Maie∣sties Servant, to Mr. Sanders neere Chee∣ring-Crosse. SIR, I Having such a fit opportunity to present my Service unto you not knowing when to have the same again by reason of the great distempers which are with you. Therefore J thought by this Messenger to certifie you of the proceedings betwixt the Queens Majesty, and her Royall Soveraign the King of great Brittain, Vpon the 22. of Iune there went to the King at York Pce Robert, rince Maurice, the Lord Dunby, Sir Edward Stradly, Sir Lewes Dues, Mr. Smith, Mr. Whalcy, Mr. Foxe, Mr. Bacon, Mr. Grand, Mr. Gffery, Captaine Cade, Captaine Bankly, the which were commanded by the States of Holland to present a Messge to His Royall Majesty of great rittain, intimating the great danger which is like to ensue▪ unlesse he be pleased to tecide to his Parliament, and so agree in Concord, and unity together. So I rest. From the Hague June, 28. 102. Your loving Friend, John Cayne. Servant to the Queens most Excellent Majestie.
FINIS.
