C2772 13117136 97760
HIS MAIESTIES Speciall Command under the great Seale of ENGLAND. To the Lord Major of the Honourable City of London, dated Decemb. 9. 1641. For the speedy sending of Precepts into severall wards of the City. To suppresse the Tumultuous and unlawfull Assemblies, and Riotous disorders both in the City of London and Westminster. VVith a Relation of the Riotous Assemblies, Mu∣tinous Vproares, and disorders, made and committed by a company, of Brownists or Seperatists within the City of London and VVestminster. Also, in what manner they entred into St. Georges Church, where one of them made a Sermon, on Sunday Decemb. 12. VVhereunto is added the Riotous Insurrection and Rebellion of some Prisoners in New-gate condemned to dye, on Munday December 13. 1641. LONDON, Printed for Iohn Thomas, 1641.
By the Major. WHereas our Soveraigne Lord the King having received information that many Riots & unlaw full assemblies are daily made at the City of West∣minster and within the City of Lon∣don, against his Majesties peace and quiet of his people for repressing & punishing where∣of hath directed his writ under the great Seale of En∣gland, dated the 9. of this instant December unto the Justices of peace within this City, and Sheriffes of the same thereby strictly commanding them to put in ex∣ecution according to the duty of their places, the Sta∣tute made and provided against such Riots, Routs, and unlawfull assembly; Therefore for the better preven∣tion & timely repressing of any tumults, Riots, Routs, or vnlawfull assemblies that may at any time hereaf∣ter be attempted, made or committed within this Ci∣ty or the Liberties thereof, These are in his Maje∣sties name to charge and command you that forth∣with upon receipt hereof, you cause his Majesties command aforesaid to be notified by some of your common Councell men, Constables or other discreet persons vnto every housholder within your Ward, charging every of them at their vttermost perill from henceforth not to permit any of their Apprentises or servants to have the Liberty of going abroad to make
any Tumults or vnlawfull meetings and assemblies within this City or elsewhere upon any pretence whatsoever, and by themselves to the vttermost of their power and best endeavour to hinder and let the committing of any such offences for the preseruation of his Majesties peace and the quiet government of this City, which at this present doth suffer much re∣proach through the great disorder, tumults, and vn∣lawfull assemblies daily made and committed within that same. And further that you make knowne unto the Masters and servants, that if they or any of them shall be found to offend in the premisses. Then they are to be proceeded with according to the Lawes in this case made, as you will answer the contrary at your perils. This 9. of December. 1641. Michell. A Relation of the disorders, muti∣nous assemblies, vprores, and distracti∣ons, committed by many Schismaticall people, but especially by the Brownists or Separatists of this Kingdome. HOw many Sects, and Schismes, are lately sprung up heere in this Kingdome, that they (like the plagues of Egypt) have over∣runne the Land, but namely the Brownists or Sepera∣tists, beare the greatest sway, to what a height of im∣pudency, and Insolencie, have they aspired unto, being upheld by too many of that sect, they like the Phili∣stins
bring their, Goliah to fight their Battells, but there is no doubt but there will arise a David of truth, to beare downe their violent and Phantasticall Doctrine, by which so many people are seduced, these are those Sectarists that will abide no degrees in Schooles, all humane Learning must be layd by, Accademies are to them abhominable. Hence come those violent outrages, and sacrilegi∣ous disorders committed in the Church, even in time of Divine service, and the hubbubs, and strange Tu∣mults raised, where reverend silence ought to be used, by laying violent hands upon the Ministers in divers places and Parishes within this City, impudently as∣cending into their Pulpits, assuming to themselves the power of preaching, others rending the Surplices from their backs, they hardly escaping in their per∣sons from being torne in peeces, and that when the Psalme hath beene singing, and the Preacher ready to goe up into the Pulpit, to deliver his Sermon, like∣wise by rending of the Rayles about the Communion Table chopping them in peeces, and burning them in Church-yard, and this to be done without Commissi∣on or order, in a rude and riotous manner, as if wee lived vnder no government; how many Riotous assem∣blies and Routs by their concourse and disorderly meetings in severall places of the Cities of London & Westminster, committing such insolencies and outra∣ges at severall times, as if Justice and authority had no power over them, to the great scandall and defa∣mation of the Government of this City and King∣dome. Witnesse their tumultuous assembling and flocking
to the Parliament at divers times, with their vndecent gestures and irreverent speeches in Westminster Hall, and other places, for which to instance, there was 4. men brought before the House of Commons Nov. 30. 1641. for making a hubbub in the Hall, crying downe Antichrist and the Bishops, and saying, if they could not be heard, they would have a farre greater number the next day to back them, and the like. Likewise the next day many hundred of Citizens flocking to the houses of Parliament, and called upon the members, as they passed from their houses, to sup∣presse Bishops, crying aloud, no Bishops, no Bishops, calling them the limbes of Antichrist. On Wednesday Sir Iohn Strangwaies made a com∣plaint that he was assaulted by 100 in the streets, & had received offensive words, whereupon the House fell into consideration for suppressing and repelling of tumults, and disorders of that nature. This evening the Citizens begun to rayse the like clamour againe, but being intreated to forbeare, and depart home to their houses, the tumult ceased for that time. Againe, on Friday Decemb. 4. many hundred of Citizens and Brownists flocked to Westminster armed with Swords and staves, as if they came to besiege the Parliament-house, whereupon the Trayned Bands was raised, and ceazed upon them, not knowing otherwise, but that they came against the Parliament-house, to that their plea was, they came to defend the truth, but it was very true, that many of them were com∣mitted to prison. Vpon Friday notice was given to the Parliament,
how that their number was so great, so that instantly there was warrants sent unto each Constahle, to com∣mand sufficient men with Swords and Halberds, to guard the Parliament-house. On Sunday last Decemb. 12. was a great assembly of these Brownists gathered about St. Georges Church in Southwarke, and one of their Preachers a Cobler by profession violently went up into the Pulpit, & made a Sermon above an houre long, whom they assisted, untill all the Constables thereabouts had raised ayd to suppresse these tumultuous outrages. After this he went from thence to St. Olaves Church neere the Bridge, with all his illitterate audience af∣ter him, thinking to make another Sermon there also, but being prevented, and that they could not get into the Church, this Preaching Cobler stood up in the Church Porch, and made a Sermon to them all. These and the like disturbances and distractions I hope the King and Parliament will take into their grave con∣siderations and pious care, that the peace of this Church and State, may not be clowded nor eclipsed by these mists and errours of darkenesse and ignorance, and let it bee the Prayer of all good Christians, that these AEgyptian Locusts, that swarme in every corner of this City and Kingdome, may be expelled, that we may enjoy the light of the Gospell.
The Riotous insurrection and Re∣bellion of the condemned Prisoners which was to suffer on Munday the 13. of December. THe Sessions of Goale delivery being finished up∣on Friday last, the parties Delinquent were sent (according to their severall offences) back againe to the place of imprisonment from whence they came, with the 7. severall Iesuites, who were accordingly condemned for their severall Treasons, according to the Statute thereupon provided, where till Sunday af∣ter dinner they were all reasonably quiet, but after∣wards they grew tumultuous by throwing of stones and other like stuffe, upon the Passengers in the streets, who in great multitudes were then gaping up at the Prison, and after a Sermon that night, all de∣parted. On the next morning early Mr. Maccalee the new visitor of the said prison came to them, with an earnest request to know whether they were prepa∣red to dye and also to receive the Sacrament, which they all did really confesse, so that the said Iesuites might suffer with them, who after some admonitions to them, he expected their appearance in the Chap∣pell, but presently they stood upon their guard, and would not dye without them, upon which they having got strength and stood in defiance, till Captain Geeres with his Trayned Band came to suppresse them, then the Sheriffes resolved to smother them, and provided a quantity of wet Hay, which being fired did smoke them up, after that the Armed men entred the prison and they were all taken and bound in chaines and lye ready to suffer according to their demerits, and wait the time of their execution. FINIS.
