C4309 09316775 42735
TVLLY'S OFFICES. IN Three Books. Turned out of LATIN into ENGLISH. By Ro. L'ESTRANGE. LONDON: Printed for Henry Brome at the Gun in St. Paul's Church-yard. 1680.
TO THE READER. 'TIS hard, me thinks, that a Man cannot Publish a Book, but he must presently give the World a Reason for't; when yet there's not One Book of Twenty that will bear a Reason; not One Man of a Hundred, perhaps, that is able to Give One; nor One Reason of a Thousand
(when they are given) that was the True Reason of Do∣ing it. The True Reason (I say) For there's a great Dif∣ference, many times, betwixt a Good Reason, for the doing of a thing, and the True Rea∣son why the thing was done. The Service of God is a very Good Reason for a Man's go∣ing to Church; and yet the meeting of a Mstriss There, may, perchance, be the True Reason of his Going. And so likewise in Other Cases, where we cover our Passions and our Interests under the Semblances of Virtue, and Duty. But however, since
Custom; (the Plague of Wise Men, and the Idol of Fools) since Custom (I say) will have it so, that a Man had as good go to Court without his Cra∣vat, as shew himself in Print without a Preface; I shall e'en Content my Self to play the Fool too, in so Much, and in so Good Company. (General Dedications being no Other, then Fashionable Fopperies.) For what can be more Ridi∣culous, than for a Man to Treat Princes, and Tinkers; Coxcombs, and Philosophers; Men of Honour, and Rascals, promiscuously, all in a Stile?
Now as it is no Easie Mat∣ter to give a Good Reason for Writing at all; so it is yet more Difficult to give That Reason in an Epistle; which, at best, stands in need of ano∣ther very good Reason, for its own support. But Pre∣faces, at the Ordinary rate of Prefaces, are wholly Inexcu∣sable; Only an Idle Deal of Fiddle-Faddle betwixt the Writer and the Reader, made worse, by Care, and Peins; and Digested, out of Vulgar, and Pedantique Common-Places, into one Mass of Putid and Elaborate Folly. This Liberty of Prefacing against
Prefaces, may seem a little Un∣reasonable; but Common Scriblers are allow'd the Pri∣vileges of Common Strum∣pets. One of the Frankest Prostitutes that ever I knew since I was born, had These Words the oftenest in her Mouth: Lord! (says she) to see the Impudence of some Women! To come now to the Reasons that indud me to the Trans∣lating of This Little Book; I shall Begin with the Excel∣lency of the Work it Self; which has ever been Esteemed, both for the Method, and Mat∣ter
of it, as one of the most Exact Pieces of the Kind that ever was written, and the most Instructive of Human Life. In so much that Cicero him∣self valu'd himself upon This Tract of Morals, as his Ma∣ster-Piece; and accordingly recommended the Study of it to his Beloved Son, under That Illustrious Character. Secondly, as it was Composed in a Loose, and Troublesome Age, so was it accmodated also to the Circumstances of Those Times; for the assert-of the Force, and Efficacy of Virtue against the utmost Ri∣gour, and Iniquity of For∣tune.
Vpon which Conside∣ration likewise, I have now turn'd it into English, with a regard to a Place, and Season, that extreamly needs it. I do not speak This, as if at any time it would have been Super∣fluous; but that Desperate Diseases require the most Pow∣erful Remedies. To give you the Sum of it in a few Words; It is a Ma∣nual of Precepts for the Go∣vernment of our Selves, in all the Offices, Actions, and Con∣ditions of Human Life; and tending, not only to the Com∣fort of Men in Society, but to the Conducting of Particu∣lars
also, into a State of Feli∣city, and Virtue. It is a Les∣son that serves us from the ve∣ry Cradle, to the Grave. It teaches us what we Ow to Mankind; to our Country; to our Parents; to our Friends; to our Selves; what we are to do as Children; what, as Men; what, as Citizens: It sets, and it keeps us Right in all the Duties of Prudence, Modera∣tion, Resolution, and Justice. It Forms our Manners; Pur∣ges our Affections; enlightens our Understandings; and leads us, through the Knowledge, and the Love of Virtue, to the Practice, and Habit of it.
This Treatise of Offices, I find to be one of the Commonest School-Books that we have; and as it is the Best of Books; so it is apply'd to the Best of Purposes; that is to say, to the Training up of Youth, in the Study and Exercise of Virtue. The Foundations of an Ho∣norable, and a Blessed Life, are laid in the very Cradle; and we suck in the Tincture of Generous, or Perverse Inclina∣tions, even with our Mothers Milk: Insomuch that we may date the greater part of our greatest Miscarriages, from the Errors, and Infelicities of our First Institution, and Educa∣tion.
But tho', upon the whole matter, I do Highly approve of the Usage of This Book in Schools, I must confess yet, with Submission, that I am not at all satisfy'd in the ordinary Way of using it. For the cutting of it out into Particles, here and there a Chop, makes it a Les∣son, to the Boys, rather of Syn∣tax, then Morality; beside the prejudice that it suffers under the Trivial name of a School-Book; and the disgust which naturally continues with us, even when we are Men, for that which we were whipt for, when we were Boyes.
Now the Matter of this Book being so Excellent; and truly the Latin of it hardly Cicero∣nian; it should be our bus'ness rather to inculcate the Doctrine then the Stile; and yet in such manner too, that the One may be Attended, without Neg∣lecting the Other. And This may be effected to the Common Benefit of the Schollar, in Both Kinds; by, First, Reading, and Expounding These Offi∣ces, Whole to him, in Eng∣lish, before he be put to Hack, and Puzzle upon them by Snaps in the Original; the One Facilitating, and Preparing him for the Other. Let him
be, First, and in his Mother-Tongue, instructed in the Prin∣ciples of Moral Duties; and he shall then with the more Ease, Profit, and Delight, take the same Notions down in La∣tin, and Digest them. Where∣as in beginning with the Latin, the Pupil has little more to do, then to bring together the No∣minative Case and the Verb, without either Understanding, or Heeding the main Scope, and Intent of the Book. I might here entertain the Reader with Twenty Stories of the Interruptions I have met with, in the Course of This Translation; how it has been
only the Work of Broken Hours; and I might plead These Distractions in excuse of all its Inequalities, and De∣fects. But such as it is, Plain, and Simple, I do here present it to the Publique, without ei∣ther Vanity, or Complement: and, I hope, without giving un∣to any sort of Reader any Iust Cause of Compleint. For He that does not like it, may let it alone, and there's no Hurt done.
TVLLY's OFFICES. The First BOOK. ALTHOUGH,'Tis a great Advantage, Good Institu∣tion, and Good Exam∣ple. after Twelve Months spent in the School of Cratippus, and That at Athens too, you cannot (my Son Marcus) but be abun∣dantly instructed in the Pre∣cepts, and Institutions of Philosophy, by reason of the Great Authority of the Master, as well as of the Place; the One, for Erudition, the Other for Example: I am yet of Opinion, that you shall do well, nevertheless,Greek and Latin, Rhe∣torique and Philosophy, do well to∣gether. to take the same Course in Your Studies, that I have done in Mine, and to mingle your Latin with your Greek; as a Me∣thod which I have ever found very much
Conducing to the Bus'ness, both of an Orator, and of a Philosopher: Beside that it will give you the Command, indifferently, of Both Languages. In This Particular, I am perswa∣ded that I have done my Country-men no small Service; and that not only those who have no Skill at all in Greek, but even the Learned Themselves will acknowledge, that I have in some sort Contributed to the Advantage, both of their Eloquence, and Iudgment. Where∣fore, as you have the greatest Philosopher of this Age for your Master, you shall also Learn of him as long as you please; and so long, certainly, you ought to desire to Learn, as you find your self the Better for it. Upon the Reading of my Writings,Cero Half a Peripate∣tique. you will see a great deal in them of the Peripatetique, (for I am a Follower of Socrates, and of Plato Both.) As to the Matter it self, you are at liberty to use your Own Judgment; but yet the Acquaint∣ing of your self with my Stile, will undoubt∣edly be of some Use toward the Improvement of your Latin Tongue. And let me not in This be thought Arrogant neither;A better O¦rator, than Philoso∣pher. For, allowing my self the meanest of many Philosophers, I have yet some Right, me thinks, after an Age spent upon This Study, to value my self upon all the Parts of an Orator; as Propriety, Perspi∣cuity, and the Flowers, and Ornaments of Well∣speaking. Wherefore I must Earnestly recom∣mend unto you the Perusal, not only of my Orations, but likewise of my Philosophical Dis∣courses, which are now swell'd almost to the Bulk of the Other: and that you will read them with Intention, and Care: for tho' there may
be, in the Other, a greater Force, and Dig∣nity, yet This smooth, and temperate Mix∣ture is not to be neglected. Among the Greeks,None of the Greeks Ex∣cellent in Both Kinds. I have not found any Man that has Successfully apply'd himself to the Language of the Bar, and to this gentle way of Argumentation, both at once; unless I should reckon Demetrius Pha∣lerus for one who was indeed a subtle Dispu∣tant, no very Powerful Orator; but then such a Vein of Sweetness with him, that a Body might imagine Theophrastus had been his Tu∣tor. For my Own part, I have labour'd in Both these Kinds; and with what Effect, let the World judge. Plato, I believe, would have made a Ready, and a Weighty Pleader, if he had bent his Mind to't: And Demosthenes, a Queint, and a Polite Philosopher, if he would but have treated of, and stuck to what he had from Plato. And This was the Case also, of Aristotle, and Isocrates; they were both of them fond of their Own Way, and slighted one another. BUT being resolved to Write somewhat to you at present, and More, Hereafter;His Reasons for the Choice of This Sub∣ject. I have made it my Choice to begin upon That Subject, which I look upon to be most accom∣modate to your Age, and best becoming the Authority of a Parent. There are many Pro∣fitable, and Important Points in Philosophy, which have been accurately, and copiously handled by divers Learned Men: But that which I take to be of the Greatest Latitude, falls under the Head of Offices, or Duties be∣twixt Man and Man; whereof, we have many
Precepts, and Traditions transmitted to us from our Fore-fathers. For there is no Condition of Life, either Publique, or Private; from Courts of Iustice, to Particular Families; either Solitary, or in Society; but there is still a place for Humane Duty: And it is the Well, or Ill discharging of This Office, that makes our Cha∣racter in the World, either Glorious, or Shame∣ful. And This is the Common Theme too of all Philosophers; for who shall dare to Usurp That Sacred Name, that never prescrib'd Rules for the Government of Life?He taxes the Epicu∣reans. But there are some Doctrines yet, that render these Offices wholly Vain and Useless; upon a Mistake con∣cerning the Ends of Good, and of Wicked Men: For whosoever phansies any Possibility of sepa∣rating the Supreme Good, from Virtue, That Man can never be either a Friend, or a Iust, or a Generous Person, upon That Foundation. (That is to say, so long as he agrees with him∣self, and without attending to the Dictate of a better Nature.) Can any Man be Brave, that makes Pein the worst of Evils? or Temperate, that makes Pleasure the Sovereign Good? This is so clear, that it is not worth a Dispute; be∣side that I have expresly discours'd upon it in another place. The Patrons of these Positions must Contradict themselves, if they will pre∣tend, in any sort, to intermeddle in This Mat∣ter: For there can be no Sound,Nothing de∣sirable for it self but Virtue. Stable, and Natural Principle of Duty erected upon any Other Foundation, than This; That Virtue is Only, or, at least, Chiefly desirable, for its pro∣per self. Wherefore the Stoiques, Academiques, and Peripatetiques, were much in the Right, in
This Particular; as the Whimsies of Aristo, Pyrrbo, and Herillus, are long since out of Doors: Not but that They had as much Right as Other People, to a Freedom of Debate, if they had but left us in a State, or Capacity of Election; without Cutting off the very Means of any Correspondence at all with Humane Du∣ties. Therefore at This Time, and in This Question, I shall follow the Stoiques; not as an Expositor, but (after my Usual Custom) I shall draw as much Water at their Well as I think fit, and then make use of it according to my Own Discretion. BEING in this Book to treat of the Offi∣ces or Duties of Mankind, it will be proper, in the First place, to define what is intended by the Word Office; (a thing omitted by Pa∣naetius, which I wonder at:) For all Reasonable Propositions ought to be introduced by a Defini∣tion;All Disputes should Be∣gin with a Definition. for the better understanding of the Point in Debate. OF Duties, or Offices,A Division of Offices. there are Two Kinds; the One respects the Ends of Good Men; the Other consists in certain Rules, and Precepts to be apply'd to the Vse, and Conduct of Humane Life. Under the Former, are These Questi∣ons: Whether All Offices be perfect, or not? Whether One Office be Greater, or Less then Ano∣ther? And What Offices are found to be of the same Sort, and Degree? But those Offices which are deliver'd to us by Precept, tho' they have a regard also to the Life of Good Men, yet it does not so much appear; because they seem
to be rather a Provision for the Ordering of Life in Society. These are the Offices which we shall Discourse of in this Book. There is also Another Division of Offices; some are call'd Middle, and Imperfect, others Perfect; We may call the Latter, a Right, (according to the Greek word ) and the Other, a Com∣mon Office, () defining That to be Per∣fect which they call Right, and That to be a Middle Office, when a Man may give a Reasonable Accompt for the doing of it. Deliberati∣on, accor∣ding to Panaetius, under Three Heads.IT is Natural to Deliberate, before we Re∣solve; and Panaetius reduces the subject matter of Deliberation into Three General Heads. The First Question is, Whether the thing delibe∣rated upon, be Good, or Evil? wherein several Men are many times of several Opinions. The Second Enquiry or Consult refers to the Ease, Pleasure, or Convenience of Life; as Estate, for the Purpose Wealth, or Power; by which we are enabled to be helpful, both to our selves, and our Friends: Whether the Matter in debate be convenient, or not? And This Question is carry'd by the Appearance of Pro∣fit. The Third Point of Deliberation, lies in a Case, where the Honest and the Profitable come in Competition. For when Vtility drives One Way, and Virtue invites us Another, there follows a Distraction of Mind, and a dubious Anxiety of Thought. It is a great failing to leave out any thing in a Division; and yet there are Two things omitted in This.Cicero makes Five. For the Question is not only Whether a thing be Honest, or Not, but where there are Two things
Honest, before us, which is the Honester? and of Two Profitables, whether is the more Pro∣fitable? So that his Three Branches must be extended to Five: First, the Concurrence of Two Good Things; Secondly, That of Two Pro∣fitables; and Lastly, Both of them in Compari∣son. Of which in Order. ALL Living Creatures are Originally mov'd by a Natural Instinct,Self-love is Natural. toward the means of Self-Preservation: As the Defence of their Lives, and Bodies; the Avoidance of things hurtful to 'em; the search, and provision of all Necessaries for Life; as Food, Shelter, and the like. It is likewise Common to them All, the appetite of Propagating, and Continuing their Kind; with a Certain Care, and Tenderness for their Issue. Now betwixt a Man,The Diffe∣rence be∣twixt In∣stinct, and Reason. and a Brute, there is eminently This Difference. The One is carry'd on by sense, and to That only which is present; with little or no regard to what is either past, or to come: whereas the Other, by the Benefit of Reason, sees the Con∣sequences of Things; Their Rise, and their Pro∣gress; and couples together, Causes, and Ef∣fects; compares Resemblances of Times, Acti∣ons, and Events; tacks the Present, to the Fu∣ture; and so taking in his whole Life at a View, he prepares all things for the Use, and Com∣fort of it. It is by Force of the same Reason,The Seeds of Justice. that Na∣ture makes one Man a Friend to Another; that she moves us to the Love of Communication, and Society;Liberality. that she implants in us a particu∣lar Affection to our Children, and dictates to us
the Necessity of Communities, and Councils. This is it that puts us upon providing for Food, and Clothing; and not for our selves alone, but for our Wives, our Children, our Friends, and for all those that are under our Protecti∣on.Prudence. This Impression raises great Thoughts in us; and fits us for Action: but there is no∣thing so Appropriate, and Peculiar to Mankind, as the Love, and Faculty of Tracing out the Truth. Insomuch, that we are no sooner at Liberty from Common Cares, and Business, but our Heads are presently at work upon something to be either seen, or heard, or under∣stood; accompting upon the knowledge of things wonderful, and hidden, as a necessary In∣gredient into a Happy, and a Virtuous Life. From whence may be drawn this Conclusion, That whatsoever is True, Simple, and Sincere, is most congruous to the Nature of Man. This love of Truth is accompany'd with a desire of Rule;Magnani∣mity. so that a Generous and Well-qualified Mind, will never be brought into Subjection, unless either for Learning, or Instruction sake; or in Submission to a Iust, and Lawful Governour, for the Common Good. This Elevation begets a Contempt of Fortune, and a Dignity of Spi∣rit.Modesty and Tempe∣rance. And it is no small matter neither, the power of Reasonable Nature even in This re∣spect; that Man alone understands Order; the Bounds of Decency, in Words, and Actions, and the Terms of Moderation: That only Man is affected with the Beauty, the Gracefulness, and the Symmetry of Visible Objects. Now if Nature, and Reason, take such Care to con∣vey the Images, even of Sensible Things, from
the Eye, to the Mind; how much a greater Value must she set upon the Grace, and Con∣stancy of our Manners; and the keeping such a guard upon all our Words, and Deeds, that no Vnmanly thing, not a loose Syllable, or Thought escape us? This is the Composition of that Honesty we look for, which is never the less Venerable, for being little Esteem'd: For without any approbation from abroad, the whole earth nnot yet hinder it from being praise-worthy in its own Nature. Oh! my Son, Marcus, we may fashion to our selves some feint Idea of Virtue or Wisdom; but if it could be presented to our Eyes in its Genuine Lustre, how should we be transported (says Plato) with the Love of it? THERE is not any Virtue whatsoever,The Four Cardinal Virtues, and the subject∣matter of each. but arises from One, or Other, of these four Heads; and consists either, First, in the search, and perception of the Truth; or, Secondly, in the Conservation of Hamane Society; giving every man his due; and keeping faith in all Pro∣mises, and Contracts; or, Thirdly, in the Great∣ness, and Force, of a Brave, and Invincible Courage; or, Fourthly, in the Order, and Measure of all our Words, and Actions; according to the Rules of Modesty, and Temperance. NOW though these four Virtues may be Complicate, and Linkt together,Distinct Duties in a Complicati∣on of Vir∣tue. there are yet certain distinct Duties, that issue severally from each of them: As the Scrutiny and Bolting out of a Truth; from Prudence, which is a Faculty particularly appertaining to That Virtue: For he that makes the best judgment of the Truth
of Things;Prudence searches the Truth of Things. he that most readily finds the way to't; and gives the best account of the Rea∣son of it, we conclude him, without all dis∣pute, to be the wisest Man. So that effectu∣ally, the proper Subject of This Virtue, is Truth:Justice shews it self in Society. But the Business of the Other three Vir∣tues, is, To procure and maintain Necessaries for the Commodity of Life; the upholding of Communities, and Society; and to shew the Dignity of the Mind,Fortitude in the Con∣tempt of Difficulties. as well in e Communica∣ting of our Fortunes, as in the Acquiring of them; and more yet (if there shall be occasion) in the despising of them. But Order, Constancy, Moderation,Tempe∣rance in Order and Measure. and the like, require somthing of Action, in concurrence with the Operations of the Mind: And he that would acquit him∣self in the Course of his Life, with Reputation and a good Grace,A Decorum in the Con∣gruity of all. must observe Order, and Measure. Prudence is a Natural Virtue.OF these Four Parts, into which we have divided the Nature, and the Power of Virtue; that which concerns the disquisition of Truth, holds most affinity with the Soul of Man. We are all of us, both drawn, and led to a desire of Knowledge; and every man values him∣self upon being wiser then his Neighbor; but on the other side, to Fail, to Wander, to be Ignorant, and to be deceived, we look upon as a wretched, and a reproachful thing. Have a care of Two Mi∣stakes.IN the pursuit of this most Natural Virtue, we must take heed of Two Mi∣stakes: First, the taking up of Things upon Trust;Credulity, and and flattering our selves, that we know more, then effectually we do. He that would
keep clear of this Rock, (as every man should endeavor it) must diligently attend his Busi∣ness, and allow himself time to consider of it. The Other is the bestowing of more Pains and Study upon things that are obscure, hard,Curiosity. and superfluous, then the Matter is worth: whereas by avoiding these Errors, and employing the same application upon profitable Knowledge, and the study of Virtue, a Man gains to him self deserved Commendation. We have heard of Cajus Sulpitius, for his Astrology; of Sextus Pompeius, for his Geometry; and of other per∣sons eminent for Logique; and Civil Law; which Sciences are all of them exercised in the Investigation of Truth; and yet for a man to divert himself, by these Studies, from Com∣mon Offices, and Business, is against the Nature of Humane Duty. For the Excellency of Vir∣tue lies in Action; but yet not without Inter∣vals; for we must Work, and Rest, by Turns. Not that the Mind is ever Idle; but still in a Constant Agitation of Thought, even when the Body is most at Repose: and all the Motions of it are apply'd either to the deli∣berating, and advising upon things Honest, and tending to a good and happy life; or upon the Acquiring of Wisdom, and Knowledge. And so much for Prudence, which is the first Foun∣tain of Virtue. OF the Other Three Virtues,Justice and Liberality. we find That to be of the largest extent, which directs the Ordering of Men in Society: and in a kind of Community of Life. Of This, there are Two parts; Iustice, which is the more Glorious
Virtue, and entitles us to the very Name, and Character, of Good men; and Beneficence, which we may otherwise call Liberality, or Bounty. The first Duty of Iustice is This;The Duties of Justice. That we hurt no man, unless provoked to it by an Injury, and in our Own Defence. We are then to distin∣guish, betwixt things Common, and Particular; and to use them accordingly: Not that any thing is Private in its Own Nature;The Bounds of it by the Civil Law. but as it becomes so, either by Antient possession, as ap∣propriated by the first Occupant, or by Con∣quest, upon the right of Arms; or else by Law, Agreement, Condition, or Lott. From hence comes the Field Arpinas, to be called Arpinati∣um, and Tusculanum, to be called the Field of the Tusculanes; and in like manner is it of Private Possessions. Now since Custom, and Vsage, have rendred many things Private, which Nature made Common; let every man quietly enjoy his Lot; and be reputed an Ene∣my to the Publique, if he attempt any thing beyond it. But because (as Plato says singular∣ly well) we are not born for our selves alone, but for our Country, our Parents, and our Friends: and with the Stoiques, that the Earth, and all the Productions of it, were Created for the Use of Man; and Man only for Mans sake begot∣ten; that one might be helpful to another: What can we do better then to follow, where Nature is our Guide. To lay Common Benefits in Common; and by an Intercourse of Good Offices, as Giving, and Receiving; by Arts, In∣dustry, and all our Faculties, to Incorporate Mankind into One Society.
THE Foundation of Iustice, is Faith; That is to say; a Firmness, and Truth in our Words, Promises, and Contracts. The Stoiques, that are great Etymologists,A forced Etymology of Fides. will have Fides to be as much as Fiat, And that it is therefore cal∣led Faith, quia fit quod dictum est; because that which is said, is done. This may seem to be far fetch'd; but however, we have taken the Freedom to apply it. THERE are Two sorts of Injustice:Two sorts of Injustice. One is the Immediate doing of an Injury; and the Other is, the not protecting, or defending the Injur'd person; for so much as in us lies. For he that Injuriously offers Violence to any Man, either in his Rage,The Injuri∣ous Aggres∣sor. or any other Passion what∣soever, may be taken to be in some degree, constructively, a Murtherer; and he that does not his best, to save his Neighbor from harm, and to keep off the Blow, is as well to blame (tho' not so much) as the Deserter of his Pa∣rents, his Friends, his Country,And the De∣serter. or his Compa∣nions. Now there are many Injuries done us upon Set purpose to hurt us, which arise yet from Fear; as when he that watches to do Another man mischief,An Injury out of Fear. does it upon preventi∣on, for fear the Other should hurt him. But the greater Part of Injuries are done with a design to compass something we have a mind to: wherein Avarice has a very great share. As to the Matter of Riches, they are desir'd,Avarice. partly for our Necessities, and partly for our Pleasures. The desire of Mony in great Minds,Magnifi∣cence. is to make an Interest by it; and to get into our Power, the means of obliging. It was
the saying of Crassus,Ambition. that He that would be Vp∣permost in a Commonwealth, could never have mony enough, till he Was able to maintain an Army at his own Charge.Luxury. There is a pleasure also, in a Splendid, and Magnificent Appearance; rich Fur∣niture; and Men take delight to live in Repu∣tation, Glory, and Plenty; which begets an In∣satiable Thirst of Mony to maintain it. And yet we are not forbidden to advance, or encrease our Fortunes; provided it be done without wrong to Another; and by Fair means, But Men are apt to forget the Rules, and Mea∣sures of Iustice, when they come once to be transported with the desire of Empire, High Places, and Titles. It goes a great way, that saying of Ennius. There is no Faith, or Fel∣lowship in Empire. 'Tis a hard matter to pre∣serve Friendship, and Agreement, in a Case where there are many Competitors, and but one can succeed: which manifestly appeared in that Tempest which C. Caesar lately brought upon the Government; who confounded Heaven and Earth, and overturn'd all Laws Divine, and Humane, for the compassing of that Power which he vainly propounded to get wholly to himself. And great pity it is, that this Inordinate desire of Honor, Dominion, Power, and Glory, does for the most part in∣fest the most Famous Wits, and the largest Minds: so that an Error in this Case, is th more to be avoided. NOW in all Injuries, there is a great dif∣ference betwixt that which is done upon the Sudden,Difference of Injuries. and in Hot Blood (which is Common∣ly
but Short, and Transient) and that which is done upon fore-thought, and Council, for those in a heat, are much lighter then those upon preparation; and this shall suffice of In∣juries, offer'd, or done. NOW why we do not Protect,Injuries of Omission; and the Causes of them. Expence. Fear. Sloth. Bus'ness. and Defend the Oppressed, but abandon our Duties; there may be several Reasons. We are not willing to be at the Charge, or Trouble; we are loth to make Enemies; or it may be, we are negli∣gent, lazy, sluggish, taken up with particular Studies; or hinder'd by Bus'ness, and This makes us leave those expos'd to Ruine, whom it is our Duty to preserve. Wherefore we must take heed, not to rest upon that which Plato observes of the Philosophers; as if the studying and endeavouring to find out the Truth, the vilifying and despising of the things that most Men vehemently desire, and quarrel about, en∣titled them presently to the Character of Ho∣nest Men: Not considering, that while they are so just on the One side, as to wrong no Body, themselves; they are yet so unjust, on the Other, as to leave Other People to do it: And so rather than quit their Studies, they forsake their Duties, and their Friends, whom they ought to defend. And therefore (says he) they would have nothing to do with the Community it self, if they were not compell'd by Force: A Thing which ought rather to be done, by Good Will, and by Choice. For it is not the Quality of the Act, let it be never so right, but the Intention of it, that makes the Virtue. There are some, that either for saving of their Own Stake, or
out of an Averseness even to dealing with Man∣kind, cry, Let every Man look to his Own Bus'∣ness; I meddle with no Body; And all this, to get the Reputation of Harmless People. These Men, while they shun One Injustice, they fall into Another. For he that contributes nei∣ther Study, Labor, nor Fortune, to the Publique, is a Deserter of the Community. Now these Two sorts of Injuries being laid down, together with the Causes of them; and having stated, beforehand the Bounds of Iustice, it will be no hard matter to assign unto every Person, and Occasion, its proper Duty, if we be not over partial to our selves: but in another bodies Case, it is quite Another matter: Although Terence's Chremes will have every Individual to be concern'd in the Common Interest of Man∣kind: But yet being more sensible, and quicker∣sighted in our Own Concerns, then for the Good, or Evil that befals others; (which we look upon as more Remote) we pass upon the One, and the Other, (tho' in the very same Case) a quite Different Judgment. It is good Advice therefore, to forbear coming to a Resolution;Do nothing with Doubt∣ing. where we doubt whether the thing be good, or bad. For the Right is as Clear as the Sun; but a wavering implies the de∣liberation of an Injustice. Faith is not always to be kept.BUT it often falls out, that the same thing which at one time would become a Man of Honor, and Iustice, would at another time not only Vary, but prove the Clear Contrary. As the delivering up of a Trust to a Mad man; or keeping promise with him: nay in matters of Faith, and Truth, it is just, in some Cases
to deny; and in others, not to keep Touch; for all must refer to those Fundamentals of Iustice already propounded. As First, to wrong no Man; and secondly, in all Cases to consult the Common Good. So that the Duty is not always the same;The Duty changes with the Occasion. but changes with the Occasion. Suppose such a Promise of Con∣tract past, as if it were performed, would ma∣nifestly tend to the damage, either of the Party promising, or of the person to whom the Promise was passed to have it perform'd. If Neptune (as it is in the Fable) had not made good his Promise to Theseus, his Son Hip∣politus had been sav'd. The Story goes, that of Three Wishes, the Last was in his Passion the destruction of Hippolitus: And the Grant of That request, cast him into Inconsolable Sor∣rows. So that neither are we to keep those Promises that are unprofitable to the Promised; or more hurtfull to the Promiser, then advan∣tageous to the Other. Of Two Evils,Of Two Evils the Less. we are to chuse the Less: As if I promise to plead any mans Cause, and in the Interim, my Son falls dangerously Ill; it is no Breach of Faith, or Duty in me, not to appear; but rather the Contrary; and it were yet worse, in him to whom the Promise was made, to complain of such a disappointment. And now in matters where a man is under Violence, or over-aw'd by Fear, or out-witted, and over-reach'd by Fraud, every body knows that Those promises are not Binding; many of them being dis∣charg'd in Form, by the Praetors Court; and some by the very Law it self.
Injuries of Fraud and Cavil.THERE are several Injuries, that are meer∣ly matter of Cavil, and only advantages taken, by a Crafty and malitious Interpretation of the Law. From whence comes that saying, Ex∣treme Right, is Extreme Wrong. The Proverb is now worn Threed-bare. Of This Sort, there have been many Practices, even upon a Publique Score: One agreed upon a Truce with the Enemy for 30 days, and afterward made Incursions upon him, and destroyed his Coun∣try by night; because the Cessation was for days, not nights. Neither can I justifie our Countryman, if it be true: Q. Fabius Labeo (or some body else (for I have it only upon Hearsay) was by the Senate Constituted Arbitrator of the Boundaries of Nola and Na∣ples. When he came to the place, he took the Commissioners apart, and advised them in private, not to do any thing greedily, or to press too much; but rather to abate of their Pretensions, then to demand more; and prevailed so far upon them, that there was a good space of ground left betwixt them; so that when they had marked out their Bounds, according to Agreement, that which was left in the middle, was adjudg'd to the Romans. This was rather a Cheat then a Iudgment; and this Indirect, and Crafty way of Imposing, should be avoided in all Cases. There are certain Duties to be observ'd also, even to those that do us the greatest wrong; for there must be a Meane in the very Punishment, and Revenge: and I do not know, whether it may be sufficient, for the Aggressor barely to Repent of his Injury, without some Penalty
over and above; both for his Own Amend∣ment, and the Terror, and Example of Others. The Laws of War,The Rules of War. among all Nations, should be strictly and Punctually observ'd. For since there are but Two ways of Contending, the One, by Dispute, the Other, by Force; the One, Humane, and the Other Brutal; we must of necessity have recourse to the Latter, where the former will not take place. Wherefore the end of War is to secure our selves from Violence,The End of War. in a state of Peace: and in case of Victory, we should preserve those that beha∣ved themselves with Honor, and Generosity in the Action of the War:The Roman Generosity to their Enemies. As our Ancestors re∣ceiv'd into the very Privileges of the City, the Tusculans, the AEqui, the Volsci, the Sa∣bines, the Hernici; but Carthage, and Numan∣tia, they wholly ras'd. I could wish they had spar'd Corinth; but they had a respect, I sup∣pose, to the strength, and scituation of the Place, and so destroy'd it; that for the fu∣ture, it might not, some time or other, prove an Encouragement to a Revolt. In my Opi∣nion, Peace should be always consulted, where it may be had without Treachery: and if my advice had been hearkned to in This matter, we might yet at this day, have had some sort of a Republique, though not the Best; where∣as now we have just none at all. We should provide likewise, not only for those that are Overcome in the Field, but for those also that threw down their Arms, and cast themselves upon the Faith of the General.And to those that yielded. Nay I would have an Enemy receiv'd, even after the Bat∣tery
is begun, and the Breach made. In which Point, we have been so scrupulously Just, that according to the Custom of our Predecessors, those that took Cities, or Nations, conquer'd in War, into the Roman Allegeance, were made Patrons, and Protectors of what they took. And the Rights of War are set forth with exact solemnity in the Provisions of the Faecial Law; wherein we are given to under∣stand, that no War can be Iust,Upon what Terms to undertake a War. and Warranta∣ble, unless it be grounded upon some matter of Claim, or denounced beforehand, by Procla∣mation. Pompilius (the General) held a Pro∣vince;A Conscien∣tious in∣stance. and a Son of Cato's listed himself a Sol∣dier under his Command. Pompilius, finding it convenient to discharge one Legion, Cato's Son serving in That Legion, was also dismist; but he continuing still in the Army, out of a love of action, his Father wrote a Letter to Pompilius, Requesting him, that if his Son conti∣nu'd with him in Arms, he would give him the Military Oath, over again, because his former Sacrament being dissolv'd, he could not otherwise justifie his putting himself into the Quarrel. Such was the Reverence they bare, even to the Conscience of making War! There is extant, an Epistle of Marcus Cato the Elder, to his Son Marcus, when he was a Soldier in Mace∣donia, in the Persian War. Wherein he tells his Son, that he heard the Consul had dis∣mist him; and charges him not to engage in any Combat, as a thing unlawful for him, that was no longer a Soldier, to fight an Enemy. It is re∣markable, the changing of the word Perduellis (a publique Enemy) into Hostis; to sweeten
the Foulness of the Thing, by the softness of the Term. For Hostis (with our Forefathers) was as much as Peregrinus, (a Stranger) as appears by the Twelve Tables. Aut status dies cum Hoste. And then, Adversus Hostem AEter∣na Authoritas. What can be Gentler, then to Treat an Enemy in this easie Language? Al∣though Custom, I must confess, has made it harsher, by transferring the signification of it, from That of a Stranger, to the proper Denomination of one that bears Arms against us. Nay in the Case of a War for Honor, or Dominion, there must yet be the same Causes, and Grounds beforementioned, to make it Just: but still all Contests of This kind must give fairer Quarter: for (as in ordinary Differences) we distinguish betwixt an Enemy and a Rival, our Title, and Dignity lies at Stake in the One Case; but our Life and Reputation, in the Other. The War we had with the Celtiberi, and the Cimbri (the Spaniards, and Danes) was a War of Enmity; and the question was not, who should Govern, but who should Live. With the Latines, the Sabines, the Samnites, the Carthaginians; and with Pyrrhus, the quar∣rel was Empire. The Carthaginians were per∣fidious; Hannibal was cruel; but the Rest more Honourable. It was a Glorious Declaration, that of Pyrrhus, about the discharge of some Prisoners, as we find it in Ennius.
A Brave Re∣solution of Pyrrhus.Let Mercenaries Truck, and Treat for Gold; Honour's a thing not to be Bought or Sold. Courage and Steel must end this Glorious Strife; And in the Case of Victory, or Life, Fortune's the Iudge. We'll take the Chance of War; And what Brave man soever she shall spare With Life; depend upon't; I'll set him Free; Let him but Own the Gift, to the Great Gods, and Mee. This was a Royal Speech, and Resolution, and well becoming the Bloud of AEacus. BUT even in the Case of a Private pro∣mise; and upon what pinch, or necessity soever; Faith is yet to be kept, even with an Enemy.Faith must be kept with an Enemy. When Regulus was taken Prisoner in the first Punique War,A noble Ex∣ample of Regulus. and sent to Rome to sollicite the exchange of some Prisoners, upon his Oath to return: so soon as ever he came There, he advised the Senate against himself; and that they should not agree to the Exchange. His Friends, and Relations prest him extremely against going back again; but he chose rather to return to the Torture, then to stay and break his Faith to an Enemy. In the second Punique War, after the Battel of Cannae, Hannibal sent ten Prisoners to Rome, under an Oath of returning; unless they could obtain the Liber∣ty of such and such Prisoners in Exchange. They were no sooner out of the Camp, by
Hannibal's permission,A glorious piece of Justice. but one of them found out a shift to evade the Oath; and presently went back under colour of something left behind him, and then return∣ing, went his way, as if the Obligation of the Oath had been discharg'd. And so it was, in Words, but not in Effect; for in all promises, the Intention is to be consider'd, not the Letter. The Censor set a Fine during Life, upon all their heads that were forsworn; and upon His, a∣mong the rest, that invented this Shift. But the more Generous Instance of Iustice to an Enemy, was that of our Ancestors.The Romans a generous Enemy. in the Case of Pyrrhus: There was a Fugitive that made a Proposal to the Senate, for the Poysoning and dispatching of Pyrrhus: but the Senate, and Fabri∣tius deliver'd up the Traitor to his Master: Such was the detestation they had for Treachery, that they would not make use of it, tho' to the destruction of a Powerful and an Invading Enemy. And so much for Military Duties. WE must not forget neither,Of Justice to Inferiors. that toward the meanest of men also, there is a Justice to be observ'd; even in the Condition, and For∣tune of Slaves: and it is good Council, to ad∣vise the using of them as Hirelings; and for their Work, to allow them their Reward. Now there are Two ways of doing a man an Injury; the one is by Force, the Other by Fraud. The One is the quality of the Fox, the Other of the Lion. They are neither of them proper for a Man; but yet Fraud is the more Odious of the Two; and of all Injustices, That is the most Abo∣minable, and Capital, which imposes upon us, under the colour of Kindness and Good meaning: and this shall suffice for Iustice.
TO persue my purpose, I shall now handle the Point of Liberality,Of Libe∣rality. or Bounty; then which there is nothing more accommodate to the Nature of man: But it falls under many Li∣mitations.How to Give, How much, and to Whom. It should be our first Care to see, that what we Give, may not be to the disad∣vantage of the person we would oblige, or of any other body; and that it be not above our Proportion. Secondly, that it be suited to the Dignity of the Receiver; for This is the Foun∣dation of Justice, to which all the Circum∣stances of it are to be referr'd, He that pre∣tends to gratifie any man with that which is rather to his damage, then to his Benefit, is so far from deserving the Reputation of being Liberal, or Bountiful, that he is to be ac∣counted as the most pernicious of Flatterers. And Those also that Rob one man, to give to another, are guilty of the same Injustice, with them, that take Mony out of their Neighbors Pockets, to put into their Own. There are many people that look big, and set up for men of Honor, that yet have this humour of taking from one, and giving to another; and reckon upon it, as a high piece of Bounty, if they can but advance the Fortunes of a Friend, upon what Terms soever. But This is so far from a Good Office,Whom to Oblige. that it is the clear Contrary. Let us therefore so govern our Favours, that we may oblige those we love, and yet hurt no body. Shall we call it Liberality, in L. Sylla, and C. Caesar, the Translation of so many Estates from the Right Owners, into the possession of Stran∣gers? There can be no Liberality in a Case of Injustice. The Second Caution is the keeping of
our Bounty within Compass;Give in Proportion. and not to give beyond our Ability; for they that extend their Kindnesses beyond this Measure, wrong their Relations, by transferring those Bounties to Strangers, which they should rather have communicated, or left to their Friends. This humour of Liberality, is commonly accompa∣nied with a certain Greediness, that makes no Scruple of getting any thing, though by Ra∣pine, or Injury, so they may but have where∣withal to supply a mistaken Bounty. Nay,Consider the Intent of the Giver. there are many that give largely, merely to be Thought Bountiful; and This, only upon a Score of Vanity, without any Frankness of Heart; which is rather a flash of Ostentation, then an act of Generosity, and Virtue. The Third Caution is, the making Choice of a wor∣thy Person;The Choice of the Per∣son. wherein we should consider the Morals of the Man that we would oblige; his particular disposition towards us; our enter∣course with him in a Community, and Society of Life, and the good Offices he hath already done us. It would be well, if we could find a Concurrence of all these; but if not, the more Inducements we have, and the greater they are, the more is their weight. HOWBEIT, since we do not live with Men absolutely Perfect,There is no Stoical Per∣fection. either for Virtue, or Wis∣dom; but with those that acquit themselves very well, if they can but arrive at some seint re∣semblances of Virtue; let This be also taken into Consideration, that no Man whatsoever is to be neglected, in whom there appears the least sign, or Glimmering of Goodness. But still we are to set the greatest Value upon him,Whom to value most.
that we find best endow'd with the soft, and gentle Virtues of Modesty, Temperance, and that Iustice, of which we have already spoken at large. For a Bold, and Manly Courage, in a Man that is neither Good, nor Wise; is com∣monly more forward, and eager, perhaps, then is Convenient. The Other are more properly the Virtues of a Good Man. And so much for our Manners. How to re∣turn Bene∣fits.TOUCHING the Good Will that any Man bears us; it is, First, our Duty to do much Good, where we are much Belov'd: but then we are not to express that Affection, in a Childish Ardour, and Fondness of Passion; but in a Constancy, and Firmness of Mind. Benefits to be repaid with Inte∣rest.IN the Case of an Antecedent Merit, where we are not now to Enter into an Obligation, but to Acknowledge, and Requite it; there must be a more than Ordinary Care taken. For Gratitude is the most Indispensable of all Du∣ties. If Hesiod bids us, Restore what we bor∣row; if we can, in a Larger Measure; what ought we to do in the Case of a Prior Obliga∣tion? Are we not to imitate Fruitful Lands, that still Return more than they Receiv'd? We are ready enough to oblige those that we hope to be the better for hereafter. How should we behave our selves then, toward such as we are the Better for already? Since so it is, that there are two sorts of Liberality, the One, of Bestowing a Benefit, and the Other of Returning it; it is at our Choice, whether we will Give, or no: But an Honest Man is not at Liberty in the point of Returning it;
provided that it may be done without Injury. And yet we are to distinguish also betwixt Benefits Receiv'd; and the Greater the Benefit, the Greater is the Obligation. Now the Obli∣gation is to be valu'd according to the Mind, the Intention, and Good Will of the Giver: For many People do many things rashly,Rash Boun∣ties. with∣out either Iudgment, or Measure. They Squander away their Donatives, indifferently upon all; carry'd on by sodain, and impe∣tuous Passions, as if they were driven by the Wind. Now these Benefits are not so much to be esteem'd, as those that are conferr'd with Steadiness, and Consideration. As to the Placing of our Bounties, and Returning of Acknowledgments,Whom to Requite first. (supposing other things to be Equal) it is our Duty to help him First, that is most in Want; tho' most People do the Contrary. For they are there most Officious, to offer their Service, where they hope for most again; tho' in cases, where their help was not at all needful. FOR the Preservation of Society, and good Correspondence among Men, we should do well to proportion our Bounties to our Rela∣tions; and to give most to those that are our nearest Friends. But for those Principles of Nature, which regard Communities, and Hu∣mane Society, they must be fetch'd higher; as the First thing that we take notice of in the Fellowship of Mankind. Reason, and Speech are the Bond of it;Reason and Speech are the Bond of Humane Society. which, by Teaching, Learn∣ing, Communicating, Disputing, and Iudging, accommodate one Man to another, and ci∣ment
the whole Body into a kind of Natural Community. Nor is there any thing wherein we are further remov'd from Beasts, than in this Advantage of Society. It is usual for us to speak of Courage, and Boldness, in Lions and Horses; but we hear nothing of either Iustice, Equity, or Goodness in them; and the business is, that they have neither Speech, nor Reason. This Society of One Man with Ano∣ther, and of All, with All; This Society, (I say) General and Particular, is of a large ex∣tent; And herein there must be a Community preserved, of all those things which Nature hath brought forth, for the Common Use of Men: provided always, that such things as are limited by Laws, and Civil Ordinances, may be observed according to the Constitu∣tion. As to the rest; they may be reduc'd to the Greek Proverb, Friends have all things in Common. Now all those things that Men hold in Community, are such, as Ennius having laid down in One Instance, may be apply'd to Many. To put a Wandring Traveller in's Way, Is but to light One Candle with Another: I've ne'er the less, for what I Give — FROM this One Case we may learn, that whatsoever we may part with to Another,Benefits in Common. without any Damage to our selves, it is our Duty to Give, or to Lend Freely, tho' to a Stranger. Of This sort, we reckon many things to be in Common; as Water from a Ri∣ver; Fire from Fire; Good Counsel to a Man
that is in doubt, or distress. All these things are profitable to the Receiver, without any loss, or burthen to the Giver. So that we may both use these things our selves, and yet be still contributing of somewhat to the Com∣mon Good. But in regard that particular Persons have not much to Give, and the Num∣ber of those that want, is almost Infinite; Common Liberality must have a respect to that End of Eunius. We must keep wherewithal to give Light to our selves, that we may have the Means of being bountiful to our Own. TO descend now from Humane Society in the Latitude, of which there are many degrees;Degrees of Communi∣ties. there is a nearer Bond yet, betwixt People of the same Province, the same Nation, and the same Language: And it is yet stricter, betwixt Men of the same City: For among Citizens, there are many things in Common:Common Privileges. As Courts of Justice, Temples, Walks, Ways, Lanes, Customs, Judgments, Suffrages; beside fre∣quent Meetings, and Familiarities, Common Bus'ness, Commerce, and Contract. And there is yet a nearer Tye; and That is, the Society of Kindred, which is Contracted into a narrow place, apart from the Vast Society of Mankind. It is by Nature, Common to all living Creatures, the appetite of producing the Kind: And the First Society is in Wedlock,Marriage, Children, Families. the next, in Children; it comes then to a Fa∣mily, and a Community of all things. And this is the Original of a City, and as it were the Seminary of a Commonwealth. The Re∣lation of Brothers comes next; and after
That, of Brothers, and Sisters Children; who, when they are too many for One House, are transplanted into Others, as into Colonies. And then follow Matches, and Alliances, with increase of Kindred;Kindred. and their Off-spring is the Beginning of a Commonwealth. There is no doubt but Relation of Blood, and the Kindness that arises from it, must necessarily endear Men to One another. For it is a great matter to have the same Pedigree; to exercise the same Religion, and to deposite their Ashes in Common Sepulchres: But of all Associa∣tions,Friendship. there is none so Firm, none so Noble, as when Virtuous Men are link'd together by a Correspondency of Manners; and a Freedom of Conversation. For such is the Charm of That Honesty which we have often spoken of, that the very Encounter of it moves us, tho' in a Stranger, and makes us Friends to the Possessor of it, where-ever we find it. Now tho' all Virtue whatsoever, is, of it self, Ami∣able, and Attractive; insomuch that we can∣not but have an Esteem for those that we find possess'd of it; yet Iustice, and Liberality gain upon us in a higher degree. But there is no∣thing more Lovly, or more Engaging, than a Conformity, and Agreement of Good Manners. For where there are the same Inclinations,Similitude of Manners. the same Desires, and the same Will, the One cannot chuse but be delighted with the Other, as with its proper self; and it effects that which Pytha∣goras requires in Friendship; the making One, of many: And it is a great Obligation that is created by the reciprocation of Benefits, that pass For∣ward and Backward, in Exchange:Exchange of Benefits. which be∣ing
mutual, and grateful; must needs, upon the Entercourse, produce firm and extraordi∣nary Friendship. But when ye shall have lookt over all the Ties in Nature, as far as your Mind, and your Reason can carry you; you will find nothing dearer, no Obligation of greater importance, then That by which we are every one of us Ty'd to the Commonwealth. Our Parents, Children, Kindred, Acquaintance, are all dear to us; but our single Country is more then all the Rest:Our Duty to our Coun∣try. and every honest man is ready to lay down his life for the advantage of that sacred Interest. How execrable then is the barbarous Impiety of those people, that have torn their Country to pieces, by all sorts of Villany; and who not only have been, but are at this instant, conspiring the destru∣ction of it, by a final desolation? But if there should be any dispute, or Comparison, where to pay our duty, in the first place, our Country and our Parents are the Principals; to whose Benefits we are the most Oblig'd. Our Chil∣dren and our Families are next;Our Kin∣dred and Friends. as depending upon us alone, without any other Retreat: After These, our Friends and Relations; which are commonly of our Own Rank, and Con∣dition. Wherefore we owe the necessary helps of Life to these beforementioned; But for Conversation, Table-Society, Counsels, Exhortations, Consolations, and (upon Oc∣casion) Reproofs: These things are found most amongst Friends; and let me tell you over again; The pleasantest Friendship is That, which is contracted by a Similitude of Manners.
NOW in the Exercise of all these Duties, we should observe what every man has most need of; and what with our help, he may, and what without our help, he cannot attain; and in some cases there is a respect to be had to Times,Duties vary with Cir∣cumstances. and Occasions, even before Relations: There are some Offices that we should rather pay to One, then to another; as I would sooner help a Neighbour in with his Harvest, then either a Brother, or Familiar Acquaintance; but in a Suit of Law, I'll defend my Kinsman, or my Friend, before my Neighbour. Where∣fore these Circumstances, and the like, should be duly consider'd in all Offices. By Custom, and Exercise, we shall become good Accomp∣tants: For it is by Adding, and Substracting, that we come to know what Remains; and Consequently, in all Cases, the Bounds, and Limits of our Duty: But as neither Physiti∣ans, nor Commanders; nor Orators, tho' never so well instructed in the Rules of their Profession, shall ever be able, without Use, and Practice, to make themselves Eminently famous; to the same end, are the Precepts of Humane Duties deliver'd us; that we should put them in exercise; but yet the difficulty, and Condition of the thing does over and above require it. Now in what manner that Virtue is deriv'd, and whence That Duty ari∣ses, which falls under the Consideration of Sociable Rights, and Common Iustice; we have almost said enough already.
In the propounding of Four general Heads, from whence all Virtues, and Duties flow; That which is done with a Noble, and Exal∣ted Mind; a Mind advanced to the Contempt of Fortune, and Worldly things;Magnani∣mity. that Vir∣tue, I say, ought to be reputed the most Glorious: and therefore that Reproach of Ennius's is always at hand upon Occasion: Young Men, in shew, but Wenches, in your Hearts; While Cloelia plays the Brave, and acts your Parts. You're for Exploits that cost no Sweat, nor Bloud, &c. And on the other side, with what Trans∣port and Rapture do we extol the humour of Brave and Generous Actions? From hence, comes that Field of the Rhetoricians, upon Marathon, Salamis, Plateae, Thermopilae, Leuctrae, Stratocles; and from hence it is, that our Cocles, the Decij, the two Scipio's, Marcellus, and a World of others, especially the Romans Themselves, are grown so famous, for the Greatness of their Minds. And their ambition of Military honour, may appear in This, that almost all the Statues they have left us, are dress'd up in Armour. AND yet That Elevation of Courage, which is seen in Hazzards, and Adventures, unless accompany'd with Justice, and con∣tending rather for the Publique, then for it self; That Courage (I say) is so far from
being a Virtue, that it is a Fault, and a brutal Ferity, inconsistent with the Tenderness of humane Nature. Wherefore the Stoiques have well defin'd it,Courage defined. in calling Courage, a Virtue contending for Equity. Nor did any man ever gain the Reputation of True Valour, by Treache∣ny, or Malice. Nothing can be Honest, but what is Just; and therefore it was notably said of Plato. As That Knowledge (says he) which is divided from Justice, is rather Craft, then Wisdom; so That Courage, which is Bold, and Adventerous, is rather Temerity, and Foolhardiness, then Valour; if it be car∣ryed on by Passion, or Interest, rather then for a Common Good. Wherefore all Men of Va∣lour, and great Undertakings, should be like∣wise Men of Goodness, Simplicity, Candor, and Friends of Truth: which are all Inseparable from Justice. But the Mischief is, that this Tumour, and Elation of Mind, breaks out many times into a Pertinacy, and an Ambitious desire of Rule.Pertinacy and Ambiti∣on. For as Plato has it, the Lace∣demonians were Naturally inflam'd with an Ar∣dent desire of Overcoming. So that whoso∣ever has the greatest Soul. is the most addict∣ed to aspiring Thoughts: And to set himself above All; or in Truth rather to stand Alone. It is a very hard matter, for a Man to observe the Tenor of True Equity (which peculiarly belongs to Justice) in the Inordinate Appetite of Superiority and Dominion, From whence it comes to pass, that such men will not be go∣vern'd, either by Reason, or any Publique, and Lawfull Constitution. This humour starts Fa∣ctions in a Commonwealth, that work by
Bribery, and Corruption, to advance their Power, and their Fortunes; whose business it is, rather to make themselves Greater, by Violence, then to keep themselves in a Stati∣on of Equality by Iustice. But the harderany thing is, the fairer it is; nor is there any Time, or Season, that can dispence a man from Ju∣stice. Wherefore Those are Truly Brave, and Magnanimous, that keep off an Injury, not Those that offer it. He that is truly Wise, and Stout, places That Virtue which is most consonant to Nature, in Action, and not in Glory; and in making himself more Conside∣rable then other men, rather then appearing so. No man can be said to be truly Heroique, that depends, for his Reputation, upon the Opi∣nion of the Multitude. But every man, the higher his Stomach is, and the greater his Thirst of Honor, the more easily is he trans∣ported to do Unjust things. He stands upon a Slippery place: For where is the man, who af∣ter all his hazzards, and Travels, does not desire, and expect Glory, as a reward of his Adventures? YOU shall know a man of Generosity,True Mag∣nanimity. and Courage, chiefly by these two Marques. First, he despises outward things, upon an Opinion that a man should not admire, wish for, or desire any thing but what is Becoming and Honest; nor subject himself to any Person, Passion, or Fortune. The Other is a dispositi∣on of Mind (as is said before) that spurs a man to attempt things Great and Profitable; but difficult, laborious, and dangerous, as well in the matter of Life it self, as in other Con∣veniences
that belong to't. All the Splendor, and Reputation (and let me say, the Profit also) of These two Things rests in the Latter: but the Cause, and the Motive is in the For∣mer: For There is the Rise, and Spring of great Resolves, that carry men even above the Consideration of any thing that is below. The thing it self is seen in Two particulars: First in Judging That only to be Good which is Honest; and, Secondly, in a Freedom of the Mind from all Perturbations. For it must be confest to be the part of a Brave and Gene∣rous Mind, to look upon Those, as Little Things, which many Account to be Great, and Glorious; and to Contemn them, upon the Foundation of a Firm, and setled Judg∣ment. It is likewise the part of a Constant, and Invincible Mind, so to bear all sorts of Calamity, and Affliction, as neither to de∣part from the Order of Nature, nor to descend below the Dignities of a Wise man. How Incongruous is it for a man that stands the shock of Danger, to be broken with Lust? or to endure the Fatigue of Labour; and then to be overcome with Pleasure? This must therefore be avoided; and so must the greedy desire of Mony.Contempt of Mony. There is not a greater Ar∣gument of a Narrow, and Wretched Mind, then to dote upon Pelf: Nothing more hu∣mane, and honourable, then to despise it, if we have it not; and to employ it generously, and do good with it, if we have it. And so for the Affectation of Glory:Affectation of Glory. We must be∣ware of it (as is said already) for it bars a man of his Liberty; which a Brave Man will
rather die, then part with. We should not be sollicitous neither for Power; which, in some Cases, we should not receive, and in others, we should lay down We must deli∣ver our selves from all disorders of mind; either by Fear or Appetite: and likewise from all Sowerness, and Transport, either of delight, or of Wrath; that we may be Calm, and Se∣cure: In which State, we shall Find both Steadiness, and Credit. There are at this day, and there have been many, that to gain this Repose, have wholly withdrawn them∣selves from Publique Business: Among These,A Retired Life. the noblest, and most eminent of Philosophers; and men truly, of great Severity, and Weight; who could neither endure the People, nor Go∣vernment: and so retired into Deserts, and Retreats, to live privately with Themselves. And these men, in this Recess, had the same Design with Princes (whose Privilege is to live as they list) that they might want no∣thing, but enjoy their Freedom, without Con∣troll. Wherefore, since both Those that af∣fect Power, and the other Idle people that I speak of, aim at the same thing; and have This in common betwixt them; the One thinks they may Gain their End, if they had but ample Fortunes: and the Other, Theirs, if they can but be content with their Own, and with a Little: They may be Both, (for ought I know) in some measure, in the Right. But it must yet be allow'd, that a Private, and Retir'd Life, is both Easier and Safer: And less Im∣portune, and Troublesome to Others. But the life of Those that apply themselves to
Publique business, is more profitable to Man∣kind; and more conducing to the Acquisiti∣on of Honour, and Reputation in the World. Wherefore there is something to be said for those Excellent Wits that dedicate them Selves to Letters; without medling in Publique Af∣fairs: And also for such Others, as either for want of Health, or perhaps some more powerful Impediment, have quitted their publique Stations; being well satisfi'd, that others should enjoy the Power and the Cre∣dit of the Employment. But for those that have none of this Pretence, to talk of despising Government, and Offices, which most people have in great estimation; I do not on∣ly, not approve of them, but take them to be much to blame. Not that I disallow of their Judgment, in the little Consideration they seem to have for Glory; but because they are manifestly afraid of the Labours, Troubles, Repulses, and Displeasures that they are to encounter. For there are many that behave themselves Vnequally in Contrary Cases: Severe Contemners of Pleasure, but they sink under Pain; Regardless of Fame, but dejected with Scandal. Nor are they Steady, even in these very Cases: But for those that are by nature, fitted and qualifi'd for Civil Business; I should advise These people to apply themselves to it without delay; and to take some Commission in the Government. For This is Necessary, both as to Publique Administration; ad to shew the Greatness of the Mind. And publique Officers, as much perhaps, as Philosophers themselves, (if not more) should be affected
with a general disdain of External things, (as I have often said) and stated in an Immoveable Tranquility, and security of Mind; which will deliver them from all Anxiety for things to come; and establish them in a life of Constancy, and Honour. Now this Point is by so much easier, for a Philosopher to gain, by how much his Life is less expos'd to the Stroke of Fortune: For there are not many things that he stands in need of: beside, that in case of any disaster, his Fall is not so dangerous. It is but reason∣able therefore to Conclude, that Men in Great, and Publique Places, are exposed to greater Perturbations of Thought, then those that live in Privacy and Repose. So that a greater Stock of Courage is there Necessary, and a Mind at Liberty from Trouble, and Care. But for him that puts himself into Business; let him first consider the Honesty of the Em∣ployment; and Then, his Own Abilities, to go thorough with it. Wherein let him nei∣ther rashly despair, out of heartlesness, and sloth; nor be over Confident neither, in the Opinion of himself. But in all matters of Business, a man should diligently prepare him∣self before he goes about it. BUT since most Men take Military Charges to be of a greater Consideration then Civil,A Compari∣son of Mili∣tary Virtues with Civil. This Opinion should be a little qualifi'd; For 'tis a very Common thing for men to apply themselves to that course of Life, out of an Itch of Glory; and this happens most frequent∣ly in Men of large Souls, and Abilities: Espe∣cially
where the Genius lies that way, and the Disposition carries them to the Profession of Armes. But if we would deal impartially, there have been Greater and more Glorious things done in the Senate, then in the Field for although Themistocles be worthy of all honour, and his Name, and Memory, more Illustrious then That of Solon; Salamis being still mentioned as a Memorial of his noble Victory over Xerxes, which is still preferr'd before the Counsel of Solon, for the Institution of the Areopagites. This must not at all give way to That: For the One did once, deliver, preserve, and help the City; but the Other will ever do it. This Council preserves the Laws of Athens, and Constitutions of their Ancestors. Themissocles cannot say that ever he help'd Areopagus, but the Other may truely boast of serving Themisto∣cles. For Solon was the Founder of That Senate which manag'd the War: And so for Pausanias, and Lysander. It is true, that their Actions, and Conduct, enlarg'd the Territories of the Lacedemonians; and yet the Laws of Licurgus, are Incomparably to be preferr'd. Nay, and upon That very Consideration, their Armies were both Readier and Bolder. It was my O∣pinion, even when I was a Boy, that Marcus Scaurus was not Inferiour to Caius Marius; and when I came afterwards into Publique Business; I lookt upon Q. Catulus not one jot below Cneius Pompeius. For what signifie Armies, Abroad, without Counsel at Home? Neither did Affricanus (tho' an Excellent Man, as well as a great Captain) do the Common∣wealth a Nobler Service in the Rasing of Nu∣mantia,
then Pub. Nasica (a private Man) did at the same time, in cutting off Tiberius Gracchus. Now This Instance is not purely Civil; but in some respect, Military, because it was done by a Violent hand: But still it was done by a Civil Council, and without an Ar∣my. It was a memorable saying of mine, that is so often cast in my Teeth, by a sort of Ma∣licious, and Envious people. Let Swordmen to the Gown give place. And Crown the Oratour with Bayes. To pass over other Instances. Did not the Sword give place to the Gown, when the Com∣monwealth was under My Administration? Never was there a more malicious Conspira∣cy; and yet by the Influence of our Diligence, and Counsel, how quickly was it crush'd? In∣somuch, that the very Arms themselves fell out of the hands of the most Audacious of the Muti∣neers. When was there ever any Action done in the Field, or any Tryumph Compa∣rable to it? This Boast,. to You, my Son, that are to inherit the honour of my Actions, and to whom I would recommend the Imita∣tion of them; This Boast, to You, (I say) may be allow'd me. Nor is it any more then Cn. Pompey (a Man laden with Military honours) ascribed to me in a full Audience. My Third Triumph (says he) would have been to little purpose, if Cicero, by preserving the Commonwealth, had not left me a place where∣in to Triumph. So that Domestique, and Civil Resolution, is not Inferiour to Military. And
it requires more Pains, and Study, to be employed upon it. That Virtue without dis∣pure, which we look for from a High, and Illustrious Mind, is acquired by the Force of the Soul, not of the Body. And yet the Bo∣dy is still to be kept in Exercise; and so affe∣cted, as to obey the Dictates of Counsel and Reason, in the dispatch of Business, and in the bearing of Toil. But the honesty here in que∣stion is wholly plac'd in the Care and Consi∣deration of the Mind: wherein the Men of the Robe, in Civil Administration, bring no less advantage to the Publique, then Those that bar Arms: For War is many times, either not begun, or otherwise finish'd, by their Ad∣vice: Nay, and some brought on too: as the Third Punique War of M. Cato was; where his Authority prevail'd, even when he was dead. Wherefore the Faculty of Determining, is more desirable then that of Contending. Always provided that we steer not our Coure rther by an Aversion to War, then a Consi∣deration to Benefit. In the Undertaking of a War there should be such a prospect, as if the Only end of it were Peace. It is the part of a Valint and a Rsolute Man, not to be discomposed in disasters, or to make a Bustle, and be put beside himself; but to maintain a presence of Mind, and Judgment, without de∣parting from Reason. As this is the Marque an Eect of a great Courage; so is the Other, of an Excellent understanding, to forecast in our Thoughts the Events of things to come: and to weigh beforehand the Good and the Bad; and what's to be done when it happens,
without being put to the foolish Exclamation of who would have Thought it? These are the Works of an Elevated Soul, that supports it self upon Prudence, and Judgment: but he that rashly thrusts himself into Dangers, with∣out fear, or wit; and engages an Enemy hand over head; this is only Brutality, and Out∣rage: But yet when the time comes, and ne∣cessity requires it, let a man fight with his Sword in his hand; and rather lose his Life, then his Honor and Freedom. IN the Case of Rasing or Demolishing of Cities there should be great Care taken,Clemency to the Con∣quer'd. that nothing be done either Headily, or Cruelly. It is the part of a Great man, in Publique Broyles, to punish the Guilty; but still to spare the Multitude;Spare the Multitude. and in all Conditions, to adhere to that which is Right, and Ho∣nest. THERE are some that esteem Feats of Arms above Civil Administrations; (as is afore∣said) and there are Others that think it more estimable, to deal in Dangerous, and Crafty, then in Quiet, and Considerate Coun∣sels. We must never in such manner avoid Dangers, as to appear Weak and faint-hearted;Courage with Dis∣cretion. And we must likewise have a Care, on the other side, not thrust our selves into Vnneces∣sary hazzards; which is one of the greatest Follies in the World. Wherefore in difficult Cases, we should do like Physitians, that ap∣ply Gentle Remedies to Gentle Diseases: but in Cases of Extremity, a desperate disease must have
desperate Cure. None but a Mad man will with for a Storm in fair Weather. But it is yet the part of a Wise man, to weather it the best he can, if he falls into a Tempest. And the honour is so much the more, if the advan∣tage of the success be greater then the Mis∣carriage. ACTIONS are dangerous,Danger Publique and Private. partly to the Undertakers, and in part to the Commonwealth: Some run the hazzard of their Lives; Some of their Good names; and Others, of the Love of the people: Now we should more frankly venture our selves, then the Publique: and more chearfully expose our selves for Honour, and Reputation, then for other Commodities.A Mistake in point of Honour. Some there are that make no scruple of hazzarding their Lives, and For∣tunes, in the defence of their Country; and yet are so nice and scrupulous in the matter of Reputation; that rather then run any risque of their Honour, they will leave their very Country in danger. As Callicratidas the Lace∣demonian General, in the Peloponnefian War; after many glorious Exploits, ruin'd all at last, by not removing the Navy from the Ar∣ginusae, and making his Retreat without giving the Athenians Battel, as he was advis'd to do; To which he made This answer, that if the Lacedemonians lost one Fleet, they might set out another; but that if he quitted his Ground, his Ho∣nor was lost for ever. But the Lacedemonians how∣ever might have born this Loss, whereas the Other Blow was mortal; when Cleombrotus, for fear of an Ill Report, unadvisadly engaged
with Epaminondas, where the whole power of the Lacedemonians was cut off at a Blow. How much better now was the Conduct of Q. Fa∣bius Maximus, of whom Ennius. Fabius was slow; but sure; and his Delay Restored the tottering State. Now it was his way To mind his Bus'ness, not what people said: He liv'd a Great man, but he's Greater dead. This is an Error, of a Quality to be avoid∣ed also in Civil Matters. For there are many that dare not speak their Opinions, tho' for the best; for fear of falling under Evil Tongues. THERE are two Precepts of Plato to be observ'd by all Men of Authority in the Go∣vernment. The One is,Plato's ad∣vice to Ma∣gistrates. in some sort to as∣sert and defend the Publique Interest, that all their Actions should refer to That, without any regard to their Own advantage. The Other is, to attend the service of the whole, in such sort, that while they are serving one part, they do not abandon another. It is in the Administration of a Government, as in the Case of a Ward: The Commission has a regard to the benefit of those that are deliver'd up in Charge; and not those to whom such a Charge, or Care is Committed. But they that Provide for One part of the People, and Neglect Another, bring into a City the most pernicious thing in the World; That is to say, Discord, and Sedition:The danger of Factions. and when they are split in∣to
Parties, some side with the People; others, with the Nobility: but none mind the Whole. This wrought great Mischiefs among the Athe∣nians; and in our Republique not only Sedition, but the most Pestilent Civil Wars. A Course not to be endur'd by a Sober, and Valiant Patriot; or any man that deserves a place in the Government: For such a man will ap∣ply himself wholly to the Care of the Pub∣lique, without designing either upon Wealth, or Power to himself; and in such manner de∣fend the whole, that he also provide for every part of it: Neither will he bring any man in∣to Envy, or Hatred, by Calumny, o Suborna∣tion; but resolutely adhere to Iustice and Honesty; maintaining his Post, in spite of all Opposition; and rather die then desert the aforesaid Duties. AMBITION or the Thirst of Honour is a wretched thing:Of Ambiti∣on. Of which Plato says very well; they that strive who shall be Upper∣most in the Republique, do as if Mariners should contend which should be at the Helm. And he tells us further, that we are to account those for Enemies that take up Armes against the Commonwealth; and not such as with Honesty, and Iudgment labour to defend it. This was the Controversie betwixt P. Affricanus, and Q. Metellus, without any sort of bitter∣ness. GIVE no ear 0to those that take it to be the part of a Brave, and Resolute man, to be Vio∣lently Angry with an Enemy:Against Anger. For there
is nothing more commendable or better be∣coming a generous Person, then Clemency, and Good Nature. Nay towards a Free People, where all are liable to the Law, we should join a Facility with That which we call height of Courage, least if we should accustom our selves to Transports upon Unseasonable Ad∣dresses, or shameful Importunities, we should fall into a humour of Morose and unprofita∣ble sourness: Provided that with these soft, and gentle ways, we use severity also, where the Publique requires it; for without That, a City can never be kept in order. ALL Reproof, and Correction,Of Reproof and Corre∣ction. let it be with∣out Contumely, as being directed only to the profit of the Commonwealth; without regard to the gratifying of his Passion, or Interest that gives either the Words, or the Blows. And the punishment, likewise should be proportion'd to the Fault: For it is unjust that one man should have Blows, and another, not so much as a Check, for the same transgression. ut above All things, Correction is not to be gi∣ven in Anger; For a man in Passion will ne∣ver observe the due mean betwixt the two Extremes of too much, and too little: where∣in the Peripatetiques are much in the Right; if they would not also approve of Anger gi∣ven us by Nature for our Advantage. But I am for the avoiding of it in all Cases; and I could wish that Magistrates, like the Laws Themselves, would never proceed to punish, in Wrath, but only in Equity.
LET us also in Prosperity, and when we have the World at will, as much as possible, avoid Pride; disgusting of every thing; and Arro∣gance; for it is the same Levity to be Trans∣ported either with Good Fortune,Moderation in both For∣tunes. or with Bad: And it is an Excellent Thing to observe an Equal Tenor of Life, and to have still the same humour, and the same Countenance; as we find it recorded of Socrates, and C. Laelius. Philip of Macedon, was outstript by his Son, in Glorious Atchievements, and Military Execution, but in Gentleness, and Humanity of Manners, Alexander came short of him: So that the One of them was always, Great, and the Other was many Times Intemperate, and Brutal. 'Tis good Advice, that bids us, the Higher we are, to be the more Humble. Panoetius tells us of Affricanus (his Disciple, and Familiar Friend) how he was wont to say, that as we put out Horses of Service to Riders, for the Training them, and making them fitter for use, when they are grown Fierce, and Unmenageable, by being chaf'd, and heat by the Action of the Battel; so should we commit Men, that are Transpor∣ted with Prosperity, and over-confident in Themselves, to some Guide that should keep them, as it were in the Ring; or within the bounds of Reason, and good Government, to make them understand the Uncertainty of Humane Affairs, and the changes of Fortune. It is in the height of our Prosperity, that we should chiefly consult our Friends; and al∣low them more Authority over us then at other times: but we must have a Care of
Entertaining Flatteries, and of being impos'd upon by Fair words, wherein we are too easie to be Mistaken. For such is the Conceipt we commonly have of our selves, that we think no Commendation more then we deserve. From This weakness there arise Innumerable Errors. For when we come once to be blown up with Praises, and high Opi∣nions of our selves, we do but serve to make sport for Others, and labour under grievous Mistakes. And so much for this Point. THEIR Business that Govern Common∣wealths, must of necessity be of the greatest moment, and require the largest Souls; be∣cause it has the largest prospect, and concerns most people. This is to be given for grant∣ed; and yet it must not be deny'd neither, on the Other side, that great Generosity of Mind has been many times shew'd in a private Life;Greatness of mind in a private Life. either in the search, or attempt of Great Matters; and the people yet keeping themselves within their own Bounds, or else mingling with Philosophers, and Men in Publique Bus'ness; contenting themselves in their Private Con∣dition: Neither scraping together Estates, by all manner of Ways, nor debarring their Friends from the use of what they had; but rather dividing with Them, and with the Republique, where there was Occasion. Now for This Estate, let it be, First, well gotten; and neither by Shamefull, nor by Odious wayes: Let a man next do good with it to as many as he can; (so they be worthy) let him en∣crease it, with Prudence, Diligence, and Good
Husbandry: and let him rather indulge Libera∣lity, and Bounty, then Luxury, and Lust. He that observes These Rules may live So∣berly, Splendidly, and Generously; and no less Candidly, Faithfully, and amicably with all Men. WE are now to speak of the remaining part of Duty; wherein Bashfulness, and a cer∣tain Gracefulness of Life; Temperance, Mo∣desty, the Composure of all Perturbations of the Mind, and Moderation, are to be consi∣der'd. Here it is that we find that same De∣corum, or as the Greeks, ; which is of so Excellent a Nature, that it is Inseparable from Virtue. For whatsoever is Decent, is likewise Honest; and whatsoever is Honest, is becoming. But still there is a difference be∣twixt this same Honesty, and Decorum;Honesty and Decorum. which may be better understood, then explained: For That which becomes us, does only Then appear, when Honesty is gone before. NOW this Decorum does not only appear in the Virtue now in question, but also in the Three former.A Decorum in Prudence. For the Right and Prudent use of Reason, and Speech; the doing of every thing Considerately; the finding out of Truth, and the Defending of it, looks well in Any man; as on the Other side to be decei∣ved, to Mistake, to Slip, to be Impos'd upon, is as misbecoming, as if a man were in a fit of Dotage, or out of his Wits. And so what∣soever is Iust, is also Gracefull; and whatso∣ever is Vnjust, or Dishonest, is likewise mis∣beseeming?
And the same Rule holds in Forti∣tude: For whatsoever is done Generously, and like a Man of Courage, cannot but be Grace∣full too, and well-becoming a man; and the Contrary as Reproachfull, and Misbecoming. Wherefore the Decorum I here speak of, appears likewise in all other Virtues;And in all Virtues. and does in such manner appertain to them, that it lies open; and there needs no Mystery to the finding of it out. There is in all Virtue, somewhat that is Gracefull, and only separable from Virtue, by Imagination: As the Gracefulness, and Beauty of the Body, cannot well be separated from Health: And so it is with the Gracefulness here in question. It is a Decorum that is in a manner so confused with Virtue, that it is In∣corporated with it; but in the Mind and Con∣ception, it may be distinguish'd. And there are of it, Two Sorts. The One is a Certain Ge∣neral Decorum,A Decorum General and Special. that shines in all Virtues; and there is Another that is subject to This, or de∣pendent upon it, which respects every Virtue in particular. The Former is Commonly de∣fined to be a Decorum congruous to the Excel∣lency of Man, in that which differences Man, from Other Living Creatures. But the Special Decorum, as dependent upon the General, they define to be a quality so Congruous to Nature, that Moderation and Temperance appear in it, with the very Image of a Generous Soul. This we may judge to be the Decorum, which the Poets ob∣serve; whereof we have spoken more in An∣other place. But we are then said to observe the Strict Decorum of the Poets,The Deco∣rum of the Poets. when every Word, and Action is fitted to the Dignity, and
Condition of the Person. As what could be more Improper, and Unseemly then to bring in These just Judges, AEacus, and Minos with these words in their Mouths, Let them hate, so they Fear: Or, the Father is the Grave of his Own Children. And yet when Atreus says it, what Acclamations are there, because the ex∣pression Suites with the Person! But Nature her self, as to us, has given every man his Part, with greatExcellency, and advantage over other Living Creatures. So that the Poets will see to the accommodating of all parts to the va∣riety of Persons, even the Observing of a De∣corum, toward the worst of men, as well as the best. But since Nature has assign'd us our parts of Constancy, Moderation, Temperance, Modesty; and the same Nature teaches us not to be wholly careless, how we demean our selves toward one Another; it is clear to us, how far that Decorum extends, that belongs to every Virtue, and every kind of Honesty. For as the Beauty of the Body, with an apt disposition of the Parts, proves the Eye; and delights us in the very Correspondence, Syme∣try and apt disposition of the Parts; so this Decorum,The Deco∣rum of Or∣der, Steadi∣ness and Moderation. that Illustrates Life, gains upon all those we converse with, by the Order, Stea∣diness, and Moderation of all our Words, and Deeds. Wherefore there should a Certain reverence be used toward all men, both high, and low; for 'tis the humour of an Arrogant and dissolute Man, not to care what the World says of him. But there's a great dif∣ference betwixt Iustice, and Modesty, upon all Accounts. It belongs to Iustice not to wrong
men; and to Modesty, not to offend them: Wherein the Power, and Virtue of a Deco∣rum, does most eminently appear. This is enough said, I suppose, to make it understood, what is intended by that which we call a De∣corum. THE Duty that proceeds from it, is chiefly to preserve our selves in a Conformity to Na∣ture;A Decorum in a Con∣formity to Nature. A Guide That will never mislead us; but conduct those that follow her, to all acute∣ness, and perspicacity of Understanding; to the best means of Uniting men in Society; to That which is Strong, and Manly. But the mighty power of Gracefulness is in That part which we are now upon: For not only the Motions of the Body, according to Nature, are to be allow'd, but the Motions of the Mind likewise much more, THE Force, and Nature, of the Mind, is Two-fold: One part is plac'd in the Appetite;From the Appetite arie Per∣turbations. the Greeks call it ; that carries a man hither and thither: The Other, in Reason, that teaches us, and explains to us what to do, and what to avoid; by which means, our Ap∣petite shall be kept obedient to our Reason. In all Cases, we should have a care of Rashness and Negligence; and do nothing but what we can give a fair Account of. This is▪ in some degree, the Image and Description of Duty; But then we must so order it, that the Appe∣tite follow the Dictate of Reason, so as nei∣ther rashly to out-run i, nor out of Heaviness, and Sloth to desert it; but keep it quiet, and calm, and free from all Perturbation. This
make us Eminent for Constancy and Modera∣tion: For Those Appetites that wander from the Rule; and Skip from one thing to ano∣ther, either by Coveting, or Avoiding: Those Appetites, I say, for want of being govern'd by Reason, will without all question pass Bounds, and Measure; for they relinquish and cast off their Allegeance to Reason, which they ought to obey by the Law of Nature: and their Ill Efsects are Imprinted,Passion dis∣orders both Mind, and Body. not only upon our Minds, but also visibly upon our Bodies: As in the Transports of Wrath, Lust, Fear, Plea∣sure; What an Alteration is there of Counte∣nance, Voice, Motion, Gesture? from whence we may Collect, how necessary it is to moderate, and govern our Passions; and so to keep our selves upon a Guard, that we do nothing heed∣lesly, Or as it were by Chance, without Care, or Consideration. For man was never made for Levity and Pleasure, but rather for the severity of Grave, and weighty Studies. Not that we are to be debarr'd the Freedom of Froliques, and Divertisements; provided that we use them only as Sleep,The Bounds of Mirth. and such other ways of Repose; after the discharge of our Serious and more Important Duties. And our very Liberties in Discourse, must not be Profuse neither, nor Immodest; but only Candid, and Facetious: For as we do not al∣low our Children all sorts of Games; but on∣ly such sports as hold some proportion with honest Actions; So in Raillery it self, there must be a mixture of Candour, as well as Vn∣derstanding.
THERE are two sorts of Raillery, or Mirth; the One is Course, Petulant, Criminal, and Foul; the Other, Cleanly, Gracious, Ingenious, and Facetious:Two Sorts of Raillery, scurrilous and faceti∣ous. In which kind, not only Plau∣tus, and the Greek Comedians, but the Follow∣ers of Socrates, have written much; and stuffed their Books with a great many of their sayings, and Conceipts: As Cato's Collection of Apo∣thegm's, &c. Now 'tis an Easie matter, to di∣stinguish betwixt a Course, and a Cleanly way of Iesting. The One, is a word in season, on∣ly for Recreation, and worthy of a man of Honour. The Other, not fit for an Honest man; especially where filthy Things are deliver'd in as Vnclean Words. NAY in our very Recreations,Honest and Manly Plea∣sures. we should keep within Compass; and have a Care that we do not lash out into Excesses, and pass the Limits of Modesty, in the Transports of our Pleasures. The Chace of Wild Beasts, and the Military and Manly Exercises that are Pra∣ctis'd in our Field, or Campus Martis: These I reckon to be Honorable pleasures; and we need never want these ways of Diversi∣on. BUT whatever we do, it should be al∣ways in our Thought, the Excellency of Hu∣mane Nature,The Excel∣lency of Man. above That of Brutes; which are only push'd on by Violent Appetites to Sen∣sual pleasures: Whereas the Enterteinment of a mans Mind, is Learning and Meditation; which is never Idle, but still employ'd either upon Enquiry, or Action; and charmed with a
delight that arises from what we hear, or see. Nay the very man himslf, that is most addi∣cted to his Pleasures:Brutal Pleasures. (if he has but the Soul of a Man in him, and not only the Name, with∣out the Effect (for such there are) Though he may be overcome by his Lusts, he yet stands so right, as to be asham'd of, to conceal, and to disguise his Love of Those pleasures, even for Modesty sake; which shews that the Plea∣sures of the Body, are not worthy of the Dignity of the Soul; but rather Contemptible, and to be rejected. But if any man shall be found to have a great Regard for Pleasures, let him be sure to use them with Moderation. In our ve∣ry Cloaths, and Dyet, we should still keep an Eye rather to matter of Health, and Strength, then to the humouring of the Phansie, or Pa∣late; and if we shall but duly weigh, and ex∣amine the Dgnity, and Excellency of Nature; we shall quickly find how shameful a Thing it is to dissolve in a Luxurious softness, and Delicacy: And how becoming, on the other side, to live Frugally, Temperately, Gravely, and Soberly. EVERY man must be understood to be in∣vested with Two Capacities;Man has Two Capa∣cities. the One Common to Mankind, as endu'd with Reason; and in a preference to Beasts, from whence we do not only drive the Knowledge of Decency, and Virtue; but the very means of finding out our several Duties. The Other is a Pro∣priety that has a respect particularly to In∣dividuals. There is a great difference in Bo∣dies:A great Di∣versity both in Minds and Bodies. One man is better for a Course, Another
for a Skuffle; and so in Beauties; One Beauty is Imperious, and Majestical; Another, Charm∣ing.Several Hu∣mours. Now there are at least as great diver∣sities, and Varieties in our Minds. L. Crassus, and L. Philippus, were both of them of a Natu∣ral, Wonderfully Gentle, and Gracious; and Both these qualities were yet more Eminent; and more Labour'd too, in C. Caesar, the Son of Lucius. There was a strange Austerity of of Humour, in M. Scaurus, and M. Drasus; and in the same Time, and as yet in their Youth too. C. Laelius was Gay, and Pleasant; his Friend Scipio more Ambitious, and Reser∣ved. It is reported, that Socrates, among the Greeks, was a Gentle and a pleasant Companion; a Wit that lay much upon Innocent Raillery, and had an Ex∣cellent faculty of speaking his Mind, under an agreeable Disguise. Pythagoras, on the other side, and Pericles, advanc'd themselves, with∣out any Gayety of Humour at all. Among the Carthaginians, Hannibal, and among our Own Commanders, Q. Maximus have the Name of men extremely Close, nd Secret, Silent, Dis∣sembling; notably good at Stratagems; or set∣ting Spies upon an Enemy, and disappointing their Counsels. Those that the Greeks have the greatest esteem of, are Themistocles, the A∣thenian, and Iason the Pheraean. But above all, they magnifie that profound, and poli∣tique Fetch of Solon; who, for the advan∣tage of the Commonwealth, and for his Own security, counterfeited himself Mad. There are others now, so far from This Artifice, that they are Simple and Open: to the degree of
not enduring any thing but what's done above board; They will not suffer any thing that looks like Treachery. These men are the Servants of Truth, and the Enemies of Fraud. There are others again, that will bear any thing, and crouch to any man, for their own Ends; as Sylla, and M. Crassus; The La∣cedemonian Lysander is said to have been a great Master of his Art in This kind; and yet Cal∣licratides, that succeeded him in his Com∣mand of the Navy, is reported to have been quite of another humour. And we find di∣versity as well in the Stile, and Fashion of Speaking, as in the difference of Manners. As you shall see men of great Authority, and Parts, that yet wont themselves to the Phrase and Language of the Common people: As the Two Catulus's, Father and Son, and the like Q. Mutius Maxcinus, which I my self am a Witness of. Nay I have heard old Men say, that P. Scipio of Nasica, had that way with him; but his Father the Clean Contrary: and no Grace of Speech in the World. I speak of him that reveng'd the Commonwealth, upon the Seditious attempts of Tiberius Gracchus. And no more had Xe∣nocrates, the severest of Philosophers; and yet Famous, and Eminent for that very Sower∣ness. There are a World of Other dissimili∣tudes, both of Nature, and Manners, which are not yet to be despised. So that every man should do well to stick to That In∣clination that nature has given him in par∣ticular; provided that it be not Vitious; and by so doing, he shall easily more discover and at∣tain
the Decorum which we look for in this place. BUT yet we are so to behave our selves, that without opposing Common Nature,Nature is the best Mi∣stress. we fol∣low the Dictates, every man of his Own Ge∣nius; and tho' other things may perhaps be weightier, and better, we are yet to take our Measures according to the Bent of our Own Particular. For 'tis in vain to struggle with Nature; or to persue any thing which we cannot attain. From hence it is, that we must gather the Knowledge of what becomes us. For nothing can be Graceful, that lays a Force upon Nature. In short; there is no∣thing more becoming, in humane Life, then an Equability, and Congruity of our Actions; which, if ever we depart from, and pass to the Af∣fectation of another mans Nature, we lose our Own. For as we are to use our Own Native Language, without forcing forreign Words into it (as some people do) and make them∣selves only ridiculous for their pains) so should we, in our LIVES, and Actions, make our selves all of a piece. NAY, so sensible is This difference of Na∣tures,The same thing Good in one, and Ill in an∣other. that one man shall be honour'd for de∣stroying of himself, and another condemned for it; all in the same Case; as it was with Mar∣cus Cato that kill'd himself, and the Rest that rendred themselves up to Caesar in Affrica. This might perhaps have turn'd to their reproach, if they had laid violent hands upon themselves; or an action so heroical would have born
no proportion with the softness and facility of their Ways and Manners, but rather have introduc'd an Incongruity betwixt their Lives, and Deaths. But for Cato, that was a man naturally Grave, and Severe, (even to a Mi∣racle) and harden'd to it by a long habit of Constancy; a man unalterably Firm to his purpose, and resolution; it made for the digni∣ty of his Humour, and Character, rather to sup∣port death it self, then the frown and Domi∣nion of a Tyrant. How many miseries did Vlysses suffer, in that tedious Ramble of his, enslving himself to Women, (if a body may give Circes, and Calypso that name) and a Com∣plaisance upon all Occasions to all sorts of people? Nay at his own house, how patient∣ly did he put up the Contempts, and Flouts of the meanest of his Servants there? Whereas Ajax, accding to the report we have of him, would have born a thousad Deaths, ra∣ther then those Contumelies. This Contem∣plation should make every man look into himself, to see what he has of his Own, and to make his best of That, without diguising mself, to act the part of Another. That which every man has Peculiar to himself,Let every man Act his own Part. is the thing which best becomes him. Wherefore every man should take a true Estimate of what he is, and impartially examine his Abilities, and Defects; What he can do, and what he can∣not. That we may be, at least, as wise in our Lives, as Comedians are upon the Stage; who make Choice, not so much of the Best Parts, or Plays, as of the fittest for their disposition. He that has the strongest Voice, chuses the
Tragedy of Epigonus, or Medaea: The best Actor prefers Melippe, or Clytaemne∣stra. Rutilius (whom I remember) always acted Antiope; and sometimes AEsopus play'd Ajax. Shall a Stage-player now take more care of himself in a Comedy, then a Wise man in his Life? Let every man see in the first place, which way his Talent Lies; and in the next, let him endeavor to emprove it. But if we should be forc'd at any time, by necessi∣ty, to play a Part that we were never made for; let it be our Care, Study, and Thought, so to behave our selves, that at least we may not lose our Credit, where we cannot get any. So that the best of this case will be to avoid Shame, without pretending to get a Reputation, by the forcing of our Nature. NOW to those two parts already spoken of, that is to say, of Common Nature, and par∣ticular Inclination, there is a Third, that is cast upon us either by Time, or Chance, and yet a Fourth, which we accommodate accor∣ding to our own Judgment. For Kingdoms Empires, Dignities, Honours, Riches, with their Contraries, are all of them in the hand of Fortune, and governed by the Revolution of Times. Now it is wholly at our own Choyce, what part we will Sustein.Let every man chuse his own Study. Where∣fore One man takes to Philosophy, another, to the Civil Law, a Third to Rhetorique, and a Fourth affects an Excellency rather in One Virtue then in Another. But for those whose Ancestors were any of them very Famous; They commonly study to get Reputation by
treading in Their Steps: As Q. Mueius fol∣low'd his Father Publius in the Civil Law: And Scipio Affricanus emulated his Fa∣ther in Feats of Arms. Some again are not content with the honour they derive from their Predecessors, unless they add some∣what to it of their Own. As Affricanus did yet Augment and Illustrate the Honour of his Military Knowledge by his Particular Elo∣quence. And so did Timotheus, the Son of Conon, who being a Captain not inferior to his Father, made himself yet greater by the Addition of Letters and Vnderstanding. But it happens sometimes that the Son declines the Imitation of the Father, and betakes himself rather to some Course, or design of his own; which is a thing often found in men of large minds, that are descended from obscure Parents. All these Circumstances must be taken into Consideration, in the question of This Decorum. THE First point in Deliberation is This, what it is that we design either to Be, or to do; and what Course of Life to take to.Some Course of Life must be pitched upon. In this Deliberation, there is great hazard, and difficulty. For it is in our Youth, that we are to resolve, and pitch upon the Con∣dition we propound; at which time, we are least able to judge of it. So that we are commonly engag'd in some certain purpose of Life, before we are able to distinguish betwixt a Better and a worse. For although (according to the Report of Prodicus, out of Xenophon) so soon as ever Hercules came out
of his Minority (the time for every man to choose what Course of Life he will Steer) he retir'd into a Solitude, and upon the Sight of Two ways, the One, of Virtue, and the Other of Pleasure, he sat a long time considering with himself, which of the Two ways he should take: Yet this might do well enough for Hercules, that was the Son of Iupiter, but not for us, I fear, that commonly follow those men still that we like best; and take up an affection for Their ways, and Studies. And yet for those that are trained up un∣der the Institution of their Parents; they do commonly and insensibly contract an Af∣fection for the Methodes and Customs of their Education. Others are carried away by the Stream of Popular practice; esteem∣ing That still to be the Best; that pleases the most. And yet some there are, that lead the Course of Life they ought to do; induced thereunto, either by Providence; a certain Felicity, or Goodness of Nature; a Virtuous Inclination, or some particular advantage of their Institution: But it is a very rare thing to find a Concurrence of Eminent Wit, and Learn∣ing; or to find Either of them, with so much Time for deliberation, as is needful for the Election of a profitable Course of Life. In this deliberation, a regard must be had to That which is most proper, and Natural to every particular: For (as is already said) since in whatever we do, we must enquire into every mans particular Genius, before we can say what becomes him; so we must be more Careful yet, in the Establishment of our Own
Lives, to see that we maintain an Equality in the Main; and that we never differ from our selves, or falter in our Duty. Nature and Fortune to be consulted what course of Life.BUT since Nature has the greatest power in This Case; and Fortune, the next; we must consult them Both; what Course of Life to fix upon; But Nature, in the first place: For She is much Firmer, and more Constant; and it is not for Fortune, that is Frail and Mortal, to contend with Immortal Nature: Whosoever therefore shall Conform, in the Ordering of his Life, to the Inclinations of an uncorrupted Nature, must keep constantly to that Tenour, which is the Decorum of Life; unless he find himself mistaken in his Choice. And in That Case (for it is a Case to be put) there must be a Change admit∣ted of Purposes and Manners. And That change will be more easily and commodiously wrought, under the favour of Times and Occasions: But where the Season is not fa∣vourable, it must be Introduc'd by Little and Little; as Wise men say of Inconvenient, and Ill Grounded Friendships; 'tis better to unstitch then to tear them all to pieces on a sodain. But when we have once alter'd our Course, we must be infinitely Careful to make it ap∣pear, that we have done it upon good, and weighty Reasons. Now whereas I have, (in what is aforesaid) propounded the Imitation of our Predecessors; let me not be thought to advise an Imitation of them in their Vices: beside that there are ma∣ny things wherein Nature is not to be Imi∣tated.
As the Son of Affricanus the Elder. (he that adopted the Son of Paulus AEmilius.) It was not possible for him, by reason of the Craziness of his body to be so like his Father, as the Other was like His.Let every man do all the Good he can. Wherefore if a man be not in Condition to plead at the Bar; to Harangue the People in Publique Assemblies, or to lead Armies; there are some Duties yet in his power, which he is obliged to perform: as the Offices of Iustice, Faith, Liberality, Mo∣desty, Temperance, which Benefits will fairly supply the want of the Other. The best of Patrimonies is the Reputation of Great, and Vir∣tuous Actions, and Ancestors; and the Son that does not uphold the Renown of his Father, is a Shame, and a Scandal to it. NOW in regard that there are several Duties properly belonging to several Ages; and many things that becoming a Young man, would be ridiculous, in an Old; we shall say something also under That distinction. IT is the duty of a Young man to Reverence his Elders,The Duy of a Young man. and to make his Choice of the Best, and most approved among them, for his Directors and Governors: For the Ignorance, and Folly of Youth should be ordered, and instructed, by the prudence and experience of the Aged. But above all things, he should be restreined from Loose and Wanton pleasures;Youth should be Temperate and Indu∣strious. and trained up rather in Laborious exercises; and in the Fatigues, and Toyles, both of Body, and Mind. For it makes men Vigorous, and Indu∣strious, as well in War, as in Peace: and even in the Intervals of Liberty, and Refreshment,
young Men should have a Care of Intempe∣rance; and not to pass the Bounds of Modesty: which will be the more Easily atteined, if they be often in the Eyes of their Seniors and Tu∣tors. WHEN we come to be in Years, the labours of the body must be abated,The Busi∣ness of Age is Wisdom. and we should encrease those of the Mind: But striving still, by all means to be serviceable to our Friends, and to our Juniors, by our Advice, and Wis∣dom; but principally to the Commonwealth. But above all things,Beware of Sloth and Luxury. have a Care of a Drow∣sie, a Languishing, and a Lasie Old Age; and so likewise of a Luxurious; which, as it is reproachful and dishonorable, in this Case it is most of all. But if the Intemperance of Lust, be added to it, the Mischief is Double. First, the Infamy which it reflects upon Age it self; and Then, the Ill Example, in Autho∣rizing young men to be more Shamless and wicked. IT would not be impertinent, here to speak something of the Duties of Magistrates,The Duty of a Magi∣strate. Private Citizens, and Strangers. The Magi∣strates part, is to consider himself as the Repre∣sentative of the City; and to uphold the Honour, and Dignity of it; to observe the Laws, and Customs, to do Iustice; and to remember, that all These things are committed to his Charge. It is the part of a Private Man, to live with his fellow Citizens, under one Common Bond of Legal Duty;A privat man. neither falling so Low, as to make himself despicable, nor too much exal∣ting himself; And never to entertein any
Thought, but to the Glory, and Peace of the Commonwealth. This is the man that we esteem, and pronounce to be a worthy Citi∣zen. As to the Duty of a Stranger;And a Stranger. let him mind his Own business, and not intermeddle with Other peoples, but keep himself within his Compass. By these means it will be un∣derstood, when it shall come to be diligent∣ly examin'd, what is most becoming us, un∣der the several Circumstances of Persons, Times, and Ages: But there is nothing so Graceful, as to behave our selves equally, and steadily, in all our Actions, and Councels. BUT this Gracefulness shews it self in all our Words, and Deeds,The Deco∣rum of the Body. nay in the very Mo∣tions, and Postures, of the body; and con∣sists principally in Beauty, Order, and a kind of Air, or Agreement suitable to every thing we do. 'Tis a hard matter to express This; but it shall suffice, that it may be easily under∣stood. In the Observance of These three Points, we render our selves Acceptable in our Conversation with all People. And so much for This too. NATURE has undoubtedly taken great Care in the forming of Mans Body,The Seeds of Modesty are in Na∣ture. exposing only Those parts to sight, that are Beautiful, Comly, and Agreeable to the Eye: and keeping Those parts conceal'd, and Cover'd, which would give Offence if they were laid open to View; and serve us only for Unclean, and Common Necessities. There is no question, but the Modesty of the Mind conforms it self, in this particular, to the exquisite fabrique of the
Body; For whatsoever Nature has conceal'd, all men in their right Wits, do naturally keep out of sight, and as private as possible, in Compliance with their very Necessities. Now for Those parts of the body which are of most necessary use to man; we neither call the part, nor the use of it, by the proper Name; and that which may be honestly done, (if se∣cretly) we cannot so much as honestly name. Insomuch, that those things cannot be done openly without Impudence: nor so much as mention'd, without obscenity. Wherefore there's no hearkning to the Ciniques,The Ob∣scene hu∣mour of the Cyniques. or to the Old Stoiques, (which are almost Cyniques) that blame and laugh at us, for reckoning those things to be foul, in Words; which are not so, in Truth. And yet Those things which we all agree to be foul, we can yet call by Their own names. As Theft, Cousenage, Adultery, are all dishonest in the Deed; and yet we use the Words without Scruple. To beget Children, is an honest Action; but it wears a Course name; and we find a great deal more to this purpose, against Modesty, in their Dispu∣tations. But we are to follow Nature, and to fly whatsoever may offend either the Eye, or the Ear of a Modest man. Nay, in our ve∣ry Postures, and Gestures;A Decency in Gestures and Po∣stures. as Walking, Stand∣ing, Sitting, Lying; in the very Countenance, the Eye, the Motion of the hands, there must a regard be had still to that which is Becoming. In all This, there are Two things we should beware of. The One, not to do any thing that is Loose, Nice, and Effeminate; The O∣ther, to void things that look Harsh, Rough,
and Vncivil. For why should That which be∣comes an Orator, or a Comedian, misbeseem us? The Discipline of the Theatre has a long time had such a regard to Modesty;The Mode∣sty of the Romans. that no man enters upon the Stage, without Drawers, least some part of the body should come to be disco∣ver'd by Chance that ought to be Conceall'd. The Roman Customs will not allow Sons, when they are Men grown, so much as to Bath, with their Fathers; Or Sons in Law, with their Wives Parent. In these points of Virtuous Modesty, Nature is both our Mistress, and our Guide. OF Beauty, or Agreeableness, there are Two Kinds; the One is matter of Gracefulness; the Other, of Dignity;Of Dignity and Grace∣fulness. and we may call them Male, and Female: It is not for a man to be Trickt out with Fooleries; or to have any thing that is Phantastical, or Effeminate; no, not so much as in his very Motion, or Gesture. How are we disgusted many times,Affectation is Odious. at the Conceipted actions of Stage-Players? And the more Odious, and affected Motions of Wrastlers? And yet we Commend that which is Natural, and Simple, both in the One, and in the Other. The dignity of the Counte∣nance is Maintein'd by a good Colour: and That Colour by the Exercise of the Body; and to all This we should keep our selves Neat and Cleanly; not to the degree of Nice∣ness, and Affectation, but only so, as not to incur the censure of Rudeness, Sluttery, and Neglect. And the same Rule we should ob∣serve in our Garments: In which particular,
as well as in other things,A Meane does best. a mediocrity does best. In our walking we must neither march so Slow, as if we were officiating at a solem∣nity; nor yet make such post-hast, as to run our selves out of breath, and put the Mouth, or the Countenance into disorder; which is a sign of a Light, and Unsteady humour. But we must take more peins, yet, to keep the Mind in a temper of Conformity to Nature; which we may easily compass, if we can but preserve our selves from Falling into Tran∣sports, and Perturbations, and diligently attend to a Conservation of the Decorum here pre∣scribed. The Motions of the Mind are Two∣fold. Some are of Thought, and others of Ap∣petite.The Moti∣ons of the Mind are Thought and Appe∣tite. These of Thought are chiefly employ∣ed in the finding out of The Truth. Those of Appetite push a man forward to the doing of something. We must be careful therefore, First, to apply our Thoughts to That which is most worthy of them; and, Secondly, to keep the Appetite in subjection to Reason. Of Rheto∣rique, and Ordinary Discourse.AS to the matter of Speech, the Power of it is Great; and it is also Two-fold. The One is a Speech of Contention; the Other, of Com∣mon discourse. The Former is for the Brre, for Publique Assemblies, and for the Senate; the Other, is for Ordinary Conversation, Casual disputes, private Meetings of Company or Friends at the Table. The Masters of Rheto∣rique have given Precepts for the Former, but we have none for the Latter; altho' perhaps, that might be done too. But there's no body that addicts himself That way. For if men
would but apply themselves to the Study of it, they would never want Masters to Teach it. And yet we are all of us Mad upon Rhe∣torique; altho', for what concerns words, and Periods, the same Rules would serve Both. It is by the help of the Voice, that we discourse; and the Two great advantages of it, are to be Clear, and Sweet;The Voice should be Clear and Sweet. We must stand indebted to Nature for them Both. And yet Exercise, and Practice, will help us in the One; and the Imitation of Smooth and gentle Speakers,Instances of Excellent Speakers. may be of use to us in the Other. What was it but This, that gave the Catuli so fair a Repu∣tation, both for Judgment and Language? They were Learned men, 'tis true, and so were Others; but These yet were lookt upon as the great Masters of the Latine Tongue; They had a wonderful Sweetness of Voice; and their Pronounciation, neither too loud, and open, nor yet muffled betwixt the Teeth. So that it was both Audible, and Agreeable; and without Any Affectation: The Tone, without any Force, and neither too feint, nor too shrill. L. Crassus, 'tis true, was a word-flowing Speaker, and no less Ingenious; but for well-speaking, the Catuli were no less esteem'd. Now for sharpness, and pleasure of Wit, Caesar, the Brother of the Elder Ca∣tulus, went beyond them all. Insomuch that in his ordinary Discourses, he surpass'd the best Pleaders of his Time. All these things, severally, must be diligently heeded, to make us understand what it is that may best become us in every thing.
IN Familiar Speech,Of Familiar Discourse. the Followers of So∣crates are most worthy of Imitation. It should be Gentle, without being too pressing, or tedi∣ous; and I would have it pleasant, and enter∣teining, in all Cases. Nor would I have any man take possession of a Common Right, in such sort as to Talk all himself, to the Exclusi∣on of Others; but in Discourse, as in Other things, every man to take his Turn. The First thing to be heeded, is the subject Matter of the Discourse.Cautious. If serious, it must be seriously handled; if Matter of Mirth, a Freedom of Raillery, and Lightness, does well enough with it. But above all things, we must be be Careful in the government of our Speech, not to discover any Vice, or Defect in our Manners; wherein a man is most liable to betray himself, when he talks spitefully of the Absent; and either in Jest, or in Earnest, maliciously exposes them to Contumely, and Reproach. The Ordinary matter of Familiar Discourse,The Subject of it. is either about Domestique Affairs, the Republique, or matter of Studies, and Learning. If at any time we pass These Bounds, we must as soon as may be take up again. But he it as it will, it must be thought upon, how far our Discourse may be Grateful to the Company:Seasonable and not Te∣dious. For we are not Equally plea∣sed with the same things, at all times. And then, as we begin a discourse upon Reason, we must not continue it beyond Measure. But as it is laid down upon very good Grounds, and as a general Rule, that we should keep our felves Clear from Perturbations, or vio∣lent
Motions of the Mind,Nor Passio∣nate. that rebel a∣gainst Reason, so should we in our Speech keep a guard upon our selves against Those Intemperate Motions; and that we do not lay open our Distempers of Anger, Appetite, Laziness, Heartlesness, or the like. We should be very Careful also in our Conversation, to possess the Company with an Opinion of the Reverence,Respectful. and Good will that we have for them. There are many Occasions wherein we cannot avoid Chiding; and we may be allow'd sometime, a more then ordinary Con∣tention of Voice;Let Reproof be without Anger. and a sharper severity of Words; but yet This is not to be done nei∣ther, as if we were Angry; but we are to proceed to this kind of Reproof, as we do to Laming, and Scarifying, rarely, and unwil∣lingly; nor ever at all, but upon Necessity, and for want of some other way of Remedy; but not in Anger still upon any Terms; for it ne∣ver does any thing either well or wisely; And yet it may do well enough to use a Tempe∣rate, and a mild way of Rebuke; but still accompany'd with Gravity, that the repre∣hension may be apply'd without Reproach: It must be also signifi'd that the Only Thing intended by the Reproof, was the Amend∣ment of him that suffers it. Nay, it will be∣come us in our differences, even with our greatest Enemies; in despite of all Indigni∣ties yet, to preserve a Gravity; to keep our selves free from Passion; for whatsoever we do in distemper, can neither be well done in it self, nor approved by those that are Witnesses to the doing it. It is a leud thing
likewise for a man to talk much of himself;Ostentation is Odiou. especially with Thraso, to brag of things that are false, and to make Sport for the Company. BEING now to go thorough all the Points of Decency and Duty (as That is my design) I shall say something what kind of House I should think fit for a Person of Honour,Of Build∣ing and Palaces. or a Prince, so as to have it accommodate for use; for That's the Intent of Building it; and there must yet be had a regard to the State, and Dignity of the Person that Inhabits it. I have been told of Cn. Octavius (the first Consul of That Family) that he was highly re∣verenc'd for a Magnificent Pile that he built upon the Palatine-Hill; and that the Repu∣tation he got by so many peoples coming to see it, open'd his way (being but a new man) to the Consulship. Scaurus afterward caused That to be demolish'd, for the En∣largement of his Own. The Former brought the Consulship first into his Family; and the Latter, (tho' the Son of an Eminent, and famous Person, and the House enlarged) brought into it, not only a Repulse, but Mi∣sery and Shame. It does well to have the Dignity of the Master yet further adorned by House;Fit the House to to the Ma∣ster. but not that Dignity to be fetch'd alto∣gether from it. The House should be grac'd by the Master, and not the Master by the House; and it is in a House, as it is in Other Cases: a man must have a respect, not only to himself, but also to Others. In the House of a Person of Eminent Condition, where many Guests, are to be received, and men of all sorts to be ad∣mitted;
there must great Care be taken that it be Large Enough: But a large house, with∣out People, disparages the Master of it; and especially if it has been more frequented un∣der a Former Possessor; for 'tis an Odious Thing to have Passengers reflect upon it, and say (as in these Times there's too much Occasion) Here's the Old House, but where's the Old Master? I would have him that sets upon Building, take special Care not to lash out into Magnificence, and Expence,Keep the Expence within Compass. as a thing of Ill Consequence, even in the Exam∣ple; for there are too many Imitators in This Kind, of the doings of Princes. How many have we that Emulate the Splendor of Lucullus's Villa's, (his Country-houses;) but where is the man that Emulates his Virtue? There must be a Meane observ'd in These things; and that Moderation must be trans∣ferr'd, in all Cases, to the Use, Ornament, and Convenience of Life. But enough of This. IN all Undertakings there are three things to be observ'd.Three Rules for all Un∣dertakings. First, That we govern our Appetites by Reason, which is a sure way to keep us to our Duties. Secondly, That we take a right Estimate of our Enterprizes, and allow Time, and Peins, neither more nor less then the matter requires. Thirdly, That we keep a Measure, even in those things that are matter of Dignity, and Reputation. We cannot do better, then to observe the Decorum already spoken of, without moving
one step beyond it. But the First point is the most Excellent of the Three. The Deco∣rum of Place and Time.WE come now to the Order of Things, and the Opportunity of Seasons. Under this Science is comprehended that which the Greeks call  by which we understand the Harmony of Order; and not That Modesty that regards Temperament, and Measure. Now to take it as Modesty; the Stoical Definition of it is This, It is the skill of disposing all our Words, and Actions, in their Proper Place. So that the Ordering of things, and the placing of them, are much one and the same: For they define Order to be only the laying together of things in their due,Order de∣fin'd. and sitting places. But they tell us, that the Place of Action re∣spects the Opportunity of Time: Now That sea∣sonable Time of Action, the Greeks call' , the Latins, Occasio. So that This Modesty, ta∣ken in the sense aforesaid, is the Knowledge of the Opportunities of Times fit for Action. Which is a definition that may as well agree with the Prudence which we have treated of in the beginning. But in this place we are dis∣coursing of Moderation, Temperance, and Vir∣tues of that quality. Wherefore having lodg'd these matters which particularly be∣long to Prudence, in their Right places; we come now to those Virtues that refer to Mode∣sty, and the Gaining of a Good opinion, and Esteem in the World; of which we have spoken largely already.
IT should be in the Order of Life,Indecencies in respect of Time and Place. as in That of an Artificial, and well govern'd Dis∣course. All the Parts of it should be Equal, and Correspondent one to another. Many things do well enough over a Glass of Wine, that would be most ridiculous and shameful, upon a Debate. There should be no fooling in serious matters. It was well said of Pe∣ricles, at a Councel of War, to his Colleague Sophocles; that was joined with him in the Command of the Army. As they were upon a Consultation, there happen'd to pass by, a very fine Youth. What a delicate Child is there? (says Sophocles; in the middle of the Debate.) Brother, (says Pericles) a Generals Eyes, should be as Temperate as his Fingers. But if the same thing had been spoken at a pub∣lique Spectacle, nothing could have been said against it; so powerful is the Consideration of Time and Place. If a man were upon a Iour∣ny, and going to Plead a Cause, no body would blame him for thinking of his Bus'ness, and conning of his Lesson, by the way; but That pensive, musing humour, at a Jolly Entertain∣ment, would be looked upon, to be either want of Wit, or Breeding, in the not distin∣guishing of Times. Now for things which are very gross, as for a man to fall a Singing in a Court of Justice; or to do any thing that is notoriously preposterous, or impro∣per: These are absurdities so well under∣stood by all people, that there needs no Pre∣cept, or Caution, in the Case. But there are certain Niceties of Conversation, which
are indeed so minute,The Nice∣ties of Con∣versation. that some make slight of them; and others do not so much as perceive them. And yet These are the Points that require our most diligent consideration. For as it is in Musical Instruments, let them be never so little out of Tune, a skilful Ear presently takes Cheque at it: and that's the Case in the least disconsonancy of Life. On∣ly the Offence is so much the Greater here, by how much the Agreement of our Actions, and Manners is of greater value, and effect, then a Consent of Sounds. Wherefore, as there is no Jarre, or Discord in Musique, so small, as to scape the animadversion of a Cri∣tical Ear; no less quick, and accurate ought we to be in Censuring, and Detecting the Venial Errors of Life: Being led to the knowledge of the greatest matters, even by the smallest. From the Motion of the Eye; from a Smooth, or a Contracted Brow; from Sadness, Mirth, Laughter, Speech, Silence, nay from the very Tone of Soft, or Loud speaking; and a thousand such Common Circumstances, we gather the understanding of Humane Duties; and of what Naturally becomes us, and what the Contrary. By Obser∣ving Others, we may Re∣form our selves.NOW toward the Erecting of a true Judg∣ment upon things in This Kind, it were not amiss for us to begin our Observations abroad: And then to Avoid, or Correct That in our selves, which we find misbecoming in Others. For so it is, (I cannot tell how it comes about) that we are much better at spying out our Neighbours Faults, then our Own: and therefore it is a good and a Profitable Method,
the teaching of Children to do better, by shewing them in imitation how ill it becomes them to do amiss. In Cases doubtful, and hard to be resolv'd upon, it will behove us to consult men of Learning, and Experience, for Direction. Now it is very Natural for men to follow the Byass of their proper In∣clinations. So that we are not only to at∣tend to what any body says; but likewise to what he Thinks; and even to the very Motive that leads him to That Thought. For as it is with Painters, Statuaries; nay, and with Right Poets too; They love to have their Works expos'd, and, as the World finds fault, to mend them. They take advice upon what's amiss▪ both with Themselves, and their Friends, and are induc'd to the doing, or not doing; to the Changing, or Correcting of many things by the opinion of Others. But for what concerns Customs, and Civil Institutions, there can be no place there for the prescri∣bing, where the matter it self is a Precept. Neither let a man so much deceive himself, as to imagine that the Example of Socrates, for the Purpose, or Aristippus, in the saying, or doing of any ill thing against Rules of Go∣vernment, must presently authorize him to the same Licence: For This Liberty, in those Great and Divine men,Great Vir∣tues are a Privilege to some Mi∣stakes. we are to look up∣on as a privilege purchas'd by their Virtues. Now for the Cyniques (those Enemies of Shame, and Consequently of Honesty, and Vir∣tue) there's no enduring of them. To Ma∣gistrates, and Persons in Authority, we are to pay all Honour, and Reverence, and so
likewise to all those worthy Patriots that have spent their Lives in Great, and Honest Actions; and in the service of their Country. We owe a respect also to Grey hairs, and even to Those that are but designed to any Administration in the Government. We must distinguish betwixt a Citizen and a Stran∣ger, and even in a Stranger, betwixt a Private Person, and a Publique. But to summ up all in Word; it is our Duty to Cherish, Maintein, and Preserve Unity,A General Duty. Peace, and Good Agree∣ment, in Humane Society. WE come now to the matter of Trade, and Profit, which we find to be divided into Liberal, (or in Vulgar English, Creditable) and Sordid. There are some Painful Em∣ployments that carry along with them a Gene∣ral Odium;Of Trade. Which is either sor∣did. as that of a Tax gatherer, or an Vsu∣rer. These, in the first place, I do not like; and I do also look upon all Mercenary Dealings, where we pay for the Work, and not for the Art, to be Meane, and Ignoble. The very Price of the Commodity is a kind of Covenanting for Slavery. It is also a Course Business, That of a Retayler, that only buys in a Lump, to sell again in Parcels: For they get their very Bread commonly by Lying; which is a most Unmanly submission. And so for all Mecha∣niques, they are men of Low, and Vulgar business, and we are not to expect any thing that is Clear, and Generous, from the Shop. I am likewise with Terence, no friend to those Trades that Minister to Luxury; as Fisher∣men,And Volup∣tuary. Butchers, Cooks, Pudding-makers, Fishmon∣gers;
nor to the Voluptuous Arts, as Perfumers, Dancing-masters, and the whole Mistery of Gaiming. But for those Professions that re∣quire a greater measure of Prudence, and mi∣nister Advantage in proportion; as Physique, Architecture, the furnishing of Good Instructi∣ons; These are commendable Employments, where they suit with the Condition of him that uses them. And then for Merchandizing, the driving of a petty Trade, That way, is little better than Peddling. But when it comes to be Large, and General, and to be menag'd back and forward, with Candor, and Credit:Or of Can∣dour and Credit. it is no contemptible Application. Nay, on the Contrary, This way of Commerce is highly to be esteem'd; when he that has made his Fortune by it, sits down (not satiated, but) contented; and retires as well from his Port, to the Country, as he has done many a time from the Sea to the Port, and there quietly en∣joys himself, and his Possessions. Of all Bene∣neficial Industry, Certainly there is not any thing more Agreeable, or more Worthy of a Man of Honour, and Reason, then the Culture and Emprovement of the Earth; which being a Subject handled at large in our Cato Major, we shall refer you thither for your satisfacti∣on. Here is enough said already upon the seve∣ral parts of Virtue, and our Duties arising from thence. It remains now to consider in a Case of two Duties before us, which to chuse:Of Two Duties, which to Chuse. (a thing that often happens) and of Two honest Propositions, which is the Honester, is the
Question: (a Point omitted by Panaetius.) For since there is no Virtue, but what issues from One of these four Fountains, and has a respect either to Knowledge, Society, Courage, or Mo∣deration; it must necessarily be, that upon a Complication of these Virtues, there must like∣wise ensue a Competition of Duties. Now it is my Opinion, that Mankind is Naturally more concerned in Offices that relate to the Commu∣nity, then in matters that only affect the Vnder∣standing; which may be thus made out. Take a wise man, that has the World at Will, both for Fortune, and Leisure; let him consider with himself, and comtemplate all things what∣soever, that are worth the Knowing. He would be yet sick of his Life, for all this, if he were to spend his time wholly in solitude, and with∣out a Companion. The Principal Virtue is (as I have said) That, which the Greeks call , and Wee, Wisdom.Wisdom is the princi∣pal Virtue. But their  (or Prudence) is quite Another thing; being the skill of Iudging what we are to do, and what not: Or of distinguishing betwixt Good and Evil. Whereas Wisdom (which we call the Princi∣pal) is the Knowledge of things Divine and Humane: wherein is Comprehended a certain Correspondence betwixt the Gods, and Men, and a Society among Themselves. Now if This be the most Eminent Virtue, as Certainly it is: So must that likewise be the most Emi∣nent Duty, which refers to Community. For the Speculation and Perception of things, is but lame and imperfect, if it be not follow'd with Action; which Action is best seen, in providing
for the Common Benefits of Mankind: And must therefore be reduced to the Subject of Hu∣mane Society; in preference to the naked Understanding of things. And this does eve∣ry Good man find to be True, upon his Own Practice, and Observation. For where's the man, that is so transported with a Thirst of Knowledge; or a desire of piercing into the Nature of things, that if he should be call'd upon the sodain, to the Relief of his Country, his Father, or his Friend, that were in danger: Where is the Man (I say) that in the heat and rapture of his most Divine Contemplations, would not quit All, to attend this Duty, even supposing him to be in his Thoughts already numbring the Stars, and taking measure of the Universe? This gives us to understand, that the Osfices of Iustice, conducing to the Common Utility of Mankind (then which nothing ought to be dearer to us) are of so much greater importance, then These of Study,Justice more va∣luable than Science. and Science; and never was any man so ta∣ken up in his Life, and Application, with the search of Knowledge, as not yet to have an Eye to his Duty to the Publique;Our Coun∣try in the first place. and to Con∣sult the well-being of Sociable Nature: As we see in the Instance of Lycias the Pythago∣rean, to the Theban Epaminondas; and in That of Pluto, to Dion of Syracuse: and divers others that train'd up their Disciples to the Love, Knowledge, and Exercise of Civil Du∣ties. And for the service, (if any at all) which I my self have render'd to the Repub∣lique, I must ascribe it to my Masters, and to my Books, that instructed, and fitted Me for
my Function. For great men do not only teach the Lovers of Learning during their Lives; but in their very Graves too: Transmitting their Precepts down to after times, for the Use of Posterity. Now to shew how much Their Leisures contributed to our Business; These Eminent men have not slipt so much as any one point apperteining to the Laws, Man∣ners, and Discipline of the Commonwealth; but have still, with all their Faculties, apply∣ed the Fruits of their Labours and Studies, to the well-being of the Publique. So that a Copious Eloquence, joined with Prudence, is much more profitable, then the most refin'd subtilty of Thought, without speaking. For Meditation does only Circulate within it self; Whereas Eloquence works upon Others, and Insinuates it self into the Affections of all that Hear it. We must not imagine that Bees ga∣ther into Swarms, upon a design to make their Cells, but it is in their Nature to Con∣gregate, and then they work their Combs. And so it is with Men, who are much more So∣ciable by Nature; when they are gotten to∣gether, they Consult their Common business. Now for That Virtue (of Iustice) which provides for the Defence, and Conservation of Men in Society; if it be not accompanied with the Vnderstanding of Things, it is but so∣litary, and Fruitless. And what is Courage, without the softness of Humane Courtesie, and Candour, but a Savage, and Outrageous Brutality? From hence we may infer the Excellency of a Practical Iustice, in the Ordering of Man∣kind; above the force, and effect of a Specu∣lative
Notion.Leagues are more for Society then Defence. There are fome people that Phansie all Leagues and Associations amongst men, to arise from the need that one man has for another, toward the supplying of our Natural, and Common Necessities: because (say They) if Providence had deliver'd us from This Care of Looking after Food, and Cloathing, by appointing some Extraordina∣ry way for the furnishing of it; no man, of either Brains, or Virtue, would ever trouble his head about Business; but wholly deliver himself up to the attaining of Wisdom. But This is a mistake: For even in That Con∣dition, a man would fly Solitude, and wish for a Companion in his very Studies: he would be willing to Teach, and to Learn; to Hear, and to Speak. So that beyond question, the Duties that defend, and support men in So∣ciety, are more to be esteem'd then those, that barely relate to Learning, and Know∣ledge. IT may be another Question whether This Community which is so Consonant to Na∣ture,Justice and Tempe∣rance com∣par'd. be in all Cases to be preferr'd to Mode∣sty, and Moderation. Now I think Not. For there are some things, partly so foul, and in part so flagitious, that a wise man (even if it were to save his Country) would not be guilty of them. Posidonius has made a large Collection of such Cases: But so filthy, so obscene, that a man cannot honestly repeat them. Now why should any man do that for the saving of his Country, which his Country it self would rather perish, that any
member of it should do? But however, this is the best on't; that it can never be for the Interest of the publique, to have a wise man do any such thing. Let it be therefore con∣cluded, that of All Duties we are to prefer those that tend toward the Mainteining of Society. For a Considerate Action presumes an An∣tecedent Cognition, and Wisdom. So that it is more to Do Considerately, then to Think Wisely. But let This suffice; for the matter is made so plain, that there will be no difficulty to resolve upon Two Duties in question, which to Chuse. But then in the Community it self, there are several Degrees of Duties, in sub∣ordination one to another.Dgrees of Duties. The First is what we owe to the Immortal Gods; the Second, to our Country; the Third, to our Parents, and so in Order, successively, to Others. Upon a Brief Disquisition of This matter, it will appear that the point in debate, is not only which is honest, and which the Contrary: but of Two honest Propositions; which is the Honester; and then, which is the Honestest of All. This (as I have said) was slipt by Pane∣tius; but let us now proceed. The End of the First Book.
TVLLY's OFFICES. The Second BOOK. IN What manner Duties arise from Virtue, and from every distinct Branch of it, is suffici∣ently explained,The Sub∣ject of This Book. (as I conceive) in the Former Book. It re∣mains now (my on Marcus) that we proceed upon some certain sorts of Duty, that have a regard to the splendor and Ornament of Life: As to Riches, Power; and a Competent provision of things Com∣modious for the Use of Man. The matter in question was, (as I told you) First, what is Profitable, and what not. Secondly, What is more Profitable, Comparatively with that which is Less: And Lastly, What's most Pro∣fitable of All things, without Comparison. You have here the Subject of This Treatise: But
before I enter upon the Discourse it self, I must give you a word or two of my Purpose, and Intention. THERE are a great many I know that have been excited, by My Books, to the Love of Letters:The Intro∣duction. And to the love, not only of Rea∣ding, but of Writing also: And yet Philoso∣phy has gotten so Ill a Name in the World, (verily with some good men too) that I am afraid sometimes, of hazzarding my Cre∣dit with them; for bestowing so much Time, and Labour, upon This Study. But truely, for my Own part, so long as the Management of Publique Affairs past thorough those hands, to which the Commonwealth had deliver'd up it self: All my Thoughts, and Cares were directed That way. But when One man came to Grasp all, and that there was no longer Any place for Authority, or Counsel, (those Publique-spirited men being gone too, that had been my Partners in the Charge of the Government) It was not for me, either on the One hand, to abandon my self to an Anxious, and irksome Melancholy; or, on the other, to plunge my self into Plea∣sures, below the Dignity of my Profession. Oh! that the Republique might have conti∣nu'd still in the Former state, without falling into those hands; that sought, not so much the Change of Affairs, as the Total Ruine of them. For if the Commonwealth were Now standing, I should be doing at this instant just as I did before. First, my Bus'ness would lie more at the Bar, then in my Study; and
Secondly, I should now be setting down my Pleadings, as formerly, instead of these Mo∣rals: But since the Dissolution of the Go∣vernment, that took up all my Cares, my Thoughts, my Studies; There's no more Law, or Senate-Imployment. Matters being brought to This Pass, (and 'tis not for any man that has a Soul, to sit still, and do nothing) What could I better do, then to betake my self to my Philosophy; My First tudy, and the most Innocent, the Honestest Diversion of my Troubles? It was the Institution of my Youth; and I spent a great deal of Time upon't: Till I came afterward to push my Fortune in the World, for Offices, and Prefer∣ments; and Then I dedicated my self wholly to the Government: But still reserving Those hours for Philosophy, which I had to spare from the Publique, and my Friends; and Those very hours were spent in Reading too: for I had no Leisure to Write. The Calamity of those Times was Extreme: and yet we have drawn This Benefit from it, that we are now at Liberty to commit those things to Letters, which our Countrymen were very little ac∣quainted with, tho' in themselves infinitely worth the Knowing. For (in the name of all the Gods!) What is more desirable then Wis∣dom? more Excellent; more useful to a man? or what more worthy of him?The Praise of Philosophy. We call the Lovers of it, Philosophers, from the very Etymon of the word: For Philosophy, by Inter∣pretation, is only the Love of Wisdom. The Antients defin'd it to be the Science of things Divine and Humane; and of their Causes. What
will any man speak well of, I wonder, that re∣proaches this Study? If he seeks either the Delight of his Mind, or the Allaying of his Cares, this is the Study that does it Incompa∣rably above all others: For it furnishes him, every day, with something or other, toward Atteining, and Enjoying a Virtuous, and a Happy Life. If Virtue, or an Unshaken Con∣stancy, be his Bus'ness, it is either to be Com∣passed This way, or not at all. There is not ay thing so small, but there goes Art, and Applicatin toward the acquiring of it: And shall any man be so mad Then, as to think that there needs none toward the most Important Acquisition of our Lives? But if there be any Discipline of Virtue, where shall we look for it; if we depart from This way of finding it out? This Question, as it falls properly under another Topique, So we have handled it in another place; and more accu∣rately too; That is to say, in our Exhortati∣ons to Philosophy. My present purpose is on∣ly to set forth, that having nothing any lon∣ger to do, in the Government, I made Choice of This Subject for my Private Entertain∣ment. But I must expect to be Here encoun∣ter'd, and that by some of the Learned too, with a Charge of Contradicting my self. For how does it consist,An Objecti∣on answer∣ed. say they, the entring up∣on Disputes, and delivering Precepts of Duty, as things Certain; and yet at the same time, to maintein that we have no certain Knowledge of any thing? I should be glad to be a little better understood; For I am none of those Roving, Wandring heads, that Live, and Live
on; without proposing to themselves any Scope, or Design. How Miserable were That mans mind, or rather his Life, that should be debarr'd the Use of his Reason, not only in the matter of Argument, but in the main End of his Being? Now for those Points which Others Divide, into Certain, and Vn∣certain; it pleases me better, that they should be distinguished by calling them Probable, or Improbable. And what should hinder me now from Embracing the One, and disallowing the Other? provided that I keep my self from being either Arrogantly positive; or Rash, and Inconsiderate; Two qualities that hold no fellowship with Wisdom. But our people, on the Other side, will Dispute every thing: For (say they) without Comparing Both parts, how shall any man know which is the Right? But This matter (I suppose) is sufficiently clear'd, in our Academical Questi∣ons. Now for You, (my Son) tho' you have been train'd up in the most Ancient, and Noble sort of Philosophy, and under the In∣stitution of Cratippus; (an Author not inferi∣our to the most Venerable Founders of it) I would not have you a Stranger yet to your Fathers Writings, which you will not find much differing from your Own. But now to the Point. WE have, for methods sake, made a Di∣stribution of Humane Duties into Five Parts;The Di∣stribution of he Whole Work. Two, upon the Points of Decency, and Virtue; Two more, with a respect to the Commodious∣ness of Life; as Power, Wealth, &c. And a
Fifth, with a regard to our Election, rather of One, then Another, when several things, ei∣ther Good, or Profitable, meet in Competition. We have already gone thorough the First Branch of this Division, which I must recom∣mend to your particular Attention, and Stu∣dy. The Point now in hand is That which we call Profitable:The Word Profitable is Corrupted. A word, which by the Cor∣ruption of Time, and Custom, is perverted in∣sensibly to the signification of somewhat that may be separated from Honesty: as if any thing could be Profitable, that were not Ho∣nest, or any thing Honest, without being Pro∣fitable; an Error of the most pernicious con∣sequence imaginable to the Life of man. These Three Points, how confused soever they may appear to be, are yet by Philoso∣phers of great Authority, very judiciously, and ingenuously distinguished in the Imagina∣tion: concluding in This, that whatsoever is Profitable, is Honest, and whatsoever is Ho∣nest, is Profitable:Profitable and Honest are Converti∣ble Terms. And consequently that whatsoever is Either of them, is the Other. From the not understanding of this matter aright, it comes often to pass, that we have a Cunning, Artificial Sort of People, in great Admiration: mistaking Craft, for Wisdom.Craft mista∣ken for Wis∣dom. This Opinion is by all means to be rooted out from among men; and this following perswasion erected in the stead of that there is is no compassing the end we aim at, by Frau∣dulent, and Indirect Courses, but only by just Dealings, and honest Counsels.
NOW the things apperteining to Conve∣niences for the Life of man, are either Inani∣mate,Things In∣animate. as Gold, Silver, Minerals,, and the productions of the Earth; or Animated,Animate. and indu'd with Impulse, and Appetite; And those again are divided, into Vnreasonable,Unreason∣able. and Reasonable. Of the former kind, we may reckon Horses, Oxen, and other sorts of Cattle; Bees, &c. whose labour Contributes in some measure, to the Use and Necessities of Life; and then for Reasonable,Reasonable. we may account the Gods, and Men. By Piety and Holiness, we make our selves acceptable to the Gods; but in the next place to the Gods themselves, it is in the Power of Men to render themselves most Beneficial to one another.One man is the great∣est Benefit or Mischief to another. And those things which may be Hurtful, or Injurious to us, do fall likewise under the same Division. But in This Case, the Gods are excepted; as presuming that they will do us no harm. So that the greatest mischief that we are liable to, is from one another. For the very Inanimate things we spake of, are most of them,The Neces∣sity of Mu∣tual Hlp and Society. the Effects of Humane Industry and Labour. There goes a great deal of Work, and Art, to the very preparing of them; and then there must be Humane Application to the Vsing of them: For neither Physique, Navigation, Tillage, the Reaping and Gathering of our Corn, and Fruits, or the Conservation, of them, could be effected without the labour of Man. There would be no Exporting what we have to spare, or Importing what we want, without the mutual Help one of an∣ther. How should we fetch up Stones oat
of the Quarries for our necessary use: or Iron, Brass, Gold, Silver, out of the Bowels of the Earth, without Labour, and the Hands of men? whence came our Houses, at First, to defend us from the Injuries of Heat and Cold? or How should we afterward have Repaired, or Rebuilt them, when they come to be laid in Ruines, either by Tempest, Earthquakes, or even by Age it self: If the Obligations and Necessities of Humane Societies, had not mov'd us to call for Help, one of another? Our Aquaducts our Canals for the turning of Rivers, and flowing of our Grounds, our Sea Banks, our forced Ports, and Harbours, are they not all of them the Effect of Manual Operation and Industry? From these Instances, and a thousand more, it appears undenyably that the very advantages which we receive even from Inanimate things would be totally lost to us; but for That Labour and Endeavor that gives us Profit of them: and to which we are like∣wise indebted for the Benefits that we re∣ceive even from Beasts themselves. It was undoubtedly the Invention of man too; the Application of them to the Use of Mankind; Nor can we at this day either Feed, Reclaim, or Preserve what we have occasion for, or make our Best of their Service▪ without the Assistance of one another. Is it not by the help of Men, that we destroy those Creatures that are hurtful to us; and take others, that we may be the better for? What should I speak of those Innumerable Arts, without which we are little better then Dead, Living? What Care for the Sick? What delight for
the Sound? What Food, or Clothing, without the help of Arts, and Trades, to supply us? This is it that furnishes, and Sweetens Hu∣mane Life; and in our manner of Feeding, and Covering, raises us above the Condition of Beasts. How should Cities have been either built, or peopled without Correspondence, and Commerce? And hence come Laws, and Customs, the Equal and Vniversal Bounds of Common Right, for the Comfort, and Regula∣tion of our Lives. And this Communication produces Gentleness of Manners, and Modesly, and This is it that supports us in a state of Se∣curity, and furnishes us in all our Wants, by the Intercourse of Giving, and Receiving and by the Exchange of Good Offices, and Conve∣niences. A great deal of this might have been spar'd; For it is Clear to every man, That which Panaetius has so much enlarg'd upon; Which is, that never any Prince or General, either in War, or in Peace, atchiev'd any Great, and Profitable Exploit, without the Concurrence of Humane Aid. He makes his Instances in Themistocles, Pericles, Cyrus, Agesi∣laus, Alexander; who could never have done those mighty things (he says) without the help of Others. But there was no necessity of Witnesses in so evident a matter.The great Mischiefs are from one man to another. Now as the Advantages are very Great, which we re∣ceive by Communication, and Agreement; So there is no Mischief so detestable, which one man does not bring upon another. Dicae∣archus, a Famous, and an Eloquent Peripate∣tique, has written an express Tract of the De∣struction of Men. He summs up all the Fa∣talities
of Mankind; as Inundations, Plagues, De∣solations; the sodain Incursions of Wild Beasts, and Serpents, which, according to his Relati∣on, have sometimes devour'd whole Nations: and all This, (he says) is as nothing, to the Calamities, that by War, and Seditions, we have brought one upon another. Now since it is without dispute, that we are the Authors both of great Good, and of great Evil, among our selves, it must be the Bus'ness, as it is the Property of Virtue, so to mould and fashion mens Minds, as to Create in them, Inclinati∣ons of Contributing toward the Common good of Mankind. Now for those Benefits, that we receive from things without Life, or in what kind soever, in the use and ordering of Beasts; they are properly Mechanical: and the Works of the Body, rather then of the Mind. But those Studies, that fit, and dis∣pose us for the Emprovement of our For∣tunes, are excited by the Prudence and Vir∣tue of excellent Men:Of Pru∣ence and Virtue. For almost all Virtue moves upon These Three Points. First, the Accurate Perception of every thing in its Na∣ked Truth and Simplicity; in the Correspon∣dence of Circumstances, and the Consequen∣ces of things, with the Rise, and Causes of them. Secondly, the Moderating of our Pas∣sions, and Appetites, (which the Greeks call , and , and subjecting them to the Go∣vernment of Reason. The Third, is, the Skill of menaging our Conversation with so much Cour∣tesie, and Discretion, as to gain the kindness and assistance of our Acquaintance, toward the furnishing of us with all things that our
Nature requires, in Competency, and Plenty; Defending, and Protecting us from Violence, revenging our selves upon those that affront us, by inflicting such punishments only as may stand with Humanity, and Justice. As to the Means, and Faculty both of Making Friends, and Keeping them, (which we shall speak of in due Time, and Place) only a Word, in Passage. We are all of us sensible of the Power of Fortune,The Power of Fortune. in the matter of Prosperity, and Ad∣versity: When she gives us a fair Gale, our Course is smooth, and gentle; till we arrive at our desired Port. But when the Wind blows strong against us, we are fain to beat it out, under a thousand hazards. Now there are some Casualties,Unhappy Casualties. less frequent, then Others; which are commonly ranged under the Domi∣nion of Fortune. First, from things Inanimate, as Storms, Tempests, Shipwracks, Ruines; Con∣flagrations; from Beasts, as Stroaks, Bitings, Trampling under foot, &c. These are Accidents, as I said, that fall not out often. But the Routing of Armies; (as of no less than Three lately:) the Loss of Brave Commanders, (one Incomparable Person but the Other Day) the Envy of the Multitude, and a World of Gallant, and Deserving Men, by Prescriptions, Imprison∣ments, and forced Escapes, sacrific'd to Popu∣lar Malice: And on the Other Side, Honours, Empire, Victory; tho' these things are All Look'd upon as Fortuitous; yet neither the One, nor the Other come to pass, without the Interposition of Labour, and Industry. Now since thus it is; let us consider by what fair
Means we may make such Interests, and Friend∣ships in the World, as may turn to our Ad∣vantage. If you shall think the Discourse over∣long; compare it with the Dignity of the Sub∣ject, and perhaps you'll come to wish there had been more on't. The Grounds of Honour and Esteem in the World.WHAT good Office soever one Man does for Another, whether in the matter of For∣tune, or Credit, he does it either upon the Accompt of Good Will, and Personal Affection; or of Respect, as wishing well to the Advance∣ment of his Fortune, out of a Veneration for his Virtue: Or else, upon the score of Trust, and Confidence in him; as one that is able to give us good Advice: Or otherwise, out of fear, perchance, of his Power. Or in hope of a Re∣ward: (as it is common for Princes, and Po∣pular Pretenders, to scatter their Donatives.) Or Lastly; Many Men are mov'd by the bare Obligation of Money, and Reward. The foul∣est, and the basest of all Considerations, both to Him that entertains the Address,Mercenary Natures. and to the Other, that makes it. For Matters are at an Ill Pass, when that which should be obtein'd by Virtue, is attempted by Money. But since there is, many times, a Necessity of That Pro∣vision, we will give some Directions for the Vsing of it. Only something must be said in the First place, of Those Things that have a Nearer Affinity with Virtue. There are se∣veral Reasons for which One Man puts himself under the Power, and Government of Another; Either Affection, Obligations, Excellency of En∣dowments, Hope of Profit; Fear of being forc'd
to it: Or Men are Inveigled by Liberal Pro∣mises; or in fine, by Corruption, and Reward; which we find to be a Common Case in our Republique. THERE is nothing that secures Power, and Greatness, like Love;Love is the best Secu∣rity of Power. Nothing that endangers it, like Fear. Wherefore Ennius says very well, He that is Fear'd, is Hated; and they that hate a Man, wish him Dead. But when it comes once to a General Hatred,Hatred is the certain effect of Fear. there is no force that is able to encounter it: As We have found by late, and dear Experience, even if the thing had been unknown to us before. And it is not only in the Violent Death of That Tyrant, Caesar, (whom this Oppressed City was forc'd to bear, for want of Power to make Resistance:) But we may read it also in the Common Fate of Other Oppressours; scarce any of them coming to a Natural End. Fear is a False, and short-liv'd Security; but Love, on the Contrary, and Benevolence, are Firm, even to the Death. In the Case of a Conquer'd People, I must confess, if nothing else will keep them in Order; I should advise the same Rigour, and Authority to be exer∣cis'd over them, that a Master uses over his Servants. But for any Man to persue the same Course in a Free City, of making himself Fear'd, were a direct Madness. For let the Laws be never so much Opprest, by Might, and Faction, and the very Foundations of the Common Liberty shaken, there will be secret Contrivances yet, Private Consultations, and Inrolling of Parties; that will some time or
other put Life again into the Government. For Men are more sensible of the Want of Liberty, than of the Enjoyment of it. Let us therefore imbrace That which most Conduces, not only to our Security, but also to Wealth, and Power. The Ready way to the attaining of our Desires, either in Publique Affairs; or in Private, is, to Cast out Fear, and to pre∣serve, and maintain Charity. For whosoever would be Fear'd, must necessarily be afraid himself of all that are afraid of him. What shall we think of the Condition of the First Dionysius,The Condi∣tion and Fate of Tyrants. under the horrour and the torture of his Terrours? that sindged his very Beard, because he would not venture his Throat un∣der the hand of a Barber? Or of Alexander the Pheraean; that Durst not trust himself with his beloved Thebe, without a Barbarian, a branded Slave, with his drawn Sword, for his Conducter; and his Guards sent before him to search all the Womens Boxes, even to their very Clothes and Linnen, for conceal'd Pony∣ards, or other dangerous Weapons; before he durst venture himself only from his Table, into his Bedchamber? O miserable Wretch, that could put more Confidence in a Stigma∣tiz'd Barbarian, than in his Own Wife! But his Fears fell upon him, for she kill'd him with her Own Hand, upon the Jealousie of a pri∣vate Amour. Nor is there any Power under Heaven that can long maintain it self against a pressing, and an Universal Fear. And This we may see in the Example of Phalaris; a Ty∣rant Celebrated for his Cruelty: who was cut off, not like the Pheraean Alexander, by secret
Treachery; nor yet like Our Caesar, by a par∣ticular band of Conspiratours: But he was put to Death,The End of Phalais. by the Unanimous Outrage of the Citizens of Agrigentum; in the very Market∣place. Did not the Macedonians abandon De∣metrius, and go over as one Man, to Pyrrbus? Were not the Lacedemonians, for their Ini∣quity, and Mis-government, almost totally de∣serted by their Allies, at that fatal Battle of Leuctra? where they stood looking on, as Idle Spectators, till the Lacedemonians were wholly routed, and cut to pieces. I had rather make use of Foreign Instances, than Domestique, upon This Subject: ut This however let me say, so long as the Government of Rome was influenc'd by Principles of Gentleness, more than of Violence: so long as they fought only for their Friends, or for Empire; the Issue of the War was either a Generous Mercy, or at worst, no manner of Unnecessary Rigour. The Senate of Rome was in those days the Haven, the Sanctuary of Oppressed Kings,Rome was formerly the Sanctuary of the Op∣pressed. People, and Nations: And the Magistrates, and Cap∣tains of Those Times, had no Other Ambition, no Other Pique of Glory in Prospect, than to defend their Provinces, and to support their Associates with Truth and Equity: so that Rome did rather affect the Patronage of the whole World, than the Empire of it. This Custom, and Discipline began sometimes since by little and little to decline; but after the Victory of Sylla, it was totally extinct: And in Truth, it would not have lookt well after such Barbarities exercis'd upon the Citizens Themselves, to have kept Touch in any point
of Faith and Justice, with their Allies. Here was a Glorious Cause attended with a most Impious,The Mise∣ries that be∣fel Rome, for Cruelty and Inju∣stice. and Shameful Victory. The Goods of so many Honest, Worthy, and Eminent Citizens expos'd to Sale in the Market-place: And to heighten the Affront; under the very Title of Sylla's Booty. There was Ano∣ther that came after him; whose Cause it self was bad; and yet made fouler by the Victory. For not only the Goods of Particular Citizens, but whole Nations and Countries, by One common Act of Calamity, were here upon Auction; and after infinite Vexations, and Ruines wrought abroad, we liv'd to see the Image of Marseilles born in Triumph: Mar∣seilles, I say, without which, we our selves could never have carry'd a Triumph beyond the Alps; and This was the Condition too of the lost Empire. I might reckon up Histories without end, of our perfidious Dealings with our Allies: but This One shall suffice; being the basest perhaps, that ever the Sun look'd upon. Now this Judgment upon us, is just: For the Sufferance of many Criminals made way to the boundless License of This One; who has left a great many Heirs of his Ambition, tho' but few of his Fortune. And there shall never want either Disposition, or Matter, for a Civil War, so long as Sylla's Successes shall stand upon Record, for an Encouragement to desperate Wretches to inrich themselves by his Example.Prosperous Cruelties are dange∣rous Presi∣dents. Those bloody, and prosperous Usurpations of Sylla; which, as they were formerly Acted in the Dictatourship of his near Kinsman, so they were now renew'd fix and
thirty years after, with more Outrage, and horrour. He that had been but a Clerk un∣der the former Dictatourship, was now pre∣ferr'd, in the Latter, to be City-Treasurer. Why should we expect now, ever to be quiet, when Sedition meets with such Rewards? 'Tis true, the Walls of the City are yet standing, and in Being, tho' in continual Dread of the utmost of Extremities: But the Government it self is absolutely sunk already. And to re∣turn to my Subject, all these Calamities are fallen upon us, for making it our bus'ness ra∣ther to be Fear'd, than Belov'd. Now if the Power of Rome could not support it self un∣der Tyranny, and Oppression; how should any particular Person expect to escape? It is suf∣ficiently made already appear, that the Bonds of Love are much stronger than those of Fear. We shall now debate upon the Fairest Means of obteining that Affection,How to gain a fair Repu∣tation in the World. which we so ear∣nestly desire, with Honour, and Justice. But we do not all of us stand in need of it alike: so that we must accommodate the Matter to every Mans Condition, and Course of Life; to see whether it be necessary to procure a General Esteem, or that the kindness of some few may do the bus'ness. We may however conclude upon This, as the First, and Princi∣pal Point: That we contract Faithful Friend∣ships; and make Acquaintances with those that Truly Love, and value us. And this is a Common Medium, almost indifferently, be∣twixt Great, and Small. And a Rule that holds with Both alike; not as if all Men stood Equally in need of Glory, and Reputation,
but they are good Helps yet (whoever has them) toward the Gaining of Other Advan∣tages, and the making of Friendships: which in my Loelius I have expresly handled. And I have written two Books also upon the Sub∣ject of Glory; which yet I must touch over again, as a thing of great moment in the Con∣duct even of our most Important Affairs. WE are then arrived at the highest pitch of Glory▪What is perfect Glory. when we have gained These Three Points: The Love, the Trust, and the Reve∣rence of the People: When we can hear them say; That Man is worthy of Honour. Now to speak hort, and Plain; The Method is well nigh the same, of Ingratiating our selves with a Single Person, or with the Multitude. But yet there is Another manner of Address also, toward the Influencing of the Minds, and good Will of the People, in our Favour. TO speak in Order now, to the three Points before mentioned; Nothing works so much upon the Affections of the People, as Libera∣lity or Bounty.Bounty and Genteness▪ wk muc upn the Peple. And next to That, is a Bene∣volent, and Generous Inclination: Even without the Means of expressing it in Effects. For the very Fame and Opinion of a Mans Frank∣ness▪ Bounty, Justice, Faith: and briefly, of all those Virtues that Contribute to the Sweet∣ening, and Smoothing of our Manners, has a wonderful Power over the Hearts of the People. There is such a Charm in That Gracefulness and Decorum, which we have al∣ready Treated of, that the very Nature, and
bare Appearance of it does move us strangely. Beside that as it receives its Lustre from the aforesaid Virtues; wherever we find those Virtues, we cannot but naturally have a good Inclination for the person that possesses them. These are the most powerful attractives of Love. Not but that there may be other motives also, tho' of less moment. AS to the Matter of Trust and Credit; if we can but get the Reputation of being Pru∣dent and Iust,The Power of Justice & Prudence. our Bus'ness is done: For we have naturally a Confidence in those that we think Wiser then our selves; In men of Pro∣vidence, and Foresight, upon whom we may depend for our seasonable direction, and ad∣vice; as those that in Case of any difficulty, are able to help us out. This is the True, and Profitable Wisdom: As to the Trust now which we repose in Iust, Good, and Faithful Men; we must not entertain so much as the least suspicion in it, of Fraud, or Injury; These being the men into whose hands we do reasonably commit our Lives, our Children, and our Fortunes. But it is Iustice yet, that creates the greater Confidence of the Two: For Iustice may beget Confidence, without Wis∣dom; but Wisdom can do nothing without Iustice. For take away the Opinion of a mans Integrity, and the more Crafty, and Subtle he is, by so much is he the more Hateful, and Suspected. Iustice, and Prudence in Conjunction, will give a man what Credit he pleases; but taking them Apart, Iustice, even without Wisdom, may do very much;
but Wisdom, without Iustice,Wisdom without Justice, is Craft. is nothing Worth. Let not any man wonder now at my divi∣ding One Virtue from Another, as if it were possible for a man to be Iust, and yet not Prudent; when the Philosophers are all agreed upon't (and my self too for one) that he that has one Virtue, has All. For it is One thing, the Nicety of hitting a Truth in a Philosophical Decision; and another thing to make a Discourse in Words accommodated to Vulgar acceptation: And That's my In∣tent in this place, when I say that one is Va∣liant, another Good, a third Wise. For these are popular Opinions, and must be clothed in Common and Popular Terms; which was also Panaetius's way of expressing himself. But to resume my Purpose. THE Third point recommended toward the acquiring of Glory, is This: So to be∣have our selves that people may hold us in Admiration, and accompt us Worthy of all honour. The Common people are General∣ly admirers of all things that are Great,Amiration produces Esteem. and beyond their Understanding: And so they are in particular Cases too: Where they find more Good in a man then they expected. But where they Phansie any Virtues Peculiar, and Extraordinary, they extol men to the Skies, and behold them with a kind of Veneration, despising, and villifying such, on the Other side, as they find wanting either in Virtue, Strength, or Courage. But they cannot yet be said to Despise all that they have an Ill Opinion of. For there is a Lewd, Backbiting,
Couzening, Quarrelsom Generation of men, which tho' they do exceedingly Dislike, they do not yet Contemn: For those Only are pro∣perly to be taken for Contemptible, that lead a Lazy, Droning, Heedless Life; without any Benefit, either to Themselves, or Others. The Admirable Spirits are such as have the Repute of a Preeminence in Virtue;Great Vir∣tue produ∣ces great Admirati∣on. and keep themselves not only from doing Mean and Dishonourable things, but clear even of those Vices, which others cannot easily re∣sist. For by th Charms of Pleasures our Minds are Dissolv'd, and withdrawn from Virtue; And we are as much discomposed and shaken, on the the other hand, with the Burnings, and Tortures of Pein. It is a pro∣digious power that the Consideration of Life and Death, Riches and Poverty, has over the Weakness of Flesh and Bloud. But how Glorious then, and how Admirable must That Virtue be, that takes so absolute a Posses∣sion of the Soul of man, in the Contemplati∣on of Great and Honorable things?As Magna∣nimity. As in that elevated state of mind, to make him look down upon all the Circumstances of Fortune, with Indifference▪ and Scorn. This Bravery of mind never fails of moving Great Admiration: Especially accompany'd with Iustice;Justice. which singl Virtue constitutes the very Character of a Good man; and makes him wonderful in the Eyes of the People; and not without reason neither: For no man can be Iust, that either Fears Death, Pein, Banishment, or Poverty; Or that Values be∣fore Equity, the Comforts that stand oppo∣sed
to these Calamities. Ve∣neration of all is paid to him that holds out against Mony:Contempt of mony. And wheresoever they find such a man, they think they can never do enough for him. So that by Iustice we gain all those points that lead to Reputation; As Benevolence by Obliging as many as we can; Repute and Admiration, by the Contempt and Neglect of those things which the greater part of the World prsues with Greediness, and Passion. NOW in my Opinion, there is not any Design or Condition of Life wherein one man does not stand in need of Another; And es∣pecially, as to the matter of Familiar Dis∣course, and Conversation: which a body shall hardly find to his satisfaction, but under the appearance of an honest man. Nay, the very Opi∣nion of Iustice will stand a man in great stead,The very Opinion of Iustice gives a man Reputation. even in the strictest solitude, and retirement imaginable; and more perhaps in That State, then in any other, as living, in some sort, out of Protection; and more exposed to Affronts; which, under the Notion of an Im∣pious person, people will be forward enough to put upon him: And then for men of Bus'ness and Commerce, as Buying, Selling, Hiring, Letting▪ there can be no dealing without Iu∣stice.Justice is sacred, even among Thieves and Pirates. Nay so great is the force of it, that common Highway-men, and those that sup∣port themselves only upon Rapine, and Vio∣lence, cannot yet subsist without it. In∣somuch that if one Thief does but Steal from Another of the same Troop, he's expell'd the Society, as a man of no Faith, And if the
Captain of the Band shews but any partiality in the Distribution of the Booty, he is at least deserted by his Party, if it does not also cost him his Life; For there is a Discipline even among Pirates themselves: And their Laws are duly executed, and obey'd. Theo∣pompus writes of an Illyrian Robber, (one Bar∣gulus) that was celebrated for his Justice to his Partners, and made himself a great For∣tune by't; but not so great a one yet as Viriatus the Portuguese; of whose Power, and Courage some of our Armies, and Generals felt the sad Effects; till the Praetor Llius (surnamed the Wise) defeated and scattered his Forces; and finally put such a Cheque to his Undertakings, that he left but little work for Those to do that came after him. How great now must the force of Iustice be in a Regular, and well order'd Government which of it self alone is able to Advance, and Establish even a Piratic Power, without any other sup∣port. HERODOTVS tells us that the Medians chose their Kings Originally,Kings cho∣sen for their Vir∣tues. for the Probity of their Manners; and in hope of enjoying the Benefits of Common Iustice: Which I am persuaded was the End, and Practice likewise of our Predecessors. For when in old time, the Weaker were Oppressed by the Stronger, the people presently betook themselves to one more Excellent then the rest, for their Protector: And it was his part to relieve the distressed, and to make such Provisions, that common right might be done Indifferently betwixt all Parties. And in the
Making of their Laws, they had the same Pro∣spect, as in the Choice of their Kings. The thing propounded, was an Equal, and a Com∣mon Right; and in Truth, it could be no Right, without being so qualifi'd. If under the Ad∣ministration of some One Man that was Iust, and Good, they atteined That End, they were well contented There to rest: But in Case of failing, there were Laws Invented, which to all, under them, and at all times, should still pronounce one and the same sentence. This now is Clear, that in all Elections, the Peo∣ple have still had a Care to pitch upon him for their Governour, that was most reve∣rene'd for his Iustice: Always provided, that he were a Man of Prudence too. And what is it that a Nation would not believe it self able to Compass, under so Auspicious a Conduct? We are therefore obliged to Che∣rish, and to preserve Iustice, by all manner of Means. First, for its Own sake, (for other∣wise, it were not Iustice;) And Secondly, for the Augmentation of our Honour, and Glory. But it is in Glory, as it is in Money; there must care be taken, both in the Getting of it, and in the Laying of it out; for we shall have perpetual Occasions for it; and we must pro∣vide for Uses of Dignity, as well as those of Necessity. It was a great thing said, That of Socrates;A Notable Saying of Socrates. The nearest way to Honour (says he) is for a Man so to live, that he may be found to be That in Truth, which he would be Thought to be. 'Tis a gross mistake▪ for any Man to think of getting a lasting Reputation in the World, by false Appearances of Things. Vain
Ostentation, or study'd Forms of Looks, and Words. True Glory is rooted in the very Soul, and brings forth fruit in our Actions. All Dis∣guises pass away, and shed, like Flowers; and nothing can be durable, that is Counterseit. This might be confirm'd by Instances in A∣bundance; but for Brevity sake, I shall Con∣tent my self with an Observation only upon One Family. The Name of Tiberius Gracchus the Son of Publius, shall be famous to Posteri∣ty, so long as there shall be any Memorial left of Rome it self: But for his Sons, they were neither Beloved, Living, nor Lamented, Dead; All good Men agreeing in a Detestation of their Lives; and approving the Justice of their Executions: He that would make himself tru∣ly Eminent for the Love of Iustice, must dis∣charge the Duties of it; of which Duties, we have treated in the former Book. But how easily soever we may make our selves known to Others for what we are, (tho' in truth the main point rests in being such Men, as we would be thought to be) it will not be amiss yet to lay down some Certain Precepts con∣cerning this Matter. He that comes into the World under any Remarkable Circumstance to make him taken notice of,Some are Born Re∣markable. either in respect of Fortune, or Family; as the Son for the purpose of such or such a Father, (which I take (my Cicero) to be your Own Case:) All Mens Eyes are presently upon him, and every body enquiring into his Life, and Manners: He Lives, as it were, in Open View, and all his Words and Doings are made Publique. Now for Those, who by reason of their Ob∣scure
Extraction,Others make them∣selves so. are in their tender Age not so much known in the World, I would have them prompted Early toward great Under∣takings; and bend their Endeavours directly That way; which they will do the more Vi∣gorously, in regard that Young Men are so far from being Envy'd, that they are rather Cherished, and Encourag'd in Virtuous, and Generous Inclinations. THE First Lesson that I would give to a Young Man for the Advance of his Credit with the People;Let a Young Man study the Use of his Arms. should be to addict himself to the Study, and Practice, of Arms; at least where there were any Glory to be gotten by Military Virtues. Our Predecessors, that were almost Continually in War; made themselves Famous by This Profession: But it has been Your Lot (my Son) to come into the World amid the Broyls of a Divided State, where the One side was Extreamly Wicked, and the Other as Unfortunate. And yet in the Command you had under Pompey; even in This very War, you acquitted your self, as a Man at Arms to all Purposes; an Excellent Horseman; a Per∣son of Indefatigable Industry; and all This, to the Common Satisfaction both of the Glo∣rious General, and the Whole Army. But the Commonwealth it self sunk here, and so did your Glory. It is not upon your Particu∣lar, but a General Accompt, that I have ta∣ken up this Discourse: VVherefore I shall now proceed to that which remains.
AS the Operations of the Mind, are in All Cases much more Noble than those of the Body;The Virtues of the Mind are more Noble than those of the Body. so are the things that we compass by the Faculties of our Reason, and Vnderstand∣ing, of much greater Value then those things that we bring to pass by Corporal Force. The First point that recommends us to a good E∣steem in the World, is Modesty;Of Modesty and Piety. After that, comes Piety, and Reverence to our Parents; and then follows a Tenderness of Affection to our Relations, and Friends. It is a promising Sign, when a Young Man applies himself to persons of Eminence for Wisdom,It is a good Sign when a Man loves good Com∣pany. Authority, and Good Affection to their Country: For it Creates an Opinion, and Expectation of Great Matters from him that proposes to himself the Imitation of Great Examples. It was every Bodies Judgment, upon Publius Rutilius, that if he liv'd, he would make a Famous Civilian, and an Honest Man. And what was This ground∣ed upon, but the frequent Conversation that he had in his Youth with Publius Mucius? But Lucius Crassus, I must confess, without the help of any borrow'd Reputation, advanced his Own Fame, and dignifi'd himself in that Generous and Memorable Accusation of his. He was at That time, of an Age to be rather held by Flatteries and fair Words to his very Exercises, than left to himself. And yet at That Age, with Demosthenes, the things which he had so happily conceiv'd at Home, he did with no less Honour Execute in Publique.
WE may divide Speech into Familiar Dis∣course,Of Speech. and matter of Argument, or Pleading. The Latter undoubtedly is of the greater Ef∣ficacy toward the purchasing of Glory: And This is it which we call Eloquence. And yet there is a Certain Affability,Affability. and Gentleness of Fashion too, that does wonderfully work up∣on the Affections of all People. There are yet Extant some Epistles of Philip to Alexan∣der; of Antipater to Cassander; and of Antigo∣nus to Philip; (Three Persons highly esteemed for their Wisdom:) And they do all of them prescribe the Use of Courtesie, and Fair Lan∣guage to him that would Ingratiate himself with the Multitude; and only the Caress of some Frank and Familiar Name, or Compella∣tion; (as Fellow-Souldier, or Camarade) to the Commander that would endear himself to the Souldiery.Eloquence, the Power of it. But then it has another kind of force, the Faculty of Haranging the Multitude; when with One Speech sometimes a Man gets an Eternal Fame. It is wonderful, the Trans∣ports that are wrought by the Power of Elo∣quence, and Wisdom: And the Veneration that is paid by the Auditory, to a Person whom they take to be so much Wiser, and Intelli∣gent, than other Mortals. And yet there is a Mixt way of speaking, that does wonders too; Especially with a Concurrence in it of both Weight and Modesty; which, in a Young Man, makes it still the more Admirable. There are many Occasions that require Eloquence; and many of our Country-men, (and Young Men too) that are highly esteemed for it, both
at the Bar, and in the Senate. But that which I look upon to be the most Effectual, and praise-worthy, is the Eloquence of the Bar; and the Subject of it,The Subject of it. is either Accusation, or De∣fence: the Latter is the more Laudable of the Two, and yet in many Cases, the Other is like∣wise to be Approved. As in what I said just now of Crassus; and Anthony also, when he was a Young Man, did the same thing. Pub∣lius Sulpicius raised the Glory of his Eloquence by his Charge against C. Norbanus, a Seditious and an Unprofitable Citizen. But this is not a thing to be done often; nor, in Truth, is it to be done at all, unless on the behalf of the Government, as the Two Luculluses: Or in favour of the Oppressed, as I my self did for the Sicilians: Iulius Csar did as much for the Sardinians; and Fusius shew'd his Skill too against Marcus Aquilius: so that it may be once done, but no more; unless a Man be call'd to it by his Duty to the Commonwealth and in the very Case of Publique Enemies, there may be an excuse for Frequent Accusations: But even There too, we must keep within the Bounds of Moderation: For it is the part of an Ill-natur'd Man, (or I might rather say, scarce of a Man) to make a Trade of hunting People to Death. And beside the danger that it brings upon the Persecuter, it is an Infa∣mous, and a Rascally Character, that of an In∣former.It is a busie Office that of an In∣former. It was the Nick-name that was given to Marcus Brutus, (the Son I mean of the Emi∣nent Civilian) and it cast a Blemish upon the very Lustre of his Family. And moreover, be sure to observe this Duty, as Inviolable,
and Sacred; Never to have any thing to do in the Exposing of Innocent Blood.Have a Care of In∣nocent Blood. For it is a Crime, that no Colour in the World can justifie; for what can be so Inhumane, as to turn the Faculties of Reason, and Eloquence, that were given us for the Benefit, and Con∣servation of Mankind, to the Ruine, and De∣struction of Honest Men? But it does not follow yet, because we must not upon any terms persecute the Innocent, that there∣fore we may not in some Case defend the Wicked, and the Guilty: For it is a thing many times agreeable to the Will of the People; to Custom, and to Humanity, so to do. It is the part of the Iudge, con∣stantly to follow the Truth; but the Advo∣cate is not so strictly ty'd up to the Pre∣cise Truth, as not to make his best some∣times of that which carries some near Re∣semblance of it. I should not take This Free∣dom upon This Subject, if I had not the Authority of Panatius, (one of the Sound∣est of the Stoiques) to support me in it. The greatest Favour and Renown is gotten by a Defensive Eloquence; and it is so much the Greater, as the Power, and Opposition of the Adversary is the Stronger; and accord∣ing to the Streights, and Exigencies of the Party reliev'd. We have brought off many, and particularly, in our younger days, we defended Sextus Roscius Amerinus against the Force and Authority of L. Sylla himself: The Oration you know is still Extant.
HAVING already set forth the Methods by which a Young man may advance his Reputation in the World; we shall now discourse the matter of Liberality, and Bounty, which is Twofold; For we oblige those that stand in need of our Help, either by our Labour, or by our Mony.Liberality is Twofold, Labour and Money. The Latter is the Easier way; es∣pecially where the Benefactor is Master of an Estate; but the Other is the more Honorable, and Splendid, and better becoming a Clear and Generous Mind. For tho' the Will may be Frank enough in Both, yet the one Obli∣gation is rather a Debt to his Fortune, but the other to his Virtue. And then by These Pe∣cuniary Bounties, the very Fountein is drawn dry, and one Bounty is destroy'd by Another; and in the very Act, we lose the Means of Obliging. But he that is Liberal of his Peins, that is to say, of his Industr, and Virtue, the more Good he has done already, the more Friends will he find to assist him toward the doing of more: And then by the Custom and Practice of doing good Offices a man does not only learn the Way of Obliging, but gets the very Habit of it. It is a Notable Reprehen∣sion, that of Philip,A Generous Reproof. in a Letter to his Son Alexander, for endeavouring to ingratiate himself with the Macedonians by the Force of Mony, What is it, (with a mischief) says he, that should make you expect Faith from those People whom you your self have Corrupted? Is it that instead of their Prince, you would be lookt upon only as their Servant, or Purse-bearer? An Office so much below the Dignity of
a Monarch! Such a Bounty could not have been better exprest, then by calling it a Cor∣ruption: For the very Receiver is the worse for't, and the more he gets, the more he looks for. This Epistle was written only to his Son; but it may serve as a Precept to Mankind. NOW as there is no question, but that the Bounty which consists in Labour, and In∣dustry is the Fairer of the two,The Bounty of Labour is the fair∣est of the Two. and the more Extensive, because more men are the better for't; we meet with several Occasions yet, and many proper Objects for the Exer∣cise also of the Other sort of Bounty, which in some Cases must be put in Practice, but with Choyce, and within Compass:Give within Compass. For there are many people that squander away their whole Estates upon Inconsiderate Gra∣tuities. Nor can any thing be more sense∣less, then for a man to take peins to put himself out of condition to do the thing that he loves to do. And these Unadvised Libe∣ralities are commonly follow'd with Extor∣tion too; for when men are brought to Want, by Over-giving, they fall to the re∣pairing of their Profusions upon Some, by Vio∣lence upon Others: And the Friends they get by Giving, on the One side, will not ballance the Enemies they raise, by taking away on the Other. Wherefore, as I would not lay my Fortune in Common, so neither would I re∣fuse a Part of it to my Friend, but still in Proportion to the whole. We have a Common saying which is grown by use into a Proverb, Bounty has no Bottom, and it is worth remem∣bring. For what Mean can be There expected,
where by the Custom of Giving, and of Re∣ceiving, both the Giver and the Receiver come to desire the same thing. OF large Givers there are Two sorts; the Liberal, and the Prodigal: The Prodigal,Prodigality. they lash out upon Treats, Popular Doales, Prizes, Publique Sports, and Spectacles, and other Entertainments, which are no sooner past, then forgotten. The Liberal,True Libe∣rality. they employ their Expences upon Redeeming of Slaves, setting a Friend out of Debt, or helping him out in the bestowing of a Daughter, in the Getting of a Fortune, or in the Encreasing of it. I cannot but wonder what put it into Theo∣phrastus's head. in his Book of Riches, that among so many Excellent things, he should be guilty of one so very gross an Absurdity. His Discourse runs much upon the Honour, and Magnificence of Popular Shews, and Pre∣sents; and he makes this to be the great Ad∣vantage of an Ample Fortune, that it Furnishes a man with means to be at That Exepnce. Now in my Opinion, the Fruit of Liberality is much more Certain, and Considerable, in the Few Instances I have before mentioned. It is a Grave, and a Pertinent Reproof, that of Aristotle's, upon This Subject: We make nothing (says he) of our Profusions upon the Humouring of the Common People, but to hear of Ten Crowns given in a Siege for a Bottle of Water, what a wonderment is made of it, as a thing Incredible: till upon second Thoughts, we find the Price excus'd by the Necessity? But in the Other Extravagant Spoil, and Excessive Prodigality, where there is neither
Honour, nor Necessity Consulted in it, and the very Pleasure passes with the Spectacle; we can find nothing there to wonder at. And who are they but the weakest of the People that stand affected with this Vanity? And no sooner are they satiated, then the Delight it self is forgotten. And who are they that are so much taken with these Fooleries, but Women, Children,Fine Shews are only for Women and Children. and Slaves; that is to say, people either of ser∣vile Condition, or of servile Minds, scarce any man of Sense, Judgement, or Consideration, approving of them? I know very well that it is an Ancient Custom in This City, for the AEdile to exhibit Shews to the People, upon Entering his Office; and that very good men expect it from him. P. Crassus the Rich (as well in his Fortune, as in his Name) made a very Magnificent Entry; and so did L. Crassus, after Him; tho' join'd with Q. Marius too, a man of singular Moderation. And then C. Claudius, the Son of Appius, with a great many more; as Lucullus, Hortensius, Si∣lanus; which were all outdone by P. Len∣tulus, in My Consulship, and Scaurus Emula∣ted him. But the most Pompous, and Expen∣sive Solemnity of all, was that of our Friend Pompey, in his Second Consulship; This is enough to shew you my opinion in all these Cases. But yet however, we must have a Care on the Other hand, not to incur a suspition of Avarice. Mamercus, (a very Rich man) was repulsed when he stood for Consul,In what Cases Pro∣fusion may be allowed. because he had refused the Charge of AEdile. Where∣fore, if the People call for it, on the One side,
and wise men be not against it, (tho' they do not desire it) on the Other; the thing ought to be done: But according to our Abilities, as it has been my Own Case: Or otherwise, where we may reap some Advantage by it, that will more then Countervail the Charge. As it turn'd much to the reputation of Ore∣stes, not long since, the publique Dinners that he exposd in the Streets, to the Multi∣tude, under Colour of Dedicating his Tenths to Hercules. Neither did any man blame M. Seius, for supplying the people in a great Scarcity with Corn, at about a Groat a Bushel: when by so doing, he delivered himself from the great and inveterate hatred of the Mul∣titude; and (being AEdile too) by a Libe∣rality, that was neither Dishonorable nor Burthensome. But it was a most Glorious, and Memorable Action my Friend Milo's en∣gaging of the Sword-players for the Publique safety, which in my own particular I was not a little concern'd in: And by Means where∣of, all the Attempts and Outrages of Claudius were Crusht, and disappointed. So that Bounties should be grounded either upon Ne∣cessity or Profit; and even in These Cases too the best Rule is Mediocrity. L. Philip the Son of Quintus, (a person of great Worth,But still within Bounds. and Understanding) was want to make it his Vaunt, that it never cost him one penny of Mony to the People, the obteining of all the Favours that were ever conferr'd upon him. Cotta said the same thing, and without Vani∣ty, so might we our selves too, in some de∣gree; for the expence of my AEdileship was
so small, that it could not signifie any thing toward the gaining of those Offices which were afterward conferr'd upon me as by a Common Consent; And That in my own year too: which is more then any of those before∣named, can boast of. I take that mony to be best laid out which is employed upon Com∣mon Walls, and Ramparts, Docks, Havens, A∣quaducts, and other Works, for the good of the Publique. Those Bounties give more of present satisfaction, I must confess, that are laid down upon the Nail, as I may say; but the Other will find better acceptation with Posterity: As for Theatres, Walks, Galleries, Temples, I shall speak the more Favourably of Them, for Pompey's sake: But Learned men, I perceive, do not approve of them; and Panaetius, for one, whom in this Discourse I have rather Followed, then Interpreted: and then there is Phalereus Demetrius, who was very sharp upon the famous Pericles, for his Extra∣vagant Profusion upon the Porch of the Tem∣ple of Pallas. But I have handled this Sub∣ject at large in my Discourse of a Common∣wealth. Now for a Conclusion; This kind of Liberality, upon the whole matter, is stark naught; and yet by the Circumstances of Times, and the like, it may be render'd Ne∣cessary; But in all Cases there must be ob∣serv'd a Mediocrity, and a Proportion. AS to the Other sort of Bounty that arises from Liberality,Of Privater Liberality. we must accommodate our selves to the Occasion, and in Differing Ca∣ses use Differing Methods. One man lies un∣der the Pinch of a Pressing Calamity: An∣other
man's Condition is not much amiss per∣haps already, but yet he would be glad to make it better.How to bestow them. My Charity binds me in the First place, to assist the Miserable Person; at least if he did not make himself so by his own fault. And yet I would not be so hard nei∣ther as not to help him also, that is Well al∣ready, in order to his Further Advantage; But this is a Point that requires singular Care and Judgment in the Choice. It was well said of Ennius, A Benefit misplaced turns to a Crime. But in That which is bestow'd upon a Good, and a Grateful man, there's, First, the Con∣scientious Comfort of the Virtue it self; and then the Satisfaction that it brings us in Other respects; For the most acceptable thing in the World is a discreet Liberality; and the Re∣putation of it must needs be great, when the Goodness of every man in Power is the Com∣mon Sanctuary of Mankind. WE must have a regard also to the Bene∣fit, as well as to the Person;A Regard to the Benfit as well as to the Person. and that it may be of such a Quality as to Descend in the me∣mory of it to the Children and Posterity of the Person Obliged, that there may be no place left for Ingratitude. For all Mortals have a Detestation for it, and every man looks upon himself as Injur'd in the discou∣ragment of Bounty: And the Guilty in this Case, are reputed the Common Enemies of the Needy. Beside the Benefit that this Piety of Disposition brings to the Publique, in the En∣riching of the Poor, and the Redeeming of Captives, which, as Crassus delivers at large in One of his Orations, was many times the
Work of the Senate it self. And is not this now a Nobler way of Obliging then the Casting of our mony away upon Pageantryes, and Popular Spectacles? This is an Expence for a man of Sense, and Honour; whereas the Other is only a Fawning application by Chargeable Fopperies to tickle the Phansies of the Common People. AS we are to Oblige with Frankness;Our Obli∣gations should be Frank. so we are not to Exact any thing again with Rigour, but in all our Dealings, as buying, selling, letting, hiring, &c. to behave our selves toward our Neighbor and Acquaintance, with Candor, and Respect; tho' to the preju∣dice sometime of our Own Right: Avoiding Law-Suits as much as may be, and a little more perhaps then needs; For it is not only Generous, but Profitable too, for a man in some Cases to remit somewhat of the strait∣ness of his Just due: But in so doing he must have an Eye yet to his Family, or Estate, which it were Impious not to defend; but in such a manner too, that there appear nothing of Harshness, or Greediness in the Dispute. For a man cannot employ his Mony better, then to do others good with it; with a regard still to the Mainteining of his Own. It is with great Reason that Theophrastu re∣commends Hospitality;Of Hospita∣lity. for in my Opinion it is a very Honourable Fashion for the Houses of Noblemen to be ever Open to Illustious Guests; and it gives no small Reputation to our Commonwealth, that Strangers can ne∣ver want That sort of Beneficence in This City. But then for those that would make an Honest
Interest abroad in the World, it is a very great Advantage, the Favour, and Recom∣mendation which they get among Foreign Nations through the Friendship of those they meet with upon This Occasion. Theophrastus writing of the Hospitality of Cimon of Athens, tells us that he gave strict Order to his Ser∣vants in the Country that his House should be still Open, to whatever Lacian (or Towns∣man of his) past that way. NOW for Those Obligations that are only the Effect of Care, and Industry,Obligations of Care and Industry. without Mo∣ney, they are both Publique, and Private: Ex∣tending from the Commonwealth it self, to eve∣ry Particular Member of it: For what readier way can there be in This World to Eminent Wealth, and Preferment, than the Skill of Di∣recting, and Advising in Difficulties of Law; together with the Power of Obliging so many upon That Score? Wherefore, among the Excellent Qualities of our Fore-fathers, the Knowledge, and Interpretation, as well as the Constitution of the Civil Law,The Repu∣tation of the Civil Law. was ever had in great Esteem: And reserved (until This Confusion of Affairs) as a Matter Sacred, in the Possession of Men of Highest Authority and Wisdom. But the Glory of This Science, as well as That of our Ancient Nobility and Vir∣tue, is now quite Extinct: And to aggravate the Indignity, this fell out in the time of a Person not inferiour in Honour to all that went before him, but in Letters much their Superiour. So that This is a Study generally acceptable, beside that it puts us in the way of doing a thousand Good Turns.
And there is some Affinity or Resemblance too betwixt the Art of a Civilian, and That of an Oratour:Some Affi∣nity be∣twixt a Ci∣vilian and an Orator. Only the Latter has more in it of Vigour, Agreeableness, and Elevation of Spirit. There is not any thing that moves the Soul, like Eloquence. It fills the Hearers with Ad∣miration;The Force of Elo∣quence. it gives Hope to the Miserable; it creates as many Friendships as there are Persons that it Defends and our Predecessors accounted of it as the most Honourable of all Professions. It is a General, and Publique Blessing, when men of Eloquence, and Industry, (after the Example of our Forefathers) undertake the Patronage of so many as stand in need of it, without either Grudging, or Reward. I should take Occasion here, over and over to Lament the Discontinuance, if not the utter Loss and Destruction of this Divine Faculty, if it were not for appearing over much concern'd in my own Interest and Case. And yet we can∣not but take notice how many brave Orators we have lost;The Dcay of Orators. how few we have any hope of, among those that are growing up; and the smaller number yet, of those that are left; tho' 'tis true that we have men of Boldness without Knowledge in Abundance. Now since we cannot be all of us either Orators, or Lawyers, (having indeed but few great men in either Faculty) we may do a world of good services yet, by Recommending, or Sol∣liciting on the Behalf of Petitioners, or Cli∣ents; and by Employing our Interests either with the Bench, or with the Counsel, for their Behoof. Whosoever takes This Course, shall be sure to Oblige a great many men,
and consequently by a great many to be well spoken of. But then we must have a Care (which every man will look to in his Own Discretion) that while we would Oblige One man, we do not Offend Another. For it hap∣pens many times that either through Heed∣lesness,Disoblige no man. we disoblige some body that does not Deserve it, or out of Rashness-provoke some Other body that may make us rue it. In which Case, we ought to excuse our selves, as well as we can; for the least offence given to any man, even where we never intended it; by shewing him the Inevitable Necessity that forc'd us upon it, and the desire we have, up∣on any favourable Occasion, to make him some favourable Amends. IN the Conferring of Good Offices we have usually a regard either to Peoples Manners, or to their Fortunes; and therefore we have the Common saying ready at our Tongues end,In Benefits consider the Man, not the For∣tune. that 'tis the Man only that we consi∣der, and not the Estate. This is a handsom Flourish, but where is the Man yet that does not more willingly bestow his Time and his Peins, upon the service of a Powerful, and a Wealthy Person, then in the Support and Protection of the best Poor man that ever was born? For we are naturally inclined to lay out our services where we may reason∣ably hope for the speediest, and the most Certain Return. And This proceeds from a Mistaken Estimate of the Nature of Things. For what if That Honest Poor man cannot re∣quite us in Kind, He may do it yet in Thank∣fulness
of Heart, and in Iust Acknowledg∣ments? It was well enough said, (whoever said it) He that Has my Mony, has not Restor'd it; and he that his Restor'd it, Has it no longer. But in the Case of Good Will, he that has Paid it Has it still; And he that Has it still, has Paid it.The Pride and Vanity of Great Men. Now for those men that value them∣selves upon their Titles, or Possessions, and have the World at Will; they are so far from accounting themselves under any Obligation for a Benefit Received, that they look upon the very Acceptance of it, (let it be never so Great) as an Obligation laid upon the other side. Nay they will not stick to be Suspicious, and Jealous of it, as a Prologue to some Pe∣tition, or further Design. But to tell them, that ever they stood in need of, or were Beholden to any man, is to strike then to the very Heart. Whereas the Poor man, that takes all Friendly Offices to himself, without any respect to his Condition; This Poor man (I say) makes it his Bus'ness,The Poor mans Gra∣titude. not only to express his Gratitude to those that have already obliged him, but to ingratiate himself likewise to those which he hopes hereafter May be Kind to him; as having Occasion for many Friends. And if it be his Good Hap to render his Patron a Pro∣fitable Service; His Humility makes the Va∣lue of it to be Less then it is, rather than Greater. And it is further to be Observed, that upon the Defence of a Great man, the Acknowledgment terminates either in Him∣self alone, or, at the Utmost, in the Effect it may have upon his Children, and Family. But in the Protection of a poor Creature, that is
is yet Virtuous, and Modest, a man makes to himself an interest in all the poor honest men in Nature; which is no Inconsiderable Party out of the Body of the Common Peo∣ple. So that it turns to a better account to oblige the Good, then the Fortunate. We should do our best however to leave no sort of men unsatisfy'd; and if This point should come in question,A Wise Sy∣ing of The∣mistoles. let Themistocles decide the Controversie. It was put to him Whether a man should rather bestow his Daughter upon a Poor man that were Honest, or upon a man that had More Wealth, but Less Integrity. And his Answer was This; I had rather bestow her upon a Man that wants Mony then upon Mony that Wants a Man. But our Minds and Manners are now-adays corrupted and depraved with the Love of Mony: And yet, as to the matter of Superfluity, what is any man the Better for't? It may be of some use perhaps to him that has it; but that is only at Some Times, and in Some Cases too. Or taking the advantage of it for Granted, it serves only to make a man the more Powerful, but not one jot the more Honest. Not that I would serve a good man ever the Less, for being Rich over and above. But I would still serve him for his Virtue, and not because of his Wealth: and govern my self by the Judgment I make upon the Quali∣ties of his Mind, without Calculating upon his Fortune. Now with one Precept more I shall Conclude:Justice is the Foun∣dation of a Lasting Fame. We must never Employ our Faculties and Endeavors, either to uphold Ini∣quity, or to overthrow Iustice. For Iustice is the Foundation of an Everlasting Fame,
and there can be nothing Commendable without it. HAVING already treated of Benefits with a regard to Particular Persons; we shall now Discourse of That sort of Bounty,Of Publick Bounties. which re∣spects the Vniversality or the Commonwealth. Of Tis Bounty there are Two Kinds. The One concerns the whole Body of a City, or the Community; the Other, the Particular Mem∣bers of it: And the Latter is the more ac∣ceptable of the Two. It is our Duty, as much as in us lies, to consult the Common Satisfa∣ction of Both: Or however, to take Care of Particulars: but in such manner that the whole may be the Better for it; Or at least not the Worse. Caius Gracchus's Excessive Largesse of Corn to the People, was Mis∣chievous; for it exhausted the Treasury; but the Moderate Donative of M. Octavius was both Tolerable to the Government, and Necessary to the People; and consequently both the Re∣publique it self, and the Citizens were the Better for't. IT should be the Principal Care of him that has the Administration of Publique Af∣fairs, to see that every Individual be Prote∣cted in his Propriety;The Propri∣ety of Par∣ticulars most be protected. and that Private men may not be dispossess'd of their Rights and Estates, under the Pretext of a Publick Good. It was a Pestilent Proposition, That of Phi∣lip's, in his Tribuneship, about an Equal Parti∣tion of Lands; But then it was a great In∣stance of his Modesty, the letting of it fall so
Easily again. He did many Ill things, to curry Favour with the People; and he dropt one lewd speech too, that there were not Two thousand men of Estates in the whole City.The danger of Levelling Principles. What a desperate Hint was That toward the bringing of all things to a Level, and all Conditions of men to a Parity: One of the greatest Plagues that can befal a State? For it was the main End of the Founding and Establishing of Cities and Publick Bodies, that Particulars might be secur'd in their Posses∣sions, and every man safe in the Enjoyment of his Own. For though men Associate by an Impulse of Nature, it was Desire and Hope yet of keeping what they had gotten, that made them Build Cities, for their Protection. It has been a Great Inconvenience that our Fore-fathers have been often put upon, the charging of the People with Extraordinary Taxes:No Extra∣ordinary Taxes. which happened either through the Lowness of the Treasury, or the Expence and Burthen of a Continual War. This is a Course by all means Possible to be Avoided, by lay∣ing in of Provisions Beforehand; but if ever any Commonwealth should fall under This Neces∣sity (for I had rather foretel it of any Other, then Ours; as I speak This only by way of General Discourse) it will be highly necessa∣ry that the People be punctually enformed of the Exigent; and that there is no way for them to subsist, but by complying with such a Ne∣cessity. It behoves all Governors to furnish the Publique Stores with Necessaries, before the Danger presses them; in what Proportion and of what Kind, is a matter so well known,
that it is sufficient the bare mention of the thing thus by the By. Corrupt Magistrates are the Bane of any Go∣vernment.BUT above all things, let all men in Pub∣lique Administratión keep themselves clear from the least suspition of Avarice. I woùld to the Heavens (says C. Pontius the Samnite) that Fortune had reserved me for another Age, and kept me from coming into the World, till the Ro∣mans had begun to take Bribes. If this had been, I should quickly have put an end to their Empire. Truly he must have staid a good while then; sor 'tis but of late that Rome has been teinted with This Evil. Now if Pontius was a man of such a Resolution as he appears to have been, it is well for us that he came into the World when he did. The first Law that ever we had against the Corruption of Magi∣strates, is not as yet of a hundred and ten years standing? and That was Piso's. But we have had a great many Others since That time; and every one still more severe then the Other. How many Criminals have we had? How ma∣ny Condemn'd? What a Confusion upon the Social War in Italy? And That War excited too merely by the Guilty, to save themselves from Punishment? There was no longer any Course of Law, or Justice; but our Friends and Al∣lies, lay exposed to Seisure and Pillage, with∣out Relief: And if we are not Totally ruin'd, it proceeds more from the Weakness of O∣thers, then from our own Virtue. PANAETIVS extols Affricanus for his Ab∣stinence in the matter of Money:The Absti∣nence of Af∣fricanus. And why not? But still he might have found greater Virtues in him then That: For That Abstinence of
his was not the Virtue of the Man only, but of the Times. Paulus AEmilius, upon his Vi∣ctory over Perseus, made himself Master of all the Macedonian Wealth, to an Infinite Value; and brought so much Money into the Publique Treasury, that One Captain's Booty deliver'd the People from any further need of Taxes. And This he did without any Other Advantage to his Family, than the Honourable, and Im∣mortal Memory of his Name and Action. Affricanus the Younger (in imitation of his Father) got as little by the Destruction of Carthage; and his Fellow-Censor, L. Mummius, as little as either of them, by the Ruines of the Magnificent City of Corinth. But his bus'∣ness was rather the Ornament, and Lustre of his Country, than That of his House: Although in giving Reputation to the One, he could not fail of doing the like to the Other. But to go on where I left. THERE is not certainly a more Detestable Vice (especially in Princes,Avarice a Detestable Vice. and Publique Ma∣gistrates) than Covetousness: And it is not only a Mean thing, but an Impious, to make a Prey of the Commonwealth. That which the Pythian Oracle deliver'd in the Case of Sparta, looks like a Prediction, not only Applicable to the Lacedemonians, but to all Opulent Na∣tions also whatsoever: To wit, that it was not in the Power of any thing in the World, but Avarice, to Destroy That Commonwealth. There is no surer way in Nature for Men in Power to gain upon the Affections of the Mul∣titude, than by Frugality and Moderation.The Power of Frugality in Publique Administra∣tions. But
yet when out of an Affectation of Popularity they come to propound such a Levelling Di∣vision of Lands as is above-mentioned; and either to Force the Right Owners out of their Possessions, or to the remitting of Just Debts; these People shake the very Foundations of Government; In the First place Dissolving the Bonds of Concord and Agreement, which can never consist with This way of taking Moneys from Some, and Discharging Others. And what's become of Common Equity then, when no Man is left the Master of his Own? For it is a Privilege Essential to a Community, that it be Free, and every Man secur'd in the Enjoy∣ment of what belongs to him. Neither does This way of Confounding all things create that Interest and Reputation among the People, which the Projectors may Imagine: for it makes the Loser still your Enemy; and the very Receiver will hardly thank you for't nei∣ther: Or at best, so coldly, as if it were a thing he had no great mind to: Especially dis∣sembling the Inward satisfaction of being for∣given a Debt; for fear of being thought un∣able to Pay it. Whereas the Injur'd Party will never Forget it, but carry the purpose of a Revenge in his Heart. Or what if there should be more to whom we Unjustly Give, than there are from whom we do as Unjustly Take away? This does not mend the matter One jot: for we are not to judge in This case by Number,The Danger of Invading Proprieties. but Weight. What colour of Equity is there for a Man that never Had an Estate, to Dispossess another of an Estate that has been many Years (nay Ages perhaps) in the Posses∣sion
of it, himself and Family; and that he that Has an Estate, should have it taken from him? It was for this way of proceeding that the Lacedemonians Banish'd Lysander, and put their King Agis to Death, beyond all President of former times. And there follow'd such Broils upon it, that their Best Men were Ba∣nish'd, a Tyranny introduced in the place of an Aristocracy, even to the utter Dissolution of one of the best-Constituted Republiques up∣on the Face of the Earth And Sparta did not fall alone neither; but the Contagion of Those Tumults spread it self so far, that the rest of Greece was wholly Ruin'd by That Example. What shall we say of our Gracchi? (the Sons of the famous Tiberius Gracchus, ad Grand∣children of the Elder Affricanus) It was this very point of Controversie about Lands, that Destroy'd Them too. But on the Contrary, how much Honour has Aratus worthily acqui∣red to himself,A Generous Account of Aratus. by his Exploit upon Sicyon? It had been Fifty Years under the Dominion, and in the Possession of Vsurpers, when he recover'd it by a surprize from Argos, sup∣press'd Nicocles the Tyrant, Restor'd six hun∣dred of the Wealthiest Citizens that had been Banish'd, and set the City it self at Liberty. But finding great Difficulty at last how to ac∣commodate the bus'ness of Lands and Possessi∣ons; and considering that it would be hard on the One side for those that he restor'd to their Town to live still in want, while Others enjoy'd Their Estates; and little Better, on the Other side, to break in upon, and take away Possessions of Fifty Years standing;
wherein so many several Interests were con∣cern'd, by Purchases, Portions, Settlements, and the like, and without any Injury by Them done to the Right Owners: He concluded it Unreasonable either to take from the One what they were possess'd of, or not to satisfie the Other, in some degree, for their Just Pre∣tensions. Wherefore he bethought himself, and resolv'd upon a Journey to Alexandria; giving Orders that all things should continue in the same state he left them, until His Re∣turn: So that he presently posted away to his Old Friend, and Acquaintance, Ptolomy the Second, King of Alexandria. He had no sooner inform'd that Generous Prince of his Bus'ness, with the Design he had, and in what Manner, to Deliver his Country; but without any dif∣ficulty, this Illustrious Person prevail'd upon him for a large Sum of Money. This Trea∣sure he carry'd with him back to Sicyon, and then pick'd out Fifteen of the Principal Per∣sons of That place, to advise with upon This Affair, and to take a strict account, as well of those that were possess'd of Other Mens Estates, as of those that had Lost their Own. The Matter was so handled, that, upon a rea∣sonable Estimate of the Lands, some were per∣swaded to content themselves with the Value in Money, and to yield the Land; and Others chose rather to take Money for their Land, than to Contest for the Recovery of it. So that in the Conclusion, the Controversie was Compounded, and Both Parts abundantly sa∣tisfi'd with the Accord. What Pity was it that this Great Man was not born a Citizen
of Rome! This is the right way of proceed∣ing in such Cases; without exposing the Per∣sons and Goods of Citizens (as it has been Twice in Our Days) to Proscriptions, and Out∣cries. This Grecian, like a Brave, and a Wise Man, consulted the Common Welfare: And it is the Highest point of a Good, and a Pru∣dent Magistrate, to Maintein the Properties of the People, and not to Invade them; but keeping all within the Bounds of Common E∣quity. Why should any Man dwell Gratis in My House? as if I were to Purchase, Build, Repair, and Defend it, for Another (in de∣spite of my heart) to reap the Fruis of My Labour, and Expence? For This is the Case in taking away from me That which is my Own, and giving to another That which does not Belong to him. And what's the End of these Letters of Protection, (if I may so call them) but that you shall buy Land with my Money; you Keep the Land, and I Lose my Money? IT is a matter therefore of great Moment, that no Debts be permitted, which may en∣danger the Publique.No Debts to be per∣mitted, that may endan∣ger the Publique. And This may be se∣veral ways prevented, if such a Course be ta∣ken, that Prodigals and Debtors may not raise their Fortunes upon Defrauding their Credi∣tors; the One losing their Own, and the O∣ther getting what belongs to Another Man, There is nothing that upholds a Common∣wealth like Faith, and Credit: which can ne∣ver be expected where People do not lie un∣der a Necessity of paying their due Debts; a
thing which was never so violently prest, as when I was Consul: All Sorts and Degrees of Men were even in Arms about it: And yet I resisted all Motions tending That way, to the very Rooting of This Evil out of the Com∣monwealth. There was never more Money stirring, nor ever was there surer, or better Payment: For where the Hope of Deceiving is cut off, Men must necessarily keep Touch. It is true, that Caesar, (who was in Those days subdu'd, tho' now a Conqueror) that Caesar, I say, did put his former Purposes in Execution, even when he had no need so to do: His very Appetite being so Vicious, that he took pleasure in the Evil it self, without any other Inducement. It is the Duty then of all good Patriots to keep themselves Clear of this same Perverse sort of Liberality, that Takes from One, and Gives to Another: And in the first place, to provide that all Men may be Equally supported in the Enjoyment of their Own, by Law, and Common Justice. And that the Poor, and Simple, may not be Circumvented, or Oppress'd by Power, nor the Wealthy Obstructed in the holding or re∣ceiving of their Dues, by the Envy and Malig∣nity of the People. And moreover, they should by all means endeavour, both in War, and Peace, to advance the Republique, in Empire, Possessions, and Revenue: These are the proper Offices and Atchievements of Great Men, and This was the Study, and the Exer∣cise of our Forefathers. Those that addict themselves to these Duties, gain great Glory and Good-Will to their Own Particulars, be∣side
the Profit that they bring to the Pub∣lique. Antipater the Tyrian (and a Stoique) that lately Deceased at Athens, charges Pa∣naetius with leaving out Two Branches touch∣ing Health, and Money in these Precepts con∣cerning Benefits. But I suppose that they were rather pass'd over by That famous Philosopher, as things well enough understood, and need∣less to be further inculcated, how advanta∣gious soever. IT is a good means of preserving Health,A Caution in Matter of Health and Estate. for every Man to understand his own Constitu∣tion; and to observe what Agrees with him, and what not. To live Temperately in all re∣spects, as well in our Diet, and the Care of our Bodies, as in our Pleasures: Using the Common Helps of Physique also, in Case of Need. In the gathering of an Estate, we must do nothing but what is Warrantable, and Ho∣nest: And when it is fairly gotten, it may be preserv'd, and improv'd by Parcimony, and Caution. This Point is excellently well hand∣led by Xenophon (the Socratist) in his OEcono∣miques; which I my self, at about your Age, turned out of Greek into Latin. THE Concurrence of Two Profitable Things in Comparison,Two Profi∣table things meeting in comparison. (which was the Fourth Consideration, omitted by Panaetius) is a Case which very often Happens: For sometimes Bodily Goods fall in Competition with the Goods of Fortune: Sometime Outward Goods with Those of the Body: And sometime again, One of either of them is compar'd with Ano∣ther
of the same Kind. As in the First In∣stance, I had rather have Health, than Mo∣ney: In the Second, I had rather have a Great Estate, than a Robust Strength of Body. And so forward. I had rather enjoy Health, than Pleasure; I had rather be Strong, then Nimble. And then in the Collusion of External Things, I had rather have Honour, than Wealth; and a Fortune in the City, rather than in the Coun∣try. The Comparison that we find in the El∣der Cato, was of This Quality. The Question was put to him, What he look'd upon as the greatest Convenience in a Country Life? His answer was, In the First Place, Good Pasturage. What next then? Pasturage that was Indiffe∣rently Good. And what then? Pasturage still, tho' a Degree worse than the Other. And what again? Tillage. What do you think of Vsury? (says the Enquirer.) And what do You think of Murther? (says Cato.) By This, and abun∣dantly more, we cannot but understand that Things Profitable came often in Competition: And that This Fourth Enquiry was not at all Impertinent. But as to the matter of Get∣ting, Disposing, or Using of Moneys, it is a Subject fitter for a Scrivener than a Philoso∣pher; and better understood by the Good Men upon the Bourse, than by the Learned Men in the Schools. It is a thing needful however to be known, as apperteining to the Business of Profit: Of which having discoursed sufficiently in This Book, we shall now proceed to what remains. The End of the Second Book.
TVLLY's OFFICES. The Third BOOK. IT was the saying (my Son Marcus) of Scipio Affri∣canus the Elder,A famous saying of Scipio Affri∣canus. (as we have it from Cato, his Co∣temporary) that he was never Less Idle, or Alone, then when he most appeared so to be. It was a Noble thing said, and wor∣thy of a Great, and of a Wise man; to shew that in all his Leisures, his Thoughts were still taken up with Business; his Solitudes, in Dis∣courses to himself, without any Loss of Time:
And without need some whiles of any other Company. Insomuch, that the Two things which commonly make Other people Listless, and Heavy, did even set an Edge upon him: That is to say, Solitude, and Leisure. Now tho' I cannot come up to the Imitation of that Illustrious Person, I am not much Behind him yet in my Good Will (I would I could say as much of my self, as he does in Effect.) For since I have been driven by the Force of Impious Arms from my Station in the Govern∣ment,Cicero's Re∣treat. and the Bus'ness of the Bar; I have ap∣ply'd my self to a Life of Leisure too: upon That very Consideration, quitting the Town, and betaking my self to the Privacy and So∣litude of a Country Life. Not that I com∣pare either This Leisure, or Solitude with That of Affricanus. For His was only a Vo∣luntary Retirement from the Importunities of Company, when he had a mind to give him∣self some Respite from the Honourable Char∣ges he susteined in the Commonwealth, by withdrawing into a Recess, as a man some∣times puts into a Port: But my Leisures pro∣ceeded not from a desire of Respite, but from want of Employment. For since the Dissolu∣tion of the Senate, what is there to be done, either in the Palace, or in the Hall, that is worthy of us? The world swarms everywhere with Criminals; and after a life spent in so Eminent a Post, and in the Open View of the People, I am e'enforc'd to hide my head, and live (in a manner) quite alone to avoid the very sight of thm▪ I have heard Wise men say that we are not only to chuse the least of
Necessary Evils, but out of all Evils them∣selves to extract somewhat of Good. I shall therefore make the best of my Repose, tho' not such perhaps as he has deserv'd from his Country, who hath formerly contributed so much to Their Quiet. And tho' this be a Solitude wholly of Necessity, not Choice; I would not yet have it absolutely Fruitless. Af∣fricanus (I must Confess) gained to himself a Fairer Reputation,Cicero com∣pares him∣self with Affricanus. but we have no Monu∣ments of his Thoughts, committed to Wri∣ting: No Remains of his Leisures, and So∣litude that we find Extant. But we may Conclude however, that he was neither Idle nor Alone, from his Glorious Actions, which were only the Product of Deliberation and Thought. But Alas! I have not that strength of Mind to Think away my Solitudes, and supply the want of Company with bare Me∣ditation. So that My whole Diversion is to pass away my Time, and my Cares upon Wri∣ting: and I have done more that away Now, in a little while, since the overturning of the Government, then I did in many years be∣fore, while it was in a flourishing Estate. NOW (my Son) tho' Philosoyhy be Pro∣fitable and Fruitful from one end of it to the other, without any Waste, or Desert: there is not any place yet in the whole Extent of it that yields greater Advantage, and Bene∣fit, then that Part of it which treats of Civil Duties, and the Rules of a Steady, and a Vir∣tuous Life.Of Civil Duties and a Virtuous Life. Wherefore, tho' I doubt not either, of the Great and Excellent Cratippus's
Care in the inculcating of this Lesson daily to you; or of your own Diligence, and Atten∣tion in the receiving of it; it is not amiss yet to be often minded of so necessary a Point; and (which way soever you turn your self) to have this voice still sounding in your Ear, even, if it were possible, without hearing any thing else. This is a thing for every man to do, that propounds to himself an Honest Course of Life; and it is your Interest per∣haps as much as any bodies; because the world expects it from you, that you should succeed to the Industry, the Honours, and (if I may so say) in some measure to the Reputation of your Father. And you have a great deal to answer for upon the score of Athens, and Cratippus. For what could be more Dishonorable then after so ample a Commission granted you to the famous Staple of the whole World, for good Manners and Letters, to come back Empty; to the Dispa∣ragement both of the Master, and the City? Wherefore you must Labour with all the Fa∣culties of your Soul, and Body, to make good This Expectation: (if I may call That a La∣bour, which is so great a Pleasure) and let it never be said that after all other supplies from your Father, you were only wanting to your self: But let This suffice: having writ∣ten so much, and so often to you already, upon This Subject. We shall now return to the remaining part of the Division pro∣pounded.
PANAETIVS is the man,Panaetius of Civil Du∣ties. without Dis∣pute, that has the most accurately handled This question: and Him have I chiesly fol∣low'd, with some amendment and additions of my Own. He lays down Three Proposi∣tions that men are want to deliberate and advise upon, in the Case of Duty. First, whether the matter in question be Honest, or Dishonest. Secondly, whether it be Profitable, or Vnpro∣fitable. Thirdly, where Two things meet in Competition, the One of them appearing Ho∣nest, and the Other Profitable; how to Distin∣guish. He has written Three Books upon the Two former Heads; and promised a Discourse upon the Third; but he has not been so good as his word: which I do the more wonder at, because I find in his Scholar Posidonius, that he lived Thirty years after the Publishing of These Books. And I am in some Admiration too, that Posidonius, in his Commentaries, should pass the matter over so slightly; espe∣cially making This Remarque upon it, that of the whole Body of Philosophy, This is the most necessary Part. There are some that will not have This to be an Oversight in Pa∣naetius; but a Point left out upon Conside∣ration; as a thing wholly Impertinent. But I am of another Opinion. The Reason they give, is This. Honest,Cicero excu∣ses an O∣mission of Panaetius. and Profitable (they say) are Convertible Terms; and not to be so much as Imagined in Opposition. From hence there may arise another Question, whether the Third Branch of Panaetius's Di∣vision should not have been absolutely re∣jected, without any mention of it all. But
it is Certain however, that he did at first undertake it, and then let it fall. He that makes a Tripartite Division, and goes thorough with Two Parts of it, is undoubtedly answerable for the Third: And he passes his word over and above toward the latter end of his Third Book, that he will go on with it. And we have the Authority of Posidonius himself to Witness as much; writing in a certain Epistle what Publius Rutilius Rufus (an Auditor of Panaetius) was wont to say. As there was never any Peinter (says he) that durst ven∣ture upon Finishing the Picture of Venus, which Apelles had begun (such was the Deli∣cacy of the Face, that there was no hope of matching it with a suitable Body) so in the Case of Panaetius, the Excellency of those things which he did perfect, was so Tran∣scendent, that no man after him durst ever attempt the supplying of what he either Omitted, or left Imperfect. So that of Pa∣naetius's Intention there can be no longer any Doubt. But yet whether he did Well or Ill in adding the Third member of his Divi∣sion, may perhaps bear a Dispute: For taking it either according to the Stoiques, that no thing can be Good but that which is Honest; or with the Peripatetiques, that Honesty is the Sovereign Good, to such a degree, that all other Goods are as nothing in the Ballance Against it; they do both of them however agree in This, that Profit can never be ad∣mitted into a Competition with Honesty.Nothing can e Pro∣fiale, but wht is Ho∣nest. How does Socrates Curse the First Dividers of Ho∣nest, and Profitable, in Imagination, which are
so Inseparable by Nature? And the Stoiques go so far along with him too, as to hold that nothing can be the One, without being also the Other. But if Panaetius were one of those that will have Virtue to be Therefore Esteem'd, for the Profit that she brings us; measuring things Desirable, either by Pleasure, or Free∣dom from Pein; he might then be allow'd to erect the Notion of a Possible Repugnancy of Profit, to Honesty. But being of Another Opinion; and that the Only Good is That which is Honest: and that whatsoever stands in Opposition to it, under the Shew of Vti∣lity, a mans life is neither the Better nor the Worse for it, either With it, or Without it: He should not so much as have put the Case, methinks, where Profit and Virtue should ap∣pear in the Comparison. For to Live accor∣ding to Nature, which the Stoiques account for the Sovereign Good: is nothing else. (as I understand it) then to lead a life Congruous to Virtue: And in all Cases whatsoever, to follow the Direction of Nature in a Confor∣mity thereunto. The matter standing Thus; some men are of opinion that This Compa∣rison was not properly introduced; and that there was not any need of prescribing in This Kind, at all. NO man can be Truly Honest,True Ho∣nesty and True Wis∣dom are In∣separable. but He that is Truly Wise; and there is no separating the One from the Other. There may be an Im∣perfect Honesty, 'tis True, with an Imperfect Wisdom; which is rather the Resemblance of Honesty, then the Thing it self. And there∣fore
all those Duties that we treat of in this Discourse, the Stoiques call Middle Duties:Middle Duties. which are Common indifferently to Mankind; and of a large Extent: and some people at∣tein the knowledge of them by a Felicity of Nature; others, by a Progression, and advance upon Study. But those which They call Right Duties, are Complete and Consummate in all the Parts (or numbers as they express it) and This Perfection is only to be found in a Wise man. But he yet that acquits him∣self in the Discharge of these Middle Offices, goes for Current with the Multitude for a good and a Wise man in the Abstract: They not being able to distinguish betwixt what is Per∣fect, and Defective. Wherefore, so far as They understand the Business, there is nothing wanting. We see many times in Poems, Pi∣ctures, and a World of Other Instances, how strangely the unskilful are delighted with them, and yet for the most part commend∣ing the least masterly stroke in the Piece: which arises from This Ground, (I suppose) they find something in the whole that pleases them; but they are not able to judge of the Imperfections of the several Parts: But when they come to be better instructed, they are easily brought to change their First Opini∣on. The Duties here Treated of, are with the Stoiques a kind of Second-rate Honesty; and not peculiar to wise men, but Common to Hu∣man Nature: And therefore they affect all people that have in them the least spark of Good Nature, or Virtue. Now when we
speak of the Magnanimity of the two Decij,No man Good or Wise in the Abstract. or the Scipio's, or of the Iustice of Fabricius, or Aristides; we do not propose their Example as the Standard of That Courage, and Equity that is required in a Wise man. For I do not look upon either of them to have been Wise to the Degree of Wisdom here intended; no, nor those very Persons upon whom the World has bestowed both the Reputation, and the Name of Wise men. I speak of Cato, Caius Laelius, or the Seven Sages themselves. But by the Frequent exercise of Middle Offi∣ces they had somewhat of the appearance, and Resemblance of Wisemen. So that we must neither Compare Profit in Opposition to that which is truly Honest; nor oppose any matter of Gain to that which we commonly call Virtue; whereupon these people value them∣selves, that would be accounted Good men. And we must as well uphold and preserve That Practical Honesty that falls under our Capacities; as That which in Strictness and Truth, is only the Honesty of Wise men: For Otherwise, how shall we know what pro∣gress we make toward Virtue? And so much for those that by doing Good Offices get them∣selves the Reputation of being Good men. BUT for those that Measure all things by the Common Interest of Gain and Benefit, and will not allow Honesty to take place;The Epicu∣reans mea∣sure Hnsty by Prfit. it is or∣dinary for Them to put Mony in the Scale against Virtue; which no Good man will ever do. I suppose therefore, that Panaetius, when he says that men are wont to make some Doubts upon the Comparison, means only
(as he says) that they are Wont to do so; and not that they do well in so doing. For not only the Preference of Profit to Honesty, but the very Comparing of them, and the ma∣king a Doubt in the Case, is a shameful Bus'ness. But what is it that we doubt up∣on? Or what's the Ground of our Conside∣ration? It is (I presume) upon the Quality of the Point in Question:Circum∣stances al∣ter the Case. For that which is Dishonorable at One time, may be Warran∣table at Another. As for Example, upon a supposition more at large; What fouler Vil∣lany can be imagin'd then the Killing not on∣ly of a Man, but a Familiar Friend? And yet the People of Rome do not only Absolve any man that destroys a Tyrant, tho' his Familar Friend; but they reckon upon it as the most Glorious Action of an Honorable Life. Is it in This Case that Profit prevails over Honesty; Or rather that the Honesty follow'd the Pro∣fit? THE Certain way to keep us Right in our Judgments upon the Concurrence of Profita∣ble,A Rule keeps us Rigt, and Honest, will be the Establishment of such a Rule as upon the Comparing of things will direct us in our Duty: which Rule I would have to be squar'd to the Reason and Discipline of the Stoiques: And This is the Rule which I shall observe in This Treatise; Because tho' the Ancient Academiques, and the Peripatetiques also, (which were formerly all one) give a Preference to that which is Honest, before that which seems to be Profi∣table; the matter is yet more Generously handled by the Stoiques, that make Profit and
Honesty Reciprocal, then by those that Ima∣gine a thing may be either Honest, and not Profitable, or Profitable, and not Honest. Now our Academy allows great Liberty, and gives us a Right to defend That which appears most Probabl. But to Return to my Rule,In our Judgments of Profitable and Honst. To take away any thing wrongfully from any man, or to make my Own Fortune by the empoverishing of Another, is more Contra∣ry to Nature, then Death, Beggery, Pein; or whatever else can befal a mans Body, or Estate. For at First Dash it destroys all Neigh∣borhood and Society: For if we come once to entertain an Opinion that One man for his Own advantage may Assault, or make a Prey of Another; there follows necessarily an Absolute Dissolution of Human Society, and a Violation of the most Certain and Powerful Dictate of Nature. Put the Case that One Member should draw to it self the Health, and Good Blood of the Member next unto it; the whole Body must, of Necessity, Consume and Perish: In like manner if every man should take from Another what he can get, and ap∣ply his Neighbors Goods to his Own Use, This would undoubtedly put an end to all Friendliness, and Fellowship among men. It is natural Enough for a man to provide Ne∣cessaries for Himself, in the First place; But it is yet against Nature for him to furnish him∣self with Mony or Provisions, by Spoil and Rapine: And it is not only by the Dictate of Nature, or the Rights of Nations, but by the particular Laws and Constitutions of all States, that it is declared Unlawful for One
man to do any Mischief to Another for his Proper Benefit.Fraud and Rapine are against the Laws of Nature and Nations. It is the Express Care, Will, and Intent of all. Laws to main∣tein the Duties of Society, Safe, and Invio∣late: and they punish the Transgressors of these Rules with Death, Banishments, Prisons, and Fines: And much more does Nature her self Exact this from us: Nature (I say) which is the Law Divine and Humane, Both in one. Whoever obeys Her Dictate (as all men will, that propose to live in a Conformity to the Principles of a Reasonable Being) will ne∣ver agree to the Coveting of what is Ano∣ther mans, or to the taking away from his Neighbor, and Giving to himself. For Great∣ness of Mind, Gentleness, Justice, and Libera∣lity are much more Consonant to Nature then Pleasure, Life, or Riches: which, in Compa∣rison with the Common Good, are by all men of Brave and Exalted Minds, neglected and despised. Whereas, on the Other side, to Spoyl my Neighbor for my Own Advan∣tage is more Contrary to Nature, then Death, Torments, and the like. As it is more ac∣cording to Nature for a man to undergo all sorts of Labours and Troubles for the Ser∣vice and Conservation, (if it were Possible) even of the whole World: After the Example of Hercules, whom the Gratitude of Men has placed for his Virtues among the Gods: All This (I say) is more Agreeable to Nature, then to live in Solitude; and not on∣ly free from Cares, but even wallowing in Pleasures, and Plenty; with all the Advan∣tages of Strength and Beauty, over and above.
This is it that makes all Great and Glorious Spirits, so much to prefer Difficulty and Acti∣on, before a Life of Idleness and Sloth. From hence it comes to pass, that according to Na∣ture, One man can never hurt another. And besides, he that wrongs another for his Own Advantage, he does either imagine that this is not against Nature; or else he supposes that Death, Poverty, Pein, Loss of Children, Kindred, and Friends, are more to be avoid∣ed, then the doing of Injuries. But if he con∣ceives that one man may do an Injury to an∣other without an offence to Nature, there's no disputing with One that has lost his Rea∣son; and in effect, Ejected all that is Man even out of Himself. But what if he thinks the One to be Bad, and yet the Other, Worse? He is in a Grievous Mistake, to Phansie any Cala∣mity of Body or Fortune Comparable to the Disorders of his Mind. We should all of us therefore agree upon This Common Proposition, That the Interest of the Whole, is the Interest of Every Part;The Inte∣rest of the Whole, is the Interest of every Part. and that whoever draws more to himself then belongs to him, is an Enemy to the Pub∣lique. Now if it be the very Prescript of Na∣ture, that for Humanity sake, one Man shall take Care of another; it does necessarily fol∣low, that the Welfare of the Publique, is the Interest of Every Particular, according to the same Principle. Let but This be admitted, and we are all of us equally under the Government of the same Law: And then taking That for granted; to do an Injury to any Man is against
the Law of Nature. The Former is certain∣ly True; and so is the Other, by Consequence. It is a Ridiculous Shift, to say, that I would not take away any thing from my Father, or from my Brother, to put in my Own Pocket; but to take from Other people, is quite ano∣ther Case: as if every Individual were not concerned in the Protection of the Whole: An Opinion utterly Inconsistent with the Rules of Government. THERE are some again will have the Citi∣zens Provided for, but not Strangers: And These Men tear up the very Foundations of Human Society. For take away That once, and there will be no longer any Good Nature, Liberality, Honesty, or Justice, to be found upon the Face of the Earth. And whosoever brings Matters to That pass, is to be accounted an Enemy to the Gods Themselves, for break∣ing That Union among Men, which was no other than a Constitution of Divine Appoint∣ment. It is the strongest Band of Society, a General Agreement in This Position, that it is a greater Offence to Nature for me to take any thing from Another, for my Own Advan∣tage,Better suffer any Calami∣ty than do an Injury. then to suffer all the Miseries that can possibly befal any Man in his Body or Estate: Nay, that can befal the very Mind it self; sa∣ving the single point of Justice, which one Virtue is the Mistress, and the Princess of all the rest. But what? (will some say) Shall a Wise Man rather Perish for want of Bread, than take a Loaf from another Man that's good for nothing, to keep himself from Sterving?
This must not be done yet; no not upon any Terms: Life is not so dear to me as my Du∣ty; and my Resolution not to wrong any Man for my Own Benefit. Suppose an Honest Man almost frozen to death might save his Life by taking away the Cloak of Phalaris; (a Barba∣rous and a Bloody Tyrant) should he not do it? This is a Case easily determin'd: For the taking of any thing away from another, for a Man's Own sake, is Inhuman, and against the Law of Nature, let the Man be never so worth∣less. But in the Case of a Person whose Life may be of Eminent Use and Service to the Commonwealth, to take any thing from such a Worthless Person to preserve so necessary an Instrument to the Publique; and to take it purely upon That Consideration, it is not blame-worthy: But Otherwise, I must rather bear my Own Misfortunes, than Relieve my self by what I force from another Man: so that it is not more against Nature to be Sick, or Necessitous, than to Seize upon, or Covet the Goods of Another: But the Abandoning of the Common Good is an Offence to Nature; for it is Unjust; and therefore the Law of Na∣ture, that Regulates and Provides for the Common Welfare of Mankind, does in a man∣ner direct the Translation of Necessaries from a slothful and unprofitable Wretch, to the behoof of a Wise, a Good, and a Valiant Man, and whose Loss might be of great damage to the Government: Provided that it be done meerly out of such a respect, without any Va∣nity, or Self love, or making use of a Pub∣lique Pretext for a Colour to a Particular In∣justice.
justice. In so doing, I keep my self still up∣on my Duty, consulting the Benefit of Man∣kind, and (that which I often Inculcate) of Human Society. AS to the Case of Phalaris, the Decision is Obvious: For a Tyrant is rather an Enemy, then a Member of Human Society; and there can be no Crime in the Dispoiling of an Usur∣per, whom it is Lawful to Kill; and it were well if the whole Race of this impious and pe∣stilent sort of Men were Exterminated from having to do with Mankind. For as we cut off Mortifi'd Limbs, when the Blood and Spi∣rits have in a manner forsaken them, and that they grow dangerous to the Rest: so should that fierce and outrageous Brutality be sepa∣rated, if I may so say, from the Common Hu∣manity of the Publique Body. Of This Qua∣lity are all those Questions of Duty, whereof the Resolution depends upon the Circumstan∣ces of Times: which I presume, Panaetius would have persu'd, if somewhat of accident or bus'∣ness had not taken him off from his Purpose. We have said enough in our former Books up∣on This Matter; to shew what we are always to shun, as evil and shameful in it self, and what we are Not obliged always to avoid, be∣cause it is not always, either Mis-becoming, or Dishonest. BUT being now about to Crown the Work we have begun,Certain Principles to be given for granted. I must deal with You, (my Cicero) as the Mathematicians Do with their Disciples. They lay down certain Postulata,
to be taken before-hand for granted, without the Trouble of discoursing the Points; to the end that they may make themselves more easily understood. So must I require of You (my Cicero) to yield me This Point, (if you can afford it) that Nothing is desirable for it self, but what is Honest. Now if Cratippus will not allow of the Proposition whole as it lies; This yet, I presume, will not be deny'd, That Vir∣tue is Chiefly, if not Only to be desired, and for its own sake. It is all one to me, which of the Two you take, for they are Both of them more Probable than any thing else: And First, let me vindicate Panaetius, in This, that he never supposed a Competition of Vtility, and Virtue; (nor could he have justifi'd it if he had) but he is to be understood of things that seem Profi∣table; for over and over in all his Discourses he still makes Vtility, and Virtue to be Conver∣tibles, and represents it to be the most Pestilent Errour that ever enter'd into Human Life, the Opinion that Divided them. And there∣fore he introduced a Repugnancy, betwixt Appearances, and Truths; not as separating the Profitable from the Honest; but for our Cau∣tion, and Instruction, that we might judge betwixt them. We shall therefore dispatch this remaining Part without any help from others; and upon our own Account, (as we say:) For since Panaetius left This Subject, I have seen nothing yet that has given me any sort of satisfaction. WE are all of us apt to be moved upon any thing that presents it self unto us, under the
appearance of Profit. But if upon looking narrowly into it, we find any thing that is dishonest, or shameful, annexed thereunto; we are not to leave it then, as a thing Profi∣table, but as considering that Vtility, and Dis∣honesty cannot stand together.Nothing can be be∣neficial, that is dishonest. For if there be nothing so Contrary to Nature as the One or so Agreeable to it, as the Other; (for Nature affects what is Right, Convenient, and Con∣stant, and despises the Contrary) it is impos∣sible that they should Both meet in the same Subject. Again; If we are born for Virtue; either (according to Zeno) Virtue is to be de∣sired for it self alone, or (according to Ari∣stotle) it weighs down all other things: then does it follow, of Necessity that Virtue must be either the Only, or the Supreme Good. So that whether way soever it be taken, that which is Good, is certainly Profitable; and that which is Prositable, is certainly Good. Those Men therefore are very short-sighted, that pre∣sently lay hold of that which appears Profita∣ble, and consider it apart from that which is Honest. From Hence come Murthers, Poyson∣ings, Forgeries, Thefts, Publique Cheats, Oppressions, Squeezing of the People, or our Confederates: From Hence come the Intole∣rable Insolencies of Men of over-grown For∣tunes; and finally, Ambition, and the Thirst of Dominion; then which nothing can be more Ruinous, or Pernicious in a Free City. They take false Measures of the Value of things, without so much as dreaming of the Punish∣ment; not the Punishment of the Laws, (for That they can with Ease break thorough) but
That of the Conscience,The great Punishment is that of Conscience. which is the bitterest of all. Wherefore This sort of Men should be excluded Human Conversation, (as most Execrable, and Impious) even for barely deli∣berating whether they should either follow That which they see to be Honest, or know∣ingly pollute themselves with Villany. The very Doubt and Deliberation is Criminal, though without advancing to the Act it self. Where∣fore we should never deliberate at all, where the very Deliberation it self is Shameful. AND then in all our Deliberations, we should not entertain any Hope, or Design, of Con∣caling, or Disguising Matters; for we should take up This for a Maxim; (at least,A Divine Precept. if we be ever the better for our Philosophy) that if we could carry things so Private, as that neither God nor Man should discover us, we should yet have such a Reverence for our Selves, as not to let any thing of Injustice, Vncleanness, or Immodesly, Escape us. Plato's Fable of Gyges,The Fable and Moral of Gyge' Ring is not im∣pertinent to our Purpose. The Story has it, that a Torrent having eaten a Hollowness in the Ground, Gyges went down into it, and there observ'd a Brazen Horse, with Doors in his Sides. Upon the Opening of these Doors, he discover'd the Dead Body of a Man, of a Prodigious Size, with a Golden Ring upon his Finger. Gyges boldly pluckt it off by force, and put it upon his Own, and being the King's Shepherd, he went his way, and joyn'd him∣self with Other Shepherds. Finding, that upon turning the Stone of the Ring, Inwards, he became Invisible to Others, and yet saw eve∣ry
thing Himself; and that upon turning it back again he became Visible, as before; by the Advantage of this Ring he made his way to the Enjoyment of the Queen, and by her Assi∣stance, Murther'd the King, his Master; and in a short time remov'd all out of the way that he thought stood betwixt Him, and the Crown. All this Lewdness he Committed by the help of this Ring, and so made himself King of Ly∣dia. Now if a Wise Man were the Master of such a Ring, he would reckon himself no more Priviledg'd to do an Ill thing with it, then without it; for an Honest Man considers the Goodness of the Action, not the Privacy of it. It is objected by some (that shew themselves to be better Men, then Philosophers) that this Story out of Plato is only a Tale; as if any Man would report it for a thing either True, or Possible: but see however the Force, and Scope of This Ring, and of This Example. How many things are done out of Avarice, Ambition, Pride, Lust, that no body knows of, or so much as suspects? Suppose that This Impie∣ty could be kept so secret, that neither God nor Man should come to know it: Would you commit it? 'Tis a thing impossible, (they say, whether it be so or not.) But what, would they do (say I) if they could do the thing, which they say they cannot? They return you the same senseless Answer over again: they say 'tis Impossible; and there they stick: not at all comprehending the Drift, and Import of the Question. For in asking what a Man would do if he could Conceal it▪ I do not ask whether he can Conceal it, or no:
But I put the Question, as if it were in Case of the Torture. If they make answer that if they were sure to scape Punishment, they would do what they found most Expedient, they confess themselves to be Criminals; and if they deny it, 'tis a Concession that all evil things are to be avoided, even for Themselves. But to return now to my purpose. THERE fall out divers Cases, that under an Appearance of Profit,The appea∣rance of Profit of∣tentimes distracts us. many times disorder our Thoughts, and trouble us in our Resolu∣tions: not as upon a Deliberation whether a man should strain a Point of Honesty in regard of the Greatness of the Benefit in prospect; (for That were Mean, and Dishonest) but whether That which seems so very Profitable may be done without Dishonour. It might look like an unjust thing in Brutus, the Depo∣sing of Collatine, his Fellow-Consul, who in the Expulsion of the Kings, was both his Partner in the Advice, and his Asfistant in the Execu∣tion: But when the whole Body of the Prin∣cipals of the City had agreed together to ex∣tirpate the whole Family, and the Relations of that Proud Prince, as well as the Name of the Tarquins; (which was a Resolution of Publique Advantage.) This was so Honest, and Just an Action, that Collatine him∣self was Obliged to approve of the Proceed∣ing: so that this Utility was valu'd for the Honesty sake, without which, in truth, it had not been Profitable. But This did not hold in the Case of that Prince that Founded our City: For he was so wrought upon by the shew of Profit, that he kill'd his Brother upon the
appearing Advantage of rather Governing Alone then with Company. He cast off all Piety and Humanity, for the obteining of That which seemed unto Him to be Profitable, tho' it proved the clear Contrary. The preten∣ded Honesty in the Action, was to punish the Affront of his Brothers leaping in scorn over the Wall; but it was neither Competent, nor Likely. Wherefore, under favour of either Quirinus or Romulus; (no matter whether) it was undoubtedly a Crime. How far we may look to our selves.AND yet we are not to neglect our own Advantages neither; or part with any thing to Others, when we want it our selves. But every man should attend his own Profit, as far as may be without Injury to Another. Chrysippus had many Witty sayings, whereof this was one. In the running of a Course, (says he) a man may be allow'd to strive, and Con∣tend his Vtmost: but to trip up his Antagonists Heels, or to lay hands upon him, this is a thing not to be done upon any terms. So for any man to get That which may serve for the use of Life, is very Fair, and allowable; but to take it away from Another, is not Lawfull. IN Friendship, 'tis true, there are many Niceties as well in the not doing of any good Office which may Honestly be done,Many Nice∣ties in Friendships. as in the doing of any thing for a Friend Contrary to Justice. But one short Rule will serve upon This whole Matter, and it is no hard one nei∣ther. Those things that seem Profitable; as Honours, Riches, Pleasures, and Other Cir∣cumstances of the like Kind; these things are
never to be preferr'd before Friendship: But no Good man will do any thing for a Friend, that is either against the Commonwealth, his Oath, or his Word: No not if he were him∣self to be a Judge in his Friends Case; for he lays down the Person of a Friend, where he takes up That of a Iudge. I would have him wish that his Friend may have Iustice on his side; and I would have him allow him all the Favour in point of Time, that the Law will permit; but when he comes to pass his Sentence, let him remember, and consider, that he calls God to witness; or (as I sup∣pose) his Own Conscience, the Divinest thing Heaven it self ever bestow'd upon a Mortal. It was therefore a Worthy Practice of our An∣cestors; They never ask'd any thing of a Judge (and I wish we did so at This day) but upon Condition that it might consist with Ju∣stice. This Request has relation to those things which (as I said e'en now) a Judge may Fairly allow to a Friend; for if a man must of Necessity do all things that a Friend would have him do, this is no longer a Friend∣ship, but a Confederacy. Let me be understood only of Common Friendships: For among men that are Wise, and Perfect, there can be no such thing. The Story goes of Damon, and Pythias,The Gene∣rous Frind∣ship of Da∣mon and Py∣thias. (Pythagoreans) so great was the Kindness they had for one another, that when Dionysius had sentenced one of them to death, the Party Condemned only desired a few days respite to put his Affairs in order; and the Other became Surety (Body for Body) for his Appearance. The Prisoner return'd at
his day, and the Tyrant fell into such admi∣ration at their Generosity, and Iustice, that he requested them to receive Him as a Third man, into that Friendship. Wherefore in all Friendships, where the Profitable and the Ho∣nest meet in Comparison we should never con∣sider the Profit, but square our actions ac∣cording to the Honesty. But wheresoever any thing shall be required in Friendship, which does not stand with Honesty, in that Case Re∣ligion, and Faith, must take place of Friend∣ship. This is the Rule by which we are to make Choice of the Duty here in Questi∣on. WE are Liable also to many Publique Mi∣stakes under the Appearance of Profit;Publique Mistakes under the appearance of Profit. as our Countrymen were to blame in the Irreco∣verable Destruction of Corinth. And the A∣thenians did yet worse, in cutting off the Thumbs of the people of AEgina, only be∣cause they were good Seamen, and they reckon'd that this might turn to their Ad∣vantage, and Security, because of the Neigh∣borhood of AEgina to one of their Principal Ports. But nothing can be Profilable that's Cruel; for we are to follow the Dictate of Nature, and nothing is more Contrary to Na∣ture, then Cruelty. THEY do very Ill also, that either Prohi∣bit, or Banish Strangers from among them;Humanity to Stran∣gers. as Petronius did of Old; and Papius, not long since. It is well enough not to suffer him that is no Citizen, to pass for a Citizen, (ac∣cording
to the Law of our Consuls Crassus and Scaevola, who were Wise men.) But it is un∣doubtedly most Inhuman, absolutely to deny the Common Benefit of Protection, and In∣tercourse in a City, to Strangers. Those are Great and Remarkable Cases wherein the Shew or Colour of Publique Vtility is despised, in comparison with Honesty. We have in the Story of our Commonwealth, a World of Emi∣nent Examples. How many times have we (and especially in the Second Punique War, af∣ter that Miserable Disaster at the Battle of Cannae) shew'd greater Courage in our Di∣stress, then ever we did in our Prosperity? There was not the least sign of Fear among us, nor any Mention of Peace; such is the Power of Honesty, that nothing of Profit can appear against it! The Athenians, when they were no longer able to resist the force of the Persians, came to a Resolve of putting all their Wives, and Children into Traezen; to abandon the City, and maintain the Liberty of Greece with a Navy. There was one Cyrcilus that advis'd them rather to stay in the City, and receive Xerxes into it; but they Ston'd him to death for his Counsel. He gave them the advice which he took to be most profitable; but it ceases to be Profit, when it stands in opposition to Honesty. Themistocles, after his Victorious War against the Persians, declar'd in Council that he had thought of something that might be of great Advantage to the Commonwealth; but it was not con∣venient to be made Publique, and therefore desir'd them to appoint some body to whom
he might impart the matter in Private. They named Aristides; and he told him that the Lacedemonian Fleet, which was laid up at Gy∣theon might easily be Fir'd by surprize, which would very much weaken the Lacedemonians. Aristides, when he had heard it, came into the Senate where they were all big with Ex∣pectation, and made his Report that Themi∣stocle's Counsel was very Profitable, but not Honorable:A scrupu∣lou point of Honour. wherefore the Athenians would not allow it to be Profitable neither, if it were not likewise Honest; and so rejected the Pro∣position, only upon the Report of Aristides, even without Hearing it. How much did these people go beyond us; that suffer our Pi∣rates to go Free, while our Confederates are Tributaries? Let it be taken therefore for granted, that nothing can ever be Profi∣table that is Dishonorable; no, not in the very Possession of That which we account so to be. Nay it is a great Infelicity of Judgment, to Imagine that any thing can be Profitable, that is Dishonest. BUT there fall out many Occasions (as I have said before) wherein the Profitable, and the Honest may fal in Competition: In which Case we should consider how far they stand in direct Opposition, and wherein they may be fairly reconcil'd: As for Instance, upon these Questions. An Honest man sets sail from Alexandria to Rhodes with a Lading of Corn; the Rhodians in great distress for want of it;Some nice Cases of Conscience. and the Commodity bearing an Excessive Price. This Person knows that there are
other Alexandrian Ships under way, and bound for the same Port, and with the same Cargo: whe∣ther or no shall he tell the Rhodians now, that there are other Merchants coming with Re∣lief, or say nothing of it, and make the best Market of his Corn that he can? We put this Case, supposing him to be a good and a Wise man, and the matter to be under Deliberation. If he thinks it an Ill thing to Conceal this from the Rhodians he will not do it; but he makes some doubt whether it be Ill, or No. In Difficulties of This Nature, Diogenes, the Babi∣lonian, (a Grave and Famous Stoique) is of One Opinion; and his Disciple Antipater (a very acute man) is of another. Antipater will have all the Circumstances laid Open; so that the Purchaser may not be kept Ignorant of any thing, which the Other knows. Dio∣genes says that the Vender is bond to Discover all the Faults, so far as he is obliged to it by the Civil Law; and to manage his Bargain with∣out Fraud. So that being to sell the Commo∣dity, he may without Deceipt make the best on't. Here (says he) I have brought my Corn; I have run the Risque on't; and I let no higher a rate upon the Commodity then Others do; nay perhaps I offer it Cheaper: If you can have it any where else, wher's the Injury? Now An∣tipater, on the other side, Reasons it Thus. How is That? (says he) It is our Duty to Consult the Good of Mankind, and to serve Human Society; and we came into the World under That Obligation. We have Principles of Nature, which we are bound to Follow and Obey; and we are to account nothing
Profitable to our selves, that is not so to the Publique: And likewise, to account of the Publique Profit, as our Own. Shall we con∣ceal That then from a Society of men, which so much concerns their Commodity, and Supply? Diogenes will reply (perhaps) that it is one thing to Conceal a matter, and another thing not to Tell it: Do I tell you (at this Instant) what is the Nature of the Gods, or the end of Good men; which are things much more Pro∣fitable to be known, then the Price of Wheat? And yet you will not say that I Conceal This from you. But it is not absolutely necessary for me neither to tell you every thing which may be Profitable for you to hear. But the Other will tell you Yes, it is necessary; if you remember that men are naturally link'd to∣gether in Society. Well (says the Other) I do not forget it: But will you have it to be such a Society then, as that no man shall have any thing particular in it of his Own? If it comes to That once, there's no longer any Buy∣ing and Selling, but only Giving. You see in this whole Dipute, that it is not said, tho' This or That be Dishonest, I will yet Do it, because it is Expedient: But it must be so Expedient, that there be nothing Dishonorable in it. Now (on the Other hand) out of that very Consideration that it is Disho∣norable, it is therefore not to be done. Sup∣pose an Honest man has a mind to put off his House for some fault or inconvenience in it, only known to himself: As a Contagious Air; (for the Purpose) tho' it may (perhaps) pass for Healthful; all the Rooms annoy'd with
Vermin, Ill-built, or Ruinous, which is only known (as I say) to the Master of the House. The Question is, if he Conceals these faults to get a better Rate for his House then he could otherwise have done, whether he does well, or ill, in That Concealment? An∣tipater will have it to be very Ill done, and near the Case of not setting a man Right that's out of his way. A Crime which was punish'd at Athens by a Formal Solemnity of Publique Execrations. Is not This the Suffering of the Purchaser to ruine himself, and to fall into the worst of Snares, by a Mistake? Nay it is worse yet, then the not shewing of the way, for one man to lead another knowingly, and wilfully, into an Errour. Diogenes asks, on the Other side, who forc'd you to buy it? Nay he did not (says he) so much as Advise you to't. That which did not please the One, he exposed to Sale, and the Other bought that which he had a mind to. If he shall not be taken for a Cheat, that sets up a Bill of a very good Farm to be Let or Sold, and well built, and in repair, tho' it be neither the One, nor the Other, much less shall he be accounted one, that does not so much as Commend his House; for where the Purcha∣ser uses his own Judgment, what Fraud can there be in the Seller? But if we are not obliged, in all Cases, to make good every word we say, how should we be oblig'd to make good That which we do not say? Nor can any thing be more Ridiculous then for a Merchant to publish the Faults of the Com∣modity he exposes to Sale. What would be
more senseless then to make Proclamation by a Common Cryer, Here's an Infected House to be Sold? Now so it falls out, that in some doubtful Cases, the Honesty of the Action may be defended, on the One hand, and the Bene∣fit of it so qualifi'd on the Other; that it may not only be Honourable, to do that which ap∣pears Profitable, but even Dishonorable, to Omit it. This is a Point that comes often into question betwixt things Profitable and Honest. THESE Difficulties must be set right: for it is not our Business to start a question, but to give a Resolution.Resolutions upon the former Ca∣ses. It is my Opinion, that neither in the Case of the Rhodian Corn-Mer∣chant, nor in That of the House offer'd to Sale, the Concealment there supposed was Iusti∣fiable. For it is not properly the Concealing of a thing, to say nothing of it; but the keeping of another man, for our own advantage, in Ig∣norance of that which he is very much con∣cern'd to know. What kind of a Conceal∣ment This is, and the Quality of the man that uses it, who does not discern? This is not the Practice undoubtedly of an Open, a Frank, a Sincere, a Just, or a Good man: but rather of a Shifting, a Close, a Deceitful, a Malicious, a Sly Shuffler, and of a very Jugler. How can any man expect to Get by the Bargain, that wears these foul Names, and lies under all these Reproaches. BUT if the saying Nothing in this Case be so Blameable; what shall we think of Them then that speak False?A Pleasant Cheat. Caius Cannius (a Knight of Rome, and one that wanted neither Wit
nor Learning) going sometimes to Syracuse, not upon Bus'ness (as he was want to say) but for his diversion; he gave out that he had a great mind to buy some Gardens there, where he might enjoy his Friends when he had a mind to't, without interruption. When this came to be talk'd of, there was one Py∣thius, in Syracuse, that drove the Trade of a Banker. I have Gardens here (says he) tho' not to be Sold, but however if Cannius pleases, he may use them as his Own: And so he invites Cannius to those Gardens, the next day▪ to Sup∣per. Upon Cannius's promise to come, Pythi∣us (whose bus'ness gave him a great Interest there, among all sorts of People) sent for the Fishermen; and directed them to meet next day, and Fish just before his Gardens; and so gave them their Lesson what to do and how to behave themselves. Cannius came at his time, where he found a Magnificent Enter∣tainment that Pythius had provided for him. There were a great many Boats before the Gardens, and every man brought the Fish he had taken, and laid them at Pythius's Feet. What's the meaning of all this (says Canni∣us) so many Fishes, and Boats? Pythius told him, there was no great wonder in't; For there is not any Fish (says he) in Syra∣cuse which is not to be had in this place. They take in their Water here, and the Town cannot be without This Convenience. This set Cannius agog upon the Purchase, and no∣thing would serve but Pythius must sell him the place; He seem'd, at First, very unwil∣ling to part with it; but without more words
they came at last to an Agreement: Cannius was a Rich man, and presently struck up a Bargain (for the Gardens, and every thing that belong'd to them) with Pythius, at his own Price: Security was given for the Mo∣ny, and the bus'ness finish'd. Cannius invited some of his Familiar Friends thither the next day: and he himself coming betimes, and find∣ing no Boats there, enquir'd of the Neigh∣borhood whether the Fishermen kept Holy-day that day, because he saw none of them There. Their Answer was, that They knew nothing of any Holy-day, nor of any Fisher∣men that us'd to be There: Insomuch that they wonder'd what brought them thither the day before. This put Cannius into a Rage: But what Remedy? For my Friend and Col∣legue Aquilius had not as yet made any Pro∣vision against Dolus Malus, or Couzenage. Up∣on my Demand to Aquilius what was intended by that same Dolus Malus, he told me, that it was the pretending of one thing, and doing another. Which truly was a Full and Clear Definition of it, and worthy of a Wise man. Wherefore Pythius, and all like him, that Pre∣tend one thing, and do another; are to be ac∣counted Perfidious, Wicked, and Deceitful; So that nothing can be Profitable to us, that is polluted by so many Crimes. But if Aquilius's Definition be True, there must be no Feigning or Dissembling allow'd of in Human Society: And a Good man will neither do the One nor the other, either to Buy or Sell, to more Advan∣tage. And That Deceipt was punishable also by the Laws: As in the Case of Guardianship by the
Twelve Tables. And so was the Circumvention of Min ours punishable by the Latorian Laws. And sometimes by Arbitration, even without a Law; where the Question was matter of Faith, and Trust. But of all other Judgments the Words that are used in the Formulary of an Arbitrement upon a Marriage-Agreement are most remarkable: As Words of Form. MELIVS, AEQVI∣VS, the Better, the Iuster: and in matters of Contract, or Confidence, INTER BONOS BE∣NE AGIER; Fair Dealing among Good Men. Can there be any Mixture of Fraud now in BETTER, and IVSTER? Or what place is there for Collusion, or Iniquity, in Fair Deal∣ing among Honest Men? NOW the Dolus Malus, or Deceipt appears either in Simulation, which is a Pretence of something that is not; or Dissimulation,Simulation and Dissi∣mulation. that is to say a Disguise, or Concealment of some∣what that Is. Wherefore there must be no Lye admitted in any Business, or Contract; Nor should there be any Underhand substituting of a Buyer, or a Seller, to enhance, or to bring down the Price; but Both Parties should say at a Word what they will Give, or Take. Q. Scaevola, the Son of Publius, being upon a Purchase, bade the Proprietor tell him in One Word what he would have for the Estate: He did so: And Scaevola told him he had under∣valu'd it,A Generous Scruple of Scaevola's. and so gave him Two Thousand Crowns more than his Bargain. There is not any Man but will confess that This was the part of a Good Man, tho' in the Opinion perhaps of some People, not of a Wise Man: As if the Other
had set it lower than he could afford it. This is a mischief therefore, that Some Men are ac∣counted Good, and Other Men Wise, as if they could be separated. Ennius says that a Man's Wisdom serves him to little purpose, if it be not Profitable to himself. This may be true E∣nough, if it were but agreed with Ennius what it is to be Profitable. I find Hecalon the Rho∣dian (Panaetius's Scholar) telling Q. Tubero in his Books of Offices, that It is the part of a Wise Man to do nothing against Publique Customs, Laws, and Institutions; and withal, to take good heed to his Fortune, and Family: For we should not propound to be Rich, only to our Selves, but to our Children, Relations, Friends, and chiefly, for the Service of the Republique: For the Estates and Provisions of Particulars, are the Wealth of the City. The proceeding of Scaevola above-mentioned would never suit with Hecaton: For he only says that he would not do any thing for his own Profit that were Unlawful: and truly he deserves little Thanks, or Commendation for his peins. But allow∣ing both Lying, and Dissembling to be this same Dolus Malus, or Deceipt, there are very few things clear of That Fraud. Or if he be only the Good Man, that obliges as many as he can, and hurts no Body; such a Good Man will not be easily found. It can never be Profitable to do an Ill Thing; because it is always unal∣lowable, and shameful. And it must ever be beneficial to be a Good Man, because it is al∣ways Honest.
IT is an Ordinance of the Civil Law in the Matter of Estates,Conceal∣ments pu∣nishable in Bagain for Estates. that the Vender should still tell the Purchaser the Defects, or Inconvenien∣ces of the Estate; for it being sufficiently pro∣vided by the Twelve Tables, that every Man should make good what he promises or de∣clares by Word of Mouth, upon the Penalty of Double Damages for Denying it. The Civilians have also set a Punishment upon Concealments too; by enacting, that if the Seller of an E∣state knew any Fault or Errour in it, without expressly acquainting the Purchaser with it, he should be obliged to make it good. As in the case of the Augurs Tower; where they were to take their Observations from the Flight of Birds. Titus Claudius Centimalus, having some Houses upon the Hill Caelius, the Augurs com∣manded him to pull them down, because they hinder'd their prospect. Claudius expos'd Those Houses to Sale, and so put them off; and Pub∣lius Calpurnius Lanarius was the Purchaser. The Augurs found the same fault still with the Hou∣ses, when they were in His Possession: so that he pull'd them down. And coming afterwards to understand that Claudius had made sale of those Houses, after that the Augurs had ap∣pointed the demolishing of them; forc'd him upon an Arbitration, what in point of Con∣science was to be done in That Case. Marcus Cato past the Sentence, (the Father of This Ca∣to of ours) For as we denominate Others from their Fathers, we shall make mention of the person that gave this Light to the World, as accounting from the Son.) The Sentence was
This, That since upon the Sale of That Estate, he had not told the Other of the Inconvenience which he knew it was expos'd to; he should indempnifie the Buyer of it; Concluding, that the Proprietor was bound in Conscience to tell the Purchaser what damage might ensue upon it. Now if This was a Just Judgement, it was not Warrantable either in the Corn-Merchant, or in him that sold the Infected Hou∣ses, to conceal as is above supposed. But it is not possible for any Law to reach all the va∣rious Cases of these Concealments: And yet however, so far as they go, they are diligent∣ly observ'd. Marcus Marius Gratidianus sold to Cais Sergius Orata those very Houses which he himself had bought of him but a few years before. These Houses paid a Duty to Sergius (which was out of his mind.) But Marius made no mention of it in the Conveying of his Right. The Cause was brought into the Court; Crassus was for Orata, and Anthony for Gratidianus. Crassus insisted upon the Law, be∣cause the Seller knew that he ought to have acquainted the Purchaser with this Incum∣brance, but did not do it. Anthony insisted up∣on matter of Equity, because That Incum∣brance was not unknown to Sergius, who sold the Houses, and so there was no need to say any thing of it; neither could he be said to be deceived, that knew what Title he had bought. Now to what End is all This, but to shew, that our Forefathers were not pleas'd with Wiles, and Shifts?
BUT Laws and Philosophers provide against Frauds several wayes: The Laws regarding on∣ly matter of Ouvert Act, whereas Philosophers judge according to Equity,Laws and Philosophers provide se∣veral ways against Fraud. and Reason: which Reason does it self require of us, that we do nothing perfidiously, or with False Pretence, or Deceit. But shall we call it a Treachery to contrive a Pitfall, or set a Toyl, without either driving, or hunting any thing into it? Well, but the Beasts many times fall into it, without a Persuer. He that offers a House to Sale, what is his Bill, but a Snare laid for the Purchaser? His House is Faulty, and he would fain put it off, and some body is caught at un∣awares. Now tho' I understand that accor∣ding to depraved Custom, and Manners, this is not accounted Dishonorable; and that there is neither Law, nor Civil Right Against it: It is nevertheless yet forbidden by the Law of Nature. For, as I have often said already, and must say oftener, Society, in the Largest Extent, is that which is Common to all men; next under That is the Society of those of the same Nation, and after That, of the same Ci∣ty. Wherefore our Fore-fathers distinguish be∣twixt the Law of Nations, and the Law Civil. For the Civil Law is not consequently the Law of Nations, but the Law of Nations does necessarily comprehend the Civil.The Law Civll, and the Law of Nations. Now to say the Truth, we have not among us any substantial or express Image of the True Law, or sincere Iustice: So that we are fain to make use of Shadows, and Figures; and it were well if we could keep up, even to Them too: For they are Translated out of the best
Originals, of Truth, and Nature. How glorious is that Provisional Condition for the making of good Contracts! Provided that by your means, and depending upon your Honesty, I may not be deceived and brought into a snare. And then that Golden Sentence, we must live Honestly among Good men, and without Fraud. But then who are the Good Men, and what it is to do well, is a Great question. Q. Scaevola the High Priest was wont to ascribe a very great force to all those Arbitrations that were grounded upon Good Faith;Of Good Faith. Accounting the very Name it self to be of a Large Extent: As having a respect to Guardian-Ships, Socie∣ties, Trusts, Mandates, things bought, or sold, hired, or let, relating to the Community, and Entercourse of Life. He must be a great Judge, that in these Cases can determine (es∣pecially meeting in most of them with Con∣trary Opinions) how One man is to behave himself towards Another, under these Cir∣cumstances. Wherefore all Tricks and Arti∣fices should be avoided: And That Craft also which imposes upon the World for Wisdom; how far from it soever. For Prudence is pla∣ced in the Choice of Good, or Evil; but Craft prefers Evil before Good; at least if things that are Dishonourable be Evil. And 'tis not only in Lands, and Houses, that the Civil Law, in Conformity to That of Nature, for∣bids Fraud, and Circumvention; but even in the very dealing for Slaves, the Seller should act as frankly as in Other Cases. For he that is presum'd to know whether the Slave be Healthful, Honest, a Fugitive, or the like;
the AEdiles Law makes That Master answerable for the Servant. But This does not hold in the Case of an Heir that found such a Slave, or Servant in the Family. From hence it may ap∣pear, since Nature is the Fountein of Iustice, that it is also according to Nature, that no man should make Advantage to himself of ano∣ther mans Ignorance. Nor is there any greater Pest, in Human Society, then a perverse Craft, under the Masque of Simplicity:No Pest like Craft under the Masque of Simplicity. And from thence proceed those Innumerable Cases, where the Profitable comes in Concurrence with the Honest. For, where's the man that would stick at any Injustice, if he might but hope for Impuity; or come off, under a pretence of Ignorance? Let us examine the Matter if you please; and in Those Instances where the Com∣mon people, perhaps, are scarce sensible that they do amiss: For we do not speak in This place, of Murthers, Poysonings, Forgeries, Rob∣beries, or Embesilments of the Publique Trea∣sure, which should rather be supprest by Pri∣sons, and Fetters, then by Words, and Philoso∣phical Precepts: But let us here rather consi∣der what we find commonly to be done, even among those that have the Reputation of Honest men. There were some people that brought out of Greece to Rome a forg'd Will of Q. Minutius Basilius,A Case of Conscience about a Forgery. (who was a very wealthy man) and to make the bus'ness pass the bet∣ter, they put into the Testament, M. Crassus, and Q. Hortensius, two of the most conside∣rable men of the City; as Ioint-Heirs, toge∣ther with Themselves. They did, Both of them, suspect it to be a Counterfeit; and yet
having no hand in it themselves, they were well enough content, to make advan∣tage of Other peoples Wickedness. And what then? Is it sufficient that they Themselves had no hand in it? I am of Another Opinion; altho', for the One of them, I lov'd him while he was alive, and and I do not hate the Other now he is Dead. But when Basilius had made his Sisters Son (Marcus Satirius) his Heir, and would have had him take his Vnkles Name upon him; (I speak of That Satirius that to the Shame of the Age had the Patronage of the Picenians, and Sabines) it was a most unreasonable thing that the Chief men of the City should carry away the Testators Estate, and leave nothing to the Right Heir but his Name. Now if he stands guilty of an Injustice, that neither keeps off an Injury from his Friend by way of Prevention; nor Repulses it when he may, (as we have said in our First Book) what shall we think of him that does not only not Repel an Injury, but even Helps it on and promotes it? Nay, for my Own part, let the Inheritance be never so Lawful; yet if it be gain'd by Craft, Flattery, Servile Offices, or False Pretences; even That Lawful Succession I cannot approve. But in such Cases men are many times extremely misled, in taking One thing to be Honest, and Another Profitable; for the same Rules holds in Both; And He that is not sensible of This, lies open to all sorts almost of Fraud, and Iniquity. For whosoever says thus to himself, This is Honest, 'tis true, but the Other is Expe∣dient; he takes upon him to divide those things
by a Mistake that are coupled by Nature; which opinion is the fountein of all Deceipts, Crimes, and Evil Deeds. Wherefore if a Good man,No Divi∣ding of what Na∣ture has Coupled. for the very holding up of a Finger, could get himself made Heir to a Considerable Estate, which he has no Title to; he should not do it, tho' upon a Certainty that no man could ever so much as suspect him for it. But if M. Crassus could get an Estate upon the same Terms, upon my Credit he would leap out of his skin at it. But a Iust, and such a one as we can allow for a Good man, will ne∣ver agree to the taking of any thing away from Another, and transferring it to himself; And whoever wonders at This, does as good as confess himself Ignorant of what a good man is. BUT he that will thoroughly examine the Secrets of his Own Soul, will be able to tell himself that only He is a Good man,Who is a Good man. who does as much good to Others as he can, and harms no body without some Injurious provocation. How's That? He that supplants the Right Heir, to get himself into his place, has not that man as much to answer for as if he had remov'd him by Poyson? But what (will some say) may not a man Do that which is Pro∣fitable and Expedient for him? Yes, yes, If he will take This along with him, that it is not possible for any thing to be So, that is Vn∣just. He that has not learn'd This Lesson, can never be a Good man. I remember, when I was a Boy, I heard my Father speak of Fim∣bria the Consul: who was appointed Judge in the Case of Marcus Luctatius Pythias, (a Knight of Rome, and a very Honest man) who un∣dertook,
upon the Forfeiture of a Sum of Mony, to prove himself a Good man: but Fimbria did absolutely refuse to pass Judgment in That matter; least he should either dero∣gate from the Reputation of a person so much Esteemed, if he gave it Against him, or appear, on the Other side, to Pronounce any man to be Good, considering the Infinite Circum∣stances of Qualities, and Offices to make him so, So that neither Fimbria's Good man, nor Socrates's, will allow any thing to be Profitable that is not Honest: And such a man will not only fear to Do, but not dare so much as to Think any thing which he would not frankly own in Publique. Is it not a Shame now, for Philosophers to Doubt, where the Common people themselves are Resolv'd? For the Old Thred∣bare Proverb is Their's; when they would ex∣press a man of an exact Sincerity and Justice, You may play at A Little Play with the Fingers. Love with him in the Dark, they say; and what is the meaning of This, but to teach us, that nothing can be Expedient that is not Honest, tho' he might gain it, and the World never the Wiser for't? In the Moral of this Proverb, we are taught, that neither Gyge's way is to be endur'd, nor so much as a Finger to be mov'd, (as in the case for∣merly supposed) tho' a man might make him∣self Master of the whole World by so doing. For whatsoever is Shameful, and Dishonorable, let it be never so Secret, nothing can make it Honest; and that which is not Honest, it is as impossible to render it Profitable, in a Repug∣nancy and Opposition to Nature.
BUT where Criminals find great Rewards, there is also a great Temptation to offend. When C. Marius appear'd out of all hope of the Consulship, and (having lyen still, for seven years after his Pratorship) no man imagin'd that he would ever have offer'd at it: Q. Metellus (a great man, and an Eminent Citizen) sent Ma∣rius (being his Lieutenant) to Rome.A Mean Action of C. Marius. Where Ma∣rius publiquely charg'd his Principal before the People, with prolonging the War, and told them that if they had made Him Consul, he would in a very short time have deliver'd up Iugartha, either Alive or Dead, into the power of the people: whereupon they made him Consul. But This was a Proceeding contrary to Faith, and Iustice; by a false Suggestion to draw an Envy upon so Brave a man, and so Famous a Citizen: Especially Marius being Metellus's Lieutenant, and by his order sent to Rome. Neither did our Kinsman Marius Gratidianus in his Praetorship discharge the Office of a Good man. The Tribunes of the Common people Consulted the College of Praetors about some Common Standard for the Valuation of their Moneys, which were then sometimes up, some∣times down, at such a rate, that no man knew what he was worth. They join'd unanimously in a Decree, with a Penalty upon any man that should not submit to't; and so they Adjourn'd for That Morning, resolving to meet again After noon for the Publishing of it. When they were gone, some, One way, some an∣other; Gratidianus stept presently from the Bench to the Tribunal; and there made Pro∣clamation
by Himself alone of that which was the Common Act of the Court: which you will find (if you observe the Story) to have gi∣ven him great Reputation; the people setting up his Statues every where up and down, with Incense, and Tapers: In one word, no man ever render'd himself more Popular.Small mat∣ters may be of great Importance These are Points that may puzzle a man sometimes in his Deliberations; especially when the Mat∣ter is but small, wherein any Violence is of∣fer'd to Justice; but yet the Consequence seems to be of great Importance. It did not appear to be so very foul, for the One Marius to preposses himself of the Favour of the People, by preventing his Collegues and the Tribunes: And then it was, in appearance, a matter of great Advantage to the Other Marius to advance himself to the Consulship by the Means he had propounded. But there is One General Rule that I would have you take special Notice of; See First that what you account Profitable, be not Dishonourable; and Then if it be Dishonourable, let nothing perswade you that it is Profitable. But what Then? Shall we pronounce either the One Marius or the Other to be an Honest man? Set your Wits at work, and try, and consider with your self what is the Image, the Character, and the Notion of a Good Man? Will a Good man tell a Lye, Calumniate, Supplant, or De∣ceive?A Good man will not do an Ill thing. Certainly nothing less. Is there any thing then on the Other side, so Profitable or so Desirable, as that a man would forfeit the Reputation and the Glory of a Good and a Wise man to gain it? Can That thing which
we call Profit, bring us any Advantage to Coun∣tervail what it takes from us, in depriving us of the very Name of Good men, and divesting us of Faith, and Iustice? What difference is there betwixt the turning of a Man into a Beast, by a Real Metamorphosis, and the bearing the Figure, and Fierceness of a Brute in his Mind, under the Shape of a Man? They that neglect and make light of all things that are Honest, for the Acquiring of Power, do they not do the same thing with Pompey that mar∣ry'd Caesar's Daughter to make himself Great, under the Boldness and Protection of his Fa∣ther in Law? But he lookt upon't as a thing Advantageous to himself to augment his Own Power by the Envy that was born to the Other: but how Vnjust This was to his Coun∣try, and how Dishonourable to himself, he did not consider. His Father in Law had often in his Mouth those Greek Verses of the Phoenicians out of Euripides, which I'll tell you as well as I can, not so gracefully perhaps, but so as to be Understood. To get a Crown, a man would break a Trust. If break't at all: everywhere else, be Just. It was a Lewd and Horrible thing done of E∣theocles (or rather of Euripides) to make That the Exception of a Crime, which of all Crimes is it self the most Abominable. But what do we talk of Petty things, as Inheritances, Traf∣fiques, Fraudulent Bargains? What do you think of Him rather, that having the Ambi∣tion
to make himself the Master of the People of Rome,The Ambi∣tion of Iu∣lius Caesar. and the Emperor of the World it self, accomplish'd his Ends? No man in his Wits will pretend to justifie This Ambition: for in so doing he passes an Approbation up∣on the Subversion of our Laws and Liberties; and reckons, as a point of Honour, that Ig∣noble, and Detestable Oppression. But he that confesses the Unlawfulness of any mans Usurp∣ing a Dominion over a City that both has been Free, and ought so to be; and yet supposes it a thing Profitable to him that can compass it; I would spare no Reprehension; nor, in truth, any Reproche, to reclaim such a man from his Error: For (I appeal to the Immortal Gods) what Profit can any man find in the Foul and Execrable Destruction of his Country; al∣beit he that is Guilty of it should come after∣wards to be stil'd the Father of it, by the oppressed People? Vtility should therefore be guided by Honesty;Utility should be guided by Honesty. and in such manner, that tho' the Words differ, the Thing should be still the same. I do not find any thing more Pro∣fitable, in the Opinion of the Common People, then Power, and Empire: Neither, when I look narrowly into the Matter, do I find any thing more Vnprofitable to him that Vnjustly atteins it. For what advantage can it be to any man, to live in Anxiety, Carefulness, Fears, Day and Night; and to lead a Life that is be∣set with Snares, and Dangers? There are more treacherous, and unfaithful men in a King∣dom (says Accius) then there are good. But of what Kingdom does he speak? even of That which is reported unto us of Tantalus
and Pelops; a Kingdom that procceded by a Law∣ful Descent. How much greater then is the Number of the Unfaithful to That Prince, who having opprest Rome it self by a Roman Army, and a City, not only Free in its own Constitution, but giving Laws to others; brought That City, at last, into subjection to Himself? How ulcerated a Conscience do you think This man must needs have? What wounds in his Soul? Or how is it possible that This mans Life should be Profitable to Himself, when such was the Condition of it, that Poste∣rity will ever have a Veneration, and Esteem for those that took it away? NOW if those things that carry the Fairest Appearance of Profit, fail yet of being what they seem to be, because they are full of Shame and Dishonour; This, methinks, should Convince any man, that nothing can be Pro∣fitable, that is not likewise Honest. Now as This has, in Many Cases, been determin'd; so most remarkably, by the Senate of Rome, and by Caius Fabricius, in his second Consulate: For when King Pyrrhus made War upon Rome, and the Quarrel was Empire too, and That with a Powerful, and a Generous Prince; there came a Fugitive from Pyrrhus into the Tents of Fa∣bricius; and promised him, upon Condition of a Considerable Reward, that he would convey himself back, as privately as he came; and Poy∣son the King. Fabricius order'd this man to be carried back to Pyrrhus;Pabricius's Generosity to Pyrrhus. and the Senate ap∣plauded the Resolution. Now if a man should regard the Appearance, and Opinion of Profit, This One Fugitive might have put a Period
to That hazardous War, in the removal of the most Considerable Enemy of the Empire. But where the point in Controversie was Ho∣nour, it would have been a Scandalous and an Impious practice to have encountred a Noble Enemy with Baseness, and Treachery, instead of Resolution, and Virtue. Now which was the more Profitable, either to Fabricius (who was as Eminent in Rome, as Aristides was in Athens) or to our Senate (that never separated Profit from Honour) to subdue an Enemy by Arms, or by Poyson? If Empire be desirable for Glories sake, let there be no Treachery or Injustice in the Attempt: For therein can be no Glory. And we must have a care too how we com∣pass Wealth it self;Wealth it self may be Unprofita∣ble. for it can never be Ad∣vantageous to us with Infamy. And therefore it was no Profitable Advice, that of L. Phi∣lippus (the Son of Quintus) to Tax those Cities over again which L. Sylla had discharg'd, for a Sum of Mony, by a Decree of the Senate: And This too, without their Mony again, which they had already paid for their Liberty. The Senate however took his Counsel, to the Scan∣dal of the Empire. At this rate, there's more Faith to  found among Pyrates then among Roman Senatos. Well! But the Revenue was increas'd, and it was therefore Profitable. But how long shall we dare to call any thing Profitable that is not Honest? How is it possible that Hatred, or Infamy, should ever be Profi∣table to any Government, that must support it self by its own Reputation, and the good will of its Confederates? Nay, I have had many a dispute, upon this Point, with my Friend Cato
himself, for insisting too rigorously upon the Interest of the Publique Treasury, and Revenue: He was too hard methought to the Officers; for we ought to be Bountiful to the One, and treat the Other as we were wont to treat our Colonies: And so much the rather, because the Connexion of the Parts did much contribute to the Preservation of the Whole. And Curio did very Ill too; who, tho' convinced that the Transpadans were in the Right, still conclu∣ded Vincat Vtilitas, Let Utility carry it. Now he should rather have said that it was not Iust, because it was not Profitable to the Com∣monwealth, then allowing it to be Profitable, to conclude that it was not Iust. In Hecaton's Sixth Book of Offices, we find a great many Questions to our purpose. As for Instance,Instances of Good and Profitable in Competiti∣on. he puts the Case, Whether in a great Scarcity of Corn, a Good Man be not oblig'd to Maintein his Servants? He Reasons it Pro and Con; but at last,Their Ser∣vants were Slaves. concludes the Duty with a regard rather to Profit, then to Humanity. He puts another Question, Whether, in the Extre∣mity of a Storm at Sea, a Man should rather throw over a Serviceable Horse, or a Servant of little Value. And here his private Interest draws him One way, and Humanity, Another. And again, Suppose that, upon a Shipwrack. a Fool should get hold of a Plank; whether or no may a Wise Man take it from him, if he can? He's upon the Negative, because the thing is Vnjust. But what if it were the Master of the Ship? Shall not he take his Own? No, by no means: He may as well throw a Man over-board, that
is at Sea in his Ship, because the Ship is his Own: For till they come to the End of the Voyage, the Ship is rather the Passengers then the Ma∣sters. But what if there should be but One Plank, and Two Men equally Wise, and Deserving, in danger to be drown'd? Whether shall Neither of them take it, or shall Either of them yield it to the Other? I would have it yielded to him that may do most Good, either to the Republique, or in his Own Particular, by Living. But what if they be both alike? I would have no Con∣tention; But let the One render to the Other as if the point had been decided by Lot. What if my Father should Rifle a Church,Cases of Conscience. or Dig a Passage under ground to Rob the Treasury? Whe∣ther or no should the Son give an Information of it to the Magistrate? This were an Un∣happy Case; but I would however Defend my Father, if he were Accused. But is not my Duty to my Country above all other Duties? Yes, it is. But then my Country it self is con∣cern'd, that the People in it should bear a Reverence to their Parents. But what if a Fa∣ther should Design the betraying of his Country; or the getting of the Government into his own Hand? Shall the Son Conceal it? I would have him earnestly desire his Father to Desist; and if That will not do, he's bound to Accuse him. But I would have him threaten him First; and, in the Conclusion, if he finds his Country in danger, he is to value the safety of it before That of his Father. He puts an∣other Question, if a Wise, and Good man, shall by oversight take False mony, whether or no may be put it off again in Payment, after he
knows it to be Counterfeit? Diogenes says he may: Antipater is against it. With whom I do rather agree of the Two. Suppose a man sells a Piece of Wine, knowing that it will not keep; Is he bound to tell this or no? Diogenes says he needs not; but Antipater says that a Good man Will tell it. These are the Pro∣positions in Controversie, among the Stoiques. In the selling of a Slave, whether or no am I bound to discover all his faults? Only those which the Civil Law obliges me to discover, or to take him again. But for Discovering him to be a Lyer, a Gamester, a Thief, a Drun∣kard; Some are For the telling of it, and O∣thers, not. What if a man should sell Gold, be∣lieving it to be Copper? Is a Good man that knoweth it to be Gold, bound to tell him it or no? Or whether can any man Iustifie the buying of That for One Penny which is worth a Thousand? I have now clear'd my own Opinion; And what are the Points in Controversie among the Philosophers before-named. WE come now to consider how far Those Offices and Contracts are to be observ'd,Conscience in Con∣tracts. that are neither Extorted by Force, nor (as the Law has it) Dolo malo, or by Circumvention. I have a Remedy given me for the Dropsie, upon This Condition, that if it Cures me, I am never to use that Medicine again: Within a few years, and after I have been once Cur'd of it, I relapse into the same Disease, and the person with whom I contracted will not give me leave to make any further Vse of it: What am I to do in This Case? It is an Inhumanity in Him to refuse me; beside that my Vsing of it does Him no Hurt: In this
Case, we must Consult the Means of Life, and Health. Well! Suppose a Wise man should be made Heir to a great Estate, upon This Obligati∣on from the Testator, that before he touches one penny of the Profits of it, he should dance pub∣liquely before a Court of Iustice, or in the Market place? He promises accordingly so to do; and without passing That Promise, he could never have been entitled to that Estate: Should he do it or no? I could wish he had not promis'd it; and my Opinion is, that it would better have become his Gravity not to have done it; but in regard that he has past his Word, if he accounts it a Shameful, and Dishonourable thing to discharge That Condition, he may break his word with a better Grace by making no Benefit of the Estate, then Otherwise; unless peradventure the Benefits of it might be converted to so Great, and Publique an Advantage, that it would be no longer Dishonorable so to do, as being Profitable to his Country. Neither is a man (always) bound to keep those Promises that are of no Advantage to those to whom the Promise is made.Some Pro∣mises better broken than kept. Phaebus (to come back to Fables) having promis'd his Son Phaeton a Grant of whatever he should ask; Phaeton demanded the Government of his Fathers Chariot; he had his Desire, and in his full Carriere Iupiter cast him down with a Thunderbolt. Had not this promise of his Fa∣thers now been better broken then kept? And then the Promise that Theseus extorted from Neptune, what became of it▪ Neptune accor∣ded to him Three Wishes: One was the De∣struction of his Son Hippolitus, upon a suspi∣cion
of his Familiarity with his own Mother-in-Law; and the Granting of That Wish was the greatest Affliction that ever came near to Theseus's Heart. And what was Agamem∣nons Vow to Diana, in promising her the most beautiful Creature that should be born with∣in his Dominions that year? which proved to be own his Daughter Iphigenia; whom he accor∣dingly sacrific'd, as the fairest Creature which That year produc'd. How much better had it been if This Promise had never been made, then so horrible a Crime admitted? Where∣fore sometime we should not pass a Promise: Nay a Depositum it self is not in all Cases to be restor'd. A man leaves a Sword in Trust with me when he's Sober, and calls for't again when he's Mad; Now to Restore it, in such a Case, were a Crime, and the Refusal of it, a Duty. What if I should lay up Mony for him, and then find that he's about to make War upon his Country? Shall I render it? I think not; be∣cause it is against the Republique, which we ought to prefer. So many things that seem Honest enough in their Own Nature, are yet made Vnwarrantable by Time, and Occasion: To make good a Promise, stand to a Bargain, deliver up a Trust; when it comes to be ra∣ther Hurtful then Profitable becomes Dishonest. This is enough said of those Vtilities against Iustice that are cover'd with a Pretext of Reason. But as we have drawn all Duties from the four Fountains of Duty in our First Book, we'ell keep still to our Subject; and Shew, how those things that seem to be Profitable, and Are not, stand in the greatest Opposition
to Virtue. Here is enough said of Prudence, and of the Counterfeit of it, which is Craft; and likewise of Iustice, which can never fail of being Profitable. THE Two remaining Parts of Honesty follow, the One is seen in the Greatness of an Excellent Mind,Of Forti∣tude. the Other in a Conformity and Modera∣tion of Continence, and Temper. It seemed Profitable to Vlysses, the Counterfeiting him∣self Mad, to avoid the War, as the Tragadi∣ans would perswade us. (For there appears no such suspition of him in Homer, who was an Eminent Author.) This was no Honest Counsel, but it may be said perhaps, that it was a Profitable one, to stay at Home, and Govern, in an Easie, Lazie Life at Ithaca, with his Wife, his Son, and his Relations; But do you Imagine, that in daily Labours, and Hazzards, there can be any Dignity that is to be compar'd with This Tranquility of Life? And yet I cannot but have a Contempt for such a Retreat, because those things that are not Honourable, I cannot allow to be Advantageous. But what do you think the World would have said of Vlysses if he had gone on in that Disguise; who notwith∣standing all his Brave Exploits in the War, did yet suffer these reproaches from Ajax, in the Tragedy? He that contriv'd the Oath, and made us take it. Was th'only man, Himself, you know, that brake it: Playing th' Mad, Driv'ling Fool, under That Blind To sleep in a whole skin, and stay behind: And the bold Cheat had past, without all doubt, But for fly alamede that found it out.
NOW it was much better for him, to encounter, as he did, not only Enemies, but likewise Seas and Tempests; then to abandon Greece, which was then by one Consent car∣rying a War among the Barbarians. But to pass over things Fabulous and Foreign. Let us now come to our own Country, and Affairs. Marcus Attilius Regulus,The Case of Regulus. in his second Consul∣ship, when he was surpriz'd, and taken pri∣soner in Affricae, by Xantippus the Lacedemonian, a Commander under Hamilcar the Father of Hannibal: (who was then General) he was sent to the Senate, under an Oath of rendring him∣self again at Carthage, unless certain Carthaginian Noblemen should be releas'd in exchange. Being come to Rome, he had before him a fair Colour of Profit, but as the Story makes it out, he found it Vain, and Idle▪ The condition of it was that he might stay in his Country, live at home with his Wife and Children, suffering the Ca∣lamity he was fallen into as the Common For∣tune of the War, and still reteining the Ho∣nour of his Consulary Dignity. Will any man deny these things to be Profitable? Or what shall we say, when Courage, and Magnanimity op∣pose it? What Greater Authority or Security would a man desire? For it is the Property of these Virtues not to fear any thing; to despise all accidents; and to reckon nothing Intolerable, that can befal a man. But what did he do? He came into the Se∣nate; told them his bus'ness;His Honour and Justice. but refus'd to to give his Opinion; for so long as he was under an Oath, he was in the Condition of a
Prisoner to an Enemy, and not of a Senator: But (like a Fool as he was (as some will say) and one that stood in his own light) that which he did speak was against himself: He would not allow it to be the Roman Interest to exchange their Prisoners; for the Carthagi∣nians were young men (he said) and good Soldiers, but himself wasted with Old age. His Authority prevailing, the prisoners were deteined, and himself return'd to Carthage, without any regard to the Affection he had either for his Country, or for his Friends; He was not Ignorant neither, to how cruel an Ene∣my, and to what exquisite Torments he expos'd himself, by his Return; only he was resol∣ved not to violate his Oath. When they had Tortur'd, and Watch'd him even to death; his Condition was yet more Honou∣rable, then if he had ended his days in his Own house; a decrepite Captive, and a For∣sworn Senator. But what a Fool was he, not only not to agree to the remitting of their Prisoners, but also to disswade it? But what? shall we call That, Foolish, that conduces to the Good of the Commonwealth? Or can any thing be Profitable to any Member of the Pub∣lique, that is not so to the Whole? It is a Subversion of the Fundamentals of Nature, to divide Profit and Honesty, for we do all of us desire that which is Profitable: It is an Attra∣ctive that draws us to it, whether we will or no. Is there any man that avoids it; or ra∣ther that does not vigorously persue it? Put since Profit is not any where to be found, but in that which is Praiseworthy, Honourable, and
Honest, therefore do we account these Con∣siderations as most Noble, and Excellent; intend∣ing under the name of Profit, what is rather necessary then Splendid. But what is there, you'll say, in an Oath?The Sa∣credness of an Oath. are we afraid that Iupiter should take offence at us? Now This is a point common to all Philoso∣phers, that God is neither Angry with us, nor Hurts us: and not only to those that take God himself to be Idle, and wholly careless of us, but to those also that will have God to be always in Action, and doing of some∣thing: But what greater harm could even an Angry Iupiter do to Regulus, then Regulus did to Himself? So that there was nothing of Re∣ligion in the perverting so great a Profit. Was it least he should do a mean thing? First, of Two evils (we know) we are to chuse the Least. But was That Dishonourable Proposition then an evil Equal to the Torment? And then, That of Accius: Hast thou broken thy Faith? To any man that does not believe me, I neither Have given, nor Do give it. Now tho' this was spoken by a Wicked King, it was yet well enough said: And moreover; as we say that some things appear Prositable, which are not so; so do they say on the Other side, that some things appear Honest too, which are not so: As in this case of Regulus's returning to the Torment, to save his Oath: For it is ren∣dred Dishonourable, because it was done under a Force, and by an Enemy, and so ought not to be made good. And they go farther, that whatsoever is very Profitable, becomes Honest upon That Consideration, tho' it was not so
before. This is it which is commonly urg'd aginst Regulus. But let us examin what it amounts to. Iupiter was not to be fear'd, least he should hurt us in his Anger; because he does not use to be either Angry or Mischievous. This Reason lies as strong against all other Oaths, as against This of Regulus. But the question is not in an Oath, the fear of being punish'd for breaking it▪ but the Conscience and the Obligation of keeping it. Now an Oath is a Religious Affirmation and whatsoever we promise psitively, as in the presence of God, we must keep it: for This does not concern the An∣ger of the Gods, which is none at all; but it belongs to Faith, and Iustice. It is a glorious Exclamation of Ennius. O Holy Faith! the Tye o'th' Gods; And fit to have thy Mansion in their Blest Abodes. He therefore that violates his Oath, pro∣fanes the Divinity of Faith it self, to which our Forefathers ascribed Divine Honours; placing her in the Capitol, as (Cato tells us) next unto Iupiter himself. But even an Angry Jupiter (you say) could not have hurt Regu∣lus more then he did himself. That were true, if there were no Evil but Pein:Pein is no Evil. But we have the Authority of the greatest Philosophers for it, that Torment is so far from being the Greatest Evil, that it is None at all. And let me recommend Regulus to you upon This point, as no Ordinary Testimony; Nay, per∣haps none more Convincing. For what no∣bler instance can be desir'd, then to see so
Illustrious a Roman subject himself voluntarily to the Torture, rather then forego his Duty? For in saying the Least of Evils, it is meant by suffering rather Dishonorably, then Miserably. Is there any Greater Evil then a Shameful Dis∣honesty? How offensive is it to the Eye, any Deformity of the Body? But how much greater then should we account the Pravity, and Cor∣ruption of a Polluted Mind? Wherefore they that argue these things with the greatest Ge∣nerosity and Vigour, as the Stoiques, pronounce That Only to be Evil which is Shameful: Nay the Peripatetiques themselves (who are not so Mas∣culine as the other) make no difficulty of unani∣mously pronouncing it to be the Greatest Evil. As for That saying, I have neither given, nor do I give, my Faith to a Faithless man: It was well enough said of the Poet, in the Case of Atreus; because it was accommodate to the Person: But  they take up This once for Granted, that a man is not oblig'd to keep Faith with him that has no Faith: let them have a Care not to make use of that Shift as a Cover for Perjury. As to the Rights and Customs of War, and keeping Faith with an Enemy, they are points we must be very Tender of: For whatsoever we swear, upon a full Perswasion in our Minds that it ought to be done, That must be ob∣serv'd: But Otherwise, a man may dispence with that Obligation without Perjury.A Pagan Dispensati∣on. As if a man that lies at the mercy of common Thieves, should promise them a certain Sum of Mony for the saving of his Life: 'Tis no deceipt, the receding from it, tho' I had given my Oath
for the performance: for we are not to look upon Pyrates as Open and Lawful Enemies; but as the Common Adversaries of Mankind. For they are a sort of men with whom we have neither Trust, nor Oath in Common. For Per∣jury is not the Swearing False, but the not per∣forming of That which we swear, with an In∣tention to do it; as may be gather'd from the very form of our Oath. It was wittily said of Euripides, I swore with my Tongue, but not with my Heart. But it was not for Regulus, however to embroyle the Conditions, and Rules of War, with Perjury; having to do with a Iust, and a Lawful Enemy; in which Case, all the Rights and Laws of Arms were admitted betwixt them in Common. For if it were otherwise, the Senate would never have sent and deliver'd up so many famous men in Chains to their Enemies.The Rigour of the Ro∣man Disci∣pline. Which was the Cas of Titus Veturius, and  Posthumius, in their Second Consulships: Who when they were beaten at Caudium, an our Legions dis∣arm'd; for concluding a Peace with the Sam∣nites, were deliver'd up to them as their Pri∣soners, because they had done it without the the Order, and Consent of the People, and Se∣nate. And at the same time T: Numitius▪ and Q. Melius, who were then Tribunes of the Common People, were deliver'd up likewise, to Evacuate the Peace concluded, because it was done by Their Authority; and Posthumius himself, that was deliver'd up was the man that advised and propounded it. And the sam thing was done many years after, by C: Mancinus, who having made a League with
the Carthaginians, without the Authority of the Senate, perswaded the representing of it to the People, himself, that he might be de∣liver'd up to the Enemy; which proposition, being so recommended, by L. Furius, and Sextus Attilius, was accepted and he accor∣dingly deliver'd up. This was more Ho∣nourable yet, then that of Q. Pompeius, who, in the same case, upon his supplication that such a Decree might not be past against him, prevail'd, and was discharg'd. Here, that which seem'd Profitable, was more Consider'd then the Honest; but in the Other Examples; the false Appearance of Profit, was overcome by a Dignity of Honor, and Virtue. But in the Case of Regulus, the Promise was made under a Force, and he was not oblig'd to Perform it. As if any Force could work upon the Mind of a Valiant man: Why did he go to the Senate then, expresly to move against him∣self, and disswade the Release of the Priso∣ners? This is to reprehend the most Generous point in the whole Case, He would not rest upon his own Opinion; but undertook the Cause, that the Senate might pass judgment upon it; wherein if he had not interposed, the Prisoners had been certainly restor'd to the Carthaginians and then, Regulus might have con∣tinu'd safe in his Own Country. But as he did not account that course Profitable to his Coun∣try, so he took the Honester Part, in chusing ra∣ther to suffer, and undergo what he did. Now as to their saying that when a thing is very Pro∣fitable, the advantage justifies it, tho' it were not Honest otherwise: Let me tell you, that
it must Be so, and not be Made so: For there is nothing Profitable, which is not Honest, and it is not Honest, because it is Profitable, but it is Profitable, because it is Honest. So that out of many Wonderful Examples, a man shall hardly find a greater, or a more laudable In∣stance then This. For in the whole Cha∣racter of Regulus, the most Worthy and Generous part of it was his Opinion for the deteining of the Prisoners. For as to his Re∣turn, tho' we wonder at it now adays, he could not yet at That time do otherwise: So that it was the Glory of the Age, rather then of the Man: For our Forefathers lookt upon the Tye of an Oath as the most Sacred Obligation in Nature.The Tye of an Oath. And this we find in the Twelve Tables; the Laws which we call Sacrate, shew as much: And so do our Leagues, by which we are ty'd to keep Faith, even with an Enemy; and so do the Orders, and Penalties of our Censors; who were not so strict in any thing, as in the bus'ness of an Oath. Lucius Manlius (the Son of Aulus) in his Dictatorship was summon'd by M. Pompo∣nius, the Tribune of the Common people, for Exercising the Power of a Dictator, some days beyond his time; And was further accus'd for Banishing his Son Titus (who was afterward called Torquatus) out of the Town, and Com∣manding him to live in the Country. The Young man, hearing that his Father was in trouble about it, is said to have gone pre∣sently to Rome; and the next morning by day-light, to Pomponius's house. To whom it was suggested that Torquatus being very Ill
us'd, had probably brought him some Com∣plaint against his Father. Pomponius present∣ly left his Bed, turn'd all people out of the Room, and so order'd the young man to be brought unto him. He was no sooner in the Chambr, but Titus drew his Sword, and swore that he would immediately kill him, if he did not presently give him his Oath, that his Father should be discharg'd: Pomponius, upon the apprehension of his present danger, past his Oath, and afterward reported the mat∣ter to the People; telling them he was for∣ced to desist, and the reason of it: Where∣upon Manlius was let go. Such a Venera∣tion had they in those times for the Tye of an Oath! This Titus Manlius is the man, who having kill'd a Frenchman in a Duel upon a Challenge, at the River Anien, and taking from him a Chain, which the Latins call Tor∣quis, took the Sirname of Torquatus. In his Third Consulship the Latins were routed and dispersed at Veseris, near the Mountain Vesu∣vius. He was a man of the highest rank of Brave men, and not more eminently Indulgent to his Father, then he was afterward severe to his Son. But as Regulus was to be commended for keeping of his Oath.The Seve∣rity of the Romans in case of Per∣fidy. So were those Ten men after the Battle of Cannae as much to be de∣spised. Hannibal sent them to the Senate, up∣on an Oath to render themselves again in the Camp of the Carthaginians, if they could not obtain such an exchange of Prisoners as was propounded. But this Story is variously re∣ported: Polybius (an Author of singular Cre∣dit) says that Nine of the Ten Noblemen that
were sent, delivered themselves up, without prevailing for the Exchanges, but that One of the Ten never went back again; Having Re∣turned to the Camp, so soon as he was out of it, upon pretence that he had left something be∣hind him; by which Return, he would un∣derstand himself to be discharg'd of his Oath: But without reason; For the Fraud encreases the Iniquity, without dissolving the Perjury. Wherefore it was a foolish piece of Cunning, and a most perverse Imitation of Prudence. Hereupon the Senate decreed that this shift∣ing Jugler should be sent bound to Hannibal. But the most glorious thing of all was This, Hannibal had 8000 Prisoners; not taken in the Battle, or that had run any hazzard of their Lives, but they were only such as were left in the Camp, by the Two Consuls Paulus and Varro. They might have been redeem'd for a small Sum of Money; but the Senate would not agree to't: for a Lesson to the Ro∣man Soldiers that they must either Conquer, or Die. This resolution being made known to Hannibal, went more to the heart of him then any thing else (as the same Author has it) to see that the Senate and People of Rome in their greatest Adversity, should still uphold so generous a Resolution. So that things seemingly Profitable are still overcome by things that are really honest. Now Acilius that wrote the Story in Greek▪ reports it, that there were more of them went back to Hannibal's Camp, under the same Colour, to deliver them∣selves from their Oath; and that they were branded for it with all sorts of Ignominy by
the Censors. We shall now put an end to This matter; for it is clear, that whatsoever is done with a Timorous, Abject, Mean, and Broken Mind, cannot be Profitable, because it is Flagitious, Disonorable, and Shameful: as this Action of Regulus would have been, if he had rather consulted his Own Interest, then that of the Publique, in the business of the Priso∣ners; or rather chosen to have staid at home. The Fourth part yet remains, consisting in Decency, Moderation, Modesty, Continence, and Temperance.Of Tempe∣rance. Now can any thing be Profitable, in opposition to this Catalogue of such Vir∣tues? But Aristippus's Cyrenaiques, and the Annicerian Philosophers place all Good in Plea∣sure, and account Virtue to be therefore Lau∣dable, for the Pleasure it produces. As these grew out of date, Epicurus came on; the Sup∣porter, Emprover, and in a manner, the Au∣thor of the same Opinion. With these we must contend (as they say) for Life; If we are resolv'd to defend, and to maintein the Cause of Honesty: For if not only Vtility, but all Happiness of Life rests in a Sound Constitu∣tion of Body, or in the search and hope of such a Constitution (as Metrodorus will have it) This Vtility certainly (and in the highest degree too (for so they understand it) will be found to clash with Honesty. For first, what Province shall we assign to Prudence? If the search and enquiry after Delights; How wretched a thing is Virtue, when it comes to serve Pleasure? But what is the Office of Prudence? To judge learnedly of Pleasure?
Suppose that nothing could be more De∣lightful then That: There is nothing yet to be imagin'd, that is more Dishonorable. Now for him that pronounces Pein to be the greatest of Evils; what place is there in such a Mind, for Magnanimity, that Exercises it self in the Contempt of Labours, and Peins? For tho' Epicurus,Epicurus places Good and Ill in Pleasure and Pein. in many places speaks Generously enough (as he does in This) of Pein and Affliction; We are not yet so much to consi∣der what he says, as what may be Reasonable for him to say, upon the Foundation of Ter∣minating all Good and Ill, in Pleasure and Pein: As to hear him now speak of Continence and Temperance; he says many very good things in several places; but yet he's gravell'd; (as we say) for how can any man commend Tem∣perance; and yet place our Chiefest Good, in Plea∣sure? For Temperance is the Enemy of Sensual Pleasures, and our Appetites are the Servants, and Followers of them. And yet in these Three kinds, they shuffle as well as they can, and their Evasions are not without some Colour. They make Prudence to be the skill of supply∣ing or procuring Pleasures, and keeping away Peins: And then they make a shift too, to acquit themselves in the point of Fortitude: which they say enables us to contemn Death, and to endure Pein. And in speaking of Temperance; tho' they are not clear, yet they extricate themselves after a fashion; for they say that the Greatness of Pleasure arises only from an Absence or Detraction of Pein. And as for Iustice, it is with Them, either Tottering, or rather Groveling upon the Ground; and so
are all those Virtues that are exercis'd in Com∣mon, and in the Society of Mankind. For there can neither be any Goodness, Liberality, or Gentleness (any more then Friendship) if these things be not desirable for Themselves; or else desirable only in relation to Pleasure, and Profit. But let us bring the matter into a Narrow Compass: For, as we have laid it down that nothing can be Profitable, in Oppo∣sition to Honesty, so we do here affirm that all Pleasure is directly Contrary to it. Concern∣ing which point, I reckon Calliphon, and Di∣nomachus to be the more to blame, in think∣ing to put an end to this Controversie, by cou∣pling Pleasure, with Honesty, as if it were a Man, with a Beast. Whereas Virtue does not admit of That Conjunction, but despises and rejects it. And then for the end of Good and Evil men, which must be Simple; it cannot be Temper'd, and Compounded of disagreeing things. But of This elsewhere more at large: And it is a weighty bus'ness. But To my purpose now in hand. Concerning any matter to be deter∣min'd in the Case of a Concurrent Opposition be∣twixt Profit, and Honesty, we have said enough already. But if Pleasure shall be said to carry some shew of Profit also, there can be no Con∣junction of it with Honesty. For allowing the most we can to Pleasure, it does but serve us for Sawce, without any Profit in it at all. IN This Book (my Son Marcus) your Fa∣ther makes you a Present; in My Opinion a Great one; but it is to You according as you Take it. And yet however, you may allow
These Three Books of Mine, an Entertainment in your Study, among the Commentaries of Cratippus. If I my self had come to Athens (as I had done, if my Country had not Command∣ed me back, even when I was half way tho∣rough) you should sometimes have been your Fathers Disciple too. So that I am now fain to speak to you in these Writings. Bestow as much of your time upon them as you can; and what you have a mind to do, you may do. When I shall understand that This Study pleases you, I hope it will not be long before I be with you my self. And however, at this distance, though in absence, I shall still be speaking to you. Wherefore My Cicero farewel: And assure your self that you are exceeding dear to me; And yet much dearer you will be, if I shall find that you take delight in these Memorials, and Precepts. THE END.
