C4512 08608524 41458
England's Remembrancer, A True and Full NARRATIVE OF Those two never to be forgotten DELIVERANCES: One From The Spanish Invasion in 88. The other from The Hellish Powder Plot, November 5. 1605. Whereunto is added The like Narrative of that signal Judgment of God upon the Papists, by the Fall of the House in Black-Fryers London, upon their fifth of November, 1623. Collected for the Information and Benefit of each Fa∣mily, by Sam. Clark, formerly Pastor in Bennet Fink. Behold the wicked travelleth with iniquity, and hath con∣ceived mischief, and brought forth falshood. He made a Pit, and digged it, and is fallen into the ditch which he made. His mischief shall return upon his own head, and his vio∣lent dealing shall come down upon his own pate. Psal. 7. 14, 15, 16. LONDON, Printed for J. Hancock, and are to be sold at the three Bibles, in Popes-Head Alley, next to Cornhill, 1677.
TO THE HONOURABLE And his Much Honoured Friends EDWARD RVSSEL, Esq Son to the Right Honourable Francis Earl of BEDFORD. AND TO The Lady PENELOPE, His prudent and pious Consort. Sir, Madam, I Take the boldness to present you with these Narratives, not for that they are new, or supposing your selves to be strangers to them: but as a Testimony of my Gratitude for those favours I have received from you: The high Heavens may be seen
in the lowest valleys: So may a large heart in the least Gift. But truly though the Gift be worthless, yet so is not the matter contained in it, which sets forth such eminent and signal de∣liverances as no Church or people in these latter Ages of the world have re∣ceived; And there must be a recog∣nition of Gods mercies, or else there will neither follow estimation, nor re∣tribution: Hence Micah 6. 5. O my people (saith God many hundreds of years after) remember now what Balack King of Moab consulted, and what Balaam the Son of Beor an∣swered him from Shittim unto Gil∣gal, that ye may know the righte∣ousness of the Lord. If there be not such a recognition of former deliver∣ances, we that should be as Temples of his praise, shall be as graves of his benefits. Our souls indeed are too like filthy Ponds, wherein fish die soon, and frogs live long: Rotten stuff is re∣membred, memorable mercies are
forgotten; whereas the soul should be as an holy Ark; the memory as the pot of Manna, preserving holy truths and special mercies; as Aarons Rod, fresh and flourishing. Oh! let us imitate that man after Gods own heart! If the Lord will be Davids Shepherd, he will dwell in Gods house to all per∣petuity, Psalm 23. 1, 6. If God deal bountifully with him, he will sit down and bethink himself what to render for all his benefits, Psalm 116. 7, 12. A Christian counts all that he can do for God by way of retribution, but a little of that much he could beteem him; and thinks nothing more unbe∣seeming him than to bury the mercies of God in oblivion. His two mites of Thankfulness and Obedience he daily presents, and then cryes out as that poor Grecian did to the Em∣perour, If I had a better present thou shouldest be sure of it. What then may we judge of those persons in our daies, who labour to
extenuate, yea annihilate these deli∣verances? that would have no pub∣lick commemorations of them, that study how to invalidate them, and to blot out the remembrance of them? To render good for evil is Divine: Good for good is Humane: Evil for evil is brutish: But evil for good is Devillish. Yet alas! how ordinary an evil is this among us, to abuse our deliverances to Gods dishonour? But Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish people, and unwise? Is not he thy Father? he hath bought thee, &c. Deut. 32. 6. Should we not remember that good-turns aggravate unkindnesses, and our offences are not a little encrea∣sed by our obligations? Ingrateful persons are like the Snake in the Fable, who said to the Country∣man when he had shewed it kind∣ness: Summum praemium pro sum∣mo beneficio est ingratitudo. In∣gratitude
is the greatest reward of the greatest benefit. How many such Snakes have we amongst us, that return evil for good, and unkindness for kindness? Is not this to fight against God, with his own weapons? as David did against Goliah: as Jehu did against Jeho∣ram: and as Benhadad did against Ahab, with that life that he had lately given him? For the preventing whereof (if it may be) are these things published, being almost worn out of remembrance more than the very names of them. Besides, though they may be found in larger Volumes, yet are they not so fit for every Fa∣mily: And as I have presumed (honourable and beloved) to publish them under your protection, so I doubt not but they will find the better en∣tertainment for the same. My earn∣est desire and prayer for you is, that the God of Peace will fill you
with all joy and peace by believe∣ing, multiplying his Blessings upon you and yours: And that you would afford me a room in your Albe among those that Sir, Madam, From my Study in Thridneedle-Street, Octob. 22. 1657. Love, honour and serve you, Sam. Clark.
THE Spanish Invasion. A Commemoration of that won∣derful, and almost miraculous Deliverance afforded by God to this Nation from the Spa∣nish Invasion, Anno Christi 1588. THE year one thousand five hun∣dred eighty eight, was foretold by an Astronomer of Konings∣berg, above one hundred years before, that it should prove a wonderful year: and the German Chronologers presaged, that it would be the Climacterical year of the World, which was in some measure ac∣complished in that glorious and never to
be forgotten Deliverance vouchsafed by God to us in England, and in that fatal overthrow of the Spanish Navy; A true Narrative whereof followes. But that we may the better see what in∣duced the Spaniard to make this hostile In∣vasion, we must be informed; both who were the inciters, and by what arguments, & artifices they stirred him up thereunto. The Inciters were the Pope, and some traiterous English Fugitives who were en∣tertained in Spain, and at Rome. The de∣sign was, The Conquest of England; which had been hindred for the space of ten years by reason of the Spanish Wars in Portu∣gal. The Arguments were, that seeing God had blessed the King of Spain with admirable Blessings and Successes; had given him in Portugal, the East-Indies, and very many rich Islands belonging to the same; that he should therefore per∣form somewhat that might be acceptable to God (the giver of so great and good things) and most worthy the Power, and Majesty of the Catholick King: That the Church of God could not be more glori∣ously, nor meritoriously propagated, than by the Conquest of England, extirpating Heresie, and planting the Catholick Ro∣man Religion there. This War (they said)
would be most just and necessary; conside∣ring that the Queen of England was ex∣communicated, and persisted contumaci∣ous against the Church of Rome. That she supported the King of Spains Rebels in the Netherlands, annoyed the Spaniards with continual depredations; surprised, and sacked his Towns in Spain, and Ame∣rica, and had very lately put the Queen of Scots to death, therein violating the Majesty of all Kings. Again, that this War would be no less profitable than just; For hereby he might add to his Empire other flourishing Kingdoms, extinguish the Rebellion in the Low-Countries, hitherto fomented and supported from England; secure his Voy∣ages from both the Indies, and abate his vast expences in Convoying his Indian Fleets both forward and backward: For proof whereof (they suggested) that the English Navy was neither for number, nor greatness, nor strength comparable to that of Spain; especially having the Por∣tugal Fleet now annexed unto it. That England was not fortified, and it wanted Commanders: Souldiers, a Cavalry, and Ammunition; was bare of Wealth, and Friends. That there were many in all parts of it addicted to the Romish Re∣ligion,
and would upon the first opportu∣nity joyn their forces with his. In brief, that so great was the strength of the Spa∣niard, and so unmatchable was their va∣lour, that no man durst oppose against them, and therefore they might confi∣dently assure themselves of victory. More∣over, that now an opportunity was afford∣ed by God himself to the King of Spain to effectuate this great design, having no cause to fear any other Enemies, by rea∣son of a Truce lately concluded by him with the Great Turk, and the French (his old Enemies) being now embroiled in Ci∣vil Wars at home. They perswaded him likewise that England was an easier Con∣quest than the Netherlands: For that he had a shorter cut to it by Sea, and that an open Sea: neither was it so fortified with Cities, Castles, &c. as the Netherlands were: and that England being once Con∣quered, the Netherlands would soon fol∣low of course, having lost their best Sup∣porter. These, and such like arguments prevail∣ing with the King of Spain, in the next place they held a serious Consultation about the manner of Invading England. Don Alvares Bassano, Marquiss of Sancta Cruce, who was to Command the Ar∣mado,
advised that some Port-Town in Hol∣land, or Zealand, should suddenly be sur∣prized by the Prince of Parma's Land For∣ces (who was then Governor of the Ne∣therlands under the King of Spain) and by some Spanish Ships sent to assist him by Sea, that so the great Fleet might have an Harbour from whence to begin their Inva∣sion: with whom agreed in opinion the Prince of Parma himself, who was very forward to promote this expedition. But others opposed this by reason of the diffi∣culty, danger, expence of time, and vast charge that it would require. They held that with the same charge England might easier be won, and that the Conquest there∣of would be assured, if a well-appointed Army out of Spain, and the Low-Countries might be landed at the Thames mouth, and London (the Metropolis of England) surprised by a sudden Assault. And this opinion, as the more probable, prevailed. And then again it was advised by some, that War should first be denounced by an Herald, both to remove suspicion and jea∣lousie from neighbour Princes, and to drive our Queen to call in Foreign Forces to assist Her: hoping that according to the insolent manner of mercenaries, they would raise mutinies, and spoil the Coun∣try,
which would make the Queens Sub∣jects evil affected towards Her; so that all things would grow into confusion in Eng∣land. But this motion was not hearkened to by men grown fierce, insolent, and con∣fident of their own strength, only they desired the blessing of the Pope upon their Armado, and the Prayers of the Catho∣licks to God and the Saints for good suc∣cess. And to strike the greater terror into the hearts of the English, They set forth Books with printed Maps, wherein was expressed the greatness of their Prepara∣tions in each particular, which indeed was so great in Spain, Portugal, Italy, and Sici∣ly, that the Spaniards themselves were a∣mazed at it, and procured the Pope to Christen it by the name of the Invincible Armado. Now that the wonderful power and mercy of God to us in this poor Nation, in protecting us against the same, may the more gloriously appear, I shall in the next place set down what their preparations were for Ships, Mariners, Land-Souldi∣ers, Ammunition, and other provisions for the carrying on of so great an under∣taking. The Spanish Navy, being the best ap∣poined for Men, Munition, and all man∣ner
of provision, that ever the Ocean saw, had been five years in preparing, consisted of one hundred and thirty Ships, whereof these were the principal. The Admiral Gallion of Saint Martins, of a thousand Tun burden, had in her one hundred seventy and seven Mariners, three hundred Souldiers, fifty Canon, &c. The Gallion of Saint Johns, of one thou∣sand and seventy Tun, had in her one hun∣dred and sixty Mariners, two hundred and thirty one Souldiers, fifty Canon, &c. The Gallion of Saint Mark of seven hundred and ninety two Tun, had in it one hundred and seventeen Mariners, two hun∣dred and ninety two Souldiers, &c. The Gallion of Saint Phillip, of eight hundred Tun, had in it one hundred and seventeen Mariners, four hundred and fif∣teen Souldiers, forty Guns, &c. The Gallion of Saint Lewis, of eight hundred and thirty Tun, had in it one hun∣dred and sixteen Mariners, three hundred and seventy six Souldiers, forty Guns, &c. The Gallion of Saint Matthew, of seven hundred and fifty Tun, had in it fifty Mari∣ners, one hundred and seventy seven Soul∣diers, forty Guns, &c. The Gallion of Saint James, of five hun∣dred and twenty Tun, had in it one hundred
Mariners, three hundred Souldiers, fifty two Guns, &c. The Gallion of Florence, of nine hundred and sixty one Tun, had in it one hundred Mariners, three hundred Souldiers, fifty two Guns, &c. The Gallion of Saint Christopher, of three hundred fifty and two Tun, had in it ninety Mariners, three hundred Souldiers, thirty Guns, &c. The Gallion of Saint Bernard, of three hundred fifty two Tun, had in it one hundred Mariners, two hundred and eighty Souldiers, thirty Guns, &c. A Ship of Saint Angelo, of seven hundred sixty and eight Tun, had in it one hundred and fourteen Mariners, three hundred and twenty three Souldiers, thirty Canons, &c. The Gangrine, of one thousand one hun∣dred and sixty Tun; had in it one hundred and ten Mariners, three hundred Souldiers, thirty six Canons, &c. The Ship Saint James, of six hundred and sixty Tun, had in her one hundred and two Mariners, two hundred and fifty Souldiers, thirty Guns, &c. The Manuel, of five hundred and twenty Tun, had in her fifty four Mariners, one hundred and thirty Souldiers, sixteen Guns, &c.
The Saint Mary, of seven hundred and 7 Tun, had in her fifty Mariners, two hun∣dred and twenty Souldiers, thirty Guns, &c. But I need not reckon up the rest. They had in all one hundred and thirty Ships, containing Fifty seven thousand, eight hun∣dred and eight Tun; wherein were Eight hundred and forty five Mariners, Nineteen thousand two hundred and ninety five Soul∣diers, and two thousand and eighty eight Gally-slaves. And so confident were the Spaniards that England should pay the shot, that they spared no cost for furnishing it forth with all things necessary. For which end they provided of Bullets for great shot two hundred and twenty thousand. Of Powder four thousand and two hundred Kintals, every Kintal containing a hundred pound weight: of Lead for Bullets a thou∣sand Kintals: of Match a thousand and two hundred Kintals: Musquets seven thousand: of Partisans and Halberts ten thousand: with store of Murthering pieces, double Canon, and Field pieces for the Camp: they had also store of Furniture for Carria∣ges, Mules and Horses; so that they were sufficiently provided both for Sea and Land. Bread and Bisket ready baked, and Wine laid aboard for six months provision. They had moreover six thousand & five hundred
Kintals of Bacon; three thousand of Cheese, besides other Flesh, Rise, Beans, Pease, Oil, and Vinegar, with twelve thousand Pipes of fresh Water. They had also store of Torches, Lamps, and Lanthorns, Canvas, Hides, and Lead to stop Leaks: Whips and Butcherly Knives to murder and tor∣ment the poor English. In a word, the Ar∣my was thirty two thousand strong, and cost the King of Spain thirty two thousand Ducats every day. In this Army were five Regiments of old Spanish Souldiers of the Tertio's of Na∣ples, Sicily, and the Tercera's, Commanded by five Masters Del-Campo: The first was Don Diego de Piementel, a Knight of the Order of Saint John, and Brother to the Marquess of Taveras: The second Colonel was Don Francisco de Toledo, Brother to the Earl of Orgas: The third Don Alonzo de Luzon: The fourth Don Nicholas de Illa: The fifth was Augustin Mexia; each Colo∣nel having in his Regiment thirty two Companies, Besides the Castilian, and Por∣tugal Bands, each of them having their pe∣culiar Commanders and Weapons. The General of this mighty Army (the Marquess of Sancta Cruce being now dead) was Don Lodovicus Peres, the Duke of Med na Sidonia of the Order of the Golden
Fleece. The Admiral was Don John Mar∣tinez de Richald: The Marshal Don Fran∣cisco Bovadille: Others were chief Coun∣sellors for the War, and Don Martin Alar∣con was Vicar General for the holy unholy Inquisition, in whose train were a hundred Monks and Jesuites: and Cardinal Allen was appointed the Superintendent of Eccle∣siastical matters throughout England, who fearing to be unprovided, translated Pope Sixtus his Bull into English, that it might be the sooner published upon the arrival of the Spanish Fleet in this our Nation. Of voluntary Adventurers, there were a hun∣dred and twenty four Noblemen, and Gen∣tlemen of all the greatest Houses in Spain, hoping to be well paid with the Lands and Riches of England. The Prince of Parma also in the Nether∣lands, by the King of Spains Command, built Ships, and very many flat bottomed Boats, each of them big enough to carry thirty Horse, with Bridges fitted to them to Ship and unship the Horses: He hired Mariners from East-Germany, set many thousands on work to dig and deepen Ri∣vers from Antwerp to Gaunt, and to Bruges: lading three hundred small Boats with Mu∣nition and Victuals. Two hundred more flat-bottom'd Boats were made, though
not so big as the former, which lay ready in the Haven of Newport, besides thirty se∣ven Ships of War at Dunkirk: He prepa∣red Piles sharpened at the nether ends, headed with Iron, and hooked on the sides to pile up the mouths of Rivers: At Graveling he provided twenty thousand empty Casks with Cords, and other furni∣ture to make floating Bridges to stop up the Heavens, beside an infinite number of Fagots: He shipped likewise a great abun∣dance of Saddles, Bridles, with other furni∣ture for Horse, and Horses also for Carria∣ges, with Ordance and other provisions for War. Near unto Newport he had lying under the command of Camillo thirty Companies of Italians, two of Walloons, and eight of Burguignons, every Company containing a hundred men: At Dyxmew he mustered eight Companies of Netherlanders, sixty of Spaniards, sixty of High Dutch, among which were seven hundred Fugitive English under the Command of Sir William Stanley, who of all others were held in greatest con∣tempt: neither was Stanley, nor the Earl of Westmoorland, nor others which offered their service and counsel once heard, but for their treachery to their Country barred from all access, and as most unfortunate
conductors, worthily with detestation re∣jected. At Conick also he quartered other four thousand, and at Watene nine hundred Horse, Commanded by the Marquess of Guast. And to this Land-service came the Duke of Pastrana, supposed to be the King of Spains base Son: the Marquess of Buor∣gon, one of the Duke Ferdinands Sons: Don Vespasian Gonsago of the House of Mantua, a great Souldier, who had been Viceroy of Spain: Don John de Medices, Bastard of Florence: Don Amadeus, Bastard of Savoy, with many others of the like quality. Neither was Sixtus Quintus, Pope of Rome, any ways backward to shew his di∣ligence, and devotion to this intended Inva∣sion; but sent abroad his Crusado (as he used to do against the Turks and Infidels) wherein out of the treasure of the Church he gave plenary Indulgences, and pardon of all their sins to every one that contribu∣ted his assistance hereunto: and for the fur∣therance of this enterprise, himself under∣took to contribute a million of Gold, the one half presently down, the other half when any notable Haven in our land should be won: yet with this Proviso, that the Crown of England should be held as Feuda∣tory to the See of Rome: in earnest whereof he bestowed upon the King of Spain his A∣postolical
postolical Benediction, and the Title of De∣fender of the Faith: He sent also Cardinal Allen into the Low-Countries, and renewed the Bulls of Pius the fifth and Gregory the thirteenth, whereby Queen Elizabeth was excommunicated, deposed from her Throne, and her Subjects absolved from all allegi∣ance to her. Thus we see what preparations were made both at Sea and Land, at Rome, in Spain, and the Netherlands, for the subdu∣ing of England, extirpating the Gospel, and subjugating us under the yoke of Spain: now let us see what provision and prepara∣tions our Queen made to dispel this black Cloud that hung over our head: And truly the first thing that she did was most Chri∣stian; For as when Jehosophat was threat∣ned with the like danger, 2 Chro. 20. 3. He sought the Lord and proclaimed a Fast; so did She, requiring all her Subjects to humble themselves by Fasting and Prayer, knowing that these are the best Weapons of the Church, that they by them might seek unto the Lord, and say in the words of Jehosophat, O Lord God, art not thus God in Heaven? and rulest not thou over all the Kingdoms of the Earth? and in thine hand is there not power and might, so that none is able to withstand thee? O our God, wilt thou not
judge them? For we have no might against this great company that cometh against us, neither know we what to do, but our eyes are upon thee. But in the second place, know∣ing that Prayers without endeavours and means are like Rachel, beautiful but barren, that She might not be taken unprovided, She prepared with all diligence as strong a Fleet as She could, and all things necessary for War; and She that in discerning mens parts and abilities was of a most sharp judg∣ment, and ever most happy, having the free choice in her self, and not by the commen∣dations of others, assigned to every office by name the best and fittest men. The charge of her Navy She committed to Charles Howard of Effingham, Lord Ad∣miral of England, of whose skill She had had former experience, and whom She knew both by his Moderation and Nobility, to be wary in providence, valiant, industrious, and of great authority among the Seamen, and well beloved of them: Her Vice-Ad∣miral She made the famous Sir Francis Drake, and these She sent to the West parts of England; and for the Guard of the nar∣row Seas, She appointed Henry Lord Sei∣more second Son to the Duke of Somerset, whom She commanded also to lie upon the Coasts of the Low-Countries, with forty
Ships, to watch that the Prince of Parma might not come forth with his Forces: By Land She commanded the General Forces of the Realm to be mustered, trained, and put in readiness in their special Shires, for the defence of the whole, which accordingly was done, and whereof the Lord Robert Dudley Earl of Leicester was appointed Lieutenant; twenty thousand whereof were disposed along our South-Coast for the guard thereof: besides which, She had two Armies; one of which consisting of a thousand Horse, and twenty two thousand Foot, was encamped at Tilbury near the Thames mouth, whither the Enemy fully intended to come: The other which was led by the Lord Hunsdon, consisted of thirty four thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse, which were to be the Guard of the Queens person: Her self in courage far surmounting her Sex, as another Zenobia or rather Deborah, led forth the Lords Host against this great Sisera, and her Soul∣diers valiant and skilful, both for courage and quick dispatch, might well be compared to those Gadites that came to aid David, whose faces were like the faces of Lions, and were compared to the Roes in the Mountains for swiftness. Arthur Lord Grey, Sir Francis Knolles,
Sir John Knorris, Sir Richard Bingham, and Sir Roger Williams, all gallant men, and brave Souldiers, were appointed to consult about managing the Land Service: These advised that all the commodious landing places for the Enemy, as well from Spain, as from the Low-Countries should be man∣ned and fortified, as Milford Haven, Fal∣mouth, Plimmouth, Portland, the Isle of Weight, Portsmouth, the open Coast of Kent, commonly called the Downs, the Thames mouth, Harwich, Yarmouth, Hull, &c. and that the Trained Bands throughout the Coast Shires, should meet upon a signal given to defend the said places, and do their best to prohibit the Enemies landing. But in case he should land, that then they should leave all the Country round about wast, that so they might find nothing for food, but what from their Ships they should carry upon their shoulders, and that they should hold the Enemies busied both night and day with continual Alarms, but not to hazard a Battel till more Commanders with their Companies were come together. Some suggested also to the Queen, that the Spaniards abroad were not so much to be feared as the Papists at home; for that the Spaniards would not attempt the Invasi∣on of England, but upon confidence of aid
from them: She thereupon committed some of them to Prison at Wisbeach in the Fenns; by her Letters also She directed Sir William Fitz-Williams, Lord Deputy of Ireland, what he should do. The King of Scots She put in mind to be∣ware of the Papists and Spanish Factions: By her frequent Letters She wrote to the States of the Vnited Provinces not to be de∣ficient in assisting her what they could. But amongst these preparations for War on both sides, Philip King of Spain, to cast a mist over her Majesties eyes, and to rock her into a sleep of security, importuned by all means the Realms unto peace, imploying the Prince of Parma to be his instrument therein, who dealt earnestly by Letters with the help of Sir James Crofts, a privy Coun∣sellor, and a man much addicted to peace, as also by Andrew Van Loey, a Netherlan∣der, that a Treaty of Peace might be entred upon, affirming that he had Warrant there∣unto from the King of Spain. Our Queen measuring other Princes by her own guile∣less heart, gave ear to this deceitful lullaby, little suspecting that a deadly Snake could be hid in so fair a Garden; yet resolved to treat of Peace with her Sword in her hand, neither was the Prince of Parma against her so doing.
In the month therefore of February Com∣missioners were sent into Flanders, Henry Earl of Darby, William Brook, Lord Cob∣ham, Sir James Crofts, Valentine Dale, and John Rogers Doctors of the Law, who arri∣ving there, were received in the Prince of Parma's name with all courtesy; who there∣upon sent away Dale presently to him to know where the place of meeting should be, and to see his Commission from the King of Spain: the place he appointed to be near Ostend, the Town it self being then in the English hands; and as for his Com∣mission, he promised it should be produced at their meeting: Only he wished them to hasten the matter, lest any thing should hap∣pen in the interim to interrupt the Treaty: and one Richardot, which stood by him, said more openly, That he knew not what in the mean time might be done against England. Which being reported to the Queen, She sent Rogers to the Prince to know whether there was any design for the Invading of England, as he, and Richardot by their words seemed to imply: The Prince answered that he had never any thought for the Inva∣ding England, when he wished the Treaty to be hastened, and was angry with Richar∣dot, who denied that any such words had fallen from him.
Commissioners for the King of Spain were Maximilian Earl of Aremberg, Go∣vernor of Antwerp, Richardot President of Artois, with some other Civilians. These stayed at Bruges, and for all their pretended haste, much time was cunningly spun out about the place of their meeting, which should have the Precedency, and what hostages should be given for security of the Commissioners: yet at length the Spaniards yielded to the English Precedency, both in going and sitting: and the place was in Tents near unto Ostend. The demands for the Queen were, that there might be a surcease of Arms, with a present and undelayed Truce, She mitrust∣ing the Spanish preparations at Sea: The sending away of foreign Souldiers out of the Low-Countries for Englands security: A restitution of such sums of money as the Queen had lent to the States, and which the King had promised to restore: That the Netherlanders might enjoy their ancient liberties, and priviledges, nor be governed by a stranger, but by a Native Prince: That they might have liberty to serve God with Freedom of Conscience: And lastly, that the Articles of the Pacification of Gaunt, and other like treaties might be observed; which things if they were granted, She
would condescend upon reasonable conditi∣ons to deliver up the Towns in the Nether∣lands, which She then had in possession, that it might appear that she had not for her own advantage, but for the necessary defence of the Netherlands, and her self taken up arms. To these the Spaniards replyed, that touching their preparations at Sea, they did assure them that it nothing concerned Eng∣land. That to send away the Souldiers, the King could not resolve till the Nether∣landers had submitted themselves to him. Concerning their priviledges, that it apper∣tained nothing to the Queen, neither should She prescribe to the King a Law. And so far was he from tolerating Religion, that he would not so much as hear thereof, o∣therwise than he had allowed to other Towns that had submitted to his obedience: And as for those Towns which had been taken from the King, and the mony expen∣ded about them, They said that the Spani∣ard might demand as many Myriades of Ducats to be repayed to him by the Queen, as he had expended upon the Low-Country War, from the time that She supported the revolting Netherlanders, and took them into her Protection. About this time went Dale by the Queens command to the Prince of Parma,
and mildly expostulated with him about a Book lately published by Cardinal Allen, that English Renegado, wherein he exhor∣ted the Nobility and People of England and Ireland to joyn with the Spanish Forces, under the Conduct of the Prince of Parma, to execute the Popes sentence already pub∣lished by his Bull against Queen Elizabeth; wherein she was declared an Heretick, Ille∣gitimate, cruel, for putting to death the Queen of Scots, &c. And her Subjects ab∣solved from their Oath of Allegiance, and commanded to aid the Prince of Parma a∣gainst Her. (And indeed there was a great number of these Bulls and Books printed at Antwerp, from thence to be dispersed all over England.) The Prince denied that he had ever seen any such Book, or Bull, neither would he undertake any thing in the Popes name; howbeit that he must obey his Prince. But for the Queen of England, he prote∣sted that he did so honour her for her Vertues, that next to the King his Ma∣ster, he esteemed Her above all others, and would be ready to do Her service. For the manifestation whereof he said that he had perswaded the King to condescend to this treaty of peace, which would be more ad∣vantagious for the English than for the Spa∣niard:
For (said he) if the Spaniards be overcome they will soon recover their loss; but if You be overcome, your Kingdom, and all is lost: To which Dale made this reply: Our Queen is provided with strength sufficient to defend her Kingdom, and you your self in your wisdom may foresee that a Kingdom cannot be lost with the fortune of one Battel; seeing the King of Spain after so long Wars, is not able to recover his ancient inheritance in the Netherlánds. Be it so (said the Prince) These things are in the hands of the Al∣mighty. After this the Commissioners contended with mutual debates, and replies, still twist∣ing and untwisting the same thread. For when the English pressed that a Toleration of Religion might be granted for the Vnited Provinces, at least for two years; It was answered, That as the Spaniard demanded not this for the English Catholicks; so they hoped the Queen in her Wisdom would require nothing of him which might be against the Honour, Oath, and Conscience of the Spaniard. When they demanded the mony due from the States of Brabant to our Queen; They answered, that it was lent without the Kings Knowledge or War∣rant; and that the accounts being cast up, how much the said mony was, and how
much the King had disbursed about the War, it would soon be known to whom the most ought to be repayed. With such answers as these they dallied with the Eng∣lish Commissioners, till the Spanish Fleet was come within the view of England, and the thundring of the Ordnance was heard from the Sea, which put the English Commissioners into some suspicion and fear, having no hostages for their safe return. But they received a safe conduct from the Prince of Parma (who had in the mean time drawn down all his Forces to the Sea-Coast) and so were conducted to the borders near Calice. Thus came this Treaty to nothing, undertaken by our Queen (as was concei∣ved) to divert the coming of the Spanish Fleet: and continued by the Spaniard to surprize England unprovided, and at una∣wares. So both sides put the Foxes skin upon the Lions head. And now we are come to speak of this Invincible Armado, which was the prepa∣ration of five whole years at least. It bare it self also upon Divine assistance, having received a special Blessing from the Pope, and was assigned as an Apostolical Mission for the reducement of this Kingdom to the obedience of the See of Rome: and in fur∣ther token of this holy Warfare, there were
amongst the rest of the Ships, twelve, called by the names of the twelve Apostles. The Gallions and Galliasses were of such a vast size, that they were like floating Towers and Castles, so that the swelling waves of the Sea could hardly be seen; and the Flags, Streamers, and Ensigns so spread in the wind, that they seemed even to darken the Sun, and to threaten destruction which way soever they turned. On the nine and twentieth day of May this Fleet set Sail out of the River Tayo, bending its course towards the Groin in Galizia, the place appointed for the gene∣ral Rendezvous, as being the nearest Ha∣ven unto England: But whilest they hoy∣sed and spread abroad their proud Sailes to the wind; God, who is an Enemy to such Nimrod-like undertakings, and hating such hostile actions, suddenly manifested his dis∣pleasure, and poured out revenge by a sud∣den and hideous tempest, which drave the Duke of Medina, the General, back again into the Groin; eight other of the Ships being dispersed on the Seas, had their Masts broken, and blown over board; besides three other Portugal Gallies which were driven upon the Coasts of Bayon in France, where, by the valour of one David Gwin, an English slave, and the help of other
slaves, French, and Turks, they were deli∣vered into the hands of the French, and they freed themselves by the slaughter of the Spaniards, amongst whom Don Diego de Mondrana was one. About the same time the English Admi∣ral, and Vice-Admiral, who had in all about one hundred Ships, whereof fifteen were Victuallers, and nine Voluntaries of Devon∣shire Gentlemen, hearing for certainty that the Spanish Fleet was ready to hoise up their Sails, resolved to put forth from Plymouth, and to meet, and fight them by the way; but were so met with by the same wind, that they could not get past the Syllies, and thence also were forced by the Tempest to return into their former Harbour, to re∣fresh their Ships, and Companies; only some of their Scouts at Sea descried some of the Spanish Ships, which likewise had been dispersed with the storm: but before the English could come near them, the wind veering about, carryed them back to the Groine, where the rest of their Fleet lay in Harbour. Intelligence being brought that the Spa∣niards were in want, their great Ships dis∣persed, and the rest sorely shaken with the storm, and their men dying by multitudes of the Pestilence; the Lord Admiral How∣ard
intended with the first Northerly wind to take advantage, which coming about upon the eighth of July, he lanched forth, and bore his Sails almost within the sight of Spain, purposing to surprise their weather-beaten Ships, and to fight them upon their own Coast. But then the wind suddenly changing into the South, and he wisely fore∣seeing that the Enemy might pass by with∣out his discovery, that the Seas might be stormy, or his Fleet wind-bound, and that whilst he thus lay abroad, his service might be more necessary at home, and that his work was to defend the Coasts of England, he therefore presently returned and An∣chored his Fleet in the Haven at Plimouth, suffering his men to refresh themselves up∣on the Land. At the same time there came more con∣fident advertisement (though false) not only to the Lord Admiral, but to the Court, that the Spanish Fleet could not possibly come forth again that year, upon which re∣ports (a dangerous matter in State affairs) so confident was our Queen, that She sent for four of her biggest Royal Ships to be brought back to Chattam: But the Lord Admiral suspecting the worst, by a mild and moderate answer retarded it, desiring that nothing might be lightly believed in so
weighty a matter, and that he might retain them though at his own charge. Wherein indeed a special providence of God did ap∣pear, for just at that time news was brought to the Lord Admiral by one Captain Tho∣mas Flemming, that the Spanish Fleet was entred into the British Seas, commonly cal∣led the Channel, and was seen near unto the Lizard-point, which came thus to pass. The Spanish Ships being new rigged, and their wants supplyed, their King still hot on his former resolutions, instantly urged and hastened his Commanders to put forth a∣gain to Sea, which accordingly they did upon the eleventh of July with the same South wind which (as was said before) brought back our Navy into Plimouth, and so having a more favourable Gale, with brave shews, and full Sails, they entred our Channel, where casting Anchor, they dis∣patched certain small Pinnaces to the Prince of Parma, to signifie their arrival and rea∣diness, and to command him in the name of their King to forward his charge for that service. July the twentieth about noon, this ter∣rible Fleet was descried by the English, coming forward amain with a South-west wind. It was a kind of surprise: For that (as was said) many of our men were gone
to land, and our Ships ready to depart: Nevertheless our undaunted Admiral tow∣ed forth such Ships as he could get in readi∣ness into the deep Sea, not without great difficulty, certainly with singular diligence, and admirable alacrity of our Mariners, cheered up with the Admirals own presence and assistance among them at their halser∣work, the wind blowing strongly into the Haven. When they were forth they saw the Spa∣nish Ships with lofty Towers like Castles, in front like an half-moon, the horns where∣of stretched forth in breadth about seven miles, sayling (as it were) with labour to the winds, the Ocean groaning under them; so that though with full sails, yet they came but slowly forward. They seemed as it were to make for Plymouth; but whether their Commission was otherwise, or because contrary to their expectation, they saw the English Ships out of the Harbour, they steer∣ed by towards Calice, hoping to meet with the Prince of Parma: the English willing∣ly suffered them to pass by, that they might the more commodiously chase them in the Reer with a fore-right wind. July the twenty first, the Lord Admiral of England sent before him a Pinnace called the Defiance, to denounce War by dischar∣ging
her Ordnance, himself following in the Ark-Royal, set upon the Admiral (as he thought) of the Spaniards, but it proved to be Alonzo de Leva's Ship, where fire, smoke, and loud thundring Cannons began the par∣ley; and rending Bullets most freely en∣terchanged betwixt them, were fiery Mes∣sengers of each others minds. Soon after came up Drake, Hawkins, and Forbusher, playing with their Ordnance upon the hind∣most Squadron of the Enemies, which was commanded by Rechalde, who laboured all he could to stay his Men from flying for shelter to the Fleet, till his own Ship being much battered with shot, and now grown unserviceable, was with much difficulty drawn into the main Fleet. At which time the Duke of Medina gathered together his whole Fleet, scattered here and there by the English, and hoising more Sail, kept on his intended course toward Callice; neither in∣deed could he do otherwise, the wind fa∣vouring the English, and himself finding the inconvenience of their great and high built Ships, powerful to defend, but not to offend; to stand, but not to move; whereas on the contrary their enemies were nimble, and ready on all sides to annoy them, and as apt to escape harms themselves, being low built and so easily shot over. Here∣upon
he caused them to gather themselves up close in the form of an half-moon, and to slacken their Sails that their whole Fleet might keep together. But our English Ad∣miral having maintained an hot fight for the space of two hours, thought not good to continue it any longer, thirty of his Ships scarce coming to the work, the rest being as yet scarce gotten out of the Harbour. In this first days fight the Saint Kathe∣rine, a Spanish Ship, having been sorely bat∣tered and much torn, was taken into the middest of their Fleet to be repaired: And an huge Ship of Biscaie of Don Oquendoes, in which was a great part of the Kings trea∣sure, began to be all in a Flame by force of Gunpowder, which was fired on purpose by a Flemish Gunner, for being misused by them: But the fire was soon quenched by the assistance of some other Ships sent in to her help. All this while the Spaniards for want of Courage (which they called Com∣mission) did what they could to decline the Fight, casting themselves continually into Roundels (their strongest Ships walling in the rest) in which posture they made a fly∣ing march towards Callice: yet in the for∣mer medly a great Gallion, wherein was Don Pedro de Valdez, Vasques de Silva, A∣lenzo de Saias, with other Noble men,
being sore battered with the English shot, in avoyding whereof she fell foul upon a∣nother Ship, and ere she could be cleared had her Fore-mast broken off, which so hindred her Sailing, that she was unable to keep way with the rest of the Fleet, nor were their friends of courage to succour these distressed Lords, but left both Ship and them in this sudden and unexpected danger. But the night coming on, our Lord Admiral supposing that they had left neither men nor Mariners aboard within her, and fearing to lose sight of the Spani∣ards, past by her, and followed the Lant∣horn which he supposed to be carried by Sir Francis Drake, as it was appointed, but that brave Knight was eagerly pursuing five great Hulks which he took to be of the Spaniards, but when he came up, and haled them, they proved Easterlings and friends, and so were dismissed: yet by this mistake of his, the greatest part of our Fleet, want∣ing the direction of his light, was forced to lye still: so that he and the rest of the Fleet till towards night, the next day, could not recover sight of the Lord Admiral, who all the night before with two other Ships, the Bear and the Mary-Rose follow∣ed the Spanish Lanthorn. July the twenty second; Sir Francis
Drake espied the aforementioned lagging Gallion, whereupon he sent forth a Pinnace to command them to yield, otherwise his bullets without any delay should force them to it: Valdes, to seem valorous, an∣swered, that they were four hundred and fifty strong; that himself was Don Pedro, and stood on his honour, and thereupon propounded certain conditions: But the Knight returned this reply, that he had no leisure to parley, if he would immediately yield, so; otherwise he should soon prove that Drake was no Dastard. Pedro hearing that it was the fiery Drake (whose name was very terrible to the Spaniards) that had him in chase, presently yielded, and with forty of his Companions, came on board Sir Francis his Ship, where first giving him the Conge, he protested that he and all his were resolved to have dyed fighting, had they not fallen into his hands, whose valour and felicity was so great, that Mars and Neptune seemed to wait on him in all his attempts, and whose noble and gene∣rous mind towards the vanquished, had often been experienced even of his greatest Foes. Sir Francis to requite his Spanish Complements with English Courtesie, pla∣ced him at his own Table, and lodged him in his own Cabin: the residue of that Com∣pany
he sent to Plimouth, where they re∣mained Prisoners for the space of eighteen months, till by payment of their ransoms they obtained their liberty: But Drakes Souldiers had well paid themselves by the plunder of the Ship, wherein they found 55000 Ducats of Gold, which they merrily shared amongst them. The same day Michael de Oquendo, Admiral of the Squadron Guy∣pusco, and Vice-Admiral of the whole Fleet, suffered no less a disaster; whose Ship being one of the greatest Gallions, fell on fire, and all the upper part of the Ship being burnt, most also of the persons there∣in were consumed: howbeit the Gunpow∣der in the hold not taking fire, the Ship fell into the hands of the English, which, to∣gether with the scorched Spaniards there∣in, was brought into Plimouth, a joyful spectacle to the beholders. All this day, the Duke of Medina laboured securely to set his Fleet in order; To Alphonso de Leva he gave in charge to joyne the first and last Squadron together; To every Ship he as∣signed his quarter to ride in according to the form prescribed in Spain, commanding them upon pain of death not to desert their stations. Glitch, an Ensign-bearer, he sent to the Prince of Parma to acquaint him with his condition.
July the twenty third, early in the morn∣ing the Spaniards taking the benefit of a Northerly wind, when they approached right against Portland, turned about against the English; but the English, nimble, and foreseeing all advantages, soon turned aside to the Westward, each striving to get the wind of the other, which at last the English got, and so they prepared themselves on each side to Fight; and the English conti∣nued all day from morning till night to bat∣ter those wooden Castles with great and small shot: The fight was very confused and variable, whilst on the one side the English bravely rescued the London Ships that were hemmed in by the Spaniards, and on the other side the Spaniards as stoutly delivered Rechalde being in danger: Never was there heard greater thundring of Ordnance on both sides, the chiefest fight being perfor∣med on this day; yet notwithstanding the shot from the Spanish Ships for the most part flew over the English without hurting them, only Cock an English man dyed with honour in the midst of his Enemies in a little Ship of his. The English Ships being far the lesser, charged that Sea-Gyant with mar∣vellous agility, and having given them their broad sides, flew off again presently, and then coming up, levelled their shot di∣rectly
without missing those heavy and un∣weildy Ships of the Spaniards. But the Lord Admiral would not hazard a fight by grappling with them, as some unadvised persons would have perswaded him: For he considered that the Enemy had a strong Ar∣my in the Fleet, whereas he had none; that their Ships were more in number, of bigger burden, stronger, and huger built, so that they could not be boarded but with extreme disadvantage: He foresaw also that the over∣throw would turn to a greater dammage than the victory would avail him: For be∣ing vanquished he should have brought England into extreme hazzard, and being Conquerour he should only have gained a little glory to himself for overthrowing the Fleet, and beating the Enemy. On this day the sorest fight was performed, where∣in, besides other remarkable harms which the Enemy sustained, a great Venetian Ship with some other smaller were surprized, and taken by the English, and the Spani∣ards were forced for their further safety to gather themselves close into a Roundel, their best and greatest Ships standing with∣out, that they might secure those that were battered and less. July the twenty fourth, the Fight was only between the four great Galliasses,
and some of the English Ships, the Spani∣ards having great advantage, theirs being rowed with Oars, and ours (by reason of the calm) having no use of their Sails, not∣withstanding which they sorely galled the Enemy with their great and Chain shot; wherewith they cut in sunder their tack∣lings, Cables, and Cordage, to their no little prejudice. But wanting Powder which they had spent so freely, and other provision to maintain the fight, the Lord Admiral sent some of his smaller Ships to the next Ports of England to fetch supply; which stirred up jealousies in the heads of many, that we should thus want upon our own Coasts. In which Interim a Council was called, wherein it was resolved that the English Fleet should be divided into four Squadrons, and those committed to four brave Cap∣tains, and skilful Seamen, whereof the Lord Admiral in the Ark Royal was chief: Sir Francis Drake in the Revenge led the se∣cond: Captain Hawkins the third: and Captain Forbusher the fourth. Other most valiant Captains there were in others of Her Majesties Ships; as the Lord Thomas Howard in the Lion▪ the Lord Sheffield in the Bear, Sir Robert Southwel in the Eli∣zabeth, Captain Baker in the Victory, and Captain George Fenner in the Gallion-Lei∣cester:
It was also further appointed, that out of every Squadron certain small Vessels should give you a charge from divers parts in the dead time of the night, but the calm continuing, this design could not be effected. July the twenty fifth, being Saint James day, the Spaniards were arrived against the Isle of Wight, where was a most terrible en∣counter, each shooting off their whole broad sides, and not above sixscore yards the one from the other: There the Saint Anne, a Gallion of Portugal, which could not hold course with the rest, was set upon by certain small English Vessels, to whose rescue came Leva and Don Diego Telles Enriques with three Galliasses: which the Lord Admiral himself and the Lord Thomas Howard in the Golden Lion, row∣ing their Ships with their Boats (so great was the calm) charged in such sort with their roaring Canons, that they had much ado, and that not without loss, to save the Gallion, from which time forward none of the Galliasses would undertake the fight. The Spaniards reported that the English the same day beat the Spanish Admiral in the utter Squadron, rending her sore with their Great Ordnance, and having slain many of her men, shot down her main Mast, and
would have much endanger'd her, but that Mexia and Rechalde came in good time to her rescue. That the Spanish Admiral, assisted by Rechalde and others, set upon the English Admiral, which happily escaped by the sudden turning of the wind. That thereupon the Spaniards gave over the pur∣suit, and holding on their Course, dispatch∣ed again a Messenger to the Prince of Par∣ma, to joyn his Fleet with all speed to the Kings Armado, and withal to send them a supply of great shot. But these things were unknown to the English, who wrote that from one of the Spanish Ships they had shot down their Lanthorn, and from ano∣ther the Beak-head, and that they had done much hurt to the third; that the Non-par∣rella and the Mary Rose, had fought a while with the Spaniards; and that other Ships had rescued the Triumph, which was in danger: The truth is, they had so sorely battered those huge wooden Castles, that once more they forced them for their further safety to gather themselves into a Roundel. July the twenty sixth, the Lord Admiral, to encourage and reward the Noble At∣tempts of his gallant Captains, bestowed the Order of Knighthood upon the Lords Howard and Sheffield, Roger Townsend,
John Hawkings, Martin Forbusher, and others: And yet the vain glorious and boast∣ing Spaniards caused a report to be spread in France, that England was wholly con∣quered by them. It was resolved by our men that from thenceforth they should as∣sail the Enemy no more till they came to the British Frith, or strait of Callis, where the Lord Henry Seimore and Sir William Winter, with the Ships which they had for the guard of the narrow Seas, waited their coming; and so with a fair gale from the South-West and by South, the Spanish Fleet sailed forward, the English Fleet fol∣lowing it close at the heels. And so far was it from terrifying our English Coasts with the name of Invincible; or with its huge and terrible spectacle, that our brave Eng∣lish youth with an incredible alacrity, leave∣ing Parents, Wives, Children, Kinsfolk, and Friends, out of their entire love to their na∣tive Country, hired Ships from all parts at their own proper charges, and joyned with the Fleet in great numbers, amongst whom were the Earl of Oxford, Northum∣berland and Cumberland: Thomas and Ro∣bert Cecil: Henry Brook: Charles Blunt: Walter Raleigh: William Hatton: Robert Carey: Ambrose Willoughby: Thomas Ge∣rard:
Arthur Gorges, and many others of great note. July the twenty seventh, the Spanish Fleet making forward, towards Evening, came over against Dover, and Anchored before Callis, intending for Dunkirk there to joyn with the Prince of Parma's Forces, wel perceiving that without their assistance they could do nothing: They were also warned by the Pilots, that if they proceed∣ed any farther it was to be feared lest they should be driven by the force of the Tide into the Northern Ocean. The English Fleet following up hard upon them, cast Anchor so near that they lay within Cul∣vering shot; at which time the Lord Henry Seimore, and Winter joyned their Ships to them, so that now the English Fleet consist∣ed of one hundred and forty Sail, all able Ships to fight, Sail, and turn about which way soever they pleased. Yet were they not above fifteen that sustained the greatest burden of the fight. From hence once more the Duke of Medina sent to the Prince of Parma to hasten forth his long expected, and much desired Forces: with which Mes∣sengers many of the Spanish Noblemen went to Land; having had enough of the Sea; amongst whom was the Prince of
Ascoli, the Kings base Son, who returned to his Ship no more; and indeed well it was for him, for that his Gallion was af∣terwards cast away upon the Irish Coast, and never returned to salute Spain. These Messengers earnestly prayed the Prince of Parma to put forth to Sea with his Army, which the Spanish Fleet should protect, as it were under her wings, till it was landed in England. And indeed the Prince of Par∣ma, hearing the best, and not the worst of this Voyage, made all things ready that lay in his charge, whose hopes were so fixed upon Englands Conquest, and the glittering Diadem upon Queen Elizabeths head did so dazel his ambitious Eyes, being assured by Cardinal Allen that he was the man de∣signed to be Crowned therewith, that neg∣lecting the Coronet of the Low-Country Government, he transferred the charge thereof upon Count Mansfield the Elder, and having made his vows to the Lady of Hall in Heinault, he was already in con∣ceit no less than a King. But the date of his Reign was soon expired, and his swel∣ling tide fallen into a low shallow ebb: For the day following in his march to Dunkirk, he heard the thundring Ordnance ringing the passing Peal of his hopes and title, and
the same Evening had news of the hard suc∣cess of the Spaniards, the hoped advancers of his dreamed felicity; and indeed do what he could, he could not be ready at the Spaniards call: His flat-bottomed Boats for the shallow Channels leaked; his provisi∣on of Victuals proved unready, and his Ma∣riners (having hitherto been detained against their wills) had withdrawn them∣selves: there lay also watching before the Havens of Dunkirk and Newport, whence he was to put forth to Sea, the men of War of the Hollanders and Zelanders, so well provided with great Ordnance and Muske∣tiers, that he could not put from the shore unless he would wilfully cast himself and his men upon eminent perils and dangers of destruction: and yet he being a skilful and experienced Commander, omitted no means, being inflamed with a desire to Con∣quer England. But Queen Elizabeths foresight pre∣vented both his diligence and the credu∣lous hope of the Spaniards. For by Her com∣mand the next day after the Spaniards had cast Anchor, the Lord Admiral made ready eight of his worst Ships, filled with wild-fire, pitch, rosin, brimstone, and other combustible matter: their Ordnance were
charged with Bullets, Stones, Chains, and such like things, fit instruments of death; and all the men being taken out, upon the Sabbath day, July, the twenty eighth, at two of the clock after midnight, were they let drive with Wind and Tide, under the guidance of Young and Prowse, amongst the Spanish Fleet. And so the Pilots re∣turning, and their trains taking fire, such a sudden thunderclap was given by them, that the affrighted Spaniards, it being the dead time of the night, were amazed, and stricken with an horrible fear, lest all their Ships should have been fired by them. And to avoid this present mischief, being in great perplexity, they had no other reme∣dy to avoid these deadly Engines, and mur∣thering inventions, than by cutting their Cables in sunder, the time being too short to weigh up their Anchors, and so hoising up their Sails to drive at random into the Seas: in which hast and confusion the great∣est of their Galliasses fell foul upon another Ship, and lost her Rudder: and so floted up and down, and the next day fearfully ma∣king towards Callis, ran aground upon the sands, where she was set upon by the Eng∣lish. This Galliass was of Naples: Her General was Heugh de Moncado, who
fought the more valiantly, because he ex∣pected present help from the Prince of Par∣ma: But Sir Amias Preston gave such a fierce assault upon her, that Moncado was shot dead with a Bullet, and the Galliass boarded, wherein many of the Spaniards were slain, and a great many others leap∣ing into the Sea were drowned, only Don Antonio de Matiques, a principal Officer, had the good hap to escape, and was the first man that carried the unwelcome news into Spain, that their Invincible Na∣vy proved vincible. This huge bottom manned with four hundred Souldiers, and three hundred Slaves, that had in her fifty thousand Ducats of the Spanish Kings trea∣sure, fell into the English mens hands; a reward well befitting their valour, who sharing it merrily amongst them, and free∣ing the miserable Slaves from their Fetters, would have fired the empty Vessel: but Monsieur Gourden, Governour of Callis, fearing that the fire might endanger the Town, would not permit them to do it, bending his Ordnance against those which attempted it. Had not this politick Stratagem of the Fire-ships been found out, it would have been very difficult for the English to have
dislodged them; for those huge Ships had their bulks so strengthened with thick Planks, and massie Beams, that our Bul∣lets might strike, and stick, and yet never pass through them: So that the greatest hurt which our English Canon did, was on∣ly by rending their Masts and Tacklings. The Spaniards report that the Duke of Medina, when these burning Ships approach∣ed, commanded the whole Fleet to weigh Anchor to avoid them, yet so, as having shunned the danger, presently every Ship to return to her former station, which ac∣cordingly he did himself, giving a signal to the rest to do the like, by discharging one of his great Guns; but in this general con∣sternation the warning was heard but of a few, the rest being scattered all about, which for fear were driven some into the wide Ocean, and other upon the shallows of Flanders. July the twenty ninth, after this miser∣able disaster, the Spaniards ranging them∣selves into the best order they could, ap∣proached over against Graveling, where once again the English getting the wind of them, deprived them of the conveniency of Callis road, and kept them from supply out of Dunkirk, from whence rested their
full hope of support. In the mean while Drake and Fenner played incessantly with their great Ordnance upon the Spanish Fleet, and with them presently joined Fenton, Southwel, Beeston, Cross, Ri∣man, and lastly the Lord Admiral him∣self, with the Lords, Thomas Howard, and Sheffield: On the other hand, the Duke of Medina, Leva, Oquenda, Richalde, and others of them, with much ado got clear off the shallows, and sustained the charge as well as they could, yet were most of their Ships pittifully torn and shot through, the fight continuing from morn∣ing till night, which indeed proved very dismal to the Spaniards; for therein a great Gallion of Biscay perished, the Cap∣tains whereof to avoid ignominy, or to be reputed valorous, desperately slew each other. In which distress also two other great Ships presently sunk. The Gallion Saint Matthew under the command of Don Diego Piementelli, coming to rescue Don Francisco de Toledo, who was in the Saint Philip, was, together with the other, miserably torn with shot, their tacklings spent, and their bulks rent, so that the water entred in on all sides, which fight was maintained against them by Seimore and
Winter; In which distress they were dri∣ven near Ostend, where again they were shot through and through by the Zelan∣ders: Their desperate condition being known, the Duke of Medina sent his own Skiff for Don Diego Piementelli, Camp∣master, and Colonel over thirty two Bands: But he in a Spanish Bravado refused to leave his Ship, and like a Souldier assayed every way to free himself: But being unable to do it, he forthwith made towards the Coast of Flanders, where being again set upon by five Dutchmen of War, was required to yield, which finally he did unto Captain Peter Banderduess, who carried him into Zeland: aud for a Trophy of his Victory hung up his Banner in the Church of Leiden, whose length reached from the very roof to the ground: Another also of the Spanish Ships coasting for Flanders, was cast away upon the sands. Francisco de Toledo also, being likewise a Colonel over thirty two Bands in the other Gallion, taking his course for the Coast of Flanders, his Ship proved so leak, that him∣self with some others of the chief betook themselves to their Skiff, and arrived at Ostend, the Ship with the residue being ta∣ken by the Flushingers.
The Spaniards now finding their wel∣come into England far worse than they ex∣pected, were content to couch their Fleet as close together as they could, not seek∣ing to offend their Enemies, but only to defend themselves, and the wind coming to the South-west, in the same order they passed by Dunkirk, the English still fol∣lowing them at the heels. But lest the Prince of Parma should take this advan∣tage to put forth to Sea, the Lord Admiral dispatched the Lord Henry Seimore with his Squadron of small Ships to the Coast of Flanders, to join with those Hollanders, which there kept watch under Justin of Nassau, their Admiral: This Holland Fleet consisted of thirty five Ships, furnished with most skilful Mariners, and twelve hundred Musqueteers, old experienced Souldiers, whom the States had culled out of several Garisons: Their charge was to stop up the Flemish Havens, and to prevent entercourse with Dunkirk, whither the Prince of Par∣ma was come, and would fain have adven∣tured forth, though his men were unwilling, hearing how their Friends had been enter∣tained at Sea: Only the English Fugitives, being about seven hundred in number, un∣der that treacherous Knight, Sir William
Stanley▪ were very forward to be the first that should assault England. July the 31. betimes in the morning the North-west-wind blew hard, and the Spa∣nish Fleet laboured by that advantage to re∣turn to the narrow strait, but were driven towards Zeland: whereupon the English gave off the Chase, because they saw them carried almost of their utter ruine; for they could not but run aground upon the sands and shallows near Zeland: but the wind turning presently into the South-west and by West, they sailed before the wind, by which means they were cleared of the shal∣lowes, and so that Evening they called a Council what to do, and by consent it was resolved to return into Spain by the Nor∣theru Ocean: for that they wanted many necessaries, especially great shot; their Ships also were pittifully torn, and there remain∣ed no hope that the Prince of Parma would or could bring forth his Fleet. The Armado having now gotten more Sea-room for their huge-bodied bulks, spread their Main Sails, and made away as fast as wind and water would give them leave: More fearing the small Fleet and Forces of the English (though far inferiour to them) than standing upon terms of ho∣nour
either for the credit of their Comman∣ders, or their Invincible Navy: But surely if they had known the want of Powder ours sustained (a fault inexcusable upon our own Coasts) they no doubt would have stood better to their tacklings: But God in this, as in all the rest, infatuated them, and would have us to acknowledge that our de∣liverance was by his own gracious Provi∣dence and power, and not by any strength or policy of our own. The Spanish Fleet being now carried forth into the deep, they directed their course Northward, and our English Ad∣miral followed them, lest they should at∣tempt to put into Scotland, against whom they now and then turned head, but stood not to it: Yet most men thought they would return, whereupon our Queen with a manly courage took a view of her Army and Camp at Tilbury, and walking through the ranks of Armed men placed on both sides, with a Leaders Truncheon in her hand, sometimes in a Martial pace, and other sometimes like a Woman, incredible it is how much she strengthened and encour∣aged the hearts both of her Captains and Souldiers with her speech and presence. But contrary to expectation, the Enemies with
their Sails spread, betook themselves to an absolute flight, and leaving Scotland on the West, they bended their Course towards Norway, being ill advised therein, (but their necessity urged, and God had infatuated their Counsels) thus to adven∣ture to put their shaken and battered bot∣toms into those black and dangerous Seas: Neither was the Climate healthful for the crazed Bodies of the Spaniards, over∣beaten, and tired with wants, they being now entred the fifty seventh degree of Nor∣therly Latitude; from whence our Lord Admiral returned, leaving only some Scouts to discover their success. When the Prince of Parma came to Dunkirk, the Spaniards entertained him with opprobrious speeches, as if in fa∣vour of Queen Elizabeth, he had neglect∣ed his opportunity, and willingly over∣thrown so hopeful a Design. The Prince to give them some satisfaction punished his Purveyors of Victuals, yet withal laughing in his sleeve at the insolency of the Spani∣ards, having heard them formerly to make their boasts that whithersoever they went they carried assured Victory along with them, and that the English durst not once abide to look them in the face.
The Spaniards (as was said even now) being freed from the English that had haunted them like their Ghosts, consul∣ted most seriously what was next to be done: they were very tender of the Popes Credit, who had prophesied, that this attempt would be fortunate and successful: The wrath of King Philip of Spain was to be feared, his vast Expences being thus lost, and his hopes frustrated: other Adventurers would be undone: the glory of the Spaniards would be laid in the dust: the Invincible Navy become a scorn, and England would still be England, not lorded over by the Spa∣niards, if without further attempt they should return into Spain. But on the other hand they considered that five thousand of the Souldiers were slain: a multitude of their Survivors lay sick or maimed upon their hands: Twelve of their greatest Ships were sunk, lost, or taken: their Cables, Masts, and Sails were cut, rent and broken with the English shot: Their Anchors left in the road of Callis: their Victuals fail∣ed: Their fresh water was spent: and their Enemies no less fierce, undaunted, and successful than at the first: The Prince of Parma though long in preparing, yet still unready, and kept in by the Dutch,
Queen Elizabeths firm Allies: which cir∣cumstances wisely ballanced, the vote went currant for their hastning to Spain. But withal knowing that the King of Scots (fast knit in affection and blood to our Queen) would yield them no sup∣plies; and having as little hope that Nor∣way would afford them any, they cast all their Horses, and Mules overboard, for the sparing of their fresh water: and so framing their course to sail about Cathenes, and the Coasts of Ireland, they steered be∣tween the Orcades and the Isles of Farr un∣to the sixty first degree of Latitude: From whence the Duke of Medina, with his best stored Ships, took Westward over the main Ocean towards Biscay, and at last arrived safely in Spain: where for his welcome, he was deposed from all his au∣thority, forbidden to come at Court, and commanded to live private, neither could he give satisfaction by his bad excu∣ses, albeit he imputed it to the treachery of his Mariners; to their ignorance, and small experience of those Northern Seas; the want of succours from the Prince of Parma; the Tempests, Shipwracks and ill fortune: but not a word of the judg∣ment of God, upon that Giantlike under∣taking
to enslave all England to the Spanish yoke. The residue of the Ships, being about forty in number, fell nearer with the Coast of Ireland, intending to touch at Cape Clare, well hoping there to refresh them∣selves, and supply their wants: but the winds proving contrary and tempestuous upon those dangerous Seas, many of their Ships perished upon the Irish shores, and amongst others a great Galliass, wherein Michael de Oquendo was Commander, and two other Venetian Ships of great bur∣den, besides thirty eight more, with most of the Spaniards contained in them. Such as got clear off the danger, put forth to Sea: some of which by a strong West Wind were driven into the English Channel, where some of them were again set upon and taken by the English, others by men of Rochel in France, and some arrived at New Haven in Normandy: So that of one hundred thirty four Ships that set Sail out of Lisbon, only fifty three returned into Spain: Of the four Galliasses of Naples but one: of the four Gallions of Portugal, but one: of the ninety one Callions, and great Hulks from divers Provinces, only thirty three returned, fifty eight being lost. In brief, they lost in this Voyage eighty one Vessels,
thirteen thousand, five hundred and odd Souldiers. Prisoners taken in England, Ireland, and the Low-Countries were above two thousand: Amongst those in England, Don Pedro de Valdez, Don Vasques de Sil∣va, and Don Alonzo de Saies, and others were kept for their ransome. In Ireland Don Alonzo de Luzon, Roderigo de Lasse, and others of great account: In Zeland was Don Diego Piementelli: To be brief, there was no famous, or noble family in all Spain, which in this expedition lost not a Son, Brother, or Kinsman. And thus this Armado which had been so many years in preparing, and rigging with such vast ex∣pence, was in one month many times as∣saulted, and at length wholly defeated with the slaughter of so many of her men, not one hundred of the English being lacking, nor one small Ship of theirs taken, or lost, save only that of Cocks: and having tra∣versed round about all Britain, by Scot∣land, the Orcades and Ireland, most grie∣vously tossed, and very much distressed, and wasted by stormes, wracks, and all kinds of misery, at length came lamely home, with perpetual dishonour: whereupon Me∣dals were stamped in memory thereof: A Fleet flying with full Sailes; with this in∣scription, Venit, vidit, fugit, It came, it
saw, it fled: Others in honour of our Queen, with flaming Ships, and a Fleet in a great confusion, and this Motto, Dux foe∣mina facti, A Woman was Conductor of the fact. In the aforementioned wracks above se∣ven hundred Souldiers and Sailors were cast on land in Scotland, who (upon the inter∣cession of the Prince of Parma to the King of Scots, and by the permission of Queen Elizabeth) were after a years time sent o∣ver into the Low-Countries: But more un∣mercifully were those miserable wretches dealt withal, whose hap was to be driven by tempest into Ireland: Some of them be∣ing slain by the wild Irish (their old friends) and others of them being put to death by the command of the Lord Deputy: For he fearing lest they might join with the Irish to disturb the peace of the Nation, comman∣ded Bingham, Governour of Connaught to destroy them: but he refusing to deal so rigorously with those that had yielded themselves, He sent Fowle, Deputy-Marshal, who drew them out of their lurking holes, and cut off the heads of above two hundred of them; which fact the Queen from her heart condemned, and abhorred as a fact of too great cruelty. The remainder of them being terrified herewith, sick and
starven as they were▪ committed them∣selves to Sea in their shattered Vessels, and were many of them swallowed up by the Waves. The Spaniards charged the whole fault of their overthrow upon the Prince of Parma, as if in favour to our Queen he had wilfully and artificially delayed his com∣ing to them: But this was but an inven∣tion, and pretention given out by them, partly upon a Spanish Envy against that Prince, he being an Italian, and his Son a Competitor to the Kingdom of Portugal: But chiefly to save the scorn and monstrous disreputation which they and their Nation received by the success of that enterprise: Therefore their colours, and excuses (for∣sooth): were, That their General by Sea had a limited Commission, not to fight till the Land Forces were come in to them, and that the Prince of Parma had particular reaches and ends of his own to cross the designe. But it was both a strange Commission, and a strange Obedience to a Commission, for men in the midst of their own blood, and being so furiously assailed, to hold their hands, contrary to the Laws of Na∣ture and necessity. And as for the Prince of Parma, he was reasonably well tempted
to be true to that enterprise, by no less promise than to be made a Feudatory or Beneficiary King of England under the Seignory (in chief) of the Pope, and the protection of the King of Spain. Besides, it appeared that the Prince of Parma held his place long after of the Government of the Netherlands, in the favour and trust of the King of Spain, and by the great im∣ployments and services that he performed in France. It is also manifest that this Prince did his best to come down, and put to Sea: The truth was, that the Spanish Navy, upon those proofs of Fight which they had with the English, finding how much hurt they received, and how little hurt they did, by reason of the activity and low building of our Ships, and skill of Seamen; and being also commanded by a General of small courage and experience, and having lost at first two of their bravest Commanders at Sea, Pedro de Valdez, and Michael de Oquendo, durst not put it to a Battel at Sea, but set up their rest wholly upon the Land enterprise. On the other side, the transportation of the Land Forces failed in the very foundati∣on; For, whereas the Council of Spain made full account that their Navy should be Master of the Sea, and therefore able
to guard and protect the Vessels of Trans∣portation: When it fell out to the con∣trary, that the great Navy was distres∣sed, and had enough to do to save it self, and that their Land Forces were impounded by the Hollanders: Things (I say) being in this state, it came to pass that the Prince of Parma must have flown, if he would have come in∣to England, for he could get neither Bark, nor Mariner to put to Sea. Yet certain it is that the Prince looked for the coming back of the Armado even at that time when they were wandring, and making their perambulation upon the Northern Seas. Queen Elizabeth lying one night in her Army at Tilbury, the old Lord Treasurer Burleigh came thither and delivered to the Earl of Leicester the Examination of Don Pedro, who was taken and brought into England by Sir Francis Drake, which exa∣mination the Earl delivered unto me (saith Dr Sharp, mine Author) that I might pub∣lish it to the Army in my next Sermon. The sum of it was this: Don Pedro being asked by some of the Lords of the Privy Council, what was the intent of their coming? stoutly answered the Lords, what? but to subdue your Nation,
and to root it out. Good (said the Lords) what then meant you to do with the Catho∣licks? we meant (said he) to have sent them (good men) directly to Heaven, as all you that are Hereticks to Hell. Yea, but (said the Lords) what meant you to do with your whips of Cord and Wier, where∣of you have such great store in your Ships? what? (said he) we meant to whip you Hereticks to Death that have assisted my Masters Rebels, and done such dishonour to our Catholick King and People. Yea, but what would you have done (said they) with their young Children? They (said he) which were above seven years old should have gone the same way that their Fathers went: the rest should have lived, only we would have branded them in the Foreheads with the letter L. for Lutheran, and reser∣ved them for perpetual bondage. This I take God to witness (saith my Author) I received of those great Lords, as upon examination taken by the Council, and by Commandment, published it to the Army. The next day (saith he) the Queen rode through her Army, attended by Noble-Footmen, Leicester, Essex, and Norris then Lord Marshall, and divers other great Lords, where she made an Excellent Ora∣tion
to her Army, and withal commanded a publick Fast to be kept. Her Oration was this. MY loving people, we have been perswaded by some that are careful of our safety, to take heed how we commit our selves to armed multitudes for fear of treachery: but I assure you I do not desire to live to distrust my faith∣ful and loving people. Let Tyrants fear: I have alwaies so behaved my self that (under God) I have alwaies placed my chiefest strength and safeguard in the loyal hearts and good will of my Subjects: and therefore I am come a∣mongst you, as you see, at this time, not for my recreation and disport, but being resolved in the middest and heat of the battel to live or die amongst you all; to lay down for my God, and for my Kingdom, and for my people, my Ho∣nour, and my Blood even in the dust. I know I have the body but of a weak and feeble Woman, but I have the Heart and Stomach of a King, and of a King of England too, and think foul scorn that Parma, or Spain, or any Prince of Europe should dare to invade the Borders of my Realm; to which, rather than any disho∣nour shall grow by me, I my self will take up Arms, I my self will be your General, Judge, and Rewarder of every one of your vertues in the Field. I know that already for your for∣wardness
you have deserved Rewards, and Crowns, and we do assure you in the word of a Prince, that shall be duly paid you. In the mean time my Lieutenant General (Leicester) shall be in my stead, than whom, never Prince commanded a more Noble or Worthy Subject; not doubting but by your Obedience to my Gene∣ral, by your Concord in the Camp, and your va∣lour in the Field, we shall shortly have a famous Victory over those Enemies of my God, of my Kingdoms, and my people. Thus we see the curse of God and his threatning in Scripture accomplished: They came out against us one way, and they fled seven wayes before us: making good (even to the astonishment of all Posterity) the wonderful Judgments of God poured out commonly upon such vast and proud aspirings. After this Glorious Deliverance of our Land by the Power of the Omni∣potent, and the wild Boar repelled that sought to lay waste Englands fair and fruitful Vineyard, our Gracious and God∣ly Queen (who ever held Ingratitude a Capital Sin, especially towards Her Al∣mighty Protector) as she had begun with Prayer, so she ended with Praise, com∣manding solemn Thanksgivings to be cele∣brated to the Lord of Hosts at the Ca∣thedral
Church of Saint Paul in her chief City of London, which accordingly was done upon Sabbath day the eighth of September: at which time eleven of the Spanish Ensignes (the once badges of their bravery, but now of their vanity and ignominy) were hung upon the lower Battlements of that Church, as Palmes of Praise for Englands Deliverance: a shew no doubt more pleasing to God than when their spread colours did set out the pride of the Spaniards, threatning the blood of so many innocent and faithful Christians. Queen Elizabeth her self, to be an ex∣ample unto others upon Sabbath the twenty fourth of September, came from her Palace of White-Hall in Westminster, through the streets of London (which were hung with blew Cloth, the Com∣panies of the City standing in their Live∣ries on both sides with their Banners in goodly order) being carried in a Cha∣riot drawn with two Horses to St. Pauls Church, where dismounting from Her Chariot at the West door, she humbled Her self upon her Knees, and with great devotion, in an audible voice She praised God as her only Defender, who had de∣livered Her Self and People from the
bloody designes of so cruel an Enemy. The Sermon then preached tended wholly to give all the glory to God, as the Author of this wonderful deliverance: and when that was ended, Her Majesty Her self, with most Princely and Christian Speeches exhorted all the people to a due performance of those religious services of thankfulness which the Lord expected and required of them. About the same time the Fair being kept in Southwark, the Spanish Flags were hung up at London-Bridge to the great joy of the beholders, and eternal infamy of the Spaniards proud attempts, as irreligious as unsuccessful. But the solemn day ap∣pointed for Thanksgiving throughout the Land was the nineteenth of November, be∣ing Tuesday, which accordingly was ob∣served with great joy and praising of God; and well it were if it had so continued still, being no less a Deliverance than was that of Purim amongst the Jews, which they in∣stituted to be kept holy throughout their Generations. The Zelanders also to leave a memo∣rial of their thankfulness to God, and their faithfulness to our Queen, caused Medals of Silver to be stamped, having engraven on the one side the Armes of their Coun∣try;
with this Inscription, Glory to God alone, and on the reverse, the Portraicture of great Ships, under written, the Spanish Fleet, and in the Circumference, It came, It went, It was, Anno 1588. In other Me∣dals also were stamped Ships floating, and sinking, and in the reverse, Supplicants upon their Knees, with this Motto, Man pro∣poseth, God disposeth, 1588. The Hollan∣ders also stamped some Medals with Spa∣nish Ships and this Motto, Impius fugit ne∣mine sequente: the wicked fly when none pursues. Our Queen, to shew Her Gratitude as well to the Instruments as to the Author of this great Deliverance, assigned cer∣tain yearly Rents to the Lord Admiral for his gallant service, and many times commended him, and the other Captains of Her Ships, as men born for the Preserva∣tion of their Country. The rest She gra∣ciously saluted by name as oft as she saw them, as men of notable deserts, where∣with they held themselves well apaid, and those which were Wounded, Maimed, or Poor, She rewarded with competent Pen∣sions. The Lord of Hosts having thus dispel∣led this Storm, the Queen dissolved Her Camp at Tilbury, and not long after the
Earl of Leicester ended his dayes, having been a Peer of great Estate and Honour, but liable to the common destiny of Great Ones, whom all men magnifie in their life time, but few speak well of after their Death. This Admirable Deliverance was con∣gratulated by almost all other Na∣tions, especially by all the reformed Churches, and many Learned Men ce∣lebrated the same in Verse, amongst which I shall onely mention two: The first was that Poem made by Reverend Mr. Beza; Translated into all the chief Languages in Christendom, to be per∣petuated to all ensuing Posterity. It was this. STraverat innumeris Hispanus classibus aequor, Regnis juncturus Sceptra Britanna suis. Tanti hujus rogitas quae motus causa? superbos Impulit Ambitio, vexat avaritia. Quam bene te Ambitio mersit vanissima ventus; Et tumidae tumidos Vos superastis aquae! Quam bene Raptores Orbis totius Iberos Mersit inexhausti justa vorago Maris! At tu, cui venti, cui totum militat Aequor, Regina, O mundi totius una decus:
Sic regnare Deo perge, Ambitione remota, Prodiga sic opibus perge jùvare pios; Vt te Angli longum, longum Anglis ipsa fruaris, Quam dilecta bonis, tam metuenda malis. SPaines King with Navies great the Seas bestrew'd, T'augment with English Crown his Spa∣nish sway: Ask ye what caus'd this proud attempt? 'twas lewd Ambition drove, and Avarice led the way. It's well; Ambitions windy puff lies drown'd By winds, and swelling hearts, by swelling waves: It's well; those Spaniards who the Worlds vast round Devour'd, devouring Sea most justly craves. But thou O Queen, for whom Winds, Seas do war, O thou the Glory of this Worlds wide Mass, So reign to God still, from Ambition far, So still with bounteous aids the Good imbrace:
That Thou maist England long, long Eng∣land Thee enjoy, Thou terror of all Bad, Thou Good Mens joy. The other is that, made by Mr Samuel Ward of Ipswich. OCtogesimus Octavus, Mirabilis annus Clade Papistarum, Faustus ubique piis. IN Eighty eight Spain arm'd with potent might Against our peaceful Land came on to fight: The Winds, and Waves, and Fire in one conspire To help the English, frustrate Spains desire.
THE Gunpowder-Treason: Being A REMEMBRANCER TO ENGLAND, Of that ancient deliverance from that Horrid Plot, hatched by the Bloody PAPISTS, 1605. Tending to revive the Memory of the fifth of November, to every Family in this Nation. That all sorts may be stirred up to real thankfulness, and transmit the same to their Posterities, that their Children may know the reason why the fifth of November is celebrated: that God may have glory and PAPISTS perpetual Infamy. The Lord is known by the judgment that he executeth, and the wicked is snared in the work of his own hands. Higgaion Selah. Psal. 9. 16. By SAMVEL CLARK, formerly Pastor of Bennet Finck, London. LONDON, Printed for J. Hancock, at the three Bibles, in Popes-Head Alley, next to Cornhill, 1676.
TO THE READER. Christian Reader, LEt the remembrance of so sig∣nal a mercy and deliverance vouchsafed by God both to Church and State should be buried in Oblivion, I have (at the request of the Book seller) presented thee here with a true and faithful Narrative of that grand work of darkness, forged in Hell, and by Satan suggested to some Popish Instruments, who envying the peace and prosperity of our Church, and progress of the Gospel, had designed at one blow to overthrow both: and that nothing might be wanting to complete that horried wickedness, their purpose was to have charged it upon the Puri∣tans, thereby hoping to free themselves and their Religion from the imputation of so hainous a Crime. Now that the
memorial of a mercy of such publick and general concernment should not be forgotten, we have the word of the eter∣nal God to be our guide therein. When the Lord had by his Angel destroyed the first-born of Egypt, and spared Israel, he instituted the feast of the Passover to continue the memorial thereof through their Generations, Ex. 12. 11, 12, 14. and ver. 26, 27. saith Moses to them, when your Children shall say unto you, What mean you by this service? ye shall say, It is the Sacrifice of the Lords Passover, who passed over the Hou∣ses of the Children of Israel when he smote the Egyptians, and deli∣vered our Houses. And how careful good Mordecai was to continue the re∣membrance of that great deliverance of the people of God from destruction plotted and contrived by that wicked Haman, appears Esth. 9. 20, &c. where they did not only celebrate those present dayes of their deliverance with feasting, and gladness: but he, toge∣ther
with the rest of the Jewes, or dained, and took upon them, and their seed, and upon all such as join∣ed themselves unto them, so as it should not fail, that they would keep those daies in their appointed time every year, and that those daies should be remembred, and kept through their Generations, every Family, every Province, and every City, and that those daies of Purim should not fail from amongst the Jews, nor the memorial of them perish from their seed, &c. And truly the remembrance of this great mercy hath the more need to be revi∣ved at this time, when some noted per∣sons amongst us begin to decry it, and wholly to lay aside the observation of that day, though enjoined by Act of Parliament, and made conscience of by most of the godly people of the Na∣tion. I have also been induced the ra∣ther to make this brief Collection of the Story, because, though it be pub∣lished by others, yet it is in larger Vo∣lumes,
which are not every ones mo∣ney; whereas, for a small matter eve∣ry family may get and keep this by them for the benefit, and satisfaction both of themselves and Children, that so the Lord may not lose of his glory, nor they (for want of information) fail of their duty. I shall conclude with that of the Psalmist, Psal. 107. 8. O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness: and for his won∣derful works to the Children of men! which is the hearty desire of Thine for thy spiritual good, SAM. CLARK.
THE DELIVERANCE OF OUR CHURCH and STATE FROM THE Hellish Powder-Plot, 1605. THE Plot was to undermine the Parliament-House, and with Pow∣der to blow up the King, Prince, Clergy, Nobles, Knights, and Burgesses, the very confluence of all the flower of Glo∣ry, Piety, Learning, Prudence and Autho∣rity in the Land: Fathers, Sons, Brothers, Allies, Friends, Foes, Papists, and Prote∣stants, all at one blast. Their intent, when that irreligious at∣chievement had been performed, was, to surprize the remainder of the Kings Issue, to alter Religion and Government, and to
bring in a Foreign Power. Sir Edmond Baynam, an attainted person (who stiled himself Prince of the damned Crew) was sent unto the Pope as he was a temporal Prince to acquaint him with the Gun-Pow∣der-Plot; and now to the Plot in self. The Sessions of Parliament being dissol∣ved July the 7th Anno Christi, 1604. and Prorogued to the seventh of February fol∣lowing: Catesby being at Lambeth, sent for Thomas Winter, who before had been im∣ployed into Spain, and acquainted him with the design of blowing up the Parliament-House, who readily apprehending it, said, This indeed strikes at the root; only these helps were wanting; a House for residence, and a skilful man to carry on the Mine: But the first, Catesby assured him was easie to be got; and for the man, he commen∣ded Guy Fawkes, a sufficient Souldier, and a forward Catholick: Thus Robert Catesby, John Wright, Thomas Winter, and Guy Fawkes, had many meetings, and Confe∣rences about this business, till at last Tho∣mas Percy came puffing in to Catesby's Lodging at Lambeth, saying, What Gentle∣mes, shall we alwaies be talking, and never do any thing? You cannot be ignorant how things proceed? To whom Catesby answered, that something was resolved on, but first an
Oath for secresie was to be administred: for which purpose they appointed to meet some three days after, behind Clements Church beyond Temple-Bar; where being met, Percy professed that for the Catho∣lick cause, himself would be the man to advance it, were it with the slaughter of the King, which he was there ready to undertake and do. No Tom (said Catesby) thou shalt not adventure thy self to so small a purpose; if thou wilt be a Traytor, there is a Plot to greater advantage, and such an one as can never be discovered: Hereupon all of them took the Oath of Secresie, heard a Mass, and received the Sacrament, after which Catesby told them his devilish device by Mine and Gunpowder to blow up the Par∣liament-House, and so by one stroke with the destruction of many to effect that at once which had been many years attempt∣ing: and for cause of Conscience to kill the innocent with the nocent, he told them that it was warrantable by the Authority of Garnet himself, the superiour of the Eng∣lish Jesuites, and of Garrard and Tresmond (Jesuitical Priests likewise) who by their Apostolical Power did commend the fact, and absolve the Actors. The Oath was given them by the said Garrard in these words;
You shall swear by the blessed Trinity, and by the Sacrament you now purpose to receive, never to disclose directly, nor indirectly, by word, or circumstance, the matter that shall be proposed to you to keep secret, nor desist from the execution thereof until the rest shall give you leave. The Project being thus far carried on, in the next place the first thing they sought after, was an House wherein they might begin their work, for which purpose no place was held fitter than a certain Edifice adjoining to the Wall of the Parliament House, which served for a withdrawing room to the Assembled Lords, and out of Parliament time was at the dispose of Mr. Winyard the Keeper of the place, and Wardrobe thereto belonging: these did Percy hire for his Lodgings, entertaining Fawkes as his man, who changing his name into Johnson, had the Keyes, and keeping of the rooms commended to him; Besides this, they hired another House to lay in provision of Powder, and to frame and fit Wood in for the carrying on the Mine, which Catesby provided at Lambeth, and sware Robert Keies into their Conspiracy, whom he made the Keeper of those provi∣sions, who by night conveyed the same un∣to Fawkes.
The appointed day for the Parliament being the seventh day of February, It was thought fit to begin their work in October before: but Fawkes returning out of the Country, found Percies rooms appointed for the Scottish Lords to meet in, who were to treat about the union of the two King∣doms, whereupon they forbore for a while to begin their work: But that Assembly being soon dissolved, upon the eleventh of December late in the night they entred up∣on their work of darkness, beginning their Mine, having tools aforehand prepared, and baked meats provided, the better to avoid suspicion, in case they should send abroad for them. They which first began the Mine, were Robert Catesby Esquire, the Arch-Contriver and Traitor, and ruine of his name, Tho∣mas Percy Esquire, a Kin to the Earl of Northumberland, Thomas Winter, John Wright, Guy Fawkes, Gentlemen, and Thomas Bates, Catesbies Man, all of them well grounded in the Romish School, and earnest labourers in this Vault of Villany, so that by Christmas-Eve they had brought the Mine under an Entry adjoining to the Wall of the Parliament-House, under-propping the Earth as they went with their framed Timber, nor till
that day were they seen abroad of any man. During this undermining, much con∣sultation was had, how to order the rest of the business, when the deed should be ac∣complished: the first was, how to surprise the next Heir to the Crown: for though they doubted not but that Prince Henry would Accompany his Father, and perish with him, yet they suspected that Duke Charles, as too young to attend the Parlia∣ment, would escape the train, and per∣chance be so carefully guarded, and atten∣ded at Court, that he would be gotten into their hands hardly; But Percy offered to be the remover of this rub, resolving with some other Gentlemen to enter the Dukes Chamber, which by reason of his acquain∣tance he might well do, and others of his like acquaintance should be placed at seve∣ral Doors of the Court, so that when the blow was given, and all men in a maze, then would he carry away the Duke, which he presumed would be easily done, the most of the Court being then absent, and for such as were present, they would be altogether unprovided for resist∣ance. For the surprize of the Lady Elizabeth, it was held a matter of far less difficulty,
she remaining at Comb Abbey in Warwick∣shire with the Lord Harrington, and Ash∣bey, Catesbies House being not far from the same, whither under a pretence of an hun∣ting upon Dunsmore Heath, many Catho∣licks should be assembled, who knowing for what purpose they were met, had the full liberty in that distracted time to pro∣vide Money, Horses, Armor, and other ne∣cessaries for War, under pretence of strengthning and guarding the Heir Appa∣rent to the Crown. Then it was debated what Lords they should save from the Parliament, and it was agreed that they should keep as many as they could that were Catholicks or Fa∣vourers of them; but that all others should feel the smart, and that the trea∣son should be charged upon the Puri∣tans to make them more odious to the World. Next it was controverted what Foreign Princes they should make Privy to this Plot seeing they could not enjoin them secresie, nor oblige them by Oath, and this much troubled them. For though Spain was held fittest to second their Plot, yet he was slow in his preparations, and France was too near and too dangerous to be dealth with, and how the Hollanders stood
affected to England they knew very well▪ But while they were thus busying them∣selves, and tormenting their brains, the Parliament was again adjourned to the fifth day of October ensuing, whereupon they brake off both discourse, and work till Candlemas, and then they laid in Powder, and other Provisions, beginning their work again, and having in the mean time taken into their Company Christopher Wright, and Robert Winter, being first sworn, and receiving the Sacrament for secresie; the foundation Wall of the Parliament-House, being very hard and nine foot thick, with great difficulty they wrought half through; Fawkes being their Centinel to give warning when any came near, that the noise in digging might not be heard. The Labourers thus working into the Wall, were suddenly surprized with a great fear, and casting away their digging Tools, betook themselves to their Wea∣pons, having sufficient shot and Powder in the House, and fully resolving rather to die in the place than to yield or be taken. The cause of this their fear was a noise that they heard in a room under the Parliament House, under which they meant to have Mined, which was directly under the Chair
of State; but now all on a sudden they were at a stand, and their Countenances cast each upon other, as doubtful what would be the Issue of their enterprize. Fawkes scouted out to see what he could discover abroad, and finding all safe, and free from suspicion, he returned, and told them that the noise was only occasioned by the removal of Coals that were now upon Sale, and that the Cellar was to be let, which would be more commodious for their purpose, and also would save their labour for the Mine. Hereupon Thomas Percy, under pretence of Stowage for his Winter provision and Coals, went and hi∣red the Cellar; which done they began a new Conference, wherein Catesby found the weight of the whole work too heavy for himself alone to support: for besides the maintenance of so many persons, and the several Houses for the several uses hired, and paid for by him, the Gunpowder and other Provisions would rise to a very great sum, and indeed too much for one mans Purse. He desired therefore that himself, Percy, and one more might call in such persons as they thought fit to help to main∣tain the charge, alledging that they knew men of worth and wealth that would wil∣lingly assist, but were not willing that their
names should be known to the rest. This request, as necessary, was approved, and therefore ceasing to dig any further in the Vault, knowing that the Cellar would be fitter for their purpose, they removed into it twenty Barrels of Gunpowder, which they covered with a thousand Billets, and five hundred Faggots, so that now their lodging rooms were cleared of all suspici∣ous provision, and might be freely entered into without danger of discovery. But the Parliament being again Proro∣gued to the fifth of November following, these persons thought sit that for a while they should again disperse themselves (all things being already in so good a forward∣ness) and that Guy Fawkes should go over to acquaint Sir William Stanley, and Ma∣ster Hugh Owen with these their proceed∣ings, yet so, as the Oath of secresie should be first taken by them. For their design was to have Sir William Stanley's presence so soon as the fatal blow should be given, to be a Leader to their intended strata∣gems, whereof (as they thought) they should have great need, and that Owen should remain where he was, to hold cor∣respondency with Foreign Princes, to allay the odiousness of the fact, and to impute the Treason to the discontented Puritanes.
Fawkes coming into Flanders found Owen, unto whom, after the Oath, he de∣clared the Plot, which he very well appro∣ved of, but Sir William Stanley being now in Spain, Owen said, that he would hardly be drawn into the business, having suits at this time in the English Court: yet he pro∣mised to ingage him all he could, and to send him into England with the first, so soon as their Plot had taken effect: Upon this, Fawkes to avoid further suspicion, kept still in Flanders all the beginning of Septem∣ber, and then returning, received the Keyes of the Cellar, and laid in more Powder, Billets and Faggots, which done he retired into the Country, and there kept till the end of October. In the mean time Catesby and Percy meet∣ing at the Bath, it was there concluded that because their number was but few, Catesby himself should have power to call in whom he would to assist their design, by which Authority he took in Sir Everard Digby of Rutlandshire, and Francis Tresham Esquire of Northamptonshire, both of them of suf∣ficient state and wealth; For Sir Everard offered fifteen hundred pounds to forward the action, and Tresham two thousand. But Percy disdaining that any should out-run him in evil, promised four thousand pounds
out of the Earl of Northumberlands Rents, and ten swift Horses to be used when the blow was past. Against which time to pro∣vide ammunition, Catesby also took in Am∣brose Rookwood, and John Grant, two Recu∣sant Gentlemen, and without doubt others were acquainted also with it, had these two grand Electors been apprehended alive, whose own tongues only could have given an account of it. The business being thus forwarded a∣broad by their complices, they at home were no less active: For Percy, Winter, and Fawkes had stored this Cellar with thirty six Barrels of Gunpowder, and instead of shot, had laid upon them Bars of Iron, logs of Timber, massie Stones, Iron Crowes, Pick-Axes, and all their working Tools, and to cover all, great store of Billets and Faggots, so that nothing was wanting against that great and terrible day. Neither were the Priests and Jesuits slack on their parts, who usually concluded their Masses with Prayers for the good success of their expected hopes, about which Garnet made these Verses, Gentem aufer perfidam credentium de finibus: Vt Christo laudes debitas persolvamus alacriter.
And others thus. Prosper Lord their pains that labour in thy cause day and night: Let Heresie vanish away like smoke: Let their me∣mory perish with a crack like the ruine and fall of a broken house. Upon Thursday in the Evening, ten days before the Parliament was to begin, a Let∣ter directed to the Lord Monteagle, was de∣livered by an unknown person to his foot∣man in the street, with a strait charge to give it into his Lords own hands, which ac∣cordingly he did: The Letter had neither date, nor subscription, and was somewhat unlegible, so that the Nobleman called for one of his servants to assist him in reading it; the strange contents whereof much per∣plexed him, he not knowing whether it was writ as a Pasquil to scare him from at∣tendance at the Parliament, or as matter of consequence, and advice from some friend: Howsoever, though it were now Supper∣time, and the night very dark, yet to shew his loyalty to his Sovereign, he immedi∣ately repaired to Whitehall, and imparted the Letter to the Earl of Salisbury, then principal Secretary, who reading the Let∣ter, and hearing how it came to the Lord Monteagles hands, highly commended his Prudence and Loyalty for discovering it, telling him plainly that whatsoever might
be the event, yet it put him in mind of di∣vers Advertisements, wherewithal he had acquainted both the King, and his Coun∣cil, of some great business which the Pa∣pists were in hand with, both at home and abroad against this Parliament, pretending a Petition to the King and Parliament for a toleration of their Religion, but withal, giving out, that it should be delivered in such an order, and so well backed, that the King should be loth to refuse their request. Then did the Earl of Salisbury presently acquaint the Lord Chamberlain therewith, who deemed the matter not a little to con∣cern himself; his Office requiring him to oversee all the places to which his Majesty was to repair: Hereupon these two Coun∣sellors shewed the Letter to the Earls of Worcester and Northampton, and all conclu∣ded (how slight soever the contents seemed to appear) to acquaint the King himself with the same, which accordingly was done by the Earl of Salisbury, who upon Friday in the Afternoon (being All-Saints day) taking the King into the Gallery at White-hall, communicated the Letter to him, which was as followeth,
My Lord, OVT of the love I bear to some of your friends, I have a care of your preservation: Therefore I would advise you as you tender your life, to devise some excuse to shift off your attendance at this Parliament: For God and Man have concurred to punish the wickedness of this time. And think not slightly of this adver∣tisement, but retire your self into your Country, where you may expect the event in safety. For though there be no appearance of any stir, yet I say they shall receive a terrible blow this Parliament, and yet they shall not see who hurts them. This coun∣sel is not to be contemned, because it may do you good, and can do you no harm: For the danger is past so soon as you have burnt the Letter; and I hope God will give you the Grace to make a good use of it, to whose holy protection I commend you.
His Majesty after reading this Letter, pausing a while, and then reading it again, delivered his judgment, that the stile of it was too quick and pithy to be a Libel pro∣ceeding from the superfluities of an idle brain, and by these words, That they should receive a terrible blow at this Parliament, and yet not see who hurt them; he presently ap∣prehended, that a sudden danger by a blast of Gunpowder was intended by some base Villain in a Corner, though no insurrecti∣on, rebellion, or desperate attempt ap∣peared: But the Earl of Salisbury, percei∣ving the King to apprehend it deeplier than he expected, told his Majesty that he judged by one sentence in it that it was written either by a Fool, or a Mad-man. For said he, If the danger be past as soon as you have burnt the Letter, then the warning is to little purpose, when the burning of the Letter may prevent the danger. But the King on the contrary, consider∣ing the former sentence, That they should receive a terrible blow at this Parliament, and yet should not see who hurt them, joining it with this other sentence, did thereupon conclude that the danger mentioned should be very sudden by some blast of Gun-Pow∣der: interpreting as soon, for, as quickly▪ and therefore wished that the rooms under
the Parliament-House should be thoroughly searched, before Himself or Peers should sit therein: Hereupon it was concluded that the Lord Chamberlain (according to his Office) should view all the rooms above and below: but yet, to prevent idle rumors and to let things ripen further, it was resolved that this search should be de∣ferred till Munday, the day immediately before the Parliament, and that then it should be done with a seeming slight eye to avoid suspect. According to this conclusion, the Earl of Suffolk, Lord Chamberlain, upon Munday in the Afternoon, accompanied with the Lord Monteagle, repaired into those un∣der rooms, and finding the Cellar so fully stored with Wood and Coals, demanded of Fawkes, the counterfeit Johnson, who stood there attending as a servant of small re∣pute, Who owed the place? He answered that the Lodgings belonged to Mr Thomas Percy, and the Cellar also, to lay in his Winter-provision, himself being the Keeper of it and Mr Percies Servant; whereunto the Earl, as void of any suspicion, told him that his Master was well provided against Winter blasts: But when they were come forth, the Lord Monteagle told him that he did much suspect Percy to be the Inditer
of the Letter, knowing his affection in Re∣ligion, and the friendship betwixt them professed, so that his heart gave him (as he said) when he heard Percy named, that his hand was in the act. The Lord Chamberlain returning, related to the King and Council what he had seen, and the suspicion that the Lord Monteagle had of Percy, and himself of Johnson his man, all which increased his Majesties jea∣lousie, so that he insisted that a narrower search should be made, and the Billets and Coals turned up to the bottom; of the same mind also were all the Privy-Counsellors then present: but for the manner how the search was to be made, they agreed not among themselves. For on the one part they were very solicitous for the Kings safety, concluding that there could not be too much caution used for preventing his danger: and yet on the other part they were all extreme loth (in case this Letter should prove nothing but the evaporation of some idle brain) that a too curious search should be made, lest, if nothing were found, it should turn to the great scandal of the King and State, as being so suspici∣ous upon every light and frivolous toy: Be∣sides it would lay an ill-favoured imputa∣tion upon the Earl of Northumberland, one
of his Majesties greatest Subjects, and Counsellors, This Thomas Percy being his Kinsman, and intimate Friend. Yet at last the search was concluded to be made, but under colour of searching for certain Hangings belonging to the House, which were missing and conveyed away. Sir Thomas Knevet (a Gentleman of his Majesties Privy-Chamber, and a Justice of Peace in Westminster) was imployed here∣in, who about midnight before the Parlia∣ment was to begin, went to the place with a small, but trusty number of persons: and at the door of the entrance to the Cellar, finding one (who was Guy Fawkes) at so unseasonable an hour, Cloked, and Booted, he apprehended him, and ransacking the Billets, he found the Serpents Nest stored with thirty six Barrels of Powder, and then searching the Villain, he found about him a dark Lanthorn, three Matches, and other instruments for blowing up the Powder: And Fawkes being no whit daunted, in∣stantly confessed his guiltiness, and was so far from repentance, as he vowed, that had he been within the House (as indeed he was but immediately come forth from his work) he would certainly have blown up the House with himself and them all: and being brought before the Council, he
lamented nothing so much as because the deed was not done, saying, that the Devil, and not God, was the discoverer of it. And indeed when this Prisoner was first brought into Whitehall, in respect of the strangeness of the thing, no man was re∣strained from seeing, and speaking with him, and not long after the Lords of the Council examined him: But he put on such a Romane resolution, that both to the Council, and to all others that spake to him that day, he seemed fixed, and settled in his resolution of concealing his compli∣ces; and notwithstanding the horror of the fact, the guiltiness of his Conscience, his sudden surprize, the terror which should have been stricken into him, by coming in∣to the presence of so noble and grave a Council, and the restless and confused questions that every man all that day did vex him with; yet was his countenance so far from being dejected, that he often smi∣led in a scornful manner, answering quick∣ly to every mans questions, scoffing at those that were impertinent, and jesting at such as he thought had no authority to examine him. Before the Council he re∣fused to answer to such questions as he thought might discover the Plot: took
all the blame upon himself, whereunto he said he was moved only for Religion, and Conscience sake: denying the King to be his lawful Sovereign, because he was an Heretick. As desperate were Catesby, Percy, and the rest, who seeing the treason discover'd, posted all into Warwickshire. About the same hour of the night where∣in Fawkes was apprehended, one Grant a Gentleman, having associated to himself others of his opinion, all desperate Papists, broke open the Stables of Mr Bennock, a Rider of great Horses at Warwick Castle, and carried away eight of them, which belonged to divers Noblemen, and Gen∣tlemen of that Country, who had put them into Mr Bennock's hand to fit them for their service, and so both they which had fled from London, and Grant and his Company met on that Tuesday night at Dun-Church, at Sir Everard Digbies Lodgings, who had made a match for a great Hunting, upon Dunsmore-heath, that under pretence there∣of they might seize upon the Lady Elizabeth then at Comb-Abbey, with the Lord Har∣rington, but when by those which posted from London they were informed that they were discovered, and pursued, being struck with a great fear, not knowing whither to
fly, they desperately began an open Re∣bellion, pretending that they did it for the cause of Religion, all the Catholicks throats being intended to be cut. But the violent taking away of those Horses in the night, seemed even in the eyes of the common-people to be so great a riot, though they knew nothing more, that it begat in their hearts a suspicion of some following Rebellion, so that all sorts both great and small began to arm themselves upon this unexpected accident. And old Sir Fulk Grevil of Beauchamps-Court, being Deputy-Lieutenant of Warwickshire, though aged and infirm, yet out of his zeal for the peace and welfare of his Country, present∣ly took order to get into his hands the Am∣munition and Arms of all such Gentlemen as were absent from their Houses, or Popishly affected, and sent such directions to the Towns about him, that thereupon when these Rebels came to Ilcester, a poor Smith stroke Winter, who had likewise been taken by the Townsmen but that he was rescued by his Companions. Yet six∣teen of their followers were taken and sent to the Sheriff at Warwick, and from thence to London. In the mean time the rest wandred through Warwickshire, being pursued by
Sir Richard Verney, the then High-Sheriff, and from thence they went through Wor∣cestershire into the Borders of Staffordshire, their Servants and followers being about eighty men, who also stole away many of them from them. Thus ranging about, and finding no resistance, they rifled the Lord Windsors House of all the Armour, Shot, Powder, and all other Warlike provisions: but the weather being rainy, and the wa∣ters somewhat high, the Powder in Carri∣age took wet, and so became unservice∣able. For their last refuge they betook them∣selves to Holbach House in Staffordshire, be∣longing to Steven Littleton, whither they were pursued by the High-Sheriff of Wor∣cestershire, who not knowing of the trea∣son, and thinking it to be only some fray, or riot, sent his Trumpeter unto them, commanding them to render themselves to him his Majesties Minister: But their Con∣sciences witnessing what the Sheriff knew not, answered, that he had need of greater assistance than of those few that were with him, before he could be able to command or controul them: and so they prepared for re∣sistance, and having laid two pounds of the said Powder into a Platter to dry in the Chimney, one coming to mend the fire
threw in a Billet, whereby a spark flew in∣to the Powder, whose sudden blast was so violent, that though so small a quantity, it blew up the roof of the House, scorching the Bodies and Faces of Catesby, Rookwood, and Grant, and some others, whose Con∣sciences now told them that God had pu∣nished them justly with Powder, who with Powder would have destroyed so many. Being dispirited with this accident, yet like desperate men, they resolved to die together, set open the Gates, and suffered the Sheriffs men to rush in upon them, and presently both the Wrights were shot down dead: Rookwood and Thomas Winter were very sorely wounded, Catesby and Percy des∣perately fighting back to back, were both shot through, and slain with one Musket Bullet: the rest being taken, were carried Prisoners to London, being all the way ga∣zed at, reviled and detested by the com∣mon people for their horrid, and horrible treason: and so at last they received the just guerdon of their wickedness. Thus you have seen this work of dark∣ness by the watchfulness of Gods provi∣dence detected and defeated, and the con∣trivers of mischief faln into the Pit that they digged for others: Now let us see also how cunningly they contrived the
transferring the Odium of it upon the Puritans. There was one Mr Pickering of Tich∣marsh-Grove in Northamptonshire, that was in great esteem with King James. This Mr Pickering had a Horse of special note for swiftness, on which he used to hunt with the King. A little before the blow was given, Mr Keies, one of the Conspirators and Brother in Law to Mr Pickering, bor∣rowed this Horse of him, and conveyed him to London upon a bloody design which was thus contrived. Fawks upon the day of the fatal blow was appointed to retire him∣self into St. Georges Fields, where this Horse was to attend him to further his es∣cape (as they made him believe) so soon as the Parliament House should be blown up. It was likewise contrived, that Mr Pickering who was noted for a Puritan, should that Morning be murthered in his Bed, and secretly conveyed away: as also that Fawks so soon as he came into Georges Fields to escape, should be there murther∣ed, and so mangled, that he could not be known: whereupon it was to be bruited abroad that the Puritans had blown up the Parliament-House, and the better to make the World believe it, there was Mr Pick∣ering with his choice Horse ready to make
an escape, but that stirred up some, who seeing the hainousness of the fact, and him ready to escape, in detestation of so horri∣ble a deed, fell upon him and hewed him in pieces, and to make it more clear, there was his Horse, known to be of special speed and swiftness, ready to carry him away, and upon this rumor a Massacre should have gone through the whole land upon the Puritans. When the contrivance of this Plot was thus discovered by some of the Conspirators, and Faux, who was now a Prisoner in the Tower made acquainted with it, whereas before he was made to be∣lieve by his Companions that he should be bountifully rewarded for that his good ser∣vice to the Catholick Cause, now percei∣ving that on the contrary his Death had been contrived by them, he thereupon freely confessed all that he knew concern∣ing that horrid Conspiracy, which before all the tortures of the rack could not force him unto. The truth of all this was attested by Mr William Perkins, an eminent Christian and Citizen of London to Dr Gouge, which Mr Perkins had it from the mouth of Mr Clement Cotton, that made our English Con∣cordance, who also had it from the Rela∣tion of Mr Pickering himself.
The Names of those that were first in this Treason and laboured in the Mine, were Robert Catesby, Robert Winter, Esquires; Thomas Percy, Thomas Winter, John Wright, Christopher Wright, Guy Fawkes, Gentlemen, and Bates, Catesbies man. Persons made acquainted with it, and Promoters of it, were Sir Everard Digby, Knight; Ambrose Rookwood, Francis Tresham, Esquires; John Grant, Gentleman; Robert Keyes. This prodigious contrivance did not on∣ly stupifie the whole Kingdom with con∣sternation and amazement, but Foreign Princes, at least, seemed to wonder at it also, and though (for the propagation of the Catholick cause) they might have Con∣science enough to wish that it had taken effect, yet they had policy enough to con∣gratulate the discoverers; and some of them, to take off the asperity of the sus∣pect, sweetned their expressions with ma∣ny rich gifts to our King and Queen. The Parliament by reason of the hurry occasioned hereby, met not till the ninth of November: at which time Henry Lord Mordant, and Edward Lord Sturton not coming to the Parliament according to their Writ of Summons, were suspected as
having knowledge of the Conspiracy; and so was the Earl of Northumberland, from some presumptions, and all three were Committed to the Tower. The two Ba∣rons after a while were redeemed by fine in Starchamber, but the Earl continued a Prisoner there for many years after. How the Parliament was affected for this great deliverance of the whole Kingdom from ruine and destruction, will appear by the Act which they made to have the fifth of November for ever solemnized with Publick Thanksgiving: wherein they im∣puted the discovery of the Treason to the inspiring the King with a divine spirit to interpret some dark Phrases of the Letter, above, and beyond all ordinary constructi∣on: they attainted also the blood of those Traytors that were executed, as also of those that were slain at Holbach-House, or that died in Prison: and the King being not unmindful of the Lord Monteagle, the first discoverer of this Treason, gave him, and his Heirs for ever, two hundred pounds a year in Fee-Farm Rents, and 500l a year besides, during his life, as a reward for his good service. But now to the Act it self.
An Act for a Publick Thanksgiving to Almighty God every year on the fifth of November. FOrasmuch as Almighty God hath in all Ages shewed his Power, and Mercy in the miraculous, and gracious deliverance of his Church; and in the protection of Religious Kings and States; and that no Nation of the Earth hath been blessed with greater benefits than this Kingdom now enjoyeth, having the true and free profession of the Gospel under our most Sovereign Lord King James, the most Great, Learned, and Religious King that ever reigned therein, enriched with a most hopeful and plentiful Progeny, proceeding out of his Royal Loyns, promising the continuance of this happiness, and profession to all Posterity: the which many malignant and Devillish Papists, Jesuits, and Seminary Priests, much envy∣ing, and fearing, conspired most horribly, when the Kings most Excellent Majesty, the Queen, the Prince, and all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, should have been Assembled in the Vpper House of Parliament, upon the fifth day of November in the year of our Lord 1605. suddenly to have blown up
the said House with Gunpowder; an inven∣tion so inhumane, barbarous, and cruel, as the like was never before heard of; and was (as some of the principal Conspirators confess) purposely devised, and concluded to be done in the said House, that, where sundry necessary and Religious Laws for preservation of the Church and State were made, which they falsly and slanderously term cruel Laws, enacted against them and their Religion; both place and per∣sons should be all destroyed and blown up at once, which would have turned to the utter ruine of this whole Kingdom, had it not pleased Almighty God, by inspiring the Kings most Excellent Majesty with a divine spirit, to interpret some dark phrases of a Letter shewed to his Majesty, above, and beyond all ordi∣nary construction, thereby miraculously disco∣vering this hidden Treason, not many hours before the appointed time for the Execution thereof. Therefore the Kings most Excellent Majesty, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and all his Majesties faithful and loving Subjects do most justly acknowledge this great and infinite blessing to have proceeded meerly from Gods great mercy, and to his most holy name do ascribe all Honour, Glory, and Praise. And to the end this unfeigned thankfulness
may never be forgotten, but be had in a per∣petual remembrance, that all Ages to come may yield praises to his Divine Majesty for the same, and have in memory this joyful day of de∣liverance. Be it therefore enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and by the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same: That all and singular Ministers in every Cathedral, and Parish Church, or other usual place for Common-Prayer, within this Realm of England, and the Dominions of the same, shall alwaies upon the fifth day of No∣vember say Morning Prayer, and give un∣to Almighty God thanks for this most happy deliverance; and that all and every person and persons inhabiting within this Realm of England, and the Dominions of the same, shall alwaies upon that day diligently and faithfully resort to the Parish Church or Chappel accustom∣ed, or to some usual Church or Chappel where the said Morning Prayer, Preaching, or other service of God shall be used, and then and there to abide orderly, and soberly, during the time of the said Prayer, Preaching, or other service of God, there to be used and mi∣nistred. And because all and every person may be
put in mind of this duty, and be the better prepared to the said holy service. Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that every Minister shall give warning to his Pa∣rishioners publickly in the Church at Morn∣ing Prayer the Sunday before every such fifth of November, for the due observation of the said day. And that after Morning Prayer or Preaching on the said fifth day of Novem∣ber, they read distinctly and plainly this pre∣sent Act.
Upon the Powder-Plot. OH Murtherous Plot! Posterity shall say, 'S Vnholyness o'reshoots Caligula. The Pope by this and such designs ('tis plain) Out-Babels Nimrod, and out-Butchers Cain. Monteagle's Letter was in dubious sence, And seem'd a piece of Stygian Eloquence: The Characters look'd just like conj'ring spells; For this bout Hell here spoke in Parables. The Popes and Devil's Signet were set to't, The Cloven Miter join'd to th' cloven foot. Thus were our Senates like to be betray'd, By a strange Egg in Peters Chair 'twas laid: For had the Serpent hatcht it, the device Had prov'd to us a bainful Cockatrice. But Fawkes his bafled hopes only bequeath, Instead of Comforts, thoughts of sudden death. Like Hamans Fate he only must aspire To the just advance of fifty Cubits higher. But couldst thou think thou monstrous Beast of Rome, To Massacre at one sad blow by Doom, And cast them down whom Heaven decreed to stand? Dark Lanthorns, whilst Truths Candlestick is here, Thy Purple Plots our Nation need not fear. The Beastly Whore may lay her Trump'ries by, Vntil our sins are of her purple-die.
A Narrative of the visible hand of God upon the Papists by the downfal in Black-Friers, Lon∣don, Anno Christi 1623. ON the Lords day, October the twen∣ty sixth according to the English account, but November the fifth according to the Popish account, went far and near, that one Drury a Romist Priest (a man of parts, and eminent gifts) would preach that day in the afternoon in a fair house in Black-Friers, London, whither all that would might freely come and hear him. Upon this report very many, Prote∣stants as well as Papists, Scholars as well as others, assembled thither about three a Clock in the Afternoon. That mansion house was now inhabited by the French Ambassador: and the Sermon was to be in a Garret, into which there were two pas∣sages: One out of the Ambassadors with∣drawing room which was private, the o∣ther more common without the great gate of the said mansion house.
Under this Garret was another large chamber which one Redyate, another Ro∣mish Priest, had hired for himself: Unto whom Papists frequently repaired to hear Mass, and make confessions. Under this room was the aforesaid withdrawing cham∣ber of the Ambassadors: supported with strong Arches of stone, being immediately over the entrance into the great house: And at the South-end of the Garret, and on the West-side thereof, there were bed-chambers, and Closets which other Priests had hired for themselves: The bed-cham∣ber at the South-end, was severed from the Garret only by a partition of Wains∣cote which was taken down for the Ser∣mon-time: The length of the Garret from North to South was almost 40 foot, the breadth about 16 foot: The two aforesaid passages met on one pair of stairs leading to the Garret which had only that one door leading into it. More came to this place than possibly it could hold, so that many for want of room returned back again: others went into the aforesaid Redyates chamber, and tarried with him. The whole Garret, rooms adjoy∣ning, door, and top of the stairs were as full as they could hold. In the Garret were set
chairs and stools for the better sort: most of the women sate on the floor, but most of the men stood thronged together: Inall, a∣bout 200 were there assembled. In the midst was a table and a chair for the Preacher. All things thus prepared, and the multi∣tude assembled, about three a clock the ex∣pected Preacher, having on a Surplice girt about his middle with a linnen girdle, and a tippet of Scarlet on both his shouldiers, came in, being attended by a man that brought after him his Book and Hour-glass. As soon as he came to the table, he kneel∣ed down with shew of private devotion for a little while: then rising up, and turning himself to the people, he crossed himself, took the book (which was said to be a Rhe∣mish Testament) out of his mans hands, and the hour-glass being set on the table, he o∣pened the book, read the Gospel appointed by the Romish Calender for that day, being the twenty first Sunday after Pentecost: The Gospel was in Mat. 18. 23, &c. The Text being read, he sate down, put on a red cap over a white linnen one turned up about the brims: He made no audible prayer, but having read his Text, which was the parable of forgiving debts, he spake some∣thing of the occasions of it, and then
propounded these three special points to be handled. 1. The debt we owe to God. 2. The mercy of God in forgiving it. 3. Mans unmercifulness to his brother. Having insisted some while on the mise∣ry of man by reason of the debt wherein he stands bound to God, he passed on to de∣clare the rich mercy of God, and the means which God hath afforded to his Church, for partaking thereof: Amongst which he rec∣koned up the Sacraments, and especially pressed the Sacrament of Penance, as they call it. When he had discoursed on these points about half an hour, on a sudden the floor whereon the preacher and the greatest part of his auditory were, fell down with such violence, as therewith the floor of the chamber under it where Redyate and his company were, was broken down with it, so that both the floors, with the beams, girders, joyces, boards, and feelings, with all the people on them, fell down toge∣ther upon the third floor, which was the floor of the French Ambassadors withdraw∣ing chamber, supported with strong arches as aforesaid. There being a partition on the South∣side
of the middle chamber which reached up to the floor of the Garret, which was at the Northwest corner. Hereupon some through amazement, would have leaped out at a window almost forty foot from the ground: but the people without, telling them of the certain danger if they leaped down, kept them from that desperate at∣tempt: At length by breaking a wall on the West side they discerned chambers adjoyn∣ing thereto, and so by creeping through that hole into the chambers, they were saved: So were all they that stood on the stair-head at the door leading into the Garret: For the stairs were without the room, and no∣thing fell but the floors, neither walls nor roof. Also amongst those that fell, many esca∣ped, for some of the timber rested with one end on the Walls, and with the other on the third floor that yielded not, and so both such as abode on those pieces, and such as were directly under them, were thereby preserved. Amongst the multitude that fell, there was a Minister who (through Gods providence) fell so between two pieces of timber, as that the timber kept his upper-parts from crushing: and holp him by his clasping about the timber to
pull out his feet from among the dead corpses. Amongst others, the present preservati∣on and future destruction of one Parker was very remarkable. This Parker was a factor for the English Seminaries, and Nuns be∣yond Sea, especially at Cambre; and he had so dealt with two of his brothers here, that he had got from one of them a son, and from the other a daughter, to send them to religious houses (as they falsly call them) beyond sea. This Parker at this time took his Nephew, a youth of about sixteen years old to the aforementioned fatal Conventi∣cle, where Drury preached: and both Parker and his Nephew fell with the rest: The youth there lost his life, but Parker himself escaped with a bruised body, being a cor∣pulent man: yet so far was he from making a good use of his deliverance, that with much discontent he wished he had died for his Nephew, saying, that God saw him not fit to die amongst such Martyrs. Many such Martyrs have been made at Tyburn for trea∣son: Such are Romes Martyrs. But the pre∣servation of the wicked, is but a reservation to future judgments; for about ten dayes after, as this Parker was shooting London-Bridge with his aforesaid Neece, whom he was
conveying beyond Sea, they were both cast away, and drowned in the Thames. Judge by this (O Parents) whether God is well pleased with disposing your Children to Popish education. Others there were that were pulled out alive, but so bruised, or so spent for want of breath, that some lived not many hours, others died not many days after. The floor of the chamber immediately over this, where the Corps lay, being fallen, there was no entrance into it but through the Ambassadours Bed-Chamber, the door whereof was closed up with the Timber of the floors that fell down; and the walls of this room were of stone, only there was one window in it with extraordinary strong cross barrs of Iron, so that though Smiths and other workmen were immediately sent for, yet it was more than an hour before succour could be afforded to them that were fallen down. Passage at length being made, I had ac∣cess into the room (saith Doctor Gouge, the relater of this story) and viewing the bo∣dies, observed some (yet but few to be mor∣tally wounded) or crushed by the Timber. Others to be apparently stifled, partly with their thick lying one upon another, and
partly with the dust that came from the feeling which fell down. On the Lords day at night when they fell they were numbred ninety one dead bo∣dies: but many of them were secretly con∣veyed away in the night, there being a pair of water-stairs leading from the Gar∣den appertaining to the House, into the Thames. On the morrow the Coroner and his Inquest coming to view the bodies found remaining but sixty three. Of those that were carried away some were buried in a burying place within the Spanish Ambassadors house in Holborn, a∣mongst whom the Lady Web was one, the Lady Blackstones Daughter another, and one Mistris Vdal a third: Master Stoker, and Master Bartholmew Bavin were buried in Brides Parish. Robert Sutton, John Loccham, and Abigail Holford in Andrews Holborn. Captain Summers wife in the vault under Black-Friers Church, and her woman in the Church-yard. For the Corps remain∣ing, two great Pits were digged, one in the fore Court of the said French Ambassa∣dors House eighteen foot long, and twelve foot broad; the other in the Garden be∣hind his House, Twelve foot long, and eight foot broad. In the former Pit were
laid forty four Corps, whereof the Bodies of the aforesaid Drury and Redyate were two. These two wound up in sheets, were first laid into the Pit, with a Partition of loose Earth to sever them from the rest. Then were others brought, some in some∣what a decent manner wound up in sheets, but the most in a most lamentable plight, the shirts only of the men tyed under the twists, and some linnen tyed about the mid∣dle of the Women, the rest of their Bodies naked, and one poor Man, or Woman ta∣king a Corps by the Head, another by the Feet tumbled them in, and so piled them up almost to the top of the Pit. The rest were put into the other Pit in the Gar∣den. Their manner of burial seemed almost as dismal, as the heap of them, when they lay upon the floor where they last fell▪ No ob∣sequies of funeral rites were used at their Burial. Only the day after, a black Cross of wood was set upon each Grave, but was soon by authority commanded to be taken down. When they were thus interred, thorough search was made about the cause of the fal∣ling of the Timber: The Timber of each floor was laid together, and the measure of
the Summers that brake was taken. The main Summer which crossed the Garret was ten Inches square: Two Girders were by Tenents, and Mortaises let into the middest of it, one just against another: the Summer was knotty where the Mortai∣ses were made, whereupon being over-bur∣dened, it knapped suddenly asunder in the middest. The main Summer of the other floor that fell was much stronger, being thirteen Inches square, strong and sound every where, neither did the Girders meet so just one against another; yet that also failed, not in the middest as the uppermost, but within five foot of one end, and that more shiveringly, and with a longer rent in the Timber than the other. For this Chamber was almost full with such persons as come∣ing too late, went into Redyates Chamber: Besides, it did not only bear the weight which lay on the upper floor, but received it with a sudden knock, and so the massie Timber shivered in two, and the people were irrecoverably, before they could fear any such thing, beaten down into the third floor, which was above twenty foot from the first. It's true we must not be rash in censu∣ring,
yet when we see judgments executed on Sinners, in the act of their sin, when they are impudent and presumptuous therein, not to acknowledge such to be judged by the Lord, is to wink against clear light, Psal. 9. 16. God is known by the judg∣ments which he executeth. Shall Nebuchad∣nezzar, while he is vaunting of his great Babylon, be bereft of his wits? Shall He∣rod, whilst he is priding himself in the flattering applause of the people, be eaten with Worms? Shall Haman, whilst he is practising to destroy all the people of God, be hanged on a Gallows fifty foot high which he had prepared for Morde∣cai? Shall the House where the Philistins met together to sport with Sampson, fall upon their heads? Shall these and such like judgments overtake men in the very act of their sin, and yet be accounted no judg∣ments, no evidences of Gods revenging Justice, or signs of his indignation? Truly then we may deny all providence, and at∣tribute all to chance: But add hereto, that this fell out upon their fifth of November, and it will be as clear as if written with a Sunbeam, that the Pit which they digged for others, they themselves fell into it.
Doctor Gouge, who relates this story in his Extent of Gods Providence, thus wri∣teth. I do the more confidently publish this History, because I was an eye-witness of ma∣ny of the things therein related; and heard from the mouths of such as were present at the Sermon, the rest. For upon the first hearing of the destruction of so many per∣sons as by that downfal lost their lives, our Constable presently caused the gates of our Precinct (it being surrounded with walls and gates) to be shut, and raised a strong guard from amongst the inhabitants, to keep the house where this accident fell out, and to prevent tumults about it. Thus through the favour of the Constables, and Watch, who were all my neighbours, I had the more free and quiet access to view the dead bodies, and to inform my self of all the material circumstances about that accident: which I did the rather because the Bishop of London that then was, sent to me to inform my self throughly of all the busi∣ness, and to send him a narration thereof under my hand; whereupon I did not on∣ly view matters my self, but caused Carpen∣ters to search the Timber, to take the mea∣sures both of the Timber and rooms. I was
also present with the Coroner and his In∣quest at their examining of all circumstances about the business. And the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury sending to me to come to him, and to bring with me the best evidence I could, I got the foreman of the Jury, and four persons that were present at the Ser∣mon, and fell down with the rest, but by God's providence escaped death, and one that stood without the door, within hearing, but fell not; all these I got to go along with me to Lambeth, where I heard the witness which they gave to the Arch∣bishop about this matter. One that fell with the rest, and escaped death, was Master Gee a Preacher in Lancashire; two others were a son and servant to a Citizen in Pa∣ter-Noster-Row: The rest were men of good understanding, able to apprehend what they saw and heard, and to relate what they conceived.
Books Printed for and are to be sold by John Hancock, at the Sign of the three Bibles in Popes-Head-Alley, in Cornhill. TWelve Books lately published by Mr. Thomas Brooks, late Preacher of the Gospel at Margaret New-fishstreet. 1. Precious Remedies against Sa∣tans Devices; or Salve for Believers and Unbelievers sores; being a Companion for those that are in Christ or out of Christ. 2. Heaven on Earth; or, A seri∣ous discourse touching a well groun∣ded assurance of mans everlasting happiness. 3. The unsearchable Riches of Christ, held forth in 22. Sermons. 4. Apples of Gold for Young Men and Women. 5. A string of Pearls; or, The best things reserved till last. 6. The Mute Christian under the Smarting Rod, with Soveraign An∣tidotes
against the most miserable Exigents. 7. An Ark for all Gods Noahs in a stormy day. 8. The Crown and Glory of Chri∣stianity, in 48. Sermons, on Heb. 12. 14. 9. The Privy Key of Heaven: or, A Discourse of Closet Prayer. 10. An Heavenly Cordial, for such as have had (or escaped) the Plague. 11. A Cabinet of choice Jewels; or, A Box of Precious Ointment. Containing special Maxims, Rules, and Directions, in order to the clearing up of a Mans Interest in Christ, and his title to all the Glory of another World. 12. Londons Lamentations touch∣ing the Fire. The Godly mans Ark, in several Sermons, to which is added Mr. Moors evidences for Heaven. By Ed∣mund Calamy, B. D. at Aldermanbury. Christs Communion with his Church
Militant, by Nicholas Lock yer. Sin the Plague of Plagues, by Mr. Ralph Venning. A True Narrative of those two never to be forgotten Deliverances, one from the Spanish Invasion in 88. the other from the Hellish Powder-Plot, November 5. 1605. by Mr. Sa∣muel Clark. With Qu. Eliz. Speech. The Accurate Accomptant; or, London Merchant. Being Instructi∣ons for keeping Merchants Ac∣compts. By Tho. Brown Accomptant. Short-writing, the most Easie, Ex∣act, Lineal, and Speedy Method that hath ever been obtained. By Theo∣philus Metcalfe. Also a Book called a Schoolmaster to it, Explaining all the Rules thereof. A Copy-Book of the newest and most useful hands. Bridges Remains: Being eight choice Sermons. By Mr. William Bridge of Yarmouth. Vennings Remains: Being the sub∣stance of many Sermons. By Mr. Ralph
Venning. On 1 John 2. 12, 13, 14. A Disswasive from Conformity to the World, together with a fare∣wel Sermon. By Henry Stubbs. Mr. Baxter's Poor Mans Family Book. Luther's 34. special and choice Sermons. Comae Berenices, or the Hairy Co∣met. The Young mans Conflict with, and Victory over the Devil, or the Expe∣riences of Tho. Powell, begun in the fifteenth and continued till the se¦venteenth year of his Age. Gospel Love, Heart, Purity, and the flourishing of the Righteous: Be∣ing the last Sermons of Mr. Joseph Caryl. A Word of Advice to Saints; or, A Choice drop of Honey from the Rock Christ. Mr. Mahews Legacy to his Chil∣dren, being full of good Counsel. A brief Description of New York. FINIS.
