C5358 R28567 10629807 45469
GREAT BRITAIN's COASTING-PILOT. The FIRST PART. Being a New and Exact SURVEY of the Sea-Coast OF ENGLAND, FROM THE RIVER of THAMES TO THE WESTWARD, WITH THE ISLANDS of SCILLY, And from thence to CARLILE. DESCRIBING All the Harbours, Rivers, Bays, Roads, Rocks, Sands, Buoys, Beacons, Sea-Marks, Depths of Water, Latitude, Bearings and Distances from Place to Place, the Setting and Flowing of Tydes, with Directions for the knowing of any Place; and how to Harbour a Ship in the same with Safety. With Directions for Coming into the CHANNEL between ENGLAND and FRANCE. By Captain GREENVILE COLLINS Hydrographer in Ordinary to the KING and QUEENS most Excellent Majesties. LONDON: Printed by Freeman Collins, and are to be Sold by Richard Mount Bookseller, at the Postern on Tower-Hill. 1693.
HONI SOIT QVI MALY PENSE IE MAIN TIENDRAY Great Britains Coasting Pylot BEING A NEW SURVEY OF THE Sea Coast By Capt. GREENVILE COLLINS HYDROGRAPHER to their MAJESTYS 1693. Sold by Richard Mount at the Postern on Great Towerhill LONDON
TO HIS SACRED MAJESTY WILLIAM III. OF Great Britain, France, and Ireland KING, THIS SURVEY of the Sea-Coast OF GREAT BRITAIN IS MOST HUMBLY DEDICATED and PRESENTED BY YOUR MAJESTY'S MOST FAITHFUL SUBJECT AND SERVANT, Greenvile Collins.
royal blazon or coat of arms W R M R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV MON DROIT William R. WILLIAM and MARY, by the Grace of God, King and Queen of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, &c.To all to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting. Whereas We are humbly Informed, That our Trusty and Welbeloved Servant, Captain Greenvile Collins, Our HYDO∣GRAPHER, hath for several Years past, with great Pains and Expence, made a Survey of the Sea-Coast, which will be of great Ʋse and Advantage for the Safety of Navigation, and now being about to publish the same, under the Title of GREAT BRITAIN'S COASTING PILOT, hath humbly besought Ʋs to grant him Our Royal Licence for the sole Printing and Publishing thereof, We have thought fit to condescend to that his Request, and We do accordingly hereby grant Our Royal Licence and Priviledge, unto the said Captain Greenvile Collins, his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, for the sole Printing and Pub∣lishing the aforesaid Survey, under the Name and Title of GREAT BRITAIN'S COASTING PILOT, as aforesaid, for the Term of Fourteen Years, to be Computed from the Day of the first setting forth of the same. And Our Royal Will and Pleasure is, and We do here∣by Require and Command, That during the said Term of Fourteen Years, no Person or Persons whatsoever, being our Subjects, do presume to Imprint, En∣grave, or Publish, or cause to be Imprinted, Engraven, or Published the same, or any part thereof, or to Epitomize the same, and Imprint, Engrave, or Publish it, or any part thereof under the same, or any other Title or Name whatsoever, or to sell the same, or to Import into our Kingdom of England,
any Copies thereof Imprinted in any Parts beyond the Seas, upon pain of the Loss and Forfeiture of all Copies so Imprinted, Sold or Imported, contrary to the Tenor of this our Royal Licence, and of such other Penalties, as the Laws and Statutes of this Our Realm will inflict, without the Knowledge Licence, and Consent of him the said Captain Greenvile Collins, his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns; And Our further Will and Pleasure, is, That the Master, Wardens, and Assistants of the Company of Stationers, in Our City of LONDON, do take due Notice hereof, and cause the same to be Entered in their Register; And that if Occasion requires, they be Aiding and Assisting unto the said Captain Greenvile Collins, his Executors, Ad∣ministrators or Assigns, in Searching for and Seizing any Plate or Plates, Print or Prints, or Copies, or Epitomies of the same, or any part thereof. Given at our Court at Kensington the 22th Day of February, 1691/2. in the Fourth Year of our Reign. By his MAJESTY's Command, SYDNEY.
The High and Mighty STATES of HOLLAND's PRIVILEDGE TO Captain Greenvile Collins 1692. DE Staten van Hollandt en Westvrieslandt: Doen te weten. Alsoo ons vertoont is by Greenvile Collins, Capiteyn van het Jaght van Sijne Koninglijke Majesteyt van Groot Brittagne, ende desselfs Hy∣drogrifus. Dat den Suppliant den tijd van twaelf jaren, naar den anderen met groote naar∣stigheyt, doende was geweest, om een Boeck van veelderhande Caarten te practiseren en op te stellen, van alle de Zeekusten, Eylanden, Havens, Landen, Ondiepten, ende verdere gelegen∣theden van de Zee ontrent Engelandt, Schotlandt en Yrlandt met den aankleven van dien, by hem geintituleert, De Nieuwe Piloot van Groot Brittagne, het welke veel bequamer en distinctelijker was, voor alle Schippers, Pilooten en Zeevarende Persoonen, dan voor henen; Dat den Suppliant daar toe veel moeyten en ko∣sten hadde aangewent, sijnde deselve ten reguarde van de voor∣gaande Caarten van de voorsz Zeekusten, een heel nieuw en klaar werk, noyt te voren soodanig gesien of uytgegeven, gelijk, uyt de voorsz Caarten oogenschijnlijk en klaar konde, gesien en aangewesen worden, sijnde den Suppliant van voor∣nemen, 't selve Caarte-Boek (onder Gods hulpe) binnen den tijt van ses Maanden eerstkomende te laten drucken en uytge∣ven, soo in Engelandt in die Taal, als alhier in onsen Lande in de Nederduytsche Tael, omme by de Zeevarende Persoonen al∣hier te Lande mede geemployeert te werden, als haar mede seer nodig sijnde: Derhalve keerde hy Suppliant hem tot Ons ootmoedelijk versoekende, dat wy hem Suppliant, sijne Erven en Nakomelingen, voor den tijd van 15 eerst achter een vol∣gende jaren geliefde te verlenen Octroy, comme in den voorn. onsen Lande alleen te mogen laten drucken, uytgeven en ver∣koopen, het voorsz Caarte-Boek, genaamt de Nieuwe Piloot van Groot Brittagne, in soodanige Talen, Formaet, en met sulke de∣scriptie, uytlegginde en Registers, als hem Suppliant goet duncken soude, en dat op seekere groote poene by ons tegens de Contraventeurs van dien te statueren, en hem daar van te
verleenen Octroy in debita forma. SOO IS'T; Dat wy de sake en't versoek voorsz overgemerckt hebbende ende genegen wesende ter bede van den Suppliant uyt onse rechte Wetens∣chap, Souvrayne Macht en Authoryteyt, den Suppliant, sijne Erven en Nakomelingen geconsenteert, geaccordeert ge∣octroyeert hebben consenteren, accorderen en octroyeren mits desen, dat hy geduerende den tijdt van vijftien eerst achter eenvolgende jaren, het voorsz Caarte-boek genaamt De Nieuwe Piloot van Groot Brittagne, binnen den voorn. onsen Lande alleen sal mogen laten drucken, uytgeven en verkoopen; verbiedende daarom allen ende eenen ygelijken het selve Caarte-boek in 't geheel ofte deel in eenigerhande formaet, en met sulke di∣scriptie, uytlegginge en Registers, en Talen, naar te drucken, ofte elders naargedrukt binnen den voorn. onsen Lande te brengen, uyt te geven ofte te verkoopen, op verbeurte van alle de naargedrukte, ingebrachte ofte verkochte Exemplaren, ende een boete van drie hondert guldens daar en boven te ver∣beuren, te appliceren een derde part voor den Officier die de calange doen sal, een derde part voor den armen der plaatse daar het casus voor vallen sal, en het resterende derde part voor den Suppliant. Ende dat hy gehouden sal zijn, een Ex∣emplaar van't voorsz Caarte-boek gebonden, en wel geconditi∣oneert te brengen in de Bibliotheeck van onse Universiteyt tot Leyden, ende daar af behoorlijkt te doenblijcken, op poene van het effect van desen te verliesen. Ende ten eyende den Sup∣pliant desen onsen Consente en Octroye moge genieten als naar behooren. Lasten wy allen en eenen ygelijken die 't aangaan mag, dat sy den Suppliant van den innehouden van desen, doen, laten, en gedogen, rustelijk, vredelijk en volkenomtlije genie∣ten en gebruyken, cesserende alle belet ter contrarie. Gedaan in den Hage onder onsen grooten Zegele, hier aan doen hangen den 28 Maart in 't Jaerons Heeren en Zaligmakers duysent ses hondert een-en t'negentigh. vt. A. HEINSIUS, Ter Ordonnantie vande Staten Simon van Beaumont.
TO THE MASTER, WARDENS and ASSISTANTS OF THE TRINITY-HOUSE OF Deptford-Strond. Right Honourable and Right Worshipful, WHEN first His Majesty King CHARLES the Second, was pleased to make Choice of me for Sur∣veying the Sea-Coast, I then, as in Duty bound (be∣ing a younger Brother) did acquaint you with it, and most humbly laid the Proposals before you; whereupon you were pleased not only to approve of them, but did most bountifully Advance towards the Charge of the WORK, which be∣ing now finished, with all Submission and Gratitude, I assume the boldness to present these Effects of my Seven Years Industry to your Protection and Patronage. If at any Time there should be made new Discoveries of any Rocks or Shelves, that are not yet known; or that Sands shall change their Situation (as often they do) I shall be ready by your Advice and Commands (by God's Blessing) to make a further Progress in this Survey. I could heartily wish that it might be so ordered by your Corporation, that all Masters of Ships, both using forreign and home Voyages, might be in∣couraged to bring you in their Journals, and a Person appointed to Inspect them, which would be a great Improvement of Navigation, by imparting their Observations and Discoveries of the true Form and Prospect of the Sea-Caost,
with all Harbours, Rivers, Bays, Islands, Creeks, Sands, and Rocks, and other dangerous Places, with the Settings and Flowings of Tydes, and Currants, with the Variation of the Compass; by which means, in a few years, we might have much more exact Sea-Charts and Maps; and for want of such a Method, we have lost many Excellent Discoveries, to the unaccountable loss of Navigation. And that those Persons that make and sell Sea-Charts and Maps, were not allowed to alter them upon the single Report of Mariners, but with your Approbation, by which means our Sea-Charts would be more Correct, and the common Scandal of their badness removed, that God may prosper all your Generous and Charitable Ʋndertakings; which that they may always succeed the greatest Advantage possible of all their Majesties Subjects, is the constant hearty Wish and Prayer of Your most humble and most obedient Servant and younger Brother, GREENVILE COLLINS. Deptford, Febr. 24. 1693.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER. To my Fellow Mariners of GREAT BRITAIN. GENTLEMEN, HIS most Excellent Majesty King CHARLES the Second, who was a great Lover of the Noble Art of NAVIGATION, finding that there were no Sea-Charts or Maps of these Kingdoms but what were Dutch, and Copies from them, and those very erroneous, his Majesty out of his great Zeal for the better Improvement of Navigation, was pleas'd in the Year 1681. to give me the Command of a Yatch for the making this Survey; in which Service I spent Seven years time. The Intent of this Survey is only to give Directions to Mariners to Sail alongst the Coast of Great Britain, and how to carry a Ship into any Harbour, River, Port, Road, Bay, or Creek with safety, and how to avoid all Dangers known. It sometimes happens, and that too frequently, that when Ships which have made long and dangerous Voyages, and are come home richly Laden, have been shipwrack't on their Native Coast, whereby both Merchants, Owners and Ma∣riners have been impoverish't. All our Neighbours will acknowledge that no Nation abounds more with skilful and experienced Seamen than our own, none meeting a Danger with more Courage or Bravery; none taking more Care, or use more Circumspection to prevent it, or are more laborious to overcome it: But we cannot expect that the Master and Mates of every Ship should be acquainted with all the Coasts and Harbours of Great Britain, into which they may be accidentally obliged to Enter. Sometimes it happens, that in long Voyages the Master and the most knowing Men die, and the Ship is brought into sight of Land by those who have skill enough to conduct the Ship at Sea, but are wholly un∣acquainted
with the Coasts and Harbours, or having but lit∣tle Knowledge, dare not trust to it; in such Cases, and to such Persons, this Survey will serve in the room of a Pilot. As many Ships are lost by Ignorance and Negligence, as by stress of Weather, so a Master of a Ship hath a very great Charge, and ought to be a sober Man, as well as a skilful Ma∣riner: All helps of Art, Care, and Circumspection are to be used by him, that the Lives of Mariners (the most useful of their Majesties Subjects at this Juncture) and the For∣tunes of honest Merchants under his Care, may be preser∣ved. To supply the Defects of which, I have been Employed by their Majesties Predecessors, and Encouraged by Inge∣nious and Noble Benefactors; and as I have hitherto made it my Business to make those true Figures of our Coasts and Harbours so to serve my Country, I shall not be wanting to give them such Additions and Amendments as I shall find hereafter needful: Wishing you always happy and successful Voyages, and safe Returns, with Prosperity to the Nation and its Forces by Sea and Land, that as we have been hitherto, so we may even be at home Soveraigns of the Seas, and Umpiers of the Differences betwixt our Neighbours abroad, which as it is every good man's Wish, so is it the constant hearty Prayer of GREENVILE COLLINS. ☞ Note that in the Year 1685 I found the Variation at   D M Edinbrough 6 00 Aberdeen 6 30 Cromertie Orkney Isles 7 00 Shetland Isles 1693 at Greenwich 6 30 Westerly The same throught England to a small matter which I advise all Seamen to allow in their Courses.
The NAMES of those Persons that Incouraged this WORK by Subscription, and Advancing money towards the Charge and Printing thereof for the Publick Good. KIng CHARLES the Second. King JAMES the Second. King WILLIAM the Third. Prince GEORGE. A. EArl of Arran, Scotland. Sir John Ashby Admiral of the Blew. Sir Samuel Astry, Glostershire. City of Aberdeen, Scotland. Mr. Thomas Alcock, Bristol. Mr. William Anguish, Purser in the Navy. Capt. Jonthan Andrews, Kenton-Park. B. DUKE of Beaufort. Earl of Berkley Vice-Admiral of the Blew. William Blathwaite Esq. Secretary of War. Arnold Browne Esq. Stepney. Sir John Barlow, Wales. John Boscauen Esq. Cornwall. Capt. James Bonnell, London. Thomas Baker Esq. Consul at Algier. Mr. John Bulfinch, Wapping. Capt. Robert Bristol. Capt. John Bowers, Rotheriff. Capt. William Bond, Rotheriff. Capt. Hopfor Bendall, Stepney. C. MArquess of Carmarthan. Earl of Clarendon. City of Chester. Capt. John Clements in the Navy. Sir John Clayton, Parsons-Green. Capt. Anthony Crow in the Navy. Mr. Robert Castell, Deptford. Sir Arthur Chichester, Devonshire. Capt. Thomas Cole in the Navy. Capt. James Conaway, Limehouse. Mr. John Colson, Goodmans-fields. Mr. Thomas Cullum, London. D. EArl of Darby. Earl of Danby. Lord Dartmouth. Trinity-House of Deptford Strond. William Davies Vice-Admiral of the Red. Sir Ralph Delaval Admiral. Edmund Dunmar Esq. Surveyor of the Navy. Mr. Robert Dawson, Greenwich. Capt. Robert Dorrell London. Mr. Samuel Deane, London. E. CIty of Edinbrough. Mr. Thomas Enys, Penrin. Capt. Benjamin England, Wapping. Walter Etrick, Sunderland. Capt. Thomas Ekins of Silly. F. JOhn Flamsteed M. R. Greenwich. Mr. Joseph Fownes Clerk of the Check Deptford. Capt. William Falsby in the Navy. Capt. John Frost, London. G. DUKE of Grafton. Capt. Christopher Gunman in the Navy. Sir Thomas Grantham, London. Mr. John Gayar, London. Sydney Codolphin Esq. Cornwall. Capt. Nicholas Goodridge, London. Capt. Charles Gibson, London. H. SIR Richard Haddock Comptroller of the Navy. Trinity-House, Hull. Town of Harwich. Capt. Thomas Hobson in the Navy. Capt. Thomas Harlow in the Navy. Mr. Peter Hallimore, Penrin. Mr. James Harle, Penrin. Mr. Benjamin Hatley, London. Capt. William Heath, Limehouse. Mr. Robert Henley, Bristoll. I. SIR Henry Johnson, Blackwall. Mr. Jeffry Jeffrys, London.
K. EArl of Kent. Sir Peter Killigrew, Cornwall. Henry Killigrew Admiral. Mr. James Kemp, Penrin. Mr. John Kent, London. Mr. Philip Keale, Penrin. Killingworth. L. Sir John Lowther Commissioner of the Ad∣miralty. Rowland Langherne Esq. Wales. Town of Liverpoole. Capt. Edward Ledger, London. William Lownds Esq. Westminster. Mr. Thomas Lane Merchant. Mr. Gyles Lytcot, London. M. EArl of Manchester. Sir Humphrey Mackworth, London. Capt. John Marr of Dundee. Capt. Thomas Monk in the Navy. Mr. Richard Mount Bookseller, London. Capt. Erby Montague, Westminster. N. DUKE of Norfolk. Sir Dudley North. Trinity-House, Newcastle. Mr. John Newman, Penrin. Sir Walter Norris, Penrin. John Nance Esq. Cornwall. Town of Newcastle. O. DUKE of Ormond. Sir Hugh Owen, Wales. Arthur Owen Esq. Wales. Capt. William Oxton, London. P. EARL of Portland. Hector Philips Esq. Wales. Sir Peter Pett, London. Capt. Peter Pickard in the Navy. Samuel Pett Esq. Battersey. Sir Philip Parker, Suffolk. Capt. Samuel Philips, London. Mr. Samuel Parke, Ipswich. Capt. Peter Paggon, London. Mr. James Pearla Jun. Westminster. R. SIR Richard Rooth, Kingsale Sir George Rooke Vice-Admiral Jonathan Rashley Esq. Cornwall Sir Robert Robinson in the Navy Colonel Jacob Richards John Romsey Esq. London Sir Paul Rycaut, London S. CHarles Sargison Esq. Commissioner of the Navy Sir Henry Shere Kt. Kent Sir Robert Southwell, Kings-weston Capt. Ralph Sanderson in the Navy Capt. George St. Lo in the Navy George Spry Esq. Cornwall John Sansom Esq. London James Sotherne Esq. Secretary of the Admi∣ralty Sir Cloudsley Shovel Admiral Mr. Nathaniel Symons, Yarmouth Joseph Saule Esq. Cornwall T. LOrd Viscount Torbet, Scotland Capt. Richard Travaion Sir Jonathan Trelawny Lord Bishop of Exon Capt. John Tyrrel in the Navy Sir Jos. Tredenham, Cornwall Mr. John Tucker, Westminster Mr. William Tregea, Cornwall Mr. Thomas Taylor, London V. JOhn Vivian Esq. Cornwall Henry Vincent Esq. Cornwall W. SIR Francis Wheeler in the Navy Colonel John Windham, Sarum Capt. Lawrence Wright in the Navy Sir Christopher Wandesford, Yorkshire Mr. Willnam Worth, Penrin Mr. Thomas Worth, Penrin Sir William Williams, Wales Mr. Thomas Weedon, London Capt. William Wright in the Navy Mr. Reeve Williams, London Capt. Thomas Warren, London Capt. Andrew Wardlow, Rotheriff Y. EARL of Yarmouth Mr. Robert Yates, Bristol Town of Yarmouth
GREAT BRITAINS COASTING PILOT. The Explanation of some Marks in the Sea-Charts. 4/1 THE Depths of Wa∣ter are all put down at Low-water on Spring Tydes, as you may see in the Chart going into Foy, Num∣ber 17. there you will find that the least water going into that place is three Fathom. But where you find a Line drawn between two Figures, as in the Margent, which is used no where but at such places as there is not three Fathom at Low-water. As for Example; At the going into Rye, as you may see in the Chart, Number 8. there on the Bar you find the Figure 4 above the Line, which sheweth that there is four Fathom at High-water: Then under the Line there is the figure 1, which sheweth that there is but one Fathom at Low-water on a Spring Tide. 18/6f But for more exactness, the depths of water on some Bars, where there is but little water, there the depths are set down in Feet at High and Low-water; and to be known from Fathoms, there is the Letter f plac'd by them, as in the Margent, as you may see in the Chart going into Exmouth, Number 14. there you find, as in the Mar∣gent, that there is 18 foot at High-water, and 6 foot at Low-water. ☽ Where you shall see a Half-moon, as in the Margent, plac'd by or on any Rock or Sand, it signifieth that such a Rock or Sand is to be seen at the Half-tide; that is, from half Ebb to half Flood, as you may see in the Chart of Falmouth, Numb. 18. There is a Rock in the Harbours mouth, call'd Falmouth Rock, and hath a Pole on it to shew where it is overflowed, and by it you will see a Half-moon. → Where you shall see an Arrow, as in the Margent, it sheweth that the Tide of Flood, or part of it, running the same way the Ar∣row pointeth, as you may see in the Chart of the Isle of Wight and Chester-Bar. It may be expected that I should have given Directions for Sailing from the River of Thames over the Flats into the Downs; and likewise from the River Thames down the Swin and the King's Channel, and so into the Downs: But upon consideration that these Places are under the Care of Pi∣lots, and for the constant supply of them, the Trinity-House of Deptford Strond have taken care that there be a sufficient number of them, both for great and small Ships, I have put the Sands down in the Sand-Chart from the Thames into the Downs, and from the Thames to the Buoy of the Gunfleet, as they were most carefully surveyed by Trinity-House, and all the rest of the Charts is my own Survey. Directions to Sail from the Downs to the Westward. Dunginness. FRom the South Foreland to Dunginness, the Course South west by south six Leagues. Dunginness is a low Beachy-point, on which is a Light-house; this place is very bold, you may keep within nine and ten
Fathom of it close by the shoar. There is good Anchoring on the East side with a westerly wind, if the wind be contrary, and that you should turn to windward from Dover to the Ness, there lieth a Sand called the RiprapRiprap. in the Midway between Dover and the French shoar. The shoalest part of it beareth from Dover south, and south by east, and from Calis Cliffs west by south. It lyeth in length North east and south west, both ends pointing the English Coast in length about four Leagues, but very nar∣row; there is on it at Low-water fifteen foot. There lieth another small Sand be∣tween this and Dover, called the Gunman-Sand, where is but twelve foot at Low-water, and lieth from the South Foreland South about five or six miles, and is not above two miles over; it lieth North east and South west; you have five and six Fa∣them close to it all round, and twenty Fa∣thom between it and the Riprap. Rye. To the westward of Dunginness lieth Rye Harbour; it is a Bar-place, but the water riseth three and four Fathom. On the east side, going in, there are two white Beacons on the Beach, which you keep together till you bring the Leadings Marks together, then run in. When you are in the Harbour you will have no less than fifteen and sixteen foot at Low-water, as you may see in the Chart, Number 8. where the going in is so plainly demonstrated, that you need have no other Directions. As you Sail from Rye to Beachy, keep not near the shoar, when you come thwart of Pemsey;Pemsey Shoal. for there lieth a small Stone-bank on which is but eleven and twelve foot at Low-water. The Mark for it is Beachy North west, and Pemsey Castle North half east. Beachy-Head. From Dunginness to Beachy-Head the Course is West south west about nine Leagues. Beachy is a high steep white Chalk Cliff: To the westward of which lieth the seven white Chalkey Cliffs, called the Seven Cliffs,Seven Cliffs. and are very remarkable. Some say there lieth a Shoal right off of Beachy-Head, but I could not find it; however, it may be a small Spot, and hard to find, therefore the best way is not to come too near it. Cuckmore Haven. Cuckmore Haven lieth four miles to the westward of Beachy-Head, and is a Bar Har∣bour, not having above six foot at Low-water, and thirteen and fourteen at High-water. When you are in, you lie dry at Low-water. This place sometimes by storms is stopt up with the Beach, and by great Land-floods is opened again. New-Haven. New-Haven is another small Bar-place, and lieth eight or nine miles to the westward of Beachy, only fit for small Vessels. Shorum. Shorum lieth between six and seven Leagues to the westward of Beachy, and is a Bar-place; but better than Cuckmore and New-Haven: The Bar often shifts. There are Beacons to run in by: when you are in, there is nine foot at Low-water. Here are many good Ships built. Bright-Hempston. Bright-Hempston is a Town that standeth by the Sea-side on a Beach. There are ma∣ny Vessels belong to it, which they heap up with Crabs on the dry Beach. This place lieth four miles to the eastward of Shorum. Arundel. Arundel lieth ten Leagues to the west∣ward of Beachy, and four short Leagues to the westward of Shorum, and is a Tide-Haven: where at High-water and Half-flood Ships go in, keeping the West-side aboard; and being in, may there ride afloat. I might have said more of these Bar-Harbours, but I leave it to Coasters, and do not recommend it to Strangers, they being Harbours of little Trade or Resort. East-barrow-heads. From Beachy to the Isle of Wight the Course is West south west eighteen Leagues. When you Sail from Beachy to the Isle of Wight, you must have a great care of the East-barrow-heads and the Owers; which lye seven Leagues to the Eastward of the Isle of Wight, and four Leagues from the shoar. The East barrow-head lieth from Arundel
south by west four Leagues, on which is but ten foot at Low-water, and is about three miles in length south and north, and about two miles broad east and west. A mile north by east from this Bank lieth ano∣ther shoal called the Little East-barrow-head, and is about two miles in length north and south, and a mile broad, having but nine foot at Low-water, and beareth north west from Chichester Church-Spire, and two miles to the northward of these lye a small parcel of Rocks, call'd Kingman-Rocks, and lye four miles south by west from the going into Arundel. You have five Fathom between them and the shoar. Owers. The Owers lye south south east from Chi∣chester Spire, and four Leagues from the shoar, and about four long Leagues or five Leagues east from Bendridge Point on the Isle of Wight; there length is north east and south west, about three Leagues, and about three miles broad in the middle, and narrow at each end, and dry at Low-water. There lieth another shoal on the inside of this, the north end of it dries at Low-water: Be∣tween which and the shoar is another Shoal lying in length as the Owers do, called the Mixens, and lieth from Selsey Point about two miles south. There is a Channel between the Owers and the Mixens, but it being of no use but to those that are very well ac∣quainted, I will not give any Directions to Sail through them, nor within them. There lye some other Banks within them, which I forbear to speak of them. The only and chief end of my business is to give good Directions how to avoid these shoals, that have proved so fatal to many Ships. There are very good Marks to avoid them, if you keep Dunnose west, you run a good brith without them; there is twelve Fathom wa∣ter close to them; keep in eighteen Fathom and you will not be in any danger of them.How Ships are lost on the Ow∣ers. The great reason why so many Ships have fallen in on these Shoals, is the great In∣draught of the Tide setting strong into St. Helens eight hours or more; the latter part of the Flood sets into St. Helens. My ad∣vice is, That when you are near this place in the night time, or thick weather, to be very careful, and keep your Lead well: In little Wind or Calms you shall be drawn in here to admiration, by the strong In∣draught, which if you find, Anchor in time. Chichester. To the eastward of the Owers is the going into Chichester, and very difficult; therefore I advise none but them that are acquainted to go in there without a Pilot. Directions for Sailing into the East end of the Isle of Wight, called St. Helens. COming from the Eastward, come no nearer the Owers then eighteen Fa∣thom water, and keep the Culver Cliff or Swan Cliff west north west, which is a high steep white Chalkey Cliff, as you may see in the making of the Lands, Number 35. and is two miles from Benbridge Point, which is the eastermost Point of the Island. Being come within a League of the Swan Cliff, or thereabouts, then steer in for St. Helens, and have a care of the Spit that lieth away to the eastward from Benbridge Point; when the Swan Cliff is hid behind Benbridge Point, then are you within it, as you may see in the Chart, Number 9. you may run over this Spit in five and 6 Fathom water. If you will Anchor in St. Helens Road,St. Helens Road. bring St. Helens Church west south west, and An∣chor in five, six, seven, or eight Fathom water. There is a small Owsey Bank in St. Helens Bay, which hath but fourteen foot at Low-water on it, and is called the Warner, which beareth N. E. from St. Helens Church. Being in St. Helens Road, and that you would go in for the Spithead, you will see a leading Mark, which is Gilkicker, a white Tower by the Sea-side and Stoke-Church, one in the other; but the best of the Chan∣nel, between the Horse and Nomans Land, is to keep the said Church just open to the southward of Gilkicker, and Anchor at the Spithead,Spithead. bring the small Village called Ryde by the Sea-side on the Isle of Wight to bear west south west, and Gilkicker north west, then you may Anchor in the best of the Road, at the Spithead,To An∣chor at the Spit∣head. which is a very good Road, and clean Ground, where the Royal Navy many times ride. The HorseMarks for the Horse. is hard Ground, and in some places not above seven foot water at Low-water; when the great white Patch on Portsmouth Down is on south Sea-Castle, then are you within it; keep Portsmouth Church-steeple on a small Re∣doubt which is like a Dove-house, and standeth on the East-side of Portsmouth: these two in one will carry you close by the
Horse in five and six Fathom water. The eastward part of this great Bank is called the Dean.Dean. When the Wind-mill on the Isle of Wight beareth south west by west, then are you abreast the Buoy of the Horse. Nomans Land. The Thwart-Mark for the Spit of Nomans Land,Nomans Land. is to bring the Wind-mill on the Isle of Wight between the south west and the south west by west, then will the said Mill be just over a square Field by the Water-side; which said Mill, if you keep sight of it, will carry you clear of Nomans Land; but if the Mill is hid by the Land, then will you run aground on the said Spit. This Mark will carry you up into Cowes Road: But for Anchoring in Stoaks-Bay, going up into Hamton water, or to Sail up to Yarmouth, I refer you to the Chart, which is so plain, that there needs no Directions. If you have occasion to turn from St. HelensWhento turn in∣to St. He∣lens. into the Spithead, have a care of Nomans Land, which is steep too; you will have twelve Fathom, and next Cast a shoar; but on the Horse you may stand into eight or nine Fathom, and turn the Church a little open of each side of Gilkicker. There are several other Marks in the Chart, which I refer you to, that I will not mention, as being needless. All within the Isle of Wight is good safe Anchoring. Being in Yarmouth Road, and that you would Sail out of the Needles,How to Sail out of the Needles. steer away for Hurst Castle, which place is very steep; being past the Castle, steer away for the Needles, which are sharp white Rocks; gi∣ving a birth to some Rocks that lye off from the Island side, in the fair way between the Castle and the Needles, you must keep close to the Needles. The Tyde of Ebb setteth on the Shingles, which are hard Stones. The Flood setteth on the Needles. To Sail into the Needles;How to Sail into the Nee∣dles. you will know the going in by the high white Land which is the west end of the Isle of Wight; run boldly in with the Land, till you see the NeedleYou may Sail with∣in a Ships length of the Nee∣dles. Rocks, and then keep close to them, observing the Tydes, as in the Directions coming out. Note, that there is a strong Indraught that sets in at the Needles,Indraught into the Needles. and into Pool; which Indraught hath hauld ma∣ny Ships into Fresh-water Bay. But I think it, and I am very sure, that no Ship can run ashoar in Fresh-water Bay, if they did but mind the Lead; the neglect of which hath been the loss of many Ship. Keep in five and twenty and thirty Fathom water, and you need not fear the Indraught of the Wight. Christ-Church. Christ-ChurchChrist Church. is a Bar-place, where small Vessels run in at High-water. This place lieth seven miles to the westward of Hurst Castle. Pool. PoolPool. is a Bar-Haven, and lyeth five Leagues to the westward of the Needles, or Isle of Wight, where Ships Sail in with a High-tyde. There is good Anchoring in Studland-Bay,Studland Bay. which lieth between the En∣trance of Pool Haven and Studland Point; and Sandwich-Bay lyeth between Studland Point and Peverly Point, where is good Anchoring for westerly Winds. I have not as yet survey'd Pool Harbour, but 'tis intend∣ed God-willing. From Peverly Point to the westward the Land is high, and is called the High-land of St. Albans. About two Leagues or more to the westward of Peverly PointFoul Ground & Shoal-water between Peverly Point and Way∣mouth. is Kem∣bridge Ledge, and lyeth off from the shoar south by east into the Sea a mile and half off, and hath at that distance but six foot at Low-water, and three quarters of a mile off thir∣teen foot, and a mile off four Fathom. There is another Ledge that lyeth right off from St. Albans-head, about three quarters of a mile off shoar, and hath but twelve foot at Low-water, and lyeth between Kem∣bredge Ledge and Peverly Point. Lulworth. Four Leagues to the westward of Peverly Point is a small Cove called Lulworth,Lulworth. where small Vessels may Ride. Portland Road. Portland RoadPrtand Rad. is a most excellent good Road for westerly and southerly Winds, very good holding clear Ground. As you Sail into Portland Road, you must have a care of a Shoal called the Shambles,Shambles which hath but fourteen foot water at Low-water, as you may see in the Draught of Portland, Num∣ber 12. Bring Waymouth Castle just on the eastward part of Portland, and that will bring you just on the edge of it in three Fathom and a half; then will the Bill of
Portland bear west by north: But if you keep the said Castle and Point a Sails breadth open, it will carry you clear. You may Anchor in Portland Road from five Fathom to ten Fathom, bringing the eastward part of Portland to bear south and south by east, and south south east. You may Sail close by the Land of Portland from the Bill into the Road. Waymouth. WaymouthWaymouth is a Bar-Haven, where at Low-water there is but six foot, and the Tydes rise but six and seven foot on a Spring; within the Bar is a small Hole, where there is nine foot at Low-water: and those Vessels that lye by the Keys before the Town, lye dry at Low-water. There is good Riding in Way∣mouth Road. Race of Portland. The Race of PortlandRace of Portland. is a great Ripling of the Tydes, caused by the unevenness of the Ground at the bottom, called Overfalls; and when the Sea is high, and the Tydes strong, it breaketh in great Seas, and one that is a stranger would think that there were shoal-water. This Ripling or Race beginneth a mile to the westward of the Bill, about a mile and a half or two mile off; and runneth to the eastward as far as St. Albans. There is good Anchoring to the westward of Portland for easterly Winds. Lime. Lime,Lime. a small Peer called Lime-Cobb, where Vessels lye aground at Low-water. This Place lyeth six or seven Leagues to the west∣ward of Portland. Exmouth-Bar. Exmouth-BarExmouth. lyeth fifteen Leagues to the westward of Portland, and three or four Leagues to the northward of Torbay; the going into this Place is very narrow, having Rocks on the east side, and Sand on the west side. At Low-water there is but six and seven foot on the Bar; but at High-water sixteen and eighteen foot water. Here are always Pilots ready to come off; and I advise no man to venter into that Place without a Pilot. Being over the Bar, there is a Place called Star-Cross,Star Cross. where Ships commonly ride afloat in ten and twelve foot at Low-water. But such Ships as go up to the Town of Top∣shamTopsham. lye aground at Low-water, from whence their Goods is carried up in Lighters through Sluces to the City of Exon.Exon. Tinmouth. TinmouthTinmouth. lyeth between Torbay and Ex∣mouth, and is a Tyde-Haven where small Vessels use; and had formerly a great Trade to Newfoundland. Torbay. TorbayTorbay. is a large Place, very good and clear ground to Anchor in, especially for westerly and southerly Winds, provided they be not to the eastward of the South. You may Anchor so far, as to bring the Ber∣ry south south east. Here are two Peers in this Bay where small Vessels lye aground, Brixham on the south side, and Tarkey on the north side. Here the Royal Navy rides in safety. Dartmouth. DartmouthDart∣mouth. lyeth two Leagues to the west∣ward of the Berry or Torbay; the going in is very narrow between two high Lands; in the narrow it is but just a Cables length o∣ver. On the west side is a Castle, and on the east side a Block-house. The going in and out at this Place is very dangerous, ex∣cept the Wind blow right in, which are sou∣therly Winds: for if the winds be either easterly or westerly, then the high Lands which lye off each side, cause Overflows and Calms, sometimes blowing in, and presently right out again, which hinders a Ship in turn∣ing in and out, by putting them astays un∣awares. There are always Boats ready to come off, which are good Boats to row, and are called Two-boats, and are very serviceable in towing ships in and out, and to tow them a-stays; without which Boats it is very dan∣gerous going in and out. The northerly Winds blow right out, and the southerly Winds right in; but the easterly and wester∣ly Winds blow with Flaws and Calms in and out. Being in, it is a most excellent good Harbour, and can contain the Navy Royal. There is good Anchoring without the Har∣bours mouth in the Road, called Dartmouth-Range.Dart∣mouth Range. From Darmouth to the StartStart. there is a Bay, and the shoar bould, only there lyeth a small Rock half a mile or more off of the Start. The Start is a low ragged Point ri∣sing from the Sea high into the Land. From the Start to the PraulPraul. the Course is west north west, about a little League; and
from the Praul to the Boulthead west north west, two miles. Between these two Heads is the going into Salcomb,Salcomb. which is a Bar-Harbour, on which there is nine foot at Low-water, and four Fathom at High-water, and more. Being in, there is very good Anchor∣ing in the Bagg at three, four, and five Fa∣thom water at Low-water. The Boulthead is very high Land. The Entrance into Sal∣comb is very narrow between the Old Castle and the Black Stone, being not above three quarters of a Cables length over, as you may see in the Chart, Number 6. The Block Stone showeth at Low-water, or the last quarter Ebb. It floweth here at Full and Change at six of the Clock. Plymouth. PlymouthPlmouth. lyeth between the Start and Ramhead, where is a large Sound, called Plymouth Sound,Plymouth Sound. and lyeth a mile to the east∣ward of the Ramhead. Here is a sunk Rock in the Sound, called the Shovel, where is but sixteen foot water at Low-water, as you may see in the Chart of Plymouth, Num∣ber 16. the west side of it is the best sailing in. The common MarkMarks to Anchor in the Sound. for to Anchor in the best Ground in the Sound, is to bring Mount Edgcom-house just open, and Withy-hedge right up and down, as you may see in the Chart on the east side. There lyeth another Rock near the Shagstone, called the Tinkers-shears or Swiftsure, and hath seventeen foot at Low-water. Catwater. CatwaterCatwater. is a good Place, where Ships ride that are bound to the westward; going in, there lyeth a Buoy against Mount Batten; you Sail in close by the west side of rhe Buoy: Being in, you must haul out a good Anchor well over to Mount Batten side; for want of so doing many Ships have drove ashoar on Catdown side. There is a Place within the Cittadel and Barbigan, called Sutton Pool,Sutton-Pool. where Ships lye aground on soft Oaze at Low-water, by the Keys side before the Town of Plymouth. Ham-Oaze. Ham-Oaze.Ham-Oaze. is a Place where Ships ride that are bound to the eastward. To Sail into Ham-Oaze, you must give the Island a great birth, keeping in the fair way between the Island and Mount Batten, till you have open∣ed Mount Edgcomb within the Island; then stand away with Mount Edgcomb between the Island and the Main, giving a birth to German-Rock, which lyeth on the Starboard side going into the Narrow. You must have a care that you do not go in here when the Tyde of Ebb is made strong out, for it will set your Ship ashoar on Mount Edgcomb side. There lyeth a Ledge off from Passage-Point going into Ham-Oaze, of which you must have a care: being in, you may Anchor where you please. Just above Froward-Point is a most excellent Dock and Yard,Kings-Dock. built for the use of the Navy. Ships may Anchor betwen the Island and the main Close under the Island. Yalme-waterYalme-water. is a place where is two and three Fathom water at Low-water, but very seldom made use of; it floweth here at Full and Change east by north. Eddy-stone. The Eddy-stoneEddy-stone lyeth south south west from Plymouth-Sound; the north west part of it is above water (at a high Spring-tyde) a∣bout six or seven foot high; the north west side is bold and steep, but the south south east part of it is foul about half a mile at Low-water; there are several Rocks show themselves above water. This Rock lyeth from the Start west a little southerly, and from Ram-head south by west. A little we∣sterly, about three Leagues or rather more from Ram-head, you have twenty Fathom water close by Ram-head; and between the Head and the Eddy-stone thirty five and thirty six Fathom water; and in the Stream of the Eddy-stone forty Fathom. Keep without for∣ty Fathom water, and you cannot come foul of the Eddy-stone. It is High-water here at the Stone when it is High-water at Ply∣mouth; from the Start to the Lizard in the Offing, it floweth half Tyde,Half-tyde that is, south east by east: It is half Flood at Plymouth be∣fore the Flood getteth to the eastward in the Offing. Loo. East and West-LooLoo. are two small Towns, which lye three Leagues to the westward of Ram-head; you may know the Place by a high Island that lyeth a little to the westward of the going in to the Harbour, which is a Bar, where are many small Vessels and Fisher-boats, which lye dry at Low-water: you have at High-water commonly ten foot going in; you may Anchor before the Town in a wild Road.
Directions for Sailing into Fowey or Foy. FOY lyeth four Leagues north east from the Deadman, and two miles to the westward of a great Bay called St. Blazey-Bay, Predmouth-Point being the west side of the Bay. There lyeth a Ledge of Rocks south east about half a mile from the said Point, called the Canneys, and shew them∣selves above water at half-Tyde: there is but seven and eight foot water within them at Low-water. From these Rocks to the going into Foy the shoar is bold. Keep the Deadman without the Winhead-Rock, and it will carry you clear off the Canneys. Foy. FoyFoy. may be very easily known, lying in between two high Lands; on the west side the going in, is an old Church and Castle, and on the east side the Ruins of an old Church, as you may see by the making of it in the Draught of Foy, Number 17. The going in is a Cables length over from side to side, and no danger; when you are in, you may Anchor before the Town, or run up above the Town. In the time of the Dutch War, in the Year 1666. there was above sixty Sail of Virginia Ships put into this Harbour. This Place lyeth north east and south west in and out, which makes it a better Outlet to the westward then Ply∣mouth or Falmouth. And whereas it hath been reported to be a Bar-Harbour, and that you cannot enter till half Tyde, I do assure you that there is no less than three Fathom at Low-water at a Spring-tyde: here you may lye ashoar to Wash, Tallow, stop Leeks. The Spring-tides rise and fall six∣teen and seventeen foot; and it is High-water here at Full and Change half an hour past five. There is good Anchoring in the Road without the Harbour, from five to ten Fathom water, but without that Depth foul Ground. Deadman. The DeadmanDeadman. is a high Bluff-head, and lyeth south west four Leagues from Foy, and north east by east seven Leagues from the Lizard, and three Leagues from Falmouth. North east from the Deadman lyeth a big Rock above water, called the Winhead-Rock,Winhead-Rock. and lyeth three miles from the Deadman, and a mile from the nearest shoar. Small Vessels that are well acquainted Sail within this Rock. St. Blazey-Bay. Between the Deadman and Predmouth-Point,St. Blazey-Bay. by the going into Foy, is a large deep sandy Bay, called St. Blazey-Bay. From the Deadman to Falmouth the Coast is bold; and close by the shoar, between the Deadman and Falmouth, lyeth a Rock above water, called the Gull-Rock. Directions for to Sail into Falmouth Harbour. FalmouthFalmouth. lyeth between the Lizard and the Deadman, and may very well be known by Pendennis Castle, which standeth on a Hill on the west side of the Harbours mouth, as you may see by the making of it, in the Draught of Falmouth, Numb 18. There is a Rock which lyeth in the Har∣bours mouth, and lyeth nearer the west shoar than the east shoar; this Rock is cal∣led Falmouth-Rock,Falmouth-Rock. and sheweth it self a∣bove water at half-Tyde; there is a Pole plac'd on it, to shew where it lyeth when it is under water. You may Sail in and out of either side of this Rock; the east side is the best. Being past the Rock, and that you would Anchor in Carreck-Road,Carreck-Road. which is the Place where great Ships ride, you may Sail up in the fair way, keeping your Lead; for there is a narrow deep Channel which hath eighteen Fathom water all the way up to Carreck-Road; you may borrow on St. Mawes side in five and six Fathom water: the west side is shoal. Being past about St. Mawes Castle, there lyeth off from the east shoar a sandy Bank, and is very steep too, and lyeth almost half Channel over from the east shoar. The best Anchoring in Carreck-Road is to bring St. Mawes-Castle east north east, laying your eastward An∣chor in eighteen Fathom, and your west∣ward Anchor in four and five Fathom, as you think convenient. But if you would Sail up in St. Just-Pool, which is the best Place in all the Harbour, then keep near the west shoar, or Trefusis-Land, and then stand over into St. Just-Pool, between St. Mawes Sand and the middle; you may run up by your Lead, borrowing on either side no nearer then six Fathom water more or
less, according to the bigness of your Ship. Note that you are not so ready to Sail from St. Just, as you are from Barreck-Road. From St. Just-Pool you may Sail to Tur∣ner-ware Point, keeping close by the east shoar, where you will have two Fathom at Low-water, and five at High-water. Being come up to the Point of Turner-ware, give the Point a distance to avoid a Shoal that lyeth off from it: being above the said Point, you many Anchor any where be∣tween Turner-ware and Mopass in great safe∣ty: but such Vessels as go up to TruroTruro. take the Tyde, and there lye dry at Low-water. You may lay up a great Fleet of great Ships between Turner-ware and Mopass. If you will Anchor before the Town of Falmouth,To an∣chor be∣fore the Town of Falmouth. and that your Ship draweth a∣bove twelve foot water, you must not go over the Bar at Low-water (which lyeth between Trefuses-land and Pendens) but must take the Tyde with you, and Ancho before the Town. Against the Rock is three Fathom at Low-water, and above and below it there is two Fathom and a half  Low-water. Those Vessels that go up  Penr must take the Tyde, where at Low-water they lye dry by the Keys side. If any Ships have occasion to haul ashoar to wash, tallow, stop leaks, or load or un∣load Goods, Sir Peter Killigrew hath been at very great Charges in building a very good,A good place to load or unload. convenient and safe Mole or Peer, where are Keys with Cranes, and good Store-houses or Ware-houses, to load or unload Goods, the Ships lying by the Keys side close by the Store-house. Many Virginia Ships have here unloaded their Tobacco, and is very convenient for that purpose. The Tydes rise and fall here at a Spring Tyde eighteen and tweenty foot, and twelve and fourteen at a Nep-tyde. It floweth here at Full and Change five hours and a half. There is a small Place called St. Mawes-Road,St. Mawes Road. where small Vessels ride before St. Mawes Town in two and three Fathom at Low-water. Manacles. Manacles.In sailing in and out at this Place, and that you come from the westward, or are bound to the westward, you must have a care of the Manacle-Rocks which lye south by west from the mouth of Falmouth Har∣bour two Leagues, some of them lye above water, and some under water, and lye a∣bout three miles east away from the Land into the Sea. You may Sail out of Fal∣mouth to carry your self clear of them south by east; but with the Tyde of Ebb you must steer south south east, and south east by south. Helford. HelfordHelford. lyeth between Falmouth and the Manacles, it is an open Sound and lyeth west in: as you Sail in and out keep in the fair way, but more to the south shoar than the north, the north being foul Ground some distance off. Being in, you may bring Maunan Church N. N. W. or N. W. and anchor in three Fathom and a half at low-water, and two Fathom, according as your Ship is big. A little to the eastward of Helford Town lyeth a Bar, the best of it is by the south shoar, where is nine foot at low-water, and the same depth before the Town, where small Vessels lye. The going in to this Place may very well be known by Maunan Church, which stand∣eth on a Hill on the north side, as you may see in the Draught of Falmouth, &c. Right off from the Point of the Lizard lyeth a parcel of steeped Rocks above water,Staggs Lizard. called the Staggs; they lye off south from the shoar into the Sea, about a short mile off; they are steep too: you shall have twelve Fathom close to them. Directions for Sailing into Mounts-Bay. MOunts-BayMounts-Bay. lyeth north west from the Lizard six Leagues, and three Leagues from the Lands end. On the east side of Mounts-Bay is a high pecked Island, called the Mount, on the top of which is an old Castle, and on the north west side of the Mount is a small Peer, where small Vessels lye aground at low-water, and lyeth from the Main about a quarter of a mile: you go over dry at low-water. Eglandkey. EglandkeyEglandkey. are a parcel of sunk Rocks, which lye south east about two or three miles from the Mount, and about a mile from the west shoar; there is not above eight or nine foot on them at low-water. Pensance. In the north west of this Bay is a small Pensance.
Peer, called Pensance, where small Vessels lye aground at low-water. Govers-Lake. On the west side of Mounts-Bay,Govers-Lake. over against the Mount, is a Bay called Govers-lake, and is a good Place to Anchor in, because you bring the sunken Rocks of Carrenbase and Lowleigh south east from you, which Rocks break off the Sea, on which there is but four and five foot at low-water; they lye about a quarter of a mile from the west Land, and bear from St. Paul's Church north west by west, and west north west. To Anchor in Govers-lakeTo anchor in Govers-Lake. you must bring St. Paul's Church south west by south, and St. Clement's Island south and south by east, and Pensance north, and you will have four and five Fathom water at low-water on a Spring tyde. Keep St. Paul's Steeple above the Land, (that is) that you keep sight of it, and then you will run without Lowleigh and Carrenbase, that is, you will go to the eastward of them. Mousehole. There is a small Peer at Mousehole,Mouse∣hole. but now gone to decay. You may Anchor in Mounts-BayTo anchor in Mounts Bay. as you please, from twenty to seven Fathom water, as you may see in the Draught, Number 27. It floweth here at Full and Change half an hour past four, that is, east north east. The Spring-tydes rise eighteen and nineteen foot. Rundle-stone. From Mounts-Bay to the Lands-end the shoar is bold; and a mile, or a mile and a half due south from the Lands-end, lyeth a Rock called the Rundle-stone,Rundle-stone. and sheweth above water from half Ebb to half Flood, and then under water there is twenty Fa∣thom water between the Lands-end, and this Stone. Gulf-Rock. Gulf-Rock.The Gulf is a small Rock, and always above water, and lyeth from the Lands-end south west three Leagues; this Rock is steep too on every side, and is no bigger then an ordinary Long-boat: Keep the out∣ward part of the Longships on the Brizan Island, and that will carry you just on the Gulff. There is forty Fathom water within a quarter of a mile of it. Long-ships. From the Lands-end to the Long-shipsLong ships. the Course is north west by north two Leagues. These Rocks are high above water, and lye in length west two miles from the Land; it is all foul Ground between them and the Land; yet I have been told that small Ves∣sels that are well acquainted will Sail within them. To the northward of them is a small Bay, called White-sand-Bay, where small Vessels and Coasters anchor. Brizan-Island. From the Long-ships to the Brizan-IslandBrizan-Island. the Course is north north east, about five or six miles. This is a high small round Island, and lyeth to the westward of Cape Cornwall a mile from the shoar. Them that are well acquainted Sail within the Island. Seven-stones. Seven-stonesSeven-stones. are a parcel of Rocks that lye from the Brizan and Cape Cornwall west half south, about six or seven Leagues, and shew themselves above water at half Tyde; they lye in length north west and south east about two miles, and half a mile broad: they bear from St. Martin's-head at Scilly north east three Leagues, and are very dan∣gerous. The first place of the beginning of the Flood in the West of England, is at the Long ships, which Place divides the Stream, one setting to the northward, and the other to the southward. At Full and Change the Flood begins east north east, and sets nine hours to the northward: And from the Long-ships to the Rundle-stone and Gulff, the Tyde setteth south east three hours, that is, it is high-water by the shoar, before the Flood setteth to the southward. At the Seven-stones,The stream setteth 9 hours to the north∣ward and but 3 to the south∣ward. and between Scilly and the Lands-end, the first of the Flood setteth north west, and endeth in the north east nine hours; and the Stream beginneth to set to the southward at high-water, which is east north east ashoar. It is high-water at the Gulff at Full and Change east north east, and the Tyde set∣teth to the eastward till half Ebb ashoar. And when it is half Ebb ashoar at Mounts-Bay, then the north stream begins in the north west, and ends in the north east nine hours, till it is high-water ashoar.
Directions for Sailing in and out at the several Sounds at the Islands of Scilly. THese Islands lye to the westward of the Lands-end of Cornwall nine or ten Leagues, and are many Islands and Rocks, you may see them six and seven Leagues off the south west: Part of these Islands are very Rocky, but are bold. On the southernmost big Island there standeth a high Light-house, erected by the Corporation of Trinity-House, Deptford-Strand, and is a most excellent good Light, and may be seen six and seven Leagues off. Before this Light-House was erected, there was not a Winter but there were some Ships cast a∣way: but since the erecting of it, there hath not a Ship been lost, but by Ignorance; so that Navigation is much obliged to the great care of Trinity-House in erecting this Light. St. Mary's Road. How to Sail into St. Mary's Sound.The principal Road is St. Mary's Road, and the best and most common Sound to go in to it, is St. Mary's Sound, between St. Mary's Island and the Island Gugh. Being to the eastward of the Island, you must run in at the south side of St. Mary's; you may know St. Mary's Island by the Castle and two Wind-wills, which stand on the south west part of the Island; run boldly in with the Mills, keeping close by St. Mary's side, which is very bold. In the fair way between Penmis Point and the Gugh, lyeth a Ledge of Rocks, called the Spanish Ledge,Spanish-Ledge. on which is but six foot at low-water, there∣fore keep close to Penmis, and then steer a∣way for the Hughland, on which stand the Castle and Wind-mills, giving them a fair birth to avoid the Woolpack,Woollpack. which is a sunk Rock close by the south end of the Hugh. You may boldly Sail within a quarter of a mile of the Hugh, from the Woolpack to the Ste∣vern, and that will carry you clear of Bar∣tholomew-Ledge,Bartholo∣mew-Ledge. which hath but six foot water at low-water, and lyeth south south west from the Stevern, about half a mile; between the Stevern and the Gugh, when you have the Light-House south west by south, then are you abreast of it. There are two leading Marks to avoid the Spanish Ledge and Bartholomew Ledge; keep the high Land of Sampson on the Stevern, and that will carry you clear of the Spanish Ledge; and being past it, then keep Castle Bryer, which is a high round Rock, on the low-land of Sampson, and that will carry you clear of Bartholomew Ledge. But if you are not sure of knowing these Marks, I advise you to your former Directions of keeping a quarter of a mile from the Hugh, or if you keep sight of the Vanes of the Wind mills, but not the Mills, that is, keep sight of half the Vanes above the Land, and that will carry you between Bartholomew Ledge and the Stevern. If you will fire a Gun, and make a Whaff, you will have a Pilot come off. Being about the Stevern Rock,How to Anchor in St. Mary's Road. steer in to the Road, and bring the Nut Rock west north west, or north west by west about half a mile from the Rock, or a quarter of a mile; or bring the Castle south south east, and anchor in five Fathom water at low-water, or seven or eight at high-water. Here you ride well for all Winds but south west Winds, which Winds bring in a great Sea. It floweth here at Full and Change east north east. There is a small PeerPeer. at the Hugh Town, where small Vessels lye aground at low-water, and is a good place to clean, wash, tallow, or stop leaks, &c. Crow-Sound. Crow-SoundCrow-Sound. lyeth at the north end of St. Mary's Island, and is a Bar-Channel, where at low-water there is not above four foot water, therefore to Sail in here you must take the Tyde. To Sail into Crow-Sound, you must Sail close by the north end of St. Mary's, off of which place lyeth a Sandy Point, and maketh the Bar. Being over the Bar, there lyeth a Rock a quarter of a mile from the shoar, called the Crow, and is above water at half Tyde: between it and the shoar is no more then six or seven foot at low-water. To Sail between this Rock and the shoar, you must keep within half a quarter of a mile of the shoar, or a Cables length. But I advise no Man to go into this Place without a Pilot, except well ac∣quainted. If you fire a Gun, and make a Whaff, you will have a Pilot come off. Broad-Sound. Broad-SoundBroad-Sound. is a dangerous Sound for those that are not acquainted. There are two Channels that lead you into this Sound, the south west Channel, and the north west
Channel. To Sail in at the south west Channel, which is the best of the two, you must Sail in between the Bishop and the Crim, which are the two westernmost Rocks of Scilly, and are a good height above the water, then steer in north east by east, keep∣ing the Islands of Great Gannelly and Great Gannick open and shut of St. Mary's Island, as you may see in the Draught of the I∣slands of Scilly, Number 20. and with this Mark you run in amongst many Rocks very terrible to behold, and the Marks difficult to be known; therefore I advise none to Sail in here without a Pilot from the I∣sland. Smith's-Sound. Smith's-Sound.Smith's-Sound is likewise a dangerous Sound, and very narrow. This Sound lyeth on the west side of the Island Agnis, on which standeth the Light-House. The Mark to Sail in is to bring Castle-Bryer, which is a high round Rock above water on the Great Smith, as you may see in the Draught; and this Mark will carry you in between St. Agnis, Melledgan, and a small Rock cal∣led Menpingo, and being between the Island St. Agnis and the Island Annet, steer then between Annet and the Great Smith Rock; being about the Rock, steer in for St. Mary's Road, as before. New Grimsbay. New Grimsbay.New Grimsbay is a Road, or rather a small Cove between the Island of Tresco and the Island Bryer; there is no danger in going in. This Place is narrow, and only fit for small Ships. You Anchor before the Castle in five, six, or seven Fathom water. At low-water it is dry between Tresco and Bryer. Old Grimsbay. Old Grimsbay.Old Grimsbay is a Place where small Ves∣sels may ride. There are two Channels in and out, and very narrow, and not to be made use of except you have a Pilot. It is high-water at all the Islands of Scilly at Full and Change, half an hour past four, that is, east north east. The Spring-tydes rise and fall 21 and 22 foot, and the Neap∣tydes fifteen and sixteen foot. The Tyde or South-stream setteth out of St. Mary's Sound from half Flood to half Ebb. The west stream cometh into St. Mary's Sound from half Ebb to half Flood, and run∣neth out through Broad-Sound. Note that about Scilly, and for six or se∣ven Leagues to the westward of it, and from the Islands to the Lands-end of England, the North-streamNorth Stream. runneth nine hours to the northward, and beginneth to set to the north∣ward the last quarter Ebb, beginning to set to the north west, and so altering till it end in the north east, at which time it will be high-water ashoar at Scilly, and then the South Tyde cometh and runneth three hours to the southward. You may see the Islands of Scilly from the south in sixty Fathom water, shelly, sandy Ground, at which time you will be six or seven Leagues of; and from the north in sixty Fathom, about six or seven Leagues of owsey sandy Ground. Twenty one or twenty two Leagues west by north and west north west from Scilly, is a BankA Bank. on which is but fifty, fifty one, and fifty two Fathom water, and between Scilly and this Bank sixty Fathom. Directions for Sailing up the Severn into Bristol. St. Ives. ST. IvesSt. Ives. is a Place where Vessels lye a∣ground at low-water, and is four Leagues to the eastward of Cape Cornwall, in a sandy Bay. Lundy. LundyLundy. is a high Island which lyeth in the Severn: at the east side of it is good An∣choring in ten and twelve Fathom water for westerly Winds. Barnstable. BarnstableBarnstable is a Bar-Haven, where good Ships may go in at half Flood. There are many Ships belong to this Place: It is very good riding in the Bay without the Bar. This Place is not yet surveyed by me, but I intend it God willing, &c. Going up the Severn, you cannot miss the Isle of Lundy, it lying in the fair way. The English Coast is bold and steep, but the
Welch Coast full of Sands and Shoals; you may sail off either side of Lundy but stand no farther than 3 Leagues from Lundy towards the Welch Coast to avoid the Sands: from Lundy steer along the English Coast, till you come up as high as PurlockPurlock. or Minehead, and then steer away north east between the Steep Holmes and the Flat Holmes: the south Island next the English Coast is called the Steep Holme, and is high round Land; the north Island is low Land, and is called the Flat Holme; there is deep water between them; keep nearest the Flat Holme, which is the steepest side, you may sail close to it without any danger. Being up with the Flat Holmes, steer away to the northward till you bring the Flat Holme south west, and keep it so for three or four miles, till you have a Mill that standeth on a Hill comes on the west end, a Land that sheweth like an Island; or bring the Mill south east by south, then you are past the Point of the English Ground; then steer away east north east on the side of the English Ground, which are flat, and keep the Lead going. The Tydes rise here at a Spring seven and eight Fathom; so if you bring a Tyde with you, you cannot come to any damage; and steer amay to Poslet Point, which is steep too. A little above that is King's Road, where you Anchor; but be sure when you Anchor at high-water, that you consider how much the Tydes fall. Here you take a Pilot to carry you into Hung-Road, and so up to Bristol. Hung-Road. Hung-Road.Hung-Road is a Place where great Ships lye afloat by the shoar side, and there Ca∣reen, having no Dock. Lesser Ships go up to the City of Bristol. Those Ships that have occasion to go a∣bove King-Road up the Severn, or up to Chepstow, must take a Pilot. Note that the Tydes are very strong in all the Severn from Milford to King-Road. There are several Places on the Welch and English sides of the Severn, but being Places only for small Ves∣sels. And such as are acquainted, I advise such as have occasion to make use of them, to take a Pilot. In going up and down the Severn, you must be very careful to keep the Lead when you stand over to the Welch Sands. Minehead. MineheadMinehead. is a Stone Peer, where small Vessels lye aground: Here Ships that are not acquainted, may have a Pilot for Bristol. You may Anchor in the Road before Mine∣head. The Draught of the Severn is not so well finished as was intended, by reason the In∣graver lost the Original Copy. If any Ship that may be bound up the English Channel, and should happen to come up the Severn, and have not a Wind to get into the English Channel, then I advise them to go for Milford. See the Directions for Milford. Directions for Sailing into Milford-Haven. Milford-Haven. MIlford-Haven is very easily to be known,There are three Hills up in the Country, which you see first at Sea in clear weather, and bear from the Harbours mouth north east by north. having the Island of Scooc∣kam, Scanmore, and Gresholme on the west, and the Isle of Lundy to the east. You may know the going in by an old Light-Tower which standeth on St. Anns Point: likewise you will see two old Stone-Blockhouses or Forts which stand on each side on the Cliffs going in; likewise Sheep-Island, which ly∣eth just at the Entrance on the east side, and another Island within the Entrance, called Rat-Island, and is like the Mewstone at Ply∣mouth, but lesser. To the westward of which Island lyeth a sunk Rock about a quar∣ter of a mile of, on which there is sixteen and seventeen foot at low-water on Spring∣tydes. A long mile within this Ratt-Isle ly∣eth a great Rock above water, called the Stack, this Rock is bold. Angle-Road is the best place to Anchor in, but in truth the whole Haven is very good and safe. Ships may ride afloat as high as Langham-ferry and Coetcanles, in three, four, and five Fathom water at low-water. Small Ships may ride afloat in Crowpool within Pennet-mouth, and may go up with the Tyde to Pembroke Key, and there lye aground at low-water; small Ships go up to Landshipping-Key, where Sir Hugh Owen hath made all Conveniencies for loading of Coals: small Ships likewise go up to Haverford-west and Crosswell with the Tyde. The Colliers that are bound out commonly lye in Dale-Road. It floweth here at Full and Change, east and west nearest.
A farther Description of Milford-Haven. Milford-Haven.MIlford-Haven is certainly the best Har∣bour in the three Kingdoms, there being no manner of danger in Sailing in or out of the Harbour, so that you need no Pilots, and may turn in and out with safety with contrary Winds, taking the Tyde, as well by Night as by Day. When you are entred into the Harbour, you may Anchor where you please, according as the Ship is in bigness: And if a Ship come in without Cable and Anchor, she may run ashoar on soft Owse, and there lye with safety. Here is most excellent Conveniencies for hauling great and small Ships ashoar, to Grave, Wash, and Tallow, stop Leaks, &c. good places to Careen, good places for ma∣king of dry Docks, Yards, Store-houses, Rope-walks, Victualling-Offices, &c. Build∣ing and Repairing of Ships, here being good store of Timber, good fresh Water, Wood and Coals, Provisions good and plenty. The Spring-tydes rise six and thirty foot, and the Neep above six and twenty foot, so that you may lay Ships ashoar at any time. But that which makes this Harbour more excellent and useful than any other, is, that in an hours time you are in and out of the Harbour into the Sea, being in a fair way between the Lands-end of England and Ire∣land, and lyeth in the Mouth of the Severn, and are in eight or ten hours over on the Coast of Ireland. You may get to the west∣ward out of this Place much sooner then when you came from Plymouth, Foy, or Fal∣mouth. Oliver Cromwell ship'd off his Forces from this place for Ireland, and in time of War kept a Squadron of Ships to Randezvous here; and Henry the Seventh landed here. This Haven lyeth north north east nine and twenty Leagues from Cape Cornwall. There lyeth about three Miles from the Havens Mouth a small Rock, called the Crow, and sheweth at half-tyde; it lyeth about half a Mile from Lonny-Point. The Sea-shoar about Milford is about the height of the Land of Plymouth. A Description of the Islands and Rocks which lye to the Westward of Mil∣ford-Haven. Schookham. SCookhamScookham. lyeth west north west from St. Ann's Point going into Milford a League and a half. Scanmore lyeth north north west from Scookham about a League, and west from St. Brid's-head, and is bigger then Scookham. Gresholm. GresholmGresholm. is a high small Island or great Rock, and is green, and lyeth to the west∣ward of Scookham and Scaumore two short Leagues. There is a good Channel be∣tween Gresholm and Scookham and Scaumore, and are all very bold and steep too. Barrel. BarrelBarrel. is a small Rock, and shews at half-tyde, and beareth from Gresholm west and west by north about a short League, and are steep too. The Hats. The HatsHats. shew at low-water, and lyes two Leagues to the westward of Gresholm, and are steep too. The Small. The SmallSmall. is a small Rock always above the water, about the bigness of a Long∣boat, and lyeth to the westward of Gresholm two Leagues and a half, or three Leagues: The west north west and north west end is foul and rocky a mile off, and is steepy too. The Tydes run very strong amongst these Islands and Rocks. The Mascus. The MascusMascus. is said to be a sunk Rock, and lyeth from St. David's-Head west north west three Leagues; but I never could hear of any Coaster or other that ever found it. There is a narrow Channel between Ram∣sey Island and St. Davids, and is used by
none but small Coasters, and those that know it very well. The Tydes run very strong, which makes the water to breach and ripple, as though it were shoal-water; and so it doth between Gresholm, Scookham, and Scaumore. Holyhead. It floweth at Full and Change at Holy∣headHolyhead. at ten of the Clock; the Spring-tydes rise and fall twenty foot, and the Neep-tydes thirteen and fourteen foot. Between Holy∣head and Dublin the Flood and Ebb run north north east, and south south west, and floweth south south east. Holyhead-Road. Road-Harbour. Platters. Cubby, Platters.Holyhead-Road lyeth to the eastward of Innis-Cubby-Island, to the northward of which Island, about half a little Mile, lyeth some sunk Rocks which have but three foot water at low-water, called the Platters of Cubby. The Road is clear Sand, the Har∣bour is dry at low-water, where Ships lye on the Sand, but the Wind out at north makes a Sea in the Harbour. The Pacquet Boats for Ireland use this place. Scarrys. Scarry-Platters.Between the Scarrys and Carren-Point ly∣eth sunk Rocks, and are called the Platters of Scarry, and lye about a short half Mile from the Scarrys; therefore keep near Car∣ren-Point which is bold. Cole-Rock. Cole-Rock.There lyeth a small sunk Rock east north east from the Scarrys about two Miles and a half, and north by east from the West-Mouse a Mile, or a Mile and a half, which hath but six foot at low-water, called the Cole-Rock. Holyhead is very high Land, as you may see in the Chart, Number 27. Isle of Man. Isle of Man.It floweth here at Full and Change south east by south: The Spring-tydes rise twen∣ty foot. Darby-Haven. Darby-Haven.Darby-Haven is a small Bay where Vessels ride affoat or lye aground. Douglas-Harbour. Douglas-HarbourDuglas-Harbour. runneth into a small fresh-water River, where at high-water is ten and twelve foot water, and at low-water lye dry. Ramsey-Bay. Ramsey-BayRamsey-Bay. is a most excellent Road, ha∣ving a Sand without which breaketh off the Sea. In this Bay is a small River where small Vessels run in at high-water, and lye dry at low-water. There runneth very strong Tydes all round this Island, and in some places ripple as though there were shoal∣water, especially near Point of Air. At this Island the north and south Tyde meet; here is great plenty of Fish of all sorts. White-haven. A little to the northward of St. Bees-head lyeth White-haven,White-haven. being a good dry Peer, where great Ships take in Sea-coals and carry them to Dublin in Ireland. This place belongeth to Sir John Lowther. North east from Great Orms-head, about a League off, lyeth a Bank north by east and south by west about a Mile in length, whereon is not above thirteen foot, being a narrow ridge; on the east side it shoaleth gra∣dually, but the west side is steep too. Directions for Sailing into Beau∣morris. THere is a small high Island called Priest∣holme, on which is a ruined Chappel with a Steeple; half way between this I∣sland and the Main Point called Trwyndu, is a Rock which showeth at Half-tyde, called the Horse, which you must leave on the Larboard side going in, keep in the middle of the Channel between the Horse and Trwyndu-Point. There lyeth some Rocks from the north east part of Trwyndu-Point, as you may see marked at A in the Chart, Number 26. The Tydes run in and out ve∣ry strong; therefore the best going in or out is at high or low-water slack; the Ebb run∣neth strong upon the Horse. After you are entred in you may Anchor where you please between the Entrance and the Beaumorris. Note that the Depths are set down in Fa∣thoms
at low-water. You may sail in to the southward of Priestholme between it and Le∣van-Sands, with a Tyde of Flood, keep nearest to Levan-Sands to avoid the Rocks that lye at the south west end of the Island. The water riseth and falleth three and twenty and four and twenty foot at a Spring-tyde. It floweth here at Full and Change between the south south east and south east by south 10h-30′. Directions for Sailing over Carnar∣van-Bar. Carnar∣van-Bar.CArnarvan-Bar hath not above seven, eight and nine foot at low-water, but then the Tydes rise four and twenty foot. The Mark of the Bar is Tuttle-hill, and a Tower on the north end of Carnarvan Town, and a little House on the Larboard-side go∣ing in, which standeth on a low sandy Point; bring these three in one, or any two of them, and this will carry you into the Ferry, and afterwards Anchor as you please, as you may see in the Draught. There are but few Ves∣sels make use of this Bar; only such as go to Carnarvan to load Corn, &c. There are some Ships that have lain wind-bound at Beaumorris bound for Virginia, and not da∣ring to turn out at Priestholme, have gone through the Swilly, and so over Carnarvan-Bar; but the Rocks at the Swilly are danger∣ous, the Passage narrow, and the Tydes very strong; and be sure to pass the Swilly at a slack Tyde. It floweth on Carnarvan-Bar at Full and Change south east; and the Tydes rise at a Spring four and twenty foot. Small Ships may sail up to Conaway with a Pilot at high-tyde. Directions for Sailing over Chester-Bar. Chester-Bar.CHester-Bar lyeth from Ormeshead five Leagues and a half east half north; keep Great Ormeshead and Little Ormes-head just open of each other, as in the Chart, Number 30. and so run in till you bring the three Hills south, then are you on the shoalest of the Bar, and about two little Miles from the shoar; then you will presently have deeper water, and may keep along by the Main in what depth you please, keeping Hailsand without you, which al∣ways sheweth it self: this Sand is always a∣bove water, except an hour or two at high-water on a Spring-tyde, and then it sheweth by a rippling. You may sail up to Dort∣pool or Nesson or Wild-Road or Highlake this way. You will find nine foot water at low-water on a Spring-tyde on Chester-Bar; there are some Patches on the Bar which alter, but the Tydes rising so high as five Fathom at a Spring, and three and a half at a Neep, there is no danger. It floweth here at full and Change between the south south east, and south by east. If you would sail up to Dort-Pool and Nesson, you must have a care of the out Scar-Rocks which shew at low-water, therefore keep over of the Bugg-side; the thwart Mark of this Out-Scar is Grange-Mill on Kerby-Church; and when you have Kerby-hall open of a Hill then are you past them. You may Anchor at Dort-Pool in three Fathom water Point of Air. Three Miles within this Bar lyeth a low sandy Point, called Point of Air,Point of Air. which you leave on the Starboard-side going in. And three Miles from this place is Moyston Mark within Wild-Road, where Vessels lade Coals, being half a Mile from High-water-mark; and those Ships that cannot take the ground, then such Ships may take in their Loading in Wild-Road, and their ride with safety: Ships may sail from Moyston Mark at a Neep-tyde. This place doth not only supply the Neighbouring places with Coals, but the Kingdom of Ire∣land. Directions to sail into Highlake and Liverpool. BEing on the back of the Hylesand, bring the Mill and Wood one on the other, as in the Chart, Number 30. and run in keeping close alongst Hylesand, and so into Highlake, and Anchor.Highlake and Li∣verpool. Here the great Ships that belong to Liverpool put out part of their Lading till the Ships are light enough to sail over the Flats to Liverpool.K Willi∣am and the Eng∣lish Army Imbark'd at this place for Ireland. There is a Channel near Formby to go into Liverpool, where is three Fathom at low-water on the Bar; but this place is not Buoy'd nor Bekon'd, and so not known: the Ships lye aground before the Town of Liverpool; 'tis bad ri∣ding afloat before the Town, by reason of the strong Tydes that run here; therefore Ships that ride afloat, ride up at the Sleyne where is less tyde.
Pillafoodra. Pillafoo∣dra.Pillafoodra is a place where good Ships may go in, but the going in being danger∣ous to those that are not acquainted, I leave those that have occasion to go there to take a Pilot, which they may have at Liverpool. This place lyeth out of the way of trade, and so is but little frequented, and not as yet surveyed by me. Directions for coming into the Chan∣nel between England and France, called the English Channel. THE Marriner having left the vast Ocean, and brought his Ship into Soundings near the Land, amongst Tydes or Streams, his Art now must be laid aside, and Pilottage taken in hand, the nearer the Land, the greater the danger, therefore your care ought to be the more. To be mindful of Tydes and Cour∣ses.Being in Tydes-ways, narrow Channels, Rocks and Sands, I hope the ingenious Ma∣riner will not take it amiss, in recommend∣ing this to your care, your Tydes, Courses, Soundings, and the goodness of your Com∣passes. To be mindful of your Compas∣ses, and how to order them.That you have a great care that no Iron be near the Compass, and that after long Voyages that the Compasses have been much used, they will grow dull, and yet the virtue of the Magnet holding good; but that which causeth the dulness, and the Compass being not quick in traversing, is caused by the Pin's point (on which the Compass stands) being worn blunt, therefore shar∣pen it with a Hone or fine Whet-stone with care and exactness. And this take for a certain Rule, that the light Card-Compas∣ses traverse best in fair weather, and the hea∣vy Card-Compass best in foul weather. I mean by the heavy Card-Compass that which is stiffned with Muscovy Glass, and a Plate of Steel which is touch'd by the Loadstone, instead of Steel-wyre, which is in the light ones. The heavy Card-Compasses are in brass Boxes, which are made to open to take the Card out at any time. Tydes, with their Sgs.The next thing that I recommend to your care, is the setting of the Tydes, which al∣tereth the course to the loss of many Ships, especially when you Sail close upon a Wind, then if the Tyde take you on the Weather∣bough, you shall fall much to Leeward of your Expectation; and if the Tyde take you on the Leebough, ir carries you to windward of your Expectation. Coming out of the Ocean into the Soundings,Depth of Water. which you may know by the water being discoloured, your best help is a good Observation of the Latitude. The next Consideration is your Depth of Wa∣ter, with the colour and quality of the Ground.Colour and Qua∣lity of the Ground. But as for the colour and quality of the Ground, I think it very uncertain, as I found by Experience lying becalm'd in the Soundings, when I very often heav'd the Lead, and did find one cast so different from another in quality, and still in the same depth of water, that I would not have any to trust to it; only this is generally obser∣ved, That the Ground to the southward on the French Coast is more gruffer, that is, the Sand is bigger or more gravelly, bigger shells and more variety, with a sort of sharp small things called Needles. West south west from Ʋshant eight or ten Leagues, you will have seventy four and seventy five Fa∣thom water, and four and five Leagues west from Ʋshant sixty eight and seventy Fa∣thom, west north west from Ʋshant eight or ten Leagues you will have seventy and se∣venty one Fathom, and four, five, or six Leagues of sixty six and sixty five Fathom. North west from Ʋshant eight or ten Leagues seventy Fathom, and five Leagues north west sixty four and sixty five Fathom; North north west from Ʋshant about seven, eight, or ten Leagues, from sixty five to sixty eight Fathom, and four Leagues north north west sixty Fathom. North from Ʋ∣shant eight or ten Leagues, sixty four and sixty five; and from three Leagues to five Leagues north you will have sixty Fathom. In these Depths, Bearings, and Distances the Ground is white things like Hakes-teeth, and the Ground ruffer then on the English Coast. But, as I said before, that the quality of the Ground being so uncertain, I would not have any Persons to give any trust to it. But on the Coast of England the Ground is finer in general; for five, six, and seven Leagues to the southward of Scilly, you will have from fifty to sixty Fathom water fine white Sand, with some red and black amongst it, and some times some small shells or pieces of shells, and at other times white Sand only.
The I∣slands of Scilly how far seen.Keep in the Latitude of forty nine de∣grees thirty minutes, or forty nine degrees thirty five minutes, or forty nine degrees forty minutes, till you have from sixty to fifty five Fathom water, more or less, as the Tydes may be high; for at Scilly and there∣abouts the Tyde riseth above three Fathom at Full and Change. I have seen the Light∣house of Scilly in the Latitude of forty nine degrees thirty five minutes, at which time the Light-house boar north by east about six or seven Leagues off, and at the same time had fifty eight Fathom water, fine Sand with black speckles, and pieces of shells. To the westward of Scilly the Ground is fine grey and white Sand, mingled with small black Sand and pieces of shells, and some∣times without black Sand and pieces of shells. But if you are to the northward of Scilly then your Ground will be white Sand, and owsey Sand: when the Islands of Scilly bear south about five or six Leagues, you will have fifty three to fifty seven Fathom wa∣ter. You may see the Light of Scilly six and seven Leagues in the Night when it is clear weather. A stream setting nine hours to the north∣ward.Many Ships have fell to the northward (into the Welch Channel or the Severn) contrary to their expectation; the cause of which is by a Stream setting nine hours from the north west to the north east, and but three hours to the southward: this Stream begins to set to the north west when it is half Ebb at Scilly, and endeth in the north east when it is high-water. This Stream beginneth six or seven Leagues to the west∣ward of Scilly, and four or five Leagues to to the southward of Scilly, and so between Scilly and the Lizard. Being to the southward of Scilly about the Latitude of forty nine degrees thirty minutes, or forty nine degrees thirty five mi∣nutes, or forty nine degrees forty minutes, and having from sixty to fifty five Fathom wa∣ter, you may keep away east in that Latitude, according as you have wind or weather, and in that depth. But when you have sailed about fifteen or twenty Leagues from sixty to fifty five or fifty two Fathom, then if the weather be clear you may steer norther∣ly for to make the Land. The LizardLizard. North by east, about nine leagues you will have fifty five, fifty six, and fifty seven Fa∣thom water, then will you have pieces of shells of several colours, thin small slatty stones, and no sand; meeting with this Ground you may stand in to the northward into fifty Fathom. Being past the Lizard, if you keep without forty Fathom water, you need not fear the Eddy-stone:Eddy-stone you will have forty Fathom in the stream of the Eddy-stone; if you keep in thirty five Fa∣thom then are you within the Eddy-stone. There is thirty five Fathom between the Ramhead and the Eddy-stone. For the knowing of the Land when you see it, I refer you to the several makings of the Land in the sheet, Number 39. And the making of some Lands are put down in the Draughts of the Harbours; as the making of the Land of Dartmouth is put into the Draught of Dartmouth; Foy and Falmouth the like, &c. Being sure of your being past the Lizard, be sure to keep off from the French shoar, for fear of the Rocks called the Gaskets,Gaskets. for when you are near them, the Tyde of Flood sets in amongst the Islands of Garnsey and Jersey: you will have deeper water near these Rocks, and gruffer Ground then on the English Coast. You may from the Start to Portland and the Wight, keep between forty and thirty Fathom water, or between thirty five and thirty, according as you go up the Channel. When you come near the Isle of WightIsle of Wight. have a care of the Indraught that setteth strong both into the Needles and St. Hellens, as you may see in the Directions for sailing into the Isle of Wight, which hath drawn many Ships into Freshwater-Bay,Freshwa∣ter-Bay. and others on the Owers, which lye to the eastward of the Isle of Wight, as you may see in the Description of the Owers and East-Burrough-Heads;Owers and East-Bur∣rough-heads. for the last half-flood, or the last quarter-flood, and all the Ebb, setteth into St. Hellens, which hath caused many Ships to run aground on the Owers, which lye to the eastward of the Isle of Wight. The De∣scription of which, and how to avoid them, and how to sail from the Isle of Wight into the Downs, you may see in the Directions from the Downs to the Isle of Wight; only I would have you to observe, that if you stand over on the French Coast, that there is a Bank in the Fair-way between Dunginness and Bullin-Bay, which hath but thirteen Fathom on it, which in the Night may cause you to think that you are nearer the shoar than you are.
Courses and Distances from Place to Place alongst the Coast of Eng∣land from Dover to the Lands-end to the Islands of Scilly, &c. COurses and Distances from place to place are better demonstrated in the Mapps than this way; but at the instigation of some Seamen I have done this. From Dover to Dunginness south west half west, 6 leagues. Dungin∣ness.From Dunginness to Rye-Road west 2½ leagues. From Dunginness to Hastings west 5 leagues. From Dunginness to Pemsey west by south 7½ leagues. From Dunginness to Beachy west south west 8½ leagues. Beachy.From Beachy to New-haven west 3 leagues. From Beachy to Shoram west northerly 6½ leagues. From Beachy to the East-barrow-head and Owers west south west 15 leagues. From Beachy to Dunnose on the Isle of WightWight. west by south, but to keep clear of the East-burrough-head and Owers west south west 21 leagues. From DunnoseDunnose. to the Needles west north west 5 leagues. From Dunnose to Peverel-Point west 8½ leagues. From Dunnose to Portland west by south 16 leagues. From Peverel-Point to Portland west by south 7½ leagues. Portland.From Portland to Lime west north west half north 7 leagues. From Portland to Exmouth-Bar west by north 12 leagues. From Portland to Torbay west 14 leagues. From Portland to the Berry west by south 14 leagues. From Portland to Dartmouth west by south 16 leagues. From Portland to the Start west by south half south 18 leagues. From the Start to the Bolt west north west 2 leagues. From the Start to the Ramhead west north west 8 leagues. From the Start to Plymouth-Sound west north west half north 7 leagues. From the Bolt to Plymouth-Sound west north west half north 5½ leagues. From the Start to the Eddy-stone west northerly 7 or 8 leagues. From the Start to Foy west by north 14 or 15 leagues. From the Start to the Deadman west half north 16 leagues. From the Start to Falmouth west 19 leagues. From the Start to the Lizard west half south 23 leagues. From Plymouth-Sound to the Eddy-stone south south west 4 leagues. From the Ramhead to the Eddy-stone south by west 4 leagues. From the Ramhead to the Loo west by north 4 leagues. From the Ramhead to Foy west 7 leagues. From Foy to the Deadman south west 3 leagues. From the Deadman to Falmouth west south west half south 3 leagues. From Falmouth to Helford west south west 1½ leagues. From Falmouth to the Manacles south 2 leagues. From the Manacles to the Lizard south west 3 leagues. From the Lizard to the Eddy-stone west by south 14 leagues. From the Lizard to the Deadman north east by east 7½ leagues. From the Lizard to Foy north east by east 11 leagues. From the Lizard to Mounts-Bay north west by north 6½ leagues. From the Lizard to the Lands-end west north west 8 leagues. From the Lizard to the Rundle-stone west north west 8 leagues. From the Lizard to the Gulf west 9 leagues. From the Lizard to the Seven-stones west north west 15 leagues. From the Lizard to the south of Scilly west half north 16 leagues. From the Lizard to the north of Scilly west by north 16 leagues. From the Lands-end to Mounts-Bay east north east 3 leagues. From the Lands-end to the Rundle-stone south 1 M. leagues. From the Lands-end to the Gulf south west 3 leagues. From the Lands-end to the Seven-stones west by north half north 7 leagues. From the Lands-end to the south of Scilly west by south 9 leagues. From the Lands-end to the north of Scilly west 9 leagues. From the Lands-end to the Long ships north west by west 2 leagues. From the Longships to the Brizan north by east 3 leagues. From the Brizan to the Gulf south by west 7 leagues. From the Brizan to the Seven-stones west by south 6 leagues. From the Brizan to the south of Scilly south west by west 10 leagues. From the Brizan to the north of Scilly west south west 9 leagues.
From the Seven-stones to the south of Scilly south west by south 5 leagues. From the Seven-stones to the north of Scilly west south west 8 leagues. From the Seven-stones to the Gulf south east 7 leagues. From the Seven-stones to the Rundle-stone east by south half south 7 leagues. From the Seven-stones to the Longships east 5½ leagues. Courses and Distances from places be∣tween England and France in the Channel, &c. FRom the South Foreland to Calis south east 8 Leagues. From the South Foreland to Deep south 28 Leagues. From the South Foreland to Seynhead south south west half south 37 Leagues. From the South Foreland to Cape Bar∣fleur south west 43 Leagues. From the South Foreland to the Cape de Hague south west by west 49 Leagues. From the South Foreland to the Gaskets west south west half south 54 Leagues. From Dunnose to Calis east by north 40 Leagues. From Dunnose to Deep east by south half south 38 Leagues. From Dunnose to Seynhead south east 33 Leagues. From Dunnose to Lehogue south south east 22 Leagues. From Dunnose to Cape Barfleur south by east 18½ Leagues. From Dunnose to Cape de Hague south by west half west 18 Leagues. From Dunnose to the Gaskets south west 19 Leagues. From Dunnose to Ʋshant south west by west 64 Leagues. From Portland to Deep east by south 52 Leagues. From Portland to Seynhead east south east easterly 45 Leagues. From Portland to Cape Barfleur south east easterly 26 Leagues. From Portland to Cape de Hague south east half south 20 Leagues. From Portland to the Gaskets south by east 16 Leagues. From Portland to Ʋshant south west 50 Leagues. From the Start to Cape Barfleur east south east easterly 20 Leagues. From the Start to the Gaskets east south east 21 Leagues. From the Start to Ʋshant south west by south 36 Leagues. From the Lizard to the Gaskets east by south easterly 22 Leagues. From the Lizard to Ʋshant south 31 Leagues. Courses and Distances from Cape Cornwal and the Islands of Scil∣ly to Bristol, Wales and Ire∣land. FRom the Islands of Scilly to Cape Clere in Ireland north north east easterly 35 Leagues. From Scilly to Kinsale north east 40 Leagues. From Scilly to the Tusker Rock north easterly 39 Leagues. From Scilly to the Small's Rocks north by east easterly 35 Leagues. From Scilly to Milford-Haven north north east half easterly 37 Leagues. From Scilly to Lundy north east 30 Leagues. From Cape Cornwal to Cape Clere west by north half west 51 Leagues. From Cape Cornwal to Kinsale north west by west 43 Leagues. From Cape Cornwal to the Tusker Rock north west by west northerly 34 Leagues. From Cape Cornwal to the Small's Rocks north half east 29 Leagues. From Cape Cornwal to Milford-Haven north north east 30 Leagues. From Cape Cornwal to Lundy north east 24 Leagues. From Cape Cornwal to St. Ives east by north 5 Leagues. From Cape Cornwal to Padstow north east by east 14 Leagues. From Cape Cornwal to Hartle Point north east half east 23 Leagues. From Cape Cornwal to Mort Point north east half east 26 Leagues. From Lundy to the Smalls Rocks north west 15 Leagues. From Lundy to Milford north north west westerly 10 Leagues. From Lundy to Caldy north 7 Leagues. From Lundy to Barnstable-Bar south east by east 5½ Leagues. From Lundy to Minehead east by south 14 Leagues. From Lundy to the Flat-Holmes east by north half north 18 Leagues. From the Flat-Holmes to the Posset Point east north east 5 Leagues. From the Flat-Holmes to King-Road east north east 5½ Leagues. From King-Road to Hung-Road 1 Leagues. From Hung-Road to Bristol by water 2 Leagues. From Milford-Haven to Cape Clere west by south 60 Leagues.
From Milford-Haven to Kinsale west 46 Leagues. From Milford-Haven to the Tusker west north west 18 Leagues. From Milford-Haven to the Smalls Rocks west by north 7 Leagues. From Milford to Gresholm west by north 4 Leagues. From Gresholm to the Bishop and Clerks which lye off of St. David's-head north north east 3½ Leagues. From the Bishop and Clerks to the Isle of Barzey north by east half east 19 Leagues. From Barzey to Holyhead north by east northerly 12 Leagues. From Holyhead to the Tusker south west 32 Leagues. From Holyhead to the Head of Hoath at Dublin-Bay west 19 Leagues. From Holyhead to the south west end of the Isle of Man north 15 Leagues. From Holyhead to the Skerreys north east by north 2 Leagues. From the Skerreys to Ormeshead east half south 8 Leagues. From Ormeshead to Chester-Bar east 6 Leagues. From Ormeshead to Highlake east 10 Leagues. From Highlake to Chester 7 Leagues. From Highlake to Liverpool 4 Leagues. From Highlake to the south west end of Man west north west half west 23 Leagues. From Highlake to the north east end of Man north west by north 25 Leagues. From the north east end of Man to the Mull of Galloway in Scotland north west westerly 14 Leagues. From the north east end of Man to Dublin south west by west 31 Leagues. From the north east end of Man to Carlingford west by south half south 27 Leagues. From the north east end of Man to Copland Islands going into Carrek∣fergus west north west 19 Leagues. From Copland Island to Carreck-fergus west north west 4 Leagues. From Carrek-fergus to Belfast south west 3 Leagues.
A TYDE-TABLE, SHEWING The Time of High-water and Full-Sea WHEN The Moon is at Full and Change: How the Tyde of Flood and Tydes of Ebb Setteth, and how many Feet the Spring-Tydes Rise and Fall, beginning at the Downs or Deal, and so Continuing away to the Westward.   H. M. F. DEal-Beach south east 09 00 16 Downs south south east half Tyde and half quarter Tyde 10 30 16 Dover south south east 10 30 16 Rye-Harbour south and by east and south south east 10 30 24 Beachy-head and Fair-Lee south south east 10 30 20 St. Hellens by the shoar south by east 11 15 16 Note that it is half flood, and sometimes more then half flood, before the Tyde cometh into St. Hellens and the Spithead. From Dover to Dunginness the Flood sets north east by east, and the Ebb south west by west. From Dunginness to Beachy the Flood east north east and the Ebb west south west. From Beachy to the Isle of Wight the Flood set east by north, and the Ebb west by north. The Tyde of Flood from the Ness, Beachy and the Isle of Wight, setteth one hour and half, and two hours after it is high-water by the shoar.   H. M. F. Portsmouth-Harbour south 12 00 16 Hampton south 12 00 15 Cowes south by east 11 15 16 Needles south east by south 9 15 14 Pool south east 9 00 8 Portland-Road and Weymouth east and west 6 00 6 Exmouth-Bar east by north and east 5 30 1 Torbay east and by north 5 15 17 Dartmouth east by north 5 15 18 Plymouth Salcom east by north 5 15 16 Eddy-stone east by north 5 15 18 Foy and Falmouth east by north 5 15 18 Helford and the Lizard east by north 5 15 18 From the Isle of Wight to the Start, and from the Start to the Lizards, the Tydes set as the Lands lye Channel Course; only take notice that by the shoar in Bays the Tydes round them. But at St. Hellens and the Needles you have a great Indraught, as you may see by the Directions for sailing into the Wight, and the sailing up the Channel from the Isle of Wight in the Offin to the Start and the Lizard; the Tydes of Flood run three hours to the eastward after it is high-water
ashoar; that is, it be∣gins to set to the eastward at half Flood ashoar, and runs six hours, till half Ebb ashoar, and the Ebb to the contrary.   H. M. F. Mounts-Bay, Pensance, east north east and west south west 4 30 19 Scilly east north east and west south west 4 30 20 Note that the Stream between the Lands-end and Scilly setteth nine hours to the northward, and but three to the southward; when it is half Ebb ashoar in Mounts-Bay, then the north Stream begins in the north west, and runneth nine hours till it ends in the north east.   H. M. F. At St. Ives east by north and west by south 5 15 24 Padstow and Barnstable-Bar east and west 6 00 24 Isle of Lundy east and west 6 00 30 Minehead east and west 6 00 36 King-Road and Hung-Road east by south and west by north 6 45 48 Milford-Haven east and west 6 00 36 Caldy and Swansey east and west 6 00 36 Between Lundy and the Holmes the Flood setteth east north east, and the Ebb west south west. From the Holmes to King-Road the Flood runneth north east by east, and the Ebb south west by west. Note that the Tyde of Flood runneth up at King-Road an hour after it is high-water.   H. M. F. Holyhead south south east and south east by south 10 00 21 Carnarvan-Bar south east 9 00 24 Beaumorris south south east and south east by south 10 30 24 Chester-Bar south and by east and south south east 10 45 30 Highlake south and by east and south south east 11 15 00 Liveroool south and south by east 11 30 30 Isle of Man south east by south 9 45 21 White-haven south east by south 9 45 00 Carrick-fergus south by east 10 38 8 Carlingford south east 9 00 14 Dublin-Bay south east by east 9 45 12 Kinsale east by north. 5 15 00 The Flood or North stream cometh in between Ireland and Scotland, and there it is high-water at south south east Moon. At the Isle of Man the north and south flood meet each other. Be∣tween Holyhead and Dublin-Bay it floweth south south east; the Flood setteth south south east, and the Ebb north north west. This is all that is Surveyed of the Coasts of England as yet. I have added some Harbours that are most useful in Ireland, being a Third Part of Great Britains Coasting Pilot. Note that the Letters H and M signifie Hours and Minutes, and the Letter F. signifies Feet. As for Example; At Chester-Bar it is High-water at Ten of the Clock, and forty five Minutes, and the Tydes Rise and Fall Thirty Foot at a Spring Tyde. The End of the First Part.
chart of the English and Bristol channels and adjacent coasts To the Right Honourable Admirall Killegrew This Chart of the Channell is Humbly Dedicated and Presented by Capt G Collins view of naval battle royal blazon or coat of arms
chart of the Camber near Rye and Winchelsea, East Sussex To the Honble Robert Austen Esq; One of the Ld: Commiss.•• for Executing the Office of Lord High Admirall of England &c. This Mapp is most humbly Dedicated and Presented by Capt Greenvile Collins
chart of the Solent (Isle of Wight, Southampton, Portsmouth To the Rt. Hon.ble EDWARD RUSSELL ADMIRALL OF THEIR MATIES. FLEET One of their Maties. most Honble. Privy Council and Treasurer of ye Navy &c This is most humbly dedicated and presented by Capt. Greenvile Collins. ☞ Needles are steep Chalk stones high and Steep: o. Shingles are a Pibble stone chart of the approaches to Weymouth and the Isle of Portland
To Captain GEORGE ST. LO This M  Most humbly Dedicated and Presented by Capt G Collins. chart of the English channel
To the Right Honourable The LORDS COMMISSIONERS for Executing the Office of LORD HIGH ADMIRALL OF ENGLAND chart of Brest Harbor A Seale of English and French Leagues 20 in A. Degree. To the Right Honourable The LORDS COMMISSIONERS for Executing the Office of LORD HIGH ADMIRALL OF ENGLAND This Mapp is most humbly Dedicated and Presented by Capt Greenvile Collins. Hydrographer to the KING and QUEENS most Excellt: Majestie 1693: chart of southeast Devon (Kingsbridge, Torquay, Exmouth)
To the Right Honourable THOMAS Earl of Pembrooke and Montgomery Bao HERBERT of Sherland &c. Primier Commiss•: for Executing the Office of Ld: High Admirall of England &c. And one of their Ma.ties most Honourable Privy Council This is most humbly Dedicated & presented by Capt: Greenvile Collins. ☞ Note that the depth of water in the River Ex. is set down in feet being distinguisht by an f depiction of King William's landing, Nov. 1686 chart of Dartmouth and the River Dart
DARTMOUTH TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE GEORGE LORD DARTMOUTH. MR. Generall of his Majesty's ORDNANCE &c. This Map is Humbly Dedicated, and Presented, by G. COLLINS. Hydrographer to the KING. depiction of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Thus Sheweth the Start when the point at A beareth S. W. 2 or 3 Leagues off. depiction of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Thus Sheweth Dartmouth when the Harbours mouth at C beareth N. by W. 3 miles off. depiction of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Thus Sheweth Dartmouth when it beareth W. N. W. 2 miles. chart of Plymouth
PLYMOUTH To the Rt. Honble. ARTHUR Earle of TORRINGTON Baro HERBERT of Torbay. First Lt. of the Admirality ADMIRALL of their Ma.ties Navy & Capt. Genll. of the Narrow Seas. Humbly Dedicat By Ct.G: Collins Hydrogr. to the KING. chart of River Fowey
FOWEY & MOUNTS-BAY Is most Humbly Presented & Dedicated To the RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD IONATHAN LORD BISHOP OF BRISTOLL By Capt. Greenvile Collins Hydrographr. to the King chart of Mounts Bay depiction of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Thus showeth the going into Fowey when Fowey Castle beareth N b W 3 Miles chart of Falmouth and Carrick Roads
FALMOUTH. To SR: PETER KILLEGREW. Baronet. This MAP is Dedicated and: Presented by Capt GREENVILE COLLINS. Hyd: to ye KING. depictions of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Thus Showeth the goeing into Falmouth when Pendennis Castle beareth N: W: b N: 2 Leagues. Thus Showeth ye goeing into Helford when the Harborsmouth at A. beareth West 2 Leagues. chart of the Scilly Islands
TO THE HONBLE: THE GOVORNOR DEPUTY GOVORNOR AND COMMITEES OF THE EAST INDIA COMPANY This Chart is Humbly Dedicated and Presented by CAPT: GREENVILE COLLINS Hydrographer to the KING. detailed chart of the Scilly Islands
THE ISLANDS OF SCILLY. TO HIS GRACE. HENRY DUKE OF GRAFTON: VICE ADMIRAL OF ENGLAND: & This CHART is most Humbly Dedicated: and Presented by Capt. G: COLLINS. Hydrogr to the KING. 1689 chart of St. George's Channel, the Irish Sea, and the Isle of Man
chart of the Bristol Channel
To the Right Honourable SR. ROBT. SOUTHWELL KT. Who attended his MAJ.TY K WILLIAM the  in his Expedition for Ireland in Quality of Principall Secretary of State for that Kingdom depiction of the King's landing Sept. 8th, 1690 A hampton near King Road. landed his Maj.tie on the 8t. of Septr. 1690 he sailed in 7 hours from Duncann Fort to King Read and lay that night at Kings Weston at the house of Sr. Robert Southwell. chart of Milford Haven
MILFORD-HAVEN. TO HIS GRACE HENRY Duke of BEAUFORT, and Earle of Worcester, Baron Herbert of Chep∣stoll. Raglan, and Gower. Lord President, and Lord Lieut. of Wales, &c. This Draught of MILFORD-HAVEN. is humbly Dedicated and Presented by Capt. Greenuile Collins. Hydr. to ye King. depiction of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea These Hills show at Sea before the and the Seaside chart of Milford Haven and St. Brides Bay
Milford Hauen and the Islands Adjacent most Humbly Dedicated and Presented to Sr. HUGH OWEN Bart. By Capt. G. Collins Hydrographer to their Majesties. chart of Pembroke north to Amlwch
depiction of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Ramsey Island N. W. depiction of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Scamor E. N. E. 2 miles. depiction of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Grasholm N. b. N. 4 mile depiction of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Barzey Island E. b. N. 2 Leagues depiction of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Thus Sheweth Stockham and St. Brides Stockham W. N. W. 2 miles St. Brides To Sr. CLODISLEY SHOUELL Kt. and REAR ADMLL. of the BLEW, This Chart of the Coast of WALES is humbly Dedicated and Presented by Capt. Green: Collins. chart of Holly Island and western Anglesey
HOLY-HEAD Is most Humbly Dedicated and Presented to Capt: Thomas Hewetson By G: COLLINS Hydrographer to the KING depiction of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Part of Anglesey Carrenpoint Holy head Skerries depiction of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Thus Sheweth Carrenpoint, Holy head and ye Skerries Island when ye highest part at A beareth S.W.b.S. 3 Leagues. chart of the Menai Strait
To the Right Worshipfull Sr. William Williams BARR This is most humbly Presented and Dedicated By Capt. G. Collin. chart of the tip of Anglesey and "Pritest Holme I" chart of the Isle of Man and surrounding coast
To the Honble. SR. IOHN LOWTHER Bart. One of the Comms for Executing the Office of Lord Riche Admirall of England. 1689 depictions of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Little Ormes head Great Ormes head Thus sheweth Great and Little Ormes head when you go over the best of Chester Barr Thus sheweth lite Hills then you are on  Chester barr  3 ill bear chart of Liverpool, River Dee and River Mersey
A New & Exact Survey of the River DEE or CHESTER-WATER, is most humbly Dedicated and Presented to his most Sacred Majt. WILLIAM the III KING of Great Britani. France. & Ireland By Capt. G. Collins Hydraghe. to the KING. Note that the depth water is set downe in Fathams at Lowater in Spring Tyde. at wch ti Tydes Rise five Fa and 3 1/2 at a Ne Tydes chart of the Isle of Man
To the Rt. Honorable WILLIAM, ELE, OF DERBY Lord of ye ISLE of MAN & This Map is humbly Dedicated and Pre∣sented by Capt. G. COLLINS. depiction of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Peel Castel chart of the bay of Belfast
To the most Potent and Heroick Prince WILLIAM the III of Great Britain France and Ireland KING Defender of the Faith &c This is most humbly Dedicated and Presented by Your Majes. most Dutifull and Loyall Subject & Servant Capt G: Collins A Prospect of CARRECK-FERGUS. Being the Place where King William landed in Ireland. A. The King in the Mary yacht Capt. Collins B. Prince George in the Henneretta Yacht Capt. Sanderson C. The King goeing a Shoare in Sr. Clo: Chouells Barg D. Sr. C. Shovell Rear. Admll. of the Blew in the Monk with his Squadron Bonfiers on the Shoare. chart of Carlingford Lough
depiction of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Thus showeth the goeing into Carlingford, when the Harbor at A. Beareth N. W. by N. 2 Leagues off. Note. that on the Barr you will haue 9 and 10 footwatter at lowwater the Common Tydes Rise 10 and 12 Foot at Neap Tydes. depiction of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Thus sheweth the Mountaines of Dundrum, which ly to the Northard of Carlingford, when they bare N. N. E. ½ E. about two Leagues off. chart of the bay of Dublin
To His Grace IAMES Duke of ORMOND &c. This is humbly Dedicated & Presented by Capt. G. Collins.
How these Severall Lands show at Sea depictions of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea So Foreland St. Margretts Church Walmer Castle Thus Sheweth the South Foreland when you are in the Gull Stream, keep St. Margretts Church a little on the side of the third Cliffe as at A. and this is the best marke of the Gull Stream Seaven Cliffs Beachy head Thus sheweth Beachy and the Seaven Cliffs when Beachy Head beareth N N W 2 Leagues Beach is a high White steep Cliff the Seaven Cliffs are likewise White Seaven Cliffs Beachyhead Thus sheweth Beachy head and the 7 Cliffs when the Head is E b N 2 Leagues Dunnose Isle of Wight Swan Cliff Thus sheweth the Isle of Wight when Dunnose beareth West 5 Leagues the Swan Cliff W N W The Swan Cliff is White 5 Donnose Swan Cliff Thus sheweth the Isle of Wight when the Swan Cliff beareth N W 3 W 4 Leagues Donnose Swan Cliff Thus sheweth the Isle of Wight when the Swan Cliff beareth N b W Bill Portland White Cliff Thus sheweth Portland when it beareth N W b W 2 or 3 Leagues Portland Portland N b E 2 Leagues off Portland St Albans Portland N E 3 Leagues off Portland Thus sheweth Portland when it beareth E N E 4 Leagues off Stk Fleming Darlmouth MOunt Whler Berry Thus sheweth the going in to Darlmouth and the Berry: when Darlmouth beareth N b W 2 Leagues off going into Darlmouth Berry Thus sheweth the going into Darlmouth when it beareth N ½ W 4 Leagues off
How these Seuerall Lands show at Sea Startpoint Thus sheweth the Start when you are a Leagues to the Eastward of it Boult Praul Start Thus sheweth the Boult Praul and the Start when the Boult beareth W b N 4 Leagues The Praul W N W and the Start N N W A is the going into Salcom Start Deadman Thus sheweth the Start from the Eddy Stone Deadman Thus sheweth the Deadman from the Eddy Stone Hinkston Ramhead Maker Plimouth Menstone Gornore Thus sheweth the Land about Plimouth when you are 2 Miles without the Eddy stone Start N E b N 5 Leagues Deadman NW 3 Leagues Foy Bindon Looc Thus sheweth the going into Foy and Looc when the Castle at C beareth N W by W 3 Leagues And the going into Loo at A N b W 2 Leagues, B is Looe Island Lizard point Thus sheweth the Lizard point when it beareth East 5 Leagues off Lighthouse Mills Thus sheweth the Islands of Scilly when the Mills bear W b S 3 Leagues off Longshipps Brezan Cape Cornwall Cape Cornwall Thus sheweth Cape Cornwall and the Longshipps when A beareth N and the Longshipps N b W 3 Miles. Cape Cornwall Thus sheweth Cape Cornwall when it beareth E N E 3 Leagues St Jues Cape Cornwall Thus sheweth the Land from cape Cornwall to St. Jues Lndy E N E 3 Leagues. The Isle of Lundy N N E 2 Leagues Seaumor Scookham Thus sheweth the Island of Milford when the going into Milford at A beareth five Leagues off Light House St. Anns point Rat Island Sheep Island Thus sheweth the going into Milford at A when the Light House beareth E b N 2 Leagues off
GREAT BRITAIN's COASTING-PILOT. The SECOND PART. Being a New and Exact SURVEY of the Sea-Coast OF England and Scotland, FROM THE RIVER of THAMES TO THE NORTHWARDS, WITH THE Islands of Orkney and Shetland: DESCRIBING All the Harbours, Rivers, Bays, Roads, Rocks, Sands, Buoys, Beacons, Sea-Marks, Depths of Water, Latitude, Bearings and Distances from Place to Place, the Setting and Flowing of Tydes, with Directions for the knowing of any Place; and how to Harbour a Ship in the same with Safety. By Captain GREENVILE COLLINS Hydrographer in Ordinary to the KING and QUEENS most Excellent Majesties. LONDON: Printed by Freeman Collins, and are to be Sold by Richard Mount Bookseller, at the Postern on Tower-Hill. 1693.
GREAT BRITAIN's COASTING-PILOT. The SECOND PART. The Explanation of the Marks in the SEA-CHARTS or MAPPS. 21/7 THE Depths of water in all the Mapps are all put down at low-water on Spring-tydes, as you may see in the Mapp going in∣to Harwich, Number E. there you will find that between the Naze and the Stone-Bank, there is one Fathom and half at low-water; but where you find a Line drawn between two figures, as in the Margent, shew the depth of water at high-water and low-water on Spring-tydes, and if there be the Letter f placed by them, then it sheweth that the depth is feet, otherwise 'tis fa∣thoms. As for Example; You will see at the going over the Bar at Tinmouth or New-Castle, there you will find 21 above the Line, and 7 below the Line, as in the Mar∣gent; which shews that on the Bar at a Spring-tyde there is 21 foot at high-water, and seven at low-water: But if there is not the Letter f by the depth or feet, than the depth is fathom. ☽ Where you shall see a Half-moon placed by any Rock or Sand, it declares that such Rock or Sand is to be seen at Half-tyde. ← Where you shall see an Arrow in the Margent, it sheweth the Tyde of Flood set∣teth the same way the Arrow pointeth; as you may see in the Mapp of the Isles of Ork∣ney, numbred with the Letter R.
D Where you shall see the Letter D plac'd by any Sand or Rock, such Rock and Sand is to be seen at low-water. It may be expected that I should have given Directions for Sailing from the River of Thames over the Flats into the Downs, and likewise from the River of Thames down the Swin and King's-Channel, and so into the Downs. But upon consideration that these Places are under the Care of Pilots, and for the constant supply of them, the Trinity-house of Deptford-strond, have taken care that there be a sufficient number of them, both for great and small Ships, &c. I laid the Sands down in the Sand-Chart from the Thames into the Downs, and from the Thames to the Buoy of the Gunfleet, as they were most carefully survey'd by Trinity-house; but all the rest of the Charts or Mapps were actually survey'd by my self. Directions for Sailing over the Spits, the Wallet, and by the Naze into Harwich. Harwich. Harwich.HARWICH being a good and con∣venient safe Harbour, and much fre∣quented by those that use the Northern Na∣vigation, and a place where Ships many times are forc'd in by bad weather, I have taken care to give such following Directions as will carry any Stranger into that place. Sailing down the Swin or King's Channel, and that you would Sail into Harwich over the Buoy of the SpitsBuoy of the Spits. into the Wallet, you must observe your Tydes; for at the Spits the Buoy lyeth in five, six, and seven foot water at low-water, and the Passage often altereth, sometimes more water, and some∣times less. The Buoy lyeth on the west end of the Gunfleet-Sand, and the east end of the Buxey, bearing from a flat Steeple, cal∣led Great Holland-Church, south and by east: Being over the Spits, you come into the Wallet,Wallet good ri∣ding. where is very good Anchoring in five, six, seven, and eight Fathom water; the Sands lying without makes it a most excellent Road. There is a good and deep Channel to Sail into the Wallet between the Gunfleet and the West-Rocks, as you may see in the Mapp of Harwich, Number E. but this Channel is very seldom used. Be∣ing over the Spits into the Wallet, steer a∣way for the Naze,Naze. which may be known by the Trees, and a House that standeth on it; keep about half a mile, or a mile of from the Naze, to avoid the Stone BankStone Bank which hath but five foot water at low-water on it, and lyeth from the Naze Trees east by north about a mile and a half from the Naze Point; there is but eight or nine foot water between it and the Naze at low-water.Mark the Stone Bank Keep Pain's Trees (which lye a little to the southward of Harwich) open and shut with Harwich-Cliff, and this Mark will carry you on the Stone Bank, and the Trees on the Corkland just open of the Naze∣land will carry you on the Bank also. There is a good leading Mark to carry you be∣tween the Naze and the Stone Bank,Mark  go be∣tween  Naze  Stone Bank. which is Harwich Steeple on Harwich Becon-Cliff, and will also carry you between the Pye-Sand and the Ridge into the Rowling-ground,Rowling ground where Ships Anchor in three and four Fa∣thom at low-water. The Mark to Anchor in the best of the Rowling-ground is to bring Harwich Windmill two Sails breadth open of Harwich-Cliff. And to Sail from the Rowling-ground to the Naze keep Pain's Trees open of Harwich-Cliff till you bring the Naze to bear south west, then keep Har∣wich Steeple on the Becon-Cliff to run with∣in the Stone Bank. There is a Channel to Sail from the Naze between the Cork-Sand and the Ridge,How  Sail f the Naze between the C and the Ridge. keep∣ing the Naze Trees south west, sailing down north east between the Cork and the Ridge in five, six, and seven Fathom wa∣ter; and when you have brought Harwich Steeple on the Brewhouse that lyeth to the northward of Landguard-Fort, then are you clear of the Cork-ledge.Cork-ledge. This Channel is much used by the Light-Colliers going to the northward. Being in the Rowling-grounds, and that you would Sail into Harwich Harbour, keep close by the Andrews,Andrews. which is a Sand that lyeth off from Languard-Fort, and is steep too on the west side; the Tyde of Ebb runneth strong over the Andrews the first half Ebb, of which you must have a care; this Sand is dry at low-water. Keep close by the Beach of Languard-Fort to avoid the Altar,Altar. which is a small stoney Shelf that lyeth right west from Languard-Fort about a Cable and a halfs length from the Beach at the Fort, on which is but five and six foot at low-water: you may Sail to the west∣ward of it, between it and Harwich-Cliff,
according as the Tyde is up, and what drought of water your Ship draweth. But if you should chance to go into Harwich at low-water, and your Ship draw above fif∣teen foot, you must stay for the Flood to have water over the Glutton,Glutton. which is a nar∣row Ridge, and stretcheth off from the Beach thwart the Channel a little within the Brewhouse that is to the northward of Lan∣guard-Fort. Being past the Glutton, you must keep close to the Beach to avoid the Gristleristle. that lyeth in the middle between Har∣wich and the Beach of Languard-Fort, on which is but three foot at low-water. There is a small Channel between the Gristle and the Guarduard. of nine foot at low-water, but when you have opened Dover-Court Church of Harwich Town, then are you clear of the Gristle and Guard, and may Anchor be∣fore the Town of Harwichrwich arbour. in five Fathom water, or run up into Ipswich-water and Anchor. This is a very safe Harbour; and if a Ship should chance to blow ashoar, she cannot take any harm, the shoars being soft Owse. There is a Yard at Harwich where many of the great Ships of the Navy have been built, where is a convenient place to haul such Ships (as can take the ground) a∣shoar to Wash, Tallow, stop Leaks, &c. This place is much approved of by the Commanders of Virginia Ships, being very convenient for unloading their Goods, ha∣ving good Store-houses for that purpose by the water side, and is the best Inlet and Outlet between England and Holland, as is experienced by the Pacquet-Boats, having made this place their station. It floweth here at Full and Change in the Harbour south; the Spring-tydes rise fifteen and six∣teen foot, and the Neap-tydes ten and ele∣ven foot. Directions for to Sail into Harwich through the Sledway. BEing at the Buoy of the Spits, and that you will not Sail over the Spits, then keep down by the Gunfleet-Sandnfleet. in seven and eight Fathom water, till you come within two Miles of the Buoy of the Gun∣fleet, and then come no nearer then nine Fathom; for there lyeth off a Spit east south east from the Sand, about a Cables length. To the eastward of this Spit is a small Swatch through the Sand, into which and Goldmore's-Gatt,Goldmore's Gatt. the Tyde of Flood set∣teth strong into the Wallet, of which you must have a care when you come near it, especially in little Wind or Calms you may be hauld on the Gunfleet-Sand. This Sand lyeth north east and south west, and drieth in several places. The Buoy of the GunfleetBuoy of the Gunfleet. beareth from the Naze south east by east easterly. You may stand into seven and eight Fathom along the side of the West-RocksWest-Rocks. into the Sledway, keeping Balsey Church north by west and north north west till you bring Harwich Steeple on the Brew∣house (that lyeth to the northward of Languard-Fort) which will carry you clear of the Cork-ledge, on which is two Fathom and a half at low-water, and then stand to the westward, and keep Orford Church and Castle open of Balsey-Cliff a Sails breadth, till you have the Lights together, keeping them so till you are past the Andrews, and then follow the former Directions for sail∣ing into Harwich. You may stand in upon the PlattersPlatters. into five Fathom, on which Sand is but two and three foot at low-water; the Ridge hath seven foot at low-water. A great part of the Cork-SandCork. dry∣eth at low-water; and lyeth in length north∣east and south west about two miles and a half long, and a mile broad. West-Rocks. The West-RocksWest-Rocks. lye in length north east, and south west about three miles, and two miles broad, and dryeth in several places, full of Banks and Swatches, the Ground rocky and stony in many places. There is a small narrow Channel between the West-Rocks and the Cork. Directions to Sail from Harwich out the Sledway. SAiling out of Harwich, keep close to the Beach of Languard-Fort, observing the Directions going out as you did going in, and when you come near the Andrews, if the Tyde of Ebb be made, it runneth strong over them the first half Ebb, of which you must have a care; bring the Lights in one, and Sail out so between the Andrews, the Ridge, and the Platters, till you bring Orford Church and Castle open of Balsey-Cliff a Sails breadth; Sail so till you
bring Harwich Steeple on the Brewhouse, and then stand out the Sledway, keeping Balsey Church north north west out. But if you turn out,How to turn out at the Sledway. then turn Balsey Church on the two Trees to the northward of the Wood; and for the other side the Church two Sails breadth open of the Cliff. But if you know not the Marks, you may stand over to the West-Rocks till you bring Balsey Church north by west, and over to Balsey-Sand and the Shipwash, till you bring Balsey Church north west by north and north west. Balsey-Sand. The Marks for the south end of Balsey-Sand.Balsey-sand. is to bring Balsey Church north west half west, and lyeth from the shoar a long League; this end is steep too, being eight and nine Fathom close by it. The Mark for the north end is to bring Orford Castle be∣tween the north by west and the north north west, and the Light-house north half east. This end lyeth about five miles from the shoar. Some part of this Sand dryeth at low-water. Shipwash-Sand. The ShipwashShipwash-sand. lyeth without Balsey-Sand and the Whiting, and drieth in many places at low-water: It lyeth in length north by east and south by west about nine miles, and is very narrow, not above a quarter of a mile over in breadth, except the south end, and there it is broader. The Mark for the south end is to bring Balsey Church north west half west about eight or nine miles off. The Mark for the north end is Balsey Church north west, and Orford Light-house north north west half west. Whiting-Sand. Whiting-sand.The Whiting lyeth north east by north in length about five miles. At the south end Balsey Church beareth west by south and west south west: and at the north end Orford Castle north west by north in five Fathom water. There is good Soundings on both sides of it. Woodbridge-Haven. Wood∣bridge-Haven.Lyeth just at the west end of Balsey-Cliff, and is a Bar-Haven, where is but three and four foot water at low-water; the Bar often shifts there, I advise such as are not acquainted to take a Pilot. After you are in 'tis a very good Harbour, and goeth up to Woodbridge. The water riseth and falleth on the Bar at a Spring-tyde fifteen foot, and at Full and Change it floweth south and south by east. Cutler. Cutler.Cutler is a small Sand that lyeth right off from Balsey-Cliff about a short mile, and hath but six foot water on it at low-water, and two Fathom between it and the Cliff. The Mark to go clear of of it, is to keep Har∣wich Steeple just open of Felsto-Cliff. Hoseley-Bay. Hoseley-BayHoseley-Bay. is a very good place to Anchor, you having the Sands without, and is very good clean ground. Directions for sailing from the Sled∣way into Hoseley-Bay, and out at Winterton-Ness. BEing in the Sledway you Sail into Hose∣ley-Bay between Balsey-Cliff and Bla∣sey-Sand; I have given you the bearing of Balsey-Sand already; you may Sail from Hoseley-Bay down to the Ness all alongst the Beach, having good Sounding you may turn down with safety. Orford-Ness is a low Beach on which stands two Light-houses, but the Castle and Church are high, and may be seen six and seven Leagues off clear wea∣ther. There were formerly two small Sands between the Ness and the Whiting, but they are now worn quite away; the Lights toge∣ther carry you out between the Shipwash and Albrough-Knaps. Albrough-Knaps Albrough-KnapsAlbro¦Knaps is a small Sand that lyeth due east from Albrough Church about five or six miles off, on which there is but two Fa∣thom at low-water. The Mark to carry you clear besides the Lights in one, is Orford Church and Castle together; between the Land and the Shoar you will have twelve, eleven, ten, nine, eight, seven, six, and five Fathom good sounding shoaling gradually. But without this Sand you will have sixteen and twelve Fathom water.
Directions to Sail from the Buoy of the Spits about the Longsand-Head and Kentish-knock. BEing at the Spits, keep the Shoalings of the Gunfleet in seven and eight Fa∣thom, and if the Winds are contrary, and that you must turn down, keep the Shoal∣ings of the Gunfleet also, till they bring the Naze Trees north north west, then steer a∣way north east by east and east north east, till the Naze Trees bear west by north, and then steer more easterly till you get into seventeen or eighteen Fathom water to go clear of the Longsand-head and Kentish-knock, but no Shoaler; then steer away south south west if you have the Tyde of Ebb; and if you have the Tyde of Flood, then steer away south south east and south by east and south, according as you have Tydes strong or weak, and that will carry you into the North-foreland. When you are near the Kentish-knock you may see the North-foreland, and it bear∣eth from St. Peter's Church on the North-foreland north north east easterly. But from the Longsand-head it must be very clear to see the Land. This Sand-head lyeth from the Naze east south east and south east by east about five Leagues. At the Knock it floweth north and south. But when you are in seventeen or eigh∣teen Fathom of water, and that you would Sail without the Goodwin, steer away more easterly till you get six and twenty, seven and twenty, eight and twenty or thirty Fa∣thom water, and keep that depth till you bring the Lights together which stand on the South-foreland to go clear of the South∣sand-head; or bring the Land off Dover o∣pen of the South-foreland, &c. Directions to Sail from the Spits down without the West-Rocks and Shipwash. FRom the Spits keep in seven and eight Fathom water down the Gunfleet and West-Rocks; but in turning down be sure to keep the Shoalings of the Gunfleet and West-Rocks, and stand no farther over to the Sunk then twelve Fathom; the Shipwash is steep too, you will have ten Fathom close to it. It lyeth in length north by east and south by west; keep it fifteen and sixteen Fathom water, and that depth will carry you two miles without it. Gallaper-Sand. Lyeth in length south by west and north by east about nine miles very narrow,Gallaper-sand. not being a quarter of a mile broad; and at low-water there is but two Fathom on it: This Sand is steep too. The Tydes run strong over it north east by east, and south west by west. A north and south Moon maketh high-water. The south end beareth from the North-foreland north east half north eight or nine Leagues: and the north end beareth from Orford Castle south east and south east by east about eight or nine Leagues. The Depths from this Sand to the Shipwash are from twenty to fifteen Fa∣thom; and on the south east side of the Sand from eighteen to six and twenty Fa∣thom. Gabard-Sand. Lyeth in length north by east and south by west about three miles and a Cables length broad.Gabard-sand. The north end beareth from Orford Castle south east by east and east south east about six Leagues off, and from the Shipwash east twelve miles, and about eleven miles from the Gallaper. Between which two Sands you will have from sixteen to eighteen Fathom, and from the Gaba d to Orford-Ness from eighteen to twenty Fa∣thom. And west north west from the north end there is a small Hole of six and twenty and seven and twenty Fathom not a Cables length over. The Falls. Is a long narrow Sand lying north by east and south by west about five Leagues in length:The Falls. The north end bears from the Lights of the North-foreland east north east about six Leagues, and the south end bear∣eth from the South-foreland east north east half north about five Leagues; and from the North-foreland south east half south; and from Callis north westerly. The shoalest water is near the south end, which is three Fathom and a half. This Sand is steep too,
having twenty Fathom close to it; at the north end there is five Fathom. Directions for Sailing from Orford-Ness to Yarmouth. FRom Orford-Ness to Albrough Town the shoar lyeth north about four Miles, being a Stoney-Beach and good Shoalings. You may Anchor before Albrough in five, six, or seven Fathom good ground. Half way between Albrough and Dunwich there is a Wood in form of a Saddle, and is a good Mark to know the Land, being the first Land discovered when you fall in with this Land. The shoar lyeth from Orford-Ness to Lastiff north by east. Dunwich, Walter-Swick and Sole, or Southwould go all in at one small Creek, and divides into three Branches. Dunwich on the south Branch, Sole on the north, and Walter-Swick in the middle. This is a Bar-Haven, where at high-water small Vessels go in; there is good Anchoring against these places from eight to twelve Fathom. South-would Church hath a high square Steeple, and standeth near the Sea-side, as you may see, in the makings of the Land numbred with the Letter V. Sole-Creek lyeth four Leagues from Orford-Ness north by east. The Bernard and Newcom are one Sand that lyeth from Carthyness to Pakefield; the southermost part is called the Bernard, be∣ginning at Cathyness and ending at Sero; and the northermost part is called the Newcom, and beginneth from Sero to Pakefield. There is not above three and four foot water on these Sands at low-water, there is a Channel within these Sands close to the shoar, where small Vessels that are acquainted go at high-water; these Sands lye a long Mile from the shoar. This Sand hath good shoalings; stand no nearer it than four or five Fa∣thom. Red-Sand. Red-Sand.Lyeth in length north north east, and south south west, about two miles in length, very narrow, not above a Cables length o∣ver; when you are on the shoalest part of it, then is Lastiff Church about two Sails breadth over the south end of the Town. It beareth from Sole Church north east by east, from Lastiff south east, from Gunton∣wood south south east. The Distance from the Sand to Lastiff is two Leagues. You have sixteen Fathom between the Shoar and the Sand; the shoalest water is three Fa∣thom that I could find: but Mr. John Grist of Yarmouth saith that he hath very lately sounded it, and found but two Fathom wa∣ter on it. You will have eight and nine Fathom within half a Mile of it on the in∣side, and sixteen Fathom close by it on the outside. Directions for to Sail into the Stand∣ford at Lastiff. TO Sail in at the Standford you will see a Light-house which standeth on a Hill to the northward of Lastiff, and as you run in you will see the other small Light-house which standeth on the Low-Beach close by the Seaside; keep these two Lights together, then will they bear north north west northerly, and run in boldly with the Lights till you come into three Fathom wa∣ter, or a Cable or two Cables length from the shoar, then keep alongst close by the Beach to the northward, and when you have brought the highest Light-house west by south, then you are on the shoalest of the Standford, between the Beach and the Home, where at low-water you will have but two Fathom, and two Fathom and a half. The Tydes do not Rise and Fall at the Standford above six and seven foot. You may Anchor in Lastiff Road in three or four Fathom, to stay for water over the Standford. At the Standford the Channel is narrow between the Beach and the Home; there is six Fa∣thom close to the Home-Sand. The north part of the Home is called Corton-Sand, for the Home and Corton are but one Sand. Be∣ing over the Standford sail down between the Sands and the Shoar into Yarmouth Roads; as you may see in the Map of Yarmouth, numbred with the Letter F. But if you happen to turn into the Stand∣ford, you may stand in towards the New∣com into four Fathom, and into the Home-head into eight Fathom; and between the Beach of Lastiff and the Home you may stand to the Beach into three Fathom, and over to the Home into seven Fathom: being over the Standford, there is a good turning Channel down into Yarmouth Roads.
Yarmouth Haven, or Yarmouth Peer. Yamuth H.Lyeth between two wooden Heads where Ships enter at high-water, at which place the Tydes Rise and Fall at a Spring but six and seven foot, and Neap-tydes four and five foot. The maintaining of the Peers of Yarmouth is very chargeable, and towards which Charge the Town of Yarmouth hath had sometimes Relief by Parliament, for this Haven is the only and chief Place for the Herring Fishing; and should this Peer go to decay, it would be the Ruin of the Herring Fishing: and notwithstanding the badness of the Haven, yet such is the In∣dustry of the People of that place, that they have about five hundred Sail of Ships belonging to that place. St. Nicholas Gatt. St. Nicho∣ Gatt.Is a Channel that lyeth between Corton-Sand and the south end of St. Nicholas-Sand, which is called the Knowle; this Pas∣sage hath altred very much within this five years, there being now a middle Ground which tails off from the Knowle, on which ly∣eth a Buoy, which you keep on the Starboard∣side going in, and Corton-Sand on the Lar∣board-side: The going into this place is now difficult for such as are not acquainted; and since the Sands have altered so much, I think it fit to give no further Directions for Sail∣ing into this Gatt, but advise Strangers to take a Pilot. It is high-water in Yarmouth-Haven at Full and Change south east by south nine hours and three quarters; and the Tyde runneth into the Haven, and to the southward in the Road an hour and a half after it is high-water in the Ha∣ven, which is quarter Tyde. Directions for Sailing from Yar∣mouth Road out at Winterton-Ness, BEing in Yarmouth Road keep close a∣longst by the shoar to Caster-Lights, keeping the Lights together (to avoid the south end of the Cockle) till you come within a Cables length of the Beach, or half a Cables length, then keep close by the Beach till you come to Winterton, where are two Lights which you keep together to Sail out at Winterton-Ness. There is a Buoy on a Spit of Sand that lyeth off from the mid∣dle, which Channel is very narrow; you leave the Buoy on the Starboard-side going out. There are two more Lights which stand on Winterton-Ness Sand-hills, and are low Lights, and serve to keep clear of the north end of the Middle. But the Lights of Win∣terton is a high Light, and standeth on high Land, and is seen four or five Leagues off. Winterton Church hath a high square Stee∣ple. Note that there is as much water at Winter∣ness at low-water slack, as there is at high∣water slack. The Tydes Rise and Fall here but six and seven foot; and at Full and Change it is high-water south east at nine of the Clock. It is very narrow turning in and out at Winterton. The Tyde runneth in at the Ness three hours after it is high-water a∣shoar, which is half Tyde. Directions to Sail without Yarmouth Sands. BEing off of Lastiff, and that you would Sail without the Sands, keep about four or five miles off in twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, and sixteen Fathom on the back of the Sands. The southermost part of Yarmouth Sands is the Home-head against Lastiff, and the northermost is the middle at Winterton-Ness; the Home and Corton are one Sand; the next is the Knowle, St. Ni∣cholas, Scroby and the Calves Knowle, all which are one Sand; there are small Swatch∣es over them, and are made use of by the Fishermen. The next is the Cockle and the Middle; the Cockle lyeth between the Calves Knowle and Caster. Some places of these Sands are dry at low-water. Being on the back of the Sands you may keep four or five Miles from the shoar of Yarmouth from twelve to sixteen fathom water, which will carry you between Yarmouth Sands and the Newark-Sand.
Newark. Is a Sand that lyeth to the eastward of Yarmouth, and the south end dryeth at low-water; the south end of it lyeth from Yar∣mouth Steeple east half north three Leagues, and the north end beareth north east half east from the same Staple, and east half north from Winterton Light about two Leagues and a half. There is a brave Chan∣nel between Yarmouth Sands and the Newark,Newark. the narrowest place being between the north end of the Newark and the Calves Knowle, which is four Miles, and sixteen, seventeen, and eighteen Fathom between them. This Sand commonly sheweth it self by the Sea breaking on it at high-water: This Sand lyeth north west by north about four or five Miles long. The Overfalls of Newark. The Over∣falls of Newark.Lye north east from the north end of Newark, and lye in length north east, having at one place, which is the middle, but three Fathom, and so deepneth towards each end to seven and eight Fathom; you have nine∣teen and twenty Fathom water close to them; they lye from the Lights of Winterton north north east half east about four or five Leagues. I am told that there are more Banks and Overfalls to the north east of Yarmouth Land too, on which is but two Fa∣thom and a half; but I have no authentick ground for it. Hasebrough-Sand, or the Vrrey-Sand. Hase∣brough, or the Ʋrrey-Sand.Is a Sand that lyeth eight Miles from Winterton-Ness, and lyeth north east and south west about seven Miles in length, and very narrow, on which is but six, seven, and eight foot at low-water. The south east end beareth from Winterton Church north east by north eight miles; and the south end beareth from Hasebrough Church north east half north, about six miles off. This Sand is steep too, having twenty and one and twenty Fathom close by it on the inside and out side, but the ends lye off shoal, four, five, six, and seven Fa∣thom. Leman and Ower. Are two very dangerous Sands,Leman and Ow. the in∣nermost is the longest, and is called the Le∣man, the body of which lyeth from Hase∣brough north east by east about eight or nine Leagues: This Sand lyeth in length north west by north about six Miles, and at low-water hath not above six, seven, and eight foot water. This Sand is steep too, having two and twenty Fathom close to it. The Ower lyeth two or three Miles with∣out the Leman, and lyeth in length north west by west about three miles, on which is nine foot at low-water, and is steep too, having two and twenty Fathom on each side of it, and two and twenty Fathom be∣tween the two Sands. At the ends of Ower you will have three, four, five, six, seven fathoms a Cables length off, and then fifteen and two and twenty Fathom.How to avoid th Leman and Ower If you keep a fair sight of the Land you will run within it, for I could not see the Land from the Mast-head of the Yatch, when I rid at Anchor close by the Leman; but being at Anchor three or four Miles within the Leman, I saw the Church and Land of Hasebrough. The Distance between this Sand of the Lemon, and Hasebrough Sand is six Leagues, and the Depth between them is nineteen, twenty, one and twenty, and two and twenty Fathom. Welbank. The south east part of it beareth from Winterton-Ness north east about fourteen leagues,We. the north west part of it beareth north and by east seventeen Leagues, and three Leagues from the Leman and Ower. It lyeth in length north east and south west one and twenty or two and twenty leagues, and in breadth north west and south east twelve leagues at the south west end, which is the broadest, the north east end growing nar∣row. There is on this Bank from thirteen to seventeen Fathom water; and two and twenty, three and twenty, and four and twenty Fathom between the Leman and Ower and this Sand, and from four and twenty to eight and twenty Fathom. Be∣tween it and the Dogger Bank, and the Di∣stance between this Sand and the Dogger Bank is six leagues.
White-water Bank. Bank.Lyeth between the Wellbank and the Broad Fourteens, and lyeth north east and south west about ten leagues in length, whereon is sixteen Fathom, and is distant from the Wellbank five leagues. Dogger Bank. The south west end of this Bank lyeth north east from the Spurne about ten leagues, and is a sharp Point growing broader to the Sand, as you may see in the Map. It lyeth in length east north east northerly about se∣venty leagues, and in breadth ten or eleven leagues; the west end is shoaler than the east end; on the west end you will have ten, eleven, and twelve, and about the middle fourteen, fifteen, and sixteen; and towards the east end from eighteen to four and twen∣ty Fathom. Between Flambrough-head and the Dogger BankDogger-ank. you will have from twenty to thirty Fathom. Directions for Sailing from Winter-Ness to the Humbers-Mouth or the Spurn. BEing without Winter-Ness in ten or twelve Fathom, keep alongst the shoar north west within Hasbrough or the Ʋrrey-Sand: This Sand is steep too; you will have two and twenty fathom close by it: The shoar is bold and clean, and very good Anchoring all along. Hasbrough Church standeth on high Land, and is a high Steeple, and may be seen six and seven Leagues off at Sea. From Hasbrough steer alongst the shoar till you come up with Foulness, which is high Land, on which standeth a Light-house, but no fire kept in it as yet. From Winterton to this place you may stand into the shoar into seven, eight, and nine Fathom water. Blakeney and Cly. Blakeney and Cly.Are two small Towns which lye into a small Creek ten Miles from Foulness. Blake∣ney is a great Church, and a high square Steeple; bring the Church south east, and run in so into five or six Fathom water, till you see the Buoy's; there is but half a Fa∣thom of water at low-water, but at high-water thirteen and fourteen foot: You sail in between two Buoys, and then keep the rest of the Buoys on the Starboard-side go∣ing in, till you come up with the Beacons, and there you may Anchor, where you will have two, and two Fathom and a half at low-water; if you run higher up, you lye a ground at low-water. It is high-water here at Full and Change east south east. Wells, Burnham, Lyn and Boston I have not survey'd,Wells, Burnham, Lyn, and Boston not survey'd. being hindred by this pre∣sent War; but as soon as the War shall be over, I intend to survey it all, with the As∣sistance of such Seamen of Lyn and Boston as are best acquainted with these places. Being off of Foulness Ships, steer away for the Humber on Flambrough-head, in which Course you will meet with many Banks and Overfalls, and this place is cal∣led the Well. Many of these Banks wash a∣way, and grow up again in time. I have not heard of any Collier of late years that hath been lost on them. From Foulness to the Spurn or Flam∣brough-head, you shape your Course ac∣cording as you have the Tyde, of which you must have a great care. The Flood set∣seth strong into Lyn and Boston Deeps; when you are open of them, the Flood set∣teth south east, and the Ebb north west. I have no certain Account of these Banks and Shoals: I have discoursed many able Coast∣ers and Colliers, who all differ much in their Bearing and Distances from the Land. At Cromer I was told, That some years ago two Colliers Anchored north north east from Cromer as much as they could see the Land, which might be about seven Leagues off; the one Ship Anchored in twelve Fathom, the other in two and a half at low-water, and is called in the Map Cromer Knowle.Cromer-Knowle▪ Blakeney-Knock. Is a small Bank, lying about six or seven Miles north from Blakeney,Blakeney-Knock. on which is but three Fathom and a half at low-water. Outward Dowsen. Is a Sand that lyeth north from Wells a∣bout eight Leagues,Outward Dowsen. on which is but three Fathom at low-water.
Directions for Sailing into the River Humber up to Hull. TO Sail into the River Humber,Humber. you must have a care of the Dreadful-Sand, on which is but six and seven foot at low-water. This Sand lyeth about four Miles, or three Miles and a half from the Spurn. There are two Lights erected on the Spurn, a high Light and a low Light; keep the two Lights together, and it car∣ries you to the southward of the Dreadful, as you may see in the Map of Humber, num∣bred with the Letter H. There lyeth a small Bank between the Dreadful and the Spurn in the Fair-way, on which is but three Fathom and a half at low-water; be∣tween the Dreadful and Sand-hail you have 12 Fathom water. Sand-hail shoaleth by degrees; you may stand over to the Sand into five Fathom water. The Spurn is a low stony Beach, on which the Lights stand; but the Land of Kelsey is indifferent high, coming from the northward; the Land is bold and clean; you may come fair aboard the shoar from Kelsey to the Spurn, keeping in five, six, and seven Fathom water. About a Mile from the shoar, and that Distance, will carry you clear of the Stone-Bank, which lyeth off from the Spurn a quarter of a Mile, or more. Bull. Between the Spurn and the BullBull. there is ten and eleven Fathom water, a brave turn∣ing Channel; you may stand over to the Bull into five Fathom, and so to the Spurn. Hawk. Being within the Spurn you may Anchor in the HawkHawk. in three, four, five, six Fa∣thom water: Bring the Light-house east by south about two mile off, and Anchor in five or six Fathom water good Ground. Buoy of Chlyness. The Buoy of ClynessBuoy of Clyness. lyeth west from the Light-house on the Spurn four Miles, and two Miles from Clyness; which Buoy you leave on the Larboard-side as you Sail up. Buoy of Burcum. And from the Buoy of Clyness to the Buoy of the Burcum,Buy of Burcum the Course is west north west three Miles; you may keep about half a mile from the Buoys in a Channel of eight Fathom, and Anchor to the westward of the Buoy of the Burcum in Grimbsbay-Road in five or six Fathom. The Buoy of the Bur∣cum lyeth on the east end of the Burcum-Sand, on which Sand is but three foot at low-water. The Middle. The MiddleMiddle. is a long narrow Sand that lyeth between the Buoys of Clynness, Bur∣cum and the Sunk. In the Fair-way be∣tween the two Buoys and the Sunk there is a good Channel of either side of eight or nine Fathom water. This Middle hath six and seven foot on the middle of it at low-water, and deepneth towards the ends to three and four Fathom. You may steer up the north Channel between the Middle and the Sunk, keeping the shoalings of the Sunk in four, five, or six Fathom; when you come near the west end of the Sunk, keep nearest to the Sunk, for over-against it lyeth a Flat off from the shoar of the Marsh, called Staningbrough-Flats; bring Pa∣trington Church on the House on the Sunk, then are you just come on it. Being past this Flat, then keep the Larboard-shoar, to avoid the Foulhome; when you have Ot∣tringam Church on Saltawood, then are you abreast the Foulhome; a Mile above which is Whitebooth-Road, which is the best Road in the Humber. The Mark to Anchor in Whitebooth-Road is to bring Patrington Church on Saltawood, as you may see in the Map. Hull. From Whitebooth-Road, if you will Sail up to Hull,Hull. steer away for Poul, and keep that shoar till you bring a white House, which is the Town-Hall, and is kept white for a leading Mark. Keep this white House on the South-Blockhouse by the water side, and these two Marks together will carry you clear of Skitterness-Sand, which lyeth half Channel over from Skitterness. You Anchor before the Town in five, six, or seven Fathom at low-water, where is a ve∣ry strong Tyde, especially upon a Spring. The Ships that belong to the Town go in∣to
the River Hull, and there lye in safety by the shoar. It is high-water here at Full and Change East and West. The Spring-tydes rise and Fall eighteen foot. Flambrough-head. .From the Spurn to Flambrough-head the Course is north and by west Distance nine Leagues, a bold and clear shoar. Flam∣brough-head is a high Promontory, on which standeth a high Light-house, but doth not burn as yet. Burlington-Bay. On the south side of Flambrough-head lyeth Burlington-Bay,ling∣-Bay. where is very good Anchoring, and clean Ground: In which Bay lyeth Smithick-Sand, on the shoalest place of it is but ten foot, as you may see in the Map of Burlington-Bay, numbred with the Letter I. Smithick-Sand. thick-d.The north end of this Sand lyeth south south west from Flambrough-head, distance two Miles; between it and the Head you have seven, eight, and nine Fathom water; the south end beareth from Burlington-Key south east by east, distance three miles. The shoalest place of the Sand beareth from Burlington-Key south east by east, and east south east. Within this Sand is very good Anchoring in four, five, and six Fathom water at low-water. There is very good going in and out at the west end of this Sand between it and the shoar; you may stand in to the shoar to what depth you please by the Lead. Burlington-Key. Burlington-Keyling∣-Key. or Peer, is a place where Vessels go in and out at high-water, and and lye dry at low-water. It is high-water here at Full and Change in the Peer east north east. The Spring-tydes rise thirteen foot. Filey-Brigg. To the northward of Flambrough-head lyeth Filey-Brigg,ley-igg. which Bridge is a natural Ledge of Rocks that stretch from the shoar into the Sea, and is distant from Flambrough-head three Leagues; within which Ledge you may Anchor in five Fathom water at low-water, and is a good Road for nor∣therly winds. Scarbrough. Lyeth north west from Flambrough-head five Leagues; the Castle standeth on a Cliff by the Sea side; to the southward of which Cliff is a fair Sandy-Bay, where is a good Peer, as you may see in the Map, numbred with the Letter I; in which Ships lye dry at low-water. It is high-water here at Full and Change east north east. There is good Anchoring in the Road called Scarbrough-wick, in four, five, six or seven Fathom water. The Spring-tydes rise thirteen foot. From Flam∣brough-head to ScarbroughScarbo∣rough. the Land is high, and so Whitby and the River Tease. Robinhood-Bay. Between Scarbrough and Whitby is Robin∣hood-Bay,Robinhood Bay. where you may Anchor in six, seven, or eight Fathom water, and is a good Road for westerly winds, but not to the eastward of the south. Whitby. To the northward of Robinhood-Bay ly∣eth Whitby,Whitby. where Ships enter at high-water into a River, where you lye dry at low-water; on the east side is a Beacon; you may lye up as high as the Bridge. There is a Rock lyeth off, the Mark to Sail clear of it is Whitby Church-steeple open to the northward of the south Point of the Har∣bour. Huntly-foot and Redcliff. To the west north west of Whitby it is high land,Huntley-foot and Redcliff. and very remarkable to know the Land by. First there is Huntly-foot, which is a high Hill or Cliff by the Sea side, and is about three Leagues from Whitby. And to the westward of that lyeth Redcliff,Redcliff. which is so called by the Colour of the Earth, which is very red. Between which Cliff and Hartley-Pool lyeth the River Tease,Tease. which River is not as yet survey'd by me, but as soon as the Wars shall be over, I in∣tend to survey it. Hartley-PoolHartley-Pool. lyeth seven Leagues from Whitby, where is a stone Peer, in which Vessels lye very safe, but dry at low-water. As you go into the Peer there is a Beacon, which you leave on the Star∣board-side going in, as you may see in the Map numbred with the Letter I. There is
good Anchoring in the Road to the south∣ward of the Town in four, five, or six Fa∣thom water. Hartley-Pool is a Peninsula, on the west side of which is the Peer. The Spring-tydes rise 13 foot. Dogger and Boat. Dogger and Boat.Are two Rocks that lye two Leagues to the northward of Hartley-Pool, about a Mile from the shoar; the Dogger is the biggest, and sheweth above water like the bottom of a Vessel, and always above water. The other is less, and lyeth under water, on which is seven foot at low-water. Sunderland. Sunder∣land.Lyeth four Leagues to the northward of Hartley-Pool, and seven Miles to the south∣ward of Tinmouth-Bar. It is a Tyde-haven, where at high-water, on a Spring-tyde, is twelve foot water, and two foot at low-water; but within in Lady-hole, there is one and twenty foot at high-water on a Spring∣tyde, and nine at low-water. A little with∣in the Bar, just without the mouth of the River, are two Beacons, called the Stell-Beacons, as you enter into Lady-hole, and there you lye by the Key side at Sunderland. Great Colliers that are laden with Coles, and have not water enough over the Stell, take in the remainder of their Coles in the Road, brought out in Keels. It floweth here at Full and Change north east. Note that you have a foot less water over the Stell then over the Bar. Tinmouth-bar. Tinmouth Bar.Tinmouth is the mouth of the River Tine, called Tinmouth-Bar, and ten Miles from the said Bar up the River is the Town of New-Castle. The Entrance of this River may be easi∣ly known by a Castle and Light-house which stand on a high Cliff by the Sea side, just on the nroth side of the going into the Ri∣ver. The Entrance is a Bar, on which is but seven foot at low-water on a Spring∣tyde, and one and twenty foot at high-water. There are two Light-houses within the Bar on the north shoar (besides the high Light-house in Tinmouth-Castle) and are a leading Mark over the Bar; the shoar at the north side going in is rocky and stony, and the south shoar a Sand, called the Harden'd: being over the Bar, open the Lights to the southward, and keep close by the Fort on the north shoar, where stands the low Light; being past that low Light, then Auchor between the two Towns of North and South-Shields. There are se∣veral places up this River where are Keys that Ships load at; and some run up as high as New-Castle, and there lye by the Town Keys. The Map of the River Tyne is num∣bred with the Letter L. Note that the depths of water in the River are feet, and a Line above the figures shews that is the depth at low-water. But where you see a Line drawn between the figures, it shews both high and low-water, as you may see at Tin∣mouth-Bar; there is seven foot at low-water, and one and twenty foot at high-water; so that the Tydes rise and fall at a Spring-tyde fourteen foot. It floweth here at Full and Change south west and north east. Coller-Coats. Is a Peer that lyeth a Mile and more from Tinmouth-Castle to the northward,Coller-Coats. and is a Peer where Vessels enter at high-water to load Coals, and lye dry at low-water. The going in to this place is between several Rocks, the way in is beacon'd. Seaton-Sluce. Lyeth five Miles to the northward of Tin∣mouth-Castle,Seaton Sluce. and is a Tyde-Haven, where small Ships enter to load Coals. There is in the Peer at high-water on a Spring-tyde, ten foot, and at Neap-tydes when the Ships have not water enough out, they go into the Road and there take in the rest of their loading, which is brought out to them in Keels. There is good Anchoring in the Road in four, five, six, and seven Fathom. It floweth here at Full and Change south west by south: The water riseth at a Spring-tyde ten foot in the Peer, and seven foot at a Neap. Blythe. BlytheBlyhe. lyeth three miles to the northward of Seaton-Sluce: There are two Beacons on the Sand-hills to the southward of the Entrance into the River, which leads you in between two Beacons; and being between the two first Beacons, or outward Beacons, then steer away close to the second Beacon, and leave it on the Larboard-side, and then run up and Anchor before Blythe-Key, where is sixteen Fathom water at high-water on a Spring-tyde, and six foot at low-water: but between
the Beacons going in there is but two Fa∣thom at low-water, and sixteen at high-wa∣ter. The Rocks which hath a Beacon on it, which you have on the Starboard-side go∣ing in, them Rocks show at low-water. There are Rocks that lye to the eastward of Blythe a Mile off from Blythe, which are above water the last quarter Ebb, and lye north and by east three Miles from Seaton-Sluce Peer, of which Rocks you must have a care at high-water, when you Sail alongst shoar. It floweth at Blythe at Full and Change south east and by south: The Spring-tydes rise sixteen foot, and the Neap seven foot. Cocket-Island. Lyeth six Leagues from Tinmouth-Castle,Cocket-Island. and above a Mile off shoar, and is a good Road for southerly winds. From the south end of the Island to the shoar, it is all Rocks and broken Ground, where at low-water at one place there is eight and nine foot, and dangerous; but the north side is bold, only from the north west part of the Island lye off some Rocks about half a Mile; small Vessels may bring the Island south, and Anchor in three and four Fa∣thom, but greater Ships must bring the I∣sland south east, and Anchor in five Fa∣thom at low-water. The Road is clean Sand. chart of "Cocket Isle," "Humble Town" and "Warpworth Castle" PART OF NORTHUMBERLAND
Fernie-Isle and Staples. Fernie-Isle and Staples.From Cocket-Island to Ferne-Island and the Staples, the Course is south, Distance six Leagues, and five Mile from Holy-Island. The outward part of the Staples lyeth five Miles from the Main. Between the Isle of Ferne and the Main is a good Channel, a Mile and a half broad, where is seven, eight, nine, and ten Fathom water. Be∣tween Ferne-Island and Bambrough-Castle is good Anchoring, which place is called Scate-Road,Scate-Road. and is good for east and north east winds. There is a Light-house on the Ferne, but doth not burn. The Staples are a par∣cel of small Islands or great Rocks, and lye north east from the Ferne. A Mile without the Staples you will have thirty Fathom, and four and twenty Fathom a Stones cast off; keep in eight and thirty and forty Fathom, and that Depth will carry you three and four Leagues from the Staples, (and the high Hills up in the Land) called Chevet-hills,Chevet-hills. bear off each other east by north, and west by south. These Hills are seen eight Leagues off at Sea, and are very re∣markable to know the Land. It floweth here at Full and Change south west by south. Note that the Flood goeth to the southward till it is two hours, and two hours and a half Ebb ashoar. Holy-Island. Holy-Island.Lyeth five Miles north west from the Ferne, a fair bold shoar, five and six Fathom water. This Island is easily known by a Ca∣stle which standeth on a high Hill. On the south side of the Island, which side is little more then half a Mile from the Main, be∣tween the Island and the Main, is the Har∣bour:To Sail between the Staples and the Goldstone. There are four several ways to go in and out the Harbour; First between Ferne-Island and the Main; then between the Sta∣ples and the Goldstone; and between the Goldstone and the Plough, and between the Plough and Holy-Island. The broadest Chan∣nel is between the Staples and the Goldstone; you may keep within half a Mile of the Staples. The GoldstoneGoldstone. sheweth from half Ebb to half Flood, and is a small Rock and bold too. To Sail between the Gold∣stone and the Plough.The Mark to Sail between the Goldstone and the Plough is to bring the Light-house on the Ferne a Sails breadth on the east part of the Megstone, and that carries you be∣tween the two Rocks. The Plough sheweth the first quarter Ebb, and is a small Rock, the north east end of it is foul about a quar∣ter of a Cables length. There is another Mark to Sail between the Goldstone and the Plough, which is to keep a hole open in the Wall of the east part of Bambrough-Castle, which hole, if you see through, will carry you clear: but this Mark being not easie to be seen, I advise none to use it but such as are well acquainted. The Plough lyeth east from the Castle on Holy-Island, and lyeth half a mile from Holy-Island. There is five Fathom water at low-water between the Plough and Holy-Island; you may stand into three and four fathom to the Island. Being clear of the Goldstone and Plough,How to Sail over the Bar into the Harbo and that you would go into the Harbour, you must stay for the Tyde, for there is but nine foot water at low-water over the Bar, between the Partner-still and the Stone-Ridge; bring the Old-Church at Holy-Island north west, and get the Soundings of the Stone-Ridge, being the boldest side; there is one part of the Stone-Ridge always above water, being shingle Stones, keep close to them, being steep and bold: Having brought the Castle north east, Anchor in four or five Fathom at low-water. The Partner-still are a Ledge of Rocks that lye from the Main, and shew themselves the last quarter Ebb. There is no failing between Holy-Island and the Main, it being all dry Sand at the last quarter Ebb. This place is much frequented by the Colli∣ers, when they are put away to the north∣ward of New-Castle by bad weather. This Harbour is defended by a Castle and Plat∣form of Guns. Here is good convenience to haul ships ashoar to Wash, Tallow, Careen, or stop Leaks. It floweth here at Full and Change south west and by south two hours and a quarter; the Spring-tydes rise and fall fifteen foot: The Flood goeth to the south∣ward two hours, and two hours and a half in the Offin after high-water ashoar. The Map of this place is numbred with the Let∣ter M. Barwick. Lyeth northwest and by west from Holy-Island,Barwick. Distance three Leagues; there is a Bar at the going into the River,The Map of Bar∣wick was Survey'd by Col. Jacob Richards. where at low-water, at a Spring-tyde, is but six and seven foot water; the going in is beacon'd, which Beacons you leave on the Starboard-side going in, keeping close to them, as you
may see in the Map, numbred with the Let∣ter M. Being in, you may Anchor by the Car-Rock, or Still-Rock, where is nine foot at low-water, or run up to the Key by the Bridge. It floweth here at Full and Change south west by south. The Spring-tydes rise eighteen foot, and the Neap thirteen and fourteen foot. There is good Anchoring in the Road: without the Bar is five, six, or se∣ven Fathom water. A DESCRIPTION OF THE East-Coast of Scotland, WITH The Isles of Orkney and Shetland. St. Tab's-head. . Tab's-d.FROM Barwick to St. Tab's-head, the Course is north west and by north, Distance five Leagues: be∣tween these two is a small place, called Haymouth, used by Fishermen with small Boats. Isle of Bass. of ss.From St. Tab's-head to the Isle of Bass, the Course is west north west four Leagues. This Island is a high round Island in the Sea, and lyeth on the south entrance of E∣dinborough Frith, a little above a mile from the shoar: this Island is steep too all round it; there is fifteen Fathom water between it and the Main. On the south east side of it is a small Fortification with Guns on it, but naturally strong of it self, and not to be taken as long as they have Provisions: there is a Spring of fresh water on the top of it. This Island is a good Mark to know the Frith. Isle of May. The Isle of MayIsle of May. beareth from the Isle of Bass north north east easterly seven miles, and is bigger than the Bass, but not so high; on which standeth a Light-house, that Ships may know the Frith in the Night; this Light may be seen six Leagues off. You may An∣chor to the eastward of this Island in Eigh∣teen Fathom water, bringing the Light-house west south west; and if your Anchor hold not you will drive into deep water, of which you must have a care to give Cable enough. Dunbar is a small Haven, used by Fishermen and small Vessels. Keith-Isle. From the Isle of May to Inch-Keith-Island,Keith-Isle the Course is west south west, Distance se∣ven Leagues, and from Inch-Keith to Leith south south west three miles; bring Leith south or south south east, and Anchor in Leith-RoadLeith-Road. in five, six, seven, or eight Fathom water.
Leith-Feer,Leith is a Tyde-Haven, where you enter at high-water, leaving the Beacon on the Lar∣board-side going in, as you may see in the Map of Leith, numbred with the Letter O. You Sail in between two wooden Peers, and lye dry at low-water by the Keys side. Here you have thirteen foot at high-water on Spring-tydes, and ten foot at Neap-tydes. Queens-Ferry. To Sail from Lieth to Queens Ferry.To Sail from Leith-Road up to Queen's-Ferry, Sail alongst the south shoar till you come to the small Island of Cramend, which you leave on the Larboard-side going up, and the Rock-Muckrie on the Starboard-side, and being past them, steer away west north west, till you open Queen's-Ferry-Town, and so stand away for it, and Anchor before the Town of Queen's-Ferry in five, six, or seven Fathom water. Note that the Tydes run very strong here; and those that have occa∣sion to Sail further up, I advise them to a Pilot. Brunt-Isle. Brunt-IsleBrunt-Island lyeth south by west from Leith four or five miles, and is a good Tyde-Haven; you Sail in north north west be∣tween two Stone-heads, where you lye dry at low-water. The Spring-tydes rise and fall here fourteen and fifteen foot, and the Neap-tydes eleven and twelve foot. It is high-water here at Full and Change south west by south; the same throughout the Frith. There are several good Peers in the Frith, but all Tyde-Peers, where Ships lye dry at low-water. Port-Seaton. Port-Sea∣ton.My Lord Winton hath been at great Charges in building a Stone-Peer at Port-Seaton, where is twelve and thirteen foot water at Spring-tydes, and nine and ten at Neap-tydes. You may Anchor in the Bay before the Peer in six, seven, and eight Fa∣thom good Ground. Note that it is a general Rule for Anchor∣ing in the Frith, that if you Anchor with∣out twelve Fathom water, you will have good and clear Ground. You may Anchor on the west side of the May in fifteen and sixteen Fathom water. Carr-Rocks. The Carr-RocksCarr-Rocks. lye off from Fifness east north east a mile in the Sea, the outward Rock dryeth the last quarter Ebb, the others are only seen at low-water on Spring-tydes. Keep the Light of the May south and by west, and that will carry you clear of the Carr; in the Night come no nearer it then in fifteen and sixteen Fathom water. If you be to the northward of it, you will have fifteen, sixteen, and seventeen Fathom; and if to the southward, you will have two and twenty, three and twenty, and four and twenty Fathom. Inch-Cape-Rock. Lyeth from Fifness four leagues north east half north;Inch-Cap Rock. from the mouth of the River Tay east half south four leagues; from the Red-head south east three leagues and a half, and from the Light of the May north north east six leagues. The Isle of Bass on the Isle of May carries you just on the edge of the Cape-Rock; but the Bass on the east part of the May carries you clear; you have from eighteen to two and twenty Fathom within a mile of it, except the southwest part of it, and there you will have four and five Fathom a mile off, as Mr. Marr saith, who is a very ingenious Mariner at Dundee. The Flood runneth over it south west, and the Ebb north east. This Rock is about a mile long, and a Cables length broad, and dryeth the last quarter Ebb, and is very dangerous, especially in smooth water at high-water time. St. Andrew's-bay. This Bay lyeth to the northward of Fif∣ness, and between Fifness and the River Tay,St. An∣drew's Bay. in which Bay is very good Anchoring for Landerly-winds. In the bottom of which Bay lyeth the Town and Haven of St. An∣drew's,St. An∣drew's-Peer. where is a small Stone-Peer for small Vessels, where at Spring-tydes at high-water is ten and eleven foot, and seven and eight at Neap-tydes. Two miles to the north∣ward of this place lyeth an Inlet called Eden,Eden. and at high-water sheweth as though it were a Harbour, but 'tis only a place for Boats.
River of Tay. iver of Tay.Lyeth four leagues to the northward of Fifness, and lyeth from the Carr-Rocks north north west. On the north side of the River is a red Sand-hill, called Bukannais, or Bot∣tonnas, on which stand two Light-houses by the Sea side, being a leading Mark to Sail into the River Tay, between two Sands, the one Sand, which is the north sand, is called the Goa, and lyeth off east south east a mile and a half off from Bukannais side; the other Sand, which is the south Sand, is called A∣vertie, and lyeth off from the south side of the River, east north east two miles and a half, and dryeth at low-water. Between these two Sand-heads in the going into the Ri∣ver Tay, which are a mile asunder, without which Sand-heads is but three Fathom water from Sand-head to Sand-head. Directions to Sail into the River Tay. BRing the highest part of Bukannas-Hill north west, or north west westerly, or the Lights together, till you bring the high pecked Hill, called Dundeelaw, just over Castle-Broughty, which is a leading Mark in; you may Sail within a Cables-length of the low Light by the water side, having six and seven Fathom water; then Sail up west and west southerly, being a∣bove Castle-Broughty; keep nearest the north shoar to avoid the Newcom-Sand that lyeth on the south shoar above Castle-Broughty, and then Anchor before the Town of Dun∣dee in five or six Fathom water; bring the Town north east, where is a very good and safe Road for all Winds. If you shall Sail into this River when it bloweth hard, and the Sea high, take two or three hours Flood with you, more or less, according as your Ship is in bur∣den, and be sure to keep a good Head-sail: but if you should go in with the Tyde of Ebb, and a great Sea, it is very frightful and dangerous for loaden Ships, all the Channel being of a breach. Directions for Turning into the River Tay. FIrst be well assured of your Ships staying, then take an hours Flood with you, then are you sure of a good Tyde running in with you. In turning in you may open the Light-houses a little on either side, and when you are above the Lights, you stand to the northward in∣to three Fathom water, and to the southward to the South-bank, which you may always know by the Ripling or Beach of the water in it; the Lead is not sure, for this Sand is steep too. You may open the Marks of Dundee-Law and Castle-Broughty a little off either side. The Map of Dundee is num∣bred with the Letter P. It floweth here at Full and Change south west by south. The Spring-tydes rise sixteen foot, and the Neap twelve foot. Red-head. From the River Tay to the Red-headRedhead. the Course is north east by north about three Leagues. A mile to the westward of Red-head is the Town and Peer of Arbroth,Arbroth. a place for Boats only. To the northward of Redhead is a fair Buoy, called Lounan-Bay,Lounan-Bay. where is good Anchoring in eight or nine Fathom water, Redhead bearing south. Montross-River. Lyeth four miles to the northward of Red-head;Montross-River. the going in to this River is ve∣ry narrow; About two Cables length over there lyeth a Rock east north east from Scurdinnais, called the Stone, on the south side; and from the north side runs off a Spit of Sand, called the Annot: between this Sand and the Stone-Rock is the going into the River. The Marks to Sail in this River is this; bring the Rivers mouth west and by south, and run in till you see three Hills lying together in the Country, and a little House on an Island in the River, bring the House on the middle of the three Hills, and this Mark carries you in; run up before Ferry-Den and Anchor in four Fa∣thom, or four Fathom and a half of water, and moar your Ship. But if the Wind blow hard, and the Sea high, be sure of your Ships working, and take notice that the Tyde of Flood cometh from the northward,
and sets strongly thwart the Rivers mouth to the southward; but being within Annot, the Tyde runneth in strong with you; the Rivers mouth is all of a Breach when the Winds are out and blow-hard, with the Tyde of Ebb. The House on the Island being kept open of the Southland, is also a good Mark to Sail into the River. The Map of Montross is numbred with the Let∣ter P. It floweth here at Full and Change south west by south. Todhead. From Montross to TodheadTodhead. the Course is north east three Leagues; betwixt both is good Anchoring for Landerly-winds. Dounfit. From Todhead to DounfitDounfit. the Course is north north east. Easterly three Leagues on the north side is Dounfit, it is a good Bay for Anchoring in nine Fathom water, the Point south. In the bottom of this Bay is the Town and Peer of Stonehive, where at Spring-tydes at high-water you have twelve and thirteen foot water, and ten and eleven foot at Neap-tydes. Girdlenais. From Dounfit to GirdlenaisGirdlenais the Course is north north east half east four Leagues. A little to the northward of Girdlenais is the Bay of Aberdeen, where is good An∣choring in seven, eight, or nine Fathom water; you may bring the Point of Gir∣dlenais south and south by east. Aberdeen. Aberdeen.Lyeth a mile to the westward of Girdle∣nais, and is a Tyde-Haven, where Vessels enter at high-water; you Sail close in by the south shoar: the Entrance into the Ri∣ver is very narrow. On the Larboard-side, going in, is a Beacon, you Sail close by it; the north shoar is a low sandy Point, on which is a Block-house, which you leave on the Starboard-side. You must not venter in here without a Pilot, for the Bar often alters: And you are to observe, that no Ship of any Burden, that draws ten, eleven, or twelve foot water, will adventure here, but when the water is very smooth, and the Winds off shoar, and Spring-tydes. Here are always Boats ready to help Ships in and out. Bokannais. From Girdlenais to Bokannais,Bokanna the Course is north north east and north east by north eight or nine Leagues. In the midway be∣tween them, is Newbrough-Creek, a place only for small Vessels. Peter-head. Peter-headPeter-head. lyeth a little to the northward of Bokannais, and lyeth within Calk-Inch. Here are two little dry Peers, only fit for small Vessels to enter at high-water. To the southward of Peter-head is a large Bay, where you may Anchor in eight or nine Fathom water, and may Ride with the Wind off shoar: but have a care that the southerly Winds do not catch you there, for then you will have a hard Road. Ratter-head. From Calk-Inch to Ratter-headKatter-head. the Course is north two Leagues. There is a Ledge of Rocks runs off from Ratter-head east north east a mile into the Sea, therefore keep no nearer the shoar than twelve or thirteen Fathom; or keep Mormount, (which is a high Hill in the Country, and sheweth like a Saddle) in sight above the Sand-hills of Ratter-head. Mormount may be seen ten or twelve Leagues at Sea. Murrey-Frith. Is a deep Bay,Mrr Frit. and lyeth in between Bo∣kannais (which is the east part of Scotland) and Dungsby-head, which is the north of Scotland. This Bay is known by the name of the North-Frith, as Edinbrough is by the name of the South-Frith. In the western-most part of this Frith lyeth two most excellent Harbours, Cromerty and Inver∣ness. Cromerty. Lyeth to the westward of Kinnards-head,Cromey. which is the north part of Bokannais, twenty Leagues; the going in is almost a mile over between two high Lands, the shoar bold and steep, and no manner of danger in going in or out. The best An∣choring
is on the south side, just within the mouth of the Harbour. The Town or Village of Cromerty lyeth on the south side in the mouth of the Harbour; the north shoar of the Harbour is sandy, and dryeth at low-water: you may stand into either side of the Harbour by your Lead, the sounding being good, and shoaleth gradu∣ally. Five miles above the Harbours mouth it falleth narrow at Inverbrecky-Ferry, where is fifteen Fathom water; and as you sail further up it shoaleth gra∣dually, there being five Fathom water at low-water five miles above the Ferry of Inverbrecky. The Map of this place is numbred with the Letter Q. This Har∣bour is able to contain the Navy Royal. It floweth here at Full and Change south and by east. The Spring-tydes rise and fall fifteen and sixteen foot, and the Neap-tydes twelve and thirteen foot. Inverness. Lyeth to the south end of Cromerty fourteen miles, To sail to Invernesserness. from the mouth of Cromerty, keep close to the west shoar till you come to Chanry-Point, which is a low sandy Point, and there it is very narrow. Being about the Point of Chanry, keep the west shoar till you come near to the mouth of Inverness, where on a low Point of the mouth of the River, you will see the Ruins of a Citta∣del; about a mile from this Cittadel lyeth a Bar, on which is but fifteen foot at low-water; so that if your Ship draw above fifteen foot water, you must stay for a Tyde. Being over the Bar, you may run up the River Beauly, and Anchor at Kessock in ten or fifteen Fathom water. The Town of Inverness lyeth a mile up the River, which is fresh water. Being got within the Chanry-Point, you may Anchor before the Town of Chanry, as you may see in the Map. But if any Ship that is not acquainted, and is fearful to adventure up to Inverness, they may have a Pilot at Cromerty. Findhorne. Lyeth east south east from Scromerty four Leagues,Findhorne and is a Tyde-Haven, where Ves∣sels enter at high-water. Tarbetness. From Cromerty to Tarbetness,Tarbetness the Course is north east and by north four Leagues, a bold and clean shoar; only in the Fair∣way there lyeth a small parcel of Rocks, about half a mile from the shoar, called the Three Kings, which shew above water. Tarbet-Bay, or The Frith of Taine. To the northward of TarbetnessTarbet-Bay or The Frith of Taine. lyeth into the westward a deep Bay, called Tar∣bet-Bay, or The Frith of Taine. Such Ships as have occasion to sail up to Taine must take in a Pilot, for there lyeth a Bar about five miles to the westward of Tarbet-Point, where is but six foot at low-water. But in the Bay is good Anchoring for all Winds but easterly. Dungesby-head. From Tarbet-Point to Dungesby-head,Dungesby-head. the Course is north east and by north and north north east fourteen Leagues. Be∣tween which Head and the Islands of Orkney is a Channel, called Pentland-Frith, where is the strongest Tyde in all the Coast of Great Britain.
THE ISLANDS OF ORKNEY. ARE several Islands that lye to the northward of Scotland, in which are many good Harbours, and good sailing between the most part of them. The Tydes run very strong amongst them: You will see (in the Map of the Isles of Orkney, numbred with the Letter R.) several Arrows, which shew that the Tyde of Flood setteth the same way the Arrows Point, and the Tydes of Ebb to the contrary. Pomona. Pomona.Pomona is the greatest Island, on which is the Town of Kirkwell, where the Bishop of Orkney resides. In this Island of Pomona are two very good Harbours, Dearsound and Cairston. Dearsound. DearsoundLyeth on the north east end of Pomona, just within the Mulhead, which Head is high land and very remarkable, as you may see by the making of it in the Map, numbred with the Letter S. The Mulhead is bold and steep too; the Harbours mouth lyeth from this Head a League, and the Harbours mouth is about a mile over. Keep in the middle, for there lyeth off some sunk Rocks from Point Nestin, which is on the Starboard-side going in; being past this Point, then edge to the northward, and bring Point Nestin east and by north, and Anchor in five Fathom water at low-water. It floweth here at Full and Change south east and by south. The Spring-tydes rise and fall ten and twelve foot, and the Neap-tydes seven and eight foot in this Harbour. The English Convoy and Fishermen for Iceland, make use of this Harbour most commonly to fill fresh water, and take in Turff for Firing. Provisions are here good and Plenty, all these Islands afford much Corn. Fish of all sorts is very plenty and cheap. Cairston. Lyeth at the south west end of Pomona,Cairst and is a good and safe Harbour, and is a good out-let to the westward. There are several Channels to sail to it, as you may see by the Map. There is a good Channel at the south end of Pomena, called Hamsound. You sail close by the Point of Rosness, lea∣ving the Island Lamholme on the Larboard-side, and so keep the Island Pomona aboard till you come up to Cairsound. There is a good Channel beween South-Ronalsha and Burra, and another broad Sound between the Island of Hoy, Flota, and South-Ronalsha. Betweeen the Isle of Hoy and Pomona, are many good places to Anchor in, where you ride Land-lock't. The Tydes run in and out very strong be∣tween the west end of Hoy and Pomona, where you will have great Riplings and Breaches, as though there were shoal-water, yet the Channel is bold and deep, and no danger; in the Harbour of Cairston is no manner of Tyde, where you ride with great safety. It floweth here at Full and Change south east. The Spring-tydes rise and fall ten and twelve foot.
Kirkwell-Road. Kirkwell-Rad.To sail into Kirkwell-Road, you must sail between Pomona, and Shapinsha, leav∣ing the Island Elgar-Holm on the Starboard-side, and the Island Thieves-Holm on the Larboard-side; being about the Island, stand into Kirkwell-Road, and Anchor before the Town in five, six, seven, eight, or nine Fa∣thom water. Moonos-Bay. Mnos-There is very good Anchoring to the westward of Kirkwell-Bay, called Moonos-Bay. There are several sunk Rocks that lye to the northward of Kirkwell-Bay, be∣tween it and the Island Garsay. But I would not have any Stranger sail that way but with a Pilot. Wiresound. Wire∣sound.To sail into Wiresound from the eastward you must sail into Stronsa-Frith, between the Mulhead and Stronsa; in which Frith runneth a very strong Tyde, especially on Spring-tydes, so that if you should Anchor, your Cables and Anchors must be very good to hold, besides the Ground is foul. Here you will have great Riplings and Breaches caused by the strength of the Tydes, and yet deep water. Being entred into the Frith between the Mulhead and Stronsa, keep over to Shapinsa, and sail between it and Green-Island, leaving Shapinsa on the Larboard-side, and Green-Island on the Starboard-side, and then sail between Wire, Eglesha and Rowsay, which three Islands make a good Road, called Wire∣sound; you may turn in with a Tyde, there being no danger; only from the south end of Eglesha lyeth off some Rocks, of which you must have a care, they lye a mile off Bring St. Agnis Church north east, or east north east, and Anchor in six, seven, eight, or nine Fathom water. This is a good Road, and but little Tyde, and is used by the Iceland Fishermen when they are bound for Iceland. Scoknesholm. There is a narrow Channel to sail out at the north end of Wiresound, between Row∣say and a little Island, called Scoknesholm,Scoken∣sholm. where is four Fathom at low-water, keep in the middle between them. But the best Channel is to go out at the south end of Eglesha, and so sail out Westra-Frith, be∣tween Rowsay and Westra, keeping nearest to Rowsa, for there lyeth some sunk Rocks about two Miles off from Croskirk on We∣stra. There is a Channel between Stronsa, Sanda, and Eda into Stronsa-Frith, and so to Wiresound, and out of Westra-Frith. I have given you an Account of the best Harbours in these Islands; only there are several others, which are made use of but by small Vessels, which I have no occasion to mention, my only design being to harbour Ships in the best Harbours. Faire-Isle. Between the Islands of Orkney and the Islands of Shetland, is a small Island cal∣led Fair-Isle,Fair-Isle. which is inhabited. The Dutch East-India Ships, as they go and come from India, sail between the Islands of Orkney and Shetland, and homeward bound they send ashoar at this Fair-Island for Letters of Advice; but commonly the Dutch East-India Company send a Ship to meet them here with Advice.
THE ISLANDS OF SHETLAND. THese Islands lye away north half east from Bokannais in Scotland about five and forty Leagues to the southward part of them, called Sumbrough-head, and north east from the Island of Orkney sixteen or seventeen Leagues. Shetland is high Land, and very remarkable, as you may see by the making of the Land, numbred with the Let∣ter W. A Description of the East side of the South part of Shetland, from Sumbrough-head to the Isles of Brasey and Nos, and from thence to Laxford and Catford-Sounds. Sumbrough-head. Sum∣brough-head.SƲmbrough-head is the south part of Shetland: between it and Fitfil-head are three Bays, as you may see in the Map of Shetland, numbred with the Letter W Quindel-Bay. The best is Quendel-Bay, and lyeth on the east side of Fitfil-head, and is a good place to Anchor in six, seven, or eight Fa∣thom water; the Sea being open but to four Points of the Compass. West-Voe. A little to the westward of Sumbrough-head is a small Bay, called West-Voe,West-Voe. where you Anchor in seven or eight Fathom wa∣ter, and is a good Road for all Winds, but from the south to the south east. East-Voe. About a Mile to the northward of Sum∣brough-head is a Bay, called East-voe,East-Voe. and lyeth south south west in, where you An∣chor in three or four Fathom, and is a good Road for all Winds, but north east Winds. As you sail in and out you must keep a Cables length. At the Entry into this Bay is another Bay, and runneth in west and by north, where is shoal-water, not above four and five foot. About six miles to the northward of Sumbrough-head is a little Inlet, where are two Bays, Lewenwick and Sandwick. Lewenwick. LewenwickLewen∣wick. lyeth in west north west, and west and by north; and as soon as the Bay opens, you sail in west, and west and by south, and Anchor in seven and eight Fa∣thom water. Sandwick. SandwichSandwick. runneth in north, and north and by east, and is a little Bay, where you Anchor in seven Fathom water. The Point of Nonnaise lyeth from Lewenwick about a Mile. Island of Musa. From the Point of Nonnaise lyeth the Island of MusaIsland of Musa. north east about a mile: there is a Channel between the Island and
the Main. North west and by north, and north north west from this Island, is a little Inlet going in north, called Eths-Noe, where is but ten and twelve foot. Brasey. From the Island of Musa to the Head of Brasey or Wart-hill, the Course is north two Leagues. Between the Island of Brasey and the Main is the going into Brasey-Sound, leaving Brasey on the Starboard-side, there is no manner of danger in sailing in and out at Brasey-Sound. You may Anchor before the Town of Lerwick in five, six, seven, eight, nine, or ten Fathom-water Land-lock. The Earl of Sandwich, in the Year 1665. in the War with Holland. An∣chored here with the English Fleet under his Command. This is a most excellent Harbour, and much frequented by the Dutch Herring-Fishers Busses; for at these Islands the Dutch begin their Summer-her∣ring fishing, and so follow the Fish from this Place to the Coast of Scotland, and the Coast of England; they begin to fish at Shetland about the middle of June, and continue fishing from thence to Yarmouth, till the latter end of September: there have been five hundred Sail of Dutch Herring-Busses at a time in Brasey-Sound. Here you have fresh water, and Turff for firing, and great plenty of several-sorts of Fish. Island of Nosse. and of sse.You may very easily know the going into Brasey-Sound by the Island of Nosse, which lyeth to the eastward of the Island Brasey, the eastward part of which Island is called Hang-cliff, being a high steep Cliff by the Sea side, and hanging over in∣to the Sea. Wart-hill, or Sandwich-hill is very remarkable, as you may see in the Map of Brasey, numbred with the Letter T. It floweth here at Full and Change south east and by south. The Spring-tydes rise and fall eight foot, and at a Neap-tyde five foot; here is but a small Tyde: the Flood cometh into the south Entrance, and runneth out at the north Entrance, and the Tyde of Ebb to the contrary: the Tydes are strongest at the north En∣trance. Holme of Cruester. Bing in Brasey-Sound, and that you would sail out at the north end, called the North-Sound, keep the Main-side till you are past a small Island, called The Holme of Cruester,The Holme of Cruester for to the westward of this Island lyeth some sunk Rocks, called Loofhabor, being past these Rocks, steer away to the northward, and when you come to the first narrow Entrance, there is a middle bank on which is but fifteen foot water; but there is a narrow Channel of eighteen foot water of each side of it; you may keep of either side of it, the shoars being bold, and then you come in∣to a broader place, and then narrow again, which is the northermost Passage; you must keep the Main aboard, and go close by the small Island or Rock called Scotland, for there lyeth some sunk Rocks off from Brasey side, as you may see see in the large Map of Brasey: being out at the north end, you have a good Channel out between Beoster-Island and Green-Island into the Sea. The Voes. Between the Island of Brasey and a head Land called the Mull of Esweek, lyeth in four deep Sounds and Bays, called by the Inhabitants Voes: the southernmost is cal∣led Deal's Voe,Deal's Voe, and lyeth two Miles to the northward of the Island Brasey, and is a Bay, lying in south west and by south two Miles, but not above a quarter of a Mile broad. About three quarters of a Mile from Kebester-Point, which is on the south side, there lyeth a Rock called Toagrood, and sheweth at half-tyde. It beareth from the said Point of Kebester north east and by north. Laxford-Voe. A Mile to the northward of Deal's Voe is Laxford Voe,Laxford Voe. lying south west and by south two Miles, much like Deal's Voe, where is three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine and ten Fathom water clear Ground, and good Anchoring. Websters-Voe. A little to the northward of Laxford-Voe, lyeth Websters-Voe,Webster's-Voe. a Mile in west and by
south, where is good Anchoring in four, five, six, seven, and eight Fathom water. Catford-Voe. Catford: Voe.Catford-Voe is the northernmost and the best, for there you ride Land-lockt for all Winds. This is a most excellent Bay, and able to hold a Navy Royal, where you may Anchor in what depth of water you please, from fourteen Fathom to three Fathom clear Ground. From Sumbrough-head to Nonnais, the Flood runneth to the northward; but from Nonnais to Brasey, the Ebb falleth to the northwards, and the Flood to the contra∣ry, as the Ebb doth from Nonnais to Sum∣brough-head, so that the Tydes part at Nonnais. A Description of the West-Coast of the south part of Shetland, from Fit∣fil-head to Scallaway. Colsa-Island. FROM Fitfil-head to the Island of Colsa,Colsa-Island. the Course is north north west two Miles, and from Colsa to the Island St. Ringins,St. Ringins Island. the Course is north and by west two Miles. This Island is joyned to the Main by a little Isthmus of Sand, which overfloweth at some high Tydes. To the southward of this Isthmus, and within the Island, is a fair sandy Bay, where is a good Road to Anchor in se∣ven, eight, or nine Fathom. There is a good Road to the northward of this Isth∣mus, where is a good Road for easterly and southerly Winds. Little Hevra and Great Hevra. Two Miles north and by west from the Island of St. Ringins are two Islands, cal∣led Little Hevra and Great Hevra;Little He∣vra and Great He∣vra. between which and the Main is the little Island, called the Holme of Maywick. Between this Island, and the Island Hevra, is the Entrance into Clift-Sound, which is a fair and clean Sound, and runneth in north half east two Leagues and a half, having the Island of East-Buro, and the Island Tronzo on the west, and the main Land on the East, and a mile broad in some places, and other places less, as you may see in the Map; where you may Anchor in good Ground, from eighteen Fathom to five Fathom. At the nor∣thernmost part of this Sound the Island of Tronzo lyeth within a Cables length of the Main, at which narrow place is a Bar, where is but six and seven foot water at low-water, and eleven and twelve foot at high-water to sail over the Bar, Keep close to the Main, and within half a Mile of the Town of Scallaway. The best Channel to go into Scallaway,How  Sail i Scalla is to sail without the Island of Buro, and bring the Castle of Scallaway north east and by east; there is a leading Mark, which is to keep the Castle of Scalla∣way just open of the south side of Green-Island, and this Mark will carry you in between Buro, Oxna, and Papa, leaving Buro on the Starboard-side, and Oxna and Papa on the Larboard-side, and so sail in between Green-Island, and the little Island called Narry, which are not above a Cables length asunder: being past these Islands, run in with the Castle open before the Town, in four, three, or two Fathom water. It floweth here at Full and Change south south east, and south east by south. From Sumbrough-head to Scallaway the Tyde of Ebb runneth to the north∣wards, and the Flood to the contrary. Here I found the Variation to be six De∣grees westerly;Variat and the same at the Islands of Orkney. The north part of the Island of Shet∣land I had not time to Survey, the Sum∣mer being well spent; at which time I went to the Islands of Orkney, and from thence to Cromerly and Inverness; from which place I parted at the latter end of October in the Year 1685. 1681. I surveyed the Channel from Dover to the Lands end in Cornwall. 1682. I surveyed the Channel from Dover to the Lands end in Cornwall. 1683. Surveyed the Islands of Scilly and the Severn, with Milford-Haven. 1684. Surveyed the Coast from Harwich to Edinbrough. 1685. Surveyed the Coast from Edinbrough to Orkney and Shetland. 1686. Surveyed the Coast from Milford to Chester. 1687. I survey'd Liverpool, the Isle of Man, Carreck-fergus, Dublin, Kinsale and Cork, which is all that is survey'd, and is the most usefullest and necessary part to Navi∣gation. I could heartily wish that the west part of Ireland and Scotland may hereafter be survey'd, &c.
COURSES and DISTANCES From Place to Place from LONDON-BRIDGE (All alongst the Sea-Coast) to BARWICK. Note that the Distances are put down in Leagues or Miles, L standing for Leagues, and M for Miles.   L. M. FROM London to Gravesend se∣veral Courses down the several Reaches 6 2 From Gravesend to the upper end of the Hope west 1 0 From the upper end of the Hope to the lower end of the Hope north and by east 1 0 From the lower end of the Hope to the Buoy of the Nower west 3 2 From the Buoy of the Nower to the Black-Tayl west north west 3 2 From the Black-Tayl to the Shoo-Beacon the Course is north east 1 1 From the Shoo-Beacon to the Whittaker-Beacon, the Course is north north east 1   From the Shoo-Beacon to the Buoy of the Middle north east by north 1 1 From the Buoy of the Middle to the Buoy of the Spits north east 2   From the Buoy of the Spits to the Buoy of the Gunfleet north east 3   From the Buoy of the Gunfleet to the Middle of the Sledway north east and north east and by east 3   From the outward part of the Sledway or West-Rocks to Balsey-Cliff north north west 3   From Balsey-Cliff to Orfordness north east and by north, and north east 4   From Orfordness to Sole-Bay north by east 4   From Sole-Bay to Lastiff north by east and north 3 1 From Lastiff to Yarmouth-Haven 2   From Yarmouth-Haven to Castor-Lights north     From Castor-Lights to Winterton-Ness-Lights north and by west, and north north west and north 2 2 From Winterton-Ness to Hasebrough north west 3   From Hasebrough to Foulness north west and by west 2 1 From Foulness to Blakeney north west and by west 3   From Foulness to the Spurne north west westerly 19   From Blakeney to the Spurne north west 16   From the Spurne to Flambrough-head north by west 9   From Flambrough-head to Scarbrough north west 5   From Scarbrough to Whitbay north west and by north 5   From Whitbay to Hartley-Pool north west and by west 7   From Hartley-Pool to Sunderland north by west 4   From Sunderland to Tinmouth-Bar north 2 2 From Tinmouth-Bar to Seaton-Sluce north north west 2   From Tinmouth-Bar to Blythe north north west 3   From Tinmouth-Bar to Cocket-Island north by west 6 1 From Cocket-Island to the Staples north 6 2 From the Staples to Holy-Island north west and by west 2   From Holy-Island to Barwick north west and by west 3  
Courses and Distances from place to place alongst the Sea-Coast of Scotland, from Barwick to the Islands of Orkney and Shetland.   L. M. FRom Barwick to St. Tabb's-Head north west by north 5   From St. Tabb's-Head to the Isle of May north north west half west 5   From St. Tabb's-Head to the Isle of Bass north west and by west 4 1 From the Isle of Bass to the Isle of May north north east 2 1 From the Isle of May to the Isle of Keith west south west 7 1 From the Isle of Keith to Leith south west by south 1   From the Isle of May to Fifness north by west 2   From the Isle of May to the Carr-Rock north 2   From the Isle of May to the Cap-Rock north north east 5 2 From the Cap-Rock to the Redhead north west and by north 3 2 From the Cap-Rock to Montross north north west 5   From Montross to Todhead north east 3 1 From Todhead to Dunfit north east and by north 3 1 From Dunfit to Girdleness north east and by north 3   From Girdleness to Aberdeen west 0 1 From Girdleness to Buckanness north east and by north 8   From Buckanness to Peter-head north 1 1 From Peter-head to Ratter-head north north west 1 2 From Ratter-head to Kinnards-head north west 1 1 From Kinnards-head to Cromerty west 20   From Kinnards-head to Tarbet-Ness west by north 19   From Ratter-head to Dungesby-head north west 25   From Ratter-head to South-Ronalsha on the Isles of Orkney north west and by north 27   From Ratter-head to North-Ronalsha one of the Isles of Orkney north by west half west 35   From South-Ronalsha to Fair-Isle north east 20   From North-Ronalsha to Fair-Isle east north east 9 1 From Buckanness to Fair-Isle north westerly 40   From Cromerty to Tarbet-Ness north east and by north 3   From Tarbet-Ness to Noshead north north east 11   From Noshead to Dungesby-head north by west 2 1 From Dungesby-head to Stroma north by west 2   From Cromerty to Fair-Isle north north east half east 41   From Cromerty to Sumbrough-head in Shetland north north east half east 48   From Buckanness to Sumbrough-head in Shetland north easterly 47   From Buckanness to Ʋnst the north east part of Shetland north by east 67   From South-Ronalsha in Orkney to Sum∣brough-head in Shetland north east northerly 28   From North-Ronalsha to Sumbrough-head north east and by east 15 1 Thwart Courses and Distances between England, Flanders and Holland, &c.   L. M. FRom Winterton-Ness to the mouth of the Maze going up to Rotter∣dam east by south 28   From Winterton-Ness to Gorey east by south southerly 28   From Winterton-Ness to Flushing south east by east easterly 27   From Winterton-Ness to Ostend south east half south 25   From Winterton-Ness to Newport south east by south 25 1 From Winterton-Ness to Dunkirk south south east 25 2 From Winterton-Ness to the Texel east north east 38 2 From the South-Foreland to Dunkirk east and by south 12   From the South-Foreland to Newport east 15 1 From the South-Foreland to Ostend east northerly 17   From the South-Foreland to Flushing east by north northerly 24 2 From the South-Foreland to the Maze east north east half north 32 2
From the South-Foreland to the Texel north east 51 1 From the North-Foreland to Dunkirk south east by east 14   From the North-Foreland to Newport east south east 16   From the North-Foreland to Ostend east by south 17 1 From the North-Foreland to Flushing east 23 2 From the North-Foreland to Gorey east by north half north 27 2 From the North-Foreland to the Maze east north east 30   From the North-Foreland to the Texel north east half north 48   From the North-Foeland to the Gal∣laper north east half north 9   From Lastiff to Dunkirk south south east half south 32   From Lastiff to Ostend south east by east 30   From Lastiff to Flushing south east 30   From Lastiff to the Maze east by south half south 28   From Lastiff to the Texel east by north northerly 34 2 From Winterton-Ness to the Maze south east by east 31 1 From Winterton-Ness to the Texel east half north 34   From the Maze to Harwich west 32   Thwart Courses and Distances from place to place between England, Holland, Jutland, Norway, and Scotland.   L. M. FRom Winterton-Ness to Holy-Island or Heylgelant before the mouth of the River Elve east by north 71   From Winterton-ness to the Naze of Norway north east and by north 113   From Winterton-ness to Bergin in Nor∣way north north east 150   From Winterton-ness to the Statlant in Norway north by east 200   From Winterton-ness to Flambrough-head north west half north 34   From Winterton-ness to Tinmouth-Bar north west half north 47   From Winterton-ness to the Staples north west by north 68   From Winterton-ness to Buckanness in Scotland north north west westerly 100   From Winterton-ness to Shetland north by west 144   From the Spurne to the Texel east by south 54   From the Spurne to Heylgelant before the mouth of the Elve east half north 87   From the Spurne to the Naze in Nor∣way north east easterly 113   From the Spurne to Bergin in Norway north east by north northerly 147   From the Spurne to the Statlant in Norway north north east 180   From the Spurne to Buckanness in Scotland north by west 86   From the Spurne to Shetland north westerly 124   From Tinmouth-Bar to the Maze south east 87   From Tinmouth-Bar to the Texel south east by east 80   From Tinmouth-Bar to Heylgelant east by south 106   From Tinmouth-Bar to the Naze of Norway east north east northerly 110   From Tinmouth-Bar to Bergin north east northerly 130   From Tinmouth-Bar to the Statlant in Norway north north east half east 160   From Tinmouth-Bar to Shetland north 95   From Tinmouth-Bar to Buckanness N. 40   From the Isle of May in the mouth of Edinbrough-Frith to the Maze south east half south 106   From the May to the Texel south east half east 98   From the May to Heylgelant before the Elve east south east 120   From the May to the Naze of Norway east by north 109   From the May to Bergin north east by east easterly 120   From the May to the Statlant north east by north easterly 150   From the May to Shetland north 73   From the May to Buckanness north east by north 27   From Buckanness to the Maze south south east easterly 132   From Buckanness to the Texel south east by south 120   From Buckanness to Heylgelant south east half east 132   From Buckanness to the Naze in Norway east half south 100  
From Buckanness to the Bergin east north east 96   From Buckanness to the Statlant north easterly 46   From the Statlant to Drunton north east, and north north east 80   From Shetland to the Statlant east north east 80   Note that there is now on the Coast of England and Scotland six De∣grees and a half variation westerly, of which I advise all Seamen to allow it in their Courses. A TYDE-TABLE, shewing the Time of High-water, when the Moon is at Full and Change, how many Feet the Water Riseth and Falleth at a Spring-Tyde, and how the Tyde of Flood and Tyde of Ebb setteth, beginning at London-Bridge, and so continuing to the Northward to the Islands of Orkney and Shetland. Note that H stands for Hours, M for Minutes, and F for Feet.   H. M. F. LOndon-bridge south west 3 00 18 Gravesend south south west 2 30 20 Buoy of the Nower south half west 12 15   Shoo-Beacon south 12     Buoy of the Middle south 12     Buoy of the Gunfleet south 12     Harwich Harbour south 12     Handford water south 12 00 16 Woodbridge-Haven south half east 11 45 14 Albrough-Haven south half east 11 45 10 Orfordness south by east 11 45   Sole-Dunwich and Walters-wick south south east 10 30 7 Lastiff south south east quarter Tyde 10 30 7 Yarmouth-Haven south east and by south quarter Tyde, that is, the Tyde of Flood runneth to the southward one hour and half after it is High-water in the Peer. The same at Lastiff and the Standford 10 15 6 Gallapar-Sand south. The Tyde runs over it south west by west, and north east by east three or four Leagues a Watch 12 00 16 Gabard-Sand south 12 00 15 At the Maze south south west: but the Tyde runneth in one hour and a half after it is High-water; so that a slack Water is a quarter Ebb. The Tyde of Flood runneth three hours in the Offin to the Northward, after it is High-water on the Maze, which is Half-tyde 2 15 7 Winterton-Ness south east. But the Flood runneth into the Ness three hours after it is High-water, which is Half-tyde 9     Cromer and Blakeney east south east 7 30 10 Frome Blakeney to Flambrough-head the Flood setteth south east, and the Ebb north west   H. M. F. Spurne east by north 5 15 1 Hull east and west 6 00 16 Burlington-Peer east north east 4 30 13 Scarbrough east north east 4 30 13 Robinhood Bay, Whit-Bay, Tease and Hartley-Pool north east by east 3 45   Sunderland north east 3 00 10 Tinmouth-Bar, and North and South-Shields, north east 3 00 13 From Tinmouth Bar to Flambrough-head the Flood setteth south west, and south west by south, and the Ebb to the contrary.   H. M. F. Seaton Sluce north east and by north 2 45 10 Blythe north east by north 2 45 10 Cocket-Island south west by south 2 45 15 Holly-Island south west by south 2 45 15 Barwick south west by south 2 45 18 Leith, and all the Peers in Edinbrough-Frith 2 45 14 St. Andrews and Dundee south west by south 2 45   Montross south west by south 2 45   Aberdeen south by west 0 45   Buckanness, Peter-head, and Ratter-head south 12     Cromerty and Inverness south by east 11 45 16 Isles of Orkney south east by south 9 45 12 Shetland south east and by south 9 45 8 FINIS.
chart of the English channel, with the coasts of England, France, Belgium, and the Netherlands To the Honourable Sr: RALPH DELAVAL Kt. Vice Admirall of the RED This is most Humbly Dedicated & Presented by Capt Greenvile Collins Hydrographer to the KING. chart of river Thames and coast of Essex
The River of THAMES from London to the Buoy of the Noure Sold by Rich & Mount at the Postern on Great Towerhill London To the Right Worppll the Master and Wardens of the TRINITY HOUSE of Deptford Strond This Mapp is most humbly Dedicatd and Presented by Capt G: Collins chart of English channel and the coasts of France, Belgium, and the Netherlands
To the Honourable Sr John Ashby K•: ADMIRAL of the BLEW This is most Humbly Dedicated and Presented by Capt: G: Collins chart of Harwich Harbor, Suffolk
HARWICH Woodbridg and Handfordwater with the Sands from th Nazeland to Hosely Bay. To ye Honble: SAMUELL PEPYS Esqr: Secretary of the ADMIRALTY of ENGLAND. President of ye Royall Society & Maister of ye TRINITY HOUSE of Deptford: Strond. This Chart is Dedicated and Presented by Capt. GREENVIL COLLINS. Hydrogr: to the KING. 1686 chart of Great Yarmouth
YARMOUTH and the Sands about it Is most Humbly Presented and Dedicated TO HIS GRACE HENRY DUKE OF NORFOLK &c By Capt. Greenvile Collins Hydrogr to the KING. chart of Blakeney
To Sr CLODISLEY SHOU Kt REAR ADMLL: of the BLEW This is most humbly Dedicated an Presented BY Capt. G. Collins.
chart of the River Humber THE RIVER HUMBER is most Humbly Dedicated and Presented. To the Worshpll. Corporation of TRINITY-HOVSE at KINGSTON vpon HULL. By Capt. Greenvile Collins Hydrogr. to the KING. chart of the bay of Bridlington and Flamborough
BURLINGTON BAY. SCARBROUGH & HARTLEPOOLE. To Capt. RALPH SANDERSON this Chart is Dedicated and Presented by Capt. GREENVILE COLLINS Hydrogr to the KING. 1686. chart of Hartlepoole chart of Scarborough chart of the River Tyne
To the Worshpl. the MASTER and the Rest of the Gentlemen Bretheren of TRINITY-HOUS NEWCASTLE vppon TYNE This Draught is humbly Presented and Dedicated by Capt. G: Collins Hydrohe. to the KING. chart of Blyth The Depth of the water with Barr in ye River T Blyth Seaton Sluce and nderland is set downe  et, the figures aboue the line ow ye Depth at highwater  below the line low wate  Spring-Tyd's chart of Sunderland
chart of Holy Island and Staple Island
HOLY ISLAND Staples and BARWICK. is most Humbly Dedicated and Presented to Capt. WILL DAVIES vice Admirall to the Rt. Honorable the Earle of TORRINGTON by Capt. Greenvil Collins Hydrogr. to the KING. chart of River Tweed A. Lowwater mark B. Highwater mark C. a Whitepatch in ye wall D. a Whitehouse for a mark chart of north coast of Scotland, Shetland and Orkney Islands
THE EAST COAST of SCOTLAND with the Isles of ORKNEY and SHETLAND Is most humbly Dedicated & Presented To the Honble: GEORGE ROOKE Esq & Vice-Admirall of ye BLEW. by Capt Greenvile Collins Hydror: to the KING. chart of the bay of Edinburgh
TO THE Right Honble. IAMES EARLE of PERTH Lord Chancellor of the KINGDOM of SCOTLAND. This Chart is humbly dedicated by Capt. Greenvile Collins. HYDROGRAPHER to the KING. chart of Leith
depiction of Leith Prospect of LEITH form the East- TO THE Right Honourable Sr. IAMES FLEMING Lord PROVOST of ye City of EDENBURGH, And ye rest of ye Honble. Councill of the said Burgh. This Mapp is humbly-dedicated by Capt. Greenvile Collins HYDROGRAPHER to the KING. chart of Dundee and River Tay
To the Honble. the Magistrates of the Citty of ABERDEENE. This Map is most humbly Dedicated & Presented by Capt. G. Collins Hydrographe to the KING. The Sea Coast from Fiffnesse to montros was Sur¦veyd by mr. Mar. an Injenious marriner of Dundee chart of Montrose chart of Aberdeen chart of northern Scotland (Inverness, Ross and Cromarty, and Sutherland)
To the Rt. Honble. my Lord Viscount TORBAT Lord Register of the Kingdom of SCOTLAND This Map is Most Humbly Dedicated & Presented by Capt. G. Collins Hydroghe. to the KING. 1689. chart of the Orkney Islands
THE ISLANDS OF ORKNEY Islands, did once be¦long to the Kingdome of DENEMARK, But since the Yeare 1472 to the Kingdome of SCOTLAND. The Arrow marked thus show the setting of the Tyde of Flood. TO HIS ROYL, HIGHS. GEORG PRINCE of DENMARK This Chart is most humbly Dedicated & Presented by Capt. GREENVILE COLLINS, Hydroghe to the KING. chart of the Orkney Islands
chart of Kirkwall chart of Graemsay depiction of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Copinsha Horse Mulhead Thus Sheweth the Island of Copinsha when it beareth S. W 3 or 4 Miles off. and the Mulhead west 2 leagues of the Cliffs Show Blac depiction of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Copinsha Horse Mulh Thus Sheweth Copinsha when it beareth West a league off. depiction of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Thus Sheweth Faire Isle when it beareth N. E. 3 leagues at n• time Rwsey if beare W. Sr. W. ½ W. and Nth. Runoldsey wt. depiction of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Maiden Papps Thus Sheweth the Maiden Papps of off Catnesse. when they bear wt. and the nearest shoare 2 miles of. and depth 23 Foth. depiction of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Thus Sheweth Dunkins bay head N. W. b. W. 2 leagues off. The Cheife Harbours in the Islands of ORKNEY Are most humbly Presented and Dedicated to Capt. WILL BOND by Capt. Greenvile Collins Hydrogr. to the KING 1688. chart of Bressay, Noss, Lerwick, and the bay of Mainland
To the Rt. Honorable DANIEL EARLE of NOTTINGHAM. This Chart is most humbly Dedicated and Presented by Capt. GREENVILE COLLINS Hydroghe. to the KING. chart of the southern tip of Mainland in the Shetland Islands
The South Part of the Isles of SHETLAND is Dedicated and Presented to Mr John olson Teacher of  Mathematicks in London by Capt Greenvile Collins
depictions of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Becon Dunwich Walterswick Thus Sheweth Dunwich and Walterswick when Dunwich Church beareth N W 2 Leagues off. The Shoare side is white Sandy Cliffs Dunwich Southwould vulgo Sole Thus sheweth Southwould or Sole when the Church beareth N: W. b. N: 2 Leagues White sandy Cliffs. Lowest oft vulgo Lastiff Lastiff Church Lights Thus sheweth Lowestost or Lastiff when the two Lights are in one, and beare N: b. W. ¼ Wt. about a League off. Lastiff Church Thus sheweth Lastiff when the Church beareth S: W: on the back of Corton sand about 2 ½ Leagues. Wood Light Mill Thus sheweth Lastiff from the Reds and when the Church beareth N: W Fulnesse Light Cromer Dagger Sheild Cly Blakney Priorey Thus sheweth the Land from Foulnesse to Blakeney when Blakeney Church beareth S W: b. S 2 Leagues Spurn Sisters Thus sheweth the Land from the Spurnae to the Northward when the Sister Churches bear S: W 3 miles. Light Tower Thus sheweth Flambrough head when the light Tower beareth N: N: W: 5 Leagues Thus sheweth the Land to the Southward of the Tees called the Red Cliff. Hartlepoole is a high Church with a Square Tower Maiden Papps Sunderland Thus sheweth the Maiden Papps and Sunderland when Sunderland beareth W. b: S: 4 Miles. Tantalland Bass Thus sheweth the Bass bearing S: W  Miles Light Thus sheweth the Isle of May bearin No: 3 miles off. Bowens Boddam Peterhead Thus sheweth Peterhead in Scotland 4 Leagues of Skerry bearing W: b: N. Thus sheweth New and Old Aberdeen in Scotland when it beareth Wt: 3 Leagues A: New Aberdeene B: Old Aberdeene
