C6961 12534453 62829
THE Scotch Presbyterian Eloquence; OR, THE FOOLISHNESS OF THEIR TEACHING DISCOVERED FROM THEIR Books, Sermons, and Prayers; And some REMARKS on Mr. RULE's LATE VINDICATION of the KIRK. It grieveth my Soul to think, what Pitiful, Raw, and Ignorant Preaching is crowded most after, meerly for the loudness of the Preacher's Voice: How often have I known the ablest Preacher undervalued, and an Igno∣rant Man by Crouds applauded, when I, who have been acquainted with the Preacher, ab incunabilis, have known him to be unable to answer most Questions in the Common Catechism. Baxter's Cure of Church: Divisions, Direct. x. Follow not the Pastors of this Land, for the Sun is gone down upon them; as the Lord liveth, they lead you from Christ and the good old way. Sam. Rutherford, Epist. 2. To his Parishioners. LONDON, Printed for Randal Taylor near Stationers-Hall. 1692.
To the R. H. P. and P. of the K; the most G. and very G. P. of the present P. of the C. in Scotland, E. C. My L. AS there was never any Book and Pa∣tron more suited to one another, than this Book is to your Lp; so there were never any Reasons more satisfy∣ing than those that have iniduced me to this De∣dication: For, first, if in this Incredulous Age, some men should charge the following Relati∣tions of any falshoods; it were an injustice done to your Lp, to pretend, that any man is so capa∣able to vindicate them as your Lp; who amidst the throng of so much Ecclesiastick and Civil Bu∣siess at Court (from which you are now fain to retire for case and refreshment to your wonted Solitude in the Country) have been very con∣stant and close in the study of those extraordina∣ry Books cited in this Pamphlet; and so unwea∣ried a hearer of those wonderful Preachers of whom I now treat, that you have every day heard them with joy for many hours together; and never fail'd, with your own hand, to write those learned and Elaborate Discourses I have here published; and many more of the like na∣ture; in which Zeal (to your glory and to the shame of other Professors be it spoken) you had no equal, but one Reverend Ruling Elder, a Bon∣net-maker in Leithweind. So that, My L▪ this Dedication is but only the offering to you some few of the rare Sayings, and comprehensive Sentences which grace and adorn those Papers that your Lp. has been at such pains to collect, and are still so careful to preserve; and which you justly value more than all the Rights and Charters of your very oppulent and flourishing Fortune. My L. the easie access which these high and mighty Preachers have e∣ver allow'd your Lp. to their company, joyn'd to that vast Experience which you have now ac∣quired in the Stile of the Curaes, by your al∣lowing them so fairly and fully to make their de∣fences at the Council-board, gives you such a title to judge of the Works of these Contending Parties, as oe but your self can pretend to: Your Lp. knows well, that it's in possible for the ablest Curate or Prelate amongst them all, to imitate the precious, powerful, Soul-ravishing, Heart-serarching Elequence of those Sons of Thun∣der, Kirkrone, Rule, Schilds, Areskine, Chrightone, Dickson, &c. and that there is such a real diffe∣rence betwixt their Sermons and that of the Prelatical Party, that if the first be Gospel, as your Lp. is fully perswaded; then it must be received by all men, for an unquestionable truth, that the Gospel was never preached in Scotland when Prelacy prevail'd in it, as your Lp. and the Godly party you Patronize, have often af∣firm'd: And tho' this were not evident to all that compare the Works of the present Profes∣sors with those of their Opposits, yet your Lps. simple word would pass in the World for a suffi∣cient proof of it, Lying, Slandering, or the least known falshood being infinitely below such a true Gentleman: Nay, there is no Heroick Vir∣tue more conspicuous in your Lp, than your Ve∣racity, which hath so fill'd the Minds and Mouths of all who intimately know you, that it must needs one day make a considerable figure in the account of your Lps. Life, which cannot miss to see the light in a short time, being, that for those three years last past, you have so suc∣cessfully laboured to furnish plenty of Memoirs and Authors for such a work. But, 2dly. Some of the Malignants, who have no tast for such Spiritual Sayings, as daily drop from the Pens and Tongues of the Covenanted Brethren, may accuse the Books and Sermons here cited of Nonsense; but for as ill natured as the World is grown, they must own, that your Lp. has been very long, and very intimately ac∣quainted with the truest and best Nonsense; so that being a complete Master of it your self, it must be allowed that you are also a very good Judge. Besides, My L. the Curates them∣selves cannot deny, but that your Lp. is fully qualified to judge of the Works of such learned men as are spoke of in this Treatise; if they consider your wonderful knowledge of, and great concern for the Mother University at St. Andrews, which had the happiness to be nearest to your Lp, and to be your particular charge; and the Kingdom is not unsensible how you Reformed and Purged it throughly, with such unspeakable Justice and Impartially, that even aged Gentlemen, Drs. of Divinity, and Heads of Colledges, some who had been your Lordships own Masters, and one your Kinsman, had not he least regard nor respect from you, because of their wanting Covenant Grace, without which no man is valuable in your Lps. Eyes: Let men but consider with what deliberation & fore∣fight
you did proceed, and what Prudent and Learned Advice you did follow in providing for the Education of the rising Generation in that Society; and then they can never doubt of your being wonderfully qualified both to be a Pa∣tron and a Judge of this Book. These Considerations, joyned to that of your Lps. unexpressible Merit (for which I want a Comparison) naturally led me to beg you would take the following Flowers of Presbyteri∣an Eloquence into your Protection, as cordially as you do the Anthors of them: If your Lps. unknown Modesty would allow it, I could tell the World in a few words, some of your natu∣ral and acquired Endowments: To your Cou∣rage and Conduct which are equal, you have added such a success, as to raise the Church and State of Scotland to be the wonder and amaze∣ment of the World: Such burning and un∣quenchable Zeal; such strange and unaccoun∣table Prudence, and unparallel'd Piety hath ap∣pear'd in all your publick Actions, that if o∣thers had but wrought together with your Lp. in any measure, then I dare say (as your Lp. excellently words it, in your pious printed Speech to the Parliament) A greater dispatch had been made of the Prelatists, and many ho∣nest suffering Ministers e're now had been delive∣red of their pinches; and the Enemies of the Kirk and Covenant had evanished, as they did lately from Court, when your Lp. condescend∣ed to appear in person at it: It is to you that the Nation owes her miraculous deliverance from the Idolatries of the Creed, Lords-Prayer, and Gloria Patri: It's your Lp. that hath re∣scued us from the Superstitions of observing Christmass, Easter, and Whitsunday, and from all the Popish fopperies of Cassocks, close sleev'd Gowns and Girdles: It's your Lp. that enriched Their Majesties Treasure with the Re∣venues of fourteen fat Bishops, and with admi∣rable expedition have voided more than half of the Churches of the Kingdom; and ad∣vanced such a set of Preachers as it is cer∣tain, never flourished in any period of the Church of Scotland under any of their Ma∣jesties Predecessors; and now that some malig∣nant Lords have been brought into the Council again; your Lp. hath retir'd from it, bravely scorning to sit at the same Board with the Op∣posers of the Cause. My L. tho' the times have been reeling and dangerous, yet your Lp. has, by extraordinary management, put your self beyond the great∣est reach and Malice of Fortune, for you have, indeed, deserved well of all Parties; K. James is obliged to thank you for the real Service you have done him; and K. William for your good Will to serve His Majesty: The Presbyte∣rian Clergy own their good Livings to you; and the Episcopal Divines are bound to you, for advancing them to the Honour of being Confessors: The stubborn Highlanders owe all their Composition-money to your Lp; and the West Country Rabble were highly enriched by your Lp's Countenauce and Protection: You scorn that malignant way of making your Pa∣lace a Cooks Shop for Strangers; but tho' your Commons be short, yet, it's well known, that your Graces are long; at least after Dinner, the full length of a Curates Sermon, and that is three quarters of an hour: There is one thing more that your Lordship is most remarkable for, and that is, your daily practice of Family Duty; it's well known, that there have been more new Creatures begotten in your Lp's Fa∣mily, than in any other we have yet heard of; and in this matter, such is your great Goodness and Humility, that you condescend often to al∣low to some of your Servants, the Paternal Ho∣nour that's known to be due to your Lp. But all these, and many more such like extraordi∣nary Qualifications which the World admire in your Lordship, are nothing to those Supernatu∣ral Gifts and Graces which are so evident in all your Actions, that you often take God to wit∣ness, that you never make one step without the special Assistance and Direction of the Holy Ghost. My L. these and other Reasons (that I now omit, since I hope this shall not be the last Ad∣dress of this nature) makes me bold to give your Lp. this trouble, and humbly to beg your Pro∣tection to what you so much value, and that you would but once at least, grant the Petiti∣on of, My L. Your Lp's most Obedient, and most Obliged Servant, Jacob Curate.
SECT. 1. The true Character of the Presbyterian Pastors and People in Scotland. OUR Blessed Saviour, in his Sermon on the Mount, bids us beware of false Teachers; and tells us, That by their Fruits we may know them: Such Fruits are not open and publick Scandals, for then the simple Multitude (that measure Re∣ligion by the Sound and not by the Sense) could not so easily be deluded by them. It must be acknowledged, that the End of Preaching should be the Edification of the Hearers; the Design of it being to perswade Men to Piety towards God, and Charity towards one another, and to draw the Image of God upon the Souls of Men. But it will appear from what follows, That the Scotch Presbyterians Sermons have no such tendency; for the Preachers themselves (who would have the world believe, that they only are the Powerful, and Soul-refreshing Gospel∣lers) have not been industrious to draw the likeness of God upon the Hearts of their Hearers, but meerly to im∣press their own Image there; that is, they labour'd not to make good Christians, but rigid Prebyterians▪ That I may not be thought to assert this without ground (for I would not slander the Devil) I shall first give you the true Character of the Presbyterian Pastors and People. 2. I shall say before you, some remarkable passages taken out of their own Printed Books, to con∣firm this Character. 3. Some special Notes (written from their own Mouths) as they preach'd them under
the happy Reign of K. Charles II, and since the late Re∣volution. Lastly, I shall give you some taste of that Extemporary Gibberish, which they use instead of Pray∣er, and for which they have justled out, not only all the Liturgies of the Pure and Primitive Church, but e∣ven the Lord's Prayer it self, because it is an evident Ar∣gument and Pattern for Christians praying in a set Form; and in all this I shall say nothing but what I know to be true, and what I am ready to make appear to be so, upon a fair and free tryal, if that may be had where Presbyterians Rule. In the first Place, then I am to give you the true Character of Presbyterian Pastors and People. I shall be∣gin with the People, for they are truly the Guides, and their Pastors must follow them, whom they pretend to Conduct. For the Preachers of the new Gospel, knowing that their trade hath no old nor sure Foundation, they are forced to flee to this new and unaccountable Notion, that the Calling and Constituting of Ministers is in the Power of the Mob: Now the World knows by too long and sad Experience, that their Mobile is not led by Reason nor Religion, but by Fancy and Imagination; so that we may be sure when the Election of Ministers is put in their hands, they will chuse none but such as will readily sooth and indulge them in their most extravagant and mad Humors: What Ministers can be expected from the choice of a People void of common Sense, and guided by irregular Passions, who torture the Scripture, making it speak the Language of their deluded Imaginations. They will tell you, that ye ought to fight the Battels of the Lord, because the Scripture says in the Epistle to the Hebrews, Without shedding of Blood there is no Remissi∣on. They are generally Covetous and Deceitful; and the Preaching they are bred with, hath no tendency to work them into the contrary Virtues. They call Peace,
Love, Charity, and Justice, not Gospel, but dry Mora∣lity only. I had once very great difficulty to convince one of them, that it was a Sin for him to cheat and im∣pose upon his Neighbour in matters of Trade, by con∣cealing the faults of his Goods from the Buyer. He ask'd my Reason: I told him, Because he would not wish one to deal so with himself. That is (said he again) but Mo∣rality: for if I shall believe in Christ I shall be saved. I ask'd him, Was not this Christ's saying, Whatsoever ye would that others should do unto you, that do you unto others? Yes, he said, that was good, but that Christ, because of the hardness of the Jews Hearts spake very much Morality with his Gospel. The poor man spoke as he was taught and bred in the Conventicles; for it will be very long e're they hear a Sermon upon Just Dealing, or Restitution of ill-gotten Goods; and who knows not that despising of Dominions, speaking evil of Dignities, and rising in Arms against the Lord's Anointed, is with them but fighting the Battels of the Lord. One George Flint, in the Parish of Smalholm, in the Shire of Teviotdate, was look'd upon as a very great Saint among them; and yet out of Zeal against the Government, he kept a Dog whom he named Charles, after the King; and a Cat which he named Ka∣therine, after the Queen; and another Dog whom he named Gideon, after the Minister of the Parish. They are a People that will not Swear in common Discourse for a World, yet they never scruple before a Judge, any Perjury that may seem to advance the Cause, nor stand in their ordinary dealings to cheat for a penny; nay, Murther it self becomes a Virtue when the work of the Covenant seems to require it; and the new Gospel which they Pro∣fess is so far from condemning Lying, Cheating, Mur∣ther and Rebellion, when committed to fulfil the Ends of the Solemn League, that many of these whom they reckon Martyrs, have at their Execution gloried in
these Crimes, as the sure Evidences of their Salvation. Morality being thus discountenanced by the generality of that Party, the poor People are thereby lock'd up in a Cell of Ignorance. This did clearly appear, when the Laws, in the former Government, discharg'd Conventicles, the people being brought thereby home to the Churches: When the Ministers began to Catechise them in the Prin∣ciples of the Christian Religion, they found them grosly Ignorant; for when they were desired to repeat the Creed, Lord's-Prayer, and Ten Commandments; they told they were above these childish Ordinances; for if they believed in Christ, they were certainly well: And yet these Ig∣norants would Adventure to pray Ex tempore, and in their Families to Lecture on the most mysterious Cha∣pters of Ezekiel, Daniel, or the Revelation. A grave and good Minister told me, that upon a certain occasion he desired a very zealous She-Saint to repeat the Creed: And that she return'd this Answer, I know not what ye mean by the Creed. Did not your Father, says the Mini∣ster, promise to bring you up in that Faith? Indeed did he not (said she) for I thank my Saviour, that Superstition was not in my Father's time. What then was in your Fa∣ther's time? (said the Minister.) It was (said she) the holy Covenant, which you have put away. Whether was it the Covenant of Works or Grace? said the Minister. Cove∣nant of Works, said she, that is handy Labour. It was the Covenent of Grace which was made with Adam, and which all of you have put away. At Night she went home, and a number of the sighing Fraternity flock'd after, pre∣tending to hear her pray: Their Family Exercise being ended, she told them the Conference that pass'd betwixt the Curate and her, and they all concluded she had the better, and that she was certainly more than match for the ablest Curate in that Country.
Generally their Conventicles produced very many Ba∣stards, and the Excuses they made for that, was, Where Sin abounds, the Grace of God superabounds. There is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ. Sometimes this, The Lambs of Christ may sport together: To the pure all things are pure. Nay, generally they are of Opinion, That a Man is never a true Saint, till he have a sound fall, such as that of David's with Bathsheba. The following Narration of a well known Truth shall serve for Instance. A party of King Charles II. his Guards being sent to ap∣prehend Mr. Dav. Williamson (one of the most Emi∣nent of their Ministers now in Edenburgh) for the fre∣quent Rebellion and Treason he preached then at Field Meetings; and the party having surrounded the House where he was, a Zealous Lady, Mistress of the House, being very Solicitous to conceal him, rose in all haste from her Bed, where she left her Daughter of about Eigh∣teen Years of Age, and having dress'd up the Holy Man's Head with some of her own Night Cloaths, she wittily advis'd him to take her place in the warm Bed with her Girl; to which he modestly and readly con∣sented: And knowing well how to employ his time, e∣specially upon such and extraordinary Call, to propagate the Image of the Party; while the Mother, to divert the Troopers enquiry, was treating them with strong drink in the Parlour; he to express his gratitude, applies him∣self with extraordinary Kindness to the Daughter, who finding him like to prove a very useful Man in his Gene∣ration, told her Mother she would have him for her Husband; to which the Mother, though otherwise un∣willing, yet for concealing the Scandal, out of Love to the Cause consented, when the mystery of the Ini∣quity, was wholly disclosed to her. This whole Story is as well known in Scotland, as that the Covenant
was begun and carried on by Rebellion and Oppres∣sion. Nor was the Actor, who is at this day one of the chief Props of the cause,Me was but last Year sent to A∣gent their Affairs at Court. more admired for his extraordinary diligence and courage in this Matter, than for his ex∣cellent Invention in finding a passage of St. Paul's, to prove that the Scandal of this was very consistent with the state of a person truly Regenerate; Verily, I do not, said he, deny, but that, with St. Paul, I have a Law in my Members, warring against the Law of my Mind, and bring∣ing me into Captivity into the Law of Sin, which is in my Members. Now according to the Gloss which that whole Party puts upon this Scripture, saying, That St. Paul here speaks of himself, and does not personate an Un∣regenerate Man, this Defence of Williamson's must be allowed to be good; as also that the height of Carnality is consistent with the greatest Grace. Even so the Here∣ticks, in St. Peter's Days, wrested some things hard to be understood in St. Paul's Epistles, to their own Destru∣ction. There was among them a married Woman near Eden∣burgh, who had paid several Fines for not going to Church, yet scrupled not to commit Adultery with one of the Earl of Marr's Regiment, and the Fellow himself: that was Guilty, told, out of detestation to their damnable Hypo∣crisie, that the vile Woman had the confidence, in time of her Abomination, to say to him; O you that are in Marr's Regiment, but you be pretty able Men, but yet ye art great Covenant Breakers; alas, few or none of you are Godly. There are very many Instances of this Nature, but I shall only add one more which was old me by a Gen∣tleman of good Reputation and Credit, who himself con∣fessed to me, with regret, that in the heat of his Youth, he had been guilty of the Sin of Fornication with a Gentle∣woman of that Holy Sect; he says, that being with her
in a Garret, and she hearing some body coming up Stairs, she said to him, Ah, here's my Aunt, I must devise a Trick to divert her; upon which she ell a whining and howl∣ing aloud, as these People use to do at their most private Devotions, O to believe, to believe; O to have Experience, said she. And by that means she diverted her Aunts fur∣ther Approaching, who instantly retired, commending her Niece's Zeal and Devotion. The Gentleman con∣ceals the Woman's Name, out of regard to her Honour and his own; begs Pardon for the Sin, and tells it only to discover the abominable Nature of their Hypocrisie. They are generally deluded by Persons that have but specious pretences to Godliness. And such is the force, that a loud Voice and a whining Tone, in broken and smother'd words, have upon the Animal Spirits of the Presbyterian Rabble; that they look not upon a Man as endued with the Spirit of God, without such canting and deformity of Holiness. A person that hath the dex∣terity of whining, may make a great Congreation of them weep with an Ode of Horace, or Eclogue of Virgil, especially if he can but drivel a little either at Mouth, or Eyes, when he repeats them. And such a person may pass for a Soul-ravishing spiritualist, if he can but set off his Nonsence with a wry mouth, which with them is called, A Grace pouring down Countenance. The snuffling and twang of the Nose, passes for the Gospel sound; and the throwings of the Face, for the motions of the Spirit. They are more concerned at the reading the Speeches of their Covenant Martyrs, yea such Martyrs as died for Rebellion and Murder, than in reading the Martyrdom of St. Stephen, or any of his Followers. A Sermon of mere Railing and Nonsence will afect them more than Christ's Sermon on the Mount; and no wonder, for all they do is to affect the Passions, and not the Judg∣ment.
One Mr. Daniel Douglass, an old Presbyterian Preacher in the Mers, simple man as to the World, yet of more Learning, Ingenuity and good Nature than most of them; he was not long agoe preaching before the meet∣ing of his Brethren, and agoe annalysing a Text Logical∣ly, and very remote from vulgar Capacities, yet so pow∣erful and melting was his Tone and Actions, that in the Congregation he spies a Woman weeping, and pointing towards her, he crys out, Wife, what makes you weep? I am sure thou understandest not what I am saying; my Disourse is directed to the Brethren, and not to the like of you; nay, I question whether the Brethren themselves un∣derstand this that I am speaking. Several Instances can be given of their strong delusions; this is none of the least, that they take it for a sure Evi∣dence upon their Death-beds, that it's well with them, because they never heard a Curate in their lifetime. For an indulged Presbyterian, who is the Author of the Re∣view of the History of the Indulgence, tells us thus much, Page 527, and Page 528, That some of the leading people among the Presbyterians, were of Opinion, that Baptism by Episcopal Ministers is the mark of the Beast; and the hearing of them as unlawful as Fornication, Adultery, or the worshipping the Calves of Dan and Bethel: And I think that a Curate can tell no worse tale of them, than this, which a Presbyterian himself owns and declares to the World in Print. I cannot here pass by what happen'd a few Years ago, in the Parish of Tindrum in the South-west; a person that was Executed for Bestiality there, in his Prayers bless'd God, that for a long time he had heard no Curate preach; at which the Hearts of some Presbyterian Saints began to warm with Affection to him, and exprest so much Cha∣rity, that upon that account they doubted not but that he might be saved; and were sorry that he was not al∣low'd
to live, because of the good that such a Zealous man might have done. It is a well known truth in the Parish of Teviotdale, that two or three sighing Sisters, coming to a Man in Prison, the Night before he was burnt for Bestiality; the whol∣somest Advice they gave him was this, O Andrew, An∣drew, Andrew, all the Sins that ever you committed are nothing to your hearing the cursed Curates; if you get Par∣don for that Sin, Andrew, all is right with you. A young Woman in Fife, Daughter to a Presbyterian Preacher there, reading that of St. Peter, Christ the Bishop of our Souls, blotted out the word (Bishop) and in the place thereof incerted Presbyterian of our Souls. And by the same Spirit of Biggotry, one of her Zealous Sisters in the same Family, tore every where out of her Bible the word Lord; Because, said she, it is polluted by being applied to the Profane Prelates. Instances of their Madness and Delusions might swell into an huge Volume, but I shall only mention two or three which are commonly known. What greater In∣stance of Delusion, than that Seven or Eight thousand peo∣ple should be raised to Rebellion at Bothwel-bridge, from laboring their ground, and keeping their Sheep; and that by Sermons assuring them, that the very Windle∣straws, the Grass in the Field, and Stars in Heaven would fight for them: And that after the Victory they should possess the Kingdom themselves. O it's the promis'd Land, and you Israelites shall inherit it: but in this they found their Preachers to prove salve Prophets. After their De∣feat, a Gentleman told me; that going to view the Field, where the Battle was fought, he saw one in the Agony of death, crying out, Ah, cheated out of Life and Soul: The Gentleman inquired what he meant by that expressi∣on, Ah (said he) our Preachers, our Preachers, they made us believe, that as sure as the Bible was the word of God,
we should gain the day, for that the Windlestraws should fight for us. About the same time a person of Quality returning from the West, with some of the King's Forces, being ne∣cessitate to lodge in a Country House, where there was but one Woman, and she with child; for the Men and all that were able to run, had fled out of the way. The Nobleman encouraged the poor Woman, desiring her not to be afraid; sent one upon his own Horse for Mid∣wife and other Women to attend her. The poor Woman surprised and encouraged with this unexpected kindness, began to talk more freely, and said, Sir, I see you that are Kings-men are not so ill as we heard ye were; for we heard that it was ordinary for you to rip up Women with Child; but pray will you tell me, Sir, what sort of Men are your Bishops? They are, said he, very good Men, and they are chosen out from among the Clergy to oversee the rest of the Ministers. But are they, says she, shapen like other Men? Why ask you that, said he? Because our Preachers made us believe, the Bishops were all cloven-footed. There is scarce one of an hundred among the Presbyterian Vulgar, that will be either reason'd or laugh'd out of the strange Opini∣ons they have of Bishops; as particularly, that they will not suffer Witches to be burnt, because (as they alledge) every Bishop loses five hundred Marks Scots, for every Witch that's burnt in his Diocess. Nay, the generality of The Presbyterian Rabble in the West, will not believe that Bishops have any Shadows, being perswaded by some of their Teachers, that the Devil hath taken away their Shadow as an earnest of the Substance, for their opposing of Covenant Work in the Land. I shall add but one Instance more of the silliness of the Presbyterian People, and that is of a certain person well known both in the North and South of Scotland, for be∣ing not a degree and an half from an Idiot, and to be a
Man that can scarcely read an English Book. This per∣son takes on him to be a Preacher, and among Presbyte∣rian People has procured a great esteem to himself for a wonderful and rare Gospeller, for having not the least degree either of natural or acquir'd Parts, they therefore conclude him to have a large stock of Grace, and to be a most heavenly Man. He came lately to the Mers, where he was never known before, and lodging on a Sa∣turday's Night in a Country-town, he caused call in the good people in the Town to Prayers. Immediately the House was fill'd with a Crow'd, then he lectures to them on the first of Ezekiel, and he told them, that the Wheel spoken of in the Sixteenth Verse, was the Anti∣christ, and the Wheel in the middle was the Bishops and the Curates; For (says he) here's a Wheel within a Wheel, just so the Curates are within the Bishops, and both of them within Antichrist. Then the Wheels are (says my Text) lifted up; even so, Beloved the Bishops and Curates are lifted up; lifted up upon Coaches with four Wheels, just as Sathan lifted up Christ to the Pinacle of the Temple, but God will take the Hammer of the Covenant in his own Hand, and knock down these proud Prelates, and break all their Coaches and their Wheels to pieces, Beloved, and lay the Curates on their Backs, so that they shall never rise again; for the Prophet says here, that when they went they went up∣on their four sides, and they returned not when they went, Be∣loved: That you may see it very plain and clear, for tho' they may go out and Persecute God's own Covenanted People, yet they shall return falling upon their Broad-sides, and get such a fall that they shall never be able to stand or return to persecute the Godly, so long as they go upon their four sides, and are lifted up upon four Wheels. The people said, they never heard such a sweet Tongue in a Gracious Man's Head. He spoke much against those that took an Indul∣gence from K. James. The next day he told them, that
the Episcopal Minister in the Parish was his Cousin, there∣fore he would go to Church, and hear how he could Preach. Truly, Sir (says the people) we shall go along with you wherever you go, albeit it be our ordinary to go to the Meeting house in the Parish. And that same very day he brought all the Dissenters in the Parish to the Church. The people intreated him to deal with the Minister to turn Presbyterian, and promis'd to desert the Meeting-house Preacher, whom they ordinarily heard, and to hear the Episcopal Minister upon his Conversion. He promised to deal very seriously with him: For that purpose, the next day he came to the Ministers House, and after a few sighs and affected groans, he expostulates thus, Dear Cousin, what makes you own perjur'd Episcopacy? What have you to say against that Office? replies the Minister. I have many Arguments, said he, and one I am sure you can never answer; and you will find it in Psal. 45. 1. My Heart enditeth a good thing: Now is not this, says he, a plain Argument agaist Bishops; for when will they endite good things? The people wondered that the Minister could not be perswaded by so clear an Argument, and said, Poor Soul, his Heart is heardened, he has not Grace enough to believe and be Converted. This Account is pro∣ved before very many famous witnesses in the City of Edinburgh. All I have told of them is truth, but the hundred part is not told. You may judge of the Tree by these Fruits; and of what a delicate Set of Reformers we have at his time in the West and South of Scotland. I come in the next place, to give you a true Character of their Preachers. And truly, to be plain, they are a Proud, Sour, Inconversable Tribe, looking perfectly like the Pharisees, having Faces like their horrid Decree of Repro∣bation. They are without Humanity, void of common Civility, as well as Catholick Charity, so wholly enslaved to the Humours of their people, that they give no other
Reason why they converse not with Men of a different Opinon, but only that their People would take it very ill if they should. However, I fear there is something in it more, and that is, lest their Ignorance should be discover'd; for it's certain, they have as little Learning as good Nature: And we have both felt and seen, that that is next Neighbour to none at all. They have their Souls cast into a different mould from all Christians in the World. There is no Church but they differ from, both in Worship and Practice: They have quite banish'd the use of the Lord's Prayer, and what ridi∣culous stuff they have foisted in for it, shall be told in its proper Place, The smoothest reason that they alledge for their forbearing it, is, That the use thereof is inconve∣nient. This is Dr. Rule's own Reason in that pretended Answer he has published to the Ten Questions concern∣ing Episcopal and Presbyterian Government in Scotland. Their famous Preacher James Kirktown, when one of the Magistrates of Edenburgh enquired why they did forbear the publick use of the Lord's Prayer? told down-right, be∣cause it was the badge of the Episcopal Worship. I doubt not but many have heard long ere now of a Conference that past betwixt my Lord B . . . and a ruling Elder in the North. In short it is this, Five Presbyterian Preachers, last Year, appointed themselves Judges, to purge Two or Three Diocesses in the North. They took to assist, or to accompany them, some whom they call Ruling-Elders, one of whom entreated my Lord B . . . to further with his help the happy and blessed Reformation, particularly by giving in Complaints against Ignorant, Scandalous, and Erroneous Ministers, that the Church of God might be replenished with the Faithful: Truly then (saith my Lord) there is one whom I can prove to be very Atheistical, Ignorant and Scandalous. At which the Ruling-Elder be∣gan to prick up is Ears; And pray you, Sir, (says he)
who is the Man? Indeed (says my Lord) I will be free with you, it is Mr. James Urquhart, one of your own Preachers, who is come with you now to sit as a Judge upon others; and by Witnesses of unquestionable Honesty I can make it appear that he said, If ever Christ was drunk upon Earth, it was when he made the Lords Prayer. And I ap∣peal to your self, who are a Ruling-Elder, whether or not this be Blasphemy? Some other things of Scandalous Nature I can prove against him. O but (says he) we are not come here to Judge our Brethren, our Business is with the Cu∣rates. It is ordinary to hear their People say, That if Christ were on Earth again, he would think shame of that Form, that they could make better themselves, and that he was but young when he compos'd it. All which Blasphemies must needs be the Effects or Consequent of what they hear from their Preachers. And as for the Apostles Creed, it is not so much as once mentioned at the Baptising of Infants; for all that they require at Baptism, is, That the Father promise to breed up the Child in the Belief of the Westmin∣ster Confession of Faith, and that he shall adhere to all the National Engagements laying on them to be Presby∣terians.Though Mr. Rule. who defends the New Gospellers by denying their Prints, and by palpable vntruths, seems to disown this in his Second Vindication of his Kirk. Yet much honester Presbyterians affirm it, and glory in it. Vid. Covenants with acknowledgment of Sins and Engagement to Duties, renew∣ed at Lesmahago. 1688. Et Hind let loose. Here I cannot forget what Mr. John Dickson, Preacher in the Meeting-House at Kelso, said once in a Sermon; Ask (said he) an old dying Wife, if she hath any Evidence of Salvation, she will tell you, I hope so; for I believe the Apostles Creed, I am taken with the Lord's Prayer, and I know my Duty to the be Ten Commands. But I tell you, Sirs, there are but old rotten Wheel-barrows, to carry Souls to
Hell. These are Idols that the false Prelates and Curates have set up, to obstruct the Covenant and the Work of God in the Land. For reading the Scriptures in Churches, they have abo∣lished that with the rest, and in place thereof, he that raises the Psalm reads the Sermon that was preach'd the Sabbath before; And for the Gospel Hymn, called the Doxology, or Gloria Patri, they reject that as a supersti∣tious prelatical Addition to the Word of God. A certain Maid being lately Catechised by one of these Preachers, the first question he propos'd to her was, Maggi, Now what think you are the Saints doing in Heaven? I know not, Sir: O Maggy, that is a very easie question, answer it, Maggy. I think then (said she) they are doing that in Heaven which ye will not let us do on Earth; What is that, Maggy? says he. They are singing Glory to the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, Sir. Now that is your Mistake, Maggy (said he) for there's no such malignant Songs sung there; you have been quite wrong taught, Maggy, the Curates have deceived you, Maggy. They have no distinguishing Garb from Lay-men, and yet they took upon them to admonish the King's Com∣missioner to their last Assembly, for wearing a Scarlet Cloak, and told him plainly, That it was not decent for his Grace to appear before them in such a Garb; upon which my Lord told them, That he thought it as undecent for them to appear before him in gray Cloaks and Cravats. When the Church of Arrol was last Year made Vacant by the Expulsion of the Reverend and Learned Dr. Niclson, the Elders and Heritors there, whereof many were Gen∣tlemen of the best quality met together, that according to the present Law and constant Practice of the Presby∣terians they might chuse and call another Minister to be their Parson; after they had unanimously agreed, and sign'd, and sent a formal Legal Call to Mr. Lisk, a per∣son
of indisputable Qualifications for the Ministry, in which he has been imploy'd with great Reputation for several Years in the North, and one who has given signal Evidence of his good Affections to heir present Majesties; my Lord Kinnard, Chief Heritor, went with the rest to signifie their Calling of Mr. Lisk to the Presbytery; at my Lords entering into the place where the Presbytery was sitting, he ask'd if they were the Ministers of the Presbytery; Do not you see that we are? said the Mode∣rator. My Lord replied, That by their Garb no Body could know them, and that their Spirit was invisible; now whe¦ther it was for this Jest, or because they knew Mr. Lisk to be Episcopal in his Judgment I know not; but this I know, that these grave New Gospellers, rejected the Call, in despite both of the Heritors and of their own Law, brought in a Hot-headed Young Man of their own Stamp and Election. However, that they use no distinguishing Garb, must be acknowledged to be very Congruous; for truly they are but Laicks, and it will surpass all their Learning, to prove that they are Ministers of Jesus Christ, but meerly Preachers sent and call'd by the People, who are generally but very ill Judges of Mens Qualifica∣tions for the Ministry; hence their constant and vast Heats and Divisions about their calling of able Men. The Mobile ordinarily take their Measures only from the appearances of things, and indeed a Presbyterian Preachers Out-side is not his worst, for they appear commonly, though in Lay-garb, yet in Sheeps-clothing; but as we have often formerly, so do we now, feel that they are inwardly nothing but ravenous Wolves. Now as to their Sermons (which is the main design of this Paper) they are still upon the Government and the Times, preaching up the Excellency of their Kirk-Government, which they call Christ, the Crown, Scepter, and Government of Christ. This was an old Custom
among them to preach up the Times, and the neglect thereof they call'd sinful Silence. When in the former Confusions of the State they violently intruded them∣selves and Usurped the Government of the Church, which they never had in settled Times. In those Days at a pub∣lick Synod they openly reproved one Mr. Lighton for not preaching up the Times. Who (saith he) doth preach up the Times? It was answer'd, That all the Brethren did it. The (says Mr. Lighton) if all you preach up the Times, you may allow one poor Brother to preach up Christ Jesus and Eternity. But this was never, not is like to be the Design of their Sermons; for, trace them in their Politicks, Mo∣rals, Mysticks, and Metaphysicks, you shall find them Selfish, Singular, and full of Nonsensick Rhapsodies, These perhaps may seem hard Words, but an Aethiopian must be painted black, and that's no sault in the Painter. For their Politicks, there is no Government under the Sun could tolerate them, if they but act in other Nations as they have done in Scotland since their Intrusion there; to instance but in our Times, Did nor Mr. Cargill, one of their Celebrated Preachers, Excommunicate all the Royal Family, the Bishops and Curates, and all that should hear them and adhere to them? They, indeed, that affect the Name of Sober Presbyterians disown'd these Hill-men, particularly because they refused to join with them in thanking King James for the Toleration, which he granted to them. And yet such is the Disingenuity of these who would be called Sober Presbyterians, that they cry out that they suffered Persecution; whereas it was the Cameronians only, whom they disown, that did suffer any thing: For these others were set∣tled in Churches by an Indulgence granted by the King. Against which Indulgence all the Sufferers, like true Presbyterians, gave their Testimony, cal∣ling it a meer brat of Erastianism. What Government
could tolerate such Ministers, as John Deckson, whom I named before, who in a Sermon Preached by him in the Parish of Gallashiels, declar'd, That it was all one to Sacrifice to Devils, as to pay Cess to King Charles. The Author of the Review of the History of Indulgence, one of the Sober sort of Presbyterians, tells, Page 610. the same of a Preacher of his Acquaintance. I shall say no more of their Sentiments concerning Go∣vernment, but only referr the Readers to their Printed Acts of General Assemblies, and to those Covenants which themselves have Printed, often Subscribed and Sworn, and which are now again, for the benefit of Strangers, published in that Excellent Vindication of King Charles II. his Happy Government in Scotland by Sir George Mac Kenze, in which it's Evident, that they plainly renounce Monarchy and all Power, but that of the Covenanted Kirk. As to their Disposition to live peaceably, I appeal not only to their Principles vented in these Covenants and Acts of their general Assemblies, but also to the many private Murthers, and open Rebellions which they have been guilty of under every Reign, since their first entry into Britain. Even in our own Days, since 1666, they have raised no less than Three formidable Rebellions, be∣sides many lesser Insurrections and Tumults, wherein many Christians have suffered. With what Violence did they flee to Arms, and persecute all who were not of their Party, upon the occasion of the late Revolution; when, if it had not been for their indiscreet and fiery Zeal, this Kingdom might have been happily united to England: But what ever Advantage such an Union might have brought to the Church and State; yet, because it seemed to have no good Aspect to the covenanted cause, therefore the motion of it, though offered, was industriously stifled, and that Opportu∣nity,
which we can hardly hope to recover, quite lost. Nay, under the present Government, for which they in the beginning pretended to be so zealous, 'tis well known over all the Kingdom, that they were last Year contriving by force, without any regard to Autho∣rity, to have the Solemn League renewed, and imposed after the old manner, upon all Men, Women and Chil∣dren; and in order to this good end, many Thousands of them, at Field meetings in the West, conveened after their ordinary way, with Bibles and Musquets, Psalm-Books and rusty Swords, and subscrbed a new Association for raising of Men, Horse and Arms, to advance the Old Cause, repurge the holy Kirk, and make a thorow Re∣formation in the Land. But I shall take occasion by and by to give you some later and more evident Instances of their Neglect and Contempt of their present Governors. In the next place survey them in their Learning, and you shall find that it lies only in the study of some Anti-Arminian Metaphysicks, and in the practical Divinity they pretend to draw from the Heads of Election and Re∣probation, whereby they preach Men out of their Wits, and very often into Despair and Self-murder. It's gene∣rally known, that Joseph Brodie, Preacher in Forress in the time of the late Presbytery, did in the presence of a very Learned and Eminent Person, take occasion in the Pulpit to speak of a poor Man, who was then in such a desperate Condition, that it was judg'd necessary to bind up his Hands, lest otherwise he should cut his own Throat, as he continually threatned; of this desperate Wretch the pious Preacher above-named pronounced thus; Sirs, this is the best Man in my Parish, would to God ye were all like him; he does truely fear Reprobation, which most of you are not aware of. There is a common printed Pamphlet compos'd and publish'd by a Presbyterian Preacher, concerning one Bessie
Clarkson, a Woman that lived at Lanark, who was three Years in despair, or to speak in their Cant, under Exer∣cise. Whosoever reads that Pamphlet will find, that the poor Woman's Distemper proceeded only form their indis∣creet Preaching, representing God as a sower, severe and unmerciful Being. It is known in the Shire of Teviotdale that Mr. William Veach murder'd the Bodies, as well as Souls, of two or three Persons with one Sermon; For, preaching in the Town of Jedburgh to a great Congrega∣tion, he said, There are Tow thousand of you here to day, but I am sure Fourscore of you will not he saved; upon which Three of his ignorant Hearers, being in Despair, dispatched themselves soon after. And lately in Eden∣burgh Mr. James Kirkton, (the Everlasting Comedian of their Party) one of their famous Preachers in that City, praying publickly for a poor Woman much troubled in Spirit, said, A wholesome Disease, good Lord, a wholesome Disease, Lord, for the Soul. Alas, said he, few in the Land are troubled with this Disease. Lord, grant that she may have many fellows in this Disease. Not only do they make their People distracted with such desperate Doctrine as this, but moreover they incourage them in direct Impieties. Mr. Selkirk preach∣ing at Musselburgh expressed himself thus, God seed no Sin in his Chosen; Now, Sirs, be you guilty of Murder, Adultery, Bestiality, or any other gross Sin, if you be of the Election of Grace there is no fear of you, for God sees no Sin in his Chosen covenanted People. And this is consonant to an expression of Mr. Samuel Rutherford's printed Letters, Hellfulls of Sins cannot separate is from Christ. In the Parish of Mr. Macmath, Minister of Leswade, some of those who were lately the most active in perse∣cuting and driving him form his Residence (even after he had the Privy Councils Protection, and a Guard assign'd
him for his Defence) have since suffer'd violent deaths; two of them prevented the Hangman's pains by becoming their own Murtherers. When the Earl of Lauderdale and Sir George Mackenzie dyed last year much about one time, the party who pretend to unriddle all the most secret Causes of God's Providence, called their Deaths a visible Judgment, for their being Enemies to the good Cause, altho' it be well known that both these honourable Persons dyed of a natural Death, in a good age, being both of them worn out with their great diligence in their King and Country's Service (perhaps, indeed, their days were shortened, by seeing such Firebrands able again to force themselves into the Church, as had before ruin'd both it and the State, and were the Scan∣dal of Christianity as well as Disgrace of their Nation.) But when these abovenamed Self-Murtherers of the Parish of Leswade had divided Judas's death betwixt them, the one hanging himself, the other ripping up his own Belly, till all his Bowels gushed out: The Presbyterian Preacher in that Parish, holding forth next Sunday, was so ready of Invention as to find Arguments from thence for the Con∣firmation of the good Cause: Ab Sirs (says he) nothing has befallen these Men but what God had from Eternity de∣creed; and I can tell you, Sirs, why he decreed it, indeed it was even because they had gone sometimes to hear the Graceless Curates. Ah, Sirs, ye may see in this Judgment the danger of that Sin, beware of hearing Curates, Sirs, you see it's a dangerous thing, Sirs, but I'll tell you more yet anent this, Sirs, this is a plain proof that the Gospel has non been preached in this Parish these twenty eight Years, for in all that time you have no: heard so much as of one that had a tender Conscience like these men; but now when we begin again to preach the Gospel, it's so powerful, that it awakes mens Consciences, and pricks them so at the Heart, that they cannot bear it, nor live under it. And now I leave the World to Judge, whether this
sort of Learning and manner of Preaching, doth not stand in diametrical opposition to all Religion and Reason, and does not in its Tenure and Effects, appear to be indeed the Doctrine of Devils, and another Gospel; and yet by it our Rabble Reformation has been wrought. All true and solid Learning, particularly Antiquity is decryed by them, because in it there is no vestige, no not so much as any shadow of Presbytery to be found; to preach Peace and Righteousness (tho' that be the design of the Gospel) yet since it does not answer the Ends of the Covenant, it must be condemn'd as temporizing, time-serving, and the pleasing of men more than God, who, they are sure, can never be pleas'd but in their Covenanted way. Morality with them is but old, out-dated, heathenish Virtue, and therefore such a Book as The whole Duty of Man, is look'd upon with wonderful contempt by them: Frazer of Bray, one of the greatest among them, profes∣ses downright, that there is no Gospel, nor any relish of it in that Book, and that Aristotle's Ethicks have as much true Divinity as that Book hath. And John Vetch of Woolstruthers says, That that Book is too much upon Mo∣ral Duty. A certain Lady of their Stamp, getting it once into her hands, and hearing that it was a Moral Book, done by an Episcopal Divine, she made a Burnt Offering of it, out of her great Zeal against Episcopacy and Mora∣lity. Mr. Macquire, one of their celebrated Professors and Preachers, in his Preface to Brown's Book, entituled, Christ the Truth, Way, and Life, calls the people that are taken up with the whole Duty of Man, or any such Books, a Mo∣ralizing, or rather, says he, a Muddizing Generation. The most of their Sermons are Nonsensick Raptures, the abuse of Mystick Divinity, in canting and compounded Vocables, oft-times stuffed with impertinent and base Similes and always with homely, course, and ridiculous Expressi∣ons, very unsuitable to the Gravity and Solemnity that
becomes Divinity. They are for the most part upon Be∣lieve, Believe; and mistaking Faith for a meer Recumben∣cy, they value no Works but such as tend to propagate Presbytery. When they speak of Christ, they represent him as a Gallant, Courting and Kissing, by their Ful∣some, Amorous Discourses on the mysterious Parables of the Canticles; and making Christ and his Gospel to be their own Kirk Government; they have quite debased Di∣vinity, and debauched the Morals of the People: This is evident, not only from their manner of Preaching, but also from their way of Writing most of their Books, whereof some Instances shall be given in the next Section. Some of them have an odd way of acting in the Pulpit, personating Discourses often by way of Dialogue betwixt them and the Devil. Such ways were of old familiar to the Monks, as appears from Monsieur Claude in his Se∣cond part of the Defence of the Reformation, Chap. 10. where he vindicates Luther from an aspersion cast upon him by the Church of Rome. For, say the Papists, Lu∣ther professeth in his Writings, that he had a Conference with the Devil concerning the Mass, and that the Devil ac∣cused him for being an Idolater. To which Luther answers, That he was then in Ignorance, and that he obey'd his Superiours. Hence the Papists conclude, that Luther was the Devil's Scholar. But Monsieur Claude lets them see▪ that Luther spoke in a Monkish Stile, and that the Stile of the Convent did represent conflicts betwixt the Flesh and Spirit, as personal exploits with the Devil: To prove this, he instances St. Dominick, who says, That he saw the Devil one Night, in his Iron Hands carry a Paper to him, which he read by the light of a Lamp, and told it was a Catalogue of his sins, and the sins of his Brethren, upon which St. Dominick commanded him to leave the Paper with him, which was done accord∣ingly; and afterwards he and his Brethren found cause to
correct something in their Lives. All that is said for this, is, that it is a Romantick Stile proper to the Monks, and all that is meant thereby is this, that the Devil could lay such and sins to their charge, their Consciences did smite them, therefore they corrected what they found a∣miss. But such a Stile did create wrong Ideas in the Lit∣teral Interpreters of such Narrations: And it is like some of our Reformers reading Books of this nature, either thought such Apparisions real, or that they affected the Stile; for it its reported of Mr. Robert Bruce, one of our Scotch Re∣formers, that having studied the Civil Law, and going one day to the Colledge of Justice, to pass his Tryals in order to commence Advocate, he said, that he saw a great Gulph in the Close or Court of the Parliament-House, like the mouth of Hell, and this diverted his entrance in∣to the House, upon which he gave over the Study of the Law, and applyed himself to Theology. Whether the thing was litterally true, or whether the man had a di∣sturbed Imagination (as good men may have) or whether he affected the Stile of the Convent, and meant thus much buy it, That the imployment of a Jurist was dange∣rous, and apt to lead men into such Temptations as he feared might be too strong for him, I know not which to conclude; but this I am sure of, That one Mr. Thomas Hogg, a very popular Presbyterian Preacher in the North, asked a person of great Learning, in a Religious Confe∣rence, whether or not he had seen the Devil? It was an∣swered him, That he had never seen him in any visible ap∣perance: Then I assure you (saith Mr. Hogg) that you can never be happy till you see him in that manner; that is, until you have both a personal Converse and Combat with him. I know nothing more apt to create a more Religi∣ous Madness in poor well-meaning people, that this sort of Divinity, in which our Presbyterians have quite out-done the senseless old Monks.
Their Principles and Doctrine being, as ye have heard, opposite to Morality, it will not be thought strange that the height of Pride and Rusticitie should appear in their Conversation: The common Civilities due to Mankind, they allow not to Persons of the Quality, that are of a different Opinion from themselves. To avoid and flee from the Company where a Curate is, as if it were a Pest-house is a common sign of Grace: To affront a Prelate openly is a most meritorious Work, and such as becomes a true Saint: To approve and applaud the Murtherers of the Archbishop of St. Andrews, is an infallible Evidence of one thoroughly reformed. That the World may be satisfied of their Behaviour towards ordinary Men, I shall give you some late Instances of their Carriage towards those of the highest Rank and Quality; the matters of Fact are such as are known to be true by Multitudes of People be∣fore whom they were acted; and themseves have the Im∣pudence still to Glory in them; and yet I will not say, but some of the Party may deny them upon occasion at Court, as they do other things as evident; for I know what Metal their Foreheads are made of. 1. Then when their Majesties Privy Council, by advice of all the Judges conform to a standing Act of Parliament, and common Practice, appointed a Sermon upon the thir∣tieth Day of January, 1690: The Council some time before sent a Person of Quality, one of their own Stamp and Kid∣ney, to the Commissioners of the General Assembly, to desire them in their Majesties and Council's Name, to ap∣point one of their number to preach before them in St. Giles's Church on that Day, and to put them in mind that it was the Anniversary for the Martyrdom of King Charles the First, and that a Sermon proper for the occa∣sion was expected according to the Religion, Law, and Custom of the Nation. The grave Noddies of the Assemb∣ly answer'd thus, Let the Council to do their own Business,
for we are to receive no Directions from the State, nor to the take our Measures from the Council, especiallly in preaching Anni∣versary-Sermons. Upon which they appointed Shields, a Cameronian, one of the most wild and violent of the Hill∣men, to preach in the Tron-Church, where-in they used to have Weekly Lectures, as it happened upon that Day of the Week, but where neither the Lords of Council nor Judges were used to come. All that he spoke concerning the King's Murther was this, Ye Sirs, perhaps some of you may foolishly fanoy that I came here to day to preach to you concerning the Death of King Charles the First: What? preach for a Man that died forty Years ago; if it be true what some Histories tells of him, he is very mach wronged; but if it be true what we believe of him; and have ground for, he is suffering the Vengeance of God in Hell this day for his own and Fore-fathers Sing. The same Shields as he was hold∣ing forth sometime before at Edinburgh, said, That for ought he saw, King William and Queen Mary were rather seeking an earthly Crown to themselves, than seeking to put the Crown on Christ's Head. That is, in the Con∣venticle stile, to settle Presbyterian Government. This same Year again they peremptorily refused and de∣spised the Privy Council's Order, requiring them, accord∣ing to a standing Act of Parliament, to preach upon that day. 2. Inst. Mr. Areskme preaching in the Tron Church at Edinburgh, the day after the King by open Proclamation had adjourned the General Assembly, said, Sirs, Ye heard a strange Proclamation the other day, which I hope the Au∣thors of may Repent some day: It brings to my mind, Sirs, an old story of King Cyrus who once set his Hands fairly to the building of God's House, but his Hand was not well in the Work, when he drew it out again: All is well that ends well, Sirs; for what think ye become of King Cyrus, Sirs? I'll tell you that Sirs; He e'en made an ill end, he e'en
died a bloody death in a strange Land. I wish the like may not befal our King; they say Comparisons are odious, but I hope ye will not think that Scripture-comparisons are so; what∣ever you may think, I am sure of this, that no King but King Jesus, had Power to Adjourn our General Assembly. This was spoken so lately, before so great an Auditory, that whatever Rule may say in his next Book, yet I think the Author himself will not have the Impudence to deny it. 3. When last Summer their Commissioners returned from King William in Flanders, and told the General As∣sembly, That the King had possitively told them, that he would not any longer suffer them to oppress and perse∣cute the Episcopal Subjects; and desired them in his Name to acquaint the General Assembly with his Mind, that for the time to come they should proceed more mode∣rately, otherwise he would let them know that he is their Master. The Moderators said openly, That if it were not for the great Army he had with him, he durst not have said so to them; and however, he had been wiser to have held his peace, for that they own'd no Master but Christ. When King William in January last desired them, by his Letter to the General Assembly, to re-admit into the Ex∣ercise of the Ministry, so many of the Episcopal Presby∣ters as should be willing to submit to and comply with a Formula which his Majesty sent to them, and appointed to be the Terms of Communion betwixt the Parties: This Proposal of Peace and Union, which moderate Pres∣byterians might have been thought to have rejoyced in, was insolently rejected, and exclaimed against by all the Assembly, except one Mr. OrackA Person who was well edu∣cated, and justly e∣steemed at St. An∣drew's V∣niversity.. Then the common dis∣course and preaching of Presbyterians was. That King William design'd to Dethrone King Jesus; that the pre∣scribing to them any Formula was an Incroachment upon Christ's Kingdom, and a violent Usurpation of his Privi∣ledges;
that any Formula but the Covenant, is of the Devil's making, and ought not to be tolerated by Presby∣terians. The Moderator of the General Assembly, in his Prayer immediately after its Dissolution, reflected upon King William as sent in Wrath to be a Curse to God's Kirk. He and the whole Assembly protested against the King's Power to dissolve them, and before his Commissioner dis∣claim'd all his Authority that way: Afterwards, to make their Testimony (that's their word for Treason) publick, they went to the Cross of Edinburgh, and took a formal Protestation after the old manner against the King in be∣half of the People of God (by which they intend their own Subjects.) The Magnanimous Earl of Crawford vow∣ed before the Commissioners, that he would adhere to the Protestation with his Life and Fortune, two things equally great and valuable. Their ordinary Doctrine and Discourse in the Pulpit and out of it, speaking of the Kirk and King, is, Deliverance will come from another hand, but thou and thy house shall perish. Mr. Matthew Red, holding forth the New Gospel at his Kirk in North Berwick, Feb. 20th, 1691-92, said, The Kirk of Scotland is presently under the same condition that David was, when he was so sore persecuted and pursued by Saul, that he seemed to have no way left him to escape; but then a Messenger came and told Saul, that the Philistines had invaded the Land; this gave Saul some otherThat is in English some other Fish to fry. Tow in his Rock, and by that David was deliver'd. This Mr. Red be∣ing that same night with another of his Brethren at Sup∣per at a Knight's House in that Parish, told plainly, That by the Philistines in his Sermon, he meant the French. And both the New Gospellers agreed, that the Kirk of Scotland could not now be otherwise deliver'd but by an Invasion of the French to restore King James. This ac∣connt I had from a Gentleman of good Credit who was present both at the Sermon and Supper. Mr. Stenton, one
of their noted Preachers, said in an open Company, the day after the Assembly was dissolved, That they had ap∣pointed their next Meeting in 1693, hoping that before that time they might have another King who would allow them better Conditions. They now lay great stress upon the Prophesie of an old Man in the West, who at his dying in 1689, said, The perfect Deliverance of God's Kirk must come after all by the French, for this King William will not do it. And say commonly, that they brought in a Dog for God's sake, and that he now begins to bite the Barnes. This being their way of treating a King who has con∣descended to oblige them even to his own loss, and to the wonder of Mankind; what may their Fellow-subjects, e∣specially such as are not of their Biggotry of Opinion, ex∣pect from them? That this is no new thing to them, nor the actings only of some few of the more rigid sort of them, is evident from their extravagant and constant course of Rudeness to King James the Sixth, and to both the Charles's, whereof many instances are to be seen in their own Books, some of them you may meet with in the next Section. All the Presbyterians profess, that the keeping of Anni∣versary Days, even for the greatest Blessing of the Go∣spel, is Superstition and Popery. For the modestest of them that ever spake last Year against Christmas, was Frazer of Bray, who preaching in the High Church of Edinburgh, in his ordinary turn upon that day on which Christmas fell, all that he said was, Some will think that I will speak either for the Day or against it: To speak against it I see no reason, and to speak for it I see as little; for why should we keep our Saviour's Birth-day, and not his Conception. Had this Man been but acquainted with the Liturgy of the Primitive Church, or of that in the Neighbour-Nation, he might have found that they keep Annunciation-day for the Conception, and this would have broke the strongest
Horn of his Presbyterian Dilemma. But for all the Ab∣horrence that Presbyterians have, and do profess against the Observation of Anniversary-days, yet they never mis∣sed to preach an Anniversary Sermon on Mr. Heriot, who built and indued the great Hospital in the City of Edin∣burgh; the reason is, that for every Sermon on Heriot's Commendation, they get five Ponds, a new Hat and a Bible. If they could have made but the same Purchase by preaching on Christmas, it's more than probable that they would have thought the Annual Observation of our Sa∣viour's Birth, as little superstitious as that of Mr. Heriot's Memory. But the Disingenuity, Hypocrisy, and Covetousness of that Party appears not only in this, but in many other particulars; for who clamour'd more than Presbyterians a∣gainst Plurality of Benefices, which was never allowed nor practised under Episcopacy in our Kingdom, and now se∣verals of them are suing for five or six tipends at once, viz. the great Apostles of the New Gospel, Dr. Bule, Mr. John and Mr. William Vetches, Mr. David Williamson, John Dickson. I cannot here omit a passage of Mr. James Kirkton, now a famous Preacher in Edinburgh, who held forth formerly in a Meeting-house about three and twen∣ty Miles from it, in the Parish of St. Martine, within the Shire of the Mers, in which Parish there was an Episcopal Minister that gave Obedience to the present Laws, but this Kirkton by the Act restoring Presbyterian Preachers to their former Charges, out of Malice against the Episcopal Minister, and Covetousness to get the Stipend of the place, Charity it self cannot put a bet∣ter Con∣struction on so foul an Action. comes from Edinburgh and preaches one Sermon in the Parish of St. Martine, and returning some days after, left the Church without a Minister, by which means he ob∣tain'd to himself the Stipend of that Parish, tho' he lived and preaches in the City of Edinburgh ever since.
There is another, Mr. Anthony Murray, who has a con∣siderable Estate in Dunsire, he ordinarly uses this Phrase as a Proverb, That he desires no more in the World but a Bit and a Brat; that is, only as much Food and Raiment as Nature craves; and yet this very Man that would seem so denied to the World, got himself into the possession of two fat Benefices, viz. that of Counter in which he never did preach, and that of Dunsire Parish, in which the Regu∣lar Pastor had served for the whole Year, 1688, and for the greater part of the Year 1689, and yet was not allow'd one Farthing of the Living for either: altho' when he was drove away he had eight young Motherless Children, and no Bread for them, whereof Murray it seems not having one Child, had no sence at all. Who cried out more against the Covetousness of Pre∣lates, and complying Ministers, than Mr. John Johnston, yet in the time of his suppos'd Persecution, he made up two thousand and five hundred Pounds Sterling; and to the certain knowledge of his Acquantances he was two hun∣dred Pounds Sterling in debt when he abdicated his Pa∣rish. This same Johnston being called to a dying Gentle∣man in East Lotham, who was always Episcopal, (but the Call was by some Phanatical Friends, without the know∣ledge of the dying Person) Johnston having come to his Chamber, advances with many Hums and Ha's close to the Gentleman's Bed-side, and after stairing a while upon him, at last with a great Groan he gave his Judgment of his State and Condition in these words: I see nothing there in that Face, ah, I see nothing but Damnation, Hell and Re∣probation! At which words, a merry Man standing by, whispers in the ears of the said Mr. Johnston, He hath left you two hundred Marks. Mr. Johnston at this changed his mind (like the Barbarians in the Isle of Malta,) and says, But methinks I see the Sun of Righteousness rising with heal∣ing under his wings, sayng, Son be of good chear, thy sins are forgiven thee.
Who cried out more against Ministers Scandals, than one Balfour in the Mers, and yet but a few Months ago he fled for the Sin of Adultery himself. This among them is called but a Slip of the Saints; but far less Slips in o∣thers are aggravated into heinous Scandals and crying Sins, as that ought indeed to be esteem'd. What greater act of Injustice than that done to Mr. A∣lexander Heriot, Minister of Dalkeith, who gave all Obe∣dience to the Civil Law, and yet the Presbytery of Dal∣keith permitted one Calderwood, a declared Enemy of Mr. Heriot's, and some others of his Accusers, to sit as Judges among them, and not only admitted, but also invited and encouraged two or three Knights of the Post to swear, That the Minister had danced about a Bon-fire the 14th of October 1688. And when it was made appear to the conviction of all Men, that there was no Bon-fires in the Town upon that Day, and that the Town was never wont to use any such Solemnity upon the occasion of that Day; all that the Presbytery said, was, That they could not help it, for the matter was sworn and deponed, and and they behoved to proceed, having a Call to Purge the Church. Besides, their not having good Notions of the Gospel, nor of any good Heathen Morals; one reason of their malicious and crabbed Nature may be, that they never suf∣fered Affliction, for after they abdicated their Churches in 1662, they began every-where in their Sermons to cant about the Persecution of the Godly, and to magnifie their own Sufferings; by this means they were pamper'd in∣stead of being persecuted; some of the godly Sisters sup∣plying them with plentiful Gratuities to their Families, and Mony to their Purses; they really lived better then ever they did before, by their Stipends. They themseves boast∣ed that they were sure of Crowns for their Sufferings; and that Angels visited them often in their Troubles; and
both were materially true. I know severals of them who got Estates this way, and that grew fat and lusty under their Persecutions. Mr. Shields, one of their honestest and best Writers, being well acquainted with all that they suf∣fered, and a great Sharer in it, glories in this, that they were highly provided for in their greatest Difficulties, and makes an Argument for it of their being God's People: In his Annalysis (as he calls it) on the 29th of Deuteronomy, delivered in a Discourse to the People on the Preparation-day before they renewed the Covenants, p. 10. l. 8. these are his words: Tho' in the Wilderness of Prelatick, Erastian, and Antichristian Vsurpations, we did not meet with Mi∣racles, yet truly we have experienced Wonders of the Lord's Care and Kindness, and for all the Harassings and Persecutions, &c. the poor Wilderness-Wanderers have look'd as Meat-like and Cloath-like a others that sat at Ease in their Houses, and drank their Wine and their strong Drink. The Party finding such good Fruits of their Itinerary Labours, con∣tinued to preach the unthinking Mobile out of their Mo∣ney and Senses, and well as out of their Duty to God and Man, receiving in the mean time, instead of Cups of cold Water,The name of a ridiculous and rebel∣lious Book emitted by them in K. Charles the Se∣cond's time. many Bowls of warm Sack; the true Co∣venant-Liquor, and the best Spirit that inspires the New Gospellers. By these means the Malignity of their Na∣ture was rather kindled than abated; the only Men and suffered any thing, being the poor silly Plow-men and Shepherds in the West, whom the false Teachers hounded out to die for a broken Covenant: It's true indeed that many such Men being deluded into several Rebellions, put the State under a necessity of defending it self, by pu∣nishing some of them, and killing others in Battels; but yet before the danger of these Battels, the Preachers were generally so wise as to save themselves, by running first; for ad they been so honest as to have born but a part of these Burdens which they imposed upon their Prose∣lytes,
or so couragious as to have but shew'd their Faces in the day of Battel (to which they always sounded the Allarm by their Sermons) then it's like we should not have been now infested with such swarms of these Lo∣custs as have over-spread our Land, and again filled our King's Chambers, as the Frogs and Lice of Aegypt did that of Pharaoh's. Tho' upon certain occasions the more subtile and cun∣ning Presbyterians, knowing that no art can defend or disguise the unaccountable wildness and madness of some of their party, are forc'd, to disprove and condemn them; Yet they never fail to make use of the Sufferings of these same wild Men, to magnify that Persecution which them∣selves pretend to have undergone, but had not the least share in. Eminent instances of this we have in Rule's late book. To whom among other favours we owe this new distinction of wild and sober Presbyterians. Truly if the Presbyterians had met with the same measure with which they formerly served the Prelatists, if they had been used as they did good Bishop Wishart, whom they made to lye seven Months in a dark stinking close Prison, without the conveniency of so much as changing his Shirt but once, so that he was like to be eaten up of himself, and the Vermine which that nasty place produced; its proba∣ble that by such Severities (which I am glad they suffered not) they might have been brought to something of that good Man's Christian Temper and Disposition: And that this was very great, the worst of themselves were con∣strained to own, when upon changing of the Scene, he being deservedly advanced to the Bishoprick of Edinburgh, was so Charitable as to convey large supplies to such of them as were Imprison'd for their Notorious Rebellion at entland Hills, 1666, and that without letting them know from what hand it came, nay his Compassion to them was such, that he continued such Presbyterian Preachers as
were any thing tollerable, in their Churches and Office; without imposing on them the conditions of Conformity which the Law then required: But now Presbyterian Prea∣chers, even those that are called the soberest, as we may see by their daily Practices, and Expressions, are highly galled, because they are not allowed to treat the Bishops and other Ministers of God's Word, after the same Bar∣barous manner that they formerly did, that is, Hew them in pieces before the Lord, as they were wont to Phrase it, for they commonly compare Bishops to Agag, and those ordained by them to the Amalekites. The Episcopal Ministers and Rulers used all Christian and discreet Methods when they had Power to gain and oblige the Dissenters, and to save them from the Penalties of the Law. But now such is the ingratitude of some, even of those same Presbyterians, whom the Episcopal Mini∣sters had saved from the Gibbet, to which the Law had justly doomed them; that they were the only Persons that invented false Stories, forged malicious Lybels, and raised Tumults against those very Ministers who had been formerly so exceeding kind to them; we have but too many instances of their rendering Evil for Good in this manner: And that which makes this the more strange and odious, is, that it is Acted under a pretence to Reli∣gion, and Reformation, and that the giddy People are instigated to this Wickedness by their Preachers; I shall trouble the Reader at present only with two Particulars to this purpose: Mr. Monro, Parson of Sterling, was lately lybel∣led and accused before the Brethren of the Inquisition, by one whom, as all the Neighbourhead knows, he preserv∣ed from being Hanged, when he well deserved it. And now, tho' the said Parson Monro has visibly baffled all the Articles of his Lybel to the disgrace of his ungrateful Accu∣ser, and of those Preachers who openly prompted him to this Villany, yet they daily molest and disquiet him, because
of his constant adherence to the Sacred Order of Episco∣pacy, which is the greatest Fault his Judges can accuse him of, except that of his possessing a good Living, and that his Parts and Piety darken the whole Presby∣tery, of which his Parishoners being fully convinced, Love him so well, that they resolve, cost what it may, they will not part with him as their Minister; and have therefore, to the great mortification of the Presbytery there, joyntly signified so much to them under their hands. The other particular instance of this Nature, shall be that of one Ronaldson, a Tenant in the Parish of Cranston, whom the Orthodox Minister there, Mr. Burnet, by his Inter∣cession with Persons of Quality, preserved from having his Goods confiscated, and Person Banished; after Ronaldson by his signal Disobedience to the Law had exposed himself to that Sentence: This kindness Ronaldson then looked on as so great and surprising, That he often and openly profes∣sed he knew not how to be thankful enough for it; he and his Family constantly kept the Church thereafter, and up∣on every occasion acknowledged the Minister's singular favour, with all the Signs of sincere gratitude; But yet upon the new light of the late Revolution, he appeared the most open and avowed Enemy that the Minister had: The Minister justly surprised with this, challenged his many promises of continuing grateful. To whom Ro∣naldson gravely replyed, that the Thanks of his Preser∣vation was not due to him, but only to God; who oft-times (said he) stirs up ill Men to befriend his own People. This change was wrought upon the Man, and this answer put in his Mouth (as himself sometimes owns and pro∣fesses) by frequent Conferences with their Preachers, who in their private Discourses and publick Sermons have as∣sured him, that he is not to look to the Instrument, but to the Cause of his Preservation.
I shall shut up this head concerning the Persecution they pretended to have suffered, with a remarkable note of a Sermon preached lately by Mr. Daniel Douglass, one of their great * Mufties, Now Sirs, (says he) I will be even plain with you, and perhaps e'en more plain than pleasant, Sirs, I'le tell you now, Sirs, its ordinary for us to cry out that we were persecuted under Episcopacy, but we are yet living, Sirs; and why were we not Hanged as well as others were, beloved? It is e'en because we thought they did cast away their Lives needlesly, and that we would not venture our Lives for such matters as they ventured their Lives, for I knew to meet with kindness both from the Church-men and the States-men: And particularly I knew that the Clerks of Council and Session would take nothing from us, but there are no such Clerks now: For there is one Gibbie Eliot, Sirs, that has no Charity nor Discretion, for if we were all made up of Dollars, he would swallow us up; pray God, Sirs, to keep our Purses from that false lown Eliot. Ingenuity is a thing they are not concerned about, for that's but a Branch of dry Morality, below Men so full of Grace; some young Men among them that have had the Advantage of being abroad are more affable, and in their Conferences with Men of Sence, they ordinarily ex∣claim against the peevish sowr and unconversable Temper of Scotch Presbyterians; but yet these same Sparks of the Cause, sing to a quite contrary Tune when they are in a collective or representative body. I have read of a cer∣tain Monk who being wearied of the Cloyster aimed at a vacant Dignity, the possession whereof he knew would set him free: For this end he applied himself to every one of his Acquaintances that had a Suffrage in the Election, and from every singular and individual Person he received very fair and satisfying promises, bet yet he found himself still disappointed when they met together in Assemblies
for the Election, whereupon he invites most or all of them upon a set Day to Dine and be merry with him. They that were invited knew that he was not in condition to make any competent Provision for so many Guests; Wherefore according to the usual Custom of that Fraternity, they sent each of them some material or other, proper to make up the Feast; some sent Flesh, some Fish of di∣vers Kinds, some sent Butter, some Cheese, some Wine, and others Oyl. All which he boyled in one Kettle toge∣ther, and his Guests being conveen'd, he caused serve up that Hotch-potch in several large Dishes to them, so that every Dish as they tasted it equally disgusted them: Where upon they asked what manner of Victuals it was? He said it was just such as themselves had sent, all well boyled in a large Kettle together. That, say they, is the worst Meat in the World when thus jumbled toge∣ther, but very good when every thing is dressed by it self. Just so are ye to me, says the Monk, you are very fair and kind, when single, and one by one: But I can find nothing worse than you, when you are all together. The Presbyterians resemble the Monks in this, as in many other things, for take them singly, and they generally condemn the Methods and Proceedings of their Brethren, as rigid and severe, but take the same Men met together in a Presbytery, Synod, or Assembly, and the whole Body is the most unpalatable and most unsavory Hotch-potch in the World. And now to hasten to a close of this Section, Strangers may justly wonder that Men of such Temper and Quali∣fication, as ye have now heard the Pretbyterian Preachers to be, should have any followers. But this will not seem so strange to such as confider what Multitudes of the Rab∣ble, crowd after Jack Bowels in his Drunken Fits, Women and Children are ordinarily led by noise and shew, tho' it were but of Hobby-Horses and Rattles. And
indeed the Presbyterian Preachers are only flocked after by such a Herd, some out of a blind Zeal and Itch after novelty and change, some again loving to Fish in the troubled Waters of such Confusions as are inseparable from Presbytery, hoping thereby o mend their broken Fortunes. And to palliate their want of Sence, and greater Faults, by a pretence to strict Religion: Others frequent them for sport and diversion, as Men of little Sence and less business run after Stage-Players and Rope-dancers. Sometimes ago these Preachers were conversant only with Shepherds, and a few silly Women, laden with di∣vers Lusts, whose hot Zeal had no knowledge to guide it; the Preachers then indeed admired themselves for Per∣sons of great Gifts and Learning, because of the esteem that these ignorant Creatures had for them; but now that they are brought to Act in publick, and possess the Pulpits of Learned Men, they are at a great Disadvantage, for their better Auditories expect solid Divinity, Rational and close Discourses, and that being none of their Talent, puts them quite out of their Road and Element, and hence it is that the People generally forsake and abhor them, and nothing but a few of the Rabble frequent their best Churches and Preachers: So that now their own dear fol∣lowers begin to complain and cry out, That Christ did more good in the Hills than he does now in the Churches. And if they hold on at their usual manner of Raving in Pulpits, they cannot fail to render themselves as Ridicu∣lous and odious as they deserve, which they have made pretty good Advances to already. They frequently up∣braid Curates, as deserted of the Spirit, because they own that in the composing of their Sermons they make use of Books, and yet Mr. David Williamson, one of their ablest Men, Preaching before the Parliament, on Ps. 2. and verse 10. stole most of his Sermon from Herle's Tripus of Wisdom, and had the Confidence to reprint the same at
Edinburgh. Indeed the nonsence and railing of that Ser∣mon is wholly his own; for none but himself ever pre∣tended or presumed as he does there, That Christ dyed a Martyr for the Presbyterian Government; because for∣sooth this Inscription was written on his Cross, Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews. I do not discommend the use of Books, but the Hypocrisie of these Men, who give out that they Preach meerly by Inspiration and Meditation, as Mr. Areskine did in a Sermon which he Preached lately in the Tron Church at Edinburgh, his words were these, The Curates goes to their Books for Preachings, but we go to our Knees for our Preachings. And yet such is the silliness of some deluded People, that they proclaim these for Soul∣refreshing and powerful Preachers, and for Men that, as they Phrase it, have an inbearing Gift, speaking home to their Hearts: Indeed make some People judges, we know Presbyterian Sermons will gain the applause. I remember the Old Fable of the Cuckow and the Nightingale, both conten∣ded who should Sing sweetest, the Ass because of his long Ears is made judge, the Nightingale Sung first, the Cuckow next, the Asse's determination was, that truly the Nightin∣gale Sung pretty well, but for a good sweet plain taking Song, and a fine Note, the Cuckow Sung far better. Some who are not so well acquainted with the Scotch Presbyterian's manner of Preaching and praying may, per∣haps, think that matters are here aggravated against them, because things so very Ridiculous were never vented by any former Sect, as these I have and am hereafter to discover of them; but they are too well known to be denyed a∣mong us: And that Strangers may not think themselves imposed upon, I shall in the next Section give the Reader some little taste of their Printed Books, and leave him to judge from the Ridiculousness of what they have delibe∣rately published to the World that way, what extravagancy they may be Guilty of in these extemporary Ravings, which they mis-call Spiritual Preaching and Praying.
SECT. II. Containing some Expressions out of their printed Books. AND first for their Sermons; Mr. William Guthry at Fenwick, hath printed one full of Curses and Im∣precations, Viz. Will you gang Man to the cursed Curates? Gang, and the Vengeance of God gang with thee: The cursed Curates bids us side with them; the Devil ruggTear. their Hearts out of their sides. The Sermon in every Page is to the same pur∣pose. The People in the West are mightily taken with it; and the Author is held for a great Saint among them, chiefly upon the account, as themselves phrase it, of his sharp Pen against Prelates and Curates. Mr. Walwood, Brother to Mercurius, in a printed Sermon on this Text, If the righteous shall scarcely be saved, &c. says, among other as ridiculous things, these words, Men think that every Dog will win to Heaven, but I assure you, it is a great matter to win there; for Noblemen that will be saved I believe there's not twenty, I trow I doubled them: for Gentlemen I could write them all in three inch of Paper. Ibid. Men thought much when a part of the City of Glascow was burnt, but for my part I would not shed a Tear tho' Glascow and Edinburgh both were burnt; and a great matter, they burnt the Covenant. The best of their Preachers were singled out to hold forth to the Parliament,Notes of printed Sermons before the Parlia∣ment. and the L. Commissioner M. a Person equally fitted to judge of Ministers and Statesmen, appoint∣ed such of these Sermons to be printed, as he in his God∣ly Wisdom thought fittest for advancing the designs of
Omnipotent Presbytery. These Sermons are generally inhanced by the Party, and preserved as infallible Eviden∣ces of the great Learning and Piety of the New Gospel Professors, upon which account they are carefully kept from malignant Hands and Eyes: However, I once had the favour allowed me to read three of the choicest of them, published by Williamson, Rule, and Spalding; where∣in they extol Presbyterian Government, with all the glo∣rious Epithets due to the Gospel and the Christian Church, viz. Christ's Bride, his Virgin, his Spouse, his Glory, his Honour, his Church, his precious Remnant, his glorious Elect, his pure People. God's House, Tabernacle, Dwel∣ling place and Sanctuary, his Holy Ark, his chosen Gene∣ration, his dear Children, his Kingdom, his Mountain, his Jewels, his Crown, Scepter, and Diadem; in a word, the most obscure and darkest Prophesies and Revelations were all spoke with an eye to the present Scotch Model, tho' that be so new as never to have been heard of in Scotland, or any other Church before: and the Presbyterians themselves will as soon prove that the High Priesthood of Aaron among the Jews was a Type of Presbyterian Democracy in the Church, as shew any Foot-steps, or the least mention of Presbyterianism in any of the ancient Monuments and Records of the Church, except they will say that Chri∣stianity began with Calvin; and yet if you'll believe the Sermons of the former Triumvirate, they that oppose the Rigour of Scotch Presbytery are Enemies to God and his Cause, to Christ and to his Gospel, they are worse than Heathens, they are Philistines, which are not to be suffered to live in the Holy Land,Spaldin's Discourse to Parlia∣ment. nay they that concur not to advance it to its former height, (and that is above King and Parliament) not only their Estates and Lives, but their Souls may go for it: You Members of Parlia∣ment who are not forward for this, you shall with Jehoia∣kim, be buried with the Burial of an Ass: Think but seri∣ously
what an Epitaph may be written on your Tomb, and what Discourses may be of you when ye are gone, Here lies a Man that never was a Friend to Christ, or his Interest, now he is dead, but he was an Opposer and Persecutor of Christ of his Truth and People. But dying is not all, what shall ye say when, ye shall be cited at the great Assize, be∣fore the Tribunal of Christ, to that Question, What Ju∣stice and Vote gave ye to we in my afflicted Church, in the first Parliament of King William and Queen Mary in Scot∣land, was ye for me or against met? Spalding's Sermon before the Parliament, on 1 Chron. 12. 32. p. 20. Versus finem & p. 21 Initio. Mr. Gilbert Rule in his Sermon before the Parliament, on Isaiah 2. 2. (for their Texts are generally out of the obscurest places of the Old Testament,) takes it for grant∣ed, that the Mountain of the Lord's House there spoke of, is expresly meant of Scotch Presbytery; Which, he says, is terrible as an Army with Banners. This last, I confess, has often been found true in the most litteral sence; but why Presbytery should be called a Mountain, I cannot so well say, except it be because it was exalted atThe Hill on which they first drew up their Army against K. Ch. 1. Dunce-law above the tops of the Mountains, that is, Monarchy and Episcopacy, at which time the Phanaticks and Rebels were the Nations that flocked unto it, and establish'd it upon the ruines of their own former Oaths and Obligations. But to speak in his own words, The exalting and establish∣ing of Scotch Presbytery, (for that's the only true Religion,) the flourishing of it, is the means to advance the poorest and most contemptible PeopleSuch the Scoth Phana∣ticks are indeed. to Reputation both with God and all good Men, yea, often in the eyes of them that are but mo∣ral and intelligent, tho' Enemies, as is evident from Deut. 4. 6. This is your wisdom in the sight of the Nations, which shall say, Surely this Nation is a wise and understanding Peo∣ple: for what Nation is there so great, who have God so nigh
unto them, &c. Now that no body might mistake, as in this he meant Religion in general, and not Scotch Presby∣tery, he makes Application particularly to the Kirk in these words, If ye will set Christ on high in this poor Church, he will set the Church and Nation on high; Scotland hath in former times beenThe glo∣rious days of the Co∣venant. renowned and esteemed among the Chur∣ches of the Reformation upon this account: It may be an Ho∣nour in after Ages to your Posterity, that such a Man was a∣ctive in that happy Parliament that settled Religion in the Church; yea, this way will render us more formidable to our Enemies, and Vnfriends to our Way,That is true blue Presbyte∣ry., than strong Armies or Navies could do. 1 Sam. 4. 7. And the Philistines were afraid, &c. fo they said, that God is come to the camp. Rule's Sermon before the Parliament, p. 13. The plain meaning of this is, All the Land and Sea-Forces of England and the Confederates, can signifie nothing against their Enemies, so long as they entertain or suffer amongst them these Enemies of Religion, the Bishops. That famous Man in his Generation, Mr. David Wil∣liamson, preached before the Reforming Parliament on this Text, Be wise ye Kings, be instucted ye Judges of the Earth, Psal. 2. 10. I cannot but approve the choice of this Text, because those Kings had need be very wise indeed, that have to do with Presbyterians; and those Civil Judges must be stronger than the Kirk, that will not condescend to be instructed by them in all things. In the former part of that Sermon he divides and subdivides Government so of∣ten, till (as the Presbyterian Author, from whom he steals these ridiculous DistinctionsHerle's Tripus.,) he at last divides the King's and Judges from all Power: It's no new thing for some Men first to distinguish the King's Person from his Autho∣rity, and then to divide his Head from his Body; Well, it's granted by all hands, that such Men are well acquaint∣ed with all the ways of dividing Government. In the lat∣ter part of that Sermon, the Author speaking of Presbyte∣rial
Government, uses these words, which we easily grant to be peculiarly his own: It's no light matter, (says he) it's an Ordinance of God, the Royal Diadem of Christ; he was a Martyr on this Head, for it was his Ditty on the Cross, John 19. 19. Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews. If this Scripture do not prove that Christ died a Martyr for Scots Presbytery, I am sure there's no other place either in Scri∣pture or Antiquity that will. The next Notes shall be from a Sermon that is highly valued by all true Presbyterians, viz. That which according to the Author's dating it, was printed the 40 Year of our publick breach of Covenant; the Year, as the Author at the end of the Title Page describes it, wherein there was much Zeal for confederating among Men, but little for co∣venanting with GOD. In the 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 Pages, he compareth the Scotch Covenants to the Covenant of Grace, and to the Covenants at Horeb and in Moab. In the 6th Page he says, The Covenant may be tendred and taken with∣out the consent of the Magistrate, but his after Dissent or Dis∣charge cannot loose the Obligation of it. Page 9. He says, As Israel in the Wilderness, so have we had our Marahs, and our Massa's, and Meribahs, Taberahs, and Kibroth Hataavahs at Pentland-hills, Bothwel-bridge, Ardsmoss,Three no∣table Re∣bellions raised by the Pres∣byterians against K. Charles, the Se∣cond. &c. From this consideration he presses the re∣newing of the Covenant. Page 10. God's removing two Kings who withstood the co∣venanted Reformation, and the abolishing two wicked Esta∣blishments, Tyranny and Prelacy, should stir up all Lovers of Religion to the Duty of Covenanting. Page 12. All the mean∣er sort of all Sexes and Ages, Wives and Children, are oblig∣ed to this, tho' the Primores & Primates regni do not con∣cur: if the Children be not capable, Parents are to engage for them. Accordingly (says he) in Scotland it hath been in use for faithful Ministers, to take Parents, engaged to the Covenant, when they presented their Children to BaptismMr. Rule denies this in his late Book, altho' himself and every Man acquainted: with the Doctrine and Pra∣ctice of the Kirk, knows it to be very true..
Page 14. Subjects are relaxed from their sworn Allegiance to a King or Magistrate, by his rescinding or disowning the Co∣venant; as is plain from the third Article of the Solemn League: But there is nothing that can any way enervate the sacred Obligation of Scotland's Holy Covenant, which still must stand in inviolable force. Page 16. It is a Covenant ob∣liging not only the present, but the absent, and not only the absent in regard of place, but in regard of time: It obligeth all the Children of Israel, binds all Posterity with Annexa∣tion of Curses to the Breakers. Page 17. It's the Foundati∣on of the People's Compact with the King at his Inauguration: therefore as long as Scotland is Scotland, and God unchange∣able, Scotland's Reformation in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government, must be endeavour'd to be performed in a Conformity to the Covenant: The matter of it is Moral, con∣taining nothing but what is antecedently and eternally binding, albeit there had never been a formal Covenant; the ends of it are perpetually good. Page 18. The express Command from Exod. 23. obliges to banish all Covenant-breakers out of the Land; for the example of the Popish, Prelatical, and Malig∣nant Faction in Britain and Ireland, the suffering them to dwell in the Land, and to creep into places of Trust, and espe∣cially the stupid Submission to the Restitution of Church and State, and to the Re-introduction of their wicked Establish∣ments, abjur'd by Covenant, did gradually induce Parishes and Provinces to this dreadful Sin of Covenant-breaking. Then in some subsequent Pages he enumerates all the Curses and Plagues, national or personal, spoken of in Scripture, as threatned with a special regard to the break∣ing of this Covenant, and who can tell (says he) but the Sword now drawn in Scotland and Ireland may avenge the Quarrel of God's broken Covenant. Pag. 27. The breaking of the Covenant is the most Heinous of all Sins: Profainity of all sorts, Hypocrisie, Idolatry, Adultery, Treachery, Pride, Blood, and Oppression, and all that ever brought down Ven∣geance
upon any Generation recorded in Scripture, or in any History, with these indeed, and the greatest aggravations of them, the Land hath been Polluted; but chiefly that which in∣censes the Anger of the Lord, hath been, and remains to be Breach of Covenant, and all these Abominations not simply because Breaches of the Law if God, but as under this spe∣cial Aggravation, that they have been and are Breaches of the Covenant, as is evident from Deuterom. 29. 25. Because they have forsaken the Covenant of the Lord God of their Fathers. &c. Compare this with making Presbytery the Foun∣dation of the present Civil Go∣vernment, without which he says it can∣not subsist. Second Vindicati∣on, Pag. 9. at the end. Pag. 33. The great Reason why Men should renew the Covenant at this time, and why those of the true Pres∣byterian Party did it in the end of 1688. They though it then (says he) expedient, as it is still, by renewing of these Antient Covenants, to declare what Cause they would a∣vouch and appear for, what King they would own, and upon what Terms they would offer their Submission to the present Government then to be Established, who had before declared their Revolt from the former, and for this end to make this the Band of their Association. The same Author, in his Solemn Confession of Sins pag. 53. says most ingenuously, We and our Teachers in a great measure complyed with, submitted unto, and connived, at the incroachments of the Supremacy, and absolute Power, both in accepting and countenancing the former Indulgences, and the late Tolleration. We have taken and subscribed Oaths, and Bonds, all which have been contrary to the Reformation we were Sworn to preserve. Pag 54. We are obliged to confess the offensive Car∣riage and Conversation of many that have gone to Eng∣land, who have proven very stumbling to the Sectarians there. Yea of late, many have embraced the Toleration introductive of a Sectarian multiformity, without so much as a Testimony against the Toleration of Popery it self. The general Toleration, which in its own Nature tended,
and in its Design intended, to introduce Popery and Slavery by Arbitrary and Absolute Power, hath been accepted and addressed for, by many of our Ministers; and countenanced, complyed, and concurr'd with by many of our People, without a Testimony or endeavour to understand it.—Many dregs of, Popish Superstition have been observed, Popish Festival days asEaster, Christmas, Shrove-Tuesday. Pasch, Yule, and Fastings Eve, &c. have been kept by many: And prelatical Anniversary days devised of their own Heart, appointed for Commemorat∣ing the Kings Birth Days, as May 29. Octob. 14. &c. Who were born as Scourges to this Realm, being complied with by many, pag. 58. As it was our Fathers Sin to inaugurate the late King, after such Discoveries of his Hypocritical enmity to Religion and Liberty, upon his subscription of the Covenant; to when he burnt and buried that Holy Covenant, and degenerated into manifest Tyranny, and had razed the very Foundation on which both his Right to Govern, and the Peoples Allegiance were founded, and remitted the Subjects Allegiance, by annulling the bond of it; we sinned in continuing to own his Autho∣rity: When all he had was engaged and exerted in Re∣bellion against God; for which the Lord put us to shame, and went not out with our Armies at Pentland Hills and Bothwell Bridge. Notes out of the Hind let loose, Printed 1687. which Book is the great Oracle and Idol of the true Covenanters. Pag. 3. It's observable how reproachfully he speaks of Princes, and even of such as are now our Kings Allies, in these words, The Protestants of Hungary are under the tearing Laws of that Ravenous Eagle the Tyrant of Au∣stria: Those of Piedmont under the Grassant Tyranny of that little Tyger of Savoy. Pag. 24. Our first Reformers never resigned nor aban∣doned that first and most just priviledge of Resistance. Nay nor of bringing publick Beasts of prey to condign
Punishment, in an extraordinary way of vindictive ju∣stice; E. G. Cardinal Beaton that was Slain in the Tower of St. Andrew's by James Melvin, who perceiving his consorts moved with Passion withdrew them, and said, This work and Judgement of God, altho' it be Secret, ought to be done with greater Gravity; and presentnig the point of his Sword to the Cardinal, said, Repent thee of thy former wicked Life, but especially of the shedding of the Blood of Mr. George Wisheart, which yet Crys for Vengeance from God upon thee: And we from God are sent to revenge it; for here before my God, I protest that—Nothing moveth me to strike thee, but only because thou hast been, and remainest an obstinate Enemy agoinst Christ Jesus and his holy Gospel; Of which fast, says my Author, the faithful and famous Hi∣storian Mr. Knox, speaks very Honourably, and after the Slaughter joyned himself with them; yet now such a fact committed upon such another Bloody and Treacherous Beast, the Cardinal prelate of Scotland Eight years agon, is gene∣rally Condemned as Horrid Murder. Pag. 75. Speaking of the King's defeat at Worcester, he says, Israel had Sinned and Transgressed the Cove∣nant.—Having taken the accursed thing, and put it even amongst their own stuff; therefore the Children of Israel could not stand before their Enemies, but an Army of them near 30000. was totally Routed at Worcester; and the Achan, the cause of the overthrow, was forced to hide himself beyond Sea, where he continued a wandring Fugitive in Exile till 1660. False Monk, then General, with a Combination of Malignants, and publick Resolu∣tioners, did machinate our Misery, and effectuated it, by bringing the King home to England from his Banish∣ment, wherein he was habituate into an implacable hatred against the Work of God. Pag. 96. The Covenant is our Magna Charta of Reli∣gion and Righteousness, our greatest Security for all our Interests.
Pag. 99. That same perfidious Parliament fram'd an Act for an Anniversary Thanksgiving, Commemorating every 29th of May, that Blasphemy against the Spirit and Work of God; and Celebrating that unhappy Re∣stauration of the Rescinder of the Reformation, which had not only the Concurrence of the Universality of the Nation, but (alas for shame that it should be told in Gath,) even of some Presbyterian Ministers, who after∣wards accepted the Indulgence; one of which, a Pillar among them, was seen scandalously Dancing about the Bonfires.—O Holy and Astonishing Justice, thus to Re∣compence our way upon our own Head; To suffer this holy Work and Cause to be ruined under our unhappy Hands, who suffered the Destroyer to come in, who had it in his Heart, swell'd with enmity against Christ, to raze and ruine the Work, as he most Wickedly did. Pag. 110. The King gave us many proofs and Demon∣strations of his being true to Antichrist, in minding all the Promises and Treaties with him, as he had of his be∣ing false to Christ, in all his Covenant-Engagements with his People: For in the Year, 1666. He, with his Dear and Royal Brother the Duke of York, contrived, Coun∣tenanced, and Abetted, the burning of London, evident by their employing their Guards to hinder the People from saving their own; and to dismiss the Incendiaries, the Papists, who were taken in the Fact. Pag. 123. At length the virulent Traytor, James Sharp, the Arch Prelate, received the just Demerit of his Perfidy, Perjuries, Apostacies, Sorceries, Villanies, and Murders, sharp Arrows of the mighty, and Coals of Juniper, for upon the 3d of May, 1679. several worthy Gentlemen, with some other Men of Courage and Zeal for the Cause of God, and the good of the Country, executed Righteous judgement upon him at Magus Moor, near St. Andrew's: And the same Month on the 29th of
May, the Testimony at Rutherglen, was published against that Abomination of Celebrating an Anniversary day for setting up an usurped Power, destroying the Interest of Christ in the Land, and against all sinful and unlaw∣ful Acts emitted and executed, published and prosecuted against our Covenanted Reformation; where also they burnt the Acts of Supremacy,, the Declaration, the Act Rescessory, for the burning the Covenant. Page 146. At length the King of Terrours, a Terrour to all Kings, cut off that Supreme Author and Authori∣ser of Mischief, Charles the Second, by the suspicious In∣tervention of an unnatural Hand, as the Instrument there∣of; wherein much of the Justice of God was to be obser∣ved, and of his Faithfulness verified; That bloody and de∣ceitful men shall not live out half their days: His bloody Violence was recompenced with the unnatural Villany of his Brother, and his unparallel'd Perjury was justly rewarded with the most ungrateful and treacherous Mon∣ster of a Parricide; for all the numerous Brood of his a∣dulterous and incestuous Brats, begotten of a Multitude of Whores, at home and abroad, yea, with his own Si∣ster too, he died a Childless Pultron, and had the unla∣mented Burial of an Ass: and for all his Hypocritical Pre∣tentions to a Protestant Profession, he drunk his Death in a Popish Potion, contrived by his own dear Brother that succeeded him;—passionately resenting Charles his Vow, to suffer the Murder of the Earl of Essx to come to a Trial, which was extorted by the reiterated Solicita∣tions of some, who offer'd to discover by whom it was contrived and acted; which made the Duke's guilty Con∣science to dread a Detection of his deep Accession to it: whereupon the Potion quickly after prepared, put a stop to that, and an end to his Life, February 6th, 1685: of which horrid Villany time will disclose the Mystery, and give the History when it shall be seasonable.
Page 237. A Prelate's Depute is no Minister of Christ, but a Curate is a Prelate's Depute, Ergo.—That a Prelate's-Depute is no Minister of Christ, I prove not only from that, that a Prelate, qua talis, is not a Servant of Christ, but an Enemy; and therefore cannot confer upon another that Dignity to be Christ's Servant; but also from this, that the Scriptures allow no derivation of deputed Officers, Rom. 12. 7, 9. Page 255. Never can it be instanced these twenty se∣ven Years, that the Curates have brought one Soul to Christ, but many instances may be given of their mur∣dering Souls: Hence these who cannot but be Soul-mur∣derers, may not be heard or entertaind as Soul-Physici∣ans; but the Curates cannot but be Soul-murderers, Ergo. Page 256. The Meetings of the Curates, for Admini∣stration of Ordinances in their way, the Lord hates, and hath signally forsaken: therefore we should hate and for∣sake them. This is confirmed by Mr. Durhame, Rev. 1. p. 55. Page 259. Hearing of Curates reductively involves us under the guilt of Idolatry, and breach of the second Commandment; therefore we ought not to let them dwell in the Land, lest they make us sin, Exod. 23. 32. We should destroy their very names out of the place, Deut. 12. 3. Jud. 2. 7. Page 285. Jus Populi, cap. 16. (says he) Make this one Character of a Tyrant, that living in Luxury, Whore∣dom, Greed and Idleness, he neglecteth, or is unfit for his Office. How these sute to our times, we need not express; what effrontery of Impudence is it for such Mon∣sters to pretend to rule. P. 296. Kings and Tyrants for the most part are reciprocal terms. Page 306. We own the obligation of our sacred Co∣venants unrepealably and indispensably binding to all.
But we deny that hereby we are bound either to main∣tain Monarchy, or to own the Authority of either of the two Monarchs that have monarchized or tyrannized over us these twenty seven Years past. In the Covenants we are not bound, but only conditionally, tomaintain the King's Person and Authority, that is only upon the terms that he should be a Loyal Subject to Christ,Mr. Rule upon the matter af∣firms the same Se∣cond Vin∣dic. p. 90. and a faithful Servant to the People, which he cannot be thought who does not cause all stand to their Covenant-Engagements, as Josiah did, 2 Chron. 34. But, alas, there was never a Jostah in the Race of our Kings; they rose up to the height of Rebellion against God and the Peo∣ple, with Heaven-daring Insolency, not only breaking but burning the Holy Covenant. Concerning owning of Tyrants Authority, p. 308. When Monarchy becomes opposite to the Ends of Go∣vernment, the Contagion of it affects that very Species of Government; and then the House is to be pulled down, when the Leprosie is got into the Walls and Foun∣dation. The People may make their publick Servant sensible, that he is at his highest Elevation but a Servant: Hence now when the Species named in the Covenant, viz. Monarchy, is so vitiate, that it is become the Instru∣ment of the Destruction of all the Ends of that Covenant, and now by Law transmitted to all Successors, as an he∣reditary, perfect, and perpetual Opposition to the coming of Christ's Kingdom; so that as long as there is one to wear that Crown, (but Jehovah will in Righteousness execute Coniah's Doom upon the Race, Jerem 22. ult. write this Man Childless,) and to enter Heir to the Go∣vernment as now established, he must be an Enemy to Christ: There is no other way left, but to think on a new Model, moulded according to the true Pattern.
Page 311. As he is not, nor will not be our covenant∣ted and sworn King, and therefore we cannot be his co∣venanted and sworn Subjects; so he is not, nor can be our crown'd King, and therefore we cannot be his liege Sub∣jects, owning Fealty and Obedience to him. Page 340. It will be found that there is no Title on Earth now to the Crowns, to Families, to Persons, but the People's Suffrage; for the Institution of Magistracy does not made James Stuart a King, no more than John Chamberlain. Page 375. Kings must be like Dogs that are best Hun∣ters, not those who are born of best Dogs; therefore Do∣minion is not hereditary. Page 389. The Inferiour is accountable to the Superi∣our, the King is inferiour, the People is superiour; Ergo, the King is accountable to the People. The Propositi∣on is plain; for if the King's Superiority make the Peo∣ple accountable to him, in case of transgressing the Laws, then why should not the People's Superiority make the King accountable to them, in case of transgressing the Laws. Page 411. In the fourth Article of the Covenant, we are obliged to endeavour that all Incendiaries and Malig∣nants, &c. be brought to condign Punishment; there∣fore is it imaginable that the Head of that unhallowed Party, the great Malignant Enemy, who is the Spring, and gives life to all these Abominations, should be exempt∣ed from punishment? shall we be obliged to discover and bring to punishment the little petty Malignants, and this implacably stated Enemy to Christ, escape with a Crown on his head? Nay, we are by this obliged, if ever we be in condition, to bring these stated Enemies to God and the Country, to condign Punishment, from the highest to the lowest: And this we are to do, as we would have the Anger of the Lord turned away from us, which can∣not
not be without hanging up their Heads before the Lord against the Sun, Numb. 25. 4. Page 412. By the fifth Article of the Covenant, we are obliged to endeavour that Justice be done upon such as oppose the Peace and Union between the Kingdoms; abut this Man and his Brother have destroy'd and annull'd that which was the Bond of these Kingdoms Union, viz. the Solemn League and Covenant. Page 459. That form God save the King, now impo∣sed, as it is found in the Original, is only paraphrastical∣ly expounded, and most catachrestically applied to Ty∣rants, being in the native sence of the words only, Let the King live; which as it is now extorted most illegally, so it can be render'd neither civilly, nor sincerely, nor chri∣stianly: It is a horrid mocking of God, and a heinous taking of his Name in vain, contrary to the third Com∣mandment: If it be a congratulation, it is the more abo∣minable, not only for the Hypocrisie that is in it, but the Blasphemy, in giving Thanks for the Promoter of the Devil's Interest, and the Destroyer of Christ's and the Liberties of Mankind. Page 466. Let us consider the Person and Matter for whom and for what, this Prayer (God save the King;) is extorted: Either it is for the Salvation of James the Papist, or of James the Tyrant; Now it's not the Will of God, that they that have, and keep, and will not part with the Mark of the Beast, should be saved; for he is adjudged of God to drink the Wine of his Wrath, Rev. 14. 9, 10. We cannot pray for him as a Christian, or as King, because he is neither; and as a Tyrant he can no more be saved that as a Papist; for, Tophet is ordained of old, yea, for the King it is prepared, Isai. 3. 33. Now while he continues such, we must complain in Prayers, not for his Mis-government only, but for that he go∣verns, and desire to be deliver'd from him; for, consi∣dering
what a Man, and what a King he is, guilty of Murder, Adultery, Idolatry, under the Sentence of the Law both of God and Man; we can pray no otherwise for him than for a Murderer, Adulterer, Idolater; we cannot pray that the Lord may bless his Government, for it's his Sin and our Misery, that he is a Governour, and his Throne is a Throne of Iniquity. What Form of Prayer this Author uses for the King, may be seen at the end of the Notes of their Prayers. Page 482 and 483. These that now would impose Bonds upon us, are such Sons of Belial as cannot be ta∣ken by the hand. There is one general Argument that will condemn coming in any Terms or Bonds with that Party that have broken the Covenant, because such Trans∣actions are a sort of Confederacy with the known Enemies of the Truth and GodlinessCompare this with the late Assembly's re∣fusing, at the King's desire, to admit of any of the Episcopal Cler∣gy with them into the Exercise of the Mini∣stry. Mr. Gillespy demonstrates that to be unlawful; when in capacity, we should not suffer them to dwell in the Land; if we are not to be familiar with Heathens, far less with Apostates; for the Apo∣stle lays much more restraint from Communion with them than with Pagans, 1 Cor. 5. 10. And again, Ex∣odus 34. 12. All sacred Transactions are discharged upon a moral and perpetually binding ground: And all Tole∣ration is prohibited, and all conjugal Affinity. Such Compliances brought on the first desolating Judgment, the Flood, on the old World, Gen. 6. when the Godly conformed and incorporated with the Ungodly Crew.—The Scriptures frequently disprove all Confedera∣cies, Covenants, Concord, and, without distinction, all Transactions and Unitive Agreements with the Men of Belial, that overturn the Reformation, p. 487. Page 501. It's clear from the Form, the Object, and from the Ends of the Covenant, which are all Moral, and of indispensable Obligation, that it is of perpetual
and unalterably binding force, obliging the present and and all future Generations. Page 500. By Allegiance and Loyalty, can be meant nothing else, by our present Governors, but an Obliga∣tion to own and Obey, and never to oppose the Design of advancing Tyranny; and by Peaceableness and Order∣liness, nothing else can be intended, than an Obligation never to oppose either the present Settlement, or future Establishment of Popery and Arbitrary Power, upon the Ruines of the Reformation, and our Civil and Religious Rights and Liberties; whence they that take these Oaths and Bonds, in any other sence, look more to the Li∣berties of Worldly Interest, than to the Dictates of Con∣science, and by quibling Evasions do but mock God, de∣ceive the World, and illude the Enemies, and delude themselves. Page 505. The Covenant is the Foundation of the People's Compact with the King at his Inauguration, the fundamental Law of the Government, and among the very Leges & regulae reganndi; so that the Rescinders of of it are chargeable not only with Perjury but of Trea∣son and Tyranny, in breaking and altering the Consti∣tution of the Government, and are lyable to the Curse of the Covenant; for they cannot rescind that, nor e∣scape it's Vengeance; whereof we have a Speaking-pledge already, in that the Rescinder of these Covenants was so terribly rescinded, and cut off by the hands of unna∣tural Violence; God thereby fulfilling that threatned Judgment of Covenant-breakers, That he that hath bro∣ken his Covenant shall be brought to Destruction; and bloody and deceitful Men shall not live out half their days: So Charles the Second got not leave to live out half of the days he projected to himself. Page 508. To require Men to subscribe to a Declarati∣on asserting that the National Covenant, and the Solemn
League and Covenant, were and are in themselves unlaw∣ful Oaths, is to require Men to enter into a Confederacy against the Lord, at which the Heavens might stand a∣stonish'd; it's an unparallel'd breach of the third Com∣mandment, and could no more be taken tin Truth and Righteousness, that an Oath renouncing the Bible. Page 513.Compare this with the Pres∣byterians now deny∣ing the Power to the King of dissolving the As∣sembly. An acknowledgment of Ecclesiastical Su∣premacy resident in the King, is the most blasphemous Usurpation on the Prerogatives of Christ, that ever the greatest Monster among Men durst arrogate; yea, the Roman Beast never claimed more; and in effect it is no∣thing else but one of his Names of Blasphemy, twisted out of the Pope's hands by King Henry the Eighth, and handed down to Queen Elizàbeth, &c. By this many in∣tolerable Incroachments, made upon the Liberties and Priviledges of the Church of Christ, are yeilded unto; as that there must be no Church-Assemblies without the Magistrates Consent, but that the Power of Convocating and Indicting Assemblies does belong only to him, that he may dissolve them when he pleases, and that his Pre∣sence, or his Commissioners, is necessary to each National Assembly. Page 516. To engage in Bonds of living peaceably, is to engage in Bonds of Iniquity; they are Covenants of Peace with God's Enemies, whom we should count our Enemies; and hate them because they hate him, Psal. 139. It's more suitable to answer as Jehu did to Joram, What peace, so long as the whoredoms of thy mother Jezabel, and her witchcrafts are so many? than to ingage to be at Peace with those who are carrying on Babylon's Interest, the Mother of Harlots and WitchcraftsVpon this consi∣deration the late As∣sembly re∣fused at K. W.'s de∣sire, to re∣ceive the Episcopal Party into any terms of Peace or Commu∣nion. Page 658. For private Persons to destroy and rid the Commonwealth, of such Burdens and vile Vermine, so pernicious to it as Tyrants are, was thought a Vertue meri∣ting Commendation by all Nations; among the rudest
Nations this is a Relict of Reason; as the Oriental Indi∣dians have a Custom when ever any Persons run a Muck, that is, in a revengeful Fury take such a quantity of Opi∣um as distracts them into such a Rage of mad Animosity, that they fear not to Assault and go thorow destroying whom they can find in their way; then every Man arms against him, and is ambitious of the Honour of first kil∣ling him; which is very rational: And it seems to be as rational, to take the same couse with out mad Malignant MucksAll that are not true Cove∣nanters., who are drunk with Hellish Fury, and are run∣ning in a Rage to destroy the People of God. Page 701. The exacting Taxations for maintaining of the Army, and the paying of Subsidies, was and remains to be a Consummating Crimson Wickedness, the Cry whereof reaches Heaven; since upon the matter it ex∣ceeded the Gadarens Wickedness, and was short of their Civility; they did not beseech Christ and his Gospel to be gone out of Scotland, but with armed Violence de∣clar'd, they would with the strong Hand drive him out of his Possession, in order to which their Legions are le∣vied with a professed Declaration, That there shall not be a Soul left in the Nation, who shall not be slain, shut up, or sold as Slaves, who will own CHRIST and his In∣terest. Page 712. The paying of Subsidies to the present Go∣verment, is to surnish that Party of the Dragon's Legi∣ons, in their War against Prince Michael and his Angels, with Supplies; which no Moral Force can excuse, no more than it can do the shedding of the Blood of their innocent Children, or sacrificing them to Moloch; for no Sacrifice they can offer to the Devil, can be more real, or so acceptable, as what they declare by this; being so di∣rect not only in opposition to the coming of the King∣dom of Christ, but the Deletion of his precious Inte∣rests, and the giving Satan such an absolute Dominion in
the Nation, as that they who have made the Decree, and all who put it in Execution, practically declare thereby they have mancipate themselves to his Slavery, and sold themselves to work Wickedness in the sight of the Lord: so likewise that all the rest of the Nation may with themselves become his Vassals, and in evidence of their Opposition to Christ, and in recognition to Satan's Sovereignty, and their Subjection, they are appointed to pay these black Meals.Taxes. Mr. Rule. the great Scribe now of the Party, in his Se∣cond Vindication of the Church of Scotland, owns at every turn, that there are many Presbyterians in Scotland, who are neither moderate nor sober; and to these he imputes all the Rebellions and Murders committed by the Party, and yet he calls the Legal Restraints, put upon these wild or mad Presbyterians, (for so they must be called, if they be neither moderate nor sober,) cruel Persecutions: Now their whole pretended Martyrology being only made up of these Men, I would fain know whose Martyrs such Men were; for the Devil has his Martys too. This is Mr. Rule's best way of Reasoning, for which I am apt to think there's few of the Party that will thank him; it being most evident, that those whom he so much disowns and reflects upon, are the only true Scotch Presbyterians; for whereas Rule, and some few with him, who would be thought moderate and sober, have evidently deserted the old Cause, and seem to sit down upon the Lees of Dutch Presbytery, unto which they have basely degenerated, while these others tread exactly in the steps of their Fore∣fathers, and act in a close Conformity to the Covenants, and the Decrees of the General Assemblies; which must be acknowledged to be the Rule for Scotch Presbyterians, or else it must be confest that they have none. I shall leave the Reader to judge which of these two are indeed the truest Scotch Presbyterians, by the account
which one of their own famous Writers gives of those whom Mr. Rule calls sober and moderate; in the Histori∣cal Representation of the Testimonies of the Church of Scot∣land, (printed 1687, p. 162. and downwards,) speaking of the Toleration granted in that same Year by the King, he says, and truely too, that those who embraced it, acted contrary to the Presbyterian Principles of the Church of Scot∣land, particularly to the Declaration of the General Assembly, July, 27, 1649; And contrary to the Covenant. And on this Head his Arguments are infinitely beyond any that ever we have heard from Mr. Rule; For (says he) this To∣leration is founded on Soveraign Authority, Prerogative Roy∣al, and Absolute Power, which all are to obey without reserve. Again, (says he) it comes through such a Conveyance, as su∣spends, stops, and disables all Penal Laws against Papists, and thereby everts all the Securities and Legal Bulwarks that Pro∣testants can have for the Establishment of their Religion, ma∣king them depend only upon the Arbitrary Word of an Absolute Monarch, whose Principles oblige him to break it: So they that accept this Toleration, do thereby recognize a Power in the King, to subvert all Laws, Right, and Liberties; which is contrary to Reason as well as Religion, and a clear breach of the Covenants: By this Toleration the Papists are encouraged and encreased in Numbers, the whole Nation overflow'd with their Hellish Locusts, and all places fill'd with Priests and Je∣suits; yea, the Executive Power of the Government is put in the Hands of the Romanists.—Watever Liberty this may be to some Consciences, it's none to the Tender: it's only a Tole∣ration which is always of Evil, for that which is good cannot be tolerated, under the Notion of Good, but countenanced and incouraged as such: therefore this reflects upon our Religion, when a Toleration is accepted, which implies such a Reproach, and the annexed Indemnity and Pardon, tacitely condemns the Profession thereof, as a Fault, or Crime; which no Christian can bear with, or homologate by Acceptance; whatever some
Addressers, particularly the Presbyterians at London, have blasphemously alledged, that God is hereby restored to his Em∣pire over the Conscience: Moreover,Alsop and other London Pesbyteri∣ans Address to K. J. (says he) true Presby∣terians can never closs themselves among them that are here∣by indulged, viz. Archbishops and Bishops, all the Prelatical and Malignant Crew, all Quakers and Papists, reaching also all Idolatry, Blasphemy, Heresie, and Truth; making the Pro∣fessors of Christ Partners with Antichrist's Vassals. Such a Toleration is contrary to the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament; it's like Julian the Apostate's Toleration, design∣ing to root out Chirstianity; it's contrary to the Confession of Faith; and therefore to accept this Toleration, is inconsistent with the Principles of the Church of Scotland, National and Solemn Leagues and Covenants, and Solemn Acknowledgments of Sins, and Engagements to Duties; in all which we are bound to Extirpate Popery and Prelacy, as inconsistent with the whole Tract of our former Contendings, and particularly with the Testimony of the Synod of Fie, and other Brethren, against Cromwel' s vast Toleration and Liberty of Consci∣ence. The worst of all is, (says he) that it's further declared in that Toleration, that nothing must be preached or taught, which may any way tend to alienate the Hearts of the People from the King or his Government: here is the Price at which they ought to purchase their Freedom; a sad Bargain to buy Liberty and sell Truth. But who can be faithful, but he must think it his Duty to alienate the Hearts of the People from such an Enemy to Christ? What Watchman must not see it his indispensable Duty, to preach so that the People may hate the Whore, and this Pimp of Hers: It cannot be but very stumbling to see the Ministers of Scotland purchasing à Liberty to themselves, at the rate of burying and betraying the Cause into Bondage; and thus to be laid by, from all Op∣position to Antichrist's Design, in such a season: The World will be tempted to think, that they are not governed by Prin∣ciples,
but their own Interest, and that it was not the late overturning of Religion and Liberty that offended them; for if that Arbitrary Power had been but exerted in their fa∣vours, tho' with the same prejudice to the Cause of Christ, they would have complied with it, as they do now. Mr. Rule in his late Book is highly offended with the Author of the case of the afflicted Clergy, for saying, That the Presbyterians Addressed and Thanked K. James for this Toleration in a fawning and flattering manner; and yet our honest Presbyterian Author deals more roundly with them, Pag. 173. his words are these, The Addresses made thereupon, were with a strain of Fulsome and Blasphe∣mous Flatteries, to the Dishonour of God, the Reproach of the Cause, the Betraying of the Church, the Detriment of the Nation, and the exposing themselves to the Contempt of all. Again, (says he, Pag 176, 177, 178.) The Address it self is of such a dress, as makes the things addressed for to be odious, and the Addressers to forefault the Respect, and merit the Indignation of all that are friends to the Pro∣testant and Presbyterian Cause.—Nothing could have been more cross to the real desires of the true Presbyteri∣ans than this newly start-up Opinion, that Interest has led them to espouse.—There is nothing here sounds like the old Presbyterian strain; neither was there ever an Address of this Stile seen before from Presbyterians: It would have looked far more Presbyterian like, to have sent a Protestation against the now openly desgn'd In∣troduction of Popery, and Subversion of all Laws and Li∣berties, which they are Covenanted to maintain; or at least, an Address in the usual Language of the Presbyte∣rians, who used always to speak of the Covenants, and work of Reformation; but here never a word of these, but of Loyalty to His Excellent, to His Gracious, and to His Sacred Majesty; of Loyalty not to be questioned; an entire Loyalty in Doctrine a resolved Loyalty in Practice,
and a fervent Loyalty in Prayers: All that they are sol∣licitous about, is not for the Prerogatives of their Master, or the Liberties of the Church; but lest their Loyalty be question'd, that they be otherwise represented; all that they beseech for, is, Not that the Cause of Christ be not wronged, or Antichrist introduced by this Liberty; but that those who promote any Disloyal Principles and Practices may be looked upon as none of theirs: and all the hopes they have,  great perswasions of His Majesty's Justice and Goodness. Here is a Lawless, Unrestrained Loyalty to a Tyrant, claiming and absolute Power, to be obeyed without re∣serve; not only professed, but solicitously sought to be the Principle of Presbyterians, whereas it is the Principle of Atheistical Hobes.—This is not the Presbyterian Loyalty to the King, according to the Restrictions in the Covenants; but Erastian Loyalty to a Tyrant in his over∣turning Religion, Laws and Liberties, and in protecting and incouraging all Iniquity. This Loyalty in Doctrine will be found Disloyalty to Christ, in a sinful and shame∣ful silence, that wrong is done to him. This Loyalty in Practice, is a plain betraying of Religion and Liberty, and lying by from all opposition to the destroyer of both. And this Loyalty in Prayers, for all Blessings ever to at∣tend His Person and Government, will be found incon∣sistent with the Zeal of Christians, and the cries of the Elect unto God, for Vengeance upon the Supporters of Antichrist; nor consonant to Presbyterian Prayers in refe∣rence to Popish Tyrants; it were much more suitable for them to pray, That God which hath caused his Name to dwell in his Church, may destroy all Kings that shall put to their Hands to alter and destroy the House of God, Ezra▪ 6. 12.
Page 178. 179. This Address is so stuffed with sneak∣ing Flatteries, that it would more become Sycophants and Court Parasites, than Ministers of the Gospel.—Nothing but a Rhapsody of Flatteries, justifying all his Claim to Absoluteness, and engaging to Demean them∣selves so, as that he may find cause to enlarge rather than to diminish his Favours, which can be no other way but in assisting him to destroy Religion and Liberty: O what an indelible Reproach is this for Ministers, who pretend to be set for the Defence of the Gospel, thus to be found betraying Religion. This is in effect not only Flattery, but Blasphemy, as great as if they had said. They resol∣ved, by the help of God, to be as Unfaithful, Time-ser∣ving, and Silent Ministers, as ever plagued the Church of God, p. 180. Now the Presbyterians who accepted this Toleration, and made such bustling Addresses of Thanks to King James for it, are they whom Mr. Rule calls the sober Presbyterians: and now I leave him to Vindicate himself and them, from what is thus charged upon them, by one who is well known to be a true Presbyterian,Shields Chaplain to my Lord Angus's Regiment, one of their famous Authors and Preach∣ers. and as such is at present own'd, and imployed in a considerable Trust by the General Assembly: And if we may judge from all the Principles and Practices of former Scotch Pres∣byterians, he is really a far honester Presbyterian, than they who would now call themselves Moderate; and yet in contradiction to that Title, persecute their Reformed Brethren with the greatest Rigour and Severity. To con∣clude this Head, and to justifie what may be thought most severe in the Character giver of Presbyterians in the former Section; if we may believe the account the Pres∣byterians of Scotland have published to the World them∣selves, (as I think they ought not to blame us if we do) then the one half of our Presbyterians are neither Mo∣derate nor Sober, but Wild Hill-men, Separatists, a rob∣bing,
lawless, ungovernable Rabble, a mad People, head∣strong Traytors and Rebels, that is, in a word, they are Cameronians, vide First and Second Vindication, and further Vindication of the Church of Scotland. The other half are Betrayers of all Religion, Covenant-breakers, Worldly, Fawning, Flattering Court Parasites, Blasphemous, Unsaith∣ful, Time-serving, Silent Ministers, and the greatest Plagues of the Church of Scotland; vide, Hind let loose, Banders disbanded. And even Dr. Rule, (as he Intitles himself, and is angry that others do not call him so too,) in that Defence of the Presbyterians, which he writes by the Or∣der of the General Assembly, calls the Cameronians a Peo∣ple rendered mad, p. 91. And in the same Page, speaking of the other Party of Presbyterians, says, I deny not but many of them put force upon their Light. Again, p. 118. They did hear renitente Conscientiâ. And what is this to say, in plain terms, but that one Party of Presbyterians is without their Wits, and many of the other without any Conscience: Now what may Prelatists look for from such Men, Pudet haec op∣probia nobis & dici potuisse & non potuisse refelli. There are some famous Authors more, that are fit to have place here, because in their Writings they discover the true Spirit of the Presbyterian New Gospel, two of them own themselves to be present Pamphleteers for the Party, pretending, forsooth, to answer Books too. The honest∣est and truest Presbyterian of these two, shall have, as he deserves, the first place, that is the Author of the brief and true Account of the Sufferings of the Kirk of Scotland, occasi∣oned by the Episcopalians, since the Year 1660; London, print∣ed 1690. In the very first Page, he seems to be struck with Asto∣nishment at the thinking but of Episcopalians, (as he calls them,) O (says he) their Superlative Impudence, their Hellish Dissimulation and Malice: They imitate the De∣vil himself, who first tempts, and then accuses, tho' it's
too visible that their Consciences are past feeling, being seared as with a hot Iron. When their Hierarchy was re∣stored, the Devil, who seemed to be bound sometime before,That was no doubt in the peaceful and godly days of the Holy Covenant: But how seem'd the Devil to be bound then? why, it was after the New Gospel way, he was bound in the Chains of Blood, Murther, and Rebellion; be∣ing surfeited with those Sacrifices, he seemed to lay himself down to rest, leaving all his Drudgery up∣on Earth to be performed by his Covenanted Agents. was let loose, the Flood-gates of all Impiety and Wick∣edness were set open; and Hell did tri∣umph in its Conquests over the Nation, and displayed its Banner not only against Religion, but even Morality: Which the Prelates, and their Adherents were so far from opposing, that they indulged the People, but especially the Gentry, in their Wickedness, as knowing that to be the only Method to secure them on their side. Well, believe but this New Gospeller, and the Scotch Gentry, as well as Clergy, are a rare sort of Monsters, indeed; for the best Characters and softest Words he bestows upon them, are these, They are Godless Miscreants, of the true Aegyptian Brood, infamous Parracides, Sorcerers, and incestuous Apostates, infamous Varlets, infamous Villains, left to corrode their own viprous Bowels with their Inhumane Fury; the Devil's Instruments, fit onely to be Stallions and Pimps to Bawdy-Houses; the Episcopalian Hireling Preachers, with their infernal Bawlings, the Scum and Refuse of the Nation, they bore the Characters of Wick∣edness of their Foreheads, liker Pagans than Professors, Blood-hounds, Children of Hell, the Tyranno-papa-pre∣latical Host, the great Papa-prelatical Champion Dundee, Savage Beasts in Humane Shape, a graceless untoward Generation of Prelatists, who use nothing but Hectoring for Reason, and Cursing for Argument; ungodly Episcopal Brutes, that reprobate Faction; that Limb of Antichrist, and infernal Locust, the Apostate Archbishop Sharp, with a Malice like his Father the Devil, that waspish formal Prelate.—The Generation of Vipers, the Episcopalian
Seed of the Serpent, Hectors and Buffoons, the most ob∣durate, impenitent, spiteful, base, impudent Priests, whose Fathers were not good enough to eat with the Dogs of their Flocks, infamous, scandalous, lying, Runnagates, &c. This is the way the Scotch Presbyterians use to argue and answer Books; and these are the sweetest Flowers of our Authors Presbyterial Rhetorick, that he liberally strows in every Page of his Book; which being quite con∣trary to the Spirit and Genious of CHRIST must be allowed to pass for new minted, superfine Presbyterian Gospel. Well, so much for Scotland, that's his own Country perhaps our Author may be more courteous and civil to Strangers. Next then let's see how he treats the other Re∣formed Churches: As for the Church of England, he dis∣charges most furiously against her in many places, viz. p 7. She is the worst constitute Church in the World; These Tantivees, let their Hyperbolical Pretensions of Zeal for Religion and Loyalty, be what they will, if the King but put forth his hand to touch them, they will curse him to his face;The Pres∣byterians indeed or∣dinarily prevent the King's put∣ting forth his hand against them, by assaulting him first. and rather than part with an Inch of Superstition, or a Swinish Lust, will, as the Party have always done, lay a Confederacy with Hell and Rome, as times past and present do evidence beyond contradiction. I wonder he did not add, and times to come; for that would have been as true as the other. And again, p. 8. For the new upstart slavish Doctrine of Passive Obedience, as the Church of England had the Dishonour to be the Mother of it, she has also the Igno∣miny to be the Murderer, having basely cut it's Throat, as Harlots use to do sometimes with their spurious Brood.The great design of the New Gospel to decry Pas∣sive Obedi∣ence, and to blas∣pheme the Church of England. Page 27. If the English Clergy offer to assist the Pre∣latical Scots, as they ate readier by a thousand to one to
do it,The English Clergy, who scruple to Swear, shew, that they can patiently suffer, and therefore are not concerned at what Pres∣byterians threaten; the Devil can go no farther than his Chain reaches. than to Swear Allegiance to their Soveraigns, it may arm the good Wo∣men with their Folding-stools once more against them; as it did formerly in King Charles the First's time, when one of the Bishops began to read the Common-Prayer, which she called PoperyAnd so do all the new Go∣spellers.. Pag. 28. Is it not as lawful for the Scots Presbyteri∣ans, to pray against the English Hierarchy as Antichri∣stian. As for the English Clergy and Prelates too, to Plot, drink and plead in their Sessions at the Devil, a∣gainst the Scots Presbyterie: And I believe they would pray against it also, but that they have not a Form for it. To suppose, that the banihing the Prelatical Scots Clergy was not encouraged by Authority, is Ignorance and Sawciness; for it's plain, Authority in Scotland, has done what was proper for a Civil Government to do, viz. They have declared the Hierarchy Antihumane; that is, contrary to the peoples InclinationBy the same argu∣ment, the Protestant Religion must be An∣tihumane in France, Italy and Spain; and the Christi∣an too in all the Grand Seig∣nior's vast Dominions.: and, I suppose, are so good natur'd, to wish their Neighbours were rid of it too; and so much the rather, that they have so often found, and do still find them imposing Sawcy Intrigues against the Kingdom of Scotland, wherein, if they per∣sist, it may perhaps, and let them blame themselves for it, prove as fatal to them as it did in the days of Dr. Laud. Well, here's a severe and open threatning, England then look to it. The Scots Presbyterians are sworn in their Ho∣ly Covenant, to reform Britain and Ireland, (though it be by Club Law) and let them but have Power, accord∣ing to their Will, and they will soon visit you once more, for all your Goods. Pag. 29. The Bishops are generally found to be a∣gainst that which is for the Nations good, and howso∣ever the late opposition which they made to the late King may be magnified, they seem quickly to have re∣pented
of it. But supposing they had continued stedfast, yet whatever good Nature might have done, I am sure, Justice would not have awarded them any thanks; which will appear undeniably true, if we consider (a∣mong many other things which he instances) how most of the Bishops opposed the reversing of the Judgment of Per∣jury given against: Dr. Oates, who did the Nation more service than Seven Idolized Stars, so many of whom are now turned dark Lanthorns. Nor can it ever be forgot, how many of the inferior Clergy, following the Conduct of their Tripple-headed Guide, advanced the Interest of the Tripple-Crown, and some of them topping ones too, at the hour of death, grated with their slavish nonsensical Doctrine of Resistance upon the Consciences of the Noble Hero's, and Darlings of the People, the Lord Russel and Duke of Monmouth, upon the very Scaffolds; and if the contrary Doctrine be dam∣nable, as they alledged, then I am sure their Church hath been guilty of damnable Practices sinceEvery thing that's not agree∣able to the New Gospel must be sla∣vish, non∣sensical, and dam∣nable.. This is the Charity that the New Gospel Professors have to the Church of England, which the whole Christi∣an World besides them, doth so justly honour and esteem, upon the account of their Government, Worship, Do∣ctrine, and Practice, which their Phanatical Neighbours so maliciously censure and blaspheme. Well, but (say they) the Church of England is still labouring under much Romish Superstition and Idolatry; and which is worse, she is Papaprelatical, nay, she is Archipapaprelatical; and that's Antihumane, in the New Gospel phrase. But I hope they will be kind, at least, to their Brethren of the Presbyterian▪ Church beyond Sea. Are not the Dutch and French, Presbyterians? Is not the Mother Church of Ge∣neva throughly reformed? No, no, they have never set up the Solemn League and Covenant for their Standard: Or to speak in the Authors own words, pag. 27. They are
strangers to the power of Godliness, because not knowing how to pray, without they must have recourse to a Form, which is as unreasonable and unnatural an imposition upon the Strong, especially, on Ministers, as would be the imposing of Crutch∣es upon the adult and able part of Mankind, who can walk better without them. Well, Christ prescribed a Form of Prayer to his Disciples; the first, and all the succeeding Ages of the Church thought it not only convenient, but necessary to use Forms in Publick Worship; but, alas the Disciples themselves, and all preceding Christians, are but weak, unable Infants, in respect of the adult, strong and covenanted Professors of the new Gospel in the West of Scotland. The next famous Author is Mr. Rule, who calls him∣self a Doctor of Medicine (for they never pretended to have any in Divinity) in his Second Vindication of the Kirk of Scotland, he says, pag. 113. That it is an unfair, injurious, and false Imputation, to charge the severity of the Stile of this Author upon the Presbyterians, who he says, disown that Stile, it being written by a Cameronian, while they stood at a distance from the sober Presbyterians; however those whom he calls Sober Presbyterians, have never yet, by any publick deed, condemned that Book, nor any other of the Barbarities of these unsober Came∣ronian Presbyterians, but have, on the contrary, received them into their Communion, without the least acknow∣ledgment of any such Crimes; and Dr. Rule (that I may not offend him) calls them the Zealous Party, and repre∣sents them as pretty gentle, in that they made it their work only to deprive, and not to Murther the Episcopal Mi∣nisters, pag. 125. Altho' the Doctor knows, that Instan∣ces can be given of some Ministers that were even Mur∣thered by that Zealous Party, not long ago; and himself owns, in the beginning of his Post-script, that five Men and six Women, Presbyterians, came to the House of Wil∣liam
Ferguson, Minister of Kilpatrick; and because he would not alter his manner of Praying, and come out of his House, as they had charged him, they therefore invaded his House, tore off his Cloaths, and beat him on the Head and Legs, which lookt but too like a design to Murther him: Several other things of this Nature were so notori∣ous, that his ridiculous way of disguising, when he can∣not deny them, must needs satisfie the World, of the cer∣tain truth of the Accounts that have been given by the Eye-witnesses and Sufferers in that Persecution. Upon which Consideration, Mr. Pitcarne, a better Writer, and as it appears, a much honester Man, declined the vindica∣ting of these late Proceedings of the Presbyterians; not that he did not like the Presbyterian Cause, for he is through-paced that way; but because, after he had exa∣mined the matters of Fact for several Months, as he had been enjoyned by the Fraternity, he found it impossible to speak any thing in their Vindication, but what the great∣est part of Scotland would know to be notoriously false; wherefore, as Dr. Rule himself informs us, Preface to his Second Vindication, parag. 5, & 7. in the end of the same Book, Pag. 190. When this Affair was committed to him, after many Months he returned the Papers to be answered, without any Reply to them. But passing this, I wonder that the Worthy Doctor should, in his late Book (now cited) exactly imitate that severe Stile, which he and his Sober Party pretend to disown; but, perhaps, he sees not this Beam in his own Eye, with which he must grant the So∣berest Presbyterians to be justly chargeable; because, as he himself is at great pains to inform the World, both in the beginning and ending of his Book, the whole party com∣mitted that trust to him, when others had refused it: Vid. Preface, parag. 5, and 7. pages, and Second Vindi∣cation, pag. 192.
Upon which account, not only the Scurrilous Railing, but all the Untruths, Contradictions, and Nonsence, which abounds in every Page, is justly chargeable up∣on the whole Party, of which I shall give the World such a tast, as may be sufficient to make them judge of all the rest, which would be too tedious and nauseous here to insert. First then, as to Scurrilous Railing Accu∣sations, in the very first page of his Preface, he calls Pre∣latists, The Seed of the Serpent, whose Enmity against the Seed of the Woman (that you must know, is Scots Presbyte∣rians) as it began, so it must end with the World; and that you may not mistake him, he avers after in the same page, That they use the old stratagems of Satan; and in the 2d. page he compares them to Heathens, Papists, yea, they are Devils, both Greek and Syriack Devils; nay, they are Jesuites, Wo to Posterity if they believe them, for then, to be sure, succeeding Ages will turn absolute Scepticks: He adds, It's evident, that many of them regarded not the Ci∣vil Authority of the Nation, and others, by their lewdness of Conversation, made themselves unworthy to be in the Ho∣ly Function of the Ministry, Preface, Paragr. 2. And in the Book it self, page 1. he charges the Authors of our late Books, with Malice, Lies, Railing, and guilty of the fowlest and falsest Misrepresentations that the Minds of Men can suggest, enraged by being deprived of the occasion they once had to persecute their Neighbours, the end to which they improved their Lucrative places. Page 4. Mean Spirits and Mercenary Souls, that imploy themselves in Men∣dicant Writings and Practices;—beyond the common size of Slanderous Malice, Page 7. Guilty of the highest Impu∣dence and Sauciness, page 12. Prelatital Party eminent for Spite, but hath neither Truth nor Charity to warrant it, page 21. They who know their temper, and the brow and way of those for whom they plead, will not believe their Pro∣fessions, their Hypocrisie being shameful, and twisted with
Malice, page 23. The temper of Episcopalians is by unman∣ly, as well as unchristian, shifts, tobuoy up their sinking Cause, page 25. This Historian's Ignorant Malice to be despised, Judas Iscariot was his Predecessor, page 52. The contempt of the Ministry came from the Atheism and Debauches of the Episcopal Clergy, page 64. And again, of an Eminent Di∣vine, Loved and honour∣ed by all but Pres∣byterians. he saith, That his Words are like those of a Mad∣man, or of one raving in a Fever, page 51. It would be tedious and nauseous to trace this his Presbyterian Elo∣quence, through every page, as he vents it; or to shew how falsly and boldly he charges a whole Sacred Order of Men, with the faults, which he supposes, and would have the World believe, some single persons among them, to be guilty of; as that they are perfrictae frontis, Nothing ma∣nifestly false can check their Conscience and Impudence: The whole party grosly Ignorant, Papising Prelates, pages 126, 131, 133. Spuing out the most spiteful Venom that can lodge in a Humane Breast, page 136. Impudence beyond Jesuitical, page 142. They glory either in their having no Principle, or that they can yield over the Belly of Conscience, to promote their Interest with Men, page 144. The diffe∣rences betwixt us and them, are not reconcileable;And yet they own the same Religion with us pag. 1. l 3. a heap of Lies, Men that have taught their Tongues and Pens to speak and write Lies, pag. 146, 147. Lies and Calumnies, horrid lies, a broad lie, pag. 150, 151. This which they now call a broad lie, past for a Gospel Truth among the Presbyterians, An. 1648.The Au∣thority of their As∣semblies a∣bove that of King and Parlia∣ment. Prelatical Incumbents were Scan∣dalous, and unfit to edifie the people, and do rather harden them in Wickedness, page 162. A whole fardel of lies, malicious Representations, coupled falshoods, impudent and false assertions, brazen Foreheads, page 166. Prelates spend their short Glass with gingling py-bald Orations, page 168. Bitterness, Malice and Contempt is suitable to the Hislori∣cal Talent of many of the Prelatical Party: If the Debau∣chery of Prelates did not tempt people to count all Religion
a sham, it were well, page 173. He knows that his Impu∣dent Assertions and Lies can be discovered, and his Villa∣nie come abroad at last, page 178. A Snarling Cur,—a lying Spirit doth possess the Men with whom we have to do,Well Ranted Rule. Pag. 191, 194. This is the Meek, Lowlie Strain of the Presbyterian new Gospel, whereby the soberest of them, pretend to vindicate their own proceedings, and refute the Writings of other Men I leave the World to judge, by this way of defending the Party, what their Cause must be, and to determine, whether he who calls himself a Sober Pres∣byterian; and says, That he was selected and appointed by the sober General Assembly, to write in their defence; be not indeed as black and foul-mouth'd, as the most rank and rigid Cameronian among them all; for my part, I can see no difference betwixt his Stile and theirs, except this may pass for one, that Mr. Rule seems to have learned his Stile from the Coal-stealers in Edenburgh, or at Buck∣haven, of which Colledge only he ought to have been Principal; whereas the Cameronians seem to have learned their Stile from the Shepherds and Herring-fishers on the Western Coast, who, tho' they have more Cant, yet they have less Knavery than the former: If Mr. Rule should challenge me, as falling into the same fault for which I here blame him, because of some sharpness which he may apprehend to be in that Character I have given before of the Presbyterian Preachers and People, yet that is only chargeable upon my single person, and not upon others of our Party, for I neither do, nor pretend to write by a Commission from them: And besides, he himself hath provided me with an Apologie, viz. Calling things by their true names, is not to be reckoned inconsistent with Moderation and Calmness; A petulant and effronted Ad∣versary is not to be handled with that softness of Stile, which is fit for such as are more modest, Preface, Paragr.6.
But passing those Flowers of Presbyterian Eloquence, let us examine in the next place, if this Author makes any a∣mends for his Stile, by the Truth and Reason that he writes; it would be tedious to trace him through every Page, in which his Nonsence, Contradictions, and Fals∣hoods abound, and therefore I shall here mention only some generals. There is one Principle suitable to the Genius of the New Gospel only, upon which much of his Book is founded, and it's this, Do as ye have been done by; by this he ex∣cuses the greatest Barbarities of the Presbyterian Rabble, and often justifies their highest Severities against Episcopal Mi∣nistersPreface Parag. 6. at the end, and p. 26. &c.; it's true in other places he condemns them, and says, he will not defend them; but he seems not concern∣ed shamefully to contradict himself at every turn: The Peo∣ple for whom he pleads are not so critical as to observe that, and for others he says, that he despises and contemns them: Sometimes, if you'l believe him, Cameronians are zealous godly Men, eminent for their suffering for Christ; by and by says he, They are a wild, ungovernable, desperate Rabble, render'd mad by Oppression: the sum of all is, Re∣venge is a true Presbyterian Vertue, and Contradiction Mr. Rule's best: way of Reasoning. Preface, par. 6. these are his words: I have treated the Adversaries I deal with as Brethren, desiring rather to ex∣eeed, than come short in Civility, and fair dealing with them. But at the same time he takes the liberty almost in every Page, to call those he deals with. Of the Seed of the Ser∣pent, Devils, habitual Drunkards and Swearers, Traitors that deserve to have their Necks stretched, prophane Persons, con∣stant Sabbath-breakers, horrid Lyers and Slanderers, Men who beat their Wives, and in their Dealings are most injuri∣ous to Men, having no Conscience, p. 32. Ministers who are Opposers of Christ, and his Institution, and who harden and encourage the People in their Sins, As may be read in the
Pages above cited, and many other of Rule's exceeding Civil Book, which being written by the Design of the whole General Assembly, it's but natural and just to con∣clude, that this is the only way of Scots Presbyterian Civi∣lity and fair Dealing. Again in the same Preface, and Pa∣rag. 6. he says, I build not on Hear-say, or common Talk, which is the best Foundation of many of the Assertions of my Adversaries. And in the same page, these are his imme∣diate preceeding words, The truth of matters of fact assert∣ed in this Treatise, is not to be taken from me, but from them who are my Informers, few of whom I pretend to any personal knowledge of, therefore not my Veracity is pledged, but that of others: if they have deceived, or been deceived, I am not to answer for that. What can a Man believe of a Book that's usher'd in with such a doubting and contradictory Preface; if these were not Mr. Rule's own express Sayings, no body could well believe, that the whole Faction could have singled out such a Writer to Vindicate them; but Falshood it seems has no Feet, and Lyars who have so little Wit and Memo∣ry, must needs be often intangled in their own Snares. Some of the Church of England have medled far beyond their Line in our Affairs, tho' we be far from interposing in any of theirs, p. 16. only upon occasion we take the Christian Liberty that our Predecessors have always done, of calling them Superstitious, Popish, and Idolatrous in their Worship; and in their Doctrine, scandalous for Arianism, Arminianism, Socinianism, Popery, and that Turkish Bow-string Doctrine of Passive Obedience; and that in their Government they are directly contrary to Christ's Institution, to the design of the Reformation, and to the Holy Covenant, being Tyrannical, Prelatical, yea and Archi-papa-prelatical; What we are bound to by the Covenant, says he again, is not to reform them, but to concur with them, when lawfully called, to advance the Re∣formation; that is, wholly to overturn their Church and State, as we formerly did by our own glorious Gospel-Methods
of Fire and Sword, having a very lawful Call from a godly Party, who invited us to fight the Battels of the Lord against the Mighty, the King who opposed Reformati∣on-Work in the Land; And now (says he) its far from our thoughts to go beyond that Boundary, in being concerned in their Affairs, we wish their Reformation, but leave the manag∣ing of it to themselves; that is, till we find such a blessed Occasion as those Worthies of the Lord, the Reformers, did in 48. Page 23. he says that King James abdicated the Govern∣ment, and that the Parliament called it so; if he knows any thing of those Affairs, he knows that the Parliament of Scotland did nor give it that name, tho' that of England did: However, if he did Abdicate, I would fain know how this consists with Rule his concluding just before, p. 22. That his Royal Authority was taken away by the Nation; and with what he says p. 100. The Nation laid him aside, and chused another; This is the constant Doctrine of Scotch Pres∣byterians, (and they practice accordingly,) That the Peo∣ple can give and take away the Royal Authority, can lay aside and chuse Kings at their pleasure, vide Buchan. de Jur. Reg. Jus Populi Vind. Lex. Rex, and Rule's Vind. Now to use Mr. Rule's moderate Phrase in that place, Some Mens necks have been made to stretch for a less Crime; than to assert un∣der an Hereditary Monarchy, that Kings are or can be e∣lected; and it's certain they are as little Friends to their present Majesties, as to Monarchy, who would found their Authority upon such a tottering bottom: nay, Mr. Rule in the name of the other Presbyterians, tells plainly that they owe no Allegiance to King William, but in so far as he supports Presbytery, and that it would overturn the ve∣ry Foundations of his Authority to restore Episcopacy, For (says he) it is declared against in, the Claim of Right, as a Grievance, and therefore cannot be restored without o∣verturniing the Foundation of our present Civil Settlement,
p. 90. parag.4. And again p. 152. parag. 2. The Convention hath voted Episcopacy to be a Grievance to the Nation, and in the Claim of Right, made it a Fundamental Article in the Government, that it should be abolished. Now what's the meaning of all this, but that the present Government of, State must necessarily stand and fall with Presbytery? So that all their great boasts of Loyalty to the present King, amounts to no more than this, No Presbytery, no King Wil∣liam. Page 36. par. 11. he says, Most of the Episcopal Mini∣sters who went out, were put out by their own Consciences; for they deserted their Charges without either Sentence Threatning, or Compulsion. And yet before that Page 26, Parag. 6. he owns that the Presbyterian Rabble did perse∣cute and drive them away. But that this is no more imput∣able to the Presbyterians, than the Drunkenness, Swearing, Whoredoms, and Persecutions,This is the Civil Style that he promi∣sed to ex∣ceed in, Pref. par. 6. that we charge many of the Prelatists with, are to be lookt on as the Crimes of all the, E∣piscopalians. And farther he excuses that Rabble, because as he there avers, They were under the highest Provocations imaginable to do what they did; yea, to have proceeded to farther Severities. And he adds out of the abundance of Presbyterian sence, that these things were done in an Inter∣regnum; which by the bye, can never possibly fall out in an Hereditary KingdomWhere in the sense of the Law the King never dies.: And tho' he says we had then no Church-Government, yet himself knows the contrary, and that Prelacy stood then established by many Laws made in 27 Parliaments, freely and legally Elected in the most setled times, and that the Prince of Orange, who had then at the de∣sire of some of the Nobility and Gentry, taken the Kingdom under his Protection, did by his solemn Proclamation or∣der all things in the Church and State to continue as the Laws had fixed them, till the Convention of the States should meet: But says honest Mr. Rule, These enraged People were chafed in their minds, and having now potenti∣am,
tho' not potestatem, therefore it was not to be wonder∣ed that they relieved themselves'Tis no new thing for Presby∣terians to think Pow∣er a suffici∣ent Call to act Illegal∣ly.; that is, by Rabbling the Legal Orthodox Clergy. Moreover, p. 161. he says ex∣presly, That in Galloway the Incumbents were generally dri∣ven away; but how all this is consistent with what he said before, viz. That they deserted without either Threating or Compulsionn, I leave the infallible Assembly who imployed this Author, to judge, and if they can, to reconcile what He writes in the following Citations. Page 34, par. 10. speaking of the Rabbling Cameronians, he says, That they came into Mr. Skinner, Minister of Da∣ly, his House, and after they had eaten, they went away without doing any prejudice to any in the Family; again p. 27. par. 10. he owns expresly, that those Rabble-Reformers by force took away the Money out of the Poor's Box, from Mr. Russel Minister at Govan; but says he, They did it with all Tenderness; and if you will credit those Sacrile∣gious Robbers, Rule's Informers, both Mr. Russel and his Wife were drunk: but that our Author may prove him∣self and his Book to be all of one Presbyterian Piece, he tells again, p. 29. par. 5. That the Author of the Case of the Af∣flicted Clergy, foully mis-represents the Cameronians, while he speaketh of their eating and drinking at the expence of them whom they rabbled; all the reports that we have of them, give account of their not laying their hands on the prey, Esth. 2. 15. Page 145. It's better that England and Scotland be two different Nations, than that the Institutions of Christ should be thwarted, that they be made one.—May not two Nations trade together, and be governed by the same Laws, and yet bear with one another as to Church-ways? And may not al∣so the West of Scotland, and the other parts of that King∣dom, trade together and be governed by the same Laws, and yet the West not impose their Kirk-ways upon the rest of the Kingdom? Responde Gilberte.
The Presbyterian Government was settled by Christ, p. 151. Here he leaves it to the Discretion of the Reader, to judge whether this be a simple Affirmation only, or an Affirma∣tion and Oath conjoyned; tho' the first may be his mean∣ing, yet the latter sence seems most natural to the words, and in any other sence there is no truth in them: and in∣deed the Arguments by which their Preachers would per∣swade the People to this, are as ridiculous as the Asserti∣on it self; for their ordinary Cant is, Beloved, we read in the Word, that the Apostles went up together, one did not go be∣fore the other; there was no Precedency amongst them, Beloved; and therefore it's clear, that there was no Prelacy in those days: And again we read, that honest Paul (they never call him St. Paul, because he never swore the Solemn League and Covenant,) left his Cloak at Troas: Why, Sirs, you see plainly from this Text, that Paul had not a Gown but a Cloak, for says the Text, he left his Cloak, it does not say that he left his Gown; never a Gown had that precious Man to leave, Beloved, and therefore you may be sure he was no Prelate; for they, false Lowns, have no Cloaks but Gowns. From these and such like Arguments, our Author allows no Church but the Presbyterian to be of Divine Institution, and at one dash he Unchurches all the Episcopal Churches; and yet says he, p. 154. Presbyterians deny not Papists to be law∣ful Ministers. If he can but confute the Learned Dr. Pear∣son's Defence of Ignatius's Epistles; or shew us from any Authentick Record, or received Ancient Historian, that Presbytery was ever the Government of the Church, then we shall yield the Cause, and believe, in spite of our Rea∣son, that all Rule's Vain and Empty Boasts of this Matter, are indeed well founded, that both parts of his Contradi∣ctions are certainly true, and all the real foolishness of their Preaching, solid Arguments. Pages 154 & 155. He racks his Wit and Cunning to evade and shift this notorious truth, That instead of four∣teen
Bishops, which were formerly in the Church, the Kirk had new set up sixty: But in this matter all his Quibles and Sophisms (and his best Arguments are no more) depend upon this Supposition, That that Parliament was the Church, (which is directly contrary to the Fundamental Principle of a Spiritual Power inherent in the Kirk, altogether In∣dependent on the Parliament, which has no Power over Christ's Office-bearers,) for it was that Parliament in which there was not so much as one Clergy-man, that impower∣ed these sixty Presbyters to govern the Kirk, and restrained all the rest from that Priviledge; it was that Parliament which took upon them to judge of the Hability of these six∣ty, and of the Inhability of other Presbyters to govern: well then, according to his way of arguing here, it's the Par∣liament that, Pro Ecclesiae Statu, can impower or restra Presbyters, notwithstanding of their Universal and Equal Priviledge to govern. Indeed this Parliament was exces∣sively kind to Mr. Rule, and he for once will be civil to them; and in contradiction to all the Principles and Pra∣ctices of former Presbyterians, they shall pass for the whole Omnipotent Kirk. Page 156. We are for Moderation, maugre all the Re∣proaches cast upon us: The Moderation of any Party is best known by their Practices when in power; now when the Presbyterians were last in power, all the Evidences of their Moderation were, the reeking of Fields and Scaffolds with the Blood of Princes, Prelates, Nobles, Gentry, and Commons; the Cries and Tears of Widows and Orphans; the Groans of Men Imprisoned, Banished, Excommunicated, Sequestred; some Cathedrals razed, and others converted to Garrisons and Sta∣bles, and the lesser Churches made Dens for Thieves, in the most litteral sence: and now that they are in power a∣gain, all the Evidences of their Moderation, are Rabbling, Robbing, Beating, Wounding, Imprisoning, and Banishing of Bishops, Curates, Wives, and Children; the stigmatizing and
slandering innocent and good Men; invading the just Rights of the King, and of his best Subjects; rendering whole Coun∣tries destitute of any Ministry, flying at every turn in the face of Civil Authority; becoming false Accusers and Informers, and at the same time sitting as judges of Men in Office, and the next day intruding into their PlacesAs Mr. Rule him∣self did.: This Purging Work as they call it, Kirk Moderation with a witness; and to use Mr. Rule's own words, it's even as essential to Presby∣terians as Rationality it self, which they pretend to be great Masters of, tho' their Scriblers be now and then delirious. Page 157. Speaking of the Protestation made by some Presbyters, against the King and the Acts of Parliament to Assist and Deliver him, when perfidiously Imprisoned by the English Rebels, he says it was no gross nor scandalous Crime, but only a speculative Opinion in a controverted Point: This shews what is the Opinion of Mr. Rule, and of the Party that imployed him; but how it consists with his telling the World so often in his two last Books, That Pres∣byterians do not take upon them to meddle in matters of State, nor to controul their Civil Governours; I leave him to shew us in his next Vindication: In the same Page, and the fol∣lowing, Mr. Rule, vindicating the Proceedings of the Ge∣neral Assembly in this matter, says, That the fatal Divi∣sion about Protestation and Remonstrance, was through the Mercy of GOD, not so much as mentioned among them; and yet in the very next lines he says, That it was moved that the old Sentence against the Remonstrators should be re∣voked; and the revoking of their Sentence was confirmed by this Meeting:—That Mr. Pitcairn, one of the Reverend Brethren, was dissatisfied with the Determination of the Meet∣ing in that Affair, and was a little hot about it, and spoke of entering a Protestation against it. Would any People but Scotch Presbyterians have imployed such a Scribler as dare thus prophane the Mercies of GOD, to justifie his own foolish and palpable Contradictions.
Page 160. He grants that to make up their Meeting, some Presbyteries sent more than was customary or allowable, and yet it was a Regular, Lawful, General Assembly; and that they had none at all sent from other parts; which parts were more than one half of the Nation: And was not this a pretty General indeed, that included only the least part of the ParticularsJust like the Roman Catholick Church, an Vniversal Particu∣lar.? This is true Presbyterian Logic, and the Author of it deserves well to be Head of a Colledge. In the same Page he denies confidently, that Presbyterians were wont to appoint their Fasts on the Lord's Day; where∣as he might have, with at least as great shew of truth, deni∣ed that ever they fasted on any Day: But his two Rea∣sons for the General Assembly's appointing this Fast on the Lord's Day, will render this whole matter as plain as a Pikestaff; First, says he, It was the Harvest time, and to fast then on a Week-day, would have been a high Inconveni∣ency; Well, we godly Presbyterians, that are the Children of the Lord, may make bold with his Day, rather than seem by Religious Exercises to incommode the People in their Worldly interest. Secondly, Religious Joy and Reli∣gious Sorrow do very well agree: And even so Fasting and Feasting at the same time may be very religiously and well observed by the Godly. They that write Contradictions must needs speak some Truths, and Mr. Rule stumbles upon one that's well known, Pag. 161. where he says, We confess that planting work went more slowly on than purging work. Well St. Paul was a Divine, and he was all for planting and healing; Dr. Rule calls himself a Physician, and he is all for purging and launcing. The Presbyterians are always for purging work. Now they are for purging the Kirk: next have at the King Council and Houshold; there must be some purging work there too. Again, There are many malignant Members, which like so many ill humours cor∣rupt the Body of the Parliament, therefore that must be
also purged: Then the filthiness of the Army (by which Reforma∣tion-Work must be carried on) that must be likewise purged; and then that all the Streams may be pure Presbyterian, the Fountains must be cleansed, the Universities must be purged from the cor∣ruption of all ill-affected and suspected persons; and in a word, to make a thorough Reformation in the Land, the whole Nation must be soundly drenched, and purging work must go on in the Land after the old Presbyterian manner, so long as there remains either Guts or Brains in it. My Lord C—d who is deservedly honoured by all the party.Pag. 167. His Godly Parks and Orchards are well planted already, and why then should the General Assembly be any farther concern∣ed about planting work? Purging work is their Great Business. There is another evident truth that Mr. Rule happens to Deviate into Pag. 188. viz. The worst of the Prela¦ists would be readiest to pro∣fess Repentance for conforming to Episcopacy, which they who acted from a principle could not do. In this I heartily agree with him, and am suf∣ficiently satisfied that that Episcopal Renegado, who professed such a Repentance before their Assembly, neither acted from any Prin∣ciple, nor can be supposed to have any Conscience; and we bless God that all the Presbyterian interest, art, and industry, now that they have power, could not prevail with any but this one man, to prostitute his Conscience to his interest, in such a base and scanda∣lous compliance. I shall end my reflections on this Author's sayings, with some short Remarks upon the Witnesses which he alledges to attest his assertions, and first in general I say of them in his own words, Pag. 88. That they are the sworn Enemies of the Episcopal ChurchWitness their ma∣ny Cove∣nants, and Engage∣ments to that pur∣pose., and in a combinati∣on not only to defame them, but to root them out, and cut them off from the face of the earth; and we have from the Pamphlet now under considerationRule's 2d Vindi∣cation of the Kirk., a taste of the veracity of the men with whom we have to do: If his witnesses make no more conscience of speaking truth, than he him∣self doth, then few thinking men will be moved with what they say. 2ly, Of the Witnesses named by the Authors of our Books, he says, they are mostly teste me ipso, the Complainant is the witness, which is not fair. Now all Rule his Evidences are by this exception to be reje∣cted, for he himself, and all others that know them, are fully satisfied that those very Cameronians, whom he names as the Evidences to dis∣guise and lessen the attested matters of fact of our late Persecution, were themselves the principal actors of that horrid Tragedy. Since then it is not fair to admit parties to be witnesses, why should these Cameronians be received as such in this affair? Again he saith, that
Ministers witnessing for one another derogateth much from the Credibility of their Testimonies; but what say you to Cameronian Presbyterians wit∣nessing for one another? why, this derogates nothing from the cre∣dibility of their Testimonoes, for they are not Ministers, that's one evident reason; and moreover they are all men of strict Conscience, a godly gene∣ration, and very faithful to their Solemn League, the Holy Scots Cove∣nant. Upon these considerations M. Rule, Defender of the New Gospel-Faith, would have the world receive the testimony of that Cameroni∣an Rabble, as infallible proofs of what he asserts in his second vin∣dication of the Presbyterian Kirk. And yet Preface pag. 6. he says of them, That he will not pledge his veracity for theirs, that he pretends to no Personal knowledg of but a few of them; and that if they deceive, or have been deceived, not he but they are to blame for it. After all this, if neither Bishops nor other Ministers, neither Laick, Lords nor Gentry, both of the Scotch and English Nation, must be allowed to have any Credit, when they are brought by our Authors to attest known Truths, and matters of Fact whereof they were Eye Witnesses; then I beseech you, why should men receive that high Character and Testimony which Mr. Rule gives of him∣self, pag. 169? when he says, He did not only practice Medicine, but likewise took the Degree of Doctor in it, yet never giving over the Work of preaching frequently: This is a terrible Man indeed, who, it seems, can kill both Soul and Body: He is far stricter to the Cove∣nanted Work, than his Brethren the Presbyterians in England; for they can upon occasion, for Interest and other such holy Purposes unite and joyn with Independents, whereas he like a man of unmove∣able Conscience, withstood the temptation of having an Independent Congregation at Aberdeen, when great offers of that Charge were made to him there; and in Northumberland he suffered no small loss, because he would not fall in with that Independent way. Again, if you'll be∣lieve himself, he hat no want of Latin, and that he speaks false Lat∣tin, is false; he is ready (as he hath done) to give proof to the con∣trary, and to compete with all such as pretend to it; but when and where we must not know, till Elias come. Nay, besides all this, he hath an excellent hand at Latin Prayers, which he can make longer or shorter, as the occasion requireth, but never so short as some men alledge; nei∣ther doth he use to pray VERY LONG in publick, even in English, and that's more indeed than any other of his Fraternity can alledge for themselves: Long Prayers serve the Party for many great ends; in them they can sound the Alarms to Rebellion, commend them∣selves highly, defame the King, rail against and revile Malignants,
raise and inflame the Mob, vent false News and Stories, and many other Hocus tricks their long ex Trumpry Prayers serve for: More∣over, Mr. Rule, to shew his Parts, longs for an Adversary like him∣self, I wish, says he, a Sciolist would make it appear by a Solid Refu∣tation, what Ignorance I have discovered in my Writings, I am ready to defend itEven tho' it be solidly refuted by a Sciolist. with all the probability the subject matter is capable of: But my mistakes, if I be in any, must not pass for proofs of my Ignorance: If any Momus will make his censure on the Presbyterian Government, it's like Mr. Rule, the great Atlas of the Cause, or some for him, will give him a farther Answer: Just such another as this exceeding civil and fair Vindication: And then, to conclude his own Character, he assures us, That he exceeds all other Presbyterians, both in his tender∣ness to the Episcopal party, and in his Argumentative way, rather than bit∣terness; of all which the new Gospel Modesty and Meekness, the Candor, Ingenuity, and Argumentation that appears every where in his late Books is a sufficient evidence. Now for a man to say all this of himself, because no body else will, this sure is teste me ipso with a witness:, unless it shall be allowed, that Gilbert may witness for Rule, and Rule again for Gilbert; that the Doctor may witness for the Principal, and the honest Principal again, by way of Requi∣tal, does the like kindness to his beloved Doctor; this is the Presby∣terian way of proving things by Witnesses. Mr. Rule answers our Books so throughly, that he imputes to the Authors, as a fault in their Method, every little escape of the Printers about wrong numbering the PagesVid Rules 2d. Vindicati∣on, pag. 88. & 177., which is frequently occasioned by sending one and the same Book to several Houses for the speedier dispatch; however the Alphabetical numbering of the Sheets, ordinarily serves to help the misplaced Figures; but tho' Mr. Rule be often dabling about the Press, yet it seems he either does not, or he will not know this. Mr. Rule, at last, to confirm all the Contradictions and Falshoods of his Book, brings in Mr. Meldrum, one of his own Kidney, and just such another Scribler, as appears by his Letter, Page 195. where he says. That the Prelatists way is to spread Reflective Pamphlets in England, keeping them as secret as they can in Scotland, where the falshood of matters of Fact are not known, and they might soon have their Shame and Lying discovered. None but a true Scots Presbyteri∣an could have asserted this, for he himself too well knows, that his Party, which domineers now in Scotland, allows no Episcopal Pam∣phlets to be brought into, or dispersed in that Kingdom, and that sometime before the writing of his Letter, several hundreds of
these Pamphlets were, by the Presbyterian Party, seiz'd at Berwick, to prevent their being dispersed in Scotland; and that contrary to all the Rules of Justice, and Commerce betwixt the two Nations, and to the great prejudice of the Bookseller, these Books are by the Arbitrary Power of Presbyterians still kept up: But we shall al∣low Mr. Meldrum to be more candid in this than in his former deal∣ings with us, if he will but now obtain to us, the common liberty of the Press in Scotland, and then we promise that he shall have a sight of all our Pamphlets sine praetio aut praece, which now he says he cannot obtain by either of these means. Page 196▪ None but a Cameronian will assert, as Mr. Meldrum does, That the Covenant is a Sacred Oath; just as Sacred as that by which the Jews bound themselves to murther St. Paul: The World is not now ignorant, how that Covenant was by Subjects, who had no shadow or Authority, pressed upon their Brethren in despite of the King, at the expence of much Treasure, and many thousand Lives and Perjuries. Page 197. he says, That the submitting of some, who had been ordained only by Presbyterians, to be re-ordained by Bi∣shops, is Scandalous: None but one of Rule's Evidences would have said this; the Reformed French have been always justly reputed by all other Protestants, for the great Learning and Piety of their Ministers, and yet the most Learned and Pious of their Ministers, at their coming into England, when they could have the advantage of being Ordained by Bishops, have chearfully not only submitted to it, but begged it of the Right Reverend Fathers of the Church: Of which we have many late Instances. The account he gives of his shufling and shifting about the Oath of Canonical Obedience is very Comical; for he owns, That he Subscribed a Paper whereof he did not seriously consider either the words or the matter, and he thinks himself sufficiently absolved from that, because, forsooth, he was not present when that paper was read in the Church, and by telling the People next Lord's day, that he conceiv'd he had yielded to nothing but what he first offered, which they that know the matter of Fact call Canonical Obedience; for which, if you'll be∣lieve him, he lamented several years▪ after; all which time he still con∣tinued both in his Lamentations and Canonical Obedience together; and now he says he's obliged to those he calls his Enemies, for giving him the opportunity to tell the World, that he repents of it. The other matters narrated in that Letter, and in the Book to which it is annexed, are only such as will at first view appear design∣ed on purpose to disguise and smother evident Truths, to extol
and magnifie themselves and their Party, as very Innocent, Godly, and Candid Men; and to reproach and condemn all others as Per∣jured Liars and Slanderers; to all which, as they neither need nor deserve any particular answer, so I hope no body shall ever Vouch∣safe them the honour of it, and if they do, I wish it may have the good effect of opening some mens Eyes. But there is no Book so much admir'd by the whole Party as Sa∣muel Rutherford's Letters, there one may see, the genuine stile of these new Gospellers, the whole Book is uniform, all of a piece, and speaks out in their own Dialect the Spirit of Scots Presbyterians, therefore I shall here set down some passages of it. Epist. 1. To Mr▪ Robert Cunningham, he says, Let us be faith∣ful to him that can ride through Hell and Death upon a Windle∣straw, and his Horse never stumble. Epist. 2. To his Parishioners. Christ sought his black Wife through Pain, Fire, Shame, and the Grave, and swimm'd the Salt Sea for her; and she then consented and said, even so I take him. Ibid. Every man hath Conversion and the New-birth, but it's not leelHonestly come by. come by, they had never a sick Night for Sin; when they go to take out their Faith, they take out a fair nothing, or as we use to speak, a BleaflumA sham.. Epist. 3. To the Professors of Christ in Ireland. It will be asked at every one of us, on what terms we here brook Christ, for we have sitten long MealRent. free: we found Christ without a wet Foot, and he and his Gospel came upon small charges.to our Doors, but now we must wet our Feet to seek him. Ibid. Christ will not bring be∣fore Sun and Moon all the Infirmities of his Wife. It is the mo∣desty of Marriage-Anger, or Husband-wrath, that our sweet Lord Jesus will not come with Chiding in the Streets, to let all the World hear what is betwixt him and us▪ Ibid. O that I had my fill of his Love, but I know ill Manners make an uncouth▪ and strange Bridegroom. Epist. 5. To my Lady Kenmure. Madam, why should I smother Christ's honesty? he lookedStrange. framed and uncouth-like upon me when I came first here, but I believe himself better than his looks, I shall not again quarrel with Christ for aFrown. Gloom: now he hath ta∣ken the Mask off his Face, and saith, Kiss thy fill. Ibid. It's little to talk of Christ by the Book and Tongue, but to come nigh Christ and haussHugg. him, and embrace him is another thing. Epist. 11. To the Vicount of Kenmure. despair that ever I should winGet. to the far end of Christ's Love, there are so many
plies in it; I wonder what he mean, to put such a Slave at the Board-head, at his own Elbow. Ah! that I should lay my black Mouth to such a fair, fair, fair Face as Christ's; he got neither bud nor hire of me, it cost me nothing. Epist. 12. To my Lady Kenmure. If there were buying, and sel∣ling, and blocking for as good again betwixt Christ and us, then Free grace might go play it self, and a Saviour might sing dumb, and Christ go and sleep. Epist. 14. To John Gordon of Gordness. Many a sweet, sweet, soft Kiss, many a perfumed well smell'd Kiss, and Embracement have I receiv'd of my Royal Master. Ibid. And now, whoever they be that have returned to their old vomit (Prelacy) since my departure, I bind upon their Back, in my Master's Name and Au∣thority, the long, lasting, weighty Vengeance and Curse of god; in the Lord's Name I give them a doom of black and unmixed pure Wrath, which my Master shall ratify, except they timeously repent and turn to the Lord. Epist. 15. To my Lady Boyd. Christ delighteth to take up fal∣len Bairns, and to mend broken Bones; he is content that ye lay broken Arms and Legs on his Knee, that he may spelk them. Ibid. I think shame of the Board-head, and first MessDish., and the Royal King's Dining-hall; and that my black hand should come on such a Ruler's Table. Ibid. I know he hath other things to do than to play with me, and trinle an Apple with me. Epist. 17 To my Lord Lowdon. You come out to the Streets with Christ on your Forehead, when many are ashamed of him, and hid him under their Cloaks as if he were a stoln Christ. Epist. 19. To Mr. Huge Mc. Kel. O how many black CountsAccounts. have Christ and I rounded over together? O how fat a Portion hath he given to an hungry Soul? I had rather have Christ's four hours, than have Dinner and Supper both in one from any other. Epist. 20. To my Lady Boyd. I see now a Sufferer for Christ will be holden at the Door as well as another poor Sinner, and will be fain to eat with the Bairns, and to take the By-board, and glad so. Epist. 21. To Mr. David Dickson. I cannot get a House in Aber∣deen wherein to leave Drink-silver in my Master's Name, save one on∣ly; there is no sale for Christ in the North, he is like to lie long on my Hand, e're any accept him. Epist. 27. To Mr. Matthew Mowat. If I had Vessels I might fill them, but my old rivenRent. holely and running-out dish, ever when I am at the Well, can but bring little away. Alas, I have
skail'dSpilt. more of God's Grace than I have brought with me. I∣bid. I had not so much free GearGoods. when I came to Christ's Camp as to buy a Sword, I wonder that Christ should not laugh at such a Souldier. Epist. 27. To Earlston Younger. I have seen the Devil as it were dead and buried, and yet rise again, and be a worse Devil than e∣ver he was; therefore, Brother, beware of a green young Devil that hath never been buried; the Devil in his Flower is much to be feared: Better yoakEngage. with an old Gray-hair'd, withered, dry Devil, &c The Saints in Heaven are nothing but Christ's for∣born, beggerly DyvarsBankrupt debters., a pack of redeem'd Sinners. All Christ's good Bairns go to Heaven with a broken Brow, and a crooked Leg. Ibid. It's a hard matter for a poor hungry Man to winYearn. his Meat upon hidden Christ, for then the Key of his Pantry Door is a seek∣ing, and cannot be had, but hunger must break through Iron-Locks: I bemoan not them that can make a dinnNoise and all. the Fields adoe, for a lost Saviour; yet must let him hear it, to say so, on both sides of his Head, when he hideth himself it standeth you hard to want Christ; and therefore that which idle onwaiting can∣not do, misnurteredIll man∣ner'd. crying and knocking will do; Christ will not dance to your daft SpringFoolish Song.. Ibid. At our first Conversion the Lord putteth the Meat in young Bairns Mouths with his own hand. We love always to have the Pap put in our Mouth. Ibid. If my Creditor Christ would take from me what he hath lent, I would not long keep the Causey. I think it Manhood to play the Coward, and joukeSculk▪ in the lee side of Christ, and thus I am saved. Ibid. I complain when Christ cometh, he Cometh always to fetch Fire, he is ever in haste, hemay not tarry, and poor I (a beggarly Dyvar) get but a standing Visit, and a standing Kiss, and but, How dost thou? in the by-going. Epist. 28. To Alexander Gordon of Knockraig. O if I could be a Bridge over a Water for my Lord Jesus to walk upon and keep his Feet dry. He can make a fair Feast out of a black Devil. I∣bid. If God were dead, and Christ buried and rotten among Worms, indeed then we might look like dead folks. Epist. 34. To Earltown. I would give him my Bond under my Faith toGive him credite. frist Heaven a hundred years longer, so being he would lay his holy Face to my sometimes wet Cheeks. Epist. 35. To Marion Mac Naught. Christ, who is your Head, hath win through with his Life, howbeit, not with a whole Skin. Sometimes King Jesus sendeth me out a standing-drink, and whis∣pereth
a word through the Wall, and I am well content of kind∣ness at the second hand, his bode is ever welcome, but at other times he will be Messenger himself, and I get the Cup of Salvation out of his own hand, he drinking to me, and we cannot rest till we be in other's Arms. Epist. 41. To my Lady Culross▪ O to be snattering and swimming over Head and Ears in Christ's Love; Blessed be my rich Lord Jesus, who sendeth not away Beggers from his House with aEmpty. toom-dish. Epist. 45. To John Keanedy. It doth a Soul good to get aA Box. cuff with the lovely, sweet, and soft hand of Jesus; what power and strength is in his Love, I am perswaded it can climb up a steep Hill and Hell upon its back, shame may confound and fear me once to hold up my black mouth to receive one of Christ's undeserved kisses. Ep. 50. To James Bantie. The best Regenerate have their defile∣ments, and, if I may speak so, theirSack full of Grains. draff-pock that will clog be∣hind them, all their days; if my Lord had not given me his love, I would have fallen through theStreets. Causey of Aberdeen e're now; but for you that hunger ye shall be filled e're you go, there is as much in our Lord's Pantry as will satisfie all this Bairns; and as much wine in his Cellar as will quench all their thirst: I shall tell you what ye shall do, treat him well, give him the armed Chair, and theTable ead. board∣head, and make him welcome to the mean portion ye have. Ep. 51. To John Stuart. That miscarried Journey is with child to you of mercy and consolation, and shall bring forth a fair birth, and the Lord shall be midwife to the birth. If our Lord ride upon a straw, his Horse shall neither stumble nor fall. Epist. 53. To John Stuart, Oh if my Lord will make dung of me to satten and make fertile his own corn-ridges in Mount Zion. Ibid. God be pleased to take home in his house my Harlot-mother.—O if her Husband would be so kind as to go and fetch her out of the Brothel-house, and chase her lovers to the hills; but there will be sad days e're it come to that. Epist. 54▪ To my Lady Busby. Wo's me that bits of living Clay dare come out to rush hard heads with him, and that my unkind mother this Harlot Kirk, hath given her sweetHusband. half-marrow such a meeting. Epist. 56. To Mr. Thomas Garvan, I confidently believe that there is a Bed made for Christ and me, and that we shall take our fill of love in it. Epist. 57. MyRent. riven dish, and running-out vessel can hold little of Christ Jesus. Ibid. It's Christ's wisdom that his Bairns go wet-shod and cold-footed to Heaven.
Ep. 63. To the Earl of Cassils, Many now would go to Heaven the Land-way (for they love not to be Sea-sick) riding up to Christ upon Foot-mantles, and ratling Coaches, and rubbing their Velvet with the Princes of the Land in the highest seats: If this be the nar∣row way I quit all skill to the way of Salvation. Ep. 89. to John Kennedy. O that the Courts fenced in the name of the Bastard Prelates, (their Godfathers, the Popes Bayliffs, She∣riffs) were cried down.—If this had not been I would haveToped o∣ver. skin∣ked over my part of Paradise for a breakfast of dead moth-eaten earth. Ep. 92. To Mr. David Dickson. I have been these two Sabbaths or three in private takingIn the hand of a Notary. instruments in the name of God, That my Lord Jesus and I have kissed each other in Aberdeen; who can blame Christ to take me on behind him, (if I may say so) on his white Horse thorow a water, will not a Father take his littleFondled Darling. dated Davie in his arms, and carry him over a Ditch or Mire; my short legs could not step over this Lair (or sinking mire) and therefore, &c. Ep. 108. To Robert Gordon of Knoxbrex. I love to be kissed and sit on Christ's knee, but I cannot set my feet to the ground, for affli∣ctions bring the cramp upon my faith. Ep. 118. To Bathia Aird. At my first entry hither, Christ and I agreed not well upon it, now he's content to kiss my black mouth, to put his hand in mine, and to feed me with as many consolations as would feed ten hungry souls, yet I dare not say he is a waster of comforts. Ep. 121. To Robert Gordon of Knocksbrek Christ seemeth to leave Heaven (to say so) and his Court, and to come down to laugh and play and sport with aFoolish Child. Daft bairn. I deny nothing that the Media∣tor will challenge me of, but I turn it all back upon himself, let him look his own oldAccounts. Counts, if he be angry, for he will get no more of me. Ep. 122. To Earleston. There is a mystery of love in Christ that I never saw, O that he would lay by the lap of the covering that is over it, and let myLonging. greening soul see it; I would break the door and be in upon him, to get my womb full of love. Ep. 128. To Mr. Hugh Henderson. Christ shuffleth up and down in his hands the great Body of Heaven and Earth, and Kirk and Com∣monwealth are in his hand like a stock of Cards, and he dealeth the Play to the Mourners in Zion. When Christ has sleeped out his sleep, and his own are tried, he will arise as a strong man after wine, &c. If Christ bud and grow green, and bloom and bear seed again in
Scotland, and his Father send him two Summers again in one year, and bless his Crop, O what cause have we to rejoyce, &c. Ep. 139. To Mr. John Mein. I see Christ will notHigle. prigg with me, nor stand upon stepping stones, but cometh in at the broad side with∣out Ceremonies, or making of it nice. Ep. 141. To the Earl of Lothian. If your Lordship and others shall go on to dive to the lowest ground and bottom of the Knavery, and perfidious treachery to Christ, of the cursed and wretched Prelates, the Antichrist's first-born, and the first-fruit of his foul womb, and shall deal with our Soveraign, then your Righteousness shall break thorough the Clouds, &c. Ep. 142. O for a long Play-day with Christ. Ep. 145. Mr. John Ferguson. Were is not that I amPamper∣ed. dated now and then with pieces of Christ's sweet comforts, I fear I should have made an illBreding. browst of this honourable Cross. Ep. 162. To Mr. Hugh Mc Kell. I will verily give my Lord Jesus a free discharge of all that I like a fool laid to his charge, and beg him pardon to theOver and above. mends. Ep. 163. I tremble at the remembrance of a new out-cast betwixt him and me, but I find Christ dare not be long unkind. Ep. 137. To my Lady Boyd. Nothing hath given my faith a grea∣ter back-set till it crackt again, than my closed mouth. Ep. 139. To Carletown. The Lord hath done it, I will not go to Law with Christ, for I would gain nothing of that. The Devil is but God's Master-fencer, to teach us to handle our arms. Ep. 198. To Mr. John Levingston. The Devil cannot get it denied but we suffer for the apple of Christ's eye, his Royal Prerogatives as King and Law-giver; let us not fear, he will have his Gospel once againPut to Auction. roûped in Scotland, and the matter go to Vows to see who will say, Let Christ be Crowned King in Scotland: It is true Antichrist stirreth his tail, but I love a rumbling and raging Devil in the Kirk, rather than a subtil or sleeping Devil, Christ never got a Bride without stroke of Sword. Epist. 200. O Hell were a good cheap price to buy him at. Ep. 207. A kiss of Christ blown over his shoulder, the parings and crumbs of glory under his Table in Heaven; a shower like a thin May mist of his love, would make me green, sappy and joyful. Ep. 214. Go on as ye have worthily begun in purging of the Lord's House in this Land, and plucking down the Stalls—of Antichrist's filthy nest, this wretched Prelacy, and that black Kingdom whose wicked aims have ever been and still are to make this fat world, the
only Compass they would have Faith and Religion to sail by, and to mount up the man of sin, their God-father the Pope of Rome, upon the highest stair of Christ's Throne, and to make a Velvet-church, &c. Ibid. These men mind nothing else but that by bringing in the Pope's foul tail first upon us, their wretched and beggerly Ceremo∣nies; they may thrust in after them Antichrist's legs, thighs, and his belly, head and shoulders; and then cry down Christ and the Go∣spel, and up the Merchandize and Wares of the Great Whore. Ibid. Christ shall never be content with this Land, neither shall his hot fiery indignation be turned away, so long as the Prelate (the man that lay in Antichrist's foul womb, and the Antichrist's Lord Bailiff) shall sit Lord Carver in the Lord Jesus Courts. The Prelate is both the Egg and the Nest to cleck and bring forth Popery; plead therefore for the pulling down of the Nest, and crushing of the Egg. All that is meant here by Christ, is Presbyterian Government. I shall conclude this Section with some of their most remarkable Principles and Opinions concerning Civil Government. The Presbyterians of late have talk'd much of their Loyalty, but if they have any, it must be in contradiction to their Principles: For proof of this I shall not trouble you with Citations from Pri∣vate Men, but appeal to their Covenants and Solemn Leagues, to their constant Doctrin as well as Practice of Resistance; and some few Instances I must not omit, taken from the Acts of their General Assemblies, and those Books which have the general Approbation of the Party, in which they express themselves thus; Vnless Men blot out of their Hearts, the Love of Religion, and Cause of God, and cast off all care of their Country, Laws, and Liberties, &c. they must now or never appear active (against the King) each one stretching him∣self to, yea, and beyond their Power; it is not time to dally, or go about the Business by halves; nor to be almost, but altogether Zealous: Cursed is he that doth the Work of the Lord negligently. Solemn and seasonable warning to all Ranks, Feb. 12. 1645. Sess. 18. In another seasonable and necessary warning, dated July 27. 1649. Sess. 27. they say; But if his Majesty, or any having or pretending Power and Commission from him, shall Invade this Kingdom, upon pre∣text of establishing him in the exercise of his Royal Power; as it will be a high provocation against God to be accessory or assisting thereto, so it will be a necessary Duty to resist and oppose the same.
The Author of the Hind let loosePag. 80. reflecting on these passages, says, These Fathers could well distinguish betwixt Authority and the Person, and were not so Loyal as now their degenerate Children are Ambitious to shew themselves stupidly stooping to the Shadow thereof, and yet will be called, The only Assertors of Presbyterian Principles. The Presbytery hath the Power of making Peace and War, and the Parliament ought not to enter into any War without them; more than Jo∣shua did without the consent of Eliazar. Any Vnion or Engagement of the Nation, to defend the King's Person, Honour, or Prerogative, is unlawful, unless allowed by the Presbytery. The Presbytery alone knows, and it only can determine, what the Cause of God is; the King and Parliament are not to be complied with, but in Subordination to the Covenant. The Presbytery can Counter-act the Acts of the States of Parliament, and discharge the Subjects from obeying such Acts as are imposed without the consent of the Presbytery. Act General Assembly, Aug. 3. 1648. Act and Declaration against the Act of Parliament, July 13. 1648. Act General Assembly, Aug 13. 1650. Tho' our Saviour told his Disciples, That his Kingdom was not of this World, and that therefore they ought not to fight for him, yet that Doctrine does not now oblige Covenanted Christians, for they may fight without, yea, and against the Consent of the Supream Magistrate for the Cause of God; and a probable capacity to effectuate their Designs, is the Call of God to do it. Jus Pop. Preface to the Reader. Naph▪ Pag. 7, 8, 16, 159. Not only is it necessary to resist the King by force, in defence of the So∣lemn League and Covenant, but also to resist King and Parliament, when they pervert the right ways of the Lord, and hinder the Work of Reforma∣tion: The crying Sins of the Land which we should confess with sorrow before the Lord, are, That the Graceless Prelates and Curates are not hung up before the Sun, and that Men should be so Godless, as to assist the King in his distress, before he had satisfied the Kirk by publick Penance, for opposing the Work of God in the Covenant. Jus Pop. Throughout. Act General Assembly, Aug. 13. 1650. Acknowledgment of Sins and Engagement to Duties appoint∣ed and published, 1648. And again renewed at Lesmachago, March 3. 1688. with Ac∣commodation to the present times.
SECT. III. Containing Notes of the Presbyterian Sermons taken in Writing from their Mouths. AT first I begin with one I heard from Zetland, who Preaching on David and Goliah, he told the Hearers, Sirs, this David was but a little manekine like my beddle Davie Gaddies there but Goliah was a meckle strong fellow, like the Laird of Quandal there; this David gets a Scrippie and Baggie, that is, a Sling and a Stone in it; he slings a Stone into Goliah' s Face, down falls Goliah and David above him: After that David was made a King; he that was keeping Sheep before, in truth he came very well too, Sirs: Well said, Davie, see what comes of it, Sirs; after that he commits Adultery with Uriah: Nay, (said the bed∣dal Davie Gaddies) it was but with Uriah' s Wife, Sir. In Faith, thou art right, it was Uriah's Wife, indeed man; said Mr. John. One Ker at his entring into a Church at Teviotdale, told the People the Relation that was to be between him and them in these following words: Sirs, I am coming home to be your Shepherd, and you must be my Sheep, and the Bible will be my Tar-bottle, for I will mark you with it; (and laying his Hand on the Clark or Precentor's Head) he saith, Andrew, you shall be my Dog: The sorrow a bit of your Dog will I be, said Andrew. O Andrew, I speak mystically, said the Preacher: Yea, but you speak mischievously, said Andew. Mr. William Guthry preaching on Peter' s Confidence, said, Peter, Sirs, was as Stalliard a Fellow as ever had cold Iron at his Arse, and yet a Hussie with aDistaff. Rock feared him. Another preaching against Drunkenness, told the Hearers, There were four sorts of Drunkenness▪ 1. To be drunk like a Sow, tumb∣ling in the Mire like many of this Parish. 2. There is to be drunk like a Dog; the Dog fills the Stomach of him, and spues all out again, and thou John Jamison was this way drunk the other day. 3. There is to be drunk like a Goose: Of all Drunk∣enness, Sirs, beware of the Drunkenness of the Goose, for it never rests, but constantly dips theBeke. Gobb of it in the Water: You are all drunk this way, Sirs, I need name none of you. 4. There is to be drunk like a Sheep; the silly Sheep seldom or ne∣ver drinks, but sometimes wets the Mouth of it in the Water, and
rises up as well as ever; and I my self use to be, drunk this way, Sirs. But now, I see (said he) two Gentlemen in the Kirk, and Gentle∣men, you are both Strangers to me, but I must vindicate my self at your hands; I have here the cursedest Parish that ever God put Breath in, for all my preaching against Drunkenness, they will go into a Change-house after Sermon, and the first thing they'll get, is a meckleLarge dish. cup full of hot Ale, and they will say, I wish we had the Minister in the midst of it: Now, Gentlemen, judge ye how I am rewarded for my good Preaching. After Sermon the Clerk gives him up, the name of a Fornicatrix, whose name was Ann▪ Cantly; Here is (saith he) one upon the Stool of Repentance, they call her Cantly, she saith her self she is an honest Woman, but I trow Scantly. Mr. John Levingstone in Ancrum, once giving the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, said to his Hearers, Now, Sirs, you may take Christ piping hot; and finding a Woman longsome in taking the Bread out of his Hand, he says, Woman, if you take not Christ, take theGreat. meikle Devil then. One John Simple, a very Zealous Preacher among them, used to personate and act Sermons in the old Monkish Stile spoken of Sect. 1. § 16. At a certain time he preached upon that Debate, Whether a Man▪ be Justified by Faith or by Works, and acted it after this manner, Sirs, this is a very great Debate, but who is that looking in at the Door, with his red Cap? follow your look, Sir; it is very ill manners to be looking in, but what's your name? Ro∣bert Bellarmine: Bellarmine, saith he, Whether is a man justified by Faith or by Works? He is justified by Works: Stand thou there man. But what is he, that honest-like-man standing in the Floor with the long Beard, and GenevaHood. Coul? a very honest-like-man, draw near; What's your name, Sir? My name is John Calvin▪ Calvin, honest Calvin, Whether is a man justified by Faith or by Works? He is justified by Faith. Very well John, thy Leg to my Leg and we shallTrip. hough down Bellarmine even now. Another time Preaching on the day of Judgment, he told them, Sirs, this will be a terrible day, we'll all be there, and in the throng I John Simple will be, and all of you will stand at my back; Christ will look to me, and he will say, Who is that standing there? I'll say again, yea even as yeKnew not. ken'd not Lord: he'll say, I know thou's honest John Simple; draw near, John; now John, what good service have you done to me on Earth? I have brought hither a company of Blew Bonnets for you, Lord: Blew Bonnets, John, what is become of the brave Hats, the Silks, and the Satins, John? I'll
tell, I know no Lord, they went aA Course. Gate of their own: Well, honest John, thou and thy blew Bonnets are welcome to me, come to my right hand, and let the Devil take the Hats, the Silks, and the Sattins. This John was ordinarily called Fitch-cape and Claw-poll, because in the time of Preaching or Praying he used to claw his Head, and rub his Callet. At a certain time he was called to preach in a Neighbouring Church, and his Preface was in these words: Sirs, I know what you will be saying among your selves the day, ye will say, Here is Fitch-cape come to preach to us the day; but as the Lord lives, I had a great deal of do e're I could come to you, for by the way I met the Devil, he said to me, What now Fitchcape, whither are you going? I am going, said I, to preach to the People of God. People of God! said theNasty. foul thief, they are my People. They are not yours, thou soul thief, said I. They are mine, Claw-poll, said he again to me: so the foul thief and IPulled and haled. tugg'd, rugg'd, and riv'd at one another, and at last I got you out of his Clutches▪ Clooks: Now here is the good that Fitch-cape hath done to you; now that ye may be kept out of his Gripes, let us pray. Another, Lecturing on the first of Job, said, Sirs, I will tell you this Story very plainly. The Devil comes to God one day, God said, What now Deel, thou foul thief, whither are you going? I am going up and down now, Lord you have put me away from you now, I must even do for my self now. Well, well, Deel (says God) all the▪ World kens that it is your fault; but do not you know that I have an honest Servant they▪ call Job? is not he an honest Man, Deel? Sorrow to his thank, says the Deel, you make his Cup stand full even, you make his Pot play well, but give him aSound bang. cuff, I'll hazard he'll be as ill as I am called. Go, Deel (says God) I'll yoke his Honesty with you: FellKill. his Cows, worry his Sheep, do all mis∣chief ye can, but for the very Saul of you, touch not a hair of his Tail. Mr. Robert Blair, that famous Presbyterian Preacher at St. Andrews, was very much thought of for his familiar way of Preaching. He preached often against the observation of Christmass; and once in this Scotch jingle; You will say, Sirs, Good oldChrist∣mass. Youle-day; I'll tell you, Good old Fool-day: You will say It is a brave Haly-day; I tell you, it is a brave Belly-day; you will say, these areGay. bonny Formalities; but I tell you, they are bonny Fartalities. Another enveighing against the Vanity and Gaddiness of Women, spake thus; Behold the Vanity of Women, look to them, you'll see, first a Sattin Peticoat; lift that, there is a Tabby Petticoat; lift that, there
is a Flanning Petticoat; lift that, there is a HollandSmock. Smarck; lift that and there you will see what they ought not to be proud of, that's no very cleanly spectacle; Eve (said he) was never so vain, she sought no cove∣ring but Fig-leaves. Mr. Simple (whom I named before) told, That Samson was the greatest fool that ever was born, for he revealed his Secrets to a Daft Foolish Wench. hussie. Samson, you may well call him Fool Thomson, for of all theHen-peckt men. John Thomson's men that ever was, he was the foolest. I have a Sermon of theirs, written from the Preachers Mouth by one of their own Zealots, whereof this is one passage, Jacob be∣gan to wrestle with God, an able hand forsooth; I Sirs, but he had a good Second, that was Faith; Faith and God gave two or three tousles together; at last GodBeats. Dings down Faith on its bottom; Faith gets up to his Heels, and says, Well, God, is this your Promise to me? I trow I have a Ticket in my Pocket here; Faith brings out the Ticket, and stops it in God's hand, and said, Now God! is not this your own Write? deny your own Hand-write if you dare? Are these the Promises? you gave me? Look how you guide me when I come to you. God reads the Ticket, and said, Well, well, Faith, I remember I gave you such a Promise, good sooth Faith, if you had been another, thou should get all the Bones in thy Skin broken. Mr. John Welsh, a Man of great esteem among their Vulgar, once preaching on these words of Joshua, As for me and my House we will serve the Lord, &c. had this Preface: You think, Sirs, that I am come here to preach the old jock∣trot Faith and Repentance to you; not I, indeed: what think you then I am come to preach? I come to preach a bro∣ken Covenant, Who brake it? Even the Devils Lairds, his Bi∣shops and his Curates; and the Deel, Deel, will get them all at last: I know some of you are come out of Curiosity to hear what the Whigs will say. Who is a Whig, Sirs? One that will not Swear, nor Curse, nor Bann, there a Whig to you: But you are welcome, Sirs, that come out of Curiosity; you may get go e're ye good back again. I'll give you an Instance of it, There was Zaccheus, a Man of a low stature; that is, a littleDwarfie. droichy body, and a Publican; that is, he was one of the Excise-men; he went out of Curiosity to see Christ, and because he was little, he went up a Tree: Do you think, Sirs, he went toRifle a Magpies-Nest. harry a Pyet's Nest? No, he went to see Christ; Christ looks up, and says, Zaccheus, thou'rt always proving pratticks, thou'rt no Bairn
now; go home, go home, and make ready my Dinner; I'll be with you this day at Noon. After that, Sirs, this little Zac∣cheus began to say his Prayers Evening and Morning, as honest old Joshua did in my Text: As for me and my House, &c. as if he had said, Go you to the Devil and you will, and I and my House will say our Prayers, Sirs, as Zaccheus and the rest of the Apostles did. Another time preaching in East Lotham, he told them the great danger of hearing the Curates, in these words; Sirs, if ever you hear these Rogues, you will cry out at the day of Judgment, O Arthur-seat fall upon us, O Pentland. Hills fall upon us: The Grass and the Corn that you see growing there, will be a Wit∣ness against you; yea, and that Cows Horns Passing by, will be a Wit∣ness against you. Another Preaching about God's sending Jonah to Nineveh, acted it thus, did you never hear tell of a good God, and aPettish. cappet Prophet, Sirs? The good God said, Jonah, now billy Jonah, wilt thou go to Nineveh forOld kind∣ness. ald lang syne; The Deel be on my feet then said Jonah: O Jonah said the good God, be not ill natured, they are my people. What care I for you or your people either, said the cappet Prophet; wherefore shall I go to be made a lyar in my face, I know thou will have mercy on that people: Alas, alas, weWait not. bide not the tenth part of that bidding; yet when we come to you, I fear we'l find you like Ephraim, a Cake unturn'd, that is, it's stonehard on one sideIntreat∣ing., andThin Dung of young Chil∣dren. skitter-raw on the other. Another Preaching in the West, near a Mountain called Tineock, cried out in a loud voice thus, What think you, Sirs, would the Curates do with Christ if they had him? they would e'en take him up to Tintock top, cut off his head, and hurle his head down the hill, and laugh at it. Another in the South of Teviotdale in his Sermon said, Our Neighbour Nation will say of us, poor Scotland, beggarly Scotland, scabbed Scotland, lousie Scotland, yea, but Covenanted Scotland, that makes amends for all. One Preaching against Bishops, expressed himself thus, Sirs, at the day of Judgment Christ will call the Prelates, and he will call one of the falsest Knaves first, and say, Come hither, Sirrah, he will not call my Lord, do you remember how you put outSuch. sike a sweet Saint of mine upon such and such a day? Sirrah, do you mind how you persecu∣ted one of my precious Saints that was Preaching my Word: Come, come, Sirrah, stand there at my left hand▪ thou and the Devil shall together even now.
There is nothing more ordinary among the Generality of their Preachers, than to tell that Christ did not set his foot in Scotland this eight and twenty years; or this, I brought a stranger to you now, and a very great stranger indeed, this many a year; would you know who it is; it is Christ, Sirs,Hold. hadd him fast then, for if once he get out of Scotland again, it's like he'l never return. It is very well known in Perthshire, that one of their Rabbies Preaching a St. Johnstone, or thereabout, a little before the Battel of Killich ankie, upon these words, Resist the Devil and he will slie from you; he begins very gravely after this manner, (Humph) my beloved, you are all here the day even for the fashions cause, but wo ye who is amongst you the day? even the meikle horned Devil, tho you cannot see him, yet I do: I see him, Sirs, by the eye of faith; but you'l say, now that we have him here, what shall we do with him, Sirs, (Humph) what way will ye destroy him, some of you will say we will hang him; ha, ha, my beloved, there are not so many tows in all the Parish as hung him; besides, he's as light as a feather. What then will ye do with him? for he will not hang. Then some of you will say, we will drown him. (Humph) my beloved, there is too much cork in his Arse, he's as souple as an Eel, he will not sink. O∣thers of you will say we will burn him, Na, na, Sirs, ye may scald your selves, but ye cannot burn him, for all the fire in Hell could never yet singe a hair on his tail. Now, Sirs, you cannot find a way a∣mong you all to kill him, but I will find it; what way will this be, Sirs? we shall even shoot him. Wherewith shall we shoot him? We shall shoot him with the Bible. Now, Sirs, I shall shoot him presently, so (presenting the Bible as Soldiers do their Musquet) he crys out, Touff, Touff, Touff. Now he is shot, there lies the foul thief as dead as a Haron. Some Eye-witnesses report of another that was to give the Sacra∣ment of the Lord's Supper, such as they can give, and having got into the Pulpit, he looks about him, and says, Sirs, I miss somebody here to day, I miss Christ here the day, but he promised to be here the day, I think he will be as good as his word: however I will go out and see if he be coming; he at this went out of the Pulpit; and staying out some little time, he comes in and tells them, Now, Sirs, Christ is coming, I saw him on his white Horse coming to you: Now what entertainment will you give him? I will tell you, Sirs, Will ye get among you all butTwo En∣glish Quarts. one Pint of Faith, a Gill of Grace, and aEnglish Pint. Mutchkine of Sanctification, and this will make a good morning draught for him.
In the Mers there was a Communion given lately, and as it is or∣dinary, there is a Discourse for every Table, one of the Preachers that's most cried up for his Eloquence, said, You that are Wives ye will be saying ordinarily when ye meet, Cummer, have ye spun your Yarn yet? But alas, I fear there are few of you that have spun a Wedding-garment for Christ the day. But Christ will be among you and see who is his well busked Bride, he'l say to them that have not on their Wedding-garment. Is that nasty Slut there my Bride? shame and lack fall that Bride: Go nasty Slut,Haste. sway'd away to Hell. It is ordinary among some Plebeians in the South of Scotland, to go about from door to door upon New-years Eve, crying Hagmane, a corrupted word from the Greek , which signifies the Holy Month. John Dickson holding forth against this Custom once in a Sermon at Kelso, says, Sirs, do ye know what Hagmane signifies? It is the Devil be in the house; that's the meaning of its Hebrew Original. Another time he told his Hearers what an Idolatrous Church the English Church is, for lay two Eggs in a Dish, and the one is not so like the other, as the Church of Rome and the Church of England are to one another. I know a Minister that went purposely to hear this man, and de∣clared upon his real truth, that he held out a nonsensick rhapsody for an hour and an half time on the third of Matth. This is my belo∣ved▪ Son in whom I am well pleased: All the Graces of the Spirit (said he) are mysterious, faith is a mystery, there is a faith that is not saving, but that's no mystery; I believe if I should ask any of you whether or no ye be∣lieve the words that I read to you, you will all say (Humf) we all believe that▪ Sirs, the Devil does more, and yet he is not saved, nor like to be in haste. This is a passage of our Saviour's Transmigration, Sirs, (says he) It tells how our blessed Saviour was reform'd like an Angel of Light, when his Disciples saw that Glorious sight, they were all like a Country man that had never tasted outlandish wine before, the wine runs up into his head, and makes him dizzie; so the Disciples were dizzie, the 17. v. They knew not what they said▪t that is they were dizzie. From the words we learn this note of Doctrine, That Christ he is lovely, O he is lovely, O he is lovely. First as he is the Son of God, 8. Prov. v. 15. By me Kings reign and princes decree justice: That is lovely Christ hath authority over all the Kings of the world: The Great Turk can do nothing without him. The meikle Deel and the black Pape can do nothing without him. There were a pack of Deels limbs a year or two ago here, and they thought forsooth all
would be their own, and now lovely Christ in his Providential Providence is like to disappoint them all, and who kens but they'l come begging Pease and Pottage at ours doors yet. Christ is lovely as he is Mediator, cut him all in pieces from head to foot, every bit of him is lovely. They'l tell you now the young Prince is ba∣nished Britain, but I'le tell you of a young Prince that has been banished Britain these 28 years by the incoming of the perjur'd Prelates and drun∣ken Curates; lovely Christ is that young Prince, and now he is like to come back again to get his Crown: O take him now, now when he is coming with a whip in his hand to scourge out the cursed Curates, &c. This was preached in the Parish of Smallum in Teviotdale, and the effect of this Preaching followed the next Sabbath, for the rabble came and pulled the Minister out of his Pulpit in the time of his Sermon. One Mr. Thomas Ramsay in Mordington within the Shire of Berwick said in a Sermon upon the foolishness of Preaching, these words: There are two sorts of Preaching, Sirs, there's a Gentlemanny Preaching and a common manny Preaching; for Gentlemanny Preaching they'l feed you up with peny whistles, orChildrens Toyes and Rattles. Nigg-nayes-bonny wallies: At which he perceived one of the Commons laugh. He points out to him, and said, Man, do not that think toTo Flout. gull one of God's Ministres that way, lift up your Bonnet off your face, think no shame of your shape. I tell you, Sirs, there is gentlemany Preaching and commonmany Preaching. I will give you commonmany Preaching, Sirs, I will give yon milkpottage, and this will make you bony fat and lusty in your journey to heaven. Ye Know. ken Sirs, ye ken, to my great grief, I may say ye ken no: But I tell you there is Gentlemany preaching, and a commonmany preaching. There are three sorts of men that despise commonmany preaching, first the Politician. 2. The Gallant. 3. The Ignorant man. First, for the Politician he will go twenty miles to hear a Gentlemanny preaching, what cares he for commonmany preaching? 2ly, for the Gal∣lant give him a glass of wine to drink, and give him a Lady to kiss, and what cares he for preaching? 3ly, For the ignorant man give him aDeep Dish. cog∣full of A Strong Porrage. Brose to his belly, and a pair ofBreeches. Brecks to his arse, what cares he for preaching. A little thereafter he saw a little child looking to and fro, he said, Sit still little Rogue, else I'le cut a lug out of your head, Sirrah. O the glorious days of the Gospel, the veryLittle Children. wie-ones, were then so serious that they wouldPul. rugg Christ out of my heart, but now they are all baudy faced, they look as if the Curates and their Mothers wereToo fami∣liar. over great. This was written from his own mouth, by a person that is ready▪ to declare the verity of it, were he to die just after.
Mr. John Veach in Wool struthers in a Nonsensical and incoherent Discourse, at the opening up of a Presbyterian Synod at Jedburgh, said, That one duty of Ministers was not to preach close and neat Dis∣courses; his reason was this, Men use not to bring the Spits and the Racs to the Table, when they bring the meat to it. There are many in Edinburgh who heard Mr. James Kirkton in a Sermon concerning Joseph and Mary, say, The first night, saith he, that they met together, he laid his hand on her belly, and found her withChild. Bairn▪ The honest man turn'd very angry, and would have put her away, as any of us all would have done, had we met with the like; and who is it that ever would suspect that the Holy Ghost should have another man's wife? Another time he told his Hearers, That they might make a Les∣son out of every thing that occurred to sense; you may, faith he, get a good Lesson out of a Goose-turd, for it is black at the bot∣tom, green in the middle, and white at the top: The blackness at the bottom let's us see the blackness of Hell; the greenness in the middle lets us see the vanity of the world; and the whiteness in the top lets us see the joys of Heaven: And this good Lesson (Sirs) ye will find in a good turd. Now, Sirs, I would have you pray to him that sits upon the white-end to keep you from a black end. One Mr. John▪ Hepburn, Lecturing on the second Psalm, told, Tha there was a Dialogue betwixt the Father and the Son in Heaven, the Son said, Father will you give me my portion now? Your por∣tion, Son, said the Father, indeed shall you; thou hast been a duti∣ful Son to me, thou never angered me in thy days; What portion will you have, Son? Will you give me poor Scotland, saith the Son? Scotland, said the Father, truly thou shalt get poor Scotland. And he proved that it was Scotland he sought, from the 8▪ ver. I shall give thee the outmost parts of the earth for a possession▪ Now, Sirs, Scotland is the outmost part of the earth, and therefore it was given to the Son for a Patrimony. One Mr. Mosman in Newbotle, past this Complement upon himself in a Sermon, All the world knows that I am a learned man, a ju∣dicious man, and a man that can clear the Scriptures well; but there are some in the Parish that have not such thoughts for me; as for them I pity them, for they must be very silly. At that time he was preaching against taking God's name in vain, he told, O Sirs, this is a very great sin, for my own part I rather steal all the horn∣ed Neat or Cattle. nout in the Parish, before I took God's name in vain once. One Mr. Robert Steidman in Caridden, told once, that the people of God had many doubts about their Election, for proof of this, see (says he) the 2. Cant. v. 16. My beloved is mine, and I am his.
Another time he told, That the best of God's Saints have a lit∣tle tincture of Atheism for a plain proof of this you, may see, says he, Psal. 14▪ 1. The fool hath said in his heart that there is no God. Another time he tells, That Christ was not proud nor Lordly, for he rode upon an Ass, which is aLow. laigh beast, and wherefore think ye did he this? It was, Sirs, for the conveniency of the old Wives that followed him, that he mightWhisper. kuttle in the Gospel in their ears as he went along. One Mr. Murray, marrying a couple, called the man, The Head, and the woman the Tail: In the name of God then, says he, I joyn Head and Tail together, Sirs, let no man ever separate them. The same person preaching at Haddan, said, Christ is a great stranger to you these 28 years, but I have brought him to you the day, Sirs, and if ye will have him,‖ Letters of Arrest∣ment. I will take him withAbscon∣ding. horning and caption for you. One Mr. Shields, preaching at Borthwick, said, Many had Religion the day, but would have none the morn, their Religion was soon gone like a womans virginity. One Wedderburn, preaching in Irvin, said, Lord, we have overNesty. foul feet to come so far benn at Heaven, but yet as broken a Ship has come to land. Mr. Rutherford preaching at Jedburgh, said, These 28 years the grass is grown long betwixt Jedburgh and Heaven. Mr▪ William Stuart preaching lately in Forres upon these words, Our God is a consuming fire, said, Sirs, I will explain these words in a very homely manner, There was a Godly man of my acquaintance, Sirs, he had a young Bairn that was dying, and he comes to him and said, Sandy, now my Cockie, believe in God now, for ye will not live long: No, no, said the Bairn, I will not believe in God, for God is a Boo, but I will believe in Christ, for he is sweet, Dady, and he is good. Now ye may by this see, Sirs, that God without Christ is a Boo. Boo is a word that's used in the North of Scotland to frighten crying Children. Mr. William Vetch preaching in Linton in Teviotdale, said, Our Bishops thought they were very secure this long time: Like Willie Willie Wastel, I am in my Castle, A the Dogs in the Town Dare not ding me down. Yea but there is a doggie in Heaven that has dung them all down. Another preaching of the Dialogue betwixt God and Adam af∣ter his Fall. Adam (said he) went to hide himself, God comes to him, and said, where art thou, man? I amabsconding courring here, Lord: I'le hazardTwo-pence Half-penny. twa and a plack, saith God, there is aAll's not well. whap in the Kape Ede, has thou been atMischief doing. Barne-breaking Ede, come out of thy holes and thy bores here Ede. Mr. James Kirkson told several times in his Sermons at Edenling,
That the Devil had his Kirk-Government as well as God, and would ye ken what a Government it is, indeed it is a Presbyterian Government, for he has his Minister and his Ruling Elder; his Minister is the Pope, and his Ruling-Elder is the King of France. The same man once speaking of the Evils of the tongue, said, Your tongues, Sirs, are as foul as a dog's tongue when he licksThin Dung. Skitter, be∣fore God it's true: But do not take this out of the House with you, Sirs. Mr. Matthew Selkirk preaching against keeping of days, said, They that keep † Yule-day,Christ∣mass. Sirs, deny that Christ came in the flesh, and are rank Jews; & they keep that day in commemoration of J. Caesar the chief of the Jews. Mr. Hugh Kennedy Moderator of the General Assembly, being about to Christen a Child in the Colledg-Kirk, looked about him, and said, Look Sirs, and see the Devil painted in that Bairns face, but we shall do the best we can to conjure him out. I shall shortly nail his lug to Christ's trone, till from a Calf he grow up to an Ox to draw in Christ's Plow. Mr. Arskine in the Tron-Church, said, That the work of the Lord is like to be ruin'd, for there are two sorts of people that have taken their hands from the work of the Lord. First, the Malignants that never laid their hands to it. 2ly, The Court-party: but you Lasses and Lads put your shoulders to that work, take a good lift of it, for it will not break your backs; and ye can never use your backs in a better work. One Mr. Robert Gourly preaching on the Woman of Canaan, how our Saviour called her a Dog, told, Sirs, some of you may think that our Saviour spake very improperly, for he should have called her a Bitch; but to this I answer, a Dog is the Masculine or Feminine Gender, there is a He-dog and a She-dog. But you will ask why did he miscall the poor Woman, and call her a Dog? There are God's Dogs and the De∣vils Dogs, she was God's Dog, not the Devil's Dog. Mr. Sheilds in a Sermon at Aberdeen, told the people, the only way to hold a fastHold. grip of Christ, was to entertain him with three Liquors in three sundryWooden Cups. Bickers, you must have a pint of hope, three pints of, faith, and nine pints of hot, hot, hot burning zeal. One Mr. Strange preaching on Act, 2. 37, 38. before several Ladies of the best Quality of our Kingdom, They were pricked at their hearts, said, Some of you are come hither the day to get a prick, I fear few of you have gotten a prick, but some of you may get a prick within a short time. And seeing some laugh, he said, Do not mistake me, Sirs, It is not a natural prick I mean, but a prick at the heart. I mean not the pricks of the flesh, but the pricks of the spirit, the sweet prick of Conscience. One Mr. James Wilson now in Kirkmeddon in Galloway, told, That Faith had wonderful effects, For by faith Noah saw the deluge before it came. But I will tell you a far more wonderful effect of Faith than that, John the Baptist saw Christ throughTwo Wombs. twa wymbs, was not that a clear-ey'd little one,
One Mr. Melvin being sent by the Presbytery to the Parish of Monzie in Struthern, to prepare the people by a Sermon for receiving a Presbyte∣rian Minister in the place of Mr. Drammond, a person of great Learning, who was deprived at the false suggestions of a Weaver in that Parish, (whom he saved from the Gibbet in King Charles 2d's time) the said Mr. Melvin Lecturing on this Text, Touch not mine Anointed, and do my Pro∣phets no harm, said, The Kings and the great folks, and the cursed Bishops, for sooth were seeking to destroy God's own people, but as sturk as they were, God is starker, and bad them bide back, bide back, (pointing with his finger) this is my folk, they are none of your folks, and so God keeped his own poor people, Sirs, except some few that were hanged; but Oh Sirs, it's a sweet, sweet denth to go off the Gallows to God for the holy Covenant. But for these cursed Bishops and Curates, Sirs, that were leading many poor souls to Hell this long time, Sirs, ye see they are now put out▪ they are put out, yea they are e'en trampled under our feet. This is attested by a person that then lived within two miles of the place, and heard him. Mr. Areskine in the Trone-Church proposed in a Sermon, What is the new man? He made this learned Answer in a Melancholy long tone, It is the new man. Mr. Kirton lately in the Church he possesses at Edinburgh, began his Sermon thus, Devil tuke me soul and body. The people startling at the expression, he anticipates their wonder with this correction, You think, Sirs, this a strange word in the Pulpit, out you think nothing of it out of Pulpit; but what if the Devil should tuke many of you when ye utter such Language? Another time preaching against Cockupps, he told, I have been this year of God preaching against the vanity of Women, yet I see my own Daughter in the Kirk even now have as high a Cockupp as any of you all. An∣other time giving the Sacramens of the Lord's Supper in Crummond, at the breaking of the Bread, he told the Participants, Take, eat, Sirs, your Bread is baken. And that was all the form he used, as one of the Commu∣nicabsts told me the day after. A Presbyterian Preacher in the Parish of Killpatrick Easter, above Glasgow, in whose Parish there is one Captain Sanderson, a Church of En∣gland man, who is looked on there by them as a rank Papist, he once went to Church to see their way. The Preacher seeing him in Church, took aPiece of Money. Fourteen our of his Pocket, and held it up before the Congregation, expressing these words, Here I take instrument in the hand of God, that tho a man be pardoned of all his original and actual sins, yet if he neglect to our Fasts he shall never go to Heaven. The Preacher owns what he said and did. And the Captain desires the thing to be published in his name, he be∣ing ready to justifie it upon any occasion. Mr. William Moncrief, in Summer last, preaching in the Church of in Fife, the first thing he pretended to prove, was, That all his Hearers were Atheists and Reprobates▪ And having demonstrated that, as he said, from
that Psalm on which he lectur'd: He proceeded next to his Sermon on this Text, NOW it the accepted time, now is the day of Salvation▪ on which he said, The Jews had their Now, and the Papists had their Now, but ah now they have no Now, for the Gospel is for ever hid from their Eyes. Scotland, poor Scotland had a gracious Now in the glorious days of the Co∣venant, when Christ was freely forced upon them; but alas, this Land break∣ing the Covenant has brought darkness upon it, for many Years last, but yea God had been pleased at lust to shine through the Cloud of Prelatical, which is worse than Egyptish darkness, and to give us another Now; that is, to of∣fer us again his Covenant, and the Foundation of it, it Gospel, for which ye are all heartily to be thinkful, for this is your Now. And would ye know now how to express your thankfulness, I'll even tell you now, Ye must do it by banishing out of the Covenanted Land, all the E∣nemies of God, the Prelates, the Curates, and all their Adherents: Ye must not converse with them, but  them Hip and Thigh ▪ ye must  the Phi∣listines quite out; ye must hate them, and persecute them, and  upon  of Damnation;  for if ye neglect it now, your Now is past for ever▪ Now, Sirs, ye must not think this strange Doctrine, for I can prove it by plain Scripture, for did not God frequently command his People, to cut off the  Root and Branch; and did not David positively hate and curse the Profane and Wicked who were God's Enemies▪ But ye'll say to me, Sirs, that Christ desired us to loveour Enemies: that's true, indeed, but there's no word of God's Enemies there▪ mark that, Beloved; tho' we love out own Enemies, yet we are bound to hate God's Enemies; that is, all the Enemies of the Covenanted : This was heard by several Sober and Judicious Persons, who were hearti∣ly sorry to hear the Scriptures so basely perverted, who immediately af∣ter the Sermon wrote down this Account, tent them to me attested un∣der their Hands. About two Years ago Mr. Shields, who is Chaplain to my Lord Angus's Regiment, being with the said Regiment at the Town of Pe, and hearing that the Colonel to an English Regiment, which had been in that Town the Week before, had made his Chaplain to read the English Ser∣vice upon the Sunday before, in the Church to his Souldiers  Shields up∣on this occasion thought to ra nightly againt the Church of England and its Liturgy; among other things he said, That there was no difference betwixt the Church of England and the Church of Rome, but that the one said Mass in English, and the other in Latin; and that upon the  they were both indeed equally Idolatrous▪ and ye know, Sirs, that according to God's Law, all Idolaters should be stoned to death▪ Alas▪ all the Water in  The name of a great River which washes the Walls of that City. Tay will not be able to wash away the filth of that Idolatry, with which the Walls of this Kirk was last Sunday defiled▪ ah, the Service Boo was  and it smell rank and strong of the old Whore of Babylon.
Mr. Kirkton preaching in his Meeting-house in the Castle-hill of Edin∣burgh adduced several instances of the Poverty of the People of God; a∣mongst others, he had this remarkable one, Brethren, says he, Criticks with theirTrifles. frim frams and whytie whaties, may imagine a hundred reasons for Abraham's going out of the Land of Caldea, but I will tell you what was always my Opinion, I believe Abraham, poor man, was forced to run out of the Land of Judea for Debt. Another Sunday, before several Gentlemen, who told me the Story so soon as they returned from Church, preaching on the Allsufficiency of God, he told his hearers, That they might make out of God what they pleased, Hose, Shoes, Cloaths, Meat and Drink, &c. One, says he, may have a good Stock, but he cannot get in out of his Friends hands when he needs it; he must pursue him first before theRaise on Action be∣fore the Judges, and Arrest him. Lords of the Session; registrat his Bond, get a charge of Horning, and at last take him with Caption; but no man ever needed to registrate God's Bond, or take him with Caption, except Jacob, who took him once with Cap∣tion at the side of a Hill, and he got a broken Leg for his pains. Once in the monthly Fast-day, I heard him my self discourse to this purpose, after he had read his Text, which if I rightly remember, was, In that day I will not regard their Prayers nor their Tears, &c. In speak∣ing to these words, says he, I shall shew you five lost Labours, three Opportunities, three Fears, three Woes, three Lamentations, three Prophesies, and a word about poor Scotland: for the three fears, the first is a great fear, and that is, lest this King give us not all our Will. The 2d. is a very great fear, and that is, if we should get all our Will. I fear we should not make good use of it. The 3d fear is the greatest of all, but I must not tell you that fear, Sirs, for fear it should fear you all to hear it. All the Town knows that this is true, and that he never preaches but after this ridiculous manner. I heard one Mr. Selkirk in a Sermon he preached in the Church of Inve∣rask. say, Sirs, Drink, Whore, and Debauch, and runStark mad. red wood through the World; yet, if you have but as much time as take hold of Christ in your last gasp, I shall pawn my Soul for yours. It may seem incredible, that one who ever heard of Christianity, should have used such an expression; but it made such an impression on the Peoples Minds at that time, that I believe there is hardly one of them who have forgot it to this hour; and consequently, all of them will be ready to vindicate the truth of what I here relate. One preaching in Preston-pans, upon Joshua's making the Sun to stand still, resolving to make a very learned Discourse, began thus, Sirs, says he, you'll may be, ask me how Joshua could make the Sun to stand still? To that I answer, it was by sisting of the motion of Primum Mobile, commonly called the Zodiack-line; but as to the Quomodo, it's no great matter; but that the
Story was true, we have reason to believe from the Heathen Writers; for it was told by them for a, base baudy tale, how Jupiter made a night as long as two, that he might got a longer time to lye with Alemena. Mr. Arskine in the Tron-Church, preaching on these words, Cry aloud and spare not; told his People, There were three sorts of Cries. There is the cry of the Mouth, says he, Psal. 104. The young Lions roar after their Prey, that is, with their Mouth. The cry of their Feet, I will run the ways of thy Commandments, that is the cry of the Feet: And the cry of the Eye, They looked on him and were lightened; that's the cry of the Eye: If we would go to Heaven, we must not only cry with our Mouth, but likewise with out Hands, Feet, and Eyes. The same Mr. Arskine said in another Sermon, What, Sirs, if the De∣vil should come with a Drum at his side, saying, Hoyes, hoyes, hoyes, who will go to Hell with me, boys? who will go to Hell with me? The Jacobines would answer, We'll all go, we'll all go. Mr. James Kirkton, preaching on Jezabel, said, That well-favoured Whore, what became of her, Sirs? she fell over a Window, Arse over Head, and her black bottom was discovered, you may all guess what the Beholders saw, beloved, a black sight you may be sure. One Mr. Mair, a Presbyterian Preacher, Son to Mr. John Mair, the Episcopal Minister in Towch, being desired by the Father to preach for him; the Son said, He would or could not preach in their Churches, because they were polluted, but was content to preach in a Fire-house. This was pro∣vided for him, and the Company (whereof his Father was one) being convened, he said, I will tell you a sad truth, Sirs, You have been driven to Hell in a Coach this eight and twenty years, and that old Stock, my Fa∣ther (pointing to him) has been the Coachman. Mr. Kirkton in October last, preaching on Hymns and Spiritual Songs, told the People, There be four kinds of Songs, Profane Songs, Ma∣lignant, Allowable, and Spiritual Songs, Profane Songs, My Mother sent me to the Well, she had better gone her self, for what I got I dare not tell, but kind Robin loves me. Malignant Songs, such as, He, ho, Gillichrankie, and the King enjoys his own again; against which I have not much to say. 3ly. Allowable Songs, like, Once I lay with another man's Wife: Ye may be allowed, Sirs, to sing this, but I do not say, that ye are allowed to do this, for that's a great deal of danger indeed, Lastly, Spiritual Songs, which are the Psalms of David; but the God∣less Prelates add to these, Glory to the Father, the wrost of all I have yet spoken of. The same Kirkton, in March the year before that, in a Sermon upon Come into me all ye that are heavy and weary laden; expressed himself thus, Christ invites none to him but those that have a great burthen of Sins upon their back; ay but, beloved, ye little ken what Christ is to day;
what Crafts-man do you think him now? is there none of you all can tell me that, Sirs? truly then I must e'en tell you; would you ken it now? in a word then, he's aTinkar. tell you; would you ken it about to day, Have ye any broken Hearts to mend, bring them to me, and I'll soder them; that is, give them Rest, beloved, for that's the words of my Text. Mr. Arskin, in January last, holding forth in the Tron Church con∣cerning Noah's Ark, said, that the Wolf and the Lamb lodged most peace∣ably together in it; and what do you think was the reason of this, Beloved? you may think it was a strange thing, and so indeed it was, Sirs, but it was done to fufil that Prophecy of Isaiah, Sirs, The Wolf and the Lamb shall lye down together; there's a plain reason now for it, Sirs. On Sunday, in January last, immediately after the King had recom∣mended to the General Assembly, a Formula, upon the Subscribing whereof, by the Episcopal Presbyters, he desired they might be re-admit∣ted to the publick Exercise of the Ministry, I heard one Mr. Webster, a noted professor of the New Gospel, lecturing upon Psal 15 On the 1st Verse, he said, That none but God could answer the Psalmist's Que∣stion there, and therefore, said he, it does not belong to any Earthly King, Prince, or Potentate to determine who should be Officers in God's House, or to prescribe Terms of Communion to his Kirk: On the 2d Verse he said, That it was necessary for God's People to walk uprightly; that is, said he, never to betray the Cause of Christ's Kirk for sear of great Men: Our way is God's own way; and sure to stand stiff to that, is the best way to please God, and even great Men, at the long run: On the 3d Verse he appealed to the Consciences of his Hear∣ers, If Scots Presbyterians were not a holy, harmless, innocent, sin∣cere, modest, and moderate People, and whatever is said to the con∣trary, but Lybels, Lies, and Slanders: On the 4th Verse he said, That the Prelates, Curates, and Malignant Counsellors are the vile persons spoke of there, and whom all the fear God are bound to con∣temn and despise; especially (said he) because they have sworn to the hurt of the Kirk, in taking the Oaths of Allegiance and Suprema∣cy, the Test, and the Oath of Canonical Obedience, and now think to expiate all this, by subscribing a bare foolish Formula, because King William, forsooth, has sent it to us; as if the Presbyterians ought to ad∣mit or allow any Form but the Covenant. About that same time, I mean, in January last, Mr. Fraser of Bray, at Edenburgh at the new Kirk, pretending to preach upon this Text of the Revelation, There was joy in Heaven, Michael and his Angels fought a∣gainst the Dragon and his Angels: Michael and his Angels, why no good Christian can doubt, but by this we are to understand Christ and this Kirk; and by the Dragon and his Angels is plainly meant, the Prelates
and Curates: You see from this then, Sirs, betwixt whom this War and this Fighting was in Heaven; and since they fight in Heaven for this Cause of the Kirk, why should not we fight for it also upon Earth? What needs our Kirk be affraid of Kings, they are but men? but we have Christ to fight for us, and we are his, his Angels, and must fight with him till we destroy the Dragon Prelates, and their Curate Angels. Ah, Sirs, ye read (says he) that this Dragon's Tail swept down a third part of the Stars of Heaven; I have a sad thing to tell you now, Sirs, Alas, this Dragon's Tail has swept the North of Scotland, for few or none of Christ Ministers are to be found there. The same Frazer of Bray preaching at a Conventicle in the beginning of King James his Reign, began his Discourse thus; I am come here to preach this day, Sirs, in spite of the Curates, and in spite of the Prelates their Masters; and in spite of the King their Master; and in spite of the Hector of France, his Master; and in spite of the Pope of Rome that's both their Master; and in spite of the Divil that's all their Master. SECT. IV. Containing some few Expressions of the Presbyterian Prayers. MR. James Kirkton said once in his Prayers, O Lord restore our banished King, Lord restore our banished King; do not mistake my meaning, Lord, it is not K. James whom thou hast rejected that we seek; it is King Christ, that has been a stranger these many years in poor Scotland. It is reported of Mr. Robert Blair at St. An∣drews, that he had this expression in his Prayers, Lord, thou art a good Goose, for thou art still dropping. And severals in the Meeting-houses, of late, have made use of it; to which they add, Lord thou rains downDunghils. middings of blessings upon us. Mr. Anderson, a Phanatick Preacher in Perthshire, in a Prayer, said, Good Lord, it is told us, That thou knows a proud man by his looks, as well as a malignant by his works; but what tilt thou do with these malignants? I'll tell thee, Lord, what thou wilt do, Even take them up by the heels andSmoke. reest them in the Chimney of Hell, and dry them like Bervy Haddocks: Lord take the Pistol of thy Vengeance, and the Mortar-piece of thy Wrath, and make theBrains. hairns of these malignants a hodge podge, but for thy own Bairns, Lord feed them with thePruins. Plumdames and Raisons of thy Promises, and e'en give them the Spurs of Confidence, and Boots of Hope, that like newWeaned. spean'd fillies, they mayJump soup over the fold-dikes of Grace. A learned Divine of that Sett, at Pitsligo, in his publick Prayer, this last Summer, said, O Lord, thou'rt like aLittle Mouse. Mousie peeping out at the hole of a Wall, for thou sees us but we see not thee. Mr. William Moncrif (whom I named before, pag.—.) after his Sermon is Summer last, at Largo in Fife, in the Intercession of his Prayer, said, O God establish and con∣firm thy Church in Scotland, and defend her from her bloody and cruel Enemies Po∣pery and Prelacy; O Lord prosper thy reformed Churches of Portugal and Piedmont, and of the rest of the Low Countries; and carry on thy work which is begun in Ireland; and sweet, good Lord, finally begin and carry on a work in England. Mr. Shields preaching near Dumfreis, in his Prayer for K William, said, Good Lord bless him with a stated opposition in his Heart to the Antichristian Church of England, and with Grace to destroy all the Idolatry and Superstition of their foolish and foppish Worship; and bless all the people of the Land with Strength, Zeal, and Courage through∣ly to reform the State as well as the Church, in these Kingdoms; that they may be untied in the Bond of the Solemn League and Covenant, and purified according to that pattern in the Mount, which we and our Posterity are all sworn to. Mr. John Welsh pray'd. Lord we are come hither, a pack of poor Beggers of us the day, alms to the poor blind here, for God's sake, that never saw the light of the Gospel; alms to the poor deaf here, that never heard the joyful sound; to the poor Cripples that have their Legs, the Covenant broken by the Bishops. Lord pity thy poor Kirk the day, poor Woman, sad is she; Lord lend her a lift, and God confound that filthy bitch, that Gumgal'd Whore, the Whore of Babylon. One Mr. Hustone said, Lord give us Grace, for if theu give us not Grace we shall not give thee Glory, and who willGain. win by that, Lord? One Brlands in Gallowshiels, a blasphemous ignorant Blockhead, said in his Prayers
before Sermon, Lord, when thou was electing to Eternity, grant, that we have not got a wrong cast of thy hand to our Souls. Another time praying at Jedburgh, he said, Lord confound the Tyrant of France, God's Vengeance light on him▪ the Vengeance of God light on him, God's Vengeance light on him: but if he be of the Election of Grace, Lord save him: Lord confound the Antichristian crew in Ireland; indeed, Lord, for the greatKing James was then in Ireland. man time heads them, God knows we wish not his destruction, we wish him Repentance of his sins, but not the rest: As for the crew of the Church of England, that's gone in to fight against them, they are as profane a crew as themselves, Lord; but thou can make one man destroy another for the Interest of the people of God, and to give Gods people Elbow-room in the Land. One who is now a Head of a Colledge, and is look't upon by the party as their great Advocate and Oracle, in a publick Congregation at Edenburgh, 1690▪ in his Prayer had these words, which one that heard them, and immediately committed them to Writing, shewed to me; O Lord give us, give us, good Lord; but Lord, you'll may be say to us, Ye are always troubling me, what shall I give you now? but, Lord, whatever thou says, we know that thou in thy hart likes such trouble; and now I'll tell thee what thou should give us Lord, I'll not be greedy norIll man∣nered. misleard now, Lord, then only give us thy self in earnest of better things. Good Lord, what have ye been doing all this time, where have you been this 30 year, What good have ye done to your poor Kirk in Scotland, that has been so many years spurgal'd with Antichrist's riding her; she has been long lying on her back, and sadly defiled; and many a good lift have we lent her; O, how often have we put our Shoul∣ders to Christs Cause, when his ownWhen he could not stand with∣out a Sup∣porter. back was at the Wall: to be free with you, Lord, we have done many things for thee that never enter'd in thy noddle, and yet we are content that thou take all the glory; is not that fair and kind. It's true, good Lord, you have donePretty. gelly well for Scotland now at last, and we hope that thou hast begun, and will carry ony thy work in England, that standsMuch in need. muckle in mister of a Reformation; but what have you done for Ireland, Lord, ah poor Ireland; (then pointing with his Finger to his Nose, he said) I true, I have nickt you there, Lord. O God, thou hast bidden us pray for Kings, and yet they have been always very trou∣blesome to thy Kirk, and veryTrouble∣some. fasious Company; Lord, either make them good or else make us quite of their Company: They say that this new King thou hast sent us, takes the Sacrament kneeling, and from the hand of a Bishop; ah, that's black, that's fowl work; Lord deliver him from Papary and Prelacy, from a Dutch Conscience, and from the hardheartedness of the Stewarts, and let us never beEncoun∣tered. trysted again with the bag and baggage of the Family, the black band of Bishops to trouble and lord it over thy Church and Heritage. Good Lord, send back our old King of poor Scotland, restore him to his Throne and Dignity, to his absolute Power and Superemacy, from which he he hat been so long and so unjustly banished: Lord, you ken what King I mean, I do not mean K. James, na forsooth, I do no mean him, I mean, Lord, you ken well enough wha I mean, I mean sweet K. Jesus, that's been long kept out of this his own Covenant∣ed Kingdom, by the Bishops and Godless Act of Supremacy. Lord I have many more tales to tell you, and many sad complaint to make of our Governors and great men, and of the malignants and Dundee's men; and many Par∣dons to ask for a broken Covenant and a backsliding Ministry, but I must refer them all till you and I be at more leisure, and I will not end without that old musty Prayer that they now call our Lords. Mr. Robert Kenedy, Brother to the very learned and moderate Hugh Kenedy, the Mode∣rator of the General Assembly, once praying at a Conventicle at Chidsdale, said, Lord grant that all the Kings in the World may fall down before thy Son, and kiss his Soles not the Pope's Soles, &c. no nor his stinkingSlipper. Panton either. Mr. Boyd, the famous Preacher in Chidsdale, finding in the Forenoon, that severals of his Hearers went away after the Forenoon Sermon, had this expression in his Afternoon Prayers. Now Lord, thou sees that many People go away from hearing thy word, but had we told them Stories of Robin Hood or Davie Lindsay, they had stay'd; and yet none of these are near so good as thy Word that I Preach. Another praying against Church
Government by Bishops and Curates, said, Lord, will thou take the Keys of thy own House out of the hand of those thieves and hirelings, and make them play clitter clat∣ter upon their Crowns till they cry Maw again—(he pronounced the word Maw like the noise of a Cat) for thy locks have got many a wrong cast since they had the Keys. About the beginning of March 1689 one prayed for a Presbyterian Election of Mem∣bers to the Parliament in the City of Edinburgh in these words: Good God now when Christ's back is at the wall, put it in the heart of the Townsmen to chuse George Stir∣ling and Baillif Hall. Another prayed, Lord thou hast said, that he is worse than an Insidel that provides not for his own Family; Give us not reason to say this of thee Lord, for we are thine own family, and yet we have been but scurvily provided for of a long time. Another praying after the Baptism of a Child in the City of Edinburgh, said, Lord bless and preserve this young Calf that he may grow an ox to draw in Christ's Plough. Mr. Areskine praying in the Tron-Church last year, said, Lord have mercy on all Fools and Idiots, and particularly on the Magistrates of Edinburgh. Another Imprecating (as is very ordinary with them to do) said, Lord give thy enemies the Papists and the Prelates a full cup of thy fury to drink; and if they refuse to drink it off, then good Lord give themAnother Cup full of it. Kelty. Mr. John Dickson praying for Grace, said, Lord dibble thou the kail-seed of thy Grace in our hearts, and if we grow not up to good kail, Lord make us good Sprouts, at least. Mr. Linning cursing the King or France in his Prayers, said, Lord, curse him, confound him, and damn him, dress him, and guide him as thou didst Pharaoh, Senacherib, and our late King James and his Father. One Frazer a young Fellow Preaching in Jedburgh, after Sermon blasphemously in∣verted the Blessing thus, The Curse of the Lord Jesus Christ, and of God the Father, and the Holy Ghost be upon all them that hear the Word and profit not by it. Mr. Arskine in the Tron-Church prayed, Lord be thou in Mons, Mons, Mons, be thou in Mons, good Lord, meikle need has Mons of thee, Lord, for now they that be Confede∣rates we hope they may be made Covenanters. Bring the sworn enemy of the Solemn League the Tyrant of France to the place whence he came, and cause his Dragons shoot him in his Retreat, that he may cry out with Julian the Apostate, Now Galilean thou hast overcome me. One Mr. James Webster was admired lately at my Lord Arbuth∣net his zealous Patron's Table for this Grace before Meat, Out of the boundless, bank∣less, brimless, bottomless, shoreless Ocean of thy goodness we are daily foddered, fill∣ed, feasted, fatted, and half an hours Discourse to the same purpose. Mr. Kennedy before the late Assembly in which he had the name of Moderator; said in his Prayer, Lord, Moderation is commended to us by the King, we all know it's a Vertue thats sometimes is useful. Lord, but I cannot say that that which they call Mo∣duration is so convenient at this time for thy People and Cause, for even to be free with you, Good Lord, I think it best to make a clean House, by sweeping them all out at the door, and casting them out to theDunghill. Midden. Their famous Scrib Rule in a Prayer, not at Sermon, but upon another occasion as pub∣lick, a little after the dissolution of the General Assembly, expressed himself thus, O Lord thou knows that Christ's Court the General Assembly ought to protest against Usurpers upon Christs Kingdom, but if we had known that King William would have been angry with us in earnest, and if the Brethren would have followed my advice, we should have pleased the King for this time, and taken Christ in our own handRun a Tick with him. till some other opportunity. The Moderator Chrighton immediately after the Assembly was dissolved, praying, (amongst many other reflexions upon the King and his Coun∣sellors) said these words, O Lord thou knows how great a Surprizal this is to us, we lookt upon King William at his first coming among us to have been sent in mercy for deliverance to this poor Kirk, but now we see that our Deliverance must come from a∣nother hand, Good God grant that he be not sent to be a plague and a curse to thy Kirk. Hind let loose by Mr. Shields, pag. 468. I conclude this Head, says he, with that Form of Prayer that I use for the King, O Lord to whom vengeance belongeth shew thy self, lift up thy self thou Judge of the Earth, render a reward to the proud: Lord, how long shall the
wicked, how long shall the wicked triumph, shall the Throne of iniquity have fellowship with thee, that frameth mischief by a law, the mighty and terrible God destroy all Kings and peo∣ple that put their hand to alter and destroy the House of God; overturn, overturn, overturn this Throne of Tyranny, and let it be no more until he come whose right it is. These are but a few of many thousand instances that might be given of that ridiculous∣ness, profanity and blasphemy which the Scotch Presbyterians daily use in their Preach∣ing and Praying; and tho Strangers may think it incredible that men professing Religion or Reason, should thus debase and prostitute both, yet they who are unfortunately bound to converse with, and hear them frequently, cannot be but sadly sensible that all that's here charged upon them is but too true, and that many of the worst expressions they are daily guilty of, are purposely here omitted, lest by such obscene, Godless, and ful∣some stuff, the ears and eyes of modest Readers should be nauseated and polluted; which if these opposers of Truth and Religion should deny, there are thousands in Scotland of the best quality and reputation ready to attest, by their Oaths and Subscriptions, as shall be made appear in a 2d Edition of this Book, if the clamors of the Party extort it, and very many are willing to join in this who were not long ago their great friends, and have many of their Sermons and Prayers in writing, which they are now willing to expose, ha∣ving fully discovered the vile hypocrisie and Pharasaick professions of that Faction; but this trouble we can hardly suppose that the Presbyterians will put us or themselves to, be∣cause it's not probable that they will deny what they so much glory in, viz. this extra∣ordinary way of Preaching and Praying, which they think an excellency and perfecti∣on, and call it a holy familiarity with God, & a peculiar priviledg of the most refined Saints. Some may perhaps think this Collection was publish'd meerly to render these Puritans ridiculous; but it's plain enough to such as know them, that we have not made but found them so, we hope that our discovering their snares may prevent some mens being intan∣gled, with them, they▪ compass Sea and Land, and are fully as zealous as their Predeces∣sours to make proselytes to their Party, and new Gospel. Now the general intent of the Collectors of these Notes, was that they might stand like Beacons to fright unwary Stran∣gers from these Rocks upon which so many have formerly made shipwrack both of faith and good conscience. Alas it's but too too evident what havock and desolation these pre∣tended Reformers have made in the Church and State, Gods Name, Honour and Wor∣ship is profan'd, the Gospel exposed to the scorn and contempt of its enemies, the more modest and honest Heathens and Turks; the Flood-gates of Impiety and Atheism are set open, the foundations of all true piety or policy are overturned, and all regard to things either Sacred or Civil quite destroyed by these, who as the Royal Martyr upon the Ordinance against the Common-Prayer-Book. speaks, seek∣ing to gain reputation with the vulgar, for their extraordinary Parts and Piety, must needs undo whatever was formerly setled, never so well and wisely. I wish (as the same Royal Author did) that their Repentance may be their only punish∣ment, that seeing the mischiefs which the disuse of publick Liturgies hath already pro∣duced, they may restore that credit, use and reverence to them, which by the Ancient Churches were given to set forms of sound and wholsome words. King Ch. his most pious and pertinent Prayer. And thou, O Lord, which art the same God, Blessed for ever, whose mercies are full of variety▪ and yet of constancy; Thou deniest us not a new and fresh sense of our old and daily wants, nor despisest renewed affections joined to constant expressions: Let us not want the benefit of thy Churches united and well-advised Devotions. Keep men in that pious Moderation of their Judgments in matters of Religion, that their ignorance may not offend others, not their opinion of their own abilities tempt them to deprive others of what they may lawfully and devountly use to help their infir∣mities. And since the advantage of Error consists in novelty and variety, as Truth's in unity and constancy, suffer not thy Church to be pestred with Erros, and deformed with undecencies in thy Service, under the pretence of variety and novelty  nor to be deprived of truth, unity and order, under this fallacy, that constancy is the cause of for∣mality. Lord keep us from formal Hypocrisie in our hearts, and then we know that praying to thee, or praising of thee (with David and other holy men) in the same forms cannot hurt us. Evermore defend and deliver thy Church from the effects of blind zeal and over-bold Devotion. Amen. FINIS.
