D2595 R6385 12142699 54870
THE PAPAL TYRANNY, As it was Exercised over ENGLAND For some AGES. REPRESENTED By the Late Reverend Doctor Peter Du Moulin: Sometimes Pastor of the Reformed Church of Paris, And since Doctor of the Chair of Divinity in the UNIVERSITY of SEDAN. Now set forth by his Eldest Son, PETER DƲ MOƲLIN, D. D. Canon of Christ-Church, Canterbury, one of his Majesties Chaplains. With an Addition of the same Subject: And REFLECTIONS upon some Provocations given him by the Papists, about matters of Fact objected to them in his Vindication of the Protestant Religion. As also TWO SERMONS upon Rev. XVIII. 4, 5. The First whereof was preached upon the Fifth of November last, The Other a little after. London, Printed for H. Brome, at the Gun in St. Paul's Church-yard at the West End, 1674.
To my Noble and Generous Friends, THE HONOURABLE Sir Robert Hales, BARONET: And his Vertuous NEPHEW, William Longville, ESQUIRE. SIRS, FOr the beneficial Protection of my Father by the eldest of you in a dangerous time, and for the most effectual Favour of you both unto me, to which (next to God) I ow a good part of my well-being, I must profess my self in the face of the world your perpetual Debtour. Neither doth my Fathers removal to a better world, nor shall mine when God shall be pleased to bless me with it, put us out of that indebted condition. That it may be acknowledged such after us, I take here my Fathers help, as im that is able to make himself remembred to posterity, that the Memory of your Goodness to him, and to me for his sake, may st as long as his Memory. This is the End of my presenting to ou this scantling of his Works and of my Endeavours for Gods Service. To which I joyn my hearty Prayers for your tempo∣al and eternal Happiness; as being, Sir, Your ever obliged humblest Servant, PETER DU MOULIN.
An Account of the Occasion of the following Discourse. CArdinal Du Perron having made an Answer to the Book of the Most Excellent King JAMES about the Right of Kings; it pleased His Majesty to send for the late Dr. Du Moulin out of France (a Divine whom he honoured with his especial Love, and whose Pen he had employed before in the like occasions) to confer with him about that Book, and to commit to him the Task of answering the Cardinal. Which he performed in French, the Language in which the Cardinal had writ, and intituled it The No∣velty of Popery. The Book was translated into English. But when it began to appear abroad, the whole Edition (very few Copies ex∣cepted) perisht in the conflagration of London. Out of that Work, which is of good length, I have singled one Chapter, the XI. of the VIII. Controversie about Penitential Satisfaction, where he repre∣sents at large the Popes Tyranny over the Kings and the people of England for some ages under that pretence. This will serve to ar our ENGLISH ISRAEL against the flattering Insinuations of some Popish Books, which would persuade us that the Pope is the kind Father of all Christians, and the Principle of Unity in whom they al should meet to enjoy the Blessings of Peace and Comfort, in tha Church out of which there is no Salvation: To her they invite us even with Tears of Compassion. But we ought not to look to thei weeping Eyes but to their bloody Fingers. By other good Book we are taught to reject their Errours, by this to beware of thei Actions: And to judg what they would do by what they hav done.
Papal Tyranny: OR, A DISCOURSE SHEWING What Tyranny the Popes have exercised over England for some Ages, under colour of Absolution and Satisfaction. And from what horrible Bondage England was delivered by the Light of the Gospel. SInce the end of Cardinal du Perron's Book was to shake the Constancy of His Majesty of Great Britain, and to induce Him to submit His Crown to the Papal See; I think it expedient, yea and necessary, to shew what was the condition of the English, and what the ignominy and bondage of the Royal Crown, under the Empire of the Roman Prelate. This matter of Satisfactions leads us to that Discourse: for it was a principal Engine of the Pope to bring Kings under his Feet, for him to tread upon their Necks, and to prey upon England with the highest Insolency. The Dispute about Investitures and Collation of Benefices, is that for which most blood hath been spilt in Europe, since Christian Religion was planted in it. Up∣on that Quarrel above an hundred Battels were fought since Grgory the VII. be∣sides Sieges of Towns, and wasting and ransacking of Provinces. As in the fourth and fifth Ages, the word Consubstantial was the Mark of the Orthodox, and in our days going to mass is the mark of Roman Catholicks; so in the eleventh and twelfth Ages, to maintain that the Right of Investitures and Collation of Bi∣shopricks and Abbeys belonged not unto Kings and Princes, but to the Pope, went for the mark of a true Christian; and they that suffered for the defence of the Popes Claim, were called Martyrs, and put in the List of Saints, and were sure to do Miracles after their Death. In old time Popes were ccated by the Authority of the Emperours, who also
punished and deposed Popes. They employed them sometimes about Embassies and other Services, as a Soveraign Prince will send his Subjects and Servants on his Errand. The Kings of Italy took of the Bishops of Rome three thousand Crowns for their Investiture; as of the Archbishop of Milan, and that of Ravenna, two thousand for theirs, according to the express Law of King Athalaricus inCassiod. var. l. 9. Ep. 13. Cassiodorus. That Law was made about the year of Christ 533. The Emperour Justinian having shortly after recovered Rome and Italy, conti∣nued the same Law, commanding that the Patriarchs should pay (and the Roman as well as the others) to the Emperours Coffers twenty pounds weight of Gold, which come to about three thousand French Crowns. This is to be seen in theNovel. 123. c. 3. Jubemus bea∣tissimos Archi∣episcopos & Patriarchas, hoc est, seniores Romae & Con∣stantinopoleos & Alexandriae & Theopoleos & Jerosolymo∣rum, si quidem consuetudo, ha∣bet Episcopis ut Clericis non minus quàm 20 libras auri da∣ri, &c. 123 Novel of Justinian, in the third Chapter. But the Roman Empire being pulled down in the West, and Italy being fallen into the hands of the French, the Pope was inriched by the immense Liberalities of Pepin and Charlemaign, and Lewis the Meek, and from a Bishop was suddenly made a Temporal Prince. Being thus raised, he took advantage, after the death of Lewis, of the dulness of his Successors, distracted with great Wars, to make his Keys to clink with a great noise, and to terrifie the Princes and Nations on this side of the Alps, with the Thunder of his Excommunications. (For as for the Gre∣cians his Neighbours, who at that time held still part of Italy, they never cared for the roaring of his Bulls.) By little and little the Papal Empire did so increase, that in the end the Popes made bold to strike at the Crowns of Emperours and Kings, and shoot Anathema's against them, giving and taking away Kingdoms, putting Interdicts upon their Provinces, and exposing them for a Prey to the next Conquerour. Yea they came toExtra U∣nam Sanctam de Majoritate  obedientia. bear themselves for Lords of the whole tem∣poral of the World, no less than of the spiritual, because it is written, Behold two Swords, &c. that is the Spiritual and the Temporal Sword. The height of the Popes Power and Glory, and together the depth, and as it were the midnight of the darkest ignorance, was from the year 1073. upon which Gregory the VII. entred into the Papal See, and the year 1517. when Leo the X. having published great Pardons over all the Papal Empire, began to sell Heaven for ready money, and put to sale remission of sins, and deliverance of Souls from Pur∣gatory. This moved the people to search the Scriptures, to know what Ground such an infamous Traffick might pretend in the Word of God. In all that Inter∣val, which was of four hundred fourty four years, Holy Scripture was a Book shut up unto the Princes and Nations of the West, and their whole Religion con∣sisted in Adoration of Reliques and New Saints doing Miracles, in Pilgrimages, in Service of Images, in Visions of Souls returning from Purgatory, in running to get Pardons, in founding of Abbeys for Satisfaction and Redemption of the sins of the Founders, in making Croisada's for Expedition into the Holy Land, and in trembling under the Popes Thunderbolts. Hardly was Christ acknowledg∣ed among the Saints. Till in the end they bethought themselves to give him his Feast, which they call Gods Feast, that Christ might not be alone with∣out a holy day.
That Gregory the VII. was the first Pope that made boldIt was i the year 1075 to pronounce a Sentence of Deposition from the Empire against Henry the IV. a wise and valorous Emperour, transporting the Empire to Rodolphus Duke of Suaben. But that bold attempt turned to the confusion both of Gregory, and of his Creature Ro∣dolphus: For Rodolphus was defeated and wounded to death by Henry, who also degraded Gregory, as guilty of High Treason, making him flee to Salerno, where soon after he died for grief. Also Henry besieged Rome, and took it.Sigebert. Ann. 1085. Confessus est Deo & Sancto Petro & toti Ecclesiae, se val∣de peccasse in pastorali cura, quae ei ad re∣gendum com∣missa erat, & suadente Dia∣bolo contra hu∣manum genus odium & iram conitasse. Sigebert who lived then, and Matthew Paris, almost his Contemporary, and Cardinal Benno, a Domestick of that Pope, write that when he saw himself near his Death, he called a Cardinal, the most confiding of all his Friends, to whom he confest, that he had greatly offended in the Pastoral Charge committed unto him, and had drawn the Wrath of God upon Mankind by the Devils Instigation. This Quarrel began, because the Emperours after the Canonical Election of the Bishops and Abbots of their Empire, used to invest them with the Lands and Lord∣ships belonging unto the Bishoprick or Abbey, putting a Ring and a Staff in their hand, and to receive the Oath of Allegiance from them. For the said Prelates hold∣ing many Noble Lands in the Empire by the Concession of the Emperours, and ha∣ving a Vote in their Election and in the greatest business of the Empire, the Em∣perours thought it just and necessary that the said Prelates should make some ac∣knowledgment of it, and should not be received into a degree so important to the State, without the States consent, and without acknowledging the Emperour to be their Lord and Master. Besides, the Emperours according to the custom of the ancient Emperours which I represented before, would take some Present in money from the said Prelates, (which yet was a small thing in comparison of that which the Popes took since, and take still for the Annat, now that they have deprived the Emperour of his Right.) And herein the Emperours thought themselves groun∣ded in right. For besides that the Churches, Abbeys, and Priories were founded by the Liberality of Emperours and Princes of the Empire, the Emperour main∣tained Armies for the Defence and Security of the said Prelates, wherefore it was reasonable that they should contribute towards the Charges. The Kings of England had the same Right in their Kingdom. So at the same time that Popes disputed those Investitures against Emperours, they laboured also in England to pluck that Flower from the Kings Crown, and to draw the profit to themselves. The first that stirred that Qarrel in England was Anselm Archbi∣shop of Canterbury; for when the Kings of England needy and greedy of money, borrowed of the Clergy great loans never to pay again, he to exempt himself from the subjection of Kings, laboured to make his Archbishoprick to depend meerly on the Pope, not on the King, although he had got it by the free Gift and Concession of the King. That Anselm then being promoted in the year 1092. to the Archbishoprick by King William Rufus, the King having given him freely that Great and Rich Place, soon after would extort from him a great sum of money for the exigence of his businesses, as claiming a Recompence for his Gift. Anselm refused to give it, and stealing privately out of England, went to Pope Ʋrban the II. who at that
time was violently prosecuting, against the Emperour Henry the Fourth, the Quar∣rel of Investiture, begun by his Predecessor Gregory the Seventh. This Ʋrban liking the Prudence and Dexterity of Anselm, made use of his Counsel, and gave him the Archbishops Pall, thereby voiding the Investiture which he had received from King William, and obliging him thereafter to depend on him, as also he did; so behaving himself ever since, as holding his Archbishoprick by the Popes Ordination, not by the Kings Concession. Whereby the King incensed, interdi∣cted to Anselm the entry into his Kingdom, confiscated the Lands and Estate of the Archbishoprick, and declared by an express Edict that his Bishops held their Places and Estates meerly from him, and were not subject unto the Pope for the same; And that he had the same Rights in his Kingdom as the Emperor had in the Empire. To which all the Bishops of England subscribed. Neither did any of them contradict it, but onely the Bishop of Rochester, as a Suffragant to the Arch∣bishop of Canterbury. By the Intervention of Friends, Anselm made his Peace; But being returned from Rome, and keeping a strict league with the Pope, he began again soon after to disswade the Clergy from receiving Investitures from the King, wherefore he was constrained to fly the second time out of the Kingdom, and his Estate was again seized upon, and confiscated, of which he had obtained Restitution at his return. He came then to Pope Ʋrban, who received him with honour, as a Confessor suffering for the Cause of Christ. The year after, Ʋrban kept a Council at Cler∣mont in Auvergne where he granted full pardon of all sins to all that should con∣tribute for the Expedition into the Holy Land,Matth. Paris in Gu∣lielmo Rufo. Baronius. and to them that should go in person, he promised a particular degree of Glory, and a preheminence in Para∣dise above the vulgar sort of Saints. In the same Council he decreed that thence∣forth it should not be lawful for any Prelate or Ecclesiastical Person to receive the Investiture or Collation of a Benefice or Church-Dignity from the hand of any Lay-person. But the Princes laught at these Decrees, and retained the possession of these Investitures. In the 1099. King William and Pope Ʋrban died. Henry the I. succeed d William, and Paschal the II. succeeded Urban. This King Henry finding is Conscience charged with many Crimes, among other things, with taking the Kingdom from his Elder Brother Robert, vowed unto God for Satisfaction for his Sins to found an Abbey, and together sought to be reconciled with An∣selm, and called him again. But Anselm being obliged with an Oath to the Pope, prevailed with the King that a Council should be gathered at London, Where he declared the Order he had from the Pope, that no Lay∣man should have the Power to confer any Investiture, and began to degrade the Bishops promoted by the Kings Nomination, and refused to consecrate some Bishops named by the King. The King angry, banish'd him out of his Kingdom presently, and confiscated his Estate.
While these things past in England, Pope Paschal prosecuted the Quarrel of his Predecessors against the EmperourThe Let∣ters of that Emperour Henry the IV. to Philip King of France, are found in Sige∣bert in the year 1106. This History is related at large by Hel∣modus Priest of Lubec, in the book intituled Chronica Scla∣vorum. See also Baronius in the Life of Paschal. Henry the IV. and seeing that all the Enemies whom the Pope had raised against him had been overcome and defeated, he did so work upon the Emperours own Son, that he made him rebel against his Father, and that Son coming upon his Father at unawares, with an Army surpri∣sed him at Confluence, took the Crown, the Scepter, and Imperial Robe from him, and degraded him from the Empire. This broke the heart of the Vene¦rable old man charged with so many Victories, who died soon after with grief, so forsaken, that Pope Paschal would not suffer him so much as to be bu∣ried. That new Emperour Henry the Fifth having slain his Father, past presently into Italy, where the Pope hoping to be recompensed for helping him in his Conspiracy against his Father, found himself deceived: For when he prest him to renounce the Rights of Investiture which his Ancestors (as Sigebert saith) had enjoyed above three hundred years, the Emperour grew very angry, and laying hold of this Pope Paschal, committed him to a close Prison: Neither would he release him, till he had renounced his Claim to the Investitures and Collations of Benefices, saying to him in scorn that which Jacob said to the Angel wrestling with him, I will not let thee go, before thou hast given me thy Blessing. Paschal then to redeem himself out of Captivity, granted to Henry that both he and the Popes after him, should leave unto the Emperours the peaceable enjoying of the Investi∣tures of Ecclesiastical Dignities by the Ring and the Staff. Also that none could be consecrated Bishop without an Investiture by the Emperour. And to make this agreement more Authentical, the Emperour and the Pope mutually obliged them∣selves by Oath upon the Host of the Mass, which they received together. But because that Oath was extorted, the Pope did not think himself obliged to keep it. So he broke that Agreement, and excommunicated Henry, and all Princes usurping Investitures. That accident confirmed Henry the I. King of England in a resolution to retain the Investitures of his Kingdom. And that Order was kept in England for a long time. Onely the Popes, that they might not wrong their pretences by a long pre∣cription, would send the Pall to some Prelates invested by the King, confirming hat which they could not alter, and giving an Approbation which was not desired of them. In the year 1142. Pope Eugenius came to Paris, where that he might usurp he Right of Investiture, and deprive the King of it, he gave the Archbishoprick  Bourges to one of his Domesticks, Chancellor of the Apostolical Chancery, na∣med Peter Aimery, without the consent of King Lewis, a Prince very much given to obedience unto the Papal See.Matth. Paris in Hen∣rico I. Yet the King was so angry at it, that he swore pon the holy Reliques, that never so long as he lived, Aimery should set his foot  Bourges. But the Pope knowing the Kings timerous nature, excommunicated im, put his Person in interdict, and gave order that in France, in all places where the King came, Divine Service should cease, and all his Court was deprived f the Communion. This lasted three whole years, till the famous Bernard, Ab∣bot
of Cleruaux came to the King, and perswaded him to receive the said Archbi∣shop. But because by so doing the King brake his Oath made upon the holy Re∣liques, he was enjoyned for Satisfaction to take a Journey to the holy Sepulchre in Syria, to fight against the Saracens. In which Journey, the King miserably lost the flower of his Nobility, and returned afflicted and full of Confusion. Matth. Pa∣ris, an. 1154. p. 88. Cum Archi∣episcopus divi∣na celebraret mysteria, hau∣sto in ipso Ca∣lice, ut aiunt, veneno obiitAbout that time died Henry Archbishop of York, being poisoned in the Chalice of the Sacrament. And it was no small question, Whether the Blood of Christ might be poisoned. After Henry the I. of England came Stephen, and after Stephen, Henry the II. a potent Prince, who besides England, held Normandy, Anjou, Poitou, Saintong, and Gulenne: That King so potent, was weakened with an inward Combate of contrary desires; for being very superstitious and scrupulous, yet he was ve∣ry ambitious and extraordinarily eager to maintain his Rights, that of Investitures especially. Helmoldi Chronicon.In the year 1155. (the year in which Frederick Barbarossa held the Popes stirrup, the left instead of the right, to abuse him, but the next day was forced to hold the Right) King Henry the II.Matth. Paris, in Hen∣rico II, p. 91. desirous to invade Ireland, and having  just Title to it, writ to Pope Adrian to desire his leave to subdue Ireland, to reduce it into the way of Salvation. Not but that the Irish were Christians, but they yielded little Obedience to the Pope, who got no money from that Island. The Popes Letters in answer to Henry, are related by Matthew Paris, whereby that Pope giveth him leave to make that Conquest, upon Condition that he should impose Tax of a penny a year upon every house of Ireland, to the profit of the Papal See; and that he should hold that Kingdom by the Popes Grant, as a Fee of the Roma Church.Sanè om∣nes insulas, quibus Sol ju∣stitiae Christus illuxit & quae documenta fidei Christianae sus∣ceperunt ad jus sancti Petri & sacrosanctae Ro∣manae Ecclesiae non est dubium pertinere. Ba∣ron. For (saith he) there is no doubt but that the Islands upon which Chris the Son of Righteousness is risen, and that have received the Instructions of the Chri∣stian Faith, belong to S. Peter's Right, and to the holy Roman Church. And upon that he exhorteth Henry to instruct that Nation in good manners, and in obedien to the Church. In the same year at Argentueil near Paris, was found our Saviours Coat withou seams, made for him by his Mother in his Infancy, and grown with him. Ther was found some Writing upon it, which made that to be known which had no been perceived in 1154 years. Then also was burnt at Rome one Arnould, who preached with great applau that the Pope had nothing to do to meddle with temporal things. And he w burnt by the Command of Pope Adrian, who soon after was suffocated by a Fl which he swallowed with his Drink. A wonder, that he that was God on Earth and whom Kings worshipped, could beUspergen∣sis. suffocated by a Flie. Alexander th III. succeeded him, who Sainted King Edward the Confessor, dead above a hun∣dred years before. Matth. Pa∣ris, BaroniusIn the year 1162. King Henry the II. of England preferred his Chan∣cellour Thomas Bcke to the Archbishoprick of Canterbury, a prudent and indu¦strious man, and learned, as the time was, but sufficiently stored with Ambitio He received that preferment from the King, without any Investiture or Conse
from the Pope. Yet the Pope not long after sent him the Archbishops Pall. This displeased the King, who soon after assembled a Council at Clarence, where all appeals to Rome were forbidden, and all the Prelates declared that they held their Offices and Benefices fom the King, and from none else; to which Orders the said Archbishop Thomas was also consenting. But a while after this Prelate changed his Opinion, and protested that he was sorry to have consented to the Kings Ordinances, and to the Conclusions of the Council, and to shew his Repentance, he cut off himself from the Communion. Then he stole away into Flanders, and from thence to Rome, to Pope Alexander the III. Whereupon the King renewed the same Laws, and decreed that every person, whether of the Clergy or Laity, that should appeal to the Pope, should be committed to Prison, and proceeded against: The Goods of Thomas he caused to be seized, and banished both him and his kindred. Clergy-men were forbid∣den to go beyond the Seas without leave, and surety for their return. A strict Order was made, that no Mandate from the Pope should be received into the Kingdom of England: And that Peters Pence, which the Pope raised by the Poll in England every year, should be seized into the hands of his Majesties Officers. But Thomas being come into France, excommunicated with burning Candles and ring of Bells, all that under pretence of maintaining the Kings Right, did hin∣der the Profits of his Holiness; then he retired to St. Colomb of Sens, where King Lewis did liberally entertain him. But King Henry angry that Pope Alexan∣der maintained Thomas, whom he called his rebellious Subject,Matth, Paris, pag. 103. forbad all his Subjects to yield any Subjection to the Pope. In the year 1170. King Henry caused his eldest Son Henry to be crowned King of England, by the Hands of the Archbishop of York. Which Thomas, though anished, took very heavily, and excommunicated the said Archbishop and all his adherents in that Action; for he pretended that the right of Crowning Kings elonged to him. King Henry, after the Crowning of his Son, passed into Normandy, where King Lewis by his Intervention so prevailed, that King Henry and Tho∣mas met and spake together. And when it was required that Thomas should kiss King Henry in sign of Reconciliation: Thomas, coming near to the King, said to him,  kiss you for the Honour of God, or for Gods sake. At which the King, offended, ould not receive the Kiss; as if Thomas had given him to understand, that e kissed him not for his own sake. So nothing was done for that time. But oon after, King Henry,Matth. Paris in Hen∣ric. II. pag. 117. Cum autem Rex & Archi∣episcopus in partem se∣ssissent, bisque descendissent & bis ascindissent, bis habenam Archiepiscopi Rex tenuit cum equum endisset. perswaded by some Prelates, met again with Thomas t Fronceuaux, and did that which no man would have believed. For twice he held e Bridle of Thomas his Horse. For that Prelate was not contented to have re∣eived that Honour once, but he alighted again, that the King should do him hat submission once more, as he also did. Thus that Priest practised Apostolick umility.
After this Triumph, Thomas returned into England full of Glory. Where in∣stead of bringing and keeping Peace, he was the Bearer and Proclaimer of an Ex∣communication and Sentence of Deposition against the Archbishop of York and his Adherents, who had taken upon them to Crown the young King in his absence. But the King hindred the Execution of that Sentence. Such was then the Power of the Keys, such was the abominable Pride of the Popes Slaves. The next year after, the same Thomas excommunicated solemnly the Lord Sack∣vill, appointed by the King Vicar of the Church at Canterbury; because he did derogate from the Rites of the Church, to please the King.Matth. Pa∣ris, p. 19. Robertum quo∣que Brook qui equum quen∣dam ipsius Ar∣chiepiscopi vi∣ctualia deferen∣tem ad dedecus ejus & ignomi∣niam decurta∣verat, solenni∣ter excommuni∣cavi, He excommuni∣cated also one Robert Brook for curtailing a Horse that carried Victuals to the Arch∣bishops House. For which reason the King, being then in Normandy, sent over four of his Servants to the Archbishop, to command him to absolve those whom he had unjustly excommunicated, and take off his Suspensions from others. Which com∣mand, when the Archbishop despised to obey, the King began to grieve very sor before his Servants, and to lament his condition. This moved the same four men, whom the King had sent before, to return into England to the same Archbishop, whom they found in the Church of Canterbury at three a clock in the after-noon, and calling him Traytor to the King, they slew him, and dashed his Brains upon the floor. His last words when he dyed were, I commend my self and Gods Cause un∣to God, and to the blessed Mary, and to the Saints, Patrons of this Church, and t Saint Dennis. Here the lightness of the peoples minds appeared. For the same men that d∣tested the Pride of that Thomas, began to worship him after his death, compas∣sion moving them to Devotion. King Henry himself shewed a deep sorrow for i and though he protested himself innocent of that Fact, yet he sent Embassad to the Pope to make satisfaction about it, and to undergo such a penance as th Pope would impose. But the Pope would not so much as receive his Embassador to kiss his Feet, and would not see them: And in great wrath spake of excom∣municating the whole Kingdom of England, and putting an Interdict upon i which (in his account) was sending all the English into Hell. As long as th King made Edicts, whereby he forbad his Subjects to yield any Obedience to th Pope, or to receive any Bulls or Mandates from Rome, the Pope did not troubl him, and used no threatning. But as soon as he began to humble himself, th Pope trod under his feet, the Majesty of such a great King. And he made the Ki to buy his Absolution at a dear rate. He enjoyned him to suffer appeals from Eng∣land to Rome. To quit his Rights and Claim against the Liberties of the Churc that is, to the Investitures. To keep two hundred men of Arms in pay for th Holy War: of which Pay, the Popes Assigns were to be the Receivers. A that in England they should celebrate the Feast of the glorious Martyr Sai homas of Canterbury. The Words of the Bull are these.Districte praecipimus, ut natalem Thomae Martyris glori∣osi Cantuariensium olim Archiepiscopi, diem videlicet passionis ejus, solenniter sub annis singulis celebretis,  apud cum votivis orationibus satagatis peccatorum veniam promereri. We strictly char you, that you solemnly celebrate every year the birth-day of the glorious Marty
Thomas sometimes Archbishop of Canterbury, that is, the day of his Passion; and that by devout Prayers to him, you endeavour to merit the Remission of your Sins. To make the satisfaction compleat, King Henry passeth from Normandy into England, stayeth at Canterbury, strips himself naked, and is whipt by a great company of Monks, of whom some gave him five lashes, some three. Of which satisfactions imposed on Henry by the Pope, Machiavel speaks thus in the first Book of the History of Florence.Le quali cose furono da Enrico accetta∣re, & sottomes se si à quel giu∣dicio un tanto Re, che hoggi un homo privato si vergognarebbe sottomettersi, &c. Tanto le cose che paiono sono piu da dis∣costo che d'ap∣presso temute. These things were accepted by Henry, and so great a King submitted himself to that Judgment, to which a private man, in our days, would be ashamed to submit himself. Then he exclaimeth, So, much things that have some shew are more feared afar off, than near hand! which he saith, be∣cause at the same time the Citizens of Rome expelled the Pope out of the City with disgrace, scorning his Excommunication. Then began the Relicks of Saint Thomas to do miracles: Insomuch that King Lewis, who had entertained Thomas at Sens, passed over into England to worship him, and made his devotions to his Reliqus. That with the Canonization of that Saint, and the Cmmandment made unto the world to pray to him, put this Tho∣mas in very great credit. Yet it is hard to say for what Article of the Christian Faith this Martyr suffered, seeing that his banishments were only for Investitures, and Collations of Benifices, and pecuniary matters. Thus by Gods permission the mystery of iniquity was growing. KingWestm. Anno 1179. Ludovicus con∣summato voto peregrinationis suae ad vetum ad propria inter Doverum & Witsand navigando sine aliquo impedimento remeavit; & quia in mari nimis timidus crat & timens pericula, dicens, esse plusquàm humanum transfretare, petiit beatum Tho∣mam ut in illo Transitu nullus pateretur ex illo tempore naufragium. Lewis at his return fearing the storm, though his passage was but from Dver to Callice, and saying, that to cross the Seas was a thing more than humane, prayed to St. Thomas the Martyr, that from that time none should suffer shipwrack in that passage. Matth. Pa∣ris, in Hen. II. Westmon.At that time Pope Alexander the III. held a Council at St. John of Lateran of Rome, where they consulted about the Extirpation of the Albigeois. And he gave order that the Archbishops visiting Churches, should content them∣selves to ride with an attendance of fifty Horses. In the year 1189 King Henry the second of England dyed. His Son Ri∣chard sirnamed Coeur de Lyon succeeded him. In the sixth year of his ReignWest. an. 1196. Matth. Paris, p. 175. Walter Archbishop of Rouen, displeased because the King was fortifying the Castle of Andeli, put whole Normandy in interdict, made Divine Service to cease over all the Country, shut up Church yards, and forbad all ringing of Bells; and for a quarrel between the King and himself, excommunicated the whole peo∣ple, so that no Norman entred into Paradise, unless he would take part against the King. Then he ran away to Rome, where he was kindly received.Matth. Pa∣ris, p. 175. At the same time William Bishop of Ely, the Popes Legat, was making a progress through England with a train of fifteen hundred Horse.Matth. Paris, an. 1197. p. 184. A chiepiscopus Rothomagensis, in Normanniam sententiam tulerat interdicti. Jacebant corpor defunctorum insepulta per plateas civitatum & vicos, quae viventibus foetorem non minimum incufferunt. That Interdict having lasted
two years, the afflicted people were in great confusion, because they saw themselves deprived of the Divine Service, and cast out of the Communion of the Church for a quarrel in which they had no hand, the burying places shut up, the dead Bodies cast out in the streets, sending forth such a stink that the whole Countrey was infected with it. In the end King Richard was necessitated to send Embassadors to Rome to plead his Cause against the Archbishop. The Agreement was made with these Conditions. That the King might fortifie the Castle of Andeli, because it was a frontier near the French. But that to appease the Archbishop, and make him take off the Interdict from the Countrey, the King should give to the Archbishop all the Mills of Rouen, to enjoy them as his own, both he and his Successors; also all the Kings demains at Diepe, and at Louviers, and the Forrest of Haliermont, with all the appertenances of the same. That being done, they began again to sing Mass in Normandy, and by the Popes order Paradise was opened again unto the Normans. Then also the Order of the Dominicans first appeared, which was approved and confirmed by Innocent the III. With that Order, and that of the Franciscans, England was presently filled. The fear of the Interdict in those days kept Princes and Nations in such fear, that there was nothing that the Pope could not obtain of the Soveraigns, as soon as he threatned their Land with an Interdict. In the year 1199. King Philip August of FranceMatth. Paris, in Jo∣hanne Rege, p. 191. imprisoned Peter de Douay elected Bishop of Cambray. And at the same time King John of England kept the Bishop of Beauunis prisoner, whom he had taken in Battel armed cap à pe. But both these Kings were constrained to release their Prisoners by the threatning of Innocent the III. to put France and England in Interdict. Which if he had done, from the Mediterranean Sea to the Border of Scotlond Divine Ser∣vice had ceased, Churches and Church-yards had been shut up, all the people had been excommunicated. It was that same year that Breasts of Flesh grew upon an Image of the Virgin Mary in Damascus, as203, & 207. Matthew Paris relateth. In the same time one Thurical an Englishman was in a rapture carried in the night to Purgatory, of which St. Nicolas is Governor; Where also he saw the mouth of Hell, whence a stinking smoak issued out, which, as it was revealed to him, came out of Tyths detained or ill paid, because there those men were horribly punisht who had ill paid the Tyths due to the Church. There also he saw the Souls for which no Masses were sung, put to a longer and sorer torment, and those poor Souls were barefoot, and had their Bellies flayed and raw. He saw also the Souls that came out of that fire besprinkled by St. Michael with holy Water. This is exactly related by Mat. Paris a Monk of St. Albons, superstitious according to the age he lived in. Then also came the Minorite Fryers into England, their Order being but lately instituted. This King John was unfortunate in War, and ill beloved of his own Subjects. King Philip August of France took from him Normandy, Anjou, Tourain, Polton, and part of Guienne. After these losses, being retired into England, he began to oppress the English, and tyrannically to rob the substance of the Nobles and the Clergy. Whereby he gave fair play to Pope Innocent III. a man as crafty, and
stirring as ever was any; for he brought that King upon his knees, and got his ends of him, at the first occasion of quarrel, which was this. The Pope having chosen Cardinal Stephen Langton Archbishop of Canterbury without the Kings consent, the King, angry at it, sent some Souldiers to Canterbury who used the Monks of Canterbury as Traytors, and expelled them out of England.Matth. Paris, & West monast. in Jo∣hanne. He sent also reproachful Letters to the Pope, upbraiding him that the Popes got more money out of England than out of any Kingdom, and yet delighted to bring it into trouble, and to encroach upon the Liberties of the Crown; threatning, that if the Pope continued in these courses, he would shut up all the passages out of his Kingdom, that no money should pass out of England to Rome; saying, that he had Prelates of sufficient capacity, and needed not to ask Justice of those that were far from him. Had a victorious King, well beloved of his Subjects, spoken thus, the Pope would have given him fair words, and spoken like a Father, that beareth with a fatherly meekness the infirmities of his dearest Son. So had his Predecessors born with all threatnings and ill words of William Rufus, Henry I. and Henry the II. before Thomas Beckets death. But with this John, a weak and ill ad∣vised Prince, he behaved himself otherwise. For after Letters of admonition, he gave order to some of his most confiding Prelates in England, that if the King should continue that Language, they should put an Interdict upon all England. Which was speedily executed. AndWestmon. An. 1214. Interdictum duravit sex an∣nis quatuorde∣cim septimanis & duobus die∣bus. England remained under the Interdict six years, and three months and a half. Whereby not only the King and his Court but also all the people of England, who had nothing to do with that quar∣rel, were excommunicated. In that long time how many thousands of men died in the great Kingdom of England? who, by the rules of the Roman Church, and by the Popes Judgment, are eternally damned; and that not for Heresie, nor for any crime of the People, but for a quarrel between the King and the Pope, about some Investitures of Churches and Collations of Benefices, and money matters.Math. Paris, in Jo∣hanne, p. 217. Cessaverunt in Anglia omnia Ecclesiastica Sacramenta praeter solum∣medo confessionem, & viaticum in ultima necessitate, & baptisma parvulorum. Corpora quoque defuncto∣um de civitatibus & villis efferebantur, & more canum in biviis & fossatis sine orationibus & sacerdo∣um ministerio sepeliebantur. Then (saith Matthew Paris, who was an eye-witness of all that disorder) all the Sacraments of the Church ceased in England, saving only the Confession and the Communion of the Host in the last necessity, and the Baptism of little Children. And the dead bodies were carried out of the Towns, and as if they had been the bodies of Dogs, they were buried by the high ways, and in ditches; with∣ut Prayers and without Service of Priests. By the same Interdict (according to the custom of the Interdict) Masses, Mattens, Vespers, all publick Service and ringing of Bells was forbidden, and he Kingdom was exposed to rapin and prey, and given to any that could onquer it. Only the King was not yet excommunicated by name, but that as done the next year after. Next, the same Innocent deposed John from the Kingdom of England, and
absolved the English from the Oath of their Allegiance,Westmon. an. 1211. & 1213. Matth. Paris, in Jo∣hanne. Ad hujus sententiae executionem scripsit Domi∣nus Papa poten∣cissimo Regi Francorum Philippo, quatenus in remissionem omnium suorum peccatorum hunc laborem assumeret, & Rege Angloru à solio expulso, ipse & successores sui regnum Angliae perpetuo jure possiderent, &c. Statuit praeterea, ut quicun∣que ad expugnandum Regem illum contumacem opes impenderint vel auxilium, sicut illi qui sepulchrum Domini visitant, tam in rebus quam in personis & animarum suffragiis in pace Ecclesiae secure permaneant. Westmo∣nast. an. 1213. Matth. Paris in Johanne. Johannes Dei Gratia Rex Angliae, &c. volentes nos ipsos humi∣liare pro illo qui se pro nobis humiliavit usque ad mortem, gratia Spiritus inspirante, non vi interdicti nec ti∣more coacti, sed nostra bona spontaneaque voluntate, ac communi consilio Baronum nostrorum, conferimus & li∣bere concedimus Deo & sanctis ejus Apostolis Petro & Paulo & sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae matri nostrae ac Domino Papae Innocentio ejusque Catholicis successoribus totum regnum Angliae & totum regnum Hiberniae, cum omni jure ac pertinentiis suis pro remissione omnium peccatorum nostrorum & totius generis nostri tam pro vivis quam pro defunctis, & à modo illa ab eo & ab Ecclesia Romana tanquam secundarius recipientes & te∣nentes, in praesentia prudentis viri Pandulsi Domini Papae Subdiaconi & familiaris: Exinde praedicto Domi∣no Papae Innocentio ejusque Catholicis successoribus, & Ecclesiae Romanae scundum formam subscriptam fecim & juravimus homagium ligium in praesentia Pandulsi. Si coram Domino Papa esse poterimus, idem faciemus, &c. Ad indicium autem hujus nostrae perpetuae obligationis & concessionis volumus & stabilimus, ut de pre∣priis & specialibus reditibus nostris praedictorum regnorum pro omni servitio & consuetudine quae pro ip facere debemus, salvis per omnia denariis beati Petri, Ecclesia Romanam ille marcas estrelingorum percipia annuatim, &c. and commanded Philip August, King of France, that for the remission of his Sins, he should invade the Kingdom of England with force of Arms, giving to those that should follow the King in that Conquest, the remission of all their Sins, and the same Gra∣ces and Pardons, as to them that visit the Holy Sepulchre. Whereupon the said King Philip, partly to obtain the remission of his Sins, partly to make himself Master of England, raised a mighty. Army whilst Innocent was labouring to make the English to rise against their King. This moved King John to humble himself under the Pope, and to receive such Conditions as were best pleasing to his Holiness. The Conditions were, that the King should yield unto the Pope the whole right of Patronage of all the Benefice of his Kingdom. That to obtain absolution of his Sins, he should pay to the Clergy of Canterbury, and to other Prelates, the sum of eight thousand pound sterling. That he should satisfie for the damages done to the Church, according to the judgment of the Popes Legat or Vicelegat. That the said John should resign his Crown into the Popes hands, with his Kingdoms of England and Ireland for which Letters were formed, and given to Pandulfus the Popes Legat. T words were these. I John by the Grace of God King, &c. freely grant unto God a to the holy Apostles Peter and Paul, and to the holy Roman Church our Mother, and  the Lord Pope Innocent, and to his Catholick Successors, the whole Kingdom of Eng∣land and the whole Kingdom of Ireland, with all the rights and all the appertena∣ces of the same, for the remission of our Sins, and of all our Generation, both forth living and the dead; that from this time forward we may receive and hold them  him, and of the Roman Church, as scond after him, &c. We have sworn, and sm unto the said Lord Pope Innocent, and to his Catholick Successors, and to the Rom Church, a liege homage in the presence of Pandulfus. If we can be in the presen of the Lord Pope we will do the same, and to this we oblige our Successors and Heirs s
ever, &c. And for the sign of this our perpetual obligation and concession, we will and ordain, that out of our proper and especial Revenues from the said Kingdoms, for all our service and custom which we ought to render, the Roman Church receive a thou∣sand Marks sterling yearly, without diminution of St. Peters Pence; that is five hun∣dred Marks at the Feast of St. Michael, and five hundred at Easter, &c. And if we or any of our successors presume to attempt against th se things, let him forfeit his right to the Kingdom, &c. Although the King did this most unwillingly, and with a heart full of rage and anguish, yet he sware (and it is inserted in the Letters) that he did this with a good will, of his own motion, and by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost. And at the same instant he did homage to the Pope, as a Vassel to his Liege Lord in the person of Pandulfus the Legat, and put at the feet of that Legat a sum of money whichMatth. Paris in Jo∣hanne p. 228. Pandulfus pe∣cuniam, quam in arcam sub∣jectionis Rex contulerat, sub pede suo concul∣cavit, Archie∣piscopo dolente & reclamante. the said Legat trod upon with his foot in sign of subjection. All this was done juxta quod Romae fuerat sententiatum, as it had been ordained at Rome,Id. p. 227. as Matthew Paris saith, that one may not think that King John did this with his own motion, and unconstrained, although they made him swear that he had done it of his good will, and by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost. All that being done, yet the Legat went away without taking off the Interdict, and without absolving the King from his Excommunication, which he might have removed with speaking one word. But he returned beyond the Sea, carrying with him a mass of Treasure squeezed out of the Purses of the poor Engli h. And being come to the Coast of Normandy, he found King Philip August with a great Army, and a Fleet of a thousand Ships, staying only for the Wind to pass into England to conquer it. To whom the Legat declared from the Pope, that he should not bring his Army over, nor undertake any thing against England; because it belonged to the Pope, the King of England being now become the Popes Vassal, and England the Patrimony of St. Peter. At which Philip exprest a great indignation, seeing himself thus affronted by the Pope, who had made him spend a vast sum of money, to raise a great Army to conquer England, pro∣mising him the remission of all his Sins, and now disappointed him, and after he had given him England, forbad him to enter into it. Wherefore notwithstanding the Legats prohibitions, the King would have continued his Design, had not the Earl of Flanders forsaken him, returning with his Troops into his Countrey, be∣cause he would not offend the Pope. Whence followed a bloody War between France and Flanders. Matth. Pa∣ris, in Johan∣ne, p. 229.But King John full of confusion and anguish, cast himself down on his knees before the Archbishop and other English Prelates, begging with tears to be absolved from the Excommunication; which in the end, out of their fatherly com∣passion, they granted. Yet was not the Interdict taken off. At the same time Innocent the III. published the Croisada against those that were reproachfully called Albigeois and Vaudois, because they did not acknowledg the Pope, called upon none but God alone, had no Images, did not go to Mass, de∣nyed Purgatory, and read the Scripture. The Pope gave the same Graces to them that should spill the Blood of these poor Christians, as to them that crossed them∣selves
to go to the holy Sepulchre and sight against the Saracens. The chief promo∣tor of that War was Dominick, the Author of the Order of Dominicans, who put above two hundred thousand of them to death. In the mean while, King John was storming and eating his own heart with sor∣row, seeing his Crown thus miserably enslaved. And his Barons forsook him, be∣ing angry that he had subjected his Crown to a forrain Power.Matth. Paris, an. 1213. p. 233. He then finding no help from any Christian, was brought to such a despair, that he sent Embassadors to a Mahumetan Prince, Amiral Murmelin or Miramolin King of Barbary and Granata, offering him the Kingdom of England, and promising to be his Vassal, if he would deliver him from his subjection to the Pope. But that barbarous King would not accept of the gift, and despised King John, who now for his last refuge had recourse to the Pope.Noverat & multiplici didicerat expe∣rientia, quod Papa super om∣nes mortales ambitiosus erat & superbus pe∣cuniaeque sititor insatiabilis & ad omnia scele∣ra pro praemiis datis aut pro∣missis cereus & proclivus. King John (saith Matthew Paris) had learned by many experiences that the Pope was above all men of the world ambitious, and proud, insatiably thirsty of money, flexible and prone to any wic∣kedness for recompences either given or promised. He sent to him then a great sum of mony, beseeching him to excommunicate the Archbishop and the Barons of his Kingdom. At his request, Innocent sent into England a Legate called Nicol Bishop of Thusculo; into whose hands John resigned his Crown, and did homage to him, as representing the Popes person, whom he acknowledged his temporal Lord, and Soveraign of the Kingdom. This was done before the great Altar of Pauls Church at London.Matth. Paris p. 236, 237. Exacta est & innovata il∣la non formosa sed famosa sub∣jectio, quae in manum Domi∣ni Papae diade∣mate cum reg∣no resignato tam dominium Hi∣berniae quàm regnum subjicit Anglicanum. And the Deed whereby that resignation of the Kingdom was made unto the Pope; was renewed and sealed with Gold, where∣as the former was sealed with Lead only. And the said Legat assumed then a full power to dispose of the Ecclesiastical Offices of England, without the consent either of the Archbishop; or the Bishops of the places. Whereby (saith Matthew Pa∣ris) he got the Indignation and Curse of many, instead of the Blessing. And Pa∣dulfus sent to Rome to exalt King Johns Goodness and Humility to the Pope, and to aggravate the Pride and Insolency of the Archbishop, Bishops, and Barons of England that opposed him. Finally, in the year 1214. the Interdict was taken off by the legate, the Mass restored, the Churches and Church-yards opened, and the people reconciled by the Popes Concession, upon condition that the King should give to the Archbishop and Bishops, that had the charge of taking off the Interdict, forty thousand Marks. But the Barons of England, sore grieved to see the Crown of England so de∣based, asked of the King the enjoying of some liberties and priviledges which he had sworn unto them. These demands having caused a great dissention between the King and the Barons, the King referred the whole unto the Pope, as unto his Liege, of whom he held the Crown.Idem p. 236. The Pope having heard the Kings Complaints by his Embassadors, said with an angry countenance, Will the Barons of England put down from the Royal Seat a crossed King, who hath put himself under the Protection of the Apostolick See? Will they transfer the Dmain of the Roman Church to another? By Saint Peter I cannot leave that injury unpunished. Where∣fore by express Bulls, he took away all the priviledges of the English Nobility, and
dispensed King John from keeping his promise unto them, and threatned the said Barons with an Anathema in case of disobedience: That dealing he grounded upon this reason,Quia no∣bis à Domino dictum est in Propheta, Con∣stitui te super gentes & reg∣na, ut evellas & destruas, & aedifices, & plantes. That to the Pope in the Person of the Prophet God said, I have set thee over Nations and over Kingdoms, to root out, and to pull down, and to destroy, and to throw down, to build, and to plant. And by other Letters he commanded the Barons like a King, not to exact of King John the fulfilling of that he had sworn unto them. But the Barons did not care for the Popes Mandate, wherefore they were all excommunicated by the Pope, and their Lands and Lordships put in Interdict. The Prelates of England were commanded to publish that Sentence over all Eng∣land with burning Candles, and ringing of Bells. At the same time, the Pope suspended Simon Langton Archbishop of York from his place, at the request of King John: And his brother Stephen Langton likewise. A worthy recompense for their helping of the Pope to make the King the Popes subject. The cause of their suspension was, that they had refused to publish the Excommunication of the Ba∣rons of the Kingdom, but it was published by others appointed for that purpose by Pandulfus, who was joyned in Commission with the Legate. The next year, which was the year 1215. Pope Innocent the III. did gather a Council of the whole Papal Empire at Rome in the Church of Laterane, in which there was neither deliberating, nor consulting with the Assembly,Matth. Paris, p. 262. Recitata sunt in pleno Con∣cilio Capitula 69. quae aliis placabilia, aliis videbantur one∣rosa. but only reading of threescore and nine Chapters of Ordinances made by this Pope Inno∣cent. By the third Chapter, power is given to the Pope to take away the Lands of Princes and Lords, and to give them to others.Bulla ad liberandam sub finem Conc. Lateran An. 1215. There also it was spoken of he Voyage and Conquest of the Holy Land, and a degree of Glory in Paradise above others, was promised unto them that should perform that Journey in their own persons. To them that would not go, but only contribute to the Journey, no more was given, but the remission of all their sins, and by consequent eternal Life. These last, having a smaller share, were to content themselves with the Kingdom of Heaven. But as for those that would neither go nor contribute, Innocent decla∣ed unto them, That they must answer him for it before God in the day of Judgment. Then also was the persecution doubled against the Vaudois and Albigeois. And he Clergy of York, named Walter de Gray Archbishop of York, who obtained is Investiture at Rome: Whence he parted, having first obliged himselfMatth. Paris, in Jo∣hanne, p. 263. Episcopus me∣moratus rediit in Angliam, ob∣ligatus in furiae Romana de de∣cem millibus li∣brarum legali∣um estrlingo∣rum, &c. Ex∣torsit Papa in∣finitam pecuni∣am, de unoquo∣que praelato. to ay unto the Pope ten thousand pounds sterling, which in those days was enough or a Kings Ransom. That was the End for which the Pope had been so long debating about e Right of Investitures. That was the fruit of the Martyrdom of Thomas ecket. By the same way the Pope extorted from the Prelates of England  incredible sum of Money. The King obtained from the Pope, that the Barons of his Kingdom, who had en excommunicated only by the great, and in general, should be excom∣unicated by name, by a second Excommunication. But the Barons and
the Citizens of London laughed at that Excommunication; saying,Ibid. pag. 267. Quod non per∣tinet ad Pa∣pam ordinatio rerum Laica∣rum, &c. Proh Pudor marcidi ribaldi qui de armis vel liberalitate minime norunt, toti mundo propter Excommunication suas volunt dominari. That it belonged not to the Pope to rule secular affairs, seeing that the Lord had left no more to Peter and his Successors, but the disposition of Ecclesiastical things. Why doth the mad Covetousness of the Romans extend to us? What have Apostolick Bishops to do with our Knighthood? These are the Successors of Constantine, not of Petr, &c. O shame! effeminate ribalds, that know not what belongs to Arms or Honour, will domineer over all the world by their Excommunications. But the Barons seeing the King too strong for them, sent to Lewis, Son to Philip August King of France, to beseech him to pass with an army into England, promising to put the Crown of England upon his Head. And for assurance, they sent to King Philip four and twenty of the noblest of the Land for Hstages. While that Lewis made himself to re to pass into England, a Legat, called Walo, came from the Pe t K Pi ip, to beseech him from the Pope not to suffer his Son to come into Engand, beause John was a Vassal of the Roman Church, and England was the Popes demain. That crafty Pope pake to King Philip with respect because he saw him beloved of his Subjects, and because he knew his Power and Courage. And although Philip notwithstanding the Pope desire, sent his Son over with an Army to take England from the Pope, and expe the Popes Vssal from his pssession, yet the Ppe sho no Excommunication a∣gainst him. Yea, when the Legate calld Englnd the Patrimony of Saint Peter Philip answered to the Legat in high scorn,Westmo∣nast. Ann. 1216. Regnum Angliae Patri∣monium Petri vel Ecclesiae Romana nun∣quam fuit, nec est, nec erit, &c. Et si Papa hunc errorem tueri allectus novae dominationis libidine contumaciter de verit, exemplum omnibus regnis dabit perniciosum. That the Kingdom of England had never been, nor was, nor ever should be the Patrimony of Sint Peer. And that the Pope would arrogantly defend that errour, being drawn to it by the gredy desi of a new domination, he should give a most pernicious example unto all Kingdom. To which all the French Lords there present added, That they would stand  death for the defence of that Article. Yet when Lewis was come into England, and had taken from John the  part of his Kingdom, the Legate comng into England, excommunicated L with Candles burning, and Bells ringing, and all his adherents. The deah of K John having appeased the wrath of the Barons, and cooled their affections to La made Lewis to return into France. John being dead, his Son Henry the III. succeeded, and almost at the sam time Fredrick attained to the Empire, whoUspergen∣sis. Cuspinia∣nus. Blondus. Matth. Paris. Collenutius. obliged himself by Oath un the Pope to pass into Syria to conquer the Holy Land. Two years after his pr¦mise, he embarqued himself at Brindissi n Calabria to go into Syria, but bein constrained to return to Land, by reason of the indisposition of his Body, Grego the IX. excommunicated him, accusing him of Perjury. Yet soon after he ¦barqued
himself again, and happily arrived into Syria, where he atchieved many great exploits against the Saracens, and conquered Jerusalem. But the Pope did not for all that take off the Excommunication. And in the very day of the tri∣umph, when thanks were given to God for that glorious Conquest, and the am∣plification of Christian Religion, the Clergy, by the Popes order, would not ad∣mit him to the Communion, but turned their backs to him as to an execrable man. But the Pope made it soon known for what reason he had been so urgent to send him away. For, as soon as the Pope saw him engaged in a difficult War, far from home, he invaded the Lands of Fredrick in Puglia, and went about to take Lombardy from him: Neither did he care to free him from the Excommuni∣cation, although he had accomplished his Vow.Matth. Paris, in Hen∣rico 3. p. 346. Yea the Knights Templers, the Popes Creatures, that were sent by him into the Levant, knowing that the Em∣perour would go to Jordan to wash himself, advertised the Soldan of the Saracens of it, that he might take Frederick. But the Soldan abhorring that perfidious∣ness, sent the Letters of the Templers to Frederick, to warn him to look to him∣self. The Pope himself hindred the Auxiliary Forces of the Croisada that were go∣ing to help Frederick, and would not suffer them to advance. This forced Frederick to abandon the Holy Land, and to return into Italy to reconquer his own Country, which the Pope had taken from him. The Pope frighted, took off the Excommu∣nication presently, yet upon condition that the Emperour should pay him two hun∣dred thousand Ounces of Gold. Yet he continued to set on the Princes and Commons of Germany to rebel a∣gainst Frederick: And so great was his hatred against Frederick, that Cuspinian andCrontzius in an. Chr. 1249. Crontzius write, that he sent Letters to the Sultan of the Saracens, to perswade that Mahumetan to make war against him. But God gave victory to Frederick every where; for he defeated, in many combates, all the enemies which the Pope raised against him. So great was his animosity against that Emperour, that when Forces of the Croisada came out of France, or England, or other parts, to sail into Syria, to defend Jerusalem and the Holy Sepulchre against the Saracens,Matth. Paris in Hen∣ric. 3. he stopt them, and gave them the same Graces and Indulgences, as if they had performed the Journy into the Holy Land, upon condition that they should turn their Arms against Frederick, whose power lay heavy upon him, be∣cause he stifly maintained the Rights of the Empire. The Pope came so far, as to give the Empire to Robert, Brother of Lewis the IX. King of France, upon con∣dition that he should conquer it.Idem pag. 500. But Robert sent back to the Pope his Pre∣sent, both because he sent him no money to furnish him for that Conquest, and because he found it very strange, that the Pope would give that which was none of his: Also because he shewed himself an enemy to a great and vertuous Prince, who had done and suffered so much, bravely sighting for the Cause of the Chri∣stians against the Infidels. Then he added, that the Popes are lavish of the blood of others, and that their end is to tread all the Princes of the world under their see, and to put on the horns of pride. In the mean while, persecution grew sore against those whom they called Vau∣dois and Albigeois, against whom the Pope caused the Croisada to be preached,
and an Infinite number of them to be massacred. Then also Saint Francis and Saint Dominick were making Miracles, and preaching obedience to the Papal See.Id. Hen∣ric. III. pag. 279. And as Pope Innocent the III. at Rome, was carrying in procession the face of Christ printed in a Linnen Cloth, that face turned it self with the Beard up∣wards, as Matthew Paris relateth. Which moved Innocent to compose a Prayer to the same Image, and to give ten days of Indulgence to all that would adore the Image, saying that Prayer. These are the Words of it,Salve san∣cta facies nostri Redemptoris, in qua niet species divini splendoris; Im∣pressa pannicu∣lo nivei splen∣doris; Dataque Veronicae signum ob amoris, &c. Nos ab omni macula purga vitiorum; Atque nos consortio junge beatorum. Salve vultus Domini imago beata, &c. Nos deduc ad propria, O felix figura! Ad videndum faciem quae est Christi pura. Hail thou holy Face of the Redeemer; In which shineth the appearance of Divine Beauty; Prin∣ted upon a Cloth of Snowy Whiteness, and given to Veronica as a Token of Love; Purge us from all spot of Vices, and joyn us to the company of Saints. Hail thou Face of the Lord! Blessed Imge! Lead us to that which is thine, O hppy Figure! To see the pure Face of Christ. The whole prayer speaks to the Image as if it heard the prayer. But in England the Popes Tyranny grew sorer every day, For Henry the III. being come to the Crown, gave the homage of his Kingdom to the Pope, and re∣newed the Oath of Fidelity and Subjection, and the promise of paying a thou∣sand marks yearly to the Pope. Innocent the III. being dead, in the year 1219. Honorius the III. succeeded him, andMatth. Paris, An. 1220. p. 299. Sanctorum Ca∣alogo ascripsimus, universitatem vestram monemus & exhortamur in Domino, quaetenus ejus apud Deum patroci∣ium devote imploretis. at his entry to the Papacy made an English Saint called Hugh, with a command to pray to him, and to celebrate his Feast. In the year 1225. King Henry being yet very young, the Pope, as his Soveraign in Temporal Things, declared him Majar, and capable to conduct his own Bu∣sinesses. In the year 1225. the Pope sent Otho his Nuntio into England, who exacted of every Conventual Church two Marks of Silver. The next year after, a Council was held at Westminster, where the said Nuntio read in full Assembly the Popes Letters, in which the Pope said,Matth. Paris, p. 314, 316. That a scandal was cast upon the Roman Church: And that the ancient reproach and disgrace of the Court of Rome, was the Covetousness of Riches, which is the Root of all Evils. Espcially because none could get any business done in the Roman Court, but with many Presents, and with greasing the Officers with money. But because the Poverty of the Romans was the cause of that evil, it was the duty of the English, as natural Son, to relieve the poverty of their Mothr, because without their Liberality, the Roman Court could not preserve her Dignity. That the way to remedy that reproach, was, that the Pope should have in every Cathedral Church, and in every Abbey and Monastery of England, two Prebends, of which he should enjoy the Fruits. And in the same year the same
Pope called a Council at Bourges, where he made the same motion by his Le∣gat. But he found Contradiction from the Clergy of France, and could not com∣pass it. After Honorius, Gregory the IX. was Pope. It was he that compiled the De∣cretals, and the same whom the Romans expelled out of Rome, for the Citizens of Rome never cared much for the Popes Excommunications. This Pope needing money for his War against the Emperour Frederick, sent a Legat into England named Stephen, who exacted of the people of England the Tenth part of all their moveable Goods, that is, of all their Flocks, Rents, Fruits, Wares, Offerings, and Gifts to the Church:Id p. 349. Habuit ex iis∣dem literis au∣thoritatem con∣tradictores ex∣communicandi & Ecclesias in∣terdicendi. And the said Legat had power to excommunicate all that should refuse to pay, and to put the Chur∣ches in Interdict. The Prelates he enjoyned upon pain of Excommunication, to make that Collection speedily, and without delay. All that should cross such an holy Work, he declared excommunicated, ipso facto. He would be paid in new Coin, and of good weight. He took the Tythe, even of the Corn in the first Blade, that is, of the Crop of the year after. In these Exactions he was so urgent and so griping, that the Parishes were forced to engage the Chalices and Church-plate to satisfie his Covetousness. And he had certain Usurers with him, who lent money upon double use, to those that had no ready money. This caused a great Clamour and Lamentation over all the Countrey, but without effect. That money was employed by the Pope to invade many Towns belonging to the Emperour in Italy. And the Emperour could not defend them, because he was engaged against the Saracens in the Levant, where he took Jerusalem, and put the affairs of the Christians in a flourishing state. And he had utterly destroyed the Saracens, if the injuries which he received from the Pope had not recalled him. Matth. Paris, p. 358, 359.Then the Benefices of England were possessed by Italians, and other Creatures of the Pope, to the great grief of the English. To the Bishop of Rochester it was revealed in Vision, That King Richard, and Stephen Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, with a Chaplain of his, were come out of Purgatory all in one day. Scarce was the Collection ended, made by Stephen the Legate, when the Pope made peace with the Emperour, but the money was not restored. And another Nuntio came from Pope Gregory, who (asP. 386. Matthew Paris saith) argumentosas extorsiones excogitans, inventing extortions grounded upon fair reasons, sent Nuntio's with power of Legates, who by Sermons, Exhor∣tations, and Excommunications,Ibid. Per regnum Angliae infinitos reddi∣derunt extorres & mendicos. brought an infinite number of English∣men to Mendicity, and turned them out of their Houses. This was done under a pretence of contributing to the Expence of the Holy War, of which himself hindred the success, and yet he promised to them that should contri∣bute money for it, the remission of all their sins, and to them that should go in person an augmentation of Glory.
Ibid. Si qui proficiscen∣tium illue ad Prestandas usu∣res juramento tenentur astri∣cti, creditores eorum per Ec∣clesiarum Prae∣latos ut remit∣tant iis praesti∣tum juramen∣tum & ab usu∣rarum exctione desistant eadem praecipimus di∣strictone com∣pelli.By the same Bulls, every man that was indebted, was exempted, and could not be arrested or sued by his Creditors, as long as he had a Cross upon his shoulders, which was the mark of those that were associated into the Croisada: And the reason given for that exemption, was, that such a man was become the Popes man, and had put himself in the protection of the Church. By the same Bulls also, power was given to the Nuntio's or Legates, to dispense with the Vow for money. So that he that had crossed himself for the Voyage to the holy Land, might redeem himself from the Vow, paying to the Legate, that which he should have spent in the Journey, and so stay at home, and enjoy the same spiritual gra∣ces, as if he had performed the whole Voyage. The Bull ended with this Exhor∣tation,Accingan∣ur ergo omnes filii adoptionis divinae ad obsequium Jesu Christi, &c. Felici commercio laboribus suis qui cito transeunt, eter∣nam requiem mercabuntur. Come then, and let the Children of Divine Adoption prepare themselves to yield obedience unto Christ, changing their Quarrels into Bonds of Love, believ∣ing that being truly confessed and contrite; by an happy Traffick, and by their Labours which do but pass, they shall purchase eternal Rest. Given at Spoleto the third of September, the eighth year of our Pontificate. The Exactors and Collectors of that money, were the Franciscans and Domini∣cans, who would to day put the Cross upon a mans Shoulder, and oblige him with an Oath to the Voyage,Ibid. Qui∣bus data fuit otestas cruce signandi & vo∣um data pecu∣nia relaxandi, &c. Signatos hodie cras data pecunia à crucis voto absolvebant. Westmonast. an. 1240. Absolvebantur per prae∣dicâtores & minores, pecunia interveniente multi cruce signati in scandalum Ecclesiae. and to morrow release him from his Oath for money. Reason and Right did require, that these great sums of money should have been employed to defray the Princes that raised Armies for the deliverance of the Holy Land. Among whom, he that most freely exposed his Life, and that of his Sub∣jects, with an incredible Expense, was Lewis the IX. of France, who reigned then; A Prince worthy to have been born in a better Age, being a rare Example of Meek∣ness and Justice, and one that partly discerned the Errors, and sighed under the Popes Tyranny. That Great Prince soon after undertook that Voyage, but to his great ruine, confusion of the Christians, and destruction of his Kingdom. Yet the Pope never gave him any part of the money raised for that Expedition, nor to the Emperour, nor to any Prince that paid Armies, and fought for that Quarrel. All was poured into the Popes Coffers, as into a Gulf, and by him employed to make War against Frederick, for he broke presently the Covenant sworn to him. So in effect, all the money contributed by devout Souls, for the Conquest of the Holy Land, was employed to hinder it, and to find other work for Frederick, wh alone was more able to promote that Conquest, than all the rest together.
While the Pope exercised that horrible Tyranny over England,Matth. Paris, p. 394. the Senate and Citizens of Rome were mastering the Pope, and were so far from giving him money, that they would have money from the Pope, pretending an old Right for it. The difference was about some Lands which the Roman Senate claimed, as be∣longing to the Roman County, but the Pope said that they belonged to his Bishop∣rick; alleadging for himself Christs words, who had promised, that the gates of Hill should not prevail against the Church; Whence he inferred, that in that Quarrel, the Senate and the Roman People might not hope to prevail against him. For all his Inferences, they turned him out, and burnt his Houses, and called the Emperour Frederick; Who being one of the Wisest and Meekest Princes that ever were in the World, instead of helping them, corrected their insolence, and would resent none of the injuries which Gregory had done him. At the same time that good Emperour demanded the Sister of Henry the III. of England, for his Wife, and had her. Id. p. 403, 404, 405.At that time also certain Usurers set up in England, called Caursins, who by Usuries and strange Arts devised in Italy, ate up the poor people and the Cler∣gy. The King himself was most deeply in their debt. The Bishop of London would have represt them, but because they were maintained by the Pope, he could not effect it. The Franciscans and Dominicans were preaching up the Popes pow∣er, and drawing all the Confessions to themselves, and every day obtained Privi∣ledges to the prejudice of the Parochial Priests, who became almost useless. The State of England was deplorable, for hungry Italians of the baser sort, with Bulls and Warrants from the Pope, came daily to fleece the people, and to raise such sums of money as they would demand upon the Clergy. If any denied what they demanded, he was presently excommunicated. And they that held the great Benefices, were strangers that were but the Popes Farmers. This made Matthew Paris, that lived then, and beheld these things, to lamentMatth. Paris, p. 424. Facta est fili Sion quasi me∣retrix effrons non habens ru∣borem, Quotidie vilissimae perso∣nae & illiteratae ullis Romanis armatae in minas statim erumpentes, &c. that the Daughter of Sion was become like a shameless Harlot that could not blush, by the just Judg∣ment (saith he) of him that made an Hypocrite to reign, and a Tyrant to do mineer. The above-mentioned Legat Otho came again into England,Id. p. 425. Rex eiusque ad confinium mari occurrit, & inclinato ad genua ejus capite usque ad interiora regni deduxit officiose. King Henry went to meet him, even to the Sea-side, and, as the Popes Vassal, cst himself down before the Legat, touching the Legates Knees with his Head. In the year 1283. the Archbishop of Antioch would not acknowledge the Pope his Superiour, and preferring himself before him,Idem, pag. 465. excommunicated the Pope, and the Papal Court, and the Roman Church, being set on to do that by German Archbishop of Constantinople, who called himself Universal Bishop. The same year the persecution was very sore against the true Christians, which were oppro∣briously called Albigoois, Vaudois, Paterins, Buggerars, in the same manner as they call us now Hugonots and Calvinists. Great numbers of them were burnt in Flanders, at the Instigation of a Dominican called Robert Buggerar.
The Oppression and Extorsions of Rome growing every day in England, the Bishops met at London, and the Legat with them, who propounded new devices to get money, and a new way of exaction. The Bishops answered him, that the Roman Court had quite exhausted England, and that it was impossible for them to furnish any more. So the Assembly was broken without concluding any thing. The Legat putting off his plot till another time, took his way towards Scot∣land, to rake all the money out of it, as he had done in England.Idem Henr. III. p. 481. Ante∣quam Legatus regnum Scotiae intrâsset, oc∣currit ei Rex Scotiae non ac∣ceptans ingres∣sum suum. Dixit enim quod nunquam aliquis Legatus excepto illo solo in Scotiam intravit. Non enim, ut asse∣ruit, opus erat. Christianitas ibi floruit, Ecclesia prospere se habebat. The King of Scotland hearing of it, came to meet him upon the borders, and forbad him to come further into his Kingdom, saying, that he was the first Legat that ever en∣tred into Scotland, and that Scotland had no need of any, since without that Chri∣stian Religion flourished, and that the Church prospered in the Kingdom. The Le∣gat then went back, and throughIbid. Rebus Ecclesiasticis pro libito ordinatis pecuniam non minimam cogendo. England, did so order the businesses of the Church, that he got no small sum of money. Then was brought into England a Mandate of the Pope, to publish in all the Churches, with Bells ringing and Candles burning, the Excommunication of the Emperour Frederick. Which was executed, though with the Kings great grief, because the Emperour had married his Sister. And the people of Milan rebelled against the Emperour, and sacked the neighbouring Cities belonging to him with cruelty almost unparallell'd, having for their head a Legate whom the Pope had sent to them. Upon which Matthew Paris expresseth, what the sense of the world was at that time. Fear and horrour filled the hearts of men, because the Papal party cared neither for Prayers, nor for Masses, nor fr Processions, &c. But put all their hope in treasures of Money, and in Rapine; and with shameless impudence ran to the sword and revenge. The best Benefices of England being possessed by Italians, and Romans especi∣ally, base in Birth and Conditions, and promoted to those places by the Popes Agents, that were sent thither with a full power to do all things at their pleasure, and to take from the English Prelates the Power of conferring Livings, the said PrelatesId. ib. p. 495. writ to Pope Gregory, Letters full of Lamentations; being just∣ly punished. For having helped the Popes to bring down the Power of their Kings, under a pretence of maintaining the Liberties of the Church, they had put the Popes Fetters about their own Legs, and drawn a hard bondage upon them∣selves. While Kings were in power, the Pope called them Simoniacks that gave some little present to the King, when thy received the Investiture. But after that the Pope had taken that Power from the King, he took an hundred times more from them than ever the King did. This Pope by his Bulls full of fervent Exhortations, had published the Croisad over all France, Germany and England, exhorting by the compassions of God, and by the zeal of Christian Religion, and by the hope of Salvation, all good
Christians, to go to the help of Christians opprest in Syria, and to deliver Jerusa∣lem, and the place of the Cross, and the holy Sepulchre, out of the hand of the Infidel Saracens, promising the remission of all Sins, and an Augmentation of Glory in Paradise, to all that should die that Voyage. Upon these Exhortations a great number of Pilgrims crossed themselves,Matth. Paris, p. 497. and having appointed their Rendevouz at Lyons, met there well armed, and furnished, and full of courage. As they were ready to march, a Legat came from the Pope, who forbad them to go further, and commanded them to return every one to their own home. At which they grew so angry, that much ado there was to keep them from killing the Legat and his men. For (said they) to obey the Pope, and for the Cause of the Crucifix, we have undertaken this Voyage: We have sold or pawned our Lands, we have borrowed Money upon great use, and now we are sent back to our houses. This happened in the year 1242. In the mean while, England was sore troubled with new exactions: and the Pope sent Letters to all the Subjects of the Empire, to absolve them from the Oath of Fidelity and Obedience, sworn to Frederick their Lord, com∣manding them to be faithful in unfaithfulness, and obedient by disobedience, asP. 499. Persuadens ut essent in infi∣delitate fide∣les, in inobe∣dientia obedi∣entes. Sed tan∣tum promeruit, Romanae Eccle∣sia improbitas omnibus execranda, quod à nullis vel à paucis meruit Papalis Authoritas exaudiri. Matthew Paris saith. But (saith the same Author) the wickedness of the Roman Church execrable unto all was the cause that none or few cared to obey the Papal Authority. The Emperour writ to the King of England, his Brother in Law, to ex∣postulate with him because he suffered him to be excommunicated, and with such disgrace in his Kingdom, and that Moneys should be raised in England continu∣ally by the Pope, to make war against him. The Kings answer was, that being the Popes Vassal and Homager, necessity did lye upon him to yield all obedience to his Holiness. Yet upon these Letters from the Emperor, King Henry desired the Legate Otho to go out of England, but the Legat would not do it, and found new ways to get Money for his Master. The English Lords and Gentlemen were selling their Lands and Mannors to the Clergy to perform that Voyage into the Holy Land, to which they had bound themselves by Vow, upon the Popes Command.Id. p. 507. Incoeperunt ipsi Praedicatores Fratres & Minores Cru∣c signatos absolvere à voto suo, accepta tamen pecunia, quanta sufficere videbatur unicuique ad viaticum ultramarinum. Et factum est in populo scandalum cum schismate. But the Dominicans and Franciscans received Power from the Pope to dispence those that had crossed themselves from their Vow, taking so much Money from them as they should have spent in their Journey. And at the same time the Pope who had crammed many Italians and Ro∣mans with the best Benefices of England, began to squeeze these Spunges, and got from them the fifth part of their revenue, towards the charges of his War against the Emperor. Then some English, seeing so much Money go out of England continually, came
to the King, and told him,Domine Princeps nomi∣natissime quare permittis An∣gliam fieri in praedam & de∣solationem transeuntium, quasi vineam sine macerie, omni commu∣nem viatori, ab apris exterminandam? &c. Quibus talia persuadentibus ait, Nec volo, nec audeo Domi Papae in aliquibus contradicere. Et facta est in populo desperatio nimis deploranda. Most Illustrious Prince, why do you suffer England to be brought to desolation, and to become the prey of them that go by, like a vine with∣out wall, exposed to travellers, and left to be destroyed by the wild boars? &c. To whom the King answered. I will not, I dare not contradict My Lord the Pope in a∣ny thing. Whence the people was brought to a most deplorable despair. But the Le∣gat having got the fifth part of all the revenues of strangers, did the same to the English, and the Archbishop led the dance, paying eight hundred marks to the Legat for the first payment; the rest was exacted from him, and from all others with all violence. Scarce was that exaction done, when one Peter de la Ronse came from Rome,Id. p. 515. Per eosdem di∣es venit in An∣gliam nova quaedam pecu∣niae exactio om∣nibus saeculis inaudita & execrabilis. Misit enim Pa∣pa Pater noster Sanctus quaen∣dam exactorem in Angliam. Pe∣trum Rubeum qui excogitata muscipulatione infinitam pecu∣niam à mieris Anglis edoctus erat emungere. Of him Matth. Paris an eye-witness speaks thus. In those days came into England a new exaction of money unheard of in all ages and execrable. For our h∣ly Father the Pope sent a certain exactor into England called Petrus Rubeus [or Peter of the Bryar] who having invented a certain kind of mouse-trap did learnedly catch an infinite sum of money from the miserable English-men. He would come into the Chapters of Monks and Prebends, and made them believe that such and such a Prelat had secretly promised such a sum of Money, and by promises and threat∣nings extorted money from them, making them swear that in six months they would not tell it to any body: without saying to them the cause why the Pope had such a suddain need of money, but leaving them to presume that there was some grea business concealed from them. Upon that the Prelats and Abbots came to the King and told him,Ibid. Do∣mine Rex sug∣gillamur, nec licet nobis cla∣mitare, jugula∣mur, nec possu∣mus ejulare. Sir, We are beaten, and we are not suffered to cry; They cut  Throats, and we cannot lament. A thing impossible is enjoyned us by the Pope, and  exaction detestable unto all the world, &c. But the King turning himself to the L¦gat there present, told him, My Lord, these miserable seducers reveal the Popes s¦crets; They detract, and will not obey your Will. Do with them what you think g¦nerous I give you one of my best Castles to put them in a sure hold. So they were forced  pay all, that the Legat was pleased to demand of them. The same year Earl Richard the King of Englands Brother, as valiant and ge∣nerous as his Brother was base and low spirited, went out of England, carryi with him the flower of the English Nobility, and made the more hast becau news was come of the miserable case of the Christians in the Levant, whe the Christian party was sinking apace. Being come to St. Giles in low Lang¦dock to go to Marseille, a Legat met him, who forbad him from the Pope to g further, dispensig the said Earl from his Vow. The Earl highly discontente answered, I have taken leave of my friends, I sent my Money and my A before; Now that I am ready to take ship, I am forbidden to go. He resolve then, notwithstanding the Popes prohibition, to perform his Voyage, and imba¦qued himselfId. p. 518. Detestans Ro∣manae Ecclesiae duplicitatem cum magna mentis amari∣tudine. detesting the double and treacherous dealing of the Roman Chur with a great bitterness of spirit. That Peter de la Ronse having not the Title of Legat got into Scotland, and d
that which none ever did before him, for he carried away three thousand pounds out of Scotland to put into the coffers of his Holiness. While the Pope was plundering England, he was raising an immense sum of money in France by a Legat sent purposely. Which sum exceeding the Popes ex∣pectation, he repented to have made truce with the Emperour Frederick, seeing that he had got so much of the sinews of War, and commanded Cardinal John Colon∣na to bring word to the Emperour that he would not keep the truce. Which when that Cardinal, whose Family was potent in Italy, refused to do, and ex∣changed some injurious words with the Pope upon that subject,Id. p. 522. Quod cum Regi Francorum in∣notuisset, prae∣cepit pecuniam totam quam in terra sua melli∣tis sermocina∣tionibus & fel∣litis commina∣tionibus messu∣erat, ab eodem Legato extor∣tam reservari. King Lewis the IX. hearing of that passage, prohibited that the money (which was yet in France) should be delivered to the Popes Assigns, or transported out of the Kingdom. The same Pope perceiving that whensoever he demanded money of the body of the English Clergy oppositions were formed against it,Matth. Pa∣ris, p. 522. Papa de pecuni∣a congreganda vigil contem∣plator significa∣vit Legato, ut non sicut prius omnem Clerum convenire at∣temptet, &c. Imo potiùs sin∣gulatim quem∣libeteorum, &c. writ to his Legat that he should deal with the Clergy-men one by one, and fleece them one after a∣nother. And he sped that way. It was about this time namely in the year 1240. that Baldwin keeping by force the Empire of Constantinople which the French and other Pilgrims of Syria had surprized, and held it by right of conveniency,Ibid. pag. 527. Necessitate in gruente & the∣sauri carentia &c. significavi Regi Franco∣rum ipse Imp¦rator Baldui∣nus quòd si ip¦sum pecunia d¦stitutum vèll de thesauro es caciter juvar ipsi Regi pro antiquo dilectionis & consanguinitatis foedere conferret coronam Domini. being in great want of money, writ to the King of France Lewis the IX. that the holy Crown of thorns of our Saviour was found, and that if he would help him with a sum of money, he would send it to him. This meek King, and of easie belief treated with the said Emperor for a great sum of money, and bought that Crown which was put in the Holy Chappel of Paris with great solemnity. Shortly after the Venetians having bought a piece of the true Cross for two thousand and five hundred pounds, sold it again to the same King Lewis for double the price. The King himself car∣ried it bare-head and bare-foot to our Lady of Paris. And the Pope gave to it forty days of true pardon. Ibid. p. 532, & 53 Rex in amptiori Regia Westmonasterii pransurus Legatum, quem ad prandium invitavrat, in eminentiori l mensae, scilicet in sd Regati, quae in mei mensae est, non sine multorum obliquantibus oculis colloavit.In the year 1241 King Henry the III. of England made a great Feast in West∣minster hall upon Christmas day. In the midst of the table was the Kings Chair un∣der the Canopy of State, according to the custome. It was a thing without exam∣ple that any but the King durst sit in that Royal Chair, especially upon a day of ex∣traordinary solemnity. Yet the King acknowledging himself the Popes Vassal, and no Soveraign, yielded that place to the Legat Otho, to the great heart-breaking of all that were present, and to the disgrace of the English Nation. Shortly after, the Legat returned to Rome: Matthew Paris beareth him this te∣stimony, that excepting the Church plates, and Ornaments of the Churches, there remai∣ned not so much money in England as Otho had extorted And that he had conferred partly by his own, partly by the Popes will, above three hundred of the best Prebends and Rectories of the Kingdom. Whereby the Kingdom was left languishing and desolate as a Vine exposed to those that pass by, and destroyed by the wild boar of the woods.
The same year, the Convent of Burg in England received an Apostolick man∣date from Pope Gregory the IX. that they should give to a certain man whom the Pope would recompense a Benefice of a hundred Marks a year, a great reve∣nue in those days. And certain sharks coming from Rome, went from Church to Church, and from Convent to Convent, and taking the several Monks apart told them,Matth. Paris, p. 536. Vocatisque Mo∣nachis dixe∣runt, Ecce fra∣tres & amici, imminet vobis ad manum mag∣num Papale be∣neficium; Po∣stulat enim à vobis quod vos deberetis flexis genibus & jun∣ctis manibus ab eo humilime postulare. Brethren and friends, you have power in your hand to receive a great benefit from the Pope; For now he asketh of you that which you should ask of him with bended knees and joined hands in all humility. The summary of the motion was that he asked them some money as an offering of sweet favour. Upon which Matthew Paris, an eye witness of these doings, speaks thus;Ibid. p. 535 Adeo invaluit Romanae Eccle∣ie insatiabilis upiditas con∣undens fas ne∣asque, quod de∣osito rubore elut meretrix ulgaris & ef∣ons omnibus nalis & ex∣sita usuram o parvo, simo∣am pro nullo sonvenienti utavit. In this time by the permission and procurement of Pope Gregory, the insatiable greediness of the Roma Church got such strength, confounding right and wrong, that putting off all shame, she became a common and impudent strumpet, selling and prostituting her self unto all, holding Ʋsury to be a small thing, and Simony to be no inconvenience.Ibid. At the same time the Bones of Edmund Archbishop of Canterbury were working abundance of miracles. The Emperor had six mighty Armies to resist the Enemies which the Pope by his Practices raised against him in several places. New Dominicans and Franciscans came from Rome into England in great num∣bers, to preach the Croisada, which they did so effectually that many crossed themselves for the voyage of the Holy Land; And the same Preachers granted to them the remission of all their sins. But three days after they released them from their Vow and gave them leave not to stir out of England. So they changed the corporal satisfaction into a pecuniary punishment. By which means even women and children, that they might have remission of all their sins, took the Cross and the Vow of the Croisada, and then redeemed their Vow with Money. Thus the Fryars collected vast sums of money. And what became of it, Matthew Paris saith that it was not known. This Legat OthoMatth. ris in Henr. . p. 547, & 4. had left two Vice-Legats with power of exacting, in∣terdicting, and excommunicating, who daily committed a thousand extorsions. One of them named Petrus de Supino took a turn into Ireland. Out of which (though money was thin sown there) he raked in few days fifteen hundred Marks. Then returning with a Mandate from the Pope, he exacted the twenti∣eth part of the Goods of the whole Island, and his fellow Petrus Rubeus did the same in Scotland. Then hearing that Pope Gregory was very sick they crost the sea in hast, and went towards Rome loaden with wealth. But in their journey they were taken by the Emperor,Id. p. 555. who made use of their money, and com∣mitted them to close prison and besieged a place in Campania where the Pope had put his Money and his Nephews. The Emperor having made himself Master of the place, hanged the Popes Nephews as Rebels to his Majesty. The Pope hear∣ing of it, was opprest with such grief that he died. The Emperor kept many Cardinals prisoners, among others Otho, the plague of England, because they would have assembled themselves in Council by the Popes Authority without his leave.
After many quarrels among the Cardinals, Galfrid Archbishop of Milan was chosen Pope, who did not last long, and died having been Pope but sixteen days. The Cardinals were 21 months before they could agree about the electi∣on of a Successor. The Emperor, angry at it, besieged them at Rome, and the King of France sent them Embassadors to declare to them, thatIbid. p. 582. Hoc au∣dacter signifi∣cabant confisi de antiquo pri∣vilegio suo per sanctum Cle∣mentem beat Dionysio con∣cesso & obten∣to, qui concessit Apostolatum eidem Dionysio super gentem Occidentatem. if they did not choose a Pope, the French would elect one for them, grounded upon their ancient priviledg granted by St. Clement unto St. Denis, whom he established Apostle o∣ver the Western people. The Cardinals frighted, in the end chose one Car∣dinal Sinebald, who leaving his name of Baptism called himself Innocent the IV. The Orders of Dominicans and Mendicant Fryers had been but 24 years in England, and already had built magnificent Convents over all the Kingdom, and governed all the houses of great persons, got great Legacies, drew to themselves all the Confessions, and many believed that Salvation could not be had with∣out them. They were Factors, Solliciters, and Executors of Apostolick Man∣dates, and bearers of Pardons; they had the Kings ear, and debased the Orders of S. Benedict and St. Austin; Doing to other Orders, and to Parochial Priests that which the Jeuits do now unto them. Yet between these two new Orders there was a great deal of envy, the Franciscans calling themselves Minors, and by con∣sequent more holy; and the Dominicans calling themselves Majors, and there∣fore preferrable. In the year 1244. one Martin came into England with full power from his Ho∣liness to exact money, to suspend, to interdict, and to excommunicate all that should any way oppose him. He would command this Abbot or that PriorPraecipiens per litteras di∣stricte illi Ab∣bati vel illi Pri∣ori, ut ei equos quales deceba specialem Do∣mini Clericum insidere, trans∣mitterent. that they would send him horses such as were fit for an especial Clark of the Lord Pope to ride on. If they alleadged any excuse, he suspended them from their Benefices. The Chur∣ches and Prebends that fell void, he kept in his own hands, till he was pleased to bestow them upon his Nephews and Cosins. And whereas Davi Prince of North-Wales was Vassal to the King of EnglandId. p. 604, & 605. David volens collum suum de subjugo fideli∣tatis Domini Regis excute∣re, ad alas Pa∣palis protectio∣nis confugit spondens se te∣nere partem Walliae eum contingentem ab ipso Papa. Cui favit Papa, & contra Regem rebellanti sinum aperuit. Pope Innocent the IV. debosht him from the Alleagiance sworn to Henry the III. his Lord, and made him his Vassal, obliging him to pay five hundred marks a year to the Apostolick See in sign of Subjection. So David by the Popes instiga¦tion shook off the Kings yoke, and put his country under the Popes subjection, promising to hold his whole Countrey from the Pope. Whence long Wars followed. The miracles of Edmund of Canterbury being daily multiplied, Commissioners were deputed by the Pope to enquire of those miracles, and to inform his Holiness about them, to know whether he ought to be canonized and lsted among the Sains: but the Commissioners made a relation to the disadvantage of the sid Ed∣mund as unworthy to be Sainted. Wherefore it was concluded that he should not be canonzed, and the request of the Monks of Pontigny, where the said Edmund ay buried, was rejected as unjust.
The forementioned Martin (whom the English called Masty,It is like that the Eng∣lish in those days called a masty dog a Mastin as the French do now; and that they made an allusion of Ma∣stin with Mar∣tin. because of his insatiable greedinessMat Paris libro supradi∣cto p. 622. received an unheard of power from the Pope, and more ample than any before, of which he had several Letters, and produced sometimes one, sometimes another, according to the exigence of the case, and ma∣ny Scroles of Parchment sealed with Lead, in which nothing was written, and those blanks he filled according to his own pleasure. He made his address unto the King; beseeching him in the Popes Name to help him to get ten thousand marks before hand of the English Clergy. And he brought forth Letters of Pope Inno∣cent to the Clergy of England, where these words are found. Being constrained by necessity, we have recourse to you confidently, and by the Counsel of our Brethren, we desire and expresly admonish your generality, and by Apostolick Writings we exhor∣ting command and commanding exhort you, that you relieve the Roman Church with such quantity and sum of money as our dear Son Martin, Clark of our Cham∣ber, shall declare unto you, &c. And that you so accomplish that which we desire of you, that we may commend your Devotion, and that we be not constrained to pro∣ceed otherwise against you about that matter. Thus in case of denyal he threatned to force them to it by Excommunication. And that Martin was grown so inso∣lent, and such a severe exactor that he would send, now to an Abbot, now to a Prior, commanding him to send him so many great Horses, so much provisi∣on for his house, such a quantity of curious stuffes for his train.Martinus remisit eis quae ei missa fue∣runt, asserens insufficientia, & praecepit eis ut meliora sibi subpoena suspen∣sionis, & ana∣thematis trans∣mitterent. Sus∣pendit autem omnes à collati∣one beneficio∣rum, 30. mar∣cas valentium & supra, donec suae satisfactum foret cupidita∣ti. Unde miseri Anglici acerbi∣orem quamolim subierunt filii Israel, se dolu∣erunt in Ae∣gypto Britani∣ca tolerare servitutem. And when he had received what they sent, he would send it back with contempt, saying that it was not good enough, and commanded them to send better upon pain of Suspension and Excommunication. And he suspended all the Prelates from the Collation of Livings of thirty marks a year and above, till they had satisfied his greediness. Wherefore the miserable English complained that they were under a harder bondage than ever the Israelites in Egypt. War being happened between the English and the Scots, they made peace upon certain conditions. But because a Vassal ought not to conclude peace or war with∣out the consent of his liege Lord, peace could not be made without the approbati∣on and ratification of Pope Innocent the IV. The same year the Prince of North-Wales continuing in his Rebellion against Henry the III. King of England, obtained of the Pope with money, and with the renewing of his promise, of paying five hundred marks a year unto the Pope, to be absolved and dispensed from the Oath of Alleagiance which he had made unto Henry, saying, that it was en extorted Oath. In the year 1245. the Pope caused the Excommunication of the Emperor Fre∣derick to be published again in all the Churches of France. That Excommunica∣tion being given to a Parochial Priest of Paris to publish it, he pronounced it is these terms. Hearken all of you, I am commanded to pronounce an excommunicatio with Candles burning and Bells ringing against the Emperor Frederick. Not know∣ing the cause why, I know only that there is an irreconcileable quarrel and hatred be∣tween him and the Pope, I know also, that the one doth wrong to the other, yet which of the two is in the wrong, I cannot tell. But him that doth wrong to the other, I excom∣municate as far as my power extends. The poor Priest was punished by the Pope, bu the Emperor sent him presents.
The Pope had a desire to come into England, and pass through France, but the passage through France was denied him. And the King of England was advised not to let him come into his Kingdom. In the mean while, Martin was continu∣ing to wast poor England, sucking the substance of the people and the Clergy, and most part of the Benefices of England were held by Italians. In the end, the Nobles of the Land were forced by the heavy oppression to assemble themselves, and to give order that all the Papal Letters which daily came into England with new Tricks to catch money should be stopt. A bearer of those Trumperies was taken, and all his Bulls and Leaden Seals were taken from him, and he laid up in close Prison. About the same time, in Rogation week, the Popes Wardrobe at Lions was burnt with an accidental fire, and there the Letters of Homage and Sub∣mission made to the Pope by King John, were consumed, as Matthew ParisP. 638. relateth. In the end, the King seeing his Kingdom exhausted by the Extortions of the Roman Court, although he trembled under the Papal power, yet he commanded Martin to depart out of the Kingdom, and for a farewel told him,Diabolus te ad infernos inducat & per∣ducat. The Devil lead thee, and bring thee into Hell. But Martin going away, left one Mr. Philip, to whom he resigned the power he had from the Pope. Being come to the Popes presence, who was then at the Council of Lions, he complained of the King of England. The Pope then remembring that both the King of France and the King of England had denied him the entry into their Kingdoms, said in great wrath, and with an angry countenance,Pag. 640. Expedit ut componamus cum Principe vestro, ut hos Regulos conte∣ramus recalci∣trantes. Contri∣to enim vel pa∣cificato dracone citò serpentuli conculcabuntur. It is expedient that we compound with your Prince Frederick, that we may crush these petty Kings that kick against us: for when the Dragon is once bruised or appeased, we shall soon tread upon these small Serpents. In that Council the Canonzation of Edmund Archbishop of Canterbury was moved again with great instance, but was rejected the second time by the Pope, and that Saint wanting the Popes favour, lost his cause for this time also, and was judg∣ed unworthy to be a Saint. The fourth day, an unusual thing happened: The Pope himself preached in a Church of Lions: His Text was, Lam. 1.12. All ye that pass by, behold and see, if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me: Then he compa∣red his Sorrows to the five Wounds of Christ; The first was, The inundation of the Tartars; the second, The Schism of the Grecians; the third, The Heresie of those that were called Patterins, Buggerars, Jovinians, and Vaudois; the fourth, The desolation of the holy Land; the fifth and the most smarting, The Emperour Frederick, the Churches Enemy and Persecutor, whose Heresies and Sacriledges he set out at large. In that Council the people and Clergy of England, complained by Deputies of the Extortions and Robberies of the Roman Court; but their Complaints were not regarded. There a Sentence of Deposition against the Emperour Frederick was pronoun∣ced by the Pope, whereby he was declared faln from the Imperial power, and all the Subjects of the Empire, as well in Germany, as in Italy, Sicily, and Province,
were absolved from the Oath of Allegiance sworn unto the said Emperour, with a prohibition by Apostolical Authority, to yield any obedience unto him, or to lend him any assistance, upon pain of Excommunication. The Electors also were com∣manded to elect another Emperour; the Pope keeping the power to himself to pro∣vide for the Kingdoms of Naples and Sicily, pretending that the disposition of those Kingdoms did particularly belong to him. There also an Order was taken for the Voyage of the Holy Land, the Pope tax∣ing himself to pay the tenth part of his Revenue, and condemning the whole Clergy to pay the twentieth part of theirs for three years. He appointed the Apo∣stolick Officers to be receivers of that Contribution. He made an order, that all that should enter into the Croisada, should be exempted from all Tributes, Ta∣xes, and subjection due to secular Lords, because by crossing themselves they put themselves under the protection of the Apostolick See. By this means the Kings lest as many Subjects as there were men that would put a Cross upon their Shoul∣der, for then they claimed themselves to be the Popes Subjects. Creditors were prohibited to exact any thing of those that were crossed, because they were under the protection of the Church.Pag. 653. Nos ergo, &c. omnibus qui la∣borem istum in propriis perso∣nis subierint, & expensis, plenam suorum peccaminum, de quibus fuerunt veraciter corde contriti & ore confessi, veniam indulgemus, & in retributione justorum salutis aeternae pollicemur augmentum. Ei autem qui non in personis propriis illuc accesserint, sed in suis duntaxat expensis juxta facultatem & qualita suam viros idoneos destinaverint, & illis similiter, qui licet in alienis expensis in propriis tamen personis accesse∣rint, plenam suorum peccatorum concedimus veniam. And to those crossed men was promised, be∣sides the remission of all their sins, an augmentation of Glory in Paradise. To those that should not go in person, but contribute with their means, defraying others that would go for them, no more was promised but the remission of all their sins. Those that should go in person defrayed by others, if they died in that Voyage, that Order assured them that they should not go into Purgatory, but they were to content themselves with Eternal Life, and might not pretend to a degree of Glory in Paradise above the common sort. Many other Laws were made and published by the Pope sitting in that Council For since Gregory the VII. it was no more the Popes Custom to assemble Council to deliberate with the Bishops, but onely that the Bishops should receive Laws from the Pope, and approve them by their silence. Wherefore also Matthew Paris saith, that of the things decreed,P. 658. Quaedam eo∣rum ante Con∣cilium, quaedam durante Conci∣lio, quaedam ve∣ro post Concili∣um, sunt statu∣a. Some were decreed before the Council, some du∣ring the Council, some after the Council. Upon the dissolution of the Council, a Pre∣late made a Sermon for a farewel to the City of Lions, wherein he told the peopl that the Council had made a great Reformation in the City, for whereas there wer many Brothel-houses in the Town before the sitting of the Council, now (said he) we leave but one, reaching from one end of the Town to the other.Ibid. That th Popes Officers were appointed Collectors of the money to be raised for the Voyag of the Holy Land, was displeasing unto many, who knew that it was usual wit the Popes Officers to put all such Conributions into the Popes Coffers, who con∣verted them to another use, and indeed to his own. The Pope sent into Englan a Copy of the Letters Patent of King John, whereby he subjected the Crown  England to the Papal See, and presented it to all the Prelates of England to sign which they did, all but the Archbishop of Canterbury, who refused it.
The same year King Lewis the IX. gave the Pope leave to come into France, as far as Clugni, but no farther. The King greatly desired a Reconciliation between the Pope and the Emperour, because himself was preparing for the Expedition in∣to the Levant, and had need of the help of Frederick, a warlike, pruden, and meek Prince, as ever any was in the world, formidable to the Saracens, and one that might stop the passage of the French, because he held Corsica, Sardinia, and the Kingdom of Naples and Sicily: But the good King could obtain nothing of Pope Innocent. Matthew Paris saith, that Innocent laboured to induce Lewis to make War with Henry King of England, whom he called in contempt a petty King. And though there was a sworn Truce between the two Kings, yet the Pope would have King Lewis to break it. But Lewis would never condescend to it, being a Prince that religiously kept his word. There was a second interview between the King and the Pope, being then at Lions, where the King used his utmost endeavour to appease rhe Pope, and recon∣cile him with the Emperour. The Emperour desirous of peace (although the De∣position fulminated by the Pope was without effect, and had wrought no diminu∣tion of his power) offered unto the Pope to pass into Syria, and reconquer the Kingdom of Jerusalem with his own strength and cost, and never to return, but die there; asking no more but his Absolution from the Pope. And the King re∣presented unto the Pope the Commandment of Christ, who will have us to for∣give seventy times seven times, and saith that the sinner that converteth and hum∣leth himself, must not be rejected. He protested against the Pope, saying, that y this Obstinacy he should be the cause of the Ruines which Christian Religion hould suffer. But the good King lost his labour, andMatth. Pa∣ris, in Henrico III. p. 676. Rex Franco∣rum recessit iratus & indig∣nans, eo quod humilitatem quam sperave∣rat in servo servorum, mi∣nimè reperisset. returned with great In∣ignation, because he had not found in the Servant of Servants the humility which he okt for. The same year, which was 1245. A Parliament was assembled at London, where  the Kings presence some Articles were made, called Gravamina Regni Angliae, he Grievances of the Kingdom of England; where the oppressions of the Popes, nd the grinding of the Kingdom by the Court of Rome were represented, and ow Italians succeeded other Italians in Church-Livings: And that by the new use, non obstante, Scriptures were enervated, the Obligation of Oaths broken,  Laws and Customs abrogated, and that the English were constrained to go ead in the Court of Rome, whence they returned ill handled, after they had a ng time consumed themselves in expenses.P. 680. That Letters came from Rome, hich not onely taxed such and such men in so much money, but enjoyned them o to find and entertain constantly a certain number of men at Arms to serve the man Church in the Wars with Men and Arms, according to the Will of his liness. It was also represented, that once the Pope considering some rich stuffs  Church-Ornaments of some English Clergy-men, had a desire to have them: nd that when he enquired where they were made, he was answered that they re made in England; and how upon that the Pope said, England is the Garden our Delights, a Garden truly inexhausible. The Pope writ to the Cistercian Monks, that they should buy for him some
Aurifri∣ia. Cloth of curled Gold; which was done at the Charges of those Monks; Whence, saith Matthew Paris,P. 683. many had the covetousness of the Church of Rome in execration. The same Author relates, that three of the wealthiest Clergy-men of England being dead, without making a Will, and having left a great sum of money, and much precious Stuff, Pope Innocent sent Dominican and Franciscan Fryars into England,  preach and make it pass for a Law, That the Goods of eve∣ry Clark dying intestate, belonged unto the Pope. When the King was going to oppose both this and the Levies and Impositions which the Pope had lately laid upon the Land, Letters came from the Pope contain∣ing an absolutePag. 686. Command to raise a great sum of Money out of England, and that within twenty days, without further delay; appointing certain English Pre∣lates to be Collectors of the same, and giving them power to proceed against thos that should refuse to pay, with Ecclesiastical Censures. Such was then the use of St. Peters Keys. The King, though used to bondage, was nettled at this, and prohibited th Extortion of His People. The Pope angry at it, misused the English that were in his Court, saying to them,P. 687, 688, 689. The King of England kicks against us, and hi Council hath a relish of Frederick, I also have my Council, which I will follow. And he writ to the English-Prelates, that upon pain of Excommunication and Suspen∣sion, they should before the Feast of the Assumption, bring the sum which he had prescribed unto his Nuntio resident at London. The King was frighted with this and the Popes Command was executed without delay. The Popes Factors an Promoters were the Franciscans and Dominicans, who gave the Remission of si for money, released the Excommunications for a certain rate, and made Usure and Extortioners to bring to them all their ill-gotten Goods, instead of restorin them to the right Owners. By their means also the Pope, besides the matrimoni causes,Pag. 694. drew to himself all Testamentary Causes, and the Cases of Perjury,  nearly concerning the Conscience. And still these Factors of Rome alleadged so specious cause; saying, that the money which they exacted was to defend the Em¦perour of Constantinople, or to resist the Soldan of Damas. But whatsoever it wa for, still the Pope was the Receiver. At the same time the Pope gave leave to King Lewis the IX to take the tea part of the Ecclesiastical Revenue of France, the King in exchange gave him le to take the twentieth part of the same Revenue, and that for three years. The Pope seeing tha he could not pull down the Emperour, and that the Ve¦tue and Power of Frederick turned the edge of his Spiritual Sword, sought  make him away by Treachery, and suborned four of Fredericks Servants, James Morra, Theobald Francisco, Pandulph de Phasanelles, and William of Sa Severin, to stab their Master.Matth. Paris, p. 690, 691. Negotium a∣perte se gerere Romanae Matris Ecclesiae praedi∣cant, ac praedi∣ctae mortis ac exhareditatio∣nis nostrae sum∣nium Pontifi∣cem sic accesse∣runt incento∣rem. Hoc ipsum captivi praefati in spontanea & extrema con∣fessione sua, quando mentiri nefarium exi∣stimani, mori∣entes coram omnibus sunt confessi. Two of them, Theobald and Willim, bei taken, confessed publickly when they were brought to the Execution, that th were set on by Pope Innocent to do that deed. The whole Story is related at larg in Letters written by the Emperour himself to Henry the III. of England his Br¦ther in law, and by other Letters of Walter d'Ocre the Emperours Clark, writt to the same King.
Scarce was the last Extortion ended, when a new one began:P. 693. And the King gave way that six thousand marks should be raised upon England, because the Pope had need of it. That money was sent to the Lantgrave, whom the Pope had named Emperour instead of Frederick: That Emperour admired the baseness of the English, who suffered the Popes to strip them: whereas the Popes (said he) fu∣gant fugientes & fugiunt fugantes; The Popes oppress those that fear them, and tremble before them that resist them. The King having made some demonstration that he bore that yoak impatiently, and let fall some words of Discontent which were related unto the Pope, the Pope was so incensed, that he would presently have put an Interdict upon the whole Na∣tion of England. Upon which a grave Remonstrance was made to him by Cardinal John, an English man by birth, and a Cistercian Monk, who represented to him, That the Holy Land was in danger; That the Greek Church had made a Schism from the Roman Church; That the Tartars were pillaging Hungary; That the Emperour was an Enemy to his Holiness; That France had a grudge against him, as being impoverished by so many Exactions, upon pretence of the Holy War; That the very people of Rome had expelled him out of Rome; Therefore that his Holiness having Enemies enough, he needed not to create more, lest he should see in a short time a general Revolt: And that it was no wonder if England, like Ba∣laams Ass, being sore laid on with blows, had spoken some words. But all this good counsel did not mitigate him. And to confirm him in his violent courses, presently Embassadors came to him out of England with deep submissions from the King, and a promise of greater obedience for the time to come. The Pope grown more arrogant with that humility, commanded all Prelates and beneficed men of England residing in their Livings, to send him the third part of their yearly Reve∣nue, and the Non-resident the half: With the Addition of the clause, Non ob∣stante, which derogated from all Customs, abrogated all Promises and Oaths, and revoked all sorts of Priviledges. In the end, after many denials about the Canonization of Edmund Archbishop of Canterbury, the Pope to stroak the English, Canonized him, and made him a Saint seven years after his Death. The Bull of the Canonization is exprest in arrogant terms and are worthy to be represented for their extravagant pride.Westmon ann. 146. Novum matri Ecclesiae gaudi¦um novi San∣cti celebritate jucundae letiti referimus ga¦dio à coelesti  collegio, de co¦legae novi co¦sortio agi fe∣stum exulta¦imo nuntiamus, &c. Laetatur nimirum se tam clara sobole illustratam, quae digno ab omnibus attollenda praecon & devota veneratione colenda; manifeste declarat ad-haereditatis aeternae participium admittendos, qui ipsam matr Ecclesiam fide ac opore profitentur, & nullum in supernam posse gloriam, nisi per eam tanquam regni coelorum c vigeram, introire. We announce unto you the Joy of our Mother the Church by the Celebrity of a new Saint; and the Heavenly Colledge keep Holy day for the Society of a New Com∣panion. The Church rejoyceth to be illustrated with such a clear Race, which ought to be exalted by all with condign Praises, and must be served with a devout Venera∣tion. And openly declareth, that those must be received to the participation of the Eternal Inheritance, that profess the Mother-Church by Word and Work, and that none can enter into the Glory that is above, but by her, as the Bearer of the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. By that Mother-Church, he understands the Church of Rome, to distinguish her from the other Churches that are subject unto her. And
he saith, that since the same Mother-Church beareth the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, none can enter into Paradise, nor be made a Saint, but by her means. Of that new Saint he speaks as if he had begun to be a Saint in his Canonization, al∣though he was dead many years before. And to abuse the Christian World, be tells them that piece of good News, That the Saints of Paradise keep Holy-day, because a new Companion is come to them. That Monster believed that the Saints of Paradise took it kindly at his hands, that he had given them a new Companion. Wherefore he exhorteth the Christian Nations in these words, Rejoyce with great joy, that a New Patron before God is accrewed unto you, one that stands before him to be a gracious intercessour for your Salvation. This was received as a Gospel-Truth; And it would have been abominable Heresie to make a question whether such a man was a Saint, and ought to be served and called upon, since the Pope who had all power on earth, had commanded that he should be. The English had this for their money, after so many Extortions of the Court of Rome; That Court sen them a new English Saint for their comfort. Soon after Blanch Queen Regent of France, came over to worship that Saint, representing to him, that he had found refuge for his Exile in France, and beseech∣ing him not to be ungrateful. She said then,Westmon. anno 1247. Hoc recolat sanctitas tua non ingrata tibi haec & tuo Tho∣mae fecisse pro∣fugo & egenti. Matth. Paris, p. 693. My Lord, most holy Father, Edmund Confessor, &c. I beseech thee to confirm that which thou hast mercifully done towards us: Confirm the Kingdom of France in a peaceable and triumphant Soli∣dity, and let not thy Holiness be ungrateful, but remember what we have done to the and to Thomas exiled and poor. In the year 1247. the French Nobility, made a League against the oppression o the Pope and Clergy, to maintain their Antient Rights and Priviledges, which were daily usurped by them. The Pope, brought to great fear, instead of punishing th Leaguers, greased the Heads of them with fat Benefices, and gave them all kind o Indulgences. He sped better in England, for at the same time two Franciscans, John an Alexander, being come into England with power of Legates, the King gave the leave to make a Collection over all the Kingdom; They had power of excommu∣nicating all that would refue to pay. They were riding upon great Horses, with guilded Saddles, and magnificent Clothes, exacting money with extream rigour. The onely Bishoprick of Lincoln they taxed in six thousand marks, the Abbey o St. Albans in the like sum. To the same end, in the same year the Pope dispatched divers Nuntio's over a the Provinces of France, to gather money by way of Loan. ButP. 700. Quod cum Re∣gi innotuisset suspectam ha∣bea Romanae Curiae. avariti∣un prohibuit, equis Praelatus regni sub poena amissionis omnium bonorum suorum taliter terram suam depauperaret. Et sic ¦bilo & derisione omnium Papales Legati sophistici inanes & vacui è regno recesserunt. (sait Matthew Paris) the good King Lewis suspecting the Avarice of the Roman Cour forbad that any Prelate of his Kingdom should thus impoverish his Land upon pain confiscation of all his Goods. Thus these Sophistical Legats returned empty, bein hissed and mocked by all.
But England, though twice more fleeced then other Lands, durst not kick a∣gainst the Pope, because the Pope pretended that England belonged to him, and that the King was his Vassal. The Pope sent into England another Martin, his Capellan, with Authority of a Legat, though he was not dignified with that name, to glean the remnant of the money of the Kingdom, and one John le Roux into Ireland, who returned from it with six thousand marks. To the same end, one called Godfrey a Roman, was sent into Scotland. In the mean while Lantgrave, whom the Pope had elected Emperour instead of Frederick, as he went with a mighty Army to his Coronation, was met with Con∣rad Son to Frederick, who defeated the said Lantgrave, who died few days after out of sorrow of that overthrow. Henry another Son of Frederick, having taken a Nephew of the Pope in Italy hanged him, and was for it excommunicated by the Pope, with the most horrible & direful Execrations that his Holiness could devise. These rubs made the Pope send into England for new Levies of money, with powerPag. 706. to the Collectors to excommunicate all refusers without appeal and delay, and without excepting any. The Abbot of St. Albans (of which Monastery Mat∣thew Paris was Monk) refused to pay, and appealed to the Pope, and sent to Rome to plead his cause. But his Deputies staid very long in the Court of Rome before they could get a judgment, till in the end having bribed some Officers they obtain∣ed a hearing, and were condemned to pay two hundred marks unto the Pope, be∣sides other costs, amounting to an hundred marks more. That sum (saithPag. 707. Tandem praeci∣pientibus ami∣cis in Curia ve∣nalibus & con∣ductitiis finem fecerunt Domi∣no Papae pro du∣centis Marcis, & sic donis & expensis omni∣bus computatis absorbuit illius Curiae Charyb∣dis insatiabilis trecentas Mar∣cas. Matthew Paris) was swallowed up by the insatiable Gulf of the Roman Court. In the same days, at the instance of the Popes Ministers, a sum of eleven thou∣sand marks was granted to the Pope by the Parliament assembled at Oxford; and besides the fore-mentioned sum of 300 marks, the Abbot of St. Albans was taxed in 800. Also Earl Richard the Kings Brother, and William Longespee, because they belonged to the Croisada, obtained the Popes license to raise a Collection from the people. To comfort the people of England in that oppression, in the year 1250. a Cry∣stal Bottle full of the Blood of Christ was sent from the Holy Land into England. The King received that Present with great joy, and carried that Bottle between his two Eyes, barefoot, in a Beggars Habit from Pauls Church to Westminster, with great pomp and sad apparel. It is not known in England now what became of that Blood. Thus were the Christian Nations amused and abused, and accu∣stomed to bondage. To all that should visit the said Bottle was given an indulgence of six years, and an hundred and forty days. The same yearPag. 708, 709, & 716. the Pope sent a Legat into Norway, the Cardinal of St. Sabin, o celebrate the Ceremony of the Coronation of King Haco, who in thankfulness for the honour which the Pope did him, sent him fifteen thousand marks of silver. This Legat returning made England his way: And as if it had been to shew that Rapine is the indelible Character of the Roman Court, in three months that he so∣ourned in England, he got four thousand Marks, with many gifts, then went on his journey loaden with booty. An. 124 Matth. Par pag. 724.It was in this time that King Lewis the IX. imbarked himself at Marse∣illa
with the flower of his Nobility, Gentry, and strength of his Kingdom to reco∣ver the Holy Land. The crowd was so great that many could get no room in the fleet, and came to the Pope to offer him their service. But the Pope con∣tented himself to unload them of their money, and to empty their purses, and to send them home with dispensation and absolution. In the mean while Domini∣cans and Franciscans sent by the Pope were preaching the Croisada in England with great vehemency, and with such effect thatIdem pag. 740. Praedi∣cantes pro nego∣tio Crucis ho∣mines cujuscun∣que aetatis, se∣xus, conditio∣nis, vel valoris, immo etiam valetudinarios vel valetudinarias, & aegrotantes & senio deficientes cruce signave∣rant, & in crastino, & etiam in continienti pro quocunque pretio crucem à cruce signatis deponentes. great number of English, yea the sick and the women crossed themselves for the voyage, and few days after, yea at the same time, the same Fryers dispensed them with their vow for a certain sum of money. So they got a great booty.West. an. 1250. Permissum est in Anglia jam quasi licite, ut habitarent Christiani usurarii inter Christianos, Papa pr∣tegente, cum sit usura in utroque Testamento condemnata. Then also by the Popes authority Userers were establisht in England. The business of the French in the Levant going to wrack, King Lewis wanting relief was writing with great urgency for help of men and money. Which mo∣ved many English Lords and Gentlemen to sell or pawn their Land, and having prepared themselves with great cost, they would begin their Journey.Matth. Paris, p. 759. Papa per lite∣ras suas, secut & ipse Rex per verba imperio∣sa districtè sub poena excommu∣nicationis inhi∣uit, nequis eo∣rum contra Re∣gis voluntatem qualecunque periculum Rex Francorum subiret aut dis∣crimen, transfretaret. But upon King Henries solicitation, Papal Letters came to forbid them to go, upon pain of Excommunication. Thus poor King Lewis having more generosity tha success was forsaken and finally taken by the Saracens, and his Army consumed by Famine and the Sword. The Emperor Frederick desired the Popes Absolution of∣fering to go in person into Syria to relieve the French, but the Pope never woul hearken to it. France was then mourning for this sad news, yet did not the Pope abate an thing of the money covenanted before, between the King and him to be raised o of France, when France was in prosperity; but he took over all the Kingdo the Tythe of all things, even of the least. Of which Matthew Paris (x) relates  example. One of these Collectors sent by the Pope met with a petty Clark carry∣ing holy Water with an Asperges to a Village, and some pieces of Bread; He as∣ked him what he got yearly by that labour.Idem, pag. 772. The poor Clark answered that the who profit was not above twenty sous a year. Then (said the Collector) two sous of  belong to me, and extorted the same of him, although his principal trade wa Begging. The people of France irritated with such exactions, and especially be∣cause the Pope hindred the Kings relief, spake thus.Matth. Paris Ibid. Heu! Heu! quanta mala nobis Papalis superbia partu∣rit, quae tam procaciter Fre∣derico restitit humiliato, &c. Alas, alas! how many evi doth the Popes pride bring upon us, so insolently resisting Frederick humbled befo him, refusing to receive any satisfaction from him, but rather provoking him to bit∣terness of heart! &c. O misery How much Christian Blood is shed in the Holy Land How much in Germany! How much in Italy! &c. Oh that this Pope was born  an ill hour! &c. King Lewis having yielded Damietta, and given the securities required for h ransom, returned toou Acre. Acon; whence he sent his Brothers into France, Adolp
Count of Poitiers, and Charles Count of Provence, and the Duke of Burgundy with them, with a command to expell the Pope out of Lions, as a man that took no care of Christian Faith, if he continued to hinder the Emperor Frederick to come to his help, because Frederick was he only that could remedy so many evils.pag. 773. Fredericum, qui solus inter Christianos tan∣tis posset mederi periculis, ad pa∣cem Ecclesiae revocans humi∣liatum ipsum ad hoc induce∣ret, ut ipsi Re∣gi jam pene de∣sperato succur∣sum competens conferat & fe∣stinum. Alio∣quin ipsi Dux & Comites Dominum Pa∣pam tanquam in odio obstinatum & de bonore Christianae fi∣dei minimè cu∣rantem à sede removeant Lugdunensi. In this general adversity of Christendom yet the Pope continued to tread Eng∣land under his feet. Which made the King (though patient even to stupidity) so bold as to write Letters full of Liberty to the Pope: Wherein he represented to him how the English being driven out by the Popes Authority, base and wicked men, that understood not the Language, and by consequent incapable of preaching and feeding the flock were installed in the best Churches and Benefices. That the Pope disposed of all the vacant Churches, and the Patrons were deprived of their right. Then having set forth all the extortions and violences which the Pope made the English to suffer, he added.p. 776. Thou Pope, Father of Fathers, why sufferest thou the climats of Christeans to be so contaminated? Justly then art thou turned out of thy Town and See, and art thrust into exile like another Cain. Thine enemies Fredericks followers prosper, but thou flyest before them that pursue thee, and they that pursue thee are swift and mighty. Thy Bulls cast forth lightnings against those that submit themselves to thee, but lose their strength against rebels. Everywhere the Prelats being suspended from the Collation of Benefices, the provisions are made un∣to persons unworthy, barbarous, and unknown, who under pretence of seeking the milk of the Ews of the Lords fold, take the flesh, shear the flleece, flay, take off the skin, and pullout the guts, &c. The Pope who had fulminated, and put Kingdoms under interdict for less of∣fenses, answered not one word, and supt up this affront, because he was expelled out of Rome, and stood in fear of Frederick; And the French Kings Brothers that were returned from the Holy Land had declared to him that they liked not his be∣ing at Lions,Id. p. 777. Imponebant illi dicti Regis fra∣tres quod per a∣varitiam Papa totum evenit infortunium memoratum. Ipse enim Papa cruce signatos, ne in succur∣sum Regi ad∣venirent, pecu∣nia corruptus imped ivit. Because (said they) the Pope by his Covetousness was the cause of all the misfortunes that happened to the King; That he being corrupted with money had hindred the crossed men to come to the Kings help, absolving them from their Vow, &c. For these causes Innocent preparing to change his abode, desired the King of England to receive him into his City of Bordeaux. But the King would neither refuse nor grant, but put off his answer. Then died that great and magnanimous Emperor Frederick the II. whose Sons and his Bones also remained excommunicate. Conrad Son to the said Frederick maintained himself by Arms in Italy against the Pope. The Pope, to resist him, caused the Croisada to be preacht against him,Id. pag 800. Statuen retributionem mirabilem, om¦ium peccatorum remissionem ampliorem videlicet quam pro peregrinatione in terram sanctam facienda. Nam s quis contra Conradum signaretur, signatus & signati, pater & mater, omnium peccatorum suorum veniam conseque¦retur. giving to those that should take arms against Conrad remission of all their sins, and more Graces than to those that made the voyage of the Holy Land. For not only he that crossed himself, but his Father and Mother obtained the remission of all their sins. Many French∣men bewitched with Superstition crossed themselves for the Popes War against Conrad. ButIbid. Queen Blanch the Kings Mother and Regent in his absence,
by the Counsel of the Nobles seized upon the estates of those crossed men. For they said, This Pope to encrease his dominion raiseth war against the Christians, and forsaketh the King our Lord who undergoeth so many adversities for the Christian Faith. And the Queen said, Let them be paid by the Pope that fight for the Pope. Also the mendicant Fryers that preacht that Croisada, and were the Popes Re∣ceivers and Collectors were roughly dealt with. The Pope not speeding that way, and Conrad strengthening himself daily, that young Prince beloved and honou∣red of all was soon after poisoned, yet by the speedy help of Physicians he re∣covered. An. Chr. 1252.Then (h) lived in England a good Prelat Bishop of Lincoln, who among the darkness of that age had a glimmering sight of the errors of Popery; and main∣tained that for promoting unworthy persons to Ecclesiastical Charges, and for the horrible abuse of Excommunications and the ill use of the Keys, the Pope was an Heretick. He said that the Pope made no conscience to destroy Souls, and there∣fore that he was the Antichrist. That Bishop (saithMatth. Paris, in Hen. III. p. 847, & 848. Episcopus elolens de jactic∣ra animarum per Papalis Cu∣riae avaritiam suspirans ait, Christus venit an mundum ut nimas lucrare∣ur. Ergo si quis animas perdere non formidas, nonne Anti∣christus merito dicendus? Matthew Paris) grieving for the loss of Souls by the covetousness of the Papal Court, would sigh and say, Christ came into the world to gain Souls, Then he that feareth not to destroy Souls, ought he not justly to be called the Antichrist? And he detested the Popes Bulls in which this clause was contained, quod in subsidium Terrae sancta impenden∣tes, tantundem recipient indulgentiae, quantum pecuniae largientur. That they that con¦tribute for the relief of the Holy Land, shall receive as much indulgence, as they shal give money. He detested also that shameful traffick, whereby the Pope bestowed a Bishoprick upon an ignorant man, and never made him Bishop, calling him elect only;Ibid. Omne genus a∣varitiae usuram, simoniam & rapinam, omne genus luxuriae, libidinem, gu∣lam & ornae∣tum, quae in Cu∣ria illa reg∣nant, detesta∣retur. And in general the covetousness, the usury, the simony, the rapi, the luxury of all sorts, the impudicity, the gluttony, the magnificence in clothes th reigned in the Papal Court. Such were the discourses of that Prelat on his death∣bed, and he foretold that the Church should not be delivered from the Aegyptian bon∣dage, but with the point of the sword. So died that Prelat. But before he died, he writ Letters full of admonitions unto the Pope; Which when the Pope had read, he said, with a ghastly squint look, and in terrible angerId. pag. 844. Quis est iste senex delirus, furdus, & absurdus, qui facta audax imo temerarias judicat? Per Petri & Paulum, nisi moveret nos innata ingenuitas, ipsum in tantam confusionem pracipitarem, ut toti mundo fab foret, stupur, exemplum, & prodigium. Nonne Rex Angloriem noster est Vassalus, & ut plus dicam, manciple Who is that old doting deaf and absurd fellow, who thus boldly and rashly gives h judgment of our actions? By Peter and Paul, did not our natural ingenuity move us, I would cast down the man into such a confusion, that he should be a fable, an asto∣nishment, an example, and a prodigy unto all the world. Is not the King of England our vassal, or rather our slve? He may imprison him by our commandment, a bring him to the lowst ignominy. Some Cardinals there present laboured to appea his Holiness. But the death of that Prelat put him out of the Popes power. I was not put to the question at Rome whether he should be canonized after h death.
But when the Pope had a mind to command the Dean and Chapter of Lincoln to ast the Bones of this Prelat out of the Church with shame,p. 855, & 868. Matth. Paris saith, that he appeared by night unto the Pope, and rebuked him with fearful words; At which the Pope became in a manner half dead: And they that waited on him in his Chamber had much ado to bring him to himself again. But he lived but a little while after this accident, and died of a pleurisie, sore pressed with a pain of his side in the same place where he said that the Bishop of Lincoln had hit him with the end of his staff. King Conrad being dead in the flower of his age, his Brother Mamfred suc∣ceeded him in the Kingdom of Naples and Sicily. And Pope Alexander, a ha∣ter by inheritance of the posterity of Frederick, sent an Army of threescore thou∣sand men against him. But his Army was beaten, and the Popes Forces received many defeats. His remedy was to send Franciscan and Dominican Friars about, to preach the Croisada against Mamfred, and promised to all that should help the Pope in that War the like graces and pardons as to those that should cross themselves against the Saracens. That Croisada being preacht in England, manyId. pag. 877, & 885. Mirabantur, quod Papa tan∣tum eis promit∣teret pro san∣guine Christia∣norum effunden∣do, quantum pro cruore Infideli∣um aliquando. were offended that the like grace was given to those that should shed Christian Blood as to those that should fight against the Infidels. King Henry the III. had crossed himself a little before for the Holy Land, and had vowed with an Oath to go in person. But Pope AlexanderDedit eis potestatem ab∣solvendi Domi∣num Regem Cruce signa∣tum à voto suo, ne iret in ter∣ram Jerosoly∣mitarum, ita tamen ut iret Apuliam. gave power to his Legats to dispense him from keeping his Oath, so that he would come into Italie, to make war in person against Mamfred, enemy of the Roman Church. Not that Mamfred was accused of any Heresie, but because be∣ing victorious in war, he ran to the very Gates of Rome.Matth. Paris p. 886. In the mean while the Pope taxed every Bishoprick, Abbey, and Priory of England in summs that exceeded their whole revenue; And the remission of sins was sold to the people for ready money. This King Henry the III. heard three Masses every day. Going thorough FranceMatth. Pa∣ris Suppl. p. 997. Contigi aliquando Lu∣dovicum Fran¦corum Regen¦dum Henrico super hoc conferentem dicere, quod non semper missis sed frequentius sermonibus audiendis est vaca dum; Cui faceta urbanitaete respondens ait, Semalle amicum suum videre, quam de eo loquentem audire. and discoursing with the good King Lewis, he told him of his De∣votion and Assiduity to hear Masses: The good King rebuked him for it, and told him that he needed not to hear so many Masses, and that it had been far better to hear Sermons; shewing thereby that he had no great devotion to the Mass. But King Henry answered him, that he had rather see his Friend than to hear of him.Ma Paris p. 958. Rex juraverat provisiones Oxonienses se inviolabiliter servaturum; & penituerat eum jurâsse tali metuens notam perjurii misit ad Papam secreto rogans, ut ab hoc se juramento absolveret, quod facilime impetravi It was that Kings custom to make Vows and Oaths according to the exi∣gence of his businesses; then to obtain a dispensation from the Pope and permission to break them. Wherein the Pope did willingly gratifie him, and never denied him a dispensation. Matth. Paris, p. 950.After so much constant obedience to the Pope he was very near to have been excommunicated, but he prevented that thunderbolt by sending five thousand marks of Silver to the Pope.
This poor-spirited King being gone, a generous and valiant King, prudent and beloved of his Subjects came in his room. This was Edward the first, who seeing his Crown impoverished, and his people exhausted by the Popes extorsions, made to himself amends with the Goods of the Clergy, and de∣spising the Popes Legats, and all his Mandates made use of the Revenue of Ab∣beys and Priories and other Benefices, and retained for himself all the mony that used to be sent to Rome. The Popes suffered it patiently, and durst not offend that warlike King, well beloved of his people. And so, under the fol∣lowing Kings, England was more or less subject unto the Popes, according  the Kings had more or less vigour. And the horrible Schisms and confusi∣ons, whereby the Roman See was torn soon after, gave other businesses to the Popes. This Narrative containing a Summary of the Ecclesiastical History of England, from the beginning of the quarrels about the Investitures (which began to gro hot in the year 1094. until Alexander the IV. who was made Pope in the year 1254.) will serve as a scantling to shew the heaviness of the yoak of the Pa∣pal domination, how hard the bondage of England was, and how shameful the debasement of that illustrious Crown, in the time when the holy Scriptures being hidden unto the People, the Pope reigned in England with absolute power. The Sun-shine of the Gospel, which arose in England about seven-score years ago, had scattered this darkness, and by destroying the error, hath also destroyed the ser∣vitude. So that in the Kingdom of England, which God was pleased to favou with inestimable graces, our Saviours saying was fulfilled. You shall know the truth and the truth shall make you free, Joh. 8. In this relation, I have followed the History of Matthew Paris, both becau he was a superstitious Monk not to be suspected in this cause, and because he w exactly, the things which he saw himself. Matthew of Westminster, anoth English Monk, which was almost his contemporary, relates much the same thing And most part of that which we have here related, is found in the Annals of B¦ronius, in the Chronicle of Genebrard, and in many Authors of the Roma Church.
ADDITION. THis excellent Author truly observeth that the cruel Tyranny of the Popes over the Kings and People of England in the long Reigns of weak Kings was in great measure stopt by the stoutness of King Ed∣ward the first. The Pope tryed his mettle by crossing the Election which the Monks of Canterbury by his consent had made of Robert Burnell to be Archbishop of that See, electing John Peckam, who got and kept the posses∣sion. The Pope, encouraged with that success, sent a Bull to that Archbishop Peck∣am, whereby he exempted the Clergy from paying Taxes to the King.Ex Chron. Rob. Gisbur∣nensis. The Clergy accordingly, when the Parliament had granted Subsidies to the King, refused to pay him any. Whereupon the King seized upon all the Archbishops Goods, forbad Annats and Peter Pence to be paid to the Pope, and put the Clergy out of his protection, and the safeguard of the Laws; so that if any would pillage the house of a Clergy-man, or even take away his Life, there was no Law against the Offender. This frighted the Clergy to their Duty. The Statute of Carlile made in that Kings Reign declareth,35. Edv. 1. that the Holy Church of England was founded in the estate of Prelacy, within the Realm of England, by the Kings and Peers thereof. And that the many Ʋsurpations of the Court of Rome, set down in that Act, did tend to the annullation of the State of the Church, the disinheriting of the King and the Peers, and to the destruction of the Laws and Rights of the Realm, contrary to the Laws and Rights of the first Founders. The last clause of that Statute sheweth, that the King and the State of England were deeply sensible of the Popes Extorsion in disposing of all the Ecclesiasti∣cal benefices of the Land, as contrary to the intention of the first Founders, which was to promote Gods Service by them, and to leave the patronage of them to their Families, not to make a prey ready for the Ambition and Avarice of a forrain Prelat. That Statute of Carlile did revive the acknowledgment of the Kings Rights, and the Liberties of the Church of England,Malm. de Gest. Pont. Ang. lib. 1. 204. by the Peers and Prelats of the Realm, in Henry the Seconds time at Clarendon; when the Pope by Thomas Bec∣kets means was most busie to invade them, and to get all the Investitures of Bi∣shopricks and Abbeys to the Pope, contrary to the ancient Right of the Kings of England; for the Saxon Kings conferred Bishopricks pleno jure, and with∣out controll. Neither did the Popes offer to make any claim to the Patronage of the English Church before the time of Henry the First. In that quarrel the King and the Church of England having had the foyl in the Reign of Henry the II. and more yet in that of King John, and that of his
Son Henry the Third; the Kings that followed stood strongly to their defence a∣gainst the Encroachments of Rome. Witness the many Statutes against Papal Pro∣visions and Collations, which the Popes had multiplied in this Realm, more than in France, or Spain, or Germany, by reason of their peculiar pretence to a Tempo∣ral Supremacy over the Crown of England. 25 E. 3.In the Statute of Provisors, after asserting the Kings Right to the Collation of Archbishopricks, and other Dignities, as granted by the Kings Progenitors, it is enacted, That the King ought, and is bound by his Oath, to remedy and remove the dama∣ges happening to the Realm by the Oppressions of the Court of Rome. 16 R. 2. c. 5.And another Law, looking to the main Chance, speaks thus: The Crown of England hath been at all times so free, that it hath been in no earthly subjection, but was immediately subjected to God in all things touching its Regality, and to no other; and ought not to be submitted to the Pope. 27 E. 3. c. 1.By other Statutes it is enacted, That whosoever shall draw any of the Kings Sub∣jects out of the Realm [that is to Rome] in plea about any cause whereof the cog∣nizance belongeth to the Kings Courts, or shall sue in any forreign Court to defeat any Judgment given in the Kings Court, shall be put out of the Kings Prote∣ction. Since those Statutes, the Popes forbore to meddle with the Investiture of Eng∣lish Benefices and Dignities; till the Troubles about the Quarrel of York and Lancaster, and the Weakness of Henry the Sixth, made him attempt some∣what in that kind, but with a short-liv'd Success. And it may be truly said that those Statutes have made one half of the Popes Ejectment, of which Henry the Eighth made the other half; and that they gave a sure footing to the Reformation in his days. But it is a wonder to me that it came not sooner, in a Nation so long, so horribly opprest, and so insolently trampled under the Popes Feet: seeing (if they had had Eyes to see) that all those Outrages were committed under a pretence of pennance, and promoting the Spiritual Good: For all the power which the Pope assumeth is in ordine ad spiritualia; And he will have us to be∣lieve that Christs saying to St. Peter, Feed my Sheep, gave power to the Pope to worry them, whensoever his Holiness shall judge that it is for their good. And whereas the Kingdoms of France, Spain, and Portugal, have also curbed the Ex∣orbitances of Rome, because they have found upon due Examination that the Popes had no ground for them in Divine Authority, why will they not exa∣mine also whether the Roman Doctrines of Purgatory, Indulgences, Worship of Images, and Invocation of Saints, which are so lucrative to Rome, be better grounded than their incroachments on the Rights of Kings and States? And how can they but see (but that a doom of blindness lieth upon these last corrupt Ages) that those Doctrines are spiritual Cheats to milk out the substance of the people, and plant the Roman Monarchy in all Monarchies? Some perhaps will say, That those Statutes and Premunires before alledged, have so broken the Popes power, that if his Spiritual Authority were acknow∣ledged
again in England, they would not or could not run into those antient Ex∣cesses. That those Exorbitances were suitable to the fierceness and stupidity of that Age; but that now that old rust is rubbed off; and the Popes by so many defe∣ctions (as they call them) from the Roman See, have learned Civility and Mode∣ration. But that those Leopards have not changed their spots, and have abated nothing of their fierceness, it was evidenced by the experience of Spain in our Age; having found Alexander the III. Innocent the III. and Innocent the IV. revived in Ʋr∣ban the VIII. who did zealously imitate them with his devillish Pride and Excor∣ion. The Book is extant of the complaint of his Catholick Majesty against him.Memorial de sa magestad Catholica. That the Pope imposed Pensions upon Dignities and other Benefices Ecclesiastical, even those that had cure of Souls, in favour of Strangers, in an excessive proportion, to the third part of the full value. That although Benefices were decayed in many  places of Spain two third parts of the former value, yet the Court kept up the Pen∣sions  at the full heighth. That it was contrived so that the Pensions did begin long  before the Beneficiaries entred into their profits; insomuch as they were indebted sometimes two years Pensions, before they themselves could taste of the Fruits of their Benefices. And then the charge of Censures and other Proceedings in the Court of Rome, fell so heavy upon them, that they could never recover themselves. And further, that whereas all Trade was driven in current Silver, only the Court of Rome, which neither toils, nor sweats, nor hazards any thing, will be paid all in Ducats of Gold; and those not after the current rates, but according to the old value. That to seek for a Remedy of these Abuses at Rome, was such an un∣supportable charge, by reason of three Instances and three Sentences necessary to be obtained, that it was in vain to attempt any such thing. This they cried out up∣on as a most grievous Yoak. They complained likewise of the Popes granting of Coadjutorships, with fu∣ture  succession, whereby Ecclesiastical Preferments were made Hereditary, persons of Parts and Worth were excluded from all hopes, and a large gap was opened to most gross Simony. They complained of the Popes Grants of Resignations with Reservation of the  greatest part of the Benefice; insomuch that he left not above an hundred Duckats early to the Incumbent ou of a great Benefice. They complained most bitterly of the Extortions of the Roman Court in the  case of Dispensations. That whereas no Dispensation ought to be granted without ust cause, now there was no cause at all enquired after in the Court of Rome, but onely the price. That a great price supplied the want of a good cause. That the Gate was shut to no man that brought money. That their Dispensations had no Limits but the Popes Wll. That for a Matrimonial Dispensation under the se∣cond degree, they took of great persons 8000 or 12000 or 14000 Duckats. They complained that the Pope being but the Churches Steward and Dispenser,  ook upon him as Lord and Master, to dispose of all the Rights of Ecclesiastical Persons. That he with-held from Bishops, the true Owners, the sole disposing
of all Ecclesiastical Preferments for eight months in the year. That he ought not to provide for his own profis, and the Necessities of his Court, with so great pre∣judice to the right of Ordinaries, and confusion of the Ecclesiastical Order, whi∣lest he suffered not Bishops to enjoy their own Patronages and Jurisdictions. They cited S. Bernard telling Pope Eugenius,Lib 4. de con∣sid. cap. 7. That the Roman Church (whereof he was made Governour by God) was the Mother of other Churches, but not the Lady or Mistress. And that he himself was not the Lord or Master of other Bishops, but one of them. They complained that the Pope did challenge and usurp to himself at the death of Clergy-men all their Estates that were raised out of the Revenue of the Church. That a rich Clergy-man could no sooner fall sick, but the Popes Collectors were gaping about him for his Goods, and set Guards presently about his House: That by this means Bishops have been deserted upon their Death-beds, and famished for want of meat to eat: That some have not had before they were dead, a Cup left to drink in, nor so much as a Candlestick of all their Goods. That by this means Creditors were defrauded, Processes in Law multiplied, and great Estates wasted to nothing. They complained that the Popes did usurp as their own all the Revenues of Bi∣shopricks during their vacancies, sometimes for divers years together; All which time the Churches were unrepaired, the Poor unrelieved, not so much as one Alms given; and the wealth of Spain exported into a forein Land which was richer than it self. They wished the Pope to take it as an argument of their respect to the See of Rome, that they did not go about forthwith to correct these Abuses by their own Authority, in imitation of other Princes. So it was not the unwarrantableness of the act in it self, but meerly their respect that did with-hold them. They represented the great Inconveniencies and Abuses in the exercise of the Na∣tio's Office: That it was reckoned as a curse in Scripture to be governed by person of a different Language. That the Fees of their Office were so great that they alone were a sufficient punishment for a grievous crime: They added that self-interest wa the Root of all these evils: That such abuses as these gave occasion to all the Refor∣mations and Schisms of the Church. That it was a work worthy of his Holiness, to turn all such Courtiers out of his Court, who did much harm by their perswa∣sions, and no good by their example: adding this Distich: Vivere qui sancte cupitis discedite Roma. Omnia cum liceant non licet esse bonum. If the Catholick King and his Spanish Subjects, the great Worshippers of the See of Rome, were so requited by the Pope, what usage could England expect o him, if he got once the Mastery over us, that have born so little respect to his Un∣holiness?. O's Answer o the Season∣ble Discourse. Great promises are made to us in print, That the Catholicks of Englan would not touch the least hair of a Protestants head (were they in power) for their Con∣science: But how can they make that good, seeing their Conscience is pinned upon the will of a Master whom they must obey, when he commands them to destro Heresie, by cutting the Throat of Hereticks? Of which the Popes have given us suf∣ficient Caveats by the Butcheries of good Christians done by their order.
But supposing that which (we trust in God) shall never be imposed upon England, that it should bee subjected again unto the Court of Rome. Supposing also that England should enjoy under the Pope as great Liberties as the Gallican Church doth enjoy or challenge, England could not but pay to Rome in her pro∣portion as much as France doth, and then the burden would lye most heavy upon the Nation; for one would hardly believe what masses of money are expor∣ted out of France to Rome continually. And who but the Professors of the trade can say how many ways the Romish Alchymists have to extract Gold out of all things, from a people enslaved to their Superstition? Who can think without horror what debasing of our Kings Dignity would attend such a change? what abatement of his Revenue? what impoverishing of his Subjects? if then they might be called his Subjects. But what! These and the losses of all worldly interesses are but fleabits, com∣pared to the loss of that Pearl of infinite value which to get and to keep every person must part with all that he hath. All good Souls will understand that I mean the precious saving Truth of God, of which this Nation hath bin, by Gods unspeakable mercy, the happy keeper and depository the best part of two ages; sometimes under, sometimes without the Cross: And which to preserve millions of good Christians in this Iland will lay down their lives, and must: But it must be in the way and sense meant by our great Master, Fear not them that can kill the Body and cannot kill the Soul, but fear him that can kill both Soul and Body in Hell. That would be the proper meditation of our English Israel, if we must have no other Pastors of of our Souls but as the Pontificale Romanum of Clement the VIII. designeth pro toto Orbe Christiano, for the whole Christian World, over which the Pope claimeth a soveraign Empire. Such Pastors as must swear in their pro∣motion to defend the Regalities of St. Peter, that is, that pretended Papal Em∣pire over all the World; and to persecute Hereticks, Schismaticks and Rebels against his Holiness. This is the Oath. IN. elect to the Church of N. from this day forward will be faithful to St. Peter the Apostle, and the Holy Roman Church,Pontificale Romanum Clem. VIII. cap. de conse∣cratione elect in Episcopum and to our Lord N. Pope N. and his Successors canonically entring, I will not concur by counsel, consent or deed, that hey lose life or member, or be unjustly taken, or that violent hands be laid upon them n any manner, or any injury done them under any pretence whatsoever. I will ot knowingly discover to their prejudice any Counsel intrusted unto me, either by hemselves, or by their Messengers or Letter. I will be a helper unto them against ll men, to keep and defend the Roman Papacy, and the Regalities of St. Peter.  will treat the Legat of the Apostolick See with Honour, both in his going and ming, and assist him in his necessities, I will endeavour to preserve, defend, in∣rease and promote the Rights, Honours, Priviledges and Authority of the Holy Ro∣an Church, of our Lord the Pope, and of his Successors aforesaid. I will not in in Counsel, or Deed, or Treaty, in which any thing sinister and prejudicial to
their Person, Right, Honour, Estate and Power shall be designed against our said Lord or the Roman Church. And if I shall know that any such thing is treated or attempted, I will hinder it to my power; and as soon as ever I can I will acquain our said Lord with it, or some body else by whom it may come to his knowledg. I will my self observe with all my strengh and cause to be observed the Rules of the holy Fathers, the Decrees, Ordinances or Dispositions, Reservations and Apostolical Mandates I will to my power persecute and impugne Hereticks, Schismaticks and Rebels to our said Lord or his Successors aforesaid. If I be called to a Synod I will come, unless I be hindered by sme Canonical impediment, Every three years I will visit [Limina] the Palaces of the Apostles personally, and render account to o Lord and his Successors aforesaid of my whole Pastoral Office, and of all things be∣longing to the state of my Church, the Discipline of the Clergy and people, and the health of Souls intrusted unto me; and on the other side most humbly receive and diligently perform the Apostolical Commands. If I be detained by a lawful impediment I will fulfil all the aforesaid by a special messenger having a special Mandate to that purpose chosen from the bosom of my Chapter, or otherwise some Ecclesiastical Dignitary or having some Ecclesiastical Parsonage; or (in defect of such) by some Priest Secular  Regular of approved Vertue and Religion, fully instructed of all matters aforesaid. And of such impediment I will make lawful proof to be sent by my said Messenger to the Cardinal presiding in the Congregation of the sacred Council. I will not sel nor pawn nor morgage anew, nor alieniate in any manner the possessions belonging t my table, even with the consent of my Church, without consulting the Bishop  Rome. And if I do proceed to any alienation I consent eo ipso to incur all the p¦nalties contained in a certain constitution set forth of this matter. In capite de scrutinio sero∣tino.In the same Pontifical there is another form of Oath which the Italian Bi∣shops took in their admission four hundred years ago; in which the Bishop elec swore obedience, not to the Pope, but to the Archbishop or Metropolita But as the Papal tyranny increaseth from age to age the Oath of Obedience  the Bishop is made now to the Pope alone. And the Oath now used for the whole Christian world is that which I have here set down, and no other; al∣though a Gentleman hath pronounced lately out of the Coffee-house, that there i no such Oath ministred but perhaps in Italy, which is a bold untruth. For  do more boldly, because more truly, affirm that in all places of the Roman Profes∣sion this Oath and no other is ministred in the reception of Bishops: And th words of the Oath justifie so much, pro toto Orbe Christiano. Observe that a that Oth there is no mention of God, or of Christ, or of his Word, or of hi Glory; but the main thing that their Bishops are sworn to is, to defend the Rom Papacy and the Regaities of St. Peter — to encrease and promote the Right Honours, Priviledges and Authority of the Holy Roman Church, of our Lord the Pp and of his Successors: for so much is with them the summary of all Religion an Piety. By the same Oath also the Pastors of the Church oblige themselves, not to r¦duce but to perscute the strayed sheep, and all whom they hold for Hereti
Let all that possess their common sense free from prejudices, judg what safety there may be in a State for the Rights of Kings and States, and for the Consciences of all men that are led by Pastors initiated in those principles, and sworn to them in their reception. The Papist Gentleman aforementioned is so ashamed of that Oath as to pro∣fess that he would not take it for the best Bishoprick in Christendom, and that it is di∣rect premunire, and perhaps worse. Then he must never be a Bishop in the Roman Church, for there is none other for Romanist Bishops to take in their admission. Till he find another, I hope, he will stand to his assertion, that the Popes can∣not impose Oaths upon the Subjects of other Princes without the consent of those Princes. Before I part with that Oath, I must impeach the latter ritualists of a bold at∣tempt, which beareth the face of a jocular Legerdemain,Pontificale ve∣tus. Pontificale no∣vum. but is a deeply crimi∣ons forgery. That whereas the old Pontifical bound the Bishops to maintain Regulas sanctorum Patrum, the Rules of holy Fathers; the new Pontifical by a ittle alteration of Syllables of Regulas sanctorum Patrum into Regalia sancti Petri, makes the Bishops swear that they shall maintain the Royalties of St. Peter, those Royalties which rob Kings of their Crowns and Subjects of their Loyalty. Certainly the large claim of those Regalities of St. Peter hath been for the last ix hundred years fundi Christiani calamitas, the cause of all the corruption of Religion and of all the publick confusions and distractions in this West of our World. Sure we are in this Island by feeling experience that it is the great Wheel hat sets those mischiefs on going, wherewith the State hath bin so many times sha∣en, torn, and brought to the brink of utter ruine. For when impetuous Zelots re once perswaded that it isBonifac VIII. Extra. Unam Sanctam subesse Romano Pontifici omni humanae crea∣turae declara∣mus, dicimus, de∣finimus & pro∣nuntiamus om∣nino esse de ne∣cessitate salutis. absolutely necessary for Salvation to be subject unto he Pope of Rome, thatBaron. An. 1076. §. 31. there is but one Name in the world, viz. that of the Pope, nd that to make that prime Article of Faith received in the world, he hath power  depose Emperours that will oppose it, and absolve Subjects from their Allegiance to hem; what attempt, be it never so difficult or so unjust, will they leave unryed to ring their Countrey under the Popes Subjection, and to promote his Universal onarchy? Or can it be expected from them, that they shall desist from attemp∣ng a conversion of their Country by the destruction of the same, as long as the ope, (whose slaves they are) is himself a slave to his cruel and illimited Ambi∣on, which to satiate all the Kingdoms and all the Blood of the world are too ttle. When the Fires of Queen Maries bloody Reign could not do his work, how any and manifold Plots were made against the Life of Queen Elizabeth, that orious Defender of the Faith, and of her Royal Rights? When neither the Dag∣r nor the Poison could reach her sacred Person, an invincible Army must be t to invade England, three Popes having made way for the Sword by three undering Bulls, which deposed the Queen, and commanded her Subjects to ell against her. For which (if custom may justifie injustice) they were justified by e practice of their Predecessors. And because many have found it strange that ngs were used more cruelly than private persons who are not divested of their
Estates by the Pope for their Offences, that Objection is answered by the Bull of Paul the III. against Henry the VIII. for he not only deprived the King of his Kingdom,Hist. Conc. Trent, Anno 1538. but all his Adherents also of whatsoever they possest. Let both Kings and Subjects learn how they must fare under the wrath of such a Master, who will no onely be Lord Paramount, but Proprietary of all Estates. When the Invincible Army had lost that name, being defeated by the powerfu Arm of God, other Armies were poured from time to time into Ireland, ever pro to rebel. When all these Efforts were frustrated, God blessing England because the Popes cursed it; and Elizabeth, full of days and glory, was received into th Arms of her heavenly Father, her peaceful Successor, Defender of the same holy Faith, must be welcomed to his Crown by a Mandate of Clement the VIII. de∣claring him incapable to wear it, as an Heretick, and forbidding his Subjects to obey him. When all that would not work the desired Deed, to make short work,  fine Device is excogitated; The King and his Royal Issue, Lords and Common all the Court, and all the Flower and Vigour of the Kingdom, must be blow up to Heaven by a gallant new way. This Plot beareth its pedigree in its Italian Garb, and sheweth it self descended from the Court of Rome and the Devil, as we may well judge, since a forein Jesu¦ite was acquainted with it before. For which notice we are obliged to the Jud¦ous and pregnant Author of the Seasonable Discourse, who in his Reasonable De¦fence of the same giveth us the whole passage out of Delrio. For that Jesuite  propounds it in the way of a supposed case,Delrio Dis∣quisit. Mag. Lib. 6. c. 11. §. 1. that comparing it to the Gun powde Treason, it is made evident that the Plot was on foot already. The Case he p is this: Whether if a Confederate discover in confession that he or some else have pl¦ced Gunpowder or such-like matter, under such or such a House, and unless it be r¦moved the House will be blown up, the Prince destroyed, and as many as are in or are g out of the City will sustain great mischief, or run an extream hazard, the Pri ought to reveal it; which is determined in the Negative. So this Jesuite prepare all the Priests conscious of the Conspiracy to hold their peace; according to  Doctrine of his Church, that it is better to let all the Princes of the World to p¦rish,Proceedings against the late Traitors. than to reveal a Confession. Marry to reveal it to the Pope they scruple  And Garnet perswaded the Conspirators to acquaint his Holiness before they pr¦ceeded, who accordingly dispatched Sir Edmund Baynam on that Service. But whe¦ther Garnet gave that Advice to inform the Pope of that which he knew not befor or for an argument that the Pope knew it not; howsoever it remains constant th the Pope was acquainted with the Plot, and that if he had disliked it, he mig have hindred it: And how could he have found in his heart to have hindred su an admirable piece of Service to the Regalities of St. Peter? The Pope being not used to hinder or to censure Treason, one may wonder wh he hath condemned Mr. Whites Book of Obedience and Government, seeing th it is full of rank Treason. But (besides the indignation which that Writer h incurred of his Holiness by his other Books) the Pope could not but take offence  his ascribing the power unto the people of altering the Government at their pleasu a power which the Pope claims in all Kingdoms, and in England more than in a
others. For the Pope doth not love Treason but when it serveth his turn, and when he may have the managing of it. The Popes Emissaries are never more dangerous than when they work Treason by the hands of their adversaries, transforming themselves into all shapes; yet so religious in their wickedness, that they will not work the destruction of their King before they have got the Popes leave, and armed themselves with his Apostolical Benediction. For a charge of that nature, which I laid upon the English Jesuits, I have bin attacked by three adversaries. The first is commonly said to be a person of Honour. In his two Books I find no material Objection obliging me to an Answer; only some playing with his gallant Wit, of which I wish him much joy. Yet to all that he objecteth he may find satisfaction in my Answer to my two other Adversaries; for I will not weary my Reader with Repetitions, and I will contend as little as I can with a Nobleman of a Family which I love and honour in a very high degree. Although he dealeth with me so unlike a Gentleman or a Chri∣stian as to point and recommend me to the fury of the people to be massacred. Of which one would think that he is in greater danger than I; especial∣ly if he appear before them in his new shaven Crown, and his Romish Priests Habit. For all the ill words which he bestoweth upon me I return hearty pray∣ers that God sanctifie his good parts, and graciously reclaim him to his holy Truth, from which he hath bin miserably seduced. My second Adversary is Mr. Serenus Cressy. Doth he not know (saith he of me) how oft,Pag. 84. of his Vindication of his Church from Fanati∣cism against Dr. Stilling-fleet. and particularly how upon the complaint of the late Queen Mother of most precious memory he hath been summoned to make good his forged calumny, but all in vain? I desire the Reader to observe the nimble juggling of Mr. Cressy, to make the world believe that which himself affirmeth not. I might in the same Stile say of an honest man, Doth he not know how oft he hath robbed upon the high ways, and particularly upon Shooters hill? and yet not affirm that he hath done so. And I might say of Mr. Cressy, Doth he not know how oft he hath done disservice to the King in the Irish Wars, and particularly in doing his utmost to seduce his Brother from His Majesties service to that of the Pope? and yet not affirm that he did so, though if I did affirm it, I should not peak, as he does, without any ground. I answer then to Mr. Cressys Question, that I never knew of any such Sum∣mons made to me upon the Queen Mothers complaint, or of any Summons at ll before his Book came forth, nor he neither. Mr. Cressy might have said with ruth, that a few days after the coming forth of my Book Her Majesty de∣ired that I might be forbidden to write any more, which was very far from sum∣moning me to bring my proofs. And several persons of Honour and good Cre∣dit can remember what a dismal consternation there was at Somerset house when my Book appeared. Mr. Cressy also being deeply stung with the Truth of that Charge, as he shew∣eth
by the extremity of his choler, will sting me in revenge with a foul asper∣sion upon my Reverend Fathers memory; denying him to have bin a loyal Subject, and calling all France to witness for it. But the famousest Pen of France, that of Monsieur Balzac a Roman Catholick, giveth him a contrary Character, in a Letter to a him which is extant among his works. For after he hath extol∣led his high parts, and yielded to him the Garland of Wit and Eloquence, he exalteth him more yet for his eminent Loyalty and Love to his King, shining in all his Writings; For which also he had solemn thanks given him by his King and the Council of State. But of nothing must we expect any thing beyond its na∣ture. And Mr. Cressy is much of the nature of Dogs, who will lift up their leg against things that are higher than themselves. Mr. Cressy concludes his invective against my Father with a worse against the Confession of Faith of the French Reformed Churches; saying, that it obligeth their to be Traitors and Rebels, whensoever the Honour of God (that is the defence of th execrable Religion) is concerned. I pass by that wicked abuse of their Religion, and say only that King James of most precious memory did not hold their Re∣ligion for execrable, when he employed one of their prime Divines, my Reve∣rend Father, to defend his Confession of Faith, and again to defend him against Cardinal Du Perron. But I forget that these Gentlemen make now an open meek of King James, so far that one of their crew hath lately printed a Satyr, where speaking of that great and good King he hath the impudence to say, None but a Pa∣pist in grain would or could have spoken so.Since him some Stories sprung up, who (might it be) Writ even more impertinently than he. But I leave this digression, and return to my matter. How unfaithfully doth. Mr. Cressy alledg the Article of the French Confession about Obedience? It i the XL. Article, and runs thus. We hold that we ought to obey the Laws an Statutes of Soveraigns, pay Triutes, Taxes, and other Duties, and bear th yoke of subjection with a free good will, though they be Infidels; so that Gods So∣veraign Empire remain entire. So much good Christians and good Subject might say, not only to a persecuting Dioclesian, but to a pious Constantine  Theodosius, Sir we will obey your Commands as long as they interfere not with God Commands. There is great difference between not obeying and rebelling. I not obeying for Conscience sake be Rebellion and Treason, how many Roman Catholicks in England have bin Rebels and Traytors these hundred years, for nee obeying the Laws of the Land, which command them to resort to the publick Service of God in their Parish Churches? It were tolerable if they had bin such upon no other account. Mr. Cressy's Serenity is pleased to call me A wretched Serpent, disgorging my Poison to the disturbance of this Island. I hope that God will requite me Blessing fo his Reviling. The least of his insolencies is the traducing of me as an Ali warmed with English Preferments. I have reason to praise God that my conditi¦on of Alien made my Services to the King and the Church more opportune an
effectual than if I had bin native of England. If my Diminution may be a pleasant hearing to Mr. Cressy, I will tell him, that of a Prebend and a sine Cura, which the King my gracious Master was pleased to give me, I had but the first, though I have still the Great Seal for both. And I might perhaps, with some sollicitation, have got somewhat in lieu of the second, did I not make a question whether I could get more ease by getting more burden. Quod satis est cui contingit nihil amplius optet. But here comes in the rear a bold Champion who sends me a defiance out of the Coffee-house, to make the Charge good which I laid against the English Je∣suits. The Gentleman is unwilling to consider that I have offered in my Vin∣dication of the Protestant Religion to justifie it whensoever Authority will re∣quire it. And therefore I ought not to answer any Summons that issues not from Authority. But his Friends the Jesuits were so far from suing for such a Summons, that when my Book came forth, after they had clamoured and stor∣med four or five days, they employed the greatest strength they had in the Court to stop my Pen by Aurhority, from writing any more. This behaviour of theirs (for which I have undeniable proofs) is the greatest evidence that can be of their guilt; unless it be their silence, now well nigh eleven years. Whereas they ought to have sued their Accuser as soon as the Accusation came forth. And would they not have done it had they bin innocent? Had the like crime bin laid o the charge of the poor Protestant Ministers of France, as weak as they are, and wanting friends in the Court, they would not have lyen one day under it, but hey would have made their way to a publick redress. Neither would they have earned of the English Jesuits to allow time enough for witnesses to dye in, while themselves are deliberating whether they shall sue for a trial. The passage of the Priest flourishing with his Sword when the Kings Head was ut off (against which the Gentleman of the Coffee house declaimeth) was prin∣ed thrice before I ventured upon it, twice by Mr. Prynne and once by Mr. Foulis. And upon Mr. Prynnes credit I alledged it. To him I did write (though a tranger to me) upon the noise made about it; And he confirmed it to me by is Letters, which I keep. Another passage which the same Gentleman excepteth against as incredible is unctually true in all the parts thereof. It is worth relating here again. An nderstanding Gentleman visiting the Friers of Dunkerk, who are Flemmish or French, put them upon the Discourse of the Kings Death; and to pump out their ense of it, said, that the Jesuits had laboured very much to compass that great ork. To which they answered that the Jesuits would engroce to themselves he glory of all great and good deeds; whereas they had laboured as diligently and ffectually to advance it as they. So there was striving among the Papists for he glory of that atchievement; and the Fryers shewed themselves as much Jesui∣ed as the Jesuits. I will match this passage with another upon mine own credit. Travelling in
Warwick shire I was accosted by a Traveller in my Inne, who asked of me ¦ther I was a Catholick; I told him I was. Whereupon he made unto  passionate Discourse of the Grievances of the Catholicks. I told him that  would have bin another world with them if the Powder had taken fire Westminster. He with a deep sigh answered, It was not Gods pleasure, knowing my self not good at long dissembling parted from him sudden and went on my Journey, full of abhorrency and compassion together such a zealous villany, but more with thankfulness to God for rescuing Israel from the claws and fangs of those bloody Tigers.
